Division        SS4^  i 

.Ms  6 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OS 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  LUerttttti^ 
on  the  versea  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


Royal  Octaro,  CUtta.  each  about  650  pages,  p«r  Volume,  $3.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  hia 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sgea  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Chriatian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotea  with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
In  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Chriatian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Gbnbsis,  Vol.  1.  Joshua,  Judob>s  and  Ruth. 

GsNBsis,  Vol.  2.  I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  £<zra,  N»- 
exodus.  hbmiah  and  esther. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs. 

Dbutbronomt.  The  Psalms.    Vol.  1:  l-xxvL 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Colossiaks. 

St.  Mark.  Thejssalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,  Titus,  and 

St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  Jambs. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Pbtbb. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Jude. 

ESphbsians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 

Send  for  our  oireular  giving  special  offers. 

Fleming  H.  RevcII  G>mpany, 

New  York:  CHic*ao:  TosoNTe: 

tjS  Fifth  Avenue.       63  Washington  Street.      37  Richmond  St.  W. 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


OR. 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on     the    Verses    of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH   S.    EXELL,   M.A. 


THE  MINOR  PROPHETS,     ^ol.  I, 

HOSEA,  JOEL,  AMOS,  OBADIAH 
JONAH,  AND  MICAH 


.^**!.  ^-X 


.„.^ 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming   H.    Revell   Company 

London    and     Edinburgh 


INTEODUCTION  TO  HOSEA. 

God  has  many  ways  by  which  He  prepares  His  servants  for  the  doing  of  His 
work — many  schools  to  which  He  sends  them.  But  there  is  no  teacher  whom  He 
uses  more  frequently  than  the  stern  teacher  whose  name  is  Sorrow.  He  makes 
His  children  acquainted  with  bitter  trial  and  privation  and  loss ;  He  "  brings  them 
into  the  wilderness,"  as  Hosea  says,  in  order  that  among  the  barren  rocks  and  sands 
He  may  speak  to  their  hearts ;  He  imparts  to  them  their  wisdom  and  their  strength 
through  the  discipline  of  sacrifice  and  pain.  Moses  is  sent  to  the  deserts  of  Midian, 
that  he  may  be  accustomed  there  to  the  endurance  of  difficulty  and  opposition, 
and  that  in  these  lonely  solitudes,  where  he  is  shut  out  from  intercourse  with  his 
fellow- men,  he  may  learn  to  hold  close  fellowship  with  his  Divine  Master  and  King. 
Paul  writes  his  loftiest  and  profoundest  letters  from  the  prison-house  of  Nero, 
where  for  the  hope  of  Israel  he  is  bound  with  a  chain.  It  was  in  the  school-house 
of  sorrow  that  God  fashioned  the  prophet  Hosea  into  fitness  for  his  life -task. 

I.  Thb  nature  of  the  mi.''sion  which  God  oayi  Hosia  to  fulfil. — He  was  a 
prophet  of  the  Northern  Kingdom — a  preacher  to  Israel  rather  than  to  Judah. 
Amos  had  the  same  sphere  of  labour  assigned  him.  But  Amos  was  himself  a 
native  of  Judea,  although  his  public  career,  so  far  as  we  know  it,  was  confined 
to  the  North.  He  came  to  Bethel  and  Samaria,  a  stranger  from  the  wilderness 
of  Tekoa  away  in  the  South — a  stranger  who  had  been  charged  to  deliver  a  terrible 
message  of  denunciation  and  of  impending  punishment.  He  carried  out  his 
commission,  and  then  he  withdrew  again  to  his  own  land  and  people.  Having 
spent  a  few  stirring  and  memorable  days  in  the  guilty  cities  of  Israel — having  seen 
their  violence  and  immorality  and  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  lifted  up  his  voice 
like  a  trumpet  against  them — he  went  back  to  the  silent  pastm-es  of  the  desert, 
to  write  down  in  quietness  the  story  of  what  he  had  said  and  done  at  the  Lord's 
commandment,  and  to  live  and  die  far  from  the  scenes  of  his  brief  prophetic  labours. 
It  was  different  altogether  with  Hosea,  the  son  of  Beeri.  That  he  was  himself 
a  child  of  that  evil  Northern  land  with  whose  inhabitants  he  pled  on  behalf  of 
God  is  evident  to  every  one  who  reads  his  book.  Only  one  born  tind  brought  up 
in  the  very  midst  of  the  sinful  people  whose  disobedience  he  bewails,  linked  to 
them  by  the  tenderest  bonds  of  family  affection  and  national  feeling,  could  pity 
them  so  truly,  and  yearn  over  them  with  so  fond  a  love,  and  entreat  them  with  such 
a  beseeching  and  persistent  earnestness  to  return  to  the  Lord.  Then,  too,  through- 
out his  prophecy  there  are  constantly  recurring  allusions  to  places  in  the  territory 
of  the  ten  tribes,  to  Mount  Tabor,  and  the  streams  of  Gilead,  and  the  idolatrous 
shrines  of  Gilgal,  and  the  splendid  woods  of  Lebanon — references  which  speak 
of  the  writer's  perfect  familiarity  with  the  scenery  of  the  Northern  Kingdom.  It 
was  indeed  a  goodly  land.  The  fairest  and  grandest  regions  within  the  entire 
country  were  to  be  found  in  it.  Its  plains  and  forests  and  rivers  were  nobler  by 
far  than  those  of  Judah.  And  Hosea  knew  it  well,  and  was  proud  of  its  beauty, 
and  grieved  much  that  men  and  women  to  whom  God  had  given  a  home  so  happy 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  ROSEA, 

and  so  richly  dowered  should  yet  be  unmindful  of  Him  and  rebel  against  Him. 
His  religion,  we  may  even  venture  to  say,  was  coloured  to  some  extent  by  the 
pleasantness  and  geniality  of  his  natural  surroundings.  It  had  in  it  more  of 
freedom  and  of  trust  and  of  joy  than  that  of  the  dwellers  in  the  South,  where  nature 
was  less  kindly  and  her  moods  more  severe.  If  it  had  not  been  that  his  heart  was 
keptin  perpetual  sadness  by  the  contemplation  of  his  people's  sin  his  would  certainly 
have  been  a  very  glad  and  peace-bringing  faith.  A  native  of  this  attractive  land, 
and  gifted  himself  with  a  temperament  natiu-ally  joyous,  Hosea  was  nevertheless 
called  to  work  that  plunged  him  into  gloom.  His  lot  was  cast  in  a  period  when  his 
country  had  to  contend  with  many  fears  and  fightings  from  without,  and  when  it 
was  full  of  utter  corruption  within.  His  prophetic  activity  extended  over  a  long 
time,  and  in  this  respect  too  he  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  Amos,  whose  ministry 
was  but  an  episode  in  his  life  and  was  quickly  fulfilled.  All  his  days  he  seems  to 
have  preached  righteousness  and  temperance  and  judgment  to  come  in  the  hearing 
of  men  who  paid  little  heed  to  his  message.  His  labours  stretched  over  a  series  of 
terrible  years,  during  which  he  saw  his  people  sink  from  one  depth  of  degradation 
and  sorrow  to  other  and  lower  depths.  Efe  hegaix  to  speak  in  God's  name  while 
Jeroboam  II.,  the  greatest  of  the  rulers  of  Israel,  was  still  on  the  throne.  But  the 
reign  of  this  monarch  was  drawing  to  its  close,  and  the  deluge  came  when  he  was 
gone.  Amos  had,  indeed,  found  much  to  condemn  in  Israel  even  in  the  days  of 
Jeroboam;  but,  bad  as  things  undoubtedly  were  then,  society  was  compact  and 
pure  compared  with  what  it  became  after  the  king's  death.  A  long  interregnum 
followed,  and  for  years  no  governor  guided  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth. 
Then  one  sovereign  after  another — Zechariah,  Shallum,  Menahem,  Pekahiah — • 
mounted  the  throne,  placed  on  it  like  the  later  Roman  emperors  by  the  rough 
soldiers  of  the  palace,  and  each  of  them  permitted  to  rule  for  only  a  few  months. 
It  was  in  the  midst  of  this  unquiet  time  that  Hosea  addressed  his  coimtrymen. 
With  these  changes  in  the  state  he  was  familiar.  And,  while  the  government 
of  the  land  was  so  unsettled,  its  inhabitants  went  from  stage  to  stage  in  the  evil 
ways  of  sin.  They  seemed  to  have  lost  all  sense  of  shame.  They  had  cast  every 
restraining  influence  to  the  winds.  There  was  no  moral  energy  in  their  hearts,  ; 
and  no  self-control  in  their  lives.  Few  prophets  draw  such  pictures  of  prevalen*  ' 
ungodliness  as  the  son  of  Beeri  does.  "Whoredom  and  wine  and  new  wine,"  I 
he  tells  us,  "took  away  the  understanding"  of  his  people.  "  False  swearing,  1 
and  killing,  and  stealing,  and  committing  adultery  broke  out,  and  blood  touched 
blood,"  one  dark  crime  treading  close  on  the  heels  of  another.  If  princes  and 
subjects  had  only  been  wise,  what  a  glorious  history  a  land  so  favoured  by  heaven 
might  well  have  had  !  And  now  the  strength  of  the  nation  was  spent ;  it  had 
fought  and  finished  an  evil  fight ;  its  powers  were  wasted  ;  there  was  no  great 
future  in  store  for  it — only  a  future  of  misery  during  which  it  would  reap  as  it  had 
sown  ;  it  was  already  old.  "  Strangers  have  devoured  the  strength  of  Israel, 
and  he  knows  it  not."  Hosea  mourned,  "  yea,  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon 
him,  yet  he  knows  not."  The  enthusiasm  and  the  possibilities  of  youth  were  gone 
for  ever  ;  the  weakness  of  age  had  come  long  before  the  time  ;  and  so  blind  were 
the  i)eople  that  they  were  unconscious  of  their  sad  decay.  Hosea  was  the  prophet 
of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Northern  Kingdom.  He  has  been  called  "  the 
Jeremiah  "f  Tarat^l/'  and  the  name  is  a  good  one,  for  he  preached  when  his  nation 
was  tottering  to  its  ruin,  as  Jeremiah  preached  in  the  troublous  days  when  the  sun 
of  Judah  was  about  to  set  in  clouds  and  darkness.  God  raised  him  up  to  speak 
plain  words  to  his  fellow-countrymen  about  their  sin,  and  to  predict  the  heavy 
doom  which  such  sin  must  bring  on  the  wrong-doers.  This  was  a  sore  and  bitter 
duty — was  it  not  ? — for  one  who  had  in  him  a  very  tender  heart,  and  who  loved 
his  people  with  an  overmastering  affection.  What  wonder  was  it  that  he  should 
resemble  Jeremiah  in  another  characteristic  also — in  this,  that  he  was  scarcely 
able  to  utter  his  message  for  weeping  ?  The  herdsman  of  Tekoa  might  joiu-ney 
from  his  southern  home  to  Bethel,  and  proclaim  against  it  God's  exceeding  great 
and  fearful  woe  ;  and  his  voice  might  never  once  so  much  as  falter  while  he 
thundered  out  his  message  of  death  ;  he  might  show  himself  stern  and  inexorable 
from  first  to  last.  It  was  little  marvel  that  he  should  be  so  unflinching  ;  he  was 
himself  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.  But  it  was  impossible  for 
Hosea  to  fulfil  his  task  in  such  a  fashion.  For  they  were  his  brothers  and 
sisters  whose  transgression  he  was  bidden  expose,  and  whose  punishment  he 
had  to  foretell.  He  had  grown  up  among  them.  He  was  bound  to  them 
by  the  strongest  ties.      He  did  not  hide  or  extenuate  the  tidings   of  wrath 


INTRODVCTION  TO  ROSEA. 


which  Jehovah  had  commanded  him  to  publish  abroad ;  he  was  too  faithful  to 
do  that ;  but  when  he  tried  to  announce  them  he  was  almost  overcome  by  his 
emotion.  His  prophecy  is  a  succession  of  sighs  and  sobs.  Each  verse  is 
"  one  heavy  toll  in  a  funeral  knelL"  That  was  the  mission  entrusted  to 
Hosea. 

II.  But  if  the  task  itself  seemed  painful  in  the  extreme,  the  prophet  was  madb 

BEADY  FOR  EXECUTING  IT  BY  A   DISCIPUNB    WHICH    WAS    MORE    PAINFUL    STILL. 

It  was  through  sore  experiences  in  his  own  history  that  he  was  moulded  into  God's 
messenger  and  representative.  What  these  experiences  were  he  explains  in  the 
opening  chapters  of  his  book.  This,  then,  is  the  miserable  recital.  Some  time  in 
the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  when  the  nation  was  already  far  from  perfect  in  God's 
sight,  and  yet  was  not  so  confirmed  in  its  wickedness  as  it  afterwards  became, 
Hosea  married  Gomer,  the  daughter  of  Diblaim.  He  hoped,  we  may  be  sure, 
that  she  would  prove  a  good  and  loyal  wife  to  him  ;  for  the  supposition  of  some 
expositors  that  Jehovah  commanded  His  prophet  to  unite  himself  with  a  woman 
who  was  already  known  to  be  of  impure  character  is  absurd  and  revolting.  But  the 
trustfulness  with  which  Hosea  regarded  his  spouse  was  not  justified  in  actual  fact : 
she  showed  herself  unfaithful  to  him  ;  she  left  his  roof  to  go  after  other  lovers,  and  I 
became  the  mother  of  children  born  in  infidelity.  Was  it  not  the  most  grievous  1 
wound  which  a  man  could  receive  ?  On  Ezekiel,  another  in  the  goodly  fellowship 
of  the  prophets,  a  great  sorrow  fell  once.  His  wife,  the  desire  of  his  eyes,  was 
taken  from  him  with  a  stroke.  He  spake  unto  the  people  in  the  morning,  and  at 
even  she  died,  and  God  bade  him  refrain  from  every  token  of  mourning,  that  he 
might  be  a  sign  to  the  nation  of  the  Jews.  But  death,  though  it  overwhelms  us 
with  grief,  is  not  so  dreadful  as  dishonour  ;  and  they  were  decider  floods  of  trouble 
into  which  Hosea  went  down  with  his  naked  feet  than  any  which  Ezekiel  knew. 
And  yet,  despite  Gomer's  disloyalty,  he  loved  her  still.  His  love  was  that  master-  ^■ 
feeling  which  the  Song  of  Solomon  calls  "  strong  as  death  "  and  "  obstinate  as  the 
grave."  He  acknowledged  her  three  children  for  his  own,  and  gave  them  names, 
to  each  of  which  a  prophetic  lesson  was  attached.  And  by  and  by  he  resolved 
that,  if  it  were  possible,  he  would  win  her  back  to  her  old  allegiance.  He  went 
after  her,  and  found  her  in  a  state  of  utter  misery,  apparently  sold  as  a  slave, 
for  he  had  to  buy  her  to  himself  "  for  fifteen  pieces  of  silver,  and  for  a  homer  of 
barley,  and  a  half  homer  of  barley."  So  she  came  to  dwell  once  more  under  her 
husband's  roof,  yet  not  to  dwell  there  just  as  she  had  done  formerly.  Things 
could  not  go  on  as  though  there  had  been  no  faithlessness  on  her  part.  For  nmnj' 
days  the  prophet  had  to  watch  over  his  wife,  secluding  her  from  temptation, 
exercising  a  wise  carefulness  and  jealousy.  It  was  with  Hosea  just  as  it  was  with 
the  Arthur  of  our  literature.  Gomer  was  untrue  hke  Guinevere,  and  her  conduct 
pierced  her  lord's  heart  and  cut  him  to  the  quick.  But  the  prophet  was  as  com- 
passionate and  long-suffering,  as  changeless  in  his  affection,  as  willing  to  pardon, 
as  the  blameless  king.  And  in  the  end  there  was  a  reconciliation.  If  the  past 
could  not  be  cancelled  quite,  it  was  at  least  forgiven.  The  poor  foolish  wanderer 
returned  to  her  loyalty.  The  truant  was  welcomed  home.  These  are  the  details 
of  Hosea's  home  life,  so  far  as  they  are  related  in  the  first  and  third  chapters  of  his 
prophecy.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  some  interpreters  should  have  denied 
the  literal  and  historical  significance  of  the  account,  and  should  have  resolved 
the  story  into  nothing  more  than  parable  or  allegory.  The  whole  narrative  is 
given  with  perfect  simplicity,  and  yet  with  touching  reserve.  It  has  an  air  of 
truthfulness  about  every  one  of  its  particulars.  It  appears  only  too  real.  But  many 
of  us  may  be  inclined  to  ask  why  the  prophet  should  have  said  anything  about  this 
great  struggle  and  bitterness  of  his  life.  Ought  he  not  to  have  kept  such  a  matter 
with  sacred  care  from  the  view  of  the  world  ?  Was  it  not  one  of  those  secret 
things  about  which  God  only  should  have  been  told  ?  He  had  a  very  sufficient 
reason  for  the  disclosure.  He  wished  to  show  how  it  was  that  he  became  a  prophet, 
and  to  explain  why  he  was  led  to  those  conceptions  which  he  had  formed,  of  the 
conduct  of  Israel  and  of  the  character  of  God.  It  was  from  his  own  history  that 
he  learned  at  once  the  disobedience  of  his  native  land  and  the  long-suffering  pity 
of  its  Lord.  He  saw  that  the  shame  which  had  blighted  his  home  was  a  represen- 
tation in  miniature  of  that  shame  which  the  seed  of  Jacob,  whom  Jehovah  had 
espoused  to  Himself,  had  cruelly  inflicted  on  Him ;  that  the  grief  which  he  felt 
over  the  erring  Gomer — a  grief  without  an  element  of  anger  in  it — was  symbolic 
of  God's  grief  over  His  backsliding  nation  ;  that  the  Divine  heart  was  but  his  own 


INTRODUCTION  TO  H08EA. 


human  heart,  with  all  its  feelings  deepened  and  all  its  emotions  intensified.  As 
Hosea  passed  through  the  sad  troubles  of  his  household,  his  eyes  were  opened, 
and  the  thought  dawned  on  him  that  his  experience  was  only  a  type  of  God's 
experience  in  His  dealings  with  His  people.  His  sufferings  lifted  him  into  fellow- 
ship with  God,  taught  him  to  think  as  God  thought,  gave  him  a  sympathetic 
insight  into  God'a  heart;  and  so  he  came  out  of  the  fires  God's  prophet  and 
spokesman. 

ni.  And  now  let  us  inquire  how  Hosba  pbbfobhbd  thb  wokk  fob  which 

HB  HAD  BBEN  TBAINBD  BY  30  TBBBIBLB  A  DISCIPLINE — hoW  he  made  knOWn  God's 

message  to  Israel.  His  words  are  strong  and  passionate.  His  heart  seems  ready 
to  break  with  sorrow.  His  whole  prophecy  is  a  cry  of  agony.  There  is  no  finish 
or  elaboration  in  his  style,  for  a  man  whose  spirit  is  moved  to  its  depths  is  not 
careful  how  he  orders  his  speech.  But  what  his  utterance  lacks  in  sweetness  it 
makes  up  in  pathos  and  power.  And  through  all  the  sudden  transitions  and 
swift  changes  of  feeling  that  are  characteristic  of  these  chapters  we  can  trace  the 
effects  of  the  painful  education  which  Hosea  had  undergone  to  fit  him  for  his  duty. 
Israel  at  large,  he  fancied,  was  like  the  wayward  Gomer  of  his  home.  Unfaithful- 
ness to  Jehovah — apostasy  from  the  heavenly  Husband  whose  kindness  surpassed 
the  kindness  of  men — that  was  the  sin  of  his  nation.  And  still,  after  all  the 
provocations  of  the  past,  the  aggrieved  and  injured  Lord  cared  for  His  thankless 
spouse.  The  framer  of  hearts  felt  towards  foolish  Israel  the  same  unselfish  affection 
with  which  Hosea  knew  that  he  had  himself  followed  the  unstedfast  daughter  of 
Diblaim.  Whatever  gentleness  and  pity  dwolt  in  his  breast  had  been  kindled  at 
God's  altar.  Whatever  readiness  to  forgive  he  might  display,  God  would  display 
far  more  willingly  and  gladly.  The  disloyalty  of  Israel  and  the  pitifulness  of  God — 
these  are  the  two  prominent  ideas  of  this  book.  The  former — the  disloyalty  of 
his  nation — Hosea  sets  forth  with  great  fulness  of  detail.  He  finds  many  tokens  of 
ingratitude  as  he  looks  around  him.  There  was,  for  example,  the  general  and 
flagrant  immorality  of  the  land.  How  dark  that  was,  and  how  notorious  !  Those 
who  should  have  been  freest  from  pollution  were  often  ringleaders  in  crime. 
The  very  priests  rejoiced  in  the  spread  of  iniquity,  and  M'ere  foremost  in  outraging 
the  law,  lying  in  wait  as  robbers  and  murdering  in  the  way  to  Shechem.  The 
king  and  his  princes  found  an  imholy  pleasure  in  conforming  to  the  prevailing 
licence,  and  were  glad  rather  than  grieved  when  they  contemplated  the  wiLkedness 
of  their  subjects.  But  besides  this  abounding  lawlessness,  and  lying  at  its  root 
and  folmdation,  there  were  the  religious  declension  and  the  false  worship  of  the 
people.  The  prophet  knew  well  that  the  outward  errors  of  his  fellow-countrymen 
sprang,  as  external  transgressions  so  frequently  do,  from  backsliding  in  religion. 
Had  not  Israel  forsaken  the  spiritual  worship  of  Jehovah  ?  Had  not  the  nation 
long  since  demanded  a  visible  symbol  of  Him  ?  Was  it  not  given  up  to  the  adora- 
tion of  the  golden  calves  ?  Hosea  was  indeed  very  jealous  for  the  honour  of  his 
God.  No  doubt  he  had  heard  many  Israelites  urge  in  extenuation  of  the  image 
worship  that  it  was  really  the  service  of  Jehovah,  and  that  those  who  went  up  to 
the  local  sanctuaries  in  Samaria  and  Bethel  and  Gilgal  simply  sought  to  give 
definiteness  to  their  idea  of  the  one  living  and  true  God  when  they  knelt  before  an 
outwiird  representation  of  Him.  But  he  brushed  aside  with  impatience  the  weak 
excuse.  What  was  the  calf  but  an  idol  ?  "  The  workman  made  it ;  therefore  it 
was  not  God."  Moreover,  this  materialising  of  religion  was  leading  only  too 
directly  and  speedily  to  unmistakable  Baal  worship.  The  old  Phoenician  idolatry, 
against  which  Elijah  had  waged  so  fierce  a  battle  on  the  summit  of  Carmel,  was 
threatening  again  to  overspread  the  land.  The  children  of  Ephraim  were  sinning 
more  and  more  ;  they  had  made  them  molten  images  of  their  silver  ;  they  sacrificed 
upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and  burned  incense  upon  the  hills.  Another 
indication  of  the  fickleness  of  Israel,  and  of  its  want  of  true  and  deep  attachment 
to  its  heavenly  Bridegroom,  Hosea  discovered  in  its  foolish  foreign  policy.  It 
would  rather  lean  on  the  nations  round  about  its  borders  than  on  the  strong 
arm  of  its  Maker,  who  should  have  been  its  Husband  too.  It  was  far  from  giving 
\j  Him  the  whole-hearted  devotion  which  He  claimed  as  His  rightful  portion.  Some- 
times it  turned  to  one  side,  and  sometimes  to  another.  It  fluttered  from  place  to 
place,  like  a  silly  dove,  calling  now  to  Egypt  and  then  going  to  Assyria.  Such 
conduct  the  prophet  felt  to  be  not  merely  a  crime  but  a  blunder,  for  whenever 
the  Israelites  should  forsake  one  of  these  great  empires,  the  other  would  become 
i::dignant  and  would  take  revenge  for  the  neglect  inflicted  upon  it.     But  thia 


INTRODUCTION  TO  HOSE  A. 


V 


coquetting  with  powerful  neighbours — this  "  hiring  lovers  among  the  nations  " — 
was  sad  and  pitiable,  chiefly  ^cause  it  showed  that  the  heart  of  the  chosen  genera- 
tion no  longer  beat  true  to  its  God.  The  people  had  forgotten  Him  who  ought  to 
have  been  their  fortress  and  high-tower  ;  and  their  forgetfulness  would  bring  its 
chastisement.  Still  another  proof  of  Israel's  faithlessness  Hosea  laid  stress  upon 
in  his  preaching.  Was  it  not  wrong,  he  asked,  that  the  nation  should  remain 
separated  from  Judah,  its  brother  ?  Was  there  not  rebellion  against  God,  dis- 
regard of  His  purposes,  opposition  to  His  will,  in  this  division  of  the  kingdom  ? 
Were  not  the  ten  tribes  in  grievous  fault  when  they  continued  to  foster  their  quarrel 
with  the  house  and  dynasty  of  David — the  house  which  the  Lord  had  blessed  ? 
This,  the  prophet  declared,  was  part  of  God's  indictment  of  the  subjects  of  the 
North :  "  They  have  set  up  kings,  but  not  by  Me  ;  they  have  made  princes,  and 
I  knew  it  not."  And  he  prayed  eagerly  for  the  healing  of  the  ancient  wound. 
A  bright  vision  rose  before  him  even  in  the  midst  of  his  griefs.  For  a  moment  he 
caught  a  glimpse  of  the  glory  of  the  latter  days,  when  "  the  children  of  Israel  should 
return  and  seek  Jehovah  their  God  and  David  their  king."  Such  was  the  country's 
infidelity  towards  God — an  infidelity  which  pierced  as  with  a  sharp  knife  the  heart 
of  Hosea,  and  wounded  him  as  the  unstedfastness  of  Gomer  had  done.  But  this 
was  not  the  whole  of  his  message.  Over  against  the  fickle  and  unreliable  nation 
he  saw  standing  the  good  and  faithful  God,  and  he  had  much  to  tell  of  the  Divine 
mercy  and  graciousness.  Like  his  own  clinging,  inextinguishable  affection  for  his 
wife  even  in  the  period  of  her  folly,  like  it,  but  purer  and  stronger  and  more  per- 
severing, was  the  affection  of  the  liord  Jehovah  for  the  land  which  He  had  wedded 
to  Himself,  and  of  which  He  was  both  the  Father  and  the  Husband.  It  was  the 
high  honour  of  Hosea  that,  first  among  all  the  prophets,  he  was  prompted  to  call 
the  feehng  with  which  God  regarded  His  people  by  the  name  of  "  love."  None 
had  xised  so  sweet  and  pregnant  a  word  before.  Joel  had  said  that  the  Lord  was 
"  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger  and  of  great  kindness."  Amos  had  spoken 
of  His  goodness  in  redeeming  the  children  of  Israel  from  Egypt  and  in  planting 
them  in  Canaan.  But  Hosea  went  further  than  either  of  his  predecessors  had  done. 
He  lit  upon  a  treasure  which  they  had  not  been  permitted  to  find — he  discovered 
a  pearl  of  great  price — when  he  realised  that  the  chiefest  of  God's  perfections, 
the  very  glory  and  crown  of  His  character,  is  His  love.  These  were  some  of  the 
words  which  this  old  preacher  put  into  the  lips  of  the  Lord :  "  When  Israel  was  a 
child,  then  I  loved  him  "  ;  and  these  also,  "  I  will  heal  their  backslidings  ;  I  will 
love  them  freely."  No  doubt,  it  was  upon  the  commtmity  as  a  whole  rather  than 
upon  individual  hearts  that  Hosea  thought  of  Jehovah  as  lavishing  this  best  of  all 
His  gifts.  He  concerned  himself  with  the  kingdom  of  God  in  its  entirety,  and  not 
with  the  units  that  went  to  compose  it.  God's  affection  for  His  people  was  in 
truth  an  invincible  affection.  He  hoped  against  hope,  when  they  went  on  in 
sin.  He  felt  that  He  could  not  abandon  them  to  utter  ruin.  His  soul  wept  over 
them.  "  How  can  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  How  can  I  cast  thee  away,  Israel  ? 
My  heart  burns  within  Me  ;  I  am  overcome  with  sympathy ;  I  will  not  execute 
the  fierceness  of  Mine  anger ;  I  will  not  turn  to  destroy  thee."  These  were  the 
thoughts  of  God  which  Hosea  learned  in  the  time  of  his  sorrow,  when  he  was 
taught  to  find  in  the  emotions  of  his  own  breast  a  picture  of  the  feelings  that 
throbbed  within  the  breast  of  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  If  Israel  persisted 
now  in  her  folly  and  disobedience,  she  was  without  excuse.  Amos  had  spoken 
to  her  of  the  righteousness  and  justice  of  God.  But  the  knowledge  that  God  is 
sternly  righteous  and  inflexibly  just  will  help  none  of  us.  But  Hosea  succeeded 
Amos  ;  and  the  burden  of  Hosea's  message  was  this :  "  God  is  love  ;  He  will  save 
you  from  your  sins,  if  you  seek  His  forgiveness ;  He  will  not  retain  His  anger  for 
ever."  And  that  is  all  that  we  need.  This  revelation  of  God  should  break 
down  our  rebelliousness.  It  should  drive  every  suspicious  thought  far  from 
our  minds.     It  should  melt  us  into  submission.     {Original  Secession  Magazine.) 

The  homiletic  use  of  Hosea. — I.  The  pbophet. — We  have  no  biography 
of  Hosea,  but  his  book  leaves  upon  us  such  a  clear  impression  of  his  character 
that  the  person  who  brings  the  message  is  as  real  as  the  message.  He  has  five 
quaUties  which  especially  equip  the  man  who  would  save  souls.  1.  Devotion  to 
God.  He  loves  God,  is  loyal  to  Him,  is  deeply  interested  in  His  cause.  He 
dwells  on  His  very  names  with  fond  and  tender  stress.  2.  Yet  he  has  a 
wondrous  sympathy  with  Israel  in  her  woes,  and,  what  is  far  more,  a  vicarious 
fellowship  in  her  guilt.     3.  Zeal  for  righteousness.     He  denounces  formal  religion 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ROSEA. 


as  worthless,  however  costly  and  elaborate.     He  denounces  the  lying,  swearing, 
stealing,  adultery,  and  murder  which  pervaded  the  nation,  in  spite  of  its  religious 
show,  and  declares  that  the  Lord  desires  mercy  and  not  sacrifice,  the  knowledge 
of  God  rather  than  burnt-offerings.     4.  Fidelity  to  truth.     He  declares  the  whole 
counsel  of  God  as  he  knows  it.     Even  sympathy  for  Israel  does  not  keep  him 
from  affirming  that  "  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of  rebuke."     5.  Hope- 
fulness.    With  all  the  sorrow,  reproof,  and  forecast  of  woe  there  is  a  spirit  of 
hope  that  rises  above   all  he  sees  and  forebodes.     II.    The    times. — Hosea's 
ministry  certainly  lay  in  the  later  years  of  the  reign  of  Jeroboam   II.,   and 
the   troublous   days   that   came   just   afterward.     The   reign   of  Jeroboam  II. 
was  the  most  brilUant  of  all  in  the  kingdom.     The  brief  account  in  the  Book 
of  Kings  suggests   power,  enterprise,  and  military  glory.     But  the  account  in 
Kings  says :    "  Jeroboam  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."     Hosea's  descrip- 
tion  accords.     This   prosperity  covers   and  decorates  disease.     Israel   has  for- 
gotten that  God  has  prospered  her.     Jeroboam  is  succeeded  by  a  son,  Zechariah, 
who  is  killed  by  a  conspiracy  after  six  months.     His  assassin,  Shallum,  reigns 
one  month  and  is  killed.     His  slayer  and  successor,  Menahem,  reigns  longer. 
The  Book  of  Kings  gives  him  ten  years ;  the  critics  say  eight.     But  he  has  to 
pay  heavy  tribute  to  Assyria,  and  loads  his  people  with  taxes  to  do  so.     So 
the  history   goes   on.      They  look  for   help  now  to  Assyria,   now  to   Egypt. 
Disaster,  ruin,  exile  are  close.     The  homiletic   bearing  of  this   is  plain.     Here 
is    a    picture    of   material    prosperity   and    religious    display    gilding    spiritual 
destitution    and     moral    rottenness,    and    inevitably    ending     in     overthrow. 
IIL  The   teachings   of  the   prophet. — 1.  His   doctrine  of   God.     There  is  a 
conception  here  of  lasting  value  to  our  theology.     Ineffable  hoUness  is  combined 
with  yearning  love  for  the  siimer.     2.  His  doctrine  of  sin.     This  is  thoroughly 
practical.     Little  or  nothing  is  said  of  original  sin.     Actual  transgression  gets 
the  chief  attention.     When  people  are  lying,  cheating,  steaHng,  kilMng,  and  com- 
mitting adultery,  the  philosophy  of  sin  draws  less  notice  than  its  phenomena.     The 
indictment  tmder  which  the  several  counts  of  transgression  are  to  be  marshalled 
is  in  viii.  12.     The  progress  of  sin  is  shown  in  xiii.  2 ;  its  peril  in  xiii.  9  and  in 
xiii.  16.     The  latter  teaches  also  the  true  character  of  sin  to  be  not  misfortune, 
but  rebelUon  against  God.     3.  The  nature  and  the  duty  of  the  knowledge  of 
God.     This  is  a  doctrine  which  is  valuable  to-day  as  a  corrective  of  agnosticism. 
Hosea  regards  ignorance  of  God  to  be  not  a  mishap  or  a  mere  hmitation,  but 
a  grievous  sin.     In  iv.   1  he  says  God  has  a  controversy  with  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land,  because  there  is  no  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land ;  in  vi.  3  he  says, 
"  So  shall  we  know  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord  "  (R.V.  substitutes  "  let  us  " 
for  "  shall  we  ").     The  knowledge  is  experiential  and  ethical.     It  is  reached  by 
repentance  and  prayer.     It  is  retained  by  obedience.     It  is  lost  by  transgression 
and  neglect.     The  Christian  pulpit  to-day  may  fairly  face  the  agnostic  with  the 
truth  that  the  knowledge  of  God  comes  by  ethical  activity  rather  tlian  meta- 
physical inquiry,  that  the  thesaurus  of  its  data  is  the  spiritual  consciousness 
rather  than  the  realm  of  material  natiu-e,  and  that  the  phenomena  of  the  latter 
can  receive  their  highest  and  truest  interpretation  only  in  the  light  of  the  former. 
4.  The  sin  of  scliism.     Hosea  was  a  patriot  of  the  Northern  Kingdom,  loyal  to 
that  part  of  the  Lord's  people  to  which  he  belonged.     Yet  he  exalts  the  ideal 
of  vmity  and  predicts  the  day  when  the  children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of 
Israel  shall  be  gathered  together  and  appoint  themselves  one  head.     Unity  was 
lost  through    folly,   sin,   oppression,   unwilHngness   to  reform   abuses.      It  was 
predicted,  permitted,  ordered  in  the  providence  of  God ;  but  it  was  not  the  ideal 
of  the  kingdom.     It  was  the  outgrowth  of  circumstances,  but  not  a  state  where- 
with to  be  content.     The  same  is  true  of  the  Church.     Historic  causes  produced 
divisions,  which  were  permitted,  even  ordered,  in  God's  providence.     But  divided 
Christendom  is  not  the  ideal.     Hosea's  prophecy  must  be  fulfilled  in  its  broad 
spiritual  meaning.     The  divided  hosts  of  Jehovah  must  be  gathered  under  the 
one  Head.    For  this  Christ  prayed ;  for  this  we  pray.     (T.  C.  Strau«.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


HOSEA. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vkb.  1.  The  'Word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Hosea. — The  prophet  Hoaea  : — I.  Hb 
WAS  DiviNBLT  COMMISSIONED.  Holy  men  of  old  spake  not  of  their  own  wisdom 
or  of  their  own  will ;  they  spake  the  Word  of  Grod.  In  what  a  contemptuous 
light  their  conduct  places  those  who  in  the  present  day  quote  the  sayings  of  the 
Fathers,  the  Church,  or  Tradition,  or  suggest  modem  innovations,  and  strange 
interpretations.  We  have  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  prompting  of  the  Spirit ; 
and  is  not  that  enough  ?  II.  Hk  had  worthy  ancestry.  His  father's  name 
would  not  have  been  mentioned  had  it  not  been  to  honour  the  son.  How  the 
father  can  strengthen  and  establish  the  son,  or  the  son  ruin  and  crush  the  father  ! 

III.  He  prophesied  at  a  critical  period.  1.  It  was  a  long  time.  Probably 
eighty  years.  2.  It  was  a  changeable  time.  Various  scenes.  DiflFerent  char- 
acters of  kings  and  peoples.  He  lived  in  the  reigns  of  one  good  king  and  four 
bad  ones.  He  saw  plenty  and  famine.  He  saw  one  revival  and  much  sin. 
3.  It  was  a  tentative  time.  Upon  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  depended  their  ultimate 
existence.  IV.  Practical  thotiohts.  1.  Hosea  must  have  begun  his  ministry 
very  young.  2.  How  very  little  we  have  of  his  prophesyings.  His  chief  work 
was  directly  relative  to  his  age.  God  has  preserved  what  was  of  permanent 
interest.  3.  How  long  a  man  of  God  may  labour,  and  yet  how  little  good  he  may 
accomplish.  He  did  not  prevent  the  Captivity.  We  are  not  answerable  for  our 
success,  but  we  are  for  our  duty.  We  are  not  to  relax  our  efforts  because  men 
are  blind  or  fools.  ( William  Jay. )  The  prophet  Hosea  : — I.  Who  he  was. 
His  name  means  a  saviour,  one  who  brings  salvation,  and  many  saving  and  savoiury 
truths  this  prophet  brings  to  us.  The  Jews  say  that  when  a  prophet's  father's 
name  is  given,  the  father  was  a  prophet  as  well  as  the  son.  "  Beeri  "  means  a 
well  that  has  springing  water  in  it,  freely  and  clearly  running.  II.  To  whom 
WAS  the  prophet  sent  ?  Especially  to  the  Ten  Tribes.  The  Ten  Tribes,  rending 
themselves  from  the  house  of  David,  separated  themselves  also  from  the  true 
worship  of  God,  and  horrible  wickedness  and  all  manner  of  abominations  grew  up 
amongst  them.  III.  What  was  Hosea's  errand  to  them  ?  To  convince  them 
of  their  abominable  idolatry,  and  those  other  wickednesses  in  which  they  lived, 
and  to  denounce  severe  threatenings,  yea,  most  fearful  destruction.  His  threaten- 
ing is  more  severe  than  any  given  before.     Yet  he,  too,  has  a  message  of  mercy. 

IV.  What  WAS  his  commission  ?  Hehadthe"  Word  of  Jehovah."  Hosea  did  not 
go  for  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  but  the  Word  came  to  him.  The  knowledge  of  a  call 
to  a  work  will  help  a  man  through  the  difficulties  of  the  work.  V.  The  time 
WHEN  Hosea  prophesied.  About  the  time  that  the  city  of  Rome  was  built.  The 
beginning  of  the  Olympiads.  During  the  reign  of  four  kings,  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz, 
and  Hezekiah.  A  lengthened  prophesying  of  nearly  fourscore  years.  See  what  of 
Grod's  mind  will  spring  from  this.  1.  It  pleases  God  sometimes  that  some  men's 
labours  shall  abide  more  full  to  posterity  than  others,  though  the  labours  of  those 
others  are  greater  and  as  excellent  as  theirs.  2.  It  appears  that  Hosea  began  to 
prophesy  very  young.  3.  Hosea  prophesying  thus  long  it  appears  he  lived  to 
grow  old  in  his  work.  4.  By  Hosea's  continuance  in  so  many  kings'  reigns,  it 
ie  evident  he  must  have  gone  through  a  variety  of  conditions.     He  preserved 


a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  l 

a  constancy  of  spirit,  however  raried  might  be  the  difficultiea  of  his  work. 
6.  God  may  continue  a  prophet  a  long  time  amongst  a  people,  and  yet  they  may 
never  be  converted.  6.  It  is  an  honour  to  the  ministers  of  God,  who  meet  with 
many  difficulties  and  discouragements  in  their  way,  yet  continue  fresh  and  lively 
to  the  very  end.  7.  It  pleases  God  many  times  to  let  His  prophets  see  the  ful- 
filling of  their  threatenings  upon  the  people  against  whom  they  have  denounced 
them.  {Jeremiah  BurrougJis.)  Scripture,  kings,  and  truth: — I.  Thi  sssxncb 
or  ScBirruBB.  What  ia  the  essence  of  the  Bible  ?  It  is  here  called  "  The  Word 
of  the  Lord."  Analyse  the  expression.  1.  It  is  a  "  Word."  A  word  fulfils  two 
functions ;  it  is  a  revelation  and  an  instrument.  The  Bible  is  the  manifestation 
of  God,  it  shows  His  intellect  and  heart,  and  is  His  instrument  as  well ;  by  which 
He  accomplishes  His  purpose  on  the  human  mind.     By  it  He  is  said  to  enlighten, — 

iuicken, — cleanse, — conquer,  &c.  2.  It  is  a  Divine  Word.  "  The  Word  of  the 
ord."  Words  are  always  powerful  and  important  according  to  the  nature  and 
character  of  the  speaker.  Because  the  Lord  is  all-mighty  and  holy.  His  Word  is 
all-powerful  and  pure.  3.  It  is  a  Divine  Word  concerning  men.  The  prophecy 
came  to  Hoeea  in  relation  to  Israel.  The  Bible  is  a  Word  to  man.  4.  It  is  a 
Divine  Word  concerning  man  coming  through  men.  In  the  Bible  God  speaks  to 
man  through  man.  This  gives  the  charm  of  an  imperishable  humanity  to  the 
Bible.  II.  Thb  mortality  of  kings.  Several  kings  are  here  mentioned  who 
appeared  and  passed  away  during  the  ministry  of  Hosea.  Uzziah  was  the 
eleventh  king  of  Judah.  His  example  was  holy,  and  his  reign  peaceful  and  pros- 
perous. Ahaz  was  a  son  of  Jotham  :  at  the  age  of  twenty  he  succeeded  his  royal 
sire.  He  gave  himself  up  to  idolatry,  and  sacrificed  even  his  own  children  to 
the  gods  of  the  heathen.  Hezekiah,  the  son  and  successor  of  Ahaz,  was  a  man  of 
distinguished  virtue  and  religion,  animated  by  true  piety  and  patriotism.  Jero- 
boam was  the  son  of  Joash,  and  great  grandson  of  Jehu,  and  followed  the  former 
Jeroboam,  the  man  who  made  Israel  to  sin,  and,  like  him,  sank  into  the  lowest 
idolatry  and  corruption.  Some  of  these  kings  had  come  and  gone  during  the 
ministry  of  Hoeea ; — kings  die,  &c.  1.  This  fact  is  a  blessing.  When  we  think 
of  such  kings  as  those  of  which  Ahaz  and  Jeroboam  were  types,  we  thank  God 
for  death,  and  rejoice  in  the  "  king  of  terrors,"  who  comes  to  strike  the  despota 
down.  2.  This  fact  is  a  lesson.  What  does  the  death  of  kings  teach  ?  (1)  Tho 
rigorous  impartiality  of  death.  Death  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  it  treats  tha 
pauper  and  the  prince  alike.  (2)  The  utter  powerlessness  of  wealth.  (3)  Th* 
sad  hoUowness  of  worldly  glory.  Death  strips  sovereigns  of  all  their  pageantry 
and  reduces  them  to  common  dust.  III.  Thb  pbbpetuity  of  truth.  Although 
these  kings  successively  appeared  and  passed  away,  the  ministry  of  Hosea  kept 
on.  1.  The  '*  Word  of  the  Lord"  is  adapted  to  all  generations.  It  is  congruous 
with  all  inteUects,  it  chimes  in  with  all  hearts,  it  provides  for  the  common  wants 
of  all.  2.  The  "  Word  of  the  Lord  "  is  necessary  for  all  generations.  (Homilist.) 
Trouble  a  teacher  : — A  wonderful  book  is  this  prophecy  of  Hosea  (b.c.  800-726). 
The  man  himself  at  once  attracts  our  sympathy  and  regard  by  his  personal  suffer- 
ings. There  is  no  teacher  of  Divine  truth  to  be  compared  for  one  moment  for 
excellence  so  deep  and  great  as  trouble.  Hosea  had  an  infinite  sorrow  at  home ; 
therefore  he  was  so  great  and  tender  a  teacher  of  Divine  truth.  He  read  every- 
thing through  his  tears ;  hence  the  enlargement,  the  colour,  the  variety,  the 
striking  beauty  of  his  visions.  When  the  sorrow  is  home  grief  it  assumes  a 
tenderer  quality.  Hosea  had  children,  but  they  had  evil  names ;  their  very 
names  were  millstones  round  the  prophet's  neck.  If  one  of  them  had  a  name 
historically  and  ideally  beautiful,  it  was  to  be  used  for  the  expression  of  judgment 
and  vengeance.  As  for  the  others,  one  represented  the  vanished  mercy  of  God, 
and  the  other  represented  the  alienation  of  the  people  from  God,  and  the  alienation 
of  God  from  the  people.  Only  sorrow  should  read  ^onie  parts  of  the  Bible, 
because  only  sorrow  could  have  written  them.  You  c;uinot  properly  sing  a  man's 
music  until  you  know  the  man  himself.  Hosea  will  iiave  a  tone  of  his  own ;  he 
will  talk  like  nobody  else ;  he  will  be  an  eccentric,  peculiar  individual ;  he  will 
begin  when  he  pleases,  and  he  will  take  a  circuit  marked  out  for  him  by  an  invisible 
guide  ;  but  now  and  again  he  will  come  down  to  the  road  we  travel,  and  will 
present  us  with  flowers  and  fruits,  and  will  say  little  sweet  sentences  to  us  that 
shall  be  as  angels,  covered  with  light,  and  tremulous  with  music.  The  sorrow  of 
Hosea  was  symbolic.  All  sorrow  is  meant  to  be  symbolic.  Whoso  has  sorrow 
is  meant  to  be  a  teacher.  You  have  no  right  to  the  exclusive  use  of  your  own 
sorrow.     Sorrow  should  only  be  silent  for  a  time ;  by  and  by  it  should  find  all 


CHAP.  I.]  HOSEA.  3 

its  words,  refine,  enlarge,  and  dignify  them,  and  pass  them  on  as  messages,  bright 
as  Gospels.  But  for  his  own  sorrow,  he  never  could  have  understood  God's  grief. 
Again  and  again  God  asks  us  to  look  at  Him  through  ourselves.  Happy  they 
who  come  up  out  of  household  trouble,  public  disappointment,  and  social  criticism, 
and  loss  and  desolation,  to  pray  larger  prayers,  and  offer  to  those  who  are  outside 
a  larger  hospitality  of  love  and  rest.  If  sorrow  makes  us  narrower  in  thought 
and  purpose,  then  sorrow  has  failed  to  convey  God's  meaning  to  the  soul. 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  The  beginning  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  by  Hosea. — The  prophet  Hosea : — 
The  prophet  Hosea  is  the  only  individual  character  that  stands  out  amidst  the 
darkness  of  this  period — the  Jeremiah,  as  he  may  be  called,  of  Israel.  His  life 
had  extended  over  nearly  the  whole  of  the  last  century  of  the  northern  kingdom. 
In  early  youth,  whilst  the  great  Jeroboam  was  still  on  the  throne,  he  had  been 
called  to  the  prophetic  office.  In  his  own  personal  history  he  shared  in  the  misery 
brought  on  his  country  by  the  profligacy  of  the  age.  In  early  youth  he  had 
been  united  in  marriage  with  a  woman  who  had  fallen  into  the  vices  which  sur- 
rounded her.  He  had  loved  her  with  a  tender  love  ;  she  had  borne  to  him  two 
sons  and  a  daughter  ;  she  had  then  deserted  him,  wandered  from  her  home, 
faUen  again  into  wild  licentiousness,  and  been  carried  off  as  a  slave.  Prom  this 
wretched  state,  with  all  the  tenderness  of  his  nature,  he  bought  her,  and  gave 
her  one  more  chance  of  recovery,  by  living  with  him,  though  apart.  No  one 
who  has  observed  the  manner  in  which  individual  experience  often  colours  the 
general  religious  doctrine  of  a  gifted  teacher  can  be  surprised  at  the  close  con- 
nection that  exists  between  the  life  of  Hosea  and  the  mission  to  which  he  was 
called.  In  his  own  grief  for  his  own  great  calamity — the  greatest  that  can  befall 
a  tender  human  soul — he  was  taught  to  feel  for  the  Divine  giief  over  the  lost 
opportunities  of  the  nation  once  so  full  of  hope.  (Dean  Stanley.)  Go,  take 
nnto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms. — God's  strange  command  to  Hosea : — Holy 
Scripture  relates  that  all  this  was  done,  and  tells  us  the  birth  and  names  of  the 
children,  as  real  history.  As  such,  then,  we  must  receive  it.  We  must  not 
imagine  things  to  be  unworthy  of  God,  because  they  do  not  commend  themselves 
to  us.  God  does  not  dispense  with  the  moral  law,  because  the  moral  law  has 
its  source  in  the  mind  of  God  Himself.  To  dispense  with  it  would  be  to  contra- 
dict Himself.  But  God,  who  is  the  absolute  Lord  of  all  things  which  He  made, 
may,  at  His  sovereign  will,  dispose  of  the  lives  or  things  which  He  created.  Thus, 
as  Sovereign  Judge,  He  commanded  the  lives  of  the  Canaanites  to  be  taken  away 
by  Israel,  as,  in  His  ordinary  providence.  He  has  ordained  that  the  magistrate 
should  not  bear  the  sword  in  vain,  but  has  made  him  His  "  minister,  a  revenger 
to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth  evil."  So,  again,  He,  whose  are  all  things, 
willed  to  repay  to  the  Israelites  their  hard  and  unjust  servitude,  by  commanding 
them  to  "  spoil  the  Egyptians."  He  who  created  marriage,  commanded  to 
Hosea  whom  he  should  marry.  The  prophet  was  not  defiled,  by  taking  as  his 
lawful  wife,  at  God's  bidding,  one  defiled,  however  hard  a  thing  this  was.  "  He 
who  remains  good,  is  not  defiled  by  coming  in  contact  with  one  evil ;  but  the 
evil,  following  his  example,  is  turned  into  good."  But  through  his  simple  obedience, 
he  foreshadowed  Him,  God  the  Word,  who  was  called  the  "  friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners  "  ;  who  warned  the  Pharisees,  that  "  the  publicans  and  harlots  should 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  them  " ;  and  who  now  vouchsafes  to 
espouse,  dwell  in,  and  unite  Himself  with,  and  so  to  hallow,  our  sinful  souls.  The 
acts  which  God  enjoined  to  the  prophets,  and  which  to  us  seem  strange,  must 
have  had  an  impressiveness  to  the  people,  in  proportion  to  their  strangeness. 
The  life  of  the  prophet  became  a  sermon  to  the  people.  Sight  impresses  more 
than  words.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Scripture  picture  -  teaching  : — In  modern 
times  picture-teaching  is  almost  confined  to  work  among  children,  because  educa- 
tion and  culture  have  made  adults  capable  of  apprehending  plain  statements, 
and  even  elaborate  arguments.  In  child-conditions  of  nations  child  methods 
of  instruction  were  wisely  employed.  And  it  is  well  for  preachers  to  bear  in 
mind  that  a  large  proportion  of  those  whom  they  address  are  as  incapable  of 
following  argument  as  children,  and  therefore  need  the  pictorial,  dramatic,  and 
illustrative  methods  of  instruction.  It  is  even  more  to  the  point  to  observe 
that  the  dramatic  acting  out  of  representative  and  suggestive  scenes,  has  always 
been,  and  still  is,  one  of  the  most  effective  methods  of  moral  instruction.  What 
we  have  in  Hosea,  whether  what  is  stated  concerning  him  be  regarded  as  history 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  I. 

or  yision,  is  a  dramatising  of  the  history  of  the  nation  of  the  Ten  Tribes  in  its 
relation  to  God  figured  as  its  husband.  The  facts  of  indiyidual  experience  are 
these.  Hoaea  takes  as  wife  a  woman  who  had  gone  astray.  All  his  love  and 
care  fail  to  recover  her  and  settle  her  in  her  home-life.  I^esently  the  old  wil* 
fulness  revives,  and  she  breaks  away  from  home,  to  live  again  a  life  of  sinful 
indulgence,  and  come  xmder  burdens  of  pain  and  slavery.  Spite  of  it  all,  Hosea 
is  willing,  if  she  will  give  up  her  sins,  to  receive  her  back,  and  give  her  the  old 
place  in  home  and  love.  The  individual  represents  the  national.  The  Ten 
Tribes  wilfully  broke  away  under  Jeroboam  I.  determined  to  live  an  inde- 
pendent life  of  self-willedness,  which  always  means  a  life  of  sin.  God  graciously 
took  this  nation  as  His,  and  strove  with  tending,  patience,  gentleness,  and  lovd 
to  win  it  as  His  own.  But  it  was  in  vain.  The  nation  again  and  again  broke 
away  from  God,  dishonoured  Him,  and  at  last  in  its  seemingly  outward  prosperity, 
under  Jeroboam  It.,  broke  away  entirely  from  Him.  Nevertheless  patient  mercy 
still  pleads.  Only  now  there  is  the  intimation  that  it  is  the  nation's  last  chance. 
Hosea,  then,  in  his  ways  with  his  wife  is  to  represent  God's  ways  with  the  nation. 
In  telling  how  he  thought  and  felt,  and  what  he  did,  and  was  willing  to  do,  Hosea 
revealed  to  the  people  the  thought  and  hope  and  anxiety  of  God  concerning  them. 
I.  Ik  taking  the  kingdom  of  Isbakl  as  His,  God  did  not  taks  a  chaste  nation. 
Under  Jeroboam  I.  the  nation  broke  away  from  its  home,  and  duty,  and  right 
relations.  It  was  a  soiled,  wilful  nation.  Nevertheless,  and  as  such  God  took 
it  for  His  own.     II.  While  calling  it  His  own,  God  did  everything  that 

LOVE  AND  cabs  COtTLD  DO  TO  WIN  THE  NATION  WHOLLY  FOB  HiMSELF  AND  EIGHT- 

BOU8NBSS.  Pathetic  is  the  tender  love  of  Hosea,  as  representing  the  patience, 
gentleness,  and  love  of  God.     III.  The  old  wilfulness  will  not  be  subdued, 

AND  AT  LAST  IT  BROKE  OUT  AGAIN,  LEADING  TO  WORSE  SINS  THAN  AT  FIRST.  Com- 
pare the  moral  and  social  life  of  Israel  under  Jeroboam  I.  and  Jeroboam  II. 

IV.  DlVINB    SEVERITIES   MUST  ATTEND  ON  DiVINE  LOVE  WHEN  MORAL  CONDITIONS 

BECOME  SO  UTTERLY  HOPELESS.  And  yet  how  evident  it  becomes,  that  judg- 
ment is  God's  strange  work,  and  mercy  His  delight !  (J.  Burroughs. )  Mysterious 
commands  : — In  the  Memorial  Hall  at  Harvard  University  there  is  a  wonderful 
array  of  beautiful  sentences  frescoed  on  the  walls  in  various  colours,  but  they 
are  all  in  Latin.  And  it  is  said  that  some  of  the  workmen  did  not  know  the  mean- 
ing of  the  sentences  they  painted,  but  could  only  put  the  letters  and  the  colours 
on  the  walls  as  they  were  told,  without  understanding  the  wondrous  meaning 
wrapped  up  in  them.  So  we  are  often  writing  our  lives  in  an  unknown  tongue  ; 
we  can  only  do  as  we  are  bidden.     {Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  4.  Call  his  name  Jexreel. — Judgment  on  the  house  of  Ahab  : — Jezreel  means, 
the  child  of  guilt ;  therefore  not  Israel,  but  Jezreel  (or  more  exactly,  Izreel). 
Tlie  name  is  referred  to  for  its  historical  associations.  It  points  both  backwaros 
and  forwards — backward  to  the  massacre  of  Ahab's  family  by  Jehu  (2  Kings 
ix.  10),  and  forward  to  the  punishment  for  that  wild  and  cruel  act.  Hosea  (in 
whom  natiiral  peculiarities  have  been  purified  and  not  extinguished  by  the  spirit 
of  prophecy)  regards  the  conduct  of  Jehu  in  a  diSerent  light  from  the  writer 
of  2  Kjngs  X.  30.  The  latter  praises  Jehu  for  having  "  done  unto  the  house  of 
Ahab  according  to  all  that  was  in  My  mind  "  ;  he  speaks  on  the  assumption 
that  Jehu  had  the  interests  of  Jehovah's  worship  at  heart,  and  that  he  destroyed 
the  house  of  Ahab  as  the  only  effectual  means  of  advancing  them.  The  former 
blames  Jehu  apparently  on  the  high  moral  ground  that  Jehovah  desires  mercy 
(love)  and  not  sacrifice  (chap.  vi.  6).  He  speaks  as  the  Israelites  of  his  time 
doubtless  felt.  They  no  more  recognised  Jehu  as  a  champion  of  Jehovah  than 
did  the  priests  of  Baal  whom  he  basely  entrapped.  But  Hosea  doubtless  felt  in 
addition  that  the  idolatry  to  which  the  house  of  Jehu  was  addicted  rendered 
a  permanent  religious  reform  hopeless.  Image-worship  could  not  be  suppressed 
by  such  half-hearted  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  and  hence,  Jehovah's  moral  govern- 
ment of  His  people  must  have  made  it  certain  to  Hosea  that  even  on  this  ground 
alone  the  dynasty  of  Jehu  could  not  escape  an  overthrow.  (T.  K.  Uheyne, 
D.D.)  And  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel. —  Ood  as  the  family  Goel,  or 
Avenger  : — We  have  no  such  associations  with  the  word  "  avenge  "  as  were  familiar 
to  ancient  Eastern  people,  and  are  familiar  in  tribal  life  to-day.  In  the  East  the 
avenger  is  the  vindicator  of  a  family  wrong  by  securing  the  adequate  punish- 
ment of  the  wrong-doer.  In  a  rude  state  of  society,  the  nearest  relative  of  a  person 
slain  was  conceived  as  under  obligation  to  put  the  slayer  to  death.     He  had  to  be 


OHAP.  I.]  E08EA.  5 

the  "  avenger  of  blood."  Dr.  S.  Cox  tella  us  that  the  main  functions  of  the  Goel 
were  three,  or  rather  that  there  were  three  tragic  contingencies  in  which  the  legal 
redeemer  and  avenger  wais  bound  to  interpose.  1.  If  any  Hebrew  had  fallen 
into  such  penury  as  that  he  was  compelled  to  part  with  his  ancestral  estate,  the 
Goel  was  bound  to  purchase  it,  and,  after  certain  conditions  had  been  observed, 
to  restore  it  to  his  impoverished  kinsman.  2.  If  any  Hebrew  had  been  taken 
captive,  or  had  sold  himself  for  a  slave,  the  Goel  was  bound  to  pay  the  price  of 
his  redemption,  to  xmloose  and  set  him  free.  3.  If  any  Hebrew  had  suffered 
grieyous  wrong,  or  had  been  slain,  the  Goel  was  bound  to  exact  compensation  for 
the  wrong,  or  to  avenge  his  murder.  In  the  case  introduced  by  the  text,  we  are 
to  understand  that  the  slaughter  of  the  house  of  Ahab  had  not  yet  been  avenged, 
though  three  generations  had  passed.  There  seemed  to  be  no  one  left  of  the 
house  of  Ahab  to  do  the  duty  of  the  avenger.  So  God  took  it  directly  upon 
Himself.  "I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel."  This  must  be  regarded  as  a 
striking  instance  of  representing  God  as  feeling,  and  then  doing,  as  a  man 
would  feel  and  do  under  such  circumstances.  The  case  occasions  difficulty  to  us, 
because  no  private  and  personal  avengements  of  wrongs  done  are  now  permitted. 
All  wrongs  are  judicially  treated.  But  in  revealing  Himself  and  His  will,  God 
must  always  speak  in  the  range  of  knowledge,  sentiment,  and  association  of  those 
whom  He  addresses,  or  He  could  not  be  understood  by  them.  To  those  who  knew 
about  avengers  He  could  present  Himself  as  the  great  Avenger.  And  if  there 
are  bad  sides  to  the  avenger's  work,  we  must  not  fail  to  see  that  there  are  also 
good  sides,  and  that  we  may  take  the  good  sides  to  represent  God.  The  idea 
that  can  be  helpfully  worked  out  for  a  modem  congregation  is,  that  God  never 
neglects  wrongs  that  are  done  to  His  people.  He  may  seem  to  delay.  He  may 
even  wait  for  generations  ;  but  His  injured  people  are  always  vindicated  at  last. 
The  wrong-doer  may  seem  to  escape  punishment,  he  never  really  does.  He  may 
seem  to  prosper,  but  there  is  surely  a  worm  whose  work  is  spoiling  his  prosperity. 
The  Lord  is  the  Avenger  of  all  His  injured  ones  ;  and  the  woes  that  eventually 
come  upon  all  wrong-doers  vindicate  His  people  and  vindicate  Him.  God's 
avenging  is  always  only  a  part  of  His  redeeming.  (Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  The 
blood  of  Jezreel : — The  name  signifies  the  "  scattered  of  the  Lord."  Five  reasons 
why  the  eon  of  Hosea  was  to  be  called  by  this  name.  1.  That  hereby  God  might 
show  that  He  intended  to  avenge  that  blood  which  was  shed  in,  Jezreel.  2.  To 
show  that  Israel  had  lost  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  was  no  more  Israel,  but 
Jezreel.  (Israel  is  one  that  prevails  by  the  "  strength  of  the  Lord."  Jezreel  is 
one  that  is  "  scattered  by  the  Lord.")  3.  To  show  the  way  that  God  intended 
to  bring  judgment  upon  these  ten  tribes.  4.  To  note  that  the  Lord  would  scatter 
them  in  that  very  place  wherein  they  most  gloried.  (Jerome  says  the  Israelite 
army  was  defeated  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel  before  Samaria  was  taken.)  5.  The 
Lord  would  hereby  show  that  He  would  turn  these  conceits  and  ^prehensions 
that  they  might  have  of  themselves  quite  the  contrary  way.  I.  What  is  this 
"blood  of  Jszbbil"  that  God  will  avbngb?  (2  Kings  ix.  10,  II).  It  was 
the  blood  of  the  house  of  Ahab.  11.  Why  will  God  "  avbnob  thb  blood  of 
Jkzbxxl  xtpon  thb  housb  of  Jbhu  "  ?  Because — 1.  Jehu  looked  to  his  own  ends, 
rather  than  to  God.  2.  Because  he  did  his  work  but  by  halves.  3.  Because  ho 
proved  Ahab's  successor  in  his  idolatry.  A  man  may  do  that  which  God  commands, 
and  yet  not  really  obey  God.  And  God  knows  how  to  make  iise  of  men's  parts 
and  abUities,  and  yet  to  punish  them  for  their  wickedness  notwithstanding. 
m.  Why  is  it  callbd  "  thb  housb  op  Jbhu  "  T  The  house  of  Jehu  is  his 
posterity,  or  family,  who  were  to  succeed.  The  posterity  of  the  ungodly  shall 
suffer  for  their  father's  sin.  Only  the  second  commandment  threatens  the  sin 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children.  IV.  What  is  this  "  little  wuxlb  "  God 
SFBAKS  OF  7  It  was  a  long  time — three  generations — before  God  came  upon  the 
house  of  Jehu,  still  He  saith,  yet  but  a  little  while,  or,  I  will  stay  but  a  little  longer, 
ere  I  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel.  1.  God  sometimes  comes  upon  sinners  for  their 
sins.  It  is  likely  that  these  sins  of  Jehu  were  forgotten,  yet  God  comes  now  at 
last  to  avenge  the  sins  of  Jehu  upon  his  house.  Youthful  sins  may  prove  to  bo 
the  terror  of  age.  2.  A  long  time  after  the  flourishing  of  a  nation  God  may  reckon 
with  it  in  ways  of  judgment.  3.  Seventy-six  years  are  but  a  little  while  in  God's 
account.  4.  The  apprehension  of  a  judgment  just  at  hand  is  that  which  will 
stir  the  heart  and  work  upon  it  most.  5.  God  suffers  some  sinners  to  continue 
long,  others  He  cuts  off  speedily.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Scattered  by  God : — 
1.  Whatever  present  fruits  men  may  seem  to  reap  by  sin,  yet  at  last,  being 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

continued  in,  it  will  ripen  to  a  height,  and  fit  for  strokes.  2.  Notwithstanding 
that  sinners  in  the  Church  do  conceit  of  their  privileges,  God  will  plague  them, 
and  make  their  judgment  conspicuous.  3.  Men  may  not  only  be  doing  what  God 
in  His  providence  will  permit  to  succeed,  but  even  tnat  which  is  in  itself  just,  and 
yet  be  guilty  before  God,  and  justly  punished  for  it,  when  either  they  do  not  the 
Lord's  work  sincerely,  but  for  their  own  base  ends  and  interests,  or  when  they 
do  it  not  thoroughly,  but  only  in  so  far  as  may  serve  their  own  turn.  (Oeorge 
HtUcheson.) 

Ver.  5.  I  will  break  th«  bow. — A  nation's  humiliation  through  its  army: — 
This  verse  was  intentionally  added ;  for  the  Israelites  were  so  inflated  with 
their  present  good  fortune,  that  they  laughed  at  the  judgment  denoimced. 
They  indeed  knew  that  they  were  well  furnished  with  arms,  men,  and  money ; 
they  thought  themselves  in  every  way  unassailable.  Hence  the  prophet  declares 
that  all  this  could  not  prevent  God  from  punishing  them.  "  Ye  are,"  he  says, 
"  inflated  with  pride ;  ye  set  up  your  valour  against  God,  thinking  yourselves 
strong  in  arms  and  power ;  and  because  ye  are  military  men,  ye  think  that  God 
can  do  nothing,  and  yet  your  bows  cannot  restrain  His  hand  from  destroying  you." 
When  He  says,  "  I  will  break  the  bow,"  He  mentions  a  part  for  the  whole ;  for 
under  one  sort  He  comprehends  every  kind  of  arms.  As  to  what  the  prophet 
had  in  view,  we  see  that  his  only  object  was  to  break  down  their  false  confidence  ; 
for  the  Israelites  thought  that  they  should  not  be  exposed  to  the  destruction  which 
Hosea  had  predicted  ;  for  they  were  dazzled  by  their  own  power,  and  thought 
themselves  beyond  the  reach  of  any  danger,  while  they  were  so  well  fortified  on 
every  side.  Hence  the  prophet  says  that  all  their  fortresses  would  be  nothing 
against  God ;  for  in  that  day,  when  the  ripe  time  for  vengeance  shall  come,  the 
Lord  will  break  all  their  bows.  He  will  tear  in  pieces  all  their  arms,  and  reduce  to 
nothing  their  power.  We  are  here  warned  ever  to  take  heed,  lest  anything  should 
lead  us  to  a  torpid  state  when  God  threatens  us.  Though  we  may  have  strength, 
though  fortune  (so  to  speak)  may  smile  on  us,  though,  in  a  word,  the  whole  world 
should  combine  to  secure  our  safety,  yet  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  felicitate 
ourselves,  when  God  declares  Himself  opposed  to  and  angry  with  us.  Why  so  ? 
Because,  as  He  can  preserve  us  when  unarmed  whenever  He  pleases,  so  He  can  spoil 
us  of  all  our  arms,  and  reduce  our  power  to  nothing.  Let  this  verse  then  come  to 
our  minds  whenever  God  terrifies  us  by  His  threatenings ;  and  what  it  teaches 
us  is,  that  He  can  take  away  all  the  defences  in  which  we  vainly  trust.  {John 
Calvin.)  Jehu's  how  (2  Kings  ix.  24): — Observe — 1.  In  those  things  wherein 
wicked  men  have  been  most  successful,  God  will  curse  them  and  let  out  His  wratJi 
upon  them.  2.  Carnal  hearts  trust  much  in  their  warlike  weapons.  3.  Fortified 
cities  cannot  help  when  God  comes  out  against  a  people.  4.  Even  in  the  place 
in  which  a  kingdom  most  glories,  and  seems  to  trust  most  in,  God  many  times 
comes,  and  breaks  the  kingdom  in  that  very  place.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
Retribution: — The  word  Jezreel  means  God's  seed,  or  sowing.  Jezreel  was  the 
plain  between  Tabor  and  Carmel,  called  by  the  Greeks,  Esdraelon.  The  royal 
city  was  in  it.  Here  the  Eternal  threatens  to  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley 
of  Jezreel.  I.  God's  reteibution  takes  away  the  power  of  its  victim.  The 
bow  of  Israel  is  to  be  broken.  The  language  means  the  utter  destruction  of  all 
their  military  power.  When  justice  comes  to  deal  out  suffering  to  the  sinner,  it 
strips  him  entirely  of  his  power.  Thus  he  is  left  to  the  mercies  of  his  enemies. 
What  are  the  great  enemies  of  the  soul  ?  Carnality,  prejudice,  selfishness,  corrupt 
impulses  and  habits.  II.  God's  retribution  despises  the  prestige  of  its 
VICTIM.  The  bow  is  to  be  broken  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  which  had  been  the 
scene  of  Israel's  grandest  military  exploits.  It  was  to  Israel  what  Marathon  was 
to  Greece,  and  Waterloo  to  England.  In  this  very  scene  the  punishment  should 
come.  The  place  of  their  glory  should  be  the  place  of  their  ruin  and  shame. 
Thus  it  is  ever.  III.  God's  retribution  defies  the  opposition  of  its  victims. 
Jezreel  was  well  fortified.  Retribution  will  strike  the  sinner  in  his  strongest 
place.  Notwithstanding  Jezreel,  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  broken.  Conclusion. 
Retribution  must  always  follow  sin.  It  may  move  slowly  and  silently,  but  its 
pace  is  steady,  resolute,  and  increasing.  Swifter  and  swifter  it  moves  towards 
the  victim.      '  Be  sure  your  sins  will  find  you  out."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  6.  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Israel. — Mercy  put 
in  the  background : — There    is    a  time  when  God  will  not  have  mercy  upon 


CHAP.  I.]  EOSEA.  7 

a  kingdom,  or  npon  a  particular  people.  There  is  a  time  for  the  decree  to  come 
forth  against  a  kingdom;  a  time  when,  though  Noah,  Job,  and  Daniel  should 
stand  before  Him,  yet  He  will  not  be  entreated ;  though  they  cry,  cry  early,  cry 
aloud,  cry  with  tears,  cry  with  fasting,  yet  God  will  not  be  entreated.  God's 
mercy  is  precious,  and  He  will  not  let  it  run  out  to  waste ;  He  will  not  be  prodigal 
of  it ;  a  time  wherein  God  will  say.  Now  I  have  done,  I  have  done  with  this  people, 
mercy  has  had  her  turn.  Men  best  know  what  the  worth  of  mercy  is,  when  mercy 
is  taken  away  from  them.  Well,  saith  God,  you  shall  have  no  more ;  you  have 
taken  no  notice  that  it  was  My  mercy  that  helped  you  before,  but  when  My  mercy  is 
gone,  then  you  will  know  it ;  but  then  I  will  not  add  more.  God  usually  takes 
not  away  His  mercy  fully  from  a  people,  or  from  a  soul,  until  after  much  mercy 
has  been  received  and  abused.  It  is  just  with  God,  when  mercy  is  abused,  that 
we  should  never  know  further  what  mercy  meant.  Mercy  as  it  is  a  precious 
thing,  so  it  is  a  tender  thing,  and  a  dangerous  thing  to  abuse.  There  is  nothing 
that  more  quickly  works  the  ruin  of  a  people,  or  of  a  soul,  than  abused  mercy. 
(Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  God's  mercy: — Mercy  is  a  modification  of  goodness. 
God  is  good  to  all,  but  is  only  merciful  to  the  suffering  sinner.  Mercy  not  only 
implies  suffering,  but  suffering  arising  from  sin.  I.  Mercy  withheld  prom 
SOME.  Burroughs  says,  There  are  three  estates  of  the  people,  signified  by  the 
three  children  of  Hosea :  first,  their  scattered  estate,  and  that  was  signified  by 
Jezxeel,  the  first  son.  Their  low  and  weak  condition,  signified  by  the  daughter. 
Their  being  rejected  and  carried  away,  signified  by  the  third  child.  God  now 
threatened  to  withhold  mercy  from  Israel,  and  we  know  that  when  He  did  so  the 
consequence  was  national  ruin.  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  men." 
II.  Mercy  bestowed  upon  others.  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  o£ 
Judah."  This  mercy  was  signally  shown  to  Judah.  When  the  Assyrian  armies 
had  destroyed  Samaria,  and  carried  the  Ten  Tribes  away  into  captivity,  they 
proceeded  to  besiege  Jerusalem ;  but  God  had  mercy  on  the  house  of  Judah, 
and  saved  them  ;  they  were  saved  by  the  Lord  their  God  immediately,  and  not  by 
sword  or  "bow."  When  the  Ten  Tribes  were  contained  in  captivity,  and  their 
land  was  possessed  by  others,  they  being  utterly  taken  away,  God  had  mercy 
on  the  house  of  Judah  and  saved  them,  and  after  seventy  years  brought  them 
back,  not  by  might  or  power,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  And  truly 
most  signal  was  the  mercy  shown  to  Judah,  when  in  one  night  one  hundred  and 
eighty-five  thousand  of  the  Assyrian  warriors  were  slain.  Looking  at  the  words 
in  their  spiritual  application  they  suggest  two  remarks  in  relation  to  man's  deliver- 
ance. 1.  It  is  of  mercy.  "I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will 
save  them  by  the  Lord  their  God."  The  deliverance  of  man  from  the  guilt,  the 
power  and  consequence  of  sin  is  entirely  of  God's  mercy,  free,  sovereign,  bound- 
less mercy.  It  is  suggested  that  man's  deliverance  is — 2.  By  moral  means.  "  Will 
not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword,  nor  by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen." 
No  material  force  can  deliver  the  soul  from  its  spiritual  difficulties  and  perUs. 
"Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  Conclusion. 
Use  mercy  rightly  while  you  have  it.  Its  grand  design  is  to  produce  reformation 
of  character  and  meetness  for  the  high  service  and  lofty  fellowship  with  the  great 
God,  here  and  yonder,  now  and  for  ever.  (Homilist.)  The  sin  against  love: — 
Men  say  they  carmot  believe  in  hell,  because  they  cannot  conceive  how  God  may 
sentence  men  to  misery  for  the  breaking  of  laws  they  were  born  without  power 
to  keep.  And  one  would  agree  with  the  inference  if  God  had  done  any  such 
thing.  But  for  them  which  are  under  the  law  and  the  sentence  of  death,  Christ 
died  once  for  all,  that  He  might  redeem  them.  Yet  this  does  not  make  a  hell  less 
believable.  When  we  see  how  almighty  was  that  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 
lifting  our  whole  ra«e  and  sending  them  forward  with  a  freedom  and  a  power  of 
growth  nothing  else  in  history  has  won  for  them  ;  when  we  prove  again  how  weak 
it  is,  so  that  it  is  possible  for  millions  of  characters  that  have  felt  it  to  refuse  its 
eternal  influence  for  the  sake  of  some  base  and  transient  passion ;  nay,  when 
I  myself  know  this  power  and  this  weakness  of  Christ's  love,  so  that  one  day  being 
loyal  I  am  raised  beyond  the  reach  of  fear  and  of  doubt,  beyond  the  desire  of  sin 
and  the  habit  of  evil,  and  the  next  day  finds  me  capable  of  putting  it  aside  in 
preference  for  some  slight  enjoyment  or  ambition — then  I  know  the  peril  and 
the  terror  of  this  love,  that  it  may  be  to  a  man  either  heaven  or  hell.  Believe 
then  in  hell,  because  you  believe  in  the  love  of  God — not  in  a  hell  to  which  God 
condemns  men  of  His  will  and  pleasure,  but  a  hell  into  which  men  cast  them- 
selves from  the  very  face  of  Hiw  love  in  Jenua  Christ.     (Geo.  Adam  Smith,  D.D.) 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

The  time  of  mercy  ended : — The  Macedonian  king,  Alexander  the  Great,  observed  a 
very  singular  custom  in  his  method  of  carrying  on  war.  Whenever  he  encamped 
before  a  fortified  city,  and  laid  siege  to  it,  he  caused  to  be  set  up  a  great  lantern, 
which  was  kept  lighted  by  day  and  night.  This  was  a  signal  to  the  besieged, 
and  what  it  meant  was  that  as  long  as  the  lamp  burned  they  had  time  to  save 
themselves  by  surrender,  but  that  when  once  the  light  should  be  extinguished 
the  city  and  all  that  were  in  it  would  be  irrevocably  given  over  to  destruction. 
And  the  conqueror  kept  his  word  with  terrible  consistency.  Now  it  is  the  good 
pleasure  of  oiur  God  to  have  compassion  and  to  show  mercy.  But  a  city  or  a 
people  can  arrive  at  such  a  pitch  of  moral  corruption  that  the  moral  order  of  the 
world  can  only  be  saved  by  its  destruction.     (Otto  Funcke.) 

Ver.  7.  But  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will  save  them 
by  the  Lord  their  God,  and  I  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword,  nor  by 
battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen. — The  vanity  of  the  positive  philosophy : — 
The  first  three  chapters  are  symbolic,  and  directed  chiefly  against  the  Ten  Tribes, 
whom  Hosea  addresses  as  Isra«l  and  Ephraim.  Hosea  condemned  their  departure 
from  the  Almighty,  as  being  a  sort  of  spiritual  adultery.  One  sign  was  an  undue 
reliance  upon  material  and  temporal  helps  in  times  of  emergency.  Against 
this  characteristic  of  a  corrupt  religion,  and  a  declining  national  life,  the  text  is 
directed.  I.  All  hxtman  and  matbelal  succoubs  abb  alonb  and  by  thbm- 
SELVES  inadbquatb.  In  their  better  days  the  people  of  Israel  reposed  all  their 
confidence  in  Jehovah.  Now  they  had  lapsed  into  idolatry.  Their  spiritual 
vision  had  by  degrees  narrowed  itself  down  to  merely  material  views  of  things. 
They  lost  spiritual  insight,  and  saw  only  the  seen.  They  trusted  in  their  military 
strength,  and  in  political  alliance  with  the  great  powers.     From  the  human  stand- 

Joint  this  conduct  was  not  unreasonable.  In  our  own  age  this  error  prevails. 
t  is  reserved  to  our  time  to  systematise  these  views  into  a  philosophy,  which, 
calling  itself  positive,  excludes  n-om  its  domain  the  least  element  of  the  super- 
natural. It  is  found  that  there  is  a  constancy  in  the  operations  of  nature.  Law 
has  been  discovered,  where  it  was  thought  that  there  was  but  fortuity.  So  we 
are  bidden  to  turn  to  science,  where  once  we  turned  to  God.  Instead  of  praying, 
we  are  to  study,  and  to  adjust  ourselves  to  ever-operating  laws.  If  we  would 
remain  prosperous  as  a  nation,  say  the  positivists,  we  must  have  recourse  to 
material  helps,  practise  political  economy,  reform  our  social  administration, 
and  push  to  their  farthest  limits  the  practical  application  of  scientific  principles. 
But  all  this  trust  to  science  and  scientific  helps  against  the  evils  and  emergencies 
of  human  life,  is  miserably  and  woefully  mistaken.  There  is  no  incompatibility 
between  true  science  and  true  religion.  But  a  mere  trust  in  means,  or  secondary 
causes,  is  vain  and  presumptuous.  The  shrewdest  anticipations  of  man  are 
constantly  disappointed.  Material  succours — those  helps  which  arise  out  of 
an  observation,  classification,  and  adaptation  of  secondary  causes  merely,  are 
by  themselves  utterly  imworthy.  II.  Help  fbom  God  is  alone  sufficient. 
God  is  the  disposer  of  all  events.  At  any  moment  this  Supreme  Power  may,  by 
a  volition  of  His  creative  will,  disappoint  the  cleverest  calculation  of  the  cleverest 
sociologist.  God  deigns  to  employ  human  and  material  agencies  in  the  execution 
of  His  purposes ;  but  because  He  works  in  a  regular  and  orderly  manner,  we  are 
not  to  think  only  of  the  mere  means  and  instruments,  and  forget  that  Divine 
omnipresent  agency,  without  which  the  mere  instrumentality  would  be  as  the 
body  without  life,  or  as  the  machine  without  motive -power.  It  is  then  God,  and 
God  alone,  who  is  worthy  of  trust.  The  means  are  with  us,  the  issues  are  with 
the  Lord.  God  can  work  with  means,  and  He  can  also  work  without  them.  Man 
may  calculate  and  scheme  for  results,  but  in  vain,  except  as  God  may  succeed 
hia  efforts.  If  we  would  make  the  best  of  both  worlds,  we  must  most  distinctly 
remember  that  our  only  reliable  help  is  to  be  found  in  the  Lord,  and  in  Him 
alone.  III.  In  all  cases  it  is  oub  duty  to  tbust  only  in  God.  Here  we  see 
the  practical  bearing  of  the  truth  enforced  by  the  prophecy.  The  lesson  of  the 
text  is,  that  we  are  not  to  trust  to  any  use  of  means  for  the  result  or  results  which 
we  may  desire.  Secondary  causes  are  only  efficient  as  they  are  so  made  by  the 
informing  agency  of  God.  (D.  Clark,  M.A.)  Saved  by  Jehovah  : — Salvation 
is  here  set  in  opposition  to  the  destruction  which  the  prophet  mentioned  in  the 
last  verse.  But  Hosea  shows  that  salvation  depends  not  in  the  least  either  on 
arms,  or  on  any  of  the  intervenients,  as  they  say,  of  this  world  ;  but  has  its  founda- 
tion only  on  God's  favour.    The  connection  ought  to  be  carefully  noticed.    Where 


CHAP.  I.]  HOSEA.  9 

the  Lord's  favour  is,  there  is  life.  Hence  the  prophet  here  connects  salvation 
with  God's  gratuitous  favoiu:,  for  we  cannot  continue  safe,  but  as  long  as  God 
is  propitious  to  us.  But  he  says,  "  By  Jehovah  their  God."  An  antithesis  is 
to  be  understood  here  between  the  false  gods  and  Jehovah,  who  was  the  God  of 
the  house  of  Judah.  It  is  the  same  as  though  the  prophet  said,  "  Ye  indeed 
profess  the  name  of  God,  but  ye  worship  the  devil  and  not  God  ;  for  ye  have 
nothing  to  do  with  Jehovah,  with  the  God  who  is  the  Creator  and  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth ;  for  He  dwells  in  His  own  temple  ;  He  pledged  His  faith  to  David, 
when  He  commanded  him  to  build  a  temple  for  Him  on  Mount  Zion  ;  He  dwells 
there  between  the  cherubim,  but  the  true  God  has  become  exiled  from  you, 
Israelites."  {John  Calvin.)  God  the  Deliverer  : — England  has  often  shown  her 
Christian  character  in  acknowledging  the  hand  of  God.  After  the  glorious 
deliverance  from  her  enemies,  by  the  destruction  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  Queen 
Elizabeth  ordered  a  medal  to  be  struck,  having  on  it,  Afflavit  Deus,  et  dissipantur — 
*'  God  blew  on  them,  and  they  were  scattered." 

Ver.  9.  Lo-aEaml:  ye  are  not  My  people,  and  I  will  not  be  your  God. — Lo- 
ammi :  the  type  of  the  third  child : — The  last  period  of  their  sins'  ripening  for 
God's  judgments,  is  represented  under  the  type  of  the  third  child,  called 
Lo-ammi,  or  not  My  people  ;  pointing  to  the  time  of  their  utter  captivity  by 
Shalmaneser,  whereby  God  made  void  the  relation  betwixt  Him  and  that  people, 
scattering  them  among  the  nations,  and  making  them  cease  from  being  His  Church 
and  people.  Whence  learn — 1.  Such  is  the  long-sufFering  patience  of  God, 
especially  toward  the  visible  Church,  that  He  is  not  only  slow  to  anger,  and  to 
manifest  the  same  by  judgments ;  but  even  when  He  hath  begun  to  strike.  He 
yet  waits  patiently,  to  see  what  use  they  will  make  of  present  judgments,  to 
prevent  future  and  sadder  strokes  ;  and  in  particular  it  is  very  long  ere  the 
Lord  come  to  unchurch  a  people  that  have  been  in  covenant  with  Him.  2.  How- 
ever the  Lord's  long-suffering  patience  be  great  and  admirable,  yet  it  will  not 
always  last  towards  a  sinful  people,  especially  after  He  hath  begun  to  plead  with 
them,  but  will  at  last  come  to  a  sad  period.  3.  Howbeit  no  limits  ought  to  be 
set  to  the  freedom  and  efiScacy  of  the  grace  of  God,  who  can  and  doth  sanctify 
afflictions  imto  the  Church,  and  make  them  a  means  to  turn  her,  and  cause  her 
to  cleave  faster  to  Him  :  yet  it  doth  ofttimes  also  prove  too  true,  that  when  the 
Lord  begins  to  contend  with  her,  she  proves  so  obstinate  in  sin,  and  so  incorrigible 
and  incessant  in  defection,  that  nothing  ends  it  but  her  utter  rejection,  at  least 
for  a  time.  4.  The  capstone  of  all  judgment  upon  a  people  is  their  unchurching, 
and  the  cutting  off  the  relations  between  God  and  them.  5.  Whenever  the 
Lord  gives  up  with  a  people  as  to  being  their  God,  He  will  make  it  appear  that 
the  breach  began  on  their  side,  and  that  they  first  voluntarily  rejected  Him, 
and  chose  that  state  and  condition  sinfully,  to  which,  and  the  effects  thereof. 
He  gives  them  up  judicially.  (George  Hutcheson.)  Lo-ammi: — "Ye  are  not 
My  people."  This  is  the  final  disowning  of  them.  They  had  been  before 
called  Jezreelites,  and  then  by  the  name  of  the  daughter  God  testified  that 
He  was  alienated  from  them  ;  but  now  the  third  name  is  still  more  grievous, 
"  Ye  are  not  My  people,"  for  God  here  abolishes,  in  a  manner,  the  covenant  He 
made  with  the  holy  fathers,  so  that  the  people  would  cease  to  have  any  pre- 
eminence over  the  other  nations.  The  Israelites  were  reduced  to  a  condition 
in  which  they  differed  nothing  from  the  profane  Gentiles  :  and  thus  God  wholly 
disinherited  them.  Let  us  hence  learn,  that  those  awfully  mistake  who  are  blind 
to  their  own  vices,  because  God  spares  and  indulges  them.  There  is  no  reason 
for  hypocrites  to  felicitate  themselves  in  prosperity  ;  they  ought,  on  the  contrary, 
to  have  regard  to  God's  judgment.  But  though  these,  as  we  see  to  be  the  case, 
heedlessly  despise  God,  yet  this  passage  reminds  us  carefully  to  beware  lest  we 
abuse  the  present  favours  of  God.     (John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  10.  There  it  sliall  be  said  unto  them,  Ye  are  tlie  sons  of  the  living  God. — A 
promise  of  mercy : — ^I.  A  pbomisb  of  mebcy  to  Israel.  1.  The  Lord  in  judgment 
remembers  mercy.  When  God  threatens  most  dreadfully,  yet  He  promises 
most  graciously.  2.  It  is  usual  when  we  are  in  prosperity  to  forget  all  threaten- 
ings,  and  when  we  are  in  adversity  to  forget  all  promises.  3.  Gk)d  in  the  midst 
of  His  anger,  knows  those  that  trust  in  Him.  4.  Not  only  when  Grod  threatens 
judgments,  but  when  judgments  are  actually  upon  us,  let  us  sanctify  God's  name 
in  looking  up  to  the  promises.    II.  To  whom  did  this  fboaosb  bkfeb  T    It 


10    -  _  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

was  not  a  promise  to  any  that  then  lived,  it  was  to  be  fulfilled  in  future  ages ; 
yet  it  is  introduced  by  the  prophet  as  a  comfort  to  the  people  of  God  then  living. 
Gracious  hearts  are  comforted  with  the  promises  of  God  made  to  the  Church, 
though  not  to  be  fulfilled  in  their  days.  III.  What  was  this  peomisb  ?  That 
Israel  should  be  a  multitude.  The  Lord  remembers  His  promises,  though  made 
a  long  time  since,  so  long  ago  as  the  time  of  Abraham.  Observe — 1.  There  is 
nothing  lost  in  being  willing,  as  Abraham  was,  to  lose  for  God.  2.  When  we 
are  willing  to  lose  for  God,  then  is  the  time  when  God  will  renew  and  confirm 
His  covenant  with  us.  Note — (1)  God  has  a  time  to  bring  in  abundance  of  people 
to  the  profession  of  the  faith.  (2)  Although  God  defers  fulfilling  His  promise 
for  a  time,  yet  at  last  He  does  it  gloriously.  (3)  We  should  greatly  rejoice  in 
multitudes  joining  the  Church.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  The  destiny  of  the 
race  : — We  shall  take  Israel  for  mankind,  and  use  the  text  to  illustrate  the  destiny 
of  the  race.  L  The  race  is  destined  to  an  indbfinitb  inceeasb  in  the  number 
of  good  men.  "  The  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  be  as  the  sand  ol 
the  sea,  which  cannot  be  numbered  or  measured."  The  good,  the  spiritual  Israel, 
have  been  comparatively  few  in  all  ages,  though  perhaps  there  is  a  larger  number 
now  than  in  any  preceding  period.  But  the  time  will  come  when  they  shall  be 
innumerable.  What  mean  such  passages  as  these  ?  "  He  shall  have  dominion 
from  sea  to  sea,  from  the  rivers  to  the  end  of  the  earth."  Again,  "  All  kings 
shall  fall  down  before  Him."  Again,  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become 
the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  His  Christ."  Numerous  as  the  sand  on  the  sea- 
shore !  A  Jewish  Rabbi  regards  the  good  as  the  sand,  not  only  in  relation  to 
number,  but  for  usefulness.  As  the  sand  keeps  the  sea  from  breaking  in  and 
drowning  the  world,  so  the  saints  keep  the  world  from  being  drowned  by  the 
waves  of  eternal  retribution.  This  is  true.  Were  it  not  for  the  good  the  world 
would  not  stand  long.  But  it  is  to  represent  number  not  protection,  that  the 
figure  is  employed.  Do  you  say  that  to  all  appearances  such  an  increase  is 
impossible  ?  When  God  promised  to  Abraham  that  his  seed  should  be  as  the 
stars  of  heaven  and  the  sand  upon  the  shore,  what  could  seem  more  improbable 
than  the  fulfilment  ?  Do  not  judge  from  appearances.  Trust  God's  Word  ; 
it  will  come  to  pass.  There  is  a  glorious  future  for  the  world.  II.  The  race  is 
destined  to  a  tbanscbndbnt  privilbqb.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in 
the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  not  My  people,  there  shall  it  be 
said  unto  them,  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God."  1.  They  are  destined  to  a 
general  conversion  to  God.  From  not  being  His  people  they  are  to  become  His 
people.  The  places  of  the  earth  now  populated  with  the  enemies  of  God  will 
one  day  be  crowded  with  His  friends.  2.  They  are  destined  to  a  general  adoption 
into  the  family  of  God.  "  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God."  They  shall  be 
endowed  and  animated  with  the  true  Spirit,  the  spirit  of  reverence  and  adoring 
love.  "  The  living  God."  The  world  has  abounded  with  dead  gods ;  there 
is  but  one  "  living "  God.  III.  The  race  is  destined  to  a  common  lbadbbshcp. 
1.  This  leadership  shall  unite  the  most  hostile.  "  Then  shall  the  children  ol 
Judah  and  the  children  of  Israel  be  gathered  together."  Great  and  long  endurins 
was  the  hostility  existing  between  these  people.  The  time  will  come  when  au 
antipathies  existing  amongst  peoples  shall  be  destroyed.  "  Ephraim  shall  not 
envy  Judah  :  they  shall  be  of  one  heart  and  one  mind."  2.  This  leadership  shall 
be  by  common  appointment.  They  shall  "  appoint  themselves  one  head."  Their 
leader  will  not  be  forced  upon  them  contrary  to  their  consent,  nor  will  He  force 
Himself.  Who  is  the  leader  ?  Christ.  He  is  the  Leader  of  the  people.  He 
is  the  Commander-in-Chief,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  All  shall  unite  in  Him. 
3.  This  leadership  will  be  glorious.  As  Moses  led  the  Jews  out  of  the  wilderness, 
as  Cyrus  delivered  them  from  Babylon,  Christ  will  lead  them  out  of  Egyptian 
darkness  and  Babylonian  corruption.  (UomUist.)  Sons  of  the  living  God: — It 
was  the  special  sin  of  Israel,  the  source  of  all  his  other  sins,  that  he  had  left 
the  living  God,  to  serve  idols.  In  the  times  of  the  Gospel,  not  only  should  he 
o^vn  God  as  his  God,  but  he  should  have  the  greatest  of  all  gifts,  that  the  living 
God,  the  Fountain  of  all  life,  of  the  life  of  nature,  of  grace,  of  glory,  should  bo 
his  Father,  should  communicate  to  him  that  life,  which  He  has  and  is.  For  He 
who  is  Life,  imparts  life.  God  doth  not  only  pour  into  the  souls  of  His  elect, 
grace  and  faith,  hope  and  love,  or  all  the  manifold  gifts  of  His  Spirit,  but  He, 
the  living  God,  maketh  them  to  be  His  living  sons,  by  His  Spirit  dwelling  in 
them,  by  whom  He  adopteth  them  as  His  sons,  through  whom  He  giveth  them 
grace.     For   by  His  Spirit  He   adopteth  thena  as  sons.  .  .  .  God  not  only 


CHAP.  I.]  HOSEA.  11 

accounteth  us,  but  maketh  us  His  sons.  He  maketh  us  sons,  not  outwardly, 
but  inwardly ;  not  by  inward  grace  alone,  but  by  His  Spirit.  God  is  our 
Father,  not  by  nature,  but  by  grace.  He  giveth  us  of  His  substance,  of  His 
nature,  although  not  by  nature  ;  not  united  with  us  (as  it  is  personally,  with  His 
Son),  but  dwelling  in  us,  and  making  us  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  Sons 
of  the  living  God  must  be  living  by  Him  and  to  Him,  by  His  life,  yea,  through 
Himself  living  in  them.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Old  Testament  'prediction: — 
"  Fossil  sunlight,"  is  what  Herschel  named  anthracite  coal.  The  vast  stores 
of  sunlight  poured  out  upon  the  globe  during  the  old  geological  ages  were  consoli- 
dated and  packed  away  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  because  this  busy  twentieth 
century,  with  its  myriads  of  railways  and  ocean  steamers  and  manufactories, 
would  need  it.  And  have  you  thought  how  large  a  proportion  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment is  prediction  ?  And  is  it,  therefore,  of  no  use  to  the  practical  working 
Church  of  to-day  ?  Nay.  This  vast  profusion  of  prophetic  light  falling  upon 
the  minds  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel  and  Jeremiah  and  David,  and  the  minor  prophets, 
and  treasured  up  in  their  inspired  pages,  may  soon  be  needed.  And  they  who 
are  delving  in  these  mines  of  eschatology,  instead  of  being  engaged  in  an  aimless 
and  profitless  toil,  may  be  providing  the  Church  with  the  needed  warmth  for  that 
predicted  time  when  "  iniquity  shall  abound,  and  the  love  of  many  wax  cold." 
(A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.) 

Yet.  11.  Great  shall  be  the  day  of  JezreeL — The  day  of  Jezred : — Jezreel 
signifies  "  the  arm  of  the  Lord."  And  it  intimates  that  when  He  arises 
to  bless  the  world,  the  spiritual  seed  of  Messiah  shall  be  numberless.  The  text 
may  be  taken  as  descriptive  of  the  future  triumphs  of  the  Gospel.  I.  The  day 
OF  Jezrbel  shall  be  great  in  the  multitudbs  of  converts  to  the  faith 
OF  Christ.  Hitherto  the  flock  of  real  believers  has  been  a  little  flock.  The 
"  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness."  May  we  not  affirm  that  one-half  of  the 
inhabitants  of  any  city,  town,  or  village  possess  not  the  semblance  of  religion  ? 
But  painful  as  the  contemplation  of  this  picture  is,  our  eyes  look  forward  to 
happier  days.  There  are  seeds  of  a  glorious  harvest  springing  up.  II.  Great 
IN  THE  unanimity  OF  ITS  SUBJECTS.  The  two  houses  were  long  divided ;  but 
under  Zerubbabel  they  were  to  return  from  Babylon,  and  together  rebuild  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem.  Under  the  mediatorial  dominion  of  Christ,  there  shall 
be  one  fold,  one  shepherd.  Jews  and  Gentiles  shall  be  united  in  crowning  the 
Saviour  Lord  of  all.  The  fair  form  of  Christianity  shall  be  clouded  by  no  stormy 
contentions — disfigured  by  no  angry  disputes — defiled  by  no  human  inventions — 
dishonoured  by  no  unscriptural  elements.  We  may  not  assume  that  any  one 
particular  form  of  Divine  service  will  become  the  only  mode  of  public  worship. 
AH  will  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  III.  Great  in  the  holiness  of  its 
FRIENDS.  There  is  a  threefold  departure  from  the  world.  The  first  is  by  death. 
This  we  may  call  involuntary.  The  second  is  by  superstition.  This  we  may  call 
voluntary.  It  is  "will- worship."  The  third  is  the  one  which  grace  effects. 
It  is  a  commendable  renunciation  of  the  world.  To  live  in  it,  while  we  forsake 
its  spirit.  IV.  Great  in  the  glory  of  its  triumphs.  1.  In  the  victories 
it  shall  achieve.  All  false  religion  shall  perish.  Idolatry  shall  be  destroyed. 
2.  Great  in  the  zeal  of  its  subjects.  It  will  no  longer  be  a  day  of  small  things. 
All  shall  be  ready  with  their  offerings,  and  none  shall  appear  before  the  Lord 
empty.  3.  The  day  of  Jezreel  shall  be  great  for  the  consummation  of  the  work 
and  glory  of  the  Redeemer.  He  then  will  "  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  be 
satisfied."  {Anon.)  Mercy  in  view  of  the  day  of  Jezreel: — Beause  there  will 
be  such  a  dreadful  day  of  Jezreel,  therefore  God  will  make  it  up  by  this  restitution. 
Or  it  may  be,  albeit  there  hath  been  such  a  great  day  of  Jezreel,  yet  this  mercy 
shall  also  come  to  pass.  It  teaches — 1.  In  a  time  of  love,  the  Lord  can  and  will 
turn  His  people's  hardest  lots  into  mercies.  2.  Days  of  the  Lord's  manifesting 
mercy  towards  His  people  are  great  days,  and  worth  the  marking,  as  affording 
mercies  above  any  mercies  besides.  3.  As  all  the  times  wherein  God  is  kind 
to  His  people  are  remarkable  times,  so  in  particular,  a  time  of  love  after  sad 
calamities.  His  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  their  afflictions,  and  of  His  love  after 
a  long  interruption,  wifl  make  a  refreshful  time.     (Oeorge  Eutcheaon.) 


,2   'w-  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


CHAPTER  n. 

YiB.  S.  Lest  I  strip  lier  naked. — Eastern  divorce  custom : — It  waa  the 
custom  among  the  Jews  when  any  married  that  what  dowry  they  brought 
their  husbands  was  written  down  in  a  table ;  and  if  afterwards  the  husband 
should  divorce  his  wife,  except  there  could  be  proved  some  gross  and  vile  thing 
against  the  woman,  she  was  to  go  away  with  her  table,  with  her  dowry ;  she  must 
not  go  away  empty,  or  naked.  But  if  there  could  be  proved  some  notorious 
villainy  which  she  had  committed,  then  she  was  sent  away  naked,  without  her 
tables,  her  dowry.  Thus  God  threatens  this  people.  "  She  is  not  My  wife."  She 
shall  be  sent  away  without  any  tables,  naked  and  wholly  destitute.  Observe — 
1.  The  beginnings  of  great  excellences  are  sometimes  very  low  and  mean.  "  Set 
her  as  in  the  day  that  she  was  born."  2.  God's  mercy  is  a  people's  beauty  and 
glory.  When  we  have  any  excellency,  any  beauty  upon  us,  it  is  God's  mercy 
that  is  all  our  beauty.  3.  Though  sinners  deserve  great  evils,  to  be  stripped 
of  all  comforts,  yet  God,  in  patience  and  clemency  continues  them  a  long  time. 
4.  The  mercies  that  God  bestows  upon  a  nation,  are  but  common  favours,  not 
spiritual  graces,  they  are  such  ornaments  as  a  people  may  be  stripped  of.  The 
great  mercies  a  people  have,  they  may  wholly  lose.  5.  Continuance  in  sin,  and 
especially  the  sin  of  spiritual  whoredom,  is  that  which  will  strip  a  nation  from  all 
their  excellences,  from  all  their  ornaments  and  beauty.  6.  It  is  time  for  a  people 
to  plead,  when  there  is  danger  of  desolation.  7.  Those  who  will  not  be  convinced 
by  the  Word,  God  has  other  means  to  convince  them  besides  the  Word.  If  pleading 
and  convincing  arguments  will  not  do  it,  well  then,  stripping  naked  shall  do  it. 

8.  Whatever  are  the  means  of  stripping  a  nation,  it  is  really  God  that  does  it. 

9.  It  is  a  grievous  judgment  for  one  that  is  advanced  from  a  low  to  a  high  degree 
to  be  brought  down  again.  10.  When  God  has  delivered  a  people  out  of  misery, 
and  bestowed  upon  them  great  mercies,  it  is  their  duty  often  to  think  of  the  poor 
condition  in  which  they  were,  and  to  use  all  the  means  they  can  that  they  may 
not  be  brought  thither  again.  God  loves  this,  that  we  should  remember  and 
seriously  take  to  heart  what  once  we  were.  {Jeremiah  Burrcmghs.)  SpiritiuU 
chastity : — It  is  not  enough  that  God  should  choose  any  people  for  Himself,  except 
the  people  themselves  persevere  in  the  obedience  of  faith  ;  for  this  is  the  spiritual 
chastity  which  the  Lord  requires  from  all  His  people.  But  when  is  a  wife,  whom 
God  hath  bound  to  Himself  by  a  sacred  marriage,  said  to  become  wanton  ?  When 
she  falls  away  from  pure  and  sound  faith.  Then  it  follows  that  the  marriage 
between  God  and  men  so  long  endures  as  they  who  have  been  adopted  continue 
in  pmre  faith.  Apostasy  in  a  manner  frees  God  from  us,  so  that  He  may  justly 
repudiate  us.     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  4.  I  will  not  have  mercy. — Threatening  and  pleading  (compare  ver.  2) : — 
"  Let  her  put  away  her  whoredoms,"  &c.  What  should  we  learn  hereby, 
but  that  it  hangs  upon  ovu-  own  will  whether  Grod  suspend  the  judgment  or 
no  ?  For  we  ought  not  to  impute  our  own  evil  to  God,  or  impiously  think  that 
fate  rules  us.  In  other  words,  this  or  that  evil  comes,  not  because  God  foreknew 
or  foreordained  it,  but  because  this  evil  was  to  be,  or  would  be,  done,  there- 
fore God  both  foreknew  it,  and  prefixed  His  sentence  upon  it.  Why  then  does 
God  predetermine  an  irrevocable  sentence  ?  Because  He  foresaw  incorrigible 
malice.  Why,  again,  after  pronouncing  sentence,  doth  God  counsel  amendment  ? 
That  we  may  know,  by  experience,  that  they  are  incorrigible.  Therefore  He 
waits  for  them,  although  they  will  not  return,  and  with  much  patience  invites 
them  to  repentance.  Moreover,  individuals  repented,  although  the  nation  was 
incorrigible.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Incorrigible  sinners: — 1.  However  the 
Lord  may  for  a  time  spare  sinners,  and  they  be  ready  to  sleep  because  of  this ; 
yet  at  last  when  their  cup  is  full,  and  they  have  proven  themselves  incorrigible, 
judgment  will  certainly  come.  2.  However  a  carnal  church  may  be  ready  to 
swell  with  conceit  of  her  own  enjoyments  and  excellences,  yet  the  Lord  needs 
no  more  to  make  her  miserable,  but  take  away  what  He  hath  given  her,  and  leave 
her  as  He  found  her.     Sin  will  prove  a  wasting  plague  to  souls.     (George  Hutcheson. ) 

Ver.  5.  For  she  said,  I  will  go  after  my  lovers. — The  sin  of  Israel : — The 
sin  of  Israel  was  not  simple  whoredom,  which  may  be  done  in  the  dark, 
but  avowed,   effronted  idolatry.      Whence  learn — 1.  Such  is  the  stupidity   ol 


3HAP.  n.]  H08EA.  13 

grossest  sinners,  that  they  neither  see  the  ill  nor  danger  of  their  way,  unless  it 
be  much  and  frequently  inculcated.  2.  A  visible  church  declining,  will  readily 
turn  impudent  in  sin.  The  more  corruption  hath  been  hemmed  in  by  the  external 
bonds  of  order,  it  swells  the  more  over  all  banks  and  bounds ;  and  God  justly 
giveth  such  up  to  be  filled  with  their  own  devices.  3.  It  is  a  great  aggravation 
of  the  sin  of  idolatry,  that  idols  do  become  lovers,  and  do  bewitch  and  draw  the 
heart  from  God.  4.  As  it  is  a  great  sin  to  depart  from  God  and  His  true  worship, 
so  especially  it  is  a  shameful  way  of  departing  from  Him,  when  men's  ends  are  so 
low  and  base,  that  they  will  follow  any  way  of  religion  for  interest  and  advantage, 
and  account  the  thriving  way  to  be  the  best  way.  5.  It  is  also  a  great  evidence 
of  impudence,  when  men  do  not  sin  through  infirmity  or  temptation,  but  deliberately, 
and  do  wilfully  follow  their  resolutions,  whatever  may  be  said  to  the  contrary. 
For,  herein  also  she  did  shamefully,  in  that  she  said,  "  I  will  go  after  my  lovers." 
She  avowed  it,  and  was  obstinate  in  it  against  all  warnings.     {George  Hutcheson.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns. — 
Divine  restraints  : — God  puts  forth  restraints  on  the  sinner  here.  I.  These 
RESTBAiNTS  ARE  MANIFOLD.  "  I  will  hedge  Up  thy  way  with  thorns,  and  make 
a  wall."  The  first  metaphor  is  taken  from  a  husbandman  who  to  prevent  the 
cattle  from  breaking  away  plants  a  prickly  hedge.  The  other  is  taken  from 
architecture.  If  the  thorns  are  insufficient,  high  and  massive  walls  must  be 
built.  1.  The  restraint  of  affliction.  2.  The  restraint  of  public  sentiment. 
The  most  daring  cower  before  the  public  voice.  3.  The  restraint  of  conscience. 
A  Divine  officer  holding  the  sinner  in.     II.  These  restraints  are  necessary, 

1.  For  the  sinner  himself.     Were  it  not  for  these  he  would  go  galloping  to  perdition. 

2.  For  the  world.  What  would  become  of  the  world  if  the  wicked  were  not 
reined  in  ?  3.  For  the  Church.  Had  wicked  men  their  full  fling,  how  long  would 
the  Church  last  ?  Thank  God  for  thorny  hedges  and  massive  walls,  for  all  the 
restraints  He  puts  on  sinful  men.  (Homilist.)  Thorns  and  walls: — A  way 
may  be  found  through  a  hedge  of  thorns,  although  with  pain  and  suffering  ; 
through  a  stone  wall  even  a  strong  man  cannot  burst  a  way.  Thorns  may 
mean  the  pains  to  the  flesh  with  which  God  visits  sinful  pleasures,  so 
that  the  soul,  if  it  would  break  through  to  them,  is  held  back  and  torn ; 
the  wall  may  mean,  that  all  such  sinful  joys  shall  be  cut  off  altogether,  as 
by  bereavement,  poverty,  sickness,  failure  of  plans,  &c.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
Blessings  from  apparent  evils : — The  idea  of  disease  being  a  messenger,  or  under 
orders  from  God,  has  long  been  a  familiar  one.  Ancient  history  tells  of  a  merchant 
who  lost  his  all  in  a  storm  at  sea,  in  which  his  vessels  laden  with  merchandise 
foundered.  The  merchant  went  to  Athens  to  study  philosophy,  having  no 
capital  to  resume  business.  He  was  so  happy  in  his  studies  that  he  was  thankful 
for  his  losses.  "  If  God  had  not  taken  away  my  fortune,"  he  said,  "  I  had  not 
gained  that  which  is  far  better."  The  benefit  of  difficulty  : — A  few  days  since 
there  came  to  me  a  man  whom  I  had  known  many  years  before  as  a  person  of 
good  character,  and  who  had  made  and  saved  money  in  business.  He  had  been 
led  to  Invest  his  savings  in  a  partnership  which  had  every  guarantee  of  respectability 
and  trustworthiness,  but  which  within  a  few  weeks  became  bankrupt,  and  left 
him  not  merely  without  a  penny,  but  responsible  for  heavy  debts.  This  happened 
some  two  years  since ;  and  for  some  time  it  was  a  question  whether  he  and  his 
large  family  must  not  go  to  the  workhouse.  In  order  to  feed  and  clothe  them  he 
had  to  take  to  manual  labour  by  day  and  by  night  at  a  very  small  remuneration  ; 
and  since  then  things  have  somewhat  bettered  with  him,  though  he  is  still  a  very 
poor  man,  instead  of  being,  as  he  was,  in  very  easy  circumstances.  But  he  said 
to  me  :  "I  would  not  for  the  world,  sir,  have  it  otherwise.  My  troubles  have 
been  my  greatest  blessing  in  my  whole  life."  And  then  he  reminded  me  how 
he  had  had  a  religious  education,  and  he  told  me  how  he  had  forgotten 
God  in  his  years  of  prosperity,  and  how  he  had  been  driven  back  upon 
God  as  his  hope  and  refuge,  and  had  found  in  Him  more,  much  more,  than 
he  had  lost  in  earthly  things.  His  religious  duties,  prayer,  the  Bible,  the 
Holy  Communion,  all  had  been  forgotten,  all  had  again  been  resumed,  and  with 
a  sense  of  the  truest  support  and  strength.  {Canon  Liddon.)  Thankful  for 
a  thorn : — Dr.  George  Matheson,  of  Scotland,  is  totally  blind.  He  is  one  of  the 
most  learned  and  gifted  men,  and,  above  all,  a  cheerful  and  happy-hearted 
Christian.  The  following  touching  words  from  his  pen  ought  to  strengthen  the 
Christian  patience  of  afflicted  ones:  "My  God,  I  have  never  thanked  Thee  for 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

my  thorn.  I  have  thanked  Thee  a  thousand  times  for  my  roses,  but  not  once 
for  my  thorn.  I  have  been  looking  forward  to  a  world  where  I  shall  get  com- 
pensation for  my  cross,  but  I  have  never  thought  of  my  cross  as  itself  a  present 
glory.  Thou  Divine  Love,  whose  human  path  has  been  perfected  through 
Bufferings,  teach  me  the  glory  of  my  cross;  teach  me  the  value  of  my  thorn. 
Show  me  that  I  have  climbed  to  Thee  by  the  path  of  pain.  Show  me  that  my 
tears  have  made  my  rainbow.  Reveal  to  me  that  my  strength  was  the  product 
of  the  hour  when  I  wrestled  imtil  the  break  of  day.  Then  shall  I  know  that  my 
thorn  was  blessed  by  Thee  ;  then  shall  I  know  that  my  cross  was  a  gift  from  Thee. 
I  shall  raise  a  monument  to  the  hour  of  my  sorrow,  and  the  words  which  I  shall 
write  upon  it  will  be  these  :  '  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted.'  " 
She  shall  follow  aiter  her  lovers,  but  she  shall  not  overtake  them. — TAe 
warning  lesson  of  Israel's  apostasy: — Hosea,  who  lived  in  a  corrupt  age  of  the 
Israelitish  Church,  was  commissioned  to  show  forth,  with  great  faithfulness  and 
plainness  of  speech,  the  gross  departures  of  that  people  from  the  laws  and  service 
of  God,  and  at  the  same  time  to  exhibit  the  mingled  actings  of  judgment  and 
mercy  wherewith  God  would  visit  His  people.  I.  The  sin  of  Israel.  Their 
Bin  was  departing  from  the  Lord,  and  going  after  forbidden  sources  of  dependence, 
and  forbidden  objects  of  desire.  We  need  not  a  more  striking  proof  of  the  depravity 
of  man's  heart  universally,  than  we  find  in  this  ungrateful  conduct  of  Israel. 
The  maimer  in  which  their  sin  is  set  forth  is  peculiarly  striking.  They  are  repre- 
sented in  the  character  of  an  unfaithful  wife  toward  the  most  tender  and  affec> 
tionate  husband.  There  is  scarcely  anything  affects  a  well-regulated  mind  more 
painfully  than  an  instance  of  imfaithfulness  on  the  part  of  a  beloved  wife  towards 
an  affectionate  husband.  It  excites  in  our  minds  mingled  emotions  of  pity. 
Borrow,  and  indignation.  How  deeply  should  we  feel  the  dishonour  done  to  Qod 
by  the  unfaithfulness  of  Israel,  and  how  humbling  a  lesson  should  we  learn  of 
the  depraved  nature  of  our  own  hearts  !  The  sin  of  Israel  was  summed  up  in 
this  :  departing  from  the  God  of  love — setting  at  nought  the  love  of  God.  This 
is  our  sin,  nationally  and  individually.  We  have  our  national  idols ;  we  have 
our  personal  idols.  The  condition  of  Israel  further  represents  the  case  of  those 
who  have  had  some  experience  of  the  love  of  God,  yet  forsake  the  guide  of  their 
youth,  and  become  entangled  with  the  world.  11.  The  chastisement  of  Israel. 
God's  forbearance  and  long-suffering  with  His  people  was  very  great.  He  was 
continually  provoked  to  anger  by  their  evil  doings,  but  nevertheless  He  bare  long 
with  them.  But  the  time  came  when  it  was  necessary  to  throw  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  their  idolatry,  and  so  hinder  the  accomplishment  of  their  desires  after 
worldly  enjoyments,  that  they  should  be  like  persons  hedged  in  with  thorns 
and  briars.  This  time  came  with  the  Captivity.  The  instruction  of  this  fact 
belongs  to  us  specially  as  a  nation  whom  God  has  signally  blessed  with  the  pure 
light  of  Gospel  truth.  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  limited  to  God's  chastisement 
of  nations.  It  applies  to  those  amongst  us  who  have  been  personally  convinced 
of  sin,  and  of  om-  need  of  such  a  Saviour  as  Jesus.  God's  riile  of  dealing  with  us 
is  the  same  as  with  nations.  God  will  make  us  feel  the  bitterness  of  sin.  If  ever 
you  are  saved,  it  shall  be  by  first  bringing  you  through  the  deep  waters  of  soul 
affliction  for  sin.  You  must  see  yourself  hedged  in  by  the  greatness  and  the 
number  of  your  sins.  It  is  a  merciful  chastisement  which  makes  us  feel  the  utter 
vanity  of  things  of  time  and  sense.  III.  The  blessed  consequenobs  of  the 
CHASTISEMENT.  As  regards  us  individually,  God's  dealings  with  Israel  find  a 
perfect  parallel.  All  the  chastisements  for  sin  issue  in  nearness  to  God,  and 
peaceful  communion  with  God,  and  holy  confidence  in  His  love.  {James  Cooper, 
II.A.)  Worldly  pleasure,  a  vain  pursuit : — What  has  been  the  experience 
of  every  man,  of  every  woman,  that  has  tried  this  world  for  a  portion  ?  Queen 
Elizabeth,  amidst  the  surroundings  of  pomp,  is  unhappy  because  the  painter 
Bketches  too  minutely  the  wrinkles  on  her  face,  and  she  indignantly  cries  out, 
"  You  must  strike  off  my  likeness  without  any  shadows  !  "  Hogarth,  at  the 
very  height  of  his  artistic  triumph,  is  stung  almost  to  death  with  chagrin  because 
the  painting  he  had  dedicated  to  the  king  does  not  seem  to  be  acceptable ;  for 
George  II.  cries  out,  "  Who  is  this  Hogarth  ?  Take  this  trumpery  out  of  my 
presence  !  "  Brinsley  Sheridan,  of  thrilling  eloquence,  had  for  his  last  words, 
I  am  absolutely  undone  !  "  Stephen  Girard,  the  wealthiest  man  in  his  day, 
or,  at  any  rate,  only  second  in  wealth,  says,  "  I  live  the  life  of  a  galley-slave ; 
when  I  arise  in  the  morning  my  one  effort  is  to  work  so  hard  that  I  can  sleep  when 
it  gets  to  be  night."     Charles  Lamb,  applauded  of  all  the  world,  in  the  very  midst 


CHAP,  n.]  ROSEA.  16 

of  his  literary  triumph,  says,  "  Do  you  remember,  Bridget,  when  we  used  to  laugh 
from  the  shilling  gallery  at  the  play  ?  There  are  now  no  good  plays  to  laugh 
at  from  the  boxes."  But  why  go  so  far  as  that  ?  I  need  go  no  farther  than  your 
street,  and  possibly  your  own  house,  to  find  an  illustration.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Then  shall  she  say,  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband;  for  then  was 
It  better  with  me  than  now. — The  design  of  affliction : — Since  we  derive 
our  knowledge  through  the  medium  of  the  senses,  only  by  the  aid  of  figiura- 
tive  language  can  spiritual  truths  forcibly  lay  hold  of  the  mind.  Nothing  is 
more  common  in  the  prophecies  than  to  express  the  relation  between  God  and 
the  Jews  of  old  by  the  alliance  of  marriage.  He  was  considered  as  their  husband  ; 
hence  they  were  laid  under  peculiar  obligations  to  Him ;  and  hence  their  sins 
had  the  character  of  violating  the  marriage-contract.  Because  of  their  unfaith- 
fulness, calamities  befell  them.  But  while  these  were  the  effects  of  sin,  they 
were  also  the  means  of  bringing  them  to  a  proper  state  of  mind.  They  are  there- 
fore considered  eventually  as  mercies.  The  hedge  here  spoken  of  is  the  hedge 
of  affliction,  composed  of  some  of  those  thorns  and  briars  which  sin  has  so  plenti- 
fully produced  in  this  wilderness  world.  The  metaphor  is  taken  from  ^e 
husbandman,  who,  to  keep  his  cattle  in  the  pastm-e,  and  prevent  their  going 
astray,  fences  them  in ;  and  the  sharper  the  hedge  the  better.  Thus  God  resolves 
to  make  oiu"  rovings  difficult.  If  we  will  go  astray,  we  must  smart  for  it.  If  lighter 
afflictions  fail  of  their  end,  God  will  employ  heavier.  They  may  be  foolhardy 
enough  to  break  through  the  thorns,  and  may  go  on  though  wounded  and  bleeding, 
but  they  shall  not  get  "  over  the  wall " — I  have  stones  as  well  as  brambles — 
I  will  present  insuperable  difficulties.  What  a  variety  of  troubles  God  has  to 
dispose  of.  The  passage  reminds  us — I.  Of  oub  depbavity.  It  appears  in 
om:  proneness  to  go  astray.  We  transfer  to  the  creature  those  regards  which 
are  due  only  to  the  Creator.  We  make  earthly  things  om:  idols.  These  draw 
away  our  hearts  from  God.  Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves,  and  judge  of  our 
declensions  only  by  gross  acts,  but  by  the  state  of  oiu:  minds.  Where  no  vices 
have  appeared  in  the  life,  there  may  have  been  many  deviations  from  God  in 
our  thoughts  and  affections  and  pursuits.  II.  Op  the  Divinb  goodness  and 
CABE.  He  employs  means,  various  means,  to  hinder  and  to  reclaim  us.  Why 
all  these  expedients  ?  Is  it  because  He  stands  in  need  of  us  ?  Nay,  but  because 
we  stand  in  need  of  Him  ;  because  He  would  not  have  us  deceived,  ensnared, 
destroyed.  III.  Of  the  benefit  of  affliction.  1.  Afflictions  are  designed 
to  be  trials.  Let  our  earthly  blessings  be  removed,  and  owe  reliance  will  quickly 
appear.  If  our  dependence  has  been  on  them,  we  sink  when  they  are  removed. 
2.  Afflictions  are  excitements.  They  quicken  to  the  exercise  of  grace,  and  to 
the  performance  of  duty.  When  we  become  indifferent  to  communion  with 
God,  He  wiU  send  some  fiery  trial  to  bring  us  to  our  knees.  3.  Afflictions  are 
spiritual  preventions, — they  are  "  to  keep  man  from  his  purpose."  Disappoint- 
ments in  favourite  wishes  are  trying,  and  we  are  not  always  wise  enough  to 
recollect — that  disappointments  in  time  are  often  the  means  of  preventing  dis- 
appointments in  eternity.  It  is  a  most  singular  mercy  for  God  to  render  the 
piursuit  of  sin  difficult.  If  we  are  going  astray — is  it  not  better  to  have  the  road 
filled  with  thorns  than  strewed  with  flowers  ?  There  are  some  who  are  now 
rejoicing  because  their  plans  succeed,  and  everything  favours  their  wishes,  who, 
if  they  knew  all,  would  see  awful  reason  to  weep  and  mourn.  And  there  are 
others,  who,  if  they  knew  all,  would  no  longer  be  sorrowful  because  they  cannot 
advance,  but  are  checked  in  every  path  they  tread.  They  would  see  that  they 
are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  they  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world. 
How  awful  is  it  when  afflictions  are  useless,  and  even  medicine  is  administered 
in  vain!  IV.  Of  the  diffeeence  thebe  is  between  cub  adheeing  to  God 
AND  CUB  FOBSAKiNG  HiM.  Bchold  the  declining  Christian,  seduced  by  the  world. 
He  would  try  deviating  ways  for  himself.  And  God  says,  "  Let  him  try," — 
"  that  he  may  know  My  service,  and  the  service  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  countries." 
By  and  by  he  begins  to  bethink  himself,  and  compare  the  present  with  the  past, 
and  is  miserable.  Let  those  who  have  been  led  astray,  and  have  fallen  by  their 
iniquity,  consider  the  melancholy  change  that  has  taken  place  in  their  experience, 
and  remember  two  things — 1.  It  cannot  be  better  with  them  than  it  is  until 
they  return  to  God.  2.  They  should,  in  returning,  guard  against  that  despondency 
which  would  tell  you  that  it  wiU  be  in  vain.  Have  any  of  you  been  restored  ? 
Turn  not  again  to  folly.  Live  near  to  God ;  your  welfare  depends  upon  it. 
(WiUiam    Jay.)        The   first    husband: — I.   A    EBsoLunoir    fobmbd.     1,   The 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt 

marriage  union.  In  such  an  union  we  look  for  the  consent  of  the  parties ; 
reciprocal  affection,  harmony  of  interest,  and  oneness  of  spirit.  2.  A  violation 
of  this  union  acknowledged.  "  I  will  go  and  return  "  is  an  indirect  confession 
of  unfaithfulness,  due  to  a  culpable  inattention  to  Divine  instruction,  to  a 
forgetfulness  of  the  Divine  law.  It  is  evinced  by  forming  attachments  to  other 
objects,  and  by  a  violation  of  their  covenant  with  God.  3.  A  purpose  to  renew 
this  union  avowed.  This  purpose  was  rationally  founded,  was  absolutely 
expressed,  practically  to  be  exemplified.  II.  A  reason  expressed  tjpon 
WHICH  THIS  RESOLUTION  IS  FOirNDED.  Self-love  is  a  powerful  principle;  it  is 
the  main-spring  of  human  actions.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is,  that  fidelity 
to  God  is  relatively  better  than  apostasy  from  Him ;  better  in  itself,  and  better 
for  me.  1.  As  it  is  more  honourable.  2.  As  it  is  more  comfortable.  3.  As  it 
is  more  safe.  Infer  from  this  subject — 1.  How  much  saints  should  prize  their 
privileges ;  how  thankful  they  should  be  for  them,  and  how  careful  not  to  forfeit 
them  by  stretching  out  their  hands  to  a  strange  god.  2.  The  folly  of  apostates, 
and  the  reasons  they  have  for  returning  to  their  first  husband.  {0.  Brooks.) 
Returning  to  God  : — 1.  In  times  of  affliction  the  only  rest  of  the  soul  is  to  return 
to  God.  2.  So  long  as  men  can  have  anything  in  their  sinful  way  to  satisfy  them- 
selves with,  they  wiU  not  return  to  God.  3.  Returning  to  God,  if  it  be  in  truth, 
though  it  be  after  we  have  sought  out  all  other  helps,  yet  God  is  willing  to  accept. 
4.  A  heart  effectually  wrought  upon  by  God,  is  a  resolute  heart  to  return  to  God. 
6.  Those  who  have  ever  foimd  the  sweetness  of  Christ  in  their  hearts,  though 
they  should  be  backsliders,  have  something  remaining  that  will  at  length  draw 
them  to  Him.  6.  There  must  be  a  sight  and  an  acknowledgment  of  our  shameful 
folly,  or  else  there  can  be  no  true  returning  to  God.  7.  Though  acknowledgment 
must  go  before,  returning  must  follow.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  For  then 
was  It  better  'with  me  than  now. — The  way  of  simple  faith  best : — There  is 
a  story  told  of  Robert  Robinson,  the  hymn-writer,  which  forcibly  illustrates 
Browning's  words,  "  Stand  back  the  man  I  am  behind  the  man  I  used  to  be." 
In  his  early  ministry,  Robinson,  the  Baptist  minister  at  Cambridge,  wrote  that 
beautiful  and  well-known  hymn — "  Come,  Thou  Fount  of  every  blessing."  In 
the  latter  part  of  his  life,  Robinson's  views  of  evangelical  truth  had  changed, 
and  he  seemed  to  have  lost  a  good  deal  of  his  spiritual  fervour.  Riding  one  day 
on  a  stage-coach,  a  lady,  who  was  quite  a  stranger  to  him,  entered  into  conversa- 
tion. The  subject  of  hymns  came  up,  and  she  asked,  little  knowing  that  he  was 
the  author,  what  he  thought  of  the  hymn,  "  Come,  Thou  Fount  of  every  blessing." 
But  he  waived  the  subject,  and  turned  her  attention  to  some  other  topic  ;  but, 
after  a  short  period,  she  contrived  to  return  to  it,  and  described  the  benefits  she 
had  often  derived  from  the  hynm,  and  her  strong  admiration  of  its  sentiments. 
At  length,  Robinson,  entirely  overcome  by  the  power  of  his  feelings,  burst  into 
tears,  and  said,  "  Madam,  I  am  the  poor,  unhappy  man  who  composed  that  hymn 
many  years  ago ;  and  I  would  give  a  thousand  worlds,  if  I  had  them,  to  enjoy 
the  feelings  I  then  had."     {A.  Hampden  Lee.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Per  she  did  not  know. — Agnosticism  : — There  is  a  theory  which 
is  known  to-day  by  the  difficult  name  Agnosticism.  A  great  deal  of 
worthless  thinking  may  be  hidden  imder  that  dark  term.  The  meaning  is 
supposed  to  be  "  not-lmow-ism."  Men  do  not  now  say,  "There  is  no  God"; 
they  say,  "  If  there  is  a  God,  we  do  not  know  Him."  If  this  were  an  intellectual 
doctrine  only,  there  might  appear  to  be  about  it  somewhat  of  the  charm  of  modesty. 
But  it  is  more.  What  great  case  does  the  intellect  wholly  cover  ?  Is  man  all 
intellect?  Agnosticism  cannot  begin  and  end  where  it  likes.  God  cannot  be 
expelled  from  the  intellect  without  the  moral  quality  of  the  whole  natiure  going 
down;  without  the  heart  also  being  as  agnostic  as  the  mind.  Agnosticism  is  a 
larger  question  than  any  that  can  be  limited  to  the  mere  dry  intellect.  And 
agnosticism  of  this  kind  means  not  only  deprivation  of  moral  sensibility,  as 
expressed  in  the  action  of  gratitude,  but  it  makes  responsibility  at  once  frivolous 
and  impossible.  Responsible  to  whom  ?  Responsibility  never  reaches  its  true 
realisation  until  it  touches  the  point  of  reverence — simple,  earnest,  continual 
dependence  upon  God.  When  a  man  denies  God  he  caimot  do  his  duty  to  hia 
fellow-men.  The  man  that  does  not  know  God  does  not  know  himself.  No  man 
can  love  God  without  loving  God's  image  as  seen  in  human  kind.  Theology — 
not  formal  and  scientific,  but  spiritual  and  inspired — is  the  fount  and  origin  of 
beneficence  and  exalted  morality.     What  is  God's  reply  to  agnosticism  ?     See 


CHAP,  n.]  ROSEA.  17 

verse  9.  "  Therefore  will  I  return,  and  take  away  My  corn,"  &c.  This  is  rational, 
just,  and  simple.  Where  God  is  not  known,  why  should  He  continue  His  bounty  ? 
God  never  gives  bread  by  itself.  When  God  gives  bread  to  the  body  He  does  not 
want  to  keep  our  bones  together  ;  He  only  feeds  the  body  that  He  may  get  at  the 
soul.  God  has  therefore  determined  that  if  men  do  not  know  Him,  or  ask  con- 
cerning Him,  or  recognise  the  purpose  of  His  ministry.  He  will  come  down  and 
claim  His  com  and  wine  and  wool  and  flax.  This  is  just.  God  must  keep  some 
control  over  things.  It  is  good  of  Him  now  and  then  to  send  a  bad  harvest.  Men 
begin  to  ask  questions,  and  to  wonder.  And  what  is  the  issue  of  this  agnosticism  ? 
See  verses  11, 12.  This  is  not  vengeance,  this  is  reason ;  this  is  not  arbitrary  punish- 
ment, this  is  a  natural  consequence  and  necessity.  Divine  gifts  are  abused, 
are  misunderstood,  are  in  some  sense  resented ;  what  if  Divine  patience  should 
be  outworn,  or  if  only  through  a  temporary  suspension  of  his  fortunes  man  can  be 
brought  to  consideration?  Providence  is  not  an  arbitrary  beneficence,  but  a 
critical  and  discriminating  ministry.  And  there  comes  a  time  when  God  w  ill 
say  to  the  cloud.  Rain  no  more  on  that  unthankful  life  ;  and  to  the  sun.  No 
longer  shine  on  ingratitude  so  base  and  desperate.  This  is  God's  method  ;  it  i3 
not  mysterious  ;  it  is  simple,  frank,  direct,  intelligible,  and  just.  {Joseph  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  blindness  of  ingratitude: — The  superstitious  sin  twice,  or  in  two 
ways.  1.  They  ascribe  to  their  idols  what  rightly  belongs  to  God  alone.  9l  They 
deprive  God  Himself  of  His  own  honour,  for  they  understand  not  that  He  is  the 
only  giver  of  all  things.  Hence  the  prophet  now  complains  of  this  ingratitude. 
And  this  was  an  inexcusable  stupidity  in  the  Israelites,  since  they  had  been 
abundantly  instructed  that  the  abundance  of  all  good  things,  and  everything 
that  supports  man,  flow  from  God's  bounty.  {John  Calvin.)  That  I  gave 
her  com,  and  wine,  and  oil. — The  misimfrovement  of  providential  favours  : — The 
particular  offences  here  charged,  are  those  of  a  wilful  blindness  with  regard  to 
the  source  of  their  temporal  blessings,  and  a  guilty  perversion  of  them  to  sinful 
and  idolatrous  uses.  They  ascribed  them  to  the  agency  of  their  heathen  deities, 
to  whom  they  were  also  in  the  habit  of  consecrating  them  in  sacrifice.  But  the 
misimprovement  of  providential  favours  is  very  offensive  to  God.  I.  When 
ABB  MEN  PROPERLY  GUILTY  OF  THIS  CONDUCT  ?  1.  When  they  fail  to  recognise 
God  as  the  sole  bestower  of  them.  This  was  the  sin  of  Israel.  Absolute  ignorance 
of  the  source  whence  temporal  blessings  flow  is  not  affirmed.  It  was  that  God'a 
agency  was  ignored.  Israel  rested  in  second  causes.  Men  talk  of  their  good 
fortune,  or  their  luck,  or  their  well-to-do  ancestors,  but  God  is  not  in  all  their 
thoughts.  2.  When  they  withhold  the  due  acknowledgment  of  them.  Not  to 
know  a  thing,  in  Scripture  language,  often  means  not  to  act  in  a  manner  corre- 
sponding with  our  knowledge.  The  people  did  not  render  to  God  according  to 
that  which  they  had  received.  For  all  His  gifts  God  expects  a  proper  return, 
the  return  of  thanksgiving  and  service.  But  how  universally  is  this  withheld. 
3.  When  they  pervert  them  to  evil  and  illegitimate  uses.  "  They  prepared  for 
Baal."  The  people  took  their  blessings  from  God,  and  devoted  them  to  the  service 
of  an  idol.  This  was  translating  indifference  into  insult  and  defiance.  And  the 
guilt  is  as  common  now  as  in  the  olden  time.  II.  What  are  the  features 
IN  IT  THAT  EVINCE  ITS  PECULIAR  SINFULNESS  ?  1.  It  involves  the  sin  of  iucou- 
sideration.  It  argues  a  mind  wrapped  up  in  utter  heedlessness  of  all  that  is  most 
adapted  to  awaken  and  engage  its  powers.  2.  It  is  characterised  by  the  basest 
ingratitude.  This  is  a  positive  element.  Ingratitude  implies  an  actual  check 
put  upon  man's  feelings — a  sort  of  moral  pressure  brought  to  bear  upon  them, 
to  prevent  their  proper  exercise  and  expression.  And  man  wills  it.  It  is  not 
simply  the  negation  of  thankfulness ;  it  is  the  deliberate  exercise  of  its  contrary. 
And  this  is  the  sin  of  the  many.  3.  It  is  a  species  of  practical  atheism.  It  is 
animated  by  a  spirit  that  militates  against  the  very  being  of  God.  Or,  if  it  stop 
short  of  this,  it  yet  seeks  to  limit  the  extent  of  His  rule,  and  to  shut  Him  out  of  thia 
earthly  province  of  His  dominions.  Atheism  is  but  the  bud  of  dislike  to  God 
tmfolded  and  outspread  into  the  garish  flower.  III.  What  is  the  punishment? 
TO  which  this  conduct  justly  exposes?  The  misimprovement,  by  neglect 
or  perversion,  of  Divine  favours  incurs  the  danger  of  their  resumption  by  their 
great  Bestower.  Blessings  unimproved  will  not  always  be  continued.  There  is  a 
point  beyond  which  even  the  patience  and  forbearance  of  the  God  that  "  delighteth 
in  mercy "  will  not  hold  out.  Neglect,  insult,  and  defiance  must  end  in  condign 
punishment.  Then  let  us  be  warned.  Let  us  search  into  our  ways.  Let  us 
Acknowledge  our  transgressions,  and  put  away  our  sins  from  us.  So,  in  wrath 
2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

will  He  remember  mercy,  and  avert  the  punishment  that  we  have  so  righteously 
deserved.  Timely  humiliation,  repentance,  and  prayer  are  never  ineffectual. 
{G.  M.  Merry.)  God's  hand  to  he  acknowledged  in  His  good  gifts : — This  was  God's 
charge  against  His  ancient  people,  a  very  heavy  charge.  They  were  unmindful 
of  their  benefactor.  The  thanks  which  they  owed  to  Him  they  paid  to  devils. 
This  is  human  nature ;  it  is  what  we  still  see  continually.  It  is  a  great  part  of 
religion  to  see  God's  hand  in  everything,  to  trace  every  instance  of  protection  to 
His  providence,  of  deliverance  to  His  care,  every  good  gift  to  His  love.  The  Bible 
refers  everything  either  directly  or  indirectly  to  God.     I.  God  is  constaijtly 

BEPRESENTBD  AS  THE  AUTHOR  AND  GIVER  OF  ALL  GOOD  THINGS  (by  Jer.  V.  21-23). 

God  is  declared  to  be  the  author  of  all  the  fruitfulness  and  plenty  which  are  so 
beautifully  described  in  Psa.  Ixv.  Take  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  people  at  Lystra, 
or  Moses'  last  charge  to  the  Israelites  (Deut.  viii.  11-20).  In  these  passages  we 
have  the  rain,  the  harvest,  the  fruitf\ilnes8  of  the  fields  and  the  increase  of  the 
cattle,  preservation  in  danger,  support  in  want,  power  to  get  wealth,  daily  protection, 
the  gift  of  children — aU  ascribed  to  God.  II.  Examples  of  good  men  of  old, 
■WHO  REFERRED  EVERY  BLESSING  THEY  ENJOYED  TO  GoD.  Abraham's  Servant, 
Jacob,  Psalmists,  &c.  These  men  had  an  abiding  sense  of  God's  interference  in 
all  their  concerns.  They  looked  beyond  second  causes,  and  fixed  their  thoughts 
at  once  upon  the  great  First  Cause.  One  feels  how  different  from  theirs  is  the  way 
of  speaking  common  among  ourselves.  We  cannot,  indeed,  prudently  use  the 
name  of  God  as  freely  as  they  did.  But  we  may  err  with  undue  reticence.  If 
God's  name  is  seldom  in  our  mouths,  there  is  reason  to  fear  it  is  seldom  in  onr 
hearts.  It  were  well  that  God's  name  were  more  frequently  introduced,  so  it 
were  done  with  reverence,  when  we  speak  of  the  good  gifts  which  we  enjoy.  The 
fixed  habit  of  ascribing  all  our  blessings  to  God  would— -1.  Be  the  surest  way  to 
eecure  the  continuance  of  God's  mercies,  and  to  draw  down  more.  2.  It  would  keep 
our  faith  in  exercise.  It  would  enable  us  to  realise  God's  presence  as  our  friend 
and  benefactor.  It  would  bring  us  into  sensible  communion  with  God  daily. 
It  would  draw  out  our  love  to  Christ.  Seeing  God  in  all  things  helps  to  make 
the  sunshine  of  life.  To  be  forward  in  recognising  God's  hand,  and  blessing  Him 
for  His  good  gifts,  is  an  excellent  help  to  diligence  and  zeal  in  God's  service.  It 
only  remains  that  we  each  press  home  upon  ourselves  this  blessed  duty ;  and 
especially  that  we  make  sure  of  our  interest  in  the  greatest  of  all  God's  gifts,  the 
gift  of  His  dear  Son.  (C.  A.  HewiUey,  B.D.)  Misusing  gifts  : — 1.  How  graci- 
ously their  plenty  was  given  to  them.  God  is  a  bountiful  benefactor.  2.  How 
basely  was  their  plenty  abused  by  them.  (1)  They  robbed  God  of  the  honour 
of  them.  (2)  They  served  and  honoured  His  enemies  with  them.  3.  How  justly 
should  their  plenty  be  taken  from  them.  Those  that  abuse  the  mercies  God 
gives  them  to  His  dishonour  cannot  expect  to  enjoy  them  long.  {Matthew  Henry.) 
All  is  of  God  : — On  the  forefront  of  the  Royal  Exchange  in  London  are  inscribed 
the  words,  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  There  is  also 
stamped  on  all  our  coins  of  the  realm  the  same  acknowledgment,  Dei  gratia ; 
it  is  aU  of  God's  grace  and  goodness.  God  acknowledged  .•—-Jenny  Lind  always 
kept  the  7th  of  March  most  religiously.  She  asked  her  friends — and  she 
was  a  Christian — always  to  pray  for  her  on  the  7th  of  March.  She  kept  it 
as  a  trysting-day  with  God.  What  was  the  reason  ?  It  was  that  on  the  7th 
of  March  she  rose  from  her  bed  unaware  of  the  God-given  gift  that  was  in 
her.  By  the  evening  she  had  realised  it ;  she  had  got  the  baptism  of  her 
life — she  realised  that  God  had  put  into  her  a  gift  of  song,  the  notes  of 
which  seemed  to  have  been  stolen  from  an  angel  in  the  heavenly  choir ;  and 
she  went  to  her  bed  conscious  that  God  had  called  her  to  the  sacred  service 
of  song.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Everything  from  God: — The  scribe  is  more 
properly  said  to  write  than  the  pen ;  and  he  that  maketh  and  keepeth  the 
clock  is  more  properly  said  to  make  it  go  and  strike,  than  the  wheels  and  pegs 
that  hang  ujKjn  it ;  and  every  workman  to  effect  his  work,  rather  than  the  tools 
which  he  useth  as  his  instruments.  So  the  Lord,  who  is  the  chief  agent  and  mover 
in  all  actions,  may  more  fitly  and  properly  be  said  to  effect  and  bring  to  pass  all 
things  which  are  done  in  the  earth,  than  any  inferior  or  subordinate  causes,  as 
meat  to  nourish  us,  clothes  to  keep  us  warm,  the  sun  to  lighten  us,  friends  to 
provide  for  us,  &c.,  seeing  they  are  all  but  His  tools  and  instruments,  but  as  they 
are  ruled  and  guided  by  the  power  and  providence  of  so  heavenly  a  workman. 
{H.  G.  Salter.)  God  overlooked  : — In  Madeira  there  is  a  grove  of  camelia  trees. 
A  gentleman  went  to  see  the  flowers,  and  returned  much  disappointed,  as  not  one 


CHAP,  n.]  HOSEA.  19 

was  visible.  He  made  a  second  visit,  and  was  delighted  when,  looking  up,  as  he 
had  been  told  to  do,  he  saw  a  canopy  of  large  white  and  scarlet  flowers,  forty 
feet  overhead.  In  times  of  difficulty  we  are  apt  to  look  round  on  earthly  agencies 
for  aid,  forgetting  to  look  up  to  God,  who  in  spite  of  all  His  glory,  is  willing  to  be 
our  helper.  {J.  Marrat. )  The  worship  of  fortune  : — Archbishop  Trench  says. 
How  prone  are  we  all  to  ascribe  to  chance  or  fortune  those  gifts  and  blessings  which 
indeed  come  directly  from  God — to  build  altars  to  Fortune  rather  than  to  Him 
who  is  the  author  of  every  good  thing  which  we  have  gotten.  And  this  faith  of 
men,  that  their  blessings,  even  their  highest,  come  to  them  by  a  blind  chance, 
they  have  incorporated  in  a  word ;  for  "  happy  "  and  "  happiness  "  are  oormected 
with  "  hap,"  which  is  chance ;  how  unworthy,  then,  to  express  any  true  felicity, 
whose  very  essence  is  that  it  excludes  hap  or  chance,  that  the  world  neither  gave 
nor  can  take  it  away.  Against  a  similar  misuse  of  "  fortunate,"  "  unfortunate," 
Wordsworth  very  nobly  protests,  when,  of  one  who,  having  lost  everything  else, 
had  yet  kept  the  truth,  he  exclaims — 

"  Call  not  the  royal  Swede  unfortunate. 
Who  never  did  to  Fortune  bend  the  knee." 

Success  rightly  ascribed: — "  In  all  my  career,"  General  Gordon  once  wrote,  "  I  can  lay 
no  claim  to  cleverness,  discretion,  or  wisdom.  My  success  has  been  due  to  a  series 
of  (called  by  the  world)  flukes.  When  one  knows  the  little  one  does  of  oneself,  and 
any  one  praises  you,  I,  at  any  rate,  have  a  rising  in  the  gorge  which  is  a  suppressed, 
'  You  lie  !  '  Who  is  he,  or  who  is  any  man,  that  he  should  be  praised  ?  I  do 
nothing.  Do  not  flatter  yourself  that  you  are  wanted — that  God  could  not  work 
without  you ;  it  is  an  honour  if  He  employs  you.  No  one  is  indispensable,  either 
in  this  world's  affairs  or  in  spiritual  works."  "  Do  not  send  me  your  paper  with 
anything  written  about  me,"  he  said  on  parting.  "  I  do  not  want  to  see  it,  or 
to  have  anything  to  do  with  it.  These  things  are  not  in  my  hands,  and  mind, 
do  not  forget — no  gilt !  "  Ood  the  source  of  blessings : — At  the  close  of  the  cotton 
famine  in  Lancashire  the  mills  in  one  village  had  been  stopped  for  months,  and 
the  first  waggon  load  of  cotton  which  arrived  before  they  recommenced,  seemed 
to  the  people  like  the  olive-branch,  "  newly  plucked  off,"  which  told  of  the 
abating  waters  of  the  deluge.  The  waggon  was  met  by  the  women,  who 
hysterically  laughed  and  cried,  and  hugged  the  cotton  bales  as  if  they  were  dear 
old  friends,  and  then  ended  by  singing  that  grand  old  hymn — a  great  favourite 
with  Lancashire  people  — "  Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow." 
WMch  they  prepared  for  Baal.  —  Political  and  social  ungodliness  :  —  The 
sin  of  the  nation,  the  misery  which  Hosea  here  laments,  was  this — the  people 
worshipped  their  prosperity,  unmindful  of  the  God  who  gave  it.  Baal-worship 
was  substantially  a  worship  of  the  forces  of  nature.  Ethically,  Baal-worship 
was  the  enthronement  of  force ;  it  was  the  worship  of  possession.  The  Jewish 
idea  in  calling  Jehovah  "  Lord  "  was  that  of  righteous  authority.  The  character 
of  God  was  His  supreme  claim  to  government.  Baal,  as  "  Lord,"  was  simply 
the  mysterious  unknown  proprietor  of  powers  of  natm-e :  a  mighty  possessor, 
to  be  honoured  as  one  who  could  give,  propitiated  as  one  who  could  withhold, 
or  trouble  and  afflict.  Ungodliness  in  Christian  nations  corresponds  to  idolatry 
among  the  Jews ;  the  refusal  to  recognise  any  higher  law  than  the  right  of 
possession,  to  acknowledge  any  other  rule  of  conduct  than  what  is  prescribed 
by  the  necessity  of  holding  and  increasing  what  one  has.  Baal-worship  did  not 
disjdaoe  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  the  two  existed  side  by  side.  Jehovah  for 
the  inspiration  of  their  loftiest  sentiment ;  Baal  for  the  mesiner  concerns  of  com 
and  wine  and  oiL  A  similar  confusion  of  godliness  and  ungodliness  is  found 
in  many  a  man,  perhaps  in  the  most  immediately  influential  majority  of  the 
English  people  to-day.  The  Gospel  has  done  too  much  for  us  to  be  lightly 
abandoned.  We  cannot  afford  to  dispense  with  the  sanctity,  the  inspiration, 
the  ennobling  thoughts  and  feelings  which  Christianity  brings  into  individual 
and  family  and  Church  life.  But  then,  how  many  would  confine  the  Gospel 
to  indivimial  and  family  and  Church  life  ?  For  polities  and  society  the  New 
Testament  morality  is  too  far-fetched,  too  fine-drawn.  This  is  what  we  mean 
by  political  and  social  ungodliness.  Many  a  man  is  personsJly  godly,  politioidly 
ungodly.  This  is  a  fatal  mistake.  No  amount  of  personal  piety  will  buy  God 
over  to  give  us  national  and  social  prosperity  while  we  contemn  the  principles 
of  rigfateottsness,  and  regard  for  men,  which  the  Bible  reveals.     There  is  one 


20   1 TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  il. 

God,  one  morality,  one  rule ;  the  same  for  nations  as  for  individuals ;  the  same 
for  our  social  relations  with  the  world  as  for  our  Christian  relations  within  the 
Church.  Political  ungodliness  has  to  be  rebuked  by  Christian  people.  We 
are  called  on  to  be  watchful,  even  jealous,  in  our  criticism  of  publio  men  and 
measures.  Your  judgment  on  political  matters  will  affect  the  integrity  of  your 
personal  character,  the  clearness  of  your  personal  faith.  Indifference  to  righteous- 
ness in  any  sphere  will  sap  the  foundation  of  your  piety,  and  blight  your  spiritual 
life.  Deal  with  social  ungodliness  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  commercial  life. 
We  do  not  find  any  such  toleration  of  immorality  as  is  common  in  political  life. 
The  conscience  of  the  community  is  quick  to  assert  itself;  the  supremacy  of 
righteousness  is  vindicated,  but  we  do  not  find  godliness  absolute  and  supreme. 
Deal  with  the  morality  of  strikes ;  the  utter  bewilderment  in  which  the  com- 
mercial complications  of  the  day  have  found  men.  How  is  social  life  presented 
to  us  in  the  Gospel  ?  It  says,  "  We  are  members  one  of  another."  Every  one 
of  us  lives  in  a  community,  for  the  benefit  of  which  he  has  been  called  into  being, 
and  all  eocial  advantages  are  conferred  on  him  for  the  sake  of  the  community. 
We  are  here  in  the  world  to  be  trained  into  spiritual  manhood,  and  all  material 
advantages  are  conferred  on  us  for  the  sake  of  the  character  they  help  to  form 
and  develop.  Consider  how  commercial  activity  and  social  life  tend  to  form 
spiritual  character.  Social  godliness  looks  for  the  fulfilment  of  God's  will  in 
all  the  action  of  society.  Social  godliness  and  ungodliness  are  measured  if  we 
consider  how  far  we  habitually  exercise  this  spirit.     (.4.  Mackennal,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Therefore  will  I  return. — Changes  in  God's  ways  with  us  : — "  There- 
fore will  I  return,"  that  is,  I  will  change  the  way  of  My  administrations  toward 
them  ;  I  will  go  out  of  My  way  of  mercy,  and  turn  into  My  way  of  judgment ; 
I  will  go  back  again.  "  I  will  take  away  My  corn  in  the  time  thereof."  That 
is  in  the  very  time  of  harvest  and  vintage.  "  And  will  recover  My  wool."  I  will 
snatch  it  away ;  I  will  spoil  you  of  it.  I  wiU  recover  it  out  of  the  hands  of  usurpers. 
Or  those  creatures,  corn,  wine,  wool,  are  now  in  bondage  to  you,  and  I  will  recover 
them  out  of  your  hands.  Observe — 1.  Though  God  gives  mercy  out  of  free 
grace  without  cause  in  ourselves,  yet  He  takes  not  away  mercy  without  cause. 

2.  Sin  causes  God  to  change  the  way  of  His  administrations  towards  His  people. 

3.  Abuse  of  mercy  causes  the  removing  of  mercy.  4.  God  keeps  the  propriety 
of  all  that  we  have.  5.  The  taking  away  the  good  things  which  we  enjoy  ia 
a  means  of  making  us  return  to  God.  6.  There  is  an  uncertainty  in  all  things 
in  the  world ;  though  they  promise  fair,  yet  they  are  ready  to  fail  us  when  they 
promise  most.  7.  God  often  shows  His  displeasure  to  those  who  provoke  Him, 
when  they  are  at  the  greatest  height  of  prosperity.  8.  When  men  abuse  mercies, 
they  forfeit  their  right  in  those  mercies.  9.  All  the  time  the  creature  serves 
wicked  men,  it  is  in  bondage,  and  God  looks  upon  it  with  pity.  10.  God  gives 
His  blessings  to  us,  not  for  luxury,  but  for  necessity.  II.  When  abundance 
is  abused,  it  is  just  with  God  that  we  should  want  necessaries.  {Jeremiah 
Burroughs.)  And  take  away  My  com. — Blessings  unimproved  resumed  by 
their  owner  : — Two  subjects  for  reflection ;  the  goodness  of  Qod,  and  the  wicked- 
ness of  man.  The  Jews  were  fair  specimens  of  human  nature.  I.  Thb  sottboh 
OF  OUR  MERCIES.  "  I  gave  her."  Here  we  do  not  refer  to  those  blessings  which 
we  caU  spiritual.  We  speak  of  temporal  good  things.  "  He  giveth  us  richly 
all  things  to  enjoy."  Never  suffer  instruments  to  keep  your  thoughts  from  God. 
1.  Unconscious  instrumentality.  This  takes  in  what  we  call  nature.  2.  Voluntary 
instrumentality.  Our  fellow-creatures  may  do  us  good  in  a  thousand  ways. 
They  act  knowingly  and  freely  in  relieving  us,  and  display  the  noblest  principles 
of  their  nature.  But  here  God  has  higher  claims  ;  for  who  placed  these  friends 
and  benefactors  in  our  way  ?  3.  Personal  instrumentality.  Few  of  the  good 
things  of  life  are  obtained  without  some  exertions  of  our  own.  Indeed,  if  they 
Avere,  they  would  not  be  half  so  sweet.  But  from  whom  have  we  derived  our 
natural  talents  ?  Whose  providence  fixed  us  in  a  situation  favourable  to  our 
efforts  ?  II.  Our  guilt  in  the  use  of  our  mercies.  Here  are  two  charges. 
1.  Ignorance.  God  does  much  more  good  in  the  world  than  is  ever  known.  He 
has  done  us  all  coinitless  acts  of  kindness  of  which  we  have  never  been  aware. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  speculative  and  practical.  The  former  is 
nothing  without  the  latter ;  it  is  no  better  than  ignorance.  2.  Perversion. 
Instead  of  using  God's  gifts  in  the  service  and  for  the  glory  of  God,  we  appropriate 
them  to  the  use  of  idols.     This  is  wor.se  tlim  the  former,  as  indifference  is  exceeded 


CHAP,  n.]  H08EA.  21 

by  insult.  What  would  you  feel  more  provoking  than  for  a  man  to  borro\v  of 
you,  in  order  to  publish  a  libel  upon  your  character  ?  Is  not  God  perpetually 
thus  affronted  and  dishonoured  ?  III.  The  removal.  "  Take  away  My 
corn,"  &c.  1.  We  see  how  precarious  everything  earthly  ia.  2.  God  withdrav/s 
our  comforts  as  well  as  gives  them.  3.  God  does  not  relinquish  His  propriety 
in  any  of  His  blessings  when  He  bestows  them.  Still  they  are  His.  When 
He  comes  for  them  He  comes  but  to  resume.  4.  He  often  removes  our  blessings 
and  comforts  when  they  seem  most  attractive  and  most  necessary,  when  their 
loss  is  least  expected,  and  we  are  rejoicing  to  see  them  flourish.  5.  God  does 
not  deprive  us  of  our  enjoyments  without  a  cause.  It  is  oiu"  non-improvement, 
it  is  our  abuse  of  our  mercies  that  endangers  them.  6.  His  conduct,  in  the 
removal  of  our  joys,  looks  forward  as  well  as  backward.  He  punishes,  not  for 
our  destruction  but  advantage,  and  the  very  consequences  of  sin  are  made  to 
cure.  While  this  subject  leads  us  to  magnify  the  Lord,  it  should  afford  instruction 
and  encouragement  to  those  who  are  afflicted.  No  affliction  will  ever  do  us  good 
unless  it  excite  in  us  both  fear  and  hope.  The  day  of  trouble  is  a  period  peculiarly 
eventful  and  important.  Salvation  or  destruction  may  hinge  upon  it.  ( William 
Jay.)  Forfeited  blessings  : — The  goodness  of  God  and  the  ingratitude  of  man 
meet  us  everywhere,  and  in  our  own  hearts  are  as  prominent  as  in  the  world. 
I.  God's  meecies.  All  our  blessings  come  direct  from  God.  Whatever  may 
be  the  instrument,  the  gift  is  of  God.  1.  There  is  nature.  2.  There  is  human 
instrumentality,  3.  There  is  personal  exertion.  "  It  is  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
thee  power  to  get  wealth."  II.  Man's  abuse  of  God's  meecies.  Here  are 
two  charges.  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Perversion.  III.  The  just  and  inevitable 
BESULT.  1.  God  reminds  us  that  our  mercies  are  only  lent.  2.  God  only  allots 
them  to  us  on  the  condition  of  using  them  rightly.  (Homilist.)  God's  gifts 
taken  away  : — God  shews  us  that  His  gifts  come  from  Him,  either  by  giving  them 
when  we  almost  despair  of  them,  or  taking  them  away,  when  they  are  all  but 
ours.  It  can  seem  no  chance  when  He  so  doeth.  The  chastisement  is  severer 
also,  when  the  good  things,  long  looked  for,  are  at  the  last  taken  out  of  our  very 
hands,  and  that,  when  there  is  no  remedy.  "  Recover  My  wool."  God  recovers 
and,  as  it  were,  delivers  the  works  of  His  hands  from  serving  the  ungodly.  Whilo 
He  leaves  His  creatures  in  the  possession  of  the  wicked,  they  are  holden,  as  it 
were,  in  captivity,  being  kept  back  from  their  proper  uses,  and  made  the  hand- 
maidens and  instruments  and  tempters  to  sin.  It  is  against  the  order  of  nature 
to  use  God's  gifts  to  any  other  end  short  of  God's  glory,  much  more,  to  turn 
God's  gifts  against  Himself,  and  make  them  serve  to  pride,  or  luxury,  or  sensual 
sin.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Necessaries  of  life  withheld  : — So  full  and  continual 
are  our  mercies  that  we  are  prone  to  forget  the  Giver  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
gift,  until  a  voice  of  sternness  calls  us  home.  I  heard  recently  of  a  young  student 
at  college,  who  became  so  interested  in  sports  and  other  things  that  he  neglected 
to  write  to  his  parents.  The  mother  became  exceedingly  anxious  and  wanted 
the  father  to  go  to  the  city  and  learn  the  cause.  But  the  father  found  a  simpler 
method.  The  supply  of  money  was  withheld,  and  very  soon  a  letter  came.  Even 
so,  God  sometimes  withholds  from  us  the  very  necessaries  of  life  until  we  learn 
that  while  He  is  willing  to  supply  our  needs.  He  earnestly  desires  our  fellowship. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  prodigal.  He  permits  a  mighty  famine  in  the  land  where 
we  are  feeding  swine,  in  order  to  bring  us  to  the  home  table,  where  His  bounty 
is  spread.  {Good  Tidings.)  God's  discipline  : — Trees,  if  the  roots  run  too 
deep  into  the  earth,  must  be  cut  shorter ;  if  the  branches  spread  too  far,  they 
must  be  lopped  ;  and  if  canker  or  caterpillar  once  infest,  and  cleave  to  them, 
then  they  must  be  blazed  and  smoked.  Thus,  the  children  of  God,  when  they 
be  too  much  rooted  by  their  affections  in  the  things  of  this  world,  and  with  great 
and  large  boughs  of  their  ability,  wrong  and  impoverish  their  poor  neighbour, 
or  let  their  money  like  the  canker  eat  into  their  souls — God  will  give  them  many 
a  cutting,  lopping,  and  fumigating  ;  and  as  they  caimot  but  naturally  do  the 
one,  so  God,  intending  to  heal  them  spiritually,  will  do  the  other  ;  His  care  will 
be  still  for  them,  notwithstanding  their  several  failings.     {J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  10-12.  None  shall  deliver  her  out  of  My  hand. — The  Lord's  sentence : — 
I.  Taking  away  thinqs  necessaey  to  life.  Learn — 1.  However  the 
Lord  communicate  of  His  bounty  with  the  children  of  men,  yet  He  still  retains 
the  dominion  of  all  the  creatures  in  His  own  hand,  that  He  may  dispose  of  them 
at  His  pleasure.    2.  Men's  abuse  of  prosperity,  especially  to  uphold  a  false  religion. 


22  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

doth  justly  forefault  their  right  thereunto  before  God,  and  doth  provoke  Him 
to  take  away  abused  mercies.  3.  As  God's  former  bounty  will  not  secure  pros- 
perity to  the  abusers  of  it,  so  He  wiU  take  it  away  when  it  promises  fairest,  as 
when  it  is  come  to  the  harvest.  4.  As  outward  mercies  are  given  for  the  supply 
of  necessities,  and  not  for  fostering  of  luxury,  so  it  is  a  special  cause  of  God's 
stroke  that  men  do  so  far  miscarry,  because  of  that,  without  which  they  would 
be  so  vile.  These  things  were  given  to  cover  her  nakedness,  and  she  would  bo 
vile  without  them.  Yet  she  abused  them,  and  therefore  God  will  take  them 
away.  II.  Making  her  vtleness  appear  to  her  lovers.  Learn — 1.  How 
right  soever  sinners  may  appear  to  themselves  or  others  in  their  prosperity,  yet 
God  will,  by  judgments,  make  it  appear  how  lewd  and  vile  their  way  hath  been. 
2.  God  is  so  strong  a  party  as  when  He  contends  with  sinners,  aU  their  confidences 
in  idolatry,  false  worship,  or  confederates,  will  fail  them,  and  not  be  able  to  help 
them.  3.  Idolatry,  and  abuse  of  prosperity  to  uphold  it,  doth  ripen  a  visible 
Church  for  very  speedy  destruction.  III.  Cutting  short  mirth  and  worship. 
Learn — L  Sin  and  mirth  will  not  last  long  together,  but  were  there  never  so 
much  of  mirth,  sin  will  cut  it  all  short.  2.  God  will  not  be  mocked  with  external 
performances  of  solemn  worship  to  Him,  when  they  join  gross  idolatry  with  them. 
IV.  Destruction  even  of  the  sources  of  blessing.  Not  only  their  fruits, 
but  the  trees  they  grew  upon.  Learn — 1.  Spiritual  judgments  and  deprivation 
of  ordinances  will  have  but  little  weight  with  wicked  men,  unless  some  other 
rod  be  sent  with  them.  2.  Such  is  the  desperate  stupidity  and  obstinacy  of 
declining  sinners,  as  no  cutting  off  of  present  enjoyments  will  afEect  them,  unless 
their  future  expectations  be  cut  off  likewise.  3.  As  God  doth  not  cut  off  enjoy- 
ments from  sinners,  but  when  they  do  abuse  them,  so  we  should  take  heed  of 
God's  quarrel  under  calamities,  and  especially  the  abuse  of  prosperity,  in  not 
acknowledging  God,  but  strengthening  ourselves  in  an  ill  way,  because  of  it. 
(George  Hutcheaon.)  God's  punishments  are  just : — Whenever  God  deals  severely 
with  men,  He  visits  their  sins,  and  inflicts  a  just  punishment.  For  though  men 
may  consider  themselves  to  be  chastised  by  the  Lord,  they  yet  do  not  thoroughly 
search  and  examine  themselves  as  they  ought.  Hence  the  prophet  repeats  what 
we  have  before  met  with,  and  that  is,  that  this  chastisement  would  be  just.  At 
the  same  time,  he  shows  us  as  by  the  finger  what  chiefly  displeased  God  in  the 
Israelites,  which  was,  that  religion  was  corrupted  by  them :  for  there  is  nothing 
more  necessary  to  be  known,  than  that  in  order  men  may  ever  habituate  them- 
selves to  worship  God  in  a  pure  manner,  this  should  be  testified  to  them,  that 
all  superstitions  are  such  an  abomination  to  God  that  He  cannot  bear  them. 
(John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  11.  I  will  also  cause  all  her  mirth  to  cease. — The  conjunction  of  ain 
and  mirth : — Mirth  is  not  happiness.  It  is  but  the  mimicry  of  real  joy. 
There  is  but  little  happiness  in  the  world,  but  there  is  much  mirth.  I.  Thb 
conjunction  of  sin  and  mirth  is  common.  The  voices  of  jollity  and  fun  are 
heard  everywhere  through  society.  II.  It  is  incongruous.  Gaiety  and  laughter 
in  a  sinner  are  most  revolting  when  rightly  regarded.  III.  It  is  temporary. 
1.  The  separation  is  certain.  An  old  writer  says,  "  If  you  will  not  take  away 
sin  from  your  mirth,  God  will  take  away  your  mirth  from  your  sin."  2.  The 
separation  will  be  solemn.  Do  not  then  confound  mirth  with  happiness.  Happi- 
ness will  follow  holiness  for  ever ;  mirth  will  only,  like  the  ignis  fatuus,  flare 
about  sin  for  a  short  time  at  most,  and  then  go  out.  (Homilist.)  Mingled 
promise  and  threatening  : — The  prophet  seems  in  this  verse  to  contradict  himself, 
for  he  promised  reconciliation,  and  now  he  speaks  of  a  new  repudiation.  But 
the  passage  is  very  consistent,  and  there  is  in  the  words  no  contrariety.  He  has 
indeed  promised  that  at  a  futine  time  Grod  would  be  propitious  to  the  Israelites  : 
but  as  they  had  not  yet  repented,  it  was  needful  to  deal  again  more  severely 
with  them,  that  they  might  return  to  their  God  really  and  thoroughly  subdued. 
So  we  see  that,  in  Scripture,  promises  and  threatenings  are  mingled  together, 
and  rightly  too.  It  is  necessary  for  men  to  be  reproved  not  only  once  and  again, 
but  very  often.     (John  Calvin.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  She  decked  herself  with  her  ornaments  and  her  Jewels. — The 

prosperity  of  the  uncked  : — The  wicked — I.  As  prospering  in  the  world.  Vines 
and  fig-trees  stand  for  prosperity.  Wicked  men  are  allowed  to  prosper  on  this 
earth  :  they  are  often  more  successful  in  worldly  enterprises  than  the  righteous. 


CHAP,  n.]  nOSEA.  23 

They  live  jor  the  world  and  to  the  world,  and  they  have  their  reward.  II.  Aa 
ASCRIBING  THEIR  PROSPERITY  TO  WRONG  CAUSES.  Israel  ascribes  to  its  idols 
or  lovers.  The  wicked  ascribe  to  fortune,  chance,  their  own  industry,  their 
own  scheming.  The  true  source  is  God.  III.  Devoting  their  prosperity 
TO  WRONG  OBJECTS.  Israel  is  here  accused  of  burning  incense  to  Baalim,  these 
Deii  minores.  Wicked  men  devote  their  wealth  to  their  own  selfish  and  super- 
stitious ends.  IV.  As  deprived  of  their  prosperity  by  the  great  God. 
The  threatening  here  is,  that  God  will  not  only  destroy  all  their  prosperity,  but 
punish  them  for  their  idolatry.  "  The  tinsel  glare  upon  a  sinner  is  too  apt  to 
offend  the  weak  eyes  of  a  saint."  {Homilist.)  And  forgat  Me,  saith  the  Lord. — 
Forgetting  God  : — Such  is  the  character  of  all  engrossing  passion,  such  is  the  course 
of  sin,  to  which  the  soul  gives  way,  in  avarice,  ambition,  worldliness,  sensual 
sin,  godless  science.  The  soul,  at  last,  does  not  rebel  against  God,  it  forgets 
Him  ;  it  is  taken  up  with  other  things,  with  itself,  with  the  subjects  of  its 
thoughts,  the  objects  of  its  affections,  and  it  has  no  time  for  God.  So  God 
complains  of  Judah  by  Jeremiah,  "  Their  fathers  have  forgotten  Mv  name  for 
Baal."         (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  I  will  allure  her,  and  brings  ber  Into  the  wilderness,  and  speak 
eomfortably  to  her. — Allure  : — The  original  word  is  used  of  one  readily  enticed,  as 
a  simple  one,  whether  to  good  or  ill.  God  uses,  as  it  were,  Satan's  weapons  against 
himself.  As  Satan  had  enticed  the  soul  to  sin,  so  would  God,  by  holy  enticements 
and  persuasiveness,  allure  her  to  Himself.  God,  too,  hath  sweetness  for  the  penitent 
soul  far  above  all  the  sweetness  of  present  joys,  much  more  above  the  bitter 
sweetness  of  sin.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  God's  presence  in  loneliness  : — PYom 
the  first  dawning  of  conversion  to  the  hour  of  death,  it  is  in  solitude  mostly  that 
God  speaks  to  the  eoul.  Here  God  spoke  by  His  prophet  to  a  nation  which, 
like  ourselves,  had,  in  its  prosperity,  multiplied  its  idols,  made  gold  and  silver 
into  gods  to  worship,  had  been  unfaithful  to  its  God,  and  abused  His  gifts.  Of 
such  God  says,  "  I  will  allure  her."  He  vouchsafes  to  speak  to  us  after  the  manner 
of  men.  He  will  give  us,  He  saith,  love  for  love.  He  speaks  as  we  may  best 
bear  to  hear,  and  is  fittest  for  us.  Blessed  are  those  holy  hours  in  which  the 
soul  retires  from  the  world  to  be  alone  with  God.  God's  voice,  as  Himself,  is 
everywhere.  Only  the  din  of  the  world,  or  the  tumult  of  our  own  hearts,  deafens 
our  inward  ear  to  it.  Chiefly  in  the  inmost  soul  He  speaks,  because  there  He 
dwells.  To  be  alone  is  to  feel  the  presence  of  God,  in  love  or  in  displeasure,  as 
a  friend  or  a  stranger.  Until  the  soul  will  open  its  whole  self  to  God,  it  shrinks 
from  inward  and  outward  loneliness.  We  must  be  alone  in  the  hour  of  death, 
let  us  learn  to  be  alone  with  God  now.  It  is  only  afar  off  that  the  wilderness 
looks  a  waste,  and  terrible  and  dry.  Until,  in  silence,  ye  enter  into  that  sacred 
loneliness,  ye  know  not  whither  ye  are  going.  In  loneliness  a  man  knows  himself 
and  his  God.  Enter  thou  with  Him,  and  by  His  grace,  thou  wilt  not  come  forth 
as  thou  goest  in.  Cherished  sin  alone  deafens  us  to  the  voice  of  God.  (Ibid.) 
Christ  allures  to  the  wilderness  : — Apply  these  words  to  ourselves,  as  setting  before 
us  the  way  Almighty  God  will  work  upon  our  souls  to  bring  us  to  repentance, 
or  to  a  deeper  knowledge  of  His  ways.  I.  He  will  allure  the  soul  and  bring 
it  into  the  wilderness.  This  implies  that  it  is  elsewhere, — it  is  in  the  world. 
What  is  meant  by  the  wilderness  ?  It  is  spoken  of  our  hearts.  God  will  make 
us,  even  while  living  in  this  world,  with  all  its  pleasures  and  vanities  around  us, 
as  dead  to  all  as  if  we  were  in  a  wilderness.  '  I  spake  unto  thee  in  prosperity, 
and  thou  wouldest  not  hear."  This  is  His  lament.  Therefore  He  will  destroy 
all  those  things  wherein  we  trust,  that  we  may  hear  His  voice  and  live.  There  is 
self-denial  involved  in  following  where  the  Spirit  leads  us.  It  allures  onwards 
to  the  wilderness.  Follow  willingly.  II.  If  God  has  thus  dealt  with  you, 
it  is  that  Hb  may  speak  to  your  hearts.  In  silence,  in  solitude,  in  the  desola- 
tion of  your  hearts.  He  will  come  and  build  up  their  ruined  breaches,  and  dwell 
therein  Himself.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth."  God  speaks  to 
the  heart ;  He  allures  it  to  Him ;  and  when  it  has  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of 
its  foot  on  the  waters  of  this  troubled  world,  bids  it  return  to  its  true  rest  in 
His  wounded  side.  {R.  A.  Suckling,  M.A.)  God's  free  grace : — Therefore, 
because  she  will  not  be  restrained  by  the  denunciations  of  wrath,  God  will  try 
whether  she  will  be  wrought  upon  by  the  offers  of  mercy.  The  design  is  plainly 
to  magnify  free  grace  to  those  on  whom  God  will  have  mercy  purely  for  mercy's 
eake.     {Mattheio  Henry.)        God's  wise  and  tender  love  to  His  pe^yple  .-—In  the 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

Old  Testament  we  see  the  struggle  between  the  Divine  lore  and  the  perverse 
human  will.  God  will  ever  impose  restraints  and  place  barriers  in  the  way  of 
ein,  and  so  would  make  sin  difficult  and  painful.  In  addition  to  conscience, 
the  inward  monitor,  there  are  outward  checks  placed  by  God  to  hinder  men  from 
the  commission  of  sin.  Toil  is  a  restraint.  It  is  a  bit  and  bridle  to  the  wayward 
and  the  vicious.  The  wave  of  prosperity  often  leaves  behind  it  the  rubbish  and 
foam  of  licentiousness.  Pain  is  also  a  restraint.  There  is  pleasure  in  sin.  It  ia 
not  real,  it  is  not  enduring,  but  there  it  is,  and  the  sinner  is  attracted  by  it.  The 
forbidden  tree  is  "  pleasant  to  the  eyes."  The  sinfulness  of  sin  may  be  inferred 
from  its  bitter  consequences.  Pain  is  a  moral  word.  It  implies  punishment. 
It  is  the  penalty  of  sin,  it  is  therefore  a  restraint.  But  God  not  only  checks. 
He  draws.  I.  He  wins  by  His  love.  He  "  allures,"  persuades,  woos,  attracts. 
God  respects  man's  freedom.  God  Himself  cannot  compel  us  to  trust  and  love 
Him.  He  has  constituted  as  moral  beings.  God  influences  the  motives,  the 
desires,  the  judgments,  the  affections,  operates  on  the  secret  power  of  the  will. 
The  only  power  that  can  win  men  from  their  sin  is  love.  Love  has  the  key  that 
fits  every  lock  in  the  different  chambers  of  the  soul.  Love  can  overcome  the 
enmity  of  our  nature.  It  will  not  be  slain  by  any  other  weapon.  And  thus 
God  deals  with  us.  II.  He  appoints  and  uses  necessaey  means  of  disciplinb. 
Having  been  "  allured,"  drawn  to  God,  we  are  then  trained,  disciplined.  This 
wilderness  state  is  a  state  of — 1.  Solitude.  A  man  must  get  out  of  the  crowd 
in  order  to  think.  Men  living  in  a  crowd  become  mere  echoes.  In  solitude 
man  discovers  himself,  and  realises  the  presence  of  God,  and  these  involve  a 
burden  of  personal  responsibility.  2.  Trouble.  Chastisement  was,  and  still 
is,  the  necessary  discipline  for  God's  children.  Why  does  God  correct  them  ? 
To  make  them  feel  that  sin  is  terribly  hateful.  And  He  shews  us  the  tendency 
of  sin.  3.  Preparation.  The  training  of  the  wilderness  was  necessary.  Had 
they  entered  Canaan  at  once,  they  would  have  been  unfit  to  take  possession  of 
it.  God  brings  us  into  the  wilderness  in  order  to  develop  our  character.  The 
faith  that  will  stand  in  the  storm  is  the  faith  that  has  been  tried.  III.  God 
SPEAKS  TO  vs.  Lit.  "  I  will  speak  to  her  heart."  Not  to  the  intellect  merely, 
but  also  to  the  heart.  But  God's  words  never  reach  the  heart  imtil  we  have 
been  prepared  for  them.  What  are  His  words  that  reach  the  heart !  Words  of 
forgiveness,  consolation,  hope.  Are  we  then  making  the  right  use  of  our  Father's 
discipline  ?  {James  Owen. )  Mercy,  troubles,  and  end  of  the  Church  : — I.  The 
OVERTUEES  OF  MBBCY.  "  I  will  allure  her."  The  natural  heart  is  in  a  state 
of  rebellion  against  God,  and  He  sends  an  offer  of  free  pardon  to  all  that  will 
submit  to  Him.  He  allures  them  by  His  mercies.  God  works  upon  men's  fears 
by  shewing  them  their  dangers,  upon  their  affections  by  the  offer  of  His  grace. 
II.  Troubles  that  shall  come  after.  "  I  will  bring  her  into  the  wilderness." 
When  souls  are  delivered  from  their  natural  bondage  to  sin  and  Satan,  they  do 
not  immediately  taste  all  the  sweets  arising  from  the  liberty  of  the  Gospel.  They 
often  indeed  suffer  greater  torments  of  mind,  greater  terrors  of  conscience,  than 
ever  they  did  before.  But  if  God  brings  His  people  through  a  wilderness.  He 
will  speak  comfortably  to  them  at  last.  III.  The  end  of  heb  troubles.  Where 
God,  by  His  Spirit,  speaks  comfortably  to  the  heart,  that  is  comfort  indeed. 
If  the  heart  be  not  at  ease,  nothing  can  give  us  comfort.  It  is  one  of  the  offices 
of  the  Spirit  to  comfort  God's  people.  {R.  W.  Dibdin,  M.A.)  And  I  will  give 
t«r  her  vineyards  from  thence. — God's  dealings  with  His  Church : — The  Church 
of  God  means  that  blessed  company  of  true  believers  in  Christ,  and  true  and 
faithful  servants  of  God  the  Father,  who  are  living  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  a  life  of  genuine  devotedness  to  God  and  His  Christ — whose  religion  is 
that  of  the  Gospel,  and  who  adorn  that  Gospel  in  all  things — whose  affections 
are  set  on  the  things  which  are  above — who  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
His  righteousness — who  are  living  as  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  earth,  and  who 
are  looking  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations.  These,  however  dispersed,  form 
one  body.  Of  this  Church  the  Jewish  nation  was  a  type  and  representative. 
In  considering  such  a  passage  as  the  text,  it  becomes  us  to  exercise  a  sober  discretion, 
lest  we  wander  into  the  regions  of  fancy.  We  may  view  it  as  representing — 
I.  The  gracious  dealings  of  God  with  His  Church.  1.  He  allures  them 
by  the  most  gracious  invitations,  to  turn  to  Him  with  penitence  and  prayer. 
God  is  love  ;  and  amongst  the  many  proofs  of  this,  are  the  gracious  invitations 
by  which  He  allures  His  rebellious  creatures  to  seek  His  face.  2.  To  these  invita- 
tions the  Lord  adds  the  most  encouraging  assurances  to  all  who  will  seek  His 


CHAP.  EL]  HOSEA.  25 

mercy,  forgiveness  of  their  sins,  and  acceptance  with  Him.  But  the  Lord  does 
more  than  this.  He  not  only  gently  raises  the  desire  of  His  favour,  but  He  power- 
fully  strengthens  and  confirms  it — "  He  brings  her  into  the  wilderness."  Some 
suppose  this  refers  to  the  love  of  solitude  and  retirement  as  affording  oppor- 
tunity for  more  unrestricted  communion  with  Grod.  Others  consider  it  as 
alluding  to  those  various  afflictive  dispensations  which  are  often  the  means 
employed  by  God  in  leading  His  people  to  the  living  fountains  of  waters.  May 
we  not  regard  them  as  denoting  more  especially  that  state  of  spiritual  distress 
into  which  God  in  mercy  brings  the  sinner  T  The  Lord  brings  His  believing  people 
into  the  wilderness  of  conviction  of  sin  and  godly  repentance.  Conviction  leads 
to  consolation,  and  repentance  prepares  the  new-born  soul  for  the  reception  of 
the  Saviour.  No  language  can  describe  the  comfort  which  springs  in  the  heart 
of  the  convinced  and  contrite  sinner  from  the  assurance  that  the  door  of  mercy 
is  not  yet  closed  against  him,  and  that  there  is  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and 
for  imcleanness.  Then,  indeed,  he  has  reason  for  blessing  God  in  that  He  has 
brought  him  into  the  wilderness.  II.  The  gifts  which  God  bestows  on  thk 
Chitbch.  1.  "  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards,"  rich  blessings  and  privileges.  Through 
the  wilderness  is  the  road  to  the  vineyards.  He  gives  the  privileges  of  children. 
He  gives  His  Holy  Spirit.  He  gives  them  peace  passing  understanding — joy 
and  peace  in  believing.  2.  He  gives  also  "  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope." 
The  present  comforts  and  privileges  of  God's  people  are  pledges  and  foretastes 
of  future  and  more  enlarged  felicity,  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 
{John    Vatcghan,   LL.B.)  Wilderness -blessings  : — "  I   will  do  it,"   says  G<)d. 

Observe  the  richness  of  the  supply.  Not  her  corn,  which  is  for  necessity;  or 
grapes,  which  are  for  delight ;  or  even  a  vine ;  but  a  vineyard.  God  concerns  Him- 
self not  only  with  our  safety,  our  welfare,  our  relief,  our  enjoyment ;  He  would 
even  fill  us  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  Observe  the  strange  way  in  which 
these  indulgences  are  to  be  communicated.  From  whence  are  these  supplies 
to  come  ?  From  a  wilderness.  Who  would  expect  to  find  the  vineyards  of 
Engedi  in  a  wilderness  T  1.  Earth  is  a  wilderness.  It  was  not  designed  to  be. 
The  ground  is  cursed  for  man's  sake.  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world. 
But  to  the  Christian  the  curse  is  turned  into  a  blessing.  He  has  not  only  before 
him  a  land  of  promise,  but  even  now,  even  here,  he  has  a  thousand  alleviations 
and  succours,  and  even  delights.  2.  Solitude  is  a  wilderness.  There  is  not  only 
much  to  be  done  alone,  but  gained  alone,  and  enjoyed  alone.  There  we  gain 
our  best  knowledge  and  our  richest  experience.  There  we  enjoy  the  freedom 
of  prayer  and  the  most  unreserved  intercourse  with  God.  They  are  never  less 
alone  than  when  alone.  3.  Outward  trouble  is  a  wilderness.  Many  have  been 
afraid  to  be  brought  into  it,  yet  He  has  given  them  their  vineyards  from  thence. 
They  have  been  saved  by  their  undoing,  and  enriched  by  their  losses.  4.  The 
state  of  mind  produced  by  the  conviction  of  sin  is  a  wilderness.  Who  does  not 
remember  the  surprise,  the  confusion  of  mind,  the  anguish,  the  self-deapair  he 
once  felt ;  and  who  can  forget  the  feelings  induced  by  a  discovery  of  the  Cross, 
and  the  joy  of  God's  salvation  ?  5.  The  same  may  be  said  of  that  soul  abase- 
ment and  distress  the  believer  himself  may  feel  from  increasing  views  of  hia 
unworthiness,  depravity,  and  guilt.  The  experience  is  truly  lamentable,  but 
will  the  humiliation  hurt  him  ?  He  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble.  6.  The 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  is  the  last  wilderness.  There  is  much  to  render 
it  uninviting  and  awful ;  and  yet,  when  it  has  been  actually  entered,  the  appre- 
hension and  the  gloom  have  fled.  This  has  been  the  case  generally,  even  with 
those  who  are  most  subject  to  bondage  by  the  fear  of  it.  The  place  has  been  made 
glad  for  them.  And  what  vineyards  does  He  give  them  from  thence  !  ( William  Jay. ) 
Vineyards  instead  of  vines : — He  had  "  destroyed  her  vines  "  (ver.  12),  but  now 
He  will  give  her  whole  vineyards  ;  as  if  for  every  vine  destroyed  she  should  have 
a  vineyard  restored,  and  so  be  repaid  vith  interest ;  she  shall  not  only  have 
corn  for  necessity,  but  vineyards  for  delight.  These  denote  the  privileges  and 
comforts  of  the  Gospel.  Note  that  God  has  vineyards  of  consolation  ready  to 
bestow  on  those  who  repent  and  turn  to  Him  ;  and  He  can  give  vineyards  "  out 
of  a  wilderness,"  which  are  of  all  others  the  most  welcome,  as  rest  to  the  weary. 
(Matthew  Henry.)  Desert  discipline  : — The  age  of  Hosea  was  one  of  great 
material  prosperity,  and  one  of  deplorable  spiritual  decay.  The  time  was  at 
hand  when  prosperity  was  to  end  and  privation  begin.  It  is  in  view  of  trial- 
times  coming  that  Hosea  brings  his  message.  And  his  message  is  a  minted 
one.     He  speaks  of  judgment  impending,  and  of  sin  as  the  cause  of  it.     Yet  ha 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

has  his  tale  of  mercy.  The  very  penalties  announced  by  him  have  their  side 
of  mercy.  Whether  God  wooed  the  sinful  nation  by  means  of  His  goodness, 
or  chastised  them  by  His  righteous  severities,  He  had  the  same  end  in  view  for 
them — their  recovery  to  Himself,  and  it  was  only  because  the  one  mode  had 
failed  that  the  other  began.  The  text  is  more  than  the  tale  of  God's  dealings 
with  Israel :  it  is  the  tale  of  His  discipline  with  the  Church,  and  with  individual 
souls,  as  many  as  have  forgotten  their  first  love,  proved  false  to  their  calling, 
played  truant  from  their  God.  I.  Love's  artifice.  "  I  will  allure  her."  What 
is  the  wilderness  ?  A  place  of  blasted  groimd — ground  where  life  once  was, 
but  has  withered.  A  place  of  desertion  and  solitude.  Surely  a  strange  place 
for  Jehovah  to  choose  as  His  meeting-place  with  His  bride.  This  is  in  its  favour, 
it  is  a  place  of  silence.  The  wilderness  of  the  prophet  finds  its  counterpart  in 
the  life  of  the  heart.  There  is  blight,  through  the  drying  up  of  the  hopes  that 
refreshed  you ;  there  is  solitude,  the  sudden  awaking  to  the  sense  that  you  are 
alone,  and  your  desert  is  a  school  of  silence.  It  hushes  the  world,  and  hushes 
the  heart.  There  is  a  blessing  for  those  in  the  wilderness.  The  grace  that  was 
unsought  and  unmissed  amidst  prosperity  and  plenty,  you  will  learn  to  recognise 
and  regain  amidst  the  wilderness  privations ;  and  the  voice  you  were  deaf  to  amidst 
prosperity's  clamours,  you  will  hear  and  respond  to  in  the  wilderness  silence. 
II.  Love's  language.  "  Speak  comfortably  to  her,"  speak  to  her  heart.  He 
had  often  spoken  to  the  ear.  Words  of  solemn  warning,  words  of  melting  entreaty. 
But  He  had  never  before  spoken  as  He  speaks  now.  Now  in  her  heartache  and 
emptiness  there  is  none  can  speak  to  her  like  her  Lord  Himself.  What  presses 
on  her  heart  is  her  trespass  against  love,  the  thought  that  a  grace  so  great  has 
been  slighted,  and  a  trust  so  true  and  loyal  has  been  betrayed.  It  is  when  a 
man's  sins  have  created  a  wilderness  around  him  that  the  Saviour  comes  near 
and  speaks  to  the  heart.  Wilderness  discipline,  with  all  its  privations,  and  with 
all  its  pain,  its  remorse  for  the  past,  and  its  dread  for  the  future,  is  well  worth 
bearing  if  at  the  last  it  brings  the  Redeemer  to  speak  to  the  heart.  III.  Love's 
TOKENS.  The  gifts  which  love  bestows.  1.  Blessings  in  possession.  Of  the 
self-same  kind  as  the  blessings  which  the  bride  had  lost.  God  took  away  the 
vines.  He  grants  vines  again,  and  more  abundant.  Whether  our  wilderness 
discipline  has  its  issue  in  temporal  restorations  or  not,  it  may  always  be  rich 
in  spiritual  blessing.  There  are  grapes  of  grace  to  be  gathered  from  the  thorns 
of  trial,  and  a  meeting  with  Christ  is  always  suflBcient  to  txu-n  the  wilderness 
to  a  vineyard,  where  the  chalice  of  the  soul  may  be  filled,  and  the  strength  of 
the  soul  be  renewed  by  the  fulness  and  exhilarations  of  God.  2.  Blessings  in 
prospect.  Achor  was  a  passage  into  Canaan.  Fertile  in  itself,  it  was  welcome 
to  Israel  as  an  earnest  of  the  greater  fertility  of  Canaan  beyond.  By  its  physical 
formation  the  valley  of  Achor  was,  in  a  most  literal  sense,  a  door  of  hope  in  front 
of  the  Israelites.  IV.  The  effects  which  love  produces.  "  She  shall  sing 
there."  In  the  old  times  there  had  been  unholy  mirth.  Now  she  fears  to  sing 
the  song  of  the  old  innocent  time.  But  those  whom  God  pardons,  He  pardons 
freely ;  those  whom  He  restores.  He  restores  right  royally.  In  the  days  of  your 
Christian  youth  you  could  sing.  But  the  glory  died,  you  scarce  know  how.  Grace 
languished,  vows  were  forgotten,  love  grew  cold,  and  you  fell  by  degrees  from 
habits  of  secret  neglect  into  acts  of  open  sin.  But  yours  may  be  singing  days 
still ;  for  with  new  material  for  such  singing,  the  Lord  will  restore  you  the  heart 
that  can  sing,  with  more  than  the  old  love  back  again.  The  song  will  be  different, 
but  fuller  and  richer,  set  to  a  steadier  cadence,  touching  a  deeper  note ;  the  song 
not  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  sin,  but  of  those  who  have  sinned,  and  sinned 
deeply,  but  by  God' s  grace  are  forgiven.  {W.A,  Gray. )  The  profit  of  affliction : — 
The  Jews  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  typical  people.  Their  history  is  all  along 
a  parable  more  or  less  descriptive  of  what  befalls  the  Christian  Church,  whether 
collectively  or  in  its  individual  members.  The  text  belongs  in  a  special  sense  to 
the  Jew.  It  may,  however,  be  taken  in  a  secondary  sense.  Notice  the  expression 
"  allure."  We  are  often  actually  allured  into  the  wilderness.  You  may  enter 
the  wilderness  by  a  rough  path,  or  by  a  smooth  path.  In  the  majority  of  cases 
men  are  allured  into  the  wilderness.  It  is  in  a  chase  after  happiness  that  men 
find  themselves  lonely  and  wretched.  He  who  follows  what  attracts  him,  and 
finds  it  end  in  disappointment,  is  certainly  allured  into  the  wilderness.  There 
is  hardly  a  person  under  affliction  of  which  this  is  not  a  faithful  description- 
God  allures,  not  that  He  may  speak  harshly,  but  that  He  may  speak  comfortably. 
The  text  declares  that  afflictions  may  be  made  occasions  of  advantage,  or  be 


CHAP,  n.]  E08EA.  27 

converted  into  instmments  of  spiritnal  benefit.  We  may  appeal  oonoeming 
the  gracious  uses  of  a£Q[iction  to  the  living  and  to  the  dead.  With  one  voice 
thej  will  reply, — that  their  best  lessons  in  spiritual  truth,  their  clearest  views 
of  the  glory  of  heaven,  their  largest  apprehensions  of  the  work  of  the  Mediator, 
their  fmlest  proofs  of  the  preciousness  of  God,  were  all  acquired  under  processes 
of  chastening.  From  the  reference  to  the  valley  of  Achor  we  may  learn  that 
sorrows  which  are  specially  the  chastisement  of  misdoings  may  issue  in  a  firmer 
hope  of  salvation-  The  valley  of  Achor  is  a  door  of  hope."  It  is  when  a  man 
is  quite  confounded  with  the  view  of  his  own  sins  that  he  is  fitted  for  the  gracious 
announcement  of  a  free  pardon  through  Christ.  The  figure  applies  to  cases 
of  conversion  and  renewal  of  heart,  and  also  to  cases  of  backsliding.  {Henry 
Mdvill,  B.D.)  The  loving  discipline  of  Ood  : — ^This  is  the  language  of  metaphor, 
borrowed  from  the  facts  of  history.  God  is  in  all  history.  In  the  history  of 
Israel  He  manifested  Himself  in  an  especial  manner.  In  the  Old  Testament 
the  historical  passes  readily  into  the  typical.  When  Hosea  wrote  the  children 
of  Israel  were  once  more  sunk  in  idolatry.  They  were  forgetting  Jehovah  and 
yielding  themselves  up  to  the  self-indulgences  and  immoralities  of  heathen  life. 
But  the  principles  of  Divine  government  were  the  same  as  ever.  Gkxi  made  them 
feel  that  the  land  of  sin  is  the  land  of  bondage.  He  would  cause  them  to  experience 
the  miseries  that  flow  from  idolatry.  Then  He  would  come  to  their  rescue  and 
reveal  His  compassion.  He  would  win  them  back  to  loyalty  by  the  twofold 
manifestation  of  His  righteousness  and  mercy.  He  would  make  the  valley  of 
humiliation  the  avenue  to  victory.  I.  The  constancy  and  tenderness  of 
THE  DrviNB  LOVE.  Observe  how  the  nation  of  Israel  is  personified.  A  faithful 
husband  cannot  become  indifferent  even  to  a  faithless  wife.  Blended  with 
the  Divine  wrath  against  idolatry — yea,  lying  at  the  very  root  of  that  wrath — 
is  the  Eternal  Love.  These  words  not  only  reveal  constancy,  they  also  breathe 
tenderness.  Speaking  to  the  heart  reaches  the  affections,  thrills  the  soul,  awakens 
responsive  echoes  there.  Thus  God  receives  the  penitent  when  they  plead  for 
pardon.  The  term  "  allure  "  expresses  that  kind  of  influence,  the  very  strength 
of  which  lies  in  its  subtlety  and  gentleness.  In  the  Bible  the  word  is  generally 
used  of  evil  enticements  {e.g.,  Samson  and  Delilah).  Men  are  gradually  led 
into  sin,  step  by  step,  through  a  seductive  fascination  which  is  far  more  potent 
than  any  obtrusive  force.  But  there  is  a  holy  as  well  as  an  imholy  "  allurement." 
God  has  His  indirect  methods  of  reaching  the  human  will.  Goodness,  as  well 
as  evil,  woos  the  soul.  The  love  of  God,  as  here  set  forth  in  its  constancy  and 
tenderness,  is  a  substantial  verity.  The  Bible  speaks  of  Divine  love  in  the  terms 
of  human  affection.  Man  is  made  in  the  Divine  image,  and  therefore,  through 
the  affection  of  our  own  souls,  we  can  rise  into  some  conceptions  of  the  eternal 
love.  Clod's  love  is  the  inspirer  of  all  true  affection.  His  love  is  the  very  fountain 
of  ours.  By  our  wanderings  God  is  grieved.  God  really  does  wish  you  to  recipro- 
cate His  love.  God  does  allure.  II.  The  beneficent  pubposb  op  the  Divinb 
DisciPLiNB  AND  CHASTISEMENT.  The  wildcmess  is  typical  of  the  discipline  to 
which  God  subjects  His  people.  The  Arabian  desert  was  the  school  in  which 
the  Israelites  were  trained  for  the  exercise  of  freedom.  In  Hosea's  time  Israel 
needed  a  repetition  of  the  old  lesson.  She  would,  therefore,  be  brought  again 
into  the  wilderness.  God  does  not  subject  us  to  hardship  for  hardship's  sake. 
It  is  needful  for  us  that  we  be  led  into  the  wilderness.  To  give  us  the  vineyards 
at  once  might  be  only  to  enervate  us — to  loosen  the  fibre  of  our  moral  being — 
to  intoxicate,  instead  of  exhilarating,  our  souls.  And  so,  in  one  form  or  another, 
all  men  have  to  pass  through  discipline.  Through  all  forms  of  trial  there  runs 
the  same  beneficent  purpose.  God  designs  to  bring  us  into  a  true  and  safe  pros- 
perity ;  and  so  He  seeks,  by  strengthening  our  character,  to  prepare  us  for  entering 
into  the  land  of  "  vineyards."  The  "  valley  of  Achor  "  may  be  taken  as  typical 
of  the  Divine  chastisements.  The  afflictions  with  which  we  are  visited  often 
assume  to  our  consciences  the  aspect  of  correction.  Our  calamities,  bringing 
lis  into  the  light  of  God,  bring  us  also  face  to  face  with  the  sins  which  that  light 
condemns.  Sometimes  we  can  trace  the  connection  between  our  troubles  and 
our  transgressions.  But  accept  your  trouble  as  the  chastisement  of  One  who 
loves  you,  tlie  "  valley  of  Achor  "  will  be  made  to  you  a  "  door  of  hope."  Never 
murmur  under  any  of  the  Divine  dealings.  Realise  the  constancy  and  tender- 
ness of  His  holy  love.  He  is  a  "  jealous  God  "  ;  but  is  there  no  such  thing  as 
a  righteous  and  holy  jealousy  in  man  ?  God  cannot  love  us  and  be  indifferent 
as  to  whether  we  love  Him  or  not.     Cling  then  to  hope,  even  in  the  midst  oX 


28  f-  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

severest  trials.  These  trials  are  either  to  chastise  us  for  our  transgressions,  or 
else  to  mould  our  characters  after  a  nobler  type.  In  either  case  a  loving  purpose 
underlies  them.  {T.  Campbell  Finlayson.)  The  rod  of  mercy: — The  text 
describes  the  way  God  takes  with  those  offenders  to  whom  He  has  "  thoughts 
of  peace  and  not  of  evil."  Apply  this  to  the  spiritual  Israel,  to  all  who  are  called 
into  the  fold  of  Christ.  I.  The  way  in  which  those  whom  God  loves  akb 
BEBUKED  AND  CHASTENED  BY  HiM.  "  I  will  allure  her,"  &c.  The  wilderness 
was  to  the  Israelites  an  emblem  of  affliction.  It  was  a  wilderness  in  which  their 
forefathers  had  spent  forty  years  of  trial  and  chastisement.  Into  the  wilderness 
of  trouble  the  Lord  brings  every  member  of  His  family,  both  at  the  time  of  their 
conversion  and  after  it.  God  often  calls  the  Christian  off  from  the  path  of  ease 
and  satisfaction,  and  makes  him  feel  the  thorns  and  briers  of  affliction,  because 
he  is  loving  earthly  things  too  well,  and  losing  sight  of  God,  cleaving  to  the 
creature  more  than  to  the  Creator.  But  the  afflictions  of  God's  people  are 
not  like  the  afflictions  of  the  world.  God  does  not  drive  His  people  to  the  wilder- 
ness. He  brings  them  there, — that  is  to  say.  He  goes  with  them  Himself.  Believers 
are,  in  a  certain  sense,  "  allured  "  to  trouble,  for  they  are  well  assured  that  their 
Lord  knows  better  than  they  do  what  is  really  good  for  them.  11,  The  comforu 
which  ATTENDS  God's  CHASTISEMENTS.  "  Speak  comfortably  to  her."  The 
Lord  speaks  thus  to  the  newly  awakened  soul,  and  He  has  comforts  for  every 
after  stage  of  experience.  Never  does  He  "  bring  them  into  the  wilderness  "  of 
trouble  but  He  comes  down  and  talks  with  them.  In  distress  of  mind  they 
may  think  God  has  forsaken  them  ;  but  it  is  not  so,  for  He  is  by,  and  full  of 
tenderness,  though  He  seem  to  deal  with  them  severely.  Soon  they  know  and 
feel  this,  for  His  comforts  flow  into  their  hearts.  III.  The  good  fbutts  which 
FOLLOW  THE  AFFLICTIONS  OF  God's  PEOPLE.  Vineyards  from  a  wilderness  I 
A  crop  of  grapes  from  a  barren  and  dry  land  !  In  the  spiritual  wilderness  of 
trouble  and  affliction  such  wonders  do  occur.  Had  the  sinner  never  smarted 
for  his  sins  he  never  would  have  reaped  the  fruits  of  a  Redeemer's  love.  The 
text  is  true  with  respect  to  all  the  wildernesses  which  the  Christian  enters  ia 
his  pilgrimage  through  life.  Never  does  he  cross  the  desert  land  of  trouble  but 
he  gathers  fruits  there.  The  believer  is  enriched  by  his  afflictions.  When  the 
Lord  straitens  him  in  one  respect.  He  enlarges  him  in  another.  The  spiritual 
Achor  becomes  a  door  of  hope.  He  expects  great  things  from  a  God  whose  mercies 
and  whose  loving-kindnesses  he  has  found  so  plenteous.  IV.  The  thanks- 
givings WHICH  God's  chastened  people  are  sure  to  return,  in  the  issue, 
UNTO  Him  who  smote  them.  "  She  shall  sing  there."  This  first  refers  to  the 
Israelites,  and  recalls  the  song  at  the  Red  Sea.  Applied  to  the  Lord's  people 
generally,  it  signifies  that  their  troubles  also  should  issue  in  a  song  of  praise. 
What  believer  is  there  who  would  not  sing,  with  all  his  heart  and  soul,  the  hyma 
that  should  bless  God  for  his  afflictions  ?  He  would  never  have  known  his  joys 
but  for  his  sorrows.  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  Christian  in  the  wilderness  : — • 
The  "  wilderness  "  became,  for  the  Israelites,  another  word  for  trouble  and  sorrow. 
I.  The  Author  of  affliction.  God  forces  Himself  on  oxa  notice  as  the  soiu-ce 
of  His  people's  troubles.  Why  this  anxiety  in  a  God  of  love  to  stand  thus  forward 
as  the  author  of  misery  ?  1.  Because  we  are  so  backward  in  affliction  to  discern 
His  hand.  2.  We  can  get  no  good  out  of  affliction,  and  no  real  comfort  under 
it,  till  we  view  it  as  sent  to  us  from  Him.  When  we  discern  God  at  the  very 
root  of  our  sufferings,  then  the  knee  bends,  the  prayer  goes  up,  and  the  blessing 
comes  down.  Then,  for  the  first  time,  we  are  quieted  and  subdued.  When 
we  see  that  a  Father's  hand  has  mingled  the  cup  of  bitterness,  we  soon  do  more 
than  say,  "  Shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  II.  Why  God  afflicts  us.  The  text  dis- 
covers  to  us  one  of  the  most  frequent  causes  of  our  sorrows.  It  is  our  forget- 
fulness  of  God,  and  that  not  in  His  judgments,  but  in  His  mercies,  a  failing 
to  recognise  His  hand  in  them.  It  may  be  you  have  lost  some  of  your  earthly 
mercies ;  but  you  know  why  God  has  stripped  you  bare,  as  well  as  though  His 
own  voice  sounded  it  from  heaven  in  your  ears.  You  had  forgotten  Him  in  His 
gifts.  You  tried  to  live  "  without  God  in  the  world."  In  jealousy  for  His  own 
honour,  in  love  for  your  souls.  He  withdrew  the  gifts  you  had  abused.  He  made 
you  feel  once  again  that  you  need  Him.  God  never  deprives  us  of  things  without 
a  cause.  But  if  you  will  not  see  Him  in  the  enjoyment  of  them.  He  will  make 
you  see  Him  in  their  loss.  III.  How  God  sometimes  afflicts  us.  Gradually, 
compassionately,  tenderly.  Sometimes  His  judgments  appear  to  come  suddenly. 
This  is  His  way  usually  with  the  strong.     He  carries  the  weak  and  inexperienced 


CHAP,  n.]  HOSE  A.  29 

"  into  the  wilderness."  A  mother's  tenderness  could  not  equal  His.  He  showa 
them  how  much  they  need  affliction,  and  how  much  good  they  will  derive  from 
it.  Other  men  are  driven  into  the  wilderness,  the  Christian  is  allured  into  it. 
IV.  Thb  comfort  which  the  Loed  imparts  in  the  wilderness.  Others 
speak  comfortably  to  us  in  our  sorrow,  but  if  that  sorrow  is  deep,  what  power 
have  their  words  ?  God  speaks  to  the  heart,  and  then  everything  comforts, 
for  God  speaks  by  everything.  V.  The  supplies  which  God  furnishes  ik 
tribulation.  He  represents  Himself  as  more  than  a  Clomforter,  He  is  a  Bene- 
factor, and  a  rich  one.  He  has  promised  vineyards  in  the  wilderness.  Such 
blessings  as  will  more  than  supply  the  place  of  those  lost.  And  these  are  actually 
to  grow  out  of  our  afflictions.  VI.  The  hope  that  God  excites  in  affliction. 
Even  when  trouble  came  on  trouble,  and  things  seemed  to  be  quite  hopeless, 
God  opened  a  door  of  hope.  Learn  the  effect  to  be  produced  on  Israel  by  tha 
mercies  vouchsafed  to  her.  (C.  Bradley.)  Soul  -  restoration  : — These  words 
are  poetically  descriptive  of  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  the  Divine  fellowship 
and  favour.  They  reveal  God's  purpose  in  regard  to  every  penitent  prodigal  in 
all  ages.  I.  Soul-restoration — in  its  origin.  The  originating  causes,  for 
the  most  part,  lie  back  of  what  is  seen.  The  agencies  that  go  to  make  summer 
are  Divine.  And  the  same  is  true  of  the  soul.  The  only  agencies  that  can  prove 
effective  in  restoring  it  to  summer  experience  and  fruitfulness  must  come  from 
God.  It  is  not  repentance,  nor  faith,  nor  service,  nor  sacrifice  does  it.  As  the 
sun  carries  all  the  influences  needful  to  give  richness  to  the  trees  and  fragrance 
to  the  flowers,  even  so  does  God  treasure  up  within  Himself  all  those  influences 
and  inspirations  which  are  essential  to  the  enrichment  of  the  soul.  It  would  be 
a  sad  thing  for  us  if  our  spiritual  restoration  were  dependent  on  our  good  deeds. 
The  Divine  effulgence  is  necessary  to  owe  illumination.  The  Divine  inflowing 
of  life  and  warmth  is  essential  to  the  production  of  Christian  sensibility.  The 
sun  does  not  shine  upon  this  earth  because  it  is  fair  and  fruitful ;  he  shines  rather 
to  make  it  so.  It  is  not  our  goodness  or  our  prayers  that  cause  God  to  love  and 
bless,  but  He  loves  and  blesses  that  we  might  become  recipients  of  all  Christian 
grace  and  excellence.  II.  In  its  methods.  How  does  God  restore  the  soul  ? 
In  a  family  the  disobedient  one  is  punished.  No  treatment  could  be  too  severe 
to  meet  the  case  of  backsliding  Israel ;  and  yet  God  in  His  mercy  says,  "  I  will 
allure  her."  He  had  left  her  for  awhile.  He  had  permitted  her  to  indulge  her 
vanities  unrestrained.  At  length  He  hedged  up  her  way.  But  all  these  methods 
proved  to  be  ineffectual.  Is  it  not  amazing  that  He  did  not  turn  away  in  disgust  ? 
But  with  infinite  tenderness  He  says,  "I  will  allure  her  into  the  wilderness." 
I  have  tried  these  various  methods  without  result.  I  will  now  exercise  my  fascina- 
tions  to  win  back  her  love.     What  is  the  "  wilderness  "  into  which  God  leads  ? 

1.  The  wilderness  is  suggestive  of  barrenness.  The  Arabian  desert  is  a  fitting 
type  of  that  soul's  experiences  which  has  been  led  away  from  its  vanities,  and 
brought  into  a  conscious  sense  of  the  Divine  nearness  and  piu'ity.  The  best 
men  who  have  ever  lived  have  shrivelled  up  in  the  all-radiant  presence  of  the 
Holy  One.  The  wilderness  ever  stands  between  guUt  and  holiness.  You  cannot 
become  estranged  from  God  in  affection  and  be  restored  to  the  experiences  of 
His  favour  without  being  brought  into  the  wilderness.  He  makes  you  realise 
your  poverty  and  guilt  that  you  may  be  prepared  to  rejoice  in  His  forgiveness. 

2.  The  wilderness  is  suggestive  of  solitude.  There  is  no  scene  more  isolated 
from  the  busy  life  of  the  world.  Solitude  is  necessary  to  repentance.  It  is  only 
when  alone  with  our  great  Lord  that  we  leam  to  despise  our  frivolities  and  sins 
and  yearn  for  succoiu:  in  His  unchanging  love.  3.  The  wilderness  is  suggestive 
of  terror.  The  Sinai  Moimt  is  in  the  wilderness.  The  flaming  law  lifts  up  its 
awful  voice  of  condenmation.  Sinai  must  frown  before  Calvary  can  smile.  III.  lu 
ITS  blessings.  She  is  only  brought  into  the  wilderness  that  she  might  be  weaned 
away  from  her  illicit  loves.  No  sooner  does  she  begin  to  blush  and  weep  and 
tremble  than  her  gracious  Lord  takes  her  into  His  arms  and  presses  her  to  His 
bosom,  and  enriches  her  with  all  the  wealth  of  His  affection.  Here  we  have— 
1.  Affluent  experiences.  No  imagery  could  be  more  expressive.  The  desert 
transformed  into  a  paradise.  The  experiences  of  the  Christian  life  are  too  rich 
and  exquisite  to  be  exhausted  by  any  imagery.  The  Lord  gives,  not  merely 
a  sufficiency  but  a  superabundancy.  2.  An  inspiring  hope.  The  valley  of 
trouble  has  often  become  a  door  of  hope  to  God's  chosen.  When  they  have 
been  most  perplexed,  their  deliverance  has  been  most  glorious.  On  the  darkest 
night  of  their  sorrow  has  broken  the  effulgence  of  the  brightest  day.     IV.  Ilf 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it 

ITS  EFFECTS.  When  our  souls  have  been  restored,  we  too  shall  "  sing  as  in  the 
days  of  our  youth."  How  was  it  with  us  then  ?  1.  What  praise  !  2.  What 
triumph  !  3.  What  exultation  !  How  many  of  n  stand  in  supreme  need  of 
soul-restoration  !  We  have  lost  the  power  and  b.  essedness  of  a  songful  life. 
Our  spiritual  sensibilities  are  benumbed,  and  our  spiritual  energies  paralysed. 
O  Lord,  be  gracious  unto  us  as  in  the  days  that  are  past !  {Benjamin  D.  Thomas. ) 
Soul-restoration  : — These  words  refer  to  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  friendship 
and  fellowship  with  God.  I.  The  stages  in  soul-kestobation  are  obadxtal. 
1.  The  first  step  to  soul-restoration  is  from  bondage  to  liberty.  All  souls  are 
in  moral  Egypt,  and  the  first  step  to  their  restoration  is  their  exodus  into  the 
moral  Arabia.  2.  The  next  step  is  from  despondency  to  hope.  In  spiritual 
restoration  the  soul  passes  from  trouble  into  hope.  Through  much  tribulation 
we  enter  into  kingdoms.  3.  The  next  step  is  from  sterility  to  fruitfulness.  The 
wilderness  was  a  barren  district,  but  Canaan  was  a  land  of  vineyards.  4.  The 
next  step  is  from  sadness  to  exultation.  The  song  of  the  redeemed  at  last  will 
be  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb.  11.  The  agency  in  sottl-bkstoration 
is  Divhtb.  No  one  but  God  can  restore  souls.  Mark  how  He  does  it.  1 .  Morally. 
Not  by  force.  2.  Lovingly.  "  Speak  comfortably  to  her."  3.  Generously. 
He  who  gave  Canaan  to  the  Jews  gives  heaven  to  restored  souls.  (Homilist.) 
The  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  liope. — The  valley  of  Achor : — The 
history  of  the  nation  is  the  history  of  the  individual  magnified.  The  records 
of  God's  dealings  with  the  nation  represent  to  us,  on  a  larger  scale,  God's  dealings 
with  the  individual.  The  dealings  of  God  with  the  individual  human  heart  are 
generally  of  so  delicate  a  character,  and  are  so  frequently  concealed  in  the  secret 
experiences  of  our  inner  life,  that  it  is  extremely  difficxilt  for  even  a  careful  observer 
to  follow  them  in  detail,  and  apprehend  them  with  any  degree  of  completeness. 
We  are  helped,  however,  by  having  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  the  nation, 
and  knowing  that  these  are  His  dealings  with  the  individual  magnified.  In  this 
chapter  we  have  the  record  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel  at  a  period  of  national 
apostasy  and  backsliding.  It  is  evident  that  God  does  not  think  slightingly 
of  sin.  The  first  consequence  of  national  sin  is  national  judgment,  inflicted 
by  a  rejected  God.  At  last  judgments  begin  to  produce  the  designed  effect, 
and  Israel  begins  to  discover  that  the  God  who  seemed  to  be  her  enemy  is  her 
real  and  only  faithful  friend.  In  all  this  we  have  a  picture  of  Grod's  dealing  with 
the  wayward  heart,  by  which  His  Divine  love  designs  to  win  it  back  from  its 
apostasy  and  forgetfulness  of  Him.  Observe  the  first  step  that  Divine  love 
and  pity  takes.  God  finds  us  in  our  pride  and  wilfulness,  and  endeavouring 
to  obtain  that  satisfaction  in  the  creature  which  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  Creator  ; 
and  He  begins  by  opening  our  eyes  to  the  emptiness  of  all  these  things  in  which 
we  have  sought  our  satisfaction ;  and  however  slow  we  are  to  learn  the  lesson. 
He  waits  His  opportunity  to  allure  us  into  the  wilderness.  And  a  dreary  wilder- 
ness it  is.  It  is  a  painful  process,  this  opening  of  the  eyes.  We  shrink  from 
being  undeceived ;  we  are  reluctant  to  believe  that  the  world  is  a  grand  imposture. 
We  try  to  persuade  ourselves  that  we  shall  find  in  it  all  we  want,  and  shrink  from 
the  dissipation  of  our  fondly  cherished  anticipations.  Sometimes  it  is  by  sorrow 
and  bereavement  that  we  are  allured  into  the  wilderness.  Sometimes  Gfod  deals 
with  His  wandering  oijes  by  an  inward  impression,  by  the  direct  and  indescribable 
infliiences  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  by  outward  circumstances,  by  unlooked-for 
relief  and  deliverance.  Thus  He  allures  us  into  the  wilderness,  to  draw  us  away 
from  o\ir  love  for,  and  our  confidence  in  earthly  things,  and  then,  when  we  are 
thus  prepared,  to  speak  to  our  hearts  as  He  only  can.  "  Speak  comfortably," 
should  be,  "  speak  to  her  heart."  The  world  can  speak  to  our  fancy,  and  to  oiur 
intellect,  God  can  speak  to  our  heart ;  that  heart  whose  wants  you  have  ignored, 
or  to  which  you  have  denied  what  it  most  needed.  He  brings  to  our  mind  all 
His  wondrous  dealings  with  us  in  the  past.  As  we  look  back  a  flood  of  recognition 
rolls  over  the  soul,  and  a  burden  of  contrition  begins  to  weigh  upon  our  heart, 
such  as  it  never  felt  before.  Yet  from  the  wilderness  where  God's  voice  has 
spoken  to  the  heart,  the  new  era  of  true  fruitfulness  is  to  begin.  "  I  will  give 
her  her  vineyards  from  thence."  The  firstfruits  of  the  new  life  are  to  be  gathered 
in  the  vintage  of  joy — the  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man.  Other 
fruits  may  follow,  but  this  generally  comes  first.  But  how  are  we  to  enter  upon 
this  new  life  of  fruitful  joy  and  of  joyfvd  fruit  ?  If  we  are  to  get  into  the  vineyards, 
we  must  enter  them  thiough  God's  appointed  door — the  "  valley  of  Achor." 
God  makes  it  a  "  door  of  hope."    What  we  need  above  everything  is  a  "  door  of 


CHAP,  n.]  HOSE  A.  SI 

hope,"  a  way  out  of  the  hideous  desolation  of  our  despair.  But  where  shall 
it  be  found  ?  None  but  God  knows  of  a  door  of  hope  for  perishing  man, 
and  He  must  give  it,  or  our  hope  is  vain.  The  valley  of  Achor  recalls  a  national 
repentance  for  a  national  sin  :  an  act  of  solemn  repudiation  of  sin  ;  it  was  the 
place  of  a  great  and  tragic  national  expiation.  We,  too,  have  a  door  of  hope, 
strangely  similar,  and  yet  strangely  different  from  this.  There  was  One  found 
among  the  sons  of  men,  who  was  able  and  willing  to  make  expiation  for  man's 
sins.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  A  door  of  hope: — I.  How  is  this  valley  of 
Achor  a  door  of  hope  to  Israel  ?  (1)  Because  it  was  the  first  place  of  which  they 
took  possession  in  Israel,  and  began  to  have  outward  means  of  subsistence,  and 
to  eat  of  the  corn  of  the  land.  (2)  God  made  their  great  trouble  there  a  means 
of  much  good  to  them,  for  by  that  they  were  brought  to  purge  their  camp.  2.  How 
was  the  valley  of  Achor  to  be  a  door  of  hope  to  Israel  in  after-times  ?  The  Jews 
think  that  Israel  shall  return  into  their  own  country  again  by  the  same  way  to 
Canaan,  by  that  valley,  which  shall  thus  be  a  door  of  hope  to  them.  As  God 
turned  this  valley  of  trouble  to  much  good  to  them,  so  He  would  turn  all  the 
Bore  afflictions  of  Israel  in  after  days  to  their  great  advantage,  grievous  afflictions 
which  should  make  way  for  glorious  mercies.  Sin  will  make  the  pleasantest 
place  in  the  world  a  place  of  trouble.  When  may  we  assure  ourselves  that  our 
mercies  are  doors  of  hope  to  f\irther  mercies  ?  1.  When  they  are  wrought  by 
the  more  immediate  hand  of  God.  2.  When  they  are  spiritual  mercies.  3.  When 
mercies  carry  to  us  the  God  of  mercy,  and  are  turned  into  duties.  {Jeremiah 
Burroughs. )  A  door  of  hope  : — These  words  reminded  an  Israelite  of  a  great 
failure,  and,  as  the  word  *'  Achor  "  means,  of  a  great  trouble — nay,  of  a  great 
tragedy.  It  implied  to  him  that  history  was  repeating  itself,  that  old  sins  wera 
to  be  followed  by  old  punishments,  and  that  beyond  those  punishments,  as  of 
old,  there  was  hope.  Israel,  in  Hosea's  days,  was  largely  apostate  and  idolatrous. 
Here  it  is  addressed  as  the  unfaithful  bride  of  Jehovah.  Achor  is  Hebrew  for 
"  trouble,"  and  it  was  chosen  for  its  likeness  to  Achan,  the  "  troubler."  Achan's 
ain  was  not  an  open  scandal  which  brought  dishonour  on  the  cause  of  God  by 
its  publicity.  Secret  sins  are  more  common  than  public  ones.  They  satisfy  the 
sinful  instinct  more  economically,  and  those  who  commit  them  are  tempted 
to  persuade  themselves  that  because  they  do  not  corrupt  others  by  the  taint 
of  bad  example  they  are  really  much  more  venial.  Achan  had  persuaded  no 
one  to  join  him  in  his  act  of  sacrilege.  We  often  wonder  why  great  causes  flag 
and  fail,  why  so  little  comes  of  schemes  for  doing  good  into  which  much  heart 
has  been  thrown,  and  for  which  great  sacrifices  have  been  made.  We  count 
up,  we  measure,  we  lay  stress  on  the  difficulties  of  the  undertaking  itself,  and 
we  satisfy  ourselves  that  these  difficulties  furnish  the  real  reason  of  the  failure. 
May  it  not  be  that  the  true  cause  of  failure  lies  nearer  home,  that  something  is 
hidden  away  in  the  tent  of  the  soul  ?  And  moral  weakness  is  contagious  ;  it 
radiates  from  soul  to  soul  just  as  does  moral  force.  We  feel  its  presence  by  a 
sure  though  inexplicable  instinct,  when  we  cannot  give  an  account  of  it  to  our- 
selves or  to  others.  As  the  strength  of  the  Church  of  Christ  lies  not  in  her  external 
circumstances,  but  in  the  secret  prayers  and  deeds  of  souls  whose  names  are 
unknown,  so  the  weakness  of  the  Church  lies  not  in  the  number  or  fierceness 
of  her  enemies,  but  in  the  secret  unbelief  and  sins  of  her  children.  Achan,  Judas, 
Diotrephes,  these  had  a  fearful  power  of  traversing  God's  purposes  of  mercy.  If 
we  knew  more,  we  should  see  how  God  acts  at  times  even  now  by  His  providence 
as  He  acted  of  old  by  Joshua :  how  men  are  removed  with  swift  decisions  from 
this  earthly  scene  because  they  bring  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  goodness  that 
moral  paralysis  and  collapse  which  comes  with  cherished  wrong-doing.  None 
of  us  are  too  high  or  too  low  to  promote  or  to  weaken  the  cause  of  Christ  in  the 
world.  The  well-being  of  God's  Israel  from  age  to  age  is  the  law  of  God's  constant 
government,  and  the  valley  of  trouble  for  the  individual  wrong-doer  is  the  door 
of  hope  for  the  Church,  for  the  nation,  for  the  race.  The  fate  of  the  family  of 
Achan  has  been  an  occasion  of  difficulty.  No  doubt  he  and  his  family  were 
regarded  as  forming,  in  some  sense,  a  moral  whole,  not  merely  as  a  set  of  individuals. 
Scripture  does  take  these  two  views  of  human  beings.  On  the  individual  aspect 
the  Gospel,  no  doubt,  specially  insists,  but  it  does  not  by  any  means  ignore  or  dis- 
pense with  the  corporate  aspect.  A  common  human  nature  we  all  share.  This 
principle  of  the  reality  of  a  common  human  natiu-e  which  we  all  share  explains 
our  loss  of  righteousness  in  Adam ;  but  it  tells  to  our  advantage  even  more 
decisively,  for  it  explains  our  recovery  of  righteousness  in  Christ.     How  can 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tl 

this  be  unless  Christ  is  the  head  of  a  family  which  He  endows  with  His  saving 
righteousness,  just  as  Adam  endowed  his  descendants  with  a  legacy  of  sin  and 
death  ?  The  principle  of  the  solidarity  of  human  beings  tells  for  good  as  it  tells 
for  evil.  We  see  the  operation  of  this  law  in  the  physical  and  social  life  of  man 
written  in  characters  too  plain  to  be  mistaken.  Achan's  children  were  involved 
in  their  father's  guilt  on  a  somewhat  like  principle.  But  the  truth  is,  that  we 
see  here  a  deeper  sense  in  which  the  valley  of  Achor  is  a  door  of  hope.  In  order 
to  explain  the  tragedy  we  must  resort  to  that  larger  conception  of  the  destiny 
of  man  which  was  affirmed  with  varying  degrees  of  distinctness  by  the  Jewish 
revelation.  If  all  ended  with  this  life  it  would  be  very  difficult  if  not  impossible 
to  explain  occurrences  of  this  sort  consistently  with  the  belief  that  the  world 
is  governed  by  an  absolute  and  unerring  justice.  Those  who  do  not  believe  in 
a  future  after  death  are  perfectly  right  in  taking  as  they  do,  the  very  gloomiest 
view  of  our  present  existence ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  faith  in  such  a  future 
enables  us  to  understand  how  the  tragedies  of  human  life  and  history  are  strictly 
consistent  with  the  moral  attributes  of  God.  In  later  ages  than  Joshua's  the 
separate  relation  of  each  individual  soul  with  God  was  more  distinctly  marked 
by  revelation.  And  Christ  our  Lord,  if  I  may  say  so,  yet  further  extricated 
the  individual  soul  from  the  mass  of  human  nature,  and  placed  it  face  to  face, 
in  an  awful  and  a  blessed  solitude,  with  the  mercy  and  with  the  justice  of  God. 
Each  Christian  is  redeemed  as  though  redemption  had  been  wrought  for  him  alone. 
The  general  truth,  which  is  independent  of  the  cases  of  Israel  and  Achan,  is  that 
the  punishment  which  God  sends  may  open  the  way  to  life's  choicest  blessings, 
or  to  blessings  which  lie  far  away  beyond  it.  What  is  of  most  importance  is 
that  when  trouble  comes  to  each  one  of  us  it  should  be  recognised  as  coming 
from  God,  and  accepted  as  His  will,  as  due  certainly  to  om:  sins,  and  therefore 
as  the  best  thing  possible  that  could  happen.  Trial  is  from  Grod,  and  there  is 
therefore  a  hope  beyond  it.  {H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.)  A  door  of  hope  : — In  the 
language  that  God  used  when  there  was  not  much  writing,  signal  events  often 
took  the  place  of  books.  Points  of  natural  scenery  were  turned  into  historic 
ciphers,  and  geography  into  a  chronicle.  Give  the  story  of  Achan.  That  "  day" 
was  lengthened  out  till,  seven  centuries  later,  when  another  seer  is  lifting  the 
curtain  of  Israel's  still  later  futvu-e,  he  takes  up  the  old  name  to  signify  the  new 
sorrow,  the  greater  sacrifice,  and  the  sublimer  deliverance  to  come.  Every  Jew 
would  understand  the  historic  allusion,  "  I  will  give  her  the  valley  of  Achor  for 
a  door  of  hope."  It  is  true  of  the  first  begiimings  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
of  its  subsequent  recovery  from  decline  and  coldness.  There  must  be  some 
suffering  at  the  narrow  door  by  which  the  imperilled  and  straitened  soul  passes 
through  into  liberty  and  rest.  It  is  just  as  true  of  most  of  our  richest  gains, 
our  noblest  advancements,  in  all  spiritual  clear-sightedness  and  strength,  that 
they  are  reached  through  pain  and  privation.  It  very  rarely  happens  that  we 
receive  what  we  particularly  need,  without  being  obliged  to  give  up  what  we 
particularly  prize.  If  the  sacrifice  is  not  laid  upon  us  voluntarily  by  ourselves, 
it  has  to  be  laid  on  by  a  hand  more  merciful  than  our  own,  and  more  concerned 
in  our  salvation.  Trouble  is  the  price  of  power.  From  one  side  of  the  globe  to 
another,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  the  glory  of  the  earth,  the  openings  of 
its  everlasting  hope,  are  its  valleys  of  trouble.  The  way  to  Christ's  final  majesty 
lies  through  the  humiliations  of  pain.  From  G«thsemane  to  Calvary  was  the 
one  true  valley  of  Achor.  {F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D.)  A  door  of  hope : — 
As  there  is  light  in  the  darkest  cloud,  so  there  is  a  ray  of  heavenly  hope  in  the 
greatest  calamities ;  yea,  there  is  light  in  God's  most  terrible  judgments,  for 
in  punishment  God  mercifully  opens  before  the  sinner  a  door  of  hope.  Illustrated 
in  the  incidents  associated  with  Ai.  There  is  no  punishment  so  heavy,  no  misery 
so  great,  no  sorrow  so  deep,  and  no  trial  so  bitter,  that  God  cannot  change  it  into 
a  door  of  hope.  I.  Human  suFFERrNO  a  door  of  heavenly  hope.  For  sinful 
and  imperfect  beings  there  is  no  door  of  hope  but  in  suffering,  and  this  fact  trans- 
figures and  glorifies  suffering  itself,  and  teaches  sinful  men  to  look  for  their 
redemption  in  what  they  strive  to  escape  from.  This  is  the  glorious  truth  taught 
in  the  text.  The  wilderness  itself  wiU  be  changed  into  a  glorious  and  blessed 
inheritance  unto  her.  The  valley  of  trouble  is  the  threshold  of  the  promised 
inheritance.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  delivering  from  trouble  and 
changing  the  trouble  itself  into  a  door  of  hope.  This  gives  a  new  character  to 
the  sufferings  and  trials  of  life,  and  to  God's  chastisements,  punishments,  and 
judgments,  because  there  is  in  them  all  a  door  of  hope,  to  which  Qod  graciously 


CHAP,  n.]  ROSEA.  33 

and  patiently  leads  the  sufferer.  It  was  in  this  respect  only  that  the  valley  of 
Achor  could  be  a  door  of  hope.  The  captivity  in  Babylon  was  a  valley  of  Achor, 
and  it  proved  a  door  of  hope.  National  calamities  are  doors  of  hope  for  nations. 
In  what  respect  can  it  be  said  that  there  is  a  door  of  hope  in  punishments  and 
Bnfierings  deserved  ?  If  they  are  retributive  only,  there  cannot  be  a  ray  of  hope 
in  them,  but  if  they  are  redemptive  and  reformative  as  well,  they  are  God's  wise 
and  merciful  method  of  leading  sinners  to  Himself.  The  notion  that  they  are 
reteibutive  only  is  unworthy  of  God,  for  we  can  never  conceive  of  Him  as 
administering  punishment  for  its  own  sake.  God's  punishments  are  means 
to  bless,  and  have  great  and  glorious  ends.  Gfod  is  sympathetical  in  all  suffering, 
not  with  sin,  of  course,  but  with  the  sufferer,  whether  he  is  guilty  or  not.  He 
is  ever  striving  with  intense  yearning  to  lead  him  to  Himself.  Every  good  and 
holy  man,  who  lives  for  the  good  of  others  and  the  glory  of  God,  suffers  in  the 
sufferings  of  all  those  to  whom  he  ministers.  If  this  is  true  of  man,  how  much 
more  must  it  be  so  of  God  ?  II.  We  are  not  to  dkspaib  of  the  worst 
CHARACTERS.  Howcvcr  siuful  and  hard-hearted  men  may  become,  they  can 
never  go  beyond  God's  power  to  touch  their  hearts.  A  man  who  lost  all  hia 
senses  by  paralysis  was  found  to  have  a  tender  spot  on  his  cheek,  by  which 
communications  could  be  made  to  him.  So  God  can  always  find  a  tender  spot 
in  the  worst,  and  He  can  speak  words  that  will  melt  the  hardest  hearts  into 
repentance  because  of  their  sins.  (Z.  Mather.)  The  valley  of  Achor : — At  each 
mention  of  this  valley  it  is  a  door  of  hope.  I.  The  valley  of  entrance.  It 
was  the  gateway  of  Canaan.  It  marked  a  great  transition.  Here  pilgrimage 
ceased ;  here  residence  began.  Here  great  changes  occiurred,  which  are  accom- 
plished by  a  very  short  march  across  a  great  boundary  line.  The  valley  of  Achor 
wais  to  Israel  a  door  of  hope,  because  it  was  the  gateway  to  the  full  possession 
of  the  land.  Across  the  line  within  the  kingdom  of  God's  grace  there  is  a  door 
of  hope.  He  who  obeys  the  Divine  command,  crosses,  enters,  dwells,  may 
through  this  entrance  valley  pass  into  all  the  treasures  of  grace  and  glory.  II.  Thb 
VALLEY  OF  TROUBLE.  The  first  Camp  became  a  scene  of  disorder  and  dismay. 
Story  of  Achan.  Hard  lessons  yield  a  rich  reward.  Rough  places  become  monu- 
mental. Success  is  the  fruit  of  failiure.  The  valley  of  trouble  becomes  a  door 
of  hope  to  brighter  scenes  and  deeper  joys.  III.  The  valley  of  renewal. 
The  silence  of  centuries  passed  over  Achor's  vale.  Israel  had  forgotten  God, 
and  broken  all  their  vows.  Then  God  recalled  to  Israel  the  valley  of  early  vows 
and  glad  consecration,  and  proposed  to  make  it  the  valley  of  renewal.  Fiora 
farthest  wandering,  greatest  sin,  saddest  ruin,  deepest  sorrow,  God  can  bring 
back  the  troubled  one  to  the  valley  of  Achor.  With  God  nothing  is  irreparable. 
A  ruined  life,  irreparable  by  human  skill,  may  here  be  renewed.  Its  sad  record 
may  be  erased.  Life  may  be  begun  again.  God  invites  the  wanderer  back  to 
the  starting-point.  {Homiletic  Magazine.)  The  valley  of  trovMing  : — "  Achor  '* 
means  "  troubling,"  and  the  valley  got  its  name  from  a  great  crime,  a  great  disaster, 
and  a  great  act  of  judicial  punishment.  The  crime  was  that  of  Achan,  who  hid 
in  his  tent  spoil  that  ought  to  have  been  consecrated  to  Jehovah.  The  disaster 
was  the  consequent  defeat  of  the  Israelites  in  their  assault  upon  one  of  the  hill 
cities  of  Canaan.  Hosea  is  prophesying  of  the  captivity  in  Babylon  under  the 
figure  of  a  repetition  of  the  earlier  history  and  the  experience  of  the  Exodus, 
and  he  takes  some  of  the  ancient  incidents  that  would  be  familiar  to  his  hearers' 
memories,  in  order  to  illustrate  one  thought — that  this  second  bondage  shall  be 
different  from  the  trials  of  the  Exodus,  in  so  far  as  much  that  was  terrible 
then  shall  be  changed  into  blessedness.  For  instance,  "  I  will  bring  her  into  the 
wilderness,  .  .  .  and  I  will  give  her  vineyards  from  thence," — grapes  and  fertility 
in  the  barren  sand  !  Similarly,  "  the  valley  of  trouble  "  shall  be  turned  "  into 
a  door  of  hope."  Let  me,  then,  suggest  two  or  three  ways  in  which,  in  our  daily 
experience,  this  great  promise  may,  in  spirit  and  substance,  be  fulfilled.  It  telU 
us  how  defeat  may  become  victory.  Go  back  to  the  old  story.  Achan  hid  the 
Babylonish  garment  and  the  wedge  of  gold  in  his  tent,  and  did  not  say  a 
word  about  it  to  anybody.  God  commanded  Joshua  to  hurl  his  men  against 
Ai.  The  Hebrews  went  in  obedience  to  God's  commandment,  and  were  beaten 
back.  But  after  that,  they  stoned  Achan,  and  then  they  were  victorious.  It 
is  very  often  the  case  that  Christian  people  cannot  do  what  they  evidently  are 
intended  to  do.  Very  often  we  fail  in  power  to  carry  out  some  plain  duty.  That 
is  often  because  there  is  an  Achan  somewhere ;  kill  him,  and  you  will  capture  Ai. 
And  every  hidden  sin  of  ours  that  we  take  hold  of  by  the  tlu-oat  and  drag  from 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ita  lair  into  the  light,  and  unsparingly  slay  and  bury  under  a  cairn  of  stones,  con- 
tributes to  our  capacity  to  do  our  duty,  and  to  our  victory  over  all  adverse  circum- 
stances— 

"  His  strength  was  as  the  strength  of  ten. 
Because  his  heart  was  pure." 

And  so  we  mav  learn  that  if  we  have  been  beaten  once,  and  again  attack,  and 
again  are  foiled,  the  shameful  disaster  is  a  Divine  warning  to  ua  to  look  not  only 
to  our  equipment,  but  our  temper,  and  to  see  whether  the  reason  for  failure  lies 
not  only  in  something  wrong  in  the  details  or  accompaniments  of  our  effort,  but 
in  something  lacking  in  the  communion  which  we  have  with  God  Himself.  But 
again,  Hosea's  imaginative  use  of  the  old  story  teaches  us  how  hope  may  co-exist 
with  trouble,  sorrow,  trial,  affliction,  or  the  like.  Such  co-existence  is  quit© 
possible.  "  Oh  !  "  you  say,  "  a  man's  feelings  cannot  be  cut  up  into  two  halves 
after  that  fashion."  Well,  it  is  not  being  cut  up  into  two  halves  ;  but  did  you 
ever  notice  that  often,  up  in  the  sky,  there  will  be  two  layers  of  clouds  going  in 
directly  opposite  ways  ?  The  lower  one  is  perhaps  hurrying  southwards,  and  the 
upper  one  passing  to  the  north.  Just  so  there  may  be  these  two  layers  of  feeling 
in  a  man's  soul,  even  when  he  is  most  harassed  by  outward  difficulties.  There 
may  be  a  drift  in  the  one  direction,  of  the  lower  emotions  and  sensitivenesses 
of  his  spirit,  and  a  clear  carry  in  the  other  direction  of  the  uppermost  element 
of  his  consciousness.  It  is  possible  that  we  may  feel  on  otir  aching  shoulders 
and  bent  backs  the  heavy  and  galling  weight  of  some  sore  burden  either  of  trouble- 
some duty  or  of  crushing  sorrow,  and  yet  that  side  by  side  with  that  there 
should  be  the  clear  hope  which  makes  it  a  "  light  affliction  which  is  but  for 
a  moment."  That  magician  Hope  turns  lead  into  feathers,  and,  as  in  an  air- 
pump  when  you  take  out  the  atmospheric  air,  all  things  become  of  the  same 
weight ;  that  is,  of  no  weight  at  all.  If  we  keep  near  Jesus  Christ,  communion 
with  Him  will  give  an  insight  into  His  purposes,  and  a  confidence  in  the  love 
that  moulds  them,  which  will  make  it  possible,  even  when  most  heavily  "  weighed 
upon  with  sore  distress,"  to  be  light  of  heart,  and  like  Paul  and  Silas  in  prison, 
to  sing  songs  though  our  backs  be  bleeding  from  the  rods,  and  our  wrists  be  fettered 
with  the  chains.  They  tell  us  that  the  six  months  of  the  Arctic  night  are  the 
occasion  for  the  display  in  the  heavens  of  such  glories  of  the  aurora  as  we  do  not 
know  anything  about  in  lower  latitudes.  As  the  darkness  and  the  deadly  frost 
increase,  it  is  possible  that  our  skies  may  glow  with  these  flaming  lights,  until 
there  is  a  great  brightness  as  in  the  midday,  and  far  more  of  mystery  and  glory 
and  beauty  than  midday  knows,  though  the  rocks  may  remain  just  as  they  were, 
as  grim  and  black  as  before  ;  the  valley  of  Achor  may  l>e  changed,  if  we  see  yonder, 
coming  down  it  to  meet  us,  the  fair  form  of  Hope,  led  by  the  hand  of  Christ  Him- 
self. Further,  there  is  a  last  point  that  I  would  suggest,  and  that  is  how  Hosea 
here  teaches  us,  not  only  the  possible  co-existence  of  hope  and  trouble,  but  the 
siu-e  issue  of  rightly  borne  trouble  in  a  brighter  hope.  Assuredly,  if  a  man  has 
accepted  the  providences  there  will  follow  on  the  darkest  of  them  a  brightening 
hope.  There  are  a  great  many  reasons  why  that  is  so.  If  I  take,  as  they  were 
meant,  all  the  annoyances,  the  little  irritations  and  the  great  ones,  mosquito 
bites  and  serpents'  stings,  the  troubles  and  trials  that  make  up  my  life,  then 
they  will  all  refine  my  character.  God  uses  the  emery-paper  of  very  rough  circum- 
stances to  polish  His  instruments.  Do  your  troubles  and  mine  refine  our  character  ? 
That  is  what  God  is  doing  with  us  by  all  our  troubles,  and  when  we  are,  if  I  might 
80  say,  scraped  thin  enough,  the  light  of  heaven — that  is,  hope — will  shine  through 
us.  The  "  valley  of  Achor  "  will  be  "  a  door  of  hope."  Then  there  is  another 
reason  why  the  siure  child  of  trouble  patiently,  Christianly  borne,  is  a  more  joyful 
hope.  And  that  reason  is  set  out  in  full  by  a  man  that  was  an  expert  in  trouble, 
namely,  Paul,  when  he  says  "  tribulation  worketh  patience."  Does  it,  Paul  ? 
Sometimes  it  worketh  impatience  ;  sometimes  it  worketh  desperation  ;  sometimes 
it  worketh  almost  the  casting  away  of  faith  altogether ;  but  if  it  does  the  right 
thing,  it  works  patience.  The  ship  has  come  through  the  hurricane,  and  has  not 
started  a  leak,  or,  as  the  sailors  say,  "  turned  turtle,  and  therefore  we  may  trust 
the  ship  and  its  captain  in  any  future  storms.  Thus  tribulation,  which  borne  in 
faith  works  patience,  and  patience  which  brings  evidence  of  a  Divine  Helper, 
teach  US  to  say,  "  Thou  hast  been  my  help ;  Thou  wilt  be  my  help."  And  so 
hope  is  the  last  blessed  result  of  tribulation.      {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The 

vaUey  of  Achor: — The  Israelite  past  seems  to  Hosea  a  mirror   in  which   to 


CBAT.  n.]  EOSEA.  36 

read  their  fatnre.  The  gloomy  gorge  through  which  at  one  time  Israel 
journeyed  proved  a  door  of  hope.  In  all  our  difficulties  and  sorrows  it  is 
within  our  power  to  turn  them  into  occasions  for  a  firmer  grasp  of  God, 
and  so  to  make  them  openings  by  which  a  happier  hope  may  flow  into 
our  souls.  But  this  promise,  like  all  God's  promises,  has  its  well-defined  con* 
ditions.  All  depends  on  how  we  use  the  trial.  1.  The  trouble  which  detaches 
us  from  earth  gives  us  new  hope.  Sometimes  the  effect  of  our  sorrows  is  to  rivet 
us  more  firmly  to  earth.  The  loss  of  dear  friends  should  stamp  their  image  on 
our  hearts,  and  set  it  as  in  a  golden  glory.  But  it  sometimes  does  more  than 
that :  it  makes  us  put  the  present  with  its  duties  impatiently  away  from  us. 
The  trouble  that  does  not  draw  us  away  from  the  present  will  never  be  a  door 
of  hope,  but  rather  a  grim  gate  for  despair  to  come  in  at.  2.  The  trouble  which 
knits  us  to  God  gives  us  new  hope.  AU  the  light  of  hope  is  the  reflection  on  our 
hearts  of  the  light  of  God.  It  is  only  when  we  by  faith  stand  in  His  grace,  and 
live  in  the  conscious  fellowship  of  peace  with  Him,  that  we  rejoice  in  hope.  Sorrow 
forsakes  its  own  nature,  and  leads  in  its  own  opposite,  when  sorrow  helps  us  to 
see  God.  Hope  is  but  the  brightness  that  goes  before  God's  face,  and  if  we  would 
see  it  we  must  look  at  Him.  3.  The  trouble  which  we  bear  rightly,  with  God's 
good  help,  gives  new  hope.  If  we  have  made  our  sorrow  an  occasion  of  learning, 
by  living  experience,  somewhat  more  of  His  exquisitely  varied  and  ever  ready 
power  to  aid  and  bless,  then  it  will  teach  us  firmer  confidence  in  these  inexhaustible 
resources  which  we  have  thus  once  more  proved.  "  Tribulation  worketh  patience, 
and  patience  experience,  and  experience  hope."  That  is  the  order.  You  cannot 
put  patience  and  experience  into  a  parenthesis,  and  omitting  them,  bring  hope 
out  of  tribulation.  I  build  upon  two  things — God's  unchangeableness,  and  His 
help  already  received.  Upon  these  strong  foundations  I  may  wisely  and  safely 
rear  a  palace  of  hope,  which  shall  never  prove  a  castle  in  the  air.  The  past, 
when  it  is  God's  past,  is  the  surest  pledge  for  the  future.  Then  let  us  set  our- 
selves with  our  loins  girt  to  the  road.  The  slope  of  the  valley  of  trouble  is  ever 
upwards.  Never  mind  how  dark  the  shadow  of  death  which  stretches  athwart 
it  is.  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  A  door  of  hope : — This  chapter  is  full  of  God's 
/  wills.  It  is  easy  to  enumerate  between  twenty  and  thirty.  And  as  we  read 
them  over,  we  are  lost  in  wonder  at  all  that  God  is  prepared  to  do  for  us,  who 
have  wandered  from  Him.  It  is  only  another  illustration  of  the  truth  that  God's 
love  is  inexhaustible,  and  that  He  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  till  He  has 
executed  His  purpose  in  each  of  those  whom  He  has  taken  to  be  His  own.  Let 
us  imagine  a  narrow,  rocky  defile.  A  mountain  torrent,  rapid  and  muddy,  hurries 
downward  beside  the  path,  strewn  with  rough  slate  and  jagged  stones,  which 
climbs  up  to  the  head  of  the  pass.  On  either  side  walls  of  rock  rear  themselves, 
steamy  with  moisture,  and  covered  with  festoons  of  hanging  plants  and  ferns ; 
above,  a  narrow  chink  of  blue  shows  itself  where  the  walls  of  rock  almost  meet ; 
all  is  wild,  and  lonely,  and  terrible.  And  there,  with  bleeding  feet,  clothed  m 
scanty  rags,  a  female  figure  crouches  in  brokenness  of  heart  and  desperate  straits. 
Such  is  the  vaUey  of  Achor,  or  trouble ;  and  that  is  Israel  in  the  homr  of  her 
extreme  distress.  God  has  allured  her  from  paths  of  vice  and  sin  into  the  wilder- 
ness. Her  way  has  been  so  hedged  up  that  she  could  not  find  her  paths.  Com 
and  wine  have  failed  ;  wool  and  fiax  have  been  withdrawn ;  ear-rings  and  jewels 
have  been  stripped  off.  Yet,  as  she  is  on  the  point  of  abandoning  herself  to 
the  uttermost  abyss  of  despair,  the  air  seems  to  quiver  with  angel-wings,  and  to 
thrill  with  the  repeated  declarations  of  the  Divine  purposes  of  grace.  And  beneath 
their  impulse  the  sinner  is  heard  to  say,  "  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband ; 
for  then  was  it  better  with  me  than  now."  Ah,  blessed  resolve  !  It  is  the 
angel  of  Hope  ;  and  when  she  reaches  the  place  where  the  penitent  kneels,  she 
touches  with  her  wand  the  adjoining  rock,  and  lo  !  it  swings  backward,  and 
opens  a  way  straight  into  a  smiling  landscape  of  luxtu-iant  beauty,  where  the 
corn  waves,  and  the  juice  reddens  in  the  clustered  grapes.  It  is  the  door  of  hope 
in  the  valley  of  Achor,  through  which  the  penitent  passes  from  the  wilderness 
into  the  garden  of  paradise,  where  the  sun  ever  shines,  and  the  breeze  is  heavy 
with  perfume.  Something  like  this  happens  still.  At  some  time  or  other  we  shaft 
have  to  pass  through  the  valley  of  Achor.  The  road  to  oiur  home  lies  that  way. 
We  cannot  forget  the  incident  which  first  gave  its  name  to  the  valley  of  Achor, 
and  which  will  throw  light  on  one  of  the  frequent  causes  of  oiur  coming  thither. 
Flushed  with  their  successful  capture  of  Jericho,  the  tribes  of  Israel  chose  out 
a  handful  of  their  number  to  capture  th«  little  town  of  Ai,  which  stood  at  the 


36  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

top  of  the  defile  leading  from  the  Jordan  plain  into  the  heart  of  the  country. 
The  work  seemed  altogether  inconsiderable,  and  any  great  effort  needless.  Ah  ! 
how  little  they  expected  that  ere  the  night  fell  that  little  band  of  warriors  would 
be  fleeing  in  hot  haste  down  the  pass,  pursued  almost  to  the  gates  of  the  camp 
by  the  foe  ! — not  because  they  were  wanting  in  prowess,  but  because  the  forbidden 
thing  was  concealed  in  one  of  their  tents,  standing  in  apparent  innocence  amongst 
the  rest,  which  glistened  as  lign-aloes  beside  the  rivers.  There  are  troubles  which 
God  sends  us  directly  from  His  Fatherly  chastening  hand ;  these  are  not  so  hard 
to  bear,  because,  if  with  one  hand  He  uses  the  scourge,  with  the  other  He  binds, 
and  heals,  and  applies  the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life.  There  are  other  troubles 
which  come  to  us  from  men ;  these,  too,  are  bearable,  because  we  can  turn  to 
Him  for  vindication,  and  count  on  Him  for  sympathy  and  fellowship.  But 
there  are  other  troubles  for  which  we  are  ourselves  accountable,  because  we  have 
taken  of  the  forbidden  thing,  and  have  hidden  it  in  our  hearts,  smoothing  over 
the  earth  that  it  appear  not  to  men.  It  may  be  that  some  who  read  these  words 
will  find  here  a  photograph  of  themselves,  of  the  inner  reason  why  their  lives 
have  been  so  full  of  defeat  and  failure.  They  are  met  in  every  direction  by  shut 
gates.  The  way  is  hedged  up  by  thorns  (Josh.  viL  10-13).  Deliverance  from 
the  valley  of  Achor  is  impossible  until  a  solemn  convocation  has  been  held  in  the 
heart,  to  which  all  the  motives,  and  purposes,  and  intentions  of  the  inner  life 
have  been  summoned.  The  lot  must  oe  solemnly  cast.  Is  it  the  inner  life  or 
the  outer  T  And  if  the  inner,  is  it  soul  or  spirit  ?  And  if  the  soul,  is  it  the  past, 
present,  or  future ;  retrospective  or  prospective ;  memory  or  hope  ?  And  if  it 
be  neither  of  these,  but  some  permitted  evil  in  the  present,  is  it  in  the  emotions 
or  the  will  ?  The  cause  of  our  defeat  and  failure  must  perish,  that  we  may  our- 
Belves  be  saved.  Maiming  is,  after  aU,  not  too  dear  a  price  to  pay,  if  only  we  may 
enter  into  life.  And  if  we  be  too  tender-hearted  to  deal  strongly  and  vigorously 
with  the  Achan  who  has  caused  us  defeat  and  loss,  let  us  go  to  our  merciful  and 
faithful  High  Priest,  who  carries  in  His  hand  the  sharp,  two-edged  sword,  which 

Sierces  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit ;  and  let  us  implore  Him  to 
o  for  us  what  we  cannot,  or  dare  not,  do  for  ourselves.  He  will  not  fail  us  in 
our  extremity.  He  will  do  the  work  as  tenderly  and  as  thoroughly  m  the  case 
requires.  Only  let  us  believe  that  in  every  valley  of  Achor  there  is  a  door  of  hope, 
if  we  will  but  dare  to  stone  Achan  to  death.  And  when  the  cairn  of  stones  beneath 
which  he  lies  is  reared  in  the  valley,  we  shall  ascend  the  long  pass  to  victory. 
As  sure  as  God  is  true,  there  is  a  way  out  of  every  trouble  into  assured  and  glorious 
victory,  if  only  in  the  trouble  we  will  do  God's  will  on  Achan.  Time  would  fail 
to  tell  of  all  the  advantages  to  which  that  door  will  lead.  Some  of  them  are 
enumerated  here.  "  She  shall  sing  "  (ver.  15).  There  shall  be  a  return  of  joy, 
which  had  fled  from  the  heart.  "  Thou  shalt  call  Me  Ishi  "  (ver.  16).  There  shall 
be  a  deeper  knowledge  of  God,  so  that  He  shall  be  rather  the  Husband  than  the 
Master.  "  I  will  make  a  covenant  "  (ver.  18).  There  shall  be  realised  a  blessed 
unity  with  all  creation.  "  I  will  hear  "  (ver.  21).  There  shall  be  new  power 
in  prayer,  and  answers  shall  tread  in  each  other's  footsteps,  as  they  hasten  into 
the  soul.  Thus  through  trouble  we  shall  pass  into  blessedness ;  through  the 
grave  into  life  ;  through  the  iron  gate  into  freedom.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A 
door  of  hope : — I.  Achor,  in  the  natubal  boxtntifttutess  of  the  valley, 

A  SYMBOL  OF  THE  JOYS  OF  LIFE, — OXTB  JOYS  MAY  BE  OCCASIONS  OF  HOPE,       1.    In 

the  joys  of  natural  scenery  there  is  an  inspiration  of  hope  to  poet  spirits.  2.  In 
temporal  mercies  there  is  an  inspiration  of  hope  to  grateful  hearts.  3.  In  religions 
privileges  there  is  a  door  of  hope  to  desert  souls.     II.  Achoe,  rs  its  obeat  histoeio 

EVENT,  A  symbol  OP  THE  SOBBOWS  OF  LIFE, — CUB  SOBBOWS  MAY  BE  OCCASIONS 

OP  HOPE.  Septuagint  renders  the  name  "  door  of  imderstanding."  So  it  was 
to  Israel.  They  came  to  know  the  evil  and  penalty  of  the  sin  of  Achan  there. 
The  valley  of  trouble  may  become  to  all  of  us  a  door  of  hope  whatever  the  trouble 
is.  1.  The  trouble  of  true  penitence.  2.  The  trouble  of  agonising  prayer. 
3.  The  trouble  of  spiritual  conflict.  4.  The  trouble  of  sanctified  adversity. 
6.  The  trouble  of  sacrificial  compassion  for  others.  6.  The  trouble  of  the  article 
of  our  own  death.  (Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Hope,  a  gracious  gift : — What  is 
hope  7  The  word  is  closely  akm  to  "  gap  "  or  "  gape."  As  little  birds,  when  the 
mother-bird  is  away,  open  their  mouths,  gape  for  food,  so  the  man  of  hope 
is  the  gaping  man,  the  open  man,  with  eyes,  ears,  mind,  and  heart  open.  If 
there  is  one  thing  more  than  another  that  Almighty  God  likes,  it  is  openness. 
The  Book  is  full  of  it.     And  if  we  be  open  ourselves,  God  will  open  heaven  and 


CHAP,  n.]  HOSEA.  87 

fill  us.  Perhaps  God's  grace  and  my  hope  are  the  two  shuttles  that  are  weaving 
for  me  the  white  robe  of  righteousness.  There  was  a  corner  of  CJomwall  where 
the  beauty  of  Devonshire  overflowed  into  it.  And  through  the  windows  of  hope, 
some  of  the  beauties  and  sweets  of  the  heavenly  life  overflowed  into  the  present. 
My  soul  was  thrilled  in  reading  an  account  of  the  fighting  at  Colesberg,  where 
the  correspondent  wrote  "  when  the  boom  of  the  cannon  ceased,  the  birds  began 
to  sing."  So  when  we  have  subdued  sin,  and  hope  for  righteousness,  glory,  and 
eternal  life,  joy  and  peace  will  abide  in  our  hearts.  {J.  H.  Jowett.)  Songs 
of  praise  : — Beethoven  composed  some  of  his  great  oratorios  in  the  open  air. 
He  had  his  piano  carried  to  the  middle  of  a  field,  and  there,  while  sunbeam  and 
cloud-shadows  played  together,  and  birds  performed  their  impromptu  oratorios, 
he  worked  out  his  harmonies  and  wrote  his  score.  So  we  would  come  out  beneath 
the  broad  canopy  of  God's  everlasting  love,  and,  encompassed  by  innumerable 
mercies,  make  music  more  pleasing  to  God  than  the  finest  oratorios.  The  music 
of  thanksgiving  for  tokens  of  Divine  goodness  abounding  in  our  lives.  (Gates 
of  Imagery.)  Nothing  like  youth  : — In  the  memoirs  of  Lady  Blessington,  there 
is  given  a  letter  addressed  to  her  by  Sir  Edward  Lytton  Bulwer,  and  containing 
these  instructive  words,  "  Do  you  know,  I  find  Paris  a  melancholy  place.  If 
one  has  seen  it  in  one's  earliest  youth,  it  reminds  one  of  the  vast  interval  of  time 
that  has  elapsed.  Say  what  we  will,  there  is  nothing  like  youth.  All  we  gain 
in  our  manhood  is  dulness  itself  compared  to  the  zest  of  novelty,  and  the  worst 
of  it  is,  the  process  of  acquiring  wisdom  is  but  another  word  for  the  process  of 
growing  old.  And   she   shall   sing   there,  as   in  the  days  of  her  yonth. 

—  Singing  at  work :  —  Those  who  have  sailed  on  the  sea  in  sailing  ships 
remember  how  the  sailors  accustom  themselves  to  sing  while  they  work.  It  is  a 
happy  memory  to  me  to  record  an  incident  on  a  vessel  on  which  I  was  a  passenger. 
The  mainyard  came  to  some  sort  of  grief,  and  then  followed  the  tremendous 
task  of  raising  it  to  its  former  position,  for  there  was  no  steam  gear  on  board. 
The  passengers  and  crew  all  set  to  work  to  hoist  the  mainyard  to  its  place.  I 
think  the  tune  the  sailors  set  was  the  famous  one  of  "  John  Brown's  Body,"  but 
with  it  they  sang  as  the  chorus,  "  Glory,  glory,  hallelujah  !  "  I  am  not  sure  they 
were  impressed  with  the  solemnity  of  these  words,  but  I  think  some  were  who 
assisted  to  haul ;  and  up  went  the  mast  twice  as  quickly  as  if  the  sailors  had  not 
sung  their  song.  When  you  have  a  specially  tough  job  on  hand,  let  your  heart 
go  up  to  God  in  song,  and  you  will  find  the  diflficulty  go  sooner  than  you  expect. 
{T.  Spurgeon. )  Songless  : — It  came  to  my  lot,  while  staying  in  far-off  Tasmania, 
to  be  shown  into  a  room  at  a  house  to  await  the  arrival  of  a  friend.  I  did  what 
I  ought  not  to  have  done — I  began  to  investigate  the  pictures  on  the  walls  and 
the  articles  on  the  table.  Amongst  other  things  I  observed  a  canary  bird  in  a 
cage  before  the  window.  I  looked  at  it,  and  hoped  it  would  sing.  As  it  would 
not  do  so  I  began  to  sing  to  it — to  say,  "  Sweet !  sweet !  "  "  Pretty  Dick !  "  If 
you  want  people  to  be  kind  to  you,  you  should  be  kind  to  them.  But  this  canary 
would  not  utter  a  note.  I  was  disgusted,  so  I  looked  into  the  cage.  Doubtless 
the  bird  was  living,  thought  I,  for  there  was  the  seed  in  the  trough  ;  then  there 
was  a  vessel  filled  with  water,  and  a  piece  of  sugar  was  stuck  between  the  bars. 
So  I  said,  "Sweet !  sweet !  "  But  still  it  would  not  sing.  Then  my  friend  came 
into  the  room,  and,  after  talking  a  little  while,  I  said,  "  You  have  got  a  dumb 
canary;  do  what  you  will,  it  will  not  sing — at  least  to  strangers."  "Oh,"  said 
my  friend,  "it's  stuffed — it's  not  a  live  bird."  And  I  confess  that  I  have  been 
into  churches  and  into  Christian  homes  where  there  was  bread  enough  and  to 
Bpare,  where  there  was  seed  in  the  trough,  and  water — aye,  and  the  sugar  too, — 
but  they  would  not  say,  "  Sweet !  sweet !  "  or  be  glad  in  their  songs.       {Ibid.) 

Ver.  16.  And  it  shall  be  at  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  that  thou  shalt  call 
Me  Ishi;  and  shalt  call  Me  no  more  Baali. — Hosea^s  marriage  figure: — In 
looking  at  the  allegory  of  Jehovah's  marriage  with  mother  Israel,  or  with 
the  mother -land,  we  must  begin  by  considering  the  current  ideas  which 
served  to  suggest  such  a  conception.  Alike  in  Israel,  and  among  its  heathen 
neighbours,  the  word  Baal,  that  is  Lord  or  Owner,  was  a  common  appellative  of 
the  national  deity.  Instead  of  the  proper  names  compounded  with  Jehovah, 
which  are  common  from  the  time  of  Elijah,  we  frequently  find  in  Old  Israel  forms 
compounded  with  Baal  which  are  certainly  not  heathenish.  When  we  meet 
with  a  son  of  Saul  named  Ish-Baal,  a  grandson  Meri-Baal,  both  names  meaning 
"  Baal's  man,"  while  David  in  like  manner  gives  to  one  of  his  sons  the  name  of 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Beeliada,  "  BhaI  bnoweth,"  we  may  be  sure  that  Baal  is  here  a  title  of  the  God 
of  Israel.  In  Hosea's  time  the  worshipping  people  still  addressed  Jehovah  aa 
Baali,  "  my  Lord,"  and  the  Baalim  of  whom  he  often  speaks  (ii.  13,  xiii.  1,  2) 
are  no  other  than  the  golden  calves,  the  recognised  symbols  of  Jehovah.  Now, 
among  the  Semites,  the  husband  is  regarded  as  the  lord  or  owner  of  his  wife 
(1  Pet.  il.  6),  whom,  in  fact,  according  to  early  law,  he  purchases  from  her  father 
for  a  price  (Exod.  xxi.  8,  xxii.  17).  The  address  Baali  is  used  by  the  wife  to 
her  husband,  as  well  as  by  the  nation  to  its  God,  and  so  in  an  early  stage  of  thought, 
when  similarities  of  expression  constantly  form  the  basis  of  identifications  of  idea, 
it  lay  very  near  to  think  of  the  God  as  the  husband  of  the  worshipping  nationality, 
or  of  the  mother-land.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  this  conception  was  in  form 
original  to  Hosea,  or  even  peculiar  to  Israel ;  such  developed  religious  analogy 
as  that  which  makes  the  national  God  not  only  father  of  the  people,  but  husband 
of  the  land,  their  mother,  has  its  familiar  home  in  natural  religions.  In  these 
religions  we  find  similar  conceptions,  in  which,  however,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
fatherhood  of  the  Deity,  the  idea  is  taken  in  a  crass  physical  sense.  Marriage  of 
female  worshippers  with  the  godhead  was  a  common  notion  among  the  Phenicians 
and  Babylonians,  and  in  the  latter  case  was  connected  with  immoral  practices 
akin  to  those  that  defiled  the  sanctuaries  of  Israel  in  Hosea's  days.  It  even 
seems  possible  to  find  some  trace  in  Semitic  heathenism  of  the  idea  of  marriage 
of  Baal  with  the  land  which  he  fertilises  by  sunshine  and  rain.  Semitic  deities 
are  conceived  as  productive  powers,  and  so  form  pairs  of  male  and  female 
jDrinciples.  Heaven  and  earth  are  such  a  pair,  as  is  well  known  from  Greek 
mythology ;  and  though  Baal  and  Ashtoreth  are  more  often  represented  as 
astral  powers  (Sun  and  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus),  it  is  certain  that  fertilising 
showers  were  one  manifestation  of  Baal's  life-giving  power.  Even  the 
Mohammedan  Arabs  retained  the  name  of  Baal  {6o7)  for  land  watered  by  the 
rains  of  heaven.  The  land  that  brings  forth  fruit  \inder  these  influences  could 
not  fail  to  be  thought  of  as  his  spouse ;  and,  in  fact,  we  have  an  Arabic  word 
Cathary)  which  seems  to  show  that  the  fertility  produced  by  the  rains  of  Baal 
v/as  associated  with  the  name  of  his  wife  Ashtoreth.  If  this  is  so,  it  follows  that 
in  point  of  form  the  marriage  of  Jehovah  with  Israel  corresponded  to  a  common 
Semitic  conception,  and  we  may  well  suppose  that  the  corrupt  mass  of  Israel 
interpreted  it  in  reference  to  the  fertility  of  the  goodly  land,  watered  by  the  dews 
of  heaven  (Deut.  xi.  11),  on  principles  that  suggested  no  higher  thoughts  of  God 
than  were  entertained  by  their  heathen  neighbours.  {W.  B^ertson  Smith,  LL.D.) 
Husband  or  lord :  God  translated  by  love  or  by  fear : — Albeit  the  names  Baali 
and  Ishi  both  signify  "  my  husband,"  though  the  first  chiefly  a  husband  under 
the  notion  of  authority,  and  the  second  of  love ;  and  albeit  Baali  may  be  said 
of  God,  yet  since  it  had  been  abused,  and  given  to  idols.  He  wUl  have  it  no  more 
used.  Doctrine — 1.  When  the  Lord  delivereth,  and  is  kind  to  His  people,  it  is  their 
duty  to  prove  their  thankfulness  by  embracing  of  Christ,  and  cleaving  to  Him 
and  His  pure  service.  2.  The  Lord  will  be  imto  His  people  what  a  faithful  husband 
is  to  his  wife,  and  they  are  allowed  to  expect  it,  and  in  the  faith  thereof,  to  profess 
and  avow  Him,  in  the  exercise  of  true  religion.  "  Thou  shalt  caU  Me  Ishi,"  or 
avow  Me  for  thy  husband,  as  thou  art  warranted  to  do.  3.  The  Lord  is  so  tender 
of  the  matter  of  His  worship  and  service,  that  He  will  allow  no  mixture  in  it,  nor 
halting  between  it  and  idolatry.  (George  Hutcheson.)  Our  name  for  God: — 
When  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife  are  simply  outward  and  formal,  and 
maintained  only  upon  necessity  of  law,  words  of  endearment  do  not  come  into 
use,  and  can  only  be  insincere  when  they  are  used.  The  formal  "  my  lord  " 
suits  the  conditions.  And  the  same  thing  is  true  when  sin  has  broken  off  relations. 
The  fear  that  separates  makes  such  a  name  as  Baali  suflSce.  But  when  love 
keeps  up  gracious  relations,  words  of  endearment  come  natvu-aUy  into  use.  Love 
in  loving,  and  in  using  loving  names,  finds  employ.  Our  relatioa  to  God  is 
revealed  by  our  name  for  Him.     (R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  And  in  tbat  day  will  I  make  a  covenant  for  them  witli 
the  beasts  of  the  field. — The  covenant  of  outward  peace  : — God's  favour  and 
covenant  shall  secui-e  them  from  hurt  by  any  of  the  creatures,  and  shall  give 
them  peace  and  security  from  wars.  Doctrine — 1.  All  the  creatures  of  God  are 
iustly  at  enmity  with  man,  and  armed  against  him,  so  long  as  he  is  not  reconciled 
to  God  their  Creator.  2.  Reconciliation  with  God  brings  peace  with  all  the 
creatures,  so  far  as  is  for  the  reconciled  man's  good,     3.  That  which  secureth 


CHAP,  n.]  EOSEA.  39 

the  godly  man  from  trouble  from  the  creatures,  is  God's  dominion  over  all  of 
them.  4.  As  peace  and  deliverance  from  war  is  a  great  blessing,  so  it  is  the  Lord 
only  who  puts  an  end  to  war  and  giveth  peace.  5.  When  a  people  study  recon- 
ciliation with  God,  and  are  cordial  in  following  a  thorough  reformation,  they  are 
in  God's  way  for  obtaining  outward  peace.  6.  When  the  Lord  hath  given  peace, 
it  is  He  only  who  must  maintain  it,  and  can  give  quietness  of  mind  to  make  people 
enjoy  quietness  and  tranquillity  by  it.  Unless  He  giveth  peace,  outward  tran- 
quillity will  not  afford  it ;  and  if  He  give  that,  we  have  no  cause  to  complain, 
though  we  be  in  the  midst  of  trouble.  {George  Hutcheson.)  The  restored 
order  of  nature  : — We  now  perceive  the  intention  of  the  prophet.  He  reminds 
the  Israelites  that  all  things  were  adverse  to  their  safety  as  long  as  they  were 
alienated  from  God  ;  but  that,  when  they  returned  into  favour  with  Him,  this 
disorder,  which  had  for  a  time  appeared,  would  be  no  longer ;  for  the  regular 
order  of  nature  would  prevail,  and  brute  animals  would  suffer  themselves  to  be 
brought  into  obedience.  (John  Calvin. )  The  promise  of  peace  : — I.  Peach 
WITH  THE  CREATURES.  L  Si  has  causcd  enmity  between  man  and  the  creatures. 
2.  Peace  with  God  brings  peace  with  the  creatures.  3.  Covenant  mercy  is 
excellent  mercy  indeed.  Two  things  observable  in  mercies  coming  by  covenant. 
They  are  more  sweet.  They  are  more  firm.  4.  If  it  is  such  a  blessed  thing  for 
God  to  make  a  covenant  with  the  beasts  for  us,  what  a  mercy  is  it  then  for  God 
to  make  a  covenant  with  our  souls.  5.  Is  it  a  mercy  for  God  to  make  a  covenant 
with  the  beasts  for  His  people  ?  then  what  a  mercy  it  is  for  Him  to  make  a  covenant 
with  His  Son  for  His  people.  II.  Deliverance  from  the  hostility  of 
ADVERSARIES.  I.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  have  the  bow  and  the  sword  broken. 
It  is  a  part  of  the  covenant  that  God  makes  with  His  people,  to  take  away  the 
instruments  of  hostility.  2.  Peace  is  a  most  amiable  thing,  and  lovely  in  all  onr 
eyes,  every  man  desires  it,  and  God  promises  it  to  His  people  in  many  places  as 
a  most  special  fruit  of  His  love.  The  shining  of  God's  face  appears  in  the  giving 
of  peace  to  a  nation.  3.  Peace  is  a  sweet  mercy,  therefore  it  is  a  pity  that  it 
should  be  abused,  and  not  improved.  4.  Peace  is  sweet,  therefore  not  to  be 
falsified.  6.  Peace  is  a  great  blessing,  therefore  it  is  a  pity  not  to  endeavoiu*  by 
every  means  to  attain  it.  Cutrsed  be  that  war  which  has  not  peace  for  its  end. 
6.  Peace  is  a  great  blessing  from  God,  but  we  must  take  heed  we  buy  it  not  too 
dear.  And  you  buy  peace  too  dear,  if  you  sell  truth  for  it :  if  you  betray  those 
who  have  been  most  active  for  the  public  good :  if,  through  desire  of  peace, 
you  subject  yourselves  to  tyranny  or  slavery.  7.  Peace  is  God's  peculiar  work ; 
we  may  treat  about  peace,  but  until  God  is  pleased  to  permit  it,  it  will  not  ensue. 
8.  Thorough  reformation  is  the  way  to  procure  peace.  III.  The  effects  of  this 
PEACE.  "  I  will  make  them  to  lie  down  safely."  1.  God's  peace  alone  bring3 
safety.  2.  "  To  lie  down  safely  "  is  God's  own  gift  to  His  people.  It  is  an 
additional  blessing  to  having  the  sword  and  bow  broken.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
The  stiblime  privileges  of  the  good: — I.  Inferior  creatures  might  be  Divinely 
RESTRAINED  FROM  iNJtTRiNG  THEM.  Were  man  to  possess  and  manifest  the  moral 
majesty  of  goodness,  the  wildest  and  most  savage  creatm-es  would  probably 
stand  in  awe  of  him.  II.  Human  enemies  might  be  made  to  submit  to  them. 
Those  who  trust  in  the  Lord  need  not  be  afraid  of  war.  The  spirit  of  the  good 
man  is  to  overcome  evil  with  good.  III.  They  might  en.toy  a  perfect  security. 
The  true  safety  is  not  the  mere  safety  of  the  body.  The  body  is  not  the  man, 
it  is  his — not  him.  Soul-safety  is  the  safety  of  the  man — protection  from  all 
that  is  unholy  in  thought,  impure  in  feeling,  umighteous  in  volition.  IV.  They 
might  enjoy  vital  union  with  the  everlasting  fountain  of  goodness. 
Here  is  union  indeed  !  Represented  by  that  of  husband  and  wife  ;  a  union 
formed  of  immutable  ties.  Righteousness,  judgment,  loving-kindness,  faithful- 
ness— who  can  break  these  bonds  ?  Learn  the  supreme  importance  of  moral 
goodness  to  man.  {Homiliat.)  And  I  will  lietroth  tbee  unto  Me  for  ever. — 
The  everlasting  espousals  : — Betrothing  or  espousing  was  the  bridegroom's  taking 
the  bride  into  a  marriage-covenant.  It  was  done  publicly  before  witnesses, 
under  a  canopy  or  tent  set  up  for  that  purpose.  Some  competent  time  inter- 
vened betwixt  the  espousals  and  the  solemnising  and  consummating  of  the 
marriage.  Infidelity  during  espousals  was  reputed  and  punished  as  adultery. 
Whomsoever  Christ  espouseth  to  Himself,  He  espouseth  for  ever.  I.  Sinners 
HAY  BB  BSPOU3BD  TO  Christ.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  espousals.  The  parties 
are  pleased  with  one  another.  As  Christ  left  His  Father's  house  for  her,  eho 
gives  up  her  own  people  and  her  father's  house  for  Him.    The  glorious  Bride* 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

groom's  consent  to  be  her  husband  she  finds  in  the  word,  which  the  Spirit  applies 
to  her,  and  which  she  by  faith  applies  to  herself.  Sinners  may  be  espoused  to 
the  Son  of  God.  1.  This  match  was  from  eternity  projected  and  concluded  in 
the  cabinet-council  of  the  Trinity.  2.  The  Bridegroom  and  all  His  relations 
are  well  pleased  with  the  match.  3.  The  lawful  impediments  of  this  match  are 
All  removed  at  the  Bridegroom's  expenses  and  pains.  4.  The  marriage  contract 
is  drawn  up  already  and  signed  by  the  Bridegroom.  5.  The  proxies  for  the 
Bridegroom  are  sent  forth  to  make  suit  for  sinners  their  consent  to  be  espoused 
to  Him.  6.  The  Bridegroom  has  already  put  on  His  marriage  robes.  7.  The 
wedding  garment  for  the  bride  is  ready,  being  purchased  at  the  expense  of  the 
Bridegroom.  8.  The  tent  for  the  espousals  is  set  up,  even  the  Church.  9.  The 
feast  and  seal  of  the  espousals,  namely,  the  holy  sacrament,  is  ready,  that  the 
espoused  bride  may  feast  and  rejoice  in  her  Lord  and  husband.  10.  Here  are 
witnesses  now.  Here  are  the  friends  of  the  Bridegroom  to  bear  witness  to  the 
espousals.  II.  Thb  peepetxhty  and  eveklastingness  of  this  marbiage 
COVENANT.  1.  The  espousals  are  for  ever  in  design.  Among  men  espousals 
are  only  for  term  of  life.  Christ  takes  the  sinner  with  a  design  to  be  that  sinner's 
husband  from  the  moment  of  the  espousals  for  ever  :  and  His  designs  are  immov- 
able as  mountains  of  brass.  He  takes  her  with  the  fixed  purpose  never  to 
put  her  away  while  she  desires  to  abide  with  Him :  never  indeed  to  part  with 
her,  though  she  should  desire  to  go  away.  The  soul  consenting  to  the  espousals 
takes  Christ  with  a  design  to  be  His  spouse  for  ever.  2.  The  espousals  are  for 
ever,  in  fact.  (1)  It  is  everlasting  without  interruption.  Espousals  stand  firm 
in  the  case  of  the  adversity  of  either  party ;  in  the  case  of  the  advancement  of 
either  party  ;  in  the  case  of  desertion  on  either  side.  (2)  It  is  everlasting  without 
expiring,  either  at  death,  or  at  the  world's  ending.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The 
spirit  of  the  LorWa  es-pousals: — He  declares  by  what  means  He  would  "  betroth 
them  to  Him  for  ever  "  ;  even  in  righteousness  and  judgment,  and  then  in  kindness 
and  mercies,  and  then  in  faithfulness.  1.  God  had  indeed  from  the  beginning 
covenanted  with  the  Israelites  in  righteousness  and  judgment ;  there  is  nothing 
disguised  or  false  in  His  covenant.  As  then  God  had  in  sincerity  adopted  the 
people,  to  what  vices  does  He  oppose  righteousness  and  judgment  ?  I  answer. 
These  words  must  be  applied  to  both  the  contracting  parties  ;  then  by  righteous- 
ness God  means  not  only  His  own,  but  that  also  which  is,  as  they  say,  mutual  and 
reciprocal;  and  by  "righteousness  and  judgment"  is  meant  rectitude,  in  which 
nothing  is  wanting.  2.  '  In  kindness  and  mercies."  By  these  words  He  intimates 
that  though  the  people  were  unworthy,  yet  this  would  be  no  impediment  in  their 
way  to  prevent  them  to  return  into  favour  with  God  ;  for  in  this  reconciliation 
God  would  regard  His  own  goodness  rather  than  the  merits  of  His  people. 
3.  "  In  faithfulness."  This  confirms  the  fixed  and  unchangeable  duration  of  the 
marriage.  By  faithfulness  is  to  be  understood  that  stability  of  which  I  have 
spoken ;  for  what  some  philosophise  on  this  expression  is  too  refined,  who  give 
this  explanation,  "  I  will  espouse  thee  in  faith,"  that  is,  by  the  Gospel.  For  we 
embrace  God's  free  promises,  and  thus  the  covenant  the  Lord  makes  with  us  is 
ratified.  I  simply  interpret  the  word  as  denoting  stability.  {John  Calvin. )  The 
wooing  and  the  wedding  : — That  is  a  tenderly  beautiful  figure  ;  surely  one  of  the 
.sweetest  and  most  exquisite  in  God's  Word  !  "I  will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  for 
.ever  !  "  The  communion  of  ideal  wedlock  is  used  to  express  the  ideal  relationship 
between  the  soul  and  the  Lord.  We  are  to  be  married  unto  the  Lord  !  Look  into 
the  heart  of  it,  and  see  how  much  the  gracious  figure  reveals.  What  do  we  find 
in  consecrated  wedlock  even  along  the  planes  of  common  life  ?  Let  me  lift  out 
some  of  its  contents.  There  is  an  affection  which  is  creative  of  sweet  and  fruitful 
xepose.  There  is  a  perfect  trust  which  is  the  minister  of  mutual  revelation.  There 
is  a  sensitive  sympathy  in  which  all  secrecy  is  destroyed.  There  is  an  intercourse 
which  is  like  a  "  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire,"  so  crystalline  is  its  purity,  so 
warm  and  genial  is  its  tone.  There  is  a  large  companionship,  whose  commerce 
consists  of  the  deepest  and  wealthiest  treasures  of  the  life.  In  ideal  wedlock 
"  deep  calleth  unto  deep,"  and  the  primary  springs  of  the  beings  are  in  confluence. 
All  this  I  find  in  sanctified  marriage  :  and  now  the  figure  is  lifted  up  and  sublimed 
and  used  to  interpret  my  possible  relationship  to  God :  "  Thy  Maker  is  thine 
husband."  "  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  for  ever."  Then  there  is  to  be  a 
wedding  !  There  is  to  be  a  wedding  of  the  soul  and  its  Saviour,  of  the  nation 
and  its  King.  That  wedding  constitutes  the  aummum  bonum  both  of  personal 
And  of  corporate  life.     That  wedding  is  the  crown  and  consummation  of  human 


CHAP,  n.]  ROSEA.  41 

blessedness.  That  wedding  enshrines  the  secret  of  moral  and  spiritual  growth. 
To  bring  that  wedding  about  is  the  aim  and  purpose  of  every  kind  and  type  of 
Christian  ministry.  What  is  the  kind  of  wooing  that  will  lead  to  a  wedding  ?  Let 
me  begin  here.  I.  He  is  not  a  far-away  Saviour  ;  His  home  is  on  earth. 
I  do  not  think  we  greatly  help  the  cause  of  the  Lover  by  proclaiming  the  remote- 
ness of  the  Lover's  home. 

"  There's  a  Friend  for  little  children 
Above  the  bright  blue  sky." 

That  is  the  only  line  I  don't  like  in  that  greatly  beloved  and  very  beautiful  hymn. 
In  my  childhood  it  helped  to  make  my  Saviour  an  absentee,  and  He  was 
"  above  the  bright  blue  sky  "  when  I  wanted  Him  on  the  near  and  common  earth. 
Destroying  all  sense  of  remoteness,  we  must  labour  to  bring  the  children  into  the 
immediate  presence  of  the  Lover  Himself.  All  the  three  attributes  must  be 
regarded  in  indissoluble  union.  The  quality  of  each  depends  upon  the  presence 
of  all.  Strike  out  one,  and  you  maim  and  Impoverish  the  rest.  There  is  an 
imperfect  love  in  which  there  is  no  admiration.  There  is  an  imperfect  admiration 
in  which  there  is  no  love.  Perfect  love  admires  ;  perfect  admiration  loves  ;  and 
love  and  admiration  are  ever  associated  with  the  gracious  spirit  of  hopeful  aspira- 
tion. These  three,  I  say,  constitute  the  very  marrow  of  life,  the  deep  secret 
springs  of  character  and  conduct.  "  We  live  by  admiration,  hope,  and  love." 
If  the  great  Lover  can  win  these,  the  wooing  will  be  followed  by  the  wedding ! 
How  can  we  so  represent  Him  that  this  triumph  shall  be  won  T  1.  Present  the 
approachable  Jesus.  But  not  only  His  simplicity  must  we  reveal,  but  His 
sympathy  too !  2.  Present  Jesus  the  Hero.  '  We  live  by  love."  By  "  admira- 
tion," too  !  "  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Christ,  to  receive  all  honour  and  glory." 
3.  Loving  !  Admiring !  These  fair  dispositions  will  be  assuredly  associated 
with  the  beautiful  genius  of  hope.  II.  Wooing  and  living  must  go  together. 
What  more  shall  we  say  about  ourselves  ?  Let  this  be  said  :  While  we  are 
employed  in  wooing  do  not  let  us  be  heedless  as  to  the  manner  of  our  living.  Those 
who  woo  for  the  Master  must  be  careful  how  they  live.  Let  us  distinguish  between 
a  wedding  and  a  funeral,  and  in  our  wooing  let  it  be  the  wedding-bells  which  lend 
their  music  to  our  speech.  III.  When  shall  we  begin  the  wooing  ?  John 
Ruskin  said  :  "  When  do  you  suppose  the  education  of  a  child  begins  ?  At  six 
months  old  it  can  answer  smile  with  smile,  and  impatience  with  impatience." 
Perhaps  we  have  to  begin  the  wooing  even  in  the  speechless  years.  In  the  life 
of  the  spirit  I  believe  in  early  wooings  because  I  believe  in  early  weddings  !  As 
for  the  wedding  itself,  the  betrothal  to  the  Lord,  I  would  have  it  a  very  decisive 
act.  It  must  be  a  conscious,  intelligent  consecration.  The  vow  must  not  be 
made  in  thoughtlessness  ;  not  in  any  bewildering  and  sensational  transports. 
In  the  rapture  there  must  be  the  moderating  presence  of  serious  and  illumined 
thought.  (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  betrothment  of  the  Church: — There  is  no 
real  or  substantial  happiness  for  the  soul  unless  it  is  really  united  to  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  by  faith.  Betrothing  was  considered  exceedingly  sacred ;  and  parents 
supposed  that  what  they  did  on  earth  God  ratified  in  heaven.  I.  The  betrothing, 
or  engaging,  is  for  ever.  There  is  no  separation  of  the  parties  here,  from  any 
cause.  No  offence  can  possibly  arise,  be  given  or  be  taken,  so  as  to  separate 
the  Church  from  its  Head.  No  other  lover  can  possibly  steal  away  the  affections 
of  believers  from  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  many  compacts  made  between  man 
and  man,  but  time  breaks  them  all.  Here  is  a  covenant  which  time  cannot 
break.  God  has  entered  into  covenant  with  Jesus  Christ  on  the  part  of  the 
Church,  and  Christ  has  undertaken  to  preserve  them  during  the  existence  of 
time.  But  is  it  not  possible  for  sin  to  separate  ?  No,  not  as  touching  eternity. 
II.  This  betrothing  is  in  righteousness.  Justice,  or  righteousness,  is  that 
perfection  of  God,  whereby  He  is  disposed  to  render  every  man  his  due.  All  His 
proceedings  are  in  perfect  equity.  There  is  no  part  of  our  eternal  salvation  which 
is  in  opposition  to  the  essential  righteousness  of  God.  III.  This  betrothing 
IS  in  judgment.  That  is,  with  judgment,  not  with  precipitancy.  The  Most 
High  will  not  act  in  anything  rashly,  but  in  a  judicious,  proper,  righteous  way  : 
He  does  not  save  our  souls  as  a  manifestation  of  His  mercy,  at  the  expense  of 
His  righteousness.  It  signifies  also  the  satisfaction  of  G<>d's  justice,  and  it 
includes  the  exercise  of  His  mercy.  IV.  This  betrothal  is  in  faithfulness. 
Look  at  the  faithfulness  of  Christ,  or  of  God  in  Christ.     Faithfulness  to  covenant 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  promises.  V.  This  betrothal  is  nr  LOvrNO-KiNDNEss  and  in  mkbciks. 
Consider  a  few  of  them.  1.  The  revelation  of  God  contained  in  the  Bible.  2.  The 
love  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  3.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  The  hope  for 
the  hereafter.  VI.  The  results.  "  Thou  shalt  know  the  Lord."  Thou  shalt 
know  that  God  hath  from  eternity  chosen  thee  as  a  vessel  of  mercy.  Thou  shalt 
know  Him  as  thy  great  Creator,  thy  Preserver,  thy  Redeemer,  &c.  (T.  Bagnall- 
Baker,  M.A.)  The  threefold  betrothal: — At  three  times  especially  did  our 
Lord  espouse  the  Church  unto  Himself.  First,  in  His  Licarnation,  when  He 
willed  to  unite  His  own  Deity  with  our  humanity.  He  will  be  for  ever  the  Word 
and  Flesh,  that  is,  God  and  Man.  Secondly,  in  His  Passion,  when  He  washed 
her  with  His  blood,  and  bought  her  for  His  own  by  His  death.  Thirdly,  in  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  when  He  poured  out  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  her,  whereby  He 
dwelleth  in  her  and  she  in  Him.  "  Knowing  God  "  is  to  know  by  experience 
that  God  is  good  ;  and  that  God  makes  known  to  the  soul  which  He  loves, 
while  it  meditates  on  Him,  reads  of  Him,  speaks  to  Him,  adores  Him,  obeys  Him. 
The  knowledge  cometh  from  the  revelation  of  the  Father,  and  it  is  true  bliss. 
{E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  great  betrothal:  —  The  Scripture  often  mentions 
espousals  and  marriage  to  express  the  great  mystery  of  the  grace  of  God  to  His 
people.  The  Holy  Ghost  seems  to  delight  much  in  this  allegory :  there  is  none 
more  frequent  in  Scripture,  and  it  sheds  very  great  honour  on  the  married  state. 
Married  people  should  so  live,  that  all  who  behold  the  sweetness,  the  happiness 
of  their  lives,  may  be  reminded  thereby  of  the  sweetness  and  happiness  which  is 
in  the  Church's  communion  with  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  in  a  married  condition  there 
are  these  four  things  most  remarkable.  L  There  is  the  nearest  possible  union. 
"  They  twain  shall  be  one  flesh."  2.  In  nothing  in  the  world  is  there  so  full  a 
communication  of  one  creature  to  another  as  in  marriage  ;  so  in  om:  spiritual 
marriage  with  Christ  there  is  a  most  intimate  communion.  3.  In  a  married 
condition,  there  is  a  mutual,  entire  love.  That  is,  loving  the  person  more  than 
the  benefits  received  from  him.  True  love  can  be  satisfied  with  nothing  else 
but  love.  Entire  love  is  a  love  in  all  conditions.  In  love  there  is  unspeakable 
delight.  There  are  two  soul-staying  and  soul-satisfying  grounds  to  assure  of 
Christ's  betrothing  Himself  for  ever.  1.  When  a  soul  is  taken  into  Christ,  it 
receives  not  only  pardon  for  sins  past,  but  there  is  forgiveness  in  store  for  all 
futiure  transgressions.  2.  Another  argument  for  perseverance  is,  that  it  is  a 
spiritual  mercy  purchased  by  Christ,  as  well  as  any  other  grace.  [Jeremiah 
Burroughs.)  God's  love  : — Many  a  heart  has  been  touched  by  that  strange 
story  of  love  of  which  Tennyson  has  written  with  so  much  tenderness.  The 
Lord  of  Burleigh,  disguised  as  a  poor  landscape  painter,  was  captivated  by  the 
beauty  of  a  humble  village  maiden,  and  determined  to  make  her  his  bride. 
But  introduced  to  a  mansion  instead  of  a  cottage,  borne  down  by  the  burden  of 
an  honour  to  which  she  was  never  born,  the  loved  one  pined  away  and  died.  The 
beauty  of  the  bride  explains  this  story  of  love  ;  but  no  such  explanation  can  be 
found  for  the  choice  of  Him  who  says:  "I  will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  for  ever," 
&c.  (Hos.  ii.  19,  20).  This  betrothed  one  had  nothing  to  commend  her  to  the 
notice  of  such  a  Bridegroom  but  her  helplessness,  her  deformity,  her  wretched- 
ness. There  was  no  beauty  in  her  that  He  should  desire  her.  She  was  a  rebel, 
an  alien,  an  outcast ;  yet,  marvel  of  marvels,  "  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the 
earth  "  set  His  love  upon  her.  He  became  poor  that  she  might  become  rich. 
He  bore  her  sin  that  she  might  bear  His  righteousness.  He  bore  her  reproach 
that  she  might  bear  His  glory.  He  gave  Himself  for  her  because  no  less  gift 
would  suflBce  to  lift  her  from  sin  and  place  her  at  His  side.  We  search  in  vain 
for  a  story  of  love  like  this.  It  is  imique,  and  we  think  of  it  till,  with  tear-filled 
eyes  and  trembling  voice,  we  sing — 

*' Jesus,  Thy  boundless  love  to  me 
No  thought  can  reach,  no  tongue  declare." 

(J.  Qrtgory  Mantle.) 

Ver.  20.  I  will  e7en  lietroth  tliee  unto  Me  In  fidthfUness;  and  thou  shalt 
know  the  Lord.  —  The  husband  of  the  Church:  —  I.  The  oondbsoension  ow 
Chbist  en  oallino  Himself  the  husband  or  His  Church.  This  appears 
if  we  consider  that — 1.  She  is  a  debtor.  2.  Deformed  (Isa.  i.  6).  3.  A 
prostitute  (Jer.  iii.  1,  2).    i.  An  enemy.     IL  Ths  raoPSKTiss  or  this  eela- 


CHAP,  n.]  H08EA.  43 

TION.  I.  Eighteousness.  2.  Judgment.  3.  Loving  •  kindness.  4.  Mercies. 
6.  For  ever.  6.  Faithfulness.  III.  Thk  bxpekience  shb  has  of  this  bblation. 
"Thou  ehalt  know."  "Know"  signifies — 1.  To  choose  (Amoe  iii.  2).  2.  To 
delight  in  (Psa.  i.  6).  3.  To  be  familiar  with  (2  Sam.  iii.  25).  (H.  Foster.) 
And  thou  Shalt  know  the  Lord. — Knowing  Jehovah : — We  indeed  see  that  we 
are  in  confusion  as  soon  as  we  turn  aside  from  the  right  and  pure  knowledge 
of  Grod.  Since  then  our  salvation  consists  in  the  light  of  faith,  our  minds 
ought  ever  to  be  directed  to  God,  that  our  union  with  Him,  which  He  hath  formed 
by  the  Gospel,  may  abide  firm  and  permanent.  But  as  this  is  not  in  the  power 
or  will  of  man,  we  draw  this  evident  conclusion  that  God  not  only  offers  His 
grace  in  the  outward  preaching,  but  at  the  same  time  in  the  renewing  of  our 
hearts.  It  is  necessary  that  God  should  work  inwardly  and  efficaciously  on 
our  hearts,  that  His  covenant  may  stand  firm  ;  nay,  since  the  knowledge  of  Him 
is  the  special  gift  of  the  Spirit,  we  may  with  certainty  conclude  that  what  is 
said  here  refers  not  only  to  outward  preaching,  but  that  the  grace  of  the  Spirit 
is  also  joined,  by  which  God  renews  us  after  His  own  image.  The  covenant 
of  God  can  be  strengthened  and  preserved  only  by  the  knowledge  He  conveys 
to  us  of  Himself  by  the  illumination  of  His  Spirit.  (John  Calvin.)  Of  the 
knowledge  of  God  : — There  can  be  no  cordial  obedience  to  God  by  those  v/ho 
are  ignorant  of  Him.  Ignorance  is  not  the  mother  of  devotion,  but  the  parent 
of  superstition  and  idolatry.  An  unknown  person  cannot  be  truly  and  cordially 
loved.  I.  Persons  in  a  natural  and  ttnregeneratb  state  are  destitlttji 
OF  Divine  knowledge.  (Acts  xvii.  30.)  1.  Sin  has  deprived  us  of  com 
munion  with  God,  corrupted  our  nature,  and  darkened  our  understandings  (Eph. 
iv.  18).  2.  This  ignorance  is  increased  by  a  course  of  sinning.  3.  There  is  many 
an  affected  ignorance  which  is  very  criminal.  Men  are  unwilling  to  understand 
what  they  might.  They  love  darkness  rather  than  light.  4.  Some  are  given 
up  to  judicial  blindness  and  hardness  of  heart  (Rom.  i.  28).  Whilst  men 
are  in  this  state  of  darkness,  they  are  ignorant — (1)  Of  God,  His  nature,  and 
perfections.  (2)  Of  Christ,  His  person  and  offices,  and  the  way  of  salvation  hy 
Him.  (3)  Of  the  Spirit  of  God.  (4)  Of  themselves,  and  of  their  state  and  con- 
dition by  nature.  (5)  Of  sin,  and  the  sad  effects  of  it.  (6)  Of  the  sacred  Scrip- 
tures, and  the  truths  contained  in  them.  II.  In  every  regenerate  person 
THERE  IS  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD  AND  OF  DiviNB  THINGS.  Observe — 1.  The  object 
of  it — God.  (1)  There  is  a  knowledge  by  the  light  of  nature,  through  the  works 
of  creation,  which  show  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead  :  and  through  the  works 
of  providence,  by  which  He  has  not  left  Himself  without  a  witness  of  His  being 
and  beneficence.  (2)  There  is  a  knowledge  of  God  by  the  moral  law.  It  came 
by  Moses,  and  it  shows  what  is  His  good  and  perfect  will.  It  is  a  transcript  of 
His  nature.  His  justice  and  holiness.  (3)  There  is  a  knowledge  of  God  which 
comes  by  the  Gospel,  the  doctrine  of  grace  and  truth,  that  is,  by  Christ,  who 
declares  God's  person,  nature,  grace,  mind,  and  will  to  men.  This  knowledge 
of  God  may  be  considered  as  respecting  the  three  Divine  Persons  in  the  Godhead. 
The  knowledge  of  God  is  of  Him  as  Father.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  is  affectionate, 
confidential,  experimental,  and  appropriating.  The  knowledge  of  the  Spirit  is  of 
Him  as  a  Spirit  of  conviction  and  illumination ;  as  the  Comforter  ;  as  the  Spirit  of 
adoption  ;  as  a  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication.  III.  The  nature  and  pro- 
perties OF  this  knowledge.  1.  It  is  practical.  The  mere  theory  of  any  science 
is  of  little  avail.  2.  It  is  of  a  soul-humbling  nature.  Other  knowledge  puffs  up. 
3.  It  is  pleasant,  savoury,  and  satisfying.  4.  It  is  super-excellent.  5.  It  is  but 
imperfect  in  this  life,  yet  it  is  progressive.  (T.  Hannam.)  A  sanctified  know- 
ledge of  Ood : — This  passage  teaches — 1.  God  is  the  undertaker  for,  and  worker 
in  His  people  of  all  that  is  required  on  their  part  for  entering  into,  and  keeping 
covenant  with  Him.  2.  A  right  and  sanctified  knowledge  of  God  is  the  root 
and  companion  of  all  sanctifying  graces  and  covenant  dispositions  ;  therefore 
all  are  comi::rebended  in  this,  to  'know  the  Lord."  Faith  gets  that  name,  not 
only  because  of  the  certitude  and  evidence  it  brings  with  it,  but  because  it  is 
begotten  by  His  Word,  and  by  the  knowledge  of  Him  in  it,  and  is  cherished  and 
confirmed  by  taking  Him  up  stUl  more,  as  He  is  revealed  there.  {George 
Hutcheson.)  ''Thou  shall  know  the  Lord":  the  best  knowledge: — Luther 
described  theology,  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  "  the  queen  of  the  sciences."  And 
in  comparison  with  it,  all  other  knowledge  is  vain.  "  We  have  lost,"  said  Dr. 
Bennett,  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  to  Dr.  Parr,  when  announcing  the  death  of  John 
Cowper,  brother  of  the  poet,  "  the  best  classic  and  most  liberal  thinker  in  tho 


44  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Tiniversity."  What  said  John  C!owper  himself  in  his  dying  hovirs  ?  "I  have 
laboured  day  and  night  to  perfect  myself  in  things  of  no  profit.  I  have  sacrificed 
myself  to  these  pursuits,  and  am  sufiEering  the  consequences  of  my  mis-spent 
labour.  I  wanted  to  be  highly  applauded,  and  was  flattered  up  to  the  height 
of  my  wishes.    Now  I  must  learn  a  new  lesson." 

Vers.  21,  22.  I  will  hear  the  heavens,  and  they  shall  hear  the  earth;  and 
the  earth  shall  hear  the  com,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil;  and  they  shall  hear 
Jezreel. — The  dependence  of  universal  being  upon  a  benignant  providence  : — Jezreel 
(seed  of  God)  was  a  city  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar.  The  valley  in  which  it  stood 
was  remarkable  for  its  fertility.  Jezreel,  in  the  text,  may  be  either  the  valley 
which  bore  the  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  or  the  obedient  part  of  the  nation,  restored 
to  the  country  from  which  they  had  been  carried  away.  One  of  the  characteristics 
of  the  Book  of  Hosea  is  the  frequent  transition  from  the  most  distressful  to  the 
most  delightful  annunciations  of  futurity.  Amid  all  that  was  adapted  to  alarm 
the  disobedient  many,  there  was  a  tender  regard  for  the  consolations  and  hopea 
of  the  pious  few.  The  text  is  a  passage  of  this  description.  It  practically,  yet 
philosophically,  depicts  the  harmony  of  universal  nature,  operating  under  the 
benignant  direction  of  Providence  for  the  good  of  man.  One  seems  to  feel  the 
piety  of  the  sentiment  more  for  this  circuitous  tracing  of  man's  enjoyment  to  his 
Maker's  bounty.  We  find  that  all  second  causes,  tarry  in  them  as  long  as  wo 
will,  and  multiply  them  as  we  may,  yet  must  terminate  in  a  great  first  cause. 
The  Deity  cannot  be  excluded  from  His  o\vn  universe.  The  prophet's  description 
is,  in  the  true  spirit  of  poetry,  the  selection  of  a  particular  instance  which  is  adorned 
with  all  the  beauty  of  imagery,  and  then  put  forward  as  the  illustration  of  a 
princijile.  1.  It  is  the  fact  that  there  is  such  a  connection  as  the  prophet  has 
intimated,  not  only  in  that  particular  case,  but  in  all  the  regions  of  matter  and 
mind,  blending  them  together,  and  making  them  one.  2.  The  influence  of  thia 
fact  upon  our  feelings  and  conduct,  its  righteous  tendency  or  unrighteous 
application,  its  gloom  or  gladness,  must  arise  from  the  notions  of  the  Divine 
character  with  which  it  is  associated  in  our  convictions.  There  is  not  merely 
a  community  of  properties,  but  a  reciprocity  of  influence,  from  the  minutest  to 
the  mightiest  substances,  from  the  nearest  to  the  most  remote,  from  the  grain 
to  the  mass,  from  the  mass  to  the  mountain,  from  the  mountain  to  the  island 
or  continent,  from  that  to  the  solid  globe,  from  our  globe  to  the  solar  system, 
from  that  system  to  other  systems,  having  their  relative  positions  and  com- 
bined movements,  until  it  expands  beyond  our  sense  or  imagination  in  the  multi- 
plicity of  worlds,  and  the  boundlessness  of  space.  This  connection  applies  to 
time  as  well  as  to  space.  In  the  mind  and  life  of  man  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
thoughts  of  the  one  and  the  events  of  the  other  have  a  similar  connection,  and 
are  under  similar  influences.  No  idea  springs  up  in  the  mind  spontaneously, 
without  something  to  introduce  it,  something  which  stands  to  it  in  the  relation 
of  a  cause,  itself  the  effect  of  something  which  preceded.  The  universe  may 
be  regarded  as  a  great  machine,  but  everything  depends  on  our  believing,  or 
not,  that  this  machine  has  a  Mover  and  Maker,  and  on  the  notions  we  enter- 
tain of  His  dispositions  and  designs.  Some  blend  this  fact  with  the  denial  of 
God.  Others  blend  the  fact  with  the  admission  of  a  God,  an  Almighty  Creator, 
but  not  a  God  whose  love  is  the  same  to  all  the  rational  beings  whom  the  system 
brings  into  existence — a  God  who  is  partly  benevolent  and  partly  malignant. 
It  is  the  glory  of  our  faith  to  blend  with  this  fact  the  deepest  conviction  of  the 
universal  love  of  the  Creator.  All  things  lead  us  back  to  God,  the  infinite  good- 
ness. Learn — 1.  A  lesson  of  humility  and  of  gratitude.  2.  A  lesson  of  caution. 
3.  Let  our  devotion  be  universal  as  the  presence  and  influence  of  our  God.  Let 
it  pervade  our  lives.  {J.  R.  Beard.)  Second  causes  : — 1.  God  is  wont  to  work 
good  for  His  people  by  second  causes.  He  sends  not  things  immediately  from 
heaven,  but  the  heavens  hear  the  earth,  and  the  earth  hears  the  corn  and  the 
wine.  We  must  look  to  second  causes,  but  take  heed  of  resting  on  them. 
Though  God  sometimes  works  beyond  means,  and  even  contrary  to  them,  ordin- 
arily He  uses  second  causes.  2.  There  is  a  concatenation  in  second  causes,  and 
not  merely  a  use.  Every  one  in  their  order  ministers  to  the  other.  If  we  could 
f.ee  the  comely  order  of  the  creatures,  we  should  see  them  all  linked  together 
by  a  golden  chain.  3.  Nothing  can  be  done  by  any  link  of  the  chain  of  second 
causes,  but  by  God's  being  at  the  uppermost  link.  4.  It  is  most  comely,  and  a 
great  blessing,  when  the  right  order  and  chain  of  second  causes  hold  :  as  in  nature. 


CHAP,  n.]  HOSEA.  45 

BO  in  any  society,  when  all  preserve  their  due  subordination.  When  they  are 
out  of  order,  it  is  a  great  misery  to  a  city  or  kingdom.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
Family  prayers  : — By  this  very  elaborate  and  poetically  ingenious  figure  the 
prophet  appears  to  be  giving  a  contrived  representation  of  the  fact,  that  when 
God  brings  in  the  promised  day  of  His  universal  reign  on  the  earth,  there  will  be 
a  grand  convergency  of  causes  to  prepare  it,  and,  like  so  many  concurrent  prayers, 
to  make  common  suit  for  it  before  Hira.  Thus  he  figures  the  world  as  being 
the  beautiful  valley  called  Jezreel,  which  is  the  garden,  so  to  speak,  of  the  land. 
And  it  is  to  be  as  when  the  people  of  Jezreel  get  their  harvest,  by  having  every- 
thing in  a  train  of  concurrent  agency  to  prepare  it — they  make  petition  by  their 
careful  tillage  to  the  corn,  the  grapes,  and  olives,  that  they  will  grow  apace  ; 
these  in  turn  make  suit  to  the  earth  to  give  them  nutriment ;  this  again  hears 
them,  and  lifts  its  petition  to  the  heavens,  asking  rain  and  dew  ;  whereupon, 
last  of  all,  the  heavens  hand  up  the  prayers  to  God,  to  furnish  them  water,  and 
let  them  shed  it  down  ;  which  petition  He  graciously  hears,  and  the  harvest 
follows.  So  he  conceives  it  will  be  as  the  harvest  of  the  world  approaches.  It 
will  be  as  if  all  things  were  put  striving  together,  and  a  prayer  were  going  up 
for  it  through  all  the  concurrent  circles  of  providence.  God's  counsel  and  kingdom 
are  constructing  always  a  perfect  harmony,  by  their  convergence  on  His  perfect 
end.  Then,  as  the  perfect  end  is  neared,  and  the  harmony  with  it  grows  com- 
plete, it  will  be  as  if  more  things  were  concurring  in  it,  and  asking  for  it,  and 
prayer,  falling  in  as  a  cause  among  causes,  will  have  them  all  praying  with  it, 
or  handing  up  its  request.  In  which  we  may  see  what  holds  good  of  all  prayer, 
and  how  or  by  what  law  it  prevails.  In  one  view  the  whole  future  is  prayed 
in  by  the  whole  present,  being  such  a  future  as  the  whole  present  demands.  The 
more  things  therefore  prayer  can  get  into  harmony  with  itself  in  its  request, 
the  more  likely  it  is  to  prevail ;  and  the  more  alone  it  is,  and  the  more  things 
it  has  opposite  to  it,  in  the  field  of  causes,  the  less  likely  it  is  to  prevail — even 
as  Adam  had  less  hope  of  success  in  praying  for  Cain,  that  the  blood  of  Abel 
was  crying  to  God  against  him  from  the  ground.  All  prayer  being  under  this 
general  condition,  family  prayer  will  be,  of  course.  I  handle  the  subject  in  this 
form,  in  the  conviction  that  the  prayers  of  families  are  so  often  defeated  by  the 
want  of  any  such  concert  in  the  aims,  plans,  tempers,  works,  and  aspirations 
of  the  house,  as  are  necessary  to  a  common  suit  before  God ;  in  other  words, 
because  the  prayers,  commonly  so  called,  are  defeated  by  the  suit  of  so  many 
causes  contrary  to  them.  I  drop  out  of  notice  family  worship  as  observance, 
and  speak  of  it  only  as  the  open  state  of  prayer  and  communion  with  God  in 
the  house.  I.  The  manner  in  which  prayers  of  all  kinds  get  their  answers 
FROM  God.  Two  things  are  wanted.  1.  That  the  matter  requested  should  agree 
with  God's  beneficent  aims,  or  the  ends  of  good  to  which  His  plans  are  built. 
2.  That  the  prayer  should  agree  with  as  many  other  prayers  and  as  many  other 
circles  of  causes  as  possible  :  for  God  is  working  always  towards  the  largest 
harmony,  and  will  not  favour  therefore  the  prayer  of  words,  when  everything 
else  in  the  life  is  demanding  something  else,  but  will  rather  have  respect  to  what 
has  the  widest  reach  of  things  and  persons  making  suit  with  it.  See  how  it  is 
in  the  great  realm  of  nature.  The  Bible  history,  too,  shows  a  grand  convergency 
of  all  the  matters  included  in  it,  and  a  mysterious  concert  weaves  all  its  facts 
together,  and  keeps  them  working  towards  the  same  result.  In  the  same  way, 
descending  to  a  lower  field,  every  conversion  to  God  takes  place  when  some  largest 
harmony  demands  it.  If  we  come  directly  to  the  matter  of  prayer  itself,  we 
meet  the  promise,  that  "If  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  He  heareth 
us,"  and  "  If  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth  as  touching  anything  that  they 
shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them."  By  the  whole  economy  of  prayer  God 
is  working  toward  the  largest,  most  inclusive  harmony,  and  prayer  is  to  be 
successful  just  according  to  the  amount  of  concurrency  there  is  in  it.  First, 
there  is  to  be  the  completest  possible  concurrency  with  God ;  then  a  concurrency 
of  one  or  two  hundred,  or,  if  so  it  may  be,  two  hundred  millions  of  petitioners 
in  a  common  suit ;  and  then  all  these  are  to  be  total  in  the  suit,  bringing  all  their 
lustings,  affections,  works,  plans,  properties,  and  self-sacrifices  into  the  petition  ; 
whereupon  the  prayer  will  grow  strong,  just  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of 
agreement  or  concurrence  there  is  in  it.  II.  Conditions  of  successful  family 
PRATER.  The  great  infirmity  of  family  prayers,  or  of  what  is  sometimes  called 
family  religion,  is  that  it  stands  alone  in  the  house,  and  has  nothing  put  in  agree- 
ment with  it.     It  ia  a  first  point  of  religion  itself,  that  by  its  very  nature,  it  rules 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

presidingly  ovot  everything  desired,  done,  thought,  planned  for,  and  prayed 
for  in  the  life.  The  mere  observance  kind  of  piety,  that  which  prays  in  the 
family  to  keep  up  a  reverent  show,  or  acknowledgment  of  religion,  is  not  enough. 
It  leaves  everything  else  in  the  life  to  be  an  open  space  for  covetousness  and 
all  the  gay  lustings  of  worldly  vanity.  What  is  prayed  for  in  the  house  by  the 
father,  is  sometimes  not  prayed  for  by  the  mother  in  her  family  tastes  and  tempers. 
It  is  necessary  that  the  practical  ends,  tastes,  plans,  aspirations,  and  works  of 
the  house  should  all  come  into  the  same  circle  of  concert,  and  join  their  petition 
to  reinforce  the  suit  of  the  prayers.  Here  is  the  great  lesson  of  family  religion ; 
it  is  that  religion,  being  the  supreme  end  and  law  of  life,  is  to  have  everything 
put  in  the  largest  possible  harmony  with  it.  {Horace  Bushnell,  D.D.)  The 
chain  of  Messing  : — The  language  of  this  text  is  poetical  and  highly  figurative, 
but  quite  easy  of  comprehension.  Jezreel,  the  seed  of  Grod,  is  the  name  used 
by  this  prophet  to  designate  the  people  of  God.  We  have,  then,  a  picture  of 
the  whole  process  by  which  God  answers  His  people  when  they  pray,  '  Give  us 
this  day  our  daOy  bread."  The  passage  is  not  only  beautiful,  but  suggestive. 
Its  range  is  very  wide.  It  leads  all  rVjng  the  chain  of  effect  and  cause,  from 
man  through  nature  up  to  God.  Beginning  at  the  lower  extremity,  we  find 
ourselves  first  in  the  wide  and  busy  domain  of  political  economy,  with  its  two 
branches  of  production  and  distribution.  Stepping  upwards,  we  reach  the  sphere 
of  natural  science,  and  the  highest  raises  us  to  the  lofty  regions  of  theology.  We 
begin,  however,  with  the  highest  link.  1.  However  many  links  may  seem  to 
intervene  in  nature's  chain,  if  followed  up,  it  always  leads  to  God  at  last.  If 
the  harvest  came  by  some  process  of  evolution,  whence  came  the  process  of 
evolution  ?  We  may  carry  back  the  chain  of  second  causes  as  far  as  we  may, 
we  shall  always  find  the  farthest  link  fastened  to  the  throne  of  the  Omnipotent. 
2.  It  is  God  that  hears,  not  only  at  the  extremity  of  the  chain,  but  through  it 
all,  between  each  separate  link,  however  long  it  may  be.  Not  only  is  God  the 
First  Cause,  He  is  in  all  intermediate  causes  too.  We  speak  of  "laws,"  laws  of 
natvire.  But  who  made  the  laws  ?  And  who  enforces  the  laws  ?  There  must 
be  power  to  do  this.  Where  is  it  ?  What  a  remarkable  thing  is  the  regular 
proportion  between  what  is  produced  and  what  is  needed  for  consumption  in 
a  given  year.  The  whole  thing  is  left  to  individual  choice,  there  must  therefore 
be  some  power  at  work  to  preserve  the  necessary  equilibrium.  There  is  the 
law  of  supply  and  demand  to  regulate  this.  But  this  law,  like  all  other  laws, 
implies  a  lawgiver.  It  implies  a  power  above  ourselves.  3.  Food  is  produced 
where  population  is  scanty,  it  is  wanted  mainly  where  population  is  dense.  Whately 
says,  "  Man's  foresight  often  gets  the  credit  for  what  is  due  to  God's  wisdom." 
All  the  foresight  of  man  would  fail  for  a  work  so  stupendous  as  this.  Many  have 
the  idea  that  the  farmer  is  more  dependent  on  the  Divine  power  than  the  artisan 
and  the  manufacturer.  It  is  a  mistake.  The  chain  along  which  we  derive  oiur 
manufactured  goods  from  the  Giver  of  all  good  may  be  longer  than  the  other, 
but  God  is  just  as  surely  at  the  upper  end  of  it,  and  in  each  intermediate  link. 
No  machine  can  produce  power.  All  the  force  which  is  used  in  all  our  factories 
is  ultimately  traceable  to  the  sun.  It  was  the  sun  which,  millions  of  years  ago, 
poured  its  rays  on  the  luxurious  vegetation  of  the  carboniferous  era,  and  filled 
it  full  of  a  latent  force,  which,  after  the  leaves  and  stems  and  roots  containing 
it  had  been  pressed  and  hardened  and  blackened  underground,  should  be  avail- 
able to  those  who,  in  future  ages,  should  dig  it  up  as  coal,  and  use  it  to  heat 
their  houses  and  drive  their  engines.  Our  manufactures  as  our  agriculture  are 
/  of  God,  and  of  Him  only.  (J.  Monro  Gibson,  D.D.)  The  promise  of  plenty  .• — 
'  1.  While  the  Lord's  people  are  within  time,  they  may  read  their  own  frailty 
in  needing  so  many  things  to  uphold  even  their  outward  man.  2.  Outward 
mercies  do  so  far  follow  on  the  covenant  as  the  confederate  may  be  free  of  fear 
and  anxiety  about  them.  Albeit  the  Lord  do  not  always  see  it  meet  to  heap 
plenty  of  com  and  wine  and  oil  upon  His  people,  yet  they  have  as  much  as,  with 
godliness  and  contentment,  may  suffice.  When  they  seek  the  best  things,  other 
things  will  certainly  be  added.  3.  God  is  so  tender  a  respecter  of  necessities 
that  He  hath  an  ear  to  hear  the  dumb  cries  of  very  insensible  creatures  in  their 
need.  4.  God's  reconciled  people  are  to  read,  not  only  God's  love  in  their  plenty, 
but  that  all  the  creation  do,  in  their  kind,  with  a  good  will,  concur  to  serve  him 
who  is  now  at  peace  with  his  Maker.  5.  The  Lord  sets  a  mark  of  excellency  upon 
man,  and  especially  upon  His  Church,  in  that  so  many  things  concur  to  serve 
them  and  provide  for  them.     6.  Whatever  it  be  that  one  creature  affords  unto 


CHAP,  n.]  ROSEA.  47 

another,  or  may  be  in  the  course  of  nature  expected  from  it,  yet  every  creature 
in  itself  is  empty,  and  must  be  supplied  by  God  before  it  satisfy  any.  7.  As  the 
Lord  is  not  to  be  tempted,  but  waited  on  in  His  established  order  for  anything, 
so  we  are  not  to  rest  on  any  such  order  or  course  of  nature,  but  to  see  Grod's  hand 
in  it,  who  establisheth  and  blesseth  it  for  such  ends.  8.  The  Lord's  former  sad 
dispositions  towards  His  people  will  not  hinder  Him  to  change  His  dealing ;  but 
He  will  make  His  kindness  so  much  the  sweeter.  (George  Hutcheson.)  God 
and  His  universe : — I.  The  opekations  of  the  universe  aeb  xtnder  the 
INTELLIGENT  DIRECTION  OF  THE  GREAT  GoD.  The  Universe  is  here  represented 
as  in  action.  There  is  nothing  stationary ;  all  things  are  full  of  labour.  The  uni- 
verse is  not  a  self-acting  machine,  left  to  itself  to  work  out.  The  great  Machinist 
is  ever  with  it,  observing  and  directing  every  motion.  This  fact  serves  several 
important  purposes.  1.  To  account  for  the  unbroken  order  of  nature.  2.  To 
impress  us  with  the  sanctity  of  nature.  3.  To  inspire  us  with  reverence  towards 
the  greatness  of  God.  II.  That  the  operations  of  the  universe  are  generally 
CONDUCTED  ON  THE  MEDIATORY  PRINCIPLE.  "  I  wiU  hear  the  heavens,"  &c. 
Look  at  this  mediatory  principle  in  its  relation  to  man — 1.  As  a  material  being. 
How  did  we  receive  these  corporeal  frames :  how  are  they  sustained ;  how  are 
they  broken  up  ?  2.  As  a  spiritual  being.  How  does  knowledge  come  to  man  ? 
He  has  teachers.  III.  The  operations  of  the  universe  are  mercifully" 
SUBORDINATED  TO  THE  INTERESTS  OF  THE  GOOD.  Jezreel,  or  the  children  of 
God,  receive  from  God  three  things.  L  The  blessings  they  devoutly  sought. 
2.  The  multiplication  of  their  number.  3.  The  heightening  of  the  sympathy 
between  them  and  God.  "  I  will  call  them  My  people."  (Homilist.)  And 
they  shall  hear  Jezreel.  —  The  avdience  of  Jezreel :  —  The  prophet  refers, 
under  the  symbolic  title  Jezreel,  to  God's  own  faithful  people,  the  undefiled 
remnant  of  Israel ;  those  who  were  brought  back  to  their  own  land  after  the 
captivity  in  Babylon.  In  a  larger  sense  we  are  to  understand  the  passage  aa 
a  prophecy  of  the  blessings  which  such  of  the  Jews  as  accept  our  Lord  Christ, 
and  those  of  the  Gentiles  who  believe  in  Him,  shall  enjoy  under  the  Gospel. 
I.  The  way  in  which  God  promises  to  be  gracious  to  His  people  at  the 
LAST.  He  will  deal  with  them  through  a  chain  of  intermediate  agencies.  1.  Super- 
ficially the  text  is  but  a  poetic  way  of  saying  that  all  the  universe  shall  unite  to 
help  the  people  of  God.  2.  The  deeper  thought  is,  that  in  this  mode  of  due  order 
and  proportion,  having  respect  to  the  fitness  of  all  things  which  He  has  made, 
God  rules  the  universe,  albeit  for  the  sake  of  His  people.     11.  The  broad  and 

ALL-EMBRACING  METHOD  OF  THE  DiVINE  OPERATION  OUGHT  TO  BE  A  GREAT  STRENGTH 

TO  US  IN  TIMES  OF  DISCOURAGEMENT  AND  DOUBT.  The  tendency  of  modem 
life  seems  to  be  to  make  men  pessimistic.  It  seems  as  if  the  enormous  natural 
forces  brought  out  into  the  light,  and  harnessed  to  work  man's  will  for  him, 
had  somehow  paralysed  our  human  instincts.  Human  life  seems  to  be  becoming 
more  and  more  but  the  life  of  a  machine.  God  has  promised  to  hear  our  prayers, 
but  only  on  the  condition  that  we  approach  Him  in  the  way  He  has  appointed. 
{Catholic  Champion.) 

Ver.  23.   And    I   will    sow   her    unto    Me    in    the    earth. — God's  sowing : — 

1.  These  words  refute  pantheism.  God  is  not  natm-e,  nor  is  nature  God. 
Pantheism  teaches  that  there  is  no  real  and  practical  distinction  between  God  and 
the  universe.  This  form  of  infidelity  ignores  evil  as  evil,  and  all  moral  responsi- 
bility, for  it  declares  that  the  soul  is  only  a  mode  of  the  thought  of  God. 
II.  These  words  declare  the  Divine  personality.  Only  on  belief  in  a  personal 
God  can  any  sound  superstructure  of  religion  be  raised.  Ill,  These  words 
show  the  abiding  connection  between  God  and  His  works.  The  Bible 
invariably  attributes  the  operations  of  nature  to  the  energy  of  God.  IV.  These 
words  show  that  the  universe  is  the  friend  of  the  PRAYiNa  SOUL.  One 
part  of  the  universe  is  here  represented  as  related  to  and  acting  upon  another 
on  behalf  of  Jezreel.  All  the  forces  of  nature  are  arrayed  against  the  disturber 
of  the  harmony  of  God's  kingdom.  V.  These  words  teach  that  God  will 
REALLY  answer  PRAYER.  The  auswcrs  are,  "  I  will  sow  her  unto  Me."  "  I 
will  have  mercy  upon  her."  "  Thou  art  My  people."  The  infinite  God  gives 
Himself  to  the  soul,  and  becomes  its  present  and  eternal  portion.  (Christian 
Age.)        God's  people  as  seeds: — 1.  God's  people  are  the  seed  of  the  earth. 

2.  Every  godly  man  should  so  live  as,  either  in  life  or  in  death,  to  be  as  a  seed 
from  whence  many  should  spring.     3.  The  saints  are  sown  unto  Christ,  they 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

are  seed  for  Christ,  therefore  all  their  fruit  must  be  consecrated  to  Christ. 
(Jeremiah  Burroug?is.)  Hope  for  the  forsaken  : — All  the  brighter  side  of  the 
prophetic  message  is  summed  up  in  the  most  wonderful  way  in  this  verse,  and 
there  are  few  verses  even  in  the  Bible  itself,  so  crowded  with  significance.  Hosea 
sums  up  all  that  he  himself  had  said,  all  that  he  had  been  teaching  for  some  seven 
years.  It  is  God  whom  he  represents  as  speaking  these  weighty  and  matterful 
words : — "  And  I  will  sow  (an  allusion,  of  course,  to  the  meaning  of  Jezreel — 
'God's  sowing ')  her  (the  impersonated  people  of  Israel)  unto  Me"  (sow,  and  no 
longer  scatter) ;  and  "  I  will  have  pity  "  upon,  *'  not  pitied  "  ;  and  I  will  say 
unto  "  Not  My  people,"  "  Thou  art  My  people  "  ;  and  she  shall  say  to  Me,  "  My 
God."  Obviously,  so  soon  as  we  can  read  the  verse  aright,  we  find  in  it  the  names 
of  all  Hosea's  chUdren,  and  the  whole  significance  of  his  prophetic  message.  On 
the  one  hand,  we  are  reminded  of  the  time  in  which  Israel  was  scattered  for  their 
guilt  among  the  heathen,  the  time  in  which  God  refused  to  pity  them,  or  to 
acknowledge  them  as  His  own  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  reminded  of  the 
better  time  in  which,  instead  of  being  God-scattered,  unpitied,  and  not  My 
people,  they  were  called  God-sown,  pitied,  and  sons  of  the  living  God  ;  when 
the  heavens  smiled  upon  them,  and  the  earth  gave  them  her  increase,  and  all 
the  forces  of  nature,  once  so  hostile,  were  at  peace  with  them.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
I  will  say  to  them  who  were  not  My  people,  Thou  axt  My  people;  and 
they  shall  say,  Thou  art  my  God.  —  Sinners  owning  a  covenant  God :  — 
Read  in  the  light  of  the  context,  these  words  seem  to  refer  to  the  nation  of 
Israel  only.  But  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
Paul  quotes  them  as  having  a  more  comprehensive  reference.  He  there  applies 
them  to  the  "  vessels  of  mercy,"  who  are  "  called  "  in  the  Gospel  day,  "  not  of  the 
Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gentiles."  These  words  foretell  the  formation  of  a 
gracious  relation  between  God  and  sinners,  and  the  mutual  acknowledgment  of 
that  relation.  On  His  side  He  shall  own  the  outcasts  as  His  people.  On  their 
side  they  shall  own  Him  as  their  God.  What  is  implied  in  sinners  saying  to 
Jehovah,  "  Thou  art  my  God  "  ?  I.  The  gracious  relation  thus  acknowledged. 
1.  And  fixst  of  all,  it  is  a  new  covenant  relation.  Naturally,  as  is  here  intimated, 
we  are  "  not  "  the  people  of  God.  When  the  covenant  which  He  made  with  us  in 
Adam,  our  representative,  was  broken,  we  ceased  to  be  His  people  and  He  ceased 
to  be  our  God.  We,  by  wilful  apostasy,  have  cast  Him  off ;  and  He,  in  holy  and 
righteous  displeasure,  has  cast  us  off.  Our  carnal  minds  are  enmity  against  Him, 
and  His  law  has  only  condemnation  and  death  for  us.  We  are  miserable  outcasts 
from  our  Maker.  We  are  "  without  God  in  the  world."  But  He  has  made  a 
covenant  with  His  Chosen :  and  in  that  new  and  better  covenant  He  has  made 
provision  that  the  gracious  relation  so  fearfully  ruptured  shall  be  more  than 
restored.  He  has  covenanted  with  His  only  begotten  Son,  as  the  Head  of  an 
innumerable  midtitude  of  our  outcast  race,  that  on  condition  of  His  assuming 
their  nature  and  doing  all  His  will  in  their  redemption  He  will,  in  a  very  special 
and  gracious  sense,  be  a  God  to  Him,  and  in  the  same  special  and  gracious  sense 
be  a  God  to  them.  2.  In  this  new  covenant  relation,  as  willing  to  be  our  God 
in  Christ,  God  offers  Himself  to  us  imconditionaUy  and  individually  in  the  Gospel. 
It  was  such  aja  offer  of  Himself  He  made  to  the  Israelites  when,  from  the  summit 
of  the  flaming  mount,  He  proclaimed,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  have  brought 
thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  It  was  God  in  the 
person  of  Christ,  as  we  learn  from  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  38),  who  there  announced 
His  willingness  to  be  the  God  of  Abraham's  seed.  And  to  these  sinners,  deeply 
infected  as  they  were  soon  to  show,  with  the  idolatry  and  moral  corruption  of 
Egypt,  that  was  a  most  free  offer  ;  and  it  is  expressed  in  absolute  and  uncon- 
ditional terms,  clogged  with  no  condition  of  any  sort  whatever.  It  was  also  an 
individual  offer,  made  to  every  Israelite  in  the  camp  without  exception,  so  that 
every  soul  in  all  that  host,  the  vilest  and  most  abject  was  warranted  as  much  aa 
Moses  and  Aaron,  to  close  with  it,  and  on  the  ground  of  it  to  take  Jehovah  as  his 
owni  personal  God.  Now  we  are  most  earnest  you  should  realise  this  day  that 
God  is  making  to  each  one  of  you,  through  Clirist,  the  same  absolutely  free  and 
gracious  offer  to  be  your  God.  Only  with  this  great  difference,  that  He  is  making 
it  not  from  "  the  mount  tliat  might  be  touched  and  that  biu-ned  with  fire,  and  from 
blackness,  and  darkness,  and  tempest  " — not  from  among  that  dark  obscurity 
of  type,  and  rigour  of  ordinance  and  law  tending  to  bondage  and  fear,  which 
beset  the  revelation  of  covenant  mercy  and  love  under  the  old  economy,  but  in 
the  clecir  sweet  light  of  the  risen  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  through  the  lips  of 


CHAP,  n.]  HOSEA.  49 

ambassadors  whom  He  has  sent  to  beseech  you  in  Christ's  stead  to  be  reconciled 
to  Him.  "  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  Me  :  hear,  and  yotir  soul  shall  live  ; 
andJI  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the  siu-e  mercies  of  David  " 
(Isa.  Iv.  3).  3.  For,  be  it  remarked  further,  that  while  God  offers  Himself  in 
this  relation  to  all.  He  actually  gives  Himself  in  this  relation  to  those  who  are 
made  willing  by  His  Spirit  to  close  with  the  offer  by  faith.  This  highest  and 
holiest  of  covenant  unions,  like  every  other  covenant  union,  is  formed  by  mutual 
consent.  Thus  the  sons  of  the  stranger  are  said  to  "  join  themselves  to  the  Lord,'* 
in  the  way  of  "  taking  hold  of  His  covenant  "  :  in  doing  which  they  first  take  hold 
of  Christ  the  Surety  of  the  Covenant  with  the  grasp  of  a  living  and  entire  faith  when 
brought  near  them  in  the  Gospel ;  and  then,  in  and  through  Christ,  they  take 
hold  of  the  God  of  the  covenant,  and  enter  into  all  the  fulness  of  His  covenanted 
love  and  grace  (Rom.  iii.  29,  30).  And  mark  how  faith  avails  to  bring  the  guiltiest 
and  vilest  into  all  the  good  and  blessedness  of  this  endearing  relation  to  Jehovah. 
Faith,  laying  hold  of  Christ,  unites  us  to  Him.  It  makes  us  so  vitally  one  with 
Him  that  we  participate  in  all  the  boundless  merit  of  His  righteousness.  And, 
having  Christ's  righteousness  as  our  own,  there  is  no  more  any  legal  obstacle  to 
keep  us  outcasts  from  God.  4.  For  observe  yet  again,  that  in  this  relation  God 
gives  Himself  to  believing  sinners  in  all  He  is  and  all  He  has.  "  He  is  not  ashamed 
to  be  called  their  God  "  (Heb.  xi.  16).  And  why  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their 
God  ?  It  is  because  He  acts  toward  them  with  a  Divine  munificence  worthy  of 
Himself,  glorifying  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace  in  giving  them  not  this  or 
that  kind  and  measure  of  good,  but  in  giving  them  Himself,  the  Fountain  and 
Centre  of  all  good.  Think  of  the  ineffable  dignity  and  privilege  of  being  able  to 
say  of  Him  whom  angels  count  it  their  supreme  happiness  to  adore,  He  is  my 
God ;  mine  in  all  His  essential  perfections  :  His  wisdom  mine,  to  enlighten  and 
guide  me ;  His  power  mine,  to  uphold  and  protect  me  ;  His  holiness  mine,  to 
raise  me  to  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the  light ;  His  justice  mine,  to  guard  me 
as  one  of  Christ's  ransomed  ones,  and  to  guarantee  to  me  all  the  inheritance  He  haa 
purchased  with  His  blood ;  His  truth  mine,  to  fulfil  to  me  every  word  He  has 
spoken  and  every  expectation  and  longing  His  Spirit  has  wakened  within  me ; 
His  love  mine,  to  delight  in  me  and  rejoice  over  me  to  do  me  good  ;  His  infinitude 
mine,  to  be  the  measure  of  the  good  and  the  blessedness  which  I  have  in  Him ; 
and  His  eternity  mine,  to  be  the  duration  through  which  it  shall  all  be  enjoyed. 
"  All  things  are  yours  ;  whether  Paul,  or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life, 
or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come  ;  aU  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's, 
and  Christ  is  God's  '  (1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23).  Can  you  contemplate  this,  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light,  without  exclaiming,  "  Happy  is  the  people  whose  God  is  the 

Lord  "  ?      II.    What   is    implied    in   the    ACKNOWIiBDGMENT   OF   THIS    EELATIOKr 

WHICH  OXTR  TEXT  FOBETELLS  ?  It  is,  as  WO  have  hinted,  a  divinely  wrought 
acknowledgment.  Neither  reason,  nor  conscience,  nor  moral  suasion,  though 
that  were  put  forth  with  the  tongue  of  an  angel,  will  persuade  the  soul  in  its  natural 
hatred  and  fear  and  distrust  of  God  to  make  it.  It  is  the  response  of  the  new- 
born nature  to  the  call  of  the  Spirit  of  God  within.  I.  It  implies,  first  of  all,  the 
believing  personal  acceptance  of  the  offer  which  God  makes  of  Himself  to  sinners 
indefinitely  and  individually  in  the  Gospel.  Proud  unbelief,  putting  on  the 
deceitful  guise  of  humility,  may  tell  you  that  it  is  presumption  for  such  as  you  to 
claim  Jehovah  as  yovir  God.  You  virtually  say  by  that  refusal  that  all  His  pro- 
fessed love  and  goodwill  toward  you  is  insincere,  that  His  word  is  not  faithful  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation.  2.  This  acknowledgment  implies,  further,  the  taking 
of  God  as  our  only  and  all-sufficing  portion.  Naturally,  our  carnal  hearts  will  not 
have  God  for  their  portion.  They  that  are  after  the  flesh  do  mind  the  things  of 
the  flesh.  But  these  earthly  things  can  no  more  satisfy  the  nature  and  cravings 
of  the  spiritual  essence  within  us  than  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat  could 
satisfy  the  prodigal.  Deeply  and  unfeignedly  that  sinner  grieves  that,  in  following 
lying  vanities,  he  should  so  long  have  forsaken  his  own  mercies.  But  in  pro- 
portion to  the  shame  and  sorrow  of  his  penitence  is  his  satisfaction  that  in  Christ, 
and  God  in  Him,  he  has  found  at  last  the  good,  the  rest,  the  home  of  his  heart. 
3.  Again,  this  acknowledgment  implies  the  surrender  of  ourselves  to  God  as  our 
Lawgiver  and  King  and  the  great  End  of  our  being.  If  we  naturally  dislike  God 
as  our  portion,  we  still  more  dislike  the  thought  of  entire  subjection  to  Him  aa 
our  King.  Many,  indeed,  would  wish  to  enjoy  His  favour  and  His  benefits, 
provided  that,  free  from  His  holy  authority  and  control,  they  could  get  following 
their  carnal  inclinations  and  living  as  they  list.     But  this  will  not  do.     It  is  aa 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in 

eternal  moral  impossibility.  God  must  change  His  nature  and  reverse  all  the 
laws  of  His  moral  government  ere  He  can  make  you  happy  while  yon  are  un- 
willing to  be  holy,  and  ere  you  can  enjoy  Him  as  your  portion  while  you  will  not 
know,  obey,  and  submit  to  His  will,  in  all  things,  as  your  Lawgiver  and  King. 
And  most  certainly  on  these  terms  you  can  never  enter  the  bond  of  His  covenant 
(Heb.  viii.  10).  The  true-hearted  covenanter  is  well  pleased  with  God's  covenant 
in  all  respects.  He  delights  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  after  the  inward  man  (Psa. 
cxix.  140).  He  feels  that  God  has  infinite  claims  upon  the  love  and  loyalty 
of  his  heart  and  the  perfect  obedience  of  his  life.  As  He  who  made  him,  and 
made  him  a  rational  and  immortal  being  responsible  to  Himself ;  as  He  who  has 
made  goodness  and  mercy  to  follow  him  through  all  his  sinful  days  when  he  would 
have  been  honoured  in  shutting  him  up  in  hefl  ;  as  He  who  has  redeemed  his  life 
from  destruction  with  the  blooa  of  His  Own  Son,  and  hid  his  life  with  Christ  in 
Himself  forever — he  feels  that  He  has  claims  upon  him  which  the  love  and  never- 
ceasing  service  of  eternity  shall  fail  to  discharge,  but  which  shall  rather  ever  grow 
in  a  still  accumulating  debt.  4.  In  a  word,  this  acknowledgment  implies  the 
explicit  and  formal  devotement  of  ourselves  to  Grod.  They  "  shall  say.  Thou 
art  my  God."  Not  merely  think  it  or  feel  it,  but  say  it.  Say  it  explicitly,  formally, 
solemnly.  With  the  heart  he  believeth  unto  righteousness,  and  with  the  mouth 
he  makes  confession  unto  salvation.  Such  an  avowed  devotement  of  ourselves 
to  God  is  really  made  in  all  spiritual  worship.  In  all  true  prayer  there  is  an 
owning  of  God's  sovereignty  and  of  our  dependence  which  says,  "Thou  art  my 
God."  In  aU  true  praise  there  is  an  owning  of  God's  goodness  and  of  our  obliga- 
tions which  says,  "  Thou  art  my  God."  But  the  honour  of  God,  the  promptings 
of  the  new  nature,  and  the  necessity  of  binding  ovu*  wayward  hearts  by  the  firmest 
and  closest  of  bonds,  demand  that  this  avouching  of  the  Lord  to  be  our  God  should 
be  made  in  the  most  explicit  and  pubhc  manner  possible  to  man  (Isa.  xliv.  3-6). 
{Original  Secession  Magazine.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Veb.  1.  According  to  the  love  of  the  Lord  toward  the  children  of  Israel. 

• — Love  in  chastisement : — The  substance  of  this  chapter  is,  that  it  was  God's 
purpose  to  keep  in  firm  hope  the  minds  of  the  faithful  during  the  Exile, 
lest  being  overwhelmed  with  despair  they  should  wholly  faint.  The  prophet 
had  before  spoken  of  God's  reconciliation  with  His  people ;  and  He  magnificently 
extoUed  that  favour  when  He  said,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  in  the  valley  of  Achor,  I  will 
restore  to  you  the  abundance  of  all  blessings ;  in  a  word,  ye  shall  be  in  all 
respects  happy."  But,  in  the  meantime,  the  daily  misery  of  the  people  continued. 
God  had  indeed  determined  to  remove  them  into  Babylon.  They  might  therefore 
have  despaired  under  that  calamity,  as  though  every  hope  of  deliverance  were 
wholly  taken  from  them.  Hence  the  prophet  now  shows  that  God  would  so 
restore  the  people  to  favour,  as  not  immediately  to  blot  out  every  remembrance 
of  His  wrath,  but  that  His  purpose  was  to  continue  for  a  time  some  measure  of 
His  severity.  We  hence  see  that  this  prediction  occupies  a  middle  place  between 
the  denunciation  the  prophet  previovisly  pronounced  and  the  promise  of  pardon. 
It  was  a  dreadful  thing  that  God  should  divorce  His  people,  and  cast  away  the 
Israelites  as  spurious  children;  but  a  consolation  was  afterwards  added.  But 
lest  the  Israelites  should  think  that  God  would  immediately,  as  on  the  first  day, 
be  so  propitious  to  them  as  to  visit  them  with  no  chastisement,  it  was  the  prophet's 
design  expressly  to  correct  the  mistake,  as  though  he  had  said,  "  God  will  indeed 
receive  you  again,  but  in  the  meantime  a  chastisement  is  prepared  for  you,  which 
by  its  intenseness  would  break  down  your  spirits,  were  it  not  that  this  comfort 
will  ease  you,  and  that  is,  that  God,  though  He  punishes  you  for  your  sins,  yet 
continues  to  provide  for  your  salvation,  and  to  be,  as  it  were,  your  husband." 
When  God  humbles  us  by  adversities,  when  He  shows  to  us  some  tokens  of  severity 
and  wrath,  we  cannot  but  instantly  fail,  were  not  this  thought  to  occur  to  tis, 
that  God  loves  us,  even  when  He  is  severe  towards  us,  and  that  though  He  seems 
to  cast  us  away,  we  are  not  yet  altogether  aliens,  for  He  retains  some  a'  ection. 


CHAP,  ra.]  ROSEA.  61 

even  in  the  midst  of  His  wrath ;  so  that  He  is  to  us  as  a  husband,  though  He 
admits  us  not  immediately  into  conjugal  honoiu-,  nor  restores  us  to  our  u)rmer 
rank.  So  we  see  how  the  doctrine  is  to  be  applied  to  ourselves.  (John  Calvin.) 
Cfod'a  forgiving  love : — I  once  visited  the  ruins  of  a  noble  city  on  a  desert  oeisis. 
Mighty  columns  of  roofless  temples  stood  in  file.  Gateways  of  carved  stone  led 
to  a  paradise  of  bats  and  owls.  All  was  ruin.  But  past  the  dismantled  city, 
brool^,  which  had  once  flowed  through  gorgeous  flower  gardens,  still  swept  on 
in  undying  music  and  freshness.  The  waters  were  just  as  sweet  as  when  queens 
quaffed  them  two  thousand  years  ago.  And  so  God's  forgiving  love  flows  in 
ever-renewed  form  through  the  wreck  of  the  past.  (T.  O.  Sdhy.)  The  love 
of  Ood : — The  dark  sad  story  which  Hosea  pathetically  shadows  forth  in  his  first 
three  chapters  taught  him  the  chief  lesson  of  his  life.  For  he  accepted  God'a 
dealings  with  him,  and  found  that  though  the  chastening  was  grievous,  it  brought 
forth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  in  his  soul.  By  virtue  of  his  holy  sub- 
missiveness  he  became  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  and  in  the  fall,  the 
punishment,  and  the  amendment  of  an  adulterous  wife,  he  saw  a  symbol  of  God's 
ways  with  sinful  men.  For  the  lesson  which  he  learnt  was  this.  If  the  love  of 
man  can  be  so  deep,  how  unfathomable,  how  eternal  must  be  the  love  of  God  I 
First  of  all  the  prophets  he  rises  to  the  sublime  height  of  calling  the  affection 
with  which  Jehovah  regards  His  people  "  love."  In  Amos  Grod  is  beneficent, 
and  knows  Israel;  in  Joel  God  is  glorious  and  merciful;  but  Hosea  introduces 
a  new  theological  idea  into  Hebrew  prophecy  when  he  ventures  to  name  the  love 
of  God.  Hence,  Prof.  Davidson,  referring  to  Duhm,  says :  "  Amos  is  the  prophet 
of  morality,  of  human  right,  of  the  ethical  order  in  human  life ;  but  Hosea  is  a 
prophet  of  religion."  And  to  what  unknown  depths  cannot  God's  love  pierce! 
Agonising  experience  had  taught  him  that  human  love,  so  poor,  so  frail,  so  mixed 
with  selfishness — human  love,  whose  wings  are  torn  and  soiled  so  easily,  and  which 
droops  before  wrong  like  a  flower  at  the  breath  of  a  sirocco, — even  human  love, 
though  disgraced  by  faithlessness,  though  dragged  through  the  mire  of  shame, 
can  still  survive.  Must  not  this  then  be  so  with  the  unchangeable  love  of  God  T 
If  Hosea  could  still  love  the  guilty  and  thankless  woman,  would  not  God  still  love 
the  guilty  and  thankless  nation,  and  by  analogy  the  guilty  and  thankless  soul  T 
That  is  why,  again  and  again,  the  voice  of  menace  breaks  into  sobs,  and  the 
funeral  anthem  is  drowned,  as  it  were,  in  angel  melodies.  He  saw  the  decadence 
and  doom  of  Ephraim ;  he  saw  king  after  king  perish  by  war  and  murder ;  he 
heard  the  thundering  march  of  the  Assyrian  shake  the  ground  from  far ;  he  Imew 
that  the  fate  of  Samaria  should  be  the  fate  of  Beth-arbel ;  and  yet,  in  spite  of 
all,  in  his  last  chapter  his  style  ceases  to  be  obscure,  rugged,  enigmatical,  oppressed 
with  heavy  thoughts ;  and  to  this  doomed  people  he  still  can  say,  as  the  message 
of  Jehovah,  "  I  will  love  them  freely,  for  Mine  anger  is  turned  away."  It  is  so 
intolerable  to  the  prophet  to  regard  Grod's  alienation  from  His  people  as  final, 
that  from  the  first  he  intimates  the  belief  that  they  would  repent  and  be  forgiven, 
and  become  numberless  as  the  sands  of  the  sea,  and  that  Judah — of  whom  at 
first  he  thought  more  favourably  than  at  a  later  time — shall  be  joined  with  them 
under  a  single  king.  (Dean  Farrar,  D.D.)  Who  look  to  other  gods,  and 
love  flagons  of  wSie.  —  Idolatry  and  sdf-indtdgence : — The  connection  here 
pointed  out  between  the  idolatry  of  heart  that  seeks  after  other  gods,  and  the 
aelf-indulgence  in  life  that  seeks  after  flagons — large  quantities — of  wine,  is  so 
truly  universal,  through  all  the  ages  it  has  been  in  evidence,  and  even  now  it 
constantly  reappears,  so  that  it  may  be  regarded  as  necessary  and  essential.  All 
natxu*e  religions,  all  pagan  religions,  all  heathen  religions  are  sensuous  and  sensuaL 
All  philosophical  religions  are,  though  in  more  subtle  forms,  sensuous,  as  may 
be  illustrated  in  the  personal  history  of  Comte  the  positivist.  It  would  be  possible 
very  widely  to  illustrate  this  fact.  But  when  it  is  established,  and  the  strongly 
marked  contrast  of  the  Jehovah  and  the  Christian  religions  is  pointed  out,  it 
remains  to  be  considered  why  this  connection  between  two  apparently  unrelated 
things  should  have  become  established.  Two  reasons  may  be  suggested. 
I.  All  other  eelioions  savb  the  Jehovah  religion  are  human  inventions. 
They  therefore  tend  to  foster  the  pride  of  man,  to  strengthen  his  self-will,  and 
encourage  him  in  doing  what  he  likes.  Jehovah  religion,  being  authoritative 
revelation,   brings  man's  will  into  subjection  and  obedience.     U.  All  other 

RELIGIONS   ARE,    IN    ONE   FORM    OR   ANOTHER,   NATURE   RELIGIONS.       And    the   rOOt 

idea  of  nature  religions  is  the  glorifying  of  sexual  relations.  The  worship 
is  virtual  sensual  indulgence,  and  thus   all  forms  of  sensual  indulgence  are 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

encouraged.  The  Jehovah  religion  alone  recjuirea  righteousness  and  purity. 
{Robert  Tuck,  B.A.) 

Ver.  2.  And  for  an  homer  of  barley. — Barley  a  mean  food:  —  Why  an 
*'  homer  of  barley  "  ?  Because  it  was  a  mean  food,  and  in  those  times  rather 
the  food  of  beasts  than  of  men.  God  promised  to  feed  His  people  with  the  finest 
of  the  wheat.  Feeding  with  barley  signifies  the  mean  condition  in  which  the  Ten 
Tribes,  and  afterwards  the  Jews,  should  be,  till  Christ  came  to  marry  them  to 
Himself.  1.  They  should  be  in  a  contemptible  condition,  they  should  be  valued 
at  but  half  the  price  of  a  slave.  2.  They  should  be  fed  but  meanly  and  basely, 
even  as  slaves,  or  rather  as  beasts ;  this  homer  and  a  half  of  barley  should  be 
for  their  sustenance.  This  not  only  referred  to  the  time  of  their  captivity  before 
Christ,  but  to  all  their  captivity  ever  since,  and  that  which  they  shall  endure 
until  their  calling.  Observe — 1.  A  people  who  have  been  high  in  outward  glory, 
when  they  depart  from  God,  make  themselves  vile  and  contemptible.  God  casts 
contempt  on  the  wicked  who  corrupt  His  worship.  2.  Though  a  people  be  under 
contempt,  yet  God's  heart  may  be  towards  them  to  do  them  good  in  the  latter 
end.  The  love  of  God's  election  is  still  on  this  people  ;  God  remembers  them, 
and  yet  intends  good  to  them.  If  there  be  any  of  you  whom  God  has  so  depressed 
as  to  render  you  contemptible,  humble  yourselves  before  God,  but  do  not  despair. 
Who  knows  but  this  was  the  only  way  that  God  had  to  bow  your  hearts  ?  God 
puts  His  own  people  under  contempt,  and  yet  it  is  all  from  love  to  them,  and  with 
an  intent  to  do  them  good  at  the  last.  3.  After  many  promises  of  God's  mercy 
and  of  a  glorious  condition,  which  He  intends  for  His  people,  He  may  yet  hold  a 
very  hard  hand  over  them  for  a  great  while.  God  takes  supreme  care  that  His 
people  shall  not  grow  wanton  with  His  mercy.  4.  Those  who  will  delight  their 
flesh  to  the  full  in  a  sensual  use  of  the  creature,  it  is  just  with  God  that  they 
should  be  cut  short,  and  made  to  live  meanly  and  basely,  made  to  feed  on  coarse 
fare.  5.  If  God  will  not  utterly  destroy  a  people,  as  He  might,  but  reserve  mercy 
for  them  at  last,  yet  they  have  cause  to  bless  God,  though  their  subsistence  for 
the  present  be  most  mean.  It  was  wont  to  be  a  phrase,  brown  bread  and  the 
Gospel  are  good  fare.  6.  It  is  the  way  of  God  to  humble  those  to  whom  He  intends 
good,  to  prepare  them  for  mercy  by  cutting  them  short  of  outward  comforts. 
{Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  God's  dominion  over  Israel: — The  prophet's  purchasing 
the  adulteress  for  so  much  money  is  not  to  be  strained  to  signify  the  Lord's 
redeeming  of  His  Church,  for  the  price  is  given  to  herself  for  maintenance  and  to 

Surchase  her  goodwill,  though  she  be  His  own,  in  order  to  a  second  marriage, 
lut  it  teacheth  that  as  a  slave  bought  with  money  is  at  the  buyer's  disposal, 
so  however  Israel  followed  many  idols,  yet  the  Lord  would  prove  that  He  alone 
had  dominion  over  her,  to  set  her  in  what  condition  He  pleased.  The  price  given 
for  her,  being  but  half  a  servant's  worth,  and  half  the  estimation  of  a  woman, 
may  teach  how  little  worth  they  are  who  despise  the  Lord  and  corrupt  His  worship. 
The  small  price,  with  the  barley  joined  to  it,  being  little  and  unfit  food,  may  teach 
that  sensuality  provokes  God  to  send  pinching  poverty,  and  that  we  must  be 
stripped  of  all  things  before  we  become  sensible,  and  are  weaned  from  our  idols. 
{Oeorge  Hutche-son.) 

Ver.  4.  For  the  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  Mng. — 

Present  condition  of  the  Jews : — Into  the  state  here  described  the  Ten  Tribes 
were  brought  upon  their  captivity,  and  (those  only  excepted  who  joined 
the  Two  Tribes,  or  have  been  converted  to  the  Gospel)  they  have  ever  since 
remained  in  it.  Into  that  same  condition  the  two  tribes  were  brought,  after 
that,  by  "killing  the  Son,"  they  had  "filled  up  the  measure  of  their  father's" 
sins,  and  the  second  temple,  which  His  presence  had  hallowed,  was  destroyed  by 
the  Romans.  In  that  condition  they  have  ever  since  remained  ;  free  from  idolatry, 
and  in  a  state  of  waiting  for  God,  yet  looking  in  vain  for  a  Messias,  since  they  had 
not  and  would  not  receive  Him  who  came  unto  them.  Praying  to  God,  yet  without 
sacrifice  for  sin.  Not  owned  by  God,  yet  kept  distinct  and  apart  by  His  providence 
for  a  future  yet  to  be  revealed.  "  No  one  of  their  own  nation  has  been  able  to 
gather  them  together,  or  to  become  their  king."  Julian  the  apostate  attempted 
in  vain  to  rebuild  their  temple.  God  interposed  by  miracles  to  hinder  the  effort 
which  challenged  His  omnipotence.  David's  temporal  kingdom  has  perished, 
and  his  line  is  lost,  because  Shiloh,  the  Peacemaker,  is  come.  The  typical  priest- 
hood ceased,  in  presence  of  the  true  "  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek," 


CHAP,  m.]  H08EA.  o3 

The  line  of  Aaron  is  forgotten,  unknown,  and  cannot  be  recovered.  Sacrifice, 
the  centre  of  their  religion,  has  ceased  and  become  unlawful.  Still  their  char- 
acteristic has  been  to  wait.  Their  prayer  as  to  the  Christ  has  been,  "  May  He 
soon  be  revealed."  Eighteen  centuries  have  flowed  by.  Their  eyes  have  failed 
with  looking  for  God's  promise,  whence  it  is  not  to  be  found.  Nothing  has  changed 
this  character  in  the  mass  of  the  people.  Oppressed,  released,  favoured,  despised, 
or  aggrandised  ;  in  East  or  West ;  hating  Christians,  loving  to  blaspheme  Christ, 
forced  (as  they  would  remain  Jews)  to  explain  away  the  prophecies  which  speak 
of  Him,  deprived  of  the  sacrifices  which,  to  their  forefathers,  spoke  of  Him  and 
His  atonement ; — still,  as  a  mass,  they  blindly  wait  for  Him,  the  true  knowledge 
of  whom,  His  offices.  His  priesthood,  and  His  kingdom,  they  have  laid  aside. 
And  God  has  been  towards  them.  He  has  preserved  them  from  mingling  with 
idolaters  or  Mahommedans.  Oppression  has  not  extinguished  them,  favour 
has  not  bribed  them.  He  has  kept  them  from  abandoning  their  mangled  worship, 
or  the  Scripture  which  they  understand  not,  and  whose  true  meaning  they 
believe  not ;  they  have  fed  on  the  raisin-husks  of  a  barren  ritual  and  unspiritual 
legalism,  since  the  Holy  Spirit  they  have  grieved  away.  Yet  they  exist  still, 
a  monument  to  us,  of  God's  abiding  wrath  on  sin,  as  Lot's  wife  was  to  them, 
encrusted,  stiff,  lifeless,  only  that  we  know  "  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the 
Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."     (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  And  shall  feax  the  Lord  and  His  goodness  In  the  latter  days. — 
Goodness  producing  fear  : — There  are  three  points  here  peculiarly  worthy  of 
our  notice.  The  designation  which  is  given  to  the  Gospel  dispensation — the 
"  goodness  of  the  Lord."  The  first  stage  of  its  development — "  in  the  latter  days." 
The  peculiar  effect  which  this  development  was  to  produce  on  the  feelings  and 
passions  of  men — "  They  shall  fear  the  Lord."  The  Gospel  dispensation  is  in 
itself  the  essence,  the  consummation,  the  perfection  of  excellence.  It  deserves 
that  appellation  because  it  is  the  supreme  gift,  the  supreme  evidence,  and  the 
supreme  instrument  of  Divine  love.  Goodness  generally  excites  aduiiration  and 
gratitude  and  obedience,  but  here  it  is  said  that  the  exhibition  of  goodncKS 
produces  fear.  In  the  first  establishment  of  the  Christian  dispensation  there 
was  everything  calculated  to  produce  fear.  The  astonishing  fall  of  the  Jews. 
A  most  splendid  exhibition  of  Divine  power.  Expectation  that  the  end  of  the 
world  was  at  hand.  The  general  principle  which  we  consider  is — that  the  good- 
ness of  God  in  the  Gospel  is  calculated  to  produce  fear.     Why  ?     I.  Because 

THIS  GOODNESS  THROWS  FRESH  LIGHT  ON  THE  TERRORS  OF  SIN.  Fear,  philo- 
sophically defined,  is  this,  a  painful  sensation  produced  by  the  apprehension  cf 
imminent  danger,  and  that  danger  may  be  the  loss  of  present  enjoyment,  the 
fear  of  future  disappointment,  or  the  infliction  of  positive  injury.  But  this 
is  not  the  fear  of  our  text.  There  is  in  it  a  holy,  reverential,  and  even  pleasing 
awe,  produced  in  the  mind  by  the  sight  of  those  visions  which  the  goodness  of 
God  in  the  Gospels  unfolds  to  the  mind.  When  Divine  light  pierces  the  darkness 
of  the  soul,  the  mind  sees  its  guilt,  feels  its  pollution,  apprehends  its  terrific  and 
awful  doom.  I  much  question  whether  any  man  has  ever  been  converted 
without,  first  of  all,  feeling  the  sensation  of  fear.  It  is  impossible  for  any  man 
to  be  impressed  with  the  depravity  of  his  own  mind  unless  he  is  impressed  with 
the  excellence  of  the  Gospel.  II.  By  the  exhibition  of  thb  goodness  of 
THE  Gospel  we  see  the  terrors  of  sin  in  the  world.  Who  is  the  man  that 
detects,  moiuns  over,  and  attempts  by  God's  help  to  remove  the  sin  that  is  in 
the  world  ?  Surely  it  is  the  man  who  has  received  this  light.  Let  us  be  alive 
to  the  real  state  of  things  in  the  world.  III.  The  goodness  of  God  in  the 
Gospel  produces  fear  because  it  is  an  extraordinary  act  of  Jehovah, 
and  arises  from  absolute  sovereignty.  If  our  salvation  were  in  our  own 
hands  why  should  we  fear  ?  If  we  had  a  power  superior  to  any  power  hostile 
to  oiu:  salvation,  why  should  we  fear  ?  Or  if  our  salvation  depended  upon  the 
absolute  justice  of  God — if  God  could  not  have  been  just  without  saving  us,  why 
should  we  fear  ?  But  the  fact  is  that  God  saves  us  purely  and  exclusively  because 
He  wishes  to  do  it.  The  very  perfections  of  the  Deity  qualify  Him  to  act  as 
a  sovereign.  He  acts  from  His  own  spontaneousness.  God  might  not  have 
exercised  any  sovereignty  in  the  way  of  mercy.  The  sovereignty  of  God  does 
real  and  positive  good.  But  while  it  does  this  good,  it  leaves  the  sinner  just 
where  he  was.  There  is  a  real  exercise  of  the  sovereignty  in  the  salvation  of 
man.     Let  us  fear,  then,  because  our  responsibility  is  awfully  augmented.     Our 


64      --  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

gratitude  to  God  ought  to  correspond  to  the  character  of  the  blessings  which 
we  have  received.  And  our  exertions  for  the  good  of  others  ought  to  correspond 
to  the  value  of  the  blessings  that  we  enjoy.  {Caleb  Morris.)  Trite  and  worthy 
fear : — It  is  not  a  servile  fear,  not  even,  as  elsewhere,  a  fear  which  makes  them 
shrink  back  from  His  awful  majesty.  It  is  a  fear  most  opposed  to  this ;  a  fear 
whereby  "  they  shall  flee  to  Him  for  help,  from  all  that  is  to  be  feared  "  ;  a  reverent 
holy  awe,  which  should  even  impel  them  to  Him  ;  a  fear  of  losing  Him,  which 
should  make  them  hasten  to  Him.  "  They  shall  fear,  and  wonder  exceedingly, 
astonied  at  the  greatness  of  God's  dealing,  or  of  their  now  joy."  Yet  they  should 
"  hasten  tremblingly,"  as  bearing  in  memory  their  past  unfaithfulness  and  ill 
deserts,  and  fearing  to  approach  but  for  the  greater  fear  of  turning  away.  Nor 
do  they  hasten  with  this  reverent  awe  and  awful  joy  to  God  only,  but  to  Hia 
goodness  also.  His  goodness  draws  them,  and  to  it  they  betake  themselves, 
away  from  all  cause  of  fear,  their  sins,  themselves,  the  evil  One.  Yet  even  His 
goodness  is  a  source  of  awe.  How  much  it  contains !  All  whereby  God  is  good 
in  Himself,  all  whereby  He  is  good  to  us.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Fear  to  the 
Lord  : — I  shall  speak  of  the  fear  of  God  here  only  as  it  concerns  this  place.  It 
is  introduced  here  to  show  that  when  this  glorious  Church  shall  be  formed,  when 
God  shall  call  home  His  own  people  the  Jews,  and  bring  in  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles,  then  shall  the  fear  of  God  mightily  prevail  upon  the  hearts  of  the  people  ; 
and  the  greater  God's  goodness  shall  be,  the  more  shall  the  fear  of  God  be  on 
their  hearts.  It  is  remarkable  that  almost  all  the  prophecies  which  speak  of 
the  glorious  condition  of  the  Church  ever  make  mention  of  the  fear  of  God  that 
should  rest  then  on  the  hearts  of  the  people.  One  would  rather  think  that  there 
should  be  a  reference  to  the  joy  they  would  have.  But  why  fear  the  Lord  in 
these  times  ?  1.  Because  of  the  glory  of  Christ  their  King.  They  shall  behold 
their  King  in  glory  that  shall  cause  fear.  2.  Because  of  the  great  works  of  God 
that  shall  then  take  place.  3.  Because  the  holiness  and  purity  of  the  worship 
of  God  and  of  His  ordinances  shall  cause  fear.  4.  Because  the  holiness  of  the 
saints,  appearing  brightly  in  their  very  faces  and  conversations,  shall  strike 
great  fear.  Surely  when  the  saints  shall  be  exalted  in  their  holiness,  when  every 
one  of  them  shall  have  their  souls  filled  with  God,  it  wiU  cause  abundance  of  fear 
in  the  hearts  of  all  those  who  shall  even  converse  with  them.  But  the  wicked 
shall  fear  too,  as  well  as  the  saints.  "  Men's  hearts  shall  fail  them  for  fear," 
shall  be  verified  in  these  days,  as  it  was  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The 
saints  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  His  goodness.  The  goodness  of  God  which  in  that 
day  they  shall  fear,  shall  be  this — (1)  That  ever  He  should  regard  such  a  wretched 
people  as  this,  and  pardon  all  their  sins.  (2)  Because  God  shall  then  make  the 
difference  between  him  that  feareth  God,  and  him  that  feareth  Him  not.  Then 
shall  God  take  away  all  the  reproach  of  His  saints.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
Israel's  conversion  : — 1.  Albeit  that  Israel  as  a  nation  hath  been,  and  yet  is, 
rejected  and  lost,  yet  they  will  certainly  return  to  God.  This  we  should  long  and 
pray  for.  2.  As  true  repentance  and  conversion  will  appear  in  men's  being 
sensible  of  their  great  distance  from  God,  and  in  their  seeking  to  make  up  this 
distance,  so  all  this  is  a  sweet  and  blessed  fruit  of  affliction.  3.  The  covenant 
standeth  still  to  be  forthcoming  for  apostates,  when  they  repent  and  turn  to  God, 
renouncing  false  ways  and  worship.  4.  There  is  no  right  seeking  of  God,  nor 
finding  Him,  or  the  comforts  of  the  Covenant,  but  through  Christ,  whom  converted 
Israel  shall  acknowledge  and  embrace.  5.  The  conversion  will  appear  in  its 
constancy  and  perseverance,  and  particularly  in  the  converts  entertaining  a  holy 
fear  and  awe  of  God.  6.  As  God  is  always  good  to  His  own  people,  whatever 
they  may  think  to  the  contrary,  so  much  of  His  goodness  will  be  manifested  in 
the  time  of  that  life  from  the  dead,  when  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  7.  The  good- 
ness of  God  will  not  make  a  true  convert  presumptuous,  but  will  be  unto  him 
matter  of  reverence  and  holy  fear  and  trembling.  8.  Albeit  Israel  be  long  in 
gathering  and  converting,  yet  we  are  firmly  to  believe  that,  before  time  end, 
it  will  certainly  come  to  pass ;  for  all  this  shall  be  in  the  latter  days.  {George 
Hutcheson.)  Fearing  the  Lord' s  goodness : — "Not  knowing  that  the  goodness 
of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."  I.  Theee  is  much  that  men  do  not  know. 
II.  Onb  thqig  that  men  do  not  know  is  the  goodness  of  God.  Goodness 
is  a  comprehensive  term.  God  saw  creation,  and  pronounced  it  "  good  '* 
Goodness  includes  beneficence,  forbearance,  patience.  It  may  be  likened  to  a 
rich  flowing  river,  or  to  the  sim  shedding  light  and  warmth  all  around.  But 
goodness  is  not  the  thing  that  most  strikes  men  in  God.     But  it  should  be.     It 


CHAP.  IV.]  EOSEA.  55 

may  be  seen  everywhere.  1.  Trace  it  in  Scripture  story.  Life  of  Jacob.  Tale 
of  the  wanderings.  Time  of  captivity.  Life  of  Jesus.  2.  See  it  in  gracious 
providences.  Winter  snows.  Summer  storms.  Autumn  harvests.  3.  See  it 
in  individual  experiences.  If  we  read  the  story  of  our  lives  aright,  we  shall 
be  able  to  trace  everywhere  upon  us  the  "good  hand  of  our  God  for  good."  But 
is  this  man's  chief  thought  of  God  ?  Is  it  not  rather  the  Gospel  which  has  to 
be  declared  ?  Is  not  this  the  surprising,  melting,  persuading  Gospel,  whose  chief 
rays  fall  from  Christ  crucified  ?  III.  If  men  did  but  know  the  goodness  of 
God  they  would  feel  the  holy  fear  and  hear  the  call  to  repentance. 
Men  either  find  a  sort  of  excuse  in  persisting  that  God  is  a  God  of  wrath  and 
judgment,  or  they  presume  on  His  goodness,  and  say  that  He  will  take  no 
notice  of  sin.  Spite  of  this,  the  mightiest  of  all  moral  forces  is  goodness.  It  is 
mother's  power.  It  is  Christ's  power.  It  melts,  draws,  wins.  But  it  is  goodness 
not  in  the  abstract.  It  is  goodness  brought  home  to  us.  "  Who  loved  me,  and 
gave  Himself  for  me."  Goodness  says,  "  Repent."  Is  that  hard  ?  Nay,  it 
is  but  the  first  step  on  the  way  to  trust,  love,  and  life  eternal.  God's  new 
goodness  seems  to  freshen  the  sense  of  His  lifelong  goodness,  and  of  His  saving 
goodness,  until  the  cords  of  God  seem  to  be  all  about  us,  and  it  becomes  evident 
that  He  is  graciously  leading  us  to  Himself.     {Robert  Tuck,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vbb.  1.  Bear  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children  of  Israel:  for  the  Lord 
hath  a  controversy  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  land. — A  corrupt  people 
and  an  ezpostidating  God : — In  the  previous  chapters  the  prophet's  language 
had  been  highly  and  somewhat  perplexingly  symbolical.  In  this  chapter  he  begins 
to  speak  more  plainly  and  in  sententious  utterances.  I.  A  corrupt  people. 
The  depravity  of  Israel  is  represented — 1.  Negatively.  "  There  is  no  truth," 
&c.  These  are  the  great  fontal  virtues  in  the  universe  ;  and  where  they  are 
not,  there  is  a  moral  abjectness  of  the  most  terrible  description.  A  people  without 
reality,  their  very  life  a  lie.  No  acts  of  beneficence  performed,  and  the  very 
spirit  of  kindliness  extinct.  The  greatest,  the  holiest  Being  in  the  universe 
utterly  ignored.  2.  Positively.  The  absence  of  these  great  virtues  gives  rise  to 
tremendous  crimes.  (1)  Profanity.  Reverence  is  gone.  (2)  Falsehood.  (3)  Killing. 
(4)  Dishonesty.  (5)  Incontinence.  (6)  Murder.  II.  An  expostulating  God. 
"  The  Lord  hath  controversy."  Of  all  controversies  this  is  the  most  awful.  L  It 
is  a  just  controversy.  Has  not  the  great  Ruler  of  the  universe  a  right  to  contend 
against  such  evils  ?  2.  It  is  a  continuous  controversy.  3.  It  is  an  unequal 
controversy.  What  are  all  human  intellects  to  His  ?  Sparks  to  the  sun.  The 
sinner  has  no  argument  to  put  before  Him.  He  cannot  deny  his  sins.  He  cannot 
plead  accidents.  He  cannot  plead  compulsion.  He  cannot  plead  some  merit 
as  a  set-off,  for  he  has  none.  This  controversy  is  still  going  on.  It  is  held  in 
the  court  of  conscience,  and  you  must  know  of  its  existence  and  character. 
(Homilist.)  Jehovah's  controversy  with  Israel  : — In  this  chapter  Israel  is  cited 
to  appear  at  God's  tribunal.  There  the  Lord  makes  the  following  accusations — 
1.  Gross  violation  of  both  Tables  of  the  Law,  both  by  omission  and  by  commission. 
God  threatens,  because  of  this,  to  send  extreme  desolation.  2.  Desperate  incor- 
rigibleness.  He  threatens  to  destroy  such,  and  the  false  prophets,  and  the  body 
of  the  people  and  Church.  3.  God  accuseth  the  priests  in  Israel,  that,  through 
their  fault,  the  people  were  kept  in  ignorance.  He  threatens  to  cast  them  and 
their  posterity  off.  He  further  accuses  the  priests  of  ingratitude  towards  Him, 
for  which  He  threatens  to  turn  their  glory  into  ignominy.  And  He  even  accuses 
them  of  sensuality  and  covetousness,  rendering  them  unfaithful  to  their  calling. 
4.  He  accuses  the  whole  people  of  gross  idolatry,  and  threatens  not  to  restrain 
their  sin  by  corrections.  6.  He  accuses  them  of  the  idolatry  of  the  calves,  from 
which  He  dissuades  Judah,  as  being  an  evidence  of  Israel's  wantonness,  and 
the  cause  of  their  ensuing  exile.  6.  He  accuses  Ephraim,  the  kingly  tribe,  of 
their  incorrigibleness  in  idolatry,  their  intemperance,  filthiness,  and  corruption 
of  justice  through  covetousness.  For  this  He  threatens  sudden  and  violent 
destruction  and  captivity,  where  they  should  be  ashamed  of  their  corrupt  worship. 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

{George  Hutcheson. )  The  Divine  suit  with  Israel  : — I.  Thk  suit  commenced. 
1.  The  knowledge  that  any  truth  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  a  special  means  to 
prepare  the  heart  to  receive  it  with  reverence  and  all  due  respect,  even  though 
it  be  hard  and  grievous  to  flesh  and  blood.  2.  The  nearness  of  a  people  to  God 
does  not  exempt  them  from  God's  contending  with  them  for  sin.  3.  The  nearer 
the.  relationship  the  more  grievous  the  controversy.  II.  The  pleading  of  God. 
A  suit  iirst  is  entered  against  a  man ;  when  the  court  day  comes,  there  is  calling 
for  a  declaration.  1.  God  contends  not  with  a  people  without  a  cause.  2.  God 
contends  not  against  a  people  for  little  things.  These  are  not  little  things — 
*'  No  truth,  no  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land."  3.  It  is  in  vain  for  any 
man  to  talk  of  his  religion,  if  he  make  no  conscience  of  the  second  table  as  well 
as  the  first.  III.  Judgment  pronouncbd  (ver.  3,  &c.).  "Therefore  shall  the 
land  mourn."  1.  All  the  glory  and  pomp  of  the  men  of  the  world  is  but  as  a 
flower.  2.  Times  of  affliction  take  down  the  jollity  and  bravery  of  men's  spirits, 
and  make  them  fade,  wither,  and  pine  away.  3.  The  good  or  evil  of  the  creature 
depends  on  man.  4.  God,  when  in  a  way  of  wrath,  can  cause  His  wrath  to  reach 
to  those  things  that  seem  to  be  most  remote.  6.  No  creature  can  help  man  in 
the  time  of  God's  wrath,  for  every  creature  suffers  as  well  as  man.  IV.  Exhor- 
tation TO  JUDAH  TO  BEWABB  THAT  SHE  COMB  NOT  INTO  THE  SAME  CONDITION 
{ver.  15).  The  prophet  Hosea  was  sent  especially  to  Israel,  to  the  Ten  Tribes,  but 
here  we  see  he  turns  his  speech  to  Judah.  1.  Ministers  should  especially  look 
to  those  whom  they  are  bovmd  unto  by  office,  but  yet  so  as  to  labour  to  benefit 
others  when  occasion  offers.  2.  When  we  see  our  labour  lost  on  those  we  most 
desire  to  benefit,  we  should  try  what  we  can  do  with  others.  There  were  many 
arguments  why  Judah  should  not  do  as  Israel  did.  V.  Execution,  God  en  His 
WBATH  GIVING  UP  Ephbaim  TO  HIMSELF  (ver.  17).  1.  Ephraim  engaging  himself 
in  false  worship  is  now  so  inwrapped  in  that  sin  and  guilt  that  he  cannot  tell 
how  to  extricate  himself.  2.  The  Lord  has  given  him  up  to  his  idols.  (1)  It 
is  a  heavy  judgment  upon  a  people  when  the  saints  withdraw  from  them. 
(2)  The  Lord  here  virtuaUy  says  to  Hosea,  "  You  can  do  no  good  to  them,  it  is 
in  vain  for  you  to  meddle  with  Ephraim."  God  has  a  time  to  give  men  over 
to  themselves,  to  say  that  His  Spirit  shall  no  longer  strive  with  them.  It  is 
the  most  woeful  judgment  of  God  upon  any  people,  or  person,  when  He  saith 
in  His  wrath,  "Let  him  alone."  It  is  a  testimony  of  very  great  disregard  in 
God  for  His  creatures.  Those  thus  let  alone  are  going  apace  to  misery.  God 
intends  by  this  to  make  way  for  some  fearful  wrath  that  is  to  come  upon  them. 
It  is  a  dreadful  sign  of  reprobation.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  The  Lord's  con- 
troversy : — The  court  is  set,  and  both  attendance  and  attention  are  demanded. 
Whom  may  God  expect  to  give  Him  a  fair  hearing,  and  take  from  Him  a  fair 
warning,  but  the  children  of  Israel,  His  own  professing  people  ?  Sin  is  the  great 
mischief-maker ;  it  sows  discord  between  God  and  Israel.  God  sees  sin  in  His 
own  people,  and  a  good  action  He  has  against  them  for  it.  He  has  a  contro- 
versy with  them  for  breaking  covenant  with  Him,  for  bringing  a  reproach  upon 
Him,  and  for  an  ungrateful  return  to  Him  for  His  favours.  God's  controversies 
will  be  pleaded,  pleaded  by  the  judgments  ^of  His  mouth  before  they  are  pleaded 
by  the  judgments  of  His  hand,  that  He  may  be  justified  in  all  He  does,  and  may 
make  it  appear  that  He  desires  not  the  death  of  sinners ;  and  God's  pleadings 
ought  to  be  attended  to,  for,  sooner  or  later,  they  shall  have  a  hearing.  {Matthew 
Henry.)  There  is  no  truth,  nor  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God  In  the  land. 
— Things  that  go  with  the  knowledge  of  God : — Truth  and  mercy  are  often 
spoken  of  as  to  Almighty  God.  Truth  takes  in  all  which  is  right,  and 
to  which  God  has  bound  Himself ;  mercy  all  beyond  which  God  does  out  of 
His  boimdless  love.  When  God  says  of  Israel  there  is  no  truth  nor  mercy,  He 
says  that  there  is  absolutely  none  of  those  two  great  qualities  under  which 
He  comprises  all  His  own  goodness.  "  There  is  no  truth,"  none  whatever,  "no 
regard  for  known  truth ;  no  conscience,  no  sincerity,  no  uprightness ;  no  truth 
of  words;  no  truth  of  promises;  no  truth  in  witnessing;  no  making  good  in 
deeds  what  they  said  in  words."  "  Nor  mercy."  This  word  has  a  wide  mean- 
ing ;  it  includes  all  love  to  one  another,  a  love  issuing  in  acts.  It  includes  loving- 
kindness,  piety  to  parents,  natural  affection,  forgiveness,  tenderness,  bene- 
ficence, mercy,  goodness.  The  prophet,  in  declaring  the  absence  of  this  grace, 
declares  the  absence  of  all  included  under  it.  Whatever  could  be  comprised 
under  love,  whatever  feelings  are  influenced  by  love,  of  that  there  was  nothing. 
*'  Nor  knowledge  of  God."    The  union  of  right  knowledge  and  wrong  practice 


CHAP.  IV.]  BOSEA.  57 

is  hideous  in  itself ;  and  it  must  be  especially  offensive  to  Almighty  God  that 
His  creatures  should  know  whom  they  offend,  how  they  offend  Him,  and  yet, 
amid  and  against  their  knowledge,  choose  that  which  displeases  Him.  And 
on  that  ground,  perhaps.  He  has  so  created  us,  that  when  our  acts  are  wrong, 
our  knowledge  becomes  darkened.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  not  merely  to  know 
eome  things  of  God,  as  that  He  is  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  the  world  and  of 
ourselves.  To  know  things  of  God  is  not  to  know  God  Himself.  We  cannot 
know  God  in  any  respect  unless  we  are  so  far  made  like  unto  Him.  Knowledge 
of  God  being  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  who  hath  not  grace,  cannot  have  that 
knowledge.  A  certain  degree  of  speculative  knowledge  of  God  a  bad  man  may 
have.  But  even  this  knowledge  is  not  retained  without  love.  Those  who  "  held 
the  truth  in  unrighteousness  "  ended  (St.  Paul  says)  by  corrupting  it.  Certainly, 
the  speculative  and  practical  knowledge  are  bound  up  together  through  the 
oneness  of  the  relation  of  the  soul  to  God,  whether  in  its  thoughts  of  Him,  or 
its  acts  towards  Him.  Wrong  practice  corrupts  belief,  as  misbelief  corrupts 
practice.  The  prophet  then  probably  denies  that  there  was  any  true  know- 
ledge of  God,  of  any  sort,  whether  of  life  or  faith,  or  understanding  or  love. 
Ignorance  of  God,  then,  is  a  great  evil,  a  source  of  all  other  sins.  {E.  B.  Pusey, 
D.D.)  A  national  duty  : — No  one  can  fail  to  acknowledge  in  this  terrible 
picture  a  representation  of  every  people  which  habitually  breaks  the  laws  of 
God ;  and  who,  having  set  themselves  free  from  the  restraints  of  religion,  or, 
through  ignorance,  being  unconscious  of  their  obligation,  are  delivered  up  to 
the  working  of  their  own  heart's  lusts,  and  to  follow  their  own  imaginations. 
This  consummation  of  depravity  is  even  found  in  the  chosen  people  of  God. 
There  was  no  truth  where  the  great  Source  of  all  truth  had  announced  the 
laws  of  moral  perfection:  there  was  no  mercy  where  the  prodigies  of  Divine 
compassion  had  been  manifested  from  one  generation  to  another:  there  was 
no  knowledge  of  God  where  alone  God  could  be  known,  and  in  the  only  place 
in  which  the  principles  of  His  government,  and  the  attributes  of  His  person, 
had  been  revealed  to  man.  What  rendered  the  case  of  Israel  desperate,  and 
remedy  impossible,  was  this,  that  those  who  had  been  set  apart  as  the  deposi- 
taries of  Divine  knowledge,  and  who,  by  their  life  and  doctrine,  had  been  intended 
by  the  Almighty  to  act  constantly,  as  a  conservative  power,  against  the  cor- 
ruptions of  the  mass,  had  yielded  themselves  to  the  popular  torrent,  and  turned 
rank  and  station,  the  dignity  of  a  holy  vocation,  and  the  talents  of  knowledge 
and  intellect  to  the  promotion  of  those  vices  which  God  had  given  them  a  solemn 
commission  to  withstand.  They  were  weary  of  resisting  the  tendencies  of  the 
age  and  the  godless  spirit  which  found  too  complete  an  echo  in  their  own  hearts. 
So  the  princes  and  priests  of  Israel  deserted  their  post,  sealed  up  the  records 
of  God's  Word,  and  by  ceasing  to  inculcate  the  awful  sanctions  of  His  law,  and 
concealing  from  the  people  those  oracles  in  which  alone  knowledge  and  wisdom 
are  to  be  found,  filled  up  to  the  brim  the  measure  of  their  iniquity.  That  measure 
was  filled  up  because  they  who  had  knowledge  and  had  the  guardianship  of 
God's  heritage  had  turned  traitors  and  withheld  the  Bread  of  Life  from  the 
famishing  people.  To  whatever  privileges  a  people  may  have  been  elected, 
no  outward  maiks  of  distinction,  apart  from  a  corresponding  holiness,  will  avail 
in  the  sight  of  Him  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and  who  trieth  the  very  reins 
and  hearts.  The  history  of  Israel  is  nothing  but  the  annals  of  those  judgments 
with  which  He  has  visited  their  abuse  of  mercies,  and  their  never-ending  neglect 
or  perversion  of  that  most  awful  of  all  deposits,  spiritual  knowledge.  If  men 
in  all  times  have  been  made  accountable  to  God  for  the  fate  of  their  fellow- 
creatures,  and  most  assuredly  they  have,  it  behoves  us  to  look  well  to  our  own 
case,  and  beware  how  we  involve  ourselves  in  the  participation  of  such  guilt. 
Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves  by  supposing  that  the  sins  and  the  sanctions,  the 
moral  actions  and  the  moral  dealings  of  the  elder  covenant  are  inapplicable  to 
ourselves.  Considerable  differences  there  may  be,  but  they  are  all  against 
us,  and  an  increase  of  our  responsibility.  It  is  known  to  few  of  us  how  vast  are 
the  masses  of  ignorance  and  vice  which  undermine  the  surface  of  this  favoured 
land.     {J.  GarbeU.) 

Ver.  3.  Therefore  shall  the  land  mourn,  and  ereiy  one  that  dwelleth 
therein  shall  languish. — The  social  causes  of  human  misery : — It  is  a  principle 
illustrated  by  the  holy  reoords,  that  when  immorality  has  thoroughly  infected 
a  state,  in  defiance  of  all  warning  and  ordinary  discipline,  it  is  given  up  to  destruc* 


158      •  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

tion,  as  was  Sodom,  and  also  many  of  the  most  renowned  empires  of  ancient 
times.  Nothing  is  more  certain  and  calculable  in  action  and  result  than  are  social 
evils  and  social  virtues.  To  inquire  into  their  nature  and  operation  is  the  way 
to  discover  a  remedy  for  a  most  serious  evil,  and  to  furnish  the  most  powerful 
motives  for  its  rigorous  and  incessant  application.  There  is  much  misery  in  the 
world.  A  primary  cause  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  man  himself.  We  are  not  to 
blame  society,  or  social  relations  in  any  of  their  forms,  for  all  the  evils  that  exist 
in,  and  seem  to  be  developed  by  them.  Man,  by  his  very  constitution,  is  a  social 
creature.  The  depravity  of  man,  both  as  the  judicial  result  of  his  sin,  and  as 
aggravated  by  his  habits  both  of  thought  and  sensual  indulgence,  insinuates 
itself  into  all  that  he  does,  and  corrupts  every  relation  into  which  he  enters.  Each 
relation,  therefore,  however  fitted  to  produce  and  increase  his  happiness,  is  found 
to  contribute  something  to  his  misery,  and  presents  to  the  observer  some  new 
form  and  modification  of  human  suffering.  Consider  the  common  relations  of 
human  society.  I.  The  political.  If  justice  were  enthroned  in  every  heart 
there  would  be  no  necessity  for  any  political  economy.  The  authority  of  Grod  in 
every  man's  conscience  would  render  all  human  government  totally  imnecessary. 
Government  as  a  human  institution  can  be  traced  no  higher  than  to  the  necessities 
that  spring  from  the  fall.  So  long  as  government  is  the  administration  of  justice^ 
the  agency  by  which  wrong  and  outrage  are  repressed  and  punished — it  must 
contribute  in  a  most  effectual  manner  to  the  good  of  a  community.  It  is  not 
because  of  this  relation  between  the  governor  and  governed  that  political  evils 
exist.  When  the  governor  ceases  to  be  the  administrator  of  justice  at  all,  and 
when  the  abettors  of  wrong  obtain  power  and  influence,  then  righteousness  is 
hurled  from  her  throne,  and  law  trampled  in  the  mire  under  the  feet  of  a  lawless 
and  licentious  mob.  The  ruin  of  a  state  has  generally  commenced  with  the 
corruption  of  its  government.  The  amount  of  calamity  and  woe  inflicted 
on  our  species  by  corrupt  and  despotic  governments  forms  too  serious  an  item 
to  be  passed  over  in  silence.     II.  The  causes  of  human  misery  operatinq 

THROUGH  THE    MEDIUM    OF    THE    RELATIONS    OF    COMMERCE.      TheSe   We   take   in 

their  most  extensive  sense,  including  the  intercourse  and  the  arrangements, 
agreed  upon  generally,  for  conducting  the  manufacturing  and  mercantile  depart- 
ments of  trade.  The  morals  of  trade,  it  is  to  be  feared,  are  but  indefinite  at  the 
best.  Gain  is  the  object  p\u"sued  ;  but  the  means  of  acquiring  it  are  as  various 
as  the  dispositions  and  amount  of  principle  felt  by  the  candidates  will  admit. 
There  are  certainly  parts  of  the  economy  of  trade  that  require  attention  and  no 
slight  measmre  of  reform.  There  is  much  of  suffering  and  unhappiness  observable 
in  the  commercial  relations  of  life  ;  and  these  may  be  clearly  traced  either  to 
causes  originating  in  something  defective  in  the  moral  principles  on  which  the 
economy  of  trade  is  based,  or  in  the  dispositions  of  those  who  take  a  part  in 
conducting  its  several  departments.  Illustrate  from  the  relation  of  master  and 
servant,  of  the  employer  and  the  employed.  Late  hours  ;  time  for  payment  of 
wages ;  speculation  ;  getting  out  of  temporary  difficulties  by  giving  accommoda- 
tion bills,  &c.  m.  The  causes  of  human  misery  en  the  relations  of  friend- 
ship AND  private  society.  1.  Society  has  its  temptations,  and  these,  if  not 
carefully  watched,  may  lead  us  into  much  evil.  One  of  the  first  consequences 
of  a  fondness  for  society  is  the  diminished  fervour  of  the  domestic  affections. 
Another  temptation  is  a  love  of  display.  A  certain  indolence  too  is  generally 
induced  by  the  kind  of  social  intercourse  to  which  we  are  now  referring.  2.  Society 
has  its  actual  vices.  What  so  pernicious  as  envy?  Consider  the  conventional 
estimate  formed  of  the  character  of  vices,  such  as  gambling.  There  never  was  a 
day  in  which  the  debauching  indulgence  of  the  appetites  was  so  inexcusable  as  the 
present.  The  cure  of  all  the  evil  and  misery  is  the  adoption  of  the  principle  and 
rule, — "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  (J.  Robinson.)  A  terrible 
deprivation  : — A  deprivation  that  comes  upon  the  people  in  consequence  of  their 
heinous  iniquities.  I.  A  deprivation  of  both  material  and  spiritual  good. 
1.  Of  material  good.  (1)  Health.  Sin  is  inimical  to  the  bodily  health  and  vigoiur 
of  men  and  nations ;  it  insidiously  saps  the  constitution.  (2)  Means  of  sub- 
sistence. Reference  is  to  one  of  those  droughts  that  occasionally  occur  in  the 
East,  and  is  ever  one  of  the  greatest  calamities.  How  soon  the  Eternal  can  destroy 
our  means  of  subsistence  I  2.  Of  spiritual  good.  Their  presumptuous  guilt 
was  as  great  as  that  of  one  who  refused  to  obey  the  priest  when  giving  judgment 
in  the  name  of  Jehovah  (Deut.  xvii.  12).  One  of  the  greatest  spiritual  blessings 
of  mankind  is  the  strife  and  reproof  of  godly  men.     What  a  deprivation  for 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  '6^ 

these  to  be  taken  away  !     II.  A  dbprivation  LKAonro  to  a  tebriblk  doom. 

1.  The  destruction  of  both  priests  and  people.  The  meaning  is  that  no  time, 
night  or  day,  shall  be  free  from  the  slaughter  both  of  the  priests  and  of  the 
people.  This  was  literally  true  of  the  Ten  Tribes  at  this  time.  2.  The  destruction 
of  the  social  state.  "  And  I  will  destroy  thy  mother."  Who  was  the  mother  ? 
The  Israelitish  state.  And  it  was  destroyed.  (HomUist.)  With  the  beasts 
of  the  field,  and  witli  the  fowls  of  heaven. — The  sharers  in  Divine  judg- 
ment:— The  Lord's  sentence  or  threatening  for  these  sins  is  that  extreme 
desolation  shall  come,  not  only  on  the  people,  but  on  the  land,  and  on  all  the 
creatures  for  their  sakes,  even  on  the  fishes  which  were  in  lakes  and  ponds  in  the 
land.  Doctrine — 1.  The  judgments  of  God  upon  the  visible  Church  will  be  very 
sad  and  grievous,  when  they  are  inflicted,  and  as  imiversal  as  sin  hath  been. 

2.  Albeit  the  Lord's  judgments  on  sinful  and  impenitent  people  do  at  first  utterly 
consume  them,  yet  that  will  be  only  that  they  may  live  awhile  to  feel  their  own 
miseries,  and  then  be  consumed  by  them,  if  they  repent  not.  3.  Sinful  man  is 
a  great  enemy  to  all  the  creatures,  as  well  as  to  himself ;  he  makes  both  himself 
and  them  to  mourn  and  pine  away,  because  he  will  not  mo\im  indeed.  4.  Aa 
the  glory  of  all  the  creatures  is  but  a  flower,  which  God  will  soon  make  to  wither 
and  languish  when  He  pursueth  for  sin,  so  the  creatures  will  not  help  man  when 
God  is  angry  at  him ;  but  as  these  draw  him  from  God,  so  God  is  provoked  to  cut 
him  short  in  them,  as  here  they  are  consumed  with  him.  (George  Hutcheson.) 
All  creatures  share  the  calamities  of  sin  : — As  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes,  and  in  a 
word,  all  other  things,  have  been  created  for  the  use  of  men,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
God  should  extend  the  tokens  of  His  curse  to  all  creatures,  above  and  below, 
when  His  purpose  is  to  punish  men.  When  God  curses  innocent  animals  for  our 
sake,  we  then  dread  the  more,  except,  indeed,  we  be  imder  the  influence  of  extreme 
stupor.     (John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  4.  Yet  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another. — Restraint  of  eon- 
verting  agencies  : — Here  is  given  an  order  of  court  that  no  pains  should  be  taken 
with  the  condemned  criminal  to  bring  him  to  repentance,  and  the  reason  for  that 
order.  I.  The  order  itself.  "  Let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another." 
Let  no  means  be  used  to  reduce  or  reclaim  them  ;  let  their  physicians  give  them 
up  as  desperate  and  past  cure.  It  intimates  that  as  long  as  there  is  any  hope 
we  ought  to  reprove  sinners  for  their  sins.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  one  another 
to  give  and  take  reproof.  Sometimes  there  is  need  to  rebuke  sharply,  not  only 
to  reprove  but  to  strive,  so  loth  are  men  to  part  with  their  sins.  But  it  is  a  sign 
that  persons  and  people  are  abandoned  to  ruin  when  God  says,  "  Let  them  not 
be  reproved."  They  are  so  hardened  in  sin,  and  so  ripened  for  ruin,  that  it  will 
be  to  little  purpose  either  to  deal  with  them,  or  to  deal  with  God  for  them.  It 
bodes  ill  to  a  people  when  reprovers  are  silenced.  11.  The  reasons  of  this 
ORDER.  1.  They  are  determined  to  go  on  in  sin,  and  no  reproofs  will  cure  them 
of  that.  "  Thy  people  are  as  those  that  strive  with  the  priests  "  ;  they  have 
grown  so  very  impudent  in  sin  that  they  will  fly  in  the  face  even  of  a  priest  him- 
self if  he  should  but  give  them  the  least  check.  Those  sinners  have  their  hearts 
wickedly  hardened  who  quarrel  with  their  ministers  for  dealing  faithfully  with 
them.  2.  God  also  is  determined  to  proceed  in  their  ruin.  '  Therefore  shalt 
thou  fall."  The  ruin  of  those  who  have  helped  to  ruin  others  will,  in  a  special 
maimer,  be  intolerable.  When  all  are  involved  in  guilt  nothing  less  can  be 
expected  than  that  all  should  be  involved  in  ruin.     (Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  5.  Therefore  shalt  thou  fa31  in  the  day,  and  the  prophet  also  shall  fiedl 
with  thee  in  the  night,  and  I  will  destroy  thy  mother. — Common  destruction  :— 
The  threatening  is  that  destruction  should  come  upon  such  sinners  and  on  the 
false  prophets  who  flattered  and  soothed  them  up  in  this  com-se.  Learn — 1.  Men's 
opposing  of  the  Word,  their  rejecting  of  reproof  and  blessing  themselves  when 
they  are  rid  of  it,  will  not  avail  them,  nor  hold  off  wrath,  but  rather  hasten  it. 
2.  How  high  soever  men  exalt  themselves  in  their  opposition  to  God  and  His 
truth,  yet  that  guilt  will  bring  them  down,  and  when  God  begins  to  reckon,  He 
will  teach  every  sinner  particularly.  3.  Vengeance  can  reach  sinners  in  the 
height  of  their  prosperity,  and  can  ruin  them  suddenly  and  unavoidably.  4.  It 
is  a  plague  upon  sinners  that  when  they  go  farthest  wrong,  and  oppose  the  faithful 
servants  of  God,  yet  they  will  never  want  corrupt  men  pretending  to  come  in 
God's  name  to  bolster  them  up  in  their  evil  way,  and  God  hath  a  sad  contro- 


60  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vr. 

versy  against  such  seducers.  5.  However  sinners  shelter  themselves  under 
the  privileges  of  a  visible  Church  or  state,  yet  the  Lord  may  let  them  find  that 
their  sin  doth  not  only  undo  themselves,  but  bring  utter  desolation  also  on  the 
Church  and  nation  whereof  they  are.  Therefore  it  is  subjoined,  "  And  I  will 
destroy  thy  mother."     (Oeorge  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  6.  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge.  —  The  perils 
of  ignorance : — If  there  is  a  knowledge  on  which  not  only  the  improve- 
ments and  the  refinements  but  the  very  being  of  society  depends,  the  state 
of  this  must  be  in  its  nature  most  deeply  awful  and  interesting.  It  was  the 
language  of  pagan  philosophy  that  such  a  knowledge  did  exist.  The  heathen 
wisdom  was  enabled  to  discern  that  all  science,  as  exercised  in  its  inferior  pro- 
vinces, required  some  principle  of  a  sublimer  nature,  which  might  afford  cement, 
consistence,  and  basis  to  every  subordinate  effort  and  exertion  of  the  human 
intellect.  In  exploring  this  principle  they  however  failed — and  instead  of  sub- 
stantial truth,  were  lost  in  the  delusive  twilight  of  a  magnificent  though  ineffectual 
and  perpetually  baffled  metaphysical  speculation.  Those  on  whom  the  day- 
star  of  revelation  arose,  found  in  the  distinct  discovery  of  a  moral  Governor 
of  the  universe,  and  the  full  and  unequivocal  display  of  His  attributes,  that  know- 
ledge which  marks  the  origin,  the  limits,  and  the  destination  of  every  faculty, 
talent,  and  acquisition.  When  God  tells  us  there  is  a  knowledge  "  for  the  lack 
of  which  a  people  is  destroyed,"  we  must  infer  that  it  is  the  knowledge  of  Him- 
self, His  nature,  His  providence,  and  His  power.  If  it  be  true  that  "  knowledge 
and  wisdom  are  the  stability  of  prosperous  times,"  the  converse  will  equally 
claim  our  attention.  Inquire  into  the  moral  causes  of  both  these  propositions. 
It  is  not  my  intention  to  institute  a  regular  comparison  between  the  various 
acquisitions  and  exertions  of  ourselves  and  our  predecessors.  I  mark  those 
intellectual  habits  which  interfere  with  the  cultivation  of  that  knowledge  which 
directs,  superintends,  and  sanctifies  every  portion  of  wisdom  we  can  acquire. 
Whatever  was  the  region  of  science  which  our  predecessors  explored,  they  steadily 
kept  in  view  the  great  Source  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift.  And  this  not 
only  in  theology  proper,  but  also  in  history,  moral  science,  and  natural  philosophy. 
Every  work  was  in  some  measure  a  school  of  Divine  knowledge.  Now  it  is 
rarely  indeed  that,  except  in  works  directly  treating  of  theology,  any  pious 
reference,  even  when  the  subject  most  points  to  it,  is  vaade  to  the  dispensation 
and  moral  government  of  Almighty  God.  To  a  variety  of  causes  this  may  be 
traced ;  to  none  more  than  to  pride,  or  to  its  abortion,  vanity.  This  engenders 
a  fondness  for  paradox,  than  which  nothing  can  be  a  greater  obstruction  to  all 
knowledge,  amd  particularly  to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  dispensations. 
All  paradox,  even  in  its  most  ingenious  forms,  is  mere  debility,  and  in  no  instance 
a  mark  of  energy  or  strength  of  mind.  It  is  observable  that,  in  proportion  to 
the  love  for  this,  the  intellectual  appetite  is  palled  and  vitiated  for  the  percep- 
tion and  investigation  of  genuine  truth.  Hence  those  mischievous  abstractions, 
which  when  introduced  into  religion,  morals,  and  politics  have,  from  causes  com- 
paratively mean,  produced  the  most  extended  and  tremendous  effects.  In  a 
short  time  there  will  (we  have  reason  to  fear)  remain  but  two  kinds  of  persona 
among  us,  either  those  who  think  not  at  all,  or  those  whose  imaginations  are 
active  indeed,  but  continually  evil.  Of  these  latter  it  may  be  said,  "  Their  foolish 
heart  was  darkened."  Of  the  principles,  I  do  not  say  of  the  detail,  of  political 
science,  a  sound  theology  is  the  only  sm-e  and  steady  basis.  Now  we  trace  the 
operations  by  which  a  destruction  so  extended  in  its  consequences  has  been 
effected.  The  master-spring  of  every  principle  which  can  permanently  secure 
the  stability  of  a  people  is  the  fear  and  knowledge  of  Almighty  God.  The  first 
operation  of  a  principle  of  atheism,  and  perhaps  one  of  the  most  formidable  in 
ito  consequences,  is  that  which  leads  political  men  to  conceive  of  Christianity  at* 
a  mere  auxiliary  to  the  State.  Religion  was  not  instituted  (in  the  Divine  council 
I  mean)  for  the  purpose  of  society  and  government,  but  society  and  government 
for  the  purposes  of  religion.  As  atheism  presumptuously  attempts  to  discard 
a  moral  government,  in  order  to  open  a  fearless  unrestrained  indulgence  for 
the  impetuosity  of  passion,  so  superstition  administers,  upon  a  principle  of  com- 
mntation,  to  those  same  indulgences.  It  is  utterly  subversive  of  the  two  grand 
pillarfl  of  the  Divine  administration.  His  justice  and  His  mercy.  Thus  both 
atheism  and  superstition  are  instruments  of  the  general  adversary  of  mankind. 
l^ir  origin  is  in  the  wilful  ignorance  of  God,  and  their  operation  in  the  merci- 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  61 

les8  destruction  of  His  creatures.  The  present  disastrous  state  of  human  affairs 
can  only  be  ascribed  to  one  source,  a  corruption  of  morals,  produced  by  a  previous 
depravation  of  the  opinions  ^  f  mankind.  If  the  events  we  deplore  and  deprecate 
arise  from  ignorance,  error,  and  false  opinion ;  and  this  ignorance  is  specifically 
the  ignorance  of  Almighty  God  and  His  dispensations,  to  revive  and  disseminate 
with  activity  the  principles  of  a  sound.  Christian,  and  orthodox  theology  will 
be  our  best  interest,  as  it  is  our  bounden  duty.  (T.  RenneU,  D.D.)  The  sin 
of  public  teachers : — Here  made  responsible  for  the  ignorance  of  the  people. 
1.  As  ignorance  is  a  very  rife  and  destroying  sin  in  the  visible  Church,  so  the 
guilt  thereof  doth  ofttimes  lie  in  great  part  at  preachers'  doors.  2.  Such  as 
would  be  able  to  teach  others,  ought  to  take  much  pains  that  they  may  be 
instructed  themselves  from  God  in  His  Word.  3.  The  more  familiar  occasion 
of  converse  men  have  with  holy  things,  wanting  holiness,  their  contempt  and 
dislike  of  them  will  be  the  greater,  and  their  opposition  to  light  have  the  more 
perversity  and  the  less  infirmity  in  it.  4.  Such  as  do  for  a  time  reject  and  resist 
means  of  knowledge,  may  at  last  come  to  lose  the  light  they  had.  5.  The  more 
relation  any  pretend  to  God,  by  virtue  of  their  general  or  particular  calling,  the 
Lord  will  make  use  thereof  to  aggravate  their  sin  and  unanswerable  walking. 
6.  Unfaithfulness  in  offices  will  cast  men  out  of  the  Church,  as  unsavoury  salt 
is  cast  out,  which  is  a  sad  judgment.  7.  It  is  a  righteous  judgment  on  unfaithful 
ministers  that  God  suffers  their  posterity  to  be  neglected.  {George  HiUcheson.) 
Lack  of  knowledge : — As  if  he  had  said,  If  they  had  the  knowledge  of  God,  they 
might  have  prevented  all  this,  but  they  were  ignorant  and  sottish  people,  and  this 
was  the  forerunner  of  misery  and  destruction.  The  heathens  were  wont  to  say 
that  if  their  god  Jupiter  would  destroy  one,  he  would  first  besot  him ;  so  these 
people  were  first  besotted  and  then  destroyed.  Ignorance  is  not  the  mother  of 
devotion,  but  rather  the  father  and  mother  too  of  destruction.  In  the  beginning  of 
this  chapter  we  have  the  sin  of  ignorance  set  forth,  here  we  have  its  danger.  There 
we  had  the  charge,  that  they  had  "  no  knowledge  in  the  land  "  ;  here  we  have 
the  judgment,  that  they  "  are  destroyed  for  want  of  knowledge."  Ignorance 
is  not  only  the  deformity  of  the  soul  as  blindness  is  the  deformity  of  the  face  ; 
though  a  man  or  woman  have  never  such  a  comely  face  otherwise,  yet  if  they 
be  blmd,  or  have  but  one  eye,  it  mars  their  beauty ;  so  ignorance  takes  away  the 
beauty  of  the  soul ;  and  not  only  so,  but  is  dangerous  and  destructive,  and  that 
in  these  respects — 1.  The  rational  creature  is  very  active  of  itself,  and  will  always 
be  in  motion,  always  working.  Then,  wanting  knowledge,  and  surrounded  by 
pits  and  snares,  how  dangerous  is  his  situation  !  2.  Man's  way  is  for  eternity, 
and  there  is  but  one  way  that  leads  to  an  eternity  of  happiness,  and  that  lies  in 
the  midst  of  a  hundred  crossways  and  bypaths.  If  he  have  not  light,  if  he  want 
knowledge,  what  is  to  become  of  him  ?  3.  Man  is  not  only  going  onward  through 
dangers  and  byways,  but  he  must  go  on  with  his  own  light.  The  soul  that  is 
ignorant  no  angel  in  heaven  can  help,  except  as  an  instrument  of  God  to  bring 
sight  into  his  eyes.  4.  The  work  we  are  to  do  about  our  souls  and  eternal  estates 
is  the  most  curious  and  most  difficult  piece  of  work,  and  we  must  do  it  by  our 
own  light.  5.  Blindness  in  this  world  makes  men  objects  of  pity  and  compassion, 
but  this  ignorance  and  blindness  make  men  to  be  the  objects  of  the  hatred  and 
curse  of  God.  God  gave  us  light  at  first,  we  have  brought  ignorance  upon  our- 
selves. {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Lack  of  knowledge  the  destruction  of  a  people: — 
The  tide  of  human  affairs  is  ever  throwing  up  upon  the  surface  of  society  some 
one  particular  subject  of  special  and  engiossing  interest.  One  of  the  prominent 
subjects  of  our  time  is  education.  It  has  been  forced  on  the  minds  of  thoughtful 
men  by  the  lamentable  results  of  allowing  an  exuberant  population  to  outgrow 
the  means  of  their  moral  and  religious  training,  bequeathed  by  the  wisdom  and 
piety  of  their  forefathers.  Hosea  the  prophet  was  commissioned  to  denounce 
God's  just  displeasure,  and  His  determination  to  inflict  punishment  upon  a  people 
that  refused  to  be  reformed.  God  had  a  controversy  with  the  inhabitants  of  the 
land,  because  there  was  no  truth,  nor  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land. 
It  is  a  serious  question  how  far  such  language  may  befit  ourselves.  It  is  certain 
that  there  is  a  fearful  lack  of  "  knowledge  of  God  "  in  ovir  times.     I.  What  is 

THE    KNOWXJJDGE,    THE   LACK    OF   WHICH   DESTROYS   A   PEOPLE  ?      The   question   iS 

analogous  to  another.  What  is  education  ?  Are  we  agreed  among  ourselves  as 
to  what  is  to  be  understood  by  this  expression  ?  There  is  a  class  of  men  whose 
ideas  of  knowledge  and  education  are  almost  confined  to  the  acquisition  and 
commimication  of  the  facts  and  principles  of  physical  and  general  science.    Educa- 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  iy. 

tion,  in  their  estimation,  is  training  up  the  young  to  be  in  mature  life  well-informed 
and  philosophical  men :  men  who  can  keep  pace  with  and  help  on  the  forward 
movements  of  an  inquiring  and  intellectual  age.  But  this  is  not  knowledge,  in 
the  true  and  full  sense  of  the  term,  neither  is  this  education.  We  are  still  short  of 
the  truth  if  we  define  knowledge  to  be  acquaintance  with  duties  as  well  as  facts, 
with  the  world  within  a  man,  as  well  as  the  world  without  him ;  and  education 
to  be  a  process  of  training  for  the  moral  as  well  as  the  intellectual  part  of  man, 
the  discipline  of  the  will  as  well  as  that  of  the  mind.  This  is  well  as  far  as  it  goes  ; 
but  it  is  not  the  whole  truth.  It  is  indeed  based  upon  a  false  principle,  that  the 
inculcation  of  moral  truths,  and  cultivation  of  moral  habits  will  suffice  to  regulate 
and  control  the  heart  and  will  of  man.  It  dreams  of  a  moral  regeneration  without 
an  adequate  regenerating  principle,  of  moral  obedience  without  a  sufficiently 
constraining  motive.  It  assumes  that  a  man  may  be  lifted  up  above  the  influence 
of  evil  by  presenting  to  his  mind  the  cold  abstraction  of  goodness.  The  advocates 
of  these  moral  systems  are  ignorant  of  the  materials  upon  which  they  would 
work.  They  do  not  know  the  nature  of  man.  They  forget  that  he  is  corrupt  and 
depraved.  The  moral  sense  of  man  is  so  beclouded  by  sin  that  to  behold  the 
beauty  of  virtue  is  neither  to  love  nor  to  embrace  it.  Education,  in  its  primary 
idea,  is  the  knowledge  of  God  in  His  relation  to  man  :  the  communication  of  this 
knowledge  to  the  heart,  through  the  medium  of  the  understanding.  Education 
is  training  as  well  as  teaching.  It  teaches  moral  duties  based  upon  the  knowledge 
of  God  as  a  reconciled  Father  in  Christ  Jesus.  Education  is  worthless  when 
severed  from  religion.  Lay  the  foundation  deeply  in  the  principles  of  true  religion, 
and  you  may  then  proceed  to  build  up  a  goodly  superstructure  of  all  that  is  worthy 
of  the  name  of  useful  knowledge.  II.  Thb  anxious  conditions  of  society 
ARE  EXPLAINED  BY  THE  LACK  OF  THIS  KNOWLBDGB.  Reflecting  minds  have 
serious  thoughts  upon  the  present  aspect  of  our  domestic  national  affairs.  We 
have  been  appalled  by  the  frightful  statistics  of  ignorance  and  vice,  of  the  mass  of 
corruption  fermenting  amidst  our  overgrown  population.  While  the  prodigious 
multiplication  of  human  beings  has  been  advancing,  there  has  been  no  corre- 
sponding multiplication  of  appliances  for  the  moral  and  religious  training  of  their 
souls,  either  as  children  or  adults.  Can  it  be  wondered  at  that  irreligion  and 
infidelity,  and  principles  of  anarchy  and  insubordination,  and  vice  in  some  of  its 
most  revolting  forms  have  overspread  these  densely  peopled  districts  ?  We 
cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  what  is  going  on  around  us.  A  population  has  grown 
up  unlearned  in  true  knowledge.  The  demoralising  process  is  going  on.  It  b  a 
self -propagating  evil.  One  uneducated  generation  begets  another,  and  probably 
a  worse.  Oiu:  fathers  did  much  for  national  education,  according  to  the  exigencies 
of  their  own  times.  We  must  follow  along  their  line  in  this,  that  religion  entered, 
as  a  component  element,  into  all  their  foundations.  ( W.  Nicholson,  M.A.)  The 
danger  of  a  lack  of  knowledge  : — I.  The  persons.  "  My  people."  A  frequent 
designation  of  the  Israelitish  people.  Jehovah  was  emphatically  to  them  a  God, 
and  they  were  emphatically  to  Him  a  people.  But  is  God's  greatest  goodness 
to  Israel  to  be  compared  with  the  civil  and  religious  privileges  with  which  He  has 
distinguished  this  favomed  country  ?  There  is  a  tendency  in  nations  as  well  as 
in  individuals  to  be  rendered  careless  and  secure  by  the  long  possession  of  privileges 
and  advantages.  And  the  history  of  Israel  is  intended  to  teach  a  lesson  of 
national  warning.  II.  Their  condition.  "My  people  are  destroyed."  Notwith- 
standing all  God's  favour  towards  them,  yet  He  abandoned  them  to  desolation. 
He  gave  them  over  to  destruction.  And  what  ground  of  security  has  Britain  any 
more  than  Israel,  except  in  the  favour  and  protection  of  God  ?  It  is  impossible  for 
any  reflecting  person  to  consider  the  internal  state  of  our  country  without  feeling 
that  we  have  within  ourselves  the  elements  of  destruction,  the  materials  for  a 
wide-wasting  desolation.  III.  The  cause  of  that  condition.  "For  lack  of 
knowledge."  Lack  of  the  knowledge  of  God  and  religion.  This  was  God's  ground 
of  complaint,  and  for  this  He  entered  into  judgment  with  them.  This  lack  of 
knowledge  was  accompanied  and  followed  by  a  general  corruption  of  morals,  as 
the  next  words  to  our  text  show.  When  the  corruption  became  general,  and  the 
fruits  of  this  religious  ignorance  were  ripe,  God  thrust  in  the  sharp  sickle  of  His 
judgments,  and  reaped  the  harvest  in  His  wrath.  Observe  then  the  bearing 
which  the  state  of  the  collective  body  of  the  people  as  to  religious  knowledge 
must  have  upon  the  question  of  national  safety  and  national  ruin.  If  there 
lea  lack  of  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  truth  in  the  bulk  of  the  people,  the 
dc^iiuction  of  the  nation  wiU  be  inevitable.     And  if  ruin  come  upon  any  land. 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  63 

who  are  the  sufferers  ?  If  the  body  be  crushed  by  a  fall,  which  of  the  members 
will  escape  the  anguish  ?  Hence  the  state  of  the  people  is  the  concern  of  all. 
God  has  bound  all  classes  in  one  common  bond  of  interest :  all  must  rejoice,  or 
all  must  suffer  together.  What  then  is  the  state  of  our  population  with  respect 
to  religious  knowledge  ?  And  what  must  be  the  end  of  these  things  7  (Thomas 
Best,  M.A.)  Neglect  of  teaching: — God  here  attacks  the  priests,  but  includes 
the  whole  people.  For  teaching  prevailed  not  among  them,  as  it  ought  to  have 
done.  The  Lord  reproaches  the  Israelites  for  their  ingratitude,  seeing  He  had 
kindled  among  them  the  light  of  celestial  wisdom.  How  did  the  Israelites  perish 
through  ignorance  7  They  closed  their  eyes  against  the  celestial  light,  because 
they  deigned  not  to  become  teachable,  so  as  to  learn  the  wisdom  of  the  eternal 
Father.  We  see  the  guilt  of  the  people  in  that  they  had  malignantly  suppressed 
the  teaching  of  the  law.  The  people  perished  without  knowledge,  because  they 
would  perish.  {John  Calvin.)  The  lack  of  knowledge  : — I.  Thb  statbmbnt 
OF  THE  TEXT  IS  NO  EXAGGERATION.  Look  at  the  Jewish  nation.  The  whole 
nation  was  a  school,  and  the  law  was  their  schoolmaster  to  bring  them  to  Christ. 
But  it  failed — utterly  failed — to  accomplish  this.  The  enmity  of  the  human 
heart  came  out  amongst  the  Jewish  people.  II.  Some  of  the  endeavours 
MEN  MAKE  TO  RECTIFY  EXISTING  EVILS.  Emphatically  this  is  an  age  of  progress  ; 
of  progress  in  many  things  that  have  rendered  man  wiser,  and  the  world  happier. 
Philosophy  takes  a  higher  range  of  thought.  Literature  is  nobler  and  healthier 
in  its  tone.  Art  is  purer  than  Grecian  art.  Science  is  not  atheistic.  Many 
run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  is  multiplied.  We  recognise  this  progress  thank- 
fully ;  it  is  all  good,  though  not  the  highest  good.  It  is  aU  capable  of  being 
turned  to  spiritual  advantage.  But  by  it  society  is  not  regenerated  :  there  are 
social  questions  of  the  deepest  importance  that  are  not  yet  settled.  There  are 
forms  of  ignorance  most  appalling,  developments  of  ignorance  most  deplorable,  and 
a  general  spirit  of  scepticism  widely  spread.  Man  has  done,  and  is  doing,  his 
very  utmost  to  set  the  world  right,  and  yet  the  world  continues  wrong.  III.  The 
Gospel  announces  itself  as  sufficient  to  meet  and  to  remove  at.t.  the 
MISERIES  OF  HUMANITY.  1.  It  is  this  which  distinguishes  the  Gospel  from  all 
other  schemes.  Many  things  are  palliatives,  but  you  can  find  nothing  that  pre- 
tends to  do  all  the  work  that  man  requires  to  have  done  for  him  but  the  Gospel. 
Then  indifference  to  the  Gospel  is  the  most  fearful  proof  that  could  be  presented 
to  the  mind  of  my  voluntary  ignorance  and  sin.  2.  We  may  with  confidence 
say  that  the  Gospel  not  only  professes  to  do  this  but  has  done  all  this.  It  has 
proved  itself  the  great  salvation.     ( W.   G.  Barrett. )        Religious  ignorance  : — 

1.  It  is  DESTRUCTIVE.  It  is  not  the  mother  of  devotion,  it  is  the  mother  of 
destruction.  \,  What  does  it  destroy  ?  The  growth  of  the  soul  in  power,  beauty, 
and  fruitfulness.  2.  How  does  it  destroy  ?  How  can  the  lack  of  a  thing  destroy  ? 
The  lack  of  heat  and  moisture  will  kill  the  vegetable  kingdom ;  the  lack  of  air 
wiU  cause  the  extinction  of  all  animal  life.  The  soul  without  knowledge  of  God 
is  like  a  plant  without  heat  or  moistvure,  an  animal  without  the  salubrious  breeze. 
II.  It  is  wilful.  No  culpability  in  a  man  being  ignorant  of  some  things.  The 
knowledge  of  God  comes  to  him  whether  he  will  or  not.  In  natmre,  in  reason, 
in  intuitions  of  his  moral  being.  Ignorance  of  God  is  a  criminal  ignorance.  III.  It 
is  God-offending.  He  deals  out  retribution — 1.  To  themselves.  2.  To  their 
children.  It  is  a  Divine  law  springing  from  the  constitution  of  society,  that 
the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  shall  be  visited  on  their  children.  {Homilist.) 
Ignorance  destructive  : — Ignorance  disqualifies  a  man  for  those  situations  in  life 
that  require  the  exercise  of  wisdom  and  discretion :  it  degrades  him  in  society 
below  the  rank  of  those  who  would  otherwise  be  deemed  his  equals  or  inferiors ; 
and  it  not  unfrequently  leads  to  idleness,  dissipation,  and  vice.  But  ignorance 
of  religion  is  of  infinitely  worse  consequence,  because  it  ensures  the  everlasting 
destruction  of  the  soul.  I.  The  ignorance  of  the  Christian  world.  Among 
nominal  Christians  there  is  a  great  lack  of  knowledge  :  an  ignorance — 1.  Of 
tliemselves.  Of  their  blindness,  guilt,  depravity,  helplessness.  2.  Of  God.  Of 
His  holiness,  justice,  truth.  3.  Of  Christ.  They  may  confess  His  Godhead,  and 
acknowledge  Him  as  a  Saviour.  But  what  do  they  know  of  Him  as  He  is  in  Himself, 
or  as  He  is  to  us  ?  II.  The  fatal  consequences  of  this  ignobance.  Lack 
of  spiritual  knowledge — 1.  Tends  to  men's  destruction.  2.  WiU  issue  in  their 
destruction.     Infer — 1.  How  carefully  should  we  improve  the  means  of  grace  ! 

2.  How  earnestly  should  we  pray  for  the  teachings  of  God's  Spirit.  3.  How 
thankful  we   should   be  for   any   measure   of  Divine  knowledge.     {Skeletons  o/ 


64  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  it. 

Sermons.)  True  knowledge  for  the  people  : — ^Neither  wealth  nor  political  forms 
of  government  give  knowledge  to  a  people.  They  may  give  them,  or  obtain 
for  them,  technical  information  in  most  things,  but  they  do  not  give  that  know- 
ledge which  is  the  height  of  wisdom — that  knowledge  which  wnl  guide  a  man 
aright  in  his  intercourse  with  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  a  continuously  changing 
government  and  an  accumulation  of  wealth  have  a  great  tendency  to  demoralise  a 
nation,  and  to  retard,  rather  than  to  foster,  the  knowledge  of  that  which  Ls  righteous 
and  true.  As  it  was  in  the  early  ages,  so  it  has  continued  through  the  various 
nations  which  have  existed  upon  the  earth  down  to  the  present  time ;  and  the 
Jewish  nation  fell  under  the  ordinary  laws  of  social  progress  when  they  departed 
from  the  directions  which  were  given,  and  the  advice  which  was  offered  by  God 
Himself.  Even  the  chosen  people  of  the  Almighty  fell  under  the  power  of  the 
tjnrant  custom  ;  and  notwithstanding  their  advance  in  civilisation  and  wealth, 
they  erred  and  were  "  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."  Why  was  this  ?  Because 
the  technical  information  which  they  obtained  from  their  teachers  was  not  that 
which  would  support  the  actions  of  their  daily  life,  was  not  that  which  would 
assist  in  guiding  them  tlirough  the  devious  windings  of  the  world  in  which  they 
lived,  but  had  relation  merely  to  the  subject  which  was  then  in  hand,  and  was 
of  no  further  avail  when  once  that  subject  was  laid  on  one  side.  As  a  natural 
consequence  of  this  narrow  and  superficial  training,  the  minds  of  the  people 
generally  became  contracted  until  they  could  not  see  any  political  or  religious 
question  in  its  proper  bearings,  or  to  its  whole  extent.  They  saw  what  related 
to  the  question  of  the  hour,  and  being  content  with  this,  they  ultimately  sank 
under  a  despotism  of  body  and  mind  ;  for  the  mind  sank  and  was  debased  long 
before  the  body  felt  any  evil  effects  from  the  narrowing  of  views  which  had  been 
going  on  for  some  time  amongst  the  people.  In  the  time  of  Hosea  the  people 
were  wandering  to  and  fro  from  lack  of  knowledge,  and  the  prejudices  of  the  age 
were  being  stirred  up  for  the  services  of  party,  instead  of  being  laid  aside  in  the 
desire  to  teach  the  people  only  that  which  was  true.  Prejudice  is  one  of  the  most 
difficult  things  which  men  have  to  encounter  in  their  desire  to  obtain  a  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.  When  once  the  mind  has  taken  up  any  opinion  it  lays  hold 
of  it  as  its  own,  and  follows  it  out  regardless  of  what  may  be  said  by  others  to  the 
contrary.  It  considers  that  which  it  holds  to  be  the  truth;  and,  as  a  natural 
consequence,  looks  upon  the  sayings  of  those  who  oppose  it  as  absolutely  false, 
and  without  any  legitimate  foundation  upon  which  to  stand.  Nor  is  it  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  events  worth  while  to  try  and  disabuse  people  of  their  pre- 
judices. And  not  only  do  our  prejudices  impel  us  to  hold  with  tenacity  that 
which  we  have  taken  up  as  the  truth,  but  they  impel  us  to  dislike  and  to  hat« 
those  who  may  differ  from  us.  A  man  is  truly  orthodox  when  he  thinks 
as  we  think ;  but  let  him  differ  from  us  only  in  one  jot  or  tittle,  and  then 
his  opinions  are  at  once  pronounced  to  be  heterodox,  and  he  himself  adjudged 
as  an  enemy.  There  are  some  conclusions  which  must  be  admitted  by  every 
reflecting  mind  as  soon  as  they  are  presented  to  it,  and  they  must  also  be  acknow- 
ledged as  truths  the  moment  they  are  offered  for  consideration.  When  we  reflect 
upon  the  matter  for  a  moment,  it  is  evident  that  each  one  ought  "  to  live  soberly, 
righteously,  and  godly  in  the  world,"  because  it  is  clearly  an  offence  against  the 
well-being  of  society  that  men  shoiild  live  otherwise.  Then  let  us  not  be  the 
servants  of  men,  for  there  is  One  greater  than  they.  Let  us  not  be  the  followers 
of  a  party,  for  there  is  One  wiser  than  it.  But  let  us  seek  honestly  after  the  truth 
wherever  it  may  be  found  ;  and  whilst  we  hold  Augustine  as  a  friend,  and  Luther 
and  Calvin  as  friends, — whilst  we  respect  men  of  every  party — let  us  ever  bear 
in  mind  that  we  have  a  duty  to  perform  far  higher  than  that  of  clansmen :  we 
have  to  teach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  to  proclaim  His  name  above  that  of  every 
other  name,  and  to  endeavour  above  all  things  to  strive  manfully  to  learn  and  to 
do  that  which  is  right.  {F.  T.  Swinbourne.)  The  importance  of  religious  know- 
ledge : — Both  philosophers  and  divines  agree  that  the  first  step  to  true  know- 
ledge is  a  discovery  of  om:  own  ignorance  ;  all  wise  men  will  confess  that  the  more 
they  know  the  more  a  modest  sense  of  the  narrow  limits  of  their  understanding 
increases.  The  recovery  of  true  knowledge,  ^dth  a  constant  improvement 
therein  ourselves,  and  the  using  our  utmost  endeavours  to  propagate  it  among 
mankind,  are  some  of  the  most  noble  and  rational  ends  of  our  existence.  Not- 
withstanding His  severe  reproachings  and  threatenings  of  Ephraim,  how  tenderly 
the  Lord  expostulates  with  them  !  A  wilftd  neglect  of  true  knowledge  is  repre- 
sented aa  the  spring  of  all  their  provocations  and  theii  danger.     Ignorance  is 


CHAP.  IV.]  ROSEA.  65 

represented  as  the  occasion  of  their  ruin.  I.  The  titlb  GiVBif  TO  thb  pboplb 
WHO  ABB  EXPOSED  TO  THIS  DESTRUCTION.  Still,  Spite  of  their  sin,  they  are  called 
"  My  people."  This  title  may  be  applied  to  mankind  in  general,  and  in  a  strict 
manner  to  those  who  are  known  as  the  "  elect."  Here  it  is  applied  to  the  kingdom 
of  the  Ten  Tribes,  under  the  name  Ephraim.  Though  they  had  revolted  from  Him, 
God  still  condescends  to  own  His  relation  to  them.  And  this  relation  materially 
aggravates  their  crimes.  11.  What  is  this  knowledge  which  is  of  such 
IMPORTANCE  ?  Men  may  be  great  strangers  to  philosophy,  to  human  arts,  and 
carnal  wisdom,  and  yet  not  be  involved  in  that  destruction  which  is  certainly 
connected  with  the  ignorance  mentioned  in  the  text.  As  true  religion  is  the  only 
effectual  security  of  private  persons  from  this  ruin,  so  it  is  with  respect  to  society. 
Keligious  knowledge  must  be  intended  in  this  text.  1.  Men  might  learn  much 
by  seriously  observing  what  is  presented  to  their  view  all  round  about  them ; 
and  much  more  if  they  would  examine  their  own  frame,  and  reflect  on  the  various 
warnings  of  that  monitor  which  is  in  every  breast.  2.  It  is  the  knowledge  which 
God  has  been  pleased  to  reveal,  which  is  chiefly  intended  here.  This  was,  in 
Hosea's  time,  to  be  found  in  the  books  of  Moses  and  the  prophets.  This  is,  for  us, 
the  knowledge  that  is  conveyed  by  the  Gospel.     III.  The  sad  occasions  ob- 

THE  WANT  OF  THIS  KNOWLEDGE,  ESPECIALLY  IN  WHAT  IS  CALLED  A  LAND  OF  LIGHT. 

I.  A  thoughtless  neglect  of  those  sober  reflections  to  which  we  are  led  even  by 
that  measure  of  natural  light,  which,  in  the  midst  of  all  our  depravity,  is  mercifully 
continued  to  us.  Observation  teaches  us  what  effect  negligence  will  have  on  our 
temporal  affairs.  When  men  come  to  divide  precious  time  principally  between 
the  cares  about  the  enlargement  of  their  worldly  substance,  and  the  various 
methods  their  own  corruptions  will  dictate,  very  little  will  be  left  for  nobler 
improvements.  2.  The  want  of  the  written  revelation  must  needs  be  attended 
with  the  most  deplorable  ignorance.  As  may  be  seen  in  the  history  of  those 
nations  which  have  wanted  this  glorious  advantage.  3.  Ignorance  of  religion 
must  needs  prevail  where  there  is  the  want  of  a  skilful,  faithful,  and  laborious 
ministry.  4.  A  pious  education  of  our  youth  is  another  method  of  cultivating 
religious  knowledge.  This  foundation  must  be  chiefly  laid  in  family  instruction. 
We  have  lived  to  see  the  day  when  the  impression  of  religious  sentiments  on  young 
minds  is  not  only  by  many  laid  aside,  but  such  a  neglect  is  defended.  It  is  said 
to  prevent  any  bar  being  put  to  what  is  called  "  free  thinking."  The  great  neglect 
of  family  religion,  and  the  pious  example  which  superiors  by  the  laws  of  reason 
are  indispensably  obliged  to  set  before  those  under  their  care,  as  it  has  long  been 
complained  of,  if  not  soon  reformed  must  bring  peril  on  our  Churches  and  on 
our  land.  5.  The  growth  of  ignorance  among  the  poorer  sort  is  a  matter  of 
peculiar  consequence.  6.  Among  good  men  there  is  too  great  a  neglect  of  applica- 
tion to  Heaven  for  a  blessing  on  such  attempts  as  are  made  to  promote  useful  Imow- 
ledge,  and  of  a  dependence  on  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  is  only  able  to  make  them 
successful.  IV.  The  destruction  which  is  the  natural  and  sad  consequence 
OF  THIS  ignorance.  Reference  is  first  to  those  temporal  calamities  which  befell 
these  people  for  their  sins  ;  or  it  relates  to  futiu"e  temporal  calamities  which 
Hosea  predicted.  But  ignorance  persisted  in  exposes  public  commimities  to 
almost  every  criminal  and  dangerous  disorder,  and  in  the  end  brings  on  national 
ruin ;  and  it  is  big  with  every  spiritual  &a  well  as  temporal  mischief  to  private 
persons  where  it  prevails.  Ignorance  of  Divine  things  keeps  the  conscience  \mder 
a  fatal  stupidity,  it  exposes  men  to  the  devices  of  the  old  serpent,  and  to  the  crafty 
attempts  of  every  seducer  ;  it  exposes  us  to  every  kind  of  error  in  conduct,  and 
obstructs  our  usefulness  both  in  public  and  in  private  life.  V.  The  remedies 
WHICH  SHOULD  BE  APPLIED  TO  SO  DANGEROUS  A  DISEASE.  1.  We  should  cheerfully 
and  constantly  attend  on  those  advantages  Heaven  has  bestowed  on  us,  that  we 
read  and  hear,  that  we  inquire  and  meditate,  and  watch  and  pray,  aa  those  who 
are  convinced  that  ignorance  has  been  their  ruin,  and  that  happiness  in  this  life 
is  absolutely  connected  with  religious  knowledge,  and  that  the  lives  of  our  souls 
depend  upon  it.  2.  We  should  do  all  we  can  to  promote  the  influence  of  religious 
knowledge  on  the  minds  of  others,  by  the  careful  instruction  of  our  families, 
and  the  support  of  a  well-qualified  ministry.  VI.  Some  applications  of  what 
HAS  BEEN  SAID.  1.  How  deplorable  is  the  state  of  multitudes  among  us,  who  lie 
under  the  grossest  ignorance.  2.  We  ought  to  rejoice  in  our  civil  constitution, 
and  to  encourage  and  defend  our  religious  advantages.  {Joseph  Stennett,  D.D.) 
Ignorance  of  Qod  among  'professing  Christians : — The  ungodliness  of  Israel  in  Hosea'a 
time  was  in  a  great  measure  to  be  traced  to  ignorance  of  the  true  God  ;  an  ignor- 

5 


ea  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TBAT0B.  [chap.  ir. 

ance  for  which  they  were  responsible,  because  there  was  the  light  of  God's  truth 
in  their  land.  It  was  peculiarly  sinful,  inasmuch  as  it  was  ignorance  in  God's 
professing  people.  And  the  ignorance  involved  their  ruin.  I.  The  fbbsbnt 
AND  FUTUEE  MISERY  OF  IGNORANCE  OF  GoD.  No  real  earthly  happiness  can  be 
enjoyed  where  there  is  ignorance  of  God,  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  not  happiness, 
though  they  often  pass  for  it.  Nor  is  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  or  the  acquisition 
of  wealth.  Happiness  must  be  sought  in  a  knowledge  of,  and  obedience  to,  the 
will  and  ways  of  God.  Where  there  is  the  true  knowledge  of  God,  there  is  no 
real  wretchedness,  though  there  may  be  much  tribulation      II.  That  which 

AGGRAVATES   THE    MISERY     13     OUB    RELATION    TO     GOD    AS     HiS    PBOPLB.       1.    It 

aggravates  their  sin,  because  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  every  man  to  seek  the 
knowledge  of  God  as  the  "  one  thing  needful."  We  are  not  to  wait  to  have  this 
knowledge  forced  upon  us,  we  are  bound  to  seek  it.  If  the  guilt  of  God's  people 
who  remain  in  ignorance  of  Him  be  aggravated  by  their  relation  to  Him,  so  likewise 
is  the  guilt  of  those  aggravated  who  are  bound  to  teach  God's  people.  Civil  govern- 
ment stands  upon  religious  grovmds,  and  has  religious  obligations.  The  Church 
is  the  bulwark  of  every  Christian  State.  { W.  J.  Brodrick,  M.A. )  The  necessity  of 
a  union  between  religion  and  education  : — I.  The  necessary  connection  betwxxk 
RELIGION  AND  EDUCATION.  The  word  "  education  "  suggests  the  idea  of  preparing 
the  young  for  the  great  duties  incumbent  on  them  in  the  various  relations  of  life  ; 
and  with  a  view  to  this  object,  includes  the  communication  of  knowledge,  the 
inculcation  of  right  principles,  and  the  formation  of  corresponding  habits  in  those 
who  are  thus  to  be  the  subjects  of  it.  But  what  are  we  to  understand  by  the 
great  duties  incumbent  upon  us  in  the  different  relations  of  life  ?  Some  think 
that  the  end  and  purpose  of  their  existence  have  been  met  when  they  have  fairly 
performed  their  present  duties,  and  honourably  met  their  obligations.  But  these 
are  practical  atheists,  for  they  completely  exclude  Grod  from  any  right  to  the 
homage  of  His  rational  creatures,  and  reduce  man  to  the  degradation  and  wretched- 
ness of  a  being  who,  whatever  other  heights  he  may  attain,  is  incapable  of  rising 
to  the  knowledge,  the  love,  the  service,  and  the  everlasting  enjoyment  of  his 
Maker.  In  opposition  to  such  views,  we  say,  that  even  reason  and  conscience, 
above  all  the  Word  of  God,  declare  that  man  is  endowed  with  a  nature  that  renders 
him  capable  of  communion  with  the  great,  eternal,  glorious  God ;  nay,  that  the 
advancement  of  the  praise  of  this  God  is  the  very  end  of  his  existence  ;  and  in 
pursuing  this  end  he  secures  present  and  everlasting  happiness.  This  duty  may, 
however,  be  acknowledged,  and  yet  the  proper  principles  and  conduct  attending 
it  may  be  repudiated.  If  the  former  view  was  practical  atheism,  this  is  practical 
infidelity.  Milton  says :  "  The  end  of  learning  is  to  repair  the  ruins  of  our  first 
parents,  by  regaining  to  know  God  aright,  and  out  of  that  knowledge  to  love 
Him,  to  imitate  Him,  to  be  like  Him  as  we  may  the  nearest,  by  possessing  our  souls 
of  true  virtue,  which,  being  united  to  the  heavenly  grace  of  faith,  makes  up  the 
highest  perfection."  Can  Christian  training  be  efficiently,  and  ought  it  to  be 
exclusively  discharged  by  parents  ?  II.  The  importance  and  advantages 
OF  A  UNION  between  RELIGION  AND  EDUCATION,  Man  was  Originally  framed 
60  as  to  derive  happiness  from  the  knowledge,  love,  and  service  of  God.  It  is 
when  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  on  the  heart  of  fallen  man  that  the  different 
parts  of  his  moral  constitution  will  resume,  as  it  were,  their  proper  place  and 
connection,  and  that  he  himself  will  be  enabled  to  act  as  he  was  designed  for  the 
glory  of  God,  in  all  the  varied  relations  in  which  he  stands.  When  religious  know- 
ledge is  communicated  and  made  effectual  for  the  conversion  of  the  soul  to  God, 
man  is  under  the  influence  of  that  principle  which  will  most  certainly  and  with 
increasing  strength  constrain  him  to  the  discharge  of  every  obligation  in  regard  to 
God,  to  himself,  and  to  his  fellow-creatures,  and  thus  fit  him  for  the  attainment 
of  the  great  end  of  his  being.  Put  forth  this  knowledge  in  aU  its  bearings,  and  you 
will  do  that  which,  with  the  Divine  blessing,  will  enable  him  to  discharge  with 
consistency  and  perseverance,  with  honour,  comfort,  and  usefulness,  the  great ' 
duties  of  life.  But  how  sad,  and  morally  helpless,  is  the  condition  of  those 
who  are  allowed  to  grow  up,  not  only  without  a  religious  education,  but  without 
an  education  of  any  kind!  {Abercromby  L.  Gordon.)  Hindrances  to  know- 
ledge : — Very  different  and  almost  opposite  things  are  said  of  knowledge  in  the 
Holy  Scriptures.  Such  may  be  found  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paid.  Following 
the  sound  rather  than  the  sense  of  some  of  St.  Paul's  expressions,  it  has  been 
the  fashion  with  some  to  decry  altogether  the  value  of  knowledge,  whether  on 
religious   or   common   subjects.     What   is   knowledge  ?     The   old   definition   is. 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  67 

"  Knowledge  is  the  firm  belief  of  something  true,  on  sufficient  grounds."  Belief 
is  necessary,  but  belief  is  not  enough.  Fully  testing  our  knowledge,  it  may  be 
said  that  we  know  almost  nothing.  In  later  life  we  become  aware  of  this,  and 
very  painfully.  But  the  charge  of  ignorance  (in  the  true  meaning  of  that  word) 
may  be  brought  as  justly  against  the  so-called  enlightenment  of  this  age,  as 
against  the  less  showy  pretensions  of  that  which  is  now  gone  by.  Two  or  three 
causes  for  the  lack  of  real  knowledge  may  be  given.  1.  The  multiplication  of 
outward  helps  and  facilities  for  learning  has  a  direct  tendency  to  counteract  true 
knowledge.  It  seems  to  be  a  condition  of  knowledge  that  it  shall  not  come  too 
easily.  Knowledge  must  be  fetched  by  exertions  of  our  own.  2.  A  misuse 
of  stimulus  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  is  an  impediment.  One  reason  why  many 
of  us  do  not  know  more  is  that  we  have  made  knowledge  a  means  instead  of 
an  end — a  means  of  getting  distinction.  The  use  of  emulation  as  a  stimulus  to  know- 
ledge is  a  perilous,  though  it  may  be  a  necessary  expedient.  Be  on  your  guard, 
too,  against  a  misuse  of  a  temporary  stimulus  acting  upon  parts  of  your  nature 
which  are,  by  comparison,  the  lower  rather  than  the  higher.  Emulation  is  higher 
than  appetite,  but  it  is  lower  than  that  to  which  manly  principle  and  Christian 
motive  appeal.  3.  The  efifect  of  light  reading  upon  the  acquisition  of  knowledge 
truly  so  called.  In  the  days  of  our  fathers,  any  one  who  could  read  at  all  would 
scarcely  fail  to  read  with  a  view  to  knowledge.  The  supply  of  amusement  by 
literature,  the  command  of  books  as  a  mere  pastime,  was  then  scarcely  thought  of. 
Now  young  people  greedily  devour  fictitious  tales  till  indulgence  produces  a 
surfeit.  Sometimes  an  absolute  vacancy  follows  upon  excess  of  such  reading. 
Fiction  has  two  legitimate  provinces.  It  is  a  salutary  relaxation  for  an  over- 
wrought brain.  And  it  may  be  employed  as  a  study  of  life.  But  the  knowledge, 
the  lack  of  which  destroys,  is  the  knowledge  not  of  things  but  of  persons.  It  is 
the  acquaintance  of  soul  with  soul,  and  spirit  with  spirit ;  the  contact  of  the  unseen 
inmost  self  of  man  with  the  unseen  inmost  essence  of  another,  even  of  Him  in  whom 
man  lives,  and  whom  truly  to  know  is  eternal  life.  What  we  need  is  to  know  God. 
It  is  no  metaphysical,  scarcely  even  a  theological,  knowledge  you  need.  It  is  the 
knowledge  as  of  a  friend.  (C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The  evils  of  ignorance  : — 
I.  Ignorancb  is  destbuctive.  1.  Destructive  of  the  dignity  of  man.  The 
faculties  of  knowledge,  reason,  judgment,  and  voluntary  determination  distinguish 
us  from  the  beasts  that  perish,  and  constitute  the  true  dignity  of  our  nature.  But 
faculties  and  powers  are  of  little  value  until  they  are  brought  into  exercise  and 
directed  to  their  proper  objects.  Instruction  is  to  man  what  culture  is  to  the 
plant.  Without  it,  life  is  spent  in  a  vacant  stupidity,  or  distracted  by  irregular 
imagination  and  heated  passions.  2.  Destructive  of  the  usefulness  of  man. 
Knowledge  constitutes  the  whole  difference  betwixt  savage  and  civilised  society. 
To  the  improvement  of  the  mind  aU  nations  have  owed  the  improvement  of  their 
condition.  Ignorance  is  the  negative  of  everything  good  and  useful.  It  not  only 
renders  the  members  of  a  community  useless  to  each  other,  it  opposes,  and 
frequently  triumphs  over,  all  the  endeavours  of  humane  and  enlightened  indi- 
viduals. The  despotism  of  ignorance  is  of  the  most  imperious  nature.  Minds 
wholly  uncultivated  are  averse  to  serious  thought,  and  are  only  conversant 
with  sensible  objects.  From  this  springs  their  aversion  to  the  Gospel ;  for  who- 
ever receives  it  must  become  serious  and  thoughtful.  3.  Destructive  of  virtue. 
Virtue  can  no  more  exist  without  knowledge,  than  an  animal  can  exist  without 
life.  In  proportion  as  ignorance  prevails  in  society,  virtue  is  destroyed.  Ignorant 
men  may  possibly  be  made  enthusiasts ;  they  may  be  made  superstitious ;  but 
before  they  can  be  made  rational,  steady,  and  consistent  Christians,  they  must 
be  enlightened.  That  ignorance  is  destructive  of  virtue  is  proved  by  facts  as 
well  as  arguments.  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  records  of  heathen  nations, 
and  from  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  4.  Destructive  of  happiness.  There 
is  pleasure  in  knowledge  of  a  kind  more  pure  and  elevated  than  can  possibly  be 
found  in  any  of  the  gratifications  of  sense,  and  for  which  the  latter  are  but 
unworthy  substitutes.  Of  the  pleasures  which  spring  from  knowledge,  and 
especially  sacred  knowledge,  we  cannot  conceive  too  highly.  To  know  God,  to 
contemplate  the  perfections  of  His  nature  and  the  wonders  of  His  hand,  to  observe 
His  providential  regard,  to  behold  the  mystery  of  redemption,  the  character 
and  undertaking  of  Jesus, — such  subjects,  when  opened  to  the  mind,  not  only  give 
pleasure  as  speculative  discoveries  and  the  solutions  of  distressing  doubta, 
but  by  awakening  virtuous  sentiments,  kindling  an  ardent  and  elevated  devotion, 
producing  the  present  possession  of  the  peace  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  prospect  of 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

fulnese  of  joy.  11.  To  couutkbact  the  dbsteuctivb  bffbcts  op  ignobanob 
IS  THB  WOBK  OP  HUMANITY.  None  oppose  the  communication  of  knowledge  to 
the  lower  ranks  of  society  save  those  who  are  altogether  unreasonable.  Special 
importance  attaches  to  Sunday  school.  The  dissemination  of  knowledge  may 
be  treated  as — 1.  A  work  of  humanity ;  2.  Of  patriotism  ;  3.  Of  virtue.  Chris- 
tianity exhibits  a  Founder  who  went  about  doing  good ;  and  His  disciples  in  every 
age  have  devoted  their  time,  their  talents,  their  property,  their  influence  to  the 
instruction  and  blessing  of  mankind.  (R.  Wai9on.)  Ignorance  destructive: — 
Ignorance  disqualifies  a  man  for  those  situations  in  life  that  require  the  exercise 
of  wisdom  and  discretion :  it  degrades  him  in  society  below  the  rank  of  those 
who  would  otherwise  be  deemed  his  equals  or  inferiors ;  and  it  not  unfrequently 
leads  to  idleness,  dissipation,  and  vice.  Ignorance  of  religion  ensures  the  ever- 
lasting destruction  of  the  soul.  I.  Thb  ignobanob  op  thb  Christian  wobld. 
1.  An  ignorance  of  themselves.  They  know  little  of  their  blindness,  guilt, 
depravity,  helplessness.  2.  Ignorance  of  Gk>d.  His  holiness,  justice,  touth. 
3.  Ignorance  of  CJhrist.  As  He  is  in  Himsell  As  He  is  to  us.  II.  Thb 
FATAL  CONSEQUBNOES  OP  IT.  The  degrees  of  criminality  attached  to  ignorance 
vary  according  to  the  opportunities  men  have  enjoyed  of  obtaining  know- 
ledge. A  lack  of  spiritual  knowledge — 1.  Tends  to  destruction.  2.  Will  issue 
in  destruction.  Then — (1)  How  carefully  should  we  improve  the  means  of 
grace  !  (2)  How  earnestly  should  we  pray  for  the  teachings  of  God's  Spirit ! 
(3)  How  thankful  should  we  be  for  any  measure  of  Divine  knowledge ! 
(G.  Simeon,  M.A.)  Rejecting  knowledge  : — The  word  used  signifies  to  reject 
with  despite  and  contempt.  Knowledge  is  rejected  in  two  ways.  1.  When  the 
means  of  knowledge  are  rejected,  then  knowledge  is  rejected.  2.  When  the 
directions  of  our  knowledge  are  rejected,  when  we  refuse  to  be  guided  by  it, 
upon  this  our  knowledge  decays,  and  eventually  is  contemned.  {Jeremiah 
Btwroughs.)  Lack  of  knowledge  : — The  lack  of  this  knowledge  causes  people 
to  perish.  Knowing  God  as  a  Father,  Saviour,  Sanctifier,  gives  the  soul  the 
consciousness  of  pardon,  life,  purity,  power — the  power  of  love — that  is  almost 
irresistible.  Knowledge  is  power  to  the  inventor,  civil  engineer,  teacher  and  lawyer. 
But  the  knowledge  of  God  is  the  greatest  power.  It  enables  all,  even  the  weakest, 
to  do  great  things.  Oh,  for  a  knowledge  and  baptism  of  power  from  Grod  !  Then 
everywhere  "  the  people  that  do  know  God  shall  do  exploits."  {H.  W.  Bailey.) 
Ignorance  impoverishes  : — Among  the  Scotch  lairds,  there  is  one  whose  father 
died  in  a  poorhouse,  like  a  beggar,  notwithstanding  his  possession  of  the  very 
same  riches  his  heir  at  present  nas  at  his  disposal ;  but  he  simply  did  not  know 
how  rich  he  was.  Shortly  after  his  decease,  rich  metallic  ore  was  discovered  on 
the  estate ;  the  mines,  which  were  worked  at  once,  gave  such  returns,  that  very 
soon  all  mortgages  and  debts  could  be  paid  off,  and,  moreover,  put  the  j^esent 
owner  in  possession  of  a  nobleman's  fortune.  His  father  possessed  no  less,  but 
he  knew  it  not.  Alas,  for  how  many  the  blessed  Word  of  Grod  is  worth  no  more 
than  waste  paper !  Therein  are  contained  the  richest  promises  of  fulness  of 
grace,  of  victory  over  every  enemy,  of  exceeding  glory ;  but  because  they  do  not 
explore  these  mines,  they  live  like  beggars,  who  can  hardly  manage  to  obtain  a 
morsel  of  bread.  {A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  I  will  also  forget  thy  children. — 
Getting  at  parents  through  their  children :  —  The  Lord  must  in  some  way 
find  our  life  that  He  may  either  reward  or  chastise  it.  In  this  case  He  will 
get  at  the  parents  through  their  children.  He  would  not  have  done  this 
if  there  had  been  any  other  way  into  their  rebellious  and  obdurate  hearts.  We 
must  leave  Him  to  explain  Himself  in  reference  to  the  children ;  He  will  do  that 
which  is  right  and  merciful ;  we  need  not  plague  ourselves  about  that  aspect  of 
mystery ;  rather  let  us  fasten  attention  upon  the  fact  that  Grod  means  for  our 
good  to  get  at  our  souls  somehow.  He  will  try  all  the  gates,  euid  even  if  He  has 
to  break  down  the  child-gate  He  wiU  come  in.  That  is  the  point  upon  which 
we  are  to  fix  our  devout  attention.  We  can  of  course  be  tempted  in  another 
direction :  why  attack  the  children,  why  conduct  Himself  towards  the  innocent 
as  if  they  were  guilty  ?  Why  punish  the  innocent  for  those  who  have  trans- 
gressed ?  So  we  metaphysicailly  fritter  away  God's  meaning ;  we  endeavour 
to  solve  the  insoluble,  when  we  might  be  accepting  with  grace  and  gratitude  the 
inevitable,  the  disciplinary,  and  the  high  administration  of  Divine  righteousness. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yet.  7.    As   tbey  irere   increased,   so  they  sinned   against    Ue.  —  Secular 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  69 

prosperity  : — The  "  increase  "  is  in  the  number  of  the  population  ;  but  it  may 
refer  to  increase  of  wealth.  I.  Secular  pkosperity  attained  by  the  wicked. 
1.  Tliat  is  a  common  fact.  Wicked  men  in  all  ages  have,  as  a  rule,  been  more 
prosperous  than  their  contemporaries.  Two  things  account  for  this  fact — ( 1 )  Their 
secular  earnestness.  Material  good  is  the  one  thing  with  them.  (2)  Their  moral 
unscrupulousness.  They  have  no  high  sense  of  honour,  no  inviolable  rules  of 
right,  no  swaying  sense  of  moral  responsibilities.  Hence  they  will  not  reject 
the  fraudulent  and  false  if  they  wiU  serve  them  in  their  course.  2.  That  is  a 
trying  fact.  Men  of  incorruptible  truth,  honesty,  and  high  devotion  have  in 
all  ages  been  baffled  and  distressed  by  this  fact.  II.  Secttlab  prosperity 
ABUSED.  In  the  hands  of  the  wicked  wealth  can — 1.  Promote  injustice.  It  fattens 
the  despotic  in  human  nature.  2.  It  promotes  sensuality.  It  provides  means 
to  inflame  the  low  passions  of  human  nature,  and  to  pamper  the  brutal  appetites. 
3.  It  promotes  practical  atheism.  The  man  with  wealth,  and  without  God  in 
his  heart,  sinks  into  an  utter  forgetfulness  of  the  Author  of  all  good.  III.  Seculab 
prosperity  is  ruinous  to  the  wicked.  God  will  strip  them  of  all  they  now 
glory  in,  all  their  worldly  prosperity,  and  give  them  shame  instead.  "  Therefore 
will  I  change  their  glory  into  shame."  I  will  quench  all  the  lights  which  they 
have  kindled.  I  will  bring  them  into  wretchedness  and  contempt.  {HomUist.) 
Prosperity  encouraging  sin  : — The  Lord  accuses  them  of  ingratitude,  that  the 
more  they  prospered,  or  increased  in  number  or  glory,  they  were  the  more  bold 
on  sin ;  therefore  He  threatens  them  with  ignominy  to  come  in  place  of  that  glory 
which  made  them  miscarry  so  far.  Learn — 1.  Such  as  do  provoke  God  highly, 
may  yet,  in  His  long-suffering  patience,  not  only  continue  as  they  are,  but 
increase  in  prosperity,  issue,  and  glory  for  a  time.  2.  As  there  is  no  outward 
mercy  conferred  on  wicked  or  unrenewed  men,  but  they  do  make  it  a  snare  to 
draw  them  into  sin,  and  harden  them  in  it,  so  this  abuse  of  God's  goodness  doth 
aggravate  sin  exceedingly,  for  it  is  a  challenge  that  "  as  they  were  increased, 
so  they  sinned  against  Me."  3.  Any  glory  or  splendour  which  men  abuse  to 
harden  themselves  in  sin,  neglecting  that  which  is  their  true  honour,  will  certainly 
end  in  ignominy ;  and  especially  when  ministers  glory  of  worldly  state  or  riches 
as  their  chief  excellency,  neglecting  that  true  honour  of  being  faithful  in  their 
station.     {George   Hutcheson.)  Worldly   prosperity  an  insidious   danger; — 

Once  an  English  friend  found  Jenny  Lind  sitting  on  the  steps  of  a  bathing-machine, 
on  the  sands,  with  a  Lutheran  Bible  open  on  her  knee,  and  looking  out  into  the 
glory  of  a  sunset  that  was  shining  over  the  waters.  They  talked,  and  the  talk 
drew  near  to  the  inevitable  question  :  "  Oh,  Madame  Goldschmidt,  how  was  it 
that  you  ever  came  to  abandon  the  stage,  at  the  very  height  of  your  success  ?  " 
"  When,  every  day,"  was  the  quiet  answer,  "  it  made  me  think  less  of  this  "  (laying 
a  finger  on  the  Bible)  "  and  nothing  at  all  of  that  "  (pointing  to  the  sunset),  "  what 
else  could  I  do  ?  "  ("  Life  of  Jenny  Lind,''  by  Canon  Scott  Holland.)  Spiritual 
ruin  through  temporal  prosperity  : — It  is  not  an  unmixed  blessing  to  be  bom  with 
a  silver  spoon  in  one's  mouth,  for  we  all  need  the  benefit  of  the  struggle.  I  knew 
a  man  who  commenced  business  on  a  small  scale,  and  at  that  time  he  attended 
the  chapel  twice  every  Sunday.  The  business  increased  rapidly,  and  he  attended 
chapel  once  a  Sunday,  and  then  once  a  month,  and  now  he  spends  his  Sundays 
in  a  house-boat  on  the  river,  and  has  lost  all  taste  for  sacred  things  !  He  is  the 
miserable  slave  of  his  gold — he  worships  it  by  day  and  dreams  of  it  by  night — 
and  one  would  not  be  surprised  to  hear  of  his  seeking  his  euthanasia  in  suicide  ! 
A  man  alone  with  his  money  is  a  sorry  sight,  for  his  heart  is  petrified,  his  spirit 
materialised,  and  his  life  poisoned.  The  gold  mines  of  Peru  helped  to  wreck 
the  fortunes  of  Spain,  for  men  abandoned  honest  work,  and  became  avaricious 
adventurers.  Excessive  luxury  and  avarice  are  the  sure  forerimners  of  national 
decadence,  and  we  Britons  must  be  on  our  guard  against  it,  or  the  fate  of  Spain 
will  be  ours.  Life  is  qualitative  rather  than  quantitative,  and  our  prosperity 
will  spoil  lis  unless  we  give  to  soul-culture  the  first  and  highest  place.  As  Seneca 
says  :  "  One  of  the  most  serious  calamities  which  can  befall  any  man  is  not  to 
know  something  of  adversity."  (J.  Ossian  Davits.)  Therefore  will  I  turn  their 
glory  into  shame. — Perverted  gifts : — God  bestows  on  man  gifts,  which  may  be 
to  him  matter  of  praise  and  glory,  if  only  ordered  aright  to  their  highest  and  only 
true  end,  the  glory  of  God.  Man  perverts  them  to  vainglory,  and  therefore 
to  sin  ;  God  turns  the  gifts,  so  abused,  to  shame.  He  not  only  gives  them  shame 
instead  of  their  glory ;  He  makes  the  glory  itself  the  means  and  occasion  of  their 
ehame.     Beauty  becomes  the  occasion  of  degradation ;  pride  is  proverbially 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

near  a  fall ;  "  vaulting  ambition  overleaps  itself  and  falls  on  the  other  side." 
(E.  B.  Ptisey,  D.D.)  Man's  glory  changed  into  shame  : — The  very  blessings 
which  God  had  bestowed  on  these  priests  for  their  glory,  in  order  to  their  good, 
were  to  be  converted  into  their  shame,  and  be  made  instrumental  to  their  injury. 

1.  The  thrbatentng  in  its  rblation  to  the  Jews.  There  never  was  a  nation 
upon  which  were  poiured  with  such  profusion  things  which  should  have  been  for 
their  good  and  for  their  glory.  But  in  a  very  wonderful  manner  the  Jews  per- 
verted all  their  privileges,  and  thus  turned  their  glory  into  shame.  Their  national 
mercies  only  strengthened  the  national  apostasy,  and  then  the  threatening  took 
literal  effect,  though  only  through  their  own  misuse  of  their  many  advantages. 
II.  The  thkbatening  in  its  relation  to  ourselves.  Constantly  things  which 
should  have  turned  to  our  glory  have  been  instrumental  to  our  shame.  But 
this  cannot  occur  without  fatal  injury.  1.  How  may  our  temporal  blessings  be 
turned  into  shame  T  Nothing  tries  a  man  more  than  prosperity.  There  are 
many  tempers  and  dispositions  which  are  comparatively  repressed  by  straitness 
of  condition,  but  which  walk  abroad  in  full  liberty  when  that  condition  is  enlarged. 
Nevertheless,  riches  are  designed  of  God  to  be  for  man's  glory.  Alas  !  there  too 
often  occurs  the  reverse  of  this,  and  riches  are  turned  into  shame.  This  is  also 
true  of  intellectual  riches.  Genius  has  often  been  the  ruin  of  its  possessor ;  the 
powers  which  ought  to  have  been  for  their  glory,  needing  nothing  but  righteous 
employment  in  order  to  the  rendering  their  possessors  happy  in  themselves,  and 
benefactors  to  the  world,  have  been  given  to  the  cause  of  vice  and  infidelity. 
But  illustrations  had  better  be  taken  from  commonplace  than  from  rare  instances. 

2.  How  may  our  spiritual  advantages  be  turned  into  shame  ?  Every  doctrine 
of  religion,  every  leading  of  providence  may  clearly  be  for  our  own  glory  if  rightly 
employed,  and  as  clearly  for  our  shame  if  misused  and  perverted.  Illustrate 
by  the  doctrine  of  human  helplessness,  or  of  the  forbearance  God  manifests 
to  sinners.  In  dealing  with  the  dispensations  of  providence,  illustrate  by  affec- 
tions. They  are  oiu*  glory,  but,  unsanctified,  they  become  our  shame.  The 
prophet  Malachi  has  this  threatening  in  the  name  of  God,  "  I  will  curse  your 
blessings."  {Henry  MelviU,  B.D.)  Shame  for  glory : — God  loves  to  stain 
the  pride  and  haughtiness  of  men.  I.  He  wottld  bring  shame  instead  of 
GLORY.  So  God  is  wont  to  do.  Women  that  glory  in  their  beauty  and  splendour 
should  mark  well  (Isa.  iii.  16-24).  If  any  will  glory  in  parts,  the  Lord  justly 
brings  shame  on  them,  blasting  their  gifts.  It  is  reported  of  Albertus  Magnus, 
that  great  scholar,  that  for  five  years  before  his  death,  he  lost  his  faculties  so 
completely  that  he  could  not  read.  If  any  glory  in  riches,  Grod  can  soon  turn 
that  into  shame.  If  any  glory  in  honour,  God  can  soon  turn  that  into  shame, 
as  in  the  case  of  Herod.  According  to  the  glory  of  men  in  external  things,  so  is 
their  shame  when  Grod  takes  them  away.  Here  is  the  difference  between  the 
saints  and  the  wicked  when  they  lose  these  outward  things.  II.  God  makes 
the  very  things  they  glory  in  turn  to  their  shame.  He  makes  their  very 
gifts  to  be  their  undoing.  When  men  glory  in  this,  that  they  had  such  success, 
and  such  a  victory  at  such  a  time,  and  thence  infer,  "  Surely  God  is  with  us,  and 
blesses  and  owns  us,"  God  wiU  turn  this  glorying  into  shame  when  He  blasts 
their  success,  and  makes  it  manifest  to  all  that  though  they  have  all  outward 
means,  yet  they  avail  nothing.  When  the  saints  suffer  any  shame  for  God,  they 
can  glory.  What  the  world  accounts  their  shame  is  their  glory ;  and  that  which 
the  world  judges  to  be  their  glory  is  their  shame.  The  prophet  is  speaking  here 
more  especially  of  the  priests.  God  casts  shame  upon  wicked  priests.  {Jeremiah 
Burroughs.) 

Ver.  8.  They  eat  up  the  sin  of  My  people. — Feeding  on  sin  .-—Dr.  Henderson 
renders  these  words,  "  They  devour  the  sin-offering  of  My  people."  The 
priests  lived  upon  the  sacrificial  meat  (Lev.  vi.  26),  and  the  more  they  had 
of  this  the  more  they  were  pleased.  But  this  increased  with  the  increase  of  the 
sins  of  the  people.  The  more  the  people  sinned,  the  more  sin-offerings,  and  the 
more  sin-offerings,  the  more  priestly  banquets.  So  in  truth,  without  a  figure, 
they  "feed  upon  the  sin  of  the  people."  Such  men  can  be  found  now — I.  In 
the  ecclesiastical  world.  II.  In  the  commercial  world.  1.  Men  who 
have  vested  interest  in  the  sin  of  intemperance.  2.  Men  who  have  vested  interest 
in  the  sin  of  war.  HI.  In  the  professional  world.  What  could  lawyers 
do  without  chicaneries,  breach  of  contracts,  and  all  kinds  of  social  immoralities 
and  crimes  ?     What  would  popular  journalists  do  were  there  no  scandals,  no 


CHAP.  IV.]  ROSEA.  71 

tragedies,  no  crimes,  no  fraudulent  advertisements  ?  What  would  become  of 
the  sensational  novelist,  if  there  were  no  sinful  love  in  the  people  for  the  horrible 
and  the  prtirient  ?  Herein  is  the  great  obstruction  to  moral  reformations. 
Destroy  a  popular  sin,  and  you  destroy  the  livelihood  of  hundreds,  and  the  pomp 
and  splendour  of  many.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  9.  And  there  shall  be,  like  people,  like  priest. — Hosea's  proverb  : — 
"  Like  princes,  like  people  "  ;  but  also,  alas  !  "  like  people,  like  priests," — a 
proverb  which  has  acquired  currency  from  its  fatal  truth,  but  which  Hosea 
originated.  The  causes  for  the  widespread  immorality  were  twofold,  as  Hosea, 
resident  perhaps  in  Samaria,  saw  more  clearly,  and  pointed  out  more  definitely 
than  Amos.  They  were — 1.  The  detestable  vileness  and  hypocrisy  of  the  priests, 
with  whom,  as  usual,  the  false  prophets  were  in  league.  From  Hosea,  the  earliest 
of  the  northern  prophets  whose  works  are  extant,  to  Malachi  the  latest  prophet 
of  the  returned  exiles,  the  priests  had  very  little  right  to  be  proud  of  their  title. 
Their  pretensions  were,  for  the  most  part,  in  inverse  proportion  to  their  merits. 
The  neutrality,  or  the  direct  wickedness,  of  the  religious  teachers  of  a  country, 
torpid  in  callous  indifference  and  stereotyped  in  false  traditions,  is  always  the 
worst  sign  of  a  nation's  decadence.  Hosea  was  no  exception  to  the  rule  that  the 
true  teacher  must  be  prepared  to  bear  the  beatitude  of  malediction,  and  not 
least  from  those  who  ought  to  share  his  responsibilities.  Amos  had  found  by 
experience  that  for  any  man  who  desired  a  reputation  for  worldly  prudence,  the 
wisest  rule  was  to  hold  his  tongue ;  but  for  Hosea,  for  whom  there  was  no  escape 
from  his  native  land,  nothing  remained  but  to  bear  the  reproach  that  "  the  prophet 
is  a  fool,  and  the  spiritual  man  is  mad,"  uttered  by  men  fuU  of  iniquity  and  hatred. 
A  fowler's  snare  was  laid  for  him  in  all  his  ways,  and  he  found  nothing  but  enmity 
in  the  house  of  his  God.  The  priests  suffered  the  people  to  perish  for  lack  of 
knowledge.  They  set  their  hearts  on  their  iniquity,  and  contentedly  connived 
at,  if  they  did  not  directly  foster,  the  sinfulness  of  the  people,  which  at  any  rate 
secured  them  an  abundance  of  sin-offerings.  So  far  had  they  apostatised  from 
their  functions  as  moral  teachers.  And  there  was  worse  behind.  They  were 
active  fomenters  of  evil.  But  the  second  cause  of  the  national  apostasy  lay  deeper 
still.  2.  The  corruption  of  worship  and  religion  at  its  source.  The  "  calf- 
worship  "  was  now  begiiming  to  produce  its  natural  fruit.  It  would  have  indig- 
nantly disclaimed  the  stigma  of  idolatry.  It  was  represented  as  "  image- worship," 
the  adoration  of  cherubic  symbols,  which  were  in  themselves  regarded  as  being 
so  little  a  violation  of  the  second  commandment  that  they  were  consecrated 
even  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  The  centralisation  of  worship,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  was  a  new  thing.  Local  sanctuaries  and  local  altars  had  been 
sanctioned  by  kings  and  used  by  prophets  from  time  immemorial.  The  worship 
at  Dan  and  Bethel  could  have  claimed  to  be,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word, 
a  worship  of  Jehovah,  as  national  and  as  ancient  as  that  at  Jerusalem.  For 
the  ox  was  the  most  distinctive  emblem  of  the  cherub,  and  even  in  the  wilder- 
ness, cherubs — possibly  winged  oxen — had  bent  over  the  mercy-seat  and  been 
woven  on  the  curtains,  and  in  the  temple  of  Solomon  had  been  embossed  upon 
the  walls,  and  formed  the  support  of  the  great  brazen  laver.  We  read  of  no 
protest  against  this  symbolism  either  by  Elijah,  Elisha,  or  Jonah.  Hosea  could 
more  truly  estimate  its  effects,  and  he  judged  it  by  its  fruits.  He  saw  the  fatal 
facility  with  which  the  title  Baal,  "  Lord,"  might  be  transferred  from  the  Lord  of 
lords  to  the  heathen  Baalim.  He  saw  how  readily  the  emblem  of  Jehovah  might 
be  identified  with  the  idol  of  Phoenicia.  Jehovah-worship  was  perverted  into 
nature-worship,  and  the  coarse  emblems  of  Asherah  and  Ashtoreth  smoothed 
the  way  for  a  cultus  of  which  the  basis  was  open  sensuality.  The  festal  dances 
of  Israel,  in  honour  of  God,  which  were  as  old  as  the  days  of  the  Judges,  became 
polluted  with  all  the  abominations  of  Phoenician  worship.  The  adultery" 
and  "  whoredom,"  which  are  denounced  so  incessantly  on  the  page  of  Hosea, 
are  not  only  the  metaphors  for  idolatry,  but  the  literal  description  of  the  lives 
which  that  idolatry  corrupted.  {Dean  Farrar,  D.D.)  Priests  become  time- 
servers: — No  greater  calamity  can  come  upon  a  people,  because — 1.  Such  priests 
cannot  exert  the  influence  which  they  should  exert.  They  should  be  men  of 
God,  supremely  loyal  to  God,  and  witnessing  for  the  supreme  claim  of  spiritual 
and  eternal  things.  2.  Their  example  is  positively  mischievous.  Men  need  no 
aid  from  their  leaders  in  living  selfish,  self-indulgent,  covetous  lives.  3.  Time- 
£erving  utterly  ruins  personal  character.     Nobility,  heroism,  devotion  can  only 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

be  nourished  by  living  outside  ourselves,  for  God  and  our  fellows.  Time-servers 
are  self-servers.  (Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  degradation  of  holy  office : — The 
people  may  have  what  they  like,  and  the  priest  will  say,  "  You  could  not  help 
it."  The  priest  will  reproduce  what  the  people  are  doing,  and  the  people  will 
take  encouragement  from  the  priest  to  go  out  and  do  double  wickedness,  and 
thus  they  shall  keep  the  action  even.  To  this  degree  of  corruption  may  holiest 
institutions  be  dragged.  The  priest — meaning  by  that  word  teacher,  preacher, 
minister,  apostle — should  always  be  strong  enough  to  condemn ;  he  can  condemn 
generally,  but  not  particularly  ;  he  can  damn  the  distant,  he  must  pet  and  flatter 
and  gratify  the  near.  He  will  outgrow  this — when  he  knows  Christ  better ; 
when  he  is  enabled  to  complete  his  faith  by  feeling  that  it  is  not  necessary  for 
him  to  live,  but  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  speak  the  truth ;  when  he  comes  to 
the  point  of  feeling,  that  it  is  not  at  all  needful  he  should  have  a  roof  over  his 
head,  but  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  have  an  approving  conscience ;  when 
he  completes  his  theology  by  this  Divinest  morality,  he  will  be  a  rare  man  in  the 
earth,  with  a  great  voice  thundering  its  judgments,  and  with  a  tender  voice 
uttering  its  benedictions  and  solaces  where  hearts  are  broken  with  real  contrition. 
Priests  should  lead ;  priests  should  not  neglect  denunciation,  even  where  they 
are  unable  to  follow  their  denunciations  with  examples  to  the  contrary.  The 
Word  should  be  spoken  boldly,  roundly,  grandly,  in  all  its  simplicity,  purity, 
rigour,  tenderness.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  reciprocal  influence  of  priest- 
hood and  people  : — I.  There  is  sometimes  a  disgraceful  reciprocal  influence. 

1.  It  is  a  disgrace  to  a  true  priest  to  become  like  the  people.  One  who  is  not 
above  the  average  man  is  no  priest,  he  is  out  of  his  place.  A  priest  is  a  man 
to  mould,  not  to  be  moulded ;  to  control,  not  to  cringe ;  to  lead,  not  to  be  led. 
His  thoughts  should  sway  the  thoughts  of  the  people,  and  his  character  should 
command  their  reverence.  Sometimes  you  see  priests  become  like  the  people, 
mean,  sordid,  grovelling.  2.  It  is  a  disgrace  to  a  people  to  become  like  a  bad 
priest.  There  are  priests  whose  natures  are  lean,  whose  capacities  are  feeble, 
whose  religion  is  sensuous,  whose  sympathies  are  exclusive,  whose  opinions  are 
stereotyped,  whose  spirit  is  intolerant.  Shame  on  the  people  who  allow  them- 
selves to  become  like  such  a  priest !  II.  There  is  sometimes  an  honourablk 
reciprocal  influence.  1.  It  is  honourable  when  people  become  like  a  true 
priest ;  when  they  feel  one  with  him  in  spiritual  interests  and  Christly  piu"suits. 

2.  It  is  honourable  to  the  true  priest  when  he  has  succeeded  in  making  the  people 
like  him.  He  may  well  feel  a  devout  exultation  as  he  moves  amongst  them 
that  their  moral  hearts  beat  in  unison  with  his,  that  their  lives  are  set  to  the 
same  keynote,  that  they  are  of  one  mind  and  one  heart  in  relation  to  the  grand 
purpose  of  life.  (Homilist.)  Naughty  ministers : — 1.  Evil  ministers  are  a 
great  cause  of  sin  and  misery  upon  the  people  they  have  charge  of.  It  is  an 
addition  to  the  priests'  judgment  that  they  drag  so  many  with  them  into  it. 
2.  Albeit  naughty  ministers  be  great  plagues  and  snares  to  people,  yet  that  will 
not  excuse  a  people's  sin,  nor  exempt  them  from  judgment,  and  therefore  the 
people  are  threatened  also.  The  sending  of  evil  ministers  may  be  so  much  the 
fruit  of  people's  former  sins,  and  they  may  be  so  well  satisfied  with  it  as  may 
justly  ripen  them  for  a  stroke.  3.  As  pastors  and  people  are  ordinarily  like  each 
other  in  sin,  and  mutual  plagues  to  each  other,  so  will  they  be  joined  together 
in  judgments,  for  "  there  shall  be,  like  people,  like  priest,"  that  is,  both  shall  be 
involved  in  judgment  (though  possibly  in  different  measure,  according  to  the 
degree  of  their  sin),  and  none  of  them  able  to  help  or  comfort  another.  4.  Albeit 
the  Lord  may  spare  for  a  time,  and  seem  to  let  things  lie  in  confusion,  yet  He 
hath  a  day  of  visitation,  wherein  He  will  call  men  to  an  account,  and  recompense 
them,  not  according  to  their  pretences,  but  their  real  deeds  and  practices. 
5.  When  men  have  made  no  conscience  of  sin,  so  they  might  compass  these  delights, 
which  they  think  will  make  them  up,  yet  it  is  easy  for  God  to  prove  that  the 
blessing  of  these  delights  is  only  in  His  hand.  6.  As  no  means  can  prosper  where 
God  deserts  and  withdraws  His  blessing,  so  what  a  man  prosecutes  unlawfully, 
he  cannot  look  it  should  be  blessed.  (George  Hutcheson.)  A  courageous 
ministerial  reproof : — The  great  northern  apostle,  Bernard  Gilpin,  who  refused  a 
bishopric,  did  not  confine  his  Christian  labours  to  the  church  of  Houghton,  of 
which  he  was  minister,  but  at  his  own  expense  visited  the  then  desolate  churches 
of  Northumberland  once  every  year  to  preach  the  Gospel.  The  Bishop  of  Durham 
commanded  him  to  preach  before  the  clergy.  Gilpin  then  went  into  the  pulpit, 
And  selected  for  his  subject  the  important  charge  of  a  Christian  bishop.     Having 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  "73 

exposed  the  corruption  of  the  clergy,  he  boldly  addressed  himself  to  his  lordship, 
who  was  present.  "  Let  not  your  lordship,"  said  he,  "  say  these  crimes  have 
been  committed  without  your  knowledge ;  for  whatever  you  yourself  do  in 
person,  or  suffer  through  your  connivance  to  be  done  by  others,  is  wholly  your 
own  ;  therefore  in  the  presence  of  God,  angels,  and  men,  I  pronounce  your  father- 
hood to  be  the  author  of  all  these  evils  ;  and  I,  and  this  whole  congregation, 
will  be  a  witness  in  the  day  of  judgment  that  these  things  have  come  to  your 
ears."  The  bishop  thanked  Mr.  Gilpin  for  his  faithful  words,  and  gave  him 
permission  to  preach  throughout  his  diocese. 

Ver.  12.  Their  staff  declaxeth  unto  them.  —  Rhahdomania,  or  divining  by 
the  stick  or  staff : — There  was  a  kind  of  idolatry  which  the  Jews  had,  a  way  to 
ask  counsel  by  the  staff,  and  with  this  the  prophet  here  charges  them.  The 
Romans  practised  the  same,  calling  it  divination  by  rods,  sticks,  arrows,  or  staves. 
There  were  four  ways  in  which  they  divined  with  these  things.  The  first  was 
to  put  arrows  or  staves  into  a  closed  case,  having  the  names  written  on  them 
of  what  they  divined  about ;  and  then,  drawing  out  one  or  two,  they  determined 
their  business  according  to  what  they  found  written  ;  thus  their  staff  declared 
unto  them  either  good  or  bad.  A  second  was  by  casting  up  staves  or  arrows  into 
the  air,  and  according  as  they  fell,  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the  left,  before  or  behind, 
so  they  divined  their  good  or  ill  luck,  as  they  called  it.  A  third  way  was  this, 
they  used  to  peel  off  the  bark  of  some  part  of  a  stick,  and  then  cast  it  up,  and 
divined  according  to  which  part  of  the  pith,  either  black  or  white,  appeared  first. 
A  fourth  was,  as  we  find  in  the  Roman  antiquities,  that  their  augurs  or  sooth- 
sayers used  to  sit  upon  the  top  of  a  tower  or  castle,  in  clear  and  fair  weather, 
with  a  crooked  staff  in  their  hand,  which  the  Latins  call  Lituus,  and  having 
quartered  out  the  regions  of  heaven,  so  far  as  to  answer  their  purpose,  and  offered 
sacrifices  and  prayers,  they  stretched  it  forth  upon  the  head  of  the  person  or 
thing  they  would  divine  for,  and  so  foreboded  good  or  ill  luck,  according  to  what 
at  that  time  they  observed  in  the  heavens,  the  birds  flying,  &c.  {Jeremiah 
Burroiighs. ) 

Ver.  13.  They  sacrifice  upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and  hum  incense  upon 
the  hills. — Blustering  sinners  : — That  is  the  bold  aspect,  that  is  the  public  phase ; 
instead  of  doing  all  these  things,  as  Ezekiel  would  say,  in  a  chamber  of  imagery 
far  down,  at  which  you  get  through  a  hole  in  the  wall,  they  go  up  to  high  places, 
and  invite  the  sun  to  look  upon  them  ;  they  kiss  the  calf  in  public.  Some  credit 
should  be  due  to  audacity,  but  there  is  another  sin  which  cannot  be  done  on  the 
tops  of  the  mountains,  so  the  charge  continues, — "  under  oaks  and  poplars  and 
elms,  because  the  shadow  thereof  is  good."  Here  is  the  secret  aspect  of  rebellion. 
Do  not  believe  that  the  blusterer  lives  only  in  public  as  fool  and  criminal ;  do 
not  say.  There  is  a  fine  frankness  about  this  man  anyhow ;  when  he  sins,  he  sins 
in  high  places ;  he  goes  upon  the  mountains,  and  stamps  his  foot  upon  the  high 
hills,  and  the  great  hill  throbs  and  vibrates  under  his  sturdy  step.  That  is  not 
the  whole  man  ;  he  will  seek  the  oak,  the  poplar,  and  the  elm,  because  the  shadow 
thereof  is  good.  It  is  a  broad  shadow ;  it  makes  night  in  daytime ;  it  casts  such 
a  shadow  upon  the  earth  which  it  covers  that  it  amounts  to  practical  darkness. 
So  the  blustering  sinner  is  upon  the  mountain,  trying  to  perpetrate  some  trick 
that  shall  deserve  the  commendation  of  being  frank,  and  when  he  has  achieved 
that  commendation  he  will  seek  the  shadow  that  is  good,  the  shadow  at  daytime, 
the  darkness  underneath  the  noontide  sun.  How  the  Lord  searches  us,  and  tries 
ovir  life,  and  puts  His  fingers  through  and  through  us,  that  nothing  may  be  hidden 
from  Him  !  He  touches  us  at  every  point,  and  looks  through  us,  and  under- 
stands us  altogether.     (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Israel  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer. — The  evil  and  danger 
of  backsliding : — L  When  we  may  be  said  to  besemblb  a  backsliding 
HEIFER.  1.  When  we  will  not  draw  in  God's  yoke  at  all.  2.  When  we  draw 
in  it  only  by  fits  and  starts.  3.  When  we  grow  weary  of  the  yoke.  Weary 
of  performing  our  duties,  exercising  oiu*  graces,  mortifying  our  lusts.  II.  The 
EVIL  AND  DANGER  OF  SUCH  A  STATE.  1.  The  evil  of  it.  It  is  a  contemning  of 
God.  It  is  a  justifying  of  the  wicked.  It  is  a  discouraging  of  the  weak.  2.  The 
danger  of  it.  This  is  an  iniquity  which  God  marks  with  peculiar  indignation. 
The  first  symptoms  of  declension  lead,  if  not  speedily  mourned  over  and  resisted. 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

to  utter  apostasy.  The  misery  that  will  be  incurred  by  means  of  it  will  far  exceed 
all  that  had  been  endured  if  no  profession  of  religion  had  been  ever  made.  Let 
these  consequences  be  duly  weighed,  and  nothing  need  be  added  to  show  the 
importance  of  "  holding  fast  our  profession  without  wavering."  Improve  the 
BUDJect.  1.  Assist  you  in  ascertaining  your  state  before  God.  Examine  dili- 
gently the  cause,  the  duration,  and  the  effects  of  your  backslidings.  2.  Give 
a  word  of  counsel  to  those  in  different  states.  Are  you  altogether  backslidden 
from  God  ?  He  invites  you  to  return.  Are  you  drawing  in  His  yoke  ?  Bless 
and  adore  your  God,  who  has  inclined  and  enabled  you  to  do  so.  (0.  Simeon,  M.A.) 
A  backslider : — It  is  a  striking  fact  to  which  careful  observers  of  the  feathered 
tribe  will  bear  witness,  that  no  birds  are  able  to  fly  backward.  A  bird  may 
allow  itself  to  fall  backward  by  slowing  its  wings,  until  its  weight  overcomes 
their  sustaining  power,  as  a  swallow  will  do  from  the  eaves  of  a  house.  But 
the  bird  can  do  no  other  than  fly  forward,  and  but  few  with  the  rarest  skill  can 
stand  still  in  the  air.  Now  if  mankind  would  only  "  consider  the  birds  of  the 
air  "  in  the  way  in  which  Christ  enjoined,  there  would  be  considerably  less  back- 
Bliding  than  there  is.  Like  the  wings  of  the  soaring  eagle,  the  wings  of  faith 
were  never  intended  for  flying  backward.  A  minister's  little  girl  and  her  play- 
mate were  talking  about  serious  things.  "  Do  you  know  what  a  backslider  is  ?  '* 
she  questioned.  "  Yes ;  it's  a  person  that  used  to  be  a  Christian  and  isn't," 
said  the  playmate  promptly.  "  But  what  do  you  s'pose  makes  them  call  them 
backsliders  ?  "  "  Oh,  that's  easy.  You  see,  when  people  are  good  they  go 
to  church  and  sit  up  in  front.  When  they  get  a  little  tired  of  being  good  they 
slide  back  a  seat,  and  keep  on  sliding  till  they  get  clear  back  to  the  door.  After 
awhile    they    slide    clear    out    and    never    come    to    church    at   all."  The 

stubborn  heifer  : — What  is  a  backsliding  heifer  ?  We  do  not  know ;  there  is 
no  such  creature.  But  read :  "  Israel  acts  stubbornly,  like  a  heifer,"  and  the 
meaning  is  clear.  The  heifer  will  not  go  as  its  owner  wants  it  to  go.  The  heifer 
stands  back  when  it  ought  to  go  forward ;  turns  aside  when  it  ought  to  move 
straight  on ;  wriggles  and  twists,  and,  as  it  were,  protests ;  and  only  by  greater 
strength,  or  by  the  infliction  of  suffering,  can  the  heifer  be  made  to  go  to  its  destined 

{>lace.  The  prophet,  looking  upon  that  heifer,  now  on  the  right,  now  on  the 
eft,  now  stooping,  now  throwing  up  its  head  in  defiance,  says.  Such  is  Israel, 
such  is  Ephraim.  The  metaphor  is  fvdl  of  suggestion,  and  full  of  high  philosophy. 
Israel  complained  of  limitation  ;  Israel  was  chafed  by  the  yoke  ;  Israel  resented 
the  puncture  of  the  goad.  Israel  said,  "  I  want  liberty,  I  do  not  want  this  moral 
bondage  any  longer ;  I  do  not  want  to  be  surrounded  by  commandments,  I 
do  not  want  to  live  in  a  cage  of  ten  bars  called  the  ten  commandments  of  God  ; 
I  want  liberty ;  let  me  follow  my  reason,  my  instincts ;  let  me  obey  myself.'* 
The  Lord  said,  "  So  be  it.  Thou  shalt  have  liberty  enough,  but  it  shall  be  the 
liberty  of  a  wilderness."  You  can  have  liberty,  but  you  will  find  no  garden  in 
it ;  if  you  want  the  garden,  you  must  have  the  law.  Let  us  take  care  how  we 
trifle  with  law,  obligation,  responsibility,  limitation.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Ephraim  is  Joined  to  idols:  let  him  alone. — Beware  of  unholy  com- 
panionships  : — These  words  do  not  mean  that  nothing  was  to  be  done  for 
Ephraim.  The  prophets  again  and  again  pleaded  with  that  people.  "  O  Israel, 
thou  hast  destroyed  thyself;  but  in  Me  is  thy  help."  Our  text  is  addressed  to 
Judah.  "  Let  Ephraim  alone."  The  best  thing  to  do  is  not  to  associate  with 
that  people,  keep  clear  of  them,  let  them  alone.  I.  This  applies  to  companion- 
ship. If  you  want  to  keep  your  own  life  pure,  be  careful  with  whom  you  associate. 
Ephraim  was  more  prosperous  and  wealthy,  and  consequently  Judah  might  be 
allured  and  led  to  offend  (ver.  15).  We  are  influenced  by  those  with  whom  we 
keep  company.  You  may  think  you  are  strong  enough  to  stand  against  the 
insidious  influence  of  the  world,  but  it  touches  you  before  you  are  aware.  If 
Judah  associates  with  Ephraim,  the  contact  must  prove  baneful,  and  Judah 
will  become  corrupt.  "  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate."  II.  It 
AFPUBS  ALSO  TO  PLA0B3  WB  VISIT  AND  FBEQUKNT.  "  Come  not  ye  tmto  Gilgal» 
neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-aven."  There  sacrifices  were  offered  to  Baal,  and  the 
golden  calf  adored.  Are  there  not  Beth-avens  (house  of  vanity)  which  we  had 
better  avoid  ?  (J.  Hampden  Lee.)  Influence  of  companions  : — When  visiting 
a  gentleman  in  England,  Mr.  Moody  observed  a  fine  canary.  Admiring  his 
beauty,  the  gentleman  replied,  "  Yes,  he  is  beautiful,  but  he  has  lost  his  voice. 
He  used  to  be  a  fine  singer,  but  I  was  in  the  habit  of  hanging  his  cage  out  of  th» 


CHAP.  IV.]  H08EA.  75 

window ;  the  sparrows  came  round  him  with  their  incessant  chirping  ;  gradually 
he  ceased  to  sing  and  learned  their  twitter."  Oh,  how  truly  does  this  represent 
many  Christians  !  They  used  to  delight  in  the  songs  of  Zion,  but  they  came 
into  close  association  with  those  whose  notes  never  rise  so  high,  until  at 
last,  like  the  canary,  they  can  do  nothing  but  twitter,  twitter.  Dangers 
of  carnal  security  : — Jeroboam  made  Israel  to  sin.  From  one  sin  they  passed 
into  another,  and  each  succeeding  year  plunged  them  deeper  in  the  mire  of 
sensuality,  idolatry,  and  corruption.  At  last  Divine  judgment  came.  It  is 
expressed  in  the  text.  Because  Ephraim  repaid  all  the  offers  of  God  to  receive 
him  back  to  Himself  with  anger,  therefore  henceforth  he  was  to  be  left  to  his  own 
devices — alone,  without  God,  to  ward  off  or  to  alleviate  the  coming  destruction. 
From  the  fate  of  Ephraim  we  draw  a  lesson  for  ourselves.  God's  dealings  with 
nations  and  with  individuals  are  the  same  in  principle,  though  differing  necessarily 
in  form  and  extent ;  and  therefore  there  are  the  same  fearful  signs  of  God's  wrath 
to  be  traced  when  we  are  let  alone  in  a  course  of  known  sin,  without  troubles, 
without  warnings  to  stay  us,  as  when  a  nation  is  suffered  to  run  its  course  of 
accustomed  riot  unrestrained.  In  both  cases  this  state  of  unnatural  quiet  is  but 
the  calm  before  the  thunderstorm — the  cessation  of  pain  in  some  mortal  disease, 
which  marks  that  nature  is  exhausted  and  death  at  hand.  He  who  is  accepted 
in  Jesus,  the  child  of  God,  is  never  let  alone,  but,  forgetting  those  things  that 
are  behind,  he  is  constantly  pressing  forward  to  those  things  which  are  before. 
We  can  never  be  forced  into  sin.  Our  danger  is  that  we  be  deceived  into  supposing 
that  we  have  no  enemies,  that  there  is  peace  when  there  is  no  peace ;  lest  we 
imagine  that  all  is  well  with  us  when,  it  may  be,  God  is  in  fact  letting  us  alone 
in  bitter  indignation  and  overhanging  vengeance.  Anything  is  better  than  that 
God  should  leave  us — let  us  alone  in  our  sin.  The  grave  is  a  remedy  for  all  earthly 
woe,  but  there  is  no  remedy  for  this  either  in  time  or  in  eternity.  Consider  then, 
all  you  who  are  living  in  any  known  sin — who  are  quenching  the  Spirit  of  life 
by  not  acting  or  striving  to  act  up  to  what  you  know  well  is  required  from  Christians 
— the  horrible  danger  of  settling  upon  your  lees  ;  of  thinking  no  evil  shall  come 
nigh  you,  that  your  sin  shall  not  find  you  out,  that  God  will  always  strive  with 
you.  But  the  words  of  the  text  whisper  strong  consolation  to  the  man  of  a 
broken  spirit  and  contrite  heart.  Grant  that  he  be  afflicted  and  mourn,  that 
he  is  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations,  that  he  go  mourning  all  the 
day  long  by  reason  of  his  sin,  that  he  is  heart-broken  ;  yet,  God  be  thanked, 
these  very  feelings  show  that  he  is  not  let  alone.  He  is  not  considered  as  joined 
unto  idols  ;  and  therefore,  if  he  persevere,  and  be  not  weary  in  well-doing,  he 
may  rightly  expect  his  God  will  turn,  and  leave  a  blessing  behind  Him. 
(H.  I.  Swale,  M.A.)  The  ain  of  Ephraim  : — As  in  the  days  before  the  flood, 
God's  Spirit  does  "  not  always  strive  with  man  "  :  even  long-suffering  itself 
has  been  exhausted,  and  the  despisers  and  mockers  have  been  either  suddenly 
destroyed,  or  given  over  to  impenitence  and  insensibility.  The  precise  period, 
or  closing  of  what  has  been  called  "  the  day  of  grace,"  being  mercifully  concealed 
from  man,  its  existence  can  form  no  rule  or  guide  for  his  procedure.  I.  The 
SIN  OF  Ephraim.  "  Joined  to  idols."  Idolatry  is  represented  in  Scripture  as 
being  twofold  ;  it  is  both  outward  and  inward,  public  and  retired.  It  does 
not  consist  chiefly  in  acts  of  religious  homage.  There  are  idols  in  the  heart, 
the  family,  the  Church.  Loving  and  serving  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator 
is  idolatry.  It  is  a  present  and  existing  evil,  and  a  prevailing,  constitutional, 
besetting,  and  most  abhorrent  sin.  It  falls  in  easfly  with  our  inbred  and  corrupt 
propensities.  II.  The  judgment  upon  Ephraim.  The  punishment  of  his 
crime.  The  text  is  an  admonition  to  Judah  not  to  hold  any  familiar  intercourse 
with  idolatrous  and  backsliding  Israel.  We,  however,  regard  it  as  a  sentence 
of  dereliction.  "  Let  him  alone."  The  phrase  is  elliptical.  It  is  addressed 
to  some  one,  but  we  do  not  know  to  whom.  May  be  angels,  providences, 
ministers  of  the  sanctuary,  conscience,  ordinances.  We  may  therefore  wisely 
pray,  "  Say  anything  of  or  to  Thy  servant,  rather  than  let  him  alone. 
{W.  B.  Williams,  M.A.)  God  abandons  the  incorrigible: — While  anything 
detains  the  heart  from  God,  the  man  is  in  a  state  of  perdition.  "  He  is  joined 
to  his  idols."     There  is  something  very  dreadful  in  this  declaration — I.  If  yot) 

DISTINGUISH    THIS    DESERTION    FROM    ANOTHER,    WHICH    MAY    BEFALL    EVEN    THE 

SUBJECTS  OF  Divine  grace.  God  sometimes  leaves  His  people  when  they  are 
becoming  high-minded,  to  convince  them  of  their  dependence  upon  Him  H« 
leaves  them  to  their  own  strength  to  show  them  their  weakness,  and  to  their 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

own  wisdom  to  make  them  sensible  of  their  ignorance.     But  this  differs  exceed- 
ingly from  the  abandoning  of  the  incorrigible.     II.  This  leaving  of  the  sinner 

IS    A   WITHDRAWING    FROM    HIM    EVERYTHING    THAT    HAS    A    TENDENCY   TO    DO   HIM 

GOOD.  Ministers,  saints,  conscience,  providence — "  let  him  alone."  Ye  afflictions, 
say  nothing  to  him  of  the  vanity  of  the  world.  Let  all  his  schemes  be  completely 
successful.  Let  his  grounds  bring  forth  plentifully.  Let  him  have  more  than 
heart  can  wish.  III.  Consider  the  importance  of  the  Being  who  thus 
ABANDONS.  It  would  be  much  better  if  all  your  friends  and  neighbours,  if  all 
your  fellow-creatures  on  whom  you  depend  for  assistance  in  a  thousand  ways, 
were  to  league  together  and  resolve  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  you,  than  for 
God  to  leave  you.  While  God  is  with  us  we  can  spare  other  things.  But  what 
is  everything  else  without  God  ?  IV.  What  will  bb  the  consequences  of 
THIS  DETERMINATION  ?  It  will  be  a  freedom  to  sin ;  it  will  be  the  removal  of 
every  hindrance  in  the  way  to  perdition.  When  God  dismisses  a  man,  and  resolves 
he  shall  have  no  more  assistance  from  Him — he  is  siure  of  being  ensnared  by 
error,  enslaved  by  lust,  and  "  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will."  It  is  as  if 
we  had  taken  poison,  and  all  that  is  necessary  to  its  killing  us  is  not  to  counteract 
its  malignity.  Such  is  the  judgment  here  denounced.  Notice — 1.  The  justice 
of  this  doom.  All  the  punishments  God  inflicts  are  deserved,  and  He  never 
inflicts  without  reluctance.  Your  condemnation  turns  upon  a  principle  that 
wiU  at  once  justify  Him  and  silence  you.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me  that  ye 
might  have  life."  2.  Let  me  call  on  you  to  fear  this  judgment.  And  surely 
some  of  you  have  reason  to  be  alarmed.  With  some  of  you  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  long  been  striving,  and  you  have  "  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace." 
Now  you  know  what  He  has  said,  and  you  know  what  He  has  done.  If  you 
say  you  have  no  forebodings,  the  symptoms  are  so  much  the  worse.  Spiritual 
judgments  are  the  most  awful,  because  they  are  insensibly  executed.  3.  Perhaps 
some  of  you  say,  "  I  am  afraid  this  is  my  doom  already.  My  convictions  seem 
to  have  been  stifled."  Perhaps  this  is  true.  Perhaps  it  is  a  groundless  appre- 
hension. Remember,  it  is  a  blessed  proof  that  God  does  not  let  you  alone,  if 
you  cannot  let  Him  alone.  (William  Jay.)  Ephraim  abandoned  to  idols: — • 
One  of  the  consequences  and  proofs  of  our  depravity  is  that  we  are  prone  to 
turn  every  blessing  into  a  curse.  We  are  too  apt  to  despise  the  forbearance  of 
God,  and  to  draw  encouragement  from  it  to  continue  in  sin.  Because  God  is 
slow  to  punish,  we  conclude  that  He  never  will  punish.  The  consequence  is, 
we  become  more  fearless  and  hardened.  No  conduct  can  be  more  base  than 
this,  none  more  dangerous,  and  yet  there  is  none  more  common.  There  is  a 
propensity  to  it  in  our  very  nature.  But  God's  time  of  patience  will  have  an 
end.  I.  Ephraim's  sin.  The  tendency  of  the  Israelites  in  the  early  ages  of 
their  history  to  idol-worship  almost  surpasses  belief.  It  is  seen  in  their  making 
a  calf  at  Horeb,  and  in  Solomon's  licence  to  surrounding  idolaters.  The  evil 
became  ruinous  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Ten  Tribes.  So  it  is  said  of  Ephraim, 
"  they  were  joined  to  idols."  They  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge,  they 
transgressed  the  plainest  and  most  unequivocal  declaration  of  the  Divine  will ; 
and  this  they  did  in  the  face  of  the  most  peremptory  threatenings,  the  most  solemn 
warnings,  and  the  most  affectionate  entreaties.  It  is  painful  and  humiliating 
to  reflect  that  human  beings  possessed  of  reason  and  understanding  should  have 
been  capable  of  acting  in  a  manner  so  unworthy  of  their  high  origin  and  their 
exalted  privileges.  We  are  not  liable  to  the  charge  of  gross  outward  idolatry, 
but  are  there  no  idols  set  up  within  the  temple  of  our  hearts  ?  Are  we  free  from 
the  guilt  of  spiritual  idolatry  ?  What  is  idolatry  ?  The  rendering  to  any  creature 
whatever  that  worship,  honour,  and  love  which  belong  to  God  alone.  1.  Covetous- 
ness  is  declared  in  Scripture  to  be  idolatry.  The  intemperate  and  lovers  of  pleasure 
are  idolaters.  Pride  is  only  another  form  of  idolatry.  Those  are  idolaters  who 
are  inordinately  attached  to  any  earthly  comforts.  On  what  things  then  are 
our  affections  placed  ?  Few  of  us  are  there  who  have  not  yielded  that  love, 
fear,  and  confidence  to  the  creature,  which  are  due  to  God  alone.  II.  Ephraim's 
punishment.  "  Let  him  alone."  Some  regard  this  as  the  language  of  caution 
addressed  to  others,  rather  than  as  a  threatening  against  Ephraim.  We  regard 
it  in  the  latter  sense.  It  is  expressive  of  the  severest  judgment  that  could  be 
inflicted  on  any  nation  or  individual.  It  imports  God's  final  abandonment 
of  them,  and  delivering  them  up  to  final  impenitence,  never  more  to  be  visited 
with  salutary  compunction  or  regret.  The  awful  state  in  which  Ephraim  was 
thus  left  resembles  that  of  incorrigible  sinners  in  every  age,  especially  those  who 


CHAP.  IV.]  BOSEA.  77 

appear  to  be  given  up  to  final  impenitence  and  unbelief.  Instances  in  which 
this  threatening  is  carried  ir'^o  effect  may  be  given.  1.  When  the  usual  means 
of  instruction  and  reproof  ;  e  no  longer  employed  or  afforded.  2.  When  the 
conscience  becomes  seared,  aad  the  Spirit  of  God  ceases  to  strive  with  the  sinner. 
3.  When  afflictions  are  withheld,  and  providence  no  longer  frowns  upon  the 
sinner,  but  suffers  him  to  take  his  course  unreproved.  Whom  the  Lord  loves 
He  rebukes  and  chastens  ;  but  He  manifests  His  displeasure  against  the  impenitent 
by  letting  them  alone,  (i?.  Davies,  M.A.)  A  call  to  separation  : — These  words 
are  not  intended  as  a  threatening  of  the  cessation  of  the  Divine  pleadings  with 
an  obstinate  transgressor — there  are  no  people  about  whom  God  says  that  they 
are  so  wedded  to  their  sin  that  it  is  useless  to  try  to  do  anything  with  them — 
and  they  are  not  a  commandment  to  God's  servants  to  fling  up  in  despair  or 
in  impatience  the  effort  to  benefit  obstinate  and  stiff-necked  evil-doers.  This 
Book  of  Hosea  is  one  long  pleading  with  this  very  Ephraim,  just  because  he  is 
"  joined  to  idols."  Hosea  was  a  prophet  of  the  northern  nation,  but  it  is  the 
.southern  nation,  Judah,  that  is  here  addressed.  What  is  meant  by  letting  alone 
is  plainly  enough  expressed  in  a  previous  verse, — "  Though  thou,  Israel,  play 
the  harlot,  let  not  Judah  offend."  The  calf-worship  of  Israel  is  held  up  as  a 
warning  to  Judah,  which  is  commanded  to  keep  clear  of  all  complicity  with  it, 
and  to  avoid  all  entangling  alliances  with  backsliding  Lsrael.  The  prophet  with 
his  "  Let  him  alone  "  is  saying  the  very  same  thing  as  the  apostle  with  his  "  Come 
out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate."  Ephraim  is  wedded  to  his  idols, 
as  parasite  to  elm-tree,  and  so  if  you  are  joined  to  it  you  will  be  joined  to  its 
idols.  Translate  this  into  plain  simple  English,  and  it  means  this — It  is  a  very 
bad  sign  of  a  Christian  man  when  his  chosen  companions  are  people  that  have 
no  sympathy  with  him  in  his  religion.  A  great  many  of  us  will  have  to  plead 
guilty  to  this  indictment.  There  are  many  things — such  as  differences  of  position, 
culture,  and  temperament  which  cannot  but  modify  the  association  of  Christian 
people  with  one  another,  and  may  sometimes  make  them  feel  more  near  to  un- 
christian associates  who  are  like  themselves  in  these  respects  than  to  Christians 
who  are  not.  What  deadens  so  much  of  our  Christianity  to-day,  and  makes  it 
fail  as  an  aggressive  power,  is  that  Christian  people  get  mixed  up  in  utterly  irre- 
ligious association  with  irreligious  men  and  women,  and  sink  their  own  Christianity, 
or  at  all  events  hide  it.  The  sad  thing  is  that  their  religion  is  so  defective  that 
it  takes  no  trouble  to  hide  it.  The  other  sad  thing  is  that  so  many  Christians, 
so  called,  have  so  little  Christianity  that  they  never  feel  they  are  out  of  their 
element  in  such  associations.  We  cannot  be  too  intimately  associated  with 
irreligious  people,  if  only  we  take  our  religion  with  us.  A  lesson  may  be  learned 
from  the  separate  existence  of  the  Jews  since  their  dispersion.  They  mix  in 
the  occupations  of  common  life,  and  yet  are  as  absolutely  distinct  as  oil  from 
the  water  on  which  it  floats.  So  should  the  Church  be  in  the  world  ;  mixing 
in  all  outward  affairs,  and  exercising  a  Christianising  influence  on  all  with  whom 
its  members  come  in  contact ;  and  yet,  by  manifest  diversity  of  sympathiea 
and  desires  and  affections,  keeping  itself  absolutely  distinct  from  the  world  with 
which  it  is  to  blend.  The  primitive  and  fundamental  meaning  of  "  holy  "  is 
"  set  apart."  You  Christian  people  are  set  apart  for  the  Master's  use.  Let  it  be 
every  man  to  his  own  company.  (.4.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  disturbing  effects 
of  Divine  discipline  : — Sin  essentially  consists  in  a  determination  to  have  our 
own  way — a  determination  planted  behind  the  movements  of  thought  and 
action,  and  directing  them  steadily  to  its  own  ends.  To  live,  no  matter  what 
special  turn  our  course  may  take,  without  having  the  main  current  of  our  life 
controlled  by  anything  superior  to  itself,  to  push  it  all  on  before  the  energy  of 
our  own  will — this  is  the  very  essence  of  sin.  Accordingly,  the  action  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  upon  the  human  heart  is  almost  always,  in  the  first  instance,  one 
of  disturbance.  You  can  detect  His  presence  by  the  discomfort  it  creates.  He 
awakens  new  thoughts,  begets  the  suspicion  that  all  is  not  within  as  it  ought 
to  be,  and  that  our  own  way,  if  followed  to  the  end,  will  terminate  in  bitterness. 
Because  our  own  way  is  wrong,  and  will,  if  persisted  in,  lead  to  loss,  God's  fibrst 
endeavour  is  to  make  us  uneasy  in  it,  and,  if  possible,  turn  us  out  of  it.  With 
this  view  all  His  dealings  are  planned,  and  planned  so  wisely  as  to  suit  each  succes- 
sive stage  of  our  growth  and  progress.  In  childhood  we  are  surrounded  by  God'a 
gentle  ministries.  It  would  not  be  strange  if  God  should  use  rougher  means 
when  His  gentle  ministry  fails.  He  has  recourse  to  the  more  potent  voice  of 
conscience  which  He  seeks  to  rouse  and  to  make  articulate.     As  life  advances 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

He  throws  into  the  heart  the  light  of  His  revelation.  He  alarms  us,  too,  with  the 
guilt  of  past  sin  till  our  heart  is  troubled  and  its  peace  is  gone.  Or  He  stirs  up 
a  longing  for  a  nobler  life.  Unutterably  sad  it  is  when  all  this  notwithstanding, 
a  man  moves  on  unchanged,  still  following  his  own  way,  still  disobedient  to  the 
heavenly  vision.  It  seems  as  if  one  other  means  of  discipline,  and  only 
one,  were  left.  An  avenue  to  conscience  must  be  opened  by  some  resist- 
less  stroke.  So  in  middle  age  God  oftentimes  in  mercy  sends  judgments.  He 
breaks  suddenly  into  the  midst  of  life  and  snatches  away  the  idol  of  your  heart. 
He  visits  you  with  reverses  in  trade,  and  disappointment  after  disappointment, 
till  your  bewilderment  grows  into  agony.  Strange  it  is  there  shoiJd  be  those 
who  have  been  thus  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel,  still  ignorant  of  what  it  means, 
still  cleaving  with  a  dull  or  desperate  blindness  to  their  own  way.  There  is  s 
point  at  which  His  discipline  ends,  just  because  it  is  useless  to  continue  it  farther. 
He  never  squanders  the  means  of  grace.  He  always  looks  for  a  return.  It  is  a 
terrible  thing  that  we  should  possess  such  a  power  of  resistance  as  to  be  able 
to  withstand  God  ;  that  after  He  has  done  His  best  He  should  be  obliged  to 
leave  us  alone.  But  so  it  is.  I.  Ths  point  at  which  thk  withdbawal  op 
DiviNB  DiscTPiiiNB  TAKES  PLACE.  It  is  a  point  which  is  gradually  reached,  and 
not  by  the  casual  commission  of  a  single  sin,  even  of  unusual  gravity  or  guilt. 
"  Being  joined  to  idols  "  is  a  state  of  sin  in  which  some  wickedness  is  deliberately 
adhered  to.  It  describes  not  an  isolated  act,  but  a  habit  which  has  grown 
easy,  natural,  fixed.  Now  a  habit  is  not  formed  at  once.  It  is  the  result  of  the 
repetition  of  an  act  which  has  become  so  ingrafted  into  a  man  it  has  grQwn  to 
be  part  of  himself.  "  Being  joined  to  idols  "  describes  a  state  or  habit  of  sin 
that  constitutes  pre-eminent  danger.  One  may  be  hurried  into  some  trespass ; 
but  no  one  was  ever  hurried  into  a  habit.  Whatever  excuse  a  man  may  have 
for  a  solitary  evil  act,  he  can  have  next  to  none  for  an  evil  habit.  It  is  of  such 
sins  as  those  of  the  Pharisees  we  have  most  need  to  beware.  They  moved  and 
breathed  in  an  atmosphere  of  insincerity  and  self-righteousness.  And  this  being 
joined  to  idols  also  describes  a  condition  which  we  refuse  to  renounce.  A  man 
may  have  contracted  a  habit  which  he  would  willingly  surrender  if  he  could. 
But  its  grasp  may  have  become  too  strong  to  be  shaken  off,  his  will  too  weak 
to  rouse  itself  to  the  effort.  But  the  desire  for  deliverance  is  the  only  door  of 
escape.     Let  that  depart,  and  there  is  no  avenue  open  to  your  heart.     II.  The 

MANNER  IN  WHICH  THE  WITHDRAWAL  OF  DiVINE  DISCIPLINE  IS  HERE  DESCRIBED. 

It  is  represented  as  a  "  letting  alone."  This  is  marked  by  the  cessation  of  all 
those  disturbing  effects  which  had  hitherto  appeared.  Restraints  are  removed. 
The  remonstrances  of  friends  are  given  up.  Truth  relaxes  its  hold.  Conscience 
is  silent.  Hence  outward  prosperity  and  ease  are  not  by  any  means  always  a  sign 
of  God's  favour.  Sometimes  they  may  be  quite  the  reverse.  When  outward  pros- 
perity co-exists  with  an  utter  indifference  to  Divine  things,  and  a  resolute  pursuit 
of  selfish  ends,  there  can  be  no  state  more  hazardous.  But  the  terrible  thing  about 
this  letting  alone  is  that  it  may  go  on  so  silently.  Even  religious  duties  may  be 
scrupulously  maintained,  though  the  heart  will  long  since  have  ceased  to  enter 
into  them.  So  God  may  even  let  a  man  alone  when  to  all  seeming  He  has  as  fast 
a  hold  of  him  as  ever,  or  faster.  There  is  only  one  preventive  against  our  reaching 
this  terrible  condition,  but  it  always  proves  effectual.  Be  loyal  to  the  light  within 
you,  and  obey  the  truth.  Shun  every  compromise  with  evU.  Make  no  tarrying 
on  debatable  ground.  Our  supreme  aim  as  Christians  is  not  comfort,  but  holiness  ; 
not  to  make  things  easy  all  round  for  ourselves,  but  to  grow  in  clearness  of  spiritual 
vision,  and  readiness  to  hear  the  voice  Divine.  And  to  be  let  alone,  even  though 
it  may  not  be  to  be  joined  to  an  idol,  is  to  become  drowsy  and  heavy-hearted, 
and  when  the  Bridegroom  comes,  to  be  found  slumbering  and  asleep.  (C.  Moinet, 
M.A.)  Warning  to  Judah  : — The  Lord  has  given  Ephraim  up  to  his  idols. 
The  curse  of  God  rests  on  him,  and  says,  "  Let  him  alone."  O  Judah,  take  heed 
then  what  you  do.  These  words  are  introduced  as  an  argument  to  persuade 
Judah  not  to  do  as  Israel  had  done.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Can  man  sin 
himself  out  of  all  saving  possibilities  f — The  words  of  the  text  are  a  dire  spectre 
to  some.  1.  The  view  of  it  taken  by  the  alarmed  sinner.  Ephraim  is  understood 
by  him  to  represent  the  sinner  at  a  supposed  point  in  his  career,  at  which  he  has 
exhausted  all  the  resources  of  Gospel  grace,  and  sinned  himself  out  of  hope  into 
doom.  He  is  still  a  living  man,  and  enveloped  in  the  showers  of  spiritual  influence ; 
but  only  seemingly,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  The  Spirit  has  abandoned  him 
tox  eyei-     All  saving  agencies  and  influences  are  commanded  to  do  the  same. 


CHAP.  IV.]  EOSEA.  79 

This  view  still  lamentably  prevails.  It  is  often  preached,  in  austerest  terms, 
from  the  pulpit,  and  found  grimly  enshrined  in  our  popular  commentaries.  There 
are  indeed  some  awful  truths  which  God  forbid  that  we  should  blink.  A  sinner 
may  harden  himself  into  insensibility  till  he  is  "twice  dead,"  past  feeling,  defiant 
of  God,  and  even  regardless  of  man.  And  his  is  a  very  hopeless  case.  More- 
over, if  we  misuse  privileges  and  opportunities,  God  may  withdraw  some  of  them 
in  His  judicial  wisdom, — as,  in  the  contrary  case.  He  may  enlarge  them.  But 
the  vicious  view  so  often  taken  of  the  prophet's  words  is  quite  another  thing. 
That  view  is  rooted  in  certain  dogmas  of  absolute  predestination  and  partial 
grace,  which  agree  as  ill  with  the  Gospel  as  fire  does  with  water.  2.  Look  at 
the  common  view  critically.  Scripture  contradicts  it.  The  Gospel  contra- 
dicts it.     Hosea  himself,  throughout  this    book,   emphatically  contradicts   it. 

(1)  Scripture  contradicts  it.  Where  is  it  taught  T  Give  and  criticise  the  passages 
relied   on  (Gen.  vi.  3  ;    1  Pet.  iii.   18-20 ;    1  Sam.  xxviii.   15 ;   Luke  xix.  42). 

(2)  The  Gospel  contradicts  it.  The  Bible  is  one  thing,  the  Gospel  is  another. 
The  Bible  is  the  collection  of  inspired  records  :  the  Gospel  is  the  good  news  therein 
contained  of  salvation  through  Christ  crucified  for  every  creature  under  heaven. 
But  good  news  to  every  man  this  Gospel  cannot  be,  if  some  living  men  are  already 
aealed  up  for  perdition.  A  limited  atonement  is  absolutely  irreconcilable  with  a 
universal  Gospel,  and  no  less  so  is  a  limited  provision  of  the  Spirit.  The  section 
we  are  examining  is  one  way  of  limiting  the  Spirit,  and  it  is  one  which  takes  the 
great  living  heart  out  of  the  Grospel.  But  as  God  is  true,  the  Gospel  is  good  news, 
and  brings  salvation  to  every  living  man.  (3)  Hosea  himself  contradicts  it. 
Ephraim  means,  not  an  individual,  but  a  nation.  Desolation  is  to  befall  Israel, 
but  the  "  valley  of  Achor  "  is  to  be  to  her  "  a  door  of  hope  "  (chaps,  ii.  14-23, 
V.  15,  vi.  1-3,  X.  12,  xi.  1-9,  xii.  1-16).  3.  What  is  the  true  view  to  be  taken  of  the 
text  ?  The  key  to  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  context.  While  Ephraim  had  become 
hopelessly  wedded  to  idolatry,  Judah,  the  adjoining  kingdom  of  the  two  tribes, 
had  not  yet  plimged  into  that  foul  and  ruinous  abyss  (chap.  xi.  12).  Judah  was, 
however,  in  imminent  danger  of  drifting  after  Ephraim  into  that  terrible  vortex. 
Hence  the  twofold  warning  in  the  passage  now  before  us — the  formal  warning 
to  Judah,  and  the  yet  more  awful  undertone  of  warning  to  Ephraim.  "  Ephraim 
is  joined  to  idols."  "  Let  not  Judah  offend  "  ;  that  is,  "  Judah,  hold  aloof  ;  let 
Ephraim  alone."  Ephraim  is  the  consociate  of  idolatries ;  Judah,  be  not 
Ephraim's  associate.  Partake  not  Ephraim's  sins,  lest  ye  partake  Ephraim's 
plagues.  The  very  expression,  "  Let  him  alone,"  is  used  by  our  Lord  in  this  same 
sense,  when  warning  His  disciples  against  the  Pharisees — "  They  be  blind  leaders 
of  the  blind  ;  let  them  alone."  The  meaning  is — beware  of  their  companionship. 
Have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  Gilgal  and  Bethel,  which  Judah  was  warned 
not  to  visit,  were  on  the  very  border  between  the  rival  kingdoms.  This  con- 
terminous position,  and  the  sacred  associations  of  the  places  made  them  specially 
perilous.  The  moral  is  obvious.  1.  Beware  of  freedom,  falsely  so  called.  There 
is  a  liberty  which  means  libertinism,  and  which  always  "  genders  to  bondage." 
2.  Beware  of  evil  company.  It  has  been  the  ruin  of  myriads  (1  John  ii.  15-17  ; 
2  Cor.  vi.  14-18).  Faithful  Judah,  however  strong  in  purpose,  ran  a  terrible 
risk  if  he  associated  with  treacherous  Ephraim.  3.  Let  us  oeware  of  doubting 
the  fulness  and  freeness  of  God's  pardoning  mercy,  as  revealed  in  the  Gospel, 
to  all  men  everywhere.  Nothing  but  a  desperate  bent  in  this  direction  can  account 
for  the  perversion  of  such  simple  texts  as  the  one  we  have  been  investigating. 
(T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Ephraim  let  alone: — These  words  give  us  this  important 
instruction,  that  God  may  be  so  provoked,  and  become  finally  so  full  of  wrath, 
as  to  leave  the  guilty  creature  to  himself,  and  remonstrate  with  him  no  more. 
I.  Ephkaim's  condition.  "  Joined  to  idols."  That  is,  as  having  withdrawn 
and  transferred  his  allegiance  ;  as  having  resisted  the  means  used  with  him  for 
his  recovery ;  and  as  having  come  into  close  affinity  with  that  which  was  antag- 
onistic to  God.  It  was  the  curse  of  Israel  that  it  loved  strange  gods,  and  was 
ever  ready  to  leave  the  Lord  and  join  itself  to  them.  And  what  is  Ephraim  but 
a  counterpart  of  many  a  one  in  the  present  day  7  The  sin  which  seemed  so  terrible 
in  him  is  common  enough  if  men's  eyes  were  only  opened  wide  enough  to  see. 
Worldly  men  will  repudiate  the  idea  of  being  under  the  same  circumstances  as 
Ephraim.  Because  the  outward  symbols  are  not  the  same,  men  argue  that  the 
main  principles  are  distinct ;  but  in  the  eyes  of  God  covetousness  is  idolatry, 
and  a  man  can  be  an  idolater  without  worshipping  a  god  of  wood  or  stone.  A 
wife  or  child  may  be  the  finely  sculptured  idol ;  or  gain  anticipated  or  acquired 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

may  be  the  great  image,  like  Nebuchadnezzar's,  all  overlaid  with  gold.  Remember 
that  »  practical  withdrawal  from  Christ  is  abundantly  enough  to  prove  the  ruin 
of  a  soul.  The  transfer  of  allegiance  may  be  a  silent  reality.  The  position  of  an 
idolater  may  be  assumed  without  one's  attracting  even  the  attention  of  his  fellows. 
But  Ephraim  had  added  sin  to  sin,  by  resisting  all  the  means  which  were  used 
to  bring  him  back.  God  did  not  lightly  part  with  Israel.  The  hand  of  justice 
long  lingered  on  the  hilt  before  it  drew  the  sword.  The  hand  of  mercy  long 
trembled  before  it  let  go  its  grasp.  A  dull,  inactive,  heavy  resistance  to  the  means 
of  grace  is  a  fearful  proof  of  the  state  of  practical  idolatry  in  which  some  men 
are.  The  work  of  a  soul's  ruin  is  carried  on  quietly.  Many  a  gracious  influence 
has  been  resisted.  Many  a  teaching  providence  has  been  thrown  away.  The 
heart  has  become,  by  the  very  order  of  nature,  harder  and  harder  ;  the  conscience 
has  become  less  impressible  ;  the  soul  has  become  more  habituated  to  being  away 
from  God.  Then  the  sentence  may  go  forth,  "  Let  him  alone."  II.  Ephbaim's 
CURSE.  The  words  are  as  fearful  as  any  which  ever  passed  from  the  lips  of  God. 
To  secure  their  ruin,  and  to  bring  down  full  vengeance  upon  them,  all  that  was 
required  was  that  they  should  be  left  to  themselves.  It  involved — 1.  A  with- 
drawal of  enlightening  influence.  This  may  occur  gradually  or  suddenly.  It 
is  possible  for  this  curse  to  be  in  operation,  and  yet  for  no  outward  change  of  any 
kind  to  be  detected  in  the  man  upon  whom  it  is  laid.  2.  Disturbing  influences 
are  also  purposely  withheld.  The  cutting  dispensations  under  which  some  of  us 
now  smart  so  much,  are  perhaps  the  only  means  to  keep  us  away  from  that  fatal 
ease  whose  end  is  death.  When  God's  work  is  done  in  us,  all  trial  will  be  taken 
away,  but  woe  betide  the  man  who  gains  freedom  from  trial  by  being  let  alone. 
Beware,  then,  how  you  trifle  with  the  present,  how  you  continue  unmoved  beneath 
the  gracious  influences  which  are  now  being  brought  to  bear  on  your  soul. 
(P.  B.  Power,  M.A.)  Let  him  alone: — "In  a  sense,  all  men  are  idolaters." 
Since  man  by  nature  is,  in  spirit  although  not  in  fact,  as  much  an  idolater  as  the 
pagans  of  any  heathen  land,  it  may  be  justly  said  of  all  who  have  been  converted 
by  the  grace  of  God,  that  He  has  "  taken  them  from  among  the  heathen."  Whatever 
comes  between  the  soul  and  God,  whatever  supplants  His  love  in  the  heart  is  an 
"  idol."  It  may  be  the  love  of  what  is  unlawful  to  be  loved,  or  it  may  be  the 
unlawful  love  of  what  in  itself  is  allowed.  I.  The  sinfttl  alliance.  "  Joined 
to  idols."  There  are  several  particulars  characterising  this  union.  1.  It  is 
illegal.  All  the  inhibitions  of  God  are  but  the  voice  of  perfect  love  and  wisdom 
enforcing  the  perfect  laws  of  parental  government.  In  a  properly  regulated 
family  there  are  laws,  and  these  have  a  threefold  piu-pose — (1)  The  good  of  each 
individual  member.  (2)  The  preservation  of  one  member  from  the  injuries  of 
another.  (3)  The  good,  or  honour,  of  the  parental  head.  The  Divine  laws  are 
illustrated  by  the  human.  To  be  "  joined  to  idols  "  is  to  be  allied  with  claims 
which  are  foreign  to  the  nature  and  opposed  to  the  claims  of  God,  and  such  an 
alliance  is  illegal.  2.  It  is  unnatural.  Redeemed  and  justified  man  is  among 
the  sublime  confederacy  of  loyal  subjects  of  the  Creator.  But  the  sinner  has 
allied  himself  with  the  dark  forces  of  hell — he  is  an  alienated  being.  3.  It  is 
degrading.  For  a  member  of  a  large  and  noble  family  to  become  united  with 
guilt  and  ignominy  would  be  to  entail  upon  himself  utter  disgrace,  to  cast  a  shade 
over  the  honour  of  his  family  name,  and  to  forfeit  all  claims  to  the  love  of  kindred 
or  respect  of  friends.  And  every  sinner,  in  the  eye  of  purity,  is  a  walking  plague, 
a  moral  Cain.  4.  It  is  irrational.  Sin  is  a  disease  producing  madness.  II.  The 
RUINOUS  alliance.  I.  The  soul  may  be  said  to  be  "  let  alone  "  when  it  seeks 
satisfaction  apart  from  God.  2.  When  the  blood  of  the  atonement  is  set  at 
»ought.  3.  When  the  truth  of  God  loses  its  wonted  power  to  "  convince  of  sin, 
righteousness,"  &c.  The  Bible  speaks,  ministers  speak,  providence  speaks,  as 
usual,  but  conscience  hears  not.  4.  The  sentence,  "let  him  alone,"  will  have 
a  future  application  to  the  sinner's  state.  "  Let  him  alone  "  is  the  burning 
inscription  on  the  walls  of  hell's  prison-house.  ((?.  Hunt  Jackson.)  Spiritual 
abandonment : — I.  The  sin  of  Ephraim — idolatry.  We  are  apt  to  be  surprised 
at  the  proneness  of  the  Israelites  to  the  sin  of  idolatry.  Yet  it  may  be  doubted 
whether  we  have  not  a  great  deal  in  common  with  idolaters.  The  same  vice  is 
apt  to  show  itself  in  different  forms — forms  produced  by  circumstances  of  age 
and  country.  There  is  the  same  heart  in  the  man  and  the  boy  ;  but  the  result 
of  the  same  passions  is  different  at  the  two  different  periods  of  life.  And  so 
we  may  not  worship  idols,  and  yet  we  may  be  partakers  of  the  iniquity  of  those 
who  did.     The  fountain-head  and  origin  of  Israel's  sin  was  their  own  wilfulness. 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOSEA.  81 

Wilfulness  and  impatience  of  old  took  the  shape  of  idolatry ;  they  now  wear  the 
form  of  heresy,  and  separation,  and  divisions.  It  was  a  zeal  for  religion  which 
prostrated  Israel  at  the  footstool  of  idols  ;  it  is  zeal  without  knowledge  which 
makes  men  forsake  the  Catholic  faith  for  crude  theories  of  their  own.  II.  Thb 
PUNISHMENT  OF  Ephraim — LET  ALONE.  God  did  not,  in  so  speaking,  design  to 
let  idolatry  go  unpunished.  "  Let  him  alone  "  proclaims  that  idolatry  would 
prove  its  own  punishment ;  so  sure,  so  inevitable,  so  miserable  would  be  the 
consequences  of  forsaking  the  true  God,  that  it  would  need  no  further  outbreak 
of  wrath  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  Almighty.  To  forsake  God  is  to  forsake 
our  own  mercies.  You  cannot  drop  a  single  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  faith,  without 
that  doctrine,  sooner  or  later,  avenging  itself.  Truth  neglected  will  make  itself 
felt.  God  lets  matters  take  their  course,  saying  of  those  who  follow  their  own 
devices,  "  He  is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone."  III.  What  is  it  for  an  indi- 
vidual TO  BE  LET  ALONE  OF  THE  ALMIGHTY  ?  God  has  implanted  in  the  heart 
of  every  man  something  which  chides  him  whenever  he  rejects  the  right  and 
chooses  what  is  wrong.  Very  wonderful  is  our  mental  organisation.  More 
sublime  seems  conscience  on  her  judgment  seat,  weighing  and  balancing  every 
idea  which  memory  or  invention  suggests  ;  and  if  her  judgment  be  not  adopted, 
if  we  will  not  act  by  her  verdict,  chastising  with  a  whip  of  scorpions.  If,  although 
remonstrated  with  as  we  are  by  our  natural  consciences  and  by  the  Eternal  Spirit, 
we  still  fall  into  presumptuous  sin, — what  should  we  become  T  The  judgment 
threatened  in  the  text  is  one  which  would  reduce  us  to  the  position  of  Satan 
himself.  For  what  will  follow  God  letting  a  man  alone  ?  That  man  will  experi- 
ence no  further  promptings  and  warnings,  but  be  left  unrestrained  by  any  secret 
reluctance  to  work  all  manner  of  iniquity.  Assure  me  that  a  man  is  troubled 
when  he  has  done  wrong,  that  he  feels  disquieted  and  restless,  that  after  indulging 
his  passions,  he  is  sensible  of  disgust  and  loathing,  and  I  have  hope  that  the  day 
will  come  when  he  will  throw  off  the  bondage  of  his  lusts.  But  assure  me  that  he 
is  happy  in  his  iniquity,  that  he  can  rob  and  cheat,  and  lie  and  be  drunken 
without  being  miserable  afterwards,  and  I  shudder  lest  indeed  he  has  come  to 
such  a  point  as  to  be  left  alone  of  God.  {J.  R.  Woodford,  MA.)  A  sin  and  its 
punishment : — This  passage  exhibits  against  this  people  a  charge  and  a  threaten- 
ing. I.  A  CHARGE.  "  He  is  joined  to  idols."  1.  All  true  believers  are  said  to 
be  "  joined  to  the  Lord."  Faith  not  only  forms  an  union,  but,  as  it  were,  an  identity 
with  the  Saviour,  so  that  they  are  no  longer  twain,  but  one,  one  mystical  person, 
one  spirit.  2.  The  prodigal  son  is  said  to  have  "  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  in 
a  far  country."  He  fastened  himself  to  him.  3.  Of  Israel  it  is  said,  he  has 
"joined  himself  unto  Baal-peor,"  an  impure  idol  of  the  Ammonites.  Christianity 
has  abolished  idolatry  from  the  nations  of  Europe :  yet  the  world  is  still 
full  of  mental  idolatry,  not  less  sinful  or  less  dangerous,  though  not  equally 
degrading  in  the  eye  of  reason.  To  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  to  love  the  creature 
more  than  the  Creator,  is  to  be  joined  to  idols.  The  sin  of  idolatry  appears  in 
such  variety  of  forms  that  perhaps  no  one  in  the  present  life  is  entirely  free  from 
it.  It  exists  in  every  inordinate  affection,  in  every  undue  attachment  to  created 
good.  II.  A  THREATENING.  This  may  be  the  language  of  caution — Do  not 
enter  into  any  friendship  with  such  an  idolatrous  people.  It  may,  however, 
be  regarded  as  a  warning  and  threatening  against  Ephraim.  The  sinner  is 
delivered  up  to  final  impenitence,  never  more  to  be  visited  with  compunction 
or  regret.  God  suffers  the  sinner  unchecked  to  pursue  his  own  way,  and  take  the 
consequences.  The  instances  in  which  this  awful  threatening  may  be  inflicted 
are  the  following — 1.  When  the  usual  means  of  instruction  and  reproof  are  no 
longer  employed  or  afforded.  2.  When  conscience  becomes  seared,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  ceases  to  strive  with  the  sinner,  then  also  may  he  be  said  to  be  given 
up.  3.  This  fearful  state  may  be  apprehended  when  afflictions  are  withheld, 
and  providence  no  longer  frowns  upon  the  sinner's  way,  but  suffers  him  to  take 
his  course  unreproved.  When  a  physician  ceases  to  administer  his  bitter  potions, 
or  a  surgeon  to  search  the  wound,  it  is  a  sign  that  they  look  upon  the  case  as 
desperate.  ( 1 )  If  God  let  us  alone,  we  shall  be  sure  to  let  Him  alone,  and  become 
prayerless,  unfeeling,  and  incorrigible.  We  then  cast  off  fear,  and  restrain  prayer 
before  God.  (2)  Though  God  should  let  us  alone,  Satan  will  not.  (3)  If  God 
let  U8  alone  it  is  the  prelude  of  our  destruction.  We  are  left  in  our  sins,  surrounded 
with  enemies  and  dangers.  (4)  Should  God  let  us  alone  now,  He  will  not  do  so 
hereafter.  Learn — L  The  wretched  state  into  which  sin  may  have  brought  us. 
2.  The  necessity  of  constant  watchfulness  and  prayer,  that  none  of  these  evila 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

come  upon  us.  It  is  better  to  endure  the  deepest  distress  than  to  enjoy  a  false 
and  delusive  peace.  Let  us  dread  nothing  so  much  as  a  state  of  insensibility; 
a  being  "past  feeling"  is  the  certain  sign  of  perdition.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
The  derdict : — I.  Thb  mbaning  op  the  vbbse  and  the  keenbl-truth  con- 
tained IN  IT.  Under  the  seductive  influence  and  example  of  Ahab  and  his  queen 
Jezebel,  the  revolt  of  Israel  had  become  complete.  From  the  false  worship  of 
the  true  God  they  had  turned  further  aside  to  the  worship  of  false  gods,  and  were 
as  really  idolaters  as  the  heathen  nations  around  them.  But  it  was  not  all  at 
once,  or  without  many  measures  aimed  at  their  reformation,  that  God  finally 
abandoned  them.  The  spirit  of  His  dealings  with  them,  for  a  long  period,  was 
expressed  in  those  tender  words,  as  if  spoken  by  a  father  over  a  prodigal  son, 
"  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  T  A  succession  of  prophets,  like  Elijah 
and  Elisha,  was  sent  to  remonstrate  with  them ;  severe  chastisements,  such  as 
famine  and  other  national  calamities,  were  commissioned  to  "  hedge  up  their 
way  with  thorns,"  to  bring  their  sins  to  their  remembrance,  and  to  lead  them  to  a 
penitent  return  to  God.  But  while  individuals  were  thereby  recovered,  any  good 
effects  upon  the  nation  were  temporary  and  partial  And  then,  at  length,  the 
patience  of  a  long-suffering  God  becoming  exhausted.  He  declares  His  holy  purpose 
to  suspend  all  further  measures  for  their  recovery.  This  unfolds  the  meaning 
and  presents  the  remarkable  central  doctrine  of  the  verse.  Some  have  indeed 
understood  it  to  bear  a  different  sense,  and  to  convey  a  seasonable  warning  to 
the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  Judah,  rather  than  to  announce  the  final  rejection 
of  Israel.  As  if  it  were  said :  "  He  is  joined  to  idols ;  beware  of  following  his 
evil  example ;  keep  aloof,  yea,  at  a  far  distance  from  him.  You  cannot  touch 
pitch  and  not  be  defiled.  When  the  dove  associates  with  the  raven,  it  soon  begins 
to  smell  of  carrion.  Have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness, 
but  rather  reprove  them."  And  this  is  a  most  seasonable  thought  in  itself,  which 
has  been  anticipated  in  a  previous  verse ;  but  it  is  not  the  immediate  truth 
expressed  in  these  solemn  words.  Their  general  meaning  is,  that  when  individuals 
or  a  nation  continue  and  obstinately  persist  in  sin,  especially  in  the  face  of 
providential  chastisement  and  means  of  grace,  it  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  with 
God  at  length  to  give  up  His  gracious  dealings  with  them,  and  to  abandon  them 
to  ruin.  The  same  doctrine,  declaring  one  of  the  laws  of  the  Divine  procedure, 
comes  out  with  startling  distinctness  in  other  passages  of  Scripture.  Thus  in 
Ezekiel :  "  As  for  you,  0  house  of  Israel,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Go  ye,  serve 
ye  every  one  his  idols."  And  in  the  Book  of  Psalms :  "  My  people  would  not 
hearken  to  My  voice,  and  Israel  would  none  of  Me :  so  I  gave  them  to  their  own 
hearts'  lusts,  and  they  walked  in  their  own  counsels."  U.  And  this  doctbinb 
OR  LAW  OF  God's  moral  government  has  written  itself  in  many  retbibutivb 

FACTS   on  the  history  OF  NOT  A  FEW  OF  THE  NATIONS   OF  THE   EARTH.      ThuS, 

when  a  people  have  shown  a  disposition,  in  the  mass  of  their  population,  to  reject 
and  persecute  the  religion  of  Christ,  and  they  have  persisted  in  this  even  when 
lengthened  opportunities  for  repentance  have  been  given  them  and  they  have 
been  tried  by  various  agencies  to  bring  them  to  a  right  state  of  mind,  they  have 
at  length  been  abandoned  and  given  over  to  the  error  and  darkness  which  they 
preferred.  It  would  be  easy  to  name  more  than  one  nation  in  Europe  which, 
at  the  great  Protestant  reformation  three  centuries  ago,  drove  away  the  Gospel 
from  their  gates,  and  turned  its  messengers  into  martyrs,  and  which  have  been 
sinking  lower  and  lower  in  the  scale  of  nations  ever  since.  The  same  thing  holds 
true  of  individuals,  only  with  a  depth  of  meaning  which,  from  the  nature  of  the 
case,  is  not  applicable  in  its  full  extent  to  organised  communities.  When  men 
persist  in  indifference  and  imbelief,  and  in  following  after  their  hearts'  idols,  and 
all  this  in  the  face  of  measures  to  break  them  off  from  their  forbidden  attachments, 
God  at  length  withdraws  every  means  at  recovering  them,  and  gives  them  over 
to  their  merited  doom.  This  terrible  experience  is  not  indeed  to  be  confounded 
with  that  temporary  withdrawal  of  the  light  of  His  countenance  with  which  the 
Father  sometimes  punishes  those  children  who  have  partially  wandered  from  Him. 
This  form  of  Divine  dealing  is  wise,  merciful,  and  paternal,  and  is  referred  to  in  a 
subsequent  verse :  "  I  will  go,"  says  Jehovah,  "  and  return  to  My  place,  till  they 
acknowledge  their  offence  and  seek  My  face :  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  Me 
early."  But  the  dealing  of  which  this  verse  speaks  is  judicial  and  punitive.  And 
80  it  also  was  with  the  miserable,  blighted,  heaven-deserted  Saul,  like  his  own 
mountain  of  Gilboa,  with  no  dew  resting  on  it.  It  is  a  melancholy  thing  to  see  a 
physician  leaving  the  sick-chamber,  and  declaring  that  he  can  do  no  more  for 


CHAP,  v.]  HOSEA.  83 

his  patient.  It  is  sad  to  hear  of  a  crew  leaving  a  wrecked  ship,  escaping  from  the 
doomed  thing,  and  making  no  more  efforts  to  Keep  it  from  sinking.  But  what  is 
this  to  God's  abandoning  an  incorrigible  human  spirit !  Lord,  afflict  me  with 
chastisements,  bereave  me  with  strokes,  do  anything  to  me  rather  than  say,  "  He 
is  jomed  to  idols  :  let  him  alone."     {A.  Thomson,  D.D.). 

Ver.  19.  The  wind  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  wings. — Retributive  justice : — 
The  simple  meaning  is  that  Israel  shall  be  borne  away  from  her  land, 
suddenly  and  violently,  as  by  the  winds  of  heaven.  There  is  retributive 
justice  in  the  vmiverse.  I.  Its  emblem.  The  wind.  It  is  like  wind — 1.  In  its 
agitation.  Wind  is  a  disturbance  or  agitation  of  the  atmosphere.  The  average 
condition  of  the  air  is  silence  and  serenity.  The  normal  condition  of  Divine 
government  is  quiet.  It  has  no  tempest  where  there  is  no  wickedness.  2.  In  its 
violence.  Power  is  in  the  wind.  Cambyses  being  once  in  the  wilderness  with 
the  soldiers,  a  strong  and  violent  wind  broke  forth  and  buried  thousands  of  them 
in  the  sand.  Who  can  stand  before  retributive  justice  when  it  comes  forth  in  its 
power?  II.  Its  BrFECT.  "Ashamed  because  of  the  sacrifices."  1.  The  shame  of 
disappointment.  All  plans  broken,  all  purposes  thwarted,  all  hopes  destroyed. 
2.  The  shame  of  exposure.  The  wicked  always  live  in  masquerade,  they  always 
appear  to  be  what  they  are  not.  Retributive  justice  takes  off  the  mask.  3.  The 
shame  of  remorse.  This  is  the  most  burning  shame  of  all.  It  sends  its  firea 
down  into  the  very  centre  of  man's  being,  and  sets  all  the  moral  nerves  aflame. 
Let  the  wicked  take  warning.  Let  not  the  present  stillness  of  their  atmosphere 
deceive  them.  Their  sins  are  generating  a  heat  that  must,  sooner  or  later,  so 
disturb  the  elements  about  them  as  to  bring  on  ruin.     (Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Veb.  1.  Hear  ye  this,  0  priests;   and   hearken,  ye   house    of  Israel;   and 
give  ye  ear,  0  house    of   the    king;    for   Judgment  is  toward  you. — God   in 

ways  of  judgment : — Here  is  a  summons  to  all  sorts  of  judgment.  Three 
classes  are  named,  "  priests,  people,  house  of  the  king."  All  sorts  are  cited  to 
judgment,  for  corruption  was  gone  over  all.  1.  When  God  comes  in  ways  of 
judgment.  He  expects  we  should  seriously  incline  our  minds  to  what  He  is  doing. 
We  should  not  only  "  hear,"  but  "  hearken,"  and  "  give  ear."  We  are  bound  to 
hearken  and  to  give  ear  to  God's  commanding  word  ;  but  if  we  refuse  it.  He  will 
have  us  to  hear  and  give  ear  to  His  threatening  word  ;  and  if  that  be  refused.  Ho 
will  force  us  to  hear  and  give  ear  to  His  condemning  word.  2.  Generality  in  sins 
is  no  means  to  escape  God's  judgments.  With  men  *'  one  and  all  "  is  a  word  of 
security.  Men  think,  I  do  but  as  others  do,  and  I  shall  escape  as  well  as  they. 
With  men  this  is  somewhat,  with  God  it  is  nothing ;  though  all  sorts  offend, 
yet  there  is  never  a  whit  the  more  security  thereby  unto  any.  3.  The  priests 
have  usually  been  the  causes  of  all  the  wickedness  in,  and  judgments  on,  a  nation. 
4.  The  people  will  usually  go  the  way  the  king  and  priests  go.  But  they  are 
not  to  be  excused  on  this  ground.  5.  Kings  and  princes  must  have  sin  charged 
upon  them,  and  be  made  to  know  that  they  are  under  the  threats  of  God,  as  well 
as  others.  The  charge  is  not  on  evil  counsellors,  but  on  the  house  of  the  king 
itself.  Evil  princes  may  be  as  great  a  cause  why  there  are  evil  counsellors,  aa 
evil  counsellors  why  there  are  evil  princes.  Evil  counsellors  usually  see  what 
the  design  of  a  prince  is,  and  what  is  suitable  to  his  disposition,  and  they  cherish 
that  with  their  wicked  counsels.  6.  Though  kings  are  to  be  reproved  for  sin, 
some  due  respect  ought  to  be  shown  to  them.  7.  When  God  pleads  against  us, 
let  us  not  disregard.  If  we  do  so  when  He  begins  to  plead  His  cause  with  us,  if 
we  neglect  it  because  judgment  is  not  upon  us,  it  will  proceed  to  a  sentence. 
{Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Mizpah,  and  a  net  spread 
upon  Tabor. — Nets  to  catch  souls : — How  cunningly  have  men  laid  such 
nets  !  They  say  it  is  but  yielding  a  little  to  a  thing  enjoined  by  authority ; 
besides,  it  is  really  unimportant,  and  is  countenanced  by  the  example 
of  many  learned  and  godly  men  ;  yea,  and  why  should  you  hinder  yourself 
of  the  good  you   may  do  ?     It  is  after   all   a   mere   matter   of  circumstance 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

connected  with  decency  and  order,  and  consistent  with  much  devotion,  and  by 
yielding  as  far  as  we  can,  we  may  gain  papists  ;  none  but  a  company  of  simple 
people  oppose  these  ancient  customs,  which  can  plead  the  precedent  of  the  fathers 
of  the  Church,  yea,  of  many  martyrs  who  have  shed  their  blood.  Thus  many 
souls  have  been  caught,  as  a  bird  in  a  snare,  with  these  lines  and  twigs  thus 
cunningly  twisted  together  ;  and  so  caught  that  they  could  not  tell  how  to  get 
out,  but  being  once  involved  in  the  meshes  were  ensnared  more  and  more  :  as  a 
bird  once  caught  in  the  net,  by  its  very  flutterings  is  the  more  entangled ;  so  men, 
when  they  yielded  a  little,  could  not  tell  where  to  stop,  but  at  last  have  gone  so 
far,  and  been  so  completely  ensnared  as  to  be  wholly  unable  to  extricate  them- 
selves, but  by  their  very  efforts  have  become  more  deeply  involved.  And  the 
truth  is,  at  length  even  their  consciences  have  ceased  to  disquiet  them  :  as 
a  bird,  that  is  perhaps  at  first  alarmed  when  the  net  is  but  stirred,  after  a 
while  loses  its  fear.  (Ihid. )  Mizpah  and  Tabor : — Mizpah,  the  scene  of 
the  solemn  covenant  of  Jacob  with  Laban,  and  of  his  signal  protection  by  God, 
lay  in  the  moimtainous  part  of  Gilead  on  the  east  of  Jordan.  Tabor  was  the  well- 
known  (traditional)  mountain  of  the  Transfiguration,  which  rises  out  of  the  midst 
of  the  plain  of  Jezreel  or  Esdraelon,  about  a  thousand  feet  high,  and  in  the  form 
of  a  sugar  loaf.  Of  Mount  Tabor  it  is  related  by  St.  Jerome  that  birds  were  still 
snared  upon  it.  But  something  more  seems  intended  than  the  mere  likeness  of 
birds  taken  in  the  snare  of  the  fowler.  This  was  to  be  seen  everywhere.  The 
prophet  has  selected  places  on  both  sides  of  Jordan,  which  were  probably  centres 
of  corruption,  or  special  scenes  of  wickedness.  Mizpah,  being  a  sacred  place  in 
the  history  of  the  patriarch  Jacob,  was  probably,  like  Gilgal,  and  other  sacred 
places,  desecrated  by  idolatry.  Tabor  was  the  scene  of  God's  deliverance  by 
Barak.  There,  by  encouraging  idolatries,  they  became  hunters,  not  pastors,  of 
souls.  There  is  an  old  Jewish  tradition  that  liers  in  wait  were  set  in  these  two 
places  to  intercept  and  murder  those  Israelites  who  persisted  in  going  up  to  worship 
at  Jerusalem.  (E.  B.  Puaey,  D.D.)  God's  judicial  process  and  sentence: — 
The  plain  meaning  is,  that  as  fowlers  and  hvmters  lay  snares  and  nets  for  birds 
and  beasts  on  the  mountains  of  Israel ;  so  their  priests  and  rulers,  by  their  erroneous 
doctrine,  fraudulent  counsels,  subtle  edicts,  and  profane  example,  and  countenanc- 
ing of  sin,  deceived  the  people,  and  ensnared  them  to  follow  idolatry.  Doctrine — 
1.  There  is  no  rank,  but  they  will  be  found  to  have  guiltiness  to  lay  to  heart,  in  a 
time  when  God  pleads  a  controversy  with  a  land.  2.  As  the  Word  of  God  doth 
reach  and  oblige  all  ranks  of  persons,  be  in  what  eminency  they  will ;  and  as  the 
Lord's  faithful  servants  must  preach  against  the  sins  of  all,  without  respect  of 
person ;  so  the  general  overspreading  of  sin  is  no  way  to  escape  judgments,  but 
rather  to  hasten  them.  3.  When  God  is  coming  against  a  people  in  judgment, 
it  concerns  them  to  be  very  serious  in  considering  what  He  saith  from  His  Word ; 
and  He  will  at  last  force  audience  and  attention  from  the  most  stubborn.  4.  The 
Lord's  contending  with  His  people  by  His  Word  is  not  an  ordinary  challenge,  aa 
of  one  displeased  only,  but  the  judicial  procedure  and  sentence  of  the  Supreme 
Judge.  5.  God  may  testify  much  of  His  anger  against  a  people,  in  the  teachers 
and  rulers  He  gives  them,  as  being  fit  means  to  ripen  them  for  judgment. 
6.  Subtle  snares  and  insinuations  are  more  dangerous  for  drawing  men  wrong 
than  open  violences.  7.  It  is  a  great  sin  in  men  when  they  prove  a  snare  to 
others,  or  by  their  insinuations,  example,  or  policy,  draw  them  to  sin  against 
God.     (George  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  2.  The  revoltera  are  profoimd  to  make  slaughter. — The  deep  ways  of 
apostates  and  false  worshippers  : — There  can  be  no  blacker  brand  on  a  people 
or  a  man  than  this — he  is  an  apostate,  a  revolter.  We  must  understand  this, 
their  revolting,  especially  in  reference  to  their  falling  off  from  the  true  worship 
of  God  to  their  idolatry.  1.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  venture  on  the  beginnings 
of  false  worship,  especially  when  the  tide  is  flowing  in.  2.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing 
to  be  deeply  rooted  in  superstitious  ways.  By  custom  men  become  deeply 
rooted.  3.  The  hearts  of  apostates  are  the  most  deeply  rooted  in  wickedness. 
4.  Idolaters,  especially  apostates,  are  profound  and  deep.  Only  those  who  have 
the  Spirit  of  God  that  searches  the  deep  things  of  God,  are  likely  to  stand  out 
against  the  deep  policies  of  idolaters.  God  calls  their  "sacrifices"  "making 
slaughter,"  by  way  of  reproach.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  I  have  been  a 
Rebuker  of  them  all. — Marg.  "  correction."  The  sin  of  the  people  was 
increased   by   the   circumstance   that   God   had   not   ceased   by   His   prophets 


CHAP,  v.]  HOSEA.  85 

to  recall  the  Israelites  to  a  sound  mind,  since  they  might  not  have  been 
wholly  irreclaimable.  Or  God  may  be  thought  of  here  as  complaining  that 
He  had  been  an  object  of  dislike  to  the  Israelites,  as  though  He  said,  "  When  I 
sent  My  prophets,  they  could  not  bear  to  be  admonished,  because  My  Word  was 
too  bitter  for  them."  Reproofs  are  not  easily  endured  by  men.  What  is  clear 
is  that  the  people  of  Israel  were  not  only  apostates,  but  hopelessly  contumacious 
and  refractory  in  their  wickedness.     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  3.  I  know  Ephraim,  and  Israel  is  not  Md  from  Me. — Knowledge  as  a 
basis  of  judgment : — To  know  Ephraim  is  to  know  all  his  shifts,  evasions, 
and  cunning  devices,  all  his  plots,  pretences,  and  base  ends.  1.  God's 
eye  is  upon  the  secrets  of  men's  hearts.  2.  God's  eye  upon  our  hearts  and  ways 
ia  a  special  means  to  humble  us.  3.  God  will  deal  with  men  according  to  their 
present  ways.  4.  Defiled  worship  exceedingly  defiles  the  souls  of  people.  5.  A 
morally  and  religiously  defiled  nation  is  near  to  ruin.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
God's  knowing  : — Emphasis  is  laid  on  the  "  I."  God  had  known  Ephraim  all  along. 
However  deep  they  may  have  laid  their  plans  of  blood,  I  have  all  along  known 
them ;  nothing  of  them  has  been  hid  from  Me.  Even  now,  when  under  a  fair 
outward  show,  they  are  veiling  the  depth  of  their  sin,  when  they  think  their  way 
is  hid  in  darkness,  I  know  their  doings,  that  they  are  defiling  themselves.  Sin 
never  wants  specious  excuse.  Although  (in  some  way  unknown  to  us)  not  inter 
fering  with  oxu:  free  will,  known  unto  God  are  our  thoughts  and  words  and 
deeds,  before  they  are  framed,  while  they  are  framed,  while  they  are  being  spoken 
and  done;  known  to  Him  is  all  which  we  do,  and  all  which,  under  any  circum- 
stances, we  should  do.  This  He  knows  with  a  knowledge  before  the  things  were. 
How  strange,  then,  to  think  of  hiding  from  God  a  secret  sin,  when  He  knew,  before 
He  created  thee,  that  He  created  thee  liable  to  this  very  temptation,  and  to  be 
assisted  amidst  it  with  just  that  grace  which  thou  art  resisting.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
Nothing  hid  jrom  Ood : — While  the  Americans  were  blockading  Cuba,  several 
captains  endeavoured  to  elude  their  vigilance  by  night,  trusting  that  the  darkness 
would  conceal  them  as  they  passed  between  the  American  war  ships.  But  in 
almost  every  case,  the  dazzling  rays  of  a  searchlight  frustrated  the  attempt, 
and  the  fugitive  vessel  was  captured  by  the  Americans.  The  brilliant  searchlight, 
sweeping  the  broad  ocean  and  revealing  even  the  smallest  craft  on  its  surface,  is 
but  a  faint  type  of  the  Eternal  Light  from  which  no  sinner  can  hide  his  sin. 
{Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 

Ver.  4.  They  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn  unto  their  God. — Framing  the 
doings  : — This  is  one  of  those  strong  Old  English  expressions  which  have  been 
retained  in  our  north  country  speech.  People  say,  "  He  frames  well,"  meaning 
of  a  new  servant,  he  sets  hopefully  to  his  work,  he  shows  adaptation.  Hosea 
lived  at  the  time  when  Israel,  whose  sin  had  ripened  before  Judah's,  was  beginning 
to  suffer  its  punishments.  Hosea  directs  the  eye  of  Judah  to  the  miseries  falling 
on  Israel,  bidding  her  take  warning  and  hasten  to  turn  back  from  all  her  wicked 
ways  to  God.  In  the  case  of  Israel  there  is  a  kind  of  hopelessness  that  they  would 
ever  repent,  and  the  text  expresses  this  hopelessness, — "  They  will  not  frame  their 
doings,"  &c.  Such  a  description  of  men's  state  in  relation  to  God  is  suitable 
to  every  generation.  I.  Every  man's  first  duty  is  to  turn  unto  his  God. 
Shew  it  is  his  duty  from  these  considerations.  1.  The  claims  and  relations  of 
God.  The  eye  of  every  created  thing  but  man  is  towards  God.  Whatever  view 
may  be  taken  of  those  relations — Creator,  King,  Father — this  is  certain,  God 
ought  to  be  something  to  every  man — ought  to  be  all  that  He  can  possibly  be. 
Man  should  turn  to  Him.  2.  The  conditions  of  our  being.  Our  condition  is 
one  of  dependence.  Possibly  one  of  gracious  friendship  with  our  Creator.  We 
are  certainly  under  temporary  conditions  on  which  depend  the  eternal  conditions. 
3.  The  fact  that  man  is  turned  from  God.  None  are  disposed  to  deny  that  fact. 
The  consequences  are  too  plainly  written  on  the  care-burdened  earth — too  certainly 
stamped  in  on  human  consciousness.  Men  everywhere  are  trying  to  tiu-n  to 
God,  then  they  must  be  turned  from  Him.  4.  The  special  call  made  by  God, 
in  His  mercy,  through  Christ.  All  natural  calls  of  God  are  sealed  and  intensified 
by  His  extraordinary  call.  A  new  pressure  God  has  put  on  men — urging  them 
to  Himself  in  Christ.  The  voice  of  the  Cross  is,  "  Turn  ye  ;  turn  ye  "  !  It  is 
man's  greatest  duty,  because  not  concerning  the  transitory  but  the  eternal,  not 
the  temporajy  but  the  essential.     A  true  life  is  a  continual  turning  to  God.  as 


Sa  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

the  needle  to  the  pole.  II.  Pbecisbly  in  this  first  and  greatest  duty  most 
MEN  FAIL.  One  of  the  most  constant  efforts  of  a  Christian  ministry  is  to  point 
out  the  various  hindrances  keeping  men  from  God,  their  self-delusions,  their 
religious  delusions,  their  procrastinations.  Men's  doings  are  the  apparent  hin- 
drance; men's  bad  wills  are  the  real  hindrance.  By  "men's  doings"  are  not 
meant  single,  isolated  acts,  but  sets  and  courses  of  conduct,  habits  of  life,  moulds 
in  which  conduct  is  regularly  cast.  These  become  such  power  for  evil,  because 
they  re-act  on  the  will,  enslaving  it.  So  the  Old  Testament  and  our  Lord  and 
His  apostles  all  say  so  much  about  men's  doings.  What  will  be  the  real  seeking 
after  God  ?  Its  fountain  must  be  in  the  heart.  Penitent  yearning  of  the  soul 
for  God.  Its  expression  must  be  in  confession  and  prayer.  The  test  and  proof 
of  its  sincerity  must  be  a  changed  conduct.  In  every  case  there  will  be  a  suitable 
"  framing  of  the  doings."  Men  are  not  without  heart  desires  for  God,  nor  without 
lip  confessions  and  seekings ;  but  how  few  can  stand  the  further  test  of  the  way 
in  which  they  "  frame  their  doings."  Let  us  test  ourselves  by  the  Scripture  terms 
for  the  spirit  of  the  ungodly.  L  Lust  of  the  flesh.  Indulgence  of  bodily  passion. 
What  have  we  given  up  in  order  to  turn  to  God  ?  2.  Lust  of  the  eyes.  The 
higher  pleasures  of  mind.  3.  Pride  of  life.  The  great  sin  of  our  times.  Further, 
test  our  religious  profession  by  our  iinforgivings  and  envyings.  What  sincerity 
then  is  there  in  our  turning  to  God  ?  This  is  the  Lord's  reproach.  "  Ye  will 
not  frame  your  doings  to  tiu-n  unto  God."  A  man's  sincerity  is  seen  in  what 
he  will  give  up  for  an  object.  Illustrate  from  the  going  to  war;  framing  their 
doings  to  show  their  patriotism.  God  looks  for  a  like  sincerity.  But,  after  all, 
behind  the  doings  is  the  real  thing  keeping  men  from  turning  to  God.  It  ia 
the  bad  will,  the  self-centred  will.  And  so  this  must  be  the  Divine  reproach, 
"  Ye  wiU  not  come  unto  Me,  that  ye  might  have  life."  (Robert  Tuck,  B.A.) 
Framing  the  doings  : — The  words  in  the  original  are  very  elegant.  Jerome  and 
Viilgate  render,  "  They  will  not  give  themselves  to  think  of  such  a  thing."  Mercer 
and  Castellius,  "  They  will  not  do  their  endeavours."  Tremellius,  "  They  do 
not  apply  any  action  of  theirs  any  way  to  turn  unto  the  Lord."  Drusius  and 
Pagninus,  "  Their  custom  in  their  ways  of  sin  will  not  suffer  them  to  turn  to 
the  Lord."  Septuagint  and  Calvin,  "  They  give  not  their  counsels,  their  studies, 
to  tvu-n  to  the  Lord."  They  will  not  give  their  mind  to  turn  to  the  Lord,  they 
will  not  put  forth  themselves  into  any  posture  that  way.  It  is  true,  we  can  do 
nothing  without  the  Lord,  but  yet  the  sin  lies  in  our  wills  rather  than  in  our 
power,  therefore  the  will  is  charged  by  God.  They  cannot  turn  unto  God  of 
themselves,  but  yet  they  may  do  somewhat,  they  may  bend  themselves  upon 
it,  they  may  think  of  it,  they  may  attend  upon  the  means.  L  Israel  will  not 
so  much  as  set  his  heart  to  think  of  anything  that  will  bring  him  unto  God.  Not 
so  much  as  to  think,  are  my  ways  right  or  not  right  ?  2.  Though  a  man  cannot 
turn  to  God,  yet  through  the  common  work  of  God's  Spirit  he  may  do  this,  he 
may  be  willing  to  hear  and  consider  what  is  said  for  the  ways  of  God.  3.  They 
will  not  wait  on  God  in  the  use  of  means.  4.  They  will  not  apply  the  rule  of 
the  Word  to  their  actions.  Whatsoever  they  think  will  make  for  their  own 
ends,  that  they  wiU  follow.  5.  The  light  and  power  they  have  they  will  not 
use.  6.  They  will  not  join  in  with  the  work  of  God.  7.  They  will  adhere  to 
their  old  customs,  to  their  former  ways,  to  what  they  have  received  from  their 
forefathers,  and  been  trained  up  in.  8.  They  will  take  and  improve  to  the  utter- 
most every  advantage  they  can  have  against  the  ways  of  God.  If  we  will  not 
frame  our  doings  to  turn  unto  the  Lord,  He  may  break  us,  break  that  frame  which 
we  raise  in  our  own  imaginations.  Observe — (1)  Apostates  seldom  have  any 
inclination  to  turn  unto  God.  No  meltings  of  spirit,  no  yieldings,  but  their 
hearts  are  hardened,  and  they  depart  farther  and  farther  from  God.  (2)  True 
repentance  is  not  only  to  leave  evil,  and  to  do  good,  but  to  turn  unto  God  as 
our  God.  (3)  It  is  God's  just  judgment  to  give  men  over  to  the  devil  to  be  blinded 
and  hardened  when  they  forsake  Him  and  His  truth.  (4)  Impetuousness  of 
spirit  blinds  the  mind.  '  The  spirit  of  whoredoms  is  in  them  "  ;  and  then  follows, 
"  they  have  not  known  the  Lord."  Whatsoever  is  said  against  their  way  cannot 
convince  them.  When  the  mind  is  possessed  by  passion,  love,  fear,  sorrow,  or 
any  other  strong  affection,  and  carried  out  powerfully  to  the  object  that  excites 
them,  it  will  not  listen  to,  it  will  not  imderstand  anything  urged  against  it ; 
the  voice  of  reason  is  unheeded,  charming  never  so  wisely.  Some  have  a  spirit 
of  sluggishness  and  love  their  ease  ;  a  spirit  of  covetousness,  and  they  must 
have  their  estates  j  a  spirit  of  ambition,  and  they  must  have  their  honour  and 


CHAP,  v.]  HOSEA.  87 

respect ;  a  spirit  of  pride  and  self-love,  and  they  must  not  on  any  account  grant 
that  they  are  ignorant  and  mistaken  ;  therefore  they  cannot  see  the  truths,  the 
ways  of  God.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Life  framing : — The  perfection  and 
beauty  of  all  life — vegetable,  animal,  intellectual,  and  moral — depends  largely 
on  "  framing,"  by  which  I  mean  cultiu-e.  Scotland  was  once  a  barren  soil,  but 
industry  and  skill  have  turned  it  into  one  of  the  most  fruitful  and  prolific  landa 
to  farmers  in  Europe.  More  :  the  orchid  would  not  be  so  popular  as  it  is,  but 
for  the  care  and  skill  of  the  botanist :  the  rose  would  not  be  the  beautiful  flower 
that  it  is,  but  for  the  gardener  :  nor  would  the  carnation,  nor  the  chrysant  hemum 
be  the  favourites  they  are,  but  for  the  care  bestowed  upon  them  by  professionals. 
The  same  law  applies  to  the  feathered  tribes.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the 
almost  endless  variety  of  pigeons  we  have  in  England  sprang  from  the  common 
blue-rock  pigeon  ;  and  Dr.  Drummond  says  that  if  all  these  pigeons  could  be 
banished  to  some  distant  island  for  a  few  years,  and  their  descendants  brought 
back,  they  would  be  totally  changed  ;  for  they  would  have  become  blue-rock 
pigeons.  The  same  law  applies  with  redoubled  force  to  man.  Let  a  man  neglect 
his  body  for  a  little  while,  and  he  would  become  little  better  than  a  beast  or  a 
savage.  Let  a  man  neglect  his  mind,  and  disorder  will  follow.  Let  him  neglect 
his  moral  nature,  and  his  sympathies  will  be  stunted,  and  his  conscience  will 
cease  to  commend  him  when  he  does  right,  and  to  warn  him  when  he  does  wrong. 
This  was  the  sin  of  those  to  whom  the  prophet  spoke  :  "  They  will  not  frame 
their  doings  to  turn  unto  their  God."  I.  What  is  this  life  framing  to 
WHICH  the  Word  op  God  calls  us  ?  1.  Each  man  possesses  a  soul,  which 
must  exist  for  ever  amongst  the  spirits  of  the  redeemed,  or  be  consigned  to 
eternal  pimishment.  2.  Some  men  tell  us  that  the  brain  is  the  greatest  power 
in  man  ;  others,  that  that  power  lies  in  the  heart ;  while  others  contend  that 
it  lies  in  the  will.  The  fact  is.  Christian  character  calls  all  these  powers  into 
requisition  (1  Tim.  vi.  9-11).  How  is  this  character  to  be  secured  ?  (1)  There 
must  be  repentance.  (2)  Prayer  and  self-denial.  These  are  as  necessary  to  expel 
the  evil  propensities  of  your  nature  as  they  were  to  expel  devils  in  our  Saviour's 
day.  (3)  Faith  in  Christ.  (4)  All  men  can  live  such  a  life  if  they  will.  A  man 
may  be  humble  in  his  origin,  and  poor  in  his  circumstances,  but  these  things 
do  not  prevent  him  rising  to  the  dignity  of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ.  II.  Look 
at  some  of  the  reasons  which  men  urge  for  the  neglect  op  this  duty. 
"  They  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn  unto  their  God."  The  reasons  which 
men  urge  for  the  neglect  of  this  important  work  are,  at  best,  mere  excuses,  and 
too  often  hollow  pretexts.  1.  Some  plead  the  unfavourable  situation  in  which 
they  are  placed.  Their  companions  stand  in  the  way.  They  would  sneer  at 
them,  revile  them,  or  even  persecute  them  if  they  could.  To  read  the  Bible, 
to  pray,  and  to  talk  about  religion  in  their  presence  would  be  impossible.  Oh, 
man,  where  is  thy  courage,  where  is  thy  manhood  ?  2.  Others  plead  the  pressing 
claims  of  their  worldly  occupations.  These  are  allowed  to  take  precedence. 
Thought,  conversation,  and  care  are  bestowed  on  houses,  lands,  and  worldly 
wealth,  as  if  there  were  no  better  inheritance  for  man.  3.  Business  is  urged  as 
an  excuse.  They  have  to  build  their  house,  educate  their  children,  provide  for 
their  families,  and  these  leave  them  no  time  to  carry  into  effect  that  which  they 
know  to  be  their  duty  to  God  and  to  themselves.  Now  observe — (1 )  There  is  time 
enough  for  every  one  to  save  his  soul.  Others  find  time  to  do  their  duty  to  God, 
and  you  can  if  you  will  but  try.  (2)  That  family  duties  and  cares  need  not 
stand  in  your  way,  for  the  calm  influences  of  religion  are  just  what  you  need  to 
help  you  to  bear  life's  heavy  cares.  (3)  There  are  methods  of  amassing  wealth  in 
our  day  which  are  hurtful  to  men  and  abominable  to  God.  4.  Others  plead  the 
strength  of  their  passion.  They  are  naturally  intemperate,  or  unchaste,  or  dis- 
honest, or  grasping.  5.  All  these  excuses  indicate  a  shocking  indifference  to  the 
claims  of  God  upon  you,  and  show,  besides,  an  amazing  ignorance  of  religion. 
They  show  that  you  don't  understand  the  necessity  of  religion,  as  you  under- 
stand the  necessity  of  food  for  the  hungry,  raiment  for  the  naked,  or  houses  for 
the  homeless.  You  undervalue  its  importance  as  compared  with  other  interests. 
6.  What  does  God  say  to  these  excuses  ?  {H.  Woodcock.)  The  guilt  and 
danger  of  refusing  to  serve  God  : — Men  will  not  act  upon  the  principle  that  the 
great  business  of  life  is  to  serve  aad  please  God,  and  enjoy  His  favour,  here  and 
hereafter.  I.  They  will  not  treasure  up  that  truth  which  is  the  only  medium 
of  sanctification.  2.  They  will  store  up  folly  till  there  is  no  room  in  their  minds 
for  Divine  and  sanctifying  truth.     3.  Men  so  associate  themselves  together  that 


88  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

it  would  rupture  all  their  friendships  to  become  the  friends  of  God.  4.  Men  so 
commit  themselves  against  religion,  the  Bible,  the  Sabbath,  the  people  of  God, 
&c.,  &a  to  cause  them  great  embarrassment  when  there  shall  be  occasion  to  take 
back  these  commitments.  5.  Men  so  locate  themselves  and  enter  such  employ- 
ments as  to  require  a  change,  and  perhaps  a  rupture  of  all  their  earthly  relation- 
ships, should  they  turn  to  serve  and  please  the  Lord.  6.  They  pollute  their 
consciences  with  those  acts  of  moral  defilement  which  will  greatly  pain  them 
should  they  become  the  children  of  God.  7.  They  advance  such  sentiments 
with  regard  to  Divine  things  before  the  ungodly  that  should  they  change  their 
course  they  will  be  thereby  much  hindered  in  their  efiforts  to  do  good.  8.  All 
their  habits  of  thinking,  speaking,  and  acting  are  at  variance  with  the  habits 
of  godliness.  9.  They  put  off  religion  until  all  their  preparation  for  eternity  is 
crowded  into  the  few  last  moments  of  life.  Remarks — (1)  What  a  calamity  it  is 
that  men  will  not  use  a  little  of  their  wisdom  in  the  matters  of  eternity,  and  not 
be  continually  blocking  up  their  way  to  heaven.  (2)  The  people  of  God  have 
great  cause  for  gratitude  that  He  has  not  suffered  them  to  go  on  to  a  returnless 
distance  from  Him.  (3)  Every  benevolent  man  will  be  doing  all  in  his  power 
to  hold  back  his  fellow-men  from  ruin.  (4)  It  would  be  wise  if  men  would  cal- 
culate to  be  saved,  and  be  shaping  their  ways  for  heaven.  {National  Preacher. ) 
Moral  frameworks  : — They  cannot  set  up  any  framework  of  God  ;  they  are 
poor  moral  carpenters  ;  their  fingers  lose  all  skill  when  they  seek  to  put  up 
something  that  shall  have  the  appearance  at  least  of  morality  and  goodness. 
They  no  sooner  set  up  one  side  of  the  edifice  than  the  other  falls  down,  and  the 
framework  will  not  hold  together,  because  the  spirit  is  wrong.  Away  with  your 
mechanical  morality ;  away  with  your  frameworks  of  honoiu:  and  social  security, 
even  of  education  when  it  is  meant  as  a  substitute  for  moral  earnestness  and 
purity.  It  is  the  spirit  that  must  be  renewed ;  we  do  not  want  a  framework, 
but  a  genius  of  heart,  an  atmosphere  of  soul,  a  new  manhood.  "  Marvel  not 
that  I  said  unto  thee.  Ye  must  be  born  again."  Make  the  tree  good,  and  the 
fruit  will  be  good.  Do  not  trouble  yourselves  about  the  framework.  You  are 
not  carpenters,  you  are  men ;  you  are  not  mechanics,  you  are  souls.  Do  not 
trifle  with  the  tragedy  of  life.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  vse  of  means: — 
A  people  are  yet  the  more  inexcusable  in  their  impenitency  when  they  will  not 
so  much  as  think  on  endeavouring  or  using  the  outward  means  which  might 
tend  towards  repentance.  They  might  have  fought  and  yet  not  come  speed, 
because  of  their  imsoundness  and  formality  in  their  way ;  but  they  were  either 
so  ignorant,  or  malicious  and  impious,  as  they  did  not  so  much  as  endeavour 
to  bend  their  course  that  way.  They  would  not  "frame  their  doings."  (George 
Hutcheson.)  Outward  conduct  'preventive  of  inward  repentance  : — Dr.  Pusey 
says,  "  The  rendering  of  the  margin,  although  less  agreeable  to  the  Hebrew, 
gives  a  striking  sense,  '  Their  doings  will  not  suffer  them  to  turn  unto  their  God.' 
Not  so  much  that  their  habits  of  sin  had  got  an  absolute  mastery  over  them, 
so  as  to  render  repentance  impossible,  but  rather  that  it  was  impossible  that 
they  should  turn  inwardly,  while  they  did  not  turn  outwardly.  Their  evil  doings, 
so  long  as  they  persevered  in  doing  them,  took  away  all  heart,  whereby  to 
turn  to  God  with  a  solid  conversion."  Sin  begets  sin,  and  the  longer  men  indulge 
in  it  the  weaker  they  become  in  good  desire  and  earnest  resolution.  But  the 
Hebrew  gives  another  idea.  "  They,"  the  people  in  general,  Ephraim  is  no 
longer  addressed  personally,  "  will  not  frame,"  lit.,  will  not  give  (LXX  oiiK 
iSwKav;  Vulg.,  Non  dabunt  cogitationes  suas).  Their  will  is  concerned,  the 
seat  and  centre  of  their  life  is  wrong,  and  so  long  as  that  is  alienated  from  God 
(Eph.  iv.  18),  they  do  not,  they  cannot  frame  their  doings.  They  have  created 
and  cherished  a  mighty  impulse  within  them  which  drives  them  on,  like  the 
devils  drove  the  swine  into  the  deep.  This  implies  resistance  to  God  and  His 
Spirit  (Acts  vii.  51).  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Self -hinder  er  s : — Betsy,  an  old  coloured 
cook,  was  moaning  around  the  kitchen  the  other  day,  when  her  mistress  asked 
her  if  she  was  ill.  "  No,  ma'am,  not  'zactly,"  said  Betsy.  "  But  the  fac'  is, 
I  don't  feel  ambition  'nough  to  get  out  of  my  own  way."  As  we  read  this,  our 
memories  ran  back  over  a  long  line  of  meetings,  in  which  we  recalled  the  faces 
of  many,  who  after  long  seeking  have  never  been  converted,  or  others  who  have 
never  grown  in  grace,  or  still  others  who  have  never  been  entirely  sanctified, 
because  like  Betsy,  they  have  not  had  ambition  enough  to  get  out  of  their  own 
way.  Almost  every  sort  of  difficulty  has  been  suggested,  perhaps  they  will  can- 
didly confess  that  Betsy  has  exactly  hit  it.    (Dr.  Pepper  in     Christian  Standard.") 


CHAP,  v.]  ROSEA.  89 

Necessary  preliminaries  to  a  godly  life  : — Few  have  any  notion  that  there  is  a 
certain  way  to  repent  and  believe,  and  fewer  still  indicate  the  natvire  of  that 
way.  How  are  men  so  to  frame  their  doings  as  to  turn  unto  their  God  ?  I.  By 
THINKING  ON  CERTAIN  SUBJECTS.  We  act  from  motives  when  we  act  as  men. 
But  what  are  the  motives  ?  The  creation  of  our  own  thoughts.  The  man  who 
centres  his  thoughts  on  the  advantages  of  fame,  or  wealth,  or  knowledge,  turns  to 
their  pursuit.  His  thoughts  excite  his  feelings,  and  his  feelings  urge  him  to  a 
resolution.  If  I  am  to  repent  I  must  think  of  my  sins  in  relation  to  the  character 
of  the  Holy  God,  and  the  self-sacrificing  Christ.  It  is  only  as  I  muse  that  the 
fires  of  penitence  will  bum.  If  a  man  is  to  turn  to  any  new  course  of  conduct, 
he  must  have  new  motives,  and  if  he  is  to  have  new  motives,  he  must  have  new 
thoughts.  II.  By  thinking  on  certain  subjects  in  a  certain  way.  1.  With 
concentration.  2.  With  persistency.  3.  With  devotion.  III.  By  thinking 
on  certain  subjects  with  a  practical  intent.  Merely  to  increase  our  theo- 
logical knowledge,  or  make  our  feelings  glow  with  religious  sentiment  would 
be  of  little  service,  but  to  think  in  order  to  translate  the  thought  into  action, 
to  embody  the  idea  in  the  life — this  is  the  way.  Thoughtlessness  is  the  curse 
of  humanity.  Think  on  right  subjects  ;  think  in  a  right  way  ;  think  with  a 
practical  intent.  {HomUist.)  They  have  not  known  the  Lord. — Ignorance 
of  the  national  Jehovah  : — By  this  sentence  the  prophet  extenuates  not  the 
sin  of  the  people,  but,  on  the  contrary,  amplifies  their  ingratitude,  because 
they  had  forgotten  their  God,  who  had  so  indulgently  treated  them.  As  they 
had  been  redeemed  by  God's  hand  ;  as  the  teaching  of  the  law  had  continued 
among  them  ;  as  they  had  been  preserved  to  that  day  through  God's  constant 
kindness, — it  was  truly  an  evidence  of  monstrous  ignorance  that  they  could  in 
an  instant  adopt  ungodly  forms  of  worship,  and  embrace  those  corruptions  which 
they  knew  were  condemned  in  the  law.  It  was  surely  an  inexcusable  wickedness 
in  the  people  thus  to  withdraw  themselves  from  their  God.  This  is  the  reason 
why  the  prophet  now  says  that  "  they  know  not  Jehovah."  But  if  they  were 
asked  the  cause,  they  could  not  have  said  that  they  had  no  light,  for  God  had 
made  known  to  them  the  way  of  salvation.  Hence,  that  they  knew  not  Jehovah 
was  to  be  imputed  to  their  perverseness  ;  for,  closing  their  eyes,  they  knowingly 
and  wilfully  ran  headlong  after  those  wicked  devices  which  they  knew,  as  it  had 
been  stated  before,  to  be  condemned  by  God.     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  5.  And  the  pride  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  His  face:  therefore  shall 
Israel  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  iniquity.  —  The  fall  of  Israel :  —  Tiglath- 
pileser  died  in  b.c.  727,  and  was  succeeded  by  Shalmaneser  IV.  The  refusal  of 
Hoshea  to  continue  the  annual  tribute  brought  the  new  Assyrian  monarch  into 
the  West.  Tyre  was  besieged  unsuccessfully,  Hoshea  carried  away  captive,  and 
Samaria  blockaded  for  three  years.  During  the  blockade  Shalmaneser  died, 
and  the  crown  was  seized  by  one  of  the  Assyrian  generals.  The  latter  assumed 
the  name  of  Sargon,  in  memory  of  the  famous  Babylonian  monarch  who  had 
reigned  so  many  centuries  before.  The  capture  of  Samaria  took  place  in  his 
first  year  (b.c.  722) ;  27,280  of  its  inhabitants  were  sent  into  exile,  but  only  fifty 
chariots  were  found  in  the  city.  An  Assyrian  governor  was  appointed  over  it, 
who  was  commissioned  to  send  each  year  to  Nineveh  the  same  tribute  as  that  paid 
by  Hoshea.  The  comparatively  small  number  of  Israelites  who  were  carried  into 
captivity  shows  that  Sargon  contented  himself  with  removing  only  those  persons 
and  their  families  who  had  taken  part  in  the  revolt  against  him  ;  in  fact,  Samaria 
was  treated  pretty  much  as  Jerusalem  was  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  time  of 
Jehoiachin.  The  greater  part  of  the  old  population  was  allowed  to  remain  in 
its  native  land.  This  fact  disposes  of  the  modern  theories  which  assume  that 
the  whole  of  the  Ten  Tribes  were  carried  away.  (Prof.  Sayce.)  Pride  aggra- 
vating sin  : — 1.  It  is  a  great  aggravation  of  sin  when  men  are  swelled  with  conceit 
under  it,  so  that  their  thoughts  of  themselves  are  nothing  lessened,  but  they 
dare  defend  sin,  please  themselves  in  it,  and  rise  against  such  as  do  reprove  it, 
and  be  filled  with  proud  impatience  under  corrections  inflicted  because  of  it. 
2.  As  pride  is  a  sin  that  will  not  conceal  itself,  so  this  sort  of  pride  is  a  notorious 
proof  of  men's  guiltiness  which  will  justly  condemn  them,  and  plead  for  God  in 
BO  doing.  3.  Sin  will  certainly  bring  on  ruin,  especially  when  men  are  not  only 
obstinate  in  it,  but  swelled  with  pride  for  all  that.  4.  God's  judgments  will  be 
universal  on  all  ranks,  according  as  they  have  sinned.  {George  Hvicheson.) 
Pride  before  destruction  : — The  prophet,  having  condemned  the  Israelites  on  two 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

accounts — for  having  departed  from  the  true  God — and  for  having  obstinately 
refused  every  instruction,  now  adds,  that  God's  vengeance  was  nigh  at  hand. 
"  Testify  then  shall  the  pride  of  Isrsiel  in  His  face  "  ;  that  is,  Israel  shall  find 
what  it  is  thus  to  resist  God  and  His  prophets.  The  prophet  no  doubt  applies 
the  word  "  pride  "  to  their  contempt  of  instruction,  because  they  were  so  swollen 
with  vain  confidence  as  to  think  that  wrong  was  done  them  whenever  the  prophets 
reproved  them.  It  must  at  the  same  time  be  observed  that  they  were  thus 
refractory,  because  they  were  like  persons  inebriated  with  their  own  pleasures ; 
for  we  know  that  while  men  enjoy  prosperity,  they  are  the  more  insolent,  according 
to  that  old  proverb,  "  Satiety  begets  ferocity."     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  6.  He  hath  withdrawn  Himself  firom  them.  —  Divine  withdrawal : — 
"  Withdrawn  "  is  a  word  that  may  well  chill  our  heart.  It  would  be  enough 
to  express  intolerable  displeasure,  if  it  stood  just  as  it  stands  in  this  verse ;  but 
a  larger  meaning  belongs  to  the  word.  "  Withdrawn  "  is  in  some  senses  a  negative 
relation,  but  it  was  a  distinctly  positive  and  we  may  add  repelling  action  which 
the  Lord  meant  to  convey  by  tne  use  of  the  term.  All  words  were  originally 
pictures,  and  the  real  dictionary  when  it  appears  will  be  pictorial.  The  Lord  in 
this  instance  frees  Himself  from  them.  That  is  the  literal  and  broader  meaning 
of  the  prophecy.  He  releases  Himself,  He  detaches  Himself,  He  shakes  off 
an  encumbrance,  a  nuisance,  a  claim  that  is  without  righteousness.  This  may 
be  taken  in  two  senses.  L  The  people  are  going  with  flocks  and  herds  as  if  bent 
on  sacrificial  purpose  ;  they  will  give  the  Lord  any  quantity  of  blood — hot,  reeking 
blood  ;  but  the  Lord  says,  I  will  have  no  more  of  your  sacrifices ;  they  are  an 
abomination  to  Me ;  I  hate  all  the  programme  of  ritual  and  ceremony  and  attitude, 
if  it  fail  to  express  a  hunger  and  a  reverence  of  the  heart  and  mind.  So  the  Lord 
is  seen  here  in  the  act  of  taking  up  all  these  flocks  and  herds,  and  all  these  unwilling 
priests,  and  freeing  Himself  from  them,  throwing  them  away,  as  men  pass  out  of 
their  custody  things  that  are  offensive,  worthless,  and  corrupting.  Or — 2.  It  may 
mean  that  the  Lord  shakes  Himself  free  from  the  clutch  of  hands  that  have  no 
heart  in  them :  He  will  walk  alone.  He  will  not  give  up  His  shepherdliness, 
though  He  have  no  flock  to  follow  Him.  Every  woman  is  mother,  every  man  is 
father,  and  a  man  is  not  the  less  father  that  all  his  children  are  thrice  dead,  and 
are  as  plants  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and  cast  out  to  the  burning.  The  shepherd- 
liness is  not  determined  by  the  number  of  sheep  following  or  going  before ; 
shepherdliness  is  a  quality,  a  disposition,  an  inspiration,  an  eternal  solicitude. 
If  need  be  God  will  continue  His  shepherdliness  though  every  sheep  go  astray, 
and  every  lamb  should  die.  Mark  the  disastrous  possibility  !  Men  may  be  left 
without  God  ;  the  Almighty  and  All-merciful  may  have  retired,  gone  away ; 
away  into  the  shade,  the  darkness  of  night ;  He  may  have  enshrouded  Himself 
in  a  pavilion  of  thick  darkness,  where  our  poor  prayers  are  lost  on  the  outside. 
To  this  dreadful  issue  things  may  come.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Unacceptable 
sacrifices  : — The  heap  of  their  sacrifices  should  not  recall  the  sentence  against 
them,  nor  bring  any  mitigation  of  their  trouble,  nor  procure  access  to  God  and 
His  favour,  who  had  justly  deserted  them.  1.  The  greatest  contemners  of  God 
may  at  last  stand  sensibly  in  need  of  Him.  2.  Impenitent  sinners  may  make  oflfer 
of  many  things,  when  they  do  not  give  themselves  to  God.  3.  It  is  a  very  sad 
stroke,  when  the  Lord  is  not  only  away,  but  has  really  deserted  a  people,  "  with- 
drawn Himself  from  them."  {George  Htdcheson.)  But  they  shall  not 
find  Him. — Too  late  : — I.  The  most  important  of  all  wobks.  "  Seek  the 
Lord."  This  implies  a  distance  between  man  and  his  Maker.  It  is  not  the 
distance  of  being,  but  the  distance  of  character.  The  great  work  of  man  is  to 
seek  the  Lord  morally,  to  seek  His  character.  1.  This  is  a  work  in  which  all  men 
should  engage.  2.  This  is  a  work  which  all  men  must  attend  to  sooner  or  later. 
II.  The  most  important  of  all  works  undertaken  too  late.  "  They  shall 
not  find  Him."  "  He  will  withdraw  Himself  from  them."  This  is  the  language 
of  accommodation.  He  puts  forth  no  effort  to  conceal  Himself,  He  alters  not 
His  position,  but  He  seems  to  withdraw  from  them.  As  the  white  cliffs  of  Albion 
seem  to  withdraw  from  the  emigrant  as  his  vessel  bears  him  away  to  distant 
shores,  so  God  seems  to  withdraw  from  the  man  who  seeks  Him  "  too  late." 
{Homilisf.)  Repenting  too  late: — The  main  truth  in  this  and  other  passages 
of  Holy  Scripture  which  speak  of  a  time  when  it  is  too  late  to  turn  to  God,  is  this  ; 
that  it  shall  be  "  too  late  to  knock  when  the  door  shall  be  shut,  and  too  late  to 
cry  for  mercy  when  it  is  the  time  of  justice."     God  waits  long  for  sinners ;  He 


CHAP,  v.]  ROSEA.  91 

threatens  long  before  He  strikes ;  He  strikes  and  pierces  in  lesser  degrees,  and 
with  increasing  severity,  before  the  final  blow  comes.  In  this  life  He  places  man 
in  a  new  state  of  trial,  even  after  His  first  judgments  have  fallen  on  the  sinner. 
But  the  general  rule  of  His  dealings  is  this  ;  that  when  the  time  of  each  judgment 
is  actually  come,  then,  as  to  that  judgment,  it  is  too  late  to  pray.  Not  too  late 
for  other  mercy,  but  too  late  as  to  this  one.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Too  late  : — 
About  thirty  years  ago,  a  gentleman  from  New  York,  who  was  travelling  in  the 
South,  met  a  young  girl  of  great  beauty  and  wealth,  and  married  her.  They 
returned  to  New  York,  and  plunged  into  a  mad  whirl  of  gaiety.  The  young  wife 
had  been  a  gentle,  thoughtful  girl,  anxious  to  help  all  in  suffering  or  want,  and 
to  serve  her  God  faithfully.  But  as  Mrs.  L.  she  had  troops  of  flatterers ;  her 
beauty  and  dresses  were  described  in  the  society  journals ;  her  bon-mots  flew 
from  mouth  to  mouth  ;  her  equipage  was  one  of  the  most  attractive  in  the  park. 
In  a  few  months  she  was  intoxicated  with  admiration.  She  and  her  husband 
flitted  from  New  York  to  Newport,  from  London  to  Paris,  with  no  object  but 
enjoyment.  There  were  other  men  and  women  of  their  class  who  had  some 
worthier  pursuit — literature,  or  art,  or  the  elevation  of  the  poorer  classes — but  L. 
and  his  wife  lived  solely  for  amusement.  Mrs.  L.  was  looked  upon  as  the  foremost 
leader  of  society.  About  ten  years  ago  she  was  returning  alone  from  California, 
when  an  accident  occurred  to  the  railroad  train  in  which  she  was  a  passenger, 
and  she  received  a  fatal  internal  injury.  She  was  carried  into  a  wayside  station, 
and  there,  attended  only  by  a  physician  from  the  neighbouring  village,  she  died. 
The  doctor  said  that  it  was  one  of  the  most  painful  experiences  of  his  life.  "  I 
had  to  tell  her  that  she  had  but  one  hour  to  live.  She  was  not  suffering  any  pain. 
Her  only  consciousness  of  hurt  was  that  she  was  unable  to  move ;  so  that  it  was 
no  wonder  she  could  not  at  first  believe  me.  '  I  have  but  an  hour,  you  tell  me  ?  * 
'  Not  more.'  '  And  this  is  all  that  is  left  me  of  the  world.  It  is  not  much,  doctor,' 
with  a  half  smile.  The  men  left  the  room,  and  I  locked  the  door,  that  she  might 
not  be  disturbed.  She  threw  her  arm  over  her  face  and  lay  quiet  a  long  time  ; 
then  she  turned  on  me  in  a  frenzy.  '  To  think  of  all  that  I  might  have  done»with 
my  money  and  my  time  !  God  wanted  me  to  help  the  poor  and  the  sick  !  It's 
too  late  now  !  I've  only  an  hour  !  '  She  struggled  up  wildly.  '  Why,  doctor, 
I  did  nothing — nothing  but  lead  the  fashion  !     The  fashion  !     Now  I've  only 

an  hour  !     An  hour  ! '     But  she  had  not  even  that,  for  the  exertion  proved 

fatal,  and  in  a  moment  she  lay  dead  at  my  feet.  No  sermon  that  I  ever  heard 
was  like  that  woman's  despairing  cry,  '  It's  too  late  now  ! '  " 

Ver.  8.  Blow  ye  the  comet  in  Gibeah. — An  earnest  ministry: — The  idea 
of  the  passage  is,  Give  an  earnest  warning  of  the  judgment  about  to  break 
on  the  people,  sound  the  alarm  and  startle  the  population.  I.  The  natubb 
OP  AN  EARNEST  MINISTRY.  "  Cry  aloud."  Let  the  whole  soul  go  forth  in  the 
work.  Earnestness  is  not  noise.  "  A  celebrated  preacher,  distinguished  for 
the  eloquence  of  his  pulpit  preparations,  exclaimed  on  his  death-bed,  '  Speak 
not  to  me  of  my  sermons  :  alas  !  I  was  fiddling  whilst  Rome  was  burning.'  " 

I.  It  is  not  frightening  people.  2.  It  is  not  bustle.  He  is  always  on  the  "  go." 
Genuine  earnestness  is  foreign  to  all  these  things.  It  has  nothing  in  it  of  the 
noise  and  rattle  of  the  fussy  brook,  it  is  like  the  deep  stream  rolling  its  current 
silently,  resistlessly,  and  without  pause.  3.  An  earnest  ministry  is  living.  It 
is  the  influence  of  the  whole  man.  4.  Such  a  ministry  is  a  matter  of  necessity. 
The  Divine  thing  in  the  man  becomes  irrepressible,  it  breaks  out  as  sunbeams 
through  the  clouds.  5.  Such  a  ministry  is  constant.  It  is  not  a  professional 
service ;  it  is  as  regular  as  the  functions  of  life.     6.  Such  a  ministry  is  mighty. 

II.  The  need  of  an  earnest  ministry.  Why  was  the  "  cornet "  to  be  now 
blown  in  Gibeah,  and  the  "  trumpet "  in  Ramah  ?  Because  there  was  danger. 
1.  The  moral  danger  to  which  souls  around  us  are  exposed  is  great.  2.  It  is  near. 
It  is  not  the  danger  of  an  invading  army  heard  in  the  distance.  The  enemy 
has  entered  the  soul  and  the  work  of  devastating  has  commenced.  3.  It  is 
increasing.  The  condition  of  the  unregenerate  soul  gets  worse  and  worse  every 
hour.  (Homilist.)  Cry  aloud  : — But  after  much  observation  and  many  deep 
yearnings  over  those  who  are  going  astray  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  it  is 
my  firm  conviction  that  here  is  at  least  one  key  to  the  situation.  This  was  the 
method  of  the  great  evangelical  revival  of  the  last  century.  Whitefield  took 
his  place  on  Kensington  Common,  where  the  bodies  of  executed  criminals  were 
left  dangling  on  the  gallows,  and  there,  with  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  of  the 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

lowest  rabble  before  him,  he  would  point  to  the  gallows,  and,  with  that  voice 
which  was  like  the  sound  of  many  waters,  exclaim  :  "If  you  want  to  know  what 
wages  the  devil  pays  his  servants,  look  yonder."  Such  methods  at  first  grat«d 
on  the  fine  sensibilities  of  Wesley.  He  says :  "  I  coidd  scarce  reconcile  myself 
at  first  to  this  strange  way  of  preaching  in  the  fields,  having  been  till  lately  so 
tenacious  of  every  point  relating  to  decency  and  order  that  I  should  have  thought 
the  saving  of  souls  a  sin  if  it  had  not  been  done  in  a  chiu-ch."  Can  we  reconcile 
ourselves  to  such  irregular  methods  ?  Can  we  accept  the  twofold  requirement 
and  preach  the  Gospel  not  only  "  in  season  "  but  "  in  season,  out  of  season  "  ? 
{A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  Earnest  Christian  effort : — Godly  Baxter  says  of  himself, 
'*  I  confess,  to  my  shame,  that  I  remember  no  one  sin  that  my  conscience  doth 
so  much  accuse  and  judge  me  for,  as  for  doing  so  little  for  the  salvation  of  men's 
souls,  and  dealing  no  more  earnestly  and  fervently  with  them  for  their  conver- 
sion. I  confess  that,  when  I  am  alone,  and  think  of  the  case  of  poor  ignorant, 
worldly,  earthly,  unconverted  sinners,  that  live  not  to  God,  nor  set  their  hearta 
on  the  life  to  come,  my  conscience  telleth  me  that  I  should  go  to  as  many 
of  them  as  I  can,  and  tell  them  plainly  what  will  become  of  them  if  they  do 
not  turn,  and  beseech  them,  with  all  the  earnestness  that  I  can,  to  come  to  Christ, 
and  change  their  coiu-se,  and  make  no  delay.  And  though  I  have  many  excuses, 
from  other  business  and  from  disability  and  want  of  time,  yet  none  of  them 
all  do  satisfy  my  own  conscience  when  I  consider  what  heaven  and  hell  are,  which 
will  one  of  them  be  the  end  of  every  man's  life.  My  conscience  telleth  me  that 
I  should  follow  them  with  all  possible  earnestness  night  and  day,  and  take  no 
denial  till  they  return  to  God."  After  thee,  0  Benjamin. — Front-rank  men  : — • 
There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  this  was  the  tribal  battle-cry.  The 
R.V.,  in  its  margin,  favours  this  idea.  It  there  reads,  "  After  thee,  Benjamin  ! 
(see  Judg.  v.  14)."  The  reference  is  to  the  passage  in  the  Song  of  Deborah: 
"  After  thee,  Benjamin,  among  thy  people."  Many  commentators  interpret 
this  as  addressed  to  Ephraim;  e.g.,  Delitzsch:  "Behind  thee,"  i.e.,  "  Ephraim, 
there  followed  Benjamin  among  thy  (Ephraim's)  people  (hosts)."  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Pulpit  Commentary  reads,  '  Following  thee,  0  Benjamin,  with  thy 
people";  and  Dean  Stanley  (Jewish  Church,  vol.  i.)  renders,  "After  thee, 
Benjamin,  in  thy  people."  Psalm  Ixviii,  seems  to  corroborate  this  interpreta- 
tion. This  psalm  is  a  glorious  song  of  triumph.  It  refers  to  past  history ;  it 
recalls  to  mind  God's  wondrous  dealings  with  His  favoured  people;  the  miracles 
He  had  wrought  for  them,  the  victories  He  had  enabled  them  to  win.  The  allusion 
to  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  in  verse  27  seems  to  be  a  direct  reference  to  the  Song  of 
Deborah,  where  these  two  tribes  receive  honourable  mention  (ver.  18) :  "  Zebulun 
and  Naphtali  were  a  people  that  jeoparded  their  lives  unto  the  death  in  the 
high  places  of  the  field."  But  first  among  the  four  tribes  mentioned  in  the 
psalm  we  have  Benjamin :  "  There  is  little  Benjamin,  their  ruler,"  or  leader  ; 
i.e.,  ruling  or  leading  the  procession.  But  why  thus  ruling  or  leading  the  festal 
procession  ?  Perhaps  with  some  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  first  judge  and 
the  first  king  had  sprung  from  their  tribe.  But  also,  no  doubt,  because  this 
was  the  position  that  its  warriors  had  taken  on  many  a  hard-fought  field.  Though 
a  small  tribe,  it  was  famous  for  its  warlike  character,  and  bore  out  the  prediction 
of  Jacob :  "  Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a  wolf ;  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour 
the  prey,  and  at  night  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  "  (Gen.  xlix.  27).  I.  A  noblb 
MOTTO.  Lead  the  way.  To  be  among  the  first  in  things  that  are  good  is  a  grand 
ambition.  Emulation  is  praiseworthy  if  "  a  man  strive  lawfully."  It  is  not  to 
be  confounded  with  envy,  which  seeks  to  outstrip  another  from  mere  jealousy ; 
nor  with  self-exaltation,  which  springs  from  vanity ;  nor  with  that  meanness 
which  seeks  to  make  one's  self  great  by  lowering  or  debasing  another.  It  is 
the  desire  to  be  in  the  front  rank  in  what  is  good ;  to  be  zealous  and  active  for 
the  right.  "  After  thee,"  then,  O  my  soul,  let  others  be,  in  striving  to  do  good. 
"  After  thee,"  in  helping  the  oppressed,  in  succouring  the  needy.  Not  holding 
back,  but  pressing  to  the  front.  "  After  thee,"  in  time  of  danger  and  difificulty. 
Lead  the  way ;  join  the  forlorn  hope.  II.  A  noble  motto,  without  God's 
BLESSING,  IS  UNAVAILING.  Hosea  dcpicts  the  invading  hosts  in  the  midst  of 
Benjamin.  "  The  evil  day  and  destruction  denounced,  is  now  vividly  pictured 
as  actually  come.  All  is  confusion,  hurry,  alarm,  because  the  enemy  was  in 
the  midst  of  them.  The  cornet,  an  instrument  made  of  horn^  was  to  be  blown 
as  an  alarm,  when  the  enemy  was  at  hand.  The  trumpet  was  especially  used 
for  the  worship  of  God.     Gibeah  and  Kamah  were  cities  of  Benjamin,  on  the 


CHAP,  v.]  HOSEA.  93 

borders  of  Ephraim,  where  the  enemy,  who  had  possessed  himself  of  Israel,  woiild 
biirst  in  upon  Judah  "  (Pusey).  Then  in  this  supreme  moment  of  danger  and 
anxiety  an  endeavour  is  mrde  to  rally  the  warriors  of  the  tribe;  their  battle- 
cry  is  raised,  "  After  thee,  0  Benjamin."  But  in  vain.  The  hand  of  the  Lord 
is  against  them  (vers.  9,  10).  Without  God  no  effort  can  be  successful.  He 
alone  can  give  the  strength.  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  it  maketh  rich.  Without 
it  there  is  no  true  prosperity ;  high  aspirations  cannot  be  reached  ;  lofty  ideals, 
great  efforts  will  not  avail.  Against  God  who  can  be  successful  ?  Learn — We  must 
have  God's  blessing  on  our  efforts,  otherwise  they  are  in  vain.  Therefore,  "  Seek 
ye  the  Lord."  III.  A  noble  motto,  when  transfereed  to  the  cause  of  sin, 
BECOMES  DOUBLY  DISASTROUS.  It  is  very  sad  to  see  splendid  opportunities 
wasted.  This  is  sad.  But  it  is  more  sad  to  see  noble  abilities,  precious  oppor- 
tunities, large  means  used  for  evil  purposes,  against  God  and  what  is  good.  To 
sin  is  bad  enough ;  but  to  be  a  leader  and  teacher  of  sin  is  satanic.  The  right 
use  of  the  noble  Benjamite  motto  demands,  therefore,  the  preliminary  inquiry 
in  the  council  chamber  of  the  soul,  "  In  what  direction  am  I  going  ?  In  what 
things  do  I  desire  to  be  found  amongst  the  first  ?  "     (J.  8.  S.  Sheilds,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of  rebuke. — The  Lord's  anger  : — 
"  Desolate "  may  be  reckoned  with  energetic  adjectives.  It  was  another 
form  of  the  word  that  the  prophet  used;  it  was  a  substantive,  colder  than  ice, 
hoUower  than  the  wind  :  Ephraim  shall  be  a  desolation.  Here  we  come  from 
the  descriptive  word  into  the  concrete  term — a  desolation  ;  a  word  which  carries 
its  own  limitations  and  qualifications.  You  cannot  amend  the  word,  you  cannot 
enlarge  it,  you  can  add  nothing  to  its  cheerlessness  ;  desolation  admits  of  no 
companion  term  ;  it  must  be  felt  to  be  understood.  There  have  been  times 
when  the  house  was  a  desolation ;  there  was  no  light  in  the  windows  ;  though 
they  stood  squarely  south,  and  looked  right  at  the  sun  at  mid-day,  yet  they  caught 
no  light ;  there  was  silence  in  the  house ;  no  sound ;  the  fire  crackled  and 
spluttered,  and  spent  itself  in  vain  explosions,  but  there  was  no  poetry  in  all 
the  way  of  the  flame,  there  was  no  picture  of  home  in  all  the  blank  shining  of 
the  hollow  tongues  of  fire  that  licked  the  grate,  but  said  nothing,  yet  only  hinted 
that  the  place  was  empty ;  bed  and  cot  and  favourite  fireside,  all  vacant,  and 
the  very  grandeur  of  the  house  an  aggravation  of  its  vacancy.  It  is  a  fearful 
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  Why  is  God  so  wrathful  ?  Is 
this  an  arbitrary  vengeance  7  Doth  He  delight  to  show  His  omnipotence,  and 
to  chastise  the  insects  of  a  day  because  He  is  almighty  ?  Never.  There  is 
always  a  moral  reason, — "  The  princes  of  Judah  were  like  them  that  remove  the 
bound."  God  has  always  been  jealous  of  the  landmark.  God  is  honest;  would 
His  Church  were  also  honest !  God  will  not  live  in  the  house  until  the  false  weights 
and  scales  be  taken  out  of  it ;  God  will  not  tabernacle  with  men  whilst  they 
are  pinching  the  poor  of  one  little  inch  of  the  yard  length ;  He  will  trouble  the 
house  with  a  great  moan  of  wind,  until  the  balances  be  right ;  then  He  will  say. 
You  may  now  pray.  And  every  sentence  will  be  an  answer.  From  the  begin- 
ning we  have  seen  that  God  would  have  the  landmark  respected.  Here  are  the 
princes  of  Judah,  thieves.  It  must  be  an  awful  thing  to  rob  the  poor  as  they 
were  robbed  by  the  great  in  all  ages.  It  must  be  an  infinitely  difficult  thing 
for  a  prince  to  be  honest ;  it  is  an  almost  impossible  thing  for  a  rich  man  to  be 
really  honest.  The  Lord  is  the  defender  of  the  poor.  We  cannot  understand 
how,  but  there  is  in  history,  taking  it  in  great  breadths,  a  spirit  that  reclaima 
what  has  been  taken  imrighteously,  that  punishes  the  men  who  trifle  with  land- 
marks and  boundaries,  and  old  family  fences.  God  rebukes  the  rich ;  God  never 
blesses  human  greediness.  Judge  not  by  appearances,  or  by  narrow  instances ; 
take  in  cycles  of  time,  great  spans  of  history,  and  see  how  the  slow  moving  but 
6ure  moving  spirit  of  providence  readjusts  and  reclaims,  and  finally  establishes 
according  to  the  law  of  honesty  and  righteousness.     (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  The  princes  of  Jad&h  were  like  them  that  remove  the  bound. — 

Breaking  bounds  : — It  was  a  custom  among  the  heathen  and  the  Romans, 
if  any  man  removed  the  bound,  the  ancient  landmark,  to  adjudge  them,  if  poor, 
to  slavery,  to  dig  in  deep  pits  ;  if  rich,  to  banishment,  and  a  forfeiture  of  the  third 
part  of  their  estates.  The  princes  of  Judah  broke  down  the  bounds  in  a  fourfold 
manner.  1.  They  took  away  other  men's  estates,  as  Ahab  did  Naboth's.  2.  They 
broke  all  bounds  ;  all  laws  and  liberties.     They  will  not  be  bound  by  laws,  saying 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

thus,  "Laws  were  made  for  subjects,  not  princes."  3.  They  broke  the  bonds 
of  religion.  This  is  the  great  breach  of  bonds,  when  people  provoke  God. 
4.  They  broke  the  bonds  of  their  own  covenants,  and  regarded  them  not.  The 
bounds  of  religion  and  laws,  as  they  keep  in  obedience,  so  they  keep  out  judgments. 
And  we  ought  to  look  on  laws  in  both  these  points  of  view,  not  only  as  means  to 
keep  us  in  order  and  duty,  but  also  to  keep  out  wrath.  If  we  break  our  bounds, 
we  must  look  that  wrath  should  break  in  upon  us  ;  therefore  we  had  need  do  as 
men  that  live  near  the  sea,  when  the  sea  breaks  in  upon  them,  they  presently 
leave  all  other  businesses,  to  make  up  the  breaches.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
Landmarks,  or  hounds  : — In  the  East,  advantage  was  taken,  wherever  possible, 
of  natural  divisions,  such  as  river  beds,  tributary  stream  lines,  or  edges  of  valleys  ; 
but  in  the  open  ground,  the  separate  properties  were  only  marked  by  a  deeper 
furrow,  or  by  large  stones  almost  buried  in  the  soil.  Stealthy  encroachments 
might  easily  be  made  by  shifting  these  stones. 

Ver.  12.  Therefore  "will  I  be  unto  Ephraim  as  a  moth. — The  moth  ;  or  Ood'a 
quiet  method  of  destroying : — "  And  I  am  like  the  moth  to  Ephraim,  and 
like  the  worm  to  the  house  of  Judah." — Keil  and  Delitzsch.  "  The  moth  and 
worm  are  figures  employed  to  represent  destructive  powers  :  the  moth  destroy- 
ing clothes  (Isa.  1.  9,  li.  8  ;  Psa.  xxxix.  12),  the  worm  injuring  both  wood  and 
flesh."  The  words  indicate  God's  quiet  method  of  ruining.  In  two  or  three 
verses  in  this  chapter  He  is  spoken  of  as  proceeding  in  His  work  of  destruction 
as  a  lion.  Here  as  a  "  moth" — working  out  ruin  silently,  slowly,  and  gradually. 
I.  He  works  decay  thus  sometimes  en  the  bodies  of  men.  Oftentimes  men 
die  violently  and  suddenly,  but  more  frequently  by  some  insidious  hidden  disease 
which,  like  a  "  moth,"  works  away  quietly  at  the  vitals,  gradually  poisoning  the 
blood  and  undermining  the  constitution.  The  moth  is  often  so  small  and  secret 
in  its  workings  that  medical  science  can  seldom  find  it  out,  and  when  it  finds  it 
out,  though  it  may  check  it  for  a  time,  it  cannot  destroy  it :  the  moth  defies  all 
medicine.  At  the  heart  of  some  of  the  strongest  trees  in  the  forest  there  are 
hosts  of  invisible  insects  noiselessly  at  work  ;  the  forester  knows  it  not,  the  tree 
seems  healthy  ;  until  one  fine  morning  before  a  strong  gust  of  wind  it  falls  a 
victim  to  these  silent  workers.     So  with  the  strongest  man  amongst  us.     II.  Hb 

WORKS  DECAY  THUS  SOMETIMES  IK  THE  ENTERPRISES  OF  MEN.       Often  men  find  it 

impossible  to  succeed  in  their  worldly  avocations.  Mercantile  establishments 
that  have  been  prosperous  for  generations  have  the  "  moth  "  in  them.  They 
have  not  been  conducted  by  godly  men  and  that  in  a  right  spirit ;  so  God  sent 
a  "  moth,"  and  the  moth  has  been  working  away  for  years  silently,  secretly, 
and  gradually,  until  all  the  vitality  has  been  eaten  up.  III.  He  works  decay 
THUS  SOMETIMES  IN  THE  KINGDOMS  OF  MEN.  Effeminacy,  luxury,  ambition, 
greed,  self-indulgence,  servility,  irreverence,  these  are  moths,  and  decay  sets  in, 
and  it  falls  not  by  the  sword  of  the  invader  but  by  its  own  "  rottenness." 
IV.  He  works  decay  thus  sometimes  in  the  churches  or  men.  What  destroyed 
the  churches  of  Asia  Minor  ?  The  "  moth  "  of  worldliness  and  religious  error. 
Some  of  our  modern  churches  are  obviously  slowly  rotting  away.  A  realising 
faith  in  the  invisible ;  brotherly  love ;  practical  self-sacrifice  ;  Christliness  of 
spirit,  are  being  eaten  up  by  the  moth  of  secularity,  sectarianism,  superstition, 
and  religious  pretence.  Thus,  too,  individual  souls  lose  their  spiritual  life  and 
strength.  God  deliver  us  from  those  errors  of  heart  that  like  a  moth  eat  away 
the  life  !  [Homilist. )  The  moth  : — The  mention  of  the  moth  in  Scripture  is, 
with  a  single  exception,  confined  to  the  destruction  caused  in  clothing  by  the 
larvae  of  the  little  clothes'  moth  (Tineidae),  of  which  very  many  species  are 
foimd  in  Palestine.  No  other  lepidopterous  insect  is  alluded  to  in  Scripture, 
and  the  class.  Including  butterflies  and  moths,  is  not  very  numerously  represented 
in  the  Holy  Land,  the  dry  climate  of  which,  together  with  the  scarcity  of  wood, 
is  not  particularly  favourable  to  the  development  of  this  group.  The  number 
of  recorded  species  in  the  Holy  Land  is  about  two  hundred  and  eighty.  (Carton 
Tristram.) 

Ver.  13.  When  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness  .  .  .  then  went  Ephraim  to  the 
Assyrian.  —  The  folly  of  creature  -  confidence :  —  Men  continually  provoke  God 
to  chastise  them,  but  rarely  make  a  due  improvement  of  His  chastisements. 
Instead  of  turning  to  God,  they  dishonour  Him  more  by  applying  to  the 
creature  under  their    distress    rather   than   to   Him.      I.    Men,    in    times   op 


CHAP,  v.]  ROSEA.  95 

TROUBLE,  ARE  PRONE  TO  LOOK  TO  THE  CREATURE  FOR  HELP  RATHER  THAN  TO  GOD. 

1.  In  troubles  of  a  temporal  nature.  Sickness  of  body.  Distress  of  mind. 
Straitened  circumstances.  God  is  invariably  our  last  refuge.  2.  In  spiritual 
troubles.  Under  conviction  of  sin.  In  sea.sons  of  temptation  or  desertion. 
Though  foiled  ten  thousand  times,  we  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  lie  as  clay  in  the 
potter's  hands.  II.  The  creature  cannot  afford  us  any  effectual  succouk. 
There  are  circumstances  wherein  friends  may  be  instrumental  to  our  relief ;  but 
they  can  do — 1.  Nothing  efiFectual ;  and  2.  Nothing  of  themselves.  Apply — 
(1)  Let  us  guard  against  this  sinful  propensity,  both  in  our  national  and  personal 
concerns.  (2)  Let  us  especially  rely  on  Christ  as  the  healer  of  our  souls.  To 
Him  then  look  with  humble,  uniform,  unshaken  aflBance.  {Sketches  of  Sermons.) 
Wrong  methods  of  relief  : — Under  a  grievous  sense  of  their  disease  and  weakness, 
instead  of  applying  to  Jehovah,  Ephraim  and  Judah  went  "  to  the  Assyrian,  and 
sent  to  King  Jareb."  The  Assyrian  king  was  ever  ready  for  his  own  aggrandise- 
ment to  mix  himself  up  with  the  affairs  of  neighbouring  states.  I.  Men  ark  often 
HADB  conscious  OF  THEIR  SPIRITUAL  MALADY.  Depravity  is  a  disease  of  the 
heart.  It  impairs  the  energies,  mars  the  enjoyments  of  the  soul,  and  incapaci- 
tates it  for  the  right  discharge  of  the  duties  of  life.  A  great  point  is  gained  when 
a  man  becomes  conscious  of  his  disease,  and  the  sinner  of  his  sin.  II.  Men  fre- 
quently RESORT  TO  WRONG  MEANS  OF  BELIEF.  The  Assyrians  had  neither  the 
power  nor  the  disposition  to  effect  the  restoration  of  Ephraim  to  political  health. 
Sometimes  men  go — \.  To  scenes  of  carnal  amusement;  or  2.  To  sceptical  philo- 
sophisings  ;  or  3.  To  false  religions.  These  are  all  miserable  comforters,  broken 
cisterns.  III.  Resorting  to  wrong  methods  of  relief  will  prove  utterly 
INEFFECTIVE.  What  Can  worldly  amusements,  sceptical  reasonings,  and  false 
religions  do  towards  healing  a  sin-sick  soul  ?  Like  anodyne,  they  may  deaden 
the  pain  for  a  minute  only,  that  the  anguish  may  return  with  intenser  acuteness. 
There  is  but  one  Physician  of  souls.  {Ilomilist.)  Christ  as  physician  of  the 
spiritually  sick : — Wherever  we  look,  or  wherever  we  go,  we  are  met  by  one  or 
another  of  God's  loving  mercies.  In  the  extremity  of  their  distress,  Ephraim 
and  Judah  chose  the  most  unholy  and  unlawful  means  for  their  deliverance. 
They  had  no  bright  confidence  in  the  fountain  of  living  waters.  I.  The  entire 
Israel  op  God  suffers  more  or  less  from  heart  and  soul  sickness.  There 
is  not  a  prophet  under  the  old  dispensation,  nor  an  apostle  under  the  new,  but 
speaks  without  one  qualifying  term  of  the  sinfulness  of  man.  Does  not  God's 
Word,  however,  seem  to  contradict  the  saying  that  the  spiritual  sickness  of  a 
guilty  soul  is  universal  ?  Is  not  this  infeiTed — that  some  souls  are  not  in  this 
lapsed  condition — when  Jesus  said,  "  They  which  be  whole  need  not  a  physician  "  ? 
Those  words  were  directly  addressed  to  the  Pharisees,  and  were  meant  as  a  rebuke 
to  that  proud,  self-righteous  seed,  whose  thoughts  were  always  running  upon  their 
own  moral  excellency.  No  sinner,  with  the  taint  and  defilement  of  sin  upon 
him,  can  possibly  be  whole  in  the  scriptural  acceptation  of  the  word.     II.  Wb 

ARE     often    driven     IN    OUR     DISTRESS     TO     UNAVAILABLE     SOURCES     FOR     OUE 

RELIEF.  Assyria  was,  at  that  time,  a  mighty  nation,  and  apparently  held  in 
her  large  grasp  the  destinies  of  the  house  of  Israel :  nevertheless,  when  that 
distressed  people  came  to  her  king  for  succour,  his  hands  were  tied  and  his  instru- 
ments were  powerless.  Yet  they  took  the  best  wisdom  of  the  children  of  this 
world.  The  heart  of  man  is  a  very  insufficient,  I  had  nearly  said  the  worst  of 
all  imaginable  counsellors.  And  men  have  no  knowledge  of  their  true  Physician, 
or  no  taste  for  His  medicines  ;  they  have  no  life  to  seek  the  grace  of  salvation, 
or  no  love  freely  to  embrace  it.  There  is  a  class  of  professors  who  accept  the 
invitations  of  Jesus,  but  only  in  a  qualified  sense.  They  receive  Him  as  a  great 
Prophet,  an  intercessory  Priest,  an  everlasting  King.  But  only  the  sick  care  to 
hear  of  Him  as  the  Great  Physician.  III.  He  who  cures  cub  malady  must 
Himself  be  free  from  it.  Christ  and  none  but  Christ  is  pointed  at  in  these 
words,  "  For  He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made  sin  for  us."  After  what  manner 
did  He  cure  ?  L  By  changing  the  appearance  of  sin,  and  showing  what  we  thought 
mere  little  scars  to  be  large  wounds.  2.  By  giving  a  new  channel  to  the  thoughts 
when  they  have  beheld  enough  of  corruption  to  alarm,  to  disturb,  and  to  humble 
the  whole  man.  3.  By  teaching  a  praying  penitent  songs  of  praise,  and  testifying 
BO  strongly  to  the  length  and  breadth  and  height  of  His  mercy,  that  he  shall  have 
no  depth  of  desire  for  anything  else.  When  the  heart  is  cured,  how  can  it  do 
otherwise  than  sing  ?  When  the  will  is  cured,  its  principal  delight  is  to  search  the 
revealed  counsels  of  the  Most  High ;  the  cure  is  effectual ;  the  thanks-offering 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

must  not  be  less  than  cordial.     (F.  G.  Crossman.)        Sin  and  sorrow  : — I.  SiN, 

HOWBVER   EEJOICED   IN,    BRINGS    MANY    SORROWS    IN    ITS    TRAIN.       Ephraim    S&W 

his  sickness,  and  Judah  his  wound.  Sin  is  the  disease  of  the  soul ;  bitter  to 
bear,  difficult  to  cure.  Like  the  leprosy  over  the  body,  it  overspread  the  entire 
framework  of  the  mind.  Conscience  itself  is  either  blind  or  dumb ;  blind,  that 
it  does  not  see  our  danger,  or  dumb,  that  it  does  not  sound  an  alarm.  Sometimes 
it  is  a  silenced  preacher,  or  an  ambassador  in  bonds.  The  disease  of  the  body 
may  be  known  by  various  symptoms,  so  may  that  of  the  soul.  The  taste  is  vitiated. 
Disease  produces  want  of  rest.  It  prostrates  the  strength.  It  darkens  and 
obscures  the  beauty  of  the  outward  frame.  Some  diseases  rob  the  soul  of  reason . 
Sinners  are  described  as  "  mad  upon  their  idols."     II.  Men,  when  involved  ht 

SUFFERING,   OFTEN  HAVE  RECOURSE  TO  WRONG  SOURCES  OF  RELIEF.       1.   They  do 

SO  in  worldly  trials.  Illustrate  by  Ephraim  sending  to  King  Jareb.  So  with  men 
now.  The  creature  is  everything  and  God  nothing.  2.  In  spiritual  distress. 
Men  are  often  sorry  for  their  troubles,  not  for  their  transgressions.  When  con- 
science is  aroused  men  try  partial  repentance  and  amendment ;  sacraments,  &c. 

III.    A   SUCCESSION   OF  TRIALS  MAY  BE  NEEDED   TO   CONVINCE  MEN   OF  THEIR  SIN" 

AND  DANGER,  AND  DRIVE  THEM  OFF  FROM  FALSE  REFUGES.  Various  are  the  mean8 
God  employs.  If  lighter  judgments  fail,  heavier  are  sent.  IV.  The  ultimate 
DESIGN  OF  God's  procedure  with  His  own  people  is  not  destruction  but 
SALVATION.  "  They  will  seek  Me  early."  "  Come,  and  let  us  return."  {S.  T.) 
Storm- signals — a  caution  for  sin-sick  souls  : — There  is  a  tendency  in  the  heart  of 
man  to  want  something  to  look  to  rather  than  something  to  trust  to.  Looking 
at  the  fallacy  of  Ephraim  as  illustrative  of  a  common  tendency  of  mankind,  and 
using  the  text  as  the  picture  of  a  sinner  in  a  peculiar  state  of  mental  anxiety, 
notice — I.  The  sinner  s  partiai.  discovery  op  his  lost  estate.  It  is  here  but 
a  partial  discovery.  Ephraim  felt  his  sickness,  but  he  did  not  know  the  radical 
disease  that  lurked  within.  He  only  perceived  the  symptoms.  How  many  men 
there  are  who  have  got  just  far  enough  to  know  there  is  something  the  matter 
with  them.  They  little  reck  that  they  are  totally  ruined.  They  still  cling  with 
some  hope  to  their  own  devices.  II.  The  wrong  means  which  he  takes  to 
BE  cured  of  his  evil.  He  tries  to  make  himself  better.  All  that  man  can 
do  apart  fiom  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  is  utterly  in  vain. 
Matthew  Wilks  used  to  say  you  might  as  well  hope  to  sail  to  America  on  a  sere 
leaf  as  hope  to  go  to  heaven  by  your  own  doings.  III.  The  right  means  op 
finding  healing  and  deliverance.  Whoever  will  be  saved  must  know  that 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  came  down  from  heaven,  lived  a  life  of  sanctity 
and  suffering,  and  at  last  became  obedient  unto  death.  He  is  a  Divinely  ordained 
Saviour.  You  must  believe  He  is  willing  to  save.  There  must  be  a  leaning  on 
Him,  a  dependency  on  Him.  God  requires  nothing  of  you  but  that  you  should 
depend  for  all  on  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Israel  and  King  Jar  eh  : — So 
Ephraim  and  Judah  went  to  the  wrong  person,  and  did  not  gain  much  by  their 
application.  It  seemed  to  them  an  excellent  policy.  Israel  could  not  choose 
to  be  indei)endent.  Neither  can  we  be  independent.  Where  is  there  a  man 
that  seriously  reflects  upon  our  earthly  lot  that  does  not  feel  there  is  a  secret 
sickness,  a  hidden  wound,  somewhere  ?  Man  is  the  great  sufferer  the  wide  world 
over.  Either  man  has  been  unduly  and  abnormally  elevated,  or  else  he  must 
needs  be  fallen.  Man's  distresses  and  disappointments  spring  from  his  fall.  He 
is  not  what  God  intended  him  to  be,  and  therefore  he  does  not  enjoy  what  God 
intended  him  to  enjoy.  He  is  out  of  harmony  with  God,  and  therefore  out  of 
harmony  with  nature.  Besides  outward  evils,  there  is  the  prevalence  of  moral 
evil,  which  in  many  cases  proves  the  very  worst  evil  of  all.  When  Ephraim  and 
Judah  saw  that  things  were  not  all  right  with  them,  they  fell  back  upon  the 
Assyrian,  instead  of  throwing  themselves  upon  God.  And  even  so  when  men 
begin  to  be  conscious  of  the  disappointments  of  life,  and  feel  an  inward  discontent, 
like  a  disease  preying  upon  their  hearts,  how  often  do  they  follow  the  example 
of  Israel,  and  seek  in  the  creature  what  can  only  be  found  in  the  Creator  !  Somfl 
take  refuge  in  the  pre-occupations  of  business.  Others  fly  to  more  intoxicating 
excitements.  There  is  the  distinct  attempt  of  human  perversity  to  get  away 
from  its  inward  sense  of  want,  and  emptiness,  and  helpless  misery,  by  falling 
back  upon  the  world,  instead  of  turning  to  God.  How  shall  God  deal  with  us 
when  we  show  ourselves  so  perverse  and  froward  ?  What  course  do  we  force 
apon  Him  by  our  folly  ?  The  appearance  that  God  bears  to  us  will  ever  be 
<2*termined  by  the  attitude  that  we  assume  towards  Him.     It  was  a  terrible  and 


CHAP,  v.]  ROSEA.  97 

startling  part  that  the  God  of  Israel  undertook  to  maintain  in  dealing  with  His 
ancient  people.  It  would  have  been  no  true  kindness  on  God's  part  if  He  had 
granted  them  prosperity  when  they  were  apostate  from  Him.  This  must  have 
led  them  to  feel  the  more  satisfied  with  their  apostasy,  and  the  less  disposed  to 
repent.  As  it  was,  the  prophets  could  point  to  each  fresh  disaster  as  a  proof 
that  the  nation  was  under  the  judgment  of  God,  and  that  their  sin  was  proving 
their  ruin.  It  is  no  less  His  love  to  us  that  makes  Him  deal  with  us  in  a  similar 
manner.  He  has  to  thwart  us  just  that  He  may  show  us  how  little  King  Jareb 
can  do  for  us.  ( W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Hdp  sought  from  the  creature : — Carnal 
hearts  seek  to  the  creature  for  help  in  time  of  difficulty.  They  saw  their  sickness, 
their  wovmd,  and  they  "  sent  to  King  Jareb."  They  look  to  no  higher  causes 
of  their  trouble  than  second  causes,  therefore  they  seek  to  no  higher  means  for 
their  relief  than  second  causes.  They  regard  their  troubles  as  such  as  befall 
other  men  as  well  as  them,  and  so  look  not  up  to  God.  They  are  led  by  sense, 
and  the  second  causes  are  before  them,  and  near  to  them,  but  God  is  above  them 
and  beyond  them,  and  His  ways  are  often  contrary  to  sense.  They  little  mind 
God  in  their  straits,  but  send  for  help  unto  the  creature.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
The  wrong  physician : — A  poor  fisherman  in  the  town  of  Nairn,  on  the  Moray 
Firth,  had  for  some  years  been  afflicted  with  a  troublesome  cough,  and,  having 
consulted  many  doctors,  was  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grew  worse.  He  had 
heard,  however,  that  there  were  very  skilful  men  in  Edinburgh,  and  he  decided 
to  go.  During  the  voyage,  he  told  some  of  the  sailors  his  object  in  going  to 
Edinburgh,  and  they  advised  him  to  see  Sir  James  Simpson.  It  was  often  a 
very  difficult  matter  to  get  an  interview  with  Sir  James,  but,  to  his  surprise,  he 
was  at  once  admitted  to  the  consulting-room,  stated  his  case,  and  after  a  short 
examination  Sir  James  said,  "  You've  applied  to  many  doctors  already,  you 
said  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir,  a  good  many."  "  Have  you  gone  to  the  Great  Physician  ?  " 
The  man  was  silent.  'Well,  my  good  man,"  resumed  Sir  James,  "I  advise  you 
to  go  to  Him  ;  I  am  sorry  I  can  do  you  little  good.  You  had  better  go  home, 
and  just  take  as  good  care  of  yourself  as  you  can."  The  man  was  very  much 
affected,  for  he  now  understood  that  his  case  appeared  hopeless.  Putting  his 
hand  in  his  pocket  and  taking  out  a  few  coins,  he  said,  "  What  have  I  to  pay  you, 
doctor  ?  "  "  My  friend,"  said  Sir  James,  putting  his  hand  kindly  on  his  shoulder, 
"  I  don't  want  any  money  from  you.  I  ask  only  an  interest  in  your  prayers. 
Good-bye.  Don't  forget  to  go  to  the  Great  Physician."  After  thanking  the 
doctor,  he  returned  home,  sought  and  found  Christ  as  his  spiritual  Physician  and 
Saviour,  and  soon  afterwards  died. 

Ver.  15.  I  will  go  and  return  to  My  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  oflfence, 
and  seek  My  face:  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  Me  early.— God's  end  and 
design  in  affliction  : — This  whole  chapter,  with  the  following  one,  contains  a 
pathetic  remonstrance  of  God's  just  quarrel  with  His  people ;  aggravated  by 
much  long-suffering  and  lenity,  and  many  warnings,  verbal  and  real,  on  His 
part,  and  much  stubbornness,  impenitence,  and  multiplied  provocation  on  theirs  ; 
He  using  all  means  to  reclaim  and  save  them,  and  they  using  all  means  to  despise 
Him,  and  ruin  themselves.  In  the  text  we  have  the  Lord  concluding  upon 
a  severe  course,  as  being  necessary,  and  likely  to  be  more  effectual  for  their  con- 
version. I.  The  procueing  cause  of  God's  afflicting  His  people.  1.  The  pro- 
curing cause  is  made  up  of  these  two — sin  and  impenitence.  ( 1 )  We  may  see  how 
unwilling  God  is  to  afflict  His  people.  Judgments  are  termed  "  His  strange  work," 
but  mercy  is  His  darling  attribute.  He  will  not  leave  them,  unless  they  drive 
Him  away.  (2)  We  see  where  the  true  blame  of  the  many  sufferings  and  miseries 
of  the  Church  is  to  be  found.  The  abounding  of  sin,  and  the  want  of  repentance, 
these  make  her  troubles  to  abound.  This  is  oiu-  folly,  that  usually  we  abuse 
all  God's  goodness,  and  will  not  part  with  our  sins,  till  we  smart  for  them,  and 
be  beaten  from  them.  We  pull  punishment  out  of  God's  hand.  II.  God's  ways 
OF  AFFLICTING  His  PEOPLE.  Upon  the  withdrawing  of  His  gracious  presence, 
as  necessarily  follows  affliction,  as  mist  upon  the  setting  of  the  sun.  This  was 
heavier  than  all  His  corrections.  No  evil  does  the  child  of  God  fear  so  much, 
or  feel  so  heavy,  as  God's  absenting  and  withdrawing  Himself  in  displeasure. 
III.  The  end  of  God's  thus  afflicting  His  people.  1.  God's  intention 
in  the  means.  To  bring  them  to  a  sorrow  for  their  offences,  and  an  ingenuous 
confession  of  it.  If  He  withdraw  Himself  it  is  not  to  leave  them  for  ever  and  look 
»t  them  no  more.     On  the  contrary,  it  is  that  they  may  learn  whether  it  is  bettel 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

to  enjoy  Him  or  their  sins.  2.  The  efiScacy  of  the  means  for  reaching  it.  There 
is  moral  fitness  in  great  affliction  to  work  a  diligent  seeking  of  God,  before 
neglected,  and  acknowledgment  of  sin,  before  unfelt.  Affliction  sets  men  ia 
upon  themselves,  calls  in  their  thoughts,  which,  in  a  fair  season,  more  readily 
dissipate  and  scatter  themselves  abroad.  When  a  man  is  driven  by  force  from 
the  comforts  of  the  world,  then,  if  he  have  any  thoughts  concerning  God,  these 
begin  to  work  with  him.  When  a  man  is  straitened  on  all  hands  by  a  crowd 
of  troubles,  and  finds  no  way  out,  then  he  finds  his  only  way  is  upward.  {Arch- 
hiahop  Leighton.)  God's  withdrawal  and  return : — Sin  is  here  characterised 
as  an  offence.  1.  It  is  committed  against  God.  2.  It  is  contrary  to  the  nature 
and  judgment  of  God.  3.  It  awakens  the  indignation  of  God.  I.  BscAasB  or 
SIN,  God  withdraws  Himself  from  His  peoplb.  1.  He  goes  and  returns  to 
His  place,  when  He  leaves  His  people  in  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  and  does 
not  interfere.  2.  When  He  removes  from  them  the  ordinances  of  His  grace — 
the  symbols  of  His  presence.  3.  When  He  allows  these  to  continue,  but  is  not  in 
them.  4.  When  He  leaves  them  to  insensibility  under  His  dealings.  5.  When 
the  soul,  feeling  His  absence,  seeks  for  Him  in  vain.  II.  God's  withdrawal 
FROM  His  offending  people  is  not  absolute  and  for  ever.  1.  Though  God 
withdraws  from  His  people.  He  does  not  cease  to  love  them.  2.  He  never  with- 
draws His  spirit  and  grace  for  their  preservation  in  the  faith.  3.  He  never  with- 
draws from  them  finally,  and  so  as  never  to  return.  4.  Sometimes,  when  He 
withdraws  in  the  way  of  ceasing  to  afford  sensible  comfort.  He  is  present  in  the 
way  of  restraining,  and  defending,  and  sanctifying — in  the  way  of  chastisement. 
There  are  degrees  in  the  withdrawings  of  God.  III.  That  God  returns  to 
His  people  when  they  acknowledge  their  offence  and  seek  His  face. 
1.  They  must  acknowledge  their  offence.  This  implies  that  they  have  discovered 
it.  That  they  see  its  enormity.  That  they  are  contrite  and  penitent.  That 
they  forsake  it.  That  they  go  to  Christ's  blood.  2.  They  must  seek  God's  face. 
They  feel  that  their  comfort  is  in  God  only.  They  mourn  and  lament  His 
absence.  They  seek  Him  in  the  appointed  ordinances  of  His  house.  They 
Beek  Him  by  prayer.  They  are  dissatisfied  with  the  choicest  of  means  and 
ordinances,  if  God  be  not  in  them.  They  seek  Him  in  Christ.  (James  Stewart.) 
Coming  to  God  in  trouble  : — "  We  only  see  those  birds,  sir,  when  the  storms  are 
about,"  said  an  old  man  to  me  on  the  seashore  last  week.  That  is  typical  of 
some  people  who  only  come  to  God  in  times  of  storm,  and  dearth,  and  epidemic, 
and  never  make  their  dwelling  in  God.     [J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Yeb.  1.  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  tlie  Lord. — The  eharacteristie  marh8 
of  true  penitence :  —  These  words  are  the  expressions  of  that  penitence 
which  was  excited  in  the  Israelites  by  God's  departure  from  them, 
and  by  His  grace  that  accompanied  the  affliction-  I.  Thb  ohaeacteristic 
marks  of  true  penitence.  It  will  always  be  attended  by — 1.  A  sense  of  our 
departure  from  God.  With  unregenerate  men  the  thought  of  being  at  a 
distance  from  God  never  distresses.  As  soon  as  the  grace  of  repentance  is  given, 
men  see  that  they  are  as  sheep  gone  astray.  2.  An  acknowledgment  of  affliction 
as  a  just  chastisement  for  sin.  The  impenitent  heart  murmurs  and  rebels  under 
the  Divine  chastisements  :  the  penitent  "  hears  the  rod,  and  Him  that  appointed 
it."  3.  A  determination  to  return  to  God.  When  a  man  is  once  thoroughly 
awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  lost  condition,  he  can  no  longer  be  contented  with 
a  formal  round  of  duties.  To  hear  of  Christ,  to  seek  Him,  are  from  henceforth 
his  chief  desire,  his  supreme  delight.  4.  A  desire  that  others  should  return  to 
Him  also.  This  is  insisted  on  as  characteristic  of  the  great  work  that  shall  be 
accomplished  in  the  latter  day  (Isa.  ii.  3).  The  penitent  feels  it  incumbent  on 
him  to  labour  for  the  salvation  of  others.  II.  The  grounds  on  which  a  penitent 
MAY  take  encouragement  TO  RETURN  TO  GoD.  1.  From  a  general  view  of 
God's  readiness  to  heal  us.  2.  From  that  particular  discovery  of  it  which  we 
have  in  the  wounds  He  has  inflicted  on  us.  Apply — 1.  To  those  who  have  deserted 
God.     2.  To  those  who  are  deserted  by  God.     {Skeletons  of  Sermons.)        Man's 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSEa.  99 

highest  social  action  : — The  prophet  calls  on  those  who  had  been  smitten,  or  sent 
into  exile,  to  put  away  all  confidence  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  to  renounce  all  idolatries. 

I.  That  society  is  away  fkom  God.  Not  locally,  of  course :  for  the  Great 
Spirit  is  with  all  and  in  all,  but  morally.  Society  is  away  from  Him  in  its  thoughts  ; 
away  from  Him  in  its  sympathies ;  away  from  Him  in  its  pursuits.     II.  That 

ESTRANGEMENT  FROM  GOD  IS  THE  SOTTECE  OF  ALL  ITS  TRIALS.       Bccause  the  prodigal 

left  his  father's  home  he  got  reduced  to  the  utmost  infamy  and  wretchedness.  Moral 
separation  from  God  is  ruin.  Cut  the  branch  from  the  root  and  it  withers  ;  the 
river  from  its  source,  and  it  dries  up ;  the  planet  from  the  sun,  and  it  rushes  into 
ruin.  Nothing  will  remove  the  evils  under  which  society  is  groaning  but  a  return 
unto  God.  Legislation,  commerce,  science,  literature,  art,  none  of  these  will  help 
it  much  so  long  as  it  continues  away  from  Him.  III.  That  eetubn  to  Him  is 
A  POSSIBLE  woKK.  (Homilist.)  Luxury  and  ease: — I.  The  fact  of  back- 
sliding. Had  there  been  no  wandering  from  the  Lord,  there  would  have  been 
no  need  of  a  return  to  Him.  From  passages  in  the  histories  of  Solomon  and 
David,  as  shewing  how  luxury  and  ease  conduce  to  backsliding.  Solomon  would. 
be  now  called  a  child  of  God.  He  did  start  well.  But  the  history  of  Solomon 
shows  us  that  no  amount  of  experience  is  in  itself  a  safeguard.  Whether  yoimg 
or  old  in  the  faith,  we  need  the  preserving  grace  of  God  from  moment  to  moment. 
In  Solomon's  case  the  affinity  with  Pharaoh,  and  marriage  with  his  daughter, 
are  like  the  first  links  in  a  long  chain  of  backsliding.  Is  it  not  often  the  case 
that  believers,  even  when  apparently  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  may  be 
cherishing  some  secret  sin  or  indulgence,  which,  like  a  seed  concealed  in  the 
earth,  finally  germinates  and  blossoms  forth  into  open  backsliding  T  Solomon  fell 
through  self-indulgence.  And  the  Christian  who  is  self-indulgent,  who  makes 
the  means  entrusted  to  him  by  God  minister  to  his  love  of  luxury  and  desire 
for  worldly  pomp,  is  on  the  high  road  to  idolatry.  God  did  not  leave  Solomon 
undisturbed  in  his  idolatry  and  self-indulgence.  The  record  of  David's  fall  is 
given  in  2  Sam.  xi.  Idleness  is  the  parent  of  vice.  Lurking  lusts,  encouraged 
by  the  quiet,  creep  out  of  their  hiding-places,  hold  converse  with  the  heart,  and 
seek  to  drag  him  into  all  manner  of  sin.  David  fell  before  temptation,  and  set 
himself  to  commit  ftirther  sin,  in  the  hope  of  covering  that  already  committed. 
This  is  almost  invariably  the  case  with  the  backslider.  II.  God's  dealings 
WITH  the  backslider.  "  He  hath  torn — He  hath  smitten."  It  is  in  mercy, 
and  not  in  wrath,  that  God  deals  with  His  backsliding  children.  Punishment 
has  for  its  object,  the  vindication  of  the  authority  of  God  as  the  moral  Ruler. 
It  is  judicial  as  well  as  remedial.  But  its  chief  purpose  is  the  backslider's  restora- 
tion.     III.   A  GLIMMER  OF  FAITH  ON  THE  PART  OF  THE  BACKSLIDER.      "  He  wiU 

heal  us — He  will  bind  us  up."  In  the  heart  of  the  backslider  there  lies  hidden 
the  germ  of  a  God-given  faith,  like  seeds  in  a  mummy  case.  IV.  The  goodly 
RESOLVE.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord."  Some  seek  to  heal  their 
backslidings  without  dealing  with  God  Himself.  How  are  we  to  return  ? 
Through  Jesus,  the  once  crucified,  the  now  risen  and  exalted  One.  {W.  P. 
Lockhart. )  Signs  of  true  penitence : — I.  Wherever  there  is  true  repentance, 
THERE  wnx  BE  A  RETURNING  UNTO  THE  LoRD.  1.  A  true  penitent  will  be  sensible, 
not  only  of  straying  from  God,  which  hath  made  a  distance  between  God  and 
him,  but  that  his  straying  hath  begotten  an  averseness,  and  turned  his  back 
upon  God,  so  that  he  needs  to  re-turn.  2.  A  penitent  will  have  a  deep  sense, 
that  all  other  courses  he  has  essayed  in  his  straying  from  God,  are  but  vanity. 

II.  The  ordinary  forerunner  of  a  time  of  mercy,  is  the  Lord's  stirring 
UP  His  people  to  seek  Him.  Here  they  are  excited,  and  excite  one  another 
to  this  duty.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return,"  and  this  is  their  temper  in  a  time  of 
love.  (Oeorge  Hutcheson.)  For  He  hath  torn,  and  He  will  heal  us. — 
He  hath  torn,  and  He  will  heal  us : — The  philosophy  of  the  Divine  judgments  is 
here  most  explicitly  expounded.  The  motive  of  every  Divine  judgment,  within 
the  limits  of  this  life,  is  mercy.  We  see  but  dimly  what  may  lie  beyond  this  life. 
Here,  at  any  rate,  the  one  constant  patient  aim  of  God,  by  every  means  of  influence 
which  He  wields,  is  to  bring  men  unto  Himself.  It  is  important  to  remember, 
what  some  schools  of  Christian  thought  have  strangely  forgotten,  that  God's 
righteousness  is  not  a  righteousness  which  would  be  satisfied  equally  by  the 
conversion,  or  by  the  punishment  of  a  sinner.  We  cannot  abstract  the  righteous- 
ness from  the  living  person  who  is  also  the  Father  of  that  sinner ;  and  who  lovea 
him  with  such  tenderness  that  He  is  capable  of  even  an  infinite  sacrifice,  that 
that  child  may  not  die  but  live.     (Jod's  righteousness,   God's  justice,  God's 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

holiness,  yearn  for  the  restoration  of  the  sinner  to  righteousness,  quite  as  much 
as  His  mercy  and  His  love.  And  through  life  they  are  spending  all  their  arts 
and  efforts  to  take  hira  captive,  and  to  bring  him  home.  It  is  beginning  to  be 
fully  recognised,  in  the  physical  sphere,  that  judgments  are  but  rich  blessings 
in  disguise.  There  are  indeed  some  dark  passages  of  Scripture  history  which 
seem  to  contradict  this  principle :  e.g.,  Pharaoh  of  the  hardened  heart.  This 
cannot  be  fully  explained,  but  it  makes  this  terrible  suggestion  —  what  must 
be  the  doom  of  a  heart  that  is  hardened  even  against  the  Divine  love  ?  There 
is  a  growing  hardness  where  the  will  is  in  it.  The  blow  that  is  sent  in  mercy,  if 
it  fails  to  open  the  heart's  sealed  portals,  strikes  down.  The  heart  hardened 
against  God,  hardens  itself  fiu-ther.  And  this  is  His  law,  and  part  of  the  solemn 
conditions  of  our  life.  But  there  is  nothing  on  earth  irreparable  while  we  can 
repent  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  ;  "  for  He  hath  torn,  and  He  will  heal  us."  There 
is  absolutely  nothing  in  the  experience  of  the  sinner,  the  sufferer,  which  God 
cannot  transmute  into  joy.  No  calamity  can  long  oppress  the  spirit  which  He 
wills  to  draw  to  the  shield  of  His  strength,  and  to  rest  on  the  bosom  of  His  love. 
Or  is  the  sorrow  a  remembrance  of  sin  ?  With  the  word  of  forgiveness,  the 
bitterness  of  the  sorrow  passes.  God  can  forgive  the  iniquity  of  the  sin.  Is  it 
temptation  ?  Believe  that  temptation  is  God's  benignant  ordinance  for  the  trial 
and  assay  of  spirits.  God  has  not  left  you  untroubled.  (J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
God's  time  for  mercy: — 1.  When  God's  time  of  mercy  is  come,  He  puts  a  mighty 
spirit  of  seeking  into  men.  2.  A  joint  turning  to  God  is  very  honourable  to 
God.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return."  3.  Times  of  mercy  are  times  of  union.  4.  True 
penitent  hearts  seek  to  get  others  to  join  with  them.  5.  In  times  of  the  greatest 
sufferings  a  truly  penitent  heart  retains  good  thoughts  of  God.  6.  A  penitent 
heart  is  not  a  discouraged  heart.  A  repenting  heart  is  not  a  discouraged,  but 
a  sustained  heart.  But  we  must  not  falsely  encourage  ourselves.  Our  hope 
is  in  God.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  He  hath  smitten,  and  He  will  bind 
us  up. — Hope  for  a  bleeding  Church : — The  text  may  be  considered  as  the 
language  of  a  Church.  I.  Smabting  under  recent  chastisements.  1.  Shew 
the  sufferings  of  such  a  Church.  2.  These  sufferings  are  to  be  received  as  from 
the  hand  of  God.  3.  And  regarded  as  chastisements  of  God  for  the  sins  of  the 
Church.  IL  Hoping  for  a  speedy  revival.  That  hope  rests  on  the  following 
grounds.  1.  On  the  mingled  exercises  of  mercy  and  judgment  which  characterise 
God's  government  of  His  Church.  2.  On  the  regard  which  God  has  to  the  honour 
of  His  name,  and  the  success  of  His  cause  in  the  earth.  3.  On  the  ground  of 
the  mediatorial  prerogatives  of  the  Son  of  God.  4.  On  the  promised  power  and 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  Resolving  upon  immediate  reformation.  Let 
us  give  up  the  language  of  complaint  and  mutual  recrimination,  and  substitute 
for  it  the  voice  of  prayer.  (T.  Vasey.)  Hope  in  God's  mercy: — The  reason 
here  given,  why  the  Israelites  could  return  safely  and  with  sure  confidence  to 
God  is,  that  they  would  acknowledge  it  as  His  office  to  heal  after  He  has  smitten, 
and  to  bring  a  remedy  for  the  wounds  which  He  has  inflicted.  The  prophet 
means  that  God  does  not  so  punish  men  as  to  pour  forth  His  wrath  on  them  for 
their  destruction ;  but  that  He  intends,  on  the  contrary,  to  promote  their  salva- 
tion, when  He  is  severe  in  punishing  their  sins.  The  beginning  of  repentance 
is  a  sense  of  God's  mercy ;  when  men  are  persuaded  that  God  is  ready  to  give 
pardon,  they  then  begin  to  gather  courage  to  repent ;  otherwise  perverseness 
will  ever  increase  in  them.     (John  Calvin.) 

Yer.  2  After  two  days  vrill  He  revive  us:  in  the  third  day  He  will  raise 
us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  His  sight. — Death  the  gate  of  life : — Let  us 
look,  not  on  the  dying  side,  but  on  the  living  side.  Each  shadow  has 
its  light ;  each  valley  its  height ;  each  night  its  dawn  ;  each  wound  of  the  oyster- 
shell  its  pearl ;  each  kind  of  death  its  counterpart  of  life.  To  have  the  one 
is  to  have  both.  It  is,  therefore,  a  mistake  to  be  ever  thinking  of  what  you  must 
give  up.  Think  rather  of  what  you  must  take  in.  Follow  hard  after  Christ, 
to  be  with  Him,  for  Him,  like  Him.  Let  your  intimacy  with  Him  be  like  those 
closely  pointed  stones  in  the  old  buildings  of  Thebes,  between  which  it  is  impossible 
to  insert  even  a  sheet  of  writing-paper.  Obey  Him  up  to  the  hilt.  So  will  ever 
new  blessings  disclose  themselves  to  you  ;  and  as  you  climb  to  them  you  will 
be  insensibly  drawn  away  from  things  that  fascinated  and  injured  you.  Beaching 
out  after  a  fuller  measure  of  life,  you  will  hardly  realise  the  cost  by  which  alone  you 
can  enter  upon  its  enjoyment.     The  wrench  of  death  will  be  less  perceptible  amid 


CHAP.  VI.]  nOSEA.  101 

the  joy  which  sheds  its  light  on  your  face,  and  the  warm  glow  into  your  heart, 
1.  Above  all,  trust  the  lead  of  Jesus.  "  He  will  revive  us;  He  will  raise  us  up; 
and  we  shall  live  in  His  sight."  He  knows  every  step  of  the  way  through  the 
dark  valley  ;  because,  as  the  Captain  of  salvation,  He  has  been  obliged  to  traverse 
it  with  each  son  whom  He  has  brought  to  glory.  He  is  with  you,  feeling  for 
you  infinitely,  though  you  cannot  see  Him.  It  is  impossible  for  Him  to  take 
one  false  step,  or  inflict  one  needless  stab  of  pain.  Out  of  your  suffering  He 
is  going  to  bring  glory  to  Himself  and  blessedness  to  you.  He  sometimes  seems 
to  tarry.  His  stages  of  redemption  are  so  slow  ;  but  His  love  is  dealing  more 
wisely  with  thee  in  its  delays,  impetuous  spirit,  than  it  could  in  haste  !  It  is 
hard  to  wait  when  heart  and  flesh  are  failing  ;  but  thy  God  will  be  the  strength 
of  thy  life,  and  thy  portion  for  ever.  He  knows  the  nearest  path  that  will  lead 
thee  to  it.  Trust  His  hand  and  purpose  running  through  the  circumstances 
of  thy  life.  2.  And  out  of  all  this  will  come  the  more  abundant  life.  Suffering 
at  first  isolates  us  ;  but  afterwards  it  links  us  in  the  closest  bonds  with  all  who 
are  sitting  on  the  hard  benches  of  the  school  of  sorrow.  We  learn  to  comfort 
them  with  the  comfort  with  which  we  have  ourselves  been  comforted  of  God. 
The  water  streams  from  the  smitten  rock.  The  flower  springs  from  the  dead 
seed.  The  crystal  river  flows  from  the  melting  glacier.  The  bright  gold  emerges 
from  the  dark  mine  and  the  cleansing  fires.  When  you  are  sure  that  Jesus  asks 
aught  of  you,  yield  up  your  will  to  Him  ;  ask  Him  to  come,  and  take  it  and  blend 
it  with  His  own.  Be  willing  to  be  made  willing.  Wait  for  Him.  Trust  Him. 
Do  not  be  afraid.  He  will  gently  open  the  door  of  life,  through  which  you  will 
pass  out  of  the  vale  of  death  into  wider  and  more  abundant  blessedness.  And, 
in  the  end,  when  the  le.sson  is  fully  mastered,  we  shall  find  that  His  going  forth 
has  been  prepared  as  the  morning  ;  and  He  will  come  unto  us  as  the  rain,  as 
the  latter  and  former  rain,  unto  the  earth.  Abraham  shall  take  his  Isaac  from 
off  the  altar  and  lead  him  home  ;  Joseph  shall  weep  tears  of  welcome  on  his 
father's  neck  ;  Job  shall  have  more  prosperity  than  before  his  trial  ;  the  young 
confessors  shall  emerge  from  the  fire  without  their  bonds  ;  flowers  shall  grow 
where  the  black  cinders  lay ;  and  where  the  body  was  buried  in  the  sepulchiH 
amid  tears  of  hopeless  sorrow,  there  shall  be  a  joyous  resurrection.  We  shall 
live  again,  and  shall  know  the  Lord  as  never  before.  Wait  to  see  the  end  of 
the  Lord ;  He  is  very  pitiful  ;  He  is  human  in  His  tenderness.  {F.  B.  Ma/cr, 
B.A.)  Christ  and  His  people  : — I.  The  connection  of  Christ  with  His 
PEOPLE.  The  head  and  the  members.  "  We  are  made  alive  in  Christ."  His 
victory  over  death  is  ours.  He  who  had  life  in  Himself  quickens  whom  He  will. 
1.  The  power  manifested  on  the  third  day  was  a  type  of  the  power  to  be  mani- 
fested at  the  general  resurrection.  2.  Christ's  resurrection  not  only  a  type  of 
a  physical  but  of  a  spiritual  resurrection.  The  soul  is  quickened  together  with 
Christ.  II.  The  presence  of  Christ  realised  by  His  people.  The  risen 
life  is  spent  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Before  the  crucifixion  the  apostles  had 
the  bodily  presence  of  the  Lord,  subject  to  time  and  place,  e.g.,  Christ  was  not 
with  the  dying  Lazarus,  because  He  was  in  Peroea.  After  the  resurrection  they 
lived  in  His  presence  as  they  had  never  lived  before.  Stephen  saw  Him  standing 
in  the  ready  attitude  of  help.  He  stood  by  St.  Paul  ;  His  eye  was  on  His  faithful 
mart5rr,  Antipas.  All  the  disciples  went  about  with  a  constant  sense  of  Christ's 
oversight,  working  under  the  King's  eye.  The  soul  risen  with  Christ  believes 
that  it  lives  in  His  sight.  Faith  in  this  promised  presence  will  be  a  source  of 
strength  and  patience.  Remember  how  Christ's  eye  is  on  His  servants  at  their 
work,  in  their  sufferings,  and  during  their  worship.  (W.  Watters,  M.A.)  The 
third  day  : — In  shadow,  the  prophecy  was  never  fulfilled  to  Israel  at  all.  The 
Ten  Tribes  were  never  restored.  Unto  the  Two  Tribes  what  a  mere  shadow  was 
the  restoration  from  Babylon,  that  it  should  be  spoken  of  as  the  gift  of  life,  or 
of  resiirrection  !  The  strictest  explanation  is  the  truest.  The  "  two  days  " 
and  the  "  third  day  "  have  nothing  in  history  to  correspond  with  them,  except 
that  in  which  they  were  fulfilled,  when  Christ,  "  rising  on  the  third  day  from 
the  grave,  raised  with  Him  the  whole  human  race."     {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord. —  olloia 
on  : — In  the  context,  the  deliverance  of  God's  Church  out  of  her  troubles  is  fore- 
told. In  the  same  words  our  salvation  in  Christ  is  figured  forth.  "  Know- 
ledge "  here  includes  the  whole  of  experimental  and  practical  godliness  ;  for 
in  religion  we  only  know  what  we  feel  and  do.     In  making  progress  in  the  lifa 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

of  godliness,  the  two  words  of  our  text  are — a  condition,  a  rule,  and  a  spur. 

1.  The  recommendation  of  our  text  implies — 1.  That  the  pursuit  is  worthy. 

2.  That  there  is  a  leader  whom  we  are  to  follow.  3.  That  the  pursuit  is  begun. 
Regeneration  has  been  experienced,  pardon  has  been  conferred,  spiritual  life 
is  possessed.  4.  That  there  is  danger  of  stopping  short.  There  are  difficulties 
without,  and  foes  within.  II.  Special  reasons  for  obeying  the  text.  1.  Only 
so  can  the  genuineness  of  our  religion  be  proved.  2.  Only  so  can  our  mission 
be  fulfilled.  3.  Only  so  can  our  characters  be  developed.  4.  Only  so  can  heaven 
be  reached.  How  much  there  is  enfolded  in  that  word  "overcometh."  Uncoil 
it  by  Divine  help  in  your  lives.  III.  Encouragements  to  cheer  and  stimu- 
late.    1.  Bread  is  provided  for  the  hungry.     2.  A  staff  of  promises  for  the  weak. 

3.  Repose  for  the  weary.  4.  Complete  success  is  guaranteed.  {R.  Berry.) 
Knowing  the  Lord  : — Ignorance  is  a  lamentable  evil.  It  unfits  persons  for  acting 
their  part  with  propriety  in  civil  life,  and  it  is  far  more  injurious  to  them  in  the 
concerns  of  eternity.  I.  What  is  meant  by  knowing  the  Lord.  1.  It  is  to 
be  scripturally  acquainted  with  His  character.  No  correct  knowledge  can  be 
acquired  concerning  God  and  salvation,  but  through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
Word.  In  the  volumes  of  nature  and  providence  there  is  much  to  be  learned 
concerning  the  existence  and  goodness  of  God.  Only  from  the  volume  of  inspira- 
tion we  leam  what  God  is,  not  only  as  our  Creator  and  Preserver,  but  also  as 
our  Redeemer.  2.  It  is  to  give  Him  the  homage  which  is  due  unto  His  name. 
There  is  the  necessity  of  acknowledging  Him — returning  unto  Him  in  new 
allegiance,  by  repentance  unto  life,  and  giving  Him  an  unreserved  reverence,  in 
obedience  to  all  His  laws,  ordinances,  and  commandments.  Knowledge  without 
a  corresponding  practice  would  only  add  to  our  condemnation.  II.  Explain 
THE  PROPOSAL  OF  FOLLOWING  ON  TO  KNOW  THE  LoRD.  1.  It  is  to  persevere  in 
cultivating  intercourse  and  acquaintance  with  Him.  In  so  far  as  it  has  pleased 
God  to  reveal  Himself  unto  us  in  His  Word,  it  is  our  duty  to  learn  what  He  hath 
revealed.  We  may,  however,  learn  all  that  is  to  be  theoretically  known  regard- 
ing God,  and  yet  remain  spiritually  ignorant  of  His  gracious  character.  His 
perfections  will  be  best  understood  by  a  practical  reliance  upon  them,  and  on 
acting  agreeably  to  their  nature.  2.  Following  on  to  know  the  Lord  shall  be 
crowned  with  success.  Exertion  in  this  Divine  pursuit  shall  be  successful.  Dis- 
appointment is  impossible.  We  shall  know  all  the  blessings  of  the  New  Coven- 
ant, whether  pertaining  to  justification,  adoption,  or  sanctification.  We  shall 
know  and  understand  the  law  of  our  God,  believingly  feel  its  importance,  and 
sincerely  practise  its  requirements.  III.  The  encouragement  to  follow  on 
TO  KNOW  the  Lord.  This  blessing  of  our  Saviour's  coming  is — 1.  Progressive 
and  certain.  "  Prepared  as  the  morning."  A  knowledge  of  Divine  things  cannot 
be  obtained  but  by  a  Divine  teacher.  The  going  forth  of  God  the  Saviour 
to  enlighten  and  cherish  His  people,  when  they  seek  after  Him,  is  as  certain  as 
the  outgoings  of  the  morning,  which  are  a  settled  and  regular  constitution  of 
nature.  2.  Pleasant  and  desirable.  "  His  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morn- 
ing." It  is  ever  comfortable  to  know  that  in  the  midst  of  difficulties  there  is 
One  prepared  to  give  us  relief.  Christ,  our  Almighty  Saviour  and  Friend,  is 
so  prepared.  As  the  morning  air  and  light  are  agreeable  to  the  watchman  who 
has  been  marching  his  weary  rounds  in  the  dark — to  the  weather-beaten  mariner 
who  has  been  tempest-tost  through  the  night — so  agreeable,  and  unspeakably 
more  so  is  the  coming  of  God  our  Saviour  to  enlighten  and  relieve  them  that 
are  cast  down  and  overwhelmed  with  the  sense  of  sin,  to  help  and  comfort  them 
that  are  ready  to  perish.  3.  Quickening  and  salutary.  "  He  shall  come  unto 
us  as  the  rain."  Rain  is  not  less  necessary  than  heat  for  the  production  of 
vegetable  life.  It  is  like  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  the  human  body,  that 
which  keeps  the  whole  system  alive.  4.  Invigorating  and  satisfying.  "  As 
the  latter  and  former  rain  unto  the  earth."  The  expression,  latter  and  former 
rain,  has  reference  to  the  two  periodical  rains  that  fell  in  the  land  of  Canaan. 
As  necessary  as  these  rains  are  the  showers  of  grace  in  the  Church  to  water 
the  seed  of  the  Word,  that  it  may  spring  up  in  our  hearts  iinto  everlasting  life, 
to  encourage  its  growth,  and  to  perfect  its  fruits  of  holiness  and  meetness  for 
the  heavenly  world.  From  this  subject  we  may  see  ground  for  cherishing  large 
expectations.  God  is  gracious.  His  promise  is  large,  and  His  Word  is  unim- 
peachable. God  is  able  to  carry  you  on  to  perfection  ;  trust  in  Him  then  for 
all  needful  supplies,  and  you  will  not  be  disappointed.  From  this  subject 
all  may  see  the  importance  of  being  possessed  by  saving  knowledge.     {Johrk 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSEA.  103 

Shoolhraid.)  The  fuller  knowledge  of  God  : — Some  give  this  rendering,  "  We 
shall  know,  and  shall  pursue  on  to  know  Jehovah,"  and  they  explain  the  passage 
thus, — that  the  Israelites  had  derived  no  such  benefit  from  the  law  of  Moses, 
but  that  they  still  expected  the  fuller  doctrine  which  Christ  brought  at  His  coming. 
They  then  think  that  this  is  a  prophecy  respecting  that  doctrine,  which  is  now 
by  the  Gospel  set  forth  to  us  in  its  full  brightness,  because  God  has  manifested 
Himself  in  His  Son  as  in  a  living  image.  But  this  is  too  refined  an  exposition  ; 
and  it  is  enough  for  us  to  keep  close  to  the  design  of  the  prophet.  (John  Calvin. ) 
Need  of  perseverance  in  seeking  the  knowledge  of  God  : — AU  Scripture  writers  bear 
witness  to  the  faithfulness  of  God ;  and  call  upon  ua,  by  patient  continuance 
m  well-doing,  to  seek  for  glory,  honour,  and  immortality.  I.  The  important 
OBJECT  OF  THE  BELIEVER'S  PURSUIT.  Of  true  believers  it  may  be  said,  "  they 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  In  what  does  this  knowledge  consist ;  and  in 
what  way  is  it  communicated  to  the  mind  ?  It  is  not  a  mere  knowledge  of  such 
a  Being  as  God,  as  Creator  and  Upholder  ;  nor  is  it  such  an  idea  of  God  as  is 
conceived  by  those  who  exalt  one  attribute  to  the  exclusion  of  another,  who 
make  Him  all  mercy,  forgetful  of  His  perfect  justice.  We  cannot  know  the  Lord 
to  our  comfort,  till  we  know  Him  as  our  God  and  Father  in  Jesus  Christ.  By 
nature,  we  stand  at  an  immeasurable  distance  from  God ;  and  the  more  correct 
are  our  notions  of  His  power.  His  holiness,  and  His  glory,  the  more  discouraging 
will  they  be  if  they  are  unconnected  with  the  Redeemer  as  our  Mediator  with 
the  Father.  This  knowledge  is  implanted  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  The 
CERTAINTY  OF  ITS  FINAL  SUCCESS.  He  who  "  follows  on  "  shall  not  fail  of  the 
grace  of  God.  This  truth  is  plainly  declared,  and  figuratively  exhibited.  The 
figures  are  the  morning  and  the  rain.  Learn — 1.  How  needful  is  this  knowledge. 
2.  The  reason  why  those  who  have  attained  some  knowledge  of  Christ  do  not 
attain  to  more  enlarged  and  experimental  acquaintance  with  spiritual  things. 
Be  patient  in  hope,  and  persevering  in  prayer.  {W.  Mayers,  A.M.)  The  duty 
and  happiness  of  progressive  spiritual  knowledge : — The  works  of  God  in  nature  are 
here  employed  to  describe  His  moral  government.  His  ways  with  His  Church, 
His  dealings  with  His  people  for  their  spiritual  discipline  and  sanctification. 
The  enlightening  and  comforting  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  as  surely 
be  vouchsafed  to  the  soul  longing  for  salvation,  as  the  rain,  the  former  and  the 
latter,  refreshes  and  fertilises  the  earth.  The  laws  and  operations  of  nature 
are  not  more  certain  than  the  fulfilment,  in  the  revelation  of  grace,  of  God's 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  The  Divine  promises  and  threatenings 
rest  on  the  same  foundation — the  immovable  foundation  of  His  everlasting 
unchangeableness.  His  perfect  faithfulness.  His  universal  presence.  His  almighty 
power.  The  text  contains  a  duty  and  a  promise.  Our  duty  is  "to  follow  on  to 
know  the  Lord,"  and  to  its  performance  we  are  incited  by  a  gracious  promise. 
"  Then  shall  we  know  Him " ;  for  His  going  forth.  His  care  and  condescension, 
to  meet  us  in  mercy  is  prepared — is  as  predetermined  and  customary  as  those 
successive  changes  and  established  operations  of  His  visible  works  which  we 
so  beneficially  and  continually  experience.  According  to  the  text,  the  safety 
and  happiness  of  knowing  the  Lord,  and  of  following  on  to  know  Him,  are  con- 
sequent upon  returning  to  the  Lord  with  penitent  acknowledgment  and  lively 
compunction  on  account  of  apostasy  and  disobedience.  Suffering  and  wretched- 
ness, in  this  world  or  in  the  next,  or  in  both,  are  necessarily  the  results  of  sin. 
Alienation  from  God  Is  likewise  spiritual  insensibility,  a  moral  death.  It  is 
also  a  condition  of  ignorance.  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard.  Consider 
what  it  is  to  know  the  Lord.  How  incomparably  great  is  the  excellence  of  this 
knowledge  !  The  knowledge  of  the  Lord  comprehends  the  experience  of  the 
Divine  goodness  and  loving-kindness,  together  with  the  fruits  of  faith  and  obedience 
to  His  commandments.  Saving  knowledge  is  communicated  through  the  oflSces 
of  the  one  Mediator,  and  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  imparting  an  efficacious 
blessing  upon  prayer,  the  Word,  and  the  ministrations  of  the  Church.  It  con- 
sists in  veneration  and  love  towards  the  Lord — a  meek  but  firm  affiance  in 
His  promises  and  mercy,  and  in  persevering  obedience  to  Him.  Let  us  make  it 
our  first  and  supreme  concern  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  God  as  our  recon- 
ciled Father  in  Christ  Jesus.  Having  attained  this,  your  salvation  is  begun. 
While  this  knowledge  implies  and  cherishes  an  approval  of  God's  ways  and  will, 
and  is  accompanied  with  love  to  Him  and  delight  in  Him,  it  likewise  implies 
justice  and  mercy  and  charity  to  our  fellow-creatures.  (Thomas  Ridley,  M.A.) 
The  progressive  character  of  the  Christian  life  : — Christian  life  is  not  a  house,  but ' 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vl. 

a  plant.  It  is  not  complete,  but  grows.  1.  It  is  growth  in  faith.  Its  begin- 
ning is,  or  may  be,  as  small  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed.  The  least  bit  will  do 
to  begin  with.  Act  upon  what  you  now  believe  to  be  true  and  right  as  relates 
to  our  duties  to  God,  to  our  fellows  and  ourselves.  With  God's  help  I  will  under- 
take every  known  duty.  Sin  is  to  be  eradicated,  and  holiness  is  to  increase. 
In  such  a  spirit  the  seed  will  germinate,  the  tree  will  grow,  and  strength  will 
come,  and  what  before  was  impossible  will  now  be  easy.  2.  In  knowledge  : 
acquaint  thyself  with  God.  Ascend  the  mountain.  There  are  ever  new  dis- 
closures in  creation,  providence,  and  redemption.  3.  In  experience:  here  faith 
is  verified.  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine.  Faith 
alone  blesses  our  life  ;  unbelief  is  destructive.  It  works  ruin  to  all  our  highest 
interests  to  live  without  faith — in  government,  in  society,  and  in  the  family. 
Principles  which  cannot  with  safety  to  all  dearest  concerns  be  followed  are 
necessarily  false.  Faith  is  confirmed  in  life  and  assured  in  death  :  "I  will  never 
leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  4.  In  good  works :  religion  is  also  practical. 
The  tree  bears  good  fruit,  and  bears  it  perennially.  The  Christian  will  improve 
in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  good  he  does.  Like  the  palm-tree,  he  will 
be  fruitful  to  the  end  of  life.  (L.  0.  Thompson.)  Divine  knowledge,  and  the 
means  of  acquiring  it : — It  is  a  universal  law  that  nothing  great  can  be  achieved 
without  perseverance.  For  want  of  considering  this,  many  who  commence  a 
religious  course  with  zeal  and  joy  run  well  for  a  season,  but  meeting  with  unex- 
pected difficulties,  grow  weary  and  give  up  the  race.  I.  Divinb  knowledge. 
1.  To  know  the  Lord  implies  a  general  knowledge  of  His  being,  nature,  and  attri- 
butes. 2.  It  signifies  a  more  particular  and  experimental  knowledge  of  God, 
especially  of  His  justice  and  mercy,  these  being  the  two  great  attributes  exer- 
cised in  the  stupendous  work  of  human  redemption.  The  true  believer  is  happily 
possessed  of  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  Divine  mercy.  3.  A  more  peculiar 
knowledge  of  God,  especially  of  His  goodness  and  love,  is  obtained  by  the  sincere 
and  pure  in  heart  who  "  follow  on  to  know  "  Him.  4.  To  know  the  Lord  includes 
Also,  profound  veneration ;  ardent  love ;  humble  confidence ;  and  sincere  and 
uniform  obedience.  II.  The  means  of  ACQuiRmo  Divtnk  knowledge.  1.  God 
could,  no  doubt,  communicate  a  perfect  knowledge  of  Himself  instantaneously. 
But  in  doing  so  He  must  work  a  miracle,  and  this  without  answering  any  valuable 
end.  The  gradual  operations  of  God  in  providence  and  grace  are  accommodated 
to  our  finite  capacities,  enabling  us,  step  by  step,  to  trace  Him  in  His  wondrous 
works.  2.  To  illustrate  this  Hosea  uses  two  beautiful  figures — the  *'  morning  " 
and  the  "  rain."  3.  That  this  is  the  mode  of  the  Divine  manifestations  evidently 
appears — ( 1 )  From  the  media  through  which  they  are  communicated ;  His  works. 
His  Word,  and  His  Spirit.  (2)  From  the  gradual  maimer  in  which  God  has 
revealed  His  will  unto  man  by  successive  dispensations.  (3)  This  appears  in 
the  rise  and  progress  of  religion  in  the  soul.  The  understanding  is  enlightened  ; 
the  judgment  convinced ;  the  heart  affected ;  and  the  will  subdued.  Hence 
contrition,  repentance,  faith,  and  prayer.  Justification  follows,  and,  in  full, 
sanctification.  (4)  We  see,  therefore,  the  necessity  of  following  on  to  know  the 
Lord,  pressing  on  as  after  a  guide  through  a  crowd,  as  after  a  light  in  a  dark  place. 
When  fully  sanctified,  there  is  as  much  necessity  as  ever  for  following  on.  The 
fountains  of  Divine  knowledge  are  perennial.  There  are  yet  unexplored  heights, 
and  lengths,  and  depths,  and  breadths  of  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  know- 
ledge. (Thomas  Rowe.)  Perseverance  in  attaining  the  knowledge  of  God  :— 
I.  To  KNOW  God  keqttires  that  men  shoxjld  seek  to  know  Him.  The  know- 
ledge of  the  Most  High  is  not  instinctive  and  intuitive.  Now,  the  world  by 
wisdom  knoweth  not  God.  How  strange  that  men  should  think  to  know  God 
and  religion  without  diligence,  whilst  they  think  not  to  know  any  human  science 
or  profession  without  application,  and  diligence,  and  exertion!  Would  to  God 
that  men  were  as  wise  for  eternity  as  they  are  for  time.  It  is,  however,  not  merely 
necessary  to  give  diligence  in  order  to  know  God,  we  must  "  follow  on  "  to  know 
Him.  The  crowning  grace  of  the  Christian  is  constant  perseverance.  To  him 
that  overcometh,  the  promise  of  eternal  life  is  made.  11.  The  encotibage- 
MENT  as  it  is  HERB  SO  VIVIDLY  PORTRAYED.  "  Then  shall  we  know."  God 
who  cannot  lie  hath  spoken  this.  The  prophet  adds  two  beautiful  figures.  The 
morning  of  the  day  is  sure  to  come.  The  former  and  the  latter  rain  will  retura 
in  their  seasons.  {Hugh  Stowell,  A.M.)  Following  on  to  know : — In  Christ, 
the  prophet  promises,  they  should  have  inward  knowledge  of  Him,  ever  growing, 
because  the  grace,  through  which  it  is  given,  ever  grows.     We  know,  in  order 


CHAP.  VT.]  HOSE  A.  105 

to  follow ;  we  follow,  in  order  to  know.  Light  prepares  the  way  for  love.  Love 
opens  the  mind  for  new  love.  The  gifts  of  God  are  interwoven.  They  multiply 
and  reproduce  each  other,  until  we  come  to  the  perfect  state  of  eternity.  Through 
eternity  we  shall  follow  on  to  know  more  of  God.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Divine 
knowledge  : — We  may  consider  this  in  two  ways.  1.  As  an  address  of  good  men 
to  themselves,  being  a  kind  of  soliloquy,  or  self-admonition  and  encouragement. 
2.  As  addressed  to  the  godly  from  each  other.  The  language  is  an  expression 
of  holy  confidence.  This  admits  of  various  degrees,  but  without  some  degree 
of  it  we  shall  never  seek  the  Lord  ;  shall  never  cleave  to  Him  with  full  purpose 
of  heart.  Between  this  holy  confidence  and  presumption  there  is  no  resem- 
blance. I.  An  important  subject — Divine  knowledge.  To  be  destitute  of 
this  knowledge  is  to  be  in  a  perilous  and  even  a  perishing  condition.  Know- 
ledge is  the  same  to  the  soul  as  the  window  is  to  the  building,  or  the  eye  to  the 
body.  Knowledge  is  essential  to  right  conduct.  It  is  from  ignorance  that  a 
disregard  to  the  Saviour  springs.  It  is  from  ignorance  that  legality  springs. 
Nothing  can  be  truly  religious  or  moral  that  is  done  in  ignorance,  because  then 
there  would  be  no  motive  or  principle,  and  to  these  the  Lord  looks  in  all  our 
actions ;  all  righteous  conduct  is  begun  and  carried  on  in  the  renewal  of  the  mind. 
God's  empire  is  founded  in  light ;  the  devil's  kingdom  is  foimded  in  darkness. 
God  opens  the  eyes  of  all  His  subjects,  and  they  follow  Him  from  conviction 
and  disposition.  Bishop  Hall  says,  "  God  never  works  in  a  dark  shop."  "  He 
that  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  om*  hearts, 
to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ." 
But  what  is  this  knowledge  to  which  such  importance  is  attached  ?  What  is 
it  to  know  the  Lord  ?  It  is  one  thing  to  know  that  there  is  a  God,  and  another 
to  know  what  He  is.  It  is  much  more  than  knowing  Him  to  be  al  might j-.  It 
is  a  knowing  Him  to  be  "  righteous  in  all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His  works." 
Such  knowledge  as  this,  if  there  be  no  more,  will  operate  upon  a  sinner's  mind 
conscious  of  guilt,  so  as  to  produce  distance,  alarm,  and  fear.  It  is  necessary 
to  the  recovery  of  a  fallen  creature  that  God  should  be  known  as  the  justifier 
of  those  who  believe  in  Christ.  In  creation  God  is  above  us.  In  providence 
He  is  beyond  us.  In  His  holy  law  He  is  against  us.  But  in  Christ  He  is  with 
us,  and  for  us,  and  in  us  too.  This  knowledge  is  not  a  merely  speculative  know- 
ledge. It  is  experimental.  Some  professors  are  like  December  nights,  very 
clear,  but  alas  !  very  cold.  This  is  all  that  can  be  said  with  regard  to  their 
religion.  But  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  is  saving ;  it  is  the  light  of  life ;  it 
descends  from  the  head  to  the  heart.  What  a  difference  there  is  between  a  mere 
conviction  and  a  cordial  assent !  II.  A  necessary  duty.  "  Follow  on  to  know 
the  Lord."  This  includes  three  things.  1.  The  practising  what  we  know.  Why 
should  God  give  you  more  light  while  you  are  not  disposed  to  make  use  of  what 
you  already  have  T  2.  Diligence  in  the  use  of  appointed  means.  God  has 
ordained  meditation,  reading  the  Scriptures,  hearing  the  Word,  conversation 
with  those  who  know  a  little  more  than  ourselves,  but,  above  all,  prayer  to  the 
Father  of  mercies,  as  the  appointed  means.  3.  It  implies  continuance  in  this 
active  course.  You  have  not  only  to  hear,  but  also  to  watch.  III.  An  assured 
PRIVILEGE.  "  Then  shall  ye  know."  If  probability  is  enough  to  actuate  a  man, 
how  much  more  should  real  certainty  do  so.  The  assurance  of  success  should 
encourage  us  in  regard  to  others.  Do  not  deal  harshly  with  them.  If  unable 
for  a  time  to  embrace  religious  truths,  be  not  impatient.  God  shall  reveal  this 
to  them  in  His  own  time  and  way.  Let  this  encourage  you  with  regard  to  prayer. 
Are  you  desirous  of  knowing  more  of  the  blessed  Saviour  ?  Go  on  and  you 
will  know  more  and  see  more.  Two  cases  in  which  this  encouragement  may 
be  applied.  1.  If  you  are  in  perplexity  with  regard  to  the  path  of  duty.  2.  Do 
you  wish  to  know  God  better  by  appropriation  ?  Are  you  anxious  to  know 
your  own  interest  in  Him  ?  IV.  A  striking  illustration.  Taken  from  the 
"morning"  and  the  "rain."  As  the  morning,  gradually;  as  the  rain,  periodic- 
ally and  regularly.  He  who  gives  the  former  rain  in  its  season,  will  not  fail  to 
give  the  latter  rain  in  its  season.  Even  after  the  stress  and  strain  of  life,  there 
shall  be  a  reviving  in  your  spiritual  experience,  to  your  own  sp-eat  comfort,  and 
to  the  praise  of  our  faithful  and  covenant-keeping  God.  (William  Jay.)  The 
knowledge  of  God  : — It  is  spoken  of  here  as  something  distinct  and  definite.  It 
is  as  palpable  as  the  morning  light.  It  is  as  sensible  as  the  rain  that  waters  the 
earth.  Is  any  knowledge  of  God  possible  ?  The  agnostic  says,  "  We  cannot 
know  God.     If  He  exists,  He  is  beyond  our  reach.     He  is  unknowable."     He 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

does  not  deny  that  there  is  a  God ;  he  only  denies  that  He  can  be  Imown.  In 
an  important  sense,  the  agnostic  is  right.  The  agnostic  is  not  born  again ;  he 
has  never  known  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  therefore  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Degenerate  man  cannot  understand  and  appropriate 
the  things  of  God — the  truths  of  the  spiritual  world.  Is  man,  then,  born  into 
this  world  with  no  capacity  for  knowing  God  ?  By  no  means.  The  spiritual 
faculties  are  not  completely  destroyed.  In  many  ways  they  respond  to  the 
voice  of  God.  No  man  is  born  either  an  atheist  or  an  agnostic.  The  organs 
of  spiritual  life  may  be  only  rudimentary,  but  they  exist.  It  is  possible  to  know 
God,  but  only  by  the  renewing  and  enlightening  grace  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  The 
knowledge  of  God  is  not  reached  by  an  intellectual  process.  It  is  faith  which 
apprehends  the  invisible  God,  yet  it  is  also  experience  which  affixes  the  seal  to 
the  knowledge  which  faith  attains.  It  is  no  exclusive  privilege  of  the  man  of 
culture,  it  is  equally  open  to  the  unlettered,  the  simple,  the  child.  The  "pure 
in  heart  shall  see  God."  It  may  be  said,  if  one  man  can  know  God,  why  may 
not  another  ?  There  is  a  gulf  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  man,  wider 
than  that  between  animal  and  plant  life.  The  distinction  is  as  broad  as  between 
the  living  and  the  dead.  The  new  life  of  regeneration  is  a  beginning,  a  bud  of 
promise,  a  day  dawn ;  it  is  not  the  consummation  of  the  spiritual  life.  The 
work  and  duty  of  the  Christian  is  to  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  We  must  take 
heed  lest  we  become  examples  of  "  arrested  development."  How  can  firm  lasting 
faith  be  attained  ?  1.  By  realising  to  its  depth  our  emptiness  and  need,  and 
then  ovir  utter  inability  to  supply  it.  2.  By  clearing  away  certain  obstaclea 
which  commonly  clog  up  and  check  the  flow  of  the  grace  of  God.  Of  these  the 
first  and  most  obvious  is  sin.  Then  there  is  worldliness.  Then  neglect  of  prayer. 
Prayer  is  the  key  that  will  unlock  the  treasures  of  Divine  knowledge.  {R.  H. 
M'Eim,  D.D.)  A  new  consciousness  : — The  infatuation  of  knowledge  is  the 
course  of  life ;  to  know,  the  desire  to  know,  unsettles  life.  Yet  what  is  most 
of  our  knowledge  ?  The  world  is  a  vast,  wide  churchyard,  and  what  we  call 
knowledge  is  but  a  reading  of  inscriptions.  Much  so-called  knowledge  is  but 
curiosity,  and  when  that  curiosity  is  satisfied,  it  turns,  like  other  unsatisfied 
appetites,  upon,  and  corrodes  itself.  Our  nature  seeks  Divine  knowledge ; 
knowledge,  not  of  notions,  but  of  facts  ;  not  of  sentiments,  but  of  laws.  A  man 
may  talk  of  God,  who  has  no  rest  in  God.  1.  If  religion  is  progression,  it  is 
surely,  before  it  can  be  this,  a  beginning ;  but  as  a  begiiming  it  is  a  consciousness. 
Consciousness  which  being  translated  is  knowledge.  Religion  should  produce 
happiness,  but  that  is  not  the  chief  idea  of  religion.  A  holy  heart  has  three  stages 
in  its  history.  (1)  To  find  something  within  us  tending  to  evil,  contrary  to  our 
full  and  free  consent.  The  first  part  of  our  spiritual  combat  is  when  the  world 
within  awakes,  and  we  find  ourselves  all  wrong.  (2)  A  state  in  which  it  is  inter- 
rupted ;  when  it  would  do  good,  and  mourns  that  evil  is  present  with  it.  (3)  A 
state  when  it  finds  itself  again  sometimes  rebelling  against  the  better  part. 
There  is  a  state  of  apparent  religious  life  which  is  not  a  state  of  consciousness 
or  knowledge ; — there  is  a  want  of  conviction,  and  also  mistaken  apprehension. 
What  a  power  the  principle  of  grace  is  in  the  soul !  This  knowledge  is  great 
because  God  is  the  substance  of  the  soul.  The  soul  stands  on  and  in  God ;  so 
long  as  I  stand  on  and  in  carnal  and  notional  and  phenomenal  knowledge,  I 
know  not  how  to  say  my  soul  has  a  substance.  When  God  is  the  substance  of 
the  soul  and  all  its  knowledge,  then  the  blessed  life  and  the  blessed  knowledge 
give  light  within.  2.  But  it  is  a  progression.  "  Follow  on."  What  states  grow 
out  of  this  Gist  state,  the  seminal  germ  of  the  Christian  life  ?  The  evidences 
brighten  as  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  You  should  determine  to  ascend 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  higher  law  of  the  Christian  life.  Then  shall  we  know 
when  our  knowledge  shall  no  longer  be  narrowed  by  limited  sensations.  Every 
sense  I  possess  is  only  a  material  sheathing  of  some  deeper  and  higher  sense, 
which  cannot  find  its  appropriate  expression  here.  I  can  only  conceive  of  the 
state  of  souls  as  a  state  of  immortal  consciousness,  a  state  where  hope  and  memory 
are  one,  and  love  is  only  passive  in  certain  and  secure  possession.  {Paxton  Hood.) 
Diligence  in  religion  : — Doctrine :  That  the  way  to  thrive  in  religion  is  to  follow 
on,  to  pursue,  to  hold  our  hand  to  it,  when  once  our  hand  is  in  it.  I.  Who  they 
ABE  WHOM  WE  MAY  CALL  TO  FOLLOW  ON.  There  sxe  some  whom  we  cannot  call 
to  follow  on,  because  they  have  not  yet  stirred  a  foot  in  religion.  There  may 
be  some  whom  the  King  has  brought  into  His  chambers,  and  assured  of  His  love. 
Their  business  is  to  foUow  on.     Others  have  got  but  some  glimmerings  of  solid 


CHAP.  VI.]  ROSEA.  107 

hope  from  the  Lord.  Others  have  gained  some  mastery  over  spiritual  foes. 
Others  are  yet  only  striving.  Others  can  only  be  said  to  have  some  desires 
towards  God.  Others  have  only  had  passing  convictions  of  sin.  Yet  others 
know  nothing  more  than  inward  uneasiness.  II.  What  is  it  to  follow  on  ? 
1.  You  must  make  religion  your  great  end.  2.  You  must  be  persuaded  of  the 
weight  and  worth  of  religion.  3.  You  must  hold  fast  what  you  have.  4.  You 
must  be  moving  forward,  labouring  for  more.  5.  You  must  habitually  attend 
upon  religion,  and  make  it  your  chief  business.  6.  You  must  be  resolute  and 
vigorous  in  your  endeavours.  7.  You  must  entertain  a  hope  of  success.  8.  If 
you  fall,  you  must  get  up  again,  and  quicken  your  pace.  III.  Confirm  this 
DOCTRINE.  However  small  your  beginnings  or  hopes  may  now  be,  yet  persevere. 
You  have  God's  Word  for  it.  "  You  shall  reap,  if  you  faint  not."  1.  You  have 
God's  Word  of  promise  for  it  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  2.  It  is  the  Lord's  ordinary 
way  in  His  works,  to  bring  great  things  by  degrees  out  of  small  beginnings.  3.  The 
works  of  grace  in  the  soul  ordinarily  arise  from  very  small  beginnings.  Con- 
sider— 4.  The  bountiful  nature  of  God,  who  surely  will  not  always  flee  from  those 
who  follow  Him,  but  will  at  length  be  found  of  them.  5.  No  person  gets  a 
refusal  from  heaven,  but  those  who  court  it  by  their  own  indifference.  A  faint 
way  of  seeking  is  to  beg  a  denial.  6.  As  importunity  is  usually  in  all  cases  the 
way  to  come  speed,  so  it  has  special  advantages  in  this  case  which  promise  success. 

7.  Such  followers  the  Lord  does  not  bid  to  go  back.     And  this  is  encouraging. 

8.  The  Lord  commands  you  to  follow  Him  (Luke  xi.  19).  IV.  Practical  improvk- 
ment.  1.  Those  who  have  not  yet  begun  to  seek  the  Lord  are  neither  prosper- 
ing in  their  souls,  nor  are  they  in  the  way  to  it.  2.  It  is  no  wonder  that  back- 
sliders have  lean  souls.  3.  They  are  in  no  prospering  case  who  are  at  a  stand 
in  religion.  4.  The  smallest  spark  which  you  now  have  may  be  brought  to  a 
flame.  5.  See  what  is  the  ruin  of  many  communicants.  It  is  not  that  they 
get  nothing,  it  is  that  they  carry  nothing  away ;  they  follow  nothing  on.  They 
do  not  hold  their  hands  to  it  when  they  are  at  home.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The 
benefit  of  following  on  to  know  the  Lord  : — I.  A  course  of  conduct  proposed. 
Knowledge  in  general  is  an  excellence.  The  knowledge  here  proposed  is  most 
excellent,  as  to  its  nature  and  object,  and  most  profitable  to  its  possessor.  1.  The 
proposal  implies  a  previous  state  of  ignorance  and  estrangement.  This  was 
manifestly  the  case  with  Israel,  and  it  is  but  too  true  a  picture  of  our  own  times. 
2.  The  proposal  implies  reformation  begun.  The  obstinacy  has  given  way. 
They  are  ashamed.  They  seek  His  face  "  early,"  earnestly.  3.  The  proposal 
is  that  of  following  up  these  good  beginnings.  We  may  learn  much  concerning 
God  in  His  attributes  and  relations.  The  inquiry  should  be  followed  up  in  the 
way  He  has  prescribed — the  way  of  righteousness,  self-denial,  prayer,  and  religious 
obedience  generally.  We  shoiUd  follow  on  in  the  manner  He  has  prescribed 
• — sincerely,  humbly,  fervently,  perseveringly.  II.  The  encouragement 
ASSUMED.  1.  This  "  going  forth "  is  a  certain  blessing.  The  "  outgoings  of 
the  morning "  are  settled  by  a  Divine  constitution.  2.  This  "  going  forth " 
is  a  progressive  blessing.  The  condition  suggested  is  that  of  improvement — 
of  going  on  from  good  to  better.  It  is  a  state  of  improving  light.  The  subject 
should  teach  us — 1.  The  importance  of  saving  knowledge.  Those  who  remain 
at  a  distance  from  God  must  remain  in  darkness  and  barrenness  and  misery. 
2.  It  should  encomrage  exertion.  3.  It  should  induce  large  expectations.  4.  It 
ehould  confirm  us  in  a  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  {Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.)  Conditions  of  knowledge : — There  must  be  no  sitting  down 
by  the  wayside,  no  loitering,  no  laziness  in  all  the  school  of  the  Church.  "  We 
shall  know  if  we  follow  on  to  know."  If  we  practise  the  little  we  do  know,  we 
shall  get  outlook  of  things  that  lie  beyond,  and  confidence  to  deal  with  them. 
Love  shall  beget  love;  capacity  shall  enlarge  itself  into  a  still  fuUer  capacity, 
and  practice  in  prayer  should,  so  to  say,  end  in  skiU  of  supplication ;  we  shall 
know  the  way  to  the  throne  and  the  seat  of  mercy,  and  come  boldly  to  it  as  of 
right,  not  in  ourselves,  but  invested  in  us  by  the  grace  of  God.  "  Prepared  as 
the  morning  " — is  established  as  the  morning.  It  is  a  great  action  of  law,  a 
great  movement  settled,  regulated,  determined  from  eternity.  "  He  shall  come 
unto  us  as  the  rain,"  not  the  occasional  shower,  not  the  intermittent  baptism 
of  soft  water,  but  "  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  unto  the  earth."  Both  must 
come,  each  in  its  own  time,  and  in  its  own  way.  Thus  we  have  law,  and  thus 
we  have  mercy.  Here  we  have  philosophy  which  earthly  philosophy  has  not 
yet  comprehended  ;  condescension  that  leaves  behind  no  amazement  that  it  can 


108  ---  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

stoop  80  low  as  to  touch  the  fartherest  away.  It  is  in  these  mysteries  we  live ; 
in  these  voices  we  hear  the  only  music  we  care  to  listen  to.  (Joseph  Parker, 
D.D.)  Patient  perseverance: — Is  God  revealed  by  the  works  of  creation,  or 
are  those  works  the  instruments  for  the  memorial  and  confirmation  of  a  previous 
revelation  ?  We  incline  to  the  latter  view.  We  caimot  regard  mankind  as  having 
been  at  any  time  independent  of  a  revelation.  Every  man  has,  by  traditionary 
revelation,  a  knowledge  of  God's  existence.  When  we  examine  into  the  works 
of  nature,  we  find  the  confirmation  of  the  truth  with  which  we  have  been  pre- 
viously and  independently  made  acquainted.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  light 
of  nature,  or  natural  religion.  I.  The  object  of  this  knowledge.  In  the 
works  of  nature,  and  without  the  aid  of  the  Bible,  God  is  merely  set  forth  as 
God,  and  not  as  the  Lord  ;  that  is.  He  is  known  only  as  Creator.  We  regard 
this  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  absolutely  essential  to  man's  happiness.  By 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  we  mean  acquaintance  with  His  purposes  and  plans. 
For  this  a  preternatural  revelation  is  necessary.  We  must  know  God  as  a  being 
possessing  a  mind  and  purpose  with  respect  to  human  actions  and  conduct. 
We  can  see  but  a  faint  shadow  of  God's  purposes  in  the  works  of  creation.  It 
is  desirable  to  know  the  Lord,  for  the  sake  of  His  law.  Unless  there  be  a  law  of 
moral  restraint,  there  must  exist  a  state  of  misery.  11.  The  nature  and  kind 
or  THIS  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  It  must  be  of  a  practical  character.  It 
must  be  capable  of  the  test  of  good  deeds.  Unpractical  knowledge  and  imperfect 
knowledge  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  To  know  is  to  perceive  with  certainty, 
or  to  see  with  approbation.  Love  is  not  perceived  and  apprehended  by  the 
intellect,  but  by  the  heart.  Intellectual  knowledge  should  be  the  handmaid 
of  heart  knowledge.  And  a  heart  knowledge  is  identical  with  a  practical  know- 
ledge. III.  The  prescribed  means  of  acquiring  this  knowledge.  "  Follow 
on  to  know  the  Lord."  The  advance  to  the  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Lord  is 
independent  of  all  external  circumstances  and  all  innate  abilities ;  and  thus  if 
we  all  employ  the  same  simple  means,  then  the  result  will  be  the  same  in  all. 
(W.  H.  Wright,  B.A.)  Go  on,  go  on; — Arago  says,  in  his  Autobiography, 
that  his  master  in  mathematics  was  a  word  or  two  of  advice  which  he  found 
in  the  binding  of  one  of  his  text-books.  Puzzled  and  discouraged  by  the  diffi- 
culties he  met  with  in  his  early  studies,  he  was  almost  ready  to  give  over  the 
pursuit.  Some  words  which  he  found  on  the  waste  leaf  used  to  stiffen  the  cover 
of  his  paper-bound  text-book  caught  his  eye  and  interested  him.  "  Impelled," 
he  says,  "  by  an  indefinable  curiosity,  I  dampened  the  cover  of  the  book,  and 
carefully  imroUed  the  leaf  to  see  what  was  on  the  other  side.  It  proved  to  be 
a  short  letter  from  D'Alembert  to  a  young  person  disheartened  like  myself  by 
the  difficulties  of  mathematical  study,  who  had  written  to  him  for  counsel.  '  Go 
on,  sir,  go  on,'  was  the  counsel  which  D'Alembert  gave  him.  '  The  difficulties 
you  meet  will  resolve  themselves  as  you  advance.  Proceed,  and  light  will  dawn 
and  shine  with  increasing  clearness  on  yoiur  path.'  That  maxim,"  says  Arago, 
"  was  my  greatest  master  in  mathematics."  Following  out  those  simple  words, 
"  Go  on,  sir,  go  on,"  made  him  the  first  astronomical  mathematician  of  his  age. 
What  Christians  it  would  make  of  us!  {Old  Testament  Anecdotes.)  Knowing 
by  following  on  : — When  climbing  Snowdon,  I  one  day  scaled  some  precipitous 
rocks  called  "  Crybydiskil,"  i.e.,  "  edge  of  the  plate,"  because  on  each  side  of 
the  narrow  ridge  was  a  sheer  precipice  of  several  hundred  feet.  A  thick  fog 
came  on  which  hid  from  view  everything  but  ovu-selves  and  the  bit  of  knife-edge 
on  which  we  straddled.  We  knew  that  the  ridge  led  direct  to  the  summit,  which 
we  should  reach  if  we  went  '*  forward."  We  could  see  two  yards  beyond  us, 
but  not  an  inch  farther.  This  was  enough  for  the  very  next  advance,  when  a 
further  similar  glimpse  was  revealed.  So  by  creeping  along  the  Gxst  few  inches, 
we  saw  the  next  few  hitherto  hidden.  So,  as  the  Scripture  says,  "  Follow  on  to 
know  the  Lord."  {Newman  Hall.)  Practical  devotion  promotes  our  know- 
ledge of  Ood  : — Near  the  Arctics  the  fogs  are  prevalent  and  thick.  This  is  because 
there  is  so  much  ice  drifting  down  from  the  vast  frozen  fields  of  the  north,  the 
meeting  of  which  with  the  warmer  southern  waters  fills  the  air  with  moisture. 
If  we  keep  our  minds  at  the  edge  of  the  cold  regions  of  secularity,  we  may  expect 
that  our  minds  shall  be  in  a  fog  as  respects  religious  truth.  Drift  into  the 
warmer  air  of  practical  devotion,  accustom  your  heart  to  the  prevalence  of  spirit- 
ual sentiments,  and  see  how  clear  God's  truth  will  become.  {J.  B.  Ludlow,  D.D.) 
His  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning. — Morning  cometh : — 1.  The 
time  of  deliverance  is  the  morning,  the  morning  after  the  sad,  dark  night. 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSE  A.  109 

As  light  is  comfortable  in  the  morning,  after  a  dark  and  stormy  night,  so  is 
deliverance  after  trouble.  God's  mercies  after  afiElictions  are  very  sweet.  2.  The 
Church  has  no  afflictions  unfollowed  by  a  morning.  3.  It  is  God's  presence  which 
constitutes  the  saints'  morning.  4.  God's  mercies  to  His  people  are  prepared 
and  decreed.  5.  The  saints  in  the  night  of  their  affliction  can  comfort  them- 
selves in  this,  that  the  morning  is  coming.  It  is  night  yet,  but  the  morning 
will  come  ;  it  is  approaching.  6.  The  saints'  night  is  darkest  a  little  before  their 
deliverance  ;  as  a  little  before  the  dawning  of  the  day  the  darkness  is  most  dense 
and  terrible.  7.  God's  mode  of  deliverance  is  gradual.  As  the  day  breaks  by 
degrees,  so  the  saints  shine  gradually  in  their  lives,  answerable  to  the  light  which 
God  imparts.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  The  going  forth  of  the  Lord  prepared 
as  the  morning  : — These  words  show  just  where  Ephraim  was  in  soul  experience. 
He  does  not  represent  one  destitute  of  spiritual  light  and  life,  but  a  quickened 
vessel  of  mercy,  but  one  who  was  wrapping  himself  up  in  a  garment,  not  of  Christ's 
giving,  nor  of  the  Spirit's  application.  And  there  are  many  still  who  have  the 
fear  of  God  in  their  hearts  who  are  wrapping  themselves  up  in  a  covering  which 
is  not  of  God's  Spirit.  There  is  something  more  to  be  known  than  the  bare 
doctrine  of  Christ's  righteousness.  That  doctrine  may  even  become  a  lying 
refuge  if  the  mere  letter  of  truth  is  sheltered  in,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
experimentally  make  it  known  to  the  soul.  I.  The  soul  experience  indi- 
cated. "  A  following  on  to  know  the  Lord."  To  know  the  Lord  is  the  desire 
of  every  living  soul.  To  know  Him  by  His  own  Divine  manifestations,  by  the 
gracious  revelation  of  His  grace.  His  love.  His  presence.  His  glory.  To  know 
the  Lord  is  to  know,  experimentally  and  spiritually,  the  power  of  Jesus'  blood 
and  righteousness.  Thus  to  know  the  Lord  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  vital 
godliness.  But  the  expression  "  follow  on  "  implies  that  there  are  many  diffi- 
culties, obstacles,  and  hindrances  in  a  man's  way,  which  keep  him  back  from 
knowing  the  Lord.  1.  Sometimes  a  man  takes  up  the  notion  that  he  is  but  a 
self-deceiver  and  a  hypocrite.  2.  Sometimes  Satan  hurls  a  blasphemous  sugges- 
tion into  our  carnal  mind.  3.  Sometimes  the  remembrance  of  past  sins,  lying 
as  a  heavy  weight  on  the  conscience,  presses  a  man  down  with  despondency 
and  despair.  4.  Sometimes  the  gusts  of  infidelity  will  so  blow  on  a  man's  mind 
as  to  make  him  doubt  the  reality  of  all  religion.  5.  Sometimes  the  recollection 
of  many  inconsistencies,  foolish  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  stand  like  moun- 
tains of  difficulty  in  his  way.  6.  Sometimes  great  worldly  troubles  hinder  him. 
7.  Sometimes  darkness  besets  the  mind,  and  clouds  of  unbelief  rest  on  the  soul, 
and  the  way  is  obscure.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  a  man's  soul  is  to  carry  him 
on  in  spite  of  all  these  obstacles.  It  is  really  astonishing  how  souls  are  kept  alive. 
For  what  are  we  to  follow  on  ?  To  know  the  Lord,  as  the  sum  and  substance 
of  all  religion,  as  the  very  marrow  of  vital  godliness.  II.  Seeking  the  Lord 
AND  NOT  finding  Him.  This  is  a  part  of  experience  through  which  every  soul 
passeth.  Here  lies  the  difference  between  a  living  soul  in  his  darkest  hours 
and  a  dead  professor.  A  living  soul  knows  that  God  is  to  be  found  of  His  saints, 
but  cannot  always  find  Him  for  himself ;  but  a  dead  professor  knows  nothing 
about  God  at  all.  It  is  to  the  living  soul  walking  in  darkness,  and  unable  to 
find  God,  that  the  t«xt  says,  "  His  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning." 
There  is  an  appointed  time  for  the  Lord  to  go  forth :  and  this  is  compared  to 
the  rising  of  the  sun.  All  His  goings  forth  are  as  much  prepared,  and  the  moment 
is  as  much  appointed,  as  the  time  is  fixed  every  morning  for  the  sun  to  rise. 
III.  The  fruit  and  effect  of  the  Lord's  coming.  As  the  rain — softening 
and  fertilising.  To  understand  the  spiritual,  we  must  first  know  the  meaning 
of  the  natural  figure.  Explain  the  two  rain  seasons  of  Palestine.  In  the  "  early 
rain  "  is  a  figure  of  Christ's  first  coming  to  the  soul.  By  the  "  latter  rain  "  is 
suggested  Christ's  coming  in  Christian  experience.  {J.  C.  Philpot.)  Christ 
the  day-dawn  and  the  rain : — The  most  ancient  Jewish  commentators  find  the 
last  fulfilment  of  these  words  in  the  great  promised  Messiah.  It  is  Christ,  then, 
whom  our  faith  must  grasp  under  these  two  figures,  the  day-dawn  and  the  rain. 
The  world  is  a  great  book  of  symbols  for  the  soul  of  man  to  read  God  by.  There 
is  something  of  common  likeness  in  these  two  figures,  and  yet  something  dis- 
tinctive is  conveyed.  There  is  a  twofold  coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  first 
in  His  own  person  to  establish  and  confirm  the  Gospel,  the  second  in  His  Holy 
Spirit,  to  apply  it  to  the  heart.  The  one  of  these  may  very  fitly  be  com- 
pared to  the  morning,  and  the  other  to  the  rain.     I.  The  day-dawn  and  thh 

bain  KEPEESENT  SOME  RESEMBLANCES   BETWEEN   THE  COMING  OF  ChrIST  IN  Hia 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Gospel  and  in  His  Spirit.  1.  They  have  the  same  manifest  origin.  The  day- 
dawn  comes  from  heaven  and  so  does  the  rain.  They  are  not  of  man's  ordering, 
but  of  God's.  And  it  is  not  less  so  with  the  Gospel  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  Man 
neither  invented  them  nor  discovered  them.  They  carry  their  evidence  with 
them,  like  heaven's  sun  and  heaven's  rain.  We  may  learn  the  origin  of  our  faith 
in  a  study  of  the  grandeur  and  comprehensiveness  of  its  plan,  and  in  a  feeling  of 
its  power  in  our  souls.  The  same  God  who  makes  morning  to  the  world  by  the 
sun,  gives  the  dawn  of  a  new  creation  to  the  spirits  of  men  through  the  Saviour. 
2.  They  have  the  same  mode  of  operation  on  the  part  of  God.  That  mode  of 
operation  is  soft  and  silent.  The  greatest  powers  of  nature  work  most  calmly 
and  noiselessly.  And  like  to  these  in  their  operations  are  the  Gospel  and  Spirit 
of  Christ.  When  our  Saviour  came  into  the  world,  it  was  silent  and  alone.  So 
it  was  with  His  entrance  into  the  heart.  There  is  no  outward  crisis  to  tell  of 
the  birth  of  souls.  3.  They  have  the  same  form  of  approach  to  ua — in  perfect 
freeness  and  fulness.  The  morning  light  comes  unfettered  by  any  condition, 
and  so,  also,  descends  the  rain.  The  Gospel  opens  on  the  world  priceless  and 
free  as  the  light  which  waits  but  for  the  eye  to  be  unclosed  to  see  and  share  it 
all.  As  free  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  Nor  has  He  less  fulness.  4.  They  have  the 
same  object  and  end.  It  is  the  transformation  of  death  into  life,  and  the  raising 
of  that  which  lives  into  higher  and  fairer  form.  The  Gospel  and  Spirit  of  Christ 
have  the  same  aim — life  and  revival.  The  Gospel  of  Christ  is  the  Word  of  life. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Spirit  of  life.  As  both  work  together  for  life,  so  both 
must  co-operate  for  revival.  II.  Some  points  of  the  distinction  between 
THEM.  1.  Christ's  approach  to  men  has  a  general  and  yet  a  special  aspect.  The 
sun  comes  every  morning  with  a  broad  unbroken  look,  shining  for  all,  and  singling 
out  none.  There  is  a  universality  of  kindness  about  him  which  men,  with  all 
their  powers  of  limitation,  have  never  been  able  to  abridge.  But  the  rain  as 
it  descends,  breaks  into  drops,  and  hangs  with  its  globules  on  every  blade.  There 
is  a  wonderfully  individualising  power  in  the  rain.  The  Gospel  of  God's  grace 
enters  the  world  with  the  broad  universal  look  of  daylight.  It  singles  out  none 
that  it  may  exclude  none.  The  arms  of  God  are  as  wide  as  His  call,  and  the 
power  of  Christ's  atonement  is  as  unlimited  as  the  invitation  to  it.  But  Christ 
comes  after  another  manner  with  His  Spirit.  Here  no  man  can  tell  how  God 
is  dealing  with  another.  2.  Christ's  coming  is  constant,  and  yet  variable.  The 
.simrise  is  of  all  things  the  most  sure  and  settled.  And  Christ  visits  men  in  His 
Gospel,  steady  and  unchanging  as  the  sun.  But  with  the  Holy  Spirit  it  is  other- 
wise. His  coming  varies  in  time  and  place,  as  the  rain,  whose  arrival  depends 
on  causes  we  have  not  fathomed.  3.  Christ's  coming  may  be  with  gladness, 
but  also  with  trouble.  What  can  be  more  joyful  than  the  returning  sun  ?  But 
God  comes  also  in  the  cloud,  and  there  is  a  shade  over  the  face  of  nature.  So 
Clirist  comes,  through  His  Spirit,  in  the  conviction  of  sin.  4.  Christ's  coming, 
in  His  Gospel  and  Spirit,  may  be  separate  for  awhile,  but  they  tend  to  a  final 
and  perfect  union.  They  are  indispensable  to  each  other.  Sunlight  without 
rain,  and  rain  without  sunlight,  can  only  work  evil.  The  Gospel  without  the 
Spirit,  would  be  the  sun  shining  on  a  waterless  waste.  The  Spirit  without  the 
Gospel,  would  be  the  rain  falling  in  a  starless  night.  Some  have  a  very  distinct 
perception  of  the  Gospel  in  its  freeness  and  fulness,  but  they  have  ceased  to 
derive  fi'om  it  the  comfort  they  once  enjoyed.  They  need  the  rain.  They  have 
been  too  neglectful  of  the  secret  life  of  religion,  which  is  its  soul.  {John  Ker, 
D.D.)  The  goings  forth  of  the  Lord  : — By  His  going  forth,  we  are  to  understand 
the  communications  of  His  grace  in  behalf  of  those  who  desire  an  interest  in 
His  favour.  I.  The  idea  suggested  by  this  expression  is  that  op  certainty 
AS  to  the  event.  Before  the  faintest  streaks  of  light  appear,  we  feel  no  mis- 
givings as  to  the  return  of  morning.  The  longest  winter  night  will  come  to  an 
end.  Thus  certain  and  infallible  are  God's  gracious  purposes  to  penitent  souls. 
As  soon  shall  the  sun  forget  to  rise,  as  His  goings  forth  of  grace  and  mercy  be 
frustrated.  This  may  encourage  seeking  souls,  afflicted  ones,  weeping  mothers 
and  fathers,  and  those  who  are  approaching  the  end  of  life.  II.  An  idea  sug- 
gested BY  the  first  image  IN  THE  TEXT  IS  THAT  OF  CLEARNESS.  What  a  change 
does  the  dawning  morn  produce  upon  the  face  of  nature  and  the  views  of  man  ! 
We  find  the  path  which  before  was  doubtful  open  to  our  view.  We  can  go  to 
our  avocations  without  stumbling,  or,  if  travellers,  prosecute  our  journey  without 
fear.  By  the  glorious  light  which  God  sheds  upon  their  path.  His  people  are 
guided  into  all  truth.     The  most  wonderful  discoveries  are  made  to  their  soul^ 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSE  A.  Ill 

and  they  see  more  accurately  than  they  ever  did  before  the  marvellous  things 
of  God's  law.  The  entrance  of  God's  word  gives  light,  and  crooked  things  become 
straight  before  it.  III.  Another  idea  suggested  is  that  of  gladness  and 
JOY.  "  The  light  is  sweet ;  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the 
sun."  As  the  night  is  the  season  of  gloom,  the  morning  ia  one  of  cheerfulness 
and  joy.  In  Psalm  cxxx.  the  truly  penitent  soul  is  represented  as  waiting 
for  the  consolations  of  religion  under  the  image  of  those  who  watch  for  the 
coming  of  the  morning.  Neither  the  moon  in  all  her  beauty,  nor  the  stars  in 
all  their  brightness,  can  compare  with  the  splendours  of  the  orb  of  day.  At  his 
rising  universal  nature  is  refreshed,  and  the  earth  on  which  he  shines  puts  on  a 
robe  of  gladness.  And  it  is  thus  with  the  "  goings  forth  "  of  the  Lord.  Let 
but  the  healing  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  upon  the  soul,  and  even 
the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  will  be  glad  for  them.  The  whole  heart 
is  inspired  with  a  joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  IV.  Another  idea 
suggested  is  that  of  progress.  Not  all  at  once,  but  gradual,  is  the  beauty  of 
the  morning.  So  the  goings  forth  of  the  Lord  are  gradual  upon  the  soul,  until 
from  the  first  dawnings  of  spiritual  light  it  is  rendered  capable  of  beholding  the 
august  glories  of  the  Gospel.  The  second  illustration  in  the  passage  is  taken 
from  the  rain.  Between  rain  that  descends  upon  the  earth,  and  the  influences 
of  Divine  grace  on  the  soul,  many  pleasing  analogies  obtain.  Bain  is  the  work 
of  God.  It  falls  according  to  the  appointment  of  Him  who  cause«  it  to  descend 
on  one  city  and  not  upon  another.  The  rain  falls  sometimes  gently  and  per- 
sistently, sometimes  violently.  Like  the  former  and  the  latter  rain  of  the  East, 
there  are  two  seasons  in  the  Divine  life,  when  the  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
are  particularly  requisite.  Yoimg  converts  stand  in  need  of  the  on^,  and  aged 
saints  of  the  other.  (J.  L.  Adamson.)  Coming  as  the  morning: — A  recent 
traveller  gives  a  striking  description  of  sunrise  among  the  Himalaya  Mountains. 
"  We  were  watching,"  she  says,  "  the  first  flash  of  rosy  dawn  on  a  high  snowpeak, 
as  the  stars  disappeared  one  by  one.  The  song  of  the  first  bird  blended  with  the 
roar  of  the  stream  that  fretted  its  way  through  the  narrow  gorge.  Then  we  could 
trace  the  forms  of  trees,  shrubs,  and  flowers  above  and  below  our  path,  and  enjoy 
the  fragrance  of  the  eglantine  blossoms  strewn  hither  and  thither  like  patches 
of  snow."  Presently,  however,  her  attention  was  drawn  to  a  mimosa-tree  which 
seemed  quite  dead.  Its  leaves,  although  green,  were  closed  and  drooping.  Yet 
the  root  had  not  been  disturbed — branches,  twigs,  blossoms,  and  the  leaves  them- 
selves all  appeared  perfect.  Was  it  dead,  or  only  asleep  ?  "  As  we  watch  and 
wonder,  the  slanting  rays  of  yellow  light  from  the  great  sun,  hidden  hitherto  by  the 
mountain  opposite,  creep  toward  us.  They  touch  the  mimosa-tree,  and  at  the 
same  moment  we  hear  the  rustle  of  the  morning  breeze  among  its  leaves.  Even 
as  we  look  the  delicate  twigs  are  stirred  ;  they  flutter  in  the  wind,  they  lift 
themselves  to  the  golden  rays,  and,  ere  we  pass  on,  the  leaves  are  expanded,  the 
blossoms  erect,  and  the  tree  seems  to  rejoice  among  its  fellows  in  its  gracious 
fulness  of  life."  (Sunday  Companion. )  Genuine  piety : — I.  In  genuine  piety  the 
individual  man  has  to  do  with  the  great  God.  He  has  to  "  foUow  on  to  know  the 
Lord."  II.  In  genuine  piety  the  great  God  has  to  do  with  individual  man. 
"  His  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning,"  &c.  1.  He  cometh  to  him  as  the 
"  morning  " — full  of  promise.  What  a  delightful  season  is  the  morning.  It  rings  the 
knell  of  the  dark  night,  and  heralds  the  coming  day.  How  delightful  the  morning 
to  the  sufferer  on  his  bed  ;  to  the  mariner  on  the  ocean,  &c.  God  comes  to  the 
man  that  is  "  following  on  "  to  know  Him  ;  puts  an  end  to  the  night  of  his  guilt, 
and  throws  around  him  the  first  beams  of  a  glorious  day.  He  comes  as  the  night 
to  the  wicked ;  He  comes  as  the  morning  to  the  good.  We  would  not  have 
Him  come  as  the  noon  to  us.  He  would  consume  us  with  His  glory.  2.  He 
comes  to  him  as  "  the  rain  " — full  of  refreshing  influence.  "  He  shall  come  unto 
us  as  the  rain,  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  unto  the  earth."  What  a  glorious 
change  do  the  seasonable  showers  produce  upon  the  parched  earth  !  they  change 
every  part  into  life  and  beauty.  Thus  the  Almighty  comes  to  the  good  man, 
and  he  feels  it  to  be  a  time  of  refreshing  from  the  "  presence  of  the  Lord."  Learn 
from  this  the  glorious  destiny  of  the  good.  It  is  a  "  following  on  "  to  know  Him, 
"whom  to  know  is  life  eternal."  (Homilist.)  The  gentleness  of  Christ: — The 
Jews  regarded  these  words  as  a  prophecy  of  Christ.  As  such  take  them.  How 
beautiful  is  the  morning !  How  refreshing  is  the  rain !  I.  Both  are  independent 
of  man.  "  The  day  is  Thine,  O  Lord,  Thou  hast  prepared  the  light."  "  He  pre- 
pareth  rain  for  the  earth."     They  both  emanate  from  God     How  true  of  grace 


112  ^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi 

and  mercy  !     He  who  gives  morning  to  the  world  gives  dawning  to  the  soul. 
1.  How  softly  and  silently  come  the  light  and  the  rain !     How  true  of  Christ's 
coming  into  the  world  and  of  His  mission  among  men  !     "  He  shall  not  strive," 
&c.     "  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation  " — with  spectators 
looking  on.     2.  How  true  of  Christ's  entrance  into  the  soul !     Not  in  the  storm, 
but  in  the  still  small  voice.     "  My  conversion,"  says  a  French  evangelist,  "  wa« 
as  gentle  as  a  mother's  kiss."     II.      oth  are  necessary  to  man.     Nansen  tells 
us  now  they  longed  for  the  light !     In  India  and  Australia,  how  the  thirsty  land 
cries  out  for  the  refreshing  showers  !     So  the  soul  of  man  needs  Christ.     III.  Bom 
ARE  FTTLL  AND  FREE  FOR  MAN.     The  sun  and  the  rain  come  for  all.     No  "  Trusts  " 
can  monopolise  them.     How  true  of  the  Divine  love  !     It  is  like  the  great  sea 
whose  waves  beat  upon  every  shore.     "  Draw  up  the  blind,"  said  George  Dawson ; 
"  let  in  the  light."     When  the  gentle  rain  descends,  you  put  out  your  ferns  and 
flower-pots.     Get  where  there  are  showers  of  blessing  that  your  soul  may  be 
refreshed.     {A.  Hampden  Lee.)         He  shall  come  to  us  as  the  rain. — Christ 
as  the  rain  : — 1.    Christ's  coming  to   the   heart,  and  the  rain's  coming  to  the 
flower,  are  alike  in  this,  that  each  is  by  the  sovereign  ordering  of  God.     Modern 
science  has  attained  wonderful  knowledge  of  the  laws  that  govern  the  movements 
of  the  clouds.     But  we  are  as  dependent  upon  God  now,  as  ever,  for  the  early 
and  the  latter  rain,  for  the  showers  that  water  and  refresh  the  earth.     Equally 
dependent  are  we  for  those  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  which  Christ  in  all 
His  preciousness  and  graciousness  is  communicated  to  the  soul.     2.  The  coming 
in  each  case  affords  scope  for  the  energy  and  efficacy  of  prayer.     Whilst  God  is 
sovereign  in  His  gifts,  He  is  not  arbitrary  in  their  bestowment  either  in  nature  or 
in  grace.     There  are  innumerable  and  well-attested  instances  in  which  God  has 
heard  the  prayers  of  His  people  for  rain.     And  so  the  coming  of  Christ  with  spiritual 
power  into  the  heart  and  into  the  Church  may  be  secured  by  earnest  and  importunate 
prayer.     3.  The  coming  of  Christ  in  refreshing  presence  and  power  is  often  pre- 
ceded by  lightning  and  tempest.     Dark  clouds  of  adversity,  fierce  winds  of  tempta- 
tion distiu-b  and  terrify  the  soul.     When   the   storms  of  spiritual  trial   have 
encompassed  the  soul,  Christ  by  His  blessed  Spirit  comes  in  gentlest  and  most 
unobtrusive  ministry  to  every  parched  leaf  and  drooping  flower  of  the  Christian 
graces.     4.  The  coming  of  Christ  is  like  that  of  the  rain  in  its  benign  and  blessed 
results.     The  roots  of  religious  life  are  fed.     The  fountains  of  spiritual  energy 
in  the  soul  are  replenished.      (T.  D.  Witherspoon,  D.D.,  LL.D.)        The  Spirit 
(ig  rain  : — 1.  As  rain,   the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  copious.     2.  Are 
seasonable.    3.  Are  refreshing.    4.  Are  fertilising.    5.  Are  from  above.    {O.Brooks.) 
As  the  latter  and  the  former  rain. — The   analogy  between  nature  and  grace 
is  very  close.      God  employs  nature  as  a  typal  thing.      He  designs  through 
it  to  image  forth  Diviner  things.     He  would  have  us  be  observers  of  nature, 
to  look  through  nature  up  to  natvire's  God.     Years  ago,  an  observing  writer  told 
how  he  "  viewed  the  ravages  of  winter  as  the  Jews  did  the  desolation  of  their 
temple  when  its  expressive  types  and  symbols  were  demolished  or  defaced  by  the 
Babylonian  armies,  and  thus  he  viewed  spring  as  the  rebuilding  of  the  creation- 
temple,  in  which  are  renewed  all  the  sweet  and  significant  emblems  of  the  ever- 
lasting Gospel."     In  the  same  spirit  may  we  consider  the  "  early  and  latter  rain," 
the  second  of  the  two  images  employed  by  the  prophet  Hosea.     Now,  we  read 
about  the  "  former  and  the  latter  rain  "  in  other  parts  of  Scripture  as  weU  as  in 
Hosea.     (Thus  in  Deut.  xi.  14 ;  Jer.  v.  24 ;  Joel  ii.  23 ;  James  v.  7.)     Rain  typifies 
and  sets  forth  Divine  influence  and  grace.     It  falls  to  fertilise  where  all  was  dry 
and  fruitless.     It  falls  to  renew  the  face  of  the  earth.     It  falls  to  ripen  and  mature 
the  grain.     In  Judea  the  rain  fell  plentifully  twice  in  the  year.     About  September, 
and  about  March,  it  chiefly  and  more  copiously  fell.     Now,  the  month  Abib,  or 
March,  was  the  first  month  in  the  ecclesiastical  or  holy  year ;  and  hence  we  have 
light  thrown  on  the  expression,  "  the  latter  rain  in  the  first  month."     It  may 
be  observed,  without  any  undue  pressing  of  the  similitude,  that  rain  being  the 
vapours  exhaled  by  the  sun,  would  cease  to  fall  were  the  siui  withdrawn  from 
the  firmament.     The  parallel  between  growth  in  nature  and  growth  in  grace, 
being  clear,  we  are  taught  at  once  that  Divine  grace  comes  not  apart  from  Him 
who,  being  the  Son  of  God,  died  on  the  Cross  for  our  sins,  that  through  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  down,  the  fruitless  soil  of  our  fallen  nature  might  have  fertility — be 
quickened  into  newness  of  life.     Now,  it  strikes  us  as  interesting  that,  in  the 
passages  we  have  cited,  beginning  with  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  ending 
with  the  Epistle  of  St.  James,  there  should  be  seen  a  certain  order  which  we  may 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSE  A.  113 

follow  as  we  try  briefly  to  exhibit  some  truths  suggested  by  our  subject.  In 
Deuteronomy,  we  read  how  God  would  give  the  first  rain  and  the  latter  rain. 
Passing  on  to  Jeremiah,  we  see  how  the  people  refused  to  fear  the  Lord  who  giveth 
rain  both  the  former  and  the  latter.  In  Hosea  we  read  of  the  fuller  knowledge 
to  be  enjoyed  by  those  who  serve  the  Lord.  In  Joel  we  read  of  the  joy  of  the 
children  of  God  to  whom  had  been  given  the  former  rain.  Then  in  St.  James 
we  read  of  the  patience  that  becomes  the  Christian  as  he  waits  for  the  coming 
of  his  Lord.  Undesigned  as  this  order  may  be,  it  is  nevertheless  interesting. 
It  suggests  to  us  the  thought  of  progressiveness.  As  the  Christian  dispensation 
is  fuller,  brighter  than  the  Jewish  ;  so  the  believer  should  advance,  following  on 
to  know  the  Lord.  Beginning,  then,  with  the  words  of  Deuteronomy,  we  read 
in  chap.  xi.  13,  14 :  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  ye  shall  hearken  diligently 
unto  My  commandments  which  I  command  you  this  day,  to  love  the  Lord  your 
Grod,  and  to  serve  Him  with  all  your  heart  and  with  all  yoiu*  soul ;  that  I  will 
give  you  the  rain  of  your  land  in  his  due  season,  the  first  rain  and  the  latter  rain, 
that  thou  mayest  gather  in  thy  corn,  and  thy  wine,  and  thine  oil."  As  Israel 
sought  spiritual  blessings,  so  should  Israel  enjoy  temporal  blessings  as  well.  These 
were  the  terms  of  the  Divine  covenant.  Grace,  free  and  undeserved  grace,  itself 
the  outflow  of  the  Divine  love,  would  bestow  these  blessings.  "  Seek  ye  first 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  (temporal 
necessaries)  shall  be  added  unto  you."  Thus  the  prophet  Jeremiah  speaks  : 
"  But  this  people  hath  a  revolting  and  a  rebellious  heart,  .  .  .  neither  say 
they  in  their  heart.  Let  us  now  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  that  giveth  rain,  both  the 
former  and  the  latter  in  his  season."  In  the  days  of  Moses,  multitudes  of  the 
Israelites  had  tiu'ned  from  God.  They  entered  not  into  the  promised  land,  because 
of  unbelief.  On  them  "  the  former  and  the  latter  rain  "  never  fell.  So,  in  the 
days  of  Jeremiah,  many  feared  not  God,  who  yet  saw  how  His  covenant  with 
nature  was  kept,  and  around  whom  privileges  were  gathered.  The  words  of  the 
prophet  Hosea  (chap.  vi.  3)  tell  of  the  bright  and  blessed  results  of  real  repent- 
ance, "  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  We  observe 
in  this  verse  that  "  the  latter  rain  "  is  placed  before  "  the  former  "  ;  and  it  may 
be  just  said  by  the  way  that  "  the  latter  rain  "  (malkush,  from  a  verb  "  to  delay  ") 
was  more  probably  that  which  fell  in  the  autumn,  and  "  the  former  rain  "  (jirah) 
that  which  fell  in  the  spring  ;  though  this  is  questioned.  (See  Calmet's  Diet. ) 
Without  seeing  in  this  uncertainty  any  explanation  of  the  precedence  of  "  the 
latter  rain  "  in  the  verse  in  Hosea,  something  perhaps  may  be  inferred  as  to  the 
inseparableness  of  "  the  former  and  the  latter  rain."  Grace  is  glory  begun.  And 
so  the  apostle  Peter  speaks :  "  And  hope  to  the  end  (or,  '  hope  perfectly,' 
TeXefwj  iXirlffare),  for  the  grace  that  is  being  brought  unto  you  (ipepo/iivtjv) 
at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Life  eternal  being  the  knowledge  of  God, 
and  of  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  has  sent,  Divine  grace,  typified  by  the  early  rain, 
must  cause  this  knowledge  to  take  root  in  our  heart.  And  then,  little  and  limited 
though  that  knowledge  be  at  first,  like  the  shower's  first  drops,  yet  "  we  shall 
know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  Where  rain  has  come,  rain  will  come. 
"  They  go  from  strength  to  strength."  Sin,  as  they  follow  on,  becomes  less  strong ; 
God  becomes  more  '  the  strength  of  their  heart."  So  the  prophet  Joel  speaks 
of  the  joy  of  Christians  :  "  Be  glad  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  your  God,  for  He  hath 
given  you  the  former  rain  moderately,  and  He  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you 
the  rain,  the  former  rain  and  the  latter  rain  in  the  first  month."  In  this  verse, 
we  are  directed  in  the  margin  to  observe  that  "  the  former  rain  moderately  "  is  in 
the  Hebrew  "  the  .  .  .  according  to  righteousness."  In  the  Septuagint  the 
literal  rendering  would  be,  "  For  He  gave  to  you  (the)  food  (t4  Ppdifiara) 
towards  (or  '  with  reference  to  ')  righteousness,  and  will  rain  for  you  rain  early 
and  late  (latter),  according  as  before."  It  does  not  seem  quite  plain  how  we  are 
to  take  the  words,  "  the  former  rain  according  to  righteousness,"  or  "  a  teacher 
unto  righteousness  "  (as  Hebrews  will  have  it),  if  they  are  not  taken  in  some  way 
to  have  regard  to  a  teacher  (perhaps  Joel  himself)  typical  of  the  Messiah.  Con- 
cerning ourselves,  however,  with  the  rendering  of  our  Authorised  Version,  "  the 
former  rain  moderately  "  (or  "  in  due  measure  "),  we  shall  see  that  the  children 
of  Zion  were  to  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  their  God,  giving  glory  to  Him  who 
had  kept  and  remembered  His  covenant,  who  had  sent  and  who  would  send  the 
shower  to  fructify  the  earth,  and  who  had  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts  the  very 
grace  that  shower  should  typify.  "  Be  glad  and  rejoice  "  ;  your  hearts  have  been 
disposed  to  holiness  through  Divine  grace  ;  God  will  perform  the  good  work  in 
8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

you  which  He  has  begun.  So  spake  the  inspired  prophet.  And,  in  truth,  joy 
becomes  the  Christian.  But  this  joy,  we  remember,  requires  patience.  And 
St.  James,  in  the  last  passage  remaining  for  us,  speaks  of  "patience":  "Be 
patient  therefore,  brethren,  imto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  "  ;  and  he  proceeds 
to  employ  an  illustration  fetched  from  the  tiller  and  the  field.  In  the  purpose 
and  promise  of  God,  precariousness  has  no  place ;  and  between  seed  -  time 
and  harvest  nature  exacts  her  needed  interval.  Time  is  needed  for  the 
early,  time  for  the  latter  rain  to  fall.  So  spiritually ;  and  more  also. 
Natural  rain  may  be  withheld ;  drought  may  be  instead.  Grace  shall  always 
come,  if  rightly  sought.  It  cannot  fail.  Patience  becomes  the  Christian ;  the 
Word  of  God  sown  in  his  heart  shall  not  be  left  waterless.  But  a  span  separates 
the  early  from  the  latter  rain.  To  none  should  the  time  be  either  too  long  or  yet 
too  short.  "  Be  patient  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord."  And  once  again,  there  is 
encouragement  in  the  thought  of  the  rain,  the  latter  rain,  where  there  may  have 
been  a  declension,  where  watchlessness  may  have  been  allowed,  or  where  trial 
and  temptation  may  have  chilled  devotion  and  zeal.  Bain  sought  again,  shall 
fall  to  revive.  Never  forsaken  by  a  covenant  God,  penitent  Israel,  idolatrous 
and  prayerless  no  more,  will  receive  the  blessing  of  abundance  of  rain :  "  he 
shall  grow  as  the  lily,"  and  "  revive  as  the  corn."     {Christian  Observer.) 

Ver.  4.  Toot  goodness  is  as  a  mornia?  dond,  and  as  the  early  dev  it 
goeth.  away.  —  Instances  of  inconstancy  in  good  men :  —  Men's  convictions 
die  away,  their  resolutions  prove  abortive;  they  run  well,  but  don't  continue; 
begin  to  build,  but  leave  their  work  imfinished  This  is  a  most  unhappy  case, 
as  dangerous  and  fatal  as  it  is  common.  I.  The  causes  of  this  wbetchkd 
INCONSTANCY.  Is  it  because  men  have  no  power,  or  no  encouragement  to  do 
otherwise  ?  Neither  can  be  the  reason,  because  where  there  is  no  power  at  all, 
there  is  no  sin,  and  where  there  is  no  encouragement  to  exert  the  power  we  have, 
if  we  are  not  altogether  without  sin,  yet  we  seem  to  have  such  an  excuse  for  our 
Bins,  as  takes  away  much  the  greatest  part  of  their  guilt.  One  represents  God 
as  the  author  of  sin  ;  the  other  as  wanting  in  goodness  and  love  to  His  creatures. 
That  so  many  do  no  more  than  begin  well,  is  not  from  want  of  power ;  since 
God,  the  righteous  Governor  and  Judge  of  the  world,  never  requires  beyond  the 
measure  of  what  He  has  given.  Does  God  command  all  men  to  repent  ?  The 
reason  is  that  by  the  grace  of  the  Gospel  all  shall  be  enabled  to  repent  who  do 
not  wilfully  refuse  and  resist  that  grace.  And  no  one  can  plead  in  excuse  for 
himself,  when  he  repents  of  his  sins,  and  then  relapses  into  them,  and  after  all 
his  fair  promises  and  repeated  resolutions,  never  makes  thorough  work  of  it, 
that  he  has  not  sufi&cient  motives  to  make  him  exert  himself.  The  true  causes 
of  inconstancy  are — 1.  Want  of  seriously  and  distinctly  considering  the  nature 
of  the  change  upon  which  they  are  entering,  the  reasons  for  it,  and  the  pains 
and  time  it  will  cost  to  efEect  it.  (1)  They  don't  consider  that  every  sin  is  to 
be  forsaken,  and  every  duty  to  be  practised  ;  nor  do  they  reflect  what  these 
particular  sins  and  duties  are,  and  what  is  meant  by  forsaking  the  one  and  practis- 
ing the  other.  For  want  of  a  distinct  notion  of  their  duty,  men  find  themselves 
bewildered,  are  at  a  loss  how  to  proceed,  and  never  want  an  excuse  for  not  doing 
what  they  ought,  or  for  doing  what  they  ought  not,  when  they  are  under  strong 
persuasion.  (2)  Men  don't  seriously  consider  the  reason  upon  which  their  purpose 
of  a  change  ought  to  be  founded,  and  therefore  they  miscarry.  The  little  they 
do  is  not  the  effect  of  judgment  and  rational  conviction,  so  much  as  of  some 
passion  accidentally  raised  in  them.  (3)  Men  don't  consider  the  pains  they  must 
take,  and  the  time  that  must  be  spent  in  effecting  this  change  (Luke  xiv.  28). 
The  difficulties  of  religion  are  to  be  duly  considered.  It  is  as  wrong  to  exaggerate 
the  difficulties  as  to  underestimate  them.  Conversion  is  a  work  of  time.  Men 
are  not  presently  cured  of  the  vices  which  have  grown  habitual.  Habits  which 
have  been  long  contracted  are  not  immediately  unlearnt  again,  and  contrary 
habits  planted  in  their  room.  Some  have  talked  as  if  the  new  creatiu:e  were  an 
instantaneous  production,  and  the  habits  of  grace  were  infused  in  a  moment. 
And  this  representation  has  done  no  little  mischief.  2.  Another  cause  of  men's 
inconstancy  is  their  being  but  half  resolved.  And  this  is  a  very  common  case. 
They  are  so  far  from  being  fully  determined  as  hardly  to  know  which  side 
they  shall  take.  It  is  not  strange  that  such  imperfect  resolutions  are  quickly 
broken.  Instability  of  conduct  is  the  necessary  effect  of  irresoluteness  of  temper. 
3.  Another  cause  is  men's  not  exercising  a  suitable  caution   and  vigilance,  in 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSEA.  115 

order  to  avoid  the  occasions  of  .sin,  and  all  those  temptations  that  beset  them, 
and  endanger  their  falling  back  into  their  former  way  of  living.  If  they  would  not 
fall,  why  do  they  walk  in  the  same  slippery  places  ?  4.  Another  cause  is  their 
not  persevering  in  the  instrumental  duties  of  religion,  particularly  the  duty  of 
secret  prayer.  Did  they  from  day  to  day  maintain  their  intercourse  with  heaven, 
they  would  be  much  better  prepared  to  do  the  will  of  God  upon  earth,  and 
to   resist   and   overcome  any  temptation  which  should   beset  them.      II.  Thb 

CERTAINTY  THAT  THESE  INEFFECTIVE  PURPOSES  OF  AMENDMENT,  THESE  MERB 
BEGINNINGS,  WILL  NOT  BE  ACCEPTED  INSTEAD  OF  TRUE  REPENTANCE  AND  HOLINESS 

OF  LIFE.  1.  The  Gospel  requires  nothing  less  than  repentance  and  true  holiness. 
This  is  abundantly  evident  from  Scripture  passages.  2.  Such  an  imperfect 
transient  goodness  is  not  that  repentance  and  holiness  of  life  upon  which  the 
Gospel  insists.  Is  confessing  sin  the  same  as  confessing  and  forsaking  it  ?  Can 
they  be  said  to  repent,  who  do  not  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance  ?  And 
the  character  of  a  man  is  to  be  taken  from  his  habitual  practice.  He  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  righteous.  3.  Out  of  regard  to  the  perfections  of  His  nature, 
and  the  declarations  of  His  Holy  Word,  God  will  not  dispense  His  saving  mercy 
upon  any  other  terms  than  those  set  forth  in  the  Gospel.  Evangelical  repentance 
and  obedience  there  must  be.     III.   What  method   we   should   take  if  wh 

WOULD  not  only  MAKE   SOME   ENTRANCE   UPON  THB  WAYS   OF  RELIGION,   BUT  GO 

ON  IN  THEM,  AND  HOLD  OUT  TO  THB  END.  Avoid  those  things  which  are  the  usual 
occasions  of  inconstancy  in  this  most  important  affair.  And  give  ourselves 
to  frequent  meditation  of  those  great  truths  on  which  religion  is  founded.  And 
often  renew  our  good  resolutions,  and  arm  ourselves  every  day  before  we  go  forth 
into  the  business  and  temptations  of  the  world.  Bend  our  chief  force  against 
those  sins  which  do  most  easily  beset  us,  and  most  frequently  overcome  us. 
Frequently  make  this  reflection,  that  while  we  spend  our  time  in  trifling  thus 
with  religion,  life  not  only  goes  on,  but  goes  off  too,  and  death  approaches.  Let 
us  reflect  every  one  for  himself,  whether,  and  how  far,  this  subject  concerns  us. 
1.  Consider  that  you  have  all  the  difficulty  without  the  benefit  of  a  thorough 
reformation  of  heart  and  life.  2.  You  can  have  no  real  satisfaction  in  your  present 
course.  3.  Every  time  you  return  to  your  sins,  after  you  have  resolved  to 
forsake  them,  and  begun  to  do  it,  you  make  your  condition  worse  than  it  was 
before.  4.  In  what  light  will  your  present  manner  of  acting  appear  when  you 
come  to  die  T     IV.  The  method  we  should  take  if  we  would  not  only  makb 

SOME  ENTRANCE  UPON   THE  WAYS    OF  RELIGION,   BUT   GO    ON   IN   THEM,   AND  HOLD 

OUT  TO  THE  END.  1.  Good  men  are  too  apt  to  change  as  to  their  diligence  and 
activity  in  the  Christian  life.  2.  Hath  the  time  been  when  the  Christian  wag 
vigilant  and  circumspect  ?  One  would  think  that  the  advantages  he  must  have 
reaped  from  thence  should  have  kept  him  so  ;  and  yet  they  do  not  always  effect 
it.  3.  There  may  be  the  loss,  as  to  the  good  man's  conscience,  of  its  former 
sensibility  and  authority.  Conscience  is  an  inward  sense  and  feeling  of  good 
and  evil.  Sensibility  of  conscience  appears  not  so  much  in  discovering  the  nature 
as  the  degrees  of  moral  good  and  evil.  How  careful  should  we  be  to  maintain 
this  sensibility  and  tenderness  of  conscience.  4.  Hath  the  Christian  disengaged 
himself  to  a  great  degree  from  the  affections  of  the  lower  life  ?  He  is  very  happy 
herein,  but  let  him  not  be  secure,  as  if  he  was  not  liable  to  a  change.  The  following 
are  among  these  affections  of  the  lower  life,  which  even  in  Christians  sometimes 
prevail  too  much.  (1)  Admiration  and  esteem  of  worldly  things.  (2)  Love  of 
sensual  pleasure.  (3)  Immoderate  hopes  and  fears,  joy  and  sorrow  about  present 
things.  (4)  Intemperate  anger,  or  a  proneness  to  kindle  into  warm  resentments 
upon  very  trivial  occasions.  (5)  A  spirit  of  devotion  is  not  always  kept  up.  His 
indevotion  appears  in  his  disuse  of  religious  thoughts  and  contemplations,  in  which 
time  was  that  he  more  frequently  employed  himself.  And  also  in  the  little 
pleasure  which  Christians  take  in  the  duties  and  exercises  of  religion.  It  is 
attended  with  want  of  desire  after  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings.     Two  directions. 

1.  Fix  in  your  minds  a  just  and  lively  apprehension  of  the  much  greater  peace 
and  pleasure  which  attend  an  even  and  regular  course  of  piety  than  the  contrary. 

2.  Have  your  eye  upon  the  first  tendencies  of  the  heart  to  wander  from  God, 
and  immediately  oppose  and  check  them.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Beligious  con- 
stancy : — This  is  a  mournful  voice  of  expostulation.  The  thing  which  aroused 
the  prophet's  sad  lament  is  as  familiar  to  us  as  it  was  to  those  who  lived  in  that 
day.  The  same  temptations  follow  the  same  passions,  and  substantially  the  same 
experiences  are  the  result.     The  inconstancy  of  men  in  goodness  ;  the  facility 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rt. 

with  which  they  are  excited  ;  the  quickness  with  which  they  recognise  the  better 
way ;  the  rapidity  with  which  they  forget  it, — these  are  the  themes  of  the  Old 
Testament  and  the  New  alike,  and  also  of  observing  men  in  profane  literatm-e. 
The  topic  is  the  inconstancy,  the  remission,  of  religious  emotion.  There  is  a 
vast  amount  of  tremulous  excitement,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  feeling,  which 
runs  for  an  hour  very  deeply ;  and  yet,  the  transientness  of  religious  life  and  of 
religious  feeling  is  just  as  much  a  matter  of  remark  to-day  as  it  was  a  thousand 
years  ago,  and  just  as  much  a  matter  of  remark  in  the  Church  as  it  was  in  the 
synagogue.  The  obvious  reason  will  be,  of  course,  in  the  nature  of  the  human 
soul;  in  its  proclivity  downward  and  backward  towards  the  animal,  on  which 
it  is  based  and  from  which  it  sprang.  Men  have  a  very  brief  religious  experience 
because  the  power  of  the  world  is  so  strong  over  them.  There  are  many  persona 
who  do  not  want  to  be  conformed  to  the  world ;  who  do  not  desire  to  have  any 
fluxes  of  feeling.  They  ask.  How  shall  I  prolong  these  experiences  ?  1.  There 
is  much  error  in  the  doctrine  of  the  uses  of  feeling,  and  therefore  of  its  degrees, 
and  of  the  possibility  of  equal  emotion  on  the  part  of  all.  If  religion  were  the 
putting  of  persons  through  a  Divine  process  from  which  each  one  emerged  amply 
equipped,  and  equipped  like  every  other,  then  every  one  might  demand  that  his 
experience  should  be  like  that  of  every  other  one ;  but  such  is  not  the  case.  Men 
are  brought  into  the  religious  state  with  all  their  conditions  of  constitution,  or 
of  soul  and  mind,  with  all  their  conditions  of  education  and  non-education,  with 
all  their  misteachings  and  prejudices  ;  and  they  begin  at  different  points.  Each 
one  has  problems  of  his  own  in  life.  God  in  His  providence  deals  with  each 
particular  man  according  to  the  method  which  is  adapted  to  him.  Feeling  is 
not  to  be  sought  as  a  luxury.  The  object  of  feeling  is  to  be  an  operative  one. 
Though  there  should  be  pleasure  in  it.  Persons  who  enter  a  Christian  life,  and 
seek  to  promote  such  a  life  by  the  experience  of  feeling,  exquisite,  abundant, 
and  continuous,  may  think  that  they  are  seeking  religion,  while  often  they  are 
only  seeking  self.  What,  then,  is  to  be  the  limit  of  feeling  ?  How  much  feeling 
is  a  man  to  have  ?  Enough  to  maintain  himself  vitally.  Enough  to  impel  him 
on  every  side  to  the  duties  which  belong  to  his  station  and  to  his  nature.  The 
most  powerful  loves  in  life  are  latent.  Everywhere  in  life,  true  and  wholesome 
feeling  tends  to  clothe  itself  in  action.  I  have  known  many  persons  who  gave 
up  a  thousand  ethical  duties  for  the  sake  of  having  experience,  as  it  is  called. 
There  are  many  who  are  attempting  to  be  eminent  in  their  Christian  life  by 
having  a  full-orbed  emotive  experience  all  the  time.  But  there  are  a  great  many 
persons  so  constituted  that  depths  and  currents  of  feeling  such  as  others  have 
are  quite  impossible  to  them.  The  law  of  the  production  of  feeling  must  be  better 
understood.  It  is  thought  that  feeling  so  exists  in  men  that  one  has  but  to  wish 
for  it,  long  for  it,  pray  for  it,  try  for  it,  to  have  it  come.  No  person  trying  on  any 
other  side  of  the  mind  would  ever  come  to  such  a  conclusion.  Try  it  with  caution, 
or  mirthfulness.  Would  they  come  at  demand  ?  The  causes  which  produce 
feeling  are  various.  There  are  certain  ideas  or  elemental  truths  which  produce 
the  sense  of  awe  :  there  are  others  that  produce  the  sense  of  faith ;  others  that 
produce  love,  or  joy,  or  sorrow,  or  remorse.  Whoever  wants  a  given  feeling  must 
understand  what  are  the  truths  which  stand  connected  with  its  production.  Take 
also  into  consideration  the  law  of  continuity  of  feeling  in  men.  Feeling,  when 
it  becomes  continuous,  is  insanity.  Emotions  never  run  in  channels.  They 
are  always  changing.  They  rise  and  fall.  If  one  observes  a  wholesome  mind, 
he  will  find  that  there  are  scores  of  feelings  which  alternate,  first  one  being  in  the 
ascendency  and  then  another.  The  on-going  of  the  impulses  of  a  wholesome 
mind  is  like  the  progress  of  a  time.  Nothing  is  worse  for  a  person  than  to  attempt 
all  the  time  to  have  just  one  state  of  mind,  because  he  thinks  that  to  be  a  Christian 
is  to  have  God  in  one's  thoughts  all  the  while.  You  cannot  do  it,  and  you 
ought  not  to  try  to  do  it.  It  is  unnatural.  There  is  a  law  of  the  inspiration  of 
distinctively  moral  feeling.  There  is  an  impression  that  religious  feeling  is  the 
direct  product  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  It  may  be,  as  harvests  are  the  product  of 
the  sun ;  but  the  sun  works  differently  on  different  growths.  Now,  the  moral 
or  spiritual  part  of  a  human  being,  that  part  which  makes  him  a  man,  not  an 
animal,  comes  from  God.  It  is  universal  mind,  moving  in  universal  space,  that 
gives  us  vitality,  and  inspires  our  reason  and  moral  emotions  in  all  their  variations. 
A  true  moral  feeling  is  an  inspiration  of  God ;  but  it  is  an  inspiration  which  acts 
differently  in  different  persons.  There  is  one  class  of  men  whose  emotions 
distinctly  run  to  ideas.     All  men's  emotions  follow  reason.     But  there  are  som» 


CHAP.  VL]  ROSEA.  117 

men  who  have  no  distinct  conceptions  of  moral  emotion  except  those  which 
evolve  ideas — that  is,  differentiated  truths,  or  a  series  of  propositions.  As,  for 
instance,  John  Calvin.  The  beauty-loving  element  has  power  to  open  the  door 
of  the  soul,  and  produce  profound  moral  emotions.  There  are  those  whose  moral 
feelings  are  largely  dependent  on  the  imagination.  Two  elements  constitute 
the  whole  revelation  of  God,  fact  and  fiction.  The  imagination,  working  with 
the  reason,  constitutes  faith,  generically  considered.  Every  man  should  have 
a  susceptibility  of  moral  emotion  through  the  imaginative  element.  How  can 
any  man  read  the  Apocalypse  of  John,  and  appreciate  it  without  imagination  ? 
There  are  different  modes  of  reaching  man's  interior  natures.  It  is  ignorance 
or  neglect  of  the  laws  of  feeling  that  makes  so  much  trouble  with  persons  in  their 
religious  experience.  There  are  many  who  think  that  if  they  are  to  have  true 
moral  feelings  they  must  have  them  in  a  particular  way ;  whereas  true  moral 
feelings  come  in  an  infinite  number  of  ways.  One  hindrance  to  the  development 
of  moral  feeling  and  to  its  continuous  flow,  in  so  far  as  continuity  of  moral  feeling 
is  practicable,  is  found  in  the  law  of  discord  of  the  force  of  malign  feelings  in 
changing  the  current  and  nature  of  a  man's  emotions.  In  the  human  soul,  which 
is  the  most  exquisite  of  aU  orchestras,  you  may  have  mirth,  reason,  wit,  and 
humour,  veneration,  hope,  faith,  and  they  help  each  other,  and  are  naturally 
harmonious,  and  cannot  of  themselves  make  discord.  But  when  a  man  is  in  that 
peaceful  and  joyous  state  of  mind  which  it  is  the  nature  of  these  combined  elements 
to  induce,  let  one  single  malign  feeling  strike  in  among  them,  and  it  will  put  them 
out  of  concord,  and  strike  a  line  of  discord  through  them.  {H.  Ward  Beecher.) 
Transieni  devotions  : — The  Chvurch  hath  seldom  seen  happier  days  than  those 
described  in  Exod.  xix.  God  had  never  diffused  His  benedictions  on  a  people 
in  a  richer  abundance.  Never  had  a  people  gratitude  more  lively,  piety  more 
fervent.  But  this  devotion  had  one  great  defect,  it  lasted  only  forty  days. 
God  had  to  say,  "  They  have  quickly  turned  aside."  Some  divines  regard  the 
text  as  prophetical.  In  their  opinion  the  goodness  mentioned  in  the  text  is  the 
mercy  of  God  displayed  in  the  Gospel.  The  dew  signifies  Jesus  Christ.  The 
morning  dew  intends  the  covenant  of  grace.  We,  however,  regard  a  goodness 
like  the  morning  dew  as  a  seeming  piety,  which  goeth  away,  is  of  short  duration, 
and  all  the  words  of  the  text  are  a  reproof  from  God  to  His  people  for  the  unsteadi- 
ness of  their  devotions.  I.  The  natxjke  of  the  piety  in  question.  We  are 
not  to  understand  by  it  those  deceitful  appearances  of  hypocrites  who  conceal 
their  profane  and  iiTcligious  hearts  under  the  cover  of  ardour  and  religion  ;  or  the 
disposition  of  those  Christians  who  fall  through  their  own  frailty  from  high  degrees 
of  pious  zeal,  and  experience  emotions  of  sin  after  they  have  felt  exercises  of 
grace.  Hypocrisy  caimot  suspend  the  strokes  of  Divine  justice  one  single  moment, 
and  it  is  more  likely  to  inflame  than  to  extinguish  the  righteous  indignation 
of  God.  The  piety  we  speak  of  lies  between  these  two  dispositions.  It  is  sincere, 
but  it  is  unfruitful,  and  in  that  respect  it  is  inferior  to  the  piety  of  the  weak  and 
revolting  Christian.  It  is  sufiBcient  to  discover  sin,  but  not  to  correct  it : 
sufficient  to  produce  sincere  resolutions,  but  not  to  keep  them  :  it  softens  the 
heart,  but  it  doth  not  renew  it ;  it  excites  grief,  but  it  doth  not  eradicate  evil 
dispositions.     It  is  a  piety  of  times,  opportunities,  and  circumstances.     1.   By 

Eiety,  like  the  early  dew  that  goeth  away,  we  mean  that  which  is  usually  excited 
y  public  calamities.  2.  In  the  second  class  of  transient  devotions  we  place 
that  which  religious  solemnities  produce.  3.  That  which  is  excited  by  the  fear 
of  death,  and  which  vanishes  as  soon  as  the  fear  subsides.  The  most  emphatical, 
the  most  urgent,  and  the  most  pathetical  of  all  preachers  is  death.  II.  The 
INSUFFICIENCY  OF  THIS  KIND  OF  DEVOTION.  1.  In  the  text  is  an  argument  of 
sentiment  and  love.  God  represents  Himself  here  under  the  image  of  a  prince 
who  had  formed  an  intimate  connection  with  one  of  his  subjects.  And  the 
subject  seems  deeply  sensible  of  the  honom*  done  him,  but  proves  faithless. 
Equivocal  reformations,  appearances  of  esteem,  are  much  more  cruel  than  total 
ingratitude  and  open  avowed  hatred.  2.  Consider  the  injustice  of  these  devotions. 
Though  they  are  vain,  yet  people  expect  God  to  reward  them.  Though  men's 
complaints  of  God's  not  rewarding  were  unjust,  yet  God  sometimes  paid  attention 
to  them ;  for  though  He  sees  the  bottom  of  men's  hearts,  and  distinguishes  reaj 
from  apparent  piety,  yet  He  hath  so  much  love  for  repentance  that  He  sometimes 
rewards  the  bare  appearance  of  it,  as  in  the  case  of  Ahab.  The  Jews  knew  this 
condescension  of  God,  and  they  insulted  it  in  the  most  odious  manner.  3.  There 
is  a  manifest  contradiction  between  these  two  periods  of  life,  between  that  of 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

our  devotion,  and  that  of  our  sin.  A  reasonable  man  acting  consistently  ought 
to  choose  either  to  have  no  periods  of  devotion,  or  to  perpetuate  them.  There 
is  a  palpable  danger  in  having  both  these  dispositions.  4.  Every  part  of  devotion 
supposes  some  action  of  life,  so  that  if  there  be  no  such  action  the  whole  value 
of  devotion  ceases.  5.  Transient  devotions  are  inconsistent  with  the  general 
design  of  religion.  This  design  is  to  reform  man,  to  renew  him,  to  transform 
him  into  the  likeness  of  glorified  saints,  to  render  him  like  God.  But  how  does  a 
rapid  torrent  of  devotion  attended  with  no  moral  rectitude  contribute  to  this 
end  ?  6.  Transient  devotions  must  render  promises  of  grace  to  you  doubtful, 
even  suppose  you  should  ever,  after  a  thousand  revolutions  of  transient  piety, 
be  in  possession  of  true  and  real  religion.  7.  Consider  the  imprudence  of  a  man 
who  divides  his  life  in  this  manner  into  periods  of  devotion  and  periods  of  sin, 
A  heart  divided  in  this  manner  cannot  be  happy.  And  the  state  of  suspension 
which  God  assumes  in  the  text  cannot  last  long.  (James  Saurin.)  The 
condition  of  man  as  a  wreck  : — I.  Man  is  a  wreck.  The  picture  which  this 
book  gives  us  of  the  Jewish  people  is  truly  a  hideous  and  lamentable  one.  Sin 
rolls  its  warm,  sparkling,  but  poisonous  current  through  the  veins  of  all.  Man 
everywhere  is  a  moral  ruin.  Physically,  intellectually,  and  morally  man  is  a 
wreck.  He  is  at  war  with  himself,  at  war  with  the  universe,  at  war  with  God. 
But  God  is  earnest  about  man  in  this  condition.  He  appeals  in  the  most  tender 
and  moving  strains  of  love  and  mercy.  II.  Man,  though  a  wreck,  is  an  object 
OF  importance.  Nothing  impresses  so  much  the  importance  of  man  as  the 
interest  which  the  great  God  seems  to  take  in  him — the  earnestness  which  He 
displays  for  his  recovery.  A  great  mind  is  never  earnest  about  an  unimportant 
object.  Little  minds  grow  enthusiastic  about  small  matters.  There  is  a  strange 
power  in  suffering  to  heighten  affection.  As  is  seen  in  homes  in  times  of  sickness. 
III.  Man,  though  a  wreck,  is  capable  of  restoration.  Three  things  show 
this.  1.  The  condition  of  man  in  this  world.  2.  The  deep  aspiration  of  humanity. 
3.  The  extraordinary  means  that  are  provided  for  man's  restoration.  IV.  Man, 
THOUGH  A  WRECK,  EXERTS  A  FEARFUL  POWER.  Why  did  all  God's  Operations 
fail  ?  On  account  of  man's  power,  even  in  his  wrecked  condition,  to  resist. 
Man  counteracts  the  moral  influence  of  natvire  and  the  tendency  of  providence  :  he 
even  resists  the  appeals  of  the  Gospel  and  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit.  {Homilist. ) 
Occasional  impressions  : — How  little  practical  influence  do  the  Divine  claims 
possess  on  the  hearts  and  conduct  of  men  !  There  are  some  who,  if  visited  by 
occasional  impression,  and  if  apparently  aroused  to  a  sense  of  their  high  obligations, 
yet  fall  back  again  to  perverted  habits  as  the  natural  element  of  life.  To  such 
as  these  Hosea  wrote.  I.  The  nature  and  exciting  circumstances  of  thb 
DISPOSITION  alleged.  The  images  employed  are  emblems  of  brevity  and 
evanescence.  The  morning  cloud  is  soon  dispersed,  and  the  early  dew  soon 
evaporates  before  the  sunbeam.  It  aflfirms  that  the  persons  indicated  had  been 
the  subjects  of  certain  emotions  towards  God  and  His  will,  which  appeared  to 
be  right  and  good,  but  which  proved  transitory  and  unsubstantial,  and  soon  gave 
way  altogether  to  returning  habits  of  transgression  and  rebellion.  There  may 
often  be  the  plausible  semblance  of  regeneration  without  the  vivifying  reality. 
Here  in  the  text  is  a  disposition  which  effects  no  mental  renovation,  and  takes 
no  established  hold — a  mere  inflamed  excitement,  subject  at  once  to  removal 
on  the  rise  of  new  suggestions,  expiring  with  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  agitating 
and  subsiding,  promising  and  disappointing,  springing  and  withering.  1.  This 
disposition  may  be  excited  by  remarkable  interferences  of  the  providence  of 
God.  Public  and  national  providences  have  given  rise,  not  seldom,  to  what  has 
thus  appeared  as  the  spirit  of  religion.  As  in  the  times  of  the  Israelite  Judges. 
Times  of  prosperity  and  calamity  have  similar  results  in  individuals.  2.  By  the 
presence  of  sickness  and  imagined  approach  of  death.  These  are  evidently 
calculated  to  lead  to  serious  consideration  on  the  interests  of  the  soul.  But  too 
often  the  zeal  keeps  time  with  the  disease  ;  the  recovery  of  health  proves  to  be 
the  resurrection  of  sins.  3.  By  the  statements  and  appeals  of  Divine  truth.  Under 
the  preaching  of  the  Word,  the  emotions  of  many  prove  transitory  and  ineffective. 
II.  The  effects  of  that  disposition  on  the  interests  of  those  who  are  thb 
SUBJECTS  of  it.  1.  It  assists  to  render  the  mind  insensible  to  religion.  The 
susceptibility  is  exhausted  and  deadened,  and  will  no  longer  answer  to  what 
awakened  it  before.  Persons  whose  impressions  have  gone  away,  cherish  an 
absolute  hatred  of  the  memory  of  those  impressions,  and  of  the  circumstances 
that  inspired  them.     2.  It  exposes  to  the  signal  retribution  of  future  punishment. 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSE  A.  119 

To  the  accusation  of  the  text  are  annexed  threatenings  of  tremendous  evils  as 
consequent  on  the  crime.     The  judicial  result,  arising  from  the  previous  trans- 
gressions, is  at  once  stated.     (James  Parsons.)        Emotion  in  the  religious  life: — 
No  two  figures  could  have  been  selected,  either  for  delicacy  or  for  beauty,  to 
represent  the  religious  feelings  better  than  these — the  beauty  of  the  cloud,  its 
promise  and  its   quick  departure  ;   and  the   beauty  of  the  jewelled   morning, 
that  excites  admiration  everywhere,  and  the  speedy  emptying  of  its  beauty. 
So  is  it,  so  it  has  been,  and  so  it  will  be  with  religious  feeling  that  rises  easily, 
that  promises  everything  that  is  ecstatic  and  that  is  fugitive,  going  as  do  tho 
clouds  and  the  dew.     One  of  the  most  important  things  to  know  to-day  is  the 
genesis  of  the  feelings.     The  ignorance  of  men  as  to  the  laws  and  uses  of  feeling, 
and  as  to  the  means  of  producing,  regulating,  and  retaining  it,  is  monumental. 
All  action  proceeds  from  emotion,  which  is  a  reservoir  of  forces.     Men  seem  to 
act  from  thinking ;  but  thinking  is  altogether  subordinate  and  auxiliary  to  feeling. 
That  which  makes  a  man  act,  that  which  sets  him  forward  in  research,  enterprise, 
effort,  is  either  open  or  latent  emotion.     You  cannot  produce  a  sound  and  large 
religious  character,  you  cannot  produce  any  change  in  the  right  direction  without 
feeling.     Susceptibility  to  emotion  is,  in  its  largest  view,  susceptibility  to  develop- 
ment in  any  direction.     How  much  emotion  does  a  person  want  ?     Enough  to 
bring  him  into  a  condition  of  action.     More  than  that.     Enough  to  make  him  a 
little  more  alert,  and  to  make  his  work  easier.     People  who  want  intense  emotion 
are  not  wise.     It  is  creditable  to  persons  to  enter  upon  high  Christian  life  without 
having  had  very  deep  experiences  of  feeling  or  emotion.     Another  mistake  in 
regard  to  feeling  is  the  temptation  to  make  it  continuous.     It  is  contrary  to  nature. 
Persons  often  reproach  themselves  for  losing  their  feeling  when  they  ought  to 
lose  it.     We  are  not  constituted  so  that  we  can  bear  continuous  emotion  long 
in  a  single  line.     Then  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  alternation  of  feeling.     And 
alternation  is  desirable,  for  alternation  is  rest.     Religious  feelings  exhausted 
by  continued  religious  considerations  are  restored  by  the  administration  of  social 
and  secular  things.     Often  the  things  which  men  avoid  seriously  and  urgently 
are  the  very  things  which  are  necessary  for  them.     The  production  of  feeling  is 
a  matter  very  little  understood.     Buoyancy  is  a  term  by  which  we  mean  that 
kind  of  general  animal  emotion  which  is  the  result  of  high  life-feeling  such  as 
children  and  all  young  animals  show.     It  is  a  purely  bodily  quality.     It  must 
not  be  confounded  with  emotion.     Quickness  of  susceptibility  is  a  sign,  not  of 
deep  emotion,  but  of  temperament.     By  temperament  several  things  are  meant. 
Emotion  proper  results  from  the  action  on  the  feelings  of  some  form  of  intellectual 
presentation.     That  is  the  general  law.     Is  there  any  law,  any  principle,  any 
direction  that  a  man  can  give  or  take,  by  which  one  can  facilitate  the  production 
of  any  feeling  that  he  wants  ?     Deep  religious  feeling  is  not  a  matter  of  chance  ; 
it  is  a  matter  of  cultivation,  as  definite  as  cultivation  in  a  field  or  garden  of  plants  ; 
and  just  as  definite  as  cultivation  in  schools.     {H.  Ward  Beecher.)        Instability 
of  character  : — No  valuable  attainment  is  to  be  made  without  industry ;  and  no 
industry  is  effectual  but  that  which  has  the  character  of  perseverance.     Yet 
there  is  an  impression  almost  imiversal,  that  spiritual  blessings  are  to  visit  us 
unsolicited  by  our  patient  exertion  ;  that,  at  all  events,  an  occasional  sensibility 
of  feeling,  and  transient  purposes  of  amendment  will  conduct  us  to  all  that  is 
requisite  for  the  life  to  come.     Reflection  might  teach  us  the  probability  of  there 
being  an  analogy  between  the  requirement  made  upon  us  for  the  earthly,  and 
that  which  is  necessary  for  the  heavenly  attainments.     Self-examination  might 
show  us  how  very  foreign  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things  is  to  the  darkness 
within  our  souls  ;  how  opposed  the  practice  of  what  is  righteous  to  the  corruption 
which  reigns  there.     Scripture  would  affix  its  authoritative  seal  on  all  which 
reflection  and  self -inquiry  suggest.     How  unstable  was  the  nation  of  Israel  ! 
What  other  means  could  Divine  wisdom  invent  to  give  to  their  repentance  a 
fixed,  a  lasting,  an  effective  character  ?     Mercies  and  judgments  had  been  tried 
again  and  again.     God  speaks  in  the  text  as  a  man  would  speak  with  respect 
to  persons  with  whom  he  had  used  every  means  of  improvement,  and  used  them 
in  vain.     The  case  before  us  is  an  exhibition  of  our  own  character  and  danger. 
It  is  the  prototype  of  a  large  class  among  ourselves.     Who  have  begun,  but  whose 
goodness  has  been  like  the  morning  cloud  which  flees  before  the  approaching 
sun,  or  as  the  early  dew  soon  caught  up  by  his  scorching  heat.     Those  who  so 
lately  tiu^ied  from  sin  to  repentance,  turn  back  again  from  repentance  to  sin. 
What  are  the  causes  of  this  short-lived  goodness ;   the  causes  which  lead  to 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

the  relapse  into  evil  ?  Great  deliverances — blessings  from  God  of  an  unusual 
importance — may  produce  a  temporary  relaxation  of  wickedness  or  worldliness. 
This  effect  is  also  seen  to  arise  from  trouble.  There  are  few  who  have  not  been 
led  by  sorrow  and  disappointment  to  make  what  has  proved  in  the  result  an 
abortive  struggle.  Another  frequent  cause  of  temporary  heats  of  religion  is 
discovered  in  the  power  of  conviction.  Appeal  to  men  is  continually  made  by 
the  Word  of  God,  by  His  ministers,  by  His  providence.  The  only  surprise  is 
that  such  impressions,  grounded  in  truth,  should  not  conduct  the  soul  further  ; 
and  that  there  is  any  point  within  the  line  which  divides  insincerity  and  sincerity 
at  which  it  should  stop.  The  solution  is  found  in  the  state  of  the  heart ;  there 
is,  in  truth,  no  principle  to  lead  it  onward  to  the  true  Christian  character.  The 
nature  of  religion  has  not  been  considered ;  its  motives  have  not  been  weighed ; 
its  difficulties  have  not  been  calculated.  No  wonder  that  animal  indulgence, 
the  temptations  of  the  world,  and  the  persuasions  and  influence  of  others  make 
it  difficult  for  a  pliable  mind  to  act  independently.  (T.  Kennion,  M.A.)  The 
instability  of  human  goodness : — Ephraim  and  Judah  were  made  better  neither 
by  promises  nor  threatenings,  so  that  their  case  was  very  hopeless,  and  nothing 
seemed  to  remain  but  that  the  Lord  should  leave  them.  In  the  text  we  have 
that  which  made  their  case  so  hopeless.  They  had  at  timea  some  goodness — 
Hebrew,  "kindness."  They  had  at  times  some  kindness  for  God  and  His  way, 
some  warmth  of  affections  towards  good.  It  was  but  sometimes.  Their  goodness 
was  passing  goodness.  This  instability  is  held  forth  by  the  similitude — 1.  Of  a 
morning  cloud;  2.  Of  the  early  dew.  Such  is  the  instability  of  many  in 
the  good  way  of  the  Lord,  that  the  goodness  at  which  they  sometimes  arrive 
passeth  away  as  a  morning  cloud  and  as  the  early  dew.  I.  In  what  eespbcts 
DOES  THIS  LIKENESS  HOLD  GOOD  ?  The  gooduess  of  the  saints  cannot  pass 
away  totally  or  finally.  But  even  the  saints  may  lose  much  of  the  degrees  of 
grace.  1.  Men's  goodness  often  goes  away  very  quickly  as  the  morning  cloud 
which  appears  only  a  very  short  while.  Goodness  of  fellowship  with  Christ  often 
fades  quickly  away.  Goodness  often  passes  quickly  away  after  deliverance  from 
trouble.  2.  Men's  goodness  ordinarily  goes  away  by  degrees,  almost  imperceptibly. 
Carnal  secmrity  creeps  leismrely  on  men,  until  by  it  they  are  taken  off  their  feet. 
When  temptation  comes,  man's  goodness  is  often  amissing.  Much  goodness 
passes  away  in  a  time  of  persecution  for  the  Gospel.  And  much  when  we  are 
called  to  duty.  II.  Reasons  why  the  goodness  of  many  thus  passes  away. 
1.  Many,  for  all  their  goodness,  have  not  the  living  Spirit  of  Christ  dwelling  in 
them.  2.  Because  the  souls  of  many  do  not  unite  with  Christ,  who  is  the  only 
head  of  influence.  3.  Because,  with  many,  religion  is  not  their  proper  element. 
It  is  a  forced  matter  with  them  that  they  have  any  at  all.  Self-love  is  their 
highest  principle.  They  have  no  real  love  to  the  Lord,  nor  does  the  intrinsic 
beauty  of  holiness  recommend  it  to  them.  4.  Because  they  have  no  spirit  for 
difficulties  and  disappointments.  They  go  forward  cheerfully  while  things  are 
laid  to  their  hand  ;  but  disappointments  take  heart  and  hand  from  them,  and 
they  are  knocked  in  the  head.  5.  Because  of  the  entertaining  of  unmortified 
Justs,  which,  like  suckers,  draw  the  sap  from  the  tree.  6.  Because  the  profits 
.and  pleasiures  of  the  world  soon  charm  away  men's  goodness.  7.  Because  of 
.unwatchfulness  over  the  heart  and  life.  I  would  exhort  you,  then,  that  have 
;attained  to  anything  of  goodness  or  kindness  to  the  Lord  in  His  way,  that  you 
•would  set  yourselves  to  hold  it  fast.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  impressions  of 
■natural  men  are  fading  : — In  these  words  God  complains  that  He  did  not  know 
what  to  do  with  Israel,  their  impressions  were  so  fading.  I.  The  fact  that 
THE  impressions  OF  NATURAL  MEN  FADE  AWAY.  1.  Prove  the  fact  from  Scripture. 
Take  the  case  of  Lot's  wife.  Or  Israel  at  the  Red  Sea.  Or  the  young  man 
■who  came  ruiming  to  Jesus.  Or  Felix.  Or  King  Agrippa.  2.  Prove  the  fact 
from  experience.  (1)  Many  have  had  a  time  of  awakening  in  childhood.  (2)  Or 
at  their  first  communion.  (3)  Or  in  a  first  time  of  serious  sickness.  (4)  Or  when 
there  has  come  a  first  death  in  the  family.  (5)  Or  in  some  season  of  religious 
awakening.  3.  Show  the  steps  of  impressions  fading  away.  (1)  Prayer  gradually 
given  up.  (2)  Hearing  the  Word  neglected.  (3)  Failing  to  seek  counsel  and  help 
of  ministers.  II.  Reasons  why  the  natubal  impressions  of  men  die  away. 
1.  They  never  are  brought  to  feel  truly  lost.  The  wounds  of  natural  men  are 
generally  skin  deep.  They  may  be  brought  to  say,  "  I  am  a  great  sinner  "  ; 
but  they  are  not  brought  to  feel  undone.  2.  They  never  saw  the  beauty  of 
Christ.     A  flash  of  terror  will  bring  a  man  to  his  knees,  but  will  not  bring  him  to 


CHAP.  VI.]  H08EA.  121 

Christ,     Love  only  will  draw.     A  natural  man,  under  concern,  sees  no  beauty 
nor  desirableness  in  Christ.     3.  He  never  had  heart-hatred  of  sin.     The  impres- 
sions of  natural  men  are  generally  of  terror.     They  feel  the  danger  of  sin,  not  the 
filthiness  of  it.     4.  They  have  no  promises  to  keep  their  impressions.     Natural 
men  have  no  interest  in  the  promises,  and  so,  in  the  time  of  temptation,  their 
anxieties  easily  wear  away.     III.  The  sadness  of  theib  case.     1.  God  mourns 
over  their  case.     It  must  be  a  truly  sad  case  that  God  mourns  over.     2.  God 
has  no  new  method  of  awakening.     He  speaks  as  even  at  a  loss  what  to  do,  to 
show  you  that  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins.     3.  No  good  by  your 
past  impressions.     When  the  cloud  is  dried  up  off  the  mountain's  brow,  and  the 
dew  off  the  rock,  the  mountain  is  as  great  as  before,  and  the  rock  as  hard  ;  but 
when  convictions  fade  away  from  the  heart  of  the  natural  man,  they  leave  the 
mountain  of  his  sins  much  greater,  and  his  rocky  heart  much  harder.     It  is  less 
likely  that  such  a  man  will  ever  be  saved.     Application.     1.  You  are  now  older, 
and  every  day  less  likely  to  be  saved.     2.  You  have  offended  the  Spirit.     You 
have  missed  yoiur  opportunity.     Convictions  are  not  in  your   power.     3.  You 
have  got  into  the  way  of  putting  aside  convictions.     4.  When  you  come  to  hell 
you  will  wish  you  never  had  convictions,  they  wiu  make  your  pimishment  so 
much  the  greater.     Entreat  all  who  now  have  any  impressions  not  to  let  them 
Blip.     It  is  a  great  mercy  to  live  under  a  Gospel  ministry  ;  still  greater  to  live  in 
a  time  of  revival ;  still  greater  to  have  God  pouring  the  Spirit  into  your  heart, 
awakening  your   soul.      Do  not  neglect   it.     {R.   M.  M^Cheyne.)        Transient 
impressions  : — How  is  the  too  common  disappearance  of  hopeful  impressions  to 
be  accounted  for  ?     The  great  reason  no  doubt  is  that  the  heart  has  never  been 
truly  reached.     But  that  is  itself  an  effect  produced  by  other  causea  which  need 
to  be  sought  after.     The  causes  which  tend  to  make  religious  impressions  evan- 
escent may  be  classified  under  three  heads.     I.  Those  which  abb  speculative 
IN  THEEB  NATURE.     When  the  conscience  is  awakened  the  soul  takes  refuge  in 
perplexing  difficulties,  which  revelation  leaves  unsolved.     But  such  difficulties 
should  never  be  allowed  to  keep  us  from  religious  decision.     I.  The  existence 
of  diflBculties  is  inseparable  from  any  revelation  which  is  short  of  infinite.     All 
perplexities  arise  from  imperfect  knowledge.     2.   The  difficulties  in  revelation 
are  of  the  same  sort,  so  far  at  least  as  they  touch  conduct,  as  those  which  we 
meet  in  God's  daily  providence.     3.  DiflBculties  in  regard  to  things  of  which  we 
are  in  doubt  ought  not  to  prevent  us  from  performing  duties  that  are  perfectly 
plain.     Whatever  a  man  may  be  perplexed  about,  he  knows  full  well  that  it  is 
wrong  to  commit  sin.     Some  however  find  perplexities  of  another  kind.     They 
are  bewildered  by  the  questions  raised  by  modern  discoveries.     It  is  important 
for  such  persons  to  keep  this  principle  in  mind — truth  already  ascertained  on 
its  own  appropriate  evidence  is  not  the  less  true  because  there  are  added  to  it 
some  important  truths  in  another  department  of  human  inquiry.     We  welcome 
truth  from  all  quarters,  for  truth  is  near  of  kin  to  Him  who  sits  upon  the  eternal 
throne.     II.  Those  causes  which  ake  practical.     1.  Some  are  hindered  from 
yielding  to  the  promptings  of  their  better  nature  by  fear  of  opposition.     2.  Others 
by  the  influence  of  evil  associations.      3.  Another  hindrance   is  the  fettering 
influence  of  some  pernicious  habit.     III.  Causes  connected  with  the  conduct 
OF  professing  Christians.     The  seriousness  produced  by  some  searching  dis- 
course is  often  wiped  out  by  the  thoughtless,  flippant  remarks  of  a  so-called 
Christian  on  the  way  home  from  Church.     Or  it  may  be  that  in  time  of  trouble 
professing  Christians  prove  indifferent  and  neglectful.     But  the  inconsistency 
of  others  cannot  excuse  us.     And,  moreover,  we  know  well  that  all  Christians 
are  not  like  those  we  have  to  condemn.     Remember  the  consistent  ones,  and  do 
not  dwell  exclusively  on  the  inconsistent.     (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        Goodness 
like  a  morning  cloud  : — I.  Portray  the  character  indicated.     1.  Unfruitful 
hearers.     Such  feel  a  pleasure  in  attending  the  ministry  of  the  Word  ;  the  passions 
are  affected,  the  understanding  is  enlightened,  and  they  form  purposes  for  amend- 
ment of  life,  but  the  impression  is  momentary  ;  there  is  no  decision  of  character. 
2.  Transient  reformers.     Those  who  xmder  providential  visitations  have  deter- 
mined to  amend  their  ways  and  live  to  God,  but  afterwards  have  relapsed  into 
sin.     3.  Inconstant  professors.     Such  go  farther  than  the  former  :  for  a  season 
they  make  a  public  profession  of  religion,  and  attend  regularly  the  ordinances 
of  God's  house ;  but  through  unwatchfulness  and  a  neglect  of  Christian  exercises 
their  piety  degenerates,  their  affections  become  cold,  and  at  last  they  abandon 
religion  altogether.     II.   Their  sin  and  danger.     1.   Unwatchfulness.     They 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

were  cautioned,  warned,  and  admonished  ;  but  instead  of  guarding  the  avenues 
of  the  soul,  they  were  heedless  and  trifling.  2.  Unfaithfulness.  Had  they 
walked  in  the  light,  their  path  would  have  been  that  of  the  just  (Prov.  iv.  18). 
3,  Ingratitude.  They  have  had  signal  displays  of  the  Divine  beneficence.  The 
returns  they  make  are  blasphemy  instead  of  praises ;  pride,  instead  of  humility ; 
sin,  instead  of  holiness;  hatred,  instead  of  love.  4.  Rebellion.  God  has  been 
striving  with  them  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Yet  their  lives  have  been  marked  with 
instability  and  indecision.  Such  has  been  their  sin  and  such  the  mercy  of  God. 
But  the  day  of  vengeance  is  at  hand.  And  their  state  is  awful  beyond  descrip- 
tion. {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons. )  Evanescence  of  the  early  dew  : — 
By  the  word  of  the  prophet  Hosea,  the  Divine  reproach  fell  on  Ephraim  and  on 
Judah,  that  their  goodness  was  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  that  as  the  early  dew  it 
passed  away.  Bright  was  the  promise  of  the  innocent  dawn,  but  the  promise 
was  unfulfilled.  Mr.  Kingsley,  in  a  touching  reflection — literally  reflection, 
looking  back  on  the  "  long  lost  might-have-been,"  adverts  to  that  personal 
idea  which  every  soul  brings  with  it  into  the  world,  which  shines  dim  and  potential 
in  the  face  of  every  sleeping  babe,  before  it  has  been  scarred,  and  distorted,  and 
encrusted  in  the  long  tragedy  of  life.  Dr.  Caird  has  said  of  the  bu-thday  of  the 
worst  of  men,  that  although  it  ushered  a  new  agent  of  evil  into  existence,  and 
was  a  day  fraught  with  more  disasters  to  the  world  than  the  day  in  which  the 
pestilence  began  to  creep  over  the  nations,  or  the  blight  to  fasten  on  the  food 
of  man,  or  any  other  physical  evil  to  enter  on  a  career  of  world-wide  devastation, — 
yet  might  this  day,  when  the  vilest  of  humanity  first  saw  the  light,  be  in  some 
aspects  of  it  regarded  as  better  (despite  Solomon's  text)  than  the  day  of  his  death. 
"  For,  to  take  only  one  view  of  it,  when  life  commenced,  the  problem  of  good 
or  evil,  to  which  death  has  brought  so  terrible  a  solution,  was,  in  his  case,  aa 
yet  unsolved.  The  page  of  human  history  which  he  was  to  write  was  as  yet 
unwritten,  and  to  that  day  belonged,  at  all  events,  the  advantage  of  the  uncer- 
tainty whether  it  was  to  be  blurred  and  blotted,  or  written  fair  and  clean." 
Life,  even  in  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances,  it  is  urged,  has  ever  some 
faint  gleams  of  hope  to  brighten  its  outset.  The  preacher  owns  that  the  sim- 
plicity, the  tenderness,  the  unconscious  refinement  that  more  or  less  characterise 
infancy,  even  among  the  lowest  and  rudest,  soon  indeed  pass  away,  and  give 
place  to  the  coarseness  of  an  unideal,  if  not  the  animal  repulsiveness  of  a  sensual 
or  sinful  life.  But  he  insists  that  at  least  at  the  beginning,  for  a  little  while, 
there  is  something  in  the  seeming  innocency,  the  brightness,  the  unworldliness, 
the  unworn  freshness  of  childhood,  that  gives  hope  room  to  work.  Is  there  not, 
he  asks,  for  every  child,  not  in  the  dreams  of  parental  fondness  only,  but  in  reality, 
and  in  God's  idea,  the  possibility  of  a  noble  future  ?  "  The  history  of  each  new- 
born soul  is  surely  in  God's  plan  and  intention  a  bright  and  blessed  one.  For 
the  vilest  miscreant  that  was  ever  hounded  out  of  life  in  dishonour  and  wretched- 
ness, there  was,  in  the  mind  of  the  All-good,  a  Divine  ideal,  a  glorious  possibility 
of  excellence,  which  might  have  been  made  a  reality."  The  most  hardened 
ruffian,  the  most  obdurate  criminal,  the  most  impenetrable  reprobate  was  once 
a  child.  Most  of  what  he  has,  the  grown-up  man  is  shewn  to  inherit  from  his 
infant  self,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he  always  enters  upon  the  whole  of  liia 
natural  inheritance.  (Francis  Jacoz,  B.A.)  Religious  declension: — Since 
in  every  age  of  the  Church  the  prophet's  description  of  Ephraim  finds  but  too 
faithful  a  resemblance,  we  must  appropriate  and  apply  to  ourselves  this  affecting 
language.  The  case  before  us  is  that  of  instability  in  religion.  The  prophet's 
lamentation  does  not  regard  those  who  have  fallen  into  known,  deliberate,  and 
grievous  sin.  The  case  before  us  does  not  regard  those  whose  ardoiu:  of  feeling 
is  less  strong  than  it  may  once  have  been.  Feeling  is  no  test  of  principle.  Feel- 
ings and  emotions,  though  they  will  ofttimes  accompany  a  religious  state  of 
heart,  yet  are  not  necessarily  attendant  on  it ;  they  are  often  the  effects  of  mere 
animal  spiiits.  The  prophet  deals  with  the  inconstancy  and  decline  of  those 
who  have  professed  to  know  God,  but  whose  acquaintance  with  Him  has  not 
grown,  but  decayed.  I.  The  character  here  described.  1.  Those  who 
have  had  stron~  convictions.  Their  consciences  have  been  visited  by  the  force 
of  the  most  solemn  and  awakening  appeals  of  God's  Word.  The  arrows  of  the 
Almighty  have  bee  i  lodged,  possibly  very  deeply,  in  the  heart.  2.  These  have 
been  accompanied  by  feelings,  strong  correspondent  feelings.  The  representa- 
tions of  God's  free  and  tender  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus  have  melted  the  soul  into  a 
love  toward  the  Saviour,  and  the  heart  has  prostrated  itself  at  His  footstool. 


CHAP.  VI.]  EOSEA.  123 

3.  And  these  feelings  have  been  followed  by  plans  for  the  honour  of  God.  4.  And 
this  leads  him  to  make  great  sacrifices.  Such  are  some  of  the  fair  appearances, 
the  goodly  blossoms,  which,  in  the  outset  of  life,  or  after  the  first  awakenings 
of  the  soul,  appear  in  the  characters  of  those  who  yet,  alas  !  bring  forth  no  fruit 
to  "perfection."  By  and  by,  the  power,  the  life,  the  unction  is  gone;  there  has 
been  a  worm  at  the  root,  eating  out  the  spirit  and  the  energy  of  the  profession. 
II.  SoMB  OF  THB  CAUSES  07  THIS  DECLENSION.  1.  Ezcessive  ignorance  of  the 
heart.  He  knows  not  of  the  ten  thousand  specious  forms  of  apology  which  his 
heart  is  devising,  and  no  wonder  that  he  is  not  prepared  with  a  resistance. 
2.  Negligence  in  devotion.  Wherever  prayer  is  disused,  or  coldly  performed, 
there  are  the  infallible  symptoms  of  decaying  piety.  3.  Unheeded  afflictions. 
By  trials  and  afflictions  that  check  our  complacent  prosperity,  God  calls  to  some 
one  whose  early  promise  of  excellence  has  disappointed  the  hopes  of  heaven.  He 
seemed,  whilst  the  pressure  of  God's  hand  was  still  felt,  to  have  learned  the  things 
which  belonged  to  his  peace ;  but  the  immediate  force  being  lifted  ofiF,  and  the 
prospect  of  speedily  meeting  God  having  vanished,  he  starts  back ;  the  things 
of  sense  again  dazzle  his  eyes,  stupefy  his  conscience,  and  carry  him  away  captive. 

4.  Seductive  worldly  connection.  Such  alliances  hang  like  a  clog  on  the  soul, 
and  drag  heavily  upon  that  wing  on  which  it  might  otherwise  mount  upwards 
with  renewed  strength  towards  the  centre  of  blessedness.  III.  What  is  God's 
ESTIMATE  OE  THE  CASE  ?  It  is  a  case  which  draws  forth  His  severe  anger.  But 
the  language  of  the  passage  rather  presents  God  as  grieved  at  the  case,  than  in 
wrath.  The  appeal  contains  sharp  rebuke  and  tender  love.  It  says,  thy  case 
carries  reproach  to  thyself,  and  draws  compassion  from  My  heart.  What  means 
this  backward  movement,  when  thou  shouldst  have  moved  forward  ?  {Robert 
Eden,  M.A.)  Fading  impressions: — A  celebrated  preacher  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  in  a  sermon  to  a  crowded  audience,  described  the  terrors  of  the  last 
Judgment  with  such  eloquence,  pathos,  and  force  of  action,  that  some  of  his 
audience  not  only  burst  into  tears,  but  sent  forth  piercing  cries  as  if  the  Judge 
Himself  had  been  present,  and  was  about  to  pass  on  them  their  final  sentence. 
In  the  height  of  this  excitement,  the  preacher  called  upon  them  to  dry  their  tears, 
and  cease  their  cries,  as  he  was  about  to  add  something  still  more  awful  and 
astonishing  than  anything  he  had  yet  brought  before  them.  Silence  being 
obtained,  he,  with  an  agitated  countenance  and  solemn  voice,  addressed  them 
thus  :  "In  one  quarter  of  an  hour  from  this  time,  the  emotions  which  you 
have  just  now  exhibited  will  be  stifled ;  the  remembrance  of  the  fearful  truths 
which  excited  them  will  vanish  ;  you  will  return  to  your  carnal  occupations,  or 
sinful  pleasures,  with  your  usual  avidity,  and  you  will  treat  all  you  have  heard 
as  a  tale  that  is  told."  Trifling  with  impressions  : — This  is  one  of  those  passages 
of  Scripture  in  which  God  seems  to  represent  Himself  as  actually  at  a  loss,  not 
knowing  what  else  could  be  done  to  produce  piety  in  hearts  which  had  heretofore 
resisted  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit.  Yet,  if  you  observe  what  these  particular 
circumstances  were  which  thus  seemed  to  bring  even  Omnipotence  to  a  stand, 
you  will  not  find  them  such  as  might  at  first  sight  have  been  expected  to  produce 
such  a  result.  God  does  not  accuse  Ephraim  and  Judah  of  being  entirely 
unmoved  by  all  the  means  which  He  had  ever  taken  to  move  them.  An  impression 
had  been  made,  but  it  had  not  been  permanent.  It  is  because  the  impression 
proved  only  transient  that  God  represents  Himself  as  at  a  loss — His  resources 
exhausted.  His  purposes  frustrated ;  for  "  your  goodness  is  as  the  morning  cloud, 
and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away."  There  were  some  indications  of  goodness  ; 
some  convictions  of  sin,  some  impressions  of  past  guilt  were  produced.  Resolu- 
tions of  amendment  were  made,  and  partially  carried  into  practice,  but  at  the 
first  impulse  of  temptation  all  these  appearances  vanished,  just  as  the  cloud 
disperses  and  the  dew  exhales  before  the  sun  shining  in  his  strength.  There  can 
hardly  be  a  less  hopeful  condition  than  that  of  a  man  on  whom  a  weak  impression 
has  been  made,  but  on  whom  it  has  not  been  abiding.  I.  The  case  described. 
The  style  of  the  preaching  to  which  men  are  accustomed  to  listen  will  determine, 
in  a  great  degree,  the  peculiar  moral  danger  to  which  they  are  exposed.  Cold 
preaching  is  likely  to  leave  men  in  their  natural  torpor,  and  fervid  preaching  is 
likely  to  communicate  a  warmth  which  may  be  mistaken  for  the  glow  of  spiritual 
life,  but  which,  proceeding  only  from  excited  sensibilities,  and  not  from  a  renewed 
heart,  will  immediately  depart  when  the  stimulating  causes  are  withdrawn.  You 
have  only  to  follow  one  of  the  multitude  who  has  been  thus  excitedly  impressed, 
and  you  will  find  that  no  steps  are  taken  to  deepen  the  impressions.     The  influences 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

of  seasons  of  affliction  are  much  the  same.  It  is  melancholy  and  disheartening 
to  observe  how  rapidly  those  promising  appearances  vanish.  Men  so  often 
virtually  mistake  the  action  of  grief  for  the  action  of  conscience.  This  is  the  case 
conceived  in  the  text.  11.  Why  should  such  a  cask  peoducb  the  stabtlino 
WOBDS  OF  THE  TEXT  ?  If  religious  impressions  have  been  produced  and  then 
erased,  the  heart  must  be  even  harder  than  it  was.  Augustine  says,  "  The 
facility  with  which  we  commit  certain  sins  is  a  pxmishment  for  sins  already  com- 
mitted." It  is  the  property  of  our  nature  that  the  doing  of  a  thing  makes  it 
easier  to  do  it  again.  This  property  of  our  nature  shoiild  teach  us  that  in 
obliterating  serious  impressions  we  make  it  more  difficult  than  ever  that  they 
should  be  reformed.  Then  comes  the  question,  if  we  have  offered  successfm 
resistance  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  will  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit  be  more  intense 
than  before  ?  It  is  on  this  very  point  that  God  represents  Himself  as  putting 
the  question  of  the  text  to  Ephraim  and  Judah.  Observe  in  these  words  of  the 
text  a  pecxiliarity  which  is  very  touching  and  affecting.  God  addresses  Himself 
to  the  very  parties  themselves  whose  goodness  has  vanished  as  the  morning 
cloud  or  early  dew.  He  proposes  what  we  may  call  His  difficulty,  in  the  shape 
of  questions,  as  though  willing  to  be  directed  by  those  with  whom  He  had  striven 
in  vain.  He  makes  them,  as  it  were,  judges  in  the  matter.  What  have  you 
to  answer  to  God  ?  You,  it  seems,  are  found  speechless.  We  will  not  say  that 
your  case  is  beyond  hope,  but  we  will  derive  a  warning  from  the  manifested  peril 
in  which  you  stand.  Take  good  heed  how  you  trifle  with  your  convictions.  Your 
eternity  may  be  dependent  on  your  present  steadfastness.  If  you  crush  your 
present  feelings,  there  is  a  fearful  likelihood  of  your  passing  from  one  degree  of 
moral  hardness  to  another,  until  God  Himself  shall  not  know  what  to  do  for  yova 
conversion.  {Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)  A  threefold  theme: — I.  Divtnte solicitude. 
The  language  implies — 1.  I  have  done  much  for  thee.  2.  I  am  ready  to  do  more. 
3.  I  am  fettered  in  My  actions.  Almightiness  has  restrictions.  It  is  God's  glory 
that  He  will  not  outrage  moral  minds.  II.  Human  perversity.  Men  set  their 
wills  in  hostility  to  God's.  Hence  He  says,  "  What  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  "  I 
can  reverse  the  laws  of  nature,  I  can  break  up  old  universes  and  create  new  ones, 
but  I  cannot  make  beings  whom  I  have  endowed  with  the  power  of  freedom, 
virtuous  and  happy,  contrary  to  their  own  will.  III.  Evanescent  goodness. 
WTiether  the  goodness  refers  exclusively  to  human  kindness,  or  includes  some 
amount  of  pious  sentiment  it  matters  not ;  it  was  so  evanescent  that  it  was  of 
no  worth.  Goodness  is  of  no  worth  to  any  being  until  it  becomes  supreme  and 
permanent.  Thank  God  for  endowing  thee  with  freedom ;  it  is  a  fearful  power. 
It  gives  to  men  a  widely  dififerent  destiny  even  here,  but  a  destiny  in  eternity 
infinitely  more  dissimilar.  {Homilist.)  MarCa  goodness: — Either — 1.  God's 
goodness  towards  them,  or  2.  Their  goodness,  that  is,  their  piety  and  holiness. 
God's  goodness  to  them  was  as  the  morning  cloud,  for  they,  by  their  sin,  had 
driven  away  God's  mercy  and  goodness  from  them,  even  as  the  wind  carriea 
the  dust  before  it.  In  these  words  God  charges  this  people  with  three  things 
whereby  their  hypocrisy  was  expressed.  (1)  Their  vacuity  and  emptiness. 
(2)  Their  falseness  and  dissembling.  (3)  Their  inconstancy  and  fickleness. 
{Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  On  transient  impressions: — Notwithstanding  the 
paralysing  effects  of  sin  upon  the  conscience,  there  are  few  persons,  perhaps, 
living  under  the  light  of  inspiration,  who  have  not,  at  one  time  or  another,  felt 
the  claims  of  heaven  press  upon  them,  and  tasted,  in  some  degree,  the  powers 
of  the  world  to  come.  I.  Impressions  bearing  the  semblance  of  religion, 
and  producinq  effects  which  are  mistaken  for  its  genuine  fruits,  abb 
genebally,  though  by  no  means  uniformly,  attributable  to  extebnal 
CAUSES.  I.  The  influence  of  education,  and  the  force  of  habit  often  induce 
seriousness  of  mind,  and  generate  a  deportment  which  seems  to  harmonise  with 
the  principles  of  the  Gospel.  The  collateral  results  of  consistent  piety  are  very 
many,  and  often  they  are  very  powerful.  But  they  sometimes  end  in  disappoint- 
ment. Under  the  strain  and  temptation  of  life,  the  young  man  from  a  pious 
home  fails  and  falls,  the  shadow  of  religion  vanishes  into  aerial  nothingness. 
2.  Impressions  of  a  similarly  transient  nature  are  often  produced  by  affliction  in 
its  varied  forms.  Such  impressions  are  often,  indeed,  solid  and  permanent.  But 
some  persons  under  affliction  resolve  on  the  godly  life,  and  then  as  the  affliction 
passes  so  does  the  resolve.  God  removes  affliction  from  the  man's  dwelling, 
and  soon  he  himself  banishes  religion  likewise  ;  telling  her,  in  effect,  that  though 
she  may  be  a  good  companion  in  adversity,  she  is  a  gloomy  guest  in  prosperity. 


CHAP.  VI.]  ROSEA.  125 

3.  The  faithful  preachmg  of  the  Gospel,  in  very  many  instances,  generates  impres- 
sions which  ultimately  prce  evanescent.  The  anxious  pastor  beholds  with 
grateful  joy  these  supposed  :ruits  of  his  labours  ;  but  how  deceitful  these  some- 
times prove.  The  flower  is  nipped  by  the  cruel  blast,  and  forthwith  it  droops 
and  fades  away.  II.  Transient  goodness  is  an  essentially  dutbkbnt  THiNa 
FROM  VITAL  RELIGION.  The  two  may  be  more  than  externally  assimilated  to 
each  other.  The  resemblance  may,  indeed,  elude  detection.  The  impressions 
we  are  now  considering  are  essentially  defective  in  reference  to  the  two  great 

Soints  of  sin  and  salvation.  The  professions  of  sin  are  not  drawn  from  the  hidden 
epths  of  self-knowledge  ;  they  do  not  grow  out  of  that  moral  feeling  which  is 
generated  by  an  insight  into  the  holiness  of  God  ;  they  are  not  the  genuine  dis- 
tinctive cry  of  the  broken  and  contrite  heart.  They  respect  danger  rather  than 
degradation.  There  may  be  correct  views  of  Gospel  theory,  they  do  not  arise 
from,  or  connect  themselves  with  a  moral  apprehension  of  the  suitableness  of 
the  remedy  to  the  nature  of  the  disease.  The  goodness  which  is  as  the  morning 
cloud  wants  spirituality  of  perception,  in  regard  to  the  salvation  of  Christ ;  and 
it  wants  that  pure  complacency  which  cements  the  union  of  believers  with  their 
Lord.  Lessons.  1.  The  importance  of  ascertaining  the  true  basis  on  which  our 
religion  rests.  In  voluntary  self-deception  there  is  an  equal  mixture  of  sin  and 
foUy.  2.  What  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  sin  against  conscience.  Backsliding  and 
apostasy  are  different  things.  But  no  person  who  is  actually  sinning  against 
the  remonstrances  of  conscience  can  have  scriptural  evidence  that  he  has  been 
in  a  state  of  grace  at  all :  he  may  rather  draw  the  conclusion  that  he  has  not. 
3.  Consider  the  forbearance  and  tender  compassion  of  Almighty  God  towards 
those  who  have  basely  treated  and  grievously  offended  Him.  God  never  gives 
up  a  sinner  who  is  unwilling  to  give  up  himself.  {W.  Knight,  M.A.)  Goodnesa 
that  will  not  last : — Of  this  their  goodness,  the  prophet  says,  the  character  was 
that  it  never  lasted.  The  morning  cloud  is  full  of  brilliancy  with  the  rays  of  the 
rising  sun,  yet  quickly  disappears  through  the  heat  of  that  sun  which  gave  it 
its  rich  hues.  The  morning  dew  glitters  in  the  same  sun,  yet  vanishes  almost 
as  soon  as  it  appears.  Generated  with  the  cold  of  the  night,  it  appears  with  the 
dawn ;  yet  appears  only  to  disappear.  So  it  was  with  the  whole  Jewish  people  ; 
so  it  ever  is  with  the  most  hopeless  class  of  sinners  ;  ever  beginning  anew ;  ever 
relapsing ;  ever  makic^  a  show  of  leaves,  good  feelings,  good  aspirations,  but 
yielding  no  fruit.  "  There  was  nothing  of  sound,  sincere,  lasting,  real  goodness 
in  them";  no  reality,  but  all  show,  quickly  assumed,  quickly  disused.  (E.  B. 
Pusey,  D.D.)  A  Divine  expostulation : — The  compassion  of  God  towards 
His  fallen  creature  man  is  manifest  in  every  part  of  the  Divine  procedure. 
Amidst  oiu"  numerous  provocations  and  offences  the  Lord  is  continually  bearing 
and  forbearing  with  us.  The  prophet  Hosea  points  out  the  tenderness  and  car© 
of  Divine  goodness  towards  the  fallen  race  of  men.  I.  The  nature  of  thb 
BXPOSTXTLATiGN  RECORDED  IN  THE  TEXT.  Nothing  can  more  effectually  stimulate 
us  to  obedience  than  the  powerful  impulse  of  gratitude.  Whether  we  contemplate 
the  works  of  nature,  providence,  or  grace,  we  find  in  each  a  brilliant  display  of 
the  goodness  of  God.  Our  salvation  from  beginning  to  end  is  wholly  of  grace, 
and  therefore  we  are  bound  by  the  strongest  motives  of  gratitude  to  glorify  God 
by  a  holy  life  and  conversation.  But  what  is  the  report  which  either  experience 
or  observation  must  make  of  our  daily  conduct  ?  If  we  calmly  look  back  on 
our  past  lives,  if  we  enter  into  a  self-examination  of  our  coldness  and  deadness 
in  religion,  of  the  little  fruit  we  produce,  we  cannot  wonder  at  the  affecting  and 
interesting  expostulation  contained  in  the  text.  What  astonishing  condescension 
is  it  that  God  should  thus  graciously  reason  with  His  creatures.  God  charges 
both  Judah  and  Ephraim  with  wavering  irresolution  and  manifest  inconsistencies 
in  their  profession  of  religion.  The  charge  is  that  they  did  not  act  up  to  their 
convictions.  And  how  justly  this  may  be  applied  to  the  whole  of  our  conduct 
through  life !  The  expostulation  implies  that  God  willeth  not  the  death  of  the 
sinner,  if  we  would  renounce  oxrr  evil  courses,  and  turn  with  full  purpose  of  heart 
unto  Him,  though  He  visit  us  occasionally  with  afflictions,  and  temporary  losses, 
and  various  disappointments,  yet  He  only  chastens  us  for  our  good.  The  expos- 
tulation plainly  suggests  that  all  our  ways  are  noticed  by  Him  who  is  constantly 
about  our  path.  God  takes  various  methods  to  bring  sinners  to  repentance. 
II.  What  are  wb  to  ttnderstand  by  the  charge  brought  against  Ephraim 
AND  Judah  T  The  mommg  cloud  promiseth  rain,  and  the  early  dew  is  some 
refreshment  to  the  parched  earth,  but  the  cloud  is  soon  dispersed,  and  the  dew 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

does  not  sink  deep  into  the  ground.  It  does  not  extend  to  the  root  of  the  tree, 
and  this  is  a  fit  emblem  of  the  superficial  religion  which  designates  the  character 
of  numbers.  The  charge  of  being  wavering  and  unstable  too  properly  belongs 
to  us.  We  profess  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  and  yet  how  few  of  us  imbibe  His 
Spirit,  or  imitate  His  example !  Our  goodness  or  piety,  which  ought  to  be 
uniformly  alike,  is  like  the  morning  cloud  or  the  early  dew.  It  shines  bright  and 
conspicuous  for  a  season  ;  but  when  temptations  or  persecutions  arise,  we  have 
no  stability,  no  depth  of  root,  and  therefore,  like  the  stony  ground  hearers,  are 
scorched  up,  wither,  and  fade  away.  Unless  there  be  a  fixed  principle  implanted 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart,  governing  the  choice,  and  directing  the  affections, 
there  will  be  no  steady  or  abiding  influence  on  the  conduct.  When  men  promise 
fair,  and  do  not  perform,  when  they  begin  well  in  religion,  and  do  not  hold  on 
to  the  end,  but  fall  off  from  a  good  profession,  the  latter  state  of  those  men  is 
even  worse  than  the  first.  Though  men  do  not  quite  cast  off  religion,  yet  if  they 
are  unsteady,  uneven,  and  inconstant  in  it,  they  are  like  the  morning  cloud  and 
early  dew.  The  dispositions  of  the  mind  need  to  be  changed  by  regenerating 
grace.     III.  The  manner  in  which  wb  should  impbovb  these  admonitions, 

BY    A   serious   inquiry   INTO    OUR   OWN    CHARACTER    AND    CONDUCT.       Let   every 

man  pay  attention  to  the  workings  of  his  own  mind,  to  the  habits  of  his  daily 
life,  and  more  especially  to  his  favourite  pursuits.  In  this  way  he  will  read  the 
progress  or  decline  of  religion  in  his  own  soul.  Let  him  also  pray  with  fervour 
for  the  constant  aids  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  fan  the  flame  of  piety,  to  cherish  holy 
dispositions,  and  to  keep  him  securely  to  the  end.  And  as  these  aids  are  promised 
to  all  who  ask  them,  how  can  we  have  the  benefit  unless  we  apply  for  it  ?  Let 
Christ  and  His  atoning  blood  be  precious  in  our  eyes.  (J.  Chose,  A.M.)  Oood- 
nesa  as  kindness  : — Some  take  the  words  to  mean,  "  Your  kindness,"  that  is, 
the  mercy  which  I  have  hitherto  exhibited  to  you  is  "  as  the  morning  dew  "  : 
"  ye  immediately  dry  up  My  favour."  This  seems  not  unsuitable,  for  we  see 
that  the  unbelieving  by  their  wickedness  absorb  the  mercy  of  God,  so  that  it 
produces  no  good,  as  when  rain  flows  over  a  rock  or  a  stone,  while  the  stone 
within,  on  accoiuit  of  its  hardness,  remains  dry.  As  then  the  moisture  of  rain  does 
not  penetrate  into  stones,  so  also  the  grace  of  God  is  spent  in  vain  and  without 
advantage  on  the  unbelieving.  (John  Calvin.)  Transient  convictions  and 
true  consecration  : — I.  Two  kinds  of  religion.  The  transient  and  the  truthful. 
Why  do  so  many  who  seem  to  be  sincere  and  earnest  endure  but  for  awhile  ? 
Worldliness,  like  the  sun,  dries  up,  and  temptation,  like  the  wind,  scatters  and 
dissolves  what  looked  so  beautiful.  Truthful  persons  are  sincere,  there  is  a 
reality  in  their  religion,  something  that  abides.  We  may  also  call  such  a  religion 
truthful  as  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  by  the  Spirit,  through  the 
truth.  II.  Some  people  have  only  known  one  oe  these  kinds  op  religion, 
AND  soiAe  have  KNOWN  BOTH.  Some  have  only  known  the  transient.  Hitherto 
it  has  been  conviction  without  conversion  ;  resolutions  without  love  ;  deficient 
repentance  and  sorrow  without  real  surrender.  Truth  has  not  conquered ; 
no  governing  principle  has  been  introduced  into  the  soul ;  nothing  permanently 
inscribed  on  the  tablets  of  the  heart.  Some  have  only  known  the  truthful.  A 
lew  have  been  drawn  gently  and  even  from  early  life.  Others  have  gone  on  in 
darkness  several  years,  and  have  then  been  suddenly  brought  to  a  stand,  and  at 
once  "  translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son."  A  third  class  have  known 
both.  In  their  case  there  were  many  attempts  and  failures.  Many  settings 
out  and  goings  back.  Yet  even  such  unlikely  ones  have  been  saved.  Therefor© 
let  none  despair.  III.  What  must  be  done  in  order  really  to  pass  prom 
THE  one  to  the  OTHER  ?  If  you  would  not  have  your  feelings  pass  away,  you 
yourself  must  pass  in,  you  must  yield  yourself  to  God.  Go  in  through  the  door, 
have  really  and  personally  to  do  with  Christ,  then  religion  will  become  to  you 
an  abiding  reality.  The  reason  why  your  religion  is  a  transient  one  is  that  you 
have  not  yet  begun  aright.  True  godliness  begins  with  the  pardon  of  sins.  God 
is  willing  to  begin  with  the  blotting  out  of  sin.  (J.  Cox.)  Fickleness  in 
religion: — "  FicMeness  cannot  but  be  attended  by  fatal  consequences."  It  has 
proved  fatal  to  real  progress  and  labting  prosperity.  The  Celts  "  shook  all 
empires  but  founded  none."  Caesar  tells  us  that  the  same  fault  characterised 
the  Gauls,  and  St.  Paul  bears  witness  to  the  same  failing  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians.  It  was  the  recurring  sin  of  the  children  of  Israel  God's  gracious 
invitations  to  His  people  show  how  great  and  faithful  was  His  love.  But  it  seems 
at  times  as  if  Divine  love  itself  were  perplexed.     "  0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSEA.  127 

unto  thee,"  &c.  Silently,  imperceptibly,  like  the  evanescent  cloud,  and  like 
the  sparkling  dewdrop,  their  goodness  and  love  passed  away.  I.  This  is  a 
COMMON  FAULT  TO-DAY.  How  many  begin  hopefully  and  then  fall  away.  One 
of  the  saddest  sights  angels  behold  is  a  warm  heart  cooling  in  its  love  towards 
God,  a  beautiful  life  withering  'neath  the  blight  of  sin.  It  is  most  instructive 
to  notice  the  cause  of  the  downfall  of  Jewish  kings.  Many  of  them  began  well, 
but  were  not  thorough,  did  not  continue  faithful,  but  substituted  inferior  things. 
*'  And  King  Ahaz  took  down  the  sea  from  off  the  brazen  oxen,  and  put  it  upon 
a  pavement  of  stones."  Many  begin  by  giving  their  best  to  God,  but  alas  ! 
they  give  up  their  early  enthusiasm  and  become  less  zealous  in  His  service. 
II.  Beforb  entering  upon  God's  service  count  the  cost.  Lord  Wolseley 
mapped  out  the  whole  campaign  before  entermg  upon  the  Egyptian  war. 
Britain's  unpreparedness  was  the  cause  of  many  reverses  in  the  great  South 
African  war.  Jesus  Christ  is  very  explicit  on  this  point.  "  Sit  down,  and  count 
the  cost."  There  is  the  bias  «f  the  heart  towards  sin.  "  When  I  would  do  good, 
evil  is  present  with  me."  A  fact  that  makes  degeneration  easy.  Goodness 
requires  effort.  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  Temptations  and  cares 
beset  the  upward  path.  Longfellow's  "  Excelsior."  III.  How  to  continue 
faithful.  Prayer  is  the  arm  of  the  soul  that  connects  it  with  God,  like  the 
tram-car  with  the  overhead  wire.  It  brings  down  light  and  power.  Study  well 
the  chart.  Read  the  Bible.  Have  fellowship  with  Christ's  people.  The  early 
Hebrew  Christians  had  many  temptations  and  trials,  hence  they  were  enjoined 
"  not  to  forsake  the  assembling  of  themselves  together."  Keep  in  touch  with 
God  and  with  His  people.  (A.  Hampden  Lee.)  Fugitive  piety: — I.  The  piety 
characterised  by  the  text.  Very  beautiful  and  full  of  promise,  but  disappointing. 
It  was  thus  with  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  34-38).  And  there 
is  much  of  the  same  piety  now.  Some  spend  their  lives  in  sinning  and  repenting. 
In  the  Polar  world  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year  the  sun  rises  just  above  the 
horizon,  streaks  the  black  sky  with  fire,  casts  on  the  desolate  scene  a  warm 
splendour,  and  then  in  a  few  minutes  sinks  again,  leaving  the  sky  as  dark  and 
the  earth  as  cold  as  they  were  before.  And  thus  it  is  with  some  amongst  us  in 
respect  to  their  experience  of  religion.  Men  receive  some  great  mercy,  suffer 
some  great  tribulation,  are  powerfully  affected  by  the  truth,  deeply  wrought  upon 
by  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  it  seems  as  if  they  would  forthwith  lead  a  new  life,  but 
in  a  little  while  they  are  as  worldly  or  as  wicked  as  they  were  before.  What  is 
done  on  Sunday  is  undone  on  Monday  ;  the  vow  of  the  sick  chamber  is  forgotten 
in  convalescence ;  the  promise  of  the  sanctuary  withers  in  the  market-place. 
II.  The  defectiveness  of  such  piety.  1.  The  shameful  inconsistency  of  it. 
Vacillating  men  are  held  in  contempt,  but  all  other  vacillations  are  trifling  com- 
pared with  this  religious  instability.  How  suddenly,  how  frequently,  how 
flippantly  some  of  us  pass  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  Now  God,  now  idols ; 
now  the  spirit,  now  the  flesh  ;  now  holiness,  now  frivolity  and  sin.  2.  The 
profound  misery  of  it.  Such  people  know  the  sorrows  of  religion  without  its  joy. 
They  know  little  more  of  the  path  to  heaven  than  the  struggles  of  the  "  Strait 
Gate  "  or  the  woes  of  the  "  Slough  of  Despond."  Before  they  get  to  "  Palace 
Beautiful,"  or  the  "  Hill  Beulah,"  they  turn  back  again,  the  bitterness  of  religion 
having  gone  to  their  heart,  and  its  sweetness  only  to  their  lips.  3.  The  utter 
insufficiency  of  it.  Some  men  look  upon  their  fits  of  goodness  with  some  satis- 
faction, but  really  thero  is  no  reason  to  do  so.  A  transient  piety  leaves  out  the 
foremost  grandeur  of  religion — its  unchangeableness.  Recognise  God's  great 
love  to  you.  "  FoUowon  to  know  the  Lord."  "  He  that  endureth  to  the  end 
shall  be  saved."  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Fitful  piety  unsatisfactory: — We  need 
to  feel  the  utter  unsatisfactoriness  of  this  fitful  piety.  Too  often  we  look  with 
complacency  upon  it.  We  argue  thus :  "  I  am  not  altogether  bad  ;  I  have  my 
times  of  good  feeling,  desire,  and  effort ;  the  bag'en  wilderness  of  my  heart  is 
relieved  by  green,  blossoming  shoots ;  the  winter  of  my  life  has  its  snowdrops 
and  violets,  telling  of  the  neighbourhood  of  golden  seasons  ;  I  am  comforted  when 
I  remember  the  recurrence  of  these  days  of  gracious  sentiment  and  aspiration  " 
Such  reasoning  is  entirely  erroneous ;  there  is  no  justification  whatever  for  inter- 
mittent goodness.  Its  sufiBcient  condemnation  is  its  unlikeness  to  God's  goodness. 
Hosea  points  out  the  contrast.  Our  goodness  is  "  the  morning  cloud,"  whilst 
the  goodness  of  God  "  is  prepared  as  the  morning  "  which  brightens  to  the  perfect 
noon  ;  our  goodness  is  "  as  the  early  dew,"  whilst  the  goodness  of  God  is  "  as  the 
tain,  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  unto  the  earth,"  it  drops  fatness  the  year  round. 


128    .  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

"  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from 
the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning." 
"  Thy  righteousness  is  an  everlasting  righteousness " ;  "  Thy  truth  endureth 
for  ever  "  ;  "  His  faithfulness  faileth  not."  This  is  the  crowning  glory  of  God, — 
He  abides  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  in  righteousness  and  love.  The  starry, 
steadfast  firmament  is  supremely  grand,  but  a  meteor  flash  which  startles  the 
night  coimts  little ;  the  flowing  river  has  a  charm  all  its  own,  but  the  summer 
brook  which  dries  whilst  we  look  at  it  is  only  a  disappointing  fancy ;  the  stately 
cedar  sheltering  successive  generations  appeals  to  the  soul,  but  the  gourd  that 
springs  in  a  night  and  perishes  in  one  touches  no  deep  chord.  Righteousness 
in  its  essential  nature  is  eternal,  and  therefore  the  righteousness  of  time  and 
change  is  deeply  perplexing  and  sad.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  For  I  desired  mercy,  and  not  sacriflce. — Mercy  and  sacrifice  not 
contrasts : — God  had  Himself,  after  the  fall,  enjoined  sacrifice  to  foreshow 
and  plead  to  Himself  the  meritorious  sacrifice  of  Christ.  He  had  not  contrasted 
mercy  and  sacrifice  who  enjoined  them  both.  When  then  they  were  contrasted, 
it  was  through  man's  severing  what  God  had  imited.  If  we  were  to  say,  "  Charity 
is  better  than  churchgoing,"  we  should  be  understood  to  mean  that  it  is  better 
than  such  churchgoing  as  is  severed  from  charity.  For,  if  they  were  united, 
they  would  not  be  contrasted.  The  soul  is  of  more  value  than  the  body.  But  it 
is  not  contrasted,  unless  they  come  in  competition  with  one  another,  and  their 
interests  seem  to  be  separated.  In  itself,  sacrifice  represented  all  the  direct  duties 
to  God,  all  the  duties  of  the  first  table.  Mercy  represented  all  the  duties  of  the 
second  table.  {E.  B.  P^isey,  D.D.)  The  double  ride  of  religion: — It  requires 
both  mercy  and  sacrifice,  but  the  relations  between  them  properly  preserved. 
1.  The  rule  of  true  religion  requires  that  all  God  commands  should  be  respected, 
and  obedience  endeavoured,  so  that  moral  duties  be  chiefiy  made  conscience  of. 
Under  "  sacrifice  and  burnt-offerings  "  is  comprehended  all  their  ceremonial  pef- 
formances,  so  far  as  they  were  mere  external  performances  rested  on  by  the  people. 
His  "  not  desiring  sacrifice  "  is  not  to  be  understood  simply,  as  if  the  Lord  did 
not  approve,  even  of  the  external  performances  which  were  enjoined  by  Himself ; 
but  comparatively,  that  He  desired  moral  duties  more  than  bimit-offerings.  To 
which  may  be  added,  that  in  some  cases,  when  moral  duties  come  in  competition 
with  ceremonials,  the  Lord  doth  not  desire  ceremonials  at  that  time,  but  moral 
duties.  2.  Let  men  submit  never  so  much  to  the  external  injunctions  of  religion 
and  worship,  or  think  to  satisfy  their  own  consciences  therewith,  yet  where  Christ 
is  not  closed  with,  to  enable  and  make  men  willing  and  active  in  moral  duties, 
they  will  not  be  approved  in  the  other  at  all.  3.  Such  as  would  approve  them- 
selves to  God,  ought  to  make  conscience  of  moral  duties,  both  of  the  first  and  second 
table  of  the  law,  and  particularly,  the  saving  knowledge  of  God,  whereby  we  may 
regulate  the  rest  of  our  obedience.  Shewing  of  mercy  in  cases  wherein  we  seem 
not  to  be  so  strictly  bound,  will  prove  our  reality  in  religion.  [Oeorge  Hutcheson.) 
Mercy  rather  than  sacrifice: — I.  Answer  some  questions.  1.  What  is  the 
difference  between  natural  ordinances  and  instituted  duties  ?  By  natural  duties 
understand  such  duties  as  we  owe  to  God  as  God,  and  to  man  as  man,  which  we 
should  have  been  required  to  fulfil  if  there  had  been  no  written  law  in  relation 
to  them.  By  instituted  duties  imderstand  those  which,  if  God  had  not  revealed 
them,  would  have  had  no  claim  on  us.  Natural  duties  refer  to  attributes  in  God's 
nature  and  character,  instituted,  to  the  expression  of  His  will.  2.  God  required 
sacrifice  as  well  as  mercy,  but  with  these  limitations.  (1)  I  will  have  sacrifice, 
but  not  without  the  spirit.  Instituted  worship  separated  from  natural  worship 
is  not  regarded.  (2)  Not  sacrifices  to  make  atonement  for  their  sins.  (3)  Not 
sacrifices  of  yoiu-  own  devising.  3.  Why  should  God  require  mercy  rather  than 
sacrifice  ?  Because  mercy  is  good  in  itself,  but  sacrifice  is  good  only  in  reference 
to  something  else.  Sacrifices  are  but  to  further  us  in  natural  duties.  11.  Satisfy 
SOME  objections.  L  Men's  hearts  are  deceitful,  and  they  may  pretend  cases  of 
mercy  when  there  is  no  such  thing  in  hand.  It  is  not  for  us  to  judge  the  sincerity 
of  other  men.  God  gives  general  rules  for  the  ordering  of  a  Christian  life  ;  and 
these  generad  rules  being  observed,  particular  cases  are  to  be  ordered  in  prudence, 
faithfulness,  and  zeal ;  and  where  there  is  miscarrying  through  frailty,  God  will 
have  mercy.  2.  Can  any  duty  of  the  second  table  be  more  excellent  than  the 
duties  of  the  first  ?  In  both  the  tables  there  are  internal  and  substantia]  duties 
and  superadded  duties.     Comparing  them  it  is  plain  that  the  substantial  are  to 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOSEA.  129 

be  preferred  before  the  superadded.  Yet  God  is  pleased  to  indulge  men  so  far 
that  He  will  let  the  duties  of  the  second  table  take  precedence.  3.  But  if  God's 
ordinances  are  duties,  can  they  be  omitted  at  any  time  ?  There  are  two  sorts 
of  precepts,  negative  and  affirmative.  A  negative  binds  always  and  at  all  seasons, 
an  affirmative  only  binds  always,  but  not  at  all  seasons  ;  for  we  cannot  do  two 
things  at  once,  and  one  duty  must  be  preferred  to  another.  It  is  the  Christian's 
skill,  when  two  duties  come  together,  which  to  choose.  If  God's  own  worship 
may  be  forborne  in  case  of  mercy,  how  much  more  men's  institutions  and  inven- 
tions. God  will  have  mercy  rather  than  disputing  about  sacrifice.  Mercy  must 
be  preferred  before  our  own  wills  and  lusts.     {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 

Ver.  7.  Bnt  they,  like  men,  bave  transg^ressed  the  covenant. — The  breach 
of  the  covenant  of  works  : — General  defection  is  a  cause  and  presage  of  a  sweeping 
stroke.  1.  The  crime  charged  on  them.  Covenant  breaking.  This  is  a  crime 
of  a  high  nature ;  it  strikes  at  the  root  of  society  among  men,  and  therefo  e  is 
scandalous  and  punishable  though  it  be  but  a  man's  covenant.  How  much  more 
atrocious  is  the  crime  where  God  is  the  one  party  !  God  took  the  Israelites  into 
covenant  with  Himself  when  He  brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  2.  Whom  they 
resembled  in  breach  of  covenant.  They  acted  like  men.  They  were  vain,  light, 
fickle,  and  inconsistent  as  men.  It  may  however  be  read,  "  like  Adam."  And 
he  broke  his  covenant.  Doctrine.  Our  father  Adam  broke  the  covenant  of 
works.  I.  The  fatal  step  by  which  that  covenant  was  transgressed  and 
BROKEN.  It  was  the  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  Consider  the  progress, 
the  ingredients,  and  the  aggravations  of  this  act.  As  to  the  ingredients,  notice 
the  imbelief,  pride,  ingratitude,  contempt  of  God,  and  the  breaking  of  the  whole 
law  of  God  at  once.  As  to  the  aggravations,  notice  that  it  was  righteous  Adam. 
The  object  by  which  he  was  enticed — a  morsel  of  fruit.  The  smaller  the  thing 
was,  the  greater  the  sin.  The  nature  of  the  thing.  It  was  theft  and  sacrilege.  The 
place  where  it  was  committed,  and  the  time  when  it  was  committed.  II.  How 
WAS  THIS  fatai,  STEP  BROUGHT  ABOUT  ?  1.  The  instrument  of  the  temptation 
was  a  serpent ;  a  true  and  real  serpent.  2.  It  was  acted  by  the  devil.  3.  Satan 
set  upon  the  woman  first,  she  being  the  weaker  vessel.  4.  He  moveth  a  doubt 
concerning  the  command.  5.  Then  he  falls  on  the  threatening  and  contradicts 
it.  6.  He  proceeds  as  one  that  wished  well  to  her  and  her  husband,  and  pretends 
to  show  how  they  might  both  arrive  at  a  high  pitch  of  happiness  speedily. 
7.  She  being  ensnared,  he  makes  use  of  her  to  tempt  her  husband,  and  prevails. 
God  left  man  to  the  freedom  of  his  own  will  in  this  matter.  He  was  not  the  cause 
of  his  fall.  But  why  was  not  man  set  beyond  the  possibility  of  change  ?  It  is 
to  be  remembered  that  absolute  immutability  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  God 
Himself,  and  every  creature,  in  as  far  as  it  is  a  creatiu-e,  is  incapable  of  being  so 
immutable.  Man  abused  his  own  liberty,  or  freedom  of  will,  and  so  broke  the 
covenant.  III.  How  was  the  covenant  of  works  broken  by  this  fatal 
STEP  ?  1.  The  command  was  violated.  2.  The  right  and  title  to  the  promised 
benefit  by  that  covenant  was  undermined.  3.  He  fell  under  the  penalty  of  the 
covenant,  became  liable  to  death  in  its  utmost  extent.  (1)  The  soul  of  man  died 
spiritually,  losing  the  image  of  God  and  the  favour  of  God.  (2)  The  body  of 
man  became  mortal,  death  working  within  it  and  without  it.  (3)  SovJ  and  body 
were  subjected  and  bound  over  to  eternal  death  in  hell.  Learn — 1.  The  nothing- 
ness of  the  creature  when  left  to  itself.  2.  The  hopelessness  of  salvation  by 
works.  3.  Watch  and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation.  4.  Take  heed  of 
forgetting  the  covenant  of  your  God.  6.  Here  is  a  demonstration  of  the  absolute 
necessity  of  being  united  to  the  second  Adam,  who  kept  the  second  covenant, 
and  thereby  fulfilled  the  demands  of  the  first  covenant.     {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8  Gilead  is  a  city  of  them  that  work  iniquity,  and  is  polluted  with  blood. 

— Divine  institutions  corrupted  : — It  is  supposed  that  Gilead  here  means  Ramoth 
Gilead :  the  metropolis  of  the  mountainous  region  beyond  Jordan  and  south  of  the 
river  Jabbok,  known  by  the  name  of  Gilead  (Josh.  xxi.  28  ;  1  Kings  iv.  18).  It 
was  here  that  Jacob  and  Laban  entered  into  a  sacred  covenant  with  each  other. 
It  was  once  a  very  sacred  place ;  it  was  one  of  the  celebrated  cities  of  refuge 
(Deut.  XX.  23  ;  Josh,  xxiii.  28).  The  place,  which  was  once  a  city  of  refuge, 
an  institution  of  the  God  of  heaven,  had  now  been  desecrated  by  wicked  men, 
and  become  the  scene  of  "  iniquity  "  and  "  blood."  I.  That  Divine  institutions, 
specially  designed  for  man's  good,  ark  often  corrupted  by  him.     Whilst  all 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha^.  vn. 


places  on  earth  are  for  the  good  of  man,  Gilead  had  a  specific  appointment. 
1.  The  Bible  is  a  special  ordinance  of  God  for  good.  Men  have  corrupted  that 
by  perverting  its  doctrines.  2.  The  Gospel  ministry  is  a  special  ordinance  of 
God  for  good.  II.  That  Divine  institutions  specially  designed  for  man's  good, 
•when  corrupted  becomb  the  worst  of  all  evils.  Holy  Gilead,  once  the  scene 
of  Divine  mercy,  was  now  filled  with  "  iniquity  "  and  "  blood."  I.  A  corrupted 
Bible  is  the  worst  of  all  books.  Political  tyrannies,  slaveries,  wars,  persecutions, 
have  all  been  sanctioned  and  encouraged  by  a  corrupted  Bible.  2.  A  corrupted 
pulpit  is  the  worst  of  all  ministries.     (Homilist. ) 

Ver.  11.  Also,  0  Judalt,  He  hath  set  an  hanrest  for  thee. — Ntxtwalneaa  of 
retribution  :  —  Divine  punishment  for  sin  is  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  a  harvest. 
I.  Retribution  is  natural  in  its  season.  There  are  the  "  appointed 
weeks  of  harvest."  These  weeks  come  roimd  with  an  undeviating  regularity. 
Punishment  comes  to  the  sinner  naturally,  so  far  as  the  proper  time  is  concerned. 
In  this  life  the  sinner  has  many  harvests.  Every  transgression  is  a  seed,  and  the 
eeed  sometimes  grows  rapidly  and  ripens  fast.  II.  That  retribution  is  natural 
in  its  results.  In  harvest,  the  man  reaps  the  kind  of  seed  he  has  sown,  what- 
ever it  may  be,  barley  or  wheat.  Also  as  a  rule  the  amount ;  if  he  has  sown 
sparingly  he  reaps  sparingly,  if  with  abundance  he  will  reap  abundantly.  He  gets 
what  he  wrought  for.  It  is  just  so  in  the  retributive  ministry  of  God.  Hence 
he  will  never  be  able  to  blame  either  God  or  His  creation  for  his  wretched  destiny, 
he  reaps  "  the  fruit  of  his  own  doings."  III.  The  retribution  is  natural  in  its 
approach.  As  soon  as  the  seed  is  sown  and  germination  begins,  it  proceeds 
slowly  and  silently  from  day  to  day,  week  to  week,  and  month  to  month,  towards 
maturition,  its  harvest  state.  It  is  just  so  with  sin,  it  proceeds  naturally  to  work 
out  its  results.  "  Lust,  when  it  is  conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin;  sin,  when  it  is 
finished,  bringeth  forth  death."     {Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  vn. 

Yer.  1.  When  I  would  have  healed  Israel,  then  fhe  iniquity  of  Ephraim  tras 
discovered,  and  the  wickedness  of  Samaria. — The  great  deceiver  and  spoiler  of 
the  nation: — We  identify  the  deceiver  as  strong  drink.  I.  The  dangerous 
and  insinuating  charaoter  of  intoxicating  drinks.  "  The  thief  cometh 
in."  Compare  the  movements  of  thieves  with  the  manner  in  which  these 
drinks  operate  upon  different  classes  of  our  fellow- men.  1.  The  thief  will 
often  seize  the  property  of  others  imder  false  pretences.  So  the  strong  drinks 
pretend  to  give  strength  to  the  weak,  and  to  preserve  the  strong  from  becoming 
weak.  Those  drinks  pretend  to  act  favourably  upon  the  sympathies  of  our 
nature,  and  to  promote  good  fellowship  among  neighbours  and  friends.  But 
when  and  where  did  strong  drink  perform  such  wonderful  things  T  2.  The  thief 
commits  his  depredations  under  the  guise  of  friendship.  If  you  are  known  to 
have  money,  many  will  offer  friendship,  and  when  they  have  gained  your  con- 
fidence, they  will  strip  you  of  everything  you  possess.  And  it  is  thus  with  the 
friendly  glass.  3.  The  thief  pounces  upon  his  prey  at  unawares.  And  the  thief, 
strong  drink,  acts  very  much  in  the  same  way.  To  be  forewarned  is  in  many 
cases  to  be  forearmed,  but  too  many  refuse  to  take  warning,  and  hence  the 
thief  pounces  upon  them  at  vmawares,  and  they  become  an  easy  prey.  4.  The 
thief  pays  no  respect  either  to  age  or  sex.  The  thief  is  known  to  seize  upon 
male  or  female,  old  or  young,  any  party,  or  under  any  circumstance,  if  he  can 
but  meet  with  a  victim.  And  the  thief,  strong  drink,  acts  precisely  in  the  same 
way.  In  every  walk  of  life,  in  every  condition  of  society,  and  under  every 
variety  of  circumstance  this  thief  commits  his  depredations.  5.  The  thief,  in 
the  accomplishment  of  his  object,  oft«n  takes  away  the  life  of  his  victim.  Here 
is  another  most  painful  characteristic  of  strong  drink.  By  this  thief  multitudes 
of  men  die  and  go  to  their  long  home.  II.  The  evtls  inflicted  upon  our 
country  by  the  traffic  in  strong  drinks.  "  The  troop  of  robbers  spoileth 
without."  1.  The  vast  extent  of  this  source  of  evil.  Thousands  are  engaged 
in  the  manufacture  of  strong  drink.     2.  The  traffic  fails  to  give  an  equivalent 


CHAP,  vn.]  ROSEA.  131 

for  what  it  costs.  3.  The  traffic  in  strong  drink  spoils  the  morals  of  our  country. 
4.  The  traffic  is  spoiling  the  efforts  of  the  Church.  III.  The  means  by  which 
THESE  EVILS  MAY  BE  REMOVED.  1.  The  real  cause  of  these  evils  must  be  kept 
distinctly  in  view.  Individual  example  is  the  matter  requiring  supreme  atten- 
tion. 2.  The  manufacture  and  sale  of  intoxicating  drinks,  except  for  scientific 
and  medicinal  purposes,  must  be  condemned.  3.  The  practical  rather  than 
the  doubtful  should  be  steadily  pursued.  There  is  always  a  danger  of  our 
having  our  minds  diverted  from  the  real  to  the  visionary.  It  is  a  delusion 
to  trust  to  acts  of  parliament.  Personal  and  individual  abstinence  is  the  one 
thing  to  urge.     (D,  Sunderland.) 

Ver.  2.  And  tbey  consider  not  in  their  hearts  that  I  do  remember  all 
tbeir  wickednesB. — The  evil  of  inconsideration : — What  the  prophet  affirms 
of  God's  ancient  people  is  gravely  distressing.  I.  The  fact  asserted. 
Grod  remembers  the  wickedness  of  men.  Wickedness  denotes  what  is  hateful 
and  destructive.  Men  may  excuse  it,  deny  it,  forget  it ;  but  God  remembers 
it.  1.  This  fact  is  clear  from  the  declarations  of  His  Word.  2.  From  the  per- 
fections of  His  natiire.  "  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  knowledge,  and  by  Him  actions 
are  weighed."  3.  From  the  equity  of  His  government  and  a  future  judgment. 
You  that  forget  God,  and  forget  your  sins,  know  that  God  remembers.  II.  The 
EVIL  STATED.  That  men  forget  this  fact.  The  evil  lamented  is  inconsideration. 
The  want  of  consideration  appears — 1.  In  men's  continued  commission  of  sin. 
2.  In  their  doing  this  without  regret.     3.  In  their  readiness  to  extenuate  sin. 

4.  In  their  disregard  of  future  consequences.  Wherein  then  consists  the  evil 
of  this  want  of  consideration  ?  (1)  They  who  are  thus  chargeable  neglect  the 
plainest  admonitions  of  Scripture.  (2)  They  oppose  the  frequent  dictates  of 
conscience.  (3)  They  allow  themselves  in  the  practice  of  secret  sins.  (4)  They 
may  even  proceed  to  the  commission  of  open  vice.  (5)  Thus  proceeding  they 
eventually  ruin  the  soul.  As  to  the  duty  of  consideration,  the  authority  of  God 
commands  it.  The  grace  of  God  recommends  it.  The  reason  of  man  approves 
it.  The  aversion  of  man  to  this  duty  implies  its  importance.  (T.  Kidd.) 
MarCs  sins  in  God's  mind : — God  alone  knows  us  perfectly.  I.  A  fact  in  the 
Divine  providence  or  government.  "  I  remember  all  their  wickedness." 
"  Remember,"  as  applied  to  God  in  Scripture,  does  not  represent  a  faculty  of 
the  Divine  mind,  but  a  state  of  God's  nature,  or  the  conduct  of  God  in  some 
particular  instance.  The  text  means,  "  Yovu-  sins  are  ever  before  Me."  1.  God 
remembers  all  kinds  and  degrees  of  sin.  2.  All  the  sins  of  all  men.  3.  He 
remembers  accurately  and  completely.     4.    Continually  and  for  ever.     And — 

5.  With  a  practical  result,  that  He  may  act  upon  His  recollection.  Then  how 
wonderful  is  God's  patience  and  forbearance  !  How  entire  must  God's  pardon 
be  when  He  forgives  a  sinner  !  How  complete  will  be  the  transactions  of  the 
judgment  day  !  How  full  will  future  and  final  punishment  be  !  II.  This  fact 
IS  forgotten  by  those  who  ought  to  remember  it.  They  do  not  think  or 
reflect,  at  least,  so  as  to  feel.  III.  God's  complaint  of  this  forgbtfxtlnbss. 
God  complains  of  forgetfulness,  because  it  sears  the  conscience,  leads  to  false 
views  of  a  man's  position,  is  personally  offensive  to  Grod,  and  is  frequently 
the  occasion  of  final  ruin.  God  does  not  hate  you  as  a  being,  but  He  does  hate 
your  character.  And  this  offensiveness  to  Grod  is  continually  increasing.  You 
can  consider  this  matter,  and  at  once.  Enter  then  the  path  of  serious  thought  and 
pursue  it.  {Samuel  Martin. )  God's  remembrance  of  sin  : — I.  God  remembers 
men's  sins.  "  I  remember  aU  their  wickedness."  1.  This  is  a  wonderful  fact. 
When  we  think  of  the  infinite  greatness  of  Him  to  whom  the  universe  is  as  nothing. 
Sin  is  no  trifie  in  the  eye  of  Him  whose  glory  is  His  holiness.  2.  This  is  not  only 
a  wonderful,  but  a  solemn  fact.  God  not  only  observes  and  knows  my  sins, 
but  He  remembers  them.  11.  Men  disregard  God's  remembrance  of  their  sins. 
Why,  then  ?  1,  Because  other  thoughts  engross  their  minds — thoughts  of 
worldly  wealth  and  power.  2.  Because  this  thought,  if  it  occurs  to  them  for  a 
moment,  is  too  painful  to  be  entertained.  III.  That  men's  disregard  of  God's 
remembrance  of  their  sins  leads  them  to  revel  in  iniquity.  "  Now  their  own 
doings  have  beset  them  about ;  they  are  before  My  face."  Here  we  have — 1.  Their 
sins  in  general.  They  are  abundant  and  daring.  Their  sins  encompass  them 
on  all  sides,  and  they  perpetrate  them  without  shame  under  the  very  face  of  God. 
2.  Some  of  their  sins  are  specified  here.  They  made  them  glad  "  with  their  lies," 
with  the  lying  praises  with  which  they  crowned  the  favourites  of  the  prince,  and 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

the  lying  calumnies  and  censures  with  which  they  blackened  those  whom  they 
knew  the  princes  disliked.  {Homilist.)  God's  record  of  our  sins: — The  great 
stone-book  of  nature  reveals  many  strange  records  of  the  past.  In  the  red  sand- 
stone there  are  found  in  some  places  marks  which  are  clearly  the  impressions 
of  showers  of  rain,  and  these  so  perfect  that  it  can  even  be  determined  in  what 
direction  the  sho .  er  inclined,  and  from  what  quarter  it  proceeded ;  and  this 
ages  ago  !  So  sin  leaves  its  track  behind  it,  and  God  keeps  a  faithful  record  of 
all  OUT  sins.  Now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about. — Man  beset 
hy  his  own  doings  : — Down  from  the  dark  ages  comes  the  story — if  memory 
is  true  to  its  charge — of  an  expert  blacksmith,  who  was  such  a  master  of 
his  trade,  and  withal  so  proud  of  nis  skill,  that  he  often  boasted  no  man  could 
break  a  chain  made  by  him.  In  time  the  blacksmith  himself  was  imprisoned 
and  manacled.  With  the  hope  that  he  might  make  his  escape,  he  examined 
the  chain  to  see  if  it  was  possible  to  break  it,  when,  to  his  horror,  he  discovered 
that  the  chain  was  one  made  by  his  own  hands,  which  no  living  man  could  break, 
himself  included.  The  chain  forged  by  his  own  hands  made  the  blacksmith 
a  helpless,  hopeless  prisoner  in  that  vile  dungeon.  Is  it  not  the  same  with  us  ? 
Each  of  us  is  forging  a  chain  we  cannot  break.  Every  bad  habit  becomes  a 
link  in  the  chain,  which  will  bind,  in  hopeless  slavery,  the  soul  that  makes  it. 
Acts  form  habits.  Let  yoiir  acts  be  beautiful  and  Christlike,  and  your  habits 
will  be  likewise.  (Pavl  S.  Biggs  Shipley.)  The  sin  of  the  people  : — The  prophet 
now  arraigns  all  the  citizens  of  Samaria,  and  in  their  persons  the  whole  people, 
because  they  rendered  obedience  to  the  king  by  flattery,  and  to  the  princes  in 
wicked  things,  respecting  which  their  own  consciences  convicted  them.  He  shows 
that  the  defection  which  then  reigned  through  all  Israel  ought  not  to  be  ascribed 
to  the  king  or  to  few  men,  but  that  it  was  a  common  evil,  which  involved  all  in 
one  and  the  same  guilt,  without  exception.  If  they  wish  to  cast  the  blame  on 
their  governors,  it  will  be  done  in  vain.  As  soon  as  Jeroboam  formed  the  calves, 
as  soon  as  he  built  temples,  religion  instantly  collapsed,  and  whatever  was  before 
pure,  degenerated.  How  was  the  change  so  sudden  ?  Even  because  the  people 
had  inwardly  concocted  their  wickedness,  which,  when  an  occasion  was  offered, 
el-Owed  itself  ;  for  hypocrisy  did  lie  hid  in  all,  and  was  then  discovered.  It  often 
happens  that  some  vice  creeps  in,  which  proceeds  from  one  man,  or  from  a  few ; 
but  when  all  readily  embrace  what  a  few  introduce,  it  is  quite  evident  that  they 
have  no  living  root  of  piety,  or  of  the  fear  of  God.  They  then  who  are  so  prone 
to  adopt  vices  were  before  hypocrites ;  and  we  daily  find  this  to  be  the  case. 
"\\Tien  men  become  corrupt  in  their  whole  life,  and  degenerate  from  the  pure 
worship  of  God,  they  are  justly  deemed  adulterers.  The  prophet  compares 
them  to  an  oven,  because  they  were  not  corrupted  by  some  outward  impulse, 
but  by  their  own  inclination  and  propensity  of  mind.  They  had  been  set  on 
fire  by  an  inward  sinful  instinct,  and  were  like  a  hot  oven.  The  blame  rested 
wholly  on  themselves.  {John  Calvin.)  In  the  day  of  our  Mng  the  princes 
have  made  him  sick  with  bottles  of  wine.  —  Court  intemperance :  —  On  the 
king's  birthday,  or  some  other  solemnity  yearly  observed,  the  princes 
induced  the  king  to  drink  until  he  became  sick,  and  forgot  and 
prostituted  his  place  and  authority  by  joining  with  scorners,  or  men 
eminently  dissolute.  Doctrine.  1.  Days  which  men  will  have  observed  as  days 
of  festivity  and  solemnity  do  ordinarily  prove  days  of  great  miscarriage 
and  provocation  against  God.  2.  Drimkenness  and  sensuality  are  heinous  and 
crying  sins,  especially  in  rulers.  It  is  a  sad  challenge  that  they  should  be  given 
to  "  bottles  of  wine."  3.  Nobles  and  princes  and  great  courtiers  are  ordinarily 
great  plagues  and  snares  to  kings,  who,  having  their  ear  and  countenance,  do 
make  use  of  it  for  no  other  end  but  to  draw  them  to  sin  against  God.  4.  It  is 
the  height  of  sensuality,  when  men  not  only  become  brutish  themselves,  but  dare 
invite  and  tempt  others  to  the  same  excess  of  riot,  and  by  all  means  draw  them 
to  drunkenness.  5.  Men  by  their  intemperance  do  not  only  draw  on  the  guilt 
of  mis-spending  time,  and  abusing  the  good  creatures  of  God,  but  of  self-murder 
and  abusing  their  own  bodies  also.  6.  Days  of  feasting  and  intemperance  do 
also  ordinarily  prove  days  of  great  insolence  and  boldness  in  other  sins.  7.  It  is 
also  the  great  sin  of  drunkenness,  that  by  their  sensuality  they  deprive  them- 
selves of  the  use  of  reason,  and  render  themselves  contemptible,  and  like 
beasts,  that  they  can  neither  know  their  place  nor  duty.  The  king  debased 
himself  to  keep  company  with  lewd  persons  and  look  like  them.  (George 
Hvicheson.) 


CHAP,  vn.]  HOSEA.  133 

Ver.  8.  Ephraim,  he  hatli  mixed  Mmself  among  the  people ;  Ephraim  is  a  cake 
not  turned. — Moral  declension: — Much  real  pain  is  caused,  to  a  rightly  coastituted 
mind,  by  the  failure  of  fondly  cherished  anticipations.  To  trace  the  causes  of 
moral  declensions  is  a  most  important  exercise.  As  these  are  discovered,  we  are 
put  on  our  guard.  I.  The  conduct  of  Epheaim.  1.  The  persona  with  whom 
he  associated.  Described  as  "  the  people,"  that  is,  the  idolatrous  remnants  of 
the  nations  originally  possessing  the  land.  The  separation  of  Israel  from  other 
nations  was  a  type  of  the  separation  into  which  God  has  ever  called  His  believing 
people  from  persons  of  sinful  and  worldly  principles  and  character.  Scripture 
injunctions,  in  relation  to  this,  are  far  from  being  regarded  by  professed  Christians 
as  they  should.  2.  The  character  of  Ephraim's  association  with  these  parties. 
"  Mixed  himself  among  them."  Friendly  and  intimate  association.  It  is  such 
intercourse  the  Christian  ought  to  avoid.  We  are  not  required  to  abstain  from 
all  intercourse,  but  from  such  intimacy  as  would  bring  us  into  evil  influence. 
In  unrestrained  intercourse  with  the  world,  a  Christian  is  often  led  to  go  farther 
than  consistency  sanctions.     A  Christian  too  much  mixes  himself  with  the  world — 

(1)  When  his  chosen  associates  and  most  intimate  friends  are  selected  from  the 
world.  (2)  When  he  allows  himself  to  participate  in  the  dishonourable  principles 
or  pursuits  of  worldly  men.  (3)  When  he  is  found  frequently  mingling  in  the 
pleasures  of  the  world.  3.  The  voluntary  and  spontaneous  nature  of  this  associ- 
ation. Ephraim  was  not  forced  into,  but  he  '  mixed  himself  "  among  them. 
To  a  certain  extent,  the  Christian  not  only  may  but  must  mingle  with  the  world. 
That  is  a  very  different  thing  from  courting  the  society  of  men  of  the  world. 
II.  The  chabacteb  of  Ephraim,  as  the  result  of  hi3  conduct.  "  A  cake 
not  turned."  The  figure  intimates — 1.  The  undecided  character  of  his  religion. 
2.  The  worthlessness  of  such  religion.     (1)  As  the  ground  of  personal  safety. 

(2)  As  a  source  of  personal  enjoyment,  and  as  the  means  of  support  and  con- 
solation under  trial.  (3)  As  a  means  of  seciu-ity  against  danger  and  temptation. 
(4)  In  exerting  a  beneficial  influence  on  the  minds  of  worldly  men.     III.  The 

PERSONAL  INSTRUCTION  WHICH  THE   CONSIDERATION  OF  SUCH  A  CHARACTER  MAY 

SUPPLY.  1.  How  important  that  worldly  minded  men  and  undecided  persons 
should  correctly  understand  their  real  position.  2.  How  needful  that  they  who 
have  any  regard  to  their  spiritual  interests  should  exercise  great  circumspection 
as  to  the  characters  and  habits  of  those  with  whom  they  familiarly  associate. 
3  How  desirable  that  Christians,  by  a  more  decided  and  elevated  tone  of  spirit- 
uality in  feeling  and  conduct,  should  make  the  line  of  separation  between  the 
Church  and  the  world  more  apparent.  This  is  required  in  view  of  your  own 
spiritual  well-being,  and  in  order  to  the  graciousness  of  your  influence  on  others. 
(H.  Bromley. )  The  sin  of  Ephraim  : — I.  Ephraim's  unhappy  mixture.  He 
hath  joined  himself  with  the  nations  in  their  idolatrous  and  profane  conversa- 
tion. There  was  a  threefold  mixture.  A  local  mixture,  of  place  and  company. 
A  civil  mixture,  of  affinity  and  alliance.  A  moral  mixture,  in  regard  of  manners, 
religion,  and  conversation.  For  God's  people  to  comply  with  those  who  are 
wicked  and  ungodly  in  their  practices,  and  to  conform  themselves  to  their 
customs  and  manners,  is  a  thing  very  grievous  and  insufferable.  The  conformity 
of  God's  people  to  the  world  is  contrary  to  their  election,  and  God's  special 
designation  of  their  persons  to  eternal  life.  It  is  also  opposed  to  their  redemption. 
We  are  redeemed  for  another  purpose  than  this.  We  are  called  out  of  the  world, 
and  God  has  thereby  distinguished  us  from  other  men  who  are  in  the  world. 
Our  sanctification  too  is  an  argument  against  conformity  to  the  world.  It 
engages  us  to  self-mortification  and  to  spiritual  quickening.  II.  Ephraim's 
INDIFFERENT  TEMPER.  "  A  cake  not  turned."  Take  the  figure  as  an  ampli- 
fication of  their  sin.  They  were  only  baked  on  one  side,  that  is,  they  were  of 
an  imperfect  and  indifferent  temper  in  religion.  This  may  be  an  expression 
of  hypocrisy  and  false-heartedness  in  religion;  of  neutrality  and  indifferency 
in  religion ;  of  deficiency  and  imperfection  in  religion.  Cakes  not  turned  are 
mere  notion  and  speculation  in  religion,  which  proceed  not  to  practice  and 
operation :  purposes  and  resolution  without  practice ;  the  practice  of  some  things, 
but  omission  of  others  ;  extravagance  and  the  following  of  two  extremes.  Take 
the  figure  as  an  amplification  of  their  punishment.  As  a  hungry  man  catches 
the  cake  from  the  hearth  before  it  is  baked,  so  the  enemies  of  Ephraim  were 
hurrying  to  devour  her.  There  was  no  respite  for  repentance  and  turning  to 
God.  No  opportunity  for  escape.  (T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Half-baked: — A  strange 
text,  but   there  are  so   many  strange  people  in  the  world  that  odd  words 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

are  sometimes  needed  to  reach  them.  All  can  understand  about  a  cake.  One 
that  was  only  half-baked  you  would  say  was  a  deceit.  There  are  people  like 
such  a  cake.  They  look  beautiful  and  good  when  in  church,  but  when  you  come 
to  try  them,  they  are  anything  but  pleasant.  They  are  cakes  not  turned.  Jesus 
was  once  speaking  of  this  kind  of  thing,  and  took  cups  and  saucers  for  His  text. 
He  said.  Do  not  wash  the  outside  only,  and  make  believe  about  the  inside. 
Do  the  same  with  your  characters.  If  you  pretend  to  be  good,  then  be  good, 
inside  and  out,  in  your  heart  and  thoughts  as  well  as  in  your  appearance."  That 
is  what  this  cake  is  meant  to  teach.  Be  thorough ;  do  not  try  to  appear  what 
you  are  not.  The  best  way  to  seem  good  is  by  being  good.  What  is  the  good 
of  seeming  good  if  your  thoughts  are  bad  t  God  can  see  when  you  are  only  as 
a  cake  not  turned.  No  one  ever  yet  lost  by  obeying  God.  Be  thorough,  honest, 
and  God-fearing  in  and  out ;  do  not  have  a  religion  like  a  weathercock  that 
shifts  with  the  wind,  or  one  that  can  be  broken  with  an  if  or  a  but.  God  sees 
you  altogether.  A  great  sculptor  in  Greece,  long  ago,  made  a  statue  that  was 
to  be  set  on  a  high  column,  yet  he  was  as  particular  about  the  hair  on  the  top 
of  the  statue's  head  as  about  all  the  rest.  "  Why  take  so  much  pains  about 
that  ?  "  some  one  said.  "  Nobody  will  ever  see  it."  "  No,"  replied  the  sculptor, 
"  but  God  will  see  it."  Then  be  true  in  heart  if  you  would  be  true  in  life. 
(J.  Reid  Howat.)  One-sidednesa  in  religion  : — The  figiures  of  Scripture  are 
less  ornate  than  homely  and  expressive.  Even  a  child  Imows  what  will  happen 
if  the  cake  be  not  turned.  It  will  be  ruined  on  both  sides,  and  be  wholly  vmfit 
for  use.  Such  a  cake  denotes  a  type  of  character  at  once  distempered  and 
imtempered,  a  character  that  lacks  unity,  that  is  spoiled  by  defect  and  damaged 
by  excess,  an  inconsistent  whole.      I.  The  oeounds  of  this  impeachment. 

1.  Ephraim  has  "  mixed  himself  among  the  people  "  ;  he  has  missed  the  practical 
design  of  religion,  which  is  entire  separation  imto  God.  Many  persons  seek  to 
combine  in  themselves  contradictory  qualities.  They  would  be  spiritual  on  one 
side  and  carnal  on  the  other.  They  have  a  side  that  is  religiously  baked,  and 
a  side  that  is  carnally  crude.     They  are  religiously  blistered  and  carnally  sodden. 

2.  Ephraim  was  indisposed  to  look  to  God,  to  call  upon  Him,  to  count  on  Him 
as  the  imit  of  power  against  the  enemy.  Religion  was  kept  for  ceremonies  and 
state  occasions ;  it  was  not  an  everyday  working  religion.  They  had  a  notional 
knowledge  of  God,  but  they  did  not  seek  after  an  experimental  knowledge  of 
Him.  Jehovah  was  in  their  notions.  He  was  not  in  their  trust.  Had  He  been 
in  their  trust  they  would  have  tiu-ned  round  to  Him  in  their  trouble.  The  cake 
would  have  been  browned  on  both  sides.  And  how  many  now  have  a  name  to 
live  and  are  dead !  To  a  certain  extent  they  have  the  right  notion,  but  it  does 
not  determine  their  practice,  nor  lead  them  to  seek  the  confirmation  of  experience. 
Hence  the  cake  is  done  only  on  one  side.  Better  never  to  have  known  the  truth 
at  all,  than  for  the  truth  never  to  influence  the  practice  and  issue  in  experience. 

3.  Ephraim  was  proud  (ver.  10).  Pride  is  always  a  one-sided  and  therefore 
spiritually  false  thing.  Pride  is  based  on  fleshly  comparison.  No  one  could 
be  proud  who  saw  himself  in  the  Divine  light.  If  self-complacence  creeps  into 
oni  hearts,  it  is  quite  time  the  cake  was  tvuned.  4.  Ephraim  used  temporal 
things  inordinately  and  licentiously.  They  were  carried  into  intemperate 
excesses.  There  is  a  possibility  of  ruining  the  cake  through  self-indulgence. 
II.  The  teachings  that  ttndeelik  Ephbaim's  impeachment.  These  teachings 
strongly  emphasise — 1.  The  need  of  a  proper  balance  of  character.  Zeal  is  only 
one  side  of  the  cake.  Zeal  without  knowledge,  or  contrary  to  knowledge,  is  a 
cake  unturned.  The  like  applies  to  fidelity  and  love,  knowing  and  doing,  energy 
and  repose.  Faith  itself  is  a  cake  of  two  sides  ;  because  faith  has  its  waiting  as 
well  as  its  working  sides.  2.  The  need  of  a  proper  balance  of  truth.  3.  The 
general  drift  of  the  whole  subject  suggests  to  our  mind  the  need  of  a  correspondence 
between  what  Christ  has  done  for  us,  and  what  He  is  doing  in  us  by  His  Spirit. 
To  be  well  baked  we  need  the  Cross  of  Christ  translated  into  experience.  Paul 
knew  Christ's  Cross  as  a  means  of  experimental  crucifixion.  To  him  it  meant 
a  death  experienced  within,  in  which  the  world  became  dead  to  him  and  he  to 
it.  {James  Douglas,  M.A.)  The  crude  cake  : — In  the  East  it  is  the  custom 
to  heat  the  hearth,  then  sweep  carefully  the  portion  heated,  put  the  cake  upon 
it,  and  cover  it  with  ashes  and  embers.  In  a  little  time  the  cake  is  turned.  It 
is  then  covered  again,  and  this  process  is  continued  several  times,  until  the  cake 
is  found  to  be  sufficiently  baked.  Ephraim  has  many  representatives  at  this 
hour.     1.  The  man  who  lives  for  pleasure  alone  is  a  cake  not  turned.     One  side 


CHAP.  VII.]  ROSEA.  135 

of  his  nature  is  unduly  baked,  the  other  is  entirely  neglected.  Pleasure  has  its 
uses,  but  pleasure  as  a  business  is  a  very  poor  business  indeed.  There  are  many 
such  persons,  both  in  the  lower  and  in  the  higher  grades  of  society.  The  ir.aa 
who  lives  for  pleasure  is  dead  while  he  liveth.  He  is  a  wretched  parasite  ;  he 
is  a  reproach  to  his  species.  One  side  of  his  nature  is  burnt  to  a  crust  by  the  fires 
of  unholy  desire  ;  the  other  side  of  his  nature  is  raw  dough.     Both  are  worthless. 

2.  The  man  who  lives  for  business  alone  is  a  cake  not  turned  Business  is  good. 
Even  though  it  be  honourable,  and  the  methods  of  its  pursuit  unobjectionable, 
the  man  who  lives  for  this  life  alone  loses  this  life  as  well  as  the  life  that  is  to  come. 
The  man  to  whom  this  world  is  a  god  is  a  wretched  idolater.  This  life  is  never 
truly  lived  except  it  is  used  for  the  good  of  others  and  for  the  glory  of  God.  If 
a  man  lives  for  business  alone,  one  side  of  his  nature  is  scorched  by  the  friction 
of  the  world's  cares,  and  the  other  is  raw  dough.  3.  A  man  who  lives  for  culture 
alone  is  a  cake  not  turned.  No  man  can  claim  the  honours  of  culture,  portions 
of  whose  nature  lie  fallow.  A  true  culture  sweeps  across  every  faculty.  Man 
has  earthward,  manward,  and  Godward  relations.  If  lacking  in  any  of  these 
directions,  it  is  a  partial,  defective,  and  unauthoritative  culture.  Tried  by  this 
true  standard  many  claimants  for  the  honour  of  cultxrre  will  be  found  wanting. 
That  is  not  true  culture  which  fails  to  cultivate  the  nobler,  the  Diviner  elements 
of  the  soul.  4.  A  man  who  is  half-hearted  in  religion  is  a  cake  not  turned. 
Ephraim,  though  proud  and  haughty  as  a  tribe,  had  been  lacking  in  moral  back- 
bone, in  loyalty,  in  consecration,  in  the  service  of  God.  There  are  such  professors 
of  religion  to-day.  A  half  and  half  man  is  a  failure  always  and  everyv/here. 
To-day  Jesus  Christ  calls  for  men  with  one  heart,  and  that  heart  on  fire  with  His 
love.  We  want  no  unturned  cakes.  We  want  men  with  convictions.  It  is  said 
of  some  men  that  they  are  very  pious  Godward,  and  very  crooked  manward. 
That  is  a  severe  criticism  when  it  is  true.  That  is  not  Christ's  model  man. 
He  is  symmetrical :  he  is  baked  through  and  through.  Christ  alone  can  make 
such  men.  {R.  8.  M' Arthur,  D.D.)  Modern  Ephraism  : — Hosea  was  a  shep- 
herd and  hewer  of  wood.  There  is  nothing  conventional  in  his  style.  His 
similes  are  quaint  and  abrupt.  They  show  that  their  author  was  possessed  of 
a  quiet  vein  of  broad  humour.  "  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned  "  may  be  said 
of  most  men  in  their  relation — I.  To  the  social  circle.     Too  often  we  have — 

I.  Courtesy  minus  friendship.  2.  Appearance  of  wealth  minus  money.  3.  Claims 
to  "  family  "  and  learning.  The  amount  of  goods  in  the  shop  window  is  generally 
in  inverse  ratio  to  the  amount  in  stock.  This  comparison  may  be  applied — II.  To 
MEN  in  their  relation  TO  COMMERCE.  Too  often  we  have — 1.  Better  goods 
than  "  any  other  house."  2.  Tradesmen  "  retiring  from  business."  The  words 
"  from  this  place  "  being  purposely  omitted.  3.  Sales  at  a  tremendous  sacrifice. 
There  is  ever  a  connection  between  demand  and  supply.  Half-baked  customers 
create  Ephraimitish  tradesmen.  This  comparison  may  be  applied — III.  To 
MEN  in  THEIR  RELATION  TO  RELIGION.  Too  often  We  have — 1.  Profession  without 
practice.  2.  Letter  without  spirit.  Profession  is  valueless  without  practice. 
So  also  is  letter  without  spirit.  So  far  as  we  have  either  without  the  other,  we 
are  as  "  cakes  not  turned."  Christ  ruling  in  our  hearts  adjusts  all  human 
relations.  {J.  8.  Swan. )  The  spoiled  cake : — Hosea's  composition  epigrammatic 
and  figurative.  He  compares  Ephraim  to  "  a  silly  dove,"  easily  enticed  into  the 
net.  When  frightened,  will  not  stay  in  the  cot  where  she  is  safe.  To  "  a  wild  ass 
alone  " — foolish,  headstrong,  wilful.  "  An  empty  vine  " — fruitless  and  useless. 
"  A  child  "  tenderly  brought  up,  who  turns  out  rebellious.  "  A  merchant," 
deceitful  in  his  balances.  "  A  cake  not  turned,"  which,  for  want  of  turning  is 
burnt  on  one  side,  and  dough  on  the  other  side,  but  good  for  nothing  on  either 
side.  Israel  was  not  completely  consecrated  to  God.  I.  God  demands  the 
CONSECRATION  OF  man's  ENTIRE  BEING.  The  cake  should  have  been  baked  on 
both  sides.  Body,  soul,  time,  possessions,  should  all  be  devoted  to  God.  He 
claims  it.  The  claim  is  based  on — 1.  What  God  is  in  Himself.  2.  What  He  is 
relatively  to  us.     3.   Our  highest  interests.     The  example  of  the  best  beings. 

II.  Some  consecrate  to  God  only  a  portion  of  their  being.  Baked  on, 
one  side  only.     This  indicates — 1.  Self-will.     2.  Lack  of  supreme  love  to  God. 

3.  Aversion  to  submission.  4.  Love  of  present  pleasure.  6.  Ignorance  of  the 
ease  of  religious  service.  6.  Indecision  of  character.  III.  The  consecration 
of  only  a  portion  of  our  being  to  God  will  end  in  destruction.  It  is 
destructive  of — L  Complete  devotion.  2.  Force  of  character.  3.  True  useful- 
ness.    4.  Thorough  enjoyment.     5.  Final  peiseverance.     6.  Futuie  glory.     {B.  D, 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vn. 

Johns.)  The  unturned  cake  : — The  text  forms  part  of  the  energetic  remon- 
strance addressed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  Israel  at  a  period  of  national  degeneracy. 
They  embody  a  reproof  ;  but  the  homely  figure  must  be  deemed  most  appropriate 
in  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  What  is  the  exact  point  of  resemblance  betwixt 
/  £phraim  and  the  unturned  cake  T  At  what  stage  in  the  process  of  baking,  or  in 
what  circumstances  are  we  to  contemplate  the  cake  ?  Is  it  when  but  for  a  while 
exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  oven,  and  therefore  when  the  cake  is  partly  cold  and 
partly  hot — exhibiting  a  vivid  representation  of  that  religious  lukewarmness 
And  indifferency  which  is  so  distasteful  to  God  ?  Or  is  the  allusion  to  the  cake 
removed  from  the  oven  while  yet  only  partially  baked,  the  lower  portions,  or 
the  outside,  having  been  converted  into  bread,  while  the  remainder,  or  the  in- 
terior, is  still  dough,  thereby  pointing  to  persons  who  seek  to  make  a  composition 
betwixt  their  inclinations  and  sense  of  duty,  by  sometimes  yielding  to  the  one, 
and  sometimes  striving  to  fulfil  the  other  ?  Or  is  the  allusion  to  the  position  of 
the  cake,  and  its  state  as  thence  to  be  inferred — cold  upwardly  and  warm  beneath 
— betokening  coldness  or  disregard  to  things  above,  and  warmth  of  affection 
exclusively  to  things  below  ?  Or  is  the  allusion  to  a  cake  left  behind  in  the  oven 
till  it  is  scorched,  blackened,  and  altogether  destroyed  ;  representing  the  condition 
of  those  who,  being  given  up  and  let  alone  of  God,  gradually  become  worse  and 
worse  ?  I.  A  rebuke  to  lukewarmness  and  indiffeeency  with  regard  to 
THE  things  of  God  AND  ETERNITY.  In  the  Christian  community  there  are 
numbers  who  are  neither  bread  nor  dough.  They  have  enough  of  Christian 
profession  to  exclude  them  from  the  designation  of  heathen,  not  enough  of  heart- 
felt godliness  to  entitle  them  to  the  name  of  disciples  indeed.  They  have  the 
name,  but  want  the  reality.  The  Christians  of  the  untvu-ned  cake  are  very  skilful 
in  evading  all  impressions  of  sacredness.  It  is  not  enough  to  profess  Christianity, 
we  must  also  feel  and  live  it.     II.  A  rebuke  to  those  who  vainly  imagine 

THAT  it  is  possible  TO  SECURE  THE  SOUL'S  SALVATION  AND  YET  GRATIFY  TO  THE 

UTTERMOST  THE  SINFUL  PROPENSITIES  OF  THE  FLESH.  There  are  some  who 
occasionally  feel,  and  that  profoundly,  the  claims  of  Gospel  truth  and  righteousness. 
But  wait  a  little.  Swiftly  passes  the  morning  cloud.  The  world  and  the  flesh 
soon  resume  their  ascendency.  There  are  some  whose  entire  life  is  a  imiform 
and  sustained  effort  to  keep  up  an  alliance  betwixt  the  spirit  and  the  flesh ; 
betwixt  God  and  the  world  ;  betwixt  duty  and  carnal  inclination.  They  will  not 
follow  the  Lord  fully.  God  will  not  tolerate  a  rival.  We  must  either  serve  Him 
altogether  or  not  at  all.  III.  A  rebuke  to  the  coldness  and  unspirituality 
'  OF  professed  believers,  a  cake  cold  upwards  and  warm  underneath.  Its 
baking  may  be  so  conducted  that  while  the  under  side  is  intensely  heated,  the 
upper  part  is  as  cold  as  when  first  placed  over  a  fire.  So  many  professors.  To 
the  heavens  they  are  cold,  to  the  earth  only  are  they  warm.  IV.  An  intimation 
OF  the  condition  and  destiny  of  those  who  are  given  up  and  forsaken 
of  God.  Cakes  left  in  the  oven  to  be  burnt  and  destroyed  there.  (James 
Cochrane,  M.  A.)  Religious  indecision: — I.  Who  are  Ephraimites  T  Three 
classes.  Real  Christians,  who  are  entirely  for  God.  The  profligate,  who  make 
no  pretension  to  religion.  Some  stand  between  both,  and  seem  to  partake  of 
each.  These  are  the  characters  we  search  for.  II.  Expose  their  conduct 
AND  their  condition.  1.  This  indecision  is  unreasonable.  2.  It  is  dishonourable. 
3.  It  is  wretched.  4.  It  is  peculiarly  dangerous.  III.  Endeavour  to  bring 
MEN  to  decision.     "  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve."     {William  Jay.) 

t  Half-hearted  religion.- — I.  Half-hearted  men  never  attain  to  loftiness  of 
character.  II.  Half-hearted  men  never  accomplish  any  great  work. 
Ill,  Half-hearted  men  fail  to  secure  life's  greatest  blessing.  {A.  Hampden 
Lee. )        Inconsistency   and    incompleteness  : — The    description   is    applicable — 

I.    To    MEN    WHOSE    CONSCIENCES    ARE    THUS    CONSTITUTED.      ScrupulouS  in  SOme 

things,  they  are  frequently  overscrupulous,  and  sometimes  unscrupulous.  The 
evil  is  aggravated  when  little  things  are  its  subjects,  and  when  the  weightier 
matters  of  the  law  are  omitted,  or  when  others'  sins  and  not  our  own  are  con- 
sidered. II.  To  THOSE  WHOSE  ZEAL  IS  PECULIAR.  Like  thorns  under  a  pot,  it 
smokes  and  crackles  to-day  and  to-morrow  is  extinct.  The  religion  of  those 
who  blaze  forth  with  transcendent  glow  for  a  time,  and  then  disappear,  is  "  a 
cake  not  turned."  III.  To  those  who  carry  their  religion  only  to  certain 
PLACES.  To  the  sanctuary,  the  prayer-meeting,  and  the  communion-table, 
but  not  into  the  family,  the  store,  the  bank,  the  senate.  Or  they  may  be  out- 
wardly consistent  amidst  home  environments,  but  abroad,  or  at  fashionable 


CHAP,  vn.]  H08EA.  13T 

watering-places,  they  follow  the  multitude  to  do  evil.  {Homiletic  Review.)  The 
unturned  cake  : — Ephraim  had  been  "  mingled,"  steeped,  kneaded  up  into  a  cake, 
as  it  were,  with  the  heathen,  their  ways,  their  idolatries,  their  vices.  God  would 
amend  them,  and  they  withholding  themselves  from  His  discipline,  and  not 
yielding  themselves  wholly  to  it,  were  spoiled.  The  fire  of  God's  judgment, 
with  which  the  people  should  have  been  amended,  made  but  an  outward  impres- 
sion upon  them,  and  reached  not  within,  nor  to  any  thorough  change,  so  that 
they  were  but  the  more  hopelessly  spoiled  through  the  means  which  God  used 
for  their  amendment.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Unturned  cakes  : — "  Ephraim  is 
a  cake  not  turned  "  ;  that  is,  overdone  on  one  side,  and  undone  on  the  other. 
Excellent  and  apt  symbol  of  much  which  we  now  see  all  about  us  !  I.  Orthodoxy 
WITHOUT  LIFE.  It  is  the  most  serious  temptation  to  which  Christians  are  exposed 
to  substitute  creed  for  conduct.  If  one  is  sensibly  weak  in  his  spirituality,  he 
will  try  to  make  up  for  it  by  redoubled  emphasis  laid  upon  his  orthodoxy.  It  is 
as  though  a  soldier  should  plant  his  flag  upon  a  high  position,  and  then  go  to  sleep 
under  its  folds,  trusting  to  his  standard  to  win  the  battle,  instead  of  to  his  own 
viligant  and  energetic  fighting.  Creeds  are  the  flags  of  the  Church — very  neces- 
sary as  symbols  and  summaries  of  faith,  but  worthless  as  a  substitute  for  Christian 
living.  When  I  see  a  Christian  growing  more  and  more  zealous  for  every  punctilio  v 
of  his  creed,  while  he  is  growing  more  and  more  selfish  and  worldly  in  his  life,  ^^ 
I  say  he  is  going  forward  by  the  wind,  and  going  backward  by  the  tide  ;  when  I 
see  a  Christian  very  unctuous  in  his  prayers  and  exhortations  in  the  Church,  and 
very  bitter  and  harsh  in  his  conduct  in  the  family,  I  say  he  is  going  forward  by 
the  wind  and  going  backward  by  the  tide.  There  is  a  constant  need  that  we 
re-adjust  our  conduct  to  our  creeds,  not  that  we  should  believe  less,  but  that 
we  should  live  more.  To  avoid  inconstancy,  some  people  contract  their  belief  to 
the  size  of  the  life,  as  a  tailor  takes  in  the  seams  of  a  coat  which  is  too  large,  in 
order  to  make  it  fit  the  wearer.  This  is  a  bad  method.  Most  of  the  heresies 
and  false  doctrines  which  have  sprung  up  in  the  Church  have  resulted  from  the 
fitting  over  of  theology  to  conform  to  a  shrunken  spirituality.  II.  Piety  without 
PRINCIPLE.  It  is  a  fearful  proof  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that  one  may  be  at  the 
same  time  very  zealous  for  God  and  very  dishonest  towards  men,  lifting  up  hands 
of  prayer  and  exhortation  on  Sundays  and  stretching  out  hands  of  fraud  and 
peculation  on  week-days.  III.  Morality  without  religion.  It  is  a  saying 
very  hard  to  be  received  that  morality  and  holiness  are  entirely  different  qualities. 
Morality  is  the  religion  of  the  natural  man  ;  holiness  is  the  religion  of  the  renewed 
man.  The  one  grows  on  the  stock  of  Adam  ;  the  other  grows  on  the  stock  of 
Christ.  Morality,  even  at  its  highest  pitch,  is  not  holiness  ;  for  holiness  is  some- 
thing of  God,  wherever  found,  like  the  sunbeams  which  inhere  in  the  sun  and  are 
inseparable  from  it,  even  while  resting  on  the  earth.  Honesty,  sobriety,  purity, — 
these  are  the  highest  qualities  of  morality;  and  noble  qualities  they  are.  But 
love  to  God,  communion  with  God,  consecration  to  God, — these  are  the  attributes 
of  true  religion.  Let  us  look  to  it  that  our  cake  is  evenly  done  ;  that  our  ortho- 
doxy has  life  as  well  as  soundness ;  that  our  piety  has  principle,  honest  and  square 
and  straightforward,  as  well  as  unction  ;  that  our  morality  has  holiness  as  well 
as  uprightness.  (J.  A.  Gordon,  D.D.)  Sad  aspects  of  character: — I.  Wrong 
COMPANIONSHIP.  What  is  a  wrong  mixing  with  people  ?  Not  intermixture  in 
marriages.  Not  intercourse  in  business.  Not  associating  with  men  for  spiritual 
usefulness.  It  is  doing  as  the  Ten  Tribes  did,  mixing  with  others  for  worldly 
advantage  and  unholy  gratification.  It  is  said  that  Pythagoras,  before  he 
admitted  any  one  to  his  school,  inquired  who  were  his  intimates,  justly  conclud- 
ing that  they  who  could  choose  immoral  companions  would  not  be  much  profited  by 
his  instructions.  II.  Moral  worthlessness.  Ephraim  had  become  as  useless, 
in  a  spiritual  sense,  as  a  half-baked  cake.  It  no  longer  fulfilled  its  Divine  mission, 
maintaining  and  promoting  the  worship  of  the  one  true  and  living  God.  Useful- 
ness is  the  grand  purpose  of  our  being.  The  man  who  does  not  make  the  world 
better  than  he  found  it,  must  be  acciu-sed.  III.  Social  despoilment.  "  Strangers 
devoured  his  strength."  How  many  souls  lose  their  strength  under  the  influence 
in  which  they  mingle !  Their  intellectual  power,  social  sympathies,  moral 
sensibilities  get  used  up,  and  they  become  the  mere  creatures  of  circles  and  cir- 
cumstances. IV.  Unconscious  decay.  Moral  strength  goes  so  slowly  from 
men  that  they  are  often  not  conscious  of  its  loss  until  they  are  reduced  to  the 
utmost  prostration.  Look  at  these  aspects  of  character,  and  learn  practical 
wisdom.     Form  no  friendship  with  sinners.     Avoid  a  worthless  life.     Allow  not 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

the  social  influences  of  your  sphere  to  steal  away  your  strength,  to  eat  up  your 
manhood.  Do  not  think  that  decay  cannot  be  working  in  you  merely  because 
you  are  unconscious  of  it.  {Homilist. )  The  evil  of  a  one-sided  character  : — 
The  Sierra  Nevada  Mountains  condense  the  cloudy  moisture  upon  their  slopes, 
and  leave  the  plains  beyond  them  arid  deserts.  So  some  great  passion  or  ambi- 
tion absorbs  into  itself  all  the  force  of  the  soul,  and  leaves  us  without  any  energy 
or  inclination  for  other  and  equally  important  things.  This  will  account  for  the 
moral  sterility  of  many  of  us.  Says  Cicero  to  a  young  man :  "  Hold  off  from 
sensuality  or  soon  you  will  be  unable  to  think  of  anything  else."  Vicious  thinking 
seems  to  rot  the  tissue  of  the  brain  itself.  It  is  so  also  with  less  degrading  traits 
of  disposition.  Thus  the  passion  for  money-getting  dries  out  from  the  soul  the 
more  gracious  impulse  of  helpfulness  toward  others  and  even  the  desire  for  self- 
culture.  Under  the  spell  of  greed  a  man  possessed  of  really  brilliant  talents  becomes 
content  to  be  a  mere  "  grind  "  in  the  counting-house  or  factory.  Similarly, 
the  passion  for  repute  prevents  many  from  obtaining  that  celebrity  which  their 
natural  talents  might  otherwise  readily  win  for  them ;  their  souls  are  so  intent 
on  listening  for  outer  applause  that  they  do  not  concentrate  their  attention  upon 
the  work  that  is  to  win  the  reward.  Scores  of  literary  reputations  are  thus 
annually  wrecked  through  over-haste  in  the  making.     (J.  M.  Ludlow,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him,  yet  lie  knoweth  not. — 
Neglected  warnings:  —  I.  Grey  haibs  ark  a  sign  of  decay.  God  has 
for  wise  purposes  given  distinctive  features  to  the  different  periods  of  human 
life,  from  the  cradle  onwards  to  the  grave.  Human  life  between  the  ages 
of  forty  and  fifty  is  a  sort  of  tableland.  Growth  has  ceased,  but  decay  has 
not  begun.  After  that  time  decay  begins.  In  this  text  grey  hairs  are 
not  associated  either  with  parental  honours,  or  with  the  ripe  wisdom  of  age, 
or  with  the  piety  of  the  venerable  Simeon.  They  are  here  but  the  tokens  of 
decay,  marks  of  age,  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  dissolution.  The  truth  it 
announces  is,  that  men  may  live  in  ignorance  and  act  in  disregard  of  signs  that 
should  warn  and  alarm  them.  II.  This  appbaes  in  the  history  op  states. 
The  words  were  first  spoken  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  In  the  oppression  of 
the  poor  and  the  sighing  of  the  needy,  in  the  corruption  of  morals  and  the  decline 
of  true  religion,  the  prophet  saw  the  signs  of  his  country's  decay — these  the  grey 
hairs  that  were  here  and  there  upon  them,  which  they  knew  not.  Nor  is  that 
vmcommon.  III.  The  text  applies  to  the  false  security  of  sinners.  Be 
our  profession  what  it  may,  if  we  have  habits  of  sin — these  are  the  grey  hairs  that, 
unless  grace  convert  and  mercy  pardon,  foretell  our  doom.  Thick  as  those  grey 
hairs  on  the  head  of  age,  some  men's  lives  are  full  of  sin.  They  are  going  to  hell  as 
plainly  as  one  whose  form  is  bent  and  whose  head  is  hoary  is  going  down  to  his 
grave.  IV.  This  appears  in  men's  insensibility  to  the  lapse  and  lessons 
op  time.  Our  minds  are  formed  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  circumstances  of 
advancing  years.  Indeed,  we  often  glide  down  so  gently  as  to  be  little  disturbed 
with  the  premonitions  of  life's  close.  Men  with  furrows  on  their  brow,  and  grey 
hairs  on  their  head,  often  find  it  diflBcult  to  remember  that  they  are  old.  Death 
seems  to  flee  before  us,  like  the  horizon  which  we  ever  see,  but  never  reach.  Where 
then  is  the  hope  of  those  who  have  trusted  to  turning  religious  when  they  become 
old,  and  attending  to  the  concerns  of  a  better  world  when  they  have  ceased  to 
feel  any  interest  in  this  ?  Death  and  a  man,  so  runs  the  story,  once  made  a 
bargain — the  man  stipulating,  lest  he  might  be  taken  unawares,  that  death  should 
send  him  so  many  warnings  before  he  came.  Well,  one  day,  years  thereafter, 
to  his  great  amazement,  the  king  of  terrors  stood  before  him.  He  had  broken 
the  bargain,  so  said  the  man,  who  clung  to  life.  Death,  he  alleged,  had  sent  him 
no  warnings.  No  warnings  T  His  eyes  were  dim  ;  his  ears  were  dull ;  his  gums 
were  toothless ;  and  spare  and  thin  were  the  hoar  locks  on  his  bent  and  palsied 
head ;  these,  death's  heralds,  had  come,  not  too  late,  yet  all  in  vain.  Amid 
warnings  which  were,  however,  unnoticed  or  despised,  his  salvation  was  neglected, 
and  his  soul  lost.  And  every  setting  sun,  every  nodding  hearse,  every  passing 
Sabbath,  warn  us  that  days  of  darkness  come,  and  opportunities  of  salvation 
go.  Time  has  but  one  lock  of  hair  on  his  forehead.  If  we  would  seize  time,  we 
must  seize  him  by  the  forelock.  {T.  ChUhrie,  D.D.)  Thoughts  for  autumn  .•— • 
If  we  come  really  to  know  and  to  think  seriously  upon  the  fact  that  there  are  grey 
hairs  here  and  there  upon  us,  and  that  they  tell  us  in  a  very  simple  and  truthful 
And  straightforward  way  that  not  a  little  of  our  work  is  done,  and  that  many  of 


CHAP.  viT.]  H08EA.  139 

our  earthly  days  have  passed  from  us,  we  cannot  but  ask  ourselves,  what  then  ? 
We  are  not  to  sink  towards  nothingness  by  reason  of  feebleness  increasing  by 
the  speeding  years ;  we,  if  at  least  we  have  life  in  Christ,  are  not  to  sink  gradually 
towards  natural  decay.     If  waning  strength  must  sooner  or  later  be  ours  here, 
if  grey  hairs  here  and  there  upon  us  tell  us  of  the  swift  approaching  drying  up 
of  the  springs  of  natural  activity,  is  there  no  prospect  of  any  restoring  power  by 
which  vmfading  and  deathless  bloom  may  yet  be  ours  T     Revelation  declares  to 
us  those  things  which  the  speculations  of  earthly  knowledge,  or  the  guesses  of 
human  science,  or  even  the  certainties  of  human  observation  fail  to  supply  us. 
Faith  in  the  future ;  faith  inspired  and  made  intelligent  by  the  teaching  of  God ; 
faith  in  the  unseen  and  eternal  tells  us  that  the  future  is  real  and  truly  abiding, 
and  that  it  is  only  the  extension,  the  carrying  on  or  forward  of  our  experience 
of  the  present.     Time  will  pass  on,  our  work  will  tell  on  us,  whether  we  like  it  or 
not.     If  we  will  not  listen  to  the  teaching  of  the  grey  hairs,  it  may  be  so  much 
the  worse  for  us  both  in  time  and  in  eternity.     We  are  now  under  a  course  of 
education.     How  to  become  fitted  for  another  stage  of  life  is  the  question  of 
supreme  interest  now.     If  the  passing  seasons  remind  us  that  here  we  carmot 
abide    for   ever,    our   walk   with    God    should    be    more    constant    than   it  is. 
(W.  M'Intosh  Arthur,  M.A.)        Imperceptible  change  : — A  grey  hair  ?     It  is  the    J 
eignature  of  time.     It  is  the  beginning  of  the  end.     It  is  a  ticket  which  entitles    | 
you  to  a  seat  amongst  the  elders.     Yet  you  did  not  know  of  that  grey  hair.     This  | 
is  the  point  to  keep  in  view.     We  are  all  undergoing  imperceptible  change.     What  f 
is  true  of  giey  hairs  is  true  of  many  other  changes  in  human  life.     To  what  practical  { 
uses  can  we  turn  the  fact  of  man's  imperceptible  decay  ?     I.  Do  not  such  changes  / 

REMIND    us    IN    THE    GENTLEST   POSSIBLE    MANNER   THAT    THIS    IS    NOT    CUB   BEST  ? 

We  go  gradually  down  the  steep,  and  as  a  general  rule  time  is  given  for  reflection. 
What  indeed  is  all  life,  from  the  sunny  laughter  of  childhood  to  the  mellow 
solemnity  of  old  age,  but  a  succes.sion  of  reminders  that  our  days  are  few  and  our 
strength  a  bruised  reed  !  II.  Ought  not  the  imperceptible  changes  of  life 
TO  modify  the  estimate  which  we  form  of  cub  own  powers  ?  Other  people 
could  see  the  grey  hairs  upon  Ephraim,  but  Ephraim  himself  could  not  see  them. 
Application  of  this  may  be  made — 1.  To  ministers  who  are  unconscious  of  the 
decline  of  their  powers.  2.  To  men  who  are  officially  called  upon  to  adapt  old 
agencies  to  new  circumstances.  III.  Ought  not  such  changes  to  suggest 
serious  inquiry  as  to  the  possible  decline  of  spiritual  power  ?  It  does 
not  follow  that  physical  decline  necessitates  spiritual  decline.  But — 1.  The  spirit 
must  resist  the  decay  to  which  it  is  drawn  by  the  flesh.  2.  A  beneficial  moral 
influence  is  exerted  by  such  resistance.  The  grey-haired  Christian  should  be  a 
tower  of  strength  to  the  Christian  cause.  No  beauty  should  exceed  the  beauty 
of  his  charitableness  and  hopefulness.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  punishment  of 
Ephraim : — I.  The  sad  and  miserable  condition  of  Ephraim  considered 
simply  in  itself.  1.  The  good  they  are  deprived  of.  "  Their  strength."  God 
fits  the  punishment  to  the  sin,  in  the  old  dispensation.  What  a  sad  and  lament- 
able thing  it  is  for  men  to  spend  their  youth  and  the  strength  and  prime  of  their 
time  in  the  ways  of  sin.  It  is — 1.  Very  disingenuous.  2.  Very  hazardous.  3.  Very 
grievous  and  uncomfortable  in  the  reflections  upon  it,  when  men  shall  call  them- 
selves to  a  serious  reckoning  and  an  account  about  it.  Take  the  words  in  their 
notional  signiflcation,  as  setting  forth  the  condition  of  Israel  at  this  time. 
"  Strangers  "  may  mean  strange  gods,  strange  women,  strange  enemies.  Strange 
gods  include  strange  worship  and  strange  doctrine.  II.  Symptoms  of  ruin 
approaching.  1.  Unfruitfulness  under  powerful  means  and  dispensations  of 
grace.  2.  Strange  sins,  which  do  abound  and  increase  in  it.  3.  Plagues  as 
forewarnings.  The  aggravation  lay  in  Ephraim's  senselessness  under  all  this. 
This  proceeded  from  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  and  the  blinding  of  Satan.  AU 
this  teaches  us  two  lessons  —  pity  for  others  and  caution  for  ourselves. 
{T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Signs  of  decay: — Two  great  unchanging,  compensating 
laws  are  eternally  at  work  in  the  universe — the  law  of  growth  or  progress  and  the 
law  of  decay.  They  are  compensating  laws,  because  it  is  the  function  of  the  one 
to  correct  and  balance  the  action  of  the  other.  When  growth  reaches  its  limit, 
then  decay  begins.  This  may  be  illustrated  in  the  tides,  the  sunshine,  the  seasons, 
the  trees.  The  process  goes  eternally  on,  growth  and  decay  ;  a  period  of  infancy 
and  tenderness  developing  into  full  growth  and  maturity ;  these  in  turn  giving 
way  to  decay  and  death.  That  which  is  going  on  in  the  world  is  going  on  in  our- 
selves.    As  in  our  bodies  there  is  going  on  every  day  a  steady  process  of  supply 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLDSTBATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

and  loss,  so  is  it  also  in  the  longer  day  of  a  lifetime.  Time  does  not  stand  still 
with  any  of  us,  though  he  seems  to  deal  more  gently  with  some  than  with  others. 
But  when  we  have  reached  middle  life,  we  all  begin  to  descend.  This  does  not 
mean  a  sudden  and  total  break-up.  It  is  a  gradual  process,  but  there  are  not 
wanting  signs  to  show  us  that  it  has  begun.  The  commonest  sign  is  the  silvery 
streak,  the  grey  hairs.  There  is  something  saddening  about  decay  in  any  form. 
So  this  herald  of  the  coming  end,  the  grey  hair,  is  often  an  unwelcome  one.  It  is 
in  the  white  heat  of  the  furnace  of  affliction  that  the  first  grey  hair  often  appears  ; 
and  it  may  soothingly  speak  to  us  of  the  better  life  beyond  the  grave.  There  are 
some  people  who  "never  grow  old."  There  are  those  who,  however  age  may 
creep  on,  are  always  young  in  heart,  whom  the  world  has  not  been  able  to  spoil. 
Then  there  are  those  of  whom  we  should  not  say  "  they  never  grow  old,"  but 
"  they  will  not  believe  that  they  ever  can  grow  old."  The  mere  thought  of  life's 
end  is  a  horror ;  with  decay  fast  taking  hold  on  them,  they  will  not  believe  it, 
and  indulge  in  a  miserable  burlesque  of  youthfulness.  It  was  of  such  people 
that  Hosea  was  speaking.  He  lived  in  gloomy  times.  National  magnificence 
was  dazzling ;  but  never  had  national  sin  been  so  general  and  so  abominable. 
Hosea  lived  ahead  of  his  times.  He  saw  the  rocks  ahead  ;  but  he  could  not  persuade 
his  coimtrymen  to  see  them,  or  to  believe  that  they  were  there.  Hosea's  prophecy 
is  one  long  wail  for  the  unhappy  people  whose  day  was  over  and  they  knew  it  not. 
What  was  true  of  Israel  has  been  true  of  many  kingdoms,  greater  and  mightier 
than  it.  Did  we  see  ourselves  as  others  see  us,  we  might  even  discern  grey  hairs 
here  and  there  upon  us.  Is  there  no  falling  off  in  our  commercial  integrity  ? 
Is  not  the  Bible  dishonouured  by  a  relentless  and  destructive  criticism  ?  Think 
of  the  moral  plague-spots  of  licentious  literature.  These  are  "  grey  hairs  here 
and  there  upon  us."  What  are  we  to  do  ?  We  cannot  put  the  wrong  right. 
This  you  can  do.  Never  countenance  what  is  wrong.  Never  consent  to  any 
lowering  of  the  standard  of  Christian  morality.  Never  sacrifice  right  to  expedi- 
ency. Never  condescend  to  call  things  by  wrong  names.  Sin  is  sin.  (J.  B.  C. 
Murphy.)  Unconscious  deterioration: — Sin  in  its  worst  forms  was  prevalent 
among  the  people.  Their  strength  was  consumed  by  their  indulgence  in  kinds 
of  wickedness  which  strangers  had  introduced  among  them  :  and  everything 
betokened,  to  those  who  could  read  the  signs  aright,  that  they  were  rapidly 
hastening  to  national  extinction.  They  were  already  in  the  old  age  of  their  history, 
and  they  knew  it  not.  This  unconsciousness  of  deterioration  marks  the  distinction 
between  the  common  backslider  and  the  open  repudiator  of  the  faith.  In  ordinary 
backsliding  the  most  dangerous  element  is  that  the  man  is  largely  unaware  of  the 
change  that  has  come  over  him.  We  attempt  to  account  for  the  fact  that  a  man 
may  have  largely  fallen  away  from  Christian  rectitude  of  heart  and  life  without 
being  aware  of  his  defection.  I.  Wb  are  all  inclined  to  look  more  favourably 
ON  ourselves  than  on  others.  This  is  especially  true  in  spiritual  matters. 
A  man's  self-love,  or  self-conceit,  or  self-security,  prevents  him  from  coming  to 
an  impartial  decision,  and  he  may  be  far  gone  in  a  course  of  backsliding  before 
he  takes  note  of  the  fact.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "Apostasy  from  God  generally 
begins  in  the  place  of  prayer."  There  we  are  set  in  the  white  light  of  God's  own 
purity,  and  every  spot  in  ourselves  is  revealed  to  us.  We  are  afraid  of  such  self- 
revelations.  II.  Backsliding  steals  gradually  upon  a  man.  If  hair  changed 
from  raven  blackness  to  snowy  whiteness  in  a  single  night,  we  should  be  struck 
by  the  change,  "^ut  because  the  greyJiairs  come  one  by  one,  the  transformation 
is  little  noticed.  Backsliding  is  »  gradual  motion  ;  it  is  a  sliding  rather  than  a 
stepping.  How  may  we  counteract  this  tendency  and  discover  our  true  position? 
We  shall  know  where  we  are  if  we  test  ourselves  by  the  Word  of  God,  as  that 
has  been  vindicated  for  us  by  the  example  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
III.  Backsliding  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  individuals 

ARE  absorbed  IN  OTHER  MATTERS  TO  SUCH  AN  EXTENT  THAT  THE  STATE  OF  THE 

HEART  IS  FORGOTTEN.  It  may  be  thus  with  the  successful  merchant.  This  danger 
is  to  be  obviated,  either  by  curtailing  the  business,  or  by  consecrating  it  as  a  whole 
to  God.  He  who  in  his  daily  calling  is  consciously  and  deliberately  seeking  to  do 
the  best  for  his  Lord,  and  is  trying  to  serve  Him  in  the  store  as  really  as  in  the 
closet,  has  most  effectually  "  overcome  the  world."  If,  then,  any  one  among  us 
has  to-day  discovered  his  deterioration,  let  him  not  wait  a  single  moment  for 
restoration.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Causes  of  declension  in  religion: — A 
nation  has  often  exhibited  every  outward  mark  of  prosperity,  while  the  elements 
of  decay  had  already  begun  their  silent  work,  and  were  hastening  forward  the 


CHAP.  VII.]  B08EA.  141 

period  of  its  ruin.  Illustrate  by  Rome,  in  the  reign  of  Augustus.  So  with 
Ephraim.  The  land  was  wrapped  in  fatal  security,  and  indulging  visions  of 
prosperity,  which  hindered  them  from  seeing  the  decay,  already  visible  to  the 
eye  of  God  and  His  prophets.  A  wise  and  skilful  physician  often  discovers 
symptoms  of  disease,  and  even  of  approaching  death,  of  which  the  patient  him- 
self may  have  no  suspicion.  So  there  may  be  already  much  spiritual  declension  ; 
the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  may  have  begun  to  depart  from  the  living  God,  and 
yet  the  man  may  be  unconscious  of  his  peril.  It  has  been  said  that  "  where 
a  man  hath  real  grace,  it  may  be  part  of  a  dispensation  towards  him  that  he  is 
suffered  to  decline.  He  walked  carelessly ;  he  was  left  to  stumble  and  fall  that 
he  might  be  brought  to  feel  his  need  of  prayer,  vigilance,  and  the  help  of  almighty 
grace."  The  causes  of  declining  religion  are — I.  An  increasing  association  / 
WITH  THE  WORLD.  The  people  of  Israel  had  fatally  identified  themselves  with'  "^ 
the  sons  and  daughters  of  idolatry  around  them.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  are  not 
of  the  world ;  and  to  them  He  says,  by  His  servant,  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither 
the  things  that  are  in  the  world."  The  love  of  Christ  burns  purely  and  brightly 
in  the  heart,  when  Christ  is  all  in  all ;  but  bring  it  into  contact  with  the  world, 
and  gradually  but  surely  it  declines,  until  it  becomes  insensible.  II.  Increasing 
ZEAL  FOR  PARTIAL  VIEWS  OF  RELIGION.  As  bread  exposed  with  one  surface  to 
the  fire  would  feel  the  influence  of  the  heat  on  that  side,  while  the  under  portion 
was  only  partially  acted  upon,  so  was  it  with  the  divided  heart  of  this  people.  Some 
acknowledgment  of  God  was  outwardly  made,  but  His  fear  was  not  in  their 
hearts.  They  were  a  nation  made  up  of  contradictions;  always  in  one  extreme 
or  the  other.  Such  partial  views  of  religion  are  common  among  professors,  and 
they  will  be  invariably  found  to  mark  a  declining  state  of  heart.  Partial  views 
of  religion  lead  to  partial  and  reserved  instead  of  entire  and  willing  obedi- 
ence. III.  Inattention  to  our  spiritual  condition.  Israel  gave  a  double 
proof  of  this  dangerous  symptom.  1.  By  an  external  weakness,  which,  however 
hidden  from  others,  might  have  been  observable  by  themselves.  2.  Ephraim 
also  exhibited  external  manifestations  of  weakness,  which  all  around  might  see, 
though  they  were  hidden  from  his  own  knowledge.  Do  our  exertions  to  promote 
the  Divine  glory  relax  and  become  faint  ?  This  is  a  sign  which  we  may  dis- 
regard, but  which  others  well  understand,  and  they  place  it  as  it  ought  to 
be  placed,  to  the  account  of  declining  religion.  {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.) 
Unconscious  decay  : — In  comparing  physical  and  spiritual  decay,  attention  is 
confined  to  the  common  element  of  unconsciousness.  The  decline  of  the  body, 
and  the  decline  of  the  soul  are  alike  in  this,  that  both  may  proceed  imperceptibly. 
Unawares,  a  man  grows  older,  and,  unawares,  too,  a  man  may  grow  worse. 
Notice  the  representation  of  true  soul-prosperity.  It  is  a  state  of  perpetual 
youth.  It  should  be  characterised  by  incessant  development,  untiring  energy, 
and  ever-brightening  hope.  Whatsoever  be  the  case  with  nature,  grace  should 
know  no  old  age.  Old  age  may  crown  the  life  that  precedes  it  with  the  calm 
and  the  fruitage  of  a  mellow  autumn.  The  text  shows  the  believer's  ideal,  but 
it  also  reminds  of  the  possibility  of  falling  short  of  it ;  and  it  tells  us  of  the  real 
source  of  danger.  That  consists  in  association  with  the  world — contact  with  its 
ungodly  practices,  fellowship  with  its  ungodly  men.  In  communion  with  God 
lies  the  well-spring  of  exhaustless  refreshment,  of  tireless  and  immortal  youth. 
The  unconsciousness  that  accompanies  spiritual  decay  is  illustrated  by  the 
ignorance  so  often  exhibited  as  regards  the  advances  and  infirmities  of  bodily 
old  age.  As  with  the  decays  of  nature,  so  with  the  decays  of  grace.  The  waste 
goes  on  ;  the  chill  steals  round  ;  the  corroding  process  makes  sure  and  certain 
headway  ;  faithlessness  in  duty,  indulgences  in  sin,  conformity  to  the  world, 
may  be  making  their  havocs  in  the  soul,  and  printing  their  tokens  in  the  life. 
And  all  the  time,  while  God  is  grieved,  the  man  himself  lives  in  complete  uncon- 
sciousness of  his  state.  Content  with  its  weakness,  accepting  its  humiliations, 
and  heedless  of  its  ultimate  issue.  I.  As  to  the  evidences  of  ignorance  con- 
cerning spiritual  decline.  1.  It  proves  itself  by  the  views  which  the  back- 
slider often  entertains  as  to  others.  Men  are  far  more  alive  to  the  ravages  of 
time  in  their  friends  than  in  themselves.  And  so  men  who  are  themselves  incon- 
sistent very  frankly  and  pointedly  remark  on  the  alterations  they  perceive  in 
others.  Men  lay  their  fingers  so  readily  on  those  faults  of  a  brother  which  society, 
by  common  consent,  has  set  down  as  their  own.  In  laying  charges  at  other  men's 
doors,  men  too  often  lay  them  at  their  own.  The  man  is  ignorant  of  his  own 
condition,  and  because  ignorant,  he  is  at  peace.     2.  It  is  proved  by  the  back- 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vu. 

slider's  views  of  sin.  As  men  decline  in  years,  it  is  not  infrequently  the  case 
that  they  show  their  unwillingness  to  believe  the  fact  by  the  notions  they  hold 
as  to  what  old  age  really  is.  The  boundary  line  is  always  receding ;  as  they  move, 
it  moves,  always  away  from  them  and  always  ahead.  So  in  the  case  of  spiritual 
decline.  What  would  once  have  been  regarded  as  a  symptom,  is  looked  at  as  a 
symptom  no  longer,  while  the  decay  it  betokens  is  actually  goinc  on.  Men  thus 
learn  to  palliate  omissions  of  duty,  excuse  indulgences  in  sin,  and  accustom  their 
consciences  with  acts  which  at  one  time  they  would  have  shrunk  from.  3.  It  ia 
proved  by  the  backslider's  views  as  to  circumstances.  It  is  often  the  tendency 
of  the  old  to  complain ;  and  their  discontent  is  directed  against  the  particular 
surroimdings  where  their  lot  for  the  time  being  is  cast.  They  blame  the  rigours 
of  the  weather,  the  fastenings  of  the  house,  the  texture  of  their  garments,  for  the 
feelings  which  distress  them.  But  the  true  reason  is  that  they  themselves  are 
feebler  ;  the  quantity  of  life  in  them  has  gone  down.  It  is  so  with  the  decays  of 
the  soul.  Some  men  are  constantly  telling  us  that  religious  character  and  religious 
agencies  aroimd  them  have  changed  for  the  worse.  According  to  them,  every- 
thing is  against  them  in  the  situation  they  occupy ;  they  have  neither  the  Christian 
fellowship  that  wiU  suit  them,  nor  the  Christian  ministry  that  will  profit.  But 
the  fault  is  nearer  home.  It  is  this,  the  eye  that  discerns  things  is  dim.  4.  It  is 
proved  by  men's  views  of  truth  and  duty.  Old  age  painfully  betrays  its  uncon- 
sciousness by  tricking  itself  out  in  the  dress  and  aping  the  manners  of  a  youth- 
time  that  has  long  gone  by.  And  does  not  the  ignorance  of  the  backslider  betray 
itself  in  the  same  self- willed  way  ?  Men  in  whom  the  paralysis  of  a  religious 
decay  has  begun,  continue  to  use  the  language,  and  engage  in  the  services,  and 
involve  themselves  in  the  responsibilities  that  are  proper  only  to  those  who  are 
in  possession  of  grace, — strong  with  the  strength  and  bright  with  the  bloom  of  a 
youth  which  their  God  maintains.     II.  The  causes  of  this  unconscious  decay. 

1.  This  spiritual  deterioration  is  usually  so  very  gradual.  If  the  infirmities  of 
old  age  leapt  forth  at  a  spring,  the  reality  would  be  plain  and  undeniable  enough. 
So  with  the  soul.  The  lapse  of  strength  is  so  gradual,  the  progiess  of  decay  is  so 
subtle  and  so  slow.  Spiritual  decline  is  like  physical  decline.  2.  While  the 
process  is  gradual,  it  is  sometimes  general,  affecting  others  than  ourselves.  One 
reason  why  so  many  are  unconscious  of  the  havocs  of  old  age  lies  in  this,  that 
their  companions  are  getting  old  round  about  them.  In  the  spiritual  sphere, 
let  a  man  surround  himself  with  the  society  of  the  irreligious  and  the  worldly, 
let  him  live  where,  on  every  side  of  him,  he  sees  habits  of  life  and  standards  of 
thought  that  are  aU  but  the  counterparts  of  his  own ;  is  it  so  strange  that  he  should 
be  unconscious  of  his  state  ?  It  is  just  such  society  a  backslider  seeks,  to  the 
silencing  of  his  better  nature,  and  the  confirmation  of  his  own  self-deception.  There 
is  no  human  standard  he  can  judge  by,  no  human  contrast  that  can  rouse  him. 
3.  As  the  unconsciousness  of  old  age  is  always  associated  with  the  wish  to  believe 
one's  self  young,  so  the  unconsciousness  of  spiritual  decay  is  produced  by  the 
desire  to  believe  one's  self  prosperous.  With  the  man  who  tries  to  minimise 
his  shortcomings,  and  persuade  himself  that  his  life  and  his  creed  are  in 
harmony,  self-examination  is  neglected,  the  plain  speaking  of  faithful  friends 
is  resented,  the  home-thrusts  of  a  Gospel  ministry  are  parried,  the  testimony  of 
the  revealing  Word  is  avoided.  All  the  time  the  decay  is  going  on.  The  man  is 
Mttfeeling  and  in  danger  of  becoming  past  feeling.  What  of  ourselves,  brethren  ? 
{W.  A.  Gray.)  The  blindness  of  a  people  to  their  oum  degeneracy: — Grey  hairs 
on  Ephraim  denoted  his  moral  degeneracy,  or  spiritual  declension.  He  is  described 
in  this  chapter  as  very  immoral,  corrupt,  and  profligate.  But  he  was  so  stupid  in 
his  degenerate  and  languishing  state  that  he  took  no  notice  of  the  visible  and 
mortal  symptoms  upon  him.  When  a  degenerate  people  are  blind  to  the  marks 
of  their  degeneracy,  they  are  in  a  dangerous  condition.  I.  When  do  a  people 
BEAR  MARKS  OF  MORAL  DEGENERACY  ?  1.  When  they  neglect  the  religious  duties 
which  they  once  practised.  The  children  of  Israel  were  once  a  very  religious 
people.  After  a  while  they  began  to  degenerate  ;  forsook  the  house  and  worship 
of  God,  cast  His  laws  behind  their  backs,  and  did  what  was  right  in  their  own 
eyes.  They  became  formal,  insincere,  and  hypocritical.  In  the  time  of  Hosea 
they   were   covered   with   grey   hairs,    the   sad    marks   of  religious   degeneracy, 

2.  Wlien  they  dislike,  oppose,  and  reject  the  plain  and  important  doctrines  of  true 
religion,  which  they  once  professed  to  love  and  believe.  A  people  generally 
become  corrupt  in  practice  before  they  become  corrupt  in  principle.  God's 
people  soon  became  unsteadfast  in  their  covenant,  and  as  corrupt  in  sentiment 


CHAP,  vn.]  HOSEA.  143 

as  they  had  been  in  practice.  They  took  up  with  the  doctrines  and  delusions  of 
the  grossest  idolaters.  3.  When  they  run  into  such  irreligious  and  vicious 
practices,  as  they  once  hated  and  avoided.  This  was  the  case  of  Israel  in  the 
days  of  their  declension.  They  fell  into  every  species  of  vice  and  dissipation.  A 
gure  sign  of  degeneracy.  4.  When  they  justify  themselves  and  others  in  the 
evil  courses  which  they  once  condemned.  When  Israel  became  degenerate, 
they  justified  unholy,  unscriptural,  and  ungodly  conduct  in  themselves  and  others. 
A  people  often  become  very  wicked  when  they  presume  to  justify  one  another 
in  their  wickedness.  This  is  one  of  the  most  visible  and  striking  signs  of  a  general 
and  gross  degeneracy.  II.  Why  abb  a  deqeneeatb  pboplb  so  blind  to  thk 
VISIBLE  MARKS  OF  THEIB  DEGENEEACY  ?  1.  Because  they  havo  degenerated 
gradually.  This  the  metaphor  of  the  text  intimates.  They  neglect  one  religious 
duty,  then  another  and  another,  until  they  neglect  them  all.  They  coimtenance 
and  justify  one  sinful  course  after  another,  and  finally  justify  all  evil  and  condemn 
all  good.  2.  Moral  degeneracy  is  of  a  blinding  nature.  It  flows  from  a  corrupt 
heart,  which  blinds  reason  and  conscience.  3.  They  choose  to  be  blind,  because 
they  are  loath  to  see  their  own  criminality.  When  they  review  their  past,  they 
feel  self-reproach  and  self-condemnation :  so  they  avoid  reviewing.  They  hold 
fast  deceit  and  refuse  'o  return.     III.  Theie  voluntaby  and  cbiminal  blind* 

NESS  TO  THBIR  DEGENEEACY  EXPOSES  THEM  TO  PECULIAR  DANGER.      I.  It  prevents 

them  from  using  the  proper  means  of  reformation.  So  long  as  people  think  they 
are  pursuing  a  right  course,  they  will  have  no  thought  or  desire  of  reforming.  A 
great  politician  says,  "It  was  never  known  that  any  degenerate  nation  ever  reformed 
themselves."  If  reformed,  it  was  owing  to  some  foreign  superior  power.  This 
is  as  true  of  religion  as  of  civil  government.  2.  It  disposes  them  to  resist  all 
means  that  are  used  to  reform  them.  Such  persons  may  fear  that  God  will  say,  Let 
them  alone,  and  use  no  more  means  with  them.  Improvement — (1)  A  people 
may  degenerate  in  religion  while  they  are  making  great  progress  in  other  respects. 
Success  in  their  secular  concerns  naturally  tends  to  make  them  worldly-minded. 
They  ardently  desire  temporal  prosperity,  and  prefer  it  to  religious  attainments 
and  growth  in  grace.  (2)  It  is  a  favour  to  a  degenerate  people  to  have  the  marks 
of  their  degeneracy  plainly  pointed  out.  For  though  they  are  so  visible,  yet 
they  are  willingly  blind  to  them.  The  more  unwilling  they  are  to  see  the  dis- 
agreeable marks  of  their  degeneracy,  the  more  necessary  it  is  that  they  should 
be  made,  if  possible,  to  see  them ;  for  without  the  sight  of  them,  God  Himself 
cannot  reform  them.  (3)  Have  you  not  degenerated  in  respect  to  the  religious 
duties  which  you  once  practised  ?  (4)  Manifestly  the  people  referred  to  in  the 
text  were  in  a  very  dangerous  state.  (5)  There  is  peculiar  need  of  special  Divine 
influence  to  revive  the  languishing  state  of  religion,  over  which  we  may  have  to 
mourn.  (6)  A  time  of  religious  declension  is  a  time  for  all  the  sincere,  faithful 
friends  of  God  to  seek  unto  Him  for  His  gracious,  renewing,  sanctifying,  and  quicken- 
ing influences.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Grey  hairs: — The  wise  man  has  said, 
**  A  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory,  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness." 
It  is  so,  as  a  symbol  of  honoured  age,  bringing  deserved  veneration ;  a  type  of 
wisdom  ;  a  sign  of  long  and  faithful  service  to  God  and  man  ;  and  is  thus  deserving 
of  honour ;  while  the  fresh  young  heart  is  always  moving  with  its  own  enthusiasm, 
though  sometimes  fettered  by  increasing  infirmities.  Over  such  a  grey  head  no 
one  has  need  to  mourn.  Why  then  does  Hosea  speak  in  these  terms  of  Ephraim  ? 
Because,  as  drivelling  dotage  and  decrepitude  are  the  result  and  penal  consequence 
of  a  misspent  life,  and  as  old  age  to  such  is  "  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf,"  so  its  near 
approach  is  to  be  dreaded  and  shrunk  from,  Ephraim's  was  an  ungodly,  immoral, 
irreligious  dotage.  "  Grey  hairs  "  is  simply  a  typical  phrase  setting  forth  the 
loss  of  the  promise  of  early  youth,  through  a  prodigal  disregard  of  Divine  favour 
and  support.  I.  The  twofold  sign  of  religious  declension.  "  Grey  hairs," 
and  ignorance  of  their  existence.  The  symptoms  by  which  it  is  manifested. 
1.  Decline  of  interest  in  Divine  things.  When  a  man's  enthusiasm  cools  down, 
and  he  forgets  the  freshness  and  vigour  of  his  spiritual  youth,  he  exhibits  the  grey 
hairs — the  first  streaks  of  silver  whiteness  which  betoken  spiritual  decrepitude. 
True,  there  are  many  godly  Christians  who,  marking  that  their  interest  is  not  so 
deep  and  fresh  as  in  the  past,  are  under  a  constant  cloud  of  dread.  Now  this 
concern  is  not  a  symptom  of  real  decline,  but  of  intensified  and  increased  anxiety 
and  desire  for  the  things  an  interest  in  which  we  fear  to  lose.  It  is  not  the  issuing 
forth  of  the  verdict  of  conscience ;  but  such  dissatisfaction  is  similar  to  that  of 
the  apostle  Paul :  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,"  &c.    Such  concern  is 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vit. 

salutary  and  preservative — a  sign  of  watchfulness  and  vigour,  and  it  will  succeed 
in  averting  the  evil  it  dreads.     It  is  a  great  blessing  when  a  Christian's  conscience 
is  sensitive  and  active.     But  what  I  mean  is,  that  listless  indifference  to  the 
blessings  of  Christian  privileges,  that  indolent  abstinence  from  the  performance 
of  Christian  duty  which  marks  the  conduct  of  so  many  in  our  churches.      2.  Too 
great  a  love  of  worldliness.   "  Ah  !  "  say  you,  "  there  you  are  again  !   '  Worldliness ! ' 
just  one  of  the  counters  you  ministers  play  with,  words  which  mean  anything 
\  or  nothing."     Well,  so  long  as  the  New  Testament  stands  it  will  be  the  duty  of 
]  every  minister  of  Christ  to  repeat  these  words  :  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the 
I  things  which  are  in  the  world.     If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  o!E  the  Father 
f  is  not  in  him."     It  is  all  very  well  to  reply  "  this  was  said  of  the  heathen  world, 
but  times  are  different  now."     Talk  about  pagan  Rome  !     What  about  London  ? 
What  about  Oxford  ?     Are  our  streets  so  pure  that  we  can  dispense  with  the 
exhortation,  "  Love  not  the  world,"  &c.  ?     There  may  be,  e.g.,  too  much  absorp- 
tion in  permissible  things.     No  man  has  a  right  to  forbid  us  to  devote  a  due  portion 
of  our  time  to  lawful  business  ;  but  it  is  so  easy  for  a  man,  when  he  at  first  becomes 
lawfully  absorbed,  to  glide  insensibly  into  too  much  absorption.    I  value  no  man's 
manhood  who  is  not  anxious  about  his  worldly  position  and  reputation  ;  but 
when  this  becomes  all  in  all ;  or  when  he  longs  for  the  condiments  and  stimulants 
of  worldly  pleasure  ;  when  a  man  yawns  and  looks  about  him  and  feels  there's 
nothing  in  life  worth  living  for  ;  when  Christianity  does  not  satisfy  his  desires, 
and  so  he  goes  in  search  of  objects  which  gradually  usurp  the  position  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  so  that  the  whilom  Christian  begins  by  giving  undue  prominence 
to  worldly  things  and  ends  by  substituting  them  for  the  Divine  ;  then  let  him 
beware — "  Grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him,"  though  perhaps  he  knows 
it  not.     3.  Loss  of  power  :  for  Christian  work  and  for  spiritual  conflict.     You 
ask  a  man  to  undertake  some  Christian  duty,  and  he  says  he  cannot  do  it.     He 
\  means  it,  and  it  is  true  !  for  it  is,  alas  !  very  possible  for  a  Christian  man  to 
1  lose  not  only  inclination,  but  power.     Watch  that  man,  and  as  time  goes  on  his 

ipowerlessness  is  more  and  more  evident,  till  he  becomes  a  mere  creature  of  circum- 
stances, a  waif  on  the  current,  a  piece  of  thistle-down,  the  sport  of  contrary  winds  : 
'  instead  of  placing  his  heel  on  the  neck  of  his  lusts.  Your  indisposition  and 
incapacity  for  work  have  this  awful  other  side :  you  are  unable  to  resist  the  power 
of  temptation.  You  can  do  nothing  for  God,  and  have  no  power  to  strive  against 
evil.  Beware  of  loss  of  energy  :  your  enfeebled  state,  the  result  of  "  wasted 
substance  "  is  a  sure  sign  that  "  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  you."  II.  Its 
CAUSES.  1.  Indolence  :  this  always  ends  in  inability.  1.  First  and  foremost 
the  Christian  has  to  cultivate  the  grace  of  industry.  With  activity  and  watchful 
earnestness,  there  is  no  fear  of  inability  and  decrepitude.  2.  Neglect  of  wholesome 
spiritual  food — God's  appointed  ordinances  and  means  of  grace.  3.  Unchristian 
society.  "  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength."  Descending  to  the  level  of 
such  society  makes  us  feel  we  are  fit  for  no  higher,  and  disinclines  us  for  the  work 
of  God.  And  with  it  all,  the  saddest  thing  is,  "he  knoweth  not."  "  Because  thou 
sayest,  .  .  .  and  knowest  not,"  &c.  (Rev.  iii.).  Awful  ignorance,  accompanied 
by  a  senile  conceit.  Haven't  looked  in  the  glass  of  God's  Word.  III.  The 
CURE.  Not  a  mere  nostrum.  You  will  never  get  rid  of  the  deep-running  evil  by 
cleansing  the  surface  of  the  stream.  L  Through  self-examination.  Let  us  be 
candid  with  ourselves.  The  first  result  may  be  panic  and  shivering  dread  ; 
but  don't  be  afraid  of  the  mirror :  take  it  in  your  hand  on  bended  knees.  There 
must  be  fair  dealing  with  conscience :  let  it  speak  out !  If  it  condemns,  well 
and  good  !  Better  to  know  now  than  through  all  eternity  what  fools  we  have 
been.  Know  the  best,  or  know  the  worst.  Be  thankful  to  God  if  the  best  be  ; 
be  thankful,  too,  if  the  worst  leads  you  to  return  to  Him  with  broken  heart.  A 
hearty,  humbling  sense  of  sin  means  sanctification  and  salvation.  2.  Humble 
application  to  the  Great  Physician.  He  has  had  many  such  cases.  Poor  David 
became  exceedingly  grey-headed,  but  under  the  bracing  remedies  of  the  Great 
Physician  he  went  forth  once  more  the  man  after  God's  own  heart.  (/.  Dunn.) 
Grey-haired  unawares  : — Among  the  reminders  and  remonstrances  which  it  was 
the  mission  of  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Beeri,  in  the  days  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah, 
to  deliver  to  Ephraim,  there  was  this  significant  passage,  expressive  of  a  reckless 
people's  unconscious  decline,  whose  lapses  were  taken  account  of  on  high,  and 
Ephraim  knew  it  not — "  Yea,  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him,  yet  he 
knoweth  not."  Who,  asks  Hartley  Coleridge,  ever  saw  their  first  grey  hairs, 
or  marked  the  crow  feet  at  the  angle  of  the  eyes,  without  a  sigh  or  a  tear,  a 


CHAP,  vn.]  H08EA.  145 

momentaneous  self-abasement,  a  sudden  sinking  of  the  soul,  a  thought  that  youth 
is  fled  for  ever  ?  "  None  but  the  blessed  few  that,  having  dedicated  the  spring  of 
their  life  to  heaven,  behold  in  the  shedding  of  their  vernal  blossoms  a  promise  that 
the  season  of  immortal  fruit  is  near."  Grey  hairs,  in  an  advancing  stage  of  the 
plural  number,  may  be  here  and  there  upon  us  before  we  know  of  it.  But  the 
actual  discovery  of  the  first  is  a  bit  of  an  epoch  in  one's  life ;  and  if  one  exclaims. 
Eureka  !  it  is  hardly  in  the  most  jubilant  of  tones,  or  the  most  exultant  of  tempers. 
It  is  among  the  graver  of  his  recreations  that  a  clerical  essayist  pictures  to  himself, 
man  or  woman,  thoughtful,  earnest,  and  pious,  sitting  down  and  musing  at  the 
sight  of  the  first  grey  hairs.  Here  is  the  slight  shadow,  he  puts  it,  of  "  a  certain 
great  event  which  is  to  come  "  ;  the  earliest  touch  of  a  chill  hand  that  must  prevail 
at  length.  Here  is  manifest  decay  ;  we  have  begun  to  die.  (Francis  Jacox,  B.A.) 
Signs  of  spiritual  declension  : — We  note  such  as  may  be  found  in  the  individual 
life.  I.  Some  of  the  signs  of  spiritual  decay.  They  are  not  numerous  and 
obtrusive,  betokening  one  ripe  for  the  grave,  but  the  grey  hairs  are  "  here  and  there," 
requiring  some  attention  ere  we  are  aware  of  them.  1.  There  is  the  growth  of 
the  critical  temper.  There  is  a  critical  temper  which  is  no  sign  of  health.  It 
is  a  ready  fault-finding.  Hosea  accuses  the  people  of  outspoken  and  defiant 
unbelief ;  "he  stretched  out  his  hand  with  scorners."  That  was  the  ending 
and  consummation  of  apostasy  ;  but  the  beginning  was  the  hinted  dislike,  the  cool 
acquiescence,  the  captious  criticism,  the  inclination  to  see  spots  in  the  sun,  to 
pick  holes  in  sacred  things.  The  habit  of  criticism  grows  as  faith  declines.  2.  An 
abatement  of  feeling.  A  sincere,  consecrated  soul  is  full  of  feeling,  emotion, 
intensity.  It  regards  the  good  and  beautiful  with  enthusiasm,  the  evil  and  ugly 
with  abhorrence.  But  it  is  possible  for  the  most  intense  Christian  soul  to  lose  its 
sensibility  and  to  become  callous.  And  such  a  process  of  hardening  may  be  very 
gradual.  There  is  a  creeping  moral  paralysis.  3.  A  relaxed  conscience.  Hosea 
saw  in  Ephraim  luxury,  profligacy,  license,  idolatry — things  they  had  learned 
from  the  pagan.  In  this  direction  we  too  must  watch  for  signs  of  degeneration. 
There  may  be  no  overt  act  of  iniquity  whilst  the  process  of  deterioration  is  still 
going  on.  We  hear  it  said  of  a  Christian  man,  "  he  is  not  as  particular  as  he  used 
to  be."  That  often  means  that  "  grey  hairs  "  are  seen  upon  them.  Any  practical 
antinomianism  is  a  sure  sign  of  spiritual  decay.  4.  An  increased  leaning  to  the 
worldly  side  of  life.  The  world  grows  upon  us,  its  interests,  its  friendships,  its 
pleasures.  Men  choke  the  higher  life  with  the  lust  of  gold,  they  strangle  it  with 
silken  cords  of  fashion  and  pleasure  ;  and  the  gold  that  chokes  is  taken  in  small 
doses,  the  cord  that  strangles  is  woven  a  thread  at  a  time.  Grey  hairs  have  a 
tendency  to  multiply  quickly,  and  secret  venial  weaknesses  may  precipitate 
flagrant  backsliding.  II.  We  may  be  quite  unconscious  of  the  mischief. 
The  complaint,  "  he  knoweth  it  not,"  is  repeated  with  an  air  of  surprise.  Men 
are  often  unconscious  of  the  decay  of  their  physical  powers  and  mental  faculties. 
It  is  the  same  with  men  morally  and  spiritually — conscience,  faith,  feeling,  hope, 
and  aspiration  decline,  and  yet  they  go  on  as  confidently  as  ever.  How  do  men 
resist  the  teaching  of  the  grey  hairs  ?  1.  They  make  light  of  them.  It  is  quite 
a  humorous  event,  those  first  grey  hairs.  But  for  all  the  merriment  it  is  a 
pathetic  signal.  So  men  talk  away  and  smile  away  the  first  signs  of  spiritual 
declension.  2.  They  pull  out  the  grey  hairs;  resolutely  refusing  to  look  at  the 
fact  of  growing  weakness  and  age.  There  is  a  corresponding  mood  to  this  in  the 
spiritual  life.  Whenever  disquieting  signs  appear,  we  absolutely  decline  to  give 
them  a  place  in  ovu-  thoughts.  3.  Sometimes  the  grey  hairs  are  hidden.  People 
are  very  clever  in  hiding  the  warning  hints  of  natvtre.  So  we  have  ingenious  ways 
of  hiding  from  ourselves  and  passing  over  the  ominous  signs  of  a  weakened  faith, 
an  impaired  conscience,  a  declining  spirituality,  a  less  strenuous  Christian  life. 
We  enlarge  upon  our  excelling  good,  instead  of  noting  the  exceptional  and  unusual 
evil  which,  spreading,  may  spoil  all.  4.  Perhaps  we  give  the  grey  hairs  another 
colour.  We  are  masters  in  thesf!.,days  of  capillary  chromajiujs.  The  tokens  of 
decay  are  turned  into  things  of  beauty  and  pride.  And  we  often  give  to  the  signs 
of  spiritual  decay  another  colour.  We  do  not  call  our  carping  criticism  of  revela- 
tion unbelief ;  we  dub  it  "  an  open  mind."  We  do  not  brand  our  coolness  and 
insensibility  as  indifference  ;  we  know  it  as  "  the  philosophic  mind."  We  do  not 
call  our  carnal  compliances  walking  after  the  flesh ;  we  are  getting  rid  of  puritanism. 
Christian  men  transfigure  the  very  signs  of  their  backsliding,  and  glory  in  the 
things  which   ought  to   fill   them  with   concern.      {W.  L.    Watkinson.)  The 

unobserved  grey  hairs : — Take  the  text — I.  Litebally.     1.  Grey  hairs  excite  our 
lO 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

admiration.  Beautiful  arrangement  of  Providence — that  old  age  should  be 
spent  in  sitting  still  and  taking  life  easily.  The  first  years  of  a  man's  life  are 
spent  in  weakness.  Why  ?  That  he  may  prepare  himself — physically,  mentally, 
morally,  and  spiritually — for  the  life  that  lies  before  him.  So  also  the  last  years. 
Age  resembles  childhood  as  sunset  resembles  sunrise.  2.  Grey  hairs  are  matter 
for  gratitude.  Life  is  like  a  table-land :  many  die  in  descending  the  slope  from 
birth  to  the  age  of  thirty ;  many  more  in  walking  along  the  level  plain  from  thirty 
to  fifty  ;  few  live  to  descend  the  slope  on  the  other  side.  3.  Grey  hairs  are  matter 
for  serious  contemplation.  "It  is  an  awful  pity,"  said  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Queen 
Elizabeth's  Secretary  of  State,  "  that  so  few  men  Inow  for  what  purpose  they  came 
into  the  world  until  they  are  ready  to  go  out  of  it."  4.  Grey  haTS  are  matter  for 
searching  of  heart.  Opportunities  wasted ;  the  final  opportunity  almost  gone. 
II.  Figuratively.  The  foUy  of  neglecting  life's  warnings.  I.  We  ought  not 
to  need  special  warnings.  (1)  Reason  speaks  to  us.  We  know  that  as  surely 
as  night  comes  after  day  and  autumn  follows  summer,  so  death  follows  life  and 
eternity  time.  (2)  Observation  and  experience  speak  to  us.  The  noise  of  weeping 
is  in  palace  and  hovel :  old  and  young,  good  and  evil,  fair  and  frail  go  in  steady 
procession  to  the  grave.  (3)  Revelation  warns  us  that  it  is  appointed  unto  man 
once  to  die,  &c.  2.  Yet  the  gradualness  of  life's  transitions  renders  these  special 
.  messengers  acceptable.  And  experience  proves  them  necessary.  "  Our  clock," 
''  says  Carlyle,"  strikes  when  there  is  a  change  from  hour  to  hour ;  but  no  hammer 
in  the  horologue  of  time  peals  through  the  universe  when  there  is  a  change  from 
era  to  era."  The  transitions  of  our  lives  from  one  stage  to  the  next  are  wrought 
in  similar  silence.  They  are  hardly  perceptible.  And  yet — to-day,  to-morrow, 
and  the  next  day,  and  in  all  its  vivid  reality,  the  sea  of  glass  and  the  eternal 
shore  will  burst  upon  us.  In  view  of  the  gradualness  of  this  progress  to  eternity, 
and  the  certainty  of  our  destiny,  we  may  be  grateful  for  the  reminder  of  grey 
hairs.  3.  The  angels  of  God  come  to  us  with  silent  footsteps.  Grey  hairs  are 
*'  the  first  faint  streaks  of  the  morning  "  ;  but  then,  what  will  that  morning  mean 
to  us  ?  III.  Spiritually.  A  neglected  Bible,  listlessness  in  prayer,  coldness 
towards  the  Master,  indifference  towards  sin,  the  sh  nning  of  Christian  companion- 
ships, carelessness  as  to  attendance  at  the  house  of  God,  callousness  a^  to  the 
eternal  welfare  of  others, — these  are  grey  hairs  that  appear  upon  us,  but  we  neither 
notice  them,  nor  the  fearful  declension  of  which  they  tell.  One  day  I  met  a  man 
pf  eighty.  I  said  :  "  My  friend,  will  you  not  trust  the  Saviour  ?  "  "  No,  no," 
he  answered  ;  "  I'm  too  old,  too  old  !  "  The  very  next  day  I  met  a  youth  of 
sixteen.  "  My  friend,"  I  said  again,  "  will  you  not  trust  the  Saviour  ?  "  "  No. 
no,"  he  answered ;  "  I'm  too  young,  too  young  !  "  And  betwixt  that  "  too  old  " 
and  that  "  too  yoimg  "  we  all  go  dancing  to  our  everlasting  doom.  What  a 
strain    on   the   mercy   of   God !     (F.    W.    Boreham).  Hoariness    was    upon 

man: — Some  understand  by  this  that  the  Israelites  were  not  improved  by 
long  succession  of  years,  by  advance  of  age.  But  the  prophet  rather  expresses 
the  greatness  of  their  calamities,  when  he  says,  "hoariness  was  sprinkled  over 
him."  When  any  one  is  grievously  pained  and  afflicted,  he  becomes  hoary  through 
the  very  pressure  of  evils.  Israel  had  been  visited  with  so  many  evils  that  he 
was  worn  out,  as  it  were,  with  old  age;  the  prophet  intimates  that  the  diseases 
which  prevailed  among  the  people  of  Israel  were  ing.urable,  for  they  could  by  no 
remedies  be  brought  to  repentance.     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  10.  They  do  not  return  to  the  Lord  their  God,  nor  seek  TTim  for  this. — 

Oiir  sin : — I.  The  duty  of  seeking  God.  In  the  Scriptures  this  stands 
for  the  whole  of  religion.  Religion  is  thus  substantially  expressed  for  two 
reasons — because  it  is  with  God  that  we  have  principally  to  do.  Our  principal 
dependence  is  upon  Him ;  our  principal  expectations  are  from  Him  ;  our  principal 
connections  are  with  Him.  And  because,  before  we  can  have  anything  to  do 
with  Him,  we  must  find  Him.  Morally  and  spiritually  considered,  we  are  away 
from  God,  and  God  is  away  from  us.  We  have  left  Him  criminally,  and  He  has 
left  us  penally.  Our  first  concern,  therefore,  is  to  find  God,  and  for  this  purpose 
we  are  to  seek  after  Him.  See  four  purposes  for  which  we  are  to  seek  God,  and 
which  enter  essentially  into  genuine  religion.  1.  We  are  to  seek  to  know  Him. 
Here  genuine  religion  begins.  2.  We  must  seek  to  enjoy  Him,  and  in  order  to 
this  we  must  be  reconciled.  Till  His  anger  is  turned  away  from  us,  He  cannot 
comfort  us.  3.  We  are  to  seek  to  serve  Him.  He  is  our  Master  to  obey  and  to 
V.  ait  upon.     4.  We  must  seek  to  resemble  Him.     It  is  the  essence  of  religion,  to 


CHAP,  vu.]  H08EA.  147 

be  like  Him  whom  we  worship.  You  cannot  resemble  His  natural  perfections ; 
you  can  His  moral  perfections.  II.  The  neglect  of  this  duty.  "  They  do 
not  seek  the  Lord  their  God."  Are  there  no  exceptions  ?  Yea,  God  always  has 
His  remnant.  But  the  language  of  Scriptm-e  is  awful  upon  this  subject.  Its 
language  implies  generality,  if  it  does  not  imply  universality.  Glance  at  five 
classes  of  delinquents.  1.  Infidels.  Who  deny,  at  least,  the  moral  providence 
and  government  of  God,  and  also  a  future  state.  2.  The  profligate.  These  hide 
not  their  sin  as  Sodom,  but  publish  it  like  unto  Gomorrah.  3.  The  careless. 
Who  are  indifferent  to  everything  of  a  religious  nature.  4.  Formalists.  Who 
have  a  name  that  they  live,  but  are  dead.  5.  Partial  seekers.  Whose  goodness 
is  like  the  morning  cloud.  Not  always  insincere  at  the  time.  Their  religion  is 
dependent  upon  external  excitements.  This  is  enough  to  refute  the  lies  you 
find  in  all  our  chiu-chyards,  where  every  tombstone  and  every  headstone  tiells 
you  that  all  the  parish  has  gone  to  heaven,  or  is  going  there.  III.  The  aggbava- 
tion  of  this  neglect.  "They  seek  not  the  Lord  their  God  for  all  this."  All 
what  ?  How  various  and  numerous  are  the  means  which  God  is  providing, 
and  which  He  perpetually  employs  as  the  prevention  of  sin  and  the  excitements 
to  holiness  ;  or  to  induce  men  to  seek  the  Lord  their  God.  What  are  they  ? 
Profusion  of  benefits  in  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  The  Scriptures,  which 
men  have  in  their  own  hand,  and  in  their  own  tongue.  Sending  His  ministers, 
so  that  men  can  hear  the  words  of  eternal  life.  The  power  of  conscience.  The 
various  addresses,  reproofs,  admonitions,  encouragements,  derived  from  their 
various  connections,  father,  mother,  &c.  Afflictions.  Public  calamities.  The 
Jews  were  threatened  with  four  very  sore  judgments.  1.  From  wild  and  noisome 
beasts.  2.  From  war.  3.  From  famine.  4.  Pestilence.  Here  we  recently 
have  awfully  resembled  them.  The  sermon  was  preached  on  the  day  of  national 
humiliation  on  account  of  the  cholera.  But  repentance  is  never  produced  by 
unmixed  terror.  Terror  may  drive,  but  goodness  alone  leads  to  repentance. 
You  are  not  to  yield  entirely  to  the  seducements  of  croaking  and  brooding.  Close 
with  a  reflection,  turning  on  the  goodness  of  God  and  depravity  of  man.  The 
goodness  of  God,  who  sees  all  sins,  and  yet  forbears.  The  depravity  of  man, 
in  that  the  beneficiaries  are  constantly  neglecting  and  opposing  their  kind 
Benefactor.  How  the  goodness  of  God  and  the  depravity  of  man  have  been 
displayed  in  our  country.  Apply  to  individuals.  Individualise  you  in  your 
gratitude,  your  penitence,  your  danger,  and  your  hope.  {William  Jay.)  Will 
not  be  humbled: — 1.  God  expects  we  should  turn  upon  affliction.  2.  Afflictions, 
if  not  sanctified,  will  never  turn  the  heart.  3.  It  is  a  great  aggravation  of  men's 
sins  not  to  turn  under  afflictions.  4.  Though  afflictions  may  work  repentance, 
yet  such  repentance  is  seldom  true ;  it  will  not  often  sustain  the  trial.  5.  True 
repentance  is  rather  a  seeking  of  God's  face  than  oiu*  own  ease  from  afflictions. 
{Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 

Ver.  11.  Ephraim  also  Is  like  a  silly  dove  without  heart. — A  aiUy  dove: — 
The  race  of  Ephraim  is  not  extinct.  Men  are  to  this  day  very  much  like 
what  they  were  in  the  days  of  the  prophets.  I.  A  saintly  similitfde. 
"  Ephraim  is  like  a  dove."  The  dove  is  the  figure  constantly  chosen  to  set  forth 
the  beauty  of  holiness,  the  believer,  the  Church,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  all 
congregations  there  are  those  who  are  like  doves,  but  not  Christ's  doves.  You 
cannot  tell  them  from  genuine  believers.  They  are  quite  harmless.  They  do 
no  mischief  to  others  in  their  lives.  They  are  amiable,  admirable.  They  are 
like  doves  for  loving  good  company.  They  have  the  same  meekness,  apparently, 
as  distinguishes  the  dove.  They  are  not  sceptics  :  they  frequent  the  house  ol 
Grod,  behave  in  a  seemly  manner,  and  with  meekness  receive  the  Word.  The  dove 
is  a  cleanly  feeder,  and  we  have  many  who  get  as  far  as  that.  They  have  come 
to  know  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  But,  while  they  have  an  orthodox  head, 
they  have  a  heterodox  heart.  As  a  dove  is  molested  by  all  sorts  of  birds  of  prey, 
so  these  persons  do,  for  a  time,  share  the  lot  which  befalls  the  people  of  (Jod. 
II.  A  SECRET  distinction.  "  A  dove  without  heart."  This  implies  a  lack  of 
understanding.  The  dove  knows  but  little,  and  is  easily  snared.  It  does  not 
seem  to  possess  the  wits  and  senses  of  some  others  of  the  feathered  tribe.  So 
there  are  many  who  have  no  real  knowledge  of  the  truth.  They  rest  in  the  letter, 
and  think  that  is  enough.  They  also  lack  a  decided  heart,  and  a  bold  heart, 
and  a  powerless  heart.  III.  A  severe  description.  "A  silly  dove."  There 
may  be  some  sort  of  dignity  in  being  a  fool,  but  to  be  silly — to  attract  no  attentioa 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm 

except  ridicule — is  so  utterly  bad,  that  I  do  not  know  how  a  more  sarcastic  name 
could  be  applied.  IV.  A  serious  consideration.  It  is  no  rare  thing  to  find 
the  attendant  of  the  sanctuary  an  imbeliever.  Be  not  deceived ;  the  Gospel  will 
harden  such  people  as  now  are.  Some  of  the  grossest  men  were  once  credulous 
and  apparently  meek-hearted  hearers  of  the  Word,  but  they  sat  imder  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  till  they  grew  ripe  enough  to  deny  God  and  curse  Him.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  SimpHcitt/  may  be  unworthy  : — The  prophet  blames  Israel  for  foolish 
credulity,  and  compares  them  to  a  dove,  for  they  had  invited  the  Egyptians  and 
sent  to  Assyria  for  help.  Simplicity  is  indeed  a  commendable  virtue  when  joined 
to  prudence.  But  as  everything  reasonable  and  judicious  in  men  is  turned  into 
wickedness,  when  there  is  no  integrity ;  so  when  men  are  too  credulous  and  void 
of  all  judgment  and  reason,  it  is  then  mere  folly.  And  this  folly  is  opposed 
to  the  knowledge  which  God  had  offered  Israel  in  His  law.  It  was  not  that  they 
sinned  through  ignorance,  but  that  they  were  destitute  of  all  judgment.  Men 
are  not  to  be  excused  by  the  pretext  of  simplicity,  for  the  prophet  condemns  this 
weakness  in  the  Israelites.  We  ought  to  attend  to  the  rule  of  Christ,  "to  be 
innocent  as  doves,  yet  to  be  prudent  as  serpents."  When  we  despise  the  Word 
and  neglect  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  follow  our  vagrant  imaginations,  we  despise 
and  quench  the  light  of  the  Word,  and  we  also  wilfully  perish,  when  the 
Lord  would  save  us.  {John  Calvin. )  The  siUinesa  of  sin  : — When  pursued 
by  a  bird  of  prey  the  dove  trusts  to  the  rapidity  of  its  flight,  instead  of  at  once 
throwing  itself  into  the  nearest  recess,  where  the  interference  of  man,  or  the 
narrowness  of  the  place  might  render  it  secure  from  molestation.  So  Ephraim, 
instead  of  trusting  God,  rested  his  hope  of  defence  on  negotiations  with  Assyria 
or  Egypt.  What  do  naturalists  say  about  the  dove  ?  I.  It  is  too  silly  to  defend 
ITS  OWN.  Most  creatures  will  stand  by  their  young  and  defend  them  to  the  last ; 
but  the  dove  allows  them  to  be  captured  without  resistance.  Ephraim  had 
sunk  into  this  state  :  his  most  distinguished  blessings  were  going  from  him,  and 
he  did  not  struggle  to  retain  them.  The  sinner  will  not  battle  with  the  devil  to 
defend  his  own — his  force  of  thought — his  sensibility  of  conscience — his  freedom 
of  will — his  purity  of  love — he  allows  these  precious  things  to  be  taken  from  him 
without  a  struggle.  II.  It  is  too  silly  to  feel  its  loss.  The  dove  will  lose 
its  nest,  and  not  feel  it.  Men  under  the  influence  of  sin  do  not  feel  their  loss. 
Whatever  is  taken  from  them,  they  still  cling  to  earthly  things.  III.  It  is  too 
silly  to  escape  danger  (Prov.  vii.  23).  So  sinners  will  not  flee  to  the  right 
place  of  safety.  They  are  too  silly  to  be  calm  under  trial.  The  dove  has  not 
the  courage  to  stay  in  the  dove-house  when  frightened,  it  flutters  and  hovers 
roimd,  and  so  exposes  itself  to  new  and  greater  dangers.  So  Ephraim  hurried 
forth  in  quest  of  foreign  help,  and  was  the  more  exposed  to  calamities  and  ruin. 
And  it  is  thus  with  souls  under  the  influence  of  sin.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  12.  I  will  spread  My  net  upon  them;  I  will  bring:  them  down  as  tixe 
fowls  of  the  heaven.  —  The  fowler  of  retribution :  —  Trans.  "  As  they  go, 
I  spread  My  net  over  them,  I  bring  them  down  as  fowls  of  the  heavens." 
As  they  go  to  Egypt  or  Asshur,  seeking  help  in  their  difficulties.  Here 
the  work  of  retribution  is  spoken  of  as  the  work  of  the  fowler.  It  includes 
two  things.  I.  Entrapment.  The  retributive  providence  of  God  employed 
the  Assyrians  as  a  net,  which  so  ensnared  the  Israelites  that  they  could 
not  escape.  How  often  in  the  history  of  the  world  is  this  retributive 
entrapment  witnessed  !  Illustrate — Joseph's  brethren.  Crucifixion  of  Christ. 
Luther  at  Wattburg.  Bunyan  at  Bedford.  The  net  that  entangled  siimers  is 
not  manufactured  in  heaven,  it  is  made  on  earth,  made  by  themselves. 
II.  Abasement.  However  high  up  they  may  tower  in  their  ambitious  work, 
retribution  has  missiles  to  bring  them  down.  There  are  men  who,  in  their  worldly 
prosperity,  pride,  and  ambition,  soar  like  the  eagles  high  up  in  heaven  above  all 
the  rest.  An  ancient  philosopher,  being  asked  what  Jupiter  does  in  the  highest 
heaven,  replied,  "  He  pulls  down  the  haughty,  and  exalts  the  humble."  (Homilist. ) 
Self-dependence  humiliated  / — The  dove  brought  down  from  its  almost  viewless 
height,  fluttering  weakly,  helplessly,  and  hopelessly  under  those  same  meshes, 
is  a  picture  of  the  self-dependent  spirit  humiliated,  overwhelmed  by  inevitable 
evils,  against  which  it  impotently  struggles,  from  which  it  seems  to  see  its  escape, 
but  by  which  it  is  held  as  fast  as  if  it  lay  motionless  in  iron.     (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  They  have  not  cried  unto  Me  with  their  heart,  when  they  howled  upon 


CHAP,  vn.]  HOSEA.  149 

their  beds. — Death-bed  repentance  : — When  called  to  encounter  dangers,  every 
possible  precaution  should  be  taken  beforehand.  Seasons  of  peril  and  distress 
often  wring  from  the  most  hardened  expressions  of  sorrow  and  remorse.  These 
are  to  be  attributed,  for  the  most  part,  to  the  alarming  perplexity  in  which  they 
are  involved,  and  differ  widely  from  the  heart-felt  supplications  of  the  humble 
and  contrite.  The  procrastinating  sinner  cannot  delude  the  all-seeing  God  by 
his  selfish  attempt  to  palm  off  these  shrieks  of  a  terrified  soul  for  the  sincere  sorrow 
of  the  penitent.  There  are  few  persons  so  hardened  in  guilt  as  not  to  promise 
themselves  some  season  of  amendment ;  and,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  a  death- 
bed repentance  is  that  upon  which  they  rely.  1.  The  grand  motive  which  should 
influence  the  sinner  in  turning  to  God  is  love  to  the  kind  and  gracious  Father, 
who  has  so  long  borne  with  his  waywardness,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  promote  His 
glory.  2.  A  reliance  on  a  death-bed  repentance  implies  a  doubt  of  the  declara- 
tions of  the  Bible,  that  God  expects  us  to  walk  before  Him  during  the  days  of  our 
earthly  pilgrimage  in  holiness  and  righteousness.  God  commands  us,  most 
explicitly,  to  work  while  it  is  day,  and  reminds  us  of  an  hour  when  the  Master 
of  the  house,  having  closed  the  door,  all  applications  for  admission,  no  matter 
how  loud  or  importimate,  will  be  in  vain.  3.  It  is  a  prominent  feature  in  the 
great  plan  of  redemption  that  we  should  openly  acknowledge  our  allegiance  to 
God  by  becoming  a  member  of  His  Church  ;  and  by  a  holy  life  and  heavenly 
conversation  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour."  If  all  should  look  to 
a  death-bed  repentance  to  fit  them  for  heaven,  what  a  prospect  the  world  would 
present !  4.  In  these  enlightened  days,  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  one  within 
the  limits  of  civilised  life,  who  had  not  repeatedly  heard  of  the  offers  of  mercy, 
through  the  merits  of  a  crucified  Saviour.  The  world,  however,  has  presented 
too  many  charms  ;  business  completely  engrossed  his  thoughts  ;  the  care  of 
providing  for  the  mere  earthly  wants  of  a  family  engaged  too  much  of  his  time 
to  leave  any  for  the  concerns  of  his  soul.  If  the  thought  arises,  When  shall  I 
prepare  for  my  final  account  ?  the  devil  stands  ready  to  suggest  that  a  few  hours 
of  prayer  on  a  death-bed  will  be  preparation  enough.  And  the  careless  worldling 
listens  most  readily  to  the  sly  tempter's  advice.  {John  N.  Norton.)  Insuffi- 
ciency and  hypocrisy  of  death-bed  remorse  : — That  religion  can  never  be  genuine 
and  saving,  lasting  and  happy,  which  is  not  the  religion  of  the  heart.  By  the  heart 
is  meant  that  which  universal  custom  has  attached  to  the  term,  namely,  the 
choice,  the  affections,  the  pleasures,  the  sincerity  of  the  soul.  Religion  must 
be  our  chosen  portion,  our  beloved  employ,  our  chief  delight,  our  sincere  and 
real  character.  There  is  a  radical  deficiency,  an  utter  worthlessness  in  the  religion 
that  does  not  reach  and  possess  and  penetrate  the  heart.  It  is  a  mere  name, 
a  mere  form,  a  mere  pretence,  a  mere  delusion.  Nothing  short  of  Divine  grace 
can  plant  religion  in  the  heart.  There  is  in  the  carnal  mind  of  man  an  aversion 
to  genuine  religion.  The  renewing  of  the  mind  is  therefore  plainly  essential  to 
true  godliness.  All  means  must  in  themselves  be  insufficient  to  produce  genuine 
religion.     I.  The  deep  and  awful  impressions  often  produced  on  the  minds 

OF  SINNERS  BY  THE  APPARENTLY  NEAR  APPROACH  OF  DEATH.   "  They  howled 

upon  their  beds."  The  word  "  howled  "  imports  the  violence  of  all  their  emotions 
and  cries  and  protestations;  rage  mingled  with  their  terror.  1.  At  such  a  time 
the  soul  is  awakened.  2.  As  the  natural  result  of  the  awakening  of  the  soul, 
it  is  fiUed  with  terror.  3.  Now  the  soul  of  such  an  awakened  sufferer  is  filled 
with  tormenting  regrets  and  self-upbraidings  for  past  folly,  neglect,  and  wicked- 
ness. 4.  Resolutions  of  repentance  and  reformation,  if  life  should  but  be  spared, 
are  often  most  violently  expressed ;  and  no  more  perhaps  is  said  than  is  at  the 
moment  meant.  But  such  resolutions  often  betray  the  sufferer's  ignorance  of 
the  treachery,  corruption,  and  weakness  of  his  own  heart.     II.  Frequently 

SUCH  TERRORS  ARE  UNACCOMPANIED  BY  ANY  CHANGE  OP  HEART,  AND  THE  PRO- 
FESSIONS AND  RESOLUTIONS  MADE  UNDER  SUCH  CIRCUMSTANCES  ARE  OFTEN  HYPO- 
CRITICAL. Afflictions  are,  indeed,  the  established  means  by  which  God  awakens 
the  careless,  slumbering  souls  of  men  to  an  effectual  saving  sense  of  Divine  things. 
The  man  who  makes  death-bed  professions  is  often  more  deluded  than  those  whom 
he  addresses.     III.  Found  on  these  considerations  an  argument  to  enforce 

SERIOUS   attention   TO   THE   SOLEMN   AFFAIRS   OP  THE   SOUL   DURING   THE   PERIOD 

OP  HEALTH  AND  EASE.  Man  is  a  being  so  constituted  and  circumstanced  by 
his  Maker  that  it  becomes  his  duty  and  interest  to  carry  forward  his  views  to 
the  future,  and  to  make  a  timely  provision  for  it.  Religion  makes  great  use  of 
this  reasonable  principle  of  our  nature.     Here  is  the  greatest  need,  the  highest 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

exercise  for  a  wise  providence  in  preparing  for  futurity.  We  must  die.  Take 
that  statement  to  include  all  that  inseparably  attends  and  follows  death.  With 
such  a  prospect  before  us  can  we  with  any  wisdom,  with  any  safety,  defer  to 
the  last  critical  hour  the  great  work  of  preparation  for  an  event  so  awful  and 
momentous  ?     {A.W.) 

Ver.  15.  Thongh  I  have  liound  and  strengrtlieiied  their  arms,  yet  do  they 
imagine  mischief  against  Me. — Divine  dispensations  abused  : — I.  God's  dis- 
pensations    WITH     MEN     AKE     CHARACTERISED     BY    VARIETY.       The     eventS     of 

human  life  are  of  a  mixed  and  conflicting  character.  But  all  are  under  the 
direction  of  the  Great  Father.  As  the  soil  to  be  fruitful  requires  the  frosts  </ 
winter  as  well  as  the  sunbeams  of  spring  and  summer,  man  requires  trials  as  well 
as  joys  to  make  his  spirit  fruitful  in  good  works.  II.  Whatever  the  character 
OF  the  Divine  dispensations  they  are  often  perverted.  "  They  imagine 
mischief  against  Me  "  It  matters  not  what  the  treatment,  they  continue  to 
rebel.  They  are  like  the  sterile  ground,  to  which  all  seasons,  all  weathers  are 
alike.  Observe — 1.  The  force  of  the  human  will.  It  can  oppose  the  influences 
of  God,  and  turn  what  He  designs  for  good  to  ill.  Man  is  a  voluntary  agent. 
This  links  him  to  moral  government,  makes  him  responsible  for  his  actions, 
and  invests  his  existence  with  a  momentous  solemnity.  2.  The  depravity  of 
the  human  heart.  This  force  of  will  explains  not  man's  rebellion,  for  regenerate 
souls  and  holy  angels  have  it,  and  they  run  in  the  way  of  the  Divine  command- 
ments. The  reason  of  the  rebellion  is  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  which 
is  desperately  wicked.  Then  open  your  hearts  to  the  various  dispensations 
of  heaven  ;  and  be  thankful  for  their  variety.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  16.  They  return,  hut  not  to  the  Most  High. — Partial  repentance : — Sin, 
in  its  worst  forms,  was  rampant  in  the  land,  and  the  very  rulers  rejoiced 
in  the  wickedness  of  their  people.  The  cause  of  all  this  social  and  national 
decay  was  in  their  original  departure  from  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  That  was  the 
root  of  the  tree  which  bore  such  poisonous  fruit.  A  melancholy  description 
of  character  is  given  in  this  chapter.  Warned  by  God's  servants  of  the  dangers 
that  were  before  them,  the  people  were  for  a  time  startled  into  a  kind  of  thought- 
fulness  and  reformation.  But  they  soon  became  worse  than  before.  The  nation 
was,  by  turns,  very  religious  and  repenting,  and  very  wicked  and  iniquitous.  In 
the  text  we  are  shown  what  in  them  was  defective,  and  led  to  the  disastrous  con- 
sequences of  their  ultimate  captivity.  It  was  their  partial,  unspiritual  repentance. 
They  returned,  but  not  to  God.  They  returned,  and  so  imagined  all  was  well 
with  them,  but  not  to  God,  and  so,  at  length,  destruction  overtook  them.  Their 
repentance  was  a  godless  thing.  So  often,  when  men  are  aroused  from  their 
carelessness,  they  go  a  little  way,  but  not  the  whole  way ;  they  retrace  their 
steps,  but  they  do  not  return  to  God.  I.  Things  which  indicate  the  presence 
op  imperfect  repentance.  1.  The  grounds  on  which  sorrow  is  felt  by  such  a 
penitent  for  sin.  There  is  nothing  of  God  in  the  sorrow.  The  regret  has  the 
character  of  remorse  and  not  that  of  repentance.  It  is  grief  for  the  consequences 
and  punishment  of  sin,  and  not  for  the  guilt  of  it  in  the  sight  of  Grod.  Of  such 
worldly  sorrow  there  are  not  a  few  painful  instances  in  the  Word  of 
God.  Saul,  Pharaoh,  Ahab,  &c.  2.  The  character  of  the  reformation  which 
such  a  penitent  makes.  He  returns  to  what  he  was  before  he  fell  into  heinous 
sin  ;  or,  at  least,  to  the  worldly  standard  of  respectable  morality,  but  not  to  God. 
It  is  all  external,  not  internal.  It  makes  the  man  for  the  time  a  Pharisee,  but 
not  a  Christian.  This  is  very  common  in  our  times.  A  man  has  been  addicted 
to  some  vice ;  he  is  prone  to  consider  that  repentance  for  him  just  means 
abstinence  from  that  sin ;  and  so  he  rests  in  that  as  if  it  were  all  that  is  required. 
He  mistakes  the  laying  aside  of  his  besetting  sin  for  the  laying  aside  of  every 
weight.  Another  form  of  this  partial  reformation  is  to  be  found  in  the  external 
formalism  of  those  who  imagine  that  to  repent  means  simply  to  attend  church, 
take  the  communion,  &c.  When  a  man  rests  in  that,  as  if  it  were  reformation, 
he  is  not  returning  unto  God.  3.  The  nature  of  the  motive  from  which  this 
reformation  is  set  about.  It  is  not  for  God's  sake,  but  their  own  sake,  and  that 
very  much  as  restricted  to  this  life  that  they  seek  to  return.  It  is  of  the  nature 
of  a  bargain,  in  which  the  sinner  covenants  to  give  so  much,  if  Grod  will  give  so 
much,  and  not  at  all  of  the  natiu-e  of  a  return  for  many  favours  received  at  the 
handa  of  God,     It  is  repentance  for  the  sake  of  his  own  interest,  not  for  God's 


CHAP,  vn.]  HOSEA.  151 

glory,  and  the  work  of  Christ  has  had  no  share  in  it ;  it  is  done  without  God's 
Spirit.  II.  Dangerous  consequences  that  result  from  this  partial 
REPENTANCE.  1.  It  leads  to  self-deception.  The  man  thinks  that  all  is  right  with 
him  because  he  has  come  so  far,  while,  in  point  of  fact,  everything  is  wrong.  He 
becomes  thus  in  a  manner  proof  against  all  expostulation,  and  dexterously  turns 
away  from  him  every  appeal  that  can  be  made.  There  is  no  form  of  self-deception 
more  common  and  more  dangerous.  2.  It  leads  to  self-conceit.  The  man  has 
done  it  all  himself,  and  is  very  well  satisfied  with  the  doing.  He  carries  his  head 
higher  than  his  fellows.  He  is  even  led  to  cavil  at  and  decry  many  of  the  most 
important  principles  of  the  Gospel.  It  exalts  man  into  his  own  saviour,  and  that 
is  tantamount  to  saying  it  leaves  a  man  unsaved.  3.  It  leads  to  repeated  fallings 
away.  This  is  a  corollary  from  the  last.  "  A  proud  look  goeth  before  a  fall." 
Christians  who  have  true  repentance  do  sometimes  fall.  But  it  is  when  they 
too  have  become  heady  and  high-minded.  The  falls  are  not  legitimate  consequences 
of  their  repentance.  But  in  the  case  of  partial  penitents  nothing  else  could  be 
expected.  4.  It  leads  to  the  hardened  heart.  Nothing  so  tends  to  indurate 
the  soul  as  the  frequent  repetition  of  such  imperfect  turnings.  5.  It  leads  to 
Bwift  and  sudden  destruction.  III.  Indicate  what  true  repentance  is.  There 
is — 1,  A  proper  sense  of  sin.  It  is  a  departure  from  God.  2.  A  proper  idea  of 
God.  That  reacts  upon  the  sense  of  sin,  making  it  more  intense  and  powerful. 
God  now  is  viewed  as  the  God  of  love.  At  the  foot  of  the  Cross  the  revelation 
comes  of  what  sin  is,  and  of  what  God  is.  3.  A  genuine  reformation.  It  is  a 
return  of  the  whole  man  to  God.  The  word  implies  a  new  heart  as  well  as  a 
new  life,  or  rather,  a  new  heart  in  order  to  a  new  life.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Defective  repentance : — I.  They  return.  Some  change  is  effected  in  their 
conduct,  and  perhaps  in  their  disposition.  1.  There  is  a  moral  distance  from  God, 
which  is  the  state  of  all  men  by  nature.  They  do  not  seek  Him  as  the  supreme 
good,  nor  serve  Him  as  the  Sovereign  Lord.  2.  A  sinner's  return,  if  feigned, 
still  supposes  a  sense  of  this  distance  to  be  impressed  upon  the  mind,  sufficient 
to  warn  him  at  least  of  his  danger.  3.  Ephraim's  return  supposes  some  partial 
change  both  in  the  disposition  and  in  the  outward  behaviour.  Some  sins  are 
avoided  and  some  duties  performed  in  order  to  satisfy  conscience  and  appease 
present  convictions.  The  power  of  conscience  and  self-love  may  carry  men  a 
great  way  in  religion,  but  leave  them  short  of  eternal  life.  Be  not  content  with 
engaging  in  this  or  the  other  duty,  or  with  making  a  profession  of  religion ;  but 
let  there  be  a  thorough  and  effectual  change,  a  total  renunciation  of  sin,  and  a 
surrender  of  the  whole  soul  to  God.  II.  They  return,  "  but  not  to  the  Most 
High."  Instances  of  defective  repentance  in  persons  who  are  under  religious 
impressions.  1.  There  are  some  who  rest  in  their  convictions,  as  others  do  in 
their  sins.  2.  Some  become  satisfied  with  a  mere  negative  religion.  3.  Some 
are  confident  of  their  salvation  merely  because  of  their  imaginary  joys  and  com- 
forts. 4.  Some  rest  satisfied  with  Gospel  privileges  in  having  a  name  and  a 
place  among  the  saints,  and  thus  deceive  their  own  souls.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
Counterfeit  repentance  : — Conscience  daily  condemns  ;  but  the  Spirit  is  ever  at 
hand  suggesting  godly  and  penitent  thoughts  and  drawing  our  hearts  to  God. 
Men  in  general  are  extremely  anxious  to  pacify  and  still  the  upbraiding  voice  of 
conscience,  but  real  and  heartfelt  repentance  is  the  last  method  which  they  will 
make  use  of  for  this  purpose.  Sinners  take  every  way  but  the  right  one  for 
quieting  their  guilty  fears.  If  we  could  look  through  the  world,  and  dive  into 
men's  secret  thoughts  and  motives,  we  should  find  self-deception  prevailing  under 
an  immense  variety  of  forms.  There  is  but  one  kind  of  repentance  which  is 
acceptable  to  God.  There  are  a  thousand  ways  of  stifling  the  conscience  and 
deceiving  ourselves  with  something  like  repentance.  1.  One  of  the  most  common 
errors  on  this  subject  is,  when  a  man  imagines  that  he  has  repented  and  forsaken 
his  sin,  although  the  truth  is,  that  he  is  no  longer  tempted  strongly  to  the  indulgence 
of  that  particular  sin.  He  is  conscious  of  an  alteration  in  his  life,  and  this  makes 
him  think  that  he  has  amended  his  life.  Illustrate  by  a  young  man's  giving  up 
his  vices,  and  by  the  aged  man  who  is  become  old  and  infirm.  Their  hearts  may 
be  quite  unchanged.  You  have  not  repented  because  you  are  no  longer  guilty  of 
certain  sins  which  you  once  habitually  committed.  2.  Some  persons  are  alarmed 
by  the  voice  of  conscience  to  such  a  degree  that  they  can  no  longer  continue  in 
the  unrestrained  course  of  sin  and  folly  which  hitherto  they  have  pursued.  The 
Spirit  of  God  strives  with  them  very  earnestly  in  order  to  bring  them  to  His  fold. 
After  many  severe  struggles  with  their  convictions,  they  set  about  the  work  of 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

repentance  and  reformation.  But  these  persons,  after  the  first  alarm  has  sub- 
sided, grow  weary  of  well-doing.  The  outward  amendment  goes  as  far  as  a  certain 
point,  but  no  further.  Different  men  will  carry  it  to  different  lengths.  But 
in  all  these  cases  something  is  kept  back.  The  heart  is  wrong.  There  was  some 
selfish  end  in  view.  The  love  of  sin  still  reigns  in  the  heart.  Men  cast  off  some 
outward  sinful  practices  without  returning  to  God.  3.  There  are  some  whose 
repentance  consists,  not  in  forsaking  sin,  but  in  performing  some  outward  religious 
duties.  They  are  religious  on  Sundays  only.  To  lay  unpleasant  thoughts  to  sleep 
they  become  strict  and  regular  in  their  attendance  at  the  house  of  God.  Some 
persons,  in  order  to  quiet  their  consciences  by  a  decent  show  of  religion,  will  go  very 
far  in  outward  acts  of  devotion.  But  the  evils  in  their  lives  are  not  put  aside. 
4.  Our  Lord  has  described  another  description  of  persons,  who  lull  their  consciences 
to  sleep  by  a  false  repentance,  in  the  parable  of  the  sower.  "  Some  seed  fell  among 
thorns."  They  begin  well,  but  their  ardour  and  earnestness  soon  fall  off,  they 
lose  their  first  love.  The  principal  part  of  their  religion  consists  in  right  notions 
and  accurate  views,  but  their  hearts  are  stiU  unchanged.  It  is  easier  for  such 
persons  to  leam  their  own  state  by  serious  and  honest  self-examination,  than  it 
is  for  others  to  discover  it  for  them.  The  work,  then,  must  be  done  by  yourselves. 
(J.  Jowett,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Vbb.  I.  Set  thy  trumpet  to  thy  mouth.  —  The  Oospd  trumpet:  —  1.  By 
sounding  the  Gospel  trumpet  the  mind  of  God  can  alone  be  communicated 
to  man.  The  voice  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  must  be  heard  from  the 
Scriptures.  To  the  whole  Christian  priesthood  the  command  is  given,  "  Preach 
the  Word."  2.  It  is  the  purpose  that  all  shall  hear  and  obey  the  Gospel  trumpet. 
The  silver  trumpet  of  the  wildnerness  was  for  the  entire  encampment.  "  Preach 
the  Gospel  to  every  creature."  3.  In  setting  the  trumpet  to  the  mouth,  we 
must  give  no  uncertain  sound.  In  the  ordinance  of  the  silver  trumpet  the 
greatest  care  was  taken  to  instruct  the  sons  of  Aaron  in  its  proper  use.  What 
is  the  Gospel  ?  Is  it  not  this  ?  (1)  Man  is  a  sinner,  and  responsible  for  his  own 
salvation.  (2)  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  Saviour.  (3)  Man's  part  in  his  salva- 
tion is  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  faith  must  trust  wholly  in  God,  and  produce 
a  pure  life.  (4)  In  the  Gospel  trumpet  is  Divine  power  ;  hence  hope  of  victory 
over  every  spiritual  foe.  Intemperance,  infidelity,  Sabbath  desecration,  indiffer- 
entism,  sin  in  the  heart — these  are  the  Jerichos  of  our  day.  Where  is  the  hope 
of  taking  these  strongholds  of  Satan  ?  The  preaching  of  the  Cross  as  the  power 
of  God.  Then  set  this  Gospel  trumpet  to  thy  mouth  !  (A.  H.  Moment.)  As 
an  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord,  because  they  have  transgressed  My 
covenant^  and  trespassed  against  My  law. — The  conventional  Church  : — These 
words  are  singularly  abrupt,  and  indicate  the  suddenness  of  the  threatened 
invader.  By  '  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  we  are  to  understand  Israel  as  a  section 
of  the  professed  people  of  God.  I.  As  endangered.  How  comes  the  eagle  T 
Ravenously,  suddenly,  and  swiftly.  A  conventional  Church  is  in  greater  danger 
than  any  secular  community,  because — I.  Its  guilt  is  greater.  2.  Its  influence 
is  more  pernicious.  Whose  influence  on  society  is  the  most  baneful — the  man 
who  denies  God,  the  man  who  ignores  Him,  or  the  man  who  misrepresents  Him  ? 
The  conventional  Church  gives  society  a  mal-representation  of  God  and  His 
religion.  II.  As  warned.  Blow  a  blast  that  shall  thrill  every  heart  in  the 
vast  congregation  of  Israel.  Why  sound  the  warning  ?  I.  Because  the  danger 
is  tremendous.  2.  Because  the  danger  is  at  hand.  3.  Because  the  danger 
may  be  avoided.  What  is  wanted  now  is  a  ministry  of  warning  to  conventional 
Churches.  III.  As  repentant.  "  Israel  shall  cry  unto  Me,  My  God,  we  know 
Thee."  Oh  hasten  the  day  when  all  conventional  Churches  shall  be  brought 
to  a  deep  and  experimental  knowledge  of  God  and  His  Son !  When  this  tran- 
spires the  dense  cloud  that  has  concealed  the  sun  of  Christianity  shall  be  swept 
away,  and  the  quickening  beam  shall  fall  on  every  heart.  (Homilist.)  Ood 
coming  in  judgment : — Whatever  be  the  local  and  particular  references  as  to  the 
eagle,  the  great  principle  remains  from  age  to  age  that  God  comes  to  judgment 
in  various  forms,  always  definitely,  and  always,  as  we  shall  see,  intelligibly,  not 


CHAP,  vra.]  ROSEA.  153 

only  inflicting  vengeance  as  a  Sovereign  whose  covenants  have  been  outraged, 
but  condescending  to  explain  the  reasons  upon  which  His  most  destructive  judg- 
ments are  based.  Thus  we  read,  "  Because  they  have  transgressed  My  covenant, 
and  trespassed  against  My  law  "  :  the  covenant  had  been  broken  by  idolatry, 
and  the  law  had  been  violated  by  social  sins.  It  is  needful  to  mark  this  distinc- 
tion with  great  particularity,  because  it  shows  the  breadth  of  the  Divine  com- 
mandment. God  is  not  speaking  about  a  merely  metaphysical  law, — a  law 
which  can  only  be  interpreted  by  the  greatest  minds,  and  put  into  operation 
on  the  sublimest  occasions  of  life  ;  He  is  speaking  about  a  law  which  had  indeed 
its  lofty  religious  aspects,  but  which  had  also  its  social,  practical,  tender  phases, 
in  whose  preservation  every  man,  woman,  and  child  in  the  kingdom  ought  to 
be  interested.  God  has  made  it  clear  that  Bin  is  always  a  crime.  Whoever 
sins  against  God  sins  against  his  own  soul.  Once  let  God's  beneficent  laws  be 
violated,  and  the  man  does  not  only  suffer  metaphysically,  or  go  down  in  some 
practical  quantity  or  quality,  but  he  actually  suffers  in  body  and  estate,  some- 
times apparently,  always  really.     (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  My  God,  we  know  Thee. — Agnosticism:  —  An  agnostic  is  not  one 
who  knows  nothing,  for  some  men  who  are  embraced  by  this  term  are  men 
of  unusual  mental  attainments  and  ability.  He  is  one  who  neither  denies  nor 
affirms.  The  term  is  applied  to  those  who  hold  that  there  are  matters  pertaining 
to  religion  which  we  not  only  do  not  know,  but  have  no  means  of  knowing.  An 
agnostic  does  not  simply  assert  the  incompleteness  of  human  knowledge  upon 
things  Divine,  but  that  real  knowledge  concerning  such  things  is  an  impossibility 
to  man.  An  agnostic  is  not  an  atheist.  He  does  not  deny  the  existence  of  a 
God.  He  is  not  a  sceptic  or  doubter.  He  is  positive  in  affirming  that  we  neither 
have  nor  can  get  any  knowledge  of  God,  or  of  the  unseen  world.  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer's  views  have  been  thus  summarised :  "  1,  The  proper  object  of  religion 
is  a  Something  which  can  never  be  known,  or  conceived,  or  understood ;  to  which 
we  cannot  apply  the  terms  emotion,  will,  intelligence  ;  of  which  we  cannot  either 
affirm  or  deny  that  it  is  either  a  person,  or  being,  or  mind,  or  matter,  or,  indeed, 
anything  else.  2.  All  that  we  can  say  of  it  is  that  it  is  an  inscrutable  existence, 
or  an  unknowable  cause  ;  we  can  neither  know  nor  conceive  what  it  is,  nor  how 
it  came  about,  nor  how  it  operates.  It  is  notwithstanding  the  ultimate  cause, 
the  all-being,  the  creative  power.  3.  The  essential  business  of  a  religion  so 
understood  is  to  keep  alive  the  consciousness  of  a  mystery  that  cannot  be 
fathomed.  4.  We  are  not  concerned  with  the  question  what  effect  this  religion 
will  have  as  a  moral  agent,  or  whether  it  will  make  good  men  and  women. 
Religion  has  to  do  with  mystery,  not  with  morals."  Agnostics  reverence  the 
phenomenal  and  the  Great  Unknown  above  and  behind  it ;  but,  holding  that 
the  senses  are  the  only  source  of  knowledge,  they  do  not  know,  and  say  we  never 
can  know,  that  the  eternal  energy  behind  all  phenomena  can  think,  feel,  will, 
and  contrive.  Agnosticism  is  open  to  three  objections.  I.  It  is  presttmptivb. 
The  agnostic  begins  by  a  confession  of  human  ignorance,  and  then  proceeds  to 
make  a  universal  assertion  which  implies  the  possession  of  universal  knowledge. 
To  assert  that  the  unknown  cause  "  can  never  be  known,  or  conceived,  or  under- 
stood "  is  to  assume  that  the  speaker  is  acquainted  with  the  constitution  and 
calibre  of  all  mind  in  all  ages.  To  say  that  the  inscrutable  existence  will  never 
be  known  by  man  is  to  say  we  know  what  will  be  the  extent  of  all  men's  know- 
ledge in  the  future.  We  cannot  measure  all  possible  knowledge  with  our  finite 
minds.  He  who  says  that  God  is  "  unknowable,"  takes  a  self-contradictory 
attitude,  and  assumes  such  knowledge  as  can  be  attributed  only  to  a  Divine 
Being.  II.  Agnosticism  is  paralysing.  The  great  mainspring  of  human 
activity  and  basis  of  human  happiness  is  faith.  The  three  steps  taken  by  every 
man  who  has  achieved  ought  worthy  of  remembrance  have  been  these — con- 
ception, conviction,  and  action.  The  conviction  was  the  faith  which  stimulated 
to  and  sustained  the  action.  United  to  faith,  but  distinct  from  it,  is  hope, — 
that  vigorous  principle  which  enlists  in  its  service  both  head  and  heart.  Agnos- 
ticism bows  these  two  fair  angels  out  of  human  society.  It  tells  us  that  we  know 
only  the  phenomenal ;  we  have  no  spiritual  insight.  If  every  man  in  society 
were  a  consistent  agnostic  there  would  be  a  speedy  and  inglorious  termination 
to  all  scientific,  social,  political,  and  ecclesiastical  enterprises.  III.  Agnosticism 
IS  POSITIVELY  PERNICIOUS.  It  disposes  of  all  true  religion.  For  religion  is  the 
linking  of  a  soul  to  a  personal  God.     Agnosticism  defines  religion  as  "  devotion 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

to  that  which  is  believed  to  be  best."  It  has  no  personal  God.  Dispensing 
■with  religion — 1.  Agnosticism  strikes  away  one  of  the  chief  supports  of  society. 

2.  Begets  despair.  There  is  nothing  left  for  the  heart  of  man  but  to  settle  down 
into  a  stony  state  of  utter  desolation  and  despair.  Agnosticism  encourages 
pessimism.  But  we  aflSrm  that  God  is  known,  though  our  knowledge  is  incomplete. 
We  have  sufficient  knowledge  to  justify  and  demand  o\xi  worship  of  God,  our 
trust  in,  and  love  for,  and  obedience  to  Him.  That  God  is  known  is  proved  by 
the  Scriptures,  by  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  and  by  the  testimony  of  Christian 
experience.  {J.  Hiles  Hitchens,  D.D.)  The  knowledge  of  Ood : — Israel  pre- 
tended to  know  God,  but  in  works  denied  Him.  They  would  cry  and  say,  We 
know  Thee ;  when  in  truth  they  knew  Him  not,  and  were  only  speaking  lies  in 
hypocrisy.  I.  Observe  the  time  when  they  wotiXD  make  this  profession. 
In  a  season  of  great  affliction  and  distress,  when  God  would  contend  with  them, 
when  their  enemies  should  be  let  loose  upon  them,  and  everything  around  them 
look  dark  and  distressing.  When  they  begin  to  feel  God's  wrath  they  will  begin 
to  humble  themselves,  and  profess  themselves  to  be  His  people.  Troubles  will 
often  make  those  pray  who  never  prayed  before.  But  if  they  leave  off  prayer 
when  the  trouble  is  over,  this  shews  that  it  came  out  of  feigned  lips.  Conviction 
is  often  the  fruit  of  correction,  but  does  not  always  lead  to  conversion.     II.  The 

MANNER   IN    WHICH    THIS    PROFESSION    WOULD    BE    MADE.       They    WOuld    not    Only 

speak,  but  speak  vehemently,  and  "cry"  with  earnestness  and  confidence.  But 
they  called  God  their  God,  though  they  had  no  interest  in  Him,  and  claimed  an 
acquaintance  with  Him  while  they  were  ignorant  of  His  true  character.  III.  The 
IMPORTANCE  OF  A  RIGHT  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD.  1.  It  is  a  great  thing  truly  to 
know  the  Lord.  A  perfect  knowledge  of  God  is  unattainable  by  us.  But  a 
true  knowledge  of  God  is  vital  and  efficacious,  and  has  a  transforming  influence. 
It  is  the  effect  of  Divine  illumination,  so  that  none  have  it  until  it  is  communi- 
cated from  above.  2.  A  profession  of  this  knowledge  is  of  great  importance. 
It  is  no  light  matter  to  be  able  to  say  on  good  ground,  "  My  God,  I  know  Thee." 
With  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation,  but  there  must  first  be  a 
believing  with  the  heart  imto  righteousness.  True  faith  will  produce  a  good 
confession.  Let  us  see  that  our  acknowledgment  of  God  be  accompanied  with 
corresponding  affections  and  dispositions  towards  Him,  going  to  the  grounds 
of  our  religion,  and  tracing  it  up  to  its  source  and  origin.  IV.  Some  of  the 
EVIDENCES  OF  A  TRUE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD.  1.  All  Saving  knowledge  proceeds 
from  God  only.  All  the  knowledge  we  have  of  Him  by  the  unassisted  efforts 
of  reason  will  come  to  nothing.  2.  Saving  knowledge  will  produce  a  humble 
confidence  in  God.     Humility  is  one  of  the  first  fruits  of  a  good  understanding. 

3.  A  spiritual  acquaintance  with  God  will  be  accompanied  with  a  conformity  of 
soul  to  Him.  There  will  be  a  resemblance  of  His  holy  nature,  and  a  subjection 
to  His  holy  will.  ( 1 )  It  is  a  great  evil  to  profess  to  know  God,  and  yet,  in  works, 
to  deny  Him.  (2)  Beware  of  the  contrary  extreme,  of  withholding  an  open 
profession  of  the  truth  after  we  have  been  brought  to  understand  and  receive 
it.  (3)  The  subject  shows  the  reason  why  many  apostatise  from  their  profession. 
They  have  received  the  truth,  but  not  in  the  love  of  it.  (4)  The  enlightening 
and  renewing  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  necessary  to  form  the  Christian 
character.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  daim  to  know  God  : — In  the  Hebrew  the 
order  of  the  words  is,  "  To  Me  they  shall  cry.  My  God,  we  know  Thee,  Israel." 
This  order  hints  some  observations  that  would  hardly  arise  from  our  version. 
In  our  Bible  it  is  only  a  speech  of  God  to  them.  In  the  Hebrew  they  seem  to 
remind  God  who  they  were ;  as  if  they  said,  "  We  are  Israel,  who  know  Thee, 
remember  we  are  not  strangers  to  Thee."  Observe — 1.  In  affliction  men  see 
their  need  of  God.  2.  Even  hypocrites  and  the  vilest  wretches  in  the  time  of 
their  distress  will  claim  interest  in  God  and  cry  to  Him.  3.  Knowledge  and 
acknowledgment  of  God  in  an  outward  and  formal  way  hypocrites  think  will 
commend  them  much  to  God  in  time  of  affliction.  They  expect  favour  from 
God  because  they  have  made  some  profession  of  Him.  "  We  know  Thee,"  as 
if  they  said,  "  Lord,  we  were  not  as  others  who  forsook  Thee ;  we  continued 
Israel  still ;  we  did  not  turn  to  the  heathens."  It  is  very  difficult  to  take  away 
men's  spirits  from  trusting  in  formality  in  outward  worship.     {Jeremiah  Burroughs. ) 

Ver.  3.  Israel  hath  cast  off  the  thing  that  is  good :  the  enemy  shall  pursue  him. — 

The  chastening  of  them  that  forsake  Ood  : — In  this  short  sentence  we  have  at  once 
the  sin  of  Israel  and  his  punishment.     Consider  the  various  ways  in  which 


CHAP,  vui.]  HOSE  A.  165 

Israel  may  be  said  to  have  "cast  off  the  thing  that  is  good."  I.  By  their  mur- 
MURiNGS.  So  long  as  they  trusted  God's  Word,  they  continued  to  walk  safely. 
When  they  began  to  murmur,  Amalek  came  upon  them.  II.  By  their  idolatries. 
When  God  was  arranging  for  their  worship,  they  made  and  worshipped  the  golden 
calves.  III.  By  their  rebellion.  As  in  their  response  to  the  message  of 
the  returned  spies.  Referring  to  Israel  in  their  later  history,  we  may  say — 
IV.  By  THEtR  rejection  OB"  Christ.  Because,  when  Messiah  did  come.  He 
did  not  suit  their  expectations,  they  despised  and  rejected  Him.  And  the  enemy 
was  not  slow  in  pursuing  them.  Their  city  was  destroyed,  and  they  were  scattered 
over  the  earth.  This  threat  is  not  confined  to  Israel.  It  is  equally  applicable 
to  nations  and  to  individuals  now.  {N.  AaJiby.)  Oood  rejected: — Him  who 
is  good.  That  which  is  good.  The  word  tab  includes  both.  They  rejected 
good  in  rejecting  God,  who  is  simply,  supremely,  wholly,  universally  good,  and 
good  to  all,  the  Author  and  Fountain  of  all  good,  so  that  there  is  nothing  simply 
good  but  God,  nothing  worthy  of  that  title,  except  in  respect  of  its  relation  to 
Him  who  is  good  and  doing  good.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  abandonment 
of  good,  and  consequent  pursuit  of  evil : — I.  The  abandonment  of  good.  "  Israel 
hath  rejected  what  is  good."  The  good  here  is  the  true  worship  of  the  true  God. 
1.  True  worship  is  "  the  good  thing  "  for  man.  It  is  good  not  only  because 
God  requires  it,  but  because  it  is  the  necessary  condition  of  spiritual  life,  growth, 
harmony,  and  blessedness.  2.  This  "  good  thing  "  man  sometimes  abandons. 
Moral  mind  has  the  power  of  abandoning  the  highest  good.  3.  The  abandon- 
ment of  this  "  good  thing  "  imperils  the  soul.  Moral  good  is  the  only  effective 
safeguard  of  the  spirit ;  when  this  is  given  up,  or  "  cast  off,"  all  the  gates  of 
the  soul  are  thrown  open  to  tormenting  fiends.  II.  The  consequent  pursuit 
OF  EVIL.  "  Set  up  kings,  but  not  by  Me."  Reference  is  to  Jeroboam  and  his 
successors.  From  kings  of  their  own  making  came  the  setting  up  of  the  idolatrous 
calf-worship.  So  they  went  wrong  in  their  politics  and  in  their  religion.  Let 
a  man  go  wrong  in  his  relations  to  God,  and  he  will  go  wrong  in  all  his  relations, 
secular  and  spiritual.  There  is  nothing  in  connection  with  the  human  race  of 
such  transcendent  importance  as  worship.  The  religious  element  is  the  strongest 
of  all  elements,  and  men  must  have  a  god  of  some  sort,  and  their  god  will  fashion 
their  character  and  determine  their  destiny.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  5.  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off ;  or.  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria, 
hath  kicked  thee  off. — Kicking  calves  : — The  words  of  the  text  have  a  quaint 
sound.  They  suggest  a  ludicrous  figure.  There  is  something  ludicrous  in  the 
notion  of  a  boy  trying  to  drive  a  calf,  and  getting  kicked  by  it.  When  you  under- 
stand what  the  words  mean,  you  will  soon  grow  grave  enough.  Samaria  was 
the  centre  and  capital  of  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel,  as  Jerusalem  was  the 
centre  and  capital  of  the  southern  kingdom  of  Judah.  Each  city  was  a  sacred 
city,  a  centre  of  worship,  as  well  as  of  business  and  government.  There  was  a 
temple  in  each  of  them,  and  in  the  temple  certain  symbols  of  the  Divine  presence 
and  activity.  At  Mount  Gerizim  they  had  only  the  golden  calf  and  the  emblems 
of  its  worship.  At  first  this  calf  was  intended  to  be  a  nature-symbol  of  Jehovah. 
But  it  too  closely  resembled  the  animal  forms  in  the  heathen  temples — especially 
in  Egypt — and  these  animal  forms  were  very  apt  to  breed  a  kind  of  worship 
which  gave  free  play  to  animal  lusts.  At  best,  moreover,  the  calf  was  a  "  graven 
image,"  and  was  therefore  a  standing  and  flagrant  violation  of  the  law  which  God 
had  given  to  Israel.  Soon  the  Ten  Tribes  sunk  into  the  idolatries  of  the  nations 
around  them,  with  their  degradation  of  God  and  man.  And  they  put  no  more 
restraint  on  their  carnal  passions  and  lusts  than  the  beasts  whose  forms  they 
placed  in  their  temples.  Men  grow  like  the  gods  they  worship.  The  animal 
part  of  their  nature  soon  prevailed  over  the  spiritual.  As  soon  as  a  man  suffers 
the  beast  in  him  to  prevail,  he  grows  worse  than  the  beasts,  and  sinks  below  their 
level.  What  they  do  by  the  law  of  their  nature,  he  does  against  the  law  of  his 
nature.  Hosea  paints  a  dreadful  picture  of  the  impotence  and  degradation 
into  which  the  Israelites  had  sunk  through  their  false  worship.  They  were  conse- 
quently so  weakened  by  their  strifes  and  divisions,  their  loss  of  manliness  and 
patriotism,  as  to  be  unable  to  resist  the  foreign  invader  when  he  came.  And 
so  their  calf  had  kicked  them.  If  they  did  not  speedily  return  to  the  God  of 
their  fathers,  their  calf  would  soon  "  kick  them  off."  They  would  find  them- 
selves abandoned  by  their  god,  in  whose  foul  service  they  had  sacrificed  their 
luanhood,  their  unity,  their  strength.     They  would  fall  before  the  sword  of  th» 


155  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8T BATOR.  [chap.  viil. 

foe,  or  be  led  captive  by  him  into  a  strange  land.  So  there  is  a  principle  in  Hosea's 
quaint  words.  It  is  this — every  sin  carries  in  itself  its  own  retribution,  and  is 
sure  to  avenge  itself  upon  us  if  we  fall  into  it.  Punishment  is  only  the  other 
half  of  sin.  Or  every  calf  we  worship  is  sure  to  kick  us,  or  even  to  kick  us  off. 
Whatever  we  love  best  and  pursue  most  heartily,  that,  for  the  time  at  least,  \s 
our  god,  our  "calf."  For  the  moment  we  look  to  it  for  the  happiness  or  the 
gratification  we  most  crave,  and  serve  and  follow  it  with  our  supreme  affection 
or  desire.  Look  at  some  of  these  calf  worshippers,  and  mark  how  their  god 
treats  them.  There  is  the  greedy  boy,  who  puts  no  restraint  upon  his  appetite. 
To  gratify  his  appetite  he  will  do  things  which  are  mean,  selfish,  wrong.  What 
follows  ?  The  caJf  which  Little  Glutton  worshipped  has  kicked  him,  and  kicked 
him  in  his  tenderest  part,  just  where  he  feels  it  most.  Take  the  case  of  a  vain, 
foolish  girl,  who  gives  herself  great  airs  when  she  goes  to  a  new  school.  When 
she  is  found  out,  ner  fibs  detected,  or  her  foolish  self-complacency  resented  and 
exposed,  may  we  not  say  that  her  calf  has  kicked  her,  humbled  her  in  the  dust, 
so  that  she  who  wanted  to  be  admired  is  despised  T  Her  sia  has  wrought  its  own 
punishment.  But  in  the  mercy  of  God  her  punishment  is  intended  to  help  her 
to  recover  herself.  And  men  have  made  idols  of  their  very  sins — drunkenness 
and  licentiousness.  They  have  sacrificed  their  all  to  them.  And  not  only  our 
base  passions,  but  even  our  best  affections,  our  plainest  duties,  may  be  exalted 
into  the  place  of  God,  and  thus  be  turned  into  calves  which  will  only  too  surely 
kick  us,  or  kick  us  off,  before  they  have  done  with  us.  Young  men  may  be  tempted 
to  snatch  at  business  success  by  taking  some  mean  advantage  of  their  fellows, 
so  straining  their  integrity  and  defiling  the  clear  honour  of  their  soul,  violating 
the  allegiance  they  owe  to  principles,  conscience,  and  God.  Or  men  may  suffer 
mere  success  in  business  to  absorb  all  their  energies,  so  that  they  neglect  the 
culture  of  the  mind,  and  the  purest  and  best  affections  of  the  heart  and  home. 
In  either  case,  if  you  yield  to  these  temptations,  you  will  have  turned  what  was 
once  a  clear  duty  into  an  idol,  into  a  calf  such  as  that  which  of  old  men  worshipped 
in  Samaria.  And  your  calf  will  kick  you  as  it  kicked  them.  Your  want  of 
integrity,  your  meanness  and  baseness  will  be  detected  and  exposed.  Your 
punishment  will  grow  out  of  your  sin.  And  young  women  need  to  be  told  that 
even  love,  if  it  be  made  an  idol,  will  prove  to  be  but  a  calf.  If  in  the  sacred  name 
of  love,  you  cast  away  prudence,  principle,  parental  control,  and  marry  a  man 
who  has  not  yet  learned  to  earn  his  own  livelihood,  or  whose  character  is  dubious, 
or  whose  life  is  bad,  you  may  be  sure  your  calf  will  kick  you  for  your  pains.  All 
these  foolish  and  hurtful  idolatries  of  ours  spring  from  our  false  conceptions  of 
God,  and  of  what  He  requires  of  us.  The  true  ends  of  life  do  not  lie  in  mere 
worldly  success,  or  even  in  gratified  affection.  Hosea  teaches  us  to  think  of  God 
as  a  wise  and  loving  Father  who  is  ever  seeking  to  make  us  good.  In  this  light 
we  may  see  how  poor  and  paltry  are  many  of  the  aims  which  men  pursue,  and 
how  inevitable  it  is  that  they  should  be  frustrated  of  these  poor  aims  in  order 
that  they  may  learn  to  set  the  true  end  of  life  before  them.  Our  well-deserved 
falls  and  failures  are  parts  of  the  process  by  which  our  Heavenly  Father  is  teach- 
ing us  to  walk,  and  to  walk  with  Him.  (8.  Cox,  D.D.)  Idols  worshipped  : — 
The  gross  and  debasing  idolatry  of  Israel  soon  brought  upon  them  the  judgments 
of  heaven ;  and  when  in  their  deep  distress  they  discovered  their  folly,  they 
found  that,  having  cast  off  Jehovah,  they  "  had  no  god  to  go  to."  It  is  to  this 
course  of  wickedness  the  text  refers.  The  prophet  addresses  the  people  of  Samaria 
in  tones  of  withering  irony.     Two  important  lessons.     I.  That  every  falsb 

AND   WORLDLY   CONFIDENCE   IS  SURE  IN  THE   END  TO   CHEAT  AND    DISAPPOINT   US. 

Speak  to  those  who  are  worshipping  some  other  object  than  the  one  true  God — 
drink,  business.  II.  The  Lord  Himself,  and  He  alone,  will  never  fail 
OB  CAST  OFF  THOSE  THAT  TRUST  IN  HiM.  Why  should  He  taunt  Israel  upon 
the  faithlessness  and  vanity  of  their  earthly  idols,  if  to  trust  Himself  might 
prove  equally  vain  ?  Wherefore  should  He  remind  you  that  the  golden  calves 
of  worldly  pleasure,  pelf,  and  pride  will  all  cast  you  off,  if  perchance  He  will  cast 
you  off  Himself  ?  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  just  as  foolish  and  worldly  people 
generally  cherish  unfounded  hopes,  so  Christian  persons  often  indulge  unfounded 
fears.  The  one  never  imagine  that  their  calf,  their  idol,  will  cast  them  off :  the 
other  are  constantly  doubting  and  dreading  that  their  God  will  forsake  them. 
If  there  is  anjrthing  that  God  makes  quite  plain,  it  is  that  this  can  never  be  ; 
He  never  fails  nor  forsakes.  The  truth  is  that  God  draws  nearer  and  closer  to 
His  people  in  their  trouble.     {J.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)        The  world  a  lie  : — 


CHAP,  vni.]  HOSE  A.  157 

The  story  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat  affords  a  perpetual  warning.  Other 
things  besides  consumption,  ^nd  lunacy,  and  various  maladies  our  flesh  is  heir 
to  are  hereditary.  Jeroboai  .'s  sin  descended  to  his  children  ;  and  was  trans- 
mitted like  an  entail  from  sire  to  son.  More  than  that,  it  struck  like  a  malaria 
of  a  virulent  disease  to  the  very  walls  of  his  palace ;  it  infected  all  his  successors, 
and  from  the  throne  spread  its  deadly  influence  to  the  poorest  and  most  distant 
cottages  of  the  land.  1.  The  sin  of  Jeroboam.  He  was  hardly  seated  on 
the  throne,  when  a  political  difficulty  arose, — and  that  a  very  serious  one.  The 
Mosaic  law  required  every  male  to  go  up  three  times  each  year  to  Jerusalem. 
An  astute  and  sagacious  politician,  Jeroboam  foresaw  how  this  custom  might 
be  attended  with  dangerous  results.  But  he  was  not  the  man  to  meet  the  diffi- 
culty aright.  He  did  what,  no  doubt,  the  world  had  thought  a  clever  thing. 
Setting  up  one  calf  in  Bethel  and  another  in  Dan,  in  imitation  of  the  cherubim 
in  the  temple,  he  sent  forth  this  edict,  "  Let  him  that  sacrificeth,  kiss  the  calves," — 
go  and  worship  these.  Jeroboam  succeeded,  but  his  success  brought  down  ruin 
on  his  house  and  government.  It  was  followed  by  results  which  should  teach 
our  statesmen  that  no  policy  in  the  end  shall  thrive  which  traverses  the  Word 
of  God.  That  can  never  be  politically  right,  which  is  morally  and  religiously 
wrong.  What  the  "  calf  "  did  to  the  monarch,  it  did  to  the  people — here  called 
Samaria.  Following  the  steps  of  their  king,  they  apostatised  from  God,  and 
turned  their  backs  on  His  temple.  Then  judgment  succeeded  judgment,  and 
one  trouble  breaking  on  the  back  of  another,  the  land  had  no  rest.  The  common- 
wealth sank  under  the  weight  of  its  idolatry.  The  voice  of  God  in  providence 
might  have  been  heard  saying,  "  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off." 
II.  Warning  from  the  sin  and  sorrow  of  Samaria.  The  sentiment  of  the 
text  is  illustrated — 1.  By  the  case  of  those  who  put  riches  in  the  place  of  God. 
The  thirst  for  gold,  like  the  drunkard's,  is  insatiable.  The  more  it  is  indulged, 
the  more  the  flame  is  fed,  it  burns  the  fiercer.  2.  The  sentiment  of  the  text  is 
illustrated  by  the  case  of  those  who  live  for  fame — for  the  favour,  not  of  God, 
but  of  men.  (T.  Outhrie,  D.D.)  The  sinner  betrayed  by  his  sins  : — Jeroboam's 
calf  symboled  not  only  his  casting  off  the  true  faith,  but  also  his  preference  for 
the  secular  and  sensual  culture  of  Egypt,  instead  of  the  simplicity  and  purity  of 
life  which  God  had  prescribed  for  His  people.  For  a  while  the  rebellious  people 
seemed  to  prosper.  At  length  the  thunderbolt  of  Divine  wrath  fell.  The  godless 
land  was  ravaged,  and  the  people  carried  away  captive  by  the  Assyrians.  Egypt 
turned  a  deaf  ear  to  their  appeals.  This,  Hosea  predicted  in  words  of  withering 
sarcasm  :  "  Thy  calf,  O  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off."  (The  calf  was  a  copy  of  the 
Egyptian  Mnevis.)  I.  The  calf  stands  in  general  for  sin.  No  sin  ever, 
in  the  long-run,  meets  the  promise  it  makes  to  the  imagination.  In  the  end 
the  soul  has  to  pay  for  its  guilty  pleasures  out  of  its  own  pains.  True  of  fleshly 
lusts.  Their  glow  is  that  of  a  fever  rising  ;  soon  they  will  burn.  Nature  does 
not  put  enough  strength  in  the  human  frame  to  endure  more  than  a  temperat  , 
lawful  supply  of  the  appetites.  This  fuel  gone,  the  indulgence  has  become  a 
necessity,  and  consumes  the  life  itself.  Selfishness  cannot  enjoy  its  accumu- 
lations beyond  a  limited  amount ;  beyond  this  they  feed  impatience  and  ennui. 
"  Pride,"  as  Bulwer  says,  "  is  a  garment  all  stiff  brocade  outside,  and  all  grating 
Backcloth  on  the  side  next  the  skin."  II.  The  calf  stands  for  a  pecxtliar 
CLASS  of  sins.  The  Samaritans  did  not  regard  their  worship  as  degrading.  The 
calf  represented  life,  productiveness ;  a  far  nobler  object  of  worship  than  that 
set  up  by  many  heathen  nations.  It  represented  especially  polite  sins,  and  those 
lines  of  conduct  whose  evil  consists  chiefly  in  that  they  are  not  obedience  to  God. 
For  instance,  such  as  meet  ovu*  ideas  of  expediency,  but  are  not  according  to  strict 
conscience.  Young  men  generally  begin  with  such  sins.  Thus  the  standard 
is  gradually  lowered.  1.  They  will  do  nothing  disreputable  in  religious  or  even 
secular  society.  2.  Nothing  disreputable  in  club  life.  3.  Nothing  that  they 
(now  blinded  by  indulgence)  think  wiU  hurt  them.  4.  At  last,  their  own  passion 
has  become  their  standard,  and  they  are  socially  a  wreck  before  they  are  fully 
aware  of  their  danger.  III.  The  calf  stands  for  a  current  form  of  trNBEi.iEF. 
The  calf-worship  was  mixed  with  some  features  of  the  true  worship  of  Israel. 
It  had  a  line  of  priests.  Its  chief  sites  were  places  already  sacred  in  the  religious 
history  of  God's  people.  The  altars  were  dedicated  at  the  time  of  a  true  religious 
festival — the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  A  cmrent  form  of  infidelity  is  a  blending 
of  human  conceits  with  some  scriptural  teaching.  It  uses  Sabbaths,  sanctuaries, 
ministries.     It  admires  Jesus,  and  praises  His  precepts.     But  it  denies  super- 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 


naturalism.  Not  God's  Word,  but  the  human  reason,  is  supreme.  (L.)  Cast 
off  by  the  god  of  loorldliness  : — The  great  Wolsey,  after  he  had  climbed  the  highest 
round  of  ambition's  Ijidder,  in  the  evening  of  life  bitterly  exclaimed,  "  Would 
that  I  had  served  my  God  as  faithfully  as  I  have  served  my  king.  He  would 
not  have  abandoned  me  in  my  old  age."  The  illustrious  statesman,  William 
Pitt,  the  favourite  of  king  and  people,  "  died,"  says  Wilberforce,  his  friend,  "  of 
a  broken  heart."  On  his  dying  bed  he  is  stated  to  have  said,  "  I  fear  I  have 
neglected  prayer  too  much  to  make  it  available  on  a  death-bed."  Still  more 
distressing  was  the  closing  scene  of  Sheridan's  career.  He  who  had  stood  on 
the  pinnacle  of  glory,  and  gained  the  most  flattering  distinctions,  writes  in  old 
age  to  one  of  his  friends,  "  I  am  absolutely  undone  and  broken-hearted."  Mis- 
fortunes crowded  on  him,  and  his  last  moments  were  haunted  by  fears  of  a  prison. 
Forsaken  by  his  gay  associates,  dispirited,  and  world-weary,  he  closed  his  eyes 
in  gloom  and  sorrow.  Campbell,  the  author  of  "  The  Pleasures  of  Hope,"  in 
his  old  age  wrote  "  I  am  alone  in  the  world.  My  wife  and  child  of  my  hopes 
are  dead ;  my  surviving  child  is  consigned  to  a  living  tomb  (a  lunatic  asylum) ; 
my  old  friends,  brothers,  sisters,  are  dead,  all  but  one,  and  she  too  is  dying ;  my 
last  hopes  are  blighted.  As  for  fame,  it  is  a  bubble  that  must  soon  burst."  How 
long  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to  innocency  7 — Attainment  hindered : — I.  Ak 
ATTAINMENT  SPOKEN  OF.  "  How  long  wiU  it  be  ere  they  attain  unto  innocency  ?  " 
"  Innocency  "  is  here  put  for  "  true  and  saving  religion."  And  this  is  a  most 
desirable  attainment,  more  so  than  all  besides.  1.  It  is  important  because  without 
it  there  can  be  no  fellowship  with  God.  Without  fellowship  with  God  there  can 
be  no  peace  ;  without  peace  there  can  be  no  happiness.  2.  It  is  important  because 
without  it  man  cannot  live  well.  A  guilty  man  lives  according  to  his  thoughts. 
3.  It  is  important  because  without  it  man  cannot  die  well.  There  is  nothing 
before  a  sinner  but  death,  darkness,  and  despair.  II.  A  hindrance  suggested. 
The  calves  were  the  idols  set  up  to  prevent  the  Israelites  from  worshipping  Jehovah. 
The  hindrances  to  attaining  innocency  (that  is,  satisfying  the  natural  cravings 
of  religion  in  worshipping  God)  are  the  idols  which  are  set  up  in  the  human  heart. 
These  idols  may  be — I.  The  gratification  of  self.  Self  is  one  of  the  most  favoured 
of  idols,  it  is  worshipped  by  all,  and  the  man  who  worships  self  cannot  worship 
God.  2.  The  vanities  of  the  world.  The  idolatry  of  the  present  day,  if  not 
80  bold  in  its  rebellion,  is  not  so  religious  as  in  the  days  of  old.  The  idolatrous 
Jews  and  heathen  were  essentially  religious.  It  was  death  to  any  one  to  speak 
against  the  gods.  It  is  pleasure  now  men  worship,  and  a  god  of  any  sort  is  forgotten. 
3.  The  blandishments  of  science.  This  is  another  idol  men  fall  down  before. 
These  are  the  calves  which  keep  men  from  God,  calves  set  up  by  themselves  at 
the  instigation  of  Satan.  No  man  can  ever  "  attain  unto  innocency  "  so  long 
as  they  remain.  III.  The  consequences  inferred.  A  time  is  coming  when 
true  religion  will  be  the  only  thing  worth  possessing.  The  day  of  sifting  will 
arrive.  God's  anger  will  be  kindled  against  the  persistently  ungodly.  Then 
what  avail  will  the  false  gods  which  men  have  served  so  long  be  to  afford  them 
shelter  ?  The  calf  will  cast  thee  off.  There  are  two  penalties,  then,  to  the  guilty. 
They  lose  both  earth  and  heaven.  They  are  cast  off — 1.  By  the  devil  whom 
they  serve.  The  world  cannot  offer  them  help.  Satan's  object  is  only  to  effect 
their  ruin.  2.  By  the  God  whom  they  have  neglected.  How  can  He  who  has 
been  scorned  and  forsaken  be  the  succour  of  those  who  have  despised  His  love 
and  rejected  His  rule  ?     (J.  J.  8.  Bird,  B.A.) 

Ver.  6.  The  workman  made  It;  therefore  it  is  not  God. — The  religion,  of 
humanity :  —  Humanitarianism  has  become  the  creed  of  the  earnest  and 
thoughtful  who  have  found  for  themselves  the  awful  truth  regarding  their 
fellow- men  in  the  depths,  and  with  that  ever  pressing  upon  them,  have  for- 
saken all  else  to  grapple  with  that  evil  and  right  that  wrong.  It  has  become 
the  home  of  loving,  aching  hearts  that  have  lost  their  God.  It  has  also 
become  the  mere  fad  of  many  who  put  on  charity  as  they  do  a  garment  when 
it  is  fashionable,  and  are  philanthropic  when  philanthropy  is  in  vogue.  But 
let  these  hangers-on  of  humanitarianism  be  distinguished  from  humanitarians. 
Humanitarians  proper  are  large-souled  enthusiasts.  Humanitarianism  has  been 
elevated  to  the  dignity  of  a  religion,  and  the  humanitarian  god  has  been  hailed 
as  the  God  of  humanity.  When  that  is  so,  we  have  to  look  at  the  work  in  a  new 
light,  and  study  anew  the  claims  which  it  puts  forth.  And,  first  of  all,  I  think 
we  may  safely  say  that  the  first  duty  of  any  one  who  desires  to  elevate  a  cult 


CHAP,  vni.]  UOSEA.  15& 

to  the  rank  of  a  religion  is  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  applicable  to  humanity  in 
general,  that  it  is  deep  enough  to  find  a  common  basis  in  characters  the  most 
widely  diverse.  For  that  only  is  really  religious  which  can  be  shared  by  all. 
The  beauty-lover,  who  is  convinced  that  in  the  power  of  perceiving  and  appre- 
ciating the  beauty  and  harmony  of  the  universe  lies  the  uplifting  of  his  kind, 
sets  himself  to  show  that  that  power  is  to  be  found,  latent  at  least,  in  every  one. 
The  moralist,  who  thinks  that  a  certain  code  of  laws,  if  strictly  adhered  to,  would 
meet  all  wants  and  settle  all  difficulties,  has,  for  the  first  part  of  his  task,  to  prove 
that  an  inherently  moral  nature  is  co-existent  everywhere  with  human  nature. 
And  the  humanitarian,  too,  must  show  that  his  religion  may  be  a  religion  for 
humanity.  To  the  enthusiasts  who  are  fired  to  generous  forgetfulness  of  self  it 
may  seem  for  a  time  to  fulfil  the  purposes  of  religion.  They  find  in  it  an  aim, 
an  inspiration,  a  faith.  But  what  of  the  other  side  T  Will  it  do  for  a  religion 
to  those  who  are  to  be  uplifted  to  the  passive  element,  which,  in  their  scheme, 
is  simply  to  permit  itself  to  be  raised  to  better  conditions  of  life  ?  Ah  !  that  is 
where  humanitarians  err.  They  cling  tenaciously  to  their  theory  that  conditions 
make  humanity.  It  is  true,  we  grant  it,  but  it  must  at  the  same  time  be  admitted 
that  humanity  makes  its  own  conditions.  The  conditions  of  man's  material 
life,  if  they  be  evil,  eat  slowly  but  surely  into  his  soul  with  corroding  influence. 
But  is  the  converse  not  also  true  ?  Does  what  a  man  is,  down  in  the  heart  of 
him,  not  stamp  itself  upon  his  surroundings  ?  Does  not  the  likeness  of  a  soul 
body  itself  out  by  slow  degrees  in  the  conditions  amid  which  it  exists  ?  Con- 
ditions the  most  favourable  for  the  growth  of  virtue,  if  round  an  ignoble  soul, 
become  a  rich  soil  for  vice  to  grow  in.  Beauty  may  be  changed  to  ugliness  by 
man's  vulgar  breath,  harmony  to  discord  by  his  strident  voice.  Conditions 
make  humanity,  and  humanity  makes  its  conditions.  But  these  two  truths 
were  never  meant  to  be  brought  into  violent  opposition.  A  perfect  humanity 
is  the  humanitarian's  dream,  but  a  perfect  humanity  is  an  impossible  thing. 
If  humanitarians  would  study  humanity  more  they  would  see  the  weakness  of 
their  claim  for  humanitarianism  as  a  religion.  There  is  a  something  in  humanity, 
an  unknown  quality,  which  for  ever  evades  the  analyst.  There  is  a  wailing  need 
for  something  greater  than  itself,  the  "  something  never  seen  but  still  desired," 
there  is  a  hidden  strength  totally  unpresaged  by  the  individual's  past  life. 
Humanity  is  full  of  surprises  ;  only  the  most  careful  student  of  it  knows  how 
small  the  circle  is  within  which  he  may  work,  how  great  is  the  tract  outside  of 
it  which  must  be  allowed  for  unknown  powers  and  their  influences.  Only  those 
who  know  its  waywardness,  its  uncertainty,  its  inherent  weakness,  its  potential 
greatness,  know  how  strong  a  hope,  how  Divine  a  thought,  humanity  needs  for 
its  deliverance.  To  serve  is  to  obey,  but  do  humanitarians  ever  dream  of  obeying 
the  humanity  which  they  deify  ?  And  to  look  to  humanity  as  a  paymaster, 
ah,  what  wages  of  sorrow  they  are  earning,  what  disappointed  hopes,  what  frus- 
trated endeavours,  what  bitterness  of  heart  that  there  is  not  sweetness  enough 
in  the  world  to  sweeten  !  Oh,  that  they  had  given  as  unto  God,  and  He  would 
have  repaid  ;  that  they  had  followed  Christ's  example — to  serve  God  and  save 
humanity.  Then  God  would  have  rewarded,  and  humanity  would  have  been 
the  recompense.  And  now  the  thought  of  Christ  arrests  us.  What,  after 
all,  is  the  humanitarianism  which  we  have  been  seriously  considering  as 
a  new  religion,  but  a  branch  of  practical  Christianity  ?  The  limitation,  which 
is  its  weakness,  is  all  that  is  new  in  it.  Why,  then,  has  it  attained  such 
great  proportions,  become  so  prominent  that  it  has  for  the  time  over- 
shadowed all  other  considerations  ?  Simply  because  it  was  for  so  long  over- 
shadowed and  neglected.  And  yet  the  Church,  whatever  it  may  have  done, 
has  seen  and  attempted  the  greater  part.  It  has  taught  this  part  of  Christ's 
doctrine,  that  to  be  heroic  and  Christlike  is  better  than  to  be  comfortable.  But 
the  humanitarian  flood  answers  back  vehemently — "  Your  God  is  a  God  for  the 
idealists,  for  those  who  in  their  visionary  world  delight  themselves  with  thoughts 
of  ideal  beauty,  and  goodness,  and  truth,  and  never  feel  the  burdened  heart  of 
the  world  of  reality  labouring  beside  them.  Your  creed  is  a  creed  for  the  comfort- 
able, the  well-to-do,  the  intellectual  who  study  Christ's  marvellous  philosophy 
and  forget  that  His  practice  gave  it  its  power,  and  demonstrated  its  truth." 
Heroism  is  for  the  strength  of  the  individual  heart  j  the  ideal  is  a  home  for  the 
individual  soul,  but  the  attitude  and  practice  of  man  towards  his  fellow-men 
should  be  that  of  pitying,  helpful  love.  Christ  was  heroic.  He  stood  majestic 
and  unmoved  in  the  midst  of  a  scoffing,  incensed  mob.     Yet  He  was  the  champioa 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vra, 

of  the  friendless  woman  taken  in  adultery.  He  lived  the  life  of  an  idealist,  and 
fed  His  soul  on  the  beauty  of  heaven.  Yet  He  was  always  ready  to  render 
practical  help  to  those  in  trouble  or  adversity.  The  duty  of  the  Church  as  an 
exponent  of  Christ  is  to  expound  Him  fully  and  equally.  The  Founder  of  Chris- 
tianity came  to  enlarge,  and  deepen,  and  exalt  the  sphere  of  every  life.  It  is 
terrible  to  think  how,  instead  of  helping  Christ  in  such  a  work,  we  spend  so  much 
time  and  energy  in  crushing  the  life  and  power  out  of  men  ;  out  of  the  boy  or 
girl  who  want  sunshine  and  joy  to  brighten  their  growth ;  out  of  the  young 
man  or  woman  enthusiastic  with  a  great  purpose  to  do  good  ; — how  we  crowd 
men  and  women  out  of  their  places  and  push  them  down  and  cause  them  to  despond, 
when  all  the  while  we  could  have  inspired  hope  and  given  them  life.  The  mission 
of  religion  is  to  give  true  increase  of  life,  and  the  Church  of  Christ  exists  to  help 
on  the  work.  And  the  members  of  Christ's  Church  should  each  feel  upon  them 
the  twofold  chain  that  links  them  to  God  and  their  fellow- men.  If  our  march 
were  but  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  then  we  could  afford  to  leave  such  aids 
as  the  Church  and  religious  communion  out  of  account,  and  the  creed  and  practice 
of  the  humanitarian  might  satisfy  us.  But  are  we  only  the  creatures  of  the 
passing  hour  ?  Nay ;  verily  the  chords  we  strike  here  in  the  music  of  life  are 
but  the  prelude  to  a  never-ending  song.  When  all  our  material  wants  are  satisfied 
there  is  still  a  hunger  of  the  soul  which  refuses  to  be  allayed,  because  only  God, 
the  Infinite  One,  can  satisfy  it.  We  are  infinite,  spiritual  beings,  and  no  finite, 
material  God,  such  as  the  humanitarian  worships,  can  give  lasting  help  and  satis- 
faction. Nothing  but  the  Infinite  can  fulfil  our  infinite  needs  ;  nothing  but 
the  Highest  can  satisfy  those  who  are  made  in  the  image  of  the  Most  High.  We 
need  a  God  wide  as  the  universe  and  eternal  as  the  life  to  which  we  belong. 
{A.  H.  M.  Sime.) 

Ver.  7.  For  they  have  sown  the  wind,  and  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind. — 

The  consequences  of  sin : — Misery  is  attached  to  sin  as  its  inevitable  con- 
sequence ;  but  the  connection  does  not  always  appear  to  a  superficial 
observer.  Transgression  sometimes  appears  to  be  productive  of  happiness,  and 
obedience  to  be  a  source  of  much  affliction  and  trouble.  But  the  wicked  are 
not  really  happy  now,  and  they  have  no  reasonable  expectation  of  happiness 
in  the  eternal  world.  I.  Who  may  bb  said  to  sow  the  wind  ?  To  "  sow  the 
wind  "  is  a  proverbial  expression  for  labouring  in  vain.  It  may  be  applied  to 
all  who  seek  happiness  in  the  way  of  sin.  1.  To  sensualists,  who  yield  themselves 
up  to  the  gratifications  of  sense.  See  confession  of  Solomon  (Eccles.  ii.  1,  10,  11). 
2.  To  worldlings.  The  lovers  of  this  present  world  hope  to  obtain,  not  a  momentary 
gratification,  but  solid  and  lasting  benefits.  But  riches  are  proverbially  uncertain. 
Our  cares  are  generally  multiplied  by  means  of  them.  3.  To  formalists.  The 
performance  of  religious  duties  seems  more  calculated  to  make  us  happy.  No 
one  can  be  happy  who  disregards  them.  But  a  mere  round  of  services  can  never 
satisfy  the  conscience.  Some  delude  themselves  with  an  idea  that  it  will  secure 
the  Divine  favoiu".  Under  that  delusion  they  may  be  filled  with  self-complacency. 
A  sight  of  sin  will  speedily  dissipate  these  self-righteous  hopes.  4.  To  false 
professors.  There  are  many  who  wish  to  be  thought  religious  when  they  are 
destitute  of  spiritual  life.  They  may  be  jealous  about  doctrines  and  their  own 
particular  form  of  Church  government,  but  they  are  not  solicitous  to  live  nigh 
to  God  in  holy  duties.  II.  What  they  may  expect  to  reap.  A  "  whirlwind  " 
is  a  figure  to  represent  extraordinary  calamities.  Their  calamities  will  be — 
1.  Sudden.  They  receive  warnings,  but  are  taken  by  surprise  at  last.  2.  Irresist- 
ible. Illustrate  by  a  whirlwind.  3.  Tremendous.  See  desolation  wrought 
by  a  whirlwind.  Infer — (1)  How  earnest  should  we  be  in  redeeming  time  ! 
(2)  How  blessed  are  they  who  are  living  to  God  !  {Sketches  of  Sermons.) 
Reaping  the  whirlwind : — Said  Napoleon  to  La  Place,  "  I  see  no  mention  of  God 
in  yoiu-  system  of  theology."  "  No,  sire,"  was  the  answer,  "  we  have  no  longer 
any  need  of  that  hypothesis."  A  half-century  of  anarchy  and  social  disorder 
in  unhappy  France  was  the  result — the  awful  "  reign  of  terror."  How  much 
wiser  was  Montesquieu,  who  said :  "  God  is  as  necessary  as  freedom  to  the 
welfare  of  France  !  "  Sowing  the  wind :  —  This  is  a  proverbial  speech, 
signifying  the  taking  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  little  piu-pose  ;  as  if  a  man 
should  go  abroad  in  the  fields,  and  spread  his  hands  about  with  effort  and  yet 
grasp  nothing  but  air.  The  wind  is  an  empty  creature  in  respect  of  things  solid, 
therefore  the  Scripture  often  makes  use  of  it  to  signify  the  vanity  of  the  hopes 


CHAP,  vni.]  HOSE  A.  161 

and  laborious  endeavours  of  wicked  men.  1.  Many  do  nothing  all  their  lifetime 
but  sow  the  wind  ;  they  labour  and  toil,  but  what  comes  of  it  ?  It  is  no  good 
account  to  give  to  God  of  our  time,  to  say  that  we  have  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  ; 
we  may  take  pains  and  yet  "  sow  the  wind."  Who  are  those  that  sow  the  wind  ? 
(1)  Some  students  :  men  that  spend  their  thoughts  and  strength  about  things 
in  no  way  profitable  to  themselves  or  others,  such  sow  the  wind  :  with  a  great 
deal  of  earnestness  they  do  just  nothing.  (2)  Idolaters.  All  those  who  take 
pains  and  are  at  great  cost  in  superstitious  worship,  all  their  intentions  that  they 
have  to  honour  God,  come  to  nothing,  it  is  but  a  sowing  the  wind.  (3)  Formalists. 
Such  as  content  themselves  in  the  outward  part  of  God's  worship,  having  no  power 
nor  life  of  godliness  in  the  services  they  perform.  (4)  The  vainglorious.  They 
who  do  all  that  they  do  out  of  vainglory,  who,  to  set  up  themselves  among  others, 
spend  a  long  time  in  prayer,  and  an  ostentatiously  scrupulous  observance  of  all 
rites  and  ceremonies,  a  principle  of  vainglory  actuating  them  throughout.  Men 
of  public  gifts,  who  do  abundance  of  good  in  the  Church  of  God  and  in  the 
commonwealth,  but  are  moved  thereto  by  a  principle  of  self  and  vainglory, 
these  lose  all,  they  sow  but  to  the  wind.  (5)  Such  as  serve  themselves  of 
sin  ;  such  as  seek  to  shift  for  themselves  by  sinful  means  when  they  are  in 
any  straits,  and  forsake  lawful  courses  to  help  themselves  out  of  trouble.  "  They 
reap  the  whirlwind."  The  Hebrew  word  has  a  syllable  more  than  usual  added 
to  it  to  increase  its  signification.  It  is  not  only  a  whirlwind,  but  a  most  terrible 
whirlwind.  There  is  more  in  the  harvest  than  in  the  seed.  Sow  a  little  sinful 
pleasure,  and  a  great  deal  of  misery  is  the  fruit.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  The 
growth  and  power  of  habit : — Notice  the  way  in  which  the  acts  of  daily  life  influence 
destiny.     I.  We  are  continually  forming  habits.     II.  Thk  tendency  of 

HABITS     ONCE     FORMED     IS     TO     INCREASE     IN     STRENGTH.       "  Wind — whirlwind." 

III.  Habits  increase  in  the  direction  of  original  tendency.  Same  in  kind, 
though  vastly  different  in  intensity  and  force.  IV.  The  tendency  of  habits 
is  to  increase  in  strength  till  they  pass  beyond  control.  The  whirlwind 
desolates  the  land  and  strews  the  sea  with  wrecks.  Habit  is  something  like 
appetite :  we  are  led  by  it,  just  as  a  hungry  man  makes  his  way  towards  home. 
It  cannot  be  explained  how  it  is  that  actions  become  easier  by  being  repeated, 
but  that  it  is  so  everybody  must  admit.  If  we  do  anything  a  certain  number  of 
times,  the  doing  has  an  effect  upon  us,  and  that  effect  we  call  "  habit."  We 
should  therefore  be  very  careful  what  we  accustom  ourselves  to  do,  lest  we  should 
acquire  the  appetite  or  habit  of  doing  things  that  are  hurtful  and  wrong.  Habit 
is  the  result  of  repeated  acts,  and  it  is  wonderful  how  soon  a  little  child  acquires 
a  habit.  The  doing  of  a  thing  once  or  twice  is  sufficient  to  lead  the  child  to  do  it 
again — 

"  All  habits  gather,  by  unseen  degiees. 
As  brooks  make  rivers,  rivers  run  to  seas." 
(A.  Hampden  Lee.) 

Ver.  9.  A  wild  asB  alone  by  Mmself. — The  Scripture  figure  of  the  wild  ass : — 
What  a  figure  of  the  imtamed  soul  which  refuses  the  easy  yoke  of  the 
blessed  Redeemer.  Man's  untamed  spirit  spurns  the  adorable  Lord's  love.  Yon 
cannot  conceive  a  truer  picture  of  the  altogether  untractable  than  this.  The 
wild  ass  wUl  go  its  own  way.  But  this  is  according  to  nature.  What  we  are 
called  to  contemplate  is  the  fallen  being  man,  described  as  a  "  wild  ass  alone  by 
itself."  Ephraim  and  the  Ten  Tribes  are  compared  to  the  wild  ass  for  many  reasons. 
1.  They  refused  Christ's  easy  yoke  ;  their  hearts  were  untamed  ;  they  were 
stubborn  in  their  rejection  of  God's  inviting  grace ;  they  were  full  of  obdvirate 
folly ;  they  were  headstrong  and  unruly,  not  consenting  to  any  restraints ;  they 
chose  their  own  course,  rurming  up  and  down  after  sin,  mad  upon  their  idols, 
as  the  wild  ass  traverses  the  desert  only  to  gratify  its  own  low  nature.  2.  The 
wild  ass  is  excessively  swift ;  and  although  numbers  of  them  commonly  herd 
together,  yet  it  is  usual  for  some  one  of  them  to  break  away  and  separate  himself 
from  his  company,  and  run  alone  or  at  random  by  himself.  It  is  when  he  thus 
breaks  away  that  he  is  such  an  easy  prey  to  the  lion.  Ephraim,  in  seeking  to  be 
all  for  himself,  became  the  more  sure  prey  of  the  devourer ;  and  whenever  the 
sinner  breais  away  by  himself,  thinking  thereby  to  be  masterless  and  free,  he  is 
in  a  fair  way  of  being  left  to  his  own  devices  and  given  up  by  God.  3.  The  wild 
ass  is  the  lion's  prey  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  soul  faithless  to  Christ,  seeking  ita 

II 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

own  things,  is  as  a  wild  ass  alone  by  himself,  or  for  himself,  for  his  own  gratification, 
his  own  pleasure,  and  the  end  of  these  things  is  death.     (Alfred  Clayton  Thiselton.) 

Vet.  11.  Ephraim  bath  made  many  altars  to  sin. — Perversion  of  worship: — 
Israel  was  to  have  only  one  altar.  Ephraim  had  built  a  number  of  altars 
in  different  places.  Men  have  perverted  worship,  not  only  by  making 
false  gods,  but  by  making  false  altars  for  the  true  God.  I.  False  worship  is 
A  GREAT  SIN.  1.  It  is  a  Very  propagative  sin.  Once  admit  a  wrong  thing  in 
worship,  and  that  one  thing  will  multiply  itself ;  superstition  will  give  it  fertility. 
2.  It  is  a  self-punishing  sin.  This  is  the  heavy  judgment  of  God,  to  give  men 
their  heart's  desire  in  what  is  evil.  II.  It  is  a  sin  against  qrbat  light.  Israel 
could  not  say  it  sinned  in  ignorance.  1.  God  has  given  us  laws  concerning 
worship.  2.  These  laws  are  oft  repeated.  3.  These  oft-repeated  laws  leave 
false  worshippers  without  excuse.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  12.  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  thlngrs  of  Hy  law,  but  they  were 
counted  a  strange  thing. — A  grave  miscalculation  : — What  God  complains  of 
is  that  whilst  He  has  made  known  to  Israel  the  loftiest  truths  of  righteousness 
and  grace,  Israel  has  treated  those  truths  as  matters  altogether  foreign,  with 
which  he  had  the  very  least  concern.  And  is  not  this  matter  of  ignoring  the 
law  characteristic  of  our  own  day  ?  How  many  live  without  attending  to  Divine 
revelation  ;  they  give  it  the  go-by,  they  dismiss  it  with  serene  unconcern. 
I.  The  truths  of  revelation  are  of  the  highest  concern.  If  the  dilemma 
of  life  is  that  we  cannot  attend  to  everything,  only  to  things  of  pre-eminent 
importance,  then  we  must  attend  to  the  great  doctrines  of  revelation  ;  for  they 
are  bound  up  with  our  highest  interests.  Take  the  doctrine  of  righteousness 
from  the  Old  Testament.  The  righteousness  of  the  law  is  essential  to  our  worldly 
interests,  to  our  characters,  to  our  happiness,  and  to  our  final  salvation.  Take  the 
doctrine  of  grace  from  the  New  Testament.  Is  not  this  great  doctrine  essential  ? 
Many  pride  themselves  upon  neglecting  religion.  They  attend  to  their  business, 
and  have  no  time  for  religion.  Religion  is  a  fancy,  a  fashion,  a  luxury,  a  thing 
to  be  brought  in  if  possible,  to  be  left  out  if  necessary.  But  it  is  the  one  thing 
needful.  II.  The  truths  of  revelation  are  of  abiding  concern.  In  Hosea's 
time  the  law  had  become  irrevelant,  obsolete.  Many  now  regard  the  law  of  God 
in  revelation  as  inadequate  to  the  modern  world.  But  do  not  these  very  objectors 
go  back  to  the  Greek  for  intellectual  perfection ;  to  Euclid  to  learn  mathematics  ; 
to  Demosthenes  to  learn  eloquence ;  to  Praxiteles  to  learn  sculpture  ;  to  Homer 
for  the  ideal  of  poetry  T  As  God  gave  the  Hebrew  the  knowledge  of  righteousness, 
it  is  no  reflection  on  us  that  we  go  back  to  Moses  and  Isaiah,  to  Job  and  Paul. 
Our  text  declares  the  abiding  validity  of  the  law.  God  keeps  on  writing  the 
law ;  He  is  continually  freshening  it,  and  making  it  a  living  thing  in  the  conscience 
of  the  world.  Men  speak  of  outgrowing  Christianity  when  they  have  become 
dead  to  it  through  a  life  of  materialism,  worldliness,  lust,  selfishness.  God's 
Word  is  not  a  strange  thing.  It  is  written  for  our  admonition  and  salvation, 
upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  have  come.  We  need  the  precious  truths  of 
this  Holy  Book  as  much  as  ever.  III.  The  truths  of  revelation  are  of 
universal  concern.  There  is  often  in  men  the  feeling  that  the  truths  of 
religion  may  concern  others,  but  are  not  applicable  to  them.  But  the  weighty 
things  of  the  law  concern  us  all.  We  all  need  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ. 
(  W.  L.  Watkinson. )  The  Scripture  despised  : — It  is  in  vain  to  imagine  that 
the  depravity  of  the  Jews  was  peculiar  to  themselves.  They  were  fair  specimens 
of  human  nature.  Under  superior  advantages,  we  are  no  better  than  they. 
With  regard  to  the  Scriptures  consider — I.  Their  Author.  If  we  consider 
Scripture  to  be  a  cuimingly  devised  fable,  we  shall  treat  it  as  a  delusion.  If  we 
believe  it  to  be  the  word  of  man,  we  shall  receive  it  as  a  human  production.  If 
we  are  convinced  that  it  is  indeed  the  Word  of  God,  we  shall  feel  it  to  be  Divine, 
and  it  will  work  powerfully  in  us,  as  it  does  in  those  who  believe.  In  favour  of 
these  writings  we  advance  a  Divine  claim.  Whoever  was  the  penman,  God 
was  the  author.  Evidence  comes  from  the  prophecies ;  from  kinness  with 
the  Book  of  Creation  ;  from  adaptation  to  the  wants  of  man.  II.  Their  con- 
tents. We  naturally  judge  of  an  author  by  his  work,  but  there  are  cases  in 
which  we  judge  of  a  work  by  the  author.  As  soon  as  we  learn  that  God  Himself 
is  the  author  of  this  Book,  we  may  approach  it  confidently,  expecting  to  find  in 
it  a  greatness  becoming  His  glorious  name.     We  find  great  things.     1.  Great 


CHAP,  vin.]  HOSE  A.  1C3 

in  number.  2.  In  profundity.  3.  In  importance.  4.  In  their  efficacy.  The 
greatest  thing  we  have  upon  earth  is  the  Gospel.  III.  The  reception  which 
THIS  Divine  communication  meets  with.  "  They  were  counted  as  a  strange 
thing."  That  means  a  thing  foreign  to  us  ;  a  matter  of  indifference.  That 
men  thus  treat  the  Scriptures  of  truth  is  the  charge  here  advanced.  1.  It  is  a 
charge  the  most  wonderful.  We  should  naturally  suppose  that  a  book  written 
by  God  Himself  would  engage  attention.  And  people  are  naturally  attracted 
to  a  work  that  regards  themselves.  2.  The  most  criminal.  We  often  err  in 
our  estimate  of  things,  especially  those  of  a  moral  nature.  We  have  frequently 
a  wrong  standard  by  which  to  judge  of  what  is  good  ;  hence  that  which  is  highly 
esteemed  among  men  is  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  In  the  same  way 
we  deceive  ourselves  with  regard  to  what  is  evil.  God  takes  into  view  the  dis- 
honour done  to  Himself.  He  weighs  the  state  of  the  mind,  the  motives  that 
determine  us,  the  good  we  oppose  and  hinder  ;  the  difficulties  we  have  to  over- 
come, the  convictions  we  have  to  stifle,  the  reasons  that  render  us  inexcusable. 
By  this  rule,  nothing  can  be  more  wicked  than  to  treat  with  contempt  or  neglect 
the  means  God  has  provided  for  our  everlasting  welfare.  3.  The  most  dreadful. 
Though  God  is  most  patient  with  you.  His  judgments  must  most  surely  fall. 
4.  The  charge  is  very  commonly  deserved.  Few  pay  a  due  regard  to  the  blessed 
Word  of  God.  Of  those  who  hear  the  Word,  how  many  are  curious  hearers,  cap- 
tious hearers,  forgetful  hearers,  hearers  only  deceiving  their  own  selves.  5.  Tbs 
charge  is  not  universally  true.  There  are  many  exceptions.  Good  men  have 
always  been  attached  to  their  Bibles.  Let  me  urge  upon  you  a  still  greater 
attention  to  the  Word  of  God.  ( William  Jay. )  Our  duty  to  the  Bible  : — Wha  t 
should  be  our  attitude  and  action  in  relation  to  the  Holy  Volume  ?  1.  We  should 
accept  the  volume  gratefully  as  the  gift  of  God.  It  is  the  message  of  our  Divino 
Father  to  us  ;  designed  to  instruct  us  in  all  the  multiform  duties  of  life — to  guide 
us  in  the  intricacies  of  our  pilgrimage — to  solace  us  in  the  seasons  of  our  sadness — 
to  be  a  companion  to  us  in  our  hours  of  loneliness.  It  is  fully  adapted  to  all 
the  necessities  of  our  nature,  and  to  all  the  vicissitudes  of  our  surroundings. 
Let  us  treat  it  as  we  treat  no  other  volume.  Let  there  be  no  cessation  to  our 
thankfulness  to  God  for  a  treasure  so  precious,  a  comfort  so  profound,  a  guide 
so  unerring,  a  weapon  so  unfailing,  a  light  so  transcendent.  2.  Our  duty  is  to 
circulate  it.  The  Book  of  books  should  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  every  man. 
It  is  addressed  to  all,  intended  for  all,  adapted  to  all,  and  should  not  be  con- 
fined to  any  clime  or  any  class.  3.  We  owe  the  duty  to  God  and  ourselves, 
to  study  the  volume  for  our  own  consolation  and  guidance.  (I)  The  Book 
should  be  approached  prayerfully.  (2)  It  should  be  searched  intelligently. 
(3)  It  should  be  searched  frequently.  Did  ever  a  nation,  a  family,  or  an 
individual  regret  adopting  and  following  the  inspired  Book  as  their  guide  ?  Com- 
pare it  with  all  the  volumes  in  the  public  libraries  of  to-day.  None  originated 
in  purer  motives ;  none  had  a  Diviner  origin  ;  none  has  had  a  more  wonderful 
history  ;  none  has  produced  fruits  of  happiness  and  holiness  so  world  wide  ; 
none  has  been  so  miraculously  preserved ;  none  is  destined  to  a  future  so 
glorious.  (J.  Hiles  Hitchens,  D.D.)  The  great  things  of  Scripture  : — I.  The 
Holy  Scbiptiires  are  God's  writing.  II.  The  subjects  op  which  the 
Holy  Scriptures  treat  abb  great  things.  The  things  written  in  the  Scrip- 
tures may  well  be  styled  great  things.  L  Because  of  their  inherent  grandeur. 
Can  there  possibly  be  any  greater  subject  than  God  Himself  in  His  character, 
in  His  infinite  excellence,  and  in  His  relations  to  men,  God  as  incarnated  and 
revealed  in  the  person  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  ?  Can  any  themes  exceed  in. 
interest,  atonement  for  sin,  redemption,  the  indwelling  Spirit,  immortal  life, 
resurrection,  heaven  ?  2.  Because  of  their  supreme  importance.  They  have 
been  given  mainly  for  the  purpose  of  answering  those  great  questions  which 
had  perplexed  the  minds  of  men  from  the  beginning  of  human  history,  and  which 
weighed  heavily  upon  their  hearts  and  consciences  the  more  they  thought  aboufr 
them.  3.  Because  of  their  great  effects.  They  make  all  those  great  who  lovingly 
receive  them  into  their  hearts.  And  much  of  what  the  Word  of  God  does  for 
individuals  it  also  does  for  nations.  It  introduces  into  them  the  germs  of  solid 
prosperity  and  the  elements  of  true  greatness.  It  makes  a  people  righteous, 
temperate,    pure,    unselfish,    benevolent.       III.  Every    human    being    has    a' 

PERSONAL   interest   IN    THE    CONTENTS    OF   THE    HOLY    SCRIPTURES.       They    hav© 

been  wTitten  for  all,  in  the  sense  of  having  been  written  for  each  individual  ia 
that  all.     I  have  written  unto  him.     This  "  /  have  written  "  arms  every  part  of 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

the  sacred  Book  with  all  the  authority  of  God.     IV.  And  yet,  how  many  treat 

THE    "gKEAT    things"    WHICH    GoD    HAS  WRITTEN    IN    HiS    WORD    IN    THE   VERY 

MANNER  WHICH  IS  HERE  CONDEMNED  !  They  Were  counted  by  them  as  a  strange 
thing ;  that  is,  with  indifference,  with  looks  askance,  as  things  with  which  they 
had  no  practical  concern,  perhaps  even  with  positive  aversion.  (Homiletie 
Magazine.)  The  dignity  of  the  Scripture  : — God  hath  vouchsafed  the  free 
use  of  His  Word  ;  what  greater  bounty  ?  Men  pass  by  it  as  a  thing  not  worth 
the  looking  to ;  what  greater  impiety  ?  I.  The  free  use  of  God's  Word. 
1.  The  commendation  of  God's  Word,  by  the  plenty,  abundance,  and  largeness 
of  the  matter  that  is  in  it ;  and  by  the  price,  excellency,  and  worth  of  the  matter. 
All  necessary  points,  either  touching  faith  or  manners,  are  abundantly  contained 
and  laid  forth  in  the  Scriptures.  This  fact  condemns  the  common  neglect  and 
universal  contempt  of  the  rules  and  precepts  of  Holy  Scripture.  In  matters 
of  conversation,  men  prefer  the  examples  and  guides  of  the  times,  the  course 
and  practice  of  the  multitude,  before  the  principles  of  God's  Spirit.  The  excellency 
of  Seriptvu-e  is  seen  in  that  the  author  of  it  is  God  ;  the  matter  of  it  is  the  mystery 
of  godliness  ;  the  style  of  it,  there  is  a  fulness  of  majesty  in  simplicity  of  words ; 
the  end  of  it  is  to  make  men  wise  unto  salvation.  II.  The  mercy  of  God  in 
voucHSAFiNQ  His  WoRD  TO  XJS.  1.  How  Can  it  be  said  that  God  hath  written 
His  Word  ?  2.  Why  was  it  meet  to  write  it  ?  3.  When  the  Word  of  God  began 
first  to  be  written,  and  how  it  was  preserved  for  the  Church's  use  all  that  time. 
4.  How  we  shall  be  assured  that  that  which  amongst  us  is  now  called  the  Scrip- 
ture is  the  very  same  Word  and  precious  will  of  God,  which  He  hath  written 
for  the  use  and  comfort  of  His  people.  Nothing  is  able  to  persuade  a  man's  con- 
science that  the  Scripture  is  the  Word  of  God,  but  only  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
best  proofs  are  to  be  fetched  out  of  Scripture  itself.  Its  excellency  is  shown  in 
the  purity  of  the  law  of  God  by  Moses :  the  quality  of  the  matter  in  Scripture ; 
the  antiquity  of  the  Scripture.  III.  Man's  misuse  of  Scripture.  1.  Shew 
the  nature  of  the  fault.  They  regarded  Scripture  as  containing  matter  that 
did  not  pertain  to  them.  This  fault  is  compounded  of  three  gross  evils — dis- 
obedience, vmthankfulness,  neglect  of  their  own  private  good,  even  the  good 
of  their  souls.  What  judgment  is  due  to  this  offence  ?  In  general  it  openeth 
the  very  floodgate  of  God's  wrath.  In  particular,  it  makes  all  our  prayers  odious, 
and  the  torment  of  our  sovds.  Seeing  then  that  to  account  the  great  things  of 
God's  law  as  a  strange  thing,  is  a  fault,  a  grievous  fault,  a  fault  liable  to  extreme 
punishment,  our  fai;lt,  there  is  no  remedy  but  we  must  henceforth  give  all  dili- 
gence, that  the  Word  of  God  may  be  no  more  a  stranger  vmto  us,  but  a  dweller 
with  us,  and  familiar  unto  us.  (S.  Hieron.)  The  great  things  of  God  : — 1.  They 
are  things  that  proclaim  the  greatness  of  the  Law-maker;  and  things  of  great 
u.se  and  importance  to  us.  2.  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  have  the  things  of  God's 
law  A^Titten  ;  thus  they  are  reduced  to  a  greater  certainty,  spread  the  further, 
and  last  the  longer,  with  much  less  danger  of  being  embezzled  and  corrupted 
tlian  if  they  were  transmitted  by  word  of  mouth  only.  3.  The  things  of  God's 
law  are  of  His  own  writing;  for  Moses  and  the  prophets  were  His  amanuenses. 
4.  It  is  the  advantage  of  those  that  are  members  of  the  visible  Church  that  these 
things  are  written  to  them,  are  intended  for  their  direction,  and  so  they  must 
receive  them.  {Matthew  Henry.)  The  great  things  of  God's  law  counted  as  a 
strange  thing  : — That  which  should  have  been  for  their  health,  became  to  them 
an  occasion  of  more  heinous  and  aggravated  guilt.  I.  God  has  written  unto 
us  THE  great  things  OF  His  LAW.  By  the  law  of  God  understand  the  whole 
revelation  which  God  has  given  of  His  will.  Take  brief  survey  of  God's  law, 
as  written  and  delivered  to  us.  1.  The  declarations  contained  in  it  are  great 
and  important.  2.  There  are  many  promises  which  are  exceeding  great  and 
precious.  3.  There  are  great  things  written  in  the  way  of  invitation  and  encourage- 
ment. 4.  There  are  great  and  interesting  precepts  and  instructions.  6.  There 
are  solemn  threatenings  against  obstinate  and  impenitent  offenders.  We  are 
certainly  not  less  favoured  than  Israel  was.  II.  Whether  and  in  what  degree 
"WE  ARE  chargeable  WITH  THEIR  GUILT,  in  "  counting  the  great  things  of  God's 
law  a  strange  thing."  1.  They  did  not  receive  what  God  delivered  to  them  as 
being  of  Divine  authority,  but  as  a  kind  of  imposition  to  which  they  were  under 
no  obligation  to  submit.  We  may  judge  who  among  ourselves  are  in  a  similar 
state  of  guilt.  All  those  who  deny  the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
and  deem  that  invaluable  treasury  of  great  things  to  be  nothing  better  than  a 
cunningly  devised  fable.     2.  They  did  not  at  all  see  or  discern  their  own  interest 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOSEA.  1G5 

in  those  things.  Are  not  similar  views  entertained  among  us  ?  And  is  not 
similar  conduct  the  consequence  ?  Some  consider  the  Bible  and  religion  as 
adapted  only  to  persons  of  a  gloomy  and  melancholy  cast  of  mind.  Others  think 
the  study  of  them  belongs  only  to  divines.  3.  They  were  apprehensive  that 
a  strict  adherence  to  God's  law  would  make  their  conduct  appear  strange  and 
singular  among  their  surrounding  neighbours.  We  contract  greater  guilt  when- 
ever we  are  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ ;  when  we  are  afraid  to  act  up  to 
its  sacred  rules.  The  mercy  of  God,  in  writing  and  committing  to  us  the  great 
things  of  His  law,  is  such  as  cannot  be  sufficiently  estimated.  It  calls  for  fervent 
and  lasting  gratitude.  "  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  much  be  required." 
(S.  Knight,  M.A.)  No  excuse  of  ignorance : — God  had  written  their  duties 
for  them  in  the  Ten  Commandments  with  His  own  hand ;  He  had  written  them 
of  old,  and  manifoldly.  He  wrote  those  manifold  things  to  them  (or  for  them) 
by  Moses,  not  for  that  time  only,  but  that  they  might  be  continually  before  their 
eyes,  as  if  He  were  still  writing.  He  had  written  to  them  since,  in  their  histories, 
in  the  Psalms.  His  words  were  still  sounding  in  their  ears  through  the  teaching 
of  the  prophets.  God  did  not  only  give  His  law  or  revelation  once  for  all,  and 
then  leave  it.  By  His  providence  and  by  His  ministers,  He  continually  renewed 
the  knowledge  of  it,  so  that  those  who  ignored  it  should  have  no  excuse. 
{E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  Bible  to  he  read  : — Young  man,  if  some  one  laughs 
at  you  because  you  read  the  Bible,  laugh  him  to  scorn.  Let  him  laugh  at  you 
because  you  read  Plato,  or  Homer,  or  Dante,  or  Shakespeare,  or  Browning ; 
but  laugh  at  him  if  he  laugh  at  you  because  you  read  the  Bible.  More  than  we 
have  gained  from  all  other  literatures  we  have  gained  from  this.  More  of  our 
law  from  Moses  than  from  Justinian ;  more  of  our  poetry  from  David  than  from 
Homer  ;  more  of  our  inspiration  from  Isaiah  than  from  Dante,  Demosthenes, 
or  Cicero  ;  more  of  our  philosophy  from  Paul  than  from  Plato ;  more  of  our  life 
from  this  one  Book  than  from  all  other  books  combined.  And  yet  it  is  not  the 
book  ;  it  is  the  message  in  the  book  that  has  to  give  the  life.     (Lyman  Abbott.) 

Ver.  14.  For  Israel  hath  forgotten  his  Maker,  and  bulldeth  temples;  and 
Judah  hath  multiplied  fenced  cities.  —  Neither  the  religion  nor  securit;/ 
of  a  nation  to  be  judged  by  appearances : — The  temples  are  the  idolatrous 
temples  built  aft«r  the  models  from  Syrophcenicia.  Fenced  cities  are  fortified 
places  erected  against  foreign  invaders.  1.  The  multiplicity  of  temples  is  no 
infallible  proof  of  the  growth  of  religion  in  a  country.  When  we  think  of  the 
moral  causes  that  often  lead  to  the  erection  of  temples,  they  rather  prove  our 
forgetfulness  of  God.  Tbey  are  greed,  spite,  sectism.  2.  The  increase  of  national 
defences  is  no  proof  of  the  increase  of  national  security.  The  safety  of  a  people 
is  in  the  moral  excellence  of  their  character,  and  in  the  guardianship  of  heaven. 
{Homilist.)  God  forgotten  : — Prosperous  men  become  dangerously  independent, 
and  in  their  pride  they  forget  God,  and  exclaim  with  Nebuchadnezzar.  "  Is  not 
this  great  Babylon  that  I  have  built  ?  "  As  Daniel  Quorm  quaintly  says,  "  The 
devil  is  called  in  the  Bible  '  Beelzebub  ' — that  do  mean,  the  '  god  o'  flies  ' — and 
you're  sure  to  find  'em  a-buzzin'  about  the  honey-pots  o'  prosperity."  Nothing 
BO  completely  blinds  a  man  as  gold-dust,  for  he  cannot  even  see  God — he  is  a 
practical  atheist.  Affluence  leads  first  to  indifference,  then  to  coldness,  then 
to  unbelief,  then  to  cynicism,  and  then  to  godlessness  !  Henry  IV.  once  asked 
the  Duke  of  Alva  if  he  had  observed  certain  eclipses  which  had  occurred  that 
year.  "  No,"  was  the  reply,  "  I  have  had  so  much  business  to  attend  to  upon 
earth,  that  I  have  had  no  time  even  to  look  up  to  heaven."  This  is  one  of  the 
perils  of  prosperity — to  forget  God,  and  leave  heaven  out  of  account.  (Helping 
Words.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Rejoice  not,  0  Israel,  for  joy,  as  other  people. — Unreliable  joy  .— 
All  are  not  Israel  who  are  of  Israel.  The  merely  nominal  Christian  is  not 
to  rejoice  as  the  true  Christian  should.  I.  Merely  nominal  professors 
HAVE  GREAT  CATTSE  TO  MOURN.  Thesc  words  Suggest  a  vast  number  of  Israelites 
preparing  for  the  songs  of  those  that  triumph,  the  shout  of  those  that  feast.     To 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  is. 

them  the  prophet  says,  "  Rejoice  not."  1.  The  first  reason  why  Israel  should 
not  rejoice  is  that  they  had  turned  aside  from  the  Lord.  In  leaving  the  Lord 
vvc  leave  all  true  happiness  behind.  2.  Because  they  were  at  ease  in  Zion. 
3.  Because  they  were  heaping  up  to  themselves  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath. 
-i.  Because  they  were  without  hope  in  the  world.  5.  Because  they  were  under 
sentence  of  condemnation.  To  every  merely  nominal  Christian  God  sends  this 
inessage,  "  Rejoice  not  for  joy,  as  other  people."  II.  God's  people  ought 
TO  BE  A  REJOICING  PEOPLE.  1.  Christ's  atonement  should  make  them  happy. 
2.  The  Triune  God  has  made  with  them  a  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and 
sure.     3.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  their  strength.     4.  The  rest  of  God  shall  be  theirs. 

5.  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth.  Tne  Lord  reigneth,  then  your  lot  in  thia 
'vorld  will  be  controlled  by  the  King  of  kings.  Then  your  sorrows,  disappoint- 
)nents,  crosses,  losses,  and  all  the  events  of  your  life  are  controlled  by  His  sceptre. 
Then  the  affairs  of  the  home,  and  the  joys  and  friendships  of  life  are  in  the  bands 
of  the  infinitely  wise  and  good,  and  you  may  well  rejoice.  [A.  Clayton  Thisdton.) 
The  miseries  of  sin : — The  doctrine  of  this  chapter  relates  to  a  time  wherein 
Israel  flourished  much  by  reason  of  outward  plenty,  victories,  and  confederacies 
with  their  neighbours ;  and  therefore  did  harden  and  please  themselves  in  their 
sins,  whatever  the  prophets  said  to  the  contrary.  Therefore  the  whole  chapter  con- 
tains a  large  description  of  the  miseries  that  were  to  come  upon  them  for  their  sins, 
which  may  be  branched  out  in  four  parts.  1.  There  is  a  description  of  the  desola- 
tion to  come  upon  them,  to  silence  their  presumptuous  and  carnal  joy ;  wherein 
he  declareth  they  had  no  cause  to  be  insolent,  thinking  to  prosper  in  sin  as  other 
nations,  seeing  their  sin  (idolatry)  was  more  heinous  than  the  sins  of  other  people. 
2.  This  desolation  is  declared  to  be  near,  whereby  the  Lord  woiild  discover  the 
folly  of  their  false  prophets,  and  their  sin  in  procuring  such  at  God's  hands,  who, 
whatever  they  pretended  to,  were  but  snares  to  the  people  and  causes  of  God's 
anger.  3.  They  are  charged  with  the  sins  of  their  fathers,  whom  they  imitated, 
hereby  provoking  God  to  call  them  to  an  account,  particularly  with  ingrate 
forsaking  of  God,  for  which  they  are  threatened  that  God  would  cut  them  off 
without  hope  of  prosperity  and  abandon  them.  4.  Their  superstition  and 
idolatry,  wherein  their  princes  had  chief  hand,  is  again  laid  to  their  charge  ;  for 
which  they  are  threatened  with  God's  anger,  and  rejection,  and  exile,  and  with 
cutting  them  off  root  and  branch.  Such  despisers  of  God's  Word  should  be 
rejected,  and  made  to  wander  in  exile.     {George  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  3.  They  Bhall  not  dwell  in  the  Lord's  land. — The  Lord's  land : — 
Before,  God  was  to  them  as  a  father  taking  maintenance  away  from  them, 
leaving  them  to  suffer  want ;  but  here  His  anger  increases,  and  He  puts  them  out 
of  His  house ;  as  a  nation  out  of  His  land.  God  would  make  them  know  that  it 
was  His  land,  that  they  were  but  tenants  at  will,  and  enjoyed  the  land  upon  con- 
ditions of  obedience.  It  is  a  good  meditation  for  us  to  dwell  upon,  that  we  are 
God's  stewards;  the  Lord  is  the  great  landlord  of  all  the  world.  "  The  earth  is 
the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  The  land  of  Canaan  was  "  Jehovah's  land  " 
in  some  special  senses.  L  It  was  a  land  that  God  had  "  espied  "  as  a  special 
place  for  His  people.  2.  It  was  the  land  of  promise.  3.  It  was  a  land  given  by 
oath  (Gen.  xxiv.  7).  4.  It  was  a  land  which  the  Lord  brought  His  people  into 
by  "  a  mighty  hand,  and  with  an  outstretched  arm."  5.  It  was  a  laud  divided 
by  lot.     The  possession  that  any  man  had  was  ordered  by  God  Himself  by  lot. 

6.  It  was  a  land  wherein  God  dwelt  Himself,  a  land  that  God  called  His  own  rest. 
It  was  the  land  wherein  were  the  ordinances  and  worship  of  God,  and  His  honour 
dwelt  there,  and  so  it  had  a  peculiar  blessing  upon  it  abov*  every  land  on  the 
face  of  the  whole  earth.  7.  It  was  a  land  over  which  God's  eye  was  in  a  more 
special  manner.  8.  This  land  was  typical  of  the  rest  of  the  Church  in  heaven. 
Then  it  would  be  a  great  judgment  of  God  to  drive  men  out  of  this  land  for  their 
sin.  To  be  cast  out  of  those  mercies  which  God  by  an  extraordinary  providence 
has  brought  to  us  is  a  sore  and  grievous  evil.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  And 
they  shall  eat  unclean  things  in  Assyria. — The  sting  of  Divine  judgment : — 
Here  we  have  the  degradation  of  sin.  To  be  ceremonially  clean  or  pure 
was  the  joy  and  pride  of  Israel.  The  Jews  would  not  eat  things  that  were 
common  or  unclean,  and  by  this  mark  they  were  distinguished  from  other  people. 
Whilst  Israel  lived  even  in  nominal  piety,  how  superfcial  soever  it  might  be, 
God  gave  him  protection  against  degradation;  but  when  Israel  turned  away 
adulterously  from  God,  and  sought  satisfaction  at  forbidden  fountains  and  altars. 


CHAP.  IX.]  HOSE  A.  167 

then  the  Lord  brought  upon  Israel  the  misery  of  this  degradation  and  shame. 
Israel  was  forced  to  eat  things  that  were  unclean,  things  that  were  killed  with 
the  blood  in  them,  things  that  revolted  the  sense  of  the  nation,  and  went  dead 
against  all  the  prejudices  of  education.  Thus  a  badge  was  taken  from  the  shoulder 
or  Israel,  a  distinction  was  removed  from  the  chosen  people  ;  they  could  have 
borne  reproaches  on  the  ground  of  moral  disobedience  with  comparative  in- 
difiEerence,  but  to  have  social  boundaries  and  distinctions  broken  down  was  a 
judgment  which  Israel  keenly  felt.  But  the  Lord  will  seize  the  sinner  at  some 
point,  for  He  cannot  be  baffled  in  judgment  or  thwarted  in  the  application  of  His 
righteousness.  The  Lord's  judgments  are  ordered  according  to  our  apostasy ; 
God  will  strike  most  where  we  feel  most ;  He  will  follow  our  pride  and  our 
vanity,  and  smite  them  so  as  to  bring  upon  them  our  keenest  shame.  God  will 
not  content  Himself  with  some  general  judgment ;  He  will  specifically  scrutinise 
and  either  reward  or  punish  according  to  the  result  of  His  inquest.  {Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Wliat  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day,  and  In  tlie  day  of  the  feast 
of  the  Lord  7 — Feasting  after  nnaccepied  sacrifice  : — Calvin  thinks  the  allusion 
is  to  the  time  of  exile,  when  the  people  would  be  deprived  of  all  their 
sacrifices.  But  the  better  point  is  that  the  sacrifices  of  Ephraim  being 
1.  unauthorised,  and  2.  unaccompanied  with  righteousness,  could  not  be 
accepted  ;  consequently  they  could  have  no  joy  in  their  lesser  or  greater  festal 
times,  because  all  the  joy  of  such  times  depended  on  their  reconciliation  and 
acceptance  with  God.  What  joy  can  there  be  in  any  of  the  joy  times  of  life 
when  we  bear  in  our  hearts  the  sad  conviction  of  our  wilful  and  persistent  estrange- 
ment from  God  ?  And  men  do  carry  that  secret  conviction  even  when,  to  their 
fellows,  they  seem  to  be  bold  and  self-satisfied.  There  is  no  sunshine  on  human 
life  when  God's  smile  is  hidden.  Illustrate  from  the  anxiety  of  Job  concerning 
his  children.  They  were  feasting,  but  he  did  not  feel  sure  that  it  was  feasting 
after  sacrifice,  enjoying  themselves  with  the  smile  of  God's  favour  resting  on  them. 
So  he  oflPered  sacrifices  to  ensure  the  acceptance  which  they  had  missed.  In  the 
ordinary  ritual  of  the  Jews  a  feast  followed  sacrifice,  as  in  the  case  of  Samuel. 
This  was  the  case  with  simple  sacrifice  and  with  the  special  sacrifices  of  solemn 
days.  No  joy  could  be  in  the  feast  if  the  sacrifice  had  failed  to  gain  acceptance. 
It  is  the  supreme  rule  for  all  the  joy  times  of  human  life.  They  never  can 
be  to  us  what  they  ought  to  be,  unless  we  enter  on  them  with  the  full  sense  of 
acceptance  with  God.  It  must  always  be,  "  sacrifice  before  feast."  {Robert 
Tuck,  B.A.)  The  solemn  days  of  life  : — The  day  here  referred  to  is  one  of  the 
great  Jewish  feasts,  either  Passover,  Pentecost,  or  Tabernacles.  What  will  you 
children  of  Abraham  do  when  you  are  deprived  of  the  privilege  of  attending 
these  solemn  assemblies  ?     There  are  solemn  days  awaiting  all  of  us — I.  The 

DAY  OF  PERSONAL  AFFLICTION.       II.  ThK  DAY  OP  SOCIAL  BEREAVEMENT.       III.  ThB 

DAY  OF  DEATH.  This  awaits  every  man.  What  will  ye  do  in  this  day,  when  heart 
and  flesh  shall  fail  ?    IV.  The  day  of  judgment.     {HomUist.) 

Ver.  7.  The  dajrs  of  visitation  are  come,  the  days  of  recompence  are  come. — Days 

of  recompence  : — The  passionate  anguish  that  breathes  in  these  words  gives  its 
colour  to  the  whole  book  of  Hosea's  prophecies.  His  language,  ajid  the  move- 
ments of  his  thoughts,  are  far  removed  from  the  simplicity  and  self-control  which 
characterise  the  prophecy  of  Amos.  Indignation  and  sorrow,  tenderness  and 
severity,  faith  in  the  sovereignty  of  Jehovah's  love  and  a  despairing  sense  of 
Israel's  infidelity,  are  woven  together  in  a  sequence  which  has  no  logical  plan, 
but  is  determined  by  the  battle  and  alternate  victory  of  contending  emotions  ; 
and  the  swift  transitions,  the  fragmentary,  unbalanced  utterance,  the  half- 
developed  allusions,  that  make  his  prophecy  so  difficult  to  the  commentator, 
express  the  agony  of  this  inward  conflict.  Hosea,  above  all  other  prophets,  is 
a  man  of  deep  affections,  of  a  gentle,  poetic  nature.  His  heart  is  too  true  and 
tender  to  snap  the  bonds  of  kindred  and  country,  or  mingle  aught  of  personal 
bitterness  with  the  severity  of  Jehovah's  words.  Alone  in  the  midst  of  a  nation 
that  knows  not  Jehovah,  without  disciple  or  friend,  without  the  solace  of  domestic 
afiEection — for  even  his  home  was  full  of  shame  and  sorrow — he  yet  clings  to 
lara^  with  inextinguishable  love.  The  doom  which  he  proclaims  against  his 
people  is  the  doom  of  all  that  is  dearest  to  him  on  earth  ;  his  heart  is  ready  to 
break  with  sorrow,  his  very  reason  totters  under  the  awful  vision  of  judgment. 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  « 

Ills  whole  prophecy  is  a  long  cry  of  anguish,  as  again  and  again  he  renews  his 
appeal  to  the  heedless  nation  that  is  running  headlong  to  destruction.  But  it 
is  all  in  vain.  The  weary  years  roll  out,  the  signs  of  Israel's  dissolution  thicken, 
and  still  his  words  find  no  audience.  Like  a  silly  dove  fluttering  in  the  toils, 
Ephraim  turns  now  to  Assyria,  now  to  Egypt,  "  but  they  return  not  to  Jehovah 
their  God,  and  seek  not  Him  for  all  this.'  Still  the  prophet  stands  alone  in  his 
recognition  of  the  true  cause  of  the  multiplied  distresses  of  his  nation,  and  still 
it  is  his  task  to  preach  repentance  to  deaf  ears,  to  declare  a  judgment  in  which 
only  himself  believes.  ( W.  Robertson  Smith,  LL.D.)  The  prophet  Is  a  fool,  and 
the  spiritual  man  is  mad.  —  Charge  against  religious  ministers  :  —  What  the 
prophet  means  is  this.  When  the  predicted  retribution  had  come,  Israel  would 
learn  that  the  prosperity  which  some  of  the  prophets  had  predicted  (Ezek.  xiii.  10) 
proved  them  infatuated    fools.      This    charge  against  religious  ministers  is — 

I.  Sometimes  too  true.  1.  There  are  men  of  weak  minds ;  utterly  incapable 
of  taking  a  harmonious  view  of  truth,  or  even  forming  a  clear  and  complete  con- 
ception of  any  great  principle.  2.  There  are  men  of  irrational  theologies.  They 
propound  theological  dogmas  which  are  utterly  incongruous  with  human  reason, 
and  therefore   un-Biblical   and   un-Divine.     3.  There   are  men  of  silly  rituals. 

II.  Often  a  scoffing  calumny.  The  ideal  preacher  is  the  wisest  and  most 
philosophical  man  of  his  age.  1.  He  aims  at  the  highest  end.  2.  He  works  in 
the  right  direction.  3.  He  employs  the  best  means.  The  best  is  not  legislation, 
art,  poetry,  rhetoric,  but  love.  This  is  the  Cross,  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation. 
(Homilist.)  SpiritiLol  madness : — Literally,  the  man  of  the  lying  spirit,  the 
man  who  was  determined  to  deceive  the  nations  :  that  prophet  is  declared  to 
be  a  fool,  and  that  spiritual  man  is  mad.  In  other  scriptures  another  spiritual 
man  is  also  said  to  be  mad.  Christ  was  so  charged.  Paul  was  declared  to  be 
mad.  The  apostles  had  to  vindicate  themselves  against  daily  charges  of  insanity. 
Why  so  ?  Simply  because  they  were  spiritual  men.  There  is  a  madness  without 
which  there  is  no  greatness.  Talent  is  never  mad,  genius  is  seldom  sane  ;  respecta- 
bility is  always  decorous,  enthusiasm  sometimes  makes  a  new  map  of  the  world 
every  day,  lining  it  and  pencilling  it  according  to  an  eccentricity  not  to  be  brought 
within  rules  and  mechanical  proprieties.  Enthusiasm  is  another  name  for  the 
kind  of  madness  which  is  described  in  the  Scriptures.  It  is  not  the  professing 
Christian  who  is  mad.  He  may  be  too  sagacious  ;  he  may  be  too  shrewd  ;  he 
may  be  but  a  calculator.  Men  of  mechanical  piety  never  helped  the  cause  of 
the  Son  of  God.  We  should  have  more  progress  if  we  had  more  madness  ;  we 
should  make  a  great  impression  if  we  had  more  enthusiasm.  The  spiritual  man 
is  necessarily  mad  in  the  estimation  of  the  worldly  man.  The  spiritual  man 
is  mad,  because  he  says  that  mind  is  greater  than  what  we  know  by  the  name 
of  matter.  The  religious  or  spiritual  man  is  mad  because  he  trusts  to  a  spirit. 
The  spiritual  man  sees  the  invisible,  and  is  not  to  be  laughed  out  of  his  spiritual 
ecstasy.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  A  converted  woman  accounted  as  mad: — 
Rev.  John  Robertson  says  :  "  During  the  revivals  of  1859,  a  woman  living  in 
an  Aberdeenshire  village  with  her  mother  and  sister  was  converted,  and  was 
full  of  enthusiasm.  She  went  from  door  to  door  pleading  with  the  people  to 
let  the  Lord  Jesus  into  their  hearts.  The  mother  and  sister  had  a  consultation 
together,  and  thej'  came  to  the  sad  conclusion  that  Mary  was  mad.  The  village 
doctor,  and  with  him  the  doctor  of  a  neighbouring  village,  was  called  in.  They 
consulted,  and  they  came  to  the  same  conclusion,  and  thereupon  signed  the 
schedule  for  her  admission  to  a  lunatic  asylum,  simply  because  she  besought 
one  and  all  of  those  whom  she  loved  to  come  to  Jesus.  On  the  night  preceding 
the  day  upon  which  she  was  to  be  sent  to  the  asylum  the  sister  and  the  mother 
had  strange  thoughts,  and  when  they  met  in  the  morning  the  mother  said  to  her 
daughter,  "  Do  you  know,  I  have  just  been  wondering  all  night  whether  it  is 
Mary  that  is  mad,  or  we."  "  Well,  do  you  know,  mother,"  replied  the  daughter,  "  I 
have  just  been  wondering  the  same  thing."  They  thought  deeply,  and  searched 
their  hearts,  until  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  not  Mary,  but  they 
themselves  who  were  mad.  Brownley  North  says  that  he  took  tea  with  the 
whole  family,  and  with  the  relations  on  both  sides  of  the  house,  about  twenty- 
three  in  all,  who,  through  Mary's  pleading,  had  been  led  to  Christ." 

Ver.  9.  As  in  the  days  of  Glbeah. — The  lessons  of  an  old  story  ( Judg.  xix.,  xx.) : — 
1.  When  men  to  whom  we  seek  for  protection  deal  falsely  with  us,  their  wicked- 
ness is  great  in  the  eyes  of  God.     2.  We  may  meet  with  worse  usage  from  those 


CHAP.  IX.]  H08EA.  169 

who  profess  religion  than  from  those  who  profess  it  not.  3.  God  may  regard 
those  as  unholy  and  unclean  who  make  a  fair  show  of  religion.  4.  For  men  to 
stand  up  impudently  and  boldly  in  the  defence  of  wickedness  committed  is  abomin- 
able in  the  eyes  of  God.  5.  To  join  with  others  in  defence  of  evil  is  worse  than 
to  stand  out  ourselves  in  evil.  6.  Those  who  defend  evil  may  for  awhile  prosper, 
but  they  must  at  last  perish.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Corrupting  forms  of 
wickedness  : — From  the  sad  and  dreadful  story  of  Gibeah  learn — 1.  Contempt 
of  true  prophets,  and  delighting  in  deceivers  and  their  delusions,  will  draw  men 
upon  abominable  wickedness.  2.  As  men  once  giving  way  to  gross  sins  will 
soon  involve  themselves  so  that  they  cannot  recover  themselves,  so  it  is  a  dreadful 
condition  to  be  entangled  in  sin  without  hope  of  recovery,  and  for  men  to  be 
active  in  hardening  themselves.  3.  As  there  is  no  wicked  course  or  measure 
of  sin,  wherein  men  have  fallen,  but  the  Church,  departing  from  God,  may  fall 
upon  it  again,  so  the  sins  of  progenitors  will  be  put  upon  the  account  of  the  present 
generation  who  imitate  them,  and  this  will  draw  to  a  great  account.  {George 
Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  10.  They  went  to  Baal-peor,  and  separated  themselves  unto  that  shame. 

—Sin  and  separation : — The  shame  here  alluded  to  was  idolatry.  I.  All 
SIN  IS  SHAME.  1.  It  is  shame  in  its  commission.  People  seldom  do  iniquity 
in  the  full  blaze  of  day.  They  would  rather  not  be  seen  in  its  commission. 
It  is  shameful  to  be  a  sinner ;  to  possess  reason  and  to  play  the  part  of  an 
idiot ;  to  have  liberty  and  to  act  the  part  of  a  slave ;  to  be  admitted  to 
the  arms  of  a  benefactor  and  then  to  stab  him  in  return.  2.  It  is  a  shame  in  its 
consequence.  It  produces  shame.  "  Thou  shalt  be  confounded,"  says  God, 
*'  because  of  your  shame."  "  The  wicked  shall  rise  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt."  II.  Sin  is  separation.  Before  a  man  can  join  the  army  of  sin 
he  must  leave  the  service  of  God.  Hence  he  separates  himself.  From  what  ? 
1.  From  the  love,  protection,  guidance,  and  companionship  of  his  God.  What 
blessings  to  turn  his  back  upon  !  2.  From  the  principles  of  truth,  righteousness, 
and  grace.  He  becomes  another  character.  All  that  can  exalt  him  is  left  behind. 
3.  From  the  prospect  of  future  bliss.     {Homiiist. ) 

Ver.  15.   All   their   wickedness   la   in   Gilgal:    for   there   I   hated   them. — 

Punishment  proportional  to  privilege :  —  Translated  into  modem  life,  the 
prophet's  plea  would  read  thus.  "  All  their  wickedness  is  in  the  house  of 
God;  all  their  wickedness  is  after  coming  from  the  table  of  the  Lord,  or  after 
receiving  some  faithful  letter,  or  after  their  own  painful  convictions  and  sorrowful 
confession,  or  after  their  repeated  resolutions  and  vows.  This  helps  us  to  realise 
how  a  Jew  would  feel  who  heard  the  prophet  make  this  reproach.  1.  At  Gilgal 
the  covenant  of  circumcision  was  renewed  for  the  second  time  since  they  came 
out  of  Egypt.  What  circumcision  was  to  the  Jew,  religious  instruction  is 
to  us  :  circumcision  was  God's  seal  to  the  Jews  that  He  would  cleanse  them  from 
taint  of  Egyptian  idolatry.  2.  At  Gilgal  they  celebrated  the  passover  for  the 
first  time  after  they  came  out  of  Egypt.  The  Lord's  supper  is  our  passover. 
3.  It  was  at  Gilgal  that  God  Himself  appeared  in  a  most  remarkable  manner  to 
assure  the  people  of  Israel  that  He  would  be  their  deliverer.  The  captains  of  the 
Lord's  host  came.  Observe  Joshua's  momentary  surprise,  courage,  reverence. 
Notice  the  communication.  1.  Beginning  life  in  humble  circumstances  may  be 
a  Gilgal  to  us.  2.  So  may  a  season  of  afHiction  be.  Or  3.  The  loss  of  a  dear 
friend.     But  the  wickedness  of  Gilgal  may  be  taken  away.     {W.  O.  Barrett.) 

Ver.  17.  My  God  will  cast  them  away,  .  .  .  and  they  shall  be  wanderers 
among  the  nations. — Divine  severities  for  a  nation  : — 1.  It  is  a  judgment  to 
have  an  unsettled  spirit.  A  spirit  wandering  up  and  down,  unable  to  settle 
to  anything,  sometimes  in  this  place,  sometimes  in  that,  sometimes  in  this 
way,  and  sometimes  in  another,  this  is  a  judgment  of  God.  The  wandering 
of  men's  appetites  and  desires  works  them  a  great  deal  of  vexation.  2.  Those 
who  are  cast  away  out  of  God's  house  can  have  no  rest ;  they  go  about  like  the 
unclean  spirit,  seeking  rest,  but  can  find  none.  The  Church  of  God  and  His 
ordinances  are  God's  rest.  But  you  will  say.  May  not  men  be  wanderers ;  that 
is,  may  they  not  be  cast  out  of  their  habitations  and  countries,  and  wander  up 
and  down,  and  yet  not  be  cast  off  from  God  ?  There  is  no  evil  in  wandering  if  we 
carry  a  good  conscience  with  us.   But  there  it  is,  "  They  shall  be  wanderers  among 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  nations."  It  was  a  great  judgment  of  God  for  Israel  to  be  scattered  among 
the  nations,  for  they  were  a  people  that  were  separated  from  the  nations,  and  not 
to  be  reckoned  among  the  nations;  they  were  God's  "peculiar  treasure."  This 
curse  is  upon  the  Jews  to  this  very  day, — how  are  they  wanderers  among  the 
nations!  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Wanderers  among  the  nations. — The  lost  ten 
tribes  .-^-The  words  of  the  prophet  imply  an  abiding  condition.  He  does  not 
say,  "  They  shall  wander,"  but  "  They  shall  be  wanderers."  Such  was  to 
be  their  lot ;  such  has  been  their  lot  ever  since ;  and  such  was  not  the  ordinary 
lot  of  those  large  populations  whom  Eastern  conquerors  transported  from  their 
own  land.  The  transported  population  had  a  settled  abode  allotted  to  it,  whether 
in  the  capital  or  the  provinces.  Sometimes  new  cities  or  villages  were  built  for 
the  settlers.  Israel  at  first  was  so  located.  Perhaps  on  account  of  the  frequent 
rebellions  of  their  kings  the  ten  tribes  were  placed  amid  a  wild,  warlike  population, 
"  in  the  cities  of  the  Medes."  When  the  interior  of  Asia  was  less  known,  people 
thought  that  they  were  still  to  be  found  there.  The  Jews  fabled,  that  the  ten 
tribes  lay  behind  some  mighty  and  fabulous  river,  Sambatyon,  or  were  fenced 
in  by  mountains.  Christians  thought  that  they  might  be  foimd  in  some  yet 
unexplored  part  of  Asia.  Undeceived  as  to  this,  they  still  asked  whether  the 
Afghans  or  Yezides,  or  the  natives  of  North  America  were  the  ten  tribes,  or  whether 
they  were  the  Nestorians  of  Kurdistan.  So  natural  did  it  seem  that  they,  like 
other  nations  so  transported,  should  remain  as  a  body  near  or  at  the  places 
where  they  had  been  located  by  their  conquerors.  The  prophet  says  otherwise. 
He  says,  their  abiding  condition  shall  be,  "  they  shall  be  wanderers  among  the 
nations  " ;  wanderers  among  them,  but  no  part  of  them.  Before  the  final  dispersion 
of  the  Jews  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  "  the  Jewish  race,"  Josephus  says, 
"  was  in  great  numbers  throughout  the  whole  world,  interspersed  with  the  nations." 
Those  assembled  at  the  Day  of  Pentecost  had  come  from  all  parts  of  Asia  Minor, 
but  also  from  Parthia,  Media,  Persia,  Mesopotamia,  Arabia,  Egypt,  maritime 
Lybia,  Crete,  and  Italy.  Wherever  the  apostles  went  in  Asia  or  Greece  they 
found  Jews,  in  numbers  sufficient  to  raise  persecution  against  them.  The  Jews, 
scoffing,  asked  whether  our  Lord  would  go  to  the  dispersion  among  the  Greeks. 
The  Jews  of  Egypt  were  probably  the  descendants  of  those  who  went  thither 
after  the  murder  of  Gedaliah.  The  Jews  of  the  North,  as  well  as  those  of  China, 
India,  Russia,  were  probably  descendants  of  the  ten  tribes.  From  one  end  of 
Asia  to  the  other,  and  onward  through  the  Crimea,  Greece,  and  Italy,  the  Jews, 
by  their  presence,  bare  witness  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  Not  like  the 
wandering  Indian  tribe,  who  spread  over  Europe,  living  apart  in  their  native 
wildness,  out,  settled  among  the  inhabitants  of  each  city,  they  were  still  distinct, 
although  with  no  polity  of  their  own,  a  distinct,  settled,  yet  foreign  and  sub- 
ordinate race.  "  Still  remains  unreversed  this  irrevocable  sentence  as  to  the 
temporal  state  and  face  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  that  they  remain  still '  wanderers,' 
or  dispersed  among  other  nations,  and  have  never  been  restored,  nor  are  in  any 
likelihood  of  ever  being  restored  to  their  own  land,  so  as  to  call  it  their  own.  If 
ever  any  of  them  hath  returned  thither,  it  hath  been  but  as  strangers."  {E.  B. 
Pusey,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  X- 

VsR.  1.  Israel  ia  an  empty  vine,  he  1n±ageth  forth  fimit  unto  himself. — 
The  abuse  of  worldly  prosperity  : — Our  version  is  faulty  here.  Elzas  renders, 
*'  Israel  is  a  luxurious  vine,  whose  fruit  is  very  abundant."  So  our  subject  is 
the  abuse  of  prosperity.  Some  men  are  very  prosperous.  Every  branch  of 
their  life  clusters  with  fruit.  Some  nations  are  very  prosperous.  When  is  pros- 
perity abused  T  L  When  it  is  used  with  an  exclusive  regabd  to  oxtb.  owk 
SBLFisH  ENDS.  As — 1.  For  Self- indulgence.  2,  For  self-aggrandisement.  The 
rieht  which  property  gives  is  the  right  to  lay  it  out  for  the  benefit  of  our 
feUow-men.  IL  When  it  is  used  without  a  supbshb  begabd  to  the  claims 
or  God.  Unless  we  employ  our  property  according  to  the  directions  of  the  Great 
Proprietor  we  abuse  the  tra&t.  How  does  God  require  ns  to  employ  our  pro- 
perty T     1.  For  the  amelioration  of  hnman  woes.    2.  For  the  dispersion  of 


CHAP.  X.]  EOSEA.  171 

human  ignorance.  3.  For  the  elevation  of  the  human  soul.  To  raise  it  to  the 
knowledge,  the  image,  the  fellowship,  and  the  enjoyment  of  God.  How  are 
we,  as  a  nation,  using  our  enormous  prosperity  T  (Homilist.)  The  figvre  of 
the  vine : — Israel  is  a  luxuriant  vine.  Not  as  in  the  A.V.  "  an  empty  vine," 
nor  as  in  the  margin  A.V.  "  a  vine  emptying  the  fruit  which  it  giveth,"  but  a 
vine  which  pours  itself  forth,  spreads  out  its  oranches.  It  denotes  the  outward 
prosperity  and  abundance  which  they  had  enjoyed.  The  vineyard  had  been 
planted  with  the  choicest  vine,  and  diligently  cultivated,  but  it  bore  wretched 
fruit,  significant  of  sins  against  God.  (W.  Henry  Green,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  The 
Church  compared  to  a  vine : — 1.  No  plant  has  a  more  unpromising  outside  than 
the  vine.  2.  The  vine  is  the  most  fruitful  plant  that  grows  out  of  the  earth. 
3.  No  plant  requires  so  great  care  as  the  vine.  4.  The  vine  is  the  most  depending 
plant  in  the  world,  unable  to  underprop  itself,  it  must  have  props  more  than 
any  other  plant,  and  therefore  nature  has  given  it  tendrils  by  which  it  catches 
hold  of  anything  near  it,  5.  If  it  be  not  fruitful,  it  is  the  most  unprofitable 
thing  in  the  world.  6.  A  vine  is  the  most  spreading  of  plants.  It  spreads  larger 
than  other  plants,  and  fills  a  great  deal  of  room  with  its  branches.  7.  The  vme 
is  the  softest  and  most  tender  of  plants,  the  emblem  of  peace.  But  Israel  is  an 
empty,  or  emptying,  vine ;  he  makes  himself  empty.  (1)  Emptiness  in  those 
who  profess  themselves  to  be  God's  people  is  a  very  great  evil.  It  is  unnatural. 
It  is  a  dishonour  to  the  root.  It  frustrates  the  Lord  of  all  the  care,  and  cost, 
and  charge  He  expends.  There  is  no  blessing  upon  thy  soul  if  thou  art  "  an 
empty  vine."  If  there  be  grace,  it  cannot  but  bear  fruit.  Common  gifts  shall 
be  taken  away,  if  the  vine  proves  empty.  The  evil  of  emptiness  is  great  accord- 
ing to  the  greatness  of  opportunities.  (2)  Sin  will  empty  a  land  of  all  the  blessings 
God  has  bestowed.  Sin  is  an  emptying  thing ;  it  empties  lands,  families,  and 
persons  of  all  their  outward  comforts.  (3)  It  is  all  one,  to  be  an  empty  Christian, 
and  to  bring  forth  fruit  to  oneself.  Men  think  that  which  they  bring  forth  to 
themselves  is  clear  gain ;  but  this  is  an  infinite  mistake,  for  that  which  is  for 
thyself  is  lost,  and  that  which  is  for  God  is  gained.  {Jeremiah  Burrotighs.) 
Israel  as  a  robbed  vine  : — The  prophet  means,  that  Israel  was  like  a  vine  which 
is  robbed  after  the  ingathering  is  come :  for  the  word  bekok  means  properly 
to  pillage,  or  to  plunder.  The  prophet  compares  the  gathering  of  the  grapes 
to  robbing ;  and  this  view  best  suits  the  place.  Israel  is  like  a  robbed  vine, 
for  it  was  stripped  of  its  fruit;  and  then  he  adds,  "  he  will  make  fruit  for  himself." 
I  understand  by  the  words  that  Israel  would  lay  up  fruit  for  himself  after  the 
robbing,  and  sacred  history  confirms  this  view ;  for  this  people,  we  know,  had 
been  in  various  ways  chastised :  so,  however,  that  they  gathered  new  strength. 
For  the  Lord  intended  only  to  admonish  them  gently,  that  they  might  be  healed  ; 
but  nothing  was  effected  by  God's  moderation.  The  case,  however,  was  so, 
that  Israel  produced  new  fruit,  as  a  vine,  after  having  been  robbed  one  year, 
brings  forth  a  new  vintage ;  for  one  ingathering  does  not  kill  the  vine.  Thus 
also  Israel  did  lay  up  fruit  for  himself ;  that  is,  alter  the  Lord  had  collected  there 
His  vintage,  He  again  favoured  the  people  with  His  blessing,  and,  as  it  were, 
restored  them  anew ;  as  vines  in  the  spring  throw  out  their  branches,  and  then 
produce  fruit.  God,  in  the  next  clause,  complains  that  Israel,  after  having  been 
once  gathered,  went  on  in  his  own  wickedness.  This  is  a  useful  doctrine.  We 
see  how  the  Lord  forbears  in  inflicting  punishments — He  does  not  execute  them 
with  the  utmost  rigour.  But  how  do  they  act  who  are  thus  moderately  chastised  ? 
As  soon  as  they  can  recruit  their  spirits  they  are  carried  away  by  a  more  head- 
strong inclination,  and  grow  insolent  against  God,  {John  Calvin.)  Israel 
as  a  vine  : — A  luxuriant  vine ;  one  which  poureth  out,  poureth  itself  out  into 
leaves,  abundant  in  switches  (as  most  old  versions  explain  it),  luxuriant  in  leaves, 
emptying  itself  in  them,  and  empty  of  fruit ;  like  the  fig-tree  which  our  Lord 
cursed.  For  the  more  a  fruit  tree  putteth  out  its  strength  in  leaves  and  branches, 
the  less  and  worse  fruit  it  beareth.  "  The  juices  wmch  it  ought  to  transmute 
into  wine  it  disperseth  in  the  ambitious  idle  shew  of  leaves  and  branches."  The 
sap  in  the  vine  is  an  emblem  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  through  whom  alone  we  can 
bear  fruit.  "  His  grace  which  was  in  me,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  was  not  in  vain." 
It  is  in  vain  to  us,  when  we  waste  the  stirrings  of  God's  Spirit  in  feelings,  aspira- 
tions, longings,  transports,  "  which  bloom  their  hour  and  fade."  Like  the  leaves, 
these  feelings  aid  in  maturing  fruit ;  when  there  are  leaves  only,  the  tree  is  barren, 
and  "  nigh  unto  cursing,  whose  end  is  to  be  burned."  "  It  bringeth  forth  fruit 
for  itself,"  lit.  "  setteth  fruit  to,  or  on,  itself."     Luxuriant  in  leaves,  its  fruit 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

becomes  worthless,  and  is  from  itself  to  itself.  It  is  uncultured  (for  Israel  refused 
culture),  pouring  itself  out,  as  it  willed,  in  what  it  willed.  It  had  a  rich  shew  of 
leaves,  a  shew  also  of  fruit,  but  not  for  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard,  since  they  came 
to  no  size  or  ripeness.  Yet  to  the  superficial  glance,  Israel,  at  this  time,  was 
rich,  prosperous,  healthy,  abimdant  in  all  things.  [E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Sdf- 
aggrandisement,  and  its  secret : — "  He  bringeth  forth  fruit  unto  himself " ;  and 
yet,  literally,  he  brings  forth  no  fruit  at  all,  only  long  stem  and  tendril,  and  leaves 
innumerable  ;  his  fruit  is  all  foliage.  The  figure  is  very  Hebraic  and  grand. 
I.srael  is  a  vine,  and  a  growing  vine,  but  Israel  misses  the  piu-pose  of  the  vine 
by  never  growing  any  wine  ;  growing  nothing  but  weedy  leaves,  and  so  disap- 
pointing men  when  they  come  to  find  fruit  thereon,  and  discover  none.  The 
Church  is  an  empty  vine.  Theology  is  an  empty  vine.  All  religious  controversy 
that  is  conducted  for  its  own  sake — that  is  to  say,  with  the  single  view  of  winning 
a  victory  in  words — is  an  empty  vine, — luxuriant  enough,  but  it  is  the  luxuriance 
of  ashes.  "  According  to  the  multitude  of  his  fruit  he  hath  increased  the  altars ; 
according  to  the  goomiess  of  his  land,  they  have  made  goodly  images."  They 
have  gone  pari  passu  with  the  Almighty — He,  the  living  Father,  doing  the  good, 
and  they,  the  rebellious  men,  doing  proportionate  evil.  When  the  harvest  has 
been  plentiful,  the  idolatry  has  been  large,  increasing  in  lu-gency  and  importance  j 
when  the  vine  has  brought  forth  abundantly,  another  image  has  been  set  up. 
That  is  the  teaching  of  the  prophet ;  yea,  that  is  the  impeachment  of  God.  God 
may  be  represented  as  saying.  Your  wickedness  has  been  in  proportion  to  My 
goodness ;  the  more  I  have  given  you,  the  less  I  have  received  from  you ;  the 
larger  the  prosperity  with  which  I  have  crowned  you,  the  more  zealous  have  you 
been  in  your  idolatry ;  the  more  lovingly  I  have  revealed  Myself  to  you,  the 
greater  your  wantonness,  selfishness,  and  rebellion.  That  is  not  only  Hebrew, 
it  is  English  ;  that  is  not  only  ancient  history,  it  is  the  tragedy,  the  blasphemy 
of  to-day.  What  is  the  explanation  ?  Where  is  the  point  at  which  we  can  stand 
and  say :  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  mischief  ?  The  answer  is  in  the  second 
verse,  "  Their  heart  is  divided."  That  has  always  been  the  difficulty  of  God; 
He  has  so  seldom  been  able  to  get  a  consenting  heart.  God  says :  These  people 
want  to  do  two  irreconcilable  things — they  want  to  serve  God  and  Mammon  ; 
they  want  to  courteously  recognise  the  existence  of  Jehovah,  and  then  run  to 
kiss  the  lips  of  Baal.  Their  heart  does  not  all  go  one  way ;  they  cannot  wholly 
throw  off  the  true  religion ;  it  has  indeed  become  to  them  little  better  than  a 
superstition,  but  men  do  not  like  to  gather  up  all  the  traditions  of  the  past,  and 
cast  them  in  one  bundle  into  the  flowing  river,  in  the  hope  that  it  may  be  carried 
away  and  lost  for  ever.  So  they  come  to  the  altar  sometimes  ;  now  and  again 
they  look  in  at  the  chvurch  door ;  intermittently  they  listen  to  the  old  Psalm  and 
the  half -remembered  hymn ;  but  in  the  soul  of  them  they  are  drunk  with  idolatry. 
There  are  persons  very  anxious  to  maintain  orthodoxy  who  are  the  most  notorious 
thieves  in  society  ;  there  are  those  who  would  subscribe  to  any  society  to  defend 
Sunday,  if  they  might  do  on  Monday  just  what  they  liked  ;  they  are  zealous 
about  the  Sabbath,  and  especially  zealous  that  other  people  should  keep  it,  but 
on  Monday  you  would  never  imagine  that  there  was  a  Sunday.  "  Their  heart 
is  divided."  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  self -shoot  the  wrong  one  to  cultivate: — 
A  little  while  ago  an  inexperienced  hand  had  trained  a  rose-tree  over  a  porch. 
The  leaves  of  the  tree  were  green,  and  the  growth  was  strong,  but  not  a  flower 
was  there.  "  Why  is  this  ?  "  inquired  the  master  of  a  skilled  gardener.  The 
answer  was  given  by  an  act,  not  by  words,  for,  taking  out  his  pruning  knife, 
the  gardener  in  one  moment  levelled  the  rampant  growth  to  the  ground.  "  What 
have  you  done  ?  "  cried  the  master.  "  Don't  you  see,  sir,"  was  the  reply;  "  your 
man  has  been  cultivating  the  wrong  shoot !  "  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  gardener 
pointed  out  the  grafted  rose,  which  had  barely  struggled  two  inches  above  the 
ground,  and  which  the  wild  shoot  had  completely  overwhelmed.  In  a  few  months 
the  graft,  set  free  from  the  encumbering  growth  of  the  wrong  shoot,  sent  out  in 
vigorous  life  its  beautiful  branches,  and  covered  the  porch  with  its  luxuriance  ; 
and  there  it  lives,  a  parable  of  heavenly  things.  Not  all  the  cultivation  or  training 
in  the  world  could  have  made  that  wrong  shoot  become  a  beautiful  and  flowering 
tree,  neither  will  the  efforts  of  a  whole  life  succeed  in  making  our  "  old  man  " 
like  Christ,  or  fruitful  towards  God.  God  has  condemned  our  nature  in  the 
Cross  of  Christ:  He  has  judicially  cut  it  down;  and  no  fruit  fit  for  ('od  shall 
grow  upon  it  for  ever.  The  practical  word,  then,  to  those  Christians  who  are 
seeking  to  produce  out  of  self  fruit  acceptable  to  God  is.  Do  not  cultivate  the 


CHAP.  X.]  HOSEA.  173 

wrong  shoot.  [E.  F.  Wethcrby.)  Sin  the  product  of  man's  free  wiU : — This 
is  the  oldest  illustration  of  cause  and  effect  known  to  our  race.  The  Old  Testa- 
ment, with  its  system  of  con  cience  education,  is  a  profound  commentary  on  the 
subject,  its  moral  law  creating  a  knowledge  of  sin,  its  sacrificial  system  deepening 
the  sense  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  its  prophetic  ministry  denouncing  sin,  and  bring- 
ing the  sorrow  and  suffering  following  sin  home  to  the  hearts  of  the  kings  and 
the  people  with  unflinching  courage  and  precision.  None  the  less  striking  is 
this  truth  when  read  from  the  pages  of  classic  heathenism.  It  is  Helen's  crime 
and  that  of  Paris  which  brings  on  sorrow  in  the  downfall  of  Troy.  ^Eschylus, 
Sophocles,  and  Euripides  are  pagan  preachers  enunciating  the  terrible  judgments 
following  in  the  train  of  wrong-doing.  Dante,  Chaucer,  Spenser,  Shakespeare, 
Milton  build  their  poems  and  construct  their  dramas  upon  this  foundation. 
Sin  is  the  product  of  man's  free  will.  "  Israel  bringeth  forth  fruit  unto  himself." 
In  appropriating  the  gifts  of  God  to  self-gratification  the  Creator  has  been 
ignored.  Sin  is  man's  own  product.  It  is  the  child  of  our  own  self-will.  While 
it  is  true  that  in  every  human  being  there  is  a  persistent  tendency  to  take  the 
wrong  direction  in  moral  development,  yet  no  man  is  ever  otherwise  than  a  wilful 
einner.  The  election  by  the  individual  will  to  act  counter  to  the  requirements 
of  God  is  the  source  of  all  sin.  Again,  we  see  the  insidious  manner  in  which  sin 
makes  its  home  in  the  human  heart.  Self-interest  is  pressed  into  the  service  of 
sin,  but  sin,  once  getting  a  foothold,  transforms  a  healthy  self-interest  into  gross 
selfishness.  Growth  and  prosperity  are  turned  to  sinful  uses.  In  the  satiety 
of  self-indulgence,  in  the  greed  of  self-aggrandisement,  in  the  divided  heart,  we 
witness  the  wreck  of  God's  purposes  as  they  are  related  to  human  life.  Into 
this  terrible  state  of  antagonism  to  the  will  of  God  the  prophet  Hosea  declares 
Israel  has  come.  When  the  Almighty  created  man  with  free  will,  He,  in  a  sense, 
"  set  bounds  to  His  own  omnipotence."  From  that  hour  man  has  held  in  his 
will  the  awful  power  of  resisting  God.  Sorrow,  then,  and  suffering,  are  the  inevit- 
able results  of  persistent  wilful  sin.  The  moment  sin  is  committed  judgment 
begins  with  the  steady  developments  of  growth.  But  in  the  distressing  picture 
of  sin  and  its  consequences  now  before  us  there  is  relief  afforded.  Sad,  indeed, 
would  be  the  lot  of  man  if  he  were  irrevocably  doomed  to  endure  the  conditions 
of  his  terrible  fortune.  There  is  promised  the  overthrow  of  the  dominion  of  sin 
by  repentance  and  service  in  the  cause  of  righteousness.     (E.  M.  Taylor.) 

Ver.  2.  Their  heart  is  divided;  now  shall  they  be  found  faulty. — A  divided 
heart. — It  is  one  grievous  fault  with  the  Church  of  Christ  at  the  present 
day,  that  it  is  not  merely  divided  somewhat  in  its  creed,  and  somewhat  also 
in  the  practice  of  its  ordinances,  but,  alas !  it  is  also  somewhat  divided  in  heart. 
When  our  doctrinal  divisions  grow  to  so  great  a  head  that  we  cease  to  co-operate, 
when  our  opinions  upon  mere  ordinances  become  so  acid  towards  each  other 
that  we  can  no  longer  extend  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  those  who  differ  from 
us,  then  indeed  is  the  Church  of  God  found  faulty.  Even  Beelzebub,  with  all 
his  craft,  cannot  stand  when  once  his  hosts  are  divided.  The  smallest  church 
in  the  world  is  potent  for  good  when  it  hath  but  one  heart  and  one  soul ;  when 
pastor,  elders,  deacons,  and  members  are  bound  together  by  a  threefold  cord 
which  cannot  be  broken.  Union  is  strength.  By  union  we  live,  and  by  disimion 
we  expire.  Apply  the  text  to  our  individual  condition.  I.  A  fearful  disease. 
"  Their  heart  is  divided."  1.  The  seat  of  the  disease.  It  affects  a  vital  part, 
a  part  so  vital  that  it  affects  the  whole  man.  There  is  no  power,  no  passion, 
no  motive,  no  principle  which  does  not  become  vitiated  when  once  the  heart 
is  diseased.  2.  The  disease  touches  this  vital  part  after  a  most  serious  fashion. 
The  heart  is  cleft  in  twain.  Nothing  can  go  right  when  that  which  should  be 
one  organ  becomes  two ;  when  the  one  motive  power  begins  to  send  forth  its 
life-floods  into  two  diverse  channels,  and  so  creates  intestine  strife  and  war.  3.  It 
is  a  divison  in  itself  peculiarly  loathsome.  Men  who  are  possessed  of  it  do  not 
feel  themselves  imclean ;  they  will  ventvure  into  the  church,  they  will  propose  to 
receive  her  communion,  and  they  will  afterwards  go  and  mingle  with  the  world ; 
and  they  do  not  feel  that  they  have  become  dishonest.  Take  the  glass  and  look 
into  that  man's  heart,  and  you  will  discern  that  it  is  loathsome,  because  Satan 
and  sin  reign  there.  All  the  while  that  he  is  living  in  sin  he  is  pretending  that 
he  is  a  child  of  God.  Stand  out  in  thy  true  colours.  If  thou  art  a  worldling, 
be  a  worldling.  4.  It  is  a  disease  always  difficult  to  cure,  because  it  is  chronic. 
It  is  not  an  acute  disease,  which  brings  pain  and  suffering  and  sorrow  with  it. 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x. 

But  it  is  chronic,  it  has  got  into  the  very  nature  of  the  man.  What  ^h-  sician 
can  join  together  a  divided  heart  T  5.  This  disease  is  a  very  difficult  one  to  deal 
with,  because  it  is  a  flattering  disease.  The  most  curming  of  all  flatterers  is  a 
man's  own  hetirt.  A  man's  own  heart  wiU  flatter  him,  even  about  his  sins.  He 
is  contented  and  self-satisfied.  II.  Thr  usual  symptoms  op  thb  disbase. 
1.  Formality  in  religous  worship.  These  men  have  no  faith ;  they  have  only 
a  creed.  They  have  no  life  within,  and  they  supply  its  place  with  outward  cere- 
mony. What  wonder,  therefore,  that  we  fiercely  defend  that !  2.  Inconsistency. 
You  must  not  see  him  always  if  you  would  have  a  good  opinion  of  him.  You 
must  be  guarded  as  to  the  days  on  which  you  call  upon  him.  You  must  have 
a  divided  heart  if  you  live  an  inconsistent  life.  3.  Variableness  in  object.  There 
are  men  who  run  first  in  one  direction  then  in  another.  Their  religion  is  all 
epasmodio.  They  are  taken  with  it  as  men  are  taken  with  the  ague.  They  take 
up  with  religion,  and  then  they  lay  it  down  again.  4.  Frivolity  in  religion  is 
often  a  token  of  a  divided  heart.  It  is  perhaps  too  common  a  sin  with  young 
persons  to  treat  religion  with  a  light  and  frivolous  air.  There  is  a  seriousness 
which  is  well-becoming,  especially  in  youthful  Christians.  III.  Thb  sad  effbcts 
op  a  divided  hbabt.  When  a  man's  heart  is  divided  he  is  at  once  everything 
that  is  bad.  1.  With  regard  to  himself,  he  is  an  imhappy  man.  Men  who  are 
neither  this  nor  that,  neither  one  thing  nor  another,  are  always  tmeasy  and  miser- 
able. 2.  He  is  useless  in  the  Chiirch.  Of  what  good  is  such  a  man  to  us  ?  We 
cannot  put  him  in  a  pulpit  or  make  him  a  deacon.  We  cannot  commit  to  his 
charge  spiritual  matters,  because  we  discern  that  he  is  not  spiritual  himself. 
We  know  that  no  man  who  is  not  united  in  his  heart  vitally  and  entirely  to  Christ 
can  ever  be  of  the  slightest  service  to  the  Church  of  God.  3.  He  is  dangerous 
to  the  world.  He  is  like  a  leper  going  abroad  in  the  midst  of  healthy  people ; 
he  spreads  the  disease.  Though  outwardly  whitewashed  like  a  sepulchre,  he 
is  more  dangerous  to  the  world  than  the  most  vicious  of  men.  4.  He  is  con- 
temptible to  everybody.  When  he  is  found  out  nobody  receives  him ;  scarcely 
will  the  world  own  him,  and  the  Church  will  have  nothing  to  administer  to  him 
but  censure.  5.  He  is  reprobate  in  the  sight  of  God.  To  the  eye  of  infinite 
purity  he  is  one  of  the  most  obnoxious  and  detestable  of  beings.  The  holy  God 
both  hates  his  sin  and  the  lies  with  which  he  endeavours  to  cover  it.  IV.  The 
FUTURE  PUNISHMENT  OF  THE  MAN  WHOSE  HEART  IS  DIVIDED.  Unless  he  is  rescued 
bv  a  great  salvation.  Let  me  describe  the  terrible  condition  of  the  hypocrite 
•when  God  shall  come  to  judge  the  world.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  divided 
Jieart : — The  root  of  the  evil  in  Israel  was,  as  always,  a  heart  divided, — that  is, 
between  God  and  Baal, — or,  perhaps,  "  smooth,"  that  is,  dissimulating  and 
insincere.  In  reality,  Baal  alone  possesses  the  heart  which  its  owner  would  share 
between  him  and  Jehovah.  "  AU  in  all,  or  not  at  all "  is  the  law.  Whether 
Baals  or  calves  were  set  beside  God,  He  was  equally  deposed.  Then  with  a  swift 
turn  Hosea  proclaims  the  impending  judgment,  setting  himself  and  the  people 
as  if  down  in  the  future.  He  hears  the  first  peal  of  the  storm,  and  echoes  it  in 
that  abrupt  "  now."  The  first  burst  of  the  judgment  scatters  dreams  of  innocence, 
and  the  cowering  wretches  see  their  sin  by  the  lurid  light.  That  discovery  awaits 
every  man  whose  heart  has  been  "  divided."  To  the  gazers  and  to  himself  masks 
drop,  and  the  true  character  stands  out  with  appalling  clearness.  What  will 
that  light  show  us  to  be  ?  The  ruin  of  their  projects  teaches  godless  men  at 
last  that  they  have  been  fools  to  take  their  own  way  ;  for  all  defences,  resources, 
and  protectors,  chosen  in  defiance  of  God,  prove  powerless  when  the  strain  comes. 
It  is  a  dismal  thing  to  have  to  bear  the  brunt  of  chastisement  for  what  we  see 
to  have  been  a  blunder  as  well  as  a  crime.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Antagonistic 
principles : — Solomon  wanted  to  live  a  life  of  self-indulgence  while  posing  as 
a  servant  of  God.  His  offering  costly  sacrifices,  and  building  a  magnificent 
temple,  and  making  a  beautifiil  prayer,  could  not  rectify  the  inconsistency.  The 
two  could  not  exist  together  in  one  person.  It  was  like  the  ice  palace  built  for 
an  empress  of  Russia,  which  was  beautiful  as  a  dream,  with  elaborate  architecture, 
and  glistening  like  a  jewel  in  the  sun.  But  it  was  intensely  cold,  and  the  empress 
ordered  a  fire  to  be  built  in  it.  The  architect  had  to  explain  to  her  that  the  fire 
would  destroy  the  building.  She  could  not  have  an  ice  palace  and  warmth  at 
the  same  time.  Neither  can  any  one  have  a  heart  of  icy  selfishness  along  with 
the  warmth  of  God's  love.  {Christian  Herald.)  A  divided  heart  : — You  know 
there  is  what  is  called  "  changeable  silk,"  which  looks  now  green  and  now  brown, 
just  as  the  light  chances  to  strike  it.     It  is  neither  brown  nor  green,  as  a  matter 


CHAP.  X.]  HOSE  A.  175 

of  fact,  but  a  commingling  and  compromise  of  the  two :  therefore  you  can  get 
whichever  colour  you  like,  according  as  you  present  it  to  the  sun.  And  I  am 
sorry  to  say  that  it  is  so  with  a  good  many  Christians.  You  can  get  a  worldly 
shade  or  a  heavenly  shade  on  their  piety,  just  according  to  the  company  they 
are  in.  (A.  J .  Gordon.)  Divided  hearts : — We  are  told  that  some  of  our  scientists 
have  recently  been  trying  a  very  doubtful  experiment.  They  take  a  section 
of  one  creature  and  fasten  it  upon  another  creature  of  an  altogether  different 
type.  This  is  done  by  a  delicate  surgery  when  the  creature  is  immature,  and 
when  it  comes  to  perfection  you  have  a  strange  monster.  For  instance,  it  is 
said  that  they  fasten  a  section  of  a  spider  on  the  butterfly,  and  by  and  by  you 
get  an  alarming  and  tragical  organism.  You  may  imagine  what  becomes  of 
those  antagonistic  impulses  and  instincts.  The  creature  has  a  feeling  for  the 
light  and  a  passion  for  the  darkness  ;  it  has  a  taste  for  blood,  and  loves  the  scent 
of  roses ;  is  afraid  of  itself  and  worries  itself.  Now,  when  you  have  seen  the 
spider  and  the  butterfly  blended  into  one  organism,  you  have  seen  a  pale  reflection 
of  your  own  personality.  One  part  of  us  sympathises  with  the  low  and  another 
part  with  the  lofty ;  one  part  of  us  looks  into  the  firmament  and  another  part 
cleaves  to  the  dust.  (IF.  L.  Watkinson.)  A  divided  heart: — In  every  age 
and  country  there  are  some  found  with  divided  hearts  on  the  subject  of  religion. 
Such  was  Hiram,  King  of  Tyie,  who,  while  he  blessed  the  Lord  that  Solomon 
was  king,  and  gladly  traded  with  him  for  some  of  the  materials  for  building  a 
temple  to  Jehovah,  also  contributed  one  hundred  and  twenty  talents  of  gold 
towards  its  erection.  And  yet,  in  his  own  country,  he  dedicated  a  golden  pillar 
to  Jupiter,  built  the  temples  of  Hercules  and  Astarte,  the  Ashtaroth  of  the 
Zidonians,  and  enriched  the  shrines  of  the  god  and  goddess  with  valuable  gifts. 
So  Redwald,  the  King  of  East  Anglia,  when  converted  to  Christianity,  is  said 
to  have  kept  two  altars,  the  one  to  the  God  of  the  Christians,  the  other  to  Woden, 
a  Saxon  idol,  being  afraid  of  the  imaginary  god  whom  he  had  so  long  worshipped. 
So  there  are  some  now,  who  appear  very  religious  at  times,  and  yet  their  hearts 
go  after  covetousness,  and  they  are  quite  at  home  in  the  circles  of  the  gay  and 
m  the  indulgence  of  sinful  pleasure.  Judgment  on  the  divided  heart : — 1.  As 
the  heart  is  a  vital  part,  which  cannot  be  divided  without  death,  so  men  can 
have  no  life  of  God,  nor  acknowledgment  of  Him,  when  they  are  not  solely  and 
wholly  for  Him  and  His  way.  2.  When  men  do  fall  from  God's  way,  it  is  just 
with  Him  to  give  them  up  to  start  and  multiply  divisions  without  end  in  their 
own  way.  3.  Civil  dissensions  and  commotions  are  the  just  fruits  of  men's 
divisions  in  the  matter  of  God  and  His  worship.     (George  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  4.  They  have  spoken  words,  swearing  falsely  in  making  a  covenant: 
thus  Judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  a  field.  —  Social 
sins  and  their  residt: — I.  Social  sins.  1.  Vain  speech.  "They  utter  empty 
speeches."  Not  only  are  words  of  falsehood,  blasphemy,  and  unchastity  sinful, 
but  empty  words.  How  much  idle  language  is  there  current  in  society !  2.  False 
swearing.  In  judicial  courts,  in  homes,  in  shops,  in  fields.  3.  Unrighteous 
treaties.  There  is  no  harm  in  making  covenants.  Making  a  bad  covenant  is 
implied.  The  primal  reference  is  to  certain  treaties  Israel  had  formed  with  foreign 
nations.  Untruthful  as  well  as  unrighteous  bargains  are  being  struck  every 
hour.  II.  Results  of  social  sins.  "  Judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in 
the  furrows  of  the  field."  Out  of  these  social  sins  certain  results  appear.  How 
do  they  come  ?  1.  They  come  as  a  growth.  Every  sin  is  a  seed  from  which 
a  pestiferous  plant  must  spring.  2.  They  come  as  a  poison.  Hemlock,  or  poppy, 
or  darnel ;  poisonous  productions.  3.  They  come  in  abundance.  Very  prolific  ia 
sin.  See  its  plants  growing  in  the  ridges  and  furrows  of  life;  in  sick  chambers, 
hospitals,  workhouses,  in  prisons,  in  battlefields.  (Uomilist.)  Sin  disturbing 
human  relations  : — The  sin  of  Israel  is  now  contemplated  in  its  effects  on  human 
relations.  Before,  it  was  regarded  in  relation  to  God.  But  men  who  are  wrong 
with  Him  cannot  be  right  with  one  another.  Morality  is  rooted  in  religion,  and,  if 
we  lie  to  God,  we  shall  not  be  true  to  our  brother.  Hence,  passing  over  all  other 
sins  for  the  present,  Hosea  fixes  upon  one,  the  prevalence  of  which  strikes  at  the 
very  foundation  of  society.  What  can  be  done  with  a  community  in  which 
lying  has  become  a  national  characteristic,  and  that  even  in  formal  agreements  ? 
Honeycombed  with  falsehood,  it  is  only  fit  for  burning.  Sin  is  bound  by  an  iron 
link  to  penalty.  "  Therefore,"  says  Hosea,  God's  judgment  springs  up,  like  a 
bitter  plant  (the  precise  name  of  which  is  unknown)  in  the  furrows,  where  the 


176  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

farmer  did  not  know  that  its  seeds  lay.  They  little  dreamed  what  they  were 
sowing  when  they  scattered  abroad  their  lives,'  but  this  is  the  fruit  of  that. 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap";  and  whatever  other  crop 
we  may  hope  to  githcr  from  our  sins,  we  shall  gather  that  bitter  one,  which  we 
did  not  expect.  The  inevitable  connection  of  sin  and  judgment,  the  bitterness 
of  its  results,  the  unexpectedness  of  them,  are  all  here,  and  to  be  laid  to  heart  by 
us.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Sin  the  cause  of  sorrow: — There  is  a  connection 
between  sin  and  sorrow,  between  wickedness  and  calamity,  between  moral  trans- 
gression and  physical,  social,  political  disaster.  We  may  define  sin  negatively 
as  impiety,  iniquity,  unspirituality  ;  but  Hosea  speaks  of  it  as  a  positive  aggressive 
force,  inflicting  injury  on  the  heart  of  the  individual  transgressor,  and  infecting 
also  the  external  condition  of  the  people.  In  emphasising  tne  influence  of  sin  on 
external  conditions,  the  prophet  teaches  a  profound  truth,  but  not  the  whole 
truth.  Jesus  teaches  that  sin  works  disaster,  even  when  the  external  condition 
is  prosperous,  and  all  that  appears  is  respectable.  Moral  transgression  is  always 
followed  by  moral  punishment.  The  connection  between  moral  transgression 
and  physical  disaster  is  not  constant  and  necessary.  The  prophet  begins  with  a 
reference  to  Israel's  condition  as  blessed  by  God.  "  Israel  is  a  luxuriant  vine." 
But  he  is  fovmd  guilty.  Here  is  the  prophet's  charge  against  Israel  on  account 
of  their  sin.  1.  It  perverts  prosperity.  Prosperity  itself  is  not  sinful.  It  is  far 
from  the  thought  of  the  Hebrew  prophet  that  misery  is  the  normal  condition  of 
the  servant  of  Jehovah.  But  sin  perverts  prosperity.  It  allows  the  material 
to  eclipse  the  spiritual.  It  fails  to  use  prosperity  for  the  noblest  ends.  It  fails 
to  take  account  of  the  latent  force  of  prosperity;  it  does  not  appreciate  its  value. 
Prosperity  is  to  be  valued  as  a  condition  of  life,  as  a  means  of  ministering  to  life 
more  abundant.  2.  It  destroys  religion,  and  takes  away  its  inspiration.  Sin 
does  not  at  once  do  away  with  religion.  It  would  fashion  religion  to  its  liking ; 
but  in  this  transformation  the  essence  of  religion  evaporates.  So  it  was  at  least 
in  Israel.  In  perfunctory  religion  there  is  nothing  to  take  hold  of  and  mould 
the  man.  3.  It  invalidates  government.  The  deepest  conditions  of  national 
prosperity  are  not  of  man's  creation,  not  determined  by  human  legislatures.  The 
political  intercourse  of  men  is  conditioned  on  eternal  principles  of  right,  and 
nations  as  well  as  men  must  act  in  truth.  4.  It  emasculates  society.  It  is  a 
pitiable  picture  which  Amos  and  Hosea  paint  of  society  in  Samaria.  Appetite 
reigns,  drunkeimess  abounds,  licentiousness  and  cruelty  follow  in  their  train.  The 
very  indulgence  which  sin  practises  defeats  its  own  object.  The  fibre  of  the 
muscle  is  relaxed,  the  vigour  of  the  mind  is  gone,  patience,  courage,  hope  have 
fled  with  faith,  and  the  people  lie  supine,  weak,  inert.  The  prophet  has  disclosed 
the  disastrous  consequences  of  sin,  but  his  purpose  is  to  establish  righteousness. 
God's  aim  is  not  to  curse,  but  to  bless.  But  alas  !  the  prophet,  like  all  spiritual 
teachers,  speaks  to  heavy  ears.  The  people  have  but  little  leisure  for  right- 
eousness. They  would  none  of  Hosea's  counsel,  they  despised  all  his  reproof. 
(T.  D.  Anderson.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  Inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall  fear  because  of  the  calres  of 
Beth-aven. — These  verses  dilate,  with  keen  irony,  on  the  fate  of  the  first 
half  of  Israel's  sin,  the  calf.  It  was  thought  a  god,  but  its  worshippers 
would  be  in  a  fright  for  it.  "  Calves,"  says  Hosea,  though  there  was  but  one  at 
Bethel ;  and  he  uses  the  feminine,  as  some  think,  depreciatingly.  "  Beth-aven," 
or  the  "house  of  vanity,"  he  says,  instead  of  "Beth-el,"  the  "house  of  God." 
A  fine  god  whose  worshippers  had  to  be  alarmed  for  its  safety  !  "  Its  people," — 
what  a  contrast  to  the  name  they  might  have  borne,  "  My  people ! "  God  disowns 
them,  and  says,  "  They  belong  to  it,  not  to  Me."  The  idolatrous  priests  of  the 
calf  worship  will  tremble  when  that  image,  which  had  been  shamefully  their 
"  glory,"  is  carried  off  to  Assyria  and  given  as  a  present  to  "  King  Jareb," — a 
name  for  the  King  of  Assyria  meaning  the  fighting  or  quarrelsome  king.  The 
captivity  of  the  god  is  the  shame  of  the  worshippers.  To  be  "  ashamed  of  their 
own  counsel "  is  the  certain  fate  of  all  who  depart  from  God ;  for,  sooner  or  later, 
experience  will  demonstrate  to  the  blindest  that  their  refuges  of  lies  can  neither 
save  themselves  nor  those  who  trust  in  them.  But  shame  is  one  thing  and 
repentance  another ;  and  many  a  man  will  say,  "  I  have  been  a  great  fool,  and  my 
clever  policy  has  all  crumbled  to  pieces,"  who  will  only  therefore  change  his  idols, 
and  not  return  to  God.  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  T?ie  degrading  influence  of  false 
worship  : — Doctrine — 1.  Idolatry  is  matter  of  ignominy  to  any  place  or  interest 


CHAP.  X.]  HOSE  A.  177 

that  owns  it ;  for  it  turns  Beth-el  into  Beth-aven.  2.  It  proves  the  vanitj"-  of 
idols  that  their  worshippers  cannot  trust  in  them,  but  must  be  solicitous  and 
anxious  about  them  in  straits  ;  for  so  were  they  about  the  calves  of  Beth-aven. 
This  solicitude  differs  far  from  the  fear  of  God's  people  about  His  worship  and 
ordinances  in  times  of  danger,  which  does  not  flow  from  their  diffidence  in  God, 
but  from  the  sense  of  their  guilt.  .3.  Anything  that  men  place  their  confidence 
in  beside  God  will  prove  matter  of  fear  and  terror.  For  so  did  the  calves  prove 
to  Samaria  in  the  time  of  their  siege.  4.  Albeit  corrupt  worship  and  religion 
may  seem  strange  at  first  to  them  who  have  been  bred  up  in  the  truth,  yet  in 
process  of  time,  and  being  attended  with  success,  it  may  take  with  them  who  are 
not  well  rooted.  5.  Such  as  are  eminently  employed  in  and  great  gainers  by 
corrupt  worship  have  a  sad  day  abiding  them,  therefore  it  is  added  in  special 
that  mom-ning  is  abiding  the  priests.  6.  The  glory  of  idolatry  and  of  a  false 
religion  (being  but  borrowed,  and  having  nothing  to  commend  it  but  novelty 
and  success)  will  at  last  evanish  and  depart.  God  will  bring  about  this  by 
judgments,  when  no  other  means  will  effectuate  it.  "  The  glory  thereof  is  departed 
from  it."  This  will  be  the  lot  of  all  false  ways ;  whereas  truth,  however  men 
loathe  it  for  awhile,  will  still  at  last  be  found  to  be  lovely,  and  to  have  a  native 
unstained  beauty.     {Oeorge  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  8   The  Ugh  places  also  of  Aven,  the  sin  of  Israel,  shall  be  destroyed. — 

Redeeming  qualities  gone  : — Beth-el  means  the  "  house  of  God,"  and  by  iniquity, 
manifold  and  black,  Beth-el  was  tiu-ned  into  Beth-aven,  which  means  the  "  house  of 
vanity."  This  is  an  instance  of  deterioration,  and  more  than  mere  deterioration ; 
it  is  an  instance  of  transformation  from  good  to  bad,  from  the  heights  of  heaven 
to  the  depths  of  the  world  of  fire.  Such  miracles  can  be  accomplished  in  the 
individual  character,  and  such  miracles  have  been  found  possible  in  ecclesiastical 
relationship.  But  the  case  is  worse.  We  now  read  of  "  the  high  places  also 
of  Aven  "  ;  the  "  Beth  "  is  left  out :  once  it  was  Beth-aven,  the  house  of  vanity ; 
now  nothing  is  left  but  the  vanity  itself.  That  is  the  process  of  unchecked, 
untaught,  unsanctified  nature.  We  say  of  a  man,  he  has  still  one  or  two  redeem- 
ing qualities  ;  but  the  time  comes  when  every  redeeming  feature  is  lost.  Then 
men  say  of  the  abandoned  one,  Aven,  vanity,  aU  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit. 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Degeneration: — When  men  degenerate  from  the  pure 
teaching  of  God,  they  in  vain  cover  their  profanations  with  empty  names.  God 
loudly  proclaims  respecting  Beth-el  that  it  is  Beth-aven,  and  the  reason  is  well 
known ;  it  is  because  Jeroboam  erected  temples  and  appointed  new  sacrifices 
without  God's  command.  The  Lord  approves  of  nothing  but  what  He  Himself 
commands.     Hence  the  high  places  of  Aven  shall  perish.     {John  Calvin. ) 

Vers.  9-11.  0  Israel,  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Giheah. — Sin  and 

punishment : — "  The  days  of  Gibeah  "  recall  the  hideous  story  of  lust  and  crime, 
which  was  the  low-water  mark  of  the  lawless  days  of  old.  That  crime  had  been 
avenged  by  merciless  war.  But  its  taint  had  lived  on,  and  the  Israel  of  Hosea's 
day  "  stood,"  obstinately  persistent,  just  where  the  Benjamites  had  been  then, 
and  set  themselves  in  dogged  resistance,  as  these  had  done,  "  that  the  battle 
against  the  children  of  unrighteousness  might  not  touch  them."  Stiff-necked 
setting  one's  self  against  God's  merciful  fighting  of  evil  lasts  for  a  little  while, 
but  verse  10  tells  how  soon  and  easily  it  is  annihilated.  God's  "  desire"  brushes 
away  all  defences,  and  the  obstinate  sinners  are  like  children,  who  are  whipped 
when  their  father  wills,  struggle  how  they  may.  The  instruments  of  chastisement 
are  foreign  armies,  and  the  chastisement  itself  is  described  with  a  striking  figure 
as  "  binding  them  to  their  two  transgressions  "  ;  that  is,  the  double  sin  which 
is  the  keynote  of  the  chapter.  Punishment  is  yoking  men  to  their  sins,  and 
making  them  drag  the  burden  like  bullocks  in  harness.  What  sort  of  load  are 
we  getting  together  for  ourselves  ?  When  we  have  to  drag  the  consequences 
of  our  doings  behind  us,  how  shall  we  feel  ?  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  It  is  in  My 
desire  that  I  should  chastise  them. — Divine  chastisement : — This  is  a  graphic 
expression ;  the  whole  meaning  of  it  does  not  appear  in  the  English  tongue. 
God  does  not  willingly  afflict  the  children  of  men  ;  it  is  not  the  delight  of  Al  mighti- 
ness to  crush.  It  is  the  vanity  of  considerable  strength  to  tyrannise,  but  in 
proportion  as  strength  becomes  complete  it  pities,  it  spares  the  helpless,  for  it 
knows  that  by  one  uplifting  of  its  arm  and  the  down- bringing  of  the  same  it 
could  crush  every  opponent.  Imperfect  strength  is  a  despot ;  Almightiness  ia^ 
12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

mercy.  But  now  there  is  a  stirring  of  the  Divine  emotions.  God  says.  It  will 
be  better  for  these  people  to  be  afiflicted ;  they  have  left  themselves  nothing  now 
but  depletion,  and  they  must  be  brought  to  the  very  point  of  extermination.  .  .  . 
The  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  kind,  and  His  eyes  are  full  of  tears,  and  judgment 
is  His  strange  work :  but  there  have  been  times  in  the  history  of  providence 
which  could  only  be  consistently  and  rationally  construed  by  granting  that  even 
the  Divine  Father  must  be  stirred  to  the  desire  to  chastise  and  humble  wicked 
men.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.  D. ) 

Ver.  11.  Render  thus,— Ephraim  indeed  is  a  heifer,  broken  in  and  loving  to 
thresh,  and  I  have  spared  the  beanty  of  her  neck ;  hut  now  will  I  nmke  Ephraim 
to  draw. — Changes  for  Ephraim  : — Israel's  punishment  is  enhanced  by  contrast 
with  her  former  prosperity,  which,  as  a  mark  of  the  Divine  goodness,  is  compared 
to  the  consideration  with  which  a  young  heifer  is  treated  by  its  master.  The 
work  of  treading  out  the  com  was  pleasant  and  easy ;  the  heifer  could  eat  freely 
as  it  walked  without  a  muzzle  roimd  and  round  the  threshing-floor.  But  this 
heifer,  that  is  Israel,  has  abused  the  kindness  of  its  Lord,  and  henceforth  shall 
be  put  to  the  heavy  labour  of  the  field — a  figure  for  the  depressing  conditions  of 
life  under  a  foreign  master.  The  rendering  "  spared  "  (lit.  passed  by)  is  justified 
by  Mic.  vii.  18;  Prov.  xix.  11 ;  it  adds  a  beautiful  distinctness  to  the  figure, 
for  the  heavy  yokes  used  in  the  East  not  only  gall  the  necks  of  the  animals,  but 
often  produce  deep  wounds.  The  meaning  is  that  Jehovah  has  hitherto  pre- 
served His  people  from  the  yoke  of  captivity.  {T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.)  Ephraim' a 
tivo  yokes  : — Albeit  Ephraim  bred  themselves  delicately,  and  could  not  endure 
trouble,  or  God's  yoke,  yet  God  would  put  a  yoke  upon  them,  and  to  endure 
bondage  and  captivity.  The  yoke  of  treading  out  the  com,  which  was  easy 
work,  is  contrasted  with  the  hard  yoke  of  the  plough  and  the  harrow.  Whence 
learn — 1.  It  is  a  fault  incident  to  our  nature  to  be  much  addicted  to  our  own 
ease,  and  that  which  brings  present  content  and  comfort,  and  to  abhor  any  lot 
or  way  of  God's  service  which  proves  contrary  to  that.  2.  It  is  a  great  snare  to 
men,  making  them  to  dote  on  an  easy  way,  when  they  have  been  accustomed  in 
God's  providence  to  such  a  lot,  and,  by  taking  too  well  with  it,  become  effeminate: 
for  "  Ephraim  is  taught,  and  loveth  to  tread  out  the  corn,"  that  is,  hath  been 
tend,erly  dealt  with,  and  hath  accustomed  his  own  heart  to  that  way.  3.  God 
hath  an  indignation  at  such  as  are  too  delicate,  and  take  too  well  with  ease,  and 
is  provoked  to  put  them  to  trouble.  For  "  I  passed  over  upon  her  fair  neck," 
that  is,  I  brought  her  under  the  yoke,  who  kept  herself  so  dainty :  as  if  a  man 
put  a  yoke  upon  the  fat  and  sound  neck  of  an  undaunted  heifer.  4.  Let  wicked 
men  tamper  as  they  will,  yet  they  will  not  get  trouble  alwajrs  shifted,  but 
God  will  bring  captivity  and  bondage,  or  other  trouble  upon  them.  Ephraim 
shall  be  tossed  into  captivity,  as  a  man  makes  his  horse  carry  him  in  far  journeys. 
6.  The  Lord's  sentence  is  universal  against  all  secure  and  delicate  sinners,  that 
He  will  send  toil  and  trouble  upon  them,  be  they  less  or  more  corrupt.  There- 
fore doth  Judah,  though  more  pure  in  many  things  than  Israel,  come  in  in  the 
sentence,  "  Judah  shall  plough,"  which  is  a  hard  laboiu:.  6.  The  hard  lots 
of  sinners  may  yet,  through  God's  blessing,  prove  useful  and  profitable  to  them, 
however  they  may  be  ill-satisfied  with  them.     {George  Hittcheson.) 

Ver.  12.  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness,  reap  in  mercy;  break  up  your 
fallow  ground.  —  Spiritual  husbandry :  —  There  is  not  a  more  melancholy 
delusion  than  this,  that  in  religious  life  the  grand  object  may  be  secured 
without  the  use  of  the  appointed  means  —  that  men  may  possess  Christian 
privileges  and  realise  Christian  rewards,  independently  of  those  holy  and  strenuous 
endeavours  so  plainly  required  by  our  Divine  Lord.  In  spiritual  things  there 
carmot  be  a  cancelling  of  the  rule  which  obtains  in  temporal  things.  The  most 
unfading  of  crowns  cannot  be  worn  where  there  has  been  no  running  in  the  race. 
The  most  splendid  of  victories  cannot  be  achieved  where  there  has  been  no  entrance 
into  the  battle.  The  most  peaceful  of  havens  cannot  be  reached  where  there  has 
been  no  contending  with  the  winds  and  the  waves.  The  most  glorious  of  harvests 
cannot  be  gathered  in  where  there  has  been  no  labouring  in  the  field.  I.  "  Break 
UP  TOUB  PAULOW  GBOUND."  The  image  here  presented  may  apply  variously. 
It  may  be  applied  to  our  country;  to  the  circle  of  our  own  families;  to  the  state 
of  our  own  heart.  The  words  may  apply  to  the  sincere  believers  amongst  us. 
For  we  are  foimd  barren  of  many  attainable  graces  and  perfections.     We  may 


CHAP.  X.]  HOSE  A.  179 

always  find  some  fallow  gtound  that  needs  breaking  up.  U.  Sow  youb  sebd. 
1.  The  character  of  the  work.  There  will  be  a  righteous  and  constant  rule  of 
the  law  of  Christ.  We  must  respect  it  alone.  The  motive  must  be  righteous. 
Whatever  be  the  rule,  if  the  motive  be  unholy,  the  a«t  will  be  unholy.  2.  The 
exclusiveness  of  the  work.  "  To  yourselves."  The  application  is  individual  and 
personal  Others  cannot  do  it  for  us,  nor  we  for  others.  In  the  singleness  of 
his  own  responsible  existence  every  man  must  stand  before  God.  III.  Reap  nr 
MERCY.  The  course  of  our  spiritual  husbandry  bears  an  analogy  with  the  natural 
There  is  first  the  breaking  up  of  the  fallow  ground,  then  the  sowing  of  the  seed, 
and  then  the  reaping  of  the  full  com  in  the  ear :  and  as  the  strength  is  derived 
from  God  in  the  former  two  cases,  the  blessing  in  the  third  comes  directly  from 
Him  as  the  Lord  of  the  harvest.  (T.  J.  Jtidkin,  M.A.)  SpirittuU  husbandry  : — 
The  Church  is  God's  husbandry.  We  are  called  upon — I.  To  bbeak  up  oxje  fallow 
GROUND.  The  heart  of  man  is  represented — 1.  As  ground.  Therefore  expected 
to  produce  fruit  that  will  benefit  its  owner.  2.  As  fallow  ground.  It  is  destitute 
of  the  fruit  that  it  might  produce.  It  is  not  only  useless  to  its  owner,  it  is 
prejudicial  to  neighbouring  land  that  has  good  seed  sown  in  it,  in  preventing  the 
plants  of  righteousness  from  growing  to  perfection.  3.  As  our  fallow  groxind. 
Because  we  all  have  ground  committed  to  our  cultivating  care.  And  if  it  be  not 
fallow  now,  there  was  a  time  when  the  term  might  have  been  applied  to  it  witn 
correctness  and  propriety.  Breaking  up  our  fallow  ground  implies  a  work — 
1.  Of  labour;  for  which  the  Master  of  the  land  imparts  strength.  2.  Of  sacrifice  ; 
for  which  the  Proprietor  communicates  fortitude.  3.  Of  constancy  and  persever- 
ance ;  for  which  the  Lord  of  the  soil  supplies  patience.  4.  Of  renovation ;  for 
which  the  Owner  of  the  ground  affords  means.  The  soil  in  its  present  state  ia 
unfit  to  produce  any  useful  plants  ;  but  when  the  weeds  which  now  grow  therein 
are  destroyed,  the  ground  shall  be  renewed,  that  it  may  bring  forth  the  fruits  of 
piety.  II.  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness.  We  have  here  a  representa- 
tion of  right  principles,  under  the  figure  of  seed  ;  the  propriety  of  which  may  be 
discerned,  if  we  notice — 1.  Right  principles  are  not  indigenous  to  the  human 
heart.  They  must  be  sown  there.  2.  The  value  of  right  principles.  (I)  Their 
author  and  giver — God.  (2)  Their  price — the  blood  of  the  covenant.  (3)  Their 
restilt — plants  of  righteousness.  3.  The  care  and  attention  they  demand.  How 
great  is  the  solicitude  of  the  hxisbandman  in  reference  to  his  seed.  4.  The  vege- 
tative power  and  productive  quality.  Right  conduct  is  the  offspring  of  these 
principles.  "  Sow  to  yourselves  "  means — (I)  Allow  these  principles  to  sink  deep 
into  the  heart ;  let  all  obstructions  be  removed  out  of  the  way.  (2)  Let  every 
plant  that  grows  in  our  heart  be  the  result  of  this  precious  seed.  (3)  Though  our 
anxiety  should  be  principally  on  our  own  account,  yet  our  conduct  should  be  a 
union  of  piety  and  benevolence.  III.  Reap  in  mercy.  If  we  plough  and  sow 
as  directed,  the  result  shall  surely  be  a  harvest  of  mercy.  We  shall  reap — 1.  In 
pardoning  mercy,  that  cancels  our  sins.  2.  In  restraining  mercy,  that  prevents 
us  from  running  into  error.  3.  In  preserving  mercy,  that  preserves  the  faithful. 
4.  In  rewarding  mercy.  The  mercy  of  God  is,  like  Himself,  infinite.  The  time 
of  reward  is  represented  as  harvest,  because — 1.  The  time  of  ploughing  and  sowing 
is  for  ever  over.  2.  Because  at  that  period  all  the  produce  of  the  soil  wiU  be 
presented  to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest.  3.  Because  reaping  time  is  a  season  of  joy 
and  festivity.  Eternity  shall  declare  the  advantages  of  sowing  in  righteousness. 
Observe — ( 1)  This  is  the  time  to  break  up  your  fallow  ground.  (2)  How  great  is  the 
mercy  of  our  God,  that  He  will  assist  our  endeavoiUB  to  sow  in  righteousness. 
(3)  How  audacious  is  the  conduct  of  those  that  despise  the  offers  of  mercy  thus 
held  out  in  the  GJospel.  {Sketches  of  Fotcr  Hundred  Sermons.)  Sovnng  and 
reaping  : — See  what  the  Word  of  Grod  teaches  with  reference  to  the  necessity  of  a 
life  of  righteousness  on  our  part,  and  as  to  the  grounds  on  which  a  reward  will  be 
given  to  the  righteous  hereafter.  The  illustration  here  chosen  from  the  works 
of  nature  is  common  to  many  other  parts  of  Scripture.  And  the  resemblance 
is  so  obvious  between  the  progress  of  a  seed  from  its  first  being  committed  to  the 
soil,  till  the  final  harvest,  with  that  of  the  gradual  development  of  the  principle  of 
good  in  the  soul  of  man,  that  I  need  not  dwell  upon  it  particularly.  We  are  told 
to  "  sow  in  righteousness  "  ;  and  what  this  injunction  involves  we  may  gather 
from  a  consideration  of  the  state  of  those  persons  to  whom  it  was  originally 
addressed.  There  was  required  of  apostate  Israel,  a  thorough,  unshrinking 
reformation,  an  unqualified  turning  from  sin  to  God.  And  nothing  short  of  this 
is  required  of  us.     Few  of  us  have  not  continued,  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  space. 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

in  deliberate  and  wilful  transgression  :  all  have  to  bewail  an  interminable  catalogue 
of  negligences  and  ignorances  :  and  all  have  the  evidence  within  themselves  of 
an  inherited  nature  so  corrupt,  that  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  unto  the  head  there 
is  no  soundness  in  it.  This  fallow  ground  must  be  broken  up.  Our  hearts  must 
be  brought  into  a  state  of  religious  cultivation.  Vicious  inclinations,  sensual 
appetites,  inordinate  affections  must  be  rooted  up.  The  soil  must  be  ploughed  ; — 
that  which  lay  below  must  be  brought  up  to  the  surface  and  exposed  to  the  light 
of  day.  Self-knowledge  and  self-discipline  must  do  their  work,  and  the  whole 
field  ie  made  fit  for  the  reception  and  growth  of  the  seed  of  righteousness.  If  we 
do,  the  text  leads  us  to  hope  that  we  shall  reap  in  mercy  ;  that  is,  we  shall  receive 
from  the  merciful  hand  of  God  our  Father  an  abimdant  reward  of  unfading 
happiness  and  glory,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  1.  We  have  no  grounds  on  which 
to  expect  a  harvest  of  mercy  without  a  previous  sowing  time  of  righteousness. 
Without  a  holy  life  here,  no  man  need  expect  or  hope  for  a  happy  life  hereafter. 
2.  The  reward  of  our  service  is  not  to  be  looked  for  as  of  right,  but  as  the  gift  of 
the  free  grace  and  mercy  of  God.  Granting  our  seed-time  of  righteousness  ever  so 
perfect  or  so  plenteous,  how  is  God  the  better  for  it,  that  He  should  be  constrained 
to  pay  us  wages  for  it  ?  Here  then  is  the  sum  of  the  whole  matter.  We  shall 
not  be  saved  for  our  works,  but  we  shall  never  be  saved  without  them.  Know- 
ing this,  let  us  pray  and  labour  and  strive  that  no  day  may  pass  over  our  heada 
without  our  having  made  some  progress  in  the  work  of  sowing  unto  righteous- 
ness. {F.  E.  Paget,  M.A.)  Sowing  righteousness  : — Let  them  "  sow  to  them- 
selves in  righteousness  "  ;  let  them  return  to  the  practice  of  good  works,  according 
to  the  rule  of  God,  which  is  the  rule  of  righteousness  ;  let  them  abound  in  works  of 
piety  towards  God,  and  in  justice  and  charity  towards  one  another.  Every  action 
is  seed  sown.  Let  them  sow  what  they  should  sow,  do  what  they  should  do, 
and  they  themselves  shall  have  the  benefit  of  it.  {Matthew  Henry.)  What 
repentance  of  national  sins  doth  God  require,  as  ever  we  expect  national  mercies  ? — 
The  prophet  joineth  counsel  with  threatenings.  Amendment  is  that  he  calleth 
them  to  as  a  means  to  save  them.  By  this  text  God  proclaims,  not  only  to  par- 
ticular persons,  but  to  nations,  how  desirable  it  is  to  Him  to  execute  His  goodness ; 
and  His  extreme  backwardness  to  avenge  Himself  on  the  most  provoking  kingdoms, 
unless  they  add  impenitency  under  solemn  warnings  unto  their  rebellion.     I.  The 

WORDS    CONTAIN    SOME    OF    THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    REPENTANCE,    AND    SUPPOSE    THE 

REST.  1.  He  that  will  repent  must  deal  with  his  indisposed  heart.  "  Break  up 
the  fallow  ground."  2.  When  the  heart  is  thus  prepared,  we  must  proceed  to 
proper  acts  of  reformation.  "  Sow  to  j'ourselves  in  (or  to)  righteousness."  Let 
the  rule  of  righteousness  be  observed  in  your  hearts  and  ways.  3.  You  must 
also  "  seek  the  Lord."     Follow  after  Him  :  persist  in  your  seeking.     II.  This 

REPENTANCE    IS     URGED     FROM    A     VARIETY     OF    ARGUMENTS.        Principally    frOm 

this,  that  national  mercies  would  certainly  follow  national  repentance.  What 
repentance  of  national  sins  doth  God  require  ?  1.  Resolve  the  case  in  general. 
Repentance  ordinarily  affords  ground  of  our  expectation  of  national  mercies, 
notwithstanding  national  sins.  But  when  this  repentance  is  not  in  a  nation, 
we  cannot  ordinarily  expect  national  mercies.  These  things  are  supposed  in  the 
case  as  stated.  What  are  national  sins  ?  Such  gross  sins  as  render  a  nation 
guilty,  and  expose  it  to  national  judgments,  and  forfeit  national  mercies.  These 
sins  are  gross  in  their  nature.  Not  sins  of  infirmity,  or  sins  which  ordinary  care, 
labour,  and  watchfulness  could  not  prevent.  They  are  such  as  idolatry,  perjury, 
breaking  of  covenant,  blood,  uncleanness,  apostasy,  oppression,  profaneness. 
These  sins  must  be  national.  And  sins  become  national  by  all,  or  the  generality  of 
a  people,  being  personally  transgressors,  as  to  those  crimes ;  or  when  the  governors, 
representatives,  and  influencing  persons  are  transgressors ;  or  by  the  generality 
of  a  nation  making  itself  a  partaker  of  other  men's  sins,  though  it  do  not  actually 
commit  them.  These  sins  are  such  as  expose  to  judgments  and  forfeit  national 
mercies.  More  refined  sins  may  expose  one  nation  to  judgments  which  may 
not  expose  another  land.  This  depends  on  the  variety  of  advantages  some  people 
are  under  above  others.  The  provoking  sins  of  one  and  the  same  nation  may  be 
made  up  by  various  kinds  of  offences,  according  to  the  different  condition  of 
offenders.  The  sins  of  magistrates  are  of  one  kind,  and  the  sins  of  subjects 
another,  according  to  their  different  talents  and  station.  Usually  the  sins  of  a 
nation  do  not  bring  judgments  or  forfeit  mercies  by  the  simple  commission  of 
them,  but  as  attended  with  some  additional  aggravations.  A  land  rarely  is 
destroyed,  unless  sins  are  committed  after  warnings.     Security  and  imi)enitence  is 


CHAP.  X.]  HOSEA.  181 

added  to  rebellion  before  God  proceeds  against  a  people.  What  then  are  national 
mercies  in  the  case  before  us  ?  Such  blessings  as  truly  and  considerably  affect  the 
good  of  a  community.  They  must  be  blessings  in  their  nature,  and  national  in 
their  extent.  These  mercies  regard  our  souls,  or  our  bodies,  or  both.  The  pardon 
of  past  sins,  and  help  against  the  like  offences ;  the  presence  of  God  as  effective  of 
spiritual  and  temporal  good  ;  Gospel  ordinances  ;  love  and  peace  among  Churches ; 
freedom  from  persecution  and  malignity ;  a  godly  magistracy ;  peace  in  our 
borders ;  justice  in  our  courts ;  learning  in  the  schools,  &c.  &c.  III.  The  case 
STATED  jlsd  distinguished  FROM  WHAT  SEEMS  LIKE  IT.  The  question  connects 
our  repentance  and  warrantable  expectations.  The  scope  of  it  is, — what  is  the 
lowest  sort  or  degree  of  repentance  for  national  sins  which  is  requisite  to  warrant, 
and  ordinarily  direct,  our  expectations  of  national  mercies  ?  IV.  The  diffi- 
culties OF  THE  CASE.  1.  Other  nations  are  not  under  such  express  rules  with 
respect  to  God's  outward  dealings  as  the  Jewish  nation  was.  There  have  been 
always  great  displays  of  sovereignty  in  God's  dispensation  of  judgments  and  mercy 
toward  nations.  There  are  prophetic  periods  wherein  national  mercies  shall  not 
be  obstructed  by  impenitence  but  repentance  shall  follow  them.  The  desolation 
of  a  land  is  sometimes  absolutely  determined.  God  sometimes  moderateth  and 
refrains  His  judgments  from  other  considerations  besides  repentance.  It  is  not 
very  easy,  at  all  times,  to  judge  of  national  judgments.  V.  The  case  resolved. 
The  rule  by  which  we  must  determine  this  is  hinted  in  the  case  itself,  under  those 
words,  "  What  repentance  doth  God  require  ?  "  Some  expression  of  the  Divine 
will  must  guide  us  ;  we  must  not  judge  by  second  causes,  or  by  vain  fancy,  as  we 
are  apt  to  do.  1.  A  repentance  short  of  that  which  is  enjoined  in  order  to  eternal 
salvation  will  suffice  to  warrant  our  expectations  of  national  mercies.  Eternal 
issues  are  not  determined  by  the  same  rules  as  temporal  blessings.  Unregenerat« 
persons  may  repent,  so  as  to  divert  present  judgments,  and  secure  mercies.  This 
is  evident  in  Ahab  and  Nineveh.  2.  The  repentance  which  yields  us  ground  to 
6xpect  national  mercies,  must  be  for  national  sins.  It  includes  clear  convictions 
of  the  guilt  and  offences  of  a  nation.  Shame,  fear,  and  deep  humblings  of  soul 
under  the  sense  of  the  wrath  of  God,  as  provoked  by  our  sins.  Such  a  compliance 
with  God's  warnings  and  rebukes,  as  to  put  men  on  seeking  God's  favour,  and 
resolving  to  forsake  the  national  pollutions.  And  there  must  be  reformation. 
In  proving  the  decision  of  the  case,  the  described  repentance  doth  ordinarily 
afford  a  people  national  mercies,  notwithstanding  national  sins.  And  where  this 
repentance  obtains  not,  a  people  cannot  justly  expect  national  mercies.  When 
a  people  is  given  up  to  impenitency,  and  God  withholds  a  blessing  from  the 
methods  that  tend  to  their  repentance,  there  is  just  cause  to  fear  that  judgments 
are  determined  against  that  land.  Impenitence  is  not  only  a  moral  obstacle  to 
good,  but  it  is  also  a  natural  obstacle.  The  iniquity  of  a  nation  is  even  materially 
its  ruin.  (Daniel  Williams,  D.D.)  The  fallow  ground: — Very  often  the 
prophet  had  to  reprove  and  call  the  people  to  repent.  Hosea  is  doing  this  in  the 
passage  before  us.  I.  The  particulab  sort  of  characters  here  indicated. 
They  are  figuratively  indicated  by  the  term,  "  fallow  ground,"  or  land  lying  fallow, 
producing  nothing.  The  figure  must  not  be  taken  quite  literally,  because  there 
are  some  points  in  which  it  will  not  apply.  The  point  in  the  figure  is  this.  There 
is  a  human  heart,  producing  nothing;  there  is  a  man,  whose  character  has  no 
religious  fruitfulness,  no  religious  excellence  in  relation  to  God.  It  is  not  verdAnt 
soil.  It  is  not  like  the  soil  of  the  primitive  forest,  which  never  has  produced  any- 
thing, for  it  has  had  its  crops.  That  is  the  character  here  represented, — a  nation, 
a  Church,  or  an  individual,  that  was  fruitful,  that  was  religious,  but  it  has  been 
neglected,  and  it  is  now  lying  barren,  fallow,  producing  nothing.  But  the  farm- 
land is  left  fallow  intentionally,  and  for  a  good  purpose.  In  the  fallow  ground 
which  is  a  man,  and  not  a  farm,  there  is  not  one  thing  done  with  thought,  delibera- 
tion, purpose,  or  plan.  Man's  heart  is  left  fallow  by  temptation,  negligence, 
ignorance,  sin,  backsliding,  and  instead  of  being  the  better  for  it,  its  condition  is 
an  injury  and  a  ciirse.  II.  The  exhortation.  "It  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord." 
The  Hebrews  ought  never  to  have  needed  a  time  for  seeking  the  Lord.  Heathen 
might  feel  after  God,  but  Hebrews  knew  Him.  The  Hebrew  child  had  to  seek 
God  for  himself,  but  that  is  quite  a  different  thing.  Though,  therefore,  this 
exhortation  ought  not  to  have  been  needed,  by  the  mercy  of  God  it  is  given.  It 
may  be  enforced  in  the  sense  in  which  the  apostle  uses  an  expression  of  the  same 
sort,  "  It  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep."  It  may  be  used  in  the  sense  of  a 
time  being  propitieus.     An  accepted  time.     Observe  what  man  is  told  to  do.     Four 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

things  are  figuratively  expressed  in  the  text.     1.  Repentance.     2.  Reformation. 
3.  Prayer.     4.  Perseverance.     III.  The  resxilt.     "  Till  God  rain  down  righteous- 
ness upon  you."     God  rains  down,  not  righteousness  absolutely,  but  that  which 
will  produce  it.     IV.  The  whole  is  in  mercy.     "  Reap  in  mercy."     [T.  Binney.) 
What  sowing  involves: — If  we  "  sow  for  righteousness,"  that  is,  if  our  efforts  are 
directed  to  embodying  it  in  our  lives,  "  we  shall  reap  according  to  mercy."     That 
is  true  universally,  whether  it  is  taken  to  mean  God's  mercy  to  us,  or  ours  to  others. 
The  aim  after  righteousness  ever  secures  the  Divine  favour,  and  usually  ensures 
the  measvire  which  we  mete  being  measured  to  us  again.     But  sowing  is  not  all ; 
thorns  must  be  grubbed  up.     We  must  not  only  turn  over  a  new  leaf,  but  tear 
out  the  old  one.     The  old  man  must  be  slain  if  the  new  man  is  to  live.     The  call 
to  amend  finds  its  warrant  in  the  assurance  that  there  is  still  time  to  seek  the 
Lord,  and  that  for  aU  His  threatenings,  He  is  ready  to  rain  blessings  upon  the 
seekers.     The  im wearying  patience  of  God,  the  possibility  of  the  worst  sinner's 
repentance,  the  conditional  nature  of  the  threatenings,   the  yet  deeper  thought 
that  righteousness  must  come  from  above,  are  all  condensed  in  this  brief  Gospel 
before  the  Gospel.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  Divine  voice  to  a  loorthless  people  : 
—  Sowing  and  reaping  are  figures  here  used  to  denote  the  spiritual  and  moral 
conduct  of  this  people.     AU  human  life  consists  of  sowing  and  reaping.     Every 
intelligent  act  embodies  a  moral  principle,  contains  a  seed  that  must  germinate 
and   grow.     I.  A   wretched   moral   state.     "  Fallow   ground,"    uncultivated 
earth.     A  state  of — 1.  Unloveliness.     It  is  either  an  expanse  of  grey  earth,  or  of 
weeds,  thistles,  and   thorns.     2.  Unfruitfnlness.     Unless   the   soil   is  cultivated 
there  is  no  fruit,  and  the  land  is  worthless.     3.  Wastefulness.     On  fallow  ground 
the  rain,  dew,  and  sunshine  fall,  but  all  in  vain.     How  much  Divine  grace  is  wasted 
on  unregenerate   men :  sermons,   books.   Bibles,   providences,   means  of  grace, 
all  wasted.     11.  An  urgent  moral  duty.     1.  Moral  ploughing.     Think  on  two 
things.    What  God  has  been  to  us.    What  we  have  been  to  Him.    2.  Moral  sowing. 
3.  Moral   reaping.     III.  A  solemn   moral   suggestion.     1.  No   time   to   lose. 
2.  Much  has  been  lost.     3.  It  is  only  now  the  work  can  be  effectively  done.     IV.  A 
GLORIOUS  moral  PROSPECT.    "  He  will  rain  righteou8ness,"or  "  teach  you  righteous- 
ness."    Pursue  this  work  of  moral  agricult\u*e  properly,  and  Goa  Himself  will 
come  and  teach  you  righteousness.     {HomUist. )        The  fallow  ground  state  : — 
The  characters  represented  by  the  term,  "fallow  ground,"  are  to  be  found   in 
every  town  and  in  every  congregation.     I.  Who  abb  the  characters  indicated  ? 
Those  whose  affections,  habits,  and  thoughts  were  once  bearing  a  rich  harvest  for 
God,  but  in  whom  this  is  all  changed,  and  the  heart  is  become  barren.    But  not  the 
backslider  only;  the  description  applies  to  all  who  are  careless  or  hardened  in 
their  sins ;  all  whose  characters  have  no  religious  fruitfulness.     11.  How  may 
WE  BREAK  UP  THE  FALLOW  GROUND  ?     We  must  first  Satisfy  ourselves  that  the 
ground  is  fallow ;  and  in  doing  this  prayerful  meditation  will  greatly  assist  us. 
We  may  also  have  the  guidance  and  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     III.  Why 
WE  SHOULD  BREAK  UP  THE  FALLOW  GROUND  ?     The  constraining  motive  is  this, 
"  it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."     Time  because  you  have  already  spent  too  much 
of  your  short  life  in  the  service  of  sin  and  Satan.     Because  you  will  never  have 
a  more  suitable  season  than  the  present.     You  have  sought  to  pOTSuade  yourself 
that,  by  and  by,  you  would  be  more  at  leisure  for  seeking  the  Lord.     You  must 
not  think  a  time  of  affliction  will  prove  a  more  suitable  time.     The  more  happy 
we  are,  in  the  fulness  of  our  strength,  before  the  eye  is  dim,  and  before  the  intel- 
lect begins  to  fail — that  is  the  time  to  think  deeply  upon  the  claims  of  God. 
{R.  K.  Bailie,  M.A.)        The  reward  of  well-doing  : — How  shall  we  attain  eternal 
life  ?     The  text  declares  that  obedience  shall  not  fail  of  its  reward.     And  that 
the  reward  is  of  grace,  and  not  of  debt.     We  should  imderstand  that  there  is  a 
vast  difference  between  reward  and  merit.     Merit  is  the  right  to  receive  a  reward. 
Reward  is  a  free  testimony  of  approval     The  text  animates  every  one  of  us  with 
the  hope  of  reward ;  it  abases  each  one  of  us  by  a  denial  of  merit.     I.  If  wb 
SOW,  WB  SHALL  REAP.     A  man  might  as  reasonably  expect  a  crop  in  the  autumn, 
though  he  had  wasted  the  season  of  seed-time,  as  suppose  that  a  life  of  indolence 
and  sensuality  would  lead  him  to  Paradise.     II.  Gonsidbr  the  caution,  "  bbaf 
IN  MERCY."     The  caution  is  against  admitting  any  notion  of  merit.     They  claim 
most  who  have  no  ground  of  claim  at  all.     If  the  notion  of  merit  would  be  impiety 
in  an  angel,  what  must  it  be  in  man  ?     And  men  have  to  regard  not  only  the  power 
of  God,  but  also  His  holiness,  which  can  carry  no  terror  to  sinless  spirits.     You 
shall  reap  "  according  to  meroy."     Be  assured,  then,  that  you  cannot  sow  too 


CHAP.  X.]  ROSEA.  183 

freely  for  that  harvest.  {M.  Biggs,  M.A.)  Sowing  and  reaping  : — Activity  is 
not  only  a  sign  of  life,  it  is  a  necessary  condition  of  its  continuance.  The  illustra- 
tions of  this  common  law  of  life  are  as  abundant  as  life  itself.  That  which  is 
true  of  trees,  of  muscle,  and  of  brain  is  equally  true  of  spiritual  powers.  For 
them  no  condition  is  a  surer  angury  of  death  than  unuse.  As  a  Divine  call  to 
religious  activity,  Hosea's  words  contain  some  points  of  perpetual  importance. 
The  call  is — 1.  Distinctly  personal.  "  Sow  for  yourselves."  Whether  a  man  will 
or  not,  he  is  constantly  a  sower  of  seed.  The  bad  man,  the  defective  Christian, 
the  dilatory,  the  prayerless,  are  all  sowers.  This  Divine  call  does  not  deal  so  much 
with  unconscious  influences,  as  with  purposed  and  determined  work.  2.  The  call 
is  specific  and  definite.  You  are  not  to  sow  anything  that  may  come  first  to  hand. 
You  are  to  sow  the  right  word,  the  right  spirit,  the  right  action.  Every  seed  we 
scatter  with  our  hands  deliberately,  every  seed  that  is  unconsciously  permitted 
to  wing  its  way  from  ovu*  whole  demeanour,  is  to  bear  within  it  the  germ  of  the 
true  life.  3.  The  call  is  opportune.  It  is  always  timely  to  be  doing  good.  There 
are,  however,  certain  seasons  when  religious  activity  is  the  present  duty.  4.  The 
call  is  urgent.  All  the  verbs  are  in  one  mood  ;  and  this  is  not  the  conditional 
or  subjunctive,  but  the  imperative.  God  never  gives  men  any  call  without 
making  it  possible  for  them  to  obey  it.  Our  encouragement  to  obedience  is  found 
in  the — 1.  Answer  of  a  good  conscience.  2.  In  certain  success.  3.  In  full  proofs 
of  Divine  mercy.  4.  The  success  will  be  far  spreading.  The  Christian  worker 
is  blessed  in  his  deed.  And — 5.  The  success  will  be  abundant.  Let  the  labour 
for  God  tax  our  utmost  ability,  oiu:  patience,  ovir  faith ;  still,  be  it  ours  to  work 
on,  confident  of  the  result.  The  blessing  is  certain  to  come,  even  for  oiu-selves, 
certain  to  have  proofs  of  mercy  in  it,  certain  to  reach  further  than  we  anticipated, 
certain  also  to  be  plenteous.  Enlarge  your  faith,  therefore,  in  the  power  and 
blessing  of  God.  Your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  shall  not  be  forgotten  ; 
but  shall  be  copiously  and  even  abundantly  blessed.  (J.  Jackson  Ooadby. )  True 
seeking  : — The  prophet  bids  them  "  seek  diligently  "  (so  the  Hebrew)  and  per- 
severingly,  "  not  leaving  ofiE  or  desisting,"  if  they  should  not  at  once  find,  but 
continuing  the  search,  quite  up  to  the  time  when  they  should  find.  His  words 
imply  the  need  of  perseverance  and  patience,  which  should  stop  short  of  nothing 
but  God's  own  time  for  finding.  The  prophet,  as  is  the  way  of  the  prophets, 
goes  on  to  Christ,  who  was  ever  in  the  prophets'  hearts  and  hopes.  The  words 
could  only  be  understood  improperly  of  God  the  Father.  God  does  not  come, 
for  He  is  everywhere.  He  ever  was  among  His  people,  nor  did  He  will  to  be 
among  them  otherwise  than  heretofore.  No  coming  of  God,  as  God,  was  looked 
for  to  teaxjh  righteousness.  But  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  partiarchs  and  holy 
men  all  along  desired  to  see.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Spiritual  husbandry: — 
God  has  been  pleased  to  give  us  instruction  not  only  by  His  Word,  but  also  by  Hia 
works.  Natm-e  echoes  Scripture  to  our  sins,  and  if  we  would  permit  it,  to  our 
hearts.  The  ground  we  till  is  under  the  curse  of  God  for  man's  sin ;  that  its 
natural  produce  is  only  thistles,  weeds,  brambles.  You  have  seen  a  piece  of 
ground  that  has  been  left  waste  and  imcultivated,  and  how  it  has  become  full  o£ 
weeds,  and  rank  with  poisonous  herbs,  and  infested  with  noisome  creatures.  Just 
such  a  place  is  man's  heart.  You  have  but  to  look  at  what  man  becomes  when 
left  to  himself,  without  knowledge,  without  instruction,  without  the  restraining 
and  renewing  grace  of  God,  and  you  cannot  doubt  but  that  the  inclination  of 
his  heart  is  not  to  good,  that  its  imaginations  are  only  evil  continually.  And 
out  of  that  heart  comes  all  manner  of  wickedness  that  is  practised  amongst 
mankind.  Suppose  any  one  of  you  had  a  garden  ovemm  with  weeds,  how  would 
he  set  about  getting  rid  of  them,  so  as  to  do  it  effectually  ?  Would  he  take  a 
scythe  and  cut  off  the  tops,  or  a  spade  and  dig  them  all  up  by  the  root  ?  So  if  we 
were  to  tell  men  that  they  must  put  away  this  or  that  particular  sin,  we  would 
do  no  more  towards  making  them  really  holy,  than  a  man  would  do  towards 
clearing  his  garden  if  he  should  only  break  off  the  heads  of  the  weeds 
growing  in  it.  For  both  would  be  leaving  the  roots  alive.  Some  may  doubt 
whether  their  hearts  are  so  bad  as  they  have  been  represented  to  be.  Then  hear 
the  Word  of  God  (Jer.  xvii.  9,  &c.).  The  words  of  the  text  bid  us  break  up  the 
fallow  ground  of  our  hearts,  that  it  may  be  prepared  to  receive  the  good  seed  of 
eternal  life.  I.  The  thing  to  bb  done.  The  plough  breaking  up  the  soil,  the 
harrow  tearing  to  pieces  the  hard  and  cumbering  clods,  are  a  sign  of  what  must 
be  done  in  our  own  hearts.  The  foul,  unprofitable  soil  of  the  carnal  and  natural 
heart  must  be  broken  up  from  the  bottom.     It  will  not  do  just  to  disturb  the 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

stirface.  Have  you  ever  even  suspected  that  your  heart  wants  cleansing  ?  Is  not 
the  deadly  root  of  sin  shooting  up  there  in  a  thousand  shapes  ?  Is  there  not 
unbelief,  like  the  poisonous  nightshade  ?  Is  there  not  pride,  as  a  towering  plant 
that  brooks  none  to  overlook  it  T  Does  not  selfishness  twine  its  roots  and  strike 
them  deep,  ay,  down  to  the  very  ground  of  the  heart  ?  Is  there  no  foul  and  rotten 
heap  of  unclean  desires  ?  Are  not  the  cares  and  pleasures  of  this  world  like  thorns 
and  briars  within  you,  choking  up  the  thought  and  the  love  of  better  things  ? 
But  how  can  your  hearts  be  broken  up  ?  Not  of  yourselves.  It  is  the  Spirit  of 
God  carrying  home  the  word  which,  like  a  two-edged  sword,  pierceth  even  to 
the  dividing  asunder  of  the  bones  and  marrow, — it  is  He  alone  that  can  break  up 
the  hard  and  stony  soil  of  the  sinner's  heart.  It  is  a  joy  to  the  angels  to  see 
the  fallow  ground  of  the  sinner's  heart  broken  up  with  godly  sorrow,  humbled 
into  repentance  before  God.  When  the  ploughshare  of  conviction  has  gone  deep, 
when  the  heart  is  no  longer  hardened,  the  seed  of  everlasting  life  will  have  a  chance 
of  springing  u^  But  it  is  the  Spirit  alone  who  can  renew  us  unto  repentance  and 
holiness.  II.  A  beason  why  it  must  be  done.  A  stirring  motive  is  given  us 
all  in  breaking  up  our  fallow  ground.  "  It  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."  The  farmer 
who  should  stand  idling  with  folded  arms  when  he  ought  to  be  sowing,  and  should 
let  the  seed-time  slip  away,  could  expect  in  harvest  only  weeds  and  thistles.  Leave 
not,  then,  to  the  evening  the  proper  work  of  the  day.  Opportunities  lost  cannot 
be  recalled.  III.  The  blessing  promised.  We  shall  not  seek  in  vain.  He 
will  "  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  us."  The  Lord  will  satiate  the  weary 
soul,  and  replenish  every  sorrowful  soul.  Upon  them  that  seek  Him  will  the 
Lord  rain  righteousness,  even  all  the  sanctifying  graces  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  Then 
wait  upon  the  Lord  in  prayer,  wait  upon  Him  till  He  come,  and  pour  out  of  His 
Spirit  upon  you.  (E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  The  proportion  of  mercy : — Rather 
"  Sow  righteousness  in  the  proportion  of  mercy."  As  God  has  been  merciful  to 
you,  so  be  ye  righteous  to  Him  :  keep  pace  for  pace  with  the  Divine  mercy ;  be 
perfect  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect ;  be  ye  holy  as  your  Father  in  heaven 
is  holy.  This  is  the  ideal ;  God  would  have  human  righteousness  in  proportion 
to  Divine  mercy.  The  standard  is  not  arbitrary ;  it  is  gracious  and  tender  and 
condescending,  but  who  can  attain  unto  it  ?  It  is  not  in  man  that  liveth  to  keep 
pace  with  God.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  It  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord. — 
Seeking  and  seekers  : — I.  Whom  are  we  to  seek  ?  "  The  Lord."  Our  Creator, 
Father,  Redeemer,  Lord,  Judge.  II.  How  are  we  to  seek  Him  T  I.  Earnestly. 
"  Agonise  to  enter  in."  2.  Humbly,  in  view  of  our  helplessne.<<s  and  sin  ;  hence 
penitently.  3.  Prayerfully.  4.  Obediently.  Israel  had  become  profane, 
idolatrous  covenant  breakers.  III.  Why  are  we  to  seek  Him  ?  1.  For  God's 
sake.  2.  For  our  neighbour's  sake.  3.  For  our  own  sake.  (1)  Viewing  the 
facts  connected  with  our  being  as  immortal  sinners,  we  cannot  be  happy  without 
salvation.  (2)  Seeking  the  Lord  is  preparation  for  the  future.  IV.  When  are 
WE  to  seek  Him  ?  Now — L  The  Scriptures  often  urge  haste.  2.  Delay  itself  ia 
sin.  3.  The  great  good  derived  from  such  a  course.  4.  The  way  to  the  throne 
is  open.  5.  The  time  is  short.  { W.  Veenschoten. )  The  duty  of  seeking  Ood : — 
I.  The  dvty  enjoined.  We  should  seek  the  Lord — \.  In  the  performance  of 
His  will.  2.  In  a  dependence  on  His  mercy.  3.  In  a  due  preparation  of  heart 
to  receive  His  blessings.  II.  The  arguments  by  which  it  is  enforced.  1.  The 
urgency  of  the  duty.  2.  The  certainty  of  success  in  it.  {T.  Hannam.)  Seeking 
the  Lord  an  immediate  duty  : — I.  Whom  are  we  to  seek  ?  "  The  Lord."  This 
implies — 1.  That  man  is  removed  from  God  by  sin.  2.  That  man  may  get  near  to 
God  by  seeking.  3.  That  it  is  his  duty  to  do  so.  II.  How  are  we  to  seek  the 
Lord  ?  1.  By  repentance.  (1)  The  heart  broken  for  sin.  (2)  The  heart  broken 
from  sin.  (3)  Reformation  of  life.  2.  By  faith.  (1)  In  God.  (2)  In  Christ. 
III.  When  are  we  to  seek  the  Lord  ?  "  Now."  1.  To  some  of  you  these 
words  contain  a  reproof.  2.  For  many  of  you  these  words  contain  a  warning. 
(1)  You  will  never  have  a  better  time.  Facilities  for  seeking  the  Lord  decrease 
with  delay.  (2)  You  may  not  have  another  opportunity.  Many  have  waited 
for  the  convenient  season  which  ne  er  came.  {E.  D.  Solomon.)  Seeking  the 
Lord  an  immediate  duty  : — I.  The  Being  whose  favour  men  are  to  seek.  "  The 
Lord  "  ;  this  is  expressive  of  His  greatness  and  power  as  the  Proprietor  of  all  things. 
"  He  is  Lord  over  all."  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,"  &c.  Think  of  His  relation 
to  us.  Creator — Preserver — Benefactor — the  God  of  grace.  Think  how  able  and 
willing  He  is  to  promote  our  happiness.  II.  The  nature  of  seeking  the  Lord. 
It  implies — L  A  knowledge  of  His  character  and  a  conviction  of  the  importance  and 


CHAP,  r]  EOSEA.  185 

advantages  of  having  Him  for  our  portion.  2.  A  conviction  that  sin  has  deprived 
us  of  Him  as  our  portion.     "  Your  iniquities,"  &c.     "  All  we  like  sheep,"  &c. 

3.  A  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  God  may  be  sought.  Through  the  Sacrifice  of 
His  Son,  the  Mediator,  the  Surety,  mercy,  pardon,  and  acceptance  may  be  obtained. 

4.  Heartfelt  repentance.  Contrition ;  godly  sorrow ;  confession  of  evil  to  God ; 
cessation  from  sin,  as  an  evidence  of  regeneration  commencing.  "  Let  the  wicked," 
&c.  5.  Faith  in  Christ.  "  Repent  and  believe  the  Gospel."  "  Believe  in,"  &c. 
What  is  faith  ?  It  is  the  reliance  of  the  sick  and  diseased  one  upon  the  skill  and 
healing  power  of  the  Great  Physician ;  it  is  the  reliance  of  the  debtor,  of  the 
prisoner,  captive,  &c.  &c.,  upon  Christ,  whose  work  on  the  Cross  is  adapted  to 
meet  all  those  exigencies  of  the  sinner.  6.  With  diligence  and  perseverance.  "  With 
the  heart  man  believeth,"  &c.  "  Ye  shall  find  Me  when  ye  shall  search  for  Me 
with  all  yotu"  heart "  ;  "  Cry  out  for  the  living  God,"  III.  Thk  advantages  of 
SEEKING  THE  LoBD.  1.  We  avoid  infinite  evil ;  as  the  result  of  transgression.  "  The 
wages  of  sin  is  death."  2.  We  become  possessed  of  infinite  good.  The  benefit  of 
all  His  attributes — of  all  His  providence — of  all  the  riches  of  His  grace — of  all  the 
glories  of  His  heaven — of  His  eternity.  3.  We  become  auxiliaries  to  Christ  in  the 
glorious  work  of  salvation — extending  the  boundaries  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom. 
This  honour  have  all  the  saints !  4.  By  seeking  the  Lord,  and  finding  Him,  we  do 
that  which  thousands  in  a  dying  hour,  and  at  the  judgment  day,  will  regret  that 
they  have  not  done.  "  The  harvest  is  past,"  &c.  5.  Those  who  seek  the  Lord 
now  will  never  lose  Him  in  eternity.  IV.  The  immediate  attention  which 
THIS  duty  demands.  1.  It  is  time,  according  to  the  statements  of  Scripture. 
"  To-day,"  &c.  "  Behold  now,"  &c.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while,"  &c.  2.  It  is 
time,  on  account  of  the  great  evil  already  perpetrated.  "  One  sinner  destroyeth 
much  good."  3.  The  great  good  to  be  realised  proves  that  it  is  time  to  seek 
the  Lord.  When  the  miser,  the  ambitious,  &c.,  perceive  an  opportunity  of  gaining 
cold,  honour,  &c.,  how  do  they  rush  forward  to  seize  the  coveted  good  !  4.  The 
frailty  of  human  existence  declares  it  is  time.  6.  It  is  time,  because  the  facilities 
in  seeking  the  Lord  will  gradually  lessen.     {Helps  for  the  Pidpit.) 

Vers.  13-15.  Te  have  plowed  wickedness,  ye  have  reaped  Iniquity. — Dili- 
gence in  serving  sin : — Whereas  the  Lord  had,  by  His  prophets,  frequently 
inculcated  that  exhortation,  to  take  pains  on  their  own  hearts,  to  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  piety  and  righteousness  ;  they,  on  the  contrary,  took  pains 
enough  in  serving  sin,  wherein  they  wanted  not  fruit,  though  it  should  disappoint 
their  expectation.  This  challenge  is  further  amplified  and  enlarged  by  showing 
what  was  the  fountain  and  spring  of  all  this  wickedness ;  to  wit,  their  carnal 
confidence  in  the  sinful  ways  and  courses  they  followed,  both  in  matters  of  state 
and  religion,  and  their  confidence  in  their  many  valiant  men.  1.  Many  are  so 
perverse,  as  they  are  not  only  content  to  live  in  sin,  neglecting  their  duty,  but  they 
will  be  at  pains  to  promote  sin,  and  will  trouble  themselves  to  undo  themselves. 
2.  Sin  is  a  very  fertile  weed  among  the  children  of  men ;  such  as  are  bent  on  it 
will  soon  get  their  hearts'  desire  of  it,  and  God  will  give  up  such  as  are  diligent 
that  way,  to  a  height  of  impiety,  as  a  plague  upon  them.  "  Ye  have  reaped 
iniquity."  By  this  we  are  not  to  understand  God's  causing  them  to  reap  the 
fruit  of  sin  in  judgments,  but  that  their  labours  in  sin  came  to  a  ripe  harvest  of 
grown-up  iniquity.  3.  Whatever  fruit  sin  seem  to  promise  to  its  followers,  or 
whatever  present  comforts  or  success  men  seem  to  have  by  it,  yet  it  will  prove 
but  vain,  and  disappoint  them.  4.  Men's  carnal  confidences  are  great  snares  to 
draw  them  upon  sinful  coxirses,  and  are  promising  fruits  which  will  disappoint 
them.  5.  There  is  no  confidence  that  more  easily  ensnares  men,  and  will  dis- 
appoint them  sooner,  than  their  own  witty  projects  and  devices  in  matters  civil 
and  sacred,  without  respecting  the  law  of  God ;  and  their  seeming  to  have  power 
enough  to  manage  and  uphold  them  in  these  contrived  ways.  For  such  is  their 
enare  here,  which  will  surely  disappoint  them.  (George  Hutcheson.)  Sow  a 
Tiabit,  reap  a  character — Professor  William  Jones,  of  Harvard,  in  his  text-book  on 
psychology,  says :  "  Could  the  young  but  realise  how  soon  they  wiU  become 
mere  bundles  of  habits,  they  would  give  more  heed  to  their  conduct  while  in  the 
plastic  state.  Every  smallest  stroke  of  virtue  or  of  vice  leaves  its  scar.  The 
drunken  Rip  Van  Winkle,  in  Jefferson's  play,  excuses  himself  for  every  fresh 
dereliction  by  saying,  '  I  won't  count  this  time.'  Well,  he  may  not  count  it, 
and  a  kind  heaven  may  not  count  it,  but  it  is  being  counted  none  the  less.  Down 
among  the  nerve-cells  and  fibres  the  molecules  are  counting  it,  registering  and 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

storing  it  up,  to  be  used  against  him  when  the  next  temptation  comes.  Nothing 
we  ever  do  is,  in  strict  scientific  literahiess,  wiped  out.  Of  course,  this  has  its  good 
side  as  well  as  its  bad  one.  As  we  become  permanent  drunkards  by  so  many 
separate  drinks,  so  we  become  saints  in  the  moral,  and  authorities  and  experts  in 
the  practical  and  scientific,  spheres  by  so  many  separate  acts  and  hours  of  work." 
Because  thou  didst  trust  in  thy  way. — Trtist  m  our  own  things : — Israel^ 
the  ten  tribes,  had  two  great  confidences.  "  Thou  didst  trust  in  thy  way, 
in  the  multitude  of  thy  mighty  men."  I.  In  their  way.  That  is,  in  the  way 
of  religion  that  they  had  chosen  for  themselves,  and  which  was  distinct  from 
the  way  of  Judah,  from  the  true  worship  of  God.  They  were  confident  that  they 
were  right,  and  would  not  hear  anything  to  the  contrajy.  That  which  is  a  man's 
own  way  he  is  very  ready  to  trust  in,  and  to  esteem  highly.  None  are  more  ready 
to  charge  others  with  pride  than  the  proud ;  and  none  are  more  ready  to  charge 
others  with  adhering  to  their  own  way  than  those  who  most  stick  to  their  own 
conceit.  II.  In  their  mighty  men.  They  had  an  army  to  back  them,  to  fight 
for  them,  and  to  maintain  that  way  of  theirs.  When  the  outward  strength  of 
a  kingdom  goes  along  with  a  way  of  religion,  men  think  it  must  needs  be  right, 
and  that  all  its  opponents  are  but  weak  men.  Great  armias  are  the  confidence 
of  careless  hearts.  Those  that  trust  to  any  way  of  their  own  have  need  of  creature 
strengths  to  uphold  them.    {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 


CHAPTER  XL 

Vbe.  1.  When  Israel  was  a  child.  —  The  ruUional  unit: — The  meaning  is 
not,  necessarily,  when  Israel  was  an  infant,  a  child  in  mere  years,  but  when 
Israel  was  a  child  in  spirit,  docile,  simple  of  mind,  sincere  of  purpose,  true  in 
worship.  When  Israel  lifted  his  eyes  heavenward,  and  sought  for  Me,  then  I 
stooped  over  him  as  a  man  might  stoop  over  his  child  to  lift  him  into  his  arms, 
and  press  him  closely  to  his  heart.  There  is  a  iinit  of  the  individual ;  let  us  take 
care  lest  we  rest  there,  and  so  miss  the  ever-enlarging  revelation  of  the  Divine 
purpose  in  human  history.  There  is  not  only  a  unit  of  the  individual,  there  is 
a  unit  of  the  nation.  Israel  is  here  spoken  of  as  if  he  were  one  man,  a  little  child  ; 
though  a  million  strong  in  population,  yet  there  was  in  the  million  a  unit.  This 
is  one  aspect  of  Divine  providence.  We  must  not  regard  nations  as  if  they  ceased 
to  have  status  and  responsibility,  name  and  destiny  before  God.  A  nation  is 
one,  a  world  is  one,  the  universe  is  one.  What  does  God  know  of  our  little 
divisions  and  distributions  into  pluralities  and  relationships  ?  The  nation  may 
have  a  character.  The  Church  is  one,  and  has  a  reputation  and  influence.  So 
we  come  upon  the  Divine  handling  of  great  occasions.  The  Lord  is  not  fretted 
by  details.  All  the  details  of  His  providence  come  out  of  and  return  to  one 
great  principle  of  redeeming  Fatherhood.  The  locks  are  innumerable ;  the  key 
is  one,  and  it  is  in  the  Father's  hand.  Let  Him  hold  it.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
Ood's  love  to  us  the  pattern  of  our  love  to  others  : — The  leading  topic  of  this  chapter 
appears  to  be  the  calling  of  the  people  of  Israel  out  of  the  prison-house  of  Egypt. 
It  gives  a  gracious  account  of  om-  heavenly  Father's  love,  and  a  fearful  picture 
of  man's  ingratitude.  Under  figures  and  emblems  there  is  a  lively  representation 
of  God's  dealings  with  His  redeemed  ones — with  the  Israel  that  now  is,  not  after 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  The  call  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  as  typical  of  Christ 
and  of  His  people,  is  our  subject.  It  is  typical  of  us,  as  we  are  called  from  sin 
to  the  holiness  of  the  heavenly  Canaan.  L  God's  lovb  to  Christ,  as  a  child, 
MANIFESTED  TO  US  BY  His  OAixiNO  HiM  FROM  EGYPT.  In  the  fulness  of  time 
the  beloved  of  the  Father  became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us.  But  no  sooner 
did  He  appear  than  His  life  was  threatened.  The  child  was  borne  for  safety 
into  Egypt.  In  due  time  Christ  was  called  out  of  Egypt,  brought  again  to  thi© 
Holy  Land,  there  to  exercise  His  ministry  and  perform  the  will  of  God.     11.  God's 

LOVE   TO    us,    WHILST   WE    WERE   YET   AT    A    DIST^VNCE    FROM    HiM.        We    who    are 

redeemed  are  loved  with  the  self-same  love  with  which  God  loved  His  only 
begotten  Son.  II.  The  effect  which  the  possession  of  this  love  will 
NATURALLY  PRODUCE  IN  OUR  HEARTS.  It  will  produce  love  to  others.  What 
should  be  the  effect  of  God's  love  in  our  minds  ?    A  disinterested  love  to  our 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROSEA.  187 

fellow-creatures.  Thua  shall  we  have  a  scriptural  evidence  that  we  are  of  the 
spiritual  Israel,  whom  God  hath  loved  and  called  out  of  Egypt.  [0.  C.  Tomlinson.) 
A  typical  portrait  of  a  people  : — I.  A  highly  favoured  people.  1.  God  loved 
them.  2.  God  emancipated  them.  3.  God  educated  them.  4.  God  healed 
them.  5.  God  guided  them.  6.  God  relieved  them.  7.  God  fed  them.  II.  A 
SIGNALLY  UNGRATEFUL  PEOPLE.  1.  They  disobeyed  God's  teaching.  2.  They 
gave  themselves  to  idolatry.  3.  They  ignored  God's  kindness.  4.  They  per- 
sistently backslided.  III.  A  righteously  punished  people.  The  judgment 
would  be — 1.  Extensive  ;  and  2.  It  should  continue  ;  and  3.  It  should  be  destruc- 
tive. Is  not  this  history  of  this  people  typical  ?  Do  not  they  represent  especi- 
ally the  peoples  of  modern  Christendom,  highly  favoured  of  God,  signally  ungrateful 
to  God,  and  exposed  to  punishment  from  God?  (Homilist.)  Backsliding: — 
1.  This  is  the  great  sin  of  the  visible  Church,  to  which  she  hath  a  strong  inclina- 
tion naturally,  even  in  her  best  frame.  2.  Men's  hanging  sometimes  in  suspense, 
and  having  some  inclinations  to  return,  will  neither  double  out  their  point  against 
the  power  of  corruption  within  them,  nor  will  it  extenuate  their  backsliding. 

3.  The  great  backsliding  of  God's  people  is  their  backsliding  from  God  and 
communion  with  Him ;   which  draweth  on  all  other  apostasies  and  defections. 

4.  It  is  of  the  Lord's  great  mercy  that  He  cease th  not  to  follow  backsliders  with 
messages  from  His  Word.     (George  Hutcheson.)        A  fivefold  view  of  God's  love  : — 

1.  It  is  adopting  love.     God  loved  Israel  in  Egypt,  Israel  in  captivity,  Israel    \ 
among  the  brick-kilns,  and  called  him  "  His  son."     It  is  by  no  merit  or  righteous-     \ 
ness  of  our  own  that  we  are  made  sons  of  God.     We  become  children  of  God      \ 
by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.     God's  love  is  adopting  love.     God  delights  in  adopting       \ 
children,  and  giving  them  the  spirit  of  adoption,  and  taking  them  to  the  home        * 
of  the  ransomed  family.     2.  It  is  a  tender  love.     The  Lord  describes  the  manner 
of  a  mother  teaching  her  babe  to  walk.     "  I  taught  Ephraim  to  go."     The  Omni-         ^^     . 
potent  became  as  a  nurse  to  Israel.     When  difficulties  arose  He  bore  him  in  His  ^ 

arms  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  little  child.  And  the  heavenly  Father  is  ever  the 
same.  3.  His  inviting  love.  "  Called  My  son  out  of  Egypt."  We  know  how 
cruel  Pharaoh  was,  and  how  hard  were  his  taskmasters.  But  there  was  One 
who  loved  them,  who  said,  "  I  have  heard  their  cry,  and  have  come  down  to  help 
them."  His  fiery  cloudy  pillar  was  the  symbol  of  his  inviting  love.  4.  It  is 
weeping  love.  God  mourns  over  their  iniquities.  God's  love  as  weeping  love 
was  displayed  by  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows,"  whose  grief  was  for  the  hardness  of 
men's  hearts,  and  whose  hot  tears  over  Jerusalem  were  because  she  knew  not 
the  things  which  belonged  to  her  peace.  5.  His  incarnate  love.  "  The  cords 
of  a  man."  Incarnate  love  is  the  magnet  by  which  souls  are  drawn  to  God. 
"  The  Word  was  made  flesh "  begins  the  story  of  redemption.  Christ  became 
man,  to  stand  in  man's  place  and  deal  with  God  in  man's  behalf,  and  to  be  able 
to  enter  into  our  feelings  and  fears  as  a  merciful  and  compassionate  High  Priest. 
{A.  Clayton  Thiselton.)  Mingled  severity  and  mercy  : — The  scope  of  this  chapter\ 
is  to  clear  God  from  severity,  and  to  upbraid  Israel  for  ungrateful  and  stubborn  } 
carriage,  against  mercies  and  means,  and  yet  to  promise  mercy  to  the  remnant^.- 
to  His  elect  ones.  At  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter  there  were  dreadful 
threatenings  against  Israel,  that  the  mothers  should  be  dashed  in  pieces  upon 
their  children,  and  the  king  utterly  cut  ofiF.  But  does  not  this  argue  God  to  be 
a  God  of  rigid  severity  T  Where  is  the  mercy,  goodness,  and  clemency  of  God 
towards  His  people  ?  God  says,  "  For  aU  this  I  am  a  God  of  mercy  and  goodness, 
for  I  have  manifested  abundance  of  mercy  already,  and  am  ready  still  to  manifest 
more ;  but  you  have  been  a  stubborn  and  a  stout-hearted  people  against  Me." 
From  this  general  scope  observe — 1.  God  stands  much  upon  the  clearing  of 
Himself  to  be  a  God  of  love  and  mercy.  Whatsoever  becomes  of  the  wicked, 
yet  God  will  make  it  clear  before  all  the  world  that  He  is  a  God  of  much  mercy. 
God  takes  it  very  ill  that  we  should  have  any  hard  thoughts  of  Him  ;  let  us  not_ 
be  ready  to  entertain  such  thoughts  of  God,  as  if  He  were  a  hard  master.  "  When  \  1 
Israel  was  a  child."  That  is,  at  his  first  beginning  to  be  a  people,  in  his  young  ^  I 
time,  My  heart  was  towards  him.  When  he  knew  little  of  Me.  When  he  could 
do  little  for  Me.  When  there  was  much  vanity  and  folly  in  him,  as  there  are 
generally  in  children.  When  he  was  helpless  and  succourless,  and  knew  not  how 
to  provide  for  himself.  The  love  of  God  to  Israel  is  expressed  in  these  three  par- 
ticulars. (1)  God  "entered  into  a  covenant"  with  him.  (2)  "Thou  becamest 
Mine,"  that  is,  I  had  separated  thee  for  Myself,  and  took  thee  for  a  peculiar 
one  to  Me,   and   intended  special    mercy  and  goodness  to  thee.      (3)  I  con- 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx, 

firmed  all  this  by  an  oath,  "  I  sware  unto  thee."  Observe — 2.  It  is  the  privilege 
of  the  Church  and  of  the  saints  to  be  beloved  of  God.  God  loves  His  people ; 
this  is  their  privilege,  He  loves  them  with  a  special  love.  3.  It  is  a  great  aggrava- 
tion to  sin,  to  sin  against  love.  4.  It  is  very  useful  to  call  to  mind  God's  old 
love.  6;  All  God's  old  mercies  remain  engagements  to  duty  and  aggravations 
to  sin.  6.  Let  not  our  hearts  sink  in  despairing  thoughts,  though  we  see  that 
we  are  able  to  do  but  little  for  God,  and  though  we  are  unworthy  of  His  love. 
7.  God's  love  begins  betimes  to  His  people ;  let  not  His  people's  love  be  deferred 
too  long.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  God's  love  for  the  Church  : — 1.  Grod's  love 
to  the  Church  is  her  first  and  great  privilege,  which  prevents  her  in  her  lowest 
condition,  when  she  is  unworthy  and  base.  When  Israel  was  a  child,  witless 
and  worthless,  then  I  loved  him.  And  this  is  the  fountain  of  all  God's  bounty 
to  him.  2.  The  Lord  will  make  His  love  to  His  people  conspicuous  in  their 
preservation  in  a  low  condition,  and  imder  much  trouble,  when  He  seeth  it  not 
fit  to  deliver  them  from  it.  3.  The  Lord  also  will  magnify  His  deliverance  from 
trouble  and  bondage,  not  only  spiritual,  but  outward  also,  in  so  far  as  is  for  their 
good.  3.  As  the  Lord  doth  ofttimes  manifest  His  love,  and  put  special  honour 
on  His  people,  by  putting  them  to  sufferings  and  trouble,  so  He  will  specially 
make  His  delivering  of  them  proclaim  His  love  and  estimation  of  them,  and  His 
peculiar  interest  in  them.  {Oeorge  Hutcheson.)  And  called  My  son  out  of 
Egypt.  — "  And  thou  shalt  say  unto  Pharaoh,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Israel 
is  My  son,  even  My  first-born  ;  and  I  say  unto  thee.  Let  My  son  go,  that  he  may 
serve  Me."  On  these  words  Hosea's  reference  rests.  The  people  of  Israel  are 
to  God  as  a  son  to  a  father  ;  even  as  a  first-born  son.  That  is  why  He  has  come 
down  to  deliver  them.  We  speak  of  the  "  purposes  "  of  God,  as  though  God 
had  formed  some  complex  schemes  at  an  early  period  in  the  world's  history, 
and  now  He  must  work  these  schemes  out.  But  the  God  of  the  Bible  is  no 
scheme-maker.  He  is  a  Father — we  are  His  sons.  It  is  Israel's  cry  that  has 
brought  Jehovah  down  to  deliver  them.  He  is  the  Father  of  the  fatherless. 
He  hears  the  cry  of  the  afflicted.  But  though  God  is  moved  by  love,  He  does 
aU  things  in  order.  He  pities  His  people  before  their  cry  has  ascended  to  Him  ; 
but  He  waits  for  that  cry  before  He  comes  down  to  deliver  them.  For  He  will 
not  deliver  the  unwilling  or  the  proud.  So  He  waits.  And  He  came  to  the 
right  person.  He  will  do  His  work  by  means  of  a  man,  and  He  knows  the  man 
to  do  it.  Moses  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt.  Jehovah,  that  is  the  name  of 
Israel's  Father  and  Deliverer.  "  I  am  that  I  am  "  is  practically  the  translation 
of  Jehovah.  It  is  a  somewhat  cold  name  to  us,  because  we  know  the  tenderer 
name  of  Father.  Hosea's  reference  looks  forward  as  well  as  backward ;  it  looks 
before  and  after.  Hosea  saw  that  his  words  had  a  fuller  meaning  than  could  be 
filled  by  the  people  of  Israel.  He  saw  that  they  carried  a  promise  which  had 
not  been  performed  even  in  his  day.  Like  Abraham,  he  saw  Christ's  day  afar 
off,  and  was  glad.  (James  Hastings,  M.A.)  The  flight  into  Egypt : — How  can 
Matthew  speak  of  these  words  as  a  prophecy,  and  of  the  sojourn  of  the  Divine  babe 
in  Egypt  as  a  fulfilment  of  their  prophecy  ?  It  has  been  said  that  Matthew  uses 
Hosea's  words,  so  to  speak,  rhetorically  or  classically,  declaring  that  the  story 
of  the  infant  Jesus  in  Egypt  was  a  fine  instance  of  Hosea's  saying.  Or  it  may 
be  answered  that  the  literal  Israel  was  the  type  of  the  spiritual  Israel.  At  all 
events,  the  Divine  Man  was  Himself  the  true,  ideal  Israel,  and  as  such  Jehovah 
did  call  Him  when  a  child  out  of  Egypt.  Once  more,  it  may  be  answered,  in  a 
more  general  way,  that  the  present  is  ever  the  fruit  of  the  past  and  the  seed  of 
the  future.  Events  are  born  of  events,  as  successive  parts  of  plants  are  born 
of  preceding  parts  ;  the  parts  are  different,  but  they  are  radically  only  repetitions 
of  the  original  seed.  History  repeats  itself.  The  historic  is  ever  the  prophetic. 
Particularly  is  it  true  in  a  case  of  special  Divine  election,  like  that  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  that  history  will  be  prophecy.  The  fulfilments  of  the  prophetic  Scriptures, 
like  waves  of  the  sea,  are  ever-multiplying  and  enlarging  concentric  circles.  And 
Jesus  Christ  is  evermore  the  final  and  crowning  fulfilment.  The  Divine  Man  is 
the  universal  pleroma — alike  the  radiant  point  and  the  circumference  of  all  things. 
As  God  called  out  of  Egypt  His  son,  so  out  of  Egypt  does  He  caU  His  Church. 
It  was  literally  true  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  fathers, — TertuUian,  Origen, 
Athanasius,  Cyprian.     It  is  spiritually  true  of  all  God's  people.     (G.  D.  Boardman. ) 

Ver.  2.  They  sacrificed  unto  Baalim,  and  burned  incense  to  graven  images. — 

Graven    images : — We    read    frequently    of    graven    images    and    of    moltea 


CHAP.  XI.]  HOSE  A.  189 

images,  and  the  words  are  become  so  familiar  as  names  of  idolatrous 
images  that,  although  they  are  not  well  chosen  to  express  the  Hebrew  names, 
it  seems  not  advisable  to  ch?,nge  them  for  others  that  might  more  exactly  corre- 
spond with  the  original.  The  graven  image  was  not  a  thing  wrought  in  metal 
by  the  tool  of  the  workman  we  should  now  call  an  engraver  ;  nor  was  the  molten 
image  an  image  made  of  metals  or  any  other  substance,  melted  and  shaped  in 
a  mould.  In  fact,  the  graven  image  and  the  molten  image  are  the  same  thing 
under  different  names.  The  images  of  the  ancient  idolaters  were  first  cut  out 
of  wood  by  the  carpenter,  as  is  very  evident  from  the  prophet  Isaiah.  This 
figure  of  wood  was  overlaid  with  plates  either  of  gold  or  silver,  or  sometimes 
perhaps  of  an  inferior  metal,  and  in  this  finished  state  it  was  called  a  graven 
image  {i.e.,  a  carved  image),  in  reference  to  the  inner  solid  figure  of  wood,  and  a 
molten  (i.e.,  an  overlaid  or  covered)  image,  in  reference  to  the  outer  metalline 
case  or  cover.  Sometimes  both  epithets  are  applied  to  it  at  once  (Nah.  i.  14  ; 
Hab.  ii.  18).  The  English  word  molten  conveys  a  notion  of  melting  or  fusion. 
But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  Hebrew  word  for  which  it  is  given.  The  Hebrew 
signifies  to  spread,  or  cover  all  over,  either  by  pouring  forth  a  substance  in  fusion, 
or  in  spreading  a  cloth  over  or  before,  or  by  hammering  on  metalline  plates. 
(Bishop  Horsley.) 

Ver.  3.  t  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taMng  them  by  their  aims.— Taken 

by  the  arm  .■ — When  God  redeems  and  shelters  His  people  by  the  blood  of 
the  Paschal  Lamb, — i.e.,  of  Christ  our  Passover  sacrificed  for  us — and  gives  them 
His  law,  telling  them  to  serve  Him,  He  does  not  leave  them  to  their  own  strength, 
but  gives  them  power  to  do  what  He  bids  them  :  He  teaches  them  how  to  go, ' 
tating  them,  as  a  nurse  would,  by  the  arms.  Our  obedience  is  not  the  cause 
which  procures  or  awakens  God's  love  to  us,  but  His  love  is  the  cause  that  pro- 
cures and  awakens  our  obedience.  The  text  tells  us  what  God  is  doing  for  the 
true  disciples  of  Jesus,  and  how  God  undertakes  to  teach  them  how  to  go. 
"  Taking  them  by  the  arms."  As  a  nurse  teaches  a  helpless  child  to  walk.  He 
invites  us  to  rely  upon  His  strength  and  watchful  care.  He  knows  our  weakness.. 
The  thought  may  be  illustrated  by  Deut.  xxxii.  11.  In  this  life  we  cannot  go 
without  the  support  of  Christ;  but  there  are  different  ways  in  which  He  gives 
this  to  His  people.  At  first  He  teaches  them  to  fight  against  their  own  evil  passions, 
to  resist  their  own  wayward  wills,  to  quench  their  fiery  temptations.  But  soon 
they  pass  onward.  The  new  nature  moves,  stirs,  waxes  stronger,  grows  ;  the 
old  decays.  At  first  He  leads.  He  guides  them  against  their  will,  then  without 
it,  and  it  is  a  happy  day  when  their  will  cheerfully  goes  along  with  His  ;  then 
they  are  taught  to  go.  {W.  Grant.)  But  they  knew  not  that  I  healed  them. — 
Unrecognised  blessings: — Two  different  types  of  ignorance  in  relation  to  two 
different  methods  of  Divine  dealings.  Look — 1.  At  the  words  uttered  by  the 
Lord  to  Cyrus,  the  Persian  king — "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known 
Me  "  (Isa.  xlv.  6).  From  these  words  we  learn  that  while  God  uses  His  own 
people  for  a  gracious  purpose,  they  are  not  the  only  people  that  He  uses  for  the 
furtherance  of  His  designs.  He  places  men  in  high  positions,  and  by  their  instru- 
mentality He  often  brings  about  the  fulfilment  of  His  own  purpose,  though  they 
themselves  have  had  no  conscious  part  in  the  accomplishment  of  such  a  glorious 
end.  2.  Our  text  points  to  a  very  different  dealing,  namely,  God's  treatment 
of  the  Jewish  people.  The  ignorance  of  Cyrus,  as  a  heathen,  was  not  the  culp- 
able thing  that  ignorance  of  God  on  the  part  of  any  king  of  Israel  or  Judah  would 
have  been.  God  had  granted  Israel  a  special  revelation,  and  admitted  them 
into  an  exceptional  relationship  with  Himself  as  His  people.  Notwithstanding 
all  God's  goodness  to  Israel,  Hosea  says,  in  God's  name,  "  They  knew  not  that 
I  healed  them."  Thus  we  have  two  types  of  ignorance.  That  of  the  man  who 
has  never  been  brought  under  godly  influence  ;  and  the  wilful  ignorance  of  those 
who  sin  against  the  light,  and  in  spite  of  gracious  influences.  The  latter  is  the 
only  ignorance  possible  to  us.  The  surprising  thing  about  Israel  was  that  they 
could  be  so  ignorant  of  God's  goodness  after  all  that  He  had  done  for  them.  Know- 
ledge of  God  they  had,  but  it  had  formed  no  part  of  their  being,  had  not  permeated 
their  character  and  life,  and  had  not  given  a  bent  to  their  conduct.  Their  attitude 
Godward  was  atheistic.  They  talked  flippantly  enough  about  their  history, 
but  there  was  no  gratitude  in  the  heart  that  would  mould  and  fashion  life  into 
submissive  obedience  to  the  law  of  God.  Thus  their  ignorance  was  all  the  worse 
for  being  so  wilful  and  persistent.     "  Ye  are  weary  of  Me,"  exclaimed  Grod  to 


190  THE  BIBLIOAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

them.  I  know  of  no  charge  more  pathetic  than  that.  Thia  ignorance  is  the 
result  of  the  blinding  power  of  a  sinful  passion ;  an  ignorance  which  will  not  let 
a  man  know  the  truth  because  he  is  too  closely  wedded  to  his  evil.     [D.  Daviea.) 

Ver.  4.  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man.  —  CfocTs  saving  method  with  the 
eovl : — I.  God  in  the  AcrriON  of  great  solicitude.  "  I  drew  them."  There 
are  two  ways  by  which  this  thought  is  confirmed — 1.  By  Scripture.  2.  By 
experience.  God  is  represented  in  the  Song  of  Solomon  as  drawing  us  with  the 
odour  of  a  great  ointment.  II.  God  drawing  man  through  the  princtplb  op 
HUMAN  AGENCY — "  Cords  of  a  man."  1.  God  did  this  in  the  use  of  the  prophets. 
2.  God  did  this  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  3.  God  is  now  doing  this  in  the  Christian 
ministry.  III.  GoD  drawing  maij  through  the  principle  of  spiritual  con- 
ditions: "With  bands  of  love."  1.  There  is  the  voice  of  the  inner  life, — telling 
of  wrong,  and  pointing  to  right  and  duty.  2.  There  is  the  agency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit, — pointing  to  holy  decisions.  Dr.  Doddridge  once  said  to  his  daughter, 
"  My  dear,  how  is  it  that  everybody  seems  to  love  you  ?  "  She  answered,  "  I 
do  not  know,  papa, — imless  it  is  that  I  love  everybody."  Jesus  loves  us.  Shall 
we  not  love  Him?  {W.  A.  Perrins.)  God's  redemptive  agency: — I.  The 
UNCOERCiVENESS  OF  His  REDEMPTIVE  AGENCY.  He  draws,  not  drives.  This 
Divine  mode  of  action  implies  two  things — 1.  That  God  respects  the  moral  freedom 
of  human  nature.  He  has  endowed  us  with  moral  agency.  We  have  a  conscious-  ' 
ness  of  freedom  which  defies  and  spurns  all  the  logic  that  would  prove  us  slaves. 
The  Holy  Father  treats  us  according  to  the  natures  He  has  given  us.  God  neither 
condemns  nor  saves  men  contrary  to  their  own  will.  2.  That  God's  moral  power 
in  the  Gospel  is  extraordinarily  great.  (1)  It  is  a  power  to  draw  souls.  Brute 
force  can  only  drive  bodies.  Mere  might  has  no  magnetism  for  the  soul.  There 
is  a  moral  power,  the  power  of  anger,  falsehood,  disgusting  immorality,  that  can 
f'rive  souls  away — repel  them  with  disgust.  But  holy  moral  power  alone  can 
draw  the  entire  soul.  (2)  It  is  a  power  to  draw  depraved  souls.  It  is  something 
therefore  extraordinary — greater  than  the  moral  power  of  nature.  It  is  the 
power  of  infinite  love,  embodied  in  the  life  of  Christ.  II.  The  humanity  of 
God's  redemptive  agency.  It  is  by  a  man's  intellect,  heart,  life,  example, 
influence  that  he  draws.  God  saves  man  by  man.  1.  The  reasonable  draws  man. 
God  appeals  to  our  reason  through  man.  2.  The  merciful  draws  man.  God 
appeals  to  our  gratitude  through  man.  3.  The  excellent  draws  man.  4.  The 
desirable  draws  man.  ( Homilist. )  The  place  of  love  in  the  Gospel : — It  is 
God  who  speaks  of  the  humanity  of  His  treatment  of  us.  When  a  man  would 
influence,  he  must  begin  by  loving.  Few  can  resist  that  spell.  I  need  not  tell 
any  one  how  mighty,  how  almighty,  in  a  man's  being  is  the  force  of  love.  There 
are  not  two  definitions  of  love,  though  it  has  many  modifications.  The  symptoms 
common  to  all  loving  are  delight  in  presence,  impatience  of  absence,  eagerness 
for  reciprocity,  intolerance  of  coldness,  joy  in  exchange  of  thought,  sympathy 
in  each  change  of  circumstance  ;  delight  in  the  opportunity  of  benefiting,  and 
corroding  grief  in  the  prohibition  of  intercourse.  We  have  claimed  for  hope — 
we  have  claimed  even  for  fear — a  place  in  the  Gospel.  Can  it  be  needful  to  do 
the  same  for  love  ?  Yet  there  may  be  some  comparative,  if  not  positive,  dis- 
paragement of  this  grace.  I  have  heard  men  speak  slightingly  of  Gospel  love. 
They  judge  it  better,  on  the  whole,  for  the  character  of  Christ's  Gospel,  that  in 
its  central  innermost  shrine  the  Deity  of  deities  should  be  rather  obedience  than 
love.  Thus,  in  improving  Christ's  Gospel,  they  spoilt,  marred,  ruined  it.  I.  The 
Gospel  is  a  revelation  of  love.  Herein  lies  its  power,  the  secret  of  its  strength. 
It  reveals  the  love  of  God.  That  God  loves  virtue,  and  will  compensate  and 
make  up  for  the  sufferings  of  the  good,  is  a  tenet  which  needs  not  a  revelation. 
But  that  God  loves  aU  men,  even  the  sinner,  is  that  quite  right  T  Must  there 
not  be  something  here  not  altogether  sound  in  doctrine,  because  not  altogether 
conducive  to  morality  and  good  ?  The  Gospel  risks  this  perversion.  It  refers 
lis  to  Christ.  Did  Christ's  example,  did  Christ's  life,  encourage  or  favour  sin  ? 
There  is,  in  the  immeasurable  love  of  God,  room  for  all  His  creatures.  There  is 
a  yearning  of  soul  over  the  scattered,  dispersed,  erring,  and  straying  race.  He 
loves,  therefore  He  pleads.  The  whole  secret  of  the  drawing  lies  in  the  spontaneity 
of  the  love.  Tell  a  man, — "  Seek  God,  and  He  will  be  found  of  you," — and 
you  waste  words.  Tell  him — "  God  loves  you  as  you  are.  God  has  come  after 
you,  with  far-reaching  endeavour."  He  will  find  there  is  strength  in  that  which 
will  not,  cannot,  be  resisted.     II.  There  is  an  invitation  op  lovb.     There  in 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROSEA.  191 

something  always  pathetic,  to  the  unsophisticated  ear,  in  the  petition  of  love. 
The  outcries  of  barren,  thirsting  affection  waste  themselves  oftentimes  upon  the 
desert.  And  yet  there  was  a  love  for  them,  would  they  but  have  had  it,  a  love 
better  than  of  son  or  daughter,  better  than  of  wife  or  husband,  a  love  indestructible, 
satisfying,  eternal.  It  is  permitted  to  you  to  love  God.  Ought  not  that  to  be 
joy  enough  and  privilege  enough  for  any  man  ?  God  makes  it  religion  to  do  the 
thing  which  will  make  us  happy ;  and  therefore  He  turns  the  invitation  into  the 
injunction  of  love,  and  bids  the  fallen  self-ruined  creature  just  love  and  be  happy 
• — just  love  and  be  saved.  III.  There  is  a  communication,  or  transmission, 
OF  LOVE.  He  who  has  been  loved,  and  therefore  loves,  is  bidden  by  that  love 
of  God  to  love  his  brother  also ;  and  then,  in  that  transmission,  that  handing  on 
of  the  love,  the  whole  of  the  Gospel — its  precept  as  its  comfort — is  in  deed  and 
in  truth  perfected.  Little,  indeed,  do  they  know  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel  who 
think  either  that  obedience  will  replsice  the  love  of  God,  or  duty  be  a  substitute 
for  the  love  of  man.  Christ  teaches  us  that  both  towards  God  and  towards  man 
love  goes  first  and  duty  follows  after.  Not,  indeed,  that  we  are  idly  to  wait  for  the 
feeling,  and  excuse  the  not  doing  on  the  i)lea  of  not  loving.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  worshipping  because  I  desire  to  love.  So  there  is  such  a  thing  as  doing  good 
to  my  brother,  if  so  be  I  may  love  him  ;  a  setting  myself  to  every  office  of  patient 
and  self-denying  charity,  if  by  any  means  it  may  at  last  become  not  a  labour 
but  a  love  to  me.  But  how  can  we  love  the  unlovely  ?  Surely  whosoever  sees 
with  the  eye  of  Christ,  can  discern,  if  he  will  look  for  it,  on  the  most  tarnished, 
debased,  defaced  coin  of  humanity,  that  Divine  image  and  superscription  in  which 
God  created,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  Christ  thought  it  no  waste  to  redeem. 
This  is  love's  place  in  Christ's  Gospel.  Love  revealed,  love  reciprocated,  then 
love  handed  on.  (C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  Good  Friday  : — This  is  not  a  day  for 
difficult  doctrines,  but  for  the  simplest  and  humblest  feelings.  The  great  work 
of  this  day  is  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  our  understanding.  The  appeal  is  not 
made  to  our  understanding,  nor  even  directly  to  our  conscience.  With  the  cords 
of  a  man  we  are  drawn.  The  human  affections  which  all  men  share,  the  feelings 
which  even  the  poorest,  the  meanest,  the  most  ignorant  partake  in,  the  pity,  the 
tenderness,  the  love  that  can  only  be  called  forth  by  love,  these  are  now  the  cords 
by  which  our  Father  draws  us,  the  cords  of  a  man.  To  the  heart  that  loves  like 
a  child,  to  the  sinner  deeply  laden  with  his  burden  of  unhappiness,  to  the  broken 
spirit  that  secretly  longs  to  escape  from  fetters  which  it  is  powerless  to  break, 
to  the  soul  that  is  ready  to  despair,  this  Gospel  speaks,  and  tells  of  hope,  and  love, 
and  eagerness  to  forgive,  and  embracing  arms,  and  falling  on  the  neck,  and  tears 
of  joy,  and  the  welcome  of  the  prodigal  son.  We  cannot  study  here.  We  can 
but  surrender  oiu-  hearts  to  the  love  which  is  too  much  for  them  to  contain.  We 
are  sometimes  cold  and  dead.  There  are  times  when  our  feelings  towards  God 
eeem  to  lose  their  warmth.  We  can  obey  and  do,  but  we  feel  like  servant.-^,  not 
like  children,  and  we  are  unhappy  because  we  cannot  rouse  any  warmer  feelings 
in  ourselves.  And  when  this  is  so,  where  can  we  go  but  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  ? 
Perhaps  under  a  decent  exterior  we  hide  some  sinful  habit  which  has  long  been 
eating  into  our  souls.  It  is  possible  that  we  may  be  discharging  every  duty  as 
far  as  human  eyes  behold  us.  Yet  time  after  time  the  temptation  has  proved 
too  strong,  or  we  have  been  found  too  weak.  Our  besetting  sin  has  clung  to 
us,  and  we  cannot  get  rid  of  it.  Then  let  us  once  more  tiun  to  God,  and  gaze 
upon  the  Cross  of  Christ.  Or  perhaps  we  have  never  striven  to  serve  God  at  all. 
We  have  lived  as  best  suited  the  society  in  which  we  were,  as  most  conduced 
to  our  own  pleasures.  Whenever  the  thought  of  God  or  conscience  comes  across 
us,  we  find  that  but  a  dull  subject  to  think  on,  and  we  turn  to  pleasanter  and  more 
exciting  themes.  What  then  shall  warm  our  hearts  but  this  plain  story  of  sadness  ? 
If  we  have  human  feelings  still  left  us,  and  sympathy  can  yet  touch  our  souls, 
it  will  be  impossible  to  read  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  without  emotion.  (Archbishop 
Temple.)  God's  gracioiis  dealings: — I.  I  dealt  with  them  rationally,  as 
MEN,  NOT  AS  BEASTS.  1.  My  Statutes  were  according  to  right  reason.  2.  They 
were  supported  by  many  arguments.  3.  And  by  persuasions,  motives,  and 
exhortations.  II.  I  dealt  with  them  gently,  not  with  rigour  and  violence. 
1.  Suiting  Myself  to  their  dispositions.  2.  Dealing  with  them  when  they  were  in 
their  best  temper.     3.  Giving  them  time  to  consider.     HI.  I  dealt  with  them 

HONOURABLY,  IN   A  MANNER   SUITABLE   TO   THAT  RESPECT  WHICH   IS    DUE   TO   MAN. 

1.  My  instructions  ever  exceeded  My  corrections.  2.  Whatever  spark  of 
ingenuousness  remained  in  them,  I  took  care  to  preserve  it.     3.  I  aimed  at  their 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

good,  as  well  as  My  own  glory,  in  all  things.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Silken 
cords  : — No  man  ever  does  come  to  God  unless  he  is  drawn.  Man  is  so  utterly 
"  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  that  the  same  Divine  power  which  provided  a 
Saviour  must  make  him  willing  to  accept  a  Saviour.  But  many  make  a  mistake 
about  Divine  drawings.  They  seem  to  fancy  that  when  the  time  comes,  they 
will,  by  some  irresistible  power,  without  any  exercise  of  thought  or  reasoning,  be 
compelled  to  be  saved.  But  no  man  can  make  another  man  lay  hold  of  Christ. 
Nay,  God  Himself  does  not  do  it  by  compulsion.  He  hath  respect  unto  man  as 
a  reasoning  creature.  Love  is  the  power  that  acts  upon  men.  God  draweth 
no  man  contrary  to  the  constitution  of  man,  but  His  methods  of  drawing  are  in 
strict  accordance  with  mental  operations.  1.  Some  are  drawn  to  Christ  by  seeing 
the  happiness  of  true  believers.  2.  Another  cord  of  love  is  the  sense  of  the 
security  of  God's  people,  and  a  desire  to  be  as  secure  as  they.  3.  Some  will  tell 
you  they  were  first  (frawn  to  Christ  by  the  holiness  of  godly  relatives.  4.  Not 
a  few  are  brought  to  Christ  by  gratitude  for  mercies  received.  5.  Some  have 
been  caught  by  becoming  convinced  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  the  most  reason- 
able religion  in  the  world.  6.  A  far  larger  number,  however,  are  attracted  to 
Jesus  by  a  sense  of  His  exceeding  great  love.  7.  The  privileges  which  a  Christian 
enjoys  ought  to  draw  some  of  you  to  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  goodness 
to  His  peojUe : — Let  us  see  what  this  goodness  did  for  Israel,  and  what  it  doea 
still  for  God's  people.  Three  leading  articles.  I.  Attraction.  "  I  drew  them." 
God  attracted  the  Jews  to  Himself  as  their  Lord  and  portion  by  conviction  and 
affection.  The  attraction  is  to  Him  as  well  as  by  Him.  In  pushing  and  driving 
you  urge  a  thing  from  you  ;  but  in  drawing  it  you  bring  it  towards  you.  God's 
aim  is  to  bring  us  to  Himself.  This  aim  regards  the  state  that  we  are  previously 
in — a  state  of  distance  and  alienation  from  Him.  As  in  this  state  we  see  his  sin, 
so  we  equally  see  his  misery,  for  with  God  is  the  fountain  of  life,  and  we  can  never 
be  happy  save  as  we  are  near  Him.  Look  at  the  manner  in  which  this  attraction 
is  accomplished.  "  With  the  cords  of  a  man."  That  is — 1.  Rationally.  Hence 
religion  is  called  a  "  reasonable  service."  2.  Affectionately.  Love  is  the  supreme 
attraction.  There  are  four  heads  of  goodness  which  are  peculiarly  attractive 
and  powerful.  (1)  Unreserved  kindness  is  very  attractive.  So  is  (2)  Disinterested 
kindness.  And  (3)  Magnanimous  kindness.  And  (4)  Costly  and  expensive 
kindness.  II.  Provision.  "I  laid  meat  unto  them."  Meat  means 
food  generally.  To  show  the  plenitude  and  riches  of  the  Gospel  provision 
it  is  represented  in  the  Scriptures  by  a  jeast.  The  provision  is  found  in  the 
Scriptures.  It  is  "  laid  unto  you  in  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel."  III.  Emanci- 
pation. He  takes  off  the  yoke  from  om:  jaws.  What  yoke  7  I.  The  yoke  of 
Judaism.  2.  Of  popery.  3.  Of  persecution.  4.  Of  bigotry.  5.  Of  ignorance. 
(William  Jay.)  Drawn  heavenwards  : — A  weeping  willow  stood  by  the  side  of 
a  pond,  and  in  the  direction  of  that  pond  it  hung  out  its  pensive-looking  branches. 
An  attempt  was  made  to  give  a  different  direction  to  these  branches.  The 
attempt  was  useless ;  where  the  water  lay,  thither  the  boughs  would  turn.  How- 
ever an  expedient  presented  itself.  A  large  pond  was  dug  on  the  other  side  of 
the  tree,  and  as  soon  as  the  greater  quantity  of  water  was  found  there,  the  tree 
of  its  own  accord  bent  its  branches  in  that  direction.  What  a  clear  illustration 
of  the  laws  which  govern  the  human  heart.  It  turns  to  the  water — the  poisoned 
waters  of  sin,  perhaps — but  the  only  streams  with  which  it  is  acquainted. 
Remonstrate  with  it,  and  your  remonstrances  are  vain.  It  knows  no  better  joys 
than  those  of  earth,  and  to  them  it  obstinately  clings.  But  open  to  its  appre- 
hension fuller  streams,  heavenly  water ;  show  to  it  some  better  thing,  some  more 
satisfying  joys ;  and  then  it  is  content  to  abandon  what  it  once  worshipped,  and 
turns  its  yearning  affections  heavenward.     {J.  A.  Gordon,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  My  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  team  Me. — Religious  declension : — 
How  singular  is  the  moral  condition  of  a  believer  bent  on  backsliding. 
It  is  not  a  mere  vacillation  between  God  and  mammon,  holiness  and  sin, 
but  a  steady  leaning,  an  earnest  leaning  toward  the  latter.  I.  Who  arb 
THEY  WHO  are  BENT  ON  BACKSLiDiNQ  ?  \.  The  first  mark  is  a  neglect  of  secret 
and  family  prayer.  The  neglect  of  one  kind  of  prayer  usually  follows  neglect 
of  the  other  kind.  2.  Habitual  neglect  of  the  Bible.  Whoever  walks  closely 
with  God  takes  delight  in  His  Word.  It  is  a  bad  sign  when  the  Scriptures  are 
read  only  from  a  conviction  of  duty.  3.  Backwardness  or  reluctance  in  efforts 
to  do  good.     Does  a  civil,  political,  or  pecuniary  enterprise  awaken  an  energy 


CHAP.  XI.]  ROSEA.  193 

and  zeal  which  you  never  evince  for  the  Saviour's  cause  ?  If  so,  what  does  it 
indicate  ?  4.  The  undervaluing  of  religious  ordinances.  Lightly  to  esteem  the 
house  of  God,  its  praises,  prayers,  instructions,  hallowed  associations,  indicates 
a  backsliding  heart.  Other  marks  of  a  backsliding  believer  are, — censoriousness ; 
high  regard  for  gaiety  and  fashion;  preference  for  vain  amusements  and 
frivolous  company.     II.  The  guilt  which  this  moral  condition  involves. 

1.  Every  such  professor  is  acting  the  part  of  a  hypocrite.  We  may  not  charge 
him  with  wilful  hypocrisy,  we  may  with  practical  hypocrisy.  2.  Their  influence 
goes  to  depress  the  standard  of  piety  which  the  Saviour  has  fixed,  to  adulterate 
that  system  of  truth  and  duty  which  He  has  given  as  the  hope  of  the  Word. 
Christianity  is  a  holy  religion.  What  we  charge  upon  every  Christian  professor 
whose  heart  is  bent  on  backsliding,  is  the  guilt  of  adulterating  this  holy  religion, 
and  depressing,  so  far  as  his  influence  goes,  its  Divine  standard  of  duty.  What 
is  it  we  are  doing  when  we  put  a  base  alloy  into  the  gold  of  heaven  ?  Inter- 
mingling principles  of  selfishness  with  those  of  a  heaven-bom  beneficence.  Of 
course,  no  Christian  could  intend  to  perpetrate  so  audacious  a  crime.  The  inten- 
tion to  work  such  mischief  is  not  charged  upon  any  one.  Yet  all  this  mischief 
is  involved  in  the  course  pursued  by  every  backslider.  3.  The  backslider  retards 
the  progress  of  Christianity  in  the  world.  He  cuts  the  sinews  of  its  strength; 
he  takes  off  its  chariot  wheels.  4.  While  bent  to  backsliding  you  cannot  be 
depended  on  in  religion.  You  are  not  reliable  persons.  You  prove  recreant  to 
duty.  Christianity  may  well  exclaim  in  reference  to  many  of  its  professed 
votaries,  "  Deliver  me  from  my  friends."  III.  The  consequences  of  continuino 
IN  this  guilty  course.  There  are  two  rods  in  the  hand  of  God  for  offenders, 
the  rod  of  discipline  and  the  rod  of  retribution.  The  former  is  to  correct,  with 
a  view  to  reclaim  the  offender.  The  latter  is  to  punish  the  incorrigible,  with 
a  view  to  vindicate  and  maintain  His  outraged  authority.  With  the  rod  of 
discipline  come  oftentimes  desolation,  rebuke,  discomfort,  darkness  and  barren- 
ness in  spiritual  experience.  1.  The  first  appliances  which  God  will  use  are 
disciplinary.  The  first  consequence  to  be  apprehended  by  a  backslider — whether 
an  individual  or  a  Church,  is  outward  rebuke.  2.  Another  consequence  is  the 
discomfort  of  the  forsaken  soul :  its  restless  condition,  the  possibly  deep  gloom 
which  may  settle  like  night  upon  it.  It  must  be  unhappy  when  comforts  are  with- 
drawn, with  a  grieved  departing  Saviour,  the  sweet  influences  of  His  grace,  as  well 
as  the  joyful  assurance  of  blessedness  hereafter.  3.  The  last  consequence  relates 
to  the  future  world.  It  takes  hold  of  retribution.  Unless  you  repent  and  do 
your  first  works,  you  must  perish.  There  is  no  talismanic  charm  about  the  name 
of  Christian,  or  about  a  profession  of  religion  which  can  rescue  the  hopeless  back- 
slider. He  must  lie  down,  like  other  sinners,  under  the  wrath  of  God.  And 
connected  with  this  consequence  to  yourselves  are  melancholy  consequences 
to  the  unconverted  in  your  families,  and  in  the  community.  How  seldom  a 
sinner  repenteth  while  the  Church  is  far  from  God  !  (E.  Strong. )  In  suspense  : 
— Two  explanations  of  this  sentence  are  given.  1.  The  word  teluaim  signifies 
"  perplexed."  The  people  would  suffer  a  just  punishment  through  being  anxious 
and  looking  around  them,  and  yet  finding  no  comfort ;  for  this  would  be  the  reward 
of  their  defection  or  apostasy.  2.  God  here  complains  of  the  wickedness  of  the 
people,  as  of  those  who  deliberated  whether  they  ought  to  repent.  They  then 
take  suspense  for  doubt.  "  My  people  are  in  suspense."  They  debate  on  the 
subject  as  on  a  doubtful  matter,  when  I  exhort  them  to  repent,  and  they  cannot 
at  once  decide  what  to  do,  but  alternate  between  divers  opinions,  and  now 
incline  to  one  thing  and  then  to  another  ;  as  if  the  subject  itself  made  it  necessary 
for  them  to  deliberate.  (John  Calvin. )  Backsliding  Israel : — I.  A  certain 
course  described.  "  My  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  from  Me."  1.  What 
this  fact  proves.  The  doctrine  of  human  depravity.  2.  What  it  involves. 
(1)  Folly  the  most  extreme.  (2)  Ingratitude  the  most  base.  (3)  Treachery  tho 
most  enormous.  II.  A  certain  feeling  indicated.  "  How  shall  I  give  thee 
up?"  1.  Its  nature.  It  was  a  feeling  of  perplexity,  2.  Its  causes.  His  back-\ 
sliding  children  deserved  to  be  punished ;  but  He  waiteth  to  be  gracious,  and  is 
ready  to  forgive.  III.  A  certain  resolution  formed.  "  I  will  not  execute 
the    fierceness    of    Mine  anger."     This    should — 1.   Excite    our    astonishment. 

2.  Kindle  our  gratitude.  3.  Subdue  our  opposition.  4.  Dissipate  our  fears. 
{Author  of  "  Footsteps  of  Jesus.")  Backslider  : — In  the  west  of  Scotland  when 
you  travel,  sometimes  when  the  furnaces  are  all  in  full  blast,  furnace  after  furnace 
flings  its  reflection  on  the  sky.     You  see  the  molten  metal  flowing  into  the  mould, 

13 


194  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

As  you  look  from  the  carriage  windows  you  see  dusky  figures  flitting  about,  all 
activity  ;  but  when  the  furnaces  are  damped  down  for  a  strike  or  for  dull  trade, 
what  a  misery  it  is  to  go  through  these  manufacturing  districts  and  behold  idleness. 
The  flames  have  been  damped  out,  the  men  are  not  working,  but  lounging  about 
at  street  corners  ;  women  and  bairns,  sad  at  heart ;  wheels  still ;  hammers 
ceased  hammering.  It  is  the  same  way,  maybe,  with  your  soul.  You  have 
damped  out  the  furnace  of  Christian  activity.  God  knows  it.  Why,  when  you 
were  a  young  man,  you  had  dozens  of  furnaces  in  full  blast  for  God.  You  gave 
tracts,  you  spoke  to  your  fellows,  you  took  a  class  in  the  Sabbath  school,  yon  gave 
of  your  money,  you  prayed  and  agonised  ;  and  all  is  shut  up,  and  you  know  it. 
You're  asleep  ;  you  do  nothing  for  God  now.     {John  Robertson.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim? — God's  feeling  in  the  fac$ 
of  man^a  obstinacy  : — Many  have  been  the  ways  adopted  by  God  to  communicate 
His  thoughts  and  reveal  His  will  to  the  human  race.  But  in  all.  Divine  truths 
were  always  represented  in  a  manner  most  adapted  to  the  constitution  of  the 
human  mind.  Three  things  suggested  by  the  passage.  I.  Man  is  able  to  resist 
God  in  the  dispensations  of  His  mebcy.  The  supposition  that  man  is 
governed  by  some  Divine  fate,  that  he  is  a  passive  being,  destitute  of  a  capacity 
to  act  in  any  way  besides  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  will,  has  arisen  partly 
from  three  sources.  1.  Unacquaintance  with  the  nature  of  the  human  will. 
Man  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  able  to  exercise  authority  not  only  over  his  own 
feelings,  actions,  and  character,  but  also  over  the  heart  itself ;  he  can  regulate 
his  disposition,  so  as  to  turn  his  whole  soul  to  be  a  sanctuary  to  particular  objects. 
Tliree  reasons  for  this  view.  (1)  Mankind  in  general  believe  that  they  are  free — 
afc  liberty  to  choose  any  course  of  action  they  please.  (2)  Our  own  consciousness. 
We  are  conscious  that  our  actual  volitions  are  such  and  only  such  as  we  please 
to  put  forth.  (3)  Our  moral  natvu-e  implies  the  same  truth.  2.  Unacquaintance 
with  God's  moral  government — confounding  the  natural  with  the  moral.  God 
does  not  rule  man  with  an  irresistible  force,  but  with  motives  of  gentleness  and 
love.  3.  Misinterpretation  of  some  particular  portions  of  the  Word  of  God. 
II.  That  man's  resistance  renders  it  necessary,  on  God's  part,  to  oivb 
him  up.  1.  The  most  applicable  means  is  insufficient  for  recovering  him.  2.  The 
only  means  is  insufficient  to  recover  him.  III.  There  is  an  infinite,  compassion- 
ate reluctance  on  God's  part  to  give  up  man.  1.  The  relation  that  exists 
between  God  and  man  renders  Him  reluctant  to  give  him  up.  One  is  a  father, 
the  other  is  a  child.  2.  God's  knowledge  of  man  renders  Him  reluctant  to  give 
him  up.  3.  God's  dealings  towards  man  prove  that  He  is  infinite  in  mercy, 
reluctant  to  give  him  up.  The  most  illustrious  display  of  Divine  mercy  was  the 
sending  of  God's  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world.  This  mercy  was  displayed 
also  in  sending  the  Holy  Spirit.  Then  if  God  feels  so  intensely  for  those  who  are 
strangers  and  aliens  from  Him,  ought  not  the  same  compassionate  feeling  to 
characterise  His  Church  universally  T  And  if  we  are  free  agents,  having  control 
over  our  dispositions  and  actions,  or  endowed  with  capacity  to  choose  the  right 
and  reject  the  wrong  ;  and  if  we  are  the  objects  of  Divine  pity,  is  it  not  our  most 
incumbent  duty  to  pity  ourselves  by  receiving  God's  mercy,  and  obeying  His 
commandments  ?  (J.  A.  Morris.)  Jv^tice  and  mercy  in  the  heart  of  God  : — 
The  Bible  is  pre-eminently  an  anthropomorphetic  book.  That  is,  it  represents 
God  through  man's  emotions,  modes  of  thought  and  actions.  It  is  in  the 
character  of  a  father  that  these  verses  present  Him  to  our  notice.  No  human 
character  can  give  a  fuU  or  perfect  revelation  of  Him.  Yet  it  is  only  through 
human  love,  human  faithfulness,  human  justice,  that  we  can  gain  any  conception 
of  the  love,  faithfulness,  and  justice  of  the  Eternal.  I.  Mercy  and  justice  as 
oo-EXiSTiNG  in  THE  HEART  OF  THE  Eternal.  To  give  up  to  ruin,  to  deliver  to 
destruction  is  the  demand  of  justice.  "  Mine  heart  is  turned  within  Me,  My 
repentings  are  kindled  together."  This  is  the  voice  of  mercy.  What  is  justice  ? 
It  is  that  sentiment  which  demands  that  every  one  should  have  his  due.  What 
is  mercy  ?  A  disposition  to  overlook  injuries  and  to  treat  things  better  than 
they  deserve.  These  two  must  never  be  regarded  as  elements  essentially  distinct, 
they  are  branches  from  the  same  root,  streams  from  the  same  fountain.  Both 
are  but  modifications  of  love.  Justice  is  but  love  standing  up  sternly  against 
the  wrong,  mercy  is  but  love  bending  in  tenderness  over  the  helpless  and  the 
Buffering.  In  the  heart  of  God  this  love  assumes  two  phases  or  manifestations. 
1.  Material  nature  shows  that  there  is  the  stern  and  mild  in  God.     2.  Providence 


CHAP.  XI.]  HOSE  A.  195 

shows  that  there  is  the  stern  and  the  mild  in  God.  The  heavy  afflictions  that 
befall  nations,  families,  and  individuals,  reveal  His  sternness ;  the  health  and 
the  joy  that  gladden  life  reveal  His  mercy.  3.  The  spiritual  constitution  of  man 
shows  that  there  is  the  stern  and  the  mild  in  God.  In  the  human  soul  there  is 
an  instinct  to  revenge  the  wrong,  often  stern,  inexorable,  and  heartless.  There 
is  also  an  instinct  of  tenderness  and  compassion.  These  came  from  the  great 
Father.     II.  Meecy  and  justice  as  excited  by  man  in  the  heart  of  the  Father. 

1.  The  moral  wickedness  of  Ephraim  evoked  His  justice.  Human  wickedness 
is  always  stirring,  so  to  say,  the  justice  of  the  Infinite  heart.  2.  The  filial  suffering 
of  Ephraim  evoked  His  mercy.  God  calls  Ephraim  His  son,  and  Ephraim  was 
in  suffering,  and  hence  His  compassion  was  turned.  III.  Meecy  steuoglino 
AGAINST  justice  IN  THE  HEAET  OP  THE  GEEAT  Father.  Even  as  the  human 
father  finds  a  struggle  between  what  justice  requires,  and  mercy  pleads  for,  in 
dealing  with  his  wilful  son.  IV.  Mercy  teitjmphing  ovee  justice  in  the  heart 
OF  THE  GEEAT  Father.  1.  Mercy  has  so  triumphed  in  the  perpetuation  of  the 
race.  2.  In  the  experience  of  every  living  man.  3.  In  the  redemptive  mission 
of  Christ.  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  mercy  thus  triumphs  ?  Here  is  the  answer : 
"  For  I  am  God,  and  not  man."  {Homilist.)  Divine  forbearance  towarda 
sinners  : — The  long-suffering  of  God,  His  patience  toward  sinners,  His  unwilling- 
ness to  punish.  His  readiness  to  pardon,  form  conspicuous  parts  of  the  Divino 
character,  as  set  forth  to  our  view  in  the  sacred  writings.  The  text  describes  a 
strong  and  tender  struggle  in  the  mind  of  God  between  the  opposite  and  contend- 
ing claims  of  justice  and  mercy  :  and  in  the  end  represents  the  latter  as  prevailing, 
mercy  rejoicing  against  judgment.  We  are  not  indeed  to  suppose  that  a  struggle 
ever  really  takes  place  in  the  Divine  Mind.  He  does  but  speak  to  us  after  the 
manner  of  men.  Ephraim  had  done  everything  to  provoke  the  Lord  to  anger. 
Forgetful  of  all  that  He  had  wrought  for  them,  and  of  all  which  they  owed  to  Him, 
they  had  left  His  service,  renounced  His  worship,  and  had  given  themselves 
up  to  the  most  shameful  idolatries.  Mercies  and  judgments  had  been  employed 
to  reclaim  them,  but  in  vain.  And  now,  what  could  be  expected  but  that  they 
should  be  dealt  with  according  to  their  deserts  ?  But  no — such  is  the  sovereignty 
of  Divine  mercy,  that  instead  God  says,  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  " 
Attend — 1.  To    the  debate  which    is  represented    between  justice  and  mercy. 

2.  The    determination   of    the  debate.     After  a  long  struggle  mercy  prevails. 

3.  The  ground  and  reason  of  this  determination  :  "  For  I  am  God,  and  not  man." 
He  who  is  God,  and  not  man,  alone  could  overcome  the  difficulty.  Draw  some 
profitable  reflections.  1.  How  exactly  does  the  view  here  given  of  the  Divine 
mercy  and  forbearance,  in  this  particular  instance,  agree  with  the  general  repre- 
sentations of  them  in  Scripture.  Illustrate  times  before  Flood.  Israel  in  wilderness. 
The  spiritual  redemption  of  man.  2.  How  greatly  do  these  views  increase  and 
aggravate  the  sinfidness  of  sin.  Sin  is  rebellion  against  a  just  and  rightful 
Sovereign.  It  is  robbery  committed  against  a  good  and  a  gracious  Master.  It  . 
is  ingratitude  to  a  most  kind  and  bountiful  Friend  and  Benefactor.  Sin  is  despite  T 
done  to  the  richest  mercy  and  tenderest  compassion.  If  God  were  not  so  very 
merciful,  sin  would  not  be  so  exceeding  sinful.  How  great  must  be  the  guilt  of 
those  who  disregard  the  mercy  offered  in  the  Gospel !  3.  What  great  encourage- 
ment does  the  subject  give  to  every  humbled  and  penitent  sinner  !  Such  are 
apt  to  be  full  of  doubts  and  fears.  They  cry  for  mercy,  but  cannot  believe  that 
they  shall  find  it.  Was  God  so  unwilling  to  give  up  even  penitent  Ephraim  ? 
And  will  He  be  imwilling  to  receive  and  pardon  penitent  offenders  ?  Surely  He 
feels  for  you  the  tenderest  pity.  He  will  meet  you  with  loving-kindness. 
(E.  Cooper.)  The  Holy  One  : — The  holiness  of  Grod  is  at  once  a  ground  why 
He  punishes  iniquity,  and  yet  does  not  punish  to  the  full  extent  of  the  sin.  Truth 
and  faithfulness  are  part  of  the  holiness  of  God.  He  will  keep  His  covenant. 
But  the  unholy  cannot  profit  by  the  promises  of  the  All-Holy.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  P — There  is  nothing  more  inspiring  in  human 
history  than  the  long,  hard  struggle  of  the  Lord  against  the  proclivities  of  the 
Jewish  people.  How  this  struggle  of  evil  against  God  arose,  what  are  the  con- 
ditions of  the  Divine  and  the  creature  nature  which  render  it  possible,  and  render 
it  possible  that  it  should  be  prolonged,  we  may  never  be  able  to  settle.  But  the 
fact  of  the  struggle  is  clear  as  the  sunlight.  We  are  resisting  God's  will ;  we  make 
life  a  ceaseless  struggle  against  His  will.  God  has  created  free  men  ;  all  the 
burden  of  their  activity,  all  the  possibilities  of  their  development  He  accepted 
in  the  hour  in  which  He  created  them  free.     He  parted  as  it  were  with  a  power. 


196  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

a  power  to  rule  all  things  by  His  decree.  A  free  spirit  cannot  be  ruled  by  a  decree. 
There  is  a  new  sphere  of  existence  created,  in  which  God's  Spirit,  in  communion 
with  free  spirits,  alone  has  power  to  sustain  His  sway.  And  this  Spirit  may  be 
grieved,  wounded,  resisted  even  unto  death.  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols : 
let  him  alone,"  may  proclaim  that  the  resources  of  the  Divine  patience  and  love 
are  exhausted.  And  yet,  was  that  sentence  final  ?  Certainly,  in  Hosea's  time. 
Divine  patience  was  not  exhausted.  Is  it  even  exhausted  yet  ?  The  answer 
is  found  by  considering,  with  some  fulness  of  detaQ,  the  history  of  the  long- 
sufiFering  of  God  with  His  ancient  Church.  {Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  God's 
dealing  vnih  sin  and  sinners  : — It  is  important  that  we  acquire  and  cherish  right 
views  of  the  character  of  God,  and  the  modes  of  His  dealing  with  the  children 
of  men.  We  cannot  fully  comprehend  the  Divine  Being.  It  may  happen  that 
the  aspect  which  is  most  attractive  is  just  that  which  we  most  fail  to  see.  Revela- 
tion makes  known  to  us  that  He  is  not  regardless  and  indifferent  to  what  takes  place 
on  earth,  and  not  immindful  of  the  welfare  of  the  beings  His  hands  have  made. 
He  is  the  Father  of  our  spirits.  We  read  of  God  as  a  God  of  justice,  and  we  are 
in  danger  of  thinking  of  justice  as  unallied  with  and  im tempered  by  mercy.  But 
He  is  also  merciful.  He  delighteth  in  mercy.  The  aspect  of  God,  Drought  before 
us  in  this  text,  is  that  of  God  reluctant  to  inflict  deserved  punishment,  suffering 
deep  disquietude  and  longing  because  of  the  waywardness  and  sinfulness  of  men. 
Man's  alienation  and  rebellion  causes  grief  and  regret  to  God.  I.  God's  back- 
wardness TO  PUNISH  SIN.  The  very  strength  of  God's  love  for  His  creatures 
kindles  His  indignation  against  that  which  works  their  ruin,  whilst  regard  for  His 
own  character  and  government  necessitates  the  punishment  of  the  ungodly  and 
impenitent.  One  great  difference  between  God's  anger  and  man's  is  this, — whilst 
man's  anger  is  soon  kindled,  God  is  "  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  mercy." 
II.  God's  yearning  disquiet  for  the  salvation  of  men.  Of  this  the  words 
of  the  text  are  an  earnest  expression.  (Joseph,  Shillito.)  God  unwilling  to 
abandon  the  sinner : — The  making  of  His  creatures  happy,  according  to  their 
capacities  of  happiness,  is  highly  pleasing  to  God.  The  Divine  nature  is  all  love 
and  benignity.  The  sun  and  light  may  be  as  soon  separated  as  God  and  goodness, 
the  Deity  and  loving-kindness.  If  He  withdraws  His  favour  from  any  people, 
it  is  all  along  of  themselves,  not  the  least  defect  of  goodness  in  Him.  It  is  wholly 
owing  to  their  rendering  themselves  unmeet  to  be  any  longer  partakers  of  His 
grace  and  favour.  God  is  always  inclined  to  do  good  to  His  creatures,  but  He 
is  often  under  the  necessity  of  being  very  severe.  Still,  He  ever  designeth  a 
general  good  in  the  judgments  He  executeth.  Men's  learning  of  righteousness 
is  God's  designs  in  His  judgments.  Then  God  inflicts  His  judgments,  not  out 
of  free  choice,  but  from  constraint,  and  with  a  kind  of  unwilling  willingness. 
In  the  text  we  see  that,  highly  as  they  had  incensed  the  great  God  against  them. 
He  nevertheless  makes  good,  when  one  would  least  expect  He  would,  that  saying 
of  the  son  of  Sirach,  "  As  is  His  majesty,  so  is  His  mercy."  In  the  text  He 
seems  to  say,  "  How  can  I  find  in  My  heart  to  be  as  bad  as  My  word  in  executing 
euch  fearful  threatenings  ?  "  Nothing  less  than  apparent  necessity  can  prevail 
with  the  infinitely  good  God  to  make  His  creatures  miserable  ;  and  this  further 
appears  by  the  following  considerations.  1.  God's  earnest  and  most  pathetical 
exciting  of  sinners  to  turn  and  repent,  that  iniquity  may  not  be  their  ruin,  is  of 
itself  sufficient  to  assure  us  hereof.  2.  'Tis  God's  ordinary  method  to  give  warn- 
ing to  sinners  before  He  strikes.  He  wants  reformation  and  repentance  to  stay 
His  hand  and  prevent  the  blow.  Hlustrate  by  the  warning  of  Noah's  ark,  and  the 
warnings  sent  by  the  prophets,  &c.  Signs  of  the  times  are  God's  warnings  now- 
adays. 3.  It  is  God's  usual  course  to  try  a  wicked  people  with  lighter  judgments 
first,  before  He  brings  the  heaviest  upon  them.  4.  When  God  determined  to 
pour  down  the  vials  of  His  vengeance  upon  a  wicked  people.  He  sometimes  plainly 
intimated  that  He  did  it  not,  until  their  wickedness  was  come  up  to  such  a  height 
as  did  necessarily  call  for  them.  6.  It  is  likewise  apparent  that  God  Almighty 
is  most  backward  to  the  destroying  of  a  wicked  people,  or  putting  them  into 
miserable  circumstances  until  necessitated,  in  that  He  hath  again  and  again 
declared  His  being  diverted  from  so  doing  by  such  motives  as  one  would  think 
could  have  but  very  little  influence  upon  such  a  Being  as  He  is,  or  rather  none  at 
all.  The  following  are  some  of  these  motives.  (1)  A  mere  partial  humiliation, 
one  far  short  of  true  repentance,  as  in  the  case  of  Ahab  and  Rehoboam.  (2)  The 
prayers  of  a  few  good  people.  As  in  Moses'  intercessions.  (3)  The  advantages 
taken  by  God's  enemies  from  His  destruction  of  His  people  (Deut.  xxxii.  27). 


CHAP.  XI.]  H08EA.  197 

Learn  from  this  what  strange  folly,  or  even  desperate  madness,  doth  lodge  in 
the  hearts  of  sinful  men.  Will  sinners  still  persevere  in  this  their  madness  ? 
(E.  Fowler,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  in  Hosea  : — Hosea  appears  again  and  again  to 
contradict  himself.  In  one  line  he  is  denouncing  a  ruinous  and  final  doom  ;  in 
the  next,  with  a  voice  that  breaks  with  tenderness,  he  is  promising  a  day  of  golden 
restoration.  Does  it  not  sound  like  a  feeble  absurdity  to  say  that  both  sets  of ,, 
declarations  can  be  fulfilled  ?  Yet  fulfilled  in  some  ideal  way  I  believe  they 
are.  Surely  the  prophet  recognised  that  there  were  positive  contradictions  in 
life, — life  and  death,  light  and  darkness,  blessing  and  cursing,  the  flame  of  wrath 
and  the  dew  of  blessing ;  and  leaving  these  contradictions  as  he  found  them, 
he  yet  believed  that  God  is  a  God  of  love,  that  mercy  shall  somehow  or  somewhere 
triumph  over  justice,  that  God  will  smite  sin,  and  yet  will  spare.  Hosea's  was 
a  real  and  not  a  sham  message,  and  it  was  a  message  full  of  comfort ;  and  still 
more  full  of  comfort  was  the  reason,  "  for  I  am  God,  and  not  man."  The  deepest 
consolation  of  life  lies  in  this,  God  and  not  man  is  the  judge.  God  is  the  Father 
of  the  prodigal.  Christ  was  the  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners ;  and  in  the 
revelation  of  God  throughout  all  the  Scripture,  as  in  the  words  of  Christ,  we  find 
always  side  by  side  with  the  awful  certainty  of  retribution,  the  unquenchable 
beams  of  love  and  hope.  But  Hosea  had  learned  his  lesson,  as  so  many  are  forced 
to  learn  it,  in  sorrow  and  anguish.  He  tells  us  his  secret  in  the  first  three  chapters. 
These  explain  the  varying  of  emotions  in  almost  every  verse  of  the  prophecy ; 
and  they  also  explain  why  this  prophet  seems  to  see  more  deeply  than  all  others 
into  the  heart  of  the  love  of  God.  The  sorrows  of  life  come  to  us  all,  though  they 
seem  to  come  in  different  measure  ;  but  the  point  for  ua  to  observe  is  how 
differently  they  affect  the  wise  and  the  foolish.  The  holy  submissiveness  of 
Hosea's  fife  taught  him  the  one  great  lesson  without  which  he  would  never  have 
become  a  prophet  at  all.  This  lesson, — If  the  love  of  man,  the  love  of  a  husband 
for  a  wife,  of  a  father  for  his  child  can  be  so  deep,  how  unfathomable,  how  eternal 
must  be  the  love  of  God  !  To  what  sunless  depths,  to  what  unfathomed  caverns 
can  the  ray  of  that  light  penetrate  !  In  this  is  a  message  of  hope  for  individual 
souls.  {Dean  Farrar.)  Moderation  in  Divine  judgments : — 1.  God's  mercy 
interposing  on  the  behalf  of  sinners  doth  produce  not  only  good  wishes  but  real 
effects  to  them.  2.  God's  mercy  towards  His  sinful  people,  doth  not  see  it  fit 
to  keep  off  all  effects  of  His  displeasure,  or  leave  them  altogether  unpunished. 
3.  When  a  sinful  people  are  under  saddest  temporal  judgments,  yet  so  long  as 
they  are  in  the  land  of  the  living,  they  are  bound  to  reckon  that  their  condition 
might  have  been  worse  if  all  God's  just  displeasure  were  let  out.  4.  The  Lord's 
moderating  of  deserved  judgments,  if  it  were  but  to  preserve  a  people  from  being 
utterly  consumed,  is  a  great  proof  of  God's  mercy,  and  ought  to  be  acknowledged 
as  such.  5.  It  is  the  great  mercy  and  advantage  of  the  Lord's  sinful  people 
that  they  have  to  do  with  God,  not  with  man,  in  their  miscarriages.  {George 
Hutcheson.)  A  father's  solicitude  for  the  erring  : — A  number  of  years  ago, 
before  any  railway  came  into  Chicago,  they  used  to  bring  in  the  grain  from  the 
Western  prairies  in  waggons  for  hundreds  of  miles,  so  as  to  have  ;t  shipped  off 
by  the  lakes.  There  was  a  father  who  had  a  large  farm  out  there,  and  who  used 
to  preach  the  Gospel  as  well  as  attend  to  his  farm.  One  day,  when  church 
business  engaged  him,  he  sent  his  son  to  Chicago  with  grain.  He  waited  and 
waited  for  his  boy  to  return,  but  he  did  not  come  home.  At  last  he  could  wait 
no  longer,  so  he  saddled  his  horse  and  rode  to  the  place  where  his  son  had  sold 
the  grain.  He  found  that  he  had  been  there  and  got  the  money  for  the  grain. 
Then  he  began  to  fear  that  his  boy  had  been  murdered  and  robbed.  At  last, 
with  the  aid  of  a  detective,  he  tracked  him  to  a  gambling  den,  where  he  found 
that  he  had  gambled  away  the  whole  of  his  money.  In  hopes  of  winning  it  back 
again  he  had  then  sold  the  team  and  lost  that  money  too.  He  had  fallen  among 
thieves,  and,  like  the  man  who  was  going  to  Jericho,  they  stripped  him,  and  then 
cared  no  more  about  him.  What  could  he  do  ?  He  was  ashamed  to  go  home 
and  meet  his  father,  and  he  fied.  The  father  knew  what  it  all  meant.  He  knew 
that  the  boy  thought  he  would  be  very  angry  with  him.  He  was  grieved  to 
think  that  his  boy  should  have  such  feelings  toward  him.  That  is  just  exactly 
like  the  sinner.  He  thinks,  because  he  has  sinned,  God  will  have  nothing  to 
do  with  him.  But  what  did  that  father  do  ?  Did  he  say,  "  Let  the  boy  go  "  ? 
No  ;  he  went  after  him.  He  arranged  his  business,  and  started  after  the  boy. 
He  went  from  town  to  town,  from  city  to  city.  He  would  get  the  ministers  to 
let  him  preach,  and  at  the  close  he  would  tell  his  story.     "  I  have  got  a  boy  who 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

is  a  wanderer  on  the  face  of  the  earth  somewhere."  He  would  describe  his  boy, 
and  say  :  "  If  you  ever  hear  of  him,  or  see  him,  will  you  not  write  to  me  ?  "  At 
last  he  found  that  he  had  gone  to  California,  thousands  of  miles  away.  Did  that 
father  even  then  say,  "  Let  him  go  "  ?  No ;  off  he  went  to  the  Pacific  coast, 
seeking  his  boy.  He  went  to  San  Francisco,  and  advertised  in  the  newspapers 
that  he  would  preach  at  such  a  church  on  such  a  day.  When  he  had  preached 
he  told  his  story,  in  the  hope  that  the  boy  might  have  seen  the  advertisement, 
and  come  to  the  church.  When  he  had  done,  away  under  the  gallery  there 
was  a  young  man,  who  waited  until  the  audience  had  gone  out ;  then  he  came 
towards  the  pulpit.  The  father  looked,  and  saw  it  was  his  son,  and  he  ran  to 
him,  and  pressed  him  to  his  bosom.  The  boy  wanted  to  confess  what  he  had 
done,  but  not  a  word  would  the  father  hear.  He  forgave  him  freely,  and  took 
him  to  his  home  once  more.  Oh,  prodigal,  you  may  be  wandering  on  the  dark 
mountains  of  sin,  but  God  wants  you  to  come  home  !  The  devil  has  been  telling 
you  lies  about  God  ;  you  think  He  will  not  receive  you  back.  I  tell  you  He  will 
welcome  you  this  minute  if  you  will  come.  Say  "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my 
Father."  There  is  not  one  whom  Jesus  has  not  sought  far  longer  than  that 
father.  There  has  not  been  a  day  since  you  left  Him  but  He  has  followed  you. 
I  do  not  care  what  the  past  has  been,  or  how  black  your  life.  He  will  receive  you 
back.  Arise,  then,  0  backslider,  and  come  home  once  more  to  your  Father's 
house.     (Z).  L.  Moody.) 

Ver.  12.  Ephraim  compasseth  Me  a1}ont  with  lies.  —  B&aeJt  round  with 
lies  : — By  lies  understand  false  worship,  for  that  is  a  lie  with  false  pretences ; 
they  put  fair  glosses  upon  things,  but  all  are  but  lies ;  they  have  beset  Me  with 
-politic  shifts  of  their  own  devising.  They  not  only  seek  to  blind  men,  but  they 
(would  (if  it  were  possible)  deceive  Me,  saith  God.  And  indeed,  when  men  seek 
to  blind  their  own  consciences,  what  do  they  but  seek  to  deceive  God  ?  In  the 
very  act  of  worship  they  are  false.  1.  Many,  in  their  prayers,  in  the  solemn  act 
of  worship,  beset  God  with  lies.  Can  God  be  deceived  ?  No,  but  they  did  what 
lay  in  them  to  deceive  Him ;  if  it  were  possible  for  God  to  have  been  deceived 
they  would  have  deceived  Him.  2.  Many  also  beset  the  business  and  affairs 
that  they  manage  with  lies.  They  plot  with  themselves  how  they  may  hand- 
somely contrive  to  put  together  a  goodly  number  of  lies,  that  so  they  may  beset 
men's  understandings.  There  are  such  cunning  attempts  in  the  world  to  beset 
the  understandings  of  men,  that  men  shall  not  know  what  to  say  to  things ;  and 
yet,  whilst  they  cannot  tell  how  to  believe  them,  neither  do  they  know  what  to 
say,  things  are  so  contrived.  Deceitful  men  think  with  themselves,  If  such  a 
thing  shall  be  questioned,  then  I  have  such  a  shift  to  put  it  off ;  and  if  another 
thing  shall  be  doubted  of,  then  I  have  such  a  report,  and  such  a  fair  pretence, 
to  make  it  good.  3.  When  men  are  once  engaged  in  shifts  and  lies,  they  grow 
pertinacious  in  them,  and  there  is  little  hope  of  their  recovery.  (Jeremiah 
Burroughs.)  Fravd  and  falsehood  : — The  Lord  complains  "  that  He  had  been 
compassed  with  the  falsehood  and  fraud  of  the  people."  By  these  words  He 
means  that  He  had  in  everything  found  the  multiplied  perfidy  of  the  Israelites ; 
for  this  is  the  import  of  the  word  "  compassed."  Not  only  in  one  way,  or  in  one 
thing  had  they  acted  unfaithfully  towards  God ;  they  were  full  of  innumerable 
frauds,  with  which  they  surrounded  God,  like  an  army  at  a  siege.  This  is  what 
hypocrites  are  wont  to  do ;  not  only  in  one  thing  do  they  endeavoiu:  to  deceive 
God,  but  they  transform  themselves  in  various  ways,  and  ever  seek  some  new 
subterfuges.  When  they  are  caught  in  one  sin  they  pass  into  another ;  so  that 
there  is  no  end  to  their  deceit.  He  speaks  of  "  frauds  and  falsehoods,"  for  they 
thought  that  they  escaped,  provided  they  covered  themselves  with  some  dis- 
guise, whenever  the  prophets  reproved  them.  But  God  here  testifies  that  they 
gained  nothing  by  their  craftiness.  The  prophet  reprobates  those  specious 
excuses,  by  which  people  think  they  are  absolved  before  God,  so  as  to  elude  all 
the  threatenings  of  the  prophet.  This  passage  teaches  that  men  in  vain  make 
excuses  before  God ;  for  when  they  contrive  pretences  to  deceive  God,  they  are 
themselves  greatly  deceived  ;  for  He  clearly  perceives  their  guiles  and  falsehoods. 
{John  Calvin.)  Bat  Jndali  ...  is  faithfal  with  the  saints. — Faithful  with  the 
saints:  —  That  is — 1.  With  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  with  Moses,  with 
the  prophets,  with  the  forefathers.  2.  Faithful  with  such  as  are  sanctified,  the 
true  priests  of  God,  that  God  has  sanctified  to  Himself.  Whereas  Jeroboam  took 
"  of  the  lowest  of  the  people "  and  made  them  priests  to  Grod,  Judah  would 


CHAP,  xn.]  H08EA.  199 

have  no  other  priests  but  the  sanctified  ones  of  God.  3.  Faithful  with  the  people 
of  God.  For  aU  of  Israel  that  were  holy,  that  were  godly,  that  were  saints,  and 
were  not  detained  by  some  special  hand  of  God,  went  up  from  the  Ten  Tribes  to 
Judah,  to  the  true  worship  of  God  ;  now  Judah  entertained  them,  and  used  them 
well,  and  was  faithful  to  them.  But  on  the  contrary,  Israel,  the  Ten  Tribes, 
were  unfaithful,  by  using  the  saints  of  God  evilly  that  woidd  worship  God  accord- 
ing to  God's  own  way ;  they  were  cruel  and  oppressing  and  unfaithful  to  them, 
but  Judah  was  faithful  towards  such,  embracing  and  encouraging  them.  For 
us  to  go  on  in  faithfulness,  though  we  have  none  to  join  with,  is  a  commendation ; 
and  the  ways  of  God  are  excellent,  whether  any  or  no  do  join  with  us  in  then.. 
But  it  is  a  great  encouragement  to  be  faithful  with  the  saints ;  that  is,  to  go  on 
in  those  ways  in  which  we  see  the  saints  walk :  and  to  join  with  the  saints,  with 
such  as  are  the  choice  saints  of  God,  greatly  encourages  and  strengthens  the 
people  of  God  in  their  way.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  The  faithful  tribe  : — 
There  is  a  striking  analogy  between  the  leading  characteristics  and  facts  of  Church 
history  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  and  under  the  New.  In  both 
we  see  a  chosen  people,  a  redeemed  people,  a  preserved  people,  and  a  perverse, 
rebellious,  stiff-necked  people.  Nothing  but  immutable  love  and  sovereign 
grace  could  have  borne  with  their  conduct.  The  great  mass  of  nominal  Israel 
of  old  were  carnally  minded.  They  degraded  themselves  with  abominable 
idolatries.  Just  so  do  multitudes  who  pass  for  Christians  in  the  nineteenth 
century,  boasting  of  ancient  pedigree,  long  succession,  and  exclusive  right ; 
wearing  the  name  of  Christian  without  possessing  one  spark  of  Christianity. 
The  modern  profession  of  Christianity  has  awfuSy  apostatised  from  ancient 
orthodoxy,  and  set  up  idols  throughout  Christendom,  worshipping  the  work  of 
men's  hands  according  to  the  free-will  system.  The  great  calamity  of  the  present 
day  arises  from  carnal  men  interfering  with  religion  in  any  way,  for  in  so 
doing  they  are  sure  to  do  mischief :  if  they  legislate  for  it,  they  clog  and  fetter 
it ;  if  they  endow  it,  they  curse  it ;  if  they  even  speak  of  it,  they  misrepresent 
it, — and  can  it  be  otherwise  while  they  are  destitute  of  it  ?  Turn  attention  to 
the  faithful  tribe  who,  in  the  face  of  all  the  revolting  ajid  apostasy  of  the  present 
day,  may  be  said  to  rule  with  God,  and  deal  faithfully  with  the  saints.  There  is 
still  such  a  tribe  in  Christendom.  If  the  God  of  all  grace  would  bestow  upon  His 
elect  remnant  a  revival  of  vital  godliness,  Christian  union,  and  fervent  prayer, 
there  would  be  nothing  to  fear  from  pope  or  infidel.  Brethren,  be  of  one  mind. 
Electing  love,  Divine  substitution,  and  invincible  grace  are  our  rallying- points. 
(Joseph  Irons.) 


CHAPTER  XII. 


Veb.  1.  Epbraim  feedeth  on  wind,  and  followeUi  after  the  east  wind:  he 
daily  increaseth  lies  and  desolation. — The  east  wind  in  Palestine,  coming 
from  Arabia  and  the  far  East,  over  large  tracts  of  sandy  waste,  is  parching, 
scorching,  destructive  to  vegetation,  oppressive  to  man,  violent  and  de- 
structive on  the  sea,  and  by  land  also,  having  the  force  of  the  whirlwind. 
*'  The  east  wind  carrieth  him  away,  and  he  departeth,  and  as  a  whirlwind 
hurleth  him  out  of  his  place  "  (Job.  xxvii.  21).  In  leaving  God  and  following 
idols,  Ephraim  fed  on  what  is  unsatisfying,  and  chased  after  what  is  destructive. 
If  a  hungry  man  were  to  feed  on  wind,  it  would  be  light  food.  If  a  man  could 
overtake  the  east  wind,  it  were  his  destruction.  Israel  "  fed  on  wind  when  he 
sought  by  gifts  to  win  one  who  could  aid  him  no  more  than  the  wind  ;  '  he 
chased  the  east  wind '  when,  in  place  of  the  gain  which  he  sought,  he  received 
from  the  patron  whom  he  had  adopted  no  slight  loss."  Israel  sought  for  the 
scorching  wind,  when  it  could  betake  itself  tmder  the  shadow  of  God.  "  The 
scorching  wind,"  says  St.  Cyril,  "  is  the  burning  of  calamities,  and  the  consuming 
fire  of  affliction."  "  He  increaseth  lies  and  desolation  "  ;  for  unrepented  sins  and 
their  punishment  are,  in  God's  government,  linked  together  ;  so  that  to  multiply 
sin  is,  in  fact,  to  multiply  desolation.  Sin  and  punishment  are  bound  together 
as  cause  and  effect.  "  Lying  will  signify  false  speaking,  false  dealing,  false  opinions, 
false  worship,  false  pretences  for  colour  thereof,  false  hopes,  or  relying  on  things 
that  will  deceive.     In  all  these  kinds  was  Ephraim  at  that  time  guilty,  adding  one 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

sort  of  lying  to  another."  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Feeding  on  wind: — This  is  a 
proverbial  speech  to  note — 1.  The  following  after  vain,  unprofitable  things.  When 
men  please  themselves  in  their  own  conceits  and  in  their  own  counsels,  and  walk 
in  ways  that  are,  and  certainly  will  be,  unprofitable  to  them,  they  are  said  to  feed 
on  wind.  When  men  think  to  please  God  with  their  own  inventions,  to  escape 
danger  by  their  own  shifts,  to  prevail  against  the  saints  by  their  deep  counsels  and 
fetches,  they  feed  upon  wina ;  when  men  promise  to  themselves  great  matters 
by  ways  of  their  own,  that  are  not  God's,  they  feed  upon  wind,  and  for  all  this  the 
prophet  rebukes  the  ten  tribes.  2.  The  prevailing  pride  and  elation  of  heart. 
According  to  the  food,  so  will  the  body  be ;  those  that  feed  on  wind  must  needs 
have  hearts  puffed  up  with  conceitedness  of  themselves,  and  contempt  of  others 
that  are  not  in  the  same  way  as  themselves :  they  lie  sucking  imaginary  content 
and  sweetness  in  their  own  ways ;  they  are  full  of  themselves.  They  feed  on 
wind,  yet  one  prick  of  disappointment  will  quickly  let  out  all  the  wind  from  such 
bladders.  3,  Dependence  on  carnal  creature  comforts.  Evil  men  that  live  upon 
the  applause  of  men,  upon  honours,  feed  on  wind,  and  are  puffed  up  for  awhile ; 
but  any  prick  of  God's  appearing  against  them  lets  out  the  windy  stuff,  and  quickly 
they  are  dead.  Any  member  of  the  body  that  is  puffed  up  with  wind  seems  to 
be  greater  than  any  other  part,  but  it  is  not  stronger  ;  no,  it  is  consequently  the 
weaker  :  and  so  it  is  with  the  hearts  of  men  that  are  puffed  up  with  windy  conceits 
and  with  creature  contentments,  they  have  no  strength  by  this  inflation ;  though 
they  seem  stronger,  yet  when  they  are  called  either  to  do  or  to  suffer  for  God, 
they  then  appear  to  be  very  weak,  and  therefore  will  change  as  the  wind  changes. 
Illustrate  by  the  chameleon.  4.  The  turbulent,  unquiet  disposition  of  such.  We 
know  that  the  wind  raises  tempests  and  storms  ;  and  so  men  that  are  puffed 
up  with  the  wind  of  their  own  conceits  are  the  men  that  raise  such  tempests 
and  storms  in  the  places  where  they  live.  The  saints  have  better  food  to  feed 
upon,  food  that  makes  them  more  solid  and  more  staid.  Learn — (1)  Creature 
comforts  will  prove  but  wind.  Those  who  seek  to  satisfy  themselves  with  such, 
and  to  stay  themselves  on  their  own  conceits,  not  only  deceive  themselves,  and 
will  be  disappointed  at  last  in  their  expectations,  but  they  will  find  these  their 
ways  to  be  very  pestilential,  hurtful,  and  dangerous ;  they  will  find  that  they  will 
undo  them  and  bring  them  to  utter  misery.  2.  It  is  a  grievous  thing,  when 
troubles  come,  to  have  nothing  within  us  to  bear  us  out  but  the  wind.  Suppose 
men  meet  with  the  rough  east  wind,  or  storms  and  tempests  befall  them,  yet  if  they 
have  had  solid  food,  whereby  they  come  to  get  good  blood  and  marrow  and 
spirits,  they  may  be  able  to  bear  it ;  but  when  the  body  is  empty  and  meets  with 
tempests,  this  is  very  grievous  to  the  poor  frame.  So  it  is  with  many  when  they 
meet  with  a£9ictions ;  but  the  saints  have  such  solidity  within  them  as  bears  them 
out,  but  other  men  that  are  empty,  that  have  fed  upon  the  wind  all  their  days, 
have  nothing  to  bear  them  out  in  great  afflictions,  but  their  hearts  sink  down 
in  horror  and  despair.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs. )  Worthless  soul- food : — Delitzsch 
renders,  "  Ephraim  grazeth  wind."  The  idea  is  that  it  sought  for  support  and 
satisfaction  in  those  things  which  were  utterly  unsubstantial  and  worthless — 

*'  wind."  I.  SENStTAIi  INDTJIiQENCES  ABB  WORTHLESS  SOUIi-FOOD.  11.  WoRLDLY 
DISTINCTIONS   ABB    WORTHLESS    SOTIL-FOOD.      III.    RELIGIOUS    FORMALITIES    ABB 

woBTHLEss  SOUL-FOOD.  {HomUist.)  And  Will  punish  Jacob  according:  to  bis 
ways. — None  can  sin  with  impunity  : — You  are  only  under  grace  as  long  as  you 
keep  clear  of  God's  law.  The  moment  you  do  wrong  you  put  yourself  under 
the  law,  and  the  law  will  punish  you.  Suppose  that  you  went  into  a  mill, 
and  the  owner  of  that  mill  was  your  best  friend,  even  your  father.  Would  that 
prevent  your  being  crushed  by  the  machinery  if  you  got  entangled  in  it  through 
ignorance  or  heedlessness  ?  I  think  not.  Even  so,  though  God  be  your  best  of 
friends,  ay,  your  Father  in  heaven,  that  will  not  prevent  your  being  injured,  it 
may  be  ruined,  not  only  by  wilful  sins,  but  by  mere  folly  and  ignorance.  {Charles 
Kingdey.) 

Vers.  3,  4.   And    by  his   strengrth   he   had   power   with  God.  —  Wrestling 

Jacob : — This  story  has  a  strange  fascination  for  most  Bible  readers,  due, 
in  part,  to  the  vividness  with  which  it  is  told ;  in  part,  to  the  deep  spiritual 
truth  which  it  half  reveals  and  half  conceals.  Jacob  recalls  in  his  prayer  the 
time  when  he  passed  this  very  place  twenty  years  before  as  he  fled  from  the 
wrath  of  Esau.  God  has  been  with  him,  and  prospered  him.  Let  us 
picture    again    that    weird    night    scene.       The    almost    oppressive    silence 


CHAP,  xi:.]  HOSE  A.  201 

was  only  broken  by  the  roar  of  the  shallow  Jabbok,  which  writhed  and 
struggled  between  obstructing  rocks  as  it  plunged  and  tumbled  to  the  Jordan 
valley  two  miles  below.  We  can  see  the  rough  waters  gleam  under  the  torches 
as  drove  after  drove  of  animals  splashed  and  ploughed  their  way  through, — the 
goats  and  the  sheep,  the  camels  and  the  cattle,  the  asses  and  their  foals  are 
carefully  arranged  in  successive  relays,  to  appease  the  wrath  of  Esau.  Then, 
in  two  companies,  his  frightened  household  followed,  and  the  sounds  died  away 
again  until  nothing  was  left  but  the  deepened  roar  of  the  turbulent  stream  beside 
him,  which  seemed  to  intensify  the  dead  silence  all  around.  Jacob  was  left  alone. 
He  was  anxious,  and  apprehensive  of  what  might  happen.  He  was  a  greedy  man, 
and  he  stood  to  lose,  at  one  stroke,  the  wealth  which  represented  the  struggles  of 
twenty  years.  He  was  an  intensely  affectionate  man,  and  it  seemed  as  if  wives  and 
children  might  be  snatched  away  from  him  at  one  fell  swoop  :  "  I  fear  lest  Esau 
come  and  smite  me,  the  mother  and  the  children."  Then,  through  the  long  night 
there  wrestled  with  him  a  man  till  daybreak — till  the  reach  of  the  Jabbok  flashed 
again  in  the  sudden  Syrian  sunrise.  As  he  lay  there  in  the  growing  light,  thrown, 
exhausted,  he  knew  it  was  no  man  who  had  striven  with  him.  In  the  sunrise  he 
had  seen  God  face  to  face.  So  he  called  the  place  Peniel — God's  face.  But 
that  is  only  the  outside  of  the  story,  the  body  of  this  experience.  What  is  its 
inner  meaning  ?  An  instinct  tells  us  that  this  is  the  record  of  a  moral  and  spiritual 
struggle,  which  doubtless  has  its  coimterpart  in  the  human  life  of  these  breathless 
days.  That  shrivelled  tendon  was  the  mark  left  in  Jacob's  body  of  a  moral  and 
spiritual  struggle — the  crisis  of  his  history.  We  know  the  long  night  ended  in 
tearful  and  penitent  prayer.  What  makes  me  feel  certain  that  this  is  the  record 
of  a  moral  and  spiritual  struggle  is  the  vmdoubted  fact  that  from  that  day  a 
great  moral  change  came  over  Jacob — a  change  represented  by  his  new  name. 
He  was  no  longer  Jacob — sly,  subtle,  crafty,  tricky  Jacob,  he  was  an  Israelite, 
indeed,  in  whom  there  was  no  guile.  He  was  Israel,  God's  prince,  for  he  had 
prevailed.  He  not  only  had  a  new  name,  but  a  new  nature.  The  blessing  which 
came  with  the  dawn  was  the  highest  blessing  which  can  ever  come  to  any  man — 
the  assurance  that  his  better  sefi  would  become  increasingly  his  truest  self.  He 
was  a  prince  of  God.  It  is  not  diflScult  to  see  that  Jacob's  whole  life  had  been 
one  long  wrestle,  a  tough,  hard  struggle  with  others.  He  had  wrestled  for  bread, 
for  love,  for  justice.  Yes  ;  and  he  had  prevailed.  He  had  succeeded,  he  had 
reaped  the  fruit  of  struggle — strength.  He  had  gained  what  comes  with  victory — 
self-confidence.  He  had  outwitted  the  crafty  Laban.  He  went  to  his  uncle  a 
penniless  tramp ;  he  left  him  a  wealthy  man.  And  now  he  comes  back  to  the  land 
which  was  promised  him.  And  here,  on  the  very  border  and  frontier  of  it,  just 
as  he  is  about  to  grasp  what  seems  to  be  already  his,  he  is  brought  up  suddenly 
face  to  face  with  an  old  sin ;  and,  as  old  sins  are  wont  to  do,  it  unnerved  him.  Do 
you  know  men  who  sinned — twenty  years  ago  ?  They  have  been  successful 
in  spite  of  their  sin — nay,  by  means  of  it,  and  God  has  given  no  sign.  Then, 
after  twenty  years,  they  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  consequences.  They 
do  not  ask  now :  What  will  it  mean  to  me  ?  There  is  a  question  which  cuts 
deeper  than  that :  What  will  it  mean  to  wife  and  children  ?  If  no  one  else  were 
involved,  if  the  man  knew  definitely  what  it  would  mean  and  how  it  would  end 
he  could  face  it.  Though  it  brought  ruin  and  exposure  and  shame,  he  could 
meet  it  like  a  man.  But  when  the  vague  dread  of  it  hangs  over  his  life,  and  he 
lies  awake  at  night  and  goes  over  all  the  possibilities  and  chances  of  what  may 
happen,  and  wonders  if  any  contingency  has  been  left  unprovided  for,  till  the 
heart  is  sick  with  a  nameless  dread — then  suspense  becomes  anguish.  Now, 
that  was  Jacob's  case.  He  had  done  all  that  foresight  and  long  experience  could 
devise.  He  had  sent  messages,  intended  to  convey  to  Esau  the  impression  that 
he  was  a  man  of  some  consequence — obsequious  messages,  too,  to  "  my  lord 
Esau."  And  "  my  lord  "  sent  back  a  soldier's  answer :  '  Esau  cometh  to  meet 
thee  with  four  hundred  men."  With  great  astuteness  Jacob  divides  his  household 
into  two  companies,  so  that  if  Esau  falls  on  one,  the  other  may  perhaps  escape. 
His  trouble  drives  him  to  his  knees,  for  with  all  his  subtlety  and  shrewdness  Jacob 
was  a  praying  man.  He  appeals,  in  his  extremity — like  many  a  trickster  since — ■ 
to  his  father's  God.  And  yet,  apprehension  of  his  loss  breaks  through  his  very 
prayer.  He  is  a  rich  man  now,  and  has  much  to  lose.  ..."  I  am  not  worthy 
of  the  least  of  all  the  mercies  which  Thou  hast  shewed  unto  Thy  servant,  ,  .  . 
deliver  me,  I  pray  Thee,  from  the  hand  of  my  brother."  In  the  very  act  of  prayer 
his  subtle  brain  is  scheming  how  he  will  send  presents  to  Esau — not  in  a  lump. 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

but  first  one,  then  another,  drove  after  drove.  He  knew  very  well  how  to  appeal 
to  the  frank,  generous  heart  of  the  rough  twin-brother.  What  a  mixture  the 
man  is  ! — craft  and  prayer,  cunning  and  faith,  daring  and  dread  !  .  .  .  "  Then 
Jacob  was  greatly  afraid,  and  was  distressed."  Does  all  this  let  any  light  on  some 
past  experience  of  your  own  ?  You  were  walking,  as  you  thought,  in  the  way  of 
God's  leading — in  obedience  to  His  call — to  some  land  of  promise,  and  on  the 
very  border  of  it  you  are  suddenly  brought  face  to  face  with  some  past  wrong. 
The  power  in  which  you  trusted — the  result  of  long  experience — fails  you.  Your 
self-confidence  is  rudely  shaken.  You  betake  yomrself  to  prayer,  and  yet  you 
will  not  trust  wholly  in  that  either  ;  you  do  all  that  foresight  can  suggest — and 
stretch  a  point  in  doing  it — to  make  quite  sure  that  the  blessing  shall  be  yours. 
You  try  to  deal  with  God  as  you  have  dealt  with  men.  Is  that  the  meaning  of 
Jacob's  wrestling  t  You  come  to  the  very  border  of  your  land  of  promise.  It  is 
almost  your  own.  And  you  will  make  quite  sure  of  it  by  human  means, — as  if  God 
could  be  tricked  and  managed,  as  if  the  blessing  must  be  wrested  from  unwilling 
hands.  Then  you  find  that  you  have  more  than  Esau  to  deal  with.  There  is 
another  Antagonist — unknown,  mysterious,  persistent.  So  you  struggle  on 
through  the  darkness,  unwilling  to  cast  aside  the  powers  which  have  never  failed 
when  dealing  with  your  fellows.  Does  not  your  own  experience  interpret  this 
story  for  you  ?  Then,  at  daybreak,  with  one  touch  the  nameless  wrestler  shrivels 
the  strongest  muscle  in  Jacob's  body,  and  shows  what  He  might  have  done  at  any 
moment.  The  strong  man  falls  back  spent  and  thrown.  His  self-confidence  is 
broken,  he  has  met  more  than  this  match. 

Nay,  but  I  yield,  I  yield; 
I  can  hold  out  no  more  ! 

Is  that  the  end,  then  T  It  would  have  been  with  some  men,  but  Jacob  clings 
with  all  his  remaining  strength  to  his  great  antagonist,  until  he  wrings  a  blessing 
from  the  struggle.  It  was  after  his  defeat,  you  observe,  after  he  was  worsted 
and  thrown,  that  he  prevailed.  Look  at  the  text  again  (R.V.  margin),  "  In  his 
strength  he  strove  with  God  ;  yea,  he  strove  with  the  angel,  and  prevailed." 
But  how  ?  In  this  way :  "  He  wept,  and  made  supplication  unto  Him."  He 
supplicates  the  possession  he  cannot  win.  The  blessing  he  sought  to  wring  from 
God  was  his  in  a  free  and  gracious  gift.  The  sun  rose  on  a  changed  and  chastened 
life.  But  the  long  struggle  had  left  its  mark  on  him.  He  halted  on  his  thigh. 
He  lost  the  proud,  self-confident  swing  in  his  gait.  He  was  a  humbler  and  a 
better  man.  Is  that  an  old  story  I  have  been  telling  you  ?  Is  it  not  your  story  ? 
Yours  and  mine  ?  Do  you  remember  that  dark  and  troubled  day  when  the  Unseen 
asserted  its  rights — when  you  wrestled,  but  not  with  flesh  and  blood  ?  And 
you  found  that  the  tricks  and  quirks  which  avail  in  that  warfare  were  no  use,  for 
you  were  dealing  with  God.  Is  that  the  explanation  of  some  struggle  in  the  dark- 
ness which  is  going  on  here  and  now  ?  Have  we  never  heard  of  the  striving  of 
the  Spirit  ?  Is  that  the  meaning  of  some  bitter  disappointment  which  comes 
unexpectedly  into  the  life  of  some  self-confident  man  who  has  hitherto  never 
known  what  failure  means  ?  The  power  which  wrestles  with  you  is  a  power 
which  longs  to  bless.  If  you  will  cling  with  all  your  strength,  it  may  be  you  will 
come  out  of  that  struggle  crowned  and  with  a  new  name,  because  in  the  struggle 
you  have  learned  His  name,  and  in  defeat  you  have  learned  to  pray.  [A.  Moor- 
house,  M.A.)  JacoVa  strength: — The  strength  that  God  puts  into  us,  though 
it  be  God's  own,  yet  when  we  have  it,  and  work  by  it,  God  accounts  it  as  ours; 
it  is  called  Jacob's  strength,  though  the  truth  is,  it  was  God's  strength.  It  is  a 
great  honour  to  manifest  much  strength  in  wrestling  with  God  in  prayer.  In 
this  was  the  honour  of  Jacob,  with  his  strength  he  prevailed  with  God.  We 
should  not  come  with  weak  and  empty  prayers,  but  we  should  put  forth  strength  ; 
if  a  Christian  has  any  strength  in  the  world  for  anything,  he  should  have  it  in 
prayer.  According  to  the  strength  of  the  fire,  the  bullet  ascends ;  so  according 
to  what  streng'  h  we  put  forth  in  prayer,  so  is  our  prevalence.  This  strength  of 
Jacob  was  a  ty^*^.  of  the  spiritual  strength  which  God  gives  His  saints  when  they 
have  to  deal  witL  Him.  SeeEph.  iii.  16.  Surely  the  strength  is  great  that  is  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  i  ut  such  strength  shall  manifest  the  glory  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
This  is  the  strength  attainable  for  Christians,  even  here  in  this  world.  Let  us 
not  be  satisfied  with  faint  desires  and  wishes,  when  Jesus  Christ  is  tendered  to 
tis  as  the  fountain  of  strength.     But  do  you  walk  so  that  your  strength  manifests 


CHAP,  xn.]  EOSEA.  203 

that  such  riches  of  the  glory  of  God  dwell  in  you  ?  Christians  should  seek  to 
be  strengthened  with  aU  might,  according  to  the  glorious  power  of  God. 
The  way  to  prevail  with  men  is  to  prevaQ  with  God.  (Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
Jacob's  victory  and  our  duty: — The  prophet  takes  the  opportunity  of  showing 
the  difference  between  their  conduct  and  that  of  Jacob,  after  whom  they  were 
called.  His  design  in  doing  so  was  to  make  them  know  that,  if  they  expected 
to  be  saved,  it  was  not  by  proving  their  descent  from  Jacob,  but  by  acting  as  did 
that  pious  patriarch  when  he  was  in  danger  and  was  sufifering  from  the  effects  of 
his  former  misconduct.  Reference  is  to  the  scene  of  wrestling  with  the  angel.  We 
use  it  as  an  example  of  the  mode  and  nature  of  faithful  and  successful  prayer. 
All  must  pray,  and  to  be  heard  must  pray  aright,  in  the  same  persevering  manner 
as  Jacob,  and  in  the  same  holy  temper.  We  are  taught,  in  other  parts  of  Scripture, 
to  address  our  God  with  penitence,  holiness,  faith,  and  perseverance ;  and  all 
these  essentials  of  acceptable  devotion  are  illustrated  in  this  narrative.  (Beaver  H. 
Blacker,  M.A.)  Israel  unlike  Jacob: — Alas!  a  nearer  view  of  Judah  shows 
that  all  the  descendants  of  Jacob,  in  Zion  as  in  Samaria,  provoke  judgment. 
How  imlike  the  early  devotion  and  fervent  faith  of  the  pilgrim-patriarch  their 
father !  From  the  strong  prayer  amidst  the  stones  at  Bethel,  where  the  eternal 
pathway  between  heaven  and  earth  was  opened  in  vision,  and  from  the  wrestling 
of  supplication  at  Peniel,  what  moral  degeneracy  a  idst  the  wealthy  traffic 
adopted  in  Canaan  !  And  what  a  cry  to  God  may  not  the  pro^  het  raise  for  a 
restoration  of  the  old  simple  tent-life,  when  it  seemed  natural  to  men  that  God 
should  raise  up  speakers  of  His  will,  and  quicken  their  spiritual  life  by  fervent 
preachers  !  In  those  days  of  prophets  Israel  dwelt  safely :  under  her  kings  she 
sins  and  suffers.  God  spared  the  ten  tribes,  notwithstanding  that  Jeroboam, 
the  son  of  Nebat,  made  them  sin.  Now,  since  idolatry  multiplies,  since  Baal 
is  worshipped,  and  perhaps  even  human  bloodshed,  either  to  Moloch,  or  through 
contagion  of  Moloch  worship,  notwithstanding  Abraham's  purer  faith  had  sought 
better  propitiations,  the  nation  drifts  like  chaff,  stubble,  smoke.  All  God's  appeals 
are  in  vain.  Stolid  and  obstinate,  the  nation  which  God  called  to  for  a  new  birth 
of  a  pious  generation,  and  for  new  thoughts  and  hope,  stands  gazing  on  its  idols. 
God  would  have  saved  them  from  the  Assyrian  sword,  and  would  have  foiled 
the  besieger,  and  bidden  death  and  the  grave  stay  their  devouring.  But  since 
sinners  do  not  repent,  God  cannot  relent.  (Rowland  Williams,  D.D.)  Bethel 
and  Peniel : — The  house  of  God  and  the  face  of  God.  God  is  here.  God  is  mine. 
I.  Jacob's  first  conversion.  At  Bethel  Jacob  cannot  be  called  a  "  religious 
man."  He  had  come  into  no  personal  relations  with  God.  He  acknowledged,  but 
did  not  know,  his  father's  God.  His  character  had,  as  yet,  received  no  shakings,  so 
it  had  thrown  down  no  personal  and  independent  rootings ;  there  were  no  signs 
of  the  sway  of  any  central  and  unifying  principles.  He  could  still  be  described 
as  "  without  God  in  the  world."  But  out  of  the  very  consequences  of  his  wrong- 
doings come  the  beginnings  of  nobler  things.  The  vision  gives  us  the  time  when 
Jacob  first  entered  into  personal  relations  with  God.  It  may  help  us  to  under- 
stand in  what  our  conversion  to  God  essentially  consists — a  revelation  of  the 
personal  God  to  the  soul ;  and  the  acceptance,  by  the  soul,  of  the  responsibilities 
of  that  revelation.  Jacob's  new  life  begins  with  a  personal  revelation  of  God. 
This  is  the  Divine  arrest  of  the  man  in  the  very  midst  of  his  wilfulness  and  selfish- 
ness. God  guides  him  with  the  hand  of  His  Providence,  and  sets  him  just  where 
He  can  best  reveal  to  him  Himself.  We  have  no  record  of  Jacob's  struggling 
after  the  light,  and  at  last  reaching,  after  long  efforts,  to  the  light  of  God.  In 
his  case  there  is  no  growing  of  knowledge  into  the  wisdom  of  God,  no  unfolding 
of  moral  feeling  into  spiritual  life ;  but  upon  him,  while  actually  in  his  heedless- 
ness, the  revelation  of  God  comes :  a  new  fact  of  his  existence  is  impressively 
disclosed  to  him :  this  fact,  that  God,  his  father's  God,  Abraham's  God,  was  with 
him.  That  fact  at  once,  and  altogether,  changes  the  principle  and  spirit  of  his 
life.  Religion  is  not  a  development ;  it  is  not  an  education  ;  it  is  not  something 
which  man  can  himself  start  and  nourish.  It  is  the  effect  of  a  Divine  salvation ; 
an  intervention  of  God ;  a  gracious  mode  of  bringing  man  into  conscious  and  happy 
relations  with  God.  It  was  a  vision  of  God,  and  an  assurance  of  the  Divine  nearness 
to  him,  and  care  of  him,  that  bowed  Jacob  down  with  the  profoundest  awe  and 
humiliation.  The  ungodly  sovd  felt  that  God  was  about  him,  close  to  him.  The 
vision  opened  Jacob's  eyes — I.  To  see  God's  relation  to  his  life.  The  vision 
showed  God  caring  for  sinful,  wandering  Jacob,  watching  over  his  slumbers, 
peopling  the  desert  for  him  with  ministering  angels,  and  assuring  him  of  unfailing 


204  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

guardianship.  He  could  never  be  the  same  man  again  when  this  fact  had  been 
brought  home  to  his  very  heart.  2.  To  feel  a  conviction  of  the  Divine  claims  of 
God  is  here,  I  must  wait,  listen,  obey.  3.  To  realise  the  Divine  love,  the  sovereign 
fulness  and  freeness  of  Divine  grace,  Jacob  woke  in  the  morning  to  feel — God 
loves  me,  even  me.  II.  Jacob's  second  convebsion.  The  wrestling  represents 
the  highest  point  in  the  spiritual  history  of  Jacob.  It  was  the  time  in  which 
Jacob  learned  the  mystery  and  the  joy  of  trusting  wholly,  committing  himself 
entirely  to  the  Divine  love  and  lead.  The  wrestling  at  Jabbok  is  the  close  of  a 
scene  of  which  each  part  requires  careful  attention.  Anxious  and  scheming  aa 
he  came  within  sight  of  Canaan,  he  had  the  vision  of  the  guarding  angels  to  recall 
him  from  his  schemings  to  trust.  He  had  hitherto  only  seen  his  helpless  company 
and  the  approaching  peril,  and  like  the  prophet's  servant  in  later  times,  God 
opened  his  eyes  to  see,  closer  than  any  danger,  the  two  angel-bands  of  watchers. 
Recalled  thus  to  the  thought  of  God's  nearness,  Jacob  feels  that  he  must  blend 
prudent  schemes  with  prayer,  and  the  prayer  he  offers  is  full  of  humility,  thank- 
fulness, and  pleading,  that  makes  it  in  many  ways  a  model  of  prayer.  But  it  ia 
easily  overestimated.  It  is  the  prayer  of  one  who  is  still  much  too  self-conscious, 
of  one  who  has  not  yet  quite  given  up  his  guileful  ways :  there  is  still  something 
of  Jacob's  old  mistake  of  "  making  terms  with  God."  He  is  evidently  learning 
his  great  life-lesson,  but  the  prayer  shows  that  he  has  not  fully  learned  it  yet.  It  was 
a  kind  of  drama  of  his  life  which  was  acted  through  that  night.  It  was  a  gracious 
way  of  shewing  Jacob  what  had  been  the  mistake  of  his  whole  career.  He  had 
always  been  wrestling.  Now  in  his  heart  he  was  even  wrestling  with  God.  But 
He  will  find  that  a  very  different  thing.  If  it  does  seem  that  a  man's  wrestling 
brings  mastery,  it  is  only  because  God  does  not  put  forth  His  strength  in  the 
conflict.  When  He  does  and  simply  touches,  Jacob,  the  confident  wrestler,  is  pros- 
trate and  utterly  helpless ;  he  can  wrestle  no  more,  he  can  only  cling,  he  can  only 
say,  "  Give  me  the  blessing  "  ;  he  gives  up  at  last  all  self-efforts  to  win  the  blessing. 
(Robert  Tuck,  B.A.) 

Ver.  5.  Even  the  Lord  God  of  hosts;  the  Lord  is  his  memorial. — The  name 
Jehovah  as  a  memorial : — To  stir  them  up  to  present  duty,  Hosea  describes 
God,  who  did  all  this,  and  spake  to  Jacob,  as  the  true  God  and  God  of 
armies.  It  teaches — 1.  Christ  is,  without  all  controversy  true  God,  the  same  in 
essence  and  equal  in  power  and  glory  with  the  Father ;  for  this  Angel  (ver.  4)  is  even 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  hosts.  2.  Great  is  their  advantage  and  their  dignity  who 
have  converse  and  keep  communion  with  God,  who  hath  being  of  Himself,  and 
who  hath  all  creatures  ready  as  hosts  at  His  command,  as  there  is  need.  For 
this  sets  out  Jacob's  advantage,  that  in  his  wrestlings  and  other  intercourse 
he  had  to  do  with  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  3.  God  is  unchangeably  still  the  same, 
as  kind,  able,  and  exorable  to  His  people  as  ever  He  was  at  any  time,  if  they  would 
come  and  make  use  of  Him ;  for  He  did  all  that  to  Jacob,  not  only  for  present 
use,  but  that,  proving  Himself  to  be  Jehovah,  this  might  be  His  memorial  for 
the  use  of  His  Church  in  all  generations ;  and  upon  this  groimd  it  is  that 
in  the  next  verse  they  are  exhorted  to  turn  to  Him.  See  Exod.  iii.  15.  4.  The 
Lord  needs  no  images  to  keep  up  a  memorial  of  Him ;  but  His  name  and  nature 
are  manifested  in  His  word  and  works  sufficiently  to  keep  them  who  converse 
with  these  in  remembrance  of  Him  ;  for  Jehovah,  and  His  manifesting  Himself  to 
be  so,  is  His  memorial.     {George  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  6.  Therefore  turn  thou  to  thy  God:  keep  mercy  and  Judgment,  and 
wait  on  thy  God  continually.  —  Instructions  to  the  unconverted  and  to  the 
converted : — As  encouragement  to  repentance,  the  example  of  the  patriarch 
Jacob  is  presented.  Let  the  descendants  of  the  patriarch  copy  his  example  ; 
let  them  seek  God  and  walk  with  Him,  as  Jacob  had  done,  and  they  would  surely 
find  Him,  and  receive  a  blessing  from  Him  in  their  turn.  The  advice  was  most 
seasonable.  It  directed  them  to  turn  to  God  ;  and  then  to  walk  with  Him  in 
the  duties  and  comforts  of  true  religion.  I.  The  instruction  to  the  uncon- 
verted. "  Turn  thou  to  thy  God."  An  imconverted  person  is  one  whose  heart 
is  not  changed  and  turned  to  God.  Every  person  who  is  habitually  proud, 
sensual,  or  covetous,  indulging  a  self-righteous  spirit,  or  following  sin  with 
greediness ;  or  leading  a  worldly  life,  careless  of  his  soul  and  eternity ;  every 
person  who  sins  without  remorse,  and  has,  in  fact,  no  other  rule  for  his  conduct 
but  his  own  interest,  gain,  or  will — every  such  person  is  an  unconverted  person. 


CHAP,  xn.]  HOSEA.  205 

All  unconverted  persons  are  turned  from  God.  They  are  estranged  from  Him 
in  heart  and  affections.  The  :e  who  are  turned  away  from  God  must  be  miserable. 
The  first  step  in  real  religion  is  conversion,  that  is,  the  turning  of  the  heart  to 
God.  There  can  be  no  real  religion  till  this  step  be  taken.  Do  you  inquire  the 
way  ?  There  is  but  one  way,  even  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  "  the  way  "  Would 
you  then  turn  to  God,  you  must  come  to  Him  by  this  way.  You  must  draw  nigh 
to  God  in  faith ;  and  pray  to  Him  for  Christ's  sake  to  be  reconciled  unto  you. 
You  must  beseech  Him  to  grant  to  you  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  to  work  in  you  true 
repentance.  Thus  turning  to  Him,  you  will  be  graciously  and  favourably  received. 
He  never  casts  out  any  souls  that  turn  to  Him  through  Jesus  Christ.     II.  ThB 

INSTRUCTION    VOUCHSAFED    TO    THOSE    WHO    ABE    ALREADY    CONVERTED.       "  Keep 

mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on  thy  God  continually."  The  converted  are 
those  who,  having  through  grace  renounced  the  ways  of  sin  and  the  course  of 
this  world,  have  turned  unto  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  their  Saviour ;  with 
penitent  hearts  have  joined  themselves  unto  Him,  and,  being  justified  by  faith, 
have  peace  with  God.  The  instruction  divides  itself  into  two  parts — 1.  "  Keep 
mercy  and  judgment."  All  who  turn  to  God  should  be  careful  to  maintain  good 
works.  They  are  called  with  a  holy  calling,  and  their  life  and  conversation  should 
accord  with  it.  In  mercy.  In  exercising  kindness  and  compassion  to  all.  In 
judgment.  In  doing  justice  and  righteousness  ;  in  rendering  to  all  their  due ; 
in  making  restitution  for  wrongs  or  injuries  committed.  2.  "  Wait  on  thy  God 
continually."  To  wait  upon  God  is  to  depend  upon  Him ;  to  exercise  a  believing 
expectation  of  receiving  from  Him  all  those  supplies  and  succours  of  which  we 
stand  in  need.  (E.  Cooper.)  The  "  'power  room  "  .• — The  quietest  room  in  a 
Lancashire  cotton  mill  is  the  engine  room.  It  is  significantly  called  the  "  power 
room  "  of  the  mill.  But  from  that  quietest  room  emerges  all  the  force  which 
speeds  the  busy  looms  in  their  process  of  production.  Let  the  engine  be  neglected, 
let  countless  looms  be  added  without  proportional  increase  of  power,  and  the  mill 
breaks  down.  We  have  been  neglecting  our  quietest  room,  our  power  room  ; 
we  have  been  adding  to  the  strain  without  multiplying  the  force,  and  the  effects 
are  seen  in  weariness,  joylessness,  and  ineffectiveness.  We  must  not  work  less, 
but  we  must  pray  more.     {Life  of  C.  A.  Berry,  D.D.) 

Vers.    7,    8,    9.    He    is   a   merchant,    the    balances    of    deceit    are    in    hia 
hand :    he   loveth  to  oppress,    etc.  —  Fortunes  : — I.    Fortunes    badly     used. 

1.  Here  there  is  no  recognition  of  human  co-operation.  No  man  comes  in  pos- 
session of  wealth  without  the  efforts  of  some  men  either  living  or  dead.  Wealth, 
in  most  cases,  is  the  result  of  the  efforts  of  a  large  number  of  human  workers. 
But  the  possessor  oftentimes  takes  no  note  of  this.     He  thinks  only  of  himself. 

2.  Here  there  is  no  recognition  of  Divine  agency.  All  fortunes  come  of  God. 
Out  of  His  materials,  out  of  His  seasons,  out  of  the  activity  of  His  creatures. 
Many  fortunes  are  held  and  employed  in  a  spirit  of  haughty  egotism.  II.  Fortunes 
BADLY  MADE.  L  Here  is  fraud.  There  is  deceit  everywhere.  In  all  fabrics, 
groceries,  trade  commodities.  Deceit  in  making,  deceit  both  in  the  buying  and 
the  selling.     2.  Here  is  oppression.     Fraud  is  oppression  in  some  form  or  other. 

3.  Here  is  cmming.  Ephraim — this  typical  fortime-maker — took  such  care  to 
conceal  all  that  was  unfaLr  and  nefarious  in  his  operations  that  he  was  certain  no 
wrong  could  be  foimd  in  his  doings.  Many  who  have  made  a  fortune  by  a  swindle 
have  so  guarded  the  transaction  that  they  have  clapped  their  hands  and  said, 
"  None  will  ever  find  it  out."  III.  Fortunes  badly  ended.  To  all  such 
fortune-holders  and  fortune-makers  retribution  must  come  sooner  or  later. 
(Homilist.)  And  Ephraim  said,  Tet  I  am  become  rich,  I  have  foimd  me  out 
substance.  —  /  am  rich :  —  Literally,  I  am  simply  rich,  in  all  my  labours 
they  shall  find  none  iniquity  that  is  sin.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  trade  ;  that 
is  how  it  is.  In  forty  pounds  weight  of  calico  put  sixteen  pounds  weight  of  china 
clay — it  is  the  custom  of  the  trade  :  a  custom  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than 
in  the  observance.  Sell  for  ten  yards  of  cloth  nine  yards  and  seven-eighths.  A 
man  likes  an  eighth  of  a  lie  ;  a  little  fraction  of  falsehood  is  a  kind  of  condiment 
in  his  supper  ;  it  is  the  custom  of  the  trade.  And  especially  if  a  man,  after 
doing  this,  can  take  the  chair  at  a  missionary  meeting,  and  speak  lugubriously 
and  tediously  about  the  condition  of  the  heathen  he  has  never  seen,  but  often 
cheated  ;  he  feels  that  there  is  none  iniquity  in  him  that  is  sin ;  he  says.  Business 
is  business.  He  always  says  that  when  he  wins  ;  when  he  loses  he  says.  There 
ought  to  be  some  morality  in  business  after  all.    {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)      Keeping 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

wp  apj)earances  : — I.  Thb  hiding  of  sin.  Ephraim  is  in  truth  moat  unrighteous, 
but  he  contrives  to  sin  in  such  a  way  that  he  appears  innocent.  And  do  we  not 
attempt  by  many  subtilties  to  hide  the  real  qualities  of  our  actions,  to  shelter 
ourselves  from  their  just  penalties  ?  1.  Men  sin  deeply,  and  yet  keep  within 
the  civil  law.  National  and  international  law  were  scrupulously  observed  by 
Ephraim*  Men  still  flatter  themselves  that  they  keep  the  law  of  the  land.  A 
man  may  do  that  and  stiU  be  an  infinite  scoundreL  He  may  be  guilty  of  gross 
dishonesty.  He  may  keep  the  civil  law  with  very  little  sense  of  generosity. 
We  may  be  guilty  of  deep  cruelty  to  our  fellows,  and  the  law  of  the  magistrate 
takes  no  cognisance  of  our  actions.  Often  the  very  worst  escape,  whilst  those 
far  less  guilty  are  denoimced  and  punished.  2.  Men  sin  deeply,  and  yet  keep 
within  public  opinion.  A  public  opinion  exists  which  is  more  strict  and  per- 
vasive than  the  civil  law.  This  public  opinion  we  are  bound  to  respect,  we  do 
respect  it,  and  some  of  us  are  abundantly  satisfied  if  we  succeed  in  meeting  its 
exactions.  But  how  much  personal,  commercial,  political  immorality  is  yet 
untouched  by  public  opinion  !  A  man  may  be  a  rascal,  and  yet  a  gentleman. 
With  a  plausible  tongue,  a  polished  style,  with  fine  phrases  and  fine  manners, 
a  man  may  be  guilty  of  fraud,  cruelty,  imcleanness,  and  yet  remain  throughout 
popular  in  society  !  Rotten  at  the  core,  he  is  painted  on  the  rind,  and  the  world 
sees  the  skin  and  not  the  soul.  Some  of  the  handsomest  butterflies  have  the 
•trangest  tastes — they  turn  aside  from  the  most  glorious  flowers  to  sip  filthiest 
messes.  3.  We  sin  deeply,  and  yet  maintain  the  sense  of  personal  dignity. 
Ephraim  hid  the  fact  of  his  guiltiness  by  looking  at  his  successfulness.  Men 
still  forget  their  sinfulness  in  their  prosperity.  A  man  may  be  a  conqueror,  and 
yet  his  glwy  be  his  shame  ;  he  may  attain  honour,  and  his  scarlet  robe  be  the 
fitting  sign  of  his  scarlet  sins  ;  he  may  grow  rich,  and  every  coin  in  his  coffers 
witness  against  him.  "  His  honour  rooted  in  dishonour  stood."  Proud,  selfish, 
dishonest,  sensual  men  flatter  themselves  in  their  own  eyes  until  their  iniquity 
is  foimd  to  be  hateful.  4.  Men  sin  deeply,  and  yet  keep  within  ecclesiastical 
discipline.  Ephraim  would  do  no  iniquity  that  were  sin  from  an  ecclesiastical 
point  of  view.  Yet  all  the  while  he  was  guilty  of  falsehood,  robbery,  injustice, 
uncleanness ;  he  called  himself  Israel,  but  God  called  him  a  Canaanite.  A  man 
may  be  a  terrible  sinner,  and  yet  observe  all  the  ceremonial  law.  II.  Mask  the 
INEVITABLE  EXPOSUBE  AND  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN.  Cleverly  disguised  as  sin  may 
be,  it  will  surely  suffer  detection.  God  knows  nothing  about  appearances  ; 
He  knows  us  as  we  think  in  our  heart.  And  what  stands  revealed  is  bound  to 
meet  with  just  retribution.  Then  in  all  life  let  us — 1.  Aim  at  the  highest ;  and — 
2.  Test  ourselves  by  the  highest ;  let  us  judge  ourselves  in  the  sight  of  God, 
and  by  the  absolute  standard.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  9.  Make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles,  as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn  feast 
— The  feast  of  tabernacles  as  a  type: — This  feast  was  the  yearly  remembrance 
of  God's  miraculous  guidance  and  support  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness.  It 
was  the  link  which  bound  on  their  deliverance  from  Egypt  to  the  close  of  their 

f)ilgrim  life,  and  their  entrance  into  their  rest.  The  passage  of  the  Red  Sea, 
ike  baptism,  was  the  beginning  of  God's  promises.  By  it  Israel  was  saved  from 
Egypt  and  from  bondage,  and  was  born  to  be  a  people  of  God.  Yet,  being  the 
beginning,  it  was  plainly  not  the  completion,  nor  could  they  themselves  complete 
it.  The  wilderness  dangers  had  to  be  surmounted.  It  was  a  time  of  the  visible 
presence  of  God.  It  was  a  long  trial  time,  and  they  were  taught  entire  dependence 
on  God ;  a  time  of  sifting,  in  which  God  proved  His  faithfulness  to  those  who 
persevered.  Standing  there,  between  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  accomplish- 
ment of  God's  promise  to  Abraham  and  to  them,  it  was  a  type  of  His  whole 
guidance  of  His  people  at  all  times.  It  was  a  pledge  that  God  wovdd  lead  His  own, 
if  often,  "  by  a  way  which  they  knew  not,"  yet  to  rest  with  Him.  The  yearly 
commemoration  of  it  was  not  only  a  thanksgiving  for  God's  past  mercies ;  it 
was  a  confession  also  of  their  present  relation  to  God,  that  "  here  we  have  no 
continuing  city "  ;  that  they  still  needed  the  guidance  and  support  of  God ; 
and  that  their  trust  was  not  in  themselves,  nor  in  man,  but  in  Him.  This  they 
themselves  saw.  "  When  they  said,  '  Leave  a  fixed  habitation,  and  dwell  in  a 
chance  abode,'  they  meant  that  the  command  to  dwell  in  tabernacles  was  given 
to  teach  us  that  no  man  must  rely  on  the  height  or  strength  of  his  house,  or  on 
its  good  arrangements,  though  it  abound  in  all  good  ;  nor  may  he  rely  on  the  help 
of  any  man,  not  though  he  were  lord  and  king  of  the  whole  earth,  but  must  trust 


CHAP.  XII.]  ROSEA.  207 

Him  by  whose  Word  the  worlds  were  made.  For  with  Him  alone  is  power  iind 
faithfulness,  so  that  whereinsoever  any  man  may  place  his  trust  he  shall  receive 
no  consolation  from  it,  since  in  God  alone  is  refuge  and  trust."  The  feast  of 
tabernacles  was  also  a  yearly  thanksgiving  for  the  mercies  with  which  God  had 
crowned  the  year.  The  joy  must  have  been  even  the  greater  since  it  followed, 
by  five  days  only,  after  the  mournful  day  of  atonement,  its  rigid  fast  from  evening 
to  evening,  and  its  confession  of  sin.  Joy  is  greater  when  ushered  in  by  sorrow ; 
sorrow  for  sin  is  the  condition  of  joy  in  God.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was, 
as  far  as  it  could  be,  a  sort  of  Easter  after  Lent.  At  the  time  when  Israel  rejoiced 
In  the  good  gifts  of  the  year,  God  made  them  express,  in  act,  their  fleeting  con- 
dition in  this  life.  It  must  have  been  a  striking  confession  of  the  slight  tenure 
of  all  earthly  things,  when  their  kings  and  great  men,  their  rich  men  and  those 
who  lived  at  ease,  had  all,  at  the  command  of  God,  to  leave  their  ceiled  houses, 
and  dwell  for  seven  days  in  rude  booths,  constructed  for  the  season,  pervioua 
in  some  measure  to  the  sun  and  wind,  with  no  fixed  foundation,  to  be  removed 
when  the  festival  was  passed.  Because,  says  a  Jewish  writer,  at  tlie  time  of 
the  ingathering  of  the  increase  from  the  field,  man  wishes  to  go  from  the  field 
to  his  house  to  make  a  fixed  abode  there,  the  law  was  anxious  lest,  on  account 
of  this  fixed  abode,  his  heart  should  be  lifted  up  at  having  found  a  sort  of  palace, 
and  he  should  "  wax  fat  and  kick."  Therefore  it  is  written,  "  All  that  are 
Israelites  born  shall  dwell  in  booths."  Whoso  begins  to  think  himself  a  citizen 
in  this  world,  and  not  a  foreigner,  him  God  biddeth  leave  his  ordinary  dwelling, 
to  remove  into  a  temporary  lodging,  in  order  that,  leaving  these  thoughts,  he 
may  learn  to  acknowledge  that  he  is  only  a  stranger  in  this  world,  and  not  a 
citizen,  in  that  he  dwells  as  in  a  stranger's  hut,  and  so  should  not  attribute  too 
much  to  the  shadow  of  his  beams,  but  "  dwell  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty." 
Every  year  the  law  was  publicly  read  in  the  feast.  Ephraim  was  living  clean 
contrary  to  all  this.  He  boasted  in  his  wealth,  justified  himself  on  the  ground  of 
it,  ascribed  it  and  his  deliverance  from  Egypt  to  his  idols.  He  would  not  keep 
the  feast,  as  alone  God  willed  it  to  be  kept.  While  he  existed  in  his  separate 
kindgom,  it  could  not  be.  Their  political  existence  had  to  be  broken  that  they 
might  be  restored.  God  then  conveys  the  notice  of  the  impending  punishment 
in  words  which  promised  the  future  mercy.  He  did  not  then  make  them  to  dwell 
in  tabernacles.  For  all  their  service  of  Him  was  out  of  their  own  mind,  contrary 
to  His  will,  displeasing  to  Him.  This,  then,  "  I  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in 
tabernacles,"  implies  a  distant  mercy,  beyond  and  distinct  from  their  present 
condition.  Looking  on  beyond  the  time  of  the  Captivity,  He  says  that  they  shall 
yet  have  a  time  of  joy,  "  as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn  feast."  God  would  give 
them  a  new  deliverance,  but  out  of  a  new  captivity.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles 
typifies  this  our  pilgrim-state,  the  life  of  simple  faith  in  God,  for  which  God 
provides ;  poor  in  this  world's  goods,  but  rich  in  God.  The  Church  militant 
dwells,  as  it  were,  in  tabernacles ;  hereafter,  we  hope  to  be  "  received  into  ever- 
lasting habitations"  in  the  Church  triumphant.  (E.  B.  Pitsey,  D.D.)  The 
days  of  Moed  : — 1.  Explanation.  Of  ancient  agreement,  or  according  to  appointed 
days ;  for  God  had  promised  to  give  the  land  of  Canaan  to  the  posterity  of 
Abraham  for  their  perpetual  rest.  Explanation — 2.  Israelites  are  here  reproved, 
because  they  neglected  the  command  of  God,  who  had  instituted  a  festal  day, 
on  which  they  were  to  commemorate  yearly  their  redemption.  Explanation — 
3.  The  prophet  threatens  the  Israelites,  as  though  he  said,  '  God  will  again  drive 
you  out,  that  you  may  dwell  in  tents,  as  you  formerly  did  in  the  desert." 
Explanation — 4.  "  Inasmuch  as  your  former  redemption  has  lost  its  influence 
through  your  wicked  forgetfulness,  I  will  become  again  your  Redeemer ;  I  will 
therefore  make  thee  to  abide  in  tents  as  formerly ;  as  your  first  redemption  avails 
nothing,  I  will  add  a  second,  that  you  may  at  length  repent,  and  know  how 
much  you  are  indebted  to  Me."     {John  Calvin.) 

Ver.  10.  I  have  also  spoken  by  the  prophets.  —  The  responsibility  of  having 
(he  revealed  Word  of  God  :  —  This  is  a  further  declaration  of  God's  goodness 
to  this  people,  and  an  upbraiding  of  them  for  their  wickedness,  when 
they  have  had  so  many  means.  1.  It  is  God  who  speaks  by  the  prophets. 
Though  the  prophets  and  the  messengers  of  God  are  mean,  yet  so  long  as  they 
speak  to  you  in  His  name,  the  authority  of  what  they  say  is  above  any.  They 
may  be  under  their  auditors  in  many  ways,  but  the  message  they  bring  is  above 
them  ;  though  they  are  weak,  the  power  of  God  goes  along  with  what  they  speak. 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOS.  [chap.  xn. 

to  make  it  good.     The  Word  does  little  good  till  men  come  to  apprehend  this, 
that  it  is  God  who  speaks  by  His  messengers.     2.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  a  people 
for  God  to  reveal  His  mind  to  them  by  His  prophets.     What  would  all  the  world 
be  but  as  a  dungeon  of  daarkness,  were  it  not  for  the  prophets  and  ministers  of 
God  ?     3.  God  will  take  accoimt  of  what  becomes  of  the  word,  labour,  and  pains 
of  His  prophets.     So  He  here  upbraids  Ephraim  with  them.     God  will  take  £iccount 
of  all  the  spirits  that  His  ministers  spend,  of  every  drop  of  their  sweat,  and  of  all 
their  watchings  in  the  night ;  I  sent  My  prophets,  rising  early.     God  will  take 
account  of  all,  and  you  shall  know  that  there  has  been  a  prophet  among  you ; 
the  ministers  shall  be  brought  out  to  say  and  testify,  "  Lord,  I  was  in  such  a 
place,  and  I  revealed  Thy  mind  thus  unto  them;  they  could  not  but  be  con- 
vinced, and  yet  still  they  continued  in  their  wickedness."     (Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 
And  used  similitudes.  —  The  figurative   and  literal  in  Scripture  :  —  There  is  a 
strong  tendency  of  the  mind  to  delight  in  figurative  descriptions  above  literal 
statements.     Unless  all  the  powers  of  the  mind  are  equally  cultivated;  unless 
there  is  a  due  balance  of  the  faculties  preserved  in  all  mental  operations,  the 
imagination  will  certainly  prevail ;  and  there  will  be  felt  a  reluctance  to  relinquish 
the  splendid  object  of  contemplation   in  which  the  imagination  is  interested, 
for  what  might  be  called  a  cold  contemplation  of  truth  in  its  literality.     We  never 
rise  to  the  fountain-head  of  truth  till  we  have  seen  it  literally ;  till  we  have 
stripped  it  of  all  figurative  dress,  till  we  have  seen  it  in  its  own  soberness  and  its 
own  simplicity,  we  have  never  seen  it  as  it  is ;  and  figurative  language  is  employed 
for  the  purpose  of  giving  to  the  mind  such  an  interest  in  the  truth  to  be  understood, 
as  will  lead  to  the  literal  contemplation  of  it.     Many  things  operate  in  the  pro- 
duction of  figurative  language.     Such  as  the  limited  vocabulary  of  uncivilised 
and  early  nations.     The  state  of  things  in  Eastern  coimtries,  luxurious  vegetation, 
&c.     What  are  we  to  lay  down  as  the  principles  on  which  we  are  to  deal  with 
figurative  language  ?     We  have  to  inquire  whether  the  language  is  employed 
in  reference  to  a  vision,  or  whether  it  is  the  mere  result  of  prophetic  inspiration. 
Figurative  language  in  visions  is  not  to  be  taken  literally.     A  great  number  of 
predictions  are  delivered  in  figurative  language.     By  a  "  similitude  "  we  under- 
stand something  resembling  what  it  is  desired  to  describe.     Orientals  frequently 
selected  things  to  be  the  signs  of  words,  instead  of  words  themselves.      Parables, 
though  often  taken  literally,  are  nothing  more  than  similitudes.     Parables  are 
sometimes  intended  to  illustrate  simply  one  idea,  and  meaning  should  not  be 
forced  into  the  mere  parts  of  a  parable.     A  safe  rule  would  be,  always  to  take 
the  language  of  Scripture  literally,  except  when  that  would  involve  an  absurdity. 
How  often  has  the  cause  of  God  been  traduced  by  its  adversaries,  how  often 
bvu-lesqued  by  the  infidel,  in  consequence  of  the  extravagant  and  figurative  inter- 
pretations of  its  own  friends  !     The  figurative  interpretation,   that  is,   taking 
figures  for  literalities,  began  with  a  pagan  school  of  philosophers,  who,  when  con- 
verted, brought  their  mystical  philosophy  into  their  interpretation  of  Scripture. 
Unfortunately  this  method  has  come  to  be  styled  "  spiritual  "  interpretation. 
Those  who  offer  these  interpretations  to  the  people,  and  often  bewilder  their  minds 
by  them,  interpret  by  no  rule,  and  on  no  principle :  just  what  they  like  they  deem 
to  be  meant ;  just  what  they  feel  to  be  beautiful  is  accepted  by  them  ;  just  what 
they  feel  to  be  interesting  is  declared  to  be  true.     (John  Burnet.)      _  Everybody's 
sermon  : — Among  the  rest  of  God's  agencies  for  striking  the  attention  and  con- 
science of  the  people,  was  the  use  of  similitudes.     The  prophets  were  accustomed 
not  only  to  preatch,  but  to  be  themselves  as  signs  and  wonders  to  the  people. 
God  is  every  day  preaching  to  us  by  similitudes.     Providence  is  God's  sermon. 
I.  Begin  with  the  early  morning.     This  morning  you  awaked,  and  put  on  your 
garments.     By  a  similitude  God  reminded  you  that  you  needed  a  garment  for 
your  souL     Taking  meals.     Going  to  business.     Returning  home  in  the  evening, 
all  are  similitudes.     II.  All  the  year  rotind  God  doth  preach  to  man  by 
SIMILITUDES.     Seed-time.     Then  the  time  of  blade ;   of  ear,  of  full  com  in  the 
ear.     The  migration  of  birds.     The  wind,  heat,  &c.     HI.  Every  place  to  which 

TOTJ  JOURNEY,   EVERY    ANIMAL   YOU   SEE,   EVERY    SPOT   YOU   VISIT,   HAS  A    SERMON 

FOR  YOU.  Journeying,  the  mountains,  the  sea,  all  have  their  lesson  for  us. 
IV.  Every  man  en  his  calling  has  a  sermon  preached  to  him.  Illustrate 
from  the  farmer,  the  baker,  the  butcher,  the  brewer,  the  salesman,  the  writer, 
the  doctor,  the  builder,  the  jeweller,  &c.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Despising  God's 
Word  : — God  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men.  It  is  enough  to  take  away  every 
excuse  from  men  to  allege  the  fact,  that  they  obey  not  the  Word,  and  offer  not 


CHAP,  xin.]  HOSEA.  209 

themselves  to  God  as  submissive  and  teachable,  when  He  by  His  prophets  exhorts 
them  to  repentance.  It  is  an  enhancing  of  sin  when  God  says  He  has  uselessly 
spent  all  His  efforts  to  collect  the  dispersed  Israel,  through  the  labours  of  Hi3 
prophets.  (John  Calvin.)  God's  method  in  teaching  the  great  teachers  of  the 
world : — God  is  the  great  Teacher  of  mankind.  He  teaches  the  best  lessons  in 
the  best  way  and  for  the  best  purpose.  God  has  always  employed  prophets  in  His 
great  school  for  humanity.  The  text  indicates  His  method  of  teaching  them. 
I.  By  visions.  He  gives  to  these  men  inner  revelations,  unfolds  to  them  spiritual 
realities,  opens  their  spiritual  eyes,  and  bids  them  look.  What  wonderful  visions 
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  Daniel,  Paul,  and  John  had.  These  visions  serve  to  show  three 
things.  I.  The  distinguishing  glory  of  the  human  mind.  2.  The  accessibility 
of  the  human  mind  to  God.  3.  The  reality  of  spiritual  things.  II.  By  similitude. 
He  showed  them  the  invisible  by  the  visible,  the  spiritual  by  the  sensuous.  He 
gave  them  parables.  There  are  good  reasons  for  this  mode  of  teaching  spiritual 
truth.  1.  It  makes  the  spiritual  more  attractive.  2.  It  makes  the  material 
appear  more  Divine.  {Homilist.)  "Take  heed  how  you  hear": — The  Lord 
takes  account  of  the  manner  of  men's  preaching  as  well  as  the  things  they 
preach.  Men  may  have  their  sins  aggravated,  not  only  for  standing  out  against 
the  Word,  but  against  the  Word  so  and  so  delivered.  The  main  necessary  truths 
of  God  are  made  known  to  all,  but  to  some  they  are  given  in  a  more  sweet  and 
winning  way,  in  a  more  convincing  manner  than  to  others.     {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 

Ver.  14.  Therefore  shall  He  leave  Ms  blood  upon  Mm,  —  The  blood-figure: 
sin  and  guilt  left  upon  the  sinner:  —  That  is,  he  shall  bring  his  sin  upon  his 
own  head.  Those  that  be  wilful  in  sin,  their  blood  be  upon  their  own  heads, 
that  is  the  meaning.  Never  stand  excusing  any  more,  you  have  warning  enough. 
If  you  will  go  on  in  your  way,  the  blood  be  upon  your  own  head,  you  will  undo 
vourselves,  and  there  is  no  help.  Mark  the  phrase,  "  Therefore  shall  He  leave 
his  blood  upon  him."  When  God  brings  the  guilt  and  punishment  of  sin  on  a  man's 
own  head,  and  there  leaves  it,  that  is  sad  indeed.  It  is  happiness  when  it  may 
be  said  of  God,  He  has  made  the  sin  and  the  guilt  to  pass  away  from  the  siimer. 
But  on  the  other  side,  when  God  leaves  the  sin,  with  its  attendant  guilt,  upon 
the  sinner,  there  is  woe  indeed.  The  Lord  many  times  brings  His  saints  unto 
the  fire  of  aflSictions,  but  He  will  not  leave  them  there  ;  but  when  He  brings  the 
wicked  into  the  fire,  there  He  leaves  them.     {Jeremiah  Burroughs.) 


CHAPTER  Xin. 


Ver.  I.  When  Ephraim  spake  trembling,  he  exalted  himself  In  Israel; 
hut  when  he  offended  In  Baal,  he  died. — Two  conditions  of  Ephraim : — "  Spake 
trem'bling,"  i.e.,  there  was  trembling.  "  Ephraim  was  once  very  awful," 
Bishop  Hall  says,  "  so  as,  while  he  spake,  the  rest  of  the  tribes  were  ready  to 
tremble."  The  prophet  contrasts  two  conditions  of  Ephraim,  of  prosperity  and 
destruction.  His  prosperity  he  owed  to  the  undeserved  mercy  of  God,  who  blessed 
him  for  Joseph's  sake  ;  his  destruction,  to  his  own  sin.  There  is  no  period  recorded 
when  Ephraim  spake  tremblingly,  i.e.,  in  humility.  Pride  was  his  characteristic, 
almost  as  soon  as  he  had  a  separate  existence  as  a  tribe.  Under  Joshua,  it  could 
not  be  called  out,  for  Ephraim  gained  honour,  when  Joshua,  one  of  themselves, 
became  the  captain  of  the  Lord's  people.  Under  the  judges,  their  pride  appeared. 
Yet  God  tried  them,  by  giving  them  their  heart's  desire.  They  longed  to  be 
exalted,  and  He  satisfied  them,  if  so  be  they  would  thus  serve  Him.  They  had  the 
chief  power,  and  were  a  terror  to  Judah.  But  he  abused  the  goodness  of  his 
Grod  ;  his  sin  followed  as  a  consequence  of  God's  goodness  to  him.  God  raised 
him,  and  he  offended.  The  alliance  with  a  king  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  which  brought 
in  the  worship  of  Baal,  was  a  part  of  the  worldly  policy  of  the  kings  of  Israel. 
The  twenty-two  years  of  Ahab's  reign  established  the  worship.  The  prophets 
of  Baal  became  450,  the  prophets  of  the  kindred  idolatry  of  Ashtoreth,  or  Astarte, 
became  400  ;  Baal  had  his  one  central  temple,  large  and  magnificent,  a  rival 
of  that  of  God.  The  prophet  Elijah  thought  the  apostasy  almost  universaL 
{E.  B.  Pv^ey,  D.D.)        The  responsibility  of  those  having  authority  and  influence  : — • 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

When  Ephraim  spoke,  there  was  trembling.  There  was  a  time  when  Ephraim 
was  very  honourable  among  the  tribes,  when  the  very  speaking  of  Ephraim  had 
great  power,  and  took  great  impression  upon  whomsoever  he  spoke  to.  1.  It  is 
an  honour  to  have  respect  from  others  when  we  speak,  to  have  what  we  say  re- 
ceived with  reverence  and  respect,  showing  that  it  impresses  the  hearts  of  others, 
and  is  not  cast  out  as  a  vain  and  worthless  thing.  Let  children,  servants,  and 
all  inferiors,  learn  to  give  due  honour  to  those  whom  God  has  set  above  them. 
2.  Those  who  are  in  place  of  power  over  others  account  it  their  honour,  not  only 
that  those  under  them  should  regard,  but  that  they  should  tremble  at  what  they 
say.  Man  greatly  delights  to  lift  himself  above  others,  and  to  lord  it  imperi- 
ously over  them.  3.  The  subjection  of  the  hearts  of  men  to  those  in  authority 
is  a  work  of  God,  and  God  is  to  have  the  glory  of  it.  4.  The  meaner  the  beginnings 
of  men  are,  the  more  imperious  they  often  prove  when  in  power.  5.  Sin  will  bring 
men's  honour  down.  Let  men  take  heed  of  trusting  their  former  repute,  for  let 
them  have  done  what  they  will  heretofore,  yet  if  they  depart  from  God,  their 
honour  will  depart  too.  {Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Ood'»  gifts  dependent  on  man's 
moods  : — Over  and  over  again  Hosea  denounces  Ephraim  for  their  infatuated 
idolatry.  AU  through  the  history  idolatry,  like  a  hideous  disease,  disfigured  the 
national  life,  but  yet  in  varying  degree.  With  their  faith  went  their  strength, 
and  in  those  days  individual  prophets  or  pious  kings  were  powerless  to  stem  the 
wave  of  destruction  that  overwhelmed  the  land.  The  lesson  is  for  all  time.  "  God 
matches  His  gifts  to  man's  believing."  They  who  tremble,  acknowledge  their 
guilt  before  Him,  are  made  strong.  They  who  go  after  idolatry  are  heavily 
punished  or  swept  away.  Idolatry  has  changed  its  symbols,  but  it  has  not  changed 
its  nature.  What  are  our  own  temptations  to  idolatry  in  England  at  the  end  of 
the  nineteenth  century  ?  One  of  our  chief  dangers  is  idolatry  of  the  visible. 
The  difficulty  of  believing  that  love  means  something  besides  ministry  to  the  body 
and  mind.  But  national  benevolence  and  national  progress  will  never  make  up 
for  national  apostasy.  Once  lose  hold  on  the  unseen,  once  rest  satisfied  with  our 
good  intentions,  and  we,  as  a  nation,  shall  cease  to  carry  on  our  mission.  For  a 
nation  to  be  true  to  itself  is  for  it  to  be  true  to  its  best.  The  national  faith  is  the 
first  thing  to  preserve.     ( W.  R.  Button,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  They  sin  more  and  more.  —  Steps  in  apostasy : — There  is  no  stop 
in  apostasy.  Let  men  once  apostatise  from  God,  there  is  no  stop  then ;  they 
cannot  tell  whither  they  may  go,  when  once  they  begin  to  roll  down.  Steps 
in  an  apostate's  departure  from  God  are — 1.  Some  slight  sin  against  knowledge, 
though  never  so  little,  for  sin  of  mere  infirmity  I  cannot  call  apostasy  ;  but  if  it  be 
ever  so  little  a  sin  against  knowledge,  it  breaks  the  bond  of  obedience.  When 
vou  will  venture  to  do  that  which  you  know  is  against  God,  this  bond  of  obedience 
being  broken,  no  marvel  though  you  fall,  and  "  sin  more  and  more."  2.  Every 
act  of  sin  tends  to  increase  the  habit.  Corruption  grows  by  acting ;  as  with  grace, 
every  act  of  grace  extends  grace  in  the  heart  of  a  man  ;  and  the  way  to  grow  in 
grace  is  to  act  grace  much ;  so  that  when  you  are  acting  your  grace,  you  do  not 
only  that  which  is  your  duty,  but  you  are  growing  in  grace:  so  when  you  are 
acting  of  corruption,  you  are  not  only  doing  that  which  is  evil,  but  you  are 
increasing  the  tendency  to  it ;  and  therefore  every  sin  that  causes  us  to  decline 
from  God,  makes  us  to  go  more  and  more  from  God.  3.  Every  sin  against  con- 
science weakens  the  work  of  conscience.  The  authority  of  conscience  will  quickly 
be  weakened  when  it  is  once  broken ;  break  but  off  the  yoke  of  conscience,  and 
conscience  will  be  weaker  than  it  was  before.  The  first  time  a  man  sins  against 
conscience,  his  conscience,  having  a  great  deal  of  strength  in  it,  mightily  troubles 
him  ;  but  having  had  a  flaw,  as  it  were,  it  grows  weaker.  Every  sin  does  some- 
what weaken  conscience,  and  therefore  one  that  falls  off  from  God  will  "  sin  more 
and  more."  4.  A  man  loses  his  comfort  in  God  according  to  the  degree  of  his 
departure  from  Him.  5.  When  one  has  sinned  against  God,  holy  duties  become 
very  unsuitable  to  his  soul.  It  is  a  more  difiScult  thing  to  engage  his  heart  in 
them  than  before,  and  so  he  comes  to  neglect  duties,  and  by  neglecting  them  his 
corruption  grows.  6.  The  presence  of  God  is  terrible  to  an  apostate.  He  cannot 
think  of  God  without  some  terror ;  before  he  would  often  think  and  speak  of  God, 
but  now  he  puts  off  the  thoughts  of  God.  It  must  needs  be  that  he  must  wander 
up  and  down  even  more  and  more,  be  as  a  Cain  wandering  away  from  the  presence 
of  God.  7.  The  thoughts  of  whatsoever  might  turn  an  apostate's  heart  to  God 
are  grievous  to  him.     8.  One  sin  cannot  be  maintained  without  another.     As  now. 


CHAP,  xni.]  HOSE  A.  211 

you  find  when  one  man  has  done  wrong  to  another,  he  knows  not  how  to  carry 
it  out  but  by  doing  him  more  wrong,  to  crush  him  if  he  can.  And  ao  there  are 
many  sins  that  have  other  sins  depending  upon  them.  If  a  man  be  engaged  in  a 
business  that  is  sinful,  in  order  that  he  may  carry  it  on  successfully,  he  must 
commit  a  great  many  other  sins,  and  so  fall  off  more  and  more.  9.  The  pride  of 
men's  hearts  is  such  that  they  will  attempt  to  justify  transgression.  Men  love  to 
justify  what  they  have  done  ;  when  they  have  sinned,  they  will  grow  more  resolute 
and  violent,  that  all  people  might  think  that  their  hearts  recoil  not  in  the  least. 
10.  When  men  have  gone  far  in  sin,  they  grow  desperate.  They  little  hope  ever 
to  recover  themselves,  and  therefore  "sin  more  and  more."  11.  God  in  His 
just  judgment  withdraws  Himself  from  apostates.  12.  God  gives  up  apostates 
to  their  corruptions,  and  to  the  power  of  the  devil.  Oh,  stand  with  all  your  might 
against  the  beginning  of  sin ;  tremble,  and  stop  on  the  threshold !  {Jeremiah 
Burroughs)  Sinning  more  and  more : — 1.  The  start  in  life  is  fair  and  promis- 
ing. 2.  There  is  a  wish  to  be  a  man  before  the  age  of  manhood  has  been  reached. 
3.  There  is  an  aversion  to  religion,  and  an  appetite  for  what  is  evil.  4.  There  is 
indulgence  in  vicious  habits.  5.  There  is  the  silencing  of  all  the  remonstrances  of 
conscience.  6.  There  is  the  defiance  of  irreligion  and  immorality.  {G.  Brooks.) 
And  have  made  them  molten  images  of  their  silver,  and  idols  according 
to  their  own  understanding,  all  of  it  the  work  of  the  craftsman.  —  Idols 
wholly  human  productions  : — The  emphasis  is  where  you  would  not  expect  it  to 
be;  it  is  upon  the  words  "all  of  it."  There  is  not  one  sacred  spot  in  any 
idol ;  there  is  not  one  faint  signature  of  the  living  God  upon  anything  that  man 
has  made  with  his  own  hands  to  worship ;  it  is  as  if  eyes  of  fire  had  searched  the 
idols  through  and  through,  and  as  if  the  hands  of  critics  had  written  their  record, 
and  reported  in  these  words :  The  idol  is  all  base,  all  dross,  all  material ;  all  of  it 
is  the  work  of  the  hands  of  craftsmen.  Men  cannot  step  from  the  finite  to  the 
infinite.  A  finite  creature  cannot  make  an  infinite  idol.  Whatever  is  made  is 
less  than  the  maker.  If  a  man  has  made  a  god,  he  is  greater  than  the  god  he  has 
made.  To  have  genius  and  power  to  make  it  is  to  have  another  genius  and  power 
equal  to  condemn  it.  Men  get  tired  of  what  they  have  made.  Ambition  may 
arise  and  say.  Make  a  better;  then  comes  the  displacement  of  the  former  god, 
amid  every  sign  and  token  of  contempt.  These  words  should  be  cried  out 
poignantly,  bitterly,  sarcastically.  A  man  is  standing  before  the  idol,  and  he  has 
gone  through  it  atom  by  atom,  so  to  speak,  lineament  by  lineament,  and  he  says 
at  the  end — "  all  of  it"  :  there  is  not  one  speck  of  heavenly  gold  in  all  this  handful 
of  earthly  rubbish.  "  They  say  of  them.  Let  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the 
calves."  It  was  said  in  Israel  concerning  the  calves,  "  These  be  thy  gods,  0  Israel." 
To  kiss  was  in  the  ancient  times  a  sign  of  homage,  either  human  or  Divine.  Men 
kissed  their  gods.  When  they  could  not  kiss  their  gods,  as,  for  example,  in  the 
instance  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  they  kissed  their  fingers,  and  waved  their  kissed 
hands  to  the  objects  of  worship.  The  Divine  Being  does  not  hesitate  to  accept 
this  action,  and  give  it  its  highest  meaning,  hence  in  the  Second  Psalm  there  is  one 
who  says,  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."  That 
man  shoiild  have  descended  to  kiss  a  god  of  his  own  making  is  the  consummation 
of  weakness,  and  the  very  climax  of  ignorance  and  blasphemy.  All  this  happened 
in  ancient  times.  That  is  true,  but  all  this  happens  letter  for  letter  to-day. 
Man  cannot  get  beyond  the  tether  of  his  race.  It  is  man  that  is  tethered  ;  not  a 
man,  some  man,  a  particular  and  dying  man,  but  humanity.  We  are  all  in  one 
condemnation  ;  the  act  of  homage  has  not  ceased,  the  object  of  desire  may  have 
changed.  Men  live  in  circumstances,  and  are  lost  in  details,  and  therefore  it  is 
probable  that  they  may  imagine  if  they  have  substituted  some  other  object  for  the 
calves  of  Israel,  therefore  they  have  left  the  old  idolatry.  That  is  not  so.  If  a 
man  be  trusting  to  his  own  right  arm,  he  is  as  great  an  idolater  as  any  that  ever 
lived  in  Israel.  Whoso  says  he  has  money  enough  to  keep  out  the  difficulties 
of  time,  the  slaves  of  want,  and  therefore  he  need  not  concern  himself  with 
providence  in  any  spiritual  or  metaphysical  sense,  is  as  much  an  idolater  as  he  who 
in  uncivilised  lands  bows  down  to  stock  or  stone,  or  lifts  eyes  of  wondering  ignorance 
to  the  blue  heavens  that  he  may  fix  them  upon  something  of  which  he  will  make 
the  image  of  a  god.  Yet  all  these  heathen  practices  awlmit  of  the  highest  applica- 
tions. Let  no  man  reject  natiu:e,  it  is  God's  handiwork ;  no  craftsman  made 
the  sun  ;  no  hireling  servant  set  the  stars  in  their  places.  If  any  poor  heart, 
ill  at  ease,  should  pick  out  some  fair-faced  star  and  say.  Be  thou  god  to  me,  it 
might  be  the  beginning  of  a  higher  religion,  the  truer  and  nobler  faith.     These 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

are  mysteries,  and  are  not  to  be  spoken  about  scornfully.  He  does  not  know  the 
human  heart  who  says  to  men  who  know  no  better,  that  idolatry  is  a  sin.  It 
was  a  sin  in  Israel,  because  it  involved  backsliding  from  the  true  God ;  but  find  a 
man  in  a  savage  land  who  has  never  heard  of  Grod  or  Christ,  and  to  whom  the 
words,  father,  mother,  brother,  sister,  carry  no  dew  of  blessing,  no  colour  of  poetry, 
no  suggestion  of  wider  and  eternal  fellowships — find  a  man  there  clinging  to  but  a 
handful  of  mud  in  the  expectation  that  there  is  something  in  it  that  can  help  him, 
and  it  is  no  sin :  it  should  be  the  business  of  those  who  know  better  to  teach 
him  better :  let  what  he  has  seized  be  the  alphabet  out  of  which  to  make  words, 
and  music,  and  wisdom.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  gold  god: — I  was  travel- 
ling recently  with  an  old  Jewish  merchant,  who  had  commenced  his  career  in 
a  Western  city  fifty  years  ago,  and  who  has  been  accumulating  money  all  these 
years  until  he  is  now  a  millionaire,  though  as  hot  in  the  chase  for  the  dollars  as 
in  his  younger  years.  His  whole  thought  and  being  seemed  absorbed  in  the 
matter  of  getting  money.  He  told  me  his  wife  was  very  different  from  him- 
self; she  was  fond  of  music  and  books  and  art.  "She  came  to  me  the  other 
day,"  said  he,  "  with  a  book  on  astronomy  in  her  hands,  and  said :  '  Jacob, 
there  is  going  to  be  a  new  star ;  let  me  read  to  you  about  it.'  But,"  said  the 
old  man,  "I  answered  her  by  lifting  both  hands  and  exclaiming:  'Don't  bother 
me,  Rebecca !  I  care  more  about  the  price  of  overalls  than  about  all  the  stars 
in  the  sky.'  "  It  seemed  to  me  a  striking  illustration  of  the  power  of  the  money- 
getting  instinct  when  given  full  sway  in  a  man's  life  to  drown  out  all  desire  for 
higher  things.     {A.  Banks,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  As  the  morning  cloud  .  .  .  early  dew  ...  as  the  chaff  ...  as  the  smoke 

out  of  the  chimney. — The  life  of  the  wicked : — I.  It  is  deceptive.  "  Like 
the  morning  cloud."  In  Palestine  and  countries  of  the  same  latitude,  dense 
clouds  often  appear  in  the  morning,  cover  the  heavens,  and  promise  fertilising 
showers  that  never  come.  A  life  without  moral  goodness  is  necessarily  decep- 
tive. It  deceives  itself  and  deceives  others.  How  many  lives  seem  full  of 
promise  !  But  they  result  in  nothing  but  disappointment.  II.  It  is  evan- 
escent. "  The  early  dew  that  passeth  away."  In  such  latitudes  too,  the  copious 
dews  that  sparkle  on  the  hedges  and  the  fields  soon  evaporate  and  disappear. 
The  millions  that  make  up  this  generation  are  only  as  dewdrops,  sparkling  for 
an  hour  and  then  lost  and  gone.  III.  It  is  worthless.  Like  chaff  stowed 
away  from  the  threshing-floor.  Chaff,  empty,  dead,  destined  to  rot.  How  empty 
the  life  of  an  ungodly  man  !  IV.  It  is  offensive.  "  As  the  smoke  out  of  the 
chimney."  The  ancient  houses  of  Palestine  were  without  chimneys:  the  smoke 
filled  the  houses,  and  smoke  is  a  nuisance.  A  corrupt  life  is  evermore  offensive 
to  the  moral  sense  of  mankind.  To  what  conscience  is  falsehood,  selfishness, 
carnality,  meanness  and  such  elements  that  make  up  the  character  of  the  wicked 
at  all  pleasing  ?     To  none.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  5-9.  I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  land  of  great 
drought.  —  Wilderness-knowledge  :  —  God  knows  His  people  where  nobody  else 
wiU  take  any  notice  of  them.  You  do  not  know  a  man  until  you  know  him 
in  the  wilderness.  There  is  but  little  revelation  of  character  in  laughter.  So 
long  as  a  man  is  living  in  rioting  and  wantonness,  in  great  abundance  and  pros- 
perity, having  only  to  lift  his  hand  to  command  a  regiment  of  servants,  you 
cannot  really  tell  what  his  true  quality  is.  Men  show  themselves  in  the  darkness ; 
men  cry  out  of  their  hearts  when  they  are  in  distress  ;  it  is  in  the  nighttime 
of  life's  bitter  sorrows  that  men's  true  quality  is  revealed.  God  never  forsakes 
His  people  in  wilderness  and  in  desert  places  ;  He  is  more  God  and  Father  to 
them  there  than  ever.  No  man  knows  God  who  only  knows  Him  theologically. 
It  is  impossible  to  read  much  about  God  ;  you  must  read  the  writing  in  your 
own  heart  The  world  is  within  you  ;  you  carry  the  imiverse  in  your  own 
bosom.  Unless  you  have  the  faculty  and  genius  of  introspection,  and  the  power 
to  read  the  small  print  that  is  bemg  daily  typed  upon  your  inmost  life,  you 
can  never  be  scholars  in  the  sanctuary  of  Christ,  you  can  never  attain  to  high 
degrees  of  wisdom  in  the  school  of  heaven.  Men  seek  God  in  the  wilderness. 
The  wilderness  is  the  school  of  discipline.  In  the  Bible  there  lies  one  great  desert 
land,  and  it  is  called  "  that  great  and  terrible  wildernevss."  There  could  not 
be  two  such  in  any  globe  ;  there  could  not  be  a  duplicate  experience  in  any 
life.     Some  things  can  be  done  only  once  ;  no  man  can  be  twice  in  Gethsemane  ; 


CHAP,  xm.]  HOSE  A.  213 

no  man  can  be  twice  crucified.  There  are  acts  in  life  which,  having  been  accom- 
plished, enable  the  sufferer  to  say.  The  bitterness  of  death  is  passed ;  come  what 
will  now,  it  is  but  a  day's  march  into  heaven.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Known 
in  time  of  distress  : — God  knew  Israel  in  the  wUderness — (1)  In  respect  of  their 
sin,  which  He  visited.  (2)  In  regard  of  their  wants,  which  He  provided  for. 
Observe — 1.  Man's  wickedness  strangely  contrasts  with  God's  goodness  ;  God  knew 
their  sin  and  yet  destroyed  them  not ;  they  receive  mercies,  and  yet  sin.  2.  It  is  a 
great  mercy  for  God  to  know  a  man  in  time  of  distress.  This  is  God's  way.  Men 
know  in  prosperity ;  but  let  us  make  God  our  friend,  He  wiU  be  a  friend  other- 
wise than  men  will  be.  3.  We  should  not  be  dejected  in  times  of  trouble ;  that 
is  the  time  for  God  to  know  thee  :  be  willing  to  foUow  God  in  any  estate.  4.  God's 
knowing  us  in  distress  is  a  mighty  engagement.  Let  us  look  back  to  the  times 
when  we  were  in  trouble.  5.  Let  us  kuow  God's  cause  when  it  suffers,  and  know 
our  brethren  in  their  sufferings.  6.  God's  knowledge  is  operative  and  working ;  it 
does  us  good.  Our  knowledge  of  God  should  be  so  too.  To  sin  against  our  know- 
ledge of  God  is  evil,  but  to  sin  against  God's  knowledge  of  us  is  worse.  {Jeremiali 
Burroughs.)  God  present  with  His  people  in  the  wilderness  : — I.  The  low  and 
WILDERNESS  STATE  OF  God's  PEOPLE.  1.  It  refers  to  their  spiritual  wants,  weak- 
nesses, and  troubles.  In  their  first  convictions  of  sin.  In  their  first  beginning 
to  walk  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  In  after  temptations.  In  seasons  of  dejection. 
2.  To  their  temporal  wants,  weaknesses,  and  troubles.  In  poverty  and  want ; 
in  pain  and  sickness  ;  in  the  dangers  of  life.     II.  What  kind  of  knowledge 

OR  NOTICE  IS  IT  THAT  GoD  TAKES  OF  HiS  PEOPLE  IN  THAT  STATE  ?       1.   It  is  with 

pity  and  compassion.  2.  So  as  to  manifest  His  love  to  them.  3.  So  as  to  bestow 
His  comforts  on  them.  4.  He  grants  His  presence  to  them.  5.  He  affords  them 
help.  III.  Lay  down  the  proof  and  evidence  of  this.  I.  The  Word  of  the 
Lord  often  declares  it.  2.  God's  dealings  with  His  people  in  all  ages  further 
confirm  it,  e.g.,  Jacob,  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  Jonah,  Hezekiah,  ancient  Israel. 
Application — 1.  Let  us  be  concerned  to  have  this  God  for  our  God.  2.  When  in 
a  wilderness  state,  let  us  trust  in  our  God.  3.  Remember  God's  kindness  in 
appearing  for  you.  4.  Despise  not  those  who  are  in  a  wilderness  state,  but 
"  weep  with  those  who  weep,"  &c.     {T.  Ilannam.) 

Ver.  6.  According  to  their  pasture,  so  were  they  filled  .  .  .  therefore  have 
they  forgotten  Me.  —  The  conjunction  of  secular  prosperity  and  spiritual  per- 
versity : — Here  are  men  in  good  physical  circumstances,  in  rich  pastures  well 
fed,  getting  thereby  proud  in  heart  and  forgetful  of  their  God.  I.  It  is  a  common 
CONJUNCTION.  Wealth  in  the  sinful  heart  tends — 1.  To  promote  self-indulgence — 
the  pampering  of  appetites  and  the  gratification  of  sinful  lusts.  2.  To  foster 
indolence.  It  weakens  and  generally  destroys  the  motive  to  industry.  II.  It 
is  an  INCONGRUOUS  conjunction.  Secular  prosperity  ought  to  lead  to  spiritual 
devotion.  1.  The  more  temporal  good  we  have,  the  more  means  we  have  for 
the  promotion  of  spiritual  excellence.  Property  puts  us  in  possession  of  a  power 
to  procure  books,  leisure,  teachers,  and  all  other  aids  to  spiritual  improvement. 
2.  The  more  temporal  good  we  have,  the  more  motives  we  have  for  the  cultiva- 
tion of  spiritual  excellence.  The  Bible  urges  the  mercies  of  God  as  an  incentive 
to  holy  life  :  "  We  beseech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God,"  &c.  3.  The  more  tem- 
poral good  we  have,  the  more  obligations  we  have  for  the  cultivation  of  spiritual 
improvement.  Thus  the  incongruity  of  the  conjunction.  III.  It  is  a  sinful 
conjunction.  The  curse  of  heaven  is  on  it.  It  is  sinful — 1.  Because  it  is  an 
abuse  of  God's  blessings.  2.  It  involves  an  infraction  of  God's  laws.  He  has 
commanded  us  in  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  to  make  known  our 
requests    unto    Him.      (Homilist.)  Poisoned    pastures : — The    grazing    land 

was  beautifully  green,  and  appeared  most  desirable  for  flocks  and  herds.  A 
farmer  turned  his  sheep  into  the  meadow,  but  after  a  short  time  some  of  them 
fell  sick,  and  eventually  all  of  them  were  affected.  No  one  could  understand 
the  reason,  until  it  was  discovered  that  a  flock  of  diseased  sheep  had  previously 
occupied  the  field,  the  grass  of  which  had  become  tainted  and  the  pasture  poisoned. 
How  careful  all  should  be  of  the  books  they  read,  the  companionships  they  form, 
and  the  amusements  in  which  they  indulge !  Do  they  taint  the  mind  and  poison 
the  soul  ?     For  according  to  their  pasture  so  is  their  life. 

Ver.  9.    0    Israel,  thou    hast    destroyed  thyself;  but  in  Me  is  thine  help. 

— Man    the    self -destroyer,    and    God    the    Saviour : — I.    The    lost    state    of. 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

MAN,  BOTH  BY  NATTTBE  AND  BY  PRACTICE.  Observe  to  whom  the  words  were 
spoken.  Of  His  ancient  people,  the  Lord,  by  His  prophet,  declares  that  "  they 
had  destroyed  themselves."  He  had  warned  them,  but  they  had  despised  His 
warnings  ;  He  had  threatened  them,  but  they  had  made  light  of  His  threaten - 
ings  ;  He  had  reproved  them,  but  they  would  have  none  of  His  reproof.  Is  it 
not  so  now  with  God's  Israel,  His  Christian  Church  ?  Who  is  there  whose  account 
of  sin  is  summed  up  in  birth-sin  only  ?  Who  is  there  that  is  guilty  of  imputed 
guilt  only  ?  Who  is  there  that  has  only  sinned  in  having  the  inclination  to  sin — 
the  disposition  to  break  God's  commandments — the  capability  of  doing  wrong  ? 
We  are  sinners  not  only  by  nature,  but  by  practice.  We  have  sinned  in  our 
thoughts.  The  very  principle  of  mind  being  corrupt,  whatever  arises  therefrom 
must  be  corrupt  also.  And  what  have  our  words  been  ?  Often  insincere, 
flattering,  proud,  corrupt,  empty.  Words  lead  on  to  actions.  He  cannot  act 
aright  who  does  not  first  think  aright.  II.  The  means  of  his  recoveey  and 
KESTORATiON.  Can  we  save  ourselves  ?  Let  any  man  try  of  himself,  and  by 
his  own  unassisted  strength,  to  think  but  one  good  and  holy  thought,  and  ha 
will  find  the  question  answered.  Is  there  no  ope  ?  In  Me  is  thy  help — in 
Me,  the  Almighty  Father,  the  eternal  Son,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Creator,  the 
Redeemer,  the  Sanctifier,  the  Just,  the  Merciful,  the  Holy  God.  (W.  W. 
Champneys,  M.A.)  The  sinner  his  own  destroyer  : — Our  text  gives  the  decision 
of  God,  who  cannot  be  deceived,  and  who  cannot  deceive.  Men  do  not  believe 
His  declarations.  They  cast  the  blame  of  their  destruction  from  themselves 
upon  God.  Sometimes  it  is  His  decree  which  constrains  them  :  sometimes  it 
is  the  withholding  of  His  grace  which  excuses  them ;  sometimes  it  is  the  force 
of  temptation  and  their  own  inability  which  exempts  them  from  blame.  The 
destruction  of  impenitent  sinners  is  procured  by  themselves.  I.  Establish 
THIS  truth  by  arguments.  1.  JDrawn  from  the  attributes  of  God.  Where 
would  His  justice.  His  mercy,  His  veracity  be,  if  He  were  the  procuring  cause 
of  man's  destruction  ?  2.  Drawn  from  the  Word  of  God.  Wliat  terms  does 
it  use  when  it  speaks  of  the  nature  of  God  ?  If  God  be  to  blame  for  the  sinner's 
perdition,  all  these  tender  expostulations  must  be  only  a  pompous  display  of 
unreal  feelings.  God  gives  many  unequivocal  assurances  that  He  would  "  have 
all  men  to  be  saved."  If  God  is  to  blame,  these  assurances  must  be  untrue. 
3.  Drawn  from  the  conduct  of  God.  Observe  the  way  in  which  He  has  acted 
towards  our  race  in  general,  or  toward  each  one  of  us  in  particular,  and  we  must 
be  convinced  that  if  we  are  lost,  the  blame  of  our  perdition  must  rest  entirely 
on  ourselves.  4.  The  sentiments  of  all  believers  establish  this  same  truth. 
5.  The  testimony  of  believers  is  corroborated  by  the  confessions  of  sinners  them- 
selves.    Nevertheless,  sinners  object  to  this  truth.     II.  Answer  the  objections. 

1.  From  the  decrees  of  God.  This  objection  is  drawn  from  a  subject  of  which 
we  have  very  inadequate  conceptions,  and  in  which  we  soon  get  beyond  our  depth. 

2.  The  principle  on  which  this  objection  is  founded  is  not  a  just  one.  It  is  that 
when  two  doctrines  are  affirmed  in  the  Scripture,  which  to  our  limited  capacity 
appear  irreconcileable,  we  are  authorised  to  embrace  the  one  and  reject  the  other. 
Show  why  this  principle  is  unjust.  3.  From  the  inability  of  man.  It  is  said 
that  God  requires  of  men  certain  duties  which  they  cannot  perform.  But  inability 
is  of  two  kinds,  natural  and  moral.  Natural  inability  consists  in  a  defect  of 
rational  faculties,  bodily  powers,  or  external  advantages.  Moral  inability  con- 
sists only  in  the  want  of  a  proper  disposition  of  heart  to  use  our  natural  ability 
aright.  And  this  is  the  essence  of  sin.  If  the  sinner  lies  under  the  first  inability, 
he  is  excusable  ;  but  if  under  the  second,  he  is  inexcusable.  Moral  inability 
is  viciousness  of  heart,  and  depravity  of  disposition.  By  reason  of  wilfully  cherish- 
ing this  moral  inability,  you  are  inexcusable,  you  "destroy  yourselves."  (H. 
Kollock,  D.D.)  The  sinner's  self-destruction  and  only  remedy  : — I.  His  sblf- 
uestruction.  "  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  L  That  the  ground 
of  condemnation  is  personal  character.  The  Bible  puts  it  nowhere  else.  "  If 
I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them  they  had  not  had  sin."  "  Ye  will  not 
come  to  Me  that  ye  may  have  eternal  life."  2.  God  governs  every  man  as  a 
free  agent.  He  is  left  to  choose  between  good  and  evil.  But  God  will  not  force 
his  choice,  not  even  to  save  him.  3.  The  provision  of  grace  is  ample  for  all  who 
will  accept  it.  None  are  excluded  from  its  scope.  Christ  tasted  death  for 
every  man."  4.  Life  is  tendered  to  you  and  urged  upon  you ;  the  means  of 
enlightenment,  of  conversion  and  training  for  heaven  are  all  in  your  hands. 
II.  The  only  bbmedy — the  only  way  to  escape  the  eternal  doom  of  the  self- 


CHAP.  XIII.]  BOSEA.  215 

destroyer.  "  In  Me  i«  thine  help."  The  sinner  can  destroy  himself,  but  he 
cannot  save  himself.  Salvation  from  sin  and  death  is  all  of  grace.  It  is  a  super- 
natural provision  outside  of  and  independent  of  human  device  and  human  merit. 
(J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  cause  of  the  destruction  of  impenitent  sinners : — 
Others  cannot  destroy  us  unless  we  contribute  by  our  own  negligence  to  our 
own  destruction.  The  Israelites  ought  to  blame  none  but  themselves  if  judg- 
ments from  heaven  should  overwhelm  them,  giving  them  up  to  the  Assyrians 
in  this  life,  and  to  punishment  after  death.  Here  God  condescends  to  exonerate 
His  conduct  in  regard  to  sinners  by  declaring  that  they  ought  to  take  the  whole 
blame  of  their  own  destruction  upon  themselves.  The  difficulties  of  this  subject 
proceed  either  from  our  notion  of  the  nature  of  God  ;  or  of  the  nature  of  religion  ; 
or  of  the  nature  of  man.  I.  The  nature  of  God.  As  Creator  and  Author  of 
every  being  that  exists,  and  of  everything  that  results  from  their  existence,  God 
seems  the  only  cause  of  the  miseries  of  His  creatiures.  There  are  two  ways  in 
which  we  may  satisfy  ourselves  on  this  subject.  One  is,  to  obtain  a  complete 
idea  of  the  decrees  of  God,  and  to  compare  them  so  exactly  with  the  disposi- 
tions of  sinners,  as  to  make  it  evident  by  this  compsirison  that  sinners  are  not 
under  a  necessity  of  committing  such  crimes,  as  cause  their  eternal  destruction. 
The  other  is,  to  refer  the  subject  to  the  determination  of  a  being  of  the  most  unsus- 
pected knowledge  and  veracity,  whose  testimony  we  may  persuade  ourselves 
is  unexceptionable,  and  whose  declaration  is  an  infallible  oracle.  The  &:st  of 
these  ways  is  impracticable,  and  always  must  remain  so.  Who  can  boast  of 
knowing  the  whole  arrangement,  all  the  extent  and  all  the  combinations,  of 
the  decrees  of  God  T  Try  the  second.  The  question  is  whether,  allowing  the 
decrees  of  God,  God  doth  any  violence  to  sinners,  compelling  them  to  commit 
sin  ?  God  Himself  declares  that  none  of  His  decrees  offer  violence  to  His 
creatures  ;  and  their  destruction  can  proceed  from  none  but  themselves.  He 
has  given  this  answer  in  those  pathetic  expostulations,  in  those  powerful  appli- 
cations, and  in  those  exhortations  which  He  employs  to  redeem  the  greatest 
sinners.  He  has  given  the  answer  by  tender  complaints  concerning  the  depravity 
of  mankind ;  by  express  assurances  that  He  would  have  all  men  to  be  saved  ; 
and  by  such  passages  as  the  text,  that  there  are  no  difficulties  insurmountable 
in  our  eaJvation,  except  such  as  we  choose  to  seek  there.  II.  The  nature  of 
REUGioN.  1.  As  to  evangelical  morality — how  clearly  it  is  revealed.  Heresy 
may  attack  our  religious  mysteries,  but  propositions  that  concern  moral  virtues 
are  placed  in  a  light  so  clear  that  nothing  can  diminish  its  brightness.  Religion 
clearly  requires  a  magistrate  to  be  equitable,  and  a  subject  obedient ;  a  father 
tender,  and  a  son  dutiful ;  a  husband  affectionate,  and  a  wife  faithful ;  a  master 
gentle,  and  a  servant  diligent ;  a  pastor  vigilant,  and  a  flock  teachable.  Religion 
clearly  requires  us  to  exercise  moderation  in  prosperity  and  patience  in  adversity. 
Our  moral  relations  are  regulated  in  a  manner  so  clear,  distinct,  and  intelligible 
that  we  not  only  cannot  invent  any  difficulties,  but  nobody  hath  ever  pre- 
tended to  invent  any.  2.  The  next  character  of  Christian  morality  is  dignity 
of  principle.  Why  did  God  give  us  laws  ?  Because  He  loves  us,  and  would 
have  us  love  Him.  How  pleasant  it  is  to  submit  to  bonds  which  the  love  of 
God  imposes  on  us.  3.  Another  character  is  the  justice  of  its  dominions.  All 
its  claims  are  foxmded  on  justice  and  equity.  4.  Another  featvu^  is  a  character 
of  proportion.  5.  Power  of  motive  is  another.  IIL  The  nature  of  man.  There 
are  implied  four  vague  and  erroneous  notions  of  human  depravity.  1.  When 
we  speak  of  oiu-  natural  impotence  to  practise  virtue  we  confound  it  with  an 
insurmountable  necessity  to  commit  the  greatest  Crimea  2.  We  confound  the 
sure  virtue  that  religion  inspires  with  other  virtues,  which  constitution,  education, 
and  motives  of  worldly  honour  are  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  practise.  3.  We 
confound  the  natural  depravity  of  a  man  born  a  pagan,  and  with  only  the 
light  of  reason,  with  that  of  a  Christian  bom  and  educated  among  Christians, 
and  amidst  all  the  advantages  of  revelation.  4.  We  confound  the  condition 
of  a  man,  to  whom  God  ha4;h  given  only  exterior  revelation,  with  the  conditions 
of  him  to  whom  God  offers  supernatural  aid  to  assist  him  against  his  natural 
frailty.  (James  Saurin,)  Pandora's  box  ;  or,  the  cause  of  all  evils  and  miseries  : 
— I  should  tremble  to  rehearse  the  text  in  your  ears,  if  there  were  not  comfort 
•n  it  as  well  as  terror.  You  may  discern  in  it  a  double  glass  ;  in  the  one  we  may 
see  ovur  hurt,  in  the  other  our  help.  Israel  is  destroyed.  Who  hath  destroyed 
Israel  T  Why  is  Israel  destroyed  T  I.  The  accident  to  the  subject  "  Destruc- 
tion."     Destruction   is   opposed   to  construction,  as   corruption   to  generation. 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

In  the  text  destruction  is  the  pulling  down  of  the  state,  and  downfall  of  the  king- 
dom of  Israel  All  politic  bodies  are  in  some  sort  subject  to  the  condition  of 
natural  bodies.  As  these,  so  they,  have  their  beginning  or  birth,  growth,  per- 
fection, state,  decay,  and  dissolution.  If  the  state  of  kingdoms  and  monarchies 
is  so  fickle,  what  folly,  or  rather  madness,  is  it  for  any  private  man  to  dream 
of  perpetuities  and  certainties  !  To  compose  the  seeming  difference  between 
God's  promises  to  Israel  and  His  threats  against  Israel,  we  must  distinguish 
divers  kinds  of  promises  made  to  Israel,  and  (fivers  Israels  to  whom  the  promises 
may  appertain.  II.  The  subject  of  this  accident.  Israel  may  signify,  properly, 
either  the  whole  posterity  of  Jacob,  or  the  Ten  Tribes  which  were  sent  from 
Eehoboam ;  figuratively  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  Christ  over  the  elect.  There 
is  a  threefold  Israel  1.  According  to  the  flesh  only.  2.  According  to  the  spirit 
only.  3.  According  to  the  flesh  and  spirit.  Some  of  the  promises  are  absolute, 
some  conditional,  some  temporal,  some  spiritual  III.  The  cause  op  this 
ACCIDENT  IN  THIS  SUBJECT.  Praise  God,  0  Israel  for  thy  former  prosperity, 
but  now  thank  thyself  for  thy  imminent  desolation.  Are  not  all  mixed  Dodies 
corrupted  on  the  disagreement  of  elements,  and  the  elements  themselves  by 
the  strife  of  contrary  qualities  within  them  ?  Are  not  all  metals  defaced  with 
their  own  rust  ?  God  is  the  cause  of  our  woe,  and  we  are  the  cause  of  our  woe. 
God  punisheth  us,  and  we  punish  ourselves.  1.  Let  us  then  confess  our  sins 
to  be  the  fuel  of  God's  wrath,  and  the  fountain  of  all  our  miseries.  2.  Let  us 
compose  ourselves  to  endure  that  with  patience  which  we  have  brought  upon 
ourselves,  3.  Let  us  forsake  our  beloved  sins;  let  repentance  be  our  practice, 
and  a  speedy  reformation  our  instruction,  so  God's  judgments  shall  not  be  our 
destruction.  (D.  FeaUey,  D.D.)  Israel  self-destroyed : — The  Gospel  of  our 
salvation  serveth  at  once  to  humble  and  to  exalt  us.  Like  certain  medicines 
for  the  body,  it  first  opens  and  searches  the  wounds  which  it  is  intended  to  heal. 
The  former  of  these  operations  is  as  necessary  as  the  latter,  though  far  from  being 
so  pleasing.  It  is  much  wiser  for  us  to  submit  to  all  the  pain  which  a  reflection 
upon  our  past  conduct  may  now  occasion  to  us,  than  to  shut  our  eyes  against 
real  danger.  I,  Israel  is  in  a  state  of  destbuotion  and  misery.  Consider 
this  charge  with  regard  to  all  mankind.  If  the  misery  is  real,  it  must  be  felt. 
It  may  be  felt,  however,  and  yet  not  be  acknowledged.  Meji  are  often  ashamed 
to  confess  their  real  feelings  on  this  subject.  Can  it  be  denied  that  man  is  in 
a  state  of  wretchedness  and  destruction  ?  II.  He  is  himself  the  author  op 
his  own  destruction.  He  hath  himself  entirely  to  blame  for  all  the  misery 
which  hath  come  upon  him.  Sin  has  brought  the  curse  upon  this  lower  world. 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die  "  is  an  irreversible  decree  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment. As  long  as  a  man  continues  a  sinner,  he  must  be  miserable  in  the  very 
nature  of  things.  To  bring  the  matter  a  little  nearer  us,  let  each  of  us  put  the 
question  to  his  own  breast,  Canst  thou  plead  exemption  from  that  general  cor- 
ruption which  hath  universally  affected  the  human  race  ?  {James  French.) 
Sin  a  universal  disease  : — ^With  us  all  the  occasional  derangements  to  which 
persons  of  the  strongest  health  are  liable  teach  every  one  the  importance  of 
knowing  particularly  of  his  own  bodily  constitution-  But  why  is  all  this  wisdom 
bestowed  on  the  body,  and  disregarded  in  the  corresponding  case  of  our  spiritual 
sickness  ?  Every  man  bears  the  seed  of  spiritual  disease  in  his  inward  frame. 
How  important  that  he  should  understand  his  own  symptoms.  To  brave  infec- 
tion, to  despise  precautions,  to  neglect  predispositions,  to  shut  his  eyes  to  growing 
disease,  to  refuse  proper  remedies,  where  the  life  of  the  soul  is  concerned,  is  no  less 
a  blind  folly  and  a  fatal  rashness  in  the  case  of  the  soul  than  in  that  of  the  body. 
Are  not  sins  diseases — fatal  diseases,  if  they  lead  to  death  ?  The  text  is  addressed, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  a  whole  people,  personified  or  spoken  to  as  an  individual 
person.  In  Israel  is  typified  all  mankind,  for  all  are  concluded  under  sin,  all 
are  guilty  before  God.  Sin  is  surely  the  symptom  of  fatal  disorder  in  the  soul, 
for  it  is  God's  revelation  that  no  sin  on  Goers  earth  is  forgiven  without  blood 
shed  for  it ;  and  that  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  heaven  anything  that  defileth 
— no  sin,  small  or  great,  unconfessed,  unforsaken,  unforgiven.  Where  there 
is  sin  on  the  conscience,  whether  known  or  unknown,  that  soul  has  destroyed 
itself.  Where  is  the  soul  that  has  not  some  time  sinned  ?  And  where  is  the 
conscience  that  has  washed  out  that  stain  for  itself  ?  And  what  is  the  washing 
that  can  take  the  stain  of  a  sin  out  of  an  immaterial  soul  ?  We  do  not  speak 
now  of  open  vice  and  wickedness.  We  do  not  address  the  conscience  that  is 
seared  with  red-hot  iron.     There  are  sins  which  are  not  so  gross,  which  lie  so 


CHAP.  XIII.]  HOSEA.  217 

deep  that  they  may  long  remain  unseen ;  not  so  hateful  to  men,  and  yet  aa 
dangerous  to  the  soul ;  for  the  root  of  dislike  to  God  and  enmity  to  godly  thincrs 
very  often  lies  hidden  among  such  secret  forms  of  sins.  How  much  real  god- 
liness of  heart  do  the  generality  of  professing  Christians  exhibit  ?  Can  there 
be  a  more  fatal  disorder  of  the  soul  than  formality,  indifference,  hypocrisy,  pro- 
fession without  practice,  lip-service  without  heart-service  ?  If  you  have 
enmities  and  cherish  hatred,  if  you  love  idle  gossip  and  carelessly  utter  slander, 
&c.  &c.,  you  must  admit  that  these  are  fatal  symptoms  of  something  miserably  wrong 
in  the  soul.  It  is  a  sure  sign  that  persons  have  "  destroyed  themselves  "  when 
they  have  no  hearts  to  praise  God.  Sin  is  not  only  the  commission  of  particular 
stated  offences ;  it  is  the  state  of  the  heart,  it  is  being  without  a  sufficient  love 
a  sufficient  liking,  for  God's  goodness,  and  having  more  liking  for  things! 
Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law.  And  this  is  the  law — to  love  my  neighbour 
as  myself.  But  if  we  have  destroyed  ourselves,  is  there  no  hope,  is  there  no 
help  ?  Few  words  will  suffice  to  disclose  that  mighty  remedy  which  is  in  our 
God  alone.  "  In  Me  is  thy  help."  (Brereton  E.  Dwarris,  M.A.)  The  sinner 
his  oum  destroyer : — Self-destruction  is  a  crime  of  awful  and  unparalleled  turpi- 
tude.    A  few  facts  will  make  this  clear  beyond  a  peradventure.     I.  No  man 

IS   DESTROYED   IN   HELL  FOB   EVER   SIMPLY   BECAUSE    HE    IS    A   SINNEE.      All    have 

sinned,  and  all  would  inevitably  perish  had  not  Omnipotent  Love  intervened 
to  prevent  it.  The  sinner  that  dies  at  last,  dies  not  because  he  is  a  sinner  but 
because  being  a  sinner  he  refused  the  pardon  and  grace  offered.     II.  A  free 

AND  FULL  SALVATION  HAS  BEEN  WROUOHT  OUT  AND  IS  PROFFERED  TO  EVERY 

SINNER.  The  physician  is  at  hand.  There  is  "  balm  in  Gilead  "  to  heal  sin's 
dreadful  malady.  III.  God  watts  long  and  graciously  to  welcome  the 
SINNER  BACK  TO  LIFE.  He  restrains  His  anger.  He  affords  every  opportunity. 
He    sends    forth    His    messenger.      IV.  God   puts    no    hindrances    in    the 

sinner's     way,     imposes       no     restraint      on     the      FREE      EXERCISE      OF      HIS 

WILL.  V.  Every  possible  inducement  is  held  out,  an  amazing  system 
OF  means  and  AGENCIES  IS  PUT  IN  FORCE,  to  morally  constrain  him  to  obey 
and  live ;  so  that,  if  he  destroys  his  soul  at  last,  it  can  only  be  by  personalh'- 
resisting  and  overcoming  the  combined  efforts  of  God  and  man  to  prevent  it ! 
{J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  Self -destruction, — Ood  salvation: — There  is  no  more 
mournful  spectacle  in  history  than  that  of  a  nation  concerning  which  this  has 
to  be  said,  "  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  It  is  bad  enough  when  a  nation 
is  destroyed  by  other  powers.  But  there  is  something  sadder,  if  our  eyes  were 
only  opened  to  see  it.  The  sadder  spectacle  is  that  of  the  human  soul  of  whom 
it  can  be  truthfully  said,  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  It  is  bad 
enough  to  be  destroyed  by  Satan ;  but  it  is  worst  of  all  to  feel  that  we  ourselves 
are  the  instruments  of  our  own  ruin.  There  is  a  whole  multitude  of  different 
kinds  of  powers  which  are  brought  to  bear  upon  the  ungodly  man  for  his  ruin. 
But  no  existing  force  can  ruin  the  human  soul  unless  it  is  false  to  its  own  interests. 
As  long  as  man  is  true  to  himself,  and  therefore  true  to  his  God,  so  long  is  he 
invincible.  But  let  that  man  once  turn  his  back  upon  that  Being  from  whom 
he  has  derived  his  origin,  and  on  whom  he  is  wholly  dependent,  then  the  man 
is  paralysed  and  stripped  of  all  moral  power.  Why  do  I  desire  to  bring  the 
accusation  of  the  text  home  ?  Because  there  is  a  tendency  in  the  human  heart 
to  lay  the  blame  of  its  own  sins  on  somebody  else,  and  pre-eminently  on  God  Him- 
self. Do  not  let  us  try  and  throw  off  the  blame  from  our  own  shoulders  on  to 
God.  The  blame  must  ever  be  ours,  and  because  the  blame  is  ours,  therefore 
the  pain  is  ours.  Some  shift  the  blame  on  to  God  by  misrepresenting  applica- 
tion  of  His  foreknowledge.  Because  God  foresees  a  thing.  He  does  not  make 
us  perform  it.  The  fact  that  God  foreknows  arises  from  the  fact  that  God 
inhabits  et«mity,  and  that  we  live  in  time.  The  vaster  region  in  which  God 
lives  and  moves  encloses  that  smaller  and  more  restricted  region  in  which  we 
live.  As  soon  as  you  think  God  interferes  with  your  own  moral  freedom,  you 
may  turn  round  and  lay  the  blame  of  your  sin  upon  God  ;  but  so  long  as'  God 
constitutes  you  a  free,  responsible  agent,  do  not  add  to  your  other  sins  the  sin 
of  blasphemy,  by  making  the  everlasting  God  the  source  of  the  sin  which  has 
disgraced  your  life.  How  does  Christ  "help"  us?  He  stoops  to  the  very 
sepulchre  where  we  are  lying,  and  lifts  the  poor  corpse  right  up  from  the  very 
jaws  of  destruction  by  the  power  of  His  own  resurrection.  He  infuses  into  our 
lifeless  nature  a  new  vitality,  which  comes  from  Himself ;  and  triumphing  over 
pur  foe.  He  exclaims :   "  I  will  ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the  grave ;  I 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

will  redeem  them  from  death."  (IF.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  sinner  self- 
destroyed : — As  regards  the  race  of  Israel,  the  prophet's  statement  is  self-evident. 
The  national  ruin  of  the  chosen  race  was  clearly  due  to  national  disobedience. 
But  is  not  man  in  all  cases  the  author  of  his  own  perdition  ?  That  it  was  so  with 
our  first  parent  admits  of  no  doubt.  His  ruin  was  chargeable  solely  on  him- 
self. Is  man  a  self- destroyer  ?  Consider  this  question — I.  In  its  eelation 
TO  THE  NATUKE  OF  GoD.  We  cannot  comprehend  God.  Between  the  Creator 
and  the  creature  there  is  an  immeasurable  distance.  If  God  foreknows  that 
this  or  that  man  will  finally  perish,  how  can  it  be  affirmed  that  he  destroys 
himself  ?  In  reply  we  ask.  Does  the  foreknowledge  of  God  as  to  any  particular 
action  imply  that  He  is  the  Agent  ?  All  that  can  be  said  is  that  God  permits 
these  actions  to  be  wrought.  We  must  not  confound  what  God  foreknows  with 
what  Go  '  appoints.  The  future  pvmishment  of  the  wicked  is  represented  in 
God's  Word  as  the  product  of  sin, — sin  the  grain  sown,  punishment  the  harvest 
to  be  reaped.  If,  then,  the  sin  is  the  sirmer's  own,  and  the  punishment  is  the 
legitimate  product  of  the  sin,  is  not  the  conclusion  just,  that  it  is  the  man  him- 
self who  commits  the  sin  who  destroys  himself  ?  Suppose  that  the  decrees  of 
God  are  apparently  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  that  man  destroys  himself. 
There  are  two  methods  by  which  the  question  might  be  set  at  rest.  One  is  through 
our  being  made  fuUy  acquainted  with  all  those  decrees,  in  all  their  relations  to 
time  and  to  eternity.  But  this  method  is  inapplicable  in  our  case,  for  we  have 
not  the  capacity  to  comprehend  the  decrees  of  God.  The  other  is  our  accepting 
the  assurance  that  the  purposes  of  God  are  not  at  variance  with  our  personal 
responsibility.  Life  and  death  are  before  us,  and  we  can  choose.  Therefore 
man's  imdoing  must  be  of  himself.  God's  decrees  we  cannot  comprehend.  His 
invitations  we  can.  II.  The  question  in  its  relation  to  the  proposals  of 
THE  Gospel.  Some  have  attempted  to  show  that  the  requirements  of  the  Gospel 
are  in  effect  the  main  hindrances  to  its  acceptance.  They  are  so  rigid  and  unyield- 
ing, that  practically  they  operate  as  a  barrier  to  our  embracing  the  proposals 
of  mercy  which  the  Gospel  brings.  With  the  requirements  of  the  Gospel  it 
is  certainly  no  easy  matter  to  comply.  No  man  can  comply  with  them  in  his 
own  strength.  But  we  must  remember  that  the  Gospel  is  of  God.  It  is  the 
plan  which  infinite  wisdom  contrived,  and  shall  feeble  man  presume  to  say  that 
the  wisdom  of  Jehovah  has  erred  ?  Bear  in  mind  that  the  precepts  of  the  Grospel 
are  framed  for  the  happiness  and  well-being  of  mankind ;  and  note  how  care- 
fully the  Gospel  adapts  itself  to  our  moral  constitution  in  the  appeal  which  it 
makes  to  those  motives  which  have  the  most  power  to  influence  human  con- 
duct. It  may,  however,  be  further  objected,  that  there  is  such  an  inherent 
weakness  and  depravity  in  human  nature  that  practically  it  is  impossible  to 
attain  to  the  standard  of  obedience  which  the  Gospel  demands.  Least  of  all 
will  this  plea  serve.  We  fully  admit  the  depravity  of  human  nature.  But  bear 
in  mind  the  nature  has  been  redeemed.  The  Son  of  God  has  taken  our  nature 
into  union  with  the  Divine,  that  He  might  redeem  and  sanctify  and  save  it.  Say 
not,  then,  that  it  is  the  nature  of  man  which  makes  it  impossible  for  him  to  be 
saved.  The  nature  has  been  redeemed,  and  the  redemption  would  be  incom- 
plete if  it  left  any  man  in  this  life  beyond  the  reach  of  being  saved.  If  there 
had  been  no  interposition  in  behalf  of  the  fallen  ;  if  mankind  had  been  allowed 
to  multiply,  and  no  movement  on  the  part  of  God  had  been  set  on  foot  for  their 
deliverance,  there  might  then  have  been  ground  for  the  excuse.  There  is,  how- 
ever, nothing  in  the  nature  of  God,  nothing  in  the  proposals  of  the  Gospel,  nothing 
in  the  moraJ  nature  of  men,  to  render  salvation  impossible.  {R.  Bickersteth, 
D.D.)  IsraeVs  relief  from  God  : — "  In  Me  is  thy  help."  That  is — (1)  It  might 
have  been.  "  I  would  have  helped  and  healed  thee,  but  thou  wouldst  not  be 
helped  and  healed."  This  will  aggravate  the  condemnation  of  sinners,  that 
they  opposed  the  offers  God  made  them.  (2)  It  n  ay  be.  "  Thy  case  is  bad, 
but  it  is  not  desperate.  Come  to  Me  and  I  will  help  thee."  This  is  a  plank 
thrown  out  after  shipwreck,  and  greatly  magnifies  the  power  of  God,  but  also 
the  riches  of  His  grace.  Dr.  Pocock  renders,  "  Presuming  upon  God  and  Hia 
favour  has  emboldened  thee  in  those  wicked  ways  which  have  been  thy  ruin." 
{Mattheto  Henry.)  Help  in  Ood  for  sinners  : — When  sinners  are  seeking  salva- 
ti  n  it  is  very  important  that  they  shoiild  know  where  to  find  it.  There  is  no 
Bubject  on  which  men  are  so  likely  to  err  as  the  subject  of  salvation.  Nowhere 
else  <  oes  the  heart  exert  such  an  influence  over  the  mind.  Men  have  "  carnal 
minds  which  are  at  enmity  with  God."    Men  do  not  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of 


CHAP.  XIII.]  ROSEA.  219 

God,"  putting  eternity  before  time.  Since  unregenerate  men  are  so  apt  to  be 
dissatisfied  with  the  rules  of  God  everywhere  else,  we  might  expect  them  to  be 
dissatisfied  with  the  plan  of  salvation,  and  make  many  mistakes  when  they  are 
seeking  to  be  saved.  Sinners  are  apt  to  lose  sight  of  the  essential  truth  of  the  text. 
God  says,  "  In  Me  is  thy  help."  The  meaning  of  this  is  unlimited.  The  sinner's 
only  help  is  in  God.  He  cannot  help  himself.  He  will  never  have  a  heart  that 
is  right  with  God,  he  will  nev^r  be  reconciled  to  Him,  he  will  never  be  a  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus  without  God's  help.  The  first  proof  of  this  is  found  in  the  language 
of  the  Bible.  The  second  is  found  in  the  nature  of  the  unrenewed  heart.  Tne 
third  proof  of  the  necessity  of  Divine  influence  is  found  in  the  inefficiency  of  all  other 
influences.  The  fourth  in  the  inefiicacy  of  all  motives.  You  may  not  always 
be  sensible  of  your  resistance ;  but  the  reason  is,  that  you  consider  these  things 
so  little,  and  examine  your  own  hearts  and  lives  so  little,  that  you  remain  in  almost 
entire  ignorance  of  yourselves.  Many  of  you  are  waiting  for  stronger  motives. 
Sinners  do  persuade  themselves,  and  they  are  able  to  persuade  themselves,  that 
some  stronger,  more  powerful  motives  would  influence  them  to  turn  to  God. 
Motives  do  not  convert  men.  Your  help  is  in  God,  not  in  motives.  Practical 
improvement  and  profitable  direction  from  this  doctrine.  1.  The  folly  of  those 
who  seek  salvation  in  themselves.  It  is  all  very  true  that  the  sinner  who  seeks 
salvation  must  strive  against  sin,  shun  temptation,  deny  himself,  guard  well 
his  heart,  or  he  will  not  be  saved.  But  when  he  relies  upon  himself  and  not  on 
God,  when  he  seeks  to  help  himself  instead  of  seeking  help  from  God,  he  is  leaning 
on  a  broken  reed.  Man  must  depend,  and  work  while  he  depends.  2.  The 
reason  why  so  many  of  those  who  are  awakened  to  a  sense  of  Divine  things,  and 
begin  to  seek  salvation,  never  attain  it.  They  wish  to  take  themselves  out 
of  the  hands  of  God.  3.  We  learn  why  sinners  who  are  making  some  attempts 
to  be  saved  sometimes  continue  so  long  in  affliction  and  trouble  before  they  find 
peace  with  God.  4.  We  learn  what  is  the  great  struggle  of  the  sinner  in  coming 
to  salvation.  It  is  to  give  his  wicked  heart  to  God.  5.  Sinners  when  awakened 
are  often  doing,  or  attempting  to  do,  something  directly  contrary  to  what  they 
suppose.  6.  They  are  often  guilty  of  resisting  the  Holy  Spirit.  7.  Sinners  are 
their  own  destroyers.  (J.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  Man's  destruction,  of  himself  ; 
his  salvation,  of  6od : — "To  understand  things  in  their  causes,  and  to  trace  them 
back  from  their  first  causes  into  their  principles,  has  always  been  deemed  the 
highest  kind  of  knowledge.  However  agreeable  and  entertaining  this  kind  of 
knowledge  may  be,  it  is  not  always  the  most  needful  and  useful.  We  are  now  in 
a  world  of  action,  rather  than  of  science.  And  usually  we  have  more  to  do  with 
the  reality  than  with  the  philosophy.  But  in  regard  to  our  destruction  and 
salvation,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we  should  know  the  causes,  in  order 
that  we  may  be  enabled  properly  to  levy  the  praise  and  the  blame.  God  must 
not  incur  the  infamy  of  our  destruction,  and  we  must  not  usurp  the  glory  of  our 
salvation.  Two  propositions  are  derivable  from  the  text.  I.  Man's  destruc- 
tion OF  HIMSELF.  What  is  this  destruction  ?  It  is  not  a  temporal  loss  ;  not  the 
loss  of  the  body,  but  the  loss  of  the  soul.  Not  the  loss  of  its  physical  being  and 
faculties,  but  the  loss  of  its  well-being  and  its  happiness  and  its  hope.  At  whose 
door  is  the  blame  to  be  laid  ?  We  make  five  appeals.  I.  We  appeal  to  the  cause 
of  your  continuance  in  the  state  in  which  you  are.  If  it  were  so,  that  you  were 
not  accessory  to  your  own  depraved  and  mortal  state,  surely  you  are  accountable 
for  your  continuance  in  it.  God  has  provided  a  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness 
open  and  free  always ;  but  if  you  love  your  pollution  better  than  cleansing,  your 
destruction  will  be  of  yourselves.  2.  To  the  nature  of  Christianity.  If  in  ihe 
Gospel  call  any  had  been  overlooked,  you  might  fear  that  you  were  in  the  number. 
If  hard  conditions  and  meritorious  qualifications  were  required  to  be  performed 
and  possessed,  you  might  despair.  If  the  truths  of  Christianity  were  hard  to  be 
understood,  you  might  complain  of  ignorance.  If  these  benefits  were  sold  ar  a 
high  price,  you  might  complain  of  poverty.  If  these  duties  were  to  requite  for 
their  performance  a  power  that  was  nowhere  to  be  found,  or  was  imattainable 
by  you,  you  might  complain  of  weakness.  If  upon  making  trial  you  could  not 
pucceed,  if  upon  praying  you  were  refused,  you  might  then  complain  of  the  provi- 
dence and  the  grace  of  God  :  but  what  can  you  complain  of  now  ?  3.  We  appeal 
to  experience.  Your  experience :  the  experience  of  a  sinner,  the  experience 
of  the  true  penitent.  The  true  penitent  is  not  only  awakened,  he  is  enlightened  ; 
and  in  God's  light  he  sees  light.  4.  To  the  Divin;^  testimony.  Let  us  defer  at 
once  to  a  Being  whose  judgment  is  always  according  to  truth.     Ask  God  whether 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

we  are  compelled  to  sin,  and  whether,  if  we  perish,  the  blame  will  be  our  own  ? 
5.  To  the  proceedings  of  the  last  day.  Then  every  one  must  give  account  of 
himself  to  God.  What  will  you  do  when  He  rises  up,  and  when  He  judges  ?  The 
hour  cometh  when  "  every  mouth  will  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  shall  be  found 
guilty  before  God,"  whatever  they  now  allege  in  their  own  defence  or  extenuation. 
II.  OuB  SALVATION  IS  OF  GoD.  Siimers  of  themselves  cannot  repair  the  con- 
sequences of  their  transgressions.  The  reason  why  so  many  think  of  being  their 
own  saviours  is,  because  they  have  such  defective  views  of  their  fallen  state  itself, 
and  because  they  have  never  seriously  and  earnestly  made  the  trial  of  their  supposed 
ability  to  deliver  themselves.  God's  help  is — 1.  The  most  gracious  in  its  source. 
Whence  did  this  scheme  arise  ?  Compidsion  is  out  of  the  question.  But  may 
not  merit  have  some  influence  ?  Alas  I  all  our  desert  is  on  the  other  side.  Has 
desirfe  had  no  influence  ?  Why,  the  scheme  was  not  only  formed,  it  was  accom- 
plished too,  long  before  we  had  any  being.  *'  According  to  His  mercy.  He  saved 
us."  2.  The  most  wonderful  in  its  procurement.  Not  only  is  the  agency  entirely 
the  Lord's,  but  He  accomplishes  the  thing  in  a  way  the  most  peculiar.  God  does 
not  save  us  by  the  mere  volition  of  His  will,  or  a  mere  exertion  of  His  power. 
We  see  the  "  Word  made  flesh  and  dwelling  among  us,"  and  suffering  for  sin, 
"  the  just  for  the  unjust."  3.  The  most  suitable  in  its  supply.  Is  light  adapted 
to  the  eye  7  Is  melody  adapted  to  the  ear  ?  Is  food  adapted  to  the  taste  T 
So  correspond  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  with  all  our  wants  and  woes  and  weak- 
nesses. Here  is  wisdom  for  the  ignorant,  pardon  for  the  offending,  renovation 
for  the  depraved,  strength  for  the  weak,  riches  for  the  poor ;  a  sun  if  you  are  in 
darkness,  a  shield  if  you  are  in  danger.  4.  The  most  perfect  in  its  efficiency. 
He  who  "  speaks  in  righteousness  is  mighty  to  save."  5.  The  most  extensive 
and  accessible.  None  of  you  are  excluded  imless  you  exclude  yourselves.  This 
subject  should  preach — (1)  Candour.  Persons  differ  in  their  opinions,  and  all  are 
not  equally  clear  in  their  religious  views  ;  but  if  they  keep  between  the  two 
grand  lines  of  the  text  they  cannot  materially  or  essentially  err.  (2)  Terror. 
Self-preservation  is  the  first  law  of  natiure.  You  can  "  destroy  yourselves." 
(3)  Encomagement.  Not  to  those  who  wish  to  continue  in  sin,  but  to  those  who 
are  desirous  of  deliverance  from  it,  and  of  obtaining  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  What  compassion  there  is  in  God,  who  hath  remembered  you  in  your 
lost  estate !  (4)  Admonition.  Though  there  is  help  in  Him,  there  is  help  in  Him 
only.  In  Him  only  is  the  hope  of  Israel.  And  there  is  only  help  now.  '  Now  ia 
the  accepted  time."  {WUliam  Jay.)  Moral  sdf -destruction : — If  a  man  is  lost 
he  has  only  himself  to  blame.  It  is  told  of  some  poor  heathens  that,  to  please 
their  god,  they  put  themselves  to  death  in  the  following  way.  They  took  a  little 
boat,  went  out  into  the  deep  water,  then  took  a  little  vessel  in  their  hand,  put  it 
over  the  boat,  filled  it  with  water,  and  then  poured  the  water  into  the  boat.  So 
they  went  on  and  on  ;  the  boat  kept  filling  and  filling,  presently  it  began  to  tremble, 
and  then  sank,  and  thus  they  died.  This  is  just  what  the  sinner  does.  He  goes 
on  in  sin  for  a  month.  What  is  he  doing  ?  He  is  putting  water  into  the  boat. 
He  goes  on  for  a  year.  He  is  putting  water  into  the  boat.  He  goes  on  yet  longer. 
Take  care  !  Take  care  !  The  boat  is  filling.  The  siimer  is  filling  it.  Stop  !  or 
it  may  sink  for  ever.  (Thomas  Jones.)  Whai  man  has  to  give  thanks  for : — 
One  thing  of  which  the  Lord  casts  the  entire  blame  upon  His  creatures,  and  another 
thing  of  which  He  takes  the  entire  glory  to  Himself.  I.  Man  hath  to  thank 
HIMSELF  FOB  HIS  OWN  DESTKXTCTiON.  That  man  is,  by  nature,  in  a  destroyed 
and  ruined  state  is  too  clear  to  be  denied.  Men  do  indeed  try  hard  to  soften 
down  the  fact.  They  strive  to  put  the  fairest  face  they  can  upon  their  situation 
and  their  prospects.  Whatever  other  charges  man  is  open  to,  self-hatred  surely 
is  not  one  of  them.  Yet  man  is  said  to  be  a  self-destroyer.  Both  these  things 
are  true — man  is  a  self-lover,  and  man  is  a  self-destroyer.  In  proof  see  this.  We 
have  turned  our  backs  on  our  best  friend.  We  have  rushed  into  the  arms  of  our 
worst  enemy.  We  have  done,  with  oiu*  eyes  open,  things  of  which  we  have  been 
perfectly  well  aware,  that  they  work  the  death  of  the  poor  soul.  And  he  is  of 
all  self-murderers  the  most  determined  who,  having  inflicted  the  wound,  will 
not  let  it  be  bound  up.  II.  Sinnbes  have  to  thank  God  for  the  work  op 
THEis  salvation.  In  this  work  man  has  no  part  or  lot.  What  a  humbling 
truth !  Why  cannot  we  help  and  save  ourselves  ?  Because  we  have  reduced 
ourselves  so  low.  The  words  of  the  text  mean :  "  I  am  qualified  to  help  you. 
There  is  in  Me  all  the  sufficiency  your  case  requires."  Nor  is  it  a  help  up  only  which 
the  Saviour  offers,  but  a  help  forward.     (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)        Man  his  own. 


CHAP,  xni.]  BOSEA.  221 

destroyer ;  God  alone  his  Saviour  : — Whatever  changes  may  be  made  by  time, 
we  are  sure  of  one  thing,  that  our  God  changeth  not,  and  that  the  principles 
involved  in  His  counsels  and  threatenings,  in  His  warnings  and  promises  and 
invitations,  are  immutable  and  everlasting  as  Himself.  I.  Self-dbstbtjction  is 
POSSIBLE  TO  us  MEN ;  even  the  destruction  of  the  highest,  noblest,  and  Divinest 
part  of  our  nature.  Man,  too,  is  the  only  being  upon  the  earth  to  whom  self- 
destruction  is  really  possible ;  the  being  whose  capacities  are  the  noblest  has 
the  power  of  self-injury.  A  man  cannot  put  out  his  life,  but  he  can  blight  and 
blast  all  that  is  bright  and  blessed,  happy  and  holy  in  his  nature  and  life.  II.  The 
ONLY  POWEK  by  which  we  can  destroy  ourselves  is  the  power  of  sinning.  Sin 
does  its  work  most  rapidly  and  completely.  Sinning  darkens  the  understanding, 
impairs  the  judgment,  makes  a  man  a  fool,  disorders  the  imagination,  deadens 
the  best  susceptibilities  of  the  heart,  and  sears  the  conscience.  It  enslaves 
the  will,  and  prevents  peace  of  mind.  It  depraves  the  whole  spiritual  nature. 
And  sinning  is  the  breach  of  God's  law  of  love.  God  takes  notice  of  every  breach 
of  His  law.  in.  Every  finally  destroyed  man  is  self-destroyed.  God 
will  not  destroy  a  man  except  as  punishment  for  sin.  The  devil  cannot  permanently 
hvirt  you,  except  as  you  combine  with  him  to  hurt  yourselves.  Two  things  are 
certain.  The  sin  which  finally  destroys  men  is  sin  for  which  they  are  responsible. 
And  the  sin  which  inflicts  most  injury  is  the  sin  which  men  love,  and  which,  because 
they  love,  they  think  lightly  of.  IV.  The  self-destroyed  may  be  saved  from 
DESTRUCTION  .  "  In  Me  is  thy  help  " — thy  deliverance,  thy  salvation.  1.  A  man 
cannot  save  himself.  All  that  he  can  do  for  himself  is  to  submit  to  be  saved. 
At  first  all  men  try  to  save  themselves.  2.  No  fellow-man  can  save  the  sinner. 
God  never  sends  a  man  to  His  priest ;  He  invites  the  man  to  Himself. 
3.  Think  of  the  encouragement  to  return  to  God.  While  God  is  speaking  to  you 
of  salvation,  you  may  have  it.  Self-destruction  by  sinning  is  the  natural  order. 
Salvation  does  not  come  in  any  natural  order,  but  as  the  result  of  an  extraordinary 
provision  on  the  part  of  God.  If  after  God  has  spoken  to  you,  you  be  finally 
destroyed,  your  destruction  will  be  self-destruction — wilful,  inexcusable,  and 
unbearable.  (Samuel  Martin.)  Sinners  are  self -destroyers,  but  salvation  is  of 
God : — I.  Sin  is  a  most  destructive  evil.  Sin  is  the  grand  disturber  of  the 
world.  It  disturbs  the  conscience,  families,  churches,  cities,  and  nations. 
II.  Sinners  are  self-destroyers.  It  wiU  be  found  that  the  blame  is  all  our 
own,  that  there  is  an  obstinate  persistence  is  sin  against  the  remonstrances  of 
conscience  and  the  admonitions  of  God.  III.  There  is  salvation  in  Jesus 
Christ,  even  for  self-destroying  sinners.  There  is  sufficient  help  for  every 
piu-pose  of  our  salvation.  There  is  grace  abounding  for  the  greatest  sinners.  ((?. 
Burder.)  The  moral  ruin  and  recovery  of  man: — I.  Man's  ruin  is  op 
himself.  Many  believe  that  God  is  in  some  way  the  author  of  evil.  This  is 
impiously  false.  God  is  not  the  author  of  man's  ruin.  Being  the  first  cause  of 
all  good,  and  independent.  He  is  good,  and  only  good.  Satan  is  not  the  author 
of  man's  ruin.  He  cannot  force  the  will  nor  constrain  the  mind  to  sin  without 
concurrence  and  consent  on  our  part,  and  in  the  concurrence  and  consent  consists 
the  sin  that  causes  our  ruin.  (1)  Our  personal  conduct  shows  this  truth,  and 
evinces  that  our  sins  result  from  the  free  choice  of  our  wills,  because  there  can 
be  no  responsibility  where  there  is  no  freedom  of  choice.  (2)  The  state  of  our 
mind  shows  the  same  truth.  This  evidence  indeed  is  cognisable  only  to  our  own 
conscience  ;  but  this  is  as  it  ought  to  be.  What  is  the  nature  of  the  ruin  ?  Loss 
of  rectitude,  or  the  Divine  image  ;  exposure  to  Divine  wrath  now,  and  in  the  world 
to  come.  These  are  the  outlines  of  the  misery  we  have  brought  on  ourselves 
through  sin.  11.  Man's  recovery  is  of  God,  "  In  Me  is  thine  help."  The 
doctrine  here  is,  that  the  salvation  of  man  is  of  the  grace  of  God.  "  By  grace 
ye  are  saved."  He  delivers  us  from  the  evils  which  involve  our  ruin.  The  guilt 
of  conscience,  the  defilement  of  the  heart,  the  disorder  of  the  faculties,  the  dominion 
of  the  passions,  the  bondage  of  sin.  He  restores  to  us  the  blessings  that  involve 
our  happiness.  {D.  V.  Phillips.)  How  sin  destroys  : — One  of  the  most  famous 
pictures  in  the  world  is  the  Last  Supper  by  Leonardo  da  Vinci.  Jesus  sits  at  the 
table  with  His  twelve  disciples.  It  is  said  that  the  artist  sought  long  for  a  model 
for  the  Saviour.  He  wanted  a  young  man  of  pure  holy  look.  At  length  his 
attention  was  fixed  on  a  chorister  in  the  cathedral  named  Pietro  Bandinelli. 
This  young  man  had  a  very  noble  face  and  a  devout  demeanour.  Leonardo  used 
him  as  a  model  in  painting  the  face  of  the  Master.  Soon  after  this  Pietro  went  to 
Rome  to  study  music.     There  he  fell  among  evil  companions  and  was  led  to  drink. 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0S.  [ooAr.  xm. 


and  then  into  all  manner  of  debasing  sins.  Year  after  year  the  painter  went  on  with 
his  picture.  All  the  apostles  were  now  painted  save  one— Judas,  the  traitor. 
Da  Vinci  went  from  place  to  place,  looking  for  some  debased  man  who  would  be 
suitable  as  a  model.  He  was  walking  one  day  on  the  streets  of  Milan,  watching 
the  faces  of  evil  men  he  chanced  to  meet,  when  his  eyes  fell  on  one  who  seemed 
to  have  in  his  features  the  character  he  sought.  He  was  a  miserable  unclean 
beggar,  wearing  rags,  with  villainous  look.  The  man  sat  as  the  artist's  model 
for  Judas.  After  the  face  was  painted  Da  Vinci  learned  that  the  man  who  sat 
for  him  was  his  old  friend  Pietro  Bandinelli,  the  same  who  had  sat  a  few  years 
before  as  the  model  for  the  Master.  Wickedness  had  debased  the  beautiful  life 
into  hideous  deformity.  Sin  distorts,  deforms,  and  destroys  the  human  soul. 
It  drags  it  down  from  its  greatness  until  it  grovels  in  the  dust.  In  Me  Is  thy 
help. — Help  for  all : — The  first  thing  that  a  man  does  after  waking  up  to  his 
sinful  condition,  is  to  try  to  help  himself.  How  are  we  to  oome  to  moral  and 
spu-itual  health  7     As  long  as  the  heart  is  wrong  the  life  will  be  wrong.     I.  God  is 

WILLING  TO  HELP  US  BY  GIVING  US  THE  HoLY  SpIBIT  TO  SHOW  US  JUST  THE  POSITION 

WE  OCCUPY.  What  is  the  use  of  conviction  ?  Without  it,  a  man  does  not  want 
Christ  and  His  salvation.  The  Holy  Spirit  coming  into  the  heart,  a  man  wakes 
up  to  see  his  true  state.  H.  God  is  ready  to  help  us,  by  giving  us  repentance. 
There  is  a  great  difference  between  seeing  my  sin  and  turning  from  it.  Conviction 
and  conversion  are  not  the  same  thing.  III.  God  is  wiLLrNG  to  help  us,  by 
ENABLING  US  TO  EXERCISE  FAITH  IN  Chbist.  The  most  exhausting  work  to  which 
I  ever  put  the  energies  of  my  soul  was  to  believe  in  Christ.  Indeed,  it  is  so  great 
an  undertaking  that  no  man  can  accomplish  it  of  himself.  IV.  God  is  willing 
TO  help  us,  by  giving  us  the  pardon  and  peace  of  the  Gospel.  He  can 
save  you.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Man's  destruction  and  God's  restora- 
tion : — I.  Consider  the  destruction  op  sin.  1.  Adam  ruined  himself  and  all 
bis  children  by  sin  (Rom.  v.  19,  21).  2.  We  have  destroyed  ourselves  by  actual 
transgression  (Rom.  iii.  23).   3.  The  intellect  or  understanding  is  ruined  ( Jer.  viii.  7). 

4.  The  will  is  become  a  rebellious  faculty  (Rom.  viii.  7).  5.  The  conscience  is 
rendered  past  feeling  (1  Tim.  iv.  2,  6).  The  passions  and  affections  of  the  soul 
are  equally  defiled  (1  John  ii.  16).  7.  He  is  destroyed  both  in  body  and 
Boul,  but  for  Christ  (Ps.  ix.  17).  II.  Christ  is  our  salvation  and  help. 
1.  Christ  is  the  true  light  (Mai.  iv.  2).  2.  He  shines  in  our  hearts  and  under- 
standings (Psa.  xxxvi.  9).  3.  He  restores  to  us  an  enlightened  conscience  (Heb. 
X.  22).     4.  The  soul  is  now  sensible  of  the  least  transgression  (2  Cor.  i.  12). 

5.  He  strengthens  our  memories  to  retain  Divine  things  (John  xiv.  26).  6.  He 
rectifies  and  restores  all  our  affections  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  7.  Provision  is  made  for 
the  everlasting  life  of  the  Church  (John  vi.  37).  8.  He  is  our  help  in  delivering 
us  from  the  wrath  to  come  (John  xiv.  3).  III.  The  improvement.  1.  This  help 
is  omnipotent  in  its  energy  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  2.  It  is  prompt  in  its  manifestation 
(Isai.  lix.  19).  3.  It  is  always  successful  in  its  undertakings  (Col.  ii.  15).  4.  It 
will  not  admit  of  any  co-operation  in  the  work  (Eph.  ii.  8,  9).  6.  It  is  unceasing 
in  its  application  (Isa.  xli.  17).  (T.  B.  Baker.)  Man  self -destroyed,  but 
not  self -saved  : — That  man  is  a  fallen  and  ruined  creature  is  generally  acknow- 
ledged. The  moral  condition  of  the  world  is  a  certain  demonstration  of  this 
distressing  truth.  It  is  confirmed  by  the  unrighteous  propensities,  by  the  vices  of 
character,  and  by  the  aberrations  from  virtuous  conduct  which  are  exhibited 
more  or  less  frequently  even  in  the  best  of  men.  Man  does  not  impute  his  ruin 
to  himself ;  and  yet,  for  the  most  part,  he  expects  his  recovery  from  himself. 
The  first  of  these  errors  blinds  him  to  the  necessity  of  repentance  ;  the  second 
prevents  the  exercise  of  faith.  I.  Man's  ruin  is  from  himself  alone.  Our  first 
father  sinned  voluntarily.  But  is  it  our  fault  that  our  natures  are  depraved  ? 
If  the  fault  be  not  yours,  it  must  be  imputed  to  God,  or  to  the  tempter,  or  to  Adam. 
The  first  would  be  no  less  impious  than  absurd.  The  second  cannot  be  entertained. 
Satan  cannot  constrain.  The  fault  must  lie  between  Adam  and  yourselves. 
And  you  cannot  separate  yourselves  from  him.  1.  Adam  was  the  head  and 
representative  of  the  entire  human  race.  The  consequences  of  Adam's  sin  are 
witnessed  in  all  his  posterity.  They  all  sin,  invariably  ;  they  all  die,  invariably. 
Do  you  complain  that,  instead  of  giving  man  a  general  law,  God  entered  into 
special  covenant  with  him  ?  Then  you  complain  of  that  which  is,  in  fact, 
the  strongest  argument  of  Divine  goodness  and  condescension ;  for  a  law  con- 
tains no  promise.  But  a  covenant  holds  out  the  certain  prospect  of  a  recompense 
in  case  of  fidelity.     Would  it  have  been  better  that  the  fate  of  the  human  race 


CHAP,  xm.]  HOSEA.  223 

should  not  have  been  entrusted  to  the  hands  of  one  T  It  is  not  only  a  fact  that 
we  are  implicated  in  the  first  sin,  but  that  fact  is  demonstrably  consistent  with 
the  righteousness  and  goodness  of  God.  Instead  of  evading  the  charge,  we  are 
called  upon  to  confess  its  truth.  2.  Men  have  universally  followed  in  the  footsteps 
of  the  &°8t  transgression,  and  have  thus  made  it  their  own.  The  original  act  is 
not  repudiated  and  disavowed,  but  is  repeated  and  imitated.  There  has  never 
been  one  individual  exception.  All  have  sinned,  are  sinning  every  day  and  every 
hour.  Every  individual  gives  ample  ground  for  his  own  condemnation.  3.  Down 
to  the  present  day  the  sins  of  men  are  committed  of  their  own  free  will,  and  without 
any  external  restraint.  Consult  your  own  reason.  Do  you  not  feel  that  you  are 
free  ?  You  are  not  conscious  of  any  foreign  force,  or  of  the  pressure  of  inevitable 
necessity.  It  is  true  that  you  are  tempted  ;  but  the  tempter  can  employ  no 
compulsion.  Since  men  sin  willingly  and  by  choice,  they  cannot  be  exculpated. 
4.  Men  have  added  to  the  guilt  of  a  single  act  of  disobedience  an  immense  multitude 
and  variety  of  new  transgressions,  clustering  about  it  from  age  to  age  ;  so  that 
it  stands  not  alone,  but  is  only  the  first,  and  yet  not  the  worst,  of  all  sins.  It  is 
difficult  to  conceive  how  they  could  have  done  more  to  appropriate  Adam's  guilt. 
The  torrents  of  iniquity  have  been  deepening  and  widenmg  from  generation  to 
generation.  5.  Men  choose  to  abide  in  their  present  depraved  condition,  though 
a  method  of  recovery  is  proposed  to  them  in  the  Gospel.  This  is  the  crowning 
evidence  which  ought  to  produce  conviction.  No  sooner  was  the  guilt  incurred 
than  redeeming  mercy  was  proclaimed  ;  and  how  has  that  proclamation  been 
treated  by  the  world  ?  On  the  ground  of  all  these  considerations,  we  insist  that 
all  transgressed  in  Adam,  and  have,  in  point  of  fact,  made  themselves  partakers 
of  his  sin.  Man  is  the  author  of  his  own  ruin.  The  recognition  of  this  truth  is 
necessary  to  excite  repentance,  without  which  there  can  be  no  escape  from  per- 
dition. Whom  else  can  the  sinner  accuse  ?  Will  he  lay  the  blame  upon  God, 
because  He  endued  man  with  a  free  will  ?  That  liberty  of  choice  is  the  glory  of 
human  nature.  Or  because  He  subjected  man  to  a  test,  in  token  of  the  homage 
due  to  His  supremacy  ?  Or  because  He  did  not  render  man  immutable  in  holiness 
from  the  very  first  ?  Will  you  quarrel  with  the  permission  of  evil  7  Would 
you  lay  the  fault  upon  the  tempter  ?  Or  upon  Adam  ?  Vain  evasions  all ! 
II.  Man's  recovery  is  from  God.  This  truth  meets  the  second  delusion  of  man. 
He  looks  generally  to  himself  for  salvation.  Four  considerations  will  set  this 
truth  in  a  clear  and  convincing  light.  1.  Man  wants  a  proper  sense  of  his  own 
condition  and  danger,  and  therefore  he  never  will  (even  if  he  could)  take  the  very 
first  step  towards  his  own  recovery.  There  is  no  adequate  motive.  If  it  had 
been  left  to  man,  the  least  effort  never  would  have  been  put  forth  to  recover  the 
friendship  of  God,  and  to  restore  His  lost  image  in  the  souL  2.  Man  has  lost  all 
his  love  of  righteousness,  and,  therefore,  never  would  have  sought  recovery  of 
his  own  accord.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  virtue  in  the  world,  but  whence  is  it 
derived  ?  Take  away  all  that  has  been  wrought  for  the  morals  of  mankind  by 
the  indirect  influence  of  religion,  and  how  much  will  be  left  ?  There  is  not  to  be 
found,  anywhere  in  the  world,  any  hatred  of  sin  as  sin,  nor  love  of  righteousness 
as  righteousness,  except  in  the  man  renewed  and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  If  a  righteous  and  holy  God  had  not  seen  and  pitied 
the  want  of  righteousness  in  man,  that  want  had  never  been  perceived,  never 
lamented  ;  and,  for  this  cause,  there  could  have  been  no  salvation.  3.  Man  has 
no  means  of  satisfying  the  justice  of  God  for  his  sins ;  and,  therefore,  even  if 
willing,  he  could  not  be  the  author  of  his  own  recovery.  1.  Some  satisfaction  is 
necessary.  2.  Man  has  none  to  offer  which  can  be  acceptable.  3.  He  has  not 
that  moral  strength  which  is  necessary  to  the  renewal  of  his  heart  and  the  amend- 
ment of  his  life ;  and,  therefore,  he  cannot  be  the  author  of  hia  own  recovery, 
God  alone  can  awaken  the  soul  to  a  conviction  of  danger,  implant  in  it  a  love  of 
holiness,  provide  the  means  of  reconciliation,  and  by  the  influence  of  His  Holy 
Spirit  renew  the  heart,  the  character,  and  the  life.  "  Salvation  belongeth  unto 
the  Lord."  (Daniel  Katterns.)  Religious  unreality: — I  have  long  been  con- 
vinced that  many  of  our  opinions  and  practices  of  these  days  differ  enormously 
from  the  simple  Gospel  which  Christ  preached.  I  see  but  little  hope  for  the 
re-animation  of  the  true  Christian  ideal  until  God  in  His  mercy  raises  up  amongst 
us  some  prophet  like  Savonarola  or  Luther,  or  John  Wesley,  or  some  saint  like 
St.  Paul,  or  St.  Francis,  who  is  a  saint  indeed.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  forget 
that  religion  means  a  good  mind  and  a  good  life.  Give  me  righteousness  and  not 
talk,  conduct  and  not  o|»j>nion&  character  and  not  ceremonies,  love  and  not 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  xnt. 

s-hams.  I.  DocxrviNE  and  practice.  In  everj'  religion  there  must  be  doctrine 
and  practice.  Christ  came  to  show  us  that  God's  will  is  our  sanctification.  The 
age,  the  natior',  and  the  Church,  supremely  need  this  lesson.  "  Get  sincerity. 
Simplify  your  lives,  simplify  your  religion  ;  return  to  the  simplicity  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Whatever  our  belief  may  be,  whatever  our  worship  may  be, 
unless  we  keep  innocency,  and  do  the  thing  that  is  right,  we  have  missed  the 
one  thing,  and  only  thing,  which  will  bring  any  human  being  peace  at  the  last. 
II.  The  bridge  of  life.  There  is  on  every  side  of  us  a  false  life,  and  on  every 
side  of  us  a  sham  religion.  There  is  open  to  us  all  a  blessed  life  and  a  real  religion. 
Christianity  in  nearly  all  of  us  produces  fruits  so  crude,  so  scant,  so  hunger- 
bitten,  as  to  be  little  better  than  a  store  of  Levitism  or  a  godless  heathenism. 
Christianity  smitten  through  and  through  with  the  curse  and  the  blight  of  our 
xmreality, — that  is  the  reason  why  it  makes  such  little  way,  and  is  losing  its  hold 
of  the  masses  of  the  population.  Yet  let  us  not  despair.  God  judges  not  as  man 
judges.  III.  Help  in  God.  Life  is  short.  There  is  nothing  which  the  world, 
the  flesh,  or  the  devil  can  offer  us  which  is  not  profoundly  unsatisfying.  Yet 
God  who  giveth  more  grace,  can  deliver  us  from  that  fraud  or  subtlety  of 
the  devil  or  man,  which  is  the  only  final  irremediable  curse  of  our  mortal  lives. 
He  can  give  us  holiness  ;  He  can  give  us  peace ;  He  can  give  us  happiness  in  Him, 
There  is  nothing  to  complain  of  in  life,  but  only  in  ourselves,  who  pervert,  and 
dwarf,  and  degrade,  and  poison  it ;  and  so  God  ever  calls  to  us,  and  pleads  with 
us  through  His  Son,  our  Lord.  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself ;  but  in  Me 
is  thy  help."  {Dean  Farrar.)  Christ,  the  sinner's  refuge  : — These  words  bring 
before  us  two  subjects — man's  state  by  nature  :  and  his  restoration  by  God. 
I.  We  have  destroyed  oxirselves.  Most  men,  though  self-destroyers  in  a 
spiritual  sense,  yet  appear  to  be  quite  unconscious  of  it.  By  many  sin  is  thought 
to  be  a  thing  quite  harmless,  altogether  innocuous ;  but,  a  more  dangerous  or 
poisonous  reptile  does  not  exist.  You  must  be  judged  by  the  rigorous  demands 
of  the  law  of  God,  and  that  law  requires  obedience,  in  thought,  word,  and  deed, 
and  that  without  the  smallest  deviation.  You  cannot  discharge  the  debt  you 
owe  to  this  law.  You  are  in  this  respect  helpless,  hopeless,  remediless.  II.  We 
CANNOT  HELP  OURSELVES.  Our  own  obedience  to  the  law  cannot  possibly  justify, 
and  consequently  cannot  save  us.  This  fact  the  Scriptures  declare.  Some  say, 
but  God  is  merciful.  Will  He  show  mercy  at  the  expense  of  justice  ?  He  delights 
in  mercy  when  His  justice  is  satisfied.  III.  When  and  how  does  God  become 
THE  sinner's  help  ?  When  the  sinner  believes  on  Christ  to  salvation.  He  could 
not  obey  the  law  perfectly,  so  as  to  be  justified  thereby,  but  when  he  believes  in 
the  Saviour,  Jesus  becomes  to  him  justification.  He  could  offer  no  sacrifice  to 
God  for  his  sins.  Jesus  is  to  the  believer  an  all-suflBcient  sacrifice.  The  sinner 
could  not  redeem  his  soul  from  death.  Jesus  becomes  to  the  believer  "  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  (0.  McClelland,  A.B.)  Man's 
ruin  and  God's  remedy  : — These  words  are  prophetic  of  the  great  disasters  and 
that  awful  ruin  which  came  upon  God's  chosen  people,  when  the  Assyrian  led 
them  into  captivity,  and  desolated  their  land  with  fire  and  sword.  They  were 
spoken  in  a  time  of  comparative  security,  when  the  cities  of  Israel  were  teeming 
with  inhabitants,  and  the  broad  harvest  fields  were  offering  their  rich  reward  to 
the  labour  of  the  husbandman.  Amid  the  glitter  and  promise  of  material  civilisa- 
tion, God  had  discerned  and  denounced  the  real  tendencies  of  this  rebellious 
people.  He  declares  that  the  ruin  should  be  the  natural  consummation  of  the 
nation's  progress,  that  they  should  be  self-destroyed  by  the  simple  operation 
of  the  principles  which  they  had  adopted,  and  the  institutions  which  they  had 
founded.  This  brief  address  proclaims  the  solemn  truth,  that  as  he  stands  amid 
the  bounties  of  God's  providence  and  the  natural  arrangements  of  the  world, 
man  is  continually  perverting  them  from  their  Divine  intent,  and  thereby  bringing 
ruin  upon  his  highest  interests  ;  and  the  only  remedy  for  his  abuse  of  mercies 
and  disarrangement  of  established  order  is  found  in  the  constant  interposition  of 
Jehovah's  arm  in  the  processes  of  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  Our  subject 
then  is,  the  destructive  tendency  of  human  progress,  and  the  remedy  supplied  by 
God  to  counteract  the  ruin.  A  weakness  of  the  present  age  is  the  temper  in  which 
men  are  wont  to  glorify  its  institutions,  its  achievements,  and  its  progress.  As 
if  by  general  consent  the  nineteenth  century  has  been  established  upon  a  throne 
of  honour,  and  around  it  have  gathered  the  high  priests  of  science  and  the  leaders 
of  opinion,  to  proclaim  its  successes  and  its  destiny.  But  the  object  of  all  this 
idolatry  is  no  less  a  shadow  and  a  deceit  than  is  that  crowned  and  jewelled  mortal 


CHAP,  xni.]  ROSEA.  225 

whose  life  is  flowing  on  to  death,  while  his  flatterers  are  extolling  his  immortality. 
I,  The  natural  progress  of  man  in  the  world  is  a  steady  lapse  towards 
CORRUPTION  AND  DESTRUCTION.  In  spite  of  the  arts,  institutions,  and  triumphs 
of  civilisation,  the  natural  development  of  the  race  is  a  descent  towards  misrule, 
oppression,  anarchy,  and  ruin.  Reason,  revelation,  and  history  make  this  evident. 
1.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  ideas  of  civilisation  and  progress  as  they  are  held 
by  men,  and  as  they  operate  in  the  world.  That  there  is  a  "  law  of  progress  " 
in  relation  to  man's  material  interests  cannot  be  overlooked,  and  ought  not  to  be 
denied.  On  behalf  of  his  various  needs,  man  is  a  ceaseless  worker.  Thus  there 
is  progress  in  the  art  of  living,  in  mechanical  inventions,  in  the  range  of  the  flne 
arts,  and  the  scope  of  great  enterprises,  and  in  the  fellowship  of  nations.  One 
age  profits  by  the  mistakes  and  successes  of  those  which  have  preceded  it.  Great 
results  are  produced,  dazzling  to  the  eye,  and  flattering  to  the  pride  of  man.  But 
when  this  process  is  closely  surveyed,  and  its  real  tendencies  are  accurately  noted, 
what  is  it  more  or  better  than  a  reconstruction  of  the  tower  of  Babel,  in  which 
railroad  iron,  and  telegraphic  wires,  and  social  comforts,  are  substituted  for 
asphaltic  brick,  and  the  fine  arts  for  the  builder's  lofty  plan,  but  the  intent  of  which 
is  equally  with  that  of  the  ancient  enterprise,  to  exalt  man  upon  the  earth,  and 
screen  him  from  the  scrutiny  of  God  ?  Expand  it,  modify  it,  or  disguise  it  as  you 
will,  the  fact  remains  that  a  process  of  development  which  rests  upon  these  ideas 
and  aims  at  these  results  is  rotten  to  the  core,  and  from  it  there  can  only  spring 
corruption.  In  material  prosperity  we  have  the  real  end  of  progress,  so  far  as  it 
is  sought  by  any  human  institutions,  and  in  this  there  cannot  be  a  single  element 
of  conservative  effect,  or  a  single  principle  of  enduring  force.  2.  This  view 
is  confirmed  by  the  lessons  of  history.  History  is  philosophy  teaching  by 
examples."  In  the  light  of  the  solid  facts  of  history  we  learn  the  real  tendencies 
of  that  refinement  and  civilisation  of  which  those  who  see  things  in  the  present 
only,  are  so  prone  to  boast.  Every  nation  that  has  culminated  in  such  a  civilisa- 
tion as  has  been  described,  has  found  therein  the  elements  of  its  decay  and  ruin. 
Illustrate  from  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Persia,  Rome,  India,  Ottoman  Empire, 
States  of  Italy,  South  American  Republics,  &c.  3.  Refer  to  our  own  land,  and 
the  influence  of  our  own  institutions.  We  have  received  a  goodly  heritage. 
Oiu:  institutions  were  founded  in  the  hatred  of  oppression  and  the  love  of  right. 
The  broad  Atlantic  rolls  between  us  and  the  corruptions  which  have  vitiated  the 
older  nations  of  the  world.  But  what  has  been  the  direction  of  our  progress  ? 
Has  there  been  ascent  or  descent  in  the  march  of  empire  ?  It  is  true  that,  in  our 
national  career,  we  have  gained  in  territory,  and  increased  in  revenue,  and  advanced 
in  culture  and  refinement,  but  amid  all  this  the  primal  vigour  and  intensity  of 
the  nation's  life  has  wasted.  Republicanism  does  not  check  depravity.  Clonsider 
the  fierce  partisanship  of  politics,  the  strife  of  interests  between  different  sections 
of  the  Union,  the  corruption  of  our  legislators,  the  apologies  for  oppression,  the 
insecurity  of  our  cities,  our  eagerness  in  the  piu-suit  of  wealth  for  its  own  sake, 
the  recklessness  of  our  expenditure,  and  the  fearful  increase  of  crimes  of  darkest 
hue,  and  you  cannot  but  acknowledge  the  general  tendency  towards  license  and 
corruption.  II.  Amid  these  destructive  tendencies  there  is  hope  fob 
MAN  IN  the  helping  HAND  OF  GoD.  God  is  Continually  averting  perils,  recon- 
structing ruined  institutions,  and  infusing  new  life  into  the  organisms  which  man 
has  corrupted.  Among  the  vivid  creations  of  the  Scandinavian  mythology  there 
is  one  which  represents  Life  under  the  similitude  of  a  Tree.  Igdrasil,  the  ash-tree  of 
existence,  has  its  roots  deep  down  in  the  very  kingdom  of  death.  At  its  base 
sit  the  three  Fates,  who  water  these  roots  from  the  sacred  well,  while  its  trunk 
mounts  high  towards  heaven,  and  its  branches  spread  into  every  land.  Its  boughs 
are  the  histories  of  nations.  Its  rustle  is  the  sound  of  human  life,  swelling  onward 
from  of  old.  It  grows  there  in  spite  of  death  below,  and  storms  above,  the  true 
emblem  of  man's  life  and  progress,  by  means  of  the  forces  through  which  God 
sustains  him  in  the  midst  of  moral  evil.  Out  of  the  very  elements  of  death  He  ia 
evolving  a  progressive  revelation  which  will  change  the  tendencies  of  the  race. 
The  process  by  which  this  is  being  accomplished  is  not  natural,  as  men  understand 
the  laws  of  nature.  It  is  a  process  of  miraculous  effect,  and  supremely  glorious 
to  the  grace  of  God.  The  formal  statement  of  this  Divine  method  we  find  only 
in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  by  implanting  living  ideas  of  truth  and  righteousness, 
and  by  renewing  sinful  human  hearts  in  the  Divine  likeness,  that  man's  ruin  is 
turned  aside.  In  the  spiritual  influences  of  the  Gospel  lies  the  help  which  His 
Word  has  promised,  and  which  His  hand  affords.     Christianity  is  the  one  power 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

of  real  progress  in  the  world.  Christianity  saves  the  world  from  corruption  and 
destruction.  By  it  society  would  be  truly  civilised,  the  State  be  reared  on  the 
great  principles  of  righteousness,  and  the  highest  welfare  of  the  world  be  secured 
by  a  prosperity  which  should  be  at  once  material  and  spiritual,  temporal  and 
eternal.  (R.  R.  Booth.)  Men's  misery  from  themselves — the  remedy  in  Ood  : — 
In  the  history  of  the  Jewish  race  are  set  forth  the  waywardness  and  the  misery 
of  men  under  alienation  from  God.  In  the  mingled  tenderness  and  severity  of  its 
treatment,  we  have  a  representative  instance  of  the  general  dealings  of  providence 
regarding  the  disobedient  and  rebellious.  The  kingdom  of  the  Ten  Tribes  had 
fallen  upon  evil  times.  Their  sufferings  were  no  doubt  judicial — the  awarded 
judgments  of  the  Supreme  Ruler ;  but  they  were  likewise  the  natural  and  inevitable 
consequences  of  their  conduct.  These  are  equally  true  propositions,  that  no  evil 
is  from  God,  and  that  all  good  is  from  Him.  Help  and  deliverance  upon  repentance 
and  amendment  are  precisely  as  much  in  the  course  of  things  as  is  suffering 
after  sin.  I.  The  first  proposition.  "  We  have  destroyed  ourselves."  1.  By 
the  immediate  effect  of  sin.  When  once  holiness  departs  from  the  soul,  life  itseu 
departs,  in  its  highest  sense.  The  destruction  attributable  to  sin  is  brought 
upon  us  by  ourselves.  No  constraint  was  laid  on  man's  will.  St.  James  gives 
the  whole  history  and  progress  of  iniquity  in  the  heart,  in  his  first  chapter. 
God  is  so  far  from  being  the  cause  or  author  of  sin,  that  He  has,  by  an  in&iity 
of  methods,  endeavoured  to  draw  us  away  from  it ;  and  is,  on  the  contrary,  the 
giver  of  every  gift  tending  to  life  and  holiness.  As  little  can  we  excuse  ourselves 
by  alleging  any  fatal  necessity ;  there  can  be  no  such  constraining  power,  inde- 
pendent of  the  Divine  purposes.  2.  By  incurring  the  punishment  and  misery 
due  to  sin.  It  is  an  eternal  law  that  misery  foUows  transgression ;  and  that 
law  is  God's  law ;  but  His  it  would  not  be,  were  it  not  founded  in  justice  and 
benevolence,  the  essential  basis  of  His  holy  character;  and  not  in  any  despotic 
exercise  of  bare  authority.  In  this  consideration  we  discover  the  inconvenience 
of  looking  on  the  means  and  instruments  of  the  punishment  of  reprobate  sinners, 
as  belonging  wholly  to  a  place,  and  not  likewise  to  a  state.  There  is  positive 
punishment ;  but  the  loss  of  our  original  privileges,  which  may  be  called  the  negative 
part  of  punishment,  is  not  of  much  less  fearful  character.  It  is  the  state  of 
degradation  and  ruin,  into  which,  while  here  on  earth,  the  sinner  plunges  himself. 
By  the  practice  of  habitual  sin,  the  activity  of  the  conscience  is  at  length 
suspended,  the  eye  of  the  understanding  is  closed,  the  ear  is  shut,  the  heart  is 
hardened,  the  Holy  Spirit  retires.  But  if  God  withdraws  His  grace.  He  must  not 
be  thought  the  cause  of  the  destruction.  We  "  quench  "  the  Spirit — we  expel, 
we  drive  Him  away,  when  we  pollute  His  temple  with  sin.  The  Word  of  God 
confirms  the  fact  that  the  destruction  of  those  who  perish  is  from  themselves ;  and 
is  a  thing  wholly  alien  from  the  intention  and  desire  of  the  Almighty.  This  is 
implied  in  the  precepts  and  commandments,  wherewith  Scripture  abounds.  The 
eame  is  expressly  urged  in  persuasions,  exhortations,  entreaties,  remonstrances, 
and  reproaches.  II.  The  second  proposition.  "  In  Me  is  thy  help." 
Emphasis  is  put  on  the  word  "  Me."  It  is  pointedly  exclusive.  Can  a  conscience 
pierced  by  guilt  be  healed  by  indulgences  that  will  heap  upon  it  more  guilt  7 
Is  it  in  the  power  of  pleasure  effectually  to  banish  remorse  ?  If  we  have  "  destroyed 
ourselves," — if  we  have  burdened  our  consciences,  corrupted  our  hearts,  ruined 
our  peace,  there  is  but  one  source  whence  the  remedy  is  to  be  obtained  ;  but  it  is  a 
Bource  deeper  than  our  unworthiness,  more  abundant  than  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world  ;  a  source  ever  present  and  ready  to  send  forth  its  healing  waters.  It 
is  the  bosom  of  God.  Whatever  our  distress,  God  has  the  power  to  help.  He  is 
almighty,  and  can  do  all  things ;  unless  the  will  of  the  creature  be  obstinately 
opposed  to  His  will  and  influences.  And  in  Him  is  willingness  to  help.  And  He 
has  provided  the  requisite  means  and  methods  of  help.  They  are  ever  within  the 
reach  of  those  who  need  and  will  apply  them.  His  help  is  never  too  late,  never 
ineffectual.  No  case  is  without  hope,  if  there  be  repentance.  If  the  destructive 
workings  are  but  little  advanced,  God's  help  may  arrest  its  progress.  Should 
it,  unhappily,  have  proceeded  so  far  as  to  have  corrupted  otir  hearts  and  seared 
our  consciences.  He  can  convert,  restore,  and  renew  us.  (R.  Cattermole,  B.D.) 
Destroyed  sinners  finding  help  in  Ood : — God's  eye  sees  at  once  all  events,  past, 
present,  and  future.  Hence  He  saw  Israel  labouring  under  the  woes  which  He  had 
threatened.  He  saw  them  scattered  and  peeled  and  eating  abundantly  of  the 
fruit  of  their  own  devices,  and  He  tells  them  that  the  blame  was  all  their  own. 
Israel,  in  coming  tinder  the  stroke  of  Divine  vengeance,  fell  a  victim  to  her  own 


CHAP,  xra.]  ROSEA.  227 

rebellion  and  obstinacy.  Yet  God  did  not  cease  to  pity  them.  God  had  first 
threatened  Israel.  Then  He  views  her  as  overwhelmed  by  His  judgments.  He 
blames  her  for  having  brought  them  upon  herself.  He  laments  over  her.  He 
opens  anew  the  door  of  hope,  by  declaring  "  in  Me  is  thine  help."  I.  The  mkans 
BY  WHICH  SINNERS  DESTROY  THEMSELVES.  1.  They  do  SO  by  departing  from  God, 
whose  favour  is  their  only  safety.  Apart  from  God  there  is  no  security  for  man. 
The  world  may  pretend  to  throw  over  him  the  shield  of  its  protection,  but  it  will 
prove  as  the  spider's  web  before  the  wrath  of  offended  heaven.  The  favour 
of  God  is  a  strong  tower,  to  which  the  righteous  run  and  are  safe.  But  unre- 
generate  men  have  tiimed  their  backs  upon  this  hiding-place  and  rock  of  defence. 
They  are  utterly  destitute  of  an  asylum  as  long  as  they  disregard  the  favour  of 
God.  And  this  destitution  is  chargeable  whoQy  on  themselves ;  because  God 
has  graciously  used  all  kinds  of  agencies  in  order  to  influence  them.  2.  By 
indulging  in  sin,  which  is  ruinous  in  its  very  nature.  We  argue  the  nature  of  a 
thing  from  its  uniform  effects.  If  we  find  sin  always  pouring  forth  streams  of 
misery,  we  say  it  is  ruinous  in  its  very  nature.  Wherever  sin  has  trod  with  unholy 
foot,  there  misery  in  some  form  and  degree  has  been  spreading  its  withering  and 
deadly  influences.  Test  sin  by  what  it  did  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  See  what  it  has 
done  to  man  as  a  race.  It  has  scattered  desolation,  mourning,  and  woe,  over  the 
face  of  the  whole  earth.  3.  By  exposing  themselves  to  the  destructive  judgments 
of  God.  God  has  axmed  Himself  against  sin  with  righteous  but  fearful  judgments. 
Many  of  these  overtake  the  sinner  during  his  earthly  career.  All  the  miseries 
which  come  upon  men  in  time  are  only  the  first-fruits  of  the  abundant  harvest  of 
wrath,  which  those  shall  reap  who  continue  to  sow  to  the  flesh.  4.  By  refusing 
to  obey  the  Gospel,  which  brings  the  only  remedy  for  their  miseries.  Notwith- 
standing all  His  wrath  against  sin,  God  has  set  before  sinners  an  open  door  of 
escape  from  its  guilt  and  consequences.  The  sinner  can  close  this  door  against 
himself  by  rejecting  the  Gospel  of  God's  Son.  And  there  is  no  other  way  of  escape 
than  that  God  has  provided.  Sometimes  the  sinner  sets  himself  to  work  out  a 
righteousness  of  his  own.  Sometimes  he  comes  after  the  Lord  has  arisen  and  shut 
to  the  door.  II.  Where  help  is  found  for  us  in  God.  There  are  many  quarters 
in  the  Divine  character  to  which  we  need  not  look  for  help.  None  is  to  be  found 
in  His  absolute  holiness  ;  or  His  absolute  justice  ;  or  His  absolute  power  ;  or  His 
absolute  and  general  mercy.  1.  There  is  help  for  us  in  the  gracious  mercy  of  God. 
By  this  we  mean  His  free  and  undeserved  compassion,  exercising  itself  through 
Christ  for  the  deliverance  of  lost  sinners.  Christ  has  removed  all  obstacles 
arising  from  the  absolute  holiness  and  justice,  and  the  general  mercy  of  God. 
Hence  cornea  to  us — along  the  channel  Christ  provided — the  forgiving  and 
sanctifying  mercy  of  God.  2.  There  is  help  for  us  in  the  gracious  power  of  God. 
Gk)d'8  power,  in  Christ,  is  the  strong  arm  sent  down  from  above  to  draw  the  sinner 
from  the  depths  of  sin  and  misery.  It  is  the  mighty  energy  by  which  his  heart 
is  changed,  his  nature  reversed,  and  by  which  he  is  drawn  to  the  Saviour.  It  is 
tile  mighty  rod  by  which  God  breaks  the  power  of  sin  in  the  believer.  It  is  the 
storehouse  out  of  which  God  gives  the  believer  strength  to  perform  the  duties 
assigned  to  him.  It  is  the  house  of  defence  in  which  the  believer  may  obtain 
protection  from  every  calamity.  3.  There  is  help  in  the  gracious  faithfulness 
of  God,  whose  promises  are  so  numerous  and  so  varied  as  to  suit  all  our  wants 
and  circumstances.  The  ground  on  which  a  man  may  lay  hold  on  these  promises 
is  the  faithfulness  of  God  in  Christ.  4.  In  short,  there  is  help  for  us  in  the  all- 
sufiioienoy  of  God.  Learn  how  lamentable  it  is  that  we  should  have  destroyed 
ourselves.  And  what  reason  we  have  for  praising  God  with  all  our  hearts.  If 
God  had  not  said,  "  In  Me  is  thy  help,"  where  would  we  have  been  ? 
{A.  Boss,  M.A.)  In  Ood  is  our  help  : — This  gracious  declaration  of  the  blessed 
God  involves  two  truths.  I.  That  in  God  I3  our  only  help,  and  that  wk 
havb  no  other  mxans  of  dslivsbancb  but  in  Him.  That  aversion  from  God 
which  constitutes  onr  goilt  and  misery,  prompts  us  to  seek  relief  anywhere 
else,  rather  than  from  BLim.  That  might  be  prudent,  if  any  dependence  could 
be  placed  in  those  refuges  which  we  rely  on.  That  Grod  is  our  only 
help  is  obvious  from  the  circumstance  of  His  having  interposed  on  our 
behalf.  Infinite  wisdom  can  do  nothing  unneceBsary.  We  oould  not  by  any 
means  accomplish  our  own  deliverance.  Reason  and  conscience  tell  us  that  no 
future  repentance,  though  we  were  disposed  to  repent,  can  atone  for  the  guilt 
of  a  single  trajisgression.  And  we  do  not  want  to  repent ;  we  are  unwilling  to 
return  to  our  allegiance,  or  to  be  reconciled  to  our  offended  Judge.    Some  say  that. 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

under  the  Gospel,  the  demands  of  the  moral  law  are  abridged,  and  that  it  is  now- 
satisfied  with  a  sincere,  though  imperfect  obedience.  Can  this  be  true  ?  The 
fact  is  that  we  can  do  nothing  towards  relieving  ourselves  from  that  destruction 
and  misery  in  which  we  are  involved  by  sin.  It  is  not  in  our  power,  though  we 
were  willing;  and  we  are  not  willing,  although  it  were  in  our  power.  It  is 
impossible  that  our  circumstances  should  be  retrieved  by  any  other  means  than 
those  which  God  Himself  hath  appointed.  11.  God  is  an  all-sufficiknt  help, 
BOTH  ABLE  AND  wiLLTNO  TO  BEING  ITS  RELiBF.  It  may  be  Said,  Is  not  God  almighty, 
so  that  He  can  do  whatsoever  He  pleaseth  ?  Yes,  He  is  able  to  effect  any  natural 
act  whatever.  But  our  circumstances  are  such  that  something  else  than  mere 
power  is  necessary  to  bring  us  relief.  The  power  of  God  cannot  act  in  opposition 
to  His  other  perfections.  God  is  not  only  powerful,  but  just  and  holy.  A  plan 
must  be  devised  by  which  all  His  perfections  may  be  illustrated  at  once.  God 
must  be  just,  though  man  should  perish.  What  circumstances  render  the  scheme 
of  redemption,  which  God  hath  wrought  for  us  by  Jesus  Christ,  fully  sufficient 
for  all  the  purposes  of  our  salvation  ?  Consider  the  dignity  of  the  person  of  the 
Redeemer  and  His  resurrection.  His  death  was  not  more  necessary  to  atone 
for  our  sins  than  His  resurrection  to  apply  the  redemption  He  had  purchased 
to  the  souls  of  His  people.  He  hath  not  only  begun,  but  completed  the  work  of 
redemption.  (James  French. )  OocPs  help  for  the  sinner : — Well,  there  are 
those  in  this  audience  who  not  only  feel  they  have  a  sinful  nature,  but  that  they 
are  helpless.  I  congratulate  you,  I  am  glad  of  it  that  you  feel  you  are  helpless. 
You  say,  "  That  isn't  brotherly ;  that  isn't  humane."  Well,  I  say  that  in  the 
same  spirit  in  which  Lady  Huntingdon  said  it  to  a  man  who  exclaimed,  "  I 
am  a  lost  man."  She  said,  "  I  am  glad  of  it."  He  said,  "  That's  a  most 
unkind  remark."  "  Ah  !  "  she  said,  "  I  am  glad  of  it.  Because  you  must  first 
feel  you  are  lost  before  you  will  win  salvation."  And  so  if  there  are  those 
here  who  not  only  know  that  they  have  a  sinful  nature,  but  that  they  are 
helpless,  I  congratulate  you.  For  now  comes  the  clarion  voice  of  my  text — it 
comes  like  ten  thousand  thunders  bursting  from  the  throne,  "  In  Me  is  thy 
help." 

Ver.  11.  I  gave  thee  a  king:  In  Mine  anger,  and  took  him  away  In  My 
•^nratli. — Savl : — The  Israelites  seem  to  have  asked  for  a  king  from  an 
unthankful  caprice  and  waywardness.  The  ill  conduct  of  Samuel's  sons  was 
the  occasion,  an  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief  "  was  the  cause.  To  pimish  them,  God 
gave  them  a  king  "  after  their  own  heart."  There  is,  in  true  religion,  a  sameness, 
an  absence  of  hue  and  brilliancy,  in  the  eyes  of  the  natviral  man.  Samuel  had 
too  much  of  primitive  simplicity  about  him  to  please  the  Israelites  ;  they  felt 
they  were  behind  the  world,  and  clamoured  to  be  put  on  a  level  with  the  heathen. 
Saul  had  much  to  recommend  him  to  minds  thus  greedy  of  the  dust  of  the  earth. 
He  was  brave,  daring,  resolute ;  gifted,  too,  with  strength  of  body  as  well  as  of 
mind.  Both  his  virtues  and  his  faults  were  such  as  became  an  Eastern  monarch, 
and  were  adapted  to  secure  the  fear  and  submission  of  his  subjects.  Samuel's 
conduct  in  the  national  emergency  is  far  above  human  praise.  Personally 
qualified  Saiil  was  for  a  time  a  prosperous  king.  But  from  the  beginning  the 
prophet's  voice  is  raised  both  against  the  people  and  king  in  warnings  and  rebukes, 
which  are  omens  of  his  destined  destruction,  according  to  the  text.  Here,  then, 
a  question  may  be  raised — Why  was  Saul  thus  marked  for  vengeance  from  the 
beginning  ?  The  question  leads  to  a  deeper  inspection  of  his  character.  The 
first  duty  of  every  man  is  the  fear  of  God — a  reverence  for  His  Word,  a  love  of 
Him,  and  a  desire  to  obey  Him.  Now  Saul  lacked  "  this  one  thing."  He  was 
never  under  the  abiding  influence  of  religion,  however  he  might  be  at  times  moved 
and  softened.  What  nature  made  him,  that  he  remained,  without  improvement ; 
with  virtues  which  had  no  value,  because  they  required  no  effort,  and  implied 
the  influence  of  no  principle.  There  was  a  deadness  to  all  considerations  not 
connected  with  the  present  world.  It  is  his  habit  to  treat  prophet  and  priest 
with  a  coldness,  to  say  the  least,  which  seems  to  argue  some  great  internal  defect. 
We  have  no  reason  to  believe,  from  the  after  history,  that  the  Divine  gift  at  his 
anointing  left  any  religious  effect  on  his  mind.  The  immediate  occasion  of  his 
rejection  was  his  failing  under  a  specific  trial  of  his  obedience,  as  set  before  him 
at  the  very  time  he  was  anointed.  There  was  no  professed  or  intentional  irrever- 
ence in  Saul's  conduct.  He  outwardly  respected  the  Mosaic  ritual.  But  he 
was  indifferent,  and  cared  for  none  of  these  things.     From  the  time  of  Saul'a 


CHAP,  xm.]  ROSEA.  22« 

disobedience  in  the  matter  of  Amalek,  Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  Saul,  whose 
season  of  probation  was  over.  He  finishes  his  bad  history  by  an  open  act  of 
apostasy  from  the  God  of  Israel.  He  consulted  the  sorceress  at  Endor.  Unbelief 
and  wilfulness  are  the  wretched  characteristics  of  Saul's  history — an  ear  deaf  to 
the  plainest  commands,  a  heart  hardened  against  the  most  gracious  influences. 
(J.  H.  Newman,  B.D.)  A  gift  of  God's  anger  : — You  were  so  set  upon  it,  that 
you  would  have  a  king ;  if  you  will,  take  him,  saith  God,  and  take  him  with  all 
that  shall  follow  after.  So  that  it  was  (as  one  speaks)  rather  from  an  angry  God 
than  from  an  entreated  one.  Saul  and  Jeroboam  were  both  given  in  anger. 
1.  God  may  have  a  hand  in  things  wherein  men  sin  exceedingly.  2.  Things 
that  are  evil  may  yet  have  present  success.  3.  God's  gifts  are  not  always  in 
lore.     Take  heed  of  immoderate  desires  for  any  worldly  thing.     I.  How  WB 

MAY  ENOW  THAT  WHAT  GOD  QIVE3  IS  IN  ANGER,  NOT  IN  LOVB.       It  is  a  very  hard 

thing  to  convince  men,  if  they  have  their  desires  satisfied,  that  it  is  rather  from 
anger  than  love.  Men  are  so  well  pleased  with  the  satisfying  of  their  desires 
that  they  can  be  very  hardly  convinced  but  that  God  intends  good  to  them  in  it. 

1.  When  you  desire  a  gift,  rather  than  God  in  it.  When  your  desires  are  for 
the  gift  rather  than  the  Giver,  you  can  have  no  comfort  that  there  is  love  in  it. 

2.  When  our  desires  are  immoderate  and  violent.  3.  When  God  grants  men 
their  desires  before  the  due  time.  They  have  what  they  would  have,  but  they 
have  it  not  in  God's  time.  4.  When  God  grants  us  what  we  would  have,  but 
without  the  blessing.  He  grants  the  thing,  but  takes  away  the  blessing  of  the 
thing.  He  takes  away  the  comfort  and  satisfaction  of  it.  "  They  shall  eat,  but 
they  shall  not  be  satisfied."  5.  When  that  which  we  desire  is  merely  to  satisfy 
our  lusts.  We  do  not  desire  such  and  such  things  that  by  them  we  may  be  fitted 
for  the  service  of  God.  6.  When  men  are  so  eager  that  they  care  not  whether 
the  gift  comes  from  a  reconciled  or  a  provoked  God  ;  it  is  all  one  to  them 
(Num.  xi.).  7.  When  God  regards  not  our  preparation  for  a  mercy.  Carnal  hearts 
take  no  great  care  themselves  of  it.  Let  me  have  it,  say  they,  our  fitness  matters 
not.  It  is  your  sin  and  wickedness  not  to  regard  the  preparation  of  your  hearts 
for  what  you  have,  and  it  is  God's  judgment  to  give  it  to  you  before  you  are  pre- 
pared. A  gracious  heart,  when  it  would  have  a  mercy,  is  as  careful  to  get  the 
heart  prepared  for  the  mercy  as  to  obtain  it.  8.  \'.  hen  we  rest  on  the  means 
we  use,  and  seek  not  God  by  prayer.  9.  WTien  God  gives  us  our  desires,  but 
not  a  sanctified  use  of  them.  When  God  gives  you  the  shell,  but  not  the  kernel, 
surely  it  is  not  in  love.  All  the  good  things  that  wicked  men  have,  are  but  shells 
without  kernels.  10.  When  a  secret  curse  attends  what  we  have.  11.  When 
we  regard  not  what  becomes  of  others,  so  we  have  our  wants  satisfied.  12.  When 
God,  in  satisfying  our  desires,  makes  way  for  some  judgment.  13.  When  men 
are  greedy  of  things  to  the  disregard  of  results ;  when  they  would  have  their 
desires  satisfied  in  a  foolish  way,  never  minding  what  inconveniences  may  follow, 
but  merely  looking  to  their  present  comfort.  14.  When  men  seek  to  have  their 
desires  satisfied,  merely  because  they  love  change.  15.  When  our  desires  of 
further  mercies  make  us  forget  former  mercies.  16.  When  men  desire  new  things 
out  of  mistrust  of  God.  17.  If  we  seek  to  attain  our  desires  by  unlawful  means. 
(Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  Answers  to  improper  prayers  : — The  flying  fish,  says 
the  fable,  had  originally  no  wings,  but  being  of  an  ambitious  and  discontented 
temper  she  repined  at  being  always  confined  to  the  water,  and  wished  to  soar 
into  the  air.  "  If  I  could  fly  like  the  birds,"  said  she,  "  I  should  not  only  see 
more  of  the  beauties  of  nature,  but  I  should  be  able  to  escape  from  those  fish 
which  are  continually  pursuing  me,  and  which  render  my  life  miserable."  She 
therefore  petitioned  Jupiter  for  a  pair  of  wings,  and  immediately  she  perceived 
her  fins  to  expand.  They  suddenly  grew  to  the  length  of  her  whole  body,  and 
became  at  the  same  time  so  strong  as  to  do  the  office  of  a  pinion.  She  was  at 
first  much  pleased  with  her  new  powers,  and  looked  with  an  air  of  disdain  on  all 
her  former  companions ;  but  she  soon  perceived  herself  exposed  to  new  dangers. 
While  flying  in  the  air  she  was  incessantly  pursued  by  the  tropic  bird  and  the 
albatross,  and  when  for  safety  she  dropped  into  the  water,  she  was  so  fatigued 
with  her  flight  that  she  was  less  able  than  ever  to  escape  from  her  old  enemies 
the  fish.  Finding  herself  more  unhappy  than  before,  she  now  begged  of  Jupiter 
to  recall  his  present ;  but  Jupiter  said  to  her,  "  When  I  gave  you  yoirr  wings 
I  well  knew  that  they  would  prove  a  curse  ;  but  your  proud  and  restless  disposi- 
tion  deserved  this  disappointment.  Now,  therefore,  what  you  begged  as  a 
favour  keep  as  a  punishment."     {Evenings  at  Home.) 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

Ver.  14.  I  will  ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the  grave.  —  For  Easter 
morning : — For  long  ages  it  must  have  almost  seemed  as  if  God  had  for- 
gotten His  challenge.  Death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses  "  ;  from  Moses  to 
David,  who  "  died  and  was  buried  "  ;  and  from  David  to  Christ.  One  of  the 
earliest  chapters  of  the  Bible  (Gen.  v.)  is  a  cemetery  of  the  old  world ;  and  in  the 
case  of  each  the  monotonous  announcement  follows,  "  and  he  died."  The  genera- 
tions of  mankind  spring  smiling  and  beautiful  on  mother  earth,  like  the  clover 
crops  of  successive  years,  as  if  to  defy  or  with  their  charms  to  fascinate  the  tyrant- 
reaper.  But  all  to  no  avail.  There  were  only  two  exceptions  to  the  dread  mon- 
otony of  death — the  rapture  of  Enoch,  and  the  ascension  of  Elijah ;  they  were 
like  the  early  crocus  or  aconite,  which  announces  the  coming  of  the  spring.  All 
the  rest  died.  At  last  He  came  in  human  form  who  had  been  fore-announced 
as  death's  death,  the  destined  fulfiUer  of  the  promise  of  paradise.  At  least  He 
will  not  succumb.  He  will  not  see  death  !  Or  if  they  meet,  before  one  glance 
of  His  eyes,  "  which  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,"  surely  death  will  wane  as  the  moon 
when  smitten  by  sunlight !  But  contrary  to  all  that  we  might  have  thought, 
it  was  not  so.  He,  too,  the  Prince  of  Life,  having  entered  the  lists  with  the  fell 
tyrant,  allowed  Himself  to  be  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter.  And  it  might 
have  seemed  therefore  that  none,  not  even  God,  could  break  the  thrall  of  death. 
Such  was  the  appearance  ;  but  not  the  fact.  We  are  reminded  of  the  old  Greek 
story  that  when  the  city  of  Athens  was  doomed  to  supply  each  year  a  tribute  of 
youths  and  maidens  to  the  monster  of  Crete,  the  hero  Theseus  embarked  with 
the  crew,  and  accompanied  the  victims  that  he  might  beard  the  dreadful  ogre 
in  his  den,  and  slaying  him,  for  ever  free  his  native  city  from  the  burden  under 
which  it  groaned.  So  Christ  through  death  abolished  death,  and  "  destroyed 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil,  and  delivered  those  who  through 
fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage."  Here  was  fulfilled 
the  Divine  announcement,  "  O  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues."  Nor  is  this  all. 
In  the  last  vision  vouchsafed  to  man  of  the  ascended  Christ,  the  keys  of  death 
are  said  to  hang  at  His  girdle,  and  He  has  the  power  to  shut  so  that  none  can 
open,  and  to  open  so  that  none  can  shut.  Nor  is  even  this  all.  The  day  is  not 
far  distant  when  all  His  saints  "  that  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  His  voice, 
and  shall  come  forth  "  ;  then  shall  be  fulfilled  the  saying  that  is  written,  "  Death 
is  swallowed  up  in  victory."  Nor  is  even  this  all.  Tlie  world  of  men  is  to  partici- 
pate in  the  resurrection  power  of  death's  victor.  "  As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so 
in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  They  shall  come  from  the  ages  before  the 
flood  ;  from  the  foot  of  the  pyramids,  where  the  slaves  of  the  Pharaohs  mingled 
their  dust  with  the  bricks  they  made  ;  from  the  earliest  scenes  of  life,  and  from 
the  latest ;  from  the  most  enlightened  races  of  mankind,  and  the  most  degraded  ; 
from  the  most  warlike  and  the  most  peaceful  tribes  ;  cathedral  vaults  shall  split 
and  give  up  their  contents  ;  Marathon,  Austerlitz,  and  Waterloo  shall  add  their 
contributions  ;  the  sea  shall  give  return  of  the  harvest  sown  through  the  centuries. 
Nor  is  this  all.  All  enemies  are  to  be  put  beneath  His  feet.  The  last  enemy  to 
be  destroyed  by  Emmanuel  shall  be  death  itself.  In  what  its  destruction  shall 
consist  we  do  not  know  ;  except  that  in  that  world  which  the  King  who  sits 
upon  the  throne  shall  create,  we  are  told,  "  There  shall  be  no  more  death."  No 
funeral  cortege  shall  wind  its  way  over  the  golden  pavement.  How  gloriously 
then  will  God  realise  the  words  that  glisten  before  our  eyes  this  Easter  morning  ! 
Already  in  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  we  see  that 
the  empire  of  death  is  doomed.  But,  in  the  meanwhile,  is  there  no  comfort  for 
us  who  are  compelled  to  live  in  the  valley  shadowed  by  death  ?  There  is,  because 
He  goes  beside  us  ;  and  the  Psalmist,  who  had  spoken  of  Him  in  the  third  person, 
addresses  Him  in  the  second  as  that  shadow  comes  nearer :  "  He  restoreth  my 
soul ;  Thou  art  with  me."  And  if  this  should  not  be  the  case,  and  we  were 
doomed  to  go  down,  each  alone,  to  die,  yet  even  then  we  need  not  be  without 
solace.  Death  is  abolished  !  The  wasp  struck  its  sting  into  the  Cross  of  the 
dying  Lord,  and  lost  it  there,  and  is  now  stingless  for  ever.  The  poison  fang  of 
the  viper  has  been  extracted  ;  Goliath  beheaded  by  his  own  sword.  The  teeth 
of  the  lion  have  been  drawn.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  pcean  of  victory  over 
the  last  enemy  : — These  words  of  mercy  are  found  amidst  words  of  judgment. 
In  wrath  God  remembers  mercy.  Ephraim  had  been  sentenced  to  temporal 
ruin,  but  now  God  speaks  of  their  eternal  redemption.  Who  has  not  painful 
associations  with  the  grave  T  Death  is  a  reaper  whose  sickle  leaves  not  one  sheaf 
ungathered.     How  blessed  the  thought  that  the  gracious  Lord  Jesus  hath  entered 


CHAP,  xin.]  HOSE  A.  231 

apon  the  scene,  to  become  the  champion  of  His  trusting  people,  and  the  subducr 
of  their  enemies.  The  word  "  ransom  "  signifies  to  rescue  by  the  payment  of 
a  price.  To  "  redeem  "  denotes  the  right  of  the  nearest  kinsman  to  acquire  a 
thing  for  himself  by  the  payment  of  a  price.  Both  words  describe  what  the 
holy  Jesus  has  done.  How  may  Christ  be  said  to  be  the  plague  of  death  ?  1.  By 
the  full  discoveries  He  made  concerning  it.  2.  In  many  of  the  miracles  which 
He  performed.  3.  He  is  the  death  of  death  by  His  own  death  and  resurrection. 
These  were  the  chief  means  and  instruments  of  His  illustrious  triumph.  4.  By 
extending  to  His  people  all  the  benefits  of  His  own  death  and  resurrection. 
Neither  in  dying  nor  in  living  does  He  stand  alone.  He  appears  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  others,  and  the  fruits  of  His  sufferings  and  sacrifice  He  imparts  to 
every  believer.  5.  By  raising  all  His  people  from  their  graves.  This  is  the 
first  resurrection  :  blessed  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection. 
{A.  Clayton  Thiselton.)  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues. — The  ruin  of 
death  : — By  these  words  the  prophet  distinctly  sets  forth  the  power  of  God,  and 
magnificently  extols  it,  lest  men  should  think  that  there  is  no  way  open  to  Him 
to  save,  when  no  hope  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  flesh  appears.  Hence 
the  prophet  says.  Though  men  are  now  dead,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  God 
to  quicken  them.  How  so  ?  For  He  is  '*  the  ruin  of  death,  and  the  excision  of 
the  grave," — that  is,  "  Though  death  should  swallow  up  all  men,  though  the 
grave  should  consume  them,  yet  God  is  superior  to  both  death  and  the  grave, 
for  He  can  slay  death,  for  He  can  abolish  the  grave."  We  learn  from  this  passage 
that  when  men  perish  God  still  continues  like  Himself,  and  that  neither  His 
power,  by  which  He  is  mighty  to  save  the  world,  is  extinguished,  nor  His  purpose 
changed,  so  as  not  to  be  always  ready  to  help  ;  but  that  the  obstinacy  of  men 
rejects  the  grace  which  has  been  provided,  and  which  God  willingly  and  bounti- 
fully offers.  This  is  one  thing.  We  may  secondly  learn,  that  the  power  of  God 
is  not  to  be  measured  by  our  rule  ;  were  we  lost  a  hundred  times,  let  God  be  still 
regarded  as  a  Saviour.  Should,  then,  despair  at  any  time  so  cast  us  down  that 
we  cannot  lay  hold  on  any  of  God's  promises,  let  this  passage  come  to  our  minds, 
which  says  that  God  is  the  excision  of  death  and  the  destruction  of  the  grave. 
"  But  death  is  nigh  to  us;  what,  then,  can  we  hope  for  any  more  ?  "  This  is  to 
say,  that  God  is  not  superior  to  death;  but  when  death  claims  so  much  power 
over  men,  how  much  more  power  has  God  over  death  itself  ?  Let  us  then  feel 
assured  that  God  is  the  destruction  of  death,  which  means  that  death  can  no 
more  destroy ;  that  is,  that  death  is  deprived  of  that  power  by  which  men  are 
naturally  destroyed  ;  and  that  though  we  may  lie  in  the  grave,  God  is  yet  the 
excision  of  the  grave  itself.  Many  interpreters,  thinking  this  passage  to  be 
quoted  by  Paul,  have  explained  what  is  here  said  of  Christ,  and  have  in  many 
respects  erred.  They  have  said  first,  that  God  promises  redemption  here  with- 
out any  condition ;  but  we  see  that  the  design  of  the  prophet  was  far  different. 
{John  Calvin.)  Death  the  plague  of  sinners,  and  Christ  the  plague  of  death  : — 
There  is  no  form  of  death  more  terrible  than  what  is  termed  plague  or  pestilence, 
which  are  the  names  commonly  given  to  any  distemper  that  is  peculiarly  malig- 
nant and  deadly  in  its  character,  and  wide-spreading,  or  as  the  phrase  is,  epidemic 
in  its  progress.  In  the  Hebrew  language,  destruction  was  another  name  for 
the  grave,  and  is  sometimes  found  joined  with  hell,  when  that  word  signifies 
the  separate  state  of  departed  souls.  I.  Death  is  the  plaque  of  the  sinner. 
A  plague  denotes  anything  that  is  troublesome  and  vexatious.  The  idea  of  death 
is  to  the  sinner  a  perpetual  source  of  uneasiness  and  pain.  The  sting  of  death  is 
sin ;    and  therefore  the  sting,  the  torment,  the  curse  of  a  sinful  life  is  death. 

1.  Contemplate  death  in  connection  with  its  forerunners.  By  which  is  meant 
everything   of  suffering   and   sorrow.     These   all   tell   us   of  death's   approach. 

2.  view  death  in  its  attendants.  What  is  death  but  just  the  grand  unfathomed 
mystery  of  wonder  and  depth  and  fear  which  lies  under  life  from  its  beginning 
to  its  close  ?  The  anticipated  terror  of  death  is  not  its  only  attendant.  It  is 
accompanied  with  pain,  the  pain  of  separation  and  the  pain  of  disease.  3.  View 
death  in  its  consequences.  Its  future  and  final  consequences.  (About  which 
we  say  much,  and  know  little.)  II.  Christ  is  the  plague  of  death.  Where 
philosophy  does  nothing,  and  infidelity  worse  than  nothing,  Christianity  steps 
in  and  does  everything.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  well  earned  to  Himself  this  most 
expressive  designation,  "  the  pestilences  of  death."  1.  Christ  showed  Himself 
the  plague  of  death,  by  the  full  discoveries  He  made  and  the  clear  instructions 
He  delivered  regarding  it.     Until  He  appeared  a  thick  cloud  rested  on  the  state  of 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV ST  BATOR.  [ohap.  xin. 

the  dead.  As  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  He  dissipated  the  clouds  which  hung 
over  the  tomb.  He  poured  a  flood  of  light  on  the  regions  beyond  it.  He  dis- 
closed futurity  in  all  its  bliss  and  in  all  its  woes.  2.  Christ  showed  Himself  the 
plague  of  death  in  many  of  the  miracles  He  performed.  Are  disease  and  wretched- 
ness "  the  concomitants  of  death  "  ?  It  was  His  daily  work  of  mercy  to  make 
distress  vanish,  and  to  chase  away  misery.  But  not  satisfied  with  giving  re- 
peated checks  to  death's  ministers.  He  trampled  on  the  grim  monster  himself. 
See  cases  of  raising  the  little  maid,  the  widow's  son,  and  Lazarus.  3.  Christ 
showed  Himself  the  plague  of  death  by  His  own  death  and  resurrection.  These 
were  the  chief  means  and  instruments  of  His  illustrious  triumph.  4.  Christ 
has  proved  Himself,  and  will  yet  prove  Himself,  the  plague  of  death,  by  extending 
to  His  people  all  the  benefits  of  His  own  death  and  resurrection.  Neither  in 
dying  nor  in  living  does  He  stand  alone  ;  He  appears  as  the  representative  of 
others,  and  the  fruits  of  His  every  toil  and  suffering  and  sacrifice  He  imparts 
to  His  believing  and  beloved  people.  (N.  Morrew,  A.M.)  The  great  con- 
queror of  the  toorld  conquered  : — Primarily,  these  words  apply  to  God's  restoration 
of  Israel  from  Assyria — partially  and  in  times  yet  future,  fully  fiom  all  the  lands 
of  their  present  long-continued  dispersion  and  political  death.  1.  Here  is  the 
great  conqueror  called  the  "  death  and  the  grave."  What  a  conqueror  is  death  ! 
(1)  Heartless,  dead  to  all  appeals.  (2)  Resistless.  Bulwarks,  battalions,  castles 
are  nothing  before  him.  (3)  Universal,  his  eyes  fastened  on  the  world-  (4)  Ever 
:  ctive.  2.  Here  is  the  great  conqueror  of  the  world  conquered.  Who  ?  "I 
am  the  resurrection  and  tne  life,  whoso  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die."  How 
has  He  conquered  death  ?  Not  by  weakening  his  power  or  arresting  his  pro- 
gress, for  he  is  as  mighty  and  active  as  ever,  but  by  stripping  him  of  his  terror. 
(Homilist.)  The  Saviour's  final  conquest: — Our  text  is  not  all  solemnity;  it 
also  wakens  within  the  mind  emotions  of  deep  and  heartfelt  joy.     I.  The  timk 

IS  COMING  WHEN  THE  EAVAGES  OF  DEATH  SHALL  BE  FOB  EVER  ENDED.       Death  iS 

always  at  work.  He  is  never  tired.  And  all  alike  are  seized  by  him  as  his  victims. 
The  ravages  of  death  !  How  the  mind  sinks  in  despondency  as  it  contemplates 
what  death  has  done  !  And  the  ravages  are  sometimes  sudden.  Then,  how 
blessed  is  the  assurance  that  the  time  is  coming  when  the  promise  of  the  text 
shall  be  fulfilled.  II.  Then  all  the  design  of  the  atonement  will  be  ful- 
filled. When  Adam  sinned  he  flung  over  the  sunshine  and  joy  of  God's  world 
the  shadow  of  the  tomb.  When  Jesus  entered  the  world  He  came  to  dissipate 
that  shadow,  and  bring  back  sunshine  and  joy  by  bringing  life  and  immortality 
to  light.  The  design  of  the  atonement  is  to  be  fulfilled  ;  it  is  not  altogether 
fulfilled  yet.  III.  Then  the  gloomy  associations  of  the  grave  will  be  all 
forgotten.  Now  it  is  not  possible  to  think  of  the  grave  without  gloomy  thoughts. 
But  that  grave  shall  one  day  be  destroyed,  and  all  its  sad  memories  shall  be 
blotted  out.  IV.  When  these  words  are  fulfilled  the  whole  family  op 
God  will  be  reunited  for  ever.  The  family  of  God  is  scattered  now.  Part 
is  triumphant  in  heaven,  and  part  is  still  militant  upon  earth.  We  shall  all  meet 
again,  where  partings  are  for  ever  unknown.  (W.  Meyndl  Whittemore,  S.C.L.) 
Christ,  the  Conqueror  of  death: — This  is  bold  and  striking  language.  Death  has 
ever  shown  himself  to  be  no  respecter  of  persons.  The  wide  extent  of  death's 
dominion  is  so  universally  admitted  that  it  were  a  waste  of  time  to  adduce  any 
argument  in  its  proof.  In  order  to  the  right  understanding  of  this  passage  we 
must  have  regard  to  the  early  history  of  man.  During  the  whole  period  of  the 
Old  Testament  history  intimations  were  given  of  a  coming  Saviour,  and  every 
promise,  as  well  as  every  type,  had  reference  to  the  blessings  of  His  kingdom. 
There  is  something  peculiarly  striking  in  the  language  here  employed.  Never 
does  death  appear  in  a  more  terrific  form  than  when,  by  plague  or  pestilence, 
thousands  are  swept  away  as  in  a  moment.  Under  whatever  aspect  death  is 
presented  to  our  notice  in  the  sacred  Volume,  it  is  associated  with  sin ;  it  appears 
as  its  result.  It  is  sin  that  arms  death  with  aU  its  poison,  and  renders  it  so  truly 
dreadful.  What  is  it  that  gives  to  sin  its  condemning  power  ?  "  The  strength 
of  sin  is  the  law."  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law."  Then,  how  has  the 
Son  of  God  achieved  the  victory  predicted  in  our  text  ?  For  the  accomplish- 
ment of  man's  redemption  the  Son  of  God  assumed  the  form  of  humanity, 
endured  the  Cross,  and  rose  again  from  the  dead.  For  us  there  is  a  bright  and 
glorious  prospect  of  final  triumph  over  the  darkness  and  desolation  of  the  grave. 
{E.  Pizey,  B.A.)  Life  reappearing  after  death: — There  are  mountain  streams 
which,  after  flowing  a  little  way  in  a  broken  current,  are  lost  to  sight.     But  far 


CHAP.  XIV.]  E08EA.  '  233 

down  the  mountain  they  reappear,  no  longer  tossed  and  restless,  but  peaceful 
as  they  flow  toward  the  sea.  So  our  restless  lives  roll  in  rocky  channels  but  a 
little  way  on  earth ;  but  beyond  the  grave  they  too  will  reappear,  realising  all 
the  peace  and  joy  of  Christ,  and  thus  flow  on  for  ever.  For  since  Christ  has 
risen  again,  all  who  believe  in  Him  have  the  certainty  of  an  endless  life  in  His 
presence.  {8.  8.  Chronicle.)  The  land  beyond  the  mist  of  death: — An  untaught 
Englishman,  standing  at  Dover  when  a  mist  lies  over  the  Channel,  might  think 
an  endless  ocean  was  before  him.  When  it  lifts  a  resident  tells  him  that  what 
he  sees  is  not  merely  France,  but  Europe  and  Asia.  The  intervening  sea,  though 
lashed  by  storms,  is  but  a  little  thing.  There  was  a  mist  hanging  over  the  Straits 
of  Death,  and  people  thought  them  a  shoreless  ocean ;  Jesus  lifted  the  mist,  and 
men  saw  there  was  a  boundless  continent  on  the  other  side.     {Christian  World.) 

Ver.  15.  An  east  wind  shall  come.  —  Reverses  of  fortune  in  human  life : — 
This  and  the  following  verse  set  forth  the  devastation  and  destruction  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  which  was  to  precede  the  deliverance  promised  in  that 
which  precedes.  I.  Reverses  in  human  fortune  are  sometimes  very  STBiKTNa. 
Ephraim  was  "  fruitful  among  his  brethren."  The  very  name  signifies  fruitful- 
ness.  Its  territory  was  most  fertile  ;  its  people  the  most  numerous.  1.  Its  riches 
would  give  way  to  poverty.  Ephraim  was  at  once  a  rich  and  a  populous  tribe  ; 
but  see  the  change  predicted :  "  His  spring  shall  become  dry.  .  .  .  He  shall 
spoil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant  vessels."  The  enemy  would  invade  the  country, 
impoverish  husbandry,  check  merchandise.  2.  Its  populousness  would  give 
way  to  paucity.  The  enemy  would  reduce  its  numbers,  and  almost  depopvUate 
it.  Such  reverses  are  frequent.  They  teach  us  to  hold  all  worldly  good  with 
a  light  hand,  and  to  settle  our  interests  on  the  good  that  is  permanent. 
II.  Reverses  are  generally  brought  about  by  secondary  instrumentality. 
Nations,  communities,  and  individuals  may  always  trace  their  calamities  to 
certain  natural  causes.  This  should  teach  us  to  study  natural  laws,  and  to 
be  diligent  in  checking  all  elements  inimical  to  human  progress.  III.  Reverses 
ARE  under  the  direction  OF  GoD.  The  change  in  the  fortunes  of  Ephraim 
was  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Almighty.  Both  true  philosophy  and 
religion  teach  us  to  trace  all  the  events  of  life  to  God.  Learn  to  acquiesce  in 
His  dispensations,  and  to  look  to  Him  for  all  that  is  good.     {HomUist.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Ver.  I.  0  Israel,  return  nnto  the  Lord  thy  God. — Man's  evU  estate,  and 
hope  of  deliverance  : — While  the  freeness  of  God's  mercy  is  the  leading  idea 
suggested  by  the  text,  it  is  not  the  only  one :  the  condition  of  our  natm-e  is 
accurately  expressed,  as  is  the  mode  by  which  alone  it  can  be  ameliorated. 
I.  The  state  into  which  man  has  brought  himself.  There  are  few  things 
more  important  than  the  fastening  on  the  sinner  all  the  blame  of  his  sin.  Adam 
might  liave  obeyed  the  simple  injunction,  and,  holding  on  his  probation,  might 
have  wun  for  himself  and  his  descendants  a  hereafter  fenced  up  against  the  spoiler. 
God  foreknew  that  Adam  would  transgress,  and  prepared  for  the  contingency. 
We  can  see  that  if  there  had  been  no  ruin  there  could  have  been  no  restoration. 
The  work  of  redemption  takes,  of  course,  for  granted  the  apostasy  of  our  race. 
On  Adam  must  be  fastened  all  the  blame  of  his  transgression.  There  was  no 
extenuating  plea  which  the  offender  could  in  justice  have  urged.  The  blame  of 
the  fall  belongs  individually  to  man.  Thou  hast  not  fallen  through  an  inherent 
inability  to  stand  ;  He  has  so  constituted  thee  that  thou  mightest  have  stood. 
Thou  hast  not  fallen  through  the  ground  being  slippery,  and  thick-set  with  snares. 
He  placed  thee  where  thy  footing  was  firm,  and  thy  pathway  direct.  So  that 
upon  man  himself  comes  home  wholly  all  the  effect  of  the  fall.  We  argue  from 
this  the  unqualified  gratuitousness  of  God's  interposition  ou  man's  behalf.  In 
whatever  degree  there  may  be  a  necessity  of  sinning,  in  no  degree  is  there  a  necessity 
of  perishing.  God  places  no  man  in  such  a  moral  condition  that  oar  falling  into 
perdition  is  unavoidable.  Let  a  man  have  once  heard  of  Christ,  and  from  that 
moment  forward  salvation  is  within  arm's  length  of  this  man.    Man  can  have 


234  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

no  right  to  take  off  the  burthen  of  responsibilities  and  cast  it  on  the  secret  decrees 
of  his  Maker.  11.  The  mode  of  man's  deliverance.  "  Return  unto  the  Lord 
thy  God."  It  comes  not  within  our  power  to  destroy  or  diminish  God's  title  to 
our  service.  The  fall  did  not  do  away  with  God's  claim  on  man.  Some  teach 
that  God  proportions  His  demands  to  our  impaired  capacities,  and  will  be  satisfied 
with  the  honest  endeavour,  seeing  that  we  cannot  come  up  to  the  thorough  per- 
formance. But  this  is  making  God  answerable  for  the  apostasy  of  man.  We 
may,  however,  gather  an  inference  of  consolation  as  well  as  one  of  admonition. 
There  is  the  groundwork  of  hope,  that  God  will  yet  look  mercifully  upon  us,  and 
restore  us,  seeing  that,  notwithstanding  our  alienation.  He  is  still  our  God.  Man 
of  himself  hath  no  power  to  turn  imto  God  ;  but  since  God  invites.  He  surely 
enables.  He  bestows  all  requisite  Jissistance,  and  a  clear  pathway  has  been  made. 
{H.  MdviU,  B.D.)  On  repentance  : — In  the  history  of  the  children  of  Israel 
we  see  the  perverseness  and  ingratitude  of  man,  and  the  forbearance  and  goodness 
of  God.  Israel's  sins  were  peculiarly  aggravated  by  their  having  been  committed 
after  repeated  and  wonderful  deliverances,  after  signal  chastisements  and  mercies. 
At  the  period  of  Hosea's  prophecy  Israel's  continued  rebellion  against  God  had 
nearly  exhausted  His  patience  toward  that  people.  Though  these  words  were 
primarily  addressed  to  Israel,  we  shall  consider  them — I.  As  conveying  a  gracious 

EXHORTATION    TO    ALL    SINNERS    TO    "  RETURN    UNTO    THB    LORD."       1.    We    must 

"  return  unto  the  Lord  "  with  consideration.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Consider  your  ways."  2.  With  weeping  and  supplication.  A  proper  review  of 
our  past  follies  and  perverse  wanderings,  and  of  God's  mercies  and  patience 
towards  us,  will  produce  sorrow  of  heart,  will  cause  tears  of  compunction  to  flow. 
3.  With  humility.  Our  lofty  imaginations  and  high  opinion  of  ourselves  must 
be  brought  low.  4.  Through  the  Mediator.  We  cannot  expect  to  find  mercy 
unless  we  seek  mercy  through  Christ.  Of  this  righteousness,  not  our  own,  we 
must  make  mention.  5.  Without  delay.  This  may  be  urged  from  the  shortness 
and  uncertainty  of  life,  and  from  the  greatness  of  the  work  which  we  have  to 

do.        II.    As    DECLARING    THE    REASONABLENESS    OF    THE    EXHORTATION.         "  For 

thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity."  The  text  is  applicable  to  the  case  of  back- 
sliders who  have  fallen  from  their  steadfastness.  But  all  mankind  have  fallen 
from  God.  Adam  fell,  and  in  him  fell  all  his  posterity.  1.  Man  is  fallen  from 
the  favour  of  God,  and  is  under  the  displeasure  of  God.  2.  Man  is  fallen  under 
the  dominion  of  sin  and  the  curse  of  the  law.  3.  Man  is  fallen  into  the  snares 
and  power  of  the  devil.  4.  Man,  if  not  recovered  by  Divine  grace,  will  at  last 
fall  into  the  bottomless  pit.  Apply  to  those  who  are  still  in  their  fallen  state, 
and  are  wandering  from  God.  1.  Yield  to  the  solemn  and  affecting  truth  that 
you  have  fallen  by  your  iniquity,  and  let  this  truth  stir  you  up  to  inquire  with 
solicitude,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  2.  Listen  to  God's  gracious  invita- 
tion, and  believe  His  willingness  to  receive  you.  3.  Contemplate  what  has  been 
done  to  accomplish  the  great  work  of  your  redemption.  4.  Consider  the  awful 
doom  of  the  finally  impenitent  transgressor.  {E.  Edwards.)  Repentance  as 
return  : — The  Divine  love  is  content  with  nothing  less  than  return.  And  nothing 
less  and  nothing  else  will  give  safety.  There  must  not  only  be  a  cessation  of 
the  present  journey,  but  a  definite  and  conclusive  retracement  of  the  steps. 
What  the  prophet  sighs  for,  and  what  his  God  so  earnestly  commands,  is  not  the 
mere  inactive  terror  of  proceeding  onwards  when  the  fiery  abyss  stretches  to  the 
view,  nor  the  attempt,  while  that  terror  lasts,  to  breathe  a  hasty  vow  or  utter 
a  disordered  prayer.  What  the  Divine  love  insists  on  is  a  decided  and  complete 
retreat,  such  as  when,  conscious  of  peril  and  aware  of  only  one  refuge,  and  that 
in  God,  he  eagerly  seeks  Him  with  the  whole  heart.  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
Father "  is  his  earnest  and  practical  resolution.  {John  Eadie,  D.D.,  LL.D.) 
A  message  to  backsliding  Israel : — I.  The  Lord's  address  unto  His  backsliding 
ONES.  "  0  Israel,  retina  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  God  glorifies  His  sanctifying 
grace  in  some,  and  His  pardoning  grace  in  others.  Let  the  children  of  God  be 
in  what  state  they  may,  as  it  respects  their  acts  of  grace  or  sin,  this  makes  no 
alteration  in  the  Lord's  love  \into  them.  As  they  have  the  body  of  sin  and  death 
dwelling  within  them,  there  is  a  continual  propensity  in  their  fallen  natures,  to 
slide  into  themselves,  and  to  backslide  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Israel's 
case  was  extreme.  He  could  not  return  unto  the  Lord  by  any  strength  of  his 
own.  He  must  be  fallen  by  his  iniquity  into  a  state  and  kind  of  desperation.  This 
was  the  fruit  of  his  iniquity.  It  is  the  Lord  Himself  who  here  speaks.  He  does 
BO  in  the  language  of  commiseration.     From  these  words  what  an  mfinity  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ROSEA.  235 

grace  and  blessed  enconragement  may  be  derived,  so  as  to  encourage  the  people 
of  the  Lord  to  trust  and  hope  in  Him.  None  but  backsliders  know  and  feel  the 
sorrows  which  arise  from  the  same.  II.  One  substantial  rbason  for  thk 
RETUBN  OF  BACKSLiDrNO  IsRABL  TO  GoD.  "  0  Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy 
God."  It  lies  in  their  relation  to  Him,  and  His  relation  to  them.  All  sin  is  the 
effect  of  unbelief.  Every  act  of  departure  from  the  Lord  is  the  fruit  of  it ;  let 
it  be  mental,  or  let  it  be  open  and  manifest.  Backsliders  need  great  encourage- 
ment, even  from  the  Lord  Himself,  to  return  to  Him.  He  is  pleased  to  give  it 
them.  The  interest  the  Lord  God  hath  in  His  people  can  never  be  broken  in 
upon,  neither  can  their  interest  in  Him  ever  be  impaired  or  cease.  It  is  always 
the  same  on  both  sides.  The  intercourse  between  the  Lord  and  His  people  may 
be  interrupted.     But  God  is  immutable  in  His  love  and  mercy.     III.  The  reason 

MADE   USB   OF  TO   HASTEN   GoD*8   PEOPLE'S  RETURN   TO   HXM.       "  ThoU  hast  fallen 

by  thine  iniquity."  The  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  exceeds  the  very  uttermost 
of  our  minds  to  receive  any  adequate  ideas  of.  Guilt  in  the  conscience  pro- 
duces fear  in  the  heart ;  so  long  as  we  indulge  the  same  it  weakens  our  faith  and 
keeps  us  from  Christ.  {Samud  Eyles  Pierce.)  A  call  to  repentant  return  : — In 
Hosea's  days  idolatry  was  first  universally  set  up  and  countenanced  by  regal 
power.  Here  we  have — I.  An  exhortation  to  repentance,  with  the  motives 
ENFORCING  THE  SAME.  Every  word  hath  its  weight,  and  In  a  manner  is  an 
argument  to  enforce  this  returning.  "  Israel  "  is  a  word  of  covenant.  Return 
unto  the  "  Lord  Jehovah,"  who  is  the  chief  good,  the  fountain  of  all  good. 
"Thy"  God  in  covenant,  who  will  make  good  His  gracious  covenant  unto  thee. 
"  Thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity  "  ;  thine  own  inventions  have  brought  these 
miseries  upon  thee,  and  none  but  God  can  help  thee  out  of  these  miseries.  God 
comes  not  as  a  sudden  storm  upon  His  people,  but  gives  them  warning  before 
He  smites  them.  He  is  a  God  of  long-suffering,  and  has  a  special  regard  to  His 
own  children.  Another  point — 11.  The  best  provision  for  preventing  of 
DESTRUCTION  IS  SPIRITUAL  MEANS.  Of  all  spiritual  means  the  best  is,  to  return 
to  the  Lord.  In  this  returning  there  must  be  a  stop.  To  make  this  stop  there 
must  be  examination  and  consideration,  humiliation  and  displeasure  against 
ourselves,  judging  and  taking  revenge  of  ourselves,  for  our  ways  and  courses. 
There  must  be  a  resolution  to  overcome  impediments.  In  the  original  it  is  a  very 
emphatic,  "  Retvun  even  to  Jehovah."  Do  not  only  begin  to  return,  but  so 
return  as  you  never  cease  coming  till  you  come  to  Jehovah.  Where  there  is  a 
falling  into  sin  there  will  be  a  falling  into  misery  and  judgment.  The  cause  of 
every  man's  misery  is  his  own  sin.  Then  take  heed  of  sm.  Pray  to  God  to  make 
our  way  plain  before  us,  and  not  to  lead  us  into  temptation.  "  Take  with  you 
words."  They  who  would  have  help  and  comfort  against  all  sins  and  sorrows 
must  come  to  God  with  words  of  prayer.  Barrenness  and  want  of  words  to  go 
unto  God  are  blameworthy.  This  is  for  consolation  :  if  they  can  take  words,  and 
can  pray  well,  they  shall  speed  well.  {B.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Sin  separates  from 
God : — You  may  sometimes  see  in  the  ocean  a  pile  of  rock  rising  steeply  to  a 
considerable  height,  and  having  on  it  here  and  there,  where  a  patch  of  soil  covers 
it,  the  remains  of  what  was  once  a  luxuriant  vegetation.  If  you  examine  it,  and 
also  the  mainland  a  few  furlongs  off,  you  wiU  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
were  at  one  time,  now  long  gone  by,  united  together.  They  have  become 
separated  by  the  action  of  the  sea.  At  first  there  was  but  a  small  inlet,  scarcely 
large  enough  for  a  single  boat  to  anchor  in ;  this  was  gradually  enlarged  by  the 
incessant  beating  of  the  surf  until  it  became  a  broad  Day,  and  at  last  the  sea, 
striking  with  more  and  more  force  upon  the  cliffs  every  year,  cut  its  way  com- 
pletely through,  and  now  what  was  once  part  of  the  mainland  is  but  a  solitary 
and  desolate  isle.  One  of  the  most  direct  and  appalling  effects  of  sin  is  the  breach 
which  it  makes  between  the  human  heart  and  God.  Man  is  made  in  the  likeness 
of  God  ;  he  is  an  offspring  of  the  Divine  thought  and  love ;  he  is  endowed  with 
the  same  moral  and  spiritual  capacities  as  those  which  God  Himself  possesses ; 
but  let  sin  be  suffered  to  find  an  entrance  into  his  heart,  and,  like  the  gnawing, 
devouring,  destructive  sea,  it  will  eat  away  all  the  holy  and  saored  ties  which 
bind  his  heart  to  God,  and  cut  him  off  from  God,  and  leave  him  inwardly  lonely 
and  desolate.  (B.  Wilkinson,  F.G.S.)  How  to  return  to  an  earnest  Uhristian 
life  : — As  long  as  the  bright  summer  sun  shines  into  the  forest  glades  the  fungus 
has  no  chance  to  flourish  ;  but  when  the  sunshine  wanes,  in  the  months  of  autumn, 
the  woods  are  filled  with  these  strange  products  of  decay.  It  is  because  we  drift 
from  God  that  our  lives  are  the  prey  to  numberless  and  nameless  ills.     Make  thq 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X17. 

best  of  all  new  starts,  and  returning  to  the  more  earnest  habits  of  earlier  days, 
or  beginning  them  from  now,  give  yourself  to  God,  believing  that  He  will  receive 
and  welcome  you,  without  a  word  of  remonstrance  or  a  moment  of  interval.  Form 
habits  of  morning  and  evening  prayer ;  especially  in  the  morning  get  time  for 
deep  communion  with  God,  waiting  at  His  footstool,  or  in  the  perusal  of  the 
Bible,  till  He  speaks  to  you.  Take  up  again  your  habits  of  attendance  at  the 
house  of  God  :  in  the  morning  and  the  evening  go  with  the  multitude  that,  with 
the  voice  of  praise,  keeps  holy-day,  and  in  the  afternoon  find  some  niche  of  the 
Christian  service,  in  your  home  or  elsewhere.  Then,  inasmuch  as  you  do  not 
wish  to  be  a  slip-carriage,  which,  when  the  couplings  are  unfastened,  rims  for 
a  little  behind  the  express,  but  gets  slower  and  slower  till  it  comes  to  a  stand, 
ask  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  confirm  these  holy  desires,  keeping  you  true 
to  them,  causing  you  to  be  steadfast,  immovable,  and  set  on  maintaining  life  on 
a  higher  level.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God  always  watching  for  our  return  : — ■ 
Bianconi,  the  introducer  of  the  car  system  in  Ireland,  on  leaving  his  home  in  Italy, 
found  his  most  trying  leave-taking  in  separating  from  his  mother.  She  fainted 
as  he  left  her.  Her  last  words  were  words  which  he  never  forgot :  "  When  you 
remember  me,  think  of  me  as  waiting  at  this  window  watching  for  your  return." 
We  may  think  of  God  in  the  same  way  if  we  have  departed  from  Him  at  all.  In 
spite  of  all  our  faults,  all  our  sins,  He  is  always  watching  for  our  return,  for  "  Hia 
mercy  endure th  for  ever."  For  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity. — Our 
fall  by  sin  : — The  sight  of  fallen  greatness  is  exceedingly  affecting  to  the  mind 
of  a  thoughtful  man,  and  excites  inquiries  concerning  the  cause  or  causes  of  it. 
The  prophet  looked  on  the  kingdom  of  Israel  fallen  from  its  past  strength  and 
honour,  and  declares  the  cause  of  the  fall  to  be — iniquity.  I.  The  fall  by  siit 
IS  THE  MOST  GRIEVOUS  IN  HUMAN  EXPERIENCE.  1.  The  fall  by  sin  is  from  the 
highest  relationships  the  soul  can  enjoy.  No  relationships,  how  distinguished 
and  valued  soever,  can  equal  those  of  God.  There  are  none  so  essential  to  the 
soul's  good  and  safety.  Without  holiness  no  true  relationship  with  Him  can  be 
sustained.  2.  The  fall  by  sin  is  from  life's  great  purpose.  Short  as  life  is,  it  has 
a  great  mission  to  fulfil.  Eternal  life  has  to  be  secured.  The  world's  truest 
good  has  to  be  promoted.  Sin  causes  a  lamentable  failure.  3.  The  fall  by  sin 
is  a  loss  of  truest  power.  A  right  life  wields  a  great  influence.  No  power  can  be 
compared  with  that  of  a  holy  character.  This  power  is  lost  by  sin.  4.  The  fall 
by  sin  is  from  truest  content  of  soul.  The  hallowed  quiet  and  peace  depart. 
Painful  misgivings  and  pangs  of  remorse  tear  the  breast.  The  consciousness  of 
guilt  prevents  the  light  and  joy  of  hope.  11.  This  fall  is  the  inevitablb 
RESULT  OF  sin.  The  course  of  sin  is  the  act  of  man's  free  will.  But  if  he  choose 
the  path  he  cannot  escape  the  ruin.  1.  The  path  of  sin  leads  to  ruin.  (1)  The 
pleasvu-es  of  the  way  cannot  avert  the  consequences.  (2)  The  fall  may  be  delayed, 
but  it  will  come.  2.  None  can  pursue  the  path  of  sin  and  escape  the  ruin.  The 
individual  cannot ;  the  Church  cannot ;  the  nation  cannot.  III.  For  this  fali. 
MAN  himself  is  RESPONSIBLE.  He  falls  by  his  own  iniquity.  1.  None  can  compel 
another  to  sin.  2.  As  none  can  compel  another  to  sin,  so  none  can  compel  his  fall. 
Apply — 1.  Sin  with  such  power  and  consequences  should  have  our  intensest  hate, 
and  should  be  guarded  against.  2.  He  who  is  fallen  should  forsake  his  sin,  and 
seek  mercy  and  grace  from  God.  God's  mercy  can  cover  the  past,  and  His  grace 
can  sanctify  and  secure  the  future.  (Rombeth.)  Message  to  the  remnant : — • 
So  the  admonition  of  Hosea  has  ended,  and  the  note  of  destruction  has  been 
sounded.  It  only  remains  to  look  for  a  remnant  out  of  the  fallen  nation,  which 
by  repentance  and  faithfulness  may  plead  with  God  for  their  own  rescue  if  not 
for  the  nation's  restoration.  Hope,  unwilling  to  be  quenched  in  the  pious 
patriarch's  breast,  suggests  words  of  returning  to  God,  to  relinquishment  of  human 
politics,  and  reliance  on  His  faithfulness.  To  such  a  remnant,  be  it  small  or  great, 
the  everlasting  mercy  of  God  offers  out  of  the  jaws  of  ruin,  as  out  of  death  and 
the  grave,  the  possibility  of  retxirn  to  Him  who  is  not  afar  from  every  one  of  us. 
If  there  are  any  that  will  understand,  let  them  not  charge  their  Maker  with  folly. 
He  has  dealt  justly  by  sinful  Israel,  and  will  deal  mercifully  with  all  men  repentant, 
{Rowland  Williams,  D.D.)  God's  call  to  the  fallen: — God  seems  to  find  aa 
argument  in  the  very  fact  of  our  fall.  He  is  moved  with  compavssion  at  the 
spectacle.  He  sees  from  what  a  height  to  what  a  depth  man  has  fallen.  1.  The 
call  to  return  implies  that  we  had  uandered  away.  Our  fall  has  indeed  been 
occasioned  by  our  wandering.  All  sin  originates  in  the  apostasy  of  the  human 
heart  from  God.     Sin  would  never  have  entered  human  hearts,  and  defiled  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EOSEA.  237 

lives  of  men,  if  man  had  been  true  to  his  primal  relations  with  God.  As  with  the 
race,  so  with  the  individual.  Moral  deterioration  and  corruption  naturally  and 
necessarily  ensue  from  the  r  ostasy  of  the  soul  from  God.  Evil  works  naturally 
flow  from  the  corrupt  condition.  The  fallen  soul  not  only  loses  contact  and 
fellowship  with  God,  but  comes  under  the  influence  of  a  certain  feeling  of  aversion, 
and  almost  of  antipathy,  towards  God  which  leads  him  to  shrink  from  the  very 
thought  of  God.  The  apostate  man  is  fallen  not  only  in  position,  but  in  character. 
Innocence  has  been  forfeited  instead  of  being  developed,  and  sin  reigns  where 
moral  beauty  should  be  crowned.  Man  needs  no  revelation  to  convince  him  of 
his  fall.  He  alone  of  all  the  animals  fails  to  live  up  to  his  own  proper  ideal,  and 
violates  in  many  cases  systematically  the  laws  of  his  own  nature.  Fallen  in 
position  and  character,  he  is  fallen  in  conduct  also.  Then  the  first  thing  needful 
for  the  fallen  and  falling  is  to  return  to  God.  He  who  invites  us  wants  us  to 
come  back  to  Him.     (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  Take  with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the  Lord.  —  Turning  to  God 
in  prayer : — This  passage  teaches  us  how  we  are  to  come  back  to  God.  "  Take 
with  you  words  and  turn."  We  are  to  come  in  prayer  to  God.  We  are  to  come 
in  supplication,  to  come  and  acknowledge  that  we  have  nothing,  and  with  an 
entreaty  that  He  will  furnish  us  with  that  which  we  require.  The  prophet  gives 
us  the  very  prayer  we  are  to  offer.  That  must  be  an  acceptable  prayer  which 
God  Himself  has  indited  !  Here  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  every  acceptable 
prayer  that  has  ever  been  offered  to  God.  Two  things  which  this  prayer  presents 
to  us — 1.  It  teaches  in  what  character  we  are  to  draw  nigh  to  God;  who  they 
are  that  are  warranted  to  come  to  the  Father  of  mercy  and  God  of  all  grace — 
sinners.  2.  In  "  Receive  us  graciously"  we  have  our  Savioiu-  presented  to  us. 
It  is  in  Him  that  the  grace  of  God  is  manifested.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  text 
and  in  the  succeeding  verse  there  is  presented  a  sort  of  supplement  to  this  prayer. 
It  contains  the  promises  of  the  servant,  the  vows  which  he  offers  to  the  Most  High, 
and  which  he  is  determined  to  pay.  The  besetting  evil  of  the  Israelites  was  their 
trusting  to  the  neighbouring  heathen  nations  for  help,  and  forming  associations 
and  unions  with  them.  We  too  have  our  besetting  evils.  We  trust  to  anything 
rather  than  to  God  in  our  various  emergencies  and  distresses.  We  use  all  the 
means  that  are  placed  within  our  power  to  relieve  us  in  oiu-  distresses,  but  we  use 
them  without  reference  to  God.  When  in  repentance  we  turn  to  the  Lord,  then 
in  His  strength  we  determine  to  abandon  our  sins.  (Dr.  Thorpe.)  IsraeFa 
petition  in  time  of  trovble: — The  blessing  of  Ephraim  was  fruitfulness.  And 
throughout  this  prophecy  the  judgments  of  God  against  Ephraim  are  expressed  by 
needs,  emptiness,  barrenness,  dryness  of  roots,  of  fruits,  of  branches,  of  springs, 
&c.  I.  An  invitation  to  repentance.  The  matter  of  it  is  conversion  ;  which 
must  be  to  the  Lord,  and  spiritual.  It  must  be  a  full,  thorough,  constant,  con- 
tinued conversion,  with  a  whole,  fixed,  rooted,  united,  and  established  heart. 
The  motives  to  this  duty  are,  God's  mercies  and  God's  judgments.  II.  Thb 
rssTiTUTioN:  HOW  TO  PERFORM  IT.  1.  A  general  instruction,  "Take  unto  you 
words,"  which  importeth  the  serious  pondering  and  choosing  of  requests  to 
put  up  to  God.  He  expects  there  should  be  preparation  in  oiu-  accesses  to  Him. 
Preparation  of  our  persons ;  by  purity  of  life.  Preparation  of  our  services  ;  by 
choice  of  matter.  Preparation  of  our  hearts ;  by  finding  them  out,  and  stirring 
them  up.  We  must  attend  unto  His  will,  as  the  rule  of  om:  prayers.  Unto  His 
precepts  and  promises,  as  the  matter  of  our  prayers.  Unto  the  guidance  of  His 
Holy  Spirit,  as  the  life  and  principle  of  our  prayers.  There  is  a  kind  of  omnipot- 
ency  in  prayer,  as  having  an  interest  and  prevalence  with  God's  omnipotency. 
2.  A  particular  form.  A  prayer  for  two  benefits :  the  removal  of  sin,  the  con- 
ferring of  good.  A  promise  of  two  things.  Thanksgiving,  and  a  special  care  for 
the  amendment  of  their  lives.  Observe  especially  the  ground  of  their  confidence 
so  to  pray,  and  of  their  resolutions  so  to  promise.  "  Because  in  Thee  the  fatherless 
findeth  mercy."  (Edward  Eeynolds.)  Israel  exhorted  to  return  unto  the  Lord  .•— 
I.  An  awfxtl  FACT  stated.  "  Thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity."  Israel  had— 
1.  Fallen  from  their  allegiance  to  God.  2.  Fallen  from  His  worship.  3.  Fallen 
fiom  the  enjoyment  of  His  favour.  II.  An  affectionate  exhortation  urged. 
"  0  Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."     Observe— 1.  The  persons  addressed. 

Israel"  2.  The  nature  of  the  address.  "  Return."  3.  The  object  to  whom 
they  were  to  return.  "The  Lord  thy  God."  III.  Instructive  direction 
ADMDOSTBBHD.     "Take  with  you  words."     Words   of   sincerity.     Appropriate 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xir. 

words.      Words  of  humble  confession.      Words  of  petition.     "  Take  away  all 
iniquity" — 1.  From  our  affections,  that  we  may  no  longer  love  it.     2.  From  our 
consciences,  that  we  may  no  longer  labour  under  the  burden  of  it.     3.  From 
our  lives,  that  it  may  no  longer  have  dominion  over  us.     4.  From  our  hearts, 
that  we  may  be  dead  to  it.     "  Receive  us  graciously."     Receive  our  prayers. 
Receive  our  persons.     Receive  us  into  Thy  favour.     IV.  Rktubns  of  GRATrruDg 
BXPRESSKD.     "  Render  calves  of  our  lips."     1.  Gratitude  is  a  debt  which  all  owe 
to  God.     2.  Gratitude  is  a  debt  which  gracious  souls  are  ready  to  pay.     Learn — 
(1)  That  neither  our  civil  nor  religious  privileges  will  preclude  the  possibility  of 
falling  by  iniquity.     (2)  That  those  who  have  fallen  by  iniquity  should  be  induced 
to  return  to  the  Lord  their  God.     (3)  Those  whose  iniquity  is  taken  away  should 
bless  the  Lord.     {C.  Simeon,  M.A.)        The  need  for  expression  in  words  : — What 
need  God  words  T     He  knows  our  hearts  before  we  speak  unto  Him.     Gtod  needs 
no  words,  but  we  do,  to  stir  up  our  hearts  and  our  affections.     Our  words  must 
not  be  empty,  but  such  as  are  joined  with  a  purpose  of  turning  to  God.      To  turn 
to  Him  with  a  purpose  to  live  in  any  sin  is  the  extremity  of  profane  impudence. 
The  petition  is,  '  Take  away  all  iniquity."     Because  where  there  is  any  true  good- 
ness in  the  heart,  that  hatred  which  carries  the  bent  of  the  soul  against  one  sin 
is  alike  against  all.     Because  the  heart  which  desires  to  be  at  peace  with  God 
desires  also  to  be  like  God,  who  hates  all  sin.     "  Take  away  all  "  sin ;  both  the 
guilt  and  the  reign  of  every  sin,  that  none  may  rule  in  me.     Forgive  the  sin,  and 
overcome  the  power  of  it  by  sanctifying  grace,  and  remit  the  judgments  attending 
it.     They  pray  for  the  taking  away  of  their  iniquity ;  for  take  away  this  and 
all  other  mercies  foUow  after ;   because  this  alone  stops  the  current  of  God's 
favours,  which  removed,  the  current  of  His  mercies  run  amain.     Many  say.  How 
shall  I  know  whether  or  no  my  sins  are  forgiven  7     You  may  know  by  something 
that  goes  before,  and  by  something  which  follows  after.      Before,   a  humble 
and  hearty  confession.     After,  when  a  man  finds  strength  against  it ;  for  where 
God  forgives  He  gives  strength  withal.     Another  evidence  is  some  peace  of 
conscience,  though  not  much  perhaps,  yet  so  much  as  supports  us  from  despair. 
Again,  where  sin  is  pardoned  our  hearts  will  be  much  enlarged  with  love  to  God. 
And  forgiveness  frames  the  soul  suitably  to  be  gentle  and  merciful,  and  to  pardon 
others.     Therefore  let  us  labour  for  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  that  God  would 
remove  and  subdue  the  power  of  them,  take  them  away,  and  the  judgments  due 
to  them,  or  else  we  are  but  miserable,  though  we  enjoyed  all  the  pleasures  of  the 
world.     "  Receive  us  graciously,  and  do  good  to  us."     So  it  is  in  the  original. 
AH  the  goodness  we  have  from  God,  it  is  out  of  His  grace.     God's  mercy  to  His 
children  is  complete  and  full.     God  not  only  takes  away  iU,  but  He  doth  good. 
We  cannot  honour  God  more  than  by  making  use  of  His  mercy  in  the  forgiveness 
of  sins ;  and  of  His  goodness,  in  going  to  Him  for  it.    The  prayer  is  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  our  own  emptiness.     The  best  that  we  can  bring  to  thee  is  emptiness, 
therefore  do  Thou  do  good  to  us,  fill  us  with  Thy  fulness.     Do  good  to  us  every 
way.     "  So  shall  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips."     Here  is  the  re-stipulation 
or  promise.     They  return  back  to  God.     There  should  be  a  rendering  according 
to  the  receiving.     This  promise  of  praise  is  a  kind  of  vow.     "  So  wiU  we  render.' 
To  bind  one's  self  is  a  kind  of  vow.     The  Church  therefore  binds  herself  that  she 
may  bind  God.     It  is  good  thus  to  vow,  if  it  were  but  to  excite  and  quicken  our 
dulness  and  forgetfulness  of  our  general  vow ;   to  put  us  in  mind  of  our  duty, 
the  more  to  oblige  us  to  God,  and  refresh  our  memories.     The  "calves  of  our 
lips  "  implies  not  only  thankfulness  to  God,  but  glorifying  of  God,  in  setting  out 
His  praise.     In  glorifying  there  are  two  things,  a  supposition  of  excellency,  and 
the  manifestation  of  this  glory.     The  jnelding  of  praise  to  God  is  a  wondrous 
acceptable  sacrifice.     Besides  this  "  the  calves  of  our  lips  "  carries  us  to  work. 
The  oral  thanksgiving  must  be  justified  by  our  works  and  deeds ;    or  else  our 
actions  will  give  our  tongue  the  lie.     Why  doth  the  prophet  especially  mention 
lips,  or  words  ?     Because — 1.  Christ,  who  is  the  Word,  delights  in  our  words. 
2.  Because  our  tongue  is  our  glory,  and  that  by  which  we  glorify  God.     3.  Our 
tongue  is  that  which  excites  others.     {B.  Sibbes,  D.D.)        A  form  of  prayer 
for  backsliders  : — It  pleased  the  Lord  to  draw  up  for  them  a  form  of  prayer,  which 
He  puts  into  their  mouths,  and  with  which  He  sends  them,  that  they  might 
present  themselves  before  Him  at  His  throne  and  mercy-seat,  and  there  repeat  it. 
I.  The  coiiTNECTiON  OF  THESE  WORDS  WITH  THE  FORMER.     Israel  is  fallen  by  her 
iniquity.     What  is  requisite  in  this  case  ?     Most  assuredly,  a  return  to  the  Lord. 
But  Israel  might  say,  "  I  know  not  how  to  return."     To  prevent  despairing 


3HAP.  XIV.}  H08EA.  239 

thoughts  the  Lord  gives  suitable  words  for  those  who  would  return  but  hardly 
know  how  to  do  so.  The  words  are  cogent  and  most  particular,  and  exactly 
suited  unto  and  expressive  of  the  grace  which  those  persons  stood  in  need  of. 
II.  Ofkn  and  explain  thk  expressions  made  use  of  in  this  pbayeb.  They 
contain  for  substance  the  whole  grace  and  gracious  design  of  the  everlasting 
Gospel.  If  all  iniquity  were  not  taken  away  there  could  be  no  expectation  of  being 
received  graciously,  therefore  the  order,  propriety,  and  connection  of  these  words, 
with  the  vast  subject  and  importance  of  them.     III.  The  suitableness  of  them 

TO  such  as  ABE  IN  A  STATE  OF  BACKSLIDING,  OB  ABB  ON  THE  VEBGB  OF  THE  SAME. 

There  is  a  continual  change,  a  flux  and  reflux,  in  the  frames,  temper,  cases, 
and  feelings  of  the  people  of  God.  None  are  safe  one  single  moment,  but  as  they 
are  kept  by  the  power  of  God.  IV.  The  most  obateful  acknowledgments 
OF  THESE  SUPPLIANTS.  "  We  will  render  the  calves  of  our  lips."  When  the  Lord 
is  pleased  to  overcome  our  minds  by  the  manifestations  of  His  pardoning  mercy, 
we  cannot  but  open  our  mouth,  and  with  our  lips  shew  forth  His  glorious  praise. 
(Samud  Eyles  Pierce.)  The  prophet's  call  to  repentance: — We  are  furnished 
in  this  chapter  with  a  most  vivid  picture  of  God's  unchangeable  love  towards 
His  people.  No  sooner  are  the  children  of  Israel  brought  to  a  sense  of  their  help- 
less wretchedness,  and  led  to  betake  themselves  to  the  footstool  of  their  God,  to 
ask  for  pardon  and  mercy,  than  they  obtain  grace,  and  find  help  in  the  time  of 
need.  They  no  sooner  assay  to  go  to  Him  than  He  anticipates  them ;  binds  up 
their  broken  hearts,  pours  the  balm  of  consolation  into  their  wounded  spirits. 
I.  The  pbophet's  call  to  repentance.  This  is  pathetic  to  a  degree.  "  O 
Israel !  "  What  boundless  instances  of  unspeakable  love  does  this  single  expres- 
Bion  imply  !  "In  Me  is  thy  help."  Return,  only  return,  and  it  shall  be  well 
with  you  again.  You  must  have  learnt,  long  ere  this,  the  hopelessness  of  the 
prodigal,  without  a  father's  love  and  protecting  care.  But  let  that  return  be  a 
sincere,  earnest,  and  permanent  return.  Let  it  be  a  truthful  and  spiritual  return. 
Only  genuine  repentance  can  do  us  any  effectual  good.  The  wording  of  the  call 
suggests  that  the  prophet's  appeal  is  dictated  by  mercy  and  judgment.  Mercy. 
"  Return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  Jehovah  is  still  thy  God,  and  not  yet  thy 
Judge,  still  gracious  and  merciful,  long-suffering,  of  great  kindness,  and  repenteth 
Him  of  the  evil.  It  is  by  the  attribute  of  mercy  tnat  God  first  appeals  to  His 
covenant  people  to  return  to  Him.  What  a  glorious  motive  for  repentance  ! 
The  Lord  Jehovah  is  still  ready  and  willing  to  be  your  God,  in  order  to  smooth 
the  way  for  your  return  to  Him.  Judgment.  "  For  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine 
iniquity,"  and  art  therefore  amenable  to  the  just  punishment  which  is  the  portion 
of  all  those  who  transgress  God's  law.  If  mercies  do  not  work  upon  your  love, 
let  judgment  work  upon  your  fear.  II.  The  natueb  of  genuine  bbpentanch. 
"  Take  with  you  words,"  &c.  The  penitent  is  not  left  to  frame  words  according 
to  his  own  fancy  or  imagination,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  actually  puts  words  into 
the  sinner's  mouth.  We  must  also  be  prepared  personally,  we  must  endeavour  to 
begin  a  pure  and  holy  life.  It  was  for  lack  of  a  personal  preparation  that  Israel's 
prayer  was  rejected.  It  is  also  necessary  to  endeavour  to  be  possessed  of  such 
a  state  of  mind  as  to  entitle  the  suppliant  to  the  benefits  of  paternal  compassion. 
We  need  preparation  of  the  heart.  This  fourfold  preparation  must  be  obtained 
from  Him  alone  who  is  almighty.  Of  ourselves  we  can  do  nothing.  From  the 
simple  expression,  "  Take  with  you  words,"  we  learn — 1.  That  God's  will  must 
be  our  rule  in  prayer,  for  it  is  under  such  circumstances  only  that  we  need  expect 
our  supplications  to  be  accepted.  2.  That  God's  precepts  and  promises  must  be 
the  subject-matter  of  our  prayer.  We  are  too  short-sighted  to  know  what  is  good 
for  us,  or  what  God  in  His  inscrutable  dispensations  has  appointed  for  us. 
3.  That  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  must  be  the  life  and  principle  of  our  prayer. 
The  Spirit  who  now  abides  with  us  must  be  our  teacher  in  all  things,  and  brincr 
all  things  to  our  remembrance.  He  will  teach  us  what  is  the  will  of  God^ 
Observe  now  the  "  sound  form  "  dictated  for  the  use  of  the  penitents,  when 
really  and  truly  returning  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  "  Take  away  all  iniquity," 
&c.  In  this  passage  there  is  a  petition  and  a  promise.  The  petition  is  sub- 
divided into  two  distinct  requests,  an  entreaty  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  and  a  solicita- 
tion for  granting  unmerited  favours.  The  promise  consists  of  thanksgiving. 
"■  So  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips  "  ;  and  of  amendment  of  life.  "  Asshur 
shall  not  save  us,"  &c.  The  text  concludes  with  a  reason  for  the  petition  and 
promise.  "  For  in  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy."  Note  that  repentance 
cannot  exist  without  thanksgiving,  nor  can  sincere  thanksgiving  be  found  in 


240  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

an  individual  not  truly  penitent.  "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us,"  means,  we  give 
up  all  human  succour.  Genuine  repentance  takes  the  heart  from  all  carnal 
confidence.  Many  are  the  gods  and  lords  which  the  unconverted  create  for 
themselves.  Men  of  power  deify  strength.  Men  of  wisdom  deify  knowledge 
and  prudence.  Men  of  morality  and  virtue  deify  their  good  works.  {Mosea 
Margoliouth.)  How  to  return  to  God  : — God  not  only  invites  us  to  return,  but 
He  tells  us  how  to  do  it.  He  puts  the  very  words  in  our  mouth.  The  first  act 
of  the  awakened  is  usually  an  act  of  prayer.  The  very  act  of  expressing  our  need 
has  a  tendency  both  to  bring  about  clearer  views  of  what  it  is  that  we  need, 
and  to  intensify  our  desire.  A  true  conversion  involves,  above  everything  else, 
personal  transactions  between  the  penitent,  on  the  one  hand,  and  his  wronged  and 
injured  God  on  the  other.  Now  the  very  act  of  prayer  tends  to  bring  to  the 
front  and  impress  upon  our  consciousness  this  personal  aspect  of  the  case.  It  is, 
however,  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  awakened  soul  should  abstain  from 
anything  that  might  be  called  making  a  prayer.  I  would  to  God  that  men 
were  more  simple  and  definite  in  their  prayers.  Grod  knows  our  needs  before  we 
utter  them.  But  do  we  know  them  ?  Indefinite  notions  as  to  what  we  require 
at  the  hands  of  God  must  paralyse  our  faith  and  rob  oiu*  approach  of  all  reality. 
Notice  the  urgency  of  the  prayer  which  God's  love  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the 
penitent.  It  is  also  the  expression  of  a  distinct  change  in  our  moral  attitude 
towards  God.  It  seems  asking  a  great  deal  to  say,  "Take  away  all  iniquity." 
Can  it  all  be  taken  away  ?  (W.  Hay  Aitlcen,  M.A.)  Israel  exhorted  to  return 
unto  the  Lord : — I.  An  awful  fact  stated.  "  Thou  hast  fallen,"  &c.  The 
term  "  fall "  is  used  literally,  when  we  speak  of  a  body  descending  from  a 
higher  to  a  lower  situation.  When  the  fall  of  angels  or  of  men  is  mentioned,  we 
understand  the  term  figuratively.  Thus  Israel  had — 1.  Fallen  from  their 
allegiance  to  God.  2.  Fallen  from  His  worship.  3.  Fallen  from  the  enjoyment 
of  His  favour.  II.  An  affectionate  exhortation  ueged.  "  Return  unto 
the  Lord."  Observe — 1.  The  persons  addressed.  "  Israel."  No  reproachful 
name  is  used.  2.  The  nature  of  the  address.  "  Return."  This  implies 
previous  wandering.  3.  To  whom  they  were  to  return.  "  The  Lord  thy  God." 
III.  Instructive  direction  administered.  "  Take  with  you  words."  Not 
bullocks  or  sacrifices.  Words  of  sincerity.  Appropriate  words.  Words  of 
confession.  Words  of  petition.  They  were  to  pray  for  the  removal  of  iniquity. 
1.  Take  it  away  from  our  affections,  that  we  may  no  longer  love  it.  2.  From 
our  consciences,  that  we  may  no  longer  labour  under  the  burden  of  it.  3.  From 
our  lives,  that  it  may  not  have  dominion  over  us.  4.  From  our  hearts,  that 
we  may  be  dead  to  it.  Receive  our  prayers  graciously.  Receive  our  persons 
graciously.  IV.  Returns  of  gratitude  expressed.  "  So  will  we  render  the 
calves   of   our  lips."      (Sketches  of   Four   Hundred  Sermons.)  The   iniquity 

of  the  people  : — The  Gospel  itself  has  gone  no  further  than  the  elements  which 
constitute  this  closing  chapter.  The  nation  is  addressed  in  its  unity.  "  Return 
unto  the  Lord."  Come  back ;  do  not  any  longer  pursue  the  way  of  folly  and 
the  path  of  darkness  ;  turn  round  ;  be  converted,  be  healed,  come  home.  That 
is  an  evangelical  cry,  that  is  the  very  passion  and  the  very  meaning  of  the  Cross 
of  Christ.  "  For  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity."  Man  is  not  called  to  come 
down,  but  to  come  up.  Thou  hast  fallen  fiat  upon  the  earth.  This  is  a  call 
from  a  fall.  The  fall  is  not  to  be  argued  into  a  man  ;  the  fall  is  an  experience 
which  must  be  confirmed  by  the  consciousness  of  the  heart  itself.  The  experience 
of  the  heart  about  this  matter  of  the  fall  is  a  varied,  conflicting,  tumultuous 
experience.  "  Take  with  you  words."  When  men  are  in  earnest  their  words  are 
themselves.  Leave  all  ritualism,  and  take  with  you  yoiu-selves  speech  of  the 
heart,  prayer  of  the  soul,  cry  of  the  felt  necessity.  "  Take  away  all  iniquity." 
Here  is  confession.  "  Receive  us  graciously."  Here  is  petition.  "  So  will  we 
render  the  calves  of  oiu:  lips."  Om-  sacrifice  shall  be  a  living  sacrifice.  But  can 
Israel  so  pray  and  so  promise,  and  then  repeat  yesterday  as  if  nothing  had 
occurred  in  the  night-time  of  penitence  ?  Israel  must  be  complete  in  confession, 
and  complete  in  renunciation.  A  man  must  at  some  point  say  good-bye  to  his 
ruined  self.  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature.  Now  we  come  upon 
words  never  excelled  by  John  or  by  Paul  for  sweep  of  thought  and  tenderness 
of  pathos.  "  I  will  love  them  freely,"  literally,  "  I  am  impelled  to  love  them." 
When  God  sees  the  returning  prodigal,  He  sees  more  than  the  sin — He  sees  the 
sinner  within  the  man,  the  man  within  the  sinner,  the  God  within  the  man. 
^Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)         The  penitent  returning  to  Ood  : — Not  only  is  the  obliga- 


CHAP.  XIV.]  H08EA.  241 

tion  to  repent  universal,  the  main  features  of  real  repentance  are  invariably  the 
same.  It  is  the  like  corruption  of  heart  and  practice  over  which  the  contrite 
sinner  of  every  age  and  country  has  to  mourn ;  it  is  the  same  mercy-seat  he  has 
to  approach  ;  it  is  the  same  God  to  whom  he  has  to  be  reconciled.  I.  As  to 
THB  GENERAL  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  MANKIND.  The  expression,  "  Thou  hast  fallen," 
applies  primarily  and  directly  to  the  case  of  the  Jews.  They  had  fallen  in  every 
sense  of  the  word.  Their  vices  had  been  their  ruin ;  their  city  was  destroyed, 
their  temple  consumed,  and  they  themselves  were  captives  in  a  strange  land. 
The  work  of  devastation  had  reached  their  minds  as  well  as  their  bodies.  Many 
of  them  clung  still  to  their  sins  and  idolatries.  Consider,  more  generally — 1.  The 
state  of  degradation  to  which  man  has  fallen.  How  often  have  we,  in  contem- 
plating our  own  hearts,  or  the  conduct  of  others,  to  blush  for  the  creature  who 
was  originally  formed  in  the  image  of  his  God.  2.  The  state  of  corruption  and 
depravity  into  which  human  nature  has  fallen.  It  is  quite  possible  to  over- 
state the  limits  of  this  corruption.  But  we  may  say  that  spiritual  qualities  are 
absolutely  extinct  in  the  unconverted  mind.  3.  The  state  of  suffering  to  which 
we  have  fallen.  Some  compare  the  world  to  a  vast  hospital,  and  others  to  a  huge 
prison.  4.  The  state  of  danger  and  condemnation  to  which  we  are  fallen.  Look 
at  the  strong  bias  of  the  heart  to  evil — at  the  snares  of  the  world,  and  the  tempta- 
tions of  the  devil.  II.  The  duty  of  man  under  such  circumstances.  Our 
Heavenly  Father  has  been  pleased  to  give  us,  in  our  guilty  and  lost  circumstances, 
certain  express  directions  for  returning  to  the  God  from  whom  we  have  fallen. 
In  our  text  the  injunction  is — 1.  That  we  should  "  turn  to  the  Lord."  With 
the  help  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  a  strong  effort  on  your  own  part,  you  should  set 
your  face  heavenwards.  2.  "  Take  with  you  words,  and  say  unto  God,  Take 
away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us  graciously."  Feel  that  your  first  business  and 
object,  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  is  to  seek  by  earnest  and  devout  supplication, 
a  release  from  guilt,  and  wrath,  and  punishment.  This  release  and  pardon  you 
are  to  seek,  not  on  the  ground  of  any  merits  of  your  OAvn,  but  from  the  free  and 
unmerited  love  of  God.  3.  You  are  to  say  unto  God,  "  We  will  render  the  calves 
of  our  lips."  Or  as  the  apostle  puts  it,  "  The  fruit  of  our  lips  giving  praise  to  Him." 
The  feelings  of  heartfelt  gratitude  and  praise  are  to  accompany  prayer.  4.  We 
are  to  renounce  all  dependence  upon  and  all  allegiance  to  other  masters.  Our 
sincerity  will  be  testified  by  an  abandonment  of  the  paths  of  sin.  A  change  in 
the  direction  of  our  affections  and  our  services  will  uniformly  follow  real  conversion. 
III.  The  encouragement  suggested  by  the  text  for  thus  turning  to  God. 
It  is  stated  in  those  simple  but  beautiful  words,  "  For  in  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth 
mercy."  Apply  to  the  despondent ;  to  the  believer ;  to  the  contrite  sinner. 
{J.  W.  Cunningham.)  An  exhortation  to  repentance  : — I.  These  verses  in 
THEIR  PRIMARY  REFERENCE  TO  IsRAEL.  1.  The  prophet  calls  upon  the  people 
to  return  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  He  was  their  God  in  an  especial  manner. 
He  had  never  been  wanting  to  them  while  they  owned  and  served  Him  as  the 
Lord  their  God.  He  directs  them  in  what  manner  and  with  what  spirit  they 
should  return.  They  were  to  take  with  them  words,  and  make  their  petition  to 
this  effect,  that  God  would  be  pleased  to  "  take  away  all  iniquity."  To  take  away 
the  guilt  of  it,  and  grant  them  His  gracious  pardon  :  to  take  away  the  power  of 
it,  and  grant  them  His  effectual  grace  to  resist  and  subdue  it.  They  were  to 
pray  that  God  would  receive  them  graciously,  graciously  implying  that  merit 
was  not  to  be  pleaded  in  any  degree  by  the  petitioners.  They  were  to  promise 
the  tribute  of  their  lips,  grateful  language  flowing  from  a  grateful  heart.  In 
returning  to  the  Lord  the  people  were  further  to  express  their  renunciation  of 
all  former  and  false  confidences.  And  they  were  frankly  to  acknowledge  that 
Jehovah  alone  was  the  effectual  succovir  of  the  helpless  and  destitute.     II.  Con- 

SIDKB    THESE    VERSES    AS    OF    MORE    GENERAL    EXTENT    IN    THEIR    APPLICATION. 

Kingdoms  and  nations  may  "  fall  by  their  iniquity."  1.  There  is  a  call  to  wander- 
ing sinners  to  return  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  A  door  of  hope  is  left  open  for 
them.  2.  God  uses  inducements.  He  assures  the  sinner  that  he  has  "  fallen  by 
his  iniquity."  Every  sinner  is  fallen  from  that  state  of  happiness  and  holiness 
in  which  God  originally  created  man.  3.  You  are  to  take  words  and  pray.  The 
removal  of  sin  must  take  place  in  order  to  our  restoration.  If  the  guilt  of  it  is 
not  taken  away  by  pardoning  grace,  the  wrath  of  God  must  abide  on  us.  If  the 
power  of  it  is  not  broken,  and  the  love  of  it  subdued  in  the  souL,  it  must  exclude 
us  from  the  holy  and  happy  society  of  God  and  glorified  spirits  above.  4.  You 
are  to  entreat  that  God  would  "  receive  you  graciously  "  :  take  you  into  Hia 

i6 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

favour,  and  admit  you  into  His  family.  6.  Such  surprising  grace  will  demand 
the  most  fervent  affections  of  yoxir  heartfi,  and  the  most  deyoted  and  obedient 
submission  of  your  lives.  6.  You  are  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace  with  a 
solemn  and  deliberate  disavowal  of  all  forbidden  dependencies,  and  an  acknow- 
ledgment that  the  God  of  grace  is  the  only  helper  of  helpless  sinners.  Glorify 
God  by  acknowledging  the  freeness  and  fulness  of  His  grace,  and  by  accepting 
the  blessed  and  complete  deliverance  offered  to  you  in  the  Gospel.  (S.  Knight, 
M.A.)  Total  repentance  : — The  prophet  entreats  them  not  only  to  turn  back, 
and  look  toward  the  Lord  with  a  partial  and  imperfect  repentance,  but  not  to 
leave  off  till  they  were  come  quite  home  to  Him  by  a  total  and  sincere  repentance 
and  amendment.  He  bids  them  return  quite  to  Himself,  the  unchangeable  God 
and  their  God.  "  Great  is  repentance,"  is  a  Jewish  saying,  "  which  maketh  men 
to  reach  quite  up  to  the  throne  of  glory."  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Repentance 
or  rejormation  : — I.  Its  natueb  ajjd  mbthod  indicated.  1.  Its  nature.  "  O 
Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  your  God."  The  description  contained  in  the  first 
and  third  verses  of  this  reformation  implies  three  things — (1)  That  the  soul  is 
away  from  God.  (2)  The  renxmciation  of  all  dependence  upon  creatures.  "  Asshur 
shall  not  save  us  ;  we  will  not  ride  ujron  horses."  This  means,  we  will  not  trust 
to  Asshur — that  is,  Assyria — for  help.  (3)  Utter  abandonment  of  all  idols. 
"  Neither  will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of  our  hands.  Ye  are  our  gods.  For 
in  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy."  2.  Its  method.  "  Take  with  you  words, 
and  turn  to  the  Lord."  Why  take  words  to  God?  (1)  Not  because  words 
can  inform  Him  of  anything  of  which  He  is  ignorant.  (2)  Not  because  words 
can  induce  Him  to  be  more  kind  to  us  than  He  is.  "  Then  will  we  offer  the 
calves  of  our  lips."  And  before  Him  pray.  Pray  for  two  things — (a)  His 
forgiveness.  "  Take  away  all  sin."  (6)  His  acceptance.  "  Receive  ua 
graciously."  11.  Its  cause  and  blessedness  specified.  1.  Its  cause — 
God.  "  I  wiU  heal  their  backsliding.  I  will  love  them  freely.  I  will  be 
as  the  dew."  I  will  act  upon  the  soul  silently,  penetratingly,  revivifyingly^ 
"  as  the  dew."  All  true  reformation  brings  with  it  God's  sQent  but  effective 
agency.  2.  Its  blessedness.  (1)  Health.  '  I  will  heal  their  backsliding."  The 
soul  is  diseased.  God  is  its  great  Physician.  (2)  Divine  favoiir.  "  I  will  love 
them  freely,  for  Mine  anger  is  tuj-ned  away  from  them."  (3)  Growth.  "  He 
shall  grow  as  the  lily."  (a)  The  growth  is  connected  with  beauty.  Solomon  in 
all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  it.  (b)  Its  growth  is  connected  with  strength, 
"  Cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."  (c)  Its  growth  is  connected  with  expansive 
ness.  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  How  a  Divinely  formed  soul  expands 
Its  sympathies  become  world  wide,  {d)  Its  growth  is  connected  with  fragrance 
"  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell  as  Lebanon."  How  delect 
able  the  fragrance  of  a  holy  life  !  (e)  Its  growth  is  connected  with  social  usefulness 
It  shall  offer  protection  to  men.  "  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall 
return."  Not  only  protection,  but  beneficent  progress  :  "  They  shall  revive  as 
the  corn,  and  grow  as  the  vine."  (Homilist.)  So  will  we  render  the 
calves  of  our  lips. — By  "  taking  with  us  words,"  in  speech  or  in  sacred  song, 
we  can  render  to  God  the  calves,  i.e.,  the  sacrifice  of  our  lips.  There  is — I.  A 
SACRIFICE  OF  SILENCE.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  know  how  to  serve  our  Lord  and 
our  neighbour  by  keeping  our  lips  closed.  To  be  silent  when  we  are  tempted 
to  speak,  but  when  the  closed  mouth  is  wiser  and  kinder  than  the  uttered  word. 
II.  The  SACRIFICE  of  truthfulness.  We  are  bound  to  truthfxilness  by  the 
express  commandment  of  God,  and  by  the  claims  of  our  fellow-men.  We  render 
this  sacrifice,  not  merely  by  refusing  to  stoop  to  downright,  deliberate  falsehood, 
but  by  avoiding  the  utterance  which  is  fitted  to  convey  a  false  impression  ;  by 
avoiding  the  evil  and  pernicious  habit  of  exaggeration  and  caricature.  Others 
should  be  able  to  trust  our  word  absolutely.  III.  The  sacbiftcb  op  praise. 
We  can  hardly  conceive  of  Divine  service  without  the  element  of  praise,  and  this 
is  the  best  and  truest  Christian  form  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  lips.  Unitedly,  intelli- 
gently, heartily,  spiritually  should  we  render  this  most  pleasant,  most  acceptable 
sacrifice.  IV.  The  sacrifice  of  prayer.  By  utterance  of  our  thought  we  help 
ourselves  to  pray  ;  for  expression  kindles,  sustains,  directs  devotion.  And  by 
uttering  our  thought  we  help  others  to  pray.  V.  The  sacrifice  of  humility 
AND  confession.  Humility  is  the  gateway  that  opens  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
When  with  deep  and  true  penitence  of  spirit  we  take  with  us  words,  we  offer  an 
acceptable  sacrifice,  and  "  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation." 
YL  The  sacrifice  of  helpfulness.     By  the  timely,  thoughtful,  helpful  word. 


fHAP.  nv.]  HOSEA.  243 

we  may  render  service  to  man  and  sacrifice  to  God.  1.  The  word  of  warning. 
2.  The  word  of  comfort.  3.  The  word  of  encouragement.  4.  Th©  word  of 
challenge.  Thus  by  timely  and  helpful  words  shall  we  "  render  the  calves  of 
our  lips."  (Sunday  in  Church.)  A  living  sacrifice  :— Our  sacrifice  shall  be 
a  living  sacrifice ;  we  have  nothing  to  slay ;  we  will  live  unto  the  Lord.  The 
"lips"  here  stand  for  life;  the  '  calves"  must  be  regarded  aa  representing 
symbolically  the  old  sacrifice  m  a  new  form, — not  the  unintelligent  and  irre- 
sponsive calves  of  the  meadow,  but  the  calves  of  our  lips,  the  living  sacrifice, 
the  personal  offermg.  What  a  prayer,  thus  modelled  and  outlined  !  Here  is 
confession,  here  is  hope,  here  is  poetry,  here  is  consecration,  here  is  communion 
with  God  :  yet  is  there  no  bargain-making.  Man  is  not  inviting  God  to  enter 
into  a  covenant  in  which  there  shall  be  so  much  for  so  much.  Forgive  us,  and 
we  will  obey.  Pardon  us,  and  reckon  then  upon  our  worship ; — the  worship 
does  not  come  as  payment,  but  as  a  necessity  of  nature  ;  it  will  be  the  utterance 
of  gratitude;  it  represents  the  irrepressible  music  of  spiritual  thanksffivinc 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  6  *    e- 

Ver.  3.  Asshnr  shall  not  save  ub. —  Giving  up  our  vain  confidences: It  is 

a  great  point  of  wisdom  to  take  advantages  with  the  stream  of  our  temper 
to  praise  God.  It  is  one  branch  of  redeeming  the  time,  to  observe  what  state 
and  temper  of  soul  we  are  in,  and  to  take  advantage  from  thence.  Add  some 
encoiu-agements  to  incite  us  to  praise  God.  We  honour  God  by  it.  It  is  a  gainful 
trading  with  Grod.  It  is  a  most  noble  act  of  religion.  We  have  more  cause  to 
praise  Gtod  than  to  pray ;  having  many  things  to  praise  Him  for,  which  we  never 
prayed  for.  Praise  being  a  larger  sacrifice  than  prayer,  we  ought  to  be  abundant 
in  it.  If  we  be  much  in  praising  God,  we  shall  be  much  in  joy,  which  easeth 
misery.  How  shall  we  know  that  God  accepts  these  sacrifices  of  praise  ?  Under 
the  old  law  God  witnessed  by  fire  from  heaven.  If  we  find  our  hearts  warmed, 
cheered,  and  encouraged  with  joy,  peace,  and  comfort  in  praising  God,  this  is 
as  it  were  a  witness  by  fire  from  heaven,  that  our  sacrifices  are  accepted.  Here 
is  also  a  promise  of  new  obedience,  which  hath  two  branches.  1.  A  renunciation 
of  the  ill  courses  they  took  before.  "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us."  The  people 
of  God,  in  anv  distress,  had  recourse  for  help  to  the  Assyrians  or  the  Egyptians, 

as  if  Grod  had  not  been  sufficient  to  be  their  rock  and  shield.     Learn 1.  That 

man  naturally  is  prone  to  put  confidence  in  the  creature.  2.  That  the  creature 
is  insuflacient  and  unable  to  yield  us  this  prop  to  uphold  our  confidence.  3.  That 
God's  people  when  they  are  endowed  with  light  supernatural,  to  discern  and  be 
convinced  hereof,  are  of  that  mind  to  say,  "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us."  As  a 
preparative  for  the  treatment  of  these  points,  notice  that  reformation  of  life  must 
be  joined  with  prayer  and  praise ;  and  that  true  repentance  is  of  the  particular 
sin  which  we  are  most  addicted  to  and  most  guilty  of.  The  particular  sin  of 
this  people  was  their  confidence  in  Assyria,  horses,  and  idols.  Naturally  we 
are  apt  and  prone  to  confidence  in  outward  helps  and  present  things.  Because 
having  lost  communion  with  God,  somewhat  we  mtist  have  to  stay  the  soul. 
Because  Satan  joins  with  our  sense  and  fancy,  by  which  we  are  naturally  i»-one 
to  live,  esteeming  of  things  not  by  faith  and  by  deeper  grounds,  but  by  fancy. 
These  outward  things  cannot  help  us,  and  so  are  not  to  be  relied  on.  "  Asshur 
shall  not  save  us."     He  is  but  a  creature.     He  is  an  enemy.     He  is  an  idolater 

A  horse  is  a  vain  thing  for  safety."     When  God  alters  and  changes  and  moulds 
anew  the  heart  of  a  man  to  repentance.  He  altereth  his  confidence  in  the  creature. 

In  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy."  When  a  man  hath  once  repented 
there  is  a  closmg  between  God  and  him,  and  he  seeth  an  all-sufficiency  in  God  to 
satisfy  all  his  desires.  Therefore  he  will  use  all  other  things  as  helps,  and  as 
far  as  it  may  stand  with  His  favour.  How  shall  we  know  whether  we  exceed 
in  confidence  in  the  creature,  or  not  ?  We  may  know  it  by  adventuring  on  ill 
courses  and  causes.  When  there  is  such  confidence  in  the  creature,  as  for  us  to 
outdare  God,  then  there  is  too  much  trust  in  the  creature ;  and  that  trust  will 
end  m  confusion.  By  security  and  resting  the  soul  m  meaner  things;  never 
seeking  to  Divine  and  religious  helps,  when  we  are  supplied  with  those  that  are 
outward.  Let  us  take  heed  of  carnal  confidence.  All  is  but  vanity.  Things 
do  not  yield  that  which  we  expect  they  should  yield.  There  is  a  falsehood  m 
the  things ;  they  promise  this  and  that  in  shows,  but  when  we  possess  them  they 
yield  It  not ;  as  they  have  no  strength  in  deed,  so  they  deceive.  Then  there  is 
mutability  in  them.     And  they  are  snares  and  baits  to  us,  to  draw  us  away  from 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

God,  by  reason  of  the  vanity  of  our  nature.  Let  this  be  the  end  of  all,  touching 
this  carnal  confidence,  to  beware  that  we  do  not  fasten  our  affections  too  much 
npon  any  earthly  thing,  at  home  or  abroad,  within  or  without  ourselves  :  for 
"  God  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise."  Let  us  use  all  outward  helps,  yet 
so  as  to  rely  upon  God  for  His  blessing  in  the  use  of  all.  (iJ.  8ibbe3,  D.D.) 
Penitence  /—We  have  here  the  true  portrait  of  real  penitents.  I.  Here  is  a 
renunciation  of  all  help  and  succour  in  all  creatures,  and  all  dependence  for 
salvation  on  anjrthing  inherent.  It  is  good  to  observe  here  that  we  have  all  the 
initials  of  true  Gospel  sorrow  and  godly  grief  for  sin,  with  all  contained  in  that 
repentance  which  is  imto,  and  belongs  unto,  everlasting  life.  Turning  to  the  Lord  ; 
acknowledging  our  case ;  deploring  our  sinfulness ;  praying  for  the  Lord's 
gracious  acceptation  of  us,  a  declaration  of  our  future  acknowledgment  of  these 
gratuitous  acts  of  the  Lord  towards  us  ;  and  then  a  full  rentmciation  of  ourselves, 
with  the  sole  ascription  to  the  free  grace  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit ;  this 
involves  and  includes  all  contained  in  godly  sorrow  for  sin.  It  was  one  of  the 
national  sins  of  Israel  to  trust  in  the  Ass3Tians  for  help  and  succour,  when  in 
trouble  and  distress  they  looked  to  them.  So  "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us,"  means, 
we  will  no  longer  seek  relief  in  human  means.  It  is  a  very  important  effect  of 
our  truly  turning  to  the   Lord  to  renounce   ourselves  wholly  and   altogether. 

2.  A  declaration  of  having  no  more  to  do  with  any  works  of  their  hands.  The 
terms  used  are  very  expressive  of  the  rejection  of  idols  and  idolatrous  worship. 

3.  The  reason  which  is  assigned  for  this.  "  In  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy." 
Mercy  is  in  the  Lord.  It  is  inherent  in  Him.  It  is  a  perfection  of  His  glorious 
nature.  In  the  display  and  manifestation  of  it  He  takes  delight.  {Samuel  Eylea 
Pierce.)  For  in  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy.  —  God  mercifvl  to  the 
fatherless  : — And  it  is  well  that  they  do  find  mercy  there,  for  very  often  they  find 
little  mercy  among  men.  The  text  contains  a  statement  of  facts  with  reference 
to  former  dispensations,  and  a  promise  of  blessing  in  the  future.  I.  The  valttablb 
BLESSING  HEBB  BESTOWED — MERCY.  Not  riches,  not  hououT.  Mercy  is  the 
Divine  perfection,  by  which  God  is  inclined  to  pity  and  succour  such  as  are  in 
distress.  It  relates  only  to  the  miserable  ;  there  can  be  no  manifestation  of 
mercy  without  misery.  But  though  misery  was  in  the  world  and  mercy  was 
the  character  of  God,  there  existed  a  strong  impediment  to  the  exercise  of  that 
mercy.  That  impediment  was  justice.  That  justice  has  been  satisfied.  God 
can  be  a  God  of  mercy  through  the  merits  of  His  own  Son.  Why  should  this 
blessing  of  mercy  be  singled  out  as  given  to  orphans  ?  L  It  is  a  comprehensive 
blessing.  It  pardons  all  sin.  It  prevents  evil.  It  supports  in  danger.  It 
supplies  all  wants.  It  guides  in  doubt.  It  heals  all  diseases.  It  sustains  in 
death.  It  comforts  in  sorrow.  It  delivers  in  diflBculty.  It  saves  the  soul. 
You  cannot  think  of  mercy  without  thinking  of  a  train  of  mercies  following  it. 
2.  It  sweetens  all  other  blessings.  Health,  property,  social  comfort,  the  fireside, 
are  mercies,  but  to  have  all  these  sweetened  by  the  mercy  of  God,  flowing  from 
Him  through  Christ, — that  gives  sweetness  to  all  other  mercies.  Mercy  sweetens 
even  the  Divine  attributes.  Mercy  sweetens  every  affliction,  Mercy  paints  a 
rainbow  on  the  darkest  clouds  of  affliction  and  distress.  There  is  mercy  put  into 
every  cup,  and  this  makes  it  ever  delightful  to  the  sinking  spirits.  Mercy 
prepares  individuals  for  contentment  in  every  situation.  3.  It  is  a  fruitful  blessing. 
What  clusters  of  fruit  gather  on  the  tree  of  mercy!  The  first-fruit  will  be  an 
humbled  spirit.  It  will  break  down  the  pride  of  the  heart.  So  sure  as  mercy 
is  manifested  to  the  soul,  the  soul  will  love  in  return.  It  creates  a  spirit  of  thank- 
fulness. 4.  It  is  an  enduring  mercy.  One  psalm  is  entirely  devoted  to  this 
blessing  (Psa.  cxxxvi.).  What  a  comfort  it  is  that  amid  all  the  changing  things 
of  time  there  is  one  thing  that  "  endureth."  11.  The  ENCOtTRAGEMENT  pbb- 
SENTED  IN  THE  CHARACTER  OF  GoD.  1.  It  is  part  of  God's  character  to  be  merciful. 
2.  What  assurances  there  are  that  we  shall  find  mercy  if  we  seek  it.  3.  See  that 
orphans  especially  are  required,  and  even  entreated,  to  have  this  mercy.  Seeing 
what  a  choice  blessing  this  mercy  must  be,  both  to  spiritual  orphans  and  to  those 
who  are  literally  so,  let  us  all  seek  to  possess  it.  But  remember  that  nothing 
provokes  the  Divine  anger  so  much  as  abusing  His  mercy,  or  slighting  His  love. 
{James  Sherman.)  The  Church  as  fatherless  : — 1.  It  is  the  Chiu-ch's  lot  to 
be  very  desolate  and  orphan-like  in  the  world.  2.  God's  compassion  and  the 
sweet  manifestation  thereof  are  especially  reserved  for  His  people's  low  condition 
and  their  greatest  need.  3.  The  confidence  of  God's  respect  to  His  humble  people, 
would  be  cherished  by  the  needy  and  penitent,  to  encourage  them  to  come  to  Him 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EOSEA.  246 

and  call  upon  Him.  4.  Suoh  aa  do  apprehend  and  believe  the  mercy  of  God 
toward  His  needy  people  will  renounce  all  carnal  and  sinful  confidences. 
(George  HutcJieaon.)  The  fatherless  finding  mercy  in  Ood : — I.  Thh  distbicssed 
CASE  HBBB  8UPPOSBD.  The  word  "  fatherless  "  is  sometimes  used  in  its  natural 
sense ;  and  sometimes  in  a  figurative  sense,  for  afflicted  and  destitute  persons  in 
general.  Our  text  supposeth  that  the  case  of  orphans  is  truly  pitiable,  and  that, 
above  all  others,  they  stand  in  need  of  assistance  and  mercy  from  God.  II.  God's 
KIND  BEOABD  TO  THB  FATHEKLBS3.  1.  God  has  Commanded  others  not  to  injure, 
but  to  assist  them.  He  made  provision  in  the  law  of  Moses  that  they  should  not 
be  wronged.  2.  He  hath  expressly  declared  Himself  their  friend  and  guardian. 
He  is  their  reliever,  helper,  judge,  redeemer,  and  father,  3.  He  hath  in  the  course 
of  His  providence  often  shown  mercy  to  them.  In  cases  of  families  deprived 
of  their  heads,  we  have  known  how  remarkably  providence  has  taken  care  of 
them  and  raised  them  up  friends.  Application.  1.  How  amiable  a  view  doth 
this  give  us  of  the  blessed  God,  and  of  His  wonderful  condescension.  2.  Let 
us  imitate  God  in  showing  mercy  to  the  fatherless.  3.  Let  parents  take 
encouragement  to  commit  their  children  to  the  care  of  God.  4.  Let  the  fatherless 
and  orphans  seek  mercy  from  God,  and  humbly  commit  themselves  to  Him. 
(J.  Orion.) 

Ver.  4.  I  will  heal  their  backsliding.  —  The  aw  fid  state  of  hacksliders : — 
In  the  history  of  the  Israelites  there  is  no  feature  more  striking  than 
their  frequent  rebellions  and  backslidings.  It  is  amazing  to  think  that  a 
nation  which  had  witnessed  such  signal  interposition  of  the  Divine  power  in 
their  behalf  could  be  found  backsliding  to  such  a  degree.  Oh,  the  unfathomable 
depths  of  Divine  compassion  !  God  has  mercy  to  heal  the  backslidings  of  His 
people.  L  The  case  of  the  backslider.  It  is  the  most  awful  to  be  foimd 
within  the  pale  of  the  professing  Christian  Church.  There  is  a  wide  difference 
between  his  case  and  that  of  the  unawakened  and  unconverted  sinner.  For  a 
man  to  become  an  apostate ;  to  relapse  into  deliberate  sin ;  with  all  his  light, 
knowledge,  and  advantages,  to  sin  openly  and  wilfully, — what  ingratitude  is 
implied  in  this,  what  treachery  and  baseness  !  The  most  awful  condition  on  this 
side  hell  is  that  of  him  whose  once  awakened  conscience  is  now  seared  as  with  a 
hot  iron ;  whose  once  melted  heart  is  turned  into  worse  than  its  original  flintiness  ; 
whose  once  enlightened  mind  is  given  over  to  judicial  blindness.  Yet  even  such 
a  case  is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  Divine  compassion.  To  human  eyes  it  is  indeed 
incurable.  It  is  a  cancer  which  spreads  its  fibres  through  the  entire  system,  the 
disease  which  mocks  at  human  cures.  But  God  says,  "  I  will  heal  their  back- 
sliding." II.  The  means  God  employs  in  healing  the  backslideb.  He  is  not 
limited  in  the  selection  or  use  of  means  ;  but  He  acts,  generally  speaking,  by 
bringing  the  backslider  into  the  wilderness  of  affliction,  and  by  turning  the  idol 
which  seduced  him  away  from  his  God,  into  his  scourge.  It  may  be  the  idol  of 
sensual  pleasure,  of  fame,  or  of  gold.  By  and  by  he  wQl  awaken  to  a  full  sense  of 
his  danger  and  misery.  His  God  forsaken,  his  Saviour  betrayed,  his  hopes  of 
heaven  blasted  !  He  let  go  the  substance  to  grasp  at  the  shadow.  The  idol 
which  led  him  from  God  has  become  his  curse.  As  he  journeys  on  in  this  wilder- 
ness, in  despair  and  wretchedness,  thinking  he  has  turned  his  back  for  ever  on 
happiness  and  peace,  then  it  is  that  a  new  and  unexpected  prospect  bursts  upon 
his  sight !  An  unthought-of  opening  presents  itself.  Through  the  long  vista  he 
catches  a  glimpse  of  a  bright  and  glorious  expanse.  God  gives  him  his  vineyards 
from  these.  "  The  valley  of  Achor  becomes  a  door  of  hope."  God  brings  the 
backslider  to  himself  by  another  route  than  he  ever  thought  of.  Let  us  remember, 
for  our  own  warning  and  heart-searching,  that  there  may  be  many  a  backslider 
in  heart,  where  there  is  no  open  and  manifest  defection  from  the  ways  of 
godliness.  {Denis  Kelly,  B.A.)  The  Lord's  healing: — Their  alienation  was 
not  only  offensive  to  God,  it  was  also  hurtful  to  themselves.  It  had  brought 
spiritual  malady  upon  them.  Jehovah  assumes  the  function  of  healer,  and  He 
effects  what  He  promises.  The  God  whom  they  had  offended  does  not  suffer  them 
to  perish,  nor  spurn  them  away  as  loathsome  ;  but  He  revives  and  quickens  them. 
The  gangrene  disappears,  and  they  return  to  soundness  and  health,  with  the 
assured  prospect  of  coming  at  length  to  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  perfect  men. 
{John  Eadie,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  Blacksliding  heeded: — In  this  verse  is  set  down 
an  answer  to  that  prayer,  repentance,  and  reformation  which  the  Church  made. 
Where  God  doth  give  a  spirit  of  prayer,  He  will  answer,     God  answers  exactly 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xiv. 

unto  all  that  is  prayed  for,  beginning  first  with  the  ground  of  all  comfort,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins.  Backsliding  is  an  aggravation  of  sin.  Sins  rank  thus — 1.  Sins 
of  ignorance.  2.  Sins  of  infirmity.  3.  Sins  against  knowledge.  4.  Sins  against 
the  Holy  Ghost.  In  that  God's  promise  is  "  I  will  heal,"  observe  that  sin  is  a 
wound  and  a  disease.  Sin,  as  disease,  arises  either  from  ourselves,  as  we  have  a 
seminary  of  them  in  our  own  hearts ;  or  from  the  infection  and  contagion  of 
others ;  or  from  Satan,  who  hath  society  with  our  spirits.  In  regard  to  its  effects, 
sin  is  like  a  disease.  Diseases  neglected  breed  death ;  they  become  incurable. 
This  is  the  end  of  sin,  either  to  end  in  a  good  despair,  or  in  a  fruitless,  barren 
despair.  How  may  we  know  that  we  are  sick  of  this  sickness  and  disease  of  sin  ? 
If  the  soul  be  inflamed  with  revenge  and  anger,  that  soul  is  certainly  diseased  : 
the  temper  of  the  soul  is  according  to  the  passions  thereof.  If  a  man  cannot 
relish  good  diet,  then  we  co\mt  him  a  sick  man ;  so  when  a  man  cannot  relish 
holy  discoiu-se,  nor  the  ordinances  of  God.  A  man  may  know  there  is  a  deadly 
sickness  upon  the  soul,  when  he  is  senseless  of  his  wounds  ;  and  senseless  of  that 
which  passeth  from  them.  A  man  is  desperately  soul-sick  when  oaths,  lies,  and 
deceitful  speeches  pass  from  him,  and  yet  he  is  senseless  of  them.  Let  us  know 
and  consider,  that  no  man  who  lives  in  sins  unrepented  of  and  uncured  is  to  be 
envied,  be  he  never  so  great.  Let  there  be  no  dallying  with  sin.  God  is  the  great 
physician  of  the  soul.  Healing  implies  taking  away — 1.  The  guilt  of  sin,  which  is 
the  venom  of  it,  by  justification.  2.  The  rage  of  sin,  which  is  the  spreading  of  it, 
by  sanctification.  3.  The  removing  of  the  judgment  upon  our  estate.  Sense 
of  pardon  only  comes  after  sight,  sense,  weariness,  and  confession  of  sin.  Let  us 
remember  this,  lest  we  deceive  oxa  souls.  {R.  Sibbes,  D.D. )  Backsliding  : — 
This  word  imports  a  departing  or  a  turning  away  again  from  God.  It  is  quite 
contrary,  in  the  formal  nature  of  it,  to  faith  and  repentance,  and  implies  that 
which  the  apostle  calls  a  "  repenting  of  repentance."  For  a  man,  having  approved 
of  God's  ways,  and  entered  into  covenant  with  Him,  after  this  to  go  from  his  word, 
and  fling  up  his  bargain,  and  start  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow ;  of  all  other  dis- 
positions of  the  soul,  this  is  one  of  the  worst ;  to  deal  with  our  sins  as  Israel 
did  with  their  servants,  dismiss  them  and  then  take  them  again  (Jer.  xxxiv.  10, 11). 
It  is  the  sad  fruit  of  an  evil  and  unbelieving  heart.  Yet  God  says,  "  I  will  heal 
their  backslidings."  To  understand  this  aright,  we  are  to  know  that  there  is  a 
twofold  apostasy.  1,  An  apostasy  arising  out  of  impotency  of  affection  and 
prevalency  of  lust,  drawing  the  heart  to  look  toward  the  old  pleasures  thereof 
again  :  it  is  a  recidivation  or  relapse  into  a  former  sinful  condition  out  of  forget- 
fulness  and  falseness  of  heart,  for  want  of  the  fear  of  God  to  balance  the  conscience 
and  to  fi^  and  unite  the  heart  to  Him.  Though  exceedingly  dangerous,  yet  God 
is  sometimes  pleased  to  forgive  and  to  heal  this  disease.  2.  An  apostasy  which 
is  proud  and  malicious,  when,  after  they  "  have  tasted  the  good  Word  of  God," 
men  set  themselves  to  hate,  oppose,  and  persecute  godliness,  to  do  "  despite  imto 
the  Spirit  of  grace,"  to  fling  off  the  holy  strictness  of  Christ's  yoke.  Observe — 
(1)  We  should  beware  of  backsliding,  above  aU  other  sins.  (2)  We  should  not  be 
80  terrified  by  any  sin,  which  our  soul  mourns  and  labours  under,  and  our  heart 
turns  from,  as  thereby  to  be  withheld  from  going  to  the  Physician  for  pardon 
and  healing.  [Jeremiah  Burroughs.)  I  will  love  them  freely.  —  God's  pro- 
mise of  forgiveness :  —  We  observe  God's  acknowledgment  or  consideration 
of  all  the  three  points  embraced  in  the  supplication  of  the  truly  penitent. 
God  healeth  in  four  different  ways,  and  each  mode  embraces  all  the  others.  1.  By 
a  gracious  pardon.  2.  By  a  spiritual  and  effectual  reformation,  by  enabling  us 
to  walk  in  newness  of  life,  by  making  us  holy,  even  as  He  is  holy.  3.  By  removing 
judgments  which  sin  brought  upon  the  sufferer,  whether  nationally  or  individually. 
4.  By  comforting.  This  mode  of  restoring  health  to  the  soul  is  one  of  Christ's 
principal  works.  The  Lord  is  very  minute  and  distinct  in  marking  every  article 
in  the  penitent's  prayer.  Ephraim  not  only  besought  mercy  to  have  all  his 
iniquity  taken  away,  but  also  that  He  who  took  away  all  sin,  should,  at  the  same 
time,  receive  good  ^fts  in  his  behalf.  Jehovah,  accordingly,  does  not  only  promise, 
"  I  will  heal  their  backsliding,"  but  proceeds  to  say  moreover,  "  I  will 
love  them  freely."  This  is  the  fundamental  principle  of  Gospel  truth.  Ephraim 
gave  a  reason  for  hia  entire  dependence,  henceforth  and  for  ever,  upon  the  Lord, 
which  was,  "  For  in  Thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy."  We  can  do  nothing  on 
our  part  to  obtain  the  mercy  vouchsafed  unto  us  ;  for  God  said,  "  I  will  love  them 
freely."  It  is  out  of  man's  power  to  deserve  God's  love.  Another  consideration 
must  be  borne  in  mind,  not  to  incur  God's  wrath  again.      (Moses  Margoliouth,  B.A.) 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ROSEA.  247 

The  free  grace  of  God : — Here  the  heart  of  our  Heavenly  Father  is  opened  to  us 
in  the  declarations  of  His  free,  royal,  and  incomprehensible  mercy.  This  as  far 
surpasses  our  sins  and  sinfulness  as  His  self-existent  Godhead  does  our  creature 
capacities.     1.  The  Lord's  free  grace  in  healing  the  backsliding  of  His  people. 

2.  The  manner  in  which  this  is  made  known  to  them.  3.  The  way  and  means 
by  which  they  receive  the  inward  sense  and  benefit  thereof.  (Samuel  Eyles  Pierce. ) 
Loving  freely  : — St.  Austin  says,  "  Those  that  are  to  petition  great  persons,  they 
will  obtain  some  who  are  skilful  to  frame  their  petitions  ;  lest  by  their  unskilful- 
ness  they  provoke  anger,  instead  of  carrying  away  the  benefit  desired."  So  it  is 
here  with  God's  people,  being  to  deal  with  the  great  God,  and  not  being  able  to  frame 
their  own  petitions.  God  answers  them  graciously  with  the  same  mercies  which 
He  had  suggested  them  to  ask.  His  answer  is  full,  "  I  will  love  them  freely." 
This  He  does  because — 1.  It  is  His  name  and  nature  to  be  gracious.  2.  No  creature 
can  deserve  anything  at  God's  hands.  God  did  not  then  begin  to  love  them, 
when  He  said,  I  will  love  them  freely,  but  to  discover  that  love  which  He  carried 
unto  them  from  all  eternity.  Whatsoever  is  in  God  (manifested  in  time)  is  eternal 
and  everlasting  in  Him,  without  beginning  or  ending ;  for  whatsoever  is  in  God, 
is  God.  His  love,  discovered  in  time,  must  needs  be  from  all  eternity.  This  free 
love  and  favour  of  God  is  the  cause  of  all  other  mercies  and  free  favours,  whereby 
He  discovereth  His  love  unto  us.     1.  It  is  the  cause  of  election.     2.  Of  vocation. 

3.  Of  forgiveness  of  sins.  4.  Of  the  grace  of  love.  5.  Of  justification,  sanctifica- 
tion,  &c.  6.  Of  eternal  life.  If  we  would  have  God  to  manifest  His  free  love  to 
us,  let  us  strive  to  be  obedient  to  His  commandments,  and  stir  up  our  hearts  by 
all  means  to  love  Him,  who  hath  so  freely  loved  us.  The  reason  for  the  discovery 
of  this  love  is  thus  given.  "  For  Mine  anger  is  turned  away  from  him."  There 
is  anger  in  God  against  sin  :  because  there  is  an  antipathy  between  Him  and 
sin.  God's  anger  is  the  special  thing  in  afflictions.  Judgments  are  called  God's 
anger.  God  will  turn  away  His  anger  upon  repentance.  It  is  His  nature  to  do  so. 
Learn  to  observe  God's  truth  in  the  performance  of  His  gracious  promises. 
(R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Loving  freely  : — The  word  means,  impelled  thereto  by  himself 
alone,  and  so  (as  used  of  God),  moved  by  His  own  essential  bountifulness,  the 
exceeding  greatness  of  His  goodness.  God  loves  us  freely  in  loving  us  against 
our  deserts,  because  He  is  love.  He  loves  us  freely,  in  that  He  became  man,  and 
having  become  man  freely  shed  His  blood  for  the  remission  of  our  sins,  freely 
forgave  our  sins.     He  loves  us  freely,  in  giving  us  grace,  according  to  the  good 

I  pleasure  of  His  will,  to  become  pleasing  to  Him,  and  causing  all  good  in  us ;  He 
loves  us  freely  in  rewarding  infinitely  the  good  which  we  have  from  Him.  "  More 
manifestly  here  speaketh  the  person  of  the  Saviour  Himself,  promising  His  own 
coming  to  the  salvation  of  penitents,  with  sweetly  sounding  promise,  with  sweetness 
full  of  grace."  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  promises  of  Ood  for  the  comfort  and 
encouragement  of  the  penitent : — I.  I  will  heal  their  backslidings.  Sin  is  the 
malady  of  the  soul.  Here  is  the  assurance  that  it  shall  not  be  fatal.  Healing 
denotes  recovery  from  the  disease.  The  condemnation  shall  be  removed,  and 
the  dominion  of  sin  subdued.  II.  I  will  love  them  freely.  Which  implies, 
conferring  upon  them  everything  good  and  desirable.  III.  I  will  be  as  the 
DEW.  God  will  visit  the  souls  of  His  penitent  people  with  His  refreshing  grac& 
and  sanctifying  Spirit.  In  consequence  they  shall  flourish  and  increase  in  know- 
ledge and  goodness,  adorning  their  religious  profession,  and  appearing  before  the 
world  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  L  Dew  refreshes  the  face  of  nature.  2.  Dew- 
makes  the  ground  fruitful.  The  soul  shall  become  as  a  fair  and  fragrant  garden, 
as  a  comely  and  flourishing  plantation.  IV.  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily,  &c. 
All  the  excellences  of  the  vegetable  world  are  here  collected  to  express  the  effects 
produced  by  the  dew  of  God's  grace  on  the  penitent's  soul ;  beauty,  fragrancy, 
vigour  (or  strength),  and  fertility.  The  salutary  influence  of  God's  blessings 
should  reach  surrounding  nations.  {8.  Knight,  M.A.)  Privileges  of  the 
pardoned  soul : — Were  it  not  then  the  wisest  course  to  begin  with  making  our 
peace,  and  then  we  may  soon  lead  a  happy  life  ?  It  is  said,  he  that  gets  out 
of  debt  grows  rich ;  most  sure  it  is,  that  the  pardoned  soul  cannot  ba  poor ;  for 
as  soon  as  the  peace  is  concluded,  a  free  trade  is  opened  between  God  and  the  soul. 
If  once  pardoned,  we  may  then  sail  to  any  port  that  lies  in  God's  domiaions, 
and  be  welcome ;  where  all  the  promises  stand  open  with  their  treasure,  and 
say :  Here,  poor  soul,  take  full  lading  in  of  all  precious  things,  even  as  much  as 
thy  faith  can  bear  and  carry  away.  (J.  Spencer. )  Love  for  the  unlovely : — 
The  greatest  sins  do  most  and  best  set  off  the  freeness  and  the  riches  of  God's 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

grace ;  there  is  nothing  that  makes  heaven  and  earth  to  ring  and  sound  out  His 
praise  so  much  as  the  fixing  of  His  love  upon  those  who  are  most  unlovely  and 
uncomely,  the  bestowing  of  Himself  upon  those  who  have  given  away  themselves 
from  Him.     (Thomas  Brooks.) 

Vers.  5-7.  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel.  —  Divine  relationship  and 
human  responsiveness :  —  Through  the  picturesque  forms  and  utterances  of 
Hebrew  prophecy  there  breaks  a  very  deep  and  generous  sympathy  with  the 
world  of  nature.  For  Israel  itself,  fallen  and  debased  by  grievous  backslidings, 
smitten  as  with  a  plague  of  shameless  apostasy  and  spiritual  corruption,  yet 
sorrowful,  repentant,  and  growingly  responsive  to  the  exhortations  of  Jehovah's 
servant,  no  simile  could  more  vividly  illustrate  the  effect  of  Divine  influence  on 
the  degenerate  nation,  or  the  restoring  impulses  it  would  give  to  its  better  life, 
than  that  to  which  Hosea  turned.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  I.  I  will 
BB  AS  THE  DEW  UNTO  IsEAEL.  A  more  tender  and  beautiful  comparison  for 
God's  association  and  fellowship  with  His  people  is  not  to  be  imagined.  The 
points  of  correspondence  are  very  obvious,  and  can  scarcely  be  invested  now 
with  any  sense  of  novelty.  The  silent  stealth  of  the  dew  to  its  resting-place, 
its  reviving  and  invigorating  effect  on  fields  and  gardens,  its  plenteous  supply 
of  moistiure  for  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  and  its  most  beneficent  adaptation  to 
needy  physical  conditions,  are  all  so  many  well-worn  and  widely  accepted  lines 
of  interpretation.  What  a  sense  of  impenetrable  mystery  there  is  about  the 
dew  !  Who  shall  make  plain  to  us  the  process  of  its  generation  ?  And  yet 
how  mild  and  familiar  this  mysterious  economy  of  nature  has  become,  inspiring 
no  dread,  arousing  no  suspicion,  creating  no  fear,  but  simply  accepted  as  a  gracious 
providential  arrangement  that,  despite  the  fact  that  it  is  so  incomprehensible, 
may  be  safely  left  to  its  close  and  constant  contact  with  oiu:  earthly  life  !  What 
marvellous  combination  of  force  and  gentleness  there  is  in  the  dew  !  It  does 
not  strive  nor  cry,  nor  lift  up  any  contending  voice  among  the  powers  of  nature. 
See  again  the  service  of  the  dew  in  replenishing  nature's  waste  of  fertilising  power. 
The  very  existence  of  the  dew  indicates  a  loss  sustained  by  nature,  and  a  pro- 
vision in  nature  for  repairing  that  loss.  II.  Fertility  is  begotten  of  the 
DEW.  Where  it  was  given  it  was  natural  to  expect  growth.  The  response  of 
fields  and  vineyards  to  its  productive  presence  was  fruitfulness  and  plenty  : 
and  so,  in  a  figure,  the  result  is  applied  to  Israel  in  this  splendid  pictm:e  of  human 
responsiveness  to  God's  gracious  influence.  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  Therer^ 
will  be  growth,  stability,  breadth,  usefulness,  and  fragrance — the  pervading 
sweetness  of  the  holy  life,  a  characteristic  of  our  growth  before  God,  which  must 
'fever  be  most  pleasing  to  Him.  (W.  U.  TeUey.)  The  dew  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — 
I.  To  WHOM  THE  BLESSING  IS  PEOMiSED.  To  Israel.  Not  Israel  only  after  the 
flesh.  The  name  Israel  brings  before  us  Jacob,  concerning  whom  there  are  two 
remarkable  circumstances  recorded.  1.  God's  special  choice  of  him.  2.  His 
power  with  God  in  prayer.  II.  The  natube  of  the  blessing  set  forth.  "  As 
the  dew."  1.  Dew  is  refreshing  and  fertilising.  2.  Dew  is,  in  many  Eastern 
lands,  the  only  means  for  producing  these  effects.  3.  Dew  is  mild  and  grateful 
in  the  manner  of  its  influence.  4.  Dew  is  generally  imperceptible  in  its  approaches. 
5.  Dew  comes  only  in  the  night.  (Joseph  Jowett,  M.A.)  Dew  to  Israel : — 
Before,  He  had  said,  "  his  spring  shall  become  dry,  and  his  fountain  shall  be  dried 
up."  Now  again  He  enlarges  the  blessing ;  their  supply  shall  be  unfailing, 
for  it  shall  be  from  God ;  yea,  God  Himself  shall  be  that  blessing.  "  I  will  be 
the  dew ;  descending  on  the  mown  grass,"  to  quicken  and  refresh  it,  descending. 
Himself,  into  the  dried  and  parched  and  sere  hearts  of  men,  as  He  saith,  "  We 
will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."  The  grace  of  God,  like 
the  dew,  is  not  given  once  for  all,  but  is  day  by  day  waited  for,  and  day  by  day 
renewed.  Yet  doth  it  not  pass  away,  like  the  fitful  goodness  of  God's  former 
people,  but  turns  into  the  growth  and  spiritual  substance  of  those  on  whom  it 
descends.  (E.  B.  PtLsey,  D.D.)  The  Lord  as  the  dew  (a  talk  with  children) : — 
When  there  are  clouds  to  lessen  the  heat  of  the  sun,  there  is  less  need  of  the  dew 
at  night,  and  so  God  ordains  that  if  clouds  cover  the  heavens,  there  is  little  dew 
to  be  foimd.  The  clouds  prevent  the  escape  of  heat  from  the  earth,  and  therefore 
it  does  not  get  cold  so  rapidly,  and  thus  the  evaporated  moistmre  that  is  in  the 
air  does  not  so  readily  condense  into  dewdrops  and  settle  on  the  grass.  When 
there  has  been  a  burning  sky  all  day,  and  it  continues  clear  even  at  night,  the 
heat  escapes  rapidly  from  the  earth,  and  the  moisture  that  is  in  the  warm  air 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSEA.  249' 

when  it  touches  the  colder  earth  condenses  rapidly,  and  so  the  dews  are  generally 
profuse.  Th»s  there  is  a  very  wise  provision  made  by  God.  According  to  the 
burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  as  a  rule,  is  the  amount  of  dew  at  nig  t.  The  dew" 
does  not  descend  upon  all  things  equally.  The  moisture  does  not  condense  so 
rapidly  upon  the  gravel  paths  as  upon  the  grass.  The  grass  needs  it  most.  The 
dew  in  descending  makes  no  noise.  It  is  a  gracious  blessing  that  comes  silently 
without  trumpeting  of  any  kind.  It  visits  every  bud  and  blade  of  grass.  It 
does  not  visit  the  big  trees  and  forget  the  tender  little  plant.  God  provides 
for  the  little  ones  as  well  as  the  great  ones.  The  dew  comes  so  gently  that  the 
feeblest  blade  can  bear  it.  It  takes  hours  to  develop  a  dewdrop.  No  blade  can 
be  injured  by  the  dew.  Even  the  most  beautiful  bloom  on  the  fruit  would  not 
be  damaged  by  it.  I  want  you  to  feel  that  as  God  is  so  gentle  and  loving  and 
kind,  your  sin  against  Him  is  all  the  greater  for  that.  But  even  when  you  sin. 
He  comes  gently  still,  so  patient  and  long-suffering  is  He.  He  comes  to  refresh 
your  strength  when  you  get  tired  and  sad  and  impatient.  God  is  constantly 
coming  like  the  dew :  not  once,  but  time  after  time.  It  is  according  to  the  need 
that  the  dew  comes.  So  the  Saviour  comes  to  us  even  in  the  darkening  hour 
when  no  one  seems  to  expect  the  blessing  ;  comes  and  refreshes  our  strength 
so  that  we  may  be  the  better  able  to  bear  the  heat  and  burden  of  another  day. 
As  you  grow  up  to  be  men  and  women  you  will  have  special  need  of  strength: 
you  will  have  new  cares,  new  duties,  new  sorrows.  But  if  God  refreshes  your 
strength  and  fits  you  for  every  duty  as  it  shall  come,  all  is  well.  Your  duty 
and  privilege  is  just  to  wait  upon  God,  and  trust  in  Him  for  every  needful  blessing. 
(D.  Davies.)  Divine  influence  : — The  dew  is  the  emblem  of  Divine  grace. 
I.  DiviJsrB  INFLUENCE,  LIKE  THE  DEW,  IS  UNSEEN.  The  greatest  things  we  know 
of  are  unseen.  II.  It  is  silent.  The  most  delicate  ear  cannot  hear  the  descent 
of  the  dew.  So  is  it  with  the  coming  of  Divine  graoe.  III.  It  is  gentle.  It 
falls  upon  the  weakest  flower  without  hurting  it.  Gentleness  is  a  property  of 
Divine  grace.  Every  true  believer  is  ready  to  say,  "  Thy  gentleness  hath  made 
me  great."  IV.  It  is  beviving.  The  source  of  many  and  great  blessings.  So 
Divine  grace,  upon  a  soul  withered  up  by  sin,  imparts  a  freshness  and  a  beauty 
to  its  faded  life.  V.  It  is  abundant.  It  bespangles  all  the  fields,  forests,  and 
gardens  of  our  beautiful  world.  The  humblest  flower  has  its  own  drop  of  dew. 
In  Christ  there  is  grace  to  enlighten,  to  pardon,  to  strengthen,  to  comfort,  to 
glorify  every  human  spirit.  VI.  It  is  free.  It  falls  as  freely  on  the  barren 
rock  as  on  the  fertile  soil ;  as  sweetly  upon  the  rough  fern  as  upon  the  delicate 
rose.  The  most  precious  temporal  blessings  we  possess  are  free  to  al'.  Even 
so  Divine  grace  is  universally  free.  The  jewel  of  Divine  grace  is  as  free  to 
all  as  the  light,  the  air,  the  water,  or  the  dew.  (John  Dunlop.)  The  measure 
of  blessing  in  spiritual  influence  determined  by  human  disposition : — Dew  is  but 
very  sparingly  deposited  on  hard  metals,  while  on  glass,  straw,  grass,  cloth,  and 
similar  substances  it  forms  abundantly.  The  nature  of  the  substance  determines 
the  amount  of  moisture  that  rests  upon  it.  And  the  nature  of  our  feelings  towards 
God,  and  the  disposition  of  our  spirits  towards  holy  things,  determine  the  amount 
of  God  we  are  privileged  to  enjoy.  Too  often  men  blame  their  surroundings  and 
accuse  others  of  being  responsible  for  their  spiritual  poverty.  But  our  environ- 
ments are  not  so  responsible  as  are  our  own  dispositions.  The  callous,  unbend- 
ing, resisting  spirit  is  but  little  blessed,  while  the  soul  that  is  submissive  to  the 
Divine  will,  lovingly  disposed  towards  God  and  His  ways,  and  possessing  a  sym- 
pathetic affinity  to  the  Divine,  is  saturated  with  rich  and  satisfying  blessings. 
{E.  Aubrey.)  God's  silent  blessings: — I.  The  dew  is  a  type  of  the  silent 
blessings  of  God.  He  descends  with  spiritual  graces,  coming  silently  even  as 
the  dew  falls  upon  the  tender  grass.  God  works  no  less  mightily  because  He 
works  in  silence.  This  mode  of  Divine  working  is  profoundly  effective.  There 
is  something  strangely  impressive  in  perfect  silence.  Man's  heart  is  a  tough 
and  stubborn  piece  of  mechanism.  Nevertheless  it  is  susceptible  to  the  influences 
of  gentleness,  persistingly  and  lovingly  laid  upon  him,  and  by  these  influences 
Goa  is  constantly  working.  II.  The  dew  teaches  the  timeliness  of  the 
Divine  blessing.  The  dew  comes  in  just  where  and  when  it  is  most  needed, 
adding  greatly  to  its  benefits  by  the  timeliness  of  its  comiug.  And  this  is  in 
accordance  with  the  modes  of  Divine  working  among  the  children  of  men.  The 
souls  who  most  need  the  Master's  tender  care  are  those  whom  He  most  seeks  to 
bless,  God  does  not  seek  us  because  we  are  saints,  but  to  make  us  saints.  Human 
sorrow  is  small  attraction  to  men,  but  is  the  lodestone  that  draws  to  us  the  Spirit 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

of  God.  III.  The  dew  teaches  the  transient  character  of  much  human 
GOODNESS.  "  As  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away."  Of  how  many  persons  may 
this  sad  complaint  be  spoken  ?  How  many  resolves  made  since  this  year  was 
born  have  already  been  dispelled  as  dew  by  the  morning  sun  !  The  dew  vanished 
and  left  a  blessing.  These  broken  resolves,  do  they  leave  the  heart  any  better  ? 
Nay,  the  heart  is  harder  and  the  mind  more  perverted  because  of  these  failures 
to  fulfil  vows.  {H.  C.  M^Cook,  D.D. )  Christ  is  as  the  dew : — This  comparison 
of  the  dew  is  made  use  of  for  illustration  in  sundry  places  of  Scripture  (Hos.  vi.  4  ; 
Psa.  ex.  3 ;  Mic.  v.  7 ;  Psa.  cxxxiii.  1,  3).  I.  What  likeness  is  there  between 
Jesus  Christ  and  the  dew  ?  The  dew  has  six  properties,  all  fitly  applicable, 
without  straining,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  dew  is  Divine  and  heaven- 
bom.  2.  The  dew  descends,  comes  down.  3.  The  manner  of  the  descending 
of  the  dew  is  not  observable.  It  descends  silently,  makes  no  noise.  4.  It  is 
the  nature  of  the  dew  to  soften  as  far  as  it  goes.  5.  The  dew  moistens.  6.  The 
dew  makes  fruitful.  II.  Who  is  the  Israel  to  whom  He  will  be  as  the  dew  ? 
There  is  a  twofold  Israel  spoken  of.  Israel  the  person,  Israel  the  people :  this 
includes  Israel  according  to  the  flesh,  and  Israel  according  to  the  spirit.  Under- 
stand this  latter.  I.  Of  the  Gospel  Church  in  general,  and  2.  Of  particular  / 
believing  souls.  III.  When  especially  have  we  need  of  this  dew  ?  1.  We  v 
have  all  need  of  it  while  we  are  in  an  unconverted  state  and  condition.  2.  When 
the  conscience  is  parched  at  any  time  with  the  sense  of  guilt,  through  some  wilful 
omission  or  commission.  3.  Under  the  withdrawings  of  the  light  of  God'a 
countenance.  4.  When  a  fit  of  barrenness  prevails,  through  the  stirrings  of 
some  corruption,  the  success  of  some  temptation,  or  through  the  want  of  quicken- 
ing means  and  ordinances,  the  Word,  sacraments.  Sabbaths,  solemn  assemblies. 
5.  In  a  time  of  outward  trouble  and  calamity.  6.  When  we  come  to  die. 
7.  When  we  go  to  an  ordinance.  The  dew  is  necessary  to  prepare  the  ground 
for  the  plough.  8.  When  we  have  been  to  an  ordinance.  IV.  What  is  our 
duty  in  reference  to  this  ?  1.  Mix  faith  with  it,  as  a  Divine  truth  ;  that 
there  is  certainly  such  a  thing  as  this  dew,  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  it. 
2.  Be  more  sensible  of  your  need  of  it  every  day  in  everything.  3.  Ask  it  of 
God ;  and  having  asked  it,  expect  and  wait  for  it,  in  the  use  of  appointed  means. 
4.  Observe  whence  all  your  spiritual  refreshments  come,  and  all  your  fruit.  It 
is  from  Christ  as  your  dew ;  and  let  Him  have  the  glory  of  it.  (Philip  Henry.) 
Improvement  in  religion  the  fruit  of  a  Divine  influence  : — God  has  so  framed  man- 
kind, and  so  disposed  the  affairs  of  human  life  as  that,  on  the  one  hand,  our 
dependence  on  Him  should  not  at  all  lessen  our  obligations  to  diligence ;  and 
that  our  diligence  should  not  preclude  our  regards  to  the  influence  of  Divine 
providence.  No  inference  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  belief  of  a  providence  that 
is  the  least  unfavourable  to  industry.  But  he  acts  a  part  equally  foolish  and 
sinful  who  builds  his  future  prospects  wholly  upon  his  own  prudence  and  labour. 
It  is  an  undoubted  truth  that  the  concurrence  of  an  external  influence,  which 
is  not  under  our  control,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  secure  success.  Let  a  man 
be  as  industrious  as  he  will,  if  he  pays  no  regard  to  the  providence  of  God,  his 
conduct  is  as  unreasonable  and  criminal,  as  if  through  a  pretended  reliance  on 
that  providence,  he  were  to  abandon  himself  to  sloth  and  indolence  !  In  vain 
do  we  profess  faith  in  the  influence  and  operations  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  while 
we  live  in  the  slothful  neglect  of  appointed  duties.     The  text  is  the  grticious 

-'assurance  of  God  to  penitent  and  returning  Israel.  By  the  blessing  here  pro- 
mised we  are  to  understand  the  influence  of  Divine  grace.  I.  Why  are  the 
Divine  influences  compared  to  the  dbw  ?  The  dew  is  a  mist,  or  thin  small 
kind  of  rain,  which  falls  upon  the  earth  morning  and  evening  in  a  very  gentle, 
gradual,  imperceptible  manner,  and  so  refreshes  the  ground  and  makes  it  fruitful. 
It  has  always  been  esteemed  a  great  blessing.  It  is  a  natural  emblem  of  the^ 
Spirit.  L  As  to  its  origin.  The  dew  comes  down  from  above.  It  is  called 
the  "  dew  of  heaven,"  and  the  heavens  are  said  to  "  drop  down  dew."  It  is  no 
effect  of  human  art  or  power.  So  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  come  down  from 
God.  They  are  absolutely  at  God's  disposal,  and  under  His  direction  and  control. 
Who  shall  question  this  7  To  deny  that  there  is  a  secret  invisible  mighty  influence, 
which  at  some  seasons  especially  quickens  the  heart  of  a  good  man  and  animates 
him  to  his  duty,  is  in  effect  to  deny  all  religion.  The  means  of  religion  are  mani- 
festly adapted  to  produce  the  effects  which  have  been  mentioned,  just  as  the 
sowing  and  cultivating  the  ground  to  make  it  fruitful.     But  these  means  are 

not  alike  successful  with  all  who  enjoy  them.     The  benefits  which  some  reap 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSE  A.  251 

from  the  means  of  religion  must  be  owing  to  the  kind  and  seasonable  influences 
of  Divine  grace  which  accompany  them.  2.  As  to  the  manner  in  which  it  falls 
upon  the  earth.  It  descends  gradually,  imperceptibly,  seasonably,  and  some- 
times very  plentifully.  So  do  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  descend  upon 
the  Christian.  They  were  given  richly  to  early  Christians  who  had  to  establish 
Christianity  and  to  endure  persecutions.  These  early  disciples  were  filled  with 
the  Spirit.  3.  As  to  its  use.  These  are  the  effects  of  the  Divine  influences. 
(1)  Divine  comfort  and  refreshment.  (2)  Establishment  and  confirmation. 
(3)  Fruitfulness.  (4)  Beauty  and  glory  put  upon  the  real  Christian.  What 
ornament  so  fair  and  beautiful  as  that  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit — a  mind  endued 
with  patience  and  contentment,   with   benevolence  and  love  ?     II.  To  make 

SOME    SUITABLE   IMPROVEMENT    OF    THE    WHOLE.       1.    DoCS    this   deW   COme   down 

from  God  ;  of  Him  then  let  us  earnestly  seek  it,  and  to  Him  let  us  offer  our  humble 
thanks  for  it.  2.  Though  we  receive  this  dew  from  above,  let  us  not  expect  it 
but  in  the  way  of  duty.  If  we  do,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  we  are  dis- 
appointed. 3.  How  vain  are  all  their  pretences  to  a  large  experience  of  these 
dews  of  Divine  grace  who  bring  forth  no  suitable  fruit  in  their  lives  !  4.  Let 
the  humble,  serious,  and  timorous  Christian  be  comforted — the  Christian  whose 
concern  it  is  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  though  through  many  discourage- 
ments he  is  sometimes  ready  to  question  whether  he  is  the  happy  subject  of 
Divine  influence.  5.  How  unspeakable  will  be  the  bliss  and  glory  of  the  heavenly 
world,  where  the  effects  of  these  Divine  influences  shall  be  enjoyed  in  their  utmost 
perfection.  {S.  Stenner,  D.D.)  As  the  dew: — These  sweet  promises  in  their v^ 
order  follow  immediately  upon  this,  that  God  would  freely  love  them,  and  cease 
to  be  angry  with  them  :  then  He  adds  the  fruits  of  His  love  to  their  souls,  and 
the  effects  of  those  fruits  in  many  particulars.  1.  God's  love  is  a  fruitful  love. 
Wheresoever  He  loves.  He  makes  the  things  lovely.  Our  hearts,  in  regard  to 
themselves  are  barren  and  dry,  wherefore  God's  grace  is  compared  to  the  dew. 
The  dew  falls  insensibly  and  invisibly.  It  falls  very  sweetly  and  mildly.  Grace 
is  compared  with  dew  in  regard  to  its  operations.  It  cools  the  air  when  it  falls, 
and  then  with  coolness  it  hath  a  fructifying  virtue,  for  falling  especially  on  tender 
herbs  and  plants,  it  soaks  into  the  root  of  them  and  makes  them  fruitful.  So  it 
is  with  the  graces  of  God's  Spirit.  2.  Notice  th^unresistibleness  of  the  dew 
and  of  God's  grace.  Christians  grow  like  lilies — l.l^or  beauty  and  glory.  2.  In 
regard  of  purity  and  whiteness.  Let  us  then  labour  that  the  dew  of  God  may 
prove  the  dew  of  grace,  and  that  God  would  make  us  lilies.  Remember  that 
there  is  a  growing  upward  ;  a  growing  in  the  root ;  and  a  spreading  and  growing 
in  the  fruit  or  sweetness.     (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)         The   metaphor  of  the  dew: — 

I.  OpEK  AND  EXPLAIN  THE  DECLARATION  AND  PROMISE  HERE  GIVEN.       The  fountain 

and  spring  of  these  words  originates  from  the  former.  Some  interpret  as  a  promise 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  expression,  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel,"  is  indica- 
tive of  Divine  sovereignty.  Here  is  the  will  of  God  expressed  in  a  promise. 
In  Scripture,  things  very  delightful  and  refreshing  are  compared  to  dew.  Unity  ^ 
amongst  brethren  is  compared  to  the  "  dew  of  Hermon."  Afflictions  and  suffer- 
ings are  like  dew  and  drops  of  the  night.  The  metaphor  as  now  before  us  is 
designed  to  show  how  the  Church  of  God  and  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  are 
refreshed  by  the  love  of  the  Father,  the  salvation  of  the  Son,  and  the  gracious 
influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  falling  gradually  and  insensibly  on  the  souls 
of  the  elect,  they  are  most  blessedly  revived  and  refreshed  ;  so  as  to  be  strong 
in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  made  fruitful  in  every  good  word  and 
work.  II.  The  sudden  change  produced  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise. 
"  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  The  expression  is  used  of  spiritual  growth.  This 
can  only  be  by  the  grace  and  Divine  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     III.  Thb 

ESTABLISHMENT    OF   THE    ChURCH    OF    ChRIST    IN    THIS    FLOURISHING    CONDITION. 

\^"He  shall  cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."  The  strength  of  Christ's  Church, 
and  the  fixation  and  firmness  of  the  same,  will  be  such  as  cannot  be  moved.  The 
whole  of  these  words  are  an  absolute  promise.  God's  "  I  will  "  runs  throughout 
them.  (Samuel  Eyles  Pierce. )  The  dew  : — This  is  a  gracious  promise  to  a  w^ 
penitent  and  returning  people.  Dew  is  of  the  greatest  value  to  all  who  are 
engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits.  It  assuages  the  fierce  drought  of  the  season. 
With  its  nightly  baptism  it  invigorates  the  languid  vegetation,  and  renews  green- 
ness and  growth  over  the  whole  landscape.  Give  some  analogies  between  the 
descent  of  the  dew  upon  the  ground  and  the  gracious  comings  and  manifestations 
of  God  to  His  people.     I.  The  dew  falls  very  quietly  and  gently.     On  the 


252  -^-^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv 

tempestuous  night  there  is  none.  It  is  distilled  beneath  serene  heavens.  Its 
crystal  drops  are  formed  under  the  wing  of  silence  and  in  the  bosom  of  the  night. 
So  God  does  not  usually  come  to  bless  and  revive  His  people  amid  agitations 
and  excitements,  in  the  stress  of  life,  in  the  hurry  of  affairs,  in  the  crash  of  startling 
events.  Times  of  recruiting  and  replenishment  will  probably  be  times  of  silence. 
Elijah  heard  the  "  still  small  voice."  There  are  times  in  the  Church's  history 
when  God  comes  graciously  near  amid  agitations  and  alarms.  But  such  comings 
of  God  have  hitherto  been  exceptional.  God's  gracious  work  has  gone  on  in 
sublime  quietness.  Many  a  true  religious  revival  has  been  accomplished  in  much 
quietness,  without  any  tremendous  agonies  or  sublime  raptures,  without  swift 
alternations  of  hope  and  fear — just  by  a  growing  sense  of  the  nearness  and  import- 
ance of  Divine  things.  God  is  waiting  for  the  opening  of  your  heart  in  the  hour 
of  quietness,  that  He  may  distil  over  all  its  affections  the  sweet  baptism  of  His 
grace.  II.  The  dbw  falls  very  copiottsly.  In  the  land  of  Israel  much  more 
abundantly  than  it  ever  does  in  this  country.  Travellers  tell  us  that  after  a 
still  night,  when  the  dew  has  been  falling,  they  find  their  baggage  and  their  tents 
dripping  as  though  it  had  been  heavy  rain  during  the  night.  God's  grace  to  a 
Church  in  a  time  of  spiritual  quickening  is  very  copious  and  full.  God's  dealings 
are  with  the  whole  soul  of  a  man.  A  man  can  find  this  engagement  of  his  whole 
nature  only  in  religion.  The  copiousness  of  Divine  influence  is  seen  not  only 
in  this  wholeness  of  effect  upon  the  individual,  but  also  in  its  diffusion  over  the 
whole  Christian  community.  God's  dew  does  not  come  in  streams  ;  it  is  distilled 
from  all  the  air.  It  lies  clear  and  cool  on  every  growing  thing.  And  God's  grace 
in  like  manner  comes  to  many  hearts.  It  runs  from  heart  to  heart  by  the  chain 
of  sympathy.  III.  The  dew  is  very  eefreshing.  It  makes  dying  nature  live. 
The  husbandman  looks  despondingly  over  his  fields,  and  fears  for  the  safety  of 
his  growing  corn.  But  then  begins  the  silent,  copious  baptism  of  the  dew.  And 
the  farmer  can  think  with  hope  of  the  coming  harvest  day.  When  God  comes 
in  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the  text,  there  is  a  recovery  of  sinking  strength, 
a  rekindling  of  dying  graces,  a  returning  to  first  love,  a  doing  of  first  works.  To 
those  who  are  so  visited  there  is  a  newness  of  religion  every  day.  IV.  The 
DEW  IS  FERTILISING.  This  silent,  copious,  refreshing  agent  works  fruitfulness 
out  of  all  growing  things.  They  are  thus  aided  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
very  end  of  their  existence.  And  God's  final  end  with  His  people  is  that  the 
plants  of  His  right  hand's  planting  may  become  fruitful.  Our  Divine  Master 
speaks  much  and  very  solemnly  on  this  subject  of  fruitfulness.  And  Christian 
fruitfulness  is  a  manifold  and  various  thing.  It  is  not  all  of  one  kind.  Let  each 
"  planted  "  soul  rejoice  to  feel  rooted  in  Him  !  And  then  let  each  grow  freely 
according  to  His  will — not  fearing,  but  gladly  daring  to  branch  and  blossom 
and  fructify  according  to  the  law  of  individual  life.  Lily,  olive,  com,  vine, 
cedar,  all  are  growing  in  God's  garden  ;  and  there  is  room  and  dew  for  them  all. 
V.  There  is  yet  another  analogy  in  the  nearness  to  us  in  both  cases  of  thk 
REVIVING  INFLUENCE.  God  docs  not  fetch  the  dew  from  stars  or  from  fountains 
in  the  skies.  He  condenses  and  distils  it  out  of  the  atmosphere.  A  little  change 
in  temperature  does  it  all.  This  reminds  us  how  we  are  surrounded  by  a  very 
atmosphere  of  grace,  which  holds  all  precious  things  in  readiness  to  be  dropt 
upon  us  when  God  shall  command  it  so.  May  God  give  us  His  Holy  Spirit  to 
work  so  on  our  hearts  that  we  shall  become  quickly  and  largely  receptive  of  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  God  promises  to  restore 
fruitfulness  to  Ephraim  : — Here  is  a  continuation  of  Jehovah's  answer  to  Ephraim's 
prayer,  especially  to  the  second  part  of  it.  "  Receive  us  graciously,"  or,  '  Receive 
good  gifts,"  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  Ephraim  shall  once  more  realise  what 
his  name  signifies,  even  fruitfulness,  not  only  in  earthly  things,  but  in  every 
good  word  and  work.  The  outpourings  of  all  these  blessings  spring  from  the 
dew  of  God's  niercy,  and  from  no  other  source.  How  infinitely  more  abundant 
is  God's  grant  than  Israel's  request.  God  answers  oiu:  petitions  more  than  we 
think  or  ask.  The  reasons  are  two.  1.  God  knows  our  wants  far  better  than 
•we  do.  We,  in  spiritual  things,  resemble  children  in  temporal  things.  2.  God 
answers  prayer  consistently  with  His  majesty.  Man  answers  his  fellow-man, 
like  the  treacherous  echo,  only  by  halves.  "  As  the  dew."  Ephraim,  on  account 
of  backsliding,  was  cursed  with  barrenness  and  bleakness  ;  but  the  gift  of  dew 
shall  restore  his  blessings.  Dew  embraces  several  significations,  comfort,  refresh- 
ment, encouragement,  fecundity,  and  suchlike.  Dew,  in  a  spiritual  point  of 
view,  means  Christ.     What  dew  is  to  the  earth,  that  is  God's  grace  to  the  souL 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ROSEA.  253 

We  are  naturally  heart-hardened,  and  therefore  barren,  as  regards  the  fruit  of 
righteousness  ;  but  the  dew  of  God's  grace  disposes  our  hearts,  by  softening 
them,  in  the  first  place,  for  l!;e  purpose  of  receiving  the  seed  of  the  Word;  and, 
in  the  second  place,  to  make  that  seed  fruitful.  Many  are  the  reasons  why  the 
grace  of  God  should  be  likened  to  dew.  1.  Because  none  can  give  it  but  Jehovah- 
Jesus.  2.  Because  it  is  the  fruit  of  a  serene,  clear,  and  tranquil  heaven.  The 
grace  of  God  is  not  given  to  a  soul  which  is  scorched  or  frozen,  but  it  is  granted 
to  such  an  one  as  looks  peacefully  and  steadily  towards  heaven  for  it.  3.  Because 
it  is  abundant  and  immeasurable.  4.  Because  it  is  silent,  and  falls  imperceptibly. 
5.  Because  it  is  of  a  gentle  and  benign  nature,  and  therefore  sinks — though  slow 
yet  sure — deeply  into  the  earth.  So  is  the  Spirit  of  God.  6.  Because  it  is  of  a 
quickening  nature.  It  causes  the  earth  to  bring  forth  her  increase.  When  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  melts  the  moral  frost  from  man's  heart,  and  the  Spirit 
breathes  upon  the  parched  soul,  it  is  then  that  both  heart  and  soul  open  to  the 
reception    of   Christ.     (Moses    Margolioutk,    B.A.)        Dew   upon    Israel: — The 

Erophecy  of  Hosea  may  be  likened  to  a  tempestuous  summer's  day.  Here  we 
ave  peace  after  storm.  Consider  the  comparison  Jehovah  here  employs. 
1.  Dew  is  refreshing.  A  godless  soul  is  like  a  rainless,  dewless,  desert  land — 
everything  is  dead  or  dying.  There  are  noble  faculties  and  Divine  capacities,"^ 
but  they  have  no  life.  Seek,  I  beseech  you,  the  benign  presence  of  your  God 
and  Saviour.  2.  Dew  is  beautifying.  What  more  delightful  than  to  go  forth 
into  the  fields  with  the  sunrise  and  see  them  lit  up  with  millions  of  sparkling 
diamonds,  and  sown  with  myriad  pearls  !  And  how  beautiful  have  been  the 
characters  of  those  in  whose  hearts  God  has  dwelt.  And  the  presence  of  God 
is  the  true  beauty  of  a  Church.  3.  Dew  is  fertilising.  Regions  where  the  dew 
falls  copiously  are  remarkable  for  their  fertility.  Fertility  implies  two  things — 
luxuriant  growth,  and  abundant  fruit.  4.  Dew  is  gentle.  In  its  descent  it  does 
not  break  the  tenderest  filaments  ;  it  does  not  wound  the  most  fragile  blossom. 
And  so  God  deals  tenderly  with  His  children.  5.  Dew  is  impartial  in  its  distribu- 
tion. It  descends  upon  the  evil  and  the  good,  upon  the  just  and  unjust.  It 
falls  alike  on  the  poor  man's  plot  and  on  the  broad  acres  of  the  rich.  So  impartial 
is  the  love  of  God,  so  impartial  are  the  benefits  of  the  Gospel.  (Joseph  Halsey.) 
God's  mission  and  expectation : — The  symbolism  of  the  Bible  is  unrivalled  for 
beauty  and  suggestiveness.  The  text  suggests — I.  The  ministry  of  the  Divine 
TO  THE  HUMAN.  God's  influence  comes  as  close  to  men  as  the  dew  to  the  flower.  It 
is  inspiring  to  know  that  ours  is  not  a  God  who  lives  only  in  the  light  of  His  own 
majesty,  but  dwells  with  the  humble  everywhere.  He  not  only  rides  in  the  rolling 
chariot  of  the  stormy  skies,  or  sits  in  silence  above  the  crested  billows  of  the 
heaving  ocean ;  but  He  stoops  to  earth,  and  kisses  the  face  of  the  flowers  with 
His  presence,  and  touches  the  weak  and  the  weary  with  a  tenderness  that  sur- 
passes that  of  the  dewdrop  as  it  rolls  into  the  heart  of  the  lily,  and  becomes  there 
a  hidden  fountain  of  strength  and  refreshment.  What  is  God  to  the  soul  that 
trusts  in  Him  ?  Is  He  not,  as  the  dew  to  the  flower,  its  unseen  source  of  strength  ? 
Men  need  to  realise,  above  everything  else,  the  readiness  of  God  to  help  them. 
Why  does  the  dew  come  to  the  flower  ?  To  bless  it,  of  course.  When  the  dew 
is  on  its  petals,  it  breathes  its  whole  sweet  fragrance  in  response.  It  is  for  this 
that  the  Lord  approaches  humanity,  that  we  may  become  better  men,  or,  to  put 
it  in  the  words  of  the  text — "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  II.  The  divine  expecta- 
tion. It  is  only  natural  for  the  Lord  to  expect  us  to  "  grow,"  when  He  haa 
nourished  us.     We  know  how  the  "  lily  grows."     Its  first  endeavour  is  to  grow — 

1.  Strong.  We  are  to  "  grow  "  like  sturdy  Christians.  It  is  the  stunted  growths, 
the  dwarfs  of  Christianity,  that  bring  it  most  discredit.     But  it  also  grows —     I 

2.  Beautiful.  We  are  to  "  grow "  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  The  Lord 
wants  all  His  servants  to  be  giants,  but  He  does  not  want  them  to  be  clumsy. 
We  are  to  develop  symmetry  as  well  as  strength.     Next,  the  "lily"  grows — 

3.  Useful.  It  has  medicinal  as  well  as  floral  uses.  Our  characters  can  never 
be  complete  until  we  "  grow "  after  this  order — strength,  beauty,  service. 
Application,  The  Lord  is  waiting  to  fill  every  life,  as  the  dew  fills  every  flower. 
And  when  He  enters,  and  not  till  then,  will  our  lives  burst  into  blossom,  and 
fragrance,  and  fruit.  (J.  W.  Bray.)  The  grace  of  God  like  the  dew : — In  the 
text,  the  Lord  is  introduced  as  promising  the  copious  and  refreshing  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  most  unrestrained  and  engaging  manner.     I.  The 

PROPEIETY  AND  FORCE  OF  THE  COMPAKISON  BETWEEN  THE  DEW  AND  THE  GRACE 

OF  God.     Ab  natural  philosophers  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  source  whence  dew 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

is  formed,  so  neither  can  we  discover  what  is  the  cause  of  the  grace  of  God.  The 
love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  procures  it  for  us  ;  but  how  that  is  effected  we  know 
not ;  nor  why,  in  the  Gospel,  it  is  offered  so  universally,  and  yet  received  so 
indifferently.  As  the  dew  is  diffused  during  the  night,  in  a  silent  and  impercep- 
tible manner,  after  the  sun  has  withdrawn  its  shining  ;  so  the  grace  of  God  has 
been  extensively  diffused  since  Jesus,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  left  this  lower 
world,,  and  the  sweet  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are,  in  a  silent  but  powerful 
manner,  carried  on,  without  our  notice  or  our  help.  As  the  dew  is  regular  in 
its  returns,  at  the  seasons  when  the  earth  is  most  in  need  of  it,  so  the  grace  of  God 
is  regularly  granted  to  His  chosen  people  in  every  time  of  need,  and  is,  in  general, 
accompanied  with  the  use  of  appointed  means.  As  the  dew  is  the  free  gift  of 
a  bountiful  providence,  so  grace  is  the  free  gift  of  our  most  merciful  Father.  The 
dew  nourishes  and  refreshes  the  whole  vegetable  creation,  and  when  the  grace 
of  God  descends  upon  men  by  the  saving  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  are 
refreshed  and  revived,  quickened  and  made  alive  to  God  and  holiness.  As  the 
dew  causes  all  things  which  grow  out  of  the  earth  to  advance  to  maturity,  so  the 
Spirit  of  God  works  upon  the  hearts  of  His  people,  making  them  fruitful  in  good 
works,  obedient  in  every  duty,  and  wise  unto  eternal  life.  It  is  said,  "  he  shall 
grow  as  the  lily."  The  lily  is  by  nature  delicate  and  weakly,  but  by  the  repeated 
visitations  and  refreshings  of  the  dew,  it  puts  forth  its  tender  buds,  and  by  degrees 
assumes  strength  and  increases  in  size.  The  grace  of  God,  by  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  enables  the  soul  to  go  on  towards  perfection.  Observe  concerning 
the  growth  promised,  that  God  will  not  only  supply  the  believer's  wants,  but 
will  Himself  be  to  him  all  that  he  needs.  "  /  will  be  as  the  dew  upon  Israel."  The 
grace  of  God  in  the  soul  is  an  active  principle.  II.  The  effects  of  the  grace 
OF  God  upon  His  people's  hearts  and  lives.  Various  similitudes  are  employed 
in  Scripture.  It  is  likened  to  "  seed  fallen  in  good  ground,"  to  being  '  made 
willing,"  to  being  "  raised  from  the  dead,"  to  being  transformed  into  another 
likeness,  &c.  Then  remember  that  when  we  profess  faith  in  the  Divine  promise, 
we  should  give  evidence  of  it  by  our  sincere  repentance,  and  our  obedience  to 
the  holy  law  of  God.  Application.  Through  faith  and  patience  the  believer 
shall  at  last  inherit  the  promises  in  their  fullest  acceptation.  "  What  shall  we 
then  say  to  these  things  ?  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  {James 
Kidd,  D.D.)  Spiritual  blessings  for  the  true  Israel  of  God: — The  text  is  part 
of  a  description  of  the  flourishing  condition  of  the  chosen  people  when  returned 
to  God.  It  may  be  accommodated  to  the  Church  of  Christ  among  the  Gentiles. 
I.  The  promise.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  We  know  the  value  of 
dew,  but  in  Eastern  lands  much  more  vivid  ideas  are  called  up  by  it.  In  Palestine 
little  or  no  rain  is  known  during  the  summer.  Were  it  not  for  the  cool  nights 
and  the  heavy  dew  all  vegetation  must  perish.  The  bestowal  of  the  dew  has 
been  accounted  one  of  God's  especial  blessings — and  the  withdrawal  of  it  a  curse. 
"WTiat  the  dew  is  in  the  natural  world,  causing  the  earth  to  soften,  to  bring  forth, 
to  fructify,  that  is  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  to  the  soul  of  man.  It  softens  the 
heart,  implants  the  principles  of  grace,  sows  the  seed  of  eternal  life,  and  puts 
forth  all  the  evident  tokens  of  a  new  creation  within.  As  the  dew  is  essential  to 
the  production  and  preservation  of  herbs  and  plants,  so  is  it  every  way  necessary 
to  the  reviving  of  the  heart  of  man,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  work  in  it,  because 
left  to  himself  man  could  never  change  one  feature  of  his  original  corrupt  and 
unfruitful  nature.  As  the  dew  descends  on  every  plant,  leaving  not  one  leaf 
unwatered,  in  silence  refreshing  even  the  smallest  blade  of  grass,  so  does  the 
Holy  Spirit  work  silently,  warning,  teaching,  convincing,  in  the  hearts  of  all. 
When  in  the  text  it  is  stated  that  Israel  shall  grow  as  a  lily  and  cast  forth  his 
roots  as  Lebanon,  of  course  it  is  implied  that  an  earnest  and  faithful  reception 
of  the  good  Spirit  has  been  given.  II.  The  effects  which  are  to  follow 
God's  Spirit  being  as  the  dew  ttnto  Israel.  Whatever  effects  may  be  expected 
from  any  future  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  the  same  in  their  measure  and  kind  are 
to  be  looked  for  in  om:  immediate  dispensation.  "  Grow  as  the  lily."  This  is  a 
beautiful  emblem  of  the  loveliness  and  purity  of  a  truly  Christian  character. 
The  chief  attributes  of  the  lily  of  the  East  are  beauty,  fragrance,  and  certain 
medicinal  qualities.  These  qualities,  morally  considered,  should  be  found  in 
every  Christian.  We  read  of  the  beauty  of  holiness.  St.  Peter  speaks  of  the 
ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  The  Christian  should  be  noted  among 
his  brethren  for  the  excellence  of  his  principles,  for  conscientious  behaviour, 
and  for  a  display  of  love  and  sympathy  in  all  his  actions.     Like  the  fragrance 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSEA.  256 

of  a  beautiful  flower,  the  name  of  the  Christian  ought  to  be  acceptable  to  all 
men.  There  should  be  a  loveliness,  a  seriousness  in  his  manner,  an  habitual 
holiness  evincing  everywhere  that  he  is  a  disciple  of  Christ.  Such  graces  can 
only  flow  from  constant  communion  with  his  God.  As  the  lily  is  endued  with 
medicinal  properties,  so  is  the  Christian  to  be  as  the  "  salt  of  the  world."  He 
must  be  jealous  of  God's  honour.  Sin  must  never  be  unreproved  in  his  presence. 
He,  by  his  principles  and  practice,  placed  as  he  is  in  a  wicked  world,  must  pre- 
serve it  from  corruption.  The  margin  says,  "  He  shall  blossom  as  the  lily." 
This  is  precisely  what  God  expects  from  us.  Too  many  forget  the  truth  that  a 
Christian  should  be  a  marked  man.  If  any  of  you  feel  your  shortcomings,  flee 
to  the  Saviour  for  grace  and  pardon.  Copy  the  example  of  your  Master  ;  learn 
of  Him  ;  emulate  His  innocence.  His  purity.  His  fragrance.  His  faithfulness. 
He  compares  Himself  to  a  lily,  and  thus  condescends  to  show  us  His  humility. 
His  love.  His  "  oneness  "  with  His  Church  and  people.  "  He  shall  cast  forth 
his  roots  as  Lebanon."  This  figure  shows  the  stability  which  true  religious 
principles  impart.  It  is  a  forcible  image  of  the  security  of  him  whose  heart 
has  yielded  to  the  strivings  of  Divine  grace.  Here  is  found  an  argument  for 
the  necessity  of  progress  in  religion.  Seasons  of  trouble,  sorrow,  inquiry;  the 
hour  of  death,  the  day  of  judgment,  are  before  us.  It  is  needful,  therefore,  to 
have  some  settled  principles,  some  well-ascertained  and  surely  laid  foundation 
upon  which  we  may  then  rest.  "  It  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be  established 
by  grace."  {R.  H.  Whitworth.)  The  progressive  Christian: — I.  Ths  spirituaIi 
INFLUENCE  WHICH  GoD  PROMISES  TO  His  PEOPLE.  It  is  like  the  dew — 1.  In  its 
source.  2.  In  its  silence.  3.  In  its  seasonableness.  4.  In  its  abundance. 
II.  Its  BENEFICIAL  RESULTS.  1.  Growth.  2.  Stability.  3.  Beauty.  4.  Frag- 
rance.    5.  Fertility.     ((?   Brooks.)         The  dew  of  Israel  arid  the  lily  of  God: — 

1.  Christ,  as  set  forth  by  the  dew  unto  Israel.  Jehovah  Himself  is  the 
dew.  This  promise  implies  that  there  is  a  dry  and  withered  field  somewhere. 
This  field  we  are,  in  so  far  as  we  are  not  yet  partakers  of  His  life.  As  the  dew 
falls  in  the  sultry  nights  of  summer,  when  the  fields  thirst  and  languish,  so  does 
the  dew  of  God  descend  only  upon  thirsting  and  fainting  souls.  As  the  dew 
falls  from  heaven  in  the  stillness  of  the  night,  so  is  the  way  of  Christ.  The  manner 
and  way  of  His  coming  to  the  soul  is  a  mystery  hidden  in  night ;  and  who  can 
unveil  it  ?  The  dew  of  the  field  has  a  bright  lustre  within  it,  for  it  has  communion 
with  the  light  of  heaven.  When  once  Christ  has  come  in  unto  us,  all  is  bright 
and  pellucid  in  the  depths  of  our  disordered  nature.  But  Christ  covers  all  our 
misery  with  His  own  self,  with  His  own  righteousness.  How  fructifying  is  the 
dew  !  And  what  a  life  does  Christ  impart  to  the  soul !  II.  Christ  compares 
His  BRIDE  the  Church,  and  herein  every  believing  soul,  to  the  beautiful 
LILY.  The  people  of  Palestine  knew  of  no  flower  more  truly  sweet  and  lovely 
than  the  noble  lily.  The  lily  is  often  found  growing  among  thorns.  Thorns 
represent  the  many  spiritual  and  temporal  troubles  with  which  the  chosen  of 
God  are  encompassed.  Observe  by  what  means  the  lily  thrives  and  flourishes. 
It  toils  not,  neither  does  it  spin.  It  passively  waves  in  the  sunshine,  and  opens 
its  cup  to  the  morning  dew.  May,  then,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  come  upon 
each  of  us  as  dew  !  (F.  W.  Krummacher.)  The  dew  of  God's  grace,  and 
its  results : — I.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit,  "  as  the  dew."  1.  Dew  is 
never  far  o£E  (humidity  of  atmosphere) ;  waits  around  ;  makes  itself  felt  at 
proper  season  by  whatsoever  thirsts  for  it.  So  the  Giver  of  life  is  ever  present 
with  His  own  ;  ready  to  refresh,  cleanse,  strengthen.  He  is  round  about  ua 
(Psa.  cxxxix.) :  the  atmosphere  of  His  promises.  His  providences.  His  presence. 

2.  Falls  in  quiet  of  evening,  and  believers  specially  realise  God's  presence  in 
quietness.  "  Commune  .  .  .  and  be  still."  Eventide  experiences ;  "  cool  of 
the  day."  Do  you  serve  with  quiet  mind  ?  Too  much  excitement,  worldly  or 
"  religious  "  ;  bustling,  mechanical  ?  Troubled  souls,  be  comforted.  3.  Falls 
in  due  measure  ;  never  in  excess  :  grasses,  flowers,  olives,  cedars ;  each  receives 
in  proportion  to  need.  Similarly,  the  workings  of  the  Spirit,  infinitely  wise, 
gracious.  Dew  of  "  youth,"  babes,  elders.  Class,  condition,  character ;  our 
responsibilities,  ..."  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us," — given  abundantly,  tenderly. 
4.  Falls  silently  ;  not  see  or  hear.  So  with  the  ordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit. 
Stillness,  secrecy  of  reception ;  gradual  formation  of  habits ;  transformation 
(2  Cor.  iii.  18) ;  growth,  "  grace  for  (upon)  grace  "  ;  renewing  of  the  hidden  life 
with  energy  invisible  ;  loving  influences,  mighty,  mysterious,  silent,  but  sure 
(Mark   iv.   27).     5.  Regularly :  to-day's   dryness,    to-day's   dew.     Even   so   we 


25G  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv 

pray  for  "  the  continual  clew  "  of  God's  blessing  ;  fresh  joy  and  vigour  from  tha 
"  healthful  Spirit  "  of  Kis  grace  (Job  xxix.  19).  Daily  hallowing.  Not  spas- 
modic. II.  The  results  of  the  Spieit's  influences.  "  He  shall  grow  .  .  . 
They  that  dwell  ..."  1.  Believers  blessed.  Notice  first  the  position  :  lily, 
cedar,  olives,  herbs,  and  grasses  ;  mountain  crest,  slope,  clefts,  and  rich  soil ; 
exposed,  admired,  hidden.  Each  plant  its  own  place.  So  each  member  of  the 
Church  his  own  vocation  :  what  we  are,  where  we  are —  of  God.  The  poor  and 
unlearned  may  as  truly,  though  not  as  widely,  glorify  God,  as  the  high-placed 
and  greatly  gifted.  Notice  second,  perfection ;  in  all  bedewed  vegetation, 
luxuriance  and  beauty  of  vigorous  life.  Special  services  and  pleasantnesses  ; 
purity  and  loveliness — the  lily  ;  strength  and  expansion — the  cedar  ;  fruitfulness 
— the  olive  ;  fragrance  ("  smell  ")  of  herbs,  and  scented  turfy  "  Lebanon." 
"  Diversities  of  gifts  "  and  "  of  operations  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  4).  A  Conway,  a  Living- 
stone, a  Jlonod,  a  Lyte,  a  Selwyn,  a  Hedley  Vicars  ;  "  stewards  of  the  manifold 
grace  of  God."  What  variety  !  Humility,  sweetness,  purity,  fervour,  fruitful- 
ness, self-sacrificing  patience,  courage,  steadfastness,  &c.  But  be  not  contented 
with  some  special  grace  :  pray  to  "  worthily  magnify  "  His  name  in  full  orbed 
holiness.  2.  Believers  a  blessing.  "  They  that  dwell  under  His  shadow  shall 
return."  The  influence  of  consistent  Christian  living  ;  it  wins,  helps,  warms, 
comforts.  Try  thus  to  be,  more  and  more,  a  means  of  grace.  (Clergyman's 
Magazine.)  A  fertilised  Church  : — God  promised  to  be  as  dew  to  His  chosen 
people.  He  was  so.  Their  entire  history  proves  it.  He  was  the  beauty  of  their 
character,  their  strength  in  battle,  the  wisdom  of  their  counsels,  the  giver  of  food 
— as  the  dew.  God  is  as  dew  to  His  people  now  by  the  operations  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Dew  is  a  type  of  spiritual  mfluence  because  it  is  essential.  Nature  pro- 
vides no  substitute.  Its  operations  are  mysterious,  unlike  rain.  Its  workings 
are  silent.  It  is  one  of  God's  many  quiet  workers.  Its  influence  is  beautify- 
ing.    It  feeds  flowers.     It  is  fertilising.     No  drink  of  vegetation  is  more  grateful. 

I.  The  growth  of  a  God-watbrkd  Church.  In  nature,  stability  is  never 
reached  rapidly.  Strength  is  always  crowned  with  hoary  years.  This  law 
affects  also  the  works  of  man.  A  new  kingdom  is  feeble ;  an  old  one  strong. 
In  the  growth  of  a  God-watered  Chiurch  we  have  a  beautiful  exception  to  this 
law  of  nature.  In  it  the  peculiarities  of  the  lily  and  the  cedar  are  blended.  It 
has  beauty  that  is  not  fragile.     It  has  strength  that  is  not  of  tedious  growth. 

II.  The  power  of  a  God-watered  Church.  Preachers  often  say  that  but 
two  classes  of  persons  inhabit  earth — the  saved  and  the  unsaved.  But  the 
unsaved  divide  into  those  who  have  never  known  God,  and  those  who  have 
apostatised  from  Him.  A  God-watered  Church  has  power  with  both  classes. 
1.  It  has  power  with  the  world  at  large.  (1)  This  power  is  the  power  of  law. 
(2)  Of  loveliness.  (3)  Of  love.  2.  It  has  power  with  relapsed  Christians. 
(1)  They  revive  as  the  com  from  apparent  death.  (2)  They  grow  as  the  vine 
rapidly.  (3)  Their  growth  is  towards  the  fragrance  of  mature  Christian  life, 
holiness,  and  love.  ( /.  K.  Jackson. )  God  as  the  dew : — The  comfortable,  fru  itf ul, 
sanctifying  grace  of  God  is  compared  to  dew.  1.  The  dew  doth  come  from  above. 
It  cannot  be  commanded  by  the  creature.  2.  The  dew  doth  fall  insensibly  and 
invisibly.  So  the  grace  of  God.  We  feel  the  comfort,  sweetness,  and  operation 
of  it,  but  it  falls  insensibly,  without  observation.  3.  It  falls  sweetly  and  mildly, 
not  violating  the  nature  or  course  of  anything,  but  rather  helping  and  cherish- 
ing the  same.  4.  Grace  is  compared  to  dew,  in  regard  of  the  operations  of  dew. 
What  effects  hath  dew  upon  the  earth  ?  (1)  It  cools  the  air  when  it  falls,  and 
with  coolness  it  hath  a  fructifying  virtue.  (2)  The  soul  is  not  only  cooled  and 
refreshed,  but  it  is  also  sweetened  and  made  fruitful  with  comfort  to  the  soul. 
5.  Dew  is  irresistible.  Nothing  can  hinder  the  dew  from  falling.  Use.  Let 
none  be  discouraged  with  the  deadness,  dryness,  and  barrenness  of  their  own 
hearts,  but  let  them  know  that  God  doth  graciously  promise,  if  they  will  take 
the  course  formerly  set  down,  to  be  "  as  the  dew  unto  them."  Therefore  let  them 
come  to  the  ordinances  of  God,  with  wondrous  hope,  confidence,  and  faith  that 
He  will  bless  the  means  of  His  own  ordaining  and  appointing,  for  His 
own  ends.  (,R.  Sibbes. )  The  Holy  Spirit  as  the  dew  : — The  Holy  Ghost  came 
down  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  He  comes  down  now  aJso,  though  not  in  any 
extraordinary  manner,  or  with  any  remarkable  manifestation.  Quietly,  calmly, 
but  mightily,  now  as  then  He  comes,  the  Lord,  the  Giver  of  Life,  to  quicken 
the  dead  soul  and  to  revive  the  drooping.  The  manner  of  His  ordinary  coming 
is  likened  to  the  falling  of  the  dew,  and  the  various  effects  of  His  coming  are 


CHAP.  XIV.]  H08EA.  257 

likened  to  the  luxuriance  of  the  most  beautiful  plants  of  an  Eastern  cUmate- 
I.  Thb  coming  of  the  Spirit  is  as  the  dew.  1.  As  the  dew  all  day  long  hangs 
suspended  in  the  atmosphere  waiting  only  for  the  fitting  moment  to  form  itsetf 
into  sensible  drops  upon  every  blade  of  grass  which  is  thirsting  for  its  fall,  so 
is  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God  ever  moving  on  all  sides  around  us,  unseen  indeed, 
but  not  altogether  unfelt,  waiting  for  the  hour  when  the  glare  of  this  world  shall 
have  gone  down,  and  man's  heart,  as  in  the  coolness  of  the  evening  hour,  be 
prepared  to  receive  Him.  The  Spirit  is  ever  in  contact  with  our  hearts,  gently 
yet  strongly,  inclining  them  to  receive  Jesus  as  their  Lord,  and  to  live  for  Him. 
Above,  beneath,  around,  within  you  is  God  the  Spirit,  and  every  moment  He  is 
striving  with  your  conscience  to  lead  you  on  to  God.  2.  There  is  a  likeness  in 
the  seasons  when  the  dew  falls,  and  when  the  Holy  Spirit  most  sensibly  comes. 
The  dew  settles  in  drops  upon  the  herbs  at  evening.  The  Spirit's  seasons  come 
when  the  gathering  night-clouds  of  sickness  or  of  sorrow,  or  the  calm  still  hours 
of  Sabbath  meditation,  have  shut  out  the  glare  of  earthly  things  and  cooled 
down  the  heart.  You  were  still  and  calm  in  your  own  spirit,  and  so  inclined  to 
receive  the  impressions  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God.  3.  The  manner  in  which 
the  dew  falls.  Gently,  and  again  and  again.  So  while  the  Spirit  humbles  the 
heart  of  the  stoutest  sinner.  He  does  not  overwhelm  the  spirit  of  the  most  timorous 
and  feeble  disciple.  He  settles  on  our  hearts,  and  shows  us  the  things  of  Jesus. 
4.  The  dew  falls  much  more  fully  on  the  grass  which  thirsts  for  it  than  on  the 
stones  which  have  no  longing  for  it.  The  Spirit  is  about  us  all,  but  His  fulness 
of  grace  comes  to  those  who  really  need.     II.  The  effect  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

AS   PICTURED    BY   THB    GROWTH    OF  PLANTS    WHEN    WATERED    BY    THE    DEW.         The 

prophet  illustrates  by  the  beauty  of  the  lily,  the  fruitfuhiess  of  the  olive,  and  the 
deep-rooted  strength  and  far-spreadmg  sweetness  of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon.  Each 
one  has  its  own  peculiar  properties,  but  each  of  these  properties  is  nourished 
and  brought  to  perfection  by  the  dew.  To  Jesus  the  Spirit  was  given  without 
measure  ;  and  therefore  in  Jesus  all  graces  and  all  gifts  are  combined  ;  each  is 
in  perfection,  and  no  one  clashes  with  another.  In  meekness  alike  and  in  firm- 
ness, in  depth  of  thought  and  in  activity  of  work.  He  stood  alone,  the  perfect 
man,  and  in  Him  alone  the  words  of  the  prophet  are  completely  fulfilled.  (Canon 
Morse.)  The  Divine  dew  and  its  results  .-—We  think  of  God  as  being  the  dew 
in  connection  with  the  influences  of  His  Spirit.  These  influences  of  the  Spirit 
descend  in  consequence  of  the  work  of  Christ.  I.  The  connection  between 
THE  Divine  dew  and  its  results.  1.  It  is  a  gentle  influence,  but  has  great 
results.  The  dew  is  never  anything  but  gentle.  It  does  not  seem  a  force  at  all. 
And  yet  it  is  an  arrangement  by  which  some  of  the  greatest  effects  in  nature 
are  produced.  To  those  whose  backslidings  have  been  healed,  and  from  whom 
God's  anger  has  been  turned  away,  there  is  no  storm  influence,  there  is  only  the 
influence  of  the  dew.  God  is  gentleness  itself,  and  His  Spirit  falls  on  our  life 
with  no  violent  action,  yet  accompanied  with  the  greatest  results.  2.  It  is  a 
silent  influence,  but  has  visible  results.  If  plants  were  always  in  the  glare  of 
the  sun  they  would  soon  wither  and  die.  But  at  nightfall,  after  the  heat  of  the 
day,  the  dews  noiselessly  descend.  Every  blade  of  grass  has  its  own  drop  of 
dew.  There  has  been  no  soimd  of  anything  going  on,  and  yet  when  morning 
comes  the  effects  are  plainly  visible.  Drooping  plants  have  revived ;  nature 
comes  forth  refreshed.  The  Divine  workings  cannot  be  traced,  but  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit  are  manifest.  3.  It  is  a  Divine  influence,  and  yet  its  results  are 
entirely  human.  The  dew  is  a  pure  ethereal  influence.  It  is  not  like  the  fogs 
or  pestilential  vapoirrs  from  swamps,  which  rise  only  a  little  from  earth.  It  is 
the  dew  of  heaven.  And  yet  it  has  an  affinity  to  all  forms  of  vegetable  life  on 
the  earth.  So  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  come  from  above,  from  a  source  high 
above  us ;  and  yet  they  have  an  affinity  to  us.  There  is  that  which  is  foreign 
to  us,  namely,  sin.  To  that  the  Spirit  has  no  affinity.  As  dew,  He  mingles 
with  and  brings  out  all  that  is  truly  human.  II.  The  results  by  themselves 
and  in  their  mutual  connection.  It  requires  three  things  to  set  forth  the 
excellence  of  the  Christian  life.  The  lily,  the  cedar,  and  the  olive-tree  are  brought 
together  to  give  us,  in  theu:  combination,  a  conception  of  what  our  life  should  , 
be  under  the  dews  of  the  Spirit.     1.  The  results  of  rapid  growth,  and  yet  solidity.    ' 

He  shall  grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth  His  roots  as  Lebanon."  There  must 
be  solidity  as  well  as  rapidity  of  growth.  The  cedar  is  especially  deep  rooted 
in  the  soil.  We  strike  our  roots  down  when  we  wrestle  with  God  in  prayer,  when 
we  read  God's  Word  so  as  to  take  firm  hold  of  it,  and  when,  in  temptation,  we 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

steadfastly  adhere  to  principle.  2.  The  results  are  breadth  of  growth  and  fertility. 
"  His  branches  shall  spread,"  &c.  It  belongs  to  the  idea  of  a  perfect  tree  that 
while  it  grows  upward  it  grows  all  round,  and  at  the  same  time.  The  cedar 
especially  is  widespreading.  And  so  while  we  have  heavenly  aspiration  we  are 
always  to  be  broadening  in  our  human  views  and  sympathies.  But  trees  that 
grow  to  breadth  do  not  grow  so  much  to  fatness.  So  one  tree  does  not  suffice 
to  complete  the  idea.  The  olive  is  superior  to  the  cedar  in  one  respect — in  fruitful- 
ness.  It  spends  its  strength,  not  on  spreading  but  on  fruit-bearing.  So  we  are 
to  combine  the  cedar  and  the  olive,  and,  while  keeping  up  our  breadth,  we  are 
to  increase  in  the  rich  elements  of  our  life.  3.  There  results  a  variety  of  beauty. 
There  is  the  beauty  of  the  lily,  and  also  of  the  olive-tree.  There  is  always  a 
dignity  and  stateliness  about  the  lily.  Whatever  belongs  to  us,  whether  it  be 
more  of  the  lily  or  of  the  olive,  will  be  brought  out  under  the  dews  of  the  Spirit. 
The  results  are  healthfulness,  and  pleasantness  of  influence.  {R.  Fivlayson,  B.A.) 
Grace  reviving  Israel : — I.  The  promise  of  grace  made  to  Israel,  notwith- 
standing Israel's  sin.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  The  Christian 
is  here  compared  to  a  plant  which  cannot  be  watered  by  any  water  that  is  to  be 
found  on  earth,  a  plant  which  needs  heavenly  watering,  even  the  dew  from  above. 
The  Eastern  figure  of  the  dew  has  in  it  several  beauties.  1.  Grace,  like  the  dew, 
often  comes  down  imperceptibly  into  man's  heart.  Who  ever  heard  the  foot- 
steps of  the  dew  coming  down  upon  the  meadow-grass  ?  And  Christianity  is 
very  often  imperceptible  in  its  operations.  Do  not  despise  spiritual  things, 
because  thou  hearest  not  a  sound  thereof.  2.  The  dew  is  always  sufficient.  If 
God  waters  the  earth  with  dew,  foolish  would  be  the  man  who  should  go  after- 
wards to  water  after  his  Maker.  God's  grace,  when  it  comes  upon  a  man's 
heart,  is  all  sufficient.  3.  The  dew,  when  it  is  required,  is  constant.  As  thou 
wantest  the  dew  of  grace,  so  shalt  thou  find  it.     II.  The  influences  of  Divinb 

GRACE   IN   the   soul  ARE   HERE   SET   FORTH  IN  METAPHOR.       1.    It   makes   US   gTOW 

upward.  "  Grow  as  the  lily."  This  refers  to  the  daffodil  lily,  which  on  a  sudden, 
in  a  night,  will  spring  up.  That  is  what  grace  does  in  a  man's  soul.  Its  first 
operation  is  to  make  us  grow  up.  2.  After  they  have  been  growing  upward 
they  have  to  grow  downward.  "  Cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."  God  will 
not  have  His  people  all  fiower  and  foliage ;  He  wants  them  also  to  take  deep 
root,  and  throw  out  strong  fibres.  Growing  down  is  quite  as  good  as  growing 
up.  We  should  be  rooted  in  humility,  and  growing  in  zeal ;  but  usually  the  two 
do  not  come  together.  Growing  downward  is  a  very  excellent  thing  to  promote 
stability.  Perhaps  that  is  the  exact  meaning  of  the  passage.  3.  The  Christian 
must  next  make  a  profession.  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  4.  The  next  effect 
of  grace  is,  the  Christian  must  be  beautiful,  as  "  the  olive-tree."  Its  beauty 
lies  in  its  fruitfulness.  And  the  olive-tree  is  an  evergreen.  5.  A  good  report 
raust  go  forth  about  the  Christian.  "  His  smell  as  Lebanon."  Wherever  the 
Christian  goes  he  will  cast  a  perfume  about  him.  II.  The  benefits  of  grace 
TO  OTHERS.  "  They  that  dwell  under  His  shadow  shall  return."  You  wiU  not 
wish  yours  to  be  a  selfish  religion.  I  like  an  expansive  religion.  By  a  godly 
conversation  the  Christian  man  shall  spread  the  sweetness  of  perfume  wherever 
he  goes.  {Anon.)  What  God  will  be  to  His  people,  and  what  He  will  make  His 
0  eople  to  he : — I.  What  God  will  be  to  His  people.  It  is  not  what  God  does 
for  His  people,  but  what  He  is.  What  does  the  dew  do  ?  1.  It  nourishes  the 
growing  plants.  All  along  the  com-se  of  life  God  comes  Himself  to  our  hearts, 
to  keep  alive  and  noiu-ish  the  good  which  He  has  planted  there.  2.  The  dew 
refreshes  the  drooping  plant.  How  often  have  we  been  drooping  and  withering, 
but  then  God  in  His  love  draws  near  to  us,  and  whispers  kind  thoughts  of  His 
love  and  pardon  and  help.  Or  perhaps  we  have  been  treated  unkindly,  or  have 
been  much  tempted  to  sin.  Then  God  comes  like  the  gentle  dew  from  heaven. 
The  dew  comes  softly ;  and  without  being  seen ;  and  day  by  day.  II.  What 
God's  people  shall  be  through  Him.  The  character  of  the  true  Christian 
shall  be  likened — 1.  To  the  lily.  This  plant  is  used  to  signify  the  beauty  and 
purity  of  God's  sanctified  ones.  God  will  make  us  pure  in  heart  and  life,  afraid 
of  what  is  wrong,  with  a  tender  conscience,  disturbed  at  little  sins,  and  that  we 
shall  be  continually  striving  after  greater  holiness.  2.  To  the  cedar  of  Lebanon. 
Which  has  deep  roots,  a  strong  trunk,  great  height,  and  spreading  branches. 
God  will  make  us  to  be  so  firmly  fixed  on  God's  truth  and  love  that  we  cannot 
be  turned  away  from  it  by  false  teaching  or  temptation  to  evil.  3.  To  the  olive- 
tree.     Which  is  always  fresh  in  appearance  and  abundant  in  fruitfulness.     God 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSEA.  269 

will  add  to  His  other  gifts,  continued  joy  from  continual  intercourse  with  Himself. 
As  God  leads  us  on,  nearer  to  Himself,  dropping  His  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  more 
unceasingly  into  our  hearts.  He  makes  to  spring  up  within  us  an  overflowing  well 
of  joy  and  peace  in  believing.     And  He  will  make  us  abound  in  all  good  works. 
He  will  make  us  do  good  things  abundantly,  acts  of  kindness,  and  forgiveness, 
and  helpfulness  to  others.     4.  To  the  smell  of  Lebanon.     The  country  immedi- 
ately around  this  mountain  smells  sweetly  of  the  many  fragrant  flowers  which 
bloom  at  its  foot.     God  by  His  grace  makes  us  to  do  what  is  right  in  His  own  sight, 
and  He  condescends  to  be  pleased  with  it ;  and  other  Christians  are  pleased  with  the 
good  they  see  in  us — so  that  to  God  and  man  we  are  pleasing,  like  the  delicious  scent 
which  rises  up  in  our  faces  from  fragrant  flowers.     How  does  God  do  His  work 
of  grace  ?     As  the  dew  He  comes — not  like  the  noisy,  violent  thunderstorm.     The 
dew  comes  very  gently,  stealing  softly  and  imobserved.     Its  work  is  very  gradual, 
but  it  is  continuous,  day  by  day.     It  is  in  secret  unobserved  ways  that  God  worka 
His  great  work  in  our  hearts.     Then  use  all  your  opportunities  diligently.     Do 
not  seek  for  excitement.     Seek  to  draw  near  to  God  in  all  the  ordinary  and  even 
little  ways.     He  will  surely  come  to  you  to  do  you  good.     {W.  H.  Ridley,  M.A.) 
On  Divine  influence  : — The  figure  here  is  borrowed  from  one  of  the  finest  and 
most  efficient  operations  of  nature.     The  promise  was  made  to  Israel,  not  at  a 
time  when  God  had  reason  to  commend,  but  to  reprove  them.     We  would  not 
lessen,  in  your  estimation,  the  evil  of  sin  ;  but  it  must  not  be  concealed  that  the 
spirit,  burdened  and  oppressed  with  guilt,  may  derive  from  this  fact  abundant 
consolation.     I.  The  origin  of  the  Divine  influence.     "As  the  dew."     1.  This 
influence  cometh  from  God.     Hence  we  call  it  Divine  influence.     Of  all  the  opera- 
tions of  nature,  there  is  nothing  more  independent  of  human  agency  than  the  dew. 
2.  This  influence  cometh  from  God  as  reconciled  in  Christ.     The  dew  is  the  off- 
spring of  an  unclouded  sky,  the  benediction  of  a  placid   atmosphere.     Is  not 
God  a  consuming  fire  ?     How  then  can  He  be  as  the  dew  ?     Inspiration  answers 
the  question:  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."     Brought 
into  a  state  of  unity,  and  having  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
there  descends  upon  our  souls  that  influence  of  His  Spirit  which  is  here  beautifully 
compared  to  the  dew.     3.  This  influence  comes  from  God,  as  a  sovereign  and 
distinguished  blessing  to  His  chosen  people.     It  is  not  a  common,  but  a  peculiar 
blessing.     It  belongs  not  to  the  world,  but  to  the  Church.     II.  The  properties 
OF  THIS  Divine  influence.     It  is  like  the  dew,  which  is  sUent,  copious,  penetrat- 
ing,   irresistible,   and   fertilising.      III.  The   results    of    Divine    influence. 
L    Growth ;  as  the  lily  :   spiritual   increase, — rapid   progress   in  knowledge,  in 
faith,  in  zeal,  in  love,  in  hope,  in  confidence,  in  whatever  adorns  the  Christian 
character.     2.  Stability.     Lebanon  is,  by  a  figure  of  speech,  put  for  the  cedars 
which  grow  there.     The  stability  of  the  Christian  refers  to  three  things — the 
security  of  his  state,  the  firmness  of  his  principles,  and  the  perpetuity  of  his 
character.     His  faith,  the  root  of  his  profession,  takes  firm  hold   of  the   holy 
covenant.     Holy  principles,  like  so  many  fibres  of  that  root,  by  adherence  to 
the  truth,  give  a  stability  to  His  Christian  profession,  like  that  of  the  majestic 
cedar.     This  stability   distinguishes   the   real   Christian.     3.  Expansion.     "  His 
branches  shall   spread."     Spreading   branches  may  denote   the  extended   and 
extending  influence  of  the  Church.     There  is  a  celebrated  oak  which  casts  its 
shadow  and  sheds  its  acorns  upon  four  counties  of  England.     4.  Corresponding 
beauty.     The  beauty  of  the  olive  was  as  proverbial  as  the  strength  of  the  cedar. 
The  proportion  of  its  branches,  the  perfection  of  its  symmetry,  the  perpetual 
freshness  of  its  verdure,  and  the  beauty  of  its  colours  constitute  that  which  in 
nature  we  call  beauty.     It  may  indicate  the  glory  which  is  put  upon  the  Christian, 
by  imputation  of  the  Saviour's  righteousness.     It  sometimes  refers  to  that  moral 
and  spiritual  beauty  which  consists  in  conformity  to  the  image  of  Christ.     It  is 
the  concentration  and  exhibition  of  all  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     5.  Moral 
fragrance.     This  expresses  the  happy  effect,  the  delightful  influence,  of  Christian 
feeling  and  Christian  character.      Two  things  are  intended  by  this  fragrance. 
(I)  That  which  is  acceptable   to  God.     (2)  That  which  is  agreeable  to  men. 
6.  Universal  excellence.     The  enjoyment  of  sacred  repose.     A  gracious  revival. 
The  earnest  of  abundant  fruitfulness.     "  Blossom  as  the  vine."     Grateful  com- 
memoration.     Learn — 1.    The    absolute    necessity    of    Divine    influence.      Be 
solicitous  to  obtain  a  copious  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     2.  The  end  for  which 
Divine  influence  is  given,  and  for  which  it  shouldf  be  desired.     3.  The  ground  on 
which  Divine  influence  is  hoped  for,  and  the  exercises  with  which  its  attainment 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

stands  inseparably  connected.  {JohnEwni.)  The  dew  and  the  plants: — Hosea 
is  eminently  the  prophet  of  repentance  and  pardoning  love.  He  has  also  a  poet's 
eye  with  which  he  looks  on  nature.  The  text  comes  from  a  fervent  and  tender 
appeal  to  Israel  to  come  back  to  its  God.  We  have  here,  with  lovely  symbolism, 
the  various  aspects  of  the  Christian  ideal  of  character,  and  the  productive  energy 
which  makes  them  all  possible.  I.  Thb  sourck  of  FBxriTFULNBSS.  The  dew 
in  Palestine  is  peculiar.  The  strong  summer  sun  carries  on  evaporation  with 
great  activity  over  the  surface  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  prevailing  summer 
winds  bring  masses  of  vapour,  which  are  condensed  by  the  cold  when  evening 
falls,  and  wrap  the  land  in  a  moist  veil  which  refreshes  the  drooping  vegetation, 
and  saves  many  a  little  floweret.  It  is  that  moistening  mist,  not  properly  "  dew" 
as  we  know  it,  which  the  prophet  picks  out  as  being  a  fitting  emblem  of  the  secret, 
silent,  refreshing,  quickening,  life-giving  influences  which  God  will  bestow  upon 
the  spirit  that  comes  back  to  Him  in  lowly  penitence.  Is  there  no  fierce  sunshine 
blazing  down  on  us,  which  needs  in  like  manner  that  our  inward  life  should  be 
moistened  and  refreshed  by  the  visitations  of  that  silent  guest  that  will  come 
and  bring  the  moistiu'e  we  need  ?  The  deceitful  ray  of  prosperity  is  full  of  danger 
to  the  spiritual  life,  and  no  less  cruel  are  the  fervid  beams  of  fiery  temptation 
with  which  we  have  all  to  be  tried.  And  where  is  our  strength  ?  I  know  but  of 
one  source  of  it — that  we  shall  receive  the  communications  of  that  spiritual  life, 
the  gift  of  which  is  the  central  blessing  of  the  Gospel ;  the  impartation  of  the  life 
of  God  to  our  hearts  and  spirits,  mediated  by  the  indwelling  in  us  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  which  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  II.  Thb  profuse  beauty  which  will 
FOLLOW  THE  FALL  OF  THB  DEW.  The  lily  is  most  probably  identified  as  the 
scarlet  anemone.  The  idea  conveyed  in  the  figure  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily  " 
is  twofold  profusion,  or  what  gardeners  call  freedom  of  growth  and  beauty. 
A  profusion  of  grace  ought  to  match  the  profusion  with  which  the  dew 
comes  from  God.  The  real  beauty  is  goodness.  That  beauty  of  goodness  will 
come  wherever  a  man  keeps  himself  in  touch  with  God  and  Christ.  We  are  all 
bound  to  try  and  make  our  Christianity  attractive.  A  great  many  very  good 
people  are  repellent  and  not  attractive.  There  ought  to  be  the  beauty  of  holiness 
where  there  is  the  dew  from  the  Lord.  III.  The  strength  which  should  go 
WITH  THE  BEAUTY.  "  He  shall  cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon ;  his  branches 
shall  spread."  To  the  beauty  of  the  fragUe  lily  we  must  add  the  strength  of  the 
stable  cedar.  There  must  be  strength  conjoined  with  beauty  in  a  world  like 
ours,  full  of  conflict  and  strife.  IV.  The  fbuitfulness  which  should  crown 
BEAUTY  AND  STRENGTH.  The  olivo  is  not  a  beautiful  tree.  It  has  a  gnarled, 
often  twisted  and  distorted,  sometimes  a  monstrous  stem  and  mean  branches, 
and  insignificant,  pointed,  pale  leaves,  with  a  silvery  grey  underside.  Its  beauty 
lies  in  its  fruit,  and  in  nothing  else,  and  that  fruit  produces  the  oil  which  sustains 
and  soothes,  and  smoothes  and  gives  light.  Our  deeds,  which  are  our  fruit, 
are  important,  not  in  themselves  so  much  as  because  they  are  the  outcome  and 
manifestation  of  what  we  are.  Our  fruit  is  the  test  of  our  Christianity. 
{A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Sacred  similitudes: — I.  God  has  here  a  similitude 
FOR  Himself.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  The  dew  steals  down  softly, 
unheard  and  unobserved  by  men.  So  silent  and  so  secret  are  the  operations  of 
the  blessed  Spirit  on  the  soiU.  It  is  an  inward  work  He  carries  on  which  the  world 
seeth  not  and  knoweth  not.  The  very  men  He  condescends  to  visit  are,  for  a 
while  at  least,  unconscious  of  His  presence,  and  are  often  praying  for  His  visita- 
tions when  He  is  actually  dwelling  in  their  hearts  and  helping  them  in  their 
petitions.  Though  the  dew  comes  softly,  it  comes  not  in  vain.  It  brings  a 
blessing  on  the  fields.  It  is  with  an  especial  view  to  these  kindly  influences  of 
the  dew  upon  the  ground  that  the  Lord  makes  it  an  emblem  of  His  own  blessed 
influences  on  the  soul.  It  is  as  if  God  said,  "  I  will  refresh  the  heart  of  a  penitent 
and  humble  sinner  as  the  dew  refreshes  and  revives  the  thirsty  land."  It  is 
said  of  the  natural  dew,  that  it  "  tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of 
men."  It  does  not  depend  on  man's  making  places  ready  for  it.  So  is  the  grace 
of  the  Divine  Spirit  free  and  sovereign  in  its  operations.     It  falleth  where  it  listeth. 

II.    MORB   THAN   ONE   SIMILITUDE   FOR    THE    PEOPLE    ON    WHOM    God'S    GRACE    IS 

BESTOWED.  When  the  natural  dew  has  fallen  plentifully  on  the  ground  we 
expect  to  see  a  growth  there — a  growth  among  the  herbs  and  flowers.  "  He 
shall  grow  as  a  lily."  This  is  a  quickly  growing  flower  :  and  so  the  man  on  whom 
the  dew  of  the  Spirit  is  plenteously  diffused  is  a  quickly  growing  Christian.  He 
IS  no  idle,  sluggish,  dull  professor,  but  is  constantly  gaining  ground  in  the  blessed 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EOSEA.  261 

life  which  is  begun  in  him.  His  faith  groweth  exceedingly.  But  the  lily  has 
only  a  feeble  footing  in  the  soil.  Nothing  more  easy  than  to  take  and  pluck  it 
up.  Not  BO  with  the  Lord's  Israel,  with  those  who  have  the  Spirit's  dew  upon 
their  souls.  This  emblem,  therefore,  does  not  altogether  suit  them.  The  text 
resorts  to  another  emblem  in  order  to  express  the  firmness  and  stability  of  the 
child  of  grace.  "  Send  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."  The  cedar  trees  are  vast 
in  height,  and  they  are  as  vast  in  depth.  So  is  it  with  those  spiritual  trees  who 
have  the  dew  of  grace  upon  their  branches.  They  are  rooted  and  grounded  in 
the  love  of  Christ,  as  those  mighty  trees  of  Lebanon  are  rooted  in  the  soil.  The 
cedars  of  Lebanon  are  spreading  trees ;  and  so  it  is  said  of  him  who  is  watered 
with  the  dew  of  grace — "  His  branches  shall  spread."  This  refers  to  the  useful- 
ness and  profitableness  of  the  Christian.  The  man  who  hath  the  dew  of  heaven 
in  his  heart  is  a  blessing  to  the  neighbourhood  in  which  he  lives.  As  far  as  his 
power  or  influence  extends  it  is  exerted  on  behalf  of  all  around  him.  It  is  also 
said,  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive-tree  "  ;  a  tree  fair  and  fruitful  to  a  proverb, 
and  employed  to  set  forth  the  spiritual  beauty  and  fruitfulness  of  true  believers. 
He  who  has  the  dew  of  the  Spirit  in  his  heart  has  "  the  beauty  of  holiness  "  in 
his  life  and  conversation.  There  is  a  comeliness  and  consistency  in  his  behaviour 
which  even  the  enemies  of  godliness  must  needs  admire.  The  last  similitude 
alludes  to  some  sweet-smelling  shrubs  with  which  Lebanon  abounded.  "  His 
smell  shall  be  as  Lebanon."  There  is  a  fragrancy,  as  it  were,  in  the  character 
of  him  who  hath  the  dew  of  grace  within  him.  He  is  acceptable  to  his  brethren. 
His  graces,  like  a  sweet  perfume,  endear  to  them  his  company,  and  make  his 
communications  precious  to  them.  I  am  afraid  that  to  find  a  suitable  emblem 
for  many  of  ourselves  we  must  look  not  to  the  garden,  but  the  wilderness.  It 
would  not  be  the  lily,  or  the  cedar,  or  the  olive,  but  the  "  heath  of  the  desert," 
or  the  prickly  bramble.  By  the  grace  of  God's  Spirit  you  may  become  trees 
of  righteousness,  lilies,  cedars,  and  olives,  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Learn,  as 
Christians,  what  trees  and  flowers  we  should  resemble  in  the  garden  where  our 
God  hath  plant«d  us.  We  should  be  as  lilies  in  growth,  as  cedars  in  establish- 
ment, as  olives  in  beauty,  and  as  the  sweet  smelling  shrubs  in  the  odour  of  oiu-  lives. 
{A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  dew  unto  Israel: — These  words  follow  immediately  the 
healing  of  the  backsliding  and  the  proclamation  of  God's  free  love.  With  us  the  dew 
is  little  noticed.  We  look  to  the  clouds  to  supply  all  that  grows  upon  the  earth 
with  suflScient  moisture.  In  Judaea  the  great  heat  and  little  rain  make  the  dew  as 
important  as  it  is  beautiful.  Three  circumstances  render  the  dew  a  peculiarly 
appropriate  symbol  of  God's  sustaining  care  for  His  people.  1.  The  dew  falls 
regularly,  in  summer  as  in  winter,  in  autumn  as  in  spring.  2.  It  comes  quietly 
in  the  night,  when  no  one  perceives  its  advent.  3.  There  is  a  mystery  connected 
with  it, — at  least  in  popular  thought.  Thus  watered  from  on  high,  Israel  "  shall 
grow  as  the  lily  (or  blossom)."  With  the  lily  is  associated  the  idea  of  purity. 
The  tall  lily,  elegant  in  shape,  gorgeous  in  colouring,  prolific  in  growth,  sending 
forth  leaves  and  flowers  freely,  forms  a  choice  emblem  of  Christian  beauty  and 
fertility.  But  the  lily  is  extremely  fragile  and  short-lived.  Another  comparison 
must  exhibit  Israel's  strength  and  stability.  What  type  can  better  set  forth 
firmness  than  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  T  It  retains  its  vigour  for  centuries.  The 
roots  clasp  themselves  around  the  rock,  and  therefore  the  tree  stands  unshaken. 
So  the  Christian  is  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might.  "  His 
branches  shall  spread."  The  flourishing  tree  sends  out  new  suckers  continually, 
which  take  root,  and  themselves  grow  into  trees,  to  repeat  the  process  again 
and  again.  Israel  multiplies  as  well  as  grows.  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the 
olive-tree."  To  an  Oriental  eye  the  olive-tree  is  actually  beautiful.  To  us  it 
is  an  emblem  of  usefulness.  The  very  character  of  a  true  Christian  renders  him 
useful.  He  is  ever  ready  to  render  to  all  men  kindly  service  and  help.  "  His 
smell  as  Lebanon."  Travellers  say  that  the  smell  of  Lebanon  extends  to  a  con- 
siderable distance  from  its  mountains  and  valleys,  owing  partly  to  its  cedars 
and  partly  to  various  sweet-smelling  plants  which  are  produced  profusely.  The 
metaphor  may  illustrate  the  influence  exerted  by  the  Christian  ceaselessly  and 
often  unconsciously.  "  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall  return."  The 
figure  represents  Israel  as  a  widespreading  umbrageous  tree.  It  may  refer  to 
the  protection  the  Church  affords.  Or  it  may  allude  to  the  teaching  and  instruct- 
ing power  of  the  Church.  "  They  shall  revive  as  the  corn."  Even  prosperous 
Israel  may  have  his  seasons  of  depression  and  apparent  feebleness.  The  green 
stalk  of  corn  may  lie  seemingly  lifeless  upon  the  parched  earth,  stricken  by  the 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

sun.  But  the  night  mists  and  morning  dew  enwrap  it,  so  that  it  drinks  in  the 
blessed  moisture,  and  once  more  it  erects  its  head  and  recovers  its  greenness. 
Thus  tribulation,  or  persecution,  or  the  assaults  of  insidious  sin  may  render  the 
Christian  feeble,  and  may  cause  him  to  fall ;  but  the  dew  of  Divine  grace  descends 
upon  him.  He  who  restoreth  the  soul  vouchsafes  His  Holy  Spirit  to  him,  and 
again  he  rises  strong  in  humility  and  trust.  Through  the  merciful  communica- 
tions of  God  to  him  he  may  revive  when  his  disease  seems  desperate  and  recovery 
hopeless.  "  And  grow  as  the  vine."  The  preceding  metaphors  imply  power 
to  stand  alone.  The  vine  must  lean  on  something  else.  And  the  Christian 
must  ever  rely  on  a  strength  beyond  his  own.  "  The  scent  (memorial)  thereof 
shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon."  Travellers  speak  enthusiastically  of  the  mani- 
fold virtues  of  the  wine  of  Lebanon,  of  its  invigorating  qualities,  &c.  Can  a  more 
appropriate  illustration  be  conceived  of  the  abiding  influence  of  a  Christian's 
life,  example,  work  after  he  has  left  this  world  ?  His  memory  is  an  inspiration. 
His  good  deeds  live  after  him.  (J.  Robinson  Gregory. )  The  dew  and  its  ener- 
gies : — God  is  no  less  with  us  day  by  day,  in  the  calmer  moods  of  our  soul, 
than  in  the  experiences  in  which  we  seem  with  more  or  less  of  terror  to  apprehend 
His  awful  presence.  We  speak  of  the  thundercloud  as  His  dark  chariot ;  let  us 
none  the  less  think  of  the  floweret  and  the  dewdrop  as  telling  of  Him.  I.  This 
IMAGE  OF  God's  character — the  dew.  1.  You  see  the  herbage  languishing 
under  the  heat  of  the  scorching  sun.  What  hope  is  there  for  the  languishing, 
thirsty  flowers  ?  Penetrating  copious  dews  will  bathe  the  dying  vegetation 
with  liquid  life ;  and  in  the  morning,  when  the  sun  looks  forth,  from  myriad  leaves 
shall  flash  the  reflection  of  God's  own  light  and  glory,  and  upon  every  petal  shall 
rest  the  spangled  dewdrop  to  tell  how  the  most  blessed  ofiices  of  nature  are  wrought 
in  silence  and  secrecy.  Observe  that  God  does  not  always  come  as  the  dew. 
It  is  to  bruised  and  moaning  penitents  God  appears  as  the  dew.  God  comes 
often,  like  the  dew,  without  observation.  A  restoration  of  religious  life  may  be 
unaccompanied  by  great  startling  signs.  We  may  scarcely  know  by  what  means 
our  spiritual  pulses  are  quickened  from  their  languor,  so  silently  and  stealthily 
comes  the  giace  of  God  into  our  hearts.  And  the  dew  represents  to  us  the 
penetrativeness  of  God's  grace.  God's  Spirit  works  beyond  escape.  A  shower 
might  miss  the  tender  life  overgrown  by  widespreading  leaves  ;  but  the  dew 
carries  its  blessing  to  the  tiny  flowerets  that  lie  concealed  beneath  the  broad 
cover  of  the  more  regal  growths.  To  lowly,  humble  spirits  God's  blessing  comes, 
diffuse  and  copious,  refreshing  and  life-giving  ;  as  well  to  them  as  to  the  more 
observed  and  outstanding.  Many  millions,  in  ways  we  know  not,  shall  be  reached 
by  God's  gi'acious  penetrative  Spirit.  II.  The  threefold  picture  of  the 
RESULTS  OF  God's  GRACIOUS  ACTIVITY.  L  The  beauty  of  vitality.  Growth 
with  rapidity  and  beauty.  Some  of  the  earlier  stages  of  the  Divine  life  have 
about  them  an  apparent  rapidity  which  finds  its  image  in  this  growth  of  the  lily. 
This  lily  is  fitly  chosen  to  represent  the  idea  of  beautiful,  vital  growth  ;  no  plant 
more  redundant.  This  picture  tells  how,  by  a  mighty  force,  our  life  should  begin 
to  be  a  prosperous  life  ;  we  should  grow  as  the  lily,  and  become  plants  of  the 
Lord,  beyond  all  doubts,  by  the  very  rapidity  of  our  growth  and  enlargement 
of  our  activity.  2.  Forceful  reserve.  There  is  a  hidden  life,  as  we  call  it,  a  life 
away  from  general  observation.  With  the  change  of  figure,  rapidity  of  develop- 
ment gives  place  to  steadfastness,  and  the  more  tedious  processes  of  the  spiritual 
life — steadfastness  of  will  and  piu-pose — all  that  goes  to  make  character.  Some 
of  the  processes  of  Divine  life,  some  of  the  most  needful  processes  too,  are  out 
of  sight,  and  not  for  observation.  I  pity  the  man  who  has  no  reserve  force  in 
him.  He  will  endure  but  for  a  season,  and  then  wither  away.  3.  Varieties 
of  usefulness.  There  will  be  fruit  and  fragrance,  and  shelter  and  refreshment. 
Its  branches  will  spread,  and  leaf  and  fruit  in  all  their  manifoldness  will  abound. 
Some  trees  are  so  beautiful  that  they  utter  no  apology  for  their  existence.  So 
of  the  Divine  life  ;  it  ought  never  to  need  an  apology.  It  should  be  self-assertive  ; 
it  should  command  admiration,  not  pity,  never  contempt.  Fruitfulness  and 
usefulness  may  command  admiration,  where  even  beauty  and  sublimity  may 
fail.  By  all  our  systems  we  may  fail  to  measure  the  effects  of  a  truly  productive 
spiritual  life.  The  indirect  blessedness  flowing  from  a  true  life,  who  can  calcu- 
late it  ?  The  "  odour  of  sanctity  "  is  a  phrase  which  has  come  to  mean  some- 
thing not  pleasant,  but  the  odour  of  real  goodness  and  worth — think  of  this. 
And  let  your  smell  be  that  of  Lebanon.  (Q.  J.  Proctor.)  Divine  refreshings  : — 
I.  God's  refreshing  communications  to  His  people.     The  communications  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSEA.  263 

God  to  His  people  are  fitly  compared  to  the  influence  of  dew,  which — 1.  Distils 
silently  and  almost  imperceptibly.  2.  Yet  insinuates  itself  into  plants.  3.  And 
thus  maintains  vegetative  powers.     II.  God's  refeeshing  commxtnicatigns  are 

ATTESTED    BY    GRACIOUS    FRUITS    AKD    EFFECTS.       1.    GrOWth.       The    quicknCSS    of 

the  growth  of  the  lily  often  excites  admiration.  Its  stability  defies  the  assaults  of 
earth  and  hell.  While  it  spreads  its  branches  and  disjplays  its  vigor  in  every 
good  word  and  work.  2.  Beauty.  Peculiar  grace  and  beauty  in  the  ohve-tree. 
And  such  there  is  in  the  soul  that  communes  much  with  God.  How  is  the  lively 
Christian  beautified  with  salvation  ?  ( 1 )  His  outward  conduct  is  rendered  amiable 
in  every  part.  (2)  His  inward  dispositions  of  humility  and  love  are  ornaments 
which  even  God  Himself  admires  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).  He  is  transformed  into  the  very 
image  of  his  God  (Eph.  iv.  23,  24).  (3)  Nor  shall  his  beauty  be  ever  suffered 
to  decay  (Psa.  i.  3).  The  olive  an  evergreen.  3.  Fragrancy  (twice  mentioned 
in  text).  Lebanon  was  no  less  famous  for  its  odoriferous  vines  than  for  its  lofty 
cedars.  (1)  And  does  not  the  Christian  diffuse  a  "  sweet  savour  of  Christ  "  all 
around  him  ?  See  him  fresh  from  the  presence  of  God  before  the  sun  has  exhaled 
the  dew,  or  the  world  abated  the  fervour  of  his  affections.  How  refreshing  and 
delightful  his  conversation  (Prov.  xvi.  24).  (2)  How  pleasing  are  his  character 
and  life  also  to  his  God  and  Saviour  I  "  The  Lord  hearkened,"  &c.  (Mai.  iii.  16). 
Awake,  O  north  wind,"  &c.  (Cant.  iv.  16).  "  Let  your  speech,"  &c.  (Col.  iv.  6). 
The  nearer  you  live  to  God  the  better  will  you  fulfil  that  duty.  4.  IVuitfulness. 
The  corn  and  the  vine  are  just  emblems  of  a  Christian's  fruitfulness.  (1)  They 
often  wear  a  most  unpromising  appearance.  (2)  Yet  they  are  "  revived  "  by 
the  genial  influences  of  sun  and  rain.  Thus  the  Christian  may  be  reduced  to  a 
drooping  or  desponding  state.  But  the  renewed  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
will  revive  him.  (3)  They  make  him  "  fruitful  in  every  good  word  and  work," 
he  yields  the  "  fruits  of  righteousness."  Note  especially  the  beneficent  influ- 
ences a  Christian  exerts.  They  who  "  dwell  under  his  shadow  "  are  most  nearly 
connected  with  him,  and  feel  the  influences  of  his  character,  will  participate 
his  blessings.  E.g.,  Master :  he  is  considerate,  gentle,  wise,  in  relation  to  his 
dependants.  Parent :  Christianity  sweetens  family  life,  and  blesses  the  children. 
Minister :  he  sheds  a  sacred  and  elevating  influence — strengthening,  solacing, 
saving.  Infer — 1.  How  honourable  and  blessed  is  the  Christian  state  !  Often  is 
he  favoured  with  visits  from  above.  Glorious  are  the  effects  produced  by  God 
upon  him.  The  whole  creation  scarcely  affords  images  whereby  his  blessedness 
may  be  adequately  represented.  Who,  then,  is  so  honourable  ?  Who  so  happy  ? 
Let  all  endeavour  to  maintain  a  sense  of  their  high  privileges;  and  to  "  walk 
worthily  of  the  calling  wherewith  they  are  called."  2.  How  hopeful  is  the  state 
of  those  who  wait  on  God!  The  promises  in  the  text  were  given  as  an  answer 
to  prayer.  And  they  axe  made  to  all  who,  like  Israel,  plead  with  God.  (1)  If 
the  "  dew  "  be  withheld  from  others,  it  shall  descend  on  them.  E.g.,  Gideon 
(Judg.  vi.  37,  38).  (2)  The  Spirit's  descent  shall  accomplish  the  utmost  wishes 
of  their  souls.  (3)  They  shall  soon  experience  the  fulfilment  of  that  word  :  "  They 
that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength"  (Isa.  xl.  31).  {Preacher's 
Assistant.)  Five  good  marks  : — I.  The  lily  mark.  A  good  life  is  like  a  lily ; 
it  is  a  fruitful  life,  it  does  more  good  than  anybody  knows  but  God.  Everything 
carries  seeds  about — birds  and  bees,  roaring  storms  and  whispering  breezes. 
Well,  so  it  is  with  a  good  life ;  it  is  very  fruitful.  Anything  that  touches  it  is 
the  better  for  it.  U.  The  moxtntain  mark.  "  Cast  forth  his  roots  like  Lebanon." 
The  lily  is  fruitful,  but  very  soon  uprooted.  It  is  a  very  weak  thing.  Well, 
a  good  hfe  is  not  only  like  the  lily,  it  is  also  like  Mount  Lebanon — that  is,  strong, 
firm,  and  steadfast.  Now,  there  are  some  people  who  are  good  by  fits  and  starts  ; 
they  are  very  good  in  the  morning,  but  before  dinner-time  their  goodness  has 
gone  away.  They  have  little  bits  of  goodness  that  look  very  nice  at  the  time, 
but  when  a  strong  wind  arises — that  is,  when  they  are  tempted  in  any  way, 
crossed  or  provoked — the  nice  little  bits  get  blown  clean  away.  But  a  really 
good  life  is  like  Lebanon.  It  has  roots.  Winds  come  and  go.  It  remains 
unmoved.  III.  The  shadow  mark.  "  His  branches  shall  spretwl."  Just  think 
of  a  hot  day  in  a  tropical  country.  A  weary  traveller  comes  trudging  along, 
and  he  says  to  himself,  "  Oh,  for  a  bit  of  shade  !  I  feel  so  tired,  the  sun  will 
kill  me."  And  then  he  sees  in  the  distance  a  great  tree  that  seems  to  say  to  him, 
"  Come  here  to  me ;  I  will  shade  you,  and  stand  between  you  and  the  heat,  and 
you  shall  rest  and  sleep  and  be  refreshed."  Well,  now,  a  good  life  is  like  that, 
it  does  good  to  others,  and  it  spreads  its  branches  so  that  others  may  be  benefited. 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

The  shadow  mark  means  usefubiess.  IV.  The  beauty  mark.  "  And  his  beauty 
Bhall  be  as  the  olive  tree."  What  is  the  beauty  of  the  oHve  tree  ?  Why,  it  is 
"  ever  green,"  it  is  beautiful  all  the  year  round.  Some  trees  are  beautiful  for 
a  few  months,  but  the  olive  tree  is  ever  green ;  it  is  beautiful  all  through  the 
seasons  of  the  year.  That  is  another  mark  of  a  good  life.  You  boys  will  grow 
up  to  be  men — old  men,  perhaps — and  you  will  lose  a  great  deal  of  the  outward 
beauty  you  have  to-day,  and  so  will  you  girls,  for  the  body  will  decay ;  but  if 
you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  like  Jesus  Christ,  every  year  will  be  like  a 
painter's  brush  adding  to  your  beauty,  every  day  will  make  you  more  and  more 
beautiful  to  the  very  end.  V.  The  wildflower  mark.  "  And  his  smell  shall 
be  like  Lebanon," — that  is,  a  good  life  gives  joy  and  pleasure  to  others.  Lebanon 
was  a  mountain ;  it  had  great  trees  growing  on  it,  and  a  great  many  beautiful 
flowers  too,  and  these  had  a  beautiful  smell ;  and  when  the  wind  blew  over 
Lebanon,  and  people  were  coming  up  the  valley  towards  it,  and  came  round 
a  certain  corner,  there  came  a  beautiful  spicy  breeze  from  Lebanon,  and  they 
drew  it  in  and  said,  "  What  a  sweet  smell !  the  smell  of  Lebanon  on  the  breeze  !  " 
Well,  now,  a  good  life  is  like  that.  It  gives  other  people  pleasiure,  it  makes  the 
earth  a  better  place  to  live  in,  and  makes  people  happier.  (J.  M.  Gibbon.)  Dew 
unto  Israel : — This  is  one  of  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  which 
God  has  given  to  Hia  Church,  in  which  every  true  believer  has  a  special  interest, 
and  for  the  fulfilment  of  which  to  himself  and  to  others  he  is  to  look,  and  long, 
and  pray.  I.  As  to  the  analogies.  1.  As  natural  dew  in  ordinary  language 
is  spoken  of  as  descending  from  heaven  or  from  above,  so  is  the  spiritual.  In 
the  blessing  of  Moses  to  Israel  before  his  death.  His  heavens,  it  is  promised, 
shall  drop  down  dew;  and  Solomon  speaks  of  the  clouJs  as  dropping  down 
dew  (Prov.  iii.  20) ;  and  the  Spirit,  in  His  gracious  influences,  comes  down 
from  the  highest  heaven.  In  waiting  for  the  promise  of  the  Spirit,  Jesus  com- 
manded His  disciples  to  tarry  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  till  they  should  be 
endued  with  power  from  on  high ;  and  the  prophet  Isaiah  declares,  that  on  the 
land  of  God's  people  will  come  up  thorns  and  briars  "  until  the  Spirit  be  poured 
upon  us  from  on  high  "  (chap,  xxxii.  13-15).  2.  As  the  natural  dew  comes  down 
freely,  so  does  the  spiritual.  The  husbandman  has  generally  to  pay  a  large  rent 
for  his  land ;  he  has  also  to  expend  much  in  manuring  and  preparing  the  ground, 
and  replenishing  it  with  appropriate  seed ;  but  the  dew,  which  contributes  so 
largely  to  the  return  which  he  reaps  in  harvest,  costs  him  nothing.  It  is  also 
distributed  over  his  field  in  the  best  possible  way,  without  any  labour  on  his  part. 
And  this  is  still  more  emphatically  true  of  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  I,  says  Jesus,  "  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another 
Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever  "  ;  and  again — "  If  ye,  being 
evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him  ?  "  This  is  an 
unspeakably  precious  gift,  which  no  money  could  purchase,  and  without  which 
men  would  laootir  in  vain  in  trying  to  cultivate  the  field  of  their  own  fallen  nature 
and  the  heritage  of  God.  3.  As  the  natural  dew  comes  down  seasonably,  and 
eometimes  very  copiously,  so  does  the  spiritual.  It  is  after  the  heat  and  drought 
of  the  day  that  the  dew  descends  din-ing  the  night,  to  refresh  and  invigorate  the 
herbs  and  plants  of  the  field ;  and  in  warm,  eastern  countries  it  often  descends 
so  plentifully  as  not  only  to  water  the  herbs  and  plants,  but  also  to  moisten 
the  soil,  and  drench  the  raiment  of  those  exposed  to  it.  And  it  is  in  this  world, 
in  which  His  people  are  exposed  to  the  scorching  and  withering  influences  of 
manifold  temptations,  that  God  sends  the  refreshing  dew  and  rain  of  the  Spirit's 
benign  influences.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  "  When  the  poor 
and  needy  seek  water,  and  there  is  none,  and  their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  I 
the  Lord  will  hear  them,  I  the  God  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them.  I  wUl  open 
rivers  in  high  places,  and  foimtains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys :  I  will  make  the 
wilderness  a  pool  of  water,  and  dry  land  springs  of  water."  God  is  pleased  to 
give  His  people  the  most  abundant  enjoyment  of  the  gracious  influences  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  season  of  deep  adversity.  4.  As  the  natural  dew  descends  very 
extensively,  so  does  the  spiiitual.  It  is  thus  diffused  not  merely  over  all  the 
hills  and  valleys,  mountains  and  plains  of  one  country,  but  of  many  countries 
in  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe.  And  the  spiritual  dew  is  also  widely  diffused. 
On  how  many  hving  souls  is  this  falling  from  day  to  day  and  night  to  night  ? 
On  every  living  soul  over  the  habitable  globe.  In  respect  of  constancy,  the 
analogy  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  dew  fails — the  natural  dew  falls 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSEA.  265 

only  during  the  night,  but  the  spiritual  descends  day  and  night.  The  natural 
dew  does  not  fall  amidst  storm  and  tempest ;  but  it  is  when  the  storms  and 
tempests  of  life  rage  most  fiercely  in  the  experience  of  the  believer  that  the  dews 
of  the  Spirit's  influence  fall  most  plentifully  on  his  soul.  The  natural  dew  only 
falls  from  a  serene  and  cloudless  sky,  but  the  spiritual  comes  down  when  the 
sky  of  the  people  of  God  is  most  deeply  overcast.  6.  The  natural  dew  comes 
down  very  gently,  and  almost  imperceptibly, — and  so  does  the  spiritual.     11.  The 

VAEIBD    EFFECTS    OF    THB    FULFILMENT     OF     THIS     PROMI3B     AS     HELD    FOETH    IN 

THE  FIGURATIVE  LANGUAGE  HEBE  EMPLOYED.  The  effect  of  this  is — 1.  Revival 
and  growth, — "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  "  They  shall  revive  as  the  corn, 
and  grow  as  the  vine."  There  are  few  more  pleasing  sights  than  a  field  of  young 
corn,  every  blade  of  which  stands  erect  with  its  drop  of  dew,  as  if  it  rejoiced  in 
drinking  in  the  cold  moisture  by  which  it  is  rendered  healthfiil  and  vigorous. 
And  such  are  the  delightful  effects  of  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
on  the  Church  and  people  of  God.  This  produces  health  of  the  most  precious 
kind — soul  health.  This  renders  the  plants  of  grace  in  the  believer  healthful 
and  vigorous,  constituting  a  leading  part  of  the  beauties  of  true  holiness.  2.  The 
effect  of  this  is  stability  and  strength, — "  He  shall  cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon." 
It  is  generally  known  that  the  taller  a  tree  grows  the  deeper  do  its  roots  sink 
into  the  soil.  The  cedars  of  Lebanon  were  distingviished  for  the  loftiness  of  their 
stature  and  the  extent  of  their  boughs,  and  consequently  for  the  depth  to  which 
their  roots  were  struck  into  the  soil,  and  the  breadth  to  which  they  extended 
vmder  the  groimd.  This  figurative  language  intimates  very  impressively  the 
strength  and  stability  which  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  give  to  the  people 
of  God,  preventing  them  from  being  driven  to  and  fro  as  the  chaff,  and  carried 
about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,  or  laid  prostrate  by  assaults  of  temptation 
like  uprooted  trees  of  the  forest  after  the  hurricane.  3.  Another  effect  of  this 
is,  an  increase  of  the  Church's  genuine  members.  He  shall  not  only  grow  as  the 
lily,  but  as  the  vine,  which,  when  in  a  prosperous  state,  abounds  with  branches  ; 
and  "  his  branches  shall  spread."  Such  was  the  effect  of  an  abimdant  effusion 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  apostolic  age,  when  thousands  of  true  converts  were  added 
to  the  Church  in  one  place  in  one  day,  and  when  there  was  a  fulfilment  of  the 
prediction  of  such  rapid  increase  to  the  Church  as  is  indicated  in  the  question, 
'  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  doves  to  their  windows  ?  "  4.  Another 
effect  of  this  is,  beauty :  moral  and  spiritual  beauty.  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as 
the  olive  tree."  Any  tree  richly  clothed  with  leaves  is  a  beautiful  sight.  But 
the  olive  tree,  with  its  verdant  leaves,  either  when  adorned  with  its  gorgeous 
blossoms  or  loaded  with  fruit,  excels  in  beauty.  And  to  this  the  beauties  of 
holiness  with  which  the  saints  of  God  are  adorned,  when  richly  replenished  with 
the  Spirit,  are  likened.  However  delightful  the  beauties  of  the  landscape  are 
to  the  natural,  such  spiritual  beauty  spread  over  the  heritage  of  God  is  unspeak- 
ably more  precious  and  delightful  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  in  the  esteem  of  His 
people,  in  proportion  as  they  have  been  made  like  Him.  6.  The  effect  of  this 
is,  the  diffusion  of  a  delightful  spiritual  fragrance.  "  His  smell  shall  be  as 
Lebanon  "  ;  and  again,  "  the  scent  thereof  shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon." 
God,  in  His  amazing  beneficence,  as  displayed  even  in  nature,  is  pleased  to  furnish 
men  with  what  gives  pleasure  to  every  sense — to  the  eye,  to  the  ear,  to  the  taste, 
and  to  the  sense  of  smelling.  Lebanon,  doubtless,  in  the  days  of  its  glory,  excelled 
in  such  richly  garnished  spots ;  and  to  this  the  savoiu:  of  the  holy,  consistent 
lives  of  the  people  of  God  to  the  spiritual  sense  are  compared ;  and  such,  we  are 
assured,  shall  be  the  lives  of  Christians  and  their  heavenly  conversation,  when 
God  fulfils  the  promise  largely  in  their  experience.  This  last  word,  here  rendered 
*'  scent,"  has  reference  to  memory.  And  of  the  righteous  it  is  testified,  that 
they  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance.  The  examples  of  the  saints  in 
ancient  times,  which  have  been  embalmed  in  the  inspired  record,  and  the  fragrant 
reminiscences  of  the  excellent  of  the  earth  in  subsequent  ages,  which  have  been 
preserved  in  authentic  uninspired  history,  are  special  means  by  which,  through 
the  Divine  blessing,  the  power  of  godliness  has  been  perpetuated  in  oiu:  fallen 
world.  Let  us,  then,  seek  to  be  enabled,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  to  hve  from  day 
to  day,  and  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  in  particular,  that  cor  example  and  our 
counsels  shall  exert  a  benign  influence  on  children  and  children's  children,  and 
on  posterity  generally.  Let  us  try  to  unite  in  praying  eaiaestly  for  an  abundant 
fulfilment  of  this  promise  to  ourselves,  as  individuals,  as  families,  as  congregations, 
and  to  the  Church  in  all  her  branches.     With  what  beauty  of  the  best  kind  would 


V 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

this  adorn  her  !  What  stability  would  this  impart  to  her  !  What  a  blessing 
would  this  make  her  among  the  nations,  yea,  to  the  whole  world  !  {Original 
/Secession  Magazine.)  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily. — Spiritual  beauty  : — We  have 
here — I.  The  secret  of  spiritual  beauty.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel," 
therefore  "  he  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  Not  the  mere  outward,  but  the 
outward  as  it  grows  from  the  inward.  The  dew  may  wash  the  dust  off 
the  fine  petals  of  the  lily,  but  it  is  not  this  that  makes  it  grow  beautiful 
and  causes  it  to  unfold  its  grandeur,  but  by  going  down  its  capillaries  and 
saturating  its  roots.  It  is,  in  the  language  of  modern  science,  first  an  invo- 
lution, and  then  an  evolution.  First  it  takes  in  and  then  gives  out.  Not  the 
amount  of  God's  blessings  that  rest  upon  us  promote  our  spiritual  beauty,  but 
the  amount  of  God  that  we  absorb  into  our  souls.  If  the  former  will,  as  it 
were,  wash  our  faces,  and  it  does  this,  as  it  makes  national  customs  more  pure 
and  humane  and  beautiful,  as  it  promotes  a  clean  morality,  as  it  gives  sweetness 
to  our  habits  and  modes  of  living,  yet  it  is  the  blessings  that  we  take  into  our 
very  being  that  make  beauty  a  growth,  a  living  product  of  the  Divine  within. 
There  is  a  beauty  of  art,  the  result  of  the  magic  pencil  or  chisel  of  the  artist, 
but  it  is  not  a  growth  ;  it  is  still,  cold,  and  lifeless.  It  is  a  decoration  and  external 
addition,  but  not  a  production.  It  is  the  difference  between  the  decorated 
Christmas-tree  and  the  living,  fruit-laden  tree  of  the  orchard.  Spiritual  beauty 
is  the  result  of  Divine  blessings  appropriated  and  converted  by  the  Divine  life 
within  into  outgrowing  grandeur.  The  addition  of  external  decorations  is 
sometimes  mistaken  for  this.  Spiritual  beauty  is  a  living  product,  the  natural 
outgrowth  of  the  life  within.  A  life  dependent  upon  the  nourishment  that  the 
Fountain  of  Life  supplies.  Be  beautiful  without  God  !  Yes,  when  nature  can 
wear  her  gorgeous  apparel  without  the  blessings  and  the  light  of  heaven.     II.  Then 

THE  FIGURE  SUGGESTS  THE  PRONOUNCED  CHARACTER  OF  TRUE  SPIRITUAL  BEAUTY. 

"  Blossom  as  the  lily."  Blossom  like  this.  Changed  into  the  plain  prose  of 
the  New  Testament  it  means  Christians  growing  like  Christ ;  beautiful  with  His 
beauty,  grand  with  His  grandeur.  For  as  He  is  the  unchanging  standard  of 
spiritual  beauty.  Making  no  pretensions,  it  frequently  hides  half-buried  among 
more  obtrusive  and  gaudy  blooms,  yet  is  known  when  seen.  To  grow  as  the 
lily  is  to  have  a  beauty  inseparable  from  real  quality.  The  disciples  in  the 
council  and  Stephen  before  the  court  were  too  real  and  beautiful  to  be  ignored, 
and  we  read  that  men  took  note  of  them.  Such  men  are  the  living  yet  unconscious 
preachers  of  the  nature  and  grandeiu-  of  the  Divine  character.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  be  anxious  about  our  appearance,  about  being  demonstrative,  about  showing 
our  character  and  piety ;  we  need  be  anxious  only  about  being  real  and  the 
character  will  show  itself.  See  that  the  inner  life  is  Christ  in  us,  filling  our  spirits, 
and  the  outer  life  will  be  a  natural,  agreeable  product  requiring  no  effort  on  our 
part  to  produce  it.  III.  Again  we  learn  that  our  spiritual  beauty  is  God's 
CONCERN  rather  THAN  OURS.  Be  not  concerned  about  your  beauty,  but  be 
concerned  about  your  goodness ;  not  about  what  you  are  to  become,  but  about 
what  you  are,  about  doing  your  duty  to  God,  and  He  will  see  to  your  beauty. 
He  does  not  bid  us  chisel  our  own  beauty ;  it  would  certainly  be  very  inferior 
work.  The  fashioning  of  the  spiritual  beauty  of  the  Christian  character  is  in 
the  hands  of  the  Master  Artist  of  the  universe,  and  we  can  profitably  leave  it  to 
Him.  (E.  Aubrey.)  Spiritual  growth: — Coleridge  defined  genius  as  "the 
faculty  of  growth  "  ;  goodness  belongs  to  the  same  order,  and  may  be  similarly 
defined.  It  is  ever  "  becoming,"  changing  into  a  more  complete  and  Diviner 
thing.  1.  There  is  growth  in  piurity.  Wesley  said,  "  I  believe  this  perfection  is 
always  wrought  in  the  sovd  by  faith,  by  a  simple  act  of  faith ;  consequently  in 
an  instant."  But  I  believe  a  gradual  work,  both  preceding  and  following  that 
instant.  The  gift  received  in  faith  was  preceded  by  a  gracious  preparation,  the 
gift  received  in  faith  is  slowly  realised  in  its  fulness  of  meaning  in  after  years. 
We  must  look  for  growth  in  clearness  of  insight,  for  increasing  freedom  from 
pride  and  self,  for  new  blossomings  in  purity  of  thought  and  motive  and  life. 
2,  There  is  growth  in  depth.  How  little  many  of  us  read,  or  meditate,  or  pray. 
And  this  is  the  reason  that  oui  branches  are  bare,  that  we  wither  at  the  top.  We 
want  more  pondering  in  our  heart,  more  of  that  secret  assimilation  which  takes 
fast  hold  of  the  eternal  grounds  of  reason  and  righteousness.  The  plants  which 
grow  in  the  Alps  are,  as  a  rule,  firmly  and  largely  rooted.  It  is  much  the  same 
with  the  Christian  character.  Whenever  we  find  strength  or  beauty  of  character, 
'We  may  be  sure  that  it  springs  from  depth  of  aovl,  that  the  fibres  have  struck 


CHAP.  XIV.]  E08EA.  267 

deep  in  the  everlasting  truth  and  love.  And  when  we  gain  this  depth  we  enjoy 
a  blessed  stability  and  peace.  The  Christian  life  is  strong  and  stable,  hidden 
with  Christ  in  God.  3.  There  is  growth  in  breadth.  Spreading  of  roots,  and 
spreading  of  boughs.  Not  unusually  we  commence  the  spiritual  life  with 
narrow  and  ignorant  views  of  the  Divine  character  and  government ;  but  justly 
cultured,  the  soul  expands  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God.  We  sorely  need 
to  grow  out  of  all  narrow  and  unworthy  misconceptions.  There  is  also  a  growth 
in  charity — a  growth  in  heart.  The  growth  in  kindness,  sympathy,  catholicity, 
is  the  Divinest  growth  of  all.  4.  There  is  growth  in  beauty.  Mount  Lebanon 
is  decked  with  loveliness,  and  it  has  an  abundance  of  aromatic  things  and 
odoriferous  flowers.  The  olive  is  a  tree  with  a  charm  of  its  own.  The  olive  is 
by  no  means  a  picturesque  tree,  it  even  sometimes  looks  stunted  and  shabby. 
But  the  soft,  delicate  beauty  of  the  olive  grows  upon  you,  until,  stirred  by  the 
wind,  the  shimmering  silver  of  its  leaves  makes  a  picture.  So  Christian  character 
is  often  not  in  the  least  brilliant,  not  heroic  or  striking.  The  noblest  men  and 
women  living  are  modest,  homely,  simple  souls ;  but  they  are  marked  by  a  mild 
and  serious  grace  which  is  in  truth  the  perfection  of  beauty.  In  this  imconscious 
winsomeness  we  ought  to  grow  unto  our  lives'  end.  6.  There  is  a  growth  in  useful- 
ness. What  corn  and  wine  are  to  men,  the  children  of  God  are  to  the  world — 
they  diffuse  life  and  gladness.  Usefulness  is  the  very  glory  of  the  Christian.  The 
glory  of  the  Christian  is  that  he  lives  to  bless.  And  we  are  reminded  that  every- 
thing is  possible  in  the  power  of  grace,  as  all  beauty  and  fruitfulness  are  possible 
in  the  dewdrop.  God  says,  "I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  (Wesley an 
Magazine.)  The  believer's  growth  in  grace  : — These  words  contain  the  gracious 
promise  of  God's  favour  and  blessing  upon  Israel  converted.  The  Lord  gives 
refreshment  to  His  people,  which  produces  in  them  the  firmness  of  the  tree  that 
is  deeply  rooted,  the  beauty  and  spotless  purity  of  the  lily,  the  fragrance  of  an 
odoriferous  plant,  the  smell  of  Lebanon.     The  dew  which  is  promised  is  grace — 

pgrace  which  justifies,  as  well  as  grace  which  sanctifies.  This  grace  is  given  in 
order  to  produce  certain  fruits.  The  beauty  of  holiness  may  be  fitly  represented 
by  the  purity  and  comeliness  of  this  flower.     Then  spiritual  growth  is  not  all 

}  outwards,  it  consists  mostly  in  growth  of  the  root,  which  is  out  of  sight.     The  | 

more  we  depend  upon  Christ,  and  draw  our  virtue  from  Him,  the  more  we  act 
from  principle,  the  more  steadfast  we  are  in  faith.  Another  blessing,  following 
the  operation  of  grace,  is  the  increase  of  God's  Church.  There  is  one  metaphor 
more.  The  Christian  plant  is  pleasing  to  the  sight ;  it  is  pleasant  also  to  the  smell. 
The  olive-tree  has  the  advantage  of  being  always  green.  And  the  spiritual 
sacrifices,  like  the  smell  of  Lebanon,  are  as  a  sweet  savour  \mto  God.  The  Church 
of  Christ  is  compared  to  a  garden  of  spices.  The  fragrance  of  true  piety  is  felt 
where  it  is  not  acknowledged.  (Richard  Burgess,  D.D.)  Spiritual  prosperity  : 
— The  cause  of  all  which  follows  is  this,  God  by  His  gracious  Spirit  will  be  "  as 
the  dew  unto  Israel."  Upon  that  note  the  prosperous  success  this  dew  of  God's 
Spirit  hath  in  them.  "  They  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  Objection — 1.  The  lily 
grows  but  hath  no  stability.  Then  "  they  shall  cast  out  their  roots  as  Lebanon." 
With  growth  they  shall  have  stability ;  not  only  grow  in  height  speedily,  but 
also  grow  fast  in  the  root  with  firmness.  Objection — 2.  As  everything  that  grows 
in  root  and  firmness  doth  not  spread  itself,  he  says  "  his  branches  shall  spread," 
making  him  more  fruitful  and  comfortable  to  others.  Objection — 3.  Everything 
is  not  fruitful,  therefore  he  shall  be  as  the  olive-tree  for  fruitfulness.  Objection — 
4.  The  olive  hath  no  pleasant  smell  or  good  taste.  Therefore  he  adds  another 
blessing.  They  shall,  in  regard  to  their  pleasantness  to  God  and  man,  be  "as 
the  smell  of  Lebanon,"  which  was  a  wondrous,  pleasant,  and  delightful  place. 
(R.  Sibbes.)  And  cast  fortli  his  roots  as  Lebanon.  —  Spiritual  strength: —  V 
The  lesson  here  directs  attention  to  spiritual  strength,  not  in  its  manifestations 
so  much  as  in  its  invisible  secret  growth  and  power,  agreeing  with  the  New 
Testament  expression,  "  Strengthened  with  might  in  the  inner  man."     I.  That 

SPIRITUAIi  STRENGTH  IS  PRIMARILY  AN  INVISIBLE   GROWTH.      We   SCO   the   Stcm  of 

the  tree  coming  to  view,  its  branches  spreading,  its  foliage  budding  and  opening ; 

but  this  is  secondary.     Previous  to  this  the  roots  have  spread  themselves  and        -^ 

absorbed  nourishment,  and  fastened  themselves  to  the  hidden  rocks.     And  our 

life  in  its  visible  beauty,  in  its  vigour,  in  its  fruitfulness,  will  be  just  in  proportion 

to  the  extent  that  our  desires  and  affections  and  motives  grow  towards  God,  and 

cling  to  Him  and  draw  their  nourishment  from  Him.     A  man  is  really  outwardly 

what  he  is  really  inwardly.     Root  principles  are  not  conveniences  but  necessities. 


268  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xiv. 

Faith  is  first  a  conviction  and  then  an  efiFort.  Trees  without  deep  roots  have 
been  seen  sprouting  and  bearing  leaves,  but  they  have  soon  withered.  Virtues 
without  principle,  the  result  of  training  or  environment,  or  even  imitation,  may 
in  their  bearings  upon  mankind  prove  beneficial.  The  man  may  act  or  give  to 
satisfy  another,  or  to  obtain  applause,  or  from  some  other  selfish  motives;  but 
the  virtues  of  the  truly  rehgious  spring  from  a  deep  invisible  principle  that  is 
rooted  in  and  gathers  its  strength  from  God.  And  .one  of  the  results  of  absorbing 
abundantly  God's  blessings  is  that  it  develops  righteous  principles  and  convictions 
in  the  soul,  bringing  the  invisible  in  us  into  living  and  growing  contact  with 
the  invisible  Eternal  II.  That  sprBmrAL  strength  is  otjks  in  proportion 
TO  THE  GROWTH  OF  ouB  INTERN Aii  PBiNOiPLBS.  We  may  have  a  laudable  ambition 
to  be  strong,  vigorous  Christians,  having  resisting  power  to  fight  manfully  and 
successfully  all  alluring  temptations,  persisting  power  to  pursue  with  filrm  step 
our  godly  course,  maintaining  a  large  measiire  of  devoutness  whatever  may  be 
the  hinctances  and  difficulties  in  our  way,  and  possessing  conquering  power 
whereby  we  may  overcome  self  as  well  as  Satan.  Then  our  desires  and  anxieties 
and  ambitions  must  move  towards  God,  to  settle  themselves  in  Him,  and  derive 
their  strength  from  Him,  and  become  "  strong  in  the  strength  which  God  supplies 
through  His  eternal  Son."  III.  A  strength  that  shall  be  seen  in  UNWAVEBiNa 
STEADFASTNESS.  Storms  swcep  over  the  Lebanon  forests  in  mad  fury,  but  they 
only  help  to  consolidate  the  roots  of  the  cedar,  and  help  them  to  strike  themselves 
deeper  ainong  the  rocks,  to  have  a  still  firmer  hold,  and  then  to  stand  in  stately 
grandeur.  The  powers  of  oiu*  soul  are  capable  of  expansion,  and  don't  try  and 
tie  them  down  to  any  circumscribed  rule  of  your  own,  and  sinfully  stunt  their 
growth  !  Give  them  scope,  being  careful  that  they  ever  move  in  the  direction 
of  God  and  eternal  realities.  Why  the  wavering  and  vacillating  on  the  part 
of  so  many  ?  Why  the  painful  unrest  so  generally  apparent  ?  The  answer 
is  not  far  to  find.  The  roots  are  not  deep.  Conviction  is  at  a  discount,  and 
principle  is  not  the  sacred  and  important  concern  that  it  rightly  should  be  in  the 
estimate  of  large  numbers  of  professing  Christians.  How  different  they  who  are 
rooted  and  grounded  in  God,  with  convictions  firm,  and  principles  a  guiding 
rule !  Compromise  and  expediency  find  no  countenance  with  them.  Such 
men  were  Moses,  Job,  Daniel,  and  others  in  Old  Testament  times,  and  Peter, 
Paul,  John,  and  others  in  apostolic  times,  and  the  martyrs  and  others  in  later 
years.  [E.  Aubrey.)  Spiritual  restoration: — I  This  expression  implies 
A  SAD  AND  painful  TRUTH.  A  truth,  alas !  only  too  evidently  confirmed 
by  our  own  experiences,  namely,  that  there  lies  in  us  a  possibility  to  err 
from  the  ways  of  God.  Among  the  many  causes  that  contribute  to  this  is — 
1.  Too  large  a  measure  of  self  -  confidence.  There  is  a  confidence  that  is 
legitimate  and  necessary,  the  confidence  that  has  God  for  its  foundation.  But 
if  in  exalting  self  our  trust  rests  upon  our  own  powers,  and  we  reason  confidently 
from  an  exaggerated  conception  of  the  ability  of  those  powers,  then  do  we  sin 
both  against  Grod  and  ourselves.  Self-confidence  is  false  confidence,  and  like 
all  things  false,  it  must  wither  and  decay.  The  chequered  cnreer  of  Israel  as 
a  nation  is  a  striking  object-lesson  that  illustrates  this  truth.  Its  several  declen- 
sions are  preceded  by  unmistakable  evidences  of  a  growing  self-confidence,  that 
leads  to  ignoring  God,  and  eventually  makes  them  the  captive  slaves  of  their 
victorious  enemies.  And  history  in  its  recital  of  the  careers  of  individuals  bears 
testimony  to  the  operation  of  the  same  law  here.  Self-confidence  has  proved 
the  sure  harbinger  of  declension.  It  was  so  with  Peter.  2.  Another  cause  of 
spiritual  declension  is  the  neglect  of  the  means  Divinely  appointed  to  ensure 
our  stability  and  progress.  This  naturally  follows  the  other.  An  exalted  self 
means  a  belittled  God.  Self-satisfaction  means  despised  Divine  provision.  We 
cannot  live  and  grow  and  prosper  without  God.  And  so  are  His  appointed  means. 
3.  Again,  too  close  a  tie  to  the  world  in  its  enervating  influences  conduces  to 
declension.  We  cannot  live  in  the  miasma  and  fever  swamps  of  sin  without  being 
spiritually  afl^ected  for  ill.  Indications  of  such  declension  are  also  present  in 
oxu"  own  spirits.  (I)  There  is  a  low  tone  to  our  spirituality.  And  matters  are 
looked  at  not  in  the  light  of  revelation  under  the  illumination  of  God's  Spirit, 
but  with  eyes  dimmed  and  vision  darkened  by  too  tlose  a  contact  with  the  world, 
(2)  Relish  for  the  spiritual  is  lost.  (3)  To  which  may  be  added  as  a  further 
indication  the  harassing  sense  of  unrest  that  i  ains  us.  II.  Voices  a  consolatory 
TRUTH.  "  They  shall  return."  Recover  the  ground  lost  by  their  declension, 
on  condition  that  in  quiet,  trustful  receptiveness  they  dwell  under  God's  shelter. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EOSEA.  269 

It  is  our  comfort  to  know  that  God  works  our  restoration.  Have  we  asked, 
"  What  shall  I  do  to  win  h&c\  the  joys  of  former  days  "  ?  We  may  have  vowed 
and  planned  and  promised  r  id  striven  in  our  own  strength  away  from  God,  but 
all  in  vain.  How  shall  we  compass  again  the  experiences  of  a  brighter  day  ? 
Here  is  the  answer,  "  They  that  abide  under  His  shadow  shall  return."  {Ibid.) 
Sovl  revival : — The  figvu-e  implies — I.  The  possession  of  a  living  energy. 
II.  The  figure  again  suggests  that  soul  revival  is  promoted  by  comino 

UNDER    THE    INFLUENCE    OF    THE    NECESSARY    AND    ADAPTED    MEANS.      The    grain 

to  germinate  and  grow  and  produce  must  be  placed  in  congenial  soil,  be  watered 
by  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  warmed  by  the  abounding  rays  of  the  sun.  Israel's 
revival  is  ensured  by  being  in  God's  presence,  with  His  fertilising  blessings  resting 
upon  them  and  His  gracious  favours  awakening  their  sleeping  powers.  Prayer, 
the  Word  of  God,  and  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  a  necessity.     III.  Soul 

REVIVAL    SHALL   MEAN    THE    INCREASE    AND    MULTIPLICATION    OF   LIFE.      *'  Revive 

as  the  corn."  How  ?  To  grow  ?  Yes,  and  to  multiply.  When  God  is  ours. 
He  multiplies  life  through  us.  We  live  to-day,  when  God  is  ours,  to  live  to-morrow, 
not  only  in  ourselves,  out  in  others,  and  become  immortal  both  in  heaven  and 
on  earth.  Immortality  is  inseparable  from  the  life  lived  in  God  and  nourished 
by  Him.  Its  very  nature,  for  it  is  Divine,  ensures  its  perpetuation.  The  saints 
that  have  gone  before  never  lived  as  they  do  to-day.  They  fill  a  larger  circle, 
and  sway  a  greater  influence  than  when  in  the  flesh.     When  filled  with  God  we 

Eroduce  what  becomes  seed  for  greater  harvests.  What  magnificent  possi- 
ilities  belong  to  us  !  (Ibid.)  And  grow  as  the  vine. — Spiritual  growth  by 
dependence  and  jyruning  : — I.  It  is  growth  by  dependence  upon  superior 
STRENGTH.  While  all  the  trees  and  plants  of  forest,  field,  and  garden  in  many 
ways  evince  their  dependence,  in  none,  perhaps,  except  the  ivy  and  its  class, 
is  it  manifested  more  openly  than  in  the  vine.  Growth  by  clinging  to  siiperior  y 
strength  seems  to  be  the  primary  lesson  that  it  teaches.  "  The  Lord  was  my  ^ 
stay,"  says  David.  "Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord,  ...  let  him  ' 
trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  upon  his  God."  It  is  no  dishonour  to 
our  devout  character,  no  disgrace  to  our  virtues,  no  disparagement  of  our  powers 
to  acknowledge  our  utter  dependence  upon  God,  and  to  exhibit  it.  "  Hold  Thou 
me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe."  It  was  no  empty  platitude,  or  mere  figure  of  speech, 
that  exhortation  of  Barnabas's  to  the  brethren  in  the  Church  at  Antioch  :  "  That 
with  full  pvurpose  of  heart  they  should  cleave  unto  the  Lord."  Clinging  to  the 
Lord  is  not  only  weakness  lajnng  hold  of  strength,  but  life  gathering  force  and 
finding  support  to  expand  and  grow  and  be  fruitful.  This  is  not  merelj^  a  wise 
policy,  but  an  absolute  necessity.  II.  Growing  in  an  elevated  situation. 
We  are  told  that  "  the  elevation  of  the  hills  and  tablelands  of  Judah  is  the  true 
climate  of  the  vine."  This  natural  fact  suggests  a  parallel  in  Christian  history 
and  experience.  The  souls  that  have  dwelt  in  the  heights  of  God,  above  the 
world  in  their  desires,  affections,  and  aims,  standing  on  an  elevated  platform 
in  the  principles  that  they  have  ever  acted  upon,  and  the  methods  which  they 
have  adopted,  have  ever  proved  the  most  fruitful,  and  the  product  of  their  life 
most  wholesome  and  rich.  As  the  vine  is  indigenous  to  an  elevated  position, 
and  grows  best  there,  so  our  souls  are  indigenous  to  a  higher  mode  of  life  than 
the  worldly,  and  meant  in  that  higher  position  to  breathe  a  holier  and  purer 
atmosphere,  and  grow  best  in  our  native  soil,  which  is  God  and  the  Divine. 
in.  That  our  spiritual  growth  is  promoted  by  necessary  purging  and 
PBxmiNG.  To  grow  is  one  thing ;  to  grow  pure,  strong,  healthy,  and  fruitful 
is  another  thing.  And  the  latter  is  ensured  by  the  wise  arrangement  that  ordains 
a  measure  of  trial  and  sorrow  and  suffering.  To  grow  as  the  vine  is  to  grow  to 
the  sharp,  necessary  touch  of  the  pruning  knife  as  it  lops  off  the  superfluous, 
and  as  it  bleeds  by  skilful  incisions  to  draw  off  the  infected  sap,  which  being  allowed 
to  remain  would  work  destruction.  Conscious  as  we  are  of  the  presence  in  our 
Bpirits  of  much  that  is  injuriously  superfluous,  it  is  a  loving  hand  that  in  affliction 
comes  to  purge,  since  it  makes  the  zeal  stronger  and  the  soul  holier.     "  It  waa 

food  for  me  that  I  waa  afflicted,"  is  a  confession  that  has  often  been  endorsed. 
8  it  not  a  privilege  to  be  helped  to  grow  strong  and  healthy  ?  Is  it  not  a  favour 
to  be  assisted  to  greater  purity  and  more  abundant  fruitfulness  ?  IV.  In  which 
FEUiTFULNESS  IS  ITS  PURPOSED  END.  The  vine  that  grows  to  a  purpose,  being 
advantageously  situated,  carefully  and  skilfully  tended  and  trimmed  is  the  one 
that  repays  the  attention  bestowed  upon  it  with  rich  clusters  of  luscious  fruit. 
And  it  is  this  that  explains  the  attention.     "  That  ye  may  abound  in  every  good 

<r%rv  iff  i^r!^^ 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU3TBAT0B.  [chap.  xir. 

work "  is  the  key  that  unlocks  the  mysteries  of  our  life,  and  explains  the 
trying  dispensations  through  which  the  believing  soul  is  made  to  pass.  (Ibid.) 
His  branches  shall  spread. — Spiritual  progreaa: — First  the  growth  of  our  inner 
virtues,  then  the  growth  of  our  outer  graces.  First  deep-rooted  convictions, 
pure  desires,  holy  affections,  honest  motives ;  then  manifest  activities, 
wide  sympathies,  and  powerful  influences,  the  natural  and  irresistible  outcome. 
I.  To  THE  MANIFEST  AND  VISIBLE  IN  SPiBiTUAL  GBOWTH.  Grace,  which  is  the 
New  Testament  term  for  the  Divine  blessings,  cannot  be  concealed.  Besides, 
we  cannot  absorb  more  unless  we  produce  with  what  we  have.  We  must  give 
Gk)d  out  in  our  life,  if  we  would  take  in  more  of  God  into  our  spirit.  Grod  has 
not  meant  that  we  should  be  reservoirs  to  store,  but  channels  to  communicate. 
It  is  as  false  as  it  is  selfish  to  suppose  that,  God  being  ours.  He  is  ours  to  conserve 
for  ourselves,  as  if  the  ideal  of  religion  consisted  in  getting  as  much  from  Him 
for  our  own  aggrandisement  as  we  can  contain.  Then  verily  would  our  portion  be 
small.  Not  how  much  of  enjoyment  can  we  derive  in  the  sanctuary  makes  us 
religious,  but  how  much  of  Grod  can  we  exhibit  in  our  homes  and  its  duties,  in  the 
workshop,  in  the  office,  and  in  the  street.  Religion  is  not  personal  enjoyment  so 
much  as  a  relative  blessing.  The  ideal  is  not  our  own  enriching  as  being  blessed  in 
being  means  of  enriching  others.  II.  A  tbuth  not  less  applicable  to  oub 
INFLUENCE  THAN  TO  otTE  ACTS.  Society  has  mistakenly  joined  the  epithet 
<  "  influential  "  to  mere  worldly  position  and  material  wealth,  and  calls  him  the 

\  influential  man  who  possesses  these.  But  the  standard  is  a  low  one,  and  neither 
true  to  history  or  experience.  True  influence,  an  influence  that  lives  and  elevates 
the  race,  is  that  which  emanates  from  goodness  and  is  joined  to  disinterested 
piety.  Caesar,  Charlemagne,  Napoleon,  and  others  are  but  mere  names  in  history 
as  compared  with  the  living  influence  of  the  disciples.  Their  branches  spread 
and  are  spreading  still.  111.  Then,  again,  progress  is  characteristic  of 
otJR  visible  graces  when  God  is  ours.  This  sentence  in  its  literal  form  presents 
to  us  a  complex  figure,  seemingly  contradictory — "  His  branches  or  sucking 
offshoots  shall  go  on.  And  having  God  as  ours  even  now  progress  is  characteristic 
of  our  life  as  we  go  "  from  strength  to  strength,"  adding  virtue  to  virtue.  Our 
life's  history  is  a  '  going  on."  !^om  grace  to  grace ;  from  effort  to  effort ;  from 
experience  to  experience ;  from  achievement  to  achievement.  The  branches 
are  going  on.  Desires  are  becoming  more  holy,  devotion's  fires  burn  brighter 
and  stronger,  zeal  becomes  increasingly  fervent,  and  religion  is  more  trans- 
parent. (Ibid.)  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive-tree,  and  his  smell 
as  Lebanon.  —  Like  the  olive  and  Lebanon :  — "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the 
'\  olive-tree,"  which  though  fruitful  and  excellent,  yet  hath  no  sweet  smeU; 
therefore  it  is  added,  "  His  smell  shall  be  as  Lebanon."  The  olive  is  a  very  fruitful 
tree,  and  the  oil  which  comes  and  distils  from  it  hath  many  excellent  properties, 
agreeing  to  graces.  It  is  a  royal  kind  of  liquor,  that  will  be  above  the  rest ; 
so  grace  commands  all  other  things,  it  gives  a  sanctified  use  of  the  creature,  and 
subdues  all  corruption.  And  then  it  is  unmixed,  it  will  mingle  with  nothing : 
light  and  darkness  will  not  mingle,  no  more  will  grace  and  corruption.  And  it 
is  sweet,  strengthening,  and  feeding  the  life.  It  is  the  excellence  and  glory  of  a 
Christian  to  be  fruitful  in  his  place  and  in  his  particular  calling.  Every  one 
that  is  fruitful,  God  hath  a  special  care  of.  A  Christian  by  his  fruitfulness  doth 
delight  others.  Note  the  figure,  "dwell  under  His  shadow."  What  is  the  use 
of  a  shadow  ?  It  is  for  a  retiring  place  to  rest  in.  It  is  for  defence  against  the 
extremity  of  heat.  It  is  for  delight,  if  the  shades  be  good  and  wholesome.  What 
solace  and  rest  do  men  find  under  the  shadow  of  the  Church  ?  There  is  rest  and 
peace.  God  is  about  His  Church  as  a  wall  to  protect  it.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
Abiding  beauty  of  the  godly  life : — So  the  beauty  of  the  pious  life  is  by 
this  figure  set  forth.  I.  As  being  unintebmittent.  A  striking  contrast 
to  the  ever-changing  and  short-lived  so-called  beauty  of  the  world.  Dressed 
in  the  charm  of  novelty  and  breaking  upon  the  world  at  certain  seasons, 
the  beauty  of  much  that  society  boasts  of,  or  even  nature  presents  to  our  view, 
is  thereby  deemed  especially  attractive.  But  true  spiritual  beauty  is  an  ever- 
present  quality.  Not  the  cold  beauty  of  a  statue  or  of  a  finely  painted  picture, 
the  result  of  human  skill  and  artistic  manipulation,  but  the  living  production 
of  a  healthy,  God-filled  soul.  The  strength  within  counteracting  the  destroying 
forces  without,  and  triumphing  over  them.  The  winter  of  life  no  less  than  summer 
witnesses  its  continuance.  As  sure  as  it  is  the  result  of  the  God-life  in  us,  so  sure 
will  it  abide  and  live  unintermittently.     The  unbelieving  observer  will  occasionally 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSE  A.  271 

complain  that  it  is  not  sufficiently  apparent,  and  some,  because  they  cannot  see 
it,  deny  its  existence,  forgetting  that  spiritual  things  are  spiritually  discerned. 
Besides,  the  pious  man's  surroundings  occasionally  prevent  the  world  from  seeing 
his  real  character.  II.  That  it  is  beauty  combined  with  utility.  The  olire- 
tree,  while  symbolical  of  beauty,  stands  none  the  less  noted  for  its  wealth,  with 
its  proverbial  fatness,  combining  with  its  abiding  vigour  and  beauty  the  virtue 
of  being  pre-eminently  serviceable — its  stock,  branches,  sap,  leaves,  and  fruit 
being  all  of  the  highest  value.  And  that  is  the  truly  beautiful  which  is  pre- 
eminently useful.  The  beauty  of  an  object  to  the  pious  mind  is  that  it  awakens 
gratifying  spiritual  sensations,  and  so  far  is  subjective ;  and,  moreover,  is  ever 
fresh  with  unfading  glory,  serves  a  useful  purpose,  harmonises  with  the  grandeiir 
of  the  Divine  creation,  and  stands  in  due  order  and  rightful  proportion  to  the 
universe  in  its  symmetry  and  forces.  The  spiritual  theory,  as  one  puts  it,  is  that 
it  is  "  the  expression  of  the  invisible  and  spiritual  under  sensible  material  forms," 
or,  in  theological  phraseology,  it  is  the  inner  life  manifesting  itself  in  holy  fruitful- 
ness  and  blessing,  glorious  with  the  attraction  of  felt  benefits.  Such  is  the  really 
beautiful  life — a  life  of  positive  activity  and  blessing.  Speak  we  of  spiritual 
beauty  ?  We  ever  associate  it  with  self-sacrificing  labours.  We  view  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  truly  beautiful  in  the  gallery  of  Scripture  ;  and  inquire  wherein 
does  their  beauty  lie  ?  And  we  find  it  consists  in  the  manifestation  of  this  self- 
sacrificing  spirit  and  effort.  They  found  their  beauty  by  distributing  their  powers 
and  blessings,  regardless  of  self.  III.  It  is  beauty  of  an  eveb-endurino 
CHARACTER.      (E.     Avbrty.)        Spiritual    fragrance: — I.   Such    fragrance    is 

THE  PRODUCT  OF  INTERNAL  GRACE  AND   DiVINB  FAVOUR.       Vain  is  the  hopC  tO  be 

able  to  diffuse  a  sweetening  and  hallowing  influence  unless  God  is  in  us  in  Hia 
sweetening  and  sanctifying  life.  The  botanist  tells  us  that  the  perfume  of  flowers 
depends  upon  the  volatilisation  of  an  essential  oil  which  they  secrete  in  their  most 
hidden  recesses,  whether  a  sweet  oil  diffusing  rich  fragrance  or  a  nauseous  oil  that 
exhales  itself  in  repulsive  smell.  Still  the  possession  of  this  oil  is  one  thing,  its 
volatile  character  another.  Turning  from  the  figure  to  the  lesson  it  embodies, 
it  manifestly  suggests  two  things  :  first,  the  necessity  of  possessing  internal  graces, 
being  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God,  and  then,  that  these  graces  should  become 
external  influences,  as  they  dispose  themselves  in  pleasing  and  effective  forms. 
Such  influences  are  the  holy  fragrance  of  the  devout  life,  arresting  attention, 
awakening  inquiry,  and  inspiring  fondness,  being  neither  heard  nor  seen  but 
powerfully  felt.  Appearance  and  sweetness  do  not  always  go  together.  To  the 
eye  the  richly-hued  dahlia  is  more  fascinating  than  the  spray  of  mignonette,  which 
can  scarcely  lay  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  flower.  But  which  is  it  that  gives 
ihe  greatest  sense  of  sweetness  ?  True  spiritual  influence  is  more  a  felt  than 
a  seen  power.  There  are  parallels  in  human  life  to  the  dahlia  and  the  mignonette  : 
the  beauty  that  expends  itself  in  colour — not  to  be  despised — and  that  still 
greater  beauty  that  touches  us  with  pleasing  and  arresting  force,  though  still 
unseen — the  subtle,  penetrating,  and  captivating  influence  whose  presence  is  a 
felt  reality.  It  is  so  in  the  life  of  many  a  humble,  modest,  retiring  disciple 
of  Jesus  Christ's,  who  dread  nothing  more  than  conspicuous  publicity,  who  would 
blush  to  find  themselves  famous,  and  yet  whose  presence  gives  a  healthy,  fragrant 
character  to  the  workshop,  warehouse,  office,  or  in  whatever  circle  they  are  found. 
Their  life  is  a  diffusion  of  Divine  sweetness.  To  scatter  a  Divine  aroma  in  the 
community,  to  diffuse  a  holy  fragrance  in  our  life,  grace  must  be  obtained  from  God, 
and  our  virtues  must  be  of  a  diffusive  nature.     II.  Spiritual  fragrance  means 

AGAIN    THE    HARMONIOUS    BLENDING    OF    CHRISTIAN    VIRTUES.       As    the    fragrance 

of  Lebanon  was  the  blended  odours  diffused  by  the  various  fragrant  plants  that 
grew  on  that  mountain  range,  so  the  spiritual  fragrance  of  the  Christian  Church 
is  the  harmonious  unity  and  co-operation  of  its  members,  and  in  the  case  of  the 
individual  believer  it  is  the  union  of  the  several  virtues  that  go  to  make  up  Christian 
character.  There  is  a  spiritual  deformity  that  hinders  the  diffusion  of  spiritual 
influence,  where  only  one  grace,  or  set  of  graces,  is  cultivated  to  the  neglect  of 
all  the  rest,  and  symmetry  is  lost  and  beauty  and  sweetness  consequently  absent. 
Christian  character,  to  prove  an  influence,  must  be  symmetrical  and  complete. 
"  Add  to  yoiu'  faith  virtue ;  and  to  virtue  knowledge,"  &c.  Men  may  admire  bold- 
ness, revere  meekness,  take  pleasurable  notice  of  stiu-dy  faith,  applaud  charity, 
speak  of  kindness,  and  trust  honesty  when  beheld  singly ;  but  it  is  when  they 
are  joined  together  in  one  character  that  men  are  afraid  of  committing  evil  in 
its  presence,  and  are  inspired  by  it  to  holy  effort.     Ill,  The  emblem  suggests 


A 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

AGAIN   tutcostinbd   expansion.     Lebanon  loads   the   passing   breezes   with   a 
rich  profusion  of  fragrance  to  be  carried  anywhere  and  everywhere — a  fragrance 
that  defies  the  artificial  limitations  of  men's  erecting.     A  high  waU  may  shut 
in  the  colour,  but  the  fragrance  wiU  overleap  it  and  scatter  itself  in  ever-widening 
directions,     \lhid.)        Lily,  cedar,  olive: — Look  at  the  picture  of  what  the  dew 
does,  that  we  may  claim  the  promise  and  drink  in  the  blessing.     I.  The  dew 
MAKES  BLOOM.     When  God  heals  the  backsliding  of  Israel,  "He  shall  blossom 
as  the  lily."     God  comes  as  the  dew  to  dower  us  with  eternal  bloom.     His  secret 
influences  are  meant  to  urge  us  to  an  open  and  increasing  beauty.     God  promises 
in  this  figure,  to  give  us,  not  merely  the  lUy  lines,  but  also  the  lily  glow.     He 
shall  lead  us  not  only  to  do  the  right,  but  to  do  it  from  a  noble  motive,  and  in 
a  noble  manner.     He  aims  at  colour  as  well  as  form.     11.  The  dew  makes  boot. 
"  Shall  cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."     The  famous  ridge  is  known  the  world 
over  for  its  groves  of  cedar,  and  the  cedar-tree  is  remarkable  for  its  deep,  strong 
grip  of  the  soil.     It  takes  its  name  indeed  from  the  way  in  which  it  "  coils  " 
its  roots  about  the  rocks.     It  is  the  very  figure  of  immovability.     Our  faith 
roots  itself  in  truths  as  sure  as  the  changeless,  tremulous  rock.     We  lay  hold 
of  the  eternal  love,  and  we  know  that  we  must  shake  the  universe  and  wreck 
all  existence  before  we  can  move  that.     Therefore  our  hope  rears  itself  ever 
nearer  heaven,  and  fears  not  the  blasts  of  temptation  nor  the  tooth  of  time. 
III.  The  dew  makes  fruit.     God  promises  the  luxuriant  growth  of  the  olive. 
Here  is  the  symbol  of  a  life  that  is  visible  in  open  majesty  and  usefulness.     It 
bears  an  ever  fuller  harvest  of  fruit.     It  shows  a  constant  freshness.     The  spiritual 
olive-tree,  weighted  with  its  berries,  is  God's  secret  benediction  to  the  soul  given 
forth  again  as  an  open  blessing  to  the  world.     IV.   The   dew  makes   scent. 
The  lily,  when  it  has  much  colour,  has  little  fragrance.     The  cedar  and  the  olive 
are  sweet- smelling  trees.     Thus  the  three  foregoing  figures  not  only  represent 
gracefulness,  steadfastness,  and  usefulness,  but  also  imply  the  virtue  which  is 
typified  by  scent.     God  wo\ild  have  His  Church  fling  far  beyond  its  borders 
a  pleasant  savour.     As  we  send  our  own  special  sweetness  into  the  air  we  make 
a  fragrance  which  woos  the  world  to  think  well  of  God's  work.     Popular  opinion 
as  to  godliness  is  not  formed  from  the  aroma  of  one  saintly  life,  but  from  the 
general  experience  of  men  in  their  dealings  with  saintly  people.     How  necessary 
then  that  every  plant  of  the  Lord,  however  lowly,  should  be  richly  fragrant. 
The  dew,  which  is  God,  nourishes  the  continual  incense  that  ascends  to  God. 
Sweeter  than  our  songs,  truer  than  our  prayers,  our  godly  spirit  is  a  delight  to 
God,  and  a  worship  ever  waited  for.    {Ancn.)        Fragrant  influence  (for  children) : 
— Lebanon  is  the  name  of  two  great  ranges  of  mountains  on  the  northern  border 
of  Palestine.     Travellers  who  have  visited  the  place  teU  us  that  when  you  enter 
the  valley  between  these  mountains  there  meets  you  at  once  "  a  perfect  gust 
of  fragrant  odours."     It  comes  from  the  flowers,  from  the  aromatic  shrubs,  from 
the  fig-trees,  mulberry-trees,  vines  and  cedars  which  abound  in  the  valley.     The 
perfume  is  delightful,  and  cannot  easily  be  described.     Hosea  must  have  passed 
that  way  and  caught  some  of  the  exquisite  fragrance,  else  he  could  not  have 
written  about  it  so  forcibly.     But  what  can  the  prophet  mean  when  he  speaks 
of  Israel — God's  people,  men,  women,  children — having  a  "  smell  as  Lebsuion  "  ? 
Was   the   smell   in  their    clothes,  or    in    their    bodies  ?      No.       Clothes    may 
smell  of  grease,  of  smoke,   of  scent ;   and  vulgar   persons  are  sometimes  vain 
enough  to  make  themselves  known  in  a  company  by  means  of  their  favourite 
perfume.     He  was  a  silly  little  boy  who,  after  nurse  had  washed  his  face,  removed 
his  pinafore,  put  some  sweet  pomatum  on  his  hair  and  a  drop  of  scent  on  his 
handkerchief,  came  strutting  into  the  drawing-room  among  his  mother's  guests, 
and,  looking  all  around,  proudly  said,  "  Now,  if  anybody  smells  a  smell,  that's 
me."     We  shall  do  well  to  shun  that  kind  of  folly  and  vanity.     If  good  people 
have  a  "  smell  as  Lebanon,"  it  is  not  in  their  clothes,  or  in  their  bodies,  but 
in  their  character — their  influence  is  what  the  prophet  refers  to  as  fragrance. 
Influence  is  not  an  easy  word  to  define,  yet  we  all  know  what  it  is.     Influence 
is  like  the  scent  of  shrubs  and  flowers ;  you  cannot  see  it,  touch  it,  hear  it,  but 
it  never  fails  to  make  its  presence  known.     The  fragrance  of  a  plant  is  part  of 
itself — that  part  which  it  gives  forth  in  minute  particles,  in  atoms  so  small  the 
eye  cannot  see  them,  yet  they  float  in  the  air,  and  reach  the  organs  of  smell. 
And  influence  is  something  going  forth  from  us  in  little,  almost  imperceptible 
ways ;  in  looks,  tones,  gestures,  tempers,  actions.     It  is  the  outcome  of  our  inner 
self.     It  may  be  good  or  bad,  swe  t  or  foul,  wholesome  or  noxious ;   and  like 


CHAP,  xiv]  H08EA.  273 

the  magnet,  it  has  power  to  draw  or  repeL  Every  one  of  us  has  influence.  No 
hair  is  so  small  that  it  is  without  a  shadow.  No  violet  is  so  hidden  that  it  yields 
no  scent.  No  child  is  too  young,  too  lowly,  to  sweeten  daily  life  in  home  aud 
school.  If  boys  and  girls  live  for  Jesus,  in  the  sunshine  of  His  love,  and  under 
the  dew  of  His  Spirit,  theirs  will  be  a  fragrant  life.  They  will  bring  joy  into 
the  family,  love  into  the  playground,  good  temper  into  every  quarrel,  nappiness 
and  gladness  into  many  hearts.  The  missionary  who  settles  among  strange 
people  in  a  foreign  land  may  not  be  able,  at  first,  to  speak  their  language,  or  say 
a  word  to  change  their  bad  habits.  Yet  there  is  something  he  can  do.  He  may 
live  a  life  of  kindness,  goodness,  compassion,  truthfulness,  purity ;  and,  so  living, 
the  influence  of  his  character  will  be  sure  to  impress  the  heathen  favourably, 
and  do  them  good.  Of  King  Jesus  it  is  said,  "  AE  Thy  garments  smell  of  myrrh." 
Keep  company  with  Jesus,  and  He  will  give  you  of  His  sweetness,  wherewith 
to  influence  others.  The  Chinese  have  a  wood  which,  however  deeply  buried 
underground,  fills  the  air  with  fragrance ;  and  in  the  higher  peak  of  Teneriffe, 
far  above  the  clouds,  in  a  dry,  burning  waste,  grows  a  plant  which  in  summer 
emits  a  delicious  odour  far  and  wide.  Let  me  so  live,  that,  whether  my  lot  be 
in  the  vale  or  on  the  hill-top,  others  may  find  some  good  and  gracious  influence 
proceeding  from  me,  like  that  in  Israel  of  which  the  prophet  testified,  "  His  smell 
as  Lebanon."  {A.  A.  Ramsey.)  God  does  everything  heautifvlly : — Every- 
thing that  GfOd  does  is  beautifully  done.  His  stars  are  jewels  set  in  velvet ; 
His  flowers  are  sapphires  set  in  emerald.  Everything  of  His  creation,  in  shape 
and  colour,  as  it  lies  bathed  in  the  sunlight,  has  upon  it  the  touch  of  the  beauti- 
ful. And  this  teaches  us  to  do  beautifully  everything  that  we  do.  Especially 
in  our  conduct  towards  each  other  ought  there  to  gleam  the  beauty  of  star  and 
breathe  the  fragrance  of  flower.  The  uses  of  the  olive : — Anybody  that  has  ever 
seen  a  grove  of  olives  knows  that  their  beauty  is  not  such  as  strikes  the  eye.  If 
it  were  not  for  the  blue  sky  overhead,  that  rays  down  glorifying  light,  they  would 
not  be  much  to  look  at  or  talk  about.  The  tree  has  a  gnarled,  grotesque  trunk, 
which  divides  into  insignificant  branches,  bearing  leaves  mean  in  shape,  harsh 
in  textvu-e,  with  a  silvery  under  side.  It  gives  but  a  quivering  shade  and  has 
no  massiveness  nor  sympathy.  Ay !  but  there  are  olives  on  the  branches.  And 
so  the  beauty  of  the  humble  tree  is  in  what  it  grows  for  man's  good.  The  olive 
is  crushed  into  oil,  and  the  oil  is  used  for  smoothing  and  suppling  joints  and 
flesh,  for  nourishing  and  sustaining  the  body  as  food,  for  illuminating  darkness 
as  oil  in  the  lamp.  And  these  three  things  are  the  three  things  for  which  wo 
Christian  people  have  received  all  our  dew,  and  all  ovir  beauty,  and  all  our  strength 
— that  we  may  give  other  people  light,  that  we  may  be  the  means  of  conveying 
to  other  people  nourishment,  that  we  may  move  gently  in  the  world  as  lubricat- 
ing, sweetening,  soothing  influences.  The  question,  after  aU,  is,  Does  anybody 
gather  fruit  of  us,  and  would  anybody  call  us  "  trees  of  righteousness,  the 
plantiug  of  the  Lord,  that  He  may  be  glorified "  ?  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 
They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall  return;  they  shall  revive  as  the 
com. — The  blessings  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  others : — 1.  Who  are  those 
that  are  imder  his  shadow,  and  what  is  their  return  ?  What  is  the  shadow  ? 
Is  it  Christ,  or  is  it  the  visible  Church  ?  A  shadow  is  literally  the  representa- 
tion which  any  solid  body,  interposing  between  the  sun,  or  light,  and  another 
body  makes  of  itself.  Christ,  and  God  in  Him,  are  the  shadow  and  protection 
of  the  Church.  But  the  Church  of  God  seems  to  be  the  shadow  meant  in  the 
text,  to  which  those  who  dwell  under  the  shade  of  the  same  return,  2.  Their 
revival  on  their  having  returned,  and  being  under  his  shadow.  This  is  described 
as  the  growth  of  corn.  Com,  in  this  metaphor,  includes  wheat,  barley,  oats, 
rye,  &c.  3.  Set  forth  the  growth  of  these  converts,  thus  returned  to  the  Church, 
who,  being  received  into  it,  and  protected  by  it,  and  being  hereby  imder  the 
shadow  of  the  same,  "  are  revived  as  the  corn,  and  grow  as  the  vine."  4.  The 
spiritual  fragrancy  of  those  who  thus  return  to  the  Lord.  "  The  scent,  or 
memorial  (see  margin),  shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon."  Thus  we  have  the 
Church  of  Christ  in  the  open,  visible  state  in  which  she  will  shine  forth  ia 
all  her  gifts  and  graces.     (Samuel  Eyles  Pierce.) 

Ver.  8.  Ephraim  shall  say,  what   have    I   to    do    any  more    with    idols. — 

Joined  to  idols  .-—Compare  this  account  of  Ephraim  with  that  given  in  chap.  iv.  17. 
How  is  this  surprising  change  to  be  accounted  for  ?     I.  A  sinner  rN  his  natural 
STATE  IS  JOINED  TO  IDOLS.     Herein  consisteth  the  essence  of  man's  apostasy, 
i8 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

Something  that  is  not  God  is  the  supreme  object  of  his  love,  and  possesseth  that 
place  in  his  heart  which  is  due  only  to  the  living  and  true  God.  This  world, 
the  things  of  the  world,  its  riches  and  pleasures  and  honours,  are  the  great  rivals 
of  God  which,  ever  since  the  fatal  apostasy,  have  usurped  the  throne  ofthe  human 
heart.  This  present  world,  in  one  shape  or  other,  is  loved  and  served  in  preference 
to  God  by  every  man,  without  exception,  who  hath  no  other  principle  of  life 
than  what  he  derived  from  the  first  Adam.  11.  To  skfabatb  a  smKSB  tbom 
HIS  IDOLS  MUST  BE  THi  PEOUIJAB  WOBK  OF  GoD  HiMSELF.  The  natural  man 
may  change  the  object  of  his  devotion ;  but  he  will  only  turn  from  one  idol  to 
another.  He  stops  short  of  God.  All  the  objects  of  his  pursuit  belong  to  the 
present  state  of  things.  The  conversion  of  a  sinner  is  in  Scripture  represented 
as  the  effect  of  omnipotent  creating  power.  It  is  called  "  a  new  creation,"  a 
being  "  born  again,"  "  a  resurrection,"  a  "  passing  from  death  to  life."  The 
apostate  creature  is  really  dead,  in  the  truest  and  most  important  sense  of  the 
word.  m.  How  DOBS  God  aocomfush  this  woek  T  By  the  discovery  and 
application  of  His  pardoning  mercy  and  sanctifying  grace.  Fear  is  the  immediate 
consequence  of  guilt,  which  soon  degenerates  into  hatred,  or  that  enmity  against 
God  which  is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  carnal  mind.  The  report 
of  God's  pardoning  mercy  presents  him  in  a  light  so  suited  to  the  necessities  of 
the  apostate  creature  that,  in  proportion  as  it  is  believed,  the  sinner  is  encouraged 
to  look  to  Him  with  hope.  Then  how  powerful  must  the  actual  experience 
of  such  pardoning  mercy  be.     IV.  These  words  of  Efhbaim  wnx  be  adopted 

BY  ALL  TTPON  WHOM  GOD  HATH  BEEN  PLEASED  TO  CONFEB  HiS  PABDOKING  MEBOY. 

By  this  means  alone  can  the  sinner  be  separated  from  idols.  Learn — 1.  How 
to  account  for  that  idolatry  which  is  so  prevalent  in  the  world.  2.  That  nothing 
can  avail  for  the  cure  of  this  idolatry  which  doth  not  relieve  from  the  guilt  of 
sin  and  vanquish  the  tormenting  fear  of  wrath,  by  representing  God  in  a  light 
wherein  we  can  behold  Him  with  pleasure.  3  The  importance  and  use  of  faith 
in  Christ.  (R.  Walk&r.)  Some  of  our  idols : — When  the  Holy  Spirit  comes 
into  any  heart  He  drives  out  the  buyers  and  sellers.  If  you  have  received  the 
Spirit  you  will  be  crying  now  in  your  heart :  Lord,  take  these  things  hence  ;  what 
have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  Some  of  the  idols  to  be  cast  away  are — 1.  Self- 
righteousness.  The  largest  idol  of  the  human  heart — the  idol  which  man  loves 
most  and  God  hates  most.  2.  Darling  sins.  Every  man  has  his  darling  sins. 
Dash  down  family  idols,  and  secret  idols  of  your  own  heart.  3.  Unlawful  attach- 
ments. There  is  not  a  more  fruitful  source  of  sin  and  misery  than  this.  4.  Ministers. 
It  is  right  to  love  them,  but  beware  of  making  idols  of  them.  5.  Earthly  pleasures. 
This  is  a  smiling,  dazzling  idoL  Lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God. 
Sometimes  it  is  a  gross  idol.  6.  Money.  You  must  not  love  money.  You 
must  be  more  open-hearted,  more  open-handed.  7.  Fear  of  man.  Grim  idol ! 
Many  souls  has  he  devoured.  His  eyes  are  full  of  hatred  to  Christ's  disciples. 
This  keeps  some  of  you  from  secret  prayer,  from  worshipping  God  in  your  family, 
from  going  to  lay  your  case  before  ministers,  from  openly  confessing  Christ. 
(R.  M.  M  Cheyne.)  Turnings  in  life  : — This  is  a  touching  delineation  of  true 
repentance,  not  the  less  applicable  to  us  in  our  turning  to  Goof  because  it  describes 
the  repentance  of  a  nation,  not  of  an  individual,or  because  it  was  written  thousands 
of  years  ago.  Israel  and  Judah  were  at  this  time  in  a  miserable  condition.  The 
form  imder  which  the  prophet  presents  the  lesson  he  would  teach  his  i)eople  is 
very  curious.  He  was  directed  to  take  a  wife ;  she  was  faithless  to  him,  and 
fell  lower  and  lower  in  infidelity  and  infamy.  In  his  own  distracted  home-life 
the  prophet  is  taught  to  see  a  parable  of  the  state  of  his  country.  The  words 
of  the  text  are  spoken  partly  by  returning  and  repentant  Israel,  and  partly  by 
God.  Ephraim  exclaims,  "What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols?"  The 
response  of  God  is,  "  I  have  heard  him,  and  observed  him."  1.  The  recoil  and 
disgust  of  Ephraim  when  he  remembers  his  past  idolatries.  Idolatry  in  the 
Bible  is  always  associated  with  moral  debasement.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the 
idol  should  be  an  image  of  wood  or  stone.  It  may  be  money,  position,  a  splendid 
establishment,  or  aesthetic  feeling ;  it  may  be  senseless  parsimony,  or  drink, 
or  licentiousness.  And  sooner  or  later  there  comes  a  sense  of  debasement,  a 
wonder  that  we  could  have  brought  ourselves  so  low.  If  we  have  ever  known 
true  repentance,  we  must  have  known  also  that  feeling  which  is  of  its  very  essence, 
— "  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  To  hate  our  idol,  even  though 
we  confess  its  power  over  our  souls,  is  at  least  an  advance,  the  beginning  of  spiritual 
life.     But  by  one  manly  effort  to  say, — "  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with 


CHAP.  XIV.]  BOSEA.  275 

idols  ?  "  and  to  lay  our  heart's  allegiance  and  love  and  reverence  before  Him 
who  deserves  it  and  asks  it,  this  is  repentance  or  change  of  mind,  this  is  to  pass 
from  death  unto  life.  2.  But  that  is  a  tremendous  revolution.  Such  a  resolve 
demands  the  very  highest  form  of  moral  courage.  The  spell  of  our  false  gods 
does  not  withdraw  itself  all  at  once.  But  God  is  not  unaware  of  the  struggle 
in  which  you  are  engaged.  And  to  returning  Ephraim  His  loving  response  is, 
"  I  have  heard  him  and  observed  him."  Our  warfare  is  so  feeble  because  we 
do  not  believe  that  God  is  witnessing  and  approving  and  aiding  us.  It  is  well 
to  hear  Ephraim  recognising  his  own  weakness  in  the  words,  "  I  am  like  a  green 
fir-tree."  "  I  do  not  think  I  am  a  giant  of  the  forest ;  I  know  I  am  but  a  slight 
and  delicate  sapling."  Then  comes  the  response  of  God,  deepening  Ephraim's 
humility  and  trust,  "  From  Me  is  thy  fruit  found."  Tlie  great  spiritual  need 
of  our  souls  is  to  trust  God  more  perfectly,  to  lay  the  full  weight  of  our  spiritual 
being  on  His  promises  and  His  character  ;  not  to  trust  Him  a  little,  and  ourselves 
much,  but  to  say  out  of  the  fulness  of  our  hearts,  "  All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  Thee." 
Such  trust  means  strength,  not  weakness.  It  is  manly ;  it  is  truthful ;  it  is 
self-respecting.  (J.  A.  Jacob,  M.A.)  True  penitents : — I.  The  langxjagb 
AND  CHARACTER  OF  TRUE  PENITENTS.  Godly  sorrow  foF  sin  is  always  fovmd 
when  sin  is  perceived  in  its  pollution  and  native  deformity.  The  language,  "  What 
have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  is  the  language  of  confession :  a  sincere 
acknowledgment  of  sin  committed  against  God.  Unless  the  sinner  confess  his 
Bins  unto  God  he  cannot  entertain  the  least  degree  of  hope  that  they  will  be 
forgiven.  But  this  sorrow  is  not  that  godly  sorrow  which  issues  in  repentance 
unto  salvation,  unless  it  has  respect  to  Him  who  was  made  a  sin-offering  for  us. 
Godly  sorrow  is  the  gift  of  God.  It  is  the  effect  of  His  Spirit  brooding  on  the  heart, 
softening  and  melting  it.  A  constituent  part  of  true  repentance  is  faith  in  the 
Saviour  of  sinners.  It  implies  also  a  steadfast  determination  to  break  away  from 
idols,  to  cast  them  off.  The  idols  of  the  heart  are  to  be  treated  as  heathen  should 
treat  their  idols  of  wood  and  stone.     But  this  costs  us  supreme  difficulty.    II.  God's 

DISPOSITION  TOWARDS  SUCH  AS  CALL  UPON  HiM  IN  PENITENTIAL  PRAYER.       1.  His 

attentive  observation.  The  words  of  this  passage  depict  the  notice  which  God 
takes  of  those  who  have  any  spark  of  generous  indignation  against  themselves. 
The  ears  of  the  Almighty  are  open  to  the  very  first  words  which  betoken  humiliation 
and  penitence.  2.  His  favourable  mind  towards  them.  He  regards  them  with 
a  placable  mind,  as  well  as  a  favourable  eye.  If  there  is  any  one  truth  to  which 
we  should  cling  with  the  greatest  tenacity  it  is  surely  this,  the  favourable  dis- 
position of  God  towards  returning  penitents.  3.  He  is  a  shadow  of  protection 
for  those  who  repair  to  Him  in  penitence  and  faith.  "  I  am  a  green  fir-tree." 
He  will  shield  and  defend  them  from  the  fiery  darts  of  Satan,  from  their  own 
clamorous  lusts,  and  from  the  depraved  examples  of  the  world.     HI.  Fruit 

PROCEEDING  FROM  THE  RELATION  INTO  WEQCH  THE  TRULY  PENITENT  ARE  BROUGHT 

WITH  God.  1.  What  is  to  be  deemed  "  fruit."  The  worth  of  a  tree  consists 
in  its  bringing  forth  the  fruit  which  is  proper  to  its  nature.  The  fruit  differs 
according  to  the  kind  of  the  tree.  God's  people  are  called  "  trees  of  righteousness." 
They  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  2.  This  fruit  is  produced  by  the  grace 
of  God  working  in  those  who  are  in  union  with  Christ,  3.  This  fruit  is  found 
in  all  who  are  truly  turned  to  God,  truly  converted  to  God.  Faith  is  lifeless 
and  dead  if  it  produce  no  fruit.  There  must  be  life  and  reality  in  our  religion 
if  we  would  glorify  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  {H.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.) 
Ephraim  forsaking  idols  : — Here  are  two  voices — first,  the  penitent  voice  of  the 
returning  wanderer,  then  the  welcoming  answer  of  the  Father.  Here  is  a  wonderful 
expression  of  the  perfect  simplicity  of  a  true  return  to  Grod.  "  What  have  I 
to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  That  is  aU  !  No  paroxysms  of  grief,  no  agonies 
of  repentance,  no  prescription  of  so  much  sorrow,  so  much  grief,  for  so  much 
sin ;  no  long,  tedious  process,  but,  like  the  finger  put  upon  the  key  here,  the 
sound  yonder.  Look  at  the  answer,  the  echo  of  this  confession  which  comes 
from  heaven  :  it  is  the  welcoming  voice  of  the  Father,  "  I  hear  him,  and  observe 
him."     Note  how  instantaneously  that  Divine  ear,  strong  enough  to  hear  the 

frass  grow,  fine  enough  to  hear  the  first  faint  shootings  of  the  new  life  in  a  man's 
eart,  catches  the  sound  that  is  inaudible  to  all  besides,  and  as  soon  as  the  word 
comes  from  the  pale  penitent  lip  of  Ephraim  the  answer  comes  from  God.  Obser- 
vation is  here  used  in  a  good  sense  :  watching  as  a  nurse  watches  a  feeble  child. 
Then  comes  a  singular  metaphor.  "  I  am  like  a  green  cyprus-tree."  The  cyprua 
is  an  evergreen.     So  God  means,  I  am  unchanged  amidst  the  changing  seasons. 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

unaffected  by  all  the  change.  To  the  prophet  this  tree,  with  its  wealth  of  con- 
tinual shadow,  was  an  emblem  of  an  unchanging  blessing  and  protection.  There 
is  another  possible  association  in  these  words — ^fanciful  but  beautiful — for  which 
I  am  indebted  to  an  old  Jewish  rabbi  and  commentator.  He  says  a  cyprus-tree 
bends  down,  and  anybody  that  has  seen  one  knows  that  its  shelves  of  leafage 
do  droop  and  come  down  near  to  the  ground  ;  that  a  man  may  lift  up  his  hand 
and  grasp  the  branches.  There  is  an  old  legend  that  the  boughs  of  the  tree  of 
life  used  to  droop  of  themselves  to  the  level  of  Adam's  hand  when  he  was  pure 
and  good.  And  when  he  had  sinned  and  fallen  they  lifted  themselves  above 
his  reach.  Tliis  metaphor,  then,  may  hint  the  condescension  of  the  great  loving 
Father,  who  stoops  down  from  heaven  in  order  that  He  may  bring  Himself  within 
our  reach.  If  you  take  these  three  points,  unchangeableness,  protection,  con- 
descension, you  exhaust  the  force  of  this  lovely  emblem.  And  so  it  all  comes 
to  this  :  the  humblest  voice  of  conscious  unworthiness  and  lowly  resolve  to  forsake 
evil,  though  it  be  whispered  only  in  the  very  depths  of  the  heart,  finds  its  way 
into  the  ears  of  the  merciful  Father,  and  brings  down  the  immediate  answer, 
the  benediction  of  His  shadowing  love  and  perpetual  presence,  and  the  fulness 
of  fruit,  which  He  alone  can  bestow.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Portraiture  of  a 
Christian : — The  text  exhibits  the  temper  of  all  converted  people  towards  God. 
Converted  men  forsake  their  idols.  The  Christian  knows  that  everything  becomes 
an  idol  to  a  man  which  occupies  more  of  his  thoughts,  his  time,  his  care,  his 
desires,  and  his  pursuit  than  God  and  His  glory.  In  setting  before  you  the 
temper  and  characteristics  of  a  child  of  God,  our  attention  must  be  directed  before 
all  things  to  its  principles,  which  is  that  of  universal  conformity  to  the  image  of 
Jesus  Christ.  If  it  be  said  that  the  character  of  our  blessed  Lord  is  too  grand 
and  too  holy  for  our  imitation,  the  excuse  may  be  met  by  saying,  that  imitation 
does  not  mean  perfection.  It  is  by  the  perpetual  earnest  study  of  the  character 
of  Christ  that  we  are  first  of  all  brought  to  love,  and  afterwards  impelled  to 
imitation.  The  more  we  study  Christ,  the  more  we  must  love  Him  ;  and  the 
more  we  love  Him,  the  more  we  shall  assuredly  copy  His  features.  The  Christian's 
temper  of  heart  and  mind  is,  of  covnse,  displayed  in  the  two  great  duties  of  life 
— 1.  That  which  concerns  his  Maker.  2.  That  which  concerns  his  neighbour.  With 
the  former  of  these  only  are  we  now  engaged.  In  casting  away  the  idols  of  his 
heart  and  life,  the  Christian,  like  Epliraim,  serves,  loves,  and  acknowledges  no 
other  but  God.  The  first  thing  in  the  character  of  the  child  of  God  is  holy  fear. 
The  next  is  obedience.  How  many  idols  are  overthrown  by  obedience !  Then 
comes  gratitude,  which  makes  a  man  seek  all  occasions  of  showing  love  and  honour 
to  his  benefactor.  Then  trust.  This  is  ever  a  peculiar  mark  of  the  Christian's 
temper  towards  God.  This  trust  keeps  the  Christian  watching,  striving,  praying, 
atid  expecting.  Then  comes  supreme  desire  for  the  glory  of  God,  which  over- 
t "rows  the  great  idol  of  selfishness.  This  temper  is  very  necessary  to  prevent 
many  deceptions  of  the  heart.  It  is  of  all  things  most  difficult  to  keep  the  motives 
pure ;  and  without  pure  motives  how  barren  and  contemptible  is  our  abstinence 
from  evil  and  our  practice  of  good.  Purity  is  the  temper  of  right  motives.  Ptirity 
of  heart  is  the  most  eminent  and  distinguished  temper  in  the  circuit  of  the  Christian 
graces.  This  temper  brings  with  it  the  love  of  God.  Love  is  the  spring  that 
moves  all  the  wheels.  It  is  that  delight  in  God  which  makes  us  choose  Him 
above  all  things.  There  is  one  more  characteristic  of  the  child  of  God — a  constant 
endeavour  to  draw  nigh  to  Him.  For  this  cause  the  Christian  loves  and  values 
the  ordinances  of  religion.  He  prizes  them  as  gracious  means  whereby  he  is 
brought  into  that  nearer  fellowship  with  God  after  which  he  is  aspiring.  Humility 
forms  the  crowning  feature  in  the  Christian's  temper  towards  God.  It  is  the 
seeing  oiu-  own  proper  position  before  God.  {W.  Harrison,  M.A.)  Ephraim 
renouncing  his  idols  : — The  necessity  and  power  of  Divine  influence  to  regenerate 
the  heart  is  a  truth  in  which  all  Christians  will  agree  who  make  the  Word  of 
God  their  sole  guide.  This  doctrine  receives  confirmation  from  the  history  of 
Ephraim.  Two  things.  Ephraim's  abandonment  of  idols  ;  and  God's  reception 
of  him.  I.  The  renunciation.  Here  is — 1.  The  language  of  confession.  The 
strong  aversion  he  expresses  is  a  virtual  admission  of  his  precious  attachment. 
The  state  of  Ephraim  in  his  degeneracy  is  a  correct  picture  of  the  entire  family 
of  man  in  their  iixeligious  condition.  2.  The  language  of  detestation.  The 
predominating  sin  of  Israel  was  the  worship  of  idols.  With  us  the  sin  which 
has  been  most  prevalent  lies  the  heaviest  on  the  conscience,  and  becomes  the 
object  of  the  most  xmqualified  indignation.     3.  Ephraim  resolved  on  the  abandon- 


CHAP.  XIV.]  BOSEA.  277 

ment  of  his  idols.  There  is  a  noble  promptitude  in  this  pions  determination. 
II.  Thb  beoeption.  1.  The  Divine  attention.  "  I  have  heard  him."  2.  The 
Divine  observation.  "  I  have  observed  him."  3.  The  Divine  protection.  "  I 
am  like  a  green  fir-tree,"  which  affords  grateful  shade  and  security  to  the 
traveller.  It  conveys  the  ideas  of  repose,  refreshment,  safety.  4.  Fruitfulness 
is  provided  for.  This  extends  the  previous  image.  Reference  probably  is  to 
the  fruit  which  the  penitent  bears  after  conversion  to  God.  This  subject  is  a 
check  to  despondency.  No  true  penitent  has  cause  for  despair.  (Anon.)  Idols 
abandoned : — 1.  What  men  pursue,  before  conversion,  are  idols,  i.e.  things  which 
give  trouble.  2.  When  the  grace  of  the  Gospel  is  received  into  the  heart  it  divorces 
the  sinner  from  his  sins.  3.  The  language  of  a  penitent  renouncing  his  sins  is 
most  pleasing  to  Grod.  4.  Converts  shall  find  that  happiness  in  (3irist  which 
idols  offered,  but  gave  not.  5.  Whatever  good  we  do  and  enjoy  is  in  and  from 
Jesus  Christ.  6.  True  wisdom  is  to  know  and  understand  God's  Word,  in  its 
threatenings  and  in  its  promises.  {H.  Foster.)  Giving  up  idols  : — Ephraim 
does  not  give  up  his  idols  without  a  reason.  He  says,  I  have  tried  you,  and  you 
are  vain ;  I  have  leaned  upon  you,  and  you  are  broken  staves ;  I  have  consulted 
you,  and  you  had  no  answer  ;  I  have  looked  to  you,  but  you  never  turned  a  kind 
eye  upon  me.  The  great  apostle  says,  "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from 
idols  "  ;  the  old  Scotch  version  says,  "  Wee  bairns,  keep  yourselves  frae  dolls  "  ; 
the  meaning  is  the  same.  I  like  the  qualntness  of  the  Scotch  version.  There 
is  a  caressing  tenderness  in  that  gruff  old  tone  ;  listen  to  it ;  it  is  the  kind  of 
tone  that  grows  upon  the  heart.  At  first  it  is  very  singular,  and  not  wholly  desirable, 
but  there  is  in  it  a  latent  music  ;  if  you  say  the  words  over  and  over  again  you 
will  come  to  like  them.  The  time  is  on  the  surface ;  open  it,  and  you  find  eternity. 
(Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  True  repentance  : — I.  The  evidence  of  a  true  repent- 
ance. Entire  renunciation  of  idolatry.  The  repentant  sinner  is  led  to  confess 
the  folly  and  sin  of  his  empty  pursuits  (Rom.  vi.  21).  Sinful  pleasures  (1  Cor.  vi. 
9-11).  False  confidences :  e.g.,  self-righteousness.  Unconditional  mercy,  &c. 
And  to  determine  to  renounce  them.  This  gracious  melting  of  heart  is  the  Lord's 
doing.  Jesus  is  exalted  to  give  repentance  (Acts  v.  31).  It  is  produced  here 
as  the  blessed  fruit  of  sanctified  afflictions.  Illus. — Manasseh.  Prodigal.  II.  Tub 
NOTICE  WHICH  GoD  TAKES  OF  A  REPENTANT  SINNER.  "  He  listens  to  his  moauings  " 
(Job  xxxiii.  27).  He  watches  for  his  return.  His  eye  is  upon  the  repentant  sinner 
when  least  he  thinks  so.  He  observes  him.  III.  The  gracious  encourage- 
ment WHICH  God  gives  to  him.  1.  A  promise  of  security.  Shadow  from  the 
heat.  Shelter  from  the  storm.  2.  An  assurance  of  supply.  Fruits  of  comfort 
derived  from  God.  Fruits  of  grace  produced  by  God's  help.  (John  D.  Lowe,  M.A.) 
The  pious  determination  of  the  true  penitent : — Whatever  we  set  our  affections 
upon,  in  preference  to  God,  is  an  idol ;  and  grace  will  teach  us  to  renounce  it. 
Every  man  in  an  impenitent  state  seeks  his  happiness  in  some  forbidden  and  sinful 
enjoyment.  He  is  therefore  an  idolater.  We  have  here — I.  A  confession 
of  guilt.  "  Any  more  "  implies  that  in  the  past  he  had  been  concerned  with 
idols.  II.  A  DETERMINATION  TO  RENOUNCE  SINS.  Implied  in  the  language 
taken  form  as  an  interrogation.  III.  The  determination  is  a  humble  one, 
FORMED  IN  RELIANCE  ON  God's  HEAVENLY  GRACE.  Reasous  for  renunciation  of 
sin  are — 1.  Penitent  sees  something  of  the  real  nature  and  evil  of  it.  2.  Penitent 
has  had  experience  of  the  vanity  and  unprofitableness  of  all  sinful  pleasures  and 
pursuits.  3.  Penitent  has  already  experienced  some,  and  expects  more  of,  solid 
and  permanent  happiness.  4.  A  principle  of  love  and  gratitude  to  God  in  the 
penitent's  heart  cannot  but  operate  to  make  him  abhor  and  renounce  all  iniquity. 
5.  Every  true  penitent  has  the  strongest  reason  to  express  and  maintain  the 
most  determined  disavowal  of  all  iniquity,  in  consequence  of  having  surrendered 
himself  to  God,  and  in  solemn  covenant  devoted  himself  to  His  service.  And 
this  is  true  religion.  This  is  genuine  repentance.  All  that  comes  short  of  this 
is  but  vanity  and  deception.  {S.  Knight,  M.A.)  Ephraim  and  his  idols: — 
The  statement  here  is,  that  Ephraim  shall  and  will  go  on  in  abominating  idols, 
be  constant  in  his  former  resolution.  Under  the  term  "  idols  "  gather — 1.  False 
doctrine,  which  is  the  foundation  of  idolatry.  2.  Idols  themselves.  3.  Idolatry, 
which  they  tend  to.  4.  Idolaters.  Idolatry  frameth  base  conceits  of  God.  Con- 
sider the  opposition  between  any  representation  of  God,  and  God.  Because 
God  is  a  jealous  God,  He  will  not  give  His  glory  to  another.  Unconverted  persons 
are  prone  to  idolatry;  to  set  up  their  own  wits  and  wills,  instead  of  God's.  Some 
commit  this  great  sin  of  idolatry  by  trusting  to  the  outward  performances  and 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xiv. 

tasks  of  religion.  Consider  God's  hatred  unto  all  sorts  of  idolaters;  for  He 
accounts  such  to  hate  Him,  and  so  accordingly  punishes  them.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
God  corroborates  Ephraim's  promise  : — There  are  two  causes  of  repentance,  one 
is  fear,  the  other  is  love.  That  repentance  which  owes  its  existence  to  fear  is 
to  be  repented  of,  but  that  which  originates  in  love  tends  to  the  soul's  salvation, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  Repentance  which  owes  its  existence  to  love  is 
distinguished  by  the  infallible  effects  of  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit.  Penitents, 
from  the  effects  of  redeeming  love,  endeavour  to  keep  God's  commandments. 
The  truly  penitent  is  never  left  to  the  treachery  of  self-dependence.  .  .  .  The 
text  is  a  ratification  or  corroboration  of  the  terms  of  the  covenant  which  Israel 
promises  to  fulfil.  Unless  the  Almighty  confirms  our  promises  and  resolves 
our  own  determination  would  be  of  no  avail.  We  learn  the  confidence  of  the 
truly  penitent  in  God's  mercy.  The  truly  penitent  ascribes  all  to  the  great  First 
Cause.  And  the  truly  penitent  loses  no  time  to  make  a  firm  stand  against  his 
former  sins.  The  words  also  express  that  the  penitent  does  not  cavil  or  reason 
as  to  the  effect  his  conversion  might  have  upon  his  worldly  prospects.  Genuine 
repentance  affords  comfort  in  every  condition  of  life.     (Moses  Margoliovth,  B.A). 

Ver.  9.  Wbo  is  wise,  and  he  shall  understand  these  things? — Who  is  xoisef 
— There  must  be  prudence  and  wisdom  before  we  can  imderstand  Divine 
truths ;  there  must  be  an  illumination  within.  A  man  may  know  whether  he 
be  prudent  and  wise  by  his  relishing  of  Divine  truths,  for  otherwise  he  is  not 
wise  and  prudent  in  these  things  which  are  the  main.  The  prophet  now  comes 
to  shew  and  defend  the  equity  of  God's  ways,  how  crooked  soever  they  seem 
to  flesh  and  blood.  By  "  ways  "  he  understandeth  the  whole  law  and  Grospel, 
the  whole  Word  of  God ;  which  he  calleth  right,  not  only  because  they  are 
righteous  in  themselves,  but  because  they  reform  whatsoever  is  amiss  in  us,  and 
rectify  us ;  and  work  whatsoever  is  needful  for  our  good  and  salvation.  God's 
ways  are  those  wherein  He  walks  to  us :  the  ways  that  He  prescribes  us  to  walk 
in ;  and  our  ways  as  they  are  comformable  to  His.  "  The  ways  of  the  Lord 
are  right  "  ;  as  they  agree  to  that  which  is  right  or  straight ;  and  right  likewise, 
because  they  lead  directly  to  a  right  end.  Observe  that  man  is  not  a  prescriber 
of  his  own  way,  and  that  no  creature's  will  is  a  rule.  The  Word  of  the  Lord 
is  every  way  i)erfect,  and  brings  us  to  perfection.  The  best  way  to  come  to  a 
good  and  right  end  is  to  take  God's  ways.  Shew  the  divers  effects  these  right 
ways  of  God  have  in  two  sorts  of  people,  the  godly  and  the  wicked.  L  The  just 
shall  walk  in  them.  They  are  just  who  give  to  every  one  their  due,  and  give 
God  His  due.  They  are  such  as  have  respect  unto  all  God's  commandments. 
They  do  things  to  a  good  end,  even  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  man.  They 
desire  to  grow  in  grace  and  they  love  the  brethren.  In  the  worst  times,  God 
will  have  always  a  people  that  shall  justify  wisdom.  Men  must  have  spiritual 
life,  and  be  just,  before  they  can  walk.  For  our  encouragement  to  walk  in  God's 
ways,  know  that  they  are  the  most  safe  ways  of  all ;  they  are  the  most  pleasant, 
and  they  are  the  cleanest  and  holiest.  "  The  transgressors  shall  fall  therein." 
The  same  word  which  is  a  word  of  life  and  salvation  to  the  godly  is  an  occasion 
of  sin  and  perdition  unto  the  wicked.  {R.  Sibbes.)  Who  are  the  truly  wise 
and  pruderU  ? — I.  Thb  chakactee  of  thb  persons  who  would  give  heed  to 

THE  WOEDS   OF  THIS  PEOPHBCY,   AND   TO  THESE   DOCTEINES.      1.    What   does   the 

Spirit  mean  by  "  wise  "  ?  Wisdom  is  described  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  In 
it  wisdom  calls,  reproves,  and  has  a  spirit  to  pour  out,  actions  and  attributes 
which  belong  only  to  the  very  and  eternal  God.  In  it  wisdom  is  said  to  be  the 
tource  of  royal  and  judicial  authority.  It  is  described  as  eternal.  It  is  said 
to  have  a  temple  and  sacrifices.  It  promises  to  do  that  which  the  Almighty 
alone  can  do.  It  threatens  to  execute  judgment  upon  those  who  refvise  to  accept 
the  proffered  mercy.  Then  who  else  can  wisdom  be  but  the  Lord  of  Hosts  ? 
"  Wise  "  must  mean  those  who  make  the  knowledge  of  God  their  chief  study 
and  pursuit.  They  are  wise  whose  heart,  mind,  and  soul  are  pervaded  by  wisdom. 
2.  What  does  the  Spirit  mean  by  "  prudent "  ?  The  original  means,  "  an  under- 
standing one,"  or  a  sound  reasoner."  So  the  real  meaning  of  the  expression 
differs  considerably  from  the  apparent  one.  The  Spirit  means  an  individual 
who,  by  diligent  searching  and  study  of  God's  dispensations  and  providential 
Tisitations,  arrives  at  accurate  conclusions  with  reference  to  the  Almighty's 
promises  and  threats ;  to  the  consequences  of  obedience  and  disobedience ;  to 
the  effects  of  impenitence  and  repentance,     A  prudent  man,  in  Scripture,  but 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOSEA.  279 

especially  in  this  place,  means  a  knowing  individual  in  the  deep  mysteries  of 
God's  holy  Word.  II.  The  nature  of  the  doctrines  taught.  "  The  ways 
of  the  Lord  are  right."  This  is  an  expression  for  true  religion  which  binds  and 
knits  man  to  God.  True  religion  is  irresistible.  What  can  be  more  "  reason- 
able "  than  that  He  who  made  all  things  for  Himself  should  demand  us  to  Him- 
self? The  ways  of  the  Lord  "are  right,"  with  regard  to  their  conformity  to 
the  holy  nature  and  wiU  of  God,  with  regard  to  the  peace  which  they  confer. 
III.  The  double  use  made  of  the  ways  of  the  Lord  by  different  parties. 
"  The  just  shall  walk  in  them  :  the  transgressors  shall  fall  therein."  We  never 
make  the  Word  of  the  Lord  oiu*  rule  of  life  whereby  to  walk,  until  we  are  made 
righteous ;  tmtil  the  sun  of  righteousness  hath  shone  in  our  hearts,  and  illum- 
ined our  souls.  But  how  fearful  is  the  doom  of  those  who  have  despised  the 
wisdom  and  prudence  which  the  prophet  recommended  for  their  Imowledge 
and  understanding.  The  same  Being  who  helps  forward  the  just  on  their  way, 
and  removes  every  impediment  from  their  path,  becomes  the  insurmountable 
obstruction  in  the  way  of  transgressors.  Many  are  the  things  in  the  Word  of 
God  at  which  corrupt  hearts  are  apt  to  stumble.  The  profoundness  and  incom- 
prehensibleness  of  some  of  its  mysterious  doctrines,  instead  of  humbling  the  finite 
mind  and  bringing  it  into  subjection  to  the  infinite,  puffs  up  with  pride  and 
arrogance  the  depraved  and  scanty  reason,  and  makes  it  exalt  itself  against 
Him  who  is  exalted  above  all.  The  sanctity  and  strictness  of  God's  ways  make 
many  an  unholy  temper  and  disposition  revolt  against  making  those  ways  their 
choice.  {Moses  Margoliouth,  B.A.)  The  right  ways  of  the  Lord: — Here  the 
prophet  makes  an  application  of  his  subject.  I.  The  import  of  this  question 
OR  APPEAL.  1.  Vain  men  would  fain  be  wise.  The  question  implies  that  the 
number  of  the  wise  and  intelligent  on  these  subjects  was  but  small.  And  those 
who  did  not  understand  such  things  as  the  prophet  had  delivered  did  not  deserve 
the  name  of  wise  and  intelligent,  however  they  might  assume  it  to  themselves. 

I.  The  important  declaration.  "  The  ways  of  the  Lord  are  right."  Need 
not  prove  this.  It  is  a  first  principle  in  religion.  It  is  now  before  us  as  matter 
of  reflection.  III.  The  different  views  of  the  ways  of  God  which  are 
entertained,  and  the  different  effects  produced  thereby.  The  righteous, 
being  taught  of  God,  have  a  proper  and  spiritual  discernment  of  things.  Trans- 
gressors, blinded  by  the  god  of  the  world,  discern  no  spiritual  objects  in  their 
proper  colours.  (S.  Knight,  M.A.)  God's  ways  made  known  unto  the  wise: — 
The  truth  is,  that  men  live  the  chief  part  of  their  lives  without  any  knowledge 
of  their  own  separation  from  the  Lord  ;  they  do  not  understand  that  sin  separates 
the  sinner  from  his  Maker.  I.  Who  are  the  wise  ?  1.  They  are  willing  hearera 
of  God's  truth.  Like  Cornelius  of  old.  2.  Humble  receivers  of  truth.  Like 
the  jailer  at  Philippi.  3.  They  are  careful  thinkers.  Like  Mary,  who  pondered 
things  in  her  heart.     No  others  but  these  can  really  be  spoken  of  as  wise. 

II.  God's  right  ways.  He  has  a  right  to  demand  obedience  on  our  part  ta 
whatever  He  may  please  to  lay  down.  If  we  walk  in  His  ways  we  shall  have 
grace  to  support  us,  and  supply  our  various  wants,  we  shall  have  guidance  in 
the  hour  of  difficulty,  we  shall  have  our  hearts  prepared  for  the  enjoyment  of 
those  pleasures  which  are  at  God's  right  hand  for  evermore.  He  will  give  us 
strength  for  the  day,  and  grace  \mto  the  end.  The  ways  of  the  just  shall  be 
increasingly  clear.  "  The  wicked  shall  fall  therein."  The  ways  are  the  same, 
but  men  receive  them  and  walk  in  them  differently.  That  which  is  really  good 
for  those  who  are  anxious  to  serve  God,  we  are  told  here,  is  turned  into  evil  in 
the  case  of  the  wicked.  (H.  Montagu  ViUiers,  M.A.)  Walking  or  falling 
in  Gods  ways : — In  the  worst  times  God  will  have  always  a  people  that  shall 
justify  wisdom.  Some  are  foolish ;  not  caring  for  the  ways  of  God,  cavilling 
at  them.  But  the  "  just  shall  walk  in  them,"  that  is,  they  take  a  contrary  course 
to  the  world  that  slights  wisdom.  In  ill  times,  let  us  labour  to  justify  truth, 
both  the  truth  of  things  to  be  believed  and  all  just  religious  courses.  1,  Men 
must  have  spiritual  life,  and  be  just,  before  they  can  walk.  Walking  is  an 
action  of  life ;  there  must  be  life  before  there  can  be  walking.  Unless  there  is 
first  spiritual  life  in  the  inward  man  there  wiU  not  be  a  harmony  and  corre- 
spondency betwixt  a  man  and  his  ways.  2.  Because  a  just  man  is  also  a  prudent 
and  wise  man,  he  walks  in  God's  ways.  Spiritual  wisdom  and  prudence  lead 
to  walking  in  obedience.  What  things  doth  this  walking  in  the  ways  of  God 
imply  ?  1.  Perspicuity.  Those  who  walk  in  the  ways  of  God  discern  those 
ways  to  be  God's  ways,  and  discern  them  aright.     2.  Resolution  to  go  on  in  those 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

ways  till  he  come  to  the  end,  though  there  be  never  so  much  opposition.  How 
shall  we  know  whether  we  go  on  in  this  way  or  not  ?  1.  When  earthly  profits 
and  pleasures  seem  little,  and  heaven  and  heavenly  things  seem  near.  2.  It 
implies  a  uniform  course  of  life.  3.  He  who  would  walk  in  God's  ways  must 
be  resolute  against  aU  opposition  whatsoever.  The  use  of  this  teaching  may 
be — 1.  Reprehension  unto  those  who  can  talk,  but  not  walk ;  that  have  tongues, 
but  not  feet.  2.  It  is  for  instruction,  to  stir  us  up  to  walk  in  God's  ways.  3.  It 
is  for  consolation.  If  this  be  our  walk,  then  God  will  walk  with  us,  and  the  angels 
of  God  shall  have  charge  of  us,  to  keep  us  in  all  our  ways.  (R.  Sibbea,  D.D.) 
The  cause  and  cure  of  social  evils  : — It  cannot  be  said  that  our  position  as  a  nation 
is  like  that  of  Israel  in  those  days  when  she  was  tottering  to  her  fall.  But  the 
same,  or  very  similar,  evils  to  those  which  proved  the  ruin  of  Israel  exist  among 
us  to  a  deplorable  degree.  Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  prophecy  will  know 
what  I  mean  when  I  say  that  evil  is  with  us  at  the  moth  stage,  not  yet  at  the 
lion  stage  (see  chap.  v. ).  The  moth  stage  is  when  evil  keeps  eating  like  a  canker 
into  the  vitals  of  a  peopl",  but  where  there  is  nothing,  or  very  little,  to  attract 
attention;  no  noise,  nothing  to  alarm.  But  let  the  moth  stage  go  on,  let  cor- 
ruption increase  among  the  people,  and  presently  the  roar  of  a  lion  will  be  heard ; 
there  will  be  tumult  and  commotion,  there  will  be  the  outbreak  of  open  rebellion 
against  the  powers  that  be,  in  heaven  and  on  earth  too.  Hosea  has  it  for  his 
great  object  throughout  to  show  the  cause  and  the  cure  of  all  these  evils.  The 
cause  is  unfaithfulness  to  God,  and  the  cure  is  returning  to  Him  with  the  whole 
heart.  There  is  never  more  vigour  in  Hosea's  tone  than  when,  reminding  of 
the  sin  of  Jehovah,  he  says,  "  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off !  "  Has 
modern  society  no  calf  ?  Does  it  not  make  a  god  of  gold  ?  Is  not  that  "  covetous- 
ness  which  is  idolatry  "  a  national  vice  ?  Israel  had  a  calf  at  Dan  as  well  as 
at  Bethel.  This  may  be  taken  to  represent  the  idol  of  natural  law.  People 
trust  in  the  laws  of  evolution,  working  through  the  struggle  for  existence  to  the 
survival  of  the  fittest.  The  great  effort  of  these  people  is  to  bring  man  and  all 
that  concerns  him  under  the  stern  operation  of  that  law.  What  shall  we  do  ?  A 
•question  much  more  easily  asked  than  answered.  There  are  many  reforms, 
And  these  by  far  the  most  needful  and  far-reaching  in  their  result,  which  can 
■only  be  accomplished  by  the  dififusion  of  a  spirit  of  love  ;  and  this  is  only  possible 
by  a  general  return  of  the  people  to  the  Lord  their  God.  The  humanitarian 
spirit  which  is  shown  by  not  a  few  of  those  who  make  no  profession  of  faith  in 
God  is  much  to  be  commended ;  but  it  never  can  by  its  inherent  force  make 
way  in  society.  To  flow  as  a  fertilising  stream  through  the  waste  places  of 
society,  it  must  take  its  rise  in  the  high  mountains  of  Divine  faith  and  hope  and 
love.  The  nether  springs  of  human  generosity  must  be  fed  by  the  upper  springs 
of  Divine  grace.    (J.  Monro  Oibson,  D.D.) 


INTEODUCTION   TO  JOEL. 

I.  In  what  period  should  Joel's  activity  be  placed  ? — Before  we  can 
get  a  true  idea  of  any  man  who  played  an  important  part  on  the  stage  of  the 
world  in  past  days,  it  is  essential  that  we  should  know  something  of  his  environ- 
ment— what  the  character  of  his  age  was,  who  his  contemporaries  were.  This 
knowledge  is  of  peculiar  value  in  connection  witli  the  prophets  ;  for,  more  than 
anything  else,  they  were  God's  messengers  and  missionaries  to  those  among  whom 
they  lived  and  moved  and  had  their  being.  They  preached  first  to  the  generation 
and  the  epoch  in  which  their  lot  was  cast.  No  doubt  their  words  had  other 
applications,  because  God's  truth,  like  God  from  whom  it  comes,  may  fulfil  itself 
in  many  ways.  But  we  shall  hold  a  very  unnatural  and  a  very  inadequate  theory 
of  prophecy  if  we  think  of  it  as  dealing  solely,  or  even  principally,  with  the  future. 
It  is  the  philosophy  of  history,  unveiling  its  meaning  and  pointing  its  lessons. 
If  the  prophet  had  had  to  do  only  or  mainly  with  the  distant  future,  it  would 
have  mattered  little  to  us  in  what  particular  age  he  chanced  to  live.  Because 
he  was  linked  very  truly  and  vitally  to  his  own  days  and  his  own  people,  it  is 
most  needful  that  we  should  try  to  understand  his  surroundings.  What,  then, 
did  Joel  preach  and  labour  ?  We  cannot  say  that  there  is  anything  like  unanimity 
in  the  reply  to  the  question.  That  he  belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah  and 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem  itself — these  facts  are  admitted  by  all,  and  are  indeed  rendered 
indisputable  by  the  prophet's  frequent  references  to  Zion,  to  the  house  of  Jehovah, 
to  the  porch  and  the  altar,  the  priests  and  the  ministers,  the  meat-offering  and 
the  drink-offering.  His  date,  however,  is  not  so  easily  determined  as  his  home. 
Opinions  have  varied  from  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century  before  Christ  down 
to  the  late  days  of  the  Maccabees.  But,  after  all,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  Joel 
is  among  the  very  oldest  of  the  prophets.  Amos,  himself  one  of  the  first  in  that 
goodly  fellowship,  knew  his  writings  and  loved  them,  and  regarded  their  author 
as  a  teacher,  at  whose  feet  he  was  willing  to  sit  and  listen.  The  herdsman  of 
Tekoa,  to  whose  soul  the  breath  of  the  Spirit  came  impelling  him  to  speak,  opened 
his  prophecy  with  the  awful  declaration  with  which  Joel  had  clo.sed  his — "  The 
Lord  shall  roar  out  of  Zion,  and  utter  His  voice  from  Jerusalem."  Isaiah,  too, 
though  he  was  so  great  and  original,  was  not  ashamed  to  glean  from  the  son  of 
Pethuel  some  of  those  spirit-stirring  thoughts  which  he  uttered  in  the  ears  of 
his  people.'  Evidently  Joel  was  more  ancient  than  these  two.  Something 
may  be  learned,  too,  from  the  silences  of  his  prophecy  as  well  as  from  its  positive 
declarations  ;  for  there  are  significant  omissions  in  his  writings.  He  does  not 
BO  much  as  allude  to  Assyria,  the  terrible  power,  whose  armies,  having  menaced 
"tsrael  often,  at  last  carried  its  tribes  into  captivity,  and  whose  might  and  cruelty 
and  doom  are  frequent  themes  with  the  prophets.  No  dovbt  there  are  inter- 
preters who  find  Assyria  and  its  people  everywhere  latent  under  Joel's  glowing 

*  Note,  for  example,  the  similarity  between  the  thought  and  language  of  Isaiah 
ziii.  and  those  of  JoeL 

iU 


Ir  INTRODUCTION  TO  JOEL. 

language ;  but  they  are  the  exponents,  as  we  shall  see,  of  a  theory  which  is  not 
the  wisest  or  the  best.  Nor  has  our  prophet  anything  to  say  even  of  Syria,  a 
nearer  neighboin*  of  Israel  and  Judah,  with  whom  they  were  often  at  war.  We 
may  conclude  that  its  people  did  not  harass  his  during  the  time  when  he  fulfilled 
his  mission,  else  he  would  surely  have  had  some  message  fiom  God  regarding 
them.  And  so  the  invasion  under  Hazael,  when,  because  King  Joash  had  for- 
gotten the  lessons  which  he  had  learned  from  the  godly  priest  Jehoiada,  and  had 
acted  foolishly,  and  unlike  a  king  of  Jehovah's  holy  nation,  "  the  host  of  Syria 
came  up  against  him  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and  destroyed  all  the  princes  of 
the  people  from  among  the  people,  and  sent  all  the  spoil  of  them  unto  the  kin-j 
of  Damascus," — this  invasion,  so  glorious  for  Syria  but  so  ignominious  for  Judah, 
could  hardly  have  fallen  within  the  years  when  Joel  lived  and  preached.  But 
it  took  place  about  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  before  Christ ;  and  we  are 
constrained  therefore  to  fix  his  age  before  that  time.  Yet  not  very  long  before  ; 
for  he  could  exult  in  the  brilliant  victory  which,  in  the  opening  years  of  this  centurj\ 
Jehoshaphat  had  gained  over  the  forces  that  combined  themselves  against  him 
and  against  his  God  ;  and  could  speak  of  it  as  the  picture  in  miniature  of  a  still 
nobler  triumph  which  the  Lord  would  win  in  the  latter  days.  "  I  will  also  gather 
all  nations,  and  will  bring  them  down  into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  will 
contend  with  them  there  for  My  people  and  for  My  heritage  Israel."  Such  con- 
siderations help  us  to  a  decision — to  this  decision,  that  Joel  prophesied  nearly 
nine  hundred  years  before  the  advent  of  Christ,  perhaps  in  the  days  when  Joash 
was  still  a  child,  and  when  the  kingdom  of  which  he  was  the  nominal  sovereign 
was  managed  by  others  in  his  stead.  For  the  preacher's  counsel  is  not  addressed 
to  any  king,  but  to  the  old  men,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  and  above 
all  to  the  priests,  who  were  the  real  rulers  during  the  regency ;  and  why  should 
he  have  so  much  to  say  to  these  classes,  if  not  because  they  were  more  prominent 
in  his  time  than  the  monarch  himself  ?  The  reign  of  Joash  commenced  about 
877  B.C.,  when  he  was  but  seven  years  of  age  ;  and  in  the  years  just  succeeding 
his  accession  we  may  imagine  Joel  coming  forth  in  the  presence  of  the  people 
to  utter  the  prophecies  of  which  we  have  some  fragments  in  the  book  which  bears 
his  name.  One  other  proof,  confirmatory  of  this  date,  may  be  added.  Names, 
we  know,  were  significant  among  the  Hebrews.  Jewish  fathers  and  mothers 
were  very  careful  what  they  called  their  children.  And  Joel  means  "  Jehovah 
is  God."'  But  that  had  been  the  cry  of  the  Israelites  on  Mount  Carmel,  on  the 
memorable  day  when  Elijah  triumphed  over  the  prophets  of  Baal,  and  slew  them 
with  his  own  hand  until  Kishon  ran  red  with  their  blood.  "  Jehovah,  He  is  the 
God,"  they  exclaimed,  "  Jehovah,  He  is  the  God."  Now,  the  birth  of  Joel, 
if  he  belonged  to  the  period  to  which  I  have  assigned  him,  would  fall  just  about 
the  time  when  on  Carmel  Elijah  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  and  turned  to  flight  the 
armies  of  the  aliens.  Joining  this  link  of  evidence  to  all  the  rest,  have  we  not 
a  chain  comparatively  strong  ? 

II.  Is  Joel's  prophecy  literal  ok  figurative  ? — Does  he  deal  with  the 
present  and  the  actual,  or  rather  with  events  which  were  still  in  the  future,  and 
which  he  depicts  only  in  the  language  of  metaphor  and  imagery  ?  Each  belief 
has  found  its  advocates.  To  all  outward  seeming  he  speaks  of  a  solemn  visitation 
of  God's  providence,  which  lay  heavily  on  the  land  of  Judah  in  his  owti  time. 
Swarm  after  swarm  of  locusts  had  spread  over  the  country,  and  had  perTuitted 
no  green  thing  to  escape  them.  Matters  were  sad  enough,  indeed,  before  they 
showed  themselves.  Long-continued  drought  had  robbed  the  fields  of  their 
wonted  fertility.  The  vine  was  dried  up,  and  the  fig-tree  languished  ;  the  pome- 
granate and  the  palm  and  the  apple  were  withered  ;  the  herds  of  cattle  were 
perplexed  because  they  had  no  pasture  ;  all  joy  was  gone  fion\  the  sons  of  men. 
But  when  the  locusts  appeared  the  crowning  desolation  came.  How  graphically 
and  vividly  Joel  describes  these  locusts  !  Joel,  we  shall  acknowledge,  had  mani- 
festly an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  natirral  history'  of  the  locust.  Then, 
too,  in  what  splendid  coloiu-s  he  paints  the  invasion  of  the  insect-host !  He 
speaks  of  the  shadow  which  their  number  throw  over  the  land — a  shadow  resem- 
bling that  of  the  dim,  grey  twilight  of  "  the  morning  spread  upon  the  mountains." 
He  tells  how  they  advance  ;  "  like  horsemen  do  they  come  "  ;  "  like  the  noise 
of  chariots  they  leap  upon  the  tops  of  the  hills  "  ;  "  like  the  noise  of  a  flame  of 
fire  that  devoureth  the  stubble  "  ;  "  as  a  strong  people  set  in  battle  array."  They 
are  well  disciplined,  for  Joel  can  confirm  from  his  own  observation  the  scientifio 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JOEL. 


truth  which  Rabbi  Agur  imparted  to  his  disciples,  Ithiel  and  Ucal — the  truth 
that,  though  the  locusts  have  no  king,  yet  they  go  forth  by  ordered  bands.  "  They 
march  every  one  on  his  ways,"  he  assures  us  ;  "  they  do  not  break  their  ranks, 
neither  does  one  thrust  another."  Before  their  onset  the  people  are  powerless. 
*'  They  run  to  and  fro  in  the  streets  "  ;  "  they  mount  the  wall "  ;  "  they  climb 
up  upon  the  houses  "  ;  "  they  go  in  at  the  windows  like  a  thief."  How,  indeed, 
can  they  be  defeated  and  put  to  shame  ?  For  this  is  the  army  of  Jehovah  ;  and 
they  are  strong — they  cannot  but  be  strong,  whether  they  be  angels  or  men  or 
locusts  of  the  field — who  execute  His  word.  And  so,  by  heaping  terror  upon 
terror,  Joel  leads  his  hearers  on  to  the  goal  towards  which  he  has  been  aiming. 
He  calls  on  them  to  repent  of  their  sin.  He  bids  them,  in  the  Lord's  name,  rend 
their  hearts  and  not  their  garments.  At  this  stage,  with  this  call  to  repentance, 
the  first  part  of  his  prophecy  ends.  We  may  imagine  a  pause,  of  longer  or  shorter 
duration,  diu-ing  which  Joel  sees  his  commands  complied  with.  Priest  and 
people  humble  themselves,  and  seek  the  pardon  of  the  God  whom  they  have 
offended.  It  is  not  in  vain  that  they  do  so.  When  these  poor  men  cry,  the 
Lord  hears  and  saves  them  out  of  all  their  troubles.  This  joyful  fact  Joel  com- 
memorates when  he  opens  his  lips  again,  and  his  strain  ]>asses  fiom  the  minor  to 
the  major  key.  Translate  the  futures  of  the  18th  verse  of  the  second  chapter, 
where  the  happier  section  of  the  prophecy  begins,  by  imperfects,  as  there  can 
be  little  doubt  they  should  be  translated  ;  and  you  will  know  how  true  was  the 
repentance  of  Judah — how  seasonable  was  God's  succour — how  thoroughly 
the  winter  passed  from  the  prophet's  soul,  and  lo,  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds 
was  come.  And  then  the  horizon  of  the  prophet  widens.  He  thinks  of  better 
blessings  still  which  God  has  for  His  sons  and  daughters.  He  predicts  the  shame 
of  those  ancient  foes  of  Israel's  youth — the  only  foes  of  Jehovah's  people  with 
whom  Joel  was  acquainted — Egypt,  and  Edom,  and  Philistia,  and  Phoenicia, 
and  the  merchants  of  the  north  who  sold  Hebrew  children  as  slaves  to  the  Greeks 
of  Asia  Minor,  giving  a  boy  for  an  harlot  and  a  girl  for  wine.  He  prophesies 
the  near  approach  of  a  day  of  the  Lord,  full  of  darkness  like  the  pillar  of  cloud 
for  all  His  enemies,  of  light  and  peace  like  the  pillar  of  fire  for  all  His  friends. 
When  he  ceases  to  speak,  this  is  the  vision  which  he  leaves  with  us — on  the  one 
side,  nothing  ;  and  on  the  other,  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  God's  foes  have  become 
non-existent ;  only  His  people  survive.  "  Egypt  shall  be  a  desolation,  and 
Edom  a  desolate  wilderness  ;  but  Judah  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusalem 
from  generation  to  generation."  With  this  note  of  stern  triumph,  of  lofty  intoler- 
ance, Joel  draws  to  a  close  the  second  and  brighter  part  of  his  prophecy.  Such 
in  substance  is  the  book.  Is  it  not  strange  that  some  interpreters  should  have 
refused  to  adopt  what  seems  its  plain  and  evident  sense  ?  The  drought  was  not 
a  literal  drought,  they  say  ;  the  locusts  were  not  the  insects  of  the  natural  world 
v/liich  have  carried  ruin  and  destitution  many  a  time  to  Eastern  lands.  One 
(;ritic  thinks  that  Joel  intended  the  work  of  the  locusts  to  represent  "  the  gnawing 
care  of  prosperity  and  the  unsatisfied  desire  left  by  a  life  of  luxury."  And  others 
are  sure  that  the  prophet's  words  dealt  with  the  futiire  and  not  with  the  present, 
and  that  it  was  the  scourge  of  the  Assyrians  of  which  he  chiefly  thought.  It 
is  true  that  Assyiia  did  not  vex  Judah  imtil  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  many  years 
after  Joel's  day  ;  but  to  the  seer's  mind,  gifted  with  the  vision  and  the  faculty 
Divine,  are  not  all  things,  even  things  distant  and  remote,  laid  naked  and  bare  ? 
It  is  difficult  to  conceive  any  reason  for  this  figurative  interpretation.  Surely, 
in  God's  hand,  the  locusts,  which  destroyed  the  pastures  and  trees,  and  brought 
want  and  woe  and  grim  death  to  many  homes,  were  a  scourge  sufficiently  terrible 
to  justify  the  raising  up  of  a  prophet  who  should  expound  the  lessons  of  the  awful 
visitation.  They  were  as  worthy  instruments  for  the  execution  of  the  Lord's 
punishments  upon  a  guilty  people  as  the  Chaldeans  could  be  ;  and  if  Joel  had 
them  for  his  text  his  theme  was  sad  and  weighty  enough.  To  unfold  the  meaning 
of  God's  providence — to  show  that  the  world  of  nature,  with  its  "  tooth  and 
claw,"  its  earthquakes  and  storms  and  fearful  diseases,  its  tribes  of  creatiu-es 
which  can  work  the  most  mournful  ruin,  is  under  His  government  and  control, — 
is  not  that  as  lofty  and  responsible  a  mission  as  any  prophet  could  desire  ?  Indeed, 
the  allegorical  view  is  the  outcome  of  that  very  insuflicient  conception  of  prophecy 
which  considers  it  to  consist  almost  exclusively  of  prediction.  Perhaps,  in  the 
case  of  Joel,  there  has  been  this  further  thought  in  some  minds,  that,  being  one 
of  the  firstborn  among  the  prophets,  he  was  bound  to  deal  with  those  themes 
which  were  principally  to  occupy  the  attention  of  his  successors.     He  must  sketch. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JOEL. 


in  outline  the  picture  which  they  would  fill  in  detail.  But  I  prefer  to  believ« 
that,  as  the  needs  of  men  demanded,  God  sent  out  to  them  His  servants,  each 
at  his  own  hour  of  the  day  and  with  his  own  allotted  task  to  do — this  servant 
among  the  rest,  who  had  a  very  real  and  actual  diflBculty  to  grapple  with,  and 
who  was  sufficiently  honoured  in  being  chosen  to  encounter  and  overcome  it. 
"  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden  "  is  a  rule  which  holds  good  in  prophecy 
as  well  as  in  daily  life.  But  the  book  itself  is  the  best  refutation  of  the  figurative 
theory.  It  is  a  marvel  that  any  could  read  its  graphic  sentences  without  feeling 
that  the  whole  soul  of  the  author  was  concerned  about  a  present  trouble — the 
trouble  which  he  describes  so  powerfully.  And  it  takes  half  of  the  grandeur 
and  sublimity  out  of  these  chapters  to  make  them  deal  with  Assyrians.  "  They 
shall  run  like  mighty  men  ;  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  men  of  war  ;  they 
shall  run  to  and  fro  in  the  city  ;  they  shall  climb  up  upon  the  houses," — under- 
stand these  sentences  of  soldiers,  and  they  are  commonplace  prose  ;  understand 
them  of  locusts,  and  they  are  throbbing,  beautiful,  impressive  poetry.  They 
rob  Joel  of  his  genius  who  abandon  the  literal  interpretation  of  his  prophecy. 

III.  For,  turning  now  to  the  characteristics  of  his  style,  I  think  we  must 
be  struck  most  of  all  by  the  poetic  cast  of  his  thought  and  expression.  There 
is  no  probability  that  this  book  contains  all  his  prophetic  utterances.  In  every 
likelihood  it  is  but  a  sample  of  the  words  he  was  wont  to  speak  to  the  people  ; 
but  if  the  rest  resembled  these,  how  much  we  could  wish  that  we  had  heard  them 
all !  If  Joel  wrestled  with  a  literal  trouble,  he  did  not  deal  with  it  in  a  matter- 
of-fact  way.  His  sentences,  we  might  well  affirm,  sound  in  our  ears  "  like  sweet 
bells  at  the  evening- time  most  musically  rung  "  ;  only,  the  music  is  for  the  most  part 
pathetic  or  terrible  rather  than  joyous,  and  the  bells,  while  they  never  lose  their 
harmony,  ring  out  now  a  plaintive  and  again  a  loud  and  spirit-stirring  peal.  If  you 
wish  an  example  of  this  sorrowful  music — this  mournful  and  yet  most  attractive 
melody — read  the  exquisite  metaphors  of  the  opening  chapter.  Joel  has  three 
different  troubles  to  describe,  each  deeper  and  bitterer  than  the  other  ;  but  he 
does  not  depict  them  like  a  pre-Raphaelite  in  their  unlovely  reality  ;  he  throws 
a  halo  of  imagination  round  them.  First,  he  wishes  to  tell  his  audience  how 
the  locusts  had  taken  away  the  luxuries  which  men  enjoyed  before,  and  he  paints 
the  picture  of  a  drunkard  whose  wine  has  been  cut  off,  and  who  weeps  that  he 
is  denied  his  old  delight.  And  then,  advancing  in  his  account  of  the  griefs  of 
the  land,  he  narrates  how  God's  worship  could  not  be  fittingly  observed,  for  the 
meat-offering  and  the  drink-offering  were  nowhere  to  be  found  ;  and  he  paints 
another  picture,  very  tenderly  and  feelingly,  of  a  young  wife  bereaved  and  mourn- 
ing and  girded  with  sackcloth  for  the  husband  of  her  youth.  And  yet  further 
and  deeper  he  goes  in  the  sad  history.  The  very  necessities  of  life,  the  things 
which  men  required  for  ordinary  sustenance,  could  not  now  be  procured.  There 
was  no  family  but  felt  the  pinch  of  poverty ;  no  home  but  learned  from  experience 
how  gaunt  and  fierce  the  wolf  is  that  comes  to  the  door  in  time  of  famine.  And, 
that  he  may  portray  this  lowest  extremity,  Joel  paints  a  third  picture,  the  com- 
panion of  the  others — the  pictm-e  of  some  disappointed  husbandmen  and  vine- 
dressers, who  go  out  to  their  fields  and  vineyards  at  the  season  when  the  fruits 
of  the  earth  should  be  gathered  in,  and  discover  only  waste  and  barrenness.  In 
this  book  you  may  find  two  characteristics  of  true  poetry — a  great  sympathy 
with  nature,  and  a  great  sympathy  with  man,  in  his  varied  life,  his  hopes  and 
fears  and  joys  and  griefs. 

IV.  What  is  Joel's  pi^ce  in  history  and  revelation  ? — He  was  the  successor 
of  Elijah  and  Elisha.  When  he  opened  his  mouth  to  speak  what  God  had  put 
into  his  heart,  the  great  warfare  between  Jehovah  and  Baal  was  accomplished. 
There  was  no  need  to  insist  now  on  the  truth  that  the  Lord  alone  was  God.  His 
unity  and  His  sovereignty  and  His  spirituality  had  already  been  placed  beyond 
all  dispute  ;  and  to  Joel  was  entrusted  the  mission  of  unveiling  and  enforcing 
other  lessons  about  God — lessons  which  followed  naturally  on  those  taught  by 
his  predecessors.  That  God  works  in  the  world,  and  that  men  are  connected 
with  Him,  and  that  there  is  a  Divine  event  towards  which  things  are  tending — . 
these  were  the  doctrines  which  this  prophet  was  bidden  proclaim.  He  made 
clear  to  his  people  the  meaning  of  two  words  which  are  very  familiar  to  us — - 
the  words  "  providence  "  and  "  judgment."  He  showed  them  that  God  does 
not  sleep,  and  does  not  only  start  at  times  into  spasmodic  activity — that  He 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JOEL. 


is  a  constant  power  moving  among  His  creatures ;  that  with  Him  men  have 
in  a  most  real  and  solemn  v/ay  to  do.  And  whilst  Joel  was  charged  to  deliver 
this  message,  he  was  honourt  J  in  being  permitted  to  hint  at  other  truths,  to  which 
his  successors  often  returned.  What  are  some  of  these  truths  which  appear 
in  his  book  in  embryo  and  germ  ?  To  him  there  was  revealed,  first  among  the 
prophets,  the  great  thought  of  "  a  day  of  the  Lord  " — dies  irae  dies  ilia — when 
the  current  of  history  should  stand  still,  and  this  present  age  of  the  world  should 
come  to  an  end.  This  prophet,  too,  lays  stress  on  the  idea  of  an  effectual  Divine 
call,  which  comes  to  men,  and  which,  when  it  comes  in  its  majesty  and  grace, 
they  cannot  resist.  "  In  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  deliverance, 
as  the  Lord  hath  said,  and  in  the  remnant  whom  the  Lord  shall  call."  Of  course, 
Joel  did  not  attach  to  the  idea  the  full  doctrinal  significance  which  the  apostle 
Paul,  for  example,  was  wont  to  do.  God's  revelation  of  this  truth,  as  of  all  truth, 
was  gradual.  A  remnant,  he  said,  called  of  God,  would  escape  the  desolating 
ruin  wrought  by  the  locusts.  These  illustrations  of  the  legacy  of  truth  which 
this  prophet  bequeathed  to  his  successors  might  be  multiplied  ;  but  I  choose 
only  one  other.  He  was  the  first  to  speak  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  which 
should  be  characteristic  of  the  new  dispensation.  They  were  his  sayings  which 
Peter  quoted  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  And  his  surely  was  a  great  honour,  as 
well  as  a  great  personal  happiness,  who,  before  any  other,  was  permitted  to  behold 
this  glory  of  the  Gospel  day.  And  can  we  not  fancy  now,  in  some  measure,  what 
manner  of  man  he  was  ?  He  was  very  humble ;  for,  though  so  high  a  mission 
was  intrusted  to  him,  he  did  not  exalt  himself.  It  was  sufficient  to  him  that  he 
should  publish  the  "  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  him  "  ;  that  he  should  be 
a  voice  crying  on  God's  behalf,  not  in  the  desert,  indeed,  but  in  the  populous 
city;  that  he  should  finish  the  work  given  him  to  do,  and  then  go  quietly  back 
to  the  darkness  and  the  silence  out  of  which  for  a  moment  he  had  been  raised. 
He  was  very  stern,  too,  towards  all  sin ;  and  when  he  spoke  of  God's  displeasure 
against  transgression,  men  trembled  as  they  listened,  and  went  straightway 
and  did  those  things  which  he  commanded.  And  yet  he  had  in  him  a  tender 
and  loving  heart,  and  perhaps  there  were  tears  in  his  eyes  when  he  told  out  his 
story  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lord.  For  he  was  much  afiected  by  the  miseries  of 
the  creatures,  and  of  the  men  and  women  and  little  children  who  were  in  sorrow 
around  him.  (A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  The  prophet  Joel: — Of  Joel  we  know 
absolutely  nothing  but  what  may  be  gathered  from  his  prophecy,  and  that  tells 
us  neither  when  nor  where  he  flourished,  save  by  hints  and  implications  which 
are  still  variously  read.  That  he  lived  in  Judah,  probably  in  Jerusalem,  we 
may  infer  from  the  fact  that  he  never  mentions  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel, 
and  that  he  shows  himself  familiar  with  the  temple,  the  priests,  the  ordinances 
of  worship;  he  moves  through  the  sacred  city  and  the  temple  of  the  Lord  as  one 
that  is  at  home  in  them,  as  one  who  is  native,  and  to  the  manner  born.  On  this 
point  the  commentators  are  pretty  well  agreed  ;  but  no  sooner  do  we  ask,  "  Wlien 
did  Joel  live  and  prophecy  ?  "  than  we  receive  the  most  diverse  and  contradictory 
replies.  He  has  been  moved  along  the  chronological  line  of  at  least  two  centuries, 
and  fixed,  now  here,  now  there,  at  almost  every  point.  He  was  probably  the 
earliest  of  the  prophets  whose  writings  have  come  down  to  us.  There  are  hints 
in  his  poem  or  prophecy  which  indicate  that  it  must  have  been  written  in  the 
ninth  century  before  Christ  (cir.  870 — 860),  more  than  a  hundred  years  before 
Isaiah  "  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  His  throne,  high  and  lifted  up,"  and  some  fdiy 
years  after  Elijah  was  carried  "  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven."  Joel's  style  is  that 
of  the  earlier  age.  So  marked,  indeed,  is  the  "  antique  vigour  and  imperativenet^s 
of  his  language  "  that  surely  on  this  ground  Ewald,  whose  fine,  critical  instinct 
deserves  a  respect  which  his  dogmatism  often  averts,  places  him,  without  a  doubt, 
first  in  the  rank  of  the  earlier  prophets,  and  makes  him  the  conteiuporary  of 
Joash.  All  we  can  say  is  that,  in  all  probability,  the  son  of  Pethuel  lived  in 
Jerusalem  during  the  reign  of  Joash ;  that  he  aided  Jehoiada,  the  high  priest, 
in  urging  the  citizens  to  repair  the  temple,  and  to  recur  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  ; 
and  that  his  prophecy  is  the  oldest  in  our  hands,  and  was  written  in  that  com- 
paratively calm  and  pure  interval  in  which  Jerusalem  was  free  from  the  bloody 
rites  and  licentious  orgies  of  the  Baalim  worship.  That  the  prophet  was  an 
accomplished  and  gifted  man  is  proved  by  his  work.  The  style  is  pure,  severe, 
animated,  finished,  and  full  of  happy  rhythms  and  easy,  graceful  tiuns.  "  He 
has  no  abrupt  transitions,  is  everywhere  connected,  and  finishes  whatever  he 
takes  up.     In  description  he  is  graphic  and  perspicuous,  in  an-angeinent  lucid  j 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JOEL. 


in  imagery  original,  copious,  and  varied."  Even  in  this  early  poem  we  find 
some  instances  of  the  tender  refrains  and  recurring  "  burdens  "  which  characterise 
much  of  the  later  Hebrew  poetry.  In  short,  there  are  marks  both  of  the  scholar 
and  of  the  artist  in  his  style,  which  distinguish  him  very  clearly  from  Amos  the 
shepherd,  and  Haggai  the  exile.  It  is  almost  beyond  a  doubt  that  he  was  a 
practised  author,  of  whose  many  poems  and  discourses  only  one  haa  come  down 
to  us.     (Samud  Cox,  D.D.) 

Abgumbnts  fob  thb  iatbb  datb  of  Joel. — ^The  probable  date  of  the  book 
of  Joel  is  a  matter  of  much  dispute.  Some  Biblical  critics  place  it  as  early  as  837, 
others  as  late  as  440  B.C.  This  is  unfortimate,  as  the  estimate  of  the  value  of 
the  prophecy  is  directly  affected  by  the  position  adopted.  Joel  is  either  at  the 
heaa  of  the  aristocracy  of  this  famous  line  of  prophets,  or  one  of  the  less  gifted 
who  bring  up  the  rear.  He  is  either  indebted  for  ideas  and  phrjises  to  twelve 
other  Old  Testament  writers,  or  they  are  indebted  to  him.  When  the  smallness 
of  the  book  is  taken  into  consideration  it  seems  much  more  likely  that  he  borrowed 
from  twelve  than  that  twelve  borrowed  from  him.  Other  reasons  support  the 
conclusion  that  the  book  is  of  late  date.  There  is  no  mention  of  the  crass  tendency 
to  idolatry,  against  which  the  early  prophets  declaimed.  On  the  contrary,  the 
people  appear  docile  and  devout.  The  northern  tribes  of  Israel  form  no  part 
of  the  body  politic  ;  direct  reference  is  made  to  the  captivity  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  and  to  the  dispersed ;  the  exile  is  apparently  a  thing  of  the  past. 
Assyria  as  a  world-power  is  not  even  darkly  hinted  at.  There  is  no  mention 
of  a  king.  These  facts  favour  a  late  date  imder  the  Persian  era.  Moreover, 
almost  exceptional  importance  is  attached  to  the  temple  ritual.  That  was  an 
outstanding  characteristic  of  the  time  succeeding  the  great  reform  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  (440  B.C.).  The  bitter  hatred  of  the  heathen  shown  in  the  idea  of 
their  utter  annihilation  (iii.  13),  and  the  narrow,  national  exclusiveness  revealed 
in  the  fond  conception  of  Jerusalem  as  a  sacred  city  imdefiled  by  the  foot  of  the 
foreigner  (iii.  17),  afford  convincing  evidence  that  the  book  belongs  to  the  later 
days  of  Judaism.  Further,  the  "  Day  of  the  Lord,"  which  in  the  time  of  Amos 
was  popularly  regarded  as  the  dawn  of  blessing  rather  than  of  judgment,  appears 
in  the  writings  of  Joel  in  the  sharpest  contrast  of  light  and  shade  that  the  idea 
had  yet  attained  in  the  successive  stages  of  its  development.  Such  stumbling- 
blocks  as  the  references  to  Egypt  and  Edom  (iii.  19)  may  be  accounted  for  on 
the  lines  of  Ezekiel's  visions  (Ezek.  xxix.  9,  xxxii.  15).  On  the  other  hand, 
Greece  appears  on  the  horizon  m  a  clear  light  (Joel  iii.  6).  These  and  other 
arguments  set  forth  by  various  writers  afford  weighty  evidence,  which  the  tone 
and  character  of  the  book  seem  altogether  to  confirm.    {Thomas  M'  William,  M.A.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

JOEL 

CHAPTER  L 

Vers.  1-4.  Tlie  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Joel  the  aon  of  PethaeL — 

Joel : — Great  as  is  the  variety  in  the  works  of  nature,  it  is  no  less  so  in  the  treasury 
of  God's  Word.  The  "  prophets  "  are  quite  unlike  the  rest  of  the  books ;  and 
between  the  prophets  themselves  there  is  a  marked  distinction  of  character. 
This  is  seen  in  the  case  of  the  four  great  prophets,  it  is  even  yet  more  striking 
in  the  twelve  lesser,  or  minor,  prophets.  Notice  particularly  the  three,  Joel, 
Micah,  and  Habakkuk.  Strongly  defined  are  the  individual  characters  of  each 
as  different  members  of  the  same  body,  while  all  alike  are  animated  by  one  life 
and  spirit ;  or  as  varied  instruments  of  music  made  use  of  by  one  and  the  same 
poet  or  musician,  and  chosen  as  best  suited  for  his  purpose,  according  to  the 
character  of  his  message  or  the  mind  he  would  convey.  The  prophet  Habakkuk 
is  remarkable  for  very  striking  figurative  expressions,  which  have  become  familiar 
in  the  mouths  of  all.  Micah  is  the  one  of  all  the  prophets  chosen  to  foretell  the 
place  of  our  Lord's  birth — Bethlehem  Ephrata.  Micah  associates  the  mercies 
of  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God  with  pastoral  scenes,  well  meet  for  the  herald  of 
Bethlehem.  Different  to  this  is  the  prophet  Joel.  One  object  fills  his  mind 
from  first  to  last,  one  subject  in  which  he  is  altogether  wrapt.  There  are  no  little 
sentences  of  wisdom  like  Habakkuk,  who  might  be  called  the  prophet  of  faith ; 
no  rural  images  like  Micah,  who  might  be  termed  the  prophet  of  mercy ;  but  one 
absorbing  spirit  throughout ;  and  the  question  is  not  about  expressions,  but 
about  the  meaning  and  intent  of  them.  He  is  beyond  all  others,  and  it  might 
be  said,  solely  and  entirely  the  prophet  of  judgment.  He  is  full  of  the  trumpet ; 
it  is  in  all  he  says.  What  are  we  to  consider  the  exact  subject  of  this  prophet  ? 
It  is,  but  more  especially  at  the  beginning,  the  description  of  a  plague  of  locusts. 
The  description  is  most  exact  and  striking  in  all  its  parts.  It  is  figurative  and 
allegorical  of  an  armed  host.  In  detailing  one  it  foretells  the  other.  This  intro- 
ducing into  the  same  description  many  judgments  is  usual  in  the  Bible  ;  more 
than  one  thing  is  contained  in  the  same  prophecy ; — one  near  and  soon  to  happen, 
the  other  more  distant ;  one  of  things  temporal,  the  other  of  things  eternal. 
One  great  lesson  God  would  impress  upon  us  by  His  prophet  Joel,  of  constantly 
hearing  the  trumpet  call,  and  realising  the  Great  Day.  Another  remarkable 
point  in  Joel  is,  the  voice  of  joy  and  exultation  that  is  combined  throughout 
with  the  terrible  theme,  and  pervades  each  subject  of  his  prophecy.  The  more 
we  are  impressed  with  a  serious  expectation  of  the  Great  Day,  the  more  shall 
we  be  able  to  look  forward  to  it  with  joy  and  comfort.  (Isaac  Williams,  B.D.) 
Jod  : — He  is  the  prophet  of  the  great  repentance,  of  the  Pentecostal  gift,  and 
of  the  final  conflict  of  great  principles.  Of  the  man  himself  and  his  age  we  know 
practically  nothing.  The  man  is  little  more  than  a  name  to  us.  1.  He  was  a 
successful  prophet.  He  accomplished  a  remarkable  moral  revolution.  He 
bowed  the  hearts  of  his  contemporaries  as  the  heart  of  one  man ;  he  drew  them 
to  the  altar  of  God,  and  united  them  in  a  great  national  fast  and  supplication. 
The  prophet  is  raised  up  to  do  his  work.  He  is  to  live,  to  speak,  to  die  if  necessary  ; 
to  rouse  the  conscience,  and,  as  far  as  he  can,  to  persuade  the  world  of  the  truth 
of  his  message.     He  is  to  do  his  errand, — he  is  not  to  be  talked  of.     And  what 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

are  we  compared  with  the  work  which  we  have  to  do  ?  The  joy  of  the  tnia 
prophet  is  like  that  of  the  Baptist.  He  (the  Lord  and  Master)  must  increase. 
What  matter  if  I  decrease,  or  be  forgotten  ?  Where  the  spirit  of  self-suppression 
is,  there  is  power.  No  dim  or  uncertain  thought  mars  the  concentration  of  pur- 
pose. Feebler  or  more  selfish  nattu-es  dread  to  lose  self.  The  date  in  which 
Joel  lived  is  not  necessary  to  be  known  in  order  to  understand  the  direction 
and  drift  of  his  ministry.  The  spiritual  value  of  many  things  is  independent 
of  chronology.  2.  What  was  his  message  ?  He  teaches  spiritual  principles, 
not  for  an  age  but  for  all  time.  (1)  He  is  a  prophet  of  rebuke  and  repent- 
ance. He  so  influences  the  people  that  they  gather  to  a  great  day  of  humilia- 
tion. A  grievous  calamity  spoke  with  the  prophet's  words.  The  calamity 
was  awful,  and  unparalleled  in  its  severity.  It  was  the  utter  desolation  of  the 
land  by  locusts.  Joy  ceases  among  the  people  as  they  gaze  at  their  desolated 
land,  and  contemplate  the  famine  that  must  follow.  The  prophet  gave  guidance 
to  people's  thoughts  and  pointed  the  significance  of  the  calamity.  Mere  trouble 
does  not  melt  the  heart  or  subdue  the  will,  but  startling  troubles  which  come 
to  disturb  the  monotony  of  indolently  expected  prosperity  are  nevertheless 
messengers  of  the  Lord.  The  day  of  calamity,  rightly  understood,  is  a  day  of 
the  Lord.  This  calamity  breaks  up  two  of  the  accustomed  orders  of  life.  The 
gifts,  of  nature's  order — the  harvest  of  corn  and  wine — are  snatched  away.  The 
usages  of  religious  order  are  suspended.  There  being  no  gifts,  the  daily  sacrifice 
ceases.  To  the  people  no  two  things  could  be  more  dread -inspiring.  The  two- 
fold bond  which  bound  the  people  to  their  God,  and  God  to  the  people,  seemed 
to  them  to  be  broken.  The  order  of  nature  and  the  order  of  worship  were  both 
upset.  All  order  is  witness  of  another  order,  the  order  of  righteousness.  If 
there  be  a  bond  between  the  Lord  and  the  people,  that  bond  must  be  of  the  highest 
and  most  enduring  order.  It  must  be  a  bond  in  the  order  of  the  moral  life.  The 
suspension  of  the  accustomed  order  of  things  may  be  the  witness  to  the  existence 
of  the  highest  order — the  righteous  order  in  which  the  righteous  God  rules.  So 
this  calamity  is  indeed  the  day  of  the  Lord.  It  calls  man  to  repair  the  bond 
which  is  more  precious  than  the  bond  of  benefits  or  material  gifts  and  sacrifices. 
It  bids  the  people  to  look  at  the  broken  links  of  that  golden  chain  which  is  right- 
eousness, purity,  faith.  The  prophet  exercises  his  function  of  rebuke.  And  this 
power  it  is  hard  for  ministers  to  retain.  Rebuke  of  men's  sins  so  easily  enlists 
the  assistance  of  our  personal  feelings.  When  once  this  unholy  alliance  is  per- 
mitted we  assail  men  rather  than  men's  vices.  Will  the  prophet  give  us  hints 
as  to  the  principles  which  would  enable  us  to  maintain  this  power  in  purity  and 
efficiency,  and  enable  us  to  discharge  this  duty  with  impartial  fairness  ?  Notice 
the  large  sympathy  of  the  prophet.  He  has  the  completest  power  of  identifying 
himself  with  the  sorrows  and  troubles  of  the  land  and  people.  He  is  one  with 
them  ;  their  sorrow  is  his  sorrow.  Here  is  one  condition  of  the  capacity  of 
rebuke.  It  has  often  been  said  that  we  can  only  help  men  by  putting  ourselves 
in  their  place.  Want  of  tenderness  almost  certainly  involves  want  of  tact; 
and  want  of  tact  renders  us  ineffective  in  reproof  and  in  persuasion.  Along 
with  sympathy  there  must  be  a  spirit  which  is  profoundly  convinced  of  the  reality 
of  the  Divine  rule.  No  man  is  or  can  be  a  prophet  to  whom  the  kingdom  of 
God  is  not  the  most  real  thing  in  the  universe.  Repentance  must  be  deep  and 
natural.  It  must  be  the  hatred  of  the  moral  evil  that  hinders  them.  It  must 
be  the  awakening  of  the  spirit  to  the  gulf  which  small  and  unobserved  sins  may 
make  between  them  and  God.  The  vainglorious  spirit  which  so  often  follows 
in  the  wake  of  earnest  and  victory-seeking  desires,  robs  away  the  protections 
which  humility  affords.  What  is  needed  is  repentance  for  the  whole  spiritual 
tone — repentance  which  implies  a  recognition  of  the  claim  of  God  upon  our  whole 
spirit ;  repentance  for  the  deviations  from  true  and  inward  righteousness — 
repentance  for  the  dxilness  and  downwardness  of  our  spirits.  Joel  does  not 
mention  specific  sins.  What  then  do  we  all  need  ?  We  need  the  strong  and 
vivid  conviction  of  the  reality  of  the  kingdom  of  righteousness  to  make  true 
our  efforts  for  good.  We  need  spirits  which  are  united  in  sympathy  with  the 
Spirit  of  Him  who  sent  us,  for  are  we  not  fellow- workers  with  Him  ?  Quick  in 
tei.derness,  firm  in  righteousness,  and  with  spirits  possessed  of  the  conscious- 
ness of  God,  we  may  attempt  our  work.  (Bishop  Boyd-Carpenter.)  The 
individuality  of  men's  messages  : — Not  the  word  that  came  to  Hosea  or  to  Amos, 
but  the  word  that  came  to  Joel, — intimating  that  there  is  a  word  that  comes 
to  every  man.     Each  man  has  his  own  view  of  God,  his  own  kingdom  of  heaven. 


CHAP.  I.]  JOEL.  3 

his  own  way  of  telling  what  God  has  done  for  him.  And  the  mischief  is  that 
we  expect  every  man  to  speak  in  the  same  tone,  to  deliver  the  same  word?, 
and  to  subject  himself  to  the  same  literary  yoke  or  spiritual  discipline.  The 
Bible  sets  itself  against  all  this  monotony.  Every  man  must  speak  the  word 
that  God  has  given  to  him  through  the  instrumentality  of  his  own  character- 
istics. A  man  cannot  say  what  word  has  to  come  to  him.  A  man  cannot  be 
both  the  message  carrier  and  the  message  originator.  We  are  errand-runners; 
we  have  to  receive  om*  message  and  to  repeat  it ;  we  have  not  first  to  create  it, 
then  to  modify  it,  then  to  deliver  it.  The  prophets  assumed  the  position  of 
being  instruments,  mediums  for  communications  which  the  Lord  wished  to  make 
with  His  children  near  and  far,  and  with  the  world  at  large,  and  through  all  time. 
A  man  cannot  say  he  will  sing  his  Gospel ;  the  Lord  has  only  sent  a  certain 
number  of  singers,  and  we  cannot  increase  the  multitude.  No  man  can  say, 
I  will  go  forth,  and  thunder  the  Word  of  the  Lord  in  the  ear  of  the  age  ;  the  Lord 
hath  not  given  His  thunder  to  that  tongue ;  it  was  meant  to  speak  peacefully, 
soothingly,  kindly,  and  when  it  tries  to  thunder  creation  would  smile  at  the 
feebleness  of  the  effort,  and  the  palpableness  of  the  irony.  So  we  have  in  the 
Bible  all  kinds  of  ministry.  There  are  thunders  and  judgments  in  the  Book, 
and  there  are  voices  like  lutes  ;  there  are  whispers  which  you  can  only  hear  when 
you  incline  your  ear  with  all  the  intensity  of  attention.  There  are  words  that 
roll  down  the  mountains  like  splintered  rocks,  granites  that  have  been  ripped 
in  two  by  the  lightning ;  and  there  are  words  that  fall  from  another  mountain 
as  flowers,  beatitudes,  tender  speeches.  The  Lord  hath  need  of  all  kinds  of 
men  ;  He  wants  the  fire  and  the  whirlwind  and  the  tempest,  and  the  dew,  and 
the  still  small  voice — all  are  God's  ministry,  God's  husbandry.  (Joseph  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  Word  of  the  Lord  to  a  sinful  nation: — The  prophet  here  informs 
us  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  and  that  it  had  reference  to  the  most 
alarming  calamities  which  could  possibly  happen  to  a  nation.  The  messages 
of  God  sometimes  come  in  a  loud  voice,  and  have  in  them  more  of  judgment 
than  of  mercy.  I.  That  thb  Word  of  God  to  a  sinful  nation  is  communi- 
cated THROUGH  THE  INSTRUMENTALITY  OF  ONE  MAN.      "  The  Word  of  the  Lord 

that  came  to  Joel."  Here  we  learn  that  it  is  the  ordinary  way  of  God  to  com- 
municate with  the  race  through  human  instrumentality.  The  Divine  Being  did 
not  present  Himself  to  the  wicked  people  of  Judah  and  threaten  woe  ;  they 
could  not  have  endured  the  brightness  of  His  presence  ;  they  would  have  fled 
from  before  the  majesty  of  His  voice.  He  did  not  send  an  angel  to  convey  His 
message ;  an  angel  would  not  have  gained  the  confidence  required.  And  so  it 
is  the  way  of  God  to  speak  by  man  to  men,  that  He  may  dim  His  infinite  glory 
by  wrapping  it  in  human  vesture,  and  thus  adapt  it  to  human  vision ;  but  the 
word  thus  spoken  is  none  the  less  Divine,  and  none  the  less  worthy  of  regard. 
Christ  was  incarnate  that  He  might  utter  the  unfathomable  Word  of  God,  and 
that  Word  is  still  prolonged  by  human  lips.  1.  This  one  man  was  Divinely  selected. 
The  prophet  Joel  was  selected  by  God  to  convey  the  message  of  woe  and  the 
need  of  repentance  to  the  people  of  Judah.  But  who  was  Joel  ?  Was  he  a 
man  of  social  reputation,  of  advanced  scholarship,  of  eminent  talent  ?  We 
know  not.  Nothing  of  his  history  is  written ;  simply  the  name  of  his  fathet" 
is  given.  He  was  anxious  to  be  known  only  as  the  servant  of  God.  And  we 
find  that  God  often  chooses  modest  agencies,  unknown  to  fame,  to  speak  His 
Word  to  mankind ;  He  uses  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  mighty. 
Thus  the  word  uttered  derives  emphasis  from  the  absence  of  human  greatness 
in  the  speaker.  Fame  is  not  a  condition  of  ministerial  success.  A  man  must 
be  chosen  by  God  before  he  has  any  right  to  preach  the  Word  to  the  nations. 
2.  This  one  man  was  greatly  honoured.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  wl^ich  came  to 
Joel  imparted  to  him  the  highest  digntty.  It  honoiured  him  by  coming  to  his 
soul,  even  as  the  presence  of  a  king  confers  renown  upon  those  who  are  favoured 
therewith.  He  was  the  chosen  of  God  out  of  a  vast  nation,  and  was  entrusted 
with  prophetic  communications.  New  abilities  were  awakened  within  him,  and 
his  life,  which  had  hitherto  been  solitary  and  of  little  influence,  was  to  become 
the  centre  of  a  nation's  life.  Manhood  can  have  no  greater  honour  conferred 
upon  it  than  to  be  sent  with  the  Word  of  God  to  men.  3.  This  one  man  was 
supremely  trusted.  Joel  was  entrusted  with  a  great  position.  He  was  selected 
as  one  man  out  of  a  vast  people  to  receive  and  make  known  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
This  might  have  led  him  to  assume  false  claims  and  empty  titles ;  he  might  have 
been  tempted  to  use  the  moral  authority  thus  given  to  him  for  secular  ends.     A 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

minister  holds  his  unique  position  in  society  as  a  sacred  trust,  and  betrays  it 
if  he  uses  it  for  any  other  purpose  than  the  moral  welfare  of  those  around  him. 
Joel  was  also  entrusted  with  a  valuable  deposit,  even  with  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
This  he  was  not  to  conceal,  but  to  declare.  This  he  was  not  to  adulterate,  but 
to  defend.  This  he  was  bravely  to  announce  to  a  sinful  people,  unawed  by 
numbers  or  results.  4.  This  one  man  was  arduously  worked.  To  Joel  was  com- 
mitted the  task  of  effecting  a  moral  reformation  in  the  national  life  of  Judah. 
He  stood  almost  alone  with  a  great  work  to  accomplish.  He  had  to  proclaim 
great  calamities  to  which  few  would  listen.  And  the  true  minister  has  arduous 
work  before  him  ;  he  has  oft,  single-handed,  to  contend  with  a  degenerate  crowd  ; 
he  has  to  preach  great  doctrines  rejected  and  despised  ;  he  cannot  guarantee 
success.  II.  That  thb  Divin«  Wobd  to  a  sinful  kation  biquibbs  the  eabnist 
ATTENTION  OF  ALL  CLASSES  OF  INDIVIDUALS  (vers.  2,  3).  1.  It  should  awaken  the 
attention  of  the  aged.  The  old  men  in  the  land  of  Judah  were  to  listen  to  the 
prediction  of  Joel,  and  say  whether  anything  so  calamitous  had  ever  occurred 
before.  They  could  remember  the  past,  and  hence  were  competent  to  speak 
concerning  it.  Attention  to  the  truth  is  the  first  condition  of  a  renewed  and 
sober  life ;  even  old  men,  who  ought  to  be  wiser,  are  sometimes  heedless  con- 
cerning it,  and  need  to  be  reminded  of  its  importance.  2.  It  should  awaken 
the  attention  of  the  general  multitude.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Judah 
were  called  upon  to  hear  the  message  of  Joel.  It  not  only  concerned  the  wise, 
but  also  the  ignorant ;  not  only  the  rulers,  but  those  under  them.  It  would 
not  be  the  fault  of  the  prophet  if  any  did  not  feel  the  importance  of  his  com- 
munication. The  common  multitude  are  not  generally  observant  of  the  judg- 
ments of  God  occurring  aroimd  them,  they  need  some  one  to  unveil  their  inner 
and  solemn  meaning.  3.  It  should  awaken  the  attention  of  remote  posterity. 
The  calamity  predicted  by  Joel  was  to  be  handed  down  to  a  remote  posterity. 
Not  only  are  the  memories  of  Divine  mercy  to  be  preserved,  but  also  of  Divine 
judgment,  that  they  may  in  future  deter  from  evil.  Children  must  be  instructed 
in  the  historical  revelation  which  God  has  made  concerning  Himself,  that  they 
may  see  the  wisdom  of  piety  demonstrated  in  the  facts  of  life.  We  should  ever 
remember  that  the  ages  are  mysteriously  linked  together,  and  that  we  are  trans- 
mitting moral  influences  and  instruction  which  the  future  must  inherit.  Let 
us  heed  the  teaching  of  the  past.     III.  That  the  Divine  Wobd  to  a  sinful 

JWATION    sometimes    HAS  BEFBEENCB    TO    THE  MOST  AWFUL  CALAMITIES   (ver.   4). 

1.  It  was  a  calamity  occasioned  by  a  wondrous  increase  of  useful  creatures.  God 
can  turn  the  existing  arrangements  of  the  universe  into  an  army  of  eternal 
justice.  He  has  no  need  to  create  new  agencies  to  rebuke  sin  ;  there  are  myriads 
awaiting  His  command.  Locusts  will  execute  His  judgments.  The  Divine 
resource  of  retribution  is  beyond  human  imagination.  2.  It  was  a  calamity 
which  employed  the  weakest  agencies  to  execute  its  piu-pose.  God's  weak  things 
are  strong  enough  to  work  mischief  to  the  wicked.  Man  is  soon  smitten  down 
by  little  creatures.  3.  It  was  a  calamity  which  for  continuous  destruction  was 
unequalled  in  the  national  history.  One  agency  of  ruin  was  succeeded  by 
another,  until  the  effect  of  the  whole  was  utter  desolation  of  resource  and  joy. 
Lessons — 1.  That  men  must  give  themselves  to  the  work  which  God  appoints 
them.  2.  That  men  should  heed  the  Word  of  the  Lord  before  the  hour  of  retribu- 
tion comes.  3.  That  sin  is  sure  to  be  followed  by  the  most  awful  calamities. 
(J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)        National  calamity  : — We  learn  from  this  passage — I.  That 

THIS   CALAMITY   WAS   DiVINELY  BEVBALED   AT   FIBST  TO   THE   MIND    OF   ONE   MAN. 

"  The  Word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Joel  the  son  of  Pethuel."  No  one  knew 
at  first  what  a  sad  calamity  was  coming  on  the  country  but  Jehovah  Himself. 
No  sage,  seer,  or  priest  knew  anything  of  it.     Such  a  fact  as  this  suggests — 

1.  The  distinguishing  faculty  of  man.  Of  all  the  creatures  on  earth,  man  alone 
can  receive  communications  from  heaven.  We  know  not  how  the  Word  came 
unto  him.  The  great  Father  of  Spirits  has  many  ways  of  striking  His  thoughts 
into  the  souls  of  His  children.  Souls  are  ever  accessible  to  Him.  2.  The  mani- 
fest sovereignty  of  God.  Why  did  He  select  Joel  more  than  any  other  man  ? 
II.  That  this  calamity  was  unprecedented  in  histoby.  "  Hear  ye  this,  ye 
old  men,"  &c.  Observe — 1.  That  no  Divine  judgments  have  been  so  great  as 
to  preclude  the  possibility  of  greater.  The  penal  resources  of  the  righteous 
Judge  are  unbounded.     Great  as  yovu:  afflictions  have  been,  they  can  be  greater. 

2.  That  the  greater  the  sins  of  a  people,  the  greater  the  judgments  to  be 
expected.    It  is  probable  that  Judah's  sins  were  greater  at  this  time  than  they 


CHAF.  I.]  JOEL.  6 

had  ever  been  before,  and  that,  consequently,  severer  penalties  were  to  come. 
Take  care,  sinner,  in  every  sin  you  commit  you  are  treasuring  up  wrath  against 
the  day  of  wrath.  III.  That  this  calamity  was  so  TREMBNDOtra  as  to 
OOHMAKD  THE  ATTENTION  OF  ALL  OBNERATiONS.  "  Tell  ye  your  children,"  4o. 
1.  Because  it  shows  that  God  rules  the  world.  It  is  not  controlled  by  chance 
or  necessity.  2.  Because  it  shows  that  Grod  takes  cognisance  of  the  world's  sin, 
and  abhors  it.  IV.  This  calamity  was  inflicted  by  the  most  insignxpioant 
OF  God's  creatxtres.  There  is  no  authority  for  the  opinion  that  the  creatures 
here  mentioned  were  symbols  of  hostile  armies.  Locusts  are  mentioned  in  their 
different  stages  and  species.  So  to  punish  sinners  God  needs  no  thunderbolts. 
He  can  kill  a  man  with  a  moth.  (Homilist.)  Hear  this,  ye  old  men,  and  give 
ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  laind.  —  Terrible  Divine  judgments  :  —  1.  When 
men  become  incorrigible,  and  sin  ripens  to  a  height,  then  the  Lord  will 
reprove  and  plead  against  it  by  judgments,  and  not  by  His  Word  only ;  for 
whereas  the  method  of  other  prophets  is,  first,  to  reprove  sin,  then  to  threaten 
for  it,  and  then  to  subjoin  exhortations  to  repentance  with  encouragements  and 
promises ;  this  prophet  doth  at  first  point  out  their  sin  and  guilt,  as  to  be  read 
in  visible  judgments.  2.  Famine  is  one  of  the  rods  whereby  the  Lord  pleads 
against  the  Church  for  her  sin,  and  strips  her  of  abused  mercies,  and  of  tenta- 
tions  to  wantonness  and  rebellion.  3.  God  can,  when  He  pleaseth,  arm  very 
mean  and  contemptible  creatures  to  execute  His  judgments,  and  particularly, 
to  deprive  men  of  the  fruits  of  the  ground  ;  for  here  He  sends  out  "  the  palmer- 
worm,  the  locust,  the  canker-worm,  and  the  caterpillar,"  and  they  eat  up  all. 
4.  As  God  hath  still  one  scourge  after  another  with  which  to  plague  a  sinful 
and  incorrigible  people,  who  will  not  repent,  but  think  to  escape  with  the  plagues 
that  have  come  on  them.  So  it  speaks  sad  things  when  one  calamity  stints  not 
the  controversy,  but  He  pursueth  still  one  judgment  after  another,  and  with 
breach  upon  breach,  for  so  it  is  here,  what  one  left  another  did  eat  up.  5.  Albeit 
the  Lord  in  every  age  be  testifying  His  displeasure  against  sin,  yet  at  some  times, 
and  when  sin  is  come  to  a  great  height.  He  may  make  one  age  a  remarkable 
spectacle  of  justice,  and  bring  judgments  on  them,  the  like  of  which  have  not 
been  seen  in  many  generations ;  for  such  was  His  dealing  with  this  generation, 
their  fathers,  past  memory  of  man,  had  not  seen  the  like,  nor  should  the  like 
be  seen  for  many  generations  to  come.  {George  Hutcheson.)  That  which 
the  palmer-worm  hatli  left  liath  the  locust  eaten.  —  Palmer-worm,  dkc.  :  — 
The  Hebrew  words  are  the  gSz^m,  the  arbeh,  the  yeleg,  the  chdsil,  and 
they  seem  to  mean,  in  accordance  with  their  etymology,  the  gnawer,  the  swarmer, 
the  licker,  and  the  consumer.  But  are  they  four  different  kinds  of  locusts  ? 
As  there  are  eighty  known  species  of  this  "  gryllus  migrator ius,"  the  supposi- 
tion would  be  possible.  But  all  known  ravages  of  locusts  are  caused  by  suc- 
cessive flights  of  the  same  insect,  not  by  different  varieties.  Are  they  then, 
as  Credner  argues,  successive  stages  in  the  growth  of  the  same  insect,  meaning 
the  imwinged,  the  partially  winged,  the  full-winged  locust,  and  that  changing 
in  colour  ?  Such  is  the  view  of  Ewald,  and  he  says  that  these  four  stages  are 
well  marked.  There  are  insuperable  difficulties  in  this  theory.  For  if  four 
successive  stages  had  been  intended  in  chap.  i.  4,  why  is  the  order  confused  and 
altered  in  chap.  ii.  25,  where  the  arbeh  is  put  first,  and  the  gizSm  last  ?  This  is  inex- 
plicable if,  as  Credner  thought,  the  gStztna.  in  chap.  i.  4  meant  the  mother-swarm,  and 
the  arbeh,  yeleg,  and  ch^il,  its  three  metamorphoses.  In  point  of  fact,  there 
are  only  two  broadly  marked  changes  in  the  development  of  the  locust^ — from 
larva  to  pupa — and  from  pupa  to  the  full-grown  insect.  In  hot  climates  the 
creature  can  use  its  wings  in  about  three  weeks.  It  seems  certain  that  the  prophet 
is  in  no  sense  writing  as  a  natural  historian.  The  use  of  the  four  terms  is  only 
due  to  poetry  and  rhetoric,  just  as  the  Psalmist,  in  Psa.  Ixxviii.  46,  cv,  34,  freely 
employs  the  words  chSsil  and  jeleg  as  interchangeable  with  the  word  arbeh, 
which  is  used  in  the  Pentateuch  to  describe  the  Egyptian  plague.  {Dean  Farrar, 
D.D.)  God's  locusts  : — What  is  to  be  told  ?  God  hath  many  locusts.  Only 
four  of  them  are  named  here,  but  they  are  the  greatest  devourers  that  ever  fell 
upon  a  landscape.  They  came  but  an  hour  ago  ;  they  are  multitudinous  beyond 
the  power  of  arithmetic  to  enumerate,  and  in  a  few  hours  not  one  green  thing 
will  be  left  upon  the  land.  Nay,  their  jaws  are  like  stones,  they  will  seize  the 
bark  upon  the  trees  and  tear  it  off,  and  none  can  hear  the  crunching  of  that 
gluttony ;  and  to-morrow  what  will  the  fair  landscape  be  like  ?  It  will  be 
like  a  country  smitten  by  sudden  winter ;  the  trees  that  yesterday  were  green 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  i, 

and  fair  and  lovely  will  be  naked,  and  their  whiteness  shall  resemble  the  white- 
ness of  snow.  All  the  fourfold  locust  tribe  belong  to  the  Lord.  The  great  pro- 
vidence of  God  is  responsible  for  its  own  acts.  Man  needs  to  be  severely  humbled  ; 
it  does  not  always  suffice  simply  to  bend  him  a  little ;  sometimes  he  must  b© 
doubled  and  thrown  down  as  out  of  a  scornful  hand — not  that  he  may  be  destroyed, 
but  that  he  may  be  brought  to  himself.  Soldiers  with  their  sabres  and  bayonets 
cannot  turn  back  the  beetle.  The  Lord  hath  made  some  things  so  small  that 
no  bayonet  can  strike  them ;  yet  how  they  bite,  how  they  devour,  how  they 
consume,  how  they  plague  the  air,  how  they  kill  kings,  and  make  nations  weak, 
and  turn  armies  white  with  panic.  Joel  knew  what  he  was  talking  about,  and 
coidd  point  to  the  landscape.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Successive  joea  of 
spiritual  life  : — The  text  speaks  of  the  ravages  of  the  locust  in  the  different  stages. 
If  to  the  Jew  the  locust  was  a  vivid  type  of  the  repeated  wastings  of  his  nation 
by  the  Assyrian,  Persian,  Macedonian,  and  Roman  invasions,  it  may  be  to  us 
a  no  less  vivid  picture  of  sin's  successive  swarm  and  scourge  of  our  own  spiritual 
heritage.  Three  thoughts  respecting  spiritual  life.  I.  Its  fobs.  Nature 
reveals  life  in  its  myriad  lower  forms  begirt  by  foes.  In  our  own  physical  life, 
the  foreign  fact  becomes  a  near  experience.  Intellectual  life  has  its  foes.  That 
spiritual  life  should  have  its  foes  is  therefore  no  anomaly.  11.  Theib  succession. 
In  a  garden,  you  save  the  plants  from  their  first  enemies  only  to  find  that  later 
foes  attack  them.  There  are  successive  foes  for  every  stage  of  the  spiritual  life. 
III.  Theib  connection.  The  foes  of  the  text  were  of  one  kind.  They  were 
several  species  of  locusts,  or  several  forms  of  the  same  species.  So  sin  in  one 
form  is  often  followed  by  its  fellows  or  its  progeny,  each  working  a  wider  ruin. 
We  see  pleasure-seeking  followed  by  a  breed  of  worthless  traits ;  speculation 
followed  by  falsehood  and  dishonour ;  worldly  yielding  followed  by  neglect 
in  prayer ;  compromise  followed  by  compliance  ;  doubt  followed  by  intellectual 
pride  ;  ignorance  foUowed  by  fanaticism ;  covetousness  by  pharisaism ;  selfish 
success  by  indolence.  ^Tiat  is  the  lesson  ?  Beware  of  the  coming  into  the 
field  of  your  spiritual  life  of  any  sin.  It  will  draw  others  after  it.  It  will  itself 
be  metamorphosed  into  something  worse.     (C.  H.  Morgan,  Ph.D.) 

Vers.  5-9.  Awake,  ye  dnmkards,  and  weep. — TJie  insensibility  and  misery  of  the 
drunkard : — The  prophet  now  endeavours  to  awaken  certain  characters  in  the  nation 
to  an  earnest  sense  of  the  woe  that  has  overtaken  them,  and  to  deep  repentance,  that 
it  may  be  averted.  His  first  warning  cry  is  to  the  drunkard.  The  evils  of  intoxica- 
tion are  often  intimately  connected  with  national  plagues,  and  require  that  earnest 
ministries  should  be  directed  against  them.  I.  That  the  dkxtnkard  is  insensible 
TO  THE  MOST  liiPOKTANT  coNCEBNS  OF  LIFE.  "  Awake."  The  prophet  knew  that 
it  was  the  tendency  of  intoxicating  drink  to  cast  men  into  an  unholy  slumber, 
and  to  render  them  dangerously  insensible  to  the  most  important  things  around 
them.  1.  Intoxicating  drink  has  a  tendency  to  darken  the  intelligence  of  man. 
2.  Intoxicating  drink  has  a  tendency  to  deaden  the  moral  susceptibilities  of  man. 
These  drunkards  of  Judah  were  not  merely  mentally  blind  to  the  calamities  which 
had  come  upon  their  country,  but  were  morally  incapable  of  estimating  their 
due  social  effect.  3.  Intoxicating  drink  has  a  tendency  to  destroy  the  conscience 
of  man.  These  drunkards  of  Judah  probably  did  not  consider  that  they  were 
working  their  own  moral  degradation,  and  that  they  were  inviting  the  retribution 
of  heaven.  They  imagined  that  they  were  enjoying  the  plenty  they  possessed, 
and  that  they  were  the  happiest  of  men.  The  prosperity  of  fools  shaU  slay  them. 
II.  That  the  dbunkard  is  exposed  to  the  most  abject  miseby.  "  And 
howl,  all  ye  drinkers  of  wine,  because  of  the  new  wine  ;  for  it  is  cut  off  from  your 
mouth."  1.  He  is  liable  to  the  misery  of  self-loathing.  We  can  readily  imagine 
that  these  drunkards  of  Judah  would  now  and  then  awake  from  their  sottish 
slumber,  and  that  in  the  moment  of  bodily  pain  they  would  be  seized  with  sad 
thoughts  of  their  own  degradation.  2.  He  is  liable  to  the  misery  of  social  con- 
tempt. Drunkards  are  the  object  of  social  scorn,  they  are  incapable  of  industrious 
work,  they  are  injurious  to  the  common  good.  They  prostitute  great  abilities. 
They  misuse  golden  opportunities.  They  place  manhood  on  a  level  with  the 
brute.  3.  They  are  liable  to  the  misery  of  unsatisfied  appetite.  The  drunkards 
of  Judah  would  howl  because  the  new  wine  was  cut  off  from  their  mouth.  They 
had  abused  the  gifts  of  providence,  and  now  thej'  are  no  longer  allowed  to  enjoy 
them.  Sin  brings  the  wealthiest  of  sinners  to  want.  Plenty  at  one  time  is  no 
guarantee  against  penury  at  another.     In  the  next  life  the  appetite  which  sia 


CHAP,  l]  JOEL.  7 

has  created  will  be  for  ever  unsatisfied  ;  then  the  wine  will  indeed  be  cut  off 
from  the  mouth.     III.  That  thb  dbtjnkajbd  is  in  immkdiatb  kxed  of  the  most 

EARNEST   MINISTBY   WHICH   CAN   BE    ADDRESSED   TO   HIM.       We   Caiinot   but  See   in 

this  verse  that  the  prophet  addressed  the  drunkards  of  Judah  in  earnest  and 
faithful  speech.  He  called  them  by  their  right  name.  He  urged  them  to  thought- 
fulness  and  repentance.  There  is  need  that  the  pulpit  of  our  age  should  take 
up  his  cry.  Lessons — 1.  That  the  drvmkard  is  incapable  of  the  qualities  necessary 
for  true  citizenship.  2.  That  many  national  calamities  are  occasioned  by  the 
driinkard.  3.  That  the  most  effective  ministries  of  the  Church  should  be  directed 
against  this  terrible  evil.  (J.  S.  Exdl,  M.A.)  Judgments  adapted  to  sins  .'— • 
Prevailing  sins  are  often  visited  with  corresponding  judgments.  The  Lord  in 
His  righteous  dealings  withholds  those  gifts  of  His  providence  which  have  been 
abused.  He  takes  from  an  ungodly  people  the  means  of  gratifying  their  lusts, 
and  leads  them  to  repentance  by  afflictions  which  are  not  capriciously  ordered, 
but  with  exactest  wisdom  suited  to  their  character.  Thus,  to  check  a  thoughtless 
indifference  to  religion.  He  sends  forth  pestilences  which  strike  down  thousands 
and  spread  universal  dismay.  To  restrain  from  habits  of  self-indulgence  and 
extravagance,  He  causes  a  blight  to  fall  upon  the  earth,  bringing  on  scarceness 
and  want.  To  put  a  rein  upon  the  unsatiated  pursuit  of  wealth,  He  allows  a 
panic  on  the  Stock  Exchange.  So  here  the  prophet  denounces  no  other  woe 
against  the  drunkards  than  the  deprivation  of  the  wine  they  had  abused.  It 
is  not  unlikely  that  this  part  of  the  prophecy  has  a  literal  as  well  as  symbolical 
aspect,  that  it  inveighs  against  intemperance  as  well  as  idolatry.  It  was  sensuality 
that  first  led  the  Israelites  into  idolatry.  Persistence  in  indulgences  so  debilitated 
their  minds  and  blinded  their  understandings  as  to  cause  them  to  apostatise 
from  Jehovah,  and  fall  down  before  images  of  wood  and  stone.  On  no  class  of 
persons  do  God's  judgments  faU  more  heavily  than  on  those  who  embrute  their 
souls  with  the  intoxicating  delights  of  idolatrous  worship.  (C.  Robinson,  LL.D.) 
Woe  to  drunkards  : — Satan  has  three  or  four  grades  down  which  he  takes  men 
to  destruction.  One  man  he  takes  up,  and  through  one  spree  pitches  him  into 
eternal  darkness.  That  is  a  rare  case.  Very  seldom,  indeed,  can  you  find  a 
man  who  will  be  such  a  fool  as  that.  Satan  will  take  another  man  to  a  grade, 
to  a  descent  at  an  angle  about  like  that  of  the  Pennsylvania  coal-shute  or  the 
Mount  Washington  rail-track,  and  shove  him  off.  But  that  is  very  rare.  When 
a  man  goes  down  to  destruction  Satan  brings  him  to  a  plane.  It  is  almost  a  level. 
The  depression  is  so  slight  that  you  can  hardly  see  it.  The  man  does  not  actually 
know  that  he  is  on  the  down  grade  and  it  tips  only  a  little  towards  darkness — 
just  a  little.  And  the  first  mile  it  is  claret,  and  the  second  mile  it  is  sherry,  and 
the  third  mile  it  is  punch,  and  the  fourth  mile  it  is  ale,  and  the  fifth  mile  it  is 
porter,  and  the  sixth  mile  it  is  brandy,  and  then  it  gets  steeper  and  steeper  and 
steeper  and  the  man  gets  frightened  and  says,  "  Oh,  let  me  get  off  !  "  "  No," 
says  the  conductor,  "  this  is  an  express  train,  and  it  does  not  stop  until  it  gets 
to  the  Grand  Central  Depot  at  Smashupton."  (T.  De  Witt  Talinage.)  For  a 
nation  is  come  up  upon  my  land,  strong,  and  without  number. — The  agencies  of 
Divine  retribution  : — It  is  generally  the  way  of  God  to  meet  sin  by  appropriate 
retribution ;  hence  He  destroys  the  vines  of  the  drunkard.  Some  men  are  only 
reached  through  the  lowest  propensities  of  their  nature,  and  are  only  conscious 
of  penalty  when  their  carnal  wants  are  unsupplied.  I.  That  the  agencies 
OF  Divine  eetribution  are  great  in  their  number.  "  For  a  nation  is  come 
up  upon  my  land,  strong,  and  without  number."  1.  These  agencies  are  numerous. 
The  locusts  did  not  come  in  a  single  flight,  but  in  incredible  and  successive  swarms. 
Heaven  has  an  infinite  resource  of  retributive  messengers  waiting  its  behest. 
It  can  soon  darken  our  lives  by  a  throng  of  hostile  energies.  2.  These  agencies 
are  strong.  True,  these  locusts  were  in  themselves  weak  and  diminutive  creatmres. 
They  were  not  like  the  proud  monarch  of  the  forest,  and  had  not  the  majestio 
appearance  or  strength  of  the  lion  or  the  bear.  They  were  insects.  And  so  the 
most  trivial  agencies  of  the  universe,  when  sent  by  God  to  punish  sin,  become 
mighty  and  resistless.  Then  the  superior  intelligence  of  man  wiU  avail  nothing 
against  them.  Then  the  pride  of  the  mighty  will  be  brought  to  the  dust.  3.  These 
agencies  are  united.  The  locusts  came  upon  the  land  of  Judah  as  though  they 
were  animated  by  one  national  policy.  The  ants  and  conies  are  designated  a 
people  (Prov.  xxx.  25,  26),  indicative  of  the  wisdom  by  which  they  are  Divinely 
taught  to  act.  Hence  the  term  nation  gives  no  favour  to  the  view  that  the  locusts 
are  symbolical  of  a  foreign  invasion.     And  so  the  retributive  agenoies  of  heaveQ 

\ 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

often  come  upon  the  wicked  in  terrible  combination.  The  agencies  of  Eternal 
Justice  are  unconsciously  in  sympathy  with  each  other,  and  advance  in  one 
vast  army  to  execute  the  penalty  of  sin.  II.  That  the  agencies  of  Divine 
KETBiBTJTioN  ARE  WELL  EQUIPPED  FOB  THEIR  woEK.  "  Whose  teeth  are  the 
teeth  of  a  lion,  and  he  hath  the  cheek-teeth  of  a  great  lion."  1.  Their  equipment 
is  appropriate.  The  teeth  of  the  locust  are  said  to  be  "  harder  than  stone." 
They  appear  to  be  created  for  a  scourge  ;  since  to  strength  incredible  for  so  small 
a  creature,  they  add  saw-like  teeth  admirably  calculated  to  eat  up  all  the  herbs 
in  the  land.  The  providence  of  God  in  executing  the  penalty  of  sin  generally 
employs  those  agencies  whose  natural  constitution  the  best  fit  them  for  the  end 
contemplated.  Heaven  knows  the  most  appropriate  instrumentalities  by  which 
to  punish  the  sinner.  2.  Their  e(i#ipment  is  fierce.  These  locusts  were  armed 
as  with  the  cheek-teeth  of  a  great  lion.  Thus  they  would  be  able  to  bite  off  the 
top,  branches,  and  boughs  of  trees.  And  truly  there  are  times  when  the  judgments 
of  heaven  come  fiercely  upon  the  wicked,  and  destroy  all  that  is  precious  to  them. 
III.  That  the  agencies  of  Divine  retbibxition  are  desolating  in  their 
EFFECT.  "  He  hath  laid  my  vine  waste,  and  barked  my  fig-tree  :  he  hath  made 
it  clean  bare,  and  cast  it  away  ;  the  branches  thereof  are  made  white."  I.  They 
desolate  things  of  the  greatest  value.  These  locusts  laid  waste  the  noblest  and 
most  valuable  fruit-trees  of  the  land,  which  the  Lord  had  given  to  His  people 
for  their  inheritance.  The  messengers  of  Eternal  Justice  will  not  spare  the  vines 
and  fig-trees  of  a  sinful  life.  They  strike  at  the  root  of  all  secular  prosperity. 
2.  They  desolate  things  to  the  utmost  extent.  These  locusts  attacked  the  herbage, 
fruit,  leaves  of  trees,  the  young  shoots,  and  their  bark.  Everything  in  the  country 
w£i8  devoured  and  made  clean  bare.  And  so  the  agencies  of  Divine  retribution 
sometimes  spread  their  desolation  over  a  vast  area,  over  the  entire  history  of  a 
nation,  throughout  the  entire  circumstances  of  a  family,  or  of  an  individual. 
They  leave  no  token  of  former  splendour.  3.  They  desolate  things  to  the  remotest 
period.  The  agencies  of  Divine  retribution  often  achieve  a  destruction  which 
is  felt  to  the  end  of  life.     IV.  That  the  agencies  of  Divine  retbibtttion  abb 

PBODUCTIVB    OF    SAD    CONTEMPLATION    IN    THE    MIND    OF    THE    TBTILY    PATRIOTIC. 

"  For  a  nation  is  come  up  upon  my  land."  The  prophet  here  speaks  in  his  character 
of  representative  of  the  people  of  God,  and  sees  in  the  desolation  of  his  country 
an  occasion  for  sorrow.  Hence  the  prophet,  regarding  the  land  as  a  Christian 
patriot,  was  pained  by  its  desolation,  and  sought  to  remove  the  cause  of  the 
Divine  anger.  Piety  makes  men  truly  patriotic.  Lessons — 1.  That  the  retributive 
agencies  of  heaven  are  countless  in  number.  2.  That  the  retributive  agencies 
of  heaven  are  effective  in  equipment.  3.  That  the  retributive  agencies  of  heaven 
spare  not  the  most  sacred  possessions.  (J.  8.  Exell,  M.A.)  And  barked  my  fig- 
tree. — The  fig-tree  barked: — We  all  have  our  fig-trees,  and  very  early  we  become 
proprietors.  Do  these  fig-trees  continue  to  live  and  to  thrive  ?  Experience 
and  observation  furnish  a  prompt  and  sufficient  reply.  To  bark  a  tree  is  to  destroy 
it.  To  bark  our  fig-tree  is  to  remove  that  in  which  we  have  found  chief  pleasure 
and  advantage.  I.  When  may  God  be  said  to  bark  our  fig-tree  ?  1.  When 
God  renders  that  which  has  been  useful  to  us  useless,  and  that  which  has  been 
pleasant,  obnoxious ;  and  that  which  has  been  helpful,  injurious.  2.  When  God 
removes  something  from  us  which  He  has  given  to  us,  and  which  we  have  taken 
to  our  hearts  as  all-important,  and  as  supremely  precious.  3.  By  breaking  up 
some  work  of  ours  in  which  we  have  found  much  pleasure ;  or  by  rooting  up 
something  which  we  have  planted,  it  may  be  with  tears,  it  may  be  with  joy. 
II.  By  what  means  does  God  bark  our  fio-tbees  T  God  uses  various  means. 
He  may  permit  some  devil,  commission  some  angel,  allow  or  employ  a  fellow-man 
to  bark  our  tree.  He  may  use  some  inanimate  and  unconscious  agent.  Or  He  may 
effect  the  destructive  work  by  some  influence  upon  our  minds  and  hearts.  III.  With 
what  intent  is  this  done  ?  What  is  the  end  of  the  Lord  ?  Does  He  do  this 
wantonly,  cruelly,  ignorantly,  or  unwisely  ?  Nay,  His  object  is  either  correction  or 
prevention.  IV.  How  should  a  man  of  God  demean  himself  when  God  barks 
HiSFiG-TBEE?  Submit  quietly.  Reverently  ask,  Why  has  God  done  this  ?  Learn 
to  use  all  temporal  things  without  abusing  them.  [Samuel  Martin.)  Barked  fig- 
trees  : — I.  Look  at  some  of  these  barked  fig-trees.  High  hopes  are  often 
changed  into  cruel  disappointments.  Bright  prospects  of  coming  happiness  are 
turned,  like  fairy  gold,  into  withered  leaves.  A  young  man's  fig-tree  is  a  healthy 
body  and  high  spirits,  and  that  tree  is  barked  when  affliction  seizes  him,  and  bodily 
weakness  and  mental  depression  make  him  as  pale  and  helpless  as  a  downright 


CHAP.  I.]  JOEL.  9 

old  man.  A  workman's  fig-tree  is  regular  work  and  a  living  wage  ;  that  tree  is 
barked  when  work  is  scarce  and  wages  low.  The  tradesman's  fig-tree  is  a  pros- 
perous business  ;  providence  smiles  upon  him,  friends  multiply,  and  everything 
promises  a  golden  harvest,  when  suddenly  he  meets  with  disappointment, 
his  schemes  axe  thwarted,  the  bank  fails,  and  he  is  doomed  to  spend  a  helpless 
and  penniless  old  age.  A  family's  fig-tree  is  the  father  and  husband ;  and  it  is 
barked  when  he  is  smitten  down  by  death.  The  old  man's  fig-tree  is  a  gladsome 
old  age,  which  he  hopes  to  spend  with  his  wife  and  children  '  about  him  " ;  and 
that  tree  is  barked  when  he  suddenly  dies  before  he  has  realised  a  thousandth 
part  of  his  anticipated  enjoyment.  The  invalid's  fig-tree  is  some  glimmering  hope 
of  returning  health ;  and  it  is  barked  when  the  doctor  tells  him  that  his  disease  is 
incurable,  and  that  he  must  die.  II.  Who  barks  our  fio-trees  ?  The  prophet, 
looking  up  to  God,  said,  "  Thou  hast  barked  my  fig-tree."  The  affairs  of  men, 
and  especially  of  good  men,  are  under  God's  wise,  omniscient,  benevolent,  and 
almighty  control.  Were  there  no  particular,  there  could  be  no  general  providence, 
for  it  seems  quite  impossible  to  take  care  of  the  whole  if  the  separate  and  dependent 
parts  be  neglected.  He  holds  the  helm  of  the  universe,  and  He  will  bring  us 
into  the  desired  haven.  III.  Why  does  God  bark  our  fig-trees  ?  1.  Does 
He  do  it  unkindly  ?  No  !  He  is  too  good  to  be  unkind.  2.  Does  He  do  it  unwisely  ? 
No  !  He  is  too  wise  to  en\  3.  God  barks  oxa  fig-trees  in  mercy,  and  not  in  wrath. 
We  are  prone  to  think  too  much  of  those  trees  ;  to  bestow  too  much  thought  and 
affection  upon  them,  and  to  expect  too  much  happiness  from  them.  4.  Barked 
fig-trees  destroy  worldliness.  Thomas  Erskine  used  to  say :  "  Education  would 
cease  if  we  and  our  circumstances  fitted  each  other."  If  our  position  in  this 
world  were  always  one  of  unmixed  comfort,  I'm  afraid  we  should  never  stretch 
our  desires  for  a  better.  It  is  often  said  that  the  world  satisfies  no  one  ;  but,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  most  men  are  so  satisfied  with  it  that  they  feel  no  concern  for 
a  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly.  Now,  what  is  God  to  do  with  such  people 
if  their  souls  are  not  to  be  lost,  but  saved  ?  They  must  be  rendered  dissatisfied 
with  their  earthly  condition,  and  be  made  to  welcome  the  hope  of  a  happier  state 
beyond  the  grave.  And  what  is  so  likely  to  do  this  as  some  dispensation  which 
snatches  from  them  the  objects  of  their  inordinate  affection  ?  5.  Barked  fig-trees 
help  to  mature  Christian  character.  In  the  midst  of  our  heaviest  trials  and  deepest 
woes  we  can  sing  of  mercy  as  well  as  of  judgment.  (1)  Job's  fig-tree  was  barked 
(James  v.  11 ).  (2)  Jacob's  fig-tree  was  barked.  The  loss  of  Joseph  was  regarded  by 
his  family  as  a  great  domestic  calamity.  (3)  Paul's  fig-tree  was  barked.  He  suffered 
imprisonment  at  Rome;  some  false  brethren  created  division  and  strife  in  the  Church. 
(4)  Barked  fig-trees  help  to  develop  latent  qualities.  It  was  when  Paul  Gerdhart 
was  banished  from  his  church  and  manse,  for  preaching  unpalatable  truth,  that 
he  wrote  that  inspiring  hymn,  "  Give  to  the  winds  thy  fears,"  &c.  IV.  What 
ARE  THE  LESSONS  THAT  THIS  SUBJECT  SUGGESTS  ?  1.  Rccognise  the  providcnco 
of  God  in  all  the  events  of  life.  2.  Moral  goodness  is  the  aim  of  all  God's  dispensa- 
tions.   3.  Trust  God's  providence.     (H.  Woodcock.) 

Vers.  8-10.  lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth  for  the  husband  of  her 
youth.  The  meat-oflfering  and  the  drink-offering  is  cut  off  from  the  house  of  the 
Lord. — The  worship  of  Qod  sadly  neglected  throiigh  the  failure  of  temporal  resource  : — 
I.  That  a  neglected  worship  is  often  consequent  upon  the  failure  of  the 
TEMPORAL  resource  OF  A  PEOPLE.  To  the  Jews  the  suspension  of  the  daily  sacrifice 
was  the  suspension  of  the  appointed  sign  indicating  that  they  were  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  therefore  the  last  of  evils.  And  so  there  is  ever  an  intimate  cormection 
between  temporal  resource  and  the  worship  of  God ;  a  desolated  commerce  will 
probably  involve  a  neglected  temple.  When  the  harvests  fail  the  offerings  of 
the  soul  are  not  brought  into  the  sanctuary.  1.  That  anything  which  tends  to 
increase  the  temporal  resource  of  a  people  gives  them  an  increased  power  of  temple- 
worship.  It  is  the  duty  of  man  to  give  himself  to  industry  and  profitable  labour 
that  he  may  win  the  means  which  shall  enable  him  to  come  into  the  sanctuary 
with  the  offering  of  the  Lord.  2.  That  our  temporal  resources  are  not  to  be  devoted 
merely  to  the  secular  needs  of  a  people  but  also  to  the  worship  of  God.  The 
people  of  Judah  were  required  not  merely  to  supply  their  own  need  with  the 
fruit  of  the  vine  and  of  the  field,  they  were  required  out  of  it  to  support  the  service 
of  the  temple  and  the  worship  of  God.  The  fine  flour  and  oil  they  gave  to  the 
priest  they  first  received  from  God,  and  hence  it  was  right  that  they  should  recog- 
nise the  Divine  beneficence.     How  many  rich  men  amongst  us  would  see  the 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cjhap.  i. 

daily  offering  of  the  temple  languish  before  they  would  aid  it  even  by  a  small 

fift !  Wealth  can  be  consecrated  to  no  higher  service  than  that  of  the  temple. 
I.  That  a  suspended  worship  cannot  but  be  regarded  as  an  indication 
OF  THE  Divine  displeasure.  Surely  the  announcement  of  the  prophet,  that 
the  temple  offerings  were  suspended,  would  run  throughout  the  land  of  Judah, 
and  would  lead  many  souls  to  ask  the  reason  why.  Hence  we  gather — 1.  That 
the  agencies  of  Divine  retribution  are  likely  to  prevent  a  sinful  people  from  the 
enjoyment  of  secular  prosperity.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  vines  and  fields 
of  a  wicked  people  will  be  destroyed  by  the  retributive  hand  of  God.  Secidar 
prosperity  is  more  dependent  upon  moral  character  than  many  are  inclined 
to  admit.  Sin  blights  many  harvests.  2.  That  a  well-maintained  temple-worship 
is  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  favour.  A  well-supported  temple-worship  is  an 
index  of  sanctified  wealth  and  of  the  Divine  approval.  III.  That  a  neglected 
worship  calls  for  the  deep  grief  of  all  reflective  minds.  The  land  of 
Judah  was  to  lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth  for  the  husband  of  her 
youth,  who  had  been  snatched  from  her  when  she  was  betrothed  to  him,  but 
had  not  yet  been  taken  to  his  house.  The  time  of  betrothal  varied  from  a  few 
days  in  the  Patriarchal  age  (Gen.  xxiv.  55)  to  a  full  year  in  later  times.  Hence 
the  people  of  Judah  were  not  to  regard  the  judgments  which  had  come  upon 
them  with  indifference,  with  a  mere  conventional  grief,  but  with  an  anguish 
akin  to  that  experienced  by  a  youthful  wife  bereaved  of  her  husband.     We  see — 

1.  That  a  neglected  worship  should  awaken  deep  grief  of  soul.  Lamentation 
in  the  hour  of  bereavement  is  commended  by  men,  but  in  the  cause  of  God  is 
regarded  as  a  sign  of  mental  weakness.  Ought  this  to  be  so  ?  2.  That  a  neglected 
worship  should  lead  to  outward  tokens  of  the  grief  of  the  soul.  Judah  was  not 
merely  to  lament  like  a  bereaved  virgin,  but  was  to  be  girded  with  sackcloth. 
IV.  That  a  suspended  worship  will  especially  awaken  painful  solicitude 
within  the  heart  of  the  true  minister.  "  The  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers, 
mourn."  1.  That  ministers  of  the  truth  are  often  the  first  to  be  affected  by  great 
calamities.  The  priests  of  Judah  would  pre-eminently  feel  the  effect  of  the 
terrible  devastation  that  had  come  upon  the  land  ;  they  would  suffer  through 
the  neglected  worship  of  the  temple,  as  they  would  cease  to  fulfil  their  ofiBce, 
and  would  be  deprived  of  their  livelihood.  He  stands  at  the  very  heart  of  society, 
and  the  most  deeply  feels  the  woe  inflicted  by  the  retributive  agencies  of  God. 

2.  That  ministers  of  the  truth  ought  to  be  the  first  to  set  an  example  of  repent- 
ance in  the  hour  of  calamity.  Lessons — 1.  That  all  temporal  resource  shovdd 
be  regarded  as  the  gift  of  God.  2.  That  the  withdrawal  of  temporal  prosperity 
is  calculated  to  affect  the  worship  of  God.  3.  That  the  suspension  of  the  worship 
of  the  sanctuary  is  a  token  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Tlie 
land  moumeUx. —  Nature'' s  voice  : — The  poets  of  all  nations  give  nature  a  voice, 
and  make  her  share  man's  feeling,  as  man  shares  her  plenty  or  calamity.  The 
Hebrew  preacher  shews  the  sanctity  of  life  by  moiu-ning  the  dearth  of  Jehovah's 
altar.  Instead  of  the  abandoned  licence  which  in  Florence,  London,  &c.,  great 
calamities  produce,  or  the  bloody  offerings  which  the  Phoenicians  and  earliest 
Greeks  practised,  he  calls  for  prayer  and  solemnity.  In  all  ages,  when  human 
effort  is  at  an  end,  an  irrepressible  instinct  bids  us  cry  to  God.  We  may  be  tempted 
to  doubt  whether  unblest  seasons  are  the  "  days  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  14),  or  are 
shortcomings  of  nature,  bound  by  wider  necessity  than  the  law  of  our  convenience ; 
and  such  doubts  are  net  useless  in  bidding  us  exhaust  the  range  of  human  effort, 
while  the  preacher  joins  the  philosopher  in  bidding  us  not  appease  God  with 
cruelty  or  wrong ;  yet  the  instinct  remains  vmreproved  by  anything  we  know 
of  the  Divine  government ;  and  our  own  prayers  (ver.  18),  justified  by  reason, 
seem  joined  by  the  instinctive  cries  (ver.  19)  of  brute  creatures  in  distress. 
{Rotdand  Williams,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  harvest  of  the  field  is  perished. — The  destriictive  iiature 
of  sin : — The  prophet  still  lingers  on  the  theme  of  his  solemn  and  faithful  discourses 
and  urges  all  classes  to  attend  to  him  that  their  sin  and  sorrow  may  be  removed. 
He  did  not  seek  new  or  pleasing  themes  on  which  to  address  the  nation.  He  was 
anxious  to  produce  a  deep  and  lasting  conviction,  and  hence  dwelt  long  on  the 
subject  which  he  felt  to  be  of  the  greatest  importance.  I.  It  is  destructive 
of  human  labour.  "  Because  the  harvest  of  the  field  is  perished."  The  tillers 
of  Judah  had  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  in  cultivating  their  soil ;  they  had  ploughed 
and  sowed  it,  and  certainly  expected  as  the  result  a  rich  and  golden  harvest. 


CHAP.  I.]  JOEL.  11 

Also  the  vine  dressers  had  worked  hard  in  the  vineyards  in  watering  and  pruning 
the  vines,  and  anticipated  their  reward.  But  the  wheat  and  barley  were  destroyed 
before  they  were  ripe ;  and  the  vines  were  withered.  Thus  we  see  how  sin  destroys 
the  products  of  human  labour  and  industry ;  how  it  utterly  wastes  those  things 
which  are  designed  by  God  to  supply  the  wants  of  man,  and  to  be  remunerative 
of  his  energy.  1.  Sin  is  destructive  by  incapacitating  man  for  industrious  labour. 
There  are  many  men  so  enfeebled  by  sin  that  they  are  really  imable  to  go  into 
the  fields  and  attend  to  advancing  harvests,  they  are  unable  to  look  after  the 
growth  of  the  vines  and  the  pomegranate-tree.  They  are  divested  of  their  vital 
energy  and  of  their  muscular  power  by  a  continued  habit  of  transgression  against 
the  laws  of  pxirity  and  temperance.  2.  Sin  is  destructive  by  rendering  men  prodigal 
of  the  time  which  should  be  occupied  by  industrious  labour.  There  are  men 
who  will  only  work  three  or  four  days  in  a  week ;  the  rest  they  spend  in  idleness. 
Thus  fields  are  untilled,  the  vines  are  neglected,  while  indolent  pleasures  are 

f)ursued.  3.  Sin  is  destructive  by  diminishing  the  ultimate  utility  of  industrious 
abour.  The  fields  and  the  vines  may  be  productive  of  crops  and  fruits,  but  if 
man  were  a  saint  instead  of  a  sinner  he  would  enhance  their  value  by  putting 
them  to  the  best  and  highest  use.  Sin  makes  the  labour  of  men  less  useful  than 
otherwise  it  would  be.  11.  It  is  destructive  of  the  good  and  beauteous 
THINGS  OF  THE  MATERIAL  UNIVERSE.  1.  Sin  destroys  the  beautiful  things  of 
the  material  universe.  We  can  well  imagine  the  desolated  condition  of  the  land 
of  Judah  robbed  of  all  its  harvests  and  fruits.  The  corn  stricken.  The  vines 
withered.  The  trees  peeled  of  their  bark.  Nature,  divested  of  her  beautiful 
vesture  of  green  and  gay  life,  a  complete  wreck.  The  difference  between  Eden 
and  the  world  as  we  now  see  it  is  entirely  occasioned  by  sin.  How  lovely  would 
this  universe  appear  were  all  sin  removed  from  amidst  its  fields  and  vines  !  2.  Sin 
destroys  the  valuable  things  of  the  material  universe.  It  destroys  the  things 
which  are  appointed  to  sustain  the  very  life  of  man,  and  failing  which  the  grave 
is  immediately  sure.  It  does  not  merely  destroy  the  little  superfluities  of  the 
universe,  but  its  most  essential  and  strongest  things.  III.  It  is  destructive  of 
THAT  JOY  WHICH  IS  THE  DESTINED  HERITAGE  OF  MAN.  "  Because  joy  is  withered 
away  from  the  sons  of  men."  1.  It  is  certain  that  God  designed  that  man  should 
experience  enjoyment  in  a  wise  use  of  the  things  around  him.  God  does  not 
wish  man  to  be  miserable  in  the  universe  which  He  has  made  for  his  welfare. 
But  the  use  of  His  creatures  must  be  wise.  They  must  not  be  abused  by  excess 
or  ingratitude,  or  they  will  be  withdrawn,  and  the  joy  they  should  give  will  be 
turned  into  mourning.  Let  us  not  rest  in  the  creature,  but  in  the  Creator,  and 
seek  all  our  joy  in  Him,  then  it  shall  never  fail.  2.  Sin  is  destructive  of  those 
things  which  should  inspire  joy  in  the  soul  of  man.  It  destroys  the  harvests 
to  which  he  had  looked  forward  as  the  reward  of  earnest  toil.  It  brings  him 
into  great  need  and  destitution.  It  hushes  the  joy  of  a  nation.  Lessons — 1.  That 
sin  is  destructive  of  human  toil.  2.  That  sin  divests  the  world  of  its  beauty. 
3.  That  sin  is  incompatible  with  true  joy.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  advantages 
of  a  bad  harvest : — A  harvest  may  be  called  bad  as  compared  with  expectation 
or  as  compared  with  crops  of  former  years ;  or  as  compared  with  the  harvests 
of  other  lands.  Under  God's  benign  providence  a  bad  harvest  is  an  instrument 
for  good  to  men.  Like  all  chastisement,  it  becomes  a  blessing  to  such  as  are 
"  exercised  thereby."  I.  It  recalls  us  to  a  sense  of  our  dependence  upon 
God.  In  these  days  law  is  everything.  There  is  a  tendency  to  exclude  God 
from  nature.  What  is  law  but  His  will  7  Adversity  helps  to  cure  this  sore  evil. 
Do  what  men  will,  they  cannot  make  sure  of  results.  There  are  causes  beyond 
their  ken.     There  are  influences  at  work  which  they  cannot  control.     II.  It 

AWAKENS   us   TO   A   DEEPER    FEELING    OF    THE    EVTL    OF    SEN.       Calamity   witnesses 

for  God  against  sin.  Things  are  out  of  course.  Every  pain,  every  sorrow,  every 
disaster  is  a  call  to  repentance.  Calamity  that  affects  a  whole  people  is  as 
the  ringing  of  the  great  bell  of  providence,  summoning  a  whole  nation  to  repent. 

III.    It   serves   as  a  time   of  discipline   fob  the  improvement   OF  CHARACTER 

AND  THE  PROMOTION  OF  THE  GENERAL  GOOD.  Calamity  is  fitted  to  humble  us. 
It  teaches  patience.  It  stimulates  thrift  and  economy.  It  quickens  the  inventive 
faculties.  It  moves  the  heart  to  a  truer  sympathy  with  tho  struggling  and  the 
poor.  It  develops  trade  and  commerce  and  civilisation.  And  commerce  becomes 
a  pioneer  of  the  Gospel.  IV.  It  impresses  the  soul  with  a  sense  of  its  hioheb 
needs  and  duties.  This  great  lesson  is  always  needful,  and  never  more  than 
in  this  grossly  material  age.     V.  It  invites  us  to  draw  nearer  to  God,  aitd 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

TO  KEGAED  HiM  AS  THE  ONLY  TRtTB  AND  SUPEEME  GOD.       If  WC  believe  Oil  Christ 

we  should  be  brave  and  hopeful.  Let  the  worst  come  to  the  worst,  our  highest 
interests  are  safe.  In  the  most  desperate  straits  we  may  rejoice  in  God.  ( WUltam 
Forsyth,  M.A.)  The  shame  of  the  husbandman: — The  husbandmen  and  vine- 
dressers should  be  ashamed,  and  disappointed  of  their  expectations,  through 
the  barrenness  of  land  and  trees.  1.  Albeit  men  are  boimd  to  labour  for  their 
daily  bread,  yet  except  God  bless,  their  labour  wiU  be  in  vain,  and  their  expectations 
by  it  end  in  sad  disappointments.  2.  Sin  doth  procure  great  desolation,  and  doth 
provoke  God  to  destroy  whatsoever  is  pleasant  or  profitable  to  the  sinner,  and 
leave  him  under  confusion  and  sorrow.  So  much  is  imported  in  the  first  reason 
of  their  shame  and  howling.  3.  Albeit  men  ordinarily  count  little  of  the  mercy 
of  their  daily  bread,  and  of  the  increase  of  their  labours,  yet  the  want  of  it  would 
soon  be  felt  as  a  sad  stroke,  and  will  overturn  much  of  their  joy  and  cheerfulness. 
4.  The  matter  of  men's  joy  is  God's  gift,  to  give  or  take  it  away  as  He  pleaseth  ; 
and  whatever  joy,  warranted  or  unlawful,  men  have  about  anything  beneath 
God,  it  is  but  uncertain  and  fading,  and  ought  to  be  looked  on  as  such  ;  for  here, 
when  God  pleaseth.  He  maketh  joy  to  '  wither  away."  {George  Hutcheson.) 
All  the  trees  of  the  field  are  witiiered. — The  voice  in  withered  leaves : — I.  We 
HAVE  A  REMINDER  OF  man's  MORTALITY.  "  We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf."  On  festive 
occasions  the  ancients  had  a  curious  custom  to  remind  them  of  their  mortality. 
Just  before  the  feast  a  skeleton  was  carried  about  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled 
guests.  The  value  of  human  life  does  not  depend  upon  its  length  so  much  as 
upon  its  fulness.  II.  We  have  a  reminder  of  the  perishing  nature  op  all 
EARTHLY  THINGS.  The  picture  of  withered  nature  in  ovi  text  is  of  blight  in 
summer — death  just  when  life  is  most  expected.  It  is  used  by  Joel  as  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  material  decay  of  Israel,  living  in  sin,  and  exposed  to  the  inroads  of 
enemies  without  the  favour  and  protection  of  God.  Material  blessings  are  pro- 
vided for  us  by  the  Giver  of  all  good,  but  we  must  remember  that  transitory 
and  uncertain  are  the  things  that  appear  most  stable.  Men  forget  this,  and  reap 
bitter  disappointments  in  life.  III.  We  have  a  reminder  of  the  resurrection. 
The  leaves  are  falling,  but  the  trees  are  not  dying.  In  the  very  decay  of  autumn 
we  have  the  promise  and  hope  of  spring.  And  this  is  the  hope  of  the  Christian 
in  view  of  decay  and  death.  At  every  stage  of  life  we  suffer  loss  and  decay,  but 
every  stage  brings  also  fresh  gain  and  new  experience.  And  when  we  come 
to  the  last  stage  it  will  be  so  in  richer  measure.  Our  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope. 
{James  Menzies.)  Because  Joy  is  withered  away  ft'om  the  sons  of  men. — 
Sin  destroys  joy : — A  brittle  thing  is  our  earthly  happiness — brittle  as  some  thin 
vase  of  Venetian  glass ;  and  yet  neither  anxiety,  nor  sorrow,  nor  the  dart  of 
death,  which  is  mightier  than  the  oak-cleaving  thunderbolt,  can  shatter  a  thing 
even  so  brittle  as  the  earthly  happiness  of  our  poor  little  homes  if  we  place  that 
happiness  under  the  care  of  God.  But  though  neither  anguish  nor  death  can 
break  it  with  all  their  violence,  sin  can  break  it  at  a  touch ;  and  selfishness  can 
shatter  it,  just  as  there  are  acids  which  will  shiver  the  Venetian  glass.  Sin  and 
selfishness — God's  balm  does  not  heal  in  this  world  the  ravages  which  they  cause  ! 
{Dean  Farrar.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Gird  yourselves,  and  lament,  ye  priests :  howl,  ye  ministers  of 

the  altar. — Ministerial  duty  in  the  time  of  dire  national  calamity  : — The  prophet 
now  directs  his  message  to  the  priests  of  Judah,  and  intimates  that  the 
calamity  which  had  befallen  their  nation  had  a  deep  moral  significance  to 
which  they  should  give  earnest  heed,  and  which  should  awaken  them  to  immediate 
activity.  1.  That  in  times  of  national  calv^ity  the  ministerial  officb 
BECOMES  OF  THE  HIGHEST  IMPORTANCE.  It  IB  evident  that  Joel  regarded  the 
office  of  the  priest  as  of  the  highest  importance  in  these  times  of  dread  calamity. 
He  had  called  the  drunkards  from  their  slumber,  but  they  could  do  nothing  to 
avert  the  immediate  danger.  He  had  made  known  to  the  husbandmen  the  extent 
of  their  loss,  but  they  could  not  render  much  aid  in  the  terrible  crisis ;  but  now 
he  turns  to  the  priests,  and  urges  upon  them  the  duty  of  initiating  and  guiding 
the  nation  to  a  reformed  life.  He  Knew  that  they  would  be  more  likely  than 
any  other  class  of  men  to  help  him  in  this  arduous  work.  And  why  ?  I.  Because 
the  ministerial  office  wields  a  great  social  influence,  and  is  therefore  competent 
to  initiate  moral  reformation-  2.  Because  the  ministerial  office  is  supposed  to 
seek  the  general  good  of  men,  and  will  therefore  be  credited  with  lofty  motive 
in  seeking  moral  reformation.     3.  Because  the  ministeriaJ  office  touches  the 


CHAP.  I.]  JOEL.  13 

springs  of  the  inner  life  of  a  nation,  and  can  therefore  infuse  healing  remedy. 
II.  That  in  time  of  national  calamity  the  ministerial  office  should  be 
BEPENTANT  IN  ITS  INMOST  SOUL.  "  Gird  yourselves,  and  lament,  ye  priests  : 
howl,  ye  ministers  of  the  altar :  come,  lie  all  night  in  sackcloth,  ye  ministers 
of  my  God."  1.  Then  the  ministerial  office  should  be  characterised  by  quick 
energy.  The  priests  of  Judah  were  to  gird  themselves.  They  were  to  hasten 
at  once  to  the  duty  required  by  the  circumstances  of  the  nation  and  by  the 
retribution  of  God.  This  was  no  time  for  indifference  or  sloth ;  their  best  ener- 
gies were  required.  2.  Then  the  ministerial  office  should  be  characterised  by 
deep  sorrow.  The  priests  of  Judah  were  to  lament  and  put  on  tokens  of  deep 
grief ;  they  were  to  robe  themselves  in  sackcloth.  Their  outward  attire  was 
to  be  indicative  of  their  inward  feeling  of  repentance  before  God.  3.  Then  the 
ministerial  office  should  be  characterised  by  untiring  watchfulness.  The  priests 
of  Judah  were  to  lie  all  night  in  sackcloth  and  give  themselves  to  prayer ;  their 
tears  of  repentance  were  not  to  be  wiped  away  by  the  gentle  hand  of  sleep. 
4.  Then  the  ministerial  office  should  be  characterised  by  true  humility.  We 
can  readily  imagine  that  the  priests  of  Judah  would  experience  a  sense  of  humilia- 
tion as  they  gazed  upon  the  neglected  temple  worship,  and  they  would  bow  in 
abasement  before  the  Lord  of  the  temple.     III.  That  in  times  of  national 

CALAMITY   the    MINISTERIAL    OFFICE    MUST   ENDEAVOUR   TO    AWAKEN   THE    PEOPLE 

TO  THE  INITIAL  ACTS  OF  REFORMATION.  "  Sanctify  ye  a  fast,"  &c.  1.  They 
proclaim  a  fast.  The  priests  of  Judah  were  to  proclaim  a  fast,  and  they  were 
also  to  sanctify  it.  A  mere  abstinence  from  food  is  of  little  service  before  God 
unless  it  be  accompanied  by  those  thoughts  and  devotions  of  the  soul  which 
alone  can  hallow  it.  2.  They  call  an  assembly.  The  prophet  commands  that 
all  the  nation  should  be  called  and  gathered  into  the  temple,  that  public  prayer 
might  be  added  to  private  abstinence.  It  appears  that  fasting  was  always  con- 
nected with  a  solemn  convocation  ;  the  confession  and  humiliation  of  men  must 
be  unanimous  and  open.  Humiliation  for  sin  must  not  be  confined  to  secrecy 
and  solitude,  but  must  be  made  in  the  great  congregation,  that  the  law  which 
has  been  openly  broken  may  be  openly  honoured,  and  that  the  ways  of  God  may 
be  justified  before  men.  3.  They  urge  to  supplication.  The  putting  on  of  sack- 
cloth by  the  priests,  the  abstaining  from  food  by  the  people,  the  coming  into 
the  temple,  would  avail  nothing  unless  it  all  were  joined  with  earnest  suppli- 
cation ;  hence  the  assembled  worshippers  are  urged  to  cry  unto  the  Lord. 
Lessons : — I.  That  the  ministerial  office  should  exert  its  best  energy  to  prevent 
moral  apostasy  in  the  nation.  2.  That  in  times  of  such  apostasy  it  must  give 
an  example  of  true  repentance.  3.  That  in  such  times  it  should  initiate  the 
necessary  worship  in  order  to  avert  the  Divine  displeasure.  (J.  S.  Exell,  31. A.) 
Sanctify  ye  a  fast.  —  On  fast  day :  —  Fasting  has,  in  all  ages  and  among 
all  nations,  been  an  exercise  much  in  use  in  times  of  mourning  and  afflic- 
tion. There  is  no  example  of  fasting  before  the  time  of  Moses.  And  he  enjoins 
only  one  fast,  on  the  solemn  day  of  expiation.  After  the  time  of  Moses  examples 
of  fasting  were  very  common  among  the  Jews.  It  does  not  appear  from  the 
practice  of  oirr  Saviour  and  His  disciples  that  He  instituted  any  particular  fast, 
or  enjoined  any  to  be  kept  out  of  pure  devotion.  Fasting  has,  in  itself,  this 
peculiar  good,  that  it  provokes  attention,  by  interrupting  ordinary  habits ;  the 
flow  of  business  and  pleasure  is  on  a  sudden  stopt ;  the  world  is  thrown  into 
gloom,  and  a  certain  solemnity  of  thought  obtruded  upon  those  whose  outward 
senses  must  be  influenced  before  their  inward  hearts  can  be  moved.  The  object, 
then,  of  this  day  is  to  confess  our  sins,  and  to  repent  of  them.  The  object  of 
the  ministers  of  the  Gospel  is,  to  state  what  those  sins  are,  what  are  their  con- 
sequences, and  how  they  may  be  avoided.  Sins  may  be  considered  under  a 
twofold  division.  Those  which  individuals  always  commit,  which  are  the  con- 
sequence of  our  fallen  state,  and  inseparable  from  our  fallen  nature.  Those 
which  are  the  result  of  any  particular  depravity,  existing  in  a  greater  degree 
at  this  time  than  at  any  other,  or  in  this  country  than  among  any  other  people. 
As  to  the  first  class  of  sins,  it  is  right  to  remind  mankind  of  those  imperfections, 
inherent  in  their  nature,  lest  they  should  relax  from  the  exertions  of  which  they 
are  really  capable.  Coming  to  that  part  of  our  conduct  which  is  variable,  to 
that  small  and  contracted  sphere  in  which  it  is  allotted  to  us  to  do  better  or  to 
do  worse,  begin  with  the  subject  of  religion.  Here  may  be  noticed  that  pro- 
digious increase  of  sectaries,  of  all  ranks  and  descriptions,  which  are  daily  spring- 
ing up  in  this  kingdom.     These  men  seem  to  think  that  the  spirit  of  religion 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

consists  in  a  certain  fervid  irritability  of  mind.  They  are  always  straining  at 
gnats,  always  suspecting  happiness,  degrading  the  majesty  of  the  Gospel.  The 
moment  fanatical  men  he  r  anything  plain  and  practical  introduced  into  religion, 
then  they  say  this  is  secular,  this  is  worldly,  this  is  moral,  this  is  not  of  Christ. 
But  the  only  way  to  know  Christ  is  not  to  make  our  notions  His  notions,  or  to 
substitute  any  conjectures  of  our  own  as  to  what  religion  ought  to  be  for  an 
humble  and  faithfvi  inquiry  of  what  it  is.  There  is  a  contrary  excess  in  matters 
of  religion  not  less  fatal  than  fanaticism,  and  still  more  common.  That  languor 
and  indifference  upon  serious  subjects  which  characterises  so  great  a  part  of 
mankind ;  not  speculative  disbelief,  not  profligate  scoffing  against  religion, 
not  incompliance  with  the  ceremonies  it  enjoins ;  but  no  penetration  of  Chris- 
tianity into  the  real  character,  little  influence  of  the  Gospel  upon  the  daily 
conduct ;  a  cold,  careless,  unfruitful  belief.  Let  it  be  our  care  to  steer  between 
these  opposite  extremes ;  to  be  serious  without  being  enthusiastic  ;  to  be  reason- 
able without  being  cold.  Alike  to  curb  the  excesses  of  those  who  have  zeal 
without  discretion,  and  to  stimulate  the  feelings  of  others  who  have  conformity 
without  zeal ;  remembering  always  that  every  thing  intended  to  endure  must 
be  regulated  by  moderation,  discretion,  and  knowledge.  (J.  Smith,  M.A.) 
An  extraordinary  fast : — It  must  have  been  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah  what  the 
drought  of  Ahab's  reign  had  been  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  It  was  a  day  of 
Divine  judgment,  a  day  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick 
darkness.  The  harsh  blast  of  the  consecrated  ram's  horn  called  an  assembly 
for  an  extraordinary  fast.  Not  a  soul  was  to  be  absent.  All  were  there  stretched 
in  front  of  the  altar.  The  altar  itself  presented  the  dreariest  of  all  sights,  a  hearth 
without  its  sacred  fire,  a  table  spread  without  its  sacred  feast.  The  priestly 
caste,  instead  of  gathering  as  usual  upon  its  steps  and  platform,  were  driven, 
as  it  were,  to  the  farther  space ;  they  turned  their  backs  to  the  dead  altar,  and 
lay  prostrate,  gazing  towards  the  Invisible  Presence  within  the  sanctuary.  In- 
stead of  the  hymns  and  music,  which,  since  the  time  of  David,  had  entered 
into  their  prayers,  there  was  nothing  heard  but  the  passionate  sobs,  and  the 
loud  dissonant  howls  such  as  only  an  eastern  hierarchy  could  utter.  Instead 
of  the  mass  of  white  mantles,  which  they  usually  presented,  they  were  wrapped 
in  black  goat's  hair  sackcloth,  twisted  round  them ;  not  with  the  brilliant  sashes 
of  the  priestly  attire,  but  with  a  rough  girdle  of  the  same  texture,  which  they 
never  unbound  night  or  day.  What  they  wore  of  their  common  dress  was  rent 
asunder  or  cast  off.  With  bare  breasts  they  waved  their  black  drapery  towards 
the  temple,  and  shrieked  aloud,  "  Spare  Thy  people,  0  Lord  !  "  (Dean  Stanley.) 
The  duty,  object,  and  method  of  keeping  a  public  fast : — Unusual  duties  require 
unusual  preparation.  I.  The  duty  of  keeping  a  public  fast.  It  is  enjoined 
on  due  occasions  by  God  Himself.  In  Joel's  time  what  was  the  occasion  ?  It 
was  a  famine.  How  strikingly  it  is  described.  The  Word  of  God  repeatedly 
declares  that  such  a  calamity  is  sent  on  nations  as  a  punishment  for  national 
sins.  When  God  sends  a  famine  in  punishment  for  our  sins  He  Himself  calls 
to  humiliation  and  fasting.  This  duty  has  been  recognised  from  time  to  time. 
As  in  the  days  of  Joshua,  the  Judges,  Samuel,  Jehoshaphat,  Ezra,  &c.  There 
is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament  to  set  the  duty  aside.  We  have  no  instance 
of  a  Christian  nation  fasting,  but  we  have  no  instance  of  a  nation  having  become 
Christian.  11.  The  object  of  a  fast  day.  Not  to  provide  opportimity  for 
seeking  our  own  pleasure.  Not  substituting  food  equally  or  more  pleasant, 
even  by  way  of  change.  Some  call  it  fasting  to  deny  themselves  food  in  one 
form,  to  take  it  in  another,  with  equal  or  greater  zest.  Fasting  is  not  an  end 
in  itself,  but  a  means  conducive  to  an  end.  The  object  is,  humiliation  for 
Bin  in  order  to  pardon  and  justification.  Therefore  ministers  must  aim  to  arouse 
the  national  conscience.  There  must  be  humiliation  in  order  to  reflection ;  the 
deepest  contrition  of  heart  for  sin,  in  order  to  turning  wholly  to  God,  with  faith 
in  the  revelation  of  Himself  in  the  Gospel  and  in  all  His  grace,  mercy,  long- 
suffering,  loving-kindness,  and  readiness  to  forgive  and  save,  through  Jesus 
Christ.  And  we  must  determine  on  reformation.  A  fast  is  worthless  without 
that  desirable  end.  III.  The  method  of  keeping  a  public  fast.  No  formal 
rules  can  be  laid  down.  The  rights  of  conscience  and  private  judgment  must 
be  respected.  1.  Sanctify  the  day.  Set  it  apart  from  all  common  uses.  And 
seek  grace  to  sanctify  it  aright.  2.  Attend  in  a  right  spirit  on  public  worship, 
joining  in  public  humiliation  and  united  confession.  3.  There  should  be  special 
and  appropriate  prayer,  both  at  home,  and  at  church.     4.  Make  special  gifts 


CHAP,  I.]  JOEL.  15 

to  the  poor.  5.  Specially  honour  Christ  as  Mediator.  He  can  feel  for  the  hungry, 
the  famishing,  the  dying.  He  can  pity  poor  perishing  sinners.  Let  Him  come 
between,  and  intercede  witli  His  own  effectual  intercession,  and  the  famine 
shall  oease.  {John  Hamhleton,  M.A.)  Public  fasting  : — The  priests  are  com- 
manded to  appoint  a  solemn  and  public  fast,  that  so  all  ranks  of  persons,  both  rulers 
and  people,  being  called  to  the  Temple,  may  solemnly  pour  out  their  prayers 
before  God.  1.  Private  mourning  and  humiliation  is  not  enough  under  public 
calamities,  but  there  ought  also  to  be  general  humiliation,  by  the  solemn  con- 
vening of  all  ranks,  to  mourn  in  a  public  way.  2.  Fasts  and  humiliations,  especially 
such  as  are  public,  should  not  be  rashly  gone  about,  but  with  due  preparation 
and  upstirring  for  so  solemn  a  service.  3.  For  the  right  discharge  of  such  a  duty 
it  is  requisite  that  men  be  sensible  of  their  former  abuse  of  mercies.  4.  Exercises 
of  humiliation  will  not  be  acceptable  to  God  unless  they  be  seasoned  and  managed 
with  faith  and  affection  to  God.  {George  Hutcheson.)  The  great  fast : — We 
have  observed  abundance  of  tears  shed  for  the  destruction  of  the  fruits  of  the 
earth  by  the  locusts,  now  here  we  have  those  tears  ttimed  into  the  right  channel, 
that  of  repentance  and  humiliation  before  God.  The  judgment  was  very  heavy, 
and  here  they  are  directed  to  own  the  hand  of  God  in  it,  His  mighty  hand,  and 
to  humble  themselves  under  it.  I.  A  proclamation  issued  out  for  a  general 
PAST.  The  priests  are  ordered  to  appoint  one;  they  must  not  only  mourn 
themselves,  but  they  must  call  upon  others  to  mourn  too.  Under  public  judg- 
ments there  ought  to  be  public  humiliations.  With  all  the  marks  of  sorrow 
and  shame  sin  must  be  confessed  and  bewailed,  the  righteousness  of  God  must 
be  acknowledged  and  His  favour  implored.  Observe  what  is  to  be  done  by  a 
nation  at  such  a  time.  1.  A  day  is  to  be  appointed  for  this  purpose,  a  day  of 
restraint  (marg.),  a  day  in  which  people  must  be  restrained  from  their  other  ordi- 
nary business,  and  from  all  bodily  refreshments.  2.  It  must  be  a  fast,  a  religious 
abstaining  from  meat  and  drink,  further  than  is  of  absolute  necessity.  Hereby 
we  own  ourselves  unworthy  of  our  necessary  food,  and  that  we  have  forfeited 
it,  and  deserve  to  be  wholly  deprived  of  it ;  we  punish  ourselves  and  mortify 
the  body,  which  has  been  the  occasion  of  sin  ;  we  keep  it  in  a  frame  fit  to  serve 
the  soul  in  serving  God,  and,  by  the  appetite's  craving  food,  the  desires  of  the 
soul  towards  that  which  is  better  than  life,  and  all  the  supports  of  it,  are  excited. 
3.  There  must  be  a  solemn  assembly.  All  had  contributed  to  the  national  guilt, 
all  shared  in  the  national  calamity,  and  therefore  they  must  all  join  in  the  pro- 
fessions of  repentance.  4.  They  must  come  together  in  the  temple,  because 
that  was  the  house  of  prayer,  and  there  they  might  hope  to  meet  with  God. 
5.  They  must  sanctify  this  fast,  must  observe  it  in  a  religious  manner,  with  sincere 
devotion.  6.  They  must  "  cry  unto  the  Lord."  To  Him  they  must  make  their 
complaint  and  offer  up  their  supplication.  II.  Some  considerations  sug- 
gested TO  induce  them  to  proclaim  this  fast,  and  to  observe  it  strictly. 
\.  God  was  beginning  a  controversy  with  them.  It  is  time  to  "cry  unto  the 
Lord,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  Either  they  mean  the  continuance 
and  consequences  of  this  present  judgment  which  they  now  saw  but  breaking 
in  upon  them,  or  some  greater  judgments  which  this  was  but  a  preface  to.  There- 
fore "  cry  to  God,"  for — (1)  The  day  of  His  judgment  is  very  near.  (2)  It  will 
be  very  terrible.  2.  They  saw  themselves  already  under  the  tokens  of  His  dis- 
pleasure. (1)  Let  them  look  into  their  own  houses,  and  there  was  no  plenty 
there,  as  there  used  to  be.  (2)  Let  them  look  into  God's  house,  and  see  the  effects 
of  the  judgment  there.  3.  The  prophet  returns  to  describe  the  grievousness  of 
the  calamity,  in  some  particulars  of  it.  (1)  The  caterpillars  have  devoured  the 
corn.  (2)  The  cattle,  too,  perish  for  want  of  grass.  III.  The  prophet  stirs  them 
UP  TO  CRY  TO  God,  with  the  consideration  op  the  examples  given  them  for 
it.  1.  His  own  example.  "  0  Lord  !  to  Thee  will  I  cry."  2.  The  example  of 
the  inferior  creatures.  When  they  groan  by  reason  of  their  calamity,  He  is 
pleased  to  interpret  it  as  if  they  cried  to  Him  ;  much  more  will  He  put  a  favourable 
construction  upon  the  groanings  of  His  own  children,  though  sometimes  so  feeble 
that  they  cannot  be  uttered.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  15.  Alas  for  the  day  I  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  Is  at  hand,  and  as  a 
destmction  ftom  the  Almighty  shall  it  come. — The  day  of  the  Lord : — The  prophet 
intimates  that  the  destruction  caused  by  the  flight  of  the  locusts  over  the  land 
of  Judah  was  but  the  commencement  of  calamity,  and  that  it  was  a  type  of  judg- 
ments more  awful  in  the  future.     And  all  the  judgments  which  come  upon  men 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

in  the  present  are  indicative  of  the  final  judgment  which  is  to  come,  and  are 
warnings  of  that  awful  event,  so  that  we  may  not  be  unprepared  to  meet  it. 
I.  That  it  will  be  Divinely  distinguished  from  all  the  days  which  havb 
PEECEDED  it.  "  The  day  !  for  the  day  of  the  Lord."  This  time  of  judgment 
is  called  the  day  of  the  Lord.  1.  Because  on  this  day  the  Lord  will  give  a  splendid 
manifestation  of  Himself.  2.  Because  this  day  will  be  in  sublime  contrast,  in 
relation  to  the  unfolding  of  the  Divine  purposes,  to  all  others  that  have  pre- 
ceded it.  In  the  days  of  Christ's  incarnation  He  was  rejected  and  despised  of 
men ;  men  saw  no  beauty  in  Him  that  they  should  desire  Him.  In  our  own 
age  there  are  multitudes  who  neglect  and  treat  Him  with  contempt,  while  many 
who  profess  to  serve  Him  are  cold  in  their  service.  These  are  the  da]rs  of  men, 
in  which  they  are  free  to  pursue  an  evil  method  of  life,  and  in  which  they  are 
left  to  accomplish  their  work,  waiting  for  the  retxirn  of  the  Great  Master ;  but 
these  days  are  soon  to  give  place  to  the  Day  of  the  Lord,  in  the  which  He  will 
give  to  every  man  according  to  the  quality  of  his  work.  Then  the  Lord  will 
exert  His  sovereign  power.  II.  That  it  is  near  in  its  approach  and  will 
COME  STTDDENLY  XTPON  MANKIND.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  1.  This 
day  is  certain  in  its  advent.  There  may  be  many  who  contemptuously  ask, 
"  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ?  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  4.)  2.  This  day  will  be 
eudden  in  its  advent.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night, 
and  will  cause  a  sudden  fear  to  come  upon  many.  3.  This  day  is  near  in  its  advent 
(2  Pet.  iii.  8).  III.  That  it  will  be  accompanied  by  the  most  awful  destruc- 
tion EVER  witnessed  BY  MANKIND.  "  And  as  a  destruction  from  the  Almighty 
shall  it  come."  Lessons — 1.  This  revelation  concerning  the  day  of  the  Lord 
should  make  us  careful  in  the  ordering  of  our  individual  life.  2.  This  revelation 
concerning  the  day  of  the  Lord  should  lead  us  to  put  forth  oiur  best  activities 
to  save  men  from  its  impending  doom.  3.  In  this  revelation  concerning  the 
day  of  the  Lord  see  the  mercy  of  heaven  in  giving  us  full  warning  of  the  coming 
peril.     (J.  a.  ExeU,  M.A.) 

Vers.  16,  18.  Is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  oar  eyes. — Sin  a  great  deprivO' 
tion : — I.  That  sin  deprives  man  of  his  cherished  hope.  "  Is  not  the  meat 
cut  off  before  our  eyes  ?  "  1.  This  deprivation  was  imexpected.  The  ripe  crops 
were  seen  by  the  people  of  Judah,  who  were  rejoicing  in  the  prospect  of  a  saie 
harvest,  when  to  their  astonishment  all  was  destroyed.  And  sin  deprives  sinners 
of  their  expected  pleasures  just  when  they  are  within  sure  reach,  and  turns  in 
an  unexpected  moment  the  fairest  prospects  into  barren  wastes.  It  is  the  way 
of  God  to  disappoint  the  evil-doer  of  his  cherished  anticipations.  2.  This  depriva- 
tion was  calamitous.  The  people  of  Judah  were  dependent  upon  the  ripe  crops 
for  the  supply  of  their  temporal  wants,  and  would  not  be  able  to  provide  anything 
as  a  substitute  for  them.  And  sin  does  not  merely  deprive  man  of  those  things 
which  are  for  his  luxury,  but  even  those  things  which  are  essential  to  his  bare 
comfort.  3.  This  deprivation  was  righteous.  The  people  of  Judah  might  imagine 
that  it  was  very  unjust  thus  to  deprive  them  of  the  harvest  for  which  they  had 
laboured,  and  that  too  at  the  very  moment  they  were  expecting  to  gather  it  in 
for  use.  They  would  be  unable  to  understand  the  equity  and  meaning  of  such 
a  visitation.  But  it  is  a  righteous  thing  that  sin  should  be  punished,  and  in 
the  manner  most  likely  to  restrain  it,  and  this  is  often  done  by  the  destruction 
of  a  cherished  hope.  II.  That  sin  deprives  the  sanctuary  of  its  appro- 
priate joy.  "  Is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  our  eyes,  yea,  joy  and  gladness 
from  the  house  of  our  Lord  ?  "  1.  That  joy  should  ever  be  associated  with  the 
service  of  the  sanctuary.  Joy  and  gladness  always  belonged  to  the  ancient 
temple ;  thither  the  Jews  went  to  give  thanks,  and  to  acknowledge  themselves 
the  blessed  of  the  Lord.  But  now  tley  could  not  rejoice  in  the  presence  of 
God,  because  of  the  calamities  which  were  upon  them.  2.  That  sin  deprives 
the  sanctuary  of  the  joy  which  should  ever  be  associated  with  it.  The  sins  of 
the  people  of  Judah  rendered  it  impossible  for  them  to  participate  in  their  usual 
harvest  festivals,  and  divested  the  Divine  presence  of  its  accustomed  joy.  And 
sin  will  extinguish  the  bright  lights  of  the  sanctuary ;  it  will  hush  its  sweet  music, 
and  stay  the  spring  of  joy  which  God  has  destined  should  flow  from  the  temple 
into  human  sotiIs.  III.  That  sin  deprives  the  seed  op  its  necessary  vitality. 
"  The  seed  is  rotten  under  the  clods,  the  garners  are  laid  desolate,  the  barns  are 
broken  down ;  for  the  com  is  withered."  Thus  we  see  that  sin  perverts  the 
natural  order  of  God's  universe,  it  renders  the  seed  which  is  full  of  life  destitute 


CHAP.  1.]  JOEL,  17 

of  all  vitality.  The  seed  is  precious  ;  man's  sin  makes  it  useless.  God  can  plague 
man's  mercies  in  the  germ  or  in  the  bam,  it  is  impossible  to  escape  His  retribution. 
IV.  That  sin  dbprives  the  brutk  of  its  befkeshing  PASTimK.  "  How  do 
the  beasts  groan  !  the  herds  of  cattle  are  perplexed,  because  they  have  no  pasture  , 
yea,  the  flocks  of  sheep  are  made  desolate."  All  the  life  and  interests  of  the 
universe  are  one,  and  one  part  of  it  cannot  suffer  without  involving  the  rest ; 
hence  the  sin  of  man  affects  the  whole.  Lessons — 1.  That  men  who  imagine 
that  they  gain  anything  by  sin  are  deceived.  2.  That  sin  divests  the  most  sacred 
places  of  their  destined  gladness.  3.  That  sin  brings  famine  where  God  intended 
there  should  be  plenty.  (J.  8.  Exell,  M.A. )  The  seed  is  rotten  under  their  clods. 
— National  calamities  : — The  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  world  is  righteous  and  bene- 
ficent.    What,  then,  is  the  cause  of  national  calamities  ?     It  is  sin.     I.  Somb 

OF  THE  PBEVAHilNQ  SINS  VPTOCCH  HAVE  BROUGHT  ITS  INTO  OXm  PRESENT  SITUATION. 

The  vices  which,  on  account  of  their  enormity  and  imcommon  spread,  may  be 
considered  as,  in  a  certain  degree,  peculiar  to  the  present  age.  1.  Ingratitude. 
No  nation  ever  experienced  more  of  the  kindness  of  heaven.  Our  climate  is 
desirable ;  our  minerals  are  varied  and  abundant ;  ova  situation  favours  our 
independence ;  our  form  of  government  is  just  and  efficient.  Internal  peace 
is  a  blessing  we  have  long  enjoyed.  Has  our  gratitude  increased  in  proportion 
as  our  blessings  have  been  multiplied  ?  Consider,  too,  our  religious  privileges. 
What  returns  have  we  made  to  God  for  these  mercies  ?  2.  Pride.  This  nas 
been  called  the  universal  passion.  It  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  our  country 
and  times.  Yet  it  may  be  called  one  of  the  peculiar  sins  of  our  age.  Would  to 
God  that  pride  were  confined  to  the  State  !  Alas  !  its  ravages  have  extended 
to  the  Church.  3.  Infidelity  has  of  late  been  greatly  increasing.  There  is  publio 
avowed  scepticism,  by  which  revelation  in  general  is  censured  and  rejected. 
4.  Luxury  and  licentiousness  of  manners  prevail  to  a  most  alarming  degree.  Was 
there  ever  a  period,  not  excepting  the  age  of  the  second  Charles,  when  profanity, 
intemperance,  seduction,  and  other  vices  were  so  common  ?  Lewdness  and 
intemperance  are  not  confined  to  the  more  wealthy.  Our  prosperity,  it  may 
be  said,  is  the  cause  of  all  these  disorders.  But  shall  we  dare  to  palliate  our 
vices  by  that  which  aggravates  them  in  an  inconceivable  degree  ?  6.  The  prevail- 
ing influence  of  a  worldly  spirit.  6.  The  spirit  of  irreligion.  As  seen  in  the  practice 
of  profane  swearing,  in  the  omission  of  family  duties,  and  in  the  neglect  of 
Divinely  instituted  ordinances.  II.  The  means  of  deliverance.  Consider 
those  important  duties  without  which  there  is  neither  safety  nor  hope.  1.  We 
must  return  to  God  in  the  exercise  of  faith.  2.  The  review  of  our  sins  ought 
to  fill  us  with  grief.  3.  Our  faith  and  contrition  must  be  accompanied  with  a 
universal  reformation  of  our  hearts  and  conduct.  Exercise  faith  in  God.  Present 
to  Him  the  sacrifices  of  a  broken  spirit.  Be  concerned  to  mortify  the  whole 
body  of  sin.  These  are  duties  beyond  the  strength  of  fallen  humanity.  The 
Spirit  alone  can  enable  us  to  perform  them.  To  unwearied  diligence  let  us 
add  fervent  supplication  to  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  He  would 
have  mercy  upon  us,  and  cause  His  Spirit  to  descend  as  a  spirit  of  faith,  of  con- 
trition, and  of  holiness.  {Alex.  Black.)  Potting  seeds  : — This  is  the  first  new 
stroke  of  pathos  which  the  poet  adds  to  his  previous  description ;  but  mark 
how  he  multiplies  stroke  on  stroke.  As  though  it  were  not  enough  to  lose  aU 
mirth  in  the  passing  day,  the  heart  of  the  people  is  torn  with  apprehension  for 
the  future.  The  very  grain  in  the  earth  has  "  rotted  under  the  clods,"  so  that 
there  is  no  prospect  of  a  crop  in  the  coming  year  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of 
this  year's  harvest.  Smitten  by  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun,  denied  the  vivifying 
touch  of  dew  or  rain,  the  germ  has  withered  in  the  seed.  The  husbandmen, 
hopeless  of  any  reward  for  their  toils,  fold  their  hands  in  indolent  despair ;  they 
suffer  their  gamers  to  moulder  away,  their  "  barns  "  to  fall.  Why  should  they 
repair  bam  and  storehouse  when  the  "  corn  is  withered,"  even  the  seed-corn  ? 
{Samuel  Cox,  D.D.)  God's  voice  in  things  terrible  : — How  does  God  utter  His 
voice  ?  In  things  terrible  by  terror,  so  that  the  feeling  He  inspires  finds  utter- 
ance in  voice  of  man.  In  natiu:e,  by  objects  which  He  creates.  In  history, 
by  results  which  He  brings  about.  In  calls  to  repentance,  by  the  concurrence 
of  calamity  with  our  sense  of  sin,  whether  an  instinct  trained  or  rather  a  senti- 
ment inbreathed  by  Divine  communion.  When  such  sentiments  run  through 
a  people,  kindled  by  prophets  or  organised  by  priests,  the  national  temples  echo 
with  them ;  public  religion  embodies  them ;  signs  of  joy  are  suspended,  and 
prayers  go  up  to  the  unsearchable  Dweller  of  eternity  in  words  which  are  the 


18  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

words  of  men,  seeking  to  move  the  mind  of  God,  yet  breathing  a  life  which  God's 
breath  implanted.     (Rowland  Williams,  D.D.) 

Yer.  18.  How  do  the  beasts  groan!    The  herds  of  cattle  are  perplexed. — The 

cattle  plague  : — We  have  been  called  to  make  this  a  time  of  solemn  humiliation 
and  prayer,  in  the  presence  of  a  grievous  plague  upon  cattle.  Let  us  seek  that 
our  prayers  this  day  may  be  the  prevailing  prayers  of  faith  There  is  a  rough 
way  of  regarding  the  afflictive  dispensations  of  God's  providence,  which  is  founded 
on  a  principle  more  Jewish  than  Christian,  and  regards  them  as  "  Judgments " 
in  the  vulgar  sense.  We  may  say,  generally,  that  all  suffering  is  the  consequence 
of  sin,  but  no  man  has  any  right  to  say  that  a  particular  judgment  follows  a 
particular  national  or  individual  sin.  1.  We  are  asked  to  acknowledge  that 
this  grievous  plague  has  been  sent  by  God  in  His  all-disposing  and  sovereign 
providence.  And  we  are  surely  all  agreed  here.  Providential  is  an  adjective 
that  admits  of  no  comparison.  Nothing  that  happens  in  this  world  is  more  or 
less  appointed  by  God  than  all  the  rest.  He  ordains  all  events.  Mercy  and 
judgment  are  alike  providential :  we  take  them  both  from  God.  Mercy  with 
thankful  joy :  judgment  with  thankful  resignation.  We  are  not  driven  from 
our  simple  faith  in  God  by  anything  that  can  be  said  of  second  causes  intervening 
between  Him  and  us,  or  even  of  the  intervention  of  human  folly  or  crime.  Man's 
mistakes  and  misdoings  have  doubtless  contributed  to  the  spread  and  fatality 
of  the  cattle  plague.  Want  of  observance  of  obvious  natural  laws  :  want  of 
knowledge  of  such  ;  want  of  simple  precautions,  &c.  We  are  called  to  acknow- 
ledge God's  hand  in  this  sore  calamity ;  to  humble  ourselves  before  Him  under 
it,  and  to  turn  from  our  sins  by  a  true  repentance.  There  is  a  discipline  of 
God's  appointment  always  around  us  which  ought  to  lead  us  to  repentance. 
God's  goodness  should  do  that ;  it  ought  not  to  need  a  cattle  plague.  God's 
goodness  would  be  quite  enough  if  we  took  our  discipline  rightly.  Alas  !  God's 
abounding  goodness  often  is  found  to  harden.  And  we  know  that  seasons  of 
great  sorrow  and  bereavement  are  often  times  of  spiritual  awakening.  As  times 
of  trouble  have  been  times  of  individual  repentance  and  amendment,  so  doubtless 
have  they  been  of  national.  How  shall  we  repent  ?  We  cannot  just  make  up 
our  mind  to  be  sorry,  any  more  than  to  be  joyful.  All  feeling  must  be  founded 
in  fact.  The  only  way  to  be  sorry  for  our  sins  is  to  think  of  them,  to  set  them 
before  us,  so  shall  we  find  good  reason  to  be  humble  and  penitent.  To  be  truly 
penitent  for  anything  you  have  thought  or  done,  you  must  see  it  to  be  wrong 
yourself.  Then  let  us  "  take  with  us  words,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord."  (.4. 
K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  0  Lord,  to  Thee  will  I  cry. — Adding  prayers  to  complaints: — Turn 
thy  complaint  into  prayer,  or  else  it  is  but  a  murmuring  against  God.  It  is  by 
prayer  we  make  our  sorrowful  hearts  known  to  God.  The  reasons  of  this  doctrine 
are — 1.  Because  God  forgetteth  not  the  complaints  of  the  poor;  i.e.  of  those 
that  pray  unto  Him.  Otherwise  He  remembereth  no  more  the  poor  man's  envy 
than  the  rich  man's  quarrel.  Therefore  let  this  stir  us  up  to  make  our  complaint 
in  prayer.  2.  When  men  do  only  complain  of  this  or  that  want  without  prayer 
they  tempt  God  ;  therefore  if  we  will  obtain  anything  at  the  Lord's  hand  for 
our  good,  let  us  ask  by  prayer.  3.  Let  us  learn  to  ask  of  God  without  murmuring 
or  grudging  at  our  own  estate,  or  the  Lord's  hand;  for  the  Lord  will  complain 
as  fast  on  us  as  we  complained  to  Him.  4.  Another  use  is  this, — that  if  com- 
plainers  without  praying  be  odious  in  the  Lord's  sight,  although  the  cause  be 
indifferent,  then  much  more  are  those  that  never  pray  but  for  unlawful  and 
filthy  things,  that  they  may  bestow  them  on  their  lusts,  as  the  apostle  saith. 
{Edw.  Topsell.)  Prayer  to  God  against  terrible  judgments : — The  prophet  now 
turns  from  the  people  of  Judah,  with  whom  he  could  prevail  but  little,  and  cries 
to  God  as  he  stands  in  the  midst  of  the  universal  plague.  It  is  often  a  relief  for 
Christian  workers  to  leave  the  society  of  hardened  men  for  communion  with 
Jehovah.     Prayer  is  sometimes  their  only  refuge  and  strength.     I.  That  this 

PRAYER   WAS    WISELY    DIRECTED     TO     THE     ONLY     GiVER    OF    THE    TRUE   REMEDY. 

"  0  Lord,  to  Thee  will  I  cry."  1.  It  was  wisely  directed.  He  sought  unto  God 
in  this  time  of  peril.  He  did  not  pray  unto  any  idols,  but  unto  the  true  God, 
the  Maker  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  Jehovah  had  sent  the  calamity,  and  He 
only  could  remove  it.  Sorrow  should  send  us  to  God.  2.  It  was  earnestly  pre- 
sented.    The  prophet  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  all  the  energy  of  his  being.     Hia 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  19 

was  no  languid  petition.  Sorrow  should  make  men  earnest  in  devotion.  3.  It 
was  widely  representative.  The  prophet  did  not  merely  pray  on  his  own  behalf  ; 
he  remembered  the  universal  woe  around  him,  and  caught  up  the  pain-cry  of 
nature  and  of  the  brute,  and  expressed  it  in  his  own  prayer.  He  prayed  as  the 
groaning  herds  could  not.  A  good  man  is  the  priest  of  the  universe,  especially 
in  the  hour  of  calamity.  II.  That  this  pbaybb  was  prompted  by  a  sad  appbe- 
HKNSION  OF  THB  CALAMITY  IT  SOUGHT  TO  BEMOVB.  "  For  the  fire  hath  devoured 
the  pastures  of  the  wilderness,  and  the  flame  hath  burned  all  the  trees  of  the 
field."  The  prophet  recognised  the  severity  of  the  calamity  which  had  come 
upon  the  nation.  And  it  is  essential  to  prayer  that  we  should  have  a  clear  appre- 
hension of  the  sorrow  to  be  relieved,  of  the  sin  to  be  removed,  and  of  the  want 
to  be  supplied ;  prayer  should  always  include  a  good  knowledge  of  the  conditions 
and  circumstances  under  which  it  is  presented  and  which  it  hopes  to  ameliorate. 
III.  That  vs  this  pbaybb  was  itnited  the  inabticulatb  plbadinqs  ob* 
suFFBBtNG  BBUTBS.  "  The  bcasts  of  the  field  cry  also  unto  Thee :  for  the  rivers 
of  waters  are  dried  up,"  &c.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  cry  of  the  brutes 
was  one  with  the  cry  of  the  prophet ;  one  was  the  outcome  of  pious  intelligence, 
the  other  was  the  outcome  of  blind  instinct  (Psa.  cxlvii.  9 ;  Job  xxx.  41 ).  Lessons — 
1.  That  a  sorrowful  soul  should  pray  to  God  for  aid.  2.  That  the  soul  must 
feel  its  need  before  it  can  expect  relief.  3.  That  man  should  consider  tha 
pain  of  the  inferior  creatures,  and  never  render  himself  liable  to  their  rebuke. 
(J.  8.  ExeU,  M.A.)  The  influence  of  national  calamities  on  the  minds  of  the 
good  : — It  is  a  question  whether  the  fiie  and  flame  are  to  be  taken  literally  as 
burning  the  grass,  or  whether  they  are  used  figuratively.  Probably  the  reference 
is  to  the  burning  heat  in  drought  which  consumes  the  meadows,  scorches  the 
trees,  and  dries  up  the  water-brooks.  The  effect  of  national  calamity  on  Joel 
was  to  excite  him  to  prayer,  to  compel  him  to  lay  the  case  before  the  Lord. 
Having  called  the  attention  of  all  classes  of  the  community  to  the  terrible  judg- 
ments, he  turns  his  soul  in  a  devout  supplication  to  Almighty  God.  I.  This 
WAS  BIGHT.  Prayer  is  right.  1.  God  requires  it.  2.  Christ  engaged  in  it.  He 
is  our  example.  11.  This  was  wise.  Who  else  could  remove  the  calamity  and 
restore  the  ruin  ?  None.  When  all  earthly  resources  fail,  where  else  can  we  go 
but  to  Him  who  originates  all  that  is  good,  and  controls  all  that  is  evil  ?  True 
prayer  is  always  wise,  because — 1.  It  seeks  the  highest  good.  2.  By  the  best 
means.  III.  This  was  natubal.  "  The  beasts  of  the  field  also  cry  unto  Thee." 
"  What  better,"  says  an  old  author,  "  are  they  than  beasts,  who  never  cry  to 
God  but  for  com  and  wine,  and  complain  of  nothing  but  the  wants  of  sense  ?  " 
Conclusion.  It  is  well  when  our  trials  lead  us  in  prayer  to  God.  The  greatest 
calamities  are  termed  the  greatest  blessings  when  they  act  thus.  Hail  the 
tempests.  If  they  drive  our  bark  into  the  quiet  haven  of  prayer  !     {HomUist.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Veb.  1.  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  In  Zion,  and  sound  An  alarm  In  My  holy 
mountain.  —  A  ministry  morally  awakening  :  —  In  the  first  eleven  verses  of 
this  chapter  we  have  a  continuation  of  the  address  of  the  prophet  to  the  priests 
of  Judah.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  priests  to  blow  the  trumpet  for  the  assembling 
of  the  congregation,  for  the  removing  of  the  camp,  and  when  they  went  forth 
to  war ;  here  the  trumpet  is  blown  to  announce  danger,  and  the  consequent 
need  of  attention  to  certain  moral  requirements.  I.  That  thebb  abb  times 
when  the  Chfbch  is  in  especial  need  of  a  ministry  morally  awakening. 
"  Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  and  soimd  an  alarm  in  My  holy  moimtain."  Zion 
was  the  meeting-place  of  the  people  of  God,  and  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the 
Church  of  God ;  here  the  trumpet  was  used  only  for  sounds  of  alarm  and  fear. 
There  was  need  that  those  who  dwelt  in  the  holy  mountain  should  be  aroused 
to  a  sense  of  the  impending  danger ;  we  should  have  thought  that  they  would 
have  been  sensitive  to  the  judgment  of  God  without  such  an  awakening  cry. 
1.  The  Chxirch  needs  an  awakening  ministry  when  it  is  not  solicitous  for  the 
moral  rectitude  of  the  nation  in  which  it  is  placed.  It  would  appear  as  if  Zion 
were  ignorant  of,  or  as  if  it  were  indifferent  to,  the  apostasy  all  around  it.     2.  The 


:  ^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

Church  needs  an  awakening  ministry  when  it  is  not  alive  to  the  peril  of  souls 
it  should  endeavour  to  instruct.  3.  The  Church  needs  an  awakening  ministry 
when  it  reposes  undue  confidence  in  external  organisations.     II.  That  at  such 

TIMES  THE  MINISTRY  MORALLY  AWAKENING  MUST  BB  CHARGED  WITH  THE  80LEMIT 

TRUTHS  OF  ADVANCING  JUDGMENT.  "  For  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  and  is 
nigh  at  hand."  Thus  the  ministry  of  the  trumpet  announced  a  terrible  day 
of  approaching  judgment.  The  congregations  of  the  present  day  are  averse 
to  these  trumpet  ministries,  they  prefer  more  gentle  strains  of  truth,  and  prefer 
to  be  lulled  to  slumber  rather  than  to  be  awakened  to  stern  activity.  The  Church 
has  need  of  its  sons  of  thunder  as  well  as  of  its  sons  of  consolation.  It  announced 
these  judgments  as  (1)  Certain,  (2)  Near,  (3)  Terrible.     III.  That  the  annoxtncb- 

MENT  OF  such  TRUTHS  SHOULD  HAVE  A  SOLEMN  EFFECT  UPON  THOSE  TO  WHOM 

THEY  ABB  ADDRESSED.  "  Let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  tremble."  L  It 
should  awaken  solemn  apprehension.  The  people  would  know  that  the  sounding 
of  the  trumpet  in  Zion  would  foretoken  evil  to  them,  and  would  be  deeply  appre- 
hensive of  the  natvure  and  extent  of  the  judgment  to  follow.  2.  It  should  awaken 
deep  repentance.  The  terrors  of  the  Lord  should  persuade  men  to  deep  repentance, 
and  should  become  a  forcible  argument  for  a  renewed  life.  3.  It  should  awaken 
devout  gratitude.  While  men  mourn  the  advancing  calamities  they  should 
indeed  be  devoutly  grateful  that  their  advent  is  so  clearly  made  known,  and 
that  they  do  not  come  unexpected  upon  them.  Lessons — \.  That  the  Church 
requires  to  be  aroused  to  a  sense  of  its  duty.  2.  That  the  pulpit  must  give  utter- 
ance to  solemn  and  awakening  truths.  3.  That  an  earnest  Church  may  avert  a 
national  judgment.  (J.  8.  Exell,  M.A. )  Warning  trumpets  : — The  trumpet 
is  lifted  up  this  tiriie  in  warning.  Sometimes  it  is  lifted  up  in  festival.  The 
trumpet  will  do  one  of  two  things,  the  performer  must  tell  it  what  to  do.  So 
with  every  ministry,  and  every  instrumentality  of  life  and  nature  ;  it  is  the 
intelligent,  responsive,  directing  man  that  must  say  what  is  to  be  done  with  the 
silver  lute  of  spring,  or  the  golden  instrument  of  summer,  or  the  cornucopia  of 
autumn,  or  the  great  wind  of  winter  that  makes  the  earth  cold  and  bleak.  The 
trumpet  will  foretell  a  coming  battle,  or  it  will  call  to  an  infinite  feast ;  the  man 
behind  it  must  use  it  according  to  the  occasion.  It  is  even  so  with  the  Bible. 
There  is  no  trumpet  like  the  Bible  for  warning,  alarm,  excitement,  a  great  blare 
at  midnight  shaking  the  whole  air  with  tones  of  alarm ;  nor  is  there  any  instru- 
ment like  the  Bible  for  sweetness,  gentleness,  tenderness,  an  instrument  that  talks 
music  to  the  heart,  and  that  assures  human  fear  that  the  time  of  apprehension 
has  passed  away.  Warning  has  always  been  given  by  the  Almighty  before  His 
judgments  have  taken  effect.  Yet  there  has  always  been  some  measure  of 
suddenness  about  Divine  judgments.  The  reason  is  that  we  cannot  sufficiently 
prepare  for  them.  We  may  know  they  are  coming,  we  may  tell  even  to  a  day 
when  the  judgment  thunder  wiU  lift  up  its  voice  ;  yet  when  it  does  sound  its 
appeal  it  startles  and  shocks  and  paralyses  the  world.  Yet,  though  the  warning 
has  always  been  given,  it  has  always  been  despised.  How  few  people  heed  the 
voice  of  warning  !  They  call  that  voice  sensational.  Were  the  old  preachers 
to  return  with  their  old  heU  they  would  have  but  scant  welcome  to-day.  They 
were  men  of  the  iron  mouth ;  they  were  no  Chrysostoms,  golden-throated  and 
golden-lipped ;  they  were  men  who,  knowing  the  terrors  of  the  law,  withheld 
them  not  from  the  knowledge  of  the  people,  but  thundered  right  mightily  even 
beside  the  altar  of  the  Cross.  Now  all  this  is  in  many  instances  ruled  out  as 
theologically  behind  the  time,  as  from  a  literary  point  of  view  vulgar  and  odious, 
and  as  from  a  spiritual  point  of  view  detestable,  and  not  likely  to  work  in  man 
mightily  in  the  direction  of  persuasion.  We  become  familiar  with  warning. 
No  man  really  believes  in  the  day  of  judgment.  But  the  warnings  given  us  by 
men  are  often  partial,  and  are  not  imfrequently  falsely  directed  There  is  not  a 
preacher  in  the  world  who  could  not  make  a  great  reputation  by  thundering 
against  heterodoxy.  The  world  loves  such  vacant  thunder ;  the  Church  is 
willing  to  subscribe  liberally  to  any  man  who  will  denounce  the  heterodoxy  of 
other  people.  What  we  do  want  is,  not  to  thunder  wamingly  against  mistaken 
speculation,  but  thunders  sevenfold  in  loudness,  to  be  delivered  against  the 
current  iniquities  of  the  day.  Warning  is  needed,  but  let  it  be  of  the  right  kind  ; 
warning  is  a  needful  element  in  every  ministry,  but  deliver  it  at  the  right  door. 
{Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  trumpet  of  Zion: — I.  What  is  meant  by  blowing 
THE  Gospel  trumpet  ?  Trumpets  were  and  are  used  in  martial  music,  and 
in  festive  song.      Commissioned  by  the  Lord,  and  in  dependence  on  God  the 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  21 

Spirit,  the  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ  come  forth  before  their  people,  to  offer  them, 
in  God's  name,  and  on  His  own  terms,  pardon  and  peace,  life  and  salvation,  through 
Christ ;  or,  if  they  reject  these,  to  denounce  to  them,  in  His  name,  the  sentence 
of  death  and  destruction.  This  is  "  blowing  the  trumpet."  Not  content  with 
this,  ministers  solemnly  warn  the  self-righteous  and  the  unrighteous,  the  professor 
and  the  hypocrite,  and  those  who  are  "  at  ease  in  Zion,"  of  their  approaching 
danger.  This  is  "  sounding  an  alarm."  But  what  reception  have  you  given  to 
this  Gospel  ?  II.  To  whom,  and  wheeb,  is  this  trumpet  oommandhd  to  be 
BLOWN,  AND  THIS  ALARM  TO  BE  sotXNDED  ?  Had  he  been  sent  to  Nineveh,  or  to  the 
profane  part  of  his  own  people,  we  should  not  feel  surprised,  but  he  was  sent  to 
the  princes  and  nobles,  priests  and  Levites,  aged  and  honourable ;  even  to  his 
neighbours  and  personal  friends.  He  was  to  show  to  "  Jacob  his  transgressions, 
and  to  Israel  his  sins."  What  was  the  duty  of  Joel  is  the  duty  of  everv  minister 
of  the  Gospel  now  ;  and  the  difficulties  are  very  nearly  the  same.  A  minister 
must  be  faithful  to  his  oath,  his  conscience,  his  people,  and  his  God.  One  reason 
for  blowing  the  trumpet  needs  consideration.  It  is  this.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord 
cometh,  it  is  nigh  at  hand."  (J.  White  Niblock,  D.D.)  Warning  ministries  : — 
The  two  sentences  mean  the  same  thing.  To  blow  the  trumpet  is  to  sound  an 
alarm.  And  the  scene  is  the  mount  of  God's  holiness — the  holy  mountain  where 
this  alarm  is  to  be  sounded.  I.  What  are  the  enemies  against  whom  an 
ALARM  must  BE  SOUNDED  ?  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Superstition.  3.  Self-righteous- 
ness. 4.  Conformity  to  the  world.  5.  Hypocrisy.  II.  Reasons  why  this 
opportunity  is  taken  for  sounding  an  alarm.  (The  clergyman  was  pleading 
on  behalf  of  Sunday  and  national  schools. )  The  children  of  the  poor  need  educa- 
tion. The  children  of  this  generation  will  be  the  fathers  and  mothers  of  the  next. 
III.  Offer  some  encouragement.  If  you  are  disposed  to  listen  to  the  alarm 
sounded,  and  endeavour  to  mind  your  ways.  The  first  encouraging  sign  will  be 
that  you  will  learn  to  know  your  own  state.  Second  encouraging  sign,  that  you 
confess  your  sins.  The  next  sign,  your  fairly  setting  to  work,  from  this  very 
hour,  to  see  what  can  possibly  be  done  for  the  everlasting  good  of  these  children. 
A  most  pleasing  sign  would  be  this,  a  looking  up  to  Grod  to  do  that  for  these  little 
ones,  which  you  have  it  not  in  your  power  to  do  for  them.  {T.  Mortimer,  B.D.) 
Alarm  in  God's  house  : — I.  A  sacred  scene.  The  trumpet  is  to  sound  the  alarm 
in  Zion — in  God's  holy  mountain — among  His  people  who  professed  His  name. 
He  was  to  tell  them  of  the  awful  judgments  the  Almighty  would  bring  upon  the 
land.  II.  Our  places  of  worship  may  be  designated  holy  mountains. 
1.  Because  there  a  holy  God  is  worshipped.  We  cannot  feel  too  much  veneration 
and  respect  for  the  house  of  God.  The  places  where  we  draw  near  to  God  are 
sacred  spots.  Holiness  becometh  His  house.  2,  Because  there  holy  gifts  are 
imparted.  We  meet  together  to  receive  blessings  from  God.  There  He  sits, 
waiting  to  bestow  on  us  all  needful  grace,  to  dispense  His  favours  and  to  display 
His  power.  Holiness  is  that  which  we  require  in  order  to  our  enjoyment  of  God. 
3.  Because  there  holy  anticipations  are  realised.  We  leave  for  a  time  the  world 
and  its  concerns,  and  endeavour  to  attend  on  God  without  distraction,  and  feel 
ourselves  surrounded  with  the  Deity.  III.  A  solemn  charge.  Blowing  of 
trumpets  an  ancient  custom  in  Israel  (Numb.  x.  3-10).  There  was  a  peculiar  way 
of  blowing  the  trumpet  when  it  sounded  an  alarm.  Ministers  are  to  sound  the 
trumpet  of  invitation,  and  the  trumpet  of  encouragement.  But  there  are  periods 
when  we  are  to  soimd  an  alarm,  and  show  God's  threatened  judgments.  Con- 
cerning four  things  you  need  warning.  1.  Formality  in  the  exercises  of  religion. 
A  dead  and  dull  spirit  has  crept  into  our  churches.  2.  Conformity  to  the  world. 
Here  is  our  special  danger  in  the  present  day.  As  Christians,  we  are  delivered 
from  this  present  evU  world.  Ought  we  then  to  love  it,  to  imbibe  its  spirit,  and 
follow  its  maxims  ?  How  difficult  the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  Church  and 
the  world !  3.  Deadness  to  the  power  of  prayer.  Prayer  is  necessary  to  our  pros- 
perity in  the  Divine  life  ;  the  more  we  are  in  it  the  more  we  shall  thrive.  But  is 
there  not  a  deficiency  in  the  manner  and  spirit  of  this  exercise,  both  alone  and  in 
the  social  meeting  ?  God  has  answered  prayer  in  every  age.  4.  Inactivity  in 
the  cause  of  Christ.  Prayer  without  exertion  is  presumption.  There  is  a  want  of 
united  effort.  Union  is  strength,  and  there  is  more  of  this  wanted.  A  united 
people  is  likely  to  be  a  prosperous,  thriving  people — a  comfort  to  the  minister, 
an  honour  to  religion,  and  a  blessing  to  the  world.     {Ebenezer  Temple. ) 

Ver.  8.  Neither  shall  one  thrust  another;   they  shall  waUr  every  one  in  bi4 


22  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

path  — Order  is  Tieaveti's  first  law:  —  Reference  is  to  the  orderly  march 
of  locusts.  Note  the  order  which  reigns  throughout  the  whole  of  God's  world. 
After  this  fashion  there  should  be  order  and  arrangement  in  the  Christian  Church. 
Note  the  order  of  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  The  same  law  holds 
good  with  the  whole  animal  creation.  There  is  also  order  in  the  providence  of 
God.  All  the  events  in  our  own  little  lives  are  marching  straight  on  to  a  gracious 
consummation.  We  may  rise  higher ;  we  may  think  of  God  Himself.  We 
may  say  of  all  His  attribut«s,  "  neither  doth  one  thrust  another,  but  each  one 
walketh  in  his  path."  The  same  order  is  perceptible  in  the  doctrines  of  the 
Word.  Doctrines  which  look  as  if  they  contradicted  each  other,  are  nevertheless 
fully  agreed.  Apply  the  lesson  to  the  Christian  life.  We  should  remember 
that  o\ir  thoughts,  graces,  and  actions,  ought  all  to  keep  their  proper  position. 
We  ought  to  endeavour,  as  God  shall  teach  us  by  His  Spirit,  to  keep  our  thoughts 
of  God's  Word  in  their  due  harmony.  Doctrine  is  not  all  that  is  taught  in  the 
Word,  there  are  duties  and  promises  also.  The  same  should  hold  good  in  the 
graces  which  we  cultivate.  The  same  proportions  and  balancings  should  be 
found  in  our  Christian  duties.  God  would  have  us  attend  to  all  duties.  The 
difficulty  is  often  felt  as  to  how  much  is  due  to  diligence  in  business,  and  how  much 
to  fervency  in  spirit.  Each  one  must  decide  and  draw  the  line  for  himself. 
There  is  a  greater  difficulty  with  regard  to  the  arrangement  of  distinct  duties, 
when  they  are  likely  to  run  counter  to  one  another.  What  is  true  in  the  little 
commonwealth  of  the  heart  and  home,  ought  also  to  be  true  of  the  Church 
at  large.  There  are  different  orders  of  workers,  and  these  must  co-operate. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  army  of  the  locusts  : — 1.  They  are  very  bold  and  daring. 
8ome  of  the  ancients  have  observed  that  the  head  of  a  locust  is  very  like  in  shape 
to  the  head  of  a  horse.  2.  Very  loud  and  noisy.  "  Like  the  noise  of  chariots," 
of  many  chariots,  when  driven  furiously  over  rough  ground.  Historians  tell 
us  that  the  noise  made  by  swarms  of  locusts  in  those  countries  that  are  infested 
with  them  has  sometimes  been  heard  six  miles  off.  The  noise  is  compared  to 
that  of  a  roaring  fire.  3.  They  are  very  regular,  and  keep  ranks  in  their  march. 
"  They  shall  march  every  one  on  his  ways,"  straight  forward,  as  if  they  had  been 
trained  up  by  the  discipline  of  war  to  keep  their  post  and  observe  their  right- 
hand  man.  Their  number  and  swiftness  shall  breed  no  confusion.  See  how 
God  can  make  creatures  to  act  by  rule  that  have  no  reason  to  act  by,  when  He 
designs  to  serve  His  own  purposes  by  them.  And  see  how  necessary  it  is  that 
those  who  are  employed  in  any  service  for  God  should  observe  order  and  keep 
rank,  should  diligently  go  on  in  their  own  work,  and  not  stand  in  one  another's 
way.     (Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  11.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  great  and  very  terrible;  who  can  abide  it? — 

The  judgments  which  shall  accompany  the  day  of  the  Lard : — I.  Judgments  pbo- 
DtrcTiVE  OF  GKEAT  SORROW.  "  A  day  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess,  a  day  of 
clouds  and  of  thick  darkness."  This  imagery  is  probably  taken  from  the  flight 
of  locusts.  They  come  in  clouds.  They  darken  the  sky  when  they  fly.  The 
judgment  of  the  locusts  was  typical  of  the  day  of  judgment.  Light  is  always 
the  emblem  of  joy.  Darkness  is  the  emblem  of  intense  sorrow.  The  day  of  the 
Lord  will  be  productive  of  great  sorrow  to  the  impenitent,  as  then  all  their  plans 
will  be  at  an  end,  their  hopes  will  vanish,  their  ambitions  will  appear  vain,  arid 
the  great  mystery  of  eternity  before  them  for  which  they  are  vmprepared  will 
awaken  the  saddest  reflections  and  anticipations  within  their  souls.  II.  Judg- 
ments WIDELY  SPREAD.  "  As  the  moming  spread  upon  the  mountains."  Some 
have  thought  this  to  allude  to  the  appearance  which  the  inhabitants  of  Abyssinia 
too  well  knew,  as  preceding  the  coming  of  the  locusts.  A  sombre  yellow  light 
is  cast  on  the  ground,  from  the  reflection,  it  was  thought,  of  their  yellow  wings. 
But  that  appearance  itself  seems  to  be  peculiar  to  that  country,  or  perhaps  to 
certain  flights  of  locusts.  The  image  naturally  describes  the  suddenness  and 
universality  of  the  darkness,  when  men  looked  for  light.  As  the  mountain-tops 
first  catch  the  gladdening  rays  of  the  sun,  ere  yet  it  riseth  on  the  plains,  and  the 
light  spreads  from  height  to  height,  until  the  whole  earth  is  arrayed  in  light,  so 
wide  and  universal  .shall  the  outspreading  be,  but  it  shall  be  of  darkness,  not  of 
light ;  the  light  itself  shall  be  turned  into  darkness  (Pusey).  Thus  the  ills  of 
the  day  of  the  Lord  will  be  rapid  in  their  motion  as  the  spread  of  the  first  light 
of  the  day,  and  will  fall  upon  all  the  myriads  of  the  impenitent  who  have  lived 
since   the   commencement   of   time.     HI.  Judgments    greatly    destructive. 


CHAP,  u.]  JOEL.  23 

*'  A  flame  devoureth  before  them,  and  behind  them  a  flame  burneth  :  the  land 
is  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before  them,  and  behind  them  a  desolate  wilderness  ; 
yea,  and  nothing  shall  escape  them."  This  is  not  to  be  understood  of  the  heat 
of  the  sun,  or  of  the  great  drought  that  went  before  and  continued  after  the 
locusts,  but  of  them  themselves,  which  were  like  a  consuming  fire  ;  wherever 
they  came  they  devoured  everything  as  fire  does  stubble.  This  is  a  picture  of 
the  judgments  which  will  accompany  the  day  of  the  Lord ;  they  will  consume 
as  with  a  terrible  flame  all  that  a  wicked  life  holds  dear,  and  there  shall  be 
no  escape  from  their  terrible  ravages.  IV.  Judgments  KMrNENTLY  warlike. 
"  They  shall  run  like  mighty  men ;  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  men  of  war  ; 
and  they  shall  march  every  one  on  his  ways,  and  they  shall  not  break  their  ranks." 
And  thus  we  have  pictured  the  awful  judgments  of  the  day  of  the  Lord, — they 
shall  be  swift  as  horsemen  (ver.  4) ;  they  shall  inspire  terror  (ver.  6) ;  they  shall 
overcome  every  obstruction  to  their  effective  operation  (ver.  7) ;  they  shall  be 
orderly  and  well  disciplined  (ver.  7) ;  they  shall  be  incapable  of  repulse  (ver.  8)  ; 
they  shall  stealthily  achieve  their  ends  (ver.  9) ;  they  shall  derange  the  usual 
order  of  nature  (ver.  10) ;  they  shall  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  they  are 
Divinely  sent  on  their  work  of  retribution.  Well  may  the  prophet  ask,  "  Who 
shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  "  V.  Judgments  Divinely  conducted.  "  And  the 
Lord  shall  utter  His  voice  before  His  army."  And  thus  amidst  the  terrors  of 
that  awful  day  there  will  be  heard  the  Divine  voice,  commanding  the  warlike 
energies  which  shall  be  so  destructive,  and  that  voice  will  strike  despair  into  the 
wicked  soul.  Lessons — 1.  That  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  advancing.  2.  That  it 
will  come  full  of  terror.     3.  That  it  should  lead  to  repentance.     (7.  8.  Exell.  M.A.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Therefore  also  now,  saith  the  Lord,  turn  ye  even  to  Me  with  all 
your   heart,    and    with    fasting,    and    with   weeping,    and   with   mourning.^ 

The  characteristics  and  encouragements  of  true  repentance  : — I.  That  true  repent- 
ance consists  in  the  immediate  turning  of  the  soul  to  God,  in  a  mood  of 
deep  sorrow  for  sin.  This  turning  to  God  must  be — 1.  Immediate.  The 
prophet  tells  the  people  of  Judah  that  they  must  turn  "  also  now  "  to  the  Lord. 
These  little  words  are  full  of  emphasis,  and  signify  that  even  though  the  people 
had  so  long  abused  the  Divine  forbearance,  and  although  the  opportunity  of 
mercy  was  passing  away,  yet  if  they  would  at  once  pay  heed  to  the  words  of 
warning  they  should  be  saved.  There  was  no  time  for  delay.  2.  Sincere.  The 
prophet  says  to  the  people  of  Judah,  turn  unto  the  Lord  "  with  all  your  heart." 
They  were  not  to  simulate  a  repentance  they  did  not  truly  feel  ;  it  was  not  to 
be  half-hearted.  They  were  to  turn  to  God  in  their  thoughts,  in  their  affections, 
in  their  wills,  and  in  every  faculty  and  capability  of  their  souls.  3.  Inward. 
The  prophet  says  to  the  people  of  Judah,  "  Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your  gar- 
ments." Sin  is  an  inward  thing,  and  so  must  be  the  repentance  which  puts  it 
away.  4.  Sorrowful.  The  people  of  Judah  were  to  turn  to  the  Lord  "  with 
fasting,  and  with  weeping,  and  with  mourning."  A  true  turning  of  the  soul 
to  God  is  always  accompanied  by  intense  sorrow  ber-ause  the  law  of  God  has 
been  broken,  becau.«e  the  soul  has  been  injured  by  sin,  because  time  has  beea 
lost  in  which  good  might  have  been  done,  because  it  has  enfeebled  the  moral 
manhood,  and  because  it  has  moved  the  anger  of  God.  II.  That  true  repent- 
ance IS  encouraged  by  our  kno\vledge  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  by  a 
HOPE  OF  THE  DiviNE  BLESSING.  "  And  turn  unto  the  Lord  your  God  :  for  He 
is  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and  repenteth 
Him  of  the  evil.  Who  knoweth  if  He  will  return  and  repent,  and  leave  a  blessing 
behind  Him  ?  "  Here  we  have  the  greatest  encouragements  to  repentance— 
1.  From  our  knowledge  of  the  Divine  character.  The  prophet  here  gives  a  very 
beautiful  revelation  of  the  nature  and  character  of  God  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Judah,  which  they  would  perhaps  hardly  regard  as  consistent  with  His  previous 
threats  of  judgment.  And  we  have  throughout  the  Bible  such  a  revelation  of 
the  Divine  mercy  as  should  be  an  encouragement  to  the  penitent.  It  is  natural 
for  God  to  have  mercy  upon  the  repentant  soul,  even  as  it  is  natural  for  fire  to 
biu-n.  2.  From  our  hope  of  the  Divine  blessing.  It  seems  as  though  the  prophet 
wished  to  leave  the  Jews  in  some  uncertainty  as  to  whether  God  would  '  return, 
and  repent,  and  leave  a  blessing  behind  Him,"  in  order  that  he  might  not  weaken 
anv  impression  which  his  former  denunciations  had  made.  God  often  leaves 
behind  Him  a  blessing  in  the  repentant  soul,  even  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory.     Lessons — 1.  That  men  should  turn  to  God  with  full  purpose  of  heart. 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

2.  That  they  should  do  so  while  it  is  called  to-day.  3.  That  they  should  thus 
seek  Hia  mercy  and  expect  His  blessing.  (J.  S.  Exdl,  M.A.)  The  first  day 
oj  Lent : — From  very  ancient  times  Ash  Wednesday  has  been  kept  by  Christians 
with  great  strictness.  Our  Church  too  marks  this  day  as  a  specially  solemn 
day,  by  providing  a  special  service  for  it,  namely,  the  "  Commination,  or  denounc- 
ing .of  God's  anger  and  judgments  against  sinners  " — a  service  well  fitted  to  stir 
up  our  dull  minds  to  the  thought  of  our  sins,  and  to  rouse  our  slumbering  con- 
sciences to  the  feeling  of  our  guilt.  Now  the  great  use  of  special  days  like  this 
is  to  fill  our  hearts  and  minds  with  some  special  thought  or  feeling,  to  fix  it  firmly 
in  our  memory,  to  press  and  stamp  it  in  so  deeply  that  it  will  not  easily  be  rubbed 
out  by  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  world  :  and  on  Ash  Wednesday  the  thought 
that  should  fill  our  mind  is  the  thought  of  our  sinfulness ;  the  feeling  that  should 
be  uppermost  in  our  hearts  is  the  feeling  of  our  deep  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God. 
This  thought  and  feeling  should  rise  with  us  in  the  morning,  should  go  forth 
with  us  to  our  daily  toil  or  business,  should  be  with  us  wherever  we  are,  and  go 
with  us  wherever  we  go,  if  we  would  spend  this  day  as  it  is  meant  to  be  spent, 
as  a  day  of  deep  and  earnest  penitence.  The  very  reason  why  most  people's 
religion  is  so  poor  and  weak  is  because  their  religious  feelings  are  so  shallow, 
their  religious  acts  so  hasty  and  formal.  A  day  like  this  is  meant  to  correct 
the  fault.  It  is  meant  to  deepen  the  feelings,  to  give  occasion  for  a  more  real 
and  searching  penitence.  It  is  meant  to  be  a  day  of  much  strict  self-examination, 
of  much  humble  confession  of  sin,  of  much  earnest  prayer,  of  much  godly  sorrow, 
of  much  hearty  resolve.  To  fast  on  this  day,  and  deny  ourselves  outwardly, 
is  a  mere  mockery  and  snare,  tempting  us  to  think  well  of  ourselves,  and  to  fancy 
we  are  doing  great  things,  if  we  have  not  the  inward  spirit  of  fasting,  which  is 
the  humbling  of  the  soul  in  secret  shame  and  sorrow  before  God.  Let  this  be 
what  we  aim  at,  and  then  we  shall  be  thankful  for  every  aid,  such  as  fasting  is, 
to  so  good  an  end.  Only  we  must  remember  the  end  is  greater  than  the  means. 
Let  us  not,  then,  despise  a  day  and  a  service  which  may  be  so  blest  to  us,  and 
which  have  been  so  blest  to  thousands  and  thousands  of  Christian  people.  Nay, 
till  we  can  say  that  our  sense  of  sin  cannot  be  made  deeper,  that  our  confessions 
caimot  be  more  earnest,  that  our  knowledge  of  self  cannot  be  increased,  that  our 
repentance  cannot  be  more  sincere, — have  we  any  right  to  despise  these  helps  ? 
(W.  Walsham  How,  D.D.)  National  and  personal  fasting: — It  is  not  always 
that  the  voice  of  the  Church  hits  the  mood  of  the  world.  Just  now  there  is  no 
thoughtful  man,  whatever  his  personal  condition,  whose  spirit  is  altogether 
untouched  by  sadness.  We  are  all  breathing  an  atmosphere  of  uneasiness, 
humiliation,  and  perplexity ;  our  hearts  are  heavy,  and  there  is  much  to  weigh 
them  down.  How  can  we  use  the  resource  which  the  text  proclaims  ?  It  is  by 
no  lip-uttered  penitence  that  we  can  so  turn  unto  God.  It  is  by  no  mere  confession 
of  faults  which  we  think  others  have  committed,  and  petitions  that  they  may 
be  repaired.  We  may  individually  feel  a  sense  of  impotence  in  the  presence 
of  movements  and  measures  which  we  caimot  control.  But,  remember,  that 
the  whole  is  made  up  of  parts ;  several  items  construct  the  whole.  Every  one 
who  honestly  tries  to  see  himself  and  his  wishes  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  of  righteous- 
ness, aids  in  the  solution  of  national  and  social  problems,  whatever  they  may  be, 
whether  they  concern  order,  home  distress,  or  troubles  beyond  the  seas.  The 
individual  is  the  unit  of  humanity.  A  sense  of  general  vexation  must  never 
blot  out  that  of  personal  responsibility.  As  each  sweeps  before  his  own  door, 
the  street  is  clean.  As  each  honestly  turns  to  the  Lord,  tne  attitude  of  the  whole 
is  corrected.  Our  business  is  to  see  to  the  items  of  our  own  conduct,  leaving 
the  total  to  accumulate  by  inevitable  law.  How  may  we  individually  use  the 
tide  of  national  anxiety  in  obeying  the  summons  of  the  Lenten  season  ?  We 
have  a  common  fauJt,  a  hectoring  tone  towards  supposed  inferiors.  If  there  is 
anything  which  should  cultivate  Christian  society  and  Christian  households, 
it  is  goodwill  and  kindliness.  Let  not  the  summons  of  the  text  demand  a  mere 
epoch  of  religious  procedure, 'when  we  kneel  in  the  congregation  or  in  the  chamber. 
Let  it  touch  our  lives.  A  turning  to  the  Lord  is  a  turning  from  self,  from  its 
lower  passions,  aims,  and  habits.  It  comes  out  in  audible,  visible,  material 
results.  It  is  seen  in  many  a  thing ;  it  is  perceived  in  the  tone  of  the  voice, 
and  in  the  look  of  the  eye  ;  it  is  seen  in  the  fair  conduct  of  commonplace  business ; 
it  is  seen  in  our  correspondence  ;  in  the  office  and  the  shop  ;  in  the  amenities 
of  home,  and  in  the  rectitude  of  public  life  ;  in  the  details  of  our  personal  con- 
Tersation,  and  in  the  nature  of  our  familiar  habits.    Pause  at  one  point — "  with 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  25 

fasting."  This  arrow  hits  a  national  and  personal  blot.  Some  people  fast  too 
much,  through  poverty.  Some  people  eat  too  much,  through  self-indulgence. 
There  are  many  who  need  to  fast,  who  need  to  use  such  abstinence  that  the  flesh 
may,  as  it  should,  obey  the  mind,  obey  the  spirit,  not  on  the  lowest,  but  on  the 
highest  grounds,  that  they  may  be,  physically  and  intellectually,  in  body  and 
soul,  such  as  God  intends  them  to  be.  Treat  the  summons  of  the  Lenten  season 
as  a  wholesome,  reasonable,  godly,  human  call  to  consider  our  ways,  as  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  in  whom  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being.  (Harry  Jones. ) 
Thoughts  for  Lent : — Ash  Wednesday  is  neither  a  saint's  day,  nor  a  festival.  It 
is  simply  the  first  of  the  forty  days  of  Lent.  On  this  day  we  read  the  seven 
penitential  Psalms,  and  the  Coramination  Service,  and  thus  the  day  assumes  a 
severe  penitential  character  of  its  own.  The  text  reminds  us  that  at  this  time 
we  have  an  inward  and  an  outward  duty  to  fulfil.  The  inward  duty  is,  the 
turning  of  the  heart  to  God.  The  outward  is,  the  mortification  of  our  bodily 
appetites.  1.  Fasting  is  a  matter  very  little  discoursed  about,  and  very  little 
practised.  Fasting  is  not  for  the  weak,  the  sickly,  the  very  young,  or  the  very 
poor.  Fasting  is  a  means  to  an  end,  not  an  end  in  itself.  Fasting  should  be 
observed  to  God.  Its  essence  is  mortification, — not  the  mere  act  of  abstaining 
from  food.  The  fasting  we  should  all  aim  at  is  rather  the  denying  ourselves 
in  respect  of  whatever  we  know  to  be  a  superfluity.  A  check  imposed  on  the 
curiousness  of  appetite  ;  a  curb  submitted  to  in  respect  of  the  quantity  eaten — 
this  is  true  fasting.  2.  The  inward  conversion  of  the  heart  to  God.  This  is  the 
great  duty  of  the  Lenten  season.  To  think  over  one's  past  life,  and  one's  present 
state  ;  to  review  one's  sins,  and  to  loathe  and  forsake  them ;  to  make  reparation 
where  it  is  possible,  and  to  confess  one's  fault  when  one  cannot  repair  it — this 
is  the  fast  which  the  Lord  approveth.  (J.  Burgon,  M.A.)  The  right  use  of 
calamities  : — Two  exhortations,  whereof  the  first  is,  that  they  should  set  about 
sincere  repentance  and  humiliation,  testified  by  holy  private  fasts  and  unfeigned 
sorrow,  and  so  prove  that  they  are  really  converted  to  God,  and  reconciled  to 
Him  through  faith  in  the  Mediator  (ver.  12).  And  that  they  should  study  rather 
to  be  afflicted  for  sin,  than  by  performance  of  external  ceremonies  to  pretend 
to  it  only  (ver.  13).  Unto  this  exhortation  two  reasons  are  subjoined,  the  first 
whereof  is  taken  from  the  properties  of  God,  who  is  merciful  and  gracious  ;  not 
easily  provoked,  rich  in  kindness,  and  who,  upon  sinners'  repentance,  is  ready 
to  recall  His  threatenings  that  they  be  not  executed.  Doctrine.  1.  Were  there 
never  so  many  plagues  on  sinners,  yet  God  is  not  bound  to  take  notice  of  them 
so  long  as  they  repent  not.  Were  there  never  so  much  terror  and  affliction  of 
spirit  upon  men,  under  feared  or  felt  judgments,  yet  all  these  serve  to  no  purpose 
if  they  stir  not  up  to  repentance  ;  and  they  must  be  mad  who,  being  in  such  a 
condition,  yet  do  not  set  about  that  duty.  Therefore  after  all  the  representation 
of  plagues,  and  of  terror  upon  men,  they  are  called  to  this  as  the  only  remedy 
and  way  to  an  issue,  and  as  the  duty  which  they  cannot  but  mind  who  are  seriously 
affected  with  such  a  condition.  "  Therefore,  turn  ye."  2.  When  God  is  threaten- 
ing most  sadly,  and  proceeding  most  severely.  He  would  be  still  understood  as 
inviting  by  these  to  repentance,  and  willing  to  accept  of  it.  For  the  Lord  who 
threatens,  doth  exhort,  and  He  brings  it  in  with  a  "  therefore,"  or  upon  the 
back  of  the  former  discourse,  to  show  that  this  is  His  scope  in  all  of  it.  3.  Such 
as  have  been  so  long  abusers  of  God's  patience,  as  matters  seem  irremediable, 
and  strokes  are  either  imminent  or  incumbent,  should  not,  for  all  that,  look  upon 
the  exercise  of  repentance  as  too  late  and  out  of  season,  but  ought  to  judge  that 
it  is  good  even  then  to  set  about  it,  and  that  it  will  do  good,  however  matters 
go.  Therefore,  notwithstanding  they  were  in  this  sad  plight,  yet  the  Lord 
exhorts  them  "  even  now  also  to  turn."  4.  Such  as  do  mind  repentance,  especially 
when  God  declareth  Himself  angry,  would  not  linger  or  delay  to  set  about  it. 
So  much  also  may  be  imported  in  that  "  now  also "  they  should  "  turn." 
5.  Whatever  doubts  such  as  are  humbled  by  judgments  may  have,  that  their 
repentance  will  not  be  accepted  ;  yet  they  are  bound  to  answer  all  these  from 
God's  naked  word  who  giveth  the  invitation  to  such.  6.  Repentance  for  particu- 
lar sins,  under  sad  judgments,  will  neither  be  right  nor  acceptable  so  long  as 
men  'do  not  mind  conversion  to  God,  and  a  change  of  their  state  by  regeneration  ; 
that  so,  the  tree  being  good,  the  fruits  may  be  answerable.  Therefore  doth  He 
begin  with,  "  Turn  ye  unto  Me,"  where  the  exhortation  doth  not  import  any 
power  in  man,  but  only  points  out  his  duty,  and  showeth  that  exhortation  is  a 
mean  which  God  bleeseth  to  His  elect,  and  not  only  deals  thereby  with  them 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

as  rational  creatures,  but  therewith  imparts  strength  that  they  may  obey. 
7.  In  turning  unto  God  men  would  beware  of  being  faint  or  feigned,  but  would 
study  to  be  sincere  and  single,  since  they  cannot  attain  to  perfection,  for  this, 
in  a  Gospel  sense,  is  "  to  turn  even  to  Me  with  all  your  heart."  8.  As  men  would 
begin  at  conversion  to  God,  so  they  would  therewith  study  to  be  deeply  affected 
for  sin  and  bygone  evils,  and  under  the  judgments  procured  thereby  ;  and  would 
evidence  their  afHiction  of  spirit  by  sorrow  and  humiliation  suitable  (in  some 
measure)  to  their  condition.  Therefore  is  it  added,  as  an  evidence  and  com- 
panion of  the  former,  "  turn  ye  with  fasting,  and  with  weeping,  and  with  mourn- 
ing "  ;  or  with  such  sorrow  as  is  usual  in  mourning  for  the  dead,  and  expressed 
not  only  by  wailing,  but  by  smiting  on  the  breast,  and  the  like  gestures.  It  is 
a  change  to  be  suspected  where  men  please  themselves  with  their  present  good 
condition,  and  do  lightly  pass  over  their  former  miscarriages.  And  albeit  signs 
and  expressions  of  sorrow  be  not  always  at  command  when  men  are  most  afflicted, 
yet  repentance  for  gross  and  long  continuance  in  iniquity,  and  under  extra- 
ordinary judgments,  should  not  be  passed  over  in  an  ordinary  and  common  way. 
9.  God  is  not  pleased,  nor  will  a  true  penitent  be  pleased,  with  external  perform- 
ances and  ceremonies,  neglecting  substance  ;  for  saith  He,  "  Rend  your  hearts 
and  not  your  garments."  10.  Whatever  the  Lord  be,  or  will  say  or  do,  to  the 
impenitent,  yet  there  is  nothing  in  Him  to  be  terrible  to  a  convert  and  a  penitent. 
Without  the  sight  of  this,  conviction  and  contrition  would  but  end  in  despair. 
Therefore,  notwithstanding  all  the  former  threatenings,  this  is  subjoined  to  the 
exhortation,  by  way  of  reason  and  encouragement,  "  Turn  ye,  for  He  is  gracious," 
&c.  {George  Hutcheson.)  The  day  of  humiliation  a  national  obligation  : — Joel, 
having  forewarned  the  people  of  Judah  of  the  impending  calamities  that  threatened 
to  overwhelm  them,  proceeds  to  point  out  the  necessary  instructions  for  them 
to  follow  in  the  prospect  of  such  an  awful  national  crisis.  I.  The  various  duties 
SUITABLE  TO  A  PERIOD  OF  NATIONAL  CALAMITY.  1.  The  appointment  of  a 
day  of  national  humiliation.  Joel  orders  them  to  assemble  the  people  together 
in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  where  by  external  purifications  and  proper  instruc- 
tions they  might  be  fitted  for  the  profitable  solemnisation  of  the  same.  Is  there 
less  obligation  on  Christian  communities  to  set  apart  a  day  of  humiliation  under 
similar  afflictive  dispensations  of  providence  ?  Properly  observed,  such  seasons 
of  public  demonstration  are  undoubtedly  acceptable  to  God.  The  assembling 
of  ourselves  together  will  sharpen  the  desire  of  the  Christian  for  more  devout 
secret  communion  with  God  in  the  closet  of  prayer.  2.  The  first  duty  is  turning 
unto  the  Lord.  The  Israelites  were  to  attend  the  temple  not  only  in  a  suitable 
manner  outwardly,  but  with  a  deep  inward  impression  of  God's  judgments. 
Their  affections  were  to  be  estranged  from  the  concerns  of  this  world,  and  set  on 
the  God  whom  they  had  offended.  Such  a  solemn  day  calls  for  nothing  less 
than  the  whole  heart.  Away  with  frivolity,  trifling,  indifference.  It  is  a  day 
that  calls  for  the  implicit  surrender  of  the  inner  man.  3.  The  duty  of  fasting. 
The  Christian  may  perform  this  act  if  his  conscience  suggest  it  as  incumbent 
upon  him.  But  he  must  remember  the  Redeemer's  admonition  in  relation  to  it. 
There  is  a  notion  that  fasting  consists  in  abstinence  from  particular  kinds  of 
flesh.  Such  an  idea  is  as  truly  absurd  as  it  is  derogatory  to  that  part  of  the 
Christian  community  which  entertains  it.  We  must  fast  in  the  spirit.  It  is 
the  motive  alone  can  render  fasting  acceptable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Creator.  4.  The 
duty  of  weeping  and  mourning.  The  Christian  dispensation  does  not  demand 
outward  demonstrations  of  grief.  External  signs  of  grief  and  humiliation  are 
but  faint  emblems  of  the  shame  experienced  by  the  contrite  soul.  Our  repent- 
ance must  be  accompanied  with  a  change  of  heart  and  life  ;  it  must  exercise  a 
converting  influence  upon  us  within.  The  sorrow  we  feel  must  be  manifested 
in  reformation  of  life.  11.  The  encouragement  to  this  performance.  "  For 
the  Lord  is  gracious,"  &c.  It  is  on  account  of  His  infinite  mercies  that  we  are 
not  consumed.  From  a  consideration  of  this  kind  we  may  draw  much  consolation. 
The  Divine  ear  will  be  open  to  the  prayers  of  all  those  who  call  upon  Him  in  sin- 
cerity. Let  the  many  mercies  of  God  experienced  during  the  past  encourage  us 
to  put  our  trust  in  His  mercy  now  in  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  Let  us  praise  Him  to-day  for  all  that  is  past ;  let  us  depend 
upon  Him  for  all  that  is  to  come.  {Richard  Jones,  B.A.)  Fasting,  and  duties 
connected  with  it : — Let  me  exhort  you  diligently  to  examine  into  the  state  of 
your  souls  at  this  particular  season.  A  business  man  has  his  seasons  for  taking 
stock.     And  are  our  souls  of  less  consequence  than  our  bodies  ?    It  is  impossible 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL,  27 

to  determine  exactly  what  must  be  the  outward  ceremonies  or  signs  attending 
our  penitential  sorrow,  so  various  are  the  tempers  and  dispositions  of  men.  Yet 
nature  points  at  the  rule  to  each  individual,  namely,  his  own  feelings ;  since 
there  can  be  no  true  compunction  for  sin,  and  consequently  no  repentance, 
without  pain  and  grief  felt  on  the  part  of  the  sinner.  If  sins  arise  from  the  over- 
indulgence of  sensual  appetites,  abstinence  and  temperance  always,  and  fasting 
on  occasion,  may  be  efficient  aids  in  bringing  such  appetites  into  subjection. 
No  man  is  so  little  a  sinner  as  not  to  be  capable  of  advancing  his  soul's  health 
by  a  due  and  religious  observance  of  appointed  fasting  days.  The  prophet  says 
we  are  to  turn  to  the  Lord  with  weeping.  Tears  are  generally  esteemed  the  signs 
of  grief,  but  there  are  tears  of  joy.  They  are  rather  to  be  esteemed  the  effects 
of  a  violent  perturbation,  either  of  body  or  mind,  proceeding  from  various  causes 
— from  grief,  joy,  envy,  anger,  or  the  exertion  of  any  strong  passion.  To  judge 
of  a  man's  repentance  solely  by  the  quantity  of  tears  he  sheds  would  be  to  judge 
very  rashly  of  it.  Tears  not  being  altogether  in  our  own  power,  can  never  be 
essential  sign  of  repentance.  A  third  circumstance  mentioned  by  the  prophet 
is  "  mourning."  That  expression  of  grief  which  breaks  forth  into  lamentation 
and  woe,  and  is  accompanied  with  tearing  open  the  garments  to  smite  on  the 
naked  breast :  an  external  appearance  of  great  humility  and  repentance,  but 
which  receives  its  whole  merit  from  the  sincerity  of  the  performer.  Weeping, 
fasting,  and  mourning  receive  all  their  worth  from  the  inward  man ;  they  are 
sanctified  by  the  integrity  and  sincerity  of  the  heart.  The  prophet  further  says, 
"  Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments."  "  Rend  your  hearts,"  herein 
lies  the  essence  of  tr\ie  penitential  sorrow ;  from  hence  will  all  the  necessary 
acts  of  outward  mortification  and  self-denial  unavoidably  ensue.  Tear  open, 
as  it  were,  the  inmost  recesses  of  your  heart,  spare  not  till  you  have  discovered 
every  stain  and  blemish,  wash  it  away  with  unremitted  diligence,  that  so  you 
may  present  it  pure  and  spotless  before  the  Lord.  Examine  the  state  of  your 
souls  fairly  and  honestly.  (C.  Moore,  M.A.)  Exhortation  to  repentance : — 
I.  A  DUTY  ENJOINED.  Here  is  at  once  implied  our  alienation  from  God.  To 
say  we  are  turned  from  Him  is  to  say  that  we  are  fallen,  depraved,  and  sinful 
creatures.  We  are  not  to  turn  from  one  evil  way  to  another,  from  one  idol  to 
another,  from  one  religious  profession  to  another,  but  unto  God.  We  cannot 
turn  of  ourselves.  We  need  to  pray  for  God's  special  and  enabling  grace.  The 
impossibility  is  not  natural  but  moral,  consequently  our  inability  to  turn  our- 
selves to  Him  does  not  lessen  our  obligation  to  do  so.  II.  The  manner  of  its 
PEEFORMANCE.  "  With  the  heart."  No  mere  change  of  opinion,  or  reformation 
of  life,  or  outward  profession  of  godliness  will  suffice.  "  With  our  whole 
heart."  God  will  brook  no  rival.  When  the  heart,  with  all  its  affections,  motives, 
and  desires,  returns  to  its  rightful  owner,  there  is  nothing  which  delights  its 
owner  more  than  to  see  it  touched  with  tender  contrite  sorrow.  "  With  fasting." 
We  approve  of  using  such  abstinence  as  will  tend,  through  grace,  to  bring  the 
body  into  subjection  to  the  Spirit.  Self-denial  is  a  primary  requisite  in  the 
religion  of  Jesus  Christ  III.  Our  encouragement  to  fulfil  it.  Gracious — 
merciful — slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  is  the  Lord  our  God.  Therefore 
none  need  be  discouraged.  ( W.  Mudge. )  On  national  repentance  : — I.  The 
exhortations  to  the  people  to  return  unto  the  Lord.  "  Turn  ye  even 
unto  Me."  What  is  the  nation  to  turn  from  ?  Its  evil  ways.  When  we  speak 
of  the  nation  we  speak  of  the  individuals  that  compose  the  nation.  The  exhorta- 
tion implies  that  the  people  had  turned  from  God.  Notice  some  of  men's  evil 
ways.  1.  Ungodliness.  Not  one  half  of  our  nation  makes  any  profession  of 
godliness.  And  of  those  who  name  "  the  name  of  Jesus,"  how  few  depart  from 
iniquity !  2.  Hear  the  blasphemy  which  pervades  the  land.  God's  solemn 
message  to  man  is  mocked,  His  Word  denied.  His  sanctuaries  too  much  neglected. 
From  all  these  evil  ways  we  are  called  to  return  unto  the  Lord.  II.  The  direc- 
tion for  returning  to  the  Lord.  "  With  all  your  heart."  Here  lies  the 
main  business — the  heart.  It  must  be  solemnly  and  unreservedly  dedicated 
to  God.  Without  this  internal  movement,  all  outward  show  of  obedience,  or 
sorrow  for  sin,  or  repentance,  or  fasting,  or  prayer  will  avail  nothing.  This 
return  of  the  heart  is  to  be  expressed  by  suitable  outward  signs.  "  With  fasting." 
"  With  weeping  and  mourning."  III.  The  encouragement  presented  to 
the  people  to  return  to  God.  "  He  is  merciful  and  gracious."  Every  moment 
of  the  world's  prolonged  existence  is  a  demonstration  of  God's  long  suffering 
and  patience — is  a  practical  commentary  on  His  own  Word.     (E.   Edwards.) 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Turning  to  the  Lord  : — I.  Repentancb  as  a  turning.  Repentance  is  sometimes 
represented  as  renewing  from  a  decay.  Refining  from  dross.  Recovering  from 
a  malady.  Cleansing  from  soil.  Rising  from  fall.  Here  the  figm'e  is  turning. 
To  turn  is  properly  applied  to  them  that  are  out  of  their  right  way.  Whether 
a  way  be  good  or  no,  we  principally  pronounce  by  the  end.  Our  end,  or  sovereign 
good,  we  call  happiness.  As  we  cannot  find  that  here,  we  are  to  seek  it  with 
God.  From  God  we  ought  never  to  turn  our  steps.  The  way  of  sin,  of  seeking 
oiu*  own  pleasure  or  profit,  is  the  way  of  turning  from  God.  We  are  to  turn  to 
God.  Whither  should  we  turn  from  sin  but  to  God  ?  Many  simply  turn  from 
one  sin  to  another.  We  are  to  turn  with  the  heart.  There  is  a  turning  of  the 
brain  only.  An  alteration  is  required  not  of  the  mind  only,  but  of  the  will,  a  ,, 
change  too  of  the  affections  of  the  heart.  Not  of  bodily  relations  only ;  heart 
and  all  must  turn.  It  must  be  with  the  whole  heart.  Not  dividing  the  heart 
from  the  body,  and  not  dividing  the  heart  in  itself.  II.  The  manner  of  it. 
"  With  fasting."  Not  only  by  way  of  regimen  to  keep  the  body  low,  but  as  a 
chastisement  for  sin  already  past.  To  be  abridged  of  that  which  otherwise  we 
might  freely  use  hath  in  it  the  nature  of  a  punishment.  How  must  we  fast  ? 
Two  kinds  of  fasting  in  Scripture.  1.  David's.  No  meat  at  all.  That  is  too 
hard.  2.  Daniel's  fast.  He  ate  no  "  meats  of  delight."  The  "Church  mitigates 
all  she  may.  Content  to  sustain  nature,  not  to  purvey  the  flesh,  to  satisfy  the 
lusts  thereof.  "  With  weeping."  Thinking  of  the  sins  of  our  past  might  well 
make  us  weep.  If  we  cannot  weep,  mourn  we  can,  and  mourn  we  must.  Mourn- 
ing is  the  sorrow  which  reason  itself  can  yield.  We  can  wish ;  we  can  pray ; 
we  can  complain  and  bemoan  ourselves.  "  Rend  your  hearts."  If  it  is  not 
done  with  the  heart,  nothing  is  done.  As  in  conversion,  the  purpose  of  amend- 
ment must  proceed  from  the  heart ;  so  in  oiur  contrition,  the  sorrow,  the  anger, 
for  our  turning  away  must  pierce  to  the  heart.  Rending  doth  not  so  properly 
pertain  to  the  passion  of  sorrow  as  to  the  passion  of  anger.  The  apostle  puts 
into  his  repentance  indignation  and  revenge,  as  well  as  sorrow.  To  say  the  truth, 
they  are  to  go  together.  If  we  be  truly  sorry  for  our  sin,  we  shall  be  angry  with 
ourselves  the  sinners.  {Bishop  Andrewes. )  Conversion  unto  God : —  Such 
was  the  call  of  God  to  Israel  of  old,  when  His  sore  judgments  lay  heavy  upon 
them,  and  more  were  impending.  "  Turn  unto  the  Lord  your  God."  Let  there 
be  in  each  one  of  us  an  unfeigned  repentance  towards  God.  I.  When  shall 
WB  TURN  UNTO  HiM  ?  Now.  Lent  is  appointed  to  call  us  to  special  repentance, 
and  humbling  of  ourselves  before  God.  Of  all  deceits  the  most  common  and 
most  dangerous  is  delay.  We  all  look  forward  to  some  time  when  we  intend  to 
be  religious.  Of  what  importance,  then,  is  that  word  "  Now."  II.  How  must 
WE  TURN  UNTO  GoD  ?  Outward  indications  of  sorrow  are  mentioned  in  the  text. 
They  are  helpful.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  warns  us  against  resting  in  the  outward 
show,  in  any  mere  signs  of  sorrow.  We  must  rend  our  hearts  on  accoimt  of  our 
sins.  Repentance  must  begin  in  godly  sorrow.  Can  we  offer  God  less  than  a 
heart  broken  and  contrite,  a  heart  hating  the  sins  which  have  dishonoured  God, 
set  at  nought  the  Saviour,  grieved  His  Spirit,  and  wounded  our  own  souls  ?  Will 
He  accept  less  than  all  our  heart  ?  Let  there  be  deep  sincerity.  Let  there  be 
steadfast  resolution.  III.  Motives  for  turning  to  God.  We  may  declare 
the  "  terrors  of  the  Lord."  The  motives  of  the  text  axe  the  graciousness  and 
mercifulness  of  God.  Judgment  is  His  strange  work,  mercy  is  His  delight. 
.{E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  Sovl-reformation : — Three  things.  I.  Its  process. 
Turning  to  the  Lord.  The  unregenerate  man  is  an  alien  from  God.  Like  the 
prodigal  son,  he  has  left  his  father's  house,  and  gone  into  the  far  country  of 
carnality  and  sin.  Reform  is  turning  and  directing  his  steps  back  to  God.  Soul- 
reformation  is  not  turning  from  one  doctrine  or  church,  or  habit,  to  another, 
but  turning  to  God,  going  back  with  all  its  deepest  love  to  Him.  But  in  turning 
there  is  deep  moral  contrition;  "fasting,"  and  "weeping,"  and  "mourning," 
and  "  rending  of  the  heart."  Soul-reformation  begins  in  genuine  repentance 
for  past  sins.  II.  Its  urgency.  Therefore  also  now,  saith  the  Lord.  There 
is  nothing  more  urgent ;  everything  must  make  way  for  this ;  until  this  is  done, 
nothing  is  done  properly.  Now,  because — 1.  The  work  is  of  the  most  paramount 
importance.  2.  The  time  for  accomplishing  it  is  very  short.  Whatever  other 
work  you  adjourn  to  a  future  time,  for  your  soul's  sake  adjourn  not  this  for  a 
single  hour.  III.  Its  encouragement.  "  For  He  is  gracious  and  merciful,"  .  .  . 
"  repenteth  Him  of  the  evil."  The  word  "  deprecateth  "  would  be  better  than 
*'  repenteth."     The  inflicting  of  sufferings  on  His  creatures  is  repugnant  to  His 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  2d 

nature.  "  He  desireth  not  the  death  of  the  sinner."  What  an  encouragement 
it  is  to  the  sinner  to  turn  to  the  Lord,  to  be  assured  that  he  will  be  welcomed 
with  all  the  love  and  tender  sympathy  of  an  affectionate  Father.  {HomUist.) 
God's  design  in  sending  affliction  : — This  exhortation  is  addressed  to  all  who,  like 
the  Israelites  in  the  time  of  Joel,  are  living  in  opposition  to  the  authority  of 
Jehovah.  "  God  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent,"  and  He  enforces 
His  Divine  command  by  the  solemn  threatenings  which  His  law  has  denoimced 
against  sin.  Some  can  only  be  reached  by  arousing  apprehension  and  alarm. 
But  even  when  we  speak  the  threatenings  of  Divine  law,  it  must  always  be  in 
accents  of  tenderness  and  love,  entreating  men  to  be  reconciled  unto  God.  Re- 
pentance is  a  turning  imto  God.  It  is  an  exercise  of  free  and  deliberate  choice. 
It  is  not  a  partial,  but  a  total  change  of  character.  What  are  its  external  mani- 
festations ?  Fasting  was  an  ordinance  in  the  Jewish  economy  designed  as  an 
expression  of  the  feelings  of  sorrow,  and  as  a  means  of  exciting  and  confirming 
these  feelings  in  the  hearts  of  the  worshippers.  Frequently  the  sorrow  of  the 
world  makes  a  man  afflict  himself  in  secret.  The  accumulation  of  terms,  "  with 
fasting  and  weeping  and  mourning,"  may  be  viewed  as  a  Hebrew  superlative 
designed  to  set  forth  the  earnestness  and  intensity  of  the  grief  which  fills  the 
heart  of  the  penitent.  It  is  to  obtain  a  season  for  solemn  thought,  that  the 
Christian  sets  apart  his  times  of  fasting.  "  Rend  yoiar  heart,"  &c.  The  rending 
of  the  garments  is  in  Eastern  countries  a  token  of  grief.  In  connection  with 
religious  worship,  it  might  be  dictated  by  a  sense  of  humility  before  God.  It 
was,  however,  by  no  means  an  infallible  mark  of  genuine  emotion.  Dubious 
marks  of  penitence  are  not  enough  for  those  who  would  turn  with  acceptance 
to  the  Lord  their  God.  A  broken  heart  is  the  emblem  of  deep  anguish.  Those 
who  will  not  yield  to  threats  of  judgment,  the  prophet  endeavours  to  persuade 
by  kindness  and  love.  He  tells  of  God  that  "  He  is  merciful  and  gracious,"  &c. 
"  Gracious,"  as  bestowing  His  favours  upon  those  who  have  no  inherent  claim 
upon  His  bounty.  "  Merciful,"  extending  His  kindness  even  to  those  who,  by 
their  sins,  have  merited  His  wrath.  "  Slow  to  anger,"  bearing  from  time  to  time 
with  those  who  are  living  in  rebellion  against  Him.  "  Of  great  kindness,"  not 
impoverished  by  the  mercies  bestowed  on  a  few,  ever  enough,  and  more  than 
enough,  for  the  wants  of  all  who  humbly  and  believingly  ask  it.  "  Repenteth 
him  of  the  evil."  Not  that  He  will  positively  alter  His  Divine  piurposes,  but 
even  when  the  cup  of  their  iniquity  is  almost  filled,  if  they  turn  to  Him  in  sorrow 
and  penitence,  the  threatened  wrath  wiU  be  averted.  The  believing  view  of 
God's  mercy,  and  the  apprehension  of  God's  wrath,  are  both,  in  their  own  place, 
instrumental  in  leading  men  to  repentance.  Learn  to  make  a  right  improvement 
of  our  afflictions.  Whatever  inquiries  we  may  institute  in  regard  to  their  secon- 
dary causes,  let  us  not  forget  that  their  great  first  cause  is  God ;  that  they  are 
sent  upon  us  for  moral  purposes ;  that  they  speak  to  us  with  the  authority  of 
heaven-appointed  messengers,  saying,  in  God's  name,  "  Turn  ye  even  unto  Me." 
{William  Beckett.)  Humiliation  and  confession: — The  pride  of  the  human 
heart  is  sometimes  fearful.  The  sinner  will  justify  or  excuse  his  course  and  carry 
a  high  look,  till  the  Holy  Spirit  actually  conquers  His  pride  and  overwhelms 
his  soul  with  a  sense  of  self-convicted  guilt  and  ruin.  I.  Humiliation  before 
God  and  man  is  both  proper  and  requisite.  1.  Proper,  that  is,  right,  enjoined 
by  the  fitness  of  things.  The  impenitent  siimer  is  openly  arrayed  against  God  ; 
his  attitude  is  one  of  radical,  persistent  hostility.  2.  Requisite.  God  absolutely 
requires  it,  and  will  not  treat  with  the  sinner  or  pardon  him  till  he  penitently 
smrrenders,  submits  to  God's  terms,  and  truly  and  openly  exhibits  his  penitence. 
II.  Confession  of  sin  follows  humiliation,  and  is  intimately  allied  to 
IT.  Confession  is  the  language  of  penitence.  The  burden  of  sin  is  very  heavy. 
The  man  who  is  unwilling  to  confess  freely — not  only  in  his  closet  to  God,  but 
openly  before  men,  his  heart  of  enmity,  his  life  of  guilt,  alienation,  and  disobedi- 
ence— is  a  stranger  to  true  penitence.     See  characteristics  of  true  confession. 

1.  Sincere.  It  must  come  from  the  heart.  2.  It  must  be  radical.  3.  It  must 
relate  chiefly  to  God.  4.  It  must  cover  up,  keep  back  nothing.  (J.  M.  Sher- 
wood, D.D.)  Fasting  : — I.  Fasting  was  a  frequent  service  of  old — a  principle 
of  Divine  original  and  practical  recognition.  Instances  in  the  Old  Testament, 
in  the  New  Testament ;  in  the  primitive  Church,  and  in  the  reformed  Church. 

2.  The  proper  method  of  fasting.  No  uniform  system  has  ever  obtained.  They 
are  regulated  by  the  character  of  the  cause  that  calls  them  forth  :  by  the  spiritual 
condition  of  the  State ;  and  by  the  idiosyncraeies  of  individuals.     Do  not  presume 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

on  the  plenty  of  your  spiritual  health,  nor  make  an  excuse  of  the  poverty  of 
yoiu"  bodily  health.  3.  Seasonable  suggestions  for  a  fast-day.  On  no  account 
convert  the  fast  into  a  festival.  On  the  other  hand,  do  not  think,  by  a  simple, 
stiff,  or  formal  fast  you  will  gain  either  heavenly  rest  for  yourselves,  or  earthly 
relief  for  your  suffering  brethren ;  do  not  fancy  that  for  an  austere  demeanour, 
and. a  rigid  restraint  of  your  appetites  and  affections,  you  will  merit  aught  at 
the  hands  of  God.  Reflect  on  your  individual  and  our  national  sins ;  confess 
and  repent.  {WUliam  Fisher,  B.A.)  And  rend  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments. — The  rent  heart  better  than  the  rent  garment : — "  Rend  your  heart 
and  not  your  garments."  Above  all,  important  that  repentance  should  be  real 
— the  weeping  the  sign  of  inward  sorrow ;  the  fasting  the  result  of  lower  desires 
kept  in  abeyance  by  higher.  There  was  danger  of  a  superficial,  evanescent  revival. 
I.  Explain  the  allusion  to  the  rending  of  the  garment.  Many  signs  and 
symbols  among  Jews  by  which  they  professed  to  express  feeling,  desire.  (1)  In 
prayer — kneeling,  prostration,  standing,  lifting  the  hands,  hiding  the  face,  smiting 
upon  the  breast.  (2)  Rending  garment.  This  expressed  strongest,  most  intense 
emotion  of  sorrow,  or  terror,  or  horror.  (Gen.  xxxvii.  29,  34 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  31  ; 
1  Kings  xxi.  27;  Jer.  xxxvi.  24;  Matt.  xxvi.  65;  Acts  xiv.  14.)  The  emotion 
professedly  expressed  in  Judah  at  that  time — the  deepest  sorrow  for  sin ;  the 
most  earnest  contrition  and  repentance.  II.  Remembering  the  sign  and 
emotion  signified,  notice  different  classes  of  men.  1.  Some  neither  rend 
their  hearts  nor  their  garments.  No  outward  sign  of  sorrow,  and  no  sorrow 
without  sign.  Describe  what  should  lead  all  to  sorrow  for  sin.  The  history  of 
sin,  its  present  existence  in  the  world,  in  us.  God's  revelation  of  His  hatred  of  sin. 
God's  revelation  of  love  to  the  sinner.  The  life  of  Christ — Gethsemane,  Calvary. 
The  voice  of  conscience  ;  the  pleadings  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Draw  the  contrast 
between  what  should  be  and  what  is.  Indifference,  coldness  of  multitudes.  Mad 
delight  of  many  in  the  world's  great  source  of  misery.  2.  Some  rend  their  garments, 
and  not  their  hearts.  The  outward  sign,  but  no  inward  reality.  The  untruthful, 
hypocritical.  Notice  the  religion  of  formal  custom.  The  services  of  the  present  day 
— devout  attitudes  in  prayer — observance  of  fasts — celebration  of  feasts — revival 
services.  The  danger — the  lack  of  inward  reality.  3.  Some  rend  their  hearts  and 
not  their  garments.  The  inward  reality,  and  not  the  outward  sign.  Men  of  reserve, 
emotion  kept  concealed  in  the  heart's  shrine.  They  shrink  from  demonstration, 
from  the  show  of  religious  feeling,  and  so  apparently  they  are  cold,  but  not  really 
so.  Picttire  the  earnestness  of  private  communion  ;  sorrow's  deep  wound  which 
only  God  can  see ;  sorrow  which  words,  looks,  cannot  express — too  deep  for 
human  sympathy.  4.  Some  rend  their  hearts  and  their  garments.  The  inward 
sorrow ;  the  outward  expression.  Room  in  the  world  for  demonstrative  and 
undemonstrative.  Notice  the  tendency  of  reserved  to  misjudge  those  not  like 
them,  and  the  injustice  of  calling  religious  excitement  worthless.  Illustrations : 
The  publican's  outward  demonstration ;  the  bitter  weeping  of  Peter.  Some 
must  rend  their  garments  when  their  hearts  are  rent.  III.  Learn  the  require- 
ment of  God.  1.  That  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  rend  our  hearts.  Repentance 
for  sin  a  necessity.  This  the  fruit  of  the  law  ;  this  the  germ  of  the  Gospel.  The 
Baptist's  cry ;  the  Saviour's  cry ;  the  cry  of  the  apostles — "  Repent."  2.  As 
to  the  rending  of  the  garment.  "  Rend  your  hearts,"  &c.  The  text  means, 
"  not  only  your  garments."  Other  similar  expressions.  (1)  From  the  Bible. 
"  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice."  The  meaning,  "  mercy  rather  than 
sacrifice."  (2)  From  ordinary  conversation.  "  Give  us  deeds,  not  words." 
The  meaning,  that  deeds  are  more  important  than  words.  Customary,  demonstra- 
tive, peculiar  experience  of  feeling  was  not  forbidden.  Reality  as  opposed  to 
mere  form  insisted  on.  3.  God  does  require  the  pure  and  holy  life.  The  rent 
heart  the  open  heart.  Christ  enters,  abides,  makes  pure.  The  pure  heart 
expressed  by  the  pure  life.  The  heart  made  clean,  the  garment  also  is  made 
white.  This  agreement  must  be.  There  cannot  be  the  changed  heart  without 
the  converted  life.  (J.  M.  Blackie,  LL.B.)  Repentance  : — This  chapter  is  not 
so  much  a  peremptory  prediction,  what  God  absolutely  intends,  as  a  communi- 
cation only,  what  conditionally  He  threateneth.  Man,  in  his  anger,  threatens 
when  he  means  to  strike  ;  God  threatens,  that  He  might  not  strike,  but  that 
we  might  be  forewarned  and  ward  off  His  blow.  The  Gospel,  that  offers  all  mercy 
and  love,  strictly  exacts  and  requires  repentance.  The  text  is  a  vehement  exhor- 
tation to  sorrow  and  repentance  ;  and  a  direction  how  and  in  v  hat  manner  we 
should  repent.     I.  The  precept  of  repentance.     1.  An  exhortation  to  con- 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  3i 

trition.  Observe  the  act  expressed  in  the  word  "  rend  "  ;  and  the  object,  which 
is  presented  affirmatively.  We  must  rend  our  heart.  And  negatively.  We 
must  not  rend  ovu-  garment? .  2.  An  exhortation  to  conversion.  "  Return  unto 
the  Lord  your  God."  Return  implies  a  motion.  (1)  The  kind  of  motion.  A 
returning.  (2)  That  whereunto  we  must  return,  "The  Lord."  (3)  That  habi- 
tude and  relation  which  guides  and  biasses  us  unto  the  term;  in  the  words 
following,  "  Your  God."  This  is  twofold.  There  is  an  attraction  in  the  term 
and  place  to  which  the  motion  tends.  And  that  which  carries  and  disposes  the 
thing  moved  towards  it.  II.  The  motive  to  bepentancb.  In  these  words, 
"For  He  is  gracious,"  &o.  1.  The  kind  and  nature  of  the  motive.  God  contents 
not  Himself  by  putting  us  in  mind  of  our  duty.  He  uses  no  threatenings,  inter- 
mingles no  curses.  He  urges  mercy  and  favour.  Observe  the  degrees  of  the 
motive.  They  are  all  set  and  purposed  to  prevent  and  remove  all  the  fears  and 
discouragements  that  a  timorous  guilty  conscience  can  forecast  to  itself.  We 
are  here  called  upon  to  present  ourselves  unto  the  Lord,  to  hope  for  and  expect 
His  love  and  favour.  But  we  are  not  worthy  of  such  favour.  True,  but  He  is  a 
gracious  God.  We  have  to  admit  that  our  lives  have  been  demeritorious,  sinful, 
offensive.  True,  but  He  is  merciful  and  compassionate.  We  daily  provoke  Him 
by  our  rebellions,  grieving  His  Spirit,  and  increasing  His  wrath  by  our  offences. 
T^ue,  but  He  is  a  patient  God,  and  slow  to  anger.  The  cry  of  our  sins  has  already 
ascended  up  to  heaven.  Yet  He  is  easy  to  be  entreated,  and  of  great  kindness. 
His  wrath  hath  smoked  out  against  us ;  His  prophets  have  denounced  His  judg- 
ments. Yet  there  is  hope  of  mercy,  for  He  repenteth  of  the  evil.  Then  do  thy 
sins  discourage  thee  1  Let  the  offer  and  invitation  of  His  mercy  assure  thee. 
Doth  the  number  and  variety  of  thy  transgressions  dishearten  thee  ?  Consider 
the  multitude  of  His  mercies.  Doth  the  measure  and  heinousness  of  thy  rebellions 
affright  thee  ?  Let  the  degrees  and  plenty  of  His  compassions  comfort  thee. 
Consider  the  duty  of  contrition.  The  act  and  practice  of  repentance  is  no  less 
than  a  rending.  And  that  implies  stiffness  and  obduration  in  the  object  to  be 
wrought  upon.  Hardness  and  difficulty  in  the  act  to  be  exercised — repentance. 
And  it  requires  all  the  strength  and  might  of  him  that  undertakes  it.  Consider 
the  object  upon  which  repentance  must  work  and  exercise  itself.  In  the  affirma- 
tive sense,  your  heart.  If  thy  heart  be  not  contrite  and  sorrowful,  it  is  not  true 
repentance.  Except  thy  sorrow  work  upon  the  heart,  there  is  no  use  or  profit 
in  thy  repentance.  Except  thy  heart  be  humble  and  cast  down  for  sin,  it  is  no 
pleasing  or  acceptable  repentance.  In  the  negative  sense, — "  Rend  not  your 
garments."  In  this  counsel  the  Lord  checks  and  reproves  our  outward  supersti- 
tion. All  outward  ceremonious  practice  of  piety,  if  divided  and  severed  from 
inward  devotion,  is  rejected  of  God.  Ceremonies,  if  accompanied  with  the  heart, 
are  useful  and  acceptable ;  if  divided  from  it,  are  sinful  and  abominable.  But 
the  words  may  be  read,  "  your  hearts  rather  than  your  garments,"  by  way  of 
comparison.  The  contrition  of  the  heart  is  more  necessary  and  useful  than  any 
outward  bodily  affliction.  {Bishop  Brownrigg. )  Penitence  and  conversion  : — 
I.  A  REAL  SOREOW  FOR  SIN.  L  Heartfelt.  Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments.  Rending  stan  !s  for  the  outward  expression  of  sorrow  or  penitence. 
The  prophet  does  not  intend  by  the  contrast  "  hearts  "  not  "  garments,"  to 
condemn  such  outward  signs,  but  to  insist  upon  the  inward  rather  than  the 
outward.  We  are  not  to  affect  sorrow,  to  display  penitence.  Outward  usages 
are  valuable,  not  as  satisfying  conscience  or  pleasing  God,  but  as  helps  to  realise 
a  right  spirit.  2.  Deliberate.  To  rend  garments  is  a  sudden  impulse.  To  rei.d 
the  heart  is  a  far  harder  and  slower  matter.  3.  Intense.  Rend — implying  a 
breaking  of  the  heart, — breaking  by  the  irresistible  force  of  conviction.  This 
implies  a  personal  sense  of  sin,  and  a  holy  hatred  of  sin.  III.  A  true  conversion 
TO  God.  It  is,  "  Turn  unto  the  Lord."  A  broken  heart  without  this  would  be 
mere  despair.  This  implies — 1.  A  change  in  will.  "  Turn."  2.  An  acceptance 
of  God's  call.  "  Turn  unto  the  Lord."  3.  An  act  of  faith  in  Him.  "  Your 
God."  An  acknowledgment  of  God's  claim  on  us.  How  are  we  to  turn  ?  The 
prayer  of  the  Lenten  season  suggests  the  answer,  "Turn  Thou  us,  O  good  Lord, 
and  so  shall  we  be  turned."  (John  Ellerton,  M.A.)  Repentance,  a  rending 
of  the  heart : — I.  The  exhortation  or  advice  given.  Rending  the  garments 
was  a  sign  of  great  sorrow  and  amazement.  This  custom,  when  a  sense  of  the  evil 
of  sin  and  true  sorrow  for  it  were  wanting,  degenerated  into  a  hypocritical  form. 
Therefore  comes  the  command,  "Rend  your  hearts."  From  what  must  they  bo 
rent  ?     From  sin,  especially  your  besetting  sin.     From  earth  and  earthly  things. 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

From  all  creatures.  From  yourselves.  From  hypocrisy  and  formality,  pride 
and  self-confidence,  unbelief,  improper  diffidence  and  distrust.  How  must  they 
be  rent  ?  By  godly  consideration  and  self-examination ;  by  conviction  and 
humiliation,  by  shame  and  sorrow,  by  confession  and  abhorrence.  Bend  your 
hearts.  The  conscience  must  be  pierced,  the  will  conquered,  the  spirit  humbled, 
the  affections  moved,  and  the  old,  hard  heart  made  soft.  The  broken  heart  is 
God's  sacrifice.  "  And  turn  unto  the  Lord."  Do  this  by  contemplation  and 
thought,  desire  and  prayer,  faith  and  confidence,  expectation  and  delight,  grati- 
tude and  love.  Turning  we  cannot  do  of  ourselves.  For  what  are  we  to  turn  ? 
For  illumination.  For  pardon.  For  Divine  favour,  communion,  and  fellowship. 
II.  The  motives  which  enforce  it.  Evil  is  gone  forth  to  chastise  or  punish  sin. 
God  is  good,  not  only  to  "  repent  of  the  evil,"  and  do  it  not,  but  to  do  good.  That 
He  is  "  of  great  kindness  "  witness  a  dying  Jesus,  an  entreating  ministry,  so  many 
sweet  promises  and  alluring  mercies.  Apply  to  the  unconverted,  backsliders, 
and  the  godly.  {J.  Benson.)  For  He  Is  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger. 
— The  'perfection  of  the  mercy  of  Ood : — Nothing  is  more  true  of  God  than 
that  He  is  the  first  and  chiefest  good  ;  His  prime  perfection  is  goodness,  and  our 
truest  notion  of  Him  is,  that  He  is  almighty  goodness.  I.  By  way  of  vindication. 
And  to  give  satisfaction  to  objections  that  arise  against  this  great  truth.  Three 
objections.  1.  Several  instances  of  God's  severity  are  found  recorded  in  Scripture  : 
e.g.,  the  Deluge;  Destruction  of  Canaanites,  &c.  To  this  answer — (1)  When 
necessaries  for  our  good  are  afforded,  and  by  any  neglected,  the  blame  lies  upon 
them.  (2)  Sometimes  the  sins  of  nations  and  persons  are  come  to  their  height, 
and  God  is  forced  to  punish.  (3)  The  judgments  of  God  in  this  life  are  exemplary 
and  disciplinary :  and  better  a  mischief  should  fall  on  particular  persons,  than 
that  a  general  inconvenience  should  follow.  (4)  God  sometimes  lets  us  feel  some- 
thing of  hell  here,  to  prevent  it  hereafter.  (5)  There  may  be  a  particular  account 
given  of  several  scriptural  cases  :  e.g.,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  and  Ananias  and 
Sapphira.  (6)  Though  we  do  not  know  what  time  or  leisure  God  will  allow  to 
sinners  to  repent,  yet  we  certainly  know  God  will  grant  forgiveness  to  penitents. 
(7)  There  is  no  other  way  for  God's  forgiveness  but  the  way  of  repentance.  This 
is  the  tenor  of  the  grace  of  God.  (8)  We  cannot  competently  judge  the  proceedings 
of  God  to  His  creatures.  2.  God  is  represented  as  severe,  in  giving  men  up  to  a 
reprobate  sense,  stupidity,  and  hardness  of  heart.  Answer — (1)  This  case  hath 
no  promise.  (2)  It  is  not  fit  for  the  exercise  of  grace  or  mercy,  for  this  case  is  not 
compassionable.  If  some  think  that  God,  by  an  irresistible  power,  might  have 
prevented  all  sin  and  misery,  it  may  be  answered, — Is  it  reasonable  that  God, 
having  made  voluntary  and  intelligeiit  agents,  should  force  them  ?  Then  there 
could  be  no  exercise  of  virtue,  for  all  virtue  is  in  choice  ;  and  no  happiness,  for 
we  should  be  under  constraint.  Of  what  use,  in  that  case,  would  our  natural 
faculties  be  ?  This  would  no  longer  be  a  probationary  state.  God  draws ;  He 
does  not  force  moral  beings.  3.  The  necessity  of  justice  in  the  case  of  sin.  This 
objection  will  be  resolved  by  a  true  explication  of  justice.  God's  justice  is  the 
same  with  His  integrity  and  uprightness.  These  consist  with  the  reason  of  the 
thing,  and  the  right  of  the  case.  It  is  not  necessary  that  God  should  punish  sin, 
but  He  may  justly  do  it,  for  sin  deserves  punishment.  II.  Explication  of  the 
PHRASES  OF  the  TEXT.  Fivo  Several  words.  1.  Gracious.  Which  imports  to 
do  good  freely,  without  constraint :  to  go  good  above  the  measure  of  right  and 
just ;  to  do  good  without  antecedent  desert,  or  after-recompense.  2.  Merciful. 
So  as  to  compassionate  His  creatures  in  misery,  so  as  to  help  them  in  respect  of 
their  infirmities,  so  as  to  pardon  their  iniquities.  3.  Slow  to  anger.  So  aa 
not  to  take  advantage  of  His  creatures,  so  as  to  overlook  provocation ;  and  so  as 
to  allow  space  for  repentance.  4.  Of  great  kindness.  What  He  doth.  He  doth 
in  pure  good  will,  and  for  our  good  ;  not  in  expectation  of  being  benefited  by 
us ;  not  according  to  the  proportion  or  disposition  of  the  receiver.  5.  Repenteth 
Him  of  the  evil.  So  as  either  it  comes  not  at  all ;  or  it  proves  not  what  we  fear 
and  imagine ;  or  it  stays  but  a  while  if  it  do  come  ;  or  He  turns  it  into  good. 
III.  Confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  proposition  of  the  text.  Four 
names  and  titles  given  to  God  that  make  this  out.  1.  His  creation  in  infinite 
goodness,  wisdom,  and  power.  The  variety,  order,  and  fitness  of  things  to 
their  ends,  declare  the  wisdom  of  God.  2.  Conservation,  protection,  and  govern- 
ment, declare  God  to  be  good,  and  full  of  loving-kindness.  3.  Restoration  and 
recovery  out  of  the  state  of  sin  and  misery.  4.  Future  confirmation  and  settle- 
ment in  glory  and  happiness.     IV.  Caution  is  presented  in  the  text.     Seen 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  33 

in  two  particulars.  1.  Not  to  abuse  this  declaration  of  Divine  goodness,  either 
by  holding  the  truth  in  unrighteousness,  or  turning  the  grace  of  God  into  wanton- 
ness. 2.  Not  to  permit  hasty  or  rash  judgment.  If  anything  seem  harsh  in  the 
dispensation  of  providence,  we  may  understand  it  in  a  little  time  ;  therefore  he 
that  believes  should  not  make  haste.  V.  Application.  1.  Here  is  matter  of 
information.  We  have  a  true  judgment  of  God  when  we  think  of  His  greatness 
in  connection  with  His  goodness.  2.  Here  is  matter  of  imitation.  We  may 
resemble  God.  3.  Here  is  matter  of  consolation.  To  all  that  are  willing  to  do 
well,  and  would  be  good.  (B.  Whichcote,  D.D. )  Repentance  recommended  : — 
I.  The  impoetant  direction  given.  The  direction  "  Turn  unto  the  Lord  your 
God  "  presupposes — 1.  A  state  of  heedless  inattention.  The  position  from  which 
they  were  to  turn  was  one  in  which  the  back  was  upon  God.  2.  A  state  of  careless 
and  criminal  negligence.  3.  A  state  of  obstinate  disobedience.  "  Rend  your 
heart."  The  action  of  rending  garments  indicates — 1.  Excessive  grief.  2.  Great 
loathing  and  abhorrence.  3.  Deep  humility  and  earnest  deprecation.  II.  Thb 
CHEERING  assurance  AFFORDED.  "  For  He  is  gracious  and  merciful,"  &c. 
1.  This  revelation  warrants  our  approach.  The  words  are  expressive  of  the  most 
melting  compassion  and  tenderness.  2.  This  revelation  requires  your  return  to 
"  the  Lord,"  your  Proprietor,  to  whom  you  owe  your  all,  and  to  whom  you  must 
account  for  all.  3.  This  revelation  encourages  your  address.  Ask,  and  receive 
now  the  effects  of  His  grace  and  mercy.  Pardon,  healing,  adoption,  grace.  All 
the  present  privileges  of  children.  And  finally,  all  their  eternal  enjoyments. 
{Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  God's  mercy  : — Like  some  black  rock 
that  heaves  itself  above  the  surface  of  a  sunlit  sea,  and  the  wave  runs  dashing 
over  it,  and  the  spray  as  it  falls  down  its  sides  is  all  rainbowed,  and  there  comes 
down  beauty  into  the  grimness  of  the  black  thing ;  so  a  man's  transgressions 
rear  themselves  up,  and  Christ's  great  love  coming  sweeping  over  them,  makes  out 
of  the  sin  an  occasion  for  the  flashing  more  brightly  of  the  beauty  of  His  mercy, 
and  turns  the  life  of  the  pardoned  soul  into  a  life  of  beauty.     (Sunday  Magazine.) 

Ver.  14.  Who  knoweth  but  He  will  turn  and  repent^  and  leave  a 
blessing  behind  Him. — Encouragements  to  hcpe : — I.  The  objects  op  the 
prophet's  hope.  1.  That  the  Lord  would  return.  This  can  only  be  in  a 
way  of  manifestation ;  all  idea  of  place  or  motion  being  utterly  incom- 
patible with  a  being  who  fills  heaven  and  earth.  God  is  said  to  depart  when, 
being  provoked  by  the  sins  of  any  people.  He  withdraws  His  wonted  assist- 
ance; and  to  return  when.  His  anger  being  appeased,  He  again  shews  Himself 
favourable.  There  is  sometimes  a  sad  parting  between  God  and  His  people; 
not  owing  to  any  want  of  faithfulness  in  Him,  but  to  those  things  in  them  which 
awaken  His  resentment,  as  pride,  self-confidence,  carnality,  and  worldly-minded- 
ness.  2.  That  He  would  "  repent."  Not  change  His  natiu-e  or  piu-poses,  only  Hia 
conduct.  Though  God  cannot  repent  as  men  do,  yet  He  may  act  as  men  do  when 
they  repent :  He  may  cease  to  do  what  He  had  begun ;  He  may  revoke  Hia 
threatenings,  and  recall  His  judgments.  3.  He  would  "  leave  a  blessing 
behind."  (1)  God  never  comes  to  His  people  empty-handed.  (2)  What  God 
gives  we  should  at  least  in  part  return.  II.  The  nature  of  this  hope.  It 
rises  no  higher  than  a  peradventure,  lest  they  should  sink  into  despondency,  or 
lest  they  should  give  way  to  presumption  and  carnal  security.  Their  hope  must 
be  mixed  with  fear,  and  their  joy  with  trembling.  A  possibility — and  much  more, 
a  probability — of  obtaining  mercy  at  the  hand  of  God  is  a  sufficient  encouragement 
to  a  poor  perishing  sinner  to  seek,  to  trust  in,  and  wait  for  Him.     III.  The  cases 

in  which  this   I  OPE,  FOUNDED  UPON  A  PROBABILITY  OF  ACCEPTANCE,  MAY  AFFORD 

ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  SOULS  IN  DISTRESS.  1.  With  rcspect  to  prayer.  2.  With 
respect  to  repentance.  3.  With  respect  to  patient  waiting  upon  God  in  seasons 
of  trial.  4.  With  respect  to  our  exertions  for  the  good  of  others.  Application. 
1.  Improve  this  consideration  so  as  to  restrain  and  keep  under  a  peevish,  fretful, 
and  impatient  spirit.  2.  Learn  that  God's  help  is  only  to  be  expected  in  the  use 
of  appointed  means.  While  we  trust  in  the  Lord,  we  must  keep  His  way.  3.  Let 
nor.e  persist  in  an  evil  course,  on  the  presumption  that  He  may  find  mercy  at  last. 
{B.  Beddome,  AI.A.)  Modest  expectation: — The  manner  of  the  expectation 
is  very  humble  and  modest : — "  Who  i  nows  if  He  will  ?  "  Some  think  it  is 
expressed  thus  doubtfully,  to  check  the  presumption  and  security  of  the  people, 
and  to  quicken  them  to  a  holy  carefulness  and  liveliness  in  their  repentance. 
Or  rather,  it  is  expressed  doubtfully,  because  it  is  the  removal  of  a  temporary 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

judgment  that  they  here  promised  themselves,  of  which  we  cannot  be  so  confident 
as  we  can  that,  in  general,  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.  There  is  no  question 
at  all  to  be  made,  but  that  if  we  triJy  repent  of  om*  sins  God  will  forgive  us  and 
be  reconciled  to  us,  but  whether  He  will  remove  this  or  the  ether  affliction  which 
we  are  imder  may  well  be  questioned,  and  yet  the  probability  of  it  should 
encourage  us  to  repent.  Promises  of  temporal  good  things  are  often  made  with 
a  peradventure.  {Matthew  Henry. )  The  hope  of  repentance  : — The  text  is  an 
encouragement  to  repentance,  upon  hope  of  mercy.  I.  The  matter  of  theib 
HOPE.  1.  The  regaining  of  God's  grace  and  favour  towards  them.  2.  The 
recalling  of  His  threatenings  and  judgments.  3.  The  renewing  of  His  mercies 
to  them.  4.  The  re-establishing  of  His  holy  worship  among  them.  For  the 
understanding  the  nature  of  this  mercy,  this  return  of  God  to  us,  will  afEord  us 
these  three  considerations — 1.  It  is  our  main  happiness  to  enjoy  God's  presence, 
to  have  Him  dwell  amongst  ub.  2.  It  is  the  bitter  fruit  of  sin,  that  it  causeth 
God  to  withdraw  His  presence,  and  to  turn  away  from  us.  3.  It  is  the  blessed 
fruit  of  repentance,  that  it  recovers  God's  presence,  causeth  God  to  return 
graciously  to  us.  11.  The  measuke  of  their  hope.  This  is  somewhat  strange. 
'Tis  but  a  cold  encouragement,  one  would  think  ;  puts  all  their  hopes  upon  a  per- 
adventure. 'Tis  but  "  Who  knows  ?  It  may  be  so  "  ;  that's  all  the  assiurance. 
It  is  a  strange  speech,  seemingly  contrary  and  inconsistent  with  God's  goodness. 
It  is  inconsistent  with  His  present  invitation  of  them  to  repentance.  It  is  in- 
consistent with  His  present  encouragement.  It  seems  contrary  to  His  absolute 
covenant  and  promise  to  pardon  penitents.  What  shall  we  think  of  this  kind 
of  speech  ?  Show  how  this  inkling  and  intimation  of  hope  may  be  useful. 
{Bishop  Brownrigg.)  Leaving  blessings  behind: — In  the  Canton  of  Berne  a 
mountain  stream  rushes  in  a  torrent  toward  the  valley,  as  if  it  would  carry  destruc- 
tion to  the  villages  below ;  but  leaping  from  the  sheer  precipice  of  nearly  nine  hundred 
feet,  it  is  caught  in  the  clutch  of  the  winds,  and  sifted  down  in  fine,  soft  spray, 
whose  benignant  showering  covers  the  fields  with  verdure.  So  sorrow  comes,  a 
dashing  torrent,  threatening  to  destroy  us ;  but  by  the  breath  of  God's  Spirit 
it  is  changed  as  it  falls,  and  povu:s  its  soft,  gentle  powers  on  our  hearts,  leaving 
rich  blessings  upon  our  whole  life.     {J.  R.  Miller.) 

Vers.    15-17.    Sanctify    a    fast. — A    penitential   assembly : — I.    It    must    be 

AN    ASSEMBLY    WHICH    SHALL   BE     SOLEMN    IN    THE    SPIRIT    IN    WHICH    IT    MEETS. 

"  Call  a  solemn  assembly."  In  all  probability  these  words  refer  to  the 
legal  purifications  which  were  enjoined  upon  the  people  prior  to  their  entering 
upon  the  worship  of  the  temple.  They  are  also  indicative  of  the  moral  purity 
and  earnestness  which  should  especially  characterise  a  penitential  assembly. 
AU  who  attended  this  meeting  were  to  be  washed  from  the  defilement  of  their 
past  sin,  and  were  to  come  and  bow  before  the  Lord  in  a  renewed  condition  of 
soul.  This  was  not  an  assembly  to  inaugurate  social  reform,  to  advance  scientific 
research,  or  to  determine  a  political  policy ;  but  to  manifest  a  deep  sorrow  for 
national  apostasy,  and  to  turn  aside  the  peril  which  had  been  awakened  thereby. 
This  meeting  was  not  to  vaunt  the  prowess  of  the  nation,  but  to  confess  sin  before 
God  ;  and  surely  only  a  solemn  mood  would  avail  at  such  a  time.  How  beneficial 
would  be  the  effect  of  such  an  assembly.     II.  It  must  be  an  assembly  in  which 

EVERY  conceivable  AID  TO   REPENTANCE  SHALL  BE   REGARDED.       "  Assemble  th© 

elders,  gather  the  children,  and  those  that  suck  the  breasts:  let  the  bridegroom 
go  forth  of  his  chamber,  and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet."  1.  There  was  the  pathos 
of  sorrowful  old  age.  Here  is  old  age  in  tears  because  of  the  sin  of  the  nation, 
and  because  of  the  evil  of  which  it  is  guilty  before  God.  The  elders  were  present. 
They  have  known  the  nation  long.  They  are  concerned  for  its  \^  elfare.  They  are 
deeply  moved  by  the  judgments  with  which  it  is  visited.  2.  There  was  the  pathos 
of  imperilled  childhood.  The  children  of  the  nation  were  present  at  this  meeting ; 
not  even  infants  were  exempt  from  attendance.  And  would  not  the  thought  of 
the  danger  to  which  these  innocent  babes  were  liable,  and  their  piteous  cries,  lead 
their  parents  to  humiliation  before  God  ?  3.  There  was  the  abandonment  of 
domestic  festivities.  The  bridegroom  went  forth  from  his  chamber,  and  the 
bride  out  of  her  closet,  in  order  that  they  might  attend  the  meeting  thus  impera- 
tively called.  The  newly-married  were  not  to  be  exempt  from  this  penitential 
assembly.  The  most  innocent  festivities  of  life  were  to  yield  their  joy  to  the 
refreshing  and  saving  tears  of  repentance.     III.  It  must  be  an  assembly  IN 

WHICH  THE   MORAL  LEADERS   OF  THE  PEOPLE   SHALL  SUSTiVIN   THEIR  APPROPRIATE 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  35 

BELATiON.  "  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  weep  between  the  porch 
and  the  altar."  The  priests  are  to  utter  in  public  before  God  the  inward  feeling 
of  the  nation.  This  was  a  Divine  arrangement.  It  was  conducive  to  order. 
It  was  promotive  of  repentance.  And  so  in  the  penitential  assembly  the  moral 
leaders  of  the  people  must  intercede  on  their  behalf  before  God.     IV.  It  must 

BB  AN  ASSEMBLY  IN  WHICH  THE  MERCY  OF  GOD  SHALL  BE  EARNESTLY  SITPPLICATED. 

"  Spare  Thy  people,  0  Lord,  and  give  not  Thine  heritage  to  reproach,  that  the 
heathen  should  rule  over  them :  wherefore  should  they  say  among  the  people. 
Where  is  their  God  ?  "  The  priests  were  not  only  to  weep ;  they  were  also  to 
pray.  Tears  without  prayers  are  vain.  1.  The  prayer  of  the  priest  is  for  mercy. 
They  ask  God  to  spare  their  undeserving  but  repentant  people.  They  make  no 
excuse.  2.  The  prayer  of  the  priest  remembers  the  covenant  of  God  with  Hia 
people.  They  plead  that  God  will  save  His  people  and  His  heritage.  In  our 
prayer  of  repentance  we  may  plead  the  Divine  Ownership  of  us  and  the  Divine 
interest  in  us.  Each  soul  is  the  heritage  of  God.  3.  The  prayer  of  the  priests 
desires  the  glory  of  God.  The  Jews  were  the  people  of  God.  Thus  the  priests 
plead  that  national  salvation  may  take  away  from  their  wicked  enemies  the 
opportunity  of  reproaching  the  Divine  name.  Lessons — L  That  national 
assemblies  should  be  frequently  called  to  confess  sin  before  God.  2.  That  they 
should  combine  all  classes  of  individuals.  3.  That  they  should  be  arranged 
by  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel.  4.  That  they  should  prayerfully  seek  the  glory 
of  God.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  A  fast : — When  God  visits  mankind  in  judgment, 
there  are  three  calamities  which  He  sends  upon  them,  the  sword,  the  famine,  and 
pestilence.  How  are  we  to  "  sanctify  a  fast,"  or  make  a  holy  thing  of  it,  by  a 
due  and  proper  celebration  T  This  is  to  be  done — I.  By  a  confession  of  sin. 
When  we  confess,  we  should  begin  with  confessing  that  sinfulness  of  our  nature 
which  is  the  root  of  all  the  sins  of  the  world.  We  should  proceed  to  confess  the 
sins  of  our  time,  the  first  and  greatest  of  which  is  the  want  of  faith,  or  the  neglect 
of  Christianity.  This  want  of  faith  is  naturally  followed  by  a  neglect  of  Divine 
worship  ;  for  who  will  worship  as  a  Christian,  that  does  not  believe  as  a  Christian  ? 
When  we  are  considering  the  sins  of  the  age,  it  is  hard  to  know  where  to  begin, 
or  where  to  end.  II.  A  resolution  of  amendment.  Not  by  the  devotion  of  a 
single  day,  but  by  a  continued  sense  of  the  "  terrors  of  the  Lord  "  upon  our  lives 
and  actions.  While  we  have  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  let  us  value  it,  and  walk 
by  it.  III.  A  dependence  upon  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God.  Penitents 
in  the  worst  of  times  have  everything  to  hope.  What  obligations  then  lie  upon 
you  at  this  moment,  to  be  serious,  to  be  sorrowful  for  past  sin,  devout  and  humble, 
constant  in  the  worship  of  God,  and  sincerely  devoted  to  His  service  for  the  time 
to  come.  (W.  Jones,  M.A.)  An  urgently  demanded  meeting  : — Men  are  con- 
stantly assembling  themselves  together  for  one  purpose  or  another, — political, 
commercial,  scientific,  entertaining.  But  of  all  the  meetings  none  are  so  urgent 
as  the  one  indicated  in  the  text.  I.  It  is  a  meeting  called  on  account  of 
common  sin.  All  the  people  of  Judah  had  sinned  grievously,  and  they  were  now 
summoned  together  on  that  account.  No  subject  is  of  such  urgent  importance 
as  this.  Sin,  this  was  the  root  of  all  the  miseries  of  their  country.  It  behoved 
them  to  meet  together  in  order  to  deliberate  how  best  to  tear  up  this  upas-tree, 
how  best  to  dry  up  this  pestiferous  fountain  of  all  their  calamities.  II.  It  is  a 
MEETING  composed  OF  ALL  CLASSES.  The  young  and  the  old  were  there ;  the 
sad  and  the  jubilant ;  even  the  bridal  pair ;  the  priests  and  the  people.  The 
subject  concerned  them  all,  AU  were  vitally  interested  in  it.  Sin  is  no  class 
subject.  It  concerns  the  man  in  imperial  purple,  as  well  as  the  man  in  pauper's 
rags.  III.  It  is  a  meeting  fob  humiliation  and  prayer.  It  was  not  a  meeting 
for  debate  or  discussion,  for  mere  social  intercourse  and  entertainment,  but  for 
profound  humiliation  before  God.  Conclusion.  No  meeting  is  more  urgently 
demanded  to-day  than  such  an  one  as  this.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  18-20.  Then  will  the  Lord  be  Jealous  for  His  land,  and  pity  His 
people. — The  Divine  attitude  towards  repentant  sovla  : — I.  Toward  repentant 
souls  God  is  strict  in  the  manifestation  op  a  jealous  reqaed.  "  Then 
will  the  Lord  be  jealous  for  His  land,  and  pity  His  people."  Thus  we  see 
the  change  which  repentance  makes  in  the  circumstances  and  conditions  of  men. 
And  God  is  jealous  of  the  welfare  and  honour  of  the  truly  penitent  soul.  He  will 
save  it  wisely  from  former  enemies  who  have  endangered  it,  and  He  will  shield  it 
kindly  from  all  reproach  which  may  threaten.     The  soul  is  Hia.     He  has  redeemed 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

it.  He  has  given  it  the  grace  of  repentance.  He  will  be  jealous  for  its  good. 
II.  Toward  repentant  souls  God  is  beneficent  in  the  restoration  of 
WITHDRAWN  MERCIES.  "Yea,  the  Lord  will  answer,"  &c.  And  happily  true 
it  ia  that  while  sin  despoils  life  of  many  of  its  richest  mercies,  repentance  with 
kind  hand  gives  them  back  again.  There  is  a  glorious  tendency  m  repentance 
to  amehorate  and  remove  the  loss  and  woe  wrought  by  moral  eviL  Repentance 
does  not  always  heal  the  pain  of  sin.  It  does  not  erase  sad  memories.  It  does 
not  always  restore  a  wasted  bodily  constitution.  It  does  not  always  bring  back 
the  substance  wasted  in  the  far  country.  But  its  tendency  is  to  do  thia 
The    moral    touches    the    material     III.  From    the    repentant    soul    God 

WILL     turn     aside     THE     PLAGUES     WHICH     HAVE     PREVIOUSLY      AFFUCTED      IT. 

"But  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you  the  northern  army,"  &c.  The 
repentant  soul  is  beset  by  old  enemies.  They  are  in  the  hand  of  God.  He  can 
cover  their  plans  with  defeat.  Lessons — 1.  That  God  will  protect  the  interests 
of  repentant  souls.  2.  Let  us  see  in  the  glad  effect  of  repentance  in  this  life  a 
prophecy  of  the  joy  of  the  sinless  life.  3.  That  the  enemies  of  repentant  soula 
will  be  brought  to  shame.  (J.  8.  Exell,  M.A.)  Divine  favour  the  best  alliance  : — 
These  words  are  a  comfortable  promise  to  Judah,  upon  a  sincere  humiliation 
and  repentance,  of  the  Divine  kindness  and  favour ;  the  earnest  of  all  blessings, 
the  fountain  of  all  prosperity,  success,  and  happiness  that  can  attend  a  people, 
or  they  can  reasonably  wish  or  hope  for.  I.  In  how  exact  a  posture  oub 
AFFAIRS  stand  WITH  THOSE  OF  JuDAH.  Joel  is  supposed  to  point  to  the  troubles 
of  the  reign  of  good  King  Hezekiah.  We  (1701)  shall  find  that  the  coast  from 
which  we  are  alarmed  and  threatened,  and  the  enemy  from  whom  we  apprehend 
our  danger,  has  all  the  characteristics  and  marks  of  those  enemies  of  the  Hebrews 
described  here  by  the  prophet.  They  were  powerful,  cruel,  and  numerous. 
Neither  is  a  foreign  power  the  only  evil  we  have  reason  to  be  apprehensive  of  and 
to  provide  against.  We  are  a  divided  and  dissatisfied  people,  maligning  our 
governors,  and  murmuring  at  providence.     II.  The  necessity  fob  seeking  a 

SUITABLE  AND  SEASONABLE  REMEDY  IN  THESX  TIMES  OF  DANGER.      It  is  the  Safest 

course  for  nations,  when  they  are  apprehensive  of  danger,  to  implore  the  Divine 
aid  and  assistance  to  their  consultations  and  enterprises  ;  to  deprecate  God's 
wrath,  and  to  engage  His  blessing.  Self-preservation  should  engage  us  to  cure  a 
distemper  in  its  beginnings  and  first  approaches ;  lest,  by  indulging  too  long  to  it, 
it  prove  incurable  and  mortal.  For  when  diseases  are  once  deeply  rooted,  and 
become  so  mixed  with  the  blood  and  humours  as  thoroughly  to  taint  them,  it  costs 
the  patient  much  more  pain  and  time  to  bear  the  several  courses  and  operations 
he  is  enjoined  in  order  to  a  cure.  To  how  near  a  crisis  the  malady  of  our  sins 
has  brought  us  ;  then  how  necessary  it  is  to  use  the  most  effectual  means  for  our 
recovery !  There  is  great  danger,  if  we  dissolve  our  public  peace,  and  do  not 
timely  cure  our  fatal  divisions.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  think  we  have  justice 
on  ovff  side,  if  we  ourselves  break  God's  most  holy  laws.  When  people  abuse 
mercies,  and  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain,  it  is  the  highest  aggravation  of 
guilt,  and  most  apt  to  incense  the  goodness  of  God,  thus  abused  and  slighted. 
Hence  He  has  often  raised  up  wicked  men,  and  wicked  nations,  as  instruments 
to  punish  others,  who  were  less  such,  but  transgressed  God's  laws  against  clearer 
light  and  plainer  evidence.  God,  like  a  tender  father,  is  jealous  of,  and  resents 
deeply  the  transgressions  of  His  children,  whom  gratitude  and  a  stricter  sense 
of  duty  ought  to  restrain  and  keep  within  due  bounds.  III.  Upon  a  duk 
APPLICATION  of  REPENTANCE  WE  SHALL  BE  SAFE.  True  repentance  is  a 
healing  balm,  like  that  of  Gilead,  that  cures  the  wounds  of  our  sins,  and  has  a 
sovereign  charm  to  render  a  nation  invulnerable  ;  having  power  enough  to  ward 
off  the  force  of  any  stroke  of  Divine  vengeance,  though  just  ready  to  be  given. 
Illustrate  by  pious  Hezekiah  and  good  Jehoshaphat.  Repentance  has  such 
influence  upon  heaven  as  to  reprieve  from  ruin  some  of  the  vilest  people  and 
most  wicked  princes,  as  in  the  cases  of  Nineveh  and  Ahab.  Upon  these  con- 
Biderations  what  should  hinder  us  from  speedily  closing  with  God  in  a  duty  upon 
which  our  safety  and  happiness  so  much  depend  ;  and  which,  if  we  perform 
seriously  and  in  earnest,  we  shall  not  fail  of  His  powerful  protection  and  succour  ? 
Every  individual  person  ought  to  begin  at  home.  Let  us  therefore  acknow- 
ledge before  God  with  the  deepest  sense  of  humility  and  contrition  how  unworthy 
we  have  rendered  ourselves  of  the  least  of  His  mercies.  Let  us  turn  from  our  evil 
ways,  and  walk  in  those  of  true  virtue,  religion,  and  holiness,  that  so  we  may  engage 
Him  "  to  be  jealous  for  His  land,  and  pity  His  people."     {John  King,  D.D,)        Tht 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  87 

glorious  issue  of  repentance  : — The  prophet  was  successful.  The  people  gathered 
at  a  great  and  solemn  national  fast.  Verse  18  reads  in  R-V.,  Then  was 
the  Lord  jealous  for  His  laud,  and  had  pity  on  His  people."  Then  the  message 
of  the  prophet  becomes  one  of  joy  and  hope.  The  scarcity  shall  be  replaced  by 
abundance.  God  will  give  the  pledge  of  His  loving  regard  in  the  sweet  rain  upon 
the  burnt  up  and  thirsty  soil.  He  gives  this  gift  of  rain  at  first,  because  an  after- 
gift  and  a  better  one  is  to  follow.  Thus  we  reach  the  re-establishment  of  con- 
fidence and  love.  But  we  have  reached  a  higher  plane  than  merely  the  repose 
which  comes  because  a  terror  has  departed,  and  nature  is  resuming  her  normal 
regularity  of  beneficence.  The  true  ground  of  the  reposeful  and  confident  spirit 
is  this,  that  the  people  know  the  Lord  is  in  their  midst,  and  that  He  is  their  God 
and  none  else.  Repentance  if  it  is  to  do  nothing  else  must  convince  men  of  that. 
It  must  establish  the  eternal  fact  of  God's  presence.  It  must  lead  us  to  feel  that 
we  are  God's,  and  that  we  owe  ourselves  to  Him.  This  confidence  in  the  Lord 
their  God  alone  is  the  first  resting-place  of  our  prophecy  after  the  day  of  humilia- 
tion. But  it  is  only  a  first  resting-place.  He  who  gave  the  former  and  the  latter 
rain  for  the  harvest  gave  them  as  gifts  to  be  followed  by  others.  A  gift  was 
coming  which  would  lift  the  people  into  a  much  higher  plane  of  thought,  and  into 
much  more  spiritual  conceptions  of  life.  It  is  the  gift  of  the  Spirit :  it  is  the  gift 
of  new  power  upon  repentant  souls.  The  thought  of  the  prophet  carries  with  it  a 
principle  which  to  the  men  of  his  day  must  have  been  lofty,  and  perchance  strange 
in  its  loftiness.  This  highest  gift  of  God,  like  all  gifts,  is  to  make  us  great  with 
that  greatness  which  is  service.  Baptized  with  the  Spirit,  the  apostles  were 
baptized  into  the  spirit  of  service.  Here  we  see  the  higher  region  of  tne  prophet's 
ambition.  It  is  not  the  restoration  of  temporal  blessings  which  exhausts  his 
desires  on  their  behalf.  He  desires  for  them  a  spirit  of  true  insight  into  the 
meaning  and  significance  of  life.  One  method  of  raising  and  rousing  others  is  by 
awaking  aspirations,  by  painting  the  possibilities  which  may  yet  be  achieved. 
It  is  the  Divine  method  to  inspire  by  placing  high  possibilities,  yet  higher  ranges 
of  life  and  duty  before  our  eyes.  No  doubt  there  is  always  something  above 
earth  in  all  the  higher  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  The  poetic  gift  is  the  power  to  see — 
not  what  is  not — but  what  is.  "  Imagination  is  the  power  to  see  things  as  they 
are."  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  enables  men  to  see  the  real  significance  of  the  facts 
of  life — the  true  meaning  of  what  men  are,  where  they  are,  and  why.  This  is 
exactly  what  the  prophet  has  been  leading  us  up  to.  The  most  real  of  all  presences 
is  the  spiritual  presence  of  Christ.  The  most  real  aspects  of  life  for  all  men  must 
be  their  spiritual  aspects.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  was  to  reveal  the  tremendous 
gulf  which  existed  between  life  as  men  lived  it  and  the  life  which  God  sought  to  see 
lived  by  men.  Among  the  knights  of  Malta,  the  cross  given  and  worn  was  the 
eight-pointed  Maltese  cross.  The  eight  points  signified  the  beatitudes.  The  cross 
was  to  be  carried  in  the  remembrance  of  the  blessing  which  belonged  to  the  poor 
in  spirit,  the  sorrowful,  the  meek,  the  hungerers  after  righteousness,  the  merciful, 
the  pure  in  heart,  the  peacemakers,  the  persecuted.  The  Cross  of  Christ  was  to 
be  carried  in  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  It  is  thus  that  the  victory  of  Christ  in  the  world 
will  be  won.  More  than  ever  we  need  the  simple,  guileless,  loving,  pure  spirit 
of  Christ.     (Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter.)        Interaction  of  the  Divine  and  human  : — 

I.  That  the  material  condition  of  a  people  depends  upon  the  Divinbj 
OPERATIONS.  1.  The  withdrawal  of  calamities.  "  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you 
the  northern  army,"  &c.  Men  may  and  ought  to  employ  means ;  but  futile  for  ever 
will  be  all  human  efforts  without  the  co-operation  of  Almighty  power.  This  fact 
should  teach  us  ever  to  look  to  Him  and  Him  only  for  deliverance  from  evil  at  all 
times,  both  material  and  moral.  2.  The  bestowment  of  blessmgs.  "  The  Lord 
wiU  answer  and  say  unto  His  people,  Behold,  I  will  send  you  corn,"  &c.  The 
productions  of  the  earth  are  dependent  every  moment  upon  Almighty  power. 

II.  That  the  Divine  operations  are  influenced  by  the  moral  condition  of  thb 
PEOPLE.  The  priests  and  the  ministers  of  the  Lord  wept  between  the  altar,  and 
said,  "  Spare  Thy  people,  0  Lord,"  &c.  "  The  porch  before  the  temple  was  a 
hundred  and  twenty  cubits  high,  twenty  broad  from  north  to  south,  and  ten  from 
east  to  west.  The  altar  was  that  of  burnt-offering  in  the  court  of  the  priests. 
Here,  with  their  backs  toward  the  altar,  on  which  they  had  nothing  to  offer,, 
and  their  faces  directed  towards  the  residence  of  the  Shekina,  they  were  to  weep 
and  make  supplication  on  behalf  of  the  people."  That  the  Divine  conduct  towards 
us  depends  upon  our  conduct  towards  heaven,  is  inexplicable  to  us  although 
clearly  taught  in  the  Word  of  God.     Indeed  consciousness  assures  us  that  He  ia 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  us  what  we  are  to  Him.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  God  will  alter  the  laws 
of  nature  because  of  human  prayers  and  human  conduct,  says  the  sceptic  scientist. 
But  what  laws  of  nature  are  more  manifest,  more  universal,  settled,  and  unalter- 
able than  the  tendency  of  human  souls  to  personal  and  intercessory  prayer  ?  Every 
aspiration  is  a  prayer.  Scripture  abounds  with  examples  of  God  apparently 
altering  His  conduct  on  account  of  man's  supplication.     III.  That  thb  eight 

MORAL  CONDUCT  OF  A  PEOPLE  WILL  ENSURE  THEM  DiVINB  BENEDICTION.      In  these 

verses  there  is  a  beautiful  gradation.  First  the  destroyed  land  is  addressed  ;  then 
the  irrational  animals ;  then  the  inhabitants.  All  are  called  to  cast  off  their  fears 
and  rejoice  in  the  happy  change  which  God  would  effect.  It  is  too  clear  for  either 
argument  or  illustration,  that  if  you  change  the  moral  character  of  any  country 
from  ignorance  to  intelligence,  from  indolence  to  industry,  from  intemperance 
to  self-discipline,  the  whole  material  region  in  which  you  live  may  abound  with 
plentifulness  and  beauty.     (HomUist.) 

Ver.  21.  Fear  not,  0  land ;  be  glad  and  rejoice :  for  the  Lord  will  do  great  things. 

—The  influence  of  a  repentant  soul  upon  the  universe  at  large : — I.  There  is  a 

TENDENCY  IN  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  A  REPENTANT  SOUL  TO  BRING  BACK  TO  THB 
material  universe  THE  FORFEITED  JOY  IT  WAS  DESTINED  TO  POSSESS.      "  Fear 

not,  O  land  ;  be  glad  and  rejoice  :  for  the  Lord  will  do  great  things."  The  land 
is  here  said  to  have  been  in  the  mood  of  fear.  It  had  abundant  cause  for  terror. 
It  had  been  stricken  by  the  retributive  hand  of  God.  All  its  produce  had  been 
destroyed.  It  was  desolate.  It  was  yet  threatened  with  more  awful  agencies 
of  destruction.  Sin  has  made  the  material  universe  to  tremble.  The  mood  of 
man  is  reflected  in  the  material  things  by  which  he  is  surrounded ;  they  reflect 
the  terror  of  sin  and  the  joy  of  repentance.  Let  man  obey  God,  and  Eden  is 
a  garden  of  the  Lord.  Let  him  disobey  God,  and  earth  becomes  the  abode  of 
Satan.  Let  man  be  redeemed,  and  the  earth  begins  to  smile.  Let  man  be  glorified, 
and  there  is  no  more  curse.  When  the  race  is  saved,  "  the  Lord  will  do  great 
things  "  in  nature.  He  will  entirely  change  her  moods.  When  the  new  earth 
dawns,  she  wiU  know  no  fear.     II.  There  is  a  tendency  in  the  influence 

OF  A  REPENTANT  SOUL  TO  RENDER  MORE  FRUITFUL  THB  BENEFICENT  OPERA- 
TIONS OF  NATURE.  "  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field :  for  the  pastures  of 
the  wilderness  do  spring,  for  the  tree  beareth  her  fruit,  the  fig-tree  and  the  vine 
do  yield  their  strength.  .  .  .  And  the  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and  the  fats 
shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil."  1.  There  is  peace.  Man  has  in  his  soul  the 
key  to  the  quietude  of  the  universe ;  when  his  soul  is  at  peace  with  God,  then 
the  entire  world  is  at  rest.  2.  There  is  growth.  When  man  is  at  peace  with 
God,  then  the  earth  is  most  potent  in  the  exercise  of  its  vitalities.  The  fruits 
of  the  earth  are  not  far  removed  from  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  3.  There  is  super- 
abundance. When  man  turns  to  God,  the  earth  in  superabundant  blessing 
turns  to  man.  When  repentant  in  soul  our  cup  runneth  over.  Nature  is  rich 
in  treasure  to  the  piu-e  in  heart.     Repentance  is  a  good  friend  to  commerce. 

III.  There  is  a  tendency  in  the  influence  of  a  repentant  soul  to  causb 
A  spirit  of  holy  satisfaction  to  rest  upon  the  world.  "  And  ye  shall  eat 
in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied,  and  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God,  that  hath 
dealt  wondrously  with  you :  and  My  people  shall  never  be  ashamed."  1.  There 
is  true  enjoyment.  Man  shall  eat  in  plenty.  Nature  shall  not  refuse  to  supply 
his  want.  2.  Here  is  real  satisfaction.  Not  merely  shall  natxire  supply  the 
need  of  man,  but  shall  appropriately  satisfy  it.  3.  Here  is  devout  praise.  The 
gifts  of  nature  shall  awaken  men  to  holy  thanksgiving.  This  is  an  ideal  state 
of  society.     Thus  will  it  be  when  all  soiols  repose  in  the  love  of  the  eternal  God. 

IV.  There  is  a  tendency  in  the  influence  of  a  repentant  soul  to  awaken 

MEN   TO   A  MORE   THOUGHTFUL  RECOGNITION   OF  THE   PRESENCE   OF  GoD   IN   THE 

MIDST  OF  LIFE.  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  and  that 
1  am  the  Lord  your  God,  and  none  else."  When  a  nation  is  given  over  to  a  sinful 
method  of  life,  it  has  no  recognition  of  God  in  its  midst.  It  forgets  Him.  But 
repentance  opens  the  eye  of  the  moral  nature  and  renders  it  keen  in  vision,  so 
that  it  sees  God.  To  see  God  in  the  midst  of  life  is  the  supreme  joy  of  the  pure 
soul,  because  all  things  around  partake  of  the  lustre  of  His  presence.  This  gives 
a  solemn  view  of  life.  Lessons — 1.  That  the  joy  of  the  universe  is  conditioned 
by  the  moral  sentiments  of  man.  2.  That  a  pure  soul  is  often  the  most  enriched 
by  nature.  3.  That  God  is  in  the  midst  of  a  repentant  humanity.  (J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A. )        A  year's  ministry : — A  prophecy  of    national    adversity,   a    call  to 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  39 

national  repentance,  and  a  promise  of  national  blessing,  are  the  three  great  topics 
of  Joel's  prophetic  ministry.  The  last  is  represented  by  the  text.  The  adversity, 
the  repentance,  and  the  blessing  indicate  a  Divine  order.  If  there  is  reason 
to  fear  that  days  "  of  darkness  and  gloominess  "  are  settling  down  upon  our 
own  land,  let  not  the  Israel  of  God  despair ;  the  "  people  "  and  the  "  elders  " 
shall  assemble  before  God ;  lift  up  the  voice  of  penitential  confession,  and  cry 
in  faith ;  the  vows  of  a  covenanted  land  shall  be  remembered  and  renewed, 
and  the  light  of  God's  countenance  shall  scatter  the  darkness.  "  Fear  not,  O 
land  .  .  .  the  Lord  will  do  great  things."  The  great  things  of  the  Lord's  doing 
comprehend  the  mission  of  the  Saviour  in  the  fulness  of  the  time  ;  the  subse- 
quent mission  of  His  Holy  Spirit ;  the  millennial  glory ;  and  the  final  triumph 
of  truth  and  righteousness  in  the  world.  Looking  far  beyond  the  intervening 
clouds  of  calamity  and  penitential  sorrow,  we  behold  a  glory ;  and  by  faith  we 
can  hear  from  the  distant  future,  in  the  trumpet-tongued  voice  of  some  messenger 
of  the  Lord,  that  consoling  prophecy  of  the  world's  last  resting-time  of  love. 
*'  Fear  not,  0  land  ;  be  glad  and  rejoice :  for  the  Lord  will  do  great  things." 
(2*.  Easton.)  Antidotes  against  the  operation  of  desponding  fear: — Unto  his 
beloved  country  Joel  is  not  only  the  messenger  of  its  misery,  but  the  herald  of 
its  prosperity.  I.  The  promise  of  doing  great  things  as  an  antidote  to 
FSAB.  The  fear  implied  is  desponding  and  unreasonable  fear.  1.  The  causes 
and  occasions  of  such  fear  are, — the  enterprises  of  the  gates  of  hell,  the  tyranny 
of  the  man  of  sin,  the  wrath  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  bulwarks  of  super- 
stition, the  efficacy  of  delusion,  the  battering-rams  of  infidelity,  and  the  fierce 
contentions  for  dominion  of  empire  with  empire,  and  kingdom  with  kingdom. 
2.  Exemplify  the  strength  and  sufficiency  of  the  antidote  to  this  fear,  in  the 
promise  of  doing  great  things.  Apply  to  the  above  several  occasions  and  causes 
of  the  fear.  3.  Enforce  the  caveat  entered  against  this  fear  with  the  promise. 
In  order  that  the  strength  and  sufficiency  of  the  antidote  may  be  felt  in  experience, 
read  the  record  of  the  great  things  which  the  Lord  hath  done :  believe  the 
promises  of  the  great  things  which  He  will  do ;  assure  yourselves  that  before 
the  Church  be  swallowed  up  by  the  world,  the  great  things  which  He  hath  done 
shall  be  done  over  again  ;  and  observe  that  the  caveat  against  desponding  fear 
is  entered,  and  its  antidote  prescribed  and  recommended,  under  the  authority 
of  the  Lord  who  is  both  the  doer  and  the  promisor.     II.  The  promise  of  doing 

GREAT  things,  WHICH  IS  THE  GROUND  OF  THE  ADMONITION,  IS  AN  EXCITATION 
TO    EXPRESS    THE    JOY    FOR    WHICH    THE    ADMONITION    IS    GIVEN.       Mention    SOme 

great  things  which  the  Lord  will  do.  Protect  the  reformed  faith,  furnish  a 
ministry  to  preach  it,  raise  out  of  every  generation  professors  to  hold  it,  reconcile 
the  remnant  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  gather  in  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles,  fill 
the  earth  with  His  glory,  crush  the  insurrection  of  the  last  days,  rend  the  heavens 
and  come  down,  raise  and  judge  the  dead,  dissolve  the  frame  of  the  world,  present 
the  whole  Church  faultless  in  the  presence  of  His  glory,  and  reign  over  it  for  ever. 
Consider  the  nature  of  the  joy  for  which  the  admonition  is  given,  and  unto  which 
the  promise  of  doing  these  great  things  is  an  excitement.  The  Father  of  glory 
is  the  fountain  of  it ;  the  Saviovu*  of  the  world  is  the  medium  of  it ;  the  Spirit 
of  holiness  is  the  author  of  it ;  the  Scriptures  of  truth  are  the  means  of  it ;  the 
city  of  God  is  the  cistern  in  which  it  collects ;  the  congi-egations  of  the  citizens 
are  the  openings  at  which  it  breaks  forth ;  and  their  lives  the  plains  over  which 
it  flows.  Then  let  us  provoke  ourselves  to  rejoice  in  His  goodness  and  truth 
and  power.  In  our  island  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things,  is  doing  great  things, 
and  according  to  our  hope  will  do  great  things.     III.  Excitation  to  rejoice 

NEEDS    to    be    accompanied    WITH    INSTRUCTION    CONCERNING    THE    EXPRESSION 

OF  OUB  JOY.  We  shall  set  before  your  faith  some  expressions  of  joy  which  corre- 
spond to  the  admonition,  and  by  which  it  ought  to  be  honoured  in  the  city  of 
God.  Particularly,  by  observing  the  works  of  the  Lord  in  the  administrations 
of  providence ;  adoring  His  glory  breaking  forth  in  these  works ;  honouring 
His  name  appearing  in  them  with  the  obedience  of  faith ;  trusting  in  His  pro- 
mises ;  praying  for  the  performance  of  the  promises  which  remain  yet  to  be 
fulfilled  ;  and  waiting  for  the  performance  of  these  promises.  Then  take  care 
to  express  your  joy  in  each  of  these  forms  distinctly.  (A.  Shanks.)  The 
Divine  response  to  the  challenge  of  evil : — I.  Our  attention  is  arrested  first  by  the 
*'  GREAT  THINGS  "  OF  SIN  AND  JUDGMENT.  Some  scholars  give  the  text  and  context 
literal  interpretations  ;  they  construe  it  to  mean  that  in  consequence  of  the  sins 
of  Israel  God  will  send  upon  the  land  swarms  of  locusts  which  shall  destroy  every 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

green  thing.  Others  give  the  text  an  allegorical  interpretation.  They  say  that 
God  threatens  to  let  loose  upon  Israel  a  fierce  invading  army,  which  like  a  swarm 
of  locusts  will  eat  \ip  the  nation.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  chapter  unmistakably 
sets  forth  the  terrible,  devouring  power  of  sin,  and  the  retributions  which  arise 
out  of  sin,  and  this  is  a  warning  that  all  generations  ought  to  consider  and  respect. 
The  swarming  locusts  remind  us  of  the  multitudinousness  of  evil.  Evil  envelops 
us,  attacks  us,  torments  us  on  every  side.  You  may  crush  a  locust,  you  may 
crush  a  score,  you  may  crush  a  thousand,  it  makes  no  appreciable  difference, 
myriads  more  crowd  in  hungrily,  and  give  you  the  sense  of  hopelessness.  So 
the  evils  that  afflict  the  world  are  manifold,  and  it  seems  useless  to  resist  them ; 
practically  they  are  infinite  and  overwhelming.  What  a  picture  this  chapter 
gives  of  the  fiery  energy,  the  swiftness,  the  restlessness,  the  practical  irresistibility 
of  the  locusts  !  "  The  appearance  of  them  is  as  the  appearance  of  horses  ;  and 
as  horsemen  so  shall  they  run."  "  Like  the  noise  of  chariots  on  the  tops  of  mountains 
shall  they  leap,  like  the  noise  of  a  flame  of  fire  that  devoureth  the  stubble."  So 
there  is  an  awful  wrathfulness,  facility,  and  effectiveness  about  evil  passions, 
evil  movements,  and  evil  things.  It  takes  a  century  to  build  up  an  oak,  but  the 
lightning  flash  blasts  it  in  a  moment.  Again,  these  locusts  remind  us  of  the 
pervasiveness  of  evil.  "  They  shall  run  to  and  fro  in  the  city  ;  they  shall  run 
upon  the  wall ;  they  shall  climb  up  upon  the  houses  ;  they  shall  enter  in  at  the 
windows  like  a  thief."  You  cannot  exclude  evil ;  it  penetrates  everywhere, 
it  defiles  everything.  It  mocks  at  personal  vigilance.  The  black  locusts  swarm 
on  all  the  roses  of  our  pleasure,  they  devour  the  golden  fruits  of  our  industry, 
they  strip  the  vine  and  fig-tree  of  our  domestic  felicity,  they  defile  the  pomegranates 
and  palms  of  our  sacred  places.  These  locusts  suggest  another  terrible  aspect 
of  evil,  namely,  that  it  expresses  a  certain  law,  order,  and  government.  "  They 
shall  march  every  one  on  his  ways,  and  they  shall  not  break  their  ranks."  The 
New  Testament  makes  this  clear,  that  the  world  of  iniquity  is  a  realm  of  government. 
Finally,  the  locusts  symbolise  the  destructiveness  of  sin.  "  The  land  is  as  the 
garden  of  Eden  before  them,  and  behind  them  a  desolate  wilderness."  We  cannot 
to-day  look  upon  this  world  without  feeling  how  awful  sin  is,  and  how  terrible 
its  consequences  are.  How  painful  are  the  aspects  of  the  world  beyond  Christendom, 
how  painful  the  scenes  on  which  we  look  !  Sin  has  "  magnified  itself  to  do  great 
things,"  and  it  has  done  them.  It  has  boasted  itself  against  nature,  and  filled 
the  earth  with  disorder,  cruelty,  and  anguish.  It  has  boasted  itself  against  man, 
and  covered  him  vrith  dishonour,  pierced  him  with  misery,  dug  his  grave.  It 
has  boasted  itself  against  God,  spoiling  His  works,  thwarting  His  purpose,  grieving 
Him  at  His  heart.  It  has  done  great  things.  It  is  doing  them,  it  is  preparing  to 
do  them.  We  often  stand  appalled  in  the  presence  of  evil ;  we  are  awed  by  it, 
staggered  by  it.  There  is  something  in  it  that  is  so  mysterious,  immeasurable, 
unfathomable,  unaccountable.  All  our  efforts  to  arrest  it  seem  ridiculous. 
Scientists  identify  it  with  the  cosmical  force.  Philosophers  recognise  in  it 
the  authority  of  necessity.  Reformers  and  educationists  faint  as  they  struggle 
against  the  sea  -  power  of  evil.  And  the  religious  worker  often  feels  the 
terrible  chill  of  despondency  and  despair.  II.  We  dwell  upon  the  "  great 
THTNOS  "  OF  THE  DiviNE  OEACB.  "  Fear  not,  0  land  ;  be  glad  and  rejoice : 
for  the  Lord  will  do  great  things."  The  adversary  has  magnified  himself, 
vaunted  himself,  to  do  "  great  things,"  and  God  responds  to  his  challenge  :  "  I, 
the  Lord,  will  do  great  things  ;  I  will  show  that  My  strength  prevails  against 
the  rage  of  evil,  I  will  drive  the  locusts  into  the  sea,  I  will  destroy  the  destroyer, 
and  bring  his  work  to  a  perpetual  end."  1.  Let  us  notice  the  wonderful  way 
in  which  God  limits  eviL  "  But  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you  the  northern 
army,  and  will  drive  him  into  a  land  barren  and  desolate,  with  his  face  towards 
the  east  sea,  and  his  hinder  part  towards  the  utmost  sea,  and  his  stink  shall  come 
up,  and  his  ill  savour  shall  come  up,  because  he  hath  done  great  things."  If  we 
look  into  natiu-e  we  see  that  limits  have  ever  been  put  to  the  destructive 
forces.  The  geologists  teU  us  this.  The  wild,  terrible,  murderous  dragons  of 
the  primitive  age  were  held  in  check.  According  to  the  theory  of  some  scientists, 
the  stronger  animals  invariably  destroy  the  weaker,  but,  if  that  be  so,  how  is  it 
that  these  awful  primeval  monsters,  all  teeth  and  claws,  did  not  take  possession 
of  the  earth  and  keep  possession  ?  It  is  certain  that  they  did  not ;  palaeontology 
answers  us  that  the  best  armed  species  are  those  which  have  almost  always  dis- 
appeared. There  were  laws  and  forces  which  hedged  in  the  wildest  elements, 
and  gave  security  and  permanence  to  the  weaker  but  nobler  races.     And  we 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  41 

to-day  see  the  same  restraints  put  upon  the  noxious  things  of  nature.  The  naturalist 
makes  this  clear.  In  New  Guinea  is  a  venomous  bird  known  as  the  "  Bird  of 
Death."  Its  bite  causes  excruciating  pain,  blindness,  and  lockjaw.  No  person 
bitten  by  it,  it  is  asserted,  has  recovered,  and  death  comes  within  a  few  hours. 
How  is  it  that  this  bird  of  bad  omen  has  not  multiplied  and  taken  possession  of 
the  forests  ?  How  is  it  that  the  birds  of  Paradise  manage  to  survive  by  its  side  ? 
Or,  to  come  ne-arer  home,  how  is  it  that  the  hawk  does  not  exterminate  the  sweet 
singers  of  our  woods  ?  The  "  devil  plant "  of  the  Mississippi  is  most  fatal ;  it 
kills  insects  and  cattle,  and  rich  meadow  lands  shrivel  at  its  insidious  approach 
as  if  they  had  been  touched  with  fire.  How  is  it  that  the  infernal  thing  remains 
within  certain  regions  ?  In  Nicaragua  is  the  "  vampire  vine,"  which  seema 
literally  to  drain  the  blood  of  every  living  thing  which  comes  within  its  death- 
dealing  touch.  How  is  it  that  this  vampire  vine  does  not  prevail,  and  drive 
out  the  vine  whose  purple  clusters  make  glad  the  heart  of  man  ?  One  of  the  old 
kings  had  a  garden  planted  solely  with  poison  flowers  ;  how  is  it  that  the  whole 
earth  has  not  become  such  a  garden  ?  The  fact  is,  there  is  a  vigilant,  benign 
law,  a  balance  of  nature,  which  keeps  these  formidable  growths  within  limit 
beyond  which  they  cannot  pass,  and,  instead  of  sickly  colours,  vile  odours,  and 
deadly  poisons  dominating  the  panorama,  the  landscape  is  full  of  loveliness, 
fragrance,  and  health.  The  octopus,  the  alligator,  the  shark  threaten  the  seas, 
but  the  same  law  prevails  there  that  prevails  on  the  land,  shielding  whatsoever 
passeth  through  the  depth  of  the  seas.  And  the  physiologist  tells  us  the  same 
story.  One  would  expect  that  diseases  of  the  blood  and  brain  would  be  transmitted 
from  one  generation  to  another,  until  the  whole  race  would  become  infected, 
and  the  earth  degenerate  into  a  lazar  house  ;  but  the  physiologist  answers  ua 
that  there  is  "  a  limit  to  the  transmission  of  abnormal  characteristics."  And  if 
you  look  into  history  you  are  taught  exactly  the  same  lesson.  The  Pharaohs, 
the  Neros,  the  AttQas,  the  Mahomets,  the  Tamerlanes,  the  Alvas,  the  Napoleona 
now  and  again  threaten  civilisation ;  it  lies  helpless  and  bleeding  at  their  feet ; 
but  the  historian  shows  that  there  is  always  a  rock  on  which  their  Armadas  suffer 
shipwreck,  a  Moscow  in  which  their  armies  perish.  And  it  is  thus  to-day  in  this 
world  of  ours.  All  about  us  are  horrible  things,  infectious  literature,  vile  institu- 
tions, degrading  practices,  which  threaten  the  very  life  of  the  nation.  And  prowling 
around  are  thousands  of  selfish,  cruel  monsters,  ready  to  prey  on  their  helpless 
fellows.  It  is  a  mystery  that  they  do  not  eat  us  up.  But  they  do  not.  Just  as 
there  is  a  secret  law  circumscribing  the  shark,  the  vampire,  the  corpse  plant, 
the  upas,  so  God's  eye  is  upon  the  drinking  saloon,  the  infamous  press,  the  gambling 
club,  the  camera  obsciu-a  of  lust,  the  prize  ring,  the  opium  den,  and  all  the  rest 
of  the  terrible  things  which  menace  civilisation,  and  the  proud,  raging  waves 
of  hell  foaming  out  their  own  shame  are  broken  on  unseen,  mystic  sands  which 
God  has  fixed  as  the  bounds  over  which  they  may  not  pass.  He  limits  one  bad 
thing  by  another  bad  thing ;  He  limits  one  bad  thing  by  a  thing  less  bad  ;  He 
limits  all  bad  things  by  the  golden  ring  of  His  perfect  sovereign  government. 
2.  But  God  does  not  merely  intend  to  limit  evil ;  He  designs  the  full  triumph  of 
righteousness.  It  is  not  enough  that  He  should  restrain  the  force  and  fiury  of 
the  devil  within  given  breakwaters  ;  He  means  to  confound  evU,  to  abolish  it. 
"  Fear  not,  O  land  ;  be  glad  and  rejoice :  for  the  Lord  hath  done  great  thmgs." 
"  And  the  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and  the  vats  shall  overflow  with  wine  and 
oiL  And  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the  locust  hath  eaten."  "  The  Lord 
hath  done  great  things  "  in  the  direction  of  this  absolute  victory.  The  Gospel 
is  a  revelation  of  "  great  things."  The  advent  of  our  Lord  ;  His  personal  moral 
glory  ;  His  ministry  ;  His  passion  ;  His  atoning  death  ;  His  resurrection  ;  Hia 
ascension  into  heaven  ;  His  sending  forth  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  His  session  at  the 
right  hand  of  God, — these  are  the  mighty  accomplished  facts  of  redemption  which 
justify  our  boast  that  the  Lord  hath  done  "  great  things."  Over  against  the 
destructive  things  and  methods  of  wickedness  He  has  put  a  "  great  salvation  " 
which  was  first  spoken  by  the  Lord,  and  which  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them 
that  heard  Him.  And  in  its  application  the  "  great  salvation  "  has  vindicated 
its  name.  At  once  in  the  actual  world  the  first  evangelists  proved  its  efficacy. 
The  "  great  things  "  of  God  at  once  assert  themselves  against  the  "  great  things  " 
of  daxuiees,  against  the  rulers  of  this  world.  And  is  not  Christianity  the  great 
force  that  overcomes  evil  in  the  world  of  to-day  ?  It  is  the  saving  power  in  the 
heathen  world.  And  here  at  home  the  "  great  things  "  of  the  Gospel  are  the 
hope  of  Booiety.    Nothing  goes  to  the  root  of  the  evil  we  bemoan  but  the  doctrines 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  the  Gospel ;  nothing  really  grapples  with  sin  but  the  power  of  grace  ;  nothing 
creates  amongst  us  a  living,  organic  righteousness  except  the  truth  and  love  ana 

{)ower  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  it  will  continue  to  save  and  bless.  Do  not 
ose  heart,  do  not  be  overwhelmed  by  the  vision  of  evil.  (W.  L.  Waikinaon.) 
€fracious  promises  : — These  promises  are  applied  and  amplified.  Application  ia 
made  to  the  land,  that  it  should  not  fear,  but  rejoice,  seeing  God  was  to  do  great 
things ;  and  to  the  beasts,  that  they  should  lay  aside  their  fear,  since  the  earth  was 
to  be  blessed  with  pasture  and  fruit.  Learn — 1.  The  Lord  would  have  His  promises 
and  comforts  applied  to  them  to  whom  they  are  given,  for  their  refreshment. 
2.  God's  kindness  to  penitents  will  be  such,  as  not  only  to  refresh  themselves, 
but  to  gladden  and  refresh  their  land,  their  beasts,  and  aU  in  their  kind.  3.  Peni- 
tents are  instrumental  to  draw  down  blessings  on  themselves  and  on  what  they 
enjoy.  4.  God's  care  of  the  earth,  and  of  the  very  cattle,  may  assure  penitents 
of  His  respects  to  them.  5.  God,  when  He  pleaseth,  can  make  fears  end  in  joy, 
and  the  hope  thereof  should  bring  joy,  when  fear  is  yet  on.  6.  God's  great  power 
who  promiseth,  and  who  hath  given  proof  thereof  in  executing  threatenings, 
may  guard  against  fear,  and  afford  ground  of  hope,  were  the  thing  promised 
never  so  great  and  difficult,  7.  God  can,  and  in  due  time  will  remove  the  fears 
of  His  people,  by  giving  actual  proofs  of  His  love,  for  so  are  they  encouraged 
by  the  promises  made  to  the  beasts  for  their  sake  and  good.     {George  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  25.  Z  will  restore  to  you  the  years  which  the  locust  hath  eaten. — 
The  great  Restorer  : — Locusts  are  happily  unknown  in  England.  We  have  only 
the  harmless  grasshopper  here.  Where  plagues  of  locusts  are  known  no  one 
could  wonder  that  the  writer  of  this  book  should  represent  them  as  a  veritable 
army,  leaving  the  desolations  of  war  in  their  train,  a  desolation  which  would 
naturally  take  whole  years  to  repair.  Herein  is  a  picture  of  some  years  in  the 
life  of  humanity.  A  German  philosopher  has  summed  up  our  earthly  state  in 
the  words,  "  Man  has  two  and  a  half  minutes  here  below — one  to  smile,  one  to 
sigh,  and  half  a  one  to  love  ;  for  in  the  midst  of  this  minute  he  dies."  It  is  so 
apart  from  God.  He  is  the  only  Restorer.  Deny  God,  and  the  locusts  are 
victorious  for  ever  ;  the  desolation  is  final  and  complete.  Some  years  in  some 
lives,  and  some  lives  as  a  whole,  do  seem  to  have  fallen  a  prey  to  the  locusts.  We 
all  know  when  we  are  wronged.  And  most  of  us  feel  keenly  wrongs  endured  by 
others.  The  words  of  the  text  are  spoken  to  a  repentant  nation.  "  I  will  restore.'* 
God  is  pledged  to  do  so  by  His  very  being.  To  that  He  must  be  true.  So  great 
is  this  necessity  that  God — may  I  say  it  ? — does  not  trouble  to  be  consistent  on 
any  lower  plane.  He  is  ever  true  to  that  name,  which  means  far  more  than 
anything  we  know  under  the  name  Love.  Years  may  be  apparently  eaten 
by  locusts  which  are  not  really  so.  When  God's  hereafter  is  recognised,  what 
possibilities  of  restoration  appear  !  The  Incarnate  Word  came  to  do  the  work 
of  restoration  from  sin,  and  the  miseries  it  has  caused  and  causes.  {W.A.  Cornaby. ) 
Lost  years  : — Lost  years  can  never  be  restored  literally.  Time  once  past  is  gone 
for  ever.  The  locusts  did  not  eat  the  years — the  locusts  ate  the  fruit  of  the 
years'  labour,  the  harvests  of  the  field :  so  that  the  meaning  of  the  restoration 
of  the  years  must  be  restoration  of  those  fruits  and  of  those  harvests  which  the 
locusts  consumed.  You  cannot  have  back  your  time  ;  but  there  is  a  strange 
and  wonderful  way  in  which  God  can  give  back  to  you  the  wasted  blessings, 
the  unripened  fruite  of  years  over  which  you  have  mourned.  The  fruits  of  wasted 
years  may  yet  be  yours.  By  giving  to  His  repentant  people  larger  harvests  than 
the  land  could  naturally  yield,  God  could  give  back  to  them,  as  it  were,  all  they 
would  have  had  if  the  locusts  had  never  come  ;  and  God,  by  giving  you  larger 
grace  in  the  present  and  in  the  future,  can  make  the  life  which  has  hitherto  been 
blighted,  and  eaten  up  with  the  locust,  the  caterpillar  and  the  palmer-worm  of 
sin,  and  self,  and  Satan,  yet  to  be  a  complete,  a  blessed,  and  useful  life  to  His 
praise  and  glory.  Linger  over  this  mystery  of  love.  Picture  the  spirits  of  evil, 
year  after  year  bearing  away  from  the  fields  of  human  life  all  their  harvests. 
Whither  have  they  borne  the  precious  products  T  The  fruits  of  wasted  years 
are  gone — gone  past  hope.  Yet  the  Lord  will  bring  forth  life  out  of  the  tomb  ; 
those  long-lost  spoils  shall  be  restored.  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ? 
Does  not  the  very  difficulty,  yea  impossibility,  of  the  enterprise  make  it  the 
more  worthy  of  the  Almighty  ?  To  him  that  believeth  aU  things  are  possible. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  cankered  years : — The  moral  not  the  picturesque 
aspect  of  the  visitation  of  locusts  is  uppermost  in  the  prophet's  mind.     He 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  43 

proclaims  it  as  a  punishment  for  the  people's  sin,  and  as  a  call  to  repentance.  If 
they  shall  repent,  he  promises  a  blessing  which  shall  amply  atone  for  past  suffer- 
ing. Wasted  and  blasted  years  are  a  fact  in  most  human  lives.  The  appalling 
thing  is  the  years  which  have  been  eaten  up  by  little,  scarcely  appreciable  agencies, 
like  a  caterpillar  or  a  canker-worm.  Years  which  have  gone,  frittered  away,  we 
do  not  know  how,  and  for  which  we  have  nothing  whatever  to  show,  years 
devoured  in  trifles  ;  years  that  fleeted,  as  on  the  wings  of  a  hurricane,  in  the  wild 
rush  of  dissipation,  and  out  of  which  are  left  only  the  broken  strains  of  old  songs^ 
and  a  few  dry  leaves  of  withered  garlands.  The  exquisitely  bitter  thought  in 
this  vision  of  wasted  years  is  that  of  our  own  share  in  the  desolation  ;  and  when 
our  eyes  are  once  fairly  opened  to  the  waste,  our  first  impulse  is  to  cast  about  for 
some  method  of  restoration.  How  does  God  deal  with  facts  like  these  ?  Does 
His  economy  include  any  law  of  restoration  ?  It  is  evident  that  any  economy 
of  restoration  must  not  only  be  based  on  superhuman  wisdom,  but  must  include 
superhuman  compassion.  '  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap," 
is  a  law  which  God  does  not  violate  in  morals  any  more  than  in  the  fields.  Viewed 
eimply  as  a  matter  of  law,  the  wasted  years  cannot  be  restored.  The  element 
of  expiation  only  evades  the  difiBculty.  It  does  not  meet  it.  Suffering  is  not  a 
fair  equivalent  for  the  results  of  neglect  or  of  wilful  wrong.  How  contrition 
may  affect  one's  moral  relations  to  God  is  one  thing  ;  how  it  affects  the  results 
of  his  wrong-doing  or  idleness  is  quite  another  and  a  different  thing.  An  ocean 
of  tears  wiU  not  give  back  life  nor  innocence.  Repentance  is  a  great  power, 
but  there  are  some  things  which  repentance  cannot  do.  On  this  side  the  truth 
is  awful  in  its  inflexibility.  I  pity  the  materialist  when  he  comes  to  the  question 
of  repairing  moral  waste.  I  pity  the  positivist  before  the  frantic  appeal  of  a 
remorseful  soul.  If  God  does  not  ignore  the  action  of  the  physical  law,  which  is 
none  the  less  His  law,  that  law  must  at  least  be  taken  up  and  carried  somehow 
in  the  sweep  of  a  larger  law.  Perhaps  it  is  not  possible  to  formulate  that  larger 
law.  At  any  rate  it  is  not  necessary,  however  desirable  it  might  be.  We  want 
to  know  how  it  touches  a  man  standing  penitently  in  view  of  his  eaten  years. 
Some  things  may  give  us  consolation  and  hope.  1.  We  have  the  general  sweeping 
promise  of  God.  "  I  will  restore  the  eaten  years."  We  might  fall  confidently 
back  on  that  alone.  Restoration,  according  to  the  Divine  ideal,  is  a  possibility 
and  a  fact  in  the  Divine  economy.  And  some  features  of  the  process  we  know. 
For  example,  God  turns  the  man  entirely  away  from  the  thought  and  the  work 
of  literal  restoration.  He  does  not  ask  him  to  make  good,  in  the  sense  of  a  literal 
equivalent,  the  waste  of  the  past.  His  concern  is  with  the  present  and  the  future, 
not  with  the  past.  Whatever  God  may  do  with  the  faultful  past,  a  penitent  soul 
can  only  leave  it  in  God's  hands.  His  work  now  is  not  to  make  good  the  past, 
but  to  give  himself  to  the  development  of  his  new  life  as  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus.  The  self-scrutiny  of  a  repentant  and  forgiven  man  ought  to  be  directed 
not  at  what  he  has  been,  but  at  what  he  is.  Still,  it  is  not  restoration,  that  a  man 
should  simply  leave  the  past  behind  him.  God  gives  certain  things  which  were 
forfeited  in  the  wasted  years  of  sin.  God  does  not  let  the  darkness  of  a  man's 
past  come  up  like  a  cloud  between  the  man  and  the  outraying  of  His  Divine  tender- 
ness. The  faultful  past  may,  and  often  does,  poison  human  affection.  Human 
nature  forgives  hesitatingly,  and  there  is  a  background  of  suspicion  behind  rein- 
stated confidence.  But  God  believes  in  the  possibility  of  a  genuine  repentance, 
and  frankly  accepts  it.  Repentance  is  a  factor  of  immense  meaning  in  God's 
economy  of  restoration.  When  God  heals  a  man's  backslidings.  He  loves  him 
freely.  Restoration  is  included  in  restored  sonship.  There  are  certain  incidents 
on  the  line  of  actual  restoration  which  are  noteworthy.  God  has  a  wonderful 
power  of  bringing  good  out  of  evil,  and  of  getting  interest  even  out  of  the  evil 
of  wasted  years.  In  manufacturing  communities,  large  fortunes  are  sometimes 
made  out  of  what  is  technically  called  "  waste."  God  discerns  facts  and  possibili- 
ties in  waste  which  we  cannot  see  and  could  not  be  trusted  to  see.  Illustrate 
from  the  story  of  John  B.  Gough.  God  strikes  at  the  evil,  but  He  saves  the 
power  out  of  the  wreck,  and  the  man  carries  the  matured  power  over  to  the  side 
of  God's  kingdom,  and  makes  it  an  instrument  of  spiritual  victory  and  conquest. 
We  do  not,  and  we  cannot  know  what  God  does  with  the  irrevocable  and  the 
irremediable  in  men's  evil  past ;  but  we  do  know  that  He  makes  those 
barren  and  blasted  heritages  bloom  again,  and  bring  forth  thirty,  sixty,  and  an 
hundredfold.  Both  the  Bible  and  Christian  history  are  full  of  the  grand  fruitful 
work  of  restored  men,  men  with  large  tracts  of  blasted  years  behind  them.     The 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

best  thing  in  restoration  is  getting  back  to  God.  Renewal,  fruitf  ulness,  peace,  are  not 
in  our  new  resolutions,  not  in  our  turning  to  new  duties  ;  they  are  in  His  presence. 
His  touch  upon  us.  His  guidance.  The  promise  of  restoration  shall  have  a  higher 
fulfilment  by  and  by.  "  In  God  all  lost  things  are  found,  and  they  who  habitually 
plunge  themselves  in  God  and  abide  in  Him,  never  become  too  rich.  Nay,  they 
find  more  things  than  they  can  lose."  Let  us  not,  however,  presume  upon  all 
this  to  neglect  our  heritage.  Let  us  not  be  tempted  by  this  revelation  of  God' a 
amazing  goodness  and  restorative  power,  to  think  lightly  of  blight  and  bareness. 
God's  promise  of  restoration  is  no  encouragement  to  presumption.  It  does  not 
make  any  less  terrible  the  blight  and  canker  which  are  due  to  our  neglect  or 
waste.  God  help  us  all  !  These  lives  of  ours  have  been  so  faulty,  so  fitful,  so 
unproductive.  What  shall  we  do  ?  Surely  not  unduly  mourn  over  the  past, 
when  He  says,  "  I  will  restore."  (M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  Twofold  restoration: — 
These  words  refer  to  a  twofold  restoration.  I.  The  restoration  of  lost  mateetai. 
MERCIES.  "  I  will  restore  you  the  years  that  the  locust  hath  eaten."  Restora* 
tion  is  God's  peculiar  work.  Who  but  He  can  restore  the  earth  ?  An  insect 
may  destroy  a  giant ;  but  God  alone  can  restore  the  life  of  a  dying  flower. 
Restoration  is  God's  constant  work.  Prom  death  He  brings  life  to  all  nature. 
Spring  is  the  grand  annual  illustration  of  it.  God  restores  lost  temporal  blessings 
to  His  people  in  two  ways — 1.  By  giving  back  the  same  in  kind,  as  in  the  case  of 
Job ;  and  2.  By  restoring  that  which  answers  the  same  purpose.  II.  The 
restoration  of  lost  beligious  pkivtleqes.  What  are  these  ?  L  Worship.  "  And 
ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied,  and  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God, 
that  hath  dealt  wondrously  with  you  :  and  My  people  shall  never  be  ashamed.'* 
2.  Communion.  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  and  that 
I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  and  none  else."     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  26.  And  ye  shall  eat  In  plenty. ^T^  promise  of  plenty  a  motive  to 
gratitude  : — I.  The  branches  of  this  promise.  L  "  Ye  shall  eat  in  plenty.'* 
To  eat  and  to  eat  in  plenty,  are  pleasures  which  threatenings  have  disjoined 
and  separated.  2.  Satisfaction.  "  Be  satisfied."  3.  The  body  is  refreshed 
and  nourished.  4.  Contentment  with  our  portion.  5.  The  power  to  eat. 
6.  Intere-st  in  the  promise  of  eating  is  manifested  and  apprehended.  7.  The 
blessing  is  in  satisfaction.  8.  God  is  enjoyed  as  our  God  in  Christ.  "  And  praise 
the  name  of  the  Lord."  These  words  point  to  a  comprehensive  duty.  1.  Acknow- 
ledging the  goodness  of  the  Lord  our  God  in  creating  plenty  and  bestowing  satis, 
faction.  2.  Rejoicing  in  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  our  God,  "  who  giveth  us  fruitful 
seasons,  and  filleth  our  heart  with  food  and  gladness."  Joy  in  His  name  is  a 
chief  part  of  praise.  Though  the  good  be  a  material  or  sensible  good,  the  joy 
in  which  we  praise  Him  is  a  spiritual  joy.  3.  Serving  the  Lord  our  God,  in  holi- 
ness and  righteousness,  all  the  days  of  our  life.  4.  Exercises  concerning  the 
person,  and  office,  and  beauty,  excellence,  riches,  treasures,  fulness,  and  sufficiency 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  are  essential  in  the  praise  which  glorifies  the  name  of 
the  Lord  God.  11.  The  motive  to  humble  ourselves  and  praise  the  nams 
OP  the  Lord  God.  There  is  something  in  God's  dealing  that  is  wondrous.  See 
in  Joel's  sphere.  1.  Calling  o£E  and  destroying  the  devouring  army  is  wondrous. 
2.  After  the  devastation,  the  springing  of  the  earth  is  wondrous.  3.  The  season- 
able rain  which  cooled  the  air  and  moistened  the  earth  is  wondrous.  4.  The 
uncommon  fertility  of  the  years  which  succeeded  the  ravages  of  the  army  and 
the  drought  is  wondrous.  Make  application  to  those  who  are  in  easy  and  affluent 
circumstances.  Also  to  poor  householders,  &c.  (A.  Shanks.)  Using  aright 
God's  restored  blessings  : — What  use  should  be  made  of  these  returns  of  God'a 
mercy  to  them  ?  1.  God  shall  have  all  the  glory  thereof.  What  is  the  matter 
of  their  rejoicing  shall  be  matter  of  their  thanksgiving.  The  plenty  of  our  creature 
comforts  is  a  mercy  indeed  to  us,  when  by  them  our  hearts  are  enlarged  in  love 
and  thankfulness  to  God,  who  gives  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy,  though 
we  serve  Him  but  poorly.  2.  They  shall  have  the  credit,  and  comfort,  and 
spiritual  benefit  thereof.  When  God  gives  them  plenty  again,  and  gives  them 
to  be  satisfied  with  it — (1)  Their  reputation  shall  be  retrieved.  (2)  Their  joy 
shall  be  revived.  (3)  Their  faith  in  God  shall  be  confirmed  and  increased.  We 
should  labour  to  grow  in  onr  acquaintance  with  God  by  all  providences,  both 
merciful  and  afflictive.  3.  Even  the  inferior  creatures  shall  snare  therein,  and 
be  made  easy  thereby.  They  had  suffered  for  the  sin  of  man,  and  for  God'a 
quarrel  with  him,  and  now  they  shall  fare  the  better  for  man's  repentance  and 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  45 

God's  reconciliation  to  him.  This  may  lead  us  to  think  of  the  restitution  of 
all  things,  when  the  creature,  that  is  now  made  subject  to  vanity  and  groans 
under  it,  shall  be  brought,  though  not  into  the  glorious  joy,  yet  into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  21).  (Matthew  Henry.)  Harvest 
thanksgiving  : — Joel  comforts  Israel  with  a  declaration  of  God's  mercies.  He 
speaks  of  a  change  for  the  better  which  God  would  bring  upon  the  Jews'  land, — 
a  change  from  drought  and  barrenness,  from  blight  and  devouring  insect,  to 
fertility  and  large  increase.  Joy  in  harvest  is  a  practice  as  old  as  any  that  is 
in  the  world.  We  find  it  in  heathen  as  well  as  in  Christian  times.  Especially 
do  we  find  it  among  God's  own  people,  the  Israelites.  Their  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles is  also  called  the  Feast  of  the  Ingathering,  or  the  Feast  of  the  Harvest. 
For  seven  days  they  rejoiced  together  before  the  Lord.  They  brought  an  offer- 
ing, some  fruit  of  their  land,  each  according  to  his  ability,  and  as  God  had  blessed 
him.  In  this  they  are  our  example.  To  a  certain  extent  this  joy  at  harvest 
has  always  been  found  amongst  us.  The  shouting  for  the  last  load,  the  harvest 
supper  in  the  master's  barn,  witness  to  this  feeling.  Of  late  years  there  have 
come  into  use  what  are  called  Harvest  Festivals.  These  do  not  interfere  with 
the  old  customs  of  harvest  joy.  They  only  lift  that  joy  into  a  higher  sphere 
by  adding  the  religious  element.  Praising  God  is  our  bounden  duty  at  this  time. 
And  an  unusual  spirit  of  thankfulness  seems  to  be  now  upon  our  people.  Such 
a  general  remembering  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  is  most  refreshing  to  witness, 
and  fraught  with  good  omen  for  our  country.  We  take  our  side  with  those  who 
depart  not  from  the  living  God,  "  Giver  to  all  of  life  and  breath,  and  all  things." 
The  praise  of  our  lips  must  be  seconded  by  the  praise  of  our  life.  (R.  D.  B. 
Hawnsley,  M.A.)  Praise  for  plenty  : — I.  Thb  promise  of  an  amplb  suffi- 
ciency OF  FOOD  FOB  THB  USE  OF  MAN.  "  Ye  shall  eat  in  plenty."  Such,  from 
the  productiveness  of  the  earth,  the  excellence  of  the  weather  to  ripen,  and  for 
the  gathering  in  of  the  late  harvest,  ought  to  be  the  case  with  even  the  most 
toiling  and  humble  classes  of  our  fellow-countrymen  during  the  winter.  The 
poor  are  greatly  dependent  on  the  bounties  of  Providence.  II.  The  duty  of 
PRAISE.  '  Ye  shall  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God."  It  was  a  charge 
brought  by  Jeremiah  against  the  Jews,  that  they  overlooked  the  hand  of  God 
in  filling  them  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat.  Many  considerations  are  adapted 
to  excite  and  strengthen  our  gratitude  for  the  blessings  of  the  harvest.  All  was 
suspended  on  the  will  of  God  ;  and  where  should  we  have  been  if  God  had  rewarded 
us  according  to  our  iniquities  ?  Now  turn  to  consider  the  higher  signification 
of  which  the  text  is  capable.  Not  one  thing  mentioned,  as  the  subject  of  promise 
or  the  ground  of  duty,  but  has  an  evangelical  complexion,  and  may  be  applied 
to  the  Gospel  in  its  nature  and  claims.  (1)  Look  at  the  provision  of  the  Gospel. 
There  is  no  emblem  under  which  the  blessings  of  salvation  are  more  commonly 
or  more  aptly  exhibited  than  that  of  food.  The  Gospel  is  the  bread  of  life.  It 
.  is  placed  before  us  with  unstinted  and  ungrudging  liberality.  (2)  Look  at  the 
satisfaction.  There  is  this  material  difference  between  earthly  and  heavenly 
things.  The  meat  for  which  men  labour  is  perishable.  To  live  in  peace  as  to 
the  safety  of  the  soul,  is  not  that  satisfying  ?  (3)  Look  at  the  praise.  If  praise 
is  due  for  temporal  blessings,  how  much  more  is  it  due  for  our  eternal  redemp- 
tion, for  gospel  provisions.  (Anon.)  My  people  shall  never  be  ashamed. — 
The  courage  and  confidence  of  Qod's  people  : — Of  God  the  prophet  says,  "  He 
shall  deal  wonderfully  with  you."  I.  The  nature  and  ground  of  that  con- 
fidence under  which  believers  "  SHALL  NEVER  BE  ASHAMED."  They  that 
fear  the  Lord  rest  upon  the  strong  arm  of  Omnipotence ;  therefore  they  are  not 
afraid.  In  the  hour  of  their  temptation  the  precepts  of  God  are  the  source  of 
their  spiritual  vigour.  They  build  on  a  foundation  which  shall  never  shake 
xmder  them,  therefore  they  tremble  not  in  the  day  of  adversity.  The  sure  and 
certain  promises  of  God,  given  through  Christ  by  the  Grospel,  afford  to  the  faith- 
ful in  Christ  a  never-failing  source  of  covirage  and  confidence  in  the  day  of  trial. 
"  The  righteous  is  bold  as  a  lion  "  in  the  face  of  danger  ;  for  his  anchor  of  hope 
is  thrown  out,  and  holds  fast  to  the  eternal  rock  of  his  salvation.  Time  cannot 
shake  the  courage  of  the  faithful ;  for  this  courage  has  its  graft  in  a  Divine  stock, 
which  is  eternal.  II.  The  effect  of  this  godly  boldness  and  confidence. 
Shame  and  confusion  of  face  bring  distress  and  disquietude.  There  cannot 
be  true  peace  within,  where  there  is  habitual  feeling  of  shame,  and  sense  of  dread, 
doubt,  and  misgiving.  The  courage  of  the  people  of  God  is  a  state  of  peace 
within,  solidly  based,  strongly  secured  beneath  the  adamantine  bars  of  Divine 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

grace,  redeeming  love,  the  Gospel's  gladdening  voice  and  elevating  spirit.  A 
•state  of  well-tried  and  well-founded  courage  is  a  state  of  well-assured  and  well- 
supported  peace.  And  the  tranquillity  depends  not  upon  outward  things  for  its 
permanency,  but  rests  upon  the  watchful  guardianship  and  unchangeable  love 
of  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls.  See  the  great  excellency  of  the  benefit 
of  this  gift  of  godly  courage.  Is  it  not  desirable  to  be  enabled  to  walk  through 
life,  securely  armed  amid  its  storms,  in  a  track  undeviating,  fixed,  and  sted- 
fast,  preserving  the  even  tenor  of  a  godly  course,  without  weariness  and  with- 
out wavering  ?  This  is  the  sound  consistency  of  character  which  we  should 
all  aim  after.  What  shall  give  you  confidence  in  the  day  of  adversity,  but  the 
sure  provision  of  Divine  grace  laid  up  in  the  soul  ?  What  shall  give  you  bold- 
ness m  the  day  of  Christ's  appearing,  but  the  love  you  have  had  for  Christ,  the 
concern  you  have  shown  for  the  one  thing  needful,"  and  the  diligence  you 
have  used  in  "working  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling"  ?  \W. 
Stone,  M.A.)  No  condemnation  to  the  righteous  : — There  are  few  men  in  whom 
the  moral  sense  is  so  extinguished  that  they  never  think  at  all  of  a  judgment 
to  come.  But  there  are  many  deceits  by  which  the  worldly  minded  may 
impose  on  themselves.  Putting  off  consideration  to  a  more  convenient  season. 
Attempting  to  serve  two  masters.  But  religion  is  not  a  thing  for  half  measures. 
Who  are  those  who  shall  never  be  ashamed  7  They  are  described  as  "  the  people 
of  God."  Not  persons  wholly  free  from  sin.  Those  who  hate  sin,  and  are 
earnestly  striving  to  be  wholly  freed  from  it.  Their  sins  are  sins  of  ignorance 
or  infirmity ;  and  these,  though  they  call  for  sorrow,  can  hardly  demand  shame. 
The  people  of  God  are  those  in  whom  there  is  honesty  and  integrity  of  moral  pur- 
pose, rather  than  actual  conformity  to  the  whole  law  of  God.  I.  Thb  man  of 
God  has  no  cause  to  be  ashamed  when  he  searches  into  himself.  Arraign 
him  before  the  tribunal  of  conscience.  There  could  be  nothing  of  shame  where 
there  was  nothing  of  sin.  Shame  entered  the  world  with  sin.  Our  first  parents 
had  no  sooner  transgressed  than  conscience  poured  out  its  reproaches,  and 
they  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  When  his  own  heart  is  laid 
open  to  a  man,  he  shrinks  from  the  scene  of  foulness  and  deformity.  He  cannot 
look  into  a  single  recess  of  his  heart  without  finding  fresh  cause  for  confusion 
of  face.  Can  a  man  ever  be  so  transformed  that  he  may  search  into  himself 
and  find  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  ?  It  is  not  true  that  he  can  ever  examine  him- 
self and  find  no  impurity.  But  his  paramount  desire,  and  unwearying  endeavovir, 
may  be  to  obey  in  everything  the  law  of  his  God.  When  he  falls  into  sin,  it  is 
not  because  he  loves  it ;  and  his  every  offence  is  quickly  followed  by  penitence 
and  confession.  If  a  man  "  have  respect  unto  all  God's  commandments,"  con- 
science may  produce  the  catalogue  of  his  sins,  and  yet  not  put  him  to  shame. 
If  a  man  have  not  sinned  deliberately,  and  if  he  have  repented  sincerely,  there 
is  nothing  of  which  he  needs  to  be  ashamed.  II.  The  man  of  God  has  no  catjsb 
TO  BE  ashamed  WHEN  HE  STANDS  BEFOEE  THE  woELD.  Arraign  him  before 
the  tribunal  of  the  world.  Nothing  but  a  clear  conscience  will  enable  us  to  look 
the  world  clearly  and  calmly  in  the  face.  We  know  how,  in  extreme  cases,  the 
inquietude  of  conscience  will  make  a  man  afraid  to  meet  his  fellow-man.  Prob- 
ably much  of  the  reluctance  that  is  observable  among  Christians  to  reprove 
unrighteousness  and  assert  cause  of  truth  may  be  traced  to  a  consciousness 
of  their  own  inconsistency,  which  makes  them  ashamed  to  condemn  what  they 
too  often  practise,  and  recommend  what  they  are  apt  to  neglect.  It  is  quite 
essential,  in  order  that  we  be  not  ashamed  before  men,  that  we  be  not  ashamed 
at  the  tribunal  of  conscience.  The  world  is  very  disposed  to  impute  wrong 
motives  to  the  professors  of  religion — to  put  a  false  construction  on  actions  which 
should  excite  the  praise  of  all  honest  and  well-meaning  men.  What  is  to  secure 
Christians  in  the  midst  of  unceasing  endeavours  to  laugh  them  to  scorn  ?  They 
must  uphold  the  characteristics  of  God's  people,  and  have  respect  unto  all  God's 
commandments.  There  is  no  other  receipt  against  shame.  The  people  of  God 
must  carry  religion  with  them  into  every  business  of  life,  and  see  that  all  scenes 
are  pervaded  by  its  influence.  Christians  should  bear  themselves  with  that 
lofty  dignity  which  no  calumny  could  disturb.  III.  The  man  of  God  has  no 
CAUSE  TO  BE  ASHAMED  WHEN  HE  STANDS  BEFORE  GoD.  Here  it  will  not  serve 
our  argument  to  say  that  there  is  no  love  of  sin,  for  every  offence  must  be  known. 
Indeed,  if  the  blush  is  to  be  removed  from  our  hearts,  only  by  a  consciousness 
that  though  God  may  search  us  and  try  us.  He  will  find  no  evil  in  us.  we  must 
be  left  without  confidence.     But  the  people  of  God  have  respect  unto  all  God's 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  47 

commandments  ;  and  amongst  these  from  the  first  have  been  reckoned  the 
commandments  which  relate  to  faith.  Here  we  have  the  ground-work  of  con- 
fidence before  God,  notwithstanding  our  own  insuflBciency.  There  is  a  breadth 
and  fulness  in  the  work  of  atonement  which  makes  it  commensurate  with  every 
necessity,  leaving  nothing  imperformed  which  either  human  wants  or  Divine 
honour  could  demand.  Then  how  are  God's  people  to  be  ashamed  before  God  ? 
(H.  Mdvill,  B.D.)  Never  ashamed: — The  explorer  may  be  ashamed  because 
the  route  he  has  patiently  followed  may  lose  itself  in  the  waste,  or  the  theory 
he  has  adopted  may  fail  to  explain  all  the  facts.  The  discoverer  may  be  ashamed 
because  the  unknown  substance  will  not  yield  up  its  secrets  to  his  tests.  But 
God's  people  shall  never  be  ashamed — never  in  this  world,  never  in  the  next. 
In  the  hour  of  death  and  in  the  day  of  judgment,  never  ashamed.     I.  Nbveb 

ASHAMED   IN   OFFERING   PRAYEBS   WHICH   GoD   HAS   HiMSELF  INDITED.       There  8X6 

many  prayers,  doubtless,  in  which  we  shall  be  ashamed.  We  endeavour  to  impose 
our  will  on  the  Eternal,  with  strong  cryings  and  tears,  as  though  to  carry  His 
imwillingness  by  the  rush  of  our  assault.  Nay,  it  is  not  thus  that  we  shall  prevaiL 
Of  these  prayers  we  shall  often  have  good  reason  to  be  ashamed.  But  the  true 
prayer  is  far  otber  than  this.  II.  Never  ashamed  in  our  appeal  for  help  against 
TEMPTATION.  Temptations  do  not  cease  with  increasing  years.  There  may  be  now 
and  then  a  brief  lull  and  respite,  but  the  storm  will  break  with  all  the  greater 
intensity.  The  temptations  which  you  overcame  in  earlier  life  will  come  back  again, 
urged  on  you  by  cleverer,  subtler,  more  crafty  spirits  than  before.  Our  only  hope 
is  to  remain  in  union  with  the  Risen,  Living  Saviour,  whose  Name  is  above  every 
name,  so  that  at  the  Name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow  of  things  under  the 
earth.  III.  Never  ashamed  in  the  resxjlt  of  words  which  He  has  given  us 
TO  speak,  or  in  the  missions  on  which  He  has  sent  us.  We  may  be  very 
often  ashamed  as  we  consider  the  result  of  the  elaborated  sentences  and  perfected 
style  ;  very  much  ashamed  of  the  nett  result  of  enterprises  which  we  have  planned 
and  executed  with  consummate  care.  Where  are  your  sheaves  ?  I  have  none. 
And  why  is  this  ?  Because  our  work  has  been  in  the  power  of  the  flesh. 
IV.  Never  ashamed  of  cub  hope.    (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  27.  My  people  shall  never  Iw  ashamed. — Religion,  a  source  of  constant 
confidence  : — Joel  was  the  bearer  of  very  heavy  tidings.  Their  sins  had  exceeded 
the  bounds  of  Divine  patience.  I.  The  character  under  which  the  persons 
MENTIONED  IN  THE  TEXT  APPEAR  BEFORE  US.  He  calls  them  "  My  people."  This 
shows  that  they  belong  to  God  by  some  peculiar  appropriation.  He  speaks  of 
them  as  having  His  favour,  as  deriving  blessings  from  Him,  and  as  feeling,  imder 
a  consciousness  of  His  presence  abiding  with  them,  a  confidence  which  the  wicked 
never  possess.  They  are  a  chosen  people  ;  a  sanctified  people  ;  and  an  obedient 
people.  They  are  always  set  upon  obedience,  and  sorry  when  they  do  not  render 
it.  II.  The  honourable  and  encouraging  statement  which  God  makes 
CONCERNING  THEM.  "  My  people  shall  never  be  ashamed."  1.  They  shall  not 
be  ashamed  of  their  principles.  Which  serve  them  at  all  times.  And  they  are 
good,  profitable  to  society,  and  calculated   to  advance  the  interests  of  men  ! 

2.  They  are  not  ashamed  of  the  singularity  which  distinguishes  their  conduct. 

3.  Of  the  confidence  which  they  repose  in  God.  And  they  shall  not  be  ashamed 
amid  the  terrors  of  the  last  great  day.  {W.  Curling,  M.A.)  Not  ashamed  : — 
After  the  desolation  caused  by  the  locusts  is  to  come  a  time  of  great  fruitfulness. 
In  the  words,  "  My  people  shall  never  be  ashamed,"  we  have  a  great  principle 
of  God's  government  announced,  and  the  promise  is  emphatically  repeated. 

1.  The  significance  of  the  promise.  It  covers  all  history,  and  the  whole 
individual  life,  and  reaches  on  "  within  the  veil."  The  promise  involves — 1.  An 
implied  assertion  of  surroimding  troubles  and  conflict.  Much  which  is  calculated 
to  put  men  to  shame,  and  to  cause  doubt  and  sorrow ;  e.g.,  loathsome  diseases, 
fearful  crimes,  error  perverting  and  hindering  truth,  drunkenness,  ignorance, 
immorality  at  our  doors  and  in  our  streets.     Where  sin  is,  there  must  be  shame. 

2.  An  express  encouragement  to  stedfast  faith.  God  "  undertakes  for "  His 
people.  3.  A  sure  prediction  of  final  triumph.  The  promise  has  progressive 
ful^ment.  Shame  and  fear  are  again  and  again  beaten  back  until  the  last  victory 
comes,  and  shame  and  sin  are  left  behind  for  ever.  11.  The  character  of  thosb 
TO  whom  the  pbomisb  is  made.  God's  people  are  put  in  antithesis  with  the 
heathen,  the  ungodly,  the  unbelieving.  They  are  those  who  have  turned  to  Him 
in  true   penitence,  have   experienced  His  pardoning  love,   and  now  trust  in 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Him.  They  are  "  led  by  the  Spirit."  Can  we  take  the  comfort  of  this  promise  ? 
On  one  side  of  man's  destinies  is  certainty  of  shame  ;  on  the  other,  assur- 
ance of  glory.  Troubles  shall  issue  in  joy ;  trials  sht^  conduct  to  triumph. 
(W.  Saumarez  Smith,  B.D.) 

Ver.  28.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that  I  will  poor  out  My  Spirit 
upon  all  flesh. — The  new  Oospd  era  : — The  prophet  had  encouraged  the  nation  to 
repentance  by  announcing  the  temporal  blessings  which  would  be  consequent 
thereon.  They  would  get  the  former  rain,  they  would  get  the  latter  rain.  The 
floors  would  be  filled  with  wheat,  and  the  fats  would  overflow  with  wine  and  oil. 
Desolation  would  vanish,  plenty  would  return.  This  was  the  lower  sphere  of 
benediction  consequent  upon  their  repentance.  Now  the  prophet  mentions  the 
higher  blessing  to  follow, — the  spiritual,  of  which  the  tempor^  was  but  a  type. 
].  That  thb  nbw  Gospel  era  would  be  charactebisbd  by  a  copious  out- 
pouring OF  THE  Holy  Spirit  (ver.  28).  1.  The  time.  "  Afterward."  "  In 
those  days."  To  what  time  does  this  refer  ?  To  the  days  of  the  prophet  ?  To 
the  era  of  the  law  ?  Or,  to  the  time  when  the  promised  Messiah  should  come  ? 
This  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  seems  to  be  connected  by  the  prophet  with  the  secular 
prosperity  of  which  he  had  been  speaking.  He  probably  did  not  know  the  time 
to  which  his  words  had  reference  ;  but  if  it  was  in  the  future  it  was  as  real  to  his 
faith  as  the  present  to  his  sight.  This  promise  no  doubt  had  reference  to  the 
Messianic  age,  though  Joel  may  not  have  been  cognizant  of  the  fact.  It  was 
not  fulfilled  at  Bethlehem,  nor  in  Gethsemane,  nor  at  Calvary,  nor  at  Olivet.  It 
was  still  "  afterward."  It  was  partially  accomplished  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  17), 
though  there  was  concealed  in  it  a  deeper  meaning  than  even  Pentecost  could 
impart,  the  entire  significance  of  which  we  are  as  yet  ignorant.  We  live  in  this 
afterward  of  time,  and  know  its  meaning,  as  did  not  the  prophets  of  old  ;  but  the 
afterward  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  has  yet  to  evolve  the  universal  reign  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  2.  The  author,  "  I  will  pom:."  This  outpouring  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  to  be  of  Divine  origin.  It  is  the  alone  prerogative  of  the  Eternal  God 
to  bestow  the  Spirit  upon  mankind.  Joel  did  not  connect  the  gift  of  the  Spirit 
in  any  way  with  himself,  or  with  any  agency  he  could  command.  Nor  did  Peter 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Prophets  and  apostles,  however  distinguished  they 
may  have  been,  were  not  the  authors  but  the  channels  of  spiritual  energy.  Man 
cannot  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  his  fellow-man.  Thoughtful  books  cannot  bestow 
it ;  organisation  cannot  impart  it.  This  is  the  testimony  of  Scripture ;  this  is 
in  conformity  with  human  experience,  and  with  the  moral  inability  of  man  to 
originate  good.  Hence  we  must  go  to  God  for  it.  We  must  wait  His  time.  We 
must  comply  with  the  moral  conditions  necessary  to  its  reception.  We  must 
give  Him  the  praise  and  glory  of  its  advent  in  any  measure.  All  true  spiritual 
emotion  is  from  above.  3.  The  extent.  "I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all 
flesh."  The  Divine  Spirit  was  to  be  poured  out  without  distinction  of  age,  sex, 
country,  or  genius.  It  should  be  given  to  universal  man.  It  would  not  be 
confined  to  the  covenant  nation.  The  poor,  the  slave,  the  unlearned — all  should 
receive  this  gift.  It  would  be  poured  out ;  not  drop  by  drop,  but  as  a  mighty 
shower ;  even  as  copiously  as  tne  rain  after  the  prayer  of  Elijah.  The  gift  of 
the  Spirit  is  not  limited  by  any  restraint  upon  the  Divine  ability  to  give.  It  is 
not  limited  by  time.  Sin  cannot  stay  it,  for  grace  abounds  much  more  than  sin. 
Then  why  is  not  spiritual  influence  more  potently  with  us  ?  4.  J  he  effect.  "  And 
your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,  yotir  old  men  shall  dream  dreams, 
your  yoimg  men  shall  see  visions."  This  does  not  limit  the  universal  application 
of  the  promise,  but  simply  gives  examples  of  those  who  shall  realise  it,  and  the 
effect  it  will  have  upon  them.  In  the  early  ages  of  the  Church,  the  miraculous 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  were  imparted ;  but  they  have  ceased,  and,  instead,  we  have 
illumination  of  soul,  a  beauteous  insight  into  the  truth  of  God,  bright  visions  of 
destiny ;  for  these  are  the  things  which  now  accompany  and  evince  the  presence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  IL  That  the  new  Gospel  era  would  be  chaba  terised 
BY  the  most  alarming  temporal  commotions.  "  And  I  will  show  wonders  in 
the  heavens  and  in  the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke,"  &c.  God  gives 
successive  revelations  of  Himself ;  revelations  of  the  spirit  of  mercy,  and  also 
of  the  spirit  of  judgment.  The  phenomena  here  named  are  physical  in  their 
nature,  but  have  a  deep  moral  significance.  The  great  events  of  Christianity 
have  been  signalised  by  phenomena  in  the  material  universe.  The  guiding  of 
the  star  at  tl^  birth  of  Christ.     The  darkness  of  the  sun  at  the  Crucifij^ion.     The 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  40 

wind  and  fire  at  Pentecost.  Nature  is  in  sympathy  with  the  great  plana  of  GSod. 
The  progress  of  truth  occasions  many  wondrous  phenomena.  It  darkens  many 
suns.  It  turns  many  moons  into  blood.  It  is  in  conflict  with  dark  prejudice, 
with  wilful  error,  with  the  carnal  mind,  with  sinful  passion,  with  old  custom,  with 
proud  philosophy ;  hence  the  moral  commotion  intimated  in  the  text,  and  illus- 
trated by  the  history  of  Christ.  But  all  these  commotions  will  be  penetrated 
and  mitigated  by  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  yield  ultimate  quietude 
when  the  voioe  of  God  shall  be  heard,  and  the  peace  of  the  Divine  reign  finally 
established.    HI.  That  the  new  Gospel  kba  woxtld  be  ohasactbbisid  by  a 

MEBCirCX  ABBANOEHENT  fob  the  salvation  of  all  EABXE3T  SUTPLLAWTS.      "  And 

it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
delivered,"  Ac  1.  Salvation  in  the  time  of  peril.  The  Grospel  era  shall  provide 
safety  for  human  souls  amidst  the  awful  calamities  which  shall  then  befall  the  world. 
2.  Salvation  in  the  time  of  despair.  3.  Salvation  on  easy  conditions.  There 
might  be  mystery  in  the  darkened  sun,  but  not  about  the  salvation  to  be  had. 
It  IS  to  be  had  from  God  by  prayer.  Lessons  : — 1.  That  God  is  the  author  of  all 
true  reviving  influence.  2.  That  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  co-extensive  with 
the  range  of  universal  life.  3.  That  in  the  Gospel  era  the  Divine  Spirit  is  richly 
manifest.  4.  That  while  we  must  anticipate  times  of  moral  commoti(Hi,  we  must 
also  expect  times  when  the  redemptive  purpose  shall  be  more  fuUy  manifest. 
(J.  S.  ExeU,  M.A.)  The  nature  of  the  great  s'piritual  change  which  we  anticipate  : — 
This  prophecy  was  not  finally  fulfilled  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The  effusion 
of  the  Spirit  on  that  day  must  be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  final  outpouring  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  last  ages  of  the  world.  1.  The  necessity  of  an  effusion  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  in  order  to  accomplish  the  change  that  is  needed.  There  never 
can  be  such  a  transformation,  as  the  principles  of  Christianity  show  to  be  required 
by  the  condition  of  the  world,  except  by  a  mighty  and  resistless  agency  on  the 
hearts  of  men  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  The  necessity  of  this  effusion  will 
appear  if  you  consider — 1.  The  absolute  and  perfect  failure  of  all  agency  apart 
from  Him,  which  hitherto  has  been  employed  by  man.  2.  The  precise  and  essential 
nature  of  the  change  which  is  anticipated  and  desired.  It  is  not  a  change  in  the 
external  aspect  of  things,  it  is  a  change  of  principle ;  it  is  a  change  of  motives ;  it 
is  the  transformation  of  all  opposition  on  the  part  of  man  towards  the  government 
of  God,  and  interests  of  eternity.  3.  The  appropriation  to  the  Divine  Spirit  of 
the  various  oflSces  which  are  assigned  to  Him  in  the  economy  of  redemption.  It 
is  the  Spirit  who  quickens,  who  converts  the  soul,  who  urges  to  faith,  who  instructs, 
guides,  consoles,  seals,  &c.  4.  The  ascription  to  the  Spirit  of  the  great  change 
in  the  latter  day  which  we  are  led  to  anticipate  throughout  the  whole  structure 
of  the  prophetic  writings.  Whoever  looks  for  the  renovation  of  future  times, 
and  the  amelioration  of  the  state  of  man,  to  any  agent  short  of  the  one  to  which 
we  now  ascribe  it,  is  most  grievously  mistaken,  and  does  most  impiously  blas- 
pheme. II.  The  mode  in  which  the  effusion  of  the  Divine  Spibit  will 
BE  condxtcted.  1.  The  effusion  of  the  Divine  Spirit  will  be  preceded  by  remark- 
able and  extensive  providential  changes  in  human  society.  With  regard  to  the 
precise  instrumentality  employed,  few  would  ventiu-e  on  distinct  assertion. 
Possibly  much  public  agitation  and  national  convulsion  may  be  necessary.  2.  It 
will  be  immediately  associated  with  the  propagation  of  the  Word  of  God,  and 
the  use  of  importunate  prayer.  3.  The  effusion  of  the  Divine  Spirit  will  be  im- 
parted with  great  and  extraordinary  rapidity.  Hitherto  there  has  been  but 
a  slow  impartation  of  spiritual  influence.  Two  topics  need  consideration. 
(1)  Whether  the  era  of  the  final  effusion  of  the  Spirit  will  bo  introduced  by 
miraculous  agency.     (2)  At  what  time  may  the  effusion  be  expected.     HI.  The 

EFFECTS   which   THE   EFFUSION   OF  THE   SPIBIT   WILL  PBODUCB.      On  the  ChuTch 

—removing  its  ignorance,  and  healing  its  divisions :  sanctifying  its  members.  On 
the  world — ^it  shall  then  be  given  to  God.  {James  Parsons.)  Prosperity  and 
the  Spirit : — Upon  the  promises  of  physical  blessing  there  follows  another  of  the 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit:  the  prophecy  by  which  Joel  became  the  prophet  of 
Pentecost,  and  through  which  his  book  is  best  known  among  Christians.  The 
order  of  events  makes  us  pause  to  question  :  does  Joel  mean  to  imply  that  physicfd 
prosperity  must  precede  spiritual  fulness  ?  It  would  be  unfair  to  assert  that  he 
does,  without  remembering  what  he  understands  by  the  physical  blessings.  To 
Joel  these  are  the  token  that  God  has  returned  to  His  people.  The  drought  and 
the  famine  produced  by  the  locusts  were  signs  of  His  anger  and  of  His  divorce  of 
the  land.     The  proofs  that  He  has  relented  and  taken  Israel  back  into  a  spiritual 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

relation  to  Himself,  can,  therefore,  from  Joel's  point  of  view,  only  be  given  by 
the  healing  of  the  people's  wounds.  In  plenteous  rains  and  full  harvests  God 
sets  His  seal  to  man's  penitence.  Rain  and  harvest  are  not  merely  physical 
benefits,  but  religious  sacraments :  signs  that  God  has  returned  to  His  people, 
and  that  His  zeal  is  again  stirred  on  their  behalf  (Joel  i.  18).  This  has  to  be  made 
clear  before  there  can  be  talk  of  any  higher  blessing.  God  has  to  return  to  His 
people  and  to  show  His  love  for  them  before  He  pours  forth  His  Spirit  upon  them. 
.  .  .  From  Joel's  standpoint  physical  blessings  may  have  been  as  religious  as 
spiritual,  but  we  must  go  further,  and  assert  that  for  Joel's  anticipation  of  the 
baptism  of  the  Spirit  by  a  return  of  prosperity,  there  is  an  ethical  reason,  and  on© 
which  is  permanently  valid  in  history.  A  certain  degree  of  prosperity,  and  even 
of  comfort,  is  an  indispensable  condition  of  that  universal  and  lavish  exercise  of 
the  religious  faculties,  which  Joel  pictures  under  the  pouring  forth  of  God's  Spirit. 
The  history  of  prophecy  itself  furnishes  us  with  proofs  of  this.  And  has  it  been 
otherwise  in  the  history  of  Christianity  ?  An  acute  historian  observes  that  every 
religious  revival  in  England  has  happened  upon  a  basis  of  comparative  prosperity. 
((?.  Adam  Smith,  D.D.)  The  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Ghost: — Joel  appears 
to  move  "  in  the  circle  of  moral  convictions,  and  of  eschatological  hopes."  He 
has  been  called  "  the  prophet  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Ghost."     I.  A 

PREDICTION  OF  THE  COMING  OF  THE  HOLY  GhOST.       1.   "  I  will  pOUT  OUt."      These 

words  suggest  the  abundance  of  the  gift.  2.  The  effusion  was  to  be  "  Of  My 
Spirit,"  that  is,  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  The  extent  of  that  manifestation. 
1.  "  Upon  all  flesh."  This  means  upon  all  mankind.  Giving  the  idea  of  an 
universal  religion.  2.  The  gift  is  said  to  descend  upon  all  "  flesh,"  naming  that 
which  is  lowest  in  our  nature.  3.  The  outpouring  only  began  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  4.  This  outpouring  will  continue  to  flow  on  as  long  as  the  world 
lasts.  See  three  effects  of  the  Spirit's  presence  and  operation  in  the  souls  of  men, 
which  are  of  the  greatest  practical  moment — 1.  His  presence  has  given  a  greater 
malignity  to  sin,  in  that,  through  His  indwelling,  sin  is  now  brought  so  near  to 
the  Holy  God ;  because  the  light  which  the  Spirit  imparts  robs  sin  of  the  excuse 
of  ignorance.  And  because  sin  is  now  committed,  in  spite  of  that  new  power  to 
resist  it  which  is  bestowed  by  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  presence 
of  the  Spirit,  with  His  fruits  and  gifts,  carries  with  it  a  higher  standard  and  ideal 
than  that  of  the  old  covenant.  3.  The  presence  of  the  Spirit  should  impart  fervour 
to  all  devotional  exercises.  {Sunday  in  Church.)  The  promise  of  the  Spirit  : — 
We,  as  well  as  the  people  of  nineteen  centviries  ago,  have  an  interest  in  the  prophecy 
of  Joel.  Whithersoever  the  quickening  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  come, 
there  shall  be  spiritual  life.  And  is  not  this  the  real  want  of  the  age  ?  The 
term  revival  is  frequently  mentioned  in  these  days.  I.  What  is  a  revival  ? 
It  is  the  renewal  in  effect  and  continuation  of  what  took  place  under  the  preaching 
of  the  Word  at  Pentecost,  when  thousands  of  spiritually  ignorant  and  perishing 
men  were  first  quickened.  Religion  is  a  life,  even  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul. 
Without  spiritual  vitality  there  can  be  no  real  personal  religion.  Spiritual  life 
is  kindled  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  Grod.  The  first  indications  of  this  life  are 
generally,  not  invariably,  alarm.  Its  first  act  is  faith.  This  life  requires  nourish- 
ment, and  that  is  supplied  chiefly  by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer.  It  has  its 
inward  growth  and  its  outward  manifestations.  The  spiritual  life  may  be  likened 
to  an  exotic.  Revivals,  or  what  is  equivalent  to  them,  are  in  separate  aepartments 
of  life  found  to  be  universally  and  indispensably  needed.  The  Reformation  in 
Germany  was  a  gigantic  revival.  About  1743,  within  two  or  three  years,  thirty 
or  forty  thousand  souls  were  bom  into  the  family  of  heaven.  Numbers  object 
to  extended  religious  manifestations,  because  of  the  excitement  which  some- 
times attends  them.  Some  measure  of  excitement  is,  however,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  inseparable  from  a  time  of  awakening,  either  of  one  or  of  many.  Many 
object  to  seasons  of  revival,  because  of  the  suddermess  with  which  some  con- 
versions are  effected  :  but  there  are  various  operations  of  the  Spirit.  A  revival 
is  just  the  gracious  sovereign  putting  forth  of  Divine  power  on  a  great  scale,  to 
effect  largely  what  in  ordinary  times  takes  place  in  one  here  and  there  through 
a  community.  II.  What  are  the  signs  that  a  eevival  is  needed  by  us  ? 
Weakness  and  fainting  in  some,  and  death  in  others.  What  is  Christian  life  in 
its  essence  ?  It  is  the  implanted,  earnest,  ever-expanding  taste  for  and  aspiration 
after  the  living  God,  reconciled  in  Christ,  as  one's  all  in  aU.  It  is  that  this  state 
may  become  the  state  of  every  one  of  us,  we  need  a  revival.  III.  What  are  thr 
lUNDBANCBS  TO  A  REVIVAL  AMONG  US  ?     Their  name  is  legion.     1.  Hindrances 


CHAP,  n.] 


JOEL.  Bl 


in  the  Church.  Unbelief  is  the  sin  which  most  easily  besets  us.  It  js  the  common 
crvina  sm  of  the  Church.  We  are  straitened  in  our  own  faith  and  hope.  Dis- 
union Conformity  to  the  world.  2.  Hindrances  in  the  world.  Ignorance, 
indifference,  infidelity,  intemperance.  IV.  What  abb  the  means  by  which 
WB  AND  others  MIGHT  RECEIVE  A  REVIVAL  ?  Earnest,  scriptural,  impressive 
preaching.  Earnest,  instant,  individual,  and  social  prayer.  Domestic  discipline, 
Ltruction,  and  family  worship.  If  we  are  to  be  Christians  at  all,  we  must  be 
crowing  Christians.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  standmg  stiUin  the  Divine  life. 
Life  is  a  battlefield  on  which  the  Christian  soldier  is  either  gainmg  ground  or  losing 
it.  (James  Stirling  Muir.)  The  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  essential  to  a 
revival  of  religion  .-—I.  Thh  animating  prediction.  Note  the  object  promised- 
it  was  the  Spirit.  The  term  Spirit  is  used  to  denote  His  miraculous  and  gracious 
influences.  The  Spirit  is  a  person.  The  influences  of  the  Spurit  may  be  considered 
as  mu-aculous  and  as  common.  The  former  were  peculiar  to  the  apostolic  age, 
the  latter  must  be  regarded  as  the  privilege  of  believers  m  every  period  of  time. 
Observe  the  persons  who  shall  receive  the  Spirit.  It  will  be  poured  out  upon 
aU  flesh  "  This  embraces  the  whole  human  race.  Observe  the  season  when  this 
prediction  wiU  be  verified.  The  "  last  days,"  i.e.,  this  entire  present  dispensation, 
th^fi^al  economy  of  mercy  to  the  world.  11.  The  glorious  effects  connected 
WITH  the  dispensation  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  Notice  the  blessmgs  of  the  Spirit,  as 
eeen  in  the  apostles-they  were  qualified  by  it  for  their  work.  And  as  it  respects 
the  revival  of  religion,  the  Gospel  is  attended  with  extraordinary  success.    111.  Ihe 

MEANS   BY   WHICH   THIS    DiVINE   INFLUENCE   MAY    BE   MORE    EMINENTLY    ENJOYED 

BY  US  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY.     I.  By  a  more  decided  and  elevated  tone  of  piety  in 
the  members  of  our  churches.     2.  By  consecrating  much  time  to  devotion.     3.  By 
a  distmguished   zeal    in   the    promotion  of  those  institutions   which   advance 
Immani^l's  cause.     4.  By  increasing  harmony  and  affection  among  the  disciplea 
of  Christ      Love  to  the  brethren  is  the  peculiar  excellence  of  Christianity,  the 
badgf  of  ditfipfeship,  and  the  glory  of  religion.     (W-    Yates.)    ..J^^  Promise 
of  the  Spirit  .--This  is  the  great  Old  Testament  promise  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spurit :  the  first  in  order  of  time,  the  first  in  degree  of  importance.     In  the  earlier 
Script(u:es  we  find  occasional  allusions  to  the  work  of  the  Spu:it.     The  prophecy 
of  Joel  contains  the  first  utterance  upon  this  great  subject.     Joel  is  thought  by 
some  to  be  the  oldest  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  who  wrote.     The  structure  of  this 
prophecy  is  very  simple.     In  the  first  we  find  God's  judgments  upon  His  people. 
Their  obtainmg  mercy.     The  punishment  of  then-  enemies.     In  the  remainder 
of  the  book  wt  have-1.  The  caU  to  repentance.     2.  The  promise  of  blessing. 
3.  The  judgment  of  the  ungodly.      Of  the  promise  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the 
culminating  point  in  the  announcement  of  blessing,  we  have  the  warrant  of  bt. 
Peter  for  saymg  that  it  received  o  fulfilment  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.     The 
expression  "  poSr  out"  cannot  be  applied  literaUy  to  a  D.vme  i^rson      It  is 
symbolical,  and  adopted  from  the  promise  of  ram  in  verse  23.     The  Lord  J^us, 
during  His  ministry,  took  up  the  promise,  and  both  expanded  and  renewed  it. 
There  was,  however,  a  condition  upon  the  fulfilment  of  which  the  gift  of  the  Spirit 
was  contingent.     The  glorification  of  Jesus  was  to  precede  the  outpouring  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     It  was  to  be  the  peculiar  office  of  the  Spirit  to      testify  of,     ^d 
"  glorify  "  Christ,  by  "  taking  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  showing  them  to  Hia 
people."     But  whUe  we  see  in  Pentecost  a  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  we  may 
ask  whether  the  Old  Testament  promise  was  exhausted  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
Certainly  it  was  not.     The  prophecy  is  asserted  by  St.  Peter  to  be  co-extensive 
with  the  Divine  calling,  to  run  side  by  side  with  that  caUing  so  long  as  it^fhaU 
continue,  to  belong  therefore  to  the  whole  Christian  dispensation,     ihe      last 
days"  is  the  New  Testament  term   descriptive  of  the  entne  mterval  between 
the  first  and  second  advents.     There  are  certain  special  and  peculiar  manifesta- 
tions of  the  Spirit.     God  at  times  vouchsafes  a  gracious  outpourmg  both  upon  the 
Church  and  the  world.     Have  we  any  ground  for  expecting  any  such  remarkable 
visitation  in  the  present  day  ?     In  examining  the  structure  of  the  prophecy  ot  J  oel, 
we  note  the  following  sequences  :    (1)  The  call  to  repentance,  addressed  to  the 
professing  people  of  God.     (2)  The  promise  of  blessmg,  culminating  in  the  promise 
of  the  Spirit.     (3)  The  announcements  of  judgments  to  be  mflicted  upon  tlie 
enemifco  of  God  and  His  Church.     This  sequence  of  events  took  place  in  connection 
with  Pentecost.     There  was  then— (1)  The  universal  preaching  of  repentance  to 
the  Jewish  nation.     (2)  The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.     (3)  The  infliction  of  signal 
vengeance  upon  those  who  proved  themselves  to  be  the  deadly  enemies  of  the  true 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 

Chiirch  of  God.  Are  there  any  events  of  a  similar  kind  taking  place  at  the 
present  time  ?  It  has  been  too  much  the  habit  with  Christians  to  rest  satisfied 
with  a  very  partial  and  moderate  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the  Spirit.  It  is 
scriptural  to  indulge  the  expectation  of  such  a  holy  revivaL  It  is  desirable  that 
such  fulfilment  should  take  place.  It  is  possible,  may  I  not  say  probable,  that 
such  blessed  results  may  be  accomplished.  But  in  what  way  are  we  to  act,  so 
that  we  may  reasonably  expect  the  blessing  7  1.  Remove  the  hindrances  which 
stand  in  the  way  of  such  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  The  unholiness  which  exists 
in  the  Church  of  God.  Ignorance  and  misapprehension  regarding  the  work  of 
the  Spirit,  and  the  nature  of  religious  revivaL  The  personal  responsibility  of 
all  Christians  in  relation  to  the  extension  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  is  not  felt 
as  it  should  be.  2.  Adopt  the  means  by  which  a  religious  revival  may  be  pro- 
moted. The  faithful  preaching  of  the  Divine  Word.  Real,  hearty,  believing, 
united,  and  persevering  prayer.  {EmUius  Bayley.)  The  Holy  Spirit  pro- 
niiaed  : — The  development  of  the  redemptive  scheme  is  by  a  succession  of  stages. 
Each  stage  is  an  advance  upon  the  preceding.  The  finger  of  prophecy  as  well 
as  of  pn^vidence  points  forward.  The  eyes  of  the  heathen  were  turned  1  ack« 
W!rd.  Their  golden  age  was  past.  Not  so  the  Jews.  So  Christianity  is  a 
religion  of  expectancy.  Though  in  the  final  stage  of  the  world's  development, 
we  are  far  from  the  end  of  that  stage.  The  remedial  agencies  are  working,  but 
tie  remedy  is  not  yet  wrought.  We  have  a  sufficient  revelation,  but  we  have 
not  yet  fathomed  it.  We  have  a  fixed  though  not  a  finished  faith.  Christianity 
is  aspiring,  hopeful,  confident.  The  Holy  Spirit  made  known,  through  Joel, 
that  in  the  ages  to  come  there  would  be  established,  through  His  own  abundant 
and  universal  effusion,  a  new  order  of  things  unspeakably  mc^e  glorious  and 
happy  than  anything  hitherto  known.  I.  Thk  extent  of  the  blessing. 
Extent  both  in  the  sense  of  amplitude  and  degree.  The  promise  is  to  all,  without 
distinction  of  age,  sex,  nationality,  or  degree.  The  Spirit  of  God  had  been  in 
the  world  before  the  last  days  began,  but,  in  no  such  plenitude  and  power  as 
after  His  effusion.  The  words  "  pour  out  "  imply  abundance  and  richness.  The 
three  usual  forms  of  special  Divine  revelation  Imown  to  the  Hebrews, — prophecy, 
visions,  dreams, — indicate  the  fulness  of  the  blessing ;  and  the  inclusion  of  all 
classes,  down  to  slaves,  shows  the  extent  of  the  blessing.  Nor  is  the  prophecy 
confined  to  the  Hebrew  nation.  On  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  the  Jews  was  the 
Spirit  poured  out.  The  true  doctrine  as  to  the  extent  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  opera- 
tion may  be  thus  summarised.  1.  The  expression  "  all  flesh  "  is  to  be  taken 
literally,  including  not  only  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  but  every  individual 
of  every  nation.  Not  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  the  same  direct  influence  upon 
all.  That  is  not  possible,  since  the  means  and  instruments  through  which  He 
works  are  not  at  hand  to  the  same  degree  in  all.  Much  of  his  work  in  the  more 
favoured  nations  is  in  behalf  of  the  less  favoured.  This  is  true  of  individuals 
also.  Man  is  part  spirit,  and  is  capable  of  receiving  and  recognising  the  monitions 
of  the  Father  Spirit.  No  soul  of  man,  not  even  the  darkest  and  most  degraded, 
is  neglected  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  However  duU  it  may  be,  still  there  is  a  con- 
science, a  Divine  spark,  and  that  is  responsive  to  the  breath  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 
In  numberless  ways  does  the  Spirit  make  Himself  felt  all  the  way  from  childhood 
to  age.  And  at  times  the  Spirit  makes  special  appeals.  2.  To  what  extent, 
in  the  sense  of  degree,  is  the  Spirit  given  ?  Thus  far  no  response  on  the  part 
of  man  has  been  supposed.  The  Spirit  comes  to  him  self-moved,  not  because 
man  wants  Him,  but  because  He  wants  man.  It  is  His  aim  to  persuade  man  to 
open  his  heart  to  receive  Him.  But  man  is  free,  and  can  open  it  or  bar  it  closer. 
With  what  measure  of  fulness  and  blessing  does  the  Spirit  come  ?  The  language 
of  prophecy  leads  us  to  expect  great  things.  The  fountain  is  inexhaustible  and 
the  supply  abundant.  Fiuness  of  possession  is  the  only  natural  limit  of  the 
promised  blessing.  As  a  matter  of^fact  the  Spirit  does  fill  every  soul  just  so 
fast  and  far  as  He  is  permitted.  It  does  not  follow  that,  if  all  were  to  receive 
Him  to  the  fullest  extent  possible,  they  would  have  Him  in  the  same  measure, 
or  possess  the  same  spiritual  power.  That  depends  upon  their  capacity  and 
ability.  Nor  does  fulness  of  the  Spirit  necessarily  imply  the  possession  of 
miraculous  power.  That  power  may  depend  on  the  possession  of  peculiar 
natural  gifts.  11.  The  nattjbe  of  the  blessing.  1.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is 
a  gift  of  enlightenment.  The  natural  man,  however  highly  endowed,  fails  to  under- 
stand "  the  things  of  the  Spirit."  To  them  his  mind  is  dark ;  but  when  the 
Spirit  comes  into  a  soul,  light  comes  with  Him.     2.  It  is  a  gift  of  purification. 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  63 

The  Scripture  emblems  of  the  pm-ifying  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  water  and 
fire.  One  cleanses  by  washing  away,  the  other  by  burning  up  impviritiea.  Li^ht 
let  into  a  dimgeon  does  not  remove  its  foulness  ;  no  more  does  illumination 
purify  the  heart ;  the  Holy  Ghost  not  only  enlightens  but  cleanses.  He  is  water 
to  wash  away  the  impurities  of  sin,  fire  to  burn  up  the  dross  of  nature.  3.  It  is 
a  gift  of  power.  At  Jerusalem  the  disciples  were  "  en  ued  with  power  from  on 
high."  The  Holy  Spirit  in  a  man  makes  him  an  engine  of  power.  He  is  strong 
to  endure,  for  God  is  with  him.  He  is  bold  in  speech,  efficient  in  action,  prevalent 
in  praj'er.  Illustrate  by  St.  Paul,  Luther,  Nettleton,  Finney,  Moody,  &c. 
4.  It  is  a  gift  of  joy.  Illustrated  in  the  ecstasies  of  the  early  disciples,  i'here 
is  a  "joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  {Sermons  by  Monday  Clvb.)  The  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  the  property  and  security  of  the  Church  of  God  : — I.  Thb  subjects 
OF  THIS  BSPECiAii  MKRCY.  It  is  a  word  from  the  God  of  all  grace  to  that  people, 
and  touching  their  increase,  who  profess  to  be  "  the  Church  of  God,  which  He  hath 
purchased  with  His  own  blood."  Their  increase  are  desig  lated  as  "  all  flesh," 
your  sons  and  your  daughters,"  "  your  old  men,  your  young  men,"  "  the 
servants,  the  handmaids."  "  All  that  are  afar  off."  With  this  limitation,  "  As 
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  II.  The  mercy  itself  which  is  promised. 
The  Spirit  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  third  person  in  the  ever-blessed  i  nd  glorious 
Trinity.  The  effusion,  or  pouring  out,  which  is  here  promised,  is  tlse  commimica- 
tion  of  His  precious  influences,  fo  spiritual  life,  health,  comfort,  strength,  love, 
wisdom  unto  salvation.  The  similitude  is  taken  from  abundant  and  fertilising 
showers.  III.  The  primary  displays  of  its  reception  are  to  be  noticed. 
"  Sons  and  daughters  prophesy,"  &c.  See  Acts  xiii.  12.  Admonitions  against 
the  abuse  of  these  special  gifts  is  found  in  1  Cor.  xii.  7 ;  xiv.  22.  IV.  The  per- 
manent POWER  and  presence  INVOLVED  IN  THIS  PROMISE.  The  powor  of  the 
infinite  Jehovah  is  involved  in  His  perpetual  presence  with  His  people.  The 
accomplishment  of  this  promise  constitutes  the  character,  and  demonstrates 
the  existence,  of  the  true  Church  of  the  living  God,  wheresoever  it  is  to  be  found 
upon  eaxth :  and  the  permanent  power  and  presence  therein  involved  enstires 
the  existence  and  increase  of  that  Church-  {William  Borrows,  M.A.)  Your 
old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  yonug  men  shall  see  Tisions. — Dreaming 
dreams  and  seeing  visions  : — The  age  is  against  us.  The  youth  of  the  world  with 
its  buoyancy  has  given  place  to  the  fin  de  si^e,  the  old  age  of  the  weary  Titan, 
with  its  spiritual  fatigue.  You  feel  this  everywhere.  It  is  not  only  in  our  hard, 
analytic  views  of  nature  that  we  feel  this  death  of  dreams  ;  all  life  is  alike.  The 
young  man  to-day  will  find  the  world  no  way  congenial  to  the  dreamer ;  it  will 
only  be  through  a  thick  fog  that  he  will  see  his  visions.  Take  city  life.  How 
viflionless  all  life  seems  to  you,  covered  inch  deep  with  dust,  and  that  not  of  the 
cleanest.  There  is  not  much  space  for  poetry  in  the  model  lodging-house,  or 
furnished  apartments.  A  hive  of  industry  the  city  may  be,  but  dreams  and 
visions  are  no  part  of  its  output.  Turn  to  the  factory.  In  old  times  man's  work 
was  itself  a  dream.  The  factory  system  has  killed  all  that.  To-day  in  every 
sphere  of  life  the  young  man  will  find  a  subtle  penetrating  realism  banishing  all 
visions,  a  fog  that  can  be  felt  chilling  down  every  enthusiasm.  Nevertheless, 
the  prophet  Joel  was  right :  dreams  and  visions  are  the  very  salt  for  all  life,  its 
one  reality.  All  life  will  ultimately  be  weighed  by  this  one  thing, — the  ideals 
to  which  men  stood  true  in  spite  of  every  difficulty.  Take  the  life  of  a  nation. 
The  study  of  that  life  is  history.  Look  then  at  Greece,  Rome,  Israel,  or  any 
other  nation,  and  you  will  find  that  its  dreams  and  visions  are  the  all  in  a  nation's 
history  which  does  not  die.  History  is,  in  fa^ct,  but  the  science  of  regulated 
enthusiasms  and  their  results.  Hope  makes  history  a  progress  instead  of  a 
cycle.  The  deathless  element  in  English  life  and  history  does  not  find  its  way 
into  oiu:  text  books.  Its  real  gold  is  those  priceless  ideas  of  liberty,  law,  and 
true  individuality,  which  have  been  the  lode-star  of  her  destinies.  The  most 
certain  verdict  of  history  is  this :  when  a  nation  once  loses  its  dreams  and  visions, 
its  end  has  come.  That  which  is  true  of  the  nation  is  no  less  true  of  the  individual. 
The  value  of  every  man  most  ultimately  be  reckoned  by  the  only  changeless 
standard  of  value — the  dreams  and  visions  that  were  his.  We  must  be  careful 
not  to  narrow  down  the  currency  of  heaven  to  realisations  only.  The  history 
of  religion,  in  fact,  is  but  the  record  of  how  the  enthusiasms  o  some  enthusiast 
have  permeated  and  changed  the  lives  of  men.  Buddhism,  Mohammedanism, 
Jesuitism,  are  all  the  slowly  stiffening  result  of  mighty  dreams.  Urge  every 
joung  man  to  be  an  idealist.     Do  not  be  ashamed  to  have  your  enthusiasms. 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

The  true  idealist  never  lives  in  cloudland ;  he  ever  seeks  to  have  his  home  amid 
the  stern  realities  of  life.  He  seeks  to  lift  the  real  up  to  the  ideal.  Take  the 
roughest  blocks,  and  be  a  seer,  like  Michael  Angelo ;  see  in  them  what  God  sees, 
the  possibilities  of  higher  things.  It  is  the  idealism  of  Jesus  that  is  the  salvation 
of  the  world.  You  can  be  an  idealist  even  in  business.  Take  your  dreams  and 
visions  into  life  as  a  citizen ;  into  your  politics  ;  into  your  home ;  into  the  Church. 
{Herbert  B.  Workman.)  A  quickened  imagination: — Joel  dips  into  the  far 
future  and  sees  the  downcoming  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  clear  is  his  vision  that 
he  minutely  notes  the  effects  of  this  marvellous  efifusion.  But  the  signs  we  expect 
him  to  enumerate  he  misses.  Not  a  word  about  a  whiter  heart  and  a  nobler 
life,  about  miraculous  power,  or  irresistible  speech.  All  these  he  ignores ;  it  is 
the  unexpected  and  apparently  the  secondary  and  tmimportant  effects  that 
fasten  his  attention.  To  him  the  outstanding  feature  of  the  days  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  a  quickened  imagination — a  power  to  dream  dreams  and  see  visions. 
If  man  be  compared  to  a  house,  there  is  the  cellar  which  is  dark  and  self-con- 
tained, representing  the  appetites  and  impulses,  there  is  the  groimd  floor  with 
the  windows  of  taste  and  smell  looking  out  upon  the  immediate  neighbourhood, 
there  is  the  upper  storey  whose  windows  of  seeing  and  hearing  command  a  wider 
prospect,  and  there  is  the  highest  storey  with  the  window  of  the  imagination 
opening  out  into  the  vast  imseen.  When  this  house  becomes  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  all  the  rooms  are  beautified  and  all  the  windows  cleansed  ;  but  to  the 
prophet  the  window  that  gleams  the  brightest  is  the  roof  window,  the  faculty  that 
is  stirred  the  deepest  is  the  imagination.  The  old  men  had  been  dwelling  in  the 
lower  rooms  all  the  days  of  their  lives,  and  during  aU  the  long  years  the  upper 
stories  had  been  all  but  forgotten.  The  windows  of  the  imagination  are  darkened 
by  dust  and  curtained  by  cobwebs.  When  the  Spirit  comes  there  is  cleansing 
enough,  but  on  account  of  the  long  neglect  the  window  will  never  become  trans- 
lucent again.  The  objects  seen  through  will  be  vague  and  shadowy.  The  old 
men  only  dream  dreams.  The  dreaminess  comes  from  the  neglect.  But  the 
young  men  led  by  curiosity  and  romance  have  explored  all  the  rooms  from  the 
roof  to  the  basement.  All  the  windows  have  been  put  to  use,  even  if  the  use 
has  not  always  been  the  noblest ;  and  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  they 
become  clear  as  crystal,  through  which  are  seen  definite  and  luminous  the  realities 
of  the  xinseen.  The  young  men  see  visions.  Their  imagination  is  unspoiled 
by  worldliness  and  neglect.  But  in  old  and  young  the  action  of  the  Spirit  is  the 
same,  only  in  the  one  it  revives  the  embers,  and  in  the  other  it  fans  the  flame. 
It  is  strange  that  the  prophet  should  have  singled  out  the  imagination,  for  the 
coming  of  the  Spirit  is  as  the  coming  of  the  spring.  Everjrthing  in  its  track  is 
bom  again.  The  spring  causes  a  tide  of  life  to  rush  through  all  creation,  and  all 
but  burst  everything.  The  buds  burst  into  blossom,  the  hard  crust  of  the  earth 
bursts  into  green,  and  the  birds  burst  forth  into  song.  All  nature  is  roused  into 
an  extraordinary  activity.  When  God  comes  into  a  man's  soul  it  is  the  same  ; 
every  faculty  is  stirred,  every  power  is  quickened,  the  heart  is  tenderer,  the  mind 
is  clearer,  the  senses  are  keener,  the  body  is  healthier ;  a  wondrous  tide  of  life 
rushes  through  the  whole  man.  The  Spirit  comes  as  a  mighty  wind,  and  as  all 
the  multitudinous  leaves  of  a  tree  are  swayed  by  the  wind,  so  are  all  the  faculties 
of  a  man  swayed  by  the  Spirit.  But  stirred  as  are  all  the  soul's  activities  it  is 
the  extraordinary  activity  of  the  imagination  that  catches  the  eye  of  the  prophet. 
But  why  this  strange  selection  ?  The  choice  is  strange  because  it  is  right,  and 
daring  because  it  is  according  to  the  mind  of  God.  He  singles  out  the  imagina- 
tion because  when  God's  Spirit  descends  on  men  His  principal  work  is  to  make 
them  realise  the  spiritual  world ;  and  the  realigation  of  the  spiritual  world  is 
the  task  of  the  imagination.  All  around  us  there  is  a  world  of  matter  and  motion, 
with  its  hills  and  plains,  minerals  and  forests,  towns  and  streets  and  factories. 
We  see  it  with  our  eyes,  and  are  familiar  with  its  features  and  movements.  But 
vast  as  this  world  is,  it  pales  into  insignificance  beside  the  great  unseen  world 
that  is  above  and  around  and  within  us,  a  world  that  outleaps  all  measurement 
and  outruns  all  duration,  more  real  than  the  solid  earth,  more  permanent  than 
the  everlasting  hills ;  the  home  of  God  and  Jesus,  of  angels  innumerable  and 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  to  be  seen  by  no  eyes  of  flesh,  seen  alone 
by  the  eye  of  the  soul — the  imagination.  {Thos.  Phillips.)  Seeing  Ood  in 
dreams  : — You  may  say  of  a  dream  that  it  is  nocturnal  fantasia,  or  that  it  is  the 
absurd  combination  of  waking  thoughts  ;  but  God  has  honoured  the  dream  by 
making  it  the  avenue  through  which  He  has  marched  upon  the  human  soul, 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  55 

decided  the  fate  of  nations,  and  changed  the  course  of  the  world's  history.  Does 
God  appear  in  our  day,  and  reveal  Himself  through  dreams  ?  1.  The  Scriptures 
are  so.  full  of  revelation  from  God  that  if  we  get  no  communication  from  Him 
in  dreams,  we  ought,  nevertheless,  to  be  satisfied.  2.  All  dreams  have  an  im- 
portant meaning.  They  prove  that  the  soul  is  comparatively  independent  of 
the  body.  3.  The  vast  majority  of  dreams  are  merely  the  result  of  distm-bed 
physical  conditions,  and  are  not  a  supernatural  message.  A  great  many  dreams 
are  merely  narcotic  disturbance.  Do  not  mistake  narcotic  disturbance  for 
Divine  revelation.  4.  Our  dreams  are  apt  to  be  merely  the  echo  of  our  daytime 
thoughts.  The  scholar's  dream  is  a  philosophic  echo.  The  poet's  dream  is  a 
rhythmic  echo.  It  is,  however,  capable  of  proof  that  God  does  sometimes  in  our 
day  appear  to  people  in  dreams.  All  dreams  that  make  you  better  are  from 
God.  It  is  possible  to  prove  that  God  does  appear  in  dreams  to  warn,  to  con- 
vert, to  save  men.  Illustrate :  John  Newton's  dreams.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D. ) 
The  'properties  of  the  Oospel  dispensation: — This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  to  the 
letter,  as  described  in  Acts  ii.,  nine  centuries  afterwards.  By  the  Gospel  dis-  , 
pensation  we  mean  the  Church.  The  Christian  dispensation  was  to  be  a  spiritual 
dispensation.  The  older  was  a  religion  of  form.  It  represented  truth.  It  was 
a  school  of  object-lessons,  a  kind  of  kindergarten.  It  was  a  system  of  forms 
so  perfect  as  to  command  the  admiration  of  all  ages  to  the  present  time.  The 
kingdom  the  prophet  foresaw  would  be  set  up  would  not  be  dependent  on  these 
earthly  forces — authority,  wealth,  intelligence — but  upon  something  far  beyond 
and  above.  The  Spirit  of  God  was  to  be  its  energy,  its  potent  force.  This 
spiritual  outpouring  had  its  power  in  these  facts — 1.  It  communicated  God  to 
us.  2.  It  associates  God  with  us.  3.  It  develops  God  in  us.  Observe  the  develop- 
ment of  power  when  there  is  this  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit.  A  prophesying  power ; 
and  a  witnessing  power.  We  have  also  brought  out  in  this  prophecy  the  fact 
of  freedom  following  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  Freedom  from  the  guilt  of 
sin.  Freedom  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  Freedom  from  all  fear  because  of  sin. 
And  we  are  told  that  this  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  would  be  accompanied  with 
great  convulsions,  mighty  signs.  So  it  proved.  In  view  of  our  privileges  as 
partakers  of  the  Spirit,  what  is  our  duty  ?  We  should  seek  more  and  more  of 
this  outpouring,  and  we  should  seek  to  bear  witness  everywhere  to  the  truths 
it  reveals  to  us.  (0.  H.  Tiffany,  D.D. )  The  Oospel  dispensation : — This  passage 
exhibits  the  leading  features  of  Christianity.     I.   The   Gospel  dispensation 

WAS    TO    BE    CHARACTERISED    BY   SPIRITUALITY.        "  I    wiU    pOur    Out    My    Spirit." 

I.  Formerly  the  Spirit  dwelt  with  man.  2.  Whereas  formerly  the  Spirit  dwelt 
with  men,  now  He  dwells  in  them.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  Spirit  was 
not  given  to  men  before  the  day  of  Pentecost.  This  sense  is  explained  in 
John  xiv.  15-17.     Jesus  was  the  first  human  being  in  whom  the  Spirit  abode. 

II.  The  Gospel  dispensation  was  to  be  chabactekised  by  liberty.  "  In 
Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  deliverance."  1.  The  Gospel  finds  us  in 
chains.  (1)  In  bondage  under  the  tyranny  of  sin.  (2)  He  also  trembles  under 
the  tyranny  of  death.  (3)  The  terrors  of  hell  are  upon  him.  2.  But  the  Gospel 
bursts  our  bonds  in  sunder.     The  believer  is  justified  by  the  merits  of  Christ. 

III.  The  Gospel  dispensation  was  to  be  characterised  by  power.  "  I 
will  show  wonders,"  &c.  1.  Here  are  marvellous  spiritual  signs.  Prophecy, 
as  prediction  and  as  preaching.  Visions.  At  the  inauguration  of  Christianity 
there  were  apparitions.  Throughout  the  dispensation  there  have  been  spiritual 
revelations.  Dreams.  2.  Here  also  are  stupendous  physical  wonders.  Some 
of  these  were  associated  with  the  great  transactions  on  Calvary.  Some  were 
associated  with  the  complementary  transactions  upon  Zion.  These  wonders 
show  that  Omnipotence  is  behind  the  truth.  IV.  Thb  Gospel  dispensation 
WAS  to  be  characterised  by  EXP  ANSI  veness.  1.  Its  salvation  is  universally 
free.  2.  The  conditions  of  this  salvation  are  level  to  all  capacities.  3.  The 
expansiveness  of  the  Gospel  triumphs  over  conventionalities.  Both  the  social 
and  the  national.  (J.  Alexander  Macdonald. )  The  coming  conflict : — No 
gift  of  God  is  intended  to  remain  a  gift  only.  Gifts  are  means  to  serve  other  ends. 
The  rain  is  a  gift,  but  it  is  a  means  toward  the  harvest.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit 
suggests  a  harvest  for  which  that  precious  rain  of  God  descended.  The  gifts  are 
bestowed  in  anticipation  of  the  hour  when  they  will  be  needed.  The  responsibility 
is  not  the  responsibility  of  possession  merely,  but  the  responsibility  of  anticipation. 
The  hour  comes  when  the  tests  of  God  wiU  be  applied.  How  very  real  the  vision 
of  the  great  conflict  is  in  the  prophet's  eyes.     It  is  as  real  and  as  vivid  in  ita 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

reality  as  the  plague  of  locust?.  He  has  no  doubt  that  it  will  take  place.  He  ha«  no 
doubt  about  its  issue.  The  power  which  makes  certain  the  issue,  and  gives  security 
to  the  combatants  has  been  vouchsafed.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  the  gift  of  safety. 
The  principle  of  spiritual  life  is  independent  of  time.  There  are  things  which  Me 
can  prepare  for  better  when  we  know  the  hour ;  but  in  the  things  of  the  Spirit 
it  is  bett€r  to  prepare  not  knowing  the  day  nor  the  hour  ;  for  the  readiness  is 
the  readiness  of  a  spiritual  quality  which  cannot  be  attained  in  a  moment,  nor 
yet  by  a  fixed  hour.  The  spiritual  principle  in  the  words  of  the  prophet  is,  that 
every  gift  of  the  Spurit  must  be  followed  by  some  decisive  conflict — in  which 
all  the  forces  which  are  allied  with  the  Spirit  are  thrown  into  antagonism  with 
all  that  are  hostile  to  the  Spirit.  Was  it  not  so  after  the  day  of  Pentecost  ?  The 
gift  of  the  Spirit  was  the  revelation  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Spirit.  But  what 
war  followed  !  It  is  thus  that  the  order  of  God  succeeds  itself.  His  first  gift 
is  love.  His  second  is  illumination.  His  last  is  conflict.  In  the  Gospels,  the 
gift  of  earth's  bounties  comes  first.  Christ  feeds  the  multitude.  The  gift  of 
vision  in  the  darkness  follows.  He  reveals  himself  in  the  darkness  on  the  sea. 
The  third  stage  is  achievement,  or  readiness  to  face  the  conflict.  To  the  disciple 
ready  to  ventvure  the  raging  waves  He  says,  "  Come."  God  never  calls  men  to 
trial  but  He  first  prepares  them  by  a  gift  of  power  and  illumination.  In  other 
words,  the  fresh  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is  to  prepare  for  the  baptism  of  fire.  Fire 
purges  in  the  truest  sense ;  water  cleanses.  Fire  penetrates  to  the  very  heart 
of  things ;  water  may  leave  much  that  is  corrupt  to  decay  and  to  destroy.  I 
am  no  friend  of  working  through  mere  terrors,  but  we  may  remind  ourselves 
that  the  questions  which  are  stirring  around  us  are  just  those  which  are  calculated 
to  test  in  the  most  complete  and  thorough  way  the  foundations  and  structure 
of  society  as  we  now  know  it.  Take  the  condition  of  Theology,  the  tenets  of 
Socialism,  the  reconstructions  demanded  by  evolutionary  theories.  But  we 
know  enough  in  current  literature  and  current  thought  to  satisfy  ourselves  that 
we  need  not  be  shaken  in  mind  or  troubled  should  some  fiery  trial  try  us.  May 
we  not  say  that  the  trial  begins  in  the  mind  of  every  man  who  tries  to  apply  the 
teaching  of  Christ  his  Lord  in  all  loyal  simplicity  to  the  facts  of  life  and  duty  ? 
Who  may  abide  ?  Who  can  come  forth  bright  and  purged  from  this  flaming 
baptism  that  is  in  store  for  the  men  and  women  of  this  generation  T  Would 
not  the  answer  be,  he  alone  can  sustain  that  ordeal  who  has  oeen  prepared  in  the 
fire  for  the  fire ;  he  alone  can  stand  in  the  day  when  all  things  are  shaken 
whose  character  and  spirit  are  built  up  of  those  very  things  which  cannot  be 
shaken  ?  Better  fall  into  His  consuming  fire  that  in  that  flame  all  evil,  self — 
all  folly  and  weakness  may  be  burned  up,  than  wait  unpurged  for  the  day  which 
shall  burn  like  an  oven.  When  He  baptized  us  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with 
fire,  did  He  not  baptize  us  to  sacrifice,  even  the  sacrifice  of  our  bodies  and  souls, 
a  living  sacrifice  to  Him  ?  He  who,  led  by  the  Spirit,  makes  his  life  a  sacrifice, 
and  passes  through  the  fire  feeling  it  for  very  love  s  sake  to  be  no  fire — need  not 
fear  the  day  of  the  Lord,  for  on  such  the  fire  of  the  fierce  trial  of  the  world  has  no 
power.  {Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter.)  The  seer : — The  preacher  need  not  fear 
the  taunt  that  he  is  an  other-worldly  man,  a  dreamer,  a  visionary.  He  may 
accept  it  with  satisfaction,  for  it  is  true.  His  main  concern  lies  in  the  realm  of 
the  unseen.  He  does  business  in  deep  waters.  He  stands  face  to  fa^^e  with  the 
etemaL  The  Japanese  cherish  a  tradition  concerning  Sho-ICaku.  They  say 
that,  "  even  when  a  lad,  he  loved  to  wander  among  the  beech-trees,  and  up  the 
green  slopes  of  the  mountain,  where  his  solitary  musings  brought  him  such  gentle- 
ness that  he  never  hurt  any  living  thing,  and  such  purity  that  the  tropical  rains 
could  not  wet  the  web  of  wistaria  fibres  which  clothed  him  !  Such  virtue  and 
merit  became  his  that  at  length  the  material  world  became  quite  subject  to  him. 
He  could  walk  upon  the  water,  fly  through  the  air,  see  into  the  future,  and  heal  the 
diseases  of  his  friends.  Then  he  was  commanded  to  undertake  a  more  difficult 
achievement,  and,  as  a  means  towards  success  in  it,  to  ascend  the  summit  of 
Mount  Omlne  in  Yamato.  He  neither  doubted  nor  delayed,  but  hewed  for  himself 
a  path  to  the  far-away  mountain  top ;  and  when  at  last  he  reached  it,  standing 
on  the  bare  space  of  jasper,  no  larger  than  a  threshing-floor,  polished  smooth 
with  many  storms,  he  beheld  a  weird  sight.  There  stood  a  huge  white  skeleton, 
grasping  in  its  bony  hand  a  great  imtamished  sword.  An  inward  voice  bade  him, 
if  he  would  triumph  in  the  mighty  enterprises  marked  out  for  him,  to  secure  that 
glittering  weapon.  Tet  it  was  no  easy  task.  He  grasped  the  sword,  but  the 
dead  band  olu&g  to  it ;  he  tried  to  wrench  away  tM  whitened  bones,  but  they 


CHAP,  n.]  JOEL.  67 

were  as  riveted  iron,  until  he  bethought  himself  of  the  '  spells  of  the  spii'it,' 
and  as  he  uttered  them  the  skeleton  limbs  relaxed  slowly,  and  the  sword  dropped, 
so  that  he  could  seize  and  brandish  it  triumphantly  in  the  light  of  the  setting  sun." 
The  eastern  legend  enshrines  a  truth  of  universal  application.  The  men  who  have 
been  most  despised  as  visionaries,  as  dreamers  of  dreams,  as  other-worldly  men, 
have  done  more  to  shape  this  world  than  have  their  more  practical  critics.  I.  The 
PREACHER  MUST  HAVE  A  VISION  OF  DEITY.  A  man  who  has  had  no  personal  experi- 
ence of  the  presence  and  power  of  God  cannot  possibly  impress  others  with  the 
august  and  intense  reality  of  things  eternal.  In  the  journal  of  an  old  Puritan 
Divine  were  found  these  words  :  "  Resolved  that,  when  I  address  a  large  meeting, 
I  shall  remember  that  God  is  there,  and  that  will  make  it  small.  Resolved  that, 
when  I  address  a  small  meeting,  I  shall  remember  that  God  is  there,  and  that  will 
make  it  great."  It  is  said  that,  when  Chrysostom  was  composing  his  sermons  he 
was  wont  to  fancy  that  the  commimion  rails  around  the  pulpit  were  crowded  with 
listening  angels.  It  was  a  splendid  inspiration.  But  the  truth  is  grander  still. 
Dr.  Gordon  dreamed  that,  when  he  preached,  the  Christ  sat  in  the  pew.  It  is 
verily  so.  The  preacher  needs  such  a  vision  of  Deity  as  will  fill  his  whole  horizon 
with  the  grandeur  of  the  Divine,  and  assure  him,  in  the  hours  of  loneliness  and 
listlessness,  of  the  stupendous  fact  that  God  is  his  Witness  and  Co-worker.  11.  The 
PREACHER  MUST  HAVE  A  VISION  OF  HUMANITY.  1.  He  needs  a  vision  of  the  sinful- 
ness of  men.  2.  He  must  have  a  vision  of  the  inner  life  of  men.  He  must  know 
that  the  most  careless  of  his  hearers  is  not  really  so  callous  as  he  seems.  Every 
man,  in  his  secret  and  silent  moments,  has  thoughts  of  God,  and  sin,  and  eternity, 
that  will  not  be  silenced.  And  no  man  who  has  had  a  true  vision  of  humanity 
will  take  it  for  granted  that  any  man  is  absolutely  without  some  prickings  of 
conscience  with  regard  to  personal  sin.  He  will  carry  Christ  to  every  soul  that 
is  "  aching  and  longing  "  after  Him.  3.  He  needs  a  vision  of  the  possibilities 
of  men.  The  preacher  is  like  Little  Nell  in  "  The  Old  Ciu-iosity  Shop."  You 
remember  how  she  discovered  the  sin  in  which  the  old  man  had  become  absorbed 
in  the  dreadful  city.  So  she  took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him  away  from  it  all, 
out  into  the  green  fields,  and  away  to  a  happier,  purer  life.  It  is  the  privilege  of 
the  man  of  God  to  take  men  by  the  hand,  and  lead  them  out  of  the  murky  atmo- 
sphere of  their  sins  into  the  purity  and  sublimity  of  the  Divine  salvation.  Christ 
saves  from  the  nethermost  depth  to  the  uttermost  height.  III.  The  preacher 
MUST  HAVE  A  VISION  OF  ETERNITY.  This  will  add  Solemnity  to  all  his  work.  H« 
cannot  afford  to  trifle.  The  biographer  of  Archbishop  Leighton  tells  us  that,  in 
the  days  when  it  was  the  custom  of  the  presbytery  to  inquire  if  all  the  preachere 
had  "  preached  to  the  times,"  Leighton  acknowledged  on  one  occasion  that  he 
had  not.  He  was  asked  why.  "  Surely,"  he  replied,  "  if  all  these  brethren  have 
preached  to  the  times,  one  poor  brother  may  be  allowed  to  preach  for  eternity  !  " 
Napoleon,  we  are  told,  found  an  artist  engrossed  in  his  painting.  "  What  are 
you  doing  that  for  ?  "  the  Emperor  asked.  "  For  immortality  !  "  the  artist, 
proudly  replied.  "  How  long  will  your  canvas  last  ?  "  inquired  Napoleon.  "  It 
will  last  for  at  least  a  thousand  years,  sire  !  "  answered  the  man.  "  Aha  !  "" 
responded  the  Emperor,  "  we  have  now  an  artist's  conception  of  immortality  !  "" 
We  have  a  loftier  ideal  than  that.  The  preacher  deals  face  to  face  with  the 
intensities  of  eternity.  He  has  a  vision  of  the  glories  of  heaven,  and  he  toils  that 
he  may  "  allure  to  brighter  worlds,  and  lead  the  way."  He  has  a  vision  of  hell, 
and  he  is  prepared  to  labour  day  and  night  that  he  may  save  his  fellow-men  from 
such  a  fearful  doom.  Harrison  Ainsworth  has  drawn,  in  Solomon  Eagle,  a  picture 
of  the  passionate  earnestness  that  becomes  an  enthusiast  who  believes  his  fellows 
to  be  doomed,  and  would  warn  them  of  their  peril.  Lord  Lytton  has  drawn  a 
similar  character  in  Olinthus,  who,  on  the  night  on  which  Pompeii  was  destroyed, 
hurried  from  place  to  place  entreating  men  to  repent.  "  Are  we  as  anxious  about 
men,"  asked  Dr.  Dale,  "  as  our  fathers  were  ?  On  any  theory  of  eschatology 
there  is  a  dark  and  menacing  future  for  those  who  have  been  brought  face  to  face 
with  Christ  in  this  life,  and  have  refused  to  receive  His  salvation,  and  to  submit 
to  His  authority.  I  do  not  ask  whether  the  element  of  fear  has  a  great  place  in  our 
preaching,  but  whether  it  has  a  great  place  in  our  hearts,  whether  we  ourselves  are 
afraid  of  what  wiU  come  to  men  who  do  not  believe  in  Christ,  whether  we,  whether 
our  people,  are  filled  with  an  agonising  earnestness  for  their  salvation."  (F. 
W.  Boreham.)  The  dreams  of  youth  : — "  The  thoughts  of  youth  are  long,  long 
thoughts."  Pity  the  one  who  has  no  dreams,  for  it  means  he  has  no  ideals, 
and  if  youth  has  no  ideals  manhood  will  be  very  commonplace.     We  have  no 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

patience  with  those  who  cynically  sneer  at  the  visions  of  youth  and  dash  cold  water 
upon  all  early  hope  and  ardour,  prophesying  with  a  cynical  assumption  of  wisdom 
an  inevitable  disappointment,  a  bitter  disillusioning  I.  Dreams  of  prospebity. 
This  may  seem  to  be  the  basest  of  all  the  dreams  that  youth  can  cherish,  and  if  it 
simply  means  a  dream  of  gain  to  follow  gain  till  the  dreamer  can  take  his  place 
among  the  wealthy,  and  secure  that  which  money  can  purchase,  it  is  not  a  vision 
to  be  encouraged.  But  there  is  a  limited  sense  in  which  the  dream  of  prosperity 
is  not  imworthy.  If  a  young  fellow  starting  his  business  career  recognises  that 
there  are  at  least  three  possible  courses  open  to  him:  (1)  To  take  always  the  line 
of  least  resistance,  and  thus  to  be  classed  with  the  great  crowd  that  is  to  be  rated 
at  a  current  market  value  for  the  particular  type  of  labour  of  which  he  is  capable  ; 
or  (2)  so  to  devote  himself  to  the  details  and  affairs  of  his  special  calling  as  to  make 
himself  of  more  value  than  the  average  employee,  and  thus  to  secure  a  bett«r 
financial  return  for  his  services,  a  larger  respect  from  his  comrades  in  toil,  and  the 
inward  satisfaction  of  "  something  attempted,  something  done  "  ;  or  (3)  to  so 
further  devote  himself  to  his  toil  as  by  the  concentration  of  all  his  energies,  the 
insight  of  a  quicker  intelligence,  the  application  of  brains  to  the  problems  of 
commerce,  and  the  possession  of  the  rare  gift  of  recognising  an  opportunity, 
coupled  with  the  courage  to  seize  it,  he  may  rise  to  the  front  rank  of  the  army 
of  commerce ;  then  I  say  that  the  settled  determination  to  take  according  to 
his  ability  either  the  second  or  third  of  these  courses,  and  the  dream  of  legiti- 
mate prosperity  resulting  therefrom,  is  by  no  means  to  be  condemned  or  dis- 
couraged. But,  young  men,  let  me  say  to  you  two  things,  and  do  you  give  them 
careful  thought.  (1)  In  the  pursuit  of  business  success  many  perils  are  to  be 
encoimtered ;  keep  a  sensitive  conscience,  and  do  not  purchase  gain  at  the  price 
of  guilt.  And  (2)  Keep  in  mind  the  fact  that  no  amoimt  of  business  success 
alone  can  ever  be  regarded  as  leading  to  a  complete  and  worthy  life  in  the  sight 
of  God.  "  The  world  passeth  away,  and  the  desire  thereof ;  but  he  that  doeth 
the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  II.  Dreams  of  service.  Probably  some 
of  you  cherish  dreams  that  do  not  revolve  around  self-interest.  You  want  to 
live  so  that,  amid  the  forces  that  make  the  conditions  of  life  easier  for  humanity 
at  large,  your  life  and  influence  may  find  a  place.  The  details  of  your  dream 
may  vary,  whilst  the  aim  of  it  may  be  the  same.  If  in  any  sense  this  be  your 
dream,  it  is  a  glorious  one.  Let  me  confirm  you  therein  by  recalling  the  wise 
words  that  tell  us  that  he  that  serves  his  fellow-men  receives  honour  from  God. 
III.  Dreams  of  reform.  Society  must  be  remodelled  ;  a  saner  idea  of  life 
must  be  presented  to  the  people ;  the  value  of  the  worker  must  be  recognised ; 
the  inalienable  right  of  every  individual  to  the  means  of  subsistence  taught, 
and  the  lavish  waste  of  the  non-producer,  the  parasite  upon  the  body  corporate, 
sturdily,  and  if  need  be  forcefully,  restrained.  By  all  means  recognise  the  current 
evils  of  the  day,  and,  according  to  your  knowledge  and  opportunity,  work  for 
the  betterment  of  alL  But  at  the  same  time  do  not  let  your  recognition  of  wrong 
lead  you  to  unfair  and  unjust  conclusions ;  do  not  indulge  in  hasty  generalisa- 
tions ;  do  not  condemn  where  no  condemnation  is  deserved,  and  try  honestly 
to  grasp  all  the  facts  that  go  to  form  the  problem  in  its  completeness.  Any 
echool-boy  will  tell  you  that  no  problem  can  be  correctly  solved  if,  in  your  attemptea 
solution,  you  disregard  essential  factors.  Nor  forget  that  if  we  could  secure 
to-morrow  the  equal  advantage  and  opportunity  for  all  that  we  so  desire,  the 
inequalities  of  to-day  would  be  repeated  within  a  generation.  Then  to  you 
I  say,  "  Do  not  put  away  as  idle  these  fair  dreams,  but  rather  learn  how  they 
may  end  in  realisation.  Spend  your  energies  in  resisting  abuses,  in  working 
for  all  schemes  of  worthy  reform,  but  do  not  forget  that  the  sinfulness  of  the 
human  heart  will  militate  against  their  success,  and  that  the  heart  finds  renewal 
in  the  power  that  comes  from  Calvary,  and  in  that  alone."  IV.  Dreams  of 
CHARACTER.  For  of  this  I  am  confident,  that  in  your  dreams  you  have  fair  visions 
of  a  life  controlled  by  loftiest  principle,  and  by  highest  ideals,  not  only  of  that 
which  you  are  to  do,  but  also  of  that  which  you  are  to  be.  It  is  the  noble  and 
almost  instinctive  hatred  of  the  unreal,  the  sham  and  the  merely  conventional, 
that  makes  many  a  young  man  so  severe  and  imcompromising  a  critic  of  the  con- 
duct of  others  ;  he  makes  no  allowances,  for  he  does  not  see  that  honesty  requires 
that  any  should  be  made.  As  years  pass  our  judgments  become  kindlier.  But 
this  is  not  the  point  just  now ;  rather  this,  that  the  young  man  has  a  splendid 
ideal  of  character,  a  sense  of  non-attainment,  and  a  dream  of  future  realisation. 
Herein  we  wish  him  "  God-speed  " ;  woe  to  the  man  who  dares  to  discourage 


CHAP,  n.]    ^  JOEL,  59 

this  hope.  Only  listen  while  I  give  you  this  from  the  experience  of  men  of  all 
ages.  Character  is  of  slow  growth ;  it  is  the  product  of  a  long  process,  the  issue 
of  much  stern  conflict.  The  saint  is  grown,  not  made,  and  the  stronger  and 
more  valuable  growths  are  always  slow  ;  an  oak  takes  many  years  to  mature. 
As  you  advance  in  attainment  your  ideal  will  advance  in  its  requirements,  so 
that  it  will  ever  be,  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained  "  ;  but  of  this  be 
sure,  every  year  shall  bring  the  richer  graces,  the  kindlier  tempers,  the  fuller 
Batisfaction  of  the  Christlike  character,  and  you  shall  realise  that  these  dreams 
of  your  youth  were  not  only  dreams,  but  also  prophecies.  {J.  W.  Butcher.) 
Visions  of  Ood  (with  Joel  ii.  8  ;  Hab.  ii.  2 ;  Isa.  vi,  6) : — This  is  one  of  the 
first  results  of  the  pentecostal  baptism.  The  yovmg  men,  the  hardened  and 
practical  members  of  the  community  who  look  at  everything  from  a  common- 
sense  and  business  standpoint,  "  shall  see  visions."  It  will  not  make  them 
visionary.  They  will  find  in  their  vision  of  God  the  secret  of  piu-ity  and  strength 
and  fidelity.  But  where  shall  we  see  visions  ?  Not  by  gazing  into  the  heavens, 
but  by  reading  our  Bibles.  So  the  prophet  Habakkuk  says.  Write  the  vision, 
and  make  it  plain  upon  tables."  This  is  the  great  purpose  of  the  Bible.  The 
daily  paper  opens  a  window  into  the  world  around  us,  and  we  see  the  craft  and 
cunning,  the  violence  and  deceit,  the  strifes  and  jealousies  of  men.  But  the 
Bible  opens  a  window  into  heaven,  and  reveals  to  us,  the  love  and  goodness  and 
power  of  God.  Have  you  seen  the  vision  ?  It  is  so  plain  that  he  who  reads 
may  run.  Nay,  you  must  not  r^m  past  it.  That  is  the  sin  of  this  hiurying 
pleasure-loving  age.  Men  will  not  give  themselves  time  to  take  in  the  vision 
of  life.  But  he  who  reads  will  have  to  run.  There  will  be  no  loitering  then. 
The  vision  will  fire  your  soul  with  such  Divine  enthusiasm  that  you  will  run  off 
to  make  known  what  you  have  seen.  Have  you  seen  the  vision  ?  The  prophet 
adds,  "  though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it !  "  Yes,  indeed,  for  you  are  of  no  use  in  the 
world  until  you  have  seen  it.  It  is  the  men  who  have  seen  God  that  are  a  bless- 
ing to  others.  Esau  lacked  this  vision,  and  it  led  him  to  sell  his  birthright.  The 
birthright  meant  spiritual  blessing.  That  is  why  Esau  is  called  a  profane  man. 
The  bargain  he  struck  was  not  only  a  foolish  one ;  it  was  a  profane  one.  He  sold 
his  birthright  because  he  despised  it.  But  when  you  have  seen  God  and  the 
opened  heaven,  your  birthright,  i.e.,  your  right  through  the  atoning  sacrifice 
to  become  a  son  of  God  and  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  outweighs 
all  the  pleasxires  of  sin,  and  it  becomes  easy  for  you  to  keep  first  things  first. 
It  was  this  which  made  Joseph  so  steadfast.  In  his  youth  God  gave  him  dreams  ; 
they  were  not  the  result  of  mdigestion,  but  visions  of  the  night.  His  father  had 
already  given  him  aa  a  special  token  of  his  love  a  "  coat  of  many  colours."  It 
was  not  surely  a  mere  piece  of  favouritism.  The  coat  was  the  outward  sign 
of  that  supremacy  which  the  dreams  indicated,  and  which  probably  had  already 
been  made  known  to  Jacob.  Jacob  knew  the  misery  that  had  resulted  in  the 
home  of  his  childhood,  where  the  judgment  of  God  choosing  the  younger  before 
the  elder  had  not  been  accepted  by  Isaac  his  father,  and  mother  and  son  stooped 
to  falsehood  and  trickery  in  order  to  bring  about  the  counsels  of  God.  So  Jacob 
determined  that  in  his  household  God's  purpose  should  be  known  and  accepted 
from  the  first,  and  he  gave  to  Joseph  this  robe  of  honour.  The  garment  stood 
then  for  two  things,  for  royalty  and  purity.  Joseph  had  his  visions,  because  he 
was  a  kingly  soul,  and  of  a  pxire  heart.  And  the  effect  of  these  visions  is  seen  all 
through  his  futiu'e  life.  That  is  the  necessary  result  of  the  vision  of  God.  It 
dwarfs  everything  else.  It  reduces  to  their  true  proportions  the  circumstances 
of  daily  life.  God  never  changes.  God  is  working  His  purpose  out.  The  man 
who  trusts  in  God  will  never  be  confounded.     The  pit,  the  slave  market,  the 

E risen  cell  may  lie  before  us,  but  these  are  only  for  a  time.  In  the  long  run  God's 
lessing  prevails  even  in  this  topsy-turvy  world,  "  and  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 
it  maketh  rich,  and  He  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it."  But  the  first  result  of  the 
vision  of  God  is  an  overwhelming  sense  of  sin.  This  is  the  distingui;  liing  character- 
istic of  the  men  who  have  seen  God.  There  is  about  them  a  depth,  a  solemnity, 
a  reverence,  a  brokenness  of  soul.  Yes,  though  the  immediate  effect  is  an  over- 
whelming sense  of  sin,  you  will  not  be  left  crushed  and  overcome.  Isaiah 
received  the  sacrament  of  cleansing,  the  live  coal  from  the  a'  ar.  To  John  came 
the  reassuring  touch  and  the  strengthening  word,  "  Fear  not,  I  am  He."  Christ 
knows  how  to  bring  His  servants  over  from  the  despair  that  comes  from  the  know- 
ledge of  self  into  the  rest  of  faith  that  comes  from  the  knowledge  of  God.  There 
is  no  remedy  for  our  sinfulness  in  ourselves.    No,  the  transformation  is  wrought 


€0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

not  by  the  discovery  of  any  saving  merit  or  qualification  in  ourselves,  but  by 
a  clearer  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  A  new  view  of  Jesus,  a  fresh  vision  of  God, 
is  the  secret  of  all  blessing.  This  made  Jacob  the  supplanter  a  "  prince  with 
God,"  this  gave  Joshua  the  victory  over  Jericho  and  the  king  thereof  and  the 
mighty  men  of  valour  ;  this  enabled  Elisha  to  go  in  and  out  throughout  Israel 
as  a  holy  man  of  God,  never  faint-hearted,  never  discoiu-aged,  never  at  a  loss, 
able  even  when  shut  in  by  the  Syrians  on  every  side  to  use  the  reckoning  of  faith 
and  reply  to  his  terrified  servant,  "  Fear  not,  for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more 
than  they  that  be  with  them."  Yes,  patience,  courage,  cheerfulness,  strength,  all 
belong  to  the  men  who  see  God.     {F.  8.  Webster,  M.A.) 

Vers.  30,  31.  And  I  will  shew  wonders  in  the  heavens  and  In  the  earth,  blood, 
and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke. — The  sirocco  suggesting  prophetic  figures : — We  have 
two  kinds  of  sirocco — one  accompanied  with  violent  wind,  which  fills  the  air 
with  dust  and  fine  sand;  and  one  of  a  quieter  kind,  which  yet  is  often  more 
overpowering.  I  have  often  seen  the  whole  heavens  veiled  in  gloom  with  this 
sort  of  sand  cloud,  through  which  the  sun,  shorn  of  its  beams,  looked  like  a  globe 
of  dull,  smouldering  fire.  It  may  have  been  this  phenomenon  which  suggested 
the  strong  prophetic  figure  of  Joel,  quoted  by  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost : — 
"  Wonders  in  the  heaven  above,  and  signs  in  the  earth  beneath ;  blood,  and  fire, 
and  pillars  of  smoke ;  the  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and  the  moon  into 
blood."  The  pillars  of  smoke  are  probably  those  columns  of  sand  and  dust  raised 
high  in  the  air  by  local  whirlwinds,  which  often  accompany  the  sirocco.  On 
the  great  desert  of  the  Hauran,  I  have  seen  a  score  of  them,  marching  with 
great  rapidity  over  the  plain,  and  they  closely  resembled  "  pillars  of  smoke." 
{W.  M.  Thomsout  "  Land  and  Book") 

Yer.  32.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  shall  call  npon  the  name  of 
the  Lord  shall  be  saved. — This  gracious  promise  is  an  instance  of  the  merciful  provi- 
dence of  God,  so  universally  displayed  in  His  prophetic  revelations,  whereby, 
in  the  midst  of  His  severest  threats  of  vengeance,  He  still  reserved  for  His  people 
a  refuge  against  despair.  Observe  how  fatal  are  the  consequences  of  that  state 
of  mind  against  which  it  was  intended  to  be  a  remedy.  Despair  of  God's  forgive- 
ness thrusts  men  into  a  recklessness  of  their  own  spiritual  concerns,  from  which 
no  reasoning  can  arouse  them  as  long  as  their  state  of  desperation  continues. 
For  why  should  a  man  turn  to  God  if  He  will  not  receive  him  ?  The  universal 
doctrine  of  Scripture  is,  that  none  shall  have  recourse  to  God  in  vain.  The  Jews 
did  not  understand  the  full  import  of  Joel's  prophecy.  No  prophecy  explains 
itself,  nor  can  its  meaning  be  thoroughly  understood,  imtil  the  event  predicted 
has  come  to  pass ;  and  then  the  event  and  the  prophecy  will  throw  light  upon 
each  other,  and  the  wise  counsel  of  God  from  the  beginning  will  be  made  manifest. 
We  find  the  fulfilment  of  Joel's  prophecy  in  the  early  times  of  the  Christian 
dispensation,  and  especially  in  the  siege  and  captm-e  of  the  holy  city.  From  the 
dangers  of  those  days  the  converted  Jews  escaped.  That  fulfilment  is  typical 
of  a  more  general  judgment  to  come.  The  third  chapter  of  Joel  must  be  considered 
as  a  prophecy  hitherto  unaccomplished.  Some  think  it  refers  to  the  return  of 
the  Jews  to  their  own  land.  (Jaa.  Randall,  M.A.)  A  great  proclamation: — 
I.  Thb  timb  of  this  proclamation  is  present.  The  time  spoken  of  by  Joel 
began  at  Pentecost.  The  Holy  Ghost,  who  then  came  down  to  earth,  has  never 
returned ;  He  is  still  in  the  midst  of  the  Church,  performing  moral  and  spiritual 
miracles  in  our  midst.  To-day  complete  salvation  is  promised  to  every  one  that 
believeth  in  Jesus,  n.  The  wide  range  of  the  proclamation.  "  Whosoever." 
All  classes,  all  ages,  all  conditions,  all  degrees  of  guilt  and  misery  and  wickedness. 
III.  How  PLAIN  AND  SIMPLE  IS  THE  RBQUiREMBNT.  "  Call  On  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  This  is  "  The  plain  man's  pathway  to  heaven."  Believe  and  live.  What 
does  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  mean  ?  1.  To  believe  in  God  as  He  reveals 
Himself  in  Scripture.  2.  To  call  upon  His  name  in  prayer.  3.  To  confess  that 
name.  As  the  requirement  is  plain,  so  the  assurance  of  blessing  is  positive. 
*'  Shall  be  saved."  Remember  that  this  is  a  personal  blessing  to  you.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  A  wide  Chapel : — I.  As  uttered  by  Joel.  It  has  a  special  reference 
to  national  and  temporary  circumstances.  Joel  depicts  the  judgments  of  God 
on  Judah,  and  calls  to  repentance.  He  exhorts  to  trust  in  the  Lord  for  deliverance. 
Then  predicts  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit ;  and  hints  at  terrible  convulsions 
of  nature  in  the  last  times.    II.  As  quoted  by  Si.  Peter  (Acts  ii.  21).     1.  He 


CHAP,  in.]  JOEL.  61 

gives  to  the  whole  passage  a  Christian  signification.  Sees  in  the  events  of  the 
day  of  Pentecost  an  accomplishment  of  vers.  28,  29.  Quotes  the  text  as  an 
exhortation  to  his  hearers  to  call  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  m.  As  beiteeated 
BY  St.  Paul  (Rom.  x.  13).     The   text  now  gains  its  widest  Christian  meaning. 

2.  It  is  coupled  here  with  Isa.  xxviii.  16,  and  made  applicable  to  the  whole  world. 

3.  It  is  thus  extensive ;  none  are  excluded.  Intensive ;  every  individual  ia 
exhorted  to  personal  faith  in  Jesus.  IV.  As  teuk  to  oueselves.  1.  It  points 
to  a  means  of  safety.  (1)  Prov.  xviii.  10.  (2)  Jesus  is  our  Lord.  (3)  Running 
to  and  into  Him  is  renouncing  all  trust  in  self,  and  taking  shelter  in  His  merits 
and  atonement.  2.  By  a  simple  way.  (1)  Illustrate  by  Acts  xxv.  11,  12.  (2)  A 
believing  appeal  to  Jesus  means  deliverance  from  the  curse  of  an  offended  law, 
from  the  penalty  of  sin.  (3)  Salvation  by  His  intercession.  3.  Open  to  all. 
(1)  Illustrate  by  Deut.  xix.  2,  3.  (2)  Jesus  is  the  refuge  of  all  sinners.  (3)  Every 
one  may  be  saved  by  Him.  None  are  bo  sin-stricKen  that  they  cannot  call. 
None  so  guilty  that  they  may  not  calL  None  so  righteous  that  they  have  no 
need  to  calL    \J.  H.  Barnett.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Veb.  1.  For,  l)eliold,  in  those  days,  and  in  that  time,  when  I  shall  brinsr 
again  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem. — The  year  of  recompense: — I.  It 

SHALL    BE    THE     YEAB     OF     THE     REDEEMED.        ThoUgh     tho     bondage     of    God'S 

people  may  be  grievous  and  long,  it  shall  not  be  everlasting.  That  in  Egypt 
ended  at  length  in  their  deliverance  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God.  That  in  Babylon  shall  likewise  end  well.  II.  It  shall  be  the  year  of 
RECOMPENCEs  FOR  THE  CONTROVERSY  OF  ZioN.  Though  God  may  suffer  the 
enemies  of  His  people  to  prevail  against  them  very  far,  and  for  a  long  time,  yet 
He  will  call  them  to  an  account  for  it,  and  will  lead  those  captive  that  led  His 
people  captive.  1.  Who  those  are  that  shall  be  reckoned  with.  "  All  nations." 
This  intimates — (1)  That  all  the  nations  had  made  themselves  liable  to  the  judg- 
ment of  God  for  wrong  done  to  His  people.  But  the  neighbouring  nations  should 
be  particularly  dealt  with.  (2)  That  whatsoever  nation  injured  God's  nation, 
they  should  not  go  unpunished.  Little  persecutors  shall  be  taken  account  of 
as  well  as  great  ones.  2.  The  sitting  of  this  coiu"t  for  judgment.  3.  The  plaintiff 
called,  on  whose  behalf  this  prosecution  is  set  on  foot.  4.  The  charge  exhibited 
against  them,  which  is  very  particular.  (1)  They  had  been  very  abusive  to  tho 
children  of  Israel.  (2)  They  had  unjustly  seized  God's  silver  and  gold.  5.  The 
sentence  passed  upon  them.  "  Return  your  recompence  upon  your  own  head." 
(1)  They  shall  not  gain  their  end  in  the  mischief  they  designed.  (2)  They  shall 
be  paid  in  their  own  coin.  {Matthew  Henry.)  The  persecution  of  good  men: 
— I.  There  have  ever  been  good  men  on  earth.  1.  "  My  people."  They 
are  His — (1)  They  have  surrendered  themselves  to  His  will.  (2)  He  has  pledged 
them  His  loving  guardianship.  2.  "  My  heritage "  (Exod.  xix.  5).  He  who 
owns  the  Tmiverse,  esteems  holy  souls  as  the  most  valuable  of  His  possessions. 
II.  These  good  men  on  earth  have  generally  been  subject  to  persecution. 
"  Whom  they  have  scattered  among  the  nations,  and  parted  My  land."  There 
is  a  persecution  that,  whilst  it  does  not  involve  bonds,  imprisonments,  and  physical 
violences,  involves  the  malice  of  hell,  and  inflicts  grievous  injury.  There  is 
social  calumny,  scorn,  degradation,  and  various  disabilities.  III.  Their  per- 
secution WILL  be  avenged  BY  HEAVEN.  "  I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and 
will  bring  them  down  into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  wiU  plead  with  them 
there,  for  My  people  and  for  My  heritage  Israel.  Ah  1  the  time  hastens  when 
persecutors  of  all  types  and  ages  wiU  have  full  retribution  dealt  out  to  them  in 
some  great  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.     {HomUist.) 

Ver.  9-17.   Prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  men. — The  final  lattte  between 

wd  and  evil : — I.    In   this   battle  evil  will  gather  all  its  availablb 

ENERGIES.     "  Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  Gentiles ;  Prepare  war,  wake  up  the 

mighty  men,  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near ;  let  them  come  up."     This  is 

sublime  irony.     The  wicked  will  collect  all  their  agencies  for  this  last  struggle* 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

The  prophet  intimates  that  all  this  shall  only  render  their  destruction  more  com- 
plete. Great  armies  are  arrayed  against  God.  They  are  bold  in  atheism.  They 
are  cunning  in  sin.  They  are  malicious  in  temper.  But  "  let  them  come  up," 
and  they  shall  be  consumed  by  the  breath  of  the  Lord.  Evil  has  many  agencies. 
It  has  many  "  mighty  men  "  on  its  side.  They  are  united  in  their  purpose. 
Their  dormant  energies  will  be  awakened.  But  they  cannot  be  finally  victorious. 
II.  In  this  battlb  bvil  wni  tubn  many  useful  agencies  into  destrxtctivb 
INSTRUMENTS.  "  Beat  your  ploughshares  into  swords,  and  your  pruning-hooks 
into  spears :  let  the  weak  say,  I  am  strong."  When  Isaiah  and  Micah  pro- 
phesied of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  they  said,  "  Beat  your  swords  into  pruning- 
hooks,  and  your  spears  into  ploughshares  "  (Isa.  ii. ;  Micah  iv.).  This  sentence 
is  now  inverted  by  Joel.  The  words  of  Isaiah  show  the  condition  of  the  world 
under  the  rule  of  goodness.  The  words  of  Joel  show  the  condition  of  men  tuider 
the  tyranny  of  evil.  Sin  converts  the  instruments  of  peace  into  the  implements 
of  war.  And  in  the  last  great  battle  between  good  and  evil,  many  useful  prin- 
ciples and  institutions  will  be  converted  into  the  means  of  attack  upon  truth. 
The  peaceful  life  and  words  of  Christ  have  been  turned  into  swords  ;  and  eminently 
will  this  be  the  case  in  the  last  great  conflict  with  evil.     III.  In  this  battle 

evil    will    present    itself    as    naturally    READY    FOR    DESTRUCTION.       "  Put 

ye  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe :  come,  get  you  down ;  for  the  press  is 
full,  the  fats  overflow ;  for  their  wickedness  is  great."  There  are  here  two  meta- 
phors, one  taken  from  the  harvest,  the  other  from  the  vintage, — indicating  that 
sin  shall  reach  its  limit.  This  gives  us  insight  into  the  method  of  the  Divine 
government.  Sin  is  not  always  destroyed  in  its  earliest  stage.  It  remains  as 
a  discipline  to  the  world.  It  tests  the  patience  and  moral  resistance  of  the  good. 
The  time  of  its  harvest  is  not  yet.  IV.  In  this  battle  the  natural  and  help- 
ful AGENCIES  of  THE  UNIVERSE  SHALL  AID  THE  DEFEAT  OF  MORAL  EVIL.       "  The 

siin  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shining." 
When  the  wicked  gather  for  the  great  battle  they  will  find  the  ordinary  agencies 
of  the  universe  against  them.  V.  In  this  battle  the  good  shall  enjoy  the 
Divine  protection.  "  The  Lord  also  shall  roar  out  of  Zion,"  &c.  Lessons : 
— 1.  That  evil  often  leads  the  Church  of  God  into  captivity.  2.  That  moral  evil 
is  advancing  to  its  perilous  destiny.  3.  That  the  good  will  finally  triumph  over 
the  combined  forces  of  evil.     (J.  8.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Ver.    13.    Put   ye  In  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  Is  ripe.  —  The  end  of  the 

world  represented  by  the  harvest : — All  things  are  evidently  tending  to  decay  and 
dissolution.  As  there  was  an  hour  fixed  from  all  eternity  for  the  creation  of 
the  world,  so  there  is  an  hour  fixed  for  its  dissolution.  Many  scriptural 
figures  represent  the  brevity  of  human  life,  the  frailty  of  man's  existence.  The 
text  contains  a  prophetic  description  of  the  destruction  of  all  God's  enemies, 
who  are  represented  as  a  field  of  com.  I.  The  ripeness  for  the  great  harvest. 
There  is  a  ripeness  to  which  every  one  must  attain.  Even  the  wicked  fiU  up 
the  measure  of  their  sin.  The  righteous  are  acquiring  ripeness ;  and  for  this 
due  preparation  and  daily  cultivation  are  needed.  True,  thorns  and  briars  spring 
up  among  the  flowers ;  but  they  are  only  allowed  to  grow  together  for  good  and 
useful  purposes.  II.  The  Holy  Scriptures  alone  can  furnish  the  true  test 
OF  THE  RIPENESS  REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  TEXT.  Compare  the  Condition  of  a  sinner 
meet  for  destruction  with  the  happy  state  of  a  soul  ripe  for  the  blessedness  of 
eternal  glory.  Such  a  review  must  induce  every  one  to  pray  that  the  life  he  lives 
in  the  flesh  may  be  a  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of  God  ;  of  conformity  to  the  will 
of  God ;  and  of  preparation  for  the  judgment  of  God.  III.  When  the  corn 
IS  FULLY  REPB,  THE  SICKLE  IS  TO  BE  PUT  IN.  When  OUT  measure  of  sin  and  holi- 
ness is  complete,  we  shall  be  reaped  down :  the  saints  will  depart  and  be  immedi- 
ately with  God.  Address  the  undecided.  {Nat.  Meeres,  B.D.)  Harvest: — 
This  emblem  of  the  harvest  is  used  elsewhere  in  the  Bible.  The  text  probably 
refers  to  the  harvest  of  the  wicked.  Two  things  for  consideration.  I.  Thb 
PROCESS  OF  RiPENiNQ.  In  the  natural  world  we  think  of  the  later  period  of 
growth,  after  the  ear  is  formed,  as  the  ripening  time.  Consider  the  process  of 
ripening  as  regards  the  wicked.  (Gen.  xv.  16.)  "  The  iniq  ity  of  the  Amorites 
is  not  yet  fulL"  It  was  ripening,  but  not  ripe.  Sin  has  dominion  over  a  man. 
Sin  is  the  spring  and  root  of  eternal  ruin.  The  signs  that  sin  is  ripening  are  two. 
1.  The  habit  of  sinning  wilfully,  and  living  wilfully  under  the  dominion  of  known 
fiin.     2.  Growing  insensibility  to  the  truths  which  have  a  tendency  to  awaken 


CHAF.  m.]  JOEL.  63 

the  mind.  The  ripening  process  as  regards  the  righteous  is  the  converse  of  that 
which  takes  pla^e  with  the  w'  ?ked.  There  is  a  ripening  process  going  on  in  every 
child  of  God.  That  which  i  the  cause  of  this  ripening  in  the  Christian  is  holi- 
ness. Increasing  holiness  alienates  him  more  and  more  from  sin,  and  from  the 
follies  and  vanities  of  the  world.  Signs  of  the  ripening  process  are — 1.  A  deepening 
sense  of  our  own  personal  unworthiness,  and  helplessness,  and  guiltiness  in 
the  sight  of  God.  2.  Growing  simplicity  of  trust  in  the  person  and  work  of  Christ. 
It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  to  reveal  Christ  to  the  soul.  n.  The  harvest  itself. 
For  the  individual  the  time  of  death.  For  the  world  the  judgment  day.  The 
children  of  God  are  ripening  for  a  blessed  harvest.  The  wicKed  are  ripeninf? 
for  a  harvest  of  wrath,  of  fiery  indignation.  {Emilius  Bayley,  M.A.)  Char- 
acter : — These  words  suggest  three  remarks  concerning  man's  moral  character. 
I.  It  is  a  QEOWTH.  The  harvest  begins  with  the  germinating  seed.  Moral 
character,  both  good  and  bad,  is  a  growing  thing ;  thoughts  grow,  affections 
grow,  principles  grow,  habits  grow.  Character  is  not  like  a  rock,  which  remains 
the  same  from  year  to  year;  but  rather  like  the  tree,  ever  growing.  Men  get 
worse  or  better  every  day.  11.  It  has  a  mattjeity.  Every  character  ripens, 
reaches  its  harvest.  Hemlock  as  well  as  wheat  ripens;  character,  both  evil 
and  good,  cornea  to  maturation,  m.  It  has  eetbibutiok.  "  Put  ye  in  the 
sickle."  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  He  that 
6oweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption,  he  that  soweth  to  the 
spirit  shall  reap  everlasting  life."  The  time  for  the  sickle  hastens  to  all. 
{HomUut.) 

Ver.  14.  Multltudea  In  the  valley  of  decision.  —  TJie  vattey  of  decision : — 
These   words   were    spoken    in    a   time   of   deep   depression.     Joel   says  the 
sadness  and  gloom  were  mainly  due  to  the  indecision  of  the  people,  who  did 
not  know  whether  to  trust  foreign  alliances  or  Jehovah.     So  they  would  have 
to  be  led  into  a  valley  of  judgment,  from  which  they  would  not  emerge  imtil 
they  had  come  to  a  decision.     In  our  day  much  of  the  prevailing  darkness  is 
due  to  indecision.     We  feel  that  things  are  wrong,  but  we  are  not  exactly  sure 
what  is  required  to  set  them  right.     I.    In   begakd    to    what   we    believf. 
There  is  peculiar  difficulty  in  this  generation,  owing  to  the  methods  of  modern 
inquiry  and  discussion.     This  is  an  age  of  specialism.     Each  branch  of  theologv 
has  its  own  special  students.     Each  presses  his  own  conclusions  to  the  fiu-thc^t 
limit.     It  is  our  duty  to  look  for  oiu-selves  at  the  general  lines  of  revealed  truth, 
and  to  measure  our  relation  to  them.     We  must  come  to  a  decision  with  regard 
to  Jesus  Christ.     Certainly — 1.  Christ  was  the  revealer  of  God.     2.  He  was  the 
remover  of  barriers.     3.  The  guidance  He  gave  us  for  our  actual  conduct  was 
authentic.     These  three  simple  truths  can  be  isolated  from  all  disputed  doctrines, 
and  used  as  a  test.     The  man  who  sincerely  accepts  these  truths  has  found  hi? 
way  out  of  the  valley  of  decision.     II.  Ix  kegaed  to  what  we  do.     We  can 
test  ourselves  by  our  conduct  in  business,  in  the  family,  in  general  society.     Thero 
are  various  plain  questions  which  we  ask  ourselves  too  rarely,  although  we  al! 
in  the  long  run  shall  require  to  answer  them.     Do  we  always  do  our  duty,  or 
only  when  it  suits  our  plans  ?     Has  our  life  any  principle,  any  plan  ?     We  know 
the  road  in  which  we  ought  to  walk,  are  we  walking  in  it  ?     Do  we  always  follow 
conscience  ?     God  often  thrusts  iis  into  the  darkest  caves  of  the  valley  in  order 
that  we  may  learn  our  need  for  giving  a  plain  answer  to  these  questions.     In 
the  valley  of  decision  you  are  bound  to  fix  your  faith  in  God  and  Christ,  and 
to  take  the  path  of  goodness.     i^A.  R.  MacEwen,  M.A.,  B.D.)        The  valley  oi 
decision  : — There  is  something  very  wonderful,  and  very  awe-inspiring  in   the 
thought  of  the  multitudinous,  the  immeasurable  multitudinousness,  of  created 
things.     Infinite  space  is  thronged  with  multitudes  of  worlds,  and  every  world 
with  multitudes  of  things.     When  we  think  of  the  race  of  mankind,  how  vast  and 
inconceivable  are  the  multitudes  of  men.     Each  individual  that  has  ever  lived 
exists  somewhere.     Once  bom,  they  can  never  die.     Yet  these  vast  hosts  lie 
easily  enough  within  the  reckoning  of  Grod.     Known  unto  Him  are  the  history 
and  the  character,  the  temptations  and  the  opportunities,  of  every  single  indi- 
vidual  of  the  vast  whole  of  the  human  race,  both  quick  and  dead.     One  by 
one  each  will  personally  appear  before  the  personal  God  in  the  valley  of  decision. 
Where  is  this  valley  ?     Tradition  identifies  as  the  vaUey  of  Jehoshaphat.     But 
the  wady  of  the  Kedron  cannot  properly  be  called  a  valley.     Joel  invented  the 
name  for  "  Jehovah's  judgment.'^     Christ  never  localised  the  seat  of  judgment, 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

any  more  than  He  announced  the  time  of  judgment.  But  what  is  judgment  ? 
It  is  not  Christ  our  judge  who  decides  the  bliss  of  the  blessed  or  the  curse  of  the 
accursed.  The  blessed  are  deciding  their  own  blessedness  when  they  cultivate 
holiness  of  character,  and  the  cursed  are  deciding  their  own  doom  when  they 
are  forgetting  God  and  living  in  sin.  The  valley  of  decision  is  the  valley  which 
each  ma  1  treads  in  the  road  of  life.  It  is  here  and  now.  Divine  decision,  or 
final  judgment,  is  no  swift,  sudden,  arbitrary  act  of  God's ;  but  a  long,  slow  pro- 
cess performed  by  ourselves.  In  the  valley  of  decision  there  is  no  standing  still. 
{Canon  Diggle. )  The  valley  of  decision  : — A  sense  of  ultimate  personal  respon- 
sibility is  inseparable  from  the  mind  of  man.  There  is  a  consciousness  within 
him,  which  announces  the  existence  of  a  God  who  judgeth  in  the  earth,  and  warns 
him  that  the  great  object  of  his  life  must  be  to  prepare  to  meet  Him  in  a  final 
account.  In  the  text  is  a  striking  exhibition  of  this  final  judgment  of  man,  the 
great  day  of  his  account  with  God.  The  "  valley  of  Jehoshaphat "  means  the 
"valley  of  the  judgment  of  the  Lord."  The  time  and  manner  are  His  own 
appointment.  In  its  practical  application  to  man  the  day  of  final  judgment 
makes  no  change  in  his  real  character.  It  simply  proclaims  that  which  was 
before  the  fact.  It  declares  the  sentence  which  has  long  been  determined.  Man's 
real  time  of  probation  is  in  the  present  life.  Here  is  the  valley  of  decision. 
I.  What  may  be  ttndbrstood  as  thb  vaixby  op  decision  for  man.  It  is  the 
whole  life  of  man  upon  the  earth.  There  is  actually  but  a  single  question  pro- 
posed from  God  to  man.  As  a  wandering,  rebellious  creature,  he  is  invited  and 
commanded,  to  come  back  in  the  spirit  and  act  of  reconciliation  unto  God.  Will 
he  lay  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  him  !  This  is  the  great  question  of  human 
life,  and  it  is  generally  determined  by  man  long  before  the  last  hours  of  his  life 
have  come.  Many  have  settled  this  question  for  themselves,  and  so  have  passed 
out  of  the  valley  of  decision.  Others  have  decided,  but  have  chosen  death  rather 
than  life.  These,  too,  have  passed  out  of  the  valley  of  decision.  We  cannot 
therefore  justly  say  that  all  men,  now  alive,  are  in  the  valley  of  decision.  We 
must  narrow  down  our  view  to  those  for  whom  the  great  question  remains  unde- 
cided. II.  The  greater  portion  of  those  to  whom  the  offers  of  eternal 
LIFE  ABE  MADE  ARE  UNDECIDED.  The  great  majority  who  listen  to  the  Gospel 
are  still  in  the  valley  of  decision.  A  blessing  and  a  curse  are  yet  before  them. 
in.  The  great  decision  must  speedily  be  made.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord 
is  near."  By  that  day  we  understand  the  time  of  final  determination  of  the 
destiny  of  the  children  of  men.  Soon  for  every  man,  this  day  must  certainly 
come  at  the  period  of  death.  Then  this  is  the  accepted  time,  and  this  is  the 
day  of  your  salvation.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Turning-points  in  life: — It  has 
been  well  said  that  in  every  life  there  is  a  turning-point,  as  in  a  fever,  a  turning- 
point  that  brings  either  life  or  death.  Napoleon  said,  "  In  every  battle  there 
are  ten  minutes  on  which  hangs  the  fate  of  nations."  Hundreds  of  soul  battles 
are  fought  and  won  in  a  few  minutes.  Unspeakably  solemn  are  the  silence  and 
the  quickness  with  which  these  spiritual  battles  are  fought.  {Old  Testament 
Anecdotes.)  Decision: — There  is  a  fascination,  even  a  terror,  in  the  appear- 
ance of  a  great  multitude.  Where  is  the  valley  of  decision  ?  First  of  all,  here 
in  this  world.  The  world  all  unconsciously  to  its  teeming  myriads  is  a  valley 
of  decision  in  which  they  gather  together  to  certain  ends  and  work  out  certain 
definite  issues.  What  is  being  decided  in  this  valley  ?  1.  Character.  That 
strange  stamp  which  gives  to  each  one  of  us  his  own  individuality,  that  per- 
sonality which  spreads  itself  over  our  likes  and  dislikes,  that  stamp  whereby 
men  can  label  us  and  catalogue  us,  and  yet  feel  at  the  end  that  we  elude  classi- 
fication. Circumstances  are  the  material  of  life,  good  or  bad.  It  is  we  who 
take  up  our  circumstances,  and  out  of  them  make  habits,  and  habits  decide  or 
form  our  character  in  this  vaUey  of  decision  which  we  call  human  life.  2.  Our 
own  happiness  or  misery.  Life  was  meant  to  be  happy.  But  this  is  placed 
in  our  own  hands  for  decision.  3.  Eternity.  The  great  decision  is  not,  after 
all,  the  sudden  thing  we  suppose  it  to  be,  except  in  very  rare  cases.  Here  in 
this  world  a  decision  may  be  altered,  it  may  not  be  final.  The  prophet  looks 
on  to  a  day  when  the  decision  wiU  be  final ;  it  is  the  great  day  of  judgment  at 
the  end  of  the  world.  Is  this  a  belief  which  is  still  a  living  and  a  practical  one 
to  you  ?  Then  judge  yoiu-selves  that  you  may  not  be,  in  that  day,  judged 
of  the  Lord.  {Canon  Newholt.)  Armageddon: — The  matters  between  two 
armies  are  g<-  ing  to  be  finally  decided  :  therefore  the  valley  is  called,  "  the  valley 
of  decision."     This  place  is  to-night  a  valley  of  decision.     See  some  of  the  things 


CHAP,  m.]  JOEL,  65 

you  have  to  decide.     1.  Whether  you  will  adhere  to  sin  or  renounce  it.     Not 
your  pleasures,  but  your  positive  sins.     You  cannot  become  a  child  of  God  and 
adhere  to  any  one  of  your  transgressions.     Will  it  pay  you  to  keep  your  sin  ? 
Sin  never  pays.     2.  Whether  you  will  have  Christ  or  refuse  Him.     There  is  no 
pardon   or   heaven  without  the   friendship  of  Christ.     And  He  is  such  a  pre- 
cious Jesus.     3.  Whether  you  will  have  Christian  associations  or  unchristian. 
Need  not  apologise  for  everything  that  is  in  the  Church.     There  is  some  bad 
and  much  good  in  the  Church.     The  fact  that  there  are  inconsistent  Christians 
is  nothing  against  Christianity,  and  nothing  against  the  Church.     Come,  then, 
into  the  ranks  of  Church  members.     4.  Whether  you  will  have  a  Christian  death- 
bed or  an  imbeliever's  departure.     There  is  a  triumphant  and  there  is  an  igno- 
minious way  of  getting  out  of  this  life,  and  we  come  here   to  choose  whicn  it 
shall  be.     5.  Whether  yours  shall  be  a  futm-e  world  of  sorrow  or  a  future  world 
of  joy.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)        Reason  for  decision  : — What  is  here  called 
"  the  valley  of  decision  "  {i.e.,  of  sharp  judgment),  is  called  in  ver.  12  "  the  valley 
of  Jehoshaphat "  (God  judgeth).     Tnis  was  locally  the  valley  of  Kedron ;  the 
later  associations  of  this  valley  (Gethsemane  was    there)  figuratively  present 
a  great  spiritual  crisis.     The  prophets  show  themselves  to  be  taught  of  God  in 
the  breadth  and  extent  of  their  visions.     While  speaking  to  their  own  nation 
only,  they  annoimce  God's  dealings  with  all  the  world.     They  look  forward  into 
the  distant  future — to  the  end  of  time.     From  time  to  time  God  specially  inter- 
feres, either  to  enlighten  and  encourage  His  own  when  the  adversary  is  too  strong 
for  them ;  or  to  overthrow  those  who  are  opposing  His  will.     The  final  inter- 
ference is  what  is  called  "  the  day  of  the  Lord."     fa  this  chapter  is  a  vision  of 
the  final  judgment  of  mankind,  and  of  that  which  is  to  precede  it.     1.  The  wicked - 
nes&  of  the  earth  is  full.     2.  Drawn  by  a  mighty  influence,  the  enemies  of  God, 
to  a  place  whither  He  has    summoned  them.     3.  The  powers  of  nature  sink  and 
fade  before  the  presence  of  the  glory  of  God.     4.  But  the  Lord  is  the  strength 
and  hope  of  His  own  people.     Note — (1)  The  great  issues  of  good  and  evil  which 
are  working  out  in  the  world.     (2)  Contemplate  the  predicted  end,  the  final 
victory  of  Christ  and  His  people.     3.  Decide  on  which  side  we  take  part  in  the 
conflict.     (S.  J.  Hvlme,  M.A.)        The  vdUey  of  decision  : — There  is  a  day  coming 
when  all  the  uncertainties  of  life  will  be  at  an  end,  when  every  mask  will  drop  off, 
when  every  hidden  thing  will  be  exposed  to  view,  and  the  secrets  of  every  life  will 
be  told.     The  prophet  is  here  looking  forward  to  an  occasion  of  judgment,  and 
every  occasion  of  judgment  must  of  necessity  be  an  occasion  of  decision.     But 
the  work  of  judgment  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  future.     Wherever  the 
Gospel  message  goes,  wherever  the  truth  of  God  is  revealed  to  the  imderstanding 
of  man,  there  the  work  of  judgment  necessarily  commences.     Our  Lord  taught 
that  it  was  in  virtue  of  the  relation  in  which  men  stood  to  the  Son  of  Man  that 
their  position  before  God  was  to   be   decided.     So  it  is  still.     The  presence  of 
Christ  in  His  Spirit  among  us  still  must  needs  cause  judgment.     The  first  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  convict  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment. 
The  word  "  convict "  is  a  judicial  term.     It  may  be  said  of  redemption  itself, 
that  the  Divine  mercy  is  ordained  to  flow  into  the  human  heart  through  judgment. 
Unconditioned  mercy — mercy  that  does  not  come  to  me  through  the  forms  of 
judgment,  and  with  the  sanction  of  justice — might  have  a  demoralising  effect 
upon  me.     Ours  is  a  Gospel  of  mercy  flowing  through  judgment.     So  then,  not 
only  docs  the  Holy  Ghost  judge  us  when  He  first  brings  our  sins  to  remembrance 
and  pronounces  us  guilty,  but  in  the  very  act  of  justifying  us  He  stiU  exhibits, 
in  the  most  impressive  manner,  God's  righteous  judgment  against  sin ;  for  it  is 
through  the  Cross  that  grace  flows  forth  to  us,  and  the  Cross  is,  above  everything 
else,  the  place  of  judgment — the  most  amazing  and  impressive  vindication  that 
God  could  give  of  the  majesty  of  law.     We  may  say  that  every  day  of  visitation 
from  God  to  the  soul  of  man  is  in  some  sense  a  lesser  judgment  day.     On  the  last 
august  occasion,  the  decision  will  lie  simply  and  solely  with  the  Judge.     There  will 
be  no  appealing  from  His  judgment.     Now,  the  decision  lies  with  oiurselves.     It  is 
the  work  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  to  bring  all  with  whom  He  strives,  into  the  valley 
of  decision,  the  place  of  judgment.      There   are   two  ways  out  of  this  valley. 
Through  the  gate  of  life  and  through  the  gate  of  death.     {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
The  valley  of  judgment : — Note  the  vast  appearance  that  shall  be  in  that  great  and 
solemn  day.     1.  The  judgment  day,  that  day  of  the  Lord,  has  all  along  been 
looked  upon,  and  spoken  of,  as  "  nigh  at  hand."     We  ought  to  be  always  ready 
for  it.     2.  The  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  day  of  decision,  when  every  man's 


(66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

eternal  state  will  be  determined,  and  the  controversy  that  has  been  long 
depending  between  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  that  of  Satan  shall  be  finally 
decided,  and  an  end  put  to  the  struggle.  The  Chaldee  calls  it,  "  the  valley 
of  the  distribution  of  judgment."  Marg.  has  "  valley  of  threshing,"  carrying 
on  the  figure  of  the  harvest.  3.  Innumerable  miiltitudes  will  be  gathered  together 
to  receive  their  final  doom  in  that  day.  0  what  vast  multitudes  of  sinnera 
will  Divine  justice  be  glorified  in  the  ruin  of  at  that  day!  {Matthew  Henry.) 
The  valley  of  decision  (Sermon  to  Children): — The  text  struck  me  when  I  was 
a  lad.  Children  have  a  strange  way  of  mixing  up  things,  and  I  came  to  think 
of  these  words  as  in  some  way  connected  with  a  place  near  my  native  town.  Away 
out  on  those  wild  cliffs,  with  the  fierce  Atlantic  rolling  in  upon  them,  there  is  a 
valley  which  came  to  be  in  my  mind  a  sort  of  "  valley  of  decision."  I.  Thb 
VALLEY  OF  DECisioK  IS  A  PLACE  FOE  soBEE  THOUGHT.  There  is  the  little  Stream 
hiurying  on  between  the  banks,  always  hastening  away  to  the  great  sea.  Is  not 
that  just  like  our  life  ?  It  is  hvurying  away  to  the  great  sea  of  eternity.  II.  A 
PLACE  OF  SOLEMN  WAENiNG.  Just  vmoer  this  little  valley  a  merry  party  had  come 
one  day  for  a  picnic.  One  young  man  slipped  away  to  bathe.  Suddenly,  as  the 
others  sat  singing  on  the  rocks,  one  sprang  up  and  pointed  to  their  friend  as  he 
was  being  borne  away  by  the  cvurent.  He  was  drowning  before  their  eyes.  What 
is  death  but  the  sweeping  in  of  the  waves  of  eternity,  bearing  away  one  and 
another  ?  Think  of  these  things  deeply  and  seriously.  III.  The  place  suggested 
OUR  DANGER  AND  OUR  DELIVERANCE.  There  was  a  hugc,  black,  rounded  cavern, 
called  Ralph's  Cupboard,  in  a  steep,  precipitous  cliff,  never  accessible  from  the 
land,  and  scarcely  ever  to  be  entered  from  the  sea.  A  smuggler,  hard  pressed 
by  the  coastguards,  turned  his  boat  towards  this  cave,  caught  the  swelling  wave, 
and  was  swept  into  what  seemed  the  jaws  of  destruction,  but  to  him  was  harbour 
of  safety.  We,  too,  have  broken  the  law.  We  want  a  refuge.  And  the  Bible  says, 
"  A  man  shall  be  as  an  hiding-place."  Our  only  safety  is  in  Him,  our  only  hope 
of  escape  is  there.  Yet  all  this  will  not  make  a  place  the  valley  of  decision.  When 
we  have  made  up  our  mind,  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near.  (Mark  Guy  Pearse.) 
Multitudes : — Joel  was  a  prophet  in  the  older  sense.  He  was  a  seer ;  he  had  visions. 
He  had,  indeed,  a  work  to  do  for  his  own  generation ;  but  this  was  all  to  be  im- 
pressed by  the  solemnity  of  the  visions  given  to  him.  One  of  these  visions  we  follow. 
In  Eastern  hovises  there  is  often  a  little  upper  chamber,  available  for  prayer  and 
meditation,  and  we  may  imagine  Joel,  in  such  a  place,  poring  over  the  records  of 
Divine  law  and  Divine  leadings,  and  bending  in  earnest  supplication  before  his  God. 
As  he  thinks  and  prays  the  daylight  fades ;  gradually  he  becomes  absorbed ;  other 
scenes  open  up  before  him  ;  he  sees  more  than  the  bodily  eye  can  see  ;  age  after 
age  passes  in  hunied  march ;  dimly,  indistinctly,  he  traces  the  progress  of  events 
as  these  ages  roll  on ;  and  gradually  he  becomes  aware  of  an  extraordinary  excite- 
ment. As  the  vision  clears  it  is  as  though  heaven  were  preparing  for  some  grand 
event ;  the  angelic  warriors  are  girding  on  their  armour,  though  evidently  rather 
for  a  day  of  glory  than  a  day  of  battle.  The  angelic  attendants  are  preparing 
thrones  of  judgment,  palms  of  victory,  robes  of  beauty,  crowns  of  glory,  songs 
of  triumph  ;  and,  strangely  enough,  also  chains  of  dar^ess  and  of  woe.  Hell  is 
moved.  Out  of  its  depths  spirit  after  spirit  is  appearing  to  join  the  procession 
that  is  ever  forming  and  passing  on.  The  sea  is  moved,  and  casts  out  the  dead 
that  are  in  her.  j^d  even  as  the  prophet  watches,  he  sees  the  last  midnight 
darkness  pass  away ;  gradually  the  grey  of  dawn  streaks  the  skies,  and  at  the 
moment  when  the  sun  first  looks  upon  the  hills,  a  mighty  angel  stands  forth  and 
cries — "Multitudes,  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
is  near  in  the  valley  of  decision."  The  "  day  of  the  Lord  "  is  yet  to  come.  The 
day  of  the  Lord's  glory,  when  the  multitude  of  the  redeemed  shall  crown  Him 
with  many  crowns.  The  day  of  the  Lord's  vindication,  when  He  shall  break 
down  the  rebellion  of  lost  souls  with  the  proofs  of  His  forbearance,  and  the  memory 
of  His  repeated  calls.  The  day  when  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  must  be  revealed, 
and  He  shall  come  "  in  flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God, 
and  that  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  His  Son."  There  must  be  an  end  of  this  dispensa- 
tion of  redemption.  There  must  be  a  completion  of  Christ's  special  administration. 
There  must  be  the  "  day  of  the  Lord."  As  Joel's  vision  gains  distinctness,  his 
attention  is  arrested  by  the  people  assembled  on  that  day.  Language  fails  him 
in  attempting  a  description.  All  around,  wherever  the  eye  can  reach,  he  sees 
people,  people  everywhere  ;  and  overwhelmed,  he  can  only  cry, — "  Multitudes, 
multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision  !  "     Few  things  make  stronger  impressions 


CHAP,  hl]  JOEL,  67 

on  us  than  the  sight  of  a  multitude  of  people.  Many  of  the  greatest  wrongs 
the  world  has  known  have  been  committed  under  the  passionate,  unreasoning 
impulses  of  multitudes.  Many  of  the  most  impressive  Bible  narratives  concern 
multitudes.  But  if  a  multitude  on  earth  can  exert  such  power  on  us,  what  shall 
be  the  effect  of  multitudes  to  which  our  present  earth-crowds  form  no  comparison ; 
multitudes  in  the  day  of  the  Lord ;  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision  ?  Numbers 
altogether  fail  for  recording  that  multitude.  Language  altogether  fails  for 
describing  it.  Even  imagination,  in  its  highest  flights,  utterly  fails  worthily  to 
conceive  it.  We  may  venture  to  contrast  in  one  or  two  particulars  the  ordinary 
crowds  of  earth,  and  the  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision.  1.  In  an  earthly 
crowd  the  individual  is  lost  in  the  multitude.  In  that  multitude  the  number  ia 
lost  in  the  individual.  Each  person  wiU  stand  out  distinct  to  view,  as  though 
he  alone  were  placed  before  the  Judge.  And  each  individual  will  feel  aa 
though  he  were  alone.  It  will  be  a  time  of  awful  self-consciousness.  2.  In  au 
earthly  crowd  there  are  almost  infinite  disguises.  The  people  are  not  in  reality 
what  they  seem.  The  dress  of  the  gentleman  too  often  covers  the  profligate  ;  the 
lowly  look,  and  humble  clothes,  often  cover  the  self-righteous  hypocrite.  The 
garb  of  poverty  often  hides  the  noble  and  generous-hearted.  In  the  valley  of 
decision  there  are  no  disguises.  AU  disguise  drops  off  at  death.  Men's  shrouds 
are  pretty  much  alike  ;  and  even  they  soon  rot  and  perish  in  the  dampness  of  the 
grave.  Men  rise  to  judgment  with  no  disguises  upon  them.  Stern,  unflinching 
truth  shall  dispel  aU  mists,  all  doubts,  and  set  our  characters  forth  clear  as  in 
the  sunlight.  And  what  are  the  great  distinctions  which  shall  mark  these  "  multi- 
tudes "  ?  We  notice  the  utter  absence  of  all  merely  human  distinctions.  Riches 
— nothing.  Poverty — nothing.  Position — nothing.  Fame — nothing.  Know- 
ledge— nothing.  Character — everything.  One  test  for  everybody — righteous 
or  wicked.  The  Scriptiu-es  do  not  satisfy  our  questionings  concerning  the  precise 
terms  of  the  decision  at  that  assize,  but  they  intimate  that  there  will  be  a  more 
general  term,  and  a  more  particular  one.  The  general  term  is  thus  expressed, — 
Condemned  already,  because  they  believed  not  on  the  Son  of  God."  The 
particular  term  is  thus  expressed, — "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body,  according 
to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  How  these  are  to  fit  into  each 
other,  it  is  beyond  any  human  power  to  explain.  But  we  can  see  the  two  separate 
facts  very  clearly.  Our  life,  in  its  minutest  acts,  has  eternal  issues.  Every- 
thing we  do,  beyond  its  bearing  on  our  present  character,  has  its  bearing  on  our 
eternal  destiny,  because  on  our  eternal  character.  Our  every-day  conduct  is,  in 
sober  reality,  raising  our  mansion  of  eternal  bliss,  or  preparing  the  dungeons  of  the 
eternal  death.  And  the  general  test  that  is  to  decide  in  that  great  day  is  very 
simple.  It  is  this — in  Christ  or  out  of  Christ  ?  The  answer  to  that  question 
settles  all  else.  And  that  test  may  be  put  now.  We  shall  come  out  upon  that 
"  day  of  the  Lord  "  as  though  from  a  room  where  we  had  rested  awhile  upon 
a  landing-place,  from  which  steps  wind  upward  into  a  place  of  beauty  and 
delights ;  and  from  which  other  steps  wind  downwards  into  ever-deepening 
darkness.  If  out  of  Christ  when  you  yield  up  the  ghost,  then  you  must  be  borne 
downwards,  until  it  can  be  said  of  you,  "  The  darlmess  took  them."  If  in  Christ 
now,  and  when  the  spirit  parts  with  its  earthly  tabernacle,  then,  loving  angel 
arms  shall  entwine  you  ;  loving  angel  songs  shall  cheer  you ;  loving  friends,  long 
lost,  shall  beckon  you  ;  the  loving  Saviour  shall  Himself  be  with  you,  as  you 
journey  up  the  steps  of  glory  everlasting ;  the  gates  of  the  golden  palace  shall 
be  flung  back  for  you,  and  with  shouts  of  triumphant  welcome,  "  the  ransomed 
of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon 
their  heads,  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
away."  {Eohert  Tuck,  B.A.)  A  time  of  judgment : — Multitudes  in  the  valley 
of  judgment ;  multitudes  come  together  that  they  may  be  examined,  criticised 
in  the  light  of  heaven,  judged  by  the  standard  eternal  and  michangeable.  Why 
not  accept  that  as  the  basis  of  an  appeal  to  human  intelligence  and  human  con- 
science ?  There  is  to  be  a  time  of  judgment,  when  the  right  and  the  left  shall  be 
specifically  distinguished ;  when  the  bad  and  the  good  shall  be  known  one  from 
the  other,  and  separated  for  ever.  Who  undertakes  this  marvellous  classification  ? 
Blessed  be  God,  not  man ;  thanks  be  unto  heaven,  we  are  to  be  judged  by  the 
Creator,  not  by  the  creature.  What  man  coidd  judge  his  brother  ?  What  does 
man  know  about  his  dearest  friend  ?  He  knows  nothing.  We  live  upon  appear- 
ances.    (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Ver.  16.  But  the  Lord  will  be  the  hope  of  His  people. — The  haven  of 
repair : — The  margin  reads,  "  The  Lord  will  be  a  place  of  repair,  or  a 
harbour  for  His  people."  As  a  secluded,  landlocked  haven,  where  storm  does 
not  rock,  is  to  a  dismasted  vessel,  so  will  our  God  be  to  those  who  come  in  live 
spiritual  need.  He  wiU  be  a  haven  of  repair.  I.  Thebb  abb  many  expebibncbs 
VfHicH  CAUSE  va  TO  NEED  A  PLACE  OF  EEPAiB.  Who  doos  not  suffet  through 
the  fault  of  others  ?  In  every  department  of  our  existence  we  are  eyes  and  hands 
and  feet  to  each  other,  in  the  same  body.  What  is  true  amongst  the  smaller 
things  of  life's  healthy  competition  is  found  also  in  that  more  important  world, 
v/heie  hearts  are  wounded,  where  confidence  is  shaken,  and  where  hopes  are  too 
often  crushed.  The  world  is  rich  in  afflictions  which  are  unintentionidly  caused. 
Who  has  not  suffered  from  his  own  unwisdom  ?  By  lack  of  caution  or  by 
over-caution  moral  weakness  is  often  induced.  By  hesitation  or  by  impulsive- 
ness we  bring  disaster  upon  ourselves.  We  need  some  kind  of  repairing  very 
frequently,  and,  for  the  most  part,  it  is  on  account  of  self-inflicted  damage.  The 
need  of  repair  may  come  through  some  want  of  knowledge.  We  did  not  know 
the  seas  of  life ;  did  not  expect  a  sudden  storm ;  did  not  understand  our 
own  weak  side.  And  so  we  spread  full  sail  when  caution  should  have  counselled  ; 
^^e  went  right  on  when  we  should  have  sought  the  anchorage  of  prayer.  But 
most  vessels  seek  a  haven  of  repair  on  accoimt  of  the  common  wear  and  strain  of 
voyaging.  And  so  it  is  with  human  hearts.  We  know  that  we  often  need  a 
1  efuge  where  there  is  the  hope  of  refitting  our  shattered  strength.  11.  The  Lobd 
"WILL  BE  OTJB  HAVEK  OF  BEPAZB.  He  alone  Combines  the  knowledge,  the  ability, 
and  the  will  which  are  needful.  No  need  or  danger  can  be  unknown  to  Him  "  whose 
eyes  are  in  every  place."  No  inability  to  do  after  His  heart's  desire  can  fetter 
Him  who  "  created  all  things  by  the  breath  of  His  mouth."  His  knowledge.  His 
love,  and  His  power,  are  the  three  mountains  which  enclose  a  haven  of  blessed 
security  and  peace  for  the  sons  of  men.  Storms  of  temptation  should  drive  us  to 
the  refuge  that  is  in  God.  The  winds  of  intellectual  difficulty  should  drive  us  to 
this  Divine  haven.  III.  A  habboub  of  eepaxb  equips  fob  futubb  voyages 
AND  SERViCB.  Acceptance  with  God  is  not  a  fact  which  should  be  exclusively,  or 
even  chiefly,  associated  with  the  close  of  life.  It  is  not  life's  end,  but  the  begin- 
ning of  new  effort  towards  a  better  life.  If  the  truth  has  done  anything  in  us  to 
make  us  free,  it  is  that  we  may  go  forth  afresh  to  meet  the  rising  storms,  ourselves, 
perhaps,  to  be  yet  more  beaten  about  and  tried,  but  as  a  recompense  to  know 
that  we  help  some  to  find  the  great  salvation,  to  enter  into  His  rest.  There  will 
always  be  Divine  strength  for  Divine  work.  Let  us  remember  in  our  religious 
joy,  that  the  haven  of  refuge  is  a  haven  of  repair,  and  that  this  always  means 
iiiore  work  for  God.  {W.  E.  Jackson.)  The  strength  of  the  children 
of  Israel. — Christ  our  strength: — Few  things  have  been  more  coveted  by  man 
than  strength.  But  man's  superiority  to  the  brutes  lies  in  something  more  than 
physical  strength.  Yet  neither  a  big  biceps  nor  a  big  brain  makes  the  man  in  the 
iikeness  of  God.  The  really  strong  men  have  often  to  be  sought  elsewhere  than 
in  the  ranks  of  warriors  and  statesmen.  Strength  is  not  the  less  real  for  being 
spiritual.  What  and  whence  is  such  strength  as  this  ?  L  The  Stoic  idea  of 
man's  spiritual  power.  Epictetus  thus  gives  man's  object  in  living.  It  is 
"  to  know  God  perfectly,  to  love  Him,  to  obey  Him,  to  please  Him,  to  overcome 
all  vices,  to  acquire  all  virtues,  and  so  to  render  ourselves  holy  and  companions 
of  God."  Then  why  did  Stoicism  fail  ?  Because  the  Stoic  philosopher  also 
claims  that  man  has  in  himself  every  means  of  acquitting  himself  of  all  these 
obligations,  and  that  the  means  are  always  within  his  own  power.  In  man 
the  mind  is  fiee  to  believe  only  what  is  true,  and  the  will  is  free  to  follow  only 
what  is  right.  11.  The  Epicueean  idea  of  man's  spiritual  powbb.  This 
Bchool  claims  that  so  far  from  the  mind  teaching  us  truth,  there  is  nothing 
we  can  positively  state  as  truth.  And  so  far  from  our  will  being  always  for 
happiness,  and  in  the  right,  it  is  generally  likely  to  lead  tis  into  trouble. 
III.  The  Christian  idea.  Christianity,  steering  between  Hegelian  and 
Calvinistic  theories  of  human  nature,  teaches  that  the  mind  of  man,  perfectly 
informed,  may  possess  right  knowledge ;  and  the  will  of  man,  perfectly  estab- 
lished, may  be  capable  of  right  conduct.  But  it  recognises  that  man  as  yet 
is  not  thus  perfect.  His  mind  is  struggling  for  light,  his  will  for  guidance. 
Christ  is  the  strength  of  the  people  of  God.  In  His  presence  man's  pride 
must  go,  since  he  will  recognise  his  incompleteness  and  weakness;  and  hia 
idleness  must  go,  since  he  will  recognise   the   grace   offered  to   honest  effort. 


CHAP,  m.]  JOEL.  69 

Laying  hold  on  the  strength  of  Christ,  you  are  using  the  resources  of  Omni- 
potence.    (H.  H.  Oowen.) 

Vers.  18-21.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  moontains 
shall  drop  down  new  wine. — The  golden  age : — I.  It  will  bb  an  age  in 
WHICH  grkat  temporal  prosperity  will  be  witnessed.  "  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine,  and  the  hills 
shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters."  Here 
we  have  set  forth  the  temporal  prosperity  which  the  Church  of  God  is  destined 
to  enjoy  after  the  destruction  of  its  enemies.  The  Church  is  now  in  great  poverty. 
It  does  not  possess  the  good  things  of  the  material  universe.  The  world  itself  is 
barren.  It  is  rendered  so  by  greed  and  covetousness.  But  the  day  is  commg 
when  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth,  and  when  the  earth  shall  spontaneously 
and  richly  yield  her  increase.  The  earth  shall  yield  her  harvest  responsive  to 
the  smile  of  heaven.     II.  It  will  be  an  agb  in  which  the  hallowed  moral 

INFLUENCES    OF   THE    SANCTUARY    SHALL   PERVADE    SOCIETY.       "And    a   fountain 

shall  come  forth  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  water  the  valley  of  Shittim." 
Thus  in  the  age  to  come  there  will  issue  from  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  a  moral 
influence  as  pure,  refreshing,  and  quickening  as  a  stream  of  water,  which  shall  be 
beneficial  to  the  social  life  of  men ;  indeed,  society  will  be  pervaded  by  the  tide 
of  thought,  feeling,  and  praise  which  takes  its  rise  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most 
High.  This  tide  shall  reach  even  to  the  valley  of  Shittim  ;  the  most  distant  and 
barren  places  of  society  shall  be  awakened  into  moral  verdure  by  the  advent  of  the 
life-giving  stream.  III.  It  will  be  an  age  in  which  moral  goodness  will  be 
continuous  and  progressive.  "  But  Judah  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusalem 
from  generation  to  generation."  Then  the  redemption  of  the  good  will  be  eternal. 
They  shall  never  again  be  led  into  captivity.  Their  morad  condition  will  be 
permanent  and  happy :  they  shall  dwell  in  it  for  ever.  Sin  of  every  kind  is 
doomed  to  become  a  "  desolate  wilderness  "  ;  but  purity,  righteousness,  truth, 
and  virtuous  character  shall  continue  and  progress  in  meaning  and  splendour 
through  the  ages.  IV.  It  will  be  an  age  in  which  the  Divine  presence  will 
BE  richly  manifested.  "  For  I  will  cleanse  their  blood  that  I  have  not  cleansed  : 
for  the  Lord  dwelleth  in  Zion."  The  men  of  the  age  will  be  made  morally  pure, 
and  then  God  will  come  and  dwell  in  their  midst.  Lessons: — 1.  The  world  has 
not  yet  reached  its  ideal  condition.  2.  There  are  agencies  at  work  seeking  to 
bring  the  world  under  Divine  influences.  3.  Let  us  derive  encouragement  from 
this  picture  of  the  future  of  the  race.  (J.  S  ExeU,  M.A.)  For  I  will  cleanse 
their  hlood  that  I  have  not  cleansed :  for  the  Lord  dwelleth  in  Zion. — Purified : — 
These  words  must  be  understood  in  the  Christian  and  spiritual,  not  in  the 
Jewish  and  literal  sense.  The  Judah  here  spoken  of  is  the  spiritual  Judah ; 
those  who  are  followers  of  the  Lord,  by  the  regenerating  grace  of  God. 
I.  Vital  consecration  to  God.  "  I  will  cleanse  their  blood  that  I  have 
not  cleansed."  Take  this  strictly  in  a  spiritual  sense.  1.  Medicinally. 
Illustrate  by  the  circumstances  of  the  cleansing  of  the  leper.  It  is  said, 
"  the  priest  shall  consider "  ;  and  we  may  be  sure  the  Great  Physician 
will  consider  those  who  seek  Him  with  their  sin-disease.  And  He  will  cleanse 
them,  even  cleanse  the  blood  which  is  the  life.  2.  It  relates  to  their  citizenship. 
For  nothing  that  defileth,  worketh  abomination,  and  maketh  a  lie,  can  enter  into 
the  city,  can  be  reckoned  a  citizen.  II.  The  presence  of  the  Lord.  "  The  Lord 
dwelleth  in  Zion."  1.  As  the  strength  of  Zion.  It  is  strong  if  salvation  be  the 
walls.  2.  As  the  security,  or  peace,  of  Zion.  The  defence  of  His  people.  3.  As 
the  source  of  happiness  to  His  people.  (James  Wells.)  A  happy  Church: — 
Three  things  promised  it.  1.  Purity.  "  I  will  cleanse,"  &c.  Put  last  here,  as  a 
reason  for  the  rest.  2.  Plenty.  "  The  mountains  shall  drop  new  wine."  Such 
abundance  shaU  they  have  of  suitable  provision.  3.  Perpetuity.  This  crowns 
the  rest.  ( 1 )  The  Church  of  Christ  shall  continue  in  the  world  to  the  end  of  time. 
All  the  living  members  of  that  Church  shall  be  established  in  their  happiness 
to  the  utmost  ages  of  eternity.  (Matthew  Henry.)  For  the  Lord  dwelleth 
in  Zion.  —  God  and  the  Church :  —  The  statement  of  the  prophet  amounts 
to  this — that  the  Lord  bears  a  peculiar  relation  to  the  Church.  I.  The  Church 
is  the  greatest  witness  of  God.  The  very  existence  of  the  Church  on  earth 
shows  that  it  is  a  witness  of  God's  being,  providence,  and  redemption.  This  will 
appear  if  we  consider — 1.  The  Church  of  God  is  decidedly  opposed  to  the  principles 
and  practice  of  the  great  mass  of  mankind.     Its  creed  and  conduct  are  thought 


70  '  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cblax.  m. 

to  be  holy,  jast,  benevolent,  and  productive  of  happiness.  2.  A  great  portion 
of  mankind  have  in  every  age  and  clime  opposed  tne  Church.  You  cannot  put 
your  finger  on  a  page  of  ecclesiastical  history  without  discovering  this.  3.  Still 
the  Church  not  only  has  existed,  but  it  has  increased.  I  am  not  able  to  account 
for  this  unless  it  be  Divine  interposition.  From  these  considerations  we  can 
confidently  say  that  the  Church  is  a  living  witness  of  God  in  the  midst  of  faithless 
generations.  May  it  ever  be  a  bold,  brave,  honest  witness  against  sin  m  all  its 
forms.  IL  The  Church  is  the  brightest  illustbation  of  God.  1.  By  publishing 
God's  own  revelations.  This  was  done  by  writing,  translating,  ana  printing. 
If  this  had  not  been  done,  we  shoidd  have  been  to  this  day  under  the  inmience  of 
Dmidism.  Let  the  Word  of  (Jod  have  free  course,  and  wherever  it  goes  it  will 
cause  the  wilderness  to  blossom  as  the  rose,  and  the  parched  earth  to  appear  in 
verdure,  fertility,  and  beauty.  2.  By  imitating  His  moral  perfections.  It  not 
only  says  such  a  being  as  God  exists,  but  in  effect  says.  Look  on  me,  and  yon 
shaJl  see  God's  character  exhibited.  One  of  the  servants  of  Plato  said  once,  very 
sagaciously,  "  Plato  has  written  a  book  against  anger,  and  yet  he  is  one  of  the  most 
angry  of  men."  Christians  speak  much  of  Christianity  as  a  system  of  love,  yet 
they  are  hating  and  persecuting  one  another.  III.  The  Church  is  the  highest 
rNSTBTJiiENT  OF  GoD.  1.  It  ameliorates  the  outward  sufferings  of  the  world. 
I  believe  that  there  is  throughout  the  world  a  favourable  disposition  towards 
Christianity,  because  it  is  calculated  to  better  the  temporal  condition  of  mankind. 
Let  us  enaeavour  not  to  contradict  this  impression.  2.  It  converts  the  moral 
heart  of  the  world.  What  a  noble  work  God  has  given  His  Church  to  do  ;  what  a 
solemn  charge  !  The  conversion  of  the  whole  world.  Let  every  individual  feel 
his  own  responsibility.  Let  us  unite  in  prayer,  that  we  may  be  baptised  with 
the  Holy  Ghost.    {Cal^  Morris.) 


INTRODUCTION   TO   AMOS. 

No  better  illustration  of  the  perfect  freeness  with  which  the  Holy  Ghost  selected 
the  men  who  spoke  in  old  time  to  the  fathers  could  be  desired  than  that  which 
is  furnished  by  the  contrast  between  Joel  and  Amos.  Not  more  than  half  a 
century  separated  the  periods  of  their  prophetic  activity ;  and  perhaps  they 
had  actually  looked  one  another  in  the  face.  They  were  both  men  of  God,  both 
natives  of  the  same  little  land,  both  commissioned  to  preach  to  one  people — 
the  people  whom  Jehovah  had  chosen  for  His  own.  Yet  they  were  entirely 
distinct  in  temperament  and  in  personal  surroundings.  Joel  was  tender  and 
pitiful,  and  Amos  rigorous  and  severe.  Joel's  words  were  those  of  a  cultured 
citizen  ;  Amos  sprang  from  the  poor  of  the  people,  and  his  language  was  simpler 
and  stronger  and  more  keen  and  cutting,  coming  from  the  heart  of  a  man  who 
had  himself  borne  the  yoke  in  his  youth.  Joel  was  a  child  of  the  busy  town  ; 
Amos  was  a  child  of  the  quiet  country-side,  summoned  from  the  spade  and  the 
goad  to  preach  to  the  educated  ranks  of  men.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  shone  through 
both  alike,  and  spoke  with  the  lips  of  both.  For  there  are  seasons  when  His 
light  is  the  white  light  of  the  diamond,  and  other  seasons  when  it  is  the  ruddy 
glow  of  the  ruby.  His  voice  may  be  compassionate  to-day,  and  full  of  an  awfiil 
solemnity  to-morrow. 

I-  What  was  the  history  of  Amos  ? — They  are  but  hints  and  glimpses  of 
his  biography  which  he  gives  us  ;  but,  slight  as  they  are,  they  tell  us  a  good  deal. 
His  home  was  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  not  in  any  of  its  great  centres  of  life, 
but  in  the  little  town  of  Tekoa,  which  lies  some  six  miles  south  of  Bethlehem. 
Far  away  on  the  horizon  he  saw  the  summits  of  Ohvet,  which  were  so  well  known 
to  Joel ;  but  the  scenes  among  which  he  was  nurtured  were  different  altogether 
from  those  familiar  to  one  born  and  trained  in  the  city.  Though  Tekoa  was 
itself  a  fruitful  spot,  well  adapted  for  flocks  and  for  the  cultivation  of  the  sycamore- 
fig,  it  lay  on  the  very  edge  of  the  wilderness.  Immediately  beyond  it  fertility 
ceased.  The  eye  looked  out  on  rugged  and  desolate  mounta-ns,  and  through  the 
gorges  between  the  barren  hills  ghttered  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea.  In  this 
last  outpost  which  man  had  snatched  from  nature,  Amos  had  his  birthplace ;  and 
most  of  his  life  was  spent  among  these  solitudes.  He  was  one  of  the  herdsmen 
of  the  district,  not  himself  the  owner  of  large  flocks,  but  simply  the  guardian  of  the 
sheep  and  lambs  that  belonged  to  another.^  He  was  a  poor  man,  and  his  usual 
food,  he  tells  us,  was  the  sycamore  fruit,  one  of  the  coarsest  and  least  desirable 
of  all  the  fruits  of  Canaan.     But  the  prophet's  vision  and  faculty  are  not  the 

^  It  is  true  that  the  word  Noqed,  by  which  Amos  designates  himself,  is  applied 
in  2  Kings  iii.  4  to  Mesha,  King  of  Moab, — the  king  so  interesting  to  us  as  being 
the  subject  of  the  inscription  on  the  Moabite  stone — applied  to  him  as  the  rich 
proprietor  of  a  choice  breed  of  sheep.  But  Amos  tells  us  that  he  followed  the 
flock  as  a  simple  shepherd  (vii.  14,  15).  The  sheep  were  not  his  possession,  they 
were  only  his  care. 

ill 


INTRODUCTION  TO  AMOS. 


prerogatives  of  the  rich,  and  Gfod's  grace  can  exalt  those  of  low  degree  to  the 
chief  seats  in  His  kingdom.  In  the  loneliness  of  the  desert  Amos  was  prepared 
little  by  little  for  his  life-task.  If  we  study  his  prophecy  we  shall  find  that  he 
was  taught  wisdom  by  two  great  instructors.  He  read  much  in  the  book  of 
nature  which  lay  open  before  him.  The  imagery  of  his  visions  is  dra\vn  from 
his  life  in  the  country.  The  locusts  in  the  meadow,  the  basket  of  fruit,  the 
shepherds  fighting  with  the  lions  for  their  prey,  the  sifting  of  corn,  the  foaming 
winter  torrents  that  descend  to  the  Dead  Sea,  the  midnight  sky,  in  which  the 
seven  stars  and  Orion  shine  conspicuously — such  are  his  metaphors.  It  was 
the  sublime  and  tragic  in  the  outside  world,  rather  than  the  merely  beautiful, 
which  fascinated  the  mind  of  Amos.  When  the  writer  of  such  a  psalm  as  the 
nineteenth  opened  his  eyes  on  nature  he  beheld  it  with  a  gaze  of  childlike  joy. 
The  sun  was  like  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber,  and  rejoicing  as  a 
strong  man  to  run  his  race.  But  the  prophet  looked  on  the  world  with  other 
eyes.  He  was  impressed  by  the  nakedness  and  changelessness  of  the  desert 
on  the  confines  of  which  he  had  his  home,  by  the  overwhelming  grandeur  of  the 
heavens,  which  bent  over  him  at  night  as  he  watched  beside  his  flocks,  by  the 
conflict  and  death  which  he  saw  around  him.  This  proneness  to  meditate  on 
the  more  terrible  aspects  of  the  outer  world  was  to  colour  his  words  when  God 
called  him  away  from  the  sheepfolds.  He  loved  to  point  his  teaching  by  wild 
and  disquieting  images  taken  from  what  he  had  himself  seen,  telling  his  hearera 
how  Jehovah  would  crush  Israel  "  as  a  waggon  full  of  sheaves  presses  what  is 
under  it,"  how  the  remnant  left  of  the  people  would  be  "  as  when  the  shepherd 
saves  from  the  mouth  of  the  lion  two  feet  or  a  piece  of  an  ear,"  how  like  some 
devouring  animal  the  Lord  would  roar  out  of  Zion  on  the  shuddering  and  doomed 
nation.  Thus  from  the  great  picture-book  of  nature  Amos  gleaned  many  pro- 
found thoughts  and  many  solemn  truths.  But  during  those  years  of  preparation 
he  read  deeply,  too,  in  another  book — the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord.  He 
brooded  over  the  revelation  which  before  his  time  Gfod  had  given  to  His  people. 
He  traced  His  doings  in  history,  in  the  vicissitudes  which  had  befallen  the  nation 
of  Israel,  and  in  those  of  other  nations  too.  In  this  fashion  he  sought  to  gather 
for  himself  some  conception  of  the  Divine  character,  and  some  understanding  of 
the  principles  which  regulate  the  Divine  government.  That  his  endeavour  was 
not  in  vain  his  writings  make  very  clear.  In  his  sohtude  he  learned  much  of 
the  ways  of  God  to  man  ;  and  when  at  last  he  came  forth  to  speak  on  behalf 
of  the  Lord  to  the  mightiest  in  the  land,  he  was  able  to  enforce  his  declarations 
by  many  references  to  God's  dealings  in  the  past.  The  law  of  Moses  was  familiar 
to  him,  and  he  recalled  its  commandments  and  threatenings  to  the  minds  of 
his  listeners.  He  knew  of  the  forty  years'  march  through  the  wilderness,  and  of 
the  idolatry  into  which  the  people  fell  in  former  days.  (Amos  ii.  10,  v.  25,  26). 
He  reiterated  in  some  of  its  very  expressions  the  prophecy  of  Balaam  against 
Moab.  Compare  his  words,  "  Moab  shall  die  with  tumult,"  with  those  of  Balaam 
in  Numb.  xxiv.  17,  where  the  Star  of  Jacob  is  said  to  "  smite  the  corners  of  Moab 
and  destroy  all  the  children  of  tumult."  He  hinted  at  the  story  of  Jacob  and 
Esau,  when  he  denounced  the  sin  of  Edom.  "His  brother"  (chap.  i.  11)  is, 
of  course,  Jacob.  He  repeated  once  and  again  the  phrases  of  his  predecessor 
Joel.  Compare  Amos  i,  2  with  Joel  iii.  16 ;  Amos  v.  18  with  Joel  ii.  I  et  seq. 
We  cannot  but  feel  that  the  bleak  and  lonely  desert  was  the  best  of  all  schools 
for  Amos.  There  he  was  moulded  into  fitness  for  a  great  and  perilous  enterprise. 
There,  like  Moses  and  Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist,  he  was  taught  by  Grod  Himself. 
And  one  day  the  wilderness  life  came  suddenly  to  an  end.  He  received  the  call 
of  Jehovah  to  special  work.  The  glory  and  the  burden  of  the  prophet  were  laid 
upon  him.  How  the  wish  of  heaven  was  indicated  we  cannot  tell ;  but  there 
was  not  a  doubt  left  on  the  mind  of  Amos  that  God  had  summoned  him  to 
unwonted  scenes  and  hazardous  duties.  He  had  no  choice  in  the  matter,  and 
he  desired  none.  "  The  lion  had  roared,"  he  said  in  his  own  characteristic  style — 
once  for  all  he  had  heard  the  thunder  of  Jehovah's  voice — and  "  who  could  but 
prophesy  ?  "  So  he  went  out  from  the  desert  to  proclaim  the  message  of  judg- 
ment revealed  to  him.  For  whither  was  the  stern  shepherd  sent  ?  Away  from 
Judah  altogether,  northward  into  the  territory  of  the  ten  tribes  ;  and  not  to 
some  quiet  Israelitish  village  like  the  Tekoa  which  he  knew,  but  to  the  court  of 
the  king,  to  the  brilliant  crowd  that  thronged  the  royal  sanctuary  at  Bethel. 
It  was  not  indeed  a  long  journey,  as  we  reckon  distances  in  our  day  ;  for  Palestine 
in  its  entirety  is  but  a  small  country.     But  it  transported  Amos  into  a  new  world. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  AMOS. 


In  his  home  he  had  heard  of  the  greatness  and  the  sin  of  Israel  ;  now  he  saw  them 
with  his  own  eyes.  Somewhere  in  the  closing  years  of  the  ninth  century  before 
Christ  this  memorable  expedition  took  place.  Jeroboam  II.  was  reigning  at 
the  time  over  the  Northern  Kingdom.  Under  his  rule  it  had  reached  its  highest 
splendour.  He  "  restored  the  coast  of  Israel,"  we  are  told  in  the  historical  books, 
"  from  the  entering  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain."  He  was  a  brave  and 
vigorous  man,  though  "  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  " ;  and  his  arms  had 
been  successful  everywhere.  His  subjects  were  secure  in  the  consciousness  of 
their  strength.  They  did  not  dream  of  disaster  or  defeat.  But  the  proud  and 
careless  kingdom  was  being  undermined  from  within.  Its  sins  were  sapping 
its  vitality.  These  sins,  we  learn  from  the  denunciations  of  Amos,  were  of  three 
kinds.  The  root  evil,  from  which  the  others  sprang,  was  the  corruption  of  the 
worship  of  Jehovah.  Induced  as  much  by  political  as  by  religious  reasons,  the 
rulers  of  Israel  had  erected  golden  calves  at  Bethel  and  Gilgal  within  their  own 
territories,  and  at  Beersheba  in  the  far  south  for  such  of  their  subjects  as  had 
settled  there.  Their  design  was  to  prevent  the  ten  tribes  from  repairing  to  God's 
house  in  Jerusalem  ;  for,  had  they  been  permitted  to  join  the  people  of  Judea 
in  the  great  annual  feasts,  they  might  have  been  won  back  to  their  allegiance 
to  the  house  of  David,  and  the  separation  between  the  kingdoms  would  have  been 
brought  to  an  end.  To  secure  their  continued  independence  the  sovereigns  of 
the  North  established  a  special  ritual  and  founded  sanctuaries  of  their  own ;  and 
at  these  sanctuaries  they  commanded  their  people  to  serve  God.  The  character 
of  the  religion  practised  at  the  shrines  of  Israel  must  not  be  misapprehended. 
It  was  far  from  the  pm-e  worship  of  Jehovah,  but  just  as  certainly  it  was  not 
rank  and  utter  idolatry,  like  the  service  of  Baal.  It  was  the  adoration  of  the 
true  Lord  under  visible  forms  and  images.  Doubtless  many  genuine  lovers  of 
Jehovah  bent  the  knee  before  the  golden  image  at  Bethel,  even  as  in  corrupt 
chiu-ches  of  our  own  day  there  may  be  much  simple  and  earnest  piety.  And  it 
was  not  otherwise  in  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Israel.  In  spite  of  its  erroneous 
worship,  numbers  of  its  citizens  may  have  been  the  children  and  servants  of  Him 
who  is  not  like  unto  gold  or  silver  or  stone  graven  by  art  and  man's  device.  The 
fact  that  God  still  spoke  with  them  through  His  prophets  is  proof  in  itself  that 
He  had  not  quite  cast  them  off,  and  that,  while  their  religion  was  sadly  mixed 
with  evil,  it  was  not  entirely  false  in  His  sight.  But  notwithstanding  all  this, 
they  sinned  grievously  when  they  tried  to  frame  an  outward  likeness  of  the  Lord 
who  transcends  thought  and  sense  ;  and  He  told  them,  by  the  mouth  of  Amos, 
that  the  altar  of  Bethel  was  an  abomination  to  Him.  And  this  initial  sin  was 
speedily  followed  by  other  offences  ;  for  when  once  the  worship  of  God  is  cor- 
rupted, it  is  hard  to  keep  contamination  out  of  any  department  of  human  life. 
The  little  leaven  very  soon  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.  Luxuriousness  and 
effeminacy,  with  the  sensual  lusts  which  generally  accompany  them,  were  but 
too  common  in  Samaria.  The  prophet  describes  its  inhabitants  as  lying  on  beds 
of  ivory  and  stretching  themselves  on  couches,  as  chanting  to  the  sound  of  the 
viol  and  inventing  to  themselves  instruments  of  music,  as  drinking  in  bowls  of 
wine  and  anointing  themselves  with  the  finest  ointments.  And  he  found  them 
willing  to  stain  their  lives  with  even  darker  crimes,  of  which  an  apostle  says  that 
it  is  a  shame  so  much  as  to  speak.  Many  of  these  proud  Israelites  were  sunk 
in  the  grossest  impurity,  as  the  clear-sighted  shepherd  from  the  desert  quickly 
discovered.  There  was  much  social  oppression,  much  greed  of  gain,  much 
injustice  done  the  destitute  and  helpless.  The  nobles  turned  judgment  into 
wormwood,  Amos  declared.  The  judges  sold  the  righteous  to  obtain  money,  and 
the  poor  for  a  pair  of  sandals.  The  princes  put  the  day  of  calamity  far  off,  and 
brought  the  seat  of  violence  near.  These  were  the  influences  which  were  working 
toward  the  downfall  of  the  state.  Fearless  as  Amos  was,  it  must  have  tested 
his  courage  to  put  into  execution  God's  command  and  to  repair  to  Bethel.  But 
he  obeyed.  His  tragic  words  rang  soon  through  all  the  wayward  northern  country. 
They  were  sharp  as  arrows  in  the  hearts  of  the  King's  enemies.  The  people  were 
bowed  down  before  the  prophet,  as  the  trees  are  bowed  before  the  storm.  Per- 
haps Jeroboam  himself,  like  another  ruler  of  a  later  day,  trembled  for  a  little  aa 
he  listened  to  the  preacher  of  righteousness  and  temperance  and  judgment  to 
come.  But  Amos  made  one  relentless  enemy  in  Israel.  Amaziah,  the  priest  of 
Bethel,  began  to  fear  for  the  reputation  and  the  gains  of  his  sanctuary.  He 
determined  to  silence  the  daring  speaker.  "Get  thee  hence,  O  seer,"  he  said, 
"flee  into  the  land  of  Judah,  and  there  earn  thy  bread,  and  prophesy  there." 


n  INTRODUCTION  TO  AMOS. 

Judging  Amos  by  himself,  he  regarded  him  as  a  man  whose  prophesying  was  a 
financial  speculation,  and  who  "  had  made  a  bold  stroke  for  notoriety."  The 
Judean  visitor  returned  him  a  prompt  and  pitiless  answer.  "  I  am  no  prophet," 
he  declared,  "  nor  a  prophet's  son,  but  a  simple  herdsman,  whom  Jehovah  took 
of  His  good  will  from  following  the  flocks,  and  sent  to  this  sinful  place  to  cry 
against  it  a  heavy  and  bitter  woe.  And  thou,  who  callest  thyself  His  servant, 
and  seekest,  nevertheless,  to  close  the  lips  of  His  chosen  messenger,  thou  wilt 
yet  know  His  special  chastisement.  His  fiercest  and  hottest  indignation."  There 
is  a  tradition  that  Amaziah,  angry  at  so  dauntless  a  witness-bearer,  sought  to 
put  him  to  death,  and  that  Amos,  wounded  by  the  attendants  of  the  priest,  crossed 
the  border  of  his  native  Judah  only  to  yield  up  his  spirit  to  God.  But  that  cannot 
have  been  the  case.  For  when  he  had  reached  his  home  again  he  set  himself  to 
write  the  story  of  his  mission  and  the  record  of  the  words  he  had  spoken  while 
he  was  away.  This  book  of  his  prophecy  is  most  carefully  arranged.  Its  sections 
are  linked  artistically  each  to  each.  That  is  the  life-story  of  Amos  of  Tekoa, 
so  far  as  we  can  gather  it  from  the  book  he  has  written.  It  tells  us — does  it  not  ? — 
bow  condescending  God's  grace  is.  This  humble  shepherd  was  His  minister. 
He  chose  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  that  were  mighty. 
It  tells  us,  too,  how  devoid  of  feverish  haste,  and  how  free  from  foolish  pomp 
and  display,  God's  movements  are.  He  spent  a  long  time  in  educating  Amos 
for  a  task  which  was  probably  accomplished  in  a  few  weeks. 

II.  The  prophecy  which  Amos  spoke. — Its  great  theme  is  the  sinfulness 
and  the  doom  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  But,  first,  the  preacher  describes  the 
judgments  of  God  as  about  to  fall  on  the  nations  which  surrounded  the  guilty 
people.  He  glances  rapidly  from  one  to  another,  and,  because  all  have  sinned, 
he  proclaims  against  all  the  Divine  wrath.  Damascus,  Philistia,  Tyre,  Edom, 
Ammon,  Moab,  Judah — there  is  not  one  of  them  which  is  not  ready  for  punish- 
ment. Yet  Israel  is  the  offender  whose  crimes  are  of  the  deej)est  dye.  Its  in- 
habitants were  under  peculiar  obligations  to  be  loyal  to  Jehovah.  He  had  brought 
them  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt.  Very  unsparingly  Amos  exposes  their  trans- 
gressions. He  pleads  with  them,  though  their  evil  was  aggravated  and  the  hour 
was  late  to  seek  the  Lord ;  but,  should  they  continue  impenitent,  he  would  have 
them  know  what  awaits  them.  Even  as  he  spoke  a  teiTible  danger  was  beginning 
to  loom  on  the  horizon.  The  hosts  of  Assyria,  soon  to  be  the  ruling  power  of 
the  world,  were  already  advancing  toward  Israel.  These  hosts  were  in  God's 
band,  and  by  means  of  them  He  would  afflict  His  foolish  and  prodigal  children. 
He  would  cause  them  to  go  into  captivity  "  beyond  Damascus,"  to  the  far  country 
of  Babylon  away  on  the  Euphrates.  Then  Amos  passes  to  relate  some  visions 
which  he  had  been  permitted  to  see.  They  are  all  ominous  of  impending  woe. 
The  grasshoppers  which  devoured  the  harvest ;  the  fire  which  was  so  fierce  that 
it  seemed  to  lick  up  the  very  depths  of  the  sea  ;  the  plumbline  employed  to  mark 
out  the  nation  for  destruction ;  the  basket  of  summer  fruit  which  typified  Israel's 
ripeness  for  judgment ;  the  altar  beside  which  the  Lord  Himself  stood,  ordaining 
a  punishment  from  which  none  should  be  able  to  escape — how  awe-inspiring 
and  weighted  with  sorrow  and  distress  each  one  of  them  is  !  A  short  section 
of  this  latter  division  of  the  prophecy  is  devoted  to  the  recital  of  the  episode  at 
Bethel ;  and  at  the  close,  as  the  manner  of  the  prophets  is,  there  is  a  lightening 
of  the  gloom  which  has  prevailed  all  through.  The  style  of  Amos  corresponds 
well  with  his  own  temperament  and  with  the  character  of  his  message.  It  is 
simple,  stern,  impressive.  His  words  are  pointed  and  powerful,  and  very  often 
fervid  and  glowing.  They  are  words  that  fall  like  a  hammer,  words  that  scorch 
like  a  flame.  Not  so  finished  or  beautiful  as  that  of  Joel,  his  diction  has  a  rugged 
grandeur  of  its  own.  One  thing  strikes  us  as  we  read  his  book.  He  likes  to  get 
hold  of  a  telling  phrase,  and  to  repeat  it  over  and  over  again.  What  a  force  there 
is  in  the  reiterated  formula  of  the  opening  verses,  "  For  three  transgressions  and 
for  four  !  "  What  a  deep  pathos  underlies  the  ever-recurring  refrain  of  the 
foiu-th  chapter,  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord  !  "  He  was 
imacquainted  with  the  learning  of  the  schools ;  but  he  was  not  ignorant  of  the 
orator's  art. 

III.  Lessons  which  Amos  is  so  well  able  to  teach. — I.  He  turns  our  atten- 
tion, we  cannot  but  remark,  to  the  severity  rather  than  to  the  goodness  of  God. 
His  prophecy  closes,  indeed,  with  an  attractive  delineation  of  the  Divine  loving- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  AMOS. 


kindness.  But  before  the  still  small  voice  there  have  been  the  wind  and  the 
earthquake  and  the  fire.  No  doubt,  the  life  of  Amos  in  the  desert  helped  to  im- 
print deep  on  his  conscience  and  heart  thoughts  of  the  Lord's  inflexible  righteous- 
ness and  awful  purity  and  unbending  justice.  Joel,  whose  home  was  in  the  city, 
had  another  and  a  gentler  conception  of  God's  character.  Dwelling  in  the  midst 
of  men  and  women  and  children,  and  loving  them  tenderly,  and  knowing  how 
ready  He  was  to  make  large  allowance  for  their  weaknesses  and  fatdts,  he  clothed 
the  Maker  of  his  heart  with  the  same  sympathies  which  he  found  within  himself. 
Joel's  testimony  concerning  Him  is  true.  Yes,  but  that  of  Amos  is  true  also — 
a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  2.  This  prophet,  too,  insists  upon 
the  universality  of  God's  government.  The  Divine  rule,  he  tells  us,  is  as  wide 
as  the  world.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  Old  Testament  writers  are  exclusive 
in  their  sympathies;  that  they  speak  as  though  Palestine  alone  enjoyed  the 
favour  of  the  Lord;  that  they  regard  all  bom  outside  the  land  of  promise  as 
heathen  men  and  publicans  for  whom  the  God  of  heaven  could  feel  no  care.  But 
these  are  false  notions.  The  Jehovah  of  the  psalmists  and  prophets  is  God  of 
the  whole  earth.  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all.  Amos  was  convinced  of  this 
truth,  and  asserted  it  strongly.  Israel  must  not  imagine,  he  said,  that  God  was 
mindful  of  its  people  alone  ;  for  had  He  not  brought  the  Philistines  from  Caphtor 
and  the  Syrians  from  Kir  ?  Though  He  had  a  special  interest  in  Israel,  His 
providence  was  present  and  powerful  everywhere.  It  was  of  the  judgments  of 
this  universal  Sovereign  that  Amos  chiefly  thought.  But  there  is  comfort,  too, 
in  the  remembrance  that  the  Lord  reigneth  with  a  limitless  and  omnipotent 
sceptre.  He  sitteth  King  upon  the  floods.  He  will  bring  good  out  of  all  the 
evils  which  mar  His  creation,  and  will  turn  wars  into  peace,  and  will  make  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world  the  kingdoms  of  His  Christ.  3.  Once  more  Amos  feels 
strongly  the  necessity  of  uprightness  and  integrity  in  the  outward  life — of  justice 
and  mercy  and  truth  in  the  conduct  from  day  to  day.  He  is  the  great  moralist 
among  the  prophets.  He  occupies  in  the  Old  Testament  the  position  which  the 
Apostle  James  fills  in  the  New.  Perverted  though  the  worship  of  the  Northern 
Kngdom  was,  the  people  were  very  zealous  in  observing  it.  They  loved  to  bring 
their  sacrifices  in  the  early  morning  to  Bethel  and  Gilgal.  They  offered  tithes 
every  three  days.  But  there  were  other  duties  which  the  prophet  would  fain 
have  seen  them  perform.  "  Hate  the  evil  and  love  the  good,  and  establish  judg- 
ment in  the  gate," — these  were  his  commandments.  It  is  the  most  certain  of 
all  certainties  that  God  can  have  no  delight  in  worshippers  who  call  themselves 
by  His  name  and  yet  refuse  to  fulfil  Hia  law.     (Origindt Secession  Magazine.) 

Thr  DATS  OF  Amos. — We  shall  assign  reasons  for  showing  that  the  prophetio 
career  of  Amos  was  probably  subsequent  to  780  B.C.  The  fact  that  the  prophet 
never  makes  mention  of  the  name  of  Assyria,  though  he  refers  expressly  to  the 
destinies  of  surrounding  nations,  seems  to  imply  that  Assyria  was  at  that  period 
not  so  disturbing  a  force  in  Syro- Palestinian  politics  as  it  had  been  in  a  former 
generation,  and  as  it  was  destined  to  become  during  the  ministry  of  the  prophet 
Hosea,  when  the  terrible  invasions  of  Tiglath-pileser  made  the  names  of  Asshur 
and  King  Combat  (Jared)  to  be  names  of  dread.  Accordingly  we  prefer  to  regard 
the  prophetic  ministry  of  Amos  as  exercised  when  Syria  had  begun  to  recover 
from  the  disastrous  invasion  of  Vulnirari  III.  For  the  social,  moral,  and  religious 
condition  of  the  Northern  Kingdom  during  the  period  we  fortunately  possess 
varied  sources  of  information.  Apart  from  the  accounts  contained  in  the  historical 
books,  we  have  the  numerous  allusions  scattered  throughout  the  prophet  Hosea, 
whose  discourses  belong  to  a  somewhat  similar  period,  and  are  extremely  valuable 
as  illustrating  those  of  Amos.  We  thus  obtain  a  tolerably  vivid  conception  of 
this  rilomentous  and  tragic  century — the  last  days  of  Israel's  history.  The 
energetic  rule  and  successful  wars  of  Jeroboam  II.  had  extended  the  bounds  of 
the  kingdom.  Syria  had  been  compelled  to  yield  up  to  him  a  large  tract  of 
country  extending  from  Hamath  to  the  Dead  Sea.  Ammon  and  Moab  had 
become  tributary.  But  the  ease  with  which  these  conquests  were  obtained 
was  due  to  the  dangers  which  threatened  the  very  existence  of  the  Syrian 
states  from  the  Assjnrian  power  which  had  for  many  centuries  been  formidable, 
but  was  now  extending  itself  westward  under  the  energetic  sway  of  Vulnirari 
III.  Under  that  monarch  Syria  received  a  terrible  blow ;  and  it  is  extremely 
probable  that  the  recovery  of  the  Trans-Jordanic  district  by  Jeroboam  from 
Syrian  domination  is  to  be  closely  connected  with  this  temporary  overthrow  o£ 


•via  INTRODUCTION  TO  AMOS. 

Syria  and  the  neighbouring  kingdoms.  .  .  .  The  conception  of  universal  Divine 
sovereignty  was  certainly  not  a  new  one  in  Israel.  But  it  was  made  especially 
prominent  by  Amos,  and  is  the  keynote  of  his  prophecies.  It  is  from  this  stand- 
point that  his  oracles  are  delivered.  While  to  Hosea,  Ephraim's  sin,  whether 
in  morals  or  worship,  appeared  as  an  outrage  to  the  relationship  of  loyalty  and 
love  to  the  Divine  Lord,  it  was  regarded  by  Amos  as  a  violation  of  a  supreme 
rule  and  a  supreme  justice,     (i?.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.) 

The  Book  of  Amos. — The  subject  is  "  Words  concerning  Israel."  I.  Thb 
MATERIAL.  1.  His  first  address,  chapters  i.  ii.  (1)  Threats  against  Damascus 
(i.  3-5),  Gaza  (i.  6-8),  Tyre  (i.  9,  10).  (2)  Threats  against  Edom  (i.  11,  12),  Ammon 
(i.  13-15),  Moab  (ii.  1-3).  (3)  Threat  against  Judah  (ii.  4,  5).  (4)  Threat  against 
Israel :  (a)  Her  sins  enumerated  (ii.  6-12).  (6)  Complete  subjugation  announced 
(ii.  13-16).  2.  The  second  address,  chapters  iii.,  iv.  :  Destruction.  (1)  The 
prophet  justifies  his  mission  (iii.  1-8).  (2)  Let  outside  nations  testify  against 
Israel's  sins  (iii.  9-15).     (3)  The  voluptuous  women  of  Samaria  shall  suffer  (iv.  1-3). 

(4)  Go  on,  Israel,  every  effort  to  reclaim  you  has  failed  ;  utter  destruction  will 
now  come  (iv.   4-13).      3.   The  third  address,   chapters  v.,   vi.  :  Lamentation. 

(1)  The  virgin  Israel  shall  fall  (v.  1-3).  (2)  Instead  of  seeking  God,  she  sins 
against  Him  (v.  4-12).  (3)  Special  classes — the  individual  (v.  13-17) ;  those 
who  pray  for  the  day  of  Jehovah  (v.  18-20) ;  those  who  make  formal  worship 
(v.  21-24).  (4)  Israel,  idolatrous  from  time  immemorial  (v.  25-27).  (5)  The 
chief  men  of  the  city  responsible  for  what  is  coming  (vi.  1-6).  (6)  Not  a 
man  shall  escape  (vi.  8-11).  (7)  Assyria  is  coming  (vi.  12-14).  4.  The  series 
of    visions,    chapters    vii.     1-ix.    10:     Punishment.       (1)    Locusts    (vii.     1-3). 

(2)  Fire  (vii.  4-6).  (3)  Plumb-line  (vii.  7-9).  (4)  Controversy  with  Amaziah 
(vii.  10-17).  (5)  Basket  of  ripe  fruit  (viii.  1-3) ;  an  address  of  warning  based 
upon  this  vision  (viii.  4-14).  (6)  The  broken  altar  (ix.  1);  an  address  based 
upon  this  vision  (ix.  1-10).  5.  Promise  of  restoration  (ix.  11-15).  (1)  David's 
hut.  (2)  Prosperity.  (3)  Restoration.  (4)  Permanency.  II.  The  essential 
IDEAS.  1.  The  prophecy  and  its  fulfilment — three  views.  (1)  Conditional  and  not 
fulfilled.  (2)  Fulfilled  not  in  "  literal "  but  in  "  spiritual "  Israel.  (3)  Literal 
and  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  2.  Teachings  of  the  Book  concerning  prophecy.  (l)In 
reference  to  the  life  of  the  prophet.  (2)  In  reference  to  the  prophet's  method  of 
receiving  the  Divine  message.  (3)  In  reference  to  the  prophet's  method  of 
delivering  the  message.     (4)  In  reference  to  the  prophet's  work  as  statesman. 

(5)  In  reference  to  the  prophet's  work  as  a  reformer.  3.  More  important  ideas. 
(1)  His  teaching  concerning  God.  (2)  His  teaching  concerning  Israel's  relations 
to  God.  (3)  The  prevailing  form  of  worship.  (4)  His  teaching  concerning  the 
future.     (WiUiam  It.  Harper,  Ph.D.) 

The  ethics  of  Amos. — It  is  obvious  that  Amos  only  takes  for  granted  the 
laws  of  righteousness  which  he  enforces :  he  takes  for  granted  also  the  people's 
conscience  of  them.  Now,  indeed,  is  the  doom  which  sinful  Israel  deserves,  and 
original  to  himself  is  the  proclamation  of  it ;  but  Amos  appeals  to  the  moral 
principles  which  justify  the  doom,  as  if  they  were  not  new,  and  as  if  Israel  ought 
always  to  have  Imown  them.  This  attitude  of  the  prophet  to  his  principles  has, 
in  our  time,  suffered  a  curious  judgment.  It  has  been  called  an  anachronism. 
So  absolute  a  morality,  men  say,  had  never  before  been  taught  in  Israel ;  nor 
had  righteousness  been  so  exclusively  emphasised  as  the  purpose  of  Jehovah.  .  .  . 
How  far  is  this  criticism  supported  by  the  facts  ?  To  no  sane  observer  can  the 
religious  history  of  Israel  appear  as  anything  but  a  course  of  gradual  develop- 
ment. Even  in  the  moral  standards,  in  respect  to  which  it  is  confessedly  often 
most  diflBcult  to  prove  growth,  the  signs  of  the  nation's  progress  are  very  manifest. 
Practices  came  to  be  forbidden  in  Israel,  and  tempers  to  be  mitigated,  which  in 
earlier  ages  were  sanctioned  to  their  extreme  by  the  explicit  decrees  of  religion. 
In  the  nation's  attitude  to  the  outer  world  sympathies  arise,  along  with  ideals 
of  spiritual  service,  where  previously  only  war  and  extermination  had  been  enforced 
in  the  name  of  the  Deity.  Now,  in  such  an  evolution  it  is  equally  indubitable 
that  the  longest  and  most  rapid  stage  was  the  prophecy  of  the  eighth  century. 
The  prophets  of  that  time  condemn  acts  which  had  been  inspired  by  then:  immediate 
predecessors.     ((?eo.  Adam  Smith,  D.D.) 

Thb  oedkr  of  pbophkts  attbb  Samuil. — There  was  one  very  remarkable 


INTRODUCTION  TO  AMOS. 


change  effected  by  this  new  order  of  prophets,  probably  the  very  greatest  relief 
which  prophecy  experienced  in  the  course  of  its  evolution.  This  was  separation 
from  the  ritual  and  from  the  implements  of  soothsaying.  Samuel  had  been  both 
priest  and  prophet.  But  after  him  the  names  and  the  duties  were  specialised, 
though  the  specialising  was  incomplete.  While  the  new  Nebi'im  remained  in 
connection  with  the  ancient  centres  of  religion,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  exer- 
cised any  part  of  the  ritual.  The  priests,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  confine 
themselves  to  sacrifice  and  other  forms  of  public  worship,  but  exercised  many 
of  the  so-called  prophetic  functions.  They  also,  as  Hosea  tells  us,  were  expected 
to  give  Toroth — revelations  of  the  Divine  will  on  points  of  conduct  and  order. 
There  remained  with  them  the  ancient  forms  of  oracle — the  Ephod,  or  plated 
image,  the  Teraphim,  the  lot,  and  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  all  of  these  apparently 
still  regarded  as  indispensable  elements  of  religion.  From  such  rude  forms  of 
ascertaining  the  Divine  will,  prophecy  in  its  new  order  w£is  absolutely  free.  And 
it  was  free  of  the  ritual  of  the  sanctuaries.  As  has  been  justly  remarked,  the 
ritual  of  Israel  always  remained  a  peril  to  the  people,  the  peril  of  relapsing  into 
paganism.  Not  only  did  it  materialise  faith,  and  engross  affections  in  the  wor- 
shipper which  were  meant  for  moral  objects,  but  very  many  of  its  forms  were 
actually  the  same  as  those  of  the  other  Semitic  religions,  and  it  tempted  its 
devotees  to  the  confusion  of  their  God  with  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  Prophecy 
was  now  wholly  independent  of  it,  and  we  may  see  in  such  independence  the 
possibility  of  aJl  the  subsequent  career  of  prophecy  along  moral  and  spiritual 
lines.     (Ibid.) 

The  old  Testament  pkophet. — He  is  a  speaker  for  God.  The  sharer  of  God's 
counsels,  as  Amos  calls  him,  he  becomes  the  bearer  and  preacher  of  God's  Word. 
Prediction  of  the  future  is  only  a  part,  and  often  a  subordinate  and  accidental 
part,  of  an  office  whose  full  function  is  to  declare  the  character  and  will  of  God. 
But  the  prophet  does  this  in  no  systematic  or  abstract  form.  He  brings  his 
revelation  point  by  point,  and  in  connection  with  some  occasion  in  the  history 
of  his  people,  or  some  phase  of  their  character.  He  is  not  a  philosopher  nor  a 
theologian  with  a  system  of  doctrine  (at  least  before  Ezekiel),  but  the  messenger 
and  herald  of  God  at  some  crisis  in  the  life  and  conduct  of  his  people.  His 
message  is  never  out  of  touch  with  events.  These  form  either  the  subject- 
matter  or  the  proof,  or  the  execution  of  every  oracle  he  uttered.  It  is  therefore 
God,  not  merely  as  Truth,  but  far  more  as  Providence,  whom  the  prophet  reveals. 
And  although  that  providence  includes  the  full  destiny  of  Israel  and  mankind, 
the  prophet  brings  the  news  of  it,  for  the  most  part,  piece  by  piece,  with  reference 
to  some  present  sin  or  duty,  or  some  impending  crisis  or  calamity.  Yet  he  does 
all  this,  not  merely  because  the  word  needed  for  the  day  has  been  committed  to 
him  by  itself,  and  as  if  he  were  only  its  mechanical  vehicle,  but  because  he  has 
come  under  the  overwhelming  conviction  of  God's  presence  and  of  His  character, 
a  conviction  often  so  strong  that  God's  Word  breaks  through  him,  and  God  speak* 
in  the  first  person  to  the  people.     (Ibid.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

AMOS. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vbb.  1.  The   words    of  Amos,    who   was   among:    the    herdmen   of  Tekoa.— ■ 

Amos  : — Though  a  native  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  Amos  was  sent  with  a  message 
to  the  ten  tribes.  The  unity  of  the  two  kingdoms  was  not  the  less  real  that 
their  histories  were  divergent.  In  its  origin,  idea,  and  ultimate  aim,  the  theo- 
cracy was  one.  The  division  which  took  place  after  the  death  of  Solomon  was 
a  departure  from  the  original  conception,  and  the  fruit  of  human  sin.  Yet, 
like  many  other  events  in  which  the  Divine  purpose  seems  to  fail,  it  was  so  over- 
ruled as  to  promote  the  very  end  which  it  apparently  frustrated.  Not  only 
were  the  two  kingdoms  a  sovu-ce  of  moral  discipline — a  mutual  check  to  each 
other — but  a  richer,  fuller  illustration  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  was 
rendered  possible  than  would  otherwise  have  been  attainable.  This  unity  in 
diversity,  and  diversity  in  imity,  this  double  development,  which  is  yet  one, 
must  not  be  overlooked  if  we  would  understand  aright  the  history  of  God's  cove- 
nant people.  Whatever  the  two  kingdoms  were  to  their  own  thoughts,  they 
were  one  in  the  eyes  of  God.  Diu*ing  the  vigorous  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  the 
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  attained  to  a  high  pitch  of  prosperity  and  power.  Aa 
this  resulted  from  energy  in  the  administration,  rather  than  in  any  deeper  moral 
principle,  it  only  hastened  the  progress  of  inward  decay.  Luxury,  oppression 
of  the  poor,  lewdness,  and  profligacy  in  its  many  varied  forms,  followed  in  the 
train.  It  was  thus  to  a  people  at  the  crisis  of  their  destiny,  in  the  height  of 
apparent,  but  delusive  prosperity,  that  Amos,  the  humble  herdman  of  Tekos, 
and  gatherer  of  sycamore  fruit,  was  sent.  The  circumstances  of  his  mission 
gave  occasion  to  a  new  step  being  taken  in  advance  in  the  development  of  the 
prophetic  testimony.  Joel,  Amos's  immediate  predecessor,  prophesied  to  those 
who  were  chargeable,  indeed,  with  much  formality  and  shallowness  of  profession, 
and  were  therefore  justly  liable  to  severe  chastisement,  but  who  were  yet  free 
from  gross  and  open  vice.  Hence,  in  unveiling  the  great  movements  of  the 
future,  he  still  identifies  generally  the  covenant  people  with  the  friends  of  God 
and  the  objects  of  Divine  deliverance ;  and  "  the  nations  "  generally  with  the 
enemies  of  God,  and  the  objects  of  His  righteous  vengeance.  In  reading  the 
Book  of  Amos,  we  find  oxirselves  breathing  another  atmosphere.  The  prophet 
no  doubt  first  proclaims  exterminating  judgment  against  the  surroimding  nations, 
but  this  is  only  the  prelude  to  the  announcement  of  a  similar  doom  on  the  chosen 
people  themselves,  who  were  eagerly  following  in  the  footsteps  of  the  heathen. 
The  prospect  is  held  out,  indeed,  of  blessing  in  the  end,  but  not  in  a  form  that 
could  convey  the  slightest  comfort  or  hope  to  that  ungodly  generation.  To  them 
at  least  it  waa  made  abundantly  plain  that,  like  their  rebellious  fathers  of  old, 
they  should  spend  theu:  days  in  a  wilderness  of  tribulation,  and  sho  'Id  not  be 
permitted  to  see  the  promised  rest.  The  book  consists  of  a  somewhat  lengthened 
introduction,  chaps,  i.  ii. — followed  by  two  chief  divisions.  The  first,  chaps, 
iii.-vi.,  in  the  simple  form  of  prophetic  addresses.  The  second,  chaps,  vii.-ix., 
in  a  series  of  visions.  The  whole  being  concluded  with  a  promise  of  future 
deliverance  and  blessing.  (Robert  Smith,  M. A.)  Amos  : — This  was  the  earliest 
of  four  prophets,  who  all  appeared  during  the  time  when  Assyria  was  the  greatest 
I 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

worl  -power,  the  other  three  being  Hosea,  Micah,  and  Isaiah.  It  was  probably 
during  the  latter  half  of  Jeroboam's  reign  that  the  prophet  Amos  appeared 
It  was  the  age  of  Israel's  greatest  splendom* ;  but  prosperity,  as  is  so  often  the 
case,  brought  the  saddest  evils  in  its  train.  Although  the  Book  of  Kings  passes 
quickly  over  the  reign  of  Jeroboam,  and  gives  the  briefest  details,  yet  the  pages 
of  Amos  and  Hosea  abound  with  descriptions  of  the  fearful  evils  which  had  crept 
in  along  with  the  renewed  prosperity  of  the  nation.  The  simplicity  which  had 
once  characterised  the  national  life  had  completely  gone.  In  defiance  of  the 
Mosaic  law,  a  class  of  nobles  had  arisen,  who  possessed  large  estates,  into  which 
they  swept  the  smaller  holdings,  and  "  misused  their  power  to  oppress  the  masses, 
who  had  sunk  into  a  condition  of  poverty,  and  in  some  cases  even  actual  slavery." 
Notwithstanding  the  terrible  social  evils,  a  show  of  worship  was  kept  up.  The 
people  sedulously  attended  the  sanctuaries,  and  brought  in  abtindance  their 
sacrifices  and  bumt-ofiferings.  It  would  have  seemed  most  unlikely  that  the 
luxurious  Israelite  nobles  and  this  humble  man,  Amos,  would  ever  have  any- 
thing to  do  with  each  other.  Yet  this  was  the  man  whose  voice  was  to  ring  through- 
out the  nation  in  imsparing  condemnation  of  its  many  vices.  Amos  may  be 
pictured  as  a  lonely  man,  whose  spirit  was  deeply  stirred  within  him  by  the  know- 
ledge of  the  sins  which  were  being  committed  by  the  people :  a  man  with  a  heart 
completely  given  to  God,  his  whole  being  consecrated  to  Jehovah's  service.  In 
the  silence  of  his  native  fields  Amos  was  spoken  to  by  Jehovah,  and  received 
the  commission  to  be  His  prophet.  He  responded  to  the  call.  Like  so  many 
others,  he  forsook  all  to  obey  the  Divine  summons.  He  journeyed  into  the  territory 
of  Israel,  and  made  Bethel,  Samaria,  and  other  places  his  headquarters.  The 
average  observer  would  have  seen  in  the  northern  kingdom  a  nation  at  the  zenith 
of  its  prosperity,  and  would  not  have  thought  of  its  fall.  But  the  keen  eye 
of  the  prophet  pierced  through  the  glittermg  cover  which  wealth  had  thrown 
over  the  foulest  corruption.  .  .  .  There  are  two  truths  of  vast  importance  on 
which  Amos  especially  insists.  He  "  starts  from  the  thought  of  the  universal 
sovereignty  of  God."  That  is  the  one  truth.  The  other  is  the  need  for  righteous- 
ness. If  the  words  which,  more  than  any  others,  describe  the  nature  of  his  pro- 
phecies had  to  be  given,  we  could  find  none  more  appropriate  than  these  :  "  Let 
judgment  roll  down  as  waters,  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty  (or  overflowing) 
stream "  (chap.  vii.  7-17).  The  prophet  taught  persistently  that  God  is  ever 
closely  watching  the  doings  of  nations  and  of  men,  and  that  He  will  reward  or 

!)unish  them  in  accordance  with  the  eternal  law  of  righteousness.  The  great 
esson  he  has  emphasised  is,  that  every  sinful  nation,  no  matter  how  great  and 
prosperous  it  may  seem,  will  assuredly  perish ;  that  the  real  strength  of  a  people 
consists  in  righteousness.  [Ernest  Elliot.)  The  herdman  of  Tekoa : — The 
prophet  was  by  birth  and  residence  a  citizen  of  Judea.  He  belonged  to  the 
district  of  Tekoa,  a  small  town  some  twelve  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  perched 
on  a  high  hill,  looking  away  eastwards  across  a  waste  of  barren  hills  to  the  Dead 
Sea  peeping  through  their  interstices,  and  the  lofty  tableland  of  Moab  bound- 
ing the  horizon  beyond.  It  stands  on  the  edge  of  the  desert,  where  the  fringes 
of  agriculture  thin  away  into  a  wilderness  of  rock  and  sand,  broken  only  by 
scattered  patches  of  scanty  pasturage.  The  town  can  never  have  been  much 
more  than  a  prosperous  village  ;  but  the  adjacent  soil  is  fruitful  and  kindly, 
and  its  oil  and  honey  became  celebrated  for  their  excellence.  For  strategic  pur- 
poses, it  was  fortified  by  Rehoboam,  and  it  had  the  advantage  of  lying  in  a  region 
intersected  by  some  of  the  busiest  highways  of  commerce.  Its  inhabitants  might 
see  much  and  hear  more,  and,  in  connection  with  trading  caravans,  be  drawn 
into  travel  and  become  acquainted  with  the  world  and  its  doings.  The  place 
was  thus,  in  several  ways,  not  imsuitable  for  the  training  of  a  prophet ;  and  it 
is  arbitrary  to  argue,  as  two  or  three  scholars  have  recently  done,  because  there 
is  now  no  sycamore  culture  in  the  district,  and  because  Amos  possesses  an  intimate 
knowledge  of  the  north,  that  therefore  we  must  look  for  another  Tekoa  some- 
where in  Samaria.  .  .  .  Spite  of  a  floating  tradition  to  the  contrary,  which 
still  survives  in  popular  circles,  the  literary  merits  of  the  Book  of  Amos  must 
be  rated  very  high.  The  general  information  of  the  writer  is  comprehensive 
and  minute.  He  can  paint  in  detail  the  religious  customs,  the  social  conditions, 
the  local  circumstances  and  vicissitudes  of  every  part  of  the  northern  kingdom. 
With  the  geography  and  history,  the  alliances  and  feuds,  trade  relations,  national 
institutions,  and  aspirations  of  the  neighbouring  nations,  he  is  thoroughly  familiar. 
He  is  possessed  of  profound  ideas  about  nature,   providence,   the  movements 


CHAP.  I.]  AMOS.  3 

of  races,  and  their  place  and  function  in  the  world's  government.  For  breadth 
of  survey,  for  strength  and  massiveness  of  conception,  alike  in  morals  and  in 
religion,  he  is  not  svirpassed  by  any  of  the  prophets.  He  is  a  poet,  orator,  philo- 
sopher, statesman.  But  in  those  days  and  in  his  social  environment,  he  might 
be  all  this  without  being  a  man  of  books  and  cities.  Native  genius,  interest 
in  the  traditions  of  his  people,  intercourse  with  passing  caravans,  personal  visits 
to  distant  parts,  and  a  spirit  awake  to  the  presence  and  working  of  God  in  human 
history,  past,  present,  and  future, — these  were  influences  potent  enough  to  educate 
the  man,  and  admirably  adapted  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  prophet.  And 
this  school  was  equally  open  to  him,  whether  he  was  a  poor  man,  living  by  his 
labolur,  now  in  one  service,  now  in  another,  or  a  prosperous  sheep-master  and 
wealthy  owner  of  fig  orchards.  Jerome  remarks  that  Amos  was  "  rude  in  speech, 
but  not  in  knowledge  " ;  and  Jewish  tradition  has  been  pleased  to  credit  him  with 
a  stutter  or  impediment  of  speech.  This  is  probably  the  origin  of  a  mistaken 
idea  that  his  book  is  badly  written,  or  at  least  betrays  the  rusticity  of  its  author. 
On  the  contrary,  the  Hebrew  of  Amos  ranks  among  the  purest  and  most  powerful 
compositions  of  the  Old  Testament.  His  language  is  choice  and  melodious, 
possibly  in  a  few  peculiar  spellings  recording  a  provincial  pronimciation,  or  more 
likely  the  slips  of  the  copyists'  pens.  His  style  is  terse,  dramatic,  and  simple, 
but  very  pointed  and  forcible.  He  loves  brief  uninvolved  sentences,  though 
occasionally  carried  away  into  passionate  appeal  or  lyrical  outbursts  of  poetic 
delineation.  He  indulges  much  in  question,  apostrophe,  and  exclamation.  He 
is  an  orator  more  than  an  artist,  or  a  bard.  With  all  his  simplicity  we  find 
traces  of  paranomasia,  rhythmic  arrangement,  and  rhetorical  construction.  Hia 
exposition  abounds  in  rich  and  varied  imagery  derived  from  nature,  and  striking 
illustrations  taken  from  everyday  life.  The  ordered  arrangement,  compact 
style,  and  general  literary  finish  of  his  book  suggest  slow,  careful,  and  leisurely 
construction,  while  the  fire  of  its  invective,  the  impetus  of  its  appeals,  and  the 
terrible  directness  of  its  denimciation  prove  it  the  record  and  embodiment  of  speech 
originally  orally  delivered.  ...  On  the  surface  Amos  may  seem  to  make  too 
much  of  mere  morality,  but  it  is  only  an  appearance.  With  him,  to  do  right 
is  to  serve  God,  and  the  motive  must  be  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbour, 
(W.  G.  Elmslie,  D.D.)  A  sketch  of  Amos: — I.  The  sphere  of  ufb  he  occu- 
pied. He  was  a  "  herdman."  God  has  often  selected  the  chief  messengers 
of  His  truth  from  men  in  the  humbler  walks  of  life.  Elisha,  David,  &c.  Our 
Lord  Himself  came  from  a  peasant  cottage  in  Nazareth.  In  this  fact  we  have 
two  things.  1.  Worldly  pride  divinely  rebuked.  2.  Human  nature  divinely 
honoured.  II.  The  age  in  which  Amos  lived.  Two  events  are  specified. 
1.  The  political  event  of  this  period.  "  In  the  days  of  Uzziah,  King  of  Judah." 
A  comparatively  peaceful  and  prosperous  period.  2.  The  physical  event  of 
this  period.  Two  years  before  the  earthquake.  Why  is  the  period  of  his  life 
thus  described  ?  (1)  Because  you  cannot  rightly  judge  a  man's  character  unless 
you  understand  the  circumstances  under  which  he  lived.  (2)  You  cannot  estimate 
the  value  of  a  man's  mission  unless  you  correctly  judge  of  the  moral  character 
of  his  times.  III.  The  mission  to  which  he  was  called.  What  was  it  to 
pronounce  Divine  judgment  ?  He  announced  it — 1.  As  coming  according  to 
his  vision.  2.  As  coming  in  a  terrible  form.  3.  As  issuing  from  a  scene  of  mercy. 
4.  As  fraught  with  calamitous  results.  What  an  argument  for  repentance ! 
(HomUist.)  Amos  the  herdman : — Amos  was  not  ashamed  of  his  descents 
He  was  not  a  farmer,  but  a  farm-labourer.  Who  cares  to  be  on  very  close  inti- 
macy with  a  field-hand,  or  a  cow-herd  ?  To  a  little  outdoor  work  Amos  added 
the  process  of  cleaning  and  preparing  the  fruit,  either  for  preservation  or  for 
sale.  Whilst  he  was  doing  his  farm-work  and  attending  to  his  fruit,  a  blast 
from  heaven  struck  his  deeper  consciousness,  and  he  stood  up  a  prophet.  The 
Lord  will  bring  His  prophets  just  as  He  pleases,  and  from  what  place  He  chooses. 
Amos  was  a  field-hand,  and  yet  he  was  fearless;  he  was  all  the  more  fearless 
because  he  was  a  field-hand.  A  farmer  could  not  have  been  so  fearless.  Amos 
was  a  farm-labourer,  yet  he  was  equal  to  the  occasion.  Education  is  never  equal 
to  anything  that  is  supremely  great.  There  are  times  in  human  history  when 
inspiration  must  go  to  the  front — talent  must  go  behind,  genius  must  go  into 
the  first  place.  When  we  are  inspired  we  forget  our  rags.  When  God  calls, 
let  not  man  despise.  God's  elections  are  startling.  Amos  begins  where  all 
rude,  energetic  minds  begin ;  they  begin  in  denunciation.  Judgment  seems 
to  be  a  natural  work  for  them  to  conduct.     Amos  issues  his  judgment  ag-iinst 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

Damascus,  Gaza*  Tyrus,  Edom,  Ammon,  Moab,  Judah,  Israel, — all  round  the 
circle  that  judgment- fire  sparkles  and  blazes.  It  seems  so  much  easier  to  denounce 
than  to  discriminate.  Even  yoimg  prophets  began  with  thunder  and  lightning. 
Amos  again  and  again  says,  "  I  will  send  a  fire."  And  the  nobles  were  lying 
on  divans  of  ivory,  having  corrupted  themselves  to  the  point  of  rottenness.  There 
are  times  in  human  history  when  the  only  disinfectant  that  can  work  the  real 
miracle  is  fire.  Fire  never  fails.  We  need  voices  of  this  kind ;  they  help  to 
keep  the  average  of  human  history  well  up  to  the  mark.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
Lessons  from  the  'prophety  of  Amos : — It  is  well  to  notice — 1.  The  importance 
of  prophecy  in  an  evidential  point  of  view,  as  one  of  the  supernatural  elements 
of  the  Bible.  To  the  honest,  earnest,  impartial  inquirer,  no  more  convincing 
or  impressive  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  revealed  Word  can  be  offered  than  its 
prophetic  element  affords.  The  age  of  miracles  is  past.  The  testimony  of  the 
more  sure  (confirmed)  word  of  prophecy,"  as  it  has  been  fulfilled,  and  as  it 
is  daily  being  fulfilled  before  our  eyes,  is  all  the  more  important.  2.  The  import- 
ance of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  The  prophet  Amos  alleges  his  own  inspira- 
tion. Much  has  been  made  by  hostile  critics  of  the  supposed  discrepancies  and 
contradictions  of  Scripture;  but  how  little  has  been  said  about  its  marvellous 
xmity  !  What  is  it  which  imparts  this  unity  ?  3.  In  the  Book  of  Amos  is 
illustrated  a  principle  of  the  Divine  dealing.  Amos  was  one  of  the  people,  and 
not  in  the  order  of  the  prophets.  The  Lord  had  suddenly  and  unexpectedly 
called  and  commissioned  him  to  be  a  prophet  of  Israel.  And  so,  in  working 
for  God,  the  question  is  not  so  much  whether  it  is  Amos  the  rude,  or  Isaiah  the 
polished ;  the  question  is,  are  we  verily  and  indeed  called  of  Him  ?  Are  we 
qualified  by  His  grace,  and  anointed  by  His  Spirit  ?  4.  The  doctrine  of  a  special 
providence  is  here  strikingly  set  forth.  Judgments  were  appointed  to  descend 
on  several  nations  in  succession.  Than  this  there  can  be  nothing  more  certain, 
that  national  sins  draw  down  national  judgments  and  punishments.  Men  are 
apt  to  think  they  may  escape  in  a  crowd.  We  have  each  our  share  in  public 
misfortime  and  in  national  guilt,  and  in  God's  sight  are  held  liable  accordingly. 
But  it  is  also  true,  that  a  special  providence  works  in  and  with  each  of  God's 
true  children.  (R.  W.  Forrest,  M.A.)  The  refining  power  of  religion : — One 
point  of  interest  in  the  Book  of  Amos  is  its  testimony  to  the  power  of  inspira- 
tion and  religion  on  the  untaught  and  uncultivated  mind.  It  shows  how  such 
a  mind  may  strike  out  bold,  simple  pathways,  and  forcible  expressions,  which 
arrest  us  with  a  greater  force  than  even  those  of  the  more  refined  and  cviltivated. 
Imagery  borrowed  from  natural  scenery  and  its  circumstances,  will  be  among 
the  most  forcible  modes  of  expression  which  such  men  will  use.  We  may  often 
gather  important  lessons  from  this  influence  of  nature  on  the  mind.  She  teaches 
us  to  dive  more  into  her  own  calm  and  profound  depth,  to  read  the  will  of  God. 
In  Amos  we  have  a  mind  accustomed  to  see  duties  or  acts  of  religion  through 
images  borrowed  from  the  external  world.  But  not  only  does  the  form  of  natiure 
influence  the  ruder  mind  of  the  peasant ;  he  is  influenced  by  the  customs  and 
conventionalities  of  the  society  in  which  he  lives.  Amos  makes  use  of  these 
frequently  in  connection  with  his  religious  mission.  One  practical  question 
opens  out  to  us,  it  is  the  real  condition  and  value  of  the  uneducated  mind  under 
the  influences  of  religion.  There  is  often  an  inclination  alike  to  overrate  as 
to  tmderrate  this  ;  and  serious  injury  is  done  by  both  tendencies.  {E.  Monro.) 
An  unscholarly  messenger  : — Do  you  remember  what  was  the  immediate  agent 
in  Bishop  Hannington's  conversion  ?  Someone  sent  him  a  little  book. 
Hannington  determined  to  read  every  word  of  it,  so  he  began  with  the  preface. 
He  became  impressed  with  the  notion  that  the  book  was  unscholarly.  "  I  there- 
fore threw  the  book  away,  and  refused  to  read  it."  Some  time  after  he  was 
leaving  Exeter  for  St.  Petherwyn,  and  he  spied  the  old  book.  He  knew  his  friend 
would  ask  him  if  he  had  read  it.  "  I  suppose  I  must  read  through  it,  and  so 
I  stuffed  it  into  my  portmanteau-  At  Petherwyn  I  took  the  book  out,  and  read 
the  first  chapter.  I  disliked  it  so  much  that  I  determined  never  to  touch  it  again. 
I  rather  think  I  flung  the  book  across  the  room.  So  back  into  my  portmanteau 
it  went,  and  remained  until  my  visit  to  Hurst,  when  I  again  saw  it,  and  thought 
I  might  as  well  read  it,  so  as  to  be  able  to  tell  the  sender  about  it.  So  once  more  I 
took  the  old  thing,  and  read  straight  on  for  three  chapters  or  so,  until  at  last 
I  came  upon  that  called,  '  Do  you  feel  your  sins  forgiven  ?  '  And  by  means 
of  this  my  eyes  were  opened.  I  was  in  bed  at  the  time,  reading.  I  sprang  out 
of  bed,  and  leaped  about  the  room  rejoicing  and  praising  God  that  Jesus  died 


CHAP,  l]  AMOS.  5 

for  me.  From  that  day  to  this  I  have  lived  under  the  shadow  of  His  wings  in 
the  assurance  of  faith  that  I  am  His  and  He  is  mine."  The  Lord  used  that  which 
was  apparently  contemptible  to  be  a  minister  of  salvation !  What  appeared 
to  James  Hannington  to  be  despicable  turned  out  to  be  the  instrument  of  his 
redemption.  Now  God  loves  to  use  the  apparently  base  and  ignoble,  and  the 
despised  1  He  loves  to  send  His  power  along  commonplace  wires  !  He  calla 
into  His  service  some  uncultured  speaker,  whose  words  tumble  out  in  disorder, 
and  whose  thoughts  are  wanting  in  logical  succession,  and  He  fills  the  imgainly 
speech  with  power,  and  through  the  rough  utterance  there  come  spiritual  staba 
that  pierce  to  the  very  hearts  of  the  hearers.  He  loves  to  use  some  letter  which 
is  devoid  of  literary  grace,  and  written  with  no  grammatical  accuracy,  and  He 
fills  it  with  the  dynamic  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  it  is  mighty  to  the  bringing 
down  of  strongholds.  {Sunday  Companion.)  Distinguished  workers  of  humMe 
origin  : — Many  of  God's  most  distinguished  workmen  have  been  called  from 
scenes  of  the  humblest  labour.  It  was  when  toiling  over  a  shoemaker's  bench 
that  Carey's  soul  was  filled  with  a  zeal  for  missionary  labour.  Morrison  was 
once  a  maker  of  shoe-lasts.  John  Williams,  of  Erromanga,  was  called  from  the 
blacksmith's  shop.  Dr.  Livingstone  from  working  in  a  cotton  mill.  Our  Saviour 
also  called  His  disciples  from  among  the  fishermen.  {J.  L.  Nye.)  Whlcb 
lie  saw  concerning  Israel. — The  sphere  of  the  prophet's  labours : — The  prophet 
was  specifically  appointed  for  the  Israelites,  though  born  elsewhere.  But 
how,  and  on  what  occasion,  he  migrated  into  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  we  know 
not.  It  is  probable  that  this  was  designedly  arranged,  that  God  might  check 
the  insolence  of  the  people,  who  flattered  themselves  so  much  in  their  prosperity. 
Since  the  Israelites  had  hitherto  rejected  God's  servants,  they  were  now  con- 
strained to  hear  a  foreigner  and  a  shepherd  condemning  them  for  their  sins,  and 
exercising  the  office  of  a  judge  :  he  who  proclaims  an  impending  destruction 
is  a  celestial  herald.  This  being  the  case,  we  hence  see  that  God  had  not  in  vain 
employed  the  ministry  of  this  prophet ;  for  He  is  wont  to  choose  the  weak  things 
of  the  world  to  confound  the  strong,  and  He  takes  prophets  and  teachers  from 
the  lowest  grade  to  humble  the  dignity  of  the  world,  and  puts  the  invaluable 
treasiure  of  His  doctrine  in  earthen  vessels,  that  His  power,  as  Paul  teaches  us, 
may  be  made  more  evident.  But  there  was  a  special  reason  as  to  the  prophet 
Amos  ;  for  he  was  sent  on  purpose  severely  to  reprove  the  ten  tribes  ;  and  he 
handled  them  with  great  asperity.  For  he  was  not  polite,  but  proved  that  he 
had  to  do  with  those  who  were  not  to  be  treated  as  men,  but  as  brute  beasts  ; 
yea,  worse  in  obstinacy  than  brute  beasts  ;  for  there  is  some  docility  in  oxen 
and  cows,  and  especially  in  sheep,  for  they  hear  the  voice  of  their  shepherd,  and 
follow  where  he  leads  them.  The  Israelites  were  all  stubbornness,  and  wholly 
untameable.  It  was  then  necessary  to  set  over  them  a  teacher  who  would  not 
treat  them  courteously,  but  exercise  towards  them  his  native  rusticity.  {John 
Calvin. )  Two  years  before  the  earthquake.  —  Earthquakes  in  Palestine  : — 
Palestine  lies  almost  in  the  centre  of  one  great  volcanic  region  of  the 
earth's  svirface,  that,  namely,  which  includes  the  basin  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  the  provinces  of  Western  or  Central  Asia.  Traces  of  that  volcanio 
action  are  found  in  every  direction.  The  black  basaltic  rocks  of  the  Hauran, 
the  hot  springs  of  Tiberias,  and  Emmaus,  and  Gadara,  the  naphtha  fountains 
near  the  Dead  Sea,  the  dykes  of  porphyry,  and  other  volcanic  rocks  that  force 
their  way  through  the  limestone,  the  many  caves  in  the  limestone  rock  them* 
selves, — all  these  show  that  we  are  treading  on  ground  where  the  forces  of  the 
hidden  fires  of  the  earth  have  been,  in  times  past,  in  active  operation.  We  are, 
that  is,  in  a  zone  of  earthquakes.  On  some  of  these  earthquakes,  tremendous 
in  their  phenomena,  and  in  the  extent  of  the  desolation  caused  by  them,  we  have 
full  details,  in  earlier  and  even  In  contemporary  history.  The  Jewish  writer, 
Josephus,  speaks  of  one  which  occurred  in  B.C.  31,  as  having  destroyed  many 
villages,  and  cotmtless  flocks,  and  herds,  and  human  lives,  which  he  estimates 
(with  somewhat,  perhaps,  of  Oriental  vagueness  as  to  statistics)  now  at  ten, 
and  now  at  thirty  thousand.  Herod  and  his  army,  who  were  then  carrying 
on  war  against  the  Arabs,  were  only  saved  by  their  being  encamped  in  tents, 
and  so  free  from  the  peril  of  falling  houses.  As  it  was,  he  had  to  combat  the 
panic  and  depression  which  it  spread  through  his  troops,  and  with  something 
of  a  sceptical  epicureanism,  to  assure  them  that  these  natural  phenomena  were 
not  signs  of  greater  evils  to  come,  but  were  calamities  by  themselves,  having 
no  connection  with  any  others  that  followed  or  preceded  them.     Within  the 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

last  thirty  years  again  the  shocks  of  an  earthquake  were  felt  over  the  whole  of 
Syria,  in  Beirftt,  Damascus,  Cyprus ;  Safed  was  almost  utterly  destroyed ; 
Tiberias  was  left  little  better  than  a  heap  of  ruins,  and  one-third  of  the  popula- 
tion perished,  to  the  number  of  a  thousand.  Rivers  forsook  their  beds,  and 
left  them  dry  for  hours.  The  hot  springs  that  flow  into  the  Sea  of  Tiberias  were 
largely  swollen  in  volume,  and  the  level  of  the  lake  was  raised.  One  such  con- 
vulsion has  left  its  impress  on  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  It  seems 
to  have  been  the  first  great  earthquake  in  the  history  of  Israel.  It  occurred 
in  the  time  of  Uzziah  (Amos  i.  1  ;  Zech.  xiv.  5).  There  is  no  trace  of  any- 
thing of  the  kind  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  or  in  the  earlier  history  of  the  Kings. 
(Dean  Plumptre.) 

Ver.  2.  The  Lord  -will  roar  firom  Zion. — The  stem  voice  of  Ood  : — ^The  prophet 
not  only  shows  here,  that  God  was  the  Author  of  his  doctrine,  but  at  the  same 
time  he  distinguishes  between  the  true  God,  and  the  idols,  which  the  first  Jeroboam 
made,  when  by  this  artifice  he  intended  to  withdraw  the  ten  tribes  from  the  house 
of  David,  and  wholly  to  alienate  them  from  the  tribe  of  Judah  :  it  was  then  that 
he  set  up  the  calves  in  Dan  and  Bethel.  The  prophet  now  shows  that  all  these 
superstitions  are  condemned  by  the  true  God.  "  Jehovah  then  will  roar  from 
Zion,  He  will  utter  His  voice  from  Jerusalem."  He,  no  doubt,  wished  here  to 
terrify  the  Israelites,  who  thought  they  had  peace  with  God.  Since,  then,  they 
abused  His  long-suffering,  Amos  now  says  that  they  would  find  at  length  that 
He  was  not  asleep.  "  When  God,  then,  shall  long  bear  with  your  iniquities. 
He  will  at  last  rise  up  for  judgment."  By  "  roaring  "  is  signified  the  terrible 
voice  of  God  ;  but  the  prophet  here  speaks  of  God's  voice,  rather  than  of  what 
are  called  actual  judgments  really  executed,  that  the  Israelites  might  learn  that 
the  examples  of  punishments  which  God  executes  in  the  world  happen  not  by 
chance  or  at  random,  but  proceed  from  His  threatenings ;  in  short,  the  prophet 
intimates  that  all  punishments  which  God  inflicts  on  the  ungodly  and  the  despisers 
of  His  Word  are  only  the  executions  of  what  the  prophets  proclaimed,  in  order 
that  men,  should  there  be  any  hope  of  their  repentance,  might  anticipate  the 
destruction  which  they  hear  to  be  nigh.  The  prophet  commends  very  highly  the 
truth  of  what  God  teaches,  by  saying  that  it  is  not  what  vanishes,  but  what  is 
accomplished  j  for  when  He  destroys  nations  and  kingdoms,  it  comes  to  pass 
according  to  prophecies.     {John  Calvin.)        The  -penalty  of  sin.- — I.  The  change 

WHICH  SIN  WOKKS  IN  THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  EARTH   AND   HEAVEN.      "  The  Lord 

will  roar  from  Zion."  The  figure  is  that  of  a  lion  ready  for  its  prey.  Can  this 
be  He  of  whose  tenderness  Moses  spoke  ?  (Deut.  xxxii.  9-14.)  What  had  wrought 
such  a  change  between  God  and  His  people  ?  Years  of  wandering,  and  rebellion, 
and  sin  can  alone  explain  this  change.  Contrast  between  the  friendship  and 
the  enmity  of  God  a  fruitful  means  to  awaken  the  sinner  and  save  His  own  people 
from  wandering  (Isa.  xl.  II).  II.  The  place  from  which  danger  should  comb 
— Zion  and  Jerusalem.  These  were  the  centres  of  the  old  national  worship — 
places  that  God  had  chosen  to  put  His  name  there.  In  the  palaces  of  Zion  God 
nad  been  known  for  a  refuge.  Sin  turned  the  sources  of  peace  and  prosperity 
into  the  seat  of  their  mightiest  enemy.  III.  The  time  of  the  prophecy  op 
WOE.  An  era  of  hope.  Prosperity  had  returned  (2  Kings  xiv.  25).  The  prophecy 
burst  upon  them  like  thunder  out  of  a  blue  sky,  or  as  if  one,  in  full  tide  of  health, 
should  see  his  own  fimeral  procession  pass.  However  dazzling  the  prosperity 
to  which  sin  may  have  raised  men,  its  time  of  most  luxuriant  growth  is  often 
the  hour  of  its  blasting.  "  The  Judge  standeth  at  the  door."  IV.  The 
visitation  was  to  touch  them  on  the  side  where  they  would  most  feel 
IT — temporal  prosperity.  "  The  habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall  mourn  " 
— poetic  personification  of  the  ruin  that  should  come  to  that  class  of  which  Amos 
had  so  recently  been  a  member.  "  Carmel " — the  place  of  surpassing  fertility 
—abounding  in  rich  pastures,  olives,  and  vines.  Grod  takes  what  men  prize 
most  if  haply  their  heart  may  be  softened  by  His  visitation.  Application — 
(1)  The  concturence  of  testimony  among  all  Divine  messengers  to  the  certainty 
of  vengeance  due  for  wrong.  Only  false  prophets  can  utter  the  "  smooth 
things  "  which  sinners  would  fain  hear.  (2)  The  change  in  God's  dealings  with 
men  wrought  by  sin.     (J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Ver.  3.  I  will  not  tixm  away  the  punisliment  thereof . — The  purpose  of 
Divine  threatenings : — The  order  of    God's    threatenings    seems    to  have  been 


CHAP.  I.]  AMOS.  7 

addressed  to  gain  the  hearing  of  the  people.  The  punishment  is  first  denounced 
upon  their  enemies,  and  that,  for  their  sins,  directly  or  indirectly  against  them- 
selves, and  God  in  them.  Then,  as  to  those  enemies  themselves,  the  order  is 
not  of  place  or  time,  but  of  their  relations  to  God's  people.  It  begins  with  their 
most  oppressive  enemy,  Syria  ;  then  Philistia,  the  old  and  ceaseless,  although  less 
powerful  enemy;  then  Tyre,  not  an  oppressor,  as  these,  yet  violating  a  relation 
which  they  had  not,  the  bonds  of  a  former  friendship  and  covenant ;  malicious 
also  and  hard  hearted  through  covetousness.  Then  followed  Edom,  Ammon, 
Moab,  who  burst  the  bonds  of  blood  also.  Lastly,  and  nearest  of  all,  it  falls 
on  Judah,  who  had  the  true  worship  of  the  true  God  among  them,  but  despised 
it.  Every  infliction  on  those  like  ourselves  finds  an  echo  in  our  own  consciences. 
Israel  heard  and  readily  believed  God's  judgments  upon  others.  It  was  not 
tempted  to  set  itself  against  believing  them.  How  then  could  it  refuse  to  believe 
of  itself  what  it  believed  of  others  like  itself  ?  "  Change  but  the  name,  the  tale 
is  told  of  thee,"  Horace  says.  The  course  of  the  prophecy  convicted  them,  as 
the  things  written  in  Holy  Scripture  for  our  ensamples  convict  Christians.  If 
they  who  sinned  without  law,  perished  without  law,  how  much  more  should 
they  who  have  sinned  in  the  law  be  judged  by  the  law  ?  God's  judgments  rolled 
round  like  a  thunder-cloud,  passing  from  land  to  land,  giving  warning  of  their 
approach,  at  last  to  gather  and  centre  on  Israel  itself,  except  it  repent.  In 
the  visitations  of  others  it  was  to  read  its  own  ;  and  that  the  more,  the  nearer 
God  was  to  them.  Israel  is  placed  last,  because  on  it  the  destruction  was  to 
fall  to  the  uttermost,  and  rest  there.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  God's  dealinga 
with  other  nations : — The  prophet  shows  that  God,  as  a  Judge,  would  call  all 
the  neighbouring  nations  to  account.  Had  the  prophet  threatened  the  Israelites 
only,  they  might  have  thought  that  what  they  suffered  was  by  chance,  when 
they  saw  the  like  things  happening  to  their  neighbours.  Thus  all  the  authority 
of  the  prophet  must  have  lost  its  power,  except  the  Israelites  were  made  to 
know  tliat  God  is  the  Judge  of  all  nations.  Amos  puts  the  Israelites  in  the 
same  bundle  with  the  Moabites,  the  Idumseans,  and  other  heathen  nations  ; 
as  though  he  had  said,  "  God  will  not  spare  your  neighbours  ;  but  think  not 
that  ye  shall  be  exempt  from  His  vengeance,  when  they  shall  be  led  to  punish- 
ment :  I  now  declare  to  you  that  God  will  be  the  Judge  of  you  all  together." 
The  design  of  Amos  was — I.  To  set  before  the  eyes  of  the  Israelites  the 
punishment  of  others  to  awaken  them,  and  also  to  induce  them  to  examine 
themselves.  He  designed  to  lead  them  into  a  teachable  frame  of  mind  :  for  he 
knew  them  to  be  torpid  in  their  indulgences,  and  also  blinded  by  presumption, 
so  that  they  could  not  be  easily  brought  under  the  yoke.  2.  He  had  this  also 
in  view,  that  God  would  punish  the  Syrians,  because  they  cruelly  raged  against 
the  Israelites,  especially  against  Gilead  and  i(s  inhabitants.  As  God,  then, 
would  inflict  so  grievous  a  punishment  on  the  Syrians,  because  they  so  cruelly 
treated  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead,  what  was  to  be  expected  by  the  Israelites 
themselves,  who  had  been  insolent  towards  God,  who  had  isolated  His  worship, 
who  had  robbed  Him  of  His  honour,  who  had  in  their  turn  destroyed  one  another  ? 
For  there  was  among  them  no  equity,  no  humanity ;  they  had  forgotten  all  reason. 
{John  Calvin.)  Divine  cognisance  of  human  sins  : — 1.  That  the  sins  of  all  the 
peoples  on  the  earth,  whatever  the  peculiarities  of  their  character  or  country, 
are  under  the  cognisance  of  God.  Seven  countries  are  named  here.  Heaven's 
omniscient  eye  detected  the  sin  of  each  man  of  all  the  various  men  and  nations. 
God's  knowledge  of  men's  sins  should — (1)  Lead  men  to  great  circumspection 
in  their  daily  life.  They  should  sedulously  avoid  evil.  They  should  devoutly 
pursue  good ;  (2)  impress  men  with  the  wonderful  patience  of  God.  Thfs 
patience  implies  the  greatest  power ;  and  the  greatest  compassion ;  (3)  impress 
men  with  the  certainty  of  a  future  retribution.  (Hoiailist.)  Because  they 
have  threshed  Gilead  with  threshing  instmments. — Signs  of  cruelty : — We  be 
many  ways  guilty  of  cruelty.  1.  If  we  exercise  tyrannous  cruelty,  in  inflicting 
punishments.  2.  If  we  fight  with  or  beat  our  neighbour,  or  maim  his  body. 
This  is  a  breach  of  the  sixth  commandment.  3.  If  we  procure  any  way  the  death 
of  our  neighbour,  whether  it  be  by  sword,  famine,  poison,  false  accusation,  or 
otherwise.  4.  If  we  use  any  of  God's  creatures  hardly.  5.  If  because  of  our 
neighbours'  infirmities,  we  use  him  discoiu-teously,  and  make  him  our  laughing- 
stock or  taunting  recreation.  6.  If  we  injure  a  stranger.  7.  If  we  molest  any 
widow,  or  fatherless  children.  8.  If  we  wrong  the  poor.  This  we  may  do — (1)  If 
we  lend  money  to  the  poor  upon  usury.     (2)  If  we  pay  not  the  poor  labourer 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

his  hire.  (3)  If  we  restore  not  the  pledge  of  the  poor.  (4)  If  we  withdraw  our 
corn  from  the  poor.  {Sebastian  Benefidd,  D.D.)  The  enormity  of  the  sin  of 
persecution  : — The  sin  of  inflicting  suffering.  I.  Pbesbcution  is  a  most  abbogant 
CBiME.  The  religious  persecutor  acts  upon  the  assumption  that  his  ideas  of 
religion  are  absolutely  true,  that  his  theological  knowledge  is  the  test  by  which 
all  other  opinions  are  to  be  tried ;  shows  an  arrogance  before  which  servile  spirits 
bow,  but  from  which  all  thoughtful  and  noble  men  recoil  with  disgust  and  indig- 
nation But  his  arrogance  is  shadowy  and  harmless  compared  with  the  arrogance 
of  him  who  enters  the  temple  of  human  aonscience  and  claims  dominion  over 
the  moral  workings  of  the  soul.  Yes,  such  arrogant  men  abound  in  all  ages, 
and  are  by  no  means  rare,  even  in  this  age  and  land  of  what  is  called  civil  and 
leligious  liberty.  II.  Pbbsbcution  is  a  most  absubd  cbime.  Far  wiser  is  the 
fool  who  would  legislate  for  the  winds  or  the  waves,  and  like  Canute  give  commands 
to  the  billows,  than  he  who  attempts  to  legislate  for  human  thoughts  and  moral 
convictions.  And  truth  never  seems  to  rise  in  greater  power  and  majesty  than 
under  the  hand  of  cruel  persecution,  m.  Pebsecution  is  a  most  cbtjel  cbime. 
What  ruthless  inhumanities  are  here  charged  against  the  various  peoples  men- 
tioned. It  has  often  been  observed,  that  no  anger  is  so  savage  as  the  anger 
which  springs  up  between  relations  of  blood.  A  brotherly  hate  is  the  chief  of 
hates.  No  animosity  bums  with  a  more  hellish  heat  than  that  connected  with 
religion.     (Eomiliat.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  of  Tyrus,  which  shall  devour 
the  palaces  thereof — The  Divine  judgment  on  Tyre : — To  foUow  out  the 
accomplishment  of  the  prophecies  respecting  Tyre,  under  the  conduct  of  so  good 
a  guide  as  Bishop  Newton,  is  a  most  interesting  occupation.  He  gives  the  following 
quotation  from  Maundrell.  "  This  city,  standing  in  the  sea,  upon  a  peninsvila, 
promises  at  a  distance  something  very  magnificent.  But  when  you  come  to 
it,  you  find  no  similitude  of  that  glory  for  which  it  was  so  renowned  in  ancient 
times.  On  the  north  side,  it  was  an  old  Turkish,  ungarrisoned  castle ;  besides 
which  you  see  nothing  here  but  a  mere  Babel  of  broken  walls,  pillars,  vaults, 
&c.,  there  being  not  so  much  as  one  entire  house  left ;  its  present  inhabitants 
are  only  a  few  poor  wretches,  harbouring  themselves  in  the  vaults,  and  subsisting 
chiefly  upon  fishing,  who  seem  to  be  preserved  in  this  place  by  Divine  providence, 
as  a  visible  evidence,  how  God  has  fulfilled  His  word  concerning  Tyre,  namely, 
that  it  should  be  '  as  a  top  of  a  rock,  a  place  for  fishers  to  dry  their  nets  on.' " 
Newton  himself  says :  "  Such  hath  been  the  fate  of  this  city,  once  the  most  famous 
in  the  world  for  trade  and  commerce.  But  trade  is  a  fluctuating  thing  :  it  passed 
from  Tyre  to  Alexandria,  from  Alexandria  to  Venice,  from  Venice  to  Antwerp, 
from  Antwerp  to  Amsterdam  and  London,  the  English  rivalling  the  Dutch, 
as  the  French  are  now  rivalling  both.  All  nations  almost  are  now  wisely  applying 
themselves  to  trade  ;  and  it  behoves  those  who  are  in  possession  of  it  to  take  the 
greatest  care  they  do  not  lose  it.  It  is  a  plant  of  tender  growth,  and  requires 
eun  and  soil  and  fine  seasons  to  make  it  thrive  and  flourish.  It  will  not  grow 
like  the  palm  tree,  which,  with  the  more  weight  and  pressure,  rises  the  more. 
Liberty  is  a  friend  to  that,  as  that  is  a  friend  to  Uberty.  But  the  greatest  enemy 
to  both  is  licentiousness,  which  tramples  upon  all  law  and  lawful  authority, 
encourages  riots  and  tumvdts,  promotes  drunkenness  and  debauchery,  sticks 
at  nothing  to  supply  its  extravagance,  practises  every  art  of  illicit  gain,  ruins 
credit,  ruins  trade,  and  will,  in  the  end,  ruin  liberty  itself.  Neither  kingdoms 
nor  commonwealths,  neither  public  companies  nor  private  persons,  can  long 
carry  on  a  beneficial,  flourishing  trade  witnout  virtue  and  what  virtue  teacheth, 
sobriety,  industry,  frugality,  modesty,  honesty,  punctuality,  humanity,  charity, 
the  love  of  our  coimtry,  and  the  fear  of  God.  The  prophets  will  inform  us  how 
the  Tjrians  lost  it ;  and  the  like  causes  will  always  produce  the  like  effects." 
{Vincent  W.  Ryan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  For  three  transgressions  of  Edom,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn 
away  the  punishment  thereof. — Edom  : — 1.  A  threatening.  Here  a  certain 
number  is  put  for  an  imcertain.  It  may  be  treated  jointly.  Three  and  four 
make  seven.  Thus  may  be  indicated  the  multitude  and  magnitude  of  the  wicked- 
ness, and  the  greatness  and  heaviness  of  the  punishment.  It  may  be  treated 
severally,  and  in  this  sense ;  going  on  still,  even  to  a  fourth  time,  in  provoking  Me, 
and  adding  obstinacy  and  impenitency  to  their  side,  I  will  bear  them  no  longer. 


CHAP.  I.]  AAIOS.  9 

2.  The  equity.  These  Idumaeans  were  stubbornly  wicked,  and  heaped  up  sin 
upon  sin.  3.  Execution  of  judgment.  "  I  will  send  a  fire."  Fire  is  put  in 
Scripture  for  a  most  grievous  plague,  by  sword,  or  famine,  or  pestilence.  Now 
for  the  application. — Edom  is  a  special  type  of  the  kingdom  of  Anti-Christ. 
Antichristian  Esau  is  Edom.     The  similitude  between  them  we  will  consider — 

1.  In  their  persons  ;  2.  in  their  sins  ;  and  3.  in  their  judgments.     {T.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13  to  chap.  ii.  8.  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punislunent  thereof. — 
Ood'a  dealing  with  nationa : — I.  The  opportunity  fob  ekpbntanob  which  all 
POSSESS.  The  punishment  of  the  six  heathen  nations,  aa  of  Judah  and  Israel, 
opens  with  a  picture  of  the  forbearance  of  God  which  had  preceded  this  horn:  of 

wrath.     "  For  three  transgressions  of  ,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away 

the  punishment  thereof."  The  cup  of  iniquity  was  not  full  till  the  fourth  trans- 
gression. God's  dealing  with  individuals  is  such — "  Who  hath  hardened  himself 
against  Him,  and  hath  prospered  ?  "  (Prov.  xxix.  1.)  II.  Peesistencb  in  a 
COURSE  OF  sin  HAS  ONLY  ONE  END.  "  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punishment 
thereof."  Men  may  put  far  away  the  evil  day,  but  all  history,  all  prophecy,  all 
strivings  of  conscience  point  to  the  certainty  of  ruin.  III.  The  causes  of  thb 
Divine  indignation  vary  accordinq  to  human  light.  In  the  fate  of  Tyrus, 
for  instance  (chap.  i.  9),  we  see  that  a  brotherly  covenant  (the  league  of  Hiram 
with  David  and  Solomon)  formed  no  barrier  to  the  grasping  spirit  of  the  mercantile 
nation.  Edom  (chap.  i.  11)  "  did  pursue  his  brother  with  the  sword,  and  cast  off 
all  pity."  The  heathen  nations  were  to  suffer  because  they  had  offended  against 
those  eternal  principles  of  compassion  and  of  truth  which  are  written  on  the 
hearts  of  all  men  alike.  Judah  (chyp.  ii.  4)  and  Israel  (vers.  6-8)  were  judged  by 
a  higher  standard,  for  the  light  had  been  greater.  "  In  Judah  is  God  known  ; 
His  name  is  great  in  Israel.  '  IV.  The  vindication  of  God's  ways  to  men 
which  these  pictures  of  national  sin  furnish  is  complete.  The  preservation 
of  truth  and  purity  is  of  far  higher  moment  than  the  fate  of  one  nation,  for  human 
society  can  only  be  founded  on  the  eternal  principles  of  right  and  wrong.  The 
detail  of  Israel's  sin  makes  us  shrink  back  with  horror.  Their  law  gave  no  power 
to  sell  an  insolvent  debtor,  but  they  were  ready  to  sell  the  righteous  man  (one  in 
trouble  through  no  fault  of  his  own)  for  silver ;  and  the  poor  (whom  there  was 
none  to  succoiu'),  to  provide  for  themselves  a  pair  of  luxurious  sandals.  J  hey 
panted  after  the  very  dust  which  the  poor  spread  on  their  head  in  token  of  motun- 
ing,  and  by  the  vilest  sin  they  profaned  the  name  of  God  which  was  called  on  them 
as  His  people.  Even  their  altars  witnessed  their  extortions  (ver.  8 ;  Deut.  xxiv. 
12,  13)  and  banquetings.  Application — The  prophet  would  have  the  people 
clearly  vmderstand  the  equity  of  the  judgments  which  he  foretold.  Men  can  be 
impartial  in  estimating  the  sin  of  others  (David  and  Nathan's  parable).  To 
study  God's  dealings  with  others  will  often  open  our  eyes  to  our  own  future. 
(J.  Telford,  B.A.)  Great  sufferings  following  great  sins  : — This  passage  illustrates 
three  truths.  1.  That  the  sins  of  all  the  people  on  the  earth,  whatever  the 
peculiarities  of  their  character  or  conduct,  are  under  the  cognisance  of  God. 

2.  That  of  all  the  sins  of  the  people,  that  of  persecution  is  peculiarly  abhorrent 
to  the  Divine  nature.  I.  Great  sins  entail  great  sufferings.  The  calamities 
threatened  to  these  different  tribes  of  different  lands  are  of  the  most  terrible 
description.  But  they  are  all  such  as  to  match  their  crimes.  1.  The  connection 
between  great  sins  and  gxeat  sufferings  is  inevitable.  The  Moral  Governor  of 
the  world  has  so  arranged  matters  that  every  sin  brings  with  t  its  own  punish- 
ment, and  it  is  only  when  the  sin  is  destroyed  the  suffering  ceases.  Thank  God 
this  sin  can  be  destroyed  through  faith  in  the  mediation  of  Him  who  came  to  put 
away  sin  by  faith  in  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  2.  The  connection  between  great 
sins  and  great  sufferings  is  universal.  All  these  sinful  peoples  had  to  realise  it 
from  their  own  bitter  experience.  It  does  not  matter  where,  when,  or  how  a 
man  lives,  his  sins  will  find  him  out.  II.  Great  sins  often  entail  great  sufferings 
UPON  PEOPLE  WHO  ARE  NOT  THE  ACTUAL  OFFENDERS.  "  The  fire,"  which  is  here 
the  instrument  of  God's  retribution  to  us  sinners,  would  not  only  scathe  the 
persons  and  consilme  the  property  of  the  actual  offenders,  but  others.  The  fact 
is  patent  in  all  history  and  in  all  experience,  that  men  here  suffer  for  the  sins  of 
others.  Two  facts  may  reconcile  our  consciences  to  this.  1.  That  few,  if  any, 
suffer  more  than  their  consciences  tell  them  they  deserve.  2.  That  there  is  to 
come  a  period  when  the  wnole  will  appear  to  be  in  accord  with  the  justice  and 
goodness  of    God.      {Homiliat.)        The  atrocitiea  of  barbarism  and  the  sins  of 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

civilisation : — The  sins  Amos  condemns  in  the  heathen  are  at  first  sight  very 
different  from  those  which  he  exposes  within  Israel.  Not  only  are  they  sins  of 
foreign  relations,  of  treaty  and  war,  while  Israel's  are  all  civic  and  domestic ; 
but  they  are  what  we  call  the  atrocities  of  barbarism — wanton  war,  massacre 
and  sacrilege ;  while  Israel's  are  rather  the  sins  of  civilisation — the  pressure  of 
the  rich  upon  the  poor,  the  bribery  of  justice,  the  seduction  of  the  innocent, 
personal  impurity,  and  other  evils  of  luxury.  So  great  is  this  difference  that  a 
critic  more  gifted  with  ingenuity  than  insight,  might  plausibly  distinguish,  in 
the  section  before  us,  two  prophets  with  two  very  different  views  of  national  sin — 
a  ruder  prophet,  and  of  course  an  earlier,  who  judged  nations  only  by  the  flagrant 
drunkenness  of  their  war ;  and  a  more  subtle  prophet,  and  of  course  a  later,  who 
exposed  the  masked  corruptions  of  their  religion  and  their  peace.  Such  a  theory 
would  be  as  false  as  it  would  be  plausible.  For  not  only  is  the  diversity  of  the 
objects  of  the  prophet's  judgment  explained  by  this,  that  Amos  had  no  familiarity 
with  the  interior  life  of  other  nations,  and  could  only  arraign  their  conduct  at 
those  points  where  it  broke  into  light  in  their  foreign  relations,  while  Israel's 
civic  life  he  knew  to  the  very  core.  But  Amos  had  besides  a  strong  and  a 
deliberate  aim  in  placing  the  sins  of  civilisation  as  the  climax  of  a  list  of  the 
atrocities  of  barbarism.  He  would  recall  what  men  are  always  forgetting,  that 
the  former  are  really  more  cruel  and  criminal  than  the  latter ;  that  luxury, 
bribery,  and  intolerance,  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  the  corruption  of  the  innocent 
and  the  silencing  of  the  prophet — what  Christ  calls  offences  against  His  little 
ones — are  even  more  awful  atrocities  than  the  wanton  horrors  of  barbarian  war- 
fare. (Geo.  Adam  Smith,  D.D.)  That  they  might  enlarge  their  borders. — 
Enlarging  our  borders  : — The  message  that  comes  from  the  old  Hebrew  prophet 
is  the  injunction  to  make  our  lives  broader,  larger,  richer  than  they  already  are. 
Men  are  enlarged  by  travel,  but  the  best  part  of  that  enlargement  comes  from 
intercourse  with  other  human  beings.  The  world  of  physical  natiu-e  can  do  much 
to  enlarge  a  man,  but  the  world  of  human  minds  and  hearts  can  do  more.  A  man 
is  like  a  planet ;  he  is  in  the  field  of  two  forces,  the  centrifugal  and  the  centri- 
petal. As  he  grows,  two  methods  are  open  to  him.  His  idea  of  perfect  manhood 
may  be  reached  by  priming  away  excrescences.  This  is  the  conventional  way : 
it  produces  a  Chesterfield.  The  other  is  the  educating  of  all  his  faculties  to  their 
full  limit :  this  produces  a  Gladstone  or  a  Browning.  It  exhibits  many  faults 
in  a  man  ;  but  it  enlarges  his  borders,  and  gives  magnitude  and  grandeur.  Every 
one  of  us  desires,  or  thinks  he  desires,  breadth  of  thought,  range  of  sympathy. 
Yet  at  our  best  we  are  never  full,  rounded  circles.  We  may  openly  resent  any 
imputation  of  narrowness,  but  in  our  hearts  we  must  plead  guilty.  Let  us 
learn  to  measvu-e  ourselves.  How  intolerant  is  youth  of  the  methods  of  age  ! 
Let  youth  leam  to  enlarge  its  borders,  and  include  the  thoughts  and  feelings 
and  methods  of  age.  Every  man,  if  he  devotes  himself  earnestly  to  his  life  a 
calling,  must  be,  in  some  degree,  narrowed  by  it.  At  least,  he  must  give  so  much 
time  to  it  that  but  little  remains,  and  but  little  strength,  for  other  things.  This 
in  itself  is  not  an  evil ;  but  it  frequently  happens  that  such  a  man  becomes  wilfully 
narrow,  and  imderrates  or  despises  pursuits  and  faculties  which  are  qiiite  as 
high  as  his  own.  "  Enlarge  your  borders,"  is  the  command  of  our  text.  Broaden 
your  sympathies !  Extend  your  range  of  observation  and  understanding ! 
Pierce  through  to  the  realities  of  things,  and  do  not  be  deceived  by  externals ! 
We  all  sadly  need  this  injunction.  Herein  lies  much  of  the  inefficiency  of  our 
modern  charitable  work.  The  visitor  and  visited  are  not  in  touch,  and  never 
can  be  until  both  shall  have  their  borders  enlarged.  In  another  field  our  text 
finds  ready  application.  It  is  the  field  of  theology.  Men  of  broad  religious 
views  are  so  rare  in  our  time,  that  the  Sodom  of  our  modern  denominational 
life  hardly  seems  worthy  to  be  saved.  There  is  a  want  of  intellectual  capacity 
to  see  the  "  other  side  of  things."  There  is  such  a  radical  difference  in  the  very 
texture  of  men's  minds,  that  the  same  facts,  especially  in  art,  in  poetry,  and  m 
religion,  will  lead  equally  good  and  able  men  to  widely  different  conclusions. 
Many  are  the  forces  which  serve  to  enlarge  ova  borders,  as  often  without  our 
consciousness  as  with  it.  Whatever  opens  up  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men  to 
each  other,  whether  it  be  joy  or  sorrow,  is  a  blessing  to  them.  The  lessons  which 
God  teaches  us  through  the  varied  experiences  of  life  are,  many  of  them,  hard 
and  bitter,  but  the  wayward  human  heart  needs  deep  probing.  But  the  grandest 
enlargement  of  life  is  that  which  comes  through  the  thought  of  God.  It  can 
enlarge  your  life  by  putting  into  your  hand  the  key  of  love  and  compassion,  which 


CHAP.  II.]  AMOS.  11 

can  open  the  doors  of  human  hearts  as  can  nothing  else  on  this  broad  earth.  A 
consciousness  of  God  is  the  greatest  broadening  and  deepening  power  which  can 
come  into  any  life.     (Bradley  Gilman.) 


CHAPTER  II. 


Veb.  I.  Because  he  burned  the  bones  of  the  king  of  Edom  into  lime. — Burning 
the  bones  of  the  dead : — Amos  says  that  the  Moabites  were  wholly  perverse,  that 
no  repentance  would  be  hoped  for,  as  they  had  added  crimes  to  crimes,  and  reached 
the  highest  pitch  of  wickedness.  He  mentions  one  thing  in  particular — that  they 
had  burnt  the  bones  of  the  king  of  Edom.  Some  take  "  bones  "  here  for  courage, 
as  though  the  prophet  had  said,  that  the  whole  strength  of  Edom  had  been  reduced 
to  ashes  :  but  this  is  a  strained  exposition  ;  and  its  authors  themselves  confess 
that  they  are  forced  into  it  by  necessity,  when  yet  there  is  none.  The  comment 
given  by  the  rabbins  does  not  please  them, — that  the  body  of  a  certain  king 
had  been  burnt,  and  then  that  the  Moabites  had  strangely  applied  the  ashea 
for  making  a  cement  instead  of  lime.  Thus  the  rabbins  trifle  in  their  usual  way, 
for  when  an  obscure  place  occurs,  immediately  they  invent  some  fable  ;  though 
there  be  no  history,  yet  they  exercise  their  wit  in  fabulous  glosses.  What  need  ia 
there  of  running  to  allegory,  when  we  may  simply  take  what  the  prophet  says — 
that  "  the  body  of  the  king  of  Edom  had  been  burnt "  :  for  the  prophet  simply 
charges  the  Moabites  with  barbarous  cruelty.  To  dig  up  the  bodies  of  enemies, 
and  to  burn  their  bones, — this  is  an  inhuman  deed,  and  wholly  barbarous.  But  it 
was  more  detestable  in  the  Moabites,  who  had  some  connection  with  the  people 
of  Edom.  If  any  humanity  existed  in  them,  they  ought  to  have  restrained  their 
passions,  so  as  not  to  treat  so  cruelly  their  brethren.  When  they  exceeded  all 
moderation  in  war,  and  raged  against  dead  bodies,  and  burnt  the  bones  of  the  dead, 
it  was  extremely  barbarous  conduct.  The  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  this: 
The  Moabites  could  no  longer  be  borne  with,  for,  in  this  one  instance,  they 
gave  an  example  of  savage  cruelty.  Their  treatment  of  their  brethren,  the 
Idumaeans,  proved  that  they  had  forgotten  all  humanity  and  justice.  {John 
Calvin.)  . 

Vers.  4,  5.  Thus  saith  the  Lord :  For  three  transgressions  of  Judah,  and  for 
four,  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punishment  thereof.  —  National  sins  and 
no^towoZpMnwAmen*.*— The  British  nation,  like  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  has  received 
innumerable  favours  at  the  hand  of  God.  In  the  purity  of  our  creed,  the  outward 
prosperity  of  our  churches,  the  influence  of  our  literature,  the  excellence  of  our 
laws,  the  freedom  of  our  institutions,  the  success  of  our  commerce,  and  the 
glory  of  our  arms, — we  are  not  surpassed  by  any  nation  in  the  world.  Yet  our  very 
prosperity  has  been  in  many  respects  a  snare  to  us.  The  advancement  of  true 
religion  in  the  inner  life  and  outward  practice  of  the  people  has  been  very  far 
from  keeping  pace  with  the  outward  movement  of  society  in  matters  that  evidently 
interest  us  more,  though  they  really  concern  us  less.  Under  three  heads  the  trans- 
gressions of  Judah  are  comprehended.  I.  Despising  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
The  law  of  the  Lord  includes  the  whole  revelation  of  His  will.  No  truth  is  more 
plainly  enforced  in  the  Bible  than  this, — that  national  chastisements  are  the 
consequence  of  national  sins.  But  is  this  generally  believed  ?  Has  it  any 
practical  influence  upon  the  character  and  conduct  of  a  tithe  of  those  who  profess 
to  believe  it  ?  It  is  too  true  that,  as  a  nation,  we  despise  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
II.  Not  keeping  His  commandments.  This  follows  naturally  the  contempt  of 
His  law.  Contempt  of  the  law  and  disobedience  are  not  the  same  thing.  One 
may  sincerely  acknowledge  the  justice,  and  respect  the  value,  of  a  law  which  his 
bad  passions  often  tempt  him  to  break.  On  the  other  hand,  one  may  have  an 
inward  contempt  for  a  law  which  he  may  still  consider  it  expedient  or  proper  to 
obey.  But  he  who  despises  the  law  of  God,  or  wilfully  continues  to  disobey  it, 
has  no  part  or  lot  in  "  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  In  every  case 
in  which  the  law  is  despised,  the  obedience  of  the  heart  is  impossible,  and  any  other 
obedience  than  that  which  proceeds  from  love  and  reverence  is  utterly  worthless 
in  the  sight  of  God.     III.  Wandebing  after  lies,  in  imitation  of  their  fathers. 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Instead  of  "  lies,"  some  read  "  idols  "  ;  for  the  same  Hebrew  term  stands  for  both. 
An  idol  is  a  lie.     Wealth,  pomp,  luxury,  literature,  fame,  power, — these  are  our 
idols,  and  they  were  the  idols  of  our  forefathers,  taken  collectively.     In  each 
succeeding  age,  the  great  majority  have  been  heart  idolaters — giving  to  various 
objects  the  place  in  their  affections  which  of  right  belonged  only  to  God.     If 
there  be  admonition  without  effect,  we  may  look  for  pimishment  without  mercy. 
(James  Mackay,  B.D.)        National  evils:—!.  Intempekance.     This  weighs  like 
a  millstone  round  the  neck  of  the  Church  in  this  country.     We  are  not,  as  a  rule, 
sensible  of  the  awful  magnitude  of  this  evil — of  the  gigantic  proportions  to  which 
it  has  attained.     II.  Infidelity.     That  this  evil  exists  and  is  active  amongst  us, 
requires  no  proof.     It  exists  in  our  midst  in  every  shape,  form,  and  degree,  from  the 
avowed  Atheism,  which   openly  blasphemes  the  name  of  God,  to  the  refined 
Rationalism,  which,  whUe  professing  belief  in  Divine  revelation,  explains  away, 
and  empties  of  all  their  real  significance,  its  most  vital  and  momentous  truths. 
III.  SuPEKSTiTioN.     While  many  nations  of  Europe — such  as  Austria  and  Italy — 
are  casting  off  the  yoke  of  superstition,  this  country,  which  was  wont  to  be  regarded 
as  the  very  centre  of  Gospel  light,  and  the  home  of  spiritual  freedom,  would  seem 
as  if  about  to  relinquish  the  position  she  took  up  after  a  struggle  which  cost  tears, 
agonies,  and  the  blood  of  some  of  her  best  and  noblest  sons.     IV.  Indifperentism. 
Beyond  question  the  most  prevalent  evil  of  our  time.     For  one  who  is  tainted 
with  Infidelity,  or  enslaved  by  Superstition,  there  are  tens  of  thousands  utterly 
indifferent  to  their  highest  interests.     They  may  give  a  formal  and   periodical 
attention  to  religious  duties,  but  practically  they  are  "  living  without  God  in  the 
world."     To  moot  these  special  evils,  special  agencies  must  be  used.     {R.   W. 
Forrest,  M.A.)        They  have  despised  the  law  of  tlie  Lord,  and  have  not  kept 
His  commandinents. —  Despising    God's    law : — Here   the   prophet   charges   the 
people  of  Judah  with  apostasy ;  for  they  had  cast  aside  the  worship  of  God, 
and  the  pure  doctrine  of  religion.     This  was  a  crime  the  most  grievous.     But  it 
may  be  asked,  why  the  prophet  charges  the  Jews  with  a  crime  so  atrocious,  since 
religion  still  existed  among  them  ?     To  this  there  is  a  ready  answer :  the  worship 
of  God  was  become  corrupt  among  them,  though  they  had  not  so  openly  departed 
from  it  as  the  Israelites.     There  remained,  indeed,  circumcision  among  the  Israel- 
ites ;  but  their  sacrifices  were  pollutions,  their  temples  were  as  immoral  houses ; 
they  thought  that  they  worshipped  God  ;  but  as  a  temple  had  been  built  at  Bethel 
contrary  to  God's  command,  the  whole  worship  was  a  profanation.     The  Jews 
were  somewhat  purer ;  but  they  had  also  degenerated  from  the  genuine  worship 
of  God.     Hence  the  prophet  does  not  unjustly  say  here  that  they  had  despised 
the  law  of  God.     But  notice  the  explanation  which  immediately  follows, — that 
*'  they  kept  not  His  statutes."     The  way  by  which  Amos  proves  that  the  Jews 
were  covenant-breakers,  and  that  having  repudiated  God's  law,  they  had  fallen 
into  wicked  superstitions,  is  by  saying  that  they  kept  not  the  precepts  of  God. 
In  these  words  no  mere  negligence  is  blamed ;  they  are  condemned  for  designedly, 
knowingly,  and  wilfully  departing  from  the  commandments  of  God,  and  devising 
for  themselves  various  modes  of  worship.     It  is  not  then  to  keep  the  precepts  of 
God,  when  men  continue  not  vmder  His  law,  but  audaciously  contrive  for  themselves 
new  forms  of  worship :  they  regard  not  what  God  commands,  but  lay  hold  on 
anything  pleasing  that  comes  to  their  minds.     This  crime  the  prophet  now  con- 
demns in  the  Jews.     Men  should  confine  themselves  within  God's  commands. 
{John  Calvin.)        Their  lies   caused  them  to   err. — The  pretence  of  good  inten- 
tion : — The  Jews  had  ever  a  defence  ready  at  hand,  that  they  did  with  good  intent 
what  the  prophet  condemned  in  them.     They  sedulously  worshipped  God,  though 
they  mixed  their  own  leaven,  by  which  their  sacrifice  was  corrupted.     It  was  not 
their  purpose  to  spend  their  substance  in  vain,  to  undergo  great  expenses  in  sacrifices, 
and  to  undertake  much  labour,  had  they  not  thought  it  was  service  acceptable 
to  God  !     As  then  the  pretence  of  good  intention  ever  deceives  the  unbelieving, 
the  prophet  condemns  this  pretence,  and  shows  it  to  be  wholly  fallacious,  and  of 
no  avail.     "It  is  nothing,"  he  says,  "  that  they  pretend  before  God  some  good 
intention ;  their  own  lies  deceive  them."     And  Amos,  no  doubt,  mentions  here 
these  lies,  in  opposition  to  the  commands  of  God.   As  soon,  then,  as  men  swerve  from 
God's  \A'ord,  they  involve  themselves  in  many  delusions,  and  cannot  but  go  astray ; 
and  this  is  deserving  of  special  notice.     We  indeed  see  how  much  wisdom  the 
world  claims  for  itself  :  for  as  soon  as  we  invent  anything,  we  are  greatly  delighted 
with  it ;  and  the  ape,  according  to  the  old  proverb,  is  ever  pleased  with  its  own 
offspring.     But  this  vice  especially  prevails,  when  by  our  devices  we  corrupt 


CHAP.  II.]  AMOS.  j3 


evi  if  IS  fo  ^T  wP  °i  ^°'i-  P"'^  ^'^^  P"""?^^*  ^^^«  de^^'ares  that  what- 
ever IS  added  to  God  s  Word  and  whatever  men  invent  in  their  own  brains,  is 
a  he  All  this,  he  says,  is  nothing  but  imposture."  We  now  see  of  what 
avail  IS  good  intention:  by  this,  indeed,  men  harden  themselves;  but  they  cannot 
make  the  Lord  to  retract  what  He  has  once  declared  by  the  mouth  of  His  prophet 
Let  us  then  take  heed  to  continue  within  the  boundaries  of  God's  Word  and  never 
t^eZn:^"Tr^'  °'  K°  *^^*  '^de  ;  for  when  we  turn  aside  ever  so  1  tt  e  from  the 
pure  Word  of  God,  we  become  immediately  involved  in  many  deceptions  (John 
?£r.l  „1  ^^««  7 '^^-Sftof^ --National  sins  have  ever  the  same  geSfeatures! 
there  are  always  the  same  general  features.  Our  lies  cause  us  to  err  •  there  are 
certain  false  principles  which  we,  as  a  people,  assume  to  be  true.     TheS  Ve  cherish 

soc1e?v  'liVy-     ^^r^  ^''>  ^  ^°""^  ^"  *^«  State,  in  the  ChSrTS,  and  t 
society.     It  IS,  of  course,  far  easier  to  point  out  existing  evils  than  to  effect  their 

W  «/~^'  T"'  ^  P'°^'  *^"  °""^  °^  reformation  than  to  bring  it  about  The 
first  step  to  reformation  18  conviction  of  our  errors.  It  is  the  most  daring  impiety 
and  most  inexcusable  foUy,  to  imagine  that,  in  political  science,  it  is  more^-uTcTous 
to  act  upon  unrighteous  precedents,  after  the  example  to  othe^,  than,  byidhering 
ThlJ2i7°^  P'!- ^P**  °*  ^  heavenly  jurisprudence,  to  trust  in  God  and  stand  alone^ 
The  great  question  for  our  nation  is.  How  shall  we  best  promote  the  glory  of 
God  hy  extending  the  blessings  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  and  therlbv  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  to  every  corner  of  the  world  ?  Missionary  sS£  are 
invaluable  but  they  are  not  doing  properly  national  work.  ManyTtime  the 
progress  of  truth  and  justice  has  been  arrested  by  our  political  ex^die™y  it 
IS  the  po  estar  by  which  our  statesmen  too  long  have  steered  ;  and  to  Go7alone 
we  owe  ,t  that  our  vessel  is  not  a  wreck.  "  Their  lies  cause  them  to  err.''  (7™ 
^Zl?nit-\  ^r  l^  rrfy--!^  ^U  civilised  communities  there  are  rS^Tny 
rnvfl  r?^^^  '"'**'•  "^^'f  '*•''  .^r^enient  and  proper  to  comply,  so  far  as  the? 
involve  no  compromise  of  principle.  The  mainspring  of  all  men's  conduct  il 
selfishness.  Selfishness  may  develop  itself  in  many  forms  which  appear  t^  be 
mterestmg  and  amiable:  it  is  the  foundation  of  some  of  our  mo^t  beautiful 
natural  instincts;  and  these  instincts  are  not  unfrequently  mistaken  for  virtues 
]''wZl"T:'''  ^^^'^  principles  are  recognised-lles  which  cause  men  to  ern 
I.  Wealth  is  the  chief  good.  This  is  a  main  article  in  the  creed  of  society  as 
a  whole  m  every  country  in  the  world.     The  advantages  of  wealth  are,  in  a  temporal 

ffifio°iirnT>.  ?'^  ^'*'--  .  ^r^'^  ''  P°^^^^-  I*  ««^^««  f°^  its  p;  sessor  eCy 
Ratification  that  can  minister  to  the  appetites,  the  senses,  and  the  taste      II  I? 

IS  POSSIBLE  TO  SERVE  God  and  mammon.  Religion,  instead  of  being  the  chief 
a  good  name.     The  heart  is  set  on  the  world  exclusively ;  yet  hopes  are  enter 

OWN       h1   M^r."^  *^'  ^'°^^°°^  °^  ^''""^°-       "I-   ^  ^^^«  POSSES?iONS  Irk  HIS 

OWN  ;  HE  MAY  DO  WITH  THEM  WHAT  HE  LIKES.     They  are  not  his  own.     They 

God  ±1h1  r  ^'  ^  '^r'^  ^°^  ^•°^-  ^"*  '^'  '^^^  °f  ^^ti-^g  ^«  ^  srward  for 
S  LT  denounced  by  people  in  general  as  fanatical.     IV  Human  nature 

IS   NOT   so   DEPRAVED   AS   THEOLOGIANS   WOULD   HAVE   US   BELIEVE.       Instincts   are 

taken  for  virtues,  and  are  referred  to  as  proofs  that  the  language  of  ScrTp?ure  hll 
been  overstrained.  J.  Zeal  in  the  cause  of  Christ  is  fanaticisV  Few 
would  use  these  words,  but  multitudes  entertain  the  idea  which  they  expresr 
Lukewarmness  is  commended  as  prudence,  and  while  zeal  is  not  tolerated,  indifferi 

vnnf^?  ""^^"^   °''  ^^''''^^-       ^^-    I^  ^   ^^^   "^=S   A   good   LIFE,   IT   MATTERS 

WEAK  AND  ™NTv'Fh^''°'°/  °'.^"^"-  ^^l-  Forgiveness  OF  injuries  is 
Zoh^tf  ^T^^  ^^'^  '^  ^'^^""^^y  opposed  to  the  teaching  and  example 
*IS  4n  ^7™-  The  forbearance  of  God  can  never  be  exhausted  Men 
talk  of  God's  merey  who  forget  that  they  are  taught  to  believe  in  His  holiness 
By  presuming  upon  God's  mercy  men  may  lose  thei?  souls.  IX  Religion^  not 
^reatesfnfT^n'''  FOR  ORDINARY  CONVERSATION.  Satan  closes  our  Hps  o^X 
greatest  of  all  topics,  and  thus  isolates  us  from  one  another,  lest  social  intercourse 
should  promote  the  success  of  the  Gospel.  X.  We  ought  to  pr  vy  but  we  need 
fn  thlXafv'^o?^  '°^  AN  ANSWER.  ^This  betokens  the  abs '.ce  ^f  rreaf  S 
offi  n,^  /.•  P^'^^l^-  ^^  encourages  us  to  expect  an  ar.wer,  as  often  as  we 
whl^h^L^  r'-  ^^"'^  r\*^"  °*  *^"  '°°«*  prevalent  errors  about  religion 
Tot  truf  ofT    "  tT"^,-^"^  '^^'t^^  by  ««eiety.     Let  us  take  care  that  ft  is 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Ver.  6.  For  three  transgressions  of  Israel,  yea,  for  four,  I  will  not  torn 
away  the  punisbment  thereof. — National  unrighteousness  : — I.  God  is  thb 
SOLE  AND  RIGHTEOUS  GovBBNOR  OF  THB  WOKLD.  Not  simply  of  Israel,  but  of 
Israel's  enemies,  Syria,  Gaza,  Edom,  &c.  Here  we  get  a  glimpse  of  the  great 
truth  of  God's  common  Fatherhood.  Amos  somewhat  anticipated  Peter,  "  God 
is  no  respecter  of  persons,"  and  taught  that  God  regarded  the  sin  of  Israel  as  He 
did  that  of  Syria  and  Edom.  That  God  would  bring  them  to  judgment  in  common 
with  other  nations,  came  as  a  thunderclap  to  the  people  of  Jeroboam  II.  With 
Amos  there  came  to  Israel  a  new  conception  of  God.  Note  his  words  (iii.  2). 
Their  privileges  and  blessings  would  not  exempt  them  from  sin's  consequences. 
They  regarded  God  as  benevolent  to  them.  The  prophet  proclaims  Him  aa 
righteous  (v.  21-24).  II.  Judgment  turns,  not  on  questions  of  privilege, 
CEREMONY,  OR  PROFESSION,  BUT  ON  CHARACTER — upon  the  character  manifested 
in  our  treatment  of  those  in  our  power.  Personal  character  is  tested  by  our 
treatment  of  "  the  least  of  these  My  brethren."  Priest  and  Levite  proclaimed 
their  unmercifulness  in  leaving  the  robber-smitten  man  to  his  fate.  We  see  in 
the  infinite  regard  and  tender  compassion  of  Christ  to  the  poor,  the  suffering, 
the  outcast,  a  revelation  of  God's  character.  National  character  similarly  tested. 
Damascus,  Edom,  Tyre,  Israel  ciursed  for  what  they  did  to  people  "  defenceless 
and  in  their  power."  Doing  is  the  gauge  of  being.  Their  greed  was  expressed 
in  their  utter  disregard  of  the  rights  of  others.  Damascus  rioted  in  the  blood  of 
defenceless  Gilead  (i.  3).  Gaza  traded  in  men  (i.  6).  Tyre  was  rich,  clever, 
strong,  enterprising,  artistic,  resourceful,  conquering.  Lust  of  wealth  and  power 
led  them,  notwithstanding  their  close  alliance  with  Solomon,  to  trade  in  Hebrew 
captives  (i.  9,  10).  Edom  became  the  incarnation  of  the  demon  revenge  (i.  11). 
Ammon,  prompted  by  lust  of  gain,  invaded  with  devilish  ferocity  the  sanctity 
of  motherhood  (i.  13).  Israel,  ceremonious,  self-righteous,  prosperous,  idolatrous, 
vain,  privileged,  denied  justice  to  her  poor,  oppressed  her  children,  sacrificed  her 
young  life  to  pleasure  (ii.  6-8).  These  nations  were  marked  as  modem  nations, 
alas  !  are  too  often,  by  selfishness,  and  "  wide  wasting  and  insatiable  pride." 
"  For  these  things,"  &c.  Samson  could  not  destroy  Gaza,  but  greed  did.  Tyre 
was  strong  to  defy  Assyria,  to  foimd  Cathage,  and  set  at  nought  Nebuchadnezzar, 
but  was  consumed  by  fire  enkindled  of  her  own  lust.  The  stone  houses  and  rocky 
palaces  of  Edom  afforded  no  refuge  from  the  consequences  of  her  sins.  Israel 
destroyed  herself.  He  who  obhterated  Tyre,  removed  Israel,  consumed  Edom 
and  Gaza.  "  He  who  obliterated  Babylon,  destroyed  Egypt,  buried  Greece 
and  Rome  under  the  debris  of  their  own  greatness."  He  still  judges  the  nations. 
In  reading  the  judgments  pronounced  by  Amos  we  are  reminded  that — (1)  Who- 
ever sins  against  man  sins  against  God.  All  human  interests  are  sacred. 
(2)  The  law  of  equilibrium  obtains  in  matters  moral  as  well  as  physical.  As  we 
give  we  receive.  Justice  is  of  God  and  meted  out  to  all.  Anything  that  dulls 
the  heart's  sensibilities,  robs  of  manhood's  sympathy,  destroys  the  faculty  for 
humanity,  prepares  for  hell.  (3)  Character  is  destiny.  "  Salvation  is  character, 
character  is  the  result  of  moral  decisions  made  daily."  III.  Sin  is  cumulative. 
What  are  the  three  transgressions  ?  They  are  not  stated.  The  fourth  only  is 
mentioned.  Why  ?  The  last  is  the  abridgment  and  consummation  of  all  the 
foregoing.  It  does  not  stand  alone.  It  is  but  the  development  in  the  way  of 
evil.  The  first  sin  leads  to  the  second,  and  the  fourth  were  impossible  but  for 
the  former  three.  The  growth  is  shown  in  the  case  of  Edom  (i.  11).  Ver.  11 
indicates — (1)  A  time  when  Edom  was  so  sensitive  that  the  very  thought  of  cruelty 
caused  him  to  shudder.  (2)  But  he  nursed  revengeful  thoughts ;  kept  the  memory 
of  wrongs  ever  fresh ;  until  the  shuddering  ceased.  "  He  corrupted  his  com- 
passions." (3)  His  anger  grew  upon  him  until  it  thoroughly  conquered  him. 
He  became  gradually  the  incarnation  of  brutal  revenge.  Gradually  men  ripen 
for  judgment.  To-day's  deeds  are  the  fruit  of  former  days.  Present  life  is  the 
resultant  of  the  past.  No  deed,  no  day,  no  sin  stands  alone  !  IV.  The  con- 
sequences OF  SIN  ARE  inevitable.  Every  act  of  sin  is  self-destructive.  It 
avenges  itself.  The  forces  of  judgment  are  loosed  by  the  act  which  violates 
the  law.  {John  T.  Ecob.)  They  sold  the  righteous  for  silver,  and  the  poor  for 
a  pair  of  shoea — No  remedy  for  injuries  : — The  prophet  means  that  there 
was  no  justice  nor  equity  among  the  Israelites,  for  they  made  a  sale  of  the 
children  of  God  :  and  it  was  a  most  shameful  thing  that  there  was  no  remedy 
for  injuries.  The  prophet  levels  his  reproof  against  the  judges,  who  then  exercised 
authority.     The  just,  he  says,  is  sold  for  silver :  this  could  not  apply  to  private 


CHAP,  n.]  AMOS.  15 

individuals,  but  to  judges,  to  whom  it  belonged  to  extend  a  helping  hand  to  the 
miserable  and  the  poor,  to  avenge  wrongs,  and  to  give  to  every  one  his  right. 
It  is  then  the  same  as  though  the  prophet  had  said  that  tmbridled  licentiousness 
reigned  triumphant  among  the  Israelites,  so  that  just  men  were  exposed  as  a  prey, 
and  were  set,  as  it  were,  on  sale.  He  says,  first,  that  they  were  "  sold  for  silver," 
and  then  he  adds,  "  for  shoes  "  :  and  this  ought  to  be  carefully  observed ;  for 
when  once  men  begin  to  turn  aside  from  the  right  course,  they  abandon  them* 
selves  to  evil  without  any  shame.  When  an  attempt  is  first  made  to  draw  aside 
a  man  that  is  just  and  upright  and  free  from  what  is  corrupt,  he  is  not  immedi- 
ately overcome  ;  though  a  great  price  may  be  offered  to  him,  he  will  yet  stand 
firm  :  but  when  he  has  sold  his  integrity  for  ten  pieces  of  gold,  he  may  afterwards 
be  easily  bought,  as  is  the  case  with  women.  Judges,  then,  who  first  covet  silver, 
that  is,  who  cannot  be  corrupted  except  by  a  rich  and  fat  bribe,  will  afterwards 
barter  their  integrity  for  the  meanest  reward ;  for  there  is  no  shame  any  more 
remaining  in  them.  This  is  what  the  prophet  points  out  in  these  words, — that 
they  sold  the  just  for  silver ;  that  is,  they  sold  him  for  a  high  price,  and  then  they 
could  be  corrupted  by  the  meanest  gift,  that  if  one  offered  them  a  pair  of  shoes, 
they  would  be  ready  without  any  blush  of  shame  to  receive  such  a  bribe.  (John 
Calvin. )  The  pettcUty  of  oppression : — Two  centuries  ago  quaint  Thomas 
Fuller  said,  "If  any  suppose  that  society  can  be  peaceful  while  one  half  is  prospered 
and  the  other  half  pinched,  let  him  try  whether  he  can  laugh  with  one  side  of  hia 
face  while  he  weeps  with  the  other."  I  am  not  concerning  myself  now,  however, 
with  those  outside  the  Church,  but  those  within.  As  surely  as  darkness  follows 
sunset  will  the  alienation  of  the  masses  follow  sanctimonious  selfishness  in  the 
Church.  If  a  Christian's  motto  is  "  Look  out  for  number  one,"  then  let  them 
look  out  for  estrangement  and  coldness  on  the  part  of  number  two.  The  Church 
millionaire  stands  at  exact  antipodes  to  the  Church  millennial,  and  in  proportion 
as  the  former  flourishes,  the  latter  will  be  hopelessly  deferred.  It  is  not  an 
orthodox  creed  which  repels  the  masses,  but  an  orthodox  greed.  Let  a  Christian 
man  stand  forth  conspicuously  in  any  community,  as  honest  as  the  law  of  Moses, 
and,  yet  let  it  be  seen  that  he  is  building  up  an  immense  fortune  by  grinding  the 
faces  of  the  poor  and  compelling  them  to  turn  the  grindstone  for  him  while  he 
does  it,  and  he  wiU  wean  a  whole  generation  from  the  Gospel.  The  reckless 
"  I  don't  care  for  the  Church,"  which  is  coming  up  in  ever-loudening  chorus  from 
the  poorer  classes,  is  but  the  echo  of  the  stolid  and  selfish  "  I  do  care  for  myself 
and  my  own  that  we  may  live  luxuriously  and  fare  sumptuously,"  which  is  the 
undeniable  expression  of  so  many  Christian  lives.     {A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Yet  destroyed  I  the  Amorlte   before  them,  whose  height  was 
like    the    height    of  the    cedars,  and  he    was   strong   as   the    oaks. — Sin   as 

ingratitude  : — These  verses  form  a  graphic  resume  of  the  great  benefits  which  God 
had  bestowed  on  His  people.  Amos  was  master  of  all  arts  by  which  a  nation 
might  be  roused  to  penitence.  Hence  the  two  pictures  of  man's  sin  (vers.  6-8) 
and  God's  goodness  are  set  side  by  side  as  a  means  of  awakening  the  slumbering 
conscience  of  the  nation,  and  winning  them  back  again  to  the  service  of  their 
almighty  and  changeless  Friend.  Only  the  most  hardened  hearts  can  resist  the 
appeal  which  Divine  mercy  makes  !  How  great  the  sin  of  Israel.  It  blinded 
them  to  the  mercies  of  heaven,  made  them  cling  to  vices  which  God  had  raised 
them  up  to  subdue,  and  forget  the  truth  and  holiness  which  were  to  be  exemplified 
in  their  lives.  The  mercies  are  summed  up  under  three  heads.  I.  The  victoribs 
WHICH  MADE  THEM  MASTERS  OF  THEIR  INHERITANCE.  "  Yet  destroyed  I  the  Amorite  " 
(ver.  9).  The  Amorites,  strongest  of  all  Canaanite  nations,  are  taken  as  the  repre- 
sentatives of  all.  The  greatness  of  the  victories  is  measured  here — (1)  By  the  might 
of  the  enemies.  The  two  noblest  trees  of  Palestine  represent  the  prowess  of  the  foe : 
"  Whose  height  was  like  the  height  of  the  cedars,  and  he  was  strong  as  the  oaks." 
The  Anakim  were  of  this  race,  combining  what  are  not  always  imited,  vast  stature 
and  gigantic  strength.  The  terror  of  the  spies  (Numb,  xiii.)  is  the  best  witness 
to  the  power  of  these  mighty  foemen.  These  enemies  are  a  type  of  aU  foes  whom 
God  subdues  before  His  people.  Passion  and  pride  are  the  Anakim  whom  He 
subdues  before  us.  Alone  we  were  powerless,  dismayed  by  thoughts  of  the 
encounter ;  yet  God  girded  Himself  as  a  mighty  man  of  war,  and  won  for  us  the 
victory.  (2)  The  victory  is  measured  by  the  completeness  of  the  deliverance. 
"  Yet  destroyed  I  his  fruit  from  above,  and  his  roots  from  beneath."  The  fruit 
might  have  been  borne  by  the  breeze  to  some  spot  where  it  would  grow  again^ 


16     -~  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  root,  left  in  the  earth,  might  have  put  forth  new  branches.  Both  were 
destroyed.  Our  own  experience  has  its  parallel  here.  God  not  only  subdues 
our  foes,  but  lays  them  low  at  our  feet,  where  they  need  never  rise  again  to  harass 
and  armoy  us :  rooting  out  the  seeds  of  bitterness.  What  a  claim  on  our  devotion ! 
n.  Dblivbeancbs  which  opened  the  way  for  this  careee  of  conquest.  "  I 
brought-  you  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt "  (ver.  10).  Nothing  seemed  more  im- 
probable than  that  they  should  escape  from  their  captivity.  All  religious  life 
begins  with  such  proofs  of  God's  power  and  mercy.  III.  God's  mercy  also 
PROVIDED  SPIRITXIAL  BLESSINGS  (ver.  11).  The  Nazarites  and  prophets  were  men 
who  witnessed  for  truth  and  purity.  The  prophet  taught  by  his  words,  the 
Nazarite  by  his  life.  Representatives  of  God,  they  walked  among  His  people 
to  bind  all  hearts  to  Himself.  They  were  to  preserve  the  nation  from  the  sins 
which  had  brought  ruin  on  the  old  inhabitants  of  Canaan,  to  keep  alive  that  truth 
and  purity  which  secured  to  them  the  possession  of  their  land.  How  rich  the 
mercy  of  God  !  The  Amorite  subdued,  that  the  people  might  inherit  their  land  ; 
the  yoke  of  Egypt  broken,  that  they  might  go  up  and  possess  their  inheritance  ; 
spiritual  guides  raised  up  to  keep  the  people  from  the  sin,  which  would  spoil  them 
of  their  new-foimd  treasure.  Such  is  God's  dealing  with  all  His  people.  Their 
path  is  strewn  with  tokens  of  His  guardian  grace.  He  is  preparing  them  for  a 
great  future.  Application  —  God's  appeal,  Is  it  not  even  thus?"  (ver.  11) 
sets  the  sin  of  Israel  before  us  in  all  its  baseness.  The  mercies  were  so  evident 
that  none  could  doubt  or  deny  them.  All  sin  in  God's  people  is  base  ingratitude. 
Remember  the  gifts  of  heaven  when  tempted  to  wander.     (J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  And  I  raised  up  of  yova  sons  for  prophets,  and  of  your  young; 

men  for  Nazarites. — Divine  appointments  and  their  frustration  : — The  sin  and 
folly  of  their  conduct  is  manifest  when  we  consider — I.  The  author  of  thb 
APPOINTMENTS.  "  I  raised  up."  The  Founder  of  their  nation.  He  whose  mercies 
have  been  commemorated  in  the  ninth  to  the  eleventh  verses,  had  originated 
these  appointments.  What  more  signal  proof  of  the  folly  in  attempting  this 
reversal!  Everything  that  Grod  willed  should  have  been  accepted  gratefully 
as  their  rule  of  life;  yet  they  tampered  with  His  appointments  thus.  (1)  An 
abiding  sense  of  the  relations  which  God  bears  to  His  people  is  a  constant  safe- 
guard against  the  spirit  which  would  cast  off  all  restraint.  He  is  the  Author 
of  all  our  blessings.  (2)  The  claim  on  reverence  for  Divine  appointments  is  not 
confined  to  His  people.  God's  love  is  boundless  as  the  universe.  II.  When  we 
consider  the  character  of  the  appointments.  God  was  striving  to  preserve 
the  national  purity,  to  train  them  up  in  all  His  ways.  Such  was  His  purpose  in 
these  remarkable  institutions : — the  prophetic  office,  and  the  order  of  the  Nazarites. 
God  had  raised  up  these  workers  out  of  the  "  young  men  "  of  Israel — the  class 
which  could  bring  the  greatest  energy  to  this  arduous  work,  devote  the  longest 
time  to  it,  and  furnish,  amid  the  temptations  to  which  youth  was  peculiarly 
exposed,  the  strongest  proof  of  the  restraining  grace  of  God.  God  still  uses  means 
to  preserve  men  in  purity.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  His  witness ;  conscience  is  Hia 
voice  ;  truth  is  His  messenger  ;  His  servants,  by  their  words,  and  by  the  example 
of  godly  lives,  are  our  prophets  and  the  Nazarites.  How  great  these  agencies  ! 
Seek  to  know  them  to  your  own  salvation.  III.  Were  frustrated  by  those  for 
WHOSE  BENEFIT  they  had  been  made.  No  regard  for  God,  no  sense  of  their  own 
interest,  deterred  them  from  presuming  to  interfere  with  the  counsels  of  God. 
The  motive  which  prompted  such  conduct  marks  their  degradation.  The 
Nazarites  were  a  standing  reproof  of  their  excess  and  revelry  ;  the  prophets  were 
obnoxious  because  they  tore  away  the  disguises  by  which  sin  sought  to  hide  its 
deformity,  and  warned  the  people  of  danger.  If  the  voice  of  the  prophet  was 
silenced,  they  fancied  that  heaven  had  no  means  of  reproving  sin.  They  forgot 
that  God  could  speak  in  the  thunder  and  the  earthquake.  Application — Man 
can  frustrate  the  purposes  of  God.  Heaven  may  appoint ;  earth  may  undo 
the  appointment.  The  effort  is  proof  of  degradation.  Success  in  such  effort 
is  the  worst  punishment  of  any  man.  Israel  reaped  disaster  and  ruin  from  thia 
attempt  to  reverse  God's  appointments.  False  prophets  multiplied,  sin  increased, 
the  nation  went  into  captivity.  {J.  Telford,  B.A.)  The  vow  of  the  Nazarite  :^ 
Though  Amos  was  neither  a  prophet  nor  a  prophet's  son,  but  a  rough  herdsman, 
and  unlettered  gatherer  of  sycamore  leaves,  his  was  one  of  those  masculine, 
indignant  natures  which  burst  like  imprisoned  flame  through  the  white  ashea 
of  social  hypocrisy.     Like  Samuel  before  Saul,  like  Elijah  before  Ahab,  like  John 


CHAP,  n.]  AMOS.  17 

the  Baptist  before  Herod,  like  Paul  before  Felix,  like  John  Huss  before  Sigismund, 
like  Luther  before  Charles  V.,  like  John  Knox  before  Mary,  so  Amos  testified 
undaunted  before  the  idola'jy  of  courts  and  priests.  One  crime  of  that  bad 
period  was  luxury  and  intemperance.  In  this  text  the  prophet  confronts  Israel 
with  the  high  appeal  of  God,  whether  He  had  not  put  the  fire  of  the  Spirit  into 
the  hearts  of  some  of  their  sons,  and  they  had  quenched  that  fire  by  their  blandish- 
ments and  conventionalities  ;  and  whether  He  had  not  inspired  some  of  their 
youths  to  take  the  vow  of  abstinence,  and  they  with  the  deliberate  cynicism  of 
worldlings  had  tempted  them  to  scorn  and  break  that  vow  ?  The  very  essence 
of  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite  was  self-dedication.  The  young  Nazarite  consecrated 
himself  to  God,  he  offered  himself,  his  soul  and  body,  a  reasonable,  holy,  and 
living  sacrifice.  The  Nazarite  was  a  marked  man,  and  because  his  vow  was 
regarded  as  a  tacit  condemnation  of  the  popular  self-indulgence,  he  was  exposed 
to  the  sneers  of  the  worldly,  and  the  temptations  of  the  base.  Nevertheless, 
*'  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children."  The  best  men,  and  the  bravest  men,  and 
the  least  conventional  men,  in  this  world  have  been  ever  the  most  loudly  and  the 
most  scornfully  abused.  Little  recked  the  true  Nazarite  of  muttered  sarcasm 
and  bitter  hate, — little  as  recks  the  sea  of  the  foolish  wild  birds  that  scream  above 
it.  Health,  strength,  physical  beauty,  wholesomeness  of  life,  tranquillity  of  soul, 
eerene  dominion  over  evil  passions,  followed  in  the  path  of  early  and  life-long 
abstinence.  There  seems  to  be  a  special  strength,  a  special  blessing,  above  all, 
a  special  power  of  swaying  the  souls  of  others  for  their  good,  which  is  imparted 
to  wise  and  voluntary  abstinence.  The  hands  of  invisible  consecration  over- 
shadow, the  fire  of  a  spiritual  unction  crowns  the  head  of  him  who  in  early  youth 
has  learnt  to  say  with  his  whole  heart,  "In  strong  warfare,  in  holy  self-denial, 
I  dedicate  my  youth  to  God."  This  age  wants,  this  England  wants,  the  Church 
of  Christ  wants  those  who,  self-dedicated,  like  the  ideal  Nazarite,  to  noble  ends, 
have  not  lost  the  natural  grace  and  bloom  of  youthful  modesty.  We  do  want 
natures  strong  and  sweet  and  simple,  to  whom  life  is  no  poor  collection  of  fragments, 
its  first  volume  an  obscene  and  noisy  jest  book,  its  last  a  grim  tragedy  or  a  despic- 
able farce  ;  but  to  those  of  whom,  however  small  the  stage,  the  life  is  a  regal 
drama,  played  out  before  God  and  man.  We  want  the  spirit  of  willing  Nazarites. 
And  total  abstinence  was  the  central  conception  of  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite.  (The 
rest  of  the  sermon  is  an  impassioned  plea  against  indulgence  in  alcoholic  drinks.) 
{Dean  Farrar.)  The  vigorous  young  man  in  most  danger  : — To  supply  the 
abundance  of  life  in  the  large  and  rich  nature  of  a  young  man  is  difficult ;  and 
it  is  that  which  makes  his  being  for  ten  or  twelve  years  of  his  youth  so  critical 
and  so  precarious.  You  will  have  noticed  that  it  is  not  the  dull  men  who  go  to 
pieces  in  a  small  town,  but  often  the  best  men,  the  men  who  have  the  largest 
natures  to  fill,  and  who,  therefore,  find  the  town  too  monotonous  for  them.  It 
is  the  same  in  the  workshop.  It  is  the  best  workmen  who  go  furthest  wrong 
when  they  begin  to  drink.  A  cabbage  is  perfectly  happy  in  a  back  garden  ;  and 
a  duU  young  man  is  perfectly  happy  without  any  brilliant  outlet  for  his  energies 
and  amusements.  But  the  man  that  requires  looking  after  is  the  man  of  strong 
and  vigorous  youth,  the  man  of  rich  personality,  the  man  of  strong  individuality, 
the  all-round  good  fellow,  who  is  so  hard  to  interest  and  so  hard  to  control.  So 
much  as  his  life  is  difficult  to  control,  so  much  the  better  to  the  community  when 
it  is  fairly  won  over  for  high  purposes  and  noble  ends.  The  difficulty  is  to  get 
hold  of  the  brilliant  young  man  and  interest  him,  and  divert  his  strong,  rich  life 
into  useful  channels.  (Prof.  Drummond.)  But  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wins 
to  drink. — Giving  wine  to  the  Nazarite : — In  Israel  worldly  prosperity  had 
produced  its  usual  effect — in  excessive  self-indulgence,  and  in  forgetfulness  of 
God  ;  and  in  the  capital  itself,  more  especially,  the  luxurious  life  of  the  upper 
classes  contrasted  painfully  with  the  miserable  destitution  of  those  who  were 
dependent  upon  them.  Under  the  circumstances  we  should  have  expected 
God  to  interfere.  And  He  does  interfere.  He  calls  forth  a  considerable  number 
of  Nazarites,  and  sends  them  as  His  representatives  among  the  people.  The 
Nazarites  were  a  class  of  persons  whose  mode  of  life  was  intended  to  be  a  witness 
to  the  high  importance  of  the  covenant-position  of  Israel.  Some  such  took  vows 
for  a  period  ;  some  for  life.  Their  obligations  were  mainly  to  abstain  from  the 
use  of  all  intoxicating  liquor.  And  they  were  to  be  on  their  guard  against  cere- 
monial defilement.  Every  Nazarite  who  made  his  appearance  in  public  would 
be  a  living  protest  against  the  sensual  ways  of  the  leading  inhabitants.  We  can 
well  understand  that  these  self-indulgent  nobles  and  wealthy  citizens  would  not 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  u, 

unfrequently  endeavour  to  induce  one  of  these  devotees  to  break  his  vow.  It 
would  be  a  triumph  for  them  if  they  succeeded.  The  charge  is  brought  against 
them  by  Amos.  What  lessons  may  be  conveyed  to  persons  situated  as  you  and 
I  are  ?  There  is  something  peculiarly  bad  in  God's  sight  in  the  endeavour  to 
induce  another  person  to  act  in  opposition  to  his  conscience.  By  "  offering 
wine  to  the  Nazarite  "  we  are  clearly  casting  in  our  lot  with  the  opponents  of 
the  cause  of  Christ.  {Gordon  Calthrop,  M.A.)  Buin  ivrought  by  drink: — 
We  have  no  means  for  focalising  the  ruin  wrought  by  England's  greatest  trade. 
The  Press  cannot  mirror  the  tithe  of  it,  nor  the  gossip  relate  its  thousandth  part. 
The  trade  is  everywhere,  and  everywhere  its  work  is  one — unceasing  slaughter. 
Could  we  but  see  in  one  fearful  perspective  the  colossal  host  of  men  and  women 
and  sweet  children  struck  to  death  by  the  traffic  in  drink,  a  new  agony  of  com- 
passion would  break  from  the  Church's  heart,  and  the  days  of  the  trade  that 
can  only  flourish  as  men  decay  would  be  numbered.     (Oreat  Thoughts.) 

Ver.  13.  Behold,  I  am  pressed  under  you,  as  a  cart  is  pressed  that 
is  full  of  sheaves. — We  go  to-day  to  the  gate  of  the  harvest-field,  to  see  the 
waggon  piled  up  aloft  with  many  sheaves  come  creaking  forth,  making  ruts  along 
the  field.  What  a  pictiure  is  a  waggon  loaded  with  com  of  you  and  of  me,  as  loaded 
with  God's  mercies  !  Alas  !  that  such  a  sign  should  be  capable  of  another  read- 
ing. That  while  God  loadeth  us  with  mercy,  we  should  load  Him  with  sin.  The 
text  is  only  a  figure,  since  God  cannot  actually  be  oppressed  by  man.  God  speaks 
to  us  as  a  great  father  may  talk  to  his  little  child.  Just  as  a  cart  has  the  axles 
bent,  and  as  the  wheels  creak  under  the  excessive  load,  so  the  Lord  says  that 
under  the  load  of  human  guilt  He  is  pressed  down,  imtil  He  crieth  out,  because 
He  can  bear  no  longer  the  iniquity  of  those  that  offend  against  Him.  I.  SiN 
IS  VERY  GBiBVOUS  AND  BURDENSOMB  TO  GoD.  There  is  no  suggestion  anywhere 
that  the  whole  burden  of  creation  is  any  weight  to  the  Most  High.  The  heathen 
picture  Atlas  stooping  beneath  the  globe ;  but  the  eternal  God,  who  beareth 
up  the  pillars  of  the  imiverse,  "  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  Nor  does 
providence  fatigue  the  Lord.  His  incessant  working  has  not  diminished  His 
strength,  nor  is  there  any  failing,  or  thought  of  failing,  with  Him.  But  sin 
burdens  God,  though  the  world  cannot ;  and  iniquity  presses  the  Most  High, 
though  the  whole  weight  of  providence  is  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance.  1.  Sin 
is  the  great  spoiler  of  all  God's  works.  Sin  looked  on  Eden,  and  withered  all 
its  flowers.  Nothing  tarnishes  beauty  so  much  as  sin,  for  it  mars  God's  image 
and  erases  His  superscription.  2.  Sin  makes  God's  creatures  unhappy.  Shall 
not,  therefore,  the  Lord  abhor  it  ?  3.  Sin  attacks  God  in  all  His  attributes. 
It  assails  Him  on  His  throne,  and  stabs  at  His  existence.  What  is  sin  ?  la 
it  not  an  insult  to  God's  wisdom  ?  Does  it  not  abuse  God's  mercy  ?  4.  Sin 
is  an  onslaught  upon  God  Himself.  For  sin  is  atheism  of  heart.  Surely  sin 
is  exceedingly  sinful;  so  it  must  be  grievous  and  burdensome  to  God.  II.  Somb 
SINS  ARE  MORE  ESPECIALLY  GRIEVOUS  TO  GoD.  There  is  uo  such  thing  as  a  little 
sin,  and  yet  there  are  degrees  of  guilt.  There  are  sins  which  especially  provoke 
God.  1.  Licentiousness.  2.  Oppression.  3.  Idolatry.  4.  Blasphemy.  Many 
men  are  especially  obnoxious  to  God,  because  of  their  length  in  sin  God  takes 
special  note,  and  feeleth  an  especial  weariness  of  sin  that  is  mixed  with  obstinacy. 
And  ingratitude  is  intensely  burdensome  to  God.  While  it  is  true  that  sin  is 
grievous  to  the  Lord,  it  magnifies  His  mercy  when  we  see  that  He  bears  the  load. 
As  the  cart  is  not  said  to  break,  but  is  pressed  only,  so  is  He  pressed,  and  yet 
He  bears.     If  you  or  I  were  m  God's  place,  should  we  have  borne  it  ?    III.  God, 

IN   THE   PERSON    OF   HiS    SON,    DID    BEAR   AND   TAKE   AWAY   SIN.       Here   StOod   the 

great  problem.  God  must  punish  sin,  yet  He  desired  to  have  mercy.  Jesua 
comes  to  be  the  substitute  for  all  who  trust  Him.  IV.  If  not  in  Christ,  that 
SAME  LOAD  WILL  CRUSH  US  FOR  EVER.  After  judgment,  for  a  soul  out  of  Christ, 
what  awaits?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  grief  (compare  Hos.  viii.  10,  xi.  8): — 

These  three  passages  give  us  an  intimation,  a  glimpse  of  the  burden  and  grief  of 
the  Infinite.  What  is  this  burden  that  presses  on  the  heart  of  the  Divine  ?  What 
are  the  thorns  under  the  golden  crown  of  universal  dominion  ?  Can  we  know 
what  they  are  ?  Yes,  the  burden  of  the  King  of  princes  is  the  sin  of  His  creatures, 
and  to  clear  it  from  the  world  is  the  one  great  problem  of  the  Divine.  If  sin 
were  committed  by  any  who  were  independent  of  God — were  it  possible  for 
such  to  exist — it  might  cause  Him  no  such  sorrow.  But  all  are  dependent  on 
Him,  closely  united  by  creation.     Sin  is  evidently  a  matter  of  greatest  cost  to 


CHAP,  n.]  AMOS. 


19 


God,  and  something  much  more  awful  than  we  can  comprehend.     Sin  meets 
God  in  His  world  at  every  turn.     Sin  now  rears  its  serpent  head  amid  the  glories 
of  God's  creation,  and  is  now  working  terrible  damage  in  the  fair  world  of  our 
Father.     I*  may  seem  a  trifling  thing  to  many ;  but  it  is  a  real  burden  and  annoy- 
ance to  God.     It  is  not  necessary  that  a  man  should  have  a  sharp  stone  in  his 
eye  in  order  to  feel  a  smart.     A  speck  of  dust,  a  grain  of  sand,  will  be  sufficient 
to  blot  out  to  us  for  a  season  the  glories  of  the  most  beautiful  landscape.     As 
to  the  presence  of  such  a  slight  foreign  substance,  the  eye  is  most  sensitive,  so 
IS  the  natirre  of  God  to  the  presence  of  sin  m  His  creature.     To  a  Being  of  such 
great  love  it  must  be  a  great  burden  to  see  such  multitudes  of  His  creatures  rushing 
on  in  the  misery  of  sin.     In  proportion  to  the  infinite  tenderness  of  the  Divine 
nature,  so  is  the  burden  increased.     God  knows  the  far-reaching  effects  of  man's 
sm.     It  IS  a  very  common  thing  to  represent  God  as  existing  only  in  unalloyed 
happiness.     It  is  only  like  Him  to  take  up  oxir  burdens,  to  know  our  sorrows. 
He  Is  most  like  God  when  love  leads  to  an  infinite  self-sacrifice  in  bearing  man's 
burdens,  and  sympathising  in  human  sorrow.     We  should  not  believe  in  God's 
sympathy  and  love  so  much  apart  from  this  bearing  some  burden.     We  should 
not  go  to  Him  so  readily.     There  was  not,  let  us  remember,  in  Christ,  who  mani- 
fested God,  the  appearance  of  submission  to  suffering.     It  was  real  suffering, 
because  there  was  a  real  burden  and  sympathy.     If  the  Divine  Being  sympathises 
with  man.  He  also  shows  us  that  He  wishes  to  have  from  us  sympathy  and  love 
in  return.     We  are  "  to  sorrow  a  little  for  the  burden  of  the  King  of  princes." 
And  the  measure  of  our  power  to  enter  into  sympathy  with  the  Divine  is  the 
measure   of   the   strength   of   our   spiritual   character.     {F.    Hastings.)         God's 
sin-burden: — This  verse,  as  it  is  by  some  translated,  is  a  part  of  the  sentence 
or  threatening,  showing  that  God  would  press  their  place  or  land,  and  fill  it  with 
heaps  of  judgments  and  enemies,  as  a  cart  is  pressed  and  filled  with  sheaves  in 
harvest.      But  as  it   is  here  translated,  it  is  a  general  conclusion  introductory 
to  the  sentence;  wherein  the   Lord  declareth,  that  the  multitude  and   variety 
of  these  their  sins  did  so  provoke  His  justice  and  patience,  that  He  might  justly 
complain  of  them  as  insupportable  and  intolerable,  as  a  cart  groans  xmder  biu-dens  ; 
and  therefore  He  would  punish,  as  is  declared  in  the  following  verses.     Doctrine— 
1.  It  is  the  way  of  secure  sinners  to  lay  over  the  weight  of  all  their  sins  on  God, 
and  on  His  mercy,  as  if  He  were  but  a  cart  to  lie  under  the  burden  of  them  all' 
that  so  they  may  sleep  the  sounder  and  sin  the  faster.     2.  The  Lord,  even  toward 
secure  sinners,  will  take  on  this  burden  so  far,  as  to  suffer  their  manners  long, 
before  He  cast  it  off,  albeit  He  be  provoked  by  every  sin,  and  doth  not  allow  their 
presumptuous  casting  off  their  iniquities  upon  Him,  vet  He  doth  not  complain 
nor  strike,  till  He  be  pressed,  "  as  a  cart  that  is  full  of  sheaves."     3.  God's  patience 
and  long-suffering  will  at  last  weary  to  endure  the  provocations  of  sinners,  as 
becoming  insupportable.     4.  When  the  cup  of  men's  iniquities  is  full,  and  God 
is  about  to  bear  them  no  longer,  yet  they  may  be  so  stupid  as  to  need  up-stirring 
to    consider   it.     (George   Hutcheson.)         Ill-treatment   of   God :— Consider,    then, 
for  a  moment,  how  bad  human  nature  must  be,  if  we  think  how  ill  it  has  treated 
its  God.     I  remember   William  Huntington  says,   in   his  Autobiography,   that 
one  of  the  sharpest  sensations  of  pain  that  he  felt  after  he  had  been  quickened 
by  Divine  grace  was  this  :  "  He  felt  such  pity  for  God."     I  do  not  know  that  I 
ever  met  with  the  expression  elsewhere,  but  it  is  a  very  expressive  one,  although 
I  might  prefer  to  say  sympathy  with  God  and  grief  that  He  should  be  so  evil 
entreated.     Ah,  there  are  many  men  that  are  forgotten,  that  are  despised,  and 
that  are  trampled  on  by  their  fellows  ;  but  there  never  was  a  man  who  was  so 
despised  as  the  everlasting  God  has  been.     [C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-16.  Therefore  the  flight  shaU  perish  from  the  swift,  and  the  strong 

shall  not  strengthen  his  force,  neither    shall    the  mighty  deliver  himself. 

Effect  of  sin  on  the  sinner : — We  have  here  the  supplement  to  the  former  verse : 
the  sin  which  wearies  God  reacts  on  those  who  walk  in  it.  I.  A  picture  of  the 
DECAY  OF  NATIONAL  PROWESS.  It  is  a  painful  remembrance  of  departed  power, 
like  some  castle  once  the  seat  of  a  nation's  strength,  now  in  ruins.  The  swift 
are  there  but  their  swiftness  is  gone ;  the  strong  remain,  but  only  as  a  wreck 
of  their  former  selves,  unable  to  gather  up  their  strength.  Danger  found  them, 
like  Samson  in  the  lap  of  Delilah,  shorn  of  all  their  boasted  power.  He  who 
handles  the  bow  dare  not  stand  to  pour  his  shafts  on  the  enemy ;  the  fleet  of 
foot,  and  even  the  mounted  soldier,  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  the  mighty  man,  once  full  of  coiirage,  should  be  glad  to  escape,  stripped  of 
arms  and  clothing,  in  the  day  of  visitation.  Every  sentence  increases  the  effect 
of  this  picture.  What  they  had  been  and  what  they  were  forms  a  terrible  con- 
trast. II.  The  reason  for  such  a  decay  of  prowess.  Sin  had  borne  this 
deadly  fruit.  All  their  national  valour  sprang  from  confidence  in  God.  They 
knew  that  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear  Him, 
and  delivereth  them."  What  foe  could  stand  before  men  who  leaned  on  the  arm 
of  God  ?  Lord  Bacon  says,  that  "  man,  when  he  resteth  and  assureth  himself 
upon  Divine  protection  and  favour,  gathereth  a  force  and  faith  which  human 
natvu-e  in  itself  could  not  obtain."  All  their  victories  are  proof  of  these  words. 
Confidence  in  Grod  had  brought  David  oflF  victorious  in  his  conflict  with  Goliath 
(Deut.  xxxii.  30).  AU  was  changed  now.  Sin  had  sapped  their  confidence  in 
heaven,  and  the  whole  fabric  of  their  national  life  was  tottering  to  its  f  unda- 
tions.  They  felt  the  truth  of  the  old  words,  "  He  that  offends  r  gainst  heaven 
has  none  to  whom  he  can  pray."  History  presents  many  parallels  to  this  declen- 
sion. Injustice  and  sin  have  shorn  great  men  of  their  strength,  and  left  them 
weak  in  the  hour  of  danger.  III.  The  effects  of  this  decay  of  valoub 
WERE  SOON  evident.  For  them,  as  for  us,  peace  depended  on  prowess  ;  prowess 
was  born  of  confidence  in  God.  Foes,  who  were  only  held  in  check  by  fear,  soon 
discovered  their  declension, — for  such  decay  has  many  tokens, — and  quickly 
overran  their  land.  The  floodgates  were  opened,  and  a  tide  of  vengeance  poured 
itself  over  their  land.  Three  times  Amos  repeats, — the  reiteration  marking 
the  certainty  of  their  doom, — "  He  shall  not  deliver  himself."  Application. 
Sin  is  ruin.  He  who  would  have  victory  must  be  loyal  to  heaven,  then  God 
will  surely  fulfil  to  him  the  great  promise  to  Joshua  (Josh.  i.  5).  (/.  Telford,  B.A.) 
Prosperity  and  ruin  : — It  may  sound  strange  to  say  that  adversity  is  not  half 
so  dangerous  to  a  man  as  prosperity  run  mad,  but  it  is  true.  I  have  read  some- 
where that  the  south  wall  of  Whitby  Abbey  is  more  dilapidated  than  the  north 
wall,  thus  proving  that  the  light  of  the  sun  has  been  more  destructive  than  that 
angry  tempest  that  swept  in  from  the  North  Sea.  And  the  bright  sunshine 
of  prosperity  has  often  proved  more  ruinous  to  individuals  and  nations  than  the 
wintry  tempests  of  adversity.     (J.  Ossian  Davies.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vers.  1-8.  Ton  only  have  I  known   of   all  the  families  of  the   earth.— 

Sin  in  the  highly -favoured : — This  is  shameful  ingratitude.  The  honour  and 
blessing  conferred  on  the  Israelites  gave  the  stain  of  ingratitude  to  every  act 
of  transgression  of  which  they  were  guilty.  It  is  direct  rebellion.  "  You  only 
have  I  known,"  so  as  to  reveal  to  you  My  will.  Iniquity  in  you  is  disobedience 
to  express  commands,  revolt  against  My  authority.  It  is  a  dishonom*  offered 
to  God.  The  privilege  of  being  called  after  the  name  of  God  brings  with  it  the 
danger  of  profaning  that  name  by  transgression.  The  nearer  in  privilege,  the 
nearer  we  are  to  judgment.  Distinguished  blessings  are  leading  to  distinguished 
reward,  or  to  distinguished  punishment.  1.  We  are  taught  here  that  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  prepares  good  and  evil  for  man.  View  what  are  called  common 
mercies  in  their  origin,  and  "  understand  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord."  Evil 
is  also  prepared  for  the  sinner,  in  the  sense  of  calamity,  judgment.  2.  We  are 
taught  by  the  prophet's  vindication  of  the  doctrine  of  a  special  providence  to 
be  very  earnest  when  affliction  comes  in,  working  together  with  God,  that  it 
may  do  us  good.  Remember  that  God  intended  that  sorrow  to  come  as  it  did 
come,  and  when  it  did  come.  3.  When  the  trumpet  of  God's  Word  is  soxmded 
by  His  ministers,  let  us  give  heed  to  the  note  of  warning  or  exhortation.  4.  When 
there  is  evil  in  the  land,  let  us  with  reverence  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God. 
5.  The  Lord  revealeth  His  secret  to  His  servants  the  prophets.  (I)  He  does  thia 
by  giving  them  spiritual  apprehension  of  the  truths  of  His  Holy  Word,  causes 
them  to  see  terror  in  the  threatenings  thereof,  sweetness  in  its  promises,  duty 
in  its  precepts.  (2)  Nothing  is  coming  upon  man  that  has  not  been  revealed. 
(3)  The  Holy  Spirit  directs  the  thoughts  and  words  of  His  ministering  servants, 
so  as  best  to  suit  the  particular  need  of  those  whom  they  address.     At  all  times 


CHAP,  ra.]  AMOS.  21 

the  sincere  preaching  of  the  Word  may  be  expected  to  give  offence.     See  how 
dangerous  is  the  conduct  of  those  who  despise,  oppose,  revile,  and  persecute 
men  of  God  for  telling  them  plain  truth  \  ith  faithfulness  and  honesty.     See  where 
the  true  strength  of  a  faithful  dispenser  of  God's  Word  lies.     The  strength  of  the 
servant  lies  in  his  conviction  that  he   is  doing  his  Master's  will.     (Vincent  W. 
Ryan,  M.A.)        Elected  for  what? — Here  was  this  desert  prophet,  with  keen, 
prayer-washed  eyes,  piercing  through  the  shows  of  things  to  the  unclean  realities 
behind.     He  disinterred  the  moral  corruption  that  lurked  behind  their  whited 
TOofessions.     What  answer  did  the  people  make  to  this  rude  child  of  the  desert  ? 
He  stood  there,  rude  in  speech  and  in  (iress,  despised  by  the  ofiQcial  priest,  a  mere 
field-preacher,  proclaiming  to  the  grandees  of  the  metropolis  that  the  moral 
corruption  of  the  people  was  eating  away  the  vital  elements  of  the  national 
strength  and  that  in  galloping  consumption  they  were  hastening  on  to  a  terrible 
and  fatal  retribution.      What  answer  did  they  make  ?      They  fell  back  upon 
their  belief  in  God.     Their  reply  to  the  herdman  was  found  in  their  doctrine 
of  providence.     What  was  that  doctrine  ?     It  was  this :   Their  nation  was  the 
favourite  of  the  Lord.     They  were  hedged  about  with  peculiar  sanctities.     "  We 
only  are  known  unto  the  Lord.     Only  between  us  and  the  Lord  is  there  the  inter- 
course which  implies  security.     Thy  threats,   0  Amos,  are  as  noisy  nothings. 
They  are  meaningless  and  terrorless."     Such  was  the  refuge  in  which  the  people 
foimd   their   security.     "  We   are   the   children   of   privilege.     Privilege   implies 
favour.     Favour   guarantees   security."     Such   was   their   doctrine   of   election, 
and  I  am  not  altogether  sure  that  their  doctrine  is  banished  from  the  minds  of  all 
men  to-day.     Now  let  us  mark  the  answer  of  the  Lord  through  the  mouth  of  His 
prophet.     We  have  heard   the  false  doctrine  of  election ;  now  let  us  hear  the 
true  doctrine  which  is  enshrined  in  the  words  of  our  text.     "  You  only  have  I 
known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth :  t  erefore  " — note  the  swift,  piercing 
logic — "  therefore  I   will   punish   you."      The   false   doctrine  ran  thus — "  You 
only    have    I    known :    therefore    I    will    indulge    you."      The    true    doctrine 
culminates    in    fire — "  You    only    have    I    known :   therefore    I    will    punish 
you."      "  You  only  have  I  known  " — I  marked  you  out  for  special  ofiBce.      I 
appointed  you  to  discharge  a  special  function.     I  elected  you  to  special  service. 
But  the  office  has  been  prostituted.     The  function  has  been  ignored.     The  service 
has  been  despised.     "  Therefore  I  will  pimish  you."     I  singled  you  out  from 
among  men,  that  all  men  through  you  might  be  blessed.     But  ye  have  defiled 
your  mission,  and,  instead  of  being  a  centre  of  saving  health,  ye  have  become  a 
noisome  pestilence.     That  is  the  expression  of  a  Divine  method  of  government 
which  prevails  in  all  time.     Election  does  not  mean  security.    Security  is  dependent 
upon  the  discharge  of  the  duty  which  election  creates.     There  is  an  aristocracy 
of  the  election,  a  chosen  few,  and  these  are  they  who  have  fulfilled  the  obliga- 
tions of  their  election,  and  are  therefore  qualified  to  enter  into  the  peace  and  joy 
of  their  Lord.     Election  therefore  does  not,  in  the  first  place,  create  security. 
It  creates  responsibility,  and  my  security  or  insecurity  depends  upon  the  manner 
in  which  that  responsibility  is  regarded.     There  is  nothing  which  can  ensure 
the  protecting  presence  of  the  Most  High  God  except  moral  agreement.     "  Can 
two  walk  together  .  .  .  ?  "  cries  the  prophet  in  the  verse  which  follows  my  text. 
"  Can  two  walk  together,  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "     If  there  is  to  be  helpful 
and    intimate   companionship   between    two   people,    there   must   be   profoxmd 
agreement,  and  if  I  am  to  enjoy  the  companionship  of  the  great  God,  with  all 
that  that  companionship  means  of  consoling  and  sheltering  grace,  if  God  and 
I  are   to  walk    together,   we  must    be    agreed,   and  my  part    of    the    agree- 
ment   must    be    faithful    and   luiconditional  obedience    to    all    His   revealed 
will.     Election ;  the  prophet  declared  that  it  could  only  be  found  in  the  fact  of 
obedience.     They  had  been  elected  to  duty ;  not  in  the  election,  but  in  the  duty 
would  they  find  the  defences  which  are  as  invulnerable  ramparts  against  their 
foes.     Election  means  selection  to  service.     The  Lord's  specialities  are  for  the 
sake  of  generalities.     An  individual  is  elected  that  he  may  serve  a  nation.     A 
nation  is  elected  that  she  may  serve  a  race.     A  call  is  not  a  self-securing  privilege ; 
it  is  the  entrustment  of  an  office.     To  evade  my  responsibility  is  to  destroy  my 
defences,  and  to  bring  down  swift  retribution  from  God.     "  You  only  have  I 
known  :  therefore  I  will  punish  you."     Election,  then,  means  selection  for  special 
service.     This  doctrine  of  election  is  here  applied  to  nations.     Certain  nations  are 
specially  known  by  God.     He  whispers  to  them  peculiax  secrets,  that  they  may 
proclaim  them  upon  the  house-tops  to  the  nations  of  the  world.     Greece  was 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

Bpecially  known  by  God.  The  waxm  breath  of  the  Lord  came  upon  her  people, 
and  endowed  her  with  that  exquisite  sense  of  the  beautiful  which  has  ma!de  her 
distinguished  among  all  the  nations  of  time.  She  revelled  in  the  joy  of  perception, 
and  exulted  in  the  creation  of  lovely  forms.  God  opened  her  eyes  to  the  holiness 
of  beauty,  and  gave  her  a  mission  to  the  race.  And  "  the  Gentiles  have  come  to 
her  light."  All  the  nations  go  to  Greece  to  school.  We  go  to  the  treasury  of  her 
graces  for  our  own  adornments.  The  Lord  God  elected  her  by  special  endowment, 
that  by  her  election  she  might  serve  a  race.  Rome  was  specially  known  by  God. 
She  was  His  own  handiwork.  He  fashioned  her  into  special  aptitude,  giving 
her  the  endowment  of  a  peculiar  passion  for  order,  a  genius  for  polity,  government, 
and  empire.  He  breathed  into  her  life  the  instinct  of  law,  and  by  the  speciality 
of  her  election  He  determined  the  speciality  of  her  mission.  "  And  the  Gentiles 
have  come  to  her  light."  The  foundations  of  modem  jurisprudence  are  laid  in 
ancient  Rome.  She  has  been  the  schoolmistress  to  all  the  nations,  Israel  was 
specially  known  by  God.  He  breathed  into  her  life  a  special  genius  for  religion, 
a  rare  instinct  for  the  Unseen  and  Eternal.  To  her  He  whispered  the  sublime 
truth  of  the  unity  of  God  and  the  august  verities  of  the  moral  law.  "  And  the 
Gentiles  have  come  to  her  light."  Just  as  beauty  is  of  the  Greeks,  and  law  of  the 
Romans,  so  salvation  is  of  the  Jews  !  Israel  was  exalted,  as  a  city  set  upon  a  hill, 
that  the  light  of  revelation  might  shine  out  upon  the  nation,  yea,  even  upon  them 
that  were  afar  off.  May  it  not  be  that  the  Lord  has  held  secret  commimion  with 
every  nation,  and  whispered  to  her  some  peculiar  message  which  makes  her  life 
distinctive  and  unique  ?  It  is  along  this  line  that  I  can  travel  with  the  least 
trembling  when  I  contemplate  the  appalling  divisions  which  distract  the  race. 
I  gain  some  assurance  from  a  broad  application  of  this  doctrine  of  election.  Each 
nation  has  been  specially  elected.  All  nations  are  dependent  upon  each  ;  each  is 
dependent  upon  all.  Because  of  the  Divine  distribution  of  gifts  absolute  severance 
is  impossible.  "  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee  :  nor, 
again,  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you."  Each  nation  is  specially 
known  of  God,  specially  elected  to  unique  and  individual  service.  In  this  doctrine 
of  the  election  of  nations,  which  is  an  election  to  mutual  service,  and  which  entails 
mutual  dependence,  I  base  my  hope  of  the  ultimate  practical  comity  of  nations, 
and  the  reahsed  brotherhood  of  the  race.  But  now  let  us  apply  the  prophet's 
doctrine  to  the  life  of  the  individual,  as  we  have  applied  it  to  the  life  of  the  nation. 
The  prophet's  doctrine  is  this — election  is  not  election  to  security,  except  through 
the  discharge  of  obligation.  Election  is  election  to  the  service  of  o'hers.  How 
many  of  us,  then,  have  been  elected  ?  Are  there  any  exempt  from  the  election  ? 
We  are  aU  known,  all  elected,  all  called — for  the  election  is  a  call  to  individual 
faithfulness,  and  om*  response  will  determine  whether  the  election  shall  issue  in 
Bunshine  or  in  fire.  Each  life  has  its  own  peculiar  mission.  God  appoints  for 
each  a  special  and  individual  task.  My  mission  is  my  election.  I  may  not  know 
what  my  mission  is.  That  matters  not.  God  knows.  My  part  is  to  discharge 
the  duty  that  lies  nearest,  and  then  the  next,  and  the  next,  and  the  next,  and 
God  will  guide  and  control  the  connected  purpose  and  mission.  How 
can  I  turn  the  election  into  a  glad  consciousness  of  protecting  providence 
and  eternal  security  ?  By  a  spirit  of  obedience.  Fy  faithfulness  in  that  which 
is  least.  (J.  H.  Joicett,  M.A.)  Humiliation  under  God's  chastisement : — We 
enjoy  creat  and  peculiar  privileges  as  a  people.  Religious  light ;  civil  liberty ; 
public  credit;  individual  exertions  ;  private  wealth  ;  national  power;  commercial 
prosperity.  Let  us  not  forget  that  privilege  involves  responsibility.  The  very 
adoption  of  sons  carries  with  it  the  certainty  of  fatherly  correction ;  for  what 
son  is  there  whom  the  father  chasteneth  not  ?  We  must  be  prepared  to  expect 
that,  as  there  are  occasions  where  a  father's  love  is  manifested  in  the  correction 
of  his  child,  and  the  affection  that  he  feels  is  expressed  by  the  chastisement  he 
applies,  so  there  are  times  when  the  same  necessity  may  compel  God  to  adopt  a 
different  mode  of  treatment  from  that  which  He  generally  employs,  and  to  prove 
the  love  that  He  feels  for  His  children  by  the  judgments  that  He  brings  upon  them. 
Nothing  seems  more  natural,  nothing  more  probable,  than  that  a  period  of  great 
scientific  advancement,  and  of  great  commercial  prosperity,  should  be  a  season 
of  great  forgetfulness  of  God.  There  are  multitudes  who  habitually  forget  their 
dependence  on  God  ;  who  form  their  plans,  pursue  their  inquiries,  calculate  their 
gains,  without  reference  to  Him.  If  punishment  is  to  begin,  where  can  it  begin 
so  appropriately  as  in  ndticing  that  forgetfulness  of  God  which  seems  to  be  the 
sin  that  doth  most  easily  beset  us  ;  and  in  teaching  us  the  humbling  but  imwelcome 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  23 

truth  of  oxa  entire  dependence  on  God  ?  In  time  of  national  distress,  let  us  pray, 
as  Elijah  prayed ;  and  as  his  prayers  prevailed  for  the  people,  when  the  people  had 
avowed  their  allegiance  to  God,  so  let  us  hope  that  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  still 
maintain  its  character,  and  that  to  an  humbled,  penitent,  and  believing  people 
the  blessing  will  never  be  refused.  [Henry  Raikes,  M.A.)  Ood's  alarm  t  Great 
Britain : — In  this  chapter  we  have  a  denunciation  of  judgments  against  Israel, 
together  with  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  it.  Notice — 1  The  special  regard 
God  had  to  His  people.  It  is  as  if  He  should  say,  "  My  heart  has  been  set  upon 
you,  My  thoughts  of  kindness  have  been  peculiarly  towards  and  concerning  you. 
2.  The  awful  visitation  which  even  God's  regard  to  them  engaged  Him  to  bring 
upon  them.  "  Therefore  I  will  punish  you."  As  to  Israelites  indeed,  though 
God  visits  their  iniquities  with  temporal  judgments,  it  is  with  a  design  of  love 
and  of  advantage  to  their  souls.  3.  The  ground  and  reason  of  this,  and  that 
was  their  iniquities.  "  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  I.  What  havb 
BEEN  Great  Britain's  eminent  mercies  ?  1.  Our  temporal  mercies,  which 
purely  relate  to  the  things  of  this  life.  2.  Our  mercies  with  regard  to  religious 
concerns,  and  to  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings.  II.  What  have  been  oub 
ABUSES  OF  THESE  EMINENT  MERCIES  ?  How  have  we  rioted  upon  the  bounties  of 
providence  !  Has  not  our  plenty  been  turned  into  means  and  occasions  of  feeding 
our  pride  and  ambition,  our  intemperance,  luxury,  and  debauchery?  How 
unfruitful  have  we  been  under  the  means  of  grace.  Has  not  the  Holy  Spirit 
been  grieved  and  provoked  to  withdraw  from  our  solemn  assemblies  ?  And  when 
we  speak  of  religion,  have  we  much  more  than  the  name  ?     III.  What  reason 

■WE   HAVE   TO   FEAR  THAT   GOD   WILL   VISIT   US   WITH    JUDGMENTS   FOB   ALL  THB8B 

INIQUITIES  AND  ABUSES  OF  His  MERCIES.  1.  OuT  provocations  are  exceeding 
great.  2.  The  honour  of  God,  as  the  great  Governor  of  the  world,  is  concerned 
to  show  His  righteous  resentment  against  a  professing  people  that  are  guilty 
of  such  exceeding  high  provocations.  3.  The  threatenings  of  God's  Word  give 
us  reason  to  fear  His  bringing  judgments  upon  us.  4.  The  examples  God  has 
made  of  other  communities,  and  particularly  of  His  professing  people,  for  their 
iniquities,  may  justly  raise  our  fears  of  His  doing  the  same  by  us.  5.  God  has 
already  taken  up  a  controversy  with  us.  IV.  What  course  is  to  be  taken  fob 
PREVENTING  SUCH  AWFUL  VISITATIONS  ?  Public  national  sins  must  be  followed 
with  public  national  breaking  them  off  by  repentance  and  returning  to  the  Lord. 
When  dangers  lie  at  the  door  of  kingdoms  and  nations,  the  only  methoa  of  preventing 
them,  according  to  God's  ordinary  rule  of  procedure  in  His  government  of  this 
world,  is  national  humiliation,  fasting,  and  repentance  for  and  departure  from 
the  provoking  evils  that  have  incensed  His  wrath  against  us,  with  earnest  supplica- 
tion and  prayer  for  national  forgiveness  of  national  sins.  {J.  Guyse,  D.D.) 
National  privileges  : — A  nation's  guilt  and  pimishment  are  graduated  according 
to  the  scale  of  its  privileges.  I.  OuB  privileges.  Knowledge,  as  it  relates  to 
God,  signifies  approval,  love.  Israel  had  been  unto  the  Lord  a  peculiar  treasure 
above  all  people.  Is  there  not  a  remarkable  parallel  between  our  own  position 
and  that  of  ancient  Israel  ?  When  we  pass  in  review  our  own  national  history 
we  may  well  stand  amazed  at  God's  marvellous  dealings  with  us.  To  us,  pre- 
eminently and  emphatically,  beyond  all  nations  of  the  earth,  has  the  kingdom  of 
God,  taken  from  the  Jews  for  their  unworthiness,  been  given.  Truly  our  privileges 
are  as  incomparable  as  they  are  priceless.  II.  Our  penalties.  Whether  as  a 
Church  or  a  nation,  we  should  be  on  our  guard  against  unfaithfulness.  We  have 
the  Word  of  the  living  God  in  our  keeping.  But  are  we  as  faithfiil  to  this  trust  as 
we  ought  to  be  ?  Do  we  not  sometimes  give  a  very  halting  and  restricted  testimony 
to  the  truth?  {R.  W.  Forrest,  M.A.)  Privilege  and  punishmenl : — I.  Thh 
privilege.  So  surpassing  had  been  the  tenderness  of  God,  so  intimate  the 
relationship  in  which  He  had  stood  to  them,  that  it  appeared  as  if  He  had  ignored 
all  other  nations  to  magnify  His  mercy  to  them.  They  alone  had  had  the  presence 
of  God  in  their  midst,  with  a  Divinely  appointed  priesthood,  and  a  law  given  by 
the  mouth  of  God.  Other  nations  were  as  worthy  as  they.  It  was  only  the  mercy 
of  God  which  had  chosen  them.  God  exalts  His  people  now  to  the  highest  privilege. 
He  reveals  His  truth  and  makes  known  His  character  to  them.  II.  The  punish- 
ment. This  was  a  necessary  result  of  their  trangression.  1.  Because  theirs 
was  no  common  sin.  The  clearest  light,  the  richest  mercy,  the  strongest  warnings, 
the  most  awful  threatenings  failed  to  deter  them  from  wandering  into  forbidden 
paths.  Punishment  is  proportioned  to  privilege.  Can  we  wonder,  then,  that 
J)ivine  indignation  should  be  kindled  against  those  who  multiplied  trangressions  ? 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

2.  It  was  necessary  that  God  should  vindicate  His  own  character.  He  had  taught 
them  by  warning  and  example  how  deeply  He  hated  sin.  The  story  of  Achan, 
the  history  of  the  spies,  the  fate  of  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  showed  that 
the  wrath  of  God  was  revealed   from  heaven  against  all   ungodliness  of  men. 

3.  To  a  certain  extent  the  punishment  was  remedial.  God  hoped  to  awaken 
the  people  from  the  stupor  into  which  sin  had  thrown  them.  (J.  Telford,  B.A.) 
A  specially  blest  people  : — Now  it  is  a  fact  that  some  men  are  far  more  highly 
favoured  by  heaven  than  others.  Some  have  more  health,  some  more  riches, 
some  more  intellect,  some  more  friendships,  some  more  means  of  spiritual  improve- 
ment. I.  They  are  oftentimes  the  qbbatbst  sinners.  Who  of  all  the  people 
on  the  face  of  the  earth  were  greater  sinners  than  the  Israelites  7  Yet  they  were 
specially  favoured  of  heaven.  England  is  a  specially  favoured  land,  but  where  is 
there  more  moral  corruption  ?  It  is  true  that  civilisation  has  so  decorated  it 
that  its  loathsomeness  is  to  some  extent  concealed ;  but  here  it  is.  The  corpse 
is  painted,  but  it  is  still  a  putrid  mass.  II.  They  are  exposed  to  special  punish- 
ment. "  Therefore  will  I  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  It  will  be  more 
tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,  &o.  Therefore  "  I 
will  punish  you."  I  who  know  all  your  sins,  I  who  abhor  all  your  sins,  I  who 
have  power  to  punish  you.  III.  They  should,  likb  all  people,  place  them- 
selves IN  HARMONY  WITH  GoD.  "  Can  two  Walk  together,  except  they  be 
agreed  ?  "  1.  Agreement  with  God  is  essential  to  the  well-being  of  all  intelligent 
existences.  No  spirit  in  the  universe  can  be  happy  without  thorough  harmony 
with  the  will  and  mind  of  God.  2.  The  condition  of  all  sinners  is  that  of  hostility 
to  the  will  of  God.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  3.  Can  two  walk  together,  except  they  l>e  agreed  ?  —  Agreement 
with  God : — Order  is  the  first  law  of  heaven's  empire.  In  the  material 
world  God  has  secured  it  by  absolute  power.  In  the  world  of  mind  His  authority 
has  enjoined  it.  And  in  the  next  state  of  human  existence  His  omnipotent  justice 
will  enforce  it.  In  the  present  world  God  has  simply  enjoined  order ;  and  if 
we  obey  not  the  great  laws  of  moral  harmony,  we  make  our  own  happiness 
impossible.  If  two  are  not  agreed,  they  cannot  walk  together.  The  enjoyments 
of  friendship  demand  a  harmony  of  sentiment ;  the  classifications  of  political 
parties,  and  all  efficient  party  movements,  whether  good  or  bad,  demand  it. 
What  efficiency  can  there  be  in  that  commercial  house  whose  partners  are  agreed 
about  no  one  of  the  great  principles  of  trade  ?  The  text  is  part  of  a  solemn 
reproof  addressed  to  the  Israelites.  They  thought  that  because  they  had  been 
taken  into  covenant  with  God,  and  had  been  careful  in  observing  the  ceremonials 
of  the  Jewish  ritual,  God  walked  with  them,  approved  of  them,  and  blessed  them. 
But  the  prophet  here  presents  this  great  principle :  "  You  must  agree  with  Me, 
and  then  I  will  walk  with  you ;  the  union  between  us  must  be  a  moral  union." 
Man,  as  unconverted,  has  no  moral  union  with  God.  Between  God  and 
these  His  creatures  there  is  no  common  taste,  there  are  no  common  principles, 
no  common  ends  nor  plans.  Observe  God  and  man  in  the  exercise  of  love  in 
its  two  branches,  complacency  and  benevolence.  God  loves  all  excellence. 
Humility,  faith,  penitence,  the  spirit  of  prayer, — these  are  the  features  of  char- 
acter of  greatest  price  in  God's  sight.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  world.  The 
eelection  of  our  companions,  and  the  ground  of  that  selection,  if  we  would  examine 
it  closely,  would  perfectly  expose  to  us  our  character  as  it  is  in  the  eyes  of  God. 
If  we  choose  the  pious,  we  have,  so  far,  an  evidence  of  our  reconciliation  to  God. 
In  the  exercise  of  their  benevolence  men  do  not  choose  as  God  chooses.  It  is 
often  said  that  no  man  can  love  his  enemies.  Then  no  man  can  dwell  with  God, 
no  man  can  wear  God's  moral  image.  We  may  test  the  condition  of  our  affections 
by  another  object — the  law  of  God.  If  its  requirements  please  us  not,  if  its 
threatenings  seem  too  severe,  then  with  us  God  is  not  agreed.  Another  object 
tests  the  heart ;  the  Son  of  God  manifested  in  human  nature.  Does  your  heart 
exalt  Him  ?  If  your  heart,  in  all  these  points,  has  no  sympathy  with  God,  how 
can  He  delight  in  you  ?  Communion  of  soul,  to  be  intimate  and  delightful, 
must  be  intelligent  and  cordial  on  those  points  which  both  parties  deem  of  the 
highest  moment.  If  you  have  no  such  fellowship  with  God  here,  what  will 
you  do  in  heaven  ?  {E.  N.  Kirk,  A.M.)  The  conditions  of  intercourse^  and 
union  with  God : — The  terms  on  which  man  can  have  converse  with  God,  inter- 
coiu-se  with  His  love,  and  experience  of  His  mercy,  are  unchangeably  the  same 
in  every  age  of  the  world.     Without  coincidence  in  sentiment,  judgment,  and 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOa.  25 

dispoeitioQ,  there  can  be  no  cordial  union  or  harmony  between  the  Creat<»r  and 
the  creature.  "  He  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord,  is  one  spirit."  1.  In  order  that 
God  and  man  should  walk  together  in  all  the  endearments  of  the  Christian 
covenant,  there  must  be  a  harmony  of  judgment  concerning  the  Scripture  plan 
of  salvation.  Man  must  acquiesce  in  what  God  has  so  solemnly  declared  and 
imposed.  2.  There  must  be  a  correspondence  of  sentiment  upon  the  rule  by 
which  redeemed  creatures  are  to  be  governed,  and  the  duties  they  must  fulfil 
towards  God  and  towards  man.  The  moral  law  is  stUl  authoritative  as  a  rule 
of  life.  3.  Man  and  God  cannot  walk  together,  unless  the  mind  of  both  have 
reference  to  the  same  end.  That  which  the  Most  High  contemplated,  when 
He  redeemed  you  on  the  Cross  of  His  Son,  was  the  advancing  of  His  own  honour, 
and  the  salvation  of  your  souls.  What  then  is  your  aim  7  (R.  P.  Buddicom, 
M.A.)  A  fair  of  jr lends  : — They  do  not  need  to  be  agreed  about  everything. 
The  two  whom  the  prophet  would  fain  see  walking  together  are  Grod  and  Israel. 
Two  may  walk  together,  but  they  have  to  be  agreed  thus  far,  at  any  rate,  that 
both  shall  wish  to  be  together,  and  both  be  going  the  same  road.  I.  That  blbsssd 
COMPANIONSHIP  THAT  MAY  CHEER  A  LIFE.  "  Walking  with  God  "  means  ordering 
the  daOy  life  under  the  continual  sense  that  we  are  ever  in  the  great  Taskmaater'a 
eye.  "  Walking  after  God  "  means  conforming  the  will  and  active  efforta  to 
the  rule  that  He  has  laid  down.  High  above  these  conceptions  of  a  devout  life 
is  the  idea  of  "  walking  with  God."  For  to  walk  before  Him  may  have  in  it 
some  tremor,  and  may  be  undertaken  in  the  spirit  of  a  slave.  And  walking  after 
Him  may  be  a  painful  effort  to  keep  His  distant  figure  in  sight.  But  to  walk 
with  Him  implies  a  constant  quiet  sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  which  forbida 
that  we  should  ever  feel  lonely.  As  the  companions  pace  along  side  by  side, 
words  may  be  spoken  by  either,  or  blessed  silence  may  be  eloquent  of  perfect 
trust  and  rest.  Such  a  life  of  friendship  with  God  is  possible  for  every  one  of 
us.  If  we  are  so  walking,  it  is  no  piece  of  fanaticism  to  say  that  there  will  be 
mutual  communications.  The  two  may  walk  together.  That  is  the  end  of  all 
religion.  All  culminates  in  this  true,  constant  fellowship  between  men  and  God. 
Gret  side  by  side  with  God.  Fellowship  with  Him  is  the  climax  of  all  religion. 
It  is  also  the  secret  of  all  blessedness,  the  onlv  thing  that  will  make  a  life  absolutely 
sovereign  over  sorrow,  and  fixedly  imperturbed  by  all  tempests,  and  invulnerable 
to  aU  the  slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune."  Hold  fast  by  God,  and 
you  have  an  amulet  against  every  evil,  and  a  shield  against  every  foe,  and  a  mighty 
power  that  will  calm  and  satisfy  yoiu:  whole  being.     II.  The  sadly  incompletii 

BEALITY,  IN  MUCH  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE,  WHICH  CONTRASTS  WITH  THIS  POSSI- 
BILITY. Perhap^  few  so-called  Christians  habitually  feel,  as  they  might  do, 
the  depth  and  blessedness  of  this  communion.  And  only  a  very  small  percentage 
of  us  have  anything  like  the  continuity  of  companionship  which  the  text  suggests 
as  possible.  There  may  be,  and  therefore  there  should  be,  running  unbroken 
through  a  Christian  life,  one  long  bright  line  of  communion  with  God,  and  happy 
inspiration  from  the  sense  of  Bis  presence  with  us.  Is  it  a  line  in  my  life,  or  is 
there  but  a  dot  here  and  a  dot  there,  and  long  breaks  between  ?    III.  An  explana- 

TION  OF  THE  FAILURE  TO  REALISE  THIS  CONTINUAL  PRESENCE.      The  explanation 

is  that  the  two  are  not  agreed.  That  is  why  they  are  not  walking  together.  The 
consciousness  of  God's  presence  with  us  is  a  very  delicate  thing.  At  bottom, 
there  is  only  one  thing  that  separates  a  soul  from  God,  and  that  is  sin  of  some 
sort.  Remember  that  very  little  divergence  will,  if  the  two  paths  are  prolonged 
far  enough,  part  their  other  ends  by  a  world.  There  may  be  scarcely  any  conscious- 
ness of  parting  company  at  the  beginning.  Take  care  of  little  divergencies  that 
are  habitual.  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  "  Can  two  walk  together,  ejccept  they  be 
agreed  ?  " — This  points  to  an  essential  condition  of  imion  between  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ,  and  those  who  really  are  His.  Fellowship  with  the  Lord  is  obviously 
the  highest  privilege  of  the  creature.  In  every  age  this  has  been  regarded  as 
the  highest  favour  that  could  possibly  be  given  to  man.  All  the  most  distinguished 
worthies  of  ancient  Scripture  history  have  this,  above  ever3rthing  else,  as  their 
distinguishing  glory  and  their  privilege — to  live  in  the  society  of  the  invisible 
God.  And  it  is  the  privilege  of  every  true  Christian  to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  into  his  heart,  and  to  live  in  constant  fellowship,  through  Him,  with  the 
unseen  God.  They  that  live  most  in  the  society  of  the  everlasting  God  must, 
more  or  less,  be  partakers  of  His  own  Divine  attributes.  And  what  joy  belongs 
to  such  a  life  as  this !  Before  we  can  really  know  Him  there  must  be  a  substantial 
agreement  between  ourselves  and  Him.    There  are  only  too  many  Christians 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iil 

who  are  living  out  of  fellowship  with  God.  And  it  is  only  too  possible  to  fall 
from  fellowship  with  Him.  Then  the  highest  privilege  in  our  life  is  gone.  We 
must  have  permitted  some  cause  of  disagreement  to  arise  between  ourselves  and 
Him.  The  relationship  in  which  we  stand  is  of  such  a  character  that  the  superior 
Being  must  be  supreme.  God's  way  being  the  way  of  absolute  perfection,  any 
attempt  on  our  part  to  assert  our  own  desire,  as  in  opposition  to  the  Divine  will, 
must  be  an  offence  against  our  own  nature  and  our  own  interest,  just  as  surely 
as  it  is  an  offence  against  His  Divine  pleasure.  There  must  be  a  complete  and 
continual  yielding  up,  a  concession  of  our  natural  inclinations  to  His  Divine  will, 
if  we  are  to  rise  to  that  which  He  desires  we  should  attain  to,  and  possess  the 
blessedness  which  we  may,  even  here,  experience.  This  is  our  life-work — to 
bring  o\ir  human  wills  into  conformity  with  Him ;  to  watch  every  little  cause  of 
disagreement,  and  to  eliminate  it  as  fast  as  it  makes  its  appearance.  Our  blessed 
Lord  is  our  example  in  this  respect.  Our  Lord  had  a  human  will,  though  it  was 
not  a  sinful  will.  Contemplate  Adam  unfallen,  and  put  beside  him  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  you  will  find  that  they  both  have  the  same  tastes  and  proclivities, 
naturally,  because  they  are  both  specimens  of  genuine  humanity.  What  was 
our  Lord's  course  of  conduct,  starting  from  this  point  ?  He  lays  it  down  as  the 
first  law  of  His  human  life,  that  He  has  come  into  the  world,  "not  to  do  His 
own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  who  had  sent  Him."  Having  accepted  this  as  the 
great  law  of  His  conduct,  lower  considerations,  considerations  connected  with 
pleasure  and  pain,  take  a  completely  subordinate  position.  There  was  the 
complete  devotion  of  the  human  nature  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Divine 
will.  The  result  was  that  God  and  He  were  walking  together  in  holy  union. 
No  doubt  at  times  oxir  Lord  felt  strangely  solitary.  But  there  was  one  thing 
that  stayed  Him  in  the  midst  of  all  His  trials,  and  cheered  Him  in  the  midst  of 
all  His  sorrows, — "  He  that  hath  sent  Me  is  with  Me."  The  life  of  Jesus  was 
a  constant  rendering  up  of  pleasure  to  God.  It  was  lived  out,  not  as  under  an 
iron  law,  but  with  a  feeling  of  filial  delight  in  doing  what  pleased  the  Father; 
and  the  result  of  this  was  an  unbroken  harmony  between  the  two  wills,  and  the 
continuous  presence  within  His  own  nature  of  the  Father,  for  whom,  and  by 
whom  He  lived.  The  will  of  man,  yielding  to  the  will  of  God,  became  the  will 
of  God.  That  will  always  be  the  effect  of  the  surrender  of  our  will  to  Him. 
The  more  our  human  wiU  is  yielded  over  to  Him,  the  more  complete  does  the 
fellowship  of  our  nature  with  His  become,  and  the  two  are  able  so  closely 
to  "  walk  together "  that  they  become  united  in  an  indissoluble  union.  It  is 
our  highest  privilege,  and  oiu-  deepest  and  truest  wisdom,  to  follow  the  example 
of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  in  the  maintenance  of  the  continuous  attitude 
of  agreement  towards  God,  who  claims  the  lordship  of  oiu:  nature.  Agree  with 
Him  in  little  things.  Anything  like  a  life  of  fellowship  with  God  is  altogether 
impossible  until  the  first  act  of  agreement  has  taken  place.  There  are  many 
who  are  always  trying  to  rise  into  a  life  of  fellowship  with  God  without  taking 
the  primary  step  towards  it.  If  you  have  not  come  into  fellowship  with  God, 
you  are  disagreed  with  respect  to  your  nature.  There  is  a  property  quarrel 
between  you.  He  lays  His  hand  upon  that  nature  of  yours,  and  says,  "  It  is 
Mine."  God  is  a  Sovereign,  He  has  laid  down  certain  laws.  Where  is  the  man 
or  woman  who  has  kept  them  ?  Moreover,  God  and  the  unrenewed  sinner  are 
in  a  state  of  disagreement  with  respect  to  the  position  which  the  sinner  has  to 
take.  It  is  one  of  helplessness.  Let  me  come  closer.  The  disagreement  is  a 
personal  one.  There  is  something  that  has  slipped  in  between  thee  and  thy 
God.  And  the  disagreement  has  arisen  with  thee,  rebellious  sinner.  {W.  Hay 
Aitken,  M.A.)  The  condition  essential  to  a  walk  with  God: — Unless  there  be 
congeniality  of  character,  there  may  be  outward  alliance,  but  there  cannot  be 
that  intimate  commimion  which  the  alliance  itself  is  supposed  to  imply.  And 
a  sameness  of  tendency  or  pursuit  appears  evidently  to  form  an  immediate  link 
between  parties  who  would  otherwise  have  had  little  in  common.  Men  of  science 
seem  attracted  towards  each  other,  though  they  may  be  strangers  by  birth  and 
even  by  country.  Our  text,  though  it  may  with  great  justice  be  applied  to  human 
associations,  furnishing  a  rule  which  ought  to  guide  us  in  forming  them,  was 
originally  intended,  and  originally  delivered,  to  refer  to  intercourse  between 
man  and  God.  The  Israelites  flattered  themselves  that  they  should  still  enjoy 
the  favoxrr  of  God,  that  the  relation  which  made  Him  specially  their  guardian 
might  still  be  maintained,  while  they  lived  in  wickedness.  "  Not  so,"  says  God, 
"  the  thing  is  impossible ;  two  cannot  walk  together,  except  they  be  agreed.'* 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  27 

1.  What  is  it  for  man  to  walk  with  God  ?  Two  walking  together  denotes 
their  having  the  same  object,  or  pursuing  the  same  end.  In  scriptural  phrase  it 
not  only  marks  a  man  out  as  pious,  but  as  eminently  pious.  A  man  who  habitually 
"  walked  with  God  "  would  be  one  who  had  a  constant  sense  of  the  Divine  presence, 
and  a  thorough  fixing  of  the  affections  on  things  above.  1.  A  man  who  walks 
with  God  must  have  a  constant  sense  of  the  Divine  presence.  He  lives  in  the 
full  consciousness  that  the  eye  of  his  Maker  is  ever  upon  him,  so  that  he  cannot 
take  a  single  unobserved  step,  or  do  the  least  thing  which  escapes  Divine  notice. 

2.  The  expression  indicates  a  thorough  fixing  of  the  affections  on  things  above. 
It  is  the  description  of  a  man  who,  whilst  yet  in  the  flesh,  may  be  said  to  have  both 
his  head  and  his  heart  in  heaven.  To  "  walk  with  God  "  implies  a  state  of  concord 
and  co-operation :  a  state  in  fact,  on  man's  part,  of  what  we  commonly  under- 
stand by  religion,  the  human  wiU  having  become  harmonious  with  the  Divine, 
and  the  creature  proposing  the  same  object  as  the  Creator.     II.  The  absolute 

NECESSITY  OF  AGREEMENT  BETWEEN  MAN  AND  GOD  IN  ORDER  TO  THEIR  "  WALKING 

TOGETHER."  The  "  agreement  "  is  clearly  given  as  indispensable  to  the  "  walking 
together."  Some  process  of  reconciliation  is  necessary  ere  there  can  be  friendly 
intercourse  between  a  human  being  and  the  Divine.  And  how  may  God  and 
man  "walk  together"  when  they  are  agreed?  Whatever  the  moral  change 
which  may  pass  upon  man,  it  is  certain  that  he  remains  to  the  last  a  being  of 
corrupt  passions  and  unholy  tendencies.  We  must  take  heed  not  to  narrow 
or  circumscribe  the  results  of  Christ's  work  of  redemption.  The  process  of  agree- 
ment, as  undertaken  and  completed  by  Christ,  had  respect  to  continuance  as 
weU  as  to  commencement.  It  was  not  a  process  for  merely  bringing  God  and 
man  into  friendship ;  it  was  a  process  for  keeping  them  in  friendship.  But 
the  "  walking  together  "  could  not  last  if  it  were  not  that  the  Mediator  ever  lives 
as  an  Intercessor  :  it  could  not  last,  if  it  were  not  that  the  work  of  the  Son  pro- 
cured for  us  the  influences  of  the  Spirit.  Another  point  of  view  is  that  to  question 
whether  "  two  can  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed,"  is  really  to  assert  an 
impossibility.  Two  cannot  walk  together  unless  they  are  agreed.  Consider 
this  impossibility  with  reference  to  a  future  state.  And  we  have  no  right  to  think 
that  this  agreement  between  God  and  man  is  ever  effected,  unless  at  least  com- 
menced on  this  side  the  grave.  Time  is  for  beginnings,  eternity  is  for  completions, 
(Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  law  and  the  conscience — their  quarrel  made  up:— 
There  must  be  a  reason  why  questions  are  put  in  the  Bible  and  not  answered 
there.  It  is  intended  that  each  learner  should  sit  down,  and,  by  the  analogy 
of  faith  applied  to  his  own  experience,  work  out  an  answer  for  himself.  The 
question  in  the  text  arises  out  of  a  particular  case  in  the  experience  of  Israel ; 
but  it  is  expressed  in  a  general  form,  and  contains  a  rule  of  universal  application. 
We  apply  to  God's  law  and  man's  conscience.  I.  The  disagreement.  1.  The 
fact  that  there  is  alienation.  God's  law  is  His  manifested  will  for  the  government 
of  His  creatures.  It  is  holy,  just,  and  good ;  it  is  perfect  as  its  Author.  Observe 
the  steadfastness  of  God's  laws  as  applied  to  material  things.  His  moral  law, 
ruling  spirits,  is  as  inexorable  as  His  physical  law,  ruling  matter.  It  has  no 
softness  for  indulged  sins.  It  never  changes  and  never  repents.  The  law  never 
saved  a  sinner ;  if  it  did,  it  would  no  longer  be  a  law.  The  law,  by  its  very  nature, 
can  have  no  partialities  and  no  compunctions.  It  never  saves  those  who  transgress, 
and  never  weeps  for  those  who  perish.  The  conscience  in  man  is  that  part  of 
his  wonderful  frame  that  comes  into  closest  contact  with  God's  law — the  part 
of  the  man  that  lies  next  to  the  fiery  law,  and  feels  its  burning.  When  first  the 
conscience  is  informed  and  awakened  it  discovers  itself  guilty  and  the  law  angry. 
There  is  not  peace  between  the  two,  and,  by  the  constitution  of  both,  they  are 
neighbours.  There  is  need  of  peace  in  so  close  a  union,  and  there  is  not  peace. 
The  conscience  is  pierced  by  the  law,  the  sharp  arrow  of  the  Lord,  and  the  con- 
victed feels  himself  a  lost,  a  dead  man.  Where  there  is  mutual  hatred  distance 
may  diminish  its  intensity ;  but  where  the  antagonists  are  forced  into  contact, 
the  nearness  exasperates  the  hate.  2.  The  consequence  of  this  disagreement 
between  the  two  is,  they  cannot  walk  together.  Enmity  tends  to  produce  distance. 
The  law,  indeed,  remains  what  it  was,  and  where  it  was  ;  but  the  offending  and 
fearing  conscience  seeks,  and  in  one  sense  obtains,  a  separation.  The  conscience 
cannot  bear  the  burning  contact  of  a  condemning  law,  and  forcibly  pushes  it 
away.  But  distance  is  disobedience.  To  walk  with  the  law  is  to  live  righteously ; 
not  to  live  with  the  law,  is  to  live  in  sin.  There  are  certain  special  features 
of  the  disagreement  in  this  case  that  aggravate  the  breach  and  increase  its  effects. 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

(1)  The  party  who  has  injured  another  hates  that  other  most  heartily,  and  cannot 
afford  to  forgive.  The  injnrer  must  foment  the  quarrel ;  it  is  his  only  source 
of  relief.     The  wrong-doer  is  miserable  when  he  whom  he  has  injured  is  near. 

(2)  There  is  not  only  the  memory  of  a  past  grudge,  but  also  the  purpose  of  a  future 
injury.  II.  The  reconciliation.  1.  The  nature  of  the  reconciliation,  and  the 
means .  of  attaining  it.  The  agreement  between  the  law  and  the  conscience  is 
a  part  of  the  great  reconciliation  between  God  and  man,  which  is  effected  in 
and  by  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  oiu:  peace.  Peace  of  conscience  follows  in  the  train 
of  justification.  Peace  is  accomplished  not  by  persuading  the  law  to  take  less, 
but  by  giving  it  all  that  it  demands.  The  law's  demands  are  satisfied  by  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  substitute  of  sinners.  He  has  already  accomplished  the 
work.  My  conscience  begins  to  love  God's  law  when  Grod's  law  ceases  to  condemn 
me  ;  and  God's  law  ceases  to  condemn  me  when  I  am  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  The 
effect  of  the  agreement  is  obedience  to  the  law — that  is,  the  whole  Word  of  God. 
The  Word  stiU  condemns  the  sins  that  linger  in  you  ;  but  this  does  not  renew 
the  quarreL  You  are  on  the  side  of  the  law,  and  against  your  own  besetting 
sins.  Practical  application  to  sinners  and  to  saints.  {W.  Arnot.)  We  must 
he  in  harmony  with  God: — When  the  battle  was  fought  between  the  Monitor 
and  the  Cumberland,  you  remember  that  the  Cumberland  was  simk  in  water 
so  shallow  that  her  topgallants  remained  above  the  waves.  A  friend  of  mine, 
who  was  in  Grovemor  Andrew's  cabinet,  had  a  friend  in  the  hold  of  the  Cumberland 
as  she  went  down.  He  was  the  surgeon,  and  was  so  absorbed  in  his  attention 
to  the  wounded  that  he  didn't  escape  from  the  hold  of  the  vessel,  and  came  near 
death  by  the  rushing  in  of  the  howling  brine.  But,  being  a  bold  man,  he  kept 
in  view  the  light  which  streamed  through  the  hatchways,  and,  aiding  himself 
by  the  rigging,  at  last,  almost  dead,  reached  the  surface,  and  was  taken  into  a 
boat  and  saved.  Now,  the  insidious  and  almost  iinseen  expectation  that  works 
in  human  nature  is,  that  when  we  go  down  in  the  sea  of  death  and  eternity  we 
shall  in  some  way  escape  out  of  ourselves,  and  swim  away  from  our  own  person- 
alities, and  thus  leave  the  Cumberland  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  The  trouble 
with  that  theory  is,  that  we  are  the  Cumberland,  and  the  Cumberland 
cannot  swim  away  from  the  Cumberland,  can  it  ?  You  will  not  get  away 
from  yourself  and  the  laws  that  are  implied  in  the  structure  of  that  nature.  How 
can  you  walk  with  yourself  unless  you  are  agreed  with  yourself — that  is,  with 
the  plan  of  your  soul  ?  And  I  hold  a  man's  soul  is  made  to  be  conscious  and 
be  in  harmony  with  God,  just  as  assuredly  as  the  hand  is  made  to  shut  toward 
the  front  and  not  toward  the  back.  You  will  not  get  away  from  that  plan  of 
your  individualities.  You  drop  your  body,  but  that  is  not  you.  How  do  I 
know  but  there  are  many  empty  sleeves  of  soldiers  of  the  Union  here  ?  They 
may  have  left  all  their  limbs  at  Gettysburg,  and  have  been  trundled  here  to-night, 
yet  we  shovdd  have  said  they  are  here.  Thoreau  said  he  had  no  interest  in 
cemeteries,  because  he  had  no  friends  there.  The  body  is  not  you.  Your  dropping 
the  body  is  not  the  dropping  of  your  personality.  You  are  going  as  a  personality 
into  the  unseen  holy  with  your  consciousness,  yoiu:  reason,  your  whole  mental 
nature,  social  and  moral.  Your  intellectual  perceptions,  perhaps  aU  that  is 
moral  in  you,  may  be  quickened  in  activity  when  the  flesh  is  dropped.  That 
seems  more  probable  than  the  reverse  ;  and  now,  "  How  can  two  walk  together 
unless  they  be  agreed  ?  "  The  plan  of  your  nature  is  not  likely  to  be  changed 
to-morrow,  or  the  day  after ;  unless  you  come  into  harmony  with  it  always,  the 
dissonance  of  your  nature  with  itself  will  be  its  own  great  and  lasting  punish- 
ment. The  Cumberland  cannot  swim  out  of  the  Cumberland.  {Joseph  Cook.) 
Matrimonial  harmony  or  discord : — Our  subject  is  the  mutual  duties  of  husbands 
and  wives.  As  individuals  we  are  fragments.  God  makes  the  race  in  parts, 
and  then  He  gradually  puts  us  together.  What  I  lack  you  make  up  ;  what  you 
lack  I  make  up.  I  have  no  more  right  to  blame  a  man  for  being  different  from 
me  than  a  driving  wheel  has  a  right  to  blame  the  iron  shaft  that  holds  it  to  the 
centre.  John  Wesley  balances  Calvin's  "Institutes."  The  difficulty  is  that  we 
are  not  satisfied  with  the  work  that  God  has  given  us  to  do.  For  more  compact- 
ness, and  that  we  may  be  more  useful,  we  are  gathered  in  still  smaller  circles  in 
the  home  group.  And  there  you  have  the  same  varieties  again.  If  the  husband 
be  all  impulse,  the  wife  must  be  all  prudence.  If  one  sister  be  sanguine  in  her 
temperament,  the  other  must  be  lymphatic.  Mary  and  Martha  are  necessities. 
The  institution  of  marriage  has  been  defamed  in  our  day.  Attempt  has  been 
made  to  turn  marriage  into  a  mere  commercial  enterprise.     1.  My  first  counsel 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  29 

to  you  who  are  setting  up  homes  for  yourselves  is, — Have  Jesus  in  your  new 
home  ;  let  Him  who  was  a  guest  at  Bethany  be  in  your  household.  Let  the 
Divine  blessing  drop  upon  your  every  hope  and  expectation.  2.  Exercise  to  the 
very  last  possibility  of  your  nature  the  law  of  forbearance.  Never  be  ashamed 
to  apologise  when  you  have  done  wrong  in  domestic  affairs.  3.  Do  not  carry 
the  fire  of  your  temper  too  near  the  gunpowder.  4.  Make  your  chief  pleasure - 
circle  round  your  home.  5.  Cultivate  sympathy  of  occupation.  6.  Let  love 
preside  in  your  home.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-6.  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest  when  he  hath  no  prey  ? — Retribution : — 
I.  Retribution  springs  out  of  the  nature  of  things.  Poiset,  in  his  travels, 
states  that  the  lion  has  two  different  modes  of  hunting  his  prey.  When  not 
very  hungry  he  contents  himself  with  watehing  behind  a  bush  for  the  animal 
which  is  the  object  of  his  attack  till  it  approaches ;  when  by  a  sudden  leap  he 
attacks  it,  and  seldom  misses  his  aim.  But  if  he  is  famished  he  does  not  proceed 
BO  quietly ;  but  impatient  and  full  of  rage,  he  leaves  his  den,  and  fills  with  his 
terrific  roar  the  echoing  forest.  His  voice  inspires  all  beings  with  terror,  no 
creature  deems  itself  safe  in  its  retreat;  all  flee  they  know  not  whither,  and  by 
this  means  some  fall  into  his  fangs.  The  naturalness  of  punishment  is  perhaps 
the  prophet's  point.  It  is  so  with  moral  retribution.  It  springs  from  the  con- 
stitution of  things.  Every  sin  carries  with  it  its  own  penalty.  No  positive 
infliction  is  required  ;  God  has  only  to  leave  the  sinner  alone,  and  his  sins  will 
find  him  out.  11.  Retribution  is  not  accidental,  but  arranged.  The 
bird  is  not  taken  in  a  snare  by  chance.  The  fowler  has  been  there,  and  made 
preparation  for  its  entanglement  and  ruin.  Every  smner  is  a  bird  that  must  be 
caught.  III.  Retribution  always  sounds  a  timely  alarm.  Heaven  does 
not  punish  without  warnings.  Nature  warns.  Providence  warns.  Conscience 
warns.  IV.  Retribution,  hovfevbr  it  comes,  is  always  Divine.  God  is 
in  all.  He  has  established  the  connection  between  sin  and  suffering.  He  has 
planned  and  laid  the  snare.  The  everlasting  destruction  with  which  the  sinner 
is  punished  comes  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  His  power. 
{Homilist.) 

Ver.  6.  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ? — Ood  aa 

the  author  of  evil: — The  principal  scope  and  design  of  the  prophecy  of  Amos  is 
this, — Though  the  Jews  had  by  their  sins  provoked  God  to  send  many  heavy 
judgments  upon  them,  yet  were  they  still  so  stupid  and  senseless  as  neither  to 
be  prevailed  on  by  them  te  amend  their  lives,  nor  so  much  as  once  consider  whence 
those  judgments  came.  If  God  sent  fixe,  plague,  or  famine,  they  regarded  them 
as  accidents,  ill-will  of  enemies,  or  misfortunes.  And  so  all  God's  judgments 
lost  their  designs.  Even  God's  prophets,  who  were  sent  to  correct  these  false 
notions,  were  despised.  When  God  saw  the  disease  grown  desperate,  and  the 
patient  not  so  much  as  enduring  the  sight  of  the  physician.  He  awoke  as  a  giant 
refreshed  with  wine,  and  to  make  His  power  known,  inspired  one  of  the  herdmen 
of  Tekoah  with  such  knowledge  as  was  wonderful  for  him,  and  sent  him  to  assure 
them  all  that  their  sufferings  were  from  heaven,  that  they  were  God's  visitation 
for  their  sins,  and  that  nothing  but  speedy  repentance  could  prevent  their  ruin. 
As  if  he  had  said,  There  is  no  such  thing  as  chance  or  fate  in  all  your  sufferings. 
They  are  all  the  effect  of  God's  overruling  providence,  without  whose  knowledge 
and  appointment  not  one  hair  falls  from  your  head.  But  some,  by  reason  of 
the  doubtful  signification  of  the  Hebrew  word  evil,  have  made  God  the  author 
of  their  sins.  I.  First,  then,  WB  must  clear  these  words  from  this  blas- 
phemous ABUSE  OF  THEM.  When  Adam  sinned,  he  found  this  excuse  for  himself, 
to  lay  the  fault  upon  God  (Gen.  iii.  12).  And  some  of  his  unhappy  offspring  have 
gone  yet  further,  "  and  thought  God  altogether  such  an  one  as  themselves  " 
(Psa.  1.  21).  To  prevent  this  dangerous  and  fundamental  error,  God  has  taken 
care,  throughout  all  the  Scriptures,  to  work  in  us  true  and  proper  notions  of 
Himself,  His  justice,  holiness,  and  mercy,  and  make  us  such  a  discovery  of  His 
own  perfections  as  might  work  us  up  to  the  highest  degree  of  holiness  and  virtue. 
To  make  God  the  author  of  sin  is  to  make  Him  act  contrary  to  Himself  and  to 
His  own  nature.  Let  not  any  one  persuade  you,  therefore,  that  God  is  the 
author  of  evil  in  this  sense,  and  by  His  unutterable  decrees  compels  mankind 
to  that  which  He  Himself  detests  and  hates.  This  indeed  cannot  be  the  meaning 
of  Amos  in  this  text,  unless  he  contradicts  himself,  and  the  whole  design  of  his 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

prophecy.  He  is  sent  to  reprove  the  Israeht«s  for  their  sins,  and  to  assure  them 
that  all  the  miseries  they  suffered  were  God's  visitation.  II.  Let  us  now  con- 
sider the  words  of  the  text  in  their  genuine  and  natural  sense,  namely,  that 

THERE  IS   KO   EVIL,  NO   CALAMITY  OR  MISERY  IN   A   CITY  OR  COUNTRY  WHICH  GOD 

IS  NOT  THE  AUTHOR  OP.  Therefore,  in  all  the  judgments  that  befall  us,  we  should 
learn  to  see  God's  hand,  and  humble  ourselves  under  His  visitation.  For  a  more 
distinct  and  methodical  consideration  of  the  judgments  and  calamities  that 
befall  a  kingdom  for  their  sins,  see — 1.  That  when  God  first  made  the  world. 
He  so  ordered  the  connection  and  dependence  of  causes  and  effects  in  the  whole 
coiu'se  of  it  as  that  very  many  sins  naturally  produce  mischief  and  sorrow  to 
the  authors  of  them.  In  open  and  visible  judgments  this  is  true  also.  Luxury 
and  drunkenness  tend  to  impair  our  health  and  our  estates,  and  either  hurry 
us  untimely  to  our  graves,  or  else  continue  us  here  in  beggary  and  want,  unpitied 
and  unrelieved.  Sloth  and  idleness  clothe  a  man  with  rags  (Prov.  xxiii.  21).  All 
this,  though  the  usual  consequence  of  the  order  of  nature,  is  properly  ascribed 
to  God  as  the  author  of  it.  The  man  of  lusts  sins  against  his  own  body,  A 
quarrelsome  temper  brings  a  man  continually  into  broils  and  dangers.  The 
old  liar  gtets  this  reward,  that  nobody  believes  in  him.  He  that  soweth  discord 
among  others  must  not  expect  to  live  at  home  in  peace.  And  envy  is  the 
rottenness  of  the  bones.  In  all  these  cases  the  punishment  is  the  natural  effect 
and  consequence  of  the  sin.  2.  When  this  doth  not  happen,  and  sins  are  great 
and  daring,  God  sometimes  breaks  through  all  the  course  of  nature  and  disturbs 
the  order  of  the  world  to  make  His  power  and  His  justice  known,  to  vindicate 
the  honour  of  His  providence,  and  cast  vengeance  upon  the  sinner.  Not  that 
God  hath  any  delight  to  hurry  the  world  into  confusion  and  destroy  His  own 
creatures ;  but  it  is  sometimes  necessary  for  God  to  make  Himself  known  by 
the  judgments  which  He  executeth.  Illustrate  by  cases  of  Flood,  Sodom,  Korah, 
Sennacherib,  Belshazzar,  Jerusalem,  Babylon,  &c.  Because,  in  these  proceedings, 
the  Almighty  is  forced  to  break  through  the  harmony  and  goodness  which  Him- 
self saw  in  His  own  creation.  He  never  makes  use  of  them  but  upon  great  and 
pressing  occasions,  when  sinners  become  daring  and  impudent,  and  defy  God 
and  His  providence.  3.  God  oftentimes  by  His  wisdom  so  directs  and  manages 
the  natural  effects  of  second  causes,  and  which  are  produced  by  a  heap  of  circum- 
stances that  seem  only  casual  and  incidental  to  other  special  ends  and  designs 
of  His  providence,  and  makes  them  become  the  executioners  of  His  wrath  against 
sinners.  Those  things  which  seem  casual  to  us,  cannot  be  so  to  God  the  author 
of  them.  God  orders  the  common  accidents  of  the  world  to  proper  ends  and 
designs  of  His  providence  ;  and  many  of  those  evils  which  seem  the  effects  only 
of  chance  are  really  designed  by  God  as  punishment  for  oiu"  sins.  In  the  following 
cases  God's  hand  more  visibly  appear*  to  us.  (1)  When  judgments  are  national 
and  public.  (2)  When  the  calamities  bear  a  particular  relation  to,  and  often- 
times the  very  stamp  and  character  of  the  sin.  Then  if  the  Lord  hath  at  this 
time  drawn  a  sword  against  us,  let  us  also  proclaim  war  against  the  sins  which 
caused  them ;  always  remembering  that  as  there  is  no  evil  in  a  city  but  from 
the  Lord,  so  there  is  no  deliverance  but  from  Him  also.  Let  us  turn  imto  the 
Lord  with  all  our  hearts,  and  He  will  have  mercy  on  us.  Let  us  resolve  to  be 
religious  in  good  earnest,  and  by  the  holiness  of  ovir  lives  call  louder  to  heaven 
for  mercies  than  ever  our  sins  have  done  for  judgments.  Let  God's  righteousness 
go  before  us  in  all  our  actions,  then  shall  His  glory  be  our  reward.  {John  Wiiles, 
D.D.)  The  Christian's  view  of  public  calamity  .-—The  well-instructed  Christian 
will  refer  all  events  to  the  overruling  providence  of  God.  The  text,  in  referring 
to  evil,  does  not  mean  natural  evil,  such  as  blindness,  disease,  and  death ;  nor 
moral  evil,  or  the  contrariety  of  men's  actions.  It  refers  particularly  to  social 
evil,  social  calamity.  \.  Moral  evil  Divinely  overruled.  Nothing  can  take 
place  without  God's  knowledge.  But  we  must  remember  that  He  never  suggests 
an  unholy  thought  or  purpose.  While  God  leaves  sinners  to  take  such  a  course 
as  their  own  evil  hearts  desire,  He  ovemiles  or  controls  their  sin  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  His  own  will.  Illustrate  cases  of,  Joseph,  and  the  crucifixion  of 
our  blessed  Lord.  2.  But  we  refer  to  social  evil  Divinely  inflicted,  sometimes 
by  human  instruments,  sometimes  without.  Of  calamities  in  the  community 
the  text  speaks.  It  is  too  customary  to  overlook  the  hand  of  God  in  these  things, 
and  to  confine  our  attention  to  second  causes.  God  could  keep  back  the  ambitious 
desires,  and  curb  the  evil  passions  of  sinful  men,  but  He  allows  them  to  take 
the  direction  upon  which  their  own  wicked  hearts  are  bent,  and  uses  them  as 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  31 

instruments  of  His  wrath.  This  subject  gives — (1)  To  worldly  men  a  solemn 
warning.  (2)  To  the  aflBicted  believer  this  subject  affords  abundant  consolation. 
(J.  G.  Breay,  B.A.)  The  Christian's  dviy  in  public  calamity  : — By  "  evil  "  hero 
we  understand  "  calamities."  Men  may  have  been  concerned  in  bringing  them 
on ;  but  God  overrules  all  things  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  purposes. 
The  truth  is  clearly  established,  that  the  sorrows  of  a  nation  may  be  traced  to 
the  sins  of  a  nation.     The  improvement  to  be  made  from  this  subject  is — I.  The 

DUTY    OF   INTBRCKSSION   WITH    GOD    FOR   THB   BEMOVAL   OF   NATIONAL   CALAMITY. 

We  need  go  no  further  than  this  prophet  for  a  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  prayer 
(Amos  vii.  1-6).  II.  Laboub  among  men  fob  the  peomotion  of  national 
HOLINESS.  Enumerate  some  national  sins.  The  advances  of  popery.  Sabbath 
breaking.  Infidelity,  especially  in  literatiu:e.  III.  Confide  in  the  protection 
OF  God  in  the  midst  of  national  dangeb.  If  you  are  in  Christ,  you  have  no 
cause  for  fear.  The  consciousness  of  sinfulness  will  lead  you  to  submit  to  personal 
trial  as  Job  did.  The  Lord  frequently  makes  a  distinction  in  times  of  calamity 
between  those  who  are  His  people  and  those  who  are  not.  Observe  how  Ezekiel 
(ix.  4-6)  describes  the  Lord's  people.  They  "  sigh  and  cry  for  the  sins  of  others." 
If  you  can  see  iniquity  unmoved,  if  you  see  men  going  to  destruction  and  the 
laws  of  God  and  man  set  at  defiance,  without  grief,  and  without  doing  all  that 
is  in  yoiu:  power  to  stem  the  torrent,  you  see  that  you  have  not  the  mark  of  God's 
people,  and  you  must  perish  with  a  careless  and  ungodly  world.  Application. 
1.  Acknowledge  God's  hand  in  every  judgment.  2.  Do  all  in  your  power  to 
spread    the    knowledge     of    God's  will.      (Ibid.)  The    mission    of    evil : — 

I.  The  fact  that  all  evil  comes  from  the  Lobd.  By  evil  imderstand 
the  evil  of  punishment.  God  cannot  be  the  author  of  evil  as  sin.  He  may 
permit  it  and  overrule  it.  Every  calamity  we  suffer  is  from  the  hand  of  God. 
This  is  universally  acknowledged  when  by  calamities  are  meant  earthquakes, 
tempests,  hurricanes,  diseases,  &c.  Other  evils  are  plainly  traceable  to  our 
own  agency,  and  so  the  agency  of  God  is  easily  ignored.  Such  are  the  diseases 
and  poverty  and  wretchedness  brought  on  by  intemperance  or  idleness.  But 
while  we  admit  human  agency  and  human  guilt  in  many  of  the  calamities  which 
we  suffer,  we  ought,  at  the  same  time,  to  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  them 
all.  They  all  come  with  His  knowledge ;  they  all  come  by  His  permission ;  they 
all  come  by  His  appointment.  As  all  these  calamities,  of  a  public  character, 
which  come  immediately  from  the  hands  of  men,  are  to  be  traced  to  the  hand 
of  God,  so  also  may  those  calamities  which  come  upon  families  and  individuals. 
The  rod  which  corrects  you  may  be  sharp  and  heavy,  and  the  evil  agency  of  men 
may  be  seen  in  every'  blow  which  you  receive,  but  the  rod  is  still  in  the  hand  of 
God,  and  He  regulates  both  the  number  and  the  severity  and  the  duration  of 
your  chastisements.  II.  If  all  evil  comes  from  the  hand  of  God,  why  does 
He  send  such  evils  ?  We  cannot  suppose  that  He  is  changeable,  and  capricious, 
and  unjust,  and  cruel ;  that  He  inflicts  willingly,  that  He  has  pleasure  in  the 
miseries  of  mankind.  It  may,  therefore,  be  stated  generally,  that  national 
calamities  are  the  punishment  of  national  sins.  Among  the  Israelites  idolatry 
was  a  great  and  prevailing  sin,  and  many  of  the  calamities  which  came  upon  them 
came  laecause  they  gave  God's  glory  unto  other  gods,  and  His  praise  unto  graven 
images.  The  truth  applies  to  individuals.  There  is  a  strange  perverseness  in 
multitudes  which  leads  them  to  imagine  that  they  are  suffering  for  the  sins  of 
others.  They  can  see  guilt  in  others,  but  none  in  themselves.  No  man  ever 
really  suffered  for  the  sins  of  others.  Others  may  have  been  the  agents  in  inflicting, 
the  sin  was  his  own.     III.  How  should  wb  act  when  God  sends  such  evils  ? 

1.  It  becomes  us  to  acknowledge  that  all  the  evils  we  suffer  come  from  God. 

2.  It  becomes  us  to  acknowledge  that  all  the  calamities  we  feel  or  fear  are  most 
just.  There  cannot  be  unrighteousness  with  God.  3.  We  should  bewail  and 
forsake  those  sins  which  have  provoked  God  to  send  such  evils  upon  us.  4.  Stand 
in  awe,  and  sin  not,  lest  a  worse  thing  befall  you.  God  has  been  visiting  you  in 
anger,  but  we  trust  it  has  also  been  in  loving-kindness.  5.  Be  much  engaged 
in  prayer.  There  are  two  things  for  which  you  should  pray.  (1)  That  God 
would  remove  the  evils  which  you  are  suffering.  (2)  That  God  would  sanctify 
to  your  use  the  calamities  which  you  have  suffered.  (W.  8.  Smart.)  Lessons 
of  the  cholera  : — There  is  no  doubt  that  in  all  ages  there  has  been  as  much  evil 
done,  and  as  much  good  prevented,  during  epidemics,  by  certain  theological 
theories  on  what  are  rightly  called  God's  judgments,  as  there  has  been  good  done 
and  evil  overcome  by  the  self-denying  devotion  of  those  who  hold  these  theories. 


32  V  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  m. 

In  fact,  the  good  they  do  is  less  than  the  evil.  Devotion  to  the  sick  relieves  s 
few  individuals ;  a  superstitious  idea  leads  astray  all  the  souls  of  a  nation 
for  centuries,  and  retards  the  salutary  work  of  science.  It  is  very  hard  on  scientific 
men  that  their  conscientious  obstructors  in  every  age  have  been  those  religious 
men  who,  from  want  of  faith  in  a  Grod  of  order  and  truth,  and  from  blind  cleaving 
to  blind  opinions,  have  opposed  mstead  of  assisting  those  whose  objects  were  the 
welfare  of  the  race  through  the  discovery  of  truth.  It  is  almost  too  strange 
to  think  that  the  spirit  of  the  inquisitors  who  condemned  Galileo  has  not  yet 
died  out.  Cholsba  as  a  judgment.  The  home  of  this  dreadful  disease  is  in 
India.  But  we  have  no  real  knowledge  of  how  it  originates,  of  the  cause  of  its 
curious  periodicity,  of  the  means  whereby  it  is  propagated.  Nor  have  we  any 
knowledge  how  to  cure  it.  The  disease  is  singularly  capricious.  Put  yourself 
back  into  old  Athenian  times,  what  would  be  the  result  of  such  a  new  phenomenon, 
which  they  could  refer  to  no  law  ?  It  could  not  be  the  work  of  any  of  their  common 
gods.  At  once  they  leaped  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  the  doing  of  some 
\mknown  god,  whom,  in  some  way  or  other,  they  had  offended.  Hence  they 
strove  to  propitiate  him  by  sacrifice  and  prayer.  The  story  goes  that,  at  least 
once,  they  let  loose  some  sheep  from  the  Areopagus,  and  wherever  the  wandering 
animals  lay  down,  built  an  altar  to  the  unknown  deity,  and  sacrificed  them  to 
appease  his  wrath.  One  thing  they  did  not  do.  They  did  not  try  to  investigate 
the  causes  of  the  disease ;  they  did  not  collect  facts  about  it.  They  assumed 
it  was  supernatm-al,  instead  of  assuming  it  was  natural.  We,  who  know  God 
as  the  Unalterable,  the  Uncapricious,  whose  unchangeable  love  constitutes 
unchangeable  law,  we  do  not  impute  this  plague,  of  which  we  know  nothing, 
and  the  strangeness  of  which  seems  to  separate  it  from  other  diseases,  to  a  caprice 
on  the  part  of  God  which  He  will  remove  on  our  imploring  Him  to  let  us  off.  Yet 
a  part  of  our  religious  world  is  guilty,  with  regard  to  the  cholera,  of  grosser  super- 
stition than  the  Athenians.  We  talk,  and  pray,  and  teach,  as  if  it  had  no  natural 
cause,  obeyed  no  natural  laws.  We  call  it,  theologically,  not  religiously,  a  judg- 
ment of  God,  and  we  use  the  term  with  a  supernatvural  meaning  attached  to  it. 
What  are  the  results  of  this  superstition  ?  According  to  this  theory,  the  cholera 
is  supernatural.  "  Nothing  will  stop  it  but  prayer."  So  all  energy  is  diminished, 
all  effort  against  the  evil  is  crushed.  Fortunately,  though  the  supernatural 
theory  is  taught,  it  is  not  generally  acted  upon.  It  is  good  for  exciting  fear, 
for  hiding  from  men's  eyes  the  real  evils  which  the  cholera  points  out  to  us  as 
deserving  of  God's  anger.  It  is  good  for  nothing  else.  It  creates  a  miserable 
fear  and  terror.  God  is  regarded  as  a  foe  who  is  to  be  bought  off,  or  coaxed  by 
prayer,  to  give  up  His  wrath.  Is  there  no  truth  then  in  the  phrase,  "  a  judgment 
of  God  "  ?  Yes,  plenty  of  truth.  These  things — famine,  pestilence,  revolution, 
war — are  judgments  of  the  Ruler  of  the  world.  A  Ruler  who  rules  in  an  orderly 
manner.  Each  judgment  is  connected  with  its  proper  cause,  and  is  the  result 
of  a  violation  of  a  particular  law,  or  set  of  laws.  God  says.  Find  out  My  laws, 
and  accord  with  them  your  action,  and  My  judgment  wUl  become  to  you  not 

!)unishment  but  blessing.  Sometimes  the  scientific  man,  enamoured  of  his 
aws  and  his  results,  says  so-called  judgments  are  nothing  but  natvu-al  laws 
working  out  their  results.  The  Christian  believes  judgment  to  be  much  more. 
These  natural  laws,  these  series  of  causes  and  effects  are  ordered  by  a  Divine 
intelligence  and  a  moral  wilL  Their  violation  is  a  transgression,  but  the  moment 
man  becomes  aware  that  evil  follows  on  their  violation,  it  is  not  only  a  trans- 
gression but  a  sin.  Moral  guilt  attends  the  nation  which  refuses  to  take  measures 
for  the  extinguishing  of  disease.  We  find  ourselves  not  only  in  the  presence  of 
mere  law,  we  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  God.  These  judgments  are  God's 
judgments.  He  is  displaying  His  justice  in  pimishment,  but  the  very  punishment 
itseu  is  a  proof  of  His  love.  For  the  disease  does  not  only  punish  evils,  it  points 
them  out,  it  discloses  to  us  the  evils  we  were  ignorant  of,  in  order  that  we  may 
remedy  them.  This  is  God's  love  in  judgment.  Apply  these  principles  to  the 
cholera.  The  conditions  in  which  it  develops  itself  are  national  sins.  It  laid 
its  finger  on  the  disgrace  of  England,  the  canker  which  eats  into  the  heart  of  a 
nation — the  neglected  state  of  the  poor.  Again,  it  has  been  proved  that  want 
of  a  continual  supply  of  pure  water  is  the  fruitful  cause,  not  only  of  cholera,  but 
of  half  the  diseases  that  decimate  the  poor.  Cholera  can  be  diminished,  as  small- 
pox has  been,  by  destroying  the  conditions  when  it  becomes  deadly  to  life.  In 
Cheshire,  years  ago,  some  new  plants,  quite  unknown  beforehand  in  the  country, 
sprang  up  beside  the  canals  by  which  the  salt  was  carried  and  in  the  pools  around 


CHAP,  m.]      ■^. AMOS.  33 

the  salt  works.  At  last  some  one  recognised  the  plants  as  those  which  haunt 
the  ledges  of  the  rocks  just  above  the  flow  of  the  tide,  but  within  the  wash  of  the 
spray.  The  germs  of  the  p'ants  had  been  carried  inland,  by  wind  or  bird,  for 
years,  but  the  conditions  under  which  they  could  grow  had  only  recently  arisen. 
So  with  cholera.  The  poison-germ  may  be  in  the  air,  but  everything  depends 
on  conditions  of  development,  and  these,  in  measure,  are  in  our  control.  {S.  A. 
Brooke,  M.A.)  A  visitation  from  God : — I.  God  exercises  a  constant  and 
MINUTE  SUPERINTENDENCE  OVER  MEN.  Objections — 1.  The  magnitude  of  the 
universe.  2.  The  dignity  of  the  Divine  Governor.  3.  The  extreme  regularity 
of  every  process.  II.  God  punishes  nations  as  such.  1.  Nations  are  morally 
responsible  as  such.  2.  They  are  capable  of  joint  operations,  as — (1)  In  framing 
laws ;  (2)  In  the  administration  of  laws ;  (3)  In  their  public  institutions ; 
(4)  In  their  procedure  towards  others;  5)  In  their  general  manners.  3.  Sacred 
history  teaches  national  responsibility.  Sodom,  Egypt,  Canaanites,  Nineveh, 
Babylon,  Jewish  history,  Israel's  dispersion.  4.  Nations  can  be  dealt  with  only 
in  time.  III.  With  what  feelings  God's  dealings  with  nations  should 
BE  REGARDED.  1.  Consideration.  (1)  Forsaking  ordinances.  (2)  Violating 
the  Sabbath.  (3)  Drunkenness.  (4)  Perjury.  (5)  Oppression.  2.  Repentance. 
Including — (1)  Humility.  (2)  Reformation.  (J.  Stewart.)  Is  God  the  author 
of  moral  evil? — This  text  is  very  liable  to  a  wrong  interpretation.  It  strongly 
asserts  by  its  question  that  God  is  the  author  of  evil.  But  of  what  evil  ? 
I.  Not  of  moral  evil,  which  is  sin,  but  of  natural  evil,  which  is  calamity. 
And  why  of  that  t  Many  have  not  scrupled,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  charge 
God  with  being  the  author  of  evil  as  sin.  What  is  moral  evil  ?  It  is  the 
evil  of  what  is  done  or  thought  or  said  by  a  moral  agent,  contrary  to  the  rule 
of  moral  conduct  laid  down  for  him  by  God,  his  moral  Governor.  The  brutes, 
without  understanding  of  moral  good  or  evil,  are  incapable  of  committing  moral 
evil.  Man  chose  to  act  contrary  to  the  rule  laid  down  for  him  by  God.  Sin  is 
the  transgression  of  the  law.  Then  God  cannot  in  any  way,  directly  or  indirectly, 
be  the  author  of  sin.  To  Him  it  is  the  abominable  thing.  No  circumstances 
can  justify  a  sin.  God  gave  us  appetites  and  passions,  but  not  to  be  abused. 
He  expressly  forbids  their  abuse.  One  of  the  most  subtle  modes  of  charging 
God  with  abetting  wickedness  is  by  abusing  the  doctrines  of  grace.  "  God 
must  give  faith  in  Christ,  and  change  the  heart.  He  has  not  done  this  for  me. 
Therefore  I  am  justified  in  following  the  devices  and  desires  of  my  own  heart." 
Wherever  there  is  moral  evil,  one  thing  is  clear  and  sure,  "  The  Lord  hath  not 
done  it "  ;  it  was  the  sinner's  own  doing.  Our  most  conclusive  proof  that  God 
cannot  be  the  author  of  moral  evil,  which  should  settle  the  matter  for  ever  is. 
His  gift  of  His  Son,  to  become  man  and  to  die,  as  the  one  only  and  sufficient 
atonement  for  sin.  This  shows  sin  to  be  infinitely  evil  in  His  sight ;  it  proves 
His  solemn  detestation  of  all  iniquity.  II.  God  does  send  natural  evil  ob 
CALAMITY ;  AND  WHY  ?  The  distinction  between  natural  and  moral  evil  is  easy 
to  be  observed.  A  child  may  learn  it.  Moral  evil  is  what  is  contrary  to  moral 
duty,  committed  by  •  moral  agent.  Natural  evil  is  that  which,  occurring  con- 
trary to  the  usual  course  and  order  of  things,  disturbs  the  being  so  interfered 
with.  Not  a  calamity  can  befall  a  city,  not  a  trouble  light  upon  an  individual, 
without  the  hand  of  God  permitting  and  directing  it.  Guard  against  hard 
thoughts  of  God.  God  deals  thus  in  the  way  of  pvmishment  and  correction. 
In  the  case  of  a  city  or  a  country  sinning  against  God,  the  connection  is  often 
more  evident  between  the  sin  and  the  punishment  than  in  the  case  of  individuals. 
It  is  good  to  read  history  with  a  Christian  eye.  We  should  seriously  mistake 
if,  wherever  we  saw  calamity  or  trouble,  we  inferred  that  there  had  been  peculiar 
sin.  Though  God  is  not  the  author  of  moral  evil.  He  is  the  author  of  deliverance 
from  it,  through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  Through  Christ  we  may  be  fully 
pardoned  and  fuUy  justified,  and  in  due  time  fully  sanctified ;  and  then  what 
will  become  of  natiu-al  evils  ?  For  Christ  is  the  Saviour  from  all  evils.  {John 
Hambleton,  M.A.)  National  calamities  the  consequence  of  national  sin: — The 
evil  here  dealt  with  is  not  moral  evil,  it  is  the  suffering  of  evil  or  calamity.  The 
text  does  not  attribute  to  God  the  production  of  sin,  but  the  infliction  of  that 
penal  or  corrective  evil  which  God  may  lay  on  a  city  or  nation,  to  punish  it  duly 
for  sin,  and  to  correct  it,  and  bring  it  back  to  God.  The  world  is  composed  of 
good  and  evil.  Of  good,  which  was  in  it  as  it  came  from  God  ;  of  evil,  that 
entered  into  it  when  it  became  infected  with  sin.  In  this  world,  while  we  have 
much  that  is  real  good  and  that  is  imaginary  good,  we  have  both  real  and  imagin- 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ary  good  commingled  with  what  is  evil ;  and  it  becomes  a  problem  of  no  easy 
solution  to  tell  whether  the  one  or  the  other  doth  generally  predominate.  When 
we  enjoy  uninterrupted  and  unmingled  good  we  are  disposed  to  attribute  all 
the  good  we  enjoy  to  ourselves.  We  easily  forget  God.  The  moment  that  evil 
is  inflicted  on  us,  our  pride  is  alarmed  by  the  injury  to  our  feelings.  We  begin 
to  look  beyond  self,  and  search  for  some  cause  to  which  we  can  attribute  the 
evil  we  endure.  Some  attribute  to  chance.  Others  to  a  general  law  of  nature. 
The  particular  actings  of  these  general  laws  they  take  entirely  out  of  the  hands  of 
God,  and  only  look  to  this  second  instrumentality  by  which,  according  to  their 
ideas,  the  general  laws  impressed  on  the  creation  of  God  are  found  to  operate. 
The  consequence  of  this  will  be  that  good  will  be  enjoyed  and  self  will  b© 
honoured  ;  or  if,  perchance,  nature,  or  the  God  of  nature,  be  acknowledged, 
yet  the  secondary  cause  will  be  their  own  skill,  or  industry,  or  application,  or 
some  other  such  cause  that  still  leaves  God  out  of  His  temple  and  sets  up  humanity. 
Or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  evil  be  endured,  it  will  be  attributed  to  any  cause  but 
to  God.  Here  it  is  that  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  in  as  our  instructor.  Wherever 
there  is  evil,  in  the  sense  of  calamity,  "  the  Lord  hath  done  it."  I.  The  bvtl 
IN  THE  CITY.  1.  The  commercial  distress  of  the  times.  Men  are  ready  to 
attribute  such  evil  to  any  cause  whatever  but  to  the  true  cause — sin  in  the  heart 
of  man,  and  God  putting  His  hand  on  that  sin  to  punish  it,  or  reform  those  who 
are  the  subjects  of  it.  2.  The  extended  want  of  employment  where  employment 
was  abundantly  enjoyed.  Why  is  there  want  of  employment  7  Attribute  it 
to  the  stagnation  of  trade — what  is  the  cause  of  that  ?  The  sin  of  the  people 
and  the  judgment  of  God.  Attribute  it  to  an  overflowing  population — what  is 
the  reason  that  employment  does  not  hold  pace  with  population  ?  It  is  simply 
because  the  population  are  not  educated  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  not  educated 
in  the  principles  of  morality.  3.  Comparative  famine  and  the  pestilence. 
4.  The  disunion  of  the  land.  This  is  to  be  attributed  to  our  national  sin ;  for 
God  in  His  mercy  is  able  to  take  away  all  these  disunions,  and  He  will  remedy 
all  these  evils  the  moment  He  has  taught  us,  rich  and  poor,  to  repent  of  our 
individual  sins  and  turn  to  the  livin»  God.  5.  Sabbath-breaking.  There  is 
one  gieat  cause  or  effect  of  the  national  depravity  of  morals.     II.  The  important 

LESSON  TO  BE  DBAWN  FEOM  THE  FACT,  "  THE  LORD  HATH  DONE  IT."  No  indi- 
vidual, no  Church,  no  minister  is  free  from  a  share  in  the  national  sins.  It  is 
the  object  of  God,  by  bringing  calamity  on  us,  to  make  us  think  of  Him.  The 
moment  man  thinks  of  God,  he  is  compelled  to  think  of  himself,  because  he  is 
God's  reflected  image.  So  man  asks.  Why  am  I  like  God,  and  yet  so  unlike  Him  ? 
There  is  not  a  portion  of  the  land  which  is  not  suffering  from  these  sins — the 
neglect  of  the  education  of  the  people  and  Sabbath- breaking.  Whenever  God 
sends  a  calamity  on  the  land.  He  sends  with  it  a  voice,  calling  upon  His  own 
people  to  do  all  the  good  they  can  by  the  means  of  the  evil  He  inflicts  on  them 
and  on  others.  Two  great  lessons  to  be  derived  from  the  subject.  1.  The  mercy 
of  God  in  the  infliction  of  evil  as  calamity.  2.  There  is  but  one  remedy  for  the  evils 
of  the  land — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {Henry  Cooke,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  National 
calamities: — I.  All  the  calamities  which  befall  a  great  state  are  sent  in 
THE  ovERRTTLiNG  PROVIDENCE  OF  GoD.  Casc  of  Pharaoh  (Exod.  ix.  14-16) ; 
and  Tyre  (Isa.  xxiii.  9-11).  But  if  the  hand  of  God  was  manifested  in  the 
punishment  and  destruction  of  idolatrous  individuals  and  nations,  much  more 
plainly  do  the  judgments  that  so  frequently  befell  God's  own  people,  the  Jews, 
seem  to  have  been  the  result  of  a  judicial  sentence  from  heaven,  passed  upon  them 
for  their  transgressions.  The  evil  spoken  of  in  the  text  is  not  criminal  evil,  but 
the  punishment  that  follows  the  commission  of  sin  and  all  the  inconveniences 
which  accompany  it.  This  is  termed  the  evil  of  punishment  or  penal  evil.  This 
may  be  ascribed  to  God.  The  evil  of  sin,  or  moral  evil,  is  from  ourselves  ;  it  is 
our  own  doing;  but  the  evil  of  trouble  and  suffering  for  sin,  individual  and 
national,  is  from  God,  is  His  doing,  whatever  be  the  immediate  instruments  by 
which  He  chooses  to  inflict  it.  II.  In  addition  to  individual  character, 
and  the  other  obvious  relations  in  life  men  have  to  sustain,  God  regards 

THEM  IN  their  COLLECTIVE  CAPACITY,  AND  VISITS  THEM  WITH  NATIONAL  JUDG- 
MENTS. This  great  truth  cannot  be  too  often  insisted  on.  Each  of  us  belongs 
to  a  country  which  has  its  claims  upon  him,  in  return  for  the  benefits  he  receives 
from  it.  When  any  particular  coimtry  is  subject  to  peculiar  national  advan- 
tages or  evils,  the  inhabitants  of  that  coimtry  are  benefited  or  injured  by  them. 
But  what  experience  teaches  us  is  the  method  that  has  been  foimd  necessary 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  35 

to  be  adopted  for  the  mutual  help  of  society,  and  which  we  find  coincide  with 
the  laws  of  nature,  Scripture  teaches  us  is  the  plan  upon  which  God's  moral 
government  over  man  is  conducted  ;  namely,  that  God  regards  man  in  his 
national  capacity,  and  rewards  or  punishes  him  accordingly.  HI.  Attempt 
TO  JUSTIFY  THESE  IMPOHTANT  DOCTRINES  OF  HoLY  Wbit.  1.  The  relationship 
which  exists  among  men,  as  members  of  society  upon  earth,  will  have  no  existence 
in  another  state.  2.  God  rewards  or  punishes  nations  in  this  world  that  they 
may  be  led,  in  their  national  capacity,  to  acknowledge  His  authority,  and  to 
regulate  their  affairs  according  to  His  will,  and  in  obedience  to  His  commands. 
It  was  on  this  very  account  that  the  Almighty  purposed  to  form  the  Jewish 
State  into  a  theocracy.  Lesson — 1.  We  should  learn  to  acknowledge  the  hand 
of  God  in  the  chastening  visits  of  His  providence,  and  humble  ourselves  before 
Him  as  parts  of  a  guilty  nation.  2.  We  should  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  cause, 
or  causes,  of  afflictive  dispensations,  so  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  put  from  us 
the  "  accursed  thing  "  that  is  so  offensive  to  our  Maker.  3.  We  should  be  thankful 
to  God  that  we  have  hitherto  so  mercifully  escaped  the  judgments,  and  in  gratitude 
to  Him  give  liberally  of  our  substance  in  aid  of  those  on  whom  the  judgments 
have  fallen.  (Joseph  Peet,  M.A.)  A  city  aroused: — Men  are  always  ready 
to  overestimate  the  importance  of  the  times  in  which  they  live.  The  ordinary 
appears  wonderful.  Our  fathers  felt  and  said  about  their  times  just  as  we  say 
and  feel  about  ours.  These  are  not  the  most  stirring  times  ever  seen  in  our  land. 
We  need  not  think  that  all  social  order  is  going  to  be  destroyed  because  sometimes 
our  city  is  aroused,  by  sounds  that  are  somewhat  alarming,  from  its  complacent 
quest  of  wealth,  comfort,  and  amusement.  1.  It  is  a  very  natural  thing  to  fear 
approaching  danger.  The  trumpet  blown  in  the  city  is  intended  to  cause  alarm. 
It  may  teU  of  an  approaching  army.  Or  the  danger  may  be  from  within ;  the 
trumpet-blast  of  some  conspiracy.  2.  Fear  is  a  great  preservative  power.  The 
certain  consequences  of  any  evil  cause  are  a  great  preventive  force.  Go  I 
intended  they  should  have  this  effect.  His  Word  often  appeals  to  this  faculty 
of  fear.  And  we  too  may  tell  of  the  judgment  that  must  be  faced  by  individuals 
as  by  nations.  We  may  tell  of  the  retributions  that  must  follow.  The  trumpet 
of  warning  must  give  no  uncertain  sound.  It  must  ring  in  the  centre  of  a  man's 
soul.  3.  The  Divine  purpose  in  permitted  evil.  It  is  to  the  same  end  as  the 
trumpet- blast.  Calamity  calls  for  consideration.  The  cause  must  be  found  out 
and  the  evil  removed.  Things  that  are  evil  in  some  way  God  wills.  It  is  for  the 
devout  student  to  consider  calamities  and  inquire  into  the  cause  of  moral  evil. 
When  a  city  has  to  suffer,  the  inhabitants  should  consider.  Illustrate  from  time 
when  the  Romans  attacked  Jerusalem.     London  may  not  be  more  wicked  in 

froportion  than  Paris,  or  Vienna,  or  Berlin,  or  Rome,  or  New  York,  or  Melbourne, 
t  is,  however,  the  largest  city  in  the  world.  Men  will  be  compelled  to  inquire 
as  to  whether  much  physical  evil  is  not  the  result  of  a  debased  moral  state,  arising 
from  a  neglect  of  God's  Word,  God's  laws,  God's  worship,  God's  day,  and  Ciod's 
love.  For  this  the  Church  itself  may  be  answerable.  Her  pride  and  laziness, 
wealth,  and  sectarian  bitterness  may  have  fostered  the  evils.  It  is  for  God's 
Church  to  be  aroused  to  a  lively  interest  in  all  that  concerns  the  temporal  and 
spiritual  welfare  of  people  around.  She  has  something  to  say  on  social  questions. 
Christians  should  be  foremost  in  all  movements  for  elevating  men,  or  extending 
the  sway  of  liberty  and  justice.  They  must  not  fold  their  hands  and  say,  "  All 
win  be  well."  They  must  do  something  to  make  things  better.  As  individuals, 
have  we  listened  to  the  warning  trumpet  ?  Have  we  sought  to  imderstand 
God's  dealing  with  us  in  the  difficulties,  the  disappointments,  the  losses,  the 
sorrows,  the  afflictions,  the  bereavements  of  life  ?  {Frederick  Hastings.)  On  the 
agency  of  God  in  human  calamities  : — Evil  here  is  not  the  commission  of  iniquity, 
but  the  pressure  of  distress.  Consider  the  Lord's  agency  in  the  infliction  of  evil, 
in  contradistinction  to — I.  Chance.  The  truth  is,  chance  is  a  mere  term  of 
human  ignorance.  The  only  rational  meaning  of  the  word  is  that  we  are  in 
ignorance  of  the  cause  or  causes  of  the  event.  There  is  an  atheism  which  denies 
the  existence  of  a  God  altogether.  And  there  is  an  atheism  which  admits  the 
existence,  but  denies  all  superintendence  of  human  or  created  beings,  and  of  their 
respective  concerns.  We  might  as  well  have  no  God  as  no  providence.  The 
sentiment  of  the  text  is  the  reverse  of  this.  It  is,  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that 
He  directs  and  governs  all  things.  In  what  strong  and  delightful  terms  is  the 
doctrine  of  a  universal  and  particular  providence  expressed  by  Him  who  "  spake 
as   never   man   spake "    (Matt.    x.   29-31).     II.  Distinguish   the   agency  of 


36     ---  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Jehovah  from  that  of  idols.  There  is  a  tendency  in  man  to  two  opposite 
extremes,  atheism  and  superstition.  Superstition  is  the  offspring  of  guilty  fears ; 
and  the  general  character  of  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  in  many  cases  indicated 
by  their  very  forms,  accords  with  the  natvire  of  their  origin.  Again,  there  haa 
discovered  iteelf,  wherever  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  has  been  imparted, 
a  moiirnfully  consistent  propensity  to  forget  Him,  to  overlook  His  superintendence, 
to  leave  Him  out  of  oxir  thoughts.  III.  Divinb  agency  may  be  eegaeded  in 
contradistinction  to  an  ExcLtrsivB  attention  to  second  causes.  How 
frequently  is  something  called  Nature  deified  !  And  second  and  subordinate 
causes  are  so  contemplated  and  insisted  on,  as  to  indicate  an  exclusion  from 
the  mind  of  the  great  originating  cause  of  all  being,  and  the  supreme  uncontrolled 
Director  of  all  events  !  In  accounting  for  our  calamities  we  are  in  imminent 
danger  of  this  kind  of  atheism.  All  second  causes  are  imder  the  unceasing  and 
sovereign  control  of  the  First.  Thus  it  is  with  the  elements  of  nature.  There 
are  laws  ;  we  forget  that  they  are  His  laws.  We  have  not  done  enough  when  we 
have  accounted  for  discEise  from  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  for  the  desolations 
of  the  storm  from  the  theory  of  the  winds,  for  deficient  crops  from  blight  and 
grub  and  mildew.  We  must  go  higher.  We  must  rise  to  Him  by  whom  all 
these,  with  every  other  power  of  mischief,  are  commissioned  to  work  their  respective 
effecte.  The  same  great  general  truth  applies  to  men  and  to  the  events  of  history, 
in  which  men  are  the  agents.  Learn  that  the  existing  national  evils  or  calamities, 
though  inflicted  by  a  power  which  we  cannot  resist,  are  not  inflicted  in  caprice. 
It  is  painful  to  hear  the  inconsiderate  manner  in  which  many  speak  of  the  Divine 
"  sovereignty."  While  God  may  retain  in  His  own  mind  the  special  causes  of 
particular  visitations.  He  has  not  left  us  in  ignorance  of  the  great  general  cause 
of  all  suffering.  Natural  evil  is  the  offspring  of  moral  evil.  All  good  is  from 
God  ;  all  evil  is  from  the  sinner  himself.  All  evil  is  of  the  nature  of  punitive, 
righteous  retribution.  (Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  finger  of  God  : — The  inscrip- 
tion which  adorns  the  south  entablature  of  the  monument  by  London  Bridge, 
and  the  ancient  custom  of  this  corporation  remind  us  that  we  are  assembled 
to  commemorate  one  of  the  most  awful  calamities  under  which  this  city  ever 
mourned,  the  great  fire  of  1666.  Why  are  such  calamities  sent  ?  Whatever 
agents  God  employs,  they  are  only  permitted  to  act  just  so  far  as  He  has  ordamed, 
and  no  farther.  Sometimes  to  punish,  sometimes  to  reward.  This  principle  is 
evident  from  those  records  of  causes  and  effects,  of  predictions  and  fulfilments, 
which  the  revealed  Word  of  God  supplies.  I  know  how  much  this  Word  has  been 
despised  by  the  world,  neglected  by  the  careless,  held  in  disrepute  by  the  wise, 
obscured  by  one  Church,  hidden  by  a  second,  and  intonated  into  empty  sound 
by  a  third ;  but  still  this,  and  this  alone,  is  the  written  memorial  of  providence, 
the  act  of  God's  legislature,  the  rule  of  His  judgment,  the  cause  of  the  acquittal, 
or  of  the  condemnation  of  man.  Trace  the  history  of  causes  and  effects  in  God's 
Word.  In  minute  circumstances  man  contrives,  and  God  disposes.  Man  is 
free  to  act,  God  directs  the  blow.  Who  were  the  agents  of  the  fire  of  1666  ? 
Many  were  accused  ;  but  the  "  London  Gazette  "  of  that  time  wisely  said,  "  The 
whole  was  the  effect  of  an  imhappy  chance :  or,  to  speak  better,  the  heavy  hand 
of  God  upon  us  for  our  sins,  showing  us  the  terror  of  His  judgment  in  thus  raising 
the  fire."  Why  was  London  thus  marked  for  destruction  ?  It  was  for  our 
example.  There  was  sin  there — sin,  perhaps,  which  God  would  not  pardon. 
There  were  then  great  provocations  against  God.  The  moral  improprieties  and 
extravagancies  of  the  court  and  of  the  nobility  were  notorious.  The  iniquities 
which  reigned  there  were  too  open  for  concealment.  And  there  is  evil  in  the 
city  still.  And  there  are  judgments  of  the  Lord  still  aJHicting  us.  But  from 
that  extremity  of  woe,  time,  the  restorer  of  all  things,  raises  up  the  fallen  city. 
The  power  of  providence,  which  brought  this  evil  upon  her,  cheers  her  with  sub- 
stantial visions  of  future  peace  and  plenty.  And  so  it  ever  is.  He  who  afflicts, 
corrects,  punishes,  is  also  the  Redeemer  and  Restorer.  (S.  Reed  Cattley,  M.A.) 
'^'^  Evil,"  or  sufjerinn,  as  chastisement  or  condemnation:  —  "Temptation,"  or 
testmg,  may  be  triil  from  God,  or  with  evil  intent  from  the  devil  or  wicked 
persons.  "  Glory,"  may  mean  either  brightness,  splendour,  or  goodness,  loveli- 
ness of  character.  "  Evil  "  may  be  either  sin  or  suffering.  The  second  sense  of 
evil  is  to  be  found  in  the  text.  I.  "  Evil,"  as  punishment  for  sens,  "  done  " 
BY  God.  Amos  foretells  suffering  as  merited  by  sin  (ver.  2).  Yet  a  visitation 
of  chastening  mercy  (Isa.  xlv.  7  ;  Jer.  v.  9,  12).  Troubles  in  a  city,  or  family, 
or  people,  may  be  punishing  providences.     They  may  be  chastisement  or  con- 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  37 

demnation.  n.  National  sins  bbino  on  national  judgments.  God  has 
declared  the  responsibility  of  a  people.  Plague,  invasion,  dearth,  may  be  evils 
sent  by  Him  to  whom  it  "  belongeth  justly  to  punish  sinners."  Amos  calls  to 
repentamce.  Judgments  are  conditional.  God  reveals  that  men  may  escape. 
III.  As  to  individuals,  special  sufferings  may  be  punishment  for  special 
sins.  Let  us  have  a  "  may  be  "  in  judging  others.  In  the  case  of  the  true 
believer  aflBiictions  are  for  purifying,  for  profit,  and  generally,  for  glorifying 
God.  Be  not  hasty  in  regarding  evil  as  a  token  of  God's  anger  towards  you. 
Yet  humbly  examine  and  judge.  Look  above  second  causes.  Receive  the  hand 
of  God  upon  you  for  good.  Of  some  special  sin  repented  of,  "  covered,"  the 
sorrow,  the  consequent  "  evil "  may  remain.  Closmg  period  of  David's  life. 
Manasseh  truly  turned,  but  he  could  not  help  seeing  the  mischief  that  he  had 
done.  Faith's  comfort  when  regarding  affliction  as  the  punishment  of  sin  is 
that  it  comes  from  the  Everlasting  Love  ;  not  from  chance  or  fate,  but  from 
the  "  Father  of  Mercies,"  perfect  in  wisdom  and  justice.  "  In  the  way  of  Thy 
judgments  have  we  waited  for  Thee."     [W.  0.  Purton.) 

Vet.  7.  Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do  nothing',  but  He  revealeth  His  secret  unto 
yrin  servants  the  prophets. — Profhecy  :  a  disclosure  of  GocTs  secrets  : — I.  God  and 
THE  PROPHET  (or  God's  rcvelatlons  to  the  prophet).  The  seventh  verse  gives  a 
striking  picture  of  the  dignity  of  the  prophetic  office.  God,  the  Ruler  of  the 
earth,  is  watching  the  tides  of  human  life.  Before  Grod  interposes  He  admits 
the  prophets  into  His  councils  and  reveals  to  them  what  is  yet  concealed  from 
the  world  (Gen.  xviii.  17).  Deluge  to  Noah,  &c.  The  lives  of  all  the  prophets 
of  Israel  illustrate  Amos's  words.  II.  The  prophet  and  the  world  (or  the 
prophet's  utterances  to  the  world).  The  prophet,  admitted  to  the  secrets  of  God, 
was  boimd  to  utter  them.  He  was  a  daysman  between  heaven  and  earth.  Aware 
of  danger,  he  would  neither  have  been  a  man  nor  a  patriot  had  he  failed  to  prophesy. 
God  foretold  the  evil  that  He  might  escape  the  pain  of  inflicting  it.  They  were 
reckoned  troublers  of  the  land  (Ahab  to  Ehjah),  yet  they  persisted  in  their  message. 
Application.  God  still  reveals  His  purposes  concerning  men.  The  fate  of 
individuals  is  not  known,  but  the  fate  of  sin  and  the  sinner  is  clearly  revealed. 
Listen  to  all  warnings.  Regard  every  one  who  utters  them  as  a  friend  who  may 
aid  you  to  avert  the  evU.  Do  not  attempt  to  silence  such  warning  voices  (Acts  iv.  20, 
V.  20,  29;  1.  Cor.  ix.  16).  (J.  Telford,  B.  A.)  On  the  argument  from  prophecy : — 
This  has  been  the  least  understood  of  all  the  evidences  in  support  of  Christianity. 
Superior  difficulties  attend  the  subject.  Not  difficulties  which  stagger  our  faith, 
but  such  as  require  attention  to  overcome.  Trace  out  the  causes  from  which  the 
difficulties  attending  this  subject  have  arisen.  The  obscurity  of  the  prophecies  is 
generally  supposed  to  have  arisen  from  the  metaphorical  or  figvurative  language  in 
which  they  are  conveyed.  But  figurative  language  is  not  necessarily  obscure; 
it  is  the  style  that  always  did,  and  stiU  does,  predominate  throughout  all  the  East. 
It  is  the  natural  language  of  all  rude  and  uncivilised  nations,  and  may  be  made, 
if  a  writer  is  inclined  to  make  it  so,  as  clear  and  as  intelligible  as  the  most  literal 
expressions.  The  obsciu-ity  of  prophecies  neither  did  nor  does  arise  from  any 
one  peculiarity,  property,  or  principle  of  language.  It  is  still  more  evident 
that  it  did  not  arise  from  anything  in  the  subject  to  which  they  allude.  For 
whatever  event  is  capable  of  being  described  after  it  has  happened,  is  equally 
capable  of  being  described  before  it  has  happened,  the  change  of  tenses 
being  in  this  case  the  only  thing  required.  The  obscurity  of  the  prophets  can 
be  attributed  to  nothing  else,  but  to  the  original  intention  and  plan  of  their  Divine 
Author.  The  fvdl  evidence  of  prophecy  does  by  no  means  appear  from  the  dis- 
cussion of  one  or  of  a  few  single  predictions  concerning  Messiah,  but  from  the 
consideration  of  all  the  prophecies  taken  together,  dispersed  as  they  are  throughout 
the  Bible.  We  have  the  same  right  to  unite  them  into  one  body  of  evidence, 
that  we  every  day  assume,  of  drawing  the  character  of  any  eminent  person  in  the 
records  of  history,  by  the  general  tone  of  all  his  actions  compared  with  one  another 
and  taken  together.  The  prophecies  are  not  only  dispersed  in  various  parts  of 
Scripture,  but  are  in  most  places  connected  with  some  other  circumstance  or 
transaction  near  the  time  at  which  they  were  delivered,  and  to  which  and  to  ita 
immediate  consequences  they  also  allude.  These  events  are  often  so  interwoven 
in  the  very  textrure  of  the  prophecy  that  to  separate  them  requires  a  superior 
knowledge  of  ancient  history,  and  superior  powers  of  discrimination.  Besides 
the  predictions  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  the  law  itself,  the  Mosaical  and 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Levitical  law  forms  in  its  very  structure  and  essence  a  distinct  series  of  prophecy. 
The  ceremonies  of  Jewish  worship  were  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  whilst 
the  body  was  of  Christ.  To  extract  the  prophetical  matter  out  of  the  Levitical 
law,  and  to  show  what  weight  it  has,  as  an  evidence  for  Christianity,  requires 
not  only  sagacity,  but  in  a  much  higher  degree,  the  greatest  sobriety,  moderation, 
and  good  sense.  May  not  these  difficulties  suggest  some  arguments  even  in  favour 
of  the  pretensions  of  prophecy  ?  1.  The  evidence  of  prophecy  is  by  no  means 
absolutely  necessary  to  the  proof  of  a  Divine  revelation.  The  working  of  miracles 
is  of  itself  sufficient  to  prove  that  a  teacher  came  from  God.  The  Divine  authority 
of  Moses,  for  instance,  was  never  foretold  by  any  prophecy,  but  was  grounded 
on  the  belief  of  his  miracles  alone.  2,  The  evidence  drawn  from  the  ancient 
Jewish  history  is  considerably  increased  by  the  obscurity  of  the  prophets,  which 
has  been  so  much  complained  of.  Obscurity,  at  least  before  their  completion, 
was  in  the  original  intention  of  their  Divine  Author.  No  one,  before  their  com- 
pletion, was  able  to  unravel  or  understand  them,  so  no  one  but  God  was  able 
to  work  their  accomplishment.  Other  means  might  co-operate,  but  the  obscurity 
of  the  prophecies  alone  was  a  sufficient  guard  and  security  for  reserving  their 
completion  in  the  hands  of  God  Himself.  We  have  shown  that  it  is  from  a  view 
of  the  whole,  not  from  single  predictions,  that  our  arguments  are  drawn.  Such 
a  view  carries  with  it  the  force  of  the  strongest  circumstantial  evidence,  which 
in  many  cases  is  more  convincing  than  evidence  which  is  direct.  Independent 
circumstances  are  facts,  not  liable  to  suspicion,  unbiassed  and  invariable.  Should 
an  unbeliever  insinuate  any  suspicion  of  collusion  in  the  first  settling  of  Christianity, 
his  argument  would  immediately  lose  its  force  when  applied  to  the  prophecies. 
It  must  insinuate  a  collusion  between  persons  of  different  countries,  who  lived 
many  centuries  distant  from  one  another,  between  our  first  parents,  and  all  the 
patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles,  and  martyrs  who  succeeded.  (W.  Pearce,  D.D., 
F.R.S.)  The  irrepressibility  of  moral  truth: — I.  God  has  madb  a  SPBCiAii 
BEVELATiON  TO  His  SERVANTS.  "  He  rcvealeth  His  secret  imto  His  servants 
the  prophets."  In  all  ages  God  has  selected  men  to  whom  He  has  made  com- 
munications of  Himself.  The  Bible  is  indeed  a  special  revelation.  1.  Special  in 
its  occasion.  It  is  made  on  account  of  the  abnormal  moral  condition  into  which 
man  has  fallen, — made  in  consequence  of  human  sin  and  its  dire  consequences. 
2.  Special  in  its  doctrines.  II.  That  the  bight  recbption  of  this  special  bbvb- 
LATiON  necessitates  pbeaching.  "  The  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  ? 
the  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  prophesy  ?  "  The  idea  is,  that  the  men 
who  have  rightly  taken  the  truth  into  them  can  no  more  conceal  it  than  men 
can  avoid  terror  at  the  roar  of  the  lion.  There  are  some  truths  which  men  may 
receive  and  feel  no  disposition  to  communicate,  such  as  the  truths  of  abstract 
science,  which  have  no  relation  to  the  social  heart.  But  Gospel  truth  has  such 
a  relation  to  the  tenderest  affections  of  the  spirit  that  their  genuine  recipients 
find  them  to  be  irrepressible.  "  Who  can  but  prophesy  ?  "  None  but  those 
who  have  not  received  the  truth.  (Homilist.)  God's  message  through  the 
prophets  : — God  has  given  to  different  nations  different  missions.  He  has  given 
to  Rome  the  mission  of  teaching  the  world  the  meaning  of  law ;  to  Greece  the 
meaning  of  art  and  philosophy ;  to  the  Hebrew  race  the  meaning  of  religion. 
He  has  given  this  race  this  message  :  TeU  the  world  what  you  can  learn  of  God 
and  His  relation  to  men.  The  Hebrew  people  have  added  nothing  to  the  archi- 
tecture, the  art,  the  philosophy  of  life ;  but  they  have  been  a  prophetic  race — • 
discoverers  of  God.  In  this  race  there  were  pre-eminently  religious  men,  who  saw 
God  more  clearly  than  their  fellows,  and  God's  relation  to  mankind  more  clearly, 
and  God's  relation  to  human  events  more  clearly,  and  told  their  fellows  what 
they  saw.  And,  from  all  their  telling,  natural  selection  says  the  scientist,  provi- 
dence says  the  theologian — I  say  the  two  are  the  same — elected  those  that  had 
in  them  the  most  vital  truth,  the  most  enduring,  the  most  worthy  to  endure. 
Thus  we  have  in  the  Old  Testament  something  like  two  score  of  writers,  the  most 
spiritually-minded  of  a  spiritually- minded  race,  telling  us  what  they  have  discovered 
concerning  God.  This  is  the  Bible.  It  is  the  gradual  discovery  of  God  in  the 
hearts  and  through  the  tongues  of  prophets  who  were  themselves  members  of  a 
prophetic  race.  (Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  The  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  7 — 
The  power  of  looking  at  facts  in  the  face  : — St.  Bernard  has  described  the  first  stage 
of  the  vision  of  God  as  the  Vision  Distributive,  in  which  the  eager  mind  distributes 
her  attention  upon  common  things  and  common  duties  in  themselves.  It  was 
in  this  elementary  school  that  the  earliest  of  the  new  prophets  passed  his  apprentice* 


CHAP,  m.]  AMOS.  39 

ehip  and  received  his  gifts.  Others  excel  Amos  in  the  powers  of  the  imagination 
and  the  intellect.  But  by  the  incorrupt  habits  of  his  shepherd  life,  by  daily 
wakefulness  to  its  alarms,  and  daily  faithfulness  to  its  opportunities,  he  was 
trained  in  that  simple  power  of  appreciating  facts  and  causes,  which,  applied 
to  the  great  phenomena  of  the  spirit  and  of  history,  forms  his  distinction  among 
his  peers.  In  this  we  find  perhaps  the  reason  why  he  records  of  himself  no  solemn 
hour  of  cleansing  and  initiation.  "  Jehovah  took  me  from  following  the  flock,  and 
Jehovah  said  unto  me.  Go,  prophesy  unto  My  people  Israel."  Amos  was  of  them 
of  whom  it  is  written,  "  Blessed  are  those  servants  whom  the  Lord,  when  He  cometh, 
shall  find  watching."  Through  all  his  hard  life  this  shepherd  had  kept  his  mind 
open  and  his  conscience  quick,  so  that  when  the  Word  of  God  came  to  him  he 
knew  it,  as  fast  as  he  knew  the  roar  of  the  lion  across  the  moor.  Certainly  there 
is  no  habit  which  so  much  as  this  of  watching  facts  with  a  single  eye  and  a  responsible 
mind  is  indispensable  alike  in  the  humblest  duties  and  in  the  highest  speculations 
of  life.  When  Amos  gives  those  naive  illustrations  of  how  real  the  voice  of  God 
is  to  him,  we  receive  them  as  the  tokens  of  a  man,  honest  and  awake,  (Geo. 
Adam  Smith,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-15.  They  know  not  to  do  right. — Safety  in  righteousness : — 1.  The 
real  security  of  wealth  is  justice  in  its  acquisition  and  liberality  in  its  use.  Where 
there  is  much  wealth,  unjustly  gotten,  or  unmercifully  stored  up,  there  an  object 
for  Divine  punishment  exists.  Such  wealth  will  be  spoiled  by  enemies  from 
within  or  from  without.  2.  This  part  of  the  prophecy  supplies  a  most  powerful 
motive  to  quicken  our  zeal  for  true  religion.  The  history  of  the  world  has  been 
a  history  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  many  false  religions,  and  of  the  rise  and  progress 
of  the  true  religion.  One  false  system  after  another  has  reared  its  head,  exerted 
its  power,  destroyed  its  victims,  and  been  smitten  and  brought  to  ruin.  The 
Christian  religion,  small  in  its  beginnings,  has  been  developed  in  its  principles, 
and  expanded  in  its  dominion,  from  the  time  when  the  germ  of  all  its  blessings 
was  planted  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  man  in  the  promise,  that  "  the  seed  of  the 
woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  With  patient,  cheerful  zeal,  therefore, 
should  we  labour  in  the  cause  of  true  religion.  It  supplies  a  living  link  between 
us  and  the  first  true  believers  in  God.  Its  principles  never  die.  3.  We  learn 
to  be  earnest  in  securing  our  interest  in  "  that  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal 
in  the  heavens."  Every  earthly  house  shall  fall.  The  strong  castle,  the  spacious 
mansion,  the  elegant  abode  of  refinement  and  taste,  the  luxurious  retreat  from 
toil,  sheltered  from  the  heat  or  protected  against  the  cold — all  must  one  day 
come  to  ruin.  Let  us  realise  this  in  our  thoughts,  and  receive  admonition  there- 
from. (Vincent  W.  Ryan,  M.A.)  Ignorance  hinders  religion: — Ignorance 
of  the  price  of  pearls  makes  the  idiot  slight  them.  Ignorance  of  the  worth  of 
diamonds  makes  the  fool  choose  a  pebble  before  them.  Ignorance  of  the  satis- 
faction learning  affords — that  makes  the  peasant  despise  and  laugh  at  it ;  and 
we  very  ordinarily  see  how  men  tread  and  trample  on  those  plants  which  are 
the  greatest  restoratives,  because  they  know  not  the  virtue  of  them :  and  the 
same  may  justly  be  afiirmed  of  religion, — the  reason  why  men  meddle  no  more 
with  it  is  because  they  are  not  acquainted  with  the  pleasantness  of  it.  (Anthony 
HomecL) 

Vers.  11-15.  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  An  adversary  there  shall  be 
even  round  about  the  land. — The  spoiler  spoiled : — In  the  previous  verse 
Amos  has  pronounced  God's  verdict  on  the  proud  citizens  of  Samaria ;  here  he 
proclaims  the  punishment  which  is  about  to  come  upon  them.  I.  The  first  word 
of  the  passage,  "  therefore,"  shows  us  that  this  sporLTNG  is  the  direct  result 
OF  their  own  sin.  They  had  chosen  their  path — that  of  remorseless  greed, 
and  of  luxury  won  by  oppression  and  tyranny — and  it  -waa  the  path  on  which 
the  avenging  angels  walked  with  the  vials  of  God's  wrath.  Theu-  sin  was  to 
be  punished  by  the  loss  of  everything  which  it  seemed  to  have  secured.  The 
history  of  Ass3rria  is  another  illustration  of  this  connection  between  sin  and  punish- 
ment (Isa.  xxxiii.  1  ;  Nahum,  &c.).  God  will  surely  spoil  every  spoiler.  11.  The 
fruits  of  this  course  of  oppression.  The  treasures  gained  by  sin  pass  away 
by  plunder.  "An  adversary"  (ver.  11).  Sixty  years  later  the  king  of  Assyria 
besieged  Samaria  as  Amos  foretold,  and  rifled  their  glorious  palaces.  They  had 
filled  them  with  stores  of  wealth,  and  had  revelled  there  in  luxury  ;  but  these 
things  only  served  to  whet  the  appetite  for  plunder  wliich  brought  Assyria  to 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  m. 

their  gates.  They  built  their  winter  houses  and  their  summer  houses,  their  great 
houses  and  their  houses  of  ivory,  regardless  of  the  despair  of  the  poor,  and  of 
the  curses  of  the  oppressed.  Even  God's  threatenings  had  not  been  able  to  check 
them  for  a  moment.  What  end  had  it  served  ?  They  had  a  few  years  of  revelry, 
but  at  last  that  for  which  they  had  sacrificed  a  good  conscience  and  the  favour 
of  God  was  snatched  from  them  in  a  moment.  What  an  ignominious  end  verse 
12  describes.  Melanchthon's  mother  said,  "  Ill-gotten  wealth  but  loss  secures." 
How  true  it  is  !  If  never  before,  yet  when  death  comes  that  for  which  a  man 
has  sacrificed  character  and  conscience  is  taken  from  him,  and,  robbed  of  all 
he  prized,  he  must  stand  in  the  presence  of  his  Judge.     III.  The  failuhe  op 

EVERY  STAY   ON   WHICH   SUCH  MEN  MIGHT   BEST  IN  THE  TIME  OF  TEOITBLE.      "  In 

the  day  that  I  shall  visit  the  trangressions  of  Israel  upon  him  I  will  also  visit 
the  altars  of  Bethel ;  and  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be  cut  off  and  fall  to  the 
ground."  The  idols  should  perish  in  the  same  hour  as  their  worshippers,  involved 
in  a  common  destruction.  It  was  from  Bethel  that  they  looked  for  deliverance. 
There  they  had  presented  their  offerings  and  paid  their  tithes,  but  the  idols  failed 
them  in  their  hour  of  trouble,  and  fell  by  the  same  visitation.  Every  arm  of 
flesh  must  fail  when  God's  judgments  come.     {J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Ver.  12.  The  shepherd  taketh  ont  of  the  mouth  of  the  Uon  two  legs  or  a 
piece  of  an  ear. — The  destroyer  and  the  rescuer: — I.  Theeb  is  a  destroyino 
POWER  AT  WORK  IN  THE  WORLD.  1.  Variously  represented.  Here,  the  lion 
devoiu-ing  the  sheep.  In  New  Testament,  "  the  roaring,"  &c.  ;  in  Old  Testament, 
"  the  serpent  beguiling,"  &c.  ;  in  New  Testament,  "  that  old  serpent,"  &c.  2.  His 
doings  are  described.  Paradise  ruined  ;  Abel  murdered  ;  the  old  world  destroyed  ; 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  burned  ;  mankind  desolated  by  pestilence,  plague,  war, 
famine,  physical  tortures,  burning  anxieties — souls  lost.  3.  He  possesses  mighty 
power.  Called  "  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  "  ;  "  ruler  of  the  darkness,"  &c. 
Unites  an  angel's  strength  with  a  fiend's  malignity.  Has  great  power,  but  not 
all  power.  4.  Possessed  of  supreme  subtlety.  An  angel  of  light,  a  lurking 
beast,  a  hidden  serpent.  Marvellously  skilful  in  adapting  temptation  and 
detecting  opportunities.  Persuades  those  in  most  danger  that  they  are  most  safe. 
II.  There  is  a  rescuing  power  at  work  in  the  world.  He  is  possessed  of 
all  power,  and  of  all  wisdom.  III.  God  is  ready  to  receive  even  the  frag- 
ments. Nothing  was  left  but  "  two  legs  and  a  piece  of  an  ear,"  yet  the  shepherd 
rescues  and  accepts  these.  1.  Total  destruction  was  very  near.  2.  None  need 
despair.  3.  None  may  presume.  IV.  That  which  is  rescued  is  for  active 
SERVICE.  "  Two  legs  " — motion,  activity.  "  Piece  of  an  ear."  "  Faith  cometh 
by  hearing,"  &c.  God  speaks  to  the  heart  through  the  ear.  (R.  Berry.)  A 
miserable  remnant : — Here  we  have  an  illustration  borrowed  from  scenes  with 
which  Amos  was  familiar.  A  part  of  the  shepherd's  office  in  those  regions  con- 
sists in  defending  the  flock  against  the  attacks  of  wild  beasts,  as  well  as  the  depre- 
dations of  robbers.  As  a  check  against  carelessness  about  the  loss  of  the  sheep 
in  either  of  these  ways,  it  was  a  part  of  the  shepherd's  duty  to  rescue  what  he 
could  from  the  beast  that  had  torn  a  sheep.  Such  remains  would  prove  the 
truth  of  his  account  of  the  matter  ;  and  show,  perhaps,  on  some  occasions,  that 
he  had  not  refused  to  attack  the  beast  which  had  seized  the  prey.  Jacob  could 
say,  in  respect  of  his  care  of  Laban's  sheep,  that  he  had  not  availed  himself  of 
any  immunity  which  such  a  custom  conferred  on  the  shepherd.  "  That  which 
was  torn  of  beasts  I  brought  not  unto  thee ;  I  bare  the  loss  of  it ;  of  my  hand 
didst  thou  require  it."  And  his  wicked  sons  were  but  speaking  a  language  in 
common  use,  when  they  showed  their  father  the  bloody  garment  of  Joseph. 
Layard  has  the  following  passage  in  his  book  on  "  Nineveh."  "  Violent  alter- 
cations arose  on  the  subject  of  missing  beeists.  Heavy  responsibilities  which 
the  Effendi  did  not  seem  to  admit,  were  thrown  upon  the  wolves.  Some  time 
elapsed  before  these  questions  were  satisfactorily  settled ;  ears  having  been 
produced,  oaths  taken,  and  witnesses  called,  with  the  assistance  of  wolves  and 
the  rot,  the  diminution  in  the  flock  was  fully  accounted  for."  The  prophet's 
language  conveys  the  meaning,  that  after  God's  righteous  vengeance  had  wrought 
out  its  purposes  amongst  the  sinful  people  of  Israel,  their  condition  would  be 
that  of  a  miserable  remnant,  without  any  of  the  glory  which  once  belonged  to 
them  as  a  nation :  with  just  enough  evidence  left  to  show  that  they  had  been 
a  part  of  it,  and  with  marks  upon  that  remnant  which  would  show  how  they 
had  been  exposed  to  violence  and  spoiL     (Vincent  W.  Ryan,  M.A.) 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  41 

Ver.  15.  And  I  will  smite  the  winter  bouse  with  the  simuner  house ;  and  the 
houses  of  ivory  shall  perish,  and  the  g^reat  houses  shall  have  an  end,  saith  the  Lord. — 
The  houses  of  ivory : — A  devout  attention  to  the  passing  operations  of  providence 
is  repaid  abundantly  in  our  increased  knowledge  of  God,  as  a  man's  character 
is  discerned  by  his  deeds  ;  and  as  we  are  wont  to  say,  "  Actions  speak  louder 
than  words,"  so  the  character  of  God  is  learned  by  His  providence.  A  due  attention 
to  both  revelations  of  God — in  His  Word  and  in  His  works — will  be  found  of 
essential  service  to  the  better  understanding  and  embrace  of  both.  God's  works 
are  the  dramatic  parable  ;  the  practical  commentary  upon  His  Word — they  reflect 
light  severally  on  each  other.  The  obscurities  of  providence  are  elucidated  by 
Scripture,  and  the  declarations  of  Scripture  are  verified  by  providence.  We  are 
apt  to  be  peculiarly  affected  at  the  spectacle  of  fallen  greatness.  When  by 
calamity  or  death  God  calls  upon  "  princes  to  remember  that  they  are  but  men," 
we  are  proportionably  affected  by  their  visitation.  Let  us  earnestly  pray  that 
the  Lord  may  make  this  voice  of  departed  royalty  a  proclamation  of  warning 
to  all  our  souls,  that  so  the  bereavement  which  has  clothed  the  nation  in  the 
form  of  mourning  may  be  the  means  of  bringing  real  sorrow  after  a  godly  sort 
into  our  hearts.    (Joseph  B.  Owen,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  1-3.  Hear  this  word,  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  that  are  In  the  monntain  of 
Samaria. — God  the  champion  of  the  oppressed : — I.  The  CHARAcrrER  OE  these  men. 
"  Ye  kine  of  Bashan,"  &c.  The  feminine,  "  kine,"  marks  their  effeminacy  ;  the 
reference  to  Bashan,  where  the  richest  pasture -land  of  Israel  lay,  shows  that 
they  had  grown  fat  with  luxurious  living.  It  is  not  rare  to  find  such  men  the  most 
unscrupulous  and  cruel.  Here  they  are  seen  in  characteristic  fashion  oppressing 
the  poor,  crushing  the  needy  (ii.  6,  7),  and  crying  out  for  new  gratification  of  their 
lusts.  "  Bring,  and  let  us  drink."  II.  Their  punishment.  1.  The  certainty 
of  this  is  assured  by  an  oath.  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn  by  His  holiness."  Such 
men  were  a  fester  in  the  creation  of  God,  an  offence  to  His  love  for  purity.  God 
had  espoused  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  taken  them  under  His  wing.  His  holiness 
forbade  Him  to  keep  any  truce  with  such  men.  2.  The  punishment  is  both 
complete  and  ignominious.  Every  one  should  seek  to  escape  by  the  nearest  breach 
in  the  walls,  and  as  God  threatened  to  do  with  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xix.  28), 
these  luxurious  nobles  should  be  taken  away  with  hooks,  and  their  posterity 
with  fish-hooks.  The  oppressor  must  reckon  with  the  great  Champion  of  the 
oppressed.     (J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Come  to  Bethel,  and  transgress ;  at  Gilg'al  multiply  transgression. — 
Ill-spent  service  : — I.  The  scenes  op  this  idolatry.  "  Come  to  Bethel,  and 
transgress ;  at  Gilgal  multiply  transgression."  Idolatry  was  flourishing  in 
the  seats  of  their  most  hallowed  memories.  "  Come,"  he  says,  "  to  Bethel." 
Here,  where  everything  spoke  of  God's  mercy,  they  were  to  transgress.  At  Bethel 
the  founder  of  their  race,  fresh  from  his  home  in  Haran,  had  "  builded  an  altar 
unto  the  Lord,  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  xii.  8).  Here,  on 
his  return  from  Egypt,  he  had  received  the  promise  that  all  the  land  on  which 
he  looked  should  be  given  to  him  and  his  seed  for  ever  (Gen.  xiii.).  There  was 
no  spot  in  the  land  so  rich  in  memories  of  God's  great  goodness  as  Bethel,  yet  here 
they  transgressed.  Think  of  a  man  calling  the  Duke  of  Wellington  a  coward  at 
Waterloo,  or  forgetting  Nelson  in  Trafalgar  Bay.  Even  this  is  a  faint  picture  of 
the  insults  which  Israel  offered  to  God  in  the  place  of  His  richest  mercy  to  the 
nation.  At  Gilgal  too  they  multiplied  transgressions.  Hosea  (ix.  15)  even  says 
"  all  their  wickedness  is  in  GilgaL"  It  was  the  spot  where  Joshua,  just  installed 
as  leader  after  the  death  of  Moses,  placed  the  twelve  stones  which  they  had  taken 
out  of  Jordan  (Josh.  iv.  24).  Strange  and  sad  is  the  story  of  human  sin  !  In 
Gilgal  they  were  despising  their  Champion  and  Deliverer.  The  city  had  another 
memory  which  might  have  saved  them.  They  kept  their  first  passover  in  the 
land  in  Gilgal  (Josh.  v.  10-12).  Sin  has  a  short  memory.  It  tries  hard  to  escape 
from  the  remembrance  of  God's  mercy,  and  can  transgress  without  remorse  ia 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  places  where  heaven  has  multiplied  blessings.  Leam,  if  you  would  escape 
the  misery  of  grieving  God,  to  recall  His  mercies.  Every  step  of  life's  journey 
is  rich  in  proofs  of  His  mercy.  Barrow  says  in  one  of  his  sermons,  that  as  men 
choose  the  fairest  places  in  great  cities  for  monuments  of  national  deliverance, 
so  we  should  erect  in  our  hearts  "  lively  representations  of,  and  lasting  memorials, 
unto  the  Divine  bounty."  II.  The  spieit  op  their  idolatry.  For  once  they 
were  whole-hearted  in  worship.  They  seem  to  have  been  prompt  to  do  every- 
thing for  their  idols,  though  they  refused  to  do  anything  for  God.  Sacrifices 
every  day ;  tithes  of  their  substance  every  three  years ;  thank-offerings,  even 
freewill  offerings,  were  readily  presented  at  Bethel  and  Gilgal.  Nothing  seems 
to  have  been  too  much  for  them  to  do.  They  withdrew  from  business  and  pleasure 
that  they  might  offer  their  morning  sacrifices,  &c.  To  whom  ?  To  the  idol 
caK  of  Bethel,  which  was  soon  to  be  carried — a  curiosity  of  the  plundered  land — 
as  a  present  to  king  Jareb  (Hos.  x.  6).  For  God  they  would  do  nothing.  Their 
whole  strength  and  wealth  were  devoted  to  idols  that  were  powerless  to  help 
them,  and  to  priests  who  were  blinding  them  to  the  doom  which  was  near  at  hand. 
It  is  a  true  picture  of  many  still.  They  will  do  nothing  for  God,  they  are  ready 
to  do  anything  for  sin.  III.  Reason  for  this  determined  transgression. 
"  This  liketh  you,  0  ye  children  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord."  Their  hearts  were 
wrong,  therefore  they  multiplied  transgression.  There  was  no  call  to  think  in 
this  false  worship.  The  idol  priests  sought  to  drown  the  voice  of  conscience 
and  to  silence  any  faithful  reproof  which  might  have  led  to  reformation  of  life. 
Men  came  from  their  houses  of  ivory,  which  had  been  built  up  with  oppression, 
from  the  palaces  where  "  robbery  and  violence  "  were  stored  up,  and  there  was 
no  Baptist  voice  to  cry  as  they  entered  into  the  idol  temple,  "  Bring  forth  fruits 
meet  for  repentance."  The  reason  for  the  alacrity  which  men  show  in  sin  is 
written  here :  "  this  liketh  you."  But  let  every  man  of  reason  consider !  Are 
we  children  that  "  like  "  should  rule  ?  (J.  Telford,  B.A.)  Worship  abounding 
with  abounding  sin : — Crimes  ran  riot  among  the  people  at  this  period,  and  yet 
how  religious  they  seemed  to  be  !  I.  Abounding  worship  often  implies  abounding 
sin.  This  is  the  case  when  the  worship  is — 1.  Selfish.  Men  crowd  churches, 
and  contribute  to  religious  institutions  purely  with  the  idea  of  avoiding  hell  and 
getting  to  a  happier  world  than  this.  2.  Formal.  Abounding  worship  is  no  proof 
of  abounding  virtue  and  abounding  godliness.  II.  Abounding  worship  often  springs 
from  abounding  sin.  It  may  spring  from — I.  A  desire  to  conceal  sin.  Sin  is  an 
ugly  thing ;  it  is  hideous  to  the  eye  of  conscience.  Hence  efforts  on  all  hands  to 
conceal.  2.  A  desire  to  compensate  for  evils.  Great  brewers  build  churches  and 
endow  religious  institutions  in  order  to  compensate  in  some  measure  for  the  enormous 
evil  connected  with  their  trade.  3.  A  desire  to  appear  good.  The  more  corrupt  a 
man  is,  the  stronger  his  desire  to  appear  otherwise.  Do  not  judge  the  character 
of  a  nation  by  the  number  of  its  churches,  the  multitude  of  its  worshippers. 
{HomUist.)  A  sinful  people  resisting  the  chastisements  of  God  : — No  sterner  picture 
of  an  utterly  rotten  social  state  was  ever  drawn  than  this  book  gives  of  the  luxury, 
licentiousness,  and  oppressiveness  of  the  ruling  classes.  This  passage  deals  with  the 
religious  declension  underlying  the  moral  filth,  and  sets  forth  the  self-willed  idolatry 
of  the  people  (vers.  4,  6) ;  their  obstinate  resistance  to  God's  merciful  chastisement 
(vers.  6-11) ;  and  the  heavier  impending  judgment  (vers.  12,  13).  1.  Indignant 
irony  flashes  in  that  permission  or  command  to  persevere  in  the  calf  worship. 
The  seeming  command  is  the  strongest  prohibition.  The  lessons  of  this  burst  of 
sarcasm  are  plain.  The  subtle  influence  of  self  creeps  in  even  in  worship,  and 
makes  it  hollow,  unreal,  and  powerless  to  bless  the  worshipper.  Obedience  is 
better  than  costly  gifts.  Men  will  lavish  gifts  far  more  freely  in  apparent  religious 
service,  which  is  but  the  worship  of  their  reflected  selves,  than  in  true  service  of 
God.  And  the  purity  of  willing  offerings  is  marred  when  they  are  given  in  response 
to  a  loud  call,  or  when  given,  are  proclaimed  with  acclamations.  2.  The  blaze 
of  indignation  changes  into  wounded  tenderness.  Mark  the  sad  cadence  of 
the  fivefold  refrain.  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  To 
Amos,  famine,  drought,  blasting,  locusts,  pestilence,  and  probably  earthquake, 
were  messengers  of  God,  and  Amos  was  taught  of  God.  If  we  looked  deeper  we 
should  see  more  clearly.  To  the  prophet's  eye  the  world  is  all  aflame  with  a 
present  God.  Amos  had  another  principle.  God  sent  physical  calamities  because 
of  moral  delinquencies,  and  for  moral  and  religious  ends.  These  disasters  were 
meant  to  bring  Israel  back  to  God,  and  were  at  once  punishments  and  reformatory 
methods.    Ames's  lesson  as  to  the  purpose  of  trials  is  not  antiquated.     Amos 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  43 

also  teaches  the  awful  power  which  we  have  of  resisting  God's  efforts  to  draw 
us  back.  The  true  tragedy  of  the  world  is  that  God  calls  and  we  refuse. 
3.  Again  the  mood  changes,  and  the  issue  of  protracted  resistance  is  prophesied 
(vers.  12,  13).  Long-delayed  judgments  are  severe,  in  proportion  as  they  are 
slow.  The  contact  of  Divine  power  with  human  rebellion  can  only  end  in  one 
way,  and  that  is  too  terrible  for  speech.  The  certainty  of  judgment  is  the  basis 
of  a  call  to  repentance,  which  may  avert  it.  The  meeting  referred  to  is  not 
judgment  after  death,  but  the  impending  destruction  of  the  northern  kingdom. 
But  Amos's  prophetic  call  is  not  misapplied  when  directed  to  the  final  day  of 
the  Lord.  The  conditions  of  meeting  the  Judge,  and  being  "  found  of  Him  in 
peace,"  are  that  we  should  be  "  without  spot  and  blameless  "  ;  and  the  conditions 
of  bemg  so  spotless  and  uncensurable  are  repentance  and  trust.  Only  we  have 
Jesus  as  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  to  trust  in,  and  His  all-suflBcient 
work  to  trust  to  for  pardon  and  purifiying.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Israel 
often  reproved  : — The  Book  of  Amos  is  one  of  the  simplest  in  the  Bible.  The  gist 
of  it  is  found  in  chap.  iii.  ver.  2.  This  is  the  prophet's  theme.  It  contains  three 
distmct  thoughts :  the  love  of  God  for  Israel ;  the  fate  in  store  for  them  •  and 
the  sins  by  which  they  had  forfeited  the  one  and  merited  the  other.  The  rest 
of  the  book  is  largely  a  series  of  variations  on  this  theme.  1.  "  Come  to  Bethel," 
cries  the  prophet.  The  words  are  hortatory  only  in  form,  for  Amos  adds  in  the 
same  breath,  "  and  transgress."  It  is  not  very  clear  why  the  prophet  condemned 
the  worship  at  Bethel.  It  is  probable  that  Amos  was  thinking  of  the  character 
of  the  worshippers.  They  certainly,  if  they  had  been  only  h  alf  as  bad  as  he  describes 
them  in  the  second  chapter,  would  have  been  sadly  unfit  to  appear  before  a  holy 
God.  Amos  did  not  condemn  sacrifices  and  offerings  as  such.  They  mean  that 
the  man  who  is  impure  in  his  life,  or  unjust  to  his  neighbour,  whatever  else  he 
may  be  or  do,  is  yet  in  his  sins  :  that  if  he  continues  such  as  he  is  no  amount  of 
zeal  in  the  forms  of  religion  wiU  make  him  acceptable  to  God ;  that  in  fact  the 
attempt  to  substitute  anything  for  moral  character  is  an  insult  to  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel.  2.  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me."  There  is  a  note  of  surprise 
and  disappointment  in  the  words  by  which  the  second  thought  is  introduced. 
They  indicate  that  the  condition  of  Israel  was  not  what  was  to  be  expected.  The 
words  following  explain  why  a  different  state  of  things  ought  to  have  existed — 
because  God  had  repeatedly  afflicted  them.  Amos  here  clearly  teaches  that  the 
calamities  which  he  describes  were  sent  upon  Israel  on  accoimt  of  their  sins, 
and  for  the  purpose  of  turning  them  to  God.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know 
just  what  was  his  idea  with  reference  to  what  we  call  "  misfortunes."  Probably 
he  saw  some  connection  between  the  afflictions  which  befell  Israel  and  their 
moral  condition.  We  are  not  satisfied  with  the  simple  views  of  God  and  His 
relation  to  the  world  which  once  prevailed.  We  know  that,  though  we  caimot 
explain  why,  the  guiltless  as  well  as  the  guilty  are  sometimes  overtaken  by 
misfortime.  But  Israel  did  not  heed  the  lesson  that  God  would  have  taught 
them.  3.  "  Therefore  thus  will  I  do  imto  thee  "  (ver.  12).  There  is  no  picture 
of  coming  terror.  Amos  could  at  most  but  dimly  outline  what  they  were  to  expect. 
The  summons,  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,"  is  usually  misxmderstood.  The 
words  are  not  an  appeal,  but  a  challenge.  Persistence  in  sin  means  nothing  short 
of  an  encounter  with  the  Almighty.  We  have  dwelt  upon  the  goodness  of  God 
80  much  that  we  have  almost  lost  sight  of  His  severity.  There  is,  however,  a 
severe  side  to  His  character.  And  can  a  man  contend  with  his  Maker  ?  The 
fate  of  Israel  is  an  illustration  of  the  fatal  consequences  of  persistent  disobedience 
of  God.  (Hinckley  G.  Mitchell.)  Israd  often  reproved: — This  entire  prophecy 
is  one  of  denunciation.  Only  once  or  twice  is  there  even  hinted  the  possibility 
of  better  things,  and  only  at  the  very  close,  like  a  gleam  of  sunset  glory  at  the  end 
of  a  day  of  gloom,  is  the  full  promise  given  of  a  restoration  of  Israel  to  goodness  and 
to  glory.  The  prophecies  against  the  six  enemies  of  the  chosen  people  and  against 
Judah,  with  which  the  book  begins,  are  only  preparatory  to  the  fuU  description 
of  the  sin  of  Israel  and  the  pimishment  which  is  to  come  upon  its  people.  Israel, 
so  far  as  it  is  like  the  nations  that  know  not  God,  is  exposed  to  the  same  judgments 
as  they.  I.  The  prophbcy  is  addressed  to  those  who  abttsb  theie  peivilegbs. 
Israel  was  the  chosen  people,  having  the  oracles  of  God.  They  knew  the  spiritual 
being  and  holy  character  of  Jehovah.  They  had  entered  into  covenant  with 
Him.  They  had  been  taught  both  how  to  worship  Him  and  how  to  please  Him 
in  their  Uves.  And  yet  they  did  not  walk  as  children  of  the  light.  They  sinned 
even  in  their  worship.     The  shrines  at  Bethel  and  at  Gilgal  were  the  centres  of 


44  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

a  mingled  idolatry  and  Jehovah-worship.  Though  they  brought  sacrifices  every 
morning  and  tithed  their  increase  or  possessions  every  three  days,  though  they 
offered  not  only  unleavened  bread,  but  the  leavened  also,  though  they  encouraged 
one  another  to  multiply  their  free-will  offerings  ;  however  much  they  might 
increase  their  devotion  to  such  religious  forms  as  pleased  them,  all  this  was  only 
the  increase  of  their  sin,  according  to  the  taunting  exhortation  of  the  prophet. 
Mere  religiousness  never  will  save  a  people  or  a  person.  External  forms  grow 
more  rigid  when  the  life  has  gone  out  of  them,  and  so  announce  the  loss.  To 
worship  the  Lord  and  serve  our  own  gods  is  the  height  of  impiety.  The  calf- 
worship  was  worse  than  Baal-worship,  because  it  was  a  more  conscious  defiance 
of  Jehovah.  Israel  was  a  prospered  people.  These  days  of  Jeroboam  II.  were 
at  the  very  summit  of  its  prosperity.  The  northern  kingdom  extended  to  the 
limits  reached  under  Solomon.  Damascus  was  taken  ;  Moab  was  reconquered  ; 
Israel  was  powerful  and  rich.  But  Israel,  instead  of  making  of  this  richness  a 
very  garden  of  the  Lord,  suffered  all  the  weeds  to  grow  out  of  it  which  so  easily 
find  root  in  such  a  soil.  The  sins  which  mark  prosperity  are  the  sins  of  the 
prosperous  classes.  Those  who  were  high  in  position  and  rich  in  possessions  in 
Israel  were  indulgent  toward  themselves  and  oppressive  toward  the  poor. 
Nations  and  men  need  to  be  warned  in  their  prosperity.  It  is  not  easy  to  tell 
the  truth  to  the  rich  and  the  high.  It  takes  the  sense  of  a  prophetic  mission  to 
give  one  courage  so  to  do.  Let  us  beware  !  What  prophet  has  a  message  for 
lis  like  that  of  Amos  the  herdsman  from  Judah  for  court  and  priest  and  people 
of  Israel  ?  Prophets  enough,  but  how  many,  alas,  with  no  message  from  the 
Lord  !  Our  ears  are  filled  with  the  teachings  of  political  economists  contradicting 
and  confounding  one  another.  The  air  is  strident  with  the  harsh  cries  of  the 
false  prophets  of  materialism.  II.  The  prophecy  is  addressed  to  those  who 
NEGLECT  the  DISCIPLINE  OF  ADVERSITY.  Israel  had  had  its  share  of  that. 
Jehovah  could  not  vindicate  His  Fatherhood  unless  He  corrected  the  faults  of 
His  children  by  reproof  and  pimishment  as  well  as  by  the  encouragement  of 
prosperity  and  the  stimulus  of  opportunity.  By  a  famine  of  food  and  a  famine 
of  water,  by  a  failure  of  crops,  by  the  scoiirge  of  pestilence,  by  general  destruction 
brought  upon  them  in  many  ways  He  had  sought  to  rouse  the  thoughts  of  His 
people  and  to  turn  their  attention  to  their  evil  ways.  But  it  had  all  been  to  no 
purpose.  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  When  aU  the 
discipline  which  the  wise  father  has  been  able  to  devise  has  failed,  his  heart  is  sad 
and  disappointed.  We  have  heard  a  great  deal  about  probation  in  the  pulpits 
of  the  past  and  in  the  theological  discussions  of  the  present.  And  yet  the  term 
and  thought  are  often  misused  and  distorted.  We  are  not  set  out  upon  this 
earthly  life  that  God  may  put  us  through  its  various  experiences  to  see  what  is 
in  us,  as  though  He  were  an  assayer  to  whom  each  human  life  was  brought  that 
He  might  determine  its  value  and  use  by  an  application  of  the  most  efficient  tests. 
We  are  God's  children  in  our  Father's  house,  and  He  is  trying  to  educate  and 
discipline  us  for  our  proper  place  and  part  in  the  home  life  as  we  come  to  our 
maturity.  We  must  learn  self-restraint  and  submission  to  others ;  we  must 
grow  into  fuller  sympathy  with  His  ways  and  plans.  All  this  is  discipline,  not 
probation.      It  is  education,  not  testing.      True,  it  does  all  test  us,  but  in  no 

Eeculiar  sense.  Everything  tests  us.  Each  command  and  each  caress  equally, 
y  the  response  which  it  elicits,  shows  our  quality  and  fibre.  But  you  neither 
kiss  your  child  nor  send  him  on  an  errand  to  test  him.  But  there  comes  a  time, 
where  all  has  been  done  that  love  and  wisdom  can  devise,  when  the  father  says, 
and  the  mother  sits  by  consenting  through  sorrow  too  deep  for  tears  and  moans, 
■"  We  have  done  all  that  we  can  for  him.  He  abuses  aU  his  privileges  and  misuses 
all  his  opportunities.  He  profits  nothing  by  the  consequences  of  his  evil  doing 
or  by  the  pxmishments  we  have  inflicted.  We  are  only  making  him  worse  by 
trying  to  help  him.  We  have  done  all  that  we  can  do,  '  yet  he  has  not  returned 
unto  us.'  "  That  is  just  the  case  with  the  mass  of  the  people,  both  of  Israel  and 
of  our  time  and  nation.  III.  The  prophecy  is  addressed  to  those  who  have 
STILL  AN  opportunity  TO  RETURN.  The  language  of  the  prophet  is  stern  and 
severe,  and  yet  it  is  not  an  imrelenting  severity,  nor  the  sternness  of  a  final  sentence. 
There  is  this  contrast  between  the  threats  against  the  Gentile  nations  and  those 
spoken  to  Israel.  Nothing  is  said  of  a  relenting  there,  but  here  it  is  always 
implied  or  expressed.  The  threat  against  the  chosen  people  is  all  the  more  severe 
by  reason  of  its  vagueness  :  "  Thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  0  Israel  "  ;  as  though 
He  could  not  bear  to  put  into  words  the  terrible  things  which  He  foresaw  would 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  45 

become  necessary.  But  the  threat  is  relieved  by  the  command  which  has  in  it 
both  the  elements  of  terror  and  of  comfort :  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  0  Israel !  " 
There  could  be  no  escape  from  that  encounter.  But  there  was  yet  time  and 
opportunity  for  them  to  make  the  needed  preparation  for  that  meeting.  It  could 
not  be  a  preparation  to  meet  their  doom  which  they  were  bidden  to  make.  It 
could  only  be  a  making  ready  by  penitence  and  amendment  of  their  lives  to  meet 
their  God  without  fear  that  they  might  receive  His  pardon  and  be  restored  to 
His  favour.  Indeed,  the  very  announcement  of  a  purpose  to  punish  implies  a 
possibility  of  averting  the  threatened  wrath.  The  thunderbolts  of  God  are  to 
arouse  the  attention  of  the  rebellious  ones,  and  the  flashes  of  His  lightning  show 
the  path  which  leads  to  Him.  Yes,  one  more  opportunity  is  given  to  every  one 
to  whom  either  the  threatening  of  the  law  or  the  invitation  of  the  Gospel  comes ; 
to  every  one  to  whom  at  least  it  has  a  meaning.  Law  and  grace  are  but  the  two 
hands  of  love.  It  behoves  the  men  of  the  nineteenth  century,  whether  they  are 
in  the  enjoyment  of  proud  prosperity  or  in  the  endurance  of  humbling  discipline, 
to  remember  that  the  purpose  of  both  is  to  draw  or  drive  them  back  to  God. 
{George  M.  Boynton.) 

Vers.  6-11.  And  I  also  have  given  you  cleanness  of  teeth  in  all  your 
cities. — Afflictions  providential :  —  There  is  a  material  difference  between 
what  may  be  called  permissive  and  active  providences  ;  and  between  such  as 
are  disciplinary,  and  such  as  are  strictly  punitive.  The  afflictions  enumerated 
here  were  sent  by  the  direct  visitation  of  God  for  disciplinary  purposes.  Hence 
the  people  were  responsible  to  God  for  the  moral  effect  of  His  providential 
visitations  upon  them.  Just  so  with  every  man  under  God's  government.  A 
thousand  evils  may  come  on  me,  and  I  may  be  personally  innocent  in  relation 
to  them  ;  but  God  will  judge  me  as  to  the  uses  I  make  of  these  visitations — the 
moral  effects  they  produce  upon  me  in  the  way  of  chastening  and  reformation. 

1.  Consider,  then,  that  God's  hand  or  purpose  is  in  every  providential  visitation. 

2.  That  God  has  a  specific  moral  end  in  every  visitation  that  He  lays  upon  us. 

3.  That  these  providences  are  sure  to  accomplish  their  mission  upon  us,  namely, 
to  chasten,  soften,  reclaim,  or  else  to  harden,  render  obdurate,  and  ripen  for 
final  destruction,  as  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh,  ancient  Israel,  and  a  multitude  of 
others.  4.  Afflictions  of  every  kind  should  humble  us,  awaken  us  to  serious 
reflection  and  earnest  inquiry  as  to  their  meaning.  They  are  never  sent  in 
vain.  A  gracious  purpose  is  behind  them,  or  a  fatherly  rebuke  is  in  them,  or  the 
dark  cloud  is  ominous  of  coming  wrath  if  we  haste  not  to  repent.  (J.  M.  Sherwood. ) 
God's  government  of  the  world  a  chastising  government : — In  these  verses  the  Almighty 
describes  the  various  corrective  measures  which  He  had  employed  for  effecting 
a  moral  reformation  in  the  character  of  the  Israelites.  I.  The  chastisements 
ABE  OFTEN  OVERWHELMINGLY  TERRIFIC.  1.  He  Sometimes  employs  blind  nature, 
famine,  drought,  blight,  pestilence,  sword.  2.  He  sometimes  employs  human 
wickedness.  II.  They  are  designed  for  moral  restoration.  1.  Men  are 
alienated  from  God.  2.  Their  alienation  is  the  cause  of  all  their  misery.  See 
the  benevolence  of  all  these  chastisements.  They  are  to  restore  souls.  III.  The 
chastisements  often  fail  in  their  grand  design.  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned 
unto  Me."  This  shows — 1.  The  force  of  human  depravity.  2.  The  force  of 
human  freedom.  Almighty  goodness  does  not  force  us  into  goodness.  He  treats 
us  as  free  agents  and  responsible  beings.  (Homilist.)  Chastisement — its 
purpose  and  failure  : — I.  The  character  of  the  chastisement.  1.  It  touched 
them  in  their  temporal  comfort.  Nothing  else  would  reach  such  obstinate  sinners. 
To  a  good  man  the  Divine  love  and  favour  is  the  highest  of  all  blessings  :  Israel 
could  only  be  reached  by  loss  of  temporal  comfort.  2.  The  chastisement  took 
various  forms  in  order  to  reach  them  all.  3.  Stroke  after  stroke  fell  upon  them, 
that  if  their  hearts  were  at  all  softened  by  the  troubles  they  had  just  known,  the 
new  trouble  might  lead  them  to  true  repentance  ;  and  so  that  every  class  of  the 
community  might  be  reached  and  won  for  God.  A  glance  at  the  five  forms  which 
the  visitation  took  will  show  how  it  reached  every  circle.  II.  Tni:  purpose  of  their 
sorrows.  God  wanted  to  bring  them  home  to  Himself.  I'!"!.  The  failure  of 
THIS  chastisement.  God  had  done  all  that  even  He  could  dj  to  make  it  impres- 
sive. Chastisement  may  fail.  "  Many  meet  the  gods,  but  few  salute  them." 
Sorrows  which  might  purify  are  lost  upon  us  because  they  do  not  make  us  acknow- 
ledge Him.  God  can  do  nothing  more.  He  must  leave  men  to  their  sin  till  the 
blow  fall  and  the  ruin  irretrievable  has  come.     {J.  Telford,  B.A.)         Unavailing 


46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

chaatiaemerUs  : — I.  The  design  of  God,  in  all  His  dispensations,  is  to  bring 
MEN  FROM  their  WANDERINGS  BACK  AGAIN  TO  HiMSBLF.  No  truth  can  be  clearer 
than  that  we  have  departed  from  Him.  Being  anxious  for  our  restoration, 
God  is  pleased  to  chastise  us.  He  does  not  afflict  willingly,  as  is  evident  from — 
1.  His  nature.  He  is  a  Being  of  boundless  compassion.  2.  The  patience  He 
exercises.     3.  The  warnings  He  gives.     II.  That  these  dispensations  frequently 

I-AIL  to  answer  the  END  FOR  WHICH  THEY  WERE  INTENDED.       Happily  it  is  not 

so  in  all  cases.  It  is  in  very  many.  They  are  chastised  in  vain,  and  the  complaint 
from  heaven  is  heard.  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  In 
the  visitations  here  referred  to,  three  things  appear.  1.  They  are  fearful  in  their 
character.  Some  light  stroke  might  be  unheeded.  2.  Frequent  in  their  infliction. 
If  a  single  trial  is  unavailing,  surely  one  coming  after  another  would  bring  them 
to  consider  their  ways,  and  tiurn  to  Him  that  smote  them.  3.  Marked  by  certain 
features  which  showed  the  hand  of  God  in  the  clearest  manner.  "  Rained  on  one 
city,  and  not  on  another."  III.  When  such  dispensations  are  disregarded 
THE  MOST  disastrous  CONSEQUENCES  ARE  LIKELY  TO  ENSUE.  "  Therefore,  thus  will 
I  do  unto  thee."  [Expository  Outlines.)  God  varies  His  instruments  of  punish- 
ment : — One  day,  seeing  some  men  in  a  field,  I  went  up  to  them,  and  found  they 
were  cutting  up  the  trunk  of  an  old  tree.  I  said,  "  That  is  slow  work,  why  not 
spilt  it  asunder  with  the  beetle  and  wedges  ?  "  "  Ah,  this  wood  is  so  cross-grained 
and  stubborn  that  it  requires  something  sharper  than  wedges  to  get  it  to  pieces." 
"  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  and  that  is  the  way  God  is  obliged  to  deal  with  obstinate, 
cross-grained  sinners  ;  if  they  will  not  yield  to  one  of  His  instruments,  you  may 
depend  on  it  He  will  make  use  of  another."     ((?.  Origg.) 

Ver.  10.  Tour  young  men  have  I  slain  with  the  sword  .  .  .  yet 
have  ye  not  returned  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord. — God's  dealings  with  us 
nationally,  and  their  object : — While  we  are  in  this  state  of  trial  and  probation 
God  does  not  punish  us,  individually  or  nationally,  in  the  spirit  of  vindictive- 
ness  or  vengeance,  but  out  of  love  and  compassion,  and  with  the  view  of 
working  in  us  that  which  is  needful  for  our  temporal  prosperity  and  eternal 
welfare,  and  which  His  good  gifts  and  past  mercies  have  failed  to  effect.  I.  The 
parties  herb  addressed.  Primarily  the  children  of  Israel.  If  we  can  trace  a 
resemblance  between  our  conduct  and  theirs,  we  must  undoubtedly  consider  the 
words  of  the  text  equally  addressed  to  us.  1.  Pride  was  a  striking  characteristic 
of  God's  people  of  old.  What  was  the  return  they  made  for  all  the  signal  blessings 
bestowed  on  them  ?  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked."  Have  not  we,  nationally 
and  individually,  acted  like  them  in  this  particular  ?  How  have  we  requited  the 
good  and  gracious  Benefactor  for  His  great  mercies  ?  Have  we  not  been  lifted  up  in 
pride  ?  Is  it  not  the  prevailing  sentiment  that  it  is  to  our  own  wisdom  we  owe 
our  constitution,  to  our  own  exertions  our  wealth,  and  to  our  superior  institutions 
our  freedom  from  rebellion  and  revolution  ?  2.  Israel  had  drawn  down  God's 
judgments  for  their  hypocrisy.  They  were  very  zealous  in  the  profession  of  their 
religion.  But  their  hearts  went  after  their  idols,  and  their  hands  were  fuD  of 
blood.  Therefore  God  refused  their  worthless  profession.  And,  nowadays, 
there  is  a  vast  deal  of  outward  profession  of  religion,  yet  but  very  little  real, 
practical,  influential  religion.  Where  is  the  self-discipline,  the  self-denial,  the 
self-sacrifice  which  our  holy  religion  calls  upon  us  for  ?  3.  Forgetfulness  of  God, 
their  great  Benefactor,  was  a  striking  characteristic  of  the  Israelites  of  old. 
And  do  we  acknowledge  God's  hand  in  the  productiveness  of  our  land,  or  in  the 
failure  of  our  crops  ?  4.  Our  sin  and  rebellion  against  God  fix  us  with  the  applica- 
bility of  these  words  to  oiu"selves.  Who  can  fathom  the  demoralisation  and 
wickedness  of  the  dense  masses  of  our  great  cities,  &c. !  11.  God's  dealings  with 
them  in  like  connection  with  His  dealings  with  us.  Unexampled  favo\u-s 
demand  a  higher  standard  of  holiness  and  devoted  obedience,  and  proportionately 
increase  the  heinousness  of  guilt.  Trace  the  dealings  with  which  God  had  visited 
the  Israelites,  in  chastisement  for  their  sins,  which  are  referred  to  in  this  chapter. 
Scarcity,  disease,  war,  &c.  III.  What  is  the  object  op  these  dealings  op 
God  towards  us  ?  His  yearning  over  us  is  that  we  should  become  a  people 
fearing  Him,  and  working  righteousness.  The  nation  is  made  up  of  individuals  ; 
and  as  far  as  individual  responsibility  is  concerned,  it  will  be  by  individual  prac- 
tice, example,  and  influence  that  we  must  severally  promote  that  reformation 
amongst  us  which  is  needful  to  restore  us  to  the  Divine  favour.  (Edward  T, 
CardcHe.) 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  AT 

Ver.     11.     Ye    were    as    a    firebrand    plucked    out    of   the    burning.  —  The 

firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  : — A  large  portion  of  the  sacred  writings  sets 
forth  God's  exhibitions  of  kindness  towards  men  as  their  Protector.  Men  in 
every  age  should  study  to  preserve  in  their  memory  the  Divine  procedure,  both 
in  providence  and  in  grace,  as  being  adapted  to  secure  their  highest  welfare. 
Here  God  magnified  His  mercy  by  interposing  when  justice  appeared  about  to 
consummate  its  work  in  their  destruction.  "  I  have  overthrown  some  of  you, 
as  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  ye  were  as  a  firebrand  plucked 
out  of  the  bvu-ning."  Those  who  are  the  subjects  of  God's  grace  under  the  Gospel 
may  properly  be  thus  addressed.     I,  Hebe  is  indicated  a  fearful  dangee. 

I.  This  danger  in  its  nature.  It  arises  under  the  moral  government  of  God  conse- 
quent upon  the  character  of  man  as  a  sinner.  Man  in  his  original  state  is  every- 
where under  the  Divine  displeasure,  condemned  and  exposed  to  punishment. 
The  punishment  does  not  extend  merely  to  the  infliction  of  temporal  calamity 
and  sorrow,  it  extends  also  to  the  life  which  is  to  come.  The  punishment  incurred 
through  sin  is  illustrated  in  the  text  by  the  metaphor  of  fire  ;  the  figure  being 
taken  from  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  The  Bible  representations 
of  future  punishment  set  forth  the  intensity  of  that  punishment.  They  are 
not  to  be  interpreted  literally ;  they  are  intended  to  denote  most  powerful  and 
supreme  intensity  of  mental  suffering  ;  the  recollections  of  the  past,  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  present,  and  the  anticipations  of  the  future,  being  united  in  one  unmiti- 
gated torment  and  agony.  2.  Its  imminence.  It  is  represented  as  being  on 
the  eve  of  consummation.  The  firebrand  is  spoken  of  as  being  close  upon  the 
element  that  is  to  consume  it,  nay,  as  being  already  seized.  There  are  few  meta- 
phorical expressions  more  adapted  to  set  forth  extreme  imminence  and  exposure 
to  danger.  All  men,  without  exception,  are  in  imminent  danger  of  the  doom 
appointed  as  the  consequence  of  sin,  because  of  the  fact  that  their  state  of  sin 
constitutes  a  moral  fitness  and  preparation  for  it ;  because  of  the  fact  that  they 
are  condemned  in  their  sinful  state  already ;  and  because  of  the  fact  that  their 
lives — the  season  of  their  probation  and  trial — are  evanescent,  frail,  and  uncertain. 

II.  A  DELIGHTFUL  RESCUE.  The  soiuTce  from  which  the  rescue  is  derived.  They 
are  not  saved  by  themselves,  or  by  any  finite  agency  whatever.  The  only  Deliverer 
of  the  human  soul  from  the  burning  is  God.  And  the  deliverance  is  wrought 
out  by  a  sublime  redemptive  scheme,  the  agents  being  the  Divine  Son  and  the 
Holy  Spirit.  III.  The  characteristics  by  which  this  deliverance  is  dis- 
tinguished. 1.  Observe  the  freeness  of  it.  2.  The  permanence  of  it.  3.  The 
blessedness  of  it.  4.  The  powerful  effect  which  the  contemplation  of  the  rescue 
from  the  danger  should  secure.  In  this  contemplation  there  will  be  involved 
astonishment,  gratitude,  and  compassion  for  those  who  are  still  in  the  place  of 
burning.  (James  Parsons.)  A  fast  sermon  for  the  fire  of  London  : — I.  The 
severity  of  the  judgment.  "  I  have  overthrown  some  of  you,  as  God  over- 
threw Sodom  and  Gomorrah."  Observe — 1.  The  nature  and  kind  of  it.  The 
suddenness  and  unexpectedness  of  it ;  the  force  and  violence  of  it ;  the  sad  train 
of  circumstances  which  attend  and  follow  it.  2.  Consider  it  in  the  series  and 
order  of  it.  It  comes  in  the  last  place,  as  a  reserve,  when  nothing  else  would  do 
any  good  upon  them.  3.  The  causes  moving  God  to  so  much  severity  in  His 
judgment.  These  are  the  greatness  of  the  sins  committed  against  Him.  But 
it  is  not  enough  in  general  to  declaim  against  our  sins,  we  must  search  out  particu- 
larly those  predominant  vices  which  by  their  boldness  and  frequency  have  provoked 
God  thus  to  pimish  us.  Three  sorta  of  sins  are  here  spoken  of.  Luxury  and  ' 
intemperance  ;  covetousness  and  oppression  ;  contempt  of  God  and  Hia  laws 
4.  The  Author  of  the  judgment.  God  challenges  the  execution  of  His  justice 
to  Himself,  not  only  in  the  great  day,  but  in  His  judgment  here  in  the  world. 
When  God  is  pleased  to  punish  men  for  their  sins,  the  execution  of  His  justice 
is  agreeable  to  His  nature  now,  as  it  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  world.  II.  The 
MIXTURE  OF  His  mercy  in  it.  "  Ye  were  as  a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  burn- 
ing." Note — 1.  The  nearness  they  were  in  to  the  danger.  Like  a  brand,  the 
greatest  part  of  which  is  already  consumed  by  fire.  This  shows  the  great  difficulty 
of  their  escaping.  2.  The  unexpectedness  of  such  a  deliverance.  They  are  not 
saved  by  their  own  skill  and  counsel,  nor  by  their  strength  and  industry,  but  by 
Him  who,  by  His  mighty  hand,  did  pluck  them  as  firebrands  out  of  the  burning. 
Though  we  own  the  justice  of  God  in  the  calamities  of  this  day,  let  us  not  forget 
His  mercy  in  what  He  hath  unexpectedly  rescued  from  the  fury  of  the  flames. 
Let  us  then  not  frustrate  the  design  of  so  much  severity  mixed  with  so  great 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv 

mercy.  Let  it  never  be  said  that  neither  judgments  nor  kindness  will  work 
upon  us.  We  have  cause  enough  for  mourning  and  lamentation.  Let  us  meet 
God  now  by  oiu:  repentance,  and  return  to  Him,  by  our  serious  humiliation  for 
our  former  sins,  and  our  steadfast  resolution  to  return  no  more  to  the  practice 
of    them.      (Bishop    Stillingfleet. )  The  fire  of    iniquity  : — Many  figures    are 

employed  to  represent  the  evil  of  sin.  But  even  the  most  suggestive  are  inade- 
quate. "  Fire  "  is  very  suggestive.  I.  Both  fibb  and  sin  are  involved  in 
MUCH  MYSTERY.  No  inspection,  or  speculation,  can  determine  the  weight,  colour, 
consuming  power,  &c.,  of  fire.  Thus  with  the  "  fire  of  iniquity,"  there  is  much 
that  is  unaccountable  connected  with  its  origin,  constitution,  and  processes  of 
ruin  ;  but  none  can  doubt  the  terrible  fact  of  its  existence.  II.  Both  find  beady 
AND  ABUNDANT  FOOD  FOB  THE  FLAMES.  Matter  imiversally  possesses  the  property 
of  heat  in  various  degrees.  Human  nature  is  morally  of  an  inflammable  character, 
and  universally  so.  It  is  only  a  question  of  time  in  the  instance  of  every  life, 
when  the  hidden  properties  of  sin  develop  in  active,  visible  form.      III.  The 

MOST    DISASTBOUS    FIBES   ABE    OFTEN   FROM   SMALLEST    BEGINNINGS.      A   Sweeping 

conflagration  that  in  two  hours  transformed  an  American  town  into  a  waste  of 
smolving  ruins,  had  its  beginning  in  an  unseen  flame  in  a  small  upper  storey. 
It  is  in  the  apparently  harmless  beginnings  of  impure  thoughts,  and  unholy  desires, 
and  little  sins  that  the  desolating  fires  of  iniquity  have  their  rise.  IV.  Supebiob 
wobth  of  objects  does  NOT  EXEMPT  FEOM  ATTACK  AND  BUiN.  Everything  suc- 
cumbs to  fire.  This  is  as  sadly  true  of  the  fires  of  sin.  It  would  seem  that  the 
brightest  genius,  the  noblest  heart,  and  the  most  promising  talent  were  the 
especial  victims  of  the  arch-fiend.  Satan  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  for  the  rich 
and  poor,  high  and  low,  ignorant  and  intelligent,  useless  and  useful  are  drawn 
upon  as  fuel  to  feed  his  merciless  flames.  V.  Means  of  defence  aee  provided 
against  the  ravages  of  this  monster.  Fire-engines,  fire-escapes,  &c.  Neither 
has  God  left  humanity  destitute  of  means  for  the  defence  of  the  soul  exposed 
to  Satan's  flames.  A  fountain  has  been  opened,  the  waters  of  salvation,  the 
means  of  grace,  the  Church,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  all  these  are  given  us  in  liberal 
provision,  that  the  fires  of  sin  may  be  quenched.  Have  we  been  rescued  ?  There 
are  many  others  yet  enveloped  in  the  flames  of  sin.  "  Pulling  them  out  of 
the  fire  "  is  the  work  of  next  importance.  God  demands  this  at  our  hands. 
(W.  0.  Thrall.)  The  strange  parallel  between  fire  and  sin: — All  nature  has 
its  lessons.  Fire  is  a  most  expressive  emblem.  What  is  there  in  the  moral  world 
to  which  it  answers  ?  It  is  a  terrible  agent ;  it  is  all  activity.  It  tends  to  con- 
sume and  to  ruin  whatever  it  touches.  All  life  perishes  when  involved  in  it. 
But  before  that  end  comes  it  inflicts  the  keenest  torture.  And  its  inherent 
tendency  is  to  spread.  Let  it  alone,  and  with  a  field  before  it,  its  ravages  will 
be  terrible  and  complete.  It  must  be  resisted,  fought  with,  mastered,  and  over- 
come. One  thing  in  the  moral  world  answers  to  it.  Sin  against  God,  sin  in  a 
man's  life.  I.  The  analogy  between  fire  and  sin.  1.  You  cannot  weigh 
fire  in  the  scales.  You  cannot  grasp  it.  Yet  you  would  call  the  man  absurd 
or  a  fool  who  should  deny  its  existence.  So  it  is  with  sin.  You  cannot  take 
hold  of  it,  but  you  can  see  the  desolation  and  the  ravages  it  makes.  It  is  a  fact 
which  no  man  can  dispute.  2.  Fire  sometimes  becomes  almost  invisible.  At 
noonday  its  flame  grows  indistinct,  but  the  pillar  of  cloud  rises  over  it  and  marks 
the  spot.  So  it  is  with  sin.  Some,  in  the  glare  and  noonday  of  their  busy  life, 
fail  to  see  it.  The  dimness  of  religious  truth  to  their  minds  is  a  terrible  monitor 
of  what  sin  is  doing  in  their  hearts.  3.  Sin  is  like  fire  in  its  attractions.  A  little 
child  loves  to  play  with  fire,  careless  or  unconscious  of  the  danger.  So  it  is  that 
men  toy  with  sin.  They  see  its  brilliant  forms,  its  beautiful  but  deadly  blaze, 
and  fall  in  love  with  it.  The  moth  loves  the  flame.  Men  are  drawn  to  sin  by 
its  pleasing,  winning  aspect.  It  has  indulgence  for  appetite  ;  mirth,  wit,  and 
humour,  to  amuse  and  gratify  ;  feasts  for  gluttons  ;  splendour  for  pride  ;  revelry 
for  the  reckless.  4.  Sin  is  like  fire  in  its  consuming  power.  In  a  short  time  the 
flames  wiU  turn  the  grandest  and  most  imposing  fabric  of  human  hands  into  a 
heap  of  smouldering  rubbish.  Sin  will  do  the  same  thing,  only  it  burns  down 
men.  The  soul  cannot  be  burned.  But  what  no  furnace  seven  times  heated 
can  do,  sin  will.  It  can  burn  the  soul  down  to  an  eternal  ruin.  It  has  done 
it.  It  can  set  it  all  ablaze  with  imholy  desires  ;  with  lust,  envy,  pride,  selfishness, 
avarice,  malice,  and  all  manner  of  iniquity.  It  can  burn  out  of  it  all  the  elements 
of  reflection,  sensibility,  principle,  and  reverence  for  God.  And  it  is  not  gross 
passions  alone  that  will  burn  down  the  soul.     You  can  kindle  with  shavings 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  49 

as  well  as  with  pitch  and  tar.  You  can  desecrate  the  soul  by  vain  and  selfish 
thoughts  as  well  as  by  criminal  deeds.  5.  Sin  is  like  flame,  because  it  spreads, 
and  tends  to  spread.  One  s}  ark  is  enough  to  kindle  a  fire  that  would  burn  down 
all  London.  And  so  one  wicked  thought,  or  evil  suggestion  or  temptation,  has 
been  the  spark  that  has  kindled  the  fires  of  sin  in  the  soul  till  it  glowed  like  a 
furnace,  or  has  set  the  whole  community  in  a  blaze  of  passion.  A  bad  man  is 
always  going  on  from  bad  to  worse.  6.  Sin  is  like  fire  in  the  pain  it  inflicts.  What 
bodily  smart  or  anguish  is  like  that  of  fire  ?  It  is  the  most  perfect  of  all  kinds 
of  tort'; re.  Lay  a  wicked  deed'  on  a  man's  conscience,  and  how  it  blisters  it ! 
It  burns,  and  stings,  and  agonises  its  victim.  It  overwhelms  him  with  anguish 
and  remorse.  Nothing  can  make  a  man  so  unhappy  as  his  sin.  7.  Sin  is  like 
fire,  because  it  defaces  whatever  it  touches.  Everything  fair  and  beautiful  withers 
before  fire.  So  sin  blights  the  fairest  landscapes.  8.  Sin  is  like  fire,  because  it 
must  be  resist  d.  Sin  is  an  evil  to  be  contended  with  in  heart  and  in  life.  It 
must  be  resisted,  or  it  will  consume  the  soul.  9.  Sin  is  like  fire,  because  if  you 
wait  too  long  before  you  attempt  to  bring  it  under,  the  attempt  is  useless.  The 
time  comes  when  fire  gets  the  upper  hand.  So  the  soul  may  be  left  till  sin  has 
got  the  mastery.  II.  It  is  the  sinner  that  is  the  fitel.  1.  A  firebrand  is  a 
combustible  material.  It  could  be  burned.  So  it  is  with  the  sinner's  heart. 
It  can  burn  with  unhallowed  passions.  2.  A  firebrand  has  been  already  exposed 
to  the  fire.  So  is  the  sinner's  heart.  Unruly  desires  and  unhallowed  aims  have 
burned  into  it,  and  you  can  find  no  one  who  has  not  sinned.  3.  A  firebrand  has 
offered  no  effectual  resistance  to  the  flames.  And  the  sinner  has  not  resisted 
the  fires  of  sin  as  he  should  have  done.  4.  A  firebrand  is  ready  to  be  kindled 
anew,  even  after  it  has  been  once  quenched.  And  a  spark  of  temptation  may 
set  the  sinner  ablaze  again.  It  needs  to  be  kept  and  guarded  well.  5.  A  firebrand 
is  already  in  the  process  of  being  consumed,  and  a  little  longer  time  will  finish  it. 
So  with  the  sinful  heart ;  the  progress  of  the  fire  has  been  rapid,  and  its  work  will 
soon  be  done.  6.  A  firebrand  needs  only  to  be  let  alone,  and  it  will  burn  to  ashes. 
Leave  the  soul  in  its  sin — leave  it  to  the  ruinous,  consuming  power  of  its  own 
lusts,  and  its  ruin  will  be  complete.  7.  A  firebrand  is  a  dangerous  thing  if  its 
sparks  and  coals  come  in  contact  with  anything  else ;  and  so  Scripture  declares 
that  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good.  III.  But  even  firebrands  may  be 
SAVED.  Desperate  as  their  condition  is,  they  are  sometimes  plucked  from  the 
burning,  and  their  flames  are  quenched.  So  it  is  with  sinners.  How  were  they 
delivered  ?  Did  they  save  themselves  ?  As  well  might  the  fu-ebrand  put  out 
its  own  fires.  The  work  is  God's.  The  converted  soul  is  a  miracle  of  grace. 
He  interposes.  It  is  by  His  Word  enlightening  the  mind.  His  Spirit  convincing 
of  sin,  and  His  grace  renewing  the  soul  that  the  work  is  accomplished. 
(E.A.  Oillett.) 

Ver.  12.  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God.  —  Preparation  for  judgment : — We  will 
endeavour  to  enforce  the  exhortation  of  the  text  m  a  series  of  arguments, 
illustrating  the  reasons  why  due  obedience  and  attention  should  be  given  to  this 
command  of  the  great  Omnipotent.  1.  Because  we  shall  most  certainly  be 
summoned  to  His  tribunal.  "  We  must  all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ."  Do  you  believe  this  awful  fact  ?  You  shall  meet  God,  to  give  an  account 
of  every  thought,  word,  and  deed.  Are  you  seeking  a  preparation  for  this  dreadful 
period  ?  The  very  idea  of  standing  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  should 
so  overpower  the  mind  with  its  awfulness  that  every  moment  should  be  busily 
employed  in  preparing  for  that  hour.  2.  Because  we  shall  then  receive  our  ever- 
lasting destiny.  Then  we  shall  know  our  irreversible  fate.  The  condition  after 
judgment  is  unchangeable.  3.  Because  our  time  on  earth  is  short  and  uncertain. 
4.  On  account  of  the  promised  blessedness  and  happiness  of  heaven.  The  reward 
of  glory,  honour,  and  eternal  life  awaits  those  who  have  made  due  preparation 
to  dwell  in  the  celestial  kingdom.  (J.  M.  Burton.)  A  call  to  remember  God:-— 
To  prepare  to  meet  Him  implies  a  firm  belief  of  His  approach,  and  careful  considera- 
tion in  what  way  best  to  receive  it.  This  precept  is  often  applied  to  the  idea 
of  meeting  God  in  another  world.  But  we  may  apply  the  lessons  of  this  teaching 
to  what  goes  on  in  this  world.  How  may  we  "  prepare  to  meet  oiir  God  "  as  He 
comes  near  to  us  ?  I.  During  our  probation  on  earth.  1.  In  the  way  of 
repentance.  God  reveals  Himself  to  us  as  willing  and  waiting  to  be  gracious  ; 
He  calls  on  the  careless  and  impenitent  to  meet  Him  in  mercy,  and  tells  them 
to  do  so— (1)  Quickly.     (2)  Carefully.     (3)  Decidedly.     2.  In  the  way  of  temporal 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

blessings-     Then  we  should  meet  Him  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude  and  praise.     3.  In 
the  way  of  temporal  sorrow.     Sorrow  is  often  represented  in  Scripture  under  the 
idea  of  the  clouds,  the  whirlwind,  and  the  storm.     (1)  Endeavour  to  turn  judgment 
aside  by  humble  prayer.     (2)  Bear  it  as  coming  from  God.     4.  In  the  use  of  the 
means  of  grace.     Men  often  lose  much  from  not  preparing  to  meet  God  in  His 
own  ordinances.      Prepare  to  meet  Him— (1)  With  reverence  and  godly  fear. 
(2)  With  earnest  expectation.     5.   In  the  works  of  righteousness.     II.   After 
THE  TIME  OF  OUR  PROBATION  IS  OVER.     1.  Very  solcmn  and  awakening  is  the 
thought  of  meeting  God  at  that  moment,  when  every  earthly  prop  will  have  been 
taken  away  from  the  soul,  and  the  veil  of  flesh  removed,  and  every  delusion  will 
have  vanished  for  ever.     Remember  this  in  the  midst  of  the  engrossing  concerns 
of  this  uncertain  life.     Realise  that  you  are  only  strangers  and  pilgrims  here. 
2.  After  death  comes  judgment,  when  we  must  "  be  made  manifest "  before  the 
tribunal   of  Christ.     Prepare   for   that  day.     Judge   yourselves  now.     {Viiicent 
W.  Ryan,  M.A.)        The  great  meeting  : — I.  God  meets  us  now,  and  wb  meet 
Him  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners.     If  in  His  own  appointed  ordin- 
ances we  draw  nigh  to  Him,  it  is  our  privilege  to  feel  assured  that  He  will  most 
certainly  draw  nigh  to  us.     But  there  must  be  antecedent  preparation.     God 
meets  us  in  the  time  of  trial,  and  we  should  prepare  to  meet  Him.     We  should 
carefully  and  honestly  examine  ourselves — search,  as  before  Him,  our  thoughts, 
feelings,  opinions,  and  habits.     There  are  temporal  blessings  in  which  Grod  meets 
us,  and  in  which  we  should  prepare  ourselves  to  meet  Him,  by  habitually  cherishing 
a  contented  and  thankful  spirit.     11.  GoD  meets  us  hereafter.     That  meeting 
is  certain.     The  doctrine  of  a  future  judgment  is,  no  doubt,  peculiar  to  Divine 
revelation,  but  it  receives  the  strongest  confirmation  from  the  natural  conscience. 
It  well-nigh  overwhelms  the  mind  to  think  of  the  disclosures  of  the  great  day. 
The  final  inquisition  shall  be  spiritual.     We  all  admit  that  the  character  of  an 
act  is  determined  by  the  motive  in  which  it  originates.     God  will  then  "  make 
manifest  the  coimsels  of  our  hearts."     There  is  in  this  much  call  for  alarm,  but 
there  is  also  abvmdant  consolation.     To  the  ungodly  there  cannot  but  be  something 
terrible  in  these  words,  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God."     How  unbearable  is  the 
thought  when  it  flashes  even  for  a  moment  on  the  guilty  conscience,  "  Thou  God 
seest  me  "  !     We  must  remember  that  our  probation  is  limited  to  this  present 
life.     We  must  prepare  to  meet  our  God  now  or  never.     {R.  W.  Forrest,  M.A.) 
Prepare : — How  often  have  these  words  been  turned  into  words  of  terror ;  how 
many  noble  discourses  have  been  preached  from  this  text  which  had  no  relation 
whatever  to  its  meaning  !     This  is  the  voice  of  love.     All  pimishment  has  failed — 
what  now  is  to  be  done  ?     Something  larger,  nobler.      '  Prepare  to  meet  thy 
God."     "  Prepare  "  :  there  is  forewarning.     When  God  forewarns  He  means  to 
give  us  every  opportunity  of  repentance  ;  if  He  wjere  not  determined  upon  giving 
us  every  opportunity  He  would  plunge  upon  us  without  warning,  and  carry  us 
away  as  a  flood  in  the  night-time.     The  very  word  "  prepare  "  so  used  in  this 
relation  is  itself  a  Gospel  term.     "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God."     Still  it  is  "  thy 
God."     Men  give  up  God,  but  does  God  give  up  them  ?     They  forget  that  there 
is  a  double  relation.     Imagine  not  that  God  is  moved  by  yoiu:  fickle  changefulness. 
You  may  have  renounced  God,  but  God  has  not  renounced  you.     {Joseph  Parker, 
D.D.)        Reverence  and  preparation  : — The  words  of  Amos,  as  they  are  imderstood 
by  Christendom,  bidding  us  prepare  for  a  final  and  extraordinary  meeting  with 
God,  appeal  to  our  sense  of  prudence  and  to  our  sense  of  justice.     The  words 
rouse  these  original  instincts  of  the  human  soul  to  a  new  acthrity.     Behind  the 
sense  of  justice  and  of  prudence  there  is  in  the  soul  of  man  another  feeling,  more 
indefinite,  yet  not  less  real  than  these — the  sense  of  awe  or  reverence.     Fear, 
love,  and  admiration  enter  into  reverence  in  different  proportions,  but  it  cannot 
be  identified  with  any  one  of  them.     It  is   the  virtuous  emotion  whereby  the 
soul   of   man   sincerely  acknowledges   the   presence  of  greatness.     Reverence   is 
not  in  any  sense  a  fictitious  sort  of  virtue.     Some  think  reverence  is  the  upshot 
of  artificial  circumstances,  of  artificial  and  stinted  convictions,  a  fruit  of  narrow 
associations,  of  subjection  to  characters  and  to  traditions  of  a  particular  tjrpe. 
But  reverence,  like  all  virtue  that  deserves  the  name,  is  based  on  truth.     And 
it  is  not  exclusively,  or  even  chiefly,  ecclesiastical  excellence.     Tt  is  true  that  the 
Church  of  Christ  is  the  great  school  of  reverence,  because,  within  it,  the  highest 
and  most  commanding  greatness  is  continually  presented  to  the  soul  of  man. 
But  reverence,  as  a  human  excellence,  is  older  than  the  Church,  older  than  Chris- 
tianity, older  than  revelation ;  it  is  as  old  as  the  idea  that  there  is  anything  in 


CHAP.  IV.]  -41/05.  61 

existence  that  is  greater  than  man.     The  first  school  of  reverence  which  has 
been  provided  for  us  is  the  natural  world  around  us.     :^  an  feels,  behind  nature, 
a  higher  power  of  some  kind,  which  appeals   to  his  sense  of  greatness.     In  the 
absence  of  revelation,  the  mystery  of  the  natural  world  has  led  to  abundant  error 
and  degradation.     Nature  is,  in  a  way,  God's  first  revelation  to  man.     It  is  our 
first  teacher  of  that  practical  sense  of  a  higher  greatness  which  we  call  reverence. 
The  lesson  is  learned  more  effectively  from  man  himself.     Man  becomes  an  object 
of  reverence  whenever  a  higher  greatness  than  his  own  rests  upon  him ;  and  it 
may  do  this  in  one  of  two  ways,  as  the  greatness  of  office,  or  the  greatness  of 
character.     High  office,  always  and  everywhere,  is  a  shadow  of  the  majesty  of 
God.     But  character  commands  reverence  more  than  office.     Office  is  in  a  sense 
outside  a  man,  character  is  himself.     Conspicuous  goodness,  in  every  age,  compels 
reverence.      Aristides,  by  his  justice ;    Scipio,   by  his  chastity ;    Cato,   by  his 
inflexibility.     Nor   is  reverence   less   due   to  great  names  because  it  has  been 
exaggerated.     Exaggeration  becomes  impossible  when  we  remember  that  the  true 
object  to  which  reverence  is  due  is  nothing  in  the  man  himself,  as  it  is  not  anything 
in  nature  herself.     It  is  that  higher  greatness  which  in  both  may  be  discovered 
beyond.     Reverence  is  no  mere  inoperative  sentiment  when  it  is  sincere.     It 
carries  with   it    practical    consequences.     Hence   the   extreme   importance   that 
the  objects  of  reverence  should  be,  as  far  as  may  be,  worthy  of  it.     That  one 
human  form,  one  human  character  might  command  a  boundless  reverence,  the 
Infinite  Being  submitted  Himself  to  bonds,  and  appeared  among  us  in  a  created 
form,  that  in  Him  all  Christian  reverence  might  centre.     Below  the  throne  of 
Jesus  Christ  reverence  is  always  paid  to  a  greatness  distinct  from  and  beyond 
the  object  which  immediately  provokes  it ;  it  is  paid  to  God.     Behind  nature 
we  find  the  omnipotence  of  God ;  behind  human  office  the  authority  of  God  ; 
behind  human  character,  in  its  highest  forms,  the  holiness  of  God.     We  do  not 
yet  see  God,  we  feel  God.     Amos  knows  the  difference  between  that  sort  of  appre- 
hension of  God  which  is  common  among  men ;  between  talking  about  Him  as 
men  do,   and  "  meeting "   Him.     Israel  was  irreverent,  and  Amos  bids  Isrtiel 
prepare  to  meet  its  God  in  quite  a  different  sense  to  that  in  which  He  had  been 
met  either  at  Bethel  or  Samaria  in  the  prosperous  days  which  were  drawing  to 
their  close.     Israel  was  to  meet  Him  in  suffering.     Suffering  strips  off  from  the 
eye  the  conventional  films  which  hide  out  God ;  it  brings  us  face  to  face  with 
Him.     So,  too,  with  us  Christians  as  to  death  and  judgment.     How  are  we  to 
be  educated  for  the  sight  of  God  after  death  ?     Chiefly  by  worship.     Religion 
is  neither  morality  nor  worship.     It  is  the  relation  which  binds  the  soul  to  God, 
of  which  religion   morality  is  a  necessary  symptom,  and  worship  a  necessary 
exercise.     But  who  ever  heard  of  anything  that  could  be  caUed  religion  which 
was  without  a  worship  ?     Worship    is    the    highest    expression    of    reverence. 
Worship  is  an  education  for  the  inevitable  future,  a  training  of  the  soul's  eye 
to  bear  the  brightness  of   the  everlasting  sun.     (Canon  Liddon.)        Prepare  to 
meet  Ood  : — Mere  belief  in  the  existence  of  the  Deity  may  be  the  belief  of  the 
basest  sinner.     If  my  faith  in  God  is  not  influencing  my  heart  and  my  conduct 
God  ward,  so  far  as  my  spiritual  condition  is  concerned,  I  might  just  as  well 
have  been  born  a  heathen.     Why  should  you  prepare  to  meet  God  ?     1.  Because 
you  must  meet  Him.     There  are  a  thousand  things  we  can  refrain  from  doing. 
Men  can  refuse  to  pray ;  refuse  to  repent  and  reform  their  ways  ;  refuse  to  make 
confession  of  Christ:  but  there  is  one  thing  they  cannot  refuse  to  do, — they  cannot 
refuse  to  meet  God.     The  call  of  death  all  must  hear  and  obey.     2.  Because  you 
may  have  to  meet  Him  soon.     The  time  is  uncertain.     Delay  in  other  matters 
is  sometimes  prudence  ;  but  in  all  that  relates  to  the  safety  of  the  soul,  delay 
is   dangerous,   and   indifference  is  inimical   to   the   highest   well-being  of  man. 

3.  Because  you  will  have  to  meet  Him  alone.  We  meet  in  crowds  now ;  but 
as   individuals  then.     We  must  all  die  alone  ;    we  must  all  meet  God  alone. 

4.  Because  to  meet  Him  unprepared  will  be  the  greatest  calamity  of  your  beino-. 
How  will  you  meet  your  Maker  if  you  neglect  the  preparation?  "  What  shail  be 
the  end  of  them  that  obey  not  the  Gospel  ?  "  (Enoch  D.  Solomon.)  The 
solemn  warning  : — I.   An  interview  between  God  and  man  is  inevitable. 

II.    PbEPAEATION    is    necessary    to    make    these    meetings    safe    and    HAPPy. 

1.  A  preparation  of  sincere  repentance.  2.  A  preparation  of  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.  3.  A  preparation  of  regeneration.  4.  The  preparation  of  good  works. 
Not  works  of  merit ;  but  works  of  goodness,  produced  in  us  by  His  Holy  Spirit. 
Works  of  devotion  to  God,  and  beneficence  and  compassion  to  men.     III.  Uegh. 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

THE  ADMONITION  OF  THE  TEXT.  1.  Prepare  scripturally.  2.  Prepare  earnestly. 
3.  Prepare  immediately.  4.  Let  all  prepare.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Preparation 
for  meeting  Ood  in  the  afflictions  and  judgments  of  His  hand  : — I.  Prepare  to 

MEET  THY  GOD,   0  ISRAEL,   ACKNOWLEDGE  WHO  IT  IS  THAT  IS  COME  OUT  AGAINST 

theb.  Stop  not  at  second  causes — dwell  not  and  trifle  not  about  petty  and 
subordinate  excuses.  Acknowledge  God  to  be  the  author  of  the  calamity.  It 
is  His  providence — His  hand — His  voice.  II.  Acknowledge  thy  inability  to 
MEET  Him.  How  can  man  meet  and  bear  and  endure  and  sustain  the  judgments 
of  his  Creator  ?  Our  weakness  being  too  great — our  guilt  too  apparent — our 
folly  too  monstrous.  III.  The  abasing  of  ourselves  before  God  in  tbub 
penitence.  Abase  thyself  before  Him — return  from  all  thy  transgressions — 
cast  away  your  idols — retiirn  unto  G<3d,  and  seek  His  face.  IV.  We  must  cast 
OURSELVES  UPON  His  GRACE  AND  MERCY  IN  Jesus  Christ.  Prepare  to  meet  thy 
God  by  throwing  thyself  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross — and  by  relying  on  justification 
and  acceptance  in  the  atoning  blood  and  meritorious  propitiation  and  sacrifice 
of  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  (Z).  Wilson. )  God's  message  to  Israel : — Our  con- 
sideration is  called  to  the  coming  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
as  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  In  the  language  of  Scripture,  the  design  of  Almighty 
God  in  any  way  to  bless  or  to  punish  mankind  is  often  represented  by  the  declara- 
tion of  His  coming  among  them  for  that  purpose.  In  His  own  existence  God 
necessarily  fills  all  space,  and  is  at  all  times  equally  present  in  every  portion 
of  the  universe  which  He  hath  formed.  Yet  He  speaks  of  Himself  as  dwelling 
among  His  people,  departing  from  them,  &c.  All  these  forms  of  expression 
arise  from  the  peculiar  government  which  He  exercised  over  the  Israelites,  often 
called  a  theocracy.  Because  every  instrument,  either  of  good  or  evil,  was  powerful 
and  effectual  only  as  employed  by  Him.  God  is  also  said  to  have  personally  done 
that  which  was  done  by  His  permission.  While  God  warns  His  people  of  His 
approach,  either  for  purposes  of  mercy  or  judgment.  He  commands  them  also 
to  prepare  for  His  reception  ;  to  be  ready  to  meet  Him  with  that  reverence 
and  gratitude  and  submission  which  comported  with  His  high  authority,  and 
with  their  dependence  upon  His  power.  It  seems  that  the  afflictions  of  Israel 
had  not  been  allowed  by  them  to  produce  their  proper  effect,  in  bringing  them 
to  repentance.  God  threatens  them  therefore  with  further  execution  of  His 
determinations  for  punishment,  and  solemnly  admonishes  them  to  be  prepared 
for  His  coming.  I.  The  events  which  may  be  referred  to  as  the  coming  of 
God.  Two  great  events  referred  to  under  this  peculiar  designation.  The  advent 
of  God  in  His  Incarnation,  for  the  redemption  of  His  people.  And  the  second 
personal  advent  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  1.  The  first  advent  of 
God,  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  in  some  of  its  aspects,  may  be 
considered  as  a  past  event.  But,  in  regard  to  its  final  object,  the  accomplishment 
of  man's  salvation,  it  must  be  considered  as  enduring  until  every  ransomed  soul 
has  been  brought  home,  converted  from  the  world,  and  fxilly  devoted  to  God. 
The  great  purpose  of  this  coming  He  is  effecting  every  day.  But  to  the  heart  yet 
unchanged,  the  real  advent  of  Christ,  for  man's  salvation,  is  as  much  a  future 
event  as  it  was  to  Abraham.  2.  The  second  advent  is,  for  all  who  live  now,  a 
future  event ;  and  it  will  be  for  the  full  salvation  of  His  people,  for  the  universal 
judgment  of  the  world,  and  for  the  final  settlement  of  His  glorious  and  ever- 
lasting kingdom.  How  far  removed  this  day  is  neither  men  nor  angels  know. 
II.  The  state  of  mind  which  is  implied  in  this  call  for  preparation.  1.  In 
regard  to  His  first  advent,  a  Divine  messenger  was  sent  to  make  ready  His  way. 
The  same  work  of  preparation  must  be  finished  before  your  hearts  can  find  peace 
with  Him.  The  world  and  self  are  to  be  forsaken  and  denied.  Your  own 
righteousness,  as  a  ground  of  hope,  is  to  be  relinquished.  2.  In  regard  to  the 
second  coming  of  Christ,  the  exhortation  of  our  text  becomes  still  more  solemn 
and  important.  What  progress  in  holiness  shall  be  too  large  a  preparation  for 
that  momentous  hour  of  the  soul's  existence  ?  What  life  of  faith  can  be  too 
elevated  ?  What  heavenliness  of  character  can  be  too  exalted  ?  Personal 
holiness  and  active  beneficence  constitute  the  whole  amount  of  pure  and  undefiled 
religion,  as  exemplified  in  the  character  which  is  required  of  the  people  of  God. 
And  though  no  worth  can  appertain  to  either,  as  j)roceeding  from  an  imperfect 
and  sinful  being,  yet  undoubtedly,  the  higher  are  our  attainments  in  both,  the 
more  full  of  peace  and  comfort  will  our  souls  be,  at  the  coming  of  our  God.  In 
all  the  duties  of  a  holy,  active  life,  the  spiritual  Israel  is  to  be  prepared  to  meet 
their  God.     III.  The  character  under  which  God  will  come  to  His  spirituas 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  53 

Israel.  "  Thy  God."  Whether  He  comes  in  His  first,  or  in  His  second  advent. 
He  comes  as  a  Saviour  who  is  welcome  to  His  people  ;  He  is  their  God.  1.  God 
the  Saviour  is  ours,  by  His  own  electio  ^  of  us  to  be  His  people.  When  we  knew 
Him  not.  He  called  us  to  receive  the  fulness  of  His  grace.  2.  By  a  voluntary 
donation  of  Himself  for  us.  By  this  donation  of  Himself,  He  purchased  for 
Himself  a  peculiar  people,  who  shall  glorify  Him  on  the  earth,  and  become  par- 
takers of  His  glory  in  heaven.  3.  By  our  voluntary  acceptance  of  His  mercy. 
4.  By  the  personal  consecration  of  ourselves  to  His  service.  This  is  the  fourfold 
ground  of  that  reciprocal  property  which  subsists  between  God  and  His  people. 
But  we  must  consider  Him,  not  only  as  theirs,  but  as  their  "  God."  We  may 
be  joyful  in  our  King,  because  of  the  glorious  character  of  the  Being  whose  coming 
is  proclaimed.  IV.  What  will  be  the  results  of  His  coming  to  them  ?  1.  His 
first  advent  is  to  their  hearts,  with  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and  with 
Divine  power,  and  its  result  is,  that  they  are  born  again  and  made  new  creatures 
in  Christ  Jesus.  The  acceptance  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  great  ofiices 
which  He  exercises  for  men,  is  the  characteristic  distinction  of  the  people  of  God ; 
the  grand  discriminating  mark  of  converted  souls.  2.  Then,  being  redeemed, 
there  will  be  nothing  disheartening  or  terrible  in  His  second  coming  to  finish. 
His  purposes  of  love  for  us.  The  text  having  thus  far  been  applied  to  spiritual 
Israel,  may  now  be  applied  to  idolatrous  Israel.  To  this  class  it  is  the  solemn 
warning  of  an  approaching  judgment.  1.  This  text,  as  a  warning,  was  addressed 
to  those  whose  service  and  affections  had  been  voluntarily  withdrawn  from  the 
living  God,  and  devoted  to  objects  prohibited  by  Him.  The  Israelites  had  openly 
established  idolatrous  worship  in  the  land  ;  and  had  secretly  withdrawn  their 
hearts  from  God,  even  while  professing  outwardly  to  serve  Him.  Every  uncon- 
verted man  is  really  an  idolater.  The  covetousness  of  the  world  is  idolatry. 
The  proud,  the  vain,  the  envious,  are  aU  idolaters.  It  is  the  voluntary  idolatry 
of  men's  hearts  which  forms  the  guiltiness  of  their  unconverted  state.  2.  The 
exhortation  of  this  text  was  addressed  to  those  who  had  experienced  many 
chastising  visitations  from  Almighty  God  without  effect.  Every  painful  providence 
dispensed  to  man  is  either  a  blessing  or  a  curse.  If  it  merely  hardens  us  in  a 
state  of  sin,  it  is  a  pvmishment.  3.  The  warning  of  the  text  was  addressed  to 
those  who  had  been  the  peculiar  objects  of  Divine  forbearance,  without  repent- 
ance. V.  What  will  render  the  day  of  God's  coming  intolerable  to  those 
WHO  HAVE  DONE  EVIL,  and  who  must  be  ju^Iged  for  the  evil  which  they  have 
done.  1.  In  that  day  of  God's  coming,  you  will  think  of  the  clear  and  inestimable 
manifestations  of  Divine  love  which  you  have  neglected.  2.  You  will  think 
of  the  laborious  and  expensive  system  which  was  devised  and  executed  for  your 
redemption.  3.  The  recompense  of  that  dreadful  day  of  God's  coming  will  be 
further  aggravated  by  a  clear  view  of  the  dignity  of  that  holy  and  merciful  Being 
who  has  been  thus  despised.  4.  You  wiU  reflect  upon  His  long-contmued  forbear- 
ance, which  has  been  abused  and  exhausted  by  yoiu-  perverseness  in  sin.  Then 
I  entreat  you  to  look  at  the  character  of  your  own  lives,  and  see  if  you  are  prepared 
to  meet  your  God.  Whatever  be  the  outward  habits  of  your  lives,  whatever  the 
opinions  which  men  entertain  of  your  characters,  without  the  power  of  godliness 
in  your  souls  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  you  are  weighed  in  the  balance,  and 
foimd  wanting.  Acquire,  then,  this  spirit  of  true  religion.  Consider  the  value 
of  your  eternal  interests.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Preparation  to  meet  God  : — Is 
this  to  be  considered  the  language  of  irony  or  of  seriousness  ?  We  view  the  words 
seriously.  Not  as  an  insultation  over  their  weakness,  but  as  an  expression  of 
kindness  designed  to  hinder  the  misery  it  foretold.  The  Divine  threatenings 
are  always  conditional ;  either  stated  or  implied.  If  God  ever  takes  a  sinner 
by  surprise,  it  is  after  the  rejection  of  a  thousand  warnings  addressed  to  him. 
God  strikes  before  He  destroys,  and  He  speaks  before  He  strikes.  I.  God  is 
COMING.  Coming  to  apprehend,  and  to  punish,  without  repentance.  This  may 
be  applied  to  any  of  His  awful  dispensations.  To  destroy  nations,  in  ways  of 
spiritual  judgment.  God's  coming  to  judgment  is  rendered  reasonable  and 
probable  by  the  testimony  and  terrors  of  conscience.  And  this  eomipg  to  judg- 
ment is  rendered  certain  by  the  Word  of  God.  Here  is  an  event  in  which  we 
are  not  to  be  mere  spectators,  but  parties  deeply  concerned.  II.  We  ought 
to  be  prepared  to  meet  Him.  Attend  to  three  questions.  1.  Can  you  escape  ? 
2.  Can  you  contend  with  Him  ?     3.  Can  you  endure  Him  ?     III.  There  is  a 

PREPARATION  WHICH  WILL  ENABLE  US  TO  MEET   H IM  IN  SAFETY  AND  PEACE.       The 

Bible  tells  us  what  we  should  do,  and  assures  us  of  full  provision  for  all  that  we 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

aie  required  to  do.  1.  You  must  go  forth  with  the  world  behind  your  backs. 
2.  With  tears  in  your  eyes.  3.  With  ropes  upon  your  necks.  4.  With  a  petition 
in  your  hand.  5.  With  Christ  at  your  side.  Go  forth  thus  to  meet  Him,  and  He 
wiU  fully  pardon  you  and  welcome  you.  {William  Jay.)  Preparation  to 
meet  God : — I.  To  whom  may  this  command  bb  consideked  as  addressed  ? 
All  who  have  made  no  preparation  for  meeting  God.  1.  Those  who  have  designedly 
crowded  the  whole  subject  from  their  minds.  2.  Those  who  have  deferred  the 
subject  with  an  intention  to  prepare  at  a  future  time.  Tliey  have  some  sense 
of  the  importance  and  necessity  of  making  preparation.  3.  Those  who  spend 
their  time  in  preparing  for  other  things,  so  as  to  crowd  this  subject  out,  though 
without  any  specific  or  settled  intention  to  do  so.  4.  Those  who  have  given 
some  slight  attention  to  the  subject,  but  have  settled  down  on  that  which  will, 
in  fact,  constitute  no  preparation  when  they  come  to  appear  before  God.  They 
are  relying  on  some  delusive  views  and  hopes,  some  erroneous  doctrine  or  opinions  ; 
some  vague,  unsettled,  and  unsubstantial  feelings.  These  classes  embrace  a 
large  portion  of  the  human  family.  II.  Why  should  pbbpabation  be  hade 
TO  MEET  God  ?     1.  Because  it  is  to  be  our  first  interview  with  Him  face  to  face. 

2.  Because  we  shall  meet  Him  in  very  solemn  circumstances.  3.  Because  we  go 
there  on  a  very  solemn  errand.  4.  Because  God  has  solemnly  commanded  such 
preparation.  5.  Because  when  we  are  brought  before  Him,  it  will  be  too  late 
to  do  what  is  necessary  to  be  done.  III.  What  la  nkcessaey  to  bb  done  dt 
OKDER  TO  BE  PREPARED  TO  MEET  GoD  ?  Mere  bravery  or  courage  is  not  a  prepar- 
ation to  meet  God.  Not  more  is  he  prepared  to  meet  God  who  bids  defiance  to 
death.  Nor  is  studied  insensibility  in  death  the  proper  preparation.  1.  It  u 
necessary  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  No  one  is  prepared  to  meet  Him  to  whom 
He  is  a  stranger  or  a  foe.     2.  To  be  born  again  ;  to  be  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

3.  There  must  be  true  repentance  for  sin,  and  true  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  sum  of  what  I  say  is  this, — To  be  prepared  to  meet  God,  we  must  comply 
exactly  with  what  He  requires.  We  must  meet  His  terms.  No  one  need  ever 
to  have  made  any  mistake  on  this  point.  IV.  When  we  should  prepare  to 
MEET  God.  We  must  attend  to  it  to-day ;  we  must  defer  it  no  longer.  The 
Bible  requires  it  to  be  done  at  once ;  it  demands  that  everything  else  shonld 
give  way  for  it ;  that  this  day  may  end  your  probation  ;  and  that  there  is  slender 
probability  of  preparation  being  made  on  a  dying  bed.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  The 
advent  message  : — These  words  contain  the  two  elements  of  all  advent  thoughts, — 
the  promise  of  a  coming,  and  the  exhortation  to  prepare  for  that  coming.  The 
one  great  difference  between  Christianity  and  all  other  forms  of  life  and  thought 
is,  that  the  former  has  an  advent  in  it,  and  that  the  latter  have  not.  Christ 
taught  men  to  look  forward.  In  other  life  there  is  no  such  definite  spirit  of 
anticipation.  The  plans  of  those  who  consider  themselves  progressive  men 
are  often  more  destructive  than  constructive.  All  true  progress,  either  conscious 
or  unconscious,  voluntary  or  compulsory,  can  be  defined  as  God  and  man  meeting 
together.  To  some  advent  lessons  of  preparation  for  meeting  our  God  let  atten- 
tion be  given.  There  is  always  a  generation  that  is  growing  up,  preparing  for 
the  world,  as  we  say.  But  what  is  this  for  which  they  are  preparing  ?  "  Prepare 
to  meet  thy  God  "  presents  a  very  different  ideal.  It  supposes  that  the  world 
of  men  and  women,  of  events  and  circumstances,  was  made  and  is  controlled 
by  God.  He  is  in  it.  Behind  all  its  more  evident  aspects  He  exists  as  a  great 
power  which  is  unlimited  in  its  plans,  and  immeasured  in  its  force.  Into  such 
a  world  we  are  called  to  enter,  and  for  preparation  toward  such  a  destiny  are 
needed  spiritual  acquirements, — the  power  of  patience  and  self-denial,  the 
accurate  perception  of  what  is  for  and  what  is  against  God's  glory,  the  possession 
of  firm  principle  and  courageous  faith  to  resist  the  wrong  and  to  assist  the  good. 
How  many  men  have  failed  in  the  world  for  want  of  just  those  things  !  The 
whole  moral  aspect  of  life  was  obscured  to  them.  The  advent  message  brings 
back  the  true  ideal.  Its  message  is — Before  us  is  God.  Do  not  treat  life  as  an 
earthly  and  insignificant  thing ;  but  at  every  step  be  sure  that  there  is  present 
the  power  of  God,  demanding  our  most  complete  preparation  for  what  it  laya 
upon  us.  The  preparation  for  such  daily  meetings  with  God  is  a  wide  one.  It 
neglects  none  of  the  ordinary  preparations,  in  body,  mind,  and  spirit ;  for  every 
emergency  requiring  wisdom  and  power,  it  adds  to  that,  it  crowns  it  all,  with  that 
preparation  of  spirit,  trained  by  intercourse  with  God  Himself,  in  the  closet, 
in  the  Church,  by  prayer,  and  by  meditation,  that  we  may  be  able  to  recognise 
His  coming,  and  to  do  Mis  wilL     "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God  "  is  a  command  whick. 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  55 

when  we  have  once  heard  it  clearly  in  Christian  revelation,  can  be  heard  re-echoed 
from  all  the  surrounding  points  of  human  Ufe.  The  words  of  the  text  also  relate 
to  death.  Religion  did  not  make  the  grave ;  it  only  foimd  it,  and  declared  how 
it  could  be  received.  Something  besides  earth  claims  us,  and  we  must  go  forth 
to  meet  it.  It  is  the  Gospel  which  says,  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God."  Let 
that  day  not  come  upon  you  unawares,  as  a  thief  in  the  night ;  refuse  to  be  snared 
by  and  identified  with  that  bodily  life  which  must  fail  you  ;  live  by  the  power 
of  Him  who  came  from  heaven,  and  took  flesh  upon  Him,  only  that  by  that  life 
in  the  flesh  He  might  do  the  will  of  His  Father,  and  call  men  back  to  Him. 
{Arthur  Brooks.)  Preparation  to  meet  Ood : — The  whole  business  which  we 
have  in  the  world  is  this,  to  prepare  to  meet  God.  This  is  the  meanmg  of  the 
whole  Bible,  to  warn  us  that  we  must  meet  God,  and  to  afford  us  every  assistance 
and  encotuagement  in  this  preparation.  It  is  this  in  which  mankind  differs 
from  all  other  creatures  of  God  which  we  know  of.  Angels  have  not  this  call 
made  to  them.  Brute  creatures  have  not  to  appear  before  Him.  Every  man 
that  is  born  must  at  last  come  into  His  presence.  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His 
coming  ?  "  Our  Lord's  warning  is,  "  Be  ye  ready  1  "  What  it  will  be  to  "  meet 
our  God  "  no  heart  of  man  can  conceive  ;  for  what  thought  of  man  can  ever 
understand  what  God  is  ?  But  we  may  come  to  know  Him  even  in  this  world 
far  more  than  we  think  we  can,  as  He  is  revealed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  The 
thought  of  meeting  God  is  of  itself  so  awful,  that  we  might  have  been  disposed 
to  sit  down  in  despair  at  the  contemplation  of  it,  were  it  not  for  this  access  to 
the  Father  which  we  have  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  of  infinite  consequence  that 
we  should  be  prepared,  "  lest  that  day  should  overtake  us  unawares."  And 
we  know  in  what  way  we  are  to  be  prepared,  what  the  things  are  which  will  be 
required  of  us.  We  cannot  undo  the  past,  which  must  all  come  before  the  all- 
seeing  eye  of  the  Judge  ;  but  during  the  little  time  that  remains  to  us  we  can 
earnestly  ask  forgiveness,  with  fastings,  and  prayers,  and  tears,  for  the  sake  of 
Christ ;  and  thus  we  may,  with  God's  mercy,  gain  some  hope  and  comfort  before 
we  die.  (Plain  Sermons  by  Contrih.  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times")  Preparation 
for  eternity  : — I.  To  whom  this  command  applies.  It  is  applicable  to  all  those 
who  have  not  made  any  preparation.  1.  There  are  those  who  have  not  made 
religion  a  personal  matter.  2.  Those  who  defer  the  subject  with  the  intention 
of  preparing  at  some  future  time.  3.  Those  who  are  so  engrossed  with  other 
matters  as  to  banish  this  subject  from  their  minds.  4.  Those  who  have  given 
some  attention  to  religion.  II.  In  what  does  such  preparation  consist  ? 
This  is  an  important  question.  It  does  not  consist  in  courage  or  bravery.  Not 
in  infidel  stoicism.  Not  in  beauty,  wealth,  &c.  Not  in  amiability,  honesty, 
justice,  a  fair  character.  Two  great  difficulties  stand  between  a  siimer  and  heaven  : 
a  legal  one — man  is  a  condemned  sinner ;  a  moral  one — man  is  unholy.  Justi- 
fication will  remove  the  legal  difficulty ;  and  regeneration  will  remove  the  moral 
one.  Justification  is  that  which  God  does  for  us  ;  regeneration,  that  which  He 
does  in  us.  III.  Some  reasons  for  preparing  to  meet  God.  {J.  D.  Carey.) 
Preparation  for  heaven  : — Every  one  knows  that  this  life  is  but  the  childhood 
of  existence.  A  great  many,  and  not  such  as  pass  for  bad  men  either,  are  making 
no  sort  of  preparation  for  another  life.  In  all  that  respects  this  world's  gain, 
the  eye  of  the  lightning  is  not  sharper  than  theirs.  Aiid  nothing  can  exceed 
the  thoughtfulness  and  attention  they  bestow  in  preparing  the  comfort  of  their 
declining  years.  But  take  one  of  these  deliberate  and  sagacious  men,  ask  him 
what  duty  he  is  doing  because  Christianity  requires  it ;  ask  him  if  he  makes  a 
point  of  doing,  not  what  pleases  himself,  but  what  will  please  God.  If  he  tells 
the  truth,  he  will  reply  that  he  thinks  of  no  such  things.  He  is  contented  if  he 
preserves  a  good  moral  character,  and  does  not  materially  injure  others.  He 
is  quite  easy  as  to  his  last  account  with  God.  But  after  giving  all  the  praise 
due  to  this  conduct,  the  great  question  returns.  What  is  there  in  all  this  that 
you  can  call  preparation  for  another  existence  ?  All  this  begins  and  ends  with 
the  present  world.  In  all  this  there  is  nothing  serious,  nothing  devoted,  nothing 
high,  nothing  which  could  not  be  done  as  well  without  Jesus  Christ  as  with  Him. 
So  many  are  in  error.  They  are  moving  on  in  the  voyage  of  life  as  if  they  were 
sure  of  drifting  to  the  right  harbour.  What  is  the  preparation  required  ?  Devo- 
tion and  benevolence  constitute  the  preparation  ; — in  better  words,  the  preparation 
is  to  love  God  with  all  the  heart,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  Devotion 
does  not  consist  in  solemnity.  The  solemnity  Christianity  wants  is  that  of  a 
heart  deeply  engaged,   interested,   busy  in  its   duty.     I  call  that  man  devout 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

who  feels,  and  tries  to  feel,  the  presence  of  God  ;  who  is  not  afraid  nor  unwilling 
to  have  the  eye  of  God  upon  him.  Such  a  man  prays,  to  make  his  requests  known 
unto  God  ;  praises,  because  praise  is  the  feeling  of  his  heart ;  and  his  greatest 
endeavour  is  to  bring  his  thoughts  and  deeds  into  subjection  to  the  Christian  law. 
Devotion  means  devotedness,  readiness  to  do  and  suffer  everything  that  pleases 
God..  Devotion  means  something  more  than  prayer.  I  would  judge  of  the 
devotion  by  the  life,  and  not  of  the  life  by  the  devotion.  And  the  benevolence 
that  makes  part  of  the  preparation  is  an  active  desire  to  do  good  to  men.  Mark 
the  words  "  active  desire  "  ;  for  the  mere  desire  is  nothing.  Very  often  there 
is  a  selfishness  in  the  midst  of  benevolence.  There  are  those  who  are  willing 
to  do  good,  but  wiU  to  do  it  in  their  own  way.  Even  the  benevolent  must  be 
on  their  guard  ;  they  are  far  too  apt  to  take  as  much  with  one  hand  as  they  give 
with  the  other.  Mere  feeling  will  do  good  as  long  as  it  is  pleasant,  and  no  longer. 
Principle  is  something  worth  having ;  it  is  patient,  not  easily  discouraged,  and 
enduring.     {W.  B.   C.   Peabody,  D.D.)        God's  voice  to  humanity: — I.  There 

IS  A  PERIOD  TO  DAWN  UPON  MANKIND  WHEN  THEY  SHALL  COME  TO  A  PARTICULAR 

CONTACT  WITH  GoD.  This  period  is  —  1.  Certain.  Nature  teaches  the  fact. 
Conscience  indicates  the  same  truth.  2.  Uncertain,  as  to  its  time.  3.  The  greatest 
of  all  periods  of  importance.  Then  the  actions  of  the  life  will  be  brought  to  the 
test.  II.  This  period  which  is  to  dawn  upon  mankind  requires  preparation 
ON  man's  part.  1.  Man,  in  his  natural  state,  is  not  in  a  condition  to  meet  God. 
2.  Man  is  in  a  state  of  possibility  to  prepare.  3.  Man's  agency  is  necessary  to 
his  preparation.  III.  God  feels  deep  interest  in  the  world's  preparation. 
He  desires  the  salvation  of  the  world.  1.  From  what  He  has  done  for  humanity. 
2.  From  what  He  is  doing  in  man.  3.  From  what  He  has  promised  to  do  for  us 
in  future.  Attention  to  God's  voice  wiU  secure  our  everlasting  happiness.  (J.  O. 
Oriffiths.)  Preparation  for  judgment: — I.  Every  one  of  the  human  family 
must  stand   before  God.     In   the  world  of  spirits   we  shall  all  meet  God. 

1.  When  the  soul  is  dislodged  from  the  body.  2.  In  the  judgment  at  the  last  day. 
Note — (1)  The  awful  character  and  appearance  of  the  Judge.  (2)  The  siurounding 
changes  which  will  take  place.  (3)  The  innumerable  midtitude  that  wiU  then  be 
assembled.  (4)  The  suddenness  of  the  summons.  (5)  The  trial,  or  testing,  through 
which  every  one  must  pass.  II.  The  nature  of  the  preparation  necessary 
to  enable  us  to  meet  God  with  comfort.     1.  The  justification  of  our  persons. 

2.  The  sanctification  of  our  nature.  3.  The  improvement  of  the  talents  entrusted 
to  our  care.  III.  The  necessity  of  attending  to  this  important  precept. 
Consider — 1.  The  awful  character  of  God.  2.  The  mighty  purposes  for  which 
this  meeting  is  convened.  3.  The  vast  importance  of  this  duty,  compared  with 
the  utter  insignificance  of  all  earthly  pursuits.  4.  The  means  of  attaining  this 
great  end  are  abundantly  supplied.  5.  We  beseech  you  to  act  upon  this  advice, 
from  the  assurance  that  on  it  depends  your  everlasting  happiness  or  misery. 
Address — 1.  Those  who  have  made  no  preparation  for  leaving  this  world.  2.  Those 
who  see  the  need,  but  delay.  3.  Those  who  are  diligently  making  preparation. 
The  more  they  are  like  God,  the  better  prepared  they  will  be  to  meet  Him.  Only 
by  a  diligent  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace  can  this  be  seciu-ed.  {R.  Treffry.) 
The  great  interview : — The  Jews  were  incorrigible.  God  had  tried  for  their  correc- 
tion, captivity,  famine,  too  much  rain,  too  little  rain,  universal  sickness,  lightning, 
and  war.  No  good  result.  He  now  tells  them  that  greater  judgments  are  to 
come.  With  God  we  must  meet.  1.  In  the  misfortunes  of  life.  Times  of  sickness, 
disaster,  &c.  2.  In  the  bereavements  of  life.  We  cannot  escape  then,  unless  a 
man  stands  all  alone — fatherless,  motherless,  brotherless,  sisterless,  childless.  3.  An 
interview  of  this  kind  will  take  place  in  ova  last  hour.  4.  We  must  meet  God 
in  the  great  day.  Common  sense  teaches  us  that  there  must  be  a  judgment-day. 
How  are  we  to  prepare  to  meet  God  ?  Two  words  will  tell  you.  Repent.  Believe. 
That  is,  give  up  your  sin,  and  be  sorry  for  it.  Take  Christ  for  your  Saviour. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Face  to  face  with  God  .-—The  late  Dr.  Arnold,  of 
Rugby,  one  of  the  most  serious  minded  and  earnest  men  whom  England  has 

froduced  in  this  century,  was  suddenly  summoned  to  meet  death  and  judgment, 
n  the  midst  of  perfect  health  he  was  attacked  with  spasm  of  the  heart,  and 
learned  that  in  a  moment  he  would  be  called  into  the  infinitely  holy  presence 
of  his  Maker.  He  knew  what  this  meant ;  for  the  immaculate  purity  of  God 
was  a  subject  that  had  profoundly  impressed  his  spiritual  and  ethical  mind.  He 
felt  the  need  of  mercy  at  the  prospect  of  seeing  God  face  to  face  ;  and  as  he  lay 
upon  his  deathbed,  still,  thoughtful,  and  absorbed  in  silent  prayer,  all  at  once 


CHAP.  IV.]  AMOS.  57 

he  repeated  firmly  and  earnestly  :  "  And  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Thomas,  because 
thou  hast  seen  Me,  thou  hast  believed  ;  blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen,  and 
yet  have  believed."  (W.  G.  T.  Shedd.)  Beady  to  meet  God  : — He  who  simply 
trusts  the  Saviour,  he  who  faithfully  performs  every  known  duty,  he  who  keeps 
a  clear  account  with  conscience,  is  always  ready  to  enter  heaven.  There  is  deep 
truth  in  John  Ruskin's  words  :  "  The  only  place  where  a  man  can  be  nobly 
thoughtless  is  on  his  deathbed.  There  ought  to  be  no  thinking  left  to  be  done 
there."  Yes,  we  know  how  to  die  if  we  know  how  to  live.  (Sunday  Companion.) 
We  Jiave  to  do  with  our  Maker  : — As  a  cathedral  built  in  the  heart  of  a  great  city 
rises  with  the  other  buildings  round  about  it,  keeps  company  with  them  a  certain 
distance,  and  then  leaves  them  all  behind,  soars  away  skyward,  and  at  last, 
solitary  and  alone,  looks  up  into  the  infinite  spaces,  so  every  man  lives  among 
men.  He  rests  with  them  upon  the  same  political  and  social  foimdation ;  he 
stands  with  them  in  a  wide  and  important  fellowship ;  he  rises  with  them  in 
a  certain  way,  and  then  he  goes  beyond  them  all,  and  the  last  look  and  reference 
of  his  spirit  is  to  the  Eternal.  We  draw  our  being  from  God,  we  live  and  move 
and  have  our  being  in  God,  and  at  death  we  breathe  back  our  life  into  God's 
hands.  The  first  thing  in  our  existence  is  our  Maker,  and  when  we  have  done 
with  all  others  we  have  still  to  do  with  Him.     {G.  A.  Gordon,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  He  that  formeth  the  mountains,  and  createth  the  Ttind. — Back- 
grounds and  foregrounds  : — The  mountains  made,  for  the  Hebrew,  the  background 
of  every  landscape  in  which  they  stand.  The  foreground  of  the  plain-land  rests 
upon  the  background  of  the  hiUs.  From  them  it  gains  its  lights  and  shadows. 
The  two  depend  on  one  another.  The  background  and  the  foreground  together 
make  the  complete  landscape  in  the  midst  of  which  a  human  life  is  set.  And 
this  is  also  true  in  the  world  of  inner  life.  There  is  a  foreground  and  a  background 
to  every  man's  career.  There  are  things  that  press  themselves  immediately 
upon  our  attention; — the  details  of  life;  these  are  the  foreground  of  our  living. 
And  then,  beyond  them,  there  are  the  great  truths  which  we  believe,  the  broad 
and  general  consecrations  of  our  life  which  we  have  made,  the  large  objects  of 
our  desire,  the  great  hopes  and  impulses  which  keep  us  at  our  work.  These  are 
the  mountain  backgrounds  of  our  life.  They  are  our  reservoirs  of  power ;  out 
of  them  come  down  our  streams  of  strength.  In  the  perfect  picture  you  cannot 
leave  out  the  foregroimd  of  immediate  detail,  nor  the  background  of  established 
principle  and  truth.  The  danger  of  our  life  is  not,  ordinarily,  lest  the  foreground 
be  forgotten  or  ignored.  The  details  of  life  command  us  and  attrEict  us.  The 
backgrounds  of  life  we  are  most  likely  to  forget.  To  most  men  the  actual  immediate 
circumstances  of  life  are  so  pressing  that  they  forget  the  everlasting  truths  and 
forces  by  which  those  circumstances  must  be  made  dignified  and  strong.  We 
are  troubled  by  the  superficialness  and  immediateness  of  living.  There  is  a  need 
of  distance  and  of  depth.  And  the  distance  and  the  depth  are  there,  if  men  would 
only  feel  them.  1.  Behind  every  foreground  of  action  lies  the  backgroimd  of 
character,  on  which  the  action  rests,  and  from  which  it  gets  its  life  and  meaning. 
It  matters  not  whether  it  be  an  age,  a  nation,  a  Church,  a  man ;  anything  which 
is  capable  both  of  being  and  of  acting  must  feel  its  being  behind  its  acting,  must 
make  its  acting  the  expression  of  its  being,  or  its  existence  is  very  unsatisfactory 
and  thin.  What  is  all  your  activity  without  you  ?  How  instantly  the  impression 
of  a  character  creates  itself,  springs  into  shape  behind  a  deed.  If  this  were  not 
so,  life  would  grow  very  tame  and  dull.  An  engine  has  no  background  of  character. 
Its  deeds  are  simple  deeds.  Man,  being  character,  will  care  for  nothing  which 
has  not  character  behind  it,  finding  expression  through  its  hfe.  Here  is  the  value 
of  reality,  sincerity,  which  is  nothing  but  the  true  relation  between  action  and 
character.  Expressed  artistically,  it  is  the  harmony  between  the  foreground 
and  backgroimd  of  a  life.  What  will  be  the  rule  of  life  which  such  a  harmony 
involves  ?  Will  it  not  include  both  the  watchfulness  over  character  and  the 
watchfulness  over  action,  either  of  which  alone  is  woefully  imperfect  ?  When 
will  men  learn  that  to  feed  the  fountain  of  character,  and  yet  never  neglect  the 
guiding  of  the  streams  of  action,  is  the  law  of  life  ?  All  the  perplexing  questions 
about  the  contemplative  and  active  life,  about  faith  and  practice,  about  self- 
discipline  and  service  of  oui  fellow-men,  have  their  key  and  solution  hidden 
somewhere  within  this  truth  of  the  background  and  foreground.  What  culture 
is  there  by  which  the  human  life  can  be  at  once  trained  into  character,  and  at  the 
same  time  kept  true  in  active  duty  ?     Only  the  culture  of  personal  loyalty. 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  v. 

admiration  for  a  nature  and  obedience  to  a  will  opening  together  into  a  resemblance 
to  Him  whom  we  ardently  desire,  and  enthusiastically  obey.  I  recall  what  Jesus 
said,  "  You  must  be  bom  again," — that  Ls  His  inexorable  demand  for  the  background 
of  character.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments," — that  is  His  absolute 
insistence  on  the  foreground  of  action.  And  the  power  of  both  of  them — the 
power  by  which  they  both  unite  into  one  life — lies  in  the  personal  love  and  service 
of  Himself.  Closely  related  to  the  background  of  character,  yet  distinguishable 
from  it  is  what  I  may  call  the  background  of  the  greater  purpose.  A  man's 
purpose  in  life  lies  behind,  and  gives  dignity  and  meaning  to  everything  that  the 
man  does  or  says.  The  greater  purpose  may  be  bad  or  good,  horrible  or  splendid. 
In  the  smaller  world,  it  is  a  man's  profession  which  makes  the  most  palpable 
backgroimd  of  his  life.  But  the  great  purpose  is  ruled  by  the  man,  as  well  aa 
the  man  by  the  great  purpose,  and  it  is  the  complicated  result  of  the  mutual 
ruling  that  makes  the  life.  Both  the  great  purpose,  and  its  immediate  activities, 
are  provided  with  their  safeguards,  that  they  may  not  be  lost.  A  closing  word 
upon  another  of  the  backgrounds  of  life.  Prayer.  The  foreground  of  prayer 
is  the  intense,  immediate  desire  for  a  certain  blessing ;  the  background  of  prayer 
is  the  quiet,  earnest  desire  that  the  will  of  God,  whatever  it  may  be,  should  bo 
done.  What  Christ's  prayer  was,  all  true  prayer  must  be.  Remember  that 
it  is  only  in  personal  love  and  loyalty  that  life  completes  itself.  Only  when  man 
loves  and  enthusiastically  obeys  God  does  the  background  of  the  imiversal  and  the 
eternal  rise  aroimd  the  special  and  temporary,  and  the  scenery  of  life  become 
complete.  Therefore  it  is  that  Christ,  who  brings  God  to  us,  and  brings  us  to 
God,  is  the  great  background-builder.  {Phillips  Brooks.)  He  declaretli 
unto  man  what  is  his  thought. —  The  Lord  showing  to  vnan  his  thought : — 
Our  first  inference  from  these  words  naturally  is,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts 
of  man."  How  little  do  we  realise  this  truth,  and,  in  consequence,  how  little 
restraint  do  we  exercise  over  our  thoughts  !  We  may  be  careful  in  our  doings, 
we  may  even  try,  by  God's  help,  to  wateh  over  our  words,  but  our  thoughts,  the 
action  of  the  highest  part  of  man,  the  workings  of  the  immortal  soul,  how  often 
do  we  STiffer  them  to  wander  ungovemed,  to  indulge  in  vanity,  to  exercise  themselves 
in  sin  !  What  would  our  neighbours  think  of  us  could  they  read  our  thoughts, 
all  our  thoughts  ?  All  our  thoughts  are  known  to  God.  Many  of  us  are  earnestly 
trying,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  rule  and  govern  our  thoughts.  The  Christian 
may  dare  to  lay  open  his  thoughts  before  God,  to  call  God's  attention  to  them, 
to  sanctify  them.  The  text  reminds  us  that  He  who  knows  the  thoughts  of  man 
also  declares  to  man  what  they  are.  He  teaches  him  to  discern  between  good  and 
evil  thoughts,  between  those  that  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  and  such  as  proceed 
from  the  corrupt  foxmtain  of  the  human  heart.  And  this  He  is  pleased  to  do 
in  different  ways  and  for  different  purposes.  God  declares  unto  man  his  thought 
by  His  Holy  Word,  to  produce  conviction  of  sin,  or  to  speak  peace  and  comfort, 
according  to  his  need.  And  God  will  declare  unto  man  what  are  his  thoughts 
at  the  last  day.     {F.  J.  Scott,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vers.   1-3.    Hear  ye  this  word  which  I  take  np  against  yon.  —  The  end 

of  carnal  security : — Such  words  as  these  must  have  fallen  like  a  thunder- 
bolt into  the  midst  of  the  corrupt  and  careless  inhabitants  of  Samaria  and 
the  other  cities  of  Israel  among  whom  Amos  prophesied.  It  is  a  dirge  or 
lamentation,  uttered  by  one  who  sees  beyond  the  present  prosperity  of  the  land 
the  future  ruin  of  its  proud  idolaters.  I.  Carnal  SBCXTRiry.  Nothing  about  sin 
is  more  wonderful  to  the  awakened  soul  than  that  blindness  which  hides  from  the 
imgodly  the  awful  future.  Noah's  generation,  on  the  eve  of  that  signal  punishment 
of  the  deluge,  saw  no  sign  of  peril  (Matt.  xxiv.  39).  The  same  spirit  marked 
the  society  of  Amos's  time.  The  sinners  forgot  all  fear.  They  lived  in  careless 
ease  in  their  winter  houses  and  summer  houses,  enjoying  all  manner  of  luxury, 
and  no  fear  of  God  or  man  disturbed  their  rest,  or  made  them  pause  either  in 
oppression  or  idolatry.  Such  is  the  prevailing  spirit  of  sin.  It  lulls  the  soul  to 
Bleep  till  suspicion  of  danger  scarcely  ever  comes  to  darken  the  spirit ;  like  the 


CHAP,  v.]  AMOS.  59 

little  sailor  lads  who  fell  asleep  on  deck  during  the  roar  of  the  cannon  in  the  great 
battle  of  the  Nile,  none  of  the  dangers  rouse  them  to  seek  safety  (Phil.  iii.  19). 
II.  God's  way  of  beeaking  this  security  is  by  revealing  its  end.  At  every 
turn  of  this  prophecy  our  wonder  at  the  tact  and  resource  of  the  prophet  seems 
to  grow.  His  Master  took  him  aside  to  show  him  the  future,  and  then,  with  those 
awful  sights  before  his  eyes,  sent  him  forth  to  utter  his  solemn  dirge  over  the 
vanished  glories  of  the  nation.  What  an  effect  such  revelations  must  have  had 
on  all  who  were  willing  to  understand  their  meaning.  "  The  virgin  of  Israel  is 
fallen  " — she  who  was  now  adorned  with  tabrets  and  joined  in  the  dances  of  those 
that  made  merry  ( Jer.  xxxi.  4),  should  soon  lie  prostrate,  not  to  rise  again,  forsaken 
of  all  her  friends,  and  without  any  to  lift  her  up  or  comfort  her — none  of  her  sons 
left  to  guide  her,  or  take  her  by  the  hand  in  this  day  of  calamity  (Isa.  li.  18).  Her 
glory  gone,  her  pride  humbled,  her  resources  cut  off.  This  is  the  picture  of  the  end 
of  that  false  security.  It  is  accompanied  by  God's  message  (ver.  3),  which  gives 
added  terror  to  this  revelation.  A  general  decay  similar  to  that  mentioned  in 
chap.  ii.  14-16  should  fall  upon  the  cities  of  the  land.  Application.  Remember 
that  sin  blinds  men's  eyes.  The  god  of  this  world  has  no  hope  of  retaining  his 
power  save  by  blinding  the  eyes  of  them  that  believe  not.  Remember  that 
warning  voices  are  God's  messengers,     (J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Seek  ye  Me,  and  ye  sliall  live  .  .  .  But  seek  not  Bethel, 
nor  enter  into  Gilgal. — I.  The  blessings  of  Israel.  Gilgal  and  Bethel 
were  places  in  Israel's  history  bedewed  by  showers  of  blessing.  1.  Gilgal 
was  the  scene  of  new  life.  2.  Bethel  was  the  scene  of  the  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  presence.  II.  Israel  had  misused  these  blessings.  1.  "  All  their 
wickedness  is  in  Gilgal."  The  sanctuary  had  been  desecrated.  2.  Bethel,  the 
house  of  God,  had  become  "  the  king's  chapel  and  the  king's  court."  Jeroboam 
had  set  up  the  golden  calf  there  as  a  convenient  place  for  the  worship  of  God,  but 
in  violation  of  the  second  commandment.  III.  Misused  blessings  become  curses. 
Gilgal  and  Bethel  were  marked  for  destruction  on  account  of  these  idolatries. 
This  was  the  retribution  that  should  follow  abuse  of  privileges.  IV.  Gilgal  and 
Bethel  have  their  counterparts  in  the  Christian  life.  Gilgal  may  represent 
the  new  start  in  life  which  is  taken  at  confirmation,  after  sickness,  &c.  Bethel 
represents  the  Sundays  and  the  services  which  should  be  as  gates  to  heaven  in 
the  house  of  God.  Satan  intrudes  into  our  most  sacred  seasons  and  places,  and 
introduces  idolatry.  He  fills  our  minds  with  other  thoughts,  so  that  we  forget 
our  resolutions,  make  light  of  our  blessings,  and  sacred  things  become  an  occasion 
of  falling.  The  safeguard  against  misuse  of  blessing  is  to  keep  in  memory  the 
redemption  that  has  been  wrought  and  the  promised  presence  of  the  Lord. 
(W.  Walters,  M.A.)  The  search  which  ends  in  life,  and  the  search  which  ends  in 
ruin  : — I.  The  search  which  ends  in  life.  The  end  of  such  search  is  life. 
*'  Ye  shall  live."  Doubtless  that  form  was  given  to  the  promise  because  of  the 
calamities  which  were  impending  over  the  State.  But  there  is  something  more 
than  preservation  from  the  scourge  of  sin.  Life  of  the  soul — full  exercise  of  its 
powers,  full  pleasure  in  its  blessings,  with  that  "  life  for  evermore "  which  God 
gives  to  those  who  seek  Him.  II.  The  search  which  ends  in  ruin.  Bethel, 
Gilgal,  and  Beersheba  were  the  centres  of  idol  worship  in  Israel  (chap.  iv.  4, 
viii.  14).  They  could  not  keep  themselves  from  ruin,  what  then  must  be  the  fate 
of  their  worshippers  ?  The  deluded  people  brought  their  sacrifices  ;  but  when 
trouble  came  it  was  in  vain  to  turn  to  Bethel  and  Gilgal — even  their  deities 
perished.  Application.  Verse  6  shows  that  God  would  punish  the  nation,  and 
none  would  be  able  to  stay  His  hand.  From  Bethel  in  the  days  of  vengeance 
there  should  be  no  deliverance.  The  sinner  must  meet  his  Judge,  whom  he  had 
despised  and  refused  to  seek,  and  meet  Him  alone.     {J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Ver.  8.  Seek  Him  that  maketh  the  sevon  stars  and  Orion. — Creation, 
and  the  Creator's  name : — The  text  brings  the  works  of  God  and  the  name 
of  God  into  one  focus,  and  makes  use  of  both  as  an  argument  with  man  to 
raise  himself  from  the  low  and  unworthy  pretences  of  religion,  such  as  are 
represented  by  the  calf- worship  of  Bethel,  to  Him  who  sits  high  above  the  magnifi- 
cence of  all  material  forms,  yet  deigns  to  listen  to  the  whisper  of  a  kneeling  child. 
I.  Seek  Him  because  He  is  immutable.  This  is  declared  by  "  the  seven  stars  and 
Orion,"  and  by  all  the  constellations  among  which  the  Pleiades  are  set.  It  is  a 
wonderful  thought,  that  when  we  look  up  to  the  mighty  heavens,  we  see  precislv 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

what  Adam  and  Eve  saw.  They  beheld  the  Pleiades,  that  group  of  stars  so  beauti- 
fully likened  to  "  a  knot  of  fire-flies  tangled  in  a  silver  braid."  They  beheld  those 
shining  orbs  in  which  we  detect  the  appearance  of  an  armed  warrior,  and  call 
Orion.  Through  all  the  changes  of  human  history,  those  celestial  bodies  have 
shone  with  like  brilliancy,  and  moved  with  like  pomp  in  the  great  spaces  overhead. 
The  Chaldeans  from  their  astronomical  towers,  the  Phoenicians  from  their  bold 
sea-tracks,  the  Egyptian  sages  from  their  mystic  temples,  the  Idumean  shepherds 
from  their  broad  pastures,  the  Jewish  kings  from  their  palace  roofs,  beheld  those 
august  revelations  of  Almighty  power  and  wisdom  ;  and  they  are  as  superb,  as 
radiant,  now  as  then.  "  Ajad  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  Thine  hands.  They 
shall  perish  ;  .  .  .  and  they  all  shall  wax  old,  as  doth  a  garment ;  and  as  a  vesture 
shalt  Thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  shall  be  changed."  "  But  Thou  art  the  same, 
and  Thy  years  shall  have  no  end."  And  now  look  at  man.  "  As  for  man,  his 
days  are  as  grass  :  as  a  flower  of  the  field  so  he  flourisheth.  For  the  wind  passeth 
over  it,  and  it  is  gone ;  and  the  place  thereof  shall  know  it  no  more."  Thus  frail, 
and  in  the  midst  of  frailty,  what  is  to  become  of  us  ?  Where  is  the  arm  on  which 
we  can  lean  ?  What  is  the  hope  to  which  we  can  cling  ?  The  reply  to  these 
inquiries  comes  not  from  the  oracles  of  human  wisdom,  but  from  Amos,  the  herds- 
man of  Tekoa.  "  Seek  Him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion."  Let  us 
seek  Him  as  He  bids  us  in  His  Word ;  and  when  the  Pleiades  are  bereft  of  their 
sweet  influence,  and  when  the  bands  of  Orion  are  loosed,  his  zone  of  mighty  worlds 
imclasped,  and  his  flaming  sword  sheathed  in  eternal  darkness,  we  shall  shine 
with  light  which  can  never  fade,  and  be  glad  with  a  gladness  which  can  never  die. 
II.  Seek  Him  because  He  is  all-powerful.  This  also  is  declared  by  "  the  sevea 
stars  and  Orion."  Many  have  looked  on  the  Pleiades  as  but  an  insignificant 
group  in  the  heavens  ;  but  that  constellation  has  depths  of  glory  which  the  unaided 
eye  cannot  reach.  We  count  seven  stars,  but  the  telescope  announces  fourteen 
magnificent  sun-like  bodies  clustered  comparatively  near  to  one  of  the  seven. 
This,  however,  is  not  the  special  peculiarity  of  the  Pleiades.  For  some  time  it  was 
suspected  that  there  is  one  great  central  sun,  round  which  our  planetary  system, 
and  many,  if  not  all,  other  suns  and  systems  are  revolving  in  measured  and  majestic 
movement;  and  at  length  an  eminent  continental  astronomer  decided  that  a 
bright  star  in  the  Pleiades  is  the  sublime  centre  of  this  sublime  march.  Here, 
then,  is  a  thought  of  almost  appalling  grandeur.  Myriads  of  orbs  keeping  their 
own  relative  position,  and  sweeping  round  and  round  in  the  path  of  their  own 
revolutions  ;  yet  the  vast  host — suns  compared  with  which  ours  is  but  a  speck  of 
fire — worlds  of  such  magnitude  as  to  dwarf  ours  into  a  mere  grain  of  sand — all 
rolling  through  space  as  if  doing  homage  to  the  influence  of  what  to  us  is  but  a 
point  of  light  in  the  blue  immensity.  According  to  this  theory,  those  thousands 
of  bodies  are  speeding  along  with  amazing  velocity ;  yet  such  is  the  long  curve 
on  which  they  travel,  that  it  will  take  more  than  eighteen  millions  of  years  for 
even  some  of  the  less  remote  to  complete  one  circuit  round  that  great  luminary. 
Now  glance  at  Orion,  as  he  gleams  aloft  in  more  than  imperial  pomp  and 
blazonry.  We  may  well  look  on  this  constellation  with  awe  and  wonder  when 
we  take  into  account  the  following  statement  in  reference   to   it.     In   what   is 

.called  the  sword  of  Orion  there  is  a  hazy  glimmer,  which  has  been  thought 
by  some  to  be  only  a  kind  of  nebidous  fluid  ;  but  Lord  Rosse,  having  scanned  it 
with  his  powerful  telescope,  ascertained  that  it  is  another  gorgeous  imiverse,  so  far 

;  away,  that  to  an  ordinary  glass  it  only  appears  as  a  dim  streak,  yet  having  heights, 
and  depths,  and  lengths,  and  breadths,  of  creative  power  and  diversity  surpassing 
all  that  we  behold  in  the  whole  canopy  of  the  starry  heavens.     But  even  if  this 

,  daring  assertion  should  be  proved  to  be  incorrect,  and  all  those  worlds  to  be  no 
more  than  a  conjecture,  we  should  scarcely  be  conscious  that  aught  had  been 
subtracted  from  our  idea  of  the  magnitude  and  multiplicity  of  Jehovah's  works ; 
for  there  are  other  streaks  and  misty  appearances  on  the  sky  which  are  known 
by  indubitable  evidence  to  be  gatherings  of  stars,  huge  in  bulk  and  veiled  in  dazzling 
splendour.  And  here  is  another  great  motive  to  seek  the  Lord.  The  power 
evinced  in  "  the  seven  stars  and  Orion,"  and  the  other  orbs  they  represent,  is 
power  wielded  for  the  advantage  of  those  who  respond  to  the  Divine  command, 
"  Seek  ye  My  face."  And  when  terrors  shake  our  souls,  when  our  heart  and 
flesh  fail,  what  consolation  we  shall  have  in  the  thought  that  the  Hand  which 
measured  out  the  heavens  is  over  us,  and  around  us,  to  keep  us  from  ill.  "  Will 
He  pleBid  against  me  with  His  great  power  ?     No  ;  but  He  would  put  strength 

;  in  me."     III.  Seek  Him  because  of  His  bbkeficent  activities.     **  And  turneth 


CHAP,  v.]  AMOS.  61 

the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,  and  maketh  the  day  dark  with  night : 
that  calleth  for  the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth."  How  beautiful  is  morning,  as  it  comes  with  golden  sandals  and  rosy 
veil  through  the  gates  of  the  east  !  Beautiful  on  the  silent  peaks  of  the  Himalayan 
mountains,  beautiful  on  the  green  heights  of  Ceylon,  beautiful  on  the  icy  pinnacles 
of  the  Alps,  beautiful  on  thetroad  mass  of  the  Grampians,  beautiful  on  the  isles  of 
the  Caribbean  Sea.  How  it  is  welcomed  as  the  apparition  of  a  smiling  friend ; 
welcomed  by  the  Arab  as  it  gleams  on  his  tent ;  by  the  mariner  as  it  turns  hia 
sails  to  cloth  of  gold  ;  by  the  sentinel  as  it  gleams  on  the  steel  of  his  weapons. 
How  beautiful  is  night !  How  soft  and  soothing  the  shadows  with  which  it 
enwraps  the  earth  !  What  images  of  peace  it  suggests  to  the  mind  !  The  bird 
spreading  its  wings  over  its  nestlings,  the  sheep  gathered  in  the  fold,  the  child 
in  its  cot,  and  wearied  labour  calmly  renewing  its  energies  for  another  day.  '*  That 
calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  poureth  them  out  upon  the  earth."  How 
beautiful  the  silent  processes  by  which  the  rain  is  distilled  on  the  thirsty  ground ! 
Think  of  the  oceans — those  mighty  reservoirs  of  the  Most  High.  Think  of  the 
clouds  drawn  from  them — now  white  as  the  snows  which  crown  a  mountain's 
forehead  ;  now  gorgeous,  as  if  woven  of  a  thousand  rainbows  ;  now  black  as  a 
funeral  pall.  Think  of  the  rain,  how  it  falls  ;  not  in  a  sudden  and  overpowering 
splash  ;  not  in  a  flood,  tearing  the  leaves  from  the  trees  and  the  young  shoots 
from  the  soil,  but  in  a  succession  of  gentle  drops.  Is  not  this  gracious  Being, 
whose  hand  is  in  the  pleasing  changes  of  day  and  night,  and  in  "  rain  from  heaven 
and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness,"  One  with  whom 
it  is  desirable  to  live  in  filial  relationship  ?  IV.  Seek  Him  because  of  His  name. 
"  The  Lord  is  His  name."  Now  we  come  to  the  teachings  of  the  written  Word 
in  reference  to  the  Supreme  Being.  Glance  at  some  of  those  ideas  which  the 
ancient  saints  attached  to  the  Divine  name.  Jehovah-jireh — the  Lord  will 
provide.  Jehovah-nissi — Jehovah  my  banner.  This  was  the  name  which  Moses 
gave  to  the  altar  he  built  as  a  memorial  of  Israel's  victory  over  Amalek.  What  a 
banner  !  A  Divine  perfection  for  every  fold,  radiant  with  the  heraldry  of  eternal 
truth,  and  bearing  a  name  bright  as  if  every  syllable  had  been  wrought  out  in  a 
constellation  of  suns.  This  banner  is  for  us  if  we  seek  the  Lord.  Jehovah- 
shalom — the  Lord  is  my  peace.  The  angel  said  to  awestricken,  affrighted  Gideon, 
'  Peace  be  unto  thee."  Jehovah-Tsidkenu — the  Lord  our  righteousness.  This 
title  is  specially  connected  with  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  And 
be  found  in  Him,  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith." 
In  one  part  of  the  heavens  there  is  a  constellation  known  as  the  Southern  Cross  ; 
and  when  Humboldt  was  in  South  America,  he  often  heard  the  guides  who  con- 
ducted him  over  the  savannahs  of  Venezuela  cry  out,  as  they  looked  up  to  that 
constellation,  "  Midnight  is  past — the  cross  begins  to  bend."  Thank  God  the 
cross  bends  over  us,  and  our  midnight  is  past — the  midnight  of  our  fear,  the  mid- 
night of  our  bondage.  {J.  Marrat.)  The  Pleiades  and  Orion : — There  are  some 
things  which  make  me  think  that  it  may  not  have  been  all  superstition  which 
connected  the  movements  and  appearance  of  the  heavenly  bodies  with  great 
moral  events  on  earth.  Astrology  may  have  been  something  more  than  a  brilliant 
heathenism.  L  Amos  saw  that  the  God  who  made  the  Pleiades  and  Orion  must 
be  the  God  of  order.  It  was  not  so  much  a  star  here  and  there  that  impressed 
the  inspired  herdsman,  but  seven  in  one  group  and  seven  in  the  other  group.  For 
ages  they  have  observed  the  order  established  for  their  coming  and  going.  If  Grod 
can  take  care  of  the  seven  worlds  of  the  Pleiades,  He  can  probably  take  care  of 
the  one  world  we  inhabit.  2.  The  God  who  made  these  two  groups  of  the  text 
was  the  God  of  light.  3.  That  the  God  who  made  these  two  archipelagos  of  stars 
must  be  an  unchanging  God.  4.  That  the  God  who  made  these  two  beacons  of 
the  Oriental  night-sky  must  be  a  God  of  love  and  kindly  warning.  The  Pleiades, 
rising  in  midsky,  said  to  all  the  herdsmen  and  shepherds  and  husbandmen,  "  Come 
out  and  enjoy  the  mild  weather,  and  cultivate  your  gardens  and  fields."  And 
Orion,  coming  in  winter,  warned  them  to  prepare  for  tempest.  The  sermon  that 
I  now  preach  believes  in  a  God  of  loving,  kindly  warning,  the  God  of  spring  and 
winter,  the  God  of  the  Pleiades  and  Orion.  (T.  De  Witt  Tal.nage,  D.D.)  God 
and  natvre  : — The  prophet  first  draws  the  attention  of  Israel  to  the  living  God 
who  stands  behind  nature,  determining  all  its  movements.  The  atheist  is  rebuked 
by  this  view  of  thmgs.  The  thought  of  the  prophet  is  full  of  God  ;  nature  does 
not  dfny  God — it  demonstrates   Him.     God    s.     Those  who   identify  God  with 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

nature  until  they  confoimd  the  personal  God  with  the  laws  and  forces  of  tl)e  world, 
are  also  rebuked  by  the  text.  Nature  is  not  God.  "  He  maketh  the  seven  stars 
and  Orion."  And  the  view  that  nature  is  independent  of  God  is  equally  repudiated. 
On  the  contrary,  the  teaching  of  Amos  is  that  God  acts  through  nature.  The 
people  of  Israel  are  summoned  to  look  up  and  to  behold  the  supreme,  self-existent 
God,  standing  before  and  above  the  world,  acting  upon  it,  acting  through  it,  with 
sovereign  sway.  He  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion,  &c.  But  the  argument 
of  Amos  gees  farther  than  this ;  he  argues  that  God  rules  in  the  midst  of  the 
nations  just  as  He  rules  in  the  midst  of  nature,  and  we  must  see  His  hand  in  human 
affairs  as  we  see  it  in  the  rising  and  setting  of  stars,  in  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of 
seas.  He  setteth  up  kings  and  captains,  and  casteth  them  down ;  He  smites  the 
splendom:  of  nations  into  desolation ;  and  again  He  restores  their  greatness  and 
joy.  The  argument  of  the  prophet  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  a  Divine 
purpose,  a  vast  design,  runs  through  all  the  evolutions  of  nature  and  all  the  move- 
ments of  history.  And  in  this  point  of  view,  let  \is  say,  these  primitive  thinkers 
have  been  confirmed  by  the  \ast  majority  of  the  philosophers  who  succeeded 
them.  A  few  erratic  philosophers  have  failed  to  discern  any  direction  or  tendency 
in  the  career  of  the  universe  ;  they  could  not  detect  any  coherency  among  events, 
or  admit  that  such  events  were  working  together  toward  any  assignable  result 
whatever.  From  their  point  of  view,  things  and  events  drifted  and  eddied  about 
in  tin  utterly  blind  and  irrational  manner ;  temporary  combinations  might 
accidentally  assume  a  rational  appearance,  but  it  was  only  accidental.  Worlds, 
they  concluded,  have  no  definite  beginning,  no  connection  or  sequence,  no  dramatic 
consistency,  no  definite  end ;  all  is  lanrelated,  arbitrary,  accidental,  purposeless. 
But  this  interpretation  has  found  little  acceptance.  Aristotle,  who  lived  some 
centuries  later  than  Amos,  wrote :  "  In  the  imity  of  nature  there  is  nothing  un- 
connected or  out  of  place,  as  in  a  bad  tragedy."  And  nearly  aU  philosophy  since 
then  has  in  different  ways  confirmed  this  view  of  the  imiverse  set  forth  by  the 
prophet  of  Israel  and  the  philosopher  of  Greece.  But  the  prophets  of  Israel  not 
only  recognised  a  distinct  design  running  through  nature  and  history ;  they  saw, 
and  this  was  the  special  merit  of  their  mission  and  message,  they  saw  that  that 
design  was  spiritual  and  moral.  Many  thinkers  see  design  and  orderly  progress 
in  the  world  who  recognise  design  and  progress  as  purely  intellectual.  They  see 
in  nature  and  history  nothing  more  than  a  play  dramatically  conducted  ;  a  story 
artistically  developed  ;  a  pictiu-e  exquisitely  balanced  and  harmonious  ;  an  organism 
complete  in  all  its  parts  and  functions ;  but  they  miss  the  real  heart  of  the 
thing,  that  the  universe  is  the  intellectual  working  out  of  the  piu*pose  of  the  holy  God. 
This  was  the  point  of  view  of  the  prophets.  The  design  they  discovered  in  the 
universe  did  not  merely  satisfy  their  logical  sense,  their  aesthetic  sense,  or 
their  scientific  sense,  but  their  moral  sense.  They  wished  to  teach  that  God 
rules  the  universe  with  a  view  to  reveal  His  righteous  character ;  His  govern- 
ment is  whoUy  moral ;  and  the  end  of  all  His  rule  in  heaven  and  earth  is  to  instruct 
His  children  in  righteousness,  and  to  discipline  them  into  holiness  imtil  they  are 
perfect,  even  as  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect.  The  religious  and  moral 
idea  is  subtly  interwoven  with  the  imiversal  fabric,  but  it  is  only  spiritually  dis- 
cerned, only  the  devout  soul  follows  the  golden  thread  that  runs  through  nature 
and  the  long,  mysterious  story  of  the  race.  "  We  are  nothing  but  the  playthings 
of  Fate,"  says  the  pagan  mind ;  but  we  refuse  the  verdict  of  dismal  atheism. 
He  "  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion,  and  tumeth  the  shadow  of  death  into 
the  morning,  and  maketh  the  day  dark  with  night "  ;  He  who  kindles  the  stars, 
and  who  darkens  them  in  eclipse ;  He  who  causes  His  sim  to  rise  upon  the  earth, 
and  to  set  in  night ;  He  who  makes  the  firmament  a  magnificent  theatre  of  majestic 
and  unfailing  order,  will  not  permit  caprice  and  chaos  in  the  far  higher  world  of 
hiunan  history — souls  are  more  than  stars,  and  when  a  great  nation  is  lifted  up  and 
cast  down,  great  reasons  and  great  ends  must  be  assumed.  If  you  look  through 
this  prophecy  of  Amos  you  must  be  struck  by  its  intense  and  persistent  moral 
tone.  The  fifth  chapter  is  full  of  it.  "  Ye  who  turn  judgment  to  wormwood, 
and  leave  off  righteousness  in  the  earth,  seek  Him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and 
Orion."  "  Forasmuch  therefore  as  your  treading  is  upon  the  poor,  and  ye  take 
from  him  burdens  of  wheat :  ye  have  built  houses  of  hewn  stone,  but  ye  shall  not 
dwell  in  them  :  ye  have  planted  pleasant  vineyards,  but  ye  shall  not  drink  wine  of 
them.  For  I  know  your  manifold  transgressions  and  your  mighty  sins  :  they  afflict 
the  just,  they  take  a  bribe,  and  they  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate  from  their 
light."     "  Seek  good,  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live  ;  and  so  the  Lord,  the  God 


CHAP,  v.]  AMOS.  63 

of  hosts,  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye  have  spoken."  "  Hate  the  evil,  and  love  the 
good,  and  establish  judgment  in  the  gate."  And  it  is  thus  throughout  the  whole 
prophecy — the  destiny  of  the  nation  turns  on  righteousness,  on  matters  of  definite, 
practical  honesty,  clemency,  humanity,  justice,  chastity,  and  temperance.  The 
shepherd  Amos,  like  David,  like  Job,  was  familiar  with  the  constellations,  and  he 
felt  how  oflFensive  the  unjust  and  the  unclean  must  be  to  Him  whose  faultless 
government  is  declared  in  the  inviolable  laws  which  govern  the  chaste  and  solemn 
stars.  And  God  is  still  of  too  pure  eyes  to  behold  iniquity,  and,  according  to  their 
works  does  He  deal  with  the  mightiest  nations.  He  calls  us  back  to  Himself,  to 
His  moral  government  and  righteous  laws.  God  has  often  "  made  the  day  dark  " 
to  us,  and  again  He  has  "  turned  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning."  We  live 
with  the  consciousness  of  these  impending  possibilities.  Any  day,  any  hour  may 
witness  the  mighty  change.  These  changes,  so  extreme  and  searching,  are  to  remind 
us  that  life  does  not  exist  either  for  pleasure  or  pain,  but  for  the  perfecting  of  the 
soul  in  love  and  nobleness.  He  who  makes  the  seven  stars  and  Orion,  who  tumeth 
the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,  and  maketh  the  day  dark  with  night  for  the 
education  of  a  nation  in  righteousness,  does  the  same  with  and  for  the  individual. 
And  every  change  is  good  that  unsettles  us  in  the  world  to  settle  us  in  God,  every 
variation  of  fortune  is  blessed  that  drives  us  to  the  central  reality,  and  makes  us 
richer  in  spiritual  feeling  and  moral  fruit.  In  some  parts  of  South  America  all 
seasons  are  singularly  blended  within  a  year ;  in  the  same  locality  there  are  many 
returns  of  spring  and  winter,  temporary  calms  and  temporary  snows  rapidly  and 
unceasingly  succeed  each  other,  but  in  such  places  plants  bloom  with  the  greatest 
vigour,  and  are  remarkable  for  their  beauty.  So,  if  we  seek  Him  who  maketh 
the  seven  stars  and  Orion,  and  who  orders  so  strangely  the  days  and  nights,  the 
summers  and  winters  of  human  life,  these  bewildering  changes  shall  only  discipline 
us  into  more  perfect  strength,  and  make  us  rich  in  the  fruits  of  righteousness  and 
peace.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  The  glory  of  religion: — I.  The  connection  God 
HAS  WITH  His  tjniverse.  1.  That  of  a  Greator.  2.  That  of  a  Governor.  3.  That 
of  a  Redeemer.  II.  The  connection  which  man  should  have  with  God. 
"  Seek  Him."  The  pursuit  implies — 1.  Faith  in  God's  personal  existence. 
2.  A  consciousness  of  moral  distance  from  God.  3.  A  felt  necessity  of  friendly 
connection  with  God.  4.  An  assvu-ance  that  such  a  connection  can  be  obtained. 
What  a  grand  thing  is  religion !  It  is  not  a  thing  of  mere  doctrine,  or  ritual,  or  sect, 
or  party.  It  is  a  moral  pursuit  of  "  Him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion," 
&c.  (Homilist.)  The  true  object  of  worship : — I.  As  the  cbeateng  God. 
"  Seek  Him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion."  This  suggests — 1.  His 
unlimited  power.  "  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made  ;  and  the  host 
of  them  by  the  breath  of  His  mouth."  2.  His  manifold  wisdom.  "  The  Lord 
by  wisdom  hath  founded  the  earth ;  by  imderstanding  hath  He  established  the 
heavens."  3.  His  boundless  benevolence.  The  sun  rules  the  day,  the  moon 
and  stars  the  night.  God's  bounty  is  lavished  on  the  world  night  and  day.  EC.  As 
the  providing  God.  "  That  calleth  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  poureth  them 
out  upon  the  earth."  This  implies — 1.  God's  government  over  the  world.  At 
His  bidding  the  waters  of  the  sea  hasten  to  the  clouds,  and  again  fall  in  rain  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth.  2.  Man's  dependence  upon  God.  Rain  is  a  universal  blessing, 
and  is  essential  for  growth,  fertility,  and  happiness.  The  earth  must  be  irrigated, 
and  none  can  command  the  clouds  to  pour  out  their  contents  but  God.  III.  As  the 
redeemino  God.  "  And  tumeth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning."  This 
indicates — 1.  God's  dominion  over  death.  2.  His  gracious  presence  with  His 
people  in  the  greatest  emergency.  His  smiling  countenance  turns  the  shadow 
and  darkness  of  death  into  a  happy  and  refreshing  day.  They  hope  in  death. 
They  die  in  faith.  3.  His  faithfuhiess  to  His  word  unto  the  last.  He  will  realise 
His  promises  to  them  in  life,  in  death,  and  in  eternity.  Seek  the  Lord,  the  Creator, 
the  Preserver,  and  the  only  Saviour.  Seek  Him  who  is  mighty  to  save. 
( Joseph  Jenkins.)  And  tumeth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning  . . .  the  Lord 
is  His  name. — The  shadow  of  death  : — I.  The  shadow  of  death  palls  upon  thb 
pathway  op  life.  It  is  the  shadow  of  God's  wrath,  which  fell  upon  the  simshine 
of  His  love,  when  man,  a  free  agent,  marred  His  work.  No  man  knows  when  or  how 
he  will  die.  II.  It  is  best  that  we  do  not  know  the  time  or  manner  of  our 
death.  If  we  knew  the  time  was  near  we  might  be  overcome  by  terror  or  despair.  If 
we  knew  the  time  was  distant,  we  might  presume.  As  it  is  uncertain,  we  need  to  be 
"  always  ready."  III.  We  make  that  which  was  intended  for  our  soul's 
HEALTH  ONLY  AN  OCCASION  OF  FALLING.     The  Uncertainty  of  life  is  a  subject  very 


64    -._  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

commonly  on  our  lips,  very  seldom  in  our  serious  thoughts.  All  men  think  all 
men  mortal  but  themselves.  IV.  You  admit  the  akgumbnt,  do  you  apply  it 
PERSONALLY  ?  There  can  be  no  greater  ignorance  than  to  ignore  the  inevitable. 
Yet  Cyprian  says,  "  We  will  not  know  that  which  we  cannot  but  know."  V.  What 
IS  death  ?  To  the  generality  of  the  Gentiles  death  was  dreadful,  and  they  spoke 
of  it  as  terrible,  cruel,  black,  and  blind.  One  of  the  great  Italian  painters,  Luino, 
the  favourite  pupil  of  Leonardo  de  Vinci,  has  represented  these  departxires  into  the 
unseen  world  by  a  design  which,  though  it  is  but  an  imagination,  appeals  forcibly 
to  our  hopes  and  fears.  In  a  grand  picture  of  the  Crucifixion,  which  is  in  the 
Church  at  Lugarno,  he  has  represented  the  soul  of  the  forgiven  thief  coming  from 
his  lips  at  the  moment  of  his  death  in  a  miniature  figure  of  himself,  robed  in  white, 
in  an  attitude  of  prayer,  and  welcomed  by  a  smiling  angel  sent  to  escort  him  to 
paradise.  From  the  mouth  of  the  reprobate  who  died  reviling  Christ,  there  issues 
a  figure  struggling  in  agony  with  a  cruel  demon.  VI.  How  shall  wb  prepare 
FOR  death  ?  We  must  learn  to  overcome  our  natural  reluctance  to  think, 
earnestly  and  constantly,  about  our  own  death.  The  way  to  overcome  our  fear 
is  not  to  evade  it,  but  to  meet  and  master  it.  VII.  Our  meditations  on  death 
SHOULD  BE  INSEPARABLY  UNITED  WITH  PRAYER.  Of  this  we  have  Scriptural 
examples,  as  in  Psalms  xxxix.  and  xc.     VIII.  All  that  we  think,  or  say,  ob 

DO,  HAS  this  one  GREAT  PURPOSE,  THAT  WE  MAY  SEEK  AND  FIND  HiM,  WHO  TURNBTH 

THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH  INTO  THE  MORNING.  1.  He  manifests  Himsclf  to  the 
faith  which  worketh  by  love.  2.  He  blesses  especially  with  His  assured  presence. 
3.  At  the  altar,  most  nearly,  dearly,  we  realise  His  presence.  (8.  Reynolds  Hole.) 
Turneth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning  : — The  Romans  had  thirty  epithets 
for  death  ;  and  all  of  them  were  full  of  the  deepest  dejection.  "  The  iron  slumber," 
"  the  eternal  night,"  "  the  mower  with  his  scythe,"  "  the  hunter  with  his  snares," 
"  the  demon  bearing  a  cup  of  poison,"  "  the  merciless  destroying  angel,"  "  the 
inexorable  jailor  with  keys,"  "  the  king  of  terrors  treading  down  empires" — some 
of  them  were  these,  the  bitterness  of  which  is  indescribable.  The  revelation 
which  the  New  Testament  furnishes  breaks  like  beautiful  sunshine  through  the 
unutterable  gloom.  Our  Lord  Jesus  came  to  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light 
in  the  Gospel.  The  immortal  life : — In  the  last  days  of  a  good  man's  life  the  fear  of 
death  is  usually  destroyed.  I  am  not  about  to  assert  that  death  has  no  solemnity, 
nor  would  I  in  any  way  lessen  your  sense  of  its  importance.  But  many  of  our 
common  conceptions  concerning  death  are  false  and  unreal.  We  have  mistaken 
figures  of  speech  for  facts  represented  by  them.  Of  death  as  a  physical  evil  little 
need  be  said.  Not  seldom  it  appears  sadly  painful.  Death  is  viewed  as  essentially 
evil,  because  it  is  assumed  to  be  the  direct  result  of  sin.  It  is  a  penal  infliction — 
the  shame  and  curse  of  life,  the  outcome  of  our  guilty  rebellion.  Thinking  thus 
concerning  it,  many  Christians  are  as  much  in  fear  of  death  as  the  heathen. 
But  this  theory  cannot  be  true.  It  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  reason  and  the  con- 
clusions of  science,  and  it  is  opposed  to  the  very  spirit  of  our  religion.  Scripture, 
rightly  interpreted,  gives  it  no  support.  Death,  instead  of  being  a  retribution, 
is  a  relenting ;  instead  of  a  curse,  a  blessing.  Whatever  of  death  Adam  by  his 
wrong-doing  introduced,  Christ  by  His  work  has  thrust  out.  The  physical  change 
called  death  is  not  the  result  of  sin.  Instead  of  being  a  dread  shadow  hanging 
over  life,  it  is  a  beneficent  arrangement  in  the  constitution  of  nature  by  the  infinite 
mercy  of  God.  It  is  recorded  that,  among  the  half  pagan  legends  which  floated 
about  Ireland  during  the  Middle  Ages,  there  was  one  in  which  two  islands  were 
mentioned,  and  named  respectively  Life  and  Death.  Upon  the  one  its  inhabitants 
could  never  die.  Yet  all  the  ills  of  human  life  came  to  its  people.  At  length 
these  did  their  work.  The  cruel  immortality  became  a  curse  which  consumed 
the  joy  and  love  of  life,  and  the  people  learned  to  regard  the  opposite  island  as  a 
haven  of  repose.  Then  soon,  with  all  eagerness,  they  launched  their  boats  upon 
the  gloomy  waters  of  the  lake  ;  they  reached  the  isle  of  death,  leaped  upon  its 
shore,  and  were  at  rest.  Death  is  a  change  from  a  known  to  an  unknown  state  of 
existence.  It  is  simply  one  of  those  changes  ordained  in  the  constitution  of  things 
through  which  we  must  pass.  The  eternal  life  is  ours  now,  and  in  this  world. 
We  are  within  the  sweep  of  the  eternal.  There  is  no  break  in  the  continuity  of  a  life. 
Present  and  future  are  but  sections  of  the  one  immortal  state.  This  earth-side 
is  but  a  small  part  of  life.  From  the  lower  to  the  higher  is  the  law  of  growth. 
Life  and  progress  never  cease.  Death  will  check  neither.  Is  there  not  sublimity 
in  the  thought  that  death  will  but  free  the  spirit  from  the  clogs  of  flesh,  and  usher 
it  into  a  world  that  gives  play  to  all  its  powers  ?     Then  the  death  of  the  body 


CHAP,  v.]  AMOS.  65 

is  nothing  to  be  feared.  It  is  but  the  laying  down  present  powers  to  take  up  others. 
By  it  the  soul  becomes  conscious  of  its  relations  with  a  new  world  and  a  new 
order  of  beings.  To  every  Cliristian  heart  this  happy  revelation  should  come  with 
regenerating  power.  He  alone  need  fear  death  who  is  abusing  life.  What  we  are 
now  determines  what  we  shall  be  then.  {George  Bainton.)  The  shadow  of 
death  turned  into  morning : — I.  To  thosb  who  havb  tbtjly  sottght  God  grim 
DEATH  IS  BUT  A  SHADOW.     To  the  Christian  death  is  but  the  semblance  of  a  foe. 

II.  The  SHADOW  of  death  ushers  in  the  eternal  morning.  No  sooner  does 
the  shadow  of  death  fall  than  the  light  of  heaven  begins  to  dawn.  Heaven's 
morning  is  without  clouds.  No  cloud  intercepts  the  intellect  of  the  glorified. 
No  moral  mists  are  known  there.  III.  The  shadow  of  death  is  often  the 
precursor  of  brighter  days  on  earth.  Death  of  one  has  been  followed  by 
the  conversion  of  others.  The  fortitude  of  departing  saints  often  dispels  the 
fear  of  death  from  the  living.  ( W.  Williams. )  The  shadow  turned  : — I.  Every 
SORROW  is  a  shadow  OF  DEATH.  Our  deepest  sorrows  are  not  always  to  be 
measured  by  events  themselves,  but  by  thoughts  and  emotions  which  lie  at  the 
heart  of  them.  When  we  see  and  feel  how  griefs  and  tribulations  are  used  by 
God,  for  softening,  purifying,  and  elevating  character,  we  see  even  here  how  the 
shadows  of  death  are  turned  into  the  morning.  II.  National  or  personal 
judgment  is  the  shadow  of  death.  Perhaps  this  is  the  direct  reference  of 
these  words.  Israel  may  live  again.  III.  Declining  strength  is  a  shadow 
OF  death.  There  comes  the  time  when  irremediable  and  irresistible  disease 
does  its  steady  work.  IV.  Unbelief  is  a  shadow  of  death.  Unbelief  regarded 
as  distrust  of  God  as  a  Father  and  Redeemer  ;  and  distrust  of  ourselves  as  destined 
for  the  glorious  immortality  opened  to  us,  and  prepared  for  us  by  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  our  blessed  Lord.  V.  Bereavement  is  the  shadow  of  death. 
We  realise  nothing  till  it  creates  vacancy  with  us.  Some  losses  we  can  bear. 
After  bereavement  there  gradually  comes  a  morning  of  humble  submission  and 
rest  in  God.  ( W.  M.  Statham. )  The  shadow  of  death  turned  into  morning  : — 
The  Tekoan  herdsman  had  often  seen  daybreak.  1.  How  mightily,  2.  How 
silently,  3.  How  mysteriously,  4.  How  mercifully  God  brought  in  the  bright- 
ness of  day  after  the  gloom  of  night.  Is  not  this  an  illustration  of  what  God  is 
always  doing  ?  I.  He  turneth  winter  to  spring.  How,  when  the  wild  flowers 
perfume  the  glen,  and  the  foliage  buds  in  the  hedgerows,  and  birds  carol  under 
brightening  skies,  the  shadow  of  death,  that  winter  so  often  seems  to  be,  is  turned 
into  morning.  II.  He  turneth  adversity  into  prosperity.  Thus  was  it  with 
Job.     Thus  need  it  be  with  many  in   this   season    of   commercial   depression. 

III.  He  turneth  sickness  to  health.  As  with  Hezekiah,  "  He  healeth  our 
diseases."     IV.  He  turneth  death  to  immortality.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  10.  They  hate  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  gate,  and  they  abhor  him  that 
speaketh  uprightly. — The  hates  of  sin  : — Amos  has  here  preserved  a  characteristic 
of  the  society  of  his  time  which  throws  much  light  on  the  real  character  of  sin 
— its  hatred  of  justice  and  truth.  1.  "  They  hate  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  gate." 
At  the  gate  the  princes  of  the  East  sat  in  judgment  (Job  xxix.  7 ;  Psa.  cxxvii. 
5).  No  wonder  such  men  as  Amos  laboured  amongst  hated  the  judge.  His 
practised  eye  pierced  their  disguise  and  detected  the  hypocrisy  and  sin  that  lurked 
for  their  prey.  He  was  vested  with  power  which  could  thwart  all  their  pur- 
poses. No  good  man  fears  justice.  It  is  the  friend  that  frees  him  from  the 
attack  of  his  enemies,  and  preserves  to  him  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  his  home. 
2.  But  there  is  another  particular  added.  "  They  abhor  him  that  speaketh 
uprightly."  They  could  not  even  bear  to  hear  the  truth.  Amaziah  (vii.  12, 
13)  resorts  to  stratagem  to  free  the  country  of  words  that  revealed  the  true 
condition  of  things  (also  1  Kings  xxii.  8,  also  Ahab  and  Jezebel's  hatred 
of  Elijah).  The  condemnation  of  sin  is  pronounced  in  this  description 
of  it.  What  can  be  said  in  defence  of  that  which  makes  men  hate  justice 
and  truth  ?  Yet  this  spirit  is  widespread.  See  the  story  of  the  Greek 
who  voted  for  the  condemnation  of  Aristides  because  he  was  tired  of  hearing 
him  called  "  the  just."  Christ  endiured  its  utmost  rancour.  The  reasons  for 
these  hates  of  sin.  1.  Justice  is  a  reproof  of  its  own  course.  Such  words 
and  deeds  make  conscience  sting  (Pro v.  ix.  8).  2.  Justice  snatches  away 
the  booty  of  sin,  and  truth  (him  that  speaketh  uprightly)  robs  it  of  the 
respect  that  even  sin  likes  to  have.  Hence  the  hatred.  ?.  Warning  c.i 
futiure  punishment.      These  censures  are  warnings  of  the  final  judgment  which 

5  __ 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

God  shall  pronounce  on  sin.  Who  would  cast  in  his  lot  with  such  men  7 
(J.  Telford,  B.A.) 

Ver.  14.  Seek  good,  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live. — Religion: — From  these 
words  two  things  may  be  inferred  concerning  reUgion.  I.  It  implies  a  sfkoifio 
PUBStJiT.  "  Seek  good,  and  not  evil."  Good  and  evil  are  both  in  the  world ; 
they  work  in  all  human  souls  ;  they  explain  all  history.  1.  They  imply  a  standard 
of  right.  By  what  do  we  determine  the  good  and  evil  in  human  life  ?  The  revealed 
wiU  of  God.  What  accords  with  that  will  is  good,  what  disagrees  with  it  is 
evil.  2.  Their  object  is  a  human  piursuit.  There  are  those  who  pursue  evil ; 
they  foUow  it  for  worldly  wealth,  animal  pleasure,  secular  aggrandisement.  There 
are  those  who  pursue  good ;  and  their  grand  question  is,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou 
have  me  to  do  ?  "  3.  The  pursuit  of  good  is  the  specific  effort  of  religion.  Good 
in  thought,  spirit,  aim,  habit,  as  embodied  in  the  life  of  Christ.  To  get  good 
requires  strenuous,  persistent,  devout,  prayerful  effort.  II.  It  involves  the 
HIGHEST  BENEDICTION.  1.  The  enjoyment  of  true  life.  "  That  ye  may  live." 
Without  goodness  you  carmot  really  live  :  goodness  is  life.  Everlasting  goodness  is 
everlasting  life.  2.  The  enjoj-ment  of  the  Divine  friendship.  What  a  benediction 
this  !  "  The  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  the  Almighty  Creator,  Proprietor  and  Governor 
of  the  universe  to  be  with  us,  to  guide,  guard,  beautify  existence.  "  I  will  walk 
among  you,"  says  He,  "  I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  My  people."  {Homiliat.) 
Siding  with  the  good  is  to  be  on  God's  side  : — If  a  man  wants  to  be  on  the  winning 
side,  let  him  be  on  the  right  side.  There  is  no  other  safe  rule  to  conform  to.  If 
a  man  is  on  the  right  side  he  will  be  on  the  winning  side,  even  if  it  seems  the  losing 
Bide.  The  right  side  is  God's  side,  and  God's  side  is  sure  of  a  triumph  in  the  end, 
however  it  may  look  to  the  world  just  now.  It  may  be  said  reverently,  that 
God's  trains  have  the  right  of  way  on  the  roads  of  imi verse,  and  that  he  who 
wants  to  reach  his  destination  surely,  and  in  time,  will  do  well  to  take  his  passage 
on  one  of  those  trains.  Any  other  train  is  hable  to  a  disastrous  coUision ;  at 
the  best  it  is  sure  to  go  astray.  He  who  is  not  going  with  God  is  not  going  God's 
way;  and  no  other  way  is  a  safe  one  to  travel.  (Great  Thoughts.)  Habit  aids 
right  doing : — The  force  of  habit,  when  enhsted  on  the  side  of  righteousness,  not 
only  strengthens  and  makes  sure  oiu:  resistance  to  vice,  but  facilitates  the  most 
arduous  performances  of  virtue.  The  man  whose  thoughts,  with  the  purposes 
and  doings  to  which  they  lead,  are  at  the  bidding  of  conscience,  will,  by  frequent 
repetition,  at  length  describe  the  same  track  almost  spontaneously, — even  as 
in  physical  education,  things,  laboriously  learned  at  the  first,  come  to  be  done 
at  last  without  the  feeling  of  an  effort.  And  so,  in  moral  education,  every  new 
achievement  of  principle  smooths  the  way  to  future  achievements  of  the  same 
kind  ;  and  the  precious  fruit  or  purchase  of  each  moral  virtue  is  to  set  us  on  higher 
and  firmer  vantage-ground  for  the  conquests  of  principle  in  all  time  coming.  He 
who  resolutely  bids  away  the  suggestions  of  avarice,  when  they  come  into  conflict 
with  the  incumbent  generosity;  or  the  suggestions  of  voluptuousness,  when 
they  come  into  conflict  with  the  incumbent  self-denial ;  or  the  suggestions  of 
anger,  when  they  come  into  conflict  with  the  incumbent  act  of  magnanimity  and 
forbearance — wiU  at  length  obtain  not  a  respite  only,  but  a  final  dehverance  from 
their  intrusion.     {T.  Chalmers.) 

Ver.  15.  The  Lord  of  hosts  will  he  gracious  unto  the  remnant  of  Joseph. — A 

remnant  saved : — There  is  a  mystery  of  mercy  in  the  destruction  and  salvation ; 
but  for  the  destruction  and  the  salvation  meeting  together  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
the  race  of  mankind  would  all  be  lost.  There  are  questions  we  constantly  insist 
on  asking  with  reference  to  the  number  of  the  saved  and  the  lost.  I  fear  we  often 
try  to  make  out  a  case  for  the  smallest  number  of  the  saved  ;  while  some  are  fond 
of  calling  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  Church,  "  a  Zoar  " — "  a  httle  one."  The 
Book  is  a  wondrous  record  of  the  story  of  the  remnant  of  grace  which  God  has 
preserved  in  every  age.     (£.  Paxton  Hood.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  Woe  unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  the  Lord ! — The  day  of  the 
Lord  : — I.  An  awakening  comjiination.  1.  What  is  meant  by  the  "day  of  the 
Lord "  ?  The  day  of  death,  or  personal  dissolution.  The  day  of  captivity, 
or  national  dissolution.  The  day  of  judgment,  or  general  accoimt.  2.  What 
is  meant  by  desiring  this  day  ?  The  people  are  censured  for  desiring  it  rashly, 
because   they  did  not  consider  it ;  scofSn^'ly,  because  they  did  not  beUeve  it  j 


CHAP,  v.]  AMOS.  67 

desperately,  because  they  did  not  fear  it.  Men  desired  the  day  of  the  Lord 
from  discontentedness  in  their  own  condition  ;  presumption  of  their  own  innocency  ; 
and  from  ignorance  or  misapprehension  of  the  thing  itself.  II.  The  coNViNCiNa 
BXPOSTUiiATiON.  "  To  what  end  is  it  for  you  ?  "  Here  is  a  calling  of  them  to 
an  account  for  their  desire,  or  an  expostulation.  And  a  discovering  to  them 
the  fruitlessness  of  their  desire,  or  a  conviction.  To  all  good  Christians  and 
believers  it  is  a  day  of  absolution  ;  a  day  of  redemption  ;  and  a  day  of  salvation. 
III.  The  express  coNCiiUSiON  or  determination,  "  The  da/  of  the  Lord  is 
darkness,  and  not  light."  This  is  to  be  understood  of  the  day  of  death  and  judgment. 
This  sentence  may  be  taken — 1.  In  the  general  proposition  of  it,  as  it  stands  by 
itself.  ( 1 )  In  the  affirmative,  what  it  is  ;  (2)  In  the  negative,  what  it  is  not.  By 
way  of  opposition ;  by  way  of  intention,  to  show  the  greatness  of  the  darkness ;  by 
way  of  perpetuity.  Darkness  and  Iways  dark  ;  by  way  of  extent  or  explication,  to 
show  unto  us  the  full  nature  of  this  business,  wherein  it  does  consist.  2.  In  its 
particular  scope,  as  directed  more  especially  to  the  persons  above  mentioned,  who 
desired  this  day  of  the  ord.  It  carries  a  threefold  force  or  emphasis  with  it.  An 
emphasis  of  information  ;  an  emphasis  of  conviction  to  those  who  were  obstinate  ; 
and  an  emphasis  of  astonishment  to  those  which  were  desperate,  which  knew  it,  but 
laid  aside  the  thoughts  and  considerations  of  it,  and  would  put  it  to  the  venture. 
(T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Avengers  of  a  broken  covenant : — To  the  overthrow  of  the 
ten  tribes  for  their  idolatry  Amos  refers  in  the  text.  He  asserts  the  absolute 
certainty .  f  that  overthrow  except  on  their  national  repentance.  I.  The  hardened 
impiety  of  ungodly  men.  Numbers  of  these  impenitent  and  blaspheming 
Jews  openly  defied  the  judgment  of  the  Almighty,  mocked  at  the  messages  and 
warnings  of  God's  Word,  and,  as  though  to  show  their  utter  contempt  of  the  prophet 
and  the  prophecy,  expressed  their  desire  to  "  see  the  day  " — to  brave  the  worst 
— as  though  convinced  that,  in  spite  of  warnings,  the  judgment  announced  would 
never  take  place,  or  if  it  did,  it  would  not  be  nearly  so  formidable  as  was  described. 
It  is  not  safe  to  despise  death,  as  some  affect  to  do,  nor  that  God  whose  minister 
death  is,  since  the  dread  realities  of  the  unseen  world  will  far  surpass  our  utmost 
apprehension.  The  Arabians  have  a  saying  that  there  are  three  things  not  to 
be  trifled  with.  It  is  not  good  to  jest  of  God,  of  death,  or  of  the  devil.  Not 
of  God,  for  God  neither  can  nor  will  be  mocked.  Not  of  death,  for  death  mocks 
the  pride  of  all  men,  one  time  or  other.  Nor  even  of  the  devil,  for  the  devil 
puts  an  eternal  sarcasm  on  those  who  are  too  familiar  with  him.  II.  The  causes 
OF  this  hardb  ED  IMPIETY.  I.  It  procccds  from  infidel  presumption.  Infidelity 
is  often  more  of  the  heart  than  of  the  head.  A  man  never  set  about  proving 
Christianity  imtrue,  but  he  wished  it  first.  2.  Sometimes  from  a  one-sided  view 
of  God's  character.  At  one  time  they  argue  that  God  is  merciful,  and  therefore 
they  trust  to  escape.  At  other  times  they  think  that  others  having  escaped 
is  an  encouragement  to  them,  and  that  threatenings  long  delayed  may  never  be 
fulfilled.  They  presume  upon  security  because  sentence  against  an  evil  work 
is  not  speedily  executed.  The  silence  of  providence  emboldens  them.  3.  From 
their  practical  immoralities.  These  darken  the  understanding,  and  sear  the  con- 
science, and  blind  the  mind  to  its  own  guilt  and  deformity.  III.  The  threatened 
JUDGMENTS  TO  AVHICH  THEY  STAND  EXPOSED.  1.  The  certainty  of  the  punishment. 
"  The  lion  out  of  the  forest ;  the  bear  from  the  wood  ;  and  the  serpent  by  the 
sides  of  the  house  "  appear.  These  Jewish  hypocrites  defied  the  threatened 
judgment,  but  they  could  not  escape  it.  2.  The  slight  and  casual  agency  by  which 
it  was  brought  about.  Amos  paints  to  the  life.  To  this  day  this  is  no  uncommon 
circumstance.  The  naturalist  in  Jamaica  tells  us  that  the  most  common  reptile 
of  the  serpent  tribe  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  is  the  small  black  snake,  which 
may  often  be  seen  hanging  half  out  of  the  loose  walls,  so  much  used  as  fences, 
and  thus  lying  motionless  for  its  prey.  Now  anply  these  images  to  God's  judgments 
on  the  ancient  Jews.  Their  own  writers  interpret  this  almost  literally  of  the 
captivities  they  should  suffer  from  the  Chaldeans,  the  Persians,  and  the  Grecian 
armies.  Their  words  are,  '"  Fleeing  from  the  face  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  Lion, 
3  ou  will  be  met  by  Ahasuerus  the  Persi.an,  and  encount  r  the  Persecution  instigated 
by  Haman  ;  or  (the  Empire  of  the  Chaldeans  being  destroj'^ed),  next  the  Medes 
and  Persians  shall  arise,  compared  by  Daniel  himself  to  '  the  Bear,'  es  their 
symbol.  But  when,  at  the  command  of  Cyrus  and  Darius,  yoiu-  captivity  is 
ended,  and  ye  return  to  Jerusalem,  and  lean  ;, o  r  v.xavy  hands  upcn  its  ruined 
walls  in  hope  of  peace  and  safety,  then  shall  come  Alexauder  the  Great,  the  head 
of  the  Grecian   E;npire, — or  Antiochus   Epiphanes,   the  Great   Persecutor,   who 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r, 

shall  bite  like  a  serpent.  Yet  not  without,  as  in  Babylon  or  Susa,  but  within, 
in  the  very  borders  of  the  Holy  Land  itself.  By  all  which  it  appears,"  say  they, 
"  that  the  day  you  anticipate  is  a  day  not  of  joy  but  of  sorrow,  not  of  Ught  but 
of  darkness,"  3.  Guard  against  all  approaches  to  this  sin.  Things  do  not  suddenly 
come  to  the  worst  between  man  and  Grod.  Again,  let  the  young  beware  of  abusing: 
the  Divine  forbearance  to  embolden  them  in  sin.  But  though  you  escape  the  lion 
and  the  bear,  you  may,  in  an  unexpected  moment,  be  stung  by  the  serpent  to  the 
heart,  in  the  chinks  and  crevices  of  the  wall.  4.  Learn  the  value  and  preciousnesa 
of  that  Gospel  which  reveals  a  method  of  escape  from  greater  evils  than  those 
which  threatened  ancient  Israel.  6.  Beware  of  neglecting  the  grace  of  the 
dispensation  under  which  you  hve.  6.  Implore  especially  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  renew  and  restore  your  nature.  To  have  a  proud  heart  under  humbhng 
dispensations,  and  a  hard  heart  imder  softening  ones  is  awful.  {Homiletic 
Magazine.)  On  false  Jwpes  in  death: — We  must  distinguish  the  persons  to 
whom  the  prophet  addresses  this  solemn  denunciation.  They  are  self-deceivers. 
Notwithstanding  the  sinfulness  of  the  people,  that  national  pride  which  led  them 
to  imagine  that  because  they  had  Abraham  to  their  father  they  must  needs  be 
saved — was  still  their  besetting  sin.  1.  From  these  words  we  gather  at  once 
this  great  fact,  that  there  is  a  day  of  the  Lord  coming — a  day  of  judgment  and 
righteous  retribution.  It  is  that  day  in  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteous- 
ness by  Jesus  Christ.  It  will  be  a  day  of  fearful  discovery  ;  of  universal  assembly  ; 
of  awful  decision.  2.  The  only  groimd  of  hope  on  which  we  can  look  for  salvation 
in  that  day.  We  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There 
is  a  subordinate  condition  of  acquittal  and  salvation  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
The  future  destiny  of  each  individual  will  have  an  exact  reference  to  the  tenor 
of  his  present  conduct.  3.  There  are  many  who  form  vain  hopes  of  salvation  at 
the  coming  of  our  Lord.  There  are  some  who  appear  to  have  no  fear  or  hope  on 
the  subject.  There  are  others  who  have  strong  expectations,  while  they  have  no 
warrant  from  Scriptiu*  for  their  hope.  Some  trust  to  what  they  call  the  goodness 
and  benevolence  of  God.  Some  are  self-righteous.  Some  make  a  high  profession 
of  faith  in  His  name,  while  they  have  in  works  denied  Him.  Theirs  is  the  hope 
of  the  hypocrite  that  shall  perish.     (Anon.) 

Vers.  21-24.  I  hate,  I  despise  your  feast  days. — The  Divinely  abhorrent  and  the 
Divinely  demanded : — I.  The  Divinely  abhorrent.  The  same  aversion  from 
the  ceremonial  observances  of  the  insincere  and  rebeUious  Israielites  which  Jehovah 
here  expresses  He  afterwards  employed  Isaiah  to  declare  to  the  Jews  (i.  10).  The 
two  passages  are  strikingly  parallel,  only  the  latter  prophet  ampUfies  what  ia 
set  forth  in  a  more  condensed  form  by  Amos.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that 
where  Amos  introduces  the  musical  accompaniments  of  the  sacrifices,  Isaiah 
substitutes  the  prayers :  both  concluding  with  the  Divine  words,  "  I  will  not 
hear."  "  Take  thou  away  from  Me  the  noise  of  thy  songs  ;  for  I  will  not  hear 
the  melody  of  thy  viols."  The  singing  of  their  psalms  was  nothing  more  to  God 
than  a  wearisome  word  which  was  to  be  brought  to  an  end.  Singing  and  playing 
on  harps  was  a  part  of  the  worship  of  the  temple  (1  Chron.  xvi.  40,  xxiii.  5, 
XXV.).  Nothing  seems  more  abhorrent  to  the  holy  eye  and  heart  of  Omniscience 
than  empty  ceremony  in  religion.  No  sacrifices  are  acceptable  to  Him,  however 
costly,  unless  the  offerer  has  presented  himself.  II.  The  Divinely  demanded. 
"  Let  judgment  run  down  as  waters,  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty  stream." 
We  prefer  to  see  justice  rolling  on  hke  mighty  waters,  and  righteousness  as  a 
swelling  and  ever-flowing  stream,  to  crowded  churches.  "  Show  me  your  faith 
by  yoiu"  works."  Show  me  your  worship  by  your  moraUty  ;  show  me  your  love 
to  God  by  yoxii  devotion  to  your  fellow-men.  "  If  we  love  one  another,  God 
dwelleth  in  us."  {Homilist.)  But  let  judgment  run  down  as  waters,  and 
:  rigtiteousness  as  a  mighty  stream. — A  prophet  of  righteousness  : — This  is  one 
of  the  commonest  ideas  aU  through  the  prophets,  but  it  is  the  sole  idea  of 
Amos.  I.  The  prophet.  Amos  is  probably  the  oldest  prophet  whose  writings 
have  come  down  to  us.  Once  only  the  Divine  inspiration  descended  on  him,  and 
constituted  him  the  messenger  of  heaven.  Amos  was  the  prophet  of  a  single 
occasion.  II.  His  prophecy.  Amos  opened  his  message  in  a  way  that  must 
at  once  have  riveted  the  attention  of  the  crowd.  He  began  with  a  series  of  brief 
oracles  about  the  neighbouring  nations.  He  denoimces  their  sins,  and  announces 
the  pimishments  that  were  about  to  fall  on  them  for  their  sins.  Notice  the 
peculiarity  of  the  sins  which  this  prophet  denounces.     This  is  the  speciahty  of 


CHAP,  VI.]  AMOS.  69 

Amos.  They  are  not  sins  against  God,  but  against  man.  The  oppression  oi 
the  poor  is  the  subject  of  Amos.  The  prosperity  of  the  country  was  nly  illusory. 
The  righteousness  which  the  righteous  God  requires  is  not  something  in  the  air. 
It  is  not  an  abstraction,  it  is  conduct  between  man  and  man,  and  there  is  no 
righteousness  of  any  account  that  does  not  embrace  that.     {James  Stalker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Veb.  1.  Woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion. — The  secure  alarmed : — 
There  is  something  very  agreeable  and  desirable  in  ease.  Yet,  strange  as  the 
declaration  may  appear,  this  tranquillity  is  too  common  ;  and  to  disturb  it  should 
be  our  design.  For  your  peace  may  be  a  false  peace.  Before  an  earthquake 
the  air  is  uncommonly  serene.  Ascertain  precisely  the  characters  whose  delusions 
we  wish  to  destroy.  I.  Some  are  at  ease  in  Zion  from  selfish  insensibility. 
Such  there  were  in  the  days  of  Amos.  In  a  similar  way  to  Amos,  Isaiah  upbraids 
the  Jews.  There  are  still  many  whose  attention  to  their  own  indulgences  regulates 
all  their  actions.  Our  dispositions  ought  always  to  correspond  with  the  providence 
of  God,  and  the  purposes  for  which  He  placed  us  in  the  world.  For  the  unfeeling 
wretch  conscience  has  no  kind  office  to  perform.  For  him  no  orphan  prays, 
no  widow  sings.  For  him  the  evil  day  comes  on  charged  with  every  horror. 
He  has  no  asylum  in  the  feelings  of  the  community,  the  happiness  of  whose  members 
he  never  sought.  II.  Some  from  infidel  presumption.  If  there  be  any  truth 
in  the  Scriptures,  the  dispositions  of  the  generality  of  mankind  are  very  unsuitable 
to  their  state  and  their  destiny.  What  is  this  ease  which  flows  from  infidel  per- 
suasion ?  1.  It  is  obtained  with  difficulty.  2.  It  is  partial,  and  liable  to  inter- 
ruption. 3.  The  less  liable  it  is  to  be  disturbed,  the  more  awful ;  for  it  is  penal. 
4.  This  ease  is  fatal.  Its  duration  is  momentary  ;  it  must  end,  and  end  in  anguish 
and  despair.  III.  Some  from  vain  confidence  ;  reljring  on  the  goodness 
of  their  present  state,  and  on  the  certainty  of  their  future  happiness.  There  is 
such  a  thing  as  spiritual  self-flattery  ;  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  delusive  depend- 
ence on  religion.  1.  This  confidence  keeps  them  from  looking  after  salvation. 
They  are  too  good  to  be  saved.  2.  This  course  will  terminate  in  woeful  surprise 
and  disappointment.  IV.  Some  from  practical  indifference.  You  would 
much  offend  persons  of  this  class,  were  you  to  inquire  whether  they  believed 
the  Scripture.  These  persons  are  not  to  be  charged  sentimentally  with  anti- 
nomianism  or  any  other  error.  They  know  the  Gospel  in  theory ;  but  they  are 
strangers  to  its  Divine  efficacy.  Of  all  the  various  characters  we  have  to  deal 
with  in  our  ministry,  these  are  the  most  unlikely  to  insure  success.  We  preach  ; 
you  acknowledge  and  admire, — but  you  discover  no  more  concern  to  obtain  the 
one  thing  needful  we  propose,  than  if  you  were  persuaded  we  called  you  "  to  foUow 
a  cunningly  devised  fable."  Your  life  is  a  perpetual  contradiction  to  your  creed  : 
you  are  not  happy,  and  contrive  not  to  be  miserable.  Inferences.  1.  They 
are  highly  criminal,  who  countenance  and  promote  a  state  of  carnal  ease.  2.  Let 
none  be  troubled  when  they  find  their  connections  distressed  and  alarmed  with 
a  sense  of  their  sin  and  danger.  3.  Nothing  is  so  much  to  be  dreaded  as  false 
security  in  religion.  4.  There  is  consolation  for  those  who  are  distressed.  We 
do  not  applaud  all  their  doubts  and  dejections,  but  these  painful  scruples  are 
easily  accounted  for,  and  they  lie  on  the  safe  side.  {William  Jay.)  Carnal 
security : — I.  The  state  of  mind  that  is  reproved  in  this  passage.  1.  It 
includes  carnal  security  (ver.  1).  2.  It  includes  presumptuous  imbehef  (vers.  2,  3). 
3.  It  includes  sensual  indulgence  (vers.  4,  5,  6,  first  clause).  4.  It  includes  selfish 
indifference  (ver.  6,  last  clause).  II.  The  justice  of  the  woe  denounced  against 
IT.  1.  Such  a  state  of  mind  indicates  a  lurking  enmity  against  God.  2.  Indicates 
insensibility  to  the  claims  of  Jesus.  3.  Indicates  a  deep-seated  unbelief  of  coming 
judgments.  {Q.  Brooks.)  The  danger  of  indifference  to  spiritual  things:^ 
I.  The  state  condemned.  God's  threatenings  had  been  declared  against  the 
kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel,  but  the  people  confided  in  their  fortifications 
and  external  advantages,  or  in  their  profession  of  being  the  people  of  God  ;  thug 
they  carelessly  indulged  themselves,  and  were  heedless  about  consequences, 
though  destruction  impended  over  them.     The  application  of  the  passage  to  thq 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

conduct  of  many  under  the  means  of  grace  is  natural  and  easy.  The  state  of 
mind  condemned  is — 1.  Expressive  of  careless  indifference.  2.  It  is  expressive 
of  false  security.  The  persons  warned  in  the  text  were  regarding  themselves 
as  secure  on  false  and  uncertain  grounds.  So  many  are  now  found  perverting 
the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  and  promising  to  themselves  security  in  such  per- 
version. Or  they  pretend  that  they  are  waiting  for  God's  time,  when  He  will 
afford  them  necessary  help.  They  make  their  moral  inability,  or  in  other  words, 
their  unwillingness  to  receive  Christ  and  His  Gospel  an  excuse  for  their  continued 
disobedience,  and  attribute  their  rebellion  and  unbelief  to  the  want  of  God's 
help,  rather  than  to  the  state  of  their  own  hearts,  to  the  love  of  sin,  and  to  their 
unwillingness  to  yield  submission  to  the  Saviour's  authority.  Others  make 
their  moral  conduct  a  ground  of  hope.  Their  honesty,  their  kindness  to  their 
neighbours,  and  the  propriety  of  their  general  deportment  are  substituted  for 
faith  in  Christ,  and  a  cordial  reception  of  His  Gospel.  3.  It  is  expressive  of  a 
state  of  sloth.  Many  professors  are  thus  at  ease.  Once  they  were  anxious, 
inquiring,  full  of  apparent  desire  after  the  favour  of  God  and  the  blessings  oJE 
salvation,  and  of  activity  in  the  Saviour's  cause.  But  their  zeal,  activity,  and 
ardour  have  passed  away.  They  are  slumbering  and  sleeping.  II.  Mark  thh 
PLACE  WHEKB  THIS  STATB  OF  MIND  IS  BXEBCiSED.  If  slothfulness  and  indifference 
are  unseemly  in  other  spheres,  are  they  less  so  in  Zion,  in  the  house,  in  the  Church 
of  God  ?  If  they  are  injurious  to  our  temporal  concerns,  are  they  less  so  to  our 
spiritual  and  eternal  interests  ?  Restricting  the  term  "  in  Zion  "  to  the  place 
where  God  is  worshipped,  to  His  sanctuary,  we  remark — 1.  That  in  Zion  the 
law  of  God  is  declared.  Its  purity,  its  justice,  its  spiritual  character  and  extensive 
requirements  are  set  forth.  In  Zion  we  are  shown  the  harmony  of  the  law  with 
the  Gospel,  while  it  becomes  the  means  of  preparing  us  to  receive  salvation.  2.  In 
Zion  the  Gospel  is  proclaimed.  Here  the  most  constant  theme  is  salvation  through 
the  Saviour's  blood.  Here  Jesus  is  evidently  set  forth  as  crucified  among  us. 
Can  you  be  at  ease  in  Zion,  cold  and  insensible,  with  the  Cross  in  view,  and 
indifferent  to  the  Saviour's  voice  addressing  us  therefrom  ?  3.  Zion  is  the  special 
residence  of  Christ.  Jesus  is  now  represented  as  King  in  Zion,  as  the  Ruler  and 
Head  of  His  Church.  III.  The  danger  to  which  this  state  of  mind  exposes. 
1.  How  opposed  to  aU  spiritual  improvement.  2.  How  expressive  of  contempt 
for  spiritual  blessings.  3.  How  ruinous  to  oxir  eternal  interests.  {Essex 
Remembrancer. )  Sinners  in  Zion  described  and  doomed  : — I.  Consider  the 
persons  here  mentioned.  They  are  described  as  being  "  at  ease  in  Zion." 
The  temple  was  called  Zion.  The  name  was  gradually  extended  to  the  worshippers, 
so  that  it  came  to  embrace  all  who  profess  to  know  and  worship  God.  To  be  in 
Zion  means  to  be  in  a  land  where  the  true  God  is  known  and  worshipped,  where 
religious  privileges,  similar  to  those  of  the  Jews,  are  enjoyed.  Taking  the  word 
in  a  more  limited  sense,  to  be  in  Zion  is  to  be  among  those  who  statedly  meet 
for  the  purpose  of  religious  worship.  Or  it  may  include  only  those  who  have 
made  a  public  profession  of  religion.  The  ease  here  intended  is  ease  not  of  body, 
but  of  mind  ;  ease  relating  not  to  our  temporal  but  to  our  religious  or  spiritual 
concerns.  Persons  are  at  ease  when  they  feel  neither  sorrow  nor  alarm  on  account 
of  their  sins  ;  when  they  are  seldom  troubled  by  the  admonitions  of  conscience  ; 
when  they  are  not  engaged  in  working  out  their  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling, 
but  feel  quiet  and  secure.  This  unconcern  respecting  themselves  is  usually  accom- 
panied by  at  least  equal  unconcern  respecting  the  salvation  of  others.  Such 
persons  are  described  as  "  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph  "  ;  that  is,  for 
the  evils  and  calamities  that  afflict  the  Church.  This  body  may  be  divided  into 
several  classes,  corresponding  with  the  various  causes  to  which  their  ease  is 
ascribed.  1.  Those  who  deny  that  any  punishment  will  be  inflicted  on  sinners. 
This  includes  infidels  of  every  description ;  those  who  deny  God's  government 
of  the  world  ;  those  who  contemn  God  ;  and  the  scoffers.  In  this  class  must 
also  be  placed  those  who  believe  that  aU  men  will  be  saved.  False  prophets 
who  cry  "  peace,  peace,"  when  there  is  no  peace.  2.  Those  who  allow  that 
sinners  will  be  punished,  but  who  deny,  or  do  not  appear  to  believe,  that  they 
are  sinners.  They  find,  or  fancy  that  they  find  none  better  than  themselves, 
few  so  good,  and  very  many  worse.  Hence  they  conclude  that  they  are  in  no 
danger,  that  they  have  nothing  to  fear,  and  of  course  feel  easy  and  secure.  Such 
persons  are  without  the  law.  They  know  nothing  of  its  spirituality,  strictness, 
and  extent.  They  have  never  tried  themselves  by  this  rule.  They  are  like  a 
man  buried  in  sleep,  totally  unconscious  of  their  true  character  and  situation. 


CHAP.  VI.]  AMOS.  71 

insensible  of  their  sins,  and  of  the  danger  to  which  their  sins  expose  them.  3.  Those 
who  acknowledge  that  they  are  sinners,  and  that  sinners  will  be  punished  ;  and 
yet  they  are  at  ease,  for  they  contrive  in  various  ways  to  persuade  themselves 
that  though  other  sinners  will  be  punished,  they  shall  themselves  escape.  Such 
persons,  though  habitually,  are  not  always  at  ease.  They  have  times  of  anxiety 
and  alarm.  It  is  their  way  by  promises  and  resolutions  to  put  oflf  the  evil  day. 
They  trust  to  a  future  convenient  season.  There  is  perhaps  no  class  of  sinners 
whose  situation  is  more  dangerous.  This  class  also  includes  all  who  entertain 
a  false  and  groundless  persuasion  that  they  have  already  become  pious,  obtained 
the  psffdon  of  their  sins,  and  secured  the  favour  of  God.  The  reasons  why  persons 
feel  such  a  persuasion  are  various.  II.  The  wob  which  is  denotjnchd  against 
THEM  IN  ouE  TEXT.  The  doom  is  expressed  in  general  terms  ;  in  terms  which 
may  include  curses  and  threatenings  of  every  kind.  Why  are  such  characters 
thought  worthy  of  a  punishment  so  severe  ?  1.  Because  the  ease  which  they 
feel  proves  that  they  belong  to  the  number  of  the  wicked.  All  who  are  habitually 
at  ease  in  Zion  know  nothing  of  true  religion.  They  are  either  careless  sinners  or 
self-deluded  hypocrites.  2.  They  are  not  only  sinners,  but  sinners  of  no  common 
stamp,  sinners  whose  guilt  and  sinfulness  are  peculiarly  aggravated,  and  whose 
punishment  will  therefore  be  peculiarly  severe.  He  who  is  at  ease  in  Zion  must 
be  deaf  to  God's  voice,  blind  to  God's  glories,  insensible  to  every  spiritual  object ; 
he  sins  against  light  and  against  love.  3.  There  is  little  reason  to  hope  that  they 
will  ever  repent.  On  what  grounds  can  we  hope  for  the  salvation  of  those  who 
are  at  ease  ?  If  they  cannot  be  roused,  if  their  false  peace  cannot  be  disturbed, 
they  must  inevitably  perish ;  and  to  rouse  them,  humanly  speaking,  seems 
impossible.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  The  Church  warned  against  supineness : — 
While  Amos  unveils  the  transgressions  of  Israel,  he  does  not  spare  the  sins  of 
Judah.  I.  The  persons  herb  referred  to.  Those  who  are  "  in  Zion."  The 
class  of  persons  spoken  of  are  the  members  of  the  visible  Church,  the  professing 
people  of  God.  Regard  the  professing  Church — 1.  As  solemnly  devoted  to  holiness 
and  God.  ( 1 )  They  are  so  by  the  immediate  and  express  purpose  of  God  Himself. 
He  has  created  them  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  He  has  done  this  for  His  own 
glory.  (2)  They  are  so  by  the  intention  of  their  Divine  Redeemer.  He  has 
done  and  suffered  much  for  them.  To  redeem  and  raise  up  a  holy  Church  is 
the  object  which  is  the  solace  of  all  the  Redeemer's  labours,  the  meed  of  all  His 
sufferings.  (3)  They  are  devoted  to  holiness  in  baptism.  The  ordinance  of 
baptism  is  the  expressive  type  and  sign  of  the  sprinkling  of  the  efficacious  blood. 
(4)  They  are  thus  devoted  by  voluntary  covenant.  Every  Christian  is  such 
by  his  free  choice.  2.  As  the  appointed  instrument  in  the  evangelisation  of  the 
world.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  designed  to  be  a  benevolent  institution.  They 
are  appointed  "  witnesses  "  for  God  to  an  unbelieving  and  perishing  world. 
(1)  Th  y  are  eminently  fitted  for  this.  They  are  themselves  awakened  and  alive 
to  the  dangerous  condition  of  every  imconverted  man.  They  know  too  the  way 
of  deliverance.  And  (2)  they  have  the  command.  3.  As  a  mediator  with  God 
on  behalf  of  a  perishing  world.  (1)  The  renovation  of  the  moral  world  depends 
upon  the  agency  and  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Word  of  God  itself  con- 
tains no  inherent  or  independent  efficacy  to  convert  mankind.  (2)  The  bestow- 
ment  of  the  Spirit  is  frequently  and  distinctly  promised,  but  always  in  answer 
to  prayer,  (3)  Hence  prayer  is  made  the  Christian's  primary  duty.  Jesus  both 
by  precept  and  by  example  urged  it  upon  His  followers.  II.  The  sin  charged 
UPON  THEM.  "  They  are  at  ease."  Consider — 1.  Their  spiritual  condition. 
They  are  devoted  to  holiness ;  are  they  holy  ?  The  spiritual  state  of  Christians 
generally  is  not  such  as  to  warrant  their  being  at  ease.  Every  scriptural  view 
of  their  character  and  duty  involves  the  obligation  of  strenuous  exertion.  2.  The 
state  of  the  world.  The  Gospel  has  now  been  preached  over  eighteen  hundred 
years,  and  what  is  the  result  ?  Look  at  your  own  family  and  domestic  circle. 
Look  at  the  inhabitants  of  your  town  and  neighbourhood.  To  how  small  a 
proportion  of  our  race  have  even  the  tidings  of  the  Gospel  yet  been  conveyed. 
3.  Another  reason  for  imeasiness  is  that  the  success  of  the  Word  must  always  arise 
from  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  The  judgment  denounced.  Under- 
stand— L  In  the  sense  of  a  simple  prophecy,  as  the  prediction  of  a  calamity  likely 
and  even  certain  to  ensue.  2.  It  is  the  language  of  righteous  retribution.  That 
there  is  an  equitable  correspondence  between  sin  and  its  consequences  is  testified 
by  all  experience.  3.  It  is  the  language  of  Divine  denunciation.  God  is  a  just 
Gfod,  and  a  terrible.     The  sceptre  of  His  mercy  may  become  the  rod  of  His  wrath. 


72  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

If  by  our  supinenesa,  our  unfaithfulness,  our  inconsistency,  our  sin,  we  have 
caused  to  be  shed  the  blood  of  souls,  shall  we  escape,  think  you,  the  just  judgment 
of  God  ?     {John  O.  Avery. )        At  ease  in  Zion  : — The  text  practically  applies 
to  all  nominal  and  professing  Christians.     I.  What  is  meant  by  those  who 
ARE  AT  EASE  IN  ZiON  ?     Lazy  Christians.     Christianity  is  more  than  profession, 
it  is  even  something  more  than  faith.     It  is  carrying  into  practice  the  truths 
we  profess.     The  soul  that  is  at  ease  sits  down  very  contentedly  on  his  mere 
profession,  and  mistakes  earth  for  heaven.     II.  What  is  the  cause  of  bbinq 
AT  EASE  IN  Zion  ?     1.  There  is  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  Christian  life.     Chris- 
tianity is  not  ease,  but  labour.     It  is  a  daily  struggle  against  unbelief  and  sin.     The 
man  at  ease  does  his  religion  by  deputy,  or  trusts  entirely  to  the  "  mercy  "  of  God, 
or  relies  on  outward  service  and  participation  in  form  and  ceremonies.     2.  There 
is  a  dislike  of  the  duties  to  be  undertaken.     S^]f -denial  is  not  congenial  to  the 
natural  heart.     Labour  is  hateful,  conflict  repulsive,  and  therefore  men  sit  down 
and   dream   away   their   opportunities.     3.    Self-confidence.     Disaster   seems   so 
unlikely.     We  fancy  we  are  so  secure  that  nothing  can  move  us.     Our  prosperity, 
our  privileges,  our  apparent  tranquillity  deceive  the  heart  and  lure  the  soul  to 
sleep.     III.  The  result  of  being  at  ease  in  Zion.     1.  It  generates  sin.     2.  It 
merits  the  displeasure  of  God.     3.  It  will  end  in  entire  destruction.     {0.  Wood,  M.A.) 
The  "  'policy  of  drift  "  easy : — Unless  you  make  for  the  great  things  of  your  life, 
for  I  am  not  talking  about  the  little  things  of  life,  many  of  which  are  best  deter- 
mined by  circumstances — unless  you  make  for  the  great  things  of  life,  the  deliberate 
choice  of  the  better  part,  you  have  in  effect  made  the  disastrous  choice  of  the 
worst.     The  "  policy  of  drift  "  always  ends  in  ruin  for  a  nation,  for  an  army, 
for  an  individual.     And  it  is  plain  enough  that  it  is  so,  because,  to  the  super- 
ficial observer,  it  is  a  great  deal  easier,  and  a  great  deal  pleasanter,  to  take  the 
low  levels  than  to  climb  ;  and  there  are  far  more,  and  very  clamant  voices  calling 
to  us  from  out  of  worldly  things  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  take  oiu:  ease  and  be  merry, 
and  let  ideals  alone,  than  there  are  summoning  us  to  the  loftier,  harder,  more 
heroic.  Christlike  coiurse  of  life.     It  is  hard  work  taking  a  great  junk  up  the  Yang- 
tse-Kiang.     Hundreds  of  trackers  have  to  strain  every  nerve  and  muscle  as  they 
go  stumbling  over  the  rocks  on  the  bank,  with  great  cables  on  their  shoulders, 
and  slow  progress  is  made.     It  would  take  a  week  to  get  as  far  up  as  they  can 
travel  coming  downwards  in  a  day,  without  any  trouble.     Ay,  and  what  is  that 
that  the  idle  crew  begin  to  hear,  as  they  lie  half  somnolent  on  the  deck,  enjoy- 
ing the  repose  ?     A  groaning  sound,  the  roar  of  the  rapids.     To  go  down  stream 
is  easy,  but  there  is  a  Niagara  at  the  far  end.     You  choose  the  worse  when  you 
do  not  deliberately  choose  the  better.     That  is  true  all  roxmd.     If  you  do  not 
coerce,  by  a  deliberate  act,  your  will,  or  your  inclination,  the  baser  sort  of  them 
will  get  the  upper  hand  of  you.     Take  away  the  police,  and  the  mob  will  loot 
and  riot.     (A.  Madaren,  D.D. )        The  inner  life  of  a  nation  determines  its  destiny  : — 
It  is  not  the  increase  of  the  outer  man  and  his  surroxmdings  and  possessions, 
but  the  renewal  of  the  inner  life  and  spirit  which  makes  the  net  profit  and  abiding 
wealth.     It  is  the  inner  life  of  a  nation  that  determines  all  things,  not  the  visible, 
but  the  more  or  less  invisible,  not  what  can  be  arrayed  in  figures  and  statistics, 
but  what  no  figures  can  express — not  the  show  and  splendour  of  prosperous  times, 
the  glare  of  wealth,  the  blaze  of  knowledge,  the  siu-feit  of  luxuries,  the  pomp 
of  pride,  the  flaunting  of  power,  but  the  hidden  qualities  of  patience,  faith,  self- 
mastery,  courage,  righteousness,  and  purity  which  lie  vmderneath  all  this  external 
display.     It  is  tlie  soul  of  a  nation  that  makes  a  nation,  not  its  body.     If  the 
soul  is  not  sound,  the  body  soon  becomes  a  mass  of  weakness  and  decay.     France 
is  wealthier  than  it  ever  was  before.     It  has  more  splendid  cities,  larger  armies, 
greater  intellectual  resources  and  material  resources  than  ever  before  ;  the  out- 
ward man  was  never  so  fair  and  strong  as  now.     What  of  all  that  if  the  heart 
has  ceased  to  beat  with  honest  purpose,  if  its  ideals  are  lost,  if  the  inner  life  has 
become  diseased,  defiled,  corrupt  ?     The  outward  show  slowly  rots  away,  when 
the  inspiring  force  within  degenerates  and  disappears.     It  is  the  continued  renewal 
of  the  inner  man  that  saves  all.     (J.  6.  Greenhough,  M.A.)        Degrading  moral 
transitions : — The  phases  of  transition  in  the  moral  temper  of  the  falling  Venetians, 
during  their  fall,  were  from  pride  to  infidelity,  and  from  infidelity  to  the  unscrupu- 
lous pursuit  of  pleasure.     During  the  last  years  of  the  existence  of  the  State, 
the  minds  both  of  the  nobility  and  the  people  seem  to  have  been  set  simply  upon 
the  attainment  of  the  means  of  self-indulgence.     There  was  not  strength  enough 
in  them  to  be  proud,  nor  forethought  enough  to  be  ambitious.     One  by  one  th© 


CHAP.  VI.]  AMOS.  73 

possessions  of  the  State  were  abandoned  to  its  enemies ;  one  by  one  the  channels 
of  its  trade  were  forsaken  by  its  own  languor,  or  occupied  and  closed  against  it 
by  its  more  energetic  rivals ;  and  the  time,  the  resources,  and  the  thoughts  of 
the  nation  were  exclusively  occupied  in  the  invention  of  such  fantastic  and  costly 
pleasures  as  might  best  amuse  their  apathy,  lull  their  remorse,  or  disguise  their 
ruin.  It  is  as  needless,  as  it  is  painful,  to  trace  the  steps  of  her  final  ruin.  That 
ancient  curse  was  upon  her,  the  curse  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  "  Pride,  fulness 
of  bread,  and  abundance  of  idleness."  By  the  inner  burning  of  her  own  passions, 
as  fatal  as  the  fiery  rain  of  Gromorrah,  she  was  consumed  from  her  place  among 
the  nations  ;  ftnd  her  ashes  are  choking  the  channels  of  the  dead  salt  sea.  {John 
Buskin.) 

Yer.  2.  Pass  ye  unto  Calneh,  and  see ;  and  f^om  thence  go  ye  to  Hamath.— 

Comparing  notes : — This  was  a  Divine  challenge  to  Israel.  Israel  in  those  days 
thought  that  religion  was  often  a  great  hardship  ;  that  it  abounded  with  demands 
for  self-denial ;  and  that  its  numerous  duties  could  be  observed  only  at  considerable 
cost.  You  generally  find  that  the  least  self-denying  are  the  most  keenly  conscious 
of  their  self-denial.  In  those  days  the  people  of  Israel  were  willing  to  be  religious, 
after  a  fashion,  but  they  must  be  also  politic,  so  that  their  religion  should  not 
militate  against  their  national  interests,  or  weaken  them  in  their  struggle  with 
the  heathen  powers  by  which  they  were  surrounded.  Israel  practically  said  : 
"  Cast  among  these  godless  nations,  there  is  nothing  for  us  to  do  but  largely  to 
adapt  ourselves  to  circumstances  ;  to  obey  God's  commandments  as  far  as  it  is 
practicable,  but  not  henceforth,  as  in  the  past,  to  sacrifice  national  interests 
by  a  too  scrupulous  attention  to  religious  precepts."  We  have  in  the  text  God's 
reply  to  Israel's  fallacy.  "  Pass  ye  into  Calneh."  Calneh  was  a  great  city  on 
the  Tigris.  Hamath  was  also  a  great  city,  and  a  capital,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Orontes,  on  the  north.  Gath  was  one  of  the  great  cities  of  Palestine.  God 
now  practically  says  to  Israel :  "  Look  at  those  powers,  those  centres  of  worldly 
empires  and  governments.  You  say  that  they  have  nothing  to  hamper  them  ; 
that  they  fight  their  battles  irrespective  of  right  and  wrong ;  that  no  principle 
is  at  stake  ;  that  their  aim  is  self- aggrandisement ;  and  therefore  that  the  path 
of  victory  is  to  them  a  far  easier  one  than  it  can  be  for  nations  who,  like  yourselves, 
•have  to  fear  God  and  to  keep  His  commandments.  See,  what  is  the  practical 
issue.  Compare  your  national  prosperity  with  the  prosperity  of  these  surrounding 
nations.  Are  their  borders  greater  than  your  borders  ?  "  That  was  the  question 
-which  practically  silenced  their  complaint.  What  are  the  relative  compensations 
•of  godliness  and  worldliness  ?  In  what  consists  man's  highest  interests  or  his 
greatest  wealth  ?  Does  true  blessedness  consist  in  what  the  world  calls  success  ? 
Take — 1.  The  life  of  the  thorough  worldling — the  man  who  has  no  principle  to 
•hamper  him,  and  to  whom  the  highest  law  of  life  is  self-aggrandisement.  Such 
as  the  spendthrift.  The  man  with  an  insatiable  love  of  money.  The  gambler. 
^.  Those  who  are  determined  to  make  their  position  in  the  world.  Such  an  one 
enters  business,  or  a  profession,  and  considers  that  it  is  necessary  to  adopt  certain 
customs  which  are  not  above  suspicion,  but  which  become  largely  respectable 
by  their  universal  acceptance.  Even  in  such  cases  there  are  hundreds  of  thousands 
who  fail  entirely  in  their  attempts.  Some  tmdoubtedly  do  prosper  and  accumulate 
■wealth  ;  but  in  how  many  instances  have  they  lost  their  good  name  in  the  effort ! 
3.  The  honest  man  of  the  world.  Even  then  business  may  be  allowed  to  mon- 
opolise all  his  time  and  all  his  energy,  to  the  exclusion  of  higher  aims,  without 
which  even  an  honest  life  is  poor.  There  is  a  distinctly  spiritual  work  for  man 
to  do.  If  that  Christian  work  is  neglected,  and  the  claims  of  Jesus  Christ  along 
spiritual  lines  ignored,  that  man  may  gain  the  whole  world,  but  he  will  lose  hia 
soul.     (David  Davies.) 

Vers.  3-6.  Te  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day,  and  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  come 
near.  — Man's  evil  day : — I.  All  men  have  an  evil  day  in  their  futubb.  Calamities 
and  trials  are  common  to  all.  There  is  one  evil  day,  it  is  death ;  but  it  need 
not  be  evil.  II.  Some  men  adjourn  in  thotjoht  this  evil  day.  1.  Not  because 
"they  have  any  doubt  as  to  its  advent.  2.  Not  because  they  lack  reminders  of 
its  approach.  Why  then  do  they  adjourn  the  thought  ?  The  reason  is  found— 
(1)  In  the  strength  of  our  material  attachments.  (2)  In  our  lack  of  interest  ia 
the  spiritual.  (3)  In  our  dread  of  the  mysterious.  (4)  In  oiir  conscious  unpre- 
•paration  for  the  scenes  of  retribution.     III.  None  who  adjourn  this  BVli 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


BAY  IN  THOTTGHT  CAJT  DELAY  IT  IN  FACT.  These  men  SO  ignored  their  coming 
calamities  that  by  their  conduct  they  hastened  them  on.  A  general  truth  is 
suggested  here, — That  a  man  who  adjourns  all  thought  of  his  end,  will  pursue 
such  a  course  of  conduct  as  will  hasten  its  approach.  (Homilist.)  The  know- 
ledge of  sin : — Only  history  can  tell  what  sin  is  ;  nothing  but  Divine  judg  >  ent 
can  give  you  a  definition  of  bad  doing.  We  must  watch  the  desolation  if  we 
would  know  the  meaning  of  certain  terms  and  the  range  of  certain  actions.  We 
must  study  Divine  judgment  if  we  would  know  human  sin.  The  difficulty  of 
the  teacher  herein  is  that  so  many  persons  are  unconscious  of  sin  and  are  therefore 
mayhap  the  greater  sinners.  Some  do  not  distinguish  between  crime  and  sin. 
They  have  not  been  criminals,  and  therefore  they  think  they  have  not  been 
sinners, — as  if  all  the  story  of  life  did  not  lie  in  the  disposition  rather  than  in  the 
action.  The  heart  is  the  seat  of  evil.  None  knoweth  the  heart  but  God.  The 
heart  does  not  know  itself  ;  and  if  there  were  not  a  concurrent  line  called  history, 
or  providence,  or  judgment,  we  should  never  know  the  real  state  of  the  heart. 
We  must  go  to  the  broader  history,  the  larger  experience  of  mankind,  and  find, 
not  in  it  alone,  but  in  it  as  interpreted  by  Divine  providence,  God's  meaning 
of  the  term  sin.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  They  are  not  grieved  for  the  afOiction  of  Joseph. — Personal  sympathy 
the  only  right  basis  for  Christian  effort : — The  term  "  Joseph  "  is  here  employed 
for  the  whole  of  the  people  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  The  term  "  Ephraim  " 
is  usually  employed  by  way  of  reproach  when  the  sin  and  rebellion  of  the  whole 
people  are  referred  to,  while  the  more  illustrious  name  of  "  Joseph  "  is  apparently 
reserved  for  occasons  that  call  for  pity  and  compassion.  The  idea  here  appears 
to  have  been  suggested  by  the  heartless  conduct  of  Joseph's  brethren  when  they 
made  away  with  their  brother,  without  pity  for  his  youth  or  respect  for  his  piety. 
So  the  prophet,  describing  the  rich  men  and  rulers  of  his  time,  says,  "  They  drink 
wine  in  bowls,  and  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief  ointments  ;  but  they  are 
not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph."  In  this  chapter  we  have  a  terrible 
picture  of  a  corrupt,  degenerate  commonwealth.  The  prophet,  with  a  noble 
plea  for  patriotism,  turning  from  the  miseries  of  the  lower  to  the  heartless  luxuries 
of  the  higher  ranks,  sees  nothing  in  the  future  but  national  ruin.  The  principle 
he  establishes  is  this, — The  life  of  a  nation  depends  on  the  healthy  exercise  of 
sympathy  throughout  all  its  parts,  all  its  ranks  and  classes.  How  shall  we  apply 
this  principle,  and  the  warning  that  accompanies  it,  to  ourselves  ?  I  am  not 
one  of  those  who  would  willingly  indulge  in  reflections  upon  the  character  of  the 
age  in  which  we  live.  I  do  not  see  the  wisdom  of  making  a  disadvantageous 
comparison  between  these  and  past  times,  as  if  our  forefathers  were  in  all  respects 
wiser  and  better  than  we.  But  I  am  not  bovmd  to  shut  my  eyes  to  the  signs 
of  the  times,  nor  cease  to  reprove  the  evils  of  the  times.  Is  not  a  want  of  union 
and  sympathy  throughout  all  ranks  of  the  nation  as  characteristic  of  our  age  as 
of  the  age  of  Amos  ?  Our  divisions,  political  and  religious,  when  taken  in  connection 
with  our  great  prosperity  and  liberty,  are  the  surprise  and  the  ridicule  of  the  whole 
world.  Of  all  power  in  the  world  there  is  no  force  equal  to  the  moral  force  of 
sympathy.  This  is  the  power  that  takes  strongest  hold,  and  enables  us  to  wield 
empire  over  the  hearts  of  men.  Personal  influence  and  kindness — thus  we  may 
form  an  estimate  of  the  comparative  failure  of  so  many  of  our  benevolent 
institutions.  Tried  by  these  Divine  rules  of  conduct,  how  does  the  benevolence 
of  many  who  have  earned  a  reputation  for  charity,  pale  before  that  which  may 
never  be  able  to  go  beyond  kindly  words  and  secret  intercessory  prayer.  Charity 
ceases  to  be  charity  if  it  is  unaccompanied  by  tenderness  and  courtesy.  By 
sympathy  is  meant  an  entrance  into  the  circumstances,  a  true  realisation  of  the 
position  of  those  whom  we  seek  to  benefit.  Jesus  came  down  at  first  from  heaven, 
and  still  administers  His  way  of  salvation  by  the  exercise  of  sympathy.  The 
same  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus  must  and  will  animate  every  true  disciple. 
He  will  be  impelled  to  seek  out  sirmers,  and  lead  them  to  their  Saviour  by  kindly 
advice  and  loving  persuasion ;  not  by  cold  reproofs  and  pharisaic  condemnation, 
but  by  brotherly  sympathy,  because  he  is  like  that  Saviour  who  came  "  not  to 
condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved."  {Joseph 
MaskeU.)  The  ruin  wrought  by  a  selfish  spirit: — We  belong  to  the  greatest 
empire  that  this  world  has  ever  seen,  and  not  only  is  this  the  vastest  empire, 
but  it  is  also  the  most  opulent.  Ours  is  an  empire  teeming  with  wealth,  genius, 
and  splendid  possibOities.     With  this  vast  empire,  with  this  rich  and  manifold 


CHAP.  VI.]  AMOS.  75 

civilisation,  what  is  our  particular  peril  ?  Let  me  say  it  in  a  word — selfishness. 
If  historians  are  to  be  believed,  selfish  indulgence  ruined  the  ancient  empires  ; 
if  some  of  the  most  capable  and  dispassionate  critics  living  are  correct,  selfish 
indulgence  is  ruining  France.  Selfishness  in  various  subtle  forms  is  a  far  greater 
menace  to  this  empire  than  any  foe  that  threatens  the  silver  streak.  Selfishness 
is  the  worm  to  spoil  your  roses,  whether  they  belong  to  York  or  Lancaster. 
Selfishness  is  the  canker  upon  your  gold  ;  selfishness  is  the  moth  to  fret  your 
purple,  and  selfishness  is  the  creeping  paralysis  that  may  eat  out  the  strength 
of  this  empire  and  spoil  its  splendour  and  its  fame.  Wherein  lies  our  safety  ? 
In  spiritual  magnanimity  !  If  you  want  to  take  care  of  your  empire,  take  care  of 
your  missions.  It  is  a  strange  thing  to  say,  but  the  guarantee  for  your  splendour 
is  your  sacrifice.  You  are  going  to  keep  your  wealth  just  as  you  give  it  away  in 
noble  causes.  The  tonic  for  your  luxury  is  the  generosity  that  does  and  dares 
for  the  perishing ;  and  if  you  want  to  keep  your  place  with  the  topnost  nations 
you  will  keep  your  place  at  the  top  by  taking  a  tremendous  stoop  to  those  who 
are  at  the  base — the  lost.  When  you  bring  your  learning,  or  wealth,  or  political 
mastery,  and  when  you  associate  them  with  pity,  humanity,  and  magnanimity, 
you  have  got  a  supreme  safeguard  upon  all  your  greatness  and  glory.  {W.  L. 
Waikitison. )  Enclosed  within  self  : — There  is  a  little  pool  in  a  mountain  chasm, 
so  completely  enclosed  within  its  high  and  rocky  walls  that  no  sound  reaches 
it  from  the  great  outer  world.  Yet  the  slightest  noise  started  within  its  environ- 
ment— the  cry  of  the  heron,  the  splash  of  the  muskrat,  or  the  roll  of  the  pebbles 
under  the  feet  of  the  deer — reverberates  over  the  water  and  is  echoed  from  the 
cliff.  Some  minds  are  so  enclosed  within  their  own  selfishness  as  to  be  silent 
to  the  great  things  which  stir  the  world — the  calls  of  human  need,  the  summons 
of  God  to  public  duty,  and  all  the  enrolling  cause  of  human  progress  in  many 
lands.  They  live  only  among  their  own  thoughts,  desires,  and  prejudices.  To 
them  their  little  concerns  are  great.  (L.  A.  Banks,  D.D. )  Christian  solicitude : — 
When  William  Burns  was  asked  the  nature  of  his  thoughts  on  finding  himself 
among  the  Chinese,  he  tiu-ned  to  his  interrogator  and  answered,  "  The  lost,  and 
a  Christ  for  them."  When  Henry  Venn  preached,  such  was  his  flaming  fervour 
that  "  men  went  down  before  him  like  slaked  lime."  It  was  the  same  yearning 
which  drove  John  Brown  to  nightly  and  prevailing  intercession  for  "  dead 
Haddington,  and  wicked,  withered  East  Lothian  "  ;  the  same  which  wrung  from 
Rowland  Hill  the  cry,  "  Oh  that  I  were  all  heart  and  soul  and  spirit,  to  tell  the 
glorious  Gospel  to  perishing  multitudes  !  "  Would  that  I  burned  out  for  Jesus 
with  the  same  intense  and  ardent  glow  !  {A.  Smdlie.)  Careless  indifference 
of  Christians  : — I  know  a  beautiful  valley  in  Wales,  guarded  by  well- wooded 
hills.  Spring  came  there  first,  and  summer  lingered  longest,  and  the  clear  river 
loitered  through  the  rich  pastures  and  the  laughing  orchards,  as  if  loth  to  leave 
the  enchanting  scene.  But  the  manufacturer  came  there  ;  he  built  his  chimneys 
and  he  lighted  his  furnaces,  out  of  which  belched  forth  poisonous  fumes  night 
and  day.  Every  tree  is  dead,  no  flower  blooms  there  now,  the  very  grass  has 
been  eaten  off  the  face  of  the  earth ;  the  beautiful  river,  in  which  the  pebbles  once 
lay  as  the  pure  thoughts  in  a  maiden's  mind,  is  now  foul,  and  the  valley,  scarred 
and  bare,  looks  like  the  entrance  into  Tophet  itself.  And  this  human  nature 
of  ours,  in  which  faith,  and  virtue,  and  godliness,  and  all  sweet  humanities  might 
flourish,  in  miles  of  this  London  of  ours,  is  what  bad  air,  and  the  gin  palace,  and 
the  careless  indifference  of  a  Christianity  bent  only  upon  saving  itself,  have  made 
it.     (Morlais  Jones.) 

Ver.  12.  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock  7  will  one  plough  there  with 
oxen  ?  —  Labour  in  vain  : — These  expressions  are  proverbs,  taken  from  the 
familiar  sayings  of  the  east  country.  A  proverb  is  generally  a  sword  with  two 
edges,  or,  if  I  may  so  say,  it  has  many  edges,  or  is  all  edge,  and  hence  it  may  be 
turned  this  way  and  that  way,  and  every  part  of  it  will  have  force  and  point.  The 
connection  would  tolerate  two  senses  in  this  place.  An  ancient  commentator  says 
that  it  has  seven  meanings.  Like  those  curiously  carved  Chinese  balls  in  which 
there  is  one  ball  within  another,  so  in  many  a  holy  text  there  is  sense  within  sense, 
teaching  within  teaching,  and  each  one  worthy  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  It  may 
be  that  the  prophet  is  expostulating  with  ungodly  men  upon  their  pursuit  of 
happiness  where  it  can  never  be  found.  They  were  endeavouring  to  grow  rich 
and  strong  by  oppression.  And  if  any  of  you  try  to  content  yourselves  with 
this  world,  and  hope  to  find  a  heaven  in  the  midst  of  your  business  and  your 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

family,  without  looking  upward  for  it,  you  laboiu:  in  vain.  To  seek  after  happi- 
ness in  evil  deeds  is  to  plough  a  rock  of  granite.  To  labour  after  true  prosperity 
by  dishonest  means  is  as  iiseless  as  to  till  the  sandy  shore.  The  words  may 
mean  this, — God  wiU  not  always  send  His  ministers  to  caU  men  to  repentance. 
There  is  a  time  of  ploughing,  but  when  it  is  evident  that  the  heart  is  wilfully 
hardened,  then  wisdom  itself  suggests  to  mercy  that  she  should  give  over  her 
efforts.  Taking  that  sense,  we  remark — I.  Ministbbs  labouh  to  bbeak  up 
men's  hearts.  They  would  make  hearts  ready  to  receive  the  heavenly  seed. 
Many  truths  are  used,  like  sharp  ploughshares,  to  break  up  the  heart.  We  must 
cut  into  the  heart  with  the  ploughshare  of  the  law.  If  we  really  love  the  souls 
of  men,  let  us  prove  it  by  honest  speech.  The  hard  heart  must  be  broken,  or  it 
will  still  refuse  the  Saviour  who  was  sent  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted.  There 
are  some  things  which  men  may  or  may  not  have,  and  yet  may  be  saved ;  but 
those  things  which  go  with  the  ploughing  of  the  heart  are  indispensable.  There 
must  be  a  holy  fear  and  a  humble  trembling  before  God,  there  must  be  an 
acknowledgment  of  guilt  and  a  penitent  petition  for  mercy ;  there  must,  in  a 
word,  be  a  thorough  ploughing  of  the  soul  before  we  can  expect  the  seed  to  bring 
forth  fruit.  II.  At  times  ministers  labotjr  in  vain.  In  a  short  time  the 
ploughman  feels  whether  the  plough  will  go  or  not,  and  so  does  the  minister. 
He  may  use  the  very  same  words  in  one  place  which  he  has  used  in  another,  but 
he  feels  in  one  place  great  joy  and  hopefulness  in  his  preaching,  while  with  another 
audience  he  has  heavy  work  and  little  hope.  All  labourers  of  Christ  know  what 
it  is  sometimes  to  work  in  heavy  soil.  There  are  rocky  hearers  in  all  congrega- 
tions. On  some  impression  is  made,  but  it  is  not  deep  and  permanent.  Certain 
of  these  rocky-hearted  people  have  been  ploughed  for  years,  and  have  become 
harder  instead  of  softer.  The  sun  which  softens  wax  hardens  clay,  and  the  same 
Gospel  which  has  brought  others  to  tenderness  and  repentance  has  exercised  a 
contrary  effect  upon  them,  and  made  them  more  careless  about  Divine  things 
than  they  were  in  their  youth.  Why  are  men  so  extremely  rocky  T  Some  are 
so  from  a  peculiar  stolidity  of  nature.  Some  are  hard  because  of  their  infidelity. 
Worldliness  hardens  a  man  in  every  way.  With  many  hardness  is  produced 
by  a  general  levity.  There  is  no  depth  of  earth  in  their  superficial  natures ; 
beneath  a  sprinkling  of  shifting,  worthless  sand  lies  an  impenetrable  rock  of  utter 
stupidity  and  senselessness.  III.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  God's 
servants  should  always  continue  to  labour  in  vain.  Labour  in  vain  cannot 
be  continued  for  ever  if  we  consider  the  ploughman.  Then  there  is  the  Master 
to  be  considered.  Is  He  always  to  be  resisted  and  provoked  ?  And  there  are  so 
many  other  people  needing  the  Gospel  who  will  receive  it.  There  is  a  boundary 
to  the  patience  of  men,  and  even  to  the  patience  of  God.  IV.  There  must  bh 
AN  ALTERATION  THEN,  AND  THAT  SPEEDILY.  The  oxcu  shall  be  taken  off  from 
such  toil.  It  can  be  effected  in  three  ways.  1.  The  unprofitable  hearer  can 
be  removed  so  that  he  shall  no  more  hear  the  Gospel  from  the  lips  of  his  best 
approved  minister.  2.  Another  plan  is  to  take  away  the  ploughman.  Or — 
3.  God  may  say,  "  This  piece  of  rock  shall  never  trouble  the  ploughman  any  more. 
I  will  take  it  away."  The  man  dies.  0  Lord,  break  up  the  rock,  and  let  the 
seed  drop  among  its  broken  substance,  and  get  Thou  a  harvest  from  the  dissolved 
granite  at  this  time.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)  Ye  have  turned  Judgment  into  gall. — 
Man^s  perverting  power  : — The  meaning  of  this  is  that  they  had  tiu-ned  the  best 
things  into  bad  use.  See  the  working  of  this  perverting  power  in  many  depart- 
ments of  action.  I.  In  physical  operations.  Everywhere  you  see  man 
perverting  nature,  perverting  the  metals,  the  rivers,  the  fruits,  and  the  chemical 
elements  of  the  world  to  bad  and  mischievous  uses.  II.  In  civic  life.  The 
principle  of  human  government  is  a  Divine  ordinance,  intended  to  secure  equal 
justice  and  protection.  But  how  has  man  perverted  it !  He  has  turned  it  into 
an  instrument  to  benefit  the  few  at  the  expense  of  the  many,  an  instrument  of 
tyranny  and  oppression.  Man's  perversion  of  the  law  is  proverbial  as  a  hideous 
enormity.  The  principle  of  merchandise,  intended  to  band  man  together  by 
the  exchange  of  commodities,  in  mutual  obligation  and  fellowship,  man  has 
awfully  perverted.  He  has  made  it  the  instrument  of  cupidity,  monopoly,  and 
nameless  frauds.  III.  In  the  religious  sphere.  Do  not  let  man  say  he  has 
no  power.  His  moral  power  is  something  stupendous.  He  has  power  to  turn 
the  things  of  God  to  the  use  of  Satan,  heavenly  blessings  into  hellish  curses. 
.{Homilist.) 


CHAP,  vn.]  AMOS.  77 

Ver.  13.  Ye  whicli  rejoice  in  a  tbing  of  nought,  which  say,  Have  we  not  taken 
to  us  horns  by  our  own  strength  ? — Human  joy  in  the  unsubstantial  : — "  Horns  " 
are  signs  and  symbols  of  power  ;  here  they  stand  for  the  military  resources  with 
which  they  fancied  that  they  could  conquer  every  foe.  "  These  delusions  of 
God-forgetting  pride  the  prophet  cast  down,  by  saying  that  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  hosts,  will  raise  up  a  nation  against  them,  which  will  crush  them  down  in  the 
whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  kingdom.  This  nation  was  Assyria  "  (Delitzsch). 
I.  To  rejoice  in  worldly  wealth,  is  to  "  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  nought."  II.  To 
rejoice  in  personal  beauty,  is  to  "  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  nought."  But  is  this 
beauty  a  thing  to  rejoice  in  ?  Those  who  possess  it  do  rejoice  in  it ;  many  pride 
themselves  on  their  good  looks  and  fine  figures.  But  what  is  beauty  ?  It  is  a 
*'  thing  of  nought."  III.  To  rejoice  in  ancestral  distinction,  is  to  "  rejoice 
in  a  thing  of  nought."  There  are  those  who  are  constantly  exulting  in  their 
pedigree.  But  even  had  we  come  from  the  loins  of  the  intellectual  and  moral 
peers  of  the  race,  what  in  this  is  there  for  rejoicing  ?  It  is  truly  "  a  thing  of 
nought."  Our  ancestry  is  independent  of  us,  we  are  not  responsible  for  it.  It 
is  not  a  matter  either  of  blame  or  praise.  IV.  To  rejoice  in  moral  mbritorious- 
NESS,  is  to  "  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  nought."  There  are  many  who  rejoice  in  their 
morality.  Like  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  they  thank  God  they  are  not  as 
"  other  men."  Moral  merit  in  a  sinner,  is  a  baseless  vision,  a  phantom  of  a  proud 
heart.  No,  our  righteousness  is  "a  thing  of  nought."  (Homilist.)  Our 
own  strength  a  "  thing  of  nought "  .• — The  Christian  life  is  something  more  than 
what  we  call  a  moral  life.  The  mere  moral  life  is  one  which  begins  to  be  and  grows 
simply  by  voluntary,  conscious,  self -originating  deeds  and  choices.  It  is  "  self- 
righteousness  "  in  Paul's  sense  of  the  word.  The  Christian  life  no  less  has 
conscious  choices,  but  something  more  is  builded  into  it,  something  spiritual 
and  real  out  of  God.  Here  is  an  illustration.  Plant  a  grain  of  wheat  in  a  wet 
sponge  kept  moist  by  a  bowl  of  water.  It  wiU  grow  and  grow  rapidly,  fed  on  itself 
and  water,  but  directly  its  tall  stem  leans,  limp  and  weak,  to  break  at  last,  and 
wither  and  die  before  it  bears  fruit.  It  was  self-nourished  ;  its  growth  was  out 
of  itself.  Now  plant  another  like  grain  of  wheat  in  the  earth.  It  grows,  not  so 
quickly ;  but  it  is  having  builded  into  it  lime  and  phosphorus  and  iron  out  of 
the  earth,  and  its  tall  stem  bends  at  last  also,  but  with  the  weight  of  "  the  full 
com  in  the  ear,"  the  fruit  of  its  union  with  the  strength  of  the  earth.  So  the 
Christian  life  and  growth  are  the  strength  of  God,  builded  by  Him  into  the 
character.  It  is  the  spiritual  element,  thus  wrought  into  our  life  by  the  higher 
Nourisher  of  our  souls,  which  gives  us  character  and  moral  strength ;  and  that 
process,  though  unconscious,  is  a  real  happening.  {S.  B.  Meeser.)  We  take 
to  ourselves  the  credit  of  our  good  things  : — Why  is  it  we  are  so  slow  to  realise  this  ? 
Partly,  I  think,  because  we  are  wont  from  so  much  of  our  life  to  shut  God  out. 
"  It  is  ever  the  nature  of  Galloway,"  says  Mr.  Crockett  in  one  of  his  stories,  "  to 
share  the  credit  of  any  victory  with  providence,  but  to  charge  it  wholly  with 
any  disaster."  "  Wasna  that  cleverly  done  ?  "  we  say  when  we  succeed.  "  We 
maun  juist  submit,"  we  say  when  we  fail.  And  Galloway  nature  is  very  much 
like  human  nature  all  the  world  over.  We  make  God  responsible  for  our  evil 
things ;  the  credit  of  our  good  things  we  put  down  to  ourselves.     (Helping  Words.) 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Vers.  1-6.  0  Lord,  forgive,  I  beseech  Thee  .  .  .  The  Lord  repented  for  this :  It 
shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord. — Intercession  for  pardon  prevailing  : — I.  Concernino 
intercession.  1.  This  intercession  was  made  by  Amos  alone.  Neither  Hosea 
nor  Isaiah,  nor  any  other  God-fearers  of  the  time  joined  in  it.  To  Amos  alone 
the  vision  appeared,  and  by  him  alone  the  intercession  was  made.  2.  This  inter- 
cession was  made  in  the  behalf  of  a  wicked  people.  Amos  calls  them  Jacob,  but 
they  had  renounced  the  principles  of  that  holy  man,  and  stained  their  manners 
with  the  vilest  corruptions.  Corruption  in  manners,  the  effect  of  corruption  in 
principles,  like  a  spreading  pestilence,  infected  the  whole  kingdom.  3.  The  form 
of  this  intercession  is  a  prayer  for  pardon.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  misery,  and  misery 
is  the  effect  and  punishment  of  sin.     By  pardon  sin  is  taken  away,  and  when  the 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vil 

cause  is  taken  away  the  effect  ceases.  In  going  to  the  throne  for  deliverance 
from  misery,  if  we  have  a  true  sense  of  sin,  pardon  will  be  our  chief  concern. 
4.  This  intercession  was  made  in  a  moment  of  extremity.  In  the  preceding  reigns 
the  kingdom  had  been  mortally  wounded,  and  though  under  Jeroboam  some  of 
its  wounds  were  bound  up  and  healed,  others  continued  bleeding,  and  terminated 
in  a  universal  mortification.  5.  Importunity  in  this  intercession  is  tempered 
with  reverence.  For  the  preservation  of  the  house  of  Israel,  the  man  of  God  is 
earnest  and  fervent  in  prayer  ;  but  his  prayer  is  blended  with  the  reverence  that 
is  suitable  to  Divine  majesty  and  holiness.  6.  This  intercession  is  exemplary; 
an  example  and  pattern  to  after  ages.  II.  Concerning  the  prevailing  of  this 
INTERCESSION.  "  The  Lord  repented  for  this."  His  meaning  is,  the  Lord  accepted 
his  importunity,  granted  the  desire  of  his  heart,  and  assured  him  that  the  miseries, 
represented  under  the  emblem  of  the  grasshoppers,  would  not  eat  up  and  consume 
all  things.  Illustrate  the  form  of  words  in  which  this  meaning  is  expressed.  1.  The 
holy  writings  frequently  contain  this  expression.  2.  Changes  in  the  administration 
of  providence,  according  to  the  purpose  of  God,  are  expressed  by  these  words. 
3.  These  changes  of  administration  encourage  intercession,  and  furnish  excitements 
and  motives  to  repentance.  Encouraged  by  considerations  of  the  grace,  mercy, 
and  kindness  of  the  God  of  Israel,  Amos  stood  and  interceded.     III.  The  sovereign 

MANNER  in  WHICH  THE   LORD  WAS   PLEASED   TO   EXPRESS  AND   COMMUNICATE  THB 

PRBVAUXNO  OF  THB  INTERCESSION.  "  It  shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord."  1.  This 
intimation  came  immediately  from  the  Holy  One,  by  whom  alone  pardon  of  sin 
and  remission  of  pimishment  is  granted.  2.  This  intimation  was  made  by  the 
Saviour  of  Israel,  who  alone  had  power  to  restrain  and  countermand  the  destroyers 
of  Israel.  The  waster  is  the  creature  of  His  power,  and  the  servant  of  His  providence. 
3,  The  intimation  came  to  the  individual  who  had  made  intercession.  4.  This 
intimation  is  effective  and  sovereign.  "  He  spake,  and  it  was  done ;  He  commanded, 
and  it  stood  fast."  6.  The  intimation  is  solemnly  authenticated.  Amos  heard 
the  words  distinctly  pronounced,  and  "  saith  the  Lord,"  solemnly  added  by  the 
glorious  Speaker.  This  encouraged  him  to  continue  interceding,  and  raised  his 
hope  of  prevailing.  Inferences.  1.  Intercession  for  a  wicked  and  perverse  people 
is  a  duty.  The  Lord  allows,  requires,  and  commands  it,  and  in  accepting  it  hath 
glorified  Himself.  2.  Supplication  for  pardon  is  an  essential  part  of  intercession. 
3.  Through  the  forbearance  and  long-suffering  of  Grod,  some  temporal  strokes 
may  be  mitigated,  or  removed,  upon  intercession ;  while  the  desolation  determined, 
deserved,  and  denounced,  is  making  ready  and  hastening  forwards.  4.  Intercessors, 
though  friends  to  their  country,  are  sometimes  treated  in  it  as  enemies.  Toward 
the  restoration  of  the  coimtry  Amos  contributed  more  by  prayer  than  Jeroboam 
did  by  the  sword.  A  few  men  who  have  power  with  God  in  prayer  are  better 
than  chariots  of  war,  and  stronger  than  standing  armies.  Exhort — (I)  Men  who 
are  lively  and  warm  Lq  prayer.  Do  not  faint  because  prayer  doth  not  always 
prevail,  nor  because  evidences  of  acceptance  are  withheld  for  a  time.  Men  ought 
always  to  pray,  and  never  to  faint.  (2)  Men  who  are  cold  and  spiritless  in  prayer. 
Deadness  of  heart  in  devotion  is  one  of  the  distempers  of  our  time.  (3)  Men  who 
are  formalists,  who  multiply  prayers,  but  never  pray  from  the  heart,  and  with 
the  Spirit.  Whatever  be  your  own  opinion  of  these  forms,  no  petition  which  is 
not  conceived  and  uttered  by  the  Spirit,  and  offered  in  the  name  of  Christ,  comes 
into  His  censer,  nor  goes  up  before  the  throne  with  acceptance.  (4)  Men  who 
neglect  prayer.  Such  are  enemies  to  themselves,  to  their  country,  to  their  king, 
and  to  their  God.  (A.  Shanks. )  Revdatioti  and  prayer : — I.  A  Divine  revela- 
tion LEADING  TO  HUMAN  PRAYER.  1.  A  Divinc  revelation.  A  vision  of  judgments 
symbolically  represented  to  the  mind  of  the  prophet.  Destruction  by  grasshoppers. 
Destruction  by  fire.  2.  A  human  prayer.  "  Forgive."  This  calamity  is  brought 
on  by  the  sin  of  the  nation.  Forgive  the  sin  ;  remove  the  moral  cause  of  the 
judgment.  "  By  whom  shall  Jacob  arise  ? "  Or,  better,  "  How  can  Jacob 
stand  ?  for  he  is  small."  Jacob's — the  nation's — weakness,  is  the  plea  of  the 
prayer  for  forgiveness.  The  Israelites  had  been  greatly  reduced  by  repeated 
invasions  on  the  part  of  the  Assyrian  kings,  and  were  now  on  the  point  of  being 
attacked  by  the  Assyrians,  but  purchased  their  retreat  by  one  thousand  talents 
of  silver  (2  Kings  xv.  19,  20).  The  nation  was  now  so  weakened  that  it  was  unable 
to  stand  before  another  invader.  How  can  Jacob  stand  ?  The  time  has  come 
when  men  may  well  ask  this  question  in  relation  to  the  Church.  By  whom  shall 
it  arise  ?  Not  by  statesmen,  scientists,  &c.  II.  Human  prayer  lbadino  to 
A  Divma  bevslahon.    The  prophet  prays,  and  the  great  God  makes  a  new 


CHAP.  VII.]  AMOS.  79 

revelation  of  mercy.  "  The  Lord  repented  for  this  :  It  shall  not  be,  saith  the 
Lord. ' '     {Homilist. ) 

Ver.  2.  By  whom  shall  Jacob  arise  ? — The  duty  of  Christians  towards  the  Jeus  : — 
These  words  were  used  as  a  plea  for  Israel  before  God,  and  proved  successful. 

1.  Jacob  is  fallen.  And  great  was  his  fall.  He  stood  higher  than  any  other 
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  was  nearer  to  God  than  any  other  people  were. 
Jacob,  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  was  to  God  what  Joseph  was  to  his  father 
among  his  brethren  :  the  chiefest  blessings  invariably  fell  to  his  lot.  "  To  whom 
pertaineth  the  adoption."  The  Jews  as  a  nation  were  adopted  by  God  into  His 
family.  And  a  dear  son  was  Ephraim  to  God  for  a  long  period.  Alas,  that 
we  are  now  compelled  to  say  of  this  once  exalted  people,  "  Thou  art  fallen  "  ! 
Many  a  downfall  did  Jacob  experience  "  because  of  his  iniquity."  He  descended 
mto  the  land  of  Egypt.  God  raised  him  thence  "  with  a  stretched-out  arm  and 
great  judgments."  He  again  fell  into  Babylon,  and  once  more  did  God  graciously 
lift  him  out,  and  place  him  upon  his  feet;  but  of  all  his  falls,  this,  the  last,  is  the 
deepest  and  the  heaviest.  Hitherto  he  had  but  fallen  backwards,  as  it  were. 
This  time  he  fell  prostrate  on  his  face.  In  all  his  former  falls  he  had  contrived 
to  keep  his  hold  of  many  promises,  blessings,  privileges.  On  this  occasion  he 
lost  his  grasp  of  all, — he  is  "  without  a  king,  and  without  a  prince,  and  without 
an  ephod,  and  without  teraphim."  He  descended  lower  than  did  any  nation, 
so  that  all  look  down  now  upon  the  Jew.  2.  Jacob  is  unable  to  arise.  Every 
movement  he  makes  sinks  him  lower  in  the  mire.  Does  he  renounce  the  Talmud  ? 
It  is  but  to  embrace  infidelity.  No  one  has  fallen  among  such  cruel  thieves  as 
Jacob,  and  it  is  hard  to  pass  by  him  continually,  as  the  priest  and  Levite  are 
said  to  have  done.  Extend  a  helping  hand  to  Jacob.  3.  Jacob  is  worth  raising. 
True,  Jacob  has  received  a  great  fall,  but  the  pit  into  which  he  descended  is  not 
bottomless.  The  grace  of  God  is  deeper  than  the  fall  of  the  Jew.  The  Christian 
Church  has  long  acted  towards  the  Jew  as  if  it  thought  he  was  not  fit  to  be  raised. 
Our  hearts  appear  to  have  been  more  tender  to  all  than  to  the  poor  Jew.  But 
Jacob  is  not  so  foul  as  that  the  blood  of  the  Cross  cannot  cleanse  him.  4.  Jacob 
is  to  be  raised.  What  a  multitude  of  things  there  are  that  are  worth  raising, 
but  of  whose  restitution  we  have  no  certainty.  It  may  be  questionable  whether 
Jacob  will  again  be  restored  to  his  own  coimtry,  but  there  is  not  the  shadow 
of  a  doubt  as  to  his  being  raised  into  the  Divine  favour.  It  is  by  the  instrument- 
ality of  the  Gentiles  that  Jacob's  restoration  is  to  be  accomplished.  One  great 
reason  for  extending  the  Gospel  to  us  was  that  we  might  reach  it  to  others,  and 
"  to  the  Jew  first."  5.  There  is  a  large  reward  for  raising  Jacob.  Once  the 
Jews  are  brought  to  believe,  the  lever  that  is  to  move  the  whole  world  will  have 
been  obtained.  The  Jew  is  a  wanderer  in  every  land  ;  he  is  foimd  imder  the 
burning  sun  of  Hindoostan,  and  among  the  eternal  snows  of  Siberia;  he  can 
speak  every  tongue,  so  that,  without  any  educational  preparation,  he  is  ready  to 
preach  the  Gospel  of  Christ  unto  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  (David  Roberts,  D.D.) 
Help  for  Jacob  : — The  chosen  people  are  in  trouble  and  distress.  They  have 
forsaken  the  living  God,  and  He  is  pimishing  their  apostasy.  But  the  prophet 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  few  faithful  among  his  brethren  deeply  deplore  the  national 
sin,  and  earnestly  invoke  the  Divine  mercy.  They  will  not  rest,  they  cannot 
hold  their  peace  till  God  pardon  the  iniquity  of  His  people,  and  restore  to  them 
the  tokens  of  His  loving-kindness.  At  such  a  time  how  natural  and  significant 
the  language  of  Amos.  Often  in  the  Church  of  Christ  are  there  not  seasons  of 
declension,  lukewarmness,  discouragement,  inefficiency,  fightings  without,  and 
fears  within,  bitter  partisanship,  and  uncharitable  controversy,  when  all  hands 
are  feeble,  and  all  hearts  are  faint  ?  And  thus  afflicted,  what  need  we  so  much 
to  know  as  our  spiritual  poverty  and  feebleness,  and  what  so  much  to  learn  as 
the  sufficiency  of  our  Divine  resources  ?     I.  Jacob  is  small.     1.  In  numbers. 

2.  In  substance.  3.  In  influence.  4.  In  religious  knowledge.  5.  In  fruitfulness 
and  efficiency.  II.  By  whom  shall  Jacob  arise  ?  His  helplessness  conceded, 
who  shall  help  him  ?  Shall  the  civil  ruler  ?  Or  the  wealthy  patron  ?  Or  by 
the  popular  orator  ?  Or  by  the  speculative  theorist  ?  Or  by  the  partisan 
controversial  st  ?  Or  by  the  sensational  enthusiast  ?  Nay,  Jehovah-Jesus 
is  our  strength  and  salvation.  The  cause  is  His,  and  with  Him  is  the  residue  of 
the  Spirit.  Fear  not  for  the  future  of  the  Church.  God  shall  help  her,  and  that 
right  early.  To  the  full  extent  of  her  necessity  His  plenipotence  is  hers. 
(J.  Cross,  D.D.)        The  true  Helper  of  the  Church  : — This  was  an  appeal  to  the 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

heart  of  God  at  a  time  when  the  judgments  of  heaven  were  bringing  the  chosen 
people  to  ruin.  This  is  a  question  which  might  well  have  been  asked  in  every 
age  which  the  Church  has  yet  seen.  Her  numbers  have  always  been  small  in 
comparison  with  the  ranks  of  the  wicked.  The  Church,  to  this  day,  is  but  a 
drop  in  the  ocean.  And  she  is  weak  as  well  as  small.  When  we  look  abroad 
over  the  world  we  behold  a  race  of  men  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  given  over 
to  the  dominion  of  the  selfish  passions,  chained  down  in  ignominious  servitude 
to  the  world ;  whom  no  motives  can  conquer,  no  means  reclaim.  To  form  such 
beings  into  materials  for  building  up  the  Chiu'ch,  they  must  be  made  to  undergo 
a  thorough  and  wonderful  transformation.  Who  shall  accomplish  this  mighty 
change  T  The  transformation  must  not  only  be  begim,  it  must  be  continued 
and  perfected.  After  men  are  set  out  on  the  heavenly  course,  they  still  have 
to  contend  with  their  original  corruptions,  and  with  a  world  full  of  objects  fitted 
to  inflame  them.  All  these  corruptions  and  temptations  stand  in  the  way  of 
the  growth  of  the  Church.  And  the  Chiu'ch  as  a  body  has  to  contend  with  a 
world  in  arms.  Every  natural  man  is  a  foe.  The  whole  bent  of  the  natural  heart 
in  every  age  and  country,  in  every  family  and  individual,  is  against  it.  Leave 
man  to  himself  for  a  single  generation,  and  with  all  the  means  of  civilisation 
and  grace,  the  Church  would  become  extinct.  Our  strength  is  wholly  incompetent 
to  preserve  the  Church  a  single  hour,  to  add  one  to  the  number  of  her  sons,  to 
produce  a  single  impression  on  a  single  heart.  If  no  other  helper  is  found  we 
must  sit  down  in  tears,  and  give  up  all  for  lost.  The  Church  is  God's  interest. 
This  interest  God  has  not  committed  to  men ;  it  is  His  own,  His  only  portion. 
He  has  taken  it  into  His  own  hands.  The  great  end  which  He  purposes  to  Himself 
in  aU  His  works  is  to  bring  out  to  view  the  riches  of  His  nature,  that  creatures 
may  see  and  acknowledge  Him  as  He  is,  and  for  ever  enjoy  Him.  It  is  the  natiiral 
course  of  unbelief  to  put  Him  out  of  view.  God  is  resolved  to  be  acknowledged 
as  the  sole  author  and  finisher  of  the  whole.  For  this  reason  He  studiously 
constructs  the  dispensations  of  His  grace  in  a  way  to  convince  His  people  that  it 
is  "  not  by  might  nor  by  power,  but  by  "  His  Spirit  that  the  Church  is  enlarged. 
Then  our  hope  is  only  in  God.  Let  all  other  dependencies  be  given  up ;  the 
Chiu-ch  must  rise  by  God  alone.  This  is  our  consolation  in  the  darkest  times. 
{E.  D.  Qrifjin,  D.D.)  How  to  have  a  revival : — 1.  The  first  step  is  humiliation. 
2.  The  second  step  is  reformation.  3.  The  third  step  lies  in  the  direction  of 
rehgious  duty.  The  path  of  duty  must  be  again  frequented.  The  cross  must 
once  more  be  carried.  Duty  must  become,  what  it  once  was,  the  paramount 
consideration.  4.  The  spirit  of  prayer  must  be  sought  and  exercised  till  the 
blessing  comes.  {Homiletic  Monthly.)  Jacob  crippled  : — I.  A  sad  confession. 
"  Jacob  is  small."  If  none  but  those  who  have  been  redeemed  from  a  low  fife 
of  flesh-love  to  a  higher  one  of  holiness  may  be  classed  under  this  term  to-day, 
then  is  Jacob  small.  1.  Numerically.  2.  In  worldly  esteem.  3.  In  material 
resources.  4.  In  pohtical  power.  And  alas !  Jacob  is  small  spiritually,  in 
personal  power.  Faith,  hope,  and  charity  are  small,  so  is  our  self-denial.  All 
this  diminutiveness  comes  as  the  result  of  being  prostrate,  down,  low.  For  Jacob 
to  be  prostrate  is  a  great  reproach  indeed.  Jacob  is,  in  too  many  cases,  a  self-made 
cripple.  (1)  Unbelief  has  crippled  him.  (2)  So  has  sectarianism.  (3)  So  has 
inactivity.  (4)  So  has  a  stinting  selfishness.  (5)  So  have  internal  bickerings. 
(6)  So  has  a  dreary  spirit  of  timidity.  (7)  And  ceremoniahsm  stunts  Jacob. 
(8)  RestrictionaUsm  has  almost  strangled  Jacob.  II.  An  anxious  inquiby. 
"  By  whom,"  &c.  That  he  ought  to  arise  is  generally  admitted.  1.  Not  by  a 
monarch's  smile.  2.  Not  by  decrees  of  State.  3.  Not  by  the  addition  of  a  few 
more  men  of  means.  4.  Not  by  a  larger  supply  of  education  and  Lterature. 
5.  Not  by  increasing  the  number  of  our  sanctuaries.  What  is  needed  is  heaven's 
force  and  Hfe.  "  By  My  Spirit."  The  Holy  Ghost  is  Jacob's  blessed  Strength, 
Guardian,  and  Helper.  (1)  By  convincing  men  of  their  own  personal  sin,  and 
showing  the  Chvurch's  real  worth,  the  Spirit  prepares  the  way  for  Jacob's  growth. 
(2)  By  the  Divine  Spirit  regenerating  men,  and  adding  them  to  the  Church. 
The  healthier  tone  a  Church  has,  the  stronger  will  her  offspring  be.  (3)  By  the 
richer  adornment  of  Christian  men  with  the  sweet  graces  of  a  higher  life,  so 
that  their  rare  moral  beauty  may  arrest,  and  even  charm  the  "  enemy  without 
the  gate."  How  can  we  aid  this  lifting  ?  This  dignity  is  not  the  privilege  of 
oSicers  only.  Every  member  of  the  rank  and  file  counts  for  one.  Slanifold  are 
the  ways  in  which  this  end  may  be  reached.  Make  commercial  fife  brighter  and 
Bounder,  and  home  fife  sweeter.     Let  hfe  be  readier  spent  and  lost  in  others' 


CHAP,  vn.]  AMOS.  81 

need.    Let  the  sense  of  stewardship  for  God  be  more  than  a  sentunent.    {E.  D. 

Green.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  Lord  stood  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  plumbline,  with  a  plumbline 
in  His  band. — Ood  in  relation  to  human  work  : — All  men  are  workers,  the  world 
is  "  full  of  labour."  The  words  suggest  two  facts  in  relation  to  it.  I.  God  has 
a  COMMANDING  VIEW  OF  IT.  "  He  stands  upon  the  waU  "  high  up,  so  that  every 
portion  comes  within  His  glance.  He  observes — 1.  Its  quality,  good  or  bad. 
2.  Its  variety,  overt  or  occult.  3.  Its  influence,  useful  or  pernicious.  Solemn 
thought,  that  God's  eye  is  on  us  in  all  our  activities,  and  that  the  most  secret 
act  eludes  not  His  glance.  II.  God  tests  the  character  of  it.  "  A  plumbline 
in  His  hand."  The  mason  uses  the  "  plumbline  "  to  determine  the  straightness 
of  the  wall,  and  thus  God  tests  the  character  of  human  actions.  What  is  God's 
"  plumbline  "  ?  1.  His  law  as  inscribed  upon  the  human  conscience.  By  this 
He  tries  all  men,  heathen,  &c.  2.  God's  law  as  written  in  the  Scriptures.  By 
this  He  tries  all  who  possess  the  revelation.  3.  God's  law  as  embodied  in  Christ. 
By  this  He  tries  all  who  have  the  Gospel.  (HomUist. )  Man's  moral  character  : — 
I.  There  is  a  kind  of  masonry  in  the  formation  of  man's  character.  Man's 
character  may  be  compared  to  masonry  in  several  respects.  1.  It  has  one  founda- 
tion. Walls  are  built,  not  upon  two,  but  upon  one  foundation.  So  is  every  man's 
character.  There  is  some  one  principle  on  which  it  is  organised.  That  principle 
is  the  paramount  affection  of  the  man.  Whatever  he  loves  most,  governs  him. 
If  he  loves  pleasure  most,  his  character  is  sensual ;  if  he  loves  money  most,  his 
character  is  worldly.  If  he  loves  wisdom  most,  his  character  is  philosophic ; 
if  he  loves  God  most,  his  character  is  Divine,  &c.  2.  It  has  a  variety  of  materials. 
In  a  building  there  are  earth,  lime,  stones,  bricks,  wood,  iron,  &c.  &c.  These 
are  brought  together  into  a  whole.  Character  is  not  formed  of  one  set  of  actions, 
thoughts,  impulses,  volitions.  All  kinds  of  acts  enter  into  it,  mental,  moral, 
muscular,  personal,  political,  religious — all  are  materials  in  the  building.  3.  It 
is  a  gradual  advancement.  II.  There  is  a  Divine  standard  by  which  to  test 
man's  character.  What  is  the  Divine  "  plumbline  "  by  which  to  test  character  ? 
Here  it  is.  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so 
tmto  them."  Or,  perhaps  more  intelligibly,  the  moral  character  of  Christ.  "  If 
any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  III.  There  is  a  terrible 
RUIN  for  those  whose  characters  will  not  bear  the  test  of  this  plumbline.  "  Behold, 
I  wiU  set  a  plumbline  in  the  midst  of  My  people  Israel :  I  will  not  again  pass  by 
them  any  more  :  and  the  high  places  of  Israel  shall  be  desolate,  and  the  sanctuaries 
of  Israel  shall  be  laid  waste  ;  and  I  will  rise  against  the  house  of  Jeroboam  with 
the  sword"  (Matt.  xxv.  31-46).  (HomUist.)  A  test  for  uprightness: — Italy 
is  a  land  of  volcanoes,  and  earthquakes,  and  other  shaking  things  of  the  sort, 
so  that  it  is  not  easy  to  build  tall  and  slender  towers  and  yet  keep  them  true  to 
the  plummet.  There  comes  a  shake,  or  the  foundation  yields  a  little,  and  the 
towers  tilts — like  the  leaning  tower  of  Pisa,  and  the  two  leaning  towers  of  Turin. 
It  is  natural  then  that  builders  who  have  taken  pains  to  do  their  work  thoroughly 
should  seek  for  some  way  to  "  prove  "  it,  so  as  to  show  that  what  they  have  done 
is  both  upright  and  downright.  The  builders  of  the  cathedral  in  Florence  took 
a  very  ingenious  way  of  proving  this.  High  up,  in  the  centre  of  that  beautiful 
building,  is  a  lofty  dome,  like  that  of  St.  Paul's,  with  stained  windows  all  round. 
On  the  casement  of  one  of  these  windows  is  a  small  iron  ring,  and  it  is  by  this 
the  uprightness  of  the  tower  is  tested  every  year.  For,  on  a  certain  day  in  June, 
at  a  certain  hour,  the  sun  shines  through  that  ring,  and  its  light  falls  on  a  brass 
plate  let  into  the  marble  floor  far  beneath.  So  long  as  the  sunbeam  falls  on  a 
spot  there,  on  that  day  and  at  that  moment,  it  proves  that  the  building  is  as  erect 
as  on  the  day  it  was  finished  ;  if  it  had  tilted  ever  so  little  to  the  one  side  or  the 
other,  that  long  ray  of  light  would  have  proved  it,  for  then  it  could  not  have  fallen 
exactly  on  the  right  spot.  (J.  Reid  Howatt.)  What  seest  thou?  And  I 
said,  A  plumbline. — Straight  up  and  down  religion : — Bricklayers,  and  stone- 
masons, and  carpenters,  in  the  building  of  walls,  use  an  instrument  made  of  a 
cord,  at  the  end  of  which  a  lump  of  lead  is  fastened.  They  drop  it  over  the  side 
of  the  wall,  and,  as  the  plummet  natiorally  seeks  the  centre  of  gravity  in  the  earth, 
the  workman  discovers  where  the  wall  recedes  and  where  it  bulges  out,  and  just 
what  is  the  perpendicular.  Our  text  represents  God  as  standing  on  the  wall  of 
character,  which  the  Israelites  had  built,  and  in  that  way  testing  it.  What  the 
world  wants  is  a  straight  up  and  down  religion.  Much  of  the  so-caUed  piety 
6 


82  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ru. 

of  the  day  tends  this  way  and  that  to  suit  the  times.  We  have  all  been  buDding 
a  wall  of  character,  and  it  is  glaringly  imperfect,  and  needs  reconstruction.  How 
shall  it  be  brought  into  perpendicular  ?  Only  by  the  Divine  measurement.  The 
whole  tendency  of  the  times  is  to  make  us  act  by  the  standard  of  what  others 
do.  There  are  ten  thousand  plumblines  in  use,  but  only  one  is  true  and  exact, 
and  that  is  the  line  of  God's  eternal  righteousness.  Nothing  would  make  times 
so  good,  and  the  earning  a  livelihood  so  easy,  as  the  universal  adoption  of  the 
law  of  right.  Suspicion  strikes  through  all  bargain-making.  In  the  same  way 
we  need  to  measure  our  theologies.  All  sorts  of  religions  are  putting  forth  their 
pretensions.  All  religions  but  one  begin  at  the  wrong  end,  and  in  the  wrong 
place.  The  Bible  religion  demands  that  we  first  get  right  with  God.  .  .  .  My 
text  gives  me  a  grand  opportunity  of  saying  a  useful  word  to  all  young  men  who 
are  now  forming  habits  for  a  lifetime.  A  young  man  is  in  danger  of  getting  a 
defect  in  his  wall  of  character  that  may  never  be  corrected.  Oh,  this  plumbline 
of  the  everlasting  right !  God  will  throw  it  over  all  our  lives  to  show  us  our 
moral  deflections.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  plumbline : — Builders 
could  not  build  our  houses  as  they  ought  without  a  plumbline.  Israel  had  been 
built  up  as  a  people,  so  to  speak,  with  a  plumbline ;  everything  was  right ;  God 
approved  of  them.  But  now  Israel  had  become  a  very  different  people  from  what 
they  were  at  the  beginning.  Very  early  Jeroboam  began  to  introduce  calf  worship. 
The  people  thus  became  very  wicked,  and  departed  from  the  way  of  the  Lord 
more  and  more.  Amos  went  to  warn  Jeroboam  the  Second.  But  all  his  warnings 
were  in  vain.  Amaziah  the  high  priest  told  him  to  go  away,  for  they  did  not 
want  his  services  there.  God  comforted  Amos  by  showing  him  a  plumbline,  and 
in  effect  saying,  "  I  have  noticed  how  Israel,  like  a  wall  which  was  once  upright, 
has  been  gradually  giving  way,  and  yet  I  have  passed  it  by,  but  I  cannot  do  so 
any  more."  This  is  what  God  says  at  last  to  every  kingdom  or  nation  that  ceases 
to  be  upright  and  true.  How  many  nations  there  have  been  that  have  begun 
fairly,  but  have  got  worse  as  time  passed  by !  God  is  always  with  His  plumbline 
trying  our  lives.  What  is  His  plumbline  ?  The  grand  old  Book.  By  this, 
too,  we  ought  all  to  be  trying  ourselves.  You  are  building  up  a  life.  Every 
thought  you  cherish,  every  word  you  utter,  and  every  deed  you  perform  is  the 
building  up  of  character  and  life.  Bricklayers  are  not  foolish  enough  to  think 
that  if  they  build  a  wall  out  of  perpendicular  it  will  stand.  If  a  man  will  grow 
up  crooked,  or  dishonest,  or  imtruthful,  he  is  bound  to  come  down  sooner  or  later. 
If  Jesus  comes  to  us.  He  is  sure  to  find  something  or  other  in  our  character  that 
is  not  right,  and  very  likely  He  will  find  a  good  many  bulging  defects.  It  may 
be  selfishness,  untruthfulness,  unkindness,  or  some  other  sin.  We  must  build 
up  our  life  according  to  His  law.  We  cannot  do  anything  ourselves  without 
His  help  ;  but  that  help  He  is  ever  ready  to  give.     (David  Davies.) 

Vers.  10-17.  Amos  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  house  of 
Israel. — The  conventional  and  the  genuine  priests  of  a  people  : — I.  The  conventional 
PRIEST.  Amaziah  was  chief  priest  of  the  royal  sanctuary  of  the  calves  at  Bethel. 
1.  He  was  in  close  intimacy  with  the  king.  2.  He  seeks  to  expel  an  independent 
teacher  from  the  dominion  of  the  king.  (1)  By  appeal  to  the  king.  By  bringing 
against  Amos  the  groundless  charge  of  treason.  By  a  base  slander  he  endeavours 
to  influence  the  king  against  the  true  teacher.  He  does  this — (2)  By  alarming 
the  prophet.  "  Amaziah  said  unto  Amos,  0  thou  seer,  go,  flee  thee  away  into 
the  land  of  Judah,  and  there  eat  bread,  and  prophesy  there  :  but  prophesy  not 
again  any  more  at  Bethel  :  for  it  is  the  king's  chapel,  and  it  is  the  king's  court." 
>/  It  does  not  appear  that  the  king  took  any  notice  of  the  message  which  this  author- 
ised religious  teacher  had  sent  him  concerning  Amos ;  hence,  in  order  to  carry 
out  his  malignant  purpose,  he  addresses  the  prophet  and  says,  "  0  thou  seer, 
go,  flee  thee  away."    Not  imagining  that  Amos  could  be  actuated  by  any  higher 

■-.principle  than  that  of  selfishness,  which  reigned  in  his  own  heart,  the  priest  advised 
him  to  consult  his  safety  by  fleeing  across  the  frontier  into  the  kingdom  of  Judah, 
where  he  might  obtain  his  livelihood  by  the  unrestrained  exercise  of  his  pro- 
phetical gifts.  Thank  God,  the  days  of  the  Amaziahs,  through  the  advancement 
of  popular  intelligence,  are  drawing  to  a  close  !  II.  Here  we  have  the  genuine 
priest  of  a  people.  Amos  seems  to  have  been  a  prophet  not  nationally  recog- 
nised as  such.     1.  He  is  not  ashamed  of  his  humble  origin.     "  I  was  no  prophet," 

/  that  is,  I  am  not  a  prophet  by  profession,  "  neither  was  I  a  prophet's  son."  By 
'    the  son  of  a  prophet  he  means  a  disciple  or  pupil.     He  had  not  studied  in  any 


CHAP.  VII.]  AMOS.  83 

prophetic  college.  No  true  prophet  is  ever  ashamed  of  his  origin,  however  humble. 
As  a  rule  the  greatest  teachers  of  the  world  have  struggled  up  from  the  regions 
of  poverty  and  obscurity.  2.  He  is  conscious  of  the  Divinity  of  his  mission. 
"  The  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock,  and  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Go, 
prophesy  unto  My  people  Israel."  Amos  seems  to  have  had  no  doubt  at  all 
as  to  the  fact  that  the  Lord  called  him.  How  he  was  called  does  not  appear. 
When  God  calls  a  man  to  work,  the  man  knows  it.  No  argument  will  convince 
him  to  the  contrary.  3.  In  the  name  of  heaven  he  denounces  the  conventional 
priest.  In  return  for  this  rebellion  against  Jehovah,  Amos  foretells  for  the  priest 
the  punishment  which  will  fall  upon  him  when  the  judgment  shall  come  upon 
Israel,  meeting  his  words,  "  Thou  sayest.  Thou  shalt  not  prophesy  "  with  the 
keen  retort,  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah."  The  punishment  is  described  in  verse  17. 
{Homilist.) 

Yer.  15.  The  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock,  and  the  Lord  said  unto  me, 
Go,  prophesy  unto  My  people  Israel. — The  messenger  faithful  to  his  mission  : — 
Holy  Scripture  seldom  teaches  more  impressively  than  when  it  teaches  by  con- 
trasts. There  may  be  instituted  a  contrast  between  two  classes  of  religious 
workers.     1.  Professional  religious  workers.     In  every  age  there  have  been  such 

\men — conventional  religionists,  whose  creed  is  compromise,  and  whose  maxim 
is,  "  Sail  with  the  stream."  2.  Men  whose  hearts  the  Lord  has  touched.  Such 
was  Amos.  Observe  the  surroundings  of  his  life.  What  was  it  the  mere  pro- 
fessionals were  afraid  of  in  his  message  ?  They  may  have  feared  lest  the  people 
should  be  roused  to  think.  More  probably  they  felt  the  inward  uneasiness  which 
hollow  profession  must  ever  experience  when  brought  into  contrast  with 
genuine  piety  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  presence  and  testimony 
of  Amos  condemned  them.     The  priest  Amaziah  suggested  that  Amos  would  be 

V  wise  to  flee  away  to  the  land  of  Judah.  There  would  have  been  nothing  neces- 
sarily sinful  in  following  this  advice.  The  presence  of  the  prophet  in  Jerusalem 
would  have  been  hailed  with  the  warmest  sympathy  and  welcome.  He  would 
have  gained  a  wide  popularity,  and  would  have  been  an  object  of  general  admira- 
tion. And  we  are  all  liable  to  be  influenced  by  such  motives.  We  do  not  like 
to  stand  alone,  beset  with  continual  difficulties  arising  from  our  position.  No 
doubt  Amos  would  have  yielded  had  he  not  been  walking  in  the  Spirit,  and  it 
is  only  this  that  will  keep  any  of  us  at  the  post  of  duty.  We  are  often  tempted 
to  run  away  from  the  cross  given  us  to  bear,  flattering  ourselves  all  the  time  that 
in  doing  so  we  are  seeking  opportunities  of  greater  usefulness.  We  cannot  get 
away  from  the  Cross ;  it  is  the  law  of  true  Christian  experience.  Satan  will  always 
entice  us  to  run  away.  Consider  the  temptations  of  the  prophet  more  in  detail. 
1.  Immunity  from  danger  is  promised.  Amos  was  in  a  state  of  continual  danger 
where  he  was.  2.  If  Amos  would  only  go  across  the  border,  he  had  a  clear  prospect 
of  obtaining  what  none  of  us  can  do  without — bread.  He  might  count  upon 
a  comfortable  maintenance,  a  good  living.  A  judicious  use  of  his  religion  would 
have  got  him  on  in  the  world,  and  his  godliness  might  have  been  made  the  stepping- 
stone  to  rank  and  fortune.  The  position  of  Amos  where  he  was  must  have  been 
very  precarious  ;  he  had  left  his  regular  means  of  livelihood,  and  was  living  a 
life  of  faith.  He  must  have  been  living,  as  we  say,  "  from  hand  to  mouth."  To 
stay  where  he  was  would  be  to  continue  in  poverty,  perhaps  to  starve.     3.  There 

J  was  something  more  than  even  bread.     Which  of  us  does  not  know  the  yearning 

of  the  human  heart  for  sympathy  ?     How  painful  it  is  to  stand  alone !     Which 

'  of  us  is  altogether  indifferent  to  popularity?     4.   Even  this  was  not  all.     Ths 

temptation  is  backed  by  an  attempt  to  get  up  a  question  of  casuistry.     The 

'  king  has  commanded  you  not  to  speak,  and  you  are  disobeying  him.  How  dare 
you  arrogate  to  yourself  such  airs  of  superiority,  and  set  yourself  up  as  better 
than  every  one  else  ?  This  is  one  of  the  severest  trials  of  the  Christian  life.  Ifc 
does  seem  to  those  who  do  not  take  pains  to  find  out  the  truth,  as  if  we  assumed 
an  attitude  of  religious  superiority.  But,  after  all,  our  position  is  not  as  trying 
as  Amos's  was.  Our  only  safety  is  ever  to  put  our  direct  duty  to  God  before 
our  indirect.  Be  loyal  to  Him  personally,  first ;  be  loyal  to  Him  indirectly, 
through  your  king  or  your  parent,  second  ;  and  remember  you  cannot  be  loyal 
to  Him  indirectly,  when  you  have  ceased  to  be  loyal  to  Him  directly.  Against 
all  these  considerations  of  expediency  and  self-interest  what  had  Amos  to  set  ? 
Only  one  mighty  word  from  the  lips  of  God.  It  was  this  that  kept  him  at  his 
post.     "Go,  prophesy  unto  My  people  Israel."    That  was  all;  but  it  was  clear. 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

Tlie  voice  said,  "  Amos,  go  !  "  From  that  moment  Amos  lived  for  God  and 
His  work ;  he  turned  his  back  on  the  sheepfold,  gave  up  the  gathering  of  syca- 
more, and  began  to  deliver  his  message.  Everything  seemed  to  wave  him  back 
to  his  primitive  seclusion.  But  against  all  opposition  rang  out  the  clear  inner 
voice,  Amos,  go  ;  have  not  I  sent  thee  ?  "  And  he  went,  with  his  life  in  his 
hand.  He  went,  in  the  face  of  the  jeers,  and  scoffs,  and  threats  of  the  world, 
and  the  advice  of  such  religious  professors  as  Amaziah.  We  do  not  want  two- 
faced  Christians.  We  want  men  who,  like  Amos,  are  carried  forward  by  the 
mighty  consciousness  of  the  Divine  call,  men  in  whose  inmost  heart  the  mighty 
voice  of  God  is  heard,  calling  them  as  by  namCf  and  bidding  them  "  Go." 
(W.  M.  Hay-Aitken,  M.A.)  A  humble  origin  remembered: — Felix  Faure,  the 
late  president  of  the  French  Republic,  never  sought  to  conceal  his  lowly  origin. 
Hanging  in  a  conspicuous  place  on  the  wall  of  his  presidential  office  was  a  photo- 
graph of  a  yoimg  man  wearing  a  tanner's  blouse  and  wooden  shoea.  Faure  the 
president,  did  not  forget  that  he  was  once  Faure  the  currier. 


CHAPTER  Vin. 


Vers.  1,  2.  A  basket  of  summer  fruit.  —  A  basket  of  summer  fruit ;  —  As 
God  set  before  Amos  a  basket  of  summei-  fruit,  as  a  sign  or  parable  concerning 
Israel ;  so,  at  harvest-tide  God  sets  before  us  a  basket  of  summer  fruit,  to  teach 
us  lessons  to  our  soul's  health.  1.  In  preparing  the  earth  for  a  harvest  crop, 
and  our  lives  for  a  crop  of  holiness,  we  must  expect  hard  labour,  and  often  sorrow. 
Whether  we  cultivate  the  fields  or  our  souls,  we  must  do  it  in  the  sweat  of  our 
face,  with  hard  labour.  Both  the  ground  and  our  nature  need  cultivation,  and 
that  implies  labour,  and  frequently  sorrow.  After  the  great  fire  of  London,  a 
flower  called  the  Golden  Rocket  appeared,  and  beautified  places  wasted  by  the 
flame,  though  it  had  never  been  seen  in  that  district  before.  The  seeds  were 
lying  in  the  ground,  but  it  needed  the  fire  to  make  them  live  and  grow.  Some- 
times we  nem  the  fire  of  affliction  to  bring  out  the  good  in  us.  It  is  God's  love, 
not  anger,  which  sends  the  fire.  Our  life  needs  clearing,  purging,  that  it  may 
bring  forth  new  and  better  fruit.  Some  of  us  can  only  be  saved  "  as  by  fire." 
2.  We  must  plough  deep.  The  man  who  wants  a  good  crop  will  not  just  scratch 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  he  will  drive  in  the  ploughshare  deep.  So  we  must 
drive  down  the  ploughshare  of  self-examination,  we  must  break  up  the  hard 
ground  of  pride  and  self-righteousness,  where  no  good  thing  can  grow.  3.  There 
must  be  sowing  of  seed.  What  we  sow  we  reap.  Our  good  deeds  and  our  evil 
deeds  bear  their  fruit  here.  Yovu:  words,  your  acts,  your  thoughts  are  seed ; 
you  may  cast  them  forth  carelessly,  but  like  seed  thoughtlessly  dropped  in  the 
ground,  they  will  grow,  and  if  it  be  bad  seed,  you  will  be  terrified  at  your  harvest. 
Remember  this, — You  may  not  have  sown  bad  seed,  but  if  you  have  sown  nothing 
for  God,  you  will  reap  nothing  from  God.  If  you  have  no  loving  fellowship  with 
God  here,  you  wiU  have  none  hereafter.  Neglect  of  duty  is  a  great  sin.  If  we 
neglect  our  souls  they  degenerate,  our  spiritual  natures  grow  weak.  Let  us 
learn  to  thank  God,  not  only  for  bread  which  strengthens  man's  heart,  but  also 
for  the  better  bread  of  holy  teaching  which  the  harvest  provides,  bread  to 
strengthen  man's  soul.  {H.  J.  WUmot-Buxton,  M.A.)  A  basket  of  summer 
fruit : — Is  there  any  similarity  between  the  Grospel  and  summer  fruit  ?  They 
both,  in  the  first  place,  mean  health.  God  every  summer  doctors  the  ailments 
of  the  world  by  the  orchards  and  groves.  The  Gospel  means  health.  It  makes 
a  man  mighty  for  work,  and  strong  for  contest.  It  cures  spiritual  ailments. 
The  analogy  is  also  found  in  the  fact  that  summer  fruit  is  pleasant  to  the  eye 
and  the  taste.  So  the  Gospel,  when  a  man  rightly  sees  it  and  tastes  it,  is  very 
pleasant.  If  summer  fruit  is  not  taken  immediately,  it  soon  fails.  First,  the 
speck ;  then  a  multiplication  of  defects ;  after  a  while  a  softening  that  is  offensive  ; 
and  then  it  is  all  flung  out.  So  all  religious  advantages  perish  right  speedily  if 
you  do  not  take  them.  I  suppose  you  have  noticed  how  swiftly  the  days  and 
the  years  go  by.  Every  day  seems  to  me  like  "  a  basket  of  summer  fruit,"  the 
morning  sky  is  vermilion,  the  noonday  is  opaline,  the  evening  cloud  is  fire-dyed. 
How  soon  the  days  are  gone  !      Notice  the  perishable  natiure  of  all  religious 


CHAP,  vni.]  AMOS.  85 

surroundings.  Christian  associations  readily  fade  away  from  the  soul.  Every 
opportunity  of  salvation  seems  to  be  restless  until  it  gets  away  from  us.  Going 
away  the  sermons ;  going  away  the  songs  ;  going  away  the  strivings  of  God's 
eternal  Spirit.  The  practical  question  is  now  ;  will  you  miss  your  chance  ?  The 
day  of  grace  will  soon  be  past.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Religion  in  the 
garden  : — In  our  great  cities  one  of  the  most  welcome  sights  of  summer  is  to  be 
foiuid  in  the  baskets  of  fruit  exposed  for  sale  in  the  shop  windows.  Reflect 
on  some  of  the  things  God  would  teach  us  from  "  a  basket  of  summer  fruit." 
I.  Fbttit  is  the  end  and  reward  of  labour.  Fruit-bearing  is  the  end  contem- 
plated in  the  seed-sowing  and  cultivation  of  the  husbandman.  Jesus  said,  "  My 
Father  is  the  husbandman."  We  are  thus  led  to  think  of  God  working  in  us 
and  for  us  by  His  grace  with  a  constancy  and  care  like  that  of  the  owner  of  a 
vineyard.  And  the  end  contemplated  by  that  gracious  work  of  God  is  that  we 
should  bear  fruit,  and  thus  minister  to  His  delight  and  glory.  We  are  not  left 
ignorant  as  to  the  nature  of  the  fruit  that  God  looks  for  in  man.  St.  Paul  says, 
'  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  kindness,  goodness, 
faithfulness,  meekness,  temperance.  '  These  are  the  resiilts  that  God  works 
for  and  waits  to  see  exhibited  by  those  who  call  themselves  by  the  name  of  Christ. 
When  our  lives  bring  forth  these  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  we  become,  in  very  truth, 
gardens  of  the  Lord.  11.  When  the  fruit  fails  there  is  disappointment 
and  loss.  Many  things  are  necessary  to  bring  the  work  of  the  garden  to  a 
successful  iasue — good  seed  and  stock,  congenial  soil  and  situation,  favourable 
climate  and  intelligent  cultivation.  Yet  when  all  has  been  attended  to  that 
wisdom  and  experience  command,  there  are  occasional  failures  that  disappoint 
and  perplex  the  gardener.  Young  trees  that  put  forth  healthy  shoots  and 
vigorous  branches,  and  gave  great  promise  at  fkst,  when  they  have  grown  are 
found  to  be  barren  and  unfruitful.  Some  trees  never  blossom  at  all,  some  have 
blossom  that  never  comes  to  fruit.  Whole  crops  of  fruit  are  sometimes  destroyed 
by  the  pests  of  the  garden,  and  are  at  times  stolen  by  thieves.  Over  these  losses 
the  husbandman  sorrows  because  he  has  laboured  in  vain.  See  the  parable  of 
the  barren  fig-tree.  May  not  some  of  our  lives  be  equally  disappointing  to  God  ? 
He  has  surrounded  us  with  privileges,  opportunities,  and  helps  to  the  attainment 
of  a  holy  life,  yet  the  spiritual  results  may  be  nowhere  visible.  There  are  the 
leaves  of  a  cold  morality,  but  no  blossoms  of  grace  ;  the  flowers  of  a  shallow 
profession,  but  none  of  the  fruits  of  a  consistent  life.  How  long  shall  we  continue 
thus  to  abuse  the  blessings  of  God,  and  try  His  patience  as  cumberers  on  His 
holy  ground  ?  III.  The  glory  of  the  garden  is  carried  away  in  the  fruit- 
basket.  The  garden  has  a  spent  and  dreary  look  after  its  beauty  and  treasure 
have  been  gathered.  But  this  dreariness  is  only  temporary.  The  husbandman 
knows  well  how  to  repair  the  waste.  Some  of  us  have  a  like  experience.  We 
can  think  of  a  time  when  duty  demanded  a  great  sacrifice,  or  when  duty  had  to 
be  done  in  the  face  of  great  danger  and  temptation.  But  then  we  were  spent 
in  the  great  effort,  almost  broken  by  the  severe  strain.  Then  God  came  and 
called  us  to  come  apart  and  rest  a  while.  In  delightful  fellowship  with  Him 
strength  and  inspiration  gradually  retiu-ned,  and  we  were  even  more  ready  than 
before  when  the  next  call  of  duty  came.  {James  Menzies.)  Harvest  or  summer 
fruits  : — God  teaches  the  world  in  two  ways  ;  by  symbols  and  sayings.  By  this 
"  basket  of  summer  fruit "  He  taught  Amos  that  Israel  was  ripe  for  judgment. 
These  summer  fruits  remind  us  of — I.  The  beneficence  of  God.  In  the  summer 
fruit  He  gives  us  the  useful  and  the  beautiful.  In  these  fruits  of  the  earth  pro- 
visions are  made  for  our  physical  wants.  They  are  beautiful  as  well  as  useful. 
How  beautiful  are  these  fruits  of  the  earth  !  Their  exquisite  forms,  in  bound- 
less variety ;  their  lovely  tints,  their  bloom  and  gorgeous  hues,  how  beautiful  ! 
Deep  within  us  all  is  the  love  for  the  beautiful.  The  God  who  planted  within 
us  the  sentiment  ministers  abundantly  to  it  in  these  baskets  of  fruit.  God's 
beneficence  in  these  fruits  of  the  earth  is  shown  to  be  —  (1)  Abundant, 
(2)  Unremitting,  (3)  Undeserved.  II.  The  maturing  forces  of  Divine 
GOVERNMENT.  This  "  basket  of  summer  fruit "  is  the  outcome  of  a  very 
long  and  complicate  process.  Snow  and  ice,  showers  and  dews,  clouds  and 
sunshine,  storm  and  calm,  bleak  winds  of  winter,  genial  airs  of  spring,  and  the 
hot  breath  of  summer,  the  constant  care  and  toil  of  the  labourers  in  the  fields 
and  orchards,  have  all  co-operated  in  bringing  out  this  result.  Antecedently, 
this  result  would  not  have  been  expected.  Suppose  a  man  in  the  depths  of  winter 
bemg  told  for  the  first  time  that  those  leafless  fruit  trees,  shivering  in  the  winds. 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

and  hung  with  icicles,  should,  in  a  few  months,  be  loaded  with  clusters  of  apples, 
and  plums,  and  pears,  and  grapes,  would  he  have  believed  it  ?     The  thing  to 
him  would  have  been  incredible.     Things  will  ever  be  occurring  in  God's  universe 
upon  which  antecedently  no  finite  being  could  calculate.     Therefore  do  not  argue — 
(1)  Against  the  conversion  of  the  world,  or  (2)  Against  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.     III.  The  destined  decadence  of  all  organic  life.     In  that  "  basket 
of  summer  fruit "  there  is  death.     In  a  few  short  days  it  will  be  reduced  to  utter 
corruption.     So  it  is  with  all  material  life :  no  sooner  is  perfection  reached  than 
decay  begins.     (Homilist.)        A  basket  of  summer  fruit: — Fruits  always  seem 
fairest,  freshest,  and  finest  when  they  are  seasonable — that  is,  when  not  forced 
into  being  before  their  proper  time  of  ripening  or  preserved  artificially  beyond 
the  period  of  their  natural  growth  in  the  gardens.     And  each  of  the  seasons, 
unless  it  be  winter,  seems  to  have  its  own  peculiar  fauna  and  flora  which  lend  it 
beauty  and  distinction.     The  prophet  Amos,  who  was  a  herdsman  accustomed 
to  the  open  air  and  to  the  nomad  life  of  the  free  East,  and  who  uses  accordingly 
many  rural  figures  in  his  writings,  speaks  of  "  a  basket  of  summer  fruit."     We 
may  figuratively  take  his  words,  now,  to  represent  those  traits  of  nature  and 
those  moral  results  which  seem  to  be  particularly  characteristic  of  summer.     1.  In 
the  first  place  we  may  say  that  there  goes  into  the  basket  of  summer  fruits  an 
innocent  joyousness  of  heart.     God  does  not  intend  that  we  should  live  to  be 
happy,  but  He  does  desire  that  we  should  be  happy  while  we  live.     Joy  is  a 
Christian  grace.     If  any  one  has  the  right  to  be  joyful  it  is  the  believer,  with 
countless  spiritual  blessings  at  his  service  in  this  world,  and  all  the  bright,  brave, 
beautiful  things  of  the  world  to  come  before  him.     "  Rejoice  evermore  !  "  is  a 
whole  Decalogue  in  itself.     And  it  seems  easier  to  rejoice  in  the  summer  time, 
when  all  things  take  on  their  brightest  look,  each  day  seems  a  gala  day,  and 
nature  dons  her  loveliest  garments.     And  we  are  then  out  of  doors  more,  which 
is  a  condition  conducing  to  greater  health  and  happiness.     All  this  now  is  natural 
and  right,  if  the  joy  be  drawn  from  the  right  soiu-ces  and  based  upon  the  right 
things.     2.  Very  like  in  nature  to  this  summer  fruit  of  joyousness  is  that  of 
gratefulness.     For  who  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  be  reasonably  happy,  innocently 
gleeful  ?     It  is  God,  who  is  Himself  the  source  and  fount  of  joy.     3.  The  summer 
is  a  good  time  to  cultivate  the  grace  of  worship.     The  spirit  of  worship  is  for 
the  whole  year.     And  at  no  period  of  the  year  should  the  regular  services  of  the 
sanctuary  be  neglected,  as  the  manner  of  many  is.     4.  Again,  there  is  the  summer 
fruit  of  generosity,  which  certainly  it  would  seem  should  thrive  in  the  expansive, 
out-of-door  life  of  that  season.     When  the  restrictions  of  indoor  life  have  given 
way  to  the  freedom  of  the  fields,  the  woods,  and  the  hills,  a  broadening  of  the 
sympathies  should  certainly  be  experienced.     If  we  breathe  a  fresher  air  and 
more  of  it  our  pulses  should  quicken  at  the  same  time  with  a  more  abundant 
fellow-feeling  for  mankind  about  us.     6.  The  basket  of  summer  fruit  also  makes 
room  for  the  grace  of  good  humour.     Summer  is  the  "  cross  "  season,  many 
think,  which  will  excuse  bad  temper  in  themselves  and  perhaps  in  others  when 
the  thermometer  goes  up  into  the  nineties.     The  hot  weather  certainly  tries 
people's  tempers,  of  what  sort  they  are  :  and  the  curious  thing  is  that  the  indi- 
viduals who  have  lost  their  temper  most  often  seem  to  have  the  most  temper 
left.     But  the  summer  months  should   be  marked   by  many  little  sufferances 
and  patiences,  which  will  come  most  surely  of  numerous  small  prayers  and  pleadings 
at  the  throne  of  grace.     Let  us  try  to  be  good-humoured  and  amiable  even  when 
circumstances  might  seem  to  excuse  petulance.     6.  And  then  no  basket  of  summer 
fruit  would  be  complete  without  the  grace  of  Christian  hopefulness.     Hope,  we 
may  say,  is  the  joy  of  the  future — that  is,  the  joy  which  we  obtain  even  now 
from  the  anticipation  of  delights  to  come.     Like  faith,  it  is  the  "  substance," 
or  assured  impression,  of  things  that  are  yet  to  be.     And  the  summer  time  may 
be  really  a  continuous  jubilee,  one  prolonged  brightsome  poem — a  lyric  of  flowers 
and  fruits  and  spiritual  feasting  and  trustful  uplift  of  heart,  as  the  soul,  like  a 
plant  toiiched  by  a  sun  in  the  heavens  and  blown  upon  by  breezes  from  off  the 
eternal  hills,  opens  out  constantly  into  the  fuller,  freer  life  of  God,  and  grows 
toward  the  ideals   of  saintly  living  which  shall   be  realised  at  last  somewhere 
beyond  the  skies  and  stars.     We  may  always  have  summer  in  our  hearts.     There 
are  those  who  have  no  summer,  to  whom  it  is  always  arctic  night,  chilling  and 
drear  ;  but  the  child  of  God  has  the  spring-tide  in  his  heart  now,  and  looks  hope- 
fully forward  to  entrance  sometime  into  a  land  where  cold  blasts  never  blow 
and  storms  never  beat,  but  where  all  things  are  surrounded  by  an  atmosphere 


CHAP,  vm.]  AMOS.  87 

of  genial  godliness,  of  beatific  beauty,  and  perfect  love.  (C.  A.  S.  Dwight.) 
Ripeness  for  jiidgment : — I.  Wicked  nations  gbow  ripe  foe  judgment.  The 
"  basket  of  summer  fruit."  This  symbol  suggests — I.  That  Israel's  present  moral 
corruption  was  no  hasty  production.  The  ripe  fruit  in  that  basket  did  not 
spring  forth  at  once,  it  took  many  months  to  produce.  Men  do  not  become 
great  sinners  at  once.  The  character  of  a  people  does  not  reach  its  last  degree  of 
vileness  in  a  few  years,  it  takes  time.  The  first  seed  of  evil  is  to  be  germinated, 
then  it  grows,  ripens,  and  multiplies  until  there  is  a  crop  ready  for  the  sickle. 
2.  That  Israel's  season  for  improvement  was  past  and  gone.  The  ripened  fruit 
in  that  basket  had  reached  a  stage  in  which  improvement  was  impossible.  The 
bloom  was  passing  away,  and  rottenness  was  setting  in.  Nations  become 
incorrigible.  3.  That  Israel's  utter  ruin  was  inevitable.  Nothing  awaited  that 
"  basket  of  summer  fruit "  but  rottenness.  Its  decomposition  was  working, 
and  would  soon  reduce  it  to  putrescent  filth.     So  it  was  with  Israel.     II.  Tktje 

PROPHETS  ABE  MADE  SENSIBLE   OF  THIS  RIPENESS.       God  givCS  AmOS  a  visioU  for 

the  purpose.  To  every  true  teacher  God  says  at  the  outset,  "  What  seest  thou  ?  " 
Hast  thou  a  clear  vision  of  this  basket  of  summer  fruit  ?  Hast  thou  a  clear  idea 
of  this  subject  on  which  thou  art  about  to  discourse  ?  Thus  He  dealt  with  Moses, 
Elijah,  Daniel,  Paul,  John.     III.  Almighty  God  makes  His  prophets  sensible 

OF  THE  ripeness   OF  A  PEOPLE'S   CORETJPTION  IN   OBDEB  THAT   THEY  MAY   SOUND 

THE  ALABM.  Why  was  Amos  thus  Divinely  impressed  with  the  wretched  moral 
condition  of  the  people  of  Israel  ?  Simply  that  he  may  be  more  earnest  and 
emphatical  in  sounding  the  alarm.     What  was  the  calamity  he  was  to  proclaim  ? 

1.  Universal  mourning.  "  The  songs  of  the  temple  shall  be  bowlings."  The 
inevitable  tendency  of  sin  is  to  turn  songs  of  gladness  into  bowlings  of  distress. 

2.  Universal  death.  "  And  there  shall  be  many  dead  bodies  in  every  place, 
and  they  shall  cast  them  forth  with  silence."  (Homilist.)  Fully  ripe  : — 1.  The 
end  of  the  season  of  trial  under  the  emblem  of  a  basket  of  summer  fruit  (vers.  1-3). 
The  emblem  meant  that  a  period  was  approaching  when  their  time  of  probation 
would  be  over,  and  the  resiilt  of  that  would  be  a  great  destruction  of  life,  accom- 
panied with  gloomy  silence  on  the  part  of  the  miserable  survivors.  The  emblem 
has  a  general  application  to  all  periods  of  the  Church's  history.  It  suggests 
the  idea  of  a  tree  which  had  been  tended,  planted,  watered  with  the  rain  and 
the  dew.  It  had  blossomed,  budded,  brought  forth  fruit ;  its  work  was  done ; 
the  fruit  was  gathered  ;  no  pains  of  the  gardener,  no  change  in  the  season,  no 
influence  of  the  sun  could  now  alter  the  character  of  the  fruit.  They  were  either 
apples  of  Sodom,  or  pleasant  to  the  eye,  and  good  for  food.  Now  was  the  time, 
not  to  cherish  their  growth,  but  to  try  their  quality.  As  there  are  means  of 
hastening  the  growth  and  ripeness  of  summer  fruit,  so  do  privileges  and  mercies 
hasten  the  maturity  of  the  soul,  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  on  the 
one  hand,  and  for  the  righteous  vengeance  of  God  on  the  other.  This  considera- 
tion shows  the  fearful  character  of  unrepented  sin.  Perseverance  therein  causes 
ripeness  for  judgment.  It  teaches  us  what  our  chief  aim  ought  to  be  ;  not  so 
much  eagerness  for  outward  privilege,  as  an  earnest  desire  that  the  heart  may 
be  right  with  God.  2.  The  close  connection  between  evil  imaginations  respecting 
God's  service,  and  unjust  dealings  towards  men  (vers.  4-6).  Contempt  for 
and  abuse  of  Grod's  ordinances  is  here  shown  to  be  closely  connected  with  doing 
wrong  to  the  poor.  He  who  forgets  his  duty  towards  his  Maker,  is  sure  to  be 
wanting  in  his  duty  towards  those  who  bear  his  Maker's  image.  The  best  friends 
of  the  poor  are  those  who  earnestly  contend  for  the  rights  of  God.  3.  The 
universality  of  Divine  knowledge,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  effects  of  Divine 
judgments  on  the  other  (vers.  7-10).  Man,  in  his  hurry  to  become  rich,  often 
does  many  things  unrighteously.  But  all  things  are  at  all  times  naked  and  open 
to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  No  lapse  of  time,  nor  change 
of  scene,  nor  combination  of  circumstances,  nor  crowding  together  of  different 
pursuits,  veils  for  one  moment  the  acts  of  ungodliness  and  wrong  which  men 
have  done.  Iniquity  is  never  forgotten  till  it  is  forgiven.  4.  A  crowning  judg- 
ment, which  implied  the  absence  of  God,  the  children's  food  taken  from  them 
(vers.  11-14).  Among  the  Jews  the  absence  of  prophetical  teaching  would  be  a 
famine  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  Direction  from  Him  was  a  part  of  their  peculiar 
blessedness.  The  want  of  that  direction  left  them  in  a  very  helpless  condition. 
In  a  Christian  land,  where  the  Word  of  Grod  is  freely  circulated,  we  have  the  law, 
the  testimony,  and  direction  in  all  the  duties  of  life.  The  precepts  of  the  Gospel 
are  so  full,  and  its  principles  so  clear,  that  we  need  never  be  at  a  loss.     And  where 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  vra. 

there  is  a  scriptiiral  ministry,  the  public  mind  may  be  kept  as  clearly  instructed 
in  the  will  of  God  as  ever  the  Jews  were  by  the  teaching  of  the  prophets.  Christian 
communities,  however,  have  been  visited  with  a  famine  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Often,  in  the  case  of  individuals,  a  famine  of  the  Word  of  God  comes  upon  the 
soul.  {Vincent  W.  Ryan,  M.A.)  Bipe  for  gathering  : — The  point  of  the  vision 
is  rather  obscured  by  the  rendering  "  summer  fruit."  "  Ripe  fruit "  would  be 
better,  since  the  emblem  represents  the  northern  kingdom  as  ripe  for  the  dreadful 
ingathering  of  judgment.  Just  as  the  mellow  ripeness  of  the  fruit  fixes  the  time 
of  gathering  it,  so  there  comes  a  stage  in  national  and  individual  corruption, 
when  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  smite.  That  period  is  not  reached  because 
God  changes,  but  because  men  get  deeper  in  sin.  Because  "  the  harvest  is  ripe," 
the  sickle  is  called  for.  It  is  a  solemn  lesson,  appljing  to  each  soul  as  well  as  to 
communities.  By  neglect  of  God's  voice,  and  persistence  in  our  own  evil  ways, 
we  can  make  ourselves  such  that  we  are  ripe  for  judgment,  and  can  compel  long- 
BufEering  to  strike.  The  tragedy  of  that  fruit-gathering  is  described  with 
extraordinary  grimness  and  force  in  the  abrupt  language  of  verse  3.  The  crimes 
that  ripened  men  for  this  terrible  harvest  are  next  set  forth  in  verses  4  to  6.  The 
catalogue  of  sins  is  left  incomplete,  as  if  holy  indignation  turned  for  relief  to 
the  thought  of  the  certain  judgment.  Amos  heaps  image  on  image  to  deepen 
the  impression  of  terror  and  confusion.  Ever3rthing  is  turned  to  its  opposite. 
All  these  threats  were  fulfilled  in  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  But  that 
"  day  of  the  Lord  "  was,  in  principle,  a  miniature  foreshadowing  of  the  great 
final  judgment.  The  last  section  (vers.  11-14)  specifies  one  feature  of  judgment, 
the  deprivation  of  the  despised  Word  of  the  Lord.  The  truth  implied  is  universal 
in  its  application.  God's  message  neglected  is  withdrawn.  Conscience  stops 
if  continually  unheeded.  The  Gospel  may  still  soimd  in  a  man's  ears,  but  have 
long  ceased  to  reach  further.  There  comes  a  time  when  men  shall  wish  wasted 
opportvmities  back,  and  find  that  they  can  no  more  retiu-n  than  last  summer's 
heat.  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Israel's  overthrow  foretold: — At  home  the  nation 
of  Israel  appeared  to  the  eye  of  its  citizens  to  possess  every  needed  element  of 
stability  and  prosperity,  in  a  strong  government,  domestic  ta'anquillity,  plentiful 
harvests,  and  multiplying  riches.  And  looking  abroad,  there  appeared  no  occasion 
for  anxiety.  But  along  with  apparent  political  and  economic  prosperity,  sad 
religious  and  moral  corruption  prevailed.  Apostasy  had  accompanied  revolution 
when  Israel  was  founded.  Other  sins  followed  in  the  train  of  apostasy.  To  this 
people,  victorious,  prosperous,  wealthy,  avaricious,  dishonest,  luxurious,  corrupt, 
immoral,  irreligious,  God  sent  a  messenger  with  a  message.  Amos  goes  from 
Tekoa  to  Bethel,  the  royal  sanctuary  and  abode  of  Israel.  Here  he  denounces 
the  sins  of  the  nation,  proclaims  the  displeasure  of  Jehovah,  and  threatens 
destruction.  Tradition  reports  that  the  fearless  preacher  was  mobbed  and  beaten, 
scarce  escaping  with  his  life.  But  he  had  done  his  work.  He  had  warned  the 
people.  The  vision  and  the  voice  come  down  to  us  to-day.  "  Behold,"  Amos 
says,  "  a  basket  of  summer  fruit."  The  meaning  does  not  lie  on  the  sm-face. 
In  Palestine  fruit  was  the  last  crop  to  be  gathered  in.  The  sight  of  fruit  suggested 
to  Amos  that  the  end  of  the  prosperity  of  Israel  was  near.  Additional  force  was 
given  to  this  suggestion  by  a  play  upon  words  which  we  can  in  no  way  reproduce 
in  English.  The  word  here  used  for  "  fruit "  was  derived  from  the  same  root 
as  the  word  which  commonly  signified  "  end."  The  significance  was  of  course 
primarily  political.  No  nation  could  long  stand  which  was  so  undermined  with 
irreligion,  and  honeycombed  with  immorality  as  was  the  nation  of  Israel.  Like 
a  summer  storm  clouding  the  noon,  disaster  soon  overshadowed  the  brightness 
of  Israel's  day.  Less  than  a  himdred  years  after  Amos  came  to  Bethel,  and  was 
scorned  and  hunted  thence,  Shalmanezer  came,  and  Israel  was  no  more.  It  is 
to  be  remembered  that  the  destruction  of  the  national  life  of  Israel  was  due  to 
itself,  its  own  faults,  its  own  corruptions.  No  nation  was  ever  destroyed  from 
without.  A  people  that  is  fit  to  live  cannot  be  made  to  die.  The  Assyrians  only 
made  an  end  of  the  fruit  that  was  already  rotten  as  well  as  ripe.  It  is  a  lesson 
for  all  lands.  Our  prosperity  is  no  certain  token  of  om:  permanence.  Size  is 
not  certain  strength  ;  numbers  and  riches  are  not  certain  strength.  The  empire 
of  Alexander  fell  to  pieces  by  its  own  weight.  Spain  was  ruined  by  its  riches. 
There  is  special  warning  in  this  chapter  against  one  class  of  corrupting  influences— 
those  which  grow  out  of  the  greed  of  gain.  The  dangers  which  beset  the  fabric 
of  society  in  these  days  link  themselves  very  largely  with  the  production, 
accumiilation,  and  distribution  of  wealth.     The  denunciations  of  Amos  illuminate 


CHAP,  vra.]  AMOS.  89 

with  wonderful  clearness  the  unjust  and  dishonest  practices  which  had  become 
prevalent  in  that  day.  Greed,  dishonesty,  haste  to  be  rich,  may  destroy  the 
fabric  of  our  society.  If  the  growth  of  vast  fortunes  and  estates  is  regtirded  with 
popular  and  legislative  favour,  and  government  and  society  and  Church  are  deaf 
to  the  cries  and  indifferent  to  the  struggles  of  honest  poverty,  sinking  deeper 
into  abject  and  hopeless  pauperism ;  and  ostentation,  luicury,  and  extravagance 
replace  oxa  old  time  simplicity,  frugality,  and  economy ;  if  the  craze  to  l^  im- 
mensely rich  fevers  the  blood  of  the  whole  people ;  if  fraud,  illegal  or  legalised, 
if  gambling  in  lotteries  and  in  futures,  if  comers  and  stock- watering,  if  dishonesty, 
in  short,  in  all  its  forms  continues  to  increase  ;  if  thus  such  sins  as  ruined  Israel 
taint  our  business  and  social  life  ever  deeper  and  deeper, — then  the  basket  of 
summer  fruit  will  become  symbol  as  apt  for  us  as  it  was  for  them  :  the  end  cannot 
be  far  off.  The  end  may  not,  however,  come  in  a  political  catastrophe  of  sub- 
jugation by  a  foreign  conqueror.  It  came  not  thus  to  France  a  century  ago. 
Learn  to  distrust  even  the  prosperity  which  seems  the  greatest,  and  carefully 
to  scrutinise  its  cost  and  its  consequences.  To  seek  first  to  be  right,  then  to  seek 
to  prosper, — not  first  to  prosper,  regardless  of  right,  is  as  important  for  the  soul 
as  for  the  nation.  Let  us  each  lay  the  corner-stone  of  our  life-work  in  the  fear 
of  God  and  in  Christian  faith,  and  rear  the  edifice  in  honesty,  morality,  kindness, 
service.  Then  surely  ours  shall  be  "  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  ;  it  maketh  rich, 
and  He  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it. "  {D.  F.  Estes. )  Israel's  overthrow  foretold : — - 
The  nation,  God's  chosen,  is  doomed.  This  is  the  import  of  the  vision.  The 
rest  of  the  chapter  is  devoted  to  justification  of  this  decree  and  description  of 
its  execution.  1.  God  is  just.  No  man  ever  felt  this  truth  more  deeply  than 
Amos.  He  betrays  its  hold  upon  him  by  the  way  in  which  he  constructs  his 
prophecies.  He  could  not  endure  that  they  shoiild  have  the  slightest  excuse 
for  charging  God  with  injustice.  They,  however,  were  not  concerned  about  God's 
justice,  though  they  might  pretend  to  question  it.  To  them,  therefore,  his  habit 
of  speech  must  have  been  extremely  annoying.  He  was  like  a  bad  conscience. 
No  wonder  that  they  wanted  to  get  rid  of  him.  The  passage  before  us  contains 
an  excellent  illustration  of  the  point  in  question.  He  shows  that  the  question 
is  not,  How  could  God  destroy  Israel  ?  but.  How  could  He  prevent  their  destruc- 
tion ?  A  community  of  self-seekers  is  an  impossibility.  2.  The  greater  part 
of  this  passage  is  predictive.  This  is  not  the  most  essential  part  of  prophecy. 
A  prediction  is  a  pictiu-e  of  the  future.  Amos  saw  the  kingdom  of  Israel  over- 
thrown by  the  Assyrians.  Probably  he  did  not  expect  his  conventional  details 
would  ever  be  fulfilled.  His  claim  to  inspiration  is  sufficiently  vindicated  by  the 
fact  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  actually  overthrown,  and  the  people  carried 
into  captivity  by  a  power  which,  when  Amos  prophesied,  seemed  on  the  verge 
of  extinction.  {Hinckly  0.  Mitchell.)  A  basket  of  summer  fruit: — 1.  The 
perfection  and  beauty  of  summer  affords  an  illiistration  of  the  goodness  of  God. 
God  is  the  Creator  as  well  as  the  Redeemer.  2.  The  beauty  and  perfection  of 
summer  suggest  to  us  some  interesting  spiritual  analogies.  (1)  They  are  the 
result  of  growth.  So  is  character.  As  the  nature  of  the  fruit  is  dependent  upon 
the   nature   of   the   seed,  so   does   our  character  depend  upon  our  principles, 

(2)  They  are  the  product  of  cultiu-e.     And  our  nature  has  need  of  spiritual  cultiu-e. 

(3)  The  beauty  of  summer  is  an  emblem  of  that  spiritual  transformation  which  is 
accomplished  in  the  sovd  by  the  grace  of  God.  The  same  Spirit  who  renews  the 
face  of  the  earth  is  able  to  renew  the  soul  of  man.  (4)  The  perfection  of  summer 
reminds  us  of  approaching  change.  The  moment  the  fruits  of  summer  are  ripened, 
they  begin  to  decay.  And  the  greater  portion  of  our  lives  is  gone.  Whatever 
length  of  days  may  await  you,  the  most  vigorous  and  active  years  are  spent — • 
years  that  can  never  be  recalled.  Whatever  work  you  have  to  do  must  be  done 
at  once — whoever  talks  of  delay,  you  cannot.  Finally,  remember  that  all  things 
here  are  transitory  and  uncertain.  Life's  changes  admonish  us  to  set  oiu*  affection 
on  things  above.  There  is  a  covenant  that  abides — a  Saviour  who  changes  not — 
a  world  where  death  never  enters.  Have  we  laid  hold  on  that  covenant  ?  have 
we  faith  in  that  Saviour?  (H.  J.  OamMe.)  A  basket  of  summer  fruit: — 
Amos  was  a  herdsman,  a  keeper  of  cattle,  and  all  through  his  book  you  find 
him  continually  alluding  to  his  peasa  .t  life.  He  is  also  called  "  a  gatherer 
of  sycamore  fruit,"  or  better,  a  bruiser,  a  trainer  or  preparer  of  sycamore  fruit. 
It  was  believed  in  the  East  that  this  fruit  would  ever  ripen  except  it  was 
a  little   bruised,    and   so   some   person   was  employed   with   an  iron   comb   to 

.scratch  and  woimd  the  skin.     Unwounded,  the  fruit,  even  when  ripe,  was  too 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viir. 

bitter  to  be  eaten;  but  after  it  had  been  wounded,  it  ripened  rapidly,  and 
became  sweet  and  eatable.  Here  is  a  basket  of  summer  fruit  which  is  so  ripe 
that  it  has  been  gathered ;  and  it  is  a  sort  of  fruit — summer  fruit — which  will 
not  keep,  will  not  lay  by  for  the  winter,  but  must  be  eaten  at  once.  Amos  sees 
that  God's  purposes  were  now  ripe  with  regard  to  His  people  Israel,  and  that 
the  nation  had  become  ripe  in  its  sin,  so  ripe  that  it  must  be  destroyed.  We  may 
learn-  that  there  is  a  ripeness  of  men,  as  weU  as  of  summer  fruit ;  there  is  a  ripening 
in  holiness  till  we  are  gathered  by  the  hand  of  Jesus  for  heaven,  and  a  ripening 
in  sin  till  we  are  swept  away  with  the  rough  hand  of  death,  and  are  cast  away 
into  the  rottenness  of  destruction.  I.  God's  purposes  may  have  a  ripbnbss. 
God  always  times  His  decrees.  Many  men  are  wise  too  late.  God  proves  His 
wisdom,  not  only  by  what  He  doeth,  but  by  the  time  when  He  doeth  it.  Notice 
two  of  God's  greatest  acts.  The  First  Advent,  and  the  Second  dvent  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Apply  this  great  truth  of  the  ripeness  of  God's  purposes  to 
your  own  personal  affairs.    All  God's  acts  are  well-timed.     II.  Nations  have  their 

BIPE.XESS,  AN)  WHEN  THEY  COME  TO  THEIR  RIPENESS  THEY   MUST  BE  DESIROYED. 

We  may  see  in  this  basket  of  summer  fruit  a  picture  of  them.  It  was  necessary 
to  eat  that  ripe  fruit  at  once.  And  there  is  need  when  a  nation  has  become  ripe 
in  sin  that  it  sho  Id  be  given  up  to  destruction.  There  are  such  things  as  national 
sins,  and  there  are  consequently  such  things  as  national  punishments.     III.  Herb 

IS  THE  PIC  LURE  OB"  WHAT  SOME  OF  US  ARE,  AND  ALL  OF  US  MUST  BE.       1.  With  the 

righteous  man  there  is  a  time  of  ripening.  The  Christian  when  converted  is, 
as  it  were,  but  a  bud  upon  the  tree.  There  is  need  that  he  grow  unto  perfection, 
and  that  fruit  should  become  ripe  fruit.  Believers  are  ripened  by  every  providence 
which  passes  over  them.  We  are  daily  ripenin  r  in  knowledge.  In  spirituality. 
As  he  ripens  in  spirituality,  he  ripens  in  savour.  2.  There  is  a  ripeness  with  which 
the  sinful  and  ungodly  are  ripening.  You  are  being  ripened  from  within;  the 
depravity  of  your  own  heart  is  developing  itself  every  hour.  And  Satan  is  daily 
busy  with  you,  to  try  and  make  you  grow  in  vice.  Sinners  ripen  in  knowledge 
of  sin,  in  love  to  sin,  and  in  that  hardness  of  heart  which  enables  them  to  commit 
sin  with  impimity.  With  some  sin  has  attauied  such  a  ripeness  that  they  dare 
to  blaspheme  God.  They  have  grown  so  rotten  ripe  that  they  will  even  dare 
to  say  there  is  no  God,  or  think  that  He  is  blind,  or  ignorant,  and  will  not  see 
and  punish  sin  in  the  sinner.  It  is  an  awful  sign  of  nearness  to  hell  when  a  man 
begins  to  think  that  he  can  doubt  the  existence  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  basket  of  summer  fruit : — Fruit  was  the  last  sign  of  harvest  in  Palestine.  When 
the  fruit  was  gathered  the  harvest  was  over.  What  then  is  the  meaning  of  this 
vision  of  a  basket  of  summer  fruit  ?  The  meaning  is  that  Amos  saw  the  end. 
Summer  fruit  had  a  mournful  suggestion  about  it  in  Palestinian  times  and  lands. 
"  What  seest  thou  ?  "  The  end  ;  the  gathered  harvest,  the  upmaking  of  all  things, 
the  year  in  its  results  :  good  or  bad,  there  it  is.  Can  this  fruit  be  changed  now  ? 
No.  Will  not  the  sun  work  some  miracle  of  ripening  upon  it  ?  Never  more. 
What  it  is,  that  it  is.  There  is  an  end  of  mmistry,  of  service,  of  stewardship, 
of  life.  Oh  that  men  were  wise,  that  they  understood  these  things,  that  they 
would  consider  their  latter  end — the  basket  of  summer  fruit,  the  ingathering 
of  the  fields  and  the  vintages.  How  stands  it  with  us  this  audit  day  ?  {Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-10.  Hear  this,  0  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy. — Avarice  : — I.  It  is 
EXECRABLE  IN  ITS  SPIRIT.  1.  It  is  sacrilegious.  Bad  as  Israel  was,  it  still  kept 
up  the  mere  observances  of  religion,  yet  these  observances  they  regarded  as 
commercial  inconveniences.  Avarice  in  heart  has  no  reverence  for  religion. 
2.  It  is  dishonest.  Always  over-reachmg,  always  cheating.  It  makes  its  fortunes 
out  of  the  brain  and  muscles,  the  sweat  and  life  of  the  needy.  3.  It  is  cruel. 
Avarice  deadens  aU  social  affections.  II.  It  is  abhorrent  to  Jehovah.  "  The 
Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  Surely  I  wiU  never  forget  any  of 
their  works."  Some  render  the  "  excellency  of  Jacob  "  the  "  pride  of  Jacob," 
and  suppose  the  expression  to  mean,  that  Israel  professed  to  regard  Him  as  its 
glory  :  and  therefore  it  is  by  Himself,  for  He  can  swear  by  no  one  greater.  God 
observes  all  the  cruelties  which  avarice  inflicts  upon  the  poor.  Nothing  is  more 
abhorrent  to  His  benevolent  nature  than  covetousness.  It  is  repugnant  to  His 
nature.  His  love  is  disinterested,  unbounded  love,  working  ever  for  the  good 
of  the  imiverse.  Greed  is  a  hideous  antagonist  to  this.  2.  It  is  hostile  to  universal 
happiness.     He  created  the  universe  in  order  to  diffuse  happiness ;  but  greed  is 


CHAP,  viii.]  A3I0S.  91 

against  it.  (1)  It  is  against  the  happiness  of  its  possessor.  The  soul  under  the 
influence  of  covetousness  can  neither  grow  in  power  nor  be  gratified  in  desire. 
(2)  It  is  against  the  happiness  of  society.  III.  It  is  a  cuese  to  society.  "  Shall 
not  the  land  tremble  for  this,"  &c.  1.  How  God  makes  nature  an  avenging 
angel.  He  makes  "  the  land  tremble."  He  "  toucheth  the  hills  and  they  smoke," 
pours  out  waters  as  a  flood.  2.  How  God  makes  a  multitude  to  suffer  on  account 
of  the  iniquities  of  the  few.  "  And  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning,  and 
all  your  songs  into  lamentations  :  and  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth,"  &c.     {HomUist.) 

Ver.  5.  When  will  the  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  com  ?  and  the  Sabbath, 
that  we  may  set  forth  wheat. — Honouring  the  Lord's  day  : — The  physical  wants 
of  man  demand  a  day  of  rest ;  and  it  is  a  gracious  appointment  of  the  all-wise 
One,  which  has  seciired  it  to  him.  No  constitution,  however  robust,  can  endure 
the  wear  and  tear  of  imceasing  labovur.  An  experiment  was  once  tried  in  England 
<  n  a  grand  scale.  Two  thousand  men  were  employed  for  years,  seven  days  in 
a  week.  To  make  them  contented  to  give  up  the  blessed  privilege  of  resting 
on  Sundays,  they  received  double  wages  for  that  day;  or  eight  days'  wages  for 
seven  c  ays'  work.  It  was  found,  however,  utterly  impossible  to  keep  them 
healthy  or  moral.  Things  went  on  so  badly  that  the  old  custom  of  resting  on 
the  Lord's  day  was  revived,  and  that,  too,  with  immediate  results.  More  work 
was  accomplished  in  six  days  than  in  seven,  and  the  labourers  were  more  sober  and 
honest.  Yet  there  are  headstrong  and  worldly-minded  people  to  be  found,  so 
eaten  by  covetousness  that  they  are  disposed  to  cry  out,  in  the  complaining 
language  of  the  text,  "  When  will  the  Sabbath  be  past,  that  we  may  sell  wheat  ?  " 
The  same  physical  law  which  requires  that  man  should  have  his  day  of  rest 
applies  also  to  the  brute  creation.  In  making  the  land  route  to  California,  the 
companies  which  rest  on  Sunday  invariably  reach  their  destinations  before  those 
which  journey  forward  without  regard  to  God's  appointment.  While  man  and 
beasts  are  decidedly  the  gainers  from  observing  the  beneficent  appointment  of 
their  Creator,  can  we  be  expected  to  isten  with  patience  while  the  despisers 
of  God's  law  ask  in  words  of  cool  contempt,  "  When  will  the  Sabbath  be  past, 
that  we  may  sell  wheat  ?  "  Besides  the  actual  benefits  secured  by  those  who 
honom:  the  Lord's  day,  they  are  saved  from  many  evils  which  natvurally  grow 
out  of  a  disregard  for  it.  The  chaplain  of  Newgate  prison,  who  hears  the  confessions 
of  those  sentenced  to  death,  once  remarked  that,  in  almost  every  instance  they 
ascribed  their  ruin  to  their  desertion  of  the  House  of  God,  and  to  their  violation 
of  the  day  of  rest.  A  distinguished  merchant,  long  accustomed  to  extensive 
observation  of  men,  was  often  heard  to  say,  "  When  I  discover  one  of  my  clerks 
to  be  a  wilful  neglecter  of  the  Lord's  day,  I  forthwith  dismiss  him.  Such  persons 
cannot  be  trusted."  Sabbath-breaking  is  the  sure  forerunner  of  other  sins.  More- 
over, we  all  need  stated  times  when  we  can  devote  ourselves  more  imreservedly  to  the 
great  work  of  preparing  for  death  and  the  final  judgment.  Few  are  the  spiritual 
blessings  of  earth,  and  few  the  joys  of  heaven,  that  have  not  a  nearer  or  remoter 
connection  with  the  Lord's  day.  How  ought  the  Lord's  day  to  be  kept  ?  Mere 
cessation  from  worldly  employments  will  not  come  up  to  the  demands  of  God's 
law.  Attendance  upon  public  worship  is  the  great  duty  of  Sunday,  and  one 
which  will  be  strictly  regarded  by  all  who  desire  God's  favour.  A  portion  of 
the  time  should  be  spent  in  such  reading  as  will  tend  to  our  spiritual  improve- 
ment.    {John  N.  Norton.) 

Ver.  9.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I 
will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon,  and  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear 
day. — The  eclipse  of  the  sun  spiritually  considered  : — Though  the  heavens  are 
full  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  yet  they  rarely  engage  our  devout  attention,  or  make 
their  voice  so  to  be  heard  as  that  we  notice  it  and  listen.  The  sight  and  the  music 
are  so  constantly  repeated,  and  become  so  common,  that  they  cease  to  impress 
us.  It  is  well,  then,  that  God  has  so  wisely  ordered  the  universe  that  ever  and 
anon  the  monotony  of  these  ordinary  phenomena  should  be  broken  by  those 
that  are  more  startling  and  extraordinary, — such  as  the  visitations  of  eclipses, 
comets,  and  earthquakes,  that  so  men  might  be  compelled  to  see  their  Maker's 
hand  and  hear  their  Author's  voice,  and  know  that  there  is  indeed  a  God  that 
created  and  that  govemeth  the  earth.  \.  Such  a  phenomenon  as  the  eclipse  is 
calculated  powerfully  to  impress  upon  us  a  lesson  of  gratitude  for  the  inestimable 
blessing  of  sunlight.     Like  some  of  our  greatest  mercies,  it  is  a  common  one,  and 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

therefore  it  is  imappreciated.  From  how  few  hearts  arise  the  morning  orison 
of  thankfulness,  and  the  noonday  hymn  of  praise.  Of  this,  like  most  of  God's 
blessings,  we  need  to  be  now  and  then  deprived,  in  order  to  teach  us  how  great 
it  is.  If  suddenly  at  midday  God  were  now  and  then  to  place  the  shadow  of 
His  hand  before  the  sun,  we  should  then  feel  to  the  full  the  horror  of  the  deprivation 
and  the  great  blessing  of  the  gift.  We  read  of  those,  like  the  Persians,  who 
worship  the  sun,  and  pay  to  it  the  homage  that  is  due  to  its  Creator.  And  far 
nobler  it  is  to  worship  the  sim  than  to  walk  day  by  day  in  his  light  with  a  heart 
thankless  for  the  blessing.  2.  A  more  solemn  truth,  of  which  this  phenomenon 
may  remind  us,  is  the  effect  of  sin  on  the  soul  of  man.  The  darkness  of  eclipse 
will  be  caused  by  a  large  and  opaque  body  coming  between  us  and  the  sun.  The 
moon  will  come  between  us  and  the  sun.  Were  it  not  for  some  intervening  object, 
God's  light  would  be  ever  shining  down  upon  us.  The  eclipse  wiU  not  be  caused 
by  the  sun's  withdrawing  his  shining.  God  never  changes.  If  there  is  darkness 
in  the  soul  of  man,  it  is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  something  or  other 
has  come  between  his  soul  and  God,  and  eclipsed  the  light.  Scripture  teaches 
us  that  this  object  is  sin.  "  Your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and 
God."  Every  soul  who  is  under  the  dominion  of  sin  may  see  in  the  eclipse  a 
faint  image  in  the  natural  world  of  the  position  of  his  soul  in  relation  to  God. 
It  is  cut  off  from  God,  and  so  abideth  in  darkness.  3.  This  eclipse  may  bring 
to  remembrance  the  awful  death  of  Him  through  whose  work  alone  those  sina 
can  be  removed.  During  His  supreme  agony  upon  the  Cross  there  occurred  a 
preternatural  eclipse  of  the  sun.  "  The  sun  was  darkened."  It  was  truly  a  time 
for  both  nature  and  man  to  mourn.  4.  The  eclipse  should  enable  us  in  some 
sort  to  realise  the  great  day  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lord.  Then  "  there  shall  be  signs 
in  the  sun  "  ;  "  the  sun  shall  withdraw  his  shining."  That  appalling  eclipse 
will  not  only  be  total  but  final,  and  to  no  man  who  is  not  then  found  to  be  a  child 
of  God,  and  a  servant  of  Christ,  will  light  evermore  return.  (Richard  Glover.) 
Untimely  sunset : — I.  The  Divtnb  hand  ts  an  appaebntly  trNTiaiELY  event. 
The  peculiar  reference  of  the  text  is  some  sudden  calamity  which  was  to  befall 
Israel.  In  nothing  is  the  Divine  sovereignty  more  conspicuous  than  in  the  im- 
timely  removal  of  useful  and  excellent  characters  from  the  world.  The  mystery 
attending  it,  however,  arises  more  from  ignorance  and  shortsightedness  than 
from  any  other  cause.  We  can  only  judge  from  appearances.  With  the  real 
nature  of  the  case,  and  the  actual  reasons  which  govern  the  decisions  of  the 
Eternal,  we  are  equally  imacquainted.  Humanity  seems  to  weep  when  her 
favourite  sons  are  removed.  Patriotism  bears  a  dejected  head  when  her  brightest 
ornaments  are  no  more.  The  world  trembles  when  its  best  pillars  bow  before 
the  stem  hand  of  time  and  death — "  when  the  earth  is  darkened  in  the  clear 
day."  Even  religion  cannot  be  unmoved.  Religion  contemplates,  and  teaches 
us  to  contemplate,  this  world  in  its  true  light,  as  introductory  only  to  a  more 
finished  state  of  being — as  connected  with  the  piuposes  and  plans  of  heaven.  It 
is  succeeded  by  an  emotion  of  triumph,  that  in  that  world  in  which  their  splendours 
are  renewed  the  same  voice  proclaims,  "  My  sun  shaU  no  more  go  down."  II.  Thb 
Divine  dispensations  demand  pahticxjlab  attention.  The  very  language 
of  the  text  denotes  surprise,  and  seems  intended  to  awaken  attention — "  and 
it  shall  come  to  pass."  So  it  is  especially  when  God  takes  from  the  world  important 
characters, — He  expressly  designs  to  arouse  men  from  their  lethargy.  Fear  should 
produce  seriousness  and  desire  for  the  true  salvation.  {Homiletic  Magazine.) 
Early  graves  : — The  words  are  suggestive  of  early  graves,  and  these  aboimd.  The 
vast  majority  of  the  race  die  in  early  life,  the  greater  number  by  far  in  childhood ; 
the  Sim  goes  down  just  as  it  appears  in  the  horizon.  What  do  these  early  graves 
show  ?  I.  That  life  is  absolutely  in  the  hands  of  God.  Who  causes  the  sun 
to  go  down  whilst  it  is  yet  noon  ?  He  alone  can  arrest  its  majestic  progress, 
and  tiun  it  back.  So  it  is  with  human  life.  The  human  creature  seems  organised 
to  live  on  for  years  ;  but  its  Maker  puts  an  end  to  its  course  at  any  time  He  pleases, 
so  that  the  first  breath  is  often  immediately  succeeded  by  the  last.  II.  That 
man  in  aU  stages  of  life  should  hold  himself  ready  to  leave  the  world.  He 
should  regard  himself  not  as  a  settler,  but  as  a  sojourner ;  not  as  a  tree,  to  root 
itself  in  the  earth,  but  a  bark  to  float  down  the  stream  to  sunnier  shores.  III.  That 
there  must  be  a  future  state  for  the  free  development  of  human  nature.  What 
a  universe  of  thought  and  sympathy  and  effort  are  crushed  in  germ  every  year 
by  death !  Potential  poets,  artists,  statesmen,  authors,  preachers,  buried  in 
early  graves.     Why  the  creation  of  these  germs — these  seeds  of  majestic  forests  ? 


CHAP,  vin.]  AMOS.  93 

Surely  the  wise  and  benevolent  Author  intended  their  full  development ;  and 
for  that  there  must  be  another  world.  {Homilist. )  Lessons  of  an  eclipse  : — 
If  the  text  were  taken  literally  it  would  be  very  nearly  verified  in  an  eclipse. 
But  the  words  are  to  be  spiritually  understood.  Here  is  intended  some  dispen- 
sation of  Divine  Providence  towards  mankind,  of  which  the  sun's  eclipse  is  a 
suitable  and  proper  emblem.  1.  Such  a  day  is  that  wherein  God  makes  a  sudden 
and  unlooked-for  change  in  a  man's  circumstances.  All  may  go  well  with  a  man, 
and  his  heart  may  be  lifted  up  within  him.  Then,  in  great  mercy  to  his  soul, 
God  may  send  him  an  eclipse.  The  bright  sun  of  prosperity  is  suddenly  put  out. 
2.  God  eclipses  a  man's  sim  when  He  calls  him  suddenly  and  prematurely  from 
the  world.  How  many  a  bright  sim  is  thus  extinguished  every  day  !  3.  The 
day  on  which  the  Lord  maketli  a  man's  sun  to  "  go  down  at  noon "  is  the  day 
on  which  He  is  pleased  to  strip  such  a  man  of  his  opportunities  and  means  of  grace. 
There  is  a  clear  day  of  blessed  opportunity  for  every  penitent,  awakened  sinner 
in  existence.  None  shall  seek  and  seek  in  vain.  But  will  the  light  shine  for  ever 
on  those  who  will  not  "  comprehend  it  "  ?  And  there  are  eclipse  times  for  sincere 
believers.  "  Now,  for  a  season,  if  need  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold 
temptations."  And  the  Lord  Himself  sometimes  appears  to  hide  from  him,  and 
withdraw  from  him  His  customary  favour,  then  indeed  his  sun  is  gone — his  day 
is  darkened.  Seasons  like  these  may  well  be  called  the  eclipses  of  believers. 
But,  blessed  be  God  !  they  are,  like  eclipses,  of  short  continuance.  (^4.  Roberts, 
M.A.)  The  solar  eclipse  : — The  darkness  of  an  eclipse  may  be  considered — 
L  As  AJU  BXCiTEMBNT  TO  GBATiruDB.  The  present  state  of  knowledge  affords 
abundant  reason  for  gratitude.  We  are  not  ignorant  of  nature  as  our  distant 
fathers  were.  Ignorance  is  never  a  simple  privation  of  knowledge  ;  in  the  absence 
of  correct  knowledge  there  will  always  be  erroneous  conclusions ;  and  hence 
ignorance  is  always  injurious.  The  regularity  of  the  course  of  nature  claims 
our  gratitude  on  an  occasion  like  the  present.  Deviations  from  the  ordinary 
course  are  not  of  frequent  occasion,  but  we  are  acquainted  with  their  arrival. 
One  reason  for  such  deviations  may  be,  that  our  sluggish  faculties  may  be  awakened 
to  observe  the  wonderful  works  of  God.  II.  The  darkness  of  an  eclipse  as 
A  MEMORIAL  OF  PAST  FACTS.  1.  We  are  reminded  of  the  creation  of  the  world, 
when  "  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep."  How  concerned  is  Grod  for 
man's  comfort !  Surely  man  ought  to  be  concerned  for  Grod's  glory  !  2.  Of 
the  darkness  with  which  God  has  surrotmded  Himself  in  His  intercourse  with 
man.  How  superior  are  the  spiritual  manifestations  of  Deity  under  the  Gospel, 
to  the  personal  manifestations  of  Deity  under  the  law.  3.  Of  the  plague  of  dark- 
ness which  was  inflicted  on  the  Egyptians.  The  bewildering  and  distressing  effects 
of  darkness  may  be  illustrated  by  a  familiar  example.  It  may  have  happened 
to  us  to  lose  our  way  in  a  field  at  night.  Once  bewildered,  you  wander  without 
the  least  conception  whither.  So  this  plague  of  darkness  gives  us  an  impressive 
view  of  the  value  of  that  light  which  will  be  temporarily  darkened  by  the  expected 
eclipse.  4.  Of  the  supernatural  darkness  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ. 
This  could  not  have  been  occasioned  by  an  eclipse,  as  the  Passover  was  held  at 
the  time  of  the  full  moon.  On  this  memorable  instance  we  are  taught  how  easily 
God  can  reverse  the  order  of  nature.  The  course  of  nature  is  but  the  will  and 
energy  of  God,  who  "worketh  all  in  all."  III.  The  darkness  of  an  eclipse 
AS  A  REMINDER  OF  EVENTS  WHICH  ARE  TO  COME.  1.  We  are  reminded  of  the  time 
when  we  shall  "  go  whence  we  shall  not  return,  even  to  the  land  of  darkness 
and  the  shadow  of  death."  The  grave  is  dsirk,  but  we  shall  not  perceive  its 
darkness  if  we  are  the  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  We  are  reminded  of  the 
punishment  of  the  wicked.  This  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  outer  darkness."  As 
figurative,  this  seems  rather  to  heighten  our  apprehensions  of  distress  than  to 
diminish  them.     (The  Essex  Bemembrancer.) 

Ver.  11.  Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the 
land. — The  uses  of  adversity  : — If  adversity  tried  and  sifted  men,  prosperity  tried 
and  sifted  them  much  more.  Where  adversity  slew  its  thousands,  prosperity  slew 
its  tens  of  thousands.  Poets  and  moralists  had  dwelt  on  the  sweet  uses  of  adversity  : 
the  misuses  and  abuses  of  prosperity  would  furnish  a  far  more  eloquent  theme. 
Adversity  was  a  bitter  medicine,  but  it  was  in  vain  to  think  that  health  could 
be  preserved  unless  it  were  administered  at  one  time  or  another.  And  as  it  was 
with  individuals,  so  was  it  also  with  large  masses  of  men.  The  severest  trial  ■ 
to  the  morality  of  a  people  was  a  long  period  of  prosperity ;  the  most  efficient 


94  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

instrument  in  the  purification  of  a  people  was  the  sharp  attack  of  adversity. 
Such  at  least  was  the  lesson  enforced  upon  Israel  in  the  days  of  Amos  the  prophet. 
Never  since  the  secession  of  the  ten  tribes  had  the  material  welfare  of  the  nation 
been  greater.  Under  two  vigorous  monarchs  it  had  recovered  from  all  its  recent 
disasters,  and  had  attained  to  somewhat  of  its  pristine  greatness.  The  reigning 
sovereign,  the  second  Jeroboam,  had  largely  extended  the  frontiers  by  foreign 
conquests  ;  his  armies  had  everywhere  been  victorious  ;  there  was  wealth  and 
plenty  at  home.  King  and  people  alike  might  well  have  congratulated  them- 
selves on  the  present  condition  of  the  nation.  It  was  just  at  this  crisis  that  the 
prophet  Amos  appeared  on  the  scene.  But  though  it  was  in  a  season  of  unex- 
ampled prosperity,  the  prosperity  of  Israel  was  not  the  burden  of  his  message ; 
though  the  armies  of  Jeroboam  had  been  signally  triumphant,  he  poured  out 
no  congratulations  over  these  triumphs.  His  whole  prophecy  was  one  prolonged 
wail,  one  unbroken  elegy,  the  funeral  dirge  of  a  dying  religion,  a  falling  dynasty, 
and  an  expiring  kingdom.  For  prosperity  was  then  doing  its  work.  Luxury, 
revelry,  and  pleasure  were  rampant ;  commercial  morality  was  low,  petty  frauds 
in  trade  were  rife  ;  the  laws  were  administered  for  the  advantage  of  the  powerful ; 
the  poor  were  ground  down  by  the  tyranny  of  the  rich.  A  stern  moralist  might 
have  found  much  to  lament  and  denounce  in  the  vices  of  the  age ;  a  far-sighted 
politician,  drawing  upon  long  experience,  might  have  discerned  from  these  elements 
of  social  disorder  the  symptoms  of  a  disease  which,  if  not  arrested  in  time,  would 
lead  to  the  ultimate  ruin  of  the  state.  But  the  prophet,  with  a  keener  eye  and 
a  wider  range  of  wisdom,  firmly  and  unhesitatingly  pronounced  the  result — 
in  the  very  midst  of  the  triumph  of  armies,  in  the  very  flush  of  successful  self- 
complacency,  he  announced  the  catastrophe  as  imminent — "  It  shall  come 
to  pass,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I  wiU  cause  the  sim  to  go  down  at  noon,  and  I 
will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  sky  ;  and  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning, 
and  all  your  songs  into  lamentation  ;  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a  famine 
of  bread,  nor  of  thirst  for  water,  but  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord."  Prosperity 
had  carried  away  the  hearts  of  Israel  from  the  true  religion  of  their  God,  and 
it  needed  the  deep  uses  of  desolation  and  captivity  to  chasten  them  and  call  them 
back.  For,  first,  the  worship  of  Israel  had  degenerated  into  a  religion  of  political 
expediency,  a  religion  of  conventional  life ;  it  had  adapted  itself  to  the  exigencies,  ay, 
and  to  the  vices,  of  the  age.  It  looked  complacently  upon  the  luxury,  the  oppression, 
the  indolence,  the  carelessness,  the  dishonesty  which  prevailed  on  all  hands ;  it  had 
no  word  of  hope,  no  thought  of  remedy  for  the  startling  social  evils  of  the  time  ; 
the  overflowing  wealth  here,  the  grinding  poverty  there.  Secondly,  the  religion 
of  Israel  was  formal  and  material ;  it  was  not  thought  of  except  in  an  outward 
and  material  sense  in  the  days  of  prosperity ;  and  when  in  their  captivity  and 
heavy  trials  their  hearts  turned  to  it  seeking  solace,  instead  of  finding  comfort 
and  help,  they  saw  only  a  vague  and  indistinct  shadow.  The  experience  of 
Israel  was  the  experience  of  all  who  worshipped  after  Israel's  manner.  In  the 
moment  of  trial  they  sought  the  Word  of  God,  and  could  not  find  it.  They  did 
not  seek  their  Father's  presence  when  their  course  was  smooth  and  even,  and 
in  their  hour  of  danger  it  was  withdrawn  from  their  eyes.  Whatever  some  men 
might  say,  their  factories,  their  workshops,  their  shipping,  and  their  coalpits, 
even  their  museums  and  their  lecture  rooms,  could  not  supply  the  deepest  wants 
of  men.  The  highest  instincts  of  their  nature  were  left  hungering  still.  The 
church  therefore  rose  up  as  a  local  centre,  round  which  the  spiritual  affections 
and  life  of  the  neighbourhood  gathered.  God  grant  that  a  blessing  might  rest 
upon  their  work  that  day.  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  Spiritual  famine  : — Whether 
these  words  apply  to  the  past,  or  refer  to  the  future,  their  awful  solemnity  is 
undiminished  ;  the  existence  of  tremendous  power  is  implied.  These  are  the 
utterances  of  a  Mind  whose  purposes  are  fully  settled.  There  is  an  awful  deter- 
minateness  about  this  language.  The  Speaker,  whoever  He  may  be,  is  not  to 
be  trifled  with.  He  asserts  His  sovereignty  over  the  physical  and  the  spiritual 
alike.     He  says,  "  I  will  send  a  famine  upon  the  land  ;  every  root  shall  be  withered 

•up,"  &C.      I.    A  REVELATION    OF   THB    DiVINB    WUSL   CONSTITXITES    MAN'S    RICHEST 

BLESSrNG.  In  the  text  it  is  referred  to  by  implication  as  food.  Its  withdraw-, 
ment  is  compared  to  a  famine.  Hence,  also,  Jesus  Christ  reveals  Himself  as  the 
"  bread  of  life,"  the  "  Bread  sent  down  from  heaven,"  and  "  the  meat  that  endureth 
to  life  everlasting."  "  Man  shall  not  live  by  breaid  alone,  but  by  every  word  that 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  As  this  natural  bread  is  fltted  to  sustain 
these  physical  functions,  so  the  spiritual  bread  is  indispensably  necessary  to 


CHAP,  vni.]  AMOS.  95 

the  prolongation  of  this  spiritual  life.  We  are  entitled,  therefore,  to  argue  that 
a  revelation  of  the  Divine  will  constitutes  man's  richest  blessing.     This  is  proved — 

1.  By  the  intellectual  satisfaction  arising  from  harmony  with  the  Divine  will. 
The  mind  can  rest  in  God  ;  short  of  God  it  is  restless.  In  God  it  enjoys  the 
serenest  calm.     The  intellect  finds  in  God  all  that  its  capacious  powers  demand. 

2.  By  the  moral  purity  arising  from  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  Moral  purity 
is  unattainable,  except  through  this  holy  will.  3.  By  the  inspiring  views  of  the 
universe  obtained  through  the  Divine  revelation.  Look  at  the  universe  apart 
from  this  Holy  Book,  and  that  universe  is  crowded  with  mysteries.  But  look 
at  the  vmiverse  through  this  Book,  and  at  once  it  is  flooded  with  celestial  splendour, 
it  is  vocal  with  heavenly  music.  II.  The  withbrawment  of  this  revelation 
CONSTITUTES  man's  DIREST  CALAMiTy.  It  is  described  in  the  text  as  a  "  famine." 
Why  is  it  so  great  a  disaster  ?  1.  Because  man  would  be  sundered  from  the 
central  life  of  the  universe.  Sever  his  connection  with  this  Book  and  you  have 
severed  his  connection  with  God.  Amputate  a  limb,  and  having  sundered  it 
from  the  vital  heart  that  limb  will  rot.  Excise  the  leaf  from  the  tree  on  which 
it  trembles,  and  sundered  from  the  root  it  shrivels  and  dies.  So  with  man  ;  take 
this  Book  away  from  thy  mind,  desist  from  perusing  this  sacred  page,  and  thou 
art  sundered  from  the  central  life  of  the  universe ;  the  heart  from  which  thou 
didst  derive  thy  nourishment  has  ceased  to  communicate  with  thee.  Thou  shalt 
die  of  famine,  and  of  thirst.  2.  Because  human  happiness  is  the  result  of  mental 
conditions,  and  these  mental  conditions  can  be  formed  and  sustained  alone  by 
a  Divine  revelation.  Pure  happiness  is  not  dependent  on  the  external.  3.  Because 
man  would  be  left  in  ignorance  of  his  Creator's  purposes.  He  would  resemble 
a  traveller  in  an  unknown  country,  not  knowing  but  his  very  next  footstep  will 
plunge  him  over  a  precipice,  or  that  he  might  fall  into  the  pit  dug  by  the  hand 
of  the  enemy.  He  would  find  himself,  indeed,  surrounded  by  memorials  of 
gigantic  power,  but  he  would  not  know  what  the  intent  of  that  power  is  in  relation 
to  him.  III.  Man's  treatment  of  this  revelation  determines  its  con- 
tinuance OR  suspension  (vers.  4-10).  1.  The  beneficence  of  God  in  granting 
a  revelation.  When  humanity  fell  from  His  favour  He  might  have  retired  into 
the  depths  of  everlasting  silence,  and  never  have  spoken  another  word  to  a  disloyal 
race.  2.  The  importance  of  making  the  best  of  our  privileges.  While  the  sun 
does  shine,  0  toil  in  its  light.     In  the  years  of  plenty  lay  up  for  the  years  of  scarcity. 

3.  The  necessity  of  grateful  appreciation  on  the  part  of  the  Church.  It  is  through 
you  who  do  appreciate  this  will  that  the  revelation  thereof  is  continued.  But 
for  you  the  world  would  be  left  in  intellectual  darkness,  and  would  perish  with 
moral  hunger.  IV.  The  loss  of  this  revelation  will  show  men  its  precious- 
NESS.  "  And  they  shall  wander  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  north  even  to  the 
east,  they  shall  run  to  and  fro  to  seek  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  not  find 
it."  We  are  continually  realising  this  principle.  We  never  estimate  our  privileges 
aright  until  we  are  in  danger  of  losing  them,  or  until  they  have  vanished  from 
our  view.  We  see  most  of  the  bird's  beauty  when  the  bird  spreads  its  wings 
for  flight.  And  so  with  our  moral  privileges,  when  they  are  vanishing  from 
our  sight  we  behold  beauties  that  never  impressed  us  before.  You  have  a  striking 
illustration  of  this  in  the  case  of  Saul,  the  first  king  of  Israel.  When  he  was 
little  in  his  own  eyes,  God  spake  with  him  ;  he  was  in  continual  communication 
with  the  Great  Ruler  of  the  universe.  But  when  he  waxed  haughty,  the  heavens 
were  as  brass,  and  God  answered  him  no  more.  "  Bring  me  up  Samuel ;  give 
me  some  link  that  shall  connect  me  with  my  God  !  Oh,  the  horror  of  this  moral 
loneliness  !  Bring  me  up  Samuel,  my  own  teacher,  that  connected  me  with 
the  Eternal  and  the  Divine.  Oh,  for  one  glance  of  him,  for  one  pressxire  of  that 
warm  hand,  for  one  rebuke  even  from  that  stern  voice  !  "  "  Connect  me  with 
God  "  is  the  desolate  cry  of  the  lonely  spirit.  The  withdrawment,  then,  of  this 
revelation  will  show  its  preciousness.  Two  facts  are  clear — 1.  We  fail  to  appreciate 
blessings  with  which  we  are  most  familiar.  Who  cares  for  the  rising  sun  ?  who 
cares  for  that  setting  orb  ?  We  may  see  it  every  day  ;  familiarity  has  engendered 
indifference.  Show  men  some  little  fireworks,  and  they  will  hurry  in  crowds 
to  look  at  them.  So  with  God's  Book.  We  have  it  so  freely  that  we  are  in  danger 
of  its  total  neglect.  Why,  the  fact  that  you  have  a  book  that  professes  to  come 
from  God  ought  to  arouse  you  into  the  most  intense  solicitude.  The  fact  that 
we  have  a  book  that  you  know  has  come  from  God  ought  to  arouse  your  energies 
into  an  activity  that  will  never  weary,  and  your  gratitude  into  a  zeal  that  will 
never  cool.     2.   Our  non-appreciation  of  these  privileges  is  a  sufficient  reason 


86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

for  their  withdrawment.     Oh,  you  know  not  how  near  may  be  the  loss  of  your 
most  precious  privileges.     V.  The  recovery  of  this  revelation  wnx  eventu- 
ally BE  FOUND  IMPOSSIBLE.     "  They  shall  run  to  and  fro  to  seek  the  Word 
of  the  Lord,  but  shall  not  find  it."     God  can  retire.     There  are  depths  in  the 
iiniverse  to  which  He  can  betake  Himself,  which  are  inaccessible  to  you.     Spirits 
crying  out  in  agony  for  that  "  old  family  Bible,"  the  very  reading  of  which  was 
80  intolerable  to  them  in  the  days  of  their  youth  ;  running  to  and  fro  to  seek 
some  man  to  guide  them,  but  every  man  they  address  says,  "  I  am  in  search 
of  the  same  blessing."     They  hear  of  some  messenger  of  God  in  the  far  distance, 
with  swift  feet  they  nm  to  him,  and,  alas  !  it  is  vanity — he  has  no  message  from 
God.     "  They  shall  run  to  and  fro  to  seek  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  not 
find  it."     Wliat  is  the  picture  ?     The  human  mind  is  a  blank;  that  God-given 
brain  a  blank,  every  idea  about  God  taken  out  of  it.     "  I  have  held  My  light, 
and  you  have  refused ;  I  have  taken  it  away,"  saith  God.     "  I  have  spread  My 
board,  I  have  given  a  world-wide  welcome,  and  ye  refused.     I  have  taken  the 
viands  away,  and  now  you  are  numing  through  the  universe  crying  for  God. 
But  God  has  retired  into  depths  to  which  you  cannot  penetrate."     Such  is  the 
idea  of  my  text.     Men  awakening  to  a  sense  of  their  privileges,  when  their  awaken- 
ing is  too  late.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Famine  : — Sin  is  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing. 
It  is  evil  in  its  nature,  and  bitter  in  its  consequences.     It  is  evil  with  regard  to 
God,  and  bitter  with  regard  to  us.     Numberless  are  the  miseries  to  which  it  has 
reduced  individuals,  families,  nations,  and  the  whole  human  race.     Among  these 
one  of  the  most  dreadful  is  famine;     Yet  there  is  a  famine  infinitely  more  dreadful 
than  the  famine  of  food  :  a  "  famine  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord."     I.  The 
NATURE  OF  THIS  JUDGMENT.     It  takes  in  the  loss  of  the  Gospel  as  a  dispensation 
administered  by  preaching.     We  may  consider  this  famine — 1.  As  eternal.     The 
means  of  grace  and  the  ordinances  of  religion  are  exclusively  confined  to  this 
life.     If  you  die  stranger  to  the  power  of  godliness,  s  j  you  must  continue.     Your 
mistake  will  indeed  be  discovered,  but  it  cannot  be  rectified  in  another  world. 
"  Now  is  the  accepted  time."     2.  As  spiritual.     Thus  it  refers  to  the  state  of  the 
mind.     It  takes  place  when  souls  are  reduced  to  such  indiflFerence  and  insensi- 
bility as  to  be  morally  or  judicially  incapable  of  improvement  by  the  institutions 
of  religion,  even  should  they  be  continued  among  them.     When  a  man  can  no 
longer  use  food,  or  turn  it  into  nourishment,  it  is  the  same  with  regard  to  himself 
as  if  all  provision  was  denied  him, — death  must  be  the  consequence.     3.  As 
doctrinal.     It  may  then  be  occasioned  by  the  removal  of  faithful  ministers,  and  the 
succession  of  others  of  different  principles.     This  is  sure  to  cause  a  declension 
in  the  number  and  in  the  zeal  of  the  members  of  churches.     For  the  grace  and 
truth  of  God  always  go  together.     When  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Gospel 
are  denied  or  concealed  the  Gospel  is  withdrawn.     4.  As  literal.     This  is  the  case 
when  a  people  are  deprived  of  the  very  institutions  of  religion,  and  are  forbidden 
the   assembling  of  themselves   together  according  to   their   convictions.     This 
may  be  done  by  the  inroads  and  oppression  of  an  enemy ;  by  the  encroachments 
of  tyranny;  or  by  the  loss  of  liberty  of  conscience.     II.  The  dreadfulnbss 
OF  IT.     1.  Dwell  upon  the  advantages  derivable  from  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel. 
The  generality  of  those  that  are  called  by  Divine  grace  are  saved  by  this  instru- 
mentality.    And  the  usefulness  of  it  continues  through  the  whole  of  the  Christian 
life.     2.  Think  of  the  importance  of  the  soul  and  eternity.     The  body  is  the  meanest 
part  of  our  nature  ;  and  time  is  the  shortest  portion  of  our  duration,  by  a  degree 
no  less  than  infinite.     Our  chief  care  ought  to  be,  to  gain  spiritual  wealth,  spiritual 
honour,  spiritual  good, — for  these  regard  man  in  ms  most  essential  claims  and 
necessities.     3.   The  design  of  such  a  (dispensation.     Some  judgments,  though 
painful,  are  still  profitable.     They  remove  the  human  arm,  but  it  is  to  lead  ua 
to  a  dependence  on  the  Divine.     Other  judgments  are  in  mercy,  but  this  is  in 
wrath.     Other  judgments  are  parental,  but  this  is  penal.     4.  In  estimating  this 
curse,  let  us  appeal  to  the  sentiments  of  the  righteous.     In  what  terms  does  David 
deplore  the  loss  of  Divine  assemblies  ?     III.  The  execution  of  this  sentence. 
God  has  engaged  to  establish  His  Church  universal,  but  this  does  not  regard 
any  particular  body  of  professors.     1.  Is  not  He  who  utters  His  threatening 
almighty,  and  so  able  to  fulfil  it  ?     2.  Is  He  not  just,  and  so  disposed  to  fulfil 
it  ?      "A  God  all  mercy  is  a  God  unjust."     3.  Is  He  not  faithful,  and  so  bound 
to  fulfil  it  ?     4.  Has  not  He  who  utters  this  threatening,  fulfilled  it  already  in 
various  instances  ?     The  Jews   are   an  eminent  example.     Our   subject,    then, 
demands  gratitude.     We  have  reason  to  bless  God  that  we  have  not  had  a  famine 


CHAP,  vra.]  AMOS.  97 

of  bread  ;  but  far  more  that  He  has  not  visited  us  with  a  famine  of  hearing 
the  words  of  the  Lord.  Let  us  be  concerned  to  improve  our  privilege  while  we 
possess  it.  With  Gospel  means  be  concerned  to  obtain  Gospel  grace,  and 
earnestly  pray  that  the  ministry  of  the  Word  may  become  the  ministration  of 
the  Spirit.  Finally,  as  it  is  so  dreadful  to  be  destitute  of  the  Gospel,  think  how 
many  of  your  fellow-creatm-es  are  in  this  deplorable  condition.  Pray  that  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  may  arise,  with  healing  in  His  wings,  and  comfort  them 
with  the  £iowledge  of  salvation.  (William  Jay.)  The  dreadful  consequences 
of  spiritual  famine : — What  an  awful  mystery  envelops  the  subject  of  the  origin 
of  evil.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that  sin  has  entered  into  our  world.  And 
it  is  the  moral  murderer  of  mankind.  I.  The  statement  of  a  peivilbge.  "  Hear- 
ing the  words  of  the  Lord."  The  possession  of  the  oracles  of  God  and  a  faithful 
dispensation  of  the  Gospel  are  privileges  far  surpassing  every  other  description 
of  good  under  the  sun.  1.  Glance  at  the  Jewish  dispensation.  A  dispensation 
means  a  dealing  out.  There  are  three  great  dispensations  with  regard  to  the 
children  of  men — the  dispensation  of  the  law,  the  Gospel,  and  judgment.  The 
whole  system  of  the  Old  Testament  may  be  summed  up  in  "  hearing  the  words 
of  the  Lord."  2.  Look  at  the  Christian  dispensation.  II.  The  iktimation  of 
A  FAMINE.     What  constitutes  a  famine  of  "  hearing  of  the  words  of  the  Lord  "  ? 

1.  Where  the  means  of  instruction  do  not  actually  exist.  2.  Where  the  means 
exist,  but  the  instruction  is  not  given.  3.  Where  the  means  of  the  instruction 
are  unconnected  with  the  Divine  blessing.  III.  The  awful  consequences 
OF  SUCH  A  FAMINE.  1.  It  presses  upon  the  nobler  principle  of  our  nature.  2.  It 
removes  the  great  preventive  of  crime.  3.  It  dries  up  the  only  source  of 
comfort.  4.  It  leaves  man  without  a  hope  beyond  the  grave.  Learn — ( 1 )  A  lesson 
of  gratitude  for  your  distinguished  religious  privileges.  (2)  Be  humble  before 
God  for  yovu:  abuse  of  such  exalted  privileges.  (3)  The  hearing  of  the  Gospel 
will  be  of  no  avail  without  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  {Essex  Remembrancer. ) 
Sovl  famine  : — I.  The  profoundest  want  of  human  nature  is  a  communica- 
tion FROM  THE  eternal  MIND.  This  is  implied  in  the  Divine  menace  of  sending 
a  worse  famine  than  that  of  want  of  bread  and  water.  It  was  special  communica- 
tions from  Himself,  not  the  ordinary  communications  of  nature,  that  Jehovah 
here  refers  to ;  and  man  has  no  greater  necessity  than  this ;  it  is  the  one  urgent 
and  imperial  need.  Two  great  questions  are  everlastingly  rising  from  the  depths 
of  the  human  soul — \.  How  does  the  Eternal  feel  in  relation  to  me  as  a  sinner  ? 

2.  How  am  I  to  get  my  moral  nature  restored  ?  II.  The  greatest  disease 
OF  human  nature  is  a  lack  of  appetite  for  THIS  communication.  The  vast 
majority  of  souls  have  lost  the  appetite  for  the  Divine  Word.  They  are  perishing, 
shrivelling  up  for  lack  of  it.     The  worst  of  this.     1.  Men  are  not  conscious  of  it. 

2.  It  works  the  worst  ruin.  III.  The  greatest  misery  of  human  nature  is 
a  quickened  appetite  and  no  supplies.  1.  The  appetite  will  be  quickened 
sooner  or  later.  2.  When  the  appetite  is  quickened,  and  there  is  no  supply,  it 
is  an  inexpressible  calamity.  (HomUist.)  The  Word  of  the  Lord: — We  are 
taught  by  this  text  the  inestimable  value  of  the  inspired  Word.  L  We  are  dependent 
on  it  for  the  regeneration  of  ovu-  souls.  The  facts,  doctrines,  promises,  warnings, 
invitations,  examples  of  the  Word  are  employed  by  the  Spirit  in  opening  blind 
eyes,  quickening  dead  sensibilities,  subduing  the  unruly  wills  and  affections  of 
sinful  men.  2.  We  are  beholden  to  this  Word  for  true  enlightenment.  A  fierce 
war  is  at  present  raging  round  the  Bible.  We  entertain  no  apprehension  as  to 
the  result  of  the  present  controversies.     The  Bible  has  survived  many  a  storm. 

3.  In  the  written  Word  are  also  found  the  springs  of  consolation.  The  Scriptures 
were  "  written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through  patience  and  comfort  thereof 
might  have  hope."  The  Bible  was  not  written  to  furnish  us  with  a  cosmogony, 
to  he  a  text-book  of  geology,  or  a  manual  of  astronomy.  It  would  have  been 
a  positive  calamity  if  Divine  revelation  had  superseded  the  active  exercise  of 
the  human  intellect  by  anticipating  the  results  of  modern  science  and  research. 

4.  We  are  under  obligation  to  the  revealed  Word  for  its  power  of  protection  in 
time  of  danger  and  temptation,  and  most  deeply  should  we  feel  this  obligation. 

5.  We  must  think  of  this  Word  in  relation  to  our  spiritual  advancement.  JIany 
devices  are  being  adopted  for  the  strengthening  of  the  faith,  the  kindling  of 
love,  the  quickening  of  zeal.  But  I  have  the  greatest  confidence  in  the 
closer  dealing  of  individual  Christians  with  the  Divine  Word.  Then  let  us 
learn  to  prize  ovu:  privileges  more  highly  than  heretofore.  (R.  W.  Forrest,  M.A.) 
Spiritual  famine  : — There  is  no  sign  of  the  unthankfulness  and  ungratefulness 

7  _> 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  vnr. 

of  the  heaxt  of  man  more  striking  than  the  tendency  to  disparage  and  forget 
the  commonest  mercies,  because  they  are  common.  It  may  be  that  God  will 
teach  us  the  worth  of  privilege  by  depriving  us  of  it.  I.  The  judqmbnt  DBNOTmcBD 
IN  THI3  TBXT.  A  famine  of  "  hearing  the  Word  of  the  liOrd."  The  Gospel  of 
salvation,  the  Word  that  bringeth  hfe  and  peace,  is  often  beautifully  figured  under 
the  emblem  of  water,  purifying  from  all  uncleanness,  and  refreshing  and  reviving 
the  fainting  spirit.  So  the  Gospel  is  often  figured  under  the  simple  symbol  of 
bread.  Jesus  said,  "  I  am  the  living  Bread  which  came  down  from  heaven." 
The  bread  and  water  of  life  signify  all  the  rich  blessings  of  salvation.  The  famine 
here  threatened  is  a  dearth  of  the  heavenly  manna.  This  famine  we  may  trace 
in  various  gradations  at  different  periods  of  the  Church.  Trace  it  in  its  hghter 
and  less  terrible  visitations.  When  God  withdraws  the  living  power  and  influence 
of  His  Spirit,  so  that  it  does  not  accompany  the  Word.  Then  there  is  a  barrenness, 
a  blight,  and  a  powerlessness  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  and  on  the  face  of  the 
Church.  Trace  it  more  manifestly  in  the  corruption  or  abstraction  of  the  great 
living  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  The  dry  morality  of  a  Cicero  or  a  Socrates 
may  usurp  the  place  of  the  living  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  same 
calamity  may  be  inflicted  upon  a  Chiu-ch  or  people  when  the  ministry  of  the 
Word  is  entirely  suppressed  or  suspended.  Thus  it  was  in  the  Jewish  Church 
of  old,  and  in  the  Christian  times  designated  as  the  "  Dark  Ages."  II.  The 
TEBRiBLBNESS  OF  THE  JTJDGMENT  THUS  DBNotTNCBD.  A  natural  famine  is  a 
fearful  visitation.  The  famine  God  here  threatens  is  altogether  more  severe 
and  terrible.  The  greatness  of  the  calamity  is  seen  because  on  the  faithful  minis- 
tration of  God's  Word  depends  all  that  is  moral,  beautiful,  great,  glorious  in  a 
land  or  in  a  church.  What  does  ovu:  own  country  owe  to  the  "  liberty  of  prophesy- 
ing "  ?  We  take  a  higher  view  when  we  remind  you  that  the  "  life  is  more  than 
meat,  and  the  body  than  raiment."  The  soul  is  lost  without  the  Saviour.  It 
is  "  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  "  that  it  pleases  God  to  "  save  them  that 
believe."  Let  the  free  Gospel  be  withdrawn,  and  all  would  be  darkness  and  death. 
in.  What  may  be  occasions  that  provoke  the  great  God  to  inflict  such  a 
CALAMITY  AS  UPON  A  CHURCH  OB  A  PEOPLE  ?  I.  Neglect  of  and  indifference  to  the 
precious  oracles  of  God.  2.  Making  the  Word  of  God  into  an  idol.  The  Bible 
itself  may  come  between  the  soul  and  the  God  it  reveals.  3.  Disregard  of  and 
forsaking  the  faithful  ministration  of  the  truth.  4.  We  may  mtike  too  much 
of  men,  and  too  little  of  the  Master ;  too  much  of  human  wisdom,  and  too  little 
of  Divine.  6.  The  supplementing  and  adding  to  God's  Word,  as  if  it  were  insufficient ; 
or  the  darkening  or  perverting  it,  as  though  man's  interpretation  were  essential, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  were  not  His  own  interpreter.  6.  The  means  and 
ordinances  may  be  exalted  to  the  depreciation  of  the  "  foolishness  of  the  preach- 
ing" of  the  Word  of  God.  God's  sacraments  do  not  act  as  magical  charms;  the 
Spirit  of  God  teaches  man  as  a  rational  and  responsible  agent.  {Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.) 
Spiritiial  famine : — It  is  a  characteristic  principle  of  Divine  warnings,  that  the 
woes  which  they  denounce  upon  guilty  men  generally  consist  in  the  mere  with- 
drawal of  abused  privileges,  and  the  desertion  of  men  to  gain  their  own  ends 
in  their  own  ways.  There  needs  nothing  for  man's  everlasting  ruin,  but  that 
Goi  should  let  him  alone.  If  God  exercise  no  positive  energy  of  His  grace  to 
rescue  him  from  destruction,  all  is  done  that  need  be  done  to  make  this  destruction 
sure,  and  without  a  remedy.  As  a  practical  illustration  of  this  principle,  you 
find  the  "^'criptures  warning  men  of  their  dangers  in  an  unconverted  state,  under 
the  simple  idea  and  shape  of  destitution  and  want.  God  departs  from  them, 
leaves  them,  hides  His  face  from  them,  lets  them  alone ;  and  they  thus  gain  the 
punishment  which  their  guilt  deserves,  as  the  harvest  of  their  own  sowing  and 
the  fruit  of  their  own  planting.  This  principle  forms  the  point  upon  which  the 
warning  of  oiu:  present  text  is  rested.  Famine,  with  all  its  attendant,  multiform 
evils,  is  the  simple  result  of  continued  want  and  deprivation.  If  God  withholds 
His  rain  and  His  snow  from  heaven,  all  the  horrors  of  famine  come  upon  man 
without  any  direct  effort  or  act  on  his  part  to  confirm  or  increase  it.  So  God 
proclaims  to  sinful  men  the  result  of  their  negligence  of  His  grace  and  contempt 
of  the  spiritual  mercies  which  have  been  long  continued  to  them  in  vain.  He 
will  withdraw  all  direct  spiritual  interposition  and  leave  them  to  the  barrenness 
of  their  own  natvire.  I.  The  evils  of  spiritual  famine.  The  Lord  treats  it  as 
a  curse  and  a  punishment.  Man  lives  not  by  bread  only,  but  by  the  words  which 
proceed  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  Man's  real  life  is  fed  by  communications 
of  Divine  ^race.    Take  from  the  soul  of  man  its  heavenly  nourishment,  and  you 


CHAP.  IX.]  AMOS.  99 

leave  it  a  prey  to  the  gnawing  of  eternal  want,  and  the  mere  resael  of  eternal 
wr  th  and  anguish.  The  full  evils  tf  this  spiritual  famine  this  world  cannot 
display,  nor  can  man,  in  his  present  state,  apprehend  them.  II.  The  facts 
WHICH  CONSTITUTB  A  s  mmTAL  FAMiNB.  These  are  facts  of  man's  experience 
here.  To  constitute  such  a  famine  there  is,  sometimes,  an  entire  removal  from 
a  people  of  all  the  ordinances  and  privileges  of  the  Grospel,  that  only  life-giving 
Word  of  God.  Or  there  is  found  a  withdrawal  from  a  commimity  who  still  retain 
the  name,  if  not  the  external  form  of  Christianity,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
in  its  pecu'iar  truths.  Or,  though  the  truth  of  God  be  still  proclaimed,  there 
is  no  power  communicated  from  above  to  carry  it  with  life-giving  efficacy  to 
the  souls  of  men.  III.  The  cibcumstancbs  which  lead  to  this  sPiEiTirAL 
FAMTNB.  Some  of  these  are  on  the  side  of  the  preacher  of  the  Word.  There 
may  be,  in  the  pulpit,  a  hiding  of  the  light  of  the  Gospel ;  or  a  spirit  of  sectarian 
division  and  controversy.  Or  a  conformity  among  professing  Christians  to 
the  course  of  this  world.  An  imbelieving  rejection  of  the  spiritual  claims  of  the 
Gospel,  and  a  misimprovement  of  the  mercies  which  a  Saviour  bestows,  lead  a 
people  with  certainty  to  this  famine  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  The  habit  of 
unmoved  and  heartless  hearing  of  the  Gospel  prepares  the  way  for  the  certain 
loss  of  all  the  blessings  which  the  Gospel  gives.  And  a  neglect  of  the  appointed 
ordinances  and  institutions  of  the  Gospel  leads  to  the  same  result.     IV.  The 

WAY  IN  WHICH  THE  EVILS  OF  SPIRITTJAL  FAMTNB  MAY  BE  AVERTED.       Prize  highly 

the  faithful  dispensation  of  the  Word  of  God.  And  pray  for  the  success  of  the 
Word  of  God.  Its  great  object  is  the  conversion  of  the  imgodly,  and  the  restora- 
tion of  this  fallen  world  to  God.  Let  this  object,  in  all  its  magnitude  and  import- 
ance, be  kept  before  you.  [T.  8.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  The  worst  starvation  : — One 
of  the  most  ghastly  tales  in  history  is  that  of  a  king  who  condemned  a  prisoner 
to  be  starved  to  death  in  a  palace  filled  with  gold,  silver,  and  the  most  precious 
stones  in  the  world.  For  a  while  the  sight  of  diamonds  and  rubies,  any  one  of 
which  would  purchase  provisions  for  a  year,  delighted  the  hapless  victim.  But 
when  the  fever  of  himger  began  to  bum,  and  the  weakness  and  languor  of  starva- 
tion unnerved  him,  the  very  sight  of  the  treasures  maddened  him.  It  is  but  a 
faint  picture  of  the  human  soul,  surrounded  with  all  the  earthly  things  that  can 
be  desired,  yet  famishing  for  love,  for  pesice,  for  rest  in  God.  {J.  J?.  Miller.) 
Religi  us  sincerity  : — The  "  sin  of  Samaria"  means  the  idolatry  of  Samaria.  The 
words  suggest  a  thought  or  two  in  relation  to  religious  sincerity.  I.  RELiGiotJS 
SINCERITY  IS  NO  PROOF  OF  THE  ACCURACY  OF  RELIGIOUS  CREBD.  Those  Israelites 
eeem  to  have  been  sincere  in  their  worship  of  the  golden  calf.  "  They  swore  by 
it."  That  dumb  idol  to  them  was  everything.  To  it  they  pledged  the  homage 
of  their  being.  A  man  is  sincere  when  he  is  faithful  to  his  convictions;  but 
if  his  convictions  are  imsoimd,  immoral,  ungodly,  his  sincerity  is  a  crime.  The 
fact  that  thousands  have  died  for  dogmas  is  no  proof  of  the  truth  of  their  dogmas. 
The  w  rds  suggest — ^11.  That  religious  sincerity  is  no  protection  against  the 
PUNISHMENT  THAT  FOLLOWS  ERRO'.  "They  shall  fall,  and  rise  no  more."  The 
eincerity  of  the  Israelites  in  their  worship  in  Bethel  and  at  Dan  prevented  not 
their  ruin.  There  are  those  who  hold  that  man  is  not  responsible  for  his  beUefs 
— that  so  long  as  he  is  smcere  he  is  a  true  man,  a  d  all  things  wiU  go  well  with 
him.  In  every  department  of  fife  '  od  holds  a  man  responsible  for  his  behefs. 
If  a  man  take  poison  into  his  system,  sincerely  beheving  that  it  is  nutriment, 
will  his  belief  save  him  ?     (HomUist.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Ver.  1.  I  saw  the  Lord  standing  upon  the  altar. — The  Lord  arising  to 
judgment  in  His  Church  : — God  will  no  longer  tolerate  sin,  nor  allow  sinners  to 
trifle  with  His  majesty.  I.  Dwelling-place  op  the  Most  High — His  Church. 
1.  No  Church  is  His  without  Him  (Rev.  iii.  2,  3,  9).  2.  High  privilege  to  have 
Him  so  nigh  (Deut.  iv.  7).  3.  Continuous  reaMsation  of  His  presence  by  Israel 
(Exod.  xl.  38).  4.  Peculiar  abiding-place  in  Holy  of  Holies  (Exod.  xxv.  20-22). 
5.  And  afterwards  incarnate  in  the  Holy  One  (John  i.  14).  6.  Future  tabernacling 
(Rev.  xxi.  3^.     But  in  text  God  is  stiU  in  temple.     II.  His  presence  in  thh 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Church  ebaused.  1.  Always  by  a  spiritual  discernment  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  Some- 
times by  outward  signs  (1  Kings  viii.  10,  11,  xix.  12).  His  Word,  ordinances, 
blessings,  visitations,  &c.  3.  But  in  text,  "  I  saw  the  Lord."  Thus  Moses 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  18),  Isaiah  (vi.  1)  (Acts  vii.  56,  ix.  3,  &c.).  III.  The  Lord  comb 
OUT  OF  His  abiding-place.  No  longer  "  dwelling  between  the  cherubim  '* 
(Psa.  Ixxx.  1),  but  "  standing  upon  the  altar  "  (unusual  place),  near  the  wor- 
shippers, ready  to  depart.  1.  Because  of  spirit  of  infatuation.  Israel  often 
acted  as  if  God  were  bound  to  remain  while  semblances  only  of  religion  existed 
(Numb.  xvi.  3 ;  Matt.  iii.  9,  v.  20).  2.  God's  judgments  often  begin  at  house 
of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).  Hence,  early  official  act  of  Jesus  Christ  (John  ii.  15), 
repeated  before  His  death  (Mark  xi.  15).  3.  Our  expectancy  and  duty  (Mark  xiii. 
33,  &c.;  Rev.  xxii.  20).  IV.  The  Lord  xjttbrinq  His  judgments  against 
SIN.  1.  Spared  not  His  own  Son,  "  made  sin  "  (Zech.  xiii.  7).  2.  Spared  not 
the  heathen  (Amos,  i.,  ii.),  nor  religious  professors  (vi.  1),  not  any,  great  or  small 
(ix.  1 ;  Heb.,  "  capitals,"  and  other  parts).  3.  Note  remarkable  parallelisma. 
4.  Observe  the  many  "  I  wills  "  of  judgment  and  power.  5.  Yet  "  remembering 
His  mercy."  A  remnant  to  be  saved.  Application.  1.  Ministerial  duty. 
2.  If  the  Lord  be  among  us,  is  His  presence  honoured  7  3.  Our  acknowledg- 
ments. (W.  W.  Tyler.)  Great  sins,  great  calamities,  great  efforts: — "This 
chapter  commences  with  an  accoimt  of  the  fifth  and  last  vision  of  the  prophet, 
in  which  the  final  ruin  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  is  represented.  This  ruin  was 
to  be  complete  and  irreparable  ;  and  no  quarter  to  which  the  inhabitants  might 
flee  for  refuge  would  afford  them  any  shelter  from  the  wrath  of  the  Omnipresent 
and  Almighty  Jehovah."  The  prophet  in  vision  sees  the  Almighty  standing 
upon  the  altar,  and  hears  Him  give  the  command  to  smite  the  Untel  of  the  temple 
door,  that  the  posts  may  shake ;  in  other  words,  to  destroy  the  temple.  I.  That 
under  the  righteous  government  of  God  great  sin  exposes  to  great 
CALAMITY.  How  terrible  the  calamities  here  referred  to  !  The  IsraeUtes,  when 
threatened  by  the  Assyrians,  would  flock  in  crowds  to  Bethel  and  implore  protec- 
tion from  the  golden  calf.  But  the  very  place  where  they  sought  protection 
would  prove  their  ruin.  Jehovah  says.  Smite  the  lintel  of  the  door,  that  the 
posts  may  shake  :  and  cut  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them  ;  and  I  will  slay  the 
last  of  them  with  the  sword,"  &c.  The  sin  of  these  Israelites  in  their  idolatrous 
worship  was  great.  They  were  the  descendants  of  Abraham  the  friend  of  God. 
Yet  they  gave  themselves  up  to  idolatry.  Hence  these  terrible  calamities. 
The  greater  the  sin  the  greater  the  punishment  "  Unto  whom  much  is  given, 
much  will  be  required."  II.  The  consciousness  of  approaching  calamities 
WILL  STIMULATE  TO  GREAT  EFFORTS  FOR  ESCAPE.  "Though  they  dig  into  heU, 
thence  shall  Mine  hand  take  them  ;  though  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  thence  will 
I  bring  them  down."  There  are  here  supposed  attempts  at  escape.  There  is 
the  supposed  attempt  to  get  into  hell — Sheol,  the  dark  realm  of  shadows,  where 
they  could  conceal  themselves.  There  is  an  attempt  to  climb  Mount  Carmel, 
1200  feet  in  height,  there  to  conceal  themselves  under  the  shadows,  intricacies, 
and  the  crowded  forests  of  oaks,  pines,  laurels,  &c.,  and  also  in  the  deep  caves 
running  down  to  the  sea.  Men  in  view  of  great  dangers  always  seek  refuge.  On 
the  great  day  of  retribution  sinners  are  represented  as  crying  to  the  rocks  and 
mountains  to  fall  on  them.  III.  The  greatest  efforts  to  escape  must  prove 
UTTERLY  FUTILE  WHEN  GoD  HAS  GIVEN  THE  SINNER  UP.  "  Though  they  dig  into 
hell,  thence  shall  Mine  hand  take  them."  Whatever  the  efforts  of  the  sinner 
in  the  prospect  of  approaching  danger,  there  is  no  escape  for  him.  God  is  every- 
where, and  everywhere  all-seeing,  all  just,  and  almighty.  Conclusion.  The 
only  way  to  escape  utter  ruin  is  to  renounce  your  sin  and  commit  yourself  unto 
the  safe  keeping  of  Him  who  is  the  Redeemer  of  mankind.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence  shall  Mine  hand  take  them ; 
though  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  thence  will  I  bring  them  down.  —  The 
danger  of  impenitence: — In  this  passage  God  manifests  His  determination  to 
arrest  and  punish  the  worker-;  of  iniquity.  The  prophet  shows  that  when  Grod 
came  forth  in  judgment,  none  would  be  able  to  stand  before  Him,  or  escape  from 
His  vengeance.  This  subject  is  enlarged  upon,  as  a  warning  to  those  who  pro- 
fane the  ordinances  and  violate  the  laws  of  the  Most  High,  to  stand  in  awe,  lest 
the  Divine  indignation  be  poured  out  upon  them.  These  things  have,  however, 
very  little  influence  on  us.  Many  seem  to  beheve,  because  sentence  against 
their  evil  deeds  has  not  been  executed  speedily,  that  it  will  never  be  executed. 


CHAP.   IX.]  ^^0«-  ^ 


T     qOMH   OF  THE  REASONS   WHY  MANY   ENTERTAIN   THIS   BELIEF.       1.   Their  SUCCesa 

IpolXSr^^asio^^^^^^^  {-the  p^ths^of  e...  th^y 

experience  °^«;^y  "^^"^Jf^.^^S'  they  try  to  persuade  themselves  that  their 
JTrmi  Tars  were  r^eatrSu;rLa^ary.'^  Sometimes  men  a^  checked 
it  X  verv  outset      They  are  detected  and  exposed.      There  is  interposition 
*  ^-fJn..  in  their   favour      When  enticed  to  the  commission  of  sm,  the 

ol  providence  "i  **^^?f ^^^^""J^.^^erly  received  wiU  occur  fresh  to  his  memory, 
Tnd  detr  him  from  the  paths  Xreil  destroyers  go.  2  The  successful  example 
of  other  iSnF^quently  we  see  men  rising  to  opulence  and  power  by  the 
of  o*'^e'^.^®?i:  ,  f/3  ^  TYe  see  the  wicked  hving  in  triumph,  and  dymg  m 
most  "^Justifiable  means,     we  see  X  pros^rity  of  t&  wicked,  others 

apparent  B^f  «>  ^.^^^^'iJ'^^'a^  are^ind^ed  to  forsake  the  path  of 

rt;1nli*g°afe"rp4^^^^^^^  dlngLus  to  happiness.     Could  we  discern 

*i?%^!^.„Wf^f  wicked  men  when  their  conscience  condemned  them  for  theur 
^cktes  w^  sWd  p^rTeive  them  frequently  endeavouririg  to  stifle  then: 
wicKocmess,  we  o"">^     t"        ,  ,      aooeaUng  to  persons  who  had  succeeded, 

convictions  a^dba^hthei^^^^^  ^3  ,^^^^  ^^,^  they 

SaJ'eS^red     3  Xy  tS  t^^^        repent  whenever  they  see  danger  approach- 
had  entered,     a.  J^^^         j^^f  ^^^  fo  sin,  that  no  motives,  no  considerations 
""!;  ipvfS  th^m  from^oSg  on  in  their  ^cked  practices.     But  at  the  same 
tZXv  haveTuch  a"i  Son  to  suffering,  that  when  they  sin    they  always 
S  to  Jo  sT^^h  security  and  with  safety.     And  they  generally  contrive  to 
^rs«flH«  themselves  that,  in  their  case  at  least,  this  object  may  be  attamed. 
Knl  tlS^  Znv  fLe  reaSnings  which  they  employ  for  this  purpose,  there  i3 
Among  tne  "^^'^y/^^^Y^/'fXn t  wh.Vh  is  founded  on  an  after  repentance.     Many 
rnkXt  'ShfviS^dr'i^k  Stp  of^ful  pleasures  to  th^  dregs   aU  they 
have  to  do  1^  to  prof^s?  themselves  sorry,  and  cast  themselves  upon  the  mercy 
of  God      This  they  think,  whatever  their  present  conduct  may  be.  will  set  aU 
?wS  right  at  lil     Repentance  is  not  such  an  easy  work  as  many  peopla 
imrSie      We  cannot  repent  at  whatever  moment  we  may  wish  to  do  so.     Alas  ! 
ranTrdXrup^n  futile  repentance,  neglect  and  abuse  their  present  mercies, 
n  It  i  Sossiblb  for  wicked  men  to  escape  the  J^st  judgments  of  God 
This  worlTIsnora  state  of  complete  retribution,  yet  the  Most  High  does  rule 
amonrthe  children  of  men.     He  has  connected  with  holiness  a  portion  of  happi- 
nrsri^d^dthsfn  a  portion  of  misery.     Whatever  happiness  wicked  men  may 
Sn^tostm  happiness  is  a  state  of  mind  to  which  they  can  have  no  claim. 
?heTcan^ot  possiW?  be  really  happy.     Wicked  men  may  evade  the  vigilance 
of  humaTlaw^  but  they  are  still   amenable  to  their  own  consciences.     And 
sometr^s  Sed  men  are   punished   more    immediately  bv  the  hand  of  God 
ffimselT    as  were  Sianias  and  Sapphira.     Then  there  is  death,  which  is  not 
fhe TxtiAction  of  b^ng.     After  dea^E  there  is  a  judgment  to  come,  which  wJl 
seal  the  doom  of  every  human  being.         {John  Mamsay,  M.A.)        JSo  escape 
/^  £   SS --Though  they  dig   into   hell,  or   though   they  undermine   our 
&ngdomS  vaults  and  ceUaragl  their  impious  labour  shaU  come  to  nothing 
bit  to^hdr  own  utter  shame.     1.  Here  is  the  negotiation  of  the  .wicked   that 
thev  iia     therrwants  no  pains,  there  wants  no  secrecy.     2   Here  is  the  object 
of  thei?  employment,  and  that  is  hell.     3.  There  is  a  twofold  end  implied,  why 
jLy  WidertakHuch  a  busmess,  either  for  their  own  refuge,  or  to  undenmne 
oSrs      4    Here  is  the  defeating  and  frustrating  of  their  work.     To  what  toJ 
omers.     4.  neio  10  1^  e.  labour      To  what  secrecy,  to  what  dread 

iniquity  puts  ^^'^j^Jj"  ,  J^X^i|„%X^p,^^^^^  is  the  event.  For  wheu 
iTsToX'the^^e'^ip^henSed  by\J?'ha^  God..  iB^kop  HacMt) 
TheimZMityof  the  sinmr^s  escape.— U  we  consider  man  in  reference  to  God 
we  seeWm  a  strange  compound  of  hardihood  and  cowardice  When  Divine 
rudgmenteaTe  remote,  he  not  only  deems  himself  secure,  but  bids  defiance  t 
SEotence  itself.  But  when  they  actually  come,  he  trembles  like  a  leaf  shaken 
bHie  Snd  I  THE  means  by  ^ch  men  seek  to  hide  themselves  i|OM 
God  S  of  the  expressions  used  indicate  fear;  others,  presumption.  Men 
^  try  aS  iSsuade  themselves  that  God  is  too  great  to  notice  the  msigmficant 
I^no^^of  creatures  like  ourselves.  Another  subterfuge  is.  that  as  sinners  they 
tenulEoTthdr  sid^  But  if  numbers  do  anything,  it  is  only  to  enhance 
the  doom  Men  have  great  confidence  in  their  own  virtues  however  little  con- 
formi?nto  may  ^  ^their  conduct  to  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  commanda 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

of  God.  II.  Thb  vanity  of  all  attbmpts  of  sinnhes  to  hidb  thbhsklvss 
rBOM  God.  Who  can  flee  from  the  presence  of  such  a  Being  ?  Where  is  the 
region  which  His  all-penetrating  gaze  does  not  pervade  ?  None  has  ever  hard- 
ened himself  against  God  and  prospered  ;  sin  has  ever  had  the  seed  of  punish- 
ment along  with  it,  and  given  beforehand  some  earnest  of  its  bitter  wages.  Be 
assured  nothing  can  screen  you  from  the  wrath  of  heaven,  nothing  give  you 
composure  in  this  world  of  afflictions  and  trials,  but  "  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."     {Stephen  Bridge,  A.M.) 

Vers.  5-7.  The  Lord  God  is  He  that  toncheth  the  land,  and  it  shall  melt. — 
God  as  the  administrator  of  jitstice: — I.  Hb  dobs  it  with  thb  obbatbst  basb. 
The  Almighty  has  no  difficulty.  Never  can  there  be  any  miscarriage  of  justice 
with  God.  He  bears  it  right  home  in  every  case.  II.  Hb  does  it  with  at.t. 
THE  POWERS  OP  NATUBB  AT  His  COMMAND.  His  throne  is  on  high,  above  all 
the  forms  and  forces  of  the  universe,  and  all  are  at  His  call.  HI.  He  does  it 
disregardful  of  mebb  EEUGiotrs  PROFESSION.  Jehovah  here  repels  the  idea 
which  the  Israelites  were  so  prone  to  entertain,  that  because  He  had  brought 
them  out  of  Egypt  and  given  them  the  land  of  Canaan  they  were  peculiarly  the 
objects  of  His  regard,  and  could  never  be  subdued  or  destroyed.  He  now  regarded 
and  would  treat  them  as  the  Cushites,  who  had  been  transplanted  from  their 
primal  location  in  Arabia  into  the  midst  of  the  barbarous  nations  of  Africa.  The 
Almighty,  in  administering  justice,  is  not  influenced  by  the  plea  of  profession. 
A  corrupt  Israelite  to  Him  was  as  bad  as  an  Ethiopian,  though  he  calls  Abraham 
his  father.  IV.  He  does  it  with  a  thorough  discrimination  of  character. 
"  Behold,  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  God  are  upon  the  sinful  kingdom,  and  I  will  destroy 
it  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  saving  that  I  will  not  utterly  destroy  the  house 
of  Jacob,  saith  the  Lord."  There  were  some  good  people  amongst  the  Israelites, 
men  of  genuine  goodness ;  the  Great  Judge  would  not  destroy  them.  "  I  will 
not  utterly  destroy  the  house  of  Jacob.  ...  I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among 
all  nations,  like  as  corn  is  sifted  in  a  sieve,"  &c.  He  would  bum  up  the  chaff 
but  save  the  wheat.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  7-10.  Are  ye  not  as  children  of  the  Ethiopians  nnto  Me,  0  children 
of  Israel  ? — Sin  dissolving  the  union  between  Ood  and  His  people  : — 1.  These 
verses  strike  at  the  root  of  all  Israel's  fancied  security.  They  were  the  people 
of  God,  whom  He  had  brought  from  Egypt  and  planted  in  Canaan,  whose  whole 
life  had  been  passed  under  His  peculiar  guardian  care.  They  thought  that  God 
would  never  execute  final  judgment  on  them,  because  He  had  so  often  spared 
them  and  blessed  them.  But  sin  dissolved  this  union  at  last.  2.  The  reason  why 
this  union  was  dissolved  is  given  in  the  following  verse.  They  are  the  "  sinftil 
kingdom."  God's  purpose  had  failed.  No  union  between  God  and  man  can 
stand  in  the  presence  of  sin — repeated  and  unrepented  sin.  3.  The  effect  of  this 
eeparation  between  God  and  His  people.  They  were  destroyed  off  the  face  of 
the  earth  ;  every  sinner  perished  by  the  sword.  (1)  No  relations  are  more  blessed 
than  those  which  exist  between  God  and  His  people.  His  covenant  is  estab- 
lished with  them,  and  it  is  a  covenant  of  life  and  blessing.  Providential  help 
in  all  the  forms  that  man  may  need :  grace  and  truth  to  save  the  soul  and  to 
prepare  for  that  home  into  which  nothing  unclean  can  enter.  These  are  God's 
gifts  to  His  people.  (2)  Sin  is  the  only  power  which  can  sever  this  union.  In 
the  face  of  aU  persecution  and  trouble  the  good  man  can  say  with  St.  Paul :  "  I 
am  persuaded,  that  neither  death  nor  life,  nor  angels,"  &c.  (3)  The  results  of 
the  separation  for  us  will  be  more  fatal  than  for  Israel.  (J.  Telford,  B.A.) 
And  the  Syrians  from  Kir. — Migrations  from  Kir : — The  most  competent 
authorities  teach  us  to  conceive  of  successive  waves  of  population  issuing 
from  the  mountainous  country  near  the  sources  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris, 
to  which  the  narrative  of  Genesis  points  as  the  cradle  of  the  human  race,  and 
to  which  the  Mosaic  accounts  of  the  Deluge  bring  us  back  as  the  centre  from 
which  the  children  of  Noah  went  forth  again  to  people  the  earth.  Of  all  the 
migrations  from  the  land  of  Kir,  to  the  regions  that  lay  south-west  of  it,  that 
which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  history  of  man,  is  vmdoubtedly  the 
one  which  the  Bible  connects  with  the  name  of  Terah.  But  this  was  so  far  from 
being  the  first  of  the  movements  in  this  direction,  that  it  is  much  more  likely 
to  have  been  the  last.  The  anthropomorphic  language  of  the  Mosaic  record 
is  certainly  not  intended  to  hinder  us  from  the  quest  of  second  causes  for  the 


CHAP.  IX.]  AMOS.  103 

change  of  abode,  which  it  ascribes  to  the  direct  command  of  Deity.  It  was  pro- 
bably partly  in  consequence  of  the  barrenness  of  the  upper  valley  of  the  Euphrates, 
that  rendered  it  little  fitted  for  the  home  of  a  pastoral  tribe  ;  partly  from  the 
establishment  of  a  powerful  non-Semitic  empire  upon  the  banks  of  the  Tigris, 
leading,  according  to  an  old  tradition,  which  may  be  accepted  in  its  general  mean- 
ing, even  if  its  details  bear  the  stamp  of  later  invention,  to  the  persecution  of 
those  who  climg  to  the  purer  faith,  that  the  family  of  Abraham  found  its  way 
into  the  more  fertile  and  peaceful  land  of  Canaan.  But  the  same  causes  which 
had  urged  him  on  we  may  believe  to  have  been  powerful  with  kindred  tribes. 
All  evidence  that  we  have  confirms  the  supposition  that,  long  before  the  days 
of  Abraham,  Semitic  tribes  had  pressed  along  the  path  by  which  the  Divine 
guidance  was  to  lead  him,  to  the  land  that  should  afterwards  be  possessed  by 
his  descendants,  as  the  sand  that  is  by  the  seashore  for  multitude.  {A.  8. 
Wilkins,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  I  "Will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among'  all  nations,  like  as  com  is 
sifted    in    a    sieve,    yet   shall   not  the    least    grain    fall    upon    the    earth. — 

Winnowing : — The  winnowing  of  com  was  effected  in  various  ways.  Sometimes 
by  the  mere  operation  of  the  wind  blowing  through  the  barns  where  it  was 
thrashed, — when  the  worthless  chaff  was  separated  and  dispersed.  Which 
similitude  well  expressed  the  character  and  condition  of  the  ungodly,  who  are 
like  the  chafif  which  the  wind  driveth  away.  As  the  action  of  the  wind  is  very 
uncertain,  the  shovel  was  early  used  by  agriculturists.  The  sieve  and  fan  were, 
however,  very  soon  invented  and  brought  into  use.  Now,  machines  save  much 
manual  toil,  and  speedily  and  more  effectually  answer  the  end  proposed.  The 
security  of  the  true  grain,  amidst  the  winnowings  to  which  in  Divine  wisdom 
it  is  exposed,  is  affirmed  in  our  text.  I.  They  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus  must  suffer  persecution.  Never  can  we  be  sufficiently  grateful  for  the 
quiet  and  toleration  we  enjoy  in  this  favoured  island.  Yet  a  degree  of  persecu- 
tion winnows  the  Church  at  the  present  day.  The  finger  of  reproach  is  still 
pointed  against  the  youthful  convert,  &c.  II.  Severe  temptations  winnow 
CHARACTERS.  Temptations  are  as  various  as  our  circumstances,  ages,  or  peculiar 
situations  in  life.  It  may  be  some  time  before  the  particular  trial,  well  adapted 
to  reach  ovu-  case,  may  occur.  Poverty  has  proved  a  snare  to  many ;  prosperity 
to  more.     There  are  temptations  which  chiefly  affect  the  mind.     III.  Adverse 

OCCURRENCES  MAY  BE  CONSIDERED    AS    THE    SIEVE    BY    WHICH    ISRAEL    IS    SIFTED. 

Personal  adversity  tries  the  character.  Relative  afflictions  winnow  our  families. 
The  Church  has  her  winnowing  times.  At  the  period  of  death,  the  last  and 
greatest  extremity,  the  character  is  sifted  as  corn  is  sifted  in  a  sieve.  But  the 
Lord  commands  His  loving- kindness  in  the  day  of  our  trial,  and  in  the  night  is  our 
song  to  the  God  of  our  hfe.  In  conclusion,  take  a  retrospect  of  all  the  way  which 
the  Lord  our  God  has  led  us  these  many  years  in  the  wilderness.  Various  have 
been  the  sifting  occurrences  of  our  hves.  Anticipate  the  period  when  we  shall 
be  finally  sifted,  and  separated  aUke  from  the  husks  of  our  own  imperfections 
and  frailties,  and  the  chaff  of  all  carnal  and  xmgodly  associations.  {W.  Clayton.) 
Divine  sifting  : — I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel.  I.  It  is  a  Divine  sifting.  The 
Oriental  mode  of  sifting  illustrates  the  Divine  method.  1.  The  primary  refer- 
ence is  to  the  Jews.  2.  Then  to  the  Church  of  God  as  a  whole.  3.  Also  to 
individual  members  of  the  Chiu-ch.  II.  The  manner  of  sifting.  "  As  corn  is 
sifted."  1.  The  sifting  suggests  a  mixed  condition  of  character  and  condition. 
The  mixed  condition  of  things  in  the  Chiu*ch  of  Grod  necessitates  a  sifting 
process.  And  the  mixed  experience  of  individuals  necessitates  various  Divine 
sif tings.  Happy  would  a  Church,  family,  or  individual  be,  if  it  could  be  said 
to  be  altogether  wholesome  grain  and  pure.  2.  The  sifting  of  com  must  be  done 
prudently  and  patiently.  Some  grains  require  a  finer  sieve  than  others.  3.  Sift- 
ing discriminates  between  chaff  and  com.  It  does  not  create  either  chaff  or  corn, 
but  makes  each  manifest.  So  all  deceits  and  mere  appearances  are  exposed  by 
God's  sittings.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  permanent  concealment  of  character 
in  the  moral  world.  4.  The  sifting  is  thorough.  There  is  an  individual  dis- 
crimination as  well  as  a  Church  sifting.  Each  grain  is  severely  subjected  to  this 
sifting.  III.  The  means  whereby  the  Divine  sifter  sifts  the  house  of 
Israel.  1.  By  the  manifold  changeful  experiences  of  hfe.  2.  A  faithful  ministry 
is  a  Divine  sieve  by  which  the  great  Husbandman  sifts  the  grain.  3.  Temptations 
of  the  devil.     IV.  The  design  of  the  Divine  siftings  of  life.     There  is  then 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

a  call  to  submission,  gratitude,  patience,  hopefulness,  and  searching  inquiry. 
{Anon.)  The  sieve  : — This  prophecy  is  originally  applicable  to  the  long- 
afflicted  seed  of  Israel.  And  how  terribly  has  it  been  fulfilled.  Apply  to  the 
spiritual  Israel.  Two  things  to  remember — the  sifting  and  the  saving.  I.  Thh 
SITTING.  God  has  ordained  that  this  side  Jordan  there  shall  be  no  rest  for  His 
people  as  to  their  outward  circumstances.  As  long  as  the  wheat  lies  on  the 
threshing-floor  the  flail  must  be  kept  in  motion.  The  Church  of  God  since  its 
institution  has  never  been  perfectly  pure.  The  Church  has  shared  in  the 
imperfection  of  everything  else  that  is  human.  Then,  wheresoever  and  when- 
soever God  has  a  Church,  it  is  sure  to  be  in  the  sieve.  Take  this  fact  in  refer- 
ence to  the  Church  at  large.  Illustrate  from  the  history  of  the  persecutions  of 
the  Christian  Church.  Other  sieves  besides  persecution  have  been  used.  There 
is  the  sieve  of  heresy.  The  uprising  of  new  infidehties  acts  as  a  test  to  the  Church. 
At  divers  times  the  public  mind  exhibits  a  strong  tendency  towards  unbehef. 
One  wave  rolls  up  black  with  superstition,  and  the  next  is  pale  with  infidehty. 
The  mind  of  man  oscillates  Uke  a  pendulum  between  beheving  a  lie  and  believing 
nothing.  Another  sieve  is  that  of  providential  examination  by  pubhc  opinion 
and  sense  of  justice.  You  must  never  expect  that  any  professing  Church  of  God 
will  be  for  a  long  time  flourishing  if  it  abide  exactly  in  the  same  state.  Whenever 
our  Churches  run  for  years  in  the  same  rut,  little  good  is  done.  We  must  expect 
often  to  hear  that  the  ship  of  Christ's  Church  is  in  a  storm.  Purification  will 
be  the  result  of  agitation.  Certain  sieves  in  which  you  and  I  shall  be.  1.  The 
preaching  of  the  Word.  Wherever  the  Gospel  is  faithfully  preached,  it  acts  as 
a  "discemer  of  spirits."  2.  Temptation.  The  daily  temptations  of  the  shop, 
the  house,  the  field,  the  street,  yea,  even  ths  Church  of  God,  are  the  discoverers 
of  sincerity,  the  detectives  of  delusion,  the  exposers  of  hypocrisy,  and  the  beacons 
of  wisdom.  3.  The  trials  of  hfe.  There  are  temptations  in  prosperity.  That 
is  a  sieve  which  few  men  can  pass.  Few  men  can  endure  long-continued,  undis- 
tiu"bed  prosperity.  Capuan  holidays  ruined  Hannibal's  troops.  Adversity 
acts  in  the  same  sifting  manner.  4.  Inward  conflicts.  There  are  times  with 
us  when  everything  in  us  is  salted  with  fire.  5.  The  hour  of  death  has  often 
served  as  a  touchstone  by  which  formality  has  been  revealed.  6.  And  what  a 
test  the  day  of  judgment  will  be !  II.  The  saving.  A  few  comfortable  words. 
Sifting  is  not  a  pleasant  experience.  The  farmer  sifts  his  wheat  because  it  is 
precious.  And  our  trials,  changes,  catastrophes,  and  afflictions  are  no  proof  of 
want  of  affection  on  the  part  of  the  Most  High,  but  the  very  contrary.  The 
farmer  does  not  mean  to  destroy  the  grain  when  he  puts  it  into  the  sieve.  God 
will  chasten,  but  He  will  not  destroy.  The  promise  of  the  text  is,  "  There  shall 
not  the  least  grain  fall  to  the  ground."  He  who  holds  the  sieve  watches  with  an 
observant  eye,  and  acts  with  an  unlimited  power.  The  least  corn  of  wheat  He 
keeps  His  eye  upon.  Much  sifted,  but  not  lost ;  much  tempest-tossed,  but 
not  shipwrecked ;  much  put  into  the  fire,  but  never  consumed.  Blessed  be  God 
for  all  that  (C.  H.  Sfurgeon. )  Divine  sifting : — When  the  Lord  sends  a  soul- 
stirring  message  through  His  servant  Amos,  He  avails  Himself  of  an  agricultural 
figure  I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel.  I.  It  is  a  Divine  sifting.  The  Oriental 
method  of  sifting  illustrates  the  Divine  method.  1.  The  primary  reference  is  to 
the  Jews.  2.  To  the  Church  of  God  as  a  whole.  3.  To  individual  members  of 
the  Church.  11.  The  mannbb  of  sifting.  "  As  corn  is  sifted."  1.  The  sifting 
suggests  a  mixed  condition.  The  mixed  experience  of  individuals  necessitates 
various  Divine  siftings.  2.  The  sifting  of  corn  must  be  done  prudently  and 
patiently.  Some  grains  require  a  finer  sieve  than  others.  And  often  one  sifting 
is  not  sufficient.  3.  Sifting  discriminates  between  chaff  and  com.  It  does  not 
create  either  chaff  or  com,  but  makes  each  manifest.  There  is  no  such  thing 
as  permanent  concealment  of  character  in  the  moral  world.  4.  The  sifting  is 
thorough.  Every  grain  is  sifted.  There  is  an  individual  discrimination  as  well 
as  a  Church  sifting.  Each  grain  is  severely  subjected  to  this  sifting.  III.  The 
means  whereby  the  Divine  sifter  sifts  the  house  of  Israel.  1.  By  the 
manifold  changeful  experiences  of  Hfe.  2.  A  faithful  ministry  is  a  Divine  sieve. 
Such  was  the  ministry  of  Amos.  3.  Temptations  of  the  devil  are  sieves  through 
which  the  enemy  desires  to  destroy  good  grain.  IV.  The  design  of  the  Divxnb 
SIFTINQS  OF  LIFE.  To  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiarly  holy  people.  Whatever 
the  manner  and  means  of  sifting  this  is  the  design.  If  these  things  are  so  there 
is  a  call  to — (1)  Submission,  (2)  Gratitude,  (3)  Patience,  (4)  Hopefulness,  (5)  Yea» 
searching  inquiry.     (H  nry  Smith.) 


CHAP.  IX.]  AMOS.        _  105 

Ver.  11.  In  tbat  day  will  I  raise  up  the  tabemade  of  David  that  is  fallen. 
— The  tabernacle  of  David  ruined  by  man,  and  reared  up  by  (he  mighty  Ood : — 
Things  to  take  notice  of.  1.  The  designation  that  the  prophet  Amos,  by  God's 
commission,  gives  unto  the  kingdom  of  IsraeL     A  *'  sinful  kingdom "  (ver.  8). 

2.  An  advertisement  that  the  prophet  Amos  gives  imto  this  sinful  kingdom. 
He  says,  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  it."  3.  God's  purpose  and  resolution 
with  reference  to  the  sinful  kingdom.  '  I  will  destroy  it  from  ofif  the  face  of  the 
earth."  4.  The  limitation  of  the  awful  sentence.  "  Saving  that  I  will  not  utterly 
destroy  the  house  of  Jacob."  5.  An  account  of  God's  management  with  respect  to 
that  remnant.  "  Yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  to  the  earth."  6.  We  are  told 
what  will  become  of  the  chaff.  "  Shall  die  by  the  sword."  Now  follows  another 
scene  :  a  scene  of  mercy  is  opened  up  in  verse  11.  Notice — (1)  The  designation 
that  God  gives  \mto  His  Church,  particularly  the  New  Testament  Church.  "  The 
tabernacle  of  David."  (2)  The  present  case  of  the  tabernacle  of  David ;  it  is 
fallen;  there  are  breaches  made  in  it;  it  is  in  a  ruinous  condition.  (3)  We  have 
a  promise  of  rebuilding  David's  tabernacle.  "  I  will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I 
will  build  it  as  in  the  days  of  old."  (4)  The  time  or  season  when  this  is  to  be  done. 
"  In  that  day."  Observation.  "  That  God  many  times  ushers  in  a  glorious  work 
of  reformation  by  very  cloudy,  dark,  and  dismal  dispensations  of  providence." 
This  is  God's  ordinary  way  of  working,  both  towards  particular  persons  and 

{)articular  Churches.  Illustrate  by  God's  planting  a  Church  for  Himself  in  the 
and  of  Canaan.  The  retiu-n  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  Babylonish  captivity. 
The  times  of  Constantino.  The  revival  of  the  Church  upon  the  downfall  of  Anti- 
christ. Why  is  it  that  God  goes  to  work  in  this  way  ?  1.  That  He  may  be  avenged 
on  the  persecutors  and  enemies  of  His  Church  and  people.  2.  That  He  may  remove 
the  abounding  offences  in  the  visible  Church,  and  roll  away  the  impedimenta 
that  hinder  her  reformation.  3.  And  there  is  something  godlike,  greatlike,  and 
majestic  in  this  manner  of  procedure.  There  is  something  admirable  in  this  way 
of  working  in  respect  of  God  Himself ;  in  respect  of  religion  itself.  In  respect  of 
the  people  of  God,  and  the  effect  that  this  way  of  working  has  upon  them. 
Doctrine.  That  God  has  His  own  time  and  way  of  rebuilding  or  reforming  Hia 
Church,  when  she  is  brought  to  a  very  low  and  ruinous  condition.  I.  Why  thb 
Church  of  Cheist  is  represented  under  the  name  and  notion  op  thb 
"  TABERNACLE  OP  David."  There  is  evident  allusion  to  the  tabernacle  which, 
by  God's  special  command  unto  Moses,  was  reared  in  the  wilderness.  1.  The 
tabernacle  was  God's  lodging  and  habitation  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  a  symbol  of 
God's  gracious  presence  among  them.  2.  The  Divine  oracles,  the  law  and  the 
testimony,  were  preserved  and  kept  in  the  tabernacle,  and  from  thence  they  were 
given  out  for  the  use  of  Israel.  So  to  the  Church  pertain  the  oracles  of  God  ; 
His  revealed  mind  and  will  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth  is  committed  to  her  trust. 

3.  The  tabernacle  was  the  place  of  worship.  So  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the  place 
where  He  will  be  worshipped  and  sanctified  of  all  that  are  about  Him.  4.  The 
pattern  of  the  tabernacle  was  given  by  God  unto  Moses  in  the  mount.  So  the 
model  of  the  Church,  with  a  perfect  system  of  laws,  by  which  she  is  to  be  governed, 
is  given  of  God  in  the  mount  of  revelation.  6.  No  man  was  to  intrude  himself 
into  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  So,  in  the  New  Testament  Church,  no  man 
is  to  intrude  himself  into  the  sacred  offices  of  the  Church,  without  he  is  qualified 
and  called  of  God  imto  that  work.  6.  The  greatest  and  most  sacred  thing  in 
the  tabernacle  was  the  ark  and  mercy-seat.  And  it  is  the  great  business  of 
ministers  of  the  Gospel,  now  under  the  New  Testament,  to  disclose  or  open  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  to  preach  Christ.  7.  The  ark  was  a  portable  or 
movable  kind  of  tent.  In  like  manner  the  Church  of  God,  while  in  this  world, 
is  not  fixed  to  any  particular  nation.  II.  When  may  the  tabernacle  of  David 
BE  SAID  TO  BE  FALLEN,  BROKEN,  AND  RUINOUS  ?  1.  When  the  God  of  the  tabernacle 
is  departed.  2.  When  the  oracles  of  God  are  not  carefully  kept  and  purely 
dispensed.  3.  When  the  God  of  the  tabernacle  is  not  worshipped  according  to 
His  appointment.  4.  When  it  is  not  kept  according  to  the  pattern  in  the  mount. 
5.  When  men  are  entered  upon  tabernacle  service,  without  being  called,  qualified, 
and  sanctified  for  such  service.  III.  How  is  it  that  God  raises  up  His 
TABERNACLE  WHEN  IT  IS  FALLEN  ?  1.  In  a  time  of  defection  He  raises  up  witnesses 
to  bear  testimony  against  the  corruptions  and  mismanagements  of  men  about  Hia 
tabernacle.  2.  The  Lord  puts  it  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  and  ministers  to 
take  pleasure  in  the  stones  and  rubbish  of  His  fallen  tabernacle,  and  to  mourn 
and  lament  over  their  own  sins  and  the  tokens  of  the  Lord's  anger  that  have  gone 


106  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

out  against  them.  3.  The  Lord  polishes  and  prepares  some  for  tabernacle  work 
and  service,  as  He  did  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab.  4.  His  tabernacle  is  raised  up  by 
a  plentiful  downpouring  of  the  Spirit.  5.  Sometimes  He  inspires  great  men, 
kings,  and  nobles,  to  espouse  the  cause  of  His  fallen  tabernacle.  6.  Sometimes 
He  rears  up  His  fallen  tabernacle  in  the  very  blood  and  sufferings  of  His  witnesses. 
IV.  Offer  some  thoxtghts  anent  the  time  or  day  of  the  Lord's  buildino 
UP  THE  tabernacle  OF  David.  1.  It  is  a  time  which  God  hath  kept  in  His  own 
power,  and  therefore  we  should  beware  of  diving  with  too  much  curiosity  into 
it.  2.  When  men  think  the  time  at  hand,  and  their  expectations  are  big,  things 
frequently  take  another  turn,  and  defeat  all  their  hopes  for  that  season.  3.  Grod's 
time  of  building  up  His  tabernacle  is  commonly  when  things  are  brought  to  the 
last  extremity.  4.  God's  time  is  a  day  of  vengeance  and  vexation  unto  the  wicked 
and  ungodly  world.  5.  Yet  is  it  a  day  of  joy  and  gladness  to  all  Zion's  friends 
and  well-wishers.  In  order  to  the  successful  building  of  the  broken  and  fallen 
tabernacle  of  David.  L  It  is  necessary  that  every  one  of  us  prepare  a  habitation 
for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  in  oiu:  hearts.  2.  That  we  be  well  acquainted  with 
the  pattern  showed  in  the  mount,  particularly  of  the  New  Testament  revelation. 
3.  That,  like  Elijah,  we  be  "  very  zealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts."  4.  We  need 
to  count  the  cost ;  to  reckon  what  tabernacle  work  may  cost.  5.  Sympathise 
with  and  help  all  ministers  or  Christians  who  are  endeavouring  honestly,  in 
their  spheres,  to  build  up  the  tabernacle  of  God.  (E.  Erskine.)  The  restoration 
of  the  true  moral  theocracy  : — The  old  Hebrew  world  was  for  ages  governed  by  a 
theocracy.  God  was  their  King.  He  had  under  Him,  and  by  His  appointment, 
human  rulers  and  other  functionaries  ;  but  they  were  simply  His  instruments  and 
He  was  their  King.  That  form  of  government  has  passed  away,  but  it  was 
symbolical.  It  was  the  emblem  of  a  higher  theocracy.  Of  which  we  note — 
I.  It  rose  from  the  humblest  condition.  "  In  that  day  I  will  raise  up  the 
tabernacle  of  David  that  is  fallen."  Its  foimder  was  a  poor  Jewish  peasant. 
Its  first  apostles,  who  were  they  ?  In  its  origin,  indeed,  its  symbols  are  the  little 
stone,  the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  the  few  particles  of  leaven.  II.  Heathens 
ARE  subject  to  ITS  AUTHORITY.  "  That  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  Edom, 
and  of  all  the  heathen,  which  are  called  by  My  name,  saith  the  Lord  that  doeth 
this."  The  old  theocracy  was  confined  to  the  Jews ;  this  one,  this  moral  theo- 
cracy, is  to  extend  to  the  heathen.  Even  Edom — the  old  and  inveterate  foe 
of  the  theocratic  people,  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  representative  of  the  whole 
heathen  world — is  to  be  subjected  to  it.  It  shall  "  inherit  the  Gentiles."  It  is 
to  have  the  heathen  for  its  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for 
its  possession.  III.  Abundant  material  provisions  will  attend  it.  "  Behold, 
the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the  ploughman  shall  overtake  the  reaper,  and 
the  treader  of  grapes  him  that  soweth  seed ;  and  the  moimtains  shall  drop  sweet 
wine,  and  all  the  hills  shall  melt."  "  The  metaphorical  language  here  employed 
is  at  once  in  the  highest  degree  bold  and  pleasing.  The  Hebrews  were  accustomed 
to  construct  terraces  on  the  sides  of  the  mountains  and  other  elevations,  on  which 
they  planted  vines.  Of  this  fact  the  prophet  avails  himself,  and  represents  the 
immense  abundance  of  the  produce  to  be  such  that  the  eminences  themselves 
would  appear  to  be  converted  into  the  juice  of  the  grape."  Just  as  this  moral 
theocracy  extends,  pauperism  will  vanish.  With  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His 
righteousness  all  necessary  material  good  comes.  Godliness  is  profitable  unto 
aU  things.  IV.  Lost  privileges  are  restored  as  it  advances.  Three 
blessings,  which  man  has  lost  through  depravity,  are  here  indicated.  1.  Freedom. 
"  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity,"  or  rather,  I  will  reverse  the  captivity,  give 
them  liberty.  Man  in  a  state  of  depravity  is  a  slave,  a  slave  to  lust,  worldliness, 
&c.  &c.  This  moral  theocracy  ensures  freedom  to  all  its  subjects.  "  Ye  shall 
know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  2.  Prosperity.  "  Shall 
build  the  desolate  cities  and  inhabit  them  ;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards  and 
drink  the  wine  thereof."  One  of  the  sad  evils  connected  with  man's  fallen 
depravity  is,  that  he  does  not  reap  the  reward  of  his  labom-s.  He  builds  cities  and 
plants  vineyards  and  makes  gardens  for  others.  Through  the  reign  of  social 
injustice  he  is  prevented  from  enjoying  the  produce  of  his  honest  labours.  Under 
thiis  theocracy  it  will  not  be  so.  What  a  man  produces  he  will  hold  and  enjoy 
as  his  own.  3.  Settledness.  "  I  will  plant  them  upon  their  land,  and  they  shall 
no  more  be  pulled  up  out  of  their  land  which  I  have  given  them,  saith  the  Lord 
thy  Grod."  Unregenerate  man  has  ever  been  restless,  homeless,  unsettled.  He 
etands  not  on  a  rock,  but  rather  on  planks  floating  on  surging  waters ;  he  is  never 


CHAP.  IX.]  AMOS.  107 

at  rest.  All  the  subjects  of  the  true  theocracy  are  established.  "  God  is  their 
refuge  and  strength."  Let  us  have  faith  in  this  predicted  future  of  the  world. 
{Homilist.) 

Ver.  13.  Behold,  the  days  come,  salth  the  Lord,  that  the  plowman  shall 
overtake  the  reaper. — A  revival  sermon  : — God's  promises  are  not  exhausted 
when  they  are  fulfilled,  for  when  once  performed  they  stand  just  as  good  as  they 
did  before,  and  we  may  await  a  second  accomplishment  of  them.  I.  Explain 
THE  TEXT  AS  A  PROMISE  OF  REVIVAL.  1.  Notice  a  promise  of  surprising  ingathering. 
2.  The  idea  of  amazing  rapidity.  3.  Notice  the  activity  of  labour  which  is 
mentioned  in  the  text.  One  sign  of  a  true  revival  is  the  increased  activity  of 
God's  labourers.  4.  A  time  of  revival  shall  be  followed  by  very  extraordinary  con- 
version, n.  What  is  taught  us  by  a  revival  ?  That  God  is  absolute  monarch 
of  the  hearts  of  men.  God  does  not  say  here  if  men  are  willing,  but  He  gives  an 
absolute  promise  of  a  blessing.  If  it  were  not  for  this  doctrine  I  wonder  where 
the  ministry  would  be.    Adam  Old  is  too  strong  for  young  Melanchthons.     III.  The 

TEXT  SHOULD   BE  A  STIMULUS  FOR  FURTHER  EXERTION.       The  duty  of  the  Church 

is  not  to  be  measured  by  its  success.  It  is  as  much  the  minister's  duty  to  preach 
the  Gospel  in  adverse  times  as  in  propitious  seasons.  Recollect  that  even  when 
this  revival  comes  an  instrumentality  will  still  be  wanted.  The  ploughman  is 
wanted  even  after  the  harvest.  The  ploughman  shall  never  be  so  much  esteemed 
as  when  he  follows  after  the  reaper,  and  the  sower  of  seed  never  so  much  valued 
as  when  he  comes  at  the  heels  of  those  that  tread  the  grapes.  The  glory  which 
God  puts  upon  instrumen^tality  should  encourage  you  to  use  it.     IV.  A  word 

OF  WARNING  TO  THOSE  WHO  KNOW  NOT  CHRIST.      {C.  H.  SpurgeOU.) 


INTEODUCTION  TO  OBADIAR 

It  is  very  noticeable  and  worthy  of  remark  how  very  little  God's  prophets 
have  to  tell  us  about  themselves.  When  their  own  history  is  in  question  they 
are  the  most  reserved  and  silent  of  men.  This  self-restraint  is  indeed  quite 
unprecedented  in  literature.  It  is  an  unparalleled  thing  that  an  author  should  be 
so  self -forgetful  as  those  old  prophets  were.  It  is  a  thing,  too,  which  other  men 
do  not  greatly  like.  We  love  to  know  as  much  as  possible  about  the  face  and  form, 
the  manners  and  the  experiences  of  those  whose  books  we  read.  No  one  of  the 
prophets  is  more  reticent  than  Obadiah.  His  name  is  all  that  we  learn  from  him 
about  himself.  But  with  no  one  in  the  high  and  holy  company  have  expositors 
busied  themselves  more  anxiously.  Some  have  hoped  that  he  might  prove  to 
have  been  the  godly  chamberlain  of  Ahab  in  the  time  of  EUjah,  who  shielded  so 
many  of  the  servants  of  Jehovah  from  the  wrath  of  the  wicked  king  (1  Kings  xviiL 
3-16) ;  and  others  have  identified  him  with  the  teacher  whom  Jehoshaphat  sent 
to  instruct  the  cities  of  Judah  in  Divine  things  (2  Chron.  xvii.  7) ;  and  others  still 
have  fancied  that  he  might  be  the  overseer  who  was  appointed  to  superintend  the 
restoration  of  the  temple  in  the  days  of  the  good  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  12).  These 
all  bore  the  same  title  ;  might  not  one  of  them,  it  has  been  suggested,  be  the  speaker 
of  this  prophecy  T    None  of  them  suits  exactly  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

I.  Perhaps,  however,  we  may  gleam  a  little  about  his  iniibb  cjhabaotbb  and 
HIS  OUTBR  HISTORY  from  the  prophecy  itself.  He  was  a  man  of  genuine  and  deep 
piety.  He  records  only  his  name,  before  he  passes  on  to  tell  out  the  message  which 
has  been  intrusted  to  him.  But  that  name  is  a  very  significant  one,  and  one  which 
was  much  loved  by  Old  Testament  believers.  Obadiah  means  ' '  the  servant  of 
Jehovah,"  or  "  the  worshipper  of  the  Lord."  When  Obadiah  makes  known  to 
us  his  name  and  stops  short  there,  it  is  as  if  he  said,  "  I  do  not  care  to  disclose 
anything  fvirther  ;  I  am  content  and  glad  to  be  thought  of  simply  as  one  of  God's 
true  worshippers ;  that  is  the  only  honoiur  which  I  covet,  the  sole  crown  which 
I  can  consent  to  wear. ' '  We  may  rest  confident  that  his  was  a  very  thorough 
and  a  very  unaffected  piety.  Unquestionably,  too,  he  was  a  man  of  fervid  patriot- 
ism. The  love  which  he  cherished  for  his  country  went  hand  in  hand  with  the 
love  which  he  cherished  for  his  God.  He  lived  in  a  dark  and  distressing  time. 
Judah  and  Jerusalem  were  passing  through  deep  floods  of  trial.  Powerful  enemies 
had  come  against  them ;  and  in  the  day  of  their  calamity  those  to  whom  they 
might  have  looked  for  help — whom  they  expected  at  least  to  refrain  from  adding 
to  their  sorrow  and  shame — had  acted  the  unkindest  and  most  cruel  part.  Lover 
and  acquaintance  and  friend  had  turned  against  them  in  the  bom:  of  need  ;  their 
bitterest  foes  had  been  men  who  were  closely  allied  with  themselves  by  blood  and 
kinship  ;  where  they  ought  to  have  found  succour — or  if  not  active  succour,  then 
certainly  neutrality  and  non-interference — they  had  discovered  hatred  and  malice 
and  blood-thirstiness.  They  were  gloomy  and  terrible  days  for  Judah,  and  Obad- 
iah's  heart  was  sore  pained  within  him  as  he  looked  on  and  saw  the  violence  which 

iU 


INTRODUCTION  TO  OBADIAH. 


prevailed.  The  present  miseries  of  Jerusalem,  and  its  ultimate  greatness ;  the 
present  triumph  of  its  adversaries,  and  their  ultimate  overthrow — these  are  his 
only  themes.  ' '  Upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance, ' '  he  says,  ' '  and  there 
shall  be  holiness ;  and  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  possessions. ' '  It 
is  his  country  first  and  last,  and  midst  and  without  end.  He  prefers  Jerusalem 
above  his  chiefest  joy.  And  so  this  book  helps  us  to  understand  the  truth  which 
other  parts  of  the  Bible  confirm,  that  the  love  of  one's  native  land  is  a  feeling  not 
only  deeply  rooted  in  our  human  nature,  but  acknowledged  and  commended  by 
God.  True  patriotism  and  true  religion  go  together ;  and  men  are  not  likely  to 
love  their  heavenly  King  less  strongly,  or  to  care  for  the  wide  world  less  ardently, 
because  they  feel  a  great  and  masterful  regard  for  the  country  whose  sons  they  are. 
It  only  remains  to  be  said  about  Obadiah  himself — what  has  been  hinted  at  already 
— that  probably  he  spoke  of  what  his  own  eyes  had  looked  upon,  of  sufferings  and 
indignities  which  he  had  witnessed  and  experienced.  It  is  not  likely  that  the 
wrongs  under  which  he  beheld  his  country  labouring  were  all  in  the  future,  and 
were  presented  to  him  only  in  picture  and  imagination.  We  may  believe  that 
the  iron  had  entered  his  soul.  He  testified  what  he  had  seen.  It  may  be  that 
he  was  one  of  the  many  inhabitants  of  Judah  who  fled  before  the  inroads  of  their 
enemies,  and  were  scattered  homeless  and  forlorn  through  the  cities  of  Palestine 
and  Phoenicia.^  Of  this  we  need  feel  little  doubt,  that  the  miseries  and  results  he 
depicted  were  not  remote  from  him,  but  were  to  be  found  in  his  own  time  and 
about  his  very  doors.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  his  heart  his  mouth  spoke.  With 
this  portrait  of  the  man — a  portrait  which  is  not  destitute  of  attractiveness,  although 
it  is  so  shadowy  and  vague — we  must  rest  content. 

II.  It  may  increase  our  understanding  of  the  book,  even  if  it  do  not  make  us 
better  acquainted  with  its  author,  to  pass  now  to  the  consideration  of  its  date. 
At  what  time  in  the  history  of  Judah  was  it  written  ?  The  question  has  received 
many  different  answers.  Putting  aside  many  of  the  ideas  which  have  been  broached, 
for  the  Book  of  Obadiah  has  been  pronounced  at  once  the  earliest  and  the  latest  of 
the  prophetic  writings,  we  are  left  with  two  distinct  periods,  at  either  of  which 
it  might  have  been  composed.  One  of  them  is  the  reign  of  Jehoram,  the  son  of 
Jehosnaphat — a  brief  and  inglorious  reign.  During  it  the  Philistines  and  the 
Arabians,  joining  their  forces,  made  an  incursion  into  Judea  (2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  17). 
They  captured  Jerusalem,  and  slew  most  of  the  royal  family,  and  retreated  to 
their  homes  laden  with  spoil.  This  might  be  the  sacking  of  the  city,  it  has  been 
said,  which  the  prophet  paints.  This  might  be  the  occasion  when  Edom  took 
that  malicious  pleasure  in  the  downfall  of  his  brother  Jacob,  which  Obadiah  casti- 
gates and  condemns  in  those  sharp  and  stern  sentences  of  his.  If  that  were  so, 
he  would  be  the  very  first  in  the  order  of  time  among  Grod's  seers  and  messengers, 
the  predecessor  of  Joel  by  some  twenty  years,  and  of  Amos  and  Hosea  by  more 
than  seventy.  But  it  is  scarcely  likely  that  this  is  the  true  date.  An  invasion 
of  freebooters  like  those  Arabs  of  Jehoram 's  day  would  not  involve  so  complete 
and  methodical  a  subjugation  of  the  Jews  as  the  prophet  describes.  They  came 
for  plunder,  and  they  would  retire  as  soon  as  they  had  secured  it.  They  had  no 
wish — probably  they  had  not  the  power — to  make  an  entire  conquest  of  the  land 
and  the  people.  It  was  a  sadder,  larger,  more  devastating  calamity  which  Obadiah 
had  in  view.  And  therefore  the  other  period  which  has  been  fixed  upon  by  many 
students  of  the  book  seems  to  be  the  more  suitable — the  period  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's capture  and  destruction  of  the  Holy  City,  the  dark  and  dreary  days  when 
the  Chaldean  was  in  the  land.  We  may  reckon  it  probable  that  Obadiah  saw  the 
irresistible  advance  and  the  too  complete  success  of  the  Babylonian  army — saw 
his  country  lying  abject  and  bleeding  at  the  feet  of  the  conqueror — saw  the  begin- 
nings of  the  long  exile.  And  that  inexcusable  glorying  of  the  Edomites  over  the 
shame  and  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  which  roused  his  indignation  more  than  anything 
else,  may  well  have  been  one  feature  of  so  sorrowful  a  time.  Indeed,  it  must  have 
been  so ;  for  although  the  historical  books  make  no  mention  of  it,  one  allusion 
after  another  to  this  bitterest  ingredient  in  the  cup  of  Zion's  humiliation  and  distress 
is  to  be  found  in  the  prophets.  In  their  pages  the  cry  for  vengeance  on  Edom 
is  heard  again  and  again.     Everything  points  to  the  conclusion,  as  most  deserving 

1  It  is  suggested  in  The  Speaker's  Commentary  that  the  word  "  this  "  in  verse  20 
indicates  the  body  of  exiles  to  which  Obadiah  himself  belonged,  and  of  which  he 
formed  one. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  OBADIAH. 


of  belief,  that  Obadiah's  work  as  a  prophet  was  performed  in  that  woeful  year — 
588  B.C. — when  God's  city  fell  a  prey  to  the  soldiers  of  Chaldea  and  the  brigands 
of  Mount  Seir.  It  does  not  really  tell  against  this  conclusion  that  Jeremiah,  who 
was  an  eye-witness  also  of  these  heart-breaking  scenes,  borrows  in  one  passage 
some  of  the  expressions  of  Obadiah,  as  though  be  were  quoting  from  one  who  had 
long  preceded  him.  For  the  brief  and  keen  denunciations  of  our  prophet  may 
have  been  poured  forth  during  the  very  days  in  which  the  wrongs  that  kindled 
his  anger  were  being  done  ;  he  may  have  spoken  out  of  the  midst  of  this  furnace 
heated  seven  times ;  and  then  his  greater  contemporary  may  have  taken  up  and 
elaborated  his  words  shortly  afterwards,  when  the  acuteness  of  the  pain  had  passed 
in  some  measure,  but  while  the  memory  of  the  sharp  anguish — the  sorrow  even 
unto  death — was  still  fresh  and  clear.  Following  immediately  in  the  footsteps 
of  Obadiah,  the  weeping  prophet  caught  and  echoed  the  notes  which  his  less  famous 
brother  had  sounded  out  with  such  resolution  and  vigour.  ^ 

III.  Let  us  think  now,  a  little  more  particularly,  of  the  contents  of  his  pro- 
phecy. It  presents  two  pictures  to  our  gaze,  the  one  dark  and  terrible  to  see,  the 
other  bright  and  beautiful  in  the  extreme.  The  dark  picture  is  that  of  the  sin 
and  destruction  of  Edom.  Edom  felt  no  fear,  the  prophet  says,  and  anticipated 
no  doom.  Its  people  were  proud  and  confident  and  imdreaming  of  disaster.  They 
relied  partly  on  the  inaccessible  position  and  the  impregnable  strength  of  their 
capital  Petra,  the  famous  rock-city  high  up  among  the  cliffs,  the  town  which  was 
one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world,  excavated  as  it  was  out  of  the  mountain- side. 
Had  they  not  exalted  themselves  as  the  eagle  ?  they  exclaimed  in  triumph.  Had 
they  not  made  their  nest  among  the  stars  ?  Did  they  not  live  in  "  a  peaceable 
habitation,  and  a  sure  dwelling,  and  a  quiet  resting-place  " — Uve  "  on  the  hills, 
like  gods  together,  careless  of  mankind  ' '  ?  And  they  leaned,  too,  on  the  wisdom 
of  their  sages  and  teachers — a  wisdom,  the  report  of  which  had  gone  out  far  and 
near.  ' '  The  mount  of  Esau, ' '  with  its  curious  and  stable  rock- houses,  was  known 
to  be  the  home  of  ' '  understanding. ' '  If  danger  were  to  arise — if  the  improbable 
should  happen,  and  days  of  trouble  dawn  for  Petra  and  its  citizens — the  ominous 
and  threatening  cloud  would  hang  over  it  only  for  a  little  ;  the  enemy  would  soon 
be  compelled  to  depart ;  the  skill  of  the  wise  men  of  Teman — men  like  Eliphaz,  the 
leader  of  Job's  friends — would  not  be  long  in  devising  a  way  of  escape  from  defeat 
and  disgrace,  a  safe  and  sure  path  to  victory  and  honour  and  peace.  So  Edom  dwelt 
secure,  dreading  no  peril,  imagining  that  to-morrow  would  be  as  this  day,  and  much 
more  abundant.  But  it  was  the  mission  of  Obadiah  to  foretell  the  entire  ruin 
and  desolation  of  the  haughty  empire.  God  was  to  bring  it  down,  he  declared, 
from  its  home  among  the  munitions  of  rocks.  He  was  to  baffle  all  its  advisers, 
and  to  make  their  prudence  and  resource  of  no  account.  There  was  a  reason  for 
a  doom  so  fearful — an  ample  reason.  Edom  deserved  to  the  full  all  that  it  was 
by  and  by  to  receive.  Obadiah  details  its  sin  in  strong  and  burning  words.  He 
sees  Jerusalem  sacked  by  the  heathen  king,  his  own  home  spoiled  and  laid  in  the 
dust,  the  house  of  his  God  destroyed.  Strangers  carry  away  captive  the  young 
and  the  old  ;  foreigners  enter  the  gates  and  tread  the  streets  of  the  city  dear  to 
his  heart.  And  there,  not  only  refusing  to  help,  but  triumphing  with  malicious 
joy,  uttering  words  of  scornful  contempt,  doing  deeds  of  robbery  and  violence, 
were  the  Edomites.  The  prophet  gives  a  vivid  narrative  of  their  cruelty  and 
unbrotherliness  ;  his  eye  could  hardly  turn  away  from  the  contemplation  of  the 
strange  and  piteous  sight.  He  beholds  them  rejoicing  in  the  gate  of  Jerusalem, 
and  intercepting  the  escape  of  those  who  would  have  fled  down  to  the  Jordan 
valley,  and  betraying  the  fugitives  to  the  Babylonian  conqueror.  These  are  the 
things  which  make  the  cry  for  vengeance  break  from  his  heart — vengeance  on  the 
false  kindred  who  had  become  the  proud  oppressors  of  his  race.  Edom  was  con- 
quered soon  afterwards  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  whom  it  had  helped  to  destroy  Jeru- 
salem ;  the  inhabitants  of  Petra  were  expelled  from  the  clefts  of  the  rock  ;  and  a 
colony  from  Chaldea  took  their  place.  And,  further  on  in  the  stream  of  history, 
the  Jews  themselves  were  permitted  to  triumph  over  their  former  enemies.  Judas 
Maccabseus  attacked  and  defeated  the  Edomites  who  had  settled  in  the  towns  of 

^  The  passage  in  Jer.  xlix.  7-22,  which  is  full  of  resemblances  to  Obadiah. 
I  take  for  granted  that  Jeremiah  was  the  borrower,  and  not  Obadiah,  because  his 
verses  are  so  much  more  elaborate  and  beaten  out  than  those  of  the  shorter 
prophecy. 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  OBADIAR. 

Southern  Palestine  after  Petra  was  wrested  from  them.  He  recovered  the  cities 
which  they  had  taken  away.  He  drove  them  forth  homeless  and  helpless,  as  they 
had  done  to  their  kinsfolk  four  centuries  before.  So  sin  finds  the  sinner  out,  even 
after  many  days.  But  Obadiah's  second  picture  is  a  bright  and  pleasing  one.  It 
is  the  pictxu*  of  the  restoration  of  Israel.  Grod's  banished,  the  prophet  saw,  were 
to  regain  their  former  possessions,  and  to  overcome  their  ancient  foes,  and  to 
spread  abroad  in  all  directions.  They  were  to  prosper  and  advance,  until  the 
grand  consummation — "  the  far-off  Divine  event  "  to  which  the  whole  creation 
moves — ^was  reached,  and  the  empire  of  God  was  set  up  over  the  entire  earth. 
"  The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's  " — ^that  is  Obadiah's  last  word.  (Original 
Seeeesion  Magazine.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

OBADIAH. 

Ver.  1.  The  Tlsion  of  Obadiah.— T^e  Divine  purpose  in  relation  to 
humanity  : — A  voice  thundering  at  midnight  is  the  voice  of  Obadiah.  It  was 
the  voice  of  a  stranger.  His  age,  his  country,  his  parents,  his  cradle,  his  grave, 
are  all  unknown.  Yet  his  was  a  prophet's  voice, — deep  as  the  boom  of  thunder, 
and  penetrating  as  the  lightning  it  fell  upon  the  fortressed  host  of  Idumea, 
and  destruction  was  in  every  shivering  note.  He  had  been  standing  on  some 
high  pinnacle,  on  which  he  heard  a  "  rumour  from  the  Lord,"  and  with  the  fidelity 
of  incorruptible  righteousness  he  breathed  that  fiery  rumour  across  the  doomed 
nation, — the  sword  was  bared  against  Edom,  and  whoso  sought  to  turn  it  aside 
was  cleft  by  the  gleaming  blade.  The  prophecy  is  short  but  terrible  in  its  ful- 
ness. It  is  a  single  shout,  but  the  cry  rends  the  rocks  of  Edom.  The  Edomites 
were  famed  for  sagacity,  prudence,  and  general  mental  skill,  but  God  here  comes 
forth  (ver.  8)  as  the  monarch  of  mind,  and  says  He  will  destroy  their  wisdom 
and  understanding.  The  high  priests  of  wisdom  come  together  to  take  counsel 
against  the  Ix)rd,  and  the  Lord  blows  upon  their  brain,  and  their  coimsels  are 
confounded  ;  the  Lord  touches  their  tongue,  and  they  babble  the  jargon  of  insanity. 
Looking  at  this  vision  as  affording  a  glimpse  of  Divine  purpose  in  relation  to 
humanity,  we  may  take  our  stand  on  two  distinct  facts.  I.  Divine  superin- 
tendence of  human  history.  He  is  a  shallow  historian  who  records  only  the 
undulations  of  the  social,  political,  and  ecclesiastical  smrface.  As  a  student  of 
the  universe,  I  wish  to  know  not  only  the  stupendous,  palpable  existences— 
the  sun,  moon,  stars,  seas,  moimtains, — but  I  wish  to  know  their  birth-forces. 
He  who  takes  me  to  the  earliest  germ  of  national  life  is  to  me  the  true  historian ; 
but  he  who  finds  that  earliest  germ  in  anything  short  of  Divine  volition  is  unfit 
to  guide  me  through  the  black  ravines,  or  the  temple  corridors,  or  the  mountain 
grandeiirs  of  the  world's  entrancing  story.  In  all  Bible  history  we  find  God 
upon  the  circle.  2.  Divine  sanctification  of  human  history.  This  vision  of 
Obadiah  is  summed  up  in  words  which  might  well  form  the  concluding  sentence 
of  the  history  of  the  whole  world.  These  words  are :  "  And  the  kingdom  shall 
be  the  Lord's."  As  we  look  at  this  as  the  ultimate  object  of  Divine  govern- 
ment we  see  that  a  great  sanctifying  process  is  in  reality  continually  operating 
in  human  history.  God  is  working  in  the  midst  of  her  moral  gloom,  and  He 
will  work  until  the  last  shadow  has  for  ever  departed.  We  see  but  a  scattered 
and  struggling  light ;  we  hear  but  a  voice  here  and  there ;  we  wonder  how  the 
heavens  can  become  flooded  with  splendour,  and  how  the  air  can  be  filled  with 
one  glad  and  undying  song  ;  and  we  should  despair  could  we  not  lay  our  trembling 
hand  upon  the  recorded  oath  of  Omnipotence,  and  see  in  the  van  the  "  dyed 
garments,"  and  hear  at  midnight  the  war-shout  of  Immanuel.  This  leads  u8 
to  the  inspiring  truth,  that  all  our  hopes  are  founded  in  Jesus,  and  all  our  energies 
sustained  by  the  mighty  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  tragedy  of  Edom  : — In  later  times  Edom  came  to  be  the  supreme  antipathy 
and  the  typical  enemy  of  Jewry.  So  when  the  actual  Edomites  ceased  to  be, 
the  name  was  transferred,  first  to  tyrant  Rome,  and  then  to  persecuting  Christen- 
dom, and  the  impassioned  words  of  Obadiah  became  a  favourite  vehicle  for  the 
expression  of  the  national  and  religious  hatred.  That  is  a  misunderstanding 
and  a  misuse  of  the  book.     The  prophecy  is,  indeed,  instigated  by  indignation 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

against  Edom,  and  the  retributive  destruction  of  that  people  is  its  theme.  But 
the  subject  is  worked  out  in  a  large  fashion  that  precludes  the  suspicion  of  petty 
vengefulness,  and  justifies  the  book's  place  in  the  record  of  revelation.  The 
motive  is  not  the  gratification  of  national  spite,  nor  is  the  aim  to  either  warn 
or  edify  the  Edomites.  The  seer  speaks  out  of  the  need  of  his  own  heart,  and 
to  the  hearts  of  the  people.  What  creates  his  vision  and  compels  his  utterance 
is  an  indestructible  sense  of  the  eternal  justice  and  fidelity,  and  of  the  Divine 
destiny  of  Israel  in  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  The  tragedy 
of  Edom  is  but  a  part  in  the  great  drama.  It  is  therefore  presented  on  a  vast 
stage,  and  has  the  world's  history  for  its  background.  Very  real  and  concrete 
to  the  prophet,  no  doubt,  are  the  antagonisms  of  Israel,  and  his  enemies, 
but  none  the  less  really  and  consciously,,  even  if  in  a  fashion  grand  beyond  his 
conceptions,  it  is  the  collision  of  universal  forces  and  everlasting  principles 
that  is  embodied  in  them.  Limited  and  material  the  presentment  of  those  issues 
may  be,  but  they  carry  in  their  bosom  the  consummation  of  the  ages.  Within 
the  rivalry  of  Edom  and  Israel  there  was  wrapped  the  eternal  antithesis  of  truth 
and  falsehood,  good  and  evil ;  and  the  vision  of  an  earthly  kingdom  on  Mount 
Zion  is  finding  its  fulfilment  in  the  silent,  slow,  but  sure  advent  of  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  of  our  Christ.  {W.  8.  Elmslie,  D.D.)  God  and  bad  men  : — I.  That 
God  makes  a  revelation  conceening  bad  men.  Here  is  a  revelation  con- 
cerning Edom,  the  enemy  of  God  and  His  people.  Isaac  had  two  sons  by  Rebecca, 
Esau  and  Jacob  ;  Esau  was  called  Edom,  because  he  robbed  his  brother  of  his 
birthright  (Gen.  xxv.).  1.  The  forms  of  the  revelation.  (1)  As  a  vision.  "  The 
vision  of  Obadiah."  The  prophet  was  a  seer.  The  Eternal  revealed  Himself 
to  the  eyes  of  his  souL  He  who  would  be  a  true  minister  of  God  must  see  the 
thing  before  he  speaks  it — "  That  which  we  have  seen  and  handled,"  man  has 
a  faculty  for  seeing  the  invisible.  (2)  As  a  report.  "  We  have  heard  a  rumour 
from  the  Lord."  He  heard  as  well  as  saw.  The  soul  has  ears  to  catch  the  echoes 
of  eternal  thought.  2.  The  character  of  this  revelation,  a  message.  "  An 
ambassador  is  sent  among  the  heathen."  God  sends  His  messages  to  the  nations 
in  many  ways  and  by  many  agents.  3.  The  subject  of  the  revelation.  "  Arise 
ye,  and  let  us  rise  up  against  her  in  battle."  The  object  of  the  message  was 
to  stir  up  the  Assyrians  and  afterwards  the  Chaldeans  against  Edom.  But  our 
proposition  is,  that  God  makes  a  revelation  concerning  bad  men  ;  and  the  subject 
of  that  revelation  embraces  at  least  two  things.  (1)  That  their  sins  will  ruin 
them.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  (2)  That  evangelical  repentance  will  save 
them.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  &c.  II.  That  God  punishes  bad 
MEN  BY  bad  men.  He  now  sent  a  messenger  amongst  the  nations, — what  for  ? 
To  stir  up  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldeans — both  bad  people — to  wreak  vengeance 
on  corrupt  Edom.  Why  does  He  employ  bad  men  for  this  awful  work  of  retri- 
bution ?  1.  He  reveals  in  the  most  powerful  way  to  the  victim  the  enormity 
of  his  sin.  2.  He  reveals  His  own  absolute  power  over  the  workings  of  the  human 
heart.  Thus  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  Him,"  &c.  (HomUist.) 
Call  to  the  batUe  against  Edom : — The  stream  of  prophecy  may  be  compared  to 
the  stream  of  a  river.  At  its  fountain  it  is  inconsiderable,  and  reveals  none 
of  its  future  greatness.  There  is  nothing  in  Scripture  more  clearly  revealed 
than  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  religion  we  profess.  1.  What  persons  were 
originally  represented  by  "  Edom,"  and  the  cause  of  the  Lord's  enmity  against 
this  1  eople.  The  Edomites  were  the  descendants  of  Esau,  who  sold  his  birth- 
right for  a  momentary  gratification.  The  Edomites  seem  to  have  assisted  the 
Chaldeans  in  their  work  of  devastating  Jerusalem,  and  to  have  instigated  their 
utmost  fury  against  Israel,  the  chosen  of  God.  2.  What  is  to  be  imderstood  by 
"  the  heathen  " — showing  that  we  are  called  upon  to  rise  up  against  Edom, 
and  that  we  have  nationally  responded  to  that  call.  3.  To  adduce  some  reasons 
that  we  should  continue  to  propagate  the  Gospel,  notwithstanding  the  objections 
which  are  urged  against  that  duty.  4.  Make  the  inquiry  of  each  individual — 
To  which  of  the  two  parties  will  you  join  yourself  ?  Shall  it  be  Edom  or  Israel? 
Shall  it  be  Baal  or  Christ  ?     (G.  C.  Tomlinson.) 

Vers.   3-5.  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee. — Pride : — I.  That 

THE     most     DESPICABLE     PEOPLE     ARE     OFTEN     THE     MOST     DISPOSED     TO     PKIDE. 

Edom  is  described  as  "  greatly  despised."  Small  and  disdainable  as  they  were, 
they  were  nevertheless  proud.  Men  of  great  intellect  and  lofty  genius  are 
characteristically  humble.     An  old  writer  has  observed  that  "  where  the  river 


OBADIAH.  3 

is  the  deepest  the  water  glides  the  smoothest.  Empty  casks  sound  most ;  whereas 
the  well-fraught  vessel  silences  its  own  sound.  As  the  shadow  of  the  sun  is  largest 
when  its  beams  are  lowest ;  so  we  are  always  least  when  we  make  ourselves  the 
greatest."  II.  That  peidb  evebmobb  disposes  to  self-deception  and  pbe- 
SUMPTION.  1.  To  self-deception.  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived 
thee."  Pride  is  a  wonderful  artist:  it  magnifies  the  small,  it  beautifies  the  ugly, 
it  honovurs  the  ignoble,  it  makes  the  truly  little,  ugly,  contemptible  man  appear 
large,  handsome,  dignified  in  his  own  eyes.  2.  To  presumption.  "  Thou  that 
dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  whose  habitation  is  high ;  that  saith  in  his 
heart.  Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground  ?  "  The  Edomites  are  here 
taunted  with  the  confidence  that  they  placed  in  their  lofty  and  precipitous 
mountain,  and  the  insolence  with  which  they  scouted  any  attempt  to  subdue 
them.  A  proud  man  always  presumes  on  strength,  reputation,  and  resources 
which  he  ha;S  not.  Ah  !  self-deception  and  presumption  are  the  twin  offspring 
of  pride.  III.  That  the  most  stbentjous  efforts  to  avoid  punishment  dub 
TO  PBiDB  will  pbove  FUTILE.  Two  things  are  taught  here  concerning  its  punish- 
ment— 1.  Its  certainty.  "  Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as  the  eagle,"  &c.  If, 
like  the  eagle,  they  towered  high  up  into  the  air,  far  up  among  the  clouds,  nestled 
among  the  stars,  and  made  the  clouds  their  footstool,  the  fowler  of  retribution 
would  bring  them  down.  All  attempts  on  behalf  of  the  impenitent  sinner  to 
avoid  punishment  must  fail  when  the  day  for  justice  to  do  its  work  has  come. 
2.  Its  completeness.  "  If  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  by  night  (how  art 
thou  cut  off  !),  would  they  not  have  stolen  till  they  had  enough  ?  if  the  grape- 
gatherers  came  to  thee,  would  they  not  leave  some  grapes  ?  "  The  spoliation 
which  thou  shalt  suffer  shall  not  be  such  as  that  which  thieves  cause,  bad  as 
that  is ;  for  these,  when  they  have  seized  enough,  or  all  they  can  get  in  a  hurry, 
leave  the  rest ;  but  it  shall  be  utter,  so  as  to  leave  thee  nothing.  Beware,  then, 
of  pride.  (Homilist.)  Pride  of  Heart  .•—The  prophet,  having  predicted  in 
the  former  verses  that  God  would  accomplish  the  destruction  of  Edom  by  hostile 
nations,  now  intimates  that  their  natural  situation  of  strength  shall  afford  them 
no  protection.  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  troops  whereby  to  subdue  those  whose 
dwelling  is  in  the  high  rocks.  I.  Pride  of  heart  is  deceptive.  The  inhabitants 
of  Edom  imagined  that  they  were  perfectly  secure  in  their  elevated  habitation 
of  rocks.  In  this  they  were  deceived.  1.  Pride  of  heart  deceives  men  in  the 
commercial  sphere  of  life.  There  are  godless  merchants  in  the  world  who  are 
deceived  by  the  pride  of  their  heart.  2.  Pride  of  heart  deceives  men  in  reference 
to  their  intellectual  thinkings.  3.  In  reference  to  their  moral  safety.  Their 
rocky  places  are  no  refuge  against  the  retributive  providence  of  God.  II.  Peidb 
OF  heart  is  presumptuous.  1.  It  presumes  unduly  upon  the  natural,  temporal, 
and  secondary  advantages  it  may  possess.  2.  It  presumes  ignorantly,  without 
taking  into  view  the  access  which  God  has  to  men,  notwithstanding  their  temporal 
fortifications.  3.  It  presumes  unwarrantably  upon  the  inability  of  men  to  achieve 
its  ruin.  III.  Pride  of  heart  is  destructive.  "  I  will  bring  thee  down," 
saith  the  Lord.  Men  may  make  lawful  things  the  subject  of  unlawful  boasting. 
1.  Such  men  are  often  brought  to  humiliation  by  commercial  failure.  2.  By 
social  slemder.  3.  By  death.  Their  destruction  is  certain,  lamentable,  humiliate 
ing,  unexpected,  irreparable.     (The  Pvlfit.) 

Vers.  6-9.  How  are  the  things  of  Esau  searched  out! — Hidden  things 
searched  out : — All  that  any  test  or  trial  can  do  is  to  show  what  was  in  us 
already.  In  many  places  of  the  East  there  is  the  horrible  disease  called 
leprosy.  When  a  man  is  feeling  ill  they  have  a  curious  way  of  discovering 
whether  he  has  leprosy  or  not.  They  light  a  candle  and  put  salt  on  the  wick, 
and  the  face  of  every  one  who  has  not  leprosy  is  white  or  pale,  but  if  leprosy  is 
in  any  one's  blood,  crimson  spots  appear  on  his  face.  The  same  thing  can  be 
done  by  the  camera ;  a  photograph  wiU  reveal  the  spots  when  the  natural  eye 
cannot  see  them.  You  sometimes  do  what,  a  moment  before,  you  never  thought 
you  possibly  could  have  done,  and  mother  says  she  could  not  have  believed 
it  of  you  ;  yet  it  has  been  done.  How's  that  ?  Simply  because  it  was  in  your 
heart  before,  and  only  wanted  the  opportunity  to  come  out.  (J.  Reid  Howatt.) 
God  in  retribution  : — Man's  sin  is,  that  he  puts  his  confidence  on  objects  unworthy 
and  unsafe.  The  Edomites  trusted  to  the  insecure.  I.  Did  they  trust  to 
their  material  defences  ?  These  are  worthless.  The  cities  of  Edom  con- 
sisted of  houses  mostly  cut  in  the  rocks.     Nations  may  trust  to  their  material 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.     ^ 


defences,  their  armies,  navies,  fortifications  ;  but  they  are  as  stubble  to  the  raging 
fire  when  justice  begins  its  work.  Individuals  may  trust  to  their  wealth,  to 
material  science  and  medical  skill,  to  preserve  their  bodily  lives  ;  but  when  justice 
sends  forth  its  emissary — death,  what  are  these  defences  ?  Nothing ;  less  than 
nothing,  vanity.  II.  Did  they  trust  to  their  pledged  confedbeates  :  these 
were  worthless.  "  All  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought  thee  even  to 
the  borders,"  &c.  Those  confederates  were  probably  Moab,  Ammon,  Tyre, 
and  Sidon,  with  whom  the  Edomites  joined  in  resisting  Nebuchadnezzar ;  but 
these  failed  them,  probably  turned  against  them  :  and  even  their  friends  who 
were  at  peace  with  them  and  ate  their  bread  deceived  them  in  their  hour  of  trial. 
"  To  no  quarter  could  the  Idumeans  look  for  aid.  Their  allies,  their  neighbours, 
their  very  dependants,  so  far  from  assisting  them,  would  act  treacherously  towso-ds 
them,  and  employ  every  means  both  of  an  open  and  covert  nature  to  effect  their 
ruin."  How  often  it  happens  that,  when  men  get  into  adverse  circumstances, 
their  old  allies,  professed  friends,  those  who  have  often  partaken  of  their  hos- 
pitality, not  only  fail  them  but  turn  against  them.  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  man  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm."  III.  Did  they  trust  to  the  wisdom 
OF  THEIR  GREAT  MEN ;  this  was  worthless.  "  Shall  I  not  in  that  day,  saith  the 
Lord,  even  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom,  and  understanding  out  of  the 
mount  of  Esau  ?  "  "  The  Idumeans  confided  not  only  in  the  natural  strength 
of  their  country,  but  in  the  superiority  of  their  intellectual  talent.  That  they 
excelled  in  the  arts  and  sciences  is  abundantly  proved  by  the  numerous  traces 
of  them  in  the  Book  of  Job,  which  was  undoubtedly  written  in  their  country. 
They  were  indeed  proverbial  for  their  philosophy,  for  the  cultivation  of  which 
their  intercourse  with  Babylon  and  Egypt  was  exceedingly  favourable,  as  were 
likewise  their  means  of  acquiring  information  from  the  numerous  caravans  whose 
route  lay  through  their  country,  thus  forming  a  chain  of  communication  between 
Europe  and  India." — Henderson.  Yet  what  is  the  wisdom  of  man  to  trust  in  ? 
"  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness."  IV.  Did  they  trust  to  the  power 
of  their  mighty  men  :  this  was  worthless.  "  And  thy  mighty  men,  O  Teman, 
shall  be  dismayed  to  the  end  that  every  one  of  the  mount  of  Esau  may  be  cut 
off  by  slaughter."  Dehtzsch  renders  this,  "  And  thy  heroes  despair,  O  Teman." 
Teman  was  the  proper  name  of  the  southern  portion  of  Idumea,  called  so  after 
Tema,  a  grandson  of  Esau.  Men  trust  in  their  heroes.  A  false  confidence  this 
also  !  Grod,  by  a  breath  of  pestilence,  can  wither  all  the  armies  of  Europe  in 
an  instant.  Men  who  trust  in  anything  short  of  God  are  hke  the  man  who  in 
a  thunderstorm  takes  shelter  under  a  tree,  whose  tall  branches  attract  the 
lightning  which  scorches  him  to  ashes.     (Homilist. ) 

Ver.  8.  Shall  I  not  in  that  day  .  .  .  even  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom. — 

Pride  in  our  wisdom  : — But  we  are  warned  by  these  words  that  if  we  excel  in 
understanding  we  are  not  to  abuse  this  singular  gift  of  Grod,  as  we  see  the  case 
to  be  with  the  ungodly,  who  turn  to  cunning  whatever  wisdom  the  Lord  has 
bestowed  on  them.  There  is  hardly  one  in  a  hundred  to  be  found  who  does 
not  seek  to  be  crafty  and  deceitful  if  he  excels  in  understanding.  This  is  a  very 
wretched  thing.  What  a  great  treasure  is  wisdom  !  Yet  we  see  that  the  world 
perverts  this  excellent  gift  of  God  ;  the  more  reason  there  is  for  us  to  labour, 
that  our  wisdom  should  be  foimd  in  true  simphcity.  This  is  one  thing.  Then 
we  must  also  beware  of  trusting  in  our  own  miderstanding,  and  of  despising  our 
enemies,  and  of  thinking  that  we  can  ward  off  any  evil  that  may  impend  over 
us  ;  but  let  us  ever  seek  from  the  Lord,  that  we  may  be  favoured  at  all  times 
with  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  that  it  may  guide  us  to  the  end  of  life  :  for  He  can  at 
any  moment  take  from  us  whatever  He  has  given  us,  and  thus  expose  us  to 
shame  and  reproach.     {John  Calvin.) 

Vers.    10-14.     For    thy    violence    against    thy    brother    Jacob. —  An    old 

sin : — In  two  aspects.  I.  Working  in  the  history  of  posterity.  "  For 
thy  violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob."  The  spirit  of  envy  that  was  kindled 
in  the  heart  of  Esau  towards  his  brother  Jacob  glowed  and  flamed  with  more 
or  less  intensity  for  ages  in  the  soul  of  Edom  towards  the  descendants  of  Jacob. 
It  was  shown  in  the  unbrotherly  refusal  of  the  request  of  Moses  to  allow  the 
children  of  Israel  to  pass  through  the  land  (Numb.  xx.  14-21).  Edom  continued 
to  be  the  inveterate  foe  of  Israel.  Neither  a  man's  sinful  passion  nor  deed  stops 
with  himself.     Like  a  spring  from  the  mountain,  it  runs  down  posterity,  often 


OBADIAB.  5 

gathering  volume  as  it  proceeds.  No  sinner  liveth  to  himself.  One  man's  sins 
may  vibrate  in  the  soul  of  another  a  thousand  ages  on.  This  fact  should — • 
1.  Impress  us  with  the  awfulness  of  our  existence.  It  is  true  that  in  one  sense 
we  are  little  beings,  occupying  but  a  small  space  in  the  imiverse,  and  soon  pass 
away  and  are  forgotten  ;  still,  there  goes  forth  from  us  an  influence  that  shall 
never  end.  We  throw  seed  into  the  mind  of  the  world  that  will  germinate, 
grow,  and  multiply  indefinitely,  and  yield  harvests  of  misery  or  joy.  This  fact 
should — 2.  Impress  us  with  the  duty  of  every  lover  of  the  universe  to  protest  against 
sin  in  individuals.  A  man  may  say.  What  does  it  matter  to  you  that  I  sin  ? 
My  reply  is.  It  does  matter  to  me  as  a  benevolent  citizen  of  the  imiverse.  Its 
pernicious  influence  on  the  universe  is  inconceivably  great  and  calamitous. 
n.  Here  is  an  old  sin  eepeobated  by  God  in  the  history  of  posterity.  God's 
eye  traced  it  from  Esau  down.  How  does  He  treat  it  ?  He  reprobates  it. 
Delitzsch  renders  the  words,  "  Look  not  at  the  day  of  thy  brother,"  and  regards 
verses  12  to  14  as  a  prohibition  ;  but  we  see  not  the  authority  for  that.  These 
Edomites,  it  would  seem  from  the  words,  did  stand  on  the  other  side  without 
rendering  help  in  the  day  when  the  stranger  entered  Jerusalem ;  they  did  "  rejoice  " 
over  the  children  of  Judah  at  that  period  ;  they  did  "  speak  proudly  "  in  the 
day  of  distress ;  they  did  "  enter  into  the  gate  "  of  God's  people  in  the  "  day 
of  calamity  "  ;  they  did  lay  "  hands  on  their  substance  "  on  that  day ;  they 
did  stand  on  the  "  crossway  "  and  "  cut  "  those  off  "  that  did  escape."  The 
Omniscient  eye  saw  all  this.  The  Jews  appeal  to  Him  for  an  account  of  the 
cruelty  of  these  Edomites.  "  Remember,  O  Lord,  the  children  of  Edom  in  the 
day  of  Jerusalem ;  who  said,  Baze  it,  raze  it,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof  " 
(Psa.  oxzxvii.  7).  For  all  this  God  says  shame  should  come  on  them,  and  shame 
did  come.  It  may  be  asked,  if  it  were  the  envy  of  Esau  that  thus  came  down 
from  age  to  age  in  his  posterity,  and  worked  these  deeds  of  crime,  where  is  the 
justice  of  God  in  reprobating  them  ?  They  only  inherit  the  iniquities  of  their 
fathers.  We  answer — (1)  Sin  is  essentially  abhorrent  to  Jehovah.  It  is  the 
"  abominable  thing  "  which  He  hates.  (2)  The  very  essence  of  sin  is  its  freeness. 
Sin  is  not  a  forced  act ;  no  deed  performed  by  a  man  against  his  will  has  any 
moral  character,  or  can  in  a  moral  sense  be  either  good  or  bad.  The  posterity 
of  Esau  were  not  compelled  to  cherish  and  develop  the  envy  of  their  great  pro- 

fenitor.  Each  one  could  have  quenched  it.  (Homilist.)  Social  cruelty: — 
.  As  A  SIN  AGAINST  THE  CREATOR.  The  truth  of  this  will  appear  from — 1.  The 
constitution  of  the  human  soul.  (1)  The  existence  of  social  love.  (2)  The  in- 
stinctive condemnation  of  cruel  acts.  (3)  Innate  craving  for  social  approbation. 
2.  The  common  relation  of  all  to  God.  He  is  the  Father  of  all  men.  3.  The 
common  interest  of  Christ  in  the  race.  4.  The  universal  teaching  of  the  Bible. 
The  man  who  injures  his  fellow-creature  is  a  rebel  against  the  government  of 
the  universe.  II.  As  perpetuated  against  a  brother  (vers.  10,  II).  Why 
specially  offensive  ?  1.  Because  the  obUgation  to  love  is  stronger.  2.  Because 
the  chief  human  institution  is  outraged.  3.  Because  the  tenderest  human  loves 
are  wounded.  III.  As  working  in  various  forms  from  generation  to  gener- 
ation. 1.  Some  forms  are — (1 )  The  lack  of  sympathy  when  Judah  was  in  distress. 
(2)  Positive  rejoicing  when  Judah  was  in  distress.  (3)  Participation  in  the  work 
of  their  enemies.  2.  Omniscience  observes  it  in  all  its  forms.  God's  eye  was 
on  the  Edomites.  Sin,  in  all  its  operations,  is  evermore  under  the  eye  of  Omni- 
science. If  we  realise  it,  it  will — (1)  Stimulate  to  great  and  spiritual  activity. 
(2)  Restrain  from  the  commission  of  sin.  (3)  Excite  the  desire  for  pardon. 
(4)  Brace  the  soul  in  the  performance  of  duty.  3.  A  just  and  terrible  retribution 
awaits  it  in  all  its  forms.  Retribution  is  a  settled  law  in  the  material  universe. 
{Homilist. )    x 

Vers.  12-15.  But  thon  shouldst  not  have  looked  on  the  day  of  thy  brother. — The 
doom  of  Edom  : — The  commentary  on  this  prophecy  is  supplied  by  every  traveller 
who  has  explored  the  recesses  of  the  mountain  of  Esau.  Every  people  that  has 
the  privileges  of  Edom,  and  like  Edom  abuses  them,  is  without  right  to  expect 
a  more  favourable  issue  from  the  hand  of  God.  The  general  sentiment  implied 
in  this  prophecy  is,  that  a  nation  in  prosperity  abusing  its  advantages  to  the 
injury  of  less  fortunate  peoples,  or  even  neglecting  them  in  their  distress,  incurs 
by  its  conduct  the  displeasure  of  God.  Apply  the  subject — 1.  To  the  rehgious 
character  and  improvement  of  England.  It  is  not  easy  to  form  an  adequate 
conception  of  the  diffusive  and  pervading  influence  of  British  power.     That 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

extraordinary  influence  is  steadily,  continually  increasing ;  England  is  rising  to 
be  the  great  leader  of  public  opinion  among  the  nations.  On  all  great  political, 
commercial,  moral,  social,  and  religious  questions  the  world  is  now  looking  to 
Britain.  Then  we  plead  with  you  on  behalf  of  your  country.  You  are  the  light 
of  your  country,  and  by  making  it  luminous  you  become,  in  it,  the  light  of  the 
world.  2.  To  the  conduct  of  England  towards  such  people  as  have  a  peculiar 
claim  upon  its  regard.  The  Edomites  ought  to  have  assisted,  and  not  oppressed, 
the  Jews.  To  us  the  sister  island  is  surely  as  intimately  related  as  Israel  could 
have  been  to  Edom.  As  to  the  colonies,  little  need  be  said.  As  England  sows, 
BO  shall  it  reap.     (R.  Halley,  M.A. ) 

Vers.  17-20.  But  upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance,  and  there  shall  be 
holiness. — Holiness  on  Mount  Zion  : — The  imagery  of  Scripture  poetry  often 
presents  instructive  truths,  referring  to  more  general  subjects  than  those  on 
which  the  sacred  writer  might,  at  the  particular  time,  be  called  to  dwell.  I.  Regard 
the  text  as  respects  Mount  Zion.  A  grand  Scripture  type.  Not  only  there 
God  was  worshipped,  but  there  God  Himself,  as  the  object  of  worship,  dwelt. 
Conceive  of  God,  accepting  Christ's  atonement, — Christ  standing  as  Mediatorial 
King  on  the  holy  hill, — the  redeemed  from  earth  actually  worshipping  there — 
and,  in  spirit,  all  true  worshippers  coming  to  God  by  Christ.  You  have  thus 
that  state  of  things  of  which  Moimt  Zion,  with  its  temples,  its  glory,  its  services, 
its  worshippers,  was  a  type.  11.  What  shall  bb  there  ?  1.  The  text  says, 
"  deliverance  "  ;  marg.  reads,  "  They  that  escape."  Two'aspects  of  the  same  subject. 
Where  do  they  come  that  flee  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  them  ? 
To  Christ  on  this  Mount  Zion.  They  escape  for  their  lives, — come  to  Him,  and 
He  casts  them  not  out.  They  have  "  deliverance  "  therefore.  Pardon,  spiritual 
freedom,  and  blessedness.  2.  Then  "  there  shall  be  holiness."  An  undoubted 
truth,  the  penitent  sinner,  coming  to  God  in  truth,  by  faith,  for  pardon,  is  made 
holy,  becomes  a  new  creature.  Justification  and  sanctification  thus  connected  ; 
the  favour,  and  the  image  of  God.  Real  holiness  ; — holiness  of  life,  as  well  as 
of  heart ; — growing  holiness.  Nor  is  it  anywhere  else.  They  who  will  not  come 
to  Christ  may  sometimes  have  human  virtue ;  they  cannot  have  Divine  holiness. 
Look  at  this  mount.  Oh,  the  blessedness  of  dwelling  there.  Well  fortified,  well 
supplied.  God  is  there.  You  live  in  peace.  He  is  preparing  you  for  the  higher 
blessings.  There  is  the  heavenly  Zion.  Only  they  pass  to  it  who  on  earth  dwelt 
on  the  spiritual  Zion.  (G.  Cubitt.)  The  Church  delivered,  purified,  and  privi- 
leged : — I.  The  delivebancb  of  the  Church  of  God.  Mount  Zion  signifies 
the  Church,  the  entire  mass  of  those  who  are  given  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  whom  He  has  ransomed  by  His  blood.  It  is  remarkable  that  what  is  ex- 
hibited as  the  liberation  of  the  Church  is  always  conjoined  with  the  destruction 
of  some  opposing  power.  The  fact  is,  that  the  destruction  of  the  opposing  power 
is  the  means  used  for  the  liberating  of  the  Church.  Conquest  in  the  world  is 
triumph  in  the  Church.  Consolation  is  combined  with  liberation.  Deliverance 
is  the  first  and  principal  object  which  presented  itself  to  the  mind  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  His  death  was  a  necessary  step  to  His  resurrection.  His  resurrection 
to  His  exaltation.  His  exaltation  to  the  assumption  of  His  mediatorial  power. 
We  see  that  Jesus  Christ  first  fought  and  conquered,  and  then  He  became  the 
liberator  of  the  world.  In  the  world  He  works  liberation  by  instrumentality, 
and  the  great  agency  employed  in  carrying  it  on  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  Liberation 
begins  with  Christ,  but  it  does  not  end  with  Him  ;  for,  as  He  Himself  obtained 
resurrection  by  the  power  of  God,  so  there  is  another  resurrection  which  takes 
place  in  the  breast  of  every  man  who  is  the  subject  of  His  kingdom.  II.  The 
GRAND  effect  WHICH  THE  TEXT  SETS  FORTH.  "  There  shall  be  holiness."  The 
mount  of  deliverance  is  always  the  mount  of  holiness.  Another  name  for  holiness 
is  spiritual  health.  Bring  the  whole  to  this  one  point,  that  the  test  of  state  is 
character  ;  that  wherever  this  holiness  is  met  with,  there  the  deliverance  that 
has  been  effected  on  Mount  Zion  by  the  Lord  Jesus  is  applied,  and  there  the 
liberation  that  the  Spirit  of  God  works  in  the  souls  of  His  people  is  likewise  brought 
to  pass.  III.  The  privileges  to  vthich  this  effect  leads,  and  for  which 
IT  PREPARES.  "  Shall  possess  their  possessions."  Canaan  for  the  earlier  saints. 
For  us  "the  inheritance  of  the  saints."  (John  Campbell.)  Mount  Zion  and 
its  blessings : — The  coming  of  the  Lord  in  glorious  majesty  to  judge  the  earth 
is  the  burden  of  the  Church's  message  to-day.  Throughout  the  writings  of  the 
prophets  the  choicest  and  most   consoling    promises  concerning  the  Christian. 


OBADIAH.  7 

Church  follow  close  upon  God's  terrible  threatenings  against  His  enemies.  The 
main  scope  of  Obadiah's  prophecy  was  to  warn  the  Edomites  of  the  destruction 
which  awaited  them.  The  true  Mount  Zion  is  the  Christian  Church,  typified 
by  Mount  Zion  in  Jerusalem.  The  prophet  in  the  text  points  us  to  Mount  Zion 
as  the  place  where  we  may  look  for  deliverance.  Prom  what  ?  From  a  mere 
local  religion  with  its  centre  at  Jerusalem.  The  Kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son 
is  for  the  whole  world.  From  the  blackness  and  condemnation  of  Sinai  and 
the  violated  law.  With  this  "  deliverance  "  will  be  seen  its  never-failmg  attendant 
— "  holiness."  It  was  the  great  design  of  our  Divine  Redeemer  to  produce  the 
fruits  of  holiness  in  His  Church.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  only  the  mani- 
festation and  free  offer  of  Christ's  pardon  to  penitent  sinners,  but  it  is  holiness 
of  heart  and  life.  When  the  tree  is  made  good,  the  fruit  will  be  good  also.  (John 
N.  Norton.)  The  true  Church,  or  the  community  of  the  good: — I.  A  bene- 
ficent POWEB.  1.  It  is  connected  with  deliverance.  2.  With  purity.  3.  With 
enjoyment.  Possess  here  means,  enjoy  their  possessions.  II.  A  consuming 
POWEK.  There  is  a  fire  in  the  true  Church  (ver.  18).  1.  The  characteristics 
this  fire  displays.  What  is  the  fire  ?  The  fire  of  truth,  that  burns  up  error ; 
the  fire  of  right,  that  burns  up  wickedness  ;  the  fire  of  love,  that  bums  up  selfish. 
ness.  It  is  a  strong  fire ;  an  extending  fire ;  a  steady  fire ;  an  unquenchable  fire. 
2.  The  materials  this  fire  consumes.  '  Stubble."  What  is  moral  depravity  in  all 
its  forms,  theoretical  and  practical,  religious,  social,  and  political  ?  "  Stubble." 
Error  to  truth,  wrong  to  right,  malice  to  love,  is  but  stubble  to  fire.  III.  An 
AGGRESSIVE  POWEB.  The  Gospel  is  at  once  the  inspiration,  the  life,  and  the 
instrument  of  the  true  Church.  1.  The  elements  of  which  the  Gospel  is  com- 
posed. "  Grace  and  truth,"  or  eternal  reality  and  Divine  benevolence.  To 
show  the  aggressiveness  of  these  principles,  state  three  facts.  (I)  The  human 
soul  is  made  to  feel  their  imperial  force.  (2)  The  human  soul  is  bound  to  yearn 
after  these  elements  as  its  highest  good.  (3)  The  human  soul  is  everywhere 
restless  without  these  elements.  2.  The  proselytising  spirit  which  the  Gospel 
engenders.  Every  genuine  recipient  of  the  Gospel  becomes  a  missionary.  3.  The 
triumphs  which  the  Gospel  has  already  achieved.  Such  thoughts  as  these  tend 
to  demonstrate  the  essential  aggressiveness  of  the  true  Church.     {Homiliat.) 

Ver.  21.  And  sayiours  shall  come  up  on  Mount  Zion  to  Judge  the  mount  of  Esau ; 
and  the  Ungrdom  shall  he  the  Lord's. — Christ  as  a  Conqueror : — This  is  a  vision 
concerning  Edom,  or  the  Mount  of  Esau,  or  Idumea,  which  are  different  names  of 
one  and  the  same  country,  the  mountainous  region  to  the  south  of  Judaea.  It 
is  a  prophecy  of  ruin  to  the  Edomites,  for  their  treatment  of  their  kindred 
nation  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  their  trouble.  When  the  remnant  of  the  Jews 
were  carried  into  Babylon,  the  Edomites  behaved  ill  to  their  subjugated 
and  suffering  kindred.  They  "stood  on  the  other  side"  (vers.  11-14).  Edom 
came  to  ruin ;  but  Israel,  though  sorely  chastised  and  brought  low,  was  never  to 
be  crushed.  The  text  shows  how  the  difference  is  to  be  effected,  and  its  issue. 
Esau  should  have  none  to  help  him,  but  shame  should  cover  him,  and  he  should 
be  cut  off  for  ever.  But  saviours  should  come  up  on  Mount  Zion,  and  that  for 
judgment  against  Esau,  and  the  Lord's  inheritance  should  be  preserved,  and  the 
kingdom  should  be  His.  Possibly  two,  or  more  than  two,  events  have  been 
purposely  mixed  up  together  in  the  prophet's  vision.  I.  Understand  by  the 
'  Saviours,"  the  great  Saviour.  The  Maccabean  princes  were  saviours,  but  the 
Saviour  Simeon  and  Anna  hailed  is  the  great  Saviour.  2.  The  purpose  for  which 
He  came  to  Mount  Zion.  For  judgment.  (1)  The  distinguishing  between  pro- 
fession and  practice,  between  the  literal  and  the  spiritual  Israel.  He  came  that 
the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  should  be  revealed.  (2)  The  same  intermixture  of 
judgment  with  present  imperfection  in  it  is  visible  in  every  part  of  the  Saviour's 
work  on  earth.  The  prince  of  this  world  is  judged,  but  he  is  not  cast  out.  He 
is  not  abashed.  (3)  It  is  the  same  with  the  spiritual  enemies  of  the  soul  of  man, 
and  of  God.  Yet  we  see  imperfection  in  every  part, — the  imperfection  of  non- 
completion.  (4)  He  is  come  for  judgment  upon  the  enemies  within  His  people, 
as  well  as  without  them,  the  old  heart  that  holds  with  the  world  and  the  flesh, 
and  is  in  league  with  the  devil.  And  the  same  incompleteness  during  our  present 
state  we  mourn  over  here.  3.  Look  at  the  predicted  end.  The  kingdom  shall 
be  the  Lord's.  That  is  promised  and  certain.  (1)  The  kingdom  shall  be  His 
over  our  rebel  hearts.  It  often  seems  impossible,  or  at  least  hopeless  now. 
(2)  The  Gospel  kingdom  is,  and  shall  be,  His.     (3)  The  kingdom  over  all  the  earth, 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.      .. 

over  all  that  rises  up  against  Him,  is  His.  To  this  end  was  He  bom,  that  as  s 
Saviour  He  should  come  to  Mount  Zion,  to  judge  the  Mount  of  Esau,  and  that 
the  kingdom  should  be  the  Lord's.  {0.  Jeans,  M.A.)  The  Ood  of  our  ealvation 
arid  His  instruments  : — The  vision  presented  to  Obadiah  is  shadowed  all  over 
with  calamities  of  various  kinds;  but  still  we  see  God  all  the  way  through, 
justifying  Himself  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen,  lest  they  should  say  that  the  punish- 
ment-He threatened,  was  more  than  equal  to  the  offence.  There  is  a  tenderness 
of  spirit  in  what  He  says  to  the  opposers  of  Israel,  in  the  twelfth  verse,  which, 
while  it  does  not  and  cannot  alter  His  purpose,  gives  us  a  delightful  view  of  His 
heart.  I.  Who  and  what  are  they  whom  the  pbophbt  calls  Saviotjbs  ? 
The  redeeming  Saviour  of  man  stands  apart  from  all  common  saviours,  because 
He  is  exclusively  the  redeeming  Saviour  of  the  Body,  the  Church.  We  cannot 
confound  Him  with  deliverers  of  any  secondary  kind.  He  is  separate  from  all 
others  in  this,  that  though  He  is  without  sin.  He  is  in  friendship  with  sinners ; 
though  He  knows  not  what  it  is  to  commit  sin.  He  does  know  what  it  is  to  take 
the  burthen  of  sin  upon  His  pure  and  righteous  person.  The  saviours  in  the 
text  are  the  messengers  of  God  to  the  blessed  children  of  Mount  Zion,  to  those 
whom  He  has  begotten  in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  they  stand  here  in  strong  contrast 
with  the  enemies  of  all  holiness,  who  are  described  as  Mount  Esau,  or  the  carnally 
minded  children  of  this  world.  These  helpers  of  our  feebleness  are  only  instru- 
mental ;  God  appoints  them  and  employs  them ;  but  they  are  to  Him  what  the 
axe  is  to  the  woodman,  they  would  De  powerless  but  for  the  power  of  the  hand 
that  holds  them.  What  a  mercy  that  God  sends  these  saviours  among  us  to 
publish  His  will,  and  to  stir  us  up  to  oiir  duty  !  Divine  providences  are  often 
saviours.  The  Gospel  Word  is  a  Saviour,  inasmuch  as  it  guides  us  immediately 
to  Him  who  is  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  and  in  whom  alone  is  the  life  which 
makes  a  man  alive  unto  God.  The  preaching  of  the  Word  is  one  of  the  saviours 
that  is  sent  upon  an  embassy  of  peace  to  Moimt  Zion.  II.  In  what  mannkb  abb 
THESE  SAVIOUBS  TO  JUDGE  MouNT  EsAU  ?  Literally,  the  land  of  Edom.  Typically, 
the  world,  which,  in  its  scriptural  interpretation,  is  "  enmity  against  God." 
These  saviours  will  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  careless,  the  prayerless,  and  the 
ungodly.  1.  Every  chastening  providence  of  God  that  has  passed  away  from  a 
sinner  unimprovea  shall  be  a  sentence  of  condemnation  against  him.  Not  to 
improve  a  dispensation  is  to  undervalue  it.  2.  God's  Word  also  enters  into 
judgment  with  the  unbelieving.  The  Word  preached,  but  not  laid  profitably 
to  heart.  The  Gospel  Word  nas  much  to  testify  concerning  many  sinners  in 
every  congregation,  who  are  satisfied  with  having  the  olive-leaf  in  their  mouths, 
whilst  there  is  no  savour  of  fruit  in  their  lives.  3.  The  ambassador  of  Christ 
has  also  something  to  testify  in  this  judgment.  He  is  likewise  appointed  to  assist 
in  judging  Moimt  Esau.  Can  a  condenming  judgment  possibly  accord  with  the 
good  news  that  we  are  commissioned  to  preach  T  Yes,  for  it  is  not  the  good  news 
simply  in  itself,  but  the  good  news  not  believed  in,  not  rejoiced  in,  that  makes 
the  judgment,  m.  What  description  of  kingdom  did  the  pbophet  intend  t 
He  says,  "  The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's  " ;  He  meant  to  say  this,  that  however 
Mount  Zion  shall  be  blessed,  or  Mount  Esau  cursed,  the  new  throne  which  will 
be  set  up  from  this  overthrow  of  the  wicked,  and  this  gathering  together  of  the 
righteous,  shall  be  Christ's.  It  is  called  a  kingdom  of  righteousness,  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Of  righteousness,  because  every  subject  of  it  is  righteous ; 
of  peace,  because  God  is  at  peace  with  all  who  rest  in  it ;  of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
because  in  the  Church  triumphant  there  shall  be  no  delight  equal  to  that  of  calling 
the  glorious  God  our  Father,  and  the  Son  of  God  our  Redeemer.  One  remarkable 
feature  in  this  kingdom  is,  that  they  who  are  worthiest  in  the  world's  judgment 
are  not  selected  to  fill  it,  but  they  who  feel  themselves  to  be  the  unworthiest. 
This  kingdom  is  also  an  invisible  treasure  within  the  heart  of  every  child  of  God's 
adoption.  Inquire  concerning  two  things.  1.  Whether  the  incorruptible  seed 
is  within  you.  2.  Whether  you  are  checking  its  growth  by  doing  every  thing  you 
can  to  sweeten  your  journey  to  the  grave,  and  as  little  as  you  can  to  adorn  yovir- 
self  for  the  happy  home  that  lies  beyond  it.  Each  of  us  should  connect  the  king- 
dom of  God  with  the  spirituality  and  heavenly  character  of  our  own  souls.  (F.  O. 
Grossman.)  The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's: — But  we  are  Christians  as  well 
as  Britons.  We  acknowledge  Victoria  as  Queen  ;  but  we  acknowledge  Christ 
as  King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of  Lords.  We  acknowledge  Him  as  King  not  of 
Britain  alone,  but  of  all  the  earth.  We  acknowledge  allegiance  to  Him  in  a  far 
deeper  sense  than  to  Victoria.     Great  as  are  her  claims  upon  us,  His  are  infinitely 


OBADIAH.  9 

greater.  Our  Christiaa  patriotism,  then,  will  be  proportionately  greater.  We 
shall  be  still  more  eager  about  news  of  His  kingdom  from  foreign  lands  than  we 
ever  have  been  of  news  from  Pekin  or  Port  Arthur.  If  we  willingly  give  up 
millions  for  the  maintenance  of  the  fleet,  we  shall  gladly  give  up  tens  of  millions 
for  the  extension  of  that  kingdom  which  is  the  Lord  s.  The  great  trouble  is 
that  it  needs  faith  to  realise  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  and  the  certainty  of 
its  prospects.  The  whole  realm  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal  is  to  many  of  us  so 
shadowy  and  unreal.  The  glorious  things  which  are  spoken  of  Zion  are  difficult 
to  credit.  There  is  a  wide  door  and  effectual  before  us  in  these  days  of  ours ; 
but  there  are  so  many  adversaries  that  faith  fails  and  hope  is  dim  and  enthusiasm 
languishes  and  dies.  But  surely,  surely  faith  ought  to  be  much  easier  for  us  than 
it  was  for  Obadiah  in  his  dreary,  hopeless  exile.  He  had  no  tens  of  thousands 
to  share  his  hope  and  expectation  ,*  no  thrilling  tidings  from  the  seat  of  war,  say 
rather  from  the  seat  of  desolation  ;  yet  see  with  what  confidence  he  looks  forward 
to  the  coming  time,  and  with  what  assurance  he  declares  that  "  saviours  shall 
come  up  on  Mount  Zion  to  judge  the  Mount  of  Esau  ;  and  the  kingdom  shall  be 
the  Lord's."  May  his  faith  inspire  ours ;  may  his  patriotism  awaken  ours. 
(J.  Monro  Otbson.)  The  kingdom  of  Ood : — W!hat  is  the  kingdom  of  the  sun  t 
It  is  here  on  earth,  and  is  in  everything  that  lives  and  moves.  It  sings  in  the  bird, 
and  waits  in  the  egg  not  yet  hatched  out ;  it  is  in  the  fragrant  blossom  and  in 
the  bud  luopened  ;  it  is  in  the  blades  of  grass  upspringing,  and  in  the  germinant 
seeds  just  breaking  through  their  shell  in  the  darkness  of  the  earth.  Thus  this 
kingdom  of  God  that  is  to  be  is  already  here.  This  is  the  second  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  taught  about  the  kingdom — it  is  not  something  postponed  ;  it  has  already 
begun.  Here,  as  the  day  is  here  when  the  sxm  begins  to  rise  ;  here,  as  the  summer 
is  here  when  spring  begins  to  come ;  here,  as  manhood  is  here  when  the  babe 
Ues  in  the  cradle,  for  then  the  man  begins  when  he  is  bom.  The  kingdom  of  God 
begins  when  it  is  first  upon  the  earth,  and  it  is  first  on  the  earth  when  the  spirit 
of  righteousness  and  justice  and  love  and  peace  is  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  is 
working  its  way  into  the  institutions  of  men.  So  Christ  said  to  men,  "  Do  not 
say,  Lo,  here,  lo,  there  :  the  kingdom  of  God  is  among  you."  Look  for  it  all 
about  you  ;  look  for  it  in  the  mother's  love,  in  the  hero's  sacrifice,  in  the  patriot's 
devotion ;  look  for  it  in  the  honest  labourer,  the  faithful  servant,  the  k>yal 
friend.    It  is  here ;  it  is  now.     (Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.) 


INTEODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 

It  is  very  interesting  and  very  instructive  to  scrutinise  the  faces  in  a  great  gallery 
of  portraits.  The  man  who  does  so  has  before  him  materials  which  should  help 
him  to  gain  a  wide  knowledge  of  human  character.  Here  is  a  countenance  noble 
and  winsome.  The  spectator  is  certain  that  it  was  a  tender  and  brave  and  faith- 
ful heart  which  beat  beneath  an  exterior  so  fair.  Features  like  these  could  not 
cover  any  littleness  of  soul.  Perhaps  it  is  a  soldier  in  his  coat  of  mail,  whose  likenesa 
the  artist  has  drawn,  or  it  may  be  a  woman's  face  that  looks  out  from  the  canvas  ; 
but  whoever  it  be,  the  onlooker  is  glad  that  he  has  seen  the  pictvure.  But  a  painting 
of  a  different  kind  attracts  him  next — that  of  one  who  has  evidently  had  many 
fierce  battles  with  temptation,  and  who  has  not  come  out  of  them  all  scathless. 
This  much  the  spectator  learns  from  the  sad  expression  which  rests  on  the 
features  ;  and  yet,  as  he  examines  them  more  carefully,  he  sees  that  dissatisfaction 
and  sorrow  are  not  their  most  prominent  characteristics.  There  is  peace  stamped 
on  the  face  as  well  as  trouble — peace  which  seems  in  the  end  to  have  gained  the 
mastery  over  the  trouble.  There  are  no  portraits  like  those  which  have  been 
painted  for  us  in  the  pages  of  the  Bible.  They  have  been  drawn  by  the  hand  of 
a  Master,  and  they  are  very  varied  in  the  types  of  character  which  they  represent. 
In  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets — to  think  meanwhile  of  no  others — what 
diflPerences  of  natural  disposition,  and  of  spiritual  attainments,  there  are  I  Some» 
like  Joel,  and  Amos,  and  Hosea,  are  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing. 
Beside  them  we  see  our  own  shortcomings,  and  know  what  manner  of  men  our 
Lord  would  have  us  to  be.  And  others,  like  Jonah,  are  far  from  faultless.  They 
are  genuine  servants  of  God,  but  servants  who  sin  and  fall,  whose  loyalty  is  not 
steadfast  and  immovable,  who  carry  to  this  day  dark  blots  on  their  fair  name. 
We  are  encouraged  om-selves  to  make  trial  of  His  compassion  and  His  grace.  That 
Jonah,  after  his  wilful  disobedience  and  foolish  querulousness,  was  healed  of  all 
the  diseases  of  his  spirit — that,  like  many  a  wayward  child,  he  learned  to  sorrow 
over  his  self-will,  and  came  home  with  a  penitent  and  reproachful  heart  to  his 
Father's  house — who  of  us  can  doubt  ?  I  take  it  that  he  was  himself  the  author  of 
the  book  which  beaxs  his  name,  though  some  have  thought  of  it  as  the  embalming 
by  a  subsequent  writer  of  an  ancient  and  venerable  tradition.^  I  can  see  no  reason 
for  doubting  that  the  prophet  penned  with  his  own  hand  these  four  short  chapters. 
Before  his  life  closed  he  sat  down  to  recount  for  the  generations  that  should  follow 
the  Btory  of  his  memorable  joiuney  to  Nmeveh.  And  how  does  he  tell  the  story  ? 
Very  humbly,  we  shall  admit,  and  very  impartially.  They  are  bitter  things  which 
he  writes  in  it  against  himself.     He  extenuates  nothing.    He  unveils  all  his  hard- 


*  "It  is  strange  that  any  argument  should  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  the 
prophet  writes  of  himself  in  the  third  person.  Manly  criticism  has  been  ashamed 
to  use  the  argument  as  to  the  Commentaries  of  Caesar  or  the  Anabasis  of 
Xenophon.  ...  It  is  the  exception  when  any  sacred  writer  speaks  of  himself  in 
the  first  person." — Pnsey,  The  Minor  Prophets, 

iU 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


ness  of  heart,  all  his  Jewish  exclusiveness,  all  his  murmuring  against  the  Lord. 
He  is  relentless  in  his  self-condemnation,  whilst  over  against  the  confession  of  his 
lack  of  obedience  and  of  charity  he  places  the  record  of  God's  loving-kindness  and 
tender  mercy.  The  book  exalts  God,  indeed,  and  rebukes  and  punishes  Jonah. 
It  is  a  book  of  Confessions  which  Jonah  has  written,  not  an  Apologia  pro  vita  sua. 
He  acknowledges  publicly  the  wrongness  of  his  thinking  and  acting.  When  we 
read  his  chapters  we  are  reminded  of  Peter  going  out  to  weep  bitterly,  and  after- 
wards inspiring  the  Gospel  of  Mark,  which  tells  more  fully  than  any  of  the  other 
evangelical  records  how  he  sinned  and  fell ;  of  Augustine,  composing  the  narrative 
of  his  foolish  youth ;  of  John  Bunyan,  declaring  how  grace  had  abounded  in  his 
experience  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  Jonah  must  have  been  a  new  man,  with  a  heart 
within  him  from  which  the  old  pride  and  unkindness  and  disobedience  had  been 
driven  quite  away,  before  he  coxild  pen  the  book  which  bears  his  name.  The  Book 
of  Jonah  is  not  like  other  prophetic  writings.  It  is  not  a  recital  of  discourses,  but 
a  vivid  narrative  of  a  strange  episode  in  its  author's  life.  It  has  been  described  as 
a  drama  in  three  acts,  each  of  which  is  full  of  interest  and  replete  with  instruction. 

I.  First  of  all,  the  prophecy  deals  with  Jonah  himself.  Very  little  is  known 
regarding  him  beyond  what  we  learn  from  these  chapters.  There  is,  however, 
one  other  mention  of  him  in  the  Old  Testament.  We  read,  in  the  Second  Book 
of  Kings,  about  Jeroboam  II.,  the  powerful  and  able  and  sinful  ruler  of  the  Northern 
tribes  imder  whom  Amos  and  Hosea  lived  and  preached,  that  "  he  restored  the 
coast  of  Israel  from  the  entering  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain,  according 
to  the  word  of  the  Lord  God  which  He  spake  by  the  hand  of  His  servant  Jonah, 
the  son  of  Amittai,  the  prophet,  who  was  of  Gath-hepher."  Jonah  was  a  native, 
then,  of  Lower  Galilee,  a  child  of  the  tribe  of  Zabulon,  born  in  a  little  village  among 
the  hills  not  far  from  Nazareth.  And  his  first  message  as  a  prophet  was  a  message 
of  gladness,  in  which  he  took  delight,  and  which  brought  him  honour  and  esteem. 
He  had  foretold  the  success  of  the  king  of  Israel,  how  he  should  regain  provinces 
that  had  been  lost,  how  he  should  win  back  for  a  short  space  the  glory  of  his  empire. 
It  is  strange  that  one  whose  ministry  began  under  such  bright  auspices  should 
end  it  under  a  cloud,  and  should  be  presented  to  us  not  as  a  model  but  as  a  beacon. 
It  is  a  warning  to  take  heed  lest  we  fall — an  illustration  of  the  truth  that  even 
the  saints  of  God  are  weak  and  brittle  in  themselves,  in  constant  danger  of  losing 
the  crown,  and  needing  always  the  support  of  a  higher  hand.  We  can  scarcely  be 
surprised  that  legend  should  have  busied  itself  about  Jonah,  and  should  have  tried 
to  augment  oxir  scanty  knowledge  of  his  earlier  years.  There  is  the  old  tradition, 
for  example,  that  he  was  the  son  of  the  widow  of  Zarephath,  the  boy  whom  Elijah 
brought  back  from  death  to  life.  And  indeed  it  would  be  pleasant  to  think  that 
the  &*st  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  sent  on  a  mission  of  mercy  to  a  heathen  people, 
was  himself  a  Gentile  on  the  mother's  side  ;  ^  and  that  he  stood  in  so  interesting 
a  relation  to  the  great  prophet  who  fought  single-handed  the  battle  of  God  against 
Baal.  But  the  very  pleasantness  of  the  fancy  is  its  condemnation.  It  fits  in  too 
neatly  with  our  preconceptions  and  desires.  Whether,  during  the  years  when  he 
lived  at  home  in  the  Northern  Kingdom,  Jonah  had  other  announcements  given 
him  to  publish  to  his  countrymen  beside  that  happy  annoimcement  of  victory 
and  national  enlargement,  we  cannot  say.  The  time  was  very  evil,  and  the  land 
was  sick  imto  death.  What  we  do  know  is,  that  to  the  prophet,  dwelling  among 
his  own  people,  there  came  one  day  a  message  from  God  which  startled  him,  and 
for  which  he  had  no  liking.  He  was  commanded  to  leave  his  kindred,  and  journey 
to  Nineveh,  the  capital  of  the  Assyrian  empire.  There  he  was  to  proclaim  the 
Lord's  judgments.  When  God  pointed  in  one  way,  he  moved  in  exactly  the 
opposite  direction.  What  made  him  so  rebellious  ?  Partly  it  may  have  been 
fear.  He  was  appalled  at  the  greatness  and  the  hazardous  nature  of  the  task 
allotted  him.  He  forgot  that  God's  servants,  who  do  His  will,  are  kept  by  Him 
safe  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand.  But  there  was  another  reason  for  his  disobedience, 
as  he  tells  us  himself.  He  could  not  help  feeling  that  though  he  was  sent  to  Nineveh 
with  a  fearful  woe  on  his  lips,  his  mission  was  in  reality  one  of  love.  He  under- 
stood well  that  often  his  God  threatened  in  order  that  He  might  afterwards  spare, 
and  that  His  terrors  were  meant  to  drive  to  Himself,  for  forgiveness  and  healing, 
those  who  would  not  be  won  by  gentler  methods.  And  Jonah  had  no  desire  to 
go  on  an  errand  of  compassion  to  Nineveh.     A  mistaken  patriotism  prompted 

^  Zarephath,  "a  city  of  Zidon,"  our  Lord  says. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


him  to  recoil  from  seeking  the  good  of  the  metropolis  of  Assyria.  He  would  rather 
a  thousand  times  that  it  should  be  left  to  its  fate — that  it  should  sink  beneath 
God's  hand  to  rise  no  more  for  ever.  We  can  sympathise  in  some  measure  with 
him.  We  know  how  the  hearts  of  our  own  fathers  were  filled  with  a  stern  joy 
when  the  tremendous  power  of  the  first  Napoleon,  which  himg  like  a  thunder- 
cloud over  Europe,  was  dispelled  and  dissipated.  They  thought  it  no  shame  to 
triumph  in  his  downfall.  The  instinct  of  seH-preservation  and  the  love  of  country 
kindled  these  emotions  within  them.  So  it  was  with  Jonah  ;  and  indeed  he  had 
even  better  ground  for  the  feelings  he  cherished.  For  Assyria  was  a  heathen 
empire,  while  Israel  was  the  land  which  God  had  blessed,  the  home  of  His  chosen 
people.  Why  should  an  effort  be  made  to  save  the  foes  of  the  true  faith  ?  There- 
fore he  disobeyed.  He  thought  himself  wiser  than  God.  He  imagined  that  he 
had  the  interests  of  God's  peculiar  people  more  truly  at  heart.  But  whither  shall 
a  man  go  from  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?  or  whither  shall  he  flee  from  His  presence  ? 
If  he  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea,  even  there  shall  God's  right  hand  hold 
him.  The  traveller  who  climbs  a  high  mountain  in  the  tropics  passes  through 
many  zones  of  temperature,  leaving  the  luxuriant  vegetation  of  the  plain  to  enter 
a  land  of  pine  forests  and  of  colder  skies,  and  finding  himself  at  length  in  a  region 
where  God  giveth  snow  like  wool  and  casteth  forth  His  ice  like  morsels.  If  we 
imagine  the  order  reversed,  we  shall  understand  the  progress  of  Jonah's  prayer.  It 
starts  from  the  cold  and  gloomy  wilderness,  and  it  ends  in  the  bright  and  warm 
sunshine.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  salvation  even  for  souls  so  unworthy  as 
mine — that  is  the  last  triumphant  note.  ' '  The  Lord  spake  unto  the  fish,  and  it 
vomited  out  Jonah  upon  the  dry  land. ' '  Thus  the  first  section  of  the  book  closes. 
And  this  is  the  truth  which  it  teaches  us,  the  comfortable  message  which  it  brings, 
that  the  goodness  of  our  God  passeth  knowledge.  There  can  be  no  sin  so  grieving 
to  Him  as  the  sin  of  His  chosen  servants — those  whom  He  has  brought  into  His 
kingdom  and  entrusted  with  its  high  and  honourable  work.  He  expects  much 
from  them  because  they  have  received  much  from  Him  ;  and,  when  they  disappoint 
Him,  He  must  be  wounded  to  the  very  heart.  He  must  feel  their  disloyalty,  as 
David  felt  the  treachery  of  Ahithophel,  his  own  familiar  friend,  and  the  rebellion 
of  Absalom,  the  son  whom  he  loved  most  fondly ;  as  Christ  felt  the  cruelty  and 
faithlessness  of  Peter,  the  foremost  of  His  disciples.  Yet  He  forgives  these  worst 
offenders  ;  He  restoreth  their  souls.  Is  not  this  the  very  acme  and  climax  of  His 
mercy  ?  Is  not  this  what  distinguishes  Him  from  the  best  of  men  ?  They  are 
unwilling  to  permit  a  servant  who  has  failed  them  once  to  have  an  opportunity 
of  retrieving  himself ;  they  will  hardly  allow  him  a  second  chance.  Even  Paul, 
the  very  noblest  and  tenderest  of  the  apostles,  refused  to  trust  John  Mark  when 
he  tiumed  away  from  the  work,  and  looked  askance  on  him  for  many  a  day. 

n.  So  we  come  to  the  second  division  of  the  narrative,  that  which  concerns 
ITSELF  WITH  NiNEVEH.  It  is  a  brief  and  yet  most  graphic  account  which  is  given 
us  of  the  grandeur  of  the  city.  Its  vast  size  is  described  ;  and  the  imagination 
is  left  to  complete  the  scene,  to  fill  in  the  wide  area  with  royal  palaces  and  crowded 
markets  and  vineyards  and  gardens,  to  summon  up  to  view  the  most  magnificent 
of  all  the  capitals  of  the  ancient  world.  The  city  was  great,  great  not  only  to 
man's  thinking  but  to  God's,  for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  phrase.  Look- 
ing down  from  heaven  upon  it,  the  Lord  of  all  things  admired  its  extent  and  stateli- 
ness  and  strength.  But  He  sorrowed  over  its  sin  ;  and  He  bade  His  prophet  travel 
all  the  way  from  Israel  to  warn  it  of  its  danger.  His  injunction,  deliberately 
slighted  at  first,  was  graciously  renewed ;  and,  when  it  came  the  second  time, 
Jonah  made  haste  and  delayed  not  to  keep  God's  commandment.  It  is  like  what 
Josephus  tells  us  of  Jesus,  the  son  of  Anan,  the  unlettered  rustic  from  the  wilder- 
ness, who  shortly  before  Jerusalem  wa«  destroyed  bmrst  in  upon  the  people  at  the 
feast  of  tabernacles  with  the  piercing  and  oft-repeated  cry,  ' '  A  voice  from  the 
East,  a  voice  from  the  West,  a  voice  from  the  four  winds,  a  voice  on  the  bridegroom 
and  the  bride,  a  voice  on  the  whole  people."  The  magistrates  and  the  cold  and 
cynical  historian  himself  thought  that  there  was  something  preternatural  here. 
But  Jerusalem's  day  of  grace  was  past ;  happily  Nineveh's  was  not  altogether 
gone  ;  it  was  the  eleventh  hour  indeed,  yet  there  was  time  still  for  repentance. 
And  the  city  knew  the  things  which  belonged  to  its  peace.  Critics  have  sought 
to  throw  discredit  on  the  Book  of  Jonah,  because  of  the  physical  miracle  of  the 
prophet's  preservation  within  the  great  fish  which  the  book  narrates.  But  it 
recounts  a  more  wonderful  miracle  still — the  moral  miracle  of  the  sudden  and 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


complete  repentance  of  all  Nineveh.  In  part,  no  doubt,  the  reason  may  be  found  m 
the  superstitiouB  bent  and  tendency  of  their  minds.  Like  the  ancient  Athenifuis, 
they  were  very  religious.  They  would  listen  eagerly  to  any  word  which  purported 
to  oome  from  the  unseen  world.  Then,  too,  they  had  heard  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
They  knew  something  of  the  marvellous  deeds  He  had  wrought  on  behalf  of  His 

nile.  They  may  have  felt  that,  although  He  ruled  over  an  alien  race,  it  would 
angerous  to  disregard  a  message  which  reached  them  from  Him.  But  Christ 
hints  at  a  deeper  cause  for  their  penitence.  They  had  learned  in  one  way  or  in 
another  the  miraculous  history  of  Jonah's  mission.  He  was  "  a  sign  "  to  them, 
our  Lord  afiSrms.  They  were  aware  that  he  had  passed  through  death  to  a  new 
life,  in  order  that  he  might  publish  God's  word  in  their  city ;  and  his  deliverance 
seemed  to  hold  out  a  prospect  of  their  deliverance,  too,  if  like  him  they  sought 
pardon  and  salvation  ere  it  was  too  late.  In  this  second  part  of  the  tale  we  read 
of  two  repentances — that  of  Nineveh  and  that  of  God  ;  and  the  one  is  consequent 
on  the,|[ther.  God  turns  from  the  infliction  of  threatened  punishment,  because 
Nineveh  turns  from  its  sin.  It  is  always  so.  Shallow  minds  have  misunderstood 
these  passages  which  tell  us  of  God's  repenting.  They  have  said,  "Then  He 
cannot  be  immutable ;  He  must  be  fickle  and  vmstedfast,  of  one  mind  to-day, 
of  another  mind  to-morrow."  Why  should  there  be  such  a  discrepancy,  they 
have  asked,  between  His  words  and  His  deeds — between  His  announcement  of 
a  purpose  of  evil  and  His  abstention  from  the  execution  of  that  purpose  ?  The 
matter  is  mysterious  ;  but  of  this  we  may  be  certain,  that  there  is  no  caprice  in 
our  God.  Nay,  it  is  because  He  is  ujialterably  the  same,  because  His  government 
is  so  uniformly  righteous  and  just  and  true,  that  He  must  change  His  procedure 
toward  men  when  their  relation  toward  Him  is  changed.  Righteousness  and 
judgment  are  the  foimdation  of  His  throne.  H  we  abhor  ourselves  and  repent 
in  dust  and  ashes — if  we  sorrow  over  our  disobedience  with  a  godly  sorrow — He 
will  lose  none  of  His  consistency  when  He  forgives  us.  He  wiU  remain  a  just  God 
while  He  is  a  Saviour ;  rather.  He  will  prove  Himself  a  just  God  simply  because 
He  shows  Himself  a  Saviour. 

III.  The  third  section  of  the  history  takes  tts  back  to  Jonah.  We  should 
have  supposed  that,  after  the  experience  through  which  he  had  gone,  he  would 
never  again  murmur  against  God  ;  but  the  old  nature  dies  hard  in  all  of  us,  even 
in  the  prophets  and  ministers  of  the  Lord.  Jonah,  with  that  proud  Hebrew  heart 
within  him,  was  utterly  displeased  at  the  result  of  his  mission.  He  grew  weary 
of  life  itself.  He  prayed  that  he  might  die.  He  built  a  little  booth  on  the  hills 
to  the  east  of  Nineveh,  and  sat  under  its  shadow  for  forty  days,  still  hoping  for 
the  worst — sat  there,  pitiless  and  revengeful,  '  *  till  he  might  see  what  would  become 
of  the  city."  And  God  was  grieved  that  His  child  should  be  of  such  a  mind,  and 
should  foster  so  carefully  a  spirit  the  very  opposite  of  His  own.  He  would  cure 
him  of  this  bitterness  of  soul.  So  He  caused  a  wide-spreading  plant — the  Palma 
Christi,  botanists  call  it — to  spring  up  and  cover  with  its  refreshing  shade  the 
prophet's  booth,  out  there  on  the  hot  and  parched  hillside.  But  Jonah  had 
scarcely  commenced  to  rejoice  in  the  welcome  shelter  when  God  sent  some  de- 
structive insects  against  the  tall  and  graceful  Palmchrist,  to  strip  it  of  its  leaves 
and  to  make  it  pine  away.  Now  was  God's  opportunity.  He  spoke  to  His  prophet, 
not  angrily  but  yet  most  effectually.  He  asked  him  a  significant  question.  ' '  Thou 
couldst  have  pity  on  a  short-lived  plant,"  He  said,  "  which  cost  thee  nothing, 
which  thou  hadst  not  trained  or  watered  ;  thou  art  displeased  on  accoimt  of  its 
l«ss  ;  and  shall  not  I,  who  am  Maker  and  King  of  all,  have  compassion  on  a  great 
city  full  of  souls  that  are  ready  to  perish  ?  Are  not  these  much  better  than  the 
goiml  ?  ' '  And  Jonah  adds  not  a  word  more.  He  drops  his  pen  when  he  has 
recorded  God's  tender  and  pregnant  reproof.  It  is  a  most  impressive  contrast 
which  this  Divine  question  draws  between  man's  pity  and  God's.  We  think  with 
kindliness  of  the  objects  of  the  natural  world — of  the  flowers  so  blue  and  golden 
which  are  the  stars  in  the  firmament  of  the  lower  earth,  of  the  trees  which  shelter 
MB  from  the  heat  of  the  noonday  sun.  It  is  true  that  these  flowers  and  trees  have 
but  a  short  life  at  the  longest.  It  is  true  also  that  we  did  not  call  them  into  being 
of  ourselves.  We  have  not  laboiured  for  them,  neither  made  them  to  grow.  Yet 
we  are  interested  in  them.  We  love  them  after  a  true  fashion.  But  God,  whUe 
He  forgets  none  of  His  works,  is  most  deeply  concerned  about  His  human  creatures. 
Jonah  might  sorrow  over  the  gourd ;  Jonah's  Lord  sorrowed  over  the  souls  of 
the  Ninevites.    It  was  bat  one ;  and  they  were  many,  ' '  a  whole  cityful ' '  of 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH.  ▼« 

men  and  women  and  children.  It  had  been  sent  to  him  without  any  thought  or 
toil  of  his  ;  but  God  had  given  them  their  being  ;  they  were  His  sons  and  daughters. 
He  was  their  Father.  Still,  it  is  chiefly  for  sords  like  yoiu-s  and  mine,  gifted  with 
many  great  powers  and  with  an  undying  life,  that  God  yearns.  Their  redemption 
He  accoimts  precious.  To  bring  about  their  salvation  He  plans  and  pleads  and 
strives.  He  has  His  richest  joy  when  His  children  who  were  dead  live  again,  and 
when  the  lost  are  found.  And  shall  we  not  give  Him  this  joy  7  Shall  we  not  look 
unto  Him  and  be  saved  ?  These,  then,  are  the  three  parts  of  the  Book  of  Jonah. 
The  great  difficulty  in  reference  to  the  book  is  this  :  Is  it  historical  ?  Is  it  a 
narrative  of  what  actually  happened  ?  Or  is  it  an  allegory,  a  fable  fraught  with 
important  meaning  ?  The  strange  events  which  it  describes — did  they  really 
occiu:,  or  had  they  an  existence  only  in  the  mind  of  him  who  wrote  them  down  T 
To  me  there  is  one  reason  which  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  these  chapters  are  a  true 
history.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  spoke  of  them  as  such.  He  declared  that  the 
imprisonment  of  the  ancient  prophet  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  typified  His  own 
death  and  btirial  and  resurrection.  "  As  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights 
in  the  whale's  belly,"  He  said,  "  so  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  three  days  and  three 
nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth."  The  one  event  was  symbolic  of  the  other.  And 
once  again.  He  affirmed  that  the  men  of  Nineveh  condemned  by  their  repentance 
the  men  of  His  own  generation.  But  how  could  He  have  instituted  such  a  com- 
parison if  Jonah  had  never  passed  through  the  streets  and  squares  of  the  Assyrian 
city,  startling  its  inhabitants  from  their  lethargy  by  his  terrible  cry  ?  Christ 
must  have  reckoned  this  Old  Testament  prophecy  a  reliable  narrative  of  actual 
occurrences.  The  great  lesson  of  the  book  is  the  lesson  that  God  loves  all  men — 
Greek  and  Jew,  Barbarian  and  Scythian,  bond  and  free.  The  prophet  did  not 
think  that  it  was  so.  With  the  spiritual  pride — the  grudging  narrow-mindedness — 
of  his  people  strong  in  his  breast,  he  imagined  that  only  the  chosen  race  was  dear 
to  GJod.  He  did  not  dream  that  Nineveh  could  be  great  in  His  sight.  ' '  He  sought 
the  honour  of  Israel,  the  son, ' '  an  old  rabbi  said,  ' '  rather  than  the  honour  of 
Jehovah,  the  Father. ' '  But  he  was  taught  the  truth  by  little  and  little  through 
the  vicissitudes  of  his  history.  Let  us  believe  it  and  rejoice  in  it.  God  would  have 
all  men  to  be  saved.  His  love  is  infinite,  like  Himself.  ' '  In  every  nation  he  that 
feareth  Him  and  worketh  righteousness  is  accepted  with  Him."  Yes,  and  our 
hearts  will  show  likest  His  when  they  despair  of  none,  and  hold  aloof  from  none, 
and  seek  and  save  all.  That  is  the  spirit  inculcated  upon  us  by  the  Gospel  of  the 
New  Testament ;  but  the  Old  Testament,  too,  is  full  of  the  rich,  free,  evangelical 
Gospel.    It  rings  with  the  same  music.     (Original  Secession  Magazine.) 

Thb  Book  ov  Jonah. — One  thing  that  strikes  the  careful  reader  of  the  Book  of 
Jonah  is  its  difference  from  the  other  books  in  the  canon  of  Scripture  among  which 
it  is  classed,  and  in  the  midst  of  which  it  is  placed.  It  does  not  consist  of  any 
connected  series  of  prophetic  discourses  bearing  upon  the  future  of  God's  kingdom 
and  the  nations  of  the  earth,  such  as  are  found  in  the  Books  of  Hosea  and  Amos  ; 
neither  does  it  consist  of  one  distinct  prophecy,  such  as  that  contained  in  the  Book 
of  Obadiah,  by  which  it  is  immediately  preceded.  It  rather  bears  the  character 
of  a  history  of  a  special  mission  to  a  heathen  city,  which  was  laid  upon  one  of  the 
prophets.  The  biographical  element  in  it  is  stronger  than  in  other  prophetic  books, 
and  surrounds  it  with  a  peculiar  interest  and  attraction.  This  position  in  the 
canon  of  Scripture  indicates  the  view  taken  of  it  by  those  who  arranged  it ;  and 
this  view  has,  with  very  few  exceptions,  been  adopted  by  both  the  Jewish  and 
Christian  Chiurch.  In  discussing  the  book  we  may  first  state  this  view,  and  then 
deal  with  the  objections  which  have  been  urged  against  it.  In  this  old  view  there 
is  embraced  these  four  points — 1.  That  the  facts  it  narrates  possess  a  symbolico- 
typical  meaning.  If  it  had  been  only  the  record  of  events  that  happened  to  the 
prophet  in  the  fulfilment  of  a  divinely  intrusted  mission  there  could  be  no  valid 
reason  for  its  being  placed  among  the  prophetic  books.  It  would  have  found  a 
more  fitting  place  in  the  historical  books,  where  we  have  mention  of  one  prophecy 
that  was  given  through  Jonah.  It  is  in  this  connection  that  we  have  the  record 
of  remarkable  incidents  in  the  lives  of  the  great  prophets  Elijah  and  Elisha.  From 
its  being  found  where  it  is,  the  Book  of  Jonah  must  have  been  regarded  as  a  prac- 
tical prophecy,  and  the  facts  which  it  narrates  must  have  been  viewed  as  invested 
with  a  symbolical  and  typical  meaning.  This  is  the  character  it  has  sustained 
in  the  opinion  of  the  great  majority  of  both  Jewish  and  Christian  interpreters. 
"  The  book  is,"  in  the  language  of  one  who  has  well  expressed  this  view,  '*  ia 


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 

a  great  measure  historical,  but  in  such  a  manner  that,  in  the  history  itself,  there 
is  hidden  the  mystery  of  the  greatest  prophecy,  and  that  Jonah  proves  himself 
to  be  a  true  prophet  by  the  events  that  happened  to  him  not  less  than  by  his  utter- 
ances." It  is  easy  to  imderstand  how  those  facts  connected  with  Jonah's  mission 
to  Nineveh  bore  against  the  exclusiveness  and  bigoted  isolation  in  which  the  Jews 
shut  themselves  up.  That  there  was  mercy  for  the  Gentile  world  was  taught 
from  the  very  first,  for  the  promise  to  Abraham  ran  in  these  terms  :  "In  thee 
and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  But  Jonah  was 
the  first  to  teach  it  plainly  and  directly  to  the  Jews,  and  it  was  taught  himself  by 
the  wonderful  incidents  connected  with  his  mission  to  Nineveh.  But  this  is  not 
all  the  teaching  of  the  book  according  to  common  Christian  interpretation.  There 
was  in  this  mission  not  only  a  prefiguring  or  foreshadowing  of  the  time  when 
mercy  would  be  extended  to  the  Gentile  world,  but  also  a  prefiguring  of  the  way 
in  which  this  was  to  be  brought  about.  When  Jonah  rebels  against  the  command 
to  go  to  Nineveh,  and  seeks  by  flight  to  escape  from  the  duties  of  his  prophetic 
ofBlce,  he  is  overtaken  by  a  terrific  storm.  It  is  only  allayed  by  his  being  thrown 
into  the  angry  waves,  and  he  remained  entombed  within  a  living  grave  beneath 
the  waters  for  three  days.  After  his  resurrection  from  this  living  grave  he  goes 
to  Nineveh,  the  inhabitants  of  which  repent  at  his  preaching  and  escape  the  threat- 
ened and  impending  judgment  of  God.  In  this  there  was  a  type  of  Christ's  burial 
'  and  resurrection,  the  subsequent  preaching  of  the  Gospel  among  the  nations,  and 
Uhe  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  According  to  this  view,  then,  there  is  embodied 
in  the  facts  narrated  in  the  book  a  hidden  prophecy  of  Christ's  work,  the  meaning 
of  which  was  not  made  plain  until  He  came.  2.  Regarded  in  this  light,  the  book 
has  been  received  as  historically  true.  It  is  in  marvellous  events  which  actually 
took  place  in  the  prophet's  own  experience — and  not  in  vision  only — that  the 
prophecy  lies.  Just  as  in  the  birth  of  Isaac,  Samson  and  Samuel  we  have  a  fore- 
shadowing of  the  miraculous  birth  of  Christ :  in  the  death  of  Abel,  and  the  sub- 
stitute for  Isaac,  there  was  prefigured  Christ's  death.  These  typical  events  are 
all  regarded  as  historical — as  having  transpired  in  the  region  of  actual  life,  and 
not  in  the  region  of  vision.  3.  The  position  of  this  book  in  the  canon  indicates 
that  it  belongs  to  the  earliest  or  Assyrian  period  of  Scripture  prophecy.  In  the 
collection  of  the  minor  prophets  it  is  placed  among  those  who  prophesied  during 
this  period.  Some  have  even  thought  that  it  was  placed  immediately  after  Obadiah, 
because  Jonah  was  regarded  as  "  the  ambassador  to  the  heathen  "  mentioned 
in  his  prophecy.  4.  This  assignation  of  the  book  to  an  early  period  was  connected 
with  the  belief  that  Jonah  himself  was  its  author.  Qbjection  has  been  taken  to 
its  historical  truthfulness,  first,  on  the  ground  of  the  miraculous  element  contained 
in  it.  As  might  have  been  anticipated,  it  became  a  special  object  of  attack  on 
the  part  of  those  who  sought  to  explain  Scripture  narratives  on  rationalistic  prin- 
ciples and  to  eliminate  from  them  the  element  of  the  supernatural.  Some  at  first 
were  disposed  to  regard  it  as  a  Jewish  adaptation  of  heathen  legends  about  the 
deliverance  of  heroes  from  sea  monsters.  But  it  was  soon  perceived  that  this 
account  of  the  story  was  an  absurd  one,  and  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  pro- 
bability of  its  being  derived  either  mediately  or  immediately  from  heathen  fables. 
The  likelihood  is  all  the  other  way,  if  there  is  any  connection  at  aU  between  them. 
The  fact  that  Jerome  states  that  near  Joppa  lay  rocks  which  were  pointed  out  to 
him  as  those  to  which  Andromache  was  bound  when  exposed  to  the  sea  monster 
gives  some  maintenance  to  the  thought  that  the  story  of  Jonah  may  have  passed 
through  Phoenicia  in  corrupted  form  to  Greece.  Modem  rationalists  incline  to 
the  view  that  it  is  simply  a  parable  or  tale  designed  to  teach  an  important  lesson. 
It  is  not  regarded  by  them  as  a  record  of  actual  events,  but  simply  as  a  parable 
or  myth  attached  to  a  historical  name  by  which  are  inculcated  truths  important 
for  the  age  in  which  it  was  written.  All  miracles,  either  in  actual  event  or  in 
prophetical  intimation,  are  taken  out  of  it.  The  design  of  the  book,  which  on 
this  view  must  have  been  written  long  after  the  time  of  Jonah,  was  simply  to 
teach  Israel  lessons  that  were  being  too  much  forgotten,  and  not  to  foreshadow 
or  foretell  any  coming  event.  Ewald  thinks  that  it  was  designed  to  show  how 
the  true  fear  of  God  and  repentance  bring  salvation,  first  in  the  case  of  the  heathen 
sailors,  then  in  the  case  of  Jonah,  and  lastly  in  the  case  of  the  Ninevites.  Bleek 
conceives  it  to  have  been  written  by  an  intelligent  liberal-minded  Jew  for  the 
purpose  of  exposing  the  narrow  religious  particularism  which  prevailed  among 
his  countrymen.  It  was,  as  we  have  mentioned,  the  miraculous  element  in  the 
book  that,  in  the  first  instance,  led  to  the  adoption  of  this  theory     Not  only  does  it 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


Q^ 


record  miracles,  but,  without  an  understanding  of  the  prophet's  design,  miracles 
of  the  most  strange  and  startling  description.  It  is  a  true  principle  that  God  never 
wastes  His  power — never  works  any  miracles  except  for  purposes  worthy  of  Him- 
self. But  in  this  circumscribed  view  of  the  book  there  appears  to  be  a  useless 
expenditiure  of  miraculous  power.  These  lessons  could  surely  have  been  taught 
without  the  prophet's  being  required  to  pass  through  such  wonderful  experiences. 
Even  to  those  who  have  no  philosophical  objections  to  miracles  in  themselves, 
the  working  of  such  miracles  for  this  end  can  hardly  but  appear  uncalled  for  and 
unnecessary.  But  when  we  view  the  book  as  essentially  a  practical  prophecy 
designed  to  prefigure  by  typical  events  the  biu-ial  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  and 
through  this  the  opening  of  the  gates  of  mercy  to  the  Gentile  world,  there  can  be 
no  difficulty  on  the  part  of  any  who  believe  miracles  possible  to  accept  those 
recorded  here  as  true.  No  one  will  venture  to  say  that  Jonah's  preservation  in 
the  belly  of  the  great  fish,  and  his  remarkable  deliverance,  viewed  as  charged  with 
typical  and  prophetical  meaning,  was  an  unnecessary  exhibition  of  Divine  power. 
No  one  will  venture  to  say  either  that  the  miraculous  growth  and  miraculous 
destruction  of  the  gourd  was  needless — if  by  it  God's  mercy  to  the  heathen  world 
was  vindicated,  and  its  truth  placed  in  the  very  forefront  of  the  prophetic  writings. 
Many  have  thought,  not  without  reason,  that  in  this  book  we  have  the  oldest 
written  prophecy,  and  that  it  is  because  this  truth  is  so  prominent  here  that  it 
is  so  conspicuously  exhibited  in  all  subsequent  prophetic  writings.  It  gives  the 
ke5Tiote  to  them  all,  and,  as  serving  this  purpose,  the  miracles  recorded  in  it  cannot 
be  regarded  as  useless  manifestations  of  supernatural  power.  The  miracles  them- 
selves too  have  oftentimes  been  so  presented  as  to  make  faith  as  difficult  as  possible. 
It  is  not  everyone  that  can  say  that  though  it  had  been  recorded  that  Jonah  had 
swallowed  the  whale  it  would  not  have  affected  or  shaken  their  faith  in  the  story. 
Faith,  though  it  may  soar  high  above  reason,  cannot  accept  what  plainly  contra- 
dicts its  teachings  and  exceeds  the  utmost  bounds  of  possibility.  Attempts  have 
been  made  to  show  that  it  is  altogether  impossible  for  the  whale — which  is  the 
fish  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  when  referring  to  the  sign  of  Jonas — to  have  accom- 
plished the  feat  here  ascribed  to  it  unless  some  remarkable  change  had  been  effected 
upon  its  structure.  Some  have  allowed  these  attempts  to  weigh  so  much  with 
them  that  they  have  intensified  the  miracle  by  insisting  either  that  this  change 
was  effected  or  that  a  special  fish  was  created  by  God  for  the  emergency.  The 
miracle  proper  seems  to  have  consisted  in  the  preservation  of  Jonah  in  his  living 
grave  for  tluree  days,  and  then  being  vomited  unhmrt  upon  the  land.  The  sudden 
growth  and  destruction  of  the  gourd  becomes,  on  closer  examuiation,  merely  a  super- 
natural quickening  of  the  power  of  nature.  But  objections  have  been  taken  to 
the  old  view  of  the  book,  not  only  on  the  groimd  of  its  miraculous  element,  but 
also  on  the  ground  of  its  literary  construction  and  features.  It  bears  a  resemblance 
to  the  myths  or  parables  that  spring  up  in  the  course  of  a  nation's  literature  and 
become  attached  to  historical  names.  An  example  of  this  may  be  found  in  the 
tales  which  have  gathered  around  our  Saxon  King  Arthiu-,  in  the  last  develop- 
ment of  which  by  Tennyson  there  is  believed  to  be  embodied  moral  and  spiritual 
truth.  Because  of  this  resemblance  this  book  is  assigned  to  this  class  of  literary 
production.  On  this  view  it  must  have  been  written  as  a  parable  with  the  design 
of  rebuking  the  narrowness  and  exclusiveness  of  the  Jewish  people.  The  cause 
of  its  being  connected  with  Jonah  may  have  been  some  tradition  of  his  having  been 
sent  to  Nineveh  on  an  errand  of  mercy.  In  regard  to  this  view  of  the  book  we 
may  note,  that  were  it  thoroughly  established  it  would  not  destroy  its  prophetic 
value.  The  parable,  instead  of  the  actual  miraculous  events,  as  in  the  old  view, 
would  become  prophetic.  It  would  teach  the  boundless  mercy  of  God,  by  pre- 
figuring the  biurial  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  subsequent  calling  of  the  Grentiles, 
and  their  reception  into  the  kmgdom  of  God.  ' '  It  would  be, ' '  as  has  been  said, 
' '  an  epitome  of  prophecy,  of  the  mediatorial  work  of  Christ. ' '  The  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  accepting  this  new  critical  view  seem  to  us  many  and  insurmountable. 
I.  We  cannot  regard  the  argument  from  the  literary  construction  of  the  books 
of  the  Bible  and  their  resemblance  to  the  literary  works  of  other  nations  as  very 
safe  or  conclusive.  It  may  be  quite  valid  and  conclusive  for  those  who  accept 
the  Bible  simply  as  the  growth  of  Hebrew  literatmre — simply  as  the  product  of 
the  national  mind  and  consciousness  in  the  various  stages  of  its  growth  and  decay  ; 
but  not  for  those  who  accept  it  as  a  supernatiu-al  revelation  of  the  God  of  the 
Hebrews.  The  supernatural  element  not  only  in  narrative,  experience,  and 
prophecy,  but  also  in  the  very  composition  itself,  must  be  taken  into  account.    This 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


f>uts  a  vast  diSerence  betw^een  the  literature  of  the  nation  of  Israel,  along  the  whole 
ine  of  its  history,  and  the  literature  of  any  other  nation.  It  is  a  growth,  but  it  is 
not  the  product  of  genius  or  mere  piety.  It  is  the  result  of  a  continued  revelation 
and  inspiration.  To  refer  again  to  King  Arthur,  the  growth  of  legends  around 
his  name  has  led  many  to  question  if  he  was  a  historical  person  at  all,  and  we  can- 
not believe  that  God  would  give  countenance  to  anything  that  would  tend  to  lead 
to  this  confusion.  The  employment  of  parables  in  itself  is  not  wrong,  for  Christ 
Himself  frequently  took  advantage  of  this  mode  of  instruction.  But  it  was  always 
done  by  Him  openly,  and  so  that  His  hearers  understood  that  His  statements  were 
parabolical.  There  was  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  the  parts  of  His 
teaching  that  were  parabolical  and  those  parts  which  were  historical.  He  never 
attached  any  of  His  parables  to  historical  names.  II.  We  may  say  that  this 
new  view  of  the  book  tends  to  shake  our  faith  in  other  historical  parts  of  Scripture. 
It  bears  a  resemblance,  both  in  its  form  and  contents,  to  the  narratives  of  remark- 
able incidents  in  the  lives  of  Elijah  and  Elisha.  If  this  be  a  parable,  why  may 
we  not  regard  the  others  as  possessing  the  same  mythical  character  ?  III.  This 
book  bears  many  marks  of  being  authentic  history.  It  is,  indeed,  fragmentary, 
and  does  not  furnish  us  with  full  information  on  all  points  about  which  our 
ciu'iosity  is  aroused.  It  does  not  tell  us  anything  about  Jonah's  life  and 
labours  previous  to  his  call  to  go  to  Nineveh.  It  does  not  tell  us  anything 
about  the  spot  where  he  was  vomited  by  the  fish  upon  the  dry  land,  nor  describe 
his  journey  to  Nineveh ;  and  some  have  seen  in  this  evidence  that  it  is  not  true 
history,  but  fable.  "  But,"  as  Keil  has  remarked,  "  the  assertion  that  complete- 
ness in  all  external  circumstances  which  would  serve  to  gratify  curiosity  rather 
than  help  to  an  understanding  of  the  true  facts  of  the  case,  is  indispensable  to  the 
truth  of  any  historical  narrative,  is  one  which  might  expose  the  whole  of  the  his- 
torical writings  of  antiquity  to  criticism,  but  can  never  shake  their  truths.  There 
is  not  a  single  one  of  the  ancient  historians  in  whose  works  such  completeness 
as  this  can  be  found ;  and  still  less  do  the  Biblical  historians  aim  at  communicat- 
ing such  things  as  have  no  close  connection  with  the  main  object  of  the  narrative, 
or  with  the  religious  significance  of  the  facts  themselves."  This  lack  of  detail 
in  the  narrative  may  also  be  accoimted  for  by  its  prophetic  character.  It  is  not 
the  design  of  the  writer  simply  to  give  a  historical  accoimt  of  Jonah's  mission  to 
Nineveh,  but  to  present  those  incidents  in  connection  with  it  which  have  a  typical 
and  prophetical  signification.  But  while  the  narrative  is  by  no  means  complete, 
there  seems  to  us  to  be  an  immistakable  touch  of  reality  in  the  experience  of  Jonah 
as  here  described.  In  the  description  of  his  feelings  and  conduct,  when  the  call 
came  to  him  to  go  to  Nineveh ;  in  his  prayer  in  his  wonderful  grave ;  and  in  the 
record  of  his  feelings  and  conduct  imder  the  unwished  for  and  disappointing  success 
of  his  mission,  there  is  something  so  strange  and  yet  so  natural  as  to  place  them 
outside  the  domain  of  fiction.  And  when  the  narrative  touches  upon  points 
on  which  any  light  can  be  thrown  by  the  researches  into  antiquity,  these  researches 
have  confirmed  its  truthfulness.  The  attempt  to  show  from  the  statement  in  the 
third  verse  of  the  tliird  chapter,  ' '  and  Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  city  of  three 
days'  journey,"  that  the  greatness  of  Nineveh  was  a  thing  of  the  past  when  the 
book  was  wriLlcn,  has  been  perfectly  futile.  The  plain  meaning  of  the  words  is, 
as  granted  evcu  by  the  rationalistic  critics  themselves,  that  Nineveh  was  a  city 
of  vast  diin.ou.sions  when  Jonah  reached  it,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  heaven-given 
mission.  Its  dimensions  as  thus  indicated  have  been  found  to  correspond  with 
the  description  of  ancient  profane  historians,  and  with  recent  examination  of  the 
ruins  of  this  city.  The  command  too,  issued  by  the  King  of  Assyria,  in  proclaim- 
ing a  national  fast  to  put  sackcloth  on  the  beasts  and  flocks  and  make  them  fast, 
is  quite  ;a  accordance  witli  the  customs  which  are  known  to  have  prevailed  in  the 
ancient  Persian  Empire.  The  book  thus  bears  traces  of  having  been  written  by 
one  who  had  seen  Nineveh  in  its  greatness  and  glory,  and  who  had  gained  some 
acquainlaiice  with  its  customs.  IV.  We  would  simply  mention  that  the  book 
was  rectiiyiid-aa-hiii toxical  by-the^Jeaa*  The  fact  is  indisputable,  whatever  weight 
may  be  attached  to  it  in  determining  its  literary  character.  V.  The  book 
•was  regarded  as  historical  bj^  owp- LordJJtme«lf.  In  this  reference  there  is  also 
establislicd  the  reality  of  tlie  marvellous  circumstances  attending  the  mission. 
lie  speaks  to  us  of  Jonah's  being  in  the  belly  of  the  great  fish  as  a  sign, 
crjiietov,  a  term  which  is  often  applied  to  His  own  miraculous  deeds,  in  which, 
through  deliverance  from  bodily  diseases,  was  typified  His  great  work  of  spiritual 
6ah  aiiuii.    It  was  thus  spoken  of  by  Him  as  a  real  miracle,  and  designed  by  God 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


to  be  a  type  of  the  still  greater  miracle  of  His  own  resurrection.  And  receiving 
the  book  as  historical,  the  most  likely  author  is  Jonah  himself.  The  objection 
against  assigning  it  to  so  early  a  period  because  of  the  Aramaic  colouring  of  its 
language  has  been  so  admirably  dealt  with  by  Dr.  Payne  Smith  that  we  will  con- 
clude by  quoting  his  answer  to  it.  "  This  argument  proves  nothing ;  for  scholars 
are  not  by  any  means  agreed  whether  these  Aramaisms  belong  or  not  to  the  declin- 
ing  age  of  Jewish  literature,  or  whether  they  may  not  have  been  the  patois  or  ver- 
nacular dialect  of  the  country  people.  There  is  very  much  to  make  it  probable 
that  pure  Hebrew  was  the  language  only  of  people  of  the  highest  caste,  tne  kings 
•ad  princes,  the  priests  and  prophets  of  Jerusalem,  or  at  most  of  Judah ;  and 
that  the  mass  of  the  people  spoke  Aramaic,  or  a  debased  Hebrew  full  of  Aramaic 
words.  Even  with  us  many  phrases  which  strike  us  as  Americanisms  are 
thoroughly  good  English  forms,  which,  however,  have  not  been  used  in  literature, 
but  belong  to  certain  country  districts  where,  if  some  poet  had  arisen,  or  writer 
of  repute,  they  would,  from  his  pagSvS,  have  won  their  way  into  the  language  of 
scholars.  Now,  Jonah  was  of  Gath-hepher,  a  village  far  away  to  the  North  in 
the  tribe  of  Zabulon.  If  he  had  used  no  words  except  such  as  were  employed  by 
Isaiah,  critics  might  with  good  reason  have  disputed  the  authenticity  of  the  book. 
They  might  fairly  have  said,  '  This  book  was  not  written  by  a  man  brought  up 
in  the  provinces,  but  by  one  of  the  literati  of  Jerusalem  ;  some  practised  hand 
there  has  employed  the  legend  of  Jonah  as  a  vehicle  for  much  pleasing  instruction, 
and  has  constructed  out  of  it  a  very  admirable  allegory.'  "     (R.  Morton.) 

Is  THB  Book  of  Jonah  tbub  histoby  ? — Let  us  examine  the  question  critically, 
but  fairly  :  Was  there  ever  such  a  man  as  Jonah  ?  I  answer,  there  is  just  as  good 
evidence  of  his  being  a  real  personality  as  is  found  in  the  case  of  any  other  of  the 
prophets  ;  and  if  we  assume  him  to  be  a  mythical  character  we  may  as  well  make 
a  like  assumption  respecting  almost  any  other  personality  brought  before  us  in 
the  Old  Testament.  He  is  distinctly  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xiv.  25.  Here  he  is 
mentioned  in  an  incidental  way  (which  is  the  most  convincing) ;  his  father's  name 
is  also  given,  and  he  is  designated  as  "  the  prophet."  The  identification  is  com- 
plete. He  is  also  spoken  of  in  Tobit,  one  of  the  apocryphal  books,  dating  about 
200  B.C.  But  far  overtopping  all  other  evidence,  and  in  itself  of  sufficient  force 
to  settle  any  question  whatever  with  those  who  accept  the  New  Testament  history 
and  Christ's  commission  as  the  Son  of  God,  is  what  is  recorded  in  Matt.  xii.  38-41, 
and  also  in  Luke  xi.  29-32.  Let  the  reader  please  notice  that  Christ  does  not  say, 
' '  as  Jonah  was  represented  as,"  &c.,  as  if  this  book  were  a  fictitious  story.  Neither 
does  He  refer  to  any  moral  lesson  that  this  book  might  be  intended  to  teach ;  but 
He  simply  refers  to  the  facta  recorded  in  the  book.  That  Christ  believed  and 
sccepted  the  genuineness  and  truthfulness  of  this  history  is  too  plain  for  argu- 
ment. And  was  He  mistaken  in  regard  to  it  ?  If  He  did  not  know,  what  becomes 
of  His  Messiahship  ?  Did  Christ  refer  to  some  Miinchausen  fiction  when  He  gave 
Jonah's  history  to  the  generation  in  which  He  lived  as  an  infallible  sign  of  His 
Messiahship ;  and  that  He  should  rise  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day  ?  Are  we 
to  compare  the  whole  teaching  of  the  Gospel  respecting  Christ's  resurrection  to 
Gulliver's  travels  ?  That  is  just  what  Christ  Himself  did  if  there  be  only  a  wild 
piece  of  fiction  in  the  Book  of  Jonah.  As  it  was  with  Jonah,  so  shall  it  be  with  the 
Son  of  Man,  says  Christ.  Whoever  makes  Jonah  to  be  a  dream  makes  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ  to  be  also  a  dream.  I  call  attention  to  the  form  of  introducing 
the  book  as  being  the  same  which  is  found  in  other  books  of  the  prophecies.  For 
example,  ' '  the  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  unto  Hosea,  the  son  of  Beeri  "  ;  * '  the 
word  of  the  Lord  that  came  unto  Joel,  the  son  of  Pethuel  "  ;  "  the  word  of  the 
Lord  which  came  unto  Zephaniah,  the  son  of  Cushi  "  ;  "  the  word  of  the  Lord 
imto  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Berechiah  ' '  ;  and  so  ' '  the  word  of  the  Lord  that  came 
unto  Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai."  The  writer  of  this  book  evidently  intended 
that  the  reader  should  accept  it  as  genuine  history ;  and  he  is  justly  chargeable 
with  intentional  deception  if  it  is  not  so.  I  may  state  further  that  the  Jews 
always  regarded  this  book  as  true  history  (Josephus,  ix.  11,  sec.  2).  And  so  the 
Christian  Church  has  esteemed  it  such  with  great  unanimity.  One  who  spends 
hours  and  days  in  the  catacombs  of  Rome  sees  the  representation  of  this  history,^ 
on  the  walls  many  times  repeated.  I  come  in  the  next  place  to  argue  for  the  truth  • 
of  this  history  from  what  it  says  about  Nineveh.  And  this  Book  of  Jonah  has  been 
illuminated  and  illustrated  and  substantiated  by  the  discoveries  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  so  that  what  sceptics  used  to  say  about  it  no  one  would  think  of  saying 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


now.  They  argued  up  to  1841  that  there  could  not  possibly  have  been  such  a 
city  as  is  described  in  this  book,  because  the  historians  and  geographers  (Strabo, 
Diodorus  Siculus,  and  Ptolemy)  made  no  mention  of  it,  and  certainly  they  would 
have  spoken  of  it  if  there  had  been  a  city  of  three  days'  journey  around  it ;  and 
one  containing  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  infants  who  did  not  know  their 
right  hand  from  their  left.  So  they  said,  Alexander  would  have  found  it  and 
fought  it.  But  what  now  ?  This  city,  after  having  been  biu'ied  up  for  more 
than  twenty-five  hundred  years,  was  discovered  in  1841  ;  and  every  competent 
judge  knows  now  that  it  was  as  large  as  this  book  represents  it.  It  might  easily 
have  contained  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  infants.  Marvellous 
are  the  testimonies  of  these  uncovered  monuments  at  Nineveh ;  and  only  a  small 
part,  probably,  of  the  whole  is  yet  in  our  hands.  But  already  lILram,  king  of 
Tyre,  1000  B.C.,  is  recognised  in  these  records  at  Nineveh.  Benhauad  and  Jehu, 
900  B.C.,  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  Sennacherib  and  Laciiish  rca,ppuar.  Demon- 
strations of  high  civilisation  but  monumental  wickedness  abound.  We  imder- 
stand  now  why  the  Greek  historians  and  the  Roman  say  nothing  about  great 
Nineveh.  Simply  because  they  knew  nothing  about  it.  For  altliough  it  was 
spared  more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  Jonah's  day,  it  had  been  blotted 
out  more  than  three  hundred  years  before  Alexander  was  born ;  more  than  two 
hundred  years  before  Herodotus  was  born ;  nearly  thi-ee  hundred  years  before 
Xenophon  was  born ;  more  than  five  hundred  years  before  Ptolemy,  Diodorus 
Siculus,  or  Strabo  had  learned  their  alphabet.  It  had  been  founded  more  than 
2000  B.C.  In  Gen.  x.  1 1  we  read,  ' '  Out  of  that  land  went  forth  Asshur  and  builded 
Nineveh."  It  was  standing  in  the  day  of  its  greatest  glory  in  Jonah's  time.  It 
was  finally  destroyed  about  713  B.C.,  in  accordance  with  the  terrible  words  of 
prophecy  uttered  by  Nahum.  For  two  years  it  was  besieged  by  the  Medes  and 
Babylonians,  and  at  that  time  was  completely  devastated.  Herodotus  passed 
over  the  site  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  but  makes  no  mention  of  even  any 
visible  ruins.  Neither  does  Xenophon.  Is  it  incredible  that  Jonah  should  have 
been  sent  to  such  a  city  on  such  an  errand  of  mercy  ?  Is  it  incredible  that  he  should 
have  hesitated  to  undertake  the  mission  ?  Is  it  incredible  that  he  should  have 
taken  a  ship  for  Joppa  ?  He  was  born  only  sixty  miles  from  that  city,  at  Gath- 
hepher.  Is  it  incredible  that  a  storm  should  have  overtaken  him  ?  It  was  in  those 
same  waters  that  Paul  went  through  the  trying  experiences  narrated  in  the  twenty- 
seventh  and  twenty-eighth  chapters  of  Acts.  Is  there  anything  incredible  in  the 
account  of  the  sailors  praying  to  their  respective  gods  ?  Is  there  anything  in- 
credible  in  a  sea  monster  following  a  ship,  ready  to  swallow  a  man  if  he  should  be 
thrown  overboard  ?  This  story  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  story  of  ' '  Jonah  and 
the  whale, ' '  but  the  Hebrew  word  ' '  dagh  ' '  is  one  of  wide  import.  Our  translation 
in  the  Old  Testament  calls  it  "  a  great  fish  "  ;  in  the  New  Testament  it  is  called 
a  ' '  whale. ' '  Just  five  years  ago  in  the  Chicago  Inter -Ocean,  vouched  for  by  the 
editors,  was  a  communication  from  a  sea  captain,  saying  that  it  was  a  mistake  to 
maintain  that  the  "great  fish  "  could  not  have  been  a  whale  ;  and  he  went  on  to 
say  that  he  had  no  interest  in  defending  Jonah,  or  in  defending  our  New  Testa- 
)iit;nt  translation  ;  but  in  the  interest  of  natural  science  and  of  simple  truth  he 
stated  that,  having  been  for  some  years  the  captain  of  a  whaling  vessel,  he  knew 
tiiitt  the  sperm-whale  could  easily  swallow  a  man  whole ;  that  one  member  of 
ills  crew,  weighing  one  hundred  and  seventy  pounds,  had  repeatedly  crawled 
tarough  a  whale's  throat  (different  whales  at  different  times)  as  the  throat  lay 
on  the  deck  of  the  ship.  And  then  he  proceeded  to  narrate  a  particular  case  of 
personal  experience  in  which  a  man  weighing  one  hundred  and  sixty-five  pounds 
was  one  of  his  helpers  ;  and  one  day  they  were  in  an  exciting  chase  after  some 
whales,  when  one  of  the  boats  was  struck  by  one  of  the  whales  and  the  men  were 
tiirown  out.  All  of  them  were  successful  in  getting  back  into  the  boat  save  one, 
whom  they  missed  on  calling  the  roll  after  they  had  captured  the  monster  they 
were  pursuing.  They  gave  him  up  for  lost ;  but  on  cutting  up  the  whale  the 
next  day  they  found  him  inside — unconscious,  but  alive.  He  was  restored,  and 
was  still  living,  and  was  following  his  vocation  at  the  time  the  captain  wrote. 
C'ourbet,  in  Cosmos,  of  March  7,  1895,  writes  (and  let  the  reader  observe  that  this 
is  not  "a  fish  story  "  by  a  romancer,  nor  "  a  sailor's  yarn,"  but  the  report  of  a 
scientific  expedition  ;  and  such  substantially  are  all  the  testimonies  which  I 
quote) :  "  The  discoveries  of  the  Prince  of  Monaco  were  such  as  to  relieve  mo 
of  all  difficulty  in  believing  the  Bible  story  that  a  whale  swallowed  Jonah."  A 
writer  in  the  Academy  of  Sciences — M.  Joubin — says :   "A  sperm  whale  can  easily 


/ 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JONAH. 


swallow  an  animal  taller  and  heavier  than  a  man. ' '  And  he  adds  :  ' '  The  animals 
when  swallowed  can  keep  alive  some  time  in  the  whale's  stomach."  Lymr.n 
Abbott  is  reported  as  stirring  up  the  mu-th  of  his  congregation  a  while  ago  by- 
alluding  to  the  "  half-digested  man  Jonah."  But  if  Lyman  Abbott  will  study 
physiology  a  little  he  will  learn  that,  although  the  gastric  fluid  is  a  remarkably 
powerful  solvent,  capable  of  dissolving  many  solid  substances,  yet  it  has  no  power 
whatever  over  living  substances.  And  if  he  used  a  very  little  logic,  superadded 
to  his  physiology,  he  would  see  that  unless  this  were  true  the  gastric  fluid  would 
at  once  assail  the  coats  of  the  stomach  itself,  and  render  all  animal  life  impossible. 
This  is  one  of  those  wonderful  proofs  of  the  Divine  wisdom  in  the  working  of  living 
organisms.  Jonah  must  first  die  before  digestion  could  even  begin.  If  we  deny 
all  miracles,  then  we  must  away  with  all  revelation  and  all  the  supernatural.  ' '  But," 
says  one,  "  I  am  prepared  to  admit  miracles  wherever  there  is  a  justifying  reason  ; 
but  what  reason  is  there  here  ?  ' '  Think  a  moment ;  think  a  moment.  Here 
was  a  wicked  city  going  to  destruction.  God  so  loved  them  that  He  bade  His 
servant  give  them  warning  ;  and  when  he  obej^ed  the  Divine  voice  the  whole  city 
was  moved  to  turn  away  from  their  sins,  and  as  a  matter  of  history,  prolonged 
their  existence  for  the  space  of  more  than  a  hundred  years.  And  no  doubt  Jonah's 
wonderful  experience  proved  to  be  as  the  mighty  power  of  God  in  bringing  about 
the  result.  What  a  preacher  Jonah  must  have  been  after  that  living  burial  !  The 
Lord  knows  when  it  is  worth  while  to  work  a  miracle ;  and  a  more  satisfactory 
reason  for  one  than  is  found  in  this  history  no  man  ought  to  ask.  Jonah  was  worth 
saving ;  the  Ninevites  were  worth  saving  ;  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand 
infants  especially  were  worth  saving.     (E.  B.  Fairfield,  D.D.] 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 

JONAH. 

CHAPTER  L 

Tebs.  1-S.  Now  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah. — Jonah,  the 
runaway  prophet  : — The  commission  may  be  viewed — I.  In  its  sotjbob.  It  is 
— 1.  Supreme,  as  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  2.  Peremptory ;  it  is  absolute, 
imperative,  final.  3.  Honourable.  As  associating  the  commissioned  with  the 
commissioner.  Investing  him  with  royal  rights,  privileges,  honours.  H.  In  it3 
EBdPlBNT.  Jonah,  1.  In  his  filial  relationship:  the  son.  2.  In  his  ofl&cial 
capacity :  prophet.  Learn — (1)  That  in  the  economy  of  moral  purposes  Grod' 
makes  use  of  creature  agency.  (2)  That  appointments  in  this  economy  ara 
specific  and  sovereign.  (3)  That  the  rewards  of  faithfulness  in  Christian  service 
will  be  promotion  here,  and  coronation  hereafter.  III.  In  its  pxtrpoet.  "  Arise, 
go  to  Nineveh."  It  is — 1.  A  summons  to  activity.  Shake  off  dull  sloth.  Bouse 
thee  from  careless  ease.  (1)  The  physical  plays  an  important  part  in  the  execu- 
tion of  Divine  purposes.  (2)  The  will  too  must  give  its  sanction,  or  all  the  activ- 
ities will  be  held  in  restful  subjection.  Where  there  is  no  will-power  a  man- 
is  a  mere  tool  in  the  hands  of  others.  2.  A  caU  to  arduous  duty.  Note — (1)  Its 
sphere.  "  Nineveh,  that  great  city."  In  Grod's  great  busy  world  there  is  a 
definite  sphere  for  everyone.  (2)  Its  spirit.  "  Cry  against  it."  Energy  was 
to  rise  to  its  highest  point.  To  cry  requires  energy  of  soul ;  a  vivid  realisation 
of  sin,  and  moral  courage.  (J.  O.  Keen,  D.D.)  The  behests  of  God: — We 
are  apt  to  think  that  this  coming  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  to  men  in  ancient 
times  was  so  special  a  circumstance  that  it  has  no  application  to  ourselves.  How 
rarely  it  occurs  to  us  that  he  who  spoke  to  the  prophets  in  times  past  is  now 
speaking  unto  us  as  directly  and  vividly,  by  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
How  are  we  to  \uiderstand  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  has  come  to  as  ?  Have 
we  a  strong  conviction  of  duty  ?  That  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  We  should  ask, 
not  "  what  is  expedient  ?  "  but  "  what  is  right  ?  "  If  a  thing  is  right,  then  it 
is  a  revelation  from  God ;  it  is  a  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  my  heart ; 
and  at  all  risks  it  must  be  done.  No  man  knows  what  he  is,  and  what  he  can 
do,  until  he  knows  the  severity  of  the  behests  of  God.  Our  call,  like  Jonah's, 
is  to  go  wherever  wickedness  is,  and  cry  against  it.  Every  child  of  God  is  to  be 
a  protesting  prophet.  Every  earnest  man  is  to  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  the 
word  of  condemnation  when  he  comes  into  the  presence  of  sin.  In  Jonah  we 
have  a  man  falling  below  the  great  occasions  of  life.  Every  man  has  some  great 
chance  put  into  his  hands.  How  possible  it  is  to  be  doing  instead  some  Uttle 
peddling  work,  to  be  mistaking  fuss  for  energy,  and  an  i(fie  industry  for  that 
holy  consecration  which  absorbs  every  power.  It  is  said  that  Jonah  "  paid  his 
fare."  How  partictilar  some  of  us  are  about  these  little  pedantries  of  moraUty  I 
Many  of  us  are  making  up  by  pedantries  what  we  are  wanting  in  the  principles 
of  our  Ufe.  We  have  good  points  without  having  a  good  soul ;  we  have  beautiful 
characteristics  without  having  a  solid  and  undoubted  character.  Jonah  has 
paid  his  fare,  but  he  has  forsaken  God.  Can  a  man  Uke  that  do  anything  right  ? 
It  is  said  that  the  mariners  "  cast  forth  their  wares."  The  bad  man  never  suffers 
alone.  This  bad  man  causes  a  loss  of  property.  He  paid  his  fare,  but  it  was 
taken  out  again  in  the  loss  of  the  wares.     Wickedness  is  the  cause  of  social  loss. 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TBAT0B.  [chap.  i. 

What  a  crying  out  for  gods  there  is  in  the  time  of  trouble  !  Note  the  instinctive- 
ness  of  the  religious  element  that  is  in  man.  We  are  all  religious.  What  was 
wrong  was  found  out  at  last,  in  the  case  of  Jonah,  and  they  cast  him  into  the 
sea,  which  then  ceased  from  its  raging.  Nothing  is  ever  settled  until  it  is  settled 
right.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Jonah  was  a  man  of  the  northern  kingdom, — an 
Israelite  prophet,  who  had  been  foretelling  the  highest  prosperity  to  which  the 
Ten  Tribes  ever  attained,  and  the  widest  extension  which,  under  Jeroboam  II., 
their  territory  ever  received.  Nineveh  was  a  Gentile,  that  is  to  say,  a  heathen 
city ;  the  very  city,  moreover,  from  which  were  to  come  those  judgments  and 
the  destruction  which  prophets  like  Jonah's  contemporary,  Amos,  were  about 
this  time  beginning  to  announce  as  certain  to  fall  upon  Israel  at  no  very  distant 
date.  Jonah,  the  Israelite,  then,  was  sent  to  a  heathen  city,  and — whether 
he  knew  it  or  not — to  that  particular  enemy  of  his  coimtry  from  which  there 
was  most  to  fear.  To  an  Israelite  patriot,  with  even  the  smallest  intimation 
of  this,  how  natural  to  say,  "  To  Nineveh  ?  "  No,  let  Nineveh  go  on  and  sin, 
and  perish ;  the  sooner  the  safer  for  my  country.  To  warn  Nineveh,  and  so  to 
turn  away  its  doom — what  is  that  but  to  keep  alive  the  fire  which  is  to  consume  our 
Samaria  and  our  national  life  ?  In  any  case,  whether  Jonah  felt  any  patriotic 
difficulty  or  not,  the  religious  difficulty  was  great  enough.  To  go  to  heathen 
people  with  God's  message,  one  of  mercy  as  he  saw  clearly,  quite  as  much  as  of 
judgment — that  alone  was  repugnant  to  all  his  instincts.  "  No  ;  rather  let  me 
no  longer  be  one  of  the  prophets  who  stand  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  ready 
for  any  errand,  awaiting  His  commands.  Rather  let  me  lay  down  my  office, 
and  go  out  from  before  His  face.  Let  me  die  first !  "  That  is  the  heart  of  a  good 
man,  but  of  a  narrow  one.  It  is  not  the  heart  of  the  God  even  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. It  is  sometimes  made  matter  of  reproach  to  the  New  Testament,  and  to 
Christianity,  as  it  is  there  expounded,  that  it  makes  little  or  no  account  of  patriot- 
ism. There  is  some  truth  in  the  criticism ;  but  why  ?  Patriotism  has  often 
been  a  noble  thing ;  but  it  is  really  a  narrow  thing,  narrower,  at  any  rate,  than 
the  heart  and  view  of  God.  The  patriot  sees  and  loves  his  fellow-countrymen  ; 
God  only  sees  man  !  He  loves  Israel,  even  to  idolatrous  Israel  of  the  Ten  Tribes. 
But  God  loves  the  world.  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  would  have  one  of 
the  earliest,  if  not  the  earliest,  of  the  prophetic  writers  to  go  and  offer  His  mercy 
to  a  heathen  city,  the  enemy  of  His  people.  (H.  J.  Foster.)  The  character 
of  Jonah  : — One  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  about  the  Book  of  Jonah  is,  that 
while  he  himself  is  so  prominent  in  it,  yet  there  is  not  a  word  from  beginning  to 
end  of  comment  upon  his  character  and  conduct.  No  word  is  said  of  his  state 
of  mind,  his  sense  of  sin,  his  repentance,  his  return  to  the  attitude  of  submission 
and  prompt  obedience  to  the  Divine  command.  The  facts  are  set  before  us  in 
the  barest,  most  naked  simplicity,  without  one  single  sentence  of  reflection.  The 
only  probable  and  consistent  view  of  the  work  is,  that  Jonah  wrote  it  himself. 
He  therefore  said  as  little  about  himself  as  possible.  He  told  the  facts  with  all 
their  weight  of  meaning  against  his  own  character,  just  as  they  were,  without 
a  line  of  exculpation  or  condemnation.  1.  The  first  point  at  which  the  narrative 
may  be  said  to  touch  the  personal  character  of  the  prophet  is  the  flight  to  Joppa. 
Here  is  a  man,  conscious  of  special  inspiration  and  authority,  doing  direct  violence 
to  the  Word  of  the  Most  High  !  We  must  begin  our  study  with  this  conviction 
— Jonah  meant  nothing  throughout  like  determined  rebellion  against  God.  From 
the  first  he  seems  to  have  understood  the  mission  to  have  been  one  of  mercy, 
and  not  of  destruction.  The  man  had  laid  hold  of  the  thought  of  Divine  good- 
ness and  compassion.  Jonah's  sin  was  not  apostasy  from  God.  He  simply  shrunk 
from  the  mission.  The  struggle  in  Jonah's  mind  must  have  been  the  result  either 
of  personal  feeling  or  of  mistaken  ideas.  It  may  have  been  personal  feeling  that 
lay  at  the  root  of  his  conduct.  There  was  personal  danger.  He  did  not  care 
to  preach  to  heathen.  But  his  feelings  were  founded  on  false  ideas  about  God, 
and  about  the  people  of  God,  and  their  vocation.  Another  view  may  be  taken 
of  Jonah's  mind.  He  anticipated  the  result  of  his  mission,  and  did  not  like  it. 
His  prediction  would  be  falsified  in  the  result.  And  a  mission  to  the  stronghold 
of  heathenism  seemed  quite  a  new  departure  in  the  religious  history  of  Israel. 
It  seemed  to  Jonah  a  change  in  the  Divine  action,  so  stupendous  that  he  could 
not  drive  out  of  his  mind  doubts  as  to  the  authority  of  the  message.  2.  Look  at 
another  point, — the  sleep  into  which  the  prophet  fell  instantly  that  he  went 
down  into  the  ship  is  quite  consistent  with  a  state  of  perplexity  and  fear.  Ho 
was  so  wearied  with  the  mental  strain  and  struggle,  so  burdened  with  the  weight 


CHAP.  1.]  JONAH.  3 

of  a  reproachful  conscience,  that  he  gladly  hid  himself  from  the  faces  of  his  fellow- 
men,  and  sought  the  darkness  and  solitude  of  his  sleeping  place,  where  nature 
asserted  its  demands,  and  he  was  soon  wrapt  in  unconsciousness.  When  he  was 
awakened  he  had  no  crime  to  confess,  such  as  heathen  men  would  understand, 
and  condemn  by  the  light  of  moral  law.  Jonah's  character  was  defective  rather 
than  corrupt.  Like  the  Apostle  Peter,  he  needed  a  great  deal  of  teaching,  but 
the  root  of  his  piety  was  sound  and  deep.  He  put  himself  at  once  into  the  hands 
of  the  chastising  Jehovah.     (R.  A.  Bedford,  M. A.)        Jonah  regarded  as  a  type  : — 

1.  In  his  solemn  discovery  and  apprehension.  Sin  hath  entered  among  us,  and 
the  Creator  is  angry.  Some  victim  is  awanting  to  pacify  His  just  indignation ; 
but  where  is  the  sacrifice  to  be  found  ?  At  length  a  merciful  Heaven  interposes, 
and  the  sacrifice  is  revealed.  2.  In  the  generous  self-devotement  of  the  prophet. 
Applied  to  the  doctrine  of  substitution,  everything  is  plain,  everything  is  instruc- 
tive. 3.  In  his  descent  to  the  place  of  the  dead.  Two  circumstances  in  the 
descent  of  Jonah.  (1)  His  descent  to  the  grave.  "  Out  of  the  belly  of  hell." 
(2)  In  the  midst  of  all  this  suffering  the  prophet  was  yet  alive.  4.  In  the  doctrine 
of  Messiah's  resurrection.  5.  In  the  mission  of  Jonah  to  the  Gentiles.  His 
was  just  the  commission  of  Jesus.  To  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  He 
first  turned  His  eyes ;  then  He  sent  His  disciples  to  the  fo\ir  winds  of  heaven. 
Baying,  "  Preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature."     {James  Simpson.) 

Ver.  2,  Go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city,  and  cry  against  it. — The  com- 
parative corruption  of  great  cities: — Proposition.  That  though  by  no  means 
exclusively,  yet  in  cities  that  are  great  and  luxurious,  integrity  is  exposed  to 
peculiar  snares,  and  depravity  cherished  to  an  extraordinary  growth.  I.  Explaih 
THIS  PBOPOSITION.  1.  We  confine  human  depravity  to  no  combination  of  cir- 
cumstances. In  some  situations,  it  is  true,  the  poison  may  evolve  its  noxious 
qualities  more  fully  and  freely  than  in  others  ;  but  in  one  way  or  another  it 
makes  itself  manifest  in  all.  It  is  not  intended  to  represent  this  depravity  as 
in  itself  essential  to  our  nature.     Sin  is  not  essential,  but  accidental,  to  our  nature. 

2.  It  should  also  be  observed,  that  in  great  cities  there  are  even  advantages 
which  are  nowhere  else  to  be  so  fully  enjoyed.  The  children  of  this  world,  wise 
in  their  generation,  instantly  discern  the  advantages  of  city  situations,  in  reference 
to  their  particular  pursuits.  Beside  the  civil  and  intellectual,  there  are  moral 
and  religious  advantages  which,  in  more  sequestered  situations,  we  can  scarcely 
hope  to  enjoy.  In  cities  there  is  an  easy  and  regular  access  to  the  ordinances 
of  grace.  3.  There  are  peculiar  temptations,  to  which  more  obscure  situations 
are  liable.  In  solitude  the  mind  is  in  danger  of  being  filled  with  prejudices,  and 
the  heart  with  passions,  which  at  once  destroy  present  tranquillity  and  endanger 
future  well-being.  II.  Illustrate  the  subject  before  us.  That  in  populous 
cities  corruption  peculiarly  prevails.  Consider — 1.  The  multitude  of  trans- 
gressors.    2.   The  aggravated   nature  of  the  sins   there   particularly  indulged. 

3.  The  individual  sinner  usually  attains  a  degree  of  presumptuous  hardness,  not 
common  in  less  frequented  scenes.  III.  The  causes  from  which  this  peculiab 
depravity  proceeds.  1.  The  depravity  of  the  heart  is  the  groimdwork  of 
the  whole.  2.  Neglect  of  parental  instruction.  3.  The  infectious  power  of 
example.  4.  The  chilling  influence  of  the  world.  5.  The  seducing  influence 
of  luxury.  {James  Simpson.)  Every  man  his  call  : — This  same  event  comes 
to  every  man.  Do  not  suppose  that  Jonah  is  a  lonely  creatiure  afar  off  in  the 
ages  somewhere,  having  an  experience  unique  and  incommunicable.  The 
experience  of  Jonah  is  the  experience  of  every  good  man.  What  is  your  call 
in  life  ?  To  go  wherever  wickedness  is,  and  cry  against  it.  Nineveh  has  perished, 
but  Ninevitish  iniquity  is  upon  our  streets,  is  throwing  its  shadow  upon  our 
thresholds,  is  sending  a  keen  wail  of  pain  and  blasphemy  through  the  very  air 
that  blows  about  us.  Every  child  of  God  is  to  be  a  protesting  prophet.  Every 
earnest  man  is  to  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  the  word  of  condemnation  when 
he  comes  into  the  presence  of  sin.  If  we  could  realise  this  call,  all  the  Lord's 
people  would  be  prophets.  Is  it  not  a  burden  to  speak  against  wickedness  ? 
Where  is  the  man  that  dare  do  it  ?  It  is  easy  to  condemn  wickedness  generally. 
The  difficulty  is  to  say  to  the  individual — "  Thou  art  the  man."  Almost  any- 
body can  stand  up  before  a  thousand  people,  and  speak  against  iniquity  in  the 
mass.  But  he  must  be  a  lion  from  God  that  dare  say  to  the  individual  criminal, 
"  I  charge  you,  in  the  name  of  the  Living  One,  with  doing  things  that  are  wrong." 
Still,  it  is  well  that  we  should  have  men  who  stand  up  in  the  midst  of  cities,  and 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


who  let  the  cities  know  that  there  are  eyes  upon  them  that  see  things  in  moral 
relationships,  and  aspects,  and  consequences :  and  woe  betide  the  cities  of  the 
earth  when  the  voice  of  the  prophet  is  no  longer  heard  in  them.  It  is  a  harsh 
voice,  it  is  a  piercing  cry  ;  but  believe  it,  and  regeneration  comes,  and  restora- 
tion and  lost  peace  return,  and  things  are  set  right  before  the  face  of  God. 
{Joseph  Parker,  JD.D.)  Jonah's  commission  : — The  city  to  which  he  was  com- 
missioned was  remarkable  for  its  magnitude  and  its  wickedness.  1.  Nineveh 
was  a  great  city  in  many  respects.  (1)  It  was  of  great  antiquity  (Gen.  x.  9-12).'' 
(2)  It  was  great  in  respect  of  its  power.  It  was  the  chief  city  of  the  mightiest 
monarchy  in  the  world.  (3)  In  respect  of  its  wealth.  (4)  In  respect  of  its  extent. 
Probably  sixty  miles  in  circumference.     (5)  In  respect  of  its  population.     Pro- 

^  bably  600,000  persons  resided  within  its  walls.  2.  Nineveh  was  a  guilty  city."* 
Cruelty  was  the  characteristic  vice.  No  man  in  Nineveh  was  secure  from  the 
violence  to  which  its  people  were  prone.  3.  Nineveh  was  a  Gentile  city.  It 
was  this  circumstance  which  chiefly  rendered  the  commission  addressed  to  Jonah 
so  remarkable.  It  was  so  imusual  that  it  startled  Jonah.  God  displayed  His 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  mankind  at  large,  even  at  that  remote  and  xmripe  epoch. 
The  Israelites  were  slow  to  learn  that  God  did  thus  interest  Himself  in  the  welfare 
of  the  Gentiles.  Now  consider  the  disobedience  of  Jonah  to  the  mandate  addressed 
to  him.  The  prophet's  object  was  to  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ;  i.e., 
to  get  as  far  as  possible  beyond  the  range  of  those  manifestations  of  the  Divine 
presence  which  were  peculiar  to  Palestine  and  its  neighbourhood.     Jonah  sought 

<  to  escape  from  such  a  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence  as  he  had  been 
accustomed  to  experience  in  his  own  country,  and  may  have  regarded  as 
peculiar  to  it.  The  presence  of  the  Lord  had  become  intolerable  to  Jonah  from 
the  moment  that  his  want  of  sympathy  with  the  Divine  will  in  relation  to  Nineveh 
had  become  apparent  to  himself.  Moreover,  Jonah  was  an  official  of  high  rank 
in  the  theocracy,  and  his  words  may  mean,  "  I  wiU  resign  my  office  rather  than 
undertake  this  duty."  But  he  had  no  right  to  resign  the  office  he  held  in  the 
service  of  Jehovah.  His  guilt  and  presumption  are  apparent ;  but  have  we 
not  been  as  guilty  and  presumptuous  as  he ;  shrinking  from  duties  that  we  knew 
were  laid  upon  us  ?  {Samuel  Clift  Burn.)  Jonah  sent  to  Nineveh  : — A  natural 
interpretation  of  the  book  is  this, — Jonah  had  as  great  contempt  for  the  heathen 
as  his  bigoted  brethren  of  Israel.  He  was  sent  on  a  mission  of  mercy  to  his  political 
enemies.  As  he  had  never  learned  to  love  his  enemies,  he  fled  from  so  distasteful 
a  service.  He  was  disciplined  in  the  stomach  of  a  fish  till  he  was  willing  to 
deliver  formally  the  commission  given.  He  preached  in  Nineveh,  still  hating 
those  who,  if  spared,  might  overthrow  Israel.  He  was  fm-ther  disciplined  by 
the  lesson  of  the  gourd.  He  at  last  learned  the  lesson  of  pity,  and  rejoiced  in 
the  good  that  accrued  to  his  enemies,  singing,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord." 
I.  Thb  prophet's  commission  to  bless  his  enemies.  About  825  b.c.  God  sent 
Jonah  with  a  message  to  Nineveh,  which  was  regarded  by  Israel  as  its  natxiral 
enemy.  II.  Jonah's  refusal  to  accept  a  mission  of  mercy  to  his  fobs. 
Jonah  was  not  a  son  of  Satan,  but  a  wilfi^  servant  of  the  Lord,  who,  by  reason 
of  false  views,  failed  to  comprehend  Jehovah's  broad  policy  in  the  government 
of  this  world.  III.  How  God  humiliated  His  prophet  before  heathen 
sailors.  Humiliating  must  have  been  the  confession  that  he  who  knew  more 
about  holy  things  than  all  others  on  board  was  afraid  to  trust  and  obey  his  own 
God.  IV.  How  the  heathen  sailors  made  friends  with  Jonah's  God.  The 
prophet's  acknowledgment  of  his  fear  of  Jehovah  struck  a  nameless  terror  to 
the  consciences  of  the  crew.  They  did  their  best  to  save  him  from  his  fate,  but 
all  was  in  vain.  When  Jonah  was  cast  overboard,  and  the  storm  ceased,  they 
felt  that  Jonah's  God  was  the  true  God,  and  must  henceforth  be  their  God. 
{Boston  Homilies.)  Ood  speaking  to  man  in  m^rcy,  and  man  fleeing  from  Ood 
in  disdtedience : — I.  God  SPEAKiNa  to  man  in  mercy.  1.  Here  He  speaks.  "  The 
Word  of  the  Lord."  His  Word  to  Jonah,  like  His  word  to  aU  men,  was  clear, 
brief,  weighty,  practical.  2.  Here  He  speaks  to  an  mdividual.  He  speaks 
to  aU  men  in  nature,  conscience,  history ;  but  in  sovereignty  He  singles  some 
men  out  for  special  communications.  3.  Here  He  speaks  to  an  individual  for 
the  sake  of  a  commvmity.  "  Arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city."  Why  does 
God  call  it  a  great  city  ?  To  men  it  was  considered  "  great,"  great  in  numbers, 
pomp,  pretensions,  masonry.  But  to  God  it  could  only  be  great  in  sin,  for  sin 
is  a  great  thing  to  God ;  it  is  a  black  cloud  in  His  universe.  For  the  sake  of 
this  city,  in  order  to  effect  its  moral  reformation,  and  therefore  to  save  it,  Jonah 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  5 

receives  a  commission.  "  Arise,"  shake  off  thy  languor,  quit  thyself  for  action, 
go  down  to  this  city,  and  "  cry  against  it."  Be  earnest.  The  danger  is  great, 
near  at  hand,  and  approaching  every  minute.  Observe  here  two  things — (1)  Man's 
distinguishing  faculty.  What  is  that  ?  The  power  to  receive,  to  appreciate, 
and  to  work  out  the  ideas  of  the  Infinite.  No  other  creature  on  earth  has  this 
power.  (2)  God's  method  of  helping  humanity.  God  enlightens,  purifies,  and 
ennobles  man  by  man.  We  have  this  "  treasure  in  earthen  vessels."  II.  Man 
FLEEING  FROM  GoD  IN  DISOBEDIENCE.  "  But  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto  Tarshish, 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  Here  is  a  threefold  revelation  of  man.  1.  His 
moral  freedom.  God  did  not  coerce  Jonah,  did  not  drive  him  to  Nineveh.  Man 
has  power  to  resist  God — a  greater  power,  this,  than  can  be  found  in  all  the  heavenly 
orbs,  or  in  the  whole  history  of  material  organisms.  This  power  invests  man 
with  all  but  infinite  importance,  links  him  to  moral  government.  "  Ye  do  always 
resist  the  Spirit  of  God."  2.  His  daring  depravity.  Alas  !  men  have  not  merely 
the  power  but  the  disposition  to  oppose  God.  This  is  their  guilt  and  their  ruin ; 
it  is  what  men  are  doing  everywhere,  trying  to  break  the  shackles  of  moral  responsi- 
bility, trying  to  elude  the  Infinite.  3.  His  egregious  folly.  His  endeavouring 
to  escape  from  God  was — (1)  Not  merely  an  impulse,  but  a  resolution.  Had  it 
been  a  sudden  wish  it  would  have  been  bad.  He  "  rose  up."  He  rallied  and 
marshalled  his  energies.  (2)  Not  merely  a  resolution,  but  an  effort.  He  "  went 
down  to  Joppa."  The  probability  is,  that  he  went  with  the  greatest  speed  to 
Joppa,  the  Jaffa  of  this  day.  When  he  reached  the  spot,  how  long  he  was  about 
the  quays  in  search  of  a  suitable  vessel.  (3)  Not  merely  an  effort,  but  a  per- 
severing effort.  It  was  not  one  or  two  or  three  spasmodic  efforts  and  then 
over.  When  he  found  a  suitable  vessel  he  "  paid  the  fare  thereof."  Ah,  what 
fares  men  pay  in  the  career  of  sin !  (Homilist.)  Jonah's  commission : — 
1.  When  God  has  a  work  to  do  He  is  never  at  a  loss  for  agents  to  accomplish 
His  purposes.  The  Lord,  on  some  occasions,  fixes  on  instruments  which  appear 
to  us  the  least  suitable.  All  fitness  is  of  God  ;  He  finds  none  fit  for  His  service 
till  He  makes  them  so,  and  He  can  qualify  the  most  defective.  Should  any 
ask  why  God  fixed  upon  Jonah,  and  preferred  him  before  any  man  on  earth  for 
this  important  service  ?  We  answer  that  God  giveth  no  account  of  His  matters  ; 
and  though  His  footsteps  are  in  the  great  deep.  He  never  errs  in  judgment.  The 
Word  of  the 'Lord  came  to  Jonah.  He  knew  who  spoke  to  him,  and  what  He 
said, — yet  he  was  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  call.  2.  The  commission  which 
God  gave  to  Jonah.  Great  cities  are  great  evils,  seminaries  of  vice,  and  schools 
for  profligacy.  The  more  the  fallen  children  of  men  herd  together,  the  more 
deeply  they  corrupt  one  another.  Cities  may  be  great  in  many  respects,  and 
yet  little  in  God's  account,  because  they  are  low  in  all  real  excellence.  3.  Nineveh 
was  ripe  for  destruction,  Mark  carefuUy,  that  all  our  sins  go  up  before  God,, 
and  are  registered  in  His  book  of  remembrance,  with  a  view  to  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. Cry  against  this  great  city.  "  Their  sins  have  cried  long  and  loud  against 
Me,  and  now  My  vengeance  from  heaven  shall  cry  against  them."  When  sinners 
kindle  anger  in  the  bosom  of  God,  who  is  love  itself,  great  m^ist  be  their  guilt, 
and  tremendous  will  be  their  judgments  when  love  turns  to  wrath.  Nineveh 
is  ripe  for  ruin ;  God  is  coming  in  His  wrath  against  it ;  yet  He  halts  by  the 
way,  and  sends  His  messenger  first,  to  say  that  He  Himself  is  coming.  (Thomas 
Jones,  of  Creaton. )  The  reasons  for  Jonah's  mission  to  Nineveh  .•—Jonah  was 
a  suitable  agent,  but  he  was  not  indispensable.  God  called  him,  but  He  could 
do  without  him.  To  be  the  bearer  of  such  a  message  as  that  which  is  here  recorded 
could  not  in  itself  be  pleasant,  but  it  was  highly  honourable.  To  refuse  to  speak 
in  such  a  case,  at  Divine  bidding,  was  almost  to  take  part  with  the  wrong-doers, 
and  is  recorded  in  this  book,  by  Jonah's  own  hand,  to  his  personal  discredit. 
There  is  but  this  one  reason  for  the  mission  stated  here ;  but  there  were  at  least 
several  other  reasons  in  reseive — some  gently  hinted,  some  unrevealed  until 
ages  afterwards.  God,  as  we  know,  not  only  kindled  in  the  indignation  of  justice 
against  what  was  wrong,  but  He  longed  for  the  repentance  of  the  wrong-doers, 
and  for  the  manifestation  of  His  mercy  among  them  when  thus  penitent.  He 
thought,  too,  of  the  future ;  of  the  use  He  would  make  of  that  people  when  His 
people  should  be  led  among  them  captive.  As  He  sent  Joseph  into  Egypt,  He 
will  send  Jonah  into  Nineveh,  to  provide  a  remedy  for  a  coming  evil,  a  home 
for  a  captive  people.  He  thought,  too,  of  the  far  future  of  the  world,  and  of 
the  spiritual  \ise  to  be  made  of  the  penitence  of  that  wicked  people  in  the  pro- 
clamation of  His  mercy  by  the  Gospel.     He  has  made  the  Ninevites  "  a  pattern  " 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

to  all  cities  and  ages — a  proof  that  shall  be  known  as  long  as  history  remains, 
that  if  a  whole  city,  full  of  sinners,  turn  unto  the  Lord,  they  shall  lire.  Whether 
Jonah  knew  much  of  these  and  such  like  reasons  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  he 
knew  quite  enough  to  make  the  road  to  Nineveh,  far  and  difficult  as  it  might 
be,  the  Lord's  highway  of  duty  and  life  to  him  ;  and  any  way  else  he  could  find, 
the  devil's  road  of  crookedness,  danger,  and  death.     (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  But  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  imto  Tarshish. — The  refusal  to  obey  a 
God-given  charge : — Jonah  sullenly  resolved  not  to  obey  God's  voice.  What  a 
glimpse  into  the  prophetic  office  that  gives  us  !  The  Divine  Spirit  could  be 
resisted,  and  the  prophet  was  no  mere  machine,  but  a  living  man  who  had  to 
consent  with  his  devoted  will  to  bear  the  burden  of  the  Lord.  One  refused,  and 
his  refusal  teaches  us  how  superb  and  self-sacrificing  was  the  faithfulness  of  the 
rest.  Jonah  represents  the  national  feelings  which  he  shared.  He  refused 
because  he  feared  success.  God's  goodness  was  being  stretched  rather  too  far 
if  it  was  going  to  take  in  Nineveh.  His  was  the  spirit  of  the  prodigal's  elder 
brother.  Israel  was  set  among  the  nations,  not  as  a  dark  lantern,  but  as  the 
great  candlestick  in  the  temple  court  proclaimed,  to  ray  out  light  to  all  the  world. 
Jonah's  mission  was  but  a  concrete  instance  of  Israel's  charge.  All  sorts  of 
religious  exclusiveness,  contemptuous  estimates  of  other  nations,  and  that  bastard 
patriotism  which  would  keep  national  blessings  for  our  own  country  alone,  are 
condemned  by  this  story.  Note  the  fatal  consequences  of  refusal  to  obey  the 
God-given  charge.  Jonah  only  meant  to  escape  from  service.  The  storm  is 
described  with  a  profusion  of  unusual  words,  all  apparently  technical  terms, 

Sicked  up  on  board.  No  wonder  that  the  fugitive  prophet  slunk  down  into  some 
ark  corner,  and  sat  bitterly  brooding  there,  self-accused  and  condemned,  till 
weariness  and  the  relief  of  the  tension  of  his  journey  lulled  him  to  sleep.  It 
was  a  stupid  and  heavy  sleep.  Over  against  the  picture  of  the  insensible  prophet 
is  set  the  behaviour  of  the  heathen  sailors,  or  "  salts,"  as  the  story  calls  them. 
Their  conduct  is  part  of  the  lesson  of  the  book.  Their  treatment  of  Jonah  is 
generous  and  chivalrous.  They  are  so  much  touched  by  the  whole  incident  that 
they  offer  sacrifices  to  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  and  are,  in  some  sense,  and  possibly 
but  for  a  time,  worshippers  of  Him.  All  this  holds  up  the  mirror  to  Israel,  by 
showing  how  much  of  human  kindness  and  generosity,  and  how  much  of  suscepti- 
bility for  the  truth  which  Israel  had  to  declare,  lay  in  rude  hearts  beyond  its 
pale.  Jonah's  conduct  in  the  storm  is  no  less  noble  than  his  former  conduct  had 
Deen  base.  The  burst  of  the  tempest  blew  all  the  fog  from  his  mind,  and  he 
paw  the  stars  again.  His  confession  of  faith  ;  his  calm  conviction  that  he  was 
the  cause  of  the  storm  ;  his  quiet,  unhesitating  command  to  throw  him  into 
the  wild  chaos  foaming  about  the  ship ;  his  willing  acceptance  of  death  as  the 
wages  of  his  sin — all  tell  how  true  a  saint  he  was  in  the  depths  of  his  souL  The 
miracle  of  rescue  is  the  last  point.  *  Jonah's  repentance  saved  his  Hfe.  The  wider 
lesson  of  the  means  of  making  chastisement  into  blessing,  and  securing  a  way  of 
escape — namely,  by  owning  the  justice  of  the  stroke,  and  returning  to  duty — is 
raeant  for  us  all.  The  ever-present  providence  of  God,  the  possible  safety  of  the 
nation,  even  when  in  captivity,  the  preservation  of  every  servant  of  God  who 
turns  to  the  Lord  in  his  chastisement,  the  exhibition  of  penitence  as  the  way  of 
deliverance,  are  the  purposes  for  which  the  miracle  was  wrought  and  told. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Jonah's  self-will : — The  main  features  of  the  case  are  clear, 
and  from  these  we  draw  the  principles  and  lessons  to  be  enforced.  On  the  one 
hand,  there  is  a  Divine  commission  and  command  distinctly  and  authoritatively 
given,  with  some  of  the  reasons  for  it  annexed,  although  with  others  certainly 
not  fully  revealed.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  state  of  reluctance  and  suspense 
ever  verging  towards  actual  disobedience — expressing  itself,  now  in  remonstrance, 
now  in  request  for  exemption,  now  in  moody  and  distrustful  silence.  The  situation 
is  none  so  rare.  The  principles  involved,  and  the  lessons  arising,  are  for  all  time. 
The  supreme  and  unchallengeable  obligation  of  the  Divine  wiU  when  clearly 
expressed.  There  can  be  no  higher  obligation  to  man  or  angel  than  that.  That 
■will  is  always  in  harmony  with  the  eternal  principles  of  truth  and  goodness.  When 
God  "speaks  "  to  a  servant,  there  can  be  no  pretence  for  delay  or  non-compliance, 
much  less  for  disobedience.  Obedience,  promptly,  fully  given,  is  the  most 
beautiful  thing  that  walks  the  earth.  Prompt  and  simple  obedience,  when  wo 
are  sure  that  God  speaks,  is  the  way  to  clearness,  virtue,  honour,  strength,  safety, 
and  peace.     2.  The  exceeding  danger  of  a  mood  of  hesitation  or  remonstrance. 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAB.  7 

We  should  watch  with  great  self- jealousy  the  moral  hesitations  of  the  will,  and 
the  silent  petitionings  for  delay  or  exemption.  All  such  heart  movements  are 
fraught  with  peril.  Divine  light  is  given  for  "  walking  "  and  "  working."  In 
most,  if  not  all  of  the  critical  moments  of  life,  duty  is  revealed  very  quickly,  and 
made  very  plain  and  clear.  In  matters  of  expediency  and  prudence,  wait  for 
the  afterthoughts.  In  matters  of  conscience  and  present  duty,  take  the  first 
thoughts  that  arise,  for  they  are  the  Divinest.  Happy  is  he  whose  action  is  as 
quick  as  the  impulse  that  calls  for  it !  whose  daily  obedience  has  in  it  the  fresh 
colours  of  newborn  convictions  !  whose  feet  sound!  the  echo  of  God's  "  Arise  "  ! 
(A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Jonah's  motive  in  his  flight : — This  dereliction  of  duty 
could  not  arise  from  imperfect  acquaintance  with  God's  wilL  That  is  nowhere 
intimated  in  the  narrative.  It  was  deliberate  disobedience.  1.  The  arduousness 
of  the  duty  may  have  been  one  cause  of  the  sin.  He  shrank  from  the  service 
because  of  the  hardships  he  supposed  to  be  involved  in  it.  He  thought  of  the 
journey ;  of  the  probable  reception  of  his  message  by  the  Ninevites ;  and  of 
possible  violence  done  to  himself  by  them.  If  God  calls  to  arduous  duty.  He  is 
prepared  to  give  all  needed  grace  for  doing  it.  2.  The  mortification  of  his  own 
vanity.  God's  mercy  and  forbearance  on  repentance  Jonah  feared  would  be  a 
personal  dishonour  to  him  as  a  prophet.  Rather  than  subject  himself  to  the 
possibility  of  such  mortification  Jonah  chose  to  decline  the  duty  altogether. 
This  motive  argues  a  painful  obtuseness  of  right  human  feelings.  Learn — 1.  In 
the  prosecution  of  arduous  and  self-denj^ing  duties  to  seek  the  help  of  God,  and 
not  throw  off  our  responsibihties  by  shunning  them.  Responsibility  can  only 
be  met  by  the  conscientious  discharge  of  duty.  Human  nature  often  shrinks, 
as  Jonah  did,  from  this  duty,  but  let  us  be  faithful  to  Grod,  and  depend  on  Him 
for  strength  and  blessing.  2.  And  let  us  discharge  all  our  obligations  to  our 
fellew-men  from  a  sincere  desire  to  benefit  them  and  please  God.  Let  us  not 
mingle  personal  vanity  with  any  of  our  religious  endeavours,  nor  be  too  anxious 
about  our  fame  and  reputation.  Oiu-  record  is  on  high,  our  judgment  is  with 
our  God.  {Thomas  Harding.)  Jonah's  self -persuasions  to  disobedience : — 
How  did  he  persuade  himself  to  enter  on  a  course  of  disobedience  to  the  Divine 
will  so  open  and  declared  7  L  It  was  a  long  way.  2.  The  thing  to  be  done  was 
very  difficult.  3.  It  would  be  natural  that  he  should  despair  of  any  great  success. 
4.  He  may  have  thought  that,  in  the  event  of  attaining  a  spiritual  success,  failure 
must  come  in  another  way.  His  own  reputation  would  suffer.  Over-conscious- 
ness of  personal  character,  and  over-carefulness  for  the  Divine  honour,  were  not 
of  old,  are  not  now  so  very  uncommon.  5.  The  prophet  had  some  dark  forecast 
of  evil  to  his  own  country  from  the  probable  tm-n  which  matters  would  take,  if 
his  mission  at  Nineveh  should  be  successful.  We  cannot  pass  any  severe  and 
overwhelming  judgment  on  Jonah.  There  is  too  much  reason  to  fear  that  his 
kind  of  disobedience  is  not  at  all  uncommon.  Far  oftener  than  many  suppose, 
great  and  gifted  spirits  have  shrunk  back  from  great  responsibihties.  See  cases 
of  Moses,  Gideon,  &c.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  story  of  Jonah: — The  Book 
of  Jonah  is  a  prophetic  history.  It  sets  forth  in  object-lessons  truths  which 
bring  us  very  near  to  the  heart  of  the  Gospel.  I.  The  scoenhd  message  of 
MERCY.  The  prophet  was  the  recipient  of  a  Divine  message.  He  was  to  declare 
to  the  people  of  Nineveh  their  sins,  and  summon  them  to  repentance.  This 
should  have  been  an  acceptable  and  agreeable  duty.  Why  should  Jonah  have 
closed  his  ear  against  the  Divine  Word,  shut  up  his  heart  against  compassion 
for  Nineveh,  and  fled  from  his  duty  ?     The  answer  uncovers  at  once  God's  com- 

Sassion  and  Jonah's  sin.  Jonah's  fault  lay  in  narrowing  the  compassion  of 
ehovah,  and  exaggerating  the  claims  of  the  chosen  people.  His  pride  of  race 
overrode  his  humanity ;  his  sectarian  zeal  consumed  his  charity.  1.  What  shall 
we  say  of  one  who  refuses  to  enter  upon  a  work  of  salvation  such  as  this  ?  Jonah 
Binned  against  God  and  humanity.  2.  If  we  seek  downward  for  the  tap-root  of 
Jonah's  fault,  where  do  we  find  it  ?  In  false  views  of  Grod's  natiu-e.  3.  There 
are  still  men  and  women — good  but  misgmded  people — who  hold  that  the 
salvation  of  God  is  limited  to  their  Church.  In  the  light  of  Jonah's  story,  we 
may  regard  all  such  people  with  sincere  pity,  even  while  we  condemn  their 
presumptuous  bigotry.  II.  The  sinnee  pttrsttbd  by  God.  If  God  is  com- 
passionate, He  is  also  just.  He  pities  Nineveh,  but  He  punishes  Jonah.  He 
pursues  the  offending  prophet  with  a  rod  of  judgment.  If  we  suppose  that 
Jonah's  sleep  was  one  of  self-security,  we  may  imagine  the  sharp  awakening  to 
the  sad  truth  of  his  condition.    III.  A  verdict  of  the  self-condemnbd.     The 


S  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

behaviour  of  the  ship's  crew  at  the  climax  of  the  storm  presents  an  interesting 
study.  We  are  insensibly  drawn  to  these  rough  pagan  mariners.  We  respect 
their  manhood,  we  praise  their  virtues,  we  pity  their  gropings  after  truth  and 
duty,  and  long  that  they  and  such  as  they  might  have  knowledge  of  the  one 
sufficient  atonement  for  sin.  We  are  drawn  with  even  tenderer  sympathy  to 
Jonah.  He  stands  there  on  the  tossing  deck,  self-condemned  indeed,  but  his 
whole  attitude  is  noble.  His  fault  has  risen  upon  him  at  once  in  its  full  magnitude. 
He  neither  denies  nor  extenuates  it ;  he  confesses  it  fully,  and  he  offers  himself 
in  atonement  therefor.  No  wonder  that  the  sailors,  profoundly  touched  by  Jonah's 
act,  struggled  to  the  verge  of  hope  ere  they  could  find  heart  to  sacrifice  this  man. 
1.  We  see  here  a  wonderful  illustration  of  the  force  of  conscience  when  it  is  once 
awakened  within  the  breast.  2.  We  have  here  a  fine  example  of  the  operation 
of  a  genuine  repentance.  What  must  have  been  the  infiuence  of  this  experience 
upon  Jonah's  after  preaching  ?  IV.  Bubial  in  the  deep.  The  miracle  consisted 
not  so  much  in  the  fact  that  Jonah  was  swallowed  alive,  as  that  he  was  kept  alive 
within  the  fish  for  three  days.  We  must  place  this  miracle  upon  the  same  footing 
as  other  Scripture  miracles.  Our  Lord  teaches  that  this  burial  and  resurrection 
was  a  sign  of  His  own  burial  and  resurrection  (Matt.  xii.  40,  41).  {Henry  C. 
M'Cook,  D.D.)  The  prophet's  disobedience,  and  what  camz  of  his  flight  from 
duty  .-—Jonah  must  have  been  a  contemporary,  or  near  successor,  of  Elisha. 
I.  His  disobediencb  and  flight  feom  God's  prhsenob.  All  men  at  least  try 
to  believe  that  they  have  good  reasons  for  their  disobedience.  What  was  Jonah's  ? 
Told  in  chap.  iv.  2.  It  was  thought  that  God  was  specially  present  in  Israel.  If 
he  left  the  country  he  would  not  be  at  hand  to  be  sent  on  missions.  His  fleeing 
was  a  way  of  resigning  his  prophetic  office.  Have  none  of  us  ever  done  as  Jonah 
did  ?  When  Grod  calls  to  service  or  duty,  do  we  never  go  another  way  ?  How 
easy  to  fancy  that,  by  some  means,  we  can  escape  the  Divine  presence  !  II.  His 
ARREST  and  EXPOSURE.  Thus  far  all  had  seemed  to  go  well  with  the  renegade 
prophet.  For  a  time  the  Lord  allowed  him  to  have  his  way.  And  so  He  does 
with  us  all.  If  one  chooses  to  run  from  duty,  to  decline  service,  to  defer  obedience, 
God  does  not  ordinarily  interpose  to  prevent  his  doing  it.  The  downward  way 
is  commonly  broad  and  smooth  for  a  time.  But,  happily  for  us,  God  often  finds 
means  for  the  arrest  of  the  disobedient.  In  the  case  of  the  fieeing  prophet.  He 
made  use  of  the  tempest.  All  sorts  of  persons  pray  in  those  great  emergencies, 
which  prove  to  us  how  utterly  powerless  we  are.  There  is  a  feeling,  which  seems 
native  to  the  human  heart,  that  behind  all  physical  ills  there  is  a  moral  cause. 
Troubles  come  out  of  sin.  These  seamen,  imagining,  as  it  is  so  common  to  imagine, 
that  unusual  calamity  is  proof  of  unusual  guilt,  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that 
their  present  peril  was  due  to  the  presence  of  some  flagrant  wrong-doer.  They 
thought  that,  by  means  of  the  lot,  the  culprit  might  be  detected.  The  lot  fell 
on  Jonah.  In  so  unlikely  a  way  his  sin  had  found  lum  out.  III.  His  confession 
and  surrender.  Crowding  about  this  mysterious  stranger,  the  questions  of 
the  sailors  fell  fast  and  thick.  They  wanted  to  have  his  whole  story.  Jonah 
made  frank  and  full  confession.  There  was  no  self-justification,  but  a  declaration 
that  Grod  is  to  be  reverenced  and  feared.  And  he  put  himself  into  God's  hands. 
Understanding,  as  a  prophet,  that  only  by  casting  him  into  the  sea  could  the 
tempest  be  stayed,  he  humbly,  submissively,  bowed  his  will  to  God's.  It  is 
precisely  that  spirit  of  penitence  and  trust  which  ever  marks  one  as  a  sure  subject 
of  that  mercy  which,  whatever  befalls  the  body,  saves  the  sovil  unto  the  life  ever- 
lasting. IV.  His  chastisement  and  preservation.  It  is  clear  that  Jonah's 
conduct  had  won  the  respect  of  the  seamen,  and  touched  their  hearts.  They 
would  save  him  if  they  could.  Jonah's  preaching  and  conduct  had  convinced 
them  of  the  true  faith ;  for  soon  we  find  them  offering  sacrifice  and  making  vows 
unto  the  Lord.  True  penitence  does  not  save  from  present  and  outward  ills. 
The  forgiven  still  need  correction.  Note  the  blending  of  the  providential  and 
the  miraculous  in  the  story.  Having  brought  a  self-willed  servant  to  account 
and  repentance,  and  administered  needed  correction,  it  was  the  Lord's  will  to 
restore  Jonah  to  the  place  he  had  deserted.  The  chief  practical  lesson  is  the 
great  folly  of  attempting  to  escape  the  service  or  duty  to  which  God  may  call  us. 
To  obey  is  easier  than  to  flee.  There  are  crosses  and  hardships  in  the  way  of 
obedience,  but  they  are  far  hghter  than  those  which  are  sure  to  overtake  unbelief 
and  self  -  will.  {Sermons  by  Monday  Clvb. )  JonaKs  failure  :  —  Jonah  was 
unwilling  to  execute  his  commission  ; — not  under  a  humble  sense  of  unworthiness 
and  insufficiency ; — this  would  have  made  him  earnest  in  prayer  to  God  for  th0 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  9 

courage  and  strength  in  which  he  felt  himself  to  be  deficient.  This  would,  in 
fact,  have  been  the  very  best  qualification  for  the  work  assigned  him  :  such 
feeliiigs  and  such  qualifications  we  find  in  Moses,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel, — 
but  he  shrunk  from  it,  through  a  distrust  of  God,  and  a  dread  of  the  consequences. 
His  faith  in  God  failed ;  and  then,  what  did  he  foresee  at  Nineveh,  but  ridicule, 
and  bonds,  and  death  ?  Perhaps,  too,  he  was  living  in  the  enjoyment  of  comforts, 
which  he  must  forego,  for  the  chance  only  of  returning  from  his  perilous 
expedition.  It  seems,  too,  that  he  was  apprehensive  that  the  labour  and  peril 
might  be  encountered  by  him  for  nothing ;  for  that,  after  all,  the  mercy  of  Grod 
would  spare  the  Ninevites,  and  then  some  might  pour  contempt  on  his  predictions. 
His  motives  were  probably  mixed  :  some  of  them  might  not  be  known  to  himself  ; 
for,  having  resolved  to  disobey  God,  he  yielded  himself  to  the  power  of  Satan, 
who  would  pour  darkness  and  perplexity  into  his  mind,  and  would  probably 
succeed  at  last  in  persuading  him  that  his  offence  was  far  from  heinous,  and  that 
the  severity  of  the  trial  would  almost  excuse  his  sinning.  Possibly  he  set  against 
this  act  of  disobedience  his  former  zealous  exertions  in  the  cause  of  God  ;  he 
excused  his  present  cowardice  by  his  former  boldness — his  present  love  of  ease, 
by  his  former  self-denial  and  endurance  of  injuries.  Thus,  while  he  regarded 
his  own  credit  and  ease  and  safety  more  than  the  honour  of  God  and  the  deliver- 
ance of  the  Ninevites,  he  deserted  his  post.  Let  us  not  condemn  him ;  but  ask 
ourselves,  before  God,  how  we  should  have  acted  in  the  same  circumstances. 
{Matthew  M.  Preston,  M.A.)  Faithless  to  a  high  vocation: — Though  the 
Israelites  were  the  elect  people,  the  mercy  of  God  was  continually  extending 
itself  beyond  them.  He  would  from  time  to  time  send  prophets  and  messengers 
to  turn  them  from  their  idols,  to  reveal  to  them  the  knowledge  of  Himself,  and 
bring  them  to  repentance.  Jonah  resisted  the  call  of  God,  and  refused  to  go  to 
Nineveh.  Why  did  he  refuse  to  go  ?  Because  he  thought  God  would  spare 
the  Ninevites  after  he,  His  prophet,  had  proclaimed  their  ruin,  and  he  shrank 
from  the  supposed  humiliation  of  appearing  in  their  eyes  a  false  prophet.  He 
shrank  from  the  sensitiveness  of  a  proud  nature.  Another  reason  has  been 
suggested,  that  he  passionately  loved  his  country,  and  feared  the  uprising  of 
this  powerful  nation  on  its  borders.  It  is  said  that  Jonah  fled  "  unto  Tarshish 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  Is  it  possible  that  he  thought  by  a  change  of 
place  to  get  beyond  the  reach  of  the  Divine  displeasure  ?  It  is  more  probable 
that  he  fled  from  "  the  service  of  God."  He  meant  to  abandon  his  prophetic 
ofiice.  He  was  faithless  to  his  vocation,  and  would  cast  off  the  responsibility 
of  a  high  calling.  Dwell  on  this  unfaithfulness,  and  draw  lessons  from  it.  Are 
we  not,  each  of  us,  like  Jonah,  called  to  stand  in  the  presence  of  God  and  to 
serve  Him  ?  We  have  each  certain  duties  and  responsibilities,  as  clear  and 
definite  as  the  prophet  had  when  he  heard  the  Word  of  God,  bidding  him  go  to 
Tarshish.  We  too  may  flee  from  the  presence  of  God.  Our  calling  may  require 
effort  and  hardness,  and  we  shrink  from  it.  Jonah  is  the  image  of  every  man 
who,  knowing  the  command  of  God,  gives  up  the  path  of  duty,  choosing  in  prefer- 
ence something  more  congenial  to  his  tastes  and  disposition,  or  some  passing 
feeling,  some  desire  or  fear.  The  call  of  duty  will  constantly  involve  giving  up 
some  interest  or  pleasure.  Some  trouble  one  meets  in  daily  life  may  try  the  soul 
and  test  its  faithfulness.  It  is  always  true  that  only  he  who  doeth  the  will  of 
the  Father  can  enter  the  kingdom.  (T.  T.  Carter. )  The  runaway  prophet  : — 
rl.  What  was  the  eeason  foe  this  flight  ?  The  cause  of  disobedience  is  to 
be  found  in  the  significance  of  God's  message  to  the  prophet.  It  was  a  message 
of  judgment,  and  yet,  tinderlying  it,  as  Jonah  easily  perceived,  was  a  message 
of  mercy.  It  taught  Jonah,  and  through  him  the  Jews  generally,  that  God  had 
a  grand  purpose  of  love  and  mercy  to  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  the  Jews.  Such  a 
thought  as  that  was  utterly  opposed  to  Jewish  ideas.  Jonah's  conduct  is  but 
the  representation  of  the  whole  national  feeling.  Jonah  wanted  the  Ninevites 
and  all  other  Gentiles  to  fall  under  the  judgment  of  God,  and  to  be  destroyed 
from  the  face  of  the  earth.  This  was  the  reason  for  his  flight.  Let  us  beware 
lest  we  should  find  his  sin  lying  at  our  door.  God  taught  the  same  lesson  to  Peter 
when  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  had  fully  come.  We  are  now  learning  the  lesson 
that  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  God's  message  of  love  to  no  one  nation,  or  select 
few,  but  to  every  member  of  the  human  family.  II.  What  was  the  object 
OF  Jonah's  flight  ?  Not  to  flee  from  the  omniscience  of  God.  The  object  of 
Jonah  was  to  escape  from  standing  before  God  as  His  prophet.  He  regarded  the 
revelation  and  voice  of  God  as  in  some  way  confined  to  Jewish  territory.     Though. 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

we,  too,  know  that  we  cannot  escape  from  the  presence  of  God,  we  often  fancy 
we  can  fly  where  the  voice  of  God  shall  not  be  heard  by  us.  When  God  calls  men 
to  go  in  one  direction,  and  they  like  it  not,  immediately  they  set  out  to  go  in 
directly  the  opposite.  III.  The  sxtccbssivb  steps  of  Jonah's  flight.  1.  He 
went  down  to  Joppa.  His  journey  was  downward  in  mora  senses  than  one. 
2.  He  found  a  ship,  and  paid  his  fare  to  Tarshish.  Is  there  not  quite  a  parable 
in  that  paying  the  fare  ?  It  was  the  last  barrier  that  kept  him  a  prisoner  to  his 
native  land.  Now  he  thinks  he  is  secure.  3.  He  falls  asleep.  He  is  tired  out. 
No  obstacles  have  been  placed  in  his  way.  It  seems  as  if  everything  had  been 
providentially  arranged.  Yes,  Jonah,  thou  sleepest,  but  God  sleeps  not.  Now 
God  will  have  a  beginning.  {James  Menzies.)  The  natural  disposition  of 
Jonah  : — It  has  often  been  remarked  that  religion  and  a  good  temper  are  by  no 
means  always  allied.  Though  it  cannot,  perhaps,  at  all  times  be  said  that  a 
religious  profession  is  adorned  by  the  meek  and  the  quiet  spirit  so  precious  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord,  it  must  be  always  remembered  that  true  religion  has  the 
most  happy  influence  on  all  who  in  reality  receive  it.  So  far  from  producing 
the  evil  with  which  it  has  often  been  associated,  it  is  associated  with  it  for  its 
correction,  and  does  actually  produce  in  due  time  its  destruction.  This  sweet 
subduing  spirit  can  tame  the  roughest  passions ;  it  can  humble  the  proudest 
heart,  and  open  the  most  avaricious,  in  a  manner  and  to  a  degree  that  no  other 
principle  can.  The  natural  dispositions  of  Jonah  seem  to  have  been  uncommonly 
adverse.  His  supreme  regard  to  the  dignity  of  his  own  character,  without  respect 
to  what  concerned  either  Divine  manifestation  or  human  comfort,  was  selfish 
and  arrogant ;  while  his  language  with  regard  to  the  gourd,  and  to  his  own 
personal  sufferings,  seems  altogether  to  represent  him  as  a  person  of  a  proud, 
passionate,  jealous,  and  intemperate  mind.  Indeed,  so  numerous  and  so  striking 
are  the  instances  of  his  misconduct,  that  they  afford  occasion  to  inquire  whether 
he  really  was  a  saint  at  all  ?  His  wicked  refusal  of  obedience,  with  the  subse- 
quent attempt  to  escape  when  under  a  special  appointment  of  heaven,  are  cir- 
cumstances in  no  respect  favourable.  His  stupid  security,  too,  during  the  tempest, 
and  his  sullen  silence  during  the  subsequent  investigation,  bespeak  a  state  of 
mind  very  foreign  from  that  which  the  lively  exercise  of  religion  would  dictate. 
His  angry  complainings,  also,  at  the  dispensations  of  providence,  seem  in  no 
common  degree  to  indicate  the  workings  of  an  unmortified  mind.  Still  grounds 
are  not  awanting  on  which  charity  may  found  a  better  hope.  See  what  may 
be  pleaded  ia  his  favour.  (James  Simpson. )  The  unfaithful  prophet : — In 
those  days  the  prophet  was  the  organ  of  a  Divine  revelation.  He  was  the  repre- 
sentative of  that  Holy  Spirit  who  had  been  speaking  through  many  ages  to  the 
fathers.  If  a  word  came  to  him  which  went  beyond  the  ordinary  scope  of  pro- 
phetic ministry  it  would  be  all  the  more  solemn  ;  it  would  be  very  clearly  not 
the  prophet's  own,  but  "  the  Word  of  Jehovah  "  which  had  "  come  to  him."  To 
disobey  that  Word,  to  hide  it  within  his  own  thoughts,  to  take  from  it,  or  add  to 
it  would  be  a  grievous  sin,  to  be  conspicuously  punished.  It  was  "  disobedience 
to  the  heavenly  vision."  It  was  renouncing  the  position  and  vocation  of  the 
Divine  messenger.  It  was  doing  "  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace."  The  whole 
book  is  a  commentary  on  the  expression,  "  Presence  of  the  Lord."  By  the 
"  presence  of  the  Lord "  is  manifestly  intended  the  organic  centre  of  Divine 
revelation.  The  radical  conception  of  Judaism  is  the  foundation  on  which  such 
an  expression  must  rest ; — it  was  that  of  a  ministry  gathered  about  Jehovah, 
who  is  seated  on  a  throne  of  majesty  and  grace  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  "  The 
presence  of  the  Lord,"  regarded  as  a  place,  is  the  chamber  where  the  ministering 
priest,  or  prophet,  is  face  to  face  with  God.  Forth  from  that  chamber  he  goes 
to  fulfil  his  mission,  whatever  it  be,  whether  as  a  priest  to  bless,  or  as  a  prophet 
to  speak  the  message,  to  proclaim  the  "  Word  of  the  Lord."  Jonah  rose  up  to 
flee  from  that  centre  of  his  spiritual  responsibility,  to  turn  his  back  upon  One 
who  was  telling  him  what  to  say  and  what  to  do.  At  that  special  crisis  in  the 
history  of  His  i)eople  such  imfaithfulness  was  specially  sinful.  {R.  A.  Redford,  M.A.) 
The  fugitive  from  duty  : — In  estimating  the  character  of  Jonah  we  have  no  desire 
to  palliate  or  to  exaggerate.  His  prominent  sin  was  disobedience  to  God.  It 
cannot  be  said  that  he  misunderstood  the  command  of  God.  Could  it  be  fear 
that  induced  Jonah  to  become  a  fugitive  from  duty  ?  It  was  the  character  of 
God  which  made  Jonah  shrink  from  His  service.  Some  of  the  fruits  of  Jonah's 
flight  from  duty.  1.  He  rose  up  to  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  2.  The 
fugitive  from  duty  was  degraded  before  his  inferiors.     Jonah's  flight  subjected 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAS.  11 

him  to  the  reproofs,  examinations,  and  cross-examinations  of  heathen  sailors. 
3.  Jonah,  no  doubt,  suffered  much  at  the  near  prospect  of  death.  4.  His  misery 
was  prolonged  in  a  living  to;  ib.  5.  The  fugitive  from  duty  had  to  do  at  length 
the  work  he  first  refused.  When  man  contends  with  his  Maker  we  may  be 
certain  who  will  be  the  victor.  That  Jonah  needed  much  refining  in  the  furnace 
of  affliction  is  evident  from  the  dross  which  remained  after  correction.  Perhaps 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  never  entrusted  to  a  frailer  earthen  vessel.  After 
Jonah  had  passed  through  the  painful  and  humiliating  punishments  of  dis- 
obedience, we  find  him  still  in  a  deplorable  state  of  mind,  and  using  most  un- 
becoming language  to  God.  Jonah  should  have  known  that  when  punishments 
are  denounced  as  coming  upon  a  nation,  it  is  with  the  understanding  that  they 
continued  in  their  sin.  If  both  Jew  and  Gentile  were  acquainted  with  mercy 
as  one  of  the  glorious  attributes  of  Jehovah,  where  was  the  room  for  Jonah's 
displeasure  ?  But  what  Jonah  did,  we  are  all  capable  of  doing,  if  not  prevented 
by  Divine  grace.  There  are  those  who  fly  from  duty,  because  pride  hinders 
them  from  pursuing  their  most  suitable  calling,  those  who  intrude  into  sacred 
places  for  which  they  were  never  designed ;  and  generally,  the  unconverted. 
{W.  Holderness.)  The  disobedient  act: — "Jonah  rose  up."  So  far  then  he 
was  obedient.  No.  He  only  rose  up  "  to  flee  to  Tarshish."  His  mind  was  made 
up,  before  he  arose,  to  disobey.  We  sin  in  thought,  resolution,  wiU,  before  we 
take  a  single  wrong  step.  Had  Jonah  sufficient  grounds  for  his  disobedient  act  ? 
Was  not  his  ministry  in  Israel  a  great  failure  ?  And  if  a  great  failure  among 
his  privileged  kindred,  might  he  not  reasonably  infer  it  would  be  a  greater  failure 
among  \intutored  and  degraded  heathen  ?  Moreover,  it  was  a  new  expedition — ■ 
there  was  no  precedent  for  him  to  follow.  And  did  not  he  fear  that  God  might 
turn  from  His  piu-pose  ?  In  the  face  of  these  considerations  it  may  be  asserted 
that  he  had  no  honest  reasons  for  shirking  duty,  for  running  away  from  God. 
Our  failures  may  be  our  greatest  successes.  I.  His  disobedient  act  was  wtlfitl. 
It  was  not  done  without  deliberation.  It  was  not  done  without  breaking  through 
moral  restraints.  Jonah  had  a  stem  battle  to  fight  with  the  checks  of  conscience 
and  the  promptings  of  his  better  nature.  Through  a  whole  "  bodyguard  " 
of  moral  influences,  monitions,  voices,  hindrances,  Jonah  had  to  cut  his  way  to 
Joppa  for  Tarshish.  This  made  his  act  of  disobedience  aU  the  more  criminally 
wilful.  The  harder  the  path  to  ruin  the  greater  the  guilt  and  punishment. 
II.  The  act  was  foolish.  He  attempted — 1.  The  impossible.  The  Presence 
like  an  all-encompassing  atmosphere  hemmed  him  in — beyond  it  he  could  not 
get.  God  meets  man  inevitably  at  every  turn  of  life.  2.  He  abandoned  the 
indispensable.  He  thought  he  could  do  without  God,  and  so  ventured  on  the 
mad  experiment.  God  is  a  necessity.  3.  He  undertook  the  unmanageable. 
In  fleeing  from  God,  he  flew  in  the  face  of  God.  In  trying  to  escape  Him,  he  came 
into  collision  with  Him.  No  man  is  sufficient  for  such  an  engagement.  How 
foolish  is  aU  sin  !  Disobedience  is  moral  mania.  III.  His  act  was  encouraged 
BY  oppoRTtTNB  CIRCUMSTANCES.  He  "  found  a  ship  going  to  Tarshish."  The 
accidental  favoured  the  intentional.  It  so  happened  that  the  ship  was  freighted 
for  Tarshish,  and  Jonah  came  on  the  quay  just  in  time  to  pay  his  fare  and  get 
on  board.  Don't  blame  the  ship,  but  blame  the  prophet.  Don't  censure  the 
opportunities,  but  censure  the  disposition  which  seized  and  made  them  auxiliaries 
of  evil  intentions.  Occasion  for  sin  is  no  Divine  warrant  to  sin.  1.  Circumstances 
are  rendered  moral  or  immoral  in  their  bearing  on  human  actions,  only  as  they 
fmrther  goodness  or  facilitate  disobedience.  2.  Opportimities  in  the  way  of 
transgression  are  accidental  and  not  Divinely  appointed,  which  if  availed  of  to 
accelerate  rebellious  flight  will  entail  heavier  penal  consequences.  3.  The  ready 
way  is  not  always  the  right  way.  IV.  The  act  was  expensive.  He  might  have 
gone  down  to  Nineveh  for  less  than  it  cost  him  to  go  to  Tarshish.  He  paid  his 
fare  in  a  very  expensive  sense.  It  cost  him  his  peace  of  mind,  his  conscience- 
approval,  his  official  honom-,  mortification  of  spirit,  risk  of  life,  and  peril  of  soul. 
As  a  mere  matter  of  economy  it  is  wiser  and  better  to  be  good  than  sinful.  Sin's 
pleasures,  sin's  fashions,  sin's  companions,  sin's  vanities  are  all  prodigiously 
expensive.  (J.  O.  Keen,  D.D.)  Neglect  of  Christian  duty: — Sleep  is  one  of 
the  great  essentials  to  human  existence.  Sleep  in  itself  is  right,  but  there  is  "  a 
time  to  sleep."  Jonah's  sleep  was  sinful,  it  was  at  the  wrong  time  and  in 
the  wrong  place.  Look  at  this  religious  deserter  asleep.  I.  It  is  a  very  easy 
THING  TO  NEGLECT  CHRISTIAN  DUTY.  All  that  Jonah  did  was  easily  done.  So 
are  neglect  of  prayer,  Bible  study,  services,  work,  &c.,  easy  now.    II.  Nepllbct 


12  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B.  [chap.  i. 

OF  Christian  duty  is  a  most  dangbrous  pbacticb.  Jonah  went  to  Tarshis^ 
at  the  peril  of  his  temporal  and  spiritual  life.  Every  Christian  who  allows 
himself  to  be  led  away  into  bypaths  of  spiritual  indolence,  lethargy,  and  neglect, 
wiU  suffer  great  loss,  wiU  imperil  his  soul.  III.  It  is  not  fob  us  to  choosb  oub 
FiBLD  of  Chbistian  wobk.  God  sent  Jonah  to  preach  a  short  soul-stirring 
sermon  to  the  Ninevites.  How  much  more  would  be  done  if  all  Christians  would 
just  take  the  field  God  assigns  them,  and  work  with  all  their  hearts  for  God  and 
souls.-  IV.  Thb  infinitb  folly  of  attempting  to  gbt  away  fbom  thb  pbbsbnob 
of  God.  "  Whither  shall  I  go  from  Thy  presence  ?  "  The  monarch  who  threw 
chains  into  the  sea  to  bind  it ;  the  boys  who  undertook  to  count  the  stars ;  these 
were  wise  adventures  compared  with  the  folly  of  attempting  to  get  away  from 
God.  Then  "  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others,  but  let  us  who  are  of  the  day  be  sober." 
(W.  Bodwell.)  Sorrow  follows  disobedience: — You  are  seeking  your  own  will. 
You  are  seeking  some  other  good  than  the  law  you  are  bound  to  obey.  But  how 
will  you  find  good  ?  It  is  not  a  thing  of  choice  ;  it  is  a  river  that  flows  from  the 
foot  of  the  invisible  throne  and  flows  by  the  path  of  obedience.  I  say  again, 
man  cannot  choose  his  duties.  You  may  choose  to  forsake  your  duties,  and 
choose  not  to  have  the  sorrows  they  bring.  But  you  will  go  forth,  and  what 
will  you  find  ?  Sorrow  without  duty — bitter  herbs  and  no  bread  with  them. 
{George   Eliot.)        He    found    a    ship    going   to  Tarshish. — Fated    success: — 

1.  Attend  to  the  whole  of  the  circumstances  concerned.  By  partial  and 
distorted  views  the  most  magnificent  objects  may  be  rendered  contemptible, 
and  the  most  perfect  propriety  ridiculous.  1.  In  this  world  the  wicked  often 
succeed,  while  the  righteous  are  involved  in  distress.  If  any  man  be  exempted 
from  trouble  in  the  present  state,  we  should  expect  it  to  be  a  wicked  man.  The 
present  is,  with  respect  to  the  wicked,  the  only  season  of  forbearance,  the  only 
time  of  indulgence.  If  any  labour  imder  a  peculiar  series  of  sufferings,  we  should 
expect  him  to  be  a  saint.  Because  the  present  is,  to  the  believer,  a  state  of 
discipline.  We  cannot,  however,  conclude  either  that  all  the  afflicted  are  righteous, 
or  that  it  is  only  the  tabernacle  of  the  robber  that  prospers.  2.  All  the  success 
of  the  wicked  is  confined  to  external  objects.  It  woiild  be  affectation  to  say  that 
man  is  independent  of  these.  3.  The  success  of  the  wicked  is  but  momentary. 
Duration  is  an  important  measure  of  value.  4.  The  worst  moral  effects  are 
produced  by  success  on  the  conduct  of  the  wicked.  But  consequences  cannot 
always  be  considered  as  a  standard  for  regulating  judgment.  6.  The  successful 
Binner  would  tremble  did  he  look  forward  to  the  sufferings  which  must  eventually 
overtake  his  crimes.  11.  The  grounds  on  which  Divine  wisdom  proceeds 
IN  such  dispensations.  1.  Previous  to  such  trials  the  siimer  is  already  warned 
of  his  danger  in  the  Word.     It  is  to  this  men  are  to  look  for  a  regulating  law. 

2.  Such  trials  are  seldom  permitted  until  conscience  has  been  grossly  violated. 

3.  No  external  obstacle  can  stop  the  career  of  the  sinner.    4.  Abused  grace  is 

Sroperly  and  justly  withdrawn.  5.  These  scenes  of  trial  discover  to  others  the 
ispositions  that  were  previously  in  power.  III.  Thb  maeks  by  which  judiciaIi 
MAY  BE  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  SANCTiFiBD  SUCCESS.  If  Sanctified  it  follows  you 
in  a  course  of  obedience  to  the  Word.  It  is  not  a  partial  or  incidental  circum- 
etance.  It  recognises  God  as  its  origin.  The  effects  will  show  whence  the 
prosperity  proceeds.  (James  Simpson.)  Jonah's  flight: — In  the  case  of 
Jonah  we  have  a  striking  instance  of  Divinely  located  work  and  responsibility. 
How  are  we  to  know  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  really  comes  to  us  ?  What  more 
can  any  man  desire  than  to  be  fully  convinced  that  his  duty  lies  in  a  certain 
direction  ?  We  are  so  made  that,  if  true  to  ourselves,  we  shall  have  clear,  sharply 
defined  religious  convictions ;  and  in  so  far  as  we  are  faithful  in  following  them,  we 
are  in  direct  communion  with  the  Spirit  of  God.    I.  Life  has  its  great  occasions, 

AND  WOE  TO  the  MAN  WHO  FAILS  TO  SUCCESSFULLY  GRAPPLE  WITH  THEM.      God 

signally  honoured  Jonah  by  selecting  him  as  the  first  preacher  to  the  heathen 
world.  Human  life  does  not  always  remain  on  the  same  key.  Sometime,  some- 
where, God  arrests  the  old  monotonous  tune,  and  strikes  the  keynote  to  a  loftier 
anthem.  Everything  depends  on  how  we  catch  the  new  tone,  follow  the  leader, 
and  master  the  music.  How  possible  it  is  to  be  unequal  to  our  opportunity, 
to  let  it  pass  imimproved,  and  to  be  doing  a  little  paltry  work,. — to  be  mistaking 
fuss  for  energy,  and  an  idle  industry  for  that  holy  consecration  which  absorbs 
every  power,  and  ennobles  the  man  by  the  sublimity  of  its  motives  and  aims. 
There  are  hours  in  the  lives  of  most  men,  compared  with  which  all  after  hours 
are  poor  and  commonplace, — great  critical  hours,  pregnant  with  the  possibilities 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAB.  IS 

of  manhood  and  destiny  To  fall  below  snch  crises  is  a  calamity  which  the 
future  can  never  repair.  Society  is  full  of  poor  men,  both  temporally  and 
spiritually,  because  tney  did  not  manfully  grapple  with  the  great  occasions  of 
life.  II.  Opportune  circumstances  do  not  of  necessity  imply  Divine 
APPROVAL,  Here  we  see  that  a  man  may  be  strangely  favoured  by  circumstances, 
who  is  in  open  rebellion  against  God.  Rightly  to  interpret  circumstances  is  one 
of  the  most  difficult  things  in  life.  And  a  man  who  has  become  loose  at  the 
conscience  may  so  interpret  them  as  to  embolden  and  fortify  himself  in  a  life  of 
sin.  There  are  people  who  make  circumstances  into  a  kind  of  Bible,  and  argue 
that,  after  all,  it  is  impossible  they  can  be  so  very  bad,  or  Providence  would  not 
thus  conspire  to  further  their  purposes.  When  a  man  gets  himself  mixed  up 
with  iniquity,  it  is  not  much  wonder  that  he  tries  to  set  up  a  kind  of  supernatural 
wisdom  of  his  own,  as  a  sort  of  self-vindication.  It  is  quite  possible  for  a  man 
so  to  put  circumstances  before  his  mind  as  to  be  fearfully  misled  by  them.  Much 
charity  should  be  exercised  towards  those  whose  very  circumstances  invite  their 
fiurther  continuance  in  sin.  Many  a  man  has  had  reason  to  thank  God  that  the 
ship  left  before  he  got  to  Joppa ;  that  was  the  only  thing  that  saved  him  from 
disaster  and  perhaps  destruction.  III.  A  man  may  ignore  the  claims  of  God 
AND  yet  be  scRtrpULotrs  IN  his  observance  of  the  laws  of  social  justice 
AND  equity.  Jonah  "  paid  his  fare."  Honest  with  the  owner  of  the  ship, 
but  dishonest  with  the  Owner  of  the  universe.  God  has  claims  upon  us  as  well 
as  man  :  and  any  man's  integrity  is  partial  and  ruinously  defective  that  does  not 
honour  both  claims.  IV.  The  wicked  man  is  a  public  calamity,  a  social 
CURSE.  No  matter  how  much  the  sinner  may  have  things  his  own  way,  God  can 
head  him  off,  frustrate  his  purposes,  and  convert  the  very  elements  that  were 
most  friendly  to  his  progress  into  instruments  of  punishment  and  death.  Learn 
that  there  is  a  right  and  a  wrong  way  of  settling  things.  We  must  have  a  settle- 
ment with  God  on  a  basis  of  mediation  and  righteousness,  or  the  sea  will  always 
be  rough.  (T.  Kelly.)  The  unwisdom  of  disobedience  : — God  said  to  Jonah, 
*'  Go  to  Nineveh."  "  I  won't  go  ;  I'll  go  to  Tarshish."  He  started  for  Tarshish. 
Did  he  get  there  ?  The  seas  raged,  the  winds  blew,  the  ship  rocked.  Come,  ye 
whales,  and  take  this  passenger  for  Tarshish.  No  man  ever  got  to  Tarshish  if 
the  Lord  told  him  to  go  to  Nineveh.  The  seas  would  not  bear  him ;  they  are 
God's  seas.  The  winds  would  not  waft  him ;  they  are  God's  winds.  If  a  man 
deliberately  sets  out  to  do  that  which  God  declares  he  must  not  do,  the  natural 
world  as  well  as  God  is  against  him  and  the  lightnings  are  ready  to  strike  him, 
and  the  fires  are  ready  to  consume  him,  and  the  sun  is  ready  to  smite  him,  and 
the  waters  are  ready  to  drown  him,  and  the  earth  is  ready  to  devour  him. 
(Christian  Age.)  He  paid  the  fare  thereof. — Paying  the  fare: — There  had 
been  many  hindrances  in  Jonah's  way  to  prevent  him  from  consummating  the 
act  of  disobedience,  but  he  overcame  them  all.  And  yet  this  fact  that  he  had 
paid  his  fare  might  have  startled  him.  It  was  the  last  hindrance  to  his  head- 
strong will.  Had  he  gone  to  Nineveh  he  would  not  have  needed  to  pay  his  own 
fare.  But  deliberately  selecting  his  own  way,  Jonah  was  left  to  pay  his  own  fare. 
1.  Accept  this  feature  of  the  case  as  a  starting-point.  Obedience  is  economy; 
disobedience  is  expensive.  2.  This  was  only  a  small  part  of  the  fare  that  Jonah 
paid.  Only  the  first  instalment.  In  the  second  place,  he  paid  his  fare  in  the 
thwarting  of  his  purposes.  He  made  more  haste  than  speed.  The  ready  way 
was  not  the  right  way.  If  you  will  be  disobedient,  you  must  pay  your  fare  in 
the  thwarting  of  your  purposes.  3.  As  part  of  the  fare  the  prophet  had  to  pay 
for  his  disobedience.  I  mention  his  moodiness  and  peevishness.  4.  Part  of  the 
fare  was  the  withdrawal  of  Jehovah's  presence.  5.  He  paid  part  of  his  fare  in 
the  loss  of  reputation.  Regard  to  reputation  was  the  only  defence  he  made. 
Reputation  may  be  overestimated.  If  the  means  is  exalted  into  an  end ;  if 
reputation  becomes  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  the  ministry,  there  is  no  limit  to 
the  harm  that  may  accrue.  For  the  sake  of  reputation  Jonah  declined  the  call 
of  God.  And  his  disobedience  was  its  own  punishment.  {John  A.  Macfadyen.) 
Sinful  pleasures  dear  bought : — The  sacrifices  required  by  religion  are  infinitely 
more  reasonable  and  light  than  those  which  sinful  courses  demand.  I.  The 
sacrifices  required  of  the  sinner.  The  boasted  pleasure  of  the  sinner  is 
obtained  at  a  very  disproportioned  expense  of  time — of  labour — and  of  substance : 
and  moreover  to  it  is  freely  sacrificed  not  only  health,  reason,  conscience,  but 
also  the  precious  soul.  II.  The  sacrifices  required  of  those  who  are  the 
friends  of  religion.     I.  Religion  does  not  require  the  renimciation  of  any 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  i. 

lawful  enjoyment.  2.  Religion  does  require  of  its  followers  certain  worldly 
sacrifices.  Such  as  a  seventh  portion  of  time.  Jehovah  demands  of  all  His 
wor.-hippers — 3.  The  total  surrender  of  their  persons.  Your  talents,  with  all 
their  energies ;  your  will,  with  all  its  propensities ;  your  affections,  with  all 
their  fervour,  are  exclusively  and  supremely  His.  The  members  of  the  body  too 
are  become  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  righteousness.  4.  When  sinners 
come  "to  the  Saviour  they  present  Him  with  their  most  cheerful  services.  5.  The 
severest  sacrifice  that  religion  requires  is  that  of  our  unholy  desires.  The  service 
is  severe,  but  the  command  is  absolute.  III.  Compare  these  systems.  Each 
has  something  to  enjoy.  The  Christian  needs  not  fear  to  grant  to  the  sensualist 
his  luxuries ;  or  to  acknowledge  the  general  depression  of  the  faithful.  To 
ascertain  the  several  claims  of  these  systems  observe — 1.  That,  while  all  the  demands 
of  religion  are  just,  those  of  iniquity  are  the  vexatious  claims  of  a  tryant.  2.  The 
demands  of  religion  are  most  gracious,  whereas  those  of  a  tyrant  are  insatiable. 
3.  The  services  of  religion  are  beneficial ;  those  of  the  world  destructive.  4.  The 
sacrifices  of  religion  shall  be  richly  repaid.  Sin  also  has  its  wages,  and  to  the 
uttermost  farthing  they  shall  be  paid.  Choose  then  what  master  you  will  serve. 
Listen  not — 1.  To  the  seductions  of  pleasure.  2.  Be  not  afraid  of  the  reproaches 
cast  upon  religion.  3.  Be  truly  wise.  Listen  to  the  cautions  of  Divine  wisdom. 
{James  Simpson.)  One  virtue  cannot  atone  for  a  wicked  course : — Jonah's 
attempt  to  run  away  was  a  foolish  and  wicked  act,  all  must  admit ;  but  there  is 
one  thing  told  of  him  that  is  very  much  to  his  credit :  he  "  paid  his  fare  "  on 
board  the  ship  that  was  to  bear  him  away  to  Tarshish.  He  fulfilled  his  obligations 
to  the  shipowners  in  the  matter  of  the  passage  money  He  was  none  of  your 
mean  sneaks  who,  in  ninning  to  destruction,  try  to  go  as  dead-heads.  Jonah 
went  on  his  way  like  a  man.  How  often,  by  some  such  reasoning  as  this,  men 
make  out  a  good  case  for  themselves,  or  for  others,  in  the  face  of  flagrant  and 
atrocious  acts.  Men  use  some  single  virtue  to  cover  much  wrong  or  vice.  I 
know  a  young  man  who  refused  to  obey  the  call  of  God,  as  clearly  given  as  was 
ever  that  to  Jonah,  and  is  satisfying  conscience  by  the  assurance  of  honesty  in 
a  very  different  and  self-appointed  sphere.  There  is  much  of  this  Jonah  business 
on  every  hand.  Men  are  sharp  in  their  dealings,  even  to  rank  dishonesty,  but 
they  talk  well,  and  profess  better.  They  cheat  and  shave  right  and  left,  but 
they  found  a  scholarship  or  a  seminary,  endow  a  college,  or  build  a  church.  They 
are  helping  to  undermine  every  good  institution  in  a  community,  but  they  are 
kind  and  obliging  neighbours.  Because  the  men  that  cheat,  swindle,  and  murder 
us  are  possessed  of  some  single  excellent  virtue,  we  are  asked  to  set  it  over  against 
their  many  nefarious  acts  and  terrible  failures  in  character  and  life,  and  call  it 
even.  Not  that  we  would  undervalue  or  despise  the  admirable  traits  that  some- 
times appear  in  wicked  and  debased  lives.  We  only  utter  our  protest  against 
the  attempt,  so  often  made,  to  make  them  atone  for  the  sin  and  failure  by  which 
they  are  surrounded.  We  are  aU  liable  to  be  satisfied  with  one  little  pet  virtue, 
that  blooms,  perhaps,  like  a  flower  adorning  a  corpse.  The  way  we  help  one 
another  to  this  same  self-complacency  over  small  virtues  cherished  in  the  midst 
of  flagrant  wrong,  is,  perhaps,  the  worst  part  of  the  story.  {Homiletic  Magazine.) 
Life's  fare  : — Men  get  "  passes  "  of  railroads — all  must  pay  the  fare  who  go  through 
life.     Bible  tells  us  there  are  two  ways.     You  must  pay  the  fare  in  either  case. 

I.  Broad  way  to  destruction.  Fare  ?  1.  Loss  of  conscience.  2.  Loss  of 
character.  Character  is  built  up  by  thoughts,  words,  deeds,  little  by  little.  3.  Loss 
of  Divine  image.      4.  Loss  of  soul.     No  escape.     "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 

II.  Narrow  way  to  life.  Fare  ?  Yes,  we  must  pay  the  fare.  The  results  are — 
1.  Noble  character.  God's  building.  2.  Uplifting  influence.  People  respect. 
3.  Satisfaction.  Duty  done  ;  clear  conscience.  4.  Gain  Heaven.  Two  ways  are 
before  you ;  which  one  will  you  take  ?     {Homiletic  Review.) 

Ver.    4.     The    Lord    sent    out   a    great    wind    into    the    sea. — The    Divine 

displeasure  : — There  is  a  rehgious  side  to  storms.  Tempests  have  done  what 
spiritual  teachers  could  not  do.  1.  Disobedience  ensures  pimishment.  No 
man  can  sin  with  impunity.  There  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  moral  wrong 
to  be  judiciously  dealt  with.  2.  The  forces  of  nature  are  often  the  instruments 
of  God's  corrective  or  punitive  purposes.  There  is  a  providence  in  all  varieties 
of  weather.  3.  The  sin  of  one  involves  others  in  its  consequences.  From  verse 
6,  we  gather — 1.  That  in  seasons  of  extreme  peril  the  religious  instinct  invariably 
reverts  to  a  real  or  imaginary  superior  power  for  help.     The  religious  sense  is 


CHAP,  i-l  JONAH.  15 

an  inherent  principle,  a  part  of  the  very  "  warp  and  woof  "  of  our  moral  constitu- 
tion. When  danger  challenges  our  helplessness,  unbidden  our  hands  outstretch 
in  imploration  to  God.  2.  That  possessions  are  valueless  when  Ufe  is  at  stake. 
3.  That  remedial  measures  to  alleviate  the  consequences  of  evil  are  futile  while 
the  cause  slumbers  undisturbed.  Sin  is  the  Jonah  in  every  man  which  keeps 
him  in  jeopardy  and  restlessness  every  hom-.  From  verse  6,  we  are  taught — 
1.  That  adverse  circumstances  often  require  to  be  supplemented  by  direct  appeal 
to  arouse  men  to  a  sense  of  their  perilous  situation.  2.  The  insufficiency  of  nature 
to  correct  the  false  and  teach  the  true  object  of  worship.  3.  The  parallel  and 
divergent  points  in  human  history.  The  same  ship,  roHte,  port,  &c.,  but  widely 
different  motives,  ends,  &c.  Verse  7  teaches — 1.  That  the  casualties  of  Ufe  are 
not  unfrequently  associated  with  wrong-doing.  No  calamity  without  a  cause, 
no  sin  without  a  calamity,  sooner  or  later.  2.  That  necessity  drives  to  expedi- 
ents. 3.  That  detection  will  inevitably  overtake  the  guilty,  or  the  lot  fall  on 
the  right  man.  4.  That  the  extremities  of  men  are  the  opportunities  of  God. 
5.  That  one  rebeUious  act  sends  its  ring  down  the  vestibule  of  ages.  {J.  0.  Keen, 
D.D.)  The  disobedience  of  the  prophet  of  Gath-hepher : — This  storm  was  not 
accidental, — accident  has  no  place  in  the  government  of  Grod.  It  is  the  name  for 
a  cause  or  causes  of  which  we  are  ignorant.  The  sublimity  of  this  description, 
and  of  others  which  occur  in  Scripture,  will  be  more  apparent  when  you  compare 
them  with  the  account  which  the  heathen  poets  give  of  the  deity  to  whom  they 
assign  the  direction  of  this  element.  The  varied  operations  and  agencies  in 
nature  and  providence  which  heathenism  has  distributed  among  lords  many  and 
gods  many,  the  Bible  centres  in  one.  What  a  humiUating  contrast  is  here  pre- 
sented between  rational  and  irrational  beings.  Jonah  obeys  not.  Inanimate 
nature  waits  God's  commands.  The  following  lessons  may  be  deduced  from 
the  passage.  I.  Sbh  heee  thh  insensibility  of  the  daring  transgressor. 
Jonah  had  entered  into  a  contest  with  his  God.  The  furious  elements  proclaimed 
the  contest  to  be  fearfully  unequal.  While  every  one  else  is  imiting  his  exertions 
and  his  prayers  to  avert  the  threatened  danger,  Jonah  had  gone  down  into  the 
sides  of  the  ship,  and  was  fast  asleep.  Contrast  oiu-  Lord's  sleeping  during  the 
storm  on  Galilee.  But  why  wonder  at  the  insensibihty  of  Jonah  ?  Look  around 
and  you  wiU  see  insensibility  as  profound,  and  where  there  is  the  same  difference 
between  insensibility  and  safety.  Engrossed  by  pleasure  or  business,  how  many 
are  there  who  feel  no  concern  for  religion.  II.  See  the  difference  bbtweek 
insensibility  and  safety.  While  the  apprehensions  of  the  prophet  diminished, 
his  dangers  increased.  In  endeavouring  to  escape  from  the  voice  of  God,  given 
to  him  in  prophetic  direction,  there  was  the  near  prospect  of  his  hearing  that 
voice  annovmcing  his  destiny  from  the  judgment-seat.  Perilous,  however,  aa 
the  prophet's  situation  was,  it  was  not  in  reality  more  so  than  that  of  thousands 
who  nevertheless  participate  in  the  secm-ity.  In  the  one  case  as  in  the  other, 
there  may  be  but  a  step  between  the  sinner  and  death.  III.  The  objects  op 
TRUST  made  the  INSTRUMENTS  OP  PUNISHMENT.  This  is  a  marked  feature  of 
the  Divine  administration.  See  the  case  of  David  numbering  the  people.  God 
permits  Jonah  to  gain  his  object.  Then  his  troubles  begin.  The  vessel  which 
he  expected  would  oring  him  to  his  ultimate  point  threatens  to  become  the  grave 
of  him  and  his  shipmates.  So  men  set  their  hearts  on  a  favourite  object.  This 
is  pursued  not  only  without  reference  to  God's  will,  but  in  manifest  opposition 
to  it.  They  gain  it.  And  out  of  this  their  vexation  and  punishment  arise.  This 
is  often  seen  in  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  IV.  The  duty  op  recognisinq  thb 
VOICE  OP  God  in  the  events  which  thwart  our  wishes.  "  Affliction  springeth 
not  from  the  dust."  It  was  Grod  who  sent  forth  that  great  wind  which  put  in 
jeopardy  the  vessel  in  which  Jonah  sailed.  It  was  for  the  purpose  of  arresting 
him  in  his  course  of  disobedience— of  bringing  him  to  a  sense  of  his  misconduct — 
and  of  leading  him  to  seek  forgiveness.  What  is  the  obvious  use  which  we  should 
make  of  this  narrative  ?  The  uniform  doctrine  of  revelation  is,  that  sin  hardens 
the  heart,  and  tends  to  the  still  further  commission  of  sin.  On  this  it  groimds 
the  exhortation  to  give  all  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure — to 
be  sober  and  watch  imto  prayer.     {B,  Brodie,  A.M.) 

Ver.  5.  The  mariners  were  afraid,  and  cried  every  one  unto  his  god. — 
Fear  driving  men  to  Ood : — We  see  how  in  dangers  men  are  constrained  to  call 
on  God.  Though,  indeed,  there  is  a  certain  impression  by  nature  on  the  hearts 
of  men  as  to  God,  so  that  everyone,  willing  and  unwilling,  is  conscious  that  there 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

is  some  Supreme  Being ;  we  yet,  by  our  wickedness,  smother  this  light  which 
ought  to  shine  within  us.  We  indeed  gladly  cast  away  all  cares  and  anxieties ; 
for  we  wish  to  live  at  ease,  and  tranquillity  is  the  chief  good  of  man.  Hence  it 
comes  that  all  desire  to  live  without  fear  and  without  care,  and  thence  we  all 
naturally  seek  quietness.  Yet  this  quietness  generates  contempt.  Hence,  then, 
it  is  that  hardly  any  religion  appears  in  the  world  when  God  leaves  us  in  an  undis- 
turbed" condition.  Fear  constrains  us,  however  unwilling,  to  come  to  God.  False, 
indeed,  is  what  is  said,  that  fear  is  the  cause  of  religion,  and  that  it  was  the  first 
reason  why  men  thought  that  there  were  gods  ;  this  notion  is  indeed  wholly 
inconsistent  with  common  sense  and  experience.  But  religion  which  has  become 
nearly  extinct,  or  at  least  covered  over  in  the  hearts  of  men,  is  stirred  up  by 
dangers.  Of  this  Jonah  gives  a  remarkable  instance  when  he  says  that  the 
Bailors  "  cried,  each  of  them  to  his  God."  We  know  how  barbarous  is  this  race 
of  men  ;  they  are  disposed  to  shake  off  every  sense  of  religion,  they  indeed  drive 
away  every  fear,  and  deride  God  Himself  as  long  as  they  may.  Hence,  that  they 
cried  to  God,  it  was  no  doubt  what  necessity  forced  them  to  do.  And  here  we 
may  learn  how  useful  it  is  for  us  to  be  disquieted  by  fear  ;  for  while  we  are  safe, 
torpidity,  as  it  is  well  known,  creeps  over  us.  Since,  then,  hardly  any  one  of  him- 
Belf  comes  to  God,  we  have  need  of  goads ;  and  God  sharply  pricks  us  when  He 
brings  any  danger  so  as  to  constrain  us  to  tremble.  But  ia  this  way  He  stimu- 
lates us ;  for  we  see  that  all  would  go  astray,  and  even  perish  in  their  thoughtless- 
ness, were  He  not  to  draw  them  back,  even  against  their  own  will.  {John  Calvin. ) 
Fear  at  the  prospect  of  death : — Pliny,  who  was  a  contemporary  of  the  Apostle 
John,  made  some  close  observations  of  the  animal  world.  Among  other  things 
he  tells  us  of  the  mole — "  Moriendo  incipit  ocvloa  aperire,"  that  is  to  say,  "  the 
mole  first  opens  his  eyes  in  death."  And  such  is  really  the  case,  for  the  mole's 
eyelids,  on  account  of  his  occupation,  are  closed  all  his  life  long,  and  only  when 
he  is  dying  does  he  force  wide  open  his  small  black  eyes  and  look  round  upon 
the  world,  and  up  to  the  sky.  Now,  although  the  mole  is  not  a  favourite  among 
men  either  for  its  usefulness  or  its  beauty,  we  may  be  permitted  to  say  that  most 
human  beings,  created  in  the  image  of  God,  do  just  the  same  as  the  mole.  Of 
them,  too,  it  is  true  that,  for  the  most  part,  they  only  truly  open  their  eyes,  that 
is,  their  inward  eyes,  in  death.  Then  only,  when  about  to  leave  the  world  and 
time,  are  their  eyes  couched ;  not  till  then  do  they  learn  to  distinguish  between 
what  is  something  and  what  is  nothing,  what  is  vanity  and  what  is  true 
glory ;  and  then,  for  the  first  time,  they  look  up  to  the  inexhaustible  sources 
of  eternal  life,  and  discover,  to  their  horror,  that  like  deluded  fools  they  have 
all  along  been  pursuing  what  was  only  illusion,  deception,  or  imposture.  Yea, 
only  in  that  hour  do  they  who  took  so  much  pride  in  their  own  wisdom  become 
wise  ia  the  sense  which  Moses  meant  when  he  prayed  :  "  So  teach  us  to  number 
our  days  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom."  So  late  do  they  begin 
to  seek  the  antidote  to  death.  Thus  we  find  the  fellow- voyagers  of  the  runaway 
prophet  are  full  of  dread  and  dismay  at  the  gates  of  death.  {Otto  Funcke. )  The 
superstitious  infidel : — The  man  who,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  refuses  a  just 
and  enlightened  submission  to  the  authority  of  God  is,  in  the  hour  of  calamity, 
of  all  others  the  most  likely  to  degrade  his  nature  and  his  name  by  the  low  and 
debasing  services  of  a  gross  superstition.  L  Whence  dobs  inbidelity  origin-' 
ATE  ?  1.  Not,  assuredly,  in  the  superior  understanding  of  its  subjects.  Were  it 
even  so,  that  the  most  acute  individuals  were  found  in  the  ranks  of  infidelity,  still 
infidelity  gains  nothing  unless  it  can  either  be  shown  that  it  is  itself  the  cause  of  this 
acumen,  or  that  it  results  properly  and  immediately  from  its  exertions.  Infidehty 
is  the  vice  not  of  mature  but  of  juvenile  minds,  or  of  those  whose  minds  never 
open  beyond  the  attainments  of  indiscretion,  2.  Infidelity,  in  very  many  in- 
stances, derives  its  origin  from  the  distorted  views  of  religion,  which  superstition 
or  bigotry  present.  3.  The  grand  origin  of  aU  infidelity  is  the  pride  and  pollution 
of  the  heart.  Passion  now  usurps  the  authority  over  conscience,  and  the  under- 
standing submits  to  the  will.  What  we  strongly  incline  to  we  are  easily  persuaded 
to  believe  ;  whereas,  a  doctrine  that  opposes  our  desires,  it  is  hardly  possible 
to  bear.  The  principles  of  infidelity  may  be  held  in  the  fullest  harmony  with 
indulged  sensuality.  II.  Trace  estfidblity  in  its  resttlts.  Follow  the  history 
of  the  infidel  to  his  ultimate  manifestation.  That  sooner  or  later  he  will  be 
revealed  is  what  we  are  warranted  to  assume.  In  one  or  other  of  the  following 
ways  is  his  folly  revealed.  1.  By  voluntary  confession  on  his  acceptance  of 
the  Saviour.     2.  By  the  despair  which  must  follow  the  rejection  of  this  salvation. 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  17 

3.  By  the  degrading  superstitions  to  which  the  infidel  is  constrained  to  apply. 
n.  What  judgmbnt  ought  to  bb  fobmbd  of  such  a  systbm  op  pbtnoiplbs  ? 

1.  Of  its  -wisdom.  Intellect  is  the  boast  of  infidels.  2.  Of  its  practical  influence. 
The  interests  of  society  are  concerned  here.  3.  What  is  infidelity  with  respect 
to  its  ultimate  comfort  ?  That  is  no  religion  for  man  which  does  not  afford 
consolation.  {James  Simpson.)  Seamen  in  storms  : — 1.  Thb  MiaHTY  agbncy 
OF  God.  The  wind  is  a  strange  power  in  nature.  The  fact  that  storms  are 
under  Divine  direction  should — 1.  Rouse  us  to  consider  them  as  God's  voice. 

2.  Lead  us  to  submit  to  the  catastrophes  they  produce.  II.  Thb  NATiTBAr. 
INSTINCTS  OF  MAN.  These  men  developed — 1.  The  dread  of  death.  2.  Faith  in 
prayer.  Their  prayer  involved — (1)  Faith  in  the  existence  of  divinity.  (2)  Faith 
in  the  intit-atableness  of  divinity.  III.  The  strange  vicabiousness  of  stjffeb- 
INO.  The  storm  came  on  as  a  consequence  of  the  sin  of  Jonah.  The  innocent 
suffer  for  the  guilty  the  world  over.  The  principle  of  vicarious  suffering  is  a 
principle  developed  in  the  experience  of  all.  We  suffer  for  others,  and  others 
have  suffered  for  us.  A  man  may  deny  the  justice  of  vicarious  suffering,  but 
he  cannot  deny  the  fact.  The  sufferings  of  mariners  are  strikingly  vicarious. 
Let  shipwrecks  remind  us — 1.  To  put  our  confidence  in  God.  2.  Of  our  moral 
condition.  3.  Of  oiu*  duty  to  pray  for  our  brethren  on  the  sea.  (Homilist.) 
They  cast  fortli  the  wares  that  were  in  the  ship  into  the  sea. — The 
unavailing  sacrifice  : — Whatever  sacrifices  the  sinner  in  the  hour  of  trial  may 
be  disposed  to  make,  nothing  can  avail  him  so  long  as  unpardoned  sin  remains 
concealed  in  the  heart.  I.  There  are  important  sacrifices  which,  in  thb 
hour  OF  TRIAL,  THE  AWAKENED  SINNER  WILL  MAKE.  1.  The  awakened  sinner 
may  abandon,  in  the  hopes  of  relief,  his  worldly  companions.  These  were  his 
treasxire.  2.  Conviction  may  even  constrain  the  sacrifice  of  the  most  endeared 
and  of  the  most  inveterate  habits  of  sin.  3.  He  sacrifices  his  prejudices.  4.  He 
sacrifices  his  personal  ease.  5.  He  will  even  sacrifice  his  worldly  substance. 
II.  Sacrifices  so  presented  can  never  be  accepted  of  God.  They  have 
no  intrinsic  value  ; — they  are  involuntary — unseasonable — selfish — unauthorised 
— unbeheving — and  unholy.  Such  sacrifices  may  be  made  while  sin  remains  safely 
concealed  in  the  souL  Two  things  are  requisite  in  order  to  our  intercourse  with 
God.  Not  only  must  iniquity  be  pardoned,  but  it  must  also  be  destroyed  as 
to  the  influence  which  it  exerts  on  the  heart.  By  that  method  of  salvation  which 
the  Scriptiure  reveals,  holiness  is  effectually  secured.     {James  Simpson.) 

Ver.  6.  So  the  shipmaster  came  to  him. — A  model  sea  -  captain : — The 
shipmaster  was  a  good  workman.  The  spirit  and  manner  in  which  he  went 
about  his  work  deserve  our  imitation.  He  was  intensely  in  earnest.  At 
any  risk  he  wished  to  arouse  this  slumbering  passenger  to  a  sense  of  duty. 
Death  was  staring  them  in  the  face,  and  he  was  anxious  that  every  person 
on  board  should  be  doing  something  to  assist  the  ship,  or  to  save  his  life. 
Seek  to  imitate — I.  His  earnest  solicitude.  When  we  remember  that  millions 
of  our  fellow-men  are  actually  slumbering  on  the  very  verge  of  perdition,  the 
first  desire  of  every  Christian  heart  should  be  to  awaken  them  out  of  sleep.  The 
conversion  of  men  to  God  is  the  ultimate  and  immediate  aim  of  all  truly  Christian 
effort.  If  we  fail  in  this  we  fail  altogether.  This  is  the  spirit  of  the  age.  In 
business,  politics,  and  science,  men  may  be  as  fanatical  as  they  please,  and  society 
will  applaud  their  zeal ;  while  in  any  undertaking  which  is  strictly  Christian 
and  spiritual,  an  ordinary  amount  of  earnestness  will  not  be  tolerated.  11.  His 
RATIONAL  APPEAL.  "  What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper  ?  "  Give  us  a  reason  for 
this  strange  conduct.  This  inquiry  is  equally  appropriate  and  rational  as  applied 
to  unconverted  men.  In  reference  to  a  matter  of  such  importance  we  cannot 
do  rational  men  the  injustice  to  suppose  that  this  subject  has  not  received  their 
most  earnest  attention.  The  fact  may  be,  that  though  there  is  so  much  nominal 
belief  in  the  world,  there  is  also,  even  amongst  ordinary  Gospel  hearers,  a  wide- 
spread spirit  of  scepticism.  III.  His  sijiple  exhortation.  "  Arise,  and  call 
upon  thy  God."  Straightforward,  honest,  manly,  and  emphatic,  the  man  came 
right  to  the  point,  and  discharged  his  soul.  Such  a  man  as  a  Gospel  preacher 
would  be  sure  of  success.  Let  us  aim  at  the  heart.  Let  our  theme  be  the 
Gospel.  This  earnest  sea-captain  is  an  example  for  every  Christian  professor. 
(IF.  H.  Burton.)  The  good  shipmaster: — Jonah  behaved  at  once  like  a  very 
presumptuous  and  a  very  ignorant  man.  Jonah's  slumbers  were  unaffected 
by  the  danger,  and  unbroken  by  the  noise  above  and  around.     The  shipmaster. 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TRAT0B.  [chap.  V 

seeing  that  he  was  quite  unconscious  of  his  peril,  and  might  probably  be  engulphed 
in  the  yawning  abyss  below  them,  before  ever  he  knew  that  there  was  danger, 
came  near  and  aroused  him.  The  shipmaster  had  no  very  accurate  ideas  of 
Jonah's  God,  of  His  character,  grace,  mercy,  long-suffering,  or  providence.  Yet 
in  the  darkness  of  heathenism  he  had  not  absolutely  lost  sight  of  every  glimpse 
of  the  truth.  Amidst  all  the  obscurity  and  ignorance  in  which  they  were  involved 
many  a  heathen  retained  the  knowledge  that  a  power  there  certainly  is  that 
made  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  things  therein ;  and  that  in  evils  which  mock 
the  weakness  of  human  devices,  the  only  probable  road  to  safety  is  in  appeal 
to  that  invisible  Being,  who  certainly  has  the  power,  and  may  have  the  will, 
to  save  to  the  uttermost.  (W.  H.  Marriott.)  Men  arouaed  by  unexpected 
means  : — If  Jonah  had  been  told  one  year  before  that  a  heathen  sea-captain 
would  ever  awaken  him  to  a  sense  of  danger,  he  would  have  scoffed  at  the  idea ; 
but  here  it  is  done.  So  now,  men  in  strangest  ways  are  aroused  from  spiritual 
stupor.  A  profane  man  is  brought  to  conviction  by  the  shocking  blasphemy 
of  a  comrade.  A  man  attending  church,  and  hearing  a  sermon  from  the  text, 
"  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,"  &c.,  goes  home  unimpressed,  but  crossing  his 
barn-yard,  an  ox  comes  up  and  licks  his  hand,  and  he  says :  "  There  it  is  now 
— '  the  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib,'  but  I  do  not  know 
God."  The  careless  remark  of  a  teamster  has  led  a  man  to  thoughtfulness  and 
heaven.  The  child's  remark,  "  Father,  they  have  prayers  at  uncle's  house, 
— why  don't  we  have  them  ? "  has  brought  salvation  to  the  dwelUng. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Remarhable  awakenings: — By  strangest  way  and  in 
most  unexpected  manner  men  are  awakened.  The  gardener  of  the  Coimtess 
of  Huntingdon  was  convicted  of  sin  by  hearing  the  countess  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  wall  talk  about  Jesus.  John  Hardoak  was  aroused  by  a  dream,  in 
which  he  saw  the  last  day,  and  the  Judge  sitting,  and  heard  his  own  name  called 
with  terrible  emphasis — "  John  Hardoak,  come  to  judgment  1  "  The  Lord 
has  a  thousand  ways  of  waking  up  Jonah.  {Ibid.)  Man* a  interest  in 
God : — To  the  end  the  Lord  may  discover  the  guilty  man,  and  cause  of  this 
tempest,  as  he  made  the  mariners  sensible  themselves,  so  the  shipmaster  is 
set  on  work  to  awaken  Jonah,  to  try  his  interest  with  his  God  (whom  they 
knew  not  yet  to  be  the  true  Grod),  if  possibly  He  had  more  power  or  goodwill  to 
such  as  worshipped  Him  than  theirs  had.  Which  is  the  first  step  to  His  dis- 
covery. Doctrine — 1.  A  child  of  God  may  sometimes  miscarry,  so  far  through 
infirmity,  negligence,  and  temptation,  that  even  a  pagan,  by  nature's  Ught, 
may  see  him  reproveable  and  blameworthy,  for  so  is  Jonah  reproved  by  the 
shipmaster.  2.  It  is  deeply  censurable  and  absurd,  even  to  nature's  eye,  to 
be  secure  in  trouble.  3.  Variety  of  false  gods  hold  men  in  suspense  and  uncer- 
tainty. Therefore  every  "  man  having  cried  uuato  his  God,"  yet  they  are  not 
settled,  but  will  have  Jonah  to  essay  his  God,  if  He  be  better  than  the  rest. 
4.  Nature's  light  will  acknowledge  that  He  who  is  the  true  God  hath  power  to 
deliver  in  most  extreme  dangers  ;  for  in  this  great  tempest  they  assert  it, 
— "  If  God  think  on  us,  we  will  not  perish."  5.  Howsoever  in  a  calm  day,  nature 
conceit  and  boast  of  merit,  yet  in  a  strait,  natural  men  are  forced  to  have  their 
recoturse  only  to  the  favour  of  God.  For  this  pagan  shipmaster  hath  no  ground 
of  hope  that  they  shaU  not  perish,  but  in  God's  thinking  (or  being  bright  and 
shining,  as  the  word  also  signifies,  that  is,  looking  favourably)  on  them.  {George 
Eutcheson.)  Arise,     call    upon    thy    God. — Asleep    in    sin : — These     were 

the  words  of  the  shipmaster  to  Jonah,  and  they  present  to  us  the  strange 
anomaly  of  the  reckless  seaman  upbraiding  with  impiety  the  prophet  of 
the  Lord.  Jonah  could  not  at  that  hour  have  possessed  a  conscience  void  of 
offence.  At  that  time  he  was  flying  in  the  face  of  God,  disobeying  His  Word, 
betraying  His  trust,  and  he  could  not  have  thought  of  Him  without  dread.  He 
could  not  have  dared  to  bend  the  knee  to  Him  in  prayer  without  conscience 
flying,  like  a  scorpion,  in  his  face.  Was  it  the  conflict  of  his  feelings  which  over- 
powered him,  and  nature  sunk  exhausted  under  the  dreadful  struggle  ?  Or  was 
it  that  Jonah  had  succeeded  in  silencing  the  remonstrances  of  conscience  ?  Only 
by  way  of  accommodation  can  this  passage  be  improved.  1.  Apply  it  to  the  care- 
less and  ungodly.  Thousands  are  rushing  onward  in  the  broad  way  which  leadeth 
to  destruction.  Many  a  man,  in  the  midst  of  the  most  awful  realities  of  Ufe, 
is  locked  up  in  fancied  security,  and  not  a  pang,  not  a  misgiving,  not  an  appre- 
hension is  entertained.  Well  may  it  be  said  to  such,  "  Awaken,  thou  that  sleepest." 
2.  Apply  to  the  backslider.     Those  who  once  knew  the  Lord,  and  who,  remember 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  19 

ing  the  blessedness  of  knowing  Him,  have  nevertheless  fallen  from  their  stead- 
fastness ;  who,  by  sin,  have  inflicted  a  deadly  wound  upon  their  souls.  They 
may  be,  Uke  Jonah,  sleeping,  insensible  to  the  perils  around  them.  But  the 
words  admit  of  a  more  extended  apphcation.  They  come,  in  a  greater  or  less 
degree,  pointed  to  us  alL  It  seems  to  say  to  us  all,  "  watch  and  pray,  arise  and 
be  doing."  (Dennis  Kelly,  M.A.)  "Sleeper,  arise"  : — Notice  the  character 
of  Jonah's  sleep.  It  could  not  have  been  the  sleep  of  innocence  and  confidence. 
Jesus  Christ  slept  in  the  calm  confidence  of  a  mighty  faith  which  knew  that  the 
elements  were  powerless  to  injure  the  Holy  One  of  Grod.  Jonah  slept  to  escape 
from  himself.  He  had  already  fled  from  the  presence  of  Grod,  but  he  could  not 
escape  from  the  sound  of  God's  voice  in  his  conscience.  May  we  not  see  in  this 
sleep  of  Jonah  a  type  of  the  condition  of  many  souls  ?  As  with  him,  so  with 
us.  God  has  given  us  a  work  to  do  for  Him.  But  the  work  grows  distasteful ; 
BO  we  gradually  slacken  our  efforts,  and  perhaps  at  last  abandon  them  alto- 
gether ;  and  then  try  to  escape  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .  We  lull 
omrselves  more  effectually  to  sleep  by  the  expressed  intention  of  making  our 
peace  with  God  at  some  far  distant  time,  when  we  are  less  distracted  by  the 
world's  claims  upon  us.  But  what  are  such  intentions  save  as  the  dreams  of 
an  unhealthy  sleep  ?  Every  landmark  of  oxa  lives  which  tells  us  that  another 
Btage  is  reached,  and  our  journey  is  so  much  nearer  the  close,  is  in  point  of  fact 
as  the  voice  of  that  heathen  sailor  who  roused  the  sleeping  prophet.  It  is  no 
new  or  striking  thing  to  say,  that  the  time  and  manner  of  your  death  is  uncertain. 
We  need  to  take  home  to  ourselves  the  common-places  of  religion  before  we  can 
actually  realise  them.  How  can  we  dare  to  continue  to  live  in  such  a  state  as 
we  dare  not  die  in  ?  (F.  E.  H.  H.  Noyes,  D.D.)  The  sleeper  called  to  awake  : — 
The  prophet,  jealous,  as  some  think,  for  the  honour  of  Israel,  and  unwilling  that 
the  Gentiles  should  partake  of  the  benefits  of  prophecy ;  or  fearing  that,  as 
others  imagine,  notwithstanding  all  the  denunciations  he  might  utter  against 
them,  the  merciful  God  might  still  spare  them,  and  thus  tarnish  the  veracity 
of  his  predictions, — subjecting  him,  moreover,  to  the  ignominy  of  being  despised 
and  punished  as  an  impostor ;  or  apprehensive,  as  is  the  opinion  of  a  third  class, 
of  the  perils  to  which  this  journey  and  message  were  likely  to  expose  him,  refused 
obedience  to  God's  authority.  What  could  the  prophet  mean  by  attempting 
to  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ?  Possibly  Jonah  thought  that  by  remov- 
ing from  Judea  the  special  place  of  Divine  revelations,  he  would  remove  from 
that  presence  of  the  Deity  which  was  pecuhar  to  it.  During  his  passage  he 
does  not  appear  to  have  thought  of  the  folly  or  sinfulness  of  his  conduct.  He 
feU  fast  asleep.  Did  not  this  splenetic  seer  know  that  it  is  in  vain  for  a  man 
to  contend  with  his  Maker  ?  1.  It  must  be  obvious  to  every  one  that  this  impas- 
sioned inquiry  into  the  conduct  of  the  sleeper  speaks  it  to  be  fraught  with  extreme 
folly.  Man  is  placed  under  the  regimen  of  a  moral  and  an  equitable  adminis- 
tration, in  which  God  deals  with  him  as  a  rational  creature.  A  door  of  hope 
is  set  before  us.  The  awful  consequences  of  refusing  to  accept  God's  mode  of 
deliverance  are  fuUy  displayed.  Now,  does  the  sleeper  act  the  part  of  a  wise 
man  ;  to  remain  locked  in  the  embraces  of  a  most  sluggish  inaction,  when  affairs 
of  such  moment  are  to  be  decided  ?  Surely  no  frenzy  is  half  so  desperate  as 
this  !  The  sleeper's  conduct  is  fraught  with  extreme  foUy.  2.  This  awakening 
salutation  intimates  that  the  sleeper's  conduct  is  full  of  danger.  See  the  appall- 
ing and  perilous  position  of  this  ship.  Far  more  appalling  and  perilous  is  yovu: 
condition,  0  ye  spiritual  slumberers.  You  are  embarked  on  the  ocean  of  Divine 
wrath.  The  vessel  to  which  you  have  committed  yourselves  is  frail  and  shattered, 
yet  an  ark  of  safety  has  all  along  attended  you,  but  you  wiU  not  be  at  the  trouble 
of  accepting  its  aid.  By  neglecting  the  great  salvation,  yom:  peril  is  increased 
a  thousand-fold.  Jonah's  condition  in  the  ship  gives  but  a  faint  idea  of  the 
danger  you  every  moment  run  while  without  Christ,  and  "  without  God  in  the 
world."  3.  The  earnestness  of  the  interrogatory  imports  that  now  is  the  proper 
time  to  awake.  It  should  be  a  rule  with  every  man  who  wishes  to  regulate  his 
conduct  wisely,  to  put  off  nothing  till  to-morrow  which  is  necessary  to  be  done 
to-day.  The  present  time  is  always  the  best,  and,  what  is  more,  it  is  all  that 
we  can  call  our  own.  The  circumstances  of  this  case  demand  that  you  decide 
instantly.  4.  The  vehemence  of  this  call  tells  us,  that  the  business  for  which 
the  sleeper  is  called  to  awake  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  well  deserves 
his  attention.  Inconceivably  greater  than  Jonah's  is  the  business  to  which 
we  now  solicit  your  attention.     By  nature  you  are  lost  and  undone  ;  but  we 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  i. 

now  announce  to  yon  a  message  of  peace  and  reconciliation  with  God.  We 
tell  you  of  a  Saviour.  Will  you,  through  the  pride  of  your  heart,  banish  from 
your  mind  that  deep  and  mysterious  project  ?  Will  you,  through  the  listless- 
ness  of  your  inaction,  discard,  as  not  deserving  your  serious  contemplation, 
that  unrivalled  event  which  filled  the  world  with  wonders  ?  6.  The  question 
here  put  to  the  sleeper  may  also  be  viewed  as  the  language  of  reproof  and  astonish- 
ment. These  sailors  were  heathen,  yet  in  time  of  strain  they  called  on  their 
God.  The  one  man  who  professed  to  fear  the  God  of  heaven  remains  fast  asleep, 
makes  no  attempt  to  call  upon  his  God.  ( W.  Nisbet. )  The  sleeper  awakened  : 
— Like  all  who  endeavour  to  frustrate  the  designs,  evade  the  commands,  or  flee 
from  the  presence  of  God,  Jonah  found  his  hopes  miserably  disappointed.  The 
address  of  the  shipmaster  to  the  slumbering  prophet  is  equally  applicable  to 
those  who  are  yet  in  their  unregenerate  state.  1.  Like  the  prophet,  you  are 
exposed  to  the  storm  of  Divine  wrath,  which  every  moment  pursues  and  threatens 
to  overwhelm  you.  2.  The  inspired  writers  employ  various  figurative  expres- 
sions to  describe  the  situation  and  character  of  impenitent  sinners.  Persons 
of  this  description  are  represented  sometimes  as  foolish,  mad,  or  infatuated ; 
sometimes  as  blind  and  senseless  ;  sometimes  as  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ; 
and  sometimes  as  slumbering  or  asleep.  (1)  Sleep  is  a  state  of  insensibility. 
(2)  Sleep  is  a  state  of  dreams  and  delusions.  Apply  to  unawakened  sinners, 
and  then  to  those  whom  God  has  been  pleased  to  awaken.  (E.  Pay  son,  D.D.) 
The  sleeper  aroused : — The  circumstances  connected  with  this  message  of  the 
prophet  are  very  striking.  We  may  trace  a  parallel  between  those  circumstances 
and  man  as  we  now  find  him.  Every  man,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  is 
charged  with  a  mission  from  God  ;  every  man  comes  into  the  world  charged 
with  this  one  great  business,  the  bringing  glory  to  God ;  and  every  man  who 
goes  forth,  in  the  exercise  of  the  faculties  which  God  has  given  him,  influenced 
and  regulated  by  Almighty  grace,  fulfils  his  mission.  But  the  greater  part 
of  mankind  shrink  from  it ;  they  flee  (as  it  were)  from  the  presence  m  the  Lord  ; 
they  go  forth  from  the  round  of  duty  in  which  He  places  them,  and  seek  to  escape. 
Every  soul  who  is  not  fulfiUing  his  mission  will  sooner  or  later  be  convinced 
how  fearful  a  thing  it  is,  as  well  as  vain,  to  seek  to  depart  from  God,  and  to  neglect 
the  one  great  business  of  life.  The  subject  suggests  one  aspect  of  the  uncon- 
verted man, — he  is  in  a  state  of  deep  sleep.  All  his  faculties  whereby  he  might 
glorify  God  are  inactive,  or  if  employed  at  all,  are  employed  unwisely  and  unfitly. 
He  slumbers  in  sinful  indulgence.  There  is  an  absorbing  power  in  this  ;  it  holds 
the  heart  fast,  it  subdues  the  whole  being,  and  brings  it  into  entire  subjection." 
He  slumbers  in  spiritual  feeling.  What  should  be  done  in  this  case  ?  Two 
things.  "  Arise."  "  Call  upon  thy  Grod."  To  every  slumberer  in  sinful  indul- 
gence and  spiritual  ignorance  we  say,  "  Arise."  Awaken  to  serious  thought. 
Respond  to  the  call  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Call  upon  God  with  all  the  lowliness 
of  humiliation,  and  in  the  exercise  of  a  simple  faith,  of  a  faith  which  He  will 
give,  of  a  faith  which  is  even  now  tendered.  And  let  me  remind  you  that  every 
day  spent  in  the  dangerous  slumber  of  sinful  indulgence  and  spiritual  ignorance 
increases  the  diflSculty  of  your  awakening.  (George  Fisk,  LL.D.)  A  rousing 
voice  to  moral  sleepers  : — Three  practical  appeals  to  the  morally  indifferent  are 
suggested.  I.  Jonah  was  in  imminent  peril;  so  are  yotj.  What  are  the 
perils  of  the  material  shipwreck  to  the  perils  of  a  corrupt  and  disobedient  soul  ? 
fl.  Jonah  was  trNCONSCious  of  his  peril  ;  so  are  yotj.  You  say  to  yourself, 
"  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace."  If  you  were  aware  of  your  position, 
you  would  give  no  sleep  to  your  eyes,  no  slumber  to  your  eyelids.  1.  Jonah's 
unconsciousness  was  foohsh ;  so  is  yours.  How  unwise  was  the  prophet  to 
sleep  imder  such  circumstances  ;  he  should  have  been  on  deck,  alert,  all  ear  and 
eye,  and  with  hands  ready  to  grapple  with  the  emergencies  of  the  terrible  hour. 
2.  Jonah's  unconsciousness  was  wicked ;  so  is  yoxu-s.  For  the  sake  of  his  com- 
panions on  board  he  ought  not  to  have  been  "  fast  asleep  "  ;  it  indicated  a 
shameful  lack  of  interest  in  his  fellow-men.  Your  indifferentism  is  wicked. 
You  ought  to  be  spiritually  alive  and  awake,  not  only  for  your  own  sake,  but 
also  for  those  around  you  who  are  in  similar  peril.  III.  Jonah  had  a  messenger 
TO  WARN  HIM  OP  HIS  PERIL ;  SO  HAVE  YOTJ.  There  are  certain  points  of  analogy 
between  this  "  shipmaster  "  and  the  godly  ministers  that  are  warning  you. 
1.  He  believed  in  the  existence  and  power  of  God  ;  so  do  they.  "  Call  upon 
thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us."  2.  He  believed  in  the  efficacy 
of  human  prayer ;  bo  do  they.     What  soul  does  not  pray  when  in  conscious 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  21 

contact  with  overwhelming  dangers  ?  Your  ministers  believe  in  prayer  ;  they 
pray  for  you,  and  urge  you  to  pray  for  yoiu'selves.  3.  He  believed  it  to  be  his 
duty  to  sound  the  warning ;  so  do  they.  Your  ministers  have  a  right  to  warn 
you ;  they  are  bound  to  warn  you.  They  are  commanded  to  "  cry  aloud,  to  lift 
up  their  voices  like  a  trumpet."  Do  you  say,  when  godly  men  speak  to  you 
about  your  moral  condition.  What  business  have  they  to  interfere  ?  My  soul 
is  my  own  ;  if  I  choose  to  throw  it  away,  what  matters  it  to  them  ?  It  does 
matter  to  them.  You  are  not  your  own,  you  are  not  an  isolated  unit,  you  are 
a  member  of  the  spiritual  universe  ;  you  have  therefore  no  right  to  be  dishonest, 
corrupt,  ungodly,  and  throw  your  soul  away.  You  were  made  to  serve  the 
universe,  not  to  curse  it ;  you  cannot  sin  without  injuring  others.  {Homilist. ) 
An  alarm  to  the  careless  : — Observe  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God.  He  would 
not  punish  without  a  warning,  and  affording  opportunity  to  forsake  their  sin 
and  turn  unto  Him.  Jonah  was  to  warn  Nineveh,  but  instead  of  obeying  he 
fled,  hoping  to  hide  himself  from  the  eye  of  the  Almighty.  Consider  Jonah  as 
representing  the  state  of  the  great  bulk  of  mankind,  the  state  of  every  uncon- 
verted sinner.  I.  The  expostulation.  "  What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper  ?  " 
Sleep  impUes  a  state — 1.  Of  insensibility.  Jonah  has  no  sense  and  feeling  of 
his  desperate  condition.  Sinners  are  dreaming,  they  are  fast  asleep.  2.  Of 
insecurity.  No  one  is  more  defenceless  than  he  who  is  asleep.  He  is  exposed 
to  every  danger,  without  anything  wherewith  to  shield  liim.  Just  such  is  the 
state  of  the  case  with  every  impenitent  sinner.  3.  Of  inactivity.  Notwith- 
standing all  the  evils  to  which  Jonah  is  exposed,  he  makes  not  one  effort  to  escape. 
He  is  fast  asleep.  So  is  it  with  the  souls  of  the  unregenerate.  4.  Of  inability. 
What  can  a  man  that  is  asleep  do  to  preserve  himself,  to  save  his  property,  or 
protect  his  life  ?  The  sinner  cannot  rescue  himself  from  danger.  II.  The 
ADVICE.  Open  thine  eyes,  and  see  thy  danger.  Look,  and  behold  the  remedy. 
"Call  upon  thy  God."  Prayer  is  a  haven  to  a  shipwrecked  mariner;  an  anchor 
to  them  that  are  sinking  in  the  waves  ;  a  staff  to  the  Umbs  that  totter  ;  a  mine 
of  jewels  to  the  poor ;  a  security  to  the  rich  ;  a  healer  of  diseases,  and  a  guardian 
of  health  ;  prayer  at  once  secures  the  continuance  of  our  blessings,  and  dissipates 
the  cloud  of  our  calamities.  III.  The  encouragement.  "  If  so  be  that  God 
will  think  upon  us  that  we  perish  not."  It  may  be  that  God  will  hear  us.  At 
least  we  can  try.  Such  was  the  encouragement  which  the  shipmaster  held  out. 
We  can  add  more  to  this.  Our  God  can  and  will  hear  and  answer  prayer.  He 
is  "  thy  God."  Address — 1.  The  careless  sinner.  2.  Those  who  are  beginning 
to  awake  to  a  sense  of  their  awful  condition.  3.  Those  who  have  complied  with 
the  advice  given.  {Robert  Simpson,  M.A.)  The  awakening  influence  of  light : 
— A  young  lady  was  carried  to  the  hospital  of  St.  Lazare  in  a  sleep  that  had  con- 
tinued for  a  week.  All  the  chemical  and  medical  apphances  had  been  used, 
and  yet  she  slumbered.  There  was  an  expert  among  these  French  doctors  that 
awoke  her.  The  last  resource  !  On  the  cones  of  the  eyes  that  have  dropped 
into  insensibihty  is  light.  He  focussed  into  the  eyeball  of  the  sleeper  the  rays 
of  the  sun.  Hardly  had  the  concentrated  ray  touched  the  eyeball  when  she 
awoke.  Is  it  in  sight  of  this  physical  principle  that  Paul  uttered  without  knowing 
it,  or  is  it  not  a  marvellous  testimony  to  God's  Holy  Spirit  and  His  guiding  when 
lie  says  that  the  last  resource  for  the  slumber,  even  of  death,  is  Christ's  light  ? 
When  Christ  shines  into  your  soul  you  can't  slumber.  {John  Robertson.)  A 
troublesome  cabin  passenger  : — I  know  a  shoal  upon  which  I  have  seen  several 
vessels  come  to  ruin,  but  upon  which  I  have  never  seen  the  remains  of  any  two 
ships  at  the  same  time.  It  has  been  remarked  that  as  long  as  the  mast  of  a  sunken 
wreck  was  to  be  seen  above  the  water,  another  vessel  was  never  known  to  strike 
on  that  bank.  But  it  is  seldom  that  that  place  is  without  its  mournful  beacon. 
As  one  ship  thus  becomes  a  beacon  to  another,  so,  in  the  voyage  of  life,  one  man's 
faults  and  failings  should  become  warnings  to  all  the  rest.  God  has  given  us 
many  such  beacons  by  the  way ;  for  the  very  falls  and  weaknesses  of  His  people 
are  made  to  subserve  our  highest  good.  The  rock  of  disobedience,  upon  which 
Jonah  split,  is  one  of  the  most  dangerous.  Some  who  have  grounded  thus  have 
managed  to  get  off  again  into  deep  water,  but  it  has  always  done  them  permanent 
injury,  and  has  maimed  them  for  the  rest  of  the  voyage.  Jonah  never  did  much 
after  this  misfortune.  We  see  in  Jonah  a  type  of  many  round  us,  both  in  the 
Church  and  in  the  world.  I.  Indolence  in  the  midst  of  activity.  "  He  lay." 
Ease — rest — to  be  down  in  the  sides  of  the  ship,  fast  asleep  in  the  bunks  of  formality 
and  carnal  ease,  is  the  fullest  realisation  of  the  ordinary  professor's  dreams. 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Respectable  Jonahs  are  the  curse  of  our  churches.  II.  Unconcern  in  thb  midst 
OF  DANGER.  Men  sleep  on  the  very  verge  of  eternal  ruin.  How  is  it  possible 
to  describe  the  sad  condition  of  those  who  "  will  not  "  be  aroused  by  all  the  Gospel 
admonitions  which  from  time  to  time  they  hear  ?  III.  Detection  in  the  midst 
OF  flight.  Jonah  little  dreamed,  when  he  was  fleeing  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  was  marking  his  every  step.  God  knows  us  through 
all  cfur  disguises.  We  must  all  "appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ," 
and  He  who  is  to  be  your  Judge  has  watched  all  your  doings  right  throughout. 
(W.  H.  Burton.)  Of  the  dispositions  becoming  men  in  the  times  of  very  threaten- 
ing  and  impending  danger  : — 1.  That  apprehensions  of  the  displeasure  and  venge- 
ance of  God,  on  account  of  sin,  are  apt  to  arise  in  all  ingenuous  minds  in  times 
of  very  threatening  and  impending  danger.  2.  That  notwithstanding  there 
is  a  just  foundation  laid  in  the  human  mind,  for  apprehensions  of  this  sort,  in 
a  state  of  distress,  or  great  danger,  yet  many  of  those  who  are  most  criminal 
and  guilty  are,  in  such  a  situation,  quite  unaffected  and  secure.  3.  That  a  sense 
of  the  displeasure  of  God,  manifested  in  present  or  apparently  approaching 
calamities,  would  naturally  excite  and  urge  men  to  devotion,  humiliation,  and 
repentance.  (J.  Orr,  D.D.)  The  history  of  Jonah:  —  Jonah  is  justly  no 
favourite  with  us,  though  conspicuously  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  Hardly  one 
prophet's  name  is  pronounced  with  so  little  respect.  He  was  a  real  saint,  with 
too  much  of  the  remaining  elements  of  a  sinner.  His  conduct  on  receiving  his 
commission  does  appear  very  strange.  We  must  accept  his  own  explanation, 
given  in  chapter  iv.,  which  seems  to  amount  to  this, — he  felt  in  danger  of  being 
disgraced  as  a  prophet,  the  denunciation  being  to  be  uttered  in  positive,  not 
conditional,  terms.  How  abominably  considerations  of  self  may  interfere  with 
obedience  to  God  !  The  purpose  of  his  voyage  betrays  a  most  unworthy  con- 
ception of  the  Divine  Being,  whatever  was  exactly  the  prophet's  notion.  He 
may  have  been  under  the  influence  of  a  notion,  that  God  maintained  a  peculiar 
jurisdiction  over  Judea,  and  a  less  absolute  one  beyond ;  though  he  knew  that 
it  must  extend,  with  awful  authority  at  least  to  Nineveh.  He  may  have  thought 
that,  if  he  went  far  enough  away,  God  would  do  without  him,  and  appoint  eome 
other  agent.  He  slept,  but  it  is  not  wise  to  sleep  in  guilt.  The  God  that  is  dis- 
obeyed on  land  can  make  the  sea  avenge  Him.  There  is  no  situation  more 
pitiable  than  that  of  a  religious  man  who  has  disabled  himself  to  take  the  benefit 
of  his  religion.  Jonah's  associates  had  various  gods,  but  they  could  all  pray 
earnestly  to  their  objects  of  adoration.  He  could  not ;  he  who  knew  the  real 
Lord  of  the  land  and  the  ocean.  There  must  soon  have  been  manifested  some 
peculiarity  of  circumstances  in  the  storm,  indicating  that  it  was  of  a  nature 
extraordinary  and  judicial.  The  mariners  referred  it  to  the  avenging  power 
to  point  out  the  criminal  by  "  casting  lots."  There  follows  the  decision  of  the 
lot,  a  series  of  questions  and  expostulations.  Jonah's  answers  were  perfectly 
explicit.  The  honesty  he  showed  made  the  mariners  think  it  best  to  inquire 
of  himself  what  they  should  do  to  him.  His  ready,  explicit  answer  and  seK- 
devotement,  no  doubt,  made  them  much  more  reluctant  to  do  what  he  directed 
them.  It  would  strike  them  as  generous  and  heroic.  They  rowed  hard.  But 
the  necessity  became  imperative  at  length.  Jonah  was  sacrificed,  but  he  was 
a  willing  sacrifice.  Think  of  the  prophet  in  his  living  tomb.  The  "  belly  of 
hell,"  that  is,  the  grave.  Short  of  death,  is  it  possible  to  conceive  so  strange 
a  transition  of  state  and  feelings  ?  By  degrees  the  amazing  fact  that  he  did 
really  live,  and  continue  to  live,  would  bring  him  to  the  distinct  sense  of  a 
miraculous  and  protective  Providence  over  him.  Every  moment  would  add 
strength  to  his  impression  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  he  came  at  length  to  a 
state  of  thought  and  faith  and  hope  capable  of  prayer.  What  is  given  as  the 
prophet's  prayer  is  doubtless  the  brief  recollection,  afterwards  recorded,  of  the 
kind  of  thoughts  which  had  filled  his  mind  during  his  dark  sojourn,  with  the 
addition  of  some  pious  and  grateful  sentiments  caused  by  the  review.  The 
final  result  of  these  mental  exercises  no  doubt  was  a  fuU  consent  of  his  will,  that 
He  who  had  sent  him  hither  should  send  him  anywhere  else  He  pleased,  even 
to  Nineveh.  Our  Lord  declares  all  this  to  be  a  type  of  Him.  We  may  trace 
the  analogy  in  the  being  consigned  to  the  deep,  and  to  the  grave,  in  order  that 
others  might  be  saved  ; — the  duration  of  time  the  same  in  the  dark  retirement ; 
— the  coming  to  light  and  life  again,  for  the  reformation  of  mankind.  (Hercules 
was  fabled  to  have  had  the  same  three  days  in  a  fish.)  We  follow  Jonah  to 
Nineveh,  and  there  leave  him.     It  does  not  appear  that  he  showed  any  "  signs 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  23 

and  wonders."  There  was  a  speedy  humiliation  and  repentance,  to  which  God 
graciously  responded,  but  at  which  Jonah  was  angry.  {John  Foster.)  The 
sleep  of  Jonah,  and  the  sleep  of  Christ  (taken  with  Matt.  riii.  24) : — Our  Lord 
has  taught  us  to  associate  His  name  with  that  of  Jonah.  Christ  taught  us  how 
to  find  high  teachings  in  that  which  is  outwardly  mean  and  insignificant.  We 
may  be  permitted  to  observe  an  incidental  resemblance  between  them,  which 
appears  to  be  fruitful  of  suggestion.  There  is  a  study  for  us  here,  in  this  sleep 
of  Jonah  and  this  sleep  of  Christ.  1.  The  physical  conditions  of  human  life 
are  the  same  in  all  cases, — in  the  case  of  the  good  and  of  the  bad.  There  is  one 
law  which  makes  sleep  a  necessity  for  all.  In  both  these  cases  the  immediate 
cause  of  sleep  was  bodily  weariness  and  exhaustion.  One  had  toiled  in  glad 
fulfilment  of  a  ministry  of  love  and  sorrow ;  the  other  had  angrily  refused  to 
obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord.  But  both  slept.  Thus  we  see  the  check  which  the 
universal  and  mysterious  law  of  sleep  puts  upon  every  form  of  human  activity. 
This  limitation  of  bodily  energy  puts  its  restraint  on  human  wickedness.  It  enforces 
a  perpetually  recurring  pause  in  the  activities  of  the  sinful,  the  thoughtless,  the 
worldly.  But  we  sometimes  cry  that  the  activities  of  the  noble  and  the  good 
should  thus  be  stopped.  Alas  !  that  these  must  lay  aside  so  often  and  so  soon 
their  toils,  their  consecrated  tasks,  their  questionings,  their  search  for  truth. 
In  discouragement  and  distress  the  Christian  man  at  times  longs  for  some  exemp- 
tion from  the  general  law.  But  we  may  take  heart  again  when  we  see  Christ 
asleep.  He  sleeps,  and  His  work  stands  still.  2.  There  are  instances  of  peril 
in  which  physical  causes  conduce  to  the  absence  of  alarm,  both  in  the  case  of 
good  men  and  bad.  Jonah,  fast  asleep,  was  as  untroubled  by  the  threatening 
fury  of  the  storm  as  Christ  Himself.  Sometimes  the  vigour  and  robustness  of 
a  man's  bodily  constitution  contribute  largely  to  indifference  to  dangers,  which, 
if  he  regarded  them,  might  fill  him  with  dismay.  Here  is  a  physical  cause  largely 
helping  to  make  a  man  altogether  indifferent  to  the  awful  peril  of  irreligion. 
Often,  when  the  time  to  die  comes,  the  avenues  of  the  soul  seem  to  close  up ; 
the  powers  of  expression  fail ;  the  whole  man  sinks  into  a  lethargy  and  imcon- 
sciousness,  in  which  he  finally  passes  away.  It  is  so  with  the  good  and  bad, 
the  prepared  and  imprepared.  3.  This  sleep  of  Jonah  and  sleep  of  Christ  are 
indicative  of  two  widely  different  spiritual  conditions  and  processes  issuing  in 
strikingly  similar  results.  We  do  not  wonder  that  Christ  should  calmly  resign 
Himself  to  sleep  without  apprehension  or  consciousness  of  peril.  He  knew 
that  He  was  in  the  Father's  hands.  But  how  could  Jonah  sleep,  whatever  his 
weariness,  in  the  very  act  of  such  imfaithfulness  to  God  ?  In  both  instances 
the  spiritual  condition  may  have  contributed  to  the  soundness  of  the  sleep  and 
the  consequent  unconsciousness  of  danger.  With  what  thought  Jonah  went  to 
sleep  we  are  not  told.  In  proportion  to  the  success  which  Jonah  had  in  quieting 
conscience  would  be  the  ease  with  which  he  would  drop  off  to  sleep  and  the  pro- 
bable soundness  of  his  slumber.  There  was  no  uneasiness  at  the  heart  of  Christ, 
and  so  He  slept.  There  was  not  uneasiness  enough  at  the  heart  of  Jonah  to 
keep  him  awake,  and  so  he  slept  also.  Misery  comes  to  men  in  gusts ;  it  is  not 
the  permanent  condition  of  life's  atmosphere  to  any  one.  If  a  man  refuse  to 
be  a  Christian  it  by  no  means  follows  that  he  will  live  in  a  state  of  perpetual 
excitement  and  alarm.  We  almost  wonder  how  it  is  that  God  lets  men  thus 
sleep  on.  It  is  not  God's  plan  to  compel  men  to  His  service.  He  never  so  speaks 
that  we  may  not  refuse  to  answer.  He  never  so  compels  us  to  attend  that  we 
may  not  settle  ourselves  to  sleep  again.  But  the  time  of  awaking  comes. 
In  most  Christian  congregations  it  may  be  there  are  some  who  are  suffering 
from  the  pangs  of  an  awakened  conscience.  For  such  Christ  waits  with  infmite 
compassion  and  concern.  But  the  probability  is  that  the  condition  of  the 
majority  of  those  who  habitually  listen  to  Christian  preaching  is  like  that  of 
the  ten  virgins,  of  whom  Christ  speaks  in  His  parable.  "  While  the  bride- 
groom tarried,  they  all  slumbered  and  slept."  We  slumber  and  sleep.  Is  it 
because  we  are  finding  our  rest  in  reconciliation  with  God,  or  because  we  have 
dismissed  the  thought  of  God,  and  comforted  ourselves  with  an  opiate  ?  (Thomas 
Stephenson.)  Call  upon  thy  God. — Terrors  of  conscience  : — 1.  How  natural 
it  is  to  mankind  to  fly  to  God  and  to  call  upon  Him  in  seasons  of  distress. 
If  nature,  dark  and  doubtful,  and  trembling  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  can  yet 
fly  to  the  Almighty  and  call  upon  Him,  shall  we,  who  are  enlightened  by 
grace,  be  careless  and  indiflFerent  about  this  high  privilege  of  drawing  near 
to  God  in  prayer  ?     Shall  we,  as  long  as  we  can  find  any  earthly  satisfactiou 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  i. 

and  enjoyment,  give  them  the  preference  to  God  ;  think  much  of  them,  and 
little  or  never  of  Him  ?  Who  that  has  a  real  concern  for  his  own  welfare  and 
happiness  will  not  perpetually  call  upon  God  ?  2.  The  folly  of  contending  with 
God.  He  sent  the  prophet  one  way ;  but  because  this  prophet  liked  not  the 
errand  that  he  was  charged  with,  he  endeavoiured  to  go  quite  a  contrary  way. 
The  folly  of  such  an  attempt  we  are  all  ready  to  acknowledge ;  but  are  all,  who 
would  not  hesitate  or  doubt  to  pass  sentence  upon  Jonah,  free  from  this  very 
folly  ?  Jonah  disobeyed  an  express  order  of  God  ;  and  in  doing  so  somehow 
satisfied  himself  that  an  all-discerning  Eye  would  not  see  perverseness  in  him, 
nor  an  almighty  Hand  reach  him  in  his  flight.  Do  not  thousands  practise  the 
same  deceit  upon  themselves  ?  3.  Conscience  hath  its  power  and  authority 
and  terrors  derived  from  God  ;  with  which  it  will  surround  the  sinner  in  the 
day  of  trouble,  forcing  him  to  confess  and  acknowledge  his  guilt.  4.  These  terrors 
of  conscience,  if  they  seize  the  sinner  in  due  time,  are  most  blessed  and  desirable. 
For  the  most  unhappy  of  all  conditions  is  security  in  sin,  without  any  feeling 
or  apprehensions  of  danger  from  it.  But  an  humble  and  contrite  heart,  con- 
fessing its  unworthiness,  bewailing  its  sins,  fully  sensible  of  its  own  inability 
to  rid  itself  of  this  burden,  is  in  the  fit  and  only  fit  disposition  to  return  to  God  : 
such  a  soul  is  not  far  from  salvation.  6.  The  Almighty,  who  bringeth  good 
out  of  evil,  ordained  that  Jonah  should  set  forth  a  type  or  sign  of  the  burial 
and  resurrection  of  Christ.  {T.  Townson,  D.D.)  Natural  religion — its  strength 
and  weakness  : — The  pilot  not  only  rebuked  the  prophet,  he  had  a  proposal  to 
make  to  him.  "  Arise,  call  upon  thy  God."  And  he  backs  his  proposal  by  a 
reason,  a  motive,  an  expectation  of  benefit.  "  If  so  be  that  Grod  will  think  upon 
us,  that  we  perish  not."  All  this,  as  coming  from  a  heathen,  is  peculiarly 
instructive.  The  two  great  truths  conveyed  are  these.  1.  That  in  man's  inmost 
nature,  originally  and  radically,  there  are  certain  principles  of  religion  most  strong 
and  ineradicable.  2.  That  these,  without  the  guidance  of  revelation  and  faith, 
are  altogether  insufficient  as  guides  in  his  real  relation  to  God.  Man's  natural 
helplessness,  and  his  natural  conscience,  necessarily  imply  a  capacity  for  religion 
and  a  certain  religiousness,  appertaining,  of  necessity,  to  human  nature,  and 
developed,  in  peculiar  strength,  even  in  heathen  worship.  In  the  progress  of 
modem  civilisation  man  may  emancipate  himself  from  the  solemn  awe  with 
which  the  heathen  contemplate  the  powers  of  natiu^e,  but  if  he  rise  not  to  a  holy 
veneration  of  the  one  Supreme  Author  of  nature,  as  a  revealed  and  reconciled 
God,  it  is  very  questionable  whether  he  does  not  become  in  some  respects  a  more 
shallow  and  trifling  being  than  the  worshipper  of  idols.  We  might  very  easily 
maintain  and  prove  the  assertion,  that  godless  men,  in  the  days  and  in  the  state 
of  society  in  which  we  live,  are  more  thoroughly  irreligious  than  the  heathen 
are :  that  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry,  is  more  contemptible  than  the  worship 
of  stocks  and  stones.  Two  facts  conspire  to  make  man  natvu-ally  and  necessarily 
a  religious  being.  1.  His  observation  of  the  powers  of  nature.  2.  His  experience 
of  the  powers  of  conscience.  I.  What  can  natural  religion  do  for  its  ?  What 
is  it  that  reason,  unenlightened  by  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God,  can  do  towards 
furnishing  man  with  a  religion  ?  1.  It  may  teU  us  that  there  is  a  God,  that  God 
is  one.  The  existence  and  the  unity  of  God  may  be  proved  by  reason.  These 
heathen  mariners  had  many  gods.  Jonah,  they  took  for  granted,  would  have 
a  God  too.  The  whole  herd  of  inferior  deities  whom  the  heathen  worshipped 
were  only  so  many  sectional  representatives  of  a  portion  of  the  powers  believed 
to  reside  in  a  God,  to  whom  might  fairly  be  given,  even  by  reason,  the  lofty 
designation,  "  God  over  all."  The  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  which  man 
sees  to  be  requisite  for  creating,  preserving,  and  controlling  the  visible  universe, 
are  felt  to  be  unbounded,  infinite.  One  such  Infinite  Being  is  felt  to  be  necessary 
to  accoimt  for  things  as  they  are.  But  not  more  than  one  is  felt  to  be  necessary. 
Indeed,  more  than  one  such  Infinite  Being,  possessmg  all  knowledge  and  power, 
is  felt  to  be  impossible.  The  same  result  follows  from  our  connection  with  the 
moral  world.  Conscience  tells  of  a  Ruler  and  Judge,  but  only  of  one.  2.  Reason, 
fairly  interpreted,  assures  us  that  thw  God  is  a  Being  capable  of  intercourse  with 
His  creatures.  The  creation  of  an  intelligent  Being  is  manifestly  the  work  of 
a  Being  who  Himself  is  intelligent.  Hence  reason  itself  demonstrates  the  possi- 
bility of  a  revelation  from  God,  and  of  the  possibility  and  efficacy  of  prayer. 
II.  Reason's  limit,  and  reason's  weakness.  1.  Reason  knows  that  God  exists, 
but  it  does  not  know  God.  We  need  revelation  to  make  us  acquainted  with  Him. 
You  never  really  know  any  person   merely  by  discovering  his  intellectual  or 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAH.  25 

scientific  abilities.  You  never  do  know  a  neighbour  save  by  knowing  his  moral 
character  and  his  heart.  2.  Reason  tells  us  that  prayer  is  possible,  yea  reasonable, 
but  revelation  alone  puts  us  in  possession  of  the  terms  on  which  God  actually 
hears  prayer, — puts  us  in  a  condition  actually  to  pray.  Reason,  therefore,  without 
revelation,  is  sure  fatally  to  err  ;  and  whether  in  ancient  paganisms  or  in  modera 
rationalisms,  which  are  heathenisms,  or  in  popery,  or  in  nominal,  formal  Christianity, 
the  error  at  bottom  is  identically  one  and  the  same.     {Hugh  Martin,  M.A.\ 

Ver.  7.  Let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may  know  for  whose  cause  this  evil  is  upon 
us. — Conditions  to  he  observed  in  casting  lots  : — 1.  We  must  never  fall  to  lottery 
but  when  necessity  enforceth  us :  all  other  lawful  means  must  be  first  assayed. 
2.  We  must  use  great  reverence  and  religiousness  in  the  action.  Holy  things 
must  be  done  in  a  holy  maimer.  3.  We  must  avoid  impiety  and  idolatry  therein, 
ascribing  the  event  of  our  wishes  neither  to  the  stars  nor  to  any  other  celestial 
body,  which  cannot  want  the  ingestion  and  intermeddUng  of  devils.  4.  We 
must  not  apply  the  oracles  of  God  in  His  sacred  Scriptures  to  om*  earthly,  tem- 
porary, and  transitory  losses.  5.  The  ends  of  our  lots  must  be  respected ;  the 
nonour  of  God,  as  the  moderator  of  all  such  ambiguities  ;  the  furnishing  of  His 
Church,  if  two  or  more  be  fit,  with  the  fitter  ;  the  preserving  of  justice  ;  the 
avoidance  of  greater  mischiefs.  6.  We  must  eschew  all  fraud  and  deceit  in  per- 
mitting om-  causes  to  heavenly  arbitrament.  (Bishop  John  King.)  The  lot: — 
In  the  proposal  of  the  sailors,  though  superstition  seems  to  have  dictated  it,  I 
perceive  an  implied  recognition  of  the  agency  of  God  in  the  storm.  They  con- 
sidered their  present  distress  as  a  visitation  from  God.  And  in  this  they  judged 
truly.  Storms  do  take  place  under  the  direction  of  Divine  providence.  I 
perceive,  further,  the  operation  of  natural  conscience  in  these  heathen  men ; 
for  they  believe  not  only  that  it  was  Grod  who  sent  the  storm,  but  that  the  storm 
was  the  evident  token  of  His  displeasure  on  account  of  sin.  Sin  indeed  is  the 
great  cause  of  all  the  evils  with  which  mankind  are  aflSicted.  The  conscience 
of  the  sinner  may  at  other  times  be  lulled  into  a  false  peace,  but  the  pressure 
of  great  calamity,  or  the  fear  of  its  approach,  rouses  it  from  its  slumber.  In 
this  case,  the  conscience  of  these  heathen,  though  not  enlightened  by  revelation, 
accused  them.  There  is,  however,  no  direct  evidence  that  these  mariners  were 
impressed,  severally,  each  with  a  conviction  of  his  own  sins  in  particular.  Every 
man  looked  away  from  himself,  as  if  he  were  blameless,  and  txurned  his  thoughts 
towards  some  other  of  the  company  as  the  guilty  cause  of  the  storm  which 
threatened  their  destruction.  Besides,  they  were  ill-informed  respecting  the 
administration  of  Divine  providence  towards  sinners  in  this  present  world.  They 
eeem  to  have  thought  that  the  sufferings  which  befall  men  in  this  life  are  in  exact 
proportion  to  the  measure  of  their  iniquities.  This  was  the  error  of  Job's  friends. 
The  sailors  considered  the  storm  as  a  special  visitation  inflicted  because  of  some 
more  than  ordinarily  aggravated  transgression,  committed  by  some  unknown 
individual  among  them.  So  they  appealed  to  God  by  lot,  in  order  to  discover 
the  guilty  person.  The  whole  business  of  the  sailors  casting  lots  must  be  ascribed 
to  their  ignorance  and  superstition.  We  should  err  were  we  to  judge  of  the 
lawfulness  or  unlawfulness  of  actions  merely  by  their  event ;  and  God  is  often 
pleased  to  employ  for  His  purposes  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  men.  {James 
Peddie,  D.D.)  And  the  lot  fell  upon  Jonah. — Finding  the  guilty  one: — God 
wiU  certainly  find  out  the  Jonah  that  causeth  the  storm.  The  guilty  person 
shall  not  always  go  undiscovered.  I,  Persons  xtoder  oirrLT  may  go  a  long 
TIME  tTODiscoyERED.  Some  men's  hidden  works  of  darkness  are  sooner  brought 
to  Ught  than  others.     II.  Some  men's  sins  are  not  discovered  tjnttl  they 

COME  TO   THE   GREAT  RECKONING,  THE  GREAT  AITDIT  DAY.        "  Some  mcn's  sinS  are 

open  beforehand  to  judgment,  and  some  men  they  follow  after."  Then  the  hidden 
things  of  darkness  that  escape  discovery  now  will  all  be  brought  to  light ;  and 
what  if  you  be  hid  here,  this  will  but  harden  you  :  whereas  a  discovery  might 
be  a  means  to  awaken  you  and  bring  you  to  repentance.     III.  Some  men's  qixilt 

COMES    TTNDER    MORE    DREADFUL    AGGRAVATIONS    THAN    OTHERS.       Ordinarily,    the 

more  aggravations  that  men's  sins  are  clothed  with,  the  sooner  will  God  lay  them 
open  to  a  discovery.     IV.  Upon  their  discovery  they  either  grow  worsb 

AND    ARE    hardened,    OR    THEY    ARE    DEEPLY    HUMBLED.       Jonah,    Upon    his    dis- 

covery,  acknowledges  and  accepts  the  punishment  of  his  iniquity.  Now  we 
inquire,  What  ways  and  means  doth  God  take  for  the  discovery  of  guilty  persons  ? 
1.  By  pursuing  them  with  the  tenors  of  conscience.     2.  By  sending  judgments 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

and  afflictions  after  them.  3.  By  suffering  them  to  fall  into  some  notorious  sin. 
4.  By  giving  the  guilty  person  up  to  some  gross  and  notorious  error.  5.  By 
causing  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Word  to  seize  upon  them  and  arrest 
them.  6.  By  wonderful  providences.  7.  By  bringing  them  to  heart  and  con- 
science examination.  By  such  discovery  of  guilty  persons  God  gets  Himself 
a  name.  A  name  for  His  justice,  wisdom,  omniscience,  omnipresence,  and  also 
for  His  Word  and  truth.  Why  will  the  Lord  discover  guilt  ?  To  bring  poor  souls 
to  shame,  and  so  to  repentance,  and  all  this  while  He  hath  a  design  of  love  to 
the  soul  in  the  discovery.  Because  He  will  have  some  persons  made  cautions 
and  examples  to  others.  That  the  world  may  know  of  His  displeasure  against 
pin.  That  the  rottenness  of  many  hearts  may  appear,  and  they  may  no  longer 
go  on  to  deceive  others.  {John  Ryther.)  The  discovery  : — Let  sinners  con- 
ceal themselves  as  they  may,  their  transgressions  will  sooner  or  later  assuredly 
discover  them.  I.  Sin  may  be  long  concbalbd  feom  the  eye  of  man.  There 
is,  indeed,  a  gracious  covering  provided  for  the  sins  of  believers.  There  is  also 
a  charitable  concealment  to  which  in  many  instances  we  are  bound ;  but  this 
regards  the  transgressions  of  others.  But  there  is  a  covering  which  is  not  of 
God's  Spirit ;  a  concealment  by  which  sinners  are  encoruraged  to  "  add  sin  to 
sin."  This  is  worn  sometimes  in  the  form  of  delusion,  and  then  sinners  deceive 
themselves.  At  other  times  they  wear  their  covering  in  the  broad  and  ostensible 
form  of  hypocrisy.  Ought  every  transgression  to  be  avowed,  however  secret  ? 
Were  it  viewed  in  relation  to  God  we  should  say  absolutely  that  it  is  hypocrisy 
to  conceal.  What  are  the  cases  where,  in  obedience  to  the  Scriptm:e,  we  are 
conscientiously  bound  to  confess  our  faults,  not  only  to  God,  but  also  in  the 
presence  of  one  another  ?  1.  Such  disclosure  would  be  necessary  when,  in  exercise 
of  lawful  authority,  the  sinner  may  be  regularly  called.  2.  Disclosure  of  secret 
offences  is  required  where,  in  their  consequences,  they  may  implicate  others. 
3.  The  interests  of  the  Divine  honour,  not  unfrequently,  may  require  it.  The 
honour  of  Divine  grace  is  by  such  confession  promoted.  II.  All  sins,  even 
THE  MOST  SECRET,  SHALL  BE  EVENTUALLY  REVEALED.  Sentence  against  an  evil 
work  is  not  at  all  times  speedily  executed.  But  delay  does  not  secure  final 
impimity.  As  there  can  be  no  hiding-place  to  the  impenitent,  neither  shall  any 
species,  any  degree  of  transgression  escape.  III.  There  are  certain  kinds 
OF  transgression  which  the  wisdom  of  the  Divine  government  reveals, 

AND   its   justice   GENERALLY  AVENGES,    EVEN   IN   OUR  PRESENT   STATE   OF   BEING. 

1.  The  general  characters  by  which  such  sins  are  distinguished.  2.  God  is  in 
no  want  of  instruments  for  the  discovery  of  the  concealed  transgressor.  3.  For 
what  purposes  are  these  discoveries  made  ?  (1)  For  the  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  glory.  (2)  In  mercy  to  the  sinner  himself.  (3)  To  afford  us  all  the  most 
salutary  warning.     {James  Simpson.) 

Ver.  8.  What  is  thine  occupation? — W?iat  is  thine  occupation F — In  secular 
life  God  intends  every  man  to  have  an  occupation.  So  too  in  the  Christian 
life.  The  world  of  sin  inquires  of  the  Church,  "  What  is  thine  occupation  ?  " 
A  religion  that  cannot  give  a  vahd  reason  for  existence  will  and  ought  to  die. 
God's  calls  to  duty  are  all  special  calls.  So  are  His  calls  to  us.  What  is  our 
response  ?  The  Church  has  been  sent  into  this  world  on  a  special  errand,  with 
a  special  message  ;  but  many  of  her  members  are  fleeing  from  duty ;  many 
are  asleep  ov^r  a  volcano  of  human  hate  ;  are  tossed  skyward  and  hellward  by 
the  tumidtuous  waves  of  social  unrest,  every  lift  of  the  wave  bearing  them  further 
from  duty  and  Divine  destiny.  The  Church  should  be  a  nursery — not  a  nursery 
for  adults,  but  for  babes.  Men  and  women  in  the  Church  should  be  nursing 
fathers  and  nursing  mothers.     Then  "  what  is  your  occupation  ?  "     {F.  A.  Swart.) 

Ver.  9.  I  am  a  Hebrew,  and  I  fear  the  Lord. — Jonah's  confession: — I.  Thb 

ADVANTAGE  OF  BEING  BORN  AND   EDUCATED   IN  SOME   COUNTRIES  ABOVE 

OTHERS.  Consider  them  both  in  a  natural  and  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Some 
coimtries  place  their  inhabitants  under  serious  disabilities.  The  conditions  are 
most  deplorable  when  men's  bodies  draw  the  yoke  of  slavery,  and  minds  are 
destitute  of  common  civility,  as  well  as  of  all  true  conceptions  concerning  God 
or  religion.  What  then  are  the  natural  advantages  into  which  we  are  born  ? 
And  how  great  are  the  spiritual  advantages  ?     II.   The  greatest  happiness 

MEN    CAN    RECEIVE    DOTH    ARISE    FROM    THEIR    BEING    NUMBERED    AMONG    THOSE 

J'BOPLE  WHO  FEAR  THE  LoRD.     This  happiuess  is  best  demonstrated  by  comparison 


CHAP.  I.]  JONAB.  27 

with  the  enjoyments  of  other  people  and  nations.  That  this  happiness  may  abide 
for  ever  with  us,  we  are  obliged — 1.  To  keep  up  a  friendly  society  and  corre- 
spondence with  all  men.  2.  We  are  more  particularly  engaged  to  love  and  help 
one  another,  as  fellow-countrymen.  {John  Hartdiffe,  M.A.)  The  confession 
and  its  sequel  : — Here  is  Jonah  at  the  bar  of  inquiry.  Conscience  brings  every 
man  there.  There  is  a  present  judgment-seat  as  well  as  a  future.  Observe — 
1.  The  interrogators.  Heathen  sailors.  2.  The  prisoner  at  the  bar.  A  prophet 
of  Israel.  A  degrading  position  to  be  in.  3.  The  investigation.  It  was  kind, 
considerate,  circumstantial.  The  verse  9  sets  forth  the  elicited  confession.  Con- 
fession is  a  relief,  a  necessity,  and  a  Divine  condition  of  forgiveness.  Here  it 
was  ingenious,  contrite,  humiliating,  God-honouring.  Verse  10  suggests  that 
God's  terribleness,  as  seen  in  His  judgments  on  sin,  inspires  the  greatest  terror. 
This  prompts  to  earnest  inquiry.  Verses  11-15  set  forth  the  humanity  of  the 
jeopardised  heathen  crew  and  the  self-sentencing  of  Jonah.  Their  conduct 
shows  great  caution,  tenderness,  sympathy,  moral  change.  There  was  earnest 
prayer ;  reluctance  to  touch  God's  anointed ;  recognition  of  the  Divine  Sove- 
reignty. The  self-sentencing  of  Jonah  was  the  result  of  conscious  demerit. 
Learn — 1.  That  no  sinner  visited  with  Divine  judgments  is  justified  in  taking 
his  own  life.  2.  When  God  intends  to  execute  judgments.  3.  That  in  executing 
sentence  against  transgressors  we  should  be  certified  it  is  in  harmony  with  the 
will  of  God.  Verse  16  indicates  the  moral  efifects  of  the  whole  phenomena  on  the 
sailors.  They  feared,  sacrificed,  vowed.  Verse  17  sets  forth  justice  attempered 
by  mercy  through  miracle.  Learn  that  —  1.  Irrational  creatures,  as  well  as 
inanimate  creation,  are  subject  to  Divine  control.  2.  That  we  may  alight  on 
the  mercy  of  God  at  the  most  unexpected  hour  and  in  the  most  unlikely  place. 

3.  That  partial  deliverance  is  Divinely  intended  to  exercise  and  develop  faith. 

4.  That  salvation  shall  be  wrought  for  the  penitent  if  it  necessitate  a  departure 
from  the  ordinary  course  of  things.     {J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  I  know  that  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest  is  upon  you. — 

Intelligible  providences : — It  is  certain  that  in  all  general  adversities  God 
has  some  purpose  to  accomplish  with  all  those  that  suffer.  But  it  is  no 
less  true  that  individual  persons  may  be  particularly  aimed  at.  A  few  years 
ago  the  great  steamship  Austria,  crowded  with  emigrants,  was  burned  far  out 
at  sea,  and  only  a  few  of  the  passengers  were  saved.  Of  these  some  after- 
wards published  reports  of  the  terrible  event.  One  thrilling  narrative  was  from 
the  pen  of  a  young  man  who  had  sunk  very  low  in  debauchery,  frivolity,  and 
scorn  of  all  higher  things.  And  this  is  what  he  said  of  himself:  "I  do  not 
understand  the  ways  of  the  Eternal ;  but  I  do  know  this,  that  it  needed  a  terrible 
catastrophe  to  awaken  me  from  my  deathlike  sleep.  Nothing  less  than  such 
awful  event  would  have  driven  me  from  the  path  of  ruin  ;  and  in  the  midst  of 
all  the  frightful  agony  of  the  scene,  an  inward  voice  seemed  to  say  to  me,  '  This 
is  all  for  your  sake,  that  your  soul  may  be  dragged  from  destruction.' "  So  also 
a  Prussian  musketeer  who  on  the  battlefield  of  Sadowa  had  both  his  legs  shot 
off,  said  to  me,  "  I  can  never  reveal  my  sins  to  any  human  being  ;  but  believe  me, 
that  only  in  that  way  could  I  be  plucked  as  a  brand  from  the  burning.  As  far 
as  I  am  concerned,  I  know  why  the  war  had  to  come."  (Pastor  Funcke.)  The 
penitence  of  the  prophet  of  Gath-hepher : — This  is  the  first  clear  indication  of  a 
return  on  the  part  of  the  prophet  to  a  proper  state  of  feeling.  His  confession 
did  not  necessarily  imply  this.  I.  The  request  op  Jonah,  "  Take  me  up,  and 
cast  me  forth  into  the  sea."  These  words  imply — 1.  A  conviction  of  the  folly 
of  attempting  to  resist  God's  will.  It  may  be  said  that  this  none  will  dispute. 
In  words,  indeed,  many  may  admit  this,  but  in  their  practice  they  contradict  it. 
Every  disobedient  sinner  imagines  that  he  can  secure  his  happiness  not  only 
independently  of  God,  but  in  opposition  to  what  He  hath  revealed  or  what  He 
can  do.  2.  An  expression  of  his  readiness  to  endure  the  chastisement  due  to  his 
transgression.  It  is  one  thing  to  acknowledge  our  guilt  and  desert  of  punish- 
ment, and  another  practically  to  acquiesce  in  that  punishment  when  it  is  about 
to  be  inflicted.  It  is  a  much  more  difficult  thing,  and  much  more  indic- 
ative of  true  penitence,  patiently  to  bear  affliction  than  actively  to  perform 
duty.  Jonah  pronounces  on  himself  the  appalling  sentence,  that  he  should  be 
cast  into  the  sea.  3.  An  expression  of  his  readiness  to  submit,  not  only  as 
respected  the  matter  of  the  punishment,  but  the  manner  of  it.  Though  Jonah 
passed  sentence  on  himself,  he  did  not  propose  that  he  should  himself  carry  it 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

into  effect.  Self-destruction  is  in  no  case  justifiable.  4.  The  expression  of  his 
satisfaction  that  the  innocent  should  escape,  though  he  might  suffer.  11.  Thb 
CONDUCT  OF  THB  MASIKEBS.  It  might  have  been  expected  that  they  would  follow 
Jonah's  advice.  They  did  not  at  once.  Notice — 1.  The  benevolence  of  their 
exertions.  2.  The  inefficacy  of  their  exertions.  Learn  the  obstructions  which 
sin  presents  to  our  efforts  for  the  good  of  others.  (R.  Brodie,  A.M.)  Settling 
the  storm  : — Trace  an  analogy  between  the  experience  of  these  ancient  mariners 
and  that  of  those  who  are  *'  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  "  to  accept  salvation  through 
the  death  of  Christ.  "  Then  the  men  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly,  and  offered 
a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  and  made  vows."  It  will  be  interesting  to  trace  the 
Bteps  by  which  this  consummation  was  reached.  I.  True  spiritual  religion  is 
DiviNB  IN  ITS  OBIGIN.  Some  of  \is  began  life  very  much  as  these  sailors  com- 
menced their  voyage.  Every  prospect  seemed  bright.  So  easily  we  persuaded 
ourselves  to  rest.  Jonah  learned  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  that  "  salvation  is  of  the 
Lord."  This  at  a  stroke  removes — 1.  Inherent  goodness.  2.  Inherited  grace. 
3.  Imparted  sanctity.  As  this  spiritual  religion  is  Divine  in  its  origin,  so  it  is — 
II.  Ibresistiblb  in  ITS  OPERATION.  When  God  said,  "  Let  light  be  !  "  light  was, 
and  nothing  could  resist  His  decree.  And  so  it  is  in  the  new  creation.  What 
could  these  sailors  do  against  the  "  mighty  tempest "  which  threatened  to  dash 
their  ship  in  pieces  ?  Men  may  encase  themselves  in  pride,  carnal  reason,  pre- 
judice, unbelief,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  "  quick  and  powerful."  III.  Absolute 
IN  its  bequibements.  "  Take  me  up,  and  cast  me  forth  into  the  sea."  That 
was  God's  way  of  giving  calm  and  rest.  See  the  ways  the  mariners  tried.  1.  They 
began  to  be  religious.  2.  They  tried  to  lighten  the  vessel.  3.  They  rowed  hard 
to  get  to  land.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith ;  and  that  not  of  your- 
selves :  it  is  the  gift  of  God."  Accept  God's  method.  IV.  Blessed  in  its 
BESULTS.  This  is  precisely  the  way  in  which  God  works  in  grace.  1.  Peace 
through  faith.  2.  Piety  with  peace.  3.  Profession  with  piety.  {W.  H.  Burton.) 
Jonah's  fate  : — Let  us  not  fail  to  admire  all  that  was  admirable  in  the  conduct 
of  this  heathen  crew.  A  nobler  ship's  company  was  never  gathered  together. 
No  human  voice  cried  across  the  deck  of  the  labouring  vessel  that  the  man  who 
pronounced  this  sentence  upon  himself  must  be  taken  at  his  word.  With  a 
humane  self-restraint  which  did  them  infinite  honour  the  sailors  set  to  work  at 
an  attempt  to  save  themselves  without  sacrificing  their  passenger :  and  it  was 
not  imtil  that  attempt  had  completely  and  manifestly  failed  that  they  reluctantly 
and  reverently  consigned  him  to  the  deep.  I.  The  noble  attempt  of  the 
SAILOBS.  1.  Notice  the  toil  it  involved  on  behalf  of  a  stranger.  2.  The  risk  to 
which  it  exposed  them  for  the  sake  of  one  who  had  occasioned  them  loss.  3.  It 
was  a  noble  motive  which  prompted  these  men  to  make  this  attempt  to  save  the 
prophet's  life.  They  desired  to  show  their  sense  of  Jonah's  own  demeanoiu-  in 
relation  to  themselves,  and  to  make  a  suitable  response  to  it.  4.  The  failure 
of  their  attempt  by  no  means  detracts  from  the  nobility  of  their  conduct.  It 
does  not  follow  that  they  had  nothing  but  their  labour  for  their  pains.  They 
were  morally  the  better  for  the  purpose  they  had  cherished  of  saving  the  prophet, 
and  for  the  effort  they  had  made  to  accomplish  their  purpose.  II.  Consigninq 
Jonah  to  the  sea.  They  handled  the  prophet  as  tenderly  as  the  circumstances 
permitted.  Look  at  the  prayer  these  men  offered  before  they  put  Jonah  into 
the  sea.  1.  The  prayer  is  replete  with  interest  to  those  who  regard  it  with  atten- 
tion. It  was  a  prayer  addressed  to  the  true  God  by  these  heathen  for  the  first 
time.  It  was  a  very  earnest  prayer.  It  was  a  prayer  for  their  own  preserva- 
tion. It  was  a  prayer  for  the  prophet.  2.  The  reply  to  the  prayer.  "  The  sea 
ceased  fiom  her  raging."  This  was  a  miracle.  Miracles  were  signs.  This  was 
a  sign  that  Jonah  was  indeed  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  A  sign  that  Jehovah 
is  the  ruler  of  the  sea.  And  a  sign  that  God  hears  and  answers  prayer. 
{Samuel  Clijt  Burn.)  Nevertheless  the  men  rowed  hard  to  bring  it  to  the 
land. — Hard  rowing: — The  unavailing  efforts  of  these  oarsmen  have  a  counter- 
part— 1.  In  the  efforts  we  are  making  to  bring  souls  to  the  shore  of  safety,  and  set 
their  feet  on  the  Rock  of  Ages.  2.  In  the  efforts  we  are  making  to  bring  this 
world  back  to  God,  His  pardon,  and  safety.  If  this  world  could  have  been  saved 
by  human  effort,  it  would  have  been  saved  long  ago.  3.  In  every  man  that  is 
trying  to  row  his  own  soul  into  safety.     [T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  And  Jonah  was  in  the  belly  of  tbe  fish  three  days  and  three  nights. — 
The  crux  of  the  miracle  : — The  real  miracle  was  that  Jonah  should  siu-vive  so 


CHAP.  L]  JONAH.  29 

long  in  his  strange  pri-^on.  "  That  violates  the  laws  of  nature."  But  let  us 
once  understand  Christ's  profound  saying  about  a  Father  who  "  worketh  hitherto  " 
(John  V.  17),  that  is,  who  has  never  taken  His  hand  from  ofiE  the  thing  which 
He  has  created,  but  is  ceaselessly  active  and  operative  in  His  creation.  Once 
let  us  understand  that  all  force,  in  the  last  reach  of  our  thought,  is  with  force, 
and  that  the  forces  of  nature  are  only  the  many-sided  puttings  forth  of  that 
force  of  the  wiU  of  God,  outspoken  and  expressed  in  that  Word  of  His  power 
by  which  He  upholdeth  all  things.  Once  understand  that  there  are  no  laws 
of  nature  "  to  be  violated,  except  the  rules  which  He  has  laid  down  for  His  own 
ordinary  and  orderly  action  in  governing  His  world.  Once  let  it  be  seen  that 
whilst  for  our  sakes  it  is  generally  best  and  happiest  that  He  should  keep  to  His 
own  rules,  and  should  very  seldom  indeed  do  in  any  way  differently,  yet  He  is 
at  perfect  liberty  to  choose  whether  He  will  keep  to  His  ordinary  and  orderly 
plan,  or  for  some  special  reason  will  in  any  particular  instance  turn  aside. 
Then,  if  there  is  as  good  evidence  for  the  fact  as  the  case  admits  of,  and,  above 
all,  if  plainly  there  is  good  reason  for  the  fact,  we  may  as  reasonably  find  no  more 
difficulty  in  the  miracle  than  in  the  general  providence.  What  is  ordinary  is 
of  God,  just  as  much  as  the  extraordinary.  The  natural  is  of  Grod,  as  much  as 
the  supernatural.  Once  more  it  may  be  said  that  if  our  eyes  were  not  too  much 
the  eyes  of  the  children,  we  should  see  that  the  wonder  is  the  orderly,  reliable, 
age-long,  ordinary  providence,  rather  than  the  special  thing,  done  just  once, 
to  meet  an  emergency  for  which  the  ordinary  rule  and  method  did  not  sufficiently 
provide.  And  the  special  is  not  an  after-thought.  It  is  provided  for  in  the 
whole  great  plan  of  the  Worker.  It  is  one  of  His  rules.  It  quite  as  much  needed 
God  to  keep  Jonah  alive  year  after  year  in  the  atmosphere  and  upon  the  earth, 
as  to  keep  him  alive  for  three  days  within  the  body  of  the  great  fish.  (H.  J.  Foster. ) 
The  mirade  of  the  whale  : — No  miracle  has  been  more  frequently  quoted,  or  more 
severely  scrutinised.  I.  Establish  such  pkinciplks  as  will  warrant  thh 
FACT.  1.  There  are  some  things  of  which  even  the  Divine  power  is  incapable. 
Things  inconsistent  or  contradictory  cannot  be  asserted  of  God.  2.  There  are 
other  instances  in  which  the  Divine  power  may  be  easily  supposed  to  interfere 
for  the  suspension  or  even  contradiction  of  those  laws  which  God  hath  given 
to  a  material  world.  3.  Besides  these  parts  of  creation  with  which  we  are  in 
some  measure  acquainted,  there  are,  doubtless,  many  others  of  which  we  remain 
totally  ignorant.  The  infinitude  of  the  Divine  power  is  the  basis  on  which  this 
observation  is  built.  II.  Consider  the  particular  difficulties  with  which 
IT  HAS  been  thought  THIS  MiBACLB  WAS  ATTENDED.  1.  The  act  of  deglutition. 
2.  The  difficulty  of  respiration  in  the  body  of  a  fish.  3.  The  impossibility  of 
resisting  for  so  long  the  digestive   powers   of  so  huge  an  animal.     III.  There 

WERE   DESIGNS   TO   SERVE   WHICH  WERE   WORTHY   OF   SUCH   INTERPOSITION.       1.   It 

was  of  important  advantage  to  the  prophet.  2.  It  was  of  vast  importance  to 
the  mariners.  3.  It  was  of  vast  advantage,  we  may  believe,  to  the  people  of 
Nineveh.  4.  It  was  of  the  utmost  importance  if  you  consider  it  in  its  relations 
to  the  promised  Messiah.  5.  The  sign  of  Jonas  is  intended  for  standing  use  to 
the  Church,  to  the  end  of  the  world.  {James  Simpson.)  The  miracle  of  the 
great  fish  : — Strauss  said,  "  He  who  will  rid  the  world  of  priests,  must  first  rid 
religion  from  miracles."  But  the  Christian  religion  stands  or  falls  with  the 
supernatural.  A  man  may  believe  in  a  hving  God  who  works  miracles,  and 
yet  hesitate  and  recoil  at  the  extraordinary  one  which  is  narrated  in  the  history 
of  Jonah.  No  one  will  say  that  every  man  who  believes  that  God  can  work 
miracles  is  bound  to  accept  implicitly  every  miraculous  event  described  in  the 
Bible  as  having  really  happened,  and  as  being  the  work  of  God.  Let  no  one 
think  that  he  is  not  a  Christian  because  he  must  hesitate  about  the  literal  inter- 
pretation of  this  miracle  of  the  "  great  fish."  Instead  of  adopting  any  artificial 
interpretation  of  this  miracle,  it  would  be  better  to  suspend  our  judgment,  and 
acknowledge  that  we  cannot  come  to  any  conclusion  about  it.  At  any  rate  there 
is  only  the  choice  between  saying  that  the  whole  history  of  Jonah  is  a  parable, 
or  an  allegory,  including  the  preaching  in  Nineveh,  and  saying  that  every  event 
in  it  is  related  as  an  actual  occiurence.  To  suppose  that  Jonah  fell  into  a 
"  mysterious  hiding-place  "  is  only  to  set  aside  the  biblical  miracle,  and  put 
another  and  more  wonderful  one  in  its  place.  We  seek  an  answer  to  the  general 
question,  whether  it  is  so  wonderful  a  thing  to  believe  that  Grod  works  miracles  : 
or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  the  belief  that  He  must  and  does  do  so,  is  not  founded 
on  the  very  being  of  God,  and  on  His  relations  with  men.     If  we  arrive  at  that 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

decision,  the  question  of  the  miracle  by  which  Jonah  was  saved  will  be  settled. 
A  God  without  miracles  would  be  the  greatest  miracle  of  all.  If  we  have  not 
a  God  who  works  miracles,  we  have  no  living  God  ;  and  if  no  living  God  who 
communicates  with  men,  then  no  God  at  all.  Whoever  knows  anything  of  the 
living  God,  cannot  possibly  think  that  God  has  tied  His  own  hands,  once  for  all, 
with  laws  of  nature.  The  rank  and  privilege  of  man  demands  Divine  miracles. 
God  must  work  for  us  in  extraordinary  and  exceptional  ways,  or  we  could  neither 
fear  nor  love  Him,  and  He  would  soon  be  indifferent  to  us.  {Otto  Funcke.) 
Jonah's  preservation : — L  An  ORDrNARy  event  in  the  peovidbncb  op  God.  It 
was  not  a  miracle  that  a  large  fish  should  swallow  Jonah.  Instances  have  been 
known  in  which  sharks  have  swallowed  men.  II.  What  may  be  called  a  SPBCLiii 
PROVIDENCE  OF  GoD.  A  remarkable  coincidence  of  ordinary  providences  leading 
to  some  important  result  we  generally  regard  as  a  special  providence.  III.  Wb 
HAVE  A  MIRACULOUS  PROVIDENCE  OF  GoD.  That  the  prophet  should  have  hved 
in  the  fish  was  a  miracle.  And  the  miracle  is  the  more  striking  because  conscious- 
ness continued.  Learn — 1.  That  there  is  no  way  out  of  a  plain  duty  except 
through  chastisement.  2.  That  the  place  of  prayer  can  neither  add  to  nor  take 
from  the  value  of  prayer,  3.  That  the  inferior  creatures  may  become  instruments 
of  moral  instruction  to  man.  4.  That  the  fish  was  honoured  by  being  thus  brought 
into  the  plan  of  God  for  Jonah's  recovery  to  the  way  of  duty.  Consider — (1)  The 
object  and  design  of  the  miracle.  (2)  The  Disposer  and  Ruler  of  the  action.  "  The 
Lord."  (3)  The  manner  of  doing  it.  "  The  Lord  prepared."  (4)  The  instru- 
ment. "  A  great  fish."  (5)  The  end  of  its  preparation.  To  swallow  up  Jonah. 
(6)  The  time  during  which  Jonah  continued  in  the  fish.  "  Three  days  and  three 
nights."  (Outlines  by  a  London  Minister.)  Jonah  in  the  sea: — Mercy 
and  truth,  or  an  innate  tendency  towards  kindness,  and  an  essential  love  of 
rectitude  form  the  most  prominent  features  of  the  revealed  character  of  God. 
A  God  all  mercy  would  be  a  God  unjust.  The  demands  of  justice  were  rigorously 
exacted,  and  the  prophet  was  hurled  into  the  deep.  Why  such  severity  ?  Jonah 
had  sinned  presumptuously  against  God,  and  he  must  bear  the  penalty.  In 
this  phase  of  Jonah's  experience,  which  we  now  consider,  we  find  "  mercy  rejoicing 
against  judgment."  I.  The  prophet's  imprisonment.  Note — 1.  The  singularity 
of  the  mode  of  imprisonment ;  the  agency  of  God  in  preparing  the  prophet's  cell. 
On  the  supposition  that  Jonah  retained  his  consciousness  when  cast  into  the 
mighty  deep,  it  must  have  been  with  emotions  of  indescribable  hoi-ror  that  he 
saw  the  jaws  of  this  marine  monster  expanding  to  receive  him.  2.  The  term 
of  Jonah's  captivity.  Explain  Jewish  reckoning  "  three  days  and  three  nights." 
II.  The  prophet's  prayer.  Jonah  retained  his  consciousness  during  the  term 
of  his  imprisonment.  Evidently  we  have  only  the  substance  of  the  prophet's 
prayer.  Note  the  evidences  which  his  spiritual  exercises  furnish  of  sanctified 
affliction.  1.  The  spiritual  exercises  with  which  the  prophet's  prayer  is  identified. 
2.  The  conclusion  of  imbelief.  "  I  am  cast  out  from  Thy  sight."  3.  The  victory 
of  faith.  "  Yet  will  I  look  again  towards  Thy  holy  temple."  4.  The  ardour 
of  Jonah's  gratitude.  5.  His  emphatic  ascription.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord." 
Notice  the  evidence  of  spiritual  reclamation  which  the  prophet's  prayer  supplies. 
See  his  altered  feeling  towards  God  :  the  rekindling  of  the  spirit  of  devotion  : 
the  vigorous  action  of  faith.  In  the  expression  of  his  faith  Jonah  embodied 
the  sentiments  of  former  saints.  Jonah  was  evidently  cured  of  his  folly  in  flying 
from  God.  III.  The  prophet's  deliverance.  This  was  miraculous  in  its 
character.  Jonah  was  conveyed  back  safely  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  cast  upon 
the  dry  shore.  It  was  intended  to  test  the  sincerity  of  the  prophet's  penitence, 
to  secure  the  fulfilment  and  success  of  his  errand,  and  to  typify  the  mission  of 
Christ.  {John  Broad.)  A  restrained  fish: — The  chapter  closeth  with  the 
narration  of  Jonah's  preservation.  Though  thus  pursued  by  justice  in  a  fish's 
belly,  where,  in  a  miraculous  way,  he  was  kept  three  days  and  three  nights. 
Doctrine.  1.  When  God  is  pursuing  the  rebellion  of  His  children  in  a  most  severe 
way,  yet  doth  He  not  altogether  cast  off  His  mercy  toward  them,  but  out  of  the 
abundance  thereof,  moderates  their  affliction  :  for  "  the  Lord,"  pursuing  Jonah, 
"  had  yet  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  him  up."  2.  God's  providence  over- 
rules and  directs  the  motions  of  irrational  creatures  and  sea  monsters,  as  pleaseth 
Him.  For  "  the  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish,"  &c.,  whereas  it  knew  nothing 
but  to  range  up  and  down  in  the  sea,  and  swallow  him  as  any  other  prey.  3.  God 
may  have  a  mercy  and  proof  of  love  waiting  upon  His  people,  in  a  time  and  place 
where  it  would  be  least  expected  ;  for  Jonah  meets  a  mercy  in  the  heart  of  a 


CHAP,  n.]  JONAH.  31 

raging  sea,  into  which  he  is  cast  in  anger,  as  to  be  destroyed.  4.  Albeit  the  mercy 
of  God  will  not  destroy  His  guilty  people  in  their  afflictions  ;  yet  His  wisdom 
seeth  it  not  fitting  at  first  totally  to  deliver  them,  but  will  have  their  faith  exercised. 
5.  God  can,  when  He  seeth  fit,  preserve  His  people  from  ruin  in  an  incredible 
and  miraculous  way.  Therefore  Jonah  is  not  only  swallowed  whole  by  the  fish, 
not  being  hurt  by  its  teeth ;  but  is  preserved  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  three  days 
and  three  nights,  where  he  was  in  hazard  of  choking  for  want  of  breath,  or  ol 
being  digested  by  the  fish  into  its  own  substance.     (Qeorge  Hutcheson.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vbrs.  1-9.  And  Jonah  prayed  unto  the  Lord  his  God,  out  of  the  fish'a 
belly. — T?ie  return  to  God : — The  object  in  setting  forth  the  history  of  Jonah 
is  to  show  the  nature  of  his  sin,  the  truth  of  his  penitence,  and  the  way 
in  which  he  was  restored  to  God's  favour.  Turn  thought  to  the  change  which 
was  worked  in  Jonah's  soul.  Bear  in  mind  what  was  the  nature  of  his  sin.  It 
was  not  that  he  was  separated  from  God,  but  that  he  had  abandoned  his  duty, 
had  shrunk  from  his  mission,  had  thought  more  of  his  own  relief  from  trial  than 
of  God's  will.  When  some  wrong  has  been  done  which  we  have  not  the  courago 
to  confess,  and  the  truth  is  discovered,  fixing  the  charge  on  one's  self-personality, 
we  know  what  a  terrible  shock  and  deep  inward  sense  of  self-reproach  is  felt. 
Illustrate  by  the  cases  of  Achan  and  David.  When  the  sailors  asked  Jonah 
what  was  to  be  done,  he  replied,  "  Cast  me  forth  into  the  sea,  .  .  .  for  I  know 
that  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest  is  upon  you."  What  do  his  words  prove  ? 
Not  only  Jonah's  personal  sense  of  guilt,  but  his  complete  surrender  of  himsel£ 
to  God,  whether  to  hve  or  to  die.  "  If  I  die,"  he  seems  to  say,  "  it  is  my  just 
doom  ;  if  I  hve,  it  is  the  pure  undeserved  mercy  of  God."  It  was  the  most 
perfect  reparation  we  can  conceive.  As  before  he  would  not  surrender  his  own 
will  and  his  own  judgment,  notwithstanding  the  command  of  God,  so  now  he 
would  give  himself  up  wholly  for  whatever  God  might  will  as  his  deserved  punish- 
ment. The  sailors  cast  him  into  the  sea,  but  then  a  yet  deeper  sense  of  penitence 
awoke  within  him,  and  a  yet  stronger  expression  of  profound  sorrow  and  un- 
questioning childlike  faith  broke  forth  from  him.  Jonah  saw,  by  faith,  fife 
restored ;  he  saw  Divine  mercy  working  itself  out  in  the  midst  of  the  deep  dark- 
ness, and  he  acknowledged  God  as  his  Father,  his  Protector,  his  eternal  Hope 
even  then  in  the  midst  of  his  awful  doom.  Two  lessons — 1.  We  see  here  an  act 
of  purest  faith.  There  is  a  faith  of  a  soft  and  easy  kind,  when  everything  goea 
smooth,  and  we  have  no  anxiety,  no  fear  or  distress  darkening  the  path  of  life. 
How  glibly  then  do  men  speak  of  having  their  hope  in  God.  There  is  another 
kind  of  faith,  which  produces  resignation,  patience,  willingness  to  endure  and 
be  brave,  and  even  willing  to  suffer.  But  yet  it  may  not  be  faith  that  cheers 
the  soul, — not  a  "  rejoicing  in  the  Lord,"  not  the  triumph  of  a  trustful  soul.  The 
real  saving  faith  is  seen  when  the  soul  finds  God  working  in  the  storm  and  tem- 
pest, and  reads  the  handwriting  on  the  wall,  speaking  even  in  the  midst  of  death 
and  terror,  and  yet  can  calmly  look  on  the  Redeemer  on  the  Cross,  and  see  in 
the  future  the  immortality  beyond  the  grave,  see  the  brightness  of  the  glory  that 
will  one  day  be  to  the  faithful  the  heritage  of  boundless  joy,  and  so  be  comforted 
and  gladdened  even  in  sorrow  and  pain, — it  is  such  faith  we  see  realised  in  the 
repentant  Jonah.  2.  We  may  learn  the  reason  of  trials  and  troubles  which  so  often 
disturb  the  currents  of  oiu*  Ufe.  What  would  it  be  if  we  were  always  in  the  sun- 
shine, always  prosperous  ?  Would  there  not  be,  even  to  the  most  faithful,  a  risk  of 
too  great  confidence  of  a  false  assurance  ?  (T.  T.  Carter.)  Jonah  in  the  sea: — 
1.  Objectively,  the  prophet's  experience  was  that  of  one  in  the  belly  of  hell,  in  the 
midst  of  the  seas,  entangled  in  the  weeds,  and  among  the  caverns  worn  by  the  waves 
beneath  the  mountains  on  the  coast.  Jonah  was  in  the  belly  of  hell — Sheol,  the 
region  of  the  dead.  He  was  in  the  heart  of  the  seas.  He  sank  at  once  when  cast 
into  the  sea.  He  was  entangled  with  the  sea-weeds.  Entangled  with  the  weeds 
which  gathered  about  his  head,  the  prophet  drifted  towards  the  coast,  and  was 
presently  carried  into  some  of  its  submarine  caverns  by  the  current,  and  there 
he  must  have  perished  but  for  the  Divine  mercy.     2.  The  subjective  experience 


32  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TRAT0B.  [chap.  n. 

of  Jonah  beneath  the  waves  was  that  of  a  Hying,  conscious,  suffering,  and  sup* 
pliant  person.  It  was  a  miraculous  circumstance  that  the  prophet  remained 
alive  in  such  a  position.  Jonah  was  not  only  alive,  but  conscious  while  under 
the  sea.  The  distress  he  experienced  beneath  the  water  appears  to  have  been 
apiritual  rather  than  physical.  His  soul  was  overwhelmed  with  the  consciousness 
that  he  was  cast  out  of  God's  sight.  Jonah  was  saved  from  despair  by  the  sup- 
pliant mood  which  possessed  him.  We  need  despair  of  no  man  while  he  prays. 
His  prayer  was  accompanied  by  a  look  toward  the  temple  of  Jehovah.  It  was 
prompted  by  his  remembrance  of  the  Lord.  "  I  remembered  Jehovah."  It 
was  accompanied  by  a  vow.  It  was  answered  in  a  remarkable  manner.  Observe 
his  reflections  when  in  the  fish.  I.  "  Thou  hast  brought  up  my  life  from  destruc- 
tion, O  Lord  my  God  !  "  2.  "  My  prayer  came  in  unto  Thee,  into  Thine  holy 
temple."  3.  "  They  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake  their  own  mercy." 
4.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  (8.  C.  Burn.)  Jonah's  prayer  : — Here  we  have 
a  very  clear  and  intense  history  of  Jonah's  inward  life.  Notice  some  points  of 
it.  1.  There  was  a  great  and  sudden  quickening  of  consciousness.  2.  Rapidly 
this  new  consciousness  became  distressful.  The  reserved  sorrow  of  long  sinning 
comes  all  at  once.  3.  Then  he  began  to  "  look  " — upwards  to  earth,  eastwards 
to  the  temple  where  he  knew  that  the  lost  presence  was  richly  manifested.  4.  The 
look  soon  became  a  cry.  It  may  have  been  an  audible  cry.  But  evidently  the 
Boul  of  the  cry  was  this,  that  it  was  the  cry  of  the  soul.  5.  He  began  to  be  grateful. 
6.  The  final  state  of  his  mind  is  a  state  of  entire  dependence.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  imprisonment  of  Jonah  : — It  is  evident  from  the  chapter  that,  whether  a  longer 
or  a  shorter  period  elapsed,  what  befell  him,  and  how  he  was  exercised  during 
his  confinement,  were  things  which  he  distinctly  recollected.  In  verse  1  Jonah 
gives  a  summary  statement  of  what  was  his  situation  and  exercise.  The  belly 
of  a  fish.  Clearly  his  preservation  and  escape  were  things  altogether  miraculous. 
That  was  his  situation ;  his  exercise  was  prayer.  Let  none  then  neglect  secret 
prayer  to  God,  or  think  themselves  excused  because  they  have  not  a  proper  or 
convenient  place  to  which  they  may  retire.  The  description  given  of  the  object 
of  his  prayer  is  worthy  of  notice.  "  The  Lord  his  Grod."  The  God  of  Israel, 
the  only  living  and  true  God,  God  in  covenant.  It  was  plainly  the  prayer  of  an 
appropriating  faith.  Verse  2  requires  but  httle  explanation.  Here  we  have 
the  success  with  which  this  exercise  of  prayer  was  crowned.  His  situation  had 
been  one  of  deep  distress.  He  cried  unto  the  Lord  out  of  his  auction.  He 
was  in  great  straits,  and  very  closely  besieged.  His  body  and  mind  were  both 
shut  up.  The  word  "  cried,"  as  used  in  relation  with  the  exercise  of  prayer, 
is  very  significant.  It  is  not  here  merely  a  loud  voice ;  it  implies  close  engage- 
ments of  heart,  great  fervour,  earnestness,  and  importunity.  This  is  the  more 
strongly  indicated  as  the  word  is  repeated.  Our  prophet  did  not  direct  his  cry 
to  one  whose  ear  was  shut  or  averted.  Our  God  is  the  hearer  of  prayer.  Verse  3 
contains  an  amplified  account  of  the  dismal  situation  of  the  prophet,  and  of 
the  utter  hopelessness  of  life  being  preserved,  or  deliverance  obtained,  except 
by  miraculous  infiuence.  Without  attempting  to  describe  the  peculiarly  dis- 
tressing feelings  of  the  prophet  when  in  the  fish's  belly,  a  case  which  baffles  all 
description,  let  us  direct  attention  to  the  piety  of  the  man.  He  traces  the  storm 
to  God  Himself.  In  verse  4  we  have  a  short  but  lively  description  of  that  conflict 
which  often  takes  place,  in  the  case  of  God's  people,  between  grace  and  remaining 
corruption,  particularly  between  faith  and  unbelief.  This  conflict,  though  in- 
cident to  the  people  of  God  at  all  times,  is  specially  felt  in  seasons  of  distress. 
The  language  is  not  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  God's  natural  presence,  or  as 
intimating  that  the  prophet  was  beyond  the  sphere  of  God's  omniscience  ;  for 
he  was  better  taught  than  to  give  any  coimtenance  to  such  an  idea.  But  he 
then  felt  strongly  tempted  to  say  that  he  was  cast  out  of  the  Lord's  gracious 
presence.  But  he  had  in  him  the  principle  of  a  true  saving  faith.  He  says, 
'  I  will  look  again  toward  Thy  holy  temple."  This  language  intimates  that  the 
faith  of  the  prophet  embraced  God  in  His  gracious  and  new-covenant  character. 
The  following  truths  may  be  inferred.  That  God  is  jealous  of  His  glory,  and 
frequently  manifests  this  most  signally  in  His  dealings  with  His  own  people.  That 
it  is  God  who  adjusts  the  kind,  measure,  and  duration  of  the  afilictions  with  which 
His  righteous  people  are  afflicted.  That  while  God  displays  much  of  His  sove- 
reignty in  the  afilictions  He  sends  upon  His  people,  yet  some  sin  is  often  the 
immediate  precursor.  That  right  exercise  under  afiliction  consists  in  a  clear  and 
impressive  discernment  of  this  connection.     That  when  afilictions  are  sanctified 


CHAP,  u.]  JONAH.  33 

to  persons  they  seek  unto  God  by  prayer  for  pardon  and  restoration.  That 
although  the  genuine  people  of  God,  under  this  or  the  other  affliction,  may  be 
reduced  to  a  very  low  state  as  respects  their  soul-exercise,  yet  they  are  always 
upheld,  and  in  the  mercy  of  God  are  prevented  from  plunging  into  the  fatal  abyss 
of  despair  !  {James  Clyde. )  The  conflict  between  despair  and  faith  : — Doctrine — 
1.  It  is  the  usual  lot  of  the  Lord's  children  to  have  not  only  outward  afflictions 
to  wrestle  with,  but  spiritual  temptations  and  sad  conclusions,  gathered  from 
their  troubles,  which  are  sorer  to  endure  than  many  simple  afflictions.  For  so 
was  it  with  Jonah  when  he  was  in  the  sea.  2.  The  children  of  the  Lord  in  their 
troubles  may  be  so  tossed  and  divided  betwixt  hope  and  despair  that  faith 
and  unbeUef  will  be  talking  word  about,  for  so  doth  Jonah's  experience  teach. 
"  I  said,  I  am  cast  out ;  yet  will  I  look  again."  3.  In  a  time  of  temptation, 
unbelief's  word  is  generally  first  out,  till  faith  come  and  correct  it ;  ordinarily 
what  is  said  in  haste  is  unbelief's  language,  and  to  be  unsaid  again,  for  this  comes 
first  out,  "  I  am  cast  out  of  Thy  sight."  4.  A  child  of  God  may  not  only  be 
assaulted  with  fits  of  despair,  but  for  a  time  be  overcome  with  it,  and  yield  to 
it ;  and  yet,  for  all  that,  recover  his  feet  again.  5.  As  it  is  ordinary  under  tempta- 
tion to  judge  of  all  God's  respect,  care,  and  love  by  our  sense  of  His  present 
dealing,  so  to  be  cast  off  by  God,  as  one  that  He  will  not  favour  nor  care  for  nor 
take  notice  of,  is  the  sorest  of  trials,  especially  to  the  child  of  God,  who  lives  by 
Good's  favour,  and  is  made  up  in  all  his  afflictions  when  he  finds  that  God  thinks 
on  him,  and  that  his  troubles  endear  him  to  God's  care.  6.  It  is  no  new  thing 
to  see  a  child  of  God,  and  vessel  of  mercy,  apprehending  reprobation  and  rejection 
from  God,  in  his  sad  and  dark  hour,  for  this  also  is  Jonah's  temptation.  7.  Nor 
is  it  strange  to  see  the  children  of  God  exercised  and  sadly  afflicted  with  that 
which  hath  never  been,  nor  will  be,  save  in  their  own  fearful  apprehensions  ; 
for  so  is  Jonah  with  "  casting  off."  When  we  reckon  by  our  own  deservings, 
and  by  probabilities  in  a  strait,  and  not  by  God's  love  and  all-sufficiency,  we 
cannot  but  draw  sad  conclusions,  and  our  own  spirits  will  make  us  work  enough. 
8.  Temptations,  even  when  they  have  overcome  for  a  season,  are  not  to  be  lien 
with,  and  given  way  to,  by  the  children  of  God,  but  ought  to  be  resisted  and  set 
against,  though  they  should  (if  it  were  possible)  perish  in  the  attempt,  this  being 
the  way  to  honour  God  and  get  deliverance, — for  vanquished  Jonah  will  not 
quit  it  so  ;  "  Yet  will  I  look  again."  9.  That  whereby  the  children  of  the  Lord 
must  oppose  all  troubles  inward  and  outward,  and  resist  temptations,  is  naked 
faith  closely  adhering  to  the  covenant  of  grace  made  in  Christ,  and  gathering 
hope  of  better  dealing.  This  is  imported  in  his  "  looking  again  toward  the  holy 
Temple,"  or  eyeing  God  in  His  covenant,  whereof  that  was  a  sign.  To  cast  away 
confidence  as  useless  in  a  strait,  or  not  to  essay  faith  imtil  we  are  hired  by  sense, 
or  to  lie  by  in  wilful  imbelief,  think  that  is  the  way  to  get  sense  to  loose  oi.r 
doubts  ;  or  to  seek  any  footing  for  faith  but  in  Grod's  covenant  and  free  grace  in 
Christ,  is  the  height  of  folly.  10.  The  weakest  act  of  faith  may  do  much  good 
in  a  day  of  greatest  need ;  for  in  all  this  extremity  Jonah  had  no  more  but  a 
" looking  again"  as  a  poor  banished  man.  11.  Faith  in  a  time  of  need  will  find 
a  way  through  many  a  dark  impediment  to  find  God.  12.  It  speaks  much  to 
Grod's  praise  that  when  His  people  are  laid  by  with  their  temptations  yet  He  will 
not  lose  them,  but  recover  them  out  of  their  deepest  swoons,  and  make  van- 
quished faith  yet  again  to  triumph  over  difficulties  which  they  had  judged  in- 
superable. For  this  is  also  recorded  to  His  praise  :  that  not  only  Jonah  persevered 
crying  when  his  trouble  was  great,  but  that  he  was  strengthened,  after  he  had 
once  yielded  to  the  temptation,  to  beUeve  and  "  look  again.'  {Oeorge  Hutcheson.) 
The  prayer  of  Jonah  : — This  prayer,  as  it  now  stands,  was  obviously  composed 
after  his  restoration.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  compendium  of  what  he  uttered 
in  his  distress.  Notice — 1.  The  depth  of  the  prophet's  misery.  The  prophet 
was  in  the  utmost  jeopardy.  He  knew  not  but  that  death  might  speedily  be 
his  portion.  His  misery  arose  chiefiy  from  the  agony  of  his  soul — the  convictioa 
that  he  had  been  arrested  in  an  act  of  wilful  disobedience, — in  the  attempt,  vain 
as  that  of  the  first  fallen  pair,  to  escape  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  Many 
of  his  expressions  are  similar  to  those  of  the  psalmist.  David  felt  the  bitterness 
which  is  the  invariable  result  of  a  departure  from  the  living  God, — the  intolerable 
anguish  which  arises  from  a  consciousness  of  guilt  when  the  conscience,  by 
habitual  transgression,  has  not  been  seared,  and  reverential  fear  of  God  not 
rooted  out  from  the  heart.  When  we  contemplate  the  prophet  in  his  dark  hours 
of  terror  and  agony,  and  behold  the  inevitable  wretehedness  which  is  the  natural 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [chap.  n. 

consequence  of  disobedience,  we  cannot  but  admire  the  wisdom,  while  we  should 
seek  to  follow  the  example,  of  that  apostle  who  declared,  in  the  presence  of  Felix, 
that  he  exercised  himself  to  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward 
God  and  toward  men.     Though  depressed  and  desponding,  Jonah  did  not  give 
way  to  despair.     He  called  to  mind  former  mercies.     His  prayer  ascended  with 
the  incense  to  heaven.     And  to  whom  should  we  betake  oxirselves  in  the  hour  of 
affliction,  but  to  that  God  who  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands  ?     We 
should  not  look  to  other  sources  for  that  comfort  which  Jehovah  alone  can  bestow. 
As  Jonah  looked  to  the  temple,  and  thought  upon  the  legal  sacrifices  there  offered, 
so  must  we,  in  all  our  addresses  to  the  throne  of  grace,  have  respect  to  the  meri- 
torious efficacy  of  that  great  sacrifice  by  which  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  averted  the 
Father's  displeasure,  and  opened  a  way  of  access  through  His  blood.     The  prayer 
of  Jonah  was  not  in  vain.     He  was  speedily  dehvered  from  his  prison-house. 
No  doubt  can  be  entertained  of  the  sincerity  of  the  prophet's  repentance — of 
the  deep  humiliation  of  his  soul,  of  his  heartfelt  contrition  for  having  disobeyed 
the    Divine    command.     No   sooner  was   the    prophet   restored   than,  like   the 
mariners,  he  offered  praise  and  thanksgiving,  and  paid  his  vows  unto  the  Lord. 
How  overwhelming  must  have  been  his  feelings  on  this  miraculous  deliverance 
from  his  strange  and  fearful  prison-house.     His  soul  must  have  been  transported 
with  gratitude  and  amazement,  and  his  vows  were  doubtless  poured  forth  with 
a  fervour  proportioned   to  a  sense  of  dehverance.     But  how  often  are  pious 
resolutions  forgotten  when  the  time  of  danger  is  past.     "  Salvation  is  of  the 
Lord."     What  truth  more  important  to  be  habitually  reaUsed  than  this, — that 
all  ovir  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal  blessings  proceed  from  God.     What  have 
we  that  we  have  not  received  ?     Our  worldly  success  we  are  tempted  to  ascribe 
to  our  prudence  and  skilful  management.     We  refer  to  second  causes  that  which 
should  be  referred  to  the  great  First  Cause  of  all.     And  we  are  apt  to  forget  that 
it  is  "  by  grace  we  are  saved."     The  great  practical  lesson  for  us  to  learn  is — 
the  value  and  importance  of  prayer.     (Thomas  Bissland,  M.A.)        The  prophet  a 
•prayer  : — The  bottom  of  the  sea  was  Jonah's  holy  ground,  and  the  belly  of  the 
fish  his  consecrated  oratory.     His  gloomy  prison  was  turned   into  a  house  of 
prayer.     Jonah  evidently  retained  has  consciousness  during  the  term  of  his  im- 
prisonment.    We  have  only  the  substance  of  the  captive's  prayer  preserved  for 
us.     1.  The  spiritual  exercises  with  which  the  prophet's  prayer  is  identified.     It 
is  impossible  to  conceive  of  a  more  critical  or  distressing  condition  than  that  to 
which  the  servant  of  God  was  reduced.     2.  The  conclusion  of  unbelief.     "  Then 
I  said,  I  am  cast  out  of  Thy  sight."     An  outcast  from  Divine  favour.     3.  The 
victory  of  faith.     '*  Yet  will  I  look  again  towards  Thy  holy  temple."     See  faith's 
realised  triumph.     "  Yet  hast  Thou  brought  up  my  life  from  corruption,  0  Lord 
my  God."     4.   The  ardour  of  Jonah's  gratitude.     5.   His  emphatic  ascription. 
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."     Notice  also  the  evidence  of  spiritual  reclamation 
which  the  prophet's  prayer  supplies.     This  is  seen  in  his  altered  feeling  towards 
God.     In  the  rekindling  of  the  spirit  of  devotion.     In  the  vigorous  action  of 
faith.     In  the  expression  of  this  faith  Jonah  embodied  the  sentiments  of  former 
saints.     The  prophet's  mind  was  evidently  richly  stored  with  the  Word  of  God. 
(John  Broad. )        The  conflict  of  faith  and  sense : — The  prayer  of  Jonah  is  an 
illustrious  instance  of  the  conflict  between  sense  and  faith.     Sense  prompting 
to  despair, — faith   pleading  for  hope  and   procuring  victory.     This  prayer  of 
faith,  though  in  unparalleled  circumstances,  and  spiritually  noble  in  a  marvellous 
degree,  contains  in  it  nothing  but  the  ordinary  principles  of  all  beheving  prayer. 
It  is  the  very  trial  of  faith  to  have  circumstances  to  contend  with  which  appear 
to  extinguish  hope,  which  even  seem  to  shut  out  hope  altogether.     This  is  the 
true  place  and  action  of  faith.     Surrounded  by  incidents,  events,  circumstances, 
influence,   powers,   all  adverse   to  your  deliverance   and  salvation ;    and  with 
your  hope,  as  far  as  this  region  of  the  things  seen  and  temporal  is  concerned, 
utterly  cut  off  ;  your  faith  discovers  another  region,  a  realm  and  kingdom  unseen. 
Your  faith  draws  upon  them.     I.  View  Jonah's  position  from  the  side  ob" 
SENSE.     Was  ever  a  case  so  fitted  to  call  forth  utter  despair  ?     Mark — 1.  The 
case  in  which  Jonah  finds  himself.     2.  The  hand  to  which  he  traces  it.     3.  The 
immediate  effects  produced  on  his  mind  by  it.     He  felt  to  be  cast  out  of  God's 
sight.     His  soul  fainted  in  him.     Outwardly  he  was  begirt  with  terrors  unspeak- 
able.    These  to  him  were  tokens  of  an  angry  God.     His  soul  was  brought  to  the 
very  verge  of  despair.     II.  Jonah's  faith  bosb  in  its  strength  and  triumph. 
What  can  stand  us  in  any  stead  in  such  an  hour  but  the  prayer  of  faith  ?     L  Wo 


CHAP,  n,]  JONAH.  35 

see  the  truth  and  power  of  Jonah's  faith  in  that  he  betook  himself  to  prayer  at 
alL  2.  He  set  before  himself  the  certainty  of  Jehovah's  reconcilableness,  His 
promised  forgiveness,  Hia  sure  accessibility.  3.  He  did  not  do  this  in  vain.  He 
was  answered  in  the  progressive  strengthening  of  his  faith,  even  while  his  trial 
lasts.  4.  Jonah  offers  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving.  He  cometh  unto  God — 
unto  God  his  exceeding  joy.  (Hugh  Martin,  M.A.)  Jonah  the  penitent  swp' 
pliant : — This  has  been  called  a  "  Song  of  deliverance."  It  suggests — 1.  The 
moral  significance  of  adverse  circumstances.  Circumstances  make  or  immake, 
mould  or  mar  us  for  future  usefulness  and  distinction,  according  to  the  spirit 
in  which  they  are  received  and  utilised.  Adverse  circumstances  are  morally 
advantageous  when  rightly  understood,  patiently  borne,  and  rightly  used.  Ad- 
versity ever  has  a  spiritual  significance.  Whether  it  be  guidance  judicial  or  dis- 
ciplinary, we  cannot  do  better  than  acknowledge  with  reverence  the  hand  that 
strikes,  and  supphcate  His  mercy.  2.  The  important  part  prayer  plays  in  the 
adversities  of  hfe.  It  is  indispensable  in  the  trying  and  troublous  experiences 
of  our  moral  and  physical  being.  Jonah's  prayer  was  a  necessity.  He  was 
borne  on  the  wings  of  strong  moral  impulses.  2.  That  the  hearer  or  receiver 
of  prayer  is  always  within  reach  and  approachable.  Time,  circumstances,  con- 
dition, place  are  no  hindrances  in  themselves  to  drawing  near  to  God.  From 
every  point  in  the  compass  of  life  He  is  accessible.  (1)  Jonah's  prayer  was  a 
personal  recognition  of  God.  (2)  He  was  earnest  in  supplication.  Importunity 
is  never  unsuccessful.  4.  That  our  prayers  to  a  great  extent  are  moulded  by  our 
experience.  As  the  countenance  indexes  the  mind,  the  eye,  the  health,  so  prayer 
is  a  pretty  sure  indicator  of  the  soul's  attitude  Godward,  its  condition  in  grace, 
its  experience  in  the  faith-life.  This  chapter  teaches  the  prevalency  of  prayer. 
It  was  answered  in  complete  salvation.  Note  here,  amazing  Divine  condescen- 
sion. Great  deviation  from  the  Divine  habitude.  Prompt  and  perfect  deliver- 
ance. Prayer  is  omnipotent,  for  it  prevails  with,  it  conquers  God.  There  is 
no  dilemma  in  Christian  experience  that  prayer  cannot  dehver  from.  (J.  O. 
Keen,  D.D.)  In  the  deep  and  mighty  waters: — Some  few  years  ago  a  terrible 
calamity  occurred  in  a  colliery  at  Tynewydd,  South  Wales.  The  mine  was  flooded 
with  water,  and  for  several  days  the  miners  were  entombed,  despite  heroic  efforts 
to  save  them.  As  one  of  the  rescuing  parties  was  exploring  the  mine  they  thought 
they  heard  singing,  and  creeping  in  the  direction  of  the  sound,  heard  the  entombed 
men  singing  the  words  of  a  Welsh  hymn,  "  In  the  deep  and  mighty  waters  there 
is  One  to  rescue  me."  (8.  S.  Chronicle.)  More  of  thanksgiving  beneath  the 
waters  : — There  is  an  old  legend  concerning  a  golden  organ  which,  when  a 
monastery  was  being  sacked,  the  monks  tnrew  into  the  rushing  stream  that 
hiurried  past  their  home ;  and  the  story  has  it  that  for  long,  long  years  there- 
after the  music  of  the  organ  was  stiU  heard  beneath  the  waters  ;  for,  though  they 
drowned  the  instrument,  they  could  not  drown  its  song.  There  is  a  lesson  for 
us  even  in  an  apparently  worthless  legend.  When  God's  waves  and  billows 
roll  over  us,  let  us  remember  that  we  are  God's,  and  that  will  set  the  seal.  Though 
the  organ  beneath  the  surface  may  run  the  risk  of  being  drowned,  if  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  with  us,  then  the  sweet  new  song  will  be  going  on  all  the  same. 
{Christian  Herald.) 

Ver.  2.  I  cried  by  reason  of  mine  afiOiction.  —  Troubles  and  deliverance : — 
I.  The  fact  of  trouble.  Jonah  is  at  one  with  all  men  in  a  common  experience 
of  trouble.  No  child  of  God  is  born  to  a  heritage  of  unmitigated  grief. 
Some  compensating  mercy  is  sure  to  throw  its  mellow  light  over  the  angriest 
storm.  Some  specimens  of  trouble.  So  many  hampered  lives ;  so  many 
obstacles  to  goodness ;  so  many  and  so  powerful  temptations ;  so  many 
apparent  contradictions  to  the  truth  of  an  infinite  goodness.  Jonah's  trouble 
was  his  being  thrust  off  into  a  conscious  distance  from  God.  II.  Delivebancb 
FROM  TROUBLE.  The  steps  toward  such  deUverance  are  stated  in  our  Scripture. 
1.  Jonah  remembered  God.  Submissive  memory  of  God  is  the  first  step.  2.  Prayer 
is  the  next  step.     3.  A  thankful  trust  is  the  next.     (Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Yet  will  I  look  again  toward  Thy  holy  temple.— TAe  backslider's 
vow  : — The  leading  feature  of  the  story  is  that  of  one  man  sacrificed  for  the 
rest  of  the  crew  :  it  is  the  execution  of  the  culprit,  in  arrest  of  judgment  on 
the  innocent.  Lessons — 1.  The  deepest  remorse  has  its  remedy  in  a  return  to 
duty.     Jonah's  truant  flight  was  a  sudden  impulse.     The  backslider  often  knows 


36  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckap.  n. 

that  the  sin  by  which  he  fell  away  was  the  result  of  sudden  temptation.  2.  Look- 
ing again  to  the  covenant  of  God  in  Christ  is  the  appointed  way  of  salvation. 
It  is  also  useful  to  consider  what  it  was  that  cast  you  out  of  God's  sight,  in  order 
that  you  may  cast  that  out  of  your  sight.     {Joseph  B.  Owen,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  When  my  soul  fainted  within  me  I  remembered  the  Lord. — Jonah 
an-  example  of  sanctified  affliction : — It  is  interesting  to  mark  the  workings 
of  a  soul  when  strugghng  with  the  strong  billows  of  affliction,  especially  if  that 
affliction  has  come  in  the  immediate  train  of  backsliding,  and  appears  as  the 
net  in  which  God  has  caught  a  wanderer  from  the  fold,  or  the  rod  by  which  He 
would  bring  him  back  to  wisdom  and  obedience.  1.  The  altered  feeling  toward 
God  of  which  Jonah  was  now  conscious,  as  compared  with  that  state  of  mind 
which  tempted  him  to  go  astray.  Now,  it  is  the  bitterest  part  of  his  complaint 
that  he  was  far  from  God.  It  must  be  a  sanctified  trouble  which  disposes  the  soul 
to  feel  thus  toward  God.  2.  It  was  but  the  natural  consequence  of  this  state  of 
mind  in  Jonah,  though  it  may  be  noted  as  another  mark  of  his  sanctified  affliction, 
that  he  poured  out  his  heart  in  prayer  :  the  spirit  of  Sonship  was  again  revived 
in  him,  and  it  led  him  to  cry,  Abba,  Father.  3.  Mark  the  workings  of  faith  here, 
sanctified  affliction  being  always  characterised  by  the  degree  in  which  faith  is 
called  into  exercise.  Notice  the  peculiar  views  and  feeHngs  which  are  expressed 
in  this  prayer.  1.  The  exercise  of  faith  in  regard  to  the  appointment  of  the  visita- 
tion :  '  Thou  hast  cast  me,"  &c.  2.  The  confidence  and  hope  in  Grod  not  extin- 
guished, but  rather  roused  into  action  by  the  extremity  of  his  distress.  Faith 
always  is,  in  proportion  to  its  clearness  and  strength,  fertile  in  resources.  3.  There 
is  a  further  manifestation  of  faith  in  the  words  of  Jonah,  although  it  lies  less 
upon  the  surface  than  those  already  noticed.  It  is  the  use  made  of  the  earlier 
portions  of  God's  Word,  and  the  recorded  experiences  of  former  times.  4.  The 
last  thing  to  notice  in  the  prayer,  as  a  mark  of  sanctified  affliction,  is  the  purpose 
of  amendment  it  expresses.     {Patrick  Fairbairn.) 

Ver.  8.  They  that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake  their  own  mercy. — The 
value  of  superstitions. — Here  we  learn  the  value  to  attach  to  all  superstitions, 
to  all  those  opinions  of  men,  when  they  attempt  to  set  up  religion  according  to 
their  own  will ;  for  Jonah  calls  them  lying  or  fallacious  vanities.  There  is,  then, 
but  one  true  religion,  the  religion  which  God  has  taught  us  in  His  Word.  Men  in 
vain  weary  themselves  when  they  follow  their  own  inventions, — for  the  more 
strenuously  they  run,  the  farther  they  recede  from  the  right  way,  as  Augustine 
has  well  observed.  But  Jonah  here  adopts  a  higher  principle, — that  God  alone 
possesses  in  Himself  all  fulness  of  blessings  ;  whosoever,  then,  truly  and  sincerely 
seeks  God,  will  find  in  Him  whatever  can  be  wished  for  salvation.  God  is  not 
to  be  sought  but  by  obedience  and  faith  ;  whosoever,  then,  dare  to  give  them- 
selves loose  reins,  so  as  to  follow  this  or  that  without  the  warrant  of  Grod's  Word, 
recede  from  God,  and  at  the  same  time  deprive  themselves  of  all  good  things. 
The  superstitious  do  indeed  think  that  they  gain  much  when  they  toil  in  their 
own  inventions  ;  but  we  see  what  the  Holy  Spirit  declares  by  the  mouth  of  Jonah. 
The  Lord  says  by  Jeremiah,  "  They  have  forsaken  Me,  the  fountain  of  living 
water,  and  cisterns  have  they  digged  for  themselves  "  (Jer.  ii.  13).  There  the 
Lord  complains  of  His  chosen  people,  who  had  gone  astray  after  wicked  super- 
stitions. Hence  when  men  wander  beyond  the  Word  of  God,  they  in  a  manner 
renounce  God,  or  say  adieu  to  Him,  and  thus  they  deprive  themselves  of  all 
good  things ;  for  without  God  there  is  no  salvation,  and  no  help  to  be  found. 
(John  Calvin.)  The  sin  and  folly  of  observing  lying  vanities: — I.  Thh  foolish 
PRACTICE  OF  OBSERvrNG  LYING  VANITIES.  Lying  vanities  may  comprehend 
all  kinds  of  sin  whereby  men  are  deceived  and  led  away  from  the  paths  of  truth 
and  righteousness  into  error  and  iniquity.  The  Hebrew  words  express  the  deceit- 
ful nature  of  the  vanities  here  intended.  That  which  is  rendered  vanity  signifies 
falsehood,  rashness,  or  deceit.  That  translated  lying  denotes  light,  trivial,  or 
airy.  L  Those  who  follow  the  delusive  practice  of  sin.  Sinful  objects  and  pursuits 
are  all  unprofitable  and  vain,  and  can  never  do  us  any  real  good.  Those  who 
worship  and  serve  strange  gods,  or  pretend  to  serve  the  living  God  in  any  other 
way  than  He  hath  appointed,  follow  after  lying  vanities.  By  sinful  practices  you 
may  increase  in  riches,  but  yoiir  profit  will  not  countervail  your  loss.  By  sinning 
against  God  you  can  have  no  real,  lasting  advantage.  2.  Those  who  greedily 
pursue  the  deceitful  enjoyments  of  this  world.     The  most  valued  worldly  enjoy- 


«HAP.  n.]  JONAH.  37 

ments  cannot  so  much  as  alleviate  personal  distress  ;  how,  then,  shall  they  deUver 
out  of  spiritual  trouble  ?  Need  not  vilify  the  things  of  this  world.  We  speak 
of  present  enjoyments,  separate  from  the  love  and  favour  of  God,  when  the  heart 
is  supremely  fixed  upon  them,  and  chiefly  solicitous  to  acquire  and  preserve 
them.     To  those  who  choose  them  for  their  portion  they  prove  lying  vanities. 

3.  Those  who  entertain  vain  hopes  of  salvation  upon  insufficient  grounds.  We 
need  not  speak  in  disparagement  of  good  works ;  but  they  must  not  be  the 
foundation  of  our  hope.     They  are  the  blessed  fruits  of  redemption  and  renovation. 

4.  Those  who  leave  the  paths  of  righteousness  to  walk  in  their  own  devices.  There 
are  various  ways  by  which  men  come  under  this  description.  Sometimes  laying 
aside  a  sense  of  the  Divine  presence  and  authority,  men  impose  upon  themselves 
by  the  most  foolish  pretexts.  Sometimes  men  desert  from  their  duty  on  account 
of  the  difficulties  with  which  the  discharge  of  it  may  be  attended.  Some  neglect 
their  duty  through  wrong  apprehensions  of  Divine  dispensations.  II.  Thh 
PERNICIOUS  TENDENCY  OF  SUCH  CONDUCT.  They  "  forsake  their  own  mercy." 
The  words  suppose  that  the  tender  mercy  of  Jehovah  is  communicated  to  sinners 
of  mankind  in  various  ways,  suited  to  relieve  their  necessities  ;  and  that  to  this 
abundant  mercy  which  they  obtain  from  God  they  may  acquire  such  a  covenant 
right  and  title,  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  closely  adhering  to  God  and 
their  duty,  as  that  it  may  be  considered  as  their  own  privilege  and  portion.  What 
mercy,  what  spiritual  benefit  or  comfort,  can  a  man  enjoy  in  sinning  against 
God,  whereby  he  dishonours  his  Maker,  wounds  his  own  conscience,  and  destroys 
his  own  soul  ?  Nothing  is  to  be  acquired  by  sinful  practices  that  is  worth  the 
having.  Application.  Every  one  should  be  deeply  humbled  in  the  sight  of 
God,  on  account  of  our  having  followed  lying  vanities  and  forsaken  ovu:  own 
mercy.  A  little  serious  reflection  may  furnish  each  of  us  with  many  instances 
of  this  sort,  with  which  we  justly  stand  chargeable.  How  many  erroneous 
doctrines  and  false  principles  are  propagated  and  supported  among  us  !  How 
many  deceitful,  ensnaring  practices  are  indulged  and  followed  among  us ! 
( W.  M^Cidloch. )  Lying  vanities  : — It  is  not  enough  to  show  that  Christ's  claims 
are  not  opposed  to  our  interests,  and  that  therefore  we  do  not  sacrifice  our  true 
well-being  when  we  submit  ourselves  to  Him ;  we  must  further  show  that 
Christ  definitely  proposes  to  advance  om*  present  as  well  as  our  future  interests, 
and  that  these  cannot  be  otherwise  safely  assured ;  and  hence  that  we  sacrifice 
our  personal  interests,  and  sin  against  otu:  true  well-being  when  we  turn  our  backs 
on  Him,  The  prophet  only  expresses  what  we  may  all,  if  we  will,  see  for  our- 
selves. Even  in  this  world  the  suflfering  and  misery  that  men  bring  upon  them- 
selves by  their  own  conduct  far  exceeds  all  that  they  would  otherwise  be  called 
upon  to  endure.  How  much  of  all  our  sufferings  springs  directly  or  indirectly 
from  sin  !  And  all  this  we  might  escape  if  only  we  yielded  ourselves  to  God 
instead  of  flying  away  from  Him.  And  such  suffering  is  the  cruellest  of  all,  because 
we  have  to  reproach  ourselves  for  it,  and  because  of  the  painful  memories  it  leaves 
behind.  And  we  must  not  dwell  only  upon  the  actual  miseries  that  we  entail 
upon  otirselves,  but  also  upon  the  comfort  and  consolation  which  we  deny  our- 
selves amidst  the  trials  which  are  the  common  lot  of  alL  "  Our  own  mercy." 
Think  of  what  that  means.  No  petition  is  more  common  on  human  lips  than 
the  cry  for  mercy.  We  feel  that  we  need  mercy.  Surely  man  is  not  only  nature's 
greatest  work ;  but  also  nature's  greatest  victim,  unless  there  be  mercy  within 
our  reach,  mercy  from  some  Grander  Power  than  nature,  who  can  feel  for  us.  And 
the  great  Father  is  rich  in  mercy.  He  brings  within  our  reach  such  a  provision 
of  mercy  as  He  sees  to  be  perfectly  adapted  to  our  complex  needs,  and  represents 
it  to  us  in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  It  is  this  provision  that  men  turn  their  backs 
upon  when  they  turn  their  backs  on  Christ.  Verily,  it  is  true,  "  They  that  observe 
lying  vanities  forsake  their  own  mercy."  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  men  are 
so  blind  to  their  own  interests  ?  Why  do  men  forsake  their  own  mercies  ?  A 
certain  class  of  persons  is  here  dealt  with — those  who  "  observe  l3mig  vanities." 
Satan  wins  influence  over  men,  and  maintains  and  extends  it,  by  falsehood.  And 
falsehood  is  a  power.  The  process  of  bUnding  is  carried  on  by  the  great  deceiver 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  induce  a  false  and  misleading  estimate  of  the  relative 
value  of  things,  and  even  of  their  relations  to  our  happiness  and  well-being.  The 
objects  which  Satan  exhibits  to  man's  imagination  through  a  distorted  and 
deceptive  medium  are  described  here  as  "  lying  vanities."  The  phrase  suggests 
specious  falsehood,  and  pretentious  inanity.  Illustrate  by  the  desert  mirage. 
Who  has  not  at  one  time  or  another  been  bewildered  and  misled  by  the  vast 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

mirage  of  life  ?  When  we  yield  ourselves  to  the  great  deceiver  we  become  his 
helpless  dupes.  "  Observe  '  signifies  diligent  watching, — the  giving  up  of  our 
mind  and  attention  to  a  specific  object.  Compare  the  sentence,  "  Wno  mind 
earthly  things."  All  earthly  things,  viewed  apart  from  their  connection  with 
things  eternal,  are  in  themselves  vanities, — they  leave  the  heart  still  unsatisfied. 
When  we  attempt  to  find  our  portion  in  these  things  of  this  world  they  become 
not  only  vanities,  but  lying  vanities, — promising  to  do  what  they  never  can  do, 
and  ever  leading  their  votaries,  as  on  a  fool's  errand,  in  quest  of  that  which  they 
are  foredoomed  never  to  discover.  When  once  man  has  surrendered  his  sense 
to  the  soUcitations  of  the  flesh,  you  can  almost  predict  with  certainty  how  he 
will  act  imder  certain  circumstances.  We  have  but  little  freedom  left  when 
once  we  have  begun  to  observe — to  give  our  minds  to — lying  vanities.  Our 
freedom  consists  rather  in  our  power  to  decide  whether  of  the  two  classes  of  objects 
we  will  observe,  whether  we  will  yield  our  hearts  to  the  Spirit  of  truth,  who  reveals 
to  us  the  things  that  are  above — the  things  of  God  ;  or  whether  we  will  yield 
oiir  hearts  to  the  spirit  of  lies,  who  spreads  out  before  us  earthly  things,  and 
endeavours  to  invest  them  in  our  eyes  with  fictitious  qualities  and  characteristics. 
{W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  I  will  pay  that  that  I  have  vowed. — A  forgotten  vow: — I  heard 
of  a  sea-captain  who  had  been  wrecked,  and  with  whose  ship  most  of  the  crew 
and  p€issenger8  were  lost.  He  himself  had  only  saved  his  life  by  holding  on  to  a 
plank,  and  had  for  a  considerable  time  been  completely  at  the  mercy  of  the  waves, 
but  fortunately  had  been  rescued,  and  was  then  travelling  in  the  stage-coach  to 
rejoin  his  family.  He  told  his  fellow-passengers  his  sad  story,  and  all  of  them 
pitied  him,  but  wondered  why  a  man  so  recently  saved  from  imminent  danger 
should  end  almost  every  sentence  with  an  oath.  The  coach  stopped  to  change 
horses,  and  one  of  the  passengers  proposed  to  the  captain  that  they  should  walk 
on  and  let  the  coach  overtake  them.  As  they  walked  together  the  gentleman 
said,  "  You  said  last  night  you  lost  your  ship  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  And  your  life  was 
saved  by  clinging  to  a  plank  ?  When  you  were  hanging  on  to  that  plank,  did 
you  not  vow  that  if  God  delivered  you,  you  would  lead  a  very  different  life  from 
that  which  you  had  formerly  done  ?  "  "  That  is  no  concern  of  yours,"  angrily 
responded  the  captain.  At  the  end  of  the  day's  journey,  as  the  travellers  were 
about  to  take  supper  together,  the  captain  was  obliged  to  decline,  saying  he  had 
no  money.  The  gentleman  who  had  spoken  to  him  on  the  way  offered  him  a 
goodly  sum.  The  captain  refused  it  at  first,  but  eventually,  rather  ungraciously, 
accepted  the  gift.  Next  morning  the  captain  surprised  the  gentleman  by  holding 
out  his  hand  and  saying,  "  I  did,  while  on  that  plank,  promise  God  that  I  would 
lead  a  different  life  if  He  would,  in  His  mercy,  save  me.  I  had  forgotten  my  vow, 
but  with  God's  help  I  shall  keep  it  from  this  day  forth  !  "  Do  not  many  sinners 
so  treat  God  ?  They  call  upon  Him  in  the  day  of  trouble,  but  when  they  are 
delivered  they  forget  all  about  Him.  (J.  Hamilton.)  Salvation  is  of  the 
Lord. — Jonah's  'praise  of  God  .• — In  his  words  we  have  a  particular  favour 
acknowledged.  Jonah  evidently  had  an  eye  to  the  wonderful  and  extraordinary 
deliverance  that  God  had  wrought  for  him ;  and  indeed  the  hand  of  God  did  so 
eminently  appear  in  it,  that  it  could  not  be  ascribed  to  any  other.  And  there  is 
a  general  truth  asserted,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  This  is  certainly  true  in 
the  most  extensive  sense.  Whether  the  salvation  be  of  a  temporal  or  spiritual 
natiu-e,  it  is  of  the  Lord.  I.  What  salvation  is  of  the  Lord.  1.  The  salvation 
of  the  soul,  salvation  from  sin,  and  from  aU  that  misery  which  is  consequential 
to  it.  There  is  a  salvation  by  purchase  and  a  salvation  by  power,  and  both  are 
of  the  Lord.  2.  Temporal  salvation  is  of  the  Lord.  God  wrought  a  temporal 
as  well  as  a  spiritual  deliverance  for  Jonah,  and  to  Him  Jonah  ascribes  the  praise 
of  both.  n.  In  what  kespects  salvation  is  of  the  Lord.  L  In  what  respects 
spiritual  salvation  is  of  the  Lord.  (1)  In  respect  of  contrivance.  (2)  In  respect 
of  purchase.  (3)  In  respect  of  the  revelation,  exhibition,  and  offer  of  it.  (4)  In 
respect  of  the  application  of  it.  (5)  In  respect  of  the  progress  of  it.  (6)  In  respect 
of  the  consummation  of  it.  2.  Temporal  salvation,  or  deliverance  from  outward 
troubles  and  afflictions,  is  of  the  Lord,  as  it  is  He  alone  who  works  it ;  and  whatever 
the  distress  is.  He  is  able  to  work  it.  Leam — 1.  Believers  in  the  most  afflicted 
condition  have  no  reason  to  be  cast  down,  as  if  their  case  were  altogether  hopeless. 

2.  Sinners,  however  guilty  and  wretched,  have  no  reason  to  despair  of  salvation. 

3.  Believers  are  wholly  indebted  to  the  grace  of  God  for  their  salvation,  for  every 


CHAF.  n.]  JONAH.  39 

spiritual  and  every  temporal  deliverance  wrought  for  them.  4.  That  when  any 
deliverance  wrought  for  persons  has  been  wrought  for  them  in  mercy,  they  will 
eye  and  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  it.  (D.  Wilson.)  Salvation  is  of 
God  : — Observe  what  happens  when  the  cry  rises  at  sea,  "  A  man  overboard  !  " 
With  others  on  deck,  you  rush  to  the  side ;  and  leaning  over  the  bulwarks,  with 
beating  heart  you  watch  the  place  where  the  rising  air-bells  and  boiling  deep  tell 
that  he  has  gone  down.  After  some  moments  of  breathless  anxiety  you  see  his 
head  emerge  from  the  wave.  Now  that  man,  I  shall  suppose,  is  no  swimmer ; 
he  has  never  learnt  to  breast  the  billows ;  yet  with  the  first  breath  he  draws 
he  begins  to  beat  the  water ;  with  violent  efforts  he  attempts  to  shake  off  the 
grasp  of  death,  and  by  the  play  of  limbs  and  arms  to  keep  his  head  from  sinking. 
It  may  be  that  these  struggles  but  exhaust  his  strength,  and  sink  him  all  the 
sooner ;  nevertheless,  that  drowning  one  makes  instinctive  and  convulsive  efforts 
to  save  himself.  So,  when  first  brought  to  feel  and  cry,  "  I  perish  !  "  when  the 
horrible  conviction  rushes  into  the  soul  that  we  are  lost,  when  we  feel  ourselves 
going  down  beneath  a  load  of  guilt  into  the  depth  of  the  wrath  of  God,  our  first 
effort  is  to  save  ourselves.  Like  a  drowning  man,  who  will  clutch  at  straws  and 
twigs,  we  seize  on  anything,  however  worthless,  that  promises  salvation.  Thus, 
alas  !  many  poor  souls  toil,  and  spend  weary,  unprofitable  years  in  the  attempt 
to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  and  find  in  the  deeds  of  the  law  protection 
from  its  curse.  (J.  Madaurin.)  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord: — Take  the  word 
"  salvation  "  in  its  highest  and  in  its  lower  senses.  I.  In  thk  deliverance  of  a 
SOUL.  Comment  upon  our  state  of  ruin.  Salvation  is — 1.  Of  the  Father.  In  its 
origin  proceeding  from  the  eternal  love  of  God,  even  before  all  time.  2.  Of  the 
Son.  In  its  meritorious  cause.  An  obstacle  to  be  removed ;  justice  to  be  satis- 
fied ;  ovu:  need  of  an  atoning  sacrifice.  Note  the  willingness  of  Christ  to  offer 
Himself;  and  the  fulness  and  suflBciency  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  3.  Of  the  Spirit. 
In  its  personal  application.  Our  aversion  to  God  to  be  taken  away — in  conversion, 
sanctification,  perseverance.  II.  In  the  lesser  deliverances  of  the  children 
OF  God.  1.  From  outward  difficulties.  Such  as  Jonah's  case.  Jonathan  and 
the  Philistines.  Children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  David  overtaken  by  Saul. 
Asa  and  the  Ethiopians.  Jehoshaphat  and  the  Moabites.  2.  From  bodily 
afflictions.  Hezekiah's  sickness.  Psa.  cvii.  17  ;  Job  xxxii.  19.  3.  From  soul 
troubles.  Temptation.  Desertion.  Backsliding.  What  are  the  legitimate 
deductions  ?  (1)  The  subject  checks  the  pride  and  vainglory  of  man.  (2)  Raises 
the  hopes  of  the  desponding.  (John  D.  Lawe,  M.A.)  What  is  salvation.^ — 
Let  us  try  to  see  what  salvation  means.  I  take  it  to  be  summed  up  in  four 
things.  First,  knowledge  that  God  is  our  Father  ;  second,  knowledge  of  the  kind 
of  life  we  are  expected  to  live  ;  third,  reconciliation  with  ourselves,  with  our  own 
consciences  ;  fourth,  a  sense  of  pardon  and  communion  with  God,  and  knowledge 
of  eternal  life  within  us.  If  you  test  these  things  you  will  find  how  true  it  is  that 
they  are  not  found  in  any  other  name  or  person  than  Jesus  Christ.  (R.  F. 
Horton,  D.D.)  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord: — This  text  announces,  in  general 
terms,  a  truth  encroached  upon  by  almost  all  systems  of  false  doctrine,  and 
repugnant  to  the  natural  heart.  I.  Salvation  is  wholly  of  God  in  its  origin 
WITH  the  Father.  I.  In  the  will  and  decree  of  the  Father  (see  Eph.  i.  4). 
2.  The  Father's  purpose  and  decree  can  be  referred  to  nothing  but  His  sovereign 
pleasure  (see  Eph.  i.  11).  3.  He  was  under  no  obligation  to  save  man.  4.  In 
order  to  receive  salvation  we  must  take  the  position  in  which  it  contemplates  us. 
Condemned,  as  guilty.  Hateful,  through  sin.  The  enemies  of  God,  against 
whom  sin  is.  Powerless  to  atone  or  obey.  6.  We  must  further  acknowledge 
God's  absolute  sovereignty  in  electing  to  salvation,  and  providing  a  Saviour, 
and  in  now  saving  us.  11.  Salvation  is  wholly  of  God  in  its  execution  by 
Christ.  1.  Had  man  been  equal  to  his  own  salvation,  then  had  Christ  not  come 
(Gal.  iii.  21).  2.  Christ  had  to  meet  human  opposition.  Man  opposed  his  own 
salvation,  according  to  God's  plan,  as  soon  as  practicable.  III.  Salvation  is 
WHOLLY  OF  God  in  its  application  by  the  Spirit.  Man  is  dependent  on  the 
Spirit  for  having  the  truth  presented ;  for  being  able  to  understand  the  truth  ; 
for  rendering  him  willing ;  for  faith  to  receive  and  rest  on  Christ ;  for  regenera- 
tion ;  for  sanctification  ;  for  perseverance  unto  the  end  of  !  ife  in  Divine  grace. 
Learn  to  pray  for  and  rely  on  the  Spirit.  {James  Stewart.)  The  Christian's 
rejoicing  and  glory  : — In  the  former  part  of  the  verse  the  prophet  expresses  his 
determination  to  bless  and  praise  the  Lord.  The  ground  of  his  doing  so  was 
what  the  Lord  had  done  for  him,  notwithstanding  his  grievous  crimes  and  rebellion. 


40  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

That  again  embraced  a  twofold  mercy,  namely,  what  had  been  done,  or  what  waa 
about  to  be  done,  for  his  body  and  for  his  soul.  The  prophet  had  now  been 
taught  a  lesson  which  it  would  be  his  wisdom  never  to  forget,  and  which  would 
the  better  enable  him  for  the  arduous  work  he  was  called  to  perform.  Some 
indisputable  facts  in  Christian  experience.  1.  That  no  one  knows  what  salvation 
means  but  they  who  have  seen  their  need  of  it.  2.  That  no  one  can  praise 
the  Lord  for  salvation  but  they  who  have  experienced  its  blessing  and  power. 
3.  That  no  one  can  be  insensible  to  the  holy  feeling  of  gratitude  and  praise  to 
whom  the  grace  of  God  hath  brought  salvation.  4.  That  it  is  generally  through 
a  variety  of  humiliating  and  painful  discipline  we  are  conducted  to  such  an 
experience,  and  formed  to  such  a  confession  and  acknowledgment.  This  then 
is  the  subject  of  our  discourse.  Considered  in  every  possible  point  of  view,  in 
its  origin,  source,  revelation,  execution,  grant,  efficiency,  continuance,  and  con- 
summation, "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  I.  What  does  the  term  "  salvation  " 
MEAN  ?  1.  What  the  Lord  had  done,  or  was  about  to  do,  for  Jonah  in  respect  of 
his  body.  La  this  Jonah  was  a  striking  type  of  Christ.  2.  What  the  Lord  had 
done  for  him  in  respect  of  his  soul,  in  preserving  him  from  hell,  and  granting  him 
repentance  unto  life.  The  word  salvation,  as  applied  to  souls,  does  not  mean — 
(1)  Profession.  (2)  Privileges.  (3)  Attainments.  (4)  Names,  sects,  or  parties. 
To  see  what  it  does  mean  we  must  ask,  What  is  the  state  of  man  ?  He  is  lost, 
as  being  guilty,  condemned,  polluted,  and  depraved,  exposed  to  many  enemies, 
from  which,  by  his  own  will  and  power,  he  can  never  escape.  Salvation  means 
deliverance  from  this  state  of  wretchedness  and  misery,  together  with  an  investi- 
ture of  all  the  blessings  needful  for  his  present  peace  and  everlasting  welfare. 
n.  Whence  does  this  salvation  flow,  and  by  whom  is  it  cabbied  into 
EFFECT  ?  It  does  not  originate  with  man.  It  is  not  effected  by  man.  It  is 
altogether  of  the  Lord.  Consider  from  Scripture — 1.  The  source  of  salvation. 
2.  The  provision  of  the  Saviour.  3.  The  assignment  of  His  mediating  work  as 
the  surety  of  His  Church  and  people.  4.  Look  at  the  execution  of  this  great 
work.  So  it  is  clear  that  salvation  is  altogether  of  the  Lord.  Consider  how,  and 
by  whom,  the  time  when,  and  the  manner  in  which  this  gracious  provision  is 
carried  into  effect  in  the  sinner's  conversion.  1.  The  regeneration  of  the  soul. 
2.  The  sinner's  pardon  and  justification.  3.  The  believer's  sanctification  and 
adoption.  4.  The  believer's  succour,  support,  and  safety.  5.  The  believer's 
perseverance  unto  the  end,  his  safe  death,  and  triumphant  glory.     III.  Wherein 

DOES  IT  APPEAR  THAT  IT  IS  INDEED  THE  SALVATION  OF  THE  LORD  ?       L  What  hath 

the  Lord  spoken  on  this  subject  ?  2.  What  does  the  state  of  the  case  absolutely 
require  ?  3.  What  does  the  experience  of  the  people  of  God  abundantly  testify 
and  confirm  ?  4.  If  salvation  be  not  of  the  Lord,  then  how  dark,  how  cheerless 
is  the  prospect  set  before  us  !  ( 1 )  Take  a  word  of  instruction.  Lay  down  this 
doctrine  as  a  fundamental  truth.  (2)  Take  a  word  of  discovery.  How  much 
error,  delusion,  and  false  doctrine  does  this  subject  bring  to  light !  (3)  Take  a 
word  of  inquiry.  In  what  way  are  you  seeking  your  salvation  ?  (4)  Take  a  word 
of  alarm.  Is  it  not  sad  to  consider  how  the  Lord  is  slighted  by  some,  and  dis- 
honoured by  others,  in  this  great  work  of  salvation  ?  (5)  Take  a  word  of  encourage- 
ment. Can  anything  be  more  cheering  than  this  assurance,  "  Salvation  is  of 
the  Lord"  ?  (6)  Take  a  word  of  gratitude  and  joy.  Is  the  Lord  my  Saviour? 
(R.  ShitUer.) 


CHAPTER  in. 

Vbbs.  1,  2.  And  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  nnto  Jonah  the  second  time, 
saying. — The  restored  commission  : — Here  we  learn  what  God  is  to  those  who 
truly  repent.  God  may  even  restore  all  that  has  been  forfeited.  For  those 
who  have  done  grievous  wrong,  it  is  encouraging  to  think  that  there  is 
honotir,  and  glory,  and  a  blessed  restoration  to  the  full  love  of  Grod,  if 
only  they  return  out  of  the  darkness  into  the  presence  from  which  they  have 
departed.  God  sent  Jonah  on  the  very  same  mission  in  which  he  had  failed 
before, — and  yet  with  a  marked  difference  distinguishing  the  second  from  the 
first  call.  The  changed  command,  though  full  of  restored  confidence,  implies 
a  warning  to  be  exact  in  fulfilling  the  will  of  God — to  be  careful  as  to  giving  the 


CHAP,  m.]  JONAH.  41- 

message  exactly  as  he  received  it.  It  seems  to  say.  Risk  not  any  further  dis- 
obedience even  in  the  least  particular  of  the  mission  on  which  you  are  sent.  1.  The 
exceeding  mercy  of  God  shown  in  this,  that  He  offers  renewed  opportunities  to 
those  who  fail  to  profit  by  the  first  opportunity ;  and  it  may  be  even  opportunities 
of  the  same  kind.  They  may  have  to  be  followed  after  a  different  manner,  but 
yet  the  same  object,  the  same  end  may  be  set  before  us  till  finally  accomplished. 
2.  There  is  this  further  wonder  in  the  forgiving  and  forbearing  of  God,  that  He 
causes  the  trials  of  the  returning  penitent  to  be  the  means  of  good.  Those 
who  have  passed  through  the  experience  of  such  penitential  struggles  and  fears 
may  become  afterwards  a  blessing  to  others,  because  they  can  tell  of  the  dangers 
that  beset  them,  and  of  the  mercy  through  which  they  have  been  saved.  The 
grace  of  God  not  only  restores  a  man  generally,  as  it  were,  but  renews  him 
in  the  very  point  in  which  he  had  sinned  and  failed.  Take  courage  then,  you 
who  are  beset  with  some  special  sin.  Let  us  learn  from  the  long  catalogue  of 
those  who  have  fallen  and  have  been  recovered  to  take  hope  for  ourselves.  God 
desires  a  perfect,  not  an  imperfect  work.  Grace  crowns  acts  of  penitence  and 
faith.  {T.  T.  Carter. )  The  preacher  of  judgment : — Jonah,  the  runaway  prophet, 
is  now  before  us  as  Jonah  the  successful  preacher.  1.  Sin  in  Grod's  servants 
is  a  great  hinderer.  2.  Faithlessness  in  the  servant  does  not  necessitate  failure 
to  the  Master.  Chastisement  may  lead  to  consecration,  and  that  to  successful 
service.  3.  Moral  deUnquency  repented  of  is  no  impassable  barrier  to  former 
favour,  privilege,  and  honour.  God  does  not  take  advantage  of  our  weakness  to 
cut  us  off  for  ever.  He  is  patient,  pitiful,  forgiving,  and  will  restore  His  penitent 
servants  to  forfeited  blessings  and  dignities.  4.  The  preacher's  true  function 
is  to  declare  what  God  commands  him.  The  message  as  well  as  the  commission 
must  bear  the  impress  of  Divinity.  Divine  thoughts,  purposes,  desires,  truths, 
and  not  human  notions,  creeds,  sentiments,  opinions,  fancies,  must  ever  fill  the 
mind,  inspire  the  tongue,  constrain  the  utterance,  and  fire  the  eloquence  and 
enthusiasm  of  every  ambassador  of  the  Cross.  Note  that  Jonah  was  obedient  at 
last  to  the  holy  orders.  He  did  what  he  should  have  done  at  first.  Obedience 
is  true  or  false  according  to  the  temper  in  which  we  act.  Notice  the  method  and 
matter  of  his  preaching.  His  method  was  earnest,  courageous,  impressive.  He 
"  cried."  His  matter  was  adapted  to  rich  and  poor.  It  was  solemn,  humihating, 
definite,  merciful.  We  have  the  practical  fruits  of  the  preaching, — repentance 
and  reformation.  Nineveh's  repentance  was  well  timed,  well  groimded,  well 
evidenced,  by  self-denial,  self-abasement,  earnest  prayer,  personal  reform.  Learn 
that  genuine  repentance  averts  the  punitive  purposes  of  God.  Grod  watches  for 
genuine  indications  of  moral  reform.  Behold  them.  He  refrains  from  executing 
His  threatenings.  Repentance  is  a  wonderfid  power  in  the  domain  of  moral 
government.  (J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.)  The  history  of  Jonah  set  before  the  young  : — 
The  prophet  Jonah  opposed  the  will  of  God,  and  would  not  do  what  God  com- 
manded him,  as  did  Balaam ;  but  there  was  this  difference  between  them, — that 
Jonah  did  fear  and  love  God.  God  destroyed  Balaam.  He  only  punished  Jonah, 
and  brought  him  to  repentance.  It  is  then  a  very  good  thing  to  love  and  serve 
God  ;  because  those  who  do  so  cannot  quite  turn  away  from  God,  and  God  will 
never  quite  turn  away  from  them.  If  they  sin,  they  will  be  punished,  like  Jonah 
was  ;  but  those  who  love  and  serve  God  are  still  under  His  care,  and  like  Jonah 
are  brought  back  to  repentance.  If  there  are  among  you  any  that  are  wishing 
to  serve  God,  but  are  yet  sometimes  tempted  to  disobey  Him,  you  may  learn 
much  by  thinking  of  what  happened  to  Jonah.  1.  God  gave  him  a  command 
to  go  and  tell  the  people  of  Nineveh  that  He  was  about  to  destroy  them.  It  was 
a  very  hard  command  for  him  to  fulfil.  Jonah  could  not  tell  what  might  happen 
to  him,  if  he  ventured  into  that  great  foreign  and  heathen  city.  But  God  could 
take  care  of  him.  He  knew  that  God  was  a  loving  Father  to  him.  Whenever  we 
are  disposed  to  do  wrong,  then  we  are  afraid  of  the  Bible ;  we  are  afraid  of  every- 
thing that  tells  us  of  our  sin  ;  we  are  afraid  of  pious  persons  ;  we  cannot  bear  to 
pray.  Whenever  you  are  disposed  to  do  what  is  wrong,  you  feel  equally  disposed 
to  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  You  act  like  Jonah.  Therefore  our  best 
way  is  to  love  and  serve  God  with  all  our  hearts,  and  ask  Him  for  grace  to  do  all 
our  duty,  as  Jonah  ought  to  have  done.  When  the  lot  fell  upon  Jonah,  they 
asked  him  what  he  had  done  ;  and  he  was  obliged  to  tell  them  how  he  had  been 
shrinking  from  doing  his  duty,  and  was  trying  to  escape  from  Grod,  who  followed 
him,  and  who  knew  where  he  was,  and  what  he  was  doing.  It  must  have  made 
him  more  miserable  to  have  seen  how  much  better  the  heathen  were  than  he. 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

For  he  had  bronght  them  into  danger,  and  they  were  trying  to  save  his  life,  At 
last,  at  his  own  wish,  they  took  him  up,  and  threw  him  into  the  sea.  Ungodly 
persons,  when  they  are  brought  into  trouble,  cannot  pray.  Now  there  is  not  a 
place  on  earth,  and  there  is  not  a  degree  of  guilt  in  which  we  may  be  living,  in 
which  our  believing  prayer  cannot  reach  the  ear  and  heart  of  God :  for  when  Jonah 
cried  unto  the  Lord,  in  the  midst  of  his  troubles,  God  heard  him,  and  caused  the 
fish  to  vomit  him  out  upon  the  shore  of  his  own  land.  How  humble  and  grateful 
he  miist  have  felt  that  day !  He  was  not  left,  however,  to  be  indolent  and  inactive. 
Jonah  was  brought  through  all  his  troubles,  to  just  this  point,  that  he  must  obey 
the  commands  of  God.  God's  commands  never  alter.  Our  sins  will  not  alter 
them ;  our  troubles  will  not  alter  them ;  our  deUverance  will  not  alter  them. 
God  commands  you  to  love  and  serve  Him  with  all  your  hearts ;  God  commands 
you  to  confess  Jesus  Christ  in  the  world,  to  make  the  Bible  your  rule  of  life,  and 
to  live  by  faith  and  in  prayer.  Jonah  was  brought  to  God's  command  a  second 
time ;  and  if  he  had  refused,  he  would  have  been  brought  to  it  a  third  time.  He 
must  do  God's  will.  When  he  accomplished  the  will  of  Grod,  and  found  it  so  easy, 
doubtless  he  thought,  "Why  did  I  not  do  it  at  first ? "  (Baptist  W.  Noel,  M.A.) 
Arise,  go  to  Nineveli,  that  great  city,  and  preach  onto  it  the  preaching  that  I  bid 
thee. — Jonah's  first  and  second  commission  : — What  are  the  points  of  difference 
between  them  ?  One  respects  Jonah  himself.  Formerly  he  knew  the  message  that 
he  was  to  deliver.  Now  he  is  simply  told  that  a  message  will  be  given  him,  but  he 
is  not  to  know  it  until  he  arrives  at  the  place.  It  may  be  the  same.  It  may  be 
milder ;  it  may  be  sterner.  Undoubtedly  this  change  has  reference  to  his  former 
disobedience.  The  message  was  different  in  its  substance  also,  to  meet  the  change 
in  Nineveh.  When  the  message  was  given,  it  proved  to  be  the  never  varying 
cry,  "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  destroyed."  Some  think  he  preached 
on  this  as  a  text;  but  as  the  cup  of  Nineveh's  iniquity  was  now  full,  what  was 
proper  to  the  case  was  just  a  cry  of  coming  judgment,  brief  and  plain,  startling, 
stern,  imalterable,  except  by  quick  and  unfeigned  repentance.  Probably  Jonah 
did  not  add  to  this  message  by  the  faintest  hint  or  suggestion.  The  simplest 
interpretation  is  the  truest.  This  message  makes  us  think.  1.  Of  the  exceeding 
sinfulness  of  sin.  2.  How  inflexible  is  the  justice  of  God.  3.  What  a  stupendoua 
power  a  city  has  for  good  or  evil.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  A  missionary  message  : — 
Jonah  was  foolish,  Jonah  was  wise  ;  foohsh  to  expect  to  balk  God,  wise  to  learn 
so  quickly  his  folly.  Misery,  calamity,  peril,  and  the  sense  of  an  ever  present 
God  who  had  brought  them,  did  their  work ;  and  the  prophet,  back  again  at  the 
starting-point,  heeds  the  Divine  voice,  and  turns  with  an  obedient  heart  to  fulfil 
the  mission  which  he  had  thought  to  escape.  I.  God's  attthobity.  The  Being 
who  speaks  is  conscious  of  His  right.  He  does  not  mince  words.  God's  demand 
on  Jonah  now  is  precisely  what  it  was  in  the  first  place.  There  is  no  effort  to 
compromise  because  of  Jonah's  former  flight.  Now  comes  the  command  again — 
plain,  stem,  uncompromising — "  Arise,  go,  preach."  The  slight  change  of  form 
in  the  expression  seems  full  of  meaning.  "  Arise,  go,  and  preach  the  preaching 
that  I  bid  thee."  See  that  thou  preach  no  other  message  than  Mine.  God  owns 
men.  All  that  we  are,  all  that  we  have,  all  the  service  of  our  lives  belongs  to 
God.  We  delude  ourselves  with  any  sense  of  self-ownership.  We  get  the  idea 
that  we  own  what  God  only  loans  to  us.  IL  God's  way  with  the  disobbdibnt. 
See  how  God  goes  to  work  to  bring  this  man's  will  into  subjection  to  His  own. 
What  a  complex  of  world-wide,  imiverse-wide  machinery  the  Sovereign  of  all  can 
set  in  motion  for  the  subduing  of  a  human  spirit !  Jonah  is  not  more  obdurate 
than  Pharaoh.  The  storms,  the  seas,  the  worse  tumults  in  his  own  bosom,  the 
upbraidings  of  the  crew,  his  thoughts  of  his  past,  his  fear, — all  are  God's  instru- 
ments, and  under  His  direction  each  does  its  unconscious  part  toward  the  sub- 
jection of  Jonah,  and  the  salvation  of  the  Assyrian  capital.  Jonah  is  a  changed 
man.  From  a  coward  he  has  become  a  dauntless  hero  and  prophet.  Jonah 
thought  himself  free  when  he  fled,  but  in  fact  his  first  real  enjoyment  of  freedom 
came  when  he  started  to  fulfil  God's  command.  III.  God's  missionaby  messagb 
AND  ITS  EFFECT.  Jonah  was  the  first  foreign  missionary.  The  men  of  far-off 
Nineveh  were  to  learn  of  God,  His  love  and  holiness.  The  very  heart  of  our 
conception  of  God  as  a  moral  being  is  His  holiness.  The  holiness  of  God  compels 
Him  to  insist  upon  holiness  in  all  men.  In  Nineveh  sin  had  taken  on  its  most 
frightful  developments.  Nineveh  had  much,  but  it  lacked  just  one  element 
of  fortune — righteousness.  Nineveh's  cup  of  iniquity  was  well-nigh  full.  Jonah's 
preaching  was  plain,  earnest,  effective,  impressive.     God  went  into  the  city  with 


CHAP,  m.]  JONAH.  43 

Jonah,  but  God  had  also  gone  before.  The  men  of  Nineveh  were  ready  for  the 
missionary.  "  The  people  believed  God,"  To  believe  God  is  a  great  thing. 
The  best  possible  evidence  of  the  Ninevites'  belief  in  the  missionary's  sermon 
was  their  conduct.  They  acted.  They  bestirred  themselves  as  if  they  believed 
that  the  sin  of  their  hearts  and  lives  was  endangering  them.  The  ringing  cry  of 
Jonah  reaches  even  the  royal  palace,  and  the  king,  humbled,  joins  his  subjects 
in  their  plea  for  God's  mercy.  The  people  turned  from  their  sin,  and  cried  for 
mercy.  IV.  God's  meecy.  God's  heart  was  moved ;  doom  was  averted ; 
Nineveh  was  saved.  God  was  merciful  to  Jonah  in  following  him  through  all 
his  flight,  in  bringing  him  back  to  the  starting-point,  in  using  him  though  he  had 
shown  himself  unworthy.  God  was  merciful  to  Nineveh  in  sending  the  messenger 
to  warn  the  city,  and  in  preparing  the  hearts  of  the  people  for  the  message.  And 
God  is  mercifid  in  listening  to  their  cry  for  forgiveness.  God  repented.  His 
attitude  toward  Nineveh  was  changed.  What  changed  it  ?  Nineveh's  attitude 
toward  sin.  What  is  meant  by  God's  repentance  ?  Speaking  to  man,  God  must 
use  language  with  which  man  is  familiar.  Repentance  means  a  changed  attitude. 
The  whole  attitude  of  the  Ninevites  toward  sin,  and  so,  toward  God,  being  changed, 
in  that  same  hour  Grod's  attitude  toward  them  was  changed.  (John  H.  Mason.) 
Conditions  of  ministerial  success : — I.  The  chabacteb  of  the  sermon  ;  or  the 
objective  elements  of  success.  1.  It  should  be  argumentative.  To  expect  men 
to  believe  without  proof  is  to  expect  them  to  become  irrational.  2.  It  must  be 
positive  ;  mainly  concerned  in  the  teaching  of  truth,  rather  than  in  the  refutation 
of  error.  3.  It  is  doctrinal.  The  larger  part  of  those  who  compose  our  con- 
gregations depend  upon  the  preacher  for  all  the  knowledge  they  wiU  ever  have 
of  these  great  theological  truths.  That  preaching  is  the  most  practical  which 
indoctrinates  the  hearers  with  the  fundamental  elements  of  the  Christian  faith. 
4.  It  should  be  systematic.  As  there  is  a  logical  coherence  between  all  the  parts 
of  the  religion  we  teach,  why  should  we  exclude  system  from  our  mode  of  exhibiting 
it  ?  5.  A  bold,  unflinching  testimony  to  the  great  doctrines  of  God's  sovereignty, 
man's  inability,  election,  and  other  unpopular  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  II.  Thb 
CHABACTER  OF  THE  MAN  J  or  the  Subjective  elements  of  success.  1.  Individuality. 
2.  Earnestness  is  self-evidencing.  3.  Consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  speaker 
that  he  is  speaking  to  his  audience.  Some  preach  for  the  sake  of  the  sermon. 
Others  preach  for  the  sake  of  the  people.  4.  The  good  preacher  speaks  with 
authority.  Whic'h  may  be  derived  from — (1)  Consciousness  of  official  dignity. 
(2)  Unwavering  conviction  of  the  truth.  (3)  Consciousness  of  personal  acceptance 
with  God.  5.  The  manner  of  delivery  should  be  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of 
good  speaking.  Delivery  is  an  art,  and  is  based  upon  scientific  principles.  6.  The 
preacher  must  have  weight  of  personal  character  ;  not  only  piety,  but  weight  of 
character.  "Who  of  us  is  sufficient  for  these  things?"  (J.  W.  Pratt,  D.D.) 
Preaching  to  great  cities  : — The  Tjord  seems  to  say  to  Jonah,  "  Begin  where  you 
were  when  you  started  out  to  have  your  own  way.  Come  back  to  the  very  point 
at  which  we  were,  and  start  again."  But  the  Lord  distrusted  him  a  little  still, 
notwithstanding  the  discipline  to  which  he  had  been  subjected.  Now  God  is 
more  definite.  "  The  preaching  that  I  bid  thee."  There  must  be  no  mistake, 
no  dodging,  no  evasion.  Man  may  disobey  God  in  two  ways.  He  may  not  go, 
may  plead  excuses,  and  refuse  to  try  to  do  the  work.  Or  he  may  not  do  what  God 
tells  him  to  do,  may  do  something  somewhat  like  it,  but  not  it.  It  is  against 
this  second  kind  of  disobedience  that  God  guards  His  servant.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  obtain  men,  in  this  age,  who  are  quite  ready  to  go  to  great  cities.  But  there 
are  many  who,  when  they  go,  do  not  do  what  God  tells  them  to  do.  There  is 
preaching  enough,  but  when  you  come  to  take  out  of  it  the  theological  dialectics, 
and  the  wranglings,  and  the  discussions  of  the  secular  phases  of  life,  and  the 
material  interests  of  the  Church,  and  the  meddling  with  current  events,  you  find 
that  the  bulk  of  God's  preaching  is  comparatively  small,  and  often  of  weak  portent. 
The  great  question  which  lays  itself  down  at  the  door  of  our  hearts  is.  Are  we 
doing  oiu:  whole  duth  to  the  city  ? — not  to  one's  self  simply,  but  to  the  city  ?  We 
are  here  upon  God's  errand.  Is  the  city  being  saved  ?  Is  it  being  saved  as  we 
might  save  it  ?    As  God  expects  us  to  save  it  ?    I.  What  are  the  methods 

WITH  WHICH  WB  ARE  TO  GO  INTO  THIS  GREAT  CITY  AS  APPOINTED  BY  THE  AXMIGHTY  ? 

God  sends  us  with  a  definite  commission,  and  there  is  to  be  decisiveness  of  action 
on  ova  part.  There  is  to  be  activity,  earnestness.  We  are  to  impress  upon  these 
sinners  round  that  we  can  die  for  them,  but  we  can  never  leave  them  unsaved. 
This  indefiniteness,  this  far-off  century,  this  millennium  dawning  out  of  small  faith 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  m. 

is  not  of  the  Gospel.  That  is  for  the  prophets  of  evolution,  of  aesthetics  and  social 
culture,  for  the  false  prophets.  Within  the  Church  are  the  leverages  and  forces 
to  bring  the  millennium  to  this  sinking  world.     II.  What  about  the  flacb  ; 

WHAT  about  the  EXACT  METHODS  J    WHAT  ABOUT  THE  APPLIANCES  OF  THE  GoSPEL  ? 

If  we  are  to  preach  to  people  the  preaching  God  bids  us  to  preach  them,  how  are 
we  to  reach  them  ?  Jonah  was  to  preach  street  preaching.  Jesus  Christ  preached 
in  the  streets.  The  preaching  of  the  Gospel  should  be  just  as  a<!cessible  to  men 
as  when  it  is  preached  in  the  streets  and  in  the  fields.  Christ  expects  men  and 
women  to  be  able  to  come  to  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  with  a«  much  freedom 
as  they  go  along  the  highways.  There  should  be  nothing  in  the  Churches  or  in 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  that  shall  embarrass  in  the  slightest  degree  any  poor 
man,  or  plamly  clad  man,  who  may  want  to  find  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  built 
our  churches  away  from  the  people.  We  imitate  a  useless,  litiu-gical  style  of 
architecture.  We  let  pews  to  the  well-to-do.  When  men  come  to  the  altar  of 
God,  and  it  is  their  home,  how  they  then  throng  about  their  minister  ;  they  don't 
hide  away  from  him.  HI.  What  shall  we  pbbach  T  The  Gospel.  Just 
simply  the  plain  old  Gospel  of  the  old  time.  You  and  I  are  to  preach  that  very 
same  Jesus  who  went  into  Rome,  and  into  Athens,  and  into  Asia-Minor,  and  whom 
our  fathers  preached,  and  whom  our  fathers  revered.  Human  nature  needs  it  as 
much  as  ever  it  did.  Preach  to  it  the  Crucified  One  ;  not  a  petty  little  philosophy 
of  salvation,  or  a  poetic  story  of  a  perfect  Man  Christ.  But  preach  a  God  Christ, 
a  Divine  Christ,  who  was  torn,  lacerated  by  a  devil-world ;  a  risen  Christ,  risen 
by  His  own  power,  which  He  will  exert  in  due  time  for  all  who  die  in  Him.  Preach 
a  Gospel  of  conviction  of  sin,  of  repentance,  of  regeneration,  of  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit,  by  which  human  hearts  are  made  new,  human  character  is  transformed, 
human  faces  are  transfigured,  and  dying  mortals  are  translated  into  that  glory 
where  all  are  always  like  Him.  (J.  R.  Day,  D.D.)  Effect  of  Jonah's  preaching  .•— 
There  was  never  a  mission  xmdertaken  apparently  more  unpromising  than  this 
of  Jonah  to  Nineveh.  Here  was — I.  A  most  unsuitable  missionary.  1.  To 
begin  with,  he  was  thoroughly  unwilling  to  go.  His  reason  he  gives  in  chap.  iv.  2. 
He  was  fearful  that  the  heathen  would  repent  at  his  preaching,  and  in  that  case 
God  would  have  compassion,  and  forgive  and  spare  them.  What  a  fear  to  be 
entertained  by  a  missionary  !  2.  Unsuitable  because  of  the  self-deception  which 
he  could  practise  on  himself,  and  his  moral  confusion  and  compromise.  Let  us 
not  think  worse  of  Jonah  than  the  case  demands.  He  has  his  good  traits.  At 
least  he  is  honest,  and  he  is  as  severe  on  himself  as  he  is  on  others.  3.  It  would 
have  seemed  unfavourable  also  that  Jonah  should  be  sent  on  such  a  mission 
entirely  alone.  II.  Nineveh  was  a  very  difficult  field.  Perhaps  the  most 
discouraging  thing  about  it  was  that  its  people  already  knew  Jonah's  country, 
his  race,  and  his  religion,  and  thoroughly  despised  them  all.  It  was  to  the  proud 
metropolis  of  a  resistless  empire,  overflowing  with  wealth  and  numbers,  filled 
with  insolence  and  luxury,  that  the  lonely  man  from  the  village  of  Gath-hepher 
was  sent.  And  did  it  not  make  matters  worse  that  God  had  bidden  Jonah  to 
carry  to  Nineveh  such  a  disheartening,  exasperating  message  ?  III.  Yet  the 
mission  of  Jonah  was  a  success.  A  success  scarcely  paralleled  in  ancient  or  in 
modem  times.  Nineveh  "believed  God."  It  is  not  possible  to  tell  the  extent 
or  the  permanence  of  this  national  repentance.  Learn — 1.  All  races  of  men  have 
been  in  God's  loving  care.  2.  We  see  the  method  of  God's  mercy  to  the  heathen. 
3.  We  may  cherish  great  expectations  concerning  the  hardest  fields  of  the  heathen 
world.  4.  The  religious  use  of  fear.  5.  The  moral  power  of  leaders,  whether 
social  or  political.  6.  Learn  Christ's  own  lessons  from  this  history.  (Arthur 
Mitchell,  D.D.)  Jonah's  commission: — The  eye  of  God  is  always  on  man. 
We  seem  to  act  as  if  God  retired  into  the  distance  of  heaven,  and  took  no  cognisance 
of  the  actions  of  man.  But  if  God's  eye  does  look  upon  man,  the  disposition 
of  God  is  to  show  mercy  to  man.  For  do  we  not  see  here  the  messenger  sent  to 
Nineveh  ?  If  God  has  a  disposition  to  show  mercy,  God  is  one  whose  patience 
has  limits.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  we  can  trifle  with  God ;  that  we  can  go 
on  with  our  iniquity,  and  that  God  will  never  vindicate  His  honour.  Learn  also 
that  we  may  hope  in  preaching  to  the  very  worst  and  most  abandoned.  Wicked 
Nineveh  listened  to  the  voice  of  warning.  The  text  fiurther  teaches  us  the  duty 
of  the  Church,  the  duty  of  all  God's  people.  They  are  to  arise  and  go  and  preach 
the  preaching  which  God  bids.  1.  We  are  to  arise  and  go.  Here  at  once  activity 
is  demanded  at  our  hand.  There  must  be  no  lethargy  and  no  lukewarmness. 
2.  Besides  showing  activity,  the  Church  is  to  be  aggressive.     Jonah  was  to  go  away 


CHAP,  in.]  JONAH.  45 

into  the  haunts  of  wickedness,  and  there  to  scatter  in  the  midst  of  those  people 
the  warnings  of  Almighty  God.  So  we  are  to  go  unto  the  dark  places,  ana  carry 
that  light  which  God  has  communicated  to  man.  3.  The  Church  is  to  be  as  the 
"  salt  of  the  earth."  What  does  that  involve  ?  That  it  is  to  influence  everything 
that  it  touches.  And  how  many  are  the  stimulants  to  urge  us  to  this  active, 
aggressive  work !  And  observe  that  we  are  to  preach  the  preaching  that  God 
bids.  The  preaching  must  be  only  what  God  wants.  There  must  be  no  addition 
on  our  part,  no  fancies  or  imaginations  of  our  own.  Three  parts  in  preaching. 
(I)  A  warning  to  the  people.  (2)  We  are  affectionately  to  expostulate.  (3)  W© 
must  speak  the  language  of  comfort  and  encouragement.  (Canon  Hvssey.) 
Christian  enterprise  : — This  is  an  age  of  enterprise.  The  world  is  more  active 
and  energetic  than  ever  before.  Gigantic  schemes,  of  which  the  world  scarcely 
dreamed  in  days  gone  by,  are  being  hourly  put  into  practical  effect.  This  spirit 
also  pervades  the  Church  of  Christ.  I.  Cheistian  entbbpbisk  is  DivrNELY 
COMMANDED.  "  Arise  and  go  "  is  the  Divine  command  to  every  church,  to  every 
society,  to  every  Christian  to-day.  II.  The  object  of  Christian  bntebprisk. 
It  is  included  in  God's  command  to  Jonah,  "  Arise,  go  .  .  .  and  preach  .  .  . 
that  I  bid  thee."  The  work  of  the  Church  is  to  preach,  to  proclaim  what  Grod 
commands  it — all  the  word  of  God.  Nothing  can  be  accomplished  without  time, 
trouble,  expense,  and  labour.  III.  The  effect  of  Cheistian  entebpbise.  1.  It 
had  its  proper  effect  upon  the  people  toward  whom  it  was  directed.  They  believed 
God,  they  repented  in  sackcloth  and  in  ashes.  2.  It  received  the  approval  of  God. 
God  was  pleased  with  Jonah  and  with  the  people.  He  heard  their  cry  of  repentance. 
(8.  H.  Doyle.) 

Ver.  3.  So  Jonah  arose,  and  went  unto  Nineveh,  accordincr  to  the  Word  of  the  /' 
Lord. — Obedient  at  last  (for  children) ; — Introduce  by  description  of  Jonah's 
conduct  and  history.  Dwell  on  his  call,  flight,  peril,  humiliation,  prayer,  restora- 
tion, and  second  call.  Also  on — (I )  The  city.  (2)  The  preacher.  (3)  The  message, 
(4)  The  fast.  (5)  The  proclamation.  (6)  The  Divine  mercy.  Impress  that  the 
long-suffering  and  forgiving  grace  of  God  are  shown — 1.  In  givmg  Jonah  another 
commission.  2.  In  hearing  the  penitent  prayer  of  the  Ninevites.  Show  that 
penitence  must,  of  necessity,  precede  forgiveness.  Make  this  question  the  point 
of  the  address, — In  what  spirit  should  God's  servants  go  forth  to  do  His  work  ? 
1.  They  should  be  strictly  obedient.  2.  They  should  be  simply  trustful ;  quite 
sure  that  God  would  will  the  right,  and  give  them  grace  as  they  needed.  3.  They 
should  be  prompt  and  ready,  going  at  once  and  cheerfully.  4.  They  should 
leave  with  God  the  results  of  their  mission.  Illustrate,  from  one  Bible  character, 
each  of  these  divisions.  (1)  By  Abraham.  (2)  By  David.  (3)  By  the  missionaries 
who  could  say,  "  Immediately  we  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood,"  &c. 
(4)  By  the  apostle  Paul.  {Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  Obedience:  —  Erastus 
Corning,  when  a  little  boy,  applied  at  a  shop  for  employment.  The  foreman 
looked  down  at  the  frail,  lame  boy,  and  asked,  "  Why,  my  little  fellow,  what  can 
you  do  ?  "  "I  can  do  what  I  am  bid,  sir,"  was  the  answer.  His  willingness  to 
obey  secured  a  place,  and  was  the  beginning  of  his  successful  career  as  a  merchant. 
(Sunday  School  Teacher.) 

Ver.  4.  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown. — The  knell  of 
Nineveh  : — Sardanapalus  puts  off  his  jewelled  array,  and  puts  on  mourning, 
and  the  whole  city  goes  down  on  its  knees,  and  street  cries  to  street,  and  temple 
to  temple.  A  black  covering  is  thrown  over  the  horses,  and  the  sheep,  and  the 
cattle.  Forage  and  water  are  kept  from  the  dumb  brutes  so  that  their  dis- 
tressed bellowings  may  make  a  dolorous  accompaniment  to  the  lamentation 
of  six  hundred  thousands  souls.  God  heard  that  cry.  He  turned  aside  from 
the  affairs  of  eternal  state,  and  listened.  He  said.  Stop  !  I  must  go  down 
and  save  that  city.  It  is  repenting,  and  cries  for  help,"  I.  The  pebcision  and 
PUNCTTTALXTY  OF  THE  DiVTNB  AEEANGEMENT.  God  knew  exactly  the  day  when 
Nineveh's  lease  of  mercy  should  end.  He  has  determined  the  length  of  endurance 
of  our  sin.  II.  Ebligious  waening  may  seem  peepostbeous.  To  many  still 
it  is  more  a  joke  than  anything  else.  Men  boast  of  their  health,  but  I  have  noticed 
that  it  is  the  invaUds  who  live  long.  "  In  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not,  the  Son 
of  Man  cometh."  III.  GoD  gives  eveey  man  a  fair  chance  foe  his  life. 
The  iniquity  of  Nineveh  was  accumulating.  Why  did  not  God  unsheath  some 
sword  of  lightning  from  the  scabbard  of  a  storm-cloud  and  slay  it  ?     It  waa 


46  THU  BTELWAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

because  He  wanted  to  give  the  city  a  fair  chance.  And  God  is  giving  us  a  fair 
chance  for  safety,  a  better  chance  than  He  gave  to  Nineveh.  IV.  When  the 
PEOPLE  EBPEiTT,  GoD  LETS  THEM  OFF.  While  Nineveh  was  on  its  knees,  God 
reversed  the  judgment.  When  a  sinner  repents  (in  one  sense)  God  repents  (in 
another).  Then  repent,  give  up  your  sin  and  turn  to  God,  and  you  will  be  saved. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D. )  God  has  many  preachers  : — God  has  many  preachers 
that  are  not  in  human  flesh.  For  instance,  fever  is  a  terrible  Elijah.  When 
the  cholera  came  to  Loiidon  it  was  a  Jonah  in  our  streets.  Many  then  began 
to  think  who  would  have  gone  blindfold  down  to  perdition.  When  poverty 
visits  some  men's  houses,  and  they  can  no  longer  indulge  in  drunkenness  and 
gluttony,  then  they  bethink  themselves  of  their  Father's  house,  and  the  hired 
servants  who  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  Omnipotence  has  servants 
everywhere  ;  God  can  make  use  of  even  the  ills  of  life  to  work  eternal  good. 
A  warning  cry  in  the  city : — It  was  a  great  and  wonderful  thing  that  was  wrought 
that  day  when  Jonah  "  began  to  enter  into  the  city."  The  great  capital  was 
suddenly  startled  by  a  voice  of  warning  in  her  streets.  A  strange,  wild  man, 
clothed  in  a  rough  garment  of  skin,  moved  from  place  to  place,  and  announced 
to  the  inhabitants  their  coming  doom.  Had  the  cry  fallen  on  them  in  their 
prosperous  time,  it  would  probably  have  been  heard  with  apathy  and  ridicule. 
But  coming  as  it  did  when  their  glory  had  declined  ;  when  their  enemies,  having 
been  allowed  a  breathing  space,  had  taken  courage,  and  were  acting  on  the 
offensive  in  many  quarters,  it  struck  them  with  fear  and  consternation.  It 
was  a  single  day,  apparently,  that  was  marked  by  such  wonders  in  the  city  of 
Nineveh.  The  prophet's  "  one  day's  journey  "  is  supposed  to  have  carried  him 
about  nineteen  mUes.  The  repentance  of  the  men  of  Nineveh  prolonged,  in  God's 
mercy  and  providence,  the  continuance  of  their  city  for  more  than  a  hundred 
years.  {Archdeacon  Harrison. )  Divine  threatenings : — I.  Divine  threats  abb 
CONDITIONAL.  It  is  with  them  in  this  respect  as  it  is  with  the  promises  recorded 
in  the  Scriptures.  The  appropriate  condition  is  implied,  whether  it  is  mentioned 
or  not,  in  all  the  promises,  and  in  all  the  threats  which  are  recorded  in  the 
Scriptures  as  coming  from  God.  II.  Divine  threats  are  merciful.  The 
threat  fulminated  against  Nineveh  was  the  means  of  bringing  the  Ninevites  to 
repentance,  and  saving  their  city  from  destruction,  as  it  was  intended  to  be.  It 
is  the  preacher's  consolation  that  the  Divine  threats  are  always  merciful.  Observe 
also  the  suitableness  of  Jonah's  preaching.  It  might  be  said,  was  not  Jonah's 
preaching  quite  as  likely  to  amuse  or  annoy  the  Ninevites  as  to  effect  a  reformation 
on  their  part  ?  They  were  certainly  more  likely  to  be  annoyed  than  amused. 
If  not  mobbed  and  molested  in  the  streets,  the  magistrate  might  be  expected  to 
deal  with  him  as  a  disturber  of  the  peace.  But  nothing  of  this  kind  occurred. 
1.  Jonah  was  a  sign  to  the  Ninevites  of  Jehovah's  power.  2.  Of  Jehovah's 
justice.  3.  Of  Jehovah's  mercy.  Observe,  too,  how  the  preaching  of  Jonah 
was  supplemented  in  Nineveh.  The  manner  in  which  this  royal  proclamation 
was  produced  deserves  consideration.  It  was  not  produced  by  the  king  alone, 
but  by  the  king  and  his  nobles.  The  drift  of  the  proclamation  may  be  regarded 
as  either  imperative  or  hortatory.  It  counselled  the  people  to  fast,  to  cover  them- 
selves with  sackcloth,  to  pray,  to  reform  their  manner  of  life,  to  associate  the  very 
brutes  with  their  appeal  to  (Jod.  Observe,  the  reason  which  the  proclamation 
gives  for  acting  as  it  counsels  is  couched  in  very  plaintive  terms.  "  Who  can 
tell  ?  "  &c.  This  was  language  equally  removed  from  despair  and  presumption. 
{S.  C.  Burn.)  The  repentance  of  Nineveh: — "The  great  city  rises  before  us, 
most  magnificent  of  all  the  capitals  of  the  ancient  world — '  great  even  unto  God.' 
It  included  parks,  and  gardens,  and  fields,  and  people,  and  cattle  within  its  vast 
circumference.  Twenty  miles  the  prophet  penetrates  into  the  city.  He  has 
still  finished  only  one-third  of  his  journey  tm-ough  it.  His  utterance,  like  that 
of  the  wild  preacher  in  the  last  days  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  is  one 
piercing  cry,  from  street  to  street,  from  square  to  square.  It  reaches  at  last 
the  king  on  his  throne  of  state.  The  remorse  for  the  wrong  and  robbery  and 
violence  of  many  generations  is  awakened.  The  dumb  animals  are  included, 
after  the  feishion  of  the  East,  in  the  universal  mourning,  and  the  Divine  decree 
is  revoked."  I.  The  penitent  prophet.  Recall  the  indications  of  his  penitence, 
given  in  his  prayer  (chap.  ii.).  And  note  the  signs  in  his  obedient  attitude,  and 
his  readiness  at  once  to  do  God's  commands.  Truly  penitent  people  give  up 
their  own  wilfulness,  and  cheerfully  submit  and  obey.  If  we  have  not  this  spirit 
\re  may  be  quite  sure  that  our  penitence  has  neither  been  sincere  nor  thorough. 


CHAP,  m.]  JONAE.  47 

Picture  the  prophet  setting  to  his  work.  11.  The  PBNiTBirr  city.  Note  "the 
signs  of  earnestness  and  sincerity.  All  classes  joined  in  the  penitent  acts.  They 
united  in  prayer.  They  put  away  their  sins.  The  king  showed  the  good  example. 
What  a  pictuj-e !  A  whole  people  prostrate  before  the  God  of  judgment ! 
III.  God's  eblation  to  both.     Long-suffering  to  both.     Forgiving  to  both.     A 

Erayer-hearer  to  both.  Describe — How  very  strange  it  was  that  Jonah,  though 
imself  a  forgiven  man,  was  offended  with  God  for  making  Nineveh  a  forgiven  city. 
Our  own  sense  of  God's  mercy  in  forgiving  v^,  ought  to  make  us  very  hopeful 
about  others,  and  very  thankful  when  we  find  that  God's  grace  reaches  also  to 
them.  There  is  joy  among  the  angels  over  one  penitent,  and  we  should  share 
their  joy.  {Bobert  Tuck,  £.A.)  The  excitement  produced  by  Eastern  Tprophets  : — 
Orientals  are  still  impressed,  more  or  less  readily,  by  the  appearance  of  "  holy 
men,"  such  as  their  own  dervishes,  whose  enthusiasm,  in  some  cases,  where  high 
sincerity  inspires  them,  is  much  like  that  which  marks  a  true  prophet  in  all  ages. 
The  name  "  dervish,"  Dr.  Wolff  tells  us,  means  "  one  who  hangs  at  the  gate  of 
Grod,"  awaiting  His  inspiration ;  and  the  ecstasy  of  some  of  the  class  may  be  com- 
pared to  that  of  which  we  read,  for  example,  of  Micah,  who,  we  are  told,  went 
about  "  stripped  and  naked,  and  howled  Uke  the  jackals,  and  roared  like  the 
ostrich."  I  do  not  suppose  that  Jonah  bore  himself  thus,  but  the  fact  that  such 
appearances  as  those  of  Micah  were  familiar  over  all  Asia  must  have  opened  the 
way  for  his  influence  in  Nineveh.  We  may  suppose  him  showing  himself  in  such 
a  garb  as  that  of  EUjah,  or  others  of  the  prophets, — his  hair  streaming  down  his 
shoulders,  his  outer  dress  a  rude  sheepskin  mantle.  He  may  have  arrived  in  the 
disastrous  time  after  the  death  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  when  the  nations  conquered 
by  that  great  monarch,  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Mediterranean,  were,  in  most 
cases,  in  rebellion,  and  troubles  oppressed  the  Nineveh  palaces.  Wandering 
over  the  open  spaces,  with  their  mansions  and  huts,  and  through  the  lanes  and 
bazaars  of  each  part  of  the  city,  he  terrified  the  crowd  by  a  piercing,  monotonous 
wail,  in  a  dialect  which,  though  intelligible  in  a  short  sentence  on  the  Tigris, 
must  have  sounded  barbarous  and  uncouth, — "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh 
shall  be  overthrown."  His  appearance  proclaimed  him  a  "  holy  man,"  and  he 
might  have  been  sent,  in  these  dark  times,  by  the  gods.  (Cunningham  Geikie, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  5-9.  So  the  people  of  Nineveh  believed  God. — Belief  inspired  by  fear  : — 
How  came  the  Ninevites  to  believe  God,  as  no  hope  of  salvation  was  given  them  7 
For  there  can  be  no  faith  without  an  acquaintance  with  the  paternal  kindness 
of  God ;  whoever  regards  God  as  angry  with  him  must  necessarily  despair.  Since, 
then,  Jonah  gave  them  no  knowledge  of  God's  mercy  he  must  have  greatly  terrified 
the  Ninevites,  and  not  have  called  them  to  faith.  The  answer  is,  that  the  expres- 
sion is  to  be  taken  as  including  a  part  for  the  whole  ;  for  there  is  no  perfect  faith 
when  men,  being  called  to  repentance,  do  suppliantly  humble  themselves  before 
God  ;  but  yet  it  is  a  part  of  faith,  for  the  apostle  says  in  Hebrews  xi.,  that  Noah 
through  faith  feared  ;  he  deduces  the  fear  which  Noah  entertained  on  account 
of  the  oracular  word  he  received  from  faith,  showing  thereby  that  it  was  faith  in 
part,  and  pointing  out  the  source  from  which  it  proceeded.  At  the  same  time, 
the  mind  of  the  holy  patriarch  must  have  been  moved  by  other  things  besides 
threatenings  when  he  built  an  ark  for  himself  as  the  means  of  safety.  We  may 
thus,  by  taking  a  part  for  the  whole,  explain  this  place — that  the  Ninevites  believed 
God ;  for  as  tiiey  knew  that  God  required  the  deserved  punishment,  they  sub- 
mitted to  Him,  and  at  the  same  time  solicited  pardon ;  but  the  Ninevites  derived 
from  the  words  of  Jonah  something  more  than  mere  terror,  for  had  they  only 
apprehended  this — that  they  were  guilty  before  Grod,  and  were  justly  summoned 
to  punishment,  they  would  have  been  confoimded  and  stuimed  with  dread,  and 
could  never  have  been  encouraged  to  seek  forgiveness.  Inasmuch,  then,  as  they 
suppliantly  prostrated  themselves  before  God,  they  must  certainly  have  conceived 
some  hope  of  grace.  They  were  not,  therefore,  so  touched  with  penitence  and 
the  fear  of  God  but  that  they  had  some  knowledge  of  Divine  grace ;  thus  they 
believed  God,  for  though  they  were  aware  that  they  were  most  worthy  of  death, 
they  yet  despaired  not,  but  betook  themselves  to  prayer.  They  must  therefore 
have  derived  more  advantage  from  the  preaching  of  Jonah  than  the  mere  know- 
ledge that  they  were  guilty  before  Grod.  {John  Calvin.)  Nineveh  brought 
to  repentance : — Analyse  and  examine  the  main  features  of  this  repentance  of 
the  men  of  Nineveh.     I.  Thb  pboplb  of  Nineveh  believbd  God.    The  men 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  Nineveh  saw  at  once  the  reason  for  this  sentence,  for  the  very  first  impression 
produced  on  them  was  a  belief  in  God.  By  this  is  implied  not  merely  the 
acceptance  of  God's  message  as  truth,  but  the  much  greater  belief  in  God. 
Israel's  God  could  not  have  been  unknown  to  the  Ninevites.  IL  MouRiraio  nr 
THE  CITY  BECAME  TiNiVERSAL.  The  sin  had  been  universal,  and  so  now  became 
the  mourning.  III.  They  tubned  tbom  thbib  evil  way.  Mourning  was 
merely  the  outward  expression  of  sorrow  and  repentance.  The  grand  fact  is 
the  sincerity  of  the  repentance.  They  were  led  to  alter  their  conduct  and  change 
their  whole  manner  of  life.  IV.  They  cried  ihohtily  unto  God.  And  that  cry 
of  Nineveh  was  not  unheard.  It  came  up  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth. 
{James  Menzies.)  The  nature  and  result  of  true  repentance  : — The  Book  of  Jonah 
illustrates  man's  perverseness,  God's  love  to  sinners,  God's  tenderness  to  His 
people.  It  contains  a  type  of  our  Lord's  work.  It  shows  God  ever  the  same, 
whether  dealing  with  Gentile  or  Jew :  stem  against  sin ;  yearning  over  sinners ; 
faithful  to  promises.  As  to  the  repentance  of  the  Ninevites,  mark — I.  Its 
OKiGiN.  "  They  believed  God."  Repentance  starts  from  faith  and  leads  to  faith. 
No  true  repentance  till  there  is  belief — I.  That  sin  is  hm-tful.  2.  That  life  is 
fleeting.  3.  That  God's  Word  is  true.  Faith  of  Ninevites  very  simple, — perhaps 
ignorant,  yet  they  were  led  on.  It  came  from  God.  The  Holy  Spirit's  work 
thus  to  convince  of  sin.  II.  Its  symptoms.  1.  Self-abasement.  2.  It  was  uni- 
versal. 3.  It  was  thorough.  The  next  symptom  was  earnest  prayer.  (1)  They 
did  not  stop  at  humiliation ;  they  cried  for  pardon.  (2)  They  looked  to 
the  right  source  for  help.  (3)  They  cried  mightily,  as  if  they  meant  it.  The 
next  symptom  was  reformation.  They  turned  from  their  evil  way.  They 
brought  forth  "  fruits  meet  for  repentance."  The  only  proof  of  true  repentance 
is  to  give  up  sin  utterly.  Not  only  fast  for  sin,  but  abstain  from  sin.  III.  The 
RESULT.  God  repented ;  that  is,  He  changed  His  dealings.  This  was  foretold 
as  possible.  "  Yet  forty  days," — a  time  of  grace  given.  There  is  room  in  the  all- 
wise  decrees  for  answers  to  faithful  prayer.  Application — 1.  God's  laws  are  the 
same  for  all.  We  have  more  light,  more  responsibility  than  had  the  Ninevites  ; 
but  for  us  the  path  is  the  same.  Contrition,  faith,  pardon.  2.  Have  we  repented  ? 
A  "  greater  than  Jonas  "  caUs  us.  By  His  Word,  His  work.  His  death.  Let  us 
turn  to  Him  while  the  day  of  salvation  lasts.  3.  What  an  encouragement  to 
the  true  penitent.  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one 
Binner  that  repenteth."  {A.  O.  Hellicar,  M.A.)  The  repentance  of  the  Nine- 
files  : — Notice  the  substance  of  Jonah's  proclamation,  and  the  strong  effect 
which  it  was  made  instrumental  in  producing.  Most  probably,  while  with  the 
zeal  of  an  awakened  spirit  Jonah  began  to  execute  his  commission,  the  burden 
of  it,  "  Yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  destroyed,"  was  but  used  by  him  as 
a  general  theme  suggestive  of  enlargement.  To  the  eye  of  sense  the  enterprise 
thus  commenced  might  seem  most  formidable  and  dangerous.  But,  in  the  view 
of  faith,  difiBculties  vanished.  The  effect  produced  was  remarkable.  All  ranks 
were  pervaded  by  feelings  of  disquietude  and  alarm.  The  woeful  tidings  spread 
from  mouth  to  mouth.  God  gave  unwonted  power  to  the  message  of  His  servant, 
so  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  great  and  dissipated  city  were  roused  to  deep 
concern,  and  its  myriads  bowed  themselves  in  penitence  and  prayer.  The 
impression  produced  might  be  partly  the  mere  result  of  apprehension,  as  the 
sinner  is  often  scared  for  a  time,  but  without  lasting  and  salutary  effect.  We 
must  distinguish  between  such  transient  and  partial  feelings  and  genuine  peni- 
tence. The  latter  issues  in  return  to  Him  who  has  been  so  grievously  offended. 
Its  reality  is  shown  in  amendment  of  life.  Notice  the  general  nature  of  the 
Ninevites'  penitence  here  described,  in  which  we  must  recognise  the  exertion  of 
a  Divine  influence  and  power.  Fear  is  contagious :  faith  is  the  result  of  Divine 
influence  upon  the  heart ;  and  it  shows  the  influence  of  prevailing  wickedness 
in  a  community  that,  while  some  are  roused  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  to 
religious  earnestness  and  activity,  a  much  larger  proportion  too  often  remain 
indifferent  and  slothful.  The  penitence  of  the  Ninevites  was  in  many  cases 
genuine.  We  are  reminded  by  this  narrative  of  the  propriety  of  rulers,  in  their 
oSicial  capacity,  employing  their  influence  with  a  view  to  promote  the  interests 
of  righteousness  and  truth.  Civil  eminence  is  to  be  consecrated  to  God's  service. 
W^e  have  giound  for  judging  of  the  pervading  and  thorough  character  of  the 
transaction.  The  vast  city  was  filled  with  fear  and  lamentation.  The  outward 
bigns  of  abasement  were  everywhere  discernible.  Had  the  repentance  of  the 
Ninevites  been  confined  to  ext«rnal  indications  it  would  have  been  exclusive  of 


CHAP.  HI.]  JONAH.  49 

that  homage  which  God  requires,  and  has  alone  declared  His  readiness  to  accept. 
The  most  important  feature  of  the  sorrow  consisted,  not  in  the  covering  of  the 
limbs  with  sackcloth,  but  in  their  "  crying  mightily  unto  Grod,"  and  in  "  turning 
every  one  from  their  evil  way,  and  from  the  violence  that  was  in  their  hands.  ' 
Godly  sorrow  will  be  followed  by  amendment,  the  view  of  sin  by  its  loathing 
and  detestation.  We  gather  from  this  narrative  the  propriety  of  a  nation,  when 
threatened  by  disaster,  turning  to  the  great  source  of  sufficiency  and  strength. 
And  also  the  happy  results  that  may  be  expected  to  follow  from  such  a  public 
recognition  of  the  Ruler  of  the  universe.  Stand  in  awe  of  Grod's  mighty  power, 
and  admire  the  wonders  of  Divine  mercy  and  patience.  This  history  is  fitted 
to  remind  Christians  of  their  duty  and  their  strength.  The  duty  is  to  *'  Go  into 
all  the  world  and  preach," — not  the  thunderings  of  wrath,  nor  the  avenging 
sentence  merely  of  a  broken  law,  but — the  "  Gospel  to  every  creature."  {A.  Bonar, 
D.D.)  Repentance  : — 1.  Note  the  renewed  charge  to  the  penitent  prophet,  and 
his  new  eagerness  to  fulfil  it.  It  is  God's  mercy  that  gives  ua  the  opportunity 
of  effacing  past  disobedience  by  new  alacrity.  The  second  charge  is  possibly 
distinguishable  from  the  first  as  being  less  precise.  The  substance  of  the  message 
is  set  forth.  "  The  preaching  which  I  bid  thee," — not  his  own  imaginations, 
nor  any  fine  things  of  his  own  spinning.  2.  Note  the  repentance  of  Nineveh. 
The  impression  made  by  Jonah's  terrible  cry  is  perfectly  credible  and  natural 
in  the  excitable  population  of  an  eastern  city,  in  which  even  now  any  appeal 
to  terror,  especially  if  associated  with  religious  and  prophetic  claims,  easily  seta 
the  whole  in  a  frenzy.  The  specified  tokens  of  repentance  are  those  of  ordinary 
mourning,  such  as  were  common  all  over  the  East,  with  only  the  strange  addition 
which  smacks  of  heathen  ideas,  that  the  animals  were  made  sharers  in  them. 
There  is  great  significance  in  that  "  believing  God  "  (ver.  5).  The  foundation  of 
all  true  repentance  is  crediting  God's  Word  of  threatening,  and  therefore  realising 
the  danger  as  well  as  the  disobedience  of  our  sin.  We  learn  from  the  Ninevites 
what  is  true  repentance.  The  deepest  meaning  of  the  whole  narrative  is  set 
forth  in  our  Lord's  use  of  it  when  He  holds  up  the  men  of  Nineveh  as  a  con- 
demnatory instance  to  the  hardened  consciences  of  His  hearers.  The  story 
was  a  smiting  blow  to  the  proud  exclusiveness  and  self-complacent  contempt 
of  prophetic  warnings,  which  marked  the  entire  history  of  God's  people.  But 
if  repentance  be  but  transient,  it  leaves  the  heart  harder  than  before.  3.  Note 
the  repentance  of  God.  All  God's  promises  and  threatenings  are  conditional. 
God  threatens  precisely  in  order  that  He  may  not  have  to  perform  His  threatenings. 
He  repents  of  the  evil  which  He  said  He  would  do  when  they  repent  of  the  evil 
which  they  have  done.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Jonah  at  Nineveh  : — I.  Nineveh's 
SIN.  Nahum  describes  Nineveh  as  "  the  bloody  city,"  "  all  full  of  lies  and 
robbery."  Zephaniah  caUs  it  "  filthy  and  polluted,"  "  the  oppressing  city." 
The  Ninevites  were  gross  and  sensual,  cruel  in  war,  eagerly  self-indulgent ;  a 
people  of  splendid  physique  and  sm-prising  courage,  but  cultivating  bodily 
excellences  and  seeking  physical  pleasures  without  thought  of  their  higher 
nature.  II.  Jonah's  prbac3hing.  Dove-like,  he  was  timid  and  despondent. 
He  naturally  shrank  from  delivering  a  message  which  might  save  a  godless 
and  hostile  people  from  destruction.  Jonah's  mission  was  one  of  great  risk. 
in.  Ninbveh's  rbpentancb.  The  Ninevites  stand  aghast  before  Jonah.  Though 
an  immoral,  yet  they  are  a  religious  people.  They  believe  in  a  higher  power. 
They  are  moved  by  the  voice  of  prophets.  Jonah's  terrible  words  are  not 
unheeded.  A  panic  seizes  the  inhabitants.  The  king  also  heard  and  believed  ; 
but  he  and  his  advisers  discerned  a  ray  of  hope.  A  possibility  of  pardon  seemed 
to  be  hinted  in  the  very  language  of  the  message,  and  had  foundation  in  the 
teachings  of  natural  religion.  What  causes  human  misery  ? — Sin,  nothing  but 
sin.  If  the  cause  be  removed  may  not  the  result  cease  ?  Still,  in  this  chain  of 
reasoning  there  is  one  broken  link,  and  the  Ninevites  were  not  certain  it  could 
be  welded.  To  stop  present  sin  is  indeed  to  stop  the  cause  of  woe  ;  but  repentance 
does  not  affect  the  past,  and  the  momentum  of  sins  before  committed  may  hurl 
a  train  of  miseries  far  into  the  future.  Repentance  is,  in  fact,  of  itself  an  insufficient 
ground  for  forgiveness.  It  does  not  touch  the  past.  The  wonder  is,  how  God, 
on  the  ground  of  man's  repentance,  can  make  it  consistent  to  forgive  him.  Had 
not  God  at  this  very  hour  of  Nineveh's  sin  had  it  in  His  plan  to  send  His  Son 
to  earth  to  die  for  man  there  could  have  been  no  forgiveness  for  Nineveh.  The 
turning  or  repentance  was  the  condition  on  which  God  would  forgive.  Was  this 
lepentance  sincere  and  lasting  ?     It  did  not  produce   permanent  results  upon 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  nation.  But  this  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  reformation  in  Jonah's 
time  was  not  thorough.  A  nation  easily  relapses  into  sin.  There  is  no  evidence 
that  pains  were  taken  to  confirm  the  work  at  Nineveh.  IV.  God's  fokgiveness. 
"  God  repented."  How  shall  we  reconcile  this  statement  with  God's  unchange- 
ableness  ?  It  is  man  that  changes,  not  God.  How  shall  we  reconcile  the  state- 
ment with  God's  veracity  ?  When  God  threatens,  if  the  condition  of  things 
be  changed  which  makes  the  evil  necessary,  the  threatening  may  be  mitigated, 
if  not  given  up  entirely.  How  shall  we  reconcile  God's  forgiveness  with  God's 
justice  ?  Repentance  does  not  atone  for  the  past.  It  simply  is  man's  part  in 
making  Christ's  work  e£Gicacious.  Repentance  stops  the  entrance  of  further 
evil  into  the  heart.  The  narrative  strikingly  illustrates  God's  love.  His  eagerness, 
we  may  say,  to  forgive.  The  love-side  of  God's  nature  is  peculiarly  prominent 
in  the  Christian  dispensation.  Notice,  in  conclusion,  the  contrasts  suggested 
by  the  text.  The  case  of  Nineveh  stands  before  the  impenitent  to-day  as  an 
expostulation  and  a  rebuke.  (Sermons  by  Monday  Clvb.)  Genuine  reforma- 
tion : — The  end  of  all  providential  mercies,  the  theme  of  all  Divine  teachers, 
the  indispensable  condition  of  all  true  hiunan  power,  dignity,  and  blessedness, 
is  genuine  reformation.  I.  Its  method.  1.  It  was  effected  through  man.  Why 
did  the  Almighty  require  the  services  of  Jonah  ?  Why  did  He  not  speak  with 
an  audible  voice  to  the  men  of  Nineveh  Himself  ?  Or  why  did  He  not  dispatch 
an  angel  from  His  throne  ?  Or  still,  why  did  He  not  write  what  He  htui  to  say  to 
them  in  red  flame  above  their  heads  ?  All  we  answer  is.  Such  is  not  God's  method 
with  man.  He  makes  man  the  organ  of  blessing  man.  This  plan  serves  several 
important  purposes.  (1)  It  serves  to  deepen  man's  interest  in  his  race.  (2)  It 
stimulates  men  to  seek  the  improvement  of  their  race.  If  they  are  to  advance 
they  must  look  to  themselves,  &c.  (3)  It  confers  signal  hono  r  on  the  race.  (4)  It 
shows  God's  wisdom  and  power  in  the  race.  "  We  have  this  treasure  in  earthen 
vessels."  2.  It  was  effected  through  man  speakmg.  Jonah  was  sent  to  speak, — 
he  was  "  to  preach  imto  the  city."  Truth  spoken  is  the  converting  force. 
Christianity  written,  as  compared  with  Christianity  spoken,  is  as  the  winter  to 
the  summer  sky.  It  may  give  as  much  hght,  but  not  as  much  heat ;  and  without 
the  summer  radiance  the  landscapes  will  wither  and  the  fountains  freeze.  3.  It 
was  effected  through  man  speaking  what  God  said.  *'  Preach  unto  it  the  preachmg 
that  I  bid  thee."  Had  he  spoken  his  own  thoughts,  no  valuable  effect  would 
have  been  produced.  God's  thoughts  are  the  converting  forces.  God's  thoughts 
are  always  reasonable  and  universally  benevolent.  II.  Its  dbvelopmbnt. 
1.  This  reformation  began  with  the  intellect.  "  So  the  people  of  Nineveh  believed 
God."  All  moral  reformation  begins  with  the  intellect — the  beliefs.  Men  must 
believe  what  God  says,  or  no  saving  effect  can  be  produced.  2.  This  reformation 
proceeded  to  the  heart.  "  They  put  on  sackcloth,  from  the  greatest  of  them 
even  to  the  least  of  them."  As  they  thought  upon  what  they  heard,  deep  con- 
trition seized  them,  &o.  3.  This  reformation  extended  to  the  outward  life. 
"  They  turned  from  their  evil  way."  They  renounced  their  old  habits  of  wicked- 
ness, and  adopted  a  new  and  virtuous  course  of  life.  Such  is  ever  the  natvural 
development  of  true  reformation.  Divine  ideas  first  enter  the  intellect,  they 
are  believed,  they  ptiss  to  the  heart  and  generate  emotions,  and  these  emotions 
come  forth  in  new  actions.  True  reformation  works  from  the  centre  to  the 
circumference,  from  the  heart  to  the  extremities.  III.  Its  value.  "  And  God 
repented  of  the  evil  that  He  had  said  He  would  do  unto  them ;  and  He  did  it 
not."  Though  this  wonderful  language  is  in  accommodation  to  our  modes  of 
thought  and  action,  it  has  a  profound  significance.  It  does  not  mean  that  God 
changed  His  mind  towards  them  ; — this  would  be  impossible.  1.  It  is  God's 
immutable  purpose  to  pardon  repentant  sinners.  When  the  impenitent  therefore 
become  penitent,  God's  conduct  so  far  as  they  are  concerned  is  changed.  (HomUiat.) 
Effect  of  JonoKs  preaching  : — In  this  chapter  we  have  the  prophet's  second  call, 
and  what  came  of  His  obedience  to  it.  I.  A  new  spirit  (vers.  1-3).  In  part, 
the  command  is  the  same  as  before.  In  part,  it  was  unlike  the  first.  Before 
it  was,  "  Cry  against  it."  Now  it  is,  "  Preach  unto  it."  Here  is  an  intimation 
of  just  that  mercy  against  which  the  prophet  before  rebelled.  Jonah  implicitly 
obeyed  it.  Here  was  a  new  spirit.  God  had  just  given  him  needed  discipline. 
No  doubt  He  now  gave  him  needed  grace.  It  is  by  both  that  He  prepares  us 
for  usefulness.  II.  A  faithful  sermon  (ver.  4).  In  this  sermon  two  things 
are  noteworthy.  1.  It  was  direct,  simple,  p'ain.  There  is  no  enlargement,  no 
argument,   no  exhortation.     There   is  great  power   in   simplicity.     It   is  God's 


eSAT.  m.]  JONAH.  61 

own  truth,  not  human  additions  to  it,  or  commendations  of  it,  which  stirs  the 
consciences  and  wins  the  hearts  of  men.  2.  It  was  also  alarming.  It  sounded 
just  one  note,  and  that  was  a  note  of  warning.  It  was  an  unqualified  announce- 
ment of  coming  judgment.  Denunciations  and  threatenings  alone  can  never 
win  and  subdue  to  repentance.  But  God's  denunciations  and  threatenings 
never  are  alone.  There  was  mercy,  as  well  as  justice,  in  the  alarm  which  Jonah 
sounded.  But  neither  the  plainness  nor  the  faithfulness  of  Jonah's  preaching 
can  fully  account  for  the  results  which  followed.  (1)  Behind  the  message  was 
the  messenger.  (2)  Our  Saviour  tells  us  that  He  was  Himself  a  sign  to  the 
Ninevites.  (3)  God  was  with  the  message  spoken,  to  make  it  effective  by  the 
influence  of  His  Spirit.  III.  A  bbpbntant  city  (vers.  5-9).  Those  that  heard 
gave  heed.  The  people  seem  to  have  moved  first.  1.  There  was  first  the  fasting, 
together  with  the  sackcloth  and  ashes.  What  did  these  signify  but  confession 
of  sin  and  grief  therefor  ?  2.  The  supplication  for  mercy.  3.  A  moral  change. 
4.  This  repentance  had  its  root  in  faith.  IV.  Judgment  avbrtbd  (ver.  10).  How 
widespread  and  deep  the  work  was  we  cannot  tell.  {Sermons  by  Monday  Club.) 
God's  purpose  of  grace  in  the  salvation  of  sinners : — The  purpose  of  God  unfolds 
itself  gradually  in  the  course  of  His  providence ;  and  when  we  see  the  end  from 
the  beginning,  we  see  that  it  is  a  purpose  of  grace.  He  wished  to  save  the  men 
of  Nineveh,  and  the  only  way  of  salvation  with  God  was  repentance  unto  life. 
The  history  of  their  repentance  is  therefore  the  revelation  of  God's  purpose  of 

gace  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.  God  renewed  His  commission  to  Jonah,  but 
e  does  not  upbraid  the  prophet  with  his  former  refusal.  All  that  is  required 
is  the  doing  of  duty.  That  is  the  fruit  meet  for  repentance.  If  there  be  any 
difference  between  this  call  and  the  former,  it  is  that  the  terms  of  the  second 
are  more  absolute  and  less  definite.  Jonah  now  yielded  to  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord.  He  went  "  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord."  That  was  all  the  differ- 
ence between  Jonah  a  sinner  and  Jonah  a  saint,  between  the  old  man  and  the 
new.  The  old  resists  the  Spirit  and  yields  to  the  flesh  ;  the  new  resists  the  flesh 
and  yields  to  the  Spirit.  God's  will,  not  his  own  nor  man's,  was  now  the  law  of 
Jonah's  life.  The  Lord  said  "  Go  "  ;  go  therefore  he  must,  go  in  spite  of  the 
world,  go  in  spite  of  self,  go  whatever  should  be  his  fate  or  his  reception  at  Nineveh. 
All  the  ancients  speak  of  Nineveh  as  an  exceeding  great  city.  It  must  have 
been  a  sublime  spectacle,  to  see  this  single  man  going  from  one  end  to  another 
of  this  great  heathen  city,  and  at  every  step,  or  at  every  street,  repeating  the 
same  awful  message  of  God.  The  terms  of  the  prophecy  were  most  absolute. 
No  proof  was  olTered  of  the  prophet's  divine  commission.  No  call  to  repentance 
was  addressed  to  their  consciences.  No  promise  was  made,  or  hope  held  out. 
The  people  believed  God,  and  the  immediate  effect  of  their  faith  was  repentance. 
They  proclaimed  a  national  and  imiversal  fast.  They  th\is  humbled  themselves 
as  sinners  before  God.  In  so  doing  they  obeyed  the  voice  of  conscience.  By 
the  joint  authority  of  the  king  and  his  government  a  proclamation  was  issued 
for  public  fasting,  prayer,  and  penitence  on  the  part  of  the  people.  While  they 
cast  themselves  on  God's  mercy,  they  were  to  turn  "  every  one  from  his  evil 
way,  and  from  the  violence  that  was  in  their  hands."  Their  faith  was  but  a 
peradventure ;  their  hope  was  in  God's  mercy.  And  God  repented  when  they 
repented.  He  did  not  change  His  purpose.  He  only  changed  His  method  of 
outworking  His  ptu"pose.  His  are  purposes  of  grace,  even  when  they  seem  to 
be  nothing  but  proclamations  of  wrath  to  the  uttermost.  They  are  given  for 
the  very  purpose  of  bringing  the  sinner  to  salvation  by  bringing  him  to  repentance. 
Why  is  there  no  such  humiliation  before  God  on  account  of  sin,  personal  and 
national,  nowadays  ?  1.  Because  there  are  few  like  Jonah  to  preach  repentance : 
if  they  are  called  to  preach,  to  be  God's  witnesses,  in  whatever  place  or  way 
or  walk  of  life,  they  are  called  to  testify  against  the  world  that  has  not  come  to 
repentance.  2.  Because  the  message  of  God  is  not  seen  to  be  a  matter  of  fact 
as  personal,  and  to  those  who  are  sinners  like  the  men  of  Nineveh  as  terrible  as 
that  of  Jonah  to  Nineveh.  3.  Because  God's  purpose  of  grace  revealed  in  the 
Gospel  is  little  realised  in  its  fulness  and  freeness  of  grace.  Two  things  in  relation 
to  salvation  which  this  history  sets  in  the  clearest  light.  (1)  Repentance  is  the 
fruit  of  faith,  not  the  root.  The  men  of  Nineveh  "  believed  God,"  and  therefore 
they  repented.  So  must  all  sinners.  (2)  Faith  in  God,  when  it  is  living  and 
genuine,  ever  works  by  such  repentance,  where  there  is  such  sin,  personal  or 
national.  Faith  brings  the  sinner  to  God,  as  a  man  who  must  bear  his  own 
burden,  and  answer  to  God  for  his  own  personal  guilt.     {N.  Paisley.)        Jonah's 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi.' 

preaching  : — God  had  delivered  Jonah  ;  but  God's  pardoning  mercy  was  no  plea 
for  negligence  of  duty.  The  Lord  requires  Jonah  to  consider  again  the  message 
with  which  he  was  originally  charged.  God  will  have  His  people  obey  His  will 
instantly,  unreservedly,  and  with  a  full  desire  to  carry  it  out  in  all  things.     I.  The 

SUBSTANCE    OF   THE    MESSAGE    WHICH   JoNAH    WAS    BIDDEN    TO    DELIVEB.       He    ha.S 

to  proclaim  that  destruction  is  nigh  at  hand,  that  evil  awaits  the  city,  and  that 
this  evil  is  the  immediate  act  of  God.  Second  causes  there  may  be,  but  they 
are  only  second.  Most  people  talk  in  their  time  of  trouble  about  God  being 
"  all-merciful."  It  is  true,  but  He  is  also  holy  and  faithful  and  just.  Men 
speak  of  God's  mercy  as  if  it  were  to  set  aside  God's  truth.  II.  The  conduct  of 
THE  NiNEViTES.  They  acknowledged  that  the  message  must  have  come  from 
the  Lord.  External  signs  of  repentance  were  used,  and  external  signs  are  useful 
when  they  express  internal  feeling.  Here  we  find  that  these  outward  signs 
were  to  be  accompanied  by  prayer  for  pardon  and  for  the  averting  of  judgments, 
and  also  by  cessation  from  sin.  III.  The  mercy  of  the  Lord.  He  is  indeed 
more  ready  to  forgive  than  to  pvmish.  Though  there  are  fearful  threatenings 
spoken  in  God's  Word  against  the  impenitent,  there  are  full  and  free  offers  of 
mercy  and  pardon  to  every  soul  that  turns  from  his  wickedness  and  believes  in 
Jesus.     (Montagu  Villiers,  M.A.) 

Ver.  8.  But  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with  sackclotlii,  and  cry  mightily 
unto  God. — The  sin  and  repentance  of  Nineveh : — We  have  in  these  words 
part  of  the  means  which  the  king  of  Nineveh  and  his  nobles  judged  necessary 
for  averting  the  calamities  which  threatened  their  city.  Fasting  and  prayer 
were  only  subsidiary  to  personal  reformation,  1.  The  guilt  and  danger  of  conduct 
which  is  at  variance  with  the  Divine  reqtiirements,  and  let  us  feel  the  necessity 
of  actual  reformation.  These  heathen  felt  that  amendment  of  life  was  the  truest 
devotion.  There  have  always  been  persons  who  have  cherished  the  expectation 
of  acceptance  with  God  while  they  continued  in  sin.  They  divorce  rehgion  and 
morality.  They  would  secure  Divine  favoiu:  by  ritual  observances,  while  their 
conduct  is  in  other  respects  habitually  at  variance  with  the  Divine  requirements. 
The  men  of  Nineveh  may  be  their  reprovers,  and  teach  them  that  they  must 
reform  before  they  can  expect  to  be  forgiven.  2.  The  guilt  and  danger  of  sins 
of  injustice  and  violence,  and  the  necessity  of  relinquishing  them.  These  sins 
are  specially  connected  with  large  cities.  Inadequate  payment  of  labourers.  Grind- 
ing the  faces  of  the  poor.  Reckless  selfishness.  3.  The  necessity  of  individually 
relinquishing  these  and  other  sins  to  which  we  are  addicted.  Men  naturally 
shut  their  eyes  on  their  own  deficiencies.  To  turn  unreservedly  from  sin  unto  God 
is  the  last  thing  which  a  sinner  will  do.  So  the  words  are,  "  Let  them  turn  every 
one."  The  great  question  for  each  to  determine  is,  not  what  are  the  defects 
of  others,  but  what  are  his  own,  and  how  the  demands  and  threatenings  of  revela- 
tion affect  him  in  particular.  The  duty  required  of  us  is,  that  "  every  man  should 
mend  one."  The  principal  lesson  of  this  history  is,  that  we  should  duly  impress 
ova  minds  with  the  guilt,  and  incompatibility  with  a  religious  profession,  of  all 
acts  of  injustice  and  dishonesty.  You  cannot  be  in  friendship  with  God  while 
you  are  at  enmity  with  man.     {Robert  Brodie.) 

Ver.  9.  Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn? — Peace  has  been  prodaimed : — 
During  the  Civil  War  in  America  some  soldiers  of  the  Southern  Army  deserted, 
and  found  themselves  caught  in  a  wood  between  their  own  regiment  and 
the  Northern  lines.  To  go  forward  or  backward  equally  meant  death.  So  here 
they  hid  and  starved,  feeding  on  berries.  Meanwhile  the  Southern  Con- 
federacy was  broken  up,  and  peace  was  made  between  North  and  South.  One 
day  an  officer  riding  through  found  them,  and  challenging  them,  heard  their 
fears.  "  You  have  nothing  to  fear,"  he  said.  "  Peace  has  been  proclaimed. 
You  can  have  all  you  want  by  going  to  the  nearest  village  and  asking  for  it." 
So  it  is  between  the  race  and  God.  Men  want  to  know  that  in  Christ  God  has 
reconciled  the  world  tmto  Himself.  (F.  B.  Meyer.)  Who  can  tell? — This 
was  the  forlorn  hope  of  the  Ninevites.  The  Book  of  Jonah  should  be  exceedingly 
comfortable  to  those  who  are  despairing  because  of  the  wickedness  of  their  times. 
Is  this,  O  God,  Thy  way  ?  Wilt  thou  make  Nineveh  repent  at  the  bidding  of 
one  man  ?  So  skilful  is  He  that  with  the  weakest  instrument  He  can  produce 
the  mightiest  workmanship.  I.  The  miserable  plight  in  which  the  men  of 
NiKEVBH  rotTND  THEMSELVES.     They  were  like  those  in  the  days  of  Noah.     They 


CHAP,  m.]  JONAH.  53 

were  rich  and  mighty  above  all  people.  Locked  in  security,  they  fell  into  abomin- 
able sins.  Their  vices  probably  rivalled  those  of  Sodom.  Suddenly  they  were 
startled  from  their  security,  and  convinced  of  their  sin.  Their  miserable  phght 
consisted  in  three  discoveries — their  great  sin ;  the  shortness  of  their  time ; 
the  terrible  character  of  their  destruction.  II.  Thb  slbndeb  GROimD  which 
THB  NiNEViTBS  HAD  FOR  HOPE.  In  Jonah's  messagc  there  was  no  proclamation 
of  mercy  made.  It  was  the  trumpet  of  the  judge,  but  not  the  silver  trump  of 
jubilee.  He  was  sent  with  a  thundering  commission,  and  he  dealt  it  out  in  a 
thundering  fashion.  The  king's  answer  was,  "  Who  can  tell  ?  There  may 
be  hope."  Another  thing  that  would  cut  ofiE  the  hope  of  the  Ninevites  was,  that 
they  knew  nothing  of  God  except,  it  may  be,  some  dreadful  legends  of  His  terrible 
acts.  They  lacked  another  encouragement  that  we  have.  They  had  never 
heard  of  the  Cross.  Jonah's  preaching  was  very  powerful,  but  there  was  no 
Christ  in  it.  III.  Thb  tjbginq  of  Divtnb  kbasons  wht  wb  should  imitatb 
THE  NiNEViTBS  IN  REPENTANCE.  God,  in  Order  that  you  may  know  His  mercy, 
has  been  pleased  to  preserve  instances  thereof,  that  so  often  as  you  look  upon 
them  you  may  be  led  to  say,  if  such  and  such  an  one  was  saved,  why  may  not  I  ? 
If  you  are  conscious  of  guilt,  your  only  hope  of  deliverance  Ues  in  the  mercy  of 
God.  While  it  will  be  a  happy  thing  for  thee  to  be  saved,  it  will  be  a  serious 
thing  for  Grod  to  save  thee.  God  delighteth  to  save  sinners,  because  this  puts 
jewels  in  His  crown.  He  is  glorified  in  His  justice,  but  not  as  He  is  in  His  mercy. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  uncertain  doom  of  kingdoms  ai  particvlar  times: — 
A  state  of  uncertainty,  a  suspense  between  hope  and  fear,  about  a  matter  of 
importance,  is  a  very  painful  and  anxious  state.  What  can  be  more  important, 
what  more  interesting,  than  our  country  !  When  the  fate  of  ovu*  country  is 
doubtful ;  when  we  can  only  ask  with  painful  solicitude,  What  will  be  the  end 
of  these  things  ?  Every  mind  must  be  agitated  with  doubtful  expectations. 
This  was  the  state  of  Nineveh.  What  was  the  cause  of  its  denunciation  ?  Sin  ; 
national,  epidemical  sin,  against  an  unknown  God.  They  sinned  against  the 
light  of  nature,  and  that  sufficed  to  bring  down  remediless  destruction  upon 
them.  Before  the  fatal  blow  fell  they  had  one  warning  more.  We  have  the 
substance  of  Jonah's  sermon.  They  understood  him  to  plead  for  repentance. 
We  have  a  very  moving  sight  before  us,  a  gay,  magnificent  city  in  mourning. 
The  repentance  does  not  wholly  consist  in  ceremonies  :  they  are  sensible  of  the 
propriety  and  necessity  of  earnest  prayer  to  God,  and  a  reformation  of  life,  as 
well  as  of  afflicting  themselves  with  fasting.  The  light  of  nature  directed  them  to 
this  as  the  only  method  of  deliverance,  if  deliverance  was  possible.  The  case  of  such 
a  people  looks  hopeful.  Yet  so  sensible  was  the  king  of  Nineveh  of  their  demerit 
and  of  the  insufficiency  of  their  repentance  to  make  atonement  for  their  sins,  that 
he  is  doubtful,  after  all,  what  would  be  the  consequence.  "  Who  can  tell,"  h& 
says,  "  whether  God  wiU  turn  and  repent."  Let  us  humble  ourselves  ever  so> 
low,  we  are  not  assured  we  shall  escape.  It  is  natural  to  a  penitent,  while  he 
has  a  full  view  of  aU  his  sins,  in  all  their  aggravations,  to  question  whether  such 
sins  can  be  forgiven  by  so  holy  a  God.  And  Jonah  was  reserved  on  this  point. 
National  as  well  as  personal  repentance  may  come  too  late.  When  a  nation 
is  in  such  a  state  that  no  man  can  certainly  determine  what  will  be  its  doom, 
if  there  be  any  possible  hope,  it  is  only  in  the  way  of  general  humiliation,  earnest 
prayer,  and  public  reformation.  1.  Sometimes  a  nation  may  be  in  such  a  situation 
that  no  man  can  tell  what  will  be  their  doom  ;  whether  the  threatened  vengeance 
will  fall  upon  them,  or  whether  they  shall  escape.  2.  The  event  of  the  present 
war  will  appear  dismally  doubtful  if  we  consider  some  scriptural  prophecies, 
particularly  in  Daniel  and  the  Revelation.  3.  The  event  of  the  present  war, 
and  the  doom  of  our  country  and  nation,  will  appear  dreadfully  uncertain  if  we 
consider  our  national  guilt  and  impenitence.  When  a  nation  is  in  such  a  doubtful 
situation  that  no  man  can  know  its  doom,  if  there  be  any  hope,  it  is  only  in  the 
way  of  repentance,  reformation,  and  earnest  prayer.  This  appears  to  be  the 
only  way  of  hope  on  two  accounts.  (1)  National  sin  has  a  direct  tendency,  in 
its  own  nature,  to  weaken  and  destroy  a  nation.  Repentance,  reformation, 
and  prayer  are  the  proper  cures  for  this  disease.  (2)  This  too  is  the  only  method 
to  turn  away  the  displeasure  of  God,  and  obtain  His  favour  and  protection.  It 
is  only  to  the  penitent  that  promises  of  deUverance  are  made.  National  judgments 
are  inflicted  for  national  sins,  and  therefore  reformation  from  national  sins  ia 
the  only  hopeful  way  to  escape  them.  {S.  Davies,  A.M.)  God's  promises  and 
threatenings  : — There  is  a  simple  distinction  between  the  promises  of  Scripture 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

and  its  threatenings  to  which  we  should  carefully  attend.  That  distinction 
is,  that  the  promises  are  recorded  that  they  may  be  fulfilled,  while  the  threatenings 
are  written  to  prevent  their  fulfilment.  We  see  the  right  influence  of  Jehovah's 
threatenings  in  the  case  of  Nineveh  of  old.  Only  one  thing  could  retard  or  prevent 
its  ruin.  That  was  repentance.  Jonah's  mission  to  Nineveh  was  really  designed 
to  prevent  desolation.  The  threatening  message  was  delivered.  The  heart 
of  man  was  touched,  sin  was  abandoned,  and  misery  was,  through  grace,  averted 
or  postponed.  Here  we  see  the  hopes  and  fears  and  agitations  of  the  Ninevites. 
*'  Who  can  tell,"  &o.  They  had  something  to  encourage,  but  nothing  to  assure. 
They  had  the  forty  days  of  respite.  That  brought  in  conditions  and  hopes.  We 
know  that  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance  ;  but,  in  imparting 
revelation  from  the  unchanging  One,  language  is  employed  which  is  strictly 
applicable  to  man,  in  order  that  man  may  understand  the  truth  imparted.  Human 
feelings  and  affections  are  thus  described  to  the  Divinity,  though  He  be,  in  fact, 
imaffected  by  them  alL  It  is  man  that  changes,  not  God  ;  out  the  language 
employed  can  occasion  no  difficulty  to  any  humble  mind.     {W.  K.  Tweedie.) 

Ver.  10.  And  God  repented  of  the  evil  that  He  had  said  that  He  would  do  unto 
them. — God  repenting : — There  are  certain  passages  of  holy  Scripture  which 
assert  in  the  strongest  way  that  God  cannot  repent,  and  that  He  never  does. 
There  are  certain  other  passages  which  assert,  just  as  strongly,  and  with  as  little 
qualification,  that  He  can  repent,  and  that,  in  fact.  He  has  often  done  so.  Here 
is  an  apparent  contradiction.  The  ordinary  method  of  interpretation  applied 
to  such  texts  is,  to  my  mind,  eminently  unsatisfactory,  and  in  fact  involves 
erroneous  and  pernicious  views  of  the  Divine  nature.  We  are  told  that  the 
passages  which  speak  of  God's  repentance  are  simply  forms  of  speech  to  indicate 
a  change  of  outward  procedure,  but  do  not  imply  any  change  whatever  of  interior 
feeling.  This  theory,  in  order  to  exempt  God  from  those  imperfections  which 
are  connected  with  the  exercise  of  the  affections  and  passions  among  men,  virtually 
denies  to  Him  the  possession  of  any  affections  at  all.  It  makes  Him  simply  a 
Being  of  pure  thought  and  unrelenting  will.  What  a  stupendous  inroad  is  thus 
made  on  the  fulness  and  beauty  of  "  the  glorious  Gospel  of  the  blessed  God  !  " 
I  take  the  words  to  mean  what  we  naturally  iinderstand  by  them — that  God 
did  really  repent — i.e.,  changed  His  mind,  which  is  the  meaning  of  repentance. 
When  He  sent  the  prophet  He  meant  destruction.  When  the  city  was  humbled. 
He  changed  His  mind,  and  waved  the  destroying  angel  home.  There  was  a 
condition  involved  in  the  threat,  and  understood.  God  knew  that  the  city  would 
repent.  Yes,  but  He  also  knew  that  the  city  would  repent  under  commination. 
Why  should  it  be  incredible  that  Grod  "  repents "  or  changes  T  Would  it  not 
be  more  incredible  if  it  were  asserted  that  He  never  does  ?  Are  we  to  suppose 
that  what  constitutes  a  special  perfection  in  the  moral  character  of  a  man  is  an 
imperfection  in  God  ?  God  morally  regards  us  at  any  one  moment  just  as  we 
are.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Repentance  applied  to  Ood  : — As  to  what  Jonah  adds, 
that  God  was  led  to  repent,  it  is  a  mode  of  speaking  that  ought  to  be  sufficiently 
known  to  us.  Strictly  speaking,  no  repentance  can  belong  to  God  ;  and  it  ought 
not  to  be  ascribed  to  His  secret  and  hidden  counsel.  God,  then,  is  in  Himself 
ever  the  same,  and  consistent  with  Himself,  but  He  is  said  to  repent  when  a 
regard  is  had  to  the  comprehension  of  men  ;  for  as  we  conceive  God  to  be  angry 
whenever  He  summons  us  to  His  tribunal,  and  shows  us  our  sins,  so  also  we 
conceive  Him  to  be  placable  when  He  offers  the  hope  of  pardon.  But  it  is  accord- 
ing to  our  perceptions  that  there  is  any  change  when  God  forgets  His  wrath, 
as  though  He  had  put  on  a  new  character.  As  then  we  cannot  otherwise  be 
terrified,  that  we  may  be  humbled  before  God  and  repent,  except  He  sets  forth 
before  us  His  wrath,  the  Scripture  accommodates  itself  to  the  grossness  of  our 
understanding.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  call  confidently  on  God 
unless  we  feel  assured  that  He  is  placable.  We  hence  see  that  some  kind  of  ch  nge 
appears  to  us,  whenever  God  either  threatens  or  gives  hopes  of  pardon  and  recon- 
ciliation ;  and  to  this  must  be  referred  this  mode  of  speaking  which  Jonah  adopts 
when  he  says  that  God  repented.  There  is  a  twofold  view  of  God — as  He  sets 
Himself  forth  in  His  word,  and  as  He  is  in  His  hidden  counsel.  With  regard 
to  His  secret  counsel,  God  is  always  like  Himself,  and  is  subject  to  none  of  our 
feelings;  but  with  regard  to  the  teaching  of  His  Word,  He  is  accommodated  to 
onr  capacities.  God  is  now  angry  with  us,  and  then,  as  though  He  were  pacified. 
He  offers  pardon,  and  is  propitious  to  us.     Such  is  the  repentance  of  God.     Let 


CHAP,  in.]  JONAH.  65 

us  remember,  then,  that  it  proceeds  from  His  Word  that  God  is  said  to  repent. 
{John  Calvin. )  Bepentance,  human  and  Divine : — Jonah's  prediction,  we 
say,  was  not  fulfilled.  But  was  it  not,  in  a  very  true  sense  ?  The  city  was  not 
OYerthrown  in  one  sense,  but  it  was  in  another.  A  moral  revolution  took  place, 
but  it  was  a  revolution.  Nineveh  was  overthrown  by  the  preaching  of  Jonah, 
as  long  afterwards  the  world  was  said  to  be  turned  upside  down  by  that  of  the 
apostles.  This,  of  course,  was  not  what  Jonah  had  in  mind.  It  was  not  that 
the  city  was  destroyed,  in  Jonah's  sense.  The  inhabitants  repented,  and  by  so 
doing  occasioned  God  Himself  to  repent  of  His  purpose  in  relation  to  them.  ITiere 
is,  then,  such  a  thing  as  repentance,  not  only  on  the  part  of  human  beings,  but 
also  on  that  of  the  Divine  Being.  I.  The  eepentancb  of  the  Ninevites.  1.  It 
was  a  sincere  repentance.  "  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned  from  their 
evil  way."  This  settles  the  matter.  It  was  impossible  for  them  to  deceive 
God.  There  is  in  our  fallen  nature  a  tendency  to  the  hateful  sin  of  hypocrisy, 
and  there  are  two  kinds  of  hypocrisy — the  hypocrisy  which  affects  holiness ; 
and  the  hypocrisy  which  affects  penitence.  The  latter  is  the  more  artful,  as  it 
is  the  more  heinous.  2.  It  was  occasioned  by  their  faith  in  God.  "  The  people 
of  Nineveh  believed  in  God."  Faith  in  God  is  certain  to  produce  repentance. 
A  man  cannot  repent  without  repenting  of  his  unbelief  in  God,  and  in  God's  Son. 
3.  It  was  universal.  They  seem  to  have  turned  every  one  from  his  evil  way.  It 
is  probable  that  the  case  of  Nineveh  is  imique  in  this  respect.  It  was  an  earnest 
of  the  universal  repentance  of  mankind.  4.  It  was  exceedingly  prompt.  There 
was  a  necessity  for  promptitude,  seeing  that  a  time-limit  had  been  fixed.  Delay 
in  such  a  case  meant  destruction.  5.  It  originated  at  the  summit  of  society, 
and  spread  downwards  to  its  base.  But  the  repentance  of  the  Ninevites,  sincere 
and  effectual  as  it  was,  did  not  prevent  their  descendants  from  doing  aU  manner 
of  evil,  and  incurring  the  destruction  of  their  city.  II.  Repentance  as  ascribed 
TO  God.  There  is  a  doctrinal  diiliculty  here.  Some  passages  of  Scripture  attribute 
repentance  to  the  Most  High,  and  some  other  passages  deny  that  He  ever  does 
repent.  Truth  may  sometimes  be  formulated  most  conveniently  by  a  paradox. 
God  may  be  said  to  be,  "  unchangeably  changeable."  Illustrate  from  the  thermo- 
meter or  from  the  tides.  As  often  as  a  change  takes  place  in  a  human  being 
from  loyalty  to  disloyalty,  or  vice  versa,  a  corresponding  change  in  God  occurs 
in  relation  to  that  person.  This  change  takes  place  in  the  Moat  High,  not  because 
He  is  changeable,  but  because  He  is  unchangeable.  See  Jer.  xviii.  7-10.  That 
gives  the  changeless  principle  of  God's  government,  and  it  explains  all  the  changes 
in  His  attitude  towards  nations  and  persons.  God  has  often  changed  in  the 
manner  thus  described,  and  that  for  the  simple  and  sufficient  reason  that  He  is 
unchangeable.  If  there  is  one  who  knows  only  too  well  that  he  is  regarded  by 
the  Supreme  Being  with  deserved  displeasure,  let  such  an  one  know  that  a  change 
on  his  part  towards  God  will  result  in  a  corresponding  change  on  God's  part 
towards  himself.  {Samuel  Clift  Burn.)  God's  mercy  vindicated: — The  dealings 
of  God  with  men  have  ever  been  characterised  by  judgment  and  mercy.  God 
always  deals  with  man  according  to  his  works ;  but  the  moral  character  of  those 
works  is  determined  by  the  state  of  the  heart,  and  by  the  motives  from  which 
they  spring.  God  deals  with  man  according  to  his  works.  To  the  penitent 
God  shows  mercy ;  to  the  obedient,  favour ;  to  the  rebellious  and  impenitent, 
judgment.  The  conduct  of  God  towards  the  repentant  Ninevites  was  in  accord- 
ance with  these  general  principles  of  His  moral  government.  I.  God's  repent- 
ance. Repentance  in  man  is  change  of  mind  and  purpose,  issuing  in  change  of 
conduct;  but  repentance  in  God  is  only  change  of  operation  or  administration, 
according  as  man's  conduct  agrees  with,  or  violates,  the  requirements  of  the 
Divine  law.  With  the  Ninevites  God  was  justly  angry.  Their  aggravated 
sins  cried  aloud  for  vengeance,  and  He  determined  to  destroy  them  ;  but  when 
they  turned  away  from  their  sins  He  graciously  withheld  His  avenging  hand. 
This  change  in  God's  dealings,  or  threatened  dealings,  with  the  Ninevites,  was 
not  a  change  of  principle  or  a  change  of  mind,  but  simply  a  change  of  dispensa- 
tion, arising  out  of  their  altered  circumstances.  Repentance  in  man  always 
produces  a  corresponding  change  in  God's  administrations  towards  him.  (Jer. 
xviii.  7-10.)  This  gives  to  the  denunciations  of  God  a  condition .vl  character.  Some- 
times the  condition  is  expressed  in  the  terms  of  the  threatening,  and  sometimes 
it  is  understood.  It  is  as  much  a  principle  of  God's  gracious  government  to 
suspend  the  execution  of  a  threatened  punishment  on  man's  sincere  repentance  as 
it  is  to  execute  it  in  the  case  of  obstinate  and  continued  sin.     Erroneous  notions 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

have  been  adopted  with  respect  to  the  immutability  of  God.  God  is  unchangeable 
in  His  being,  perfections,  and  principles  of  moral  government.  But  in  His  actual 
dispensations  with  man  He  deals  with  him  according  to  the  state  of  his  heart 
and  life.  II.  The  effects  of  God's  repentance  on  Jonah.  Such  an  act 
of  grace  and  forbearance  on  the  part  of  God  ought  to  have  excited  the  devout 
thankfulness  of  the  prophet.  But  Jonah  heard  of  the  reprieve  and  pardon 
not  only  without  joy,  but  with  angry  displeasure.  The  reason  of  his  inhuman 
displeasure  was  a  fear  for  his  own  fame.  Jonah's  unreasonable  anger  will  account 
for  his  unseemly  and  censurable  prayer.  HI.  God's  keproof  of  Jonah,  and 
VINDICATION  of  Himself.  God's  dealings  with  Jonah  place  His  own  character 
in  the  most  gracious  and  amiable  light,  and  in  the  most  affecting  contrast  with 
that  of  the  prophet.  Jonah  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  strong  passions,  and 
easily  excited.  Means  had  been  found,  in  connection  with  the  booth,  the  gourd, 
and  the  worm,  to  arouse  conviction  in  Jonah's  mind,  and  now  God  proceeds  to 
make  more  direct  application.  He  approaches  Jonah  with  mild  and  dispassionate 
language — "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  gourd  ?  "  How  great  the 
patience  that  bore  with  Jonah's  petulance  !  "  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the  gourd ; 
and  should  not  I  spare  Nineveh  ?  "  Whether  this  appeal  of  God  had  any  salutary 
effect  on  Jonah's  mind,  and  led  to  any  improvement  in  his  conduct  or  not,  is 
wholly  unknown.  We  lose  sight  of  Jonah  under  circumstances  extremely  dis- 
advantageous to  him.  He  drops  out  of  history  in  a  bad  temper ;  and  we  have 
little  to  recall  him  to  ovu-  remembrance  but  his  sin,  his  punishment,  and  his  petul- 
ance.    (Thomas  Harding.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Tbbs.  I,  2.  Bat  it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  lie  was  very  angry. — 
The  shortness  of  human  charity: — Why  is  Jonah  so  much  offended  and  so  very 
angry  ?  Surely  there  is  here  some  great  dishonour  to  God ;  or  some  great  enormity 
or  departure  from  the  immutable  and  unchanging  law  of  everlasting  righteousness, 
goodness,  and  truth.  If  neither  of  these  two,  at  least  there  is  some  dreadful  de- 
nunciation of  judgment,  or  some  terrible  threatening,  at  which  the  very  nature 
of  man  doth  tremble.  But  here  is  the  wonder,  there  is  nothing  that  is  any  just 
cause ;  no  cause  at  all  of  any  true  offence,  or  real  provocation.  It  is  a  shame 
to  say  what  is  the  cause.  This  good  man  is  displeased  with  God  Himself,  and  he 
is  offended  at  the  Divine  goodness  and  compassion,  and  that  God  hath  respect  to 
the  repentance  of  sinners.  It  is  strange  that  he  should  be  angry  at  this,  because 
it  is  a  thing  contrary  to  the  sense  of  the  lower  and  of  the  upper  world.  We  have 
found  the  man  of  whom  it  is  spoken  in  the  Gospel,  that  "  his  eye  was  evil  because 
God's  was  good  "  (Matt.  xx.  15).  He  prefers  his  own  conceited  credit  and  esteem 
before  the  lives  and  beings  of  six-score  thousand  persons.  All  God's  denunciations 
against  sinners  are  to  be  understood  with  a  clause  of  reservation.  He  always 
excepts  this  case — if  the  sinner  repent.  If  he  forsake  his  iniquity  he  shall  surely 
live.  That  which  makes  the  wonder  the  greater  is  that  Jonah,  whom  we  find  in 
this  distemper,  is  of  all  the  prophets  the  type  of  Christ.  In  his  temper  and  dis- 
position he  is  no  type  of  .Christ.  That  temper  admits  of  no  apology.  1.  Nothing 
is  more  unreasonable  in  itself.  2.  Nothing  is  worse  for  Jonah  mmself,  and  the 
whole  world  besides  him.  For  what  would  become  of  us  all  if  there  were  no  place 
for  repentance  ?  And  how  should  Jonah  himself  be  pardonable  for  his  present 
distemper  if  God  should  not  allow  place  for  repentance  ?  3.  Nothing  is  more 
unnatrural  in  respect  of  his  office  as  a  prophet.  Was  it  not  his  very  work  to  pro- 
mote repentance  and  reformation  among  sinners  ?  4.  Nothing  worse  can  be 
put  upon  God  than  to  be  represented  as  implacable  and  irreconcilable.  5.  And 
this  wotild  render  men  hopeless  and  desperate  in  the  world.  This  is  not  the  first 
distemper  that  we  find  Jonah  in.  At  first  we  find  him  in  great  refractoriness  and 
disobedience.  Then  we  find  him  stupid  and  senseless,  and  more  blockish  than 
the  idolatrous  mariners.  Then  we  find  him  in  a  case  of  desperate  insolency.  For 
we  have  no  reason  to  think  his  wish  to  be  cast  into  the  sea  came  from  the  greatness 
of  his  faith.  Then  we  find  him  in  a  state  that  is  unnatural,  barbarous,  and  in- 
humane ;  for  he  desired  the  destruction  of  others  just  to  save  his  own  reputation. 
All  these  distempers  are  aggravated  by  his  late  deliverance  in  the  belly  of  the  whale. 
Horeover,  he  is  not  overcome  by  the  declaration  of  the  reason  of  things,  when  it 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  51 

comes  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  Himself.  The  story  leaves  Jonah  without  any 
account  of  his  returning  to  himself,  ana  to  a  due  temper.  1.  Learn  to  consider 
in  how  sad  and  forlorn  a  condition  we  are,  if  God  be  not  for  us  and  with  us. 

2.  How  sin  multiplies  and   grows  upon  us  if  once  we  fall  into  a  distemper. 

3.  Notice  the  great  danger  of  selfishness.  4.  Let  this  be  for  caution  and  admoni- 
tion. Persons  acquainted  with  religion,  if  once  out  of  the  way  of  reason  and 
conscience,  prove  more  exorbitant  than  others.  What  great  care  a  man  should 
take  to  preserve  his  innocence  and  integrity !  For  our  better  secvu-ity  let  us  consider 
— ( 1 )  That  it  is  much  easier  to  prevent  than  to  restrain  sin.  (2)  Let  us  be  very 
wary  and  cautious  of  approaching  evil.  Avoid  self-confidence,  and  ever  keep 
this  confidence — ovu:  sufficiency  is  of  Grod.  It  seems  that  Jonah  did  know  before- 
hand that,  if  Nineveh  did  repent,  God  was  so  gracious  and  merciful  that  He 
would  revoke  the  sentence.  Observe,  then,  how  passion  transforms  a  man.  How 
selfishness  narrows  and  contracts  a  man's  spirit.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  judgment. 
There  is  not  stay  at  all  in  the  way  of  sin.  But  repentance  alters  the  case.  Notice 
how  God  deals  with  man  to  bring  him  to  a  right  mind  when  He  finds  him  in  his 
distemper.  God  deals  with  Jonah  by  reason  and  argument.  What  a  strange 
kind  of  prayer  Jonah's  was !  Indeed,  he  rather  quarrels  with  God  than  prays  to 
Him.  In  prayer  let  us  take  care  of  two  things.  L  That  our  mind  be  in  a  praying 
temper.  2.  That  we  oJBFer  to  God  in  sacrifice  prayer-matter.  Consider  the  person 
with  whom  Jonah  is  displeased.  None  other  than  God  Himself.  Consider  the 
cause  of  his  offence.  He  is  offended  with  God's  goodness,  and  with  sinners' 
repentance.  He  is  offended  that  repentance  takes  effect.  See,  then,  that  you  keep 
out  of  passion,  if  you  would  not  shamefully  miscarry.  Remember  your  own  weak- 
ness and  infirmity,  and  be  modest  and  humble.  Let  us  preserve  our  innocence,  and 
beware  of  running  into  such  heat  of  temper  and  mind.  Take  care  of  selfishness 
and  narrowness  of  spirit.  {B.  Whichcote. )  Contrast  between  the  response  to  Ood 
of  Jonah,  and  of  the  Ninevites  : — 1.  Beware  of  a  spirit  of  selfishness.  2.  Beware 
of  the  peril  of  approaching  your  Creator  in  a  peevish  and  discontented  mood. 
3.  Rejoice  that  under  the  Gospel  the  true  efficacy  of  repentance  has  been  ex- 
plained to  you.  You  know  how  and  why  it  can  be  effective.  {W.  H.  Marriott.) 
Jonah's  anger  : — There  is  one  thing  most  wonderful,  and  that  is,  that  God  should 
be  so  good  as  He  is.  I.  Jonah's  selfishness.  Selfishness  is  one  of  the  last  evils 
that  is  rooted  out  of  the  nature  of  man,  and  it  is  hardly  possible  to  limit  the  extent 
of  the  evil  that  selfishness  works  in  us  ;  it  is  the  great  hinderer  of  good.  Selfishness 
is  at  the  root  of  that  exceeding  anxiety  lest  our  fellow-men  should  undervalue 
us.  The  great  fear  on  the  part  of  Jonah  was  lest  his  dignity  should  suffer  by  the 
repentance  of  the  Ninevites,  and  lest,  therefore,  he  should  lose  his  character  as 
prophet,  and  should  be  spoken  of  as  an  utterer  of  falsehoods.  We  see  connected 
with  it  a  slight  estimation  of  the  life  and  comfort  of  others.  Thus  the  selfish  man 
is  continually  violating  the  spirit  of  the  second  table  of  the  law.  We  find  selfish- 
ness existing  in  a  very  prominent  way  whenever  men  are  found  to  be  murmuring 
at  God's  will,  if  that  will  is  opposed  to  their  own.  II.  The  Lord's  lesson  to  him. 
Now  Jonah  was  disposed  to  show  the  same  rebellious  spirit  as  before,  in  objecting 
to  the  manner  in  which  God  was  dealing  with  Nineveh.  In  dealing  with  him, 
God  gave  him  comfort  to  prevent  his  suffering,  and  then  removed  the  comfort. 
God  thus  deals  with  -as  constantly.  We  all  need  to  be  taught  that  creatiire 
comforts  are  but  vanities,  and  that  our  only  real  comfort  and  consolation  is  in 
the  Lord  Himself.  III.  God's  unchangeable  love.  We  might  have  expected 
that  such  a  man  as  Jonah  God  would  have  chastised  and  banished  from  His 
presence.  What  condescension  we  can  see  in  His  dealings  with  him  !  What  a 
contrast  between  Jonah's  selfishness  and  God's  love.  {Montagu  VUliers,  M.A.) 
Bible  phases  of  indignation  : — Anger  is  not  necessarily  a  proof  of  corruption  of 
the  heart,  but  is  often  an  inseparable  part  of  life.  The  Divine  Creator  has  planted 
in  our  beings  this  self-defensive  attribute  for  noble  and  serviceable  purposes.  See 
the  two  sides  of  this  passion,  as  exemplified  in  the  difference  between  the  anger  of 
Jonah  and  that  of  Jesus.  One  only  shows  the  spirit  of  selfishness,  which  is  fretful 
and  unruly,  while  the  other  shows  the  grandeur  of  a  self-sacrificing  spirit  united 
with  piety  and  love.  I.  The  anger  of  Jonah  is  the  type  op  unrighteous 
PASSION.  Its  sin  consisted  in — 1.  Its  selfish  nature.  It  was  his  own  honour  he 
feared  for,  not  the  glory  of  God.  2.  Its  unjust  character.  He  would  have  had 
God  repudiate  fiis  justice  and  mercy  and  love  to  gratify  a  sinful  prophet. 
3.  Its  uncharitable  folly.  It  was  vindictive.  It  was  not  against  the  evil,  but  the 
good.     II.  The  anger  of  Christ  as  a  type  op  righteous  indignation.     "  He 


58      .^  .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0B.  [chap.  iv. 

looked  round  about  on  them  in  anger,  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their 
hearts."     Contrasting  it  with  Jonah's,  observe  the  following  points.     1.  It  was 
sinless.     2.  It  was  just.     3.  It  was  merciful.     Severity  is  no  token  of  hatred. 
Kingsley  says :  "  The  highest  reason  should  tell  us  that  there  must  be  indignation 
in  God  so  long  as  there  is  evil  in  the  universe."     Hazlett  says:  "  Good-natured 
people  there  are  amongst  the  worst  people  in  the  world.     They  leave  others  to 
bear  the  burden  of   indignation    and   correction."      {Alfred   Buckley.)        The 
anger   of   Jonah : — Servant    of    God    as    he    was,  Jonah    here    displayed    the 
infirmity  of  many  a  good  man  in  his  irritability  and  ill-disposition.     While,  on 
the  other  hand,  a  bad  temper  has  been  described  as  the  "  vice  of  the  virtuous," 
a  good  one  ha*  been  characterised  as  nine-tenths  of  Christianity.     Professor 
Drummond  has  forcibly  pointed  out,  "  that  for  embittering  life,  for  breaking 
up  communities,  for  talung  the  bloom  ofE  childhood,  in  short,  for  sheer  gratuitoxia 
misery-producing  power,  this  influence  of  an  ill-temper  stands  alone."     It  waa 
this  irritable,  testy,  uncontrollable  disposition  which  cast  such  a  reflection  upon 
the  prophet  Jonah  as  he  ran  down  to  the  port  at  Tarshish,  and  fled  from  the  Lord, 
a  disposition  which  appears  to  have  cooled  off  after  having  passed  through  a 
period  of  trial  and  become  repentant,  but  which,  when  God  acted  contrary  to  hia 
expectations,  flamed  out  again,  as  if  he  were  composed  of  combustible  material, 
I.  Jonah's  bad  temper  was  shown  by  the  way  in  which  he  disputed  with 
God.     Jonah  was  neither  willing  to  leave  to  God  the  results  of  his  mission  to 
Nineveh,  nor  ready  even  to  go  to  that  city.     When  God  asks  for  that  implicit 
obedience  to  which  He  has  a  right.  He  does  not  make  an  unreasonable  demand. 
Some  seem  to  think  they  display  a  human  and  rightful  prerogative  when  they 
question  God's  ways  and  authority,  forgetting  that  by  a  thousand  ties  we  are 
bound  to  accede  to  the  Divine  wishes,  and  that  our  wills  are  never  in  a  more 
normal  condition  than  when  they  are  subjected  to  the  One  who  never  errs.     "  Our 
wills  are  ours  to  make  them  Thine,"  said  Tennyson,  and  when  they  will  not  be 
subservient  to  God  a  cvirse  is  pronoimced  upon  them  such  as  that  uttered  by  Isaiah 
when  he  exclaimed,  "  Woe  imto  him   that  striveth  with  his  Maker  " — the  woe 
of  a  conscience  ill  at  eaae,  of  a  soul  insensitive  to  the  Divine  love,  and  a  heart 
shut  out  from  that  blessed  communion  which  is  accorded  to  those  in  harmony 
with  God.     And  this  penalty  fell  upon  Jonah  when  he  argued  and  disputed  with 
God,  who  had  an  absolute  claim  to  an  unquestioned  obedience.     II.  This  bad 
TEMPER  NARROWED  Jonah's  VISION  AND  OUTLOOK.     Intensely  national,  patriotic, 
and  partisan,  he  could  not  see  why  Jehovah  should  display  His  saving  mercy  to 
another  nation,  and  that  so  wicked  as  Nineveh,  when  He  had  made  Israel  His 
chosen,  and  the  sole  depositary  of  His  will.     Why  take  the  children's  bread  and 
give  it  to  dogs  ?     Was  not  salvation  of  the  Jews  ?     He  was  against  a  missionary 
Gospel,  just  as  the  Pharisees  objected  to  theGrospel  being  proclaimed  to  the  publicans 
and  sinners ;  and  as  Peter  was  opposed  to  opening  the  door  to  the  Gentiles,  but 
about  which  his  eyes  were  opened  when  he  saw  the  sheet  let  down  from  heaven, 
and  was  sent  to  the  house  of  the  devout  ComeUus.     Believing  that  God  is  a  gracious 
God,  slow  to  anger,  and  repents  of  the  evil  when  He  sees  a  heart  contrite  and 
penitent,  Jonah,  like  the  elder  son  of  the  parable,  was  angry  when  he  saw  there 
was  a  possibility  of  the  Ninevites  being  saved  from  destruction.     Oh,  how  passion 
will  narrow  one's  vision !    Scarcely  anything  will  as  surely  exclude  a  wide,  impartial, 
and  generous  view  of  things.     Just  as  it  is  said  that  a  frightened  horse  can  see 
little  and  becomes  almost  blind,  so  an  irritable  temper  wiU  narrow  the  creed  and 
sour  the  life.     Just  notice  the  way  which  God  took  to  enlarge  Jonah's  vision  and 
soften  and  mollify  his  disposition.     Sorry  for  the  goiird  ?     Yes,  though  it  was  but 
a  plant,  but  not  sorry  for  the  souls  against  whom  he  had  cried,  that  they  should 
be  overthrown  and  destroyed,  nor  was  he  glad  when  they  repented.     What  a  lesson  ! 
Men  grieve  over  the  loss  of  property,  but  not  over  the  loss  of  souls.     They  repent 
over  the  loss  of  a  cargo,  the  burning  of  a  house,  or  destruction  of  a  church,  but, 
how  pitiable !  there  is  so  little  anxiety  for  the  eternal  loss  of  that  which  is  beyond 
the  price  of  rubies,  so  that  to-day  many  a  man  can  say  truly,  "  No  man  careth 
for  my  souL"    III.  Moreover,  Jonah's  ill-temper  diminished  his  affection 
AND  LOVE  FOE  HIS  FELLOW-MEN.     We  draw  artificial  distinctions  of  soul  values, 
by  esteeming  the  soul  of  an  educated,  wealthy,  and  refined  person  of  more  value 
than  that  of  the  downtrodden  and  humanly  forsaken  one.     But  to  such  a  man 
as  Jonah,  the  prophet  of  God,  or  to  any  Christian  worker,  no  such  distinction 
should  be  made.     And  no  such  discrimination  will  be  made  if  the  right  temper 
_po8sesseB  the  Christian.     We  must  learn  to  love  men,  love  them  broadly,  largely. 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  69 

comprehensively.  But  you  say  there  is  nothing  lovable  in  the  vast  majority  of 
men.  Even  bo  ;  yet,  Cliristif'.n  workers,  you  must  love  men,  for  there  is  no  other 
force  that  will  carry  you  t'lrough,  and  inspire  you  to  the  accomplishment  of 
your  mission.  IV.  Thbotjgh  this  ill-tempeb  Jonah  failed  to  keep  due  aud 
NECESSARY  CONTROL  OF  HIMSELF.  "  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the 
mighty,  and  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit,  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  Oiu:  trouble 
is  not  in  having  strong,  impetuous,  fiery,  passionate  natures.  Who  can  measure 
the  fire  and  passion  in  such  natures  as  Luther,  Whitefield,  Spurgeon,  or  Moody  ? 
They  were  volcanoes,  Niagaras  of  passion,  but  made  serviceable  to  God  and 
humanity.  "  What  a  waste  of  power,"  said  Edison,  as  he  looked  at  the  most 
magnificent  falls  in  the  world  ;  and  when  I  see  deep,  strong,  fiery  natures  spending 
their  vitality  in  petulant  anger  as  did  Jonah,  I  feel  like  saying,  "  What  a  waste 
of  power."  Bring  the  stream  and  electricity  of  your  nature,  and  harness  it  in 
the  service  of  God.  It  is  little  that  the  manufacturer  cares  for  a  small  trickling 
stream  running  through  the  meadows,  but  he  does  value  a  torrent  that  leaps 
from  rock  to  rock,  and  crag  to  crag,  and  rushes  with  furious  energy  through  the 
valley.  Smother  your  passion,  crush  your  anger,  queU  your  wrath?  No;  pour 
them  out  upon  sin.  Let  them  come  down  upon  evil  in  high  and  low  places,  and 
switch  them  on  to  the  waggons  on  the  King's  highway.  "  He  was  very  angry." 
Is  it  unusual  for  the  soul  to  be  angry  with  God  ?  Here  is  a  man  to  whom  God 
gave  a  child  which  was  deformed  in  body,  defective  in  mind,  and  an  object  of  care 
day  and  night,  whish  was  freely  given  by  a  loving  mother.  Some  years  after 
another  child  was  given,  handsome,  plump,  and  the  pink  of  perfection ;  but, 
strange  to  say,  in  a  short  time  it  was  taken,  and  folded  in  the  bosom  of  a  safe 
keeping  God.  Far  from  saying  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  a  spirit  of  petulance  arose 
in  the  father's  bosom,  in  which  he  denied  the  existence  of  God,  and  tmrned  his 
back  upon  love  and  hope,  running  a  swift  coin-se  to  business  ruin  and  moral  failure. 
"  He  was  very  angry."  Shame  !  Pity  !  Keep  the  fiery  steed  in  hand ;  or, 
better  stiU,  give  God  the  reins.  V.  Tms  bad  temper  unfitted  him  to  pass 
INTO  THE  presence  OF  HIS  Maker.  Jonah  was  not  backward  in  talking  about 
dying.  "  0  Lord,  take,  I  beseech  thee,  my  life  from  me,  for  it  is  better  for  me 
to  die  than  to  live,"  and  when  the  sun's  rays  beat  upon  his  head  he  wished  in  himself 
to  die,  and  said,  "  It  is  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live."  Angry  people  are  apt 
to  wish  they  were  dead,  for  when  the  fog  of  passion  and  disappointment  weighs 
upon  the  spirit  the  ill-tempered  man  speaks  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  Is 
a  man  fit  to  die  in  such  a  temper  as  this  ?  {T.  M.  Father  gill.)  Jonah's 
displeasure : — I.  The  nature  of  Jonah's  displeasure  may  easily  be  mis- 
understood. There  are  two  kinds  of  displeasure.  One  is  wrath,  the  other 
is  grief.  The  word  used  of  Jonah  may  mean  either  angry  or  distressed.  Perhaps 
grieved  is  the  proper  idea  here.  Notice  the  impotence  of  mere  external  experience 
in  relation  to  a  person's  inward  disposition.  Jonah  had  passed  through  trying 
erperiences,  yet  he  was  the  same  man.  II.  The  intensity  of  Jonah's  dis- 
pleasure. "  Exceedingly,  and  he  was  very  grieved."  It  was  deep  distress  in 
the  prospect  of  calamity  to  his  own  country.  Sparing  Nineveh  involved  the 
future  destruction  of  Israel.  The  prophet  may  have  foreseen  this.  No  doubt 
the  destruction  of  an  impenitent  heathen  community  would  not  have  appeared 
to  Jonah  so  terrible  as  such  a  thing  must  appear  to  ourselves.  And  if  Jonah  was 
grieved  at  the  escape  of  the  Ninevites  from  death,  he  was  himself  anxious  to  die. 
He  did  not  desire  a  worse  fate  for  them  than  for  himself.  Of  some  men  it  is  said, 
"  their  bark  is  worse  than  their  bite,"  and  Jonah  might  have  been  one  of  these 
men.     III.  The  extreme  distress  of  Jonah  found  expression  in  prayee. 

1.  The  prayer  contains  a  reference  to  a  former  saying  of  the  prophet  himself. 

2.  The  prayer  contains  an  account  of  his  flight.  3.  It  contains  an  accovmt  of 
Jonah's  conviction  concerning  the  Divine  character.  He  knew  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious,  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  of  great  kindness.  4.  It  contains  a  petition  on 
the  prophet's  part  for  death.  An  unbecoming,  as  well  as  unusual,  prayer  ;  but 
the  petition  of  a  noble-minded  man.  He  knew  the  sanctity  of  his  own  life  too 
well  to  commit  suicide.  The  prayer  was  caused  by  his  despondency  in  relation 
to  the  cause  of  God.  {Samuel  Clift  Burn.)  Jonah's  temper  : — Jonah's  spirit  at 
this  time  was  not  worthy  of  the  character  in  which  he  came  to  Nineveh.  Courage, 
indeed,  he  had  shown,  in  raising  his  single  voice  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  the 
midst  of  an  idolatrous  and  wicked  people.  But  he  had  not  yet  learned  compassion 
for  perishing  sinners  ;  or,  if  he  had  any  such  feeling,  it  was  quite  overborne,  for 
the  present,  by  a  selfish  regard  to  his  own  reputation ;  he  was  chagrined  at  the 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [chap.  iv. 

discredit  brought  upon  his  own  predictions  by  the  forbearance  of  God  exercised 
towards  the  Ninevites.  Foolish  man  !  He  had  put  himself  in  the  place  of  (Jod. 
He  had  forgotten,  it  should  seem,  that  he  vbs  sent  to  preach  the  preaching  that 
God  should  bid  him,  and  had  imagined  that  he  was  denouncing  Jonah^s  threaten- 
ings,  and  not  those  of  the  Most  High,  when  he  said,  "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh 
shall  be  destroyed."  Having  put  himself  in  the  place  of  God,  he  vainly  concluded 
that  his  own  credit  was  concerned  in  the  execution  of  the  threatened  judgment. 
But  whosoever  exalteth  himself,  though  it  be  in  the  exercise  of  even  a  Divine 
•ommission,  shall  be  humbled  ; — and  the  sooner  he  is  effectually  humbled,  the 
better  for  himself.  With  respect  to  the  Divine  veracity,  the  vindication  of  that 
may  safely  be  left  in  His  hands  whose  "  word  is  truth."  As  for  the  credit  of  His 
ministers,  it  is,  indeed,  a  very  light  matter  ;  but  that,  too,  may  be  committed  to 
Him  who  has  the  hearts  of  all  men  in  His  hands,  and  who  has  said,  "  Them  that 
honour  Me,  I  will  honour."  (Matthew  M.  Proton,  M.A.)  The  selfish  man  : — 
We  turn  again  to  the  dark  side  of  Jonah's  character  ;  and  very  dark  it  is.  Poor 
man  !  Whom  is  he  angry  with,  and  what  is  the  ground  of  his  displeasure  T  Some 
of  the  most  prominent  evil  tempers  that  break  out  in  the  prophet  on  the  occasion 
are  the  following — 1.  Extreme  selfishness.  There  is  no  principle  in  fallen  man 
that  does  so  much  mischief  in  the  world  as  that  of  selfishness  ;  none  dishonours 
God  more  ;  none  produces  so  much  injury  to  mankind ;  it  prevents  more  good, 
and  produces  more  evil,  than  any  other  temper  of  mind.  Indeed,  every  sin  and 
every  suffering  seem  to  have  their  origin  in  selfishness,  and  to  proceed  from  it  in 
one  way  or  another.  Selfishness  is  sin  essentially.  Self  is  the  fountain  of  evil, 
and  all  sorts  of  sins  are  but  as  so  many  streams  that  issue  from  it.  What  is  self- 
will  ?  It  is  a  contest  between  man  and  his  God  who  is  to  have  his  way.  What 
is  the  real  cause  of  so  much  discontent  and  restlessness  in  the  minds  of  men  ?  It 
is  striving  with  God  whose  will  is  to  be  done.  2.  Jonah  was  a  very  peevish, 
quarrelsome,  and  fretful  man.  He  retains  his  unhappy  temper  of  mind  wherever 
he  goes,  and  however  he  is  treated.  Whether  you  strike  or  stroke  him,  he  snarls. 
Guard  against  this  miserable  temper  of  mind,  which  must  be  painful  to  one's  self, 
disagreeable  to  others,  and  offensive  to  God.  Learn  that  this  peevish,  fretful,  and 
discontented  temper  is  a  stubborn  sin,  difficult  to  subdue,  and  a  disease  which  is 
seldom  cured.  3.  Jonah  betrays  the  greatest  ingratitude  to  his  kind,  indulgent  God. 
Not  one  expression  of  thankfulness  do  we  hear  from  him.  He  is  sullen  and  silent, 
full  of  anger  and  displeasure.  The  ungrateful  man  has  a  bad  soul,  unhappy  in 
himself,  and  disagreeable  to  others ;  he  enjoys  nothing  of  what  he  possesses,  let 
him  possess  ever  so  much.  Possession  and  enjoyment  are  distinct  things.  True 
and  lively  gratitude  is  one  of  the  most  amiable  and  pleasing  of  all  dispositions. 
May  our  wiUs  be  swallowed  up  in  the  will  of  God ;  may  our  spirits  be  satisfied 
with  all  that  God  does  ;  and  may  our  hearts  be  thankful  for  all  His  g'fts,  which 
are  numerous,  free,  precious,  constant,  and  eternal !     (Thomas  Jones.) 

Ver.  2.  And  he  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  said. — The  secret  of  Jonah : — 
In  this  verse  we  have  the  key  to  the  whole  Book  of  Jonah  ;  the  secret,  the  motive, 
both  of  his  character  and  of  h.s  mission.  God  had  sent  the  prophet  to  Nineveh, 
to  threaten  the  inhabitants  of  that  wicked  city  with  the  doom  due  to  their  sins. 
"  God  does  not  always  pay  on  Saturdays,"  says  an  old  proverb,  but  sooner 
or  later  He  pays  every  man,  and  every  race,  the  wages  they  have  earned.  When 
the  Ninevites  were  convinced  that  pay-day  had  really  come  at  last,  that  they 
were  about  to  receive  the  wages  of  their  iniquity,  they  repented  and  tvuned  every 
one  from  his  evil  way.  And  when  they  repented  of  the  evil  they  had  done,  "God 
repented  of  the  evil  He  had  said  He  would  do  unto  them."  That  is  to  say,  when 
they  were  no  longer  sinners,  they  were  to  be  no  longer  treated  as  sinners.  But 
when,  and  because,  God  was  no  longer  angry,  Jonah  became  very  angry.  That 
God  should  "  turn  away  from  the  evil "  He  had  threatened  against  Nineveh  was 
itself  an  evil,  and  a  great  evil,  to  him, — so  unlike  may  men  of  God  be  to  the  God 
whom  they  serve.  Jonah  was  angry,  and  in  his  anger  he  "  prayed  unto  the 
Lord  "  ;  and  in  his  prayer  he  let  out  the  secret  of  his  anger,  and,  indeed,  of  the 
whole  story.  Now,  an  angry  man  may  certainly  do  worse  than  pray.  But  if 
his  prayer  show  that  he  is  angry  with  God,  and  angry  because  God's  mercy  is 
wider  than  his  own,  can  he  do  much  worse  than  pray  such  a  prayer  as  that  ? 
Jonah  was  angry  not  only  because  God's  mercy  was  shown  to  be  wider  than  his 
own,  but  because  he  had  always  known  that  it  would  be.  Jonah's  reluctance 
fiprang  from  his  fear  of  God's  mercy,  his  knowledge  of  God's  humanity.     What 


CHAT,  iv-l  JONAH.  61 

he  was  really  afraid  of  was,  that  God  would  be  too  kind  to  keep  His  word.  If 
the  Ninevites  were  forgiven,  instead  of  destroyed,  why,  then,  he,  Jonah,  would 
be  made  to  look  like  a  fool — a  prophet  who  could  not  read  the  omens,  nor  fore- 
cast the  future,  nor  interpret  the  Voice  that  spake  within  his  heart.  There  is 
no  need,  however,  to  insist  that  Jonah  had  no  other  motive  than  this.  Human 
nature  is  so  complex  that  men  rarely  act  from  a  single  motive.  His  main  sin 
certainly  was  a  want  of  pity  for  his  fellows,  an  egotism  so  profound  as  to  move 
him,  a  sinful  man,  to  reproach  God  for  His  grace  to  man.  He  was  angry  with 
God  for  the  very  reason  which  should  most  of  all  have  induced  him  to  love  Him, — 
because  he  knew  God  to  be  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great 
kindness.  Have  we  mastered  the  great  lesson  of  this  book  ?  Do  we  believe 
that  God  loves  all  men,  without  distinction  of  race  and  creed,  and  willeth  not 
that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  turn  to  Him  ?  There  are  yet  many 
among  us  who,  if  they  never  doubt  God's  mercy  for  themselves,  utterly  disbelieve 
that  God's  mercy,  in  any  efficient  sense,  embraces  the  whole  world.  They  have 
never  thought  nobly  of  God,  but  have  rather  conceived  of  Him  as  altogether 
such  an  one  as  themselves.  No  hope,  however  "  large,"  should  be  unwelcome 
to  a  merciful  man,  who  believes  in  a  God  more  infinitely  merciful  than  himself. 
Even  though  he  be  not  able  to  entertain  it,  it  should  not  make  him  angry.  We 
should  miss  the  moral  of  this  story  were  we  to  conclude  that  we  are  merciful 
simply  because  we  trust  in  a  larger  mercy  than  some  of  our  neighbours.  There 
is  a  taint  of  Jonah's  selfish  jealousy  in  us  all,  of  his  indifference  to  the  fate  of 
others,  so  that  our  comforts,  our  salvation,  our  security  are  assured.  The  better 
we  are,  and  the  better  we  know  ourselves,  the  more  eager  shall  we  be  to  modify 
Jonah's  prayer,  and  to  cry, — "  O  Lord,  I  beseech  Thee,  make  me  to  know  that 
Thou  art  a  gracious  God,  and  full  of  compassion,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous 
in  mercy,  and  repentest  Thee  of  the  evil."     (Samuel  Cox,  D.D,) 

Ver.  3.  It  ia  better  for  me  to  die  tlian  to  live. — la  life  worth,  living? — 
Jonah's  mission,  though  ui  some  respects  strange  and  terrible,  was  one  of  mercy, 
to  lead  the  Ninevites  to  repentance ;  and  Jonah  knew  this  from  the  first.  The 
Lord  could  have  found  another  messenger,  but  He  had  chosen  this  man  for  His 
purpose ;  so  He  brought  him  back,  and  commanded  him  for  the  second  time  to 
go  to  Nineveh,  and  "  cry  the  cry  that  I  bid  thee."  The  mercy  shown  to  Nineveh 
displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  made  him  very  angry.  It  waa  not  merely 
that  he  seemed  to  be  discredited  by  the  issue,  and  made  a  fool  of,  but  he  was 
vexed  and  chagrined  at  what  took  place,  and  boded  no  good  from  it.  He  would 
have  let  the  doom  fall  without  a  warning.  As  Jonah  sat  in  his  booth  there  is 
still  some  lingering  hope  in  his  mind  that  the  threatened  overthrow  may  yet 
take  place.  He  shows  no  sign  of  brotherly-kindness ;  he  does  not  sympathise 
with  the  Divine  philanthropy  that  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked. 
And  so,  when  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment,  he  thinks  it  well  to  be  angry, 
even  imto  death.  He  counts  that  for  him  "  it  is  better  to  die  than  to  live."  It 
is  the  fretting  of  a  wounded  and  disappointed  spirit.  His  words  bring  up  a  question 
that  has  been  asked  again  and  again — Is  life  worth  living  ?  The  question  is 
a  vague  one,  and  really  covers  a  wide  diversity  both  of  meanings  and  mental 
moods.  Life  is  very  different  to  different  men.  The  problem  of  life  will  be 
viewed  differently  by  men  according  to  their  different  standing-point.  We 
must  find  some  standing-point  which  does  not  shift  with  the  century,  or  with 
the  changing  conditions  under  which  we  pass.  Such  is  furnished  us  by  the  reve- 
lation of  God's  purpose  of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  What  we  see  in  Christ  is  the 
very  life  which  is  the  gift  of  God  for  man's  possession.  If  we  would  only  cease 
trying  to  fit  theological  notions  into  a  perfect  system,  and  set  ourselves  to  view 
this  revelation  of  God's  gracious  purpose,  the  problem  of  life  would  be  wonder- 
fully cleared  and  simplified.     (J.  Cidross,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Then  said  the  Lord,  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry. — Anger  reproved : 
— Jonah's  anger  was  not  justifiable  ;  for  it  rose  high  against  God,  and  quarrelled  ' 
with  the  dispensations  of  His  providence  and  grace.  A  man  is  known  by  his 
temper,  as  much  as  by  his  speech  and  behaviour.  The  temper  of  Jonah  was 
peculiar.  He  was  a  man  of  some  goodness.  He  was  a  man  of  prayer  and  a 
prophet ;  yet  his  piety  was  greatly  defective,  and  his  virtues  were  tarnished 
with  much  imperfection.  His  history  exhibits  a  sad  picture  of  pettishness, 
fretfulness,   and  impatience.     I.   The  cibcxjmstakces  of  the  case,  and  the 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

TBMPBR  OF  THE  PROPHET  UNDER  THEM.  Jonah  WES  displeased  exceedingly  because 
God  had  accepted  the  repentance  of  Nineveh ;  that  He  exercised  mercy,  and 
turned  away  His  wrath  from  that  numerous  people.  We  cannot  acquit  him 
of  much  that  was  wrong  on  this  occasion.  He  was  off  his  guard.  He  was  greatly 
influenced  by  a  proud  and  rebellious  spirit.  Henry  observes  of  his  prayer, — 
It  is  a  very  awkward  prayer.  Indeed,  what  could  we  expect  from  a  man  agitated 
with  such  a  temper  ?  How  unhallowed  is  the  petition,  "  Now,  0  Lord,  take, 
I  beseech  Thee,  my  life  from  me."  We  cannot  but  notice  the  long-suffering 
goodness  of  God,  the  tenderness  of  Divine  compassion,  in  the  expostulation  with 
Jonah.  II.  This  temper  of  the  prophet  was  extremely  censurable. 
Is  anger,  then,  in  no  case  allowable  ?  It  may  be  directed  against  sin,  in  ourselves 
or  in  others.  It  was  not  allowable  in  Jonah.  Every  emotion  of  displeasure 
with  the  dispensations  of  God  is  extremely  censurable;  for — 1.  Each  of  them 
is  just.  2.  Most  of  them  are  merciful.  3.  All  of  them  work  together  for  good. 
Then,  "  in  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls."  Self-possession  is  a  great  and 
most    desirable    attainment.     {T.    Kidd.)  Jonah's    vexation  : — With    what 

strange  feelings  of  disappointment  must  every  one  rise  from  the  perusal  of  this 
chapter  !  For  Jonah  fails  again  under  his  disappointment.  What  was  it  that 
displeased  Jonah  ?  The  salvation  of  the  sinners  of  Nineveh  who  repented.  The 
grace  of  God  manifested  in  the  salvation  of  Nineveh.  With  the  Divine  purposes 
of  grace  he  had  no  sympathy.  He  was  displeased  because  he  was  not  a  minister 
of  wrath  to  sinners.  But  how  does  he  give  vent  to  his  displeasure  ?  In  prayer 
to  God.  He  upbraids  God  for  being  a  gracious  God,  merciful,  slow  to  anger, 
and  of  great  compassion,  and  for  having  resolved  to  manifest  this  grace  of  His 
character  in  the  salvation  of  this  great  city.  For  what  does  he  pray  ?  For 
death  to  himself,  miless  God  would  give  up  Nineveh  and  its  inhabitants  to  death 
and  destruction.  This  is  the  thing  which  he  says  in  his  heart's  desire  and  prayer 
before  God.  Jonah  even  seems  to  say  that  he  has  not  repented  of  going  to 
Tarshish,  but  rather,  in  his  present  mood,  repents  of  returning  and  going  to 
Nineveh,  after  he  received  the  second  call.  What  is  this  but  to  say  that  he  repents 
of  his  repentance  ?  Every  feeling  was  sacrificed  to  resentment  at  the  non-fulfil- 
ment of  his  prophecy.  If  forty  days  passed  and  Nineveh  were  not  overthrown, 
what  would  men  say  of  Jonah  and  his  prophecies  ?  He  would  have  sacrificed 
Nineveh  to  a  point  of  honour,  to  a  feeling  of  pride  or  vanity,  to  a  thought  of 
personal  interest  or  aggrandisement,  to  public  opinion,  or  national  bigotry  and 
sectarian  spite.  Such  is  selfishness  when  it  stands  up  barefaced  to  proclaim 
itself  in  all  its  nakedness  before  God.  Now  admire  the  forbearance  of  God. 
All  He  said  in  answer  to  this  prayer  of  mixed  pride  and  petulance  was,  "  Doest 
thou  well  to  be  angry  ?  "  God  is  not  angry,  though  Jonah  is  angry.  But  a 
rebuke  is  not  the  less  severe  that  it  is  administered  in  a  spirit  of  mild  and  gentle 
love  ;  and  such  surely  is  the  spirit  in  which  God  deals  with  Jonah's  conscience  ; 
not  answering  the  fool  according  to  his  folly.  With  this  question,  like  an  arrow 
stuck  in  his  spirit,  God  leaves  the  angry  man  to  himself.  Jonah  gave  no  answer. 
Anger  is  sullen,  and  sullenness  is  silent.  He  went  out  to  the  east  of  the  city, 
made  a  booth  to  shelter  himself  from  the  sun,  and  over  this  a  large-leafed  gourd 
quickly  grew.  Jonah  began  to  be  better  pleased.  The  next  day  the  gourd 
withered,  and  Jonah  was  exposed  and  distressed.  Then  God  asked  His  question 
again,  "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  gourd  ?  "  Now  Jonah's  vexation 
rises  ;  he  justifies  his  anger,  and  says  to  God  that  he  has  good  cause  to  be  offended, 
and  even  weary  of  life.  Then  God  interpreted  the  sudden  withering  of  the  gourd. 
Out  of  his  own  mouth  Jonah  was  judged.  He  was  pitiful  towards  a  gourd,  and 
complained  of  God's  being  pitiful  towards  myriads  of  immortal  souls.  God 
silences  all  cavil  respecting  His  present  work  of  providence ;  He  sets  at  rest  all 
controversy  respecting  His  purpose  of  grace  to  sinners,  like  the  men  of  Nineveh, 
by  an  appeal  to  Jonah's  own  conscience.     And  Jonah  is  speechless.     Leam — 

1.  That  in  the  end  God's  purpose  of  grace  in  the  salvation  of  sinners  will  be  justified. 

2.  Want  of  sympathy  with  God's  purpose  of  grace  and  salvation  to  sinners  is 
a  common  sin.  3.  This  want  of  sympathy  betrays  itself,  in  selfishness  like  Jonah's, 
in  self-seeking,  self-pleasing,  self-indulgence.  4.  God  is  still  rebuking  this  sin 
of  selfishness,  or  want  of  sympathy,  as  He  rebuked  Jonah  here,  both  in  His  Word, 
and  in  His  providence.  (A'^.  Paisley.)  Jonah  and  the  passions  : — This  chapter 
presents  the  weakness  of  human  nature  ;  the  illusion  or  the  passions  ;  the  bad 
effects  that  flow  from  the  want  of  self-government.  Here  is  a  prophet,  an  advocate 
of  righteousness,  and  a  denouncer  of  the  judgments  of  heaven,  fallen  into  rather 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  68 

disgraceful  circumstances,  forgetting  the  dignity  of  his  oflBce,  and  losing  the 
command  of  himself ;  discomposed  and  agitated  by  passion.  And  what  was  the 
cause  t  His  work  seemed  to  be  a  failure,  and  he  would  rather  see  that  populous 
city  laid  in  ashes,  than  that  the  least  imputation  should  fall  upon  his  own  prophetic 
character.  To  him  came  the  expostulating  voice  of  God.  "  Doest  thou  well 
to  be  angry  ?  "  The  mild  rebuke  was  ineffective.  Then  came  the  appeal,  "  Doest 
thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  gourd  ?  "  Stung  with  rage,  and  overcome  by  his 
passion,  the  prophet  replied,  "  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death."  Angry  ? 
With  whom  ?  With  God,  the  Father  of  mercies.  For  what  ?  For  pardoning 
a  vast  multitude,  all  humbled  in  dust  and  ashes  before  Him.  Could  a  small 
personal  interest  plead  against  the  voice  of  nature,  and  harden  this  prophet's 
heart  against  every  sentiment  of  humanity  ?  It  is  the  nature  of  the  passions 
to  concentre  oiur  views  in  one  glowing  point,  and  thus  cause  us  to  overlook  what- 
ever might  allay  their  fervour.  Hence  the  undoubting  confidence  with  which 
the  impassioned  mind  insists  upon  its  own  rectitude,  and  even  glories  in  the  violence 
of  its  emotions.  Nor  is  it  the  angry  and  revengeful  only ;  the  voluptuous,  the 
ambitious,  and  distempered  minds  of  every  description  all  find  specious  arguments 
to  reconcile  the  indulgence  of  their  own  will,  and  their  personal  gratification, 
with  the  general  good  ;  at  least,  to  palliate,  if  they  cannot  altogether  justify, 
their  conduct,  from  the  inevitable  pressure  of  events  and  peculiarity  of  situation. 
We  cannot  but  be  astonished  at  the  height  to  which  Jonah  s  mind  was  inflamed — 
at  the  degree  in  which  his  feelings  were  exasperated.  How  weak  is  man  !  When 
clouded  with  passion,  his  boasted  reason,  instead  of  disentangling  the  perplexity 
of  his  affairs,  or  impelling  him  to  act  wisely  and  virtuously,  often  serves  only 
to  aggravate  his  misery,  and  to  justify  him  in  his  perverseness.  During  this 
temporary  insanity  all  things  upon  which  the  eye  is  fixed  appear  enlarged  and 
gigantic.  Into  what  extravagancies,  what  miseries,  what  crimes  are  men  precipi- 
tated for  want  of  learning  and  practising  the  art  of  self-government.  How 
greatly  ought  we  to  be  upon  oiu:  guard,  not  only  against  the  violence,  but  against 
the  illusion  of  the  passions !  It  is  certainly  in  our  power,  by  the  vigorous  exercise 
of  our  mental  faculties,  to  reduce  the  objects  which  are  magnified  and  distorted 
by  the  magic  of  passion  to  their  natural  shape  and  just  dimension.  Change 
of  scene  will  often  help  us  in  this  self-mastery,  and  time  has  a  quieting  power. 
Devout  and  regular  attendance  on  the  duties  of  religion  will  greatly  favour  and 
shorten  the  process,  and  render  our  passage  through  the  tempestuous  region 
of  the  passions  not  only  safe  but  salutary.  Let  the  considerations  which  reason 
and  religion  present  induce  calmness  of  spirit,  and  "  give  rest  to  our  souls." 
The  shortness  of  life,  the  emptiness  of  worldly  pleasures,  the  approach  of  eternity. 
Within  the  hallowed  round  of  religion  all  is  peace.  (P.  Houghton.)  Jonah, 
ike  petulant  man : — I.  The  reason  of  Jonah's  petxtlance.  Why  was  Jonah 
angry  ?  The  highest  and  noblest  success  of  preaching  is  in  its  constructive  and 
saving  effects,  not  in  its  destructive  results.  But  Jonah  thought  otherwise. 
To  him  destruction  meant  success,  but  salvation  he  thought  failure.  II.  The 
BESORT.  Whither  did  he  flee  in  his  petulant  fit  ?  "  Unto  the  Lord."  Can  a 
man  in  a  passion  pray  ?  Jonah's  prayer  was  a  perverted  privilege.  He  made 
it  the  medium  of  access  to  God  for  self-vindication  and  Divine  vituperation. 
This  is  the  first  attempt  at  excusing  himself  for  going  to  Tarshish.  The  greatness 
of  Grod's  mercy  was  his  present  grievance.  Jonah's  prayer  closed  with — HI.  A 
BEQUEST.  It  was  as  unreasonable  as  it  was  imjustifiable.  Self-will  prompted 
it,  and  peevishness  uttered  it.  "  My  reputation  as  a  truth-speaking  prophet 
will  be  slain,  therefore  I  prefer  being  slain  myself."  What  cowards  disappointed 
expectations  make  us.  IV.  Petulance  divinely  questioned.  The  question 
has  a  sting  which  enters  deeply  into  Jonah's  soul.  Physicians  probe  woimds 
before  they  heal  them.  Temper  is  the  shadow  of  the  tempter.  V.  Petulance 
IN  betibement.  Temper  generally  seeks  solitude  when  its  tide  is  ebbing.  Sulks 
like  to  mope  by  themselves  in  seclusion.  VI.  Petulance  subjecting  Jonah 
to  inconveniences.  Petulance  is  the  parent  of  manifold  discomforts — physical, 
mental,  social,  moral,  ecclesiastical.  It  is  the  multiplier  of  life's  sorrows,  the 
inventor  of  ghostly  troubles,  the  despotic  subjector  to  manifold  inconveniences. 
Vn.  Petulance  under  Divine  symbolic  cobbection.  The  gourd  is  to  be 
the  means  of  physical  amelioration,  and  then  the  medium  of  symbolic  spiritual 
correction.  Jonah  learned  this  lesson.  If  the  perishing  of  a  mere  gourd  was  a 
source  of  great  grief  to  him,  how  infinitely  more  painful  to  God  would  be  the 
destruction  of  multitudes  of  intelligent  beings.     (J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.)        The,  recur ' 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

fence  of  old  sins  after  repentance  : — When  Jonah  saw  that  the  threatened  ruin 
came  not, — "  it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  he  was  very  angry."  Jonah 
lived  and  served  Grod  under  the  old  covenant,  which  spoke  chiefly  of  Divine  judg- 
ments, and  comparatively  little  of  Divine  mercy.  Moreover,  he  patriotically 
dreaded  the  growing  power  of  the  enemies  of  his  race.  He  was  moved,  even 
to  anger,  at  the  sight  of  God's  mercy  to  the  sinner.  Though  in  this  troubled 
condition,  Jonah  could  pray,  and  complain  to  God.  God  dealt  tenderly  with 
him.  God  even  withholds  any  reproof  or  censure.  He  but  seeks  to  teach  His 
servant  by  a  sign,  such  as  might  personally  touch  his  heart.  The  goiurd  spnmg 
up.  The  gourd  withered.  Then  God  pleaded  with  His  servant,  bidding  him 
to  think  how,  if  he  were  grieved  for  the  plant,  how  much  more  Grod  must  desire 
to  spare  the  great  city.  Let  us  take  home  a  solemn  warning.  How  striking 
it  is  that  even  in  a  prophet's  soul  the  same  dispositions  he  had  renounced  when 
he  returned  to  God  could  rise  up  again,  and  overcome  him  !  Yet  this  is  what 
we  are  all  liable  to.  Old  temptations,  old  passions,  rise  up  again,  and  sometimes 
with  even  stronger  force,  because  of  having  been  long  kept  back.  Repentance 
really  is  a  state  to  be  continued  and  persevered  in.  Contrition  is  a  power  that 
is  to  penetrate  the  soul,  to  make  it  and  to  keep  it  tender  and  soft ;  and  this  cannot 
be  at  once.  Remember  our  Lord's  words,  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into 
temptation."  To  cease  from  a  penitent  state  of  mind  till  sin  is  wholly  vanquished 
is  for  a  soldier  in  some  dangerous  country  to  lay  down  his  arms  and  sleep,  forgetful 
of  the  danger  of  a  night  attack.  Why  did  Jonah  become  angry  ?  Because 
he  had  not  learned  what  he  might  have  learned  of  the  character  of  God.  What- 
ever may  be  the  ordering  of  the  mysterious  destiny  that  besets  us,  is  it  not  a 
creature's  true  condition  to  adapt  his  purposes  and  his  feelings  to  the  purposes 
of  his  Creator?  {T.  T.  Carter.)  Uses  of  anger: — There  is  an  anger  that  is 
sinful,  and  there  is  an  anger  which  is  not  sinful.  The  difference  lies  not  so 
much  in  the  character  or  even  the  degree  of  the  emotion,  but  rather  in  the  motive 
which  rouses  it  and  the  object  towards  which  it  is  directed.  Jonah's  anger 
was  that  of  a  mortified  vanity  and  a  wounded  self-love  ;  it  was  the  anger  of  bodily 
discomfort  and  an  insubordinate  will ;  the  anger  of  a  most  irrational  jealousy, 
of  an  utterly  selfish  and  heartless  pride.  Sometimes  we  read  of  anger  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  we  see  it  having  place  in  the  heart  of  absolute  love 
and  goodness,  where  selfishness  is  a  name  imknown,  and  where  yet  the  very  fire 
which  warms  and  illuminates  is  a  fire  also  of  consuming  fierceness  towards  the 
evil  which  will  not  have  it  for  its  good.  The  maxim  "  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not " 
has  a  voice  for  all  of  us.  Anger  need  not  be  sin,  but  in  human  hearts  it  always 
borders  upon  it.  Anger  cherished  and  fostered  is  a  sin  at  once.  Being  angry 
without  sinning  is  an  important  point  in  Christian  ethics.  L  There  is  a  feeling 
to  which  we  give  the  name  of  moral  indignation.  We  thus  distinguish  it  from 
other  kinds  of  anger,  more  or  less  selfish  and  self-asserting,  such  as  anger  at  an 
inconvenience,  at  a  slight,  at  a  disappointment,  or  even  at  a  providence.  Of  this 
kind  are  all  those  broodings  over  the  superior  advantage  or  happiness  of  other 
ranks  or  other  people,  over  the  circumstances  of  the  station  or  the  education 
or  the  success  in  life,  over  the  events  which  make  a  home  dreary,  or  over  the 
natural  temperament  which  makes  a  heart  gloomy,  or  over  the  peculiar  predis- 
positions and  tendencies  which  make  it  doubly  diflBcult  to  be  good, — all  of  which, 
when  thoroughly  sifted,  are  a  "replying  against  God."  Moral  indignation  is 
characterised  chiefly  by  this,  that  it  is  quite  unselfish.  It  is  the  feeling  that 
rises  in  the  breast  of  a  man  on  seeing  the  ill-treatment  of  an  animal,  a  child,  or 
a  woman.  To  stand  by  and  see  these  things  without  remonstrance  or  without 
interference  is  no  forbearance :  it  is  cowardice,  it  is  unmanliness,  it  is  sin.  In 
such  cases  to  be  angry  is  a  virtue.  It  is  a  higher  exercise  of  the  same  virtuous 
indignation,  to  feel  where  it  does  not  see — where  it  only  reflects  and  meditates 
■upon  the  misery  and  the  wickedness  and  the  living  death  which  hangs  so  heavily 
and  so  hopelessly  upon  the  world.  2.  There  is  place  also  for  anger,  not  only  in 
the  contemplation  of  wrong,  but  in  the  personal  experience  of  temptation.  There 
is  an  indignation,  even  a  resentment,  even  a  rage  and  fury,  which  may  be  employed 
without  offence  to  the  Gospel,  in  repelling  assaults  upon  our  peace  and  virtue. 
"  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not "  has  often  been  exemplified,  in  its  truth  and  power, 
in  the  experience  of  the  man,  yoiint^  or  old,  who  would  none  of  the  tempter's 
enticements,  or  of  the  companionship  of  the  profligate.  3.  There  is  a  place  for 
moral  indignation  in  connection  with  the  great  personal  tempter.  {C.  J. 
Vaughan,  D.D.)  . 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  66 

Vers.  5-11.  So  Jonah  went  out  of  the  city. — Ood'a  expostvlation  with  Jonah  : — 
We  may  presume  that  Jonah  had  two  reasons  for  going  out  of  Nineveh.  One 
was,  that  he  might  provide  for  his  personal  safety.  The  other,  that  he  might 
witness  the  execution  of  Jehovah's  threatening,  and  be  a  spectator  of  the  ruin 
which  he  had  himself  predicted.  With  this  view  he  went  to  the  east  side  of 
Nineveh,  perhaps  because  there  was  an  eminence  where  he  would  be  secuure  from 
danger,  and  from  which  he  could  survey  the  wide  extent  of  the  devoted  city. 
Whatever  were  the  images  of  ruin  which  presented  themselves  to  the  mind  of 
Jonah,  it  is  certain  that  he  looked,  nay,  that  he  longed,  for  the  destruction  of 
the  city.  What  a  contrast  to  our  blessed  Lord  looking  down  upon  Jerusalem 
from  the  Mount  of  Olives.  What  forbearance  and  condescension  Jonah  had 
experienced  at  God's  hand  !  The  very  mildness  of  the  Divine  expostulation 
ought  to  have  made  him  ashamed  of  his  folly  and  perverseness.  But  God's 
reproof  was  disregarded,  and  we  have  now  to  notice  the  other  method  which  God 
adopted  in  order  to  bring  him  to  a  better  mind.  The  gourd  relieved  Jonah  from 
much  physical  suffering,  and  by  diverting  his  attention  from  the  bitter  disap- 
pointment over  which  he  had  been  brooding,  it  helped  materially  to  tranquillise 
his  mind.  Brief,  however,  was  the  stay  of  the  gourd,  and  of  his  tranquillity. 
A  worm  ruined  the  gourd,  Affictions  seldom  come  single.  Sim  and  wind  followed 
loss  of  gourd.  Jonah  felt  his  very  life  a  burden.  When  men  set  their  hearts 
upon  earthly  treasures,  and  forget  their  obligations  to  the  Giver  of  all  good,  they 
are  ill  prepared  for  encountering  adversity.  Then  their  days  are  days  of 
darkness,  and  they  become  weary  of  life  without  being  prepared  for  death.  What 
was  the  design  of  the  peculiar  trial  to  which  Jonah  waa  subjected  ?  The  trial 
was  sent  to  convince  him  of  his  sin  in  wishing  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  in 
opposition  to  the  will  of  God,  and  for  the  sake  of  maintaining  his  own  credit  as  a 
prophet.  Instruction  had  to  come  to  him  by  the  way  of  chastisement.  But 
pride  perverts  the  understanding,  and  passion  darkens  it ;  and  when  these  un- 
happy influences  are  at  work,  men,  when  visited  with  trouble,  are  slow  to  perceive 
the  end  for  which  God  afflicts  them.  Thus  it  was  with  Jonah.  See  God's  reproof 
of  the  prophet,  as  given  in  ver.  11.  He  had  sighed  very  bitterly  over  the  premature 
decay  of  the  mere  gourd ;  should  he  not  have  had  pity  on  the  populous  city  ? 
Thus  God  reproved  Jonah,  and  condescended  to  vindicate  His  own  procedure. 
With  His  solemn  and  touching  expostulation  the  book  closes.  Learn  from  the 
case  of  this  prophet  the  indispensable  necessity  of  cultivating  an  humble  and 
self-denying  spirit,  and  of  guarding  with  holy  jealousy  against  any  such  feelings  as 
would  prompt  us,  on  the  one  hand,  to  arraign  the  equity  of  Jehovah's  dispensations, 
when  they  seem  to  be  averse  to  oiu*  personal  comfort  or  our  fancied  honour, 
or  would  prevent  us,  on  the  other,  from  cherishing  compassion  for  any  of  our 
fellow-creatiu'es,  or  even  for  the  beasts  that  perish.  And  let  us  be  encouraged, 
by  the  view  here  given  us  of  the  character  of  God,  to  approach  Him,  in  the  exercise 
of  faith  and  penitence,  by  the  way  of  His  appointment.  He  dehghteth  in  mercy. 
Beware  lest  we  should  be  found  to  despise  the  goodness  and  forbearance  of  God. 
(David  Cowper. )  Out  of  sympathy  with  God  : — Prom  first  to  last,  in  this  book, 
we  have  an  exhibition  of  God's  mercy  in  all  its  greatness  and  heavenly  grandeiu-, 
and,  as  contrasted  with  this  in  the  most  forcible  way,  an  exhibition  of  man's 
littleness.  The  exhibition  of  mercy  on  Grod's  part  is  of  the  richest  and  most 
gracious  kind.  Jonah  in  his  conduct  was  but  a  representative  of  his  nation. 
What  he  did  and  felt  as  an  individual,  they  would  have  done  and  felt  as  a  nation 
in  like  circiunstances  ;  and  the  one  great  piu-pose  of  the  book  seems  to  be  to 
prove  how  wrong  he  was  in  his  unwillingness  to  appreciate  God's  mercy  towards 
the  Gentiles,  in  order  that  his  fellow-countrymen,  who  had  exactly  the  same 
ideas,  might  take  a  warning  from  him,  and  give  up  their  exclusive  spirit  and 
haughty  bearing  towards  other  nations.  We  are  often  in  danger  of  sinning  in 
the  same  way  as  Jonah  and  the  Jewish  people.  There  are  times  when  we  are 
inchned  to  take  narrow  and  exclusive  views  of  God's  mercy.  I.  Jonah's  dis- 
PLEASTTBB.  He  went  out,  and  sat  on  the  east  of  the  city.  He  made  himself 
a  booth,  a  mere  hut  of  branches.  There  he  sat  and  watched  the  city  to  see 
what  would  become  of  it.  He  had  hoped,  perhaps,  that  fire  would  come  from 
heaven  and  destroy  Nineveh,  as  Sodom  was  destroyed  of  old.  But  no  such  hope 
was  to  be  realised.  The  fortieth  day  arrived,  and  no  destruction  took  place. 
Why  was  Jonah  so  displeased  at  this  grand  exercise  of  God's  mercy,  at  this  triumph 
of  mercy  over  judgment  ?  In  some  measure  it  may  be  accoimted  for  on  natural 
causes.     He  may  have  been  experiencing  that  depression  of  spirit  which  is  the 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {.chap.  it. 

natural  result  of  physical  weakness,  produced  by  bodily  or  mental  toil.  Mistaken 
zeal  for  God  may  also  in  part  account  for  the  prophet's  displeasure.  He  may 
have  fancied  that  the  Ninevites  were  not  in  a  fit  state  to  appreciate  mercy. 
Personal  pride  also  had  some  share  in  it.  It  is  hard  for  a  man,  even  when  a 
prophet  of  God,  to  forget  himself  in  doing  God's  work.  He  was  afraid  that  the 
Ninevites  would  despise  him  as  a  prophet  of  lies.  A  more  satisfactory  reason  than 
these  must  be  found.  Jonah's  displeasure  resulted  from  the  fact  that  his  exclusive 
love  for  his  own  covmtry  and  his  own  people  caused  him  to  have  no  sympathy 
with  this  extension  of  God's  mercy  to  a  Gentile  people.  To  his  way  of  thinking, 
Nineveh's  being  spared  was  like  the  strengthening  and  prospering  of  his  coimtry's 
greatest  enemy.  Taking  such  a  view  of  the  case,  he  had  no  sympathy  whatever 
with  God's  mercy  being  extended  to  them.  In  God's  dealings  with  Nineveh 
there  was  a  glorious  revelation  of  many  mercies  yet  in  store  for  the  Gentiles.  If 
Jonah  saw  that  vision,  that  "  first  fruits  "  of  mercy  to  the  Gentiles,  he  tmmed 
away  from  the  sight  and  shut  his  eyes.  It  did  not  agree  with  another  vision, 
a  picture  of  his  own  fancy — the  lasting  greatness  of  the  Jewish  people  as  the 
exclusive  people  of  God.  Jonah  came  to  a  better  mind  afterwards.  His  heart 
was  enlarged,  and  his  sympathies  widened,  when  God  spoke  to  him.  It  was  then 
that  he  wrote  this  story.  11.  God's  plea  in  vindication  of  His  sparing  mbbct. 
There  is  something  wonderful  in  this  condescension  on  God's  part  to  argue  with 
the  prophet  and  to  justify  Himself.  He  shows  him  the  folly  and  the  wrongness 
of  his  displeasure.  But  He  has  to  prepare  Jonah's  mind  first  of  all.  1.  He  begins 
by  taking  away  Jonah's  displeasure.  An  angry  man  cannot  look  all  round  a 
question ;  he  takes  a  one-sided  view,  and  keeps  to  that.  And  Jonah,  before 
he  can  see  the  full  meaning  of  Grod's  mercy,  must  become  calm,  and  rid  himself 
of  all  his  vexation.  This  God  did  when  He  prepared  the  "  gourd,"  and  caused 
it  to  overshadow  the  prophet.  This  plant  is  of  exceedingly  quick  growth.  It 
is  chiefly  remarkable  for  its  leaves.  Only  one  leaf  grows  on  a  branch,  but,  being 
large,  sometimes  measuring  more  than  a  foot,  and  spread  out  in  the  shape  of  an 
open  hand,  their  collective  shade  would  afford  excellent  shelter  from  the  heat 
of  the  sun.  There  was  nothing  miraculous  in  the  fact  of  this  plant  springing 
up  beside  Jonah's  resting-place,  but  if  the  words  be  taken  literally,  the  develop- 
ment of  the  plant  so  quickly  is  certainly  miraculous.  The  Ruler  of  nature  is 
here  working,  not  contrary  to,  but  in  harmony  with,  and  yet  above,  natural  law. 
Under  the  shelter  of  this  plant  Jonah's  spirits  revive,  displeasm-e  vanishes,  and  he 
who  yesterday  was  exceedingly  displeased  is  now  found  "  exceeriing  glad."  Jonah 
is  now  in  a  better  state  of  mind  to  listen  to  God.  2.  But  God  has  something 
more  to  do  before  He  speaks  to  Jonah.  Comfort  is  to  be  followed  again  by  dis- 
comfort. The  gourd  withers,  and  a  "  vehement  east  wind  "  arises.  This  was 
not  as  our  east  winds.  It  was  the  sultry  and  oppressive  wind  which  blows 
in  the  summer  months  across  the  vast  Arabian  desert,  and  produces  universal 
languor  and  relaxation.  Thus  exposed,  the  prophet  sinks  down  into  weariness 
and  languor.  Sorrow  comes  over  him,  and  he  longs  to  die.  Now  the  voice  of 
Grod  comes  to  him.  "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  gourd  ?  "  Let  us  have 
a  clear  idea  of  the  point  on  which  God's  argument  turns.  It  is  neither  the  gourd 
nor  the  worm  that  God  lays  hold  of  in  His  plea,  but  Jonah's  sorrow  for  the  gourd. 
The  gourd  was  a  loss  to  the  man,  for  which  he  grieved.  But  it  was  more  and 
better  than  a  selfish  regret.  Man  has  a  sympathy  with  all  life,  not  only  in  the 
animal,  but  also  in  the  vegetable  world.  Jonah  pitied  the  gourd,  with  its  short 
life.  Then  came  further  sublime  Divine  pleadings.  In  the  light  of  heaven  Jonah 
now  sees  his  unreasonableness.  AU  his  fault  lay  in  not  allowing  God  to  have  the 
same  sympathies  as  he  had  himself.  What  was  a  gourd  compared  with  the  great 
city  of  Nineveh  ?  Yet  Jonah  pitied  the  one,  and  was  angry  because  God  had  pity 
upon  the  other ;  Jonah  was  aU  wrong,  and  he  sees  it  now  and  is  silent.  Silently  and 
in  shame  he  rises  and  goes  home  to  his  coimtry  and  to  his  people,  to  tell  them 
how  wrong  he  was,  that  they  might  know  how  right  God  was.     (James  Memies. ) 

Ver.  6.  And  the  Lord  God  prepared  a  gourd. — The  Eastern  gourd : — Is 
there  any  gourd  in  Palestine  of  growth  so  rapid  as  to  lay  a  foundation  for  the 
statement  that  Jonah's  grew  up  in  a  night  ?  Certainly  not.  Without  any  of 
that  anxiety  about  the  how  and  the  possible  in  miracles,  we  may  remark  that 
there  is  an  economical  propriety  in  selecting  this  vine  rather  than  any  other, 
and  for  several  reasons.  It  is  very  commonly  used  for  trailing  over  temporary 
arbours.     It  grows  with  extraordinary  rapidity.     In  a  few  days  after  it  has  fairly 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  67 

begun  to  run  the  whole  arbour  is  covered.  It  forma  a  shade  absolutely  impene- 
trable to  the  sun's  rays,  even  at  noonday.  It  flourishes  best  in  the  very  hottest 
part  of  summer ;  and,  lastly,  when  injured  or  cut,  it  withers  away  with  equal 
rapidity.  In  selecting  the  gourd,  therefore,  there  is  not  only  an  adherence  to 
verisimilitude,  which  is  always  becoming,  but  there  is  also  an  economy,  if  we 
may  bo  speak,  in  the  expenditure  of  miraculous  agency.  The  question  is  not 
about  power  at  all.  The  same  God  who  caused  the  gourd  to  grow  in  a  night 
could  make  a  cedar  do  so  likewise  ;  but  this  would  be  a  wide  departure  from  the 
general  method  of  miraculous  interposition,  which  is  to  employ  it  no  further  than 
is  necessary  to  secure  the  result  required.  Is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that, 
after  all,  it  was  not  a  gourd,  but  some  other  plant — that  of  the  castor-bean,  for 
example,  as  many  learned  critics  have  concluded  T  Orientals  never  dream  of 
training  a  castor-oil  plant  over  a  booth,  or  planting  it  for  a  shade,  and  they  would 
have  but  small  respect  for  any  one  who  did.  It  is  in  no  way  adapted  for  that 
purpose,  while  thousands  of  arbours  are  covered  with  various  creepers  of  the 
general  gourd  family.  As  to  ancient  translations,  the  Septuagint  gives  colocynth, 
a  general  name  for  gourd ;  and  the  Vulgate,  castor-bean.  {Thomson^ a  "  Land 
and  Book")  Jonah  and  his  gourd  : — Learn — 1.  That  all  our  comforts,  small  and 
great,  come  from  God.  2.  As  our  comforts,  so  also  do  our  trials,  come  from  God. 
3.  Eveiy  goiurd  of  earth,  every  enjoyment  here,  has  a  worm  at  its  root.  4.  There 
is  a  plant,  better  than  any  gourd  of  earth,  under  the  shadow  of  which  we  may 
live  m  peace  and  die  in  hope.  That  plant  is  Christ.  {E.  Blencowe,  M.A.) 
Jonah's  gourd  : — Here  the  Lord  doth  first  give  Jonah  matter  of  delight  in  a  plant 
miraculously  raised  up  to  cover  his  booth,  and  keep  him  from  the  heat  which 
increased  his  grief.  Then  again,  his  passion  is  stirred  up  by  occasion  of  the  Lord's 
Budden  removal  of  the  goiurd,  and  raising  such  a  wind  as  might  effectually  make 
the  sunbeams  beat  upon  him.  By  all  which  the  Lord  lays  a  ground  of  more 
sensible  reproving  of  him  for  his  former  bitterness.  Doctrine— 1.  A  spirit  once 
broken  and  embittered  with  troubles  is  easily  grieved  and  stirred  up.  2.  The 
Lord,  in  healing  the  infirmities  of  His  people,  uses  first  to  lance  their  sores,  and 
discover  more  of  their  putrefaction,  before  He  apply  any  healing  plasters  ;  there- 
fore is  Jonah's  passion  more  kindled  ere  the  former  distemper  be  healed.  3.  God 
in  His  holy  providence  may  ensnare  men  who  are  wilfully  given  to  passions, 
with  more  occasions  to  vent  more  of  their  corruptions.  4.  From  this  sending 
of  the  gourd  and  the  worm,  and  the  effects  of  it  in  Jonah,  we  may  see — (1)  The 
vanity  of  all  earthly  delights,  in  that  they  aU  carry  a  worm  of  instability  in  their 
root,  which  in  short  time  will  turn  upside  down  all  the  expectations  which  men 
have  from  them.  (2)  Much  delight  in  earthly  contentments  is  ordinarily  a  fore- 
runner of  much  sorrow  in  their  removal.  (3)  Passion  given  way  im.to  will  soon 
turn  men  furious  and  absurd.  So  little  are  men  themselves  in  their  passions. 
(George  Hutcheson.)  Jonah's  gourd;  or  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  enjoyments: — 
There  is  that  in  the  conduct  of  Jonah  which  claims  oiu-  pity  and  provokes  our 
resentment ;  especially  when  we  see  him  have  more  regard  for  his  own  honour 
than  for  the  lives  of  so  many  thousands  that  know  not  their  right  hand  from  their 
left.  Perhaps,  in  passing  our  censure  upon  him,  we  shall  condemn  oiu-selves. 
Is  it  an  uncommon  thing  to  find  Christians  in  the  same  spirit  ?  The  history 
records  an  instance  of  God's  pity  in  the  provision  of  the  gourd.  But  the  swiftly 
growing  plant  more  swiftly  faded.  This  reminds  us  of  the  vanity  of  all  earthly 
enjoyments.  What  are  they,  even  the  best  of  them,  but  as  the  goiird  that  grew 
up  in  a  night  and  perished  in  a  night  ?  We  refer  to  those  pleasures  which  have 
their  root  in  corruption  and  luxury.  But  it  is  also  true  of  those  enjoyments 
which  are  consistent  with  virtue  and  piety.  Which  of  them  can  afford  us  more 
than  a  momentary  delight  ?  Mutability  is  the  characteristic  of  all  things  under 
the  sun.  The  scene  is  ever  shifting,  and  like  the  vagaries  of  a  dream,  which 
only  appear  to  amuse  for  a  moment,  and  then  are  gone.  Jonah  was  exceeding 
glad  of  the  gourd.  He  set  great  store  by  it,  more  than  by  the  lives  of  aU  the 
inhabitants  of  Nineveh.  And  how  apt  are  we,  like  him,  to  overrate  our  comforts  ! 
We  forget  that  our  happiness  has  its  root  in  the  earth.  There  liu-ks  a  worm  at 
the  root  of  every  goiu:d.  Sin  has  marred  our  happiness  and  given  the  death- 
eting  to  all  our  comforts.  Sometimes  our  enjoyments  are  our  punishments. 
Where  is  the  heart  that  does  not  ache  at  the  loss  of  some  earthly  good  ?  The 
same  God  who  prepared  the  gourd  prepared  the  worm.  The  hand  of  God  is  to 
be  acknowledged  in  all  our  pleasures,  and  in  all  our  so-called  calamities.  He 
does  not  measure  His  kindness  by  our  merit.     Blessings  that  come  in  the  ordinary 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i\r. 

way  deserve  our  sincere  acknowledgments ;  much  more  should  we  be  thankful 
for  undeserved  favoiu-s.  But  we  often  complain  of  the  evils  we  suffer  that  God 
sends  to  us.  We  look  to  second  causes,  and  fret  as  though  there  were  no  God 
to  rule  in  the  earth.  There  cannot  be  good  or  evil  without  the  Divine  permission. 
The  gourd  grew  up  in  a  night ;  might  not  this  circumstance  have  taught  Jonah 
to  expect  it  as  suddenly  to  decay  ?  Pleasures  that  are  quick  in  their  growth 
seldom  last  long.  The  vanity  and  uncertainty  of  all  our  earthly  enjoyments 
show  us  that  error  lies  somewhere,  and  where  should  we  look  for  it  but  in  the 
nature  of  man  ?  Whence  is  man's  misery  but  from  his  inordinate  attachment 
to  the  creature  ?  God  Himself  is  our  only  end.  Let  our  trials  remind  us  of  our 
sins,  and  we  shall  see  in  the  end  that  God  has  been  correcting  us  for  our  profit, 
that  compassion  has  guided  the  rod  to  recall  us  to  our  proper  resting-place. 
Here  we  learn  the  importance  of  religious  principle.  Without  it,  what  can  we  do 
in  a  changmg  world  where  aU  perishes  in  the  using,  and  is  sometimes  blasted 
by  the  touch  ?  Beligion  wiU  produce  a  satisfaction  in  the  mind  which  no  evil 
can  disturb ;  let  the  worm  destroy,  let  the  gourd  wither,  let  all  natural  things 
take  their  course,  or  perish  by  violence,  yet  the  well-principled  man  shall  be 
happy  without  them  all,  for  none  of  these  things  are  essential  to  his  bliss  ;  having 
God  for  his  portion  and  choice,  he  is  blessed,  ifiwen  Morris.)  Earthly  comforts  : 
— From  the  history  of  the  prophet  thus  brought  to  a  close  we  learn — I.  Not  to 
PRIZE  EARTHLY  COMFORTS  TOO  HIGHLY.  Jonah  finds  comfort  in  life  only  from 
the  gourd  which  God  had  suffered  to  grow  up.  Improve  this.  1.  Let  us  remember 
that  all  our  comforts  spring  but  from  the  earth.  2.  Earthly  comforts  are  only 
gourds ;  they  rise  up  suddenly,  and  as  suddenly  decay.  3.  Earthly  comforts 
have  a  worm  at  their  root.  They  carry  in  themselves  the  seeds  of  their  own 
dissolution.  The  very  means  by  which  we  are  supported  in  life  have  in  them 
the  seeds  of  disease,  decay,  and  death.  4.  Earthly  comforts  are  short  in  their 
duration.     As  they  rose  like  the  gourd,  so,  like  that,  they  may  wither  in  a  night. 

II.    Not    TO    BE    GRIEVED    OVERMUCH    AT   THE    REMOVAL    OF    EARTHLY    BLESSINGS. 

L  Consider  their  real  character.  2.  We  should  believe  that  there  is  much  wisdom 
and  mercy  in  their  removal.  3.  Remember  that  God  can  either  restore  these 
things  to  us,  or  give  us  better  in  their  stead.  4.  We  should  look  forward  to  a 
better  and  more  enduring  substance.  III.  Learn  from  our  own  troubles 
TO  FEEL  FOR  OTHERS.  1.  Leam  to  pity  those  who  have  not  such  comforts  as  we 
have.  2.  To  mourn  on  account  of  those  who  are  losing  their  souls.  Let  the 
people  of  God  seek  resignation  to  His  will.  (W.  Cooper.)  Emblems  of  marl's 
earthly  good,  and  Ood's  disciplinary  procedure.  I.  Emblem  of  man's  earthly 
GOOD.  The  gourd  represents  this.  It  was  like  it  in  its  development,  its  decay, 
and  its  destruction.  It  came  out  of  the  earth.  It  came  out  by  Divine  agency. 
The  decaying  agent  was  mean.  The  decay  was  prompt.  The  work  was  done 
in  secret.  II.  Emblem  of  God's  disciplinary  procedure.  1.  God  disciplines 
man  by  facts.  2.  These  facts  are  varied  in  their  character.  3.  These  facts  are 
adapted  to  their  end.  Leam — (1)  Not  to  trust  in  earthly  good.  (2)  Improve 
under  the  disciplinary  influences  of  heaven.  {Preacher^ s  Finger-post.)  The 
history  of  Jonah's  gourd  : — I.  The  springing  up  of  this  gourd.  This  took  place 
under  very  remarkable  and  truly  affecting  circumstances.  1.  Learn  that  a 
gracious  God  sometimes  visits  us  with  mercies  when  we  have  reason  to  expect 
judgments.  Rage  drives  Jonah  out  of  Nineveh  into  the  scorching  heat  of  an 
eastern  sun,  and  there,  while  he  is  quarrelling  with  God  and  asking  for  death, 
springs  up  suddenly  a  wide-spreading  plant  to  shelter  and  comfort  him.  In 
seasons  like  these  faith  is  weak,  and  a  compassionate  God  stoops  to  its  weakness. 
He  gives  the  soul  sensible  indications  of  His  love,  recalls  it  to  its  duty  and  happiness, 
by  mercies  which  it  can  feel  and  understand.  2.  There  is  no  want  of  His  servants 
too  small  for  God  to  notice,  and  no  suffering  too  light  for  Him  to  relieve.  Jonah's 
worthless  head  is  as  much  an  object  of  His  concern  as  Jonah's  guilty  soul.  In 
no  point  do  we  mistake  more  than  in  this.  "  This  matter,"  we  say,  "is  too  con- 
temptible to  be  taken  to  God."  We  limit,  we  dishonour  God  when  we  say, 
"  This  is  too  small  for  Him."  The  care  He  invites  us  to  roll  on  Him  is,  all  oiu* 
care.  3.  The  Lord  often  reveals  His  greatness  by  the  mode  in  which  He  imparts 
comfort  and  manifests  compassion.  Refer  to  those  dispensations  of  Providence, 
those  unexpected  deliverances,  and  blessings  and  comforts  which  every  servant 
of  God  occasionally  experiences :  things  occurring  so  that  he  must  be  blind 
who  does  not  see  in  them  the  Divine  hand.  We  have  not  to  rim  after  goodness 
and  mercy.    IT.  The  effect  produced  on  the  prophet's  mind  by  this  intbb- 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  69 

POSITION  OF  God  on  ins  behalf.  Jonah  rejoiced  in  the  gourd  with  great  joy 
1.  Well  may  we  wonder  at  the  folly  of  that  heart  which  could  take  so  much  pleasure 
in  so  mean  a  thing ;  but  there  is  still  greater  reason  to  wonder  at  its  amazing 
Belfishness.  This  history  is  like  a  libel  on  human  nature.  2.  The  ingratitude 
of  the  human  heart.  We  too  have  often  forgotten  God  in  the  comforts  He  has 
given  us.  Those  very  comforts  have  been  the  causes  of  our  forgetting  Him. 
They  have  separated  between  Christ  and  our  soul.  III.  The  witheeing  of  this 
OVERVALUED  GOURD.  1.  All  earthly  comforts  are  short-lived ;  they  are  frail 
and  perishing.  They  often  die  while  we  are  rejoicing  in  them.  2.  The  comfort 
that  most  delights  us  is  generally  the  first  to  perish.  The  mercies  we  lose  the 
soonest  are  those  we  love  the  best.  This  is  the  testimony  of  fact.  3.  Our  comforts 
are  often  taken  from  us  when  they  appear  to  be  the  most  needed.  Our  prop 
gives  way  when  we  are  the  weakest.  The  gourd  withers  in  the  mornmg,  just 
when  the  sun  is  begiiming  to  scorch.  4.  Our  comforts  often  perish  from  un- 
foreseen  and  very  inconsiderable  causes.  A  trifle — a  worm — destroys  them. 
Such  is  the  history  of  this  miraculous  plant — it  sprang  up,  it  gave  delight,  it 
brought  into  sight  the  baseness  of  the  human  heart,  and  then  it  withered.  Is 
not  this  the  history  of  every  comfort  the  earth  yields  ?  It  speaks  to  us  all.  It 
bids  us  care  less  about  a  passing  world.  It  calls  us  to  seek  after  that  refuge  and 
comfort  of  which  no  creatm-e,  either  small  or  great,  can  rob  us.  Is  there  such 
a  refuge  ?  Yes.  It  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  in  a  manifested,  incarnate  God  ;  in  His 
cross  and  righteousness  and  spirit,  in  union  and  intercourse  with  Him.  And 
it  is  nowhere  else.  A  crucified  Jesus  is  the  one  only  remedy  for  all  human  iUs, 
the  one  only  source  of  all  solid  happiness.  (C.  Bradley.)  The  preparations 
of  God : — Let  the  subject  be — The  precise  personal  action  of  God  in  the  discipline, 
or  teaching  troubles,  of  His  people.  The  Lord's  teaching  by  grouping  and  com- 
bination. One  teaching  suggested  to  us  by  these  combinations  of  God  is  the 
need  of  profound  humility  in  judging  any  of  His  dealings  while  they  are  going 
on ;  and  of  unlimited  faith  in  Him  as  the  preparer  and  arranger  of  everything. 
In  no  case  do  we  know  the  whole  of  a  matter.  We  see  but  one  part,  and  do 
not  understand  the  relation  of  that  part  to  the  whole.  Jonah  did  not  know  what 
real  relationship  that  gourd  had  to  him.  We  are  taught  that  we  must  not  quarrel 
with  any  one  dealing  of  God.  We  must  not  think  there  is  failure  because  one 
part  of  a  dealing  is,  to  all  appearance,  not  doing  its  work.  Though  one  mean 
and  another  has  apparently  come  short  in  your  hand,  view  God  in  combination, 
and  do  not  despair.  God  taught  Jonah  by  a  combination  of  facts,  by  personal 
experiences,  personal  suffering.  The  incidents  of  our  lives  are  instinct  with 
educational  power.  Only,  we  must  see  God  in  them.  Alas!  that  life's  facts 
are  so  barren  of  teaching  to  many.  Men  fail  to  read  their  own  lives.  By  this 
education  of  facts  God's  teaching  is  very  penetrating.  Observe  also  the  grouping 
together  of  opposites — of  pleasure  and  pain;  God  reproduces  in  daily  life — the 
gourd,  the  worm,  the  wind.  Often  we  see  light  and  darkness;  or  conversely, 
darkness  and  light  mingled  in  our  homes,  ovu  business,  our  relationships,  and 
ova  only  way  of  being  at  peace,  and  being  helped  heavenward  by  all  that  comes, 
is  by  seeing  in  them  the  preparations  of  the  Lord.  The  same  thoughtfulness 
by  which  God  arranged  the  prophet's  teaching  arranges  ovirs,  if  only  we  will 
learn.  The  same  sovereignty  which  has  the  gourd,  the  worm,  and  the  wind 
at  command  has  things  great  and  small,  all  ready  to  do  us  good.  The  same 
patience  in  waiting  while  His  combination  of  circumstances  were  doing  their 
work  is  waitmg  on  us  now.  (P.  H.  Power,  M.A.)  So  Jonah  was  exceed- 
ing glad  of  tlie  gourd. — Gladness  is  not  gratitude : — The  sequel  shows 
clearly  that  the  prophet  had  not  one  spark  of  gratitude  to  God  for  His  merciful 
interposition  in  his  extremity.  He  was  "  glad  of  the  gourd,"  which,  springing 
up  in  a  night,  sheltered  him  from  the  burning  rays  of  a  fierce  sun,  but  not  thankful 
to  God  whose  goodness  had  provided  it ;  the  feeling  was  purely  selfish  and  sensual, 
destitute  utterly  of  piety.  Glad  of  the  gift,  but  not  a  thought  of  the  Giver ; 
for  as  soon  as  the  gourd  "  withered  away  "  he  was  "  angry,"  and  "  wished  for 
death,"  and  bitterly  complained  to  God,  and  justified  his  folly  and  petulance. 
In  all  this,  Jonah  is  a  type  of  multitudes  of  nominal  Christians — "  glad  "  because 
of  God's  great  mercies,  but  never  grateful ;  the  temporal  gift,  but  not  the  Divine 
Giver,  is  thought  of.     (Homiletic  Monthly.) 

Ver.  7.  But  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  morning  rose  the  next  day. — 
The  prepared  worm : — Just  when  Jonah  had  felt  the  delight  of  the  shadowing' 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

foliage,  and  had  begun  to  promise  himself  a  most  comfortable  retreat  against 
an  Assyrian  sun,  the  broad-leaved  gourd  withered.  What  caused  this  calamity  ? 
A  worm.  No,  that  is  not  all.  God  prepared  the  worm.  But  He  also  prepared 
the  goiu-d.  Does  He,  then,  build  up  in  order  to  destroy  ?  Does  He  give  comfort 
to  His  creatures  in  order  to  torment  them  by  its  removal  ?  I.  God  is  the  Author 
OF  AFFLICTION.  God  asserts  in  His  Word,  that  all  the  losses  in  the  world  are 
sent  by  Him.  By  evil  is  often  meant  calamity,  not  wickedness.  God  is  the 
Author  equally  of  prosperity  and  adversity  to  His  creatures.  He  uses  agents, 
but  we  must  not  forget  that  He  is  behind  them.  He  is  the  Author  of  affliction, 
whatever  may  be  the  agencies  He  uses  in  the  course  of  His  providence.     11.  Hb 

USES    THE    NATURAL   LAWS    OF    THE    WORLD    AS    HiS    AGENTS    IN    AFFLICTING.      The 

worm  merely  followed  the  impulses  of  its  nature.  That  is  all  science  can  say. 
But  God  has  made  all  things,  however  great,  however  small,  for  Himself.  The 
things  which  we  call  laws  are  only  the  methods  of  His  activity.  Nature  is  a 
forlorn  object  to  study  imless  we  find  it  a  mirror  to  reflect  God.  IV.  God  is 
JUST  IN  AFFUcrriNG  US.  Simply  as  the  Maker  and  Owner  of  His  creatiires,  God 
has  a  right  to  afflict.  But  He  has  entered  into  a  covenant  with  us.  He  has 
said,  "  Do  ye  according  to  My  commandments,  and  ye  shall  live."  What  is 
the  record  of  our  race  since  ?  Have  we  obeyed,  or  have  we  disobeyed  7  Surely 
we  have  come  into  the  need  of  affliction.  If  God  would  be  just  in  casting  us 
down  to  hell  for  our  disobedience,  surely  He  is  just  in  laying  upon  us  disciplinary 
afflictions.  IV.  God  afflicts  us  in  His  love.  With  all  Jonah's  sins  agamst 
God,  it  was  not  to  punish  him  that  God  prepared  a  worm.  God's  aim  in  affliction 
is  our  restoration,  our  improvement.  There  are  uses  of  adversity.  However 
harsh  the  voice  of  God  may  seem  to  us,  it  is  yet  a  Father's  voice,  with  a  Father's 
heart  behind  it.  Inferences — 1.  If  God  afflicts,  how  foolish  it  is  to  go  to  the 
world  for  relief.  2.  God's  worms  for  us  prove  an  interesting  study.  3.  When 
our  gourds  wither  it  is  proof  that  God  is  near.  [Howard  Crosby,  D.D.)  A 
worm-smitten  gourd  : — I.  God  has  a  right  to  recall  His  gifts.  II.  God  may 
recall  at  any  time.     He  has  placed  Himself  under  no  obligation.     III.  God 

aiAY    RECALL    THE    GOT    WHEN    IT    IS    APPARENTLY    MOST    NEEDED.       "  When    the 

morning  rose  "  the  gourd  was  smitten.  IV.  God  may  recall  the  gift  when 
WE  are  beginnino  to  appreciate  it  most.  When  "  Jonah  was  exceeding  glad 
because  of  the  gourd,"  it  withered.  V.  God  may  recall  the  gift  by  any 
instrumentality  He  may  choose.  "  A  worm "  smote  the  gourd.  Some 
apparently  insignificant  thing  may  be  God's  agent  for  our  deprivation.     ^T.  GoD, 

AFTER  recalling  THE  GIFT,  CAN  COMFORT  THE  SORROWING,  AND  CAN  COMPENSATE 

FOR  THE  LOSS.  {Homihtic  Review.)  The  lesson  of  the  gourd: — Jonah's  gourd 
teaches  us  that  the  Lord  mercifully  cares  for  the  comfort  of  His  creatures,  and 
that  He  is  kind  even  to  the  unthankful  and  to  the  evil.  Perhaps  Jonah  was 
a  little  too  glad  of  the  temporal  refreshment  of  the  gourd.  This  is  the  mistake 
we  are  all  tempted  to  commit  with  regard  to  our  temporal  comforts  and  con- 
veniences. We  are  so  glad  of  them  that  we  pillow  our  hearts  upon  them.  But 
are  our  earthly  comforts  incorruptible  and  undecaying  ?  There  is  a  worm  at 
the  root  of  all  our  earthly  comforts.  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away. 
But  let  a  man,  through  grace,  enjoy  his  comforts  soberly,  habitually  regarding 
them  as  transient  things ;  let  him  look  up  through  the  gift  unto  the  Giver,  and 
then,  when  his  gourd  is  withered,  he  will  still  bless  and  magnify  the  Hand  that 
withered  it.  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  Creature  comforts  withered  : — A  very  awful 
proof  of  human  depravity,  in  God's  own  people,  is  recorded  in  the  case  of  Jonah. 
If  Jonah's  corruption  is  very  conspicuous,  the  mercy  of  God  is  yet  more  so,  both 
as  it  respects  Jonah  and  the  Ninevites.  See  what  absolute  obedience  God  requires 
of  all  His  prophets  and  people  in  general.  This  prophecy  teaches  us  that  God's 
dispensations  may  vary,  and  be  different  from  His  threatening,  without  any 
change  taking  place  in  His  nature  or  purpose.  God  so  wisely  governs  His  kingdom 
that  even  in  His  very  punishment  of  the  rebellions  of  His  people  He  investeth 
them  with  honour,  so  little  is  His  goodness  dependent  on  human  worthiness. 
Here  we  find  Jonah  exceedingly  displeased,  very  angry  indeed,  at  God's  merciful 
conduct  towards  Nineveh.  He  reason.s  with  God  against  His  merciful  conduct 
towards  that  great  city.  In  the  heat  of  his  angry  impatience  he  wants  to  die. 
God  rebukes  Jonah's  impatience  in  gentle  terms,  and  the  prophet  seems  to  have 
conceived  some  hope  that  God  for  his  sake  might  yet  destroy  the  city ;  therefore 
he  fled  from  it  and  waited  the  issue  in  painful  suspense.  He  made  a  booth,  and 
rested  under  its  shade,  and  to  make  it  more  comfortable  God  covered  it  with 


CHAP.  I '.]  JONAH.  71 

a  gourd.  But  as  Jonah's  grief  had  been  carnal  and  rebellious,  so  now  his  joy 
was  merely  sensual,  the  excess  of  which  it  behoved  the  Almighty  to  curb.  ■  There- 
fore God  suddenly  destroyed  the  gourd.  Doctrine — That  as  mankind  in  general 
are  apt,  like  Jonah,  to  delight  to  sit  under  the  shadow  of  a  gourd,  God  hath  very 
wisely,  and  hi  great  love,  ordained  a  worm  at  the  root  of  every  gourd  of  creature 
delight  and  comfort ;  by  which  means  He  drives  His  people  to  a  more  excellent 
dwelling-place,  and  more  certain  dependence.  1.  Point  out  some  things  in  which 
people  are  apt  to  promise  themselves  great  pleasure  and  satisfaction,  but  which 
in  the  event  evidently  appear  to  be  no  better  than  Jonah's  withered  gouid. 
Such  as  riches,  self-indulgence  in  food,  children,  human  esteem,  connections  in 
social  life.  Trust  in  mere  outward  ordinances.  Too  high  expectations  even 
from  relation  to  a  gospel  church.  2.  At  the  root  of  every  gourd  there  is  a  canker 
worm,  whose  envenomed  bite  smiteth  it  that  it  withereth.  Apply  to  the  above- 
mentioned  human  pleasures.  God  will  by  no  means  have  creatures  dignified 
with  any  dignity  besides  that  with  which  He  Himself  is  pleased  to  invest  them. 
Now  point  out  a  certain  antidote  against  the  poison  of  this  canker-worm  which 
is  the  thing  to  be  attended  to.  (1)  The  vanity,  emptiness,  and  uncertainty  of 
worldly  riches.  (2)  All  temporal  honours  vanish  in  the  grave,  where  distmctions 
are  no  longer  known.  (3)  Children  are  certain  cares,  but  very  xmcertain  comforts. 
Cease,  then,  O  believer,  cease  from  temporary  gourds.  Call  back  thy  wanderuig 
afiEections  from  transitory  objects,  and  sit  down  under  the  "  shadow  of  thy  only 
Lord  and  Saviour."  {John  Mncgowan.)  The  Ood  of  the  vx/rm  : — This  writer 
does  not,  as  many  foolishly  do,  banish  God  from  His  universe  to  watch  in  idle  un- 
concern its  workings  from  afar.  This  book  says,  God  answered,  God  commanded, 
God  saved,  God  bethought,  God  excited  the  wind,  God  made  the  great  fish,  God 
caused  a  gourd  to  grow,  God  made  a  worm,  God  repented  and  God  spared.  It 
is  God,  God,  God.  He  is  the  explanation  of  aU  things,  and  His  existence  gives 
purpose  and  meaning  to  all  things.  Or  think  again  of  the  character  of  God  as 
it  is  here  explicitly  set  forth  in  words.  He  is  "  the  gracious  God  and  merciful, 
long-suffering,  abundant  in  kindness,  and  repentant  of  the  evil."  This  is  one  of 
the  most  evangelical  writings  in  the  Old  Testament.  What,  an  expression  it 
gives  of  the  Divine  love  to  all  mankind,  and  how  it  forespeaks  like  the  first  gleam 
of  the  dawn  that  universal  brotherhood  of  men  so  bound  up  with  the  Fatherhood 
of  God  as  it  is  proclaimed  by  Christ.  How  nobly,  too,  the  doctrine  of  repentance 
and  its  value  are  stated.  Assuredly  this  is  a  great  book  with  a  great  message 
and  high  teaching  on  the  nature,  character,  and  purpose  of  God.  And  now, 
keeping  aU  that  in  view,  and  distinctly  remembering  that  the  God  of  this  book 
is  the  merciful  and  is  a  God  of  purpose,  let  us  think  of  the  statement  of  the  text, 
"  And  the  Lord  prepared  a  worm."  That  is  a  truth  before  which  many  people 
stagger.  There  are  people,  some  who  may  be  said  never  to  have  thought  at  aU, 
and  some  who  have  thought  much  but  mistakenly,  who  cannot  understand  the 
character  of  a  holy  God  who  in  any  way  sends  pain,  suffering,  loss,  who,  in  short, 
prepares  a  worm.  They  can  understand  the  God  of  the  gourd,  who  provides 
protection  and  safety,  but  they  cannot  imderstand  a  God  of  discipline  and  rebuke 
and  chastisement.  At  such  a  thought  they  rebel  and  stagger,  or  sulk  in  unbelief. 
They  are  prepared  readily  and  gladly  to  believe  in  the  God  of  the  gourd,  but  not 
in  the  God  of  the  worm  ;  in  the  God  of  the  rose,  but  not  in  the  God  of  the  thorn. 
Happiness,  gifts,  and  love,  these  are  all  marked  by  His  hand,  but  loss  and  suffering 
and  sorrow,  too,  may  be  His  instruments  of  good.  Through  the  chastisement 
of  His  love  men  may  find  the  best  He  has  to  give.  And  yet  we  must  be 
careful  here  to  differentiate.  Is  it  not  true  that  a  great  deal  of  the  sorrow 
and  evU  that  are  in  the  world  are  wrongly  blamed  on  God  ?  There  is 
nothing  plainer  than  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  evil  that  afflicts  man  and 
burdens  life  is  a  direct  outcome  of  the  breach  of  God's  laws  of  truth  and  justice 
and  love.  They  are  clearly  the  fruit  of  sin,  and  sin  is  in  man's  will.  But  sin 
is  against  God's  purpose,  and  He  is  ever  seeking  to  destroy  it.  Ah  !  "  It's  man's 
inhumanity  to  man  that  makes  countless  thousands  mourn  "  ;  it  is  the  selfishness 
and  the  pitilessness,  the  unscrupulousness  and  injustice  of  the  human  heart, 
the  ignorance  and  superstition  of  the  human  mind  that  have  caused  the  very 
creation  to  groan  and  travail  in  pain  ;  it  is  no  will  or  act  of  God'.s.  To-day,  as 
then,  there  is  the  tendency  for  people,  by  ignorance  and  injustice  and  moral 
laziness,  to  bring  upon  themselves  and  their  neighbours  the  ravages  of  disease, 
the  miseries  of  unholy  social  relationships,  the  shame  that  crushes  the  heart  with 
unhealable  sorrow,  and  to  blame  God  for  it  all,  and  to  preach  resignation  in  th& 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

midst  of  it,  when  it  is  our  plain  duty  to  rise  up  and  to  deal  with  the  causes  of  such 
things — to  slay  the  evil,  to  tear  up  its  roots,  to  fight  "  against  the  wrong  that  needs 
resistance  and  for  the  cause  that  needs  assistance,"  and  to  bring  in  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  which  is  life  and  health  and  peace.  But  after  all  that  has  been  said, 
there  still  remain  suffering  and  evil  in  the  world,  and  we  can  do  nothing  to  explain 
it,  and  still  less  to  remove  it.  It  is  oftentimes  a  great  mystery,  and  it  burdens 
many  hearts  with  heavy  perplexity.  The  only  explanation  that  can  be  given 
of  it  is  that  Grod  permits  it;  yea,  that  He  sends  it,  and  that  He  has  got  a  great 
purpose  in  it.  "  Neither  did  this  man  sin,  nor  his  parents  ;  but  he  was  bom 
blind  in  order  that  he  might  manifest  the  works  of  God."  The  man  suffered  not 
only  for  himself  but  for  others  ;  yea,  in  his  suffering  there  was  a  Divine  purpose. 
He  illustrated  that  great  principle  everywhere  present  in  nature  and  in  life,  and 
which  foimd  its  sublimest  expression  in  the  Cross  itself,  the  deep  and  precious 
truth  that  much  suffering  is  vicarious.  Now  towards  such  pain,  suffering,  sorrow 
— and  which  cannot  be  removed  and  but  little  explained — two  attitudes  may  be 
assumed.  In  the  midst  of  it  men  may  forget  God,  or  ignore  Him  altogether,  or 
rebel  against  Him.  There  are  many  people  who  are  not  able  to  see  God  for  their 
trouble ;  they  are  afflicted  with  the  rebellious  heart.  All  this,  of  course,  in  no  way 
mitigates  the  evil  or  helps  them  in  the  day  of  their  suffering ;  it  only  twists  their 
nature  and  warps  and  stunts  their  inner  life.  It  is  evil  added  to  evU,  and  no  gain 
p.nywhere,  for  the  trouble  still  remains.  Rebellion  only  aggravates  the  trouble. 
To  have  done  with  God  and  religion  makes  matters  worse  instead  of  better.  The 
other  attitude  is  that  of  humble  submission  and  recognition  of  the  truth  that  God 
has  prepared  a  worm,  and  that  He,  the  merciful  and  the  holy,  has  a  piu-pose  in 
it.  Before  anyone  can  have  any  light  on  the  great  mysteries  of  suffering  and  sorrow 
he  must  first  learn  and  distinctly  recognise  that  the  end  of  life  is  not  happiness, 
but  character  ;  that  discipline  is  necessary  to  character,  that  submission  and  a 
spirit  of  devout  resignation  are  the  only  way  to  get  good  by  seeking  even  through 
pain  and  suffering — character,  holiness,  Christ-likeness.  It  is  a  truth  which  all 
the  great  teachers  of  the  world  have  declared.  It  was  taught  by  Buddhist  as 
it  was  by  the  Greek  dramatist,  by  the  Stoic  as  it  is  by  the  Christian  ;  but  the 
Christian  looks  at  it  from  a  loftier  height  than  any  other,  and  recognises  in  it 
the  fatherly  purpose  of  the  Eternal  God,  "  who  maketh  all  things  work  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  Him,"  and  causeth  "  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but 
for  a  moment,  to  work  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory. 
Resignation  is  the  attitude  of  the  wise.  The  distinct  recognition  of  the  fact 
that  God  made  the  worm  is  the  wisdom  of  the  holy.  But  how  many  mistake 
what  is  meant  by  resignation !  Mr.  Gladstone,  whom  Lord  Salisbury  described 
as  a  "  great  Christian,"  in  writing  to  his  wife,  said  that  "  resignation  is  too  often 
conceived  to  be  merely  a  submission,  not  unattended  by  complaint,  to  what  we 
have  no  power  to  avoii  But  that  is  less  than  the  whole  work  of  a  Christian. 
Our  full  triumph  will  be  found  when  we  not  merely  repress  inward  tendencies 
to  murmur,  but  when  we  would  not  even,  though  we  could,  alter  what  in  any 
matter  God  has  willed."  Here  is  the  great  work  of  religion,  here  is  the  test  from 
which  sanctity  is  attained.  And  siu:ely  sanctity  is  God's  greatest  gift  to  men. 
How  many  of  the  saintliest  characters  that  the  world  has  known  have  been  those 
who  have  learned  this  great  lesson  in  the  school  of  God,  when  they  met  pain 
without  murmuring,  and  sorrow  with  resignation ;  when  through  loss  they  found 
gain,  and  so  treasured  up  in  themselves  that  enduring  wealth.  The  greatest 
instrument  that  the  world  has  ever  known  for  the  shaping  of  human  character 
is  the  will  of  God,  and  the  glad  acceptance  of  it  as  wisdom  and  love  and  life.  I 
read  somewhere  not  long  ago  an  illustration  that  may  help  us  to  \mderstand  this 
truth  and  seal  it  on  o\ir  hearts.  The  end  is  not  clear,  not  yet ;  some  day  it  will 
become  plain,  when  the  tuning  is  over  and  the  discipline  is  done.  Meanwhile 
we  can  trust  Him  who  is  the  God  of  the  worm  as  He  is  of  the  gourd,  the  God  at 
once  of  the  rose  and  thorn.     (Z).  L.  Ritchie.) 

Vers.  8-11.  He  fainted  and  wished  in  himself  to  die. — JonaKa  woe : — 
It  would  be  difficult  to  say  whether  the  tokens  of  God's  holy  justice,  or  of  His 
abounding  mercy,  be  the  more  numerous  in  the  Scriptures.  But  all  doubt  is 
dispelled  the  moment  that  we  understand  the  Gospel  of  our  salvation.  We  can  no 
longer  question  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  when  we  see  what  has  been  done 
that  sirmers  might  have  hope.  But  God's  mercy  had  strangely  distempered 
the  mind  of  the  prophet.     He  complained  like  one  defrauded  of  his  due.     And 


CHAP.  IV,]  JONAH.  73 

that  complaint  led  only  to  misery.  Wtat  made  others  happy  only  fomented 
Jonah's  grief.  Sunrise  brought  no  joy  to  him  ;  the  wind  parched  him,  and 
withered  the  gourd  ;  he  was  smitten  with  faintness  by  the  eastern  sun  ;  he 
became  weary  of  existence  ;  he  prayed  that  he  might  die.  1.  The  longer  a  sinner 
continues  in  his  sin,  the  more  wretched  does  he  become.  Jonah  was  obviously 
sinking  deeper  from  hour  to  hour.  2.  Suffering  and  sin  are  inseparably  linked 
by  the  appointment  of  the  holy  God.  It  is  the  sinner  himself  who  brings  sorrow 
on  the  sinner.  3.  God  in  holy  sovereignty  may  punish  sin  by  sin.  When  His 
creatures  go  astray  His  restraining  grace  is  sometimes  withheld,  and  then  sin 
follows  sin  in  rapid  succession,  until  the  wanderer  at  last  perhaps  stands  appalled 
at  his  own  iniquity,  or  else  is  proved  to  be  hopelessly  degenerate.  See  in  Jonah's 
case  how  transgression  followed  transgression.  He  is  offended  at  the  mercy  of 
God  to  Nineveh.  He  refuses  to  acknowledge  his  waywardness, — he  would  rather 
die.  Then  he  withdraws  from  all  intercourse  with  those  whom  God  had  in  mercy 
spared  ;  their  proximity  was  a  source  of  pain  to  Jonah.  Then  he  pines  for  death  j 
then  he  tries  to  justify  his  waywardness,  and  comes  at  last  to  declare  that  he  did 
right  in  sinning.  It  is  thus  that  sin  deludes  the  very  conscience,  darkens  the 
understanding,  and  enslaves  the  will.  Bhnded  by  passion,  resolute  in  self- 
defence,  determined  to  acknowledge  no  fault,  but  to  vindicate  all  that  he  had  done, 
Jonah  makes  a  confession  which  justifies  the  ways  of  God  with  Nineveh.  If  the 
prophet  lamented  the  loss  of  the  gourd,  and  pitied  it  when  it  perished,  surely 
much  more  might  the  compassionate  One  pity  the  city  which  had  repented. 
( W.  K.  Tweedie. )  Impatience  under  trials  : — Afflictions  produce  a  twofold 
effect :  either  making  us  more  submissive  to  God,  or  rendering  us  impatient, 
irritable,  and  rebellious.  They  had  the  latter  effect  on  Jonah.  1.  His  impatient 
grief  was  inconsiderate.  It  was  passion,  not  reason,  which  dictated  the  prayer 
that  he  might  die.  No  sooner  were  his  wishes  crossed  than  he  broke  out  into 
discontented  complainings.  In  our  own  case,  reflection  would  silence  many  of 
our  complaints.  We  should  especially  beware  of  expressing  weariness  of  life 
in  such  cases.  2.  His  impatient  grief  was  rebelUous.  He  was  not  willing  to  have 
his  Maker's  will  done.  3.  It  was  extremely  selfish.  The  saving  of  so  many 
thousands  gave  him  no  pleasure  unless  his  word  was  honoured.  4.  It  was 
unbelieving.  Could  he  not  trust  God  to  take  care  of  his  reputation  ?  And  which 
of  us  can  say  that  he  is  not  often  impatient  and  repining  ?  The  habit  of  re- 
cognising the  hand  of  God  in  little  things  that  try  our  temper  would  repress 
many  a  peevish  exclamation.  (W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  Jonah's  passion,  and 
Ood's  forbearance  : — 1.  The  first  element  in  Jonah's  character  was  moral  cowardice. 
In  what  lay  his  sin  7  Simply  in  his  unwillingness  to  discharge  a  plain  positive 
duty.  Learn — (1)  When  you  are  called  to  discharge  a  painful  duty,  the  quicker 
you  set  about  it  the  better.  (2)  The  discharge  of  duty  is  always  less  difficult 
than  we  anticipate.  (3)  Neglected  duty,  if  you  are  a  Christian,  will  always  follow 
you  till  it  is  performed.  2.  The  next  element  was,  imperfect  views  of  the  Divine 
character  and  government.  (1)  Jonah  had  discharged  his  duty  in  proclaiming 
the  burden  of  the  Lord  concerning  Nineveh,  (2)  Jonah,  having  discharged  his 
duty,  thought  that  God  ought  to  take  the  same  view  of  things  as  he  did.  (3)  Notice 
the  practical  but  gracious  manner  which  God  took  to  reveal  His  mind  to  Jonah. 
(4)  Observe  the  ominous  silence  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  concerning  the  end  of 
Jonah.  God  will  justify  His  own  mercy  and  love.  {W.  0.  Barrett.)  The 
weariness  of  life : — This  was  the  desire  of  Jonah  when  the  Lord  smote  the  gourd 
so  that  it  died.  In  the  disappointment  of  hia  soul  he  wept  over  it,  and  in  the 
trouble  of  his  spirit  his  prayer  was  for  death.  It  is  so  with  not  a  few  selfish  people. 
When  sorrow  touches  anything  that  is  theirs  they  are  overwhelmed.  They 
seem  to  feel,  think,  and  act  as  if  all  the  agencies  of  life  and  providence  were  in 
motion  but  for  them,  and  as  if  all  were  out  of  order  when  they  suffer  inconvenience, 
and  all  rightly  going  when  they  are  in  comfort.  This  estimate  of  ill-being  or 
well-being,  in  its  relation  to  self,  is  extremely  low  ;  and  yet  it  often  takes  a 
religious  form  of  expression.  Why  should  we  regard  calamities  as  in  any  way 
peculiar  or  severe  because  they  come  near  to  us  ?  This  distinction  you  will 
ever  observe  through  life — the  selfish  make  little  of  the  sufferings  which  their 
neighbours  have  to  bear,  however  great,  while  they  are  loud  about  their  own, 
however  small.  The  sufferings  of  the  selfish  render  them  more  selfish,  the 
sufferings  of  the  generous  make  them  more  generous.  There  are,  however,  many 
instances  in  which  the  weariness  of  Jonah  may  fall  upon  the  spirit  without  his 
bitterness,  and  without  his  misanthropy.     Many  a  one,  with  a  sincerer  despond- 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

ency,  is  ready  to  exclaim  with  him,  "  It  is  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live." 
How  often  is  this  the  sentiment  under  severe  physical  pain,  whether  it  is  uttered 
or  concealed.  How  natural,  in  the  tossings  of  convulsive  irritation,  to  fix  the 
mind  upon  the  quiet  grave  !  If  the  love  of  hfe  is  stronger  in  age,  the  consciousness 
of  life  is  stronger  in  youth.  This  very  strength  of  consciousness  may,  and  some- 
times does,  turn  into  a  disgust  of  life.  Having  not  deeply  entered  into  the  moral 
purposes  of  life,  anything  which  cuts  off  the  young  from  its  sparkling  felicities 
cleaves  them  almost  to  despair.  The  loss  of  this  world's  goods  may  fall  heavy 
on  the  spirit,  but  the  wound,  though  deep,  is  seldom  incurable, — there  is  a  worm 
more  destructive  than  that  which  consumes  our  health  and  property.  It  is  the 
worm  of  insatiable  passion.  This  turns  hfe  into  an  irritable,  discontented  dream, 
with  waking  starts  of  more  than  ordinary  loathing,  in  which  the  desire  often 
obtrudes  on  the  sickened  mind,  to  be  well  rid  of  such  an  existence.  Desire  that 
once  passes  the  moderation  of  nature  is  disease  ;  it  is  worse  than  any  ordinary 
illness,  because  it  is  in  the  mind.  It  becomes  an  inward  and  rooted  malady. 
A  man  is  thus  a  victim  to  his  own  best  advantages.  Many,  whose  circumstances 
and  constitution  place  them  much  nearer  to  nature,  are  not  always  wholly  saved 
from  this  temper.  With  all  that  is  substantially  needful  for  a  good  and  enjoyable 
life,  they  become  weary  and  sullen,  and  fret,  and  make  others  and  themselves 
most  unhappy  ;  they  are  not  content,  because  their  wishes  are  not  sound.  I  can 
conceive  of  one  to  whom  life  is  worn  out,  and  whose  wish  to  leave  it  we  can 
scarcely  censure.  It  is  one  who  has  survived  his  kindred  and  his  companions,  and 
remains  alone  in  the  desert  of  adversity  and  the  world.  Many  that  are  scorned 
elsewhere  have  an  asylum  from  contempt  among  their  kindred.  They  are  nothing, 
or  worse  than  nothing,  to  those  who  have  only  remotely  seen  them,  and  yet 
everything  to  those  who  have  lived  near  them  and  with  them.  Much  of  dissatis- 
faction with  life  arises  from  a  doubly  false  estimate  of  life.  We  underrate  our 
own  position  in  it ;  we  overrate  the  positions  of  others.  Out  of  this  doubly 
false  estimate  spring  correspondent  false  contrasts  and  desires.  Take  a  certain 
level  of  comfortable  existence  to  begin  with,  and  life  from  that  is  equal  in  all 
essentials.  All  poetry,  song,  drama,  fiction,  and  reUgion  imply  this.  The  passions 
are  the  same  ;  the  same  in  their  experience,  the  same  in  their  results.  All  that 
makes  the  essence  of  life  is  equal  ;  and  the  proof  may  be  put  into  one  short 
sentence  : — the  grief  or  the  enjoyment  that  reaches  life  makes  nothing  of  station. 
But  if  it  were  not  even  so,  yet  complaint  against  life  would  be  against  wisdom, 
virtue,  and  religion.  Where  is  the  wisdom  of  that  man  who  murmurs  at  that 
which  he  could  not  avoid,  or  could  not  have  changed  ?  There  are  those  who 
say  that  they  have  lost  all  interest  in  life.  It  is  to  them  and  not  to  life  that 
poverty  comes  ;  for  life  is  ever  rich  in  interest.  Life  is  rich  for  the  senses  ;  for 
the  affections  ;  for  the  moral  sentiments  ;  for  sympathy.  If  a  man  has  clear 
views  of  God  and  of  His  providence,  if  he  has  a  trustful  and  patient  spirit,  he  will 
be  grateful  for  his  enjoyments,  and  he  will  meekly  bear  his  griefs.  He  will  try 
to  extract  from  his  circumstances  all  the  good  which  they  yield  him,  and  he  will 
not  darken  his  position  with  imaginary  calamities.  Experience  will  convince 
him  that  he  might  be  more  unhappy,  and  humiUty  will  suggest  that  he  has,  on 
the  whole,  more  pleasure  than  he  merits.  In  the  worst  trials  faith  will  teach  him 
that  earth  is  not  his  rest,  that  his  afliictions  here,  light  and  enduring  but  for  a 
moment,  working  for  him  an  eternal  weight  of  glory,  are  but  as  hasty  April  showers 
that  usher  in  an  everlasting  summer.  The  day  of  Ufe  spent  in  honest  and 
benevolent  labour  comes  in  hope  to  an  evening  calm  and  lovely.  Earth,  to  each 
of  us,  is  but  as  the  gotu-d  of  Jonah.  Happy  for  each  if  at  the  close  of  it  he  can 
say,  not  in  a  querulous  discontent,  but  in  believing  trust,  "  It  is  better  for  me  to 
die  than  to  live  "  ;  or  rather,  if  he  can  say  with  the  tranquil  joyfulness  of  old 
Simeon,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  (Henry 
Giles.) 

Ver.  9.  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  for  the  gt)urd?  —  Jehovah* «  appeal 
to  Jonah : — I.  Jonah's  then  mood.  "  God  said  to  Jonah,  Doest  thou  well 
to  be  angry  ?  "     1.  Observe  the  point  of  this  appeal.     To  be  grieved  for  the 

fourd  was  to  be  grieved  for  himself.  2.  The  compliment  involved  in  this 
)ivine  appeal.  God  made  Jonah  judge  in  his  own  case.  3.  Note  the  response 
of  the  prophet  to  this  appeal.  "  I  do  well  to  be  grieved,  even  unto  death." 
Candid,  if  somewhat  passionate.  TL.  The  propriety  of  the  Divine  procedure. 
Note  the  correspondence  between   the  words   "  pity "   and   "  spare."     God  did 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  75 

not  contradict  the  prophet.  There  is  a  double  contrast  presented  in  this  branch 
of  the  appeal.  The  contrast  between  Jonah  and  Jehovah ;  and  between  the 
gourd  and  the  city.  1.  The  labour  expended  on  the  city  was  one  reason  why 
God  should  spare  it.  2.  The  growth  of  Nineveh  was  another  reason.  3.  The 
antiquity  of  Nineveh  was  another.  4.  The  commodiousness  and  magnitude  of 
Nineveh  was  another.  5.  The  presence  of  the  children  and  cattle  was  another. 
iSamud  Clijt  Bum.)  God  reasoning  with  man  : — The  amazing  interest  God  takes 
in  mankind  is  shown — I.  In  His  eeasoning  with  a  man  who  is  in  a  bad  tkhfkb. 
Jonah  was  angry,  and  the  intensity  of  his  anger  became  so  intolerable  that  he 
wished  to  die.  Why  was  he  angry  ?  1.  Because  of  the  Divine  compassion  shown 
to  the  Ninevites.     2.  Because  of  the  loss  of  a  temporal  blessmg.     II.  In  Hra 

BEASONINO  IN  ORDER  TO  IMPRESS  THIS  MAN  WITH  THE  REALITY  OE  HiS  COMPASSION. 

The  comparison  between  the  plant  and  Nineveh  may  be  expressed  in  three  ques- 
tions. 1.  What  is  this  plant  to  the  men  that  inhabit  Nineveh  ?  2.  What  is  this 
one  plant  even  to  the  imconscious  infante  at  Nineveh  ?  3.  What  is  one  plant  to 
even  the  irrational  creatures  in  Nineveh  T  (Bomilist.)  The  sinfulness  and  cure 
of  absorbing  passion  : — The  Book  of  Jonah  is  a  standmg  rebuke  of  intolerance 
among  the  sacred  writings  of  a  most  intolerant  people.  It  is  because  it  exposes 
and  rebukes  the  sin  of  intolerance  that  this  book  has  been  preserved.  The  reason 
of  Jonah's  disobedience  to  the  heavenly  voice  is  boldly  and  frankly  told  in  the 
history.  No  tenderness  for  the  prophet's  reputation  is  allowed  to  veil  his  sin ; 
exclusiveness  is  laid  bare  in  all  its  baseness  and  malignity.  There  is  no  need  for 
us  to  offer  other  explanations  of  the  prophet's  conduct.  National  antipathy  and 
religious  exclusiveness  will  account  for  it  all.  Equally  marked  in  this  history  is 
God's  determination  to  expose  the  workings  and  rebuke  the  sin  of  exclusiveness. 
Why  was  the  hai"d  and  obstinate  Jonah  called  and  forced  to  a  work  that  was  so  un- 
congenial to  him,  a  work  that  goaded  him  to  wildest  turbulence,  and  called  out  his 
bitterest  passion  7  It  was  for  Jonah's  sake,  that  his  bad  heart  might  be  searched 
and  corrected.  We  have  here  God's  solemn  rebuke  of  a  common  sin,  and  many  a 
man  may  find  here  searching  and  hmnbling  lessons.  Jonah  rebelled  against  the 
mission  appointed  him,  but  he  had  to  fulfil  it.  To  do  God's  work  is  o\xc  sole 
discharge.  It  is  only  by  obeying  God's  bidding  that  we  can  be  purged  from  the 
sinfulness  that  makes  obedience  im welcome.  God's  chosen  servants  have  to 
yield  to  Him,  though  often  in  the  yieldmg  they  are  searched  and  convicted  of 
startling  wickedness.  In  the  working  of  Jonah's  anger  we  see  the  characteristics 
of  all  absorbing  passion  ;  and  God's  mode  of  curing  him  is  an  example  of  the 
myriad  influences  by  which  He  restores  the  self-absorbed  to  true  and  healthy  life. 

I.  The  sinfulness  of  absorbing  passion.  1.  The  sinfulness  is  seen  in  Jonah's 
contempt  of  life.  A  man's  worth  may  be  measured  by  the  reverence  he  has  for 
his  life.  The  Gospel,  which  deUvers  us  from  a  coward  fear  of  dying,  was  never 
intended  to  foster  an  equally  coward  fear  of  living.  2.  The  sinfulness  is  seen  in 
that  it  works  insincerity.  Even  after  Jonah  has  recognised  that  God  is  sparing 
the  city,  he  still  affects  to  believe  that  it  will  be  overthrown.  He  hastens  out  of  it 
lest  he  should  be  partaker  of  its  plagues.  Under  his  booth  he  pretends  that  he  is 
awaiting  its  destruction.  What  hateful  affectation  and  insincerity  !  But  is  it 
very  imcommon  ?  How  much  of  life  is  wasted  because  of  oiu:  refusal  to  acknow- 
ledge that  we  have  outgrown  the  expectations  of  the  past,  or  that  time  and  change 
have  swept  us  far  beyond  them  !  3.  The  selfishness  of  an  absorbing  passion  is 
illustrated  in  Jonah's  contempt  for  the  men  of  Nineveh.  He  will  not  share  in 
their  repentance,  nor  encourage  them  to  hope  in  God's  mercy ;  he  shuts  himself 
up  alone  to  brood  over  his  anger.  All  passion  tends  to  arrogance.  Self-absorption 
means  scorn  of  our  fellows.  A  single  passion  may  arrogate  to  itself  the  whole 
sphere  of  life,  and  constitute  itself  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  existence.  It  is  well 
for  us  to  be  aware  of  this.     Our  hohest  emotions  may  become  overweening. 

II.  God's  curb  for  absorbing  passion.  Notice  the  exceeding  gentleness  with 
which  God  reproves  and  seeks  to  restore  the  angry  prophet.  The  disobedient  are 
constrained  by  a  force  too  strong  for  them  ;  but  even  the  imgracious  doing  of 
duty  brings  the  spirit  into  fitness  for  gentler  discipline.  The  Lord  cares  for  Jonah 
in  his  self-wilL  When  God  smites  the  gourd,  and  sends  the  vehement  east  wind 
and  burning  sun  to  beat  on  Jonah's  head,  it  is  that  He  may  speak  in  words  gentler 
than  the  gourd-shade,  and  reveal  Himself  to  the  stricken  spirit  as  "  the  shadow 
of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  How  different  is  this  from  man  !  We  should 
have  been  glad  that  the  self-absorbed  man  should  be  his  own  tormentor.  God ' 
seeks  to  restore  the  prophet  by  awakening  love  in  his  heart :  awakening  his  interest^ 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

and  making  him  tender  over  the  gourd.  Over  the  wretched,  gloomy  Jonah,  sprung 
up  the  wondrous  plant,  and  its  leaves  and  tendrils  drev^  oflE  his  thoughts  from 
himself,  and  as  he  watched  it  grow,  a  new  interest  was  awakened  in  him.  Hia 
heart  softened  to  the  plant,  and  he  becomes  strangely  tender  and  reverential 
over  a  gourd.  There  is  something  wonderful  in  life,  even  though  it  be  the  life  of 
a  common  weed.  Jonah  loves  his  gourd,  and  "  has  pity  "  on  it  when  it  is  smitten. 
The  first  result  of  Jonah's  tenderness  would  seem  to  be  a  deeper  gloom.  Another 
wrong  is  added  to  his  suffering  ;  and  again  he  cries  for  death.  But  it  has  not  all 
been  in  vain ;  for  he  is  prepared  to  listen  to  the  voice  that  once  more  sounds  in 
his  ears.  His  reply,  "  I  do  well  to  be  angry,"  was  bad  and  bitter ;  but  perverse 
and  sullen  silence  before  God  is  far  worse  than  perverse  and  sullen  speech.  How 
wonderful  is  God's  answer.  The  tenderness  that  was  in  Jonah,  poor  as  it  was, 
mingled  with  selfishness  as  it  was,  was  yet,  in  its  dim  and  partial  way,  an  emblem 
of  the  tenderness  of  God  for  every  creature  He  has  made.  "  Thou  canst  not  bear 
that  what  has  lived,  and  lived  for  thee,  should  die.  And  shall  I  be  careless  of 
the  great  city  ?  "  There  is  this  sacred  energy  in  love,  however  poor  it  may  be, 
however  mixed  with  selfishness,  that  it  admits  us  into  the  secret  of  God's  counsel, 
helps  us  to  bear  Divine  mysteries,  and  imderstand  God's  ways.  Since  on  every 
hand  God  has  put  the  tokens  and  witnesses  of  His  Divine  care  and  tenderness, 
do  we  not  hear  on  every  hand  the  voice  that  calls  us  from  our  absorbing  passions, 
from  our  griefs,  our  angers,  and  our  woes  ?  Life  is  worth  living  when  every 
human  creature  is  felt  worthy  of  our  love  :  the  voice  of  duty  will  sweetly  beckon 
us  to  human  sympathy  and  human  helpfulness.  And  so  the  dark  mystery  of 
TOUT  life  will  be  read.  In  God's  care  for  all  men  you  will  find  yourself  surrounded 
by  God's  care  for  you.  The  wise  and  blessed  purpose  of  the  individual  destiny 
is  seen  in  the  one  eternal  piurpose  of  love  to  men.  (A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  The 
character  of  Jonah  : — The  immediate  occasion  of  Jonah's  anger  was  the  withering 
of  the  gourd.  There  had  been,  however,  a  prior  occasion  of  his  wrath.  He  had 
been  offended  with  the  patience  and  lenity  which  God  had  exercised  towards  the 
inhabitants  of  Nineveh,  contrary  (as  he  unreasonably  thought)  to  the  commission 
that  had  been  given  him,  to  threaten  their  destruction.  If  Jonah  was  grieved 
at  the  destruction  of  the  agreeable  and  useful  gourd,  the  destruction  of  a  populous, 
flourishing,  and  powerful  city  ought  to  be  a  much  more  mournful  and  distressing 
sight ;  and  if  this  could  be  prevented,  though  it  had  been  threatened,  it  ought  to 
give  him  joy.  His  behaviour  exhibits  to  our  view  the  hurtful  effects  of  that  pride 
and  wrath,  which,  in  certain  circumstances,  more  or  less  arises  in  the  breast  of 
every  man.  Learn  these  lessons — 1.  That  the  mind  of  man,  being  prone  to  gratify 
every  passion  which  it  feels  to  the  utmost  possible  extent,  therefore  gives  the 
object  for  which  it  is  conceived  that  figure  and  importance  in  its  own  imagination 
whereby  it  is  fitted  to  afford  the  most  extensive  and  complete  gratification.  2.  That 
the  mind  of  man,  being  thus  disposed  to  magnify  the  object  of  every  passion  beyond 
its  real  nature  and  extent,  it  is  hereby  equally  disposed  to  justify  the  passion  it 
conceives,  however  excessive  and  unreasonable.  What  use  ought  we  to  make  of 
Jonah's  example  ?  It  ought  to  put  us  on  our  guard  against  that  fatal  self-deceit 
which  leads  men  to  give  themselves  a  false  description  of  the  objects  of  their 
several  passions,  and  as  false  a  description  of  the  innocence  and  justice  of  the 

fassions  which  they  have  conceived.  Being  of  a  passionate  and  peevish  nature, 
is  pride  and  anger  being  raised,  by  what  Jonah  apprehended  might  hurt  his 
interest  and  reputation  as  a  prophet,  every  pious,  every  tender  and  humane 
consideration  was  entirely  overlooked.  We  should  learn  to  put  ourselves  upon 
our  guard  against  the  influence  of  this  pernicious  self-deceit,  and  to  make  it,  as 
far  as  possible  we  can,  the  invariable  measure  of  oiu*  conduct.  1.  To  proportion 
the  degree  of  our  affections  to  the  real  merit  and  importance  of  the  cause  by 
which  they  are  produced  ;  and  2.  To  exclude  the  false,  artificial  apologies  by  which 
the  most  unjust  and  criminal  attachments  in  the  heart  of  man  are  ready  to 
conceal,  or  justify  their  own  excess.  This  conduct  will,  indeed,  require  a  careful 
attention  to  ourselves  and  much  self-correction  and  command.  To  enforce  this 
instruction  the  following  reflection  ought  to  be  attended  to,  namely,  that  the 
artifice  by  which  the  mind  of  man  imposes  on  itself,  in  the  indulgence  of  its  sinful 
and  irregular  desires,  whatever  present  ease  or  pleasure  it  may  give,  must  become, 
ere  long,  the  source  of  anguish  and  remorse.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  the 
consciences  of  men  will  hereafter  punish  them  in  the  same  manner  for  those 
iniquities  which  they  now  commit  calmly  and  without  remorse.  Without  great 
vigilance  and  much  insi)ection  of  ourselves  we  are  in  the  utmost  danger  of  mis- 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  77 

apprehending  our  own  character  and  of  justifying  ourselves.  This  dangerous 
self-deceit  proceeds  from  two  causes.  1.  From  the  self-love  and  vanity  which  is 
natural  to  every  man.  2.  From  the  artifice  of  sinful  passions.  By  the  first,  men 
are  laid  imder  a  general  partiality  in  favour  of  themselves,  and  are  disposed  to 
form  a  more  favourable  opinion  of  their  own  character  than  it  is  entitled  to. 
By  the  second,  they  are  hindered  in  a  more  particular  manner  from  perceiving  the 
iniquity  and  guilt  of  those  parts  of  their  character  and  conduct  which  are  directed 
by  the  influence  of  their  sinful  passions.  When  these  two  causes  of  self-deceit  meet, 
they  must  betray  a  man  into  a  total  ignorance  and  misapprehension  of  himself. 
(W.  Craig,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the  gottrd. — Jonah's  gourd: — There  is  no 
mention  of  Israel  in  this  Book  of  Jonah.  It  is  concerned  solely  about  the  welfare 
of  a  foreign  nation.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  spirit  of  the  book  is  entirely 
opposed  to  Jewish  feeling.  While  its  form  is  historical,  in  substance  it  is  pro- 
phetical. It  contains  great  and  important  truths  which  Israel  was  in  danger 
of  overlooking,  and  foreshadows  a  time  when  God's  mercy  towards  mankind 
should  no  longer  be  restrained  within  the  limits  of  the  seed  of  Jacob.  All  the 
concern  of  the  writer  is  t-o  point  a  moral  lesson.  The  exclusive  spirit  which 
regarded  all  nations  as  made  to  subserve  the  welfare  of  Israel  was  always  hateful 
to  God.  But  Jonah  is  scarcely  to  be  blamed  for  not  seeing  what  many  excellent 
Christians  have  failed  to  see.  We  must  not  throw  stones  at  Jonah,  for  our  own 
kouses  are  sufficiently  brittle.  Look  at  the  lesson  of  the  gourd.  It  had  cost 
him  nothing,  his  wisdom  had  not  provided  it,  nor  his  care  cherished  its  growth, 
yet  he  resented  the  loss  of  it  as  a  personal  injury.  It  was  a  parable  designed  to 
convey  a  needful  lesson  to  abate  Jonah's  peevish  grief  at  the  sparing  of  Nineveh. 
God  answered  Jonah  by  dealing  with  the  plant  as  Jonah  would  have  had  Him 
deal  with  Nineveh.  What  was  there,  then,  in  Nineveh,  which  answered  to  the 
consolation  Jonah  derived  from  the  plant  ?  Its  sentient  life  and  evident  happiness, 
the  work  of  God's  hands,  unspoiled  as  yet  by  human  wickedness,  was  God's 
gourd,  the  consolation  of  His  heart  when  the  hot  wind  of  Nineveh's  wickedness 
blew  upon  Him.  He  could  not  bear  the  thought  of  sending  the  pestilence  to 
crush  in  pain  and  death  all  this  innocent  life  and  enjoyment,  or  of  giving  up  these 
tender  little  ones  to  the  cruel  carnage  of  savage  foes.  Judgment  is  His  strange 
work,  and  only  when  absolutely  necessary  will  He  sacrifice  the  innocent  and 
helpless  for  the  sake  of  punishing  the  world  and  purifying  its  moral  atmosphere. 
This  is  a  very  beautiful  lesson.  It  sheds  a  shaft  of  tender  light  into  God'^  dealings 
with  mankind.  God  will  not  let  the  happiness  of  creation  be  sacrificed  for  the 
sake  of  punishing  human  corruption.  The  final  lesson  of  this  Book  of  Jonah  is 
full  of  encouragement,  and  gives  us  a  conception  of  God  which  is  scarcely  siu-passed 
even  in  the  New  Testament.  He  is  represented  as  more  merciful  than  His 
servant,  and  as  possessed  of  far  wider  sympathies.  If  God  were  not  more  merci- 
ful than  man  there  would  be  little  hope  for  us.  Repentance  instantly  calls 
forth  Divine  mercy.  The  prayer  of  the  contrite  no  sooner  reaches  His  ear  than 
the  justifying  word  goes  forth.     (E.  W.  Shalders,  B.A.) 

Ver.  11.  And  shotild  not  I  spare  Nineveh,  that  great  city. — Great  cities  ;  or 
our  fellow-creatures : — Jonah's  disquietude  had  arisen  from  a  strange  cause ;  it 
was  from  the  exercise  of  God's  mercy  in  sparing  the  lives  and  the  city  of  a  mighty 

S>ople.  Jonah  could  not  bear  that  his  message  should  seem  not  to  take  effect, 
e  regarded  the  sparing  of  the  city  as  a  dishonour  done  to  him.  1.  The  great 
thought  which  these  words  suggest  to  our  minds  is  God's  great  compassion  for 
the  helpless  and  ignorant.  2.  A  comparison  between  the  view  which  God  takes 
of  great  masses  of  human  beings,  and  that  with  which  we  sometimes,  in  carelessness 
or  pride,  are  disposed  to  look  upon  them.  We  live,  in  fact,  on  the  outside  of 
oiur  fellow-creatures ;  we  exercise  little  sympathy  with  them.  Jonah's  fault 
was  his  heartless  selfishness.  How  could  a  man  that  knew  anything  of  the  soul's 
value  express  himself  as  Jonah  did  but  under  this  fatal  influence  ?  3.  What 
are  our  thoughts  and  feelings  and  views  in  similar  circumstances  ?  What  do  we 
feel  when  contemplating  great  masses  of  human  beings  in  helpless  innocence, 
or  in  degraded  ignorance  ?  There  is  nothing  more  impressive  than  a  great  city. 
If  we  are  true  brethren  of  the  Grod-man,  if  the  manhood  of  Christ  is  more  than 
a  name  to  us,  if  it  is  a  word  of  real  sympathy,  then  it  must  unlock  the  chambers 
of  our  hearts  to  our  brethren.     Then  every  man  we  deal  with,  every  servant. 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ly. 

every  neighbour  will  be  an  object  of  interest  to  ns.  The  watchword  of  the  whole 
creation  now  is  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  (C.  E.  Kennaway,  M.A.)  The 
Divine  character  and  purposes : — Had  we  met  with  the  Book  of  Jonah  in  the 
Apocrypha,  we  should  have  been  tempted  to  overlook  the  profound  teachings 
contained  in  it,  and  we  should  have  regarded  it  as  a  traditional  story,  wrought 
up  into  its  present  shape  by  some  writer  of  a  later  time,  whose  spirit  was,  by 
contact  with  better  forms  of  heathenism,  liberated  and  delivered  from  Jewish 
prejudices.  What  is  the  special  contribution  which  is  made  by  it  to  the  body 
of  revelation  ?  1.  The  first  and  broadest  teaching  regards  the  character  of  God 
as  the  God  of  nations.  2.  Another  aspect  of  the  book  is  its  bearing  upon  the 
popular  mind  at  the  time  it  was  written,  its  teachings  as  to  the  character  of  God 
as  the  God  of  IsraeL  3.  It  was  a  direct  and  very  powerful  protest  against  mere 
priestism  and  ceremonialism.  Jonah  had  nothing  to  do  but  preach  repentance. 
And  God  spared  Nineveh  simply  on  their  timiing  from  their  wickedbess  and 
confessing  their  sins.  4.  What  can  be  said  of  "  God's  repenting  Him  of  the  evil "  ? 
The  proclamation  to  Nineveh  carried  an  implied  condition.  It  meant  that  the 
same  God  who  pronounced  the  sentence  was  ready  to  recall  it  on  the  repentance 
of  the  people.  The  unconditional  form  of  the  proclamation  is  merely  the  tribute 
which  is  paid  to  the  justice  of  God,  which  is  absolute,  which  can  never  be  changed 
as  justice,  which  is  honoured  even  in  the  remission  of  pimishment,  and  which 
must  be  proclaimed  as  the  foundation  on  which  all  true  repentance  is  made  to 
rest.  But  the  prophet's  appearance  was  an  invitation  to  repentance  and  salva- 
tion. God  morally  regards  us  at  any  moment  just  as  we  are.  Of  course  He 
has  considered  our  future  and  provided  for  it  alL  What  we  are  now  God  regards 
U6  as  being,  and  treats  us  accordingly,  (i?.  A.  Bedford,  M.A.)  Reflections 
on  the  story  of  Jonah  : — 1.  The  warning  furnished  by  this  history,  to  beware  of 
allowing  expected  results  to   interfere  with   present  and  pressing  obligations. 

2.  Another  reflection  respects  the  spheres  of  greatest  usefulness  for  the  servants 
of  God,  and  admonishes  them  to  watch  for  the  leadings  of  providence,  rather 
than  give  way  to  their  own  desires  and  inclinations.  Men  are  not  always  the 
best  judges  of  the  department  of  service  by  which  they  can  do  most  to  glorify 
God,  any  more  than  of  the  particular  stations  they  can  most  successfully  occupy. 

3.  The  benefit  which  may  be  derived,  both  for  direction  in  duty  and  for  the  profitable 
study  of  His  Word  and  ways,  from  a  connected  and  orderly  view  of  His  dispensations. 

4.  Whenever  and  wherever  God  is  pleased  to  manifest  of  His  grace  and  goodness,  it 
is  our  part  to  acknowledge  and  rejoice  in  the  manifestation.  {Patrick  Fairbairn.) 
The  education  of  a  prophet : — According  to  tradition,  Jonah  was  the  son  of  the 
widow  of  Zarephath,  whom  Elijah  raised  to  life  again  ;  and  the  sturdy  youth  who 
stood  at  the  prophet's  side  throughout  that  long  and  terrible  day  on  Mount  Carmel. 
He  was  further  identified  with  a  young  man  whom  Elisha  sent  to  anoint  Jehu 
to  be  king  over  Israel.  Certainly  he  belonged  to  that  stem  order  of  men,  and  had 
a  great  "  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge."  He  greatly  needed 
enlargement  of  mind  and  soul ;  and  in  the  end,  I  thiri,  received  it.  And  the 
story  of  this  book,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  Jonah,  is  a  study  of  a  typical  zealot  or 
religionist  in  contact  with  the  larger  purposes  of  the  Divine  loving-kindness  not 
sympathising  with  them,  or  even  understanding  them ;  yet  learning  at  last, 
perhaps  after  much  Divine  discipline,  in  some  small  measure  to  share  them.  1.  He 
IS  first  of  all  shown  in  association  with  the  rough  heathen  Phoenician  sailors,  and 
their  humanity  is  seen  in  gracious  contrast  with  his  own  temper.  For  he  is  now 
endeavoiuring  to  put  the  whole  Mediterranean  sea  between  himself  and  his  duty, 
which,  if  faithfully  performed,  may  save  a  vast  city  from  its  doom ;  and  it  is 
because  he  foresees  this  as  a  likely  result  that,  instead  of  going  to  Nineveh,  he 
is  trying  to  flee  into  Spain.  But  these  poor  sailors  will  save  this  foreigner,  bird 
of  ill  passage  though  he  is,  if  they  can.  But  Jonah  emerged  from  the  dread 
experience  that  followed,  when  he  went  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  mountains, 
and  the  earth  with  her  bars  was  about  him  for  ever,"  unsoftened  in  feeling.  He  is 
as  atistere  and  pitiless  as  before,  and  thinks  himself  more  righteous  than  God. 
It  is  infinitely  strange  that  men  can  come  forth  from  dark  seas  of  peril  and  judg- 
ment, and,  after  deliverance,  deny  one  morsel  of  compassion  to  their  fellow- 
sinners  !  2.  But  Jonah,  unreconciled  to  the  thought  of  God's  clemency  to  others, 
goes  on  his  sulky  way  to  Nineveh,  "  that  great  city,"  "  great  unto  God,"  wherein 
were  "  six  score  thousand  persons  that  cannot  discern  between  their  right  hand 
and  their  left  hand  " — little  children,  and,  as  it  is  humanely  added,  "  also  much 
cattle."     He  cries  aloud   in   the   broad   thoroughfares   and  beside  the  massive 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  79 

temples  his  message  of  doom,  "  Yet  forty  days."  It  is  said  that  four  years  before 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem  an  unknown  man  traversed  the  city  continually  crying, 
"  A  voice  from  the  east,  a  voice  from  the  west,  a  voice  from  the  four  winds,  a  voice 
against  Jerusalem  and  the  Holy  Place,  a  voice  against  the  bridegroom  and  the 
bride  1  Woe,  woe  to  Jerusalem  !  "  But  this  voice  was  more  immediate,  "  Yet 
forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  destroyed."  Now,  it  says  a  great  deal  for  the 
tolerance  of  the  people  that  they  suffered  a  foreigner  thus  to  denounce  them. 
People  do  not  always  care  to  be  told  of  their  sins,  and  the  judgment  to  come. 
"  Am  I  therefore  become  your  enemy,"  says  Paul,  "  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ?  " 
Ah,  there  is  often  no  surer  way  !  But  these  heathen  not  only  permitted  the  message 
to  be  spoken  in  their  midst ;  they  allowed  it  to  resoimd  in  their  consciences. 
They  repented,  after  a  godly  sort,  "  they  turned  from  their  evil  way."  And  so 
theirs  was  a  repentance  unto  life,  not  to  be  repented  of.  How  salutary  is  this 
grace — this  tinning  of  the  mind  from  sia,  this  honest  regret  and  resolve  I  3.  "  But 
it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  he  was  very  angry."  It  is  the  littleness  of 
man,  which  everywhere  in  this  book  is  confronted  by  the  majesty  and  iho 
magnanimity  and  the  philanthropy  of  Grod.  The  prayer  of  Jonah  that  follows 
is  the  most  remarkable  prayer  on  record.  Here  is  this  narrow,  parochial,  in- 
adequate man  presuming  to  speak  to  the  Almighty  as  if  on  level  terms  with  Him — 
nay,  as  if  he  spoke  hova.  a  superior  eminence  of  wisdom  and  virtue  !  "I  pray 
Thee  was  not  this  my  8a3ring,"  he  cries,  "  when  I  was  yet  in  my  country  ?  "  it 
has  all  turned  out,  he  declares,  as  he  knew  it  would.  But  when  his  prayer  returns 
into  his  own  bosom,  Jonah  now  becomes  a  spectacle  unto  angels  and  unto  men. 
He  went  out  of  the  city,  and  built  hims^  a  booth  and  waited  to  see  what  would 
become  of  the  city.  Perhaps  the  clock  had  not  struck  ;  perhaps  there  was  some- 
thing  wrong  with  his  chronology  ;  perhaps  the  people  would  lapse  again  into  aia., 
and  the  doom  fall  after  alL  An,  how  different  from  the  spirit  of  Him  who,  when 
He  beheld  Jerusalem  in  its  sins  and  foresaw  its  coming  ruin,  wept  over  it !  4.  But 
Jonah  did  not  weep  over  the  city :  He  wept  over  himself.  Li  his  mortification 
and  mental  and  physical  exhaustion  he  thought  that  he  wanted  to  die ;  though, 
when  death  was  very  near  him  in  the  deep  seas,  he  was  of  another  mind.  But 
just  as  when  his  great  predecessor,  EUjah,  in  the  wilderness,  "  requested  for 
himself  that  he  might  die,  *  God  took  no  notice  of  the  request,  but  inquired  about 
his  duty  onoe  and  again :  '*  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "  So  God  took  no 
notic-e  of  Jonah's  request,  but  inquired  once  and  again  about  his  temper  :  "  Doest 
thou  well  to  be  angry  ?  "  And,  as  God  taught  EUjah  by  a  nature  parable,  the 
whirlwind,  the  earthquake,  the  fire,  and  the  still,  small  voice,  so  He  taught  Jonah 
by  the  parable  of  the  gourd.  "  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the  goxu:d,"  said  God.  It 
was  a  form  of  self-pity,  no  doubt ;  but,  then,  how  much  of  our  sympathy  starts 
from  a  selfish  root !  It  is  a  great  thing  when  feeling  splits  away  from  a  purely 
personal  reference,  and  puts  forth  an  altruistic  branchlet.  Time  and  grace  may 
make  much  of  a  sentiment  not  so  pvire  and  lofty  in  its  beginning  as  one  would  wish. 
Think,  Jonah,  think  !  "  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the  gourd."  You  did  not  make 
it ;  it  was  not  yours  ;  yet  its  short-lived  glory  touched  you  with  some  regret.  I 
have  made  both  plants  and  men.     Ought  I  not  to  have  pity  on  men  falling  and 

Eassing  ?  Think  !  till  you,  too,  pity  them  with  Me.  5.  Did  Jonah  learn  the 
ssson  of  charity,  and  take  a  larger  and  a  gentler  mould  ?  There  is  some  reason 
to  think  that  he  did,  for  as  the  story  leaves  him  he  is  still  under  the  hand  of  God, 
and  God  is  still  speaking.  The  inference  is  that  he  receives  the  Divine  admonition. 
He  has  no  answer  to  make,  and  God  is  still  with  him,  and  not  failing  nor  forsaking 
this  cross-grained  servant  of  His.  We  love  the  amiable.  What  a  mercy  it  is 
that  Grod  loves  the  unamiable  also,  and  the  awkward  and  ignorant  and  dim- 
sighted,  and  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  the  evil.  But  there  is  perhaps  another 
reason  for  hoping  that  God's  teaching  was  not  in  vain.  In  2  Kings  xiv.  26  we 
learn  that  Jonah  jM^phesied  with  reference  to  the  re-conquest  of  Moab  under 
Jeroboam  II.,  who  "  restored  the  coast  of  Israel  from  the  entering  of  Hamath  to 
the  Sea  of  the  Plain."  Now,  in  the  oracles  contained  in  Isaiah  there  is  one  con- 
cerning Moab.  not  by  Isaiah,  but  spoken,  it  is  said,  "  in  time  pa,st "  (R.V.). 
By  a  number  of  eminent  critics  this  is  supposed  to  be  the  substance  of  Jonah's 
prophecy  during  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  11.  If  we  can  take  this  view  we  may  well 
consider  how  different  the  tone  of  this  prophecy  is  from  that  which  we  should 
expect  from  the  accuser  of  Nineveh.  It  is  full  of  tender  feeling  and  humane 
regret-  "  I  will  weep  with  the  weeping  of  Jazer  for  the  vine  of  Sibmah :  I  will 
waAec  thee  with  my  teaxs,  O  Heshbon  and  Elealeh :  for  upon  thy  summer  fruits 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iy. 

and  upon  thy  harvest  the  battle  shout  is  fallen  .  .  .  Wherefore  my  bowels 
sound  like  an  harp  for  Moab,  and  mine  inward  parts  for  Kirheres"  (Isa.  xvi.  9 
and  11).  We  cannot  recognise  in  these  words  the  voice  of  the  Jonah  who  went  to 
Nineveh  ;  and,  indeed,  it  may  be  the  voice  of  another  Jonah,  whom  God's  gentle- 
ness held  made  great.  And,  whether  Jonah  learned  his  lesson  or  not,  the  story 
remains — a  poem,  in  which  man  is  humiliated  and  God  only  exalted.  "  For  My 
ways  are  not  your  ways,  nor  your  thoughts  My  thoughts,  saith  the  Lord :  for 
as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  My  ways  higher  than  your  ways, 
and  My  thoughts  higher  than  your  thoughts."  (A.  H.  Vine.)  The  Church 
and  the  city  (with  Luke  xix.  41) : — These  texts  from  Jonah  and  the  Gospel  by  Luke 
are  selected  that  their  light  may  fall  upon  the  subject  of  the  attitude  of  God 
toward  the  cities  of  to-day.  I  have  not  often  found  myself  in  agreement  with 
Bismarck,  but  with  his  views  of  cities  I  perfectly  agree :  "  Great  cities  are  great 
eores  on  the  body  politic."  The  crowding  of  populations  into  great  cities  is  never 
conducive  to  the  development  of  individualism,  nor  does  it  make  for  the  ideal 
socialism.  The  Divine  attitude  toward  the  city  has  never  been  that  of  aloofness 
from  failure  and  sin,  but  rather  that  of  keen  interest,  profound  pity,  ceaseless 
activity.  Nineveh  was  a  city  outside  the  covenant  of  the  chosen  people,  a  city 
steeped  in  heathen  customs  and  wrong-doing.  Yet  God  sent  Jonah,  and  proves 
in  the  language  of  the  text  this  love  and  care.  Jerusalem  was  the  city  of  privilege 
and  blessing,  which  killed  the  prophets  and  stoned  the  messengers.  The  city 
which  Jesus  wept  over.  The  Divine  attitude  toward  great  cities  is  one  of  com* 
passionate  interest  and  love.  Every  city  is  known  to  God.  Every  part  of  it  is 
known  to  Him,  the  rich  and  the  poor  parts.  In  this  city  "  all  things  are  naked 
and  open  to  the  eye  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  But  beyond  the  infinite 
knowledge  is  this  other  thought.  He  cares.  There  is  no  sorrow  that  God  does 
not  feel.  He  has  abtmdoned  no  part  of  what  He  Himself  created.  All  the 
physical  disability  has  His  sympathy — the  dwellings  of  the  poor,  the  workshops 
of  our  men  and  women ;  all  the  mental  sufferings,  the  misery  of  mystery  and  the 
mystery  of  the  misery ;  all  the  spiritual  death — "  the  cursed  mountain  of  sorrow 
lies  heaviest  on  the  Divine  heart."  God  has  not  forsaken  the  city :  He  is  stiU 
sending  His  prophets.  His  messengers.  His  Son.  Moreover,  He  is,  by  His  Holy 
Spirit,  the  actual  and  ever-present  force  for  the  relieving  of  every  condition  of 
evil  and  sorrow.  No  problem  is  too  complex  for  His  wisdom,  no  opposing  force 
too  mighty  for  His  power,  no  darkness  too  dense  for  His  light,  no  trifle  too  trivial 
for  His  notice.  He  is  working  for  its  regeneration.  What,  then,  is  the  responsi- 
bihty  of  the  city  ?  What  does  the  Chiurch  of  Christ  exist  for  7  For  the  select 
few  who  to-day  worship  within  the  buildings  called  by  His  name  ?  Then  in 
God's  name  close  the  doors  !  Such  churches  have  no  mission,  and  should  cease 
to  exist.  The  Church  of  Christ  exists  to  reveal  God  and  to  act  in  concert  with 
Him.  Would  that  I  could  startle  you  into  Christian  activity  1  The  sorrow  of 
the  city  awaits  your  sympathy,  and  the  saving  force  and  grace  of  Jesus  Christ. 
How  is  the  city  to  know  that  it  is  not  God-forsaken  ?  Through  the  Church. 
Yfe  have  here  no  continuing  city ;  we  seek  one  to  come,  whose  builder  and  maker 
is  God.  The  centres  of  the  Christian  life  and  the  civic  life  are  diametrically 
opposite.  The  first  principle  of  the  Christian  life  is  self -death ;  that  of  the  civic 
life  is  selfishness.  The  second  element  of  the  one  is  sacrifice ;  of  the  other,  self- 
seeking.  The  third  law  of  the  one  is,  "  I  believe  in  the  salvation  of  the  unfit " ; 
that  of  the  civic  hfe  is  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  We  seek  a  city  which  hath 
foundations.  Many  are  trying  to  find  it  by  star-gazing.  They  thank  God  for 
their  comfortable  lot  in  life,  and  wait.  Seek  the  city  that  is  to  be  here.  We 
must  take  part  in  the  government  of  the  city.  Whether  the  factory  is  to  be 
occupied  so  long  and  so  closely  that  life  and  comfort  are  neglected  is  not  the 
question  of  the  manufacturer's  profit,  but  of  the  worker's  health.  If  you  do  not 
care  you  are  not  a  Christian.  You  cannot  live  near  to  Christ  and  be  indifferent. 
We  must  press  forward  all  the  time  in  our  distinctive  work  of  setting  men  and 
women  into  personal  contact  with  Christ.  The  law  of  adaptation  is  one  law  of 
progress.  There  can  be  no  failure  in  God ;  if  there  be  any,  it  is  in  us.  I  call 
every  Christian  man  and  woman  to  attention.  Concerning  the  Divine  attitude 
there  is  no  question.  You  believe  that  God  loves  the  city.  A  boy  asked  hi.i 
Sunday-school  teacher,  "  Do  you  think  God  loves  wicked  boys  ?  "  "  Certainly 
not,"  was  her  reply.  Oh,  the  blasphemy  of  such  an  answer  !  Of  course,  God 
loves  wicked  boys.  If  He  had  never  loved  sinners  there  would  have  been  no 
saints.     Concerning  our  relation  to  God's  attitude  toward  the  city  there  is  room 


CHAP.  IV.]  JONAH.  81 

for  much  heart-searching.  We  must  know  the  city.  Contrast,  in  conclusion, 
our  texts.  Jonah  was  angry  because  God  forgives.  Jesus  wept  over  the  sins 
of  the  city.  I  am  in  sympathy  with  Jesus  rather  than  with  Jonah.  Christian 
am  I  if  I  am  Christ-like  ;  Christ-like  am  I  if,  like  Christ,  I  weep  over  the  city 
and  give  myself  for  it  even  unto  death.     ((?.  C.  Morgan,  D.D.) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MICAH. 

r 

"  NoifB  of  ns  liveth  unto  himself,"  the  apostle  Patil  says  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Romans.  Very  careful  this  should  make  us  about  our  thoughts  and  our  behaviour, 
lest  we  do  harm  by  our  example.  But  very  cheering,  too,  when  we  are  striving 
to  walk  as  children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day,  the  knowledge  ought  to  be  that 
we  are  wielding  over  others  a  "  power  which  makes  for  righteousness."  The 
lives  of  good  men — of  all  who  have  been  in  the  main,  with  however  many  faults, 
saints  and  servants  of  God — have  an  incalculable  value.  The  influence  of  a  holy 
example  carries  weight  long  after  the  man  himself  has  gone  from  the  world. 
\  Such  thoughts  as  these  are  awakened  in  us  by  the  very  name  of  the  prophet 
-A.  Micah.  It  was  not  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  chosen  people  that  the  name 
j  had  been  borne  by  a  minister  of  the  Lord.  More  than  a  century  and  a  half  before 
\ ;  the  days  when  this  preacher  of  judgment  and  mercy  stood  up  to  deliver  his  message 
\  to  his  nation  there  had  been  another  Micah,  who  had  testified  faithfully  for  God. 
We  know  little  regarding  him  ;  only  one  dramatic  and  thrilling  incident  in  his 
career  has  been  recorded  (I  Bongs  xxii.).  So  Micaiah,  the  son  of  Imlah — and 
Micaiah  is  simply  a  fuller  and  more  original  form  of  Micah — was  summoned  ; 
and  his  single  voice  was  heard,  solemn  and  brave  in  that  turbulent  crowd,  warning 
Ahab  that  he  must  die,  and  that  his  people  must  be  scattered  like  sheep  upon 
the  hills.  The  bold  witness-bearer  was  smitten  and  imprisoned,  and  we  hear 
no  more  of  him.  But  his  words  were  vindicated.  Micaiah  means  "  Who  is  like 
the  Lord  ?  "  There  was  a  trumpet-call  in  the  very  title  which  the  man  bore. 
It  was  in  itself  an  inspiring  watchword.  It  was  a  challenge  to  those  four  hundred 
blind  leaders  who  stood  round  him ;  an  assiu-ance  given  them  that  Jehovah  was 
about  to  prove  Himself  superior  to  every  false  god.  But  the  prophet  who  had 
been  so  loyal  to  God  had  a  further  reward.  Many  years  after  his  time  there 
was  need  for  the  unfiurling  again  of  the  old  standard,  the  uttering  afresh  of  the 
old  watchword.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  it  was  in  the  Kingdom  of  Judah,  which 
had  been  more  faithful  to  the  truth  than  its  Northern  neighbovir,  that  the  need 
had  arisen.  Those  evil  influences  had  indeed  begun  to  work  within  its  borders 
which  were  to  lead  at  last  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  to  the  weary 
captivity  that  ensued.  [  The  people  were  anxious  to  walk  after  the  desires  of  their 
own  hearts,  without  any  disturbing  voice  to  tell  them  that  the  wages  of  their 
sin  must  be  death ;  they  longed  for  men  who  should  speak  only  smooth  things 
to  them ;  and  they  had  their  wish.  There  were  many  religious  teachers  in  the 
land  who  were  prepared,  for  the  pay  of  the  hireling,  to  give  those  careless  and 
unrighteous  souls  all  that  they  craved.  They  condoned  their  sins ;  they  minimised 
their  unjust  practices  ;  they  concealed  the  demands  and  the  penalties  of  God'.s 
law.  Then  it  was  that  a  new  Micah  arose,  possessed  of  the  dauntless  spirit  of 
the  old.  The  name  which  he  had  received  from  his  parents,  in  memory,  perhaps, 
of  the  brave  preacher  who  had  gone  before  him,  was  full  of  meaning  to  him.  He 
determined  to  walk  in  the  footsteps  of  his  predecessor.  He  would  ring  out  again 
the  solemn  challenge,  "  Who  is  like  the  Lord  ?  "     He,  too,  would  show  himself 

ui 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MIC  AH. 


an  Abdiel,  "  among  innumerable  false  unmoved."  He  would  summon  the  world 
,  to  behold  the  conflict,  undertaken  afresh  which  God  had  formerly  brought  to  a 

/  triumphant  issue.  "  Hear,  all  ye  people ;  hearken,  0  earth,  and  all  that  therein 
is ;  and  let  the  Lord  Grod  be  witness  against  you,  the  Lord  from  His  holy  temple," 
— these  were  his  fearless  words.  Micah  had  no  higher  ambition  than  to  reproduce 
the  good  soldier  of  an  earlier  time,  who  had  been  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God 
of  hosts.  There  is  a  twofold  lesson  here  which  we  shall  do  well  to  lay  to  heart. 
There  is  the  comforting  truth  that  the  dead  are  blessed  who  die  in  the  Lord,  be- 
cause their  works  do  follow  them — their  example  lives  on  when  they  are  themselves 
.  away,  to  stimulate  other  souls  to  think  of  those  things  which  are  true  and  honour- 
'  able  and  just  and  pure  and  lovely  and  of  good  report.  The  first  Micah  is  repeated 
in  the  second,  who  is  even  greater,  and  who  wields  a  wider  influence  than  himself. 
So  it  is  very  often.  Our  success  as  husbandmen  in  God's  vineyard  may  seem  to 
us  meagre  indeed,  and  we  may  not  feel  ourselves  qualified  to  render  Him  any  large 
service.  But  if  we  speak  as  He  gives  us  language,  and  enter  willingly  the  doors 
which  He  sets  open,  and  pray  without  ceasing.  He  may  employ  us  to  kindle  into 
vitality  and  enthusiasm  a  life  which  He  is  to  use  for  the  noblest  ends.  And  the 
other  lesson  is  similar.  It  is  this,  that  God  will  take  care  to  perpetuate  His  work, 
and  to  provide  Himself  age  after  age  with  true-hearted  servants  and  witness- 
bearers.  When  one  Micah  dies,  his  place  will  be  filled,  if  need  be,  by  another, 
who  will  utter  anew  the  ancient  watchword,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether 
they  will  forbear.  Micah — the  Micah  who  wrote  this  book — was  a  native  of  the 
country  and  not  of  the  town.  He  was  born  in  Moresheth  Gath,  a  village  on  the 
Philistine  frontier,  which  could  still  be  identified  when,  long  centuries  later,  the 
Christian  father  Jerome  lived  in  Palestine.  It  was  from  the  thrifty  and  industrious 
peasantry  of  Judah  that  the  prophet  sprang.  He  was  essentially  a  man  of  the 
people.  As  we  read  his  words  we  can  see  how  all  along  his  sympathies  continued 
to  go  out  towards  the  humbler  classes,  the  toilers  of- the  land,  those  who  bound 
the  sheaf  and  built  the  house  and  dug  the  grave.  There  is  a  burning  indignation 
in  his  tone  when  he  speaks  against  the  tyranny  of  the  rich  and  noble.  It  is  a 
vivid  pictiu'e  which  he  paints  from  his  own  observation  of  the  sufferings  of  the 
commonalty  at  the  hands  of  their  lords.  Those  proud  and  wealthy  men  seemed 
to  imagine  that  all  who  were  beneath  them  in  social  station  existed  but  for  their 
benefit.  "  They  coveted  fields,  and  seized  them  ;  and  houses,  and  took  them 
away."  The  poorer  agriculturists  were  robbed  daily  of  their  holdings  by  violence 
,or  by  false  judgment.     And  so  to  Micah  the  worst  enemies  of  Judah  were  not  the 

^  Assyrians  ;  they  were  the  men  of  her  own  household — the  haughty  grandees  who 
were  hostile  to  God,  because  they  oppressed  those  who  were  under  God's  most 
immediate  care,  the  needy  and  the  helpless  and  the  destitute.  Micah  was  a  social 
reformer  as  well  as  a  prophet.     It  appears  strange  that  the  sins  which  he  denounces 

'j    in  such  bm-ning  words  should  have  prevailed  in  what  to  outward  seeming  was  a 

'  period  not  only  of  great  prosperity,  but  even  of  great  attention  to  the  observances 
of  religion.  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  the  heading  of  the  book  informs 
us,  "in  the  days  of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  kings  of  Judah."  ^  It  may 
be,  as  recent  expositors  incline  to  believe,  that  the  larger  part  of  the  prophetic 
utteranoes  which  follow  must  be  assigned  to  the  last  of  these  reigns ;  but  the 
life  of  the  prophet  himself  extended  over  them  all.  Now,  two  of  the  kings  who 
!are  named  were  anxious  to  know  and  do  God's  will,  and  sought  to  induce  their 
■'  subjects  to  act  wisely  and  uprightly.  Ahaz,  it  is  true,  was  anything  but  a  God- 
fearing prince,  and  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  in  his  time  truth  should  stand 
on  the  scaffold,  and  wrong  be  seated  on  the  throne.  But  it  is  grieving  to  learn 
that,  under  the  rule  of  Jotham  and  Hezekiah,  evils  should  abound  like  those  which 
Micah  exposes  and  condemns.  The  sympathies  of  the  sovereigns  were  with 
what  was  good  ;  they  were  careful  to  see  that  God  was  outwardly  honoured 
and  obeyed  ;  but  they  could  not  change  the  hearts  and  characters  of  their  people. 
Under  their  government,  injustice  and  corruption  were  rampant  still,  and  the 
prophet  had  to  utter  severe  and  awful  words  concerning  the  crimes  of  the  land. 

1  That  is,  between  769  and  679  b.c.  But  only  a  small  part  of  Micah's  prophetic 
activity  may  have  fallen  in  the  reign  of  Jotham ;  and  he  must  have  been  called 
away  from  the  earth  early  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  for  in  chap.  i.  he  speaks  of 
Sargon's  capture  of  Samaria  as  still  future,  and  that  occurred  before  Hezekiali 
had  been  many  years  on  the  throne.  A  period  of  thirty  years  may  cover  all  hifl 
labours  as  a  prophet. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MICAE. 

i 


It  was  at  a  national  crisis  that  he  began  to  speak.  Ruin  was  impending  over  the 
Northern  Kingdom  of  Israel.  There  the  storm,  which  had  been  gathering  for  long, 
was  about  to  burst  at  last.  Ere  many  months  had  gone  Samaria  would  be  a  heap  of 
the  field ;  the  stones  of  her  bulwarks  were  to  be  rolled  down  into  the  valley,  and 
her  graven  images  dashed  to  pieces  by  the  soldiers  of  Sargon,  the  Assyrian  king. 
Amid  such  clouds  and  darkness,  such  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,  Micah  lifted  up  \ 
his  voice.  But  it  was  not  to  the  Kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  that  he  was  eager  to  ■ 
bear  God's  message.  ■  It  was  to  his  own  land  of  Judah.  It,  too,  had  shared  the 
transgression  of  Samaria,  and  the  same  judgments  menaced  it.  Outwardly  it 
looked  strong  and  noble  ;  never  since  the  time  of  David  and  Solomon  had  its 
wealth  and  power  been  greater;  it  seemed  to  be  reUg^ous,  too;  but  there  was 
a  canker  eating  at  its  heartA  Beneath  the  fair  covering,  what  unrighteousness  ,  <?. 
dwelt,  and  what  neglect  of  thelDivine  law  !  And  now,  when  the  Lord's  punishments 
were  abroad  and  Israel  was  tottering  to  its  fall,  would  Judah  not  learn  righteous- 
ness ?  Would  it  not  be  roused  into  concern  ?  The  task  given  Micah  to  accomplish 
— the  revealing  to  the  Jewish  people  of  their  evil  and  of  the  grievous  judgments 
which  awaited  them — was  not  a  light  or  an  easy  task.  It  was  one  under  the 
burden  of  which  he  would  often  be  ready  to  sink.  But  at  those  moments  when 
heart  and  flesh  are  like  to  fail  it  must  have  encouraged  him  to  know  that  he  was 
not  alone  in  doing  God's  strange  and  heavy  work.  He  had  a  great  coadjutor 
and  friend.  Isaiah,  the  noblest  of  all  the  prophets,  had  begun  his  ministry  before 
Micah,  in  the  reign  of  Jotham's  father  Uzziah  ;  and  when  Micah  laid  down  his 
armour  he  left  Isaiah  still  labouring  and  battling  on.  And  we  may  regard  it 
certain  that  the  two  were  not  contemporaries  merely,  bot  helpers  one  of  another. 
In  what  fashion,  then,  did  Micah  finish  the  work  given  him  to  do  ?  We  have  only 
to  read  the  book  in  which  he  collected  the  substance  of  what  God  had  taught  by  him, 
to  feel  assured  that,  if  it  ha^d  been  possible  to  stir  within  the  proud  hearts  of  the 
Jews  that  godly  sorrow  which  needeth  not  to  be  repented  of,  this  was  the  man  to 
break  and  bend  and  melt  them.  I  like  that  old  division  of  the  prophecy,  though  some 
of  the  critics  reject  it,  which  finds  in  it  three  distinct  parts,  each  of  them  introduced 
by  the  call,  "  Hear  ye  !  "  (See  i.  2,  iii.  1,  vL  1.)  If  we  look  at  the  separate  sections  we  ' 
shall  discover  that  in  all  there  is  first  an  unveiUng  of  the  national  sins,  and  then 
a  solemn  prediction  of  the  woes  with  which  God  must  visit  such  transgressions ;  and 
finally — as  if  the  heart  of  the  prophet,  and  the  heart  of  the  Lord  whose  spokesman 
he  was,  relented  and  shrank  back  from  the  strange  work  of  judgment — a  multitude 
of  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  The  sins  against  which  the  preacher 
inveighs  are  sins  both  against  God  and  man — a  religion  full  of  idolatry,  and  a  false 
confidence  in  Jehovah  fostered  and  encouraged  by  lying  oracles  ;  these  on  the 
one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the  unjust  dealing  which  abounded,  and  the  oppression 
of  the  poor  by  the  rich.  Evils  like  these  God  could  not  leave  impunished.  If 
Micah  spoke  of  the  terrors  of  the  Lord — if  he  felt  that  he  must  put  the  trumpet 
to  his  lips  and  blow  what  Milton  calls  "  a  dolorous  blast,"  in  order  that  the  careless 
in  Zion  might  be  aroused — he  could  not  refrain  from  telling  out,  too,  Grod's  mercy  *" 
and  grace.  He  was  compelled  by  stern  necessity  to  show  himself  a  Boanerges, 
a  son  of  thunder ;  but  we  cannot  help  seeing  how  much  rather  he  would  have 
been  a  Barnabas,  a  son  of  consolation.  And  had  he  no  reward  given  him  for  all 
his  faithfulness  ?  Yes,  a  rich  and  enviable  reward.  God's  approval  rested  upon 
him ;  the  Master  whom  he  served  was  well  pleased  with  him.  But,  more  than 
that,  he  was  honoured  to  work  a  great  reformation  in  the  guilty  land.  The  Divine 
judgment,  he  saw,  must  come  sooner  or  later ;  the  nation  had  sinned  too  deeply 
to  escape  the  infliction  of  punishment ;  but  he  delayed  the  evil  day — he  rendered 
it  possible  for  God  to  spare  the  erring  people  yet  a  while.  His  message  stiired  y 
within  some  who  listened  to  it  a  deep  and  saving  repentance.  It  is  the  prophet 
Jeremiah  who  narrates  the  story  (Jer.  xxvi.  10-19).  When  his  own  life  was 
endangered  by  his  uncompromising  words,  and  the  priests  and  false  prophets 
were  crying  out  for  his  blood,  he  tells  us  that  certain  of  the  elders  of  the  land  took 
his  part  and  secured  his  safety.  And  this  was  how  they  argued,  "  Micah  the 
Morasthite  prophesied  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah ;  and  he  spake  to 
all  the  people  of  Judah,  saying,  '  Zion  shall  be  ploughed  as  a  field,  and  Jerusalem 
shall  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain  of  the  house  as  the  high  places  of  a  forest.' 
Did  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  and  aU  Judah  put  him  at  all  to  death  ?  Did  he 
not  fear  the  Lord,  and  entreat  the  favour  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  repented 
Him  of  the  evil  which  He  had  pronounced  against  them  ?  "  Here,  then,  is  the 
completion  of  Micah's  history.     His  proclamation  of  lamentation  and  mourning 


yi  INTRODUCTION  TO  MIC  AH. 

J 


and  woe— his  sharp  and  piercing  words — penetrated  the  hearts  of  Hezekiah  and 
of  numbers  of  his  subjects.  To  this  prophet  the  conversion  of  the  king  may  be 
traced,  and  all  those  noble  reforms  which  the  king  inaugurated.  For  a  time  the 
swoi-d  of  Jehovah  was  put  away  into  its  scabbard,  and  His  fierce  anger  tarried. 
He  saw  the  nation  awake  to  sorrow  and  to  righteousness  under  the  rebukes  of 
His  servant ;  and  He  heard  it  ask  the  way  to  Zion,  setting  its  face  thitherward. 
AVas  not  Micah  blessed  indeed  ?  If  many  went  on  still  in  their  wickedness,  there 
were  some  whom  he  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning,  and  whom  he  led  into 
the  ways  of  wisdom  which  are  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace.  Probably  his 
office  on  earth  closed  shortly  afterwards.     {Original  Secession  Magazine.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

MICAH. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vbbs.  1,  2.  Tlie  Word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Micah  the  Morasthite. — 
Divine  revelation : — I.  It  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  What  is  a  word  ?  1.  A 
mind  manifesting  power.  In  his  word  a  true  man  manifests  himself,  his  thought, 
feeling,  character.  His  word  is  important  according  to  the  measure  of  his  faculties, 
experiences,  attainments.  Divine  revelation  manifests  the  mind  of  God,  especially 
the  moral  characteristics  of  that  mind — His  rectitude,  holiness,  mercy,  &c.  2.  A 
mind  influencing  power,  Man  uses  his  word  to  influence  other  minds,  to  bring 
other  minds  into  sympathy  with  his  own.  Thus  God  uses  His  Word.  He  uses 
it  to  correct  human  errors,  dispel  human  ignorance,  remove  human  perversities, 
and  turn  human  thought  and  sympathy  into  a  course  harmonious  with  His  own 
mind.  II.  It  is  made  to  individual  men.  It  came  to  Micah,  not  to  his  con- 
temporaries. Why  certain  men  were  chosen  as  the  special  recipients  of  God's 
Word  is  a  problem  whose  solution  must  be  left  for  eternity.  III.  It  is  for  all 
MANKIND.  God  did  not  speak  to  any  individual  man  specially  that  the  com- 
munication might  be  kept  to  himself,  but  that  he  might  communicate  it  to  others. 
He  makes  one  man  the  special  recipient  of  truth  that  he  may  become  the  organ 
and  promoter  of  it.  God's  Word  is  for  the  world.  {Homilist.)  Moresheth: — 
This  was  a  place  in  the  Shephelah,  or  range  of  low  hills  which  lie  between  the 
hill  country  of  Judah  and  the  Philistine  plain.  It  is  the  opposite  exposure  from 
the  wilderness  of  Tekoa,  some  seventeen  miles  away  across  the  watershed.  As 
the  home  of  Amos  is  bare  and  desert,  so  the  home  of  Micah  is  fair  and  fertile. 
The  irregular  chalk  hills  are  separated  by  broad  glens,  in  which  the  soil  is  alluvial 
and  red,  with  room  for  cornfields  on  either  side  of  the  perennial,  or  almost  perennial 
streams.  The  olive  groves  on  the  braes  are  finer  than  either  those  of  the  plaixi 
below  or  of  the  Judaean  tableland  above.  There  is  herbage  for  cattle.  Bees 
murmur  everywhere,  larks  are  singing,  and  although  to-day  you  may  wander 
in  the  maze  of  hills  for  hours  without  meeting  a  man,  or  seeing  a  house,  you  are 
never  out  of  sight  of  the  traces  of  human  habitation,  and  seldom  beyond  the 
sound  of  the  human  voice  —  shepherds  and  ploughmen  calling  to  their  flocks 
and  to  each  other  across  the  glens.  There  are  none  of  the  conditions,  or  of  the 
occasions,  of  a  large  town.  But,  like  the  south  of  England,  the  country  is  one 
of  villages  and  homesteads,  breeding  good  yeomen — men  satisfied  and  in  love 
with  their  soil,  yet  borderers  with  a  fair  outlook  and  a  keen  vigilance  and  sensibility. 
The  Shephelah  is  sufficiently  detached  fi'om  the  capital  and  body  of  the  land  to 
beget  in  her  sons  an  independence  of  mind  and  feeling,  but  so  much  upon  the 
edge  of  the  open  world  as  to  endue  them  at  the  same  time  with  that  sense  of 
the  responsibilities  of  warfare,  which  the  national  statesmen,  aloof  and  at  ease 
in  Zion,  could  not  possibly  have  shared.  Upon  one  of  the  westniost  terraces 
of  the  Shephelah,  nearly  a  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  lay  Moresheth  itself. 
{Geo.  Adam  Smith,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-7.  For,  behold,  the  Lord  cometh  out  of  His  place. — God's  procedure  in 
relation  to  sin  : — This  is  a  highly  figurative  and  sublime  representation  of  the 
Almighty  in  His  retributive  work,  especially  in  relation  to  Samaria  and  Jerusalem. 

I 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

He  is  represented  as  leaving  His  holy  temple,  coming  out  of  His  place,  and  marching 
with  overwhelming  grandem*  over  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  to  deal  out  punish- 
ment to  the  wicked.  "The  description  of  this  theophany,"  says  Delitzsch,  "is 
founded  upon  the  idea  of  a  terrible  storm  and  eaithquake,  as  in  Psa.  xviii.  8.  The 
mountains  melt  (Judg.  v.  4,  and  Psa.  Ixviii.  9)  with  the  streams  of  water  which 
discharge  themselves  from  heaven  (Judg.  v.  4),  and  the  valleys  split  with  the 
deep  channels  cut  out  by  the  torrents  of  water.  The  similes  '  like  wax,'  &c. 
(as  in  Psa.  Ixviii.  3),  and  'like  water '  are  intended  to  express  the  complete  dissolu- 
tion of  mountains  and  valleys.  The  actual  facts  answering  to  this  description 
are  the  destructive  influences  exerted  upon  nature  by  great  national  judgments." 
The  reference  is  undoubtedly  to  the  destruction  of  the  king  of  Israel  by  Shal- 
maneser,  and  the  invasion  of  Judah  by  the  armies  of  Sennacherib  and  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, by  the  latter  of  whom  the  Jews  were  carried  away  captive.  The  passage 
is  an  inexpressibly  grand  representation  of  God's  procedure  in  relation  to  sin. 
I.  As  it  APPEARS  TO  THE  EYE  OF  MAN.  The  Bible  is  eminently  anthropomorphic. 
1.  God,  in  dealing  out  retribution,  appears  to  man  in  an  extraordinary  position. 
"  He  oometh  forth  out  of  His  place."  What  is  His  place  ?  To  all  intelligent 
beings,  the  settled  place  of  the  Almighty  is  the  temple  of  love,  the  pavihon  of 
goodness,  the  mercy  seat.  The  general  beauty,  order,  and  happiness  of  the 
universe  give  all  intelligent  creatures  this  impression  of  Him.  But  when  confusion 
and  misery  fall  on  the  sinner,  the  Almighty  seems  to  man  to  come  out  of  His 
"  place,"  to  step  aside  from  His  ordinary  procedure.  Judgment  is  Grod's  strange 
work.  He  comes  out  of  His  place  to  execute  it.  2.  God,  in  deahng  out  retri- 
bution, appears  to  man  in  a  terrific  aspect.  He  does  not  appear  as  in  the  silent 
march  of  the  stars  or  the  serenity  of  the  sun  ;  but  as  in  thunderstorms  and  volcanic 
eruptions.  "The  mountains  shall  be  molten  under  Him,"  &c.  II.  As  it  affects 
A  srNFUiy  PEOPLE.  In  Grod's  procedure  in  relation  to  sin  what  disastrous  effects 
were  brought  upon  Samaria  and  Jerusalem  !  1.  God,  in  His  procedure  in  relation 
to  sin,  brings  material  ruin  upon  people.  Sin  brings  on  commercial  decay, 
political  ruin  ;  it  destroys  the  health  of  the  body,  and  brings  it  ultimately  to  the 
dust.  2.  God,  in  His  procedure  in  relation  to  sin,  brings  mental  anguish  upon  a 
people.  A  disruption  between  the  soul  and  the  objects  of  its  supreme  affections 
involves  the  greatest  anguish.  The  gods  of  a  people,  whatever  they  may  be, 
are  these  objects,  and  these  are  to  be  destroyed.  Conclusion — Mark  weU  that 
God  has  a  course  of  conduct  in  relation  to  sin,  or  rather,  that  God,  in  His  beneficent 
march,  must  ever  appear  terrible  to  the  sinner,  and  bring  ruin  on  his  head.  It 
is  the  wisdom  as  well  as  the  duty  of  all  intelligent  creatures  to  move  in  thought, 
sympathy,  and  purpose,  as  God  moves — move  with  Him,  not  against  Him. 
{Homilist. )  Ood's  way  of  taking  vengeance  : — The  justice  of  God  taking  vengeance 
on  enemies  is  further  described  from  the  way  of  manifesting  thereof,  which  is 
slowly  but  certainly ;  the  Lord  forbearing,  neither  because  He  purposes  to  give, 
nor  because  He  wants  power ;  as  may  appear  from  His  majesty  and  state,  when 
He  appeareth  environed  with  whirlwinds  and  tempests  raised  by  His  power. 
Doctrine — 1.  The  Lord,  even  toward  enemies,  is  long-suffering,  and  slow  in  executing 
of  anger,  that  their  destruction  may  be  seen  to  be  of  themselves,  that  in  His  holy 
providence  they  may  stumble  more  upon  His  indulgence,  and  fill  up  their  measure  ; 
and  that  His  Church's  faith  and  patience  may  be  tried.  2.  When  the  Lord 
spareth  His  enemies,  it  is  not  because  He  is  not  able  to  meet  with  them,  nor  ought 
we  to  judge  from  any  outward  appearance  that  they  are  invincible  ;  for,  how 
unlikely  soever  the  destruction  of  enemies  may  be  in  the  eyes  of  men,  yet  the 
Lord  who  is  "  slow  to  anger  "  is  also  "  great  in  power."  3.  As  the  Lord  is  able 
to  reach  His  enemies  when  He  pleaseth,  so  His  forbearing  of  them  is  no  evidence 
that  they  shall  be  exempted  altogether ;  but  He  will  undoubtedly  give  proof 
of  His  power,  in  dealing  with  them  as  their  way  deserveth.  4.  The  Lord  is  able 
by  His  power  speedily  to  bring  to  pass  greatest  things,  and  can,  when  He  pleaseth, 
overturn,  confound,  and  darken  all  things  which  appeared  to  be  stable,  well  ordered, 
and  clear.  5.  The  Lord,  manifesting  Himself  in  His  great  glory,  doth  but,  so  to 
say,  obscure  Himself  in  respect  of  our  infirmity,  which  cannot  comprehend  His 
glory  in  its  brightness  ;  for  so  much  doth  His  manifestation  of  Himself  environed 
with  dark  storms  or  tempests  and  thick  lowering  clouds  teach.  6.  God's  dis- 
pensations, even  when  they  are  most  dreadful  and  terrible  in  effects,  may  yet 
be  deep  and  unsearchable,  and  His  purpose  and  counsel  in  them  hard  to  discern ; 
for  so  much  doth  His  way  in  whirlwinds,  storms,  and  clouds  (which  involve  and 
darken  all)  teach.     (George  Hufcheson.) 


CHAP.  I.]  MICAH.  3 

Vers.  8,  9.  For  her  wound  is  incurable. — Moral  incurableness : — Samaria 
and  Jerusalem  were,  in  a  material  and  political  sense,  in  a  desperate  and 
hopeless  condition.  I.  Moral  inctjrableness  is  a  condition  into  which  men 
MAY  FALL.  1.  Mental  philosophy  shows  this.  Such  is  the  constitution  of 
the  human  mind,  that  the  repetition  of  an  act  can  generate  an  uncontrollable 
tendency  to  repeat  it ;  and  the  repetition  of  a  sin  deadens  altogether  that  moral 
sensibility  which  constitutionally  recoils  from  the  wrong.  The  mind  often  makes 
habit,  not  only  second  nature,  but  the  sovereign  of  nature.  2.  Observation  shows 
this.  That  man's  circle  of  acquaintance  must  be  exceedingly  limited  who  does  not 
know  men  who  become  morally  incurable.  There  are  incm-able  liars,  incurable 
misers,  incurable  sensualists,  and  incurable  drunkards.  No  moral  logician, 
however  great  his  dialectic  skill,  can  forge  an  argument  strong  enough  to  move 
them  from  their  old  ways,  even  when  urged  by  the  seraphic  fervour  of  the  highest 
rhetoric.  3.  The  Bible  shows  this.  "  Speak  not  in  the  ears  of  a  fool,  for  he  will 
despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  words."  "  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least 
in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  !  But  now  they  are 
hid  from  thine  eyes."  We  often  speak  of  retribution  as  if  it  always  lay  beyond 
the  grave,  and  the  day  of  grace  as  extending  through  the  whole  life  of  man  ;  but 
such  is  not  the  fact.  Retribution  begins  with  many  men  here.  II.  It  is  a 
CONDITION  FOR  THE  PROFOUNDEST  LAMENTATION.  "  Therefore  I  will  wail  and 
howl,  I  will  go  stripped  and  naked.  I  will  make  a  wailing  like  the  dragons  and 
mourning  as  the  owls."  Christ  wept  when  He  considered  the  moral  incurableness 
of  the  men  of  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  sight  more  distressing  than  the  sight  of  a 
morally  incurable  soul.  There  is  no  building  that  I  pass  that  strikes  me  with 
greater  sadness  than  the  Hospital  for  "  Incurables  "  ;  but  what  are  incurable 
bodies,  compared  to  morally  incurable  souls  ?  There  are  anodynes  that  may 
deaden  their  pains,  and  death  will  relieve  them  of  their  torture  ;  but  a  morally 
incurable  soul  is  destined  to  pass  into  anguish,  intense  and  more  intense  as  existence 
runs  on,  and  peradventure  without  end.  The  incurable  body  may  not  necessarily 
be  an  injury  to  others ;  but  a  morally  incurable  soul  must  be  a  ciu-se  as  long  as  it 
lives.  (Homilist.)  An  incurable  wound  : — The  late  Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon  gave  the 
following  anecdote  in  one  of  the  last  sermons  he  preached  :  "  Dr.  Westmoreland, 
an  eminent  army  surgeon,  tells  of  a  soldier  who  was  shot  in  the  neck,  the  ball 
just  grazing  and  wounding  the  carotid  artery.  The  doctor  knew  that  his  life 
hung  on  a  hair,  and  one  day  as  he  was  dressing  the  wound  the  walls  of  the  artery 
gave  way.  Instantly  the  surgeon  pressed  his  finger  upon  the  artery,  and  held 
the  blood  in  check  ;  and  the  patient  asked,  '  What  does  this  mean  ?  '  'It  means 
that  you  are  a  dead  man,'  answered  the  doctor.  '  How  long  can  I  hve  ?  '  'As 
long  as  I  keep  my  hand  on  the  artery.'  '  Can  I  have  time  to  dictate  a  letter 
to  my  wife  and  child  ?  '  '  Yes.'  And  so  the  letter  was  written  for  him,  full 
of  tender  farewell  messages,  and  when  all  was  finished  he  calmly  closed  his  eyes 
and  said  '  I  am  ready,  doctor.'  The  pvu-ple  tide  ebbed  quickly  away  and  all 
was  over.  What  a  parable  is  here  of  a  far  more  solemn  fact.  Oh,  unsaved  one, 
you  are  by  natvu-e  '  dead  through  trespasses  and  sins  '  !  But  God  keeps  His 
hand  upon  your  pulse,  preserving  your  life  that  you  may  have  an  opportunity 
to  repent  and  be  saved." 

Ver.  13.  Bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast. — Be  quick : — These  words  are 
addressed  to  the  inhabitants  of  Lachish.  Our  subject  is  promptitude  in  action. 
I.  Be  quick  in  your  material  engagements.  The  distinction  between  the 
secular  and  the  spiritual  is  not  real  but  fictitious.  A  man  should  be  quick 
in  all  his  legitimate  temporal  engagements,  whatever  they  may  be.  By 
quickness  is  not  meant  the  hurry  of  confusion,  but  adroit  expertness,  skilful 
promptitude.  As  Shakespeare  said,  "  What  the  wise  do  quickly,  is  not  done 
rashly."  1.  The  quicker  you  are  the  more  you  will  accomplish.  An  expert  man 
will  accomplish  more  in  an  hour  than  a  slow  man  in  a  day.  2.  The  quicker  you 
are,  the  better  for  your  faculties.  The  quick  movement  of  the  limb  is  healthier 
than  the  slow ;  the  quick  action  of  the  mental  faculties  is  more  invigorating 
than  the  slow.  As  a  rule,  the  quick  man  is  in  every  way  healthier  and  happier 
than  the  slow.  3.  The  quicker  you  are,  the  more  valuable  you  are  in  the  market 
of  the  world.  The  skilful  man  who  cultivates  the  habit  of  quickness  and  despatch 
increases  his  commercial  value  every  day.  II.  Be  quick  in  your  intellectual 
PURSUITS.  You  have  an  enormous  amount  of  mental  work  to  do,  if  you  act  up  to 
your  duty,  and  discharge  your  mission  in  life.     1.  The  quicker  you  are,  the  more 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

you  will  attain.  The  more  fields  of  truth  you  will  traverse,  the  more  fruits  you 
will  gather  from  the  tree  of  knowledge.  Some  men  in  their  studies  move  Uke 
elephemts,  and  only  traverse  a  small  space.  Others,  like  eagles,  sweep  continents 
in  a  day.  The  quick  eye  will  see  what  escapes  the  dull  eye,  the  quick  ear  will 
oatch  voices  unheard  by  the  slow  of  hearing.  2.  The  quicker  you  are,  the  better 
fot  your  faculties.  It  is  the  brisk  walker  that  best  strengthens  his  limbs,  the 
brisk  fighter  that  wins  the  greatest  victories.  It  is  by  quick  action  that  the  steel 
is  polished  and  that  weapons  are  sharpened.  Intellectual  quickness  whets  the 
faculties,  makes  them  keen,  agile,  and  apt.  "  Bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift 
beast."  m.  Be  quick  in  your  spiritual  affairs.  1.  Morally  you  have  a  work 
to  do  for  your  own  soul.  The  work  is  great  and  urgent.  2.  Morally  you  have  a 
work  to  do  for  others.  There  are  souls  around  you  demanding  your  most  earnest 
efforts,  &c.  (1)  Be  quick ;  the  work  must  be  done  during  your  life  here,  if  ever 
done.  (2)  Be  quick ;  your  life  here  is  very  short  and  uncertain.  (3)  Be  quick  ; 
the  longer  you  delay  the  more  difficult  it  is  to  do.  {Homilist.)  Promptitude 
in  action : — An  officer  of  high  rank  in  the  British  Army  relates  how  he  won  the 
first  step  of  the  ladder  to  recognition  and  promotion.  He  was  then  a  young 
sub-lieutenant  of  engineers  in  Ceylon.  One  morning,  while  at  a  quiet  game  in 
the  amusement-room,  unaware  that  any  duty  was  being  neglected,  the  governor 
of  the  island  saw  him.  "  What  are  you  doing  here,  youngster  ?  "  said  his  chief. 
"  I  thought  you  would  have  been  at  Negombo  by  this  time  !  "  "  What  to  do  there, 
sir  ?  "  "  What !  Have  you  not  received  your  orders  ?  Go  to  the  quartermaster- 
general  at  once."  But  it  was  nearly  one  o'clock  before  the  young  fellow  could 
find  that  officer.  When  found,  his  instructions  were  to  proceed  to  Negombo,  an 
old  fort  twenty-three  miles  north,  make  a  plan  of  the  barracks  there,  and  note 
various  important  details.  But  the  sub-heutenant  was  vexed  ;  for  that  evening 
he  was  obliged  to  attend  a  dinner-party  at  the  Government  House,  and  there  was 
not  much  time  to  spare.  However,  he  saddled  his  Arab  horse,  that  could  do 
almost  anything  except  fly,  and  covered  the  twenty-three  miles  in  two  hours. 
Next,  field-book  and  tape-line  in  hand,  he  made  the  necessary  measurements 
and  calculations,  sketching  plans,  and  writing  down  facts  and  figures.  Having 
drafted  an  accurate  report,  he  remounted  his  faithful  steed,  and  was  back  in 
Colombo  before  the  dinner-hour.  Walking  in  quietly  with  the  other  guests, 
the  governor  saw  him,  and  exclaimed :  "  You  here,  sir !  What  were  your  orders  ? 
Why  are  you  not  attending  to  them  ?  Be  off  at  once  !  "  "  My  orders  were  to 
go  to  Negombo,  sir,"  rephed  the  young  officer,  repeating  the  instructions.  "  Then, 
what  do  you  mean  by  neglecting  them  ?  "  "I  have  not,"  was  the  answer.  "  The 
report  is  finished,  and  will  be  laid  before  you  to-morrow  morning."  The  governor 
showed  his  delight  by  the  glow  of  satisfaction  on  his  face.  He  detailed  the  matter 
to  his  staff,  dwelling  on  the  smart  and  accurate  obedience  manifested,  and  from 
that  day  the  young  man  rose  steadily  in  his  profession.     {Sunday  Companion.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vers.  1-4.  And  they  covet  fields,  and  take  them  by  violence. — Avarice: — 
Greed  is  the  spring  and  spirit  of  all  oppression.  Here  rapacious  avarice  is  pre- 
sented in  three  aspects.  I.  Schbmino  in  the  night.  When  avarice  takes 
possession  of  a  man,  it  works  the  brain  by  night  as  well  as  by  day.  What  schemes 
to  swindle,  defraud,  and  plunder  men  are  fabricated  every  night  upon  the  pillow  ! 
n.  Workinq  in  thb  day.  The  idea  esteemed  most  is  the  worldly  gain  of  avari- 
cious labour.  So  it  ever  is ;  gain  is  the  god  of  the  greedy  man.  He  sacrifices 
all  his  time  and  labour  on  its  altar.  Shakespeare  compares  such  a  man  to  a 
whale  which  plays  and  tumbles,  driving  the  poor  fry  before  him,  and  at  last 
devours  them  all  at  a  mouthful.  III.  Suffering  in  the  judgment.  For 
judgment  comes  at  last,  and  in  the  judgment  these  words  give  us  to  understand 
the  punishment  will  correspond  with  the  sin.  "  Because  they  reflect  upon  evil," 
says  Delitzsch,  "  to  deprive  their  fellow-men  of  their  possessions,  Jehovah  will 
bring  evil  upon  this  generation,  lay  a  heavy  yoke  upon  their  necks,  under  which 
they  will  not  be  able  to  walk  loftily  or  with  extended  neck."  Ay,  the  time  will 
come  when  the  avaricious  millionaire  will  exclaim,   "  We  be  utterly  spoiled.'' 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  5 

"Go  to,  now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon 
you,"  &c.  (Homilist.)  Th^  wrong  which  Micah  attacks : — Micah  scourges 
the  avarice  of  the  landowner,  and  the  injustice  which  oppresses  the  peasant. 
Social  wrongs  are  always  felt  most  acutely,  not  in  the  town,  but  in  the  country. 
It  was  so  in  the  days  of  Rome,  whose  earliest  social  revolts  were  agrarian.  It 
was  so  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  the  fourteenth  century  saw  both  the  Jacquerie  in 
France  and  the  Peasants  rising  in  England  ;  Langland,  who  was  equally  familiar 
with  town  and  country,  expends  nearly  all  his  sympathy  upon  the  poverty  of 
the  latter,  "  the  poure  folk  in  cotes."  It  was  so  after  the  Reformation,  under 
the  new  spirit  of  which  the  first  social  revolt  was  the  Peasants'  war  in  Germany. 
It  was  so  at  the  French  Revolution,  which  began  with  the  march  of  the  starving 
peasants  into  Paris.  And  it  is  so  still,  for  our  new  era  of  social  legislation  has 
been  forced  upon  us,  not  by  the  poor  of  London  and  the  large  cities,  but  by  the 
peasantry  of  Ireland  and  the  crofters  of  the  Scottish  Highlands.  Political 
discontent  and  religious  heresy  take  their  start  among  industrial  and  manufactur- 
ing centres,  but  the  first  springs  of  the  social  revolt  are  nearly  always  found 
among  rural  populations.  Why  the  country  should  begin  to  feel  the  acuteness 
of  social  wrong  before  the  town  is  sufficiently  obvious.  In  the  town  there  are 
mitigations,  and  there  are  escapes.  If  the  conditions  of  one  trade  become 
oppressive,  it  is  easier  to  pass  to  another.  The  workers  are  better  educated 
and  better  organised ;  there  is  a  middle  class,  and  the  tyrant  dare  not  bring  matters 
to  so  high  a  crisis.  The  might  of  the  wealthy,  too,  is  divided ;  the  poor  man's 
employer  is  seldom  at  the  same  time  his  landlord.  But  in  the  country  power 
easily  gathers  into  the  hands  of  the  few.  The  labourer's  opportimities  and 
means  of  work,  his  house,  his  very  standing-ground  are  often  all  the  property  of 
one  man.  In  the  coTuitry  the  rich  have  a  real  power  of  life  and  death,  and  are 
less  hampered  by  competition  with  each  other,  and  by  the  force  of  public  opinion. 
One  man  cannot  hold  a  city  in  fee,  but  one  man  can  affect  for  evil  or  for  good 
almost  as  large  a  population  as  a  city's,  when  it  is  scattered  across  a  country 
side.  This  is  precisely  the  state  of  wrong  which  Micah  attacks.  This  is  the 
evil,  the  ease  with  which  wrong  is  done  in  the  country.  "  It  lies  to  the  power 
of  their  hands ;  they  covet  and  seize."  Micah  feels  that  by  themselves  the 
economic  wrongs  explain  and  justify  the  doom  impending  on  the  nation. 
{G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Therefore,  thas  saith  the  Lord :  Behold,  against  this  family  do  I  devise 
eviL — The  great  antagonist  : — Here  is  Micah.  the  fresh  child  of  the  country,  who  has 
communed  with  theLord  God  in  the  ploughed  field,  in  the  fragrant  vineyard,  amid  the 
primeval  forest,  in  lonely  wilderness,  and  in  secluded  height.  He  comes  to  human 
affairs  with  keen  and  unblunted  perceptions.  Through  this  man's  eyes  we  may  gaze 
at  the  outlines  and  colours  of  the  golden  age,  we  may  look  upon  the  causes  of 
lukewarm  and  congealed  affection,  and  we  may  also  contemplate  the  fated  and 
inevitable  consequences  of  sin.  It  is  this  latter  awful  vision  which  I  want  to 
bring  before  you.  "  Behold,  against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  evil."  Let  us  get 
the  connection  of  this  word.  In  an  earlier  chapter  I  come  upon  this  indictment : 
"  Woe  to  them  that  devise  iniquity  upon  their  beds."  The  people  are  busy 
devising,  planning,  plotting,  scheming.  They  are  building  upon  falsehood.  They 
are  arranging  the  items  of  their  life  in  evil  sequence.  But  there  is  a  Counter- plotter  ! 
"  Against  this  family  do  1  devise  an  evil.  The  human  schemer  is  confronted 
by  a  great  Antagonist,  God.  The  Antagonist  evidences  His  working  in  adversities, 
disappointments,  dissatisfactions,  in  failures,  in  fimdamental  and  ignominious 
defeat.  Micah's  initial  teaching  is  therefore  this :  Every  sin  has  its  deliberately 
planned  penalty.  We  cannot  isolate  the  bacillus  of  sin ;  it  makes  its  appointed 
ravages,  and  no  human  ministry  can  fashion  an  escape.  Man  devises  iniquity ; 
God  devises  the  appropriate  issue.  One  is  as  certain  as  the  other.  Prussic  acid 
is  not  more  certain  in  its  ravages  than  sin.  Now,  with  this  expression  of  a  general 
and  imescapable  law  before  us,  let  us  see  what  this  sharp-eyed  prophet  regards 
as  some  of  the  inevitable  consequences  of  sin.  "  Uncleanness  that  destroyeth 
with  a  grievous  destruction."  All  sin  is  uncleanness,  and  uncleanness  is  a  monster 
of  destruction.  As  sure  as  a  moth  eats  away  the  fabrics  of  a  garment,  so  sin 
consumes  the  robes  and  habits  of  the  soul.  As  sure  as  rust  corrodes  an  instrument 
of  steel,  so  sin  destroys  the  implements  of  life.  What  does  sin  destroy  T  Our 
philosophers  arrange  the  powers  and  endowments  of  man  in  a  heightening  scale. 
They  begin  with  meie  animal  vitality,  sheer  naked  energy,  the  basal  aptitude* 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  passions,  and  they  ascend  through  the  senses,  the  intellectual  perceptions, 
the  powers  of  reasoning,  the  a?sthetic  tastes,  up  to  the  raoral  realm,  and  higher 
still  to  the  peerless  sphere  of  ireverence  and  veneration,  where  life  looks  out  upon 
God !  It  is  all-important  that  we  remember  this  range  of  endowment  when  we 
are  considering  the  destructiveness  of  sin.  And  I  will  tell  you  why.  When  sin 
breaks  out  in  the  life  there  are  parts  of  this  extensive  range  which  appear  to  be 
vm touched,  and  if  a  man  looked  at  these  alone  it  might  appear  that  sin  has  committed 
no  ravages  at  all.  Let  us  look  at  this.  When  a  noxious  gas  gets  into  a  greenhouse 
the  most  delicate  things  are  the  first  things  to  suffer.  When  the  coarser  plants 
are  smitten  the  finer  ones  have  long  been  dead.  It  is  so  in  the  life.  When  de- 
structive uncleanness  enters,  the  coarsest  thing  is  the  last  to  be  hit.  The  body 
preserves  its  life  the  longest.  Let  us  assume  that  a  man  has  become  ridden  by 
lust.  When  that  man's  body  begins  to  shake  the  more  delicate  things  of  the  soul 
are  already  destroyed.  When  the  passion  for  drink  shows  itself  in  the  face,  other 
parts  are  already  in  ashes.  The  fire  of  sin  always  begins  to  flame  in  the  upper 
chambers,  and  biu-ns  down  towards  the  basement.  The  first  thing  to  suffer  is 
our  affection.  When  purity  goes  out  of  life  love  droops  like  a  bird  whose  cage 
is  near  the  ceiling,  and  which  faints  amid  the  accumulated  fumes  of  the  burning 
gas.  Let  a  man  live  an  impure  life,  for  one  day  ;  let  falsehood,  passion,  malice, 
bear  down  upon  him,  and  let  him  watch  the  effect  upon  his  affection  for  wife  and 
child.  "  Uncleanness,"  according  to  this  prophet,  '  destroyeth  with  a  grievous 
destruction."  "  It  shall  be  night  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  have  no  vision."  You 
will  not  be  surpiised  to  be  taken  this  second  step  under  the  guidance  of  the  prophet 
Micah.  The  sentence  is  descriptive  of  a  second  penalty.  What  is  that  ?  It 
is  the  loss  of  spiritual  perception.  In  the  higher  realms  of  our  being  we  are  like 
instruments  to  be  played  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  what  is  the  worth  of 
the  harp  when  the  strings  are  eaten  away  ?  What  is  the  use  of  a  piano  when  the 
wires  are  corroded  ?  The  executant  is  unable  to  convey  his  message  because 
the  instrument  is  unable  to  receive  it.  And  when  the  instrument  of  our  higher 
self  is  corrupted  or  impaired  we  cannot  perceive  the  approaches  of  the  Spirit 
or  discern  the  whispering  coimsels  of  our  God.  This  is  a  law  whose  working  I 
have  proved  by  sad  experience  in  my  own  life.  There  have  been  days  when  the 
Book  of  Scripture  seemed  closed  before  me.  The  page  appears  commonplace  ; 
it  does  not  glow  with  the  heavenly  Presence.  But  on  the  day  of  moral  alertness 
and  strenuousness  of  spiritual  nearness  to  my  God  the  common  bush  is  aflame, 
and  His  word  becomes  "  a  light  unto  my  path."  Sin  spoils  our  spiritual  eyes 
and  ears,  and  makes  us  poor  receivers.  '  Thou  shalt  eat  and  not  be  satisfied." 
This  is  the  third  of  the  penalties  of  sin.  Sin  issues  in  deep-seated  weariness  and 
unrest.  The  man  makes  money,  but  he  sighs  amid  his  abundance.  His  friends 
speak  of  him  in  terms  of  admiration :  "  He  has  got  everything  that  heart  could 
wish."  Ah,  that  is  just  what  he  has  not  got !  He  has  got  everything  that  flesh 
could  wish,  but  the  heart  is  mourning  in  secret  impoverishment.  These  dissatisfied 
souls  are  all  about  us,  in  the  pulpit  and  out  of  it.  But  our  very  dissatisfaction 
is  more  than  the  issue  of  sin  ;  it  is  the  merciful  judgment  of  infinite  grace  and 
love.  If  our  Father  left  us  in  satisfaction  our  perdition  would  be  hopeless  and 
complete.     (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  0  thou  that  art  named  the  house  of  Jacob,  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
straitened? — The  criminality  and  folly  of  limiting  the  Holy  Spirit: — 1.  Amongst 
the  numerous  instances  in  which  Christians  conduct  themselves  as  if  they  imagined 
that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  straitened,  notice  the  following.  (1)  Their  conduct 
is  of  this  description,  when  they  expect  little  or  no  benefit  from  the  Word  of  God 
and  the  ordinances  of  His  worship.  (2)  When  they  shrink  from  the  discharge 
of  necessary  duty.  (3)  When  they  are  unduly  afraid  of  their  enemies.  (4)  When 
they  sink  under  the  pressure  of  adversity.  (5)  When  they  limit  the  operations 
of  the  Spirit  to  particxilar  periods  of  time,  or  to  any  particular  denomination 
of  professed  Christians.  2.  The  unreasonableness  of  such  conduct.  It  is  at 
once  sinful  and  selfish,  imreasonable  and  absurd.  Consider — (1)  That  the  Spirit 
of  Jehovah  is  a  Spirit  of  unbounded  intelligence  and  power.  Dependent  and 
limited  creatures  may  soon  become  straitened.  (2)  He  is  a  Spirit  of  infinite  good- 
ness and  love.  (3)  He  is  a  Spirit  sent  forth  by  the  Father  and  the  Son.  (4)  The 
Scriptures  contain  rich  promises  of  the  continued  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
(6)  The  gracious  and  mighty  works  which  have  already  been  effected  by  the 
Spirit  of  Jehoyah.     Let  us  aU  be  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  necessity  and 


CHAP,  n.]  MIC  AH.  7 

importance  of  the  Spirit's  agency.  It  deeply  concerns  us  to  inquire  whether 
or  not  it  is  our  privilege  to  have  the  Spirit  dwelling  and  operating  in  us. 
(Z).  Eraser,  D.D.)  The  influence  of  the  Spirit, — the  doctrine  abused  by  straiten- 
ing the  Spirit : — 1.  The  work  of  the  Lord,  the  Spirit,  is  wide,  extended,  and 
extensive.  He  is  emphatically  the  "  Comforter " ;  this  is  His  principal  work. 
He  comforts  the  soul,  made  conscious  how  little  there  is  in  himself  to  nourish 
and  strengthen ;  stripped,  in  a  sense,  of  his  self-wisdom,  self-power,  self-importance, 
and  self-complacency.  He  testifies  of  Jesus  as  having  "  all  fulness  "  in  Him. 
He  comforts  the  poor,  tried,  and  harassed  soul,  in  the  midst  of  its  trial,  sorrow, 
and  affliction,  by  unfolding  the  man  of  sympathy,  the  sympathy  of  the  God-man 
Mediator.  He  comforts  the  soxil  by  revealing  the  character  of  God;  in  His 
grficious  character;  in  His  sin-forgiving  character;  in  His  tenderness,  compassion, 
gentleness,  and  holiness.  He  comforts  His  saints  as  they  pass  through  the 
changes  of  a  changing  world,  by  revealing  the  covenant,  "ordered  in  all  things 
and  Sure."  He  unfolds  the  gracious  promises  of  the  God  of  grace.  He  is  called 
*'  the  C!omforter,"  because  it  belongs  to  Him  especially  to  comfort  the  saints  of 
the  Most  High.  But  He  is  a  Rebuker  as  well  as  a  Comforter.  Here  it  is  to  be 
feared  that  He  is  not  glorified  as  He  ought  to  be.  He  is  a  "  Spirit  of  judgment  " 
m  our  souls.  There  is  no  court  that  a  natural  man  so  dislikes  as  the  court  of  an 
enlightened  conscience.  It  is  a  solemn  place.  Not  only  in  the  first  awakening 
of  the  soul,  but  in  all  after  revealings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  our  hearts,  there 
is  still  something  of  a  rebuking  Spirit.  We  have  to  learn  out  our  truths  in  the 
school  of  God,  who  will  be  a  light  to  guide  in  the  way.  2.  God's  Word  yields  to 
the  spiritual  pilgrim  food  and  nourishment,  as  well  as  light.  3.  As  the  pilgrim's 
way  lies  through  an  enemy's  country  he  is  liable  to  various  assaults,  and  the 
Word  of  God  wUl  furnish  him  with  armour  of  defence.  It  is  his  shield  and  buckler, 
to  ward  off  and  repel  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  4.  When  the  Christian 
begins  to  be  weary  and  faint  in  his  mind,  God's  Word  becomes  his  stay  and  support. 
6.  It  is  a  comfort  to  travellers  to  have  a  prospect,  though  a  distant  and  imperfect 
one,  of  the  place  whither  they  are  going.  The  Divine  Word  is  both  a  map  of  the 
heavenly  country  and  a  perspective  glass  through  which  we  may  view  it.  It  is 
the  prospect  of  that  better  country  which  cheers  the  Christian  by  the  way,  and 
quickens  his  steps  through  the  wilderness.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  plenitude 
of  the  Hdy  Spirit's  influence  : — The  prophet  is  reproving  the  people  for  their 
opposition  to  the  servants  of  God,  and  their  attachment  to  false  prophets.  Their 
rulers  would  silence  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  because  they  wished  to  hear  no 
more  of  their  alarming  predictions,  but  to  be  told  only  smooth  and  flattering 
things.  Micah  is  therefore  commissioned  to  declare  that  they  should  be  deprived 
of  this  privilege.  I.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spikit  in  our  salvation.  The 
recovery  of  fallen  men  to  the  love  and  likeness  of  God  is  usually  expressed  by 
the  word  "  salvation."  Salvation  is  ascribed  in  Scripture  to  the  love  of  God 
the  Father,  in  whose  infinite  benevolence  it  originated.  It  was,  however, 
necessary  that  an  adequate  atonement  should  be  made  for  human  transgressions. 
This  work,  assigned  to  Christ  in  the  economy  of  redemption,  He  voluntarily 
undertook,  and  He  alone  oould  execute  it.  All  the  blessings  of  salvation  are 
ascribed  to  Him.  But  the  death  of  Christ  would  have  been  fruitless  without 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Without  this  there  could  be  no  conviction  of  our 
need  of  salvation,  no  discernment  of  the  way  in  which  alone  it  can  be  obtained, 
no  desire  to  possess  it,  no  faith,  no  hope,  no  love,  nothing  of  that  purity  of  heart, 
destitute  of  which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord-  The  Spirit  proceedeth  from  the 
Father.  He  gave  His  Son  that  He  might  send  His  pure  and  Holy  Spirit  into 
our  depraved  hearts  to  form  us  for  communion  with,  and  the  everlasting  enjoy- 
ment of  Himself.  We  are  equally  indebted  for  the  Spirit  to  the  love  of  God  and 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  II.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
PLENITUDE  OF  Hi3  INFLUENCE.  It  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  practical 
design  of  Scripture  to  apply  a  truth  spoken  on  a  particular  occasion  to  the 
general  purposes  of  the  Christian  life.  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ? 
No  ;  we  are  to  set  no  bounds  to  His  power ;  we  are  not  to  circumscribe  the 
measure  of  His  influence ;  our  expectations  and  our  endeavours  should  corre- 
spond to  the  fulness  of  His  grace.  We  may  infer  that  the  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  not  straitened  from  the  extent  and  merit  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings, 
and  the  greatness  and  design  of  His  exaltation  ;  from  the  abimdant  measure 
in  which  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  were  communicated  on  the  day  of  Pentecost; 
from  the  predictions  of  Scripture  concerning  the  future  prosperity  of  the  Christian 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Church,  and  from  the  eminence  in  piety  and  usefulness  to  which  many  have 
attained.  The  truth  we  press  on  attention  is,  that  every  one  may,  through  faith 
in  the  Saviour,  and  in  answer  to  prayer,  certainly  obtain  all  the  assistance  from 
the  Holy  Spirit  which  he  needs.  This  is  evident  from  a  multitude  of  promisee. 
The  subject  calls  for  an  admonitory  application.  1.  It  condemns  an  undue 
dependence  on  instruments.  2.  It  forbids  an  exclusive  attachment  to  particular 
subjects.  3.  It  censures  those  who  despair  of  the  conversion  of  others.  4.  It 
remonstrates  with  such  as  are  ready  to  abandon  their  efforts  to  do  good  from 
a  feeling  of  their  own  insufficiency.  5.  It  should  urge  us  to  unite  in  all  scriptural 
plans  of  usefulness,  instead  of  confining  ourselves  to  particular  methods.  G.  It 
frowns  on  a  bigoted  party  spirit.  7.  Beware  of  resisting  and  grieving  the  Spirit. 
{Essex  Remembrancer.)  The  straitened  Spirit: — Regard  the  Holy  Spirit  as 
that  most  glorious  and  blessed  agency  by  which  our  depraved  nature  is  purified, 
our  bondage  of  evil  turned  into  freedom,  our  spiritual  darkness  enlightened, 
our  penitent  sorrows  exchanged  for  feelings  of  joyousness,  and  our  rugged  path 
on  life's  upward  journey  made  smooth  and  plain.  In  the  time  of  Micah  the 
inspiration  of  prophecy  was  regarded  by  the  people  of  the  Jews  as  the  result 
of  this  agency  ;  but  they  were  not  always  pleased  with  it.  The  prophets  who 
were  faithful  were  men  who  did  not  seek  to  please  the  public  ear  by  prophesying 
what  was  most  palatable  to  its  pride  and  luxury,  but  what  was  calculated  to 
humble  and  alarm.  And  if  this  ofiFended  some,  was  their  offence  to  be  the  guide 
and  rule  of  the  prophet's  teaching  ?  Was  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be  straitened  or 
limited  in  His  operations  because  His  inspired  messages  were  not  acceptable  ? 
Hence  the  question  of  the  text.  I.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  acts  with  itnlimitbd 
SOVEREIGNTY.  He  is  not  bound  by  human  laws  and  human  opinions,  neither 
is  He  fettered  in  His  movements  by  any  dogmatic  assumption  or  priestly  power. 
What  is  to  hinder  Him  from  doing  His  Will  ?  An  earnest  seeking  for  His  aid, 
an  humble  trust  in  His  love,  a  devout  prayer  for  His  deliverance,  and  a  persever- 
ing hold  upon  Christ  as  our  Sacrifice  and  Mediator  may  soon  bring  to  the  soul 
that  bright  light  of  life  which  speaks  of  His  indwelling  presence  and  resurrection 
power.  II.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  acts  with  an  unchangeableness  ov 
LOVE.  And  who  can  give  any  bounds  to  this  love,  not  only  in  its  objects  but  in 
its  intensity  ?  It  never  changes.  Time  can  never  alter  it,  and  nothing  in  the 
great  imiverse  about  us  can  either  divert  it  from  its  course  or  weaken  its  power. 
III.  Though  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  straitened,  it  is  possible  that  it  may 
appear  so.  But  this  arises  from  oiu-  own  disobedience.  We  may  have  stifled 
His  convictions.  We  may  have  deserted  His  coimsels.  We  may  have  rejected 
His  offers,  His  promises,  and  His  invitations.  IV.  Some  wish  the  Spirit  op 
the  Lord  to  be  straitened  to  their  own  view  of  things.  Some  would 
straiten  the  Lord  in  the  execution  of  His  judgraents.  To  the  fainting,  weak, 
and  doubting  spirit  of  the  Christian  there  is  something  very  exhilarating  in  the 
thought  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  not  straitened  in  His  power  and  love  and 
wisdom.  Troubled  as  He  oftentimes  is  from  a  deceitful  heart  and  powerful 
temptations,  how  great  a  privilege  to  feel  His  nearness  and  to  realise  His  inspira- 
tion in  the  prayer  that  goes  up  like  incense  to  the  throne  of  heaven.  In  the 
infinitude  of  the  Spirit's  power  there  is  liberty — a  vast  ocean  of  life,  that  seeme 
to  spread  out  more  and  more  before  the  eager  and  aspiring  soul.  But,  on  the 
contrary,  this  very  truth  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  illimitability  will  be  a  cause  of 
condemnation  to  those  who  continue  to  reject  Him.  {W.  D.  Horwood.)  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  not  straitened : — Here  God  is  expostulating  with  His  Ch'irch, 
when  in  a  low  and  languishing  state,  as  to  the  cause  of  this.  He  is  vindicating 
Himself  from  all  share  of  blame  in  the  matter, — He  is  showing  them  where  the 
blame  lies,  even  with  His  professing  people  themselves,  in  their  want  of  faith 
and  prayer.  It  is  their  unbelief  that  mars  all.  This  straitens,  shuts  up,  im- 
prisons their  spirits,  so  that  their  desires  do  not  flow  forth  with  any  enlargement 
after  Divine  communications.  It  is  not  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  that  is  straitened. 
There  is  a  straitening,  but  it  is  all  on  their  part.  I.  The  question  in  the  text 
implies  that  the  Spirit  is  not  straitened  in  the  sense  which  our  unbelief 
WOULD  suggest.  1.  The  Spirit  is  not  straitened  in  respect  of  His  own  inherent 
sufficiency.  All  grace,  wisdom,  might,  and  faithfulness  are  in  Him.  The  creature 
is  limited  in  duration ;  He  is  eternal.  The  creature  is  limited  in  respect  of  know- 
ledge. "  The  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God."  The 
creature  is  limited  in  respect  of  power  ;  not  so  the  Spirit.  The  creatvu"e  is  limited 
in  respect  of  moral  excellence ;  the  Spirit  is  distmctively  and  supereminently 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  9 

the  Spirit  of  holiness.  2.  In  respect  of  the  Saviour's  purchase  of  Him  for  the 
Chuich.  As  the  Head  of  His  Church,  Christ  is  its  source  of  spiritual  influence. 
In  Him,  for  the  use  of  His  Chuich,  the  Spirit  dwells  in  immeasurable  degree. 
Mark  the  encouragement  afforded  us  by  the  death  of  Christ  to  expect  free  and 
full  communications  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  In  respect  of  the  offer  of  Him  in 
the  Gospel.     (1)  He  is   offered  universally.     (2)  Freely.     (3)  Largely.     II.  The 

QUESTION    IMPOES    THAT    He    IS    OFTEN    STRAITENED    OR    DIMINISHED    IN    RESPECT 

OP  His  actual  communications  to  the  Church.     It  is  a  fact  that  the  presence 
and  power  of  the  Spirit  are  not  enjoyed  by  the  Church  at  some  periods  as  much 
as  at  others.     Point  out  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  Church  from  which  the 
Spirit  has  withdrawn  much  of  His  presence  and  power.     1.  In  such  a  Church 
the  truth  will  not  generally  be  preached  with  evangelical  purity,  faithfulness, 
and  power.     2.  There  will  be  a  general  departure  from  the  simple  and  scriptural 
principles  of  government  and  discipline  on  which  the  Church  is  founded.     3.  There 
will  be  a  sad  lack  of  zeal  in  propagating  religion  and  extending  the  means  of  grace. 
The  missionary  spirit  will  be  all  but  extinct.     4.  There  will  be  few  conversions. 
6.  Even  the  people  of  (xod  themselves  will  not  be  possessed  of  so  high  a  tone  of 
spirituality  as  they  ought  to  be.      In  short,  there  will  be  little  personal  piety 
and  family  prayer;  but,  on  the  contrary,  much  worldliness,  much  ungodliness, 
much  hostility  to  anything  like  zealous  Christianity.     In  the  same  proportion 
as  the  Spirit  departs  will  spirituality  decay  and  carnality  increase.     What  should 
we  leam  from  this  but  our  entire  dependence  upon  this  blessed  agent  ?     III.  The 
question  is  intended  to  convey  a  rebuke  to  the  Church  for  its  not  havinq 
sufficiently  valued,  and  therefore  asked  and  received,  the  Holy  Spirit. 
If  the  Spirit  is  restrained  in  His  actual  communications,   this  must  be  either 
because  He  is  unwilling  to  bestow  His  influences  upon  us,  or  because  we  are 
unwilling  to  accept  of  them.     It  cannot  be  the  first ;  it  must  be  the  last.     Apply — 
1.  To  the  unconverted  ;  there  are  some  who  are  entirely  destitute  of  any  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  their  hearts.     Dare  they  say  that  they  have  long  been 
willing  to  receive  Him,  but  have  found  it  impossible  ?    Their  consciences  would  not 
suffer  them  to  say  so.     2.  To  those  who  have  in  some  measure  received  the  Spirit. 
They  often  complain  of  the  low  state  of  religion  in  their  own  hearts,  and  in  the 
world  around  them.     Hard  thoughts  of  God  suggest  themselves  to  them,  as  if 
He  had  become  careless  of  the  interests  of  His  Church.     But  they  will  find  reason 
to  exonerate  God  of  all  blame,  and  to  place  it  to  their  own  account.     Have  they 
cherished,  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  the  visits  of  this  Divine  Person  to  their 
own  souls  ?     Is  it  not  true  that  they  have,  in  a  great  measure,  ceased  to  realise 
their  dependence  on  Him  ?     Thus  reUgion  decaying  in  their  own  hearts,  they 
become  less  concerned  about  the  progress  of  religion  in  the  hearts  of  others. 
IV.  The  question  is  intended  to  convey  an  encouragement  to  us  to  ask 
Him — TO  ASK  Him  confidently  and  largely.     The  encouragement  is  twofold, 
drawn — 1.  From  the  form  of  the  question  itself.     It  is  evidently  designed  to 
teach  us  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  not  straitened,  not  limitea  nor  confined 
in  the  sense  our  unbelief  suggests.     It  is  as  if  it  were  said — Set  no  bounds  to 
your  desires  ;  ask  more  and  more  ;  ask  again  and  again.     2.  Notice  to  whom 
the  question  is  addressed.     "  0  thou  that  art  named  the  house  of  Israel."     It  is 
addressed  to  the  professing  Church  and  people  of  God,  and  it  is  designed  to  put 
them  in  mind  of  the  relation  God  bears  to  them  as  their  God,  and  the  warrant 
thereby  afforded  them  to  ask  and  expect  the  Holy  Spirit.    There  must  be  a  want, 
and  what  can  that  want  be  but  the  want  of  sufficiently  earnest  and  believing 
prayer?     Immediately,  then,  let  this  want  be  suppUed.     {A.  L.  E.  Foote.)        Is 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  f — I.  The  promise  of  Pentecost.     What  did  it 
declare  and  hold  forth  for  the  faith  of  the  Church  ?     1.  The  promise  of  a  Divine 
Spirit  by  symbols  which  express  some,  at  all  events,  of  the  characteristics  and 
wonderfulness  of  His  work.     The  "rushing  of  a  mighty  wind  "  spoke  of  a  power 
which  varies  in  its  manifestations  from  the  gentlest  breath  that  scarce  moves 
the  leaves  on  the  summer  trees  to  the  wildest  blast  that  casts  down  all  which 
stands  in  its  way.     The  natural  symbolism  of  the  wind,  to  popular  apprehension, 
the  least  material  of  all  material  forces,  and  of  which  the  connection  with  the 
immaterial  part  of  a  man's  personality  has  been  expressed  in  all  languages,  points 
to  a  Divine,  immaterial,  mighty,  hfe-giving  power  which  is  free  to  blow  where  it 
listeth,  and  of  which  men  can  mark  the  effects,  though  they  are  all  ignorant  of 
the  force  itself.     The  twin  symbol  of  the  fiery  tongues  which  parted  and  sat 
upon  each  of  them  speaks  in  like  manner  of  the  Divine  influence,  not  as  destruc- 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  n. 

tive,  but  full  of  quick,  rejoicing  energy  and  life,  the  power  to  transform  and  to 
purify.  Whithersoever  the  fire  comes,  it  changes  all  things  into  its  own  substance. 
Wherever  the  fiery  spirit  comes  there  is  energy,  swift  life,  rejoicing  activity, 
transforming  and  transmuting  power  which  changes  the  recipient  of  the  flame 
into  flame  itself.  In  the  fact  of  Pentecost  there  is  the  promise  of  a  Divine  Spirit 
which  is  to  influence  all  the  moral  side  of  humanity.  This  is  the  distinction 
between  the  Christian  doctrine  of  inspiration  and  all  others  which  have,  in 
heathen  lands,  partially  reached  similar  conceptions — that  the  Gfospel  of  Jesus 
Christ  has  laid  emphasis  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  has  declared  that  holiness  of 
heart  is  the  touchstone  and  test  of  aU  claims  of  Divine  inspiration.  Gifts  are 
much,  graces  are  more.  An  inspiration  which  makes  wise  is  to  be  coveted,  an 
inspiration  which  makes  holy  is  transcendently  better.  There  we  find  the  safe- 
guard against  all  the  fanaticisms  which  have  at  times  invaded  the  Christian 
Church.  The  Spirit  that  came  at  Pentecost  is  not  merely  a  spirit  of  rushing 
might,  and  of  swift  flaming  energy;  it  is  a  Spirit  of  holiness,  Pentecost  also 
carried  in  it  the  promise  and  prophecy  of  a  Spirit  granted  to  all  the  Church. 
"  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  Further,  the  promise  of  the  early 
history  was  that  of  a  Spirit  which  should  fill  the  whole  nature  of  the  men  to  whom 
He  was  granted.  Each  man,  according  to  his  character,  stature,  circumstances, 
and  all  the  varjring  conditions  which  determine  his  power  of  receptivity,  will 
receive  a  varying  measure  of  that  gift.  Yet  it  is  meant  that  all  shall  be  full. 
II.  Thb  apparent  failxjbb  of  thi  promise.  Will  anyone  say  that  the 
religious  condition  of  any  body  of  behevers  at  this  moment  corresponds  to 
Pentecost  ?  Do  any  existing  Churches  present  the  final  perfect  form  of  Christianity 
as  embodied  in  a  society  ?  Estimate  by  three  tests.  1.  Does  the  ordinary  tenour 
of  our  own  rehgious  life  look  as  if  we  had  that  Divine  Spirit  in  us  which  trans- 
forms everything  into  its  own  beauty,  and  makes  men,  through  all  the  regions 
of  their  nature,  holy  and  piire  ?  Does  the  standard  of  devotion  and  consecration 
in  any  Church  witness  of  the  presence  of  a  Divine  Spirit  ?  2.  Do  the  relations 
of  modem  Christians  and  their  churches  to  one  another  attest  the  presence  of  a 
unifying  Spirit  ?  3.  Look  at  the  comparative  impotence  of  the  Church  in  its 
conflict  with  the  growing  worldliness  of  the  world.  III.  The  solution  of  thb 
CONTRADICTION.  It  is  Sometimes  urged  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  straitened. 
Some  say,  Christianity  is  effete.  Others  say,  God  in  His  sovereignty  is  pleased 
to  withhold  His  Spirit  for  reasons  which  we  cannot  trace.  But  there  is  always 
the  same  flow  from  Grod.  There  are  ebbs  and  flows  in  the  spiritual  power  of  the 
Church.  It  is  our  own  fault,  and  the  result  of  evil  in  ourselves  that  may  be 
remedied,  that  we  have  so  little  of  this  Divine  gift.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Why 
%8  the  Spirit  straitened  ? — In  view  of  the  large  effusion  of  religious  knowledge  in 
our  days,  we  inquire.  Why  does  not  the  fear  of  God  more  abound  ?  Whence 
is  it  that,  even  where  true  piety  really  exists,  it  is  so  little  deep,  spiritual,  and  full 
of  love,  warmth,  and  holy  unction  7  Shall  we  reply  that  the  blessing  must  be 
from  above,  and  that  God  alone  can  re-model  the  human  heart  ?  This  indeed 
is  true ;  but  then  occurs  the  question,  "  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  " 
If  He  be  not  straitened,  whence  comes  it  to  pass  that  His  gracious  influences  are 
not  more  fuUy  manifested  T  Is  the  fault  in  ourselves  or  in  God  ?  The  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  His  miraculous  and  His  ordinary  manifestations.  Is  Ho 
straitened  in  either  of  these  ?  I.  Is  Ha  straitened  in  His  MiRAOT5nLOX73  in- 
fluences ?  Miracles,  we  say,  are  not  now  to  be  expected.  They  have  done  their 
work.  But  God  is  not  therefore  straitened.  He  could,  if  He  saw  fit,  revive  His 
miraculous  influences.  And  even  now  we  have  remarkable  effusions  of  grace, 
as  in  revival  times.  He  could,  if  He  so  willed,  bring  back  even  a  second  day  of 
Pentecost,  with  all  its  miraculous  outpourings,     11.  Is  Hb  straitened  in  THoea 

ORDINARY   PROmSBD    INFLUBNCBS    UNDER   WHICH    WE    OURSELVES  LIVE  ?        Take 

the  following  influences — as  a  Teacher,  as  a  Sanctifier,  as  a  Comforter.  Is 
the  Holy  Spirit  less  an  EnUghtener,  a  Sanctifier,  and  a  Guide  now  than  He  was  in 
the  days  of  Abraham,  or  David,  or  St,  Paul  ?  Is  He  less  powerful  ?  Is  He  less 
willing  ?  Is  He  less  gracious  in  His  promises  ?  Whence,  then,  comes  it  to  pass 
that,  after  so  many  centuries  of  nominal  Christianity,  more  spiritual  good  has 
not  been  effected  ?  In  particular,  what  are  the  causes  which  impede  in  our  own 
age,  oiu*  own  country,  oiu:  own  families  and  congregations,  and  above  all,  in  our 
own  hearts,  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  may  be 
straitened,  on  account  of  the  finite  capacity  of  the  recipient.  If  the  Holy  Ghost 
consecrates  our  hearts  for  His  temple.  He  chooses  a  shrine  in  which  He  can  exhibit, 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  11 

so  to  speak,  but  a  small  portion  of  His  glory  ;  it  will  be  enlarged  in  heaven,  but 
even  there  it  will  be  finite.  Take  the  love  of  St.  John,  the  fervour  of  David,  the 
heavenly  mindedness  of  St.  Paul ;  these  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  those  blessed  men 
were  eminently  great ;  but  they  were  bounded  by  the  mortal  mould,  and  for 
them  to  be  enlarged  to  the  elevation  of  a  Gabriel  death  must  intervene.  But 
the  littleness  of  the  human  heart  is  not  the  only  cause  why  the  Divine  manifesta- 
tions appear  straitened.  Its  corruption  and  sinfulness  are  far  more  powerful 
causes.  Think  of  the  innate  workings  of  human  depravity ;  the  stubbornness 
of  the  soil  which  is  to  be  broken  up  and  cultivated  ;  the  natural  enmity  of  the 
human  heart  to  God,  and  all  that  is  like  God  ;  the  prejudices  which  exist  against 
the  Gospel  of  Christ ;  the  evil  devices  of  Satan  ;  the  "  infection  of  nature  "  which 
remains  "  even  in  them  that  are  regenerate."  In  addition  to  the  deadening 
effects  of  sin  generally,  every  age  and  country  has  its  own  special  temptations, 
which  in  a  pecuhar  manner  seem  to  restrain  the  effusion  of  the  Divine  influences 
at  that  particular  place  and  season.  1.  Being  satisfied  with  a  low  standard  of 
spiritual  attainment.  Look  at  apostles  and  prophets  ;  look  at  saints  and  pro- 
fessors and  martyrs.  Are  we  like  them  ?  2.  Another  cause  of  check  to  the 
Spirit's  work  in  our  day  is  excitement.  Not  religious  excitement  so  much  as 
the  rush  and  hurry  and  worry  of  modem  business  and  social  life.  The  Spirit 
needs  quiet  times  and  moods  in  which  to  carry  on  His  hallowing  work.  {Samuel 
Charles  WUks,  M.A.)  The  Holy  Spirit  not  straitened  (marg.,  shortened"): — 
The  meaning  is,  not  limited,  bound,  restrained,  but  free  to  work  and  bless  at 
all  times,  and  in  unlimited  measure.  We  pray  and  act  as  if  God  were  subject 
to  metes  and  bounds, — confined  to  times  and  seasons — unable  or  unwilling  to 
do  for  His  cause  and  people  on  a  scale  commensurate  with  His  own  infinite  grace 
and  power  and  piu-pose.  I.  God  the  Spirit  is  not  steaitenhd  in  Himsbu. 
This  were  impossible,  as  His  nature  and  all  His  attributes  are  infinite  ;  His  love, 
mercy,  grace,  power  are  imbounded.  II.  He  has  not  tied  His  own  hands, 
by  His  decrees,  or  in  any  other  way,  so  that  He  cannot  work  to  save  even  to  the 
uttermost  all  that  will  come  to  Him.  His  arm  is  never  shortened  that  it  cannot 
save.  If  the  Church  is  in  a  feeble  state,  the  fault  lies  at  her  own  door.  III.  God 
IS  not  straitened  by  ebason  of  any  lack  of  provision  in  the  Gospel 
ECONOMY,  or  efficacy  in  the  atoning  sacrifice,  or  fulness  of  the  Spirit's  power. 
IV.  Neither  is  the  Spirit  straitened  by  reason  of  the  unbelief  and 
obstinacy  of  sinners,  or  the  abounding  infidelity  and  wickedness  of  thb 
times.  The  power  that  could  change  Saul  of  Tarsus  into  Paul  the  Apostle  ;  that 
could  plant  and  maintain  flourishing  Christian  Churches  in  such  corrupt  heathen 
cities  as  Corinth,  Ephesus,  and  Rome  ;  that  could  resurrect  the  Church  of  the 
Reformation  from  the  grave  of  the  dark  ages  and  the  corruptions  of  Rome ;  that 
is  achieving  such  glorious  conquests  to-day,  not  simply  in  heathen  lands,  is  equal 
to  any  emergency,  any  work,  that  prayer  and  Christian  endeavour  can  compass. 
If  God  is  ever  straitened,  it  is  in  His  people.  Their  unbelief,  supineness,  iaaction, 
serve  to  restrain  the  Spirit's  power,  and  block  the  wheels  of  salvation.  What  a 
tremendous  responsibihty  !  Who  is  willing  to  share  it  ?  (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.) 
The  straitened  Spirit : — The  Lord's  people  were  now  so  far  degenerated  as  to 
continue  and  oppose  God's  messengers,  as  if  they  might  limit  His  Spirit  to  speak 
only  what  pleased  them  ;  or  as  if  His  Spirit  were  straitened  to  do  them  good. 
Doctrine — 1.  It  is  a  deplorable  case,  and  sadly  to  be  lamented,  when  men  stand 
in  opposition  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  carriers  thereof.  So  much  doth  this 
expostulation  and  these  pressing  interrogatories  imply.  2.  Men  may  both  think 
and  do  many  things  with  great  boldness,  which  yet,  if  they  would  seriously  think 
upon,  they  would  be  forced  to  condemn,  and  find  a  witness  against  in  their  own 
bosoms.  For  these  questions  put  to  their  consciences  imply,  that  God  had  a 
witness  for  Him  there,  and  they  durst  not  say  or  do  as  they  did  if  their  consciences 
were  put  to  it,  as  in  His  sight.  3.  Many  have  and  study  to  keep  up  a  name  which 
they  are  ill  worthy  of,  and  no  way  answerable  to  it.  4.  God  can  discern  betwixt 
shows  and  substance,  and  will  see  a  fault  in  such  aa  glory  in  fair  titles ;  for  He 
calls  them  as  they  are.  "  Thou  art  named  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  hast  but  a 
name."  6.  It  is  an  evidence  that  a  visible  chmrch  is  degenerated,  whatever  show 
they  have,  when  they  tvana.  opposers  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  in  the  mouth  of  His 
servants.  6.  Such  aa  oppose  and  fight  against  the  Word  of  God  and  His  messengers 
do  in  effect  fight  against  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  whose  Word  it  is.  These  opposers 
are  challenged  as  "  straitening  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  7.  It  is  a  high  presumption 
and  injury  done  to  the  Spirit,  to  think  to  imprison  and  deny  Him  liberty  in  the 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

mouth  of  His  servants,  to  speak  anything  but  what  men  please.  It  is  not  seemly 
that  men  should  limit  God  in  giving  commission  to  His  servants.  8.  The  Lord 
hath  a  storehouse  of  Spirit  to  bring  forth  comforts,  and  of  power  to  produce 
mercies,  if  His  people  were  fit  for  them,  9.  When  the  Lord  sends  forth  sad 
threatenings  in  the  mouths  of  His  servants,  it  becomes  a  people  seriously  to  examine 
their  ways.  {George  Hutcheson.)  Do  not  My  words  do  good  to  him  that 
walketh  uprightly  ? — The  privileges  of  the  upright : — Weary  of  correction  and 
reproof,  the  house  of  Jacob  refused  to  receive  instruction,  and  said  to  the 
prophets,  "  Prophesy  ye  not."  The  Lord  appeals  to  them  that  the  messages 
sent  by  His  servants  were  intended  for  their  good,  that  even  the  threatenings 
were  designed  to  correct  and  to  reclaim,  that  He  was  ready  to  pour  out  of  His 
Spirit  upon  them,  but  for  their  impenitence  and  unbelief  and  rejection  of  His 
testimony ;  and  that  His  words  were  acceptable  and  profitable  to  the  upright,  how 
much  soever  they  might  be  despised  by  the  apostate  house  of  Jacob.     I.  The 

CHARACTERS   TO  WHOM   THB  WORD   OF   GoD   IS   PROFITABLB   ARE   THE    "  TTPRIGHT." 

I.  The  truly  upright  are  those  whose  hearts  are  right  in  the  sight  of  God ;  Israelites 
in  whom  is  no  guile.  They  are  no  dissemblers  m  religion ;  truth  is  stamped 
upon  their  words  and  actions.  Their  faith  is  unfeigned,  and  Jiheir  love  without 
dissimulation.  An  upright  man  is  what  he  appears  to  be.  2.  The  upright  are 
such  as  walk  by  a  right  rule,  the  Word  of  God,  making  this  the  guide  and  standard 
of  their  actions.  He  who  is  continually  gadding  about  to  change  his  way  feennot 
be  in  the  right  way.  Uniformity  of  conduct  is  essential  to  uprightness.  3;  The 
upright  are  represented  as  "  walking,"  or  making  progress  in  the  way  to  heaven. 
True  religion  means  not  only  persevering,  but  making  some  proficiency  in  the 
good  ways  of  God.  Hence  we  learn  that — (1)  True  religion  is  practical.  (2)  It  is 
personal.  (3)  It  is  free  and  volxmtary.  (4)  It  is  imperfect  at  present,  though 
tending  to  perfection,  and  there  is  room  for  continual  improvement.     II.  The 

ADVANTAGES  WHICH   THB   TRULY   UPRIGHT   DERIVE   FROM   THB  WORD  OF  GOD.      To 

him  that  walketh  uprightly,  the  word  of  real  experience,  and  we  are  taught  them 
oft  in  the  school  of  painful  experience ;  it  is  in  this  way  He  applies  them.  All 
His  rebukings  are  for  our  sanctification.     II.  The  cause  for  caution  on  our 

PART,   that   we   turn   NOT  AWAY   FROM   A   WHOLE   CONSIDERATION   OF  THIS   WIDE, 

EXTENDED,  AND  EXTENSIVE  WORK  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  Do  not  imagine  that  a  man 
can  really  "  straiten  the  Spirit  of  God."  I  might  as  well  imagine  that  a  molehill 
could  change  the  course  of  the  planets.  Our  blessed  Spirit  is  Jehovah,  omnipotent. 
Some  attempt  to  straiten  the  Spirit  of  God  by  confining  their  ideas  of  His  operation 
on  the  soul  to  that  which  is  pleasant  only,  to  tnat  which  is  refreshing,  to  that 
which  is  comforting,  to  that  which  is  elevating.  They  see  not  that  there  is  as 
much  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  that  which  humbles,  in  that  which  reproves,  in 
tliat  which  cuts  down,  in  that  which  dries  up,  in  that  which  lays  low,  and  keeps 
the  soul  as  in  a  low  place.  (J.  H.  Evans,  31. A.)  Upright  walking,  the  condition 
of  profiting  by  the  ministry  of  the  Word: — The  greatest  blessings  when  perverted 
become  the  greatest  curses.  An  unimproved  or  an  abused  privilege  becomes  a 
positive  evQ.  It  were  easy  to  adduce  a  host  of  illustrations  to  confirm  the  justice 
of  these  observations.  There  is  hardly  a  temporal  blessing  to  be  named,  in  respect 
of  which  it  may  not  be  shown  that  its  abuse  becomes  a  curse  to  the  possessor. 
Take  the  endowment  of  intellect  or  of  reason.  Or  the  case  of  one  to  whom  provi- 
dence has  allotted  a  more  than  common  abundance  of  this  world's  wealth.  Spiritual 
mercies  may  be  equally  abused  with  temporal,  and  the  result  which  ensues  from 
their  misuse  is  to  the  full  as  disastrous.  The  prophet,  speaking  in  the  name  of 
God,  demands,  "  Do  not  My  words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly  ?  " 
But  the  form  of  interrogation  clearly  implies,  that  to  such  as  walk  not  in  upright- 
ness, the  words  of  the  Almighty  will  rather  do  injury.  It  was  in  reply  to  the 
solicitations  of  those  who  entreated  of  the  prophet  not  to  prophesy  that  he  delivered 
the  emphatic  appeal  which  we  have  in  the  verse  containing  our  text.  We  are, 
however,  concerned  with  the  broad  principle  which  it  seems  to  imply.  There  is 
pointed  out  the  condition  of  all  profitable  hearing  of  God's  words.  It  is — upright 
walking.  The  precept  must  be  embodied  in  practice,  or  it  will  not  only  be 
useless,  it  will  be  positively  injurious.  I.  What  reasons  there  are  for  expect- 
ing  THAT   THB   HEARING   OF   God'S   WORDS   WILL  INJURE,   RATHER   THAN   BENEFIT, 

THE  INDIVIDUAL  WHO  WALKS  NOT  UPRIGHTLY.  Some  qualification  is  necessary 
at  the  outset  to  obviate  an  erroneous  conclusion  which  might  be  drawn.  It 
might  be  said,  "  What,  then,  becomes  of  the  utility  of  the  proclamation  to  the 
disobedient  ?     And  what  remains  of  the  office  of  the  Word  to  convince  and  to  con- 


OHAP.  n.]  MIC  AH.  13 

vert  the  soul  ?  "  The  apparent  contradiction  is  easily  explained.  The  prophet 
is  clearly  speaking  of  such  persons  as,  under  the  hearing  of  God's  words,  refused 
to  repent  and  be  obedient.  The  message  he  had  to  deliver  was  calcxilated  to 
reclaim  and  convert  them,  but  they  refused  submission  to  the  authority  of  Him 
in  whose  name  the  messenger  spake,  and  it  was  in  this  case  that  the  tidings  injured, 
in  place  of  benefiting.  The  guilt  and  the  responsibility  were  all  their  own  ; 
the  fault  was  not  in  the  Word.  The  prophet  was  not  to  desist  from  proclaiming 
that  Word,  simply  because,  when  its  statements  were  rejected,  moral  injury  would 
result.  And  we  are  not  to  be  deterred  from  communicating  God's  words  to  the 
disobedient,  simply  because  there  is  a  possibility  that  they  will  continue  to  be 
disobedient,  and  in  that  case  be  injured  and  not  advantaged  by  the  message. 
Now  take  the  case  of  one  to  whom  God's  words  are  sent,  but  they  have  never 
yet  led  him  to  a  walk  of  uprightness.  God's  words  have  been  practically  a  dead 
letter.  This  is  the  case  in  which  we  are  prepared  to  contend  that  the  words  of 
God  are  turning  to  that  man's  injury ;  the  blessing  is  being  converted  into  a 
curse.  We  assume  that  every  man's  real  and  highest  enjoyment,  his  greatest 
moral  advantage,  depends  upon  his  conformity  to  the  precepts  of  God's  Word. 
Each  instance  in  which  God's  words  are  heard,  and  no  result  towards  holiness 
produced,  diminishes  the  probability  of  ultimate  obedience.  He  is  becoming 
more  hard  and  inflexible,  and  less  likely  ever  to  become  the  subject  of  genuine 
repentance.  It  is  a  law  of  man's  moral  constitution,  that  feelings  once  aroused, 
which  are  not  carried  out  into  practice,  gradually  become  feebler  and  less  capable 
of  being  wakened  afresh.  There  is  no  case  in  which  there  is  greater  cause  for 
apprehension  than  that  of  an  individual  who  has  long  been  accustomed  to  the 
ministrations  of  the  Gospel,  without  being  converted  beneath  them.     II.  The 

POSITIVE    GOOD    WHICH    RESULTS    TO    THE    UPBIGHT    FROM    HEARING    God's    WORDS. 

1.  Look  at  the  knowledge  which  revelation  imparts.  2.  The  words  of  God  accom- 
plish a  most  important  purpose  with  reference  to  the  believer's  sanctification,  or 
his  actual  preparation  for  heaven.  The  promise  cannot  advantage  any  but  the 
consistent  disciple.  No  man  has  a  right  to  appropriate  a  single  promise  of  God's 
Word,  who  is  not  resolved  upon  striving  after  obedience.  It  is  the  "  upright  " 
walker  to  whom  alone  the  promise  in  reality  belongs.  May  we  cany  away  with 
us  the  recollection  of  this  great  truth, — that  in  order  to  profit  by  God's  words, 
whether  as  commimicated  to  us  on  the  page  of  inspiration,  or  by  the  ministrations 
of  the  Gospel,  there  must  be  an  endeavour  on  oiu:  parts  to  walk  uprightly,  or  to 
walk  in  agreement  with  what  God's  Word  prescribes.  (Robert  Bickersteth,  B.A.) 
The  Bible  vindicated  by  its  good  effects  : — There  are  some  difficulties  to  be  found 
in  the  Bible,  no  doubt.  There  are  a  good  many  things  that  you  do  not  understand 
in  nature,  but  you  do  not  dismiss  them.  Whatever  may  be  said  against  this 
planet,  it  is  our  best  standing  groimd  at  present.  And  so  long  as  the  Bible  vindi- 
cates itself  in  its  practical,  moral,  and  spiritual  effects,  that  is  enough  for  us. 
Look  to-day  at  the  nations  that  do  not  read  the  Bible — Turkey,  China,  India — 
they  belong  to  the  ruined  civil isatioiLS.  Scientists  have  used  the  spectroscope 
lately,  and  they  have  foimd  a  good  deal  in  the  sun  that  they  did  not  expect. 
They  have  found  a  good  many  terrestrial  elements  there.  But,  so  long  as  the  sun 
keeps  on  ripening  harvests  and  painting  summers,  and  filling  the  planet  with 
loveliness  and  music,  we  shall  respect  the  sim.  And  whatever  may  be  ihe  technical 
defects,  or  alleged  defects  of  Scripture,  so  long  shall  we  stand  by  it  whilst  it  lifts  up 
fallen  men  into  righteousness,  and  makes  the  great  wilderness  of  the  nations  to 
blossom  as  the  rose.  The  social  evils  of  Christendom  are  not  sanctioned  by  the  Bible : 
— These  are  the  indignant  questions  proposed  by  the  inspired  man  of  God  when 
he  contemplated  the  corruption  and  depravity  which  had  spread  themselves 
throughout  the  whole  Church  and  nation  of  the  Jews.  I.  Explain  what  I  mean 
BY  the  social  evils  OF  CHRISTENDOM.  Some  would  tell  us  that  religion  is  a  social 
evil;  marriage,  private  property,  and  equitable  laws,  social  evils.  We  can  all  see 
that  ignorance  and  credulity,  superstition  and  imposture,  tyranny  and  oppression, 
war  and  persecution  are  among  the  social  evils  which  all  good  men  ought  to 
deplore.  1.  Ignorance  and  credulity.  That  the  inhabitants  of  those  nations 
who  possess  a  Book  that  contains  a  revelation  from  God  of  all  the  great  principles 
of  faith  and  duty,  should  be  in  a  state  of  ignorance,  seems  most  extraordinary. 
Up  to  comparatively  a  very  recent  date,  throughout  the  whole  of  Christendom 
the  common  people  were  in  a  state  of  deplorable  ignorance.  We  count  ig-norance 
to  be  a  fearful  social  evil.  Credulity  is  always  the  result  of  ignorance  ;  and  thus 
originates  that  most  baneful  maxim,  that  "  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion." 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

2.  We  account  superstition  and  imposture  to  be  great  social  evils,  as  they 
have  existed  in  Christendom.  Christianity,  as  established  by  the  apostles,  was  a 
religion  of  extraordinary  simplicity.  It  had  no  temples,  no  altars,  no  sacrifices, 
no  priests,  no  pageants,  no  festivities,  no  holidays.  It  was  a  simple  religion,  plain 
and  imadorned,  addressing  itself  to  the  judgment  and  to  the  affections  of  men. 
To  meet  the  prejudices  of  the  vulgar,  and  to  gratify  the  corrupt  taste  of  the  multi- 
tude, pompous  ceremonies  were  introduced,  which  easily  reconciled  the  pagans  to 
a  worship  that  appeared  so  like  their  own.  It  is  a  matter  beyond  all  controversy 
that  the  old  demigods  of  paganism  were  worshipped  under  new  names  by  these 
very  questionable  Christians, — worshipped  at  the  same  wells,  on  the  same  moimtain 
sides,  in  the  same  groves,  and  with  the  same  rites, — and  that  nothing  was 
changed  but  the  name.     Surely  these  things  do  not  result  from  God's  Holy  Word  ! 

3.  Tyranny  and  oppression,  as  they  have  existed  in  Christendom,  are  social  evils 
which  must  be  deplored.  They  are  as  old  as  the  apostasy  of  man  from  God. 
When  man  would  not  submit  to  God,  he  soon  sought  to  usurp  authority  over 
his  brethren.  In  private  and  in  public  life  it  will  be  foimd  that  those  who  are  least 
disposed  to  submit  are  most  disposed  to  usurp.  Those  persons  who  are  least  patient 
of  restraints  themselves,  are  most  willing  to  put  restraints  on  others.  We  refer, 
however,  not  so  much  to  oppression  and  tyranny  in  civil  affairs,  as  to  that  spiritual 
usurpation  which  arose  in  the  Church,  when  the  humble  presbyters  became  priests, 
patriarchs,  and  popes.  We  lament  over  all  proofs  of  spiritual  tyranny  and  oppres- 
sion. 4.  Wars  and  persecutions  are  amongst  the  social  evils  that  have  afflicted 
Christendom.  Some  of  these  have  been  political  contests — wars  undertaken 
upon  questions  of  international  polity.  But  religious  wars  now  demand  our 
attention.  The  history  of  Christian  nations  is  like  Ezekiel's  roll,  "  written  within 
and  without  with  lamentations   and   mourning  and  woe."     II.  These   social 

EVILS  ABE  NOT   SANCTIONED   BY   THE   BiBLE,    BUT   COBRBCTED   BY  IT.       It  mUSt  be 

conceded,  however,  that  there  are  some  facts  connected  with  the  history  of  the 
Jews  in  the  Old  Testament  which  appear  at  first  sight  to  sanction  at  least  some 
of  these  acts  of  violence  and  bloodshed.  Some  are  explained  by  God's  right  to 
visit  and  punish  guilty  nations,  as  well  as  guilty  individuals.  These  are  reserved 
and  excepted  cases,  and  those  who  now  dare  to  plead  for  the  extirpation  and 
oppression  of  their  enemies,  or  for  acts  of  violence  and  persecution  from  the  facts 
of  the  Old  Testament,  iare  altogether  beside  the  mark,  imless  they  can  show  that 
they  possess  the  power  of  working  miracles  to  sustain  the  assumption.  1.  We 
account  the  Bible  to  be  the  enemy  of  ignorance  and  credulity.  That  which  is 
a  revelation  necessarily  supposes  the  dissipation  of  ignorance.  The  very  com- 
munication of  a  Book  that  must  be  read,  studied,  and  illustrated  by  various  other 
critical,  scientific,  and  historical  inquiries,  compels  intelligence,  and  shows  that 
the  Word  of  God  is  the  friend  of  knowledge,  the  fountain  of  wisdom.  2.  The 
Bible  is  the  enemy  of  superstition  and  imposture.  There  were  many  ceremonies 
in  the  Jewish  Church,  but  these  were  "  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,"  and 
were  only  to  continue  imtil  the  substance  should  appear.  When  Christianity 
was  revealed,  Judaism  passed  away.  Primitive  Christianity  and  the  Word  of 
God  are  not  answerable  for  the  accumulated  ceremonies  and  superstitions  of  the 
modern  Christian  Church.  3.  The  Bible  is  the  enemy  of  tyranny  and  oppression. 
The  Word  of  God  professes  to  be  the  Word  of  the  Most  Upright;  just  and  right 
is  He  !  Rectitude  characterises  the  mind  and  government  of  God.  That  Word 
would  be  inconsistent  with  its  Author  if  it  were  found  to  sanction  tjTanny  and 
oppression  in  any  form.  4.  The  Bible  is  the  enemy  of  war  and  persecution.  Our 
Lord  inculcated  in  His  disciples  a  spirit  of  forbearance,  a  disposition  not  to  resist 
evil,  not  to  take  offence.  Then  if  we  desire  important  changes  in  human  society, 
it  is  that  there  may  be  more  equal  happiness.  Let  us  then  become  Bible  Christians. 
If  we  really  take  the  Book  as  our  giiide,  we  shall  not  be  ignorant  or  superstitious 
or  tyrannical.  We  shall  avoid  the  mischiefs  by  which  the  Christian  name  is  dis- 
honoured, and  we  shall  exhibit  to  those  around  us  the  blessed  influence  of  the 
religion  of  Jesus  on  the  character  and  lives  of  men.  (John  Blackburn.)  God's 
Word  good  to  the  upright: — Micah  says.  You  are  trying  to  do  the  right  thing  in  a 
wrong  way :  you  are  wasting  the  bread  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  you  have 
mistaken  the  right  beginning  and  the  right  continuance  of  all  this  ministry  of 
revelation.  My  sun  will  never  do  good  to  a  dead  creed  ;  every  beam  of  that  sim 
is  a  sword  striking  at  that  poor  outcast  dead  thing.  "  Do  not  My  words  do  good  ?  " 
To  whom  ?  To  the  man  who  wants  them,  longs  for  them,  represents  their  purpose, 
walks  uprightly.     Literally,  Do  not  My  words  do  good  to  him  that  is  upright  ?    You 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  15 

must  not  only  have  right  food,  you  must  have  the  right  appetite  and  the  right 
digestion.  God's  revelation  is  lost  upon  the  man  who  cares  nothmg  for  it.  It  is 
within  the  power  of  the  eyelid  to  shut  out  the  midday.  The  Bible  has  nothing  to 
say  to  the  froward  soul.  The  revelation  of  God  never  talks  to  the  critic.  Intellect, 
unless  a  servant,  has  no  business  with  things  spiritual,  supernatural,  ineffable. 
Let  every  man  then  test  himself  by  this  one  standard.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is 
meant  to  be  good  to  the  upright.  Not  necessarily  to  the  personally  perfect.  There 
are  no  such  people,  except  in  their  own  estimation,  and  therefore  there  are  none 
perfect  at  all.  What  is  it  to  be  upright  then  ?  To  be  sincere :  to  mean  to  be 
right.  There  is  a  middle  line  in  every  man's  thought  and  life  and  purpose.  Do 
not  judge  him  by  the  higher  line,  or  by  the  lower  level ;  you  will  find  the 
average  thought,  and  tendency,  and  pressure — judge  by  that.  When  a  man 
says,  I  want  to  be  right,  though  I  am  failing  seven  times  a  day, — he  is  right.  .  .  . 
To  walk  uprightly  is  not  to  walk  pedantically,  ostentatiously,  and  perfectly  in 
the  estimation  of  the  world ;  but  to  walk  uprightly  is  to  have  the  stress  of  the  V 
soul  in  the  right  direction.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  God's  truth  : — "  Thou 
called  house  of  Jacob,  is  the  patience  of  Jehovah  short  then  7  or  is  this  His  doing  ? 
Are  not  My  words  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly  ?  "  Such  is  a  modern 
translation.  We  prefer  the  translation  of  Henderson,  as  follows  :  "  What  language, 
O  house  of  Jacob  !  Is  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  shortened  ?  Are  these  His  operations  ? 
Do  not  My  words  benefit  him  that  walketh  uprightly  ?  "  These  words  seem  to 
be  a  reply  to  an  objection  raised  against  the  prophets  in  the  preceding  verse. 
The  objector  did  not  approve  of  predictions  so  terribly  severe.  "  It  is  not  strange," 
says  Matthew  Henry,  "  if  people  that  are  vicious  and  debauched  covet  to  have 
ministers  that  are  altogether  such  as  themselves,  for  they  are  willing  to  believe 
that  God  is  so  too."  I.  That  the  Spirit  of  Divine  truth  cannot  be  restrained. 
"  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  "  There  is  no  limit  to  truth  ;  it  is  an  ocean 
that  has  no  shore,  a  field  whose  everspringing  seeds  are  innumerable.  "  The 
Lord  hath  yet  more  light  and  truth  to  break  forth  from  His  Word."  II.  That  the 
PRACTICE  of  Divine  truth  cannot  but  do  good.  "  Do  not  My  words  do  good  to 
him  that  walketh  uprightly  ?  "  Though  you  have  never  heard  the  particular 
truth  before,  though  it  may  be  too  severe  to  please  you,  though  it  may  clash  with 
all  your  prejudices  and  wishes,  if  you  practise  it,  it  will  do  you  good.  1.  It  is  to 
be  practised.  It  is  not  merely  for  speculation,  systematising,  controversy,  and 
debate,  it  is  for  inspirmg  the  activities  and  ruling  the  life.  It  is  a  code  rather 
than  a  creed.  It  must  be  incarnated,  made  flesh,  and  dwell  in  the  land. 
2.  When  practised  it  is  a  blessing.  "  Do  not  My  words  do  good  to  him  that 
walketh  uprightly  ?  "  Yes,  they  do  good.  When  they  are  translated,  not  mto 
languages  and  creeds,  but  into  living  deeds.  A  man  gets  good  only  as  he 
builds    up    a    noble    character.       {HomUist.)  An    upright    man    reaps    the 

fvU  benefit  of  God's  Word : — The  leading  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to 
these  words  was  the  degeneracy  of  God's  ancient  people,  the  Jews.  This 
degeneracy  was  very  prevalent  in  the  days  of  Micah,  both  in  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  and  that  of  Judah.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  covenant 
engagements  into  which  the  Divine  Being  enters  with  man  by  no  means  preclude 
His  hatred  and  condemnation  of  sin  ;  neither  do  our  covenant  engagements  with 
Him  exempt  us  from  the  liability  of  falling  into  sin.  Nothing  that  was  said  to 
them  by  Grod  and  His  servants  met  their  approbation.  Everything  was  wrong, 
and,  in  their  vitiated  judgment,  unlike  what  it  had  been.  And,  to  make  good  their 
own  case,  they  were  presumptuous  enough  to  charge  the  cause  of  all  their  woes 
upon  God ;  but  He  nobly  vindicated  Himself,  and  tacitly  condemned  them  in 
these  words,  "Do  not  My  words,"  &c.  The  drift  of  the  text,  or  the  doctrme 
contained  therein,  is  this, — that  however  painful  and  offensive  God's  Word  may 
be  to  those  who  live  in  the  love  of  sin,  it  is  highly  beneficial  to  those  who  walk 
uprightly  ;  and  that  if  it  does  not  please  and  profit  the  soul,  it  is  not  owing  to 
any  defect  in  the  Word,  but  to  some  defect  in  us.  1.  To  the  character  oe" 
an  upright  man.  The  husbandman,  in  winnowing  his  giain  for  the  market, 
divides  one  heap  into  two.  The  one  he  calls  corn,  the  other  chaff.  And  thus 
does  the  Bible  deal  with  the  human  family :  it  divides  the  whole  into  two  classes 
— and  into  two  only,  as  to  kind.  The  one  it  calls  good,  the  other  bad.  But 
the  husbandman,  by  putting  his  corn  through  another  process  or  two,  divides 
it  into  three  or  more  portions,  according  to  its  quality.  The  best  he  calls  saleable  ; 
the  next  best,  hinderends  ;  and  the  rest,  hen-corn.  After  the  same  way  does 
the  Bible  divide  the  righteous  into  classes  ;  and  in  the  same  way  will  they  be 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

disposed  of  at  the  last  day.  Nearly  all  the  good  men  we  read  of  m  the  Bible 
and  elsewhere  excelled  in  one  or  two  branches  of  piety ;  but  few  excelled  in 
all.  Christ,  however,  did  this.  An  upright  man  is  one  who  strives  to  know 
as  much  of  the  will  of  God  as  he  can,  in  order  that  he  may  live  according  to  it. 
His  main  object  is  to  live  well  and  die  happy.  1.  He  is  a  religious  man.  Not 
a  mere  professor  of  religion,  not  one  whose  opinions  have  undergone  a  change 
for  the  better,  nor  one  whose  morality  is  of  a  high  and  refined  order  ;  but  a  man 
whose  heart  and  mind,  principles  and  practices  have  been  changed  by  Divine 
grace.  2.  He  is  a  considerate  man. — Sensible  of  the  many  evils  with  which  he 
is  surrounded,  and  the  proneness  of  human  nature  to  fall  into  them,  he  ponders 
well  the  path  of  his  feet.  He  plans  with  his  head  what  he  executes  with  his  hands. 
He  thinks  before  he  acts.  "  Thou  God  seest  me  "  is  indelibly  engraven  on  his 
memory.  That  he  may  be  found  a  wise  and  safe  man  at  last  he,  at  present, 
considers  his  ways  in  his  heart  (Hag.  i.  15).  3.  He  is  a  conscientious  man.  Con- 
science is  prompt  in  commanding,  and  he  is  as  prompt  in  obeying.  It  speaks, 
and  the  upright,  God-feaxing  man  responds,  "  How,  then,  can  I  do  this  great 
wickedness,  and  sin  against  God  ?  "  4.  He  is  a  consistent  man.  He  is  actuated 
by  principle  rather  than  passion.  II.  We  pubpose  to  show  whether  such 
A  MAN  IS  BENEFITED  BY  THE  WoRD  OF  GoD.  By  the  Word  of  God  we  under- 
stand the  Bible.  It  contains  the  revelation  of  His  wiU  to  and  concerning  man. 
And  every  man  who  can  have  the  Bible  is  expected  to  understand  and  practise 
it  so  far  as  is  essential  to  his  salvation.     To  an  upright  man  the  Word  of  God 

firoves — 1.  An  instructive  Word.  The  Bible  is  professionally  a  book  of  instructions, 
ts  instructions  relate  to  the  highest  subjects — to  soul  matters  and  matters  of 
eternity.  And,  apart  from  its  teachings,  we  cannot  gain  the  same  instructions 
elsewhere.  The  upright  man  is  quite  alive  to  this ;  hence  he  prizes  the  Bible, 
and  evinces  a  peculiar  aptness  for  its  teachings.  By  a  prayerful  perusal  of  its 
sacred  pages  he  becomes  possessed  of  much  spiritual  and  Divine  knowledge. 
And  Bible  light  is  the  best  of  light.  The  knowledge  that  comes  from  God  is 
the  purest  of  knowledge.  It  makes  us  acquainted  with  God  and  His  will — with 
man  and  his  ways — with  sin  and  its  consequences — with  redemption  and  its 
effects.  These  things  are  spiritual  in  their  nature,  and  by  the  upright  man  are 
spiritually  discerned.  2.  It  is  a  corrective  Word.  Not  only  are  all  men  liable 
to  err,  but  all  men  have  erred ;  for,  "  to  err  is  human."  Hence  all  men  need 
correction.  But  all  are  not  willing  to  be  corrected ;  some,  however,  are,  and 
among  these  may  be  ranked  the  upright.  The  corrective  lessons  of  the  Bible 
are  received  by  him  in  the  same  spirit  and  with  the  same  thankfulness,  as  what  a 
traveller  who  has  missed  his  way  evinces  when  put  right.  It  is  in  this  light 
especially  that  God's  "  words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly."  3/  It 
is  a  pacific  Word.  The  midday  sun  does  not  bring  its  rays  more  gently  to  bear 
upon  the  virgin  flower  than  are  the  soothing  truths  of  God's  Word  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  good  man's  troubled  spirit.  The  gentle  rain  is  not  more  acceptable 
to  the  vegetation  of  spring  than  are  God's  promises  to  the  tried  Christian.  The 
healing  balm  is  not  more  alleviating  to  the  wounded  traveller  than  is  God's 
Word  to  the  expiring  pilgrim.  In  conclusion,  observe  three  things — 1.  The  Word 
of  God  is  full  of  truth  and  goodness.  Its  sole  object  being  to  make  men  wise 
and  happy.  2.  That  it  may  "  not  return  unto  God  void,  but  accomplish  that 
which  He  pleases,  and  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  He  sends  it,"  we  must  be 
upright.  3.  AU  may  become  upright,  and  thereby  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  the 
Bible.     (J.  Fawcit.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  My  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy. — Sin  an  antagonist : — 
This  chapter  refers  to  the  character  and  doings  of  Israel  during  the  last 
nine  years  of  Ahaz.  A  very  dark  period  in  Israelitish  history  was  this. 
"We  are  told  in  2  Chron.  xxviii.  24,  26,  that  Ahaz  shut  up  the  doors  of 
the  temple  and  erected  altars  in  every  corner  of  Jerusalem.  We  may  safely 
conclude,  from  the  language  of  Micah  (chap,  ii.)  and  Isaiah  (chap,  xi.),  that  when 
he  did  so,  abominations  of  every  kind  overran  the  land.  A  prophet  like  Micah 
was  no  longer  permitted  to  speak.  The  testimony  of  Isaiah  (chaps,  vii.,  viii.) 
had  borne  no  fruit ;  the  fruitlessness  of  invoking  the  aid  of  Assyria  had  taught 
him  no  better.  Ahaz  did  not  repent,  like  Manasseh,  but  persisted  in  his  evil 
ways.  What  a  melancholy  course  of  conduct !  Like  Uzziah,  Ahaz  was  denied 
honourable  burial  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  27).  The  prophet  here,  in  denouncing  the 
sins  which  were  then  most  prevalent  in  Judah  and  Ephraim,  alludes  expressly 


CHAP.  II.]  MIC  AH.  17 

to  the  acts  of  oppression  and  violence  then  common,  and  tells  them  that  for  these 
they  would  be  driven  out  of  the  land."  The  verses  lead  us  to  look  at  sin  in  the 
aspect  of  an  antagonist,  and  suggest — I.  That  it  is  an  antagonist  to  the  Divine. 
"  Even  of  late  [marg.,  '  yesterday ']  My  people  has  risen  up  as  an  enemy." 
*'  It  is  not  stated,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  against  whom  the  people  rise  up  as  an  enemy ; 
but,  according  to  the  context,  it  can  only  be  against  Jehovah."  Sin  is  an  antag- 
onist to  God ;  it  lifts  up  the  soul  in  hostility  agamst  its  Maker.  Unregenerated 
men  say  that  they  are  not  conscious  of  any  enmity  in  their  hearts  towards  their 
Maker  ;  on  the  contrary,  sometimes  they  feel  a  passing  glow  of  gratitude  and 
adoration  for  Him.  But  it  is  the  conduct  of  a  man  that  proves  the  settled  state 
of  his  heart.  1.  This  enmity  is  most  unjustifiable.  Enmity  sometimes  admits 
of  justification,  but  never  in  this  case.  2.  This  enmity  is  most  wicked.  It  is 
against  reason  and  justice.  3.  This  enmity  is  most  miserable.  Enmity  to  God 
is  the  fountain  of  all  the  misery  in  the  universe.  The  words  suggest  another 
idea  concerning  sin — II.  That  it  is  an  antagonist  to  the  human.  "  Ye  pull  off 
the  robe  with  the  garment  [marg.,  '  over  against  the  garment ']  from  them  that 
pass  by  securely  as  men  averse  from  war."  Not  content  with  the  outer  garment, 
ye  greedily  rob  passers-by  of  the  ornamental  robe  fitting  the  body  closely  and 
flowing  down  to  the  feet ;  and  this  you  do,  not  to  enemies,  but  to  friends,  to  those 
who  are  "  averse  from  war."  More  :  "  The  women  of  My  people  have  ye  cast 
out  from  their  pleasant  houses."  The  widows  of  the  men  slain  by  you  in  battle 
you  have  deprived  of  their  homes.  They  "devoured  widows'  houses."  This  was 
not  all.  "  From  their  children  have  ye  taken  away  My  glory  for  ever."  The 
orphan  children  you  have  despoiled.  In  all  this  there  is  the  manifestation  of 
sin,  as  an  antagonist  to  human  rights  and  human  happiness.  Sin  puts  man 
against  his  brother  ;  hence  the  slanders,  quarrels,  litigations,  wars  that  are  rife 
in  every  human  scene.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  10.  Arise  ye,  and  depart:  for  this  Is  not  your  rest;  because  it  is 
polluted. — No  rest,  and  the  reason  why:  —  Above  all  lands  the  land  of  Canaan 
seemed  most  adapted  for  a  place  of  rest.  And  the  people  whom  God 
had  so  wondrously  led  into  it,  appeared  most  likely  to  find  a  place  of 
rest.  Yet  to  this  people,  and  in  respect  of  this  very  country,  God  says, 
"  Arise  ye,  and  depart ;  for  this  is  not  your  rest."  I.  OuB  territobial  position. 
"  This  is  not  your  rest."  The  body  is  not  the  resting-place  of  the  spirit.  It  is  a 
house  of  dust,  a  tenement  of  clay,  and  it  is  more  like  to  a  tent  than  to  a  substantial 
dwelling.  While  we  are  in  the  body,  and  while  we  are  resident  on  the  globe, 
there  is  very  little  permanent  besides  change.  If  it  is  true  that  this  is  not  our  rest, 
no  man  should  try  to  rest  in  his  temporal  condition.  And  no  man  should  suffer 
himself  to  rest.  And  no  man  should  murmur  when  he  is  disturbed.  No  man 
should  live  unprepared  for  change  and  disturbance.  II.  The  echo  of  a  voice 
WB  OFTEN  hear.  "  Arise  ye,  and  depart."  In  events  that  happen,  in  circum- 
stances that  arise,  we  hear  this  voice.  Hourly  do  we  listen  to  it.  Do  not  neglect 
events.  See  that  the  voice  calls  you  not  only  to  submit  to  change,  but  to 
acquiesce  in  it.  III.  A  reason  for  such  exposure  to  change.  "  Because 
it  is  polluted."  The  body  is  born  in  sin,  and  is  an  instrument  of  unrighteousness, 
and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  body  is  doomed  to  die.  God  could,  if  necessary, 
have  changed  the  body  without  death.  The  earth  has  been  the  theatre  of  trans- 
gression, and  it  must  be  destroyed.  Everything  we  touch  we  pollute.  Nothing 
is  really  right  here.  Everything  must  be  changed  until  everything  becomes  right. 
The  removal  of  sin  is  essential  to  rest.  We  may,  from  Jesus  Christ,  find  rest  within. 
And  there  shall  be  rest  in  a  glorious  body,  rest  in  a  perfect  paradise,  rest  in  an 
incorruptible  inheritance,  and  rest  in  the  eternal  God.  {Samuel  Martin.)  This 
world  is  not  a  state  of  happiness : — This  world  is  not  and  never  was  designed  to 
be  the  place  of  our  happiness  or  long  abode ;  and  it  highly  concerns  us,  whilst 
we  are  in  it,  to  raise  our  hearts  above  it,  and  prepare  to  leave  it.  I.  As  this 
•world  is  not  our  rest,  or  the  scene  of  our  happiness,  our  souls  should 
RISE  ABOVE  IT.  1.  Prove  the  truth  of  this  proposition.  AU  men  profess  to 
believe  this  propositiop,  and  yet  look  at  their  pursuits,  views,  and  cares,  and  you 
would  think  they  believed  nothing  less.  The  truth  is  that  they  do  not  attend  to 
what  they  believe,  or  pursue  it  into  its  proper  and  practical  consequences.  The 
proposition  is  not  the  less  certain  for  the  inattention  and  disregard  which  some 
men  pay  to  it,  or  for  their  practical  contradiction  of  it.  That  this  world  is  not 
and  never  was  designed  to  be  our  state  of  rest  or  happiness,  appears — (1)  From  the 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

certain  nature  and  properties  of  all  our  earthly  enjoyments.  (2)  From  the 
nature  and  circumstances  of  our  condition  in  it ;  which  is  in  every  view  a  state  of 
imperfection  and  trial.  (3)  Setting  aside  all  the  distasteful  ingredients  which 
the  many  moral  and  natural  evils  of  life  throw  into  its  cup  of  pleasiu-es,  and  sup- 
pose t'lem  ever  so  pure  and  constant,  yet  they  are  by  no  means  suited  to  a  soul, 
an  immortal  soul,  conscious  of  capacities  which  such  delights  can  never  fill,  and 
of  cravings  they  can  never  gratify.  Objects  of  sense  are  ill  adapted  to  the  wants 
of  the  mind.  (4)  Appeal  to  personal  experience  for  a  proof  of  the  proposition 
before  us.  Did  you  ever  taste  a  pleasure  of  earth  that  fully  satisfied  you  ?  If  this 
world  is  not  our  rest,  we  should  take  care  not  to  be  over  fond  of  it.  How  are  we 
to  live  above  the  world  ?  The  only  way  is  to  get  our  hearts  fixed  on  heaven. 
II.  We  mtjst  be  continttally  ekdeavottrino  after  a  heavenly  disposition. 
To  have  oiu*  minds  habitually  attempered  to  that  blessed  world.  The  true  temper 
of  the  blessed  consists  of  love  and  purity.  Then  let  us  seek  that  the  love  of 
God  may  have  a  prevailing  influence  on  our  hearts.  The  Divine  image,  or  moral 
likeness  to  God,  which  consists  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  does  in  a  degree 
enter  into  the  character  of  all  true  Christians  now.  The  more  we  are  fit  for  a 
better  world,  the  more  we  shall  be  out  of  love  with  this.  (J.  Mason,  A.M.) 
The  sovTa  exodus  : — This  injunction  does  not  mean  either  of  the  three  following 
things.  1.  It  does  not  mean  the  termination  of  our  mortal  life.  Life  is  a  talent  which 
we  should  guard.  2.  It  does  not  mean  neglect  of  material  interests  and  duties. 
We  are  commanded  to  be  "  diligent  in  business,"  &c.  3.  It  does  not  mean 
absolute  retirement  from  the  world.  1.  There  is  no  rest  for  the  soul  in  a  dominant 
materialism.  "  This  is  not  your  rest."  There  are  four  forms  in  which  this 
dominant  materialism  exists  amongst  us,  and  in  neither  of  which  can  the  soul 
find  rest.  ( I )  There  is  the  gross,  sensual  form.  The  sensualist  and  the  voluptuary 
live  in  this,  but  they  have  no  rest.  Ask  the  epicurean  and  the  debauchee. 
(2)  There  is  the  thoroughly  secular  form.  The  man  who  is  absorbed  in  the  work 
of  "  making  money  "  lives  here  ;  but  in  it  he  finds  no  rest.  Ask  the  man  who 
has  become  the  creature  of  business,  &c.  (3)  There  is  the  intellectual  form. 
The  region  of  mere  "  fleshy  wisdom  "  : — fleshy  arts  and  fleshy  literature ; — 
poetry  and  novels  that  appeal  to  the  flesh.  There  is  no  rest  for  the  soul  here. 
Ask  Byron,  Burns,  Dryden,  &c.  (4)  There  is  the  religious  form.  There  is  a 
fleshly  religion  amongst  men  : — a  religion  of  pictures,  music,  pompous  rites  and 
ceremonies ; — all  appealing  to  the  senses.  There  is  no  rest  for  the  soul  here.  Let 
it "  arise  then  and  depart."  Another  reason  here  suggested  is — 2.  There  is  pollution 
for  the  soixl  in  it.  To  allow  the  material  in  any  form  to  rule  us  is  a  sin.  ( 1 )  Reason 
shows  this.  Mind  was  made  to  govern  matter — the  senses  were  made  to  be  the 
servants,  not  the  sovereign  of  the  soul.  (2)  Conscience  testifies  this.  Conscience 
is  everlastingly  protesting  against  the  dominion  of  the  flesh.  (3)  The  Bible 
declares  this.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  3.  There  is  danger 
to  the  soul  in  materialism.  "  It  shall  destroy  you."  "  For  to  be  carnally-minded 
is  death."  The  work  of  soul -destruction  is  going  on  every  moment ;  the  soul 
decays  in  this  state.  Force  of  intellect,  discrimination  of  judgment,  freedom 
of  will,  sensibility  of  conscience,  elasticity  of  soul,  are  being  destroyed.  "  Arise," 
then.  The  voice  of  philosophy,  the  voice  of  history,  the  voice  of  the  Bible,  and 
the  voice  of  departed  saints,  all  combine  in  the  injunction,  "  Arise  and  depart." 
(Homilist.)  Liberalism  in  religion: — Cardinal  Newman  says  that  liberalism 
in  religion  is  an  error,  overspreading  as  a  snare  the  whole  earth  ;  it  is  sweeping 
into  its  own  ranks  great  numbers  of  able,  earnest,  virtuous  men,  elderly  men 
of  approved  antecedents,  young  men  with  a  career  before  them.  The  Cardinal 
calls  this  condition  of  things  "  a  great  apostasy."  He  thus  defines  "  liberalism 
in  religion."  "  It  is  the  doctrine  that  there  is  no  positive  truth  in  religion, — that 
one  creed  is  as  good  as  another, — that  all  are  to  be  tolerated,  as  all  are  matters  of 
opinion ;  that  revealed  religion  is  not  a  truth,  but  a  sentiment  and  a  taste."  But 
this  condition  of  mind  is  not  very  widespread  in  England.  Take  each  mark  of  this 
liberalism  in  religion,  and  ask,  "  i-oes  it  denote  large  numbers  ?  "  1.  The  doctrine 
that  there  is  no  positive  truth  in  religion.  The  Cardinal  says,  "  Every  dozen 
men  you  meet  in  the  streets  represent  one  or  other  of  as  many  as  seven  religions. " 
Then,  on  this  statement,  we  must  conclude  that  seven  out  of  twelve  profess  a 
definite  religion.  These  seven  do  not  hold  that  there  is  no  positive  truth  in  religion. 
And  what  may  we  say  of  the  other  five  ?  They  may  be  indifferent  to  religion, 
but  they  do  not  disbelieve  it.  Positivists  are  a  very  small  class  indeed,  and  even 
positivism  has  developed  a  religion.     2.  The  doctrine  that  "  one  creed  is  as  good 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  19 

as  another."  Are  there  many  who  hold  this  doctrine  ?  Manifestly,  if  men 
choose  one  form  of  religion  instead  of  another,  it  must  be  because  they  think 
one  better  than  another.  It  is  the  deep  feeling  that  a  man  has  truer  views  of  God 
to  put  before  his  fellows  which  gives  him  power  to  push  his  way  through  obstinate 
dulness  or  obstructive  narrowness.  3.  The  doctrine  that  all  creeds  are  to  be 
tolerated  because  all  are  matters  of  opinion.  That  all  are  to  be  tolerated  is 
certainly  now  a  very  widespread  conviction.  Yet  for  centuries  coercion  was  the 
invariable  custom,  and  not  toleration.  Why  do  the  different  Christian  com- 
munities now  all  approve  of  toleration  ?  Is  it  because  they  think  the  faiths  of 
the  sects  are  all  matters  of  opinion  ?  They  know  that,  in  their  own  case,  their 
faith  is  a  matter  of  deep  conviction ;  and  if  they  do  justice  to  their  neighbours, 
they  know  that  their  faith  is  equally  matter  of  deep  conviction  with  them.  4.  The 
doctrine  that  revealed  religion  is  not  a  truth  but  a  sentiment  or  taste.  Who  is 
it  that  professes  this  ?  It  is  almost  confined  to  a  single  person,  if  indeed  even 
he  would  admit  it, — Mr.  Matthew  Arnold.  If  religion  fundamentally  is  a  sentiment, 
it  is  a  sentiment  towards  something ;  that  something  is  something  we  believe 
exists ;  we  believe  in  that  something,  and  that  is  the  beginning  of  a  creed ;  the 
sentiment  postulates  an  object ;  the  sentiment  is  love,  and  the  great  object  is  God. 
Religious  liberalism  does  cling  to  positive  truth,  but  she  will  away  with  positive 
lies.  It  does  teach  that  though  all  creeds  are  not  equally  good,  there  is  some  good 
in  all  creeds,  and  this  is  a  very  different  thing.  (W.  Page  Boberts,  M.A.)  This 
is  not  your  rest : — Canaan  was  given  to  Israel  on  condition  of  their  faithful  obedience. 
That  obedience  they  had  failed  to  render.  It  is  allowed  by  commentators  that 
these  words  may  be  properly  applied  to  the  state  of  men  in  the  present  world. 
Expand  them  thus — 1.  This  world  would  have  been  a  rest  had  sin  never  entered 
it :  but  since  it  is  polluted,  there  is  neither  contentment  nor  continuance  here, — 
neither  solid  happiness  in  the  enjoyments  it  offers,  nor  an  abiding  city  in  any  of  its 
domains.  It  is  no  longer  our  permanent  abode,  but  ovu*  passage  to  another  country ; 
our  inn,  not  our  home.  2.  To  attempt  to  rest  in  the  creature  after  God  has  com- 
manded us  to  give  it  up  is  sinful.  To  rest  in  a  connection  with  unrighteous  men — 
satisfied  with  a  world  corrupt  through  "  divers  lusts  " — is  still  more  polluted. 
3.  Through  the  selfish  passions  and  oppressive  conduct  of  men,  through  the 
numerous  troubles  which  beset  this  vale  of  tears, — the  pilgrim  can  find  no  rest  on 
earth.  It  is  a  relief  to  think  of  departing  to  that  world  where  "the  wicked  cease 
from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest."  I.  This  is  not  ouii  home.  Our 
life  is  as  a  "handbreadth."  Regular  and  rapid,  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,  one 
generation  sweeps  off  another  into  the  gulf  of  oblivion.  This  is  but  the  threshold 
of  your  being,  and  all  before  you  is  a  boundless  eternity.  11.  The  worlo  cannot 
SATISFY.  Never  were  the  things  of  the  world  intended  to  fill  the  human  mind. 
In  the  original  formation  of  man  he  received  a  capacity  which  nothing  but  God 
could  fill :  and  though  by  the  fall  he  lost  his  relish  for  God,  the  same  capacity 
still  remains,  and  all  creation  cannot  fill  it  now.  Many  minds,  broken  loose  from 
their  centre,  have  wandered  in  search  of  rest  in  the  creatures  ;  but  none  have 
ever  found  it.  III.  An  attempt  to  rest  in  the  creature  is  sinful.  The  first 
command  is,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  Me."  To  make  a  god  of 
anything,  is  to  set  the  heart  supremely  upon  it,  and  to  attempt  to  rest  in  it  as  a 
chief  soxirce  of  happiness.  To  love  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator."  and 
to  look  to  that  for  our  chief  comfort,  is  to  idolise  the  creature.  We  may  value 
the  creature  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  is  given  to  us.  To  attempt  to  rest  in 
the  creature  is  to  seek  a  guilty  rest.  IV.  No  alliance  can  be  formed  with  men 
OF  the  world  without  hazard  of  pollution.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt 
good  manners."  A  great  part  of  the  feelings,  opinions,  conversation,  and  customs 
of  the  world  are  opposed  to  the  genuine  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  V.  No  rest  can  be 
FOUND  IN  A  world  FULL  OF  INJUSTICE  AND  OPPRESSION.  The  coUisions  of  Selfish 
passions  keep  the  world  in  a  flame,  and  drench  it  in  blood.     VI.  No  rest  can  be 

FOUND    IN    A    WORLD    INUNDATED    WITH    THE    FLOODS    OF    AFFLICTION.       Ever  since 

sin  entered,  this  world  has  been  a  vale  of  tears,  a  house  of  correction,  to  break 
stubborn  spirits  to  submission,  to  drive  wayward  children  to  obedience  by  the 
rod,  to  humble  the  proud,  and  to  discover  God's  severity  against  sin.  Why 
then  .should  we  wish  to  continue  here  ?  (E.  D.  Griffin,  D.D.)  Rest : — The  pro- 
phecy of  Micah  stands  conspicuous  for  the  bright  anticipations  it  gives  of  Messiah's 
daysl  It  is  to  the  desolation  of  the  ten  tribes  and  their  scattering  among  the 
nations  that  the  text  refers.  I.  A  truth  which  we  are  all  very  reluctant 
TO  ADMIT.     "  This  is  not  your  rest."     A  just  estimate  of  human   life  is  a  very 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

rare  thing,  and  seldom  attained  but  at  the  price  of  painful  experience.  1.  It  was 
never  designed  to  be  our  rest.  We  are  not  forbidden  to  seek  happiness  ;  we 
are  only  forbidden  seeking  it  in  the  wrong  direction.  The  grand  mistake  of  human 
nature  is  to  suppose  that  there  is  some  other  good,  some  higher  path  to  happiness 
than  that  which  God  has  made  coincident  with  human  duty.  God  has  given  us 
on  earth  every  requisite  for  our  pilgrimage,  but  nothing  adequate  to  our  home. 
Things  on  earth  are  too  poor  to  make  us  rich  ;  too  low  to  raise  us  to  happiness  ; 
too  limited  and  shortlived  to  fill  the  capacities  of  our  nobler  nature.  Life,  there- 
fore, is  a  scene  of  progress  towards  something  better.  2.  It  is  never  found  to  be 
our  rest  in  actual  experience.  At  our  very  best  estate  the  world  is  altogether 
vanity.  All  experience  tells  us,  "  This  is  not  your  reat."  Every  broken  hope, 
every  unsatisfied  desire,  every  withered  rose,  every  opened  grave,  says,  "  This  is 
not  your  rest."     3.  Our  religion  tells  us  that  this  is  not  our  rest,  for  it  is  polluted. 

II.    A   CHANGE   FOR  WHICH   WE   ARE  MOST   EKLUCTANT    TO    PREPARE.       1.    OuT   love 

of  life  induces  us  to  linger.  Like  Lot's  wife  in  Sodom.  Trials,  disappointments, 
bereavements,  and  the  heaviest  personal  afflictions,  instead  of  teaching  us  to 
take  wing,  by  a  perverse  alternative  seem  to  root  us  faster  to  the  noil.  2.  0\ir 
fears  of  death  induce  us  to  linger.  We  aim  to  put  the  subject  far  from  us. 
Because  the  future  is  dreadful,  and  the  realm  \inknown.  3.  Our  neglect  of  the 
great  salvation  heightens  our  reluctance.  III.  It  is  a  command  which  it  is 
OUR  interest  to  obey.  Because  the  command  comes  from  One  who  is  the  Lord 
of  both  worlds,  and  who  has  the  highest  interest  in  our  welfare.  He  knows  us 
better  than  we  know  ourselves,  as  He  loves  us  better  too.  He  knows  how  poor 
is  this  world,  and  how  rich  is  the  next.  (HotnUetic  Magazine.)  The  true  resting' 
place  : — The  land  of  Canaan  is  here  spoken  of  as  a  land  not  designed  for  the  rest 
of  the  people  that  dwelt  in  it.  Apparently,  if  any  land  was  properly  designated 
a  "  land  of  rest "  Canaan  was.  It  is  evident  that  the  land  had  been  defiled, 
polluted  by  the  people,  by  their  idolatries,  and  by  their  rebellion  against  the 
Most  High ;  and  therefore  it  could  no  longer  be  their  rest.  We  may  apply  the 
text  to  ourselves  in  regard  to  our  own  land.  Life  upon  this  earth  cannot  be 
regarded  as  man's  rest  or  resting-place.  L  Because  man's  life  on  it  is  brief  and 
short.  Scripture  images  are — fleeting  as  a  shadow ;  vanishing  as  the  vapour ; 
unsettled  and  shifting  as  a  pilgrimage  ;  swifter  than  the  transit  of  a  weaver's 
shuttle,  or  the  arrow  that  is  directed  to  its  mark ;  transient  as  a  tale  that  is  told, 
as  a  dream  when  one  awaketh.  To  the  young,  entering  upon  life,  it  presents 
an  interminable  vista — something  in  their  eye  like  a  little  eternity  that  will  hardly 
ever  be  passed ;  and  before  they  have  time  to  realise  it,  the  frost  of  age  is  upon 
their  heads,  and  they  count  the  graves  of  the  companions  of  their  youth. 
2.  Because  even  that  short  life  is  so  changing.  External  circumstances  and 
relationships  are  ever  changing.  3.  Look  at  the  images  by  which  life  is  repre- 
sented, and  we  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  A  pilgrimage,  a  journey,  a  warfare, 
a  voyage.  4.  Look  at  man's  pursuits,  what  do  they  bring  ?  Do  they  satisfy 
the  wants  and  cravings  of  man  s  immortal  soul  ?  One  man's  pursuit  is  wealth  ; 
another  man  is  bent  on  enjoying  life.  Another  man's  desire  is  fame.  Where  then 
shall  rest  be  found  ?  There  can  be  no  consistency  between  sin  and  real  rest  or 
happiness.  The  text  says  the  land  was  polluted,  therefore  it  was  not  a  place  of 
rest.  There  can  be  no  rest — true,  real,  abiding  rest — except  that  which  is  found 
in  God,  its  only  source.  {Joseph  Bardsley,  M.A.)  Rest  indeed: — In  deep 
anger  Amos  intimated  that  the  Lord  would  command  Israel  to  arise  and  go  forth 
into  a  land  of  captivity ;  their  own  land  should  no  longer  be  their  rest  and  quiet 
habitation,  for  they  had  polluted  it  by  their  idolatry,  excess,  and  iniquity.  He 
would  bring  upon  them  enemies  who  should  be  His  instruments  for  removing  them 
from  their  then  quiet  habitation.  Canaan  is,  when  spiritually  applied  to  the 
condition  of  the  children  of  God,  a  very  apt  type  of  the  heavenly  country ;  and 
the  rest  which  the  children  of  Israel  therein  enjoyed,  is  a  type  of  that  "  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God."  Regard  then  the  text  as  addressed  to  every 
one  of  us  in  reference  to  our  present  condition  in  this  fallen  world,  and  our  future 
condition  in  the  kingdom  of  glory.  I.  The  meaning  of  rest.  By  rest  we  under- 
stand cessation  from  labour,  accompanied  with  peace,  quiet,  ease,  and  everything 
that  can  mark  and  constitute  comfort,  happiness,  security.  When  in  a  state  of 
rest  we  do  not  expect  to  be  troubled  with  the  ordinary  perplexities  of  life.  To 
enjoy  rest  is  to  enjoy  quietness,  security,  ease,  and  peace.  II.  The  certainty 
OF  NOT  finding  REST  HERE.  How  Stands  the  case  with  us  in  this  world,  fallen, 
*nd  shattered,  and  disorganised  as  it  is,  beautiful  though  it  be  in  its  very  ruins  ? 


CHAP,  n.]  MIC  AH.  21 

Can  we  be  said  to  find  substantial,  solid  rest  in  this  world  ?  Has  the  world  no 
disappointments  to  meet  our  be^t  laid  schemes  ?  Nothing  here  is  certain.  And 
should  worldly  possessions  and  worldly  enjoyments  remain  undisturbed,  yet  to 
the  man  who  sets  his  heart  on  them,  and  wishes  to  be  satisfied  with  them,  there 
is  one  evil  ever  near  and  calculated  to  mar  his  enjoyment,  and  that  is  the  fear  of 
death,  which  is  to  such  an  one  a  monster  evil,  which  he  can  find  no  means  of 
averting.  III.  The  promise  of  rest  to  the  people  of  God.  The  rest  is  com- 
plete and  substantial ;  it  is  rest  from  sin.  The  departed  saint  is  at  once  removed 
from  the  influence  of  sin  and  the  power  of  Satan ;  nothing  can  then  disturb  his 
tranquillity ;  no  coimteracting  agency  can  then  affect  him ;  he  is  in  God's  keeping, 
he  is  safe  and  safe  for  ever.  This  rest  the  redeemed  soul  is  capable  of  enjoying. 
IV.  The  way  m  which  this  rest  is  to  be  obtained.  The  Israelites  had  one 
leader  given  to  them  to  lead  them  into  the  land  of  Canaan.  A  Joshua  has  been 
given  to  us.  He  leads  those  who  will  submit  to  His  guidance  into  the  heavenly 
rest  prepared  foi  the  people  of  God.  To  effect  this  He  condescended  to  take  our 
nature  upon  Him,  and  to  become  man.  As  such  He  went  in  and  out  among  His 
creatures ;  and  after  a  life  of  self-denial  and  active  benevolence,  died  upon  the 
Cross  to  make  atonement  for  man's  sin.  The  door  to  this  rest  has  been  thrown  wide 
open  by  Him.  {T.  R.  Redwar,  M.A.)  This  world  not  our  rest : — Human  beings 
seem  universally  characterised  by  a  spirit  of  restlessness.  This  spirit,  existing 
either  as  an  obvious  passion  or  as  a  smothered  feeling,  is  inseparably  connected 
with  our  fallen  state,  and  though  very  liable  to  abuse,  is  yet  very  capable  of  pro- 
ducing excellent  effects.  It  excites  a  propensity  to  look  forward,  and  to  go  forward. 
Hence,  the  soul  refuses  to  settle  into  inactivity,  and  is  ever  pressing  on  to  the 
attainment  of  some  future  good,  real  or  imaginary.  It  is  very  desirable,  then,  that 
this  restlessness  should  always  be  excited  by  a  right  cause,  and  always  urge  U8 
forward  to  a  right  end.     I.  Why  we  never  can  have  our  rest  in  this  world. 

1.  Because  our  continuance  on  earth  is  short  and  uncertain.  "  What  is  our  life  ? 
It  is  even  a  vapovur,  that  appeareth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away." 

2.  Even  while  life  lasts  it  is  full  of  trouble — it  has  many  changes,  labours,  dis- 
appointments, and  sorrows.  To  what  changes  are  we  exposed  here  below  !  This 
is  not  a  place  of  rest  but  of  labour.  Think,  too,  of  the  disappointments  and 
reverses  of  life.  In  view  of  these  various  forms  of  bodily  distress,  how  foolish 
it  appears  to  look  on  this  state  as  a  state  of  rest !  Can  it  be  said  that  though 
we  are  exposed  to  trouble  ourselves,  we  may  find  rest  in  our  friends  ?  But  though 
it  is  our  duty  to  love  them,  and  to  be  grateful  to  them,  we  shall  suffer  for  it  severely 
if  we  idolise  them  as  the  authors  of  our  happiness,  or  look  to  them  as  our  ultimate 
resource.  Instead  of  finding  rest  in  them,  we  may  suffer  doubly  in  sympathising 
with  them,  and  the  time  is  coming  when  we  must  part.  3.  Though  our  whole 
life  were  steady,  prosperous,  honourable,  and  pious  in  the  highest  degree,  still  it 
would  not  be  a  satisfying  portion  to  the  soul.  Some  seem  to  be,  almost  through 
life,  free  from  trouble.  But  we  cannot  be  sure  of  this.  "  Each  heart  knoweth 
its  own  bitterness."  And  when  there  are  no  real  troubles  men  are  sure  to  find 
imaginary  ones.  And  he  who  lives  many  days,  and  rejoices  in  them  all,  yet 
fears  at  times  that  the  days  of  darkness  will  be  many.  To  be  altogether  at  rest 
we  must  be  sure  that  our  rest  will  never  be  disturbed.  Nor  can  the  continuance 
of  positive  prosperity  and  ever-mcreasing  wealth  satisfy  the  mind.  Equally 
unsuccessful  is  the  pursuit  of  mental  tranquillity  in  scenes  of  frivolity  and  mirth. 
Nor  is  the  more  rational  pursuit  of  human  knowledge  found  to  secure  rest  to  the 
soul.  As  speculation  and  theory  cannot  satisfy  the  mind,  so  neither  can  great 
works,  in  their  undertaking,  progress,  or  accomplishment.  It  is  necessary  to  add 
that  even  the  people  of  God,  however  spiritually-minded  and  however  aidvanced 
in  the  Divine  life,  cannot  find  rest  here.  However  happy  they  may  be,  they 
are  still  subject  to  some  imeasiness ;  however  calm  they  may  feel,  their  quiet  is 
sometimes  disturbed.  4.  We  never  can  have  our  rest  in  this  world  because  of 
the  prevalence  of  sin,  because  "  it  is  polluted,"  By  an  unalterable  decree  of 
heaven,  sin  is  inconsistent  with  happiness.  As  this  is  a  world  of  rebellion,  it 
cannot  be  a  world  of  peace.  How  can  they  whose  minds  have  been  enlightened 
to  see  the  evil  of  sin,  and  in  whom  its  power  is  in  a  great  measure  broken,  be  at 
rest  while  living  in  such  a  world  as  this  ?  II.  Address  to  you  the  exhortation, 
"  Arise  ye,  and  depart."  1.  Arise  and  depart  in  the  spirit  of  your  minds.  Depart 
from  the  idea  that  the  world  can  give  you  rest.  From  all  trust  in  others.  But 
the  mind  must  have  something  whereon  to  rest.  Without  some  prop  it  would 
sink  down  into  utter  despondency.      Arise  and  depart  and  seek  rest  directly 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTMATOB.  [chap.  n. 

from  God  in  Christ.  Set  your  hearts  on  heaven.  So  depart  in  the  spirit  of  your 
minds  as  to  be  willing  to  depart  literally  from  this  life,  whenever  God  shall  call 
you.  Cultivate  that  spirit  of  faith  and  hope  which,  when  death  is  comparatively 
at  a  distance,  will  sometimes  fill  you  with  a  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ, 
which  is  far  better.  2.  Arise  and  depart  in  the  tenor  of  your  conduct.  Depart 
from  all  such  pursuits  as  interfere  with  the  concerns  of  eternity.  Cease  from 
excessive  eagerness  in  the  pursuit  of  worldly  gain.  Be  found  at  last  actively 
engaged  as  becomes  those  who  profess  that  this  is  not  their  rest.  III.  Address 
THBBE  DIFFERENT  CLASSES  OF  PERSONS.  1.  Congratulate  those  who  have  ceased 
to  seek  their  rest  in  the  world — who  have  arisen  and  gone  to  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  for  rest.  Recollect  that  you  are  only  on  the  way  to  perfect  happiness. 
Endure,  without  mxirmiiring,  the  hardships  of  the  way.  2.  Speak  to  those  who 
are  still  seeking  rest  on  earth.  Boast  not  of  your  happiness.  The  outward 
appearance  is  not  always  the  genuine  index  of  the  heart.  3.  Address  those  who 
have  lost  their  former  rest  and  have  not  found  another.  We  would  not  have 
you  look  again  to  the  world  for  rest.  We  would  not  have  you  remain  where  you 
are.  Why  not  proceed  another  step  and  lay  hold  of  those  consolations  that  never 
fail  ?  In  order  to  this,  it  iB  necessary  that  you  do  indeed  receive  the  Gospel, 
and  positively  join  the  company  of  pilgrims.  If  you  would  be  happy,  be  decided. 
Yield  yourself  up,  without  reserve,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  has  pledged 
His  Word  that  He  will  give  you  rest.  (James  Foote,  A.M.)  No  rest  here: — 
This  was  the  drum-beat  of  a  prophet  who  wanted  to  arouse  his  people  from  their 
oppressed  and  sinful  condition ;  but  it  may  just  as  properly  be  uttered  now  as 
then.  Our  great  want  is  rest.  Grod  did  not  make  this  world  to  rest  in.  This 
world  would  be  a  very  different  world  if  it  were  intended  for  us  to  lounge  in. 
It  does  right  well  for  a  few  hom:s.  You  and  I  have  seen  men  who  tried  to  rest 
here.  In  trade.  In  seeking  fame.  If  there  is  no  rest  on  earth  there  is  rest  in 
heaven — perfect  rest,  unending  rest.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  economy 
of  renewal : — The  arising  and  the  departure,  as  the  passage  stands,  referred  to  a 
visible  residence ;  there  was  to  be  a  Hteral  change  of  place.  But  even  there  the 
act  was  required  as  part  of  a  religious  discipline  and  for  a  Divine  purpose.  The 
national  condition  that  made  such  a  migration  necessary  w£is  one  incident  in  a 
pecuHar  providential  history.  The  outward  removal  was  the  result  of  an  inward 
state, — a  state  of  moral  deterioration  and  danger.  Domestic  comfort  must  be 
abandoned  for  the  sake  of  the  spiritual  safety,  purity,  and  progress  of  a  corrupt, 
imperilled  people.  The  call  is  made  in  the  name  and  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God. 
There  is  no  violence  in  transferring  it  from  a  Hebrew  to  a  Christian  age.  The 
need  that  a  self-absorbed  heart  should  bestir  itself  and  arise — should  go  forth 
and  follow  God's  call,  should  be  moulded  into  a  new  form  and  bom  into  a  new 
life,  through  separation,  travail,  and  sacrifice,  is  as  independent  of  the  differences 
of  time  and  country  as  any  attribute  of  humanity.  Indeed,  this  permanence  of 
the  essential  realities  of  hfe  through  all  social  changes,  wherever  a  human  soul  lives, 
sins  and  suffers,  furnishes  the  starting-point  in  this  subject.  1.  The  true  growth 
of  e\ery  really  progressive  character  is  made  through  a  succession  of  decided 
departures  out  of  positions,  habits,  estates  of  thought  and  feehng,  which  have 
once  been  famihar,  into  untried  territories.  There  is  the  passage  from  the  com- 
paratively irresponsible,  and  dependent  period  of  early  childhood,  into  the  greater 
self-determination  of  youth.  Within  the  safe  enclosures  of  a  guarded  external 
iimocence  the  moral  purposes  M'ill  not  stay  any  longer.  They  would  not  be 
fulfilling  the  Creator's  design  if  they  did.  That  is  not  their  rest ;  they  must  arise 
and  depart.  Youth  must  see  its  visions,  dream  its  dreams,  and  taste  its  awful 
liberty.  Again,  later,  there  is  a  transition  from  youth  into  maturity.  The  dream 
is  broken.  That  graceful,  airy  tent  which  the  uncommitted  thought  reared 
for  itself  at  will  is  dissolved.  A  more  real  habitation,  of  severer  shape,  supplants  it. 
Or  rather,  it  is  now  a  field  of  outdoor  service.  Chilly  as  the  future  looks,  the 
least  enterprising  must  go  to  meet  it.  In  some  vague,  indefinite  way  this  decree 
of  departure  makes  itself  felt  in  all  thoughtful  soiils.  Beyond  these  early  and 
successive  departures,  from  one  period  of  our  age  to  another,  there  are  a  great 
variety  of  other  changes,  having  the  same  general  purpose  and  illustrating  the 
same  plan  of  God.  Sometimes  the  dissolution  of  our  former  order  of  life  is  made 
unavoidable  by  conditions  beyond  our  control.  A  particular  line  of  employment 
is  found  to  have  furnished  all  of  opportunity,  or  stimulus,  or  trial,  that  the  great 
former  of  our  characters  intended,  and  it  is  broken  off.  A  particular  place  of 
residence  has  exhausted  all  its  helps  and  ministries  upon  us,  and  we  must  take 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  23 

up  the  little  parcels  that  we  call  our  goods,  and  go  to  be  schooled  in  some  new 
neighbourhood,  &c.  In  other  cases,  with  less  visible  signals,  but  not  less  effectually, 
we  are  moved  out  of  our  moral  and  mental  habitations.  So  long  as  we  are  in 
them  nothing  seems  more  fixed  than  our  opinions,  tastes,  and  estimates.  But 
they  may  become  too  fixed.  Estimates  of  men  and  things  stiffen  into  prejudices. 
And  hence  by  one  process  and  another  we  are  led  to  give  many  of  them  up,  or  to 
modify  them.  Events  are  ordered  to  that  end.  2.  These  turns  of  the  inner 
life  will  often  be  painful,  demanding  something  more  than  a  natural,  or  Stoic 
courage.  Religious  indifference  wishes  only  to  be  let  alone.  But  no.  Pain 
comes.  The  insensible  heart  must  be  startled.  The  earthly  and  the  Divine  fight 
together  within  us,  and  we  suffer  under  the  conflict.  Sometimes  this  septiration 
from  familiar  evil  is  a  struggle  as  between  life  and  death,  shaking  the  whole  soul, 
and  tearing  its  shrinking  quick  in  torture.  And  yet,  such  is  the  power  of  the 
conviction  of  the  spirit  of  truth  when  humility  has  once  begun  its  holy  and  honest 
work  within  us,  how  many  even  go  out  to  meet  that  saving  sorrow  !  Blessed 
is  the  mind  that  springs  with  alacrity  and  thanksgiving  to  its  better  ministry  ! 
3.  All  true  souls,  really  touched  with  the  Spii'it  and  consecrated  to  the  fellowship 
of  Christian  obedience,  will  be  ready  for  this  sacrifice.  Not  all  equally.  This, 
in  fact,  is  the  test  of  the  sincerity  of  faith  :  the  willingness  to  give  up  all  that  has 
been  precious,  but  not  holy,  and  launch  out  upon  the  future,  trusting  only  to  an 
unseen  hand.  So,  through  familiar  analogies,  we  are  led  to  see  how  the  sacred 
provision  is  made,  in  our  fallen  but  still  aspiring  nature,  for  that  one  only  radical 
and  complete  transformation  which  changes  the  governing  motive  of  life, — the 
"  regeneration  "  of  the  GospeL  It  has  been  said  that  no  period  of  our  life  becomes 
quite  intelligible  to  us  till  we  quit  it  for  the  next.  And  there  is  certainly  truth 
here.  But  retrospect  is  not  all  our  outlook.  Our  best  wisdom  is  not  gained  from 
what  is  behind  us,  but  from  what  is  above.  When  the  heart  is  really  made  new, 
and  is  filled  with  all  the  holy  life  of  its  Lord,  it  matters  nothing  what  the  outward 
place  or  scenery  may  be.  To  this,  then,  we  are  brought,  that  there  is  one  migration 
of  the  soul  more  complete  and  adventurous  than  all  besides :  that  which  takes  it 
over  from  every  kind  of  self-direction  into  a  piure  self-renimciation  to  the  Spirit 
of  God  ;  one  "  going  forth  "  more  decisive  and  sublime  than  all  journeys  and  dis- 
coveries— from  the  miserable  effort  to  satisfy  ourselves  into  the  liberty  of  the 
eons  of  God ;  one  central  and  all  transforming  change — that  which  refashions 
us,  by  a  new  principle  of  life,  from  the  likeness  of  sinful  men  into  the  likeness  of 
God's  Son.  All  other  transitions  touch  us  at  certain  points  or  parts  of  our  nature  : 
this  transfuses  another  spirit  through  the  whole;  old  things  pass  away,  because 
the  old  evil  is  gone,  and  all  things  are  new.  (F.  D.  Huntinglon,  D.D.)  A 
resting-place  for  the  soul : — Years  ago  there  came  to  the  late  Canon  Hoare,  of 
Ttinbridge  Wells,  a  rich  man,  then  in  his  old  age,  to  arrange  with  him  about  his 
burial-place,  and  after  they  had  gone  carefully  over  the  churchyard,  and  had 
chosen  the  spot  where  he  was  to  he.  Canon  Hoare  turned  to  him  and  said  :  "  You 
have  chosen  a  resting-place  for  your  body,  but  have  you  yet  found  a  resting- 
place  for  yoTir  soul  ?  "  Turning  round,  and  looking  hito  full  in  the  face,  the  old 
man  answered  :  "  You  are  the  first  clergyman  who  ever  asked  me  that  question." 
He  went  with  Canon  Hoare  into  his  study,  and,  to  make  a  long  story  short,  he 
gave  his  heart  to  Christ,  and  found  his  resting-place,  and  in  Canon  Hoare's  study 
to  the  day  of  his  death  a  well-known  picture  representing  the  saving  of  a  life 
from  a  wreck  hung.  It  was  the  gift  of  the  grateful  man,  who  had  found  a 
resting-place  not  only  for  his  body  but  for  his  soul.  Ask  yourself  the  question 
now,  before  you  turn  to  another  page  :  "  Have  I  found  a  resting-place  for  my 
soul?" 

Ver.  11.  If  a  man  walking:  i^  the  spirit  and  falsehood  do  He,  .  .  .  he 
shall  even  be  the  prophet  of  this  people.  —  Israel's  popidar  preacher :  — 
This  is  Micah's  idea  of  the  kind  of  prophet  (or,  as  we  should  say,  pulpit) 
the  men  of  Israel  would  willingly  and  unanimously  accept.  The  sketch 
is  marked  by  two  things  which  always  tend  to  make  a  preacher  generallj'  ac- 
ceptable to  thoughtless  men  in  every  age.  I.  By  emptiness  of  mtnd.  Ho  has 
nothing  in  his  mind  but  wind,  vain  conceits,  vapid  notions — no  deep  thought, 
no  rich  store  of  information,  no  well-digested  belief  or  profound  conviction.  II.  By 
MINISTERING  TO  PLEASE.  "  I  wiU  prophcsy  unto  thee  of  wine  and  of  strong  drink." 
These  prophets  would  accommodate  themselves  to  their  tastes  and  habits,  and 
sanction  their  indulgences.     They  would  not  disturb  their  consciences  nor  strike 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n, 

against  their  prejudices,  but  talk  to  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  them  satisfied 
with  themselves.     {Homiliat.) 

Vers,  12,  13.  I  will  surely  assemble,  0  Jacob,  all  of  thee. — Oospd  work : — 
The  prophet  here  passes  from  threats  to  promises.  The  future  was  to 
embrace  two  things.  1.  A  grand  gathering.  Jacob  and  the  remnant  of 
Israel  was  to  be  "  gathered  "  as  a  mighty  flock  in  the  fruitful  and  lovely  region  of 
Bozrah.  2.  A  triumphant  deliverance.  "  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them." 
Who  is  the  breaker  ?  If  reference  is  here  made  to  Jewish  bonds,  it  was  to  Mosee ; 
if  to  Babylonish  captivity,  it  was  to  Cjivlb  ;  if  to  the  bondage  of  the  devil,  it  was 
Christ.  We  shall  apply  the  words  to  illustrate  the  grand  work  of  the  Gospel. 
"  The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  commenced  with  the  gathering 
together  of  Israel  to  its  God  and  King  bv  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  will  b© 
completed  at  some  future  time,  when  the  Lord  will  redeem  Israel,  which  is  now 
pining  in  dispersion,  out  of  the  fetters  of  its  \mbelief  and  life  of  sin.  We  must 
not  exclude  all  allusion  to  the  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation  only  out  of  the 
earthly  Babylon  by  Cyrus ;  at  the  same  time,  it  is  ordy  in  its  typical  significance 
that  this  comes  into  consideration  at  all,  namely,  as  a  preliminary  stage  and  pledge 
of  the  redemption  to  be  effected  by  Christ  out  of  the  spiritual  Babylon  of  tms 
world."  Taking  the  words,  then,  as  an  illustration  of  Gospel  work,  two  thoughts 
are  suggested.  I.  Unification.  "  I  will  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of 
Bozrah."  Men  are  morally  divided ;  there  is  a  schism  in  the  great  body  of 
humanity.  Men  have  not  only  lost  interest  in  their  fellows,  but  an  antipathy 
prevails  amongst  them.  They  are  scattered  abroad  in  different  coimtries,  under 
different  governments,  and  in  connection  with  different  religions  and  interests. 
The  great  work  of  the  Gospel  is  to  bring  men  together,  to  gather  them  together 
in  some  moral  Bozrah,to  unite  them  in  the  fold  of  Christ.  There  is  only  one  way, 
and  that  is  the  presentation  of  an  object  of  supreme  moral  attraction  to  all  men. 
That  object  the  Gospel  presents  :  it  is  Christ.  And  He  Himself  said :  "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  As  a  mater  of  philosophy,  I  proclaim  that 
there  is  nothing  but  the  Gospel  that  can  hush  the  discords,  heal  the  divisions, 
and  terminate  all  wars  and  strifes  amongst  men  ;  and  historically.  11.  Emancipa- 
tion. "  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them :  they  have  broken  up  and  passed 
through  the  gate."  Men  everywhere  are  in  moral  bondage.  They  are  the  slaves 
of  sin  and  the  devil.  "  Carnally  sold  imto  sin."  Moral  bondage  is  the  worst  of 
all  bondage  ;  it  is  a  bondage — (1)  Connected  with  self -compunction ;  it  is  a  bond- 
age (2)  Of  the  soul,  the  self ;  it  is  a  bondage  (3)  That  death  cannot  terminate. 
Who  shall  free  us  from  this  bondage  ?  There  is  One,  and  but  One,  who  can. 
Christ,  the  Breaker.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  13.  The  breaker  Is  come  up  before  tbem:  they  baye  broken  up. 
and  have  passed  through  the  gate,  and  are  gone  ont  by  it. — Christ,  aa  the 
Breaker,  opening  aU  fosses  to  glory  thai  were  impassable  : — It  is  agreed  not  only 
by  Christian,  but  even  by  some  Jewish  interpreters,  that  these  words  have  a 
principal  and  ultimate  view  unto  the  glorious  Messiah,  and  the  great  work  of 
salvation  that  He  was  to  accomplish  in  the  fulness  of  time.  The  prophet  here 
prophesies  that  Christ  should  rid  the  way,  and  clear  the  passage,  and  make  moun- 
tains as  a  plain.  I.  The  way  of  thb  Lobd's  kansohbd  opened  up  by  the  great 
Redeemer.  "  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them."  1.  The  designation  given 
to  the  glorious  Messiah.  "  The  breaker."  Cyrus  was  an  instrument  in  the  hand 
of  God  for  breaking  the  Babylonish  yoke.  Herein  he  was  a  type  of  Christ,  by 
whom  the  yoke  of  oiu:  spiritual  captivity  under  sin  and  Satan  is  broken.  2.  We 
have  the  courageous  appearance  of  the  glorious  Redeemer  in  His  breaking  work. 
He  "comes  up,"  He  appears  upon  the  field  with  am  undaxmted  and  heroic  courage. 
3.  The  party  that  He  heads,  or  those  in  whose  quarrel  this  Breaker  appears.  Enquire 
upon  what  accoimt  Christ  is  called  the  Breaker.  (1)  In  general,  because  of  the 
great  opposition  He  had  to  break  through.  (2)  He  breaks  up  a  new  and  living 
way,  by  which  we  have  access  to  God  and  glory.  (3)  He  breaks  through  the 
storms  of  Divine  wrath,  the  rage  of  men  and  devils,  in  order  to  accomplish  our 
redemption.  (4)  In  a  day  of  power  He  breaks  the  enmity  of  our  hearts  against 
Him.  (5)  Those  who  will  not  bow  unto  His  royal  authority  He  breaks  in  pieces. 
6.  He  may  be  called  a  Breaker  because  of  the  breaking  trials  He  brings  on  His  own 
people,  and  the  judgments  and  calamities  that  He  brings  on  an  offending  Church 
or  nation.    II.  The  upcoming  of  Christ  as  the  Breaker.    Understand  of  His 


CHAP,  n.]  MICAH.  25 

coming  up  to  avenge  the  quarrel  of  His  children  and  people.  Like  a  mighty 
champion  He  takes  the  field.  Tell  of  some  seasonable  upcomings.  1.  He  appeared 
in  our  quarrel  in  the  council  of  peace.  2.  He  came  seasonably  immediately 
after  the  fall  of  man.  3.  Really  and  personally  in  His  incarnation.  4.  In  the 
power  of  His  Spirit  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel.  5.  In  the  outward  dispensa- 
tion of  His  providence.  6.  When  He  revives  His  own  work  in  a  backsliding  land 
and  church.  7.  In  every  display  of  His  grace  and  love  to  a  particular  believer ; 
when  He  seasonably  interposes  for  the  relief  of  a  poor  soul  sinking  xmder  the 
burden  of  sin,  temptation,  affliction,  and  desertion.  8.  At  death.  Question — 
In  what  manner  doth  He  come  up  in  our  quarrel,  to  the  help  of  the  weak  against 
the  mighty  ?  1.  All  His  appearances  for  the  help  and  relief  of  His  people  have 
been  well-timed,  2.  He  comes  up  solitarily.  He  alone  comes  up.  It  is  His 
own  arm  brings  salvation.  3.  With  the  greatest  alacrity  and  cheerfulness. 
4.  Speedily,  with  no  lingering  or  tarrying.  6.  Courageously.  6.  Victoriously. 
7.  His  coming  to  His  breaking  work  is  irresistible.  And — 8.  It  is  with  much 
awful  greatness  and  majesty.  III.  What  is  implied  xs  His  "  coming  up  beforb 
THEM  7  1.  It  imports  that  He  has  them  and  their  case  deeply  at  heart.  2.  It 
implies  that  their  way  is  hard  and  difficult.  3.  It  implies  His  authority  to  rule 
and  govern  them.  4.  It  implies  strength  and  ability  to  support  authority.  5.  It 
implies  their  inability  to  break  up  their  own  way.  6.  As  the  Breaker  is  gone  up 
before  them,  it  implies  that  He  has  paved  the  road,  and  travelled  the  way  before 
them.  He  goes  before  His  people  in  obedience,  in  suffering,  in  going  through 
death  into  glory.  7.  It  implies  His  routing  and  discomfiting  all  the  enemies  that 
stood  in  the  way  of  our  salvation  :  Satan,  sin,  the  world,  death.  8.  It  implies 
that  the  way  to  heaven  is  patent.  9.  It  implies  that,  whatever  dangers,  difficulties, 
or  opposition  be  in  their  way,  they  are  in  absolute  safety  under  His  conduct. 
IV.  The  geottnds  and  reasons  of  this  dispensation,  or  why  doth  Christ 
BREAK  UP  THE  WAY  TO  His  PEOPLE  7  1.  Because  they  were  gifted  to  Him  of  the 
Father,  as  a  heritage  and  possession.  2.  Because  they  are  the  purchase  of  Hia 
blood.  3.  Because  His  faithfulness  is  engaged  to  lead  them  in  their  way. 
4.  Because  He  has  to  give  an  account  of  them  to  the  Father.  5.  Because  they 
cannot  break  up  their  own  way.  6.  Because  they  trust  in  Him  as  Leader  and 
Commander.  7.  Because  of  the  near  and  dear  relation  that  He  has  come  under 
onto  them.  {E.  Erskine.)  The  Breaker : — Micah  lived  near  the  time  of  the 
Babylonish  Captivity.  It  is  a  prominent  subject  in  the  prophetic  writings. 
Resembling,  as  it  did,  the  spiritual  captivity  of  God's  people,  it  is  made  the  groimd- 
work  of  many  glorious  predictions  relating  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  Hia 
salvation.  In  this  light  commentators  regard  the  prediction  of  the  text.  It  has 
a  reference  to  the  captive  Jews,  and  their  liberator  Cyrus ;  but  it  looks  further. 
In  Christ  and  His  ransomed  people  it  has  its  real,  complete  fulfilment.  It  sets 
forth  the  Lord  Jesus — I.  As  interposinq  for  His  people  in  a  peculiar  char- 
AOTER.  "  The  breaker."  The  demolisher.  One  who  beats  down  before  them 
all  barriers  and  impediments  that  obstruct  their  way.  The  figure  places  ua 
where  we  really  are,  far  off  from  God  and  His  kingdom,  with  many  obstructions 
lying  in  between  God's  kingdom  and  us  ;  with  more  than  distance  to  be  got  over — 
with  barriers  and  obstacles  to  be  siurmounted.  What  are  these  ?  Some  of  them 
lie  out  of  us,  some  within  us.  Out  of  us  is — 1.  The  judicial  displeasure  of  God. 
It  is  our  guilt  which  has  subjected  us  to  His  wrath.  2.  The  opposition  of  Satan. 
By  Satan  is  meant,  not  one  being,  but  a  numerous  host  of  beings  in  the  spiritual 
world  opposed  to  our  happiness.  Through  this  difficulty  Christ  breaks.  Not, 
as  we  might  have  supposed,  by  exterminating  these  enemies  of  om^  salvation, 
scattering  them  out  of  our  path ;  but  in  first  making  His  own  way  to  heaven  in 
man's  form  through  them,  and  then  by  communicating  strength  to  His  people  to  do 
as  He  has  done — withstand  these  enemies,  force  their  way  through  them,  and 
tread  them  down.  Within  His  people,  what  is  there  to  impede  them  in  their 
way  to  heaven  ?  We  may  say  that  everything  within  them  is  an  impediment 
to  them  in  their  way.  There  is  nothing  within  fallen  man,  naturally,  that  does 
not  tend  to  carry  him  away  from  God,  rather  than  to  lead  him  to  God.  See — 
1.  The  natural  self-sufficiency  and  pride  of  heart,  which  we  may  call  self -righteous- 
ness. But  Christ  comes,  and  touches  the  proud  heart  of  man,  and  this  barrier 
in  it  faUs  down.  2.  There  is  the  ungodliness  of  the  heart.  Almost  as  stiff  a 
barrier  in  the  way  of  our  salvation  as  its  pride.  Here  too  the  heavenly  Breaker 
comes  in.  He  opens  the  sinner's  heart,  communicates  to  it  a  holy  principle  ; 
and  this  principle,  warring  against  the  unholiness  in  him,  gradually  breaks  its 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

strength,  mast«r8  and  dethrones  it.  3.  The  unbelief  of  our  hearts.  This  leads 
to  hesitation  and  delay,  under  one  excuse  after  another.  II.  The  escape  of 
God's  Israel  in  consequence  of  Christ's  interposition  for  them.  Two 
remarks.     1.  A  great  change  has  taken  place  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  Christ's 

Seople,  in  consequence  of  what  He  has  done  for  them.  2.  The  people  really 
elivered  by  Christ  co-operate  with  Him  in  their  deliverance.  You  must  be 
warned  agamst  imagining  that  you  have  one  particle  of  spiritual  ability  or  strength 
of  your  own.  But  you  must  be  warned  as  earnestly  against  taking  up  with  what 
may  be  termed  a  passive  religion.  III.  The  hioh  pbivilegb  of  these  escaped 
UBEBATED  MEN  AFTER  THEIR  ESCAPE.  "  Their  king  shall  pass  before  them, 
and  the  Lord  on  the  head  of  them."  This  is  more  than  saying  we  shall  have  the 
Lord  for  us,  we  shall  have  Him  with  us.  It  indicates  not  merely  the  presence, 
but  the  near  presence  of  the  Lord.     It  may  be  a  figure  taken  £rom  the  cloudy 

Sillar  hanging  over  Israel,  overshadowing  them.     It  is  an  assurance  at  once  of 
iscipline  and  of  safety  on  our  way  to  heaven.     {Charles  Bradley,  M.A.)        The 
Breaker : — Names  appropriate  to  the  offices  which  He  was  afterwards  to  fin 
were  bestowed  upon  the  promised  Messiah.     This  is  one  of  them.     The  name 
answers  to  what  we  call  a  "  pioneer,"  one  who  clears  the  way  before  an  army 
in  its  march.     1.  It  is  appropriate  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  because  it  was  through 
His  agency  alone  that  the  power  of  sin  was  broken.     Our  redeemed  broke  the 
strength  of  the  law,  by  obeying  its  rigid  requirements  in  our  stead.     2.  This  title 
marks  the  character  and  office  of  the  Messiah  when,  by  His  death,  the  destruction 
between  Jews  and  Gentiles  was  for  ever  removed.     3.  The  title  is  appropriate, 
since  by  His  death  Christ  destroyed  death,  and  by  His  triumphant  resiurection 
^^^  has  given  an  earnest  of  what  He  will  one  day  accomplish  for  all  who  fall  asleep 
VI  Him.     4.  Appropriate  also  when  we  notice  the  steady  inroads  which  Hia 
kingdom  has  made  upon  the  widespread  dominions  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness. 
In  vain  does  infidelity  attempt  to  account  for  the  improvement  in  morality  and 
refinement  by  attributing  them  to  the  advance  of  civilisation  alone.     Stubborn 
facte,  drawn  from  the  history  of  nations,  contradict  the  assertion.     Civilisation, 
imless  animated  and  directed  by  the  religion  of  Christ,  has  uniformly  corrupted 
and  deteriorated  public  morals.     We  must  look  to  a  higher  source  than  the  wisdom 
or  ingenuity  or  strength  of  man  for  the  agency  which  has  vanquished  the  powers 
of  darkness,  and  redeemed  the  world  from  bondage ;  and  we  need  not  look  for  it 
in  vain.     (John  N.  Norton,  D.D.)        The  Breaker  : — I.  In  what  respects  may 
Jesus  Christ  be  caixbd  a  Breaker  ?     Because  of  the  great  opposition  He  had 
to  break  through  in  the  work  of  our  redemption.     Because  He  breaks  up  a  new 
and  living  way,  by  which  we  may  have  access  to  God  and  glory.     Because  He 
breaks  the  enmity  of  our  hearts  against  Him.     Because  of  the  breaking  judgments 
He  brings  on  the  world,  and  the  breaking  trials  on  His  people.     II.  In  what 
respects  may  He  bb  said  to  "  comb  up  "  ?     When  our  first  parents  sinned, 
He  came  up  in  the  promise.     He  came  up  really  and  personally  in  the  incarnation, 
&c.     In  the  chariots  of  a  preached  Gospel.     In  every  display  of  His  grace  and 
love  to  such  as  believe.     IQ.  What  may  be  implibd  in  Hth  coming  up  befobs 
them  ?     He  comes  before  them  as  a  Shepherd,  as  a  General,  as  a  King.     It 
imports  t'lat  the  way  to  heaven  is  patent.     IV.  Thb  bsoape  of  the  ransomed 
by  this  way.     They  have  broken  np,  &c.,  out  of  darkness  into  light,  out  of  bond- 
age into  liberty.     They  have  passed  through  the  law-gate  of  conviction,  and 
the  gospel-gate  of  conversion.     {T.  Hannam.)        The  Lord  Jetus  as  the  Leader 
of  His  fetyple : — I.  The  Lord  Jesus  in  thb  ohabactbb  of  a  Breaker.    By 
breaker  understand  one  who  burst  through  all  obstacles.     1.  What  are  the  diffi- 
culties to  be  broken  through  T     2.  Jesus,  as  the  Breaker,  has  burst  through  every 
difficulty,     n.  His  people  following  in  His  steps.     Allusion  is  to  the  entrance 
of  a  victorious  captain,  with  his  troops  following.     Every  act  of  Christ  was  done 
for  His  Church.     How  great  will  be  the  final  glory  of  the  Saviour  !     How  blessed 
is  the  lot  of  the  people  of  God  !     How  awful  it  must  be  to  be  a  stranger  to  Christ. 
(J.  O.   Breay,  B.A.)        The  matchless  heaviy  of  Jesus : — Apply  the  words  to 
the  spiritual  and  eternal  salvation  of  the  Israel  of  God.     Consider — I.  Their 
captivity,  implied  in  the  promise  of  deliverance.     The  people  are  described 
as  sheep,  but  their  salvation   is  spoken  of  in  language  which  implies  they  are 
captives,  and  such  captives  that  no  other  than  the  Lord  Jehovah  can  effect  their 
freedom.     It  is  a  captivity  to  sin.     It  is  a  willing  captivity.     They  have  sold 
themselves.     II.    Their    glorious    redemption.     Who    is    it    that   undertakes 
their  cause,  and  as  their  Redeemer  is  mighty  to  set  them  free  7    HI.  The  making 


CHAP,  in.]  MIC  AH.  27 

EFFECTTJAL   OF  THE   REDEMPTION   THUS   OBTAINED   IN   THE   EELEASB   AND   LIBERTY 

OF  THE  CAPTIVES.  They  break  through  their  unbelief ;  they  break  through  the 
barriers  of  sin,  guilt,  and  death,  and  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.  They  break,  also, 
from  their  sins,  from  the  world,  from  its  ungodly  ways,  and  from  whatever  would 
withstand  them  in  their  following  their  glorious  Lord  and  King,  who  goes  before 
them,  and  whom  they  obey  as  their  Leader  and  Commander.  A  threefold  appli- 
cation. 1.  Warning  to  such  as  go  on  still  in  their  trespasses.  2.  Encouragement 
to  all  that  are  sensible  of  their  sins,  and  concerned  about  their  souls.  3.  Comfort 
for  all  such  as  are  following  after  the  Lord.  {J.  T.  Parker,  M.A.)  Christ 
the  Breaker  : — I.  The  great  work  of  ottr  Divine  Redeemer,  by  which  Hb 

HAS    broken    for   THE    CAPTIVES   THE   PRISON-HOUSE    OF   THEIR   BONDAGE.      Many 

of  us  know  not  the  bondage  in  which  we  are  held.  We  are  chained  by  sin,  chained 
by  the  habit  of  evil  with  a  strength  of  which  you  never  know  till  you  try  to  shake 
off.  II.  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Opener,  and  the  Path,  to  God.  Our  condition 
is  not  only  one  of  bondage  to  evil,  but  also  one  of  separation  from  God.  We  do 
not  know  God  as  He  is,  except  by  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  only  the  God  manifest 
in  Jesus  Christ  that  draws  men's  hearts  to  Him.  That  God  that  is  in  Christ  is  the 
only  God  that  humanity  ever  loved.  He,  by  the  fact  of  His  Cross  and  Passion, 
has  borne  and  borne  away  the  impediments  of  our  own  sin  and  transgression 
which  rise  for  evesr  between  us  and  Him,  unless  He  shall  sweep  them  out  of  the 
way.  in.  Christ  is  the  Breaker  as  the  Captain  of  cub  life's  march. 
"  When  He  putteth  forth  His  sheep.  He  goeth  before  them."  IV.  He  is  the 
Breaker  for  us  of  the  bands  of  death.  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  only 
solid  proof  of  a  future  life.  It  is  not  possible  that  we  should  be  holden  of  the 
impotent  chains  that  He  has  broken.     {A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  in. 

Vers.  1-4.  Hear,  I  pray  you,  0  heads  of  Jacob,  and  ye  princes  of  the  house  of 
Israel. — Civil  riders  : — I.  What  civil  rulers  ought  always  to  be.  They  ought 
always  to  "  know  judgment,"  that  is,  always  practically  to  know  the  right.  What 
is  the  standard  of  right  ?  Not  public  sentiment,  not  human  law,  but  the  Divine 
will.  God's  being  is  the  foundation  of  right ;  God's  will  is  the  standard  of  right ; 
God's  Christ  is  the  completest  revelation  of  that  standard.  II.  What  civil 
rulers  often  are.  What  were  these  rulers  ?  1.  Morally  corrupt.  2.  Socially 
cruel.  3.  Divinely  abandoned.  The  Monarch  of  the  universe  is  no  respecter 
of  persons.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  prophets  that  make  My  people 
err. — False  prophets  : — Here  the  prophet  attacks  the  false  prophets,  as  before  he 
had  attacked  the  "  princes."  I.  They  are  deceiving.  God  says,  they  "  make  My 
people  err."  Preachers  often  make  their  hearers  err.  (1)  In  theology.  They 
propound  ideas,  crude  and  ill-digested,  concerning  God,  Christ,  moral  conditions 
and  relations,  utterly  inconsistent  with  truth.  (2)  In  worship.  (3)  In  morality. 
Their  standard  of  duty  is  often  wrong.  II.  They  are  avaricious.  They  "  bite 
with  their  teeth,  and  cry  peace."  Greed  governs  them  in  all  their  ministries. 
III.  They  are  confounded.  1.  Confounded  in  darkness.  "  Night  shall  be 
unto  you,  that  ye  shall  not  have  a  vision ;  and  it  shall  be  dark  unto  you,  that 
ye  shall  not  divine  ;  and  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets,  and  the  day 
shall  be  dark  over  them."  2.  Confounded  in  shame.  Then  shall  the  seers  be 
ashamed,  and  the  diviners  be  confounded.  Jehovah  ignores  them.  "  There 
is  no  answer  of  God."  "  Those,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  who  deceive  others 
are  but  preparing  confusion  for  their  own  faces."     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  8.   But  truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  of 

judgment,  and  of  might. — The  prophetic  endowrnent:— The  three  gifts,  power,  judg- 
men^r  might,  are  the  fruits  of  the  one  Spirit  of  God,  through  whom  the  prophet 
was  filled  with  them.  Of  these,  power  is  always  strength  residing  in  the  person, 
whether  it  be  the  "  power,  or  might  of  wisdom  "  of  Almighty  God  Himself,  or 
power  which  He  imparts  or  implants.     But  it  is  always  power  lodged  in  the 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

person,  to  be  put  forth  on  him.  Here  it  is  Divine  power,  given  through  God 
the  Holy  Ghost,  to  accomplish  that  for  which  He  was  sent.  "  Judgment  "  is, 
from  its  form,  not  so  much  discernment  in  the  human  being  as  "  the  thing  judged," 
pronounced  by  God,  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  and  righteous  judgment 
in  man  conformably  therewith.  "  Might  "  is  courage  or  boldness  to  deliver 
the  message  of  God ;  not  awed  or  hindered  by  any  adversaries.  "  Whoso  is  so 
strengthened  and  arrayed  uttereth  fiery  words,  whereby  hearers'  hearts  are 
moved  and  changed.  But  whoso  speaketh  of  his  own  mind  doth  good  neither 
to  himself  nor  others."  So  then,  of  these  three  gifts,  power  expresses  the  Divine 
might  lodged  in  him  ;  judgment,  the  substance  of  what  he  had  to  deliver  ;  might 
or  courage,  the  strength  to  dehver  it  in  face  of  human  power,  persecution,  ridicule, 
death.  These  gifts  the  prophets  know  are  not  their  own,  but  are  from  the 
Spirit  of  Grod,  and  are  by  Him  inspired  into  them.  Such  was  the  spirit  of  Elijah, 
of  John  Baptist,  of  Paul,  of  the  apostles.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  Holy 
Spirit  the  Author  of  all  ministerial  qualifications : — The  work  of  the  ministry  is 
the  most  arduous,  the  most  important,  the  most  honourable  work  in  which 
a  man  can  be  engaged.  Arduous,  because  it  requires  constant  diligence,  watch- 
fulness, zeal,  and  perseverance.  Important,  because  it  involves  the  eternal 
interests  of  man.  Honourable,  because  it  is  the  work  of  God,  and  in  the  due 
discharge  of  it  the  glory  of  God  is  most  promoted.  I.  The  ministeb's  appoint- 
ment. This  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God ;  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  God  has  set 
apart  certain  persons  to  this  office,  who  from  time  to  time,  as  the  services  of 
His  Church  require,  are  raised  up,  converted,  qualified,  and  sent  for  this  office. 
Jesus  sends  His  ministers  whither  He  Himself  will  come.  All  the  qualifica- 
tions of  ministers  for  their  office  are  of  God,  both  gifts  and  graces.  Ministers 
are  men  of  God  sent  from  God  to  work  for  God,  and  bring  sinners  to  God. 

I.    ThBIB  FAITHFtTLNESS   IN    THE    DISCHARGE    OF    THEIB  HOLY   DUTIES   IS    OF  GOD 

THE  Holt  Spibit.  The  first  ministers  were  commanded  to  tarry  in  the  city 
of  Jerusalem  imtil  they  were  endued  with  "  power  from  on  high  "  (Acts  i.  8).     The 

Srophets  under  the  Old  Testament  and  all  the  ministers  of  Christ  in  the  present 
ay  have  been  and  are  equally  indebted  to  this  gracious  operation.  Nor  can 
we  be  surprised  at  this,  when  the  blessed  Saviour  Himself  is  represented  in  His 
mediatorial  character  as  qualified  and  sustained  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ministers 
know  not  what  to  preach,  except  as  the  Holy  Spirit  teaches  them.  III.  That 
MINISTEES'  SUCCESS  IS  OF  THE  SpiRiT.  And  this  Spirit  is  poured  out  just  in  pro- 
portion as  Christ  is  preached.  Learn — 1.  Where  to  look  for  a  blessing.  All 
our  fresh  springs  are  in  Jesus.  2.  Ask  whether  the  Lord  is  among  us  or  not  ? 
3.  To  whom  we  should  give  the  glory,  all  the  glory,  for  any  benefit  that  we  at 
any  time  receive  from  the  ministry.  (R.  Simpson,  M.A.)  The  true  prophet : 
— It  is  supposed  that  this  chapter  belongs  to  the  reign  of  Hezekiah ;  if  so,  the 
mournful  state  of  matters  which  it  depicts  cannot  have  begun  until  towards 
its  close.  These  words  lead  us  to  consider  the  true  prophet.  I.  The  work  of 
a  true  prophet.  "  To  declare  unto  Jacob  his  transgression  and  to  Israel  his 
sin."  It  is  a  characteristic  of  all  true  prophets  that  they  have  a  keen  moral 
sense  to  discern  wrong,  to  loathe  it,  and  to  burn  at  it.  No  man  is  a  true  prophet 
who  is  not  roused  to  thunder  by  the  wrong.  Where  have  we  men  now  to  "  declare 
unto  Jacob  his  transgression,  and  unto  Israel  his  sin  "  ?  1.  This  is  a  painful 
work.  It  will  incur  the  disfavour  of  some  and  rouse  the  antagonism  of  the  delin- 
quents. 2.  This  is  an  urgent  work.  No  work  is  more  needed  in  England  to- 
day. To  expose  wrong  goes  a  great  way  towards  its  extinction.  St.  Peter 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  charged  home  the  terrible  crime  of  the  crucifixion  to 
the  men  he  addressed  1  II.  The  power  of  a  true  prophet.  "  Truly,  I  am  fuU 
of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  of  judgment  and  of  might."  There 
is  no  egotism  in  this.  A  powerful  man  knows  his  power  and  will  ascribe  it  to 
the  right  source — the  "Spirit  of  the  Lord."  His  power  was  moral;  it  was  the 
might  of  conscience,  moral  conviction  of  invincible  sympathy  with  eternal  right 
and  truth.  This  is  a  very  different  power  to  that  of  mere  intellect,  imagina- 
tion, or  what  is  called  genius.  It  is  higher,  more  creditable,  more  influential, 
more  Godhke.  III.  The  fidelity  of  a  true  prophet.  This  is  seen  here  in  three 
things — 1.  In  the  class  he  denounces.  "  Hear  this,  I  pray  you,  ye  heads  of 
the  house  of  Jacob,  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel."  He  struck  at  the  higher 
classes  of  life.  2.  The  prophet's  fidelity  is  seen  in  the  charges  he  makes. 
**  They  build  up  Zion  with  blood,  and  Jerusalem  with  iniquity."  (1)  He  charges 
them   with   extortionate   cruelty.     (2)   With   base   mercenariness.     Money   was 


CHAP.  IV.]  MIC  AH.  29 

the  motive  power  of  all.  The  prophet's  faithfulness  ia  seen — 3.  In  the  doom 
he  proclaims.  The  reference  may  be  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
Romans.  {Homilist.)  A  faithful  prophet : — During  the  Chartist  agitation 
many  of  Kingsley's  friends  and  relations  tried  to  withdraw  him  from  the  people's 
cause,  fearful  lest  his  prospects  in  life  might  be  seriously  prejudiced ;  but  to 
all  of  them  he  turned  a  deaf  ear,  and  in  writing  to  his  wife  on  the  subject  he  says : 
"  I  will  not  be  a  liar.  I  will  speak  in  season  and  out  of  season.  I  will  not 
shun  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  My  path  is  clear,  and  I  will  follow 
in  it."  (A.  Bell,  B.A.)  Showing  the  transgression : — The  great  power  of 
Charles  G.  Finney  in  deahng  with  awakened  souls  consisted  in  this  :  he  used 
to  pin  a  man  down  to  his  favourite  sins,  and  say  to  him :  "  Are  you  willing  to 
give  up  this  iu  order  to  obey  Christ  ?  "  At  that  decisive  point  came  the  defeat 
or  victory.  He  once  knelt  down  beside  an  inquirer,  and  as  he  enumerated  various 
sins  the  man  responded  that  he  would  surrender  them .  At  length  Mr.  Finney 
said:  "  I  agree  to  serve  God  in  my  business,"  The  man  was  silent.  "What 
is  the  matter  ?  "  said  Mr.  F.  kindly ;  "  can  you  not  do  that  ?  "  "  No,"  stam- 
mered the  poor  fellow;  "  I  am  in  the  liquor  trade."  And  in  it  he  continued. 
He  rose  from  his  knees  and  went  back  to  his  cursed  business,  with  a  fresh  weight 
of  guilt  upon  his  head. 

Vers.  10,  11.  Hear  this  ...  ye  heads  of  the  house  of  Jacob  .  .  .  that  abhor 
judgment,  and  pervert  all  equity. — Rectitude  : — I.  There  is  an  eteenal  law  of 
"  RIGHT  "  that  should  GOVERN  MAN  IN  ALL  HIS  RELATIONS.  Right,  as  a  Sentiment, 
is  one  of  the  deepest,  most  ineradicable  and  operative  sentiments  in  humanity. 
/All  men  feel  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  right..  What  the  right  is  is  a  subject 
tm  which  there  has  been  and  is  a  variety  of  opiliion.  Right  implies  a  standard, 
and  men  difiFer  abQut._tha  Stafidard.  Some  say  the  law  of  your  country  is  the 
standard ;  some  say  public  sentiment  is  the  standard ;  some  say  temporal 
expediency  is  the  standard.  All  these  are  fearfully  mistaken.  Philosophy 
and  the  Bible  teach  that  there  is  but  one  standard,  that  is  the  will  of  the  Creator. 
That  will  He  reveals  in  many  ways — in  nature,  in  history,  in  conscience,  in  Christ. 
Conformity  to  that  will  is  right.  1.  The  law  of  Christ  should  govern  man  in 
his  relations  with  God.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  2.  The  law 
of  right  should  govern  man  in  his  relation  to  his  fellow-men — "  Whatsoever 
ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them."  This  law 
of  right  is  immutable.  It  admits  of  no  modification.  It  is  universal.  It  is 
binding  alike  on  all  moral  beings  in  the  universe.  It  is  benevolent.  It  seeks 
the  happiness  of  all.  II.  That  a  practical  disregard  of  this  law  leads  to 
FRAUD  AND  vioLBNOB.  "  For  they  know  not  to  do  right,  saith  the  Lord,  who 
store  up  violence  and  robbery  in  their  palaces."  The  magnates  of  Samaria  had 
no  respect  for  the  practice  of  right,  hence  they  "  stored  up  violence  and  robbery 
in  their  palaces."  Fraud  and  violence  are  the  two  great  primary  crimes  in  all 
social  life.  III.  That  fraud  and  violence  must  ultimately  meet  with 
condign  punishment.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God :  An  adversary 
there  shall  be  even  round  about  the  land  ;  and  he  shall  bring  down  thy  strength 
from  thee,  and  thy  palaces  shall  be  spoiled."  How  was  this  realised  ?  "  Against 
him  came  up  Shalmaneser,  king  of  Assyria  ;  and  Hoshea  became  his  servant, 
and  gave  him  presents.  In  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea  the  king  of  Assyria  took 
Samaria  and  carried  Israel  away  into  Assyria,  and  placed  them  in  Halah  and 
in  Habor  by  the  river  of  Gozan  and  in  the  cities  of  the  Medes  "  (2  Kings  xvii. 
3,  6  ;  xviii.  9-11).  The  cheats  and  murderers  of  mankind  will,  as  sure  as  there 
is  justice  in  the  world,  meet  with  a  terrible  doom.  "  Punishment  is  the  recoil 
of  crime  ;  and  the  strength  of  the  back-stroke  is  in  proportion  to  the  original 
blow."     (HomtlisU) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  1-5.  The  mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  be  established  in  the 
top  of  the  mountains. — The  moral  grandeur  of  the  Christian  Church  : — The  gift  of 
prophecy  would  have  been  to  its  possessor  a  source  of  the  most  exquisite  misery 
if  it  had  been  restricted  only  to  the  dark  passages  of  human  history.     But  the 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

future  had  a  bright  side  as  well  as  a  dark,  and  it  was  as  cheering  to  contemplate 
the  former  as  it  was  dismal  to  apprehend  the  latter.  As  the  sorrows  of  the  prophets 
were  greater,  their  joys  also  were  higher  than  those  of  ordinary  men.  In  the 
chapter  immediately  preceding  the  text  the  prophet  had  announced  the  future 
desolation  of  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  The  sins  of  her  priests  and  princes,  he  fore- 
saw, would  attain  such  a  height  of  aggravation  that  the  very  day  itself  would, 
in  a  manner,  be  dark  over  them.  But  as  in  the  as'-es  of  winter  the  husbandman 
can  read  the  glories  of  spring,  the  prophetic  eye  could  discern  in  the  ruin  of  one 
city  the  establishment  of  another  more  glorious  by  far.  So  he  goes  on  to  expatiate 
with  rapture  on  the  glory  that  was  to  follow.  By  "  last  days  "  are  meant  the 
times  of  the  Messiah,  or,  in  other  words,  the  Christian  era.  The  meaning  is, 
that  the  Christian  dispensation  would  be  the  last  of  all,  and  that  no  other  economy 
would  be  after  it.  It  was  an  economy  that  was  to  last  until  the  end  of  time. 
In  these  "  last  days  "  it  is  foretold  by  the  prophet  that  "  the  mountain  of  the 
Lord's  house  shall  be  established  on  the  top  of  the  movmtains,  and  exalted  above 
the  hills."  In  a  mountainous  region,  among  the  multitude  of  hiUs  that  rise  one 
above  another  in  sublimity  and  grandeur,  there  is  generally  one  that  proudly  and 
pre-eminently  lifts  its  head  above  them  aU.  It  is  seen  from  a  greater  distance  than 
any  of  the  others,  and  towers  in  glorious  majesty  over  the  heights  which  are  allied 
to  it.  Under  this  bold  and  significant  image,  the  prophet  exhibits  to  us  the 
moral  grandeur  and  elevation  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was,  like  the  loftiest 
of  mountains  in  an  extensive  range,  to  be  visible  from  afar.  A  house,  or  temple, 
was  to  be  reared  on  its  summit.  The  Christian  religion  would  surpass  every 
other  in  majesty,  and  look  down  triumphantly  on  every  other  system  of  worship. 
This  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in  part.  Where  is  there  a  creed  or  system  of  theology 
that  can  compare  with  it  ?  In  the  Gospel  there  is  prominence,  there  is  attractive-  / 
ness,  there  is  conspicuity.  The  hill  of  Calvary  is  more  illustrious  than  the  moun- 
tains of  any  land.  He  who  was  lifted  up  there,  draws  towards  Him  the  eyes 
of  many  nations.  The  language  of  the  prophet  implies  that,  before  this  mountain 
could  be  exalted,  there  must  be  a  shaking  of  the  hills  around.  The  prediction 
is  to  receive  its  fuU  and  perfect  accomplishment  in  days  still  future — in,  if  we 
may  so  speak,  the  latest  of  the  last  days.  Then  indeed  shall  the  mountain  of 
the  Lord's  house  rise  sublimely  above  all  the  hills.  There  is  reason,  too,  for 
believing,  that  just  as  at  the  first  propagation  of  the  Gospel,  so  likewise  at 
its  universal  diffusion,  there  shall  be  a  series  of  great  and  momentous  changes 
in  the  political  world.  The  great  battle  of  contending  principles  must  be  fought 
out — the  old  warfare  between  sense  and  spirit  must  be  renewed — and  a  period 
of  intense  misery  must  precede  the  final  adjustment  of  the  question.  Neverthe- 
less, truth  which  is  mighty  must  prevail.  At  the  close  of  the  first  verse  the 
prophet  intimates  the  triumph  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  immense  number  of  its 
converts.  "  People  shall  flow  unto  it."  The  metaphor  signifies  that  the  triumph 
of  the  Gospel  would  be  sure  and  certain,  though  it  looked  like  a  physical  impossi- 
bility. The  nations  of  the  earth  are  not  only  compared  to  a  river,  but  to  a  river 
flowing  upward.  To  a  certain  extent  this  part  of  the  prophecy  has  already  been 
accomplished.  The  success  of  the  Gospel  hitherto  in  the  world  has  been  like 
the  flowing  of  a  river  up  a  hill.  Nothing,  humanly  speaking,  could  have  been 
pronounced  more  improbable  than  the  conversion  of  the  nations  to  Christianity. 
It  is  the  religion  of  purity;  and  the  hearts  of  men  are  naturally  unclean.  It  is 
the  religion  of  benevolence  and  peace ;  but  the  spirit  that  is  in  men  lusteth  to 
envy.  It  is  the  religion  of  principle  ;  and  the  heart  of  man  is  naturally  disposed 
to  content  itself  with  forms.  It  were  a  curious  enough  question  whether  the 
age  in  which  we  ourselves  live  is  an  approximation  to  that  glorious  period  of 
vmich  the  prophet  speaks.  But  we  dare  not  with  certainty  affirm  it.  While 
we  rejoice  in  the  symptoms  of  good,  it  becomes  us,  before  pronouncing  a  positive 
judgment  on  the  matter,  to  tremble  at  so  many  prognostications  of  evil.  We 
may  take  warning  against  any  fanatical  use  of  this  doctrine.  The  passage  is  not 
to  be  understood  literally.  The  very  terms  of  it  intimate  as  much.  The  ultimate 
establishment  of  Messiah's  throne  wiU  not  interfere  with  the  forms  and  modes 
of  earthly  government.  There  will  be  liberty  and  equality  and  fraternity.  It 
will  not  be  the  grossly  misnamed  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  of  infidel  and 
republican  France.  It  will  be  a  liberty,  not  from  tifie  salutary  restraints  of  govern- 
ment, but  from  Satan  and  the  tyranny  of  evil  passions.  An  equality,  not  of 
spoil,  plunder,  and  substance,  but  of  principle  and  unity  of  spirit.  A  fraternisa- 
tion, not  of  robbery,  under  the  mask  of  communism,  but  of  love  and  generosity. 


CHAP.  IV.]  MICAH.  31 

and  of  men  preferring  one  another  in  honour.  {J.  L.  Adamson.)  A  vision 
of  the  latter-day  glories : — The  prophets  frequently  described  what  they  saw  with 
spiritual  eyes  after  the  form  or  fashion  of  something  which  could  be  seen  by  the 
eye  of  nature.  The  Church  will  be  like  a  high  mountain,  for  she  will  be  pre- 
eminently conspicuous.  I  believe  that  at  this  period  the  thoughts  of  men  are 
more  engaged  upon  the  religion  of  Christ  than  upon  any  other.  The  Christian 
religion  has  become  more  conspicuous  now  than  ever  it  was.  The  Church  will 
become  awful  and  venerable  in  her  grandeur.  There  is  something  awfully 
grand  in  a  mountain,  but  how  much  more  so  in  such  a  mountain  as  is  described 
in  our  text,  which  is  to  be  exalted  above  all  hills,  and  above  all  the  highest  moun- 
tains of  the  earth.  Now  the  Church  is  despised ;  the  infidel  barketh  at  her. 
But  the  day  shall  come  when  the  Cross  shall  command  universal  homage.  The 
day  is  coming  when  the  Chiu*ch  shall  have  absolute  supremacy.  Now  she  has 
to  fight  for  her  existence.  The  day  is  coming  when  she  shall  be  so  mighty  that 
there  shall  be  nought  left  to  compete  with  her.  Here  is  the  meaning  of  the  text, — 
the  Church  growing  and  rising  up  till  she  becomes  conspicuous,  venerable,  and 
supreme.  But  how  is  this  to  be  done  ?  Three  things  will  ensure  the  growth 
of  the  Church.  1.  The  individual  exertion  of  everjr  C^istian.  We  shall  indeed 
see  something  more  than  natural  agency,  but  this  is  to  contribute  to  it.  2.  The 
Church  has  within  her  a  living  influence.  This  must  expand  and  grow.  3.  The 
great  hope  of  the  Church  is  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  When  He  shall  come, 
then  shall  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  be  exalted  above  the  hills.  We 
know  not  when  Jesus  may  come.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  established  Church  : — 
Such  is  the  established  Church  predicted  in  ancient  prophecy.  Compare  the 
similar  prophecy  in  Isa.  ii.  In  the  chapter  immediately  preceding  this  passage 
God  denounces  the  severest  and  most  unsparing  judgments  upon  a  guilty  people. 
The  text  is  couched  in  the  language  of  promise.  In  order  to  cheer  those  on  whom 
God  was  about  to  pour  many  and  merited  judgments,  He  gives  them — not  a  precept, 
which  would  only  depress  them ;  not  another  threatening,  for  that  might  over- 
whelm them ;  not  an  invitation,  for  that  they  might  not  be  able  to  obey — but 
a  promise,  causing  the  future  to  unbosom  rays  of  light  for  the  comfort  of  the 
present.  From  this  prophecy,  see  that  the  last  days  of  the  Gospel  are  predicted 
as  the  brightest.  Divisions  and  discords  have  been  the  history  of  the  visible 
Church  from  its  cradle  downwards  to  the  present  hour.  Notice  the  epithet. 
The  Church  of  Christ  is  here  called  "  a  mountain."  This  symbol  is  taken  from 
the  fact  that  the  sacred  site  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  a  mountain — Mount 
Moriah.  It  suggests  that  the  Chiurch  of  Christ  shall  be  exalted  above  all  the 
obstructions  or  impediments  of  the  world  ;  principalities  and  powers  bending 
before  it.  Notwithstanding  then  all  the  difficulties,  discords,  divisions,  heresies, 
schisms,  errors,  misconstruction,  and  misapprehensions  that  prevail  amid  the 
Church  of  God,  not  one  of  them  is  retarding  in  the  least  degree  the  ultimate 
and  glorious  outburst.  The  Church  is  beautifully  and  suitably  symbolised  by  a 
mountain.  A  mountain  is  a  fixed  and  stable  thing.  ''In  Scripture  strength  and 
stability  are  represented  by  mountains.  A  mountain  most  suitably  represents 
the  varied  climacterics  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  from  this  circumstance,  that  it 
is  sometimes  covered  with  clouds,  and  thereby  involved  in  darkness,  and  swept 
by  the  hurricane,  while  at  other  times  it  basks  and  spreads  its  bosom  before 
the  vminterrupted  and  meridian  sunbeams.  This  is  precisely  the  historj'  of 
the  Church.  A  mountain  is  a  place  of  safety  or  retreat.  The  true  Church 
becomes  a  place  of  retreat,  in  which  there  is  found  the  Rock  of  Age>,  and 
the  shadow  of  those  wings  beneath  which  there  is  safety.  A  mountain  is 
a  source  of  streams  and  rivulets.  The  dews  descend  from  heaven  upon  it ; 
those  dews  collect  into  streams,  which  irrigate  and  refresh  the  valley  beIo\v. 
The  Church  of  Christ  is  the  great  preserver  of  the  earth.  A  mountain  is  the 
spot,  standing  on  which  we  can  see  to  the  greatest  distance.  In  this  is 
snadowed  one  of  the  great  functions  which  the  Church  of  Christ  is  meant  to 
discharge,  namely,  to  enable  the  believer  to  see  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  more 
clearly  and  distinctly.  A  mountain  was  selected  in  the  ancient  economy  for 
those  who  sounded  the  trumpet  of  jubilee.  And  the  "  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord  "  ought  to  be  proclaimed  in  the  pulpits  of  every  true  and  apostolic  Church. 
It  is  predicted  that  this  mountain  "  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tains." "  Establishment  "  is  not  to  be  understood  as  popularly  applied  to  certain 
modern  Churches.  The  passage  does  not  mean  that  the  Church  is  established 
or  built  upon  Peter.     There  cannot  be  two  foundations.    If  Christ  be  the  founda- 


32  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

tion,  there  can  be  no  room  for  another  ;  whatever  cornea  next  must  be  laid  upon 
the  foundation,  and  must  be  part  of  the  superstructure,  and  not  the  foundation. 
The  Church  is  established  on  Christ,  the  Rock  of  Ages.  This  is  a  tried  foundation. 
It  is  called  "  precious."  It  is  called  a  living  rock,  and  the  comer-stone.  This 
foundation  is  an  everlasting  foundation.  (John  Gumming,  A.M.)  A  mia- 
tionary  discourse : — I.  A  desc!BIPTion  of  the  Chtjboh.  Such  phrases  as  "  the 
mountain  of  the  Lord's  house,"  and  "  Zion,"  signify,  in  such  connection  as  this, 
the  Church  of  God.  The  visible  Church  has,  from  the  beginning,  always  had  an 
existence ;  but  its  boundaries  have  generally  been  very  limited,  and  its  situation 
has  often  been  very  obscure.  But  the  Church  shall  be  conspicuous  to  all ; 
as  on  the  top  of  the  mountains.  She  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills.  And 
philosophy,  idolatry,  superstition,  and  errors,  shall  no  longer  obstruct  her  view, 
or  obscure  her  glory.  And  she  shall  be  established.  She  has  been  tossed  about 
by  commotions.  One  day  she  shall  be  no  longer  oppressed  by  persecutions, 
or  disturbed  by  the  arm  of  human  power.  EC.  A  disposition  in  all  towards 
THE  Church.  "  All  nations  shall  flow  into  it."  Their  movements  shall  be 
characterised  by  friendly  co-operation.  By  a  definite  and  sacred  object.  By 
proper  intentions  and  correct  views.  By  right  dispositions.  By  confidence 
in  the  excellency  of  the  Divine  instructions.  III.  The  blessings  resulting 
X^OM  these  circumstances.  Taught  from  above,  then,  nations  generally  will 
own  the  authority  of  God,  acknowledge  His  right  to  judge,  and  submit  to 
His  laws.  IV.  The  period  of  these  great  events.  "  In  the  last  days."  The 
Church  of  God  has  had  her  days ;  and  these  days  have  been  somewhat  commen- 
surate with  the  progress  of  time,  and  with  the  limited  or  more  extended  popu- 
lation of  the  earth.  Day  of  patriarchal  Church  was  a  day  of  small  things.  But 
patriarchs  and  prophets  spoke  of  another  day,  of  other  days,  which  they  called 
the  "  last  days."  Evidently  the  prophet  referred  to  the  days  of  the  Gospel. 
Improvement — 1.  Let  our  spirits  be  cheered  though  so  few  have  hitherto  embraced 
real  Christianity.  2.  We  may  well  be  excited  to  renewed  exertions  in  rendering 
Divine  truth  conspicuous  to  all.  3.  Let  this  prospect  call  forth  the  gratitude 
of  all  who  already  participate  in  the  blessings  of  redemption.  (Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.)  The  law  of  the  Spirit : — Pentecost  is  the  culminating  point 
of  Divine  revelation.  This  great  event  is  the  focus  of  all  prophecy.  The  text 
is  not  exhausted  in  its  reference  to  Israel,  but  stretches  forward  to  the  renovation 
of  mankind  in  the  Church  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  I.  The  law  of  the  Spirit  is 
AN  UNIVERSAL  LAW.  Adapted  to  all  men,  in  all  circumstances,  and  in  all  times. 
Because  it  is  the  announcing  of  eternal  principles,  accompanied  with  Divine 
power  to  enforce  them.  11.  Hence  its  prb-bminencb  over  all  laws.  It 
absorbs  and  expresses  the  truth  of  all  other  Jaws.  All  nations  recognise  it  as 
something  higher,  deeper,  more  complete  than  their  previous  revelation  or  religion. 
III.  Mark  its  effects.  1.  In  judgment  (ver.  3).  It  is  the  conviction  of  right 
and  wrong,  good  and  eviL  It  is  the  conviction  that  right  will  be  maintained 
and  vindicated,  and  wrong  put  down.  This  must  be  the  foundation  of  all  real 
moral  and  spiritual  life.  2.  In  producing  obedience  (ver.  2).  Not  mere  con- 
viction, but  submission.  3.  In  working  love.  The  real  root  of  obedience.  Lead- 
ing men  to  mutual  respect,  and  to  a  care  for  each  other's  good.  4.  In  producing 
safety  and  security.  This  can  never  be  fully  attained  oy  mere  external  law 
and  restrictive  measures.  The  best  laws  will  be  obeyed  only  when  men's  hearts 
are  in  harmony  with  their  requirements.  The  true  way  to  safety  is  by  the  spirit 
of  love  and  mutual  consideration.  The  great  lesson  of  Pentecost  is  this, — When 
love  is  universal,  discord  of  acts  and  words  and  purpose  will  cease.  (William 
M.  Clark,  M.A.)  The  promise  of  Ood  regarding  His  Church  : — The  sin  of  the 
Church  had  necessitated  frequent  denunciations  and  words  of  warning  on  the 
part  of  God.  He  had  been  speaking  very  tempestuously  to  His  people ;  He 
now  exhibits  the  gentler  aspects  of  His  character.  There  is  a  pause — a  calm 
after  tempest ;  and  the  sweet  birds  of  promise  troop  forth  with  their  notes  of 
peace  and  gladness.  I.  The  Church's  hope.  "  In  the  last  days,"  &c.  Who 
can  interpret  these  words  ?  Not  the  man  of  mere  dates.  The  world  has  not 
seen  its  brightest  day  yet.  The  light  is  still  struggling — not  meridian  glory. 
This  world  has  a  rich  promise  hidden  in  its  heart,  like  the  snow-drops  of  winter — 
anticipatory  of  spring.  Death  is  now  in  the  majority.  It  shall  not  always  be 
BO.  The  Church,  like  youth,  lives  in  hope — of  brighter  days  to  come — of  what 
it  is  to  be.  Thou  livest  in  the  infinitive  mood  !  II.  The  Church's  revival. 
"  And  many  nations  shall  come,  and  say.  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  moimtaio 


CHAP.  IV.]  MIC  AH.  33 

of  the  Lord  .  .  .  and  He  will  teach  us  of  His  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  His  paths," 
&c.  (vers.  2,  3).     Then  shall  the  Church  illustrate  the  fulness  of  meaning  contained 
in  the  Savioiir's  words  :  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  hfe,  and  that  they 
might  have  it  more  abundantly."     Souls  shall  be  enfranchised,  and  know  the 
liberty  of  infinitude,  &c.     III.  The  Church's  skcxibity.     "  They  shall  sit  every 
man  under  his  vine,  and  imder  his  fig-tree  ;  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid  " 
(ver.  4).     The  history  of  human  progress  has  been  written  in  fear.     "  For  fear 
of  the  Jews  "  the  disciples  had  to  move  about  cautiously,  and  assemble  in  quiet 
and  concealed  places.     Not  imtil  "  the  doors  were  shut  "  could  they  worship  with 
any  sense  of  security.      And  through  all  subsequent  ages  the  history  of  religious 
progress  has  thus  been  illustrated.     In  the  fastnesses  of  the  wilderness  and  fissures 
of  the  rocks,  the  low  murmurings  of  sacred  song  have  been  heard  by  God  alone, 
"  for  fear  "  of  the  persecuting  hand ;  as  in  the  days  of  the  Covenanters,  Lollards, 
and  others.     But  behold,  the  days  come — "  the  last  days  " — when  doors  shall 
be  no  longer  shut,  when  bolts  shall  be  aU  withdrawn,  every  gate  thrown  wide 
open,  and  no  barrier  intervene  between  the  soul  and  its  perfected  liberty.     IV.  The 
IMPBOBABILITY  OF  ALL  THIS.     Lookcd  at  in  the  light  of  the  present  state  of  the 
world,   this   bright   perspective   is   a  dream — an  extravaganza — insanity's   wild 
vision.     Look  at  the  corruption  of  the  world  ;  look  at  a  Church  dying  of  doctrine  ; 
and  see  whether  such  a  future  be  probable.     Apart  from  "  the  Word  of  the  Ix)rd  " 
it  is  not ;  but  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  spoken  it "  (ver.  4).     What 
are  the  improbabilities  of  a  frozen  river,  or  field,  in  winter  ?     Shall  the  waters 
ever  flow  again,  or  the  field  wave  its  ears  of  com  again  ?     Yes.     What  is  the 
guarantee  ?     "  The  mouth  of  the  Lord  "  that  says :  "  seed  time  and  harvest, 
sxmimer  and  winter,  shall  not  cease."     The  text  speaks  of  a  life  flowing  upwards — 
"  all  people  shall  flow  unto  it " — to  the  "  top  of  the  mountains."     Who  ever 
heard  of  water  flowing  upwards,  or  fire  burning  downwards  ?     You  say  to  one 
unacquainted  with  electricity  :  "  I  can  send  a  message  to  a  friend  in  India,  and 
get  an  answer  in  the  course  of  an  hour  or  two."     "  How  utterly  absurd,"  is  the 
reply.     There  are  laws  that  defy  gravitation ;  a  life  sublimer  than  science,  and 
more  eloquent  than  music.     Sceptical  science  says  :  "  This  thing  cannot  be." 
Faith  says :  "  It  shall  be,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Ix)rd  hath  spoken  it."     {Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.)        The-  Gospel  age  : — The  "  last  days  "  means  the  times  of  the 
Messiah.     I.  The  true  religion  on  the  Gospel  age  will  become  a  great 
POWKB.     The  temple  was  the  greatest  thing  in  the  religion  of  the  Jews ;  it  was 
the  "  mountain  "  in  their  scenery.     The  true  religion  is  to  become  a  mountain. 
The  true  religion,  where  it  exists,  is  the  biggest  thing.     It  is  either  everything  or 
nothing.    II.  The  true  religion  op  the  Gospel  age  will  become  universality 
attractive.     "  And  people  shall  flow  unto  it."     "  This  is  a  figurative  expression, 
denoting  that  they  shall  be  converted  to  the  true  religion.     It  indicates  that  they 
shall  come  in  multitudes,  like  the  flowing  of  a  mighty  river.     The  idea  of  the 
flowing  of  the  nation,  as  of  the  movement  of  many  people  towards  an  object  like 
a  broad  stream  on  the  tides  of  the  ocean,  is  one  that  is  very  grand  and  sublime  " 
(Barnes).     In  this  period  the  social  element  will  be  brought  into  full  play  in 
connection  with  true  religion.     1.  They  will  study  its  laws,  in  order  to  obey  them. 
"  He  will  teach  us  His  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  His  paths."     2.  They  will  study 
its  laws  at  the  fountain  head.     "  For  the  law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion,  and  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."    III.  The  true  religion  of  the  Gospel  age  will 
BECOME  POWERFUL  TO  TERMINATE  ALL  WARS.     1.  Here  is  the  destruction  of  war. 
*'  Beat  their  swords   into  ploughshares,  and  their  spears  into  priming-hooks." 
2.  Here  is  the  establishment  of  peace.     "  Shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine  and 
under  his  fig-tree."     Most  incredible  must  this  prediction  have  been  to  the  men 
of  Micah's  time ;  but  it  will  be  accomplished,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
hath  spoken  it.     If  He  has  spoken  it  and  it  does  not  come  to  pass,  it  must 
be  for   one   of   three   reasons — (1)   Insincerity;    which   cannot  be   entertained. 
(2)  Change  of  piurpose ;  which  is  equally  inadmissible.     (3)  Unexpected  difficulties ; 
which  is  an  absurdity  when  applied  to  Omniscience.     (Homilist.)         Mountain- 
top  religion  : — The  true  way  to  conquer  temptations  is  not  to  fight  them  in  detail, 
but  to  go  up  into  a  loftier  region  where  they  cease  to  be  tem.ptations.     How 
is  it  that  grown  men  do  not  like  the  sweetmeats  that  used  to  tempt  them  when 
they  were  children  ?     They  have  outgrown  them.     Then  outgrow  the  temptations 
of  the  world  !     How  is  it  that  there  are  no  mosquitoes  nor  malaria  on  the  mountain- 
tops  ?     They  cannot  rise  above  the  level  of  the  swamps  by  the  river.     Go  up 
to  the  mountain-top,  and  neither  malaria  nor  mosquito  will  follow  you, — which, 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

being  interpreted,  is,  live  near  Jesus  Christ  and  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  occu- 

Eied  with  Him,  and  yon  will  dwell  in  a  region  high  above  the  temptations  which 
uzz  and  sting,  which  infest  and  slay  on  the  lower  levels.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 
The  Saviour's  kingdom:  —  The  world  has  always  had  its  dreams  of  a  Golden 
Age.  A  better  state  of  things  than  that  which  exists,  has  been  felt  to  be  not  only 
possible,  but  normal,  and  so  men  have  reasoned  that  what  ought  to  be,  either 
has  been  in  the  old  time,  or  will  be  in  the  new.  Either  as  a  memory  or  a  hope, 
this  idea  has  done  much  to  reconcile  men  to  the  confusion  and  contradictions 
of  life.  To  the  vagueness  and  mist  of  that  human  dream  Scripture  gives  the 
sharpness  and  substance  of  fact.  It  speaks  with  positiveness.  The  Golden 
Age  has  not  passed.  Humanity  is  on  the  way  to  the  realisation  of  its  long  hope. 
The  Scripture  idea,  however,  differs  from  the  human  in  the  importance  which 
it  attaches  to  the  spiritual  element.  The  transformations  in  society,  which 
must  precede  the  ushering  in  of  the  golden  age,  are  moral,  not  material.  Better- 
ment of  laws,  advance  in  knowledge,  multiplication  of  industrial  arts,  increase 
of  wealth — these  things  cannot  transfigure  humanity.  It  is  the  established 
and  recognised  sovereignty  of  Christ  and  His  truth  on  which  the  desired  blessed- 
ness depends.  It  is  important  to  emphasise  this  truth  at  the  present  time,  when 
religion  is  depreciated  in  the  popular  estimate.  There  is  a  prevalent  idea  that 
it  is  weak  and  on  the  wane.  It  has  recently  been  said  that  "  fifty  years  hence 
no  one  will  go  to  chiirch  except  for  culture."  Note  that  the  function  of  religion 
is  not  limited  to  the  regeneration  of  a  single  man.  It  works  through  the  individual, 
upon  the  organic  life  of  the  race.  And  it  employs  varied  methods.  Sometimes 
it  sparks  on  the  surface  of  history ;  sometimes  it  works  out  of  sight.  There  is 
a  river  in  Kentucky  that,  after  imroUing  its  silver  thread  through  leagues  of 
verdant  meadows,  suddenly  disappears.  The  earth  swallows  it  up.  But  though 
lost  to  view,  its  flow  is  not  checked.  It  channels  its  way  through  the  hidden 
rocks ;  it  hollows  out  the  vast  halls  and  the  glittering  galleries  of  the  Mammoth 
Cave.  It  springs  the  arches  of  that  grandest  of  cathedrals,  and  inlays  the  rocky 
roof  with  stars,  after  the  pattern  of  the  heavens.  The  sculpture  of  the  silent 
waters  outstrips  the  skill  of  human  artists.  The  weird  and  the  beautiful,  the 
quaint  and  the  sublime  are  clustered  in  groupings,  whose  impressiveness  is  eloquent 
of  the  wonder-workings  of  the  Divine  hand.  So  Christ's  rehgion  has  its  epochs 
of  disappearance  from  the  surface  of  life.  But  it  works  nevertheless,  works 
persistently,  works  mightily.  Divine  truth  never  comes  to  a  standstill.  In 
sight,  or  out  of  sight  it  is  for  ever  busy.  Standing  at  the  casement  of  prospect, 
let  us  note  some  of  the  glories  of  the  coming  kingdom.  1.  The  acknowledged 
supremacy  of  the  Christian  Church  (ver.  1).  2.  A  imiversal  desire  to  know  and 
obey  the  truth  (vers.  1,  2).  TiU  now,  religious  truth  has  had  to  be  carried  to 
men  and  pressed  upon  their  attention.  3.  An  adjustment  of  international 
relations  on  the  basis  of  righteousness  (ver.  3).  The  two  forces  which  men  have 
always  used  for  the  regulation  of  international  affairs,  are  diplomacy  and  war. 
The  cimning  of  intrigue  or  the  edge  of  the  sword  is  employed  to  \mtangle 
or  cut  every  knot  of  dispute.  By  and  by  righteousness  shall  be  both  the  basis 
and  substance  of  the  international  code.  4.  Safety  of  life  and  property  secured 
by  individual  piety  (vers.  4,  6).  One  principal  office  of  organised  society  is  to 
surround  with  safeguards  the  individual  man.  Barbarism  is  every  man  for 
himself ;  commimism  is  the  rule  of  the  caprice  or  frenzy  of  a  mob ;  civilisation 
is  the  effort  of  all  for  the  good  of  each ;  and  yet  the  efficient  agent  in  these  widely 
diverse  types  of  society  is  the  same,  —  brute  force.  In  the  coming  kingdom 
individual  character  is  to  be  the  security  of  society.  6.  The  elimination  of  the 
elements  of  weakness  in  society  (vers.  6,  7).  What  is  to  be  done  with  the  dependent 
and  dangerous  classes  ?  What  society  cannot  do,  God  can,  and  by  and  by  He 
will.  The  value  of  such  an  outlook  as  has  been  now  attempted  is  incalculable. 
It  gives  men  the  inspiration  of  a  great  expectation ;  composure  of  mind  in  the 
midst  of  discouragements  ;  and  the  true  ideal  of  life.  This  blessed  consummation, 
whether  near  or  far  off,  is  not  so  near  but  what  it  needs  our  help ;  it  is  not  so  far 
off  but  what  we  can  make  oiu-selves  felt  as  a  force  in  it.  We  need  to  clothe  oiu:- 
selves  in  workman's  garments,  not  in  the  ascension  robes  of  those  who  sit  down 
and  dream  about  the  second  advent.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  golderi 
age  : — "  But  in  the  latter  days  it  shall  come  to  pass.  .  .  ."  The  prophet  lifts 
his  eyes  away  to  the  latter  days  to  gain  refreshment  in  his  present  toil.  He  feasts 
his  soul  upon  the  golden  age  which  is  to  be,  in  order  that  he  may  serve  himself 
in  his  immediate  service.     Without  the  anticipation  of  a  golden  age  he  would 


OHAP.  IV.]  MICAH.  35 

lose  his  buoyancy,  and  the  spirit  of  endeavour  would  go  out  of  his  work.     Our 
visions  always  determine  the  quality  of  our  tasks.     Out  dominant  thought  regulates 
our  activities.     What  pattern  am  I  working  by  ?     What  golden  age  have  I  in 
my  mind  ?     What  do  I  see  as  the  possible  consummation  of  my  labours  ?     There 
is  your  child  at  home.     You  are  ministering  to  him  in  your  daily  attention  and 
service.     What  is  your  pattern  in  the  mind  ?     What  sort  of  a  man  do  you  see 
in  your  boy  7     How  would  you  fill  up  this  imperfect  phrase  concerning  him,  "  In 
the  latter  days  it  shall  come  to  pass.  .  ,  .  "  ?     Have  you  ever  painted  his  possi- 
bilities ?     If  you  have  no  clear  golden  age  for  the  boy  your  training  will  be  un- 
certain, your  discipline  will  be  a  guesswork  and  a  chance.     Our  vision  of  possibilities 
helps  to  shape  the  actuality.     There  is  the  scholar  in  the  school.     When  a  teacher 
goea  to  his  clasp,  be  it  of  boys  or  girls,  what  kind  of  men  or  women  has  he  in  hia 
eye  ?     Surely  we  do  not  go  to  work  among  our  children  in  blind  and  good-humoured 
chance  ?     We  are  the  architects  and  builders  of  their  characters,  and  we  must 
have  some  completed  conception  even  before  we  begin  our  work.     I  suppose 
the  architect  sees  the  finished  building  in  his  eye  even  before  he  takes  a  pencil 
in  his  hand,  and  certainly  long  before  the  pick  and  the  spade  touch  the  viigin  soil. 
That  boy  who  gives  the  teacher  so  much  trouble,  restless,  indifferent,  bursting 
with  animal  vitality,  how  is  he  depicted  as  man  in  your  chamber  of  imagery  ? 
Do  you  only  see  him  as  he  is  ?     Little,  then,  wiU  be  your  influence  to  make  him 
what  he  might  be.     Let  me  assume  that  your  work  is  among  the  outcasts.     When 
you  go  to  court  and  alley,  or  to  the  elegant  house  in  the  favoured  suburb,  and 
find  men  and  women,  sunk  in  animalism,  trailing  the  robes  of  human  dignity 
in  unamiable  mire,  how  do  you  see  them  with  the  eyes  of  the  soul  ?     "In  the 
latter  days  it  shall  come  to  pass  .  .  ."     What  ?     To  the  eye  of  sense  they  are 
filthy,  offensive,  repellant.     What  like  are  their  faces,  and  what  sort  of  robes 
do  they  wear  in  the  vision  of  the  soul  ?     Are  we  dealing  with  the  "  might-be  " 
or  only  with  the  thing  that  is  ?     Sir  Titus  Salt  was  pacing  the  docks  at  Liverpool 
and  saw  great  quantities  of  dirty,  waste  material  lying  in  unregarded  heaps.     He 
looked  at  the  impromising  substance,  and  in  the  mind's  eye  saw  finished  fabrics 
and  wai  m  and  welcome  garments  ;  and  ere  long  the  power  of  the  imagination 
devised  ministeries  for  converting  the  outcast  stuff  into  refined  and  finished  robes. 
We  must  look  at  all  our  waste  material  in  human  life  and  see  the  vision  of  the 
"  might-be."     Surely  this  was  the  Master's  way  !     He  is  always  calling  the  thing 
that  is  by  the  name  of  its  "  might-be."     "  Thou  art  Simon,"  a  mere  hearer ; 
"  Thou  shalt  be  called  Peter,"  a  rock.     To  the  woman  of  sin,  the  outcast  child 
of  the  city.  He  addressed  the  gracious  word  "  daughter,"  and  spoke  to  her  as  if 
she  were  already  a  child  of  the  golden  age  ;  her  weary  heart  leapt  to  the  welcome 
speech.     And  so  we  have  got  to  come  to  our  work  with  visions  of  the  latter  days. 
I  am  not  surprised,  therefore,  that  all  great  reformers  and  all  men  and  women 
who  have  profoimdly  influenced    the  life  and  thought  of  their  day  have  been 
visionaries,  having  a  clear  sight  of  things  as  they  might  be,  feeling  the  cheesy  y^ 
glow  of  the  light  and  heat  of  the  golden  age.     In  the  latter  days  the  spirituar 
is  to  have  emphasis  above  pleasure,  money,  armaments.     In  whatever  prominence 
these  may  be  seen,  they  are  all  to  be  subordinate  to  the  reverence  and  worship 
of  God.     Military  prowess  and  money-making  and  pleasure-seeking  are  to  be  put 
in  their  own  place,  and  not  to  be  permitted  to  leave  it.     First  things  first !        In 
the  beginning  God."     This  is  the  first  characteristic  of  the  golden  age.     "  And 
many  nations  shall  come  and  say :  Come  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the 
Lord  and  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  and  He  will  teach  us  His  ways,  and     . 
we  will  walk  in  His  paths."     Then  the  second  characteristic  of  the  golden  age  is  '''^ 
that  people  are  to  find   their   confluence  and  unity  in  common  worship.     The 
brotherhood  is  to  be  discovered  in  spiritual  communion.     We  are  not  to  find 
profound  community  upon  the  river  of  pleastu-e  or  in  the  ways  of  business  or  in 
the  armaments  of  the  castle.     These  are  never  permanently  cohesive.     Pleasure  is 
more  frequently  divisive  than  cohesive.     No,  it  is  in  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house  the  peoples  will  discover  their  unity  and  kinship.     It  is  in  the  common 
worship  of  the  one  Lord.    "  And  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares, 
and   their   spears   into   pruning  hooks."     Then  the  third   characteristic   of  the  / 
golden  age  is  to  be  the  conversion  of  merely  destructive  force  into  positive  and  ^ 
constructive  ministries.    No  energy  is  to  be  destroyed ;  it  is  all  to  be  transfigured. 
The  sword  is  to  become  a  ploughshare  ;  the  weapon  of  destruction  an  implement 
of  culture.     After  the  Franco-German  war  many  of  the  cannon  balls  were  re-made 
into  church  bells.     One  of  our  manufacturers  in  Birmingham  told  me  only  a  week 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

ago  that  he  was  busy  turning  the  empty  cases  of  the  shells  used  in  the  recent  war 
into  dinner  gongs  !  That  is  the  suggestion  we  seek  in  the  golden  age :  all  destructive 
forces  are  to  be  changed  into  helpful  ministries.  Tongues  that  speak  nothing 
but  malice  are  to  be  turned  into  instructors  of  wisdom.  All  men's  gifts  and 
powers  and  all  material  forces  are  to  be  used  in  the  employment  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  "  They  shall  ait  every  man  under  his  vine  and  tmder  his  fig-tree."  There 
is  to  be  a  distribution  of  comforts.  Life's  monotony  is  to  be  broken  up.  Sweet 
and  winsome  things  are  to  be  brought  into  the  common  life.  Dinginess  and  want 
are  both  to  be  banished.  There  is  to  be  a  little  beauty  for  everybody,  something 
of  the  vine  and  the  fig-tree.  There  is  to  be  a  little  ease  for  everybody,  time  to  sit 
down  and  rest.  To  every  mortal  man  there  is  to  be  given  a  little  treasure,  a 
little  leisure,  and  a  little  pleasure.  "  And  none  shall  make  them  afraid."  And 
they  are  not  only  to  have  comfort,  but  the  added  glory  of  peace.  The  gift  of  the 
vine  and  fig-tree  would  be  nothing  if  peace  remained  an  exile.  And  now  mark 
the  beautiful  final  touches  in  this  prophet's  dream  :  "  I  will  assemble  her  that 
halteth,  and  I  will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out  and  her  that  is  afflicted."  They 
are  all  to  be  found  in  God's  family.  "  Her  that  halteth,"  the  child  of  "  ifs  "  and 
"  buts  "  and  fears  and  indecision,  she  shall  lose  her  halting  and  obtain  a  firm  and 
confident  step.  "  And  her  that  is  driven  out,"  the  child  of  exile,  the  self-banished 
son  or  daughter,  the  outcast  by  reason  of  sin  ;  they  shall  all  be  home  again.  "  He 
gathereth  together  the  outcasts."  And  along  with  these  there  is  to  come  "  her 
that  is  afflicted,"  the  child  of  sorrows.  The  day  of  grief  is  to  be  ended,  mourning 
shall  be  the  thing  of  the  preparatory  day  which  is  over ;  "  He  shall  wipe  away 
all  tears  from  their  eyes,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away.  (/.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
He  will  teach  us  of  His  ways. — Gaining  knowledge  of  God  : — They  do  not  go  to  God 
because  they  know  Him,  but  that  they  may  know  Him.  They  are  drawn  by  a  mighty 
impulse  towards  Him.  Howsoever  attracted,  they  come,  not  making  bargains 
with  God  what  they  should  be  taught,  that  He  should  reveal  to  them  nothing 
transcending  reason,  nothing  exceeding  or  contradicting  their  notions  of  God ; 
they  do  not  come  with  reserves,  that  God  shoiild  not  take  away  this  or  that  error, 
or  should  not  disclose  anything  of  His  incomprehensibleness.  They  come  in 
holy  simplicity,  to  learn  whatever  He  will  condescend  to  tell  them  ;  in  holy  con- 
fidence, that  He,  the  infaUible  truth,  will  teach  them  infaUibly.  They  say  "of 
His  ways,"  for  all  learning  is  by  degrees,  and  all  which  all  creatures  could  learn 
in  all  eternity  falls  infinitely  short  of  His  truth  and  hohness.  Nay,  in  all  eternity, 
the  highest  creature  which  He  has  made,  and  which  He  has  admitted  most  deeply 
into  the  secrets  of  His  wisdom  will  be  as  infinitely  removed  as  ever  from  the  full 
knowledge  of  His  wisdom  and  His  love.  For  what  is  finite,  enlarged,  expanded, 
accumulated  to  the  utmost  degree  possible,  remains  finite  still.  It  has  no  pro- 
portion to  the  infinite.  But  even  here,  all  growth  in  grace  implies  growth  in 
knowledge.  The  more  we  love  God,  the  more  we  know  of  Him  ;  and  with  increased 
knowledge  of  Him  come  higher  perceptions  of  worship,  praise,  thanksgiving, 
of  the  character  of  faith,  hope,  charity,  of  our  outward  and  inward  acts  and 
relations  to  God,  the  unboundedness  of  God's  love  to  us,  and  the  manifold- 
ness  of  the  ways  of  pleasing  Him,  which,  in  His  love,  He  has  given  us.  St.  Paul 
was  ever  learning  in  intensity  what  he  knew  by  revelation.  "  The  way  of  life 
to  Godwards  is  one,  in  that  it  looketh  to  one  end,  to  please  God  :  but  there  are 
many  tracks  along  it,  as  there  are  many  modes  of  life  "  ;  and  each  several  grace 
is  a  part  of  the  way  to  God.  {E.  B.  Puaey,  D.D.)  The  law  shall  go  forth  of 
Zion,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem. — Christianity — its  nature,  diffu- 
sion, and  effects  : — Immortality,  guilt,  and  danger,  are  intuitions  of  our  common 
nature  always  felt  to  possess  arresting  attractive  power.  Unprepared  to  throw 
away  the  hope  of  immortality,  the  question  arises :  how  can  we  forecast  its 
issues,  or  determine  its  conditions  ?  Whither  shall  we  turn  for  light  and  guidance  ? 
The  revelations  of  Christianity  are  alone  able  to  solve  the  mystery.  The  Bible 
is  the  book  and  the  gift  of  God.  The  Christian  revelation  was  not  intended  merely 
or  mainly  to  gratify  the  intellectual  curiosity  and  enrich  the  mind  of  man,  but 
so  to  change  his  nature  and  reverse  his  moral  condition  as  to  estabhsh  him  in 
the  final  virtue  and  happiness  of  heaven.  The  portion  of  prophecy  now  claiming 
attention  relates  to  the  entire  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  1.  Some  of  the 
more  distinguishing  elements  and  attributes  of  the  Gospel  denominated  in  our 
subject,  with  distinctive  significance,  the  law  and  Word  of  Jehovah.  (1)  The 
source  of  its  origination  is  Divine.  (2)  The  great  object  of  the  bestowment  of 
the  Grospel  was  the  happiness  of  mankind.     (3)  The  excellence  of  its  matter — 


CHAP.  IV.]  MICAE.  37 

the  subject-matter  of  its  revelations — vindicates  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have 
arrived.  (4)  Christianity  is  a  system  exhibiting  in  its  nature,  evidence,  and 
claims,  not  only  an  uncompounded  oneness,  but  a  most  striking  distinctive  unique- 
ness of  character.  The  Grospel  appeals  to  the  mind  and  heart  with  an  illumination 
and  efficacy  imknown  to  any  other  system,  or  in  any  other  department  of  inquiry. 
It  exerts  a  remarkable  influence  on  the  character  and  destiny  of  man.  It  is 
not  more  Divine  in  theory  than  Godlike  in  issue.  2.  The  extent  of  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Gospel,  and  its  corresponding  publication.  Glance  at  a  few  of  its 
provisional  adaptations.  (1)  Christianity  stands  pledged  for  the  destruction 
of  the  great  primal  curse.  (2)  Of  ignorance  and  error,  (3)  Of  violence  and  wrong 
in  the  structure  and  relations  of  government  and  society.  (4)  Of  national  war 
and  bloodshed.  (5)  The  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  ranks  high  among  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Gospel.  (6)  Universal  and  unmolested  brotherhood  between  man 
and  man,  nation  and  nation,  is  equally  a  promise  of  the  Gospel.  3.  The  agency 
and  means  by  the  operation  and  instrumentality  of  which  the  Gospel  was  to  go 
forth  from  the  place  of  its  first  publication,  and,  disdaining  all  locality,  diffuse 
itself  among  the  nations.  Providence  will  prepare  the  way.  Divine  influence 
will  prepare  the  heart.  Divine  truth — the  Bible — shall  be  the  grand  exclusive 
instrument.  The  spread  of  the  Gospel  wiU  receive  its  direction  from  the  purposes, 
and  its  impulse  from  the  energy  of  heaven,  while  the  pulpit,  press,  social  inter- 
course, and  the  force  of  example,  shall  secure  its  acceleration.  4.  What  will 
be  the  effect  of  the  whole  7  An  incalculable  enlargement  of  the  Church,  both  in 
extent  and  influence — a  boundless  multiplication  of  its  numbers  and  blessings. 
Consider  also  its  more  distinctive  influence  upon — (1)  The  mind  ;  (2)  The  morals  ; 
(3)  The  movements,  of  the  world.  Christianity  is  identified  with  the  growth 
and  the  glory  of  the  ages.  Her  work  cannot  be  retarded.  The  indestructible 
elements  of  rejuvenescence  and  immortahty  foimd  in  the  Gospel  will  secure  the 
triumph  and  multiply  the  conquests  of  Christianity,  until  the  empire  of  sin  is 
destroyed,  and  death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  It  is  reserved  for  Christianity 
to  realise  the  fable  of  the  bird  of  Jove  ;  grasping  the  thunder  of  heaven  in  her 
hand,  and  spreading  her  wings  from  sunrise  to  the  oceans  of  the  West,  she  throws 
her  shadow  over  the  world  ;  and  the  laurels  of  peaceful  triumph  and  imperishable 

flory  shall  encircle  her  brow  when  the  wreath  of  the  Caesars  shall  only  be  remem- 
ered  as  the  badge  of  crime.  {Bishop  H.  B.  Baseom,  D.D.)  And  He  shall  / 
judge  among'  many  people,  &c. — International  Christianity: — The  time  of  which''''^ 
the  prophet  speaks  has  evidently  not  yet  arrived.  Let  us  assume  that  what  the 
prophet  saw  was  a  real  purpose  of  the  Lord,  a  piu-pose  which  might  be  worked 
out  gradually  or  suddenly,  quickly  or  after  a  long  interval,  but  distinct  in  its 
character  and  practical  in  its  effects — that  peace  amongst  the  nations  was,  and 
therefore  is,  in  the  covmsels  of  the  eternal  God.  Looking  at  the  prophecy  in 
this  light,  we  ought  not  to  be  slow  to  admit  that  a  very  real  progress  has  been 
made  towards  the  prophet's  goal.  Compare  what  the  world  is  now  with  what 
it  was  before  Christ  came,  and  the  difference  as  regards  the  peaceable  enjoy- 
ment  of  life  is  immense ;  and  the  improvement  is  everywhere  associated  with 
Christian  civilisation.  History  does  not  leave  us  without  hope,  or  mock  the 
encoiiragement  to  be  drawn  from  such  prophecies  as  those  we  are  considering. 
In  this  prophecy  the  peace  is  set  forth  as  a  result  produced  by  an  antecedent 
cause.  The  nations  are  described  as  agreeing  together  to  go  up  to  the  house 
of  the  God  of  Jacob,  that  He  may  teach  them  His  ways,  and  that  they  may  walk 
in  His  paths.  In  modem  words,  it  is  through  an  increasing  prevalence  of  the 
authority  of  justice,  through  the  growth  of  an  international  sentiment  recognising 
Christian  obligations  that  international  peace  is  to  be  looked  for.  We  need 
not  wonder  that  the  prospect  of  universal  peace  is  still  remote,  when  we  consider 
how  slow  a  progress  has  been  made  in  international  morality.  There  must  be  *^ 
a  morality  between  nations  as  well  as  a  morality  between  persons.  A  biblical 
ideal  of  true  concord  amongst  the  nations  has  been  beckoning  on  mankind  through 
the  ages,  though  men  have  been  slow  to  pay  it  due  homage.  But  it  is  probably 
in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  appointed  development  that  the  sentiment  of 
international  obligation  should  be  of  late  growth.  Family  duty  seems  to  come 
first.  Some  think  that  duty  to  the  clan,  or  larger  family,  takes  precedence  even 
of  that.  Then  follows  duty  to  the  chief,  or  sovereign,  or  nation,  and  to  fellow- 
members  of  the  same  community.  Personal  duty  towards  persons  of  a  different 
race  and  country  and  tongue  is  felt  later  and  less  strongly.  But  perhaps  that 
which  waits  to  the  last  to  be  felt  is  the  duty  of  a  nation  as  a  body  to  other  national 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

branches  of  the  great  family  of  man.  The  theory  of  international  duty  is  not 
altogether  a  simple  matter.  A  man  is  certainly  not  so  free  to  give  up  the  interests 
of  his  country  as  he  is  to  give  up  his  own  private  interests.  Our  country  is  a 
sacred  name,  including  nearly  all  that  is  dear  to  us.  Is  patriotism  selfish  ?  No. 
But  there  may  be  a  selfish  taint  in  it.  Experience  and  the  common  sense  of 
mankind  bear  witness  that  it  is  not  impossible  to  reconcile  the  due  moral  sentiment 
of  the  small  circle  with  the  due  moral  sentiment  of  the  larger.  A  man  may 
love  his  family,  and  yet  feel  that  it  would  be  a  shame  to  him  to  push  its  interests 
to  the  detriment  of  other  families  of  his  people;  A  man  may  be  ardently  patriotic, 
and  may  not  the  less  wish  well  to  other  countries.  In  all  moral  perplexities 
resulting  from  an  apparent  conflict  of  obhgations,  our  wisdom  is  to  go  forward 
tentatively  and  in  faith,  following  after  the  better  ideal,  yielding  to  the  nobler 
instinct.  Micah  lifts  us  up  to  the  higher  international  atmosphere  towards  which 
we  ought  to  aspire.  He  shows  us  nations  persuaded  and  constrained  into  mutual 
peace  by  a  common  reverence  for  the  righteous  and  merciful  God.  These  nations 
have  been  chastened  by  the  judgments  and  rebukes  of  God,  so  that  they  have 
learnt  not  to  abuse  their  strength  for  wrong-doing,  but  to  use  it  rather  for  the 
righting  of  the  injured  and  the  help  of  the  weak.  (J.  Llewelyn  Davies,  M.A.) 
An  emblem  of  peace  .•-—Upon  the  plains  of  Waterloo  there  stands  a  great  bronze 
lion,  forged  from  the  captured  guns  of  Britain's  foes  in  1815.  The  beast's  mouth 
is  open,  and  seems  snarUng  through  his  teeth  over  the  battlefield.  When  I  saw 
it  last,  one  spring  noonday,  a  bird  had  built  its  nest  right  in  the  lion's  mouth, 
twining  the  twigs  of  the  downy  bed  where  the  fledglings  nestled  around  the  very 
teeth  of  the  metal  monster,  and  from  the  very  jaws  of  the  bronze  beast  the  chirp 
of  the  swallows  seemed  to  twitter  forth  timidly  the  tocsin  of  peace.  It  was  the 
audacity  of  hope.     May  it  be  prophetic  ! 

Ver.  5.  For  all  people  will  walk  every  one  in  the  name  of  his  God,  and  we 
will  walk  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  o\ir  God  for  ever  and  ever. — Every  nation 
its  Ood : — That  this  chapter  contains  a  prophecy  of  the  glorious  times  of 
the  Gospel  is  the  general  opinion  of  all  Christian  interpreters.  Some  things 
are  foretold  in  it  which  have  never  been  accomplished  in  the  times  of  the 
Jewish  Church.  1.  That  there  shall  be  a  general  confluence  to  the  true  religion 
and  worship  of  God.  2.  That  this  great  and  conspicuous  society  of  the  Church 
shall  enjoy  peace  and  tranquillity.  3.  That  internal  zeal  and  devotion  shall 
accompany  all  this  external  glory  and  happiness.  That  all  these  would  admirably 
become  the  Christian  Church  cannot  be  doubted.  I.  All  nations  and  peoplb 
OENBBALLY  HAVE  SOME  GOD  AND  RELIGION  OB  OTHER.  Atheism  is  contrary 
to  the  common  sense  of  mankind.  It  will  be  very  hard,  if  not  impossible,  to 
find  any  nation  or  people  that  have  lived  without  a  God.     II.  All  those  nations 

AND  people  that  HAVE  ANY  BELIEF  OF  A  GoD,  HAVE  ALSO  SOME  DEVOTION,  AND 
PAY    SOME    EEMABKABLE    REVERENCE    TOWARDS    THE    DeITY.       The    nature    and 

notion  of  God  is  so  great  that  it  cannot  ordinarily  miss  of  affecting  men  with 
the  greatest  seriousness.  If  any  man  acknowledges  the  true  God,  and  has  ripe 
notions  of  Him,  he  then  apprehends  a  mighty  majesty,  invested  with  infinite 
power,  wisdom,  justice,  and  goodness.  He  that  can  think  of  such  a  God  without 
a  religious  reverence  must  have  either  something  below  a  human  folly,  or  beyond 
a  human  hardiness.  III.  The  greater  the  God,  and  the  tbueb  the  religion, 
THE  MORE  ought  TO  BE  THE  DEVOTION.  It  is  most  genuine,  natural,  and  reason- 
able, that  the  best  religion  should  be  attended  with  the  greatest  devotion,  and 
the  most  holy  lives.  Show — 1.  The  excellency  of  our  principles,  and  how  much 
the  religion  which  we  profess  is  better  than  any  other.  Represent  four  things — 
(1)  The  antiquity  of  our  religion.  (2)  The  credibility  and  easiness  of  its  belief. 
(3)  The  gravity  and  decency  of  its  rituals.  (4)  Its  efficaciousness  to  make  men 
generously  good  and  holy.     IV.  With  the  more  ardent  zeal  and  devotion 

WE   SHOULD  treat  THE  TRXTB   GoD    AND    THE  TRUE  RELIGION.      1.    We  Ought  tO 

be  more  steadfast  and  unmovable  in  our  religion  than  other  people  are.  2.  Wo 
ought  to  outstrip  them  in  good  life,  in  zeal  and  fervency,  as  much  as  we  do  in 
our  principles  and  advantages.  (J.  Goodman,  D.D.)  TTie  great  resolve: — 
"  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower."  We  invite  you  to  "  go  about  Zion, 
tell  the  towers  thereof."  The  various  towers  of  this  great  spiritual  fortress  are 
nothing  else  than  the  titles  and  attributes  with  which,  in  His  own  inspired  volume, 
God  has  seen  meet  to  make  Himself  known.  I.  Jehovah-Tsidkenu  j  the  Toweb 
OF  biohteousness.     Any  shelter  we  can  rear  is  a  tower  of  sand — a  citadel  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  MICAH.  89 

bulrushes — that  will  leave  us  naked  and  defenceless  in  that  solemn  hour  which 
is  to  try  every  man's  work,  and  every  man's  righteousness,  of  what  sort  it  is. 
Christ  hath  finished  transgression,  and  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  made  reconcilia- 
tion for  iniquity,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  To  attempt  aught 
of  our  own  by  way  of  supplement  or  addition  to  the  merits  of  the  Divine  surety, 
would  be  to  seek  to  gild  refined  gold,  or  holding  up  the  taper  to  help  the  sun- 
light. II.  Jehovah-Shalom;  the  Lord  my  feack.  This  spiritual  tower  of 
peace  stands  side  by  side  with  the  tower  of  righteousness.  "  The  work  of  right- 
eousness shall  be  peace."  "  Having  made  peace,  through  the  blood  of  His  Cross." 
What  a  repose  this  Gospel  peace  gives  amid  all  the  petty  troubles  of  life  !  It 
"  keeps  the  heart,"  as  in  a  citadel  or  garrison.  A  calm  elevation  is  imparted 
to  the  present,  and  the  future  can  be  contemplated  undismayed.  All  that 
belongs  to  the  Christian ;  his  duties ;  his  engagements ;  his  very  cares  and 
difficulties  are  softened  and  mellowed  with  this  calm  tranquillity ;  just  as  in 
nature  the  setting  sun  transforms  and  metamorphoses  the  whole  landscape  into 
gold.  m.  Jehovah-Shammah  ;  the  Towbb  of  the  Divine  pkesencb.  God 
is  everjrwhere.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  the  believer  to  bear  constantly  about 
with  him  the  realised  sense  of  the  Divine  nearness,  and  it  is  his  peculiar  privilege 
and  prerogative  to  do  so.  He  is  the  living  God  in  nature  and  in  providence, 
guiding  and  supervising  all.  But  there  is  a  nobler  and  pre-eminent  sense  in 
which  His  covenant  people  can  flee  into  this  strong  tower.  Walking  in  the  name 
of  their  God,  they  can  say,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us."  "  Our  fellowship 
is  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  IV.  Jehovah-Nissi  ;  th» 
Tower  of  defence.  We  are  still  in  an  enemy's  coimtry.  He  that  is  for  us 
is  greater  than  all  that  can  be  against  us.  The  Lord  is  our  defence.  V.  Jehovah- 
Jirsh  ;  THE  Tower  of  trust.  A  conquering  army  must  keep  near  its  supplies. 
And  the  Christian  has  His  promises  of  assured  help.  Each  apparently  capriciov* 
turn  in  life's  way,  all  its  accidents  and  incidents  are  the  appointments  of  infinite 
wisdom  ;  and  "  they  that  know  Thy  name,  shall  put  their  trust  in  Thee."  Trust 
is  a  staff  not  for  level  plains  and  smooth  highways.  It  is  the  alpenstock,  the 
pilgrim  prop  for  the  mountaineer,  for  the  rugged  ascent,  for  the  slippery  path, 
for  the  glacier  crevasse.  God  is  a  rich,  sure,  willing,  and  wise  Provider. 
VI.  Jehovah-Rophi  ;  the  Tower  of  healing.  He  proclaims  as  His  name, 
"  I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee."  He  is  the  true  "  healing-tree,"  which, 
cast  into  your  bitterest  Marah-pool,  will  make  its  waters  sweet.  (J.  R.  Macduff, 
D.D.)  Heathen  zeal  and  Christian  lukewarmnesa : — The  siurvey  of  missions 
under  their  most  glorious  aspects  may  keep  men  from  considering  them  under 
less  striking,  but  not  less  important  points  of  view.  Missions,  whether  suc- 
cessful or  unsuccessful,  so  far  as  the  conversion  of  pagans  is  concerned,  return 
one  hundredfold  multiplied  to  the  land  whence  they  sprang, — return  in  demon- 
stration of  human  corruption,  and  of  the  need  of  a  Mediator ;  and  of  the  truth 
and  power  of  the  Gospel, — ^return  in  a  stimulus  to  self-examination,  in  incentive 
to  prayer,  and  in  warning  against  caring  for  others,  and  neglecting  ourselves. 
It  is  a  very  peculiar  use  which  may  be  said  to  be  made  of  missions  in  our  text. 
The  heathen  are  siu-veyed  not  as  abandoning  their  falsehood  and  superstition, 
but  as  adhering  to  them  with  the  greatest  earnestness  and  tenacity.  From 
this  steadfastness  of  the  heathen  the  argument  is  drawn  for  making  the  resolve, 
"  And  we  will  walk  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  God  for  ever  and  ever."  If  the  pagan 
adheres  to  what  is  false,  we  will  cleave  to  what  is  true.  The  tenacity  with  which 
false  deities  are  adhered  to,  does  but  set  in  stronger  light  the  fickleness  of  the 
professed  servants  of  the  true.  What  the  missionary  ascertains  is  not  that 
idolaters  refuse  to  add  to  the  number  of  their  idols,  but  only  that  they  will  not 
exchange  their  idols.  If  they  admit  new,  they  nevertheless  adhere  to  the  old. 
Shall  the  pagan  adhere  to  his  idols,  because  they  were  the  idols  of  his  fathers ; 
and  shall  we  virtually  revolt  from  that  God  whom  our  ancestors  served,  and 
whose  truth,  though  at  the  cost  of  substance  and  life,  they  handed  down  to  us 
as  the  most  precious  possession  ?  We  may  change  our  gods,  if  we  will,  yielding 
to  the  opposition  of  science,  falsely  so  called  ;  we  may  burn  incense  before  images, 
which  the  madness  of  speculation  would  set  up,  when  reason  is  too  proud  to  bow 
meekly  to  revelation.  In  either  case  we  should  be  "  changing  our  glory  for 
that  which  cannot  profit."  Our  God  is  the  God  of  the  Bible,  a  God  who  has 
revealed  Himself  through  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  providing  through  His  obedience 
and  death  for  our  pardon  and  life.  We  ask  the  missionaries  this  question.  Has 
a  people  ceased  to  "  walk  in  the  name  of  its  god  "  ?     They  have  as  yet  nothing 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  iv. 

very  encouraging  to  answer.  There  are  cases  of  individual  conversion.  The 
missionary  report  is  a  report  of  adhering  to  error,  and  opposition  to  truth.  What 
inferences  are  to  be  di-awn  from  this  report — inferences  reproachful  to  ourselves, 
or  containing  lessons  which  it  may  become  us  to  study  and  apply  with  the  utmost 
diligence  ?  The  gist  of  the  text  is,  that  the  tenacity  with  which  the  heathen 
adhere  to  their  idols,  helps  to  condemn,  or  display  in  its  atrociousness,  the  con- 
duct of  the  Jew,  or  the  Christian,  who  shall  renoimce  or  be  cold  in  the  service 
of  his  Creator  and  Redeemer.  (Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)  Man's  religious  nature  : 
— It  is  trite  to  say  that  man  has  a  religious  nature.  This  verse  suggests  the 
wrong  and  the  right  development  of  this  nature.  I.  The  wrong  development. 
Idolatry.  Polytheism  proper  is,  and  generally  has  been,  the  most  popular 
religion  in  the  world.  Whence  comes  polytheism  ?  The  one  great  cause,  which 
comprehends  all  others,  is  depravity.  Which — 1.  Involves  moral  corruption. 
What  are  heathen  gods,  as  a  rule,  but  the  deification  of  the  lower  paesions  and 
vices  of  mankind  ?  2.  Involves  carnality.  Hence  they  want  a  god  they  can 
see  and  handle  and  touch.  3.  Involves  thoughtlessness.  Polytheism  cannot 
stand  reasoning.  II.  The  eight  development.  What  is  that  ?  Practical 
monotheism.  "  We  will  walk  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  for  ever  and 
ever."  1.  This  is  rationaL  The  one  God  is  the  sum-total  of  all  moral  properties, 
the  Proprietor  of  all  resources,  and  the  Bestower  of  all  existences  and  all  the 
blessings  therewith.  What  can  be  more  rational  than  to  walk  in  His  way  ? 
2.  This  is  obligatory.  No  man  is  bound  to  walk  in  the  name  of  an  idol ;  nay, 
he  is  commanded  not  to.  But  every  man  is  bound  to  walk  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord — bound  on  the  ground  of  His  supreme  excellence.  His  relations  to  man,  and 
the  obligation  springing  therefrom.  3.  This  is  blessed.  To  walk  in  His  name  is  to 
walk  through  sunny  fields  aboimding  with  all  beauty  and  fruitfulness.    {Homilist.) 

Vers.  6-8.  The  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  In  Mount  Zion. — The  blessing 
of  the  ingalhered  ones:  —  I.  The  character  of  the  assembly.  1.  The 
halt.  2.  The  banished.  3.  The  afflicted.  From  this  gather  the  ruined  con- 
dition of  man.  (1)  The  halt — incapable  of  any  spiritual  movement.  Hence 
the  corruption  of  the  understanding,  will,  affections,  memory;  the  whole  man. 
(2)  Driven  out ;  banished  ;  expelled  from  God.  Condemned  by  the  law.  Subject 
to  God's  wrath.  Allied  to  God's  enemies.  (3)  Afflicted,  that  is,  grievously 
distressed.  Afflicted  with  blindness,  lameness,  deafness,  dumbness,  leprosy ; 
and  by  sin,  Satan,  &c.  11.  Their  gracious  advancement  and  honour.  "  I 
will  make  her  that  halteth  a  remnant."  A  remnant  is  a  small  quantity  or  number. 
A  definitive  or  proportioned  remnant.  An  eternally  saved  remnant.  A  gathered 
or  collected  remnant.  A  prosperous  or  happy  remnant.  A  holy  and  righteous 
remnant.  An  opposed  remnant.  Yet  finally  a  successful  remnant.  "  And 
her  that  was  cast  far  off  a  strong  nation."  Strong  by  reason  of  its  situation  ; 
its  fortifications ;  its  judicious  and  good  laws ;  its  military  skill ;  its  ruler's 
wisdom.  Consequently  a  blessed  nation.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  reign  over 
them  in  Moimt  Zion  from  henceforth  for  ever."  They  are  made  submissive 
to  Christ.  Christ  reigns  in  the  Church  generally.  He  reigns  in  the  Church's 
officers.  He  reigns  in  the  Church  members.  He  reigns  in  the  xmderstandings 
of  His  people.  He  reigns  in  their  will,  subduing  them.  He  reigns  in  their  hearts. 
This  reign  is  by  the  power  of  Divine  grace.  III.  Their  positive  and  infalliblk 
security  (ver.  8).  Represented  by  a  flock  of  sheep,  denotive  of  feebleness, 
and  liabihty  to  danger.  But  Christ  is  their  tower  of  defence.  A  high  and  lofty 
tower,  and  a  strong  and  safe  tower.  "  The  stronghold  of  the  daughter  of  Zion." 
By  the  word  daughter  is  meant  the  Church.  This  stronghold  denotes  that  we 
have  enemies.  It  is  a  hiding-place  for  the  Lord's  prisoners.  "  Unto  thee  shall 
it  come,  even  the  first  dominion."  An  eternally  decreed  dominion,  over  sin, 
Satan,  the  world,  death.  "  The  kingdom  shall  come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem." 
The  kingdom  of  God's  power ;  grace ;  glory.  Improvement — 1.  This  subject 
teaches  us  man's  total  depravity  and  utter  helplessness.  2.  It  also  further  provea 
that  our  salvation  is  entirely  of  grace.  3.  It  evinces  the  final  security  of  all  true 
behevers.  {T.  B.  Baker.)  The  moral  monarchy  of  Christ  in  the  world: — 
Whether  the  subject  of  these  verses  is  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  after  the 
Babylonish  Captivity  or  the  gathering  of  men  by  Christ  into  a  grand  spiritual 
commimity,  is  a  question  on  which  there  has  been  considerable  discussion  among 
bibhcal  scholars,  and,  therefrom,  should  preclude  anything  like  dogmatism 
on  either  side.     I.  It  embraces  amongst  its  subjects  the  most  wretched 


CHAP.  IV.]  MICAH.  41 

AND  SCATTERED  OF  MEN.  "  In  that  day,  Raith  the  Tx)rd,  will  I  assemble  [gather] 
her  that  halteth  [that  which  lirapeth],  and  I  will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out 
[that  which  was  thrust  out],  and  her  that  [which]  I  have  afflicted  ;  and  I  will 
make  her  that  [that  which]  halted  [limps]  a  remnant,  and  her  that  [that  which] 
was  cast  off  a  strong  nation  :  and  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  Mount  Zion 
from  henceforth,  even  for  ever."  Christ  was  sent  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
of  Israel  (Matt.  x.  6),  and  His  invitation  was  to  all  that  are  "  weary  "  and  "  heavy 
laden."  The  Chiu-ch  of  Christ  from  the  beginning  has  comprised  those  who 
were  the  most  afflicted,  the  most  scattered,  and  the  most  distressed  of  mankind. 

1.  Christ's  moral  monarchy  knows  nothing  of  favouritism.  Every  soul  to 
Him  is  a  matter  of  profoimd  practical  interest.  2.  Christ's  moral  monarchy 
is  remedial  in  its  design.  It  brings  aU  the  miserable  together  in  order  to  rid 
them  of  their  sorrows.  II.  It  establishes  itself  as  the  guakdian  of  men 
FOB  EVER.  "  And  thou,  O  tower  of  the  flock,  the  stronghold  of  the  daughter 
of  Zion,"  &o.  The  watch-tower  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  is  most  likely  the  tower 
here  referred  to  by  Micah.  Flock-tower  is  a  good  expression,  inasmuch  as  it 
indicates  the  watchfulness  of  Christ  as  a  moral  Shepherd,  the  great  Shepherd 
of  souls.  What  a  Guardian,  what  a  "  Bishop  of  souls  "  is  Christ !  1.  He  knows 
all  His  sheep.  2.  He  has  ample  provision  for  all  His  sheep.  3.  He  has  power 
to  protect  all  His  sheep.  Thank  God  this  moral  kingdom  is  established  on  our 
earth.  Because  it  is  moral,  men  have  the  power  of  resisting  it.  (Homilist.) 
Prophecies  relative  to  the  Jeunah  nation  : — The  Jewish  nation,  when  restored, 
will  be  the  most  glorious  of  the  nations  of  the  earth.  There  is,  in  this  passage, 
a  comparison  instituted  between  the  glory  of  other  nations;  and  it  is  stated 
that  her  glory  shall  be  superior  to  that  of  all  others.  I.  Reasons  drawn  FRok 
THE  NATURE  OF  NATIONAL  GLORY.  The  glory  of  the  Jewish  nation  cannot  be 
what  is  generally  considered  as  the  glory  of  nations.  1.  Because  the  glory  of 
common  nations  is  inseparable  from  unrighteousness.  Self  is  the  moving  power 
of  the  machine,  interest  and  vanity  form  its  mainspring.  2.  Because  it  leads 
to  war  and  bloodshed,  to  wretchedness  and  misery.  3.  Because  it  may  consist 
with  infidelity.  IL  Reasons  drawn  from  what  is  revealed  bespectinq 
THE  Jews.  1.  Because  the  Jews,  when  brought  back  to  their  own  land,  will 
be  a  righteous  nation.  2.  It  will  be  a  peaceful,  happy  nation.  3.  A  nation  of 
faithful  worshippers  of  the  one  only  living  and  true  God.  What  then  will  be 
her  glory  T  It  wiU  consist  in  righteousness,  penitence,  godliness,  purity,  and 
devotion.  Lessons — 1.  A  political  lesson.  The  duty  of  the  Christian  is  sub- 
mission to  the  powers  that  be,  patiently  waiting  for  the  time  when  righteousness 
alone  shall  prevail.  2.  A  religious  lesson.  How  should  this  subject  enhance 
the  importance  of  being  snatched  out  of  the  vortex  of  this  present  state,  and  of 
becoming  so  established  as  to  be  able  to  sing,  by  anticipation,  the  songs  of  joy 
which  are  here  set  to  be  sung  by  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  in  Zion.  [Hugh 
M'NeUe.) 

Vers.  9-13.  The  Lord  shall  redeem  thee  firom  the  hand  of  thine  enemies. — 
The  moral  regeneration  of  the  vmrld  : — I.  The  state  or  mankind  requires  it.  "Is 
there  no  king  in  thee  ?  is  thy  coimsellor  perished  ?  "  It  ■was  more  serious  for 
the  Jewish  people  to  be  deprived  of  a  king  than  for  any  other  people,  for  their 
king  was  theocratic,  he  was  supposed  to  be  the  voice  and  vicegerent  of  Grod.  T^ie 
prophet  means  to  say,  that  when  the  Chaldeans  would  come  and  carry  them 
away,  they  would  have  no  king  and  no  counsellors.  Now,  men  in  an  unregenerate 
state — 1.  Have  no  king.  A  political  ruler  is  to  man,  as  a  spiritual  existent, 
only  a  king  in  name.  He  does  not  command  the  moral  affections,  rule  the  con- 
science, or  legislate  for  the  inner  and  primal  springs  of  all  activity.  Such  a  king 
is  the  deep  want  of  man,  he  wants  some  one  to  be  enthroned  on  his  heart,  to  whom 
his  conscience  can  render  homage.  No  man  in  an  unregenerate  state  has  such 
a  king ;  he  has  gods  many  and  lords  many,  of  a  sort,  but  none  to  rule  him,  and 
to  bring  all  the  powers  of  his  sotil  into  one  harmonious  channel  of  obedience. 

2.  Have  no  counsellor.  Society  abounds  with  counsellors  who  proffer  their 
advice  ;  but  some  of  them  are  wicked,  most  of  them  worthless,  few,  if  any,  satis- 
factory, that  is,  to  conscience.  What  the  soul  wants,  is  not  the  mere  book  coun- 
sellor,— though  it  be  the  Bible  itself, — but  the  spirit  of  that  book,  the  spirit  ol 
reverence,  love,  Christlike  trust.  3.  Have  no  ease.  "  Pangs  have  taken  thee  as 
a  woman  in  travail."  The  unregenerate  soul  is  always  liable  to  consternation, 
remorse,  it  often  writhes  in  agony.     "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  for  the 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

wicked."  Now,  moral  regeneration  brings  the  man  a  true  King,  a  true  Coun- 
sellor, a  true  Peace — a  peace  "  that  passe th  all  understanding."  II.  It  is  opposed 
BY  FORMIDABLE  ANTAGONISTS.  The  nations  referred  to  are  those  that  composed 
the  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  What  formidable  opponents  there  are  to  the 
conversion  of  man  !  1.  The  depraved  elements  of  the  soul.  Unbelief,  selfishness, 
carnality,  &c.  2.  The  corrupt  influence  of  society.  Custom,  fashion,  amiise- 
ments,  pleasures  !  III.  It  is  guaranteed  by  the  Word  oy  Almighty  God. 
The  enemies  of  the  Jews  were  utterly  ignorant  of  God's  purpose  to  deliver  His 
people  from  Babylonish  Captivity.  1.  Man  in  ignorance  fights  against  God's 
purpose.  2.  Man,  in  fighting  against  God's  purpose,  brings  ruin  on  himself.  The 
nations  thought  to  ruin  Christianity  in  its  infancy,  but  it  was  Tictorious  over 
them !     (HomilisL) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vbb.  I.  Now  gather  thyself  in  troops,  0  daughter  of  troops. — The  Church 
of  Ood :  —  I.  As  militant  in  its  character.  Jerusalem  is  addressed 
as  "  daughter  of  troops."  As  Jerusalem  was  a  military  city  containing  a  great 
body  of  soldiers  within  her  walls,  so  is  the  Church  on  earth,  it  is  military.  The 
life  of  all  true  men  here  is  that  of  a  battle  ;  all  are  soldiers,  bound  to  be  valiant 
for  the  truth.  They  are  commanded  to  fight  the  good  fight,  to  war  the  good 
warfare.  The  warfare  is  spiritual,  righteous,  indispensable,  personal.  No  one 
can  fight  the  battle  by  proxy.  Look  at  the  Church — II.  As  perilous  in  its 
position.  "  He  hath  laid  siege  against  us."  The  dangerous  condition  of  Jeru- 
salem when  the  Chaldean  army  surrounded  its  walls  in  order  to  force  an  entrance, 
is  only  a  faint  shadow  of  the  perilous  position  of  the  Chiu-ch  of  God.  It  is 
besieged  by  mighty  hosts  of  errors  and  evil  passions,  and  mighty  lusts  that  "  war 
against  the  soul."  The  siege  is  planned  with  strategic  skill,  and  with  malignant 
determination.  III.  As  insulted  by  its  enemies.  "  They  shall  smite  the 
Judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek."  Were  the  enemies  of  Christianity 
ever  more  insolent  than  in  this  age  ?  IV.  As  summoned  to  action.  "  Now 
gather  thyself  in  troops."  The  men  of  Jerusalem  are  here  commanded  by  heaven 
to  marshal  their  troops  and  to  prepare  for  battle,  since  the  enemies  are  outside 
their  walls.  Far  more  urgent  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  collect,  arrange,  and 
concentrate  all  its  forces  against  the  mighty  hosts  that  encompass  it.     (HomUist.) 

Ver.  2.  But  thou,  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  though  thou  be  little  among  the 
thousands  of  Judah. — Bethlehem  and  its  Babe  : — The  Jews  regarded  this  text 
as  a  prophecy  of  Messiah's  birthplace.  Micah,  though  a  prophet  of  Divine 
wrath,  is  also  a  prophet  of  Divine  promise.  Next  to  Isaiah,  he  is  richest 
in  Messianic  prediction.  I.  Concerning  Bethlehem.  Micah  is  noted  for  his 
"  rapid  transitions  "  from  one  topic  to  another — from  threats  to  promises.  The 
prophet  addresses  the  village  by  both  its  names,  Bethlehem  Ephratah.  The 
patriarchal  name  Ephratah  means  "  fruitfulness."  It  was  one  of  the  most  fertile 
parts  of  Palestine,  and  its  natural  fruitfulness  was  a  prophecy  of  its  spiritual 
fruitfulness.  Bethlehem  means  the  "  house  of  bread,"  and  points  to  its  specific 
form  of  fertility,  its  rich  corn-land.  The  prophet  marks  with  wonder  its  insig- 
nificance. It  was  too  remote  ever  to  become  a  place  of  importance.  II.  Con- 
cerning Christ.  We  cannot  select  our  birthplace  and  circumstances,  but 
Christ  could.  The  Saviour  came  to  teach  humility,  and  to  reverse  the  maxims 
of  the  world.  Bethlehem  was  the  "  city  of  David,"  and  Christ  was  to  be  of 
the  seed  of  David.  We  have  also  the  description  of  Christ's  office.  "  Ruler 
in  Israel."  He  came  to  found  a  kingdom.  The  description  of  Christ's  person, 
the  eternity  of  God  the  Son,  is  also  contained  in  the  text.  m.  Lessons.  1.  We 
are  taught  the  grace  of  lowliness.  2.  The  name  "  house  of  bread  "  reminds  us 
of  the  great  Sacrament.  3.  The  prophetic  description  helps  us  to  realise  the  two 
natures  in  one  Divine  Person.  4.  Obedience  to  our  King  is  the  way  to  reach  up 
to  the  higher  mystery  of  His  timeless  generation  (John  vii.  17).  {The  Thinker.) 
The  littleness  of  Bethlehem,  and  the  greatness  of  Christ : — Bethlehem  cannot  account 
for  Jesus.     Do  mangers  bring  forth  Messiahs  ?     Things  bring  forth  after  their 


CHAP,  v.]  MICAH.  43 

kind.  It  is  true  that  genius  often  arises  from  lowliest  station,  and  the  great 
human  powers  seem  to  make  way  for  themselves  through  narrowest  surround- 
ings. 1.  Consider  the  meaning  of  this  fac*^,  that  from  the  lowliest  of  peasants 
sprang  the  soul  that  has  swayed  the  mightiest  intellects  of  the  world.  The 
moving  powers  of  the  eighteen  centuries  have  been  themselves  moved  by  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  That  out  of  the  most  materialistic  of  religions  came  the  most  spiritual 
of  teachers.  Judaism  clung  with  almost  ferocious  tenacity  to  external  signs 
and  symbols.  3.  That  out  of  the  narrowest  of  races  came  the  most  universal 
of  teachers.  The  characteristic  of  Judaism,  ancient  and  modem,  is  its  refusal 
to  recognise  the  universal  element  in  religion  or  in  humanity.  4.  That  out  of 
an  age  which  exalted  power  as  supreme,  came  One  who  exalted  love  as  supreme 
in  God  and  in  man.  The  symbol  of  Rome  was  the  rapacious,  unwearied  eagle. 
Military  virtues  were  supreme.  The  Jews  wanted  a  conquering  general  aa 
Messiah.  Out  of  such  environment  and  atmosphere  came  One  who  exalted 
the  feminine  virtues,  and  proclaimed  that  the  meek  should  inherit  the  earth. 
And  as  Bethlehem  could  not  produce  Christ,  it  could  not  confine  Christ. 
( W.  H.  P.  Faunce. )  Prophecy  of  the  Nativity  : — One  great  use  of  prophecy 
is  to  give  authority  and  weight  to  the  doctrines  dehvered  by  the  prophet.  In 
order  that  the  evidence  arising  from  prophecy  may  be  perfectly  convincing, 
it  seems  necessary  that  the  meaning  of  the  prediction  should  be  somewhat 
obscure  at  first ;  otherwise  the  friends  and  followers  of  the  prophet  might  perhaps 
find  means  to  bring  about  a  fulfilment  of  it ;  or  his  opposers  might,  in  some 
cases,  prevent  its  accomplishment.  It  must,  however,  be  sufficiently  precise 
to  verify  the  event  when  it  comes  to  pass.  However  obscure  and  mysterious, 
a  prophet's  words  could  not  fail  to  be  striking  and  interesting.  The  text  pro- 
vides an  excellent  specimen  of  prophetic  methods.  Suppose  you  had  never 
heard  of  any  event  which  could  be  regarded  as  a  fulfilment  of  Micah's  predic- 
tion, in  what  light  would  it  appear  to  you  ?  However  perplexing,  there  is  one 
thing  you  would  understand.  A  town  is  distinctly  referred  to.  There  the  Person 
foretold  by  Micah  was  born  seven  hundred  years  later.  I.  Thh  human  berth 
OF  Jesus.  It  is  a  human  birth  that  is  foretold.  The  place  where  David  was 
born  was  to  be  the  birthplace  of  a  second  David,  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
Observe  how  singularly  the  prediction  was  fulfilled,  without  the  least  suspicion 
of  human  contrivance,  merely  by  God's  secret  overruling  providence.  II.  Thh 
ETKBNAL  GoDHBAD  OF  Christ.  "  Whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  ever- 
lasting." To  those  who  first  heard  this  language,  how  strange  it  would  appear ! 
Something  more  than  human  is  here  described.  Words  like  these  are  never 
applied  to  any  creature ;  but  to  God  the  Creator  they  are  frequently  applied. 
The  language  of  Micah  gives  the  twofold  character  of  the  Messiah.  III.  His 
MEDIATORIAL  DIGNITY.  He  is — 1.  Our  Ruler.  2.  Our  Restorer.  3.  Our  Shepherd. 
His  administration  of  all  these  offices  shall  one  day  be  universal.  (J.  Jowett.) 
Christ : — I.  His  bieth  as  the  Son  of  Man.  1.  He  was  born  in  obscurity.  As 
a  protest  to  the  ages  against  the  popular  and  influential  opinion  that  human 
dignity  consists  in  birth  and  ancestral  distinctions.  2.  He  was  born  according 
to  Divine  plan.  "  Out  of  thee  shall  He  come  forth  unto  Me."  Who  ?  Jehovah. 
The  fact  of  His  birth,  the  scene  of  His  birth,  the  object  of  His  birth,  were  all 
according  to  a  Divine  plan.  "He  shall  come  forth  imto  Me."  (I)  According 
to  My  will.  (2)  To  do  My  will.  3.  He  was  bom  to  an  empire.  "  To  be  Ruler 
in  Israel."  He  is  the  Prince  of  Peace  on  whose  shoulder  the  government  is  laid. 
He  is  a  Ruler.  Not  a  temporal  ruler,  temporal  rule  is  but  a  shadow.  He  is 
to  rule  thought,  intelligence,  soul.  He  is  the  greatest  king  who  governs  mind ; 
and  no  one  has  obtained  such  a  government  over  mind  as  He  who,  eighteen 
centuries  ago,  "  came  forth  out  of  Bethlehem  Ephratah."  His  kingdom  is 
increasing  every  day.  II.  His  history  as  the  Son  of  God.  "  Whose  goings 
forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting,"  or,  as  Delitzsch  says,  "  Whose 
goings  forth  are  from  olden  time,  from  the  days  of  eternity."  {Homilist.) 
Of  the  Nativity  : — There  is  no  applying  this  verse  to  any  but  to  Christ.  I.  The 
PLACE  of  His  birth.  Bethlehem  ;  spoken  of  as  "  httle,"  and  Ephrata  "  fruit- 
ful." There  were  two  Bethlehems.  One  in  the  tribe  of  Zebulon.  It  was  a 
sorry  poor  village.  II.  The  Person  that  cometh  from  this  place.  III.  Of 
both  His  natures.  As  Man  from  Bethlehem ;  as  God  from  everlasting. 
IV.  His  office.  GrO  before  us,  and  be  our  Guide.  He  not  only  leads,  He  feeds. 
(Launcdot  Andrewes,  D.D.)  The  King  of  Zion  : — I.  The  promised  Messiah 
in  His  true  nature.     A  Man.     Come  out  of  Bethlehem.     He  was  born  there. 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

More  than  man.  The  prophet  speaks  of  a  twofold  going  forth,  of  Bethlehem, 
and  "  from  everlasting."  True  God  as  well  as  true  Man.  II.  Jesus  in  His 
CHABACTEE  AS  EuLER.  What  are  regal  acts  ?  The  exercise  of  legislative  and 
judicial  authority.  The  legislative  consists  in  making  and  repealing  laws.  The 
judicial  in  executing  or  applying  laws.  III.  Jesus  in  His  character  as 
Shepherd.  Who  are  His  sheep  ?  First  the  Jews,  then  the  Gentiles.  As  a 
shepherd  His  care  is  constant — He  changes  not.  It  is  tender  and  discriminat- 
ing care.  It  is  effectual.  He  gives  us  life.  {J.  Summerfidd,  A.M.)  Christ's 
birthplace : — This  passage  has  always  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  clearest 
and  most  striking  of  the  ancient  prophecies  of  the  Messiah.  The  gradations  in 
the  revelations  of  Christ  have  always  awakened  the  attention  of  Bible  readers. 
First,  we  have  the  old  word  in  Eden  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord  God  to  the  serpent 
about  his  seed  and  the  seed  of  Eve  :  "It  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt 
bruise  his  heel."  Out  of  which  dim  Messianic  germ  grows  the  whole  wonderful 
mediatorial  history,  its  conflicts,  its  alterations,  its  reversals,  and  its  eternal 
triumph  in  the  endless  overthrow  of  its  great  adversary.  Then,  about  1600 
years  later,  the  Shemitic  division  of  the  human  race  is  indicated  as  the  favoured 
one,  rather  than  Japhet  or  Ham.  By  and  by  Abraham  was  selected  from  the 
sons  of  Shem  to  be  the  head  of  the  Hebrew  race,  from  whom  the  Redeemer  should 
come.  Two  hundred  years  later  Jacob,  on  his  dying  bed,  points  out  the  particular 
tribe  of  Israel  from  whom  the  Shiloh  or  Prince  of  Peace  shall  be  bom.  No  further 
revelation  was  then  made  for  about  seven  hundred  years,  when  the  house  of 
David,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  was  declared  to  be  the  favoured  family,  and  about 
three  hundred  years  after  that,  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  the  prophet  Micah  reveals 
the  place  where  Messiah  shall  be  bom.  This  was  all  that  was  Imown  for  the  next 
seven  hundred  years,  but  every  intelligent  Jew  knew  that  the  coming  Messiah 
was  to  be  the  Son  of  David,  and  was  to  be  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judah.  "  Thou 
Bethlehem  Ephratah,  though  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands  of  Judah." 
So  unimportant  was  Bethlehem  in  the  old  times,  that  Joshua  in  his  enumeration 
of  the  cities  and  villages  of  Judah  gives  it  no  mention  :  E«hoboam  made  it  a  sort 
of  outlying  fortress  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  Philistines  at  one  time  had  a  garrison 
there,  the  place  being  a  strong  natural  position.  But  it  never  grew  to  size,  or 
became  of  any  national  importance,  except  for  its  associations.  Although  the 
birthplace  of  David,  the  great  king ,  yet  it  never  rose  above  the  grade  of  an  obscure 
Jewish  village.  In  the  list  of  Judean  villages  which  Nehemiah  gives  after  the 
Captivity  it  is  not  named,  and  in  the  New  Testament,  after  the  birth  of  Jesus 
and  in  that  connection,  its  name  never  once  occurs.  So  little  was  Bethlehem 
Ephratah.  And  it  did  not  seem  destined  to  any  more  commanding  place  in 
history  when,  in  later  times,  a  plain-looking  couple  drew  near  the  village,  a  young 
wife  and  her  husband,  travelling  on  foot,  because  very  poor,  although  both  of 
the  lineage  of  David.  For  not  only  was  Bethlehem  little,  but  the  exceeding  low 
condition  to  which  the  family  of  the  great  king  had  sunk  appears  from  the  fact 
that  Joseph  and  Mary,  who  could  trace  their  pedigree  up  to  David  through  a 
long  line  of  kings,  were  thus  poor,  and  received  no  sort  of  recognition  in  the  crowded 
village.  But  Bethlehem  Ephratah  was  now  to  be  immortalised  indeed.  Athens, 
Ephesus,  Alexandria,  Rome,  all  were  extant,  some  of  them  at  the  very  pinnacle 
of  their  glory,  but  the  glory  of  Bethlehem  was  henceforth  to  surpass  tnem  aU. 
You  will  mark  here  the  words  "  unto  Me."  The  birth  of  Christ  was  an  event 
whose  relations  were  chiefly  Godward.  Christ's  coming  to  the  earth  is  inconceivably 
the  greatest  of  all  events  to  us ;  but,  after  all,  God  the  Father,  and  the  eternal 
glory  of  the  Godhead,  are  concerned  in  it  in  a  way  we  cannot  now  fully  understand, 
but  of  which  the  Scriptures  give  us  distinct  intimations.  It  would  be  quite  in 
accordance  with  the  choice  of  Uttle  Bethlehem  as  the  birthplace  of  the  Divine  Lord, 
and  the  passing  by  of  the  great  places  of  the  world,  if  God  should  have  chosen 
our  small  earth,  this  little  globe,  to  be  the  scene  of  the  wondrous  Incarnation, 
passing  by  those  far  mightier  worlds  in  space  whose  magnitude  dwarfs  into  in- 
significance this  minute  planet ;  here,  in  a  world  whose  absence  would  hardly 
be  missed  from  the  vast  system,  to  enact  scenes  of  unparalleled  importance  to 
all  worlds,  illustrating  all  the  principles  of  the  Divine  government  and  the  most 
precious  attributes  of  the  Divine  Nature.  The  word  "  Ruler  "  is  suggestive. 
The  usual  Old  Testament  idea  of  Christ  is  that  of  the  head  of  a  kingdom  or  dynasty. 
The  representations  of  Isaiah,  chapter  liii.,  and  of  the  prophet  Zechariah,  are 
exceptions  to  the  general  Old  Testament  thought  of  the  Messiah.  Elsewhere 
it  is  the  Shiloh  or  Prince,  the  King  in  Zion,  the  son  of  David  enthroned — He  upon 


CHAP,  v.]  MICAH.  ,  45 

whose  shoulders  has  been  laid  the  government,  who  is  to  reign  over  the  house  of 
Jacob  for  ever,  and  to  whose  kingdom  there  is  to  be  no  end.  The  connection 
of  these  last  words  with  the  former  words  of  the  prophecy  are  wonderfully  in- 
structive :  "  He  shall  come  forth  out  of  thee,  Uttle  Bethlehem,"  and  the  words, 
"  He  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting."  Have  they  not 
great  suggestions  of  the  nature  of  the  coming  Messiah  ?  Does  the  Old  Testament 
know  nothing  of  the  mystery  and  the  miracle  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  of  the  human 
and  the  divine,  of  the  advent  in  time  and  the  glory  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was  ?  The  phrase  "  goings  forth  "  is  used  sometimes  of  the  sun,  of  whose 
progress  in  the  sky  it  is  said,  "  his  going  forth  is  from  the  end  of  heaven."  "  Thou 
makest  the  outgoings  of  the  morning  and  evening  to  rejoice."  It  is  used  to  denote 
that  which  proceeds  out  from  any  one,  as  speech  or  language.  Deuteronomy  viii.  3, 
"  By  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  Grod  doth  man  live."  Thus 
it  comes  to  have  the  meaning  of  origin,  descent,  an  outgoing  of  existence,  which 
is  its  import  in  our  text  The  old  divines  declare  it  to  be  a  proof  text  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Second  Person  of  the  TMnity.  Without  feeling 
called  on  to  adopt  that  phrase,  yet  I  fully  agree  with  one  of  them  who  says,  "  We 
have  here  Christ's  existence  from  eternity ;  the  phrase,  '  His  goings  forth  have  been 
from  of  old,  from  everlasting,'  is  so  signal  a  description  of  Christ's  eternal  genera- 
tion, or  His  going  forth  as  the  Son  of  God  begotten  of  the  Father  before  all  worlds, 
that  this  prophecy  must  belong  only  to  Him,  and  could  never  be  verified  of  any 
other."  We  embrace  the  mysterious  truth  of  Christ's  humanity  and  divinity  as 
herein  declared  ;  one  of  the  clearest  prophecies  of  this  sublime  foundation  doctrine 
of  the  Scriptures  which  they  anywhere  contain.  With  what  greatness  does  this 
invest  the  birth  of  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  !  If  He  had  indeed  come  to  little 
Bethlehem,  whose  goings  forth  were  from  everlasting,  then  all  the  miracles  He 
performed  were  the  simplest  outstretching  of  His  hand  ;  the  obedience  to  Him 
of  demons,  of  nature,  of  death,  were  mere  matters  of  course  ;  the  attendant 
angels,  the  awaiting  legions  ready  at  His  call,  were  but  the  renewed  services  of 
cherubim  and  seraphim  who  had  of  old  listened  to  His  commands  standing 
round  His  heavenly  throne.  There  is  not  time  even  to  glance  at  the  triumphs 
which  this  birth  in  Bethlehem  has  already  won.  How  it  has  given  the  era  to  all 
human  history,  guided  the  life  of  nations,  subjected  the  intellects  of  the  greatest 
of  men,  moulded  the  sentiments  of  civilised  society,  yea,  made  true  society  a 
possibility ;  rescued  women  and  the  family  from  degradation,  uplifted  the  poor, 
guarded  the  rights  of  the  weak  ;  won  the  deep,  unquenchable  love  of  millions  upon 
millions  of  true  human  hearts ;  stood  by  the  martyr's  rack,  walked  with  him 
in  the  furnace ;  put  the  arms  of  support  beneath  dying  pillows,  and  uplifted 
to  the  eternal  hills  the  successive  generations  of  the  believing  children  of  God. 
AU  these  things  have  been  done  through  that  birth  in  Bethlehem  Ephratah. 
There  can  be  no  greater  things  in  kind,  but  there  are  yet  to  be  greater  in  the 
extent  of  the  victory.  (R.  Aikman,  D.D. )  Advent : — The  thought  of  the  prophet 
is,  that  God  is  about  to  restore  the  monarchy  in  Israel  by  a  return  to  its  original 
starting-point,  the  ancestral  house  and  home  of  David,  and  to  restore  it  in  sur- 
passing greatness  and  power.  As  in  the  days  of  Saul's  apostasy  and  the  kingdom's 
peril.  He  had  taken  from  thence  a  man  to  sit  upon  the  throne,  so  again  when 
wickedness  with  its  long  train  of  miseries  had  brought  the  nation  low,  a  Deliverer 
was  to  come  forth  from  the  place  that  had  given  David  to  Israel.  The  prophet 
had  asked  (chap.  iv.  9)  as  he  beheld  the  desolation  of  his  country,  "  Is  there  no  king 
in  thee  ?  "  And  here  the  answer  is  given.  Isaiah  and  Micah  were  contemporaries. 
The  former  was  the  prophet  of  the  city,  the  latter  of  the  country.  The  power 
and  wealth  of  the  kingdoms  had  become  centralised  in  the  two  cities,  Samaria  and 
Jerusalem.  The  condition  of  the  country  was  like  France  in  the  years  before 
the  Revolution,  when  Paris  was  France,  and  the  provinces  were  despised  and 
oppressed ;  pillaged  to  feed  the  luxuries  and  vices  of  the  metropolis.  It  was 
joy  to  the  rural  prophet  to  know  that  God  would  pass  by  the  pomp  and  pride 
of  the  city,  and  bring  forth  the  king  from  a  place  that  was  "  little  among  the 
thousands  of  Judah."  A  parallel  is  plainly  instituted  between  what  God  had 
once  done  in  Israel's  history  and  what  He  is  about  to  do.  Bethlehem,  that  had 
already  furnished  one  king,  the  typical  king,  should  furnish  yet  another.  The 
scene  of  Christ's  advent,  its  significance  concerning  Himself.  1.  It  declared  His 
advent  to  be  the  advent  of  a  King.  Bethlehem  was  identified  in  every  mind  with 
the  throne  of  Israel,  with  the  royal  house  of  David.  Insignificant  in  itself,  it 
was  famous  through  its  association  with  Israel's  great  king.     The  kingly  idea 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

was  enshrined  in  Bethlehem.  It  is  a  prediction  of  His  royalty.  2.  It  declared  His 
advent  to  be  not  according  to  human  ideas  and  expectations.  It  was  a  surprise  to 
Samuel  when  he  was  sent  to  Bethlehem  to  anoint  the  son  of  Jesse,  and  his  surprise 
deepened  as  the  stalwart  elder  brethren  were  rejected.  The  wise  men  from  the 
East  came  to  Jerusalem,  naturally  expecting  to  find  the  new  king  in  the  great 
city.  But  they  found  him  not  at  Jerusalem,  but  at  Bethlehem.  He  is  to  be  a 
King  after  God's  mind,  and  not  according  to  human  thought.  His  royalty  is  to 
be  the  royalty  of  His  own  nature,  and  not  of  earthly  circumstance  and  rank. 
3.  It  declared  the  character  of  His  kingly  rule.  "  He  chose  David  also  His  servant, 
and  took  him  from  the  sheepfolds.  He  brought  him  to  feed  Jacob  His  people, 
and  Israel  His  inheritance  "  It  intimated  that  his  shepherd  life  was  the  prepara- 
tion and  the  pattern  of  his  kingly  life,  that  as  a  shepherd  with  his  flock  so  was  the 
king  over  his  people  ;  ruling  tnem  for  their  good,  defending  them  from  their 
enemies,  risking  his  life  for  them,  carrying  into  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom  the  spirit 
of  a  shepherd  with  his  sheep.  In  like  manner  when  we  hear  that  another  King 
is  to  rise  from  Bethlehem  we  conclude  that  His  rule  will  be  of  the  same  kind. 
He  too  will  be  a  Shepherd  King,  ruling  not  by  force  but  by  gentleness,  seeking 
not  His  own  gain  but  the  good  of  His  people,  caring  for  the  weak,  recovering  the 
lost.  4.  It  declared  that  His  advent  was  demanded  by  the  condition  of  others, 
by  the  need,  the  misery  of  those  to  whom  He  came.  Men  have  sought  sovereignty 
at  the  bidding  of  their  own  ambition.  The  Bethlehem  King  was  called  to  it  by 
God  Himself,  called  to  it  by  the  national  crisis,  by  the  misery  of  the  people,  the 
degradation  of  the  land.  The  prophet  sees  everywhere  anarchy  and  confusion, 
oppression  and  wrong,  weakness  and  suffering.  The  advent  of  Clu-ist  is  the  advent 
of  a  King  whose  presence  is  demanded  by  the  need  and  misery  of  men.  He  does 
not  come  to  set  up  a  kingdom  for  Himself,  that  is,  for  personal  ends.  He  comes 
into  the  world  because  the  world  cannot  do  without  Him.  5.  The  unprecedented 
greatness  of  the  future  King,  "  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from 
everlasting."  Coming  into  the  world  centuries  after  David  had  fallen  on  sleep, 
He  is  yet  before  David.  He  is  David's  Lord  as  well  as  David's  Son.  His  advent 
is  the  manifestation  of  One  whose  nature  knows  neither  youth  nor  age,  whose 
sovereignty  has  no  beginning  and  no  end.  "  From  of  old,  from  everlasting." 
The  scene  of  His  advent  teaches  chiefly  the  greatness  of  His  condescension  and 
humiliation.  He  "  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting," 
links  Himself  with  time,  enters  into  human  history,  associates  Himself  with  earthly 
places.     (W.  Perkins.) 

Yer.  4.  He  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strengrth  of  the  Lord. — Tfie  Mighty 
Shepherd : — I.  His  activity  and  zeal.  "  He  shall  stand."  We  read  of  idle 
shepherds,  who  lie  down  and  sleep  and  neglect  their  flock.  This  attitude  of 
standing  shows — 1.  Dignity.  He  is  the  Royal  Shepherd.  2.  Observation.  He 
who  stands  can  survey  all  around.  3.  Attention.  He  does  not  withdraw  His 
eyes.  He  that  keepeth  Israel  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  11.  His  regard. 
"  He  shall  feed."  The  term  feed  is  not  confined  to  providing  food.  It  applies 
to  all  the  duties  of  a  shepherd.  And  this  office  consists  of  unwearied  care,  such 
as — 1.  Causing  them  to  rest.  The  weary  child  of  God  must  pause,  and  the  wise 
Shepherd  selects  the  time  and  place.  2.  Leading  them.  The  Eastern  shepherd 
treads  the  ground  before  his  flock.  3.  Restoring  the  wanderers.  There  are 
always  the  erring  and  wandering — headstrong,  foolish,  daring.  4.  Healing  the 
wounded.  5.  Defending  the  weak  and  securing  the  flock.  III.  His  ability. 
"  In  the  strength  of  the  Lord."  This  does  not  mean  "  borrowed  "  strength ; 
the  strength  of  the  Lord  is  His  own.  And  power  is  needed.  Who  can  realise 
the  danger  and  difficulties  of  the  Church  on  earth,  or  the  trials  of  a  struggling 
Boul  ?  IV.  His  dignity.  "  In  the  majesty  of  His  God."  Majesty  combined 
with  strength.  How  majestic  was  Christ,  even  in  His  humiliation  !  Majesty 
combined  with  simplicity ;  majesty  and  gentleness.  But  Christ  is  terrible  in 
majesty,  terrible  to  His  foes.  Who  shall  abide  His  day  ?  Yea,  He  is  terrible 
to  the  foes  of  His  flock.  {Homilist.)  The  Shepherd  and  His  mission  : — "  The 
testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  Many  other  things  were  predicted 
in  the  Scriptures ;  but  incidentally,  relatively,  subordinately ;  this  testimony 
was  the  fixed  subject  and  steady  aim  of  the  whole.  All  the  prophets  testified 
of  Jesus,  though  not  all  in  the  same  way  or  in  the  same  degree.  They  did  not 
always  understand  their  o^vn  predictions.  From  this  prediction  consider — 
I.  His  implied  character.    It  is  that  of  a  shepherd.    The  character  of  a  shepherd 


CHAP,  v.]  MICAE.  47 

now  is  far  less  respectable  than  it  was  in  early  ages,  and  especially  in  the  East. 
The  character  of  a  good  shepherd  has  been  applied  to  a  good  ruler.  Christ  is 
called  the  Good  Shepherd,  the  Chief  Shepherd,  the  Great  Shepherd,  and  God's 
Shepherd.  And  we  are  told  that  both  His  kindness  and  His  love  are  unexampled. 
n.  Observe  His  work.  "  Stand  and  feed."  The  pastures  in  which  He  feeds 
His  people  are  His  Word  and  ordinances.  We  are  not  to  restrain  the  work  of 
this  Divine  Shepherd  to  feeding  only.  He  affords  repose ;  for  His  flock  need 
rest  as  well  as  provision.  A  shepherd  also  guides  them.  Christ  guides  His 
people  by  His  Word,  by  His  Spirit,  and  by  His  providence.  By  His  Word  He 
shows  them  the  way  in  which  they  should  go.  By  His  Spirit  He  gives  them 
the  inclination,  and  works  in  them  to  walk  in  the  way  of  His  pleasure.  By  His 
providence  He  arranges  all,  and  fixes  all  their  circumstances  in  life  for  the  advance- 
ment of  His  own  glory  and  their  real  welfare.  As  a  shepherd  He  restores ;  for 
they  sometimes,  nay  often,  go  astray.  As  a  shepherd  He  heals  their  sicknesses. 
He  renders  all  His  ordinances  and  all  His  dispensations  salutary.  As  a  shepherd 
He  defends  them  all,  else  they  would  be  destroyed.  III.  How  He  is  to  perform 
His  work.  1.  He  will  do  this  attentively.  Stand  and  feed."  2.  Powerfully. 
"  In  the  strength  of  the  Lord."  3.  Nobly  or  gracefully.  "  In  the  majesty  of 
the  name  of  the  Lord  His  God."  Power  is  not  always  dignity  ;  authority,  when 
it  is  not  softened  by  condescension,  has  in  it  something  harsh  and  repelling.  Some 
who  feel  their  strength,  think  of  nothing  else.  Christ  is  mild  and  gentle.  He 
exerted  His  power  mildly,  kindly,  if  you  will,  majestically.  IV.  The  safety 
OF  THE  FLOCK.  "  And  they  shall  abide."  To  abide  is  to  continue,  to  endure, 
to  be  able  to  withstand  any  foe,  and  to  go  forth  against  it.  There  is,  however, 
a  difference  between  the  fact  and  the  comfort  of  it.  The  believer  is  often  filled 
with  fear,  and  is  ready  to  suppose  that  God  is  going  to  destroy  us.  At  other 
times  Christians  are  able  to  realise  this  fact  by  faith.  V.  The  extension  of 
His  own  renown.  "  Now  shall  He  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  In 
order  to  this  He  must  be  known,  and  to  make  Himself  known  is  all  that  is  necessary 
to  this.  The  more  He  is  known,  the  more  will  He  be  loved  and  adored.  And 
does  He  not  deserve  to  be  known  ?  The  Christians'  grief  is  that  Christ  is  so  little 
known  and  adored.  There  are,  however,  two  things  to  console  thfem.  1.  That 
it  is  not  so  in  the  other  world.  2.  They  know  that  it  will  not  be  so  always,  nor 
long,  even  in  this  world.  They  know  that  He  shall  have  "  the  heathen  for  His 
inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  His  possession."  {William 
Jay.) 

Ver.  6.  And  this  Man  shall  be  the  peace,  when  the  Ass3nian  shall  come  Into  our 
land. — Peace  in  Christ  amid  invading  foes  : — This  is  an  announcement  of  the  mission 
of  our  Saviour.  He  is  to  be  peace.  Two  facts  in  the  text.  1.  A  special  danger 
is  apprehended.  2.  A  provision  is  made  to  meet  the  danger.  I.  The  crisis 
OF  danger.  Two  great  nations  invaded  the  Holy  Land,  the  AssjTian  and  the 
Babylonian.  These  differed.  The  former  was  heathen,  the  latter  idolatrous. 
The  one  sought  to  destroy  all  worship ;  the  other  to  establish  the  worship  of 
its  own  gods.  These  two  nations  represent  the  different  forces  that  battle  against 
Christianity  to  the  present  time.  In  the  philosophy  of  the  infidel  we  see  the 
one  ;  in  the  superstition  of  Rome  we  see  the  other.  II.  The  provision  to  meet 
THE  danger.  This  Man,  Christ,  is  our  peace.  Christ  meets  the  infidel  success- 
fully at  every  turn.  Human  unbelief  directs  its  whole  power  to  break  down 
the  truth  of  God  in  Christ,  and  to  destroy  the  hope  of  man.  Sometimes  by  out- 
ward, open,  organised  attack,  at  other  times  by  private,  insidious  attacks  on 
the  heart  of  man.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  hostility  the  advent  of  our  Saviour 
is  our  peace.  III.  Some  of  the  weapons  of  this  Assyrian  enemy.  I.  It  con- 
tested the  authenticity  of  the  Scriptures.  This  was  the  method  of  attack,  from 
Porphyry  and  Celsus  down  to  Hume  and  Gibbon.  This  mode  of  attack  is  ended. 
2.  The  impossibility,  the  absurdity  of  the  incarnation  of  Christ  is  urged.  The 
Assyrian  rejects  the  personality  of  God,  the  immortality  of  man.  He  seeks  the 
enthronement  of  matter.  3.  There  is  a  private,  a  personal  hostility.  Many  a 
man  retains  his  peace  amid  all  the  outward  conflict,  but  when  assailed  by  doubt 
and  fear  the  citadel  of  the  soul  is  carried.  But  this  Man — this  Saviour — is  the 
strength  of  the  soul  for  ever.  (Stephen  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Christ  our  peace  : — 
The  term  "  Assyrian  "  may  be  regarded  as  symbolically  used,  the  great  enemy 
of  the  Jews  being  made  to  represent  generally  the  enemies  of  man,  or  particularly 
of  the  Church.     One  of  the  titles  under  which  Isaiah  annovmces  the  Child  that 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

should  be  born  is  "  Prince  of  Peace."  The  chorus  of  the  angels  mentions  "  peace." 
The  angels  associated  the  incarnation  of  the  Saviour  with  the  re-establishment 
of  peace  on  the  disquieted  earth.  In  the  apostolic  writings  peace  is  equally 
associated  with  Christ,  and  especially  attributed  to  His  death.  Except  through 
Him  there  could  be  no  reconciliation  of  the  human  race  to  God.  Christ  Jesus, 
by  His  obedience  and  death,  removed  every  obstacle  to  the  free  forgiveness  of 
sinners,  juid  thus  in  the  largest  sense  reconciled  the  world  unto  God.  There  are 
other  reasons  why  Christ  may  be  aifirmed  to  have  accomplished  our  text.  It 
is  the  tendency  and  property  of  the  Christian  religion  to  heal  all  differences 
between  man  and  man,  and  to  produce  and  preserve  universal  harmony.  In 
the  very  degree  in  which  the  religion  of  Christ  now  gains  a  hold  on  individuals 
or  families,  it  vindicates  its  character  as  a  religion  of  peace.  It  cannot  establish 
its  dominion  in  the  heart  without  producing  a  disposition  towards  goodwill 
to  all  men.  Christianity,  going  straightway  to  the  inner  man,  throws  the  salt, 
as  it  were,  into  the  very  fountains  of  the  waters  of  strife,  and  by  healing  the  springs, 
sweetens  all  their  after-flowings.  Who  shall  order  the  jarring  elements  of  the 
world  into  harmony  ?  Make  tarue  Christians  of  all  men,  and  then,  such  will  be 
the  principles  which  are  universally  acted  on,  such  the  motives  which  will  be 
universally  at  work,  such  the  ends  which  will  be  universally  proposed,  that 
divisions  must  disappear,  because  every  one  will  seek  the  good  of  others  in  seeking 
his  own.  In  an  individual  and  personal  sense,  too,  Christ  is  our  peace.  {Henry 
Melvill,  B.D.)  The.  peace  from  God: — In  some  crystals  that  coat,  as  with 
shining  frost  work,  the  sides  of  a  vessel,  we  have  aU  the  salts  that  give  perpetual 
freshness  to  the  ocean,  their  life  to  the  weeds  that  clothe  its  rocks,  and  their  energy 
to  the  fish  that  swim  its  depths  and  hollows.  In  some  drops  of  oil  distilled 
from  rose  leaves  of  Indian  lands,  and  valued  at  many  times  their  weight  in  gold, 
we  have  enclosed  within  one  small  phial  the  perfume  of  a  whole  field  of  roses, 
that  which,  diffused  through  ten  thousand  leaves,  gave  every  flower  its  fragrance. 
Like  these  our  text  contains  the  essence  of  the  Gospel ;  peace  to  a  world  at  enmity 
against  God ;  peace  to  a  race  of  sinners  at  variance  with  God  ;  peace  and  joy 
in  believing.  Peace.  I.  Who  is  herb  spoken  of  ?  The  Man ;  the  Christ. 
He  stands  alone  as  the  Man.  This  is  His  distinguishing  feature.  Micah  has 
just  uttered  a  prediction  fixing  the  birthplace  of  the  promised  Messiah.  He  is 
called  "  the  Man,"  because  He  is — 1.  The  Divine  Man.  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  He  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  is  in  Him.  2.  As  the  sinless  Man. 
"  He  knew  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth."  A  Lamb  for  sacrifice, 
"  without  blemish  and  without  spot."  II.  What  is  He  to  be  to  us  ?  Christ 
our  peace.  In  Him  God  provides  for  the  destruction  of  all  causes  of  enmity 
and  disorder.  This  work  of  destruction  was  to  be  the  foundation  for  peace  between 
God  and  man.  For  peace  between  God  and  man  as  a  sinner,  and  as  a  saint. 
Peace  He  brings  for  the  sinner.  The  true  peace  is  in  Christ,  through  His  precious 
bloodshedding,  and  by  His  atoning  death.  Peace  He  brings  for  the  believer. 
It  is  built  upon  His  own  promise  and  Word,  and  is  compatible  with  the  most 
calm  and  considerate  view  of  all  truth.  God's  peace  is  with  one's  self,  with  our 
conscience,  with  God,  in  fact,  through  the  blood  of  Jesus.  It  is  that  we  want. 
III.  How  IS  He  to  be  peace  to  us  ?  L  He  satisfied  Jehovah.  By  bearing 
our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree ;  by  making  peace  through  the  blood  of 
His  Cross  ;  by  dying  the  just  for  the  unjust  to  bring  us  to  God ;  by  making 
reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  bringing  in  everlasting  righteousness.  2.  He 
overcame  the  enmity  of  the  human  heart.  This  peace  is  piurchased  for  us  by 
His  Divinely  eflScacious  bloodshedding,  but  it  is  bestowed  upon  us  by  the 
mysterious  communication  of  His  Spirit.  The  soxurce  of  true  peace  is  faith, 
realising  and  resting  on  the  faithful  and  unchanging  promises  of  God.  IV.  When 
may  Christ  be  said  to  be  our  peace  ?  "  When  the  Assyrian  cometh  into 
our  land."  The  allusion  is  to  the  invasion  of  Judaea  by  Sennacherib,  in  the  reign 
of  Hezekiah.  Some  think  that  Hezekiah  is  the  man  here  referred  to.  But  note 
that  this  Man  was  born  at  Bethlehem ;  and  He  was  a  Man  whose  goings  forth 
have  been  of  old  from  everlasting.  This  must  be  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  in  the 
very  presence  of  the  Assyrian  that  the  child  of  God  has  peace.  We  do  not  say 
that  the  consequences  of  our  sins  are  taken  away.  And  yet  there  is  peace  ;  Christ 
works  it  by  destroying  the  painful  sense  of  the  corruption  of  the  spirit's  purity, 
and  the  deadly  evil  poisoning  of  all  the  springs  of  being.  He  is  our  peace,  able 
and  willing  to  hush  every  storm,  and  fill  us  with  all  peace  and  joy.  Apply  both 
to  our  corruption  and  to  our  affliction.     Then,  if  there  is  no  true  peace  in  time 


CHAP,  v.]  MICAH.  49 

or  eternity  but  what  comes  from  God  in  Christ,  then  let  the  believer  live  near 
to  God.  Let  him,  through  the  aids  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  maintain  a  conscience 
void  of  offence  towards  God  and  man.  ( WiUiam  Adamson.)  An  invasion : — I.  A 
TEBBIBLE  INVASION.  The  Assyrian,  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  representative 
of  all  the  enemies  of  Israel,  enters  the  Holy  Land,  takes  Jerusalem,  and  treads 
the  "  palaces  "  of  the  chosen  people.  A  faint  picture  is  the  Assyrian  of  the 
hellish  invader  of  human  souls.  He  breaks  his  way  through  all  bulwarks,  enters 
the  sacred  territory,  and  treads  even  in  the  palaces  of  the  intellect  and  heart. 
II.  A  TRIUMPHANT  DEFENDBK.  There  are  "  seven  shepherds  and  eight  principal 
men "  who  now  hurled  back  the  Assyrian  invader,  entered  bis  own  territory, 
and  carried  war  into  the  midst.  Who  is  the  deliverer  ?  "  This  Man  shall  be 
the  peace."  1.  He  did  it  successfully.  "Thus  shall  He  deliver  us  from  the 
Assyrian."  Christ  will  one  day  ruin  this  moral  Assyrian,  as  "  lightning  falleth 
from  heaven  he  shall  fall."  He  will  hurl  him  from  the  habitation  of  men. 
2.  Christ,  in  doing  this,  uses  human  instrumentality.  "  Seven  shepherds  and 
eight  principal  men."  Christ  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  men.  (1)  The  instrumentality  that  He  employs  may  seem  to  us 
very  feeble.  "  Seven  shepherds  and  eight  principal  men,"  against  unnumbered 
hosts  of  enemies.  "  He  chooseth  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
the  wise,"  &c.  (2)  Though  the  instrumentality  may  seem  feeble,  it  was  sufficient. 
The  work  was  done.  "  Not  by  might  and  not  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  7.  And  the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  many  people 
as  a  dew  from  the  Lord.  —  Christian  influence :  —  This  text  may  suggest 
the  beneficial  influence  which  God's  people  are  intended  and  calculated 
to  exert  upon  surroimding  society,  wherever  their  lot  may  be  cast, 
and  whatever  may  be  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed.  God  has 
never  failed  to  preserve  for  Himself  a  people  in  the  world.  The  principles  of 
spiritual  religion,  embodied  in  living  character,  and  manifested  in  suitable  con- 
duct, have  had  the  effect  of  spreading  an  illumination  'which  has  operated  bene- 
ficially upon  the  spiritual  interests  of  mankind,  and  led  many  an  ignorant 
wanderer  to  salvation  and  heaven.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  estimate  too  highly 
the  beneficial  influence  of  Christian  character,  when  consistently  and  properly 
exemplified.  It  operates  in  a  manner  most  beautiful  and  eflScient.  This  character 
is  composed  of  such  elements  that  it  cannot  be  successfully  imitated.  It  is 
what  no  worldly  system  or  agency  is  capable  of  producing.  The  influence  which 
belongs  legitimately  to  the  character  of  God's  people  does  not  depend  for  its 
successful  exertion  upon  associated  numbers,  or  outward  circumstances  of  wealth, 
respectability,  and  prosperity.  More  importance  has  been  attached  to  these 
things  than  properly  belongs  to  them.  The  potency  of  religious  influence 
depends  not  upon  mere  accumulated  numbers,  but  upon  character.  It  will 
prove  a  fatal  mistake,  wherever  the  outward  accessories  of  religion  are  allowed 
to  supplant  its  spiritualities.  The  machinery  of  Christianity  cannot  be  suc- 
cessfully worked,  except  by  the  hands  of  those  who  are  under  its  sanctifying 
influence.  This  Christian  influence  is  not  something  natural  to  a  certain  class 
of  individuals,  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  their  species  by  mysterious  endow- 
ments. And  the  influence  of  Christian  character  must  not  be  understood  as  super- 
seding and  disparaging  the  influence  of  those  other  agencies  by  which  Christianity 
is  to  be  spread  and  propagated  in  the  world.  We  need  not  disparage  the  Christian 
ministry ;  or  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  The  truth  and  grace  in  the  Gospel 
are  destined  to  issue  in  the  formation  of  a  holy  character,  and  to  display  them- 
selves in  corresponding  practical  results.  It  is  in  vain  to  pretend  to  the  pos 
session  of  Christian  character,  where  those  appropriate  practical  results  are  not 
witnessed.  On  the  exemplification  of  religion  in  its  excellence  and  beauty,  the 
usefulness  of  professing  Christians  very  materially  and  essentially  depends. 
Worldly  observers  will  justly  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  religion  is  worth- 
less, the  offspring  of  hypocritical  ostentation,  of  infatuated  superstition,  which 
does  not  ameliorate  and  elevate  the  character.  These  are  just  expectations, 
and  ought  to  be  realised.  How  great  then  ought  to  be  the  circumspection  of 
those  who  bear  the  Christian  name,  that  they  may  not  dishonour  it  by  any 
unbecoming  conduct.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  importance,  that  religious  character 
should  develop  itself,  free  from  all  those  blemishes  which  would  have  the  effect 
of  tarnishing  its  Divine  lustre  and  impairing  its  reputation.     Those  who  would 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

exemplify  the  legitimate  influence  of  Christian  character  in  its  fullest  efficiency, 
must  live  in  close  fellowship  with  the  Divine  throne.  Nothing  else  can  render 
us  beneficially  influential.  The  influence  of  genuine  Christian  character  is 
always  mild,  and  beneficent,  and  diffusive.  Individual  Christians  should  reflect 
much  upon  their  responsibility.  {William  Hurl.)  The  paucity,  position, 
and  power  of  the  true  : — The  truth  in  this  verse  may  be  said  to  have  met  with 
its  partial  fulfilment  in  the  unique  and  marvellous  experience  of  the  Jews  ;  for — 
(1)  They  are  but  a  "  remnant "  of  the  human  family,  being  but  a  fragment,  a 
fraction  of  the  whole  human  race.  (2)  They  dwell  in  "  remnants,"  in  detached, 
broken,  and  fragmentary  portions,  "  here  a  little  and  there  a  little."  (3)  They 
dwell  "  in  the  midst  of  many  people,"  so  that  there  is  hardly  a  single  nation  or 
people  in  which  there  is  not  at  present  some  small  remnant  of  the  Abrahamio 
seed.  (4)  They  exist,  and  are  preserved  as  a  witness  on  the  behalf  of  heaven 
and  its  truth.  (5)  All  this  has  been  continued  irrespective  of,  and,  in  many 
cases,  in  opposition  to  the  most  earnest  human  effort,  "  tarrying  not  for  man, ' 
&c.  I.  The  pattcity  of  the  tkue.  God  has  ever  had  a  people  peculiarly  His 
own ;  and  who  wiU  dare  dispute  His  right  to  have  a  more  special  regard  to  some, 
than  He  may  have  to  others  ?  Calvinian  or  Arminian,  we  all  agree  that  "  the 
Lord  hath  set  apart  him  that  is  godly  for  Himself  "  ;  the  true  from  among  the 
false,  and  the  pure  from  amongst  the  vUe.  From  the  dawn  of  human  history 
these  have  been  but  a  "  remnant "  of  the  human  family.  Look  at  the  flood, 
and  at  Egypt.  Thus  the  holy  and  the  true  are  but  a  '  remnant "  in  nations, 
in  towns,  and  in  families.  II.  The  position  of  the  true.  "  In  the  midst," 
&c.  It  might  be  more  in  harmony  with  our  own  natural  tastes  and  preferences 
to  be  a  separate  people  in  one  land  swarming  together,  without  any  of  the  false 
about  us,  but  such  is  not  God's  arrangement.  Shiploads  of  Christians  may  leave 
our  shores  for  some  Canterbury  or  other  settlement,  where  they  may  hope  to 
live  and  not  see  the  face  of  an  unbeliever,  but  sadly  do  such  men  err  in  expecting 
this.  Should  the  whole  Church  but  settle  down  in  one  land,  it  would  be  a  most 
grievous  curse  and  woe  to  the  world.  We  are  to  settle  down  only  in  heaven. 
The  distribution  of  the  Church  "  in  the  midst,"  &c.,  is  necessary  in  order  to  pro- 
mote the  Divine  purpose ;  for  it  exists  not  for  itself  alone,  but  as  leaven  in  meal, 
as  salt,  as  Divine  seed,  here  a  grain  and  there  a  grain.  Learn  this,  that  God 
hath  placed  you  "  in  the  midst "  of  your  enemies,  by  contact  to  bless  them,  for 
each  has  his  sphere.  III.  The  pukpose  of  the  true.  The  design  of  their  dis- 
persion has  a  vital  relation  to  the  people  amongst  whom  they  are  placed,  as  the 
dew  and  showers  to  the  grass.  As  the  showers  are  of  heavenly  origin,  so  is  Israel 
"  bom  from  above."  As  the  dew  is  a  pure  and  crystal  liquid,  so  the  true  Israel 
is  composed  of  the  choicest  natiures  and  sweetest  spirits  in  the  world.  Dew 
is  silently  produced,  and  so  the  mightiest  work  may  be  accomplished  in  the 
human  soul,  "  without  observation."  As  the  dew  and  showers  are  entirely 
independent  of  the  human,  so  the  Church,  like  the  truth,  lives  not  upon  human 
sufferance.  This  purpose  will  be  fulfilled.  Many  weak  and  unbelieving  minds 
have  thought  that  the  true,  being  but  a  "  remnant,"  their  influence  would  waste 
and  die,  but  thank  God  this  cannot  be,  for  the  source  is  unfailing  and  Divine. 
{E.  D.  Green.)  God^s  people,  their  tender  and  terrible  aspect  in  the  world : — Two 
things  are  predicted  concerning  the  Jews  after  their  restoration  from  Babylon. 
1.  Their  influence  upon  the  nations  would  be  as  refreshing  dew.  2.  Their  power 
on  the  nations  would  be  as  terrible  as  the  lion's  on  the  herds,  and  on  the  flocks. 
It  will  not,  I  think,  be  imfair  to  use  the  passage  to  illustrate  the  twofold  aspect 
of  the  people  of  God  in  this  world — the  tender  and  terrible,  the  restorative  and 
the  destructive.  Like  Israel  of  old,  godly  men  in  every  age  have  only  been  a 
remnant,  a  very  small  minority  of  the  generation  in  which  they  lived.  It  will 
not  always  be  so.  I.  The  tender  aspect  of  God's  people  in  the  world.  They 
are  spoken  of  here  as  "  dew."  Silent  in  its  fall,  beautiful  in  its  appearance, 
refreshing  in  its  influence.     Three  things  are  suggested  concerning  this  "  dew." 

1.  It  is  Divine.  It  is  "  from  the  Lord."  All  that  is  quickening  and  refreshing 
in  the  thoughts,  spirits,  character  of  good  men  on  this  earth  descends  from  heaven. 
"  Every  good  and  perfect   gift  cometh   down  from  the  Father  of  lights,"   &c. 

2.  It  is  copious.  "  As  the  showers  upon  the  grass."  There  have  been  seasons 
when  those  spiritual  influences  have  descended  on  men  with  plenitude  and  power, 
such  as  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Would  it  were  so  now  !  3.  It  is  undeserved 
of  men.  "  That  tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  men."  Good 
men  on  this  earth  are  to  their  generation  what  the  gentle  dew  and  the  fertilising 


CHAP,  v.]  MIGAH.  61 

ehower  are  to  the  thirsty  earth.  Their  speech  distils  as  dew,  and  their  influence 
descends  on  the  souls  of  men  like  rain  upon  the  new-mown  grass.  II.  The  terrible 
aspect  of  God's  people  in  the  world.  The  same  men  as  are  represented  under 
the  metaphor  of  dew  are  here  spoken  of  as  a  "  lion."  Bold,  terrible,  and  destruc- 
tive. Elijah  was  a  lion  in  his  age,  so  was  John  the  Baptist,  so  was  Luther,  so 
was  Latimer,  &c.  This  subject  suggests — 1.  A  picture  of  the  imregenerate 
world.  There  are  some  germs  of  goodness  in  its  soil  that  reqiiire  the  fertihsing 
influence  of  heaven  to  quicken  and  develop,  and  there  are  some  things  in  it  so 
pernicious  and  baneful  that  it  requires  all  the  courage,  force,  and  passion  of  moral 
lions  to  destroy.  2.  A  picture  of  the  completeness  of  moral  character.  Not  all 
"  dew,"  nor  all  "  lion,"  but  both  combined.  {Homilist.)  Qod^s  purposes  of 
mercy  : — We  are  imperfect  judges  of  moral  power,  both  as  to  what  really  con- 
stitutes mora!  power  and  as  to  its  extent  and  influence.  We  are  very  prone  to 
transfer  the  idea  of  largeness,  mass,  weight  from  the  physical  to  the  moral  world  ; 
to  place  our  trust  in  numbers,  in  wealth,  in  outward  visible  power,  and  are  dis- 

Eosed  to  despond  even  of  the  very  best  cause  when  it  has  not  these  upon  its  side, 
a  the  management  of  public  affairs  men  come  to  have  implicit  faith  in  majorities, 
rather  than  in  truth  and  in  righteousness.  We  are  apt  to  think  the  Church  strong 
and  prosperous  when  it  is  popular  with  the  crowd  ;  when  its  coffers  are  filled 
with  wealth ;  when  it  is  surrounded  with  the  bulwarks  and  appliances  of  secular 
power  and  favour.  There  is  forgetfulness  of  that  which  constitutes  the  real 
strength  and  power  of  a  moral  system ;  which  is  the  goodness  of  the  cause  ;  and 
the  faith,  earnestness,  and  zeal  of  those  who  are  its  advocates  and  its  professors. 
One  man,  with  God's  truth  in  him,  which  he  thoroughly  believes  and  which  he 
has  the  courage  to  speak  out,  has  more  real  weight  in  him  than  a  whole  community 
that  are  ignorant  of  that  truth,  or  opposed  to  it.  The  strength  of  God's  Church 
lies  in  the  truth  of  her  doctrines,  in  the  purity  of  her  morality,  in  the  piety  and 
zeal  of  her  members.  By  means  of  these  she  is  leaven  in  the  mass.  Thus  she 
becomes  a  great  blessing  to  the  nation.  The  higher  meaning  of  our  text  has 
reference  to  the  Church  as  such,  to  the  spiritual  Church  of  God  in  all  times  and 
ages.  1.  We  need  not  be  surprised  to  find  the  Church  of  God  existing  as  a  small 
remnant.  It  has,  indeed,  never  yet  been  otherwise.  At  no  period  has  the  Church 
ever  been  in  a  majority.  At  times  the  spiritual  body  has  seemed  to  be  almost 
lost  to  the  eye  of  sense.  Seen  ever  at  her  best  estate,  she  is  but  a  remnant  in 
the  midst  of  many  people.  2.  The  proper  place  of  this  remnant  is  in  the  midst 
of  the  commimity.  God  has  so  placed  His  Church.  Sometimes  the  Church, 
or  individual  members  of  the  Church,  would  have  it  otherwise.  Secluding  them- 
selves in  coteries  or  cloisters.  Whilst  Christians  keep  themselves  sedulously 
pure  from  the  contamination  of  evil  example  or  corrupt  conversation,  they  are 
not  to  go  out  of  the  world.  They  are  to  abide  in  the  calling  in  which  they  were 
when  God  called  them.  They  are  to  be  friendly,  social,  coiu:teous,  benevolent 
towards  all  men.  3.  The  Church  possesses  a  mighty  power  for  benefiting  a 
commimity.  It  is  amongst  them  "  as  a  dew  from  the  Lord,  and  as  showers  that 
water  the  grass."  Dew  and  rain  came  to  be  regarded  as  special  gifts  of  God. 
And  so  they  were  taken  in  Scripture  as  symbols  of  what  is  directly  and  immedi- 
ately God-produced.  They  are  thus  a  fitting  emblem  of  the  Church,  in  its  position 
and  its  working  in  the  world.  God  has  formed  the  Church  as  an  instrument  in 
His  hands  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  immediate  purpose  of  grace  and  mercy 
to  the  world.  4.  This  working  does  not  depend  upon  man's  wUl  or  permission. 
It  is  not  by  our  favour  that  the  Church  of  God  is  in  the  midst  of  the  nations  as 
a  dew  from  the  Lord,  exerting  a  conservative,  vivifying,  renovating,  ameliorating 
power  upon  the  world.  God  has  ever  been  with  His  own  cause.  Neither  from 
fear  nor  favour  must  the  Church  wait  upon  man,  nor  lean  upon  an  arm  of  flesh. 
It  is  when  God  is  with  His  Church  that  she  is  strong  and  powerful  and  good. 
Learn,  then — ( 1 )  The  importance  and  the  responsibility  of  the  Church's  position 
in  the  midst  of  the  nations.  (2)  The  condition  on  which  the  Church's  usefulness 
depends.  It  is  that  it  be  as  a  dew  from  the  Lord.  He  must  be  in  the  midst  of 
His  Church,  and  His  Church  must  be  prayerfully  dependent  on  Him.  (IF.  L. 
Alexander,  D.D.)  The  Church  in  the  world  : — I.  The  influence  which  the 
Church  may  exebt  in  the  world.  1.  Their  influence  is  great.  Dew  and  rain 
rank  among  the  most  powerful  natural  agencies.  In  the  energy  of  these  we  have 
a  fit  image  of  the  Influence  of  the  Church.  The  resources  which  the  members 
of  the  Church  may  command,  and  the  instrumentality  which  they  can  employ, 
are  "  mighty  through  God."     This  is  evident  from  the  purposes  they  are  called 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

to  fulfil ;  the  field  upon  which  they  are  to  operate ;  the  promises  and  provisiona 
on  which  they  may  rely ;  the  responsibility  under  which  they  are  laid  ;  the 
influence,  limited  indeed,  but  vast,  which  they  have  already  exerted,  and  the 
prophecies  which  they  must  yet  fulfil.  What  might  not  the  Church  accomplish 
did  she  put  forth  her  strength  ?  but  at  what  a  low  standard  have  Christians 
commonly  estimated  their  power.  2.  This  influence  is  beneficial.  Who  can 
adequately  calculate  the  consequence  of  being  deprived,  but  for  a  single  season, 
of  the  rain  and  the  dew  from  heaven  !  It  is  our  peculiar  prerogative  and  privilege 
to  possess  a  power  which  can  convert  the  sources  of  man's  present  evil  into 
means  and  channels  of  permanent  good  ;  to  render  every  society  and  institution 
and  mind  under  heaven  an  unmixed  blessing.  3.  This  influence  is  diffusive. 
It  is  delightful  to  consider  it  within  a  narrow  circle  and  on  a  limited  scale — in 
the  family,  neighbourhood.  Sabbath  school.  But  it  is  adapted  and  designed 
for  all  the  nations  and  tribes  and  families  of  men,  and  for  all  the  classes  and 
individuals  that  compose  them.  This  universal  adaptation  of  the  influence  of 
the  Church  arises  not  merely  from  the  nature  of  that  influence,  but  also  from 
the  diversified  gifts  and  circumstances  of  those  who  possess  It.  These  are  marked 
by  an  almost  boundless  variety.  4.  This  influence  is  Divine.  It  is  not  inherent 
in  the  Church  nor  independent  of  God.  If  the  Chiurch  has  power,  it  is  endued 
from  on  high.  She  is  mighty  through  God.  II.  Thk  position  which  thb  Chitrch 
SHOiTLD  OCCUPY.  "  In  the  midst  of  many  people."  Rain  and  dew  are  but 
images  of  the  far  more  genial  influences  which  the  Church  is  able  and  destined 
to  diffuse  through  the  world.  In  what  position,  and  by  what  process,  can  we 
best  employ  this  power  ?  "  Teach  all  nations."  How  far  has  our  Saviour's 
design  been  met  ?  Much  has  been  done ;  but  the  labours  of  the  Church  are  but 
begun.  Much  remains  to  be  done  at  home  and  abroad.  Why  is  progress  so  slow  T 
It  cannot  be  traced  to  deficient  power ;  to  inadequate  means,  to  want  of  oppor- 
tunity, or  to  any  inability  in  the  Church  to  furnish  the  requisite  agency.  It  is 
due  to  imperfectness  of  consecration,  and  the  partial  employment  of  the  Church's 
resources.  III.  The  independence  which  the  Chubch  >iay  claim.  "  That 
tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  men."  The  principal  source 
of  independence  is  the  power  and  presence  of  Him  from  whom  she  has  received 
her  commission.  Enjoying  this,  she  need  not,  she  dare  not  "  wait  for  man." 
Shall  we  wait  till  civilisation  and  law  have  smoothed  and  opened  our  way  ?  But 
while  the  Church  must  not  tarry  for  man,  God  waits  for  His  Church.  Then 
listen  not  to  the  dictates  of  the  selfish  ;  follow  not  the  course  of  the  indolent ; 
look  not  to  others  ;  let  each  in  his  sphere,  and  according  to  his  ability,  arise  and 
be  doing,  and  the  Lord  will  be  with  thee.  (E.  Prout.)  The  world's  silent 
benefactor : — It  must  be  evident  to  every  thoughtful  man  that  we  are  all 
apt  to  judge  unfairly  of  moral  force.  We  are  so  much  more  familiar  with 
the  sphere  of  sense  than  with  the  sphere  of  spirit  that  we  constantly  transfer 
ideas  gained  from  the  former  into  the  latter,  although  its  nature  is  quite  different. 
We  judge  of  matter  by  its  bulk,  we  judge  of  machinery  by  its  clever  adaptations, 
and  we  carry  these  criteria  from  the  physical  into  the  spiritual  sphere.  Because 
we  see  great  effects  produced  by  the  movement  of  mighty  bodies,  we  argue  that 
it  must  be  so  everywhere,  and  that  what  the  world  requires  is  a  Niagara-like 
Church,  which  will  make  itself  felt  by  noise  and  impetus  and  quantity.  Hence 
we  get  very  depressed  if,  in  connection  with  a  religious  society,  we  see  smaU 
numbers  suttd  hear  of  diminished  fimds,  while  we  congratulate  ourselves  all  round 
if,  in  regard  to  these,  we  hear  a  good  report.  This  false  method  of  judgment 
asserts  itself  in  various  directions.  Many  of  us  trust  to  majorities,  instead  of 
to  conscience.  We  are  very  respectable  to  public  opinion,  and  wait  cautiously 
to  see  which  way  the  wind  blows  before  we  commit  ourselves  to  a  policy.  Power 
and  victory  were  our  Lord's,  not  because  He  won  the  majority  over  to  His  way 
of  thinking,  not  because  He  devised  complex  ecclesiastical  machinery  cleverly 
adapted  to  the  times,  not  because  He  had  on  His  side  the  weight  of  money-bags 
and  the  prestige  of  social  respectability,  but  because  His  followers,  though  few  and 
unlearned,  were  inspired  by  Him  with  an  enthusiasm  of  faith  which  proved  resist- 
less. I  say,  then,  that  the  real  strength  of  a  moral  system  does  not  lie  in  its  mass  ; 
but  in  its  truth  and  goodness,  and  in  the  faith  and  zeal  of  its  advocates.  Even 
in  the  physical  world  there  are  not  wanting  examples  of  quality  overmatching 
quantity.  The  heaviest  sword  made  of  poor  material  cannot  do  what  even  a 
light  rapier  would  do,  in  attack  and  defence,  if  the  rapier  be  of  well-tempered 
steel.     A  handful  of  men,  trained  and  brave,  have  often  held  out  victoriously 


CHAP,  v.]  MICAH.  63 

against  the  impact  of  a  vast  horde  of  undisciplined  savages.  And  this  is  equally 
true  of  a  Church.  Its  fellowship  may  not  be  numerous,  its  members  may  not  be 
individually  influential,  but  if  it  be  distinguished  for  piety  and  prayerfulness, 
it  does  more  for  the  cause  of  Christ  than  far  larger  Churches  not  so  rich  in  them. 
The  influence  which  the  world's  wiseacres  contemn  is  mighty  through  God,  to 
the  pulling  down  of  strongholds.  Now,  it  is  in  the  light  of  these  truths  j^ou  can 
most  clearly  see  the  meaning  of  our  text.  It  compares  God's  people  not  to  a 
mighty  storm  or  to  a  resistless  sea,  but  to  the  silent  dew  and  the  gentle  showers, 
which  are  mighty,  not  because  of  the  stir  they  make,  but  because  of  what  they 
themselves  are.  And  this  analogy  is  accordant  with  all  the  parables  of  our  Lord, 
on  the  natiure  of  His  kingdom,  in  which  He  likened  it  to  the  mustard-seed,  and 
to  the  leaven  hidden  in  three  measures  of  meal.  Every  one  knows  that  dew  is 
absolutely  essential  to  the  continued  life  of  nature  in  the  lands  to  which  this 
prophet  referred.  From  the  beginning  of  April  to  the  end  of  October — in  other 
words,  from  the  close  of  the  "  latter  "  to  the  beginning  of  the  "  former  rains  " — - 
during  all  the  hot  summer  months,  the  life  of  herbage  depends  there  on  dew  alone. 
That  dew  is  transparent,  beautiful,  glistening  with  hght,  gentle  and  silent,  weak 
in  itself,  yet  mighty  in  its  aggregate  effect,  refreshing  and  cooling  bej'ond  power 
of  description,  and  preserving  the  life  it  touches,  while  it  is  itself  consumed  in 
giving  the  blessing.  Then  as  for  the  "  showers."  Often,  after  a  long  period  of 
drought,  and  of  dry,  searching  winds,  the  face  of  the  sky  has  been  covered  with 
clouds,  and  showers  have  fallen  on  every  field  and  garden  throughout  the  land, 
descending  without  effort,  yet  penetrating  deeply  to  nourish  forgotten  seeds  and 
parched  roots,  and  though  no  one  drop  of  rain  was  of  any  great  value  in  itself 
yet  the  aggregate  of  drops  which  we  call  a  "  shower  "  has  proved  of  Divine  and 
incalculable  worth.  It  is  to  these  two  means — showers  and  dew — which  God 
employs  to  bless  the  natural  world,  that  Micah  likens  "  the  remnant  of  Jacob," 
the  handful  of  people  which  alone  would  represent  God  among  the  heathen  ; 
and  the  Christian  Churches,  who  represent  the  same  God,  may  fairly  regard  the 
description  as  applicable  to  themselves.  1.  Our  attention  is  called  here  first  to 
the  Chiurch's  insignificance.  It  is  referred  to  as  a  "  remnant."  It  has  seldom 
been  otherwise.  Insignificance,  in  the  scale  of  the  world's  judgment,  is  its  normal 
condition.  Earnest,  religious  men  have  never  been  a  majority  at  any  time  in 
the  world's  history.  Once  the  Church  consisted  of  a  single  family  called  from 
idolatry  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  Indeed,  even  now,  what  is  the  Christian  Church 
but  a  "  remnant "  ?  Compare  the  number  even  of  professing  Christians — with 
the  teeming  millions  of  those  who  follow  Mahomet,  Confucius,  or  Buddha — and 
your  heart  will  sink  in  hopelessness,  if  you  do  not  believe  that  on  your  side  is 
the  living  God — the  Eternal  Truth — the  Almighty  Saviour  !  God  does  His  work 
by  despised  agencies,  and  this  He  does  also  in  the  moral  enhghtenment  of  the  world 
and  in  its  regeneration,  choosing  the  weak  things  "  and  the  things  which  are 
despised,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God  and  not  of  us."  Do 
not  suppose,  then,  that  you  are  on  the  losing  side  because  you  hold  a  religious 
faith  which  as  yet  only  the  minority  of  the  race  accepts.  2.  But  we  are  also  remmded 
by  our  text  of  the  Church's  association.  It  is  in  contact  with  the  world. 
lUie  remnant  of  Jacob  is  "  in  the  midst  of  the  people."  The  dew  and  the  showers 
are  blessings,  because  they  actually  touch  the  earth.  There  have  been  times 
when  Christian  people  have  sought  to  have  it  otherwise.  They  have  retired  to 
cells  in  the  desert,  and  to  monasteries  and  convents.  We  are  followers  of  Jesus 
Christ,  brethren,  and  He  went  to  eat  with  publicans  and  sinners,  and  talked  to 
folk  the  Pharisees  would  have  had  nothing  to  do  with.  Now,  you  perhaps  are 
thrown  by  God's  providence,  as  a  Christian  man,  into  business.  You  cannot 
help  yourself.  There  you  see  people  of  all  sorts — men  sensual  and  men  spiritual ; 
men  avaricious  and  men  open-handed ;  men  saint-like  and  men  worldly ;  men 
who  believe  in  Christ  and  men  who  scorn  Him.  Do  not,  I  beseech  you,  resent 
that  position ;  do  not  go  about  your  daily  work  as  if  you  were  ashamed  of  it. 
Do  not  give  the  cold  shoulder  to  everybody  who  differs  from  you.  You  are  put 
there  as  God's  representative  to  the  worldly,  as  well  as  to  the  pious.  3.  The 
Church's  beneficence,  t.p.,  its  capacity  for  doing  good,  is  suggested  in  the  figures 
of  the  dew  and  the  showers.  These  powers  in  nature  are  the  gifts  of  God.  We 
cannot  create  them  by  any  of  our  scientific  appliances,  nor  can  we  foretell  them 
with  any  approach  to  accuracy.  Has  not  the  apostle  said,  "  We  are  His  workman- 
ship, created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath  ordained  before 
that  we  should  walk  in  them  "  ?     And  Jehovah  Himself  declared,  "  This  people 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

have  I  formed  for  Myself ;  they  shall  show  forth  My  praise."  In  other  words, 
God  has  given  you  such  religious  life  as  you  have.  You  are  a  Christian  because 
He  has  made  you  a  new  creature  in  Christ.  And  He  has  done  this,  not  that  you 
may  complacently  congratulate  yourself  on  yovir  own  salvation,  and  contentedly 
but  selfishly  enjoy  your  religious  privileges,  but  that  you  may  bless  othei-s,  and 
that  you  may  serve  Him.  Do  your  own  part  faithfully  and  prayerfully,  and  you 
wiU  do  much  more  than  you  think,  and  perhaps  the  results  you  did  not  aim  at 
will  prove  greater  than  those  you  did.  4.  The  fourth  and  final  suggestion  which 
this  verse  aroused  in  my  mind  was  one  respecting  the  Chiu"ch's  independence 
of  mere  human  planning.  Of  the  dew  and  of  the  showers,  to  which  Micah  likens 
the  Church,  he  says,  "They  tarry  not  for  man,  nor  wait  for  the  sons  of  men." 
The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  did  not  depend  for  its  existence  on  man's  permission. 
It  originated  m  God's  free  gift  of  His  only  Son.  If  you  have  some  God-given 
indication  of  your  work,  do  not  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  follow  it  up.  Just  throw 
yourself  right  into  it  at  once,  for  you  are  amongst  those  who  are  not  to  tarry  for 
man  nor  to  wait  for  the  sons  of  men.  Do  not  give  up  the  idea  of  it  because  your 
friends  would  dissuade  you.  Depend  upon  it,  if  we  go  out  in  God's  strength  and 
at  His  call ;  if,  in  the  name  of  our  God,  we  set  up  our  banners,  success  is  certain. 
If  you  would  be  a  blessing  to  others  you  need  yourself  to  receive  a  fuller  blessing. 
The  morning  dew  only  appears  when  there  is  a  certain  relation  between  heaven 
and  earth,  and  if  there  be  not  that,  no  power  we  know  of  can  create  the  dew.  The 
earth  must  give  off  its  own  heat,  under  an  open  heaven,  when  the  air  is  still,  and 
then  the  dew  will  be  deposited  abundantly.  There  is  something  you  have  to 
give  forth — namely,  your  own  love  and  longing ;  and  if  these  rise  heavenward 
in  the  stillness  of  thought  and  prayer,  and  there  be  no  cloud  of  doubt  between 
you  and  heaven,  you,  too,  may  become  as  the  dew,  pure  in  itself  and  as  a  means 
of  blessing  to  others.  Therefore,  let  us  pray  for  the  transforming  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  {A.  Rowland,  D.D.)  A  dew  from  the  Lord: — The  simple  natural 
science  of  the  Hebrews  saw  a  mystery  in  the  production  of  the  dew  on  a  clear 
night,  and  the  poetic  imagination  found  in  it  a  fit  symbol  for  all  silent  and  gentle 
influences  from  Heaven  that  refreshed  and  quickened  parched  and  dusty  souls. 
Where  the  dew  fell  the  scorched  vegetation  lifted  its  drooping  head.  That  is 
what  Israel  is  to  be  in  the  world,  says  Micah.  He  saw  very  deep  into  God's  mind, 
and  into  the  function  of  the  nation.  It  may  be  a  question  as  to  whether  the  text 
refers  more  especially  to  the  place  and  oflBce  of  Israel  when  planted  in  its  own 
land,  or  when  dispersed  among  the  nations.  For,  as  you  see,  he  speaks  of  "  the 
remnant  of  Jacob  "  as  if  he  was  thinking  of  the  survivors  of  some  great  calamity 
which  had  swept  away  the  greater  portion  of  the  nation.  Both  things  are  true. 
I.  The  FTiNCTioif  of  each  Christian  in  his  place.  "  The  remnant  of  Jacob 
shall  be  as  a  dew  from  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  many  nations."  What  made 
Israel  "  as  a  dew"  ?  One  thing  only:  its  religion,  its  knowledge  of  God,  and  its 
consequent  purer  morality.  It  could  teach  Greece  no  philosophy,  no  art,  no 
refinement,  no  sensitiveness  to  the  beautiful.  It  could  teach  Rome  no  lessons 
of  policy  or  government.  It  could  bring  no  wisdom  to  Egypt,  no  power  or  wealth 
to  Assyria.  The  same  thing  is  true  about  Christian  people.  We  cannot  teach 
the  world  science,  we  cannot  teach  it  philosophy  or  art,  but  we  can  teach  it  God. 
Now,  the  possibility  brings  with  it  the  obligation.  The  personal  experience  of 
Jesus  Christ  in  our  hearts,  as  the  dew  that  brings  to  us  life  and  fertility,  carries 
with  it  a  commission  as  distinct  and  imperative  as  if  it  had  been  pealed  into  each 
single  ear  by  a  voice  from  heaven.  Remember,  too,  that,  strange  as  it  may  seem, 
the  only  way  by  which  that  knowledge  of  God  which  was  bestowed  upon  Israel 
could  become  the  possession  of  the  world  was  by  its,  first  of  all,  being  made  the 
possession  of  a  few.  Art,  literature,  science,  political  wisdom,  they  are  all 
entrusted  to  a  few  who  are  made  their  apostles  ;  and  the  purpose  is  their  imiversal 
diffusion  from  these  human  centres.  So  to  us  the  message  comes  :  "  The  Lord 
hath  need  of  thee."  Now,  that  diffusion  from  individual  centres  of  the  life  that 
is  in  Jesus  Christ  is  the  chiefest  reason — or,  at  all  events,  is  one  chief  reason — for 
the  strange  and  inextricable  intertwining  in  modem  society  of  saint  and  sinner, 
of  Christian  and  non-Christian.  The  seed  is  sown  among  the  thorns ;  the  wheat 
springs  up  amongst  the  tares.  The  remnant  of  Jacob  is  in  the  midst  of  many 
peoples ;  and  you  and  I  are  all  encompassed  by  those  who  need  our  Christ,  and 
who  do  not  know  Him  or  love  Him  ;  and  one  great  reason  for  the  close  inter- 
twining is  that,  scattered  we  may  diffuse,  and  that  at  all  points  the  world  may  be 
in  contact  with  those  who  ought  to  be  working  to  preserve  it  from  putrefaction 


OHAP.  v.]  MIGAH.  66 

and  decay.  Now,  there  are  two  ways  by  which  this  function  may  be  discharged. 
The  one  is  by  direct  eflorts  to  impart  to  others  the  knowledge  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ  which  we  have,  and  which  we  profess  to  be  the  very  root  of  our  lives.  We 
can  do  all  that  if  we  will,  and  we  are  here  to  do  it.  Every  one  of  us  has  somebody 
or  other  close  to  us,  bound  to  us,  perhaps,  by  the  tie  of  kindred  and  love,  who  will 
listen  to  us  more  than  they  will  to  anybody  else.  Christian  men  and  women, 
have  you  utilised  these  channels  which  God  Himself,  by  the  arrangements  of 
society,  has  dug  for  you,  that  through  them  you  may  pour  upon  some  thirsty 
ground  the  water  of  life  ?  But  there  is  another  way  by  which  "  the  remnant  of 
Jacob  "  is  to  be  "  a  dew  from  the  Lord,"  and  that  is  by  trying  to  bring  to  bear 
Christian  thoughts  and  Christian  principles  upon  all  the  relations  of  life  in  which 
we  stand,  and  all  the  societies,  be  they  greater  or  smaller — the  family,  the  city, 
or  the  nation — of  which  we  form  parts.  Have  you  ever  lifted  a  finger  to  abate 
drunkenness  ?  Have  you  ever  done  anything  to  help  to  make  it  possible  that  the 
masses  of  our  town  communities  should  live  in  places  better  than  the  pigstyes  in 
which  many  of  them  have  to  wallow  ?  Time  was  when  a  bastard  piety  shrank 
back  from  intermeddling  with  these  affairs  and  gathered  up  its  skirts  about  it  in 
an  ecstasy  of  unwholesome  unworldliness.  There  is  not  much  danger  of  that 
now,  when  Christian  men  are  in  the  full  swim  of  the  currents  of  civic,  professional, 
literary,  national  life.  TL.  The  fxxnction  of  English  Cheisttans  ix  thk  world. 
I  have  suggested  in  an  earlier  part  of  this  sermon  that  possibly  the  application 
of  this  text  originally  was  to  the  scattered  remnant.  Be  that  as  it  may,  wherever 
you  go  you  find  the  Jew  and  the  Englishman.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  ubiquity 
of  our  race.  But  I  do  wish  to  remind  you  that  that  ubiquity  has  its  obligation. 
We  hear  a  great  deal  to-day  about  Imperialism,  about  "  the  Greater  Britain," 
about  "  the  expansion  of  England."  And  on  one  side  all  that  new  atmosphere 
of  feeling  is  good,  for  it  speaks  of  a  vivid  consciousness  which  is  all  to  the  good 
in  the  pulsations  of  the  national  life.  But  there  is  another  side  to  it  that  is  not 
so  good.  What  is  the  expansion  sought  for  ?  Trade  ?  Yes  !  necessarily ;  and 
no  man  who  lives  in  Lancashire  will  speak  lightly  of  that  necessity.  My  text 
tells  us  why  expansion  should  be  sought,  and  what  are  the  obligations  it 
brings  with  it.  '  The  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  many  people 
as  a  dew  from  the  Lord."  "  He  that  is  greatest  among  you,  let  him  be  your 
servant " ;  and  the  dominion  founded  on  unselfish  surrender  for  others  is 
the  only  dommion  that  will  last.  That  is  the  spirit  in  which  alone  England  will 
keep  its  empire  over  the  world.  I  need  not  remind  you  that  the  gift  which  we 
have  to  carry  to  the  heathen  nations,  the  subject  peoples  who  are  imder  the  aegis 
of  our  laws,  is  not  merely  our  literature,  our  science,  our  Western  civilisation, 
still  less  the  products  of  our  commerce,  for  all  of  which  some  of  them  are  asking ; 
but  it  is  the  gift  that  they  do  not  ask  for.  III.  The  failure  to  fulfil  the 
FUNCTION.  Israel  failed.  Pharisaism  was  the  end  of  it.  And  so  destruction 
came,  and  the  fire  on  the  hearth  was  scattered  and  died  out,  and  the  vineyard 
was  taken  from  them  and  "  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof." 
"  A  dew  from  the  Lord  !  "  Say  rather  a  malaria  from  the  devil  !  "  By  you," 
said  the  prophet,  "  is  the  name  of  God  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles."  And 
by  Englishmen  the  missionary's  efforts  are,  in  a  hundred  cases,  neutrahsed,  or 
hampered  if  not  neutralised.  We  have  failed  because,  as  Christian  people,  we  have 
not  been  adequately  in  earnest.  No  man  can  say  with  truth  that  the  churches 
of  England  are  awake  to  the  imperative  obligation  of  this  missionary  enterprise. 
Israel's  religion  was  not  diffusive,  therefore  it  corrupted  ;  Israel's  religion  did 
not  reach  out  a  hand  to  the  nations,  therefore  its  heart  was  paralysed  and  stricken. 
They  who  bring  the  Gospel  to  others  increase  their  own  hold  upon  it.  There  is 
a  joy  of  activity,  there  is  a  firmer  faith,  as  new  evidences  of  its  power  are  presented 
before  them.  There  is  the  blessing  that  comes  down  upon  all  faithful  discharge 
of  duty.  If  our  fleece  is  wet  and  we  leave  the  ground  dry,  our  fleece  will  soon 
be  dry,  though  the  ground  may  be  bedewed.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-14.  I  will  cut  off  thy  horses  out  of  the  midst  of  thee. — God^a  depriv- 
ing dispensation  towards  men  : — Here  the  Almighty  is  represented  as  taking  away 
from  Israel  many  things  they  greatly  valued.  God's  providence  deprives  as 
well  as  bestows.  Depriving  dispensations  are — I.  Very  painful.  The  things 
He  takes  away  are — 1.  The  temporally  valuable.  Whatever  is  dearest  to  tho 
heart — property,  friends,  health,  fame — is  the  most  painful  to  lose.  The  other 
class  of  things  He  takes  away  are — 2.  The  morally  vile.     Here  are  "  witchcrafts. 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

soothsayers,  graven  images,"  &c.  Whatever  man  indulges  in  that  is  wrong — 
false  worship,  all  the  sorceries  of  intellectual  or  physical  pleasure — must  go,  the 
sooner  the  better.  II.  They  are  very  useful.  God  takes  away  temporal  pro- 
perty from  a  man  in  order  that  he  may  get  spiritual  wealth ;  and  often  does  a 
man's  secular  fall  lead  to  his  spiritual  rise.  He  takes  away  physical  health  from 
a  man  in  order  that  he  may  get  spiritual ;  and  often  do  the  diseases  of  the  body 
lead  to  the  cure  of  the  souL    {Homilut.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Vers.  1-3.  Arise,  contend  thou  before  the  mountains,  and  let  the  bills  hear 
thy  voice. — God^s  controversy  with  Israel : — In  this  text  we  have  God  offering 
to  plead  before  the  sinner.  The  parties,  who  are  they  ?  On  the  one  part,  the 
Lord  of  universal  nature.  On  the  other  part,  man,  Israel,  the  Church.  The 
manner  of  pleading  this  cause.  Who  can  coolly  hear  this  language  ?  At  the  soimd 
of  these  words  conscience  takes  fright.  The  matter  of  controversy  is,  the  whole 
conduct  of  man  to  God,  and  the  whole  conduct  of  God  to  man.     I.  Hkab  what 

COMPLAINTS   MAN  HAS  TO   BBING  AGAINST  GoD,    AND   WHAT  GOD   HAS  TO   ANSWER. 

That  a  creature  should  complain  of  his  Creator  should  seem  a  paradox.  We  are 
apt  to  complain  of  God  on  three  accounts  :  His  law  seems  too  severe,  His  temporal 
favours  too  small,  and  His  judgments  too  rigorous.  1.  Are  not  the  laws  of  God 
just  in  themselves.  What  is  the  design  of  those  laws  7  Is  it  not  to  make  you  as 
happy  as  possible  ?  Are  not  those  laws  infinitely  proper  to  make  you  happy  in  this 
world  ?  And  doth  not  God  exemplifj'  these  laws  Himself  ?  What  does  God  require 
of  you,  but  to  endeavour  to  please  Him  ?  2.  Complaints  against  God  as  the  governor 
of  the  world.  Man  complains  of  providence ;  the  economy  of  it  is  too  narrow  and 
confined,  the  temporal  benefits  bestowed  are  too  few  and  partial.  This  complaint, 
we  allow,  has  some  colour.  But  from  the  mouth  of  a  Christian  it  cannot  come 
without  extreme  ignorance  and  ingratitude.  If  the  morality  of  Jesus  Christ  be 
examined  it  will  be  found  almost  incompatible  with  worldly  prosperity.  Temporal 
prosperity  is  often  hostile  to  our  happiness.  Had  God  given  us  a  life  full  of 
charms  we  should  have  taken  little  thought  about  another.  3.  Complaints 
against  the  rigour  of  His  judgments.  If  we  consider  God  as  a  Judge,  what  a  number 
of  reasons  may  be  assigned  to  prove  the  equity  of  all  the  evils  that  He  hath  brought 
upon  us.  But  if  God  be  considered  as  a  Father,  all  these  chastisements,  even  the 
most  rigorous  of  them,  are  perfectly  consistent  with  His  character.  It  was  His 
love  that  engaged  Him  to  employ  such  severe  means  for  youi  benefit.  II.  Hkak 
WHAT  COMPLAINTS  GoD  HAS  TO  BRING  AGAINST  MAN.  Every  one  is  acquainted 
with  the  irregularities  of  the  Jews.  They  corrupted  both  natural  and  revealed 
religion.  And  their  crimes  were  aggravated  by  the  innumerable  blessings  which 
God  bestowed  on  them.  Apply  to  ourselves — 1.  When  Grod  distinguishes  a  people 
by  signal  favours,  the  people  ought  to  distinguish  themselves  by  gratitude  to  Him. 
When  were  ever  any  people  so  favoured  as  we  are  ?  2.  When  men  are  imder  the 
hand  of  an  angry  God  they  are  called  to  mourning  and  contrition.  We  are  imder 
the  correcting  hand  of  God.     What  are  the  signs  of  our  right  feeling  and  mood  ? 

3.  To  attend  public  worship  is  not  to  obtain  the  end  of  the  ministry.  Not  to 
become  wise  by  attending  it  is  to  increase  our  miseries  by  aggravating  our  sins. 

4.  Slander  is  a  dangerous  vice.  It  is  tolerated  in  society  only  because  every  one 
has  an  invincible  inclination  to  commit  it.  5.  If  the  dangeis  that  threaten  us,  and 
the  blows  that  providence  strikes,  ought  to  affect  us  all,  they  ought  those  most 
of  all  who  are  most  exposed  to  them.  6.  If  gaming  be  innocent  in  any  circum- 
stances, they  are  uncommon  and  rare.  Such  is  the  controversy  of  God  with  you. 
It  is  }'our  part  to  reply.  What  have  you  to  say  in  your  own  behalf  ?  (J.  Saurin. ) 
God's  appeal  to  His  people  : — The  prophet  is  directed  to  plead  with  Judah,  and 
to  expostulate  with  them  for  their  rebellious  backslidings.  The  prophet  is  directed 
to  address  himself  to  inanimate  nature  ;  to  summons  the  very  senseless  earth 
itself,  as  it  were,  to  bo  an  auditor  of  his  words,  and  an  umpire  between  God  and 
His  people.  There  is  something,  indeed,  very  solemn  and  awful  in  this  appeal. 
The  prophet  was  directed  to  proclaim,  in  the  face  of  all  nature,  the  equity  and 
justice  of  God's  dealings;   and   to   challenge,  as  it  were,  a  scrutiny  from  His 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  67 

people.  He  condescends  to  put  Himself  (so  to  speak)  on  trial,  to  demand  an 
investigation  into  His  dealings,  and  to  plead  His  cause  as  man  with  his  fellow- 
man.  Having  exhibited  the  claims  which  God  had  upon  the  grateful  obedience 
of  His  people,  and,  by  consequence,  the  inexcusableness  of  their  revolt,  the  prophet 
next  introduces,  in  His  figurative  description,  the  Israelites  as  being  struck  with 
alarm  and  consternation  at  the  condition  whereunto  their  transgression  had 
brought  them,  and,  in  the  excitement  of  their  minds,  as  seeking  to  appease  the 
anger  of  a  justly  offended  God  by  the  most  costly  and  abundant  sacrifices.  May 
we  not  take  up  the  words  of  the  prophet,  and,  adapting  them  to  our  own  times 
and  circumstances,  sav,  "  The  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  His  people  "  ? 
May  we  not,  as  Micah  did,  stand  forth  to  challenge  a  hearing  for  the  cause  of  the 
Lord,  to  show  of  His  righteous  dealings  towards  us,  to  plead  for  the  equity  and 
mercy  of  His  government,  and  to  leave  the  folly  and  ingratitude  and  rebellion  of 
those  whom  He  hath  so  signally  favoured  utterly  and  absolutely  without  excuse  ? 
We  cannot  plead  ignorance,  or  that  He  is  a  rigid  taskmaster  whose  service  is 
hard  and  oppressive.  Nor  can  a  conscious  sense  of  unfitness  and  depravity  be 
pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  not  complying  with  the  invitations  of  a  gracious  God 
to  engage  in  His  service.  Why,  then,  is  it  that  men  refuse  to  listen  to  the  gracious 
calls  of  God  ?  There  is  but  one  plea  that  can  be  urged  with  any  apparent  reason  ; 
namely,  the  utter  inability  of  fallen  man,  of  himself,  to  turn  unto  God,  or  to  make 
one  movement  toward  that  which  is  good.  While  it  is  acknowledged  that  the 
grace  of  God  alone  can  change  the  carnal  mind,  and  renew  the  corrupt  heart, 
and  incline  the  apostate  will,  yet  we  must  ever  bear  in  mind  that  God  worketh 
not  without  means;  He  accomplisheth  not  without  methods  and  instruments. 
In  the  work  of  grace  it  is  precisely  as  in  the  works  of  nature,  that  Grod  hath 
appointed  certain  steps  to  be  followed,  in  the  economy  of  His  providence,  on  the 
part  of  man,  which  He  doth  cause  to  be  successful  to  the  production  of  their  object. 
Then  we  must  use  the  means  of  His  special  appointment ;  humbly  come  to  Him 
in  faith  and  prayer,  to  pray  that  we  may  have  grace  to  do  justly,  and  to  love 
mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  our  God.  (J.  B.  Smith,  D.D.)  Man  in  the 
moral  court  of  history  : — I.  Here  is  a  call  on  man  to  give  audience  to  Almighty 
God.  "  Hear  ye  now  what  the  Lord  saith."  L  Natiural.  What  is  more  natural 
than  for  a  child  to  hang  on  the  lips  and  attend  to  the  words  of  his  parent  ?  How 
much  more  natural  for  the  finite  intelligence  to  open  its  ears  to  the  words  of  the 
Infinite  !  2.  Binding.  The  great  command  of  God  to  all  is,  "  Hearken  diligently 
to  Me  ;  hear,  and  your  souls  shall  live."  3.  Indispensable.  It  is  only  as  men 
hear,  interpret,  digest,  appropriate,  incarnate  God's  Word  that  they  can  rise 
to  a  true,  noble,  and  happy  life.     II.  Here  is  a  summons  to  inanimate  nature 

TO    HEAR    THE    CONTROVERSY    BETWEEN    GOD    AND    MAN.       "  Arise,    Contend    thou 

before  the  mountains."  The  appeal  to  inanimate  nature — L  Indicates  the 
earnestness  of  the  prophet.  Every  minister  should  be  earnest.  "  Passion  is 
reason  "  here.  2.  Suggests  the  stupidity  of  the  people.  Perhaps  the  prophet 
meant  to  compare  them  to  the  dead  hills  and  mountains.  As  hard  in  heart  as 
the  rocks.  3.  Hints  the  universality  of  his  theme.  His  doctrine  was  no  secret ; 
it  was  as  open  and  free  as  nature.  III.  A  challenge  to  man  to  find  fault 
WITH  Divine  dealings.  This  implies — 1.  That  they  could  bring  nothing  against 
Him.  2.  It  declares  that  He  had  done  everything  for  them.  {HomUist.) 
Hear  ye,  0  moimtains,  the  Lord's  controversy. — The  influences  of  external 
nature : — The  striking  feature  of  Micah's  prophecy  is  the  mode  in  which  he 
appeals  to  the  objects  of  nature.  While  Isaiah  borrows  his  imagery  from  the 
sublime  realms  of  the  imagination  ;  Jeremiah,  from  the  scenes  of  human  life ; 
Ezekiel,  from  the  realms  of  the  dead  ;  and  Daniel,  from  allegories  connected  with 
history  ;  Micah  paints  from  the  mountain,  the  tree,  and  the  flood.  In  the  text, 
and  many  other  passages,  we  see  the  tendency  of  this  prophet  to  associate  with 
the  external  forms  of  natiu'e  the  presence  and  the  judgments  of  God.  It  is  very 
natural  that  the  objects  of  God's  creation  should  speak  to  the  human  mind  of 
Himself.  The  sublime  silence  of  nature  raises  our  mind  far  above  the  thoughts 
of  this  world,  and  fixes  its  gaze  on  the  Eternal  1.  The  objects  of  nature  in  their 
different  ways  speak  of  Him,  and  show  in  singular  fashion  how  He  is  ever  present 
at  the  events  of  mankind.  2.  The  objects  of  nature  indirectly  speak  of  religion 
and  of  heaven  to  the  thoughtful  mind.  They  embody  and  call  out  from  us  each 
elementary  principle  of  religion.  Majesty  and  sublimity  are  suggested  by  the 
moimtain  ;  repose  by  the  evening  sky  ;  joy  and  gladness  by  that  of  the  morning, 
&c.     3.  The  objects  of  nature  become  the  home  of  association.     This  power  ol 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crap,  vl 

association  that  connects  us  to  the  scenes  of  daily  life  is  essentially  religious  ;  it 
appeals  to  all  the  higher  and  holier  parts  of  our  nature  when  severed  from  their 
earthly  dross.  4.  There  is  another  way  in  which  this  appeal  to  nature  becomes 
a  very  practical  matter.  Nature  is  monotonous  ;  so  is  God.  We  find  it  where 
we  left  it.  The  scene  of  nature  which  witnessed  our  early  devotion  becomes  in 
after  years  our  accuser  and  condemnation.  5.  And  nature  suggests  the  Divine 
cause,  the  intelligent  mind,  the  adaptation  of  the  physical  world  to  the  wanta 
of  His  creatures.  But  while  this  observation  of  nature  so  elevates  the  mind  to 
God,  it  has  its  faults  and  infirmities,  which  are  its  own.  Without  the  Word  of 
God  the  works  of  God  may  mislead  us.  There  is  a  further  infirmity ;  the 
tendency  there  is  in  the  objects  of  nature  to  cast  melancholy  and  despondency 
over  the  mind.  There  are  two  elements  of  our  nature  which  produce  conscious 
happiness — hope  and  practical  energy.  To  make  hope  effective,  there  must  be 
a  certain  amount  of  connection  between  our  practical  energy  and  itself.  The 
essence  and  health  of  our  being  rests  in  overcoming  difficulties.  Where  we  find 
no  opportimity  of  doing  this  we  become  conscious  of  feelings  without  their  natural 
vent,  and  the  result  is  melancholy  and  ennui.  But  when  we  come  to  gaze  upon 
the  sublime  forms  of  nature,  none  of  our  practical  energies  being  of  necessity 
called  out  towards  them,  we  turn  away  with  impressions  of  disappointment  and 
sadness  :  the  objects  are  too  much  for  us,  because  we  are  not  necessarily  practically 
concerned  upon  them.  It  is  singular  that  few  people  are  more  negligent  of  the 
call  to  Divine  worship,  are  more  blunted  in  their  appreciation  of  Christianity, 
than  the  farming  and  agricultural  classes.  Manufacturing  populations  are  much 
more  actively  intelligent.  (E.  Monro.)  0  My  people,  what  have  I  done 
unto  thee  ? — The  LordCs  controversy  with  ua  : — God  offers  Himself  to  be  judged 
as  to  His  dealings.  1.  Is  there  nowhere  a  cry  to  provoke  the  Lord  to  ask.  What 
have  I  done  unto  you  ?  What  should  the  heart  reply  ?  It  concerns  us  to  con- 
sider. When  we  faU  short  in  putting  to  account  the  whole  store  of  God's  mercies 
we  are  sure  to  charge  the  deficiency  upon  God's  niggardliness,  and  not  upon  our 
oWn  unfaithfulness ;  for  self -justification  is  always  the  immediate  consequence 
of  self-inflicted  loss.  It  is  the  very  extent  of  God's  mercies  which  makes  men 
murmurers  and  complainers ;  for  by  so  much  the  more  they  have  failed  to  take 
due  advantage  of  them.  What  would  one  reasonably  expect  from  those  highly 
favoured  of  God  ?  But  what  is  the  real  state  of  things  T  Discontent,  dis- 
obedience, unthankfulness,  unwatchfulness,  murmurings,  rebellion,  open  violation 
of  God's  statutes,  public  profanation  of  His  ordinances,  common  and  declared 
neglect  and  contempt  of  His  sacraments  and  means  of  grace,  are  the  prevailing 
features  of  the  picture.  What  a  question  to  be  put  by  a  merciful  God  and  a 
redeeming  Saviour,  to  any  one  of  us — "  What  have  I  done  unto  Thee  ?  "  Do 
we  incur  the  rebuke  ?  2.  The  question  goes  further  yet, — "  Wherein  have  I 
wearied  thee  ?  "  How  cutting  a  question  to  the  people  that  profess  His  name  ! 
{R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  The  Lord's  controversy  : — The  history  of  Israel  is  a  most 
humbling  and  affecting  picture  of  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  The  Sinai 
covenant,  though  it  had  much  of  Gospel  in  it,  yet  was  essentially  a  covenant  of 
works.  The  turning-point  of  its  blessings  was  the  nation's  obedience.  In  the 
New  Testament  the  legal  dispensation  is  ever  opposed  to  the  Gospel  covenant, 
in  which  the  turning-point  is  not  our  obedience,  but  the  obedience  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  yet  are  its  blessings  dispensed  in  such  a  way  as  iiifallibly  secures 
the  highest  obedience  of  the  renewed  soul.  The  first  covenant  excited  to  holiness, 
and  in  those  that  were  real  saints,  and  lived  above  their  covenant,  it  promoted 
it,  but  did  not  secure  it ;  but  the  Grospel  not  only  excites  on  higher  grounds,  not 
only  promotes  to  the  highest  point,  but  infallibly  secures  sanctification  in  aU  that 
reaUy  receive  it.  11.  God's  affectinq  comcplaint  op  His  ancient  feoflb. 
They  were  wearied  of  the  Lord  and  His  pleasant  service.  And  as  they  sowed, 
they  reaped.  They  reaped  misery  and  destruction.  But  is  this  confined  to  them  T 
How  often  even  the  true  saints  of  God  seem  weary  of  their  God  !  How  soon  we 
are  weary  of  His  services ;  of  His  rod ;  aye,  even  of  God  Himself,  11.  God's 
MOST  TENDER  EXPOSTULATION.  Such  an  expostulation  from  a  grieved  fellow- 
creature  would  be  wonderful,  but  consider  the  dignity  of  Him  who  speaketh. 
Let  unwearied  kindness,  imbroken  faithfulness,  tender  love,  most  unmerited  and 
most  sovereign  grace  aU  speak.  Oh,  that  this  view  of  the  Divine  character  were 
laid  on  all  our  hearts  and  consciences  !  Oh,  that  our  souls  might  be  stirred  up 
deeply  to  repent  of  past  unwearinesses,  to  take  them  to  the  Fountain  opened  for 
ein  and  uncleaimess,  and  there  receiving  fresh  springs  of  life  and  love,  consecrate 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIC  AH.  59 

ourselves  unweariedly  to  His  glory.  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  What  can  man 
accuse  God  of  ? — It  is  impossible  to  predict  what  impression  the  same  truth  will 
make  upon  the  different  minds  of  men.  But  surely,  all  the  terrors  of  God  could 
not  more  effectually  overawe  the  heart  of  a  sinner  than  the  passage  of  Scripture 
which  I  have  now  read.  It  strikes  my  ear  like  the  last  sound  of  God's  mercy. 
Instead  of  vindicating  His  authority,  does  He  condescend  to  plead  the  reasonable- 
ness of  His  law  ?  Then  His  forbearance  is  almost  exhausted,  and  the  day  of 
grace  is  nearing  its  end.  The  supreme  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  appeals  to  sinners 
themselves,  for  the  mildness  and  equity  of  His  government ;  and  challenges 
them  to  produce  one  instance  of  undue  severity  towards  them,  or  the  least  shadow 
of  excuse  for  their  undutiful  behaviour  towards  Him.     I.  A  dibbot  proof  of 

THE  goodness  of  GoD,  AND  OF  HiS  TENDER  CONCERN  FOR  THE  WELFARE  OF  HiS 

CREATURES.  This  appears  from — 1  The  unwearied  patience  which  He  exercises 
towards  transgressors.  2.  The  sufferings  and  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
3.  The  various  means  which  God  employs  for  reclaiming  men  from  their  ways  of 
folly  and  vice.  He  is  not  only  the  gracious  Author  of  the  plan  of  redemption, 
but  He  has  likewise  set  before  us  the  most  powerful  motives  to  persuade  us  to 
embrace  His  proffered  favour,  and  to  comply  with  His  designs  of  mercy.  4.  The 
fact  that  He  has  selected  some  of  the  most  notorious  offenders  in  the  different 
ages  of  the  world  to  be  monuments  of  the  riches  of  His  grace.     II.  Objections 

UBOED    AGAINST    THE    MILDNESS    AND    EQtriTY    OF    THE    DiVINB    ADMINISTRATION. 

L  Is  it  the  holiness  and  perfection  of  His  law  that  is  complained  of  ?  This  com- 
plaint is  both  foolish  and  imgrateful.  The  law  of  God  requires  nothing  but 
what  tends  to  make  us  happy,  nor  doth  it  forbid  anything  which  would  not  be 
productive  of  our  misery.  2.  Is  it  the  threatening  with  which  the  law  is  enforced 
that  is  complained  of  ?  But  shall  God  be  reckoned  an  emeny  to  your  happiness 
because  He  useth  the  most  effectual  means  to  promote  it  ?  There  is  a  friendly 
design  in  all  God's  threatenings.  3.  Perhaps  the  objection  is  to  the  final  execution 
of  the  threatenings.  But  would  the  threatenings  be  of  any  use  at  all  if  the  sinner 
knew  that  they  would  never  be  executed  ?  4.  Do  you  blame  God  for  the  tempta- 
tions you  meet  with  in  the  world,  and  those  circumstances  of  danger  with  which 
you  are  surrounded  ?  But  temptations  have  no  compulsive  efficacy ;  all  they 
can  do  is  solicit  and  entice.  5.  Do  you  object  that  you  cannot  reclaim  or  convert 
yourselves  ?  But  you  can  use  the  means  appointed.  He  who  does  not  employ 
these  faithfully,  complains  very  unreasonably  if  the  grace  is  withheld  which  is 
only  promised  with  the  use  of  the  means.  The  truth  of  the  matter  is,  that  the 
sinner  has  no  right  to  complain  of  Gk)d ;  he  destroys  himself  by  his  own  wilful  and 
obstinate  folly,  and  then  he  accuses  God,  as  if  He  were  the  cause  of  his  misery. 
Consider  that  to  be  yoiu*  own  destroyers  is  to  coimteract  the  very  strongest 
principle  of  your  natures,  the  principle  of  self-preservation.     (£f.  Blair,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  For  I  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  redeemed  thee  out 
of  the  house  of  servants ;  and  I  sent  before  thee  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Miriam. — 
Reasons  for  gratUvde  : — Ingratitude  often  meets  with,  what  it  always  deserves, 
the  most  grievous  punishment.  The  highest  aggravation  of  this  ingratitude 
is,  when  the  goodness  of  God  is  despised,  when  His  loving-kindness  is  disregarded, 
and  the  mercies  the  Supreme  Being  bestows  on  poor  depending  creatures  are 
neglected,  if  not  altogether  forgotten,  by  those  to  whom  they  were  graciously 
afforded.  Then  a  grateful  remembrance  of  any  remarkable  mercy,  or  signal 
deliverance,  is  a  duty  the  most  reasonable '  in  itself,  and  well  pleasing  to  God. 
This  important  duty  is  not  confined  to  private  persons  ;  but  if  God  l»stows  on 
a  nation  public  mercies,  all  the  members  of  the  community  should  join  together 
to  express  their  gratitude  and  thankfulness.  1.  Consider  the  great  reason  the 
children  of  Israel  had  thankfully  to  remember  the  mercy  in  the  text  mentioned. 
(1)  The  miserable  condition  they  were  delivered  from  with  regard  to  their  bodies 
and  souls.  (2)  Their  wonderfid  deliverance  from  this  unhappy  state.  (3)  The 
state  they  were  brought  into.  2.  Show  how  applicable  this  is  to  our  present 
circumstances.  (Reference  is  to  the  reformation  of  the  Church  of  England 
from  popery,  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth.)     {Richard  Mayo,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  0  My  people,  remember  now.  —  A  Divine  reading : — This  chapter 
is  a  pathetical  expostulation  of  God  with  His  chosen  people,  the  Jews,  for  their 
ungracious  demeanour  and  miscarriage  towards  Him.  This  expostulation  ia 
carried  in  a  gracious  manner.     God  pleads  the  justice  and  equity  of  Hia  cause 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vi. 

by  a  threefold  argument.  1.  By  an  attestation  of  the  dumb  and  senseless  creatures 
(Ter.  1 ).  2.  An  appeal  and  reference  to  themselves.  3.  A  commemoration  of  many 
blessings  bestowed  upon  them.  He  insists  upon  three  fundamental  blessings,  by 
all  which  He  manifests  His  favour  towards  them,  and  aggravates  their  impiety 
and  ingratitude  against  Him.  1.  A  redemption  from  a  long  and  tedious  bondage  ; 
from  a  grievous  and  miserable  bondage,  and  from  a  vile  and  base  bondage. 
2.  The  placing  of  a  gracious  administration  over  them.  3.  He  watches  over 
them,  against  all  attempts  of  their  malicious  enemies.  He  defeated  Balak  and 
Balaam's  conspiracy.  And  this  makes  up  the  full  sum  and  measure  of  God'a 
goodness  to  His  people.  I.  The  commemoration  itself.  Here  is  a  gracious 
compellation.  "  0  My  people."  It  imports  three  things.  It  is  a  speech  of 
claim  and  possession.  It  is  a  speech  of  love  and  affection.  It  is  a  speech  of 
recall  and  invitation.  Here  is  a  forcible  quickening  of  memory.  "  Remember 
now."  God  appeals  to  His  ancient  mercies.  He  kept  them  upon  record ; 
registered  them  up  in  His  holy  Book  ;  framed  them  into  songs  of  commemora- 
tion ;  put  them  into  the  form  of  an  oath  ;  founded  the  sacrament  of  the  passover 
as  a  commemoration.  These  remembrances  are  provocations  of  thankfulness, 
and  obligations  to  obedience,  and  encouragements  to  faith.  II.  The  benefit 
OB  blessing  to  be  commemoeated.  1.  Of  the  danger  that  beset  them.  Notice 
the  ground  of  it ;  the  manner  of  it ;  the  matter  of  the  conspiracy.  2.  The  issue 
out  of  this  danger.  The  answer  to  Balak  contains  God's  gracious  deliverance 
of  His  people  from  Balak's  malicious  and  wicked  intendment.  In  it  there  is  a 
strict  prohibition,  a  gracious  inversion,  a  just  retorsion.  III.  The  end  and  pur- 
pose OF  this  gracious  deliverance.  That  ye  may  understand  the  righteousness 
of  the  Lord.  {George  Stradling,  S.T.P.)  That  ye  may  know  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  Lord. — The  importance  of  just  ideas  of  Ood  : — if  idolaters  are  zealous 
in  the  service  of  imaginary  deities,  we  ought  much  more  to  be  engaged  in  the 
service  of  the  one  living  and  true  God  for  ever.  The  ideas  which  people  entertain 
of  their  God  do  actually  exert  great  influence,  and  produce  interesting  effects 
upon  their  disposition  and  conduct.  It  has  been  observed  by  men  of  the  best 
information,  that  idolatrous  nations  have  cherished  the  dispositions  and  indulged 
the  vices  which  they  have  attributed  to  their  deities.  Virtue  and  vice  are  mea- 
siu"ed  by  the  supposed  disposition  and  character  of  their  idols.  The  descendants 
of  Abraham  imagined  that  God  was  partial  to  them  and  vindictive  to  other  nations. 
Hence  they  despised  and  hated  the  nations  aroimd  them,  and  looked  upon  them 
as  dogs  and  outcasts  from  God.  Then  it  is  easy  to  see  the  high  importance  of 
entertaining  just  notions  of  the  Lord  our  God.  If  we  believe  that  Grod  is  partial, 
arbitrary,  and  vindictive  we  shall  cherish  a  similar  disposition  and  practice, 
as  far  as  we  make  any  sober  pretensions  to  religion.  And  we  ought  to  imitate 
the  moral  character  of  God.  See  what  results  if  we  think  God  arbitrary,  hard 
and  revengeful,  or  passionate  and  wrathful.  Oxir  relations  with  our  fellows 
will  match  omr  thoughts  of  o\xr  God.  The  same  applies  to  better  thoughts  of 
God.  It  would  be  difficult  to  set  in  a  just  light  the  moral  purity,  excellence,  and 
happiness  of  a  character  formed  by  such  a  glorious  and  perfect  model  as  that 
of  the  infinite  God,  who  is  emphatically  love.  But  most  persons  arrive  at  mature 
years  without  acquiring  just,  enlarged,  and  honorary  notions  of  God,  especially 
on  some  important  points  and  traits  of  character.  How  shall  this  evil  be  remedied  ? 
By  a  careful  attention  to  the  Bible,  where  the  character  of  God  is  fully  revealed. 
By  excluding  from  the  character  of  God  everything  that  appears  to  be  hard 
and  imreasonable,  partial  and  vindictive — everything  that  would  be  thought 
Tmreasonable  and  unworthy  in  a  good  man,  a  wise  and  affectionate  parent,  or 
an  upright  and  compassionate  judge.     {Ezra  Ridley,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-8.  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord. — Pleasing  God : — This 
is  a  momentous  question,  which  the  world  has  ever  been  asking — "  How 
shall  we  approach  God  ?  "  For  men  feel  that  they  are  separated  from  Him, — 
that  there  is  something  which  prevents  access,  and  they  have  sought  how  to 
remove  the  obstacles  which  intervene.  I.  Three  methods  likely  to  effect 
THE  DESIRED  PURPOSE.  They  are — 1.  Outward  acts.  What  must  I  do  ?  This 
is  to  a  certain  extent  natural,  for  we  cannot  obtain  any  substantial  good  in  the 
world  without  work,  or  its  equivalent,  money.  Some  attempt  one  particular 
deed,  such  as  self-denial,  others  a  notably  moral  life ;  others,  again,  obsequious 
religious  observances.  2.  Pious  gifts.  "  With  burnt  offerings."  This  shows 
the  innate  idea  of  atonement  or  propitiation.     There  is  a  universal  consciousness 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  61 

of  innate  guilt  and  sinfulness,  and  there  is  a  universal  feeling  that  it  must  be 
punished.  There  is  also  in  the  text  the  idea  of  purchase.  "  Will  the  Lord  be 
pleased  with  thousands  of  rams  ?  "  It  is  not  uncommon  for  men  to  think  that 
they  can  bribe  God  by  outward  acts  of  philanthropy,  by  building  churches  or 
hospitals.  3.  Personal  suffering  and  self-denial.  Should  1  give  my  first- 
born," &c.  How  terrible  the  consequences  of  such  an  act !  Yet  men  have 
thought  that  mortifying  the  natural  sentiments  of  humanity  would  gratify  God. 
Many  have  voluntarily  submitted  to  mutilation,  to  pilgrimages ;  they  have  even 
sacrificed  their  children  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  eternal  life.      II.   The  text 

POINTS    OUT   THE   ONLY   TRUE   METHOD   OF   ACCEPTANCE   WITH   GOD.      The   prophet 

rebukes  these  popular  ideaa  in  a  quiet  manner.  He  says, — There  is  no  excuse 
for  yoiur  ignorance.  Then  why  do  men  ask  ?  It  is  because  of  their  want  of  faith, 
for  "  seeing  they  se©  not."  He  hath  showed  this  in  His  Word,  in  His  precepts, 
in  His  examples  of  life.  We  have  here  aa  components  of  that  way — 1.  Holiness. 
God  hath  required  of  thee  to  do  justly.  We  must  not  forget  that  justice  is  due 
to  God  as  well  as  to  man.  Just  dealing  demands  reverence,  faith,  trust  towards 
God  in  Christ,  as  much  as  honesty  towards  our  fellow-creatures.  2.  Mercy. 
This  means  tenderness  of  disposition,  and  an  ability  to  receive  God's  message  as 
well  as  to  show  our  mercy  to  others.  3.  Huoiility.  Accepting  God's  method 
of  salvation,  leaving  our  hopes  and  destiny  with  Him,  receiving  the  sacrifice 
wrought  out  for  us  at  Calvary  ;  not  to  think  higher  of  himself  than  a  man  ought 
to  think.  To  live  justly  is  to  live  in  Christ,  for  in  Him  all  justice  is  fulfilled.  To 
love  mercy  is  to  imbibe  Christ's  spirit,  for  He  is  the  manifestation  of  Divine  mercy. 
To  walk  humbly  is  to  follow  Christ's  teaching,  for  He  inculcates  humility,  seft- 
denial,  and  trust.  {J.  J.  8.  Bird,  B. A.)  The  world's  cry  concerning  the  method 
of  being  brought  into  fellowship  unth  God : — It  is  not  that  God  has  withdrawn 
from  us ;  it  is  that  we  are  alienated  from  Him  by  wicked  works.  Here  is  one 
of  the  world's  cries.  Where  can  we  get  a  satisfying  response  ?  There  are  only 
three  answers — 1.  That  which  has  reference  to  the  presentation  of  sacrifices.  This 
is  the  way  in  which  the  heathen  have  sought  to  bridge  the  gulf  between  them- 
selves and  their  Maker.  Yes,  and  the  old  Hebrew  too.  Millions  of  victims  have 
been  slain,  and  oceans  of  blood  have  been  shed.  But  is  this  satisfactory  ?  To 
say  that  we  are  to  retiim  to  Grod  through  sacrifices,  however  costly  and  abundant, 
is  not  quite  sufficient.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  repugnant  to  our  reason  to  suppose 
that  such  sacrifices  can  be  acceptable  to  the  God  of  love  and  mercy.  In  the 
second  place,  it  is  opposed  to  the  declarations  of  the  Bible.  "  For  thou  desirest 
not  sacrifice ;  else  would  I  give  it :  Thou  delightest  not  in  burnt-offering  "  (Psa. 
ii.  16).  "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  imto  Me  ?  saith 
the  Tx>rd  "  (Tsa.  i.  11).  "And  Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  bum,  nor  the  beasts 
thereof  sufficient  for  a  burnt-offering"  (Isa.  xl.  16).  "  None  of  them  can  by  any 
means  redeem  his  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him  :  for  the  redemption 
of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  it  ceaseth  for  ever"  (Psa.  xlix.  7,  8).  And  in  the 
third  place,  such  sacrifices,  as  a  fact,  have  never  removed  from  man  this  feeling 
of  distance  from  his  Maker.  The  gulf  remaius  as  deep  and  broad  though  the 
cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  were  offered.  2.  There  is  that  which  has  reference 
to  a  right  moral  conduct.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good ;  and 
what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to 
walk  humbly  with  thy  Grod  ?  "  This  is  just  what  philosophy  would  say.  Think 
the  true,  love  the  good,  and  do  the  right,  and  you  will  be  accepted  of  your  Maker — 
you  will  come  back  into  a  friendly  state  with  Him.  This  is  satisfactory  so  far 
as  it  goes ;  for  to  do  the  right  thing  is  reconciliation  with  heaven.  *  Those 
who  live  a  holy  life  walk  with  God,  and  are  happy  in  His  fellowship.  But 
the  question  is.  How  to  come  into  this  morally  right  state  ?  And  the  phQosophy 
which  presents  this  method  has  no  answer  to  this  question.  3.  There  is  that 
which  has  reference  to  the  intervention  of  Christ.  This  is  the  answer  of  the 
Bible.  It  teaches  that  Christ  is  man's  way  back  to  fellowship  with  his  Maker.  ' 
*'  I  am  the  way :  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  Me."  "  Through 
Him  we  both  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father "  (Eph.  ii.  18). 
But,  now,  in  order  to  see  the  satisfactoriness  of  this  answer,  it  may 
be  necessary  to  ask  the  question.  In  what  way  does  Christ  bring  man  into 
fellowship  with  God  ?  Negatively — First :  Not  by  repealing  any  of  the  laws 
of  moral  obligation  binding  on  man.  Christ's  intervention  did  not  render  man 
in  the  slightest  degree  less  bound  to  obey  every  precept  in  heaven's  moral  code. 
Tha*  code  is  as  immutable  as  God  Himself.     Secondly :  Not  by  dispensi  g  with 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

any  of  the  settled  conditions  of  spiritual  culture  and  improvement.  Christ  does 
not  make  men  good  in  any  miracvilous  way.  Observation,  reflection,  study, 
resolution,  faith,  practice,  these  are  the  means  by  which  souls  must  ever  advance. 
Thirdly  :  Not  by  efifecting  any  change  in  the  Divine  mind.  The  mission  of  Christ 
was  the  effect — not  the  cause — of  God's  love.  Christ  was  its  messenger  and 
minister,  not  its  creator.  Nor  did  He  change  God's  purpose.  It  was  according 
to  His  eternal  purpose  that  Christ  came,  and  to  work  that  purpose  out  was  Christ's 
mission.  What,  then,  does  He  do  ?  He  is  the  Reconciler.  He  reconciles  not 
God  to  man,  but  man  to  God.  "  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto 
Himself."  In  Christ,  as  the  reconciler  or  remover  of  this  felt  distance  between 
man  and  his  Maker,  we  discover  a  twofold  adaptation  of  the  most  perfect  kind. 
I.  In  Him  we  see  a  special  appkoach  of  God  to  mah.  In  Christ  there  is  a  change 
in  the  Divine  manifestation.  He  in  Christ  comes  to  man  in  man's  own  nature. 
"  God  is  manifest  in  the  flesh."  In  man  He  reveals  the  image  of  His  invisible 
self.  In  this  manifestation  two  great  obstructions  to  man's  imion  to  God  are 
removed.  1.  The  obstruction  of  inappreciableness.  God  in  nature  is  so  vast  as 
to  be  inappreciable  by  man,  but  in  the  Man  Christ  He  comes  within  ovir  horizon, 
and  within  the  compass  of  our  faculties.  2.  The  obstruction  of  guilty  dread. 
Was  there  an  obstruction  to  this  union  on  God's  part  ?  If  so,  who  shall  describe 
its  nature  ?  Men,  the  world  over,  feel  that  they  have  sinned,  and  are  liable 
to  a  terrible  punishment.  This  sense  of  guilt  hangs  as  a  portentous  cloud  over 
the  soul  of  the  world.  Men,  by  millions,  often  stagger  with  horror  under  its  black 
shadow,  and  anxiously  seek  some  shelter  from  the  threatened  storm.  This  guilty 
dread  first  drove  man  from  his  Maker.  "  I  heard  Thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and 
I  was  afraid."  The  soul,  from  the  laws  of  its  nature,  flees  from  the  object  of  its 
dread.  Fear  is  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  spirit ;  it  drives  it  from  its  Maker. 
This  dread  of  God  is  as  universal  as  sin,  and  as  deep  as  the  heart  of  humanity. 
It  accounts  for  all  the  horrid  views  that  men  have  of  their  Maker,  and  for  all 
their  hostility  to  Him  in  heart  and  life.  Now,  how  does  God  in  Christ  remove 
this  ?  He  comes  to  man  in  just  such  a  form  as  is  adapted  to  expel  fear,  and 
inspire  hope  and  trust.  In  what  form  could  He  come  but  in  the  form  of  a  man 
to  effect  this  ?  Would  a  revelation  of  Himself  in  all  His  absolute  glory  do  it  ? 
No  !  this,  if  it  could  be  borne  by  mortals,  would  only  raise  the  terror  to  a  more 
overwhelming  degree.  Would  a  revelation  of  Himself  through  angelic  natures 
do  it  ?  The  Eternal,  to  disarm  man  of  this  terrible  fear,  comes  to  him  in  man's 
own  nature.  Are  you  afraid  of  a  Teacher,  who,  free  from  all  assumption  of  superi- 
ority, scholastic  stiffness,  and  pedantic  utterance,  mingles  with  the  crowd,  and 
utters  truth  the  most  lofty  to  the  imagination,  the  most  reasonable  to  the  intellect, 
the  most  real  to  the  conscience,  the  most  inspiring  and  ennobling  to  the  heart  T 
Transport  yourselves  in  thought  to  the  mountains  of  Capernaum,  and  the  shores 
of  Galilee,  and  listen  to  Him  who  speaks  as  "  never  man  spake."  God  is  in  that 
Teacher,  and  through  Him  He  says,  "  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  Are  you  afraid 
of  a  Philanthropist,  the  most  tender  in  heart,  the  most  earnest  in  affection,  the 
most  race-wide  in  sympathy  ?  Follow  Jesus  of  Nazareth  during  the  three  years 
of  His  public  life,  as  He  goes  "  about  doing  good."  Count  the  diseased  that  He 
heals,  the  himgry  that  He  feeds,  and  the  disconsolate  that  He  comforts.  II.  In 
Him  we  see  a  special  attraction  op  man  to  God.  This  is  another  step.  He 
not  only  comes  to  man,  but  He  attracts  man  to  Himself.  He  does  this — I.  By 
awakening  the  highest  gratitude.  Gratitude  attracts,  draws  the  soul  into  loving 
sympathy  with  its  benefactor.  Kindness  is  a  magnet  that  draws  the  object 
to  its  author.  God  in  Christ  displays  such  infinite  mercy  as  is  adapted  to  inspire 
the  soul  with  the  strongest  gratitude.  Where  is  there  mercy  like  this  ?  He 
loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us.  2.  He  does  this  by  awakening  the  highest 
love.  Love  attracts,  love  draws  us  into  the  presence  of  its  object  and  makes 
us  one  with  it,  feel  as  it  feels,  and  move  as  it  moves.  God  in  Christ  is  moral 
beauty  in  its  sublimest  form.  All  conceivable  virtues  centre  there,  and  radiate 
thence,  in  infinite  perfection.  Holiness,  as  it  streams  directly  from  the  Absolute 
One,  would  be  too  strong  for  our  vision,  would  dazzle  and  confound  us,  but  in 
Christ  it  comes  mildly  and  fascinatingly,  reflected  through  the  humanities  of 
our  nature.  3.  He  does  this  by  awakening  the  highest  hope.  Hope  draws  the 
heart  to  its  object.  Thus  we  are  drawn  to  Him.  We  feel  that  "  our  fellowship 
is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ."  (Homilist.)  The  religion 
of  man,  and  the  religion  of  God  : — I.  The  religion  of  man.  "  Wherewith  shall 
I  come  before  the  Lord  ?  "  &c.     1.  This  is  simply  the  voice  of  man's  religious 


CHAP.  VI.]  IIICAH.  63 

instinct  seeking  after  God.  In  Pope's  universal  prayer,  there  is  truth,  as  well 
as  error.  "  There  are,"  says  the  late  Dr.  Vaughan,  "  tendencies  in  man  which 
make  religion,  in  some  form,  a  necessity  of  his  nature ;  but  it  is  no  less  certain 
that  there  are  tendencies  in  him  which  ensure  that  the  religion  chosen  by  him 
will  not  be  a  spiritual  one,"  &c.  2.  Consciousness,  history,  the  Bible,  prove 
that  this  inward  light  has  become  darkness.  Man's  religious  faculty  has  become 
impaired,  and  reveals  its  degeneracy  in  superstition  and  cruelty.  God  must 
be  propitiated,  but  by  "  thousands  of  rams,  and  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil," 
and  by  the  sacrifice  of  their  own  ofifspring.  "  Where  there  is  no  vision,"  &c. 
3.  The  ignorance  in  which  man  has  involved  himself  is  rectified  by  God's  revealed 
will.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,"  &c.  Reason  has  failed  to  discover  a 
resting-place  for  the  soul.  The  course  of  ages  witnessed  the  trial,  and  in  the 
most  favourable  circumstances.  II.  Gob's  beligion.  "  He  hath  showed  thee, 
O  man."  Notwithstanding  their  gorgeous  economy  of  symbol  and  sacrifice, 
they  were  taught  that  the  symbol  could  not  save,  that  God  "  desired  truth  in 
the  inward  parts."  The  religion  of  God  is  summed  up  under  three  heads — 
1.  "  Do  justly."  Love  to  God  ensures  love  and  justice  to  man.  2.  "  Love  mercy." 
This  strikes  at  the  selfishness  of  our  natiu-e.  3.  "  Walk  humbly  with  thy  God." 
The  soul  of  religion  is  here  ;  reconciliation — communion  —  reverent,  constar.t 
converse  with  God.  (John  Lewis.)  The  ancient  question: — A  question  which 
has  troubled  mankind  in  every  age.  For  the  religious  feeling  is  natural  to  man. 
All  nations  have  had  some  idea  of  God,  and  have  worshipped  Him  according 
y^to  their  notion  of  His  nature  and  attributes.  Consequently,  strange  answers 
have  been  given  to  this  inquiry,  which  have  led  to  cruelty  and  human  sacrifices. 
Men  have  mistaken  the  character  of  God.  1.  The  question  which  the  heathen 
tried  to  answer  is  still  waiting  for  our  individual  answer.  In  the  minds  of  all 
thinking  and  earnest  persons  the  question  will  sometimes  arise.  Am  I  living  as 
God  intended  me  to  live  ?  Am  I  at  peace  with  God  ?  There  are  times  when 
we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  living  realities  of  life,  and  of  death,  and  of 
eternity.  2.  To  this  question  many  and  different  answers  have  been  given.  The 
old  Jews  thought  the  best  way  to  approach  God  was  by  the  sacrifices  of  the 
Levitical  law.  Will  God  be  pleased  with  outward  observances  and  external 
show  ?  Can  we  gain  God's  favour  by  bribing  Him  with  flattery  and  gifts  ?  Not 
Jews  only,  many  Christians  have  had  such  fancies.  What  does  Isaiah  say  to 
such  religionists  ?  God  wants  no  gifts  and  offerings.  Can  God's  favour  be 
obtained  by  suffering  ?  Shall  I  lacerate  my  tenderest  affection  ?  Shall  I  give 
up  everything  that  is  pleasant  ?  Hundreds  have  asked  themselves  this  question. 
But  they  have  utterly  mistaken  the  character  of  God.  They  thought  He  was 
pleased  with  torture  and  self-sacrifice.  But  He  is  a  God  of  love,  our  Father, 
and  not  a  hard  taskmaster.  3.  To  this  question  the  prophet  gives  us  the  true 
answer.  God  would  have  us  live  justly,  and  mercifully,  and  humbly  before 
our  God.  Our  Father's  will  is  that  we  do  our  duty  where  He  has  placed  us, 
to  God,  and  to  oiu:  feUows,  and  to  ourselves ;  that  we  be  just,  with  a  justice  that 
hates  oppression,  and  will  not  tolerate  wrong ;  that  scorns  petty  vices  and 
despicable  meannesses  ;  merciful,  with  a  mercy  that  condescends  to  the  helpless, 
the  fallen,  and  the  despised ;  and  humble,  with  an  honest  reverence  towards  God, 
the  Author  and  Giver  of  all  good  things.  This  is  what  God  requires,  goodness, 
and  justice,  and  sincerity,  and  love.  {John  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  awakened 
sinner : — Here  the  purport,  though  not  the  express  words,  of  a  conversation 
between  Balak  and  Balaam  is  introduced,  in  order  strongly  to  describe  the  state 
of  a  mind  harassed  with  guilt,  and  clearly  to  point  out  the  only  way  in  which 
relief  can  be  obtained.  I.  Show  what  is  implied  in  the  anxious  inquiries 
OF  THE  AWAKENED  siNNBB.  1.  Such  inquiries  imply  the  existence  of  a  sense 
of  sin.  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  Divine  law — an  infraction  of  the  immutable 
rule  of  rightetousness  which  God  hath  given  to  His  creatures — a  state  and  course 
of  rebellion  against  His  rightful  authority ;  and  an  opposition  to  His  character, 
and  the  interests  of  His  holy  dominion.  Every  child  of  Adam  is  the  subject  of 
moral  failure,  chargeable  with  moral  delinquency,  and  exposed  to  all  the  evils 
of  moral  ruin.  The  great  bulk  of  mankind  are  totally  insensible  to  their  real 
condition.  Sooner  or  later  the  spell  on  them  will  be  broken.  The  idea  of  God 
presents  itself.  The  character  of  God  is  seen  as  infinitely  pure  and  inflexibly 
just.  The  sinner  finds  he  has  broken  His  law  in  innumerable  instances,  in 
thought,  word,  and  deed.  There  is  often  some  particular  transgression  to  which 
the  sinner  is  addicted.     2.  The  questions  before  us  imply  a  conviction  of  the 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  n. 

indispensable  necessity  of  expiation.     The  awakened   sinner  is  convinced,  not 
only  that  God  has  a  right  to  demand  satisfaction  for  the  injiuy  done  to  His  moral 
character,  in  the  view  of  intelligent  beings,  but  that  reparation  of  one  kind  or 
other  must  be  made,  else  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  the  offender  to  escape. 
Under  the  influence  of  such  views,  the  sinner  asks,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come 
before  the  Lord,"  &c.     His  concern  is,  to  get  the  obstacle  removed  which  inter- 
venes between  him  and  the  favour  of  the  Almighty.     Something,  he  conceives, 
must  be  done :  some  sacrifice  must  be  presented ;  a  suitable  expiation  must  be 
made.     3.  The  words  imply  a  willingness  to  go  any  length,  and  to  be  at  any 
expense,  if  only  expiation  can  thereby  be  made,  and  the  desired  pardon  be  obtained. 
It  is  to  this  natural  principle  of  the  carnal  mind  that  we  are  to  ascribe  the  numerous 
austerities  and  works  of  supererogation  practised  by  the  members  of  the  Church 
of  Rome.     4.  All  these  anxious  inquiries,  with  all  the  self-righteous  efforts  to 
which  they  give  rise,  discover  an  awful  and  lamentable  ignorance  of  the  only 
way  of  salvation.     How  can  a  creature  that  is  boimd  by  the  laws  of  his  moral 
constitution  to  yield  a  perfect,  uninterrupted,  and  perpetual  obedience  to  the 
reasonable  demands  of  his  Maker,  throughout  every  period  of  his  being,  make 
compensation  by  any  subsequent  conduct  for  former  omissions  and  transgressions  ? 
II.  The  chkerino  import  of  the  prophet's  reply.     Revelation  alone  solves 
the  difficulty.     In  the  Bible,  and  in  the  Bible  alone.     Of  this  Divinely  authenti- 
cated communication  the  substance  is  this :  that  the  whole  human  race,  having, 
by  transgression  and  rebellion,  forfeited  the  Divine  favour,  and  become  dbnoxious 
to  the  everlasting  infliction  of  the  Divine  wrath,  and  being  utterly  destitute  of 
all  aid  from  themselves  and  from  all  creatures,  the  Infinite  Jehovah,  whawe  laws 
they  had  broken,  and  whose  authority  they  had  rejected  and  contemned,  moved 
with  amazing  pity,  sent  His  own  equal  Son  into  the  world  to  suffer,  the  just  for 
the  unjust :  that  by  the  infliction  of  the  punishment  upon  Him  as  the  substitute 
of  the  guilty,  a  sufficient  manifestation  might  be  afforded  of  the  Divine  opposition 
to  sin,  while  mercy  is  extended  to  every  sinner  that  betakes  himself  by  fadth  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  his  Righteousness,  and  his  Strength.     Who- 
ever, of  all  the  guilty  sons  or  daughters  of  Adam,  believes  in  the  all-sufficiency 
pf  the  atonement  which  the  Son  of  God  made  with  His  infinitely  precious  blood 
TipoQ  the  Cross,  is  freed  from  his  obligation  to  punishment,  and  obtains  a  right 
to  all  the  privileges  and  all  the  blessedness  of  the  kingdiom  of  heaven.     The 
atonement  is  that  good  which  we  individually  require.     Nothing  else  can  satisfy 
"the  mind,  remove  its  fears,  or  inspire  it  with  a  good  hope  towards  God.     HI.  A 
description  is  here  given  of  BVANQELicAii  HOLINESS.     There  are  two  rocks 
on  which  men  are  ever  disposed  to  make  shipwreck  of  their  souls :  the  one-  is 
self-righteousness  ;  the  other  is,   turning  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness. 
Multitudes  go  down  to  the  grave  with  part  of  the  concluding  words  of  the  text 
as  a  lie  in  their  right  hand.     Piqueing  themselves  on  the  probity  of  their  character 
before  men,  the  charity  which  they  distribute  to  the  poor,  and  their  going  regularly 
through  the  outward  forms   of  religion,  they  imagine  that   they  have   Divine 
authority  itself  for  believing  that  all  will  be  well  with  them  at  last.     But  the  words 
admit  of  no  such  construction.     They  do  not,  in  fact,  apply  at  all  to  unconverted 
and  unbelieving  sinners ;  but  to  such  only  as  have  found  the  good  which  the 
Lord  "  hath  showed  "  them  in  the  Gospel.     Then  there  are  others  who  talk  loudly 
about  the  Gospel,  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  the  liberty  of  believers, 
but  who  cannot  brook  the  idea  of  requirement  and  duty.     It  is>  however,  absolutely 
required  of  us,  that  we  "  do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  our  God." 
Have  ever  such  anxious  inquiries  as  these  of  the  text  been  put  by  you  ?     Submit, 
I  beseech  you,  to  the  righteousness  of  God.     And  let  such  as  have,  by  the  savingly 
illuminating  influences  of  the  Spirit,  been  shown  "  what  is  good,"  be  careful  to 
■"^Nmaintain  good  works.     {E.  Henderson.)        The  good  way  of  coming  before  the 
Lord : — The  question  of  an  awakened  soul.      "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord  ?  "     An  una  wakened  man  never  puts  that  question.     He  does  not  like 
to  think  of  God,  or  the  claims  of  God.     I.  The  piercing  question  op  Evrnv 
AWAKENED  SOUX.     1.  An  awakened  soul  feels  that  his  chief  happiness  is  in  coming 
before  God.     This  was  unfallen  Adam's  happiness.     This  is  the  joy  of  holy  angels. 
This  is  the  true  happiness  of  a  believer.     2.  An  awakened  soul  feels  difficulties 
in  the  way.     Two  great  difficulties.     The  nature  of  the  sinner.     When  God  really 
awakens  a  soul.  He  shows  him  the  vileness  and  hatefulness  of  himself.     He  directs 
the  eye  within.     The  nature  of  God.     "  The  High  God."     When  God  really 
awakens  a  soul,  He  generally  reveals  to  him  something  of  His  own  holiness  and 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  66 

majesty.  See  the  cases  of  Isaiah  and  Job.  The  anxiety  of  the  awakened  soul 
leads  to  the  question,  "  Wherewith  ?  "  It  is  the  question  of  one  who  haa  been 
made  to  feel  that  "  one  thing  is  needful."  Anything  he  has  he  would  give  up 
to  get  peace  with  God.  II.  The  answer  of  peace  to  the  awakened  soxtl. 
"  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good."  Nothing  that  man  can  bring 
with  him  will  justify  him  before  God.  There  is  nothing  a  man  would  not  do — 
nothing  he  woiild  not  suffer — if  he  might  only  cover  himself  before  Grod.     Tears, 

Erayers,  duties,  reformations,  devotions — the  heart  will  do  anything  to  be  righteous 
efore  God.  But  all  this  righteousness  is  filthy  rags.  For — 1.  The  heart  remains 
an  awful  depth  of  corruption.  2.  Supposing  the  righteousness  were  perfect,  it 
cannot  cover  the  past.  Old  sins,  and  the  sins  of  youth  stiU  remain  iincovered. 
Christ  is  the  good  way.  The  good  way  to  the  Father — (1)  Because  He  is  so  suitable. 
(2)  Because  He  is  so  free.  (3)  Because  He  is  so  God-glorifying.  All  other  ways 
of  salvation  are  man-glorifying  ;  but  this  way  is  God-glorifying.  III.  God's 
REQUIREMENT  OF  THE  JUSTIFIED.  1.  God  requires  His  redeemed  ones,  to  be 
holy.  (1)  He  requires  you  to  "  do  justly  "  ;  to  be  just  in  your  dealings  between 
man  and  man.  (2)  To  "  love  mercy."  This  is  the  brightest  feature  in  the  char- 
acter of  Christ.  If  you  are  in  Christ,  drink  deep  of  His  Spirit.  (3)  To  "  walk 
humbly  with  your  God."  2.  Remember  that  this  is  God's  end  in  justifying  you. 
He  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  Himself  for  it,  that  He  might  sanctify  and  cleanse 
it.  If  you  are  not  made  holy,  Christ  died  for  you  in  vain.  3.  Whatever  He 
requires.  He  gives  grace  to  perform.  Christ  is  not  only  good  as  our  way  to  the 
Father,  but  He  is  our  fountain  of  living  waters.  Be  strong  in  the  grace  that  is 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Look  as  much  to  Him  for  sanctification  as  for  justification. 
(R.  M.  M'Cheyne.)  On  the  atonement: — The  first  rites  of  all  religions  hut  one 
are  rites  of  propitiation.  Men  everywhere,  feeling  themselves  sinners,  justly 
conceive  it  necessary  that,  in  order  to  obey  God  acceptably,  they  must  first 
be  reconciled  to  Him,  and  obtain  indemnity  for  past  offences.  Among  the  pro- 
fessors of  idolatry,  ancient  and  modern,  the  principle  of  self-atonement  has  taken 
up  its  residence.  Even  we  may  think  that  our  sufferings  ought  to  be  accepted 
as  a  partial  atonement  for  our  offences.  The  mistake  is  not  man's  conviction 
of  the  necessity  of  an  atonement,  but  the  way  in  which  that  atonement  is  sought. 
The  mistake  is  man's  making  his  conviction  a  foundation  for  his  pride  to  erect 
its  fancied  claims  on  the  Divine  justice,  and  his  self-righteousness  to  flatter  itself 
with  the  hopes  of  meritorious  exertion.  God  has  provided  the  necessary  burnt- 
offering.  He  has  provided  it  in  a  way  at  once  the  most  suitable  to  His  own  glory, 
the  most  congenial  to  the  harmony  of  the  Divine  attributes,  and  adapted,  with 
unspeakable  wisdom  and  felicity,  to  the  lost  and  hopeless  state  of  His  guilty 
creatures.  Being  justified  by  His  grace,  through  the  atonement  which  He  has 
accepted,  we  have  a  ground  of  confidence  before  God.  And  being  reconciled 
to  God  through  the  death  of  His  Son,  we  should  walk  acceptably  before  Him, 
in  newness  of  life.  (C.  R.  Maturin.)  How  to  come  before  God: — Assuming 
the  fall  of  our  first  parents,  human  reason  brings  us  to  the  conclusion  that  we 
are  all  naturally  the  worthy  objects  of  God's  wrath  and  punishment.  Scripture 
seems  to  teach  this,  and  our  experience  confirms  it.  How  then  can  we  be  delivered 
out  of  this  state  ?  Wherewith  shall  we  come  before  the  Lord  ?  1.  Shall  we 
come  with  repentance  and  amendment  of  life  ?  No.  These  may  be  indispensable 
conditions  of  salvation,  they  can,  in  no  sense,  be  its  meritorious  and  procuring 
cau.se.  2.  Shall  we  come  before  Him  with  biu-nt-offerings  ?  &c.  There  is  no 
virtue  in  animal  sacrifices  to  wash  out  the  guilty  stain  of  our  offences.  3.  Shall 
we  give  our  firstborn  for  our  transgression  ?  Would  human  sacrifices  do,  if 
animal  sacrifices  would  not  ?  No.  They  would  be  neither  an  adequate  nor 
perfect  sacrifice,  such  as  God  could  accept.  4.  Is  there  any  created  being  that 
would  suffice  to  redeem  us  ?  There  is  no  creature  that  could  meet  the  two 
required  conditions,  and  be,  at  the  same  time,  a  perfect  and  an  adequate  sacrifice. 
5.  The  apostle  answers  the  question  in  Eph.  ii.  13-18.  Christ  was  the  victim 
everyway  adapted  to  the  necessities  of  the  case.  He  was  a  perfect  sacrifice, 
and  He  was  a  sufficient  sacrifice.  (Ch.  O.  Lawson,  M.A.)  The  principles 
of  the  Reformation  and  of  Protestantism  : — I  propose  to  consider  that  peculiar 
element  of  Christianity  which,  though  not  exclusively  held  by  the  Churches  of 
the  Reformation,  yet  it  was  the  glory  of  the  Reformation  to  have  brought  fully 
out.  The  warning  of  the  prophet  Micah  consists  of  three  parts,  which  contain 
within  themselves  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  all  true  Protestant  religion. 
L  The  authority  to  which  all  beligious  questions  must  be  referred.    Th» 


N 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

question  of  authority  is  one  by  which  men  in  these  days  are  often  perplexed. 
It  is  said  that  our  business  is  not  to  ask  what  is  taught,  but  only  to  know  who 
it  is  that  teaches  us.  This  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  Bible  speaks  of  authority. 
We  are  to  heed  what  it  is  that  is  said,  and  what  it  is  that  commends  itself  to 
our  own  consciences.  The  person,  the  office,  no  doubt  is  something;  but  the 
message,  and  the  substance  of  the  message  is  much  more.  The  real  authority 
which  guides  and  ought  to  guide  us,  is  that  which  needs  no  external  support 
or  credentials.  Everywhere  the  true  voices  of  God  make  themselves  heard  and 
felt,  if  not  immediately,  yet  at  last,  not  by  external  weight,  but  by  their  own 
intrinsic  force.  The  real  teachers  and  oracles  of  mankind  have  been  those  who, 
in  every  age,  and  in  every  station,  and  in  every  race  of  men,  have  been  raised 
up  by  God.  The  Bible  is  the  great  and  supreme  authority,  because  the  Bible 
contains  the  greatest  of  all  truths  in  the  most  enduring,  persuasive,  and  exalted 
form.  We  do  not  believe  the  Bible  to  be  true  because  it  is  inspired  ;  but  we 
believe  the  Bible  to  be  inspired  because  and  in  proportion  as  it  is  true.  There 
is,  therefore,  no  need  to  go  to  any  external  official  source  for  guidance.  II.  The 
GEEAT  QUESTION  WHICH  HAS  TO  BE  SETTLED.  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord  ?  "  That  question  is  the  root  at  once  of  all  religion,  and  of  all  super- 
stition. Man  feels  that  there  is  a  Being  above  him,  whom  he  longs  to  propitiate 
and  to  approach.  Between  weak,  frail,  sinful  man,  and  the  great,  supreme, 
holy  God  what  is  there  in  common  ?  Many  ways  have  been  devised.  In  the 
early  ages  of  the  world  it  was  by  the  offering  of  gifts — the  gifts  of  the  earth,  the 
gifts  of  slain  animals,  the  gift  even  of  human  life.  In  Christian  times  other 
modes  have  been  adopted,  also  of  the  most  various  kinds.  Even  the  wildest 
and  the  worst  of  them  is  instructive  as  expressive  of  the  yearning  of  the  human 
heart,  even  in  its  lowest  condition,  to  bridge  over  the  gulf,  to  express  its  reverence 
for  the  Most  High,  to  be  at  peace  with  its  Maker.  The  modes  of  approaching 
God  might  be  wrong,  but  the  question  how  we  are  to  approach,  and  how  we  are 
to  please  the  great  Father  of  all  human  spirits,  is  the  qiiestion  which  cannot 
be  put  aside.  III.  The  Divtnb  answer  to  that  question.  This  is  the  answer 
to  the  question  how  God  is  to  be  approached.  There  is  no  other  answer — by 
justice,  by  mercy,  by  humility.  Though  this  answer  came  from  a  heathen  prophet, 
it  was  yet  the  Word  of  God,  and  commends  itself  at  once  to  every  enlightened 
heart  and  conscience.  It  needs  no  defence;  it  needs  no  explanation.  It  is  the 
foundation  of  all  true  religion,  because  it  rests  on  the  only  true  idea  of  the  char- 
acter of  God.  This  is  true  theology ;  this  is  a  true  account  of  what  God  is, 
and  of  what  God  requires.  False  religion  imagines  that  God  can  be  pleased 
by  other  means  than  by  a  good,  merciful,  and  humble  life.  True  religion  teaches 
that  whatever  else  may  be  pleasing  to  God,  there  is  and  there  can  be  nothing 
so  pleasing  to  Him  as  doing  jtistly,  loving  mercy,  and  walking  humbly.  There 
are  many  other  great  truths  in  the  Bible  besides  this ;  but  this  is  the  one  master- 
truth  which  rims  through  from  first  to  last,  controls  and  covers  all  the  rest.  And 
this  is  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament.  Through  that  ideal  of  human  justice, 
mercy,  and  reverence,  was  the  Divine  nature  manifested  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
And  it  is  the  end  and  meaning  of  the  death  of  Christ.  Not  by  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  goats,  but  by  the  eternal  spirit  of  holiness  and  truth,  He  offered  Himself. 
It  is  the  end  and  meaning  also  of  His  resurrection.  He  rose  again  that  we  might 
rise  above  the  follies  and  sins  of  the  world,  that  we  might  "  die  unto  sin  and  live 
unto  righteousness."  {Dean  Stanley.)  The  true,  sacrifice  for  sin  : — Does  any 
one  ask,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord  ?  "  Then  we  have  a  cheering 
answer  for  him.  No  such  way  of  acceptance  as  is  suggested  in  this  passage. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  ima;;ine  that  by  an  increased  attention  to  outward  services, 
and  by  a  devotion  to  specified  duties,  he  can  compensate  for  the  violations  or 
omissions  of  days  gone  by.  God  requireth  another  sort  of  service  than  that 
of  mere  outward  ceremony.  He  is  to  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth :  He 
requireth  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit.  Nor  can  the  most  painful  efforts  or 
arduous  instances  of  seK-pimishment  or  self-denial  avail.  We  are  too  apt  to 
have  a  low  estimate  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  It  requires  a  deep  sense  of  the  holiness 
and  majesty  of  God  to  estimate  sin  in  some  degree  aright.  When  we  do,  we 
may  comprehend  more  adequately  the  nature  of  that  precious  and  costly  atone- 
ment of  God's  own  providing,  set  forth  in  Scripture  as  a  sufficient  sswrifice 
and  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  We  are  not  com- 
petent, in  the  weakness  of  ovu:  present  powers,  to  comprehend  these  matters 
fully.     Should  the  newly  awakened  sinner  ask    what  sacrifice  he  shall  offer ; 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  67 

what  self- infliction  shall  he  undergo  ?  we  say.  No  such  things  are  required  of 
thee.  Look  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  as  the  heaven-sent  remedy  for  the  disease  of 
the  soul,  and  as  the  Divinely  appointed  way  of  reconciliation  with  God.  (J.  B. 
Smith,  D.D.)  Outward  and  inward  religion: — Does  the  prophet,  in  these 
words,  really  condemn  all  outward  rites  and  sacrifices  as  such  ?  All  that  the 
prophet  seems  to  inveigh  against  was  enjoined  by  the  express  commands  of 
Almighty  God.  Neither  Micah,  nor  Isaiah,  nor  any  other  prophet,  had  authority 
to  dispense  with  the  requirements  of  the  Mosaic  law.  And  our  blessed  Lord 
came  '  not  to  destroy  the  law."  The  office  of  the  prophets  was  clearly  to  prepare 
the  way  for  a  more  spiritual  religion  than  the  law  had  given  to  Israel.  Their 
mission  was  to  perfect,  or  rather  to  prepare  the  way  for  perfection.  And  so 
they  disparaged  legal  ordinances,  not  as  useless  or  wrong,  but  because  they  were 
imperfect.  The  law  was  given  for  a  particular  use,  to  be  a  schoolmaster  to 
bring  men  to  Christ.  But  if  men  made  it  an  end,  instead  of  the  way  to  an  end, 
no  wonder  that  the  prophets  lifted  up  their  voices  in  warning  against  it.  You 
are  not  necessarily  arguing  for  the  total  disuse  of  a  thing,  because  you  maintain 
its  proper  use  against  its  abuse.  Christianity  grafted  a  higher  state  of  things 
upon  what  was  already  in  existence.  What  the  prophets  say  is,  in  effect,  this, — 
"  Your  s£icrifices  are  nothing  in  themselves,  but  connected  with  the  truth  they 
typify  and  shadow  forth,  they  have  a  value  and  dignity.  But  while  you  practise 
injustice,  cruelty,  and  pride,  they  are  utterly  valueless  in  the  sight  of  God.  You 
cannot  please  God  with  these  alone,  imless  you  are  pleasing  Him  by  the  discharge 
of  your  social  and  moral  duties."  The  truth  for  us  is,  that  no  attention  to  the 
externals  of  religion  can  satisfy  the  demands  of  our  Creator  and  Redeemer  if  it 
be  not  accompanied  with  a  holy  and  virtuous  life.  {J.  C.  CJiambers,  M.A.) 
God  requires  what  He  does : — Taking  the  text  as  a  revelation  of  the  character  of 
the  Speaker  Himself,  we  may  say  that  God  does  in  His  own  economy  and  sphere 
what  He  asks  us  to  do  in  ours.  What  does  this  revelation  do  ?  1.  It  does  away 
with  all  ostentatious  piety.  Many  of  us  would  be  glad  to  buy  ourselves  off 
from  judgment.  We  may  not  put  the  question  into  words ;  it  is  not,  therefore, 
less  a  question  of  the  soul.  What  can  I  buy  my  liberty  for  ?  No  amount  of  '^' 
oil  shall  stand  between  me  and  release  ;  no  number  of  calves  and  rams  shall  for 
a  moment  deter  me  from  paying  the  fine,  if  so  be  I  can  have  the  arrow  drawn 
out  of  my  heart,  the  poison  withdrawn  from  my  blood.  But  the  Lord  will  not 
have  all  this.  He  does  not  want  your  gaiety  but  your  simplicity ;  He  does  not 
want  you  to  drive  up  to  His  door  in  chariot  of  gold  and  with  steeds  of  fire,  that 
He  may  receive  your  patronage  ;  He  sends  word  down  to  you  by  the  first  and 
humblest  servant  He  lights  upon, — Go  and  say  aU  I  want  is  that  thou  shalt  do 
justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  thy  God.  This  will  take  all  the  paint 
off  our  religion ;  this  will  deplete  our  decoration  ;  this  will  leave  us  in  ruins  as 
to  external  appearance  ;  but  there  are  ruins  that  are  true  palaces.  It  will  do 
away  with  all  our  ostentation  of  another  kind  than  that  which  is  merely  physical, 
ornamental,  or  decorative ;  it  will  do  away  with  all  our  intellectual  contributions 
and  displays  of  patronage  in  reference  to  the  Cross.  The  Cross  does  not  want 
your  intellectual  homage.  2.  This  revelation  vindicates  God  from  the  charge 
of  delighting  in  animal  sacrifices.  Does  He  love  to  see  the  smoking  hecatomb  ? 
No ;  when  He  has  required  blood  of  the  merely  animal  kind,  it  has  always  been 
symbolically,  typically,  or  prefigmratively  ;  it  was  a  necessary  pait  of  the  alphabet 
of  spiritual  lessons.  He  miist  begin  His  lessons  where  the  scholar  can  begin. 
Everything  the  Lord  did  require  of  a  physical  and  external  kind  was  only  in  a 
temporary  sense,  the  whole  thought  of  God  leading  up  to  spirituality.  "  God 
is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 
3.  This  revelation  destroys  the  notion  of  piety  by  proxy.  "  My  firstborn  for 
my  transgressions."  We  are  always  willing  to  make  away  with  other  jjeople  ; 
we  are  exceedingly  liberal  with  the  lives  of  others.  We  philosophise  and  theorise 
with  admirable  serenity,  as  if  we  had  abundance  of  leisure  in  which  to  contemplate 
the  tragedy  of  mankind,  and  we  say.  If  a  thousand  perish,  and  ten  thousand  be 
saved,  the  gain  is  on  the  side  of  salvation.  No  !  That  is  false  ;  that  is  a  misuse 
of  the  principle  of  majorities.  There  ought  to  be  no  man  lost.  And  no  man  will 
be  lost  but  the  son  of  perdition.  If  after  the  Lord  has  dealt  with  a  man  by  His 
providence  and  by  His  Spirit,  an;l  by  all  the  mystery  of  the  Cross,  there  is  foimd  in 
that  man  nothing  but  devil,  he  must  go  to  his  own  place,  and  to  his  own  company. 
But  the  Lord  will  do  the  handling  upon  a  scale  we  cannot  comprehend,  and  if  the 
Lord  gives  up  any  human  soul  we  may  well  say  sadly,  Amen.   {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  \x 

Ver.  8.  But  He  liath  shewed  tbee,  0  man,  what  is  good.  —  Piety  and 
true  religion : — I.  What  is  good  ?  You  may  conceive  of  true  piety  as  of  a  tree 
of  life  planted  in  the  midst  of  Paradise,  in  the  midst  of  the  Church,  spreading 
as  it  were  its  branches  ;  whereof  these  three  in  the  text  are  the  fairest.  Justice 
and  uprightness  of  conversation ;  mercy  and  liberality ;  and  humility.  The 
sacrifices  and  ceremonious  parts  of  God's  worship  were  "  good"  but  ex  instituto, 
because  God  for  some  reason  was  pleased  to  institute  and  ordain  them.  In  them- 
selves they  were  neither  good  nor  evil.  When  they  were  commanded,  it  was 
for  the  sake  of  that  good  effect  which  the  wisdom  of  God  could  work  out  of  them. 
That  which  is  good  in  its  own  nature  is  always  so.  Piety  and  true  religion  are 
older  than  the  world.  Ceremonies  are  confined  to  time  and  place.  The  cere- 
monious part  of  religion  was  many  times  omitted,  many  times  dispensed  with, 
but  this  good  which  is  here  shown  admitteth  no  dispensation.  Mere  outward 
performances  of  some  parts  of  the  law  were  not  done  out  of  any  love  to  the  law 
or  the  Lawgiver.  Formal  worshippers  do  not  Icwe  the  command  ;  they  obey 
for  the  sake  of  something  else.  Outward  performances  and  formality  in  religion 
have  the  same  spring  and  motive  with  our  greatest  and  foulest  sins.  The  same 
cause  produceth  them,  the  same  considerations  promote  them,  and  they  are 
carried  to  their  end  on  the  same  wings  of  our  carnal  desires.  This  formality 
in  religion  standeth  in  no  opposition  with  the  devil  and  his  designs,  but  rather 
advanceth  his  kingdom  and  enlargeth  his  dominion.  This  formality  and  insin- 
cerity is  most  opposite  to  God,  who  is  a  God  of  truth.  Innocence,  integrity,  and 
mercifulness  are  the  good  man's  sacrifice.  They  were  from  the  beginning,  and 
shall  never  be  abolished.  II.  What  is  good,  and  its  manifestations.  View 
this  good  as  it  stands  in  opposition  to  the  things  of  this  world,  which  either  our 
luxury  or  pride  or  covetousness  has  raised  in  their  esteem  and  above  their  worth, 
and  called  good,  as  the  heathen  have  done  their  vices.  Good  things  are  not  in 
themselves,  but  only  as  they  are  subservient  to  the  good  in  the  text.  Look  at 
the  good  of  the  text.  1.  As  fitted  and  proportioned  to  oiir  very  nature.  God 
built  up  man  for  this  end  alone,  for  this  good  ; — to  communicate  His  goodness 
to  him,  to  make  him  "  partaker  of  a  Divine  nature,"  to  make  him  a  kind  of  god 
upon  the  earth,  to  imprint  His  image  upon  him,  by  which  according  to  his  measure 
and  capacity  he  might  express  and  represent  Grod.  (1)  By  the  knowledge  not  only 
of  natural  and  transitory  things,  but  also  of  those  which  pertain  to  everlasting 
life.  (2)  By  the  rectitude  and  sanctity  of  his  will.  (3)  By  the  free  and  ready 
obedience  of  the  outward  parts  and  inward  faculties  to  the  beck  and  command 
of  God.  2.  As  fitted  to  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men.  Freedom  and  slavery, 
circumcision  and  uncircumcision,  riches  and  poverty,  quickness  and  slowness 
of  understanding,  in  respect  of  this  good,  of  piety  and  religion,  are  all  alike. 
Religion  is  no  peculiar,  but  the  most  common  and  the  most  communicative  thing 
that  is.  This  good  is  every  man's  good  that  will.  3.  As  lovely  and  amiable 
in  the  eyes  of  all.  This  is  the  glory  of  goodness  and  piety,  that  it  striketh  a 
reverence  in  those  who  neglect  it,  findeth  a  place  in  his  breast  whose  hand  is  ready 
to  suppress  it,  is  magnified  by  those  who  revile  it,  and  gaineth  honour  when  it 
cannot  win  assent.  4.  As  filling  and  satisfying  us.  That  which  filleth  a  thing 
must  be  proportioned  to  it.  "  There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  universe  that  is 
taken  for  enough  by  any  one  particular  man  "  ;  nothing  in  which  the  appetite 
of  a  single  man  can  rest.  Only  this  good  here  in  the  text  can  fit  it,  because  it  is 
fitted  to  it.  6.  As  giving  a  relish  and  sweet  taste  to  the  worst  of  evils  which 
may  befall  us,  whilst  with  love  and  admiration  we  look  upon  it.  It  maketh  those 
things  which  are  not  good  in  themselves  useful  and  advantageous  to  us.  This 
good  is  open  and  manifest  to  all.  It  is  published  by  open  proclamation,  as  a  law, 
which  hath  "  a  forcing  and  necessitating  power."  But  if  the  object  be  so  fair 
and  visible,  it  may  be  asked.  How  cometh  it  to  pass  that  it  is  hid  from  so 
many  eyes,  that  there  be  so  few  that  see  it,  or  see  it  so  as  to  fall  in  love  with  it 
and  embrace  it  ?  Three  hindrances  are  mentioned  by  Isidore  of  Pelusium. 
(1)  Narrowness  and  defect  of  the  imderstanding  and  judgment.  (2)  Sloth  and 
neglect  in  the  pursuit.  (3)  Improbity  of  men's  manners,  and  a  wicked  and 
profane  conversation.  Then  let  us  cleave  fast  to  this  good,  and  uphold  it  in  its 
native  and  proper  purity  against  aU  external  rites  and  empty  formalities  ;  and, 
in  the  next  place,  against  all  the  pomp  of  the  world,  against  that  which  we  call 
good  when  it  maketh  us  evil.  III.  The  promulgation  of  this  good  as  a  law. 
"  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee  ?  "  This  is  as  the  publication  of  it,  and 
making  it  a  law.     And  His  will  is  attended  with  power,  wisdom,  and  love.     I.  By 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIC  AH.  69 

His  power  God  created  man,  and  "  breathed  into  him  a  living  sonl."  Made  him 
as  it  were  wax,  to  receive  the  impressions  of  a  Deity,  made  him  a  subject  capable 
of  a  law.  As  God  createth,  so  He  continues  man  and  protects  him.  From  this 
ocean  of  God's  power  naturally  issueth  forth  His  power  of  giving  laws,  of  requiring 
what  He  may  please  from  His  creature.  2.  As  His  absolute  will  is  attended  with 
power  uncontrollable,  so  it  is  also  with  wisdom  unquestionable.  The  '*  only  wise 
Grod."  His  laws  are  like  Himself,  just  and  holy,  pure  and  undefiled,  unchange- 
able, immutable,  and  everlasting.  As  His  wisdom  is  seen  in  giving  laws,  so 
it  is  in  fitting  the  means  to  the  end,  in  giving  them  virtue  and  force  to  di&vr 
us  to  a  nearer  vision  and  sight  of  God.  3.  God's  absolute  will  is  attended  with 
love.  These  are  the  glories  of  His  will ;  He  can  do  what  He  will ;  He  will  do  it 
by  the  most  proper  and  fitting  means  ;  and  whatsoever  He  requireth  is  the  dictate 
of  His  love.  Consider  the  form  in  which  God's  requirements  are  presented,  and 
the  manner  of  proposing  them.  The  prophet  here  does  not  "  bid  us  do  any  great 
things."  When  men  pretend  they  cannot  do  what  God  requires,  they  should 
change  their  language ;  for  the  truth  is,  they  will  not.  It  is  not  only  easy,  it  is 
sweet  and  pleasant  to  do  what  Grod  requireth.  Obedience  is  the  only  spring 
from  whence  the  waters  of  comfort  flow,  an  everlasting  foundation  on  which 
alone  joy  and  peace  will  settle  and  rest.  Take  in  view  the  substance  of  these 
words  of  the  text.  The  word  "  Lord  "  is  a  word  of  force  and  efficacy  ;  it  striketh 
a  reverence  into  os,  and  remembereth  us  of  our  duty  and  allegiance.  As  He  is 
Lord  paramount,  and  hath  an  absolute  will,  so  His  will  is  attended  with  powers, 
with  that  power  which  made  thee.  I  cannot  name  the  several  ways  we  stand 
obliged  to  this  Lord.  We  may  comprehend  all  in  that  axiom  of  the  civilians, 
"  We  have  as  many  engagements  and  obligations  as  there  be  instruments  and 
writings  betwixt  us."  IV.  Justioh  and  honbsty.  We  are  no  sooner  men, 
but  we  are  debtors,  under  obligations  to  God,  to  men,  to  ourselves.  To  "do 
justly  "  is  to  give  every  man  his  own,  not  to  lay  hold  on,  or  alienate  or  deceitfully 
withdraw,  or  violently  force  from  any  man  that  of  which  he  is  the  lawful  possessor. 
Private  justice  is  of  far  larger  extent  than  that  which  is  public,  which  speaketh 
and  acteth  from  the  tribunal.  Public  justice  steereth  by  no  other  compass  but 
the  laws  of  men  ;  but  this  by  the  laws  of  nature  and  charity.  Justice  and  honesty 
in  its  full  shape  and  beauty  is  fastened  upon  its  proper  pillars,  the  law  of  nature, 
and  the  law  of  the  God  of  natiu-e.  V.  Thb  lovb  of  mercy.  Where  there  is  no 
justice,  there  can  be  no  mercy  ;  and  where  there  is  no  mercy,  there  justice  is  but 
gall  and  wormwood.  Therefore  in  the  Scriptm-e  they  go  hand  in  hand.  Consider 
mercy — 1.  In  the  fruit  it  jdeldeth.  2.  In  its  root.  VI.  Walking  humbly  with 
God.  Humility  consisteth  in  placing  us  where  we  should  be  at  the  footstool 
of  God.  (A.  Farindon,  B.D.)  True  religion  a  reasonable  service: — Virtue  is 
essentially,  and  therefore  inseparably  connected  with  religion.  It  is  not  possible 
that  a  vitiated  mind  should  have  any  proper  relish  for  Divine  truth.  The  animal 
man  comprehendeth  not  the  doctrines  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  There  is  a  strong 
and  an  insuperable  reason  in  nature  for  this  evident  distinction  between  good 
and  bad  men  in  inquiries  of  religion,  which  is  plainly  this, — That  every  advance 
in  celestial  truth  opens  a  prospect  the  most  inviting  to  the  virtuous,  while  the 
vicious  man  trembles  at  every  ray  of  light  which  is  let  in  on  his  disordered  mind. 
It  seems  most  natural  to  put  the  address  of  the  text  into  the  mouth  of  the  king 
of  Moab,  in  conversation  with  the  prophet.  Success  against  a  numerous  and 
victorious  enemy  engrossed  the  king's  thoughts.  For  this  purpose  he  had  recourse 
to  the  God  of  Israel,  whose  aid  he  endeavours  to  engage  by  a  profusion  of  offerings 
in  every  kind  of  his  substance,  or  even,  if  aU  these  should  fail,  with  the  life  of 
his  son.  The  answer  is  such  as  well  suited  a  representative  of  the  (>eator  of  the 
universe.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good."  Whatever  answers 
entirely  the  end  for  which  it  was  made  is  said,  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old 
Testament,  particularly  to  be  good.  That  must  be  good  indeed  which  serves 
admirably  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  designed  by  infinite  wisdom.  To  man 
alone  is  reserved  the  happy  privilege  of  dedicating  voluntarily  his  powers  to  the 
ends  for  which  they  were  at  first  bestowed.  This  is  good  for  man.  ft  is  naturally 
to  be  expected  of  him,  upon  whom  the  dominion  of  this  world  and  the  reversion 
of  the  next  is  conferred,  that  he  should  regulate  his  conduct  by  the  laws  of  nature 
and  of  God.  This  is  his  rational  worship.  Obedience,  arising  from  any  other 
cause  than  moral  motives,  would  be  the  motion  of  a  stone,  not  the  duty  of  a  man, 
and  consequently  incapable  of  being  in  any  sense  acceptable  to  God  more  than 
the  rising  vapour,  or  the  falling  dew.     It  is  most  reasonable  to  suppose,  that 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

if  ever  the  Creator  of  the  world  should  vouchsafe  to  make  any  discovery  of  His 
intention  relative  to  the  conduct  of  man,  the  tables  of  revelation  must  contain 
a  transcript  of  the  laws  of  natiu-e.  "  To  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
humbly  with  God  "  is  the  sum  and  great  outline  of  the  whole  duty  of  man.  To 
preserve  a  solicitous  attention  to  God's  supreme  direction,  under  a  rational  con- 
viction of  His  paternal  care ;  an  equitable  regard  to  the  rights  and  interests 
of  oiu:  brethren.  His  children ;  with  a  sensible  concern  for  their  infirmities  and 
wants,  a  concern  which  must  reach  out  its  hand  beyond  the  line  of  rigid  justice. 
These  offices  are  generally  ranged  by  moralists  under  three  different  branches, 
as  they  relate  to  God,  to  mankind,  and  to  the  individual.  However  contracted  or 
enlarged,  this  is  the  law  of  man  ;  and  this  law  is  properly  eternal  and  immutable, 
which  is  not  so  of  any  accidental  or  accessional  appendages  to  religion.  If  this 
law  were  once  as  punctually  observed  as  it  is  often  plainly  promulged,  we  should 
then  have  the  same  harmony  in  the  moral  as  has  always  been  in  the  natural  world. 
{T.  Ashton,  D.D.)  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  Justly,  and  to 
love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ? — Three  things  God  wants  of  us  : — 

1.  Explain  thh  wholb  passage.  The  prophet  alludes  to  the  story  of  Balak 
and  Balaam.  The  lesson  drawn  from  the  story  is  this, — How  unavailing  are 
the  most  costly  sacrifices,  how  far  from  being  truly  acceptable  to  God,  when 
not  attended  with  true  piety,  justice,  mercy,  and  a  good  disposition  of  the  heart 
in  those  that  offer  them.  For  this  was  the  case  of  Balak  in  the  history  told  us. 
We  have  in  the  text  a  sort  of  dialogue  betwixt  Balak  and  Balaam,  represented 
to  us  in  the  prophetical  way.  It  might  seem  that  Balaam's  advice  was  too  good 
for  him  to  give  ;  but  it  is  to  be  considered  that  Balaam's  character  was  of  a 
mixed  nature,  had  something  good  and  something  bad  in  it.  II.  Raise  observ- 
ations ON  THE  PASSAGE.  1.  This  reference  of  one  Script xire  book  to  another 
is  one  of  those  internal  marks  of  their  truth  and  genuineness  which,  to  men  of 
true  learning,  gives  great  satisfaction  in  their  study  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures. 

2.  How  prone  men  must  have  been  to  rest  in  the  mere  outward  performances  of 
some  acts  of  worship  or  devotion,  to  the  neglect  of  those  substantial  duties  of 
justice,  mercy,  and  true  piety ;  or  that  purity  of  heart  and  life  which  God  more 
especially  requires  in  those  that  worship  Him.  Learn  here  the  harmony  and 
agreement  of  God's  dispensations  to  mankind  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. 
Resolve  to  learn  and  practise  the  good  lesson  of  the  text.  (C.  Peters,  M.A.) 
What  God  requires : — God  had  shown  by  His  law  what  is  good ;  but  the  prophet 
adds  that  it  is  "  to  do  justly,  to  love  mercy  (or  kindness),  and  to  be  humbled 
before  God."  It  is  evident  that,  in  the  two  first  particulars,  he  refers  to  the 
second  table  of  the  law;  that  is,  to  "do  justice,  and  to  love  mercy."  Nor  is 
it  a  matter  of  wonder  that  the  prophet  begins  with  the  duties  of  love  ;  for 
though  in  order  the  worship  of  God  precedes  these  duties,  and  ought  rightly  to 
be  so  regarded,  yet  justice,  which  is  to  be  exercised  towards  men,  is  the  real 
evidence  of  true  religion.  The  prophet  therefore  mentions  justice  and  mercy, 
not  that  God  casts  aside  that  which  is  principal — the  worship  of  His  name  ;  but 
he  shows,  by  evidences  or  effects,  what  true  religion  is.  Hypocrites  place  all 
holiness  in  external  rites  ;  but  God  requires  what  is  very  different ;  for  His 
worship  is  spiritual.  But  as  hypocrites  can  make  a  great  show  of  zeal  and 
solicitude  in  the  outward  worship  of  God,  the  prophets  try  the  conduct  of  men  in 
another  way,  by  inquiring  whether  they  act  justly  and  kindly  towards  one 
another,  whether  they  are  free  from  all  fraud  and  violence,  whether  they  observe 
justice  and  show  mercy.  Micah  adds,  however,  "  And  to  be  humble  in  walking 
with  thy  God."  No  doubt,  as  the  name  of  God  is  more  excellent  than  anything  in 
the  whole  world,  so  the  worship  of  Him  ought  to  be  regarded  as  of  more  import- 
ance than  all  those  duties  by  which  we  prove  our  love  towards  men.  The  main 
object  of  the  prophet  was  to  show  how  men  were  to  prove  that  they  seriously 
feared  God  and  His  law:  he  afterwards  speaks  of  God's  worship.  Condemned 
here  is  all  pride,  and  also  all  confidence  in  the  flesh  :  for  whosoever  arrogates  to 
himself  even  the  least  thing,  does  in  a  manner  contend  with  God  as  an  opposing 
party.  The  true  way  then  of  walking  with  God  is,  when  we  thoroughly  humble 
ourselves,  yea,  when  we  bring  ourselves  down  to  nothing :  for  it  is  the  very 
beginning  of  worshipping  and  glorifying  God  when  men  entertain  humble  and 
low  opinion  of  themselves.  (John  Calvin.)  God^s  requirements  and  God's 
gift : — The  prophet  read  off  rightly  God's  requirements,  but  he  had  not  anything 
to  say  about  Grod's  gifts.  So  his  word  is  a  half-truth.  The  great  glory  of 
Christianity  is  not  that  it  reiterates  or  alters  Grod's  requirements,  but  that  it 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIOAH.  71 

brings  into  view  God's  gifts.  To  "  do  justly,"  &c.,  is  only  possible  through 
repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  God's  require- 
ments. In  the  text  are  the  plain,  elementary  duties  of  morality  and  religion. 
It  covers  substantially  the  same  ground,  in  a  condensed  form,  as  does  the  Deca- 
logue, only  that  Moses  begins  with  the  deepest  thing  and  works  outwards,  as 
it  were  :  Mieah  begins  at  the  other  end,  and  starting  with  the  lesser,  the  more 
external,  the  purely  human,  works  his  way  inwards  to  that  which  is  the  centre 
and  the  source  of  all.  II.  Our  faelurh.  There  is  not  one  of  us  that  has  come 
up  to  the  standard.  Micah's  requirements  come  to  every  man  that  will  honestly 
take  stock  of  his  life  and  his  character,  as  the  statement  of  an  unreached  and 
unreachable  ideal.  If  then  it  is  true,  that  all  have  come  short  of  the  require- 
ment, then  there  should  follow  a  universal  sense  of  guilt,  for  there  is  a  imiversal 
fact  of  guilt,  whether  there  be  a  sense  of  it  or  not.  And  there  follows  a  hopeless- 
ness as  to  ever  accomplishing  that  which  is  demanded  of  us.  III.  God's  gifts. 
The  gift  of  God  is  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  meets  all  our  failures.  What  a  difference 
the  conception  of  God  as  giving — rather  than  requiring — makes  to  the  spirit 
in  which  we  work  !  What  a  difference  it  brings  into  what  we  have  to  do.  We 
have  not  to  begin  with  effort,  we  have  to  begin  with  faith.  First  go  to  the  giving 
God.  Then  accept  His  gift.  And  then  say,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me 
to  do  ?  "  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  On  the  extent  of  genuine  religion: — Most 
commonly  the  Scriptures  press  upon  us,  in  the  first  instance,  that  supreme  and 
affectionate  faith  towards  God  and  Christ,  which  is  the  foundation  of  every 
Christian  virtue.  And  then  proceed  to  inculcate  those  pure  principles,  those 
holy  tempers,  and  those  good  works  which  genuine  faith  in  God  and  Christ  will 
necessarily  produce.  Sometimes,  however,  solicitous  to  recommend  the  tree 
by  a  reference  to  the  excellence  of  the  fruit,  they  specify  works  in  the  outset ; 
and  then  direct  our  views  to  that  faith  from  which  every  acceptable  work  is 
to  spring.  Love  to  God  and  our  Redeemer,  whether  mentioned  first  or  last, 
must  be  the  fountain  from  which  every  human  duty  is  derived.  Christ  is  the 
corner-stone  of  the  belief  and  the  practice  of  a  Christian.  Explain  the  different 
branches  of  human  duty  according  to  the  order  in  which  they  are  arranged  by  the 
prophet.  I.  "  He  ha':?h  showed  thee,0  man,  what  is  good."  So  clearly  hath  God 
made  known  whatever  is  necessary  to  salvation,  that  they  who  attain  not  salvation 
shall  stand  without  excuse.  In  the  breast  of  every  man  God  hath  implanted  •- 
a  natural  conscience.  And  He  has  given  us  His  written  Word.  *^0n  every  man 
He  bestows  power  to  attain  eternal  Ufe.  He  ensiures  to  every  faithful  supphant 
the  all-sufficient  influence  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  not  only  that  it  may  enlighten 
the  mind  to  understand  the  Scriptures,  but  may  also  give  grace  to  obey  them. 
And  He  commands  His  ministers  to  preach  the  Gospel  throughout  the  world 
to  every  creature.  Then  if  you  know  not  your  duty,  it  is  because  you  will 
not  know  it.  If  you  perish  through  ignorance,  it  is  because  you  prefer  ignorance 
to  understanding.  II.  What  then  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  1.  You  must 
do  justly.  You  must  be  just  in  every  part  of  every  one  of  your  proceedings. 
You  must  render  to  every  man,  cheerfully,  and  without  delay,  that  which  belongs 
to  him.  This  rule  obliges  you — (1)  On  all  occasions  to  speak  the  truth.  For 
a  lie  is  not  only  a  breach  of  your  duty  to  God,  but  is  also  a  breach  of  your  duty 
to  your  neighbour.  (2)  To  be  a  faithful  subject  to  the  king  :  to  submit  to  all 
who  are  entitled  to  authority  over  you.  (3)  To  keep  from  injuring  the  person 
and  restraining  the  hberty  of  your  neighbour.  (4)  To  avoid  in  any  way  injuring 
your  neighbour's  property.  And  the  methods  in  which  this  may  be  done  are 
numberless.  2.  You  are  to  "love  mercy."  Mercy  signifies  Christian  charity-.,— 
in  its  largest  sense.  It  includes  everything  which  we  mean  by  affection,  bene- 
volence, kindness,  tenderness,  mildness,  meekness,  patience,  forgiveness ;  and  by 
every  other  expression  which  imphes  goodwill  to  men.  Observe  the  difference 
of  the  terms  in  which  God  requires  of  us  first  justice  then  mercy.  We  are  to 
do  justly ;  we  are  to  love  mercy.  Justice  admits  of  no  degrees.  If  we  are  not 
perfectly  just,  we  are  imjust.  But  mercy  is  in  its  own  nature  capable  of  grada- 
tions. One  person  may  be  more  mercifid  than  another.  Thou  shalt  love  mercy 
then.  Thy  heart  shall  be  constantly  set  on  deeds  of  mercy,  they  shall  be  thy 
study ;  they  shall  be  a  delight  unto  thee.  3.  You  are  to  "  walk  humbly  with 
God."  To  walk  with  God  signifies  to  be  a  faithful  and  zealous  servant  of  God. 
We  are  to  bring  our  whole  hearts,  as  weU  as  our  actions,  into  subjection  to  the 
Divine  will.  Are  you  in  prosperity  ?  Walk  humbly  with  your  God.  Let  the  Giver 
be  glorified  in  His  gifts.     Are  you  in  distress  ?     Walk  humbly  with  your  God. 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

Evidently  then,  to  the  Jew  and  to  the  Christian,  the  sum  and  substance  of  religion 
have  ever  been  the  same.  (Thomas  Oisborne,  M. A.)  Root  principles  : — I.  Thb 
SOOT  PRINCIPLB  OF  ALL  DUTY.  "  Do  justly."  It  is  Said  that  in  some  parts  of 
Africa  and  South  America  certain  races  of  men  have  been  found  with  appar- 
ently no  sense  of  justice  in  them,  and  of  course  no  religion.  It  would  be  interest- 
ing to  know  how  far  the  one  is  the  cause  or  the  consequence  of  the  other.  It 
may  be  said  they  have  lost  their  religion,  and  with  it  all  sense  of  justice,  or,  having 
lost  all  sense  of  justice,  there  is  no  groundwork  or  foundation  for  any  religious 
principle  to  operate  upon.  The  question  comes  before  us  in  a  practical  shape. 
How  are  the  wild  creatiures  of  our  streets  to  be  caught  and  tamed  and  domestic- 
ated; how  are  the  principles  of  justice  and  morality  to  be  imparted  to  them — 
in  other  words,  how  are  they  to  be  taught  to  "  do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk 
humbly  with  their  God  "  ?  In  the  Hebrew  law  God  laid  a  foundation,  in  justice 
and  morality,  for  the  Gospel ;  a  foundation  on  which  He  afterwards  reared  the 
superstructure  of  a  glorious  Church,  whose  walls  are  salvation,  and  whose  gates 
are  praise.  On  this  common  platform  of  justice  and  morality  we  all  meet,  acknow- 
ledging the  law  of  the  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and  through  all, 
and  in  us  all.  II.  The  root  principlb  of  all  religion.  "  Love  mercy."  We 
are  not  only  to  practise  this  virtue,  and  imitate  this  attribute  of  our  Father  in 
the  heavens,  but  we  are  to  "  love  mercy."  To  love  it  we  must  see  it  in  all  its 
beauty  and  Divine  perfection,  and  this  we  can  only  do  in  Jesus  Christ.  He  is 
the  mercy  of  God  to  us.  III.  The  root  principlb  of  the  spiritual  life. 
"  Walk  humbly  with  thy  God."  To  walk  with  Him  humbly  and  reverently, 
as  He  reveals  Himself  in  the  pages  of  His  Word,  and  in  the  person  and  work 
of  His  Son,  is  the  privilege  of  His  believing  children.  This  humble  walk  with 
God  is  one  of  light,  and  joy,  and  triumph.  The  entrance  is  pleasant,  so  is 
the  road  ;  the  company  ;  and  the  end.  (if.  Balgamie. )  Of  the  great  duties  of 
natural  religion,  with  the  ways  and  means  of  knowing  them  : — In  these  words  you 
have — 1.  An  inquiry  which  is  the  best  way  to  appease  God  when  He  ia 
offended.  2.  The  way  that  men  are  apt  to  take  in  this  case.  3.  The  course 
which  Grod  Himself  directs  to,  and  which  will  effectually  pacify  Him.  Dwell  on 
this  third  point.  I.  Those  several  dtttxbs  which  God  herb  rbqttirbs  of  its. 
The  Jews  reduced  all  the  duties  of  religion  to  these  three  heads,  justice,  mercy, 
and  piety:  under  the  first  two,  comprdiendinc  the  duties  which  we  owe  to  one 
another ;  and  under  the  third,  the  duties  whicn  we  owe  to  God.     II.  Thb  ways 

AND   MEANS   BY  WHICH  GoD  HATH  MADE   KNOWN    THESE  DUTIES  TO  US,   AND  THB 

goodness  and  the  obligation  of  THEM.  1.  By  a  kind  of  natural  instinct. 
2.  By  natural  reason.  3.  By  the  general  vote  and  consent  of  mankind.  4.  By 
external  revelation.  5.  By  the  inward  dictates  and  motions  of  God's  Spirit 
upon  the  minds  of  men.  (J.  TiUotson,  D.D.)  The  Lord's  requirements : — 
I.  The  duties  expressed  by  the  prophet.  They  are  most  reasonable ;  there 
is  nothing  in  them  but  what  every  enlightened  mind  will  most  cordially  agree  to. 
1.  To  "  do  justly."  Not  only  to  think  and  speak  justly,  but  to  act  so — to  act 
with  honesty,  integrity,  and  fidelity,  without  injm-ing,  defrauding,  oppressing 
or  tempting  to  evil  any  one.  To  "ao  justly  "  is  in  every  way  to  befriend  your 
neighbour.  2.  To  "  love  mercy."  To  take  pleasm-e  in  acts  of  compassion,  forgive- 
ness, and  kindness.  The  love  of  mercy  is  a  very  different  thing  from  any  act  of 
professed  mercy.  Real  mercy  lies  in  the  motive  of  kindness,  and  the  love  of  it  V 
lies  in  the  gratification  felt  in  another's  benefit.  The  love  of  mercy  is  a  mighty 
impulse  to  its  exercise.  The  love  of  mercy  gives  an  intensity  to  it.  3.  To  "  walk 
humbly  with  God."  This  indicates  a  teachable,  submissive,  thankful,  patient, 
and  dependent  spirit ;  a  close  communion  with  God  ;  and  a  progressive  know- 
ledge of  the  character  and  majesty  of  the  Deity.  As  this  knowledge  dawns  upon 
the  soul,  so  does  the  soul  sink  into  self-abasement.  The  great  characteristic 
of  walking  with  God  on  earth  is  trust  in  Christ.  11.  The  motives  furnished 
IN  THE  TEXT  FOR  THE  DISCHARGE  OF  THESE  DUTIES.  1.  One  motivo  is  derived 
from  the  exhibition  of  the  Lord's  goodness.  2.  Another  from  the  authority  of 
the  requirement.  3.  Another  from  the  nature  and  reasonableness  of  the  things 
required.  (W.  D.  Horwood.)  God's  requirements  : — The  consummate  result  of 
all  education  consists  in  the  power  of  applying  a  few  scientific  principles.  Out 
of  one  clear  rule  or  method  spring  all  the  products  of  the  branching  and  luxuriant 
science  of  figiu-es.  So  the  highest  art  and  achievement  of  man's  life  is  but  the 
flowering  of  one  or  two  germinal  truths.  The  requirements  of  the  text  are  easy 
to  understand — worth  whole  tons  of  sermons  and  dissertations.     And  yet  these 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  73 

are  precepts  which  are  not  yet  made  practical  in  the  hearts  of  men.  It  is  the 
application  of  the  theory  that  is  requisite.  These  words  of  the  text  point  out  the 
entire  essence  of  religion — vital,  evangelical  religion.  Some  people  entertain  a 
dread  of  plain  propositions.  They  do  not  like  to  have  religion  put  in  simple 
words  ;  they  want  it  left  with  some  vagueness  and  complexity  mingled  with  it. 
In  plain  words,  they  suspect  it  is  only  good  morality.  They  miss  the  vitality 
of  religion,  as  they  call  it.  There  is  nothing  in  these  words  concerning  terms  of 
salvation,  or  faith  in  the  atonement.     But  we  may  be  sure  that  all  the  essence 

and  vitality  of  religion  is  here.     Christ  is  here ;  because  who  can  do  justly,  love| 

mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  his  Maker,  without  that  communion  with  Christ 
Jesus,  and  that  inspiration  of  His  Spirit,  by  which  alone  we  are  strengthened 
and  guided  to  do  these  things  ?  And  what  an  advantage  there  is  in  having  such 
a  condensed  statement  of  religion  !  It  clears  up  things ;  it  is  like  getting  a  glimpse 
of  a  star  in  heaven,  and  taking  our  latitude  and  longitude,  when  we  have  been 
drifting  about  on  the  dark  waves  of  doubt.  The  words  of  the  text  set  forth  no 
light  affair  for  our  performance.  The  essence  of  all  right  doing,  right  feeling, 
and  right  living  is  here  indicated.  The  text  expresses  nothing  less  than  all  morality, 
all  philanthropy,  all  religion ;  the  essence  of  all  vital  religion,  and  the  highest 
spiritual  life.  1.  The  foundation  principle  of  morality  is  involved  in  the  precept. 
Do  justly."  It  is  a  compact  summary  of  all  social  duty.  It  abolishes  all 
standards  of  mere  selfish  advantage  and  worldly  policy,  commanding  us  to  do 

V  the  just,  the  true,  the  righteous  thing,  whatever  may  come  of  it  in  the  way  of 
personal  or  temporal  consequences.  Be  just,  in  thought,  deed,  word,  hand,  brain, 
heart.  What,  then,  is  the  proper  idea  of  justice  ?  There  is  a  vast  difference 
between  law  and  justice — between  human  enactments  and  God's  everlasting 
requirements.  Is  your  idea  of  justice  that  which  is  merely  legal  ?  Or  is  it  to  set 
up  your  individual  will,  your  selfish  standard,  regulated  only  by  parchment  laws, 
no  matter  what  the  spirit  of  civilisation  or  the  general  good  demands  ?  With 
others  justice  only  means  the  stem  thing — eye  for  eye,  &c.  But  in  this  way  a 
man  gets  a  good  chance  to  deify  his  own  passions,  and  think  he  is  doing  Grod  service. 
Sometimes  men  reverse  this  a  very  little.  They  manage,  by  some  sting  of  reproach, 
or  some  obnoxious  word,  to  get  their  revenge.  They  are  after  their  revenge 
all  the  while.  But  justice  is  a  merciful  thing.  It  may  be  severe,  it  is  never 
merciless.  vTrue  jxistice  is  the  justice  of  charity.  In  order  to  do  justly  we  should 
construe  the  conduct  of  others  as  we  would  have  our  own  conduct  construed  by 
them.  The  text  absorbs  so  much  of  our  being  as  is  occupied  in  doing.  "  Do 
,  justly."  It  is  a  lesson  that  God  has  set  in  two  words,  but  it  may  take  man  all 
his  life  to  learn  it.  All  action  should  be  just  action.  2.  A  requisition  which 
calls  for  all  the  life  and  power  of  the  most  genuine  philanthropy  Love  mercy." 
Here  comes  in  the  element  of  feeling  coupled  with  doing.  In  all  good  and  true 
performances  there  must  be  affection.  Out  of  philanthropy  springs  justice,  as, 
in  its  highest  form,  that  springs  out  of  the  ocean-depths  of  God's  love.  The 
grandest  justice  in  this  world  is  that  which  is  conceived  by  the  spirit  of  an 
earnest,  toiling  humanity.  For  all  good  and  noble  ends  we  ought  to  love  mercy. 
There  can  be  no  beneficent  power  in  this  world  that  does  not  spring  from 
love.  They  who  have  the  real  love  of  mercy  in  them,  rejoice  when  they  can 
palliate.  You  never  can  lift  men  up,  and  bring  them  into  Grod's  kingdom,  by  any 
other  way  than  loving  them  and  implicating  yourself  with  them.  And  mercy  is 
the  essence  of  all  love.  If  you  want  to  love  your  feUowmen,  have  mercy  on  them. 
Loving  mercy  is  the  spring  of  all  right  feeling,  as  doing  justly  is  of  all  right  being. 

V*^.  The  final  requu^ment  is  to  be  religious — to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God.  Neither  ^^ 
to  be  just  nor  merciful  is  the  primal  thing,  for  we  cannot  do  so  unless  we  come 
into  communion  with  the  Spirit  of  Almighty  God.  We  cannot  do  a  right  thing 
save  as  we  are  inspired  to  do  it.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  aU  true  leligion — 
to  walk  humbly  with,  or  before  God.  The  religion  of  the  Bible  makes  us  walk 
with  God.  It  gives  us  a  sens©  of  a  personal  relation  to  Him.  The  Bible  makes 
God  a  kindred  personality.  We  become  like  Him,  and  we  obtain  therefore  in 
ourselves  the  real  springs  and  powers  of  all  good  feeling  and  all  good  action.  Then 
learn  that  there  is  something  required  which  is  more  than  mere  exercise  of  the 
intellect — it  is  the  surrender  and  sanctification  of  the  will  and  the  affections.  A 
surrendering,  transfiguration,  regeneration  of  the  heart  that  brings  men  into  a  . 
position  in  which  they  can  walk  humbly  with  God,  do  justly,  and  love  mercy. 
God  is  the  inspiration  of  all  human  excellence,the  quickener  of  all  human  thought ; 
and  when  we  can  walk  with  Him,  we  do  not  need  anything  else  ;  we  can  walk  with 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Him  everywhere.  {E.  II.  Cliapin. )  The  last  gospel  of  science  : — Prof.  Huxley  calls 
this  verse  "  the  perfect  ideal  of  religion."  And  he  says  that  "  the  true  function 
of  science  is  not  to  set  herself  in  antagonism  to  religion,  but  to  deliver  her  from 
the  heathen  survivals,  the  bad  philosophy,  and  the  science  falsely  so  called,  which 
have  obscured  her  lustre  and  impaired  her  vigom:.  Consider  what  this  "perfect 
ideal "  is,  and  what  it  involves.  The  prophet,  whether  Micah  or  Balaam,  sums 
up  the  whole  duty  of  man  in  doing  justice,  loving  mercy,  and  walking  humbly 
with  God.  Can  we  accept  this  summary  as  setting  forth  the  very  substance  of 
religion  ?  Yes,  if  we  are  allowed  to  take  the  words  of  Micah  in  the  sense  in  which 
he  used  them.  Taken  simply  by  themselves,  indeed,  and  apart  from  their  pro- 
phetic use,  they  postulate  the  existence  of  God,  and  of  a  God  whose  character  is 
the  standard  and  rule  of  the  justice  and  mercy  we  are  bound  to  show.  A  God, 
therefore,  to  whom  we  owe  a  constant  obedience,  with  whom  we  are  to  walk  in  a 
living  sympathy  and  communion,  and  toward  whom  our  proper  attitude  is  one 
of  profound  humility  and  devotion.  What  did  a  Hebrew  prophet  mean  by  a 
"  just "  man,  if  not  a  man  who  walked  in  all  the  commandments  of  the  Hebrew 
law  blameless  ?  Whence  did  this  man  learn  that  justice  must  be  tempered  with»J 
mercy  but  from  the  self-same  law  ?  What  was  his  standard  of  compassion  and 
charity  but  the  charity  of  God  ?  Assuming  the  words  of  the  text  to  mean  only 
what  a  modern  man  of  science  would  use  them  to  mean,  have  you  considered 
how  much  they  involve ;  how  difficult  it  is  to  apply  them  to  the  complex  and 
often  conflicting  claims  of  human  life ;  and  how  much  more  difficult  it  is  to 
render  them  a  living  and  constant  obedience  ?  Is  it  always  easy  to  ascertain-^ 
what  "  justice  "  demands  ?  The  fatal  defect  of  all  the  ethical  schemes  put  forward 
by  those  who  reject  revealed  religion  and  yet  are  fain  to  find  some  substitute 
for  it  is  that  they  take  no  account,  or  not  sufficient  account,  of  the  fact  and  power 
of  sin.  We  who  believe  in  God  and  Christ  contend  that  to  men  defiled  and 
weakened  by  sin,  only  faith  in  God,  revealed  in  Christ,  will  enable  them  to  do  their 
duty,  and  to  embody  the  perfect  ideal  in  their  lives.  (Samuel  Cox,  D.D.) 
A  great  question  ansv>ered : — Without  controversy  the  highest,  noblest  element  in 
man  is  his  moral  nature,  with  all  that  the  word  involves.  A  man's  highest 
destiny  can  never  be  achieved  if  this  element  of  his  nature  be  neglected.  To 
gain  this  end  of  conformity  to  our  highest  nature  in  moral  and  spiritual  matters, 
we  need  to  know  the  law  of  our  being  on  this  subjecr^  The  greatest  practical 
question  man  can  ask  is.  How  shall  I  live  ?  What  shall  t  do  to  meet  the  highest 
destiny  of  which  I  am  capable,  both  for  time  and  eternity  ?  This  question  the 
"  prophet  answers.  It  can  oe  answered  in  no  other  waj'.  No  man  can  answer  it 
out  of  the  depth  of  his  own  judgment.  It  cannot  be  answered  by  conscience, 
nor  by  expediency.  The  Church  cannot  answer  it.  Upon  no  human  foimdation 
can  we  build  anything  solid  in  ethics.  See  the  completeness  of  the  prophet's 
answer.  1.  The  answer  is  practical.  2.  It  covers  the  whole  ground.  Two 
conclusions — (1)  Let  us  as  individuals  take  no  man's  authority  in  matters  of 
duty.  (2)  National  security  and  prosperity  depend  upon  the  use  and  teaching 
of  the  Bible.  (C.  F.  Anthony,  D.D.)  The  threefold  law  : — This  is  the  climax 
of  an  outburst  of  God's  rebuke  and  expostulation.  He  stoops  to  plead  with 
His  rebellious  people.  Here  are  two  characteristics  of  the  natural  heart.  1.  An 
insinuation  that  God  is  a  hard,  austere  Master.  2.  A  readiness  to  yield  all  except- 
ing the  heart  itself.  Notice  that  these  three  commands  are  linked  together. 
The  triple  command  cannot  be  dismembered.  Notice  that  the  order  is  logical, 
not  that  of  historical  development.  Justice  is  the  root,  mercy  the  foliage,  and  ;^ 
godliness  the  fruit.  I.  Deal  justly.  There  may  be  a  noisy  zeal  in  religion 
while  the  scant  measure,  the  wicked  balance,  and  the  deceitful  weight  are  used. 
II.  LovB  MERCY.  The  whole  New  Testament  imfolds  this  idea.  This  is  to  be 
not  an  occasional  act,  but  a  habit ;  not  in  exercise  when  under  pressure,  but 
growing  from  an  inward  impulse.  III.  Walk  httmbly  with  God.  Lit.  it  is 
"  bow  low."  Thus  we  feel  an  invisible  presence  and  power,  and  have  fellowship 
with  the  Unseen.  Walking  with  God  involves  five  particulars.  1.  Choice  of 
Him.  2.  Sense  of  His  actual  presence.  3.  Prayerfulness.  4.  Sympathy. 
5.  Constant  dependence.  Two  remarks — (1)  This  verse  is  commonly  quoted 
by  the  enemies  of  Christ,  mere  moralists.     But  it  is  one  of  the  most  searching 

})ortions  of  the  Word,  and  proves  that  by  the  law  no  flesh  is  justified,  for  by  the 
aw  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  (2)  Those  who  have  fled  to  the  Cross  for  refuge  will 
find  in  this  verse  a  new  incentive  to  holiness.  It  is  by  a  blameless  life  we  are  to 
illustrate  to  the  world  the  genuineness  of  om*  faith  and  professions  of  godliness. 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  75 

Let  us  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God,  but  lovingly  heed  this  threefold  law,  that 
we  may  at  once  prove  to  ourselves,  and  to  the  world  about  us,  that  we  are  truly 
the  children  of  God.  (J.  H.  Worcester,  D.D.)  The  great  question  of  humanity  : — 
Apart  from  revelation  man  can  only  know  of  God  through  man.  And  so  the 
guess  of  man  concerning  God  in  any  age  reveals  that  age's  heart.  The  answers 
given  to  the  question,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord  ?  "  greatly  differ. 
Through  them  all  the  desire  is  manifestly  to  atone  for  bygone  sin.  Yet  when 
we  examine  the  offerings  of  atonement  which  man  has  laid  upon  the  seen  and 
unseen  altars  of  the  world,  we  cannot  help  exclaiming :  What  were  sin  if 
gifts  like  these  would  piurchase  cleansing  ?  What  were  man  if  gifts  like 
these  could  give  him  peace  ?  And  what  were  God  if  gifts  like  these  could 
call  forth  His  forgiving  love  ?  God's  answer  to  the  deepest  question  of  humanity 
reveals  God's  character.  He  does  not  behold  our  efforts  of  atonement  with 
complacency,  as  though  we  were  climbing  feebly  up  a  righteous  way.  God  regards 
our  offerings  of  atonement  with  exalted  scorn.  We  have  in  the  text  a  great 
ethical  doctrine  to  which  the  heart  of  imiversal  man  assents  without  reserve.  All 
men  feel,  and  ever  will  feel,  that  whosoever  doeth  these  things  shall  doubtless 
live  by  means  of  them.  If  a  man  will  "  do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly 
before  his  God,"  all  heavens  that  are  worthy  of  the  name  will  open  wide  before 
him.  We  have  here  a  scheme  of  holiness  in  three  degrees.  1.  If  we  would  stand 
before  the  High  God  we  must  "  act  justly."  Justly  in  every  relation  of  life.  ^ 
And  we  must  be  just  to  God,  "  presentmg  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy, 
acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  our  reasonable  service."  2.  We  must  "  love 
mercy."  In  heaven,  maybe,  only  justice  is  required.  On  this  sin-stained  earth 
mere  justice,  if  it  stood  alone,  may  emphasise  the  evils  that  are  here.  We  must 
add  mercy  to  our  justice.  A  merciful  man  will  be  honoured  by  his  fellows  as 
long  as  aught  of  the  Divine  remains  within  humanity.  Mercy  is  a  tree  whose 
root  is  pity,  and  its  branches  stretch  with  healing  leaves  and  refreshing  fruits 
above  all  the  helpless,  and  suffering,  and  needy,  of  every  grade  and  kind.  Blessed 
are  they  who  are  merciful  on  earth,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy  when  they  stand  > 
before  God's  throne.  3.  We  must  "  walk  humbly  with  God."  The  more  we 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  two  words  "God"  and  "man,"  the  more  daring 
seems  the  affirmation  that  they  may  walk  together.  To  say  that  God  will  walk 
with  man  is  to  clothe  God  with  ineffable  tenderness.  And  to  say  that  man  can 
walk  with  God  is  to  clothe  men  with  sublimity.  Surely  the  great  mystery  of  the 
religious  life  is  this,  that  God  can  walk  and  talk  with  me  as  though  He  and  I  J 
were  the  only  beings  in  the  universe.  But  we  must  walk  humbly  with  our  God, 
so  humbly  that  we  shall  commit  all  our  ways  to  Him  ;  so  humbly  that  we  shall 
never  murmur  at  distress,  knowing  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  ;  so 
humbly  that  we  shall  never  worry  about  the  things  to  come,  remembering  that 
"  sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  All  sorts  and  conditions  of  men 
have  quoted  this  text  approvingly.  But  all  have  not  quoted  it  with  equal  fairness  >--' 
to  themselves.  The  man  whose  inward  piety  has  not  as  yet  transformed  his 
outward  life,  is  apt  to  sliur  over  the  words,  "  do  justly."  The  man  who  takes 
his  stand  upon  his  own  integrity  is  apt  to  glide  too  swiftly  over  the  words  "  love 
mercy."  The  man  whose  faith  is  limited  to  sensuous  things  is  apt  to  read  only 
in  a  poetic  way  the  words  "  walk  humbly  with  thy  God."  Refrain  from  doing/, 
justly,  and  the  love  of  mercy  soon  will  pass  away.  Refrain  from  doing  justly,  1 
and  from  loving  mercy,  and  the  consciousness  of  the  Omnipresent  God  will  fade.  I 
And  refrain  from  walking  humbly  with  the  Lord,  and  the  love  of  mercy  and  desire  S 
for  justice  soon  will  disappear.  All  have  not  quoted  this  text  with  equal  fairness  / 
to  the  evangelical  faith.  One  can  safely  challenge  the  world  to  produce  a  single  J 
man  who  has  fulfilled  the  whole  of  this  counsel,  apart  from  the  shed  blood  and 
broken  body  of  om:  Lord.  (J.  Moffat  Logan.)  Eeligion  and  religionism: — 
-Thgse  words  express  the  true  object  of  all  revelation,  which  is  to  make  men  good ; 
they  express  the  Inmost  meaning  of  all  life,  which  is  the  attainment  of  holiness. 
Unmistakable  in  their  plainness,  these  words  sweep  away  the  cobwebs  of  confusion 
of  ages.  Frankly  accepted,  they  would  be  an  eternal  cure  for  all  the  maladies 
which  in  age  after  age  have  afflicted  religion.  They  show  that  the  aim  of  religion 
is  to  elevate  character,  to  purify  conduct,  to  promote  goodness  ;  they  sum  up  the 
mighty  spiritual  teaching  of  the  prophets  ;  they  herald  the  essential  moral  revela- 
tion of  the  Son  of  God.  The  word  "  religion  "  properly  means  certain  opinions, 
and  certain  ordinances  ;  a  set  of  doctrines ;  or  a  mode  of  worship.  Now,  outward 
ordinances,  when  their  importance  is  exaggerat^ed,  tend  to  become  burdensome 


l/ 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

and  superstitious ;  and  religious  opinions,  when  maintained  by  ambition  and 
self-interest,  have  deluged  the  world  with  crime.  To  avoid  confusion,  however, 
I  will  call  this  "religionism,"  not  "religion."  A  stream  of  religionism  flows 
through  the  Old  Testament.  The  Judaic  code  has  neither  value  nor  significance 
in  itself,  but  solely  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  a  help  or  adjunct  to  higher  things. 
Beligicaiism,  when  it  ends  in  opinions  or  observances,  is  worthless.  All  that 
was  poorest  and  most  pagan  in  Judaism  eagerly  seized  on  this  element  in  the 
sacred  "books.  Side  by  side  with  this  stream  of  religious  ordinance  flows,  through 
most  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  through  all  the  New,  the  richer,  purer,  deeper 
stream  of  righteousness.  And  righteousness  expresses,  and  alone  expresses,  the 
essence  of  true  religion  ;  for  true  religion  is  a  good  mind  and  a  good  life.  Ask 
a  dogmatist  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  T  "  and  he  will  give  you  some  elaborate 
metaphysical  deflnitiou.  Ask  a  party  religionist,  and  he  will  say  that  you  must 
hear  the  Church.  Ask  your  Lord  and  Master,  and  He  will  say,  "  If  thou  wouldest 
enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments."  See  bow  the  prophets  spoke ;  the 
New  Testament  so  completely  endorses  their  spiritual  ideal  that,  while  every 
page  and  verse  of  it  breathes  of  righteousness,  you  scarcely  find  any  religionism 
at  all,  scarcely  any  organisation,  ritual,  or  dogmatic  creed.  What  is  the  sum  \^ 
total  of  the  moral  revelation  of  Christ  ?  It  goes  into  two  words — Love :  Serve. 
The  teaching  of  every  one  of  His  apostles  was  the  very  antithesis  of  the  spirit  of 
extemalism.  According  to  them,  "  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  bom  of  God." 
To  preach  these  principles  is  to  preach  the  very  essential  heart  of  the  scriptural 
morality ;  but  yet  it  is  a  preaching  that  invariably  makes  religionists  very  angry. 
For  its  importaiice  lies  in  this,  that  it  is  the  very  touchstone  which  discriminates 
between  true  and  false  religion,  and  which  sweeps  away,  at  any  rate,  the  exagger- 
ated importance  attached  to  the  adjvmcts,  the  scaffoldings,  the  traditions  and 
ordinances  of  men,  which  to  so  many  make  up  the  whole  of  their  religion.  What 
God  wants  is  not  so-called  orthodoxy,  but  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts."  What 
will  avail  you  is  not  any  amoimt  of  religiosity,  but  righteousness.  The  reason 
why  it  is  necessary  to  insist  on  this  is  that  eternal  pharisaism  of  the  human  heart, 
which  prefers  formalism  to  spirituality,  and  which  causes  a  constant  recrud- 
escence of  Judaism  in  the  heart  of  Christianity.  The  lesson  for  us  is  clear.  Our 
religious  opinions  may  be  false ;  our  party  shibboleths  may  be  but  the  blurred 
echoes  of  our  ignorance  or  our  incompetence ;  our  private  interpretations  of 
Scripture  may  be  no  better  than  grotesque  nonsense  in  their  presumptuous  falsity, 
and  all  this  may  not  greatly  matter,  if  by  some  Divine  deliverance  from  our  opinion- 
ated follies,  we  stiU  do  justly,  and  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  our  God. 
{Dean  Farrar. )  The  essentials  of  religion : — It  is  a  great  thing  to  get  down  to  simple 
principles.  One  of  the  hopeful  signs  of  oiu:  times  is  a  growing  disposition  to  do  this. 
Jn  science  and  in  theology  alike,  we  are  recognising  simplicity  where  we  once  imagined 
that  there  was  wonderful  complexity.  I  rejoice  that,  in  theology,  we  are  getting 
down  to  fundamental  Christian  truths,  which  will  ultimately  make  more  clear 
man's  duties  and  God's  love.  This  was,  in  part,  the  mission  of  Christianity. 
God's  Temple  of  Truth  could  hardly  be  seen  for  the  human  rubbish  which  had 
accumulated  about  it,  and  Jesus  Christ  came  to  sweep  it  away.  You  remember 
how  He  did  so.  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount  must  have  amazed  all  His  hearers. 
It  went  down  to  the  very  roots  of  human  life  and  duty,  and  was  a  fresh  revelation 
of  truth.  His  disciples  followed  in  His  footsteps.  Even  St.  Paul,  who  was  by 
far  the  most  subtle-minded  of  them,  analysed  Christianity,  and  showed  that  it 
consisted  in  three  things — "  faith,  hope,  love," — and  finally  he  reduced  even 
these  to  one,  saying,  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  The  fact  is,  that  the 
nearer  men  are  to  God,  the  simpler  becomes  their  religious  life  and  their  religious 
thought.  Look  at  this  text.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good." 
Micah  could  fairly  say  this  to  every  one  in  Israel ;  but  much  more  forcibly  should 
the  words  come  home  to  us,  who  have  heard  the  teaching  and  known  the  life  of 
Jesus,  Son  of  God,  and  yet  Son  of  Man.  I.  What  does  the  Lord  requieb  of 
THEE  BTJT  TO  "  DO  JUSTLY  "  ?  The  reference  of  the  prophet  is  to  justice  between 
man  and  man,  which  was  but  seldom  seen  in  his  day.  Happily,  our  law  courts 
are,  on  the  whole,  among  our  noblest  institutions.  But  how  about  business 
affairs  ?  What  of  the  conflicts  between  capital  and  labomr  ?  Is  all  as  it  should 
be  there  ?  II.  The  second  requirement  is  to  "  love  mbbcy."  The  philan- 
thropist in  the  Church  may  be  the  screw  in  business.  To  do  justly  is  to  do  what, 
right  requires,  and  to  love  mercy  is  to  do  what  love  requires.  III.  The  last 
requirement  is  walk  humbly  with  thy  God.     This  is  not  the  top-stone  of 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIGAH.  77 

the  edifice,  but  its  foundation.  Walk  humbly  with  God,  and  you  will  walk 
honestly  and  kindly  among  your  neighbours.  [Alfred  Rowland,  LL.B.,  B.A.) 
The  essentials  of  a  religious  life : — They  have  always  been  the  same.  Our  Lord 
has  really  added  nothing  to  these  words  of  Micah.  What  He  has  done  has  been 
to  put  these  truths  in  a  new  setting,  to  read  them  with  a  wider  and  deeper 
application ;  to  embody  them  in  His  own  life,  and  thus  to  enforce  them  with 
greater  authority;  to  give  us  a  new  motive  for  obedience,  and  greater  power 
to  obey.  What  does  the  Cross  say  to  us  but  "  do  justly,"  "  love  mercy,"  and 
"  walk  humbly "  ?  The  essentials  of  a  religious  life  are  practical  rather  than 
theoretical.  It  appears  that  the  Jews  of  Micah's  time  were  most  anxious  about 
the  right  form  of  worship.  Yet,  what  does  Micah  declare  to  have  been  the 
common  life  of  these  people  T  He  takes  us  into  their  houses,  and  shows  them 
to  be  fuU  of  dishonest  gains.  He  takes  us  into  their  shops,  and  shows  us  the 
scimt  measure,  the  short  weights,  the  false  balances.  Into  their  law  courts, 
and  we  find  the  judge  selling  his  verdict  for  a  bribe.  Right  through  society  there 
was  the  same  hollow  deception.  "  The  inhabitants  have  spoken  lies,  and  their 
tongue  is  deceitful  in  their  mouths."  So  the  prophet  has  to  tell  them  this, — 
It  is  not  a  question  of  right  worship  for  you,  but  of  right  conduct.  Not  how  you 
should  sacrifice,  but  how  you  should  live.  There  are  certain  duties  necessary 
because  God  has  commanded  them,  and  there  are  other  duties  which  God 
commands  because  they  are  necessary.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  men,  now- 
adays, make  too  much  of  the  non-essentials  of  religion.  There  is  the  ritualist, 
who  exaggerates  the  importance  of  ceremonial.  We  become  ritualists  of  a  sort 
when  we  think  the  claims  of  God  are  met  by  coming  to  services  and  meetings 
regularly.  The  essence  of  religion  is  not  in  those  agreeable  emotions  you  feel 
in  listening  to  a  stirring  sermon.  It  lies  in  honest  dealing,  in  kind  actions,  in  that 
humble,  obedient  spirit  which  springs  from  a  realisation  of  the  presence  of  God. 
Its  sphere  is  principally  not  in  the  Church,  but  outside — in  the  world  and  in  the 
home.  The  time  and  place  in  which  to  show  that  you  are  religious  men  and 
women  is  when  you  start  upon  your  work  in  the  morning,  when  you  buy  and  when 
you  sell,  when  you  spend  an  hour  in  recreation,  quite  as  much  as  when  you  pray 
or  when  you  teach.  Another  way  in  which  some  make  too  much  of  the  non- 
essentials of  religion  is  on  the  side  of  doctrine.  Men  speak  as  if  they  wanted 
all  difficult  questions  settled  out  of  hand  before  they  wiU  become  the  servants 
of  God.  There  are  difficulties  m  the  Bible,  but  they  belong  to  the  intellect,  and 
not  to  the  practical  life.  We  need  not  underestimate  the  importance  of  evan- 
gelical doctrine,  but  unless  the  doctrines  of  grace  bear  practical  results,  it  is 
doubtful  whether  we  are  truly  acquainted  with  them.  These  are  the  essential 
things — 1.  "  Do  justly."  (1)  There  is  a  justice  of  which  the  civil  law  is  the 
guardian.  (2)  A  justice  of  which  custom  is  the  guardian.  (3)  The  only  justice 
which  will  satisfy  God  is  that  of  which  conscience  is  the  guardian.  This  will 
teach  the  thief  to  make  restitution ;  this  will  not  truckle  to  underhand  tricks ; 
this  will  respect  the  claims  of  others  even  when  it  is  most  seeking  to  advance 
its  own.  2.  "  Love  mercy."  Many  fail  here.  They  are  as  upright  as  a  marble 
column,  and  as  cold  and  hard.  The  instincts  of  oiu-  better  natiu-e  should  teach 
us  to  be  merciful.  God  lu-ges  us  to  show  mercy  one  to  another  on  the  ground 
that  we  are  all  debtors  alike  to  Him.  3.  "  Walk  humbly  with  thy  God."  Many 
so-called  moral  men,  and  kind  men,  are  nevertheless  godless  men.  What  is  it  to 
lead  a  godless  life  ?  It  is  to  spend  the  life  apart  from  God.  This  is  the  essence 
of  all  religious  life,  making  God  a  reality,  and  acting  as  in  His  presence.  {Frank  HaU. ) 
The  three  great  human  duties : — Misconceptions  of  the  truth  are  as  dangerous 
as  the  reception  of  falsehood.  This  text  is  one  by  which  proud,  self-sufficient, 
and  imgodly  mortals  are  accustomed  to  lull  their  consciences  to  sleep,  and  their 
guilty  fears  to  rest,  saying,  "  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace."  They  say, 
"  that  if  a  man  do  the  best  he  can,  God  will  require  no  more."  I.  What  is  it 
TO  DO  JUSTLY  ?  1.  Is  it  not  to  keep  a  just  weight,  and  a  just  measure  ;  to  be  true 
and  just  in  all  your  dealings  7  2.  To  do  justly,  there  must  be  no  extortion,  no 
speculation,  no  forestalling,  no  monopoly,  no  oppression.  3.  The  just  man  hates 
every  false  way ;  he  keeps  far  from  a  false  matter ;  he  raises  no  false  report ; 
he  is  no  false  accuser,  takes  no  false  oath,  bears  no  false  report.  4.  If  you 
do  justly,  it  will  be  by  yo\xr  God  as  well  as  by  your  neighbour.  If  just  towards 
God,  you  will  have  "  respect  imto  all  His  commandments."  You  will  justify 
all  the  gracious  dispensations  of  heaven.  Can  you  bless  God  for  your  creation 
BO  long  as  you  make,  not  God,  but  self,  the  end  of  your  creation  ?     Can  you  say 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

that  you  justly  bless  God  for  your  preservation  so  long  as  you  do  not  bless  Him 
for  your  salvation  ?  It  is  impossible  that  you  can  justly  bless  God  for  the 
inestimable  gift  of  His  dear  Son  while  you  refuse  to  hear  Him.  If  you  are  just 
with  God,  you  will  be  constant  in  your  attendance  in  His  house — the  place  where 
His  honour  dwelleth.  II.  What  is  it  to  love  mercy  ?  1.  If  you  love  mercy, 
you  will  "  break  off  your  sins  by  righteousness,  and  your  iniquities  by  showing 
mercy  to  the  poor."  2.  You  will  be  merciful  in  all  your  intercourse  with  mankind. 
3.  If  you  love  mercy,  and  show  it  to  others,  you  will  crave  it  for  yourself.  4.  If 
you  love  mercy,  your  waUss  will  be  walks  of  mercy,  your  visits  will  be  visits  of 
mercy,  and  your  inquiries  will  be  inquiries  of  mercy.  III.  What  is  it  to  walk 
HUMBLY  with  God  ?  1 .  If  you  do,  you  will  be  of  a  teachable  spirit.  2.  You 
will  have  a  mean  opinion  of  yourself.  3.  You  will  not  be  carried  away  with  high- 
sounding  words  in  sermons  or  in  prayers :  you  will  love  the  plain,  homely,  honest 
truth.  4.  If  you  walk  humbly  with  God,  you  will  walk  humbly  before  Him. 
5.  You  will  walk  humbly  with  Him  in  secret ;  your  humility  will  not  be  a  mere 
show  of  humility.  6.  If  you  walk  with  your  God,  you  will  walk  much  with  His 
dear  Son.  7.  You  will  enjoy  much  of  His  presence,  the  lifting  up  of  the  light 
of  His  countenance.  8.  You  will  neither  hide  the  talents  He  has  committed  to 
your  charge  in  a  napkin,  nor  lock  up  His  kindnesses  in  your  bosom,  but  will  make 
known  His  goodness  to  the  sons  of  men.  Thankfiilness  will  ever  dwell  with 
humility.  (John  Clementson.)  God's  great  demonstrations  and  demands  : — "  Do 
justly."  There  is  a  justice  of  expiation,  to  break  off  our  sins  by  repentance. 
A  justice  of  compensation,  by  meet  repairing  our  public  injuries.  A  justice  of 
vindication,  to  confirm  our  laws  by  inflicting  such  just  penalties  and  restraints  aa 
some  men's  insolvencies  have  deserved.  There  is  the  allay  of  mercy,  or  modera- 
tion, compassion,  and  tenderness,  by  way  of  pardon,  indemnity  and  oblivion. 
There  is  added  the  root  and  crown  of  all  virtues  and  graces,  humility  ;  which 
makes  you  sm^est  of  God's  acceptation  and  benediction.  Humility  is  the  salt 
that  must  be  mingled  with  every  sacrifice ;  a  sweet  perfume  that  must  attend 
every  oblation.  It  is  the  glory  of  all  human  and  Divine  perfections  ;  the  seciurity 
of  justice,  and  the  sanctuary  of  mercy.  If  you  intend  to  walk  with  God,  and  hope 
that  God  will  go  along  with  you,  you  must  not  only  deny,  you  must  so  far  utterly 
renounce,  and  annihilate  yourselves,  as  not  to  trust  in  or  seek  yourselves,  but  the 
living  God.  I.  The  Demonstbatob  ob  Shewee.  "  The  Lord."  1.  The  rise  or 
occasion  of  this  demonstration.  Find  this  in  verses  6,  7.  Observe  the  vaunting 
questions  and  presumptuous  postulations  of  a  company  of  formal  hypocrites. 
2.  The  credit  and  authority  of  this  Demonstrator,  which  makes  His  words,  both 
for  the  truth  and  goodness  of  them,  most  worthy  to  be  believed,  received,  and 
obeyed.  He  is  the  great  and  inexhaustible  fountain  of  all  power  and  order, 
natural,  civil,  spiritual.  He  is  not  more  able  by  His  wisdom,  than  willing  by  His 
indulgence  and  love,  to  instruct  mankind  in  the  way  that  is  best  for  him.  He  has 
showed  us  the  most  infallible  and  immutable  rules  of  justice,  mercy,  and  humility. 
II.  The  thing  demonstrated.  Denoted  under  three  grand  hea^s — 1.  Consider 
justice,  mercy,  and  humility  together,  and  conjointly.  Note  the  sanctity  of 
these  grand  demands.  The  shortness  of  the  discourse  concerning  them.  Their 
perspicuity,  though  stated  so  briefly.  The  order  and  situation  of  the  particulars. 
Justice  comes  first ;  then  mercy ;  and  then  humility.  The  juncture  of  these 
three  is  inobservable,  because  they  are  inseparable  where  they  are  sincere.  The 
common  epithet,  or  predicate,  to  all  of  them.  "  The  Lord  hath  showed  thee 
what  is  good."  2.  Consider  them  separately.  (1)  In  the  subject  or  substance, 
spirit  an  1  quintessence,  of  each  of  them.  What  is  justice  ?  Some  measure  it  by 
their  power ;  others  by  their  wills ;  yet  others  by  their  fancies  and  imaginations. 
Some  measure  justice  by  necessity ;  some  measure  justice  by  forcible  power  and 
possession  ;  as  if  might  were  right.  Justice  must  be  considered,  in  its  fountain 
and  original,  the  wisdom  and  will  of  God ;  in  the  grand  cistern  and  conservatory, 
which  is  the  sovereign  and  legislative  power  in  every  society  and  polity.  Justice 
is  considerable  in  the  pipes  and  conduits  of  all  subordinate  magistrates.  There 
is  a  justice  due  to  God,  to  ourselves,  and  to  others.  What  is  mercy  ?  By  mercy 
God  is,  as  it  were,  greater  than  Himself :  a  denier  of  Himself,  and  a  sider  with  our 
interests.  All  our  hopes  and  happiness  are  founded  upon,  and  bound  up  in,  the 
mercy  of  God.  Mercy  in  God  is  a  perfection  of  goodness,  by  which  He  moderates 
the  severity  of  His  justice  toward  sinful  mankind.  Mercy  in  man  is  an  affection 
by  which  he  lays  to  heart  the  misery  of  another,  and  is  disposed  to  relieve  them. 
Mercy  is  an  inseparable  attendant  to  human  justice ;  yea,  and  to  the  Divine.     Peni- 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIGAH.  7.9 

tents  are  the  proper  objects  of  mercy.  There  are  but  few  cases  wherein  the  summum 
jus  is  required.  In  most  cases  there  is  possibility  of  remission,  and  moderation. 
What  is  humility  ?  It  is  a  most  Christian  grace,  no  less  than  a  most  manly  virtue, 
becomlfig^aH  men, — in  the  sense  of  their  common  infirmities,  and  mortal  condition ; 
in  the  conscience  of  their  many  sins  and  deserved  miseries ;  in  the  reflection 
upon  their  best  actions,  full  of  failings  and  defects.  .Pride^,4estroy8  and  sours 
aU  the  good,  even  of  justice  and  mercy,  that  any  man  doth.  Pride  hath  its  reward 
only  from  itself,  or  the  vain  world.  Consider  the  predicates  or  actions  applied 
to  each  of  these  three  terms.  Consider  justice — 1.  Materially,  as  to  the  merit 
of  the  cause  or  person.  2.  Regularly,  as  to  the  law  prescribed  by  God  or  man, 
not  by  private  opinion.  3.  Authoritatively,  by  due  order  and  commission, 
derived  to  thee  from  the  lawful  supreme  power.  Do  justice  as  to  the  inward 
form,  principle,  or  conscience,  for  justice  sake,  not  for  ambition.  Do  justice  in 
practice;  impartially,  speedily,  in  due  measure  and  proportion,  with  humanity 
and  compassion  to  the  person.  "  Love  mercy."  Observe  the  order ;  justice 
must  be  done  before  mercy.  It  is  presumptuous  to  do  unjustly  under  pretence 
of  showing  mercy.  Observe  the  emphasis  of  the  word  "  love  "  put  to  mercy. 
Justice  must  be  done  as  a  task  enjoined.  Mercy  must  be  loved  and  delighted  in. 
This  love  is  conjoined  to  mercy  as  a  thing  in  itself  most  desirable,  as  most  beneficial 
to  ourselves  and  others,  as  obedience  to  God's  commands,  and  in  imitation  of 
the  Divine  perfections.  Love  mercy  for  the  advance  of  all  graces ;  as  the  best 
sign  of  the  best  religion,  remembering  that  sin  exposeth  thee  to  misery ;  in  order 
to  confirm  thy  hope,  and  increase  thy  reward  in  glory.  "  Walk  humbly."  Be 
ready  and  prepared  to  go  with  God.  The  words  imply  a  freedom  and  familiarity 
of  conversation  which  cannot  be  without  two  are  agreed ;  nor  can  there  be  agreement 
with  God,  except  where  the  heart  is  humble.  Walking  is  a  social  and  friendly 
notion,  and  it  is  progressive  and  parallel,  in  a  way  of  confirmity,  not  contrariety, 
^^e  more  a  man  walks  with  God,  the  more  he  will  grow  in  humility.  3.  To 
whom  God  shows,  and  of  whom  He  requires,  these  great  lessons  and  duties.  "  Thee, 
O  man."  (1)  All  mankind.  (2)  Those  who  enjoy  the  light  of  God's  Word. 
(3)  Each  in  His  particular  station.  4.  The  manner  of  God's  showing  and  re- 
quiring these  duties  of  aU  sorts  of  men,  in  all  occasions,  times,  and  dealings.  God 
hath  showed  it  to  mankind  in  those  inward  principles  of  right  reason,  and  that 
standard  of  justice  which  is  set  up  in  each  man's  own  heart.  By  the  letters  patent 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  By  the  greatest  exemplars  of  holy  men  in  all  degrees. 
With  frequent  obtestation,  threatening  punishment.  {John  Oaitden,  D.D.) 
OocTs  claims  on  man: — 1.  Has  God  any  claims  upon  you  ?  Has  He  a  right  to 
require  anything  of  you,  if  it  should  seem  good  to  Him  to  do  so  ?  2.  Does  He 
exercise  this  right  ?  Has  He  actually  required  anything  ?  In  the  Bible  you 
find  God  everywhere  speaking  imperatively  to  His  creatures,  giving  them  not 
merely  counsels,  but  authoritative  counsels  and  commands.  3.  What  are  the 
claims  which  God  asserts  ?  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee  ?  Thy  supreme 
love,  thy  choicest  affections,  thy  whole  heart,  and  whatever  else  such  a  love 
disposes  to  and  draws  after  it.  God  has  given  rules  for  the  regulation  not  only 
of  our  external  conduct,  and  aU  of  it,  but  of  our  speech,  our  thoughts,  our  motives, 
otu-  principles  of  action,  and  of  all  the  various  modifications  of  feeling.  4.  What 
is  the  character  of  these  claims  of  God  ?  (I)  They  are  reasonable.  Their  reason- 
ableness may  be  inferred  from  their  reality.  God  is  incapable  of  making  an 
unreasonable  demand.  (2)  They  are  particular.  They  are  made  on  you  as  an 
individual,  and  not  in  any  social  capacity.  God  addresses  His  commands  singly 
to  each  one.  (3)  His  claims  are  paramount.  In  every  comparison  they  deserve 
to  have  the  pre-eminence ;  in  every  competition  the  preference.  (4)  His  claims 
are  impartial.  God  asserts  them  with  respect  to  every  intelligent  being,  and 
with  respect  to  each  the  same.  (5)  His  claims  are  unalterable.  We  may  change, 
but  not  they.  Our  duty  is  the  same,  whatever  our  character.  God  cannot 
lower  His  demands  to  adapt  them  to  our  inclinations  or  disabilities.  Then  how 
have  we  treated  His  claims  ?  Have  we  done  as  He  has  required  ?  Remember, 
there  is  a  penalty  threatened  on  him  who  disregards  them.  The  claims  of  justice 
are  prior  to  the  claims  of  mercy.  You  ought  to  comply  with  His  explicit  and 
authoritative  claims  upon  you.  And  you  ought  to  comply  at  once,  and  fully. 
{W.  Nevins,  D.D.)  The  requirements  of  the  Gospel : — There  have  been  consider- 
able disputes  in  those  countries  where  the  Scriptures  were  unknown  with  regard 
to  man's  chief  or  sovereign  good.  Religion  is  man's  chief  good.  It  is  good  in  its 
origin  ;  it  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights ;  it  is  good  in  its  nature ;  it  is 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

good  in  its  tendency  and  in  its  end.  It  is  man's  chief  good.  There  is  nothing 
in  it  but  what  is  most  fit  and  proper  and  suitable  to  man,  whether  considered 
in  himself,  or  in  his  relation  to  God  or  to  His  fellow-creatures.  Religion  is  a 
satisfying  good.  It  possesses  the  power  of  healing  all  the  various  disorders  of  the 
human  mind  and  heart ;  the  power  to  console,  comfort,  exhilarate,  and  delight 
the  redeemed  spirit  of  man,  in  all  the  circumstances  through  which,  in  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  he  may  be  called  to  pass  in  this  world.  It  is  a  universal  good, 
not  restricted  to  any  class  of  persons,  to  the  persons  of  any  one  age,  or  country, 
or  locality.  It  is  an  everlasting  good ;  as  vast  as  the  necessities  and  capacities 
of  the  human  spirit.  The  table  of  the  law  which  instructs  us  in  our  duty  to  God 
is  generally  the  first  presented  to  us  in  Scripture.  In  the  text  the  order  is  reversed. 
It  is  required  that  every  man  do  justly  to  his  fellow-man.  We  are  required  to 
act  with  the  exactest  integrity  and  uprightness  towards  our  fellow-creatmes  in 
all  respects,  and  towards  every  one  of  our  fellow-creatures.  Keep  the  Golden 
Rule.  But  we  are  not  to  do  justice  strictly ;  we  are  also  to  love  mercy.  Mercy 
is  ever  ready  to  listen  to  complaints,  to  relieve  wants,  to  pardon  offences,  to  cover 
faults.  Mercy  delights  to  imitate  the  Father  of  mercies  ;  to  do  good,  according 
to  its  power,  to  all  mankind,  under  all  circumstances.  There  must  not  only  be 
merciful  conduct  and  language,  but  a  merciful  heart  within  us.  "  Walk  humbly 
with  thy  God."  This  means  at  least  three  things — reconciliation,  affection, 
and  intercourse.  1.  Reconciliation.  Two  cannot  walk  together  except  they  be 
^  agreed.  There  are  three  classes  of  persons  with  whom  God  can  never  be  agreed. 
The  immoral,  the  unbeliever,  and  the  worldly  minded.  2.  Affection.  All 
God's  people  love  Him.  And  we  know  that  God  loves  His  people.  3.  Inter- 
course. The  intercourse  between  God  and  His  people  is  as  real  as  any  intercourse 
is  which  takes  place  between  any  spirits  in  heaven,  or  any  interchange  of  thought 
and  of  kindness  which  takes  place  between  men  on  earth.  Humility  is  essential 
to  walking  with  God.  The  margin  reads,  "  and  to  humble  thyself  to  walk  with 
thy  God."  Before  any  of  us  can  walk  with  God  we  must  be  humbled  under  His 
mighty  hand  ;  and  the  more  deeply  and  thoroughly  we  humble  ourselves,  the 
more  closely  we  shall  walk  with  God.  I  speak  not  of  that  humility  which  is  woven 
into  the  character  by  artifice  and  cunning  ;  but  of  that  humility  which  is  wrought 
in  the  inmost  soul  by  the  finger  of  God.  There  are  two  doctrinal  heresies  against 
which  our  text  is  opposed.  1.  The  heresy  of  those  who  seek  to  be  justified  by 
works.  2.  The  heresy  of  those  who  think  to  be  justified  by  a  faith  which  is 
a  mere  sentiment,  and  never  does  any  works.  (F.  Ward.)  The  inner 
■meaning  of  the  Divine  requirements : — These  words  have  often  been  quoted 
with  respectful  admiration  by  persons  who  look  upon  what  they  suppose  to 
be  the  theology  of  the  Bible  with  indifference  or  contempt.  The  philosopher 
and  the  philanthropist  are  to  be  invited  to  extricate  these  great  maxims  from  the 
overlying  mass,  to  give  them  the  prominence  which  has  been  given  to  those  dog- 
mas which  are  so  intricate,  and  which  lead  to  evil  results  or  to  none.  Most  cheer- 
fully do  I  take  these  words  of  the  prophet  as  my  guide  ;  they  are  worthy  of  all 
the  honour  which  has  been  paid  them.  To  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to 
walk  humbly, — does  God  indeed  require  all  this  of  me  ?  If  I  may  not  learn 
how  I  can  be  just  and  merciful  and  humble,  to  assure  me  that  I  am  bound 
to  be  so  is  an  intolerable  oppression.  Men  have  felt  this  at  all  times ;  they  are 
feeling  it  now.  And  the  feeling,  though  it  is  mixed  with  much  contradiction, 
is  not  a  false  one.  They  would  have  a  right  to  complain  of  us,  and 
of  the  Bible,  if  we  came  and  delivered  to  them  a  set  of  precepts — the  best 
precepts  in  the  world — and  did  not  tell  them  whence  they  were  to  derive  the 
strength  for  obeying  the  precepts.  Our  morality  must  have  some  deep  under- 
ground basis  to  rest  upon.  What  is  that  basis  ?  I  answer,  you  must  seek  it  in 
that  very  theology  of  the  Bible  which  you  have  supposed  it  so  great  a  deliverance 
to  cast  aside.  There,  and  there  only,  will  you  find  the  protection  against  the 
narrow,  local,  artificial  dogmas  of  priests,  and  the  dry,  hard,  scarcely  less  artificial, 
often  even  more  heartless,  dogmas  of  philosophers.  There  you  will  find  the 
protection  against  the  fiimsy,  conventional  morality  of  classes  and  ages  ;  there 
you  will  find  a  meaning  for  the  words,  "  Do  justly,  love  mercy,  walk  humbly," 
and  a  power  to  translate  them  from  words  into  life.  1.  The  Lord  requires  thee 
to  "  do  justly."  The  whole  question  of  the  ground  of  moral  obligation  is  raised 
by  this  sentence.  It  seems  to  tell  me  that  some  One  is  commanding  a  certain 
course  of  action  which  I  am  bound  to  follow  because  He  commands  it.  And  this 
course  of  action  is  described  by  the  phrase  "  doing  justly."     Is  justice,  then,  nothing 


CHAP.  VI.]  MWAH.  81 

in  itself  ?     Are  actions  made  right  because  a  certain  power  insists  that  they  shall 
be  performed  ?     The  main  controversy  between  the   mere  priest  and  the  mere 

Ehilosopher,  so  far  as  it  bears  on  human  conduct,  lies  here.  The  one  has  always 
een  tempted  to  maintain  that  an  omnipotent  decree  makes  that  good  which 
would  not  be  good  without  it,  makes  that  evil  which  would  be  otherwise  indif- 
ferent :  the  other  has  been  always  seeking  to  find  what  constitutes  an  action  or 
a  habit  just  or  unjust,  true  or  untrue  ;  whether  something  in  its  own  nature,  or 
in  its  effect  upon  the  individual  doer,  or  in  its  influence  upon  society.  The  con- 
science in  men  cries  out  for  a  ruler  ;  therefore  it  gives  heed  to  the  priest.  Con- 
science exists  only  in  the  affirmation  that  right  and  wrong  are  eternally  opposed  ; 
therefore  it  gives  heed  to  the  philosophers.  Experience  shows  that  ihe  priest  is  very 
prone  to  raise  maxims  of  temporary  expedience  to  the  level  of  eternal  laws ;  there- 
fore the  conscience  protests  against  him.  Experience  shows  that  the  philosopher 
can  find  no  standing-ground  from  which  he  can  act  upon  individuals  or  society, 
but  is  obliged  to  beg  a  standing-ground  from  their  opinion,  or  to  erect  his  own 
above  both  ;  therefore  the  conscience  protests  against  him.  Then  comes  the 
message  :  "  He  hath  shown  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good."  A  message  from 
whom  ?  If  He  has  not  told  me  what  He  is,  the  tidings  are  worth  nothing,  the 
good  has  not  been  shown.  If  you  desire  a  universal  morality,  there  must  be  the 
revelation  of  a  moral  Being.  If  you  would  have  the  command  "  do  justly," 
in  place  of  a  weight  of  rules,  observances,  and  ceremonies,  you  must  have  justice 
Bet  before  you,  not  in  words,  formulas,  decrees,  but  livingly,  personally,  histori- 
cally. You  must  be  taught  what  the  just  Being  is  by  seeing  what  He  does — 
what  He  does  for  you.  He  would  have  you  like  Him.  He  must  tell  you  how  He 
makes  you  like  Him.  The  Bible  is  not  a  book  of  mere  moralities.  It  would  be 
if  you  took  away  its  theology.  Its  theology  is  the  unveiling  of  the  righteous 
Being  to  the  heart  and  conscience  of  the  only  creatm-e  that  is  capable  of  being 
righteous,  because  of  the  only  creature  that  is  capable  of  departing  from 
righteousness.  It  is  at  last  the  manifestation  to  all  nations  of  that  original 
righteousness  which  had  been  the  root  of  all  righteousness  in  them  ;  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Divine  righteousness  in  a  Man,  who  came  into  the  world  to 
reconcile  men  to  His  Father,  that  they  might  receive  His  Spirit,  and  be  able  to  be 
just,  as  He  is, — to  do  justly,  as  He  does.  2.  The  Lord  requires  of  men  to  "  love 
mercy."  This  is  a  higher  obligation  still — harder  to  fulfil.  I  may  do  things, 
but  against  my  whole  nature.  They  will  not  be  just  or  righteous  acts,  according 
to  the  scriptural  idea  of  righteousness,  which  supposes  the  man  to  be  good  before 
he  does  good  things.  But  they  may  be  just  according  to  some  legal,  philosophical, 
or  sacerdotal  rule.  Can  such  a  rule  explain  how  I  am  to  love  because  it  is  desirable 
that  I  should  ?  Mercy  is,  no  doubt,  a  beautiful  quality.  But  there  is  a  limit  to 
men's  admiration.  If  mercy  meets  an  unmerciful  habit  of  mind  in  us,  its  works 
vnU  be  explained  away.  Mercy  is  not  necessarily  loved  when  it  is  exhibited  in 
its  fullest,  most  perfect  form,  when  it  shows  itself  in  the  most  gracious  and 
serviceable  acts.  There  may  be  a  cry  for  it  on  another  ground.  Men  may  feel 
that  they  resisted  the  Divine  righteousness,  that  they  are  at  war  with  it.  They 
may  invoke  mercy  to  avert  the  punishment  which  they  believe  that  righteousness 
desires  to  inflict  upon  them.  Turn  to  the  theology  of  the  Bible.  There  Christ 
is  set  forth  as  the  image  of  the  Father,  not  in  one  quality,  but  in  His  whole 
character.  He  is  said  to  show  forth  the  righteousness  of  God  in  the  forgiveness 
of  sins.  Man  wants  mercy  because  he  has  sinned,  but  this  mercy  has  in  it  a  power 
of  putting  away  sin,  of  covering  it,  extinguishing  it, — of  transforming  the  creature, 
who  was  the  subject  and  slave  of  it,  into  a  new  creature  who  can  love  mercy  and 
do  justly.  3.  The  Lord  requires  man  to  "  walk  humbly  with  Him."  About  this 
virtue  of  humility  there  is  as  much  strife  as  about  justice  and  mercy.  Can  it  be 
intended  that  the  man  should  think  meanly  of  the  nature  and  the  powers  which 
God  has  given  him  ?  The  more  nobly  he  judges  of  his  humanity,  the  more 
noble,  says  the  philosopher,  he  himself  will  be.  It  is  most  true  that,  if  we  try 
by  any  artificial  methods  to  cultivate  what  is  called  the  grace  of  humility,  it 
may  become  actually  another  name  for  meanness,  for  the  abandonment  of  manli- 
ness and  dignity,  for  a  nominal  self-denial  v/hich  is  compatible  with  much  in- 
ward self-exaltation.  What  is  the  true  humility  ?  We  are  humble  in  ourselves 
only  when  we  are  walking  with  God.  It  is  this  which  lays  a  man  in  the  dust. 
It  is  this  which  raises  him  to  a  height  he  had  never  dreamt  of.  The  theology  of 
the  Bible,  then,  explains  its  morality.  It  enables  us  to  know  what  we  ought  to 
be,  and  to  be  what  we  would  wish  to  be.     {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)         Wluxt  doth 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

(he  Lord  require  of  thee  ? — The  text  contains  three  points  for  our  self-examination. 
The  Lord  requires,  first,  that  we  "  do  justly  "  ;  in  other  words,  that  all  our  conduct 
be  upright  and  faithful,  that  we  "  defraud  not  any,"  and  that  we  always  "  do 
unto  others  as  we  would  they  should  do  unto  us."  The  second  requirement  is, 
"  to  love  mercy."  To  be  just,  strictly  just,  honest,  upright,  is  indeed  something, 
but  it  is  not  all.  A  man  may  be  very  honest,  and  yet  very  selfish  ;  indeed,  justice 
and -mercy  are  somewhat  antagonistic  virtues,  and  are  not  often  found  existing 
together.  The  man  who  prides  himself  upon  his  integrity  not  unfrequently 
makes  it  an  excuse  for  uncharitableness.  The  more  highly,  then,  any  one  prides 
himself  upon  his  justice,  the  more  reason  he  has  to  examine  himself  on  the  point 
of  mercy.  Are  you  always  tender-hearted, — ready  to  forgive, — treating  others 
with  due  consideration  and  kindness,  and  putting  the  most  charitable  construction 
on  all  their  actions  ?  It  is  required  of  us  not  merely  to  show  mercy,  but  to  love 
mercy;  to  take  positive  delight  in  doing  good.  The  third  requirement  is,  to 
"  walk  huihbly  with  thy  God."  This  implies  something  more  than  the  absence  of 
pride.  What  is  it  to  "  walk  with  God  "  ?  There  is  implied  in  the  expression 
a  un?ty  of  mind  and  will,  a  holy  communion  and  fellowship  with  God,  such  as 
those  are  very  far  from  even  dreaming  of,  who  content  themselves  with  doing 
justly  and  loving  mercy.  Where  shall  we  find  this  unity  save  in  those  who 
humbly  inquire  what  God's  mind  is,  and  who  seek  to  know  and  do  His  will  T 
The  text  is  literally,  as  margin,  "  Humble  thyself  to  walk  with  thy  God."  Sinful 
man  is  naturally  too  proud  to  walk  with  God ;  he  wovdd  rather  be  altogether  inde- 
pendent and  walk  by  himself.  When  by  the  grace  of  God  he  has  been  humbled 
and  brought  low,  then  he  finds  that  to  walk  with  God  is  his  highest  honour  and 
present  joy.  Our  text,  which  at  fitrst  seemed  but  an  epitome  of  the  law,  is 
seen  to  contain  the  Gospel.  (W.  E.  Light,  M.A.)  The  requirements  of  Ood  : — 
I.  To  DO  JUSTLY.  To  act,  speak,  and  to  strive  to  think,  fairly,  honestly,  towards 
all  men.  Not  to  suffer  feelings,  interest,  passions,  or  prejudices  to  influence  us. 
(See  for  Scripture  counsels  and  commands,  Deut.  xvi.  19,  20 ;  Ps.  Ixxxii.  3,  4 ; 
Exod.  xxiii.  3,  8;  Lev.  xix.  33,  34,  35,  36;  Prov.  xx.  14;  Lev.  xix.  11  ;  Exod. 
^xxiii.  1.)  Ngtice  that  we  are  bidden  to  do  justly,  but  not  commanded  always  to 
exact  justice,  or  our  strict  rights  from  others.  II.  Love  mercy.  The  doing  of 
strict  justice  is  sometimes  most  painful,  but  the  work  of  mercy  is  ever  a  labour  of 
love.  The  Christian  learns,  more  and  more,  how  much  he  is  indebted  to  mercy  ; 
and  hence  he  loves  mercy  with  thankful  love,  and  the  work  of  mercy  is  to  him 
the  work  of  gratitude.  The  Bible  has  beautiful  precepts  on  this  subject  (Deut. 
xxii.  1-4;  Exod.  xxiii.  4,  5;  Matt.  v.  44;  Rom.  xii.  20,  21).  The  poor  are 
especial  objects  of  God's  mercy  (Deut.  xv.  11,  xxiv.  10-13).  The  merciful 
will  not  be  too  sharp  in  gathering  for  himself  all  he  can,  nor  in  insisting  on  every 
right  which  man's  law  gives  him,  if  that  right  bear  hardly  on  his  neighbour 
(Deut.  xxiv.  19-21  ;  Jas.  ii.  13).  Mercy  is  to  be  shown  in  sympathy  (Rom. 
xii.  15  ;  Luke  xxiii.  34).  III.  Walk  humbly  with  thy  God.  The  humblest 
thing  a  man  can  do  is  to  accept  Christ.  The  next  is  to  depend  simply  and  entirely 
on  God  the  Holy  Ghost  for  strength  to  do  just,  grace  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
humbly.  To  walk  humbly  is  to  have  a  constant  sense  of  our  sinfulness — God's 
holiness ;  our  weakness — God's  all  might ;  our  folly  and  ignorance — God's 
wisdom,  truth,  and  love.  It  is  to  acknowledge  God  in  prosperity  (Deut.  viii. 
12,  &c.).  It  is  to  acknowledge  God  in  adversity  (1  Pet.  v.  6;  Isa.  Ivii.  15).  (F.  J, 
Scott,  M.A.)  The  sum  of  God's  requirements : — These  words  are  the  answer  of  the 
Almighty,  by  the  mouth  of  His  prophet,  to  the  cry  of  one  of  old,  whose  difficulties 
in  his  reUgious  course  appeared  too  great  for  him.  God  demands  from  him  no 
impossible  service — no  countless  sacrifices,  no  rivers  of  oil ;  He  but  bids  him  walk 
in  the  way  in  which  all  may  walk  who  will — the  paths  of  justice,  mercy,  and 
humility.  The  very  terms  in  which  the  requirement  is  made  imply  that  the  work 
is  far  from  an  impracticable  one.  God  speaks  in  mercy  and  tenderness.  Upon 
the  ease  with  which  His  precepts  may  be  obeyed  He  founds  a  claim,  surely  a 
"most  touching  and  irresistible  claim,  to_obedieace.  Was  the  doing  justly,  loving 
mercy,  and  walking  with  God  a  thing  practicable  for  the  few, — living  in  the 
dawn  only  of  the  clay-spring ;  and  can  it  be  impossible  for  you,  the  children 
of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus — you,  upon  whom  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  hath 
risen  in  all  His  glory  ?  God  never  set  a  man  any  work  which  he  could  not  perform. 
He  never  yet  bade  His  servant  to  do  His  will,  and  withheld  from  him  the  power 
of  doing  it.  If  you  ask  how  a  man,  awakened  to  a  sense  of  religion,  may  set 
himself  to  do  the  will  of  God,  you  must  bear  in  mind  the  twofold  principle  of 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  83 

pu£e..grace  and  free-will.  You  must  never  lose  sight  of  your  own  utter  inability 
to  do  anything  of  yourselves  apart  from  the  grace  and  power  of  God.  If  we 
would  work  the  works  of  God  it  must  be  in  the  might  of  God.  But  you  must 
not  rest  satisfied  with  praying  for  grace ;  you  must  not  relax  in  your  own  exertions 
to  serve  and  obey  God.  When  we  think  how  great  a  task  is  set  before  us  we 
may  well  rejoice  that  we  have  many  promises  that  it  is  not  an  impossible  one. 
We  should  see  that  the  seeming  impossibilities  had  been  all  of  our  own  imagining. 
Though  we  are  never  to  remit  our  watchfulness,  nor  to  forget  our  danger  of  again 
falling  into  sin,  if  we  be  true  to  God,  we  shall  find  each  additional  act  of  self- 
sacrifice  made  in  obedience  to  His  will  a  source  of  peace  and  comfort  to  us. 
(<?.  W.  Brameld.)  Do  justly. — Here  is  the  summing  up  of  the  law;  these 
are  the  things  which,  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  Uve  by  them.  Seldom  does  a  sinner 
come  to  Christ  who  has  not  first  attempted  to  work  out  his  own  salvation  by 
keeping  the  law,  who  has  not  resolved  in  his  own  strength  not  to  sin  again,  but 
to  walk  blameless.  If  he  strive  honestly  and  deal  faithfully  with  himself,  it 
will  not  be  long  before  he  will  despair  of  success  in  his  undertaking.  This  is 
quite  beyond  us,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and 
blind,  and  soul,  and  strength."  And  yet  no  man  can  enter  the  pear'y  gates 
who  does  not  thus  love  his  God.  Is  God's,  then,  an  unjust  requirement  ? 
Siu:ely  it  is  the  one  object  of  all  human  law  to  compel  man  to  do  justly.  Would 
society,  culture,  civilisation,  anything  that  is  worth  living  for,  be  possible  if  all  men 
refused  to  be  just  ?  Is  it,  then,  unreasonable  for  God  to  command  us  to  do 
justly  ?  Is  it  too  hard  to  require  us  to  love  mercy  ?  Is  this  not  felt  instinct- 
ively to  be  one  of  the  noblest  traits  of  character,  and  do  we  not  admire  the  exercise 
of  it  ?  If  all  men  were  strictly  just  to  each  other,  humanly  speaking,  there  would  , 
be  little  need  of  mercy ;  but  realising  that  we  need  mercy  ourselves,  is  it  too  ^  ■ 
much  that  we  should  be  required  to  grant  it  to  others  ?  And  the  third  require- 
ment is  surely  no  heavy  or  excessive  burden  laid  upon  us.  "  Do  justly."  That 
is  the  foundation  virtue,  without  which  you  can  rear  no  superstructirre  of  noble 
character.  A  man  who  has  no  sense  of  justice  is  utterly  lost  to  all  good  influences,  , 
and,  labour  as  you  may,  nothing  can  be  made  out  of  him.  One's  sense  of  justice  / 
may  be  perverted,  and  needs  to  be  rightly  educated ;  but  it  must  be  there,  else 
there  can  be  only  vileness  and  corruption.  Primarily,  justice  means  erectness, 
uprightness,  being  swayed  neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left  by  all  the  influences 
that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  life.  1.  We  must  be  just  to  oiu'selves  ;' 
and  we  can  do  this  only  by  giving  any  faculty  of  our  nature  its  due  authority 
and  influence  in  governing  our  conduct.  There  are  three  motors  in  us  which 
govern  the  executive  will — passion,  self-love,  and  conscience,  and  these  are  far 
from  agreeing  with  each  other.  Our  entire  lives  are  frequently  one  long  battle 
between  them.  Justice  requires  that  all  passions  and  appetites  should  be 
subordinate  to  self-love,  which  bids  us  regard  the  consequences  to  ourselves  of 
what  we  do.  Not  selfishness,  but  self-love,  which,  in  its  proper  place,  is  a  noble 
faculty.  But  above  self-love  sits  the  supreme  ruler  conscience,  whose  one  great 
utterance,  "  Duty,"  is  the  grandest  word  in  any  language  ;  which  shows  to 
passion  the  baseness  of  sacrificing  all  else  to  present  gratification,  as  well  as  the 
injury  that  results  ;  and  which  tells  self-love  of  higher  and  grander  aims  than 
personal  advantage.  If  you  are  just  to  all  that  is  best  and  truest  in  your  own 
characters  you  will  not  be  unjust  to  others.  If  you  have  not  been  thus  just  to 
yourselves,  there  is  no  hope  for  you  save  in  Christ.  2.  We  must  be  just  to  our 
fellow- men.  Just  before  charitable  and  merciful.  Men  are  ready  to  do  any- 
thing, and  to  give  liberally,  if  only  they  can  avoid  doing  justly.  There  can  be  , 
no  mercy  shown  by  one  who  is  not  just.  A  little  more  justice  in  the  world  ^ 
would  do  away  with  the  necessity  for  much  almsgiving.  Justice  consists  in 
giving  to  each  action  its  proper  reward,  neither  adding,  thereto  fioitn  partiality, 
nor  taking  therefrom  from  envy  and  hatred.  Then  be  perfectly  upright,  bending 
neither  to  the  side  of  weak  dislike  to  inflict  suffering,  nor  to  the  side  of  angiy 
desire  for  vengeance,  and  showing  no  respect  of  persons.  And  never  ask  more 
than  justice  from  others.  Do  justly  to  those  about  you  in  estimating  their  con- 
duct towards  you,  and  especially  in  judging  of  their  motives.  You  may  be  rest- 
fully  sure  that  God  will  always — and  in  His  gracious  redemption  most  certainly 
of  all — do  justly.  {T.  T.  Eaton,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  The  justice  of  one  man  towards 
another : — There  are  in  reUgion  things  that  are  of  a  mutable  and  alterable  nature, 
and  things  that  are  immutable  and  unchangeable.  Whatsoever  is  by  institution 
may,  by  the  same  authority  that  imposed  it,  be  discharged  and  abated.     The 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

things  mentioned  in  this  text  continue  to  all  perpetuity.  About  these  things 
all  persons  agree,  that  are  of  any  education  and  improvement.  Single  out  for 
treaiment  this  righteousness  between  man  and  man — to  "  do  justly."  There  is 
a  difference  between  justice  and  equity.  Equity  takes  into  account  the  circuui- 
^  tances  of  a  case,  grants  allowances,  and  can  moderate  the  rigour  of  law.  There 
i^.  no  one  but  expects  this  measure  from  God  when  he  makes  application  to 
Hini.  .  God  considers  and  deals  with  us  in  a  M'ay  of  mercy  and  compassion. 
And  we  should  deal  so  with  one  another.  This  is  true  liberty  and  perfection 
for  a  man,  to  have  pov/er  over  hie  own  right,  so  as  to  compassionate  and  com- 
miserate in  case  of  weakness  and  offence.  It  is  greatness  of  power  to  be  able 
to  do  this  ;  and  it  is  goodness  of  mind  to  perform  it.  Therefore  let  "just"  and 
"equal  "  be  so  stated  that  that  shall  be  just  which  appears  to  be  either  according 
to  law  or  according  to  reason.  Right  is  determined  either  by  the  proprietors, 
or  by  the  magistrate,  or  by  the  voluntary  agreement  of  persons  that  have  power 
and  interest.  In  commerce,  custom  and  usage  is  to  be  heeded,  for  these  began 
by  consent.  A  man  may  be  unjust  from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  as  well  as  by 
the  breach  of  any  law  or  constitution.  He  is  equal — as  differing  from  just — 
who  considers  all  things  that  are  reasonable,  and  makes  allowance  accordingly. 
There  is  a  third  thing  beyond  these,  and  that  is  to  be  gracious  and  merciful. 
God  deals  with  us  usually,  but  we  deal  thus  with  one  another  very  rarely. 
The  following  are  reasons  why  we  should  take  this  whole  temper  of  mind 
into  consideration,  and  put  it  into  practice.  1.  It  is  the  temper  of  God. 
2.  It  is  everybody's  tenure  and  security.  Where  justice  and  equity  do 
not  get  place  there  will  be  nothing  but  fraud,  and  everybody  will  be 
insecure.  3.  These  things  do  uphold  the  world,  which  otherwise  would  soon 
fall  into  confusion.  4.  It  is  according  to  our  principles;  we  are  made 
to  these  things.  6.  It  is  the  right  in  every  case.  A  man's  greatest  wisdom  is 
seen  in  finding  that  out,  and  his  goodness  in  complying  with  it.  6.  They  are 
the  rule  and  law  of  all  action.  7.  Everybody  expects  to  be  thus  dealt  with  by 
others.  That  which  is  expected  from  another  should  be  the  measure  of  my 
dealing  with  him.  8.  If  we  keep  to  the  rule  of  right  and  fit  we  shall  be  justified 
whenever  called  to  examination.  Punishment  is  for  the  upholding  of  right, 
or  it  is  exemplary  that  others,  by  a  bad  example,  may  learn  not  to  offend.  To 
live  in  the  practice  of  justice  and  equity,  will  remove  all  suspicion  of  arbitrariness 
or  self-will,  will  give  a  man  heart's  ease  and  satisfaction,  and  will  render  a 
man  acceptable  to  God.  There  are  several  things  which  every  man  must  take 
care  of  that  would  be  found  in  the  practice  of  justice  and  equity.  1.  Let  a  man 
be  wary  of  self-interest.  2.  Let  no  man  allow  himself  to  be  arbitrary  in  a  thing 
depending  between  himself  and  another.  3.  Let  not  a  man  take  upon  him  to 
be  judge  where  he  is  a  party.  4.  Be  always  ready  to  any  fair  reference.  5.  As 
thou  art  a  Christian,  yield  more  in  fair  consideration  towards  a  friendly  com- 
posure than  absolute  reason  will  obUge  to  and  enjoin.  6.  Let  nothing  rest  upon 
secret  and  undeclared  trust ;  leave  nothing  half  done.  7.  Make  a  simple  repara- 
tion in  case  of  wrong.  8.  Be  a  plain  and  open  dealer.  9.  Make  the  same  allowance 
for  the  infirmity  and  mistakes  of  others  as  thou  dost  desire  for  thyself.  10.  In 
acknowledgment  of  what  Christ  hath  done  for  thee,  be  thou  equal,  just,  and 
righteous,  beyond  what  absolute  reason  or  strict  right  may  enjoin.  (J5.  Which- 
cote,  D.D.)  Justice  and  mercy  : — These  words,  written  so  many  hundred  years 
ago,  come  home  to  our  hearts  as  freshly  as  if  they  had  been  spoken  yesterday.  We 
also  have  been  shown  what  is  good,  and  we  also  should  admit  that  no  better  descrip- 
tion could  be  given  of  the  goodness  which  our  hearts  recognise  than  "  to  do  justly 
and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  Grod."  Of  course,  it  is  true  that 
through  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  have  a  clearer  knowledge  of 
God's  nature,  and  so  a  deeper  insight  into  what  He  requires  of  us,  than  the  people 
to  whom  Micah  spoke.  No  modern  equivalent  of  biu:nt-offering  or  calves  of  a 
year  old,  not  thousands  of  rams  or  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil,  no  gift  of  churches, 
or  communion-plate,  or  musical  instruments,  or  stained-glass  windows,  no,  not 
even  subscription  to  charity — nothing  is  good  in  the  sight  of  God  unless  it  carries 
with  it  the  good  will,  the  will  to  do  justice  and  mercy.  For  to-day  I  do  not  propose 
to  consider  with  you  the  abstract  question  as  to  what  justice  is,  a  question  first 
asked  in  one  of  the  most  fascinating  books  in  the  world.  The  Republic  of  Plato, 
and  often  enough  asked  since.  I  propose  to  follow  the  Jewish  prophet  in  assuming 
that  we  have  all  been  instructed  in  the  Divine  law,  so  that  the  great  names  of 
justice  and  mercy  have  a  meaning  to  us,  whether  we  can  put  that  meaning  into 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  86 

words  or  not.  Assuming  that,  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  briefly  to  the  necessary 
moral  qualities  which  underlie  the  practice  of  these  Christian  virtues.  The 
moral  qualities  necessary  for  all  who  aim  at  being  just  and  merciful  are  three — 
courage,  patience,  sympathy.  1.  Courage.  Courage  is  plainly  necessary ;  for 
what  can  it  profit  us  to  see  the  right  course  to  take,  if,  through  faint-heartedness, 
we  are  unable  to  take  it  ?  No  one  can  be  just  or  merciful  who  cannot  take  his 
own  line  ;  who  has  not,  as  we  say,  "  the  courage  of  his  opinions."  2.  And  then, 
patience — that  is  necessary.  How  much  injustice  in  the  world  comes  about 
because  people  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  investigate  the  case  before  them.  In 
the  abstract,  in  intention  everybody  is  anxious  to  be  just ;  everybody  is  eager 
to  be  merciful.  But,  unfortunately  for  us,  the  world  is  not  an  abstract  world. 
It  is  very  concrete,  and  it  presents  particular  cases  for  the  exercise  of  our  virtue, 
and  so  our  good  intention  counts  for  so  little.  If  action  on  a  great  scale  were 
required  of  us,  we  should  all  give  a  judgment  that  would  be  admirably  just.  But 
unfortunately,  the  decisions  that  are  asked  for  from  day  to  day  are  trifling  decisions 
on  everyday  matters,  and,  in  every  instance,  to  come  at  the  true  facts  of  the  case 
means  spending  time,  means  going  into  worrying  details,  and  there  is  so  much 
else  to  be  done  of  so  much  importance.  And  so  we  become  unjust,  just  for  want 
of  patience.  3.  And  then  the  man  who  would  be  just  or  merciful  must  have  the 
power  of  putting  himself  in  the  place  of  another,  and  seeing  the  matter  in  all 
its  circumstances  from  another's  point  of  view ;  and  that  means  that  he  must 
have  a  real  interest  in  other  people  for  their  own  sakes,  and  be  able  to  understand 
them,  and  be  able  to  see  why  they  did  what  they  did.  Would  it  be  too  much  to 
say  that  no  one  can  be  either  just  or  merciful  to  those  whom  he  does  not  love  ? 
I  said  that  these  three  qualities  of  courage,  patience,  and  sympathy  are  necessary, 
whether  the  work  that  we  have  to  do  is  an  act  of  justice  or  an  act  of  mercy.  And 
you  will  see  that  it  is  so  when  you  recollect  that  that  common  distinction  between 
justice  and  mercy  is  merely  a  practical  distinction  necessary  for  human  infirmity, 
but  not  a  distinction  that  goes  down  to  the  root  of  action.  We  might  illustrate 
from  any  trial  for  murder.  In  a  case  of  that  sort  we  should  consider  that  it  was 
the  province  of  justice  to  concern  itself  with  the  bare  account  of  the  crime  alleged, 
and  if  that  were  proved  sentence  would  be  passed.  And  then  it  would  be  con- 
sidered the  part  of  mercy  to  come  in  and  weigh  the  extenuating  circumstances, 
and  modify  the  sentence  accordingly.  But  if  justice  means  giving  to  every  one 
his  due,  clearly  mercy  is  still  more  due  to  the  criminal  than  what  we  called 
first  justice.  The  extenuating  circumstances  are  a  very  real  part  of  the  action. 
X  Or  again,  suppose  that  some  one  in  our  employment  has  abused  our  confidence. 
vZ/'^A  clerk  has  stolen  money  to  pay  his  gambling  debts.  Well,  his  employer,  if  he 
were  a  just  man,  in  deciding  whether  to  prosecute  his  clerk  or  not  to  prosecute 
him,  would  decide  on  the  whole  circumstances,  and  he  would  do  what  he  thought 
best  in  the  interests  of  the  clerk.  If  he  thought  imprisonment  likely  to  have 
the  most  salutary  effect  on  the  man's  character  he  would  prosecute,  and  in  that 
case  prosecution  would  be  mercy  as  well  as  justice.  We  can  see  this,  of  course, 
most  plainly  in  God's  dealings  with  us.  We  can  see,  I  mean,  that  justice  and 
mercy  are  only  two  sides  of  the  same  thing.  We  know  God  gives  us  in  all  the 
circumstances  of  life  what  He  sees  to  be  best  for  us.  We  may  sometimes  call 
what  He  sends  us  a  judgment,  and  sometimes  we  may  call  it  a  mercy,  and  all  the 

time  we  know  that  the  judgment  as  much  as  the  mercy  proceeds  from  His  love 

proceeds  from  His  knowledge  of  our  real  need  ;  so  that  His  justice  is  mercy  in 
being  what  is  best  for  us,  and  His  mercy  is  justice,  because  that  best  is  our  due 
as  being  His  children.  Now,  that  is  our  ideal — a  mercy  that  shall  be  justice,  a 
justice  that  shall  be  mercy.  Let  us,  then,  do  justice,  let  us  love  mercy,  as  lecometh 
saints.  And  then  for  that  third  requirement.  That,  we  know,  is  a  pre-condition 
of  the  other  two — "  to  walk  humbly  with  God."  If  the  other  two  give  the  substance 
of  saintship,  surely  this  gives  the  secret — "  to  walk  humbly  with  God."  It  is 
a  strange  expression,  and  the  rendering  in  the  margin  of  the  Bible  is  stranger ' 
still :  '*  Humble  thyself  to  walk  with  God."  Surely,  if  we  had  a  vision  of  God 
as  Moses  or  Isaiah,  we  should  veil  our  faces  and  fall  in  the  dust.  Why  should 
we  need  humility  to  walk  with  God  ?  Indeed,  it  is  a  question  well  worth  asking. 
Why  are  we  so  often  ashamed  to  obey  the  promptings  of  God's  voice  speaking  in 
conscience  ?  Why  are  we  so  often  ashamed  to  be  just,  ashamed  to  be  merciful, 
ashamed  in  society  of  defending  an  unpopular  person,  ashamed  in  politics  of  defend- 
ing an  unpopular  cause,  fearing  to  be  righteous  overmuch,  to  be  merciful  overmuch  ? 
May  God  give  us  enough  humility  to  accept  His  Almighty  guidance  through  this 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

world — humility  enough  to  be  on  the  look-out  for  the  way  that  He  has  prepared 
for  us  to  walk  in  ;  and  may  He  give  us  all  the  courage  and  the  patience  and 
the  sympathy  necessary  for  our  task  whatever  it  may  prove  to   be.      (H.   C. 
Beeching.)      And   to  walk    humbly    with   thy    God. — Of   walking  humbly   with 
God: — The  beginning  of  this  chapter  contains  a  most  pathetical  expostulation 
of  God  by  the  prophet  with  His  people  about  their  sins,  and  unworthy  walking 
before  Him.     Convictions,  made  effectual  upon  the  soul,  draw  out  its  inward 
principles,  which  are  not  otherwise  discovered.     Men  think  they  must  do  some- 
thing whereby  to   appease   the   God  whom   they  have  provoked.     They  fix  on 
two  general  heads.     They  propose  things  which   God   Himself  had  appointed, 
such  as  sacrifices  and  burnt  offerings.     Or  they  propose  things   of    their    own 
finding  out,  which  they  suppose  may  have  a  further  and  better  efiicacy  to  the 
end  aimed  at  than  anything  appointed  of  God  Himself.     They  have  a  better 
opinion  of  their  own  ways  and  endeavours,  for  the  pleasing  of  God  and  quieting 
their  consciences,  than  of  anything  of  God's  institution.     There  is  nothing  so 
desperate,  irksome,  or  wicked  that  convinced  persons  will  not  engage  to  do  under 
their  pressure  on  the  account  of  the  guilt  of  sin.     The  prophet  discovers  to  such 
persons  their   mistake.     God   prefers  moral  worship,  in  the  way  of  obedience, 
to  all  sacrifice  whatever.     This  moral  obedience  is  referred  to  three  heads — 
do  justly  ;  love  mercy  ;  walk  humbly  with  God.     The  two  first  are  comprehensive 
of  our  whole  duty  in  respect  of  men.     The  third  head  regards  the  first  table  of 
the  law.     I.  What  it  is  to  walk  with  God.     1.  Some  things  are  required  to  it. 
(1)  Peace  and  agreement.     These  have  to  be  made,  can  only  be  made,  through 
the  blood  of  atonement.     (2)  Oneness  of  design.     The  aim  of  God,  in  general, 
is  His  own  glory ;  in  particular,  it  is  "  the  praise  of  His  glorious  grace."     To  exalt 
this  glorious  grace,  two  things  are  considerable.     That  all  which  is  to  be  looked 
for  at  the  hand  of  God  is  upon  the  account  of  mere  grace  and  mercy.     The 
enjoyment  of  Himself  in  this  way  of  mercy  and  grace  is  that  great  reward  of 
him  that  walks  with  Him.     That  a  man  may  walk  with  another,  it  is  required 
that  he   have   a  living  principle  in   him  to  enable   him  thereimto.     2.  What 
it  is  to  walk  with  God.      It  consisteth  in  the  performance  of  that  obedience, 
for  matter  and  manner,  which  God,  in  His  covenant  of  grace,  requires  at  our 
hands.     (1)  That  our  obedience  be  walking  with  God,  it  is  required  that  we  be 
in  covenant  with  Him,  and  that  the  obedience  be  required  in  the  tenour  of  that 
covenant.     Things  required  if  it  is  to  answer  the  tenovu:  of  the  covenant.     It 
must  proceed  from  faith  in  God,  by  Christ  the  Mediator.     The  person  must  be 
perfect  or  upright  therein.     (2)  That  our  obedience  may  be  walking  with  God, 
it  is  required  that  it  be  a  constant  progressive  motion  towards  a  mark  before 
us.     Walking  is  a  constant  progress.     (3)  Walking  with  God  is  to  walk  always 
as  under  the  eye  of  God.     By  a  general  apprehension  of  God's  omniscience  and 
presence.     Two  things  will   follow  being   under   the   eye   and   control   of   God. 
Reverential  thoughts  of  Him.     Self-abasement  iinder  a  sense  of  the  imperfection 
of  all  our  services.     3.  Our  walking  with   God   in   our   obedience   argues   com- 
placency and  delight  therein  ;  and  that  we  are  bound  unto  God  in  His  ways 
with   the  cords  of  love.     II.  What  it  is  to  walk  humbly  with  God.     The 
original  words  are,  "  To  humble  thyself  in  walking."     In  our  walking  with  God 
distinguish  between   the   inward   power  of  it  and  the  outward  privilege  of  it. 
What  it  is  in  reference  whereunto  we  are  to  humble  ourselves  in  walking  with 
God.     To  the  law  of  His  grace,  and  to  the  law  of  His  providence.     We  must 
humble  ourselves  to  place  our  obedience  on  a  new  foot  of  account,  and  yet  to 
pursue  it  with  no  less  diligence  than  if  it  stood  upon  the  old.     We  must  address 
ourselves  to  the  greatest  duties,  being  fully  persuaded  that  we  have  no  strength 
for  the  least.     We  must  see  that  in  Christ  is  our  supply.     And  we  humble  our- 
selves to  be  contented  to  have  the  sharpest  afflictions  accompanying  the  strictest 
obedience.     Consider  now  what  it  is  to  humble  ourselves  to  the  law  of  His 
providence.     There  is  much  in  God's  providential  administration  beyond,  and 
even  apparently  contradictory  to,  the  reason  of  men.     Four  things  require  this 
humbling    of    ourselves.      (1)    Visible    confusion.      (2)    Unsjpeakable    variety. 
(3)  Sudden  alterations.     (4)  Deep  distresses.     We  are  to  be  humbled  unto  His 
sovereignty,   His  wisdom.   His  righteousness.      How  are  we,   by  what    means 
are  we  to  humble  ourselves  to  the  law  of  God's  grace  and  providence  ?     (1)  Let 
faith  have  its  work.     (2)  Constant  abiding  reverence  of  God  will  help  the  soul 
in  this  imiversal  resignation  and  humbUng  of  itself.     This  reverence  of  God 
ariseth  from  the  infinite  excellency  and  majesty  of  God  and  His  great  name. 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  87 

The  infinite,  inconceivable  distance  we  stand  from  Him.  This  glorious  God 
is  pleased  of  His  own  grace  to  condescend  to  concern  Himself  in  us  and  our  ser- 
vices. III.  Humble  walking  with  God  is  the  gkeat  duty  and  most  valuable 
CONCERNMENT  OF  BELIEVERS.  Sundry  ways  whereby  glory  redounds  to  Gk)d 
by  believers  humbly  walking  with  Him.  1.  It  gives  Him  the  glory  of  the  doctrine 
of  grace.  2.  It  gives  Him  the  glory  of  the  power  of  His  grace.  3.  It  gives  Him 
the  glory  of  the  law  of  His  grace,  that  He  is  a  King  obeyed.  4.  It  gives  Him  the 
glory  of  His  justice.  5.  The  glory  of  His  kingdom  ;  first,  in  its  order  and  beauty  ; 
and  secondly,  in  multiplying  His  subjects.  This  humble  walking  must  certainly 
be  the  great  and  incomparable  concernment  of  all  those  whose  chief  end  is  the 
advancement  of  the  glory  of  God.  In  humble  walking  with  God,  we  shall  find 
peace  in  every  condition.  We  shall  find  comfort.  This  will  make  us  useful 
in  our  generation.  (John  Owen,  D.D.)  Walk  with  God: — Why  not  joyfully  ? 
There  is  a  foundation  laid  for  this.  Joy  is  not,  however,  absolutely  necessary. 
We  have  known  much  self-denial,  and  deadness  to  the  world,  and  spirituality 
of  devotion,  and  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  others,  in  persons 
who  may  be  said  to  be  saved  by  hope,  rather  than  confidence.  But  with  regard 
to  humbleness  of  mind,  this  is  indispensable, — always,  and  in  everything :  and 
no  progress  can  be  made  without  it.  How  is  our  walking  humbly  with  God  to 
appear  ?  I.  In  connection  with  Divine  truth.  Here,  God  is  our  teacher ; 
and  if,  as  learners,  we  walk  humbly  with  Him,  we  shall  cast  down  imaginations 
and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  Christ  •  we 
shall  sacrifice  the  pride  of  reason ;  and  having  ascertained  that  the  Scriptures 
are  the  Word  of  God,  and  discovered  what  they  really  contain,  we  shall  not 
speculate  upon  their  principles,  but  admit  them  on  their  Divine  authority. 
II.  I^  connection  with  Divine  ordinances.  Here  we  walk  with  God  as 
worshippers  ;  and  if  we  walk  humbly  with  Him,  we  shall  have  grace,  whereby 
we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence  and  with  godly  fear.  III.  In 
connection  with  His  mercies.  Here  we  walk  with  God  as  our  benefactor. 
If  we  walk  humbly  with  Him,  we  shall  own  and  feel  that  we  have  no  claim  upon 
God  for  anything  we  possess  or  enjoy.  IV.  With  regard  to  our  trials.  Here 
we  walk  with  God  as  our  reprover  and  corrector  ;  and  if  we  walk  humbly,  we 
shall  not  charge  Him  foolishly  ;  we  shall  not  arraign  His  authority,  or  ask,  What 
doest  Thou  ?  V.  With  regard  to  our  conditions.  Here  we  walk  with  God 
as  our  disposer  and  governor  ;  and  if  we  walk  humbly,  we  shall  hold  ourselves 
at  His  control ;  we  shall  be  wiUing  that  He  should  choose  our  inheritance  for 
us.  We  shall  be  satisfied  with  our  own  allotment,  and  learn,  in  whatsoever  state 
we  are,  therewith  to  be  content.  VI.  With  regard  to  our  qualification  and 
ability  for  our  work.  Here  we  walk  with  God  as  our  helper  and  strength ; 
and  if  we  walk  humbly,  we  shall  be  sensible  of  our  insuflSciency  for  all  the  pur- 
poses of  the  Divine  life.  Here,  humility  is — to  fear  always  ;  and  to — pray. 
Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe.  VII.  With  regard  to  the  whole  of 
OUR  RECOVERY.  Here  we  walk  with  God  as  a  Saviour  ;  and  if  we  walk  humbly, 
we  shall  not  go  about  to  establish  our  own  righteousness,  but  submit  ourselves 
\mto  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God,  and  acknowledge  that  we  have  nothing 
to  glory  in  before  Him.  Happy  this  humble  walker  with  Gk)d  !  God  resisteth 
the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble.  (William  Jay.)  God's  require- 
ments from  His  creatures: — I.  A  great  deal  is  required  of  man  when  he  is 
TOLD  TO  "  WALK  HUMBLY  WITH  GoD."  1.  He  who  walks  with  God  must  be  con- 
sidered as  living  in  the  full  consciousness  that  the  eye  of  his  Maker  is  ever  upon 
him  ;  that  he  cannot  take  a  single  unobserved  step,  nor  do  the  least  thing  which 
escapes  Divine  notice.  When  you  consider  walking  with  God  as  implying  an 
ever  active  consciousness  of  God's  presence,  it  would  not  perhaps  be  easy  to 
find  words  which  should  better  express  a  pre-eminent  holiness.  If  a  man  has 
a  practical  conviction  that  God  is  ever  at  his  side,  such  a  man  will  be  the  same 
in  public  and  in  private.  2.  Walking  with  God  denotes  a  complete  fixing  of 
the  affections  "on  things  that  are  above."  He  has  both  his  head  and  his  heart 
in  heaven.  High  attainments  in  piety  have  been  reached  by  the  man  to  whom 
such  a  description  applies.  II.  Why,  though  a  great  deal  be  required, 
IT  might  be  spoken  of  in  that  almost  slighting  manner  which  is  so  observ- 
able in  the  text.  The  form  of  expression  seems  to  indicate  that  God  might 
have  required  much  more  than  He  has  required.  God  asks  nothing  which  it 
is  not  for  man's  present  as  well  as  future  advantage  to  yield.  He  hath  so 
ordered  His  dealings  with  our  race,  that  obedience  is  the  parent  of  peace,  and 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vr 

disobedience  of  disquietude.  The  creature  is  advantaged  by  giving  what  the 
Creator  demands.  God  might  have  instituted  so  different  a  mode  of  dealing 
with  man,  that  what  He  now  asks  is  as  nothing  compared  with  what  He  might 
have  demanded.  [Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)'  Humility: — A  question  to  which  the 
text  is  an  answer.  This  question  teacheth  us  that  ceremonial  observances  will 
not  compensate  a  neglect  of  substantial  duties  ;  that  hypocrites  will  give  anything 
rather  than  give  up  themselves  to  the  Lord ;  that  it  is  not  the  costliness  of  the 
sacrifice,  but  the  godliness  of  the  sacrifice  which  God  looketh  at.  The  answer 
is,  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good."  Doctrine — In  revealing  our 
duty  to  us,  God  exacteth  nothing  of  man  but  what  is  good.  God  has  revealed 
His  mind  by  the  light  of  nature,  and  by  the  light  of  His  Word,  which  is  more 
clear,  full,  and  certain.  The  revelation  of  God's  mind  consists  of  two  parts, 
the  moral  part,  and  the  evangelical  part.  Whatever  God  has  revealed  is  good. 
There  is  a  moral  and  beneficial  goodness.  God  exacteth  nothing  of  us  but  what 
is  good.  This  can  be  proved  by  the  design  of  the  Christian  religion ;  and  by 
the  structure  and  frame  of  it.  Doctrine — Walking  humbly  with  God  is  our 
great  duty,  which  distinguisheth  the  sincere  from  the  hypocrites.  What  is 
walking  humbly  with  God  ?  A  ready  submitting  and  subjecting  of  ourselves 
to  all  God's  commands.  This  includes  a  fear  to  offend,  and  a  care  to  please. 
A  patient  contentedness  with  every  condition  God  bringeth  us  into.  It  implieth 
specially  reverence  in  worship,  and  that  we  be  deeply  sensible  of  our  unworthiness 
to  approach  His  holy  presence.  A  constant  dependence  on  Him,  and  a  looking 
for  all  from  Him  that  we  stand  in  need  of  in  the  course  of  our  obedience.  A 
modest  sense  of  our  own  vileness  and  nothingness  ;  humility  being  and  involv- 
ing a  mean  esteem  of  ourselves.  What  reasons  may  enforce  this  humility. 
It  is  God,  on  whom  we  continually  depend,  who  requires  it.  It  is  our  God,  in 
whom  we  have  direct  interest.  We  are  always  with  Him  ;  in  His  eye  and 
presence.  Then  if  walking  humbly  with  God  distinguishes  the  sincere  from  the 
hypocrite,  let  us  take  care  to  walk  humbly.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Humility 
before  God : — In  the  evening  of  the  morning  that  Gordon,  when  in  Palestine, 
received  a  telegram  from  England,  asking  him  to  undertake  a  mission  which  he 
had  all  his  life  longed  to  undertake,  he  was  found  by  a  friend  outside  the  city 
wall,  kneeling  in  prayer.  When  remonstrated  with  on  account  of  the  place  being 
dangerous  from  Arabs,  he  replied,  "  The  telegrams  from  England  this  morning 
filled  me  with  such  elation,  I  felt  I  might  get  into  trouble  by  being  proud,  and 
I  thought  I  would  just  get  upon  my  horse  and  go  away  by  myself  and  humble 
myself  before  God."  Peace  on  the  path  (ver.  8,  marg.) : — This  "  walking  with 
God  "  is  the  most  expressive  phrase  in  the  Bible  for  the  Divine  life.  God  and 
the  soul  companion  pedestrians  on  the  path  of  life — what  could  be  more  forcible  ? 
Walking  with  God  is  the  flood-tide  of  spirituality  in  our  hearts,  all  the  shoals 
and  rocks  and  shallows  covered  by  the  bay-filled  sea.  I.  Meeting  must  bb. 
Before  we  can  walk  with  God,  we  must  have  met  Him.  Here  is  just  the  difficulty, 
this  is  the  stumble  at  the  start.  There  can  be  no  walking  with  God,  no  communion 
with  Him,  till  agreement  be  come  to.  There  is  a  quarrel  and  controversy  in 
the  universe.  By  birth,  man  is  God's  enemy ;  by  choice,  he  is ;  by  will,  he 
remains.  Darkness  and  light  cannot  be  together.  How  then  can  man  walk 
with  God  ?  Agreement  is  found  alone  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  in  the  Cross 
of  Christ.  II.  Acquaintance  must  be.  For  walking  together  more  is  required 
than  agreement.  Agreement  would  not  keep  us  together.  This  walking  together 
is  for  the  closest  of  friends  alone.  We  must  be  friends  with  God.  We  must 
know  one  another,  we  must  love  one  another.  This  acquaintance,  this  knowledge, 
this  friendship  is  foimd  also  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  Christ  we  know  God,  and 
thus  we  walk  homeward  together.  Sin  is  that  which  brings  distrust,  and  sin 
is  done  away  in  the  Sin- Bearer.  III.  The  same  pace  must  be.  Walking  with 
God  implies  that  at  the  same  pace  the  feet  lift  along  the  path.  He  knows  what 
a  slow,  struggling  pace  ours  is.  He  knows  how  our  faltering  feet  drag  along 
on  the  heavenly  road.  God  will  not  let  His  feeble  child  walk  cheerlessly  alone, 
far  behind  Him.  IV.  Going  the  same  way  must  be.  When  two  walk  together, 
one  face  does  not  look  one  way,  and  the  other  face  the  other  way.  Both  step 
onward  side  by  side.  Thus  it  is  with  us  and  the  Lord,  our  Companion. 
(J.  Bailey,  A.M.) 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord's  voice  crleth  unto  the  city,  and  the  man  of  wisdom  shall 
see    Thy    name.     Hear  ye    the  rod,  and    who    hath  appointed  it. — The   voice 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  89 

of  God  in  His  judgments :  —  I.  This  text  announces  that  therb  is  a 
MESSAGE  sent  FROM  GoD.  The  voice  of  the  Lord,  as  the  written  Word,  is  the 
ordinary,  the  appointed  means  of  conveying  His  will  to  men.  By  that  means 
God  has  in  every  age  announced  His  pvu-poses,  and  made  known  to  us  our  duty. 
But  there  are  occa'ions  when  God  adopts  another  mode  of  communication,  and 
speaks  to  us  in  a  di. --rent  manner.  There  are  times  when  He  speaks  to  us  through 
His  providence,  and  conveys  a  lesson  by  a  language  which  ensures  respect,  if 
it  does  not  compel  obedience.  He  speaks  to  us  as  individuals  by  afiiictions, 
by  calamities,  by  losses,  by  bereavements,  and  this  makes  the  careless  sensible, 
by  addressing  them  in  a  form  which  ensures  attention.  At  other  times  He  raises 
His  voice  and  addresses  cities  or  communities  by  judgments  of  a  far  more  com- 
prehensive kind — by  war,  famine,  or  pestilence.  Thus  God  speaks  to  a  disobedient 
and  rebelUous  people.  If  His  Word  is  despised,  if  His  frown  is  neglected.  He  must 
adopt  another  mode  of  procedure.  He  must  smite  ;  a  sort  of  necessity  compels 
Him  to  make  use  of  means  which  are  foreign  to  His  nature,  and  differ  from  His 
ordinary  treatment.  All  that  we  know  of  God  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  mode 
of  His  address  will  be  adapted  to  the  state  of  His  people.  If  they  are  like  sheep, 
gentle,  docile,  and  obedient.  He  will  lead  them  forth  like  a  shepherd.  If  they  are 
rebellious  and  proud,  if  they  show  by  their  behavioxu:  that  they  are  not  the  sheep 
of  His  pasture.  He  must  take  up  other  instruments,  and  lead  them  in  another  way. 
In  that  case  He  must  rebuke.  He  must  chastise.  He  must  subdue  by  affliction 
those  whom  He  cannot  draw  by  love,  and  must  humble  the  pride  which  resists 
instruction.  But  though  He  speaks,  we  dare  not  say  that  all  hear.  There  were 
those,  of  old  time,  who  had  eyes  and  could  not  see,  and  ears  and  could  not  hear. 
There  are  those,  even  now,  who  can  read  the  written  Word,  and  see  nothing  that 
applies  to  themselves  ;  or  can  sit  under  the  sound  of  the  Gospel,  and  hear  nothing 
that  they  understand.  II.  The  text  names  the  persons  by  whom  that  message 
WILL  BE  understood.  The  men  of  wisdom,  the  few,  the  very  few,  whose  hearts 
the  Lord  has  opened,  see  what  others  overlook.  They  see  His  name,  the  end 
and  the  object  of  His  doings,  and  learn  to  glorify  God  by  being  made  acquainted 
with  His  nature  in  contemplating  His  works.  Others  see  the  rod,  but  do  not 
perceive  the  hand  that  wields  it.  They  see  the  event,  but  do  not  mark  the 
providence.  They  see  the  afflictions,  but  will  not  observe  the  judgments.  But 
just  these  things  the  man  of  wisdom  does  see.  Nothing  excites  his  attention 
which  does  not  carry  him  to  God,  and  lead  him  to  look  to  God  as  the  author  of 
all  that  happens,  the  Ruler,  the  intelligent,  the  merciful  Ruler  of  the  world.  The 
man  of  wisdom  sees,  and  marks,  and  notes,  what  the  fool  does  not ;  and  the 
affliction  which  confounds  the  one  becomes  the  means  of  illumination  and  correction 
to  the  other,  while  God  is  seen  and  considered  in  what  is  done.  III.  The  text 
DESCRIBES  the  OBJECT  AND  PURPORT  OF  THE  MESSAGE.  Consider  the  inference 
which  is  drawn  by  the  man  of  wisdom,  and  how  he  applies  it.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod, 
and  who  hath  appointed  it."  Convinced  that  the  affliction  which  they  undergo 
is  a  rod  which  God  uses  for  the  rebuke  and  chastisement  of  His  people,  they 
urge  attention  to  what  is  passing.  "  Despise  not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord." 
"  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may  exalt  you  in 
due  season."  This  is  the  language  of  wisdom,  as  well  as  of  piety.  Admit  the 
existence  of  God,  and  belief  in  His  providence  follows.  Admit  His  providence, 
and  you  must  see  that  providence  such  as  His  can  have  no  limits.  It  extends  to 
everything  :  it  includes  everything,  the  greatest  as  well  as  the  least.  But  if  this 
necessarily  follows  from  the  mere  behef  in  God,  remember  that  it  is  the  part  of 
wisdom  to  draw  the  necessary  deduction,  and  to  explain  the  event  which  appears 
by  referring  to  the  cause  which  produces  it,  and  what  is  known  of  the  character 
and  will  of  Him  with  whom  the  event  originates.  Illustrate  by  reference  to  the 
failure  of  the  potato-crop  during  two  succeeding  seasons.  We  need  not  refer 
such  calamities  to  any  of  the  public  or  private  iniquities  which  we  have  reason 
to  lament.  God  deals  with  principles  rather  than  with  particulars.  He  corrects 
us  by  vindicating  His  own  natiu-e  from  our  misconceptions  ;  and  a  judgment 
which  extends  to  all  must  be  intended  to  convey  to  all  a  lesson  which  they  need. 
We  go  to  the  root  of  all  sins  when  we  name  the  sinful  heart  of  unbelief  as  the 
object  of  God's  displeasure,  and  believe  that  God  is  reproving  that  evil  heart 
by  the  judgments  He  sends.  We  do  not  mean  that  speculative  unbelief  which 
denies  the  existence  of  God,  but  that  practical  unbelief  which  forgets  Him.  But 
just  in  proportion  as  a  man  is  endeavouring  to  forget  God,  it  is  necessary  that  he 
ehould  be  reminded  of  Him.     Unless  we  are  to  be  given  up  to  our  idols,  and  left 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B.  [chap.  vi. 

to  work  out  oiir  own  destruction,  we  must  be  taught  the  secret  of  our  dependence 
on  God,  and  be  led  to  seek  Him  in  the  way  He  has  appointed.  {Henry  Raikes,M.A.) 
The,  Divine  cry  against  iniquity  : — Mioah  tells  us  his  vision  concerned  both  Samaria 
and  Jerusalem.  Against  these  there  is  a  cry  both  of  sins  and  of  punishments. 
1.  Of  sins.  These  two  cities  had  corrupted  the  two  kingdoms  of  which  they  were 
the  respective  heads.  Atheism  and  immorality  are  nowhere  so  predominant  as 
in  great  cities.  The  transgressions  of  Samaria  were  Baal  and  the  golden  calves. 
The  transgressions  of  Jerusalem  were  her  high  places,  where  idolatries  were 
practised.  The  idolatrous  worship  of  these  cities  did  not  mean  only  a  multiplica- 
tion of  images,  altars,  &c. ;  it  consisted  much  in  the  gratification  of  their  carnal 
lusts  and  passions.  God's  voice  also  cries  against  their  violence  and  oppression  ; 
their  bribery  and  corruption  ;  their  witchcrafts  and  soothsayers  ;  their  frauds 
in  commerce  and  dealing ;  the  treachery  of  friends,  and  the  want  of  mutual 
affection  in  the  nearest  relations.  2.  Of  punishments.  The  first  woe  denoimced 
is  the  ruin  of  Samaria.  The  second  is  captivity.  The  third  is  the  failure  of  the 
true  prophecy  and  ministry  of  God's  Word  among  them.  They  did  not  care  to 
hear  unpleasant  truths.  The  fourth  is  a  pining,  wasting  sickness  which  should 
seize  upon  them.  The  fifth  is  famine.  The  sixth  is  the  scorn  and  contempt  with 
which  their  enemies  should  treat  them.  In  these  charges  and  denunciations,  it 
is  said,  that  the  "  man  of  wisdom  will  see  God's  name,"  that  is,  will  acknowledge 
His  commission  and  authority  in  them  as  fully  as  if  he  had  seen  Him  write  them. 
Such  a  man  will  confess,  when  the  judgments  are  inflicted,  that  they  are  not 
fortuitous,  coming  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  or  owing  to  the  mere  will  of 
man,  or  concurrence  of  second  causes  ;  but  that  they  are  a  rod  from  heaven, 
which  God  hath  appointed  for  the  punishment  of  His  sinful  people.  ( W.  Reading, 
M.A.)  Man's  blindness  to  his  own  evil : — Nothing  is  more  essential  to  the 
character  of  the  Supreme  Being  than  perfect  holiness.  He  loves  righteousness 
and  hates  iniquity.  As  every  man's  own  conscience  is  a  witness  to  the  moral 
rectitude  of  the  great  Lawgiver,  and  leads  to  the  expectation  of  His  impartial 
judgment ;  so  the  remarkable  interposition  of  Divine  providence  in  the  affairs 
of  the  world,  by  inflicting  severe  punishments  for  the  obstinate  wickedness  of 
men,  hath  been  universally  acknowledged.  Great  and  desolating  strokes  have 
been  always  attributed  to  the  immediate  avenging  hand  of  God.  Other  cata- 
strophes of  nations  and  cities  have  been  accounted  for  by  the  wisest  of  men  as 
intended  for  examples  of  punishing  obstinate  wickedness  and  dissolute  luxury. 
But  the  same  uniformity  is  by  no  means  observable  in  the  effects  of  those  judgments, 
as  in  their  cause.  We  are  not  absolutely  unconcerned  at  the  strokes  of  providence 
which  we  see  in  the  world.  Stupidity  cannot  carry  us  quite  so  far  ;  but  we  seldom 
consider  them  with  such  attention  as  we  ought.  In  the  afflictions  which  happen 
to  mankind,  every  side  deserves  to  be  considered ;  and  all  is  worthy  of  attention 
in  these  messages  of  Divine  vengeance.  It  is  a  sad  observation,  that  those  men 
who  above  all  boast  of  their  reason,  are  least  of  all  employed  in  such  reflections. 
More  occupied  with  nature  than  with  the  God  of  nature,  they  hold  it  weakness 
to  discover  the  finger  of  the  Almighty  in  the  afflictions  of  men ;  they  ascribe 
everything  to  second  causes.  But  what  is  called  nature,  is  either  nothing,  or 
it  is  an  assemblage  of  beings  created  by  God :  either  the  effects  of  nature  are 
nothingi  or  they  are  the  consequences  of  the  laws  by  which  the  Supreme  Creator 
governs  those  beings  ;  and  consequently,  whatever  we  call  natural  effects,  or 
actions  of  second  causes,  are  the  works  of  God,  and  the  effects  of  laws  established 
by  Him.  This  reasoning,  apparently  sound,  is  confirmed  in  the  Scriptures,  which 
clearly  teach  that  the  calamities  of  particular  men  are  designed  for  the  instruction 
of  all.  But,  not  infrequently,  the  Divine  judgments  are  abused  ia  another  manner  ; 
when  men  of  a  proud  and  uncharitable  spirit,  instead  of  considering  them  as 
warnings  to  themselves,  think  and  speak  of  them  as  direct  punishments  for  the 
crimes  of  those  who  suffer  them.  No  reasoning  can  be  worse  than  to  say,  such  a 
man  is  a  grievous  sinner,  because  he  is  unhappy  here  on  earth;  and  another 
is  a  great  saint,  because  he  is  surrounded  with  all  manner  of  delights.  To  reason 
in  this  manner  is  to  set  bounds  to  the  Most  High,  without  considering  the  different 
views  which  an  infinite  Intelligence  may  have  in  those  strokes  which  He  inflicts 
on  mortals.  Sometimes  He  designs  them  for  trials  ;  sometimes  to  show  forth 
His  power  and  glory ;  sometimes  to  show  the  faith  and  fortitude  of  the  sufferer. 
If  any  conclusion  could  be  fairly  drawn  from  the  sufferings  of  men  on  earth,  it 
ought  rather  to  be  of  God's  love  than  His  anger.  In  place  of  saying  that  the 
man  who  suffers  is  more  culpable  than  he  who  suffers  not,  we  might  often  havo 


CHAP.  VI.]  MIC  AH.  91 

occasion  to  say,  that  he  who  suffers  nothing  at  all  is  far  more  criminal  than  the 
man  who  suffers  most.  In  general,  there  are  very  few  sinners  to  whom  any  man 
hath  a  right  to  prefer  himself.  (A.  M'Donald.)  Hear  the  rod  : — God  conveys 
instruction  to  the  children  of  men  by  His  Word,  and  by  His  providences.  These 
two  methods  of  instruction  mutually  aid  each  other.  When  both  His  Word  and 
His  providence  unite  in  addressing  us,  the  criminality  of  inattention  is  carried 
to  the  very  highest  degree.     Yet  such  inattention  is  common.     T.  It  behoves 

us  TO  BE  ATTENTIVE  TO  THE  DISPENSATIONS  OF  PEO\^DENCE  WHICH  NOW  MAY  BE 

TAKING  PLACE.  In  them  God  is,  as  it  were,  shaking  His  rod  over  us.  II.  Point 
OUT  some  lessons  of  instruction.  1.  God  is  teaching  us  the  very  great  evil 
and  malignity  of  sin  in  general.  2.  God  is  now  calling  upon  us  to  examine  our- 
selves, in  order  to  ascertain  whether  we  ourselves,  as  a  nation,  or  as  individuals, 
have  in  any  measure  contributed  to  bring  on  these  calamities.  3.  God  is  calling 
us  to  deep  repentance  ;  to  examine  into  the  state  of  our  immortal  souls,  and  to 
prove  the  genuineness  and  reality  of  our  religion.  It  behoves  us  individually 
to  examine  our  own  hearts,  and  compare  them  with  the  mirror  of  God's  most 
Holy  Word.  4.  God  is  calling  upon  us  to  pray  for  the  commencement  of  that 
great  and  glorious  day,  when  the  Gospel  shall  be  universally  spread  over  the 
face  of  the  whole  globe,  and  the  "  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  have  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  His  Christ."  (John  Vaughan,  LL.D.)  God's 
voice  to  cities  : — I.  God  has  a  voice  to  cities.  The  city  meant  here  is  Jerusalem. 
He  speaks  to  a  city  through  its — 1.  Commerce.  2.  Mortality.  3.  Churches. 
The  sermons  that  are  preached,  the  agents  that  are  employed  to  enlighten  the 
ignorant,  to  comfort  the  distressed,  reclaim  the  lost.  II.  The  wise  in  cities 
KECOONiSE  THE  VOICE.  "  The  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  Thy  name."  "  And 
wisdom  has  Thy  name  in  its  eye"  (Delitzsch).  "  And  he  who  is  wise  will  regard 
Thy  name"  (Henderson).  The  idea  seems  to  be  this,  that  the  wise  man  will 
recognise  God's  voice.  Job  says,  "  God  speaks  once,  yea  twice,  and  they  perceive 
it  not."  The  crowds  that  populate  cities  are  deaf  to  the  Divine  "  voice."  The 
din  of  passion,  the  hum  of  commerce,  the  chimes  of  animal  pleasures  drown 
the  voice  of  God.  But  the  wise  man  has  his  soul  ever  in  a  listening  attitude. 
Like  young  Samuel,  he  says,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth."  Abraham 
heard  the  voice  of  God  concerning  Sodom,  Daniel  concerning  Babylon,  Jonah 
concerning  Nineveh,  Jeremiah  concerning  Jerusalem.  III.  The  judgment  of 
CITIES  is  in  that  VOICE.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  it."  The 
rod  is  the  symbol  of  judgment.  "  0  Assyria,  the  rod  of  My  anger,  the  staff  in  My 
hand  is  My  indignation."  1.  GJod  warns  cities.  (I)  He  warns  them  of  ultimate 
temporal  ruin.  All  cities  must  go — go  with  Nineveh,  Greece,  Babylon,  Rome, 
Jerusalem.  (2)  He  warns  them  of  spiritual  danger.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it 
shall  die."  This  is  His  voice  to  every  citizen.  2.  His  warning  should  be  attended 
to.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod."  The  only  way  to  escape,  is  attention.  (Homilist.) 
The  voice  of  the  rod : — Our  prophet  is  proclaiming  God's  controversy  with  Israel. 
He  represents  God  as  sitting  in  judgment  on  Israel.  Appealing  to  them  in  proof 
of  His  former  kindnesses  to  them.  Specifying  the  crimes  with  which  they  were 
chargeable.  Threatening  to  punish  them  with  desolating  judgments.  Showing 
Israel  how  the  impending  destruction  might  be  averted.  He  supposes  a  penitent 
Israelite  manifesting  concern  for  salvation  by  instituting  the  most  important 
inquiries,  and  expressing  his  readiness  to  comply  with  whatsoever  God  might 
be  pleased  to  demand.  To  obtain  God's  favour,  Micah  says,  we  must  come  to 
Him,  not  according  to  the  devices  of  superstition,  but  as  God  prescribes  in  His 
Word.  To  please  Grod  we  must  live  in  the  uniform  practice  of  justice,  mercy, 
and  humble  piety.     I.  The  adversities  of  mankind  are  appointed  by  God. 

1.  The  afflictions  of  mankind  are  various.  2.  They  are  all  subject  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  God.  They  could  not  exist  without  Him.  He  adjusts  all  their  circum- 
stances. 3.  They  are  appointed  for  important  purposes.  They  should  not 
therefore  be  disregarded  nor  despised.  II.  Adversity  is  the  instrument  of 
God's   fatherly    correction.     Like    a    rod — 1.  He    employs   it  reluctantly : 

2.  Only  for  man's  benefit :  3.  Only  when  necessary.  III.  God  speaks  by  the 
bod  to  those  whom  He  chastens.    He  speaks  with — 1,  A  reproving,  2.  A  warning, 

3.  An  encouraging  voice.  IV.  The  instruction  conveyed  by  the  rod  claims 
our  attention.  1.  With  pious  attention.  2.  Inquisitive  attention.  3.  Candid 
attention.  4.  Practical  attention.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.) 
Hearing  the  rod  (a  funeral  discoiu-se): — Our  Heavenly  Father  employs  many 
instruments  for  the  moral  instruction  of  His  children.     To  thoughtful  and  docile 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

minds  He  teaches  many  an  important  and  useful  lesson  by  means  of  His  providence 
perpetually  operating  around  us.  It  is  not  in  times  of  trial  and  affliction  alone 
that  providence  conveys  lessons  designed  for  our  enlightenment  and  benefit. 
But  the  lessons  we  are  very  slow  to  learn  and  very  ready  to  forget.  When  some 
sudden  and  saddening  affliction  befalls  us,  the  mind  is  often  aroused,  the  heart 
is  softened,  we  are  compelled  to  pause  and  reflect.  A  painful  dispensation 
Bolemnly  speaks  to  us.  I.  Op  the  brevity  and  uncertainty  of  human  life. 
This  is  a  lesson  often  sounded  in  our  ears,  and  often  addressed  to  our  hearts. 
Early  death  is  especially  affecting.  By  it  the  young  are  urged  so  to  live  that 
death,  whenever  it  may  come,  shall  have  no  terror  and  no  sting.  II.  Of  the 
DISAPPOINTMENT  OF  THE  BRIGHTEST  HUMAN  HOPES.  The  Vanity  of  human 
wishes,  and  the  frequent  blighting  of  human  hopes,  have  been  in  every  age  the 
theme  of  the  moralist,  the  poet,  and  the  preacher.  Ought  we  not  all  to  ask 
ourselves  whether  our  hopes  are  such  as  death  cannot  destroy  ?  III.  Of  the 
MYSTERY  OF  PROVIDENCE.  When  We  remember  that  all  things  are  under  the 
government  of  God,  the  Only  Wise,  the  Almighty,  and  the  All-loving,  we  ought 
not  to  complain  even  if  we  cannot  comprehend.  God  works  on  a  scale,  and  for 
a  period,  so  vast,  that  it  would  be  both  presumption  and  folly  for  short-sighted 
and  short-lived  creatures,  such  as  we  are,  to  expect  to  comprehend  His  plans. 
IV.  Of  the  worth  of  a  Christian  faith.  It  supports  the  dying,  it  comforts 
the  bereaved.  It  enables  the  believer  in  the  conflict  with  the  last  enemy  to  come 
off  more  than  conqueror  ;  it  enables  those  who  mourn  departed  friends  to  live 
in  the  certainty  of  a  future  and  blessed  reunion.  {G.  D.  Macgregor.)  The 
voice  of  God  to  the  careless  city  (on  a  visitation  of  cholera): — 1.  This  infliction 
is  the  "  Lord's  voice,"  as  a  rebuke  and  warning  from  Him.  After  every  deduction 
and  allowance  for  secondary  causes,  whether  natural  or  artificial,  we  are  compelled 
to  retvirn  to  the  great  first  cause,  and  to  acknowledge  that  this  public  calamity 
is  indeed  the  voice  of  God.  This  voice  of  the  Lord  "  crieth  unto  the  city."  It  is 
that  of  a  watchman,  or  herald,  proclaiming  with  loud  and  unmistakable  voice, 
"  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  "  Let  the  people  turn  every  one  from 
the  evil  of  his  way,  and  from  the  violence  that  is  in  their  hands.  Who  can  tell 
if  God  will  return  and  repent,  and  turn  from  His  fierce  anger,  that  we  perish  not  ?  " 
2.  At  such  times  "  the  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  Thy  name."  The  name  of  the 
Lord  in  a  special  manner  denotes  His  attributes — His  justice,  power,  wisdom, 
goodness,  love.  3.  At  such  times,  "  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  it." 
Not  "  bear  ye,"  but  "  hear  ye."  The  rod  of  Divine  justice  and  love  has  a  voice, 
both  for  the  sufferer  and  the  beholder.  Invite  to  personal  prayer  and  self- 
examination.  (1)  As  to  your  feelings  in  regard  to  sin  in  general.  (2)  There 
should  be  a  renunciation  of  self.  (3)  But  external  reformation  is  not  enough, 
nor  will  it  ever  be  lasting  unless  the  heart  be  touched  within,  and  attrac  ted  by  the 
loadstone  of  Divine  grace.  (L.  M.  Humbert,  M.A.)  The  voice  of  God  to  the 
nation : — I.  Public  calamities  are  the  voice  of  God  to  the  nation.  The 
dispensations  of  God  are  particular  or  general.  The  particular  affect  individuals  ; 
the  general  affect  a  nation  or  a  world.  A  nation  is  but  a  larger  family,  a  more 
numerous  and  extensive  household.  "  The  voice  of  the  Lord  crieth  unto  the 
city  " — against  the  city.  Why  ?  On  accoimt  of  our  national  sins.  They  are 
many  and  great.  Have  not  profligate  luxm-y  on  the  one  hand,  and  commercial 
covetousness  on  the  other,  marked  the  latter  period  of  oiu"  history  ?  Gross 
immorality,  daring  crime,  heaven  defying  impiety  and  blasphemy  raise  their 
unveiled,  unblushing  fronts  in  the  broad  light  of  day.  Lying,  uncleanness,  and 
fraud  are  to  be  reckoned  among  the  crying  sins  of  our  country.  The  voice  of 
the  Lord  crieth  against  us  on  accoimt  of  the  little  improvement  we  have  made 
of  our  religious  advantages.  How  few  are  living  under  the  vital  influence  of 
those  doctrines  and  principles,  which  distinguish  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
from  all  other  systems  !  The  voice  charges  us,  not  only  with  a  shameful  neglect 
of  the  Gospel,  as  a  matter  of  personal  concern,  but  also  with  indifference  respecting 
its  diffusion  through  the  earth.  II.  It  is  wisdom  to  see  and  acknowledge 
God  in  public  calamities.  His  great,  and  venerable,  and  inviting  name  of 
wisdom,  power,  and  love  is  inscribed  upon  all  His  works,  and  there  it  is  seen  and 
read  by  the  man  of  wisdozn.  But  especially  it  is  visible  upon  the  gloomy  clouds 
of  affliction.  Multitudes  live,  and  act,  and  form  their  judgments  as  if  there  were 
no  Divine  government — as  if  chance  were  universal  monarch.  They  look  only 
to  secondary  causes.  The  text  implies  that  it  is  the  part  of,  folly  not  to  perceive 
and  acknowledge  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  public  calamities.     Such  insensibility 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  93 

is  an  evidence  of  positive  wickedness,  approaching  to  atheism.  III.  It  is  our 
DUTY  AND  INTEREST  TO  iMPKOVK  FUBLic  CALAMITIES.  Why  does  a  father  chastise 
his  children  ?  That  they  may  be  improved  by  his  correction.  He  uses  the  rod, 
not  to  gratify  his  own  temper,  but  to  profit  them.  It  becomes  our  duty  to  seek 
personal  improvement  from  the  dispensations  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  It  is  not 
only  our  dut}',  it  is  our  interest  to  'mprove  public  calamities.  The  first  lesson 
to  learn  is  to  examine  and  abase  ourselves  before  God.  1.  To  be  cheerfully 
resigned  to  the  Divine  will.  2.  To  bear  upon  our  minds  the  claims  which  our 
rulers  have  on  our  prayers.  3.  To  nourish  solemn  and  practical  reflections  upon 
death.  4.  To  derive  improvement  from  this  public  calamity — the  death  of  the 
Princess  Charlotte  of  Wales — by  seeking  deeper  impressions  of  the  truth,  that 
all  is  vanity  except  the  Gospel.  {John  East,  A.B.)  God's  threatening  rod  : — 
It  is  a  question  hard  to  determine,  whether  the  greatness  of  God,  or  the  con- 
descendency  of  God,  be  the  greater  mystery.  The  day  may  be  approaching 
when  ye  shall  meet  with  these  six  silent  things  from  God.  1.  Silent  rods,  when 
ye  shall  not  know  nor  understand  the  language  of  them.  2.  A  silent  God.  When 
ye  shall  cry  to  Him,  and  He  shall  not  hear  you.  3.  Silent  and  dumb  ordinances, 
which  shall  not  speak  to  you.  4.  Silent  mercies,  so  that  all  the  good  things  He 
doth  unto  you,  ye  shall  not  know  their  language.  5.  The  sad  lot  of  a  silent 
conscience.  6.  Silent  commands,  threatenings,  and  promises  ;  that  is,  ye  shall 
never  know  what  the  commands  call  for,  or  the  threatenings  or  the  promises. 
The  prophet  accuses  the  people  of  neglect  of  duties  which  were  tying  at  their  door. 
In  this  verse  we  have  the  scope  of  it,  which  is  this, — showing  the  people  that  the 
Lord  would  send  a  more  sharp  message,  if  they  will  not  obey.  Three  things 
from  the  scope,  before  we  come  to  the  first  thing  in  the  words — 1.  The  slighting 
of  known  duties  is  the  forerimner  of  some  sad  and  lamentable  stroke  from  the 
Lord.  Note  some  aggravations  of  the  sin  of  slighting  known  duties.  (1)  When 
a  person  slights  duty,  after  the  sinfulness  of  that  sin  hath  been  discovered  to 
him.  (2)  When  a  person  slights  known  duties,  after  God  hath  been  discovering 
discontent  with  another  person  for  that  sin.  (3)  After  God  hath  begun  to  contend 
with  them  for  so  doing.  (4)  Upon  very  small  temptations.  (5)  When  persons  do 
not  as  much  as  set  about  the  well-doing  of  them.  (6)  After  God  hath  commended 
the  beauty  and  excellency  of  such  duties.  (7)  After  they  have  been  convinced 
of  the  advantage  which  waits  upon  the  doing  of  them.  (8)  With  very  little 
resentment  and  grief  of  heart.  2.  Some  considerations  to  press  you  to  the 
exercise  of  these  duties.  (1)  It  is  the  Christian  who  practiseth.notwho  knoweth, 
to  whom  the  promises  are  made.  (2)  The  Christian  that  is  taken  up  in  practising, 
and  not  the  knowing  Christian,  is  blessed.  The  blessed  Christian  is  he  who  knoweth 
his  duty,  and  doeth  it.  (3)  The  practising,  not  the  knowing,  Christian  is  approven 
and  commended  of  God.  (4)  Not  the  knowledge,  but  the  practice  of  Christian 
duties  will  give  peace  to  the  conscience.  (5)  It  is  by  the  practice,  not  the  know- 
ledge of  your  duty,  that  you  rise  up  in  conformity  with  God.  3.  Six  things 
concerning  known  duties.  (1)  Many  persons  are  more  desirous  to  know  what 
they  shoiUd  do,  than  to  do  what  they  know.  (2)  The  question  which  shall  be 
proposed  to  you  in  the  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord,  will  be,  "  0  man, 
what  didst  thou  ?  "  (3)  A  grain  weight  of  sincerity  and  practice  is  worth  a 
talent  of  knowledge.  (4)  The  slighting  of  known  duties  hath  many  sad  dis- 
advantages waiting  upon  it.  It  makes  Christians  weary  of  duties.  It  brings 
on  much  hardness  and  stupidity  of  heart.  It  either  mars  the  peace  of  conscience, 
or  it  hardens  the  conscience,  or  it  lulls  the  conscience  asleep.  And  the  Chi-istian 
who  slights  duty  is  likely  to  become  exceeding  formal  in  the  duty  he  does. 
(5)  The  slighting  of  known  duty  is  the  first  step  of  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I.  God  HATH  MANY  WAYS  IN  PRESSING  PEOPLE   TO  THEIR  DUTIES.      VoicC.       I.    The 

voice  of  threatenings.  2.  Of  sad  afflicting  dispensations.  3.  Of  the  promises. 
4.  Of  all  the  mercies  that  we  meet  with.  5.  Of  our  consciences.  6.  Of  public 
ordinances.  There  are  seven  steps  of  judgment,  which  are  likely  to  overtake 
us,  if  we  hearken  not  to  His  voice.  1.  God  shall  slight  the  voice  of  the  disobeyers 
when  they  cry  to  Him.  2.  At  last  God  will  speak  no  more  to  them.  3.  God 
will  draw  His  sword  out  of  the  sheath,  and  not  replace  it.  4.  He  will  deliver 
us  into  the  hand  of  the  slayer.  5.  He  will  cease  to  have  correspondence  with  us 
any  more.  6.  He  will  purge  us  no  more.  7.  We  shall  be  let  alone,  left  alone 
in  our  sin.  II.  God  hath  many  rods  to  use  in  punishing  those  who  slight 
THEIR  DUTIES.  1.  The  rod  of  His  mouth.  2.  The  rod  of  His  hand  ;  or  afflictions 
and  crosses.     3.  The  iron  rod  of  destruction,  when  God  doth  utterly  destroy. 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

Some  will  not  take  and  make  use  of  these  threatenings,  because  they  mistake 
what  is  their  meaning  ;  or  they  are  in  ignorance  of  their  own  condition.  {A.  Gray.) 
Wisdom  of  hearing  the  voice  of  affliction : — I.  G  od  appoints  every  affliction 
THAT  MEN  EXPERIENCE.  He  always  acts  agreeably  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will, 
in  every  evil  He  inflicts,  and  in  every  good  He  bestows.  All  the  afflictions  and 
sorrows  and  sufferings  of  Christ  were  brought  upon  Him  according  to  the  eternal 
appointment  of  God.  II.  Every  affliction  has  an  instructive  voice.  This 
is  intimated  by  the  figurative  expression  in  the  text.  God  would  not  call  upon 
men  to  hear  the  voice  of  His  rod,  if  His  rod  had  no  voice.  Men  often  speak  as 
plainly  by  what  they  do  as  by  what  they  say.  And  God  often  speaks  as  plainly 
by  His  rod  as  by  His  Word.  God  means  to  teach,  and  does  teach  by  His  providence. 
Afflictions  tend  to  teach  the  afflicted  their  entire  dependence  upon  God.  This 
they  are  naturally  insensible  of,  and  need  to  be  taught  by  the  voice  of  the  rod. 
Men  must  leam  their  dependence  on  God,  before  they  can  be  happy,  either  in 
this  life  or  in  that  which  is  to  come.  The  voice  of  affliction  tends  to  teach  mankind 
the  vanity  of  all  earthly  enjoyments.  The  great  inquiry  is,  who  will  show  us 
any  temporal  good  ?  And  if  God  grants  outward  prosperity,  and  pours  the  blessings 
of  His  providence  upon  men,  they  are  ready  to  think  that  their  moimtain  stands 
strong,  that  their  happiness  is  secure,  and  that  they  shall  never  see  corruption. 
Their  hearts  become  wedded  to  the  world.  When  God  chastens  them  with  the 
rod  of  correction,  and  takes  away  one  earthly  blessing  after  another,  by  His 
bereaving  hand,  they  are  ready  to  adopt  the  language  of  Job,  "  Naked  came  I," 
&c.  The  voice  of  affliction  naturally  tends  to  turn  the  thoughts  of  the  afflicted 
upon  the  most  serious  and  solemn  subjects.  When  the  world  appears  vain, 
other  things  appear  weighty  and  important.  When  temporal  things  lose  their 
lustre,  eternal  things  will  assume  their  importance,  and  fix  the  whole  soul  in 
solemn  reflections  and  anticipations.  The  day  of  adversity  is  the  day  to 
consider.  This  is  one  of  the  natural  and  salutary  effects  of  Divine  corrections. 
How  often  do  afflictions  prepare  the  way  for  awakenings,  convictions,  and 
conversions !  Eliphaz  very  reasonably  says,  "  Happy  is  the  man  whom  God 
correcteth."  III.  It  is  always  a  po^t  of  wisdom  to  hear  the  instrxjctivb 
VOICE  OF  affliction.  This  will  appear,  if  we  consider — 1.  That  the  voice  of 
affliction  is  the  voice  of  God.  The  men  of  wisdom  who  see  and  know  the  name 
of  God  ;  that  is,  those  who  know  and  love  the  character,  perfections,  and  govern- 
ment of  God  ;  will  hear,  imderstand,  and  obey  the  voice  of  the  rod  of  His  wrath, 
which  is  His  most  solemn,  imperious,  and  impressive  voice.  2.  To  refuse  to  hear 
the  voice  of  affliction  will  be  highly  displeasing  to  God.  3.  By  refusing  to  hear 
it,  men  will  expose  themselves  to  still  severer  marks  of  the  Divine  displeasure. 
Afflictions,  bereavements,  and  fiery  trials  often  follow  one  another  in  quick 
succession.  One  affliction  seems  to  be  the  presage  of  another.  4.  The  afflicted 
never  know  when  God  calls  to  them  by  the  voice  of  His  rod,  but  that  it  is  the  last 
call  He  wiU  ever  give  them,  before  He  calls  them  into  eternity.  Improve  the 
subject — 1.  If  God  appoints  every  affliction  for  the  purpose  of  instructing  the 
afflicted,  then  He  can  instruct  those  who  are  the  most  unwilling  to  be  instructed. 
2.  If  the  voice  of  affliction  be  instructive,  then  aU  persons  must  be  beneficially 
instructed,  unlcTS  they  use  great  efforts  to  prevent  it.  3.  If  God  Himself  instructs 
the  afflicted  by  the  voice  of  His  rod,  then  they  never  can  have  any  excuse  for 
not  hearing  His  instructions.  4.  If  it  be  a  point  of  wisdom  in  the  afflicted  to  hear 
the  instructive  voice  of  the  rod,  then  it  argues  want  of  wisdom  in  them  to  refuse 
to  hear  it.  5.  If  afflictions  are  instructive,  then  the  afflicted  are  always  in  a 
peculiarly  trying  and  dangerous  situation.  They  must  receive,  or  refuse  to  receive 
instruction.  6.  This  subject  calls  upon  all  to  hear  the  voice  of  providence,  which 
crieth  to  the  nations  who  are  now  groaning  under  the  rod  of  affliction  and  calamity. 
{N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  God's  threatening  rod: — There  are  three  things  which  a 
Christian  may  meet  with  which  are  unspeakable.  1.  An  unspeakable  sorrow, 
so  that  he  cannot  make  language  of  it.  2.  Unspeakable  mercy.  3.  Unspeakable 
joy.  There  is  not  a  grain  weight  of  affliction  in  the  cup  which  infinite  wisdom 
doth  not  think  fit  should  be  there.  There  are  some  Christians  that  are  forced 
to  bless  God  more  for  their  crosses  than  for  their  mercies.  The  cross  of  a  Christian 
has  two  faces — an  outward  and  an  inward  face.  From  this  exhortation  to  Israel 
notice — I.  Every  rod  which  a  Christian  meets  with  hath  a  voice  in  it. 
1.  It  is  a  singular  and  remarkable  step  of  the  goodwill  of  God,  when  He  doth 
manifest  the  meaning  of  a  rod  to  a  person  or  people.  2.  The  Christians  of  old 
have  taken  much  pains  to  know  the  voice  of  the  rods  that  they  meet  with.     3.  It 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  96 

is  exceeding  anxious  for  a  Christian  to  be  under  a  silent  rod ;  to  be  under  such  a 
dispensation  that  he  knows  not  the  language  of  it.  4.  It  is  exceeding  hard  for  a 
Christian  to  profit  by  a  rod  till  once  he  take  up  the  meaning  of  it.  5.  A  Christian 
may  be  long  under  a  rod  before  he  know  the  voice  and  language  of  it.  6.  When 
a  Christian  wins  apprehension  of  the  meaning  of  his  rod  he  should  at  once  go 
about  to  answer  it.  How  may  a  Christian  gain  the  meaning  of  his  rod  ?  By 
making  serious  application  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  God  would  give  light 
concerning  it.  If  the  rod  was  timed  to  thee,  when  the  heart  was  under  much 
distance  from  God,  that  probably  is  the  meaning  of  the  rod — to  draw  thee  nigh 
again.  We  may  also  know  the  rod  by  reflecting  on  the  manner  and  circumstances 
of  the  rod,  and  by  observing  the  mind  of  the  Lord  in  Scriptures ;  and  by  studying 
the  circumstances  associated  with  the  rod ;  and  by  considering  what  are  the 
Divine  designs  in  sending  rods.  It  is  easier  to  bear  a  rod  patiently  which  is  for 
the  trial  and  exercise  of  our  predominant  grace,  than  to  bear  a  rod  patiently 
that  is  for  the  mortification  of  our  predominant  idols.  There  is  ordinarily  some 
analogy  between  our  crosses  and  oiu-  sins.  II.  Some  mistakes  which  Christians 
HAVE  concerning  THE  MEANING  OF  THE  ROD.  1.  Many  think  the  cross  speaks 
wrath  when  it  speaks  love.  Some  think  that  love  and  the  rod  cannot  be  together 
at  all.  2.  Some  think  that  God  can  never  answer  their  prayers  while  He  is 
afflicting  them.  3.  Some  begin  to  dispute  their  interest  when  they  meet  with 
a  rod  or  sad  dispensation.  4.  It  is  a  great  mistake  of  the  voice  and  language  of 
God's  threatening  rod  for  a  person  to  think  religion  but  vanity  and  an  empty 
thing  under  the  cross.  5.  Another  mistake  is,  to  dispute  the  fellowship  a  Christian 
hath  with  God.  III.  How  a  Christian  mat  be  helped  to  obey  the  voich 
OF  the  rod.  1.  If  the  rod  call  for  the  mortifying  of  a  particular  lust  and  idol, 
it  is  incumbent  to  sit  down,  and  bring  up  your  hearts  to  a  spiritual  detestation 
of  such  an  idol.  2.  If  the  voice  of  the  rod  be  to  stir  up  a  grace,  then  study  to 
know  that  there  is  as  much  spiritual  advantage  in  the  real  and  spiritual  exercise 
of  such  a  grace  as  ye  can  lose  by  all  the  Tods  ye  can  meet  with.  3.  If  the  voice 
of  the  rod  be  that  thou  shouldst  set  about  the  exercise  of  a  duty,  then  endeavour 
seriously  that  all  impediments  and  lets  to  that  duty  be  laid  aside.  IV.  What 
ought  to  be  a  Christian's  duty  while  he  is  walking  under  a  silent  rod. 
He  should  know  God  to  be  just,  though  he  knoweth  not  for  what  He  contends 
with  him.  He  should  be  serious  in  making  distinct  supplications  to  Grod  to  know 
the  meaning  of  such  a  rod.  He  should  be  serious  to  know  the  reason  of  God's 
keeping  up  His  mind  from  him  in  such  a  rod.  He  should  study  to  bring  his  heart 
into  a  tender  and  spiritual  frame.  Study  to  have  thy  heart  most  united  to  Christ 
when  under  a  silent  cross,  for  at  that  time  thou  art  most  ready  to  fall.  Take 
notice  of  the  following  observations  concerning  the  cross.  If  affliction  be  spun 
out  to  any  length,  the  Christian  may  turn  impatient.  There  are  five  sorts  of 
blasphemy  which  one  that  is  under  a  cross  may  fall  into.  It  shows  the  want  of  a 
son-like  frame  if  the  cross  hinders  us  in  the  exercise  of  our  duties.  Look  upon 
your  crosses  as  divine  gifts.  There  are  some  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness 
that  redound  to  a  Christian  who  is  rightly  exercised  under  the  cross.  The  most, 
rare  enjoyments  of  the  Christian  are  trysted  to  the  time  of  his  being  under  a  cross. 
(A.  Gray.)  The  voice  of  the  rod  : — In  the  presence  of  calamities  let  us  say, 
"  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servants  hear."  This,  in  substance,  is — I.  To  feel  the 
strokes  of  God's  hand.  If  we  feel  the  strokes  of  God's  hand  we  shall  shake 
off  a  certain  state  of  indolence  in  which  many  of  us  are  found,  and  be  clothed 
with  the  sentiments  of  humiliation,  and  of  terror  and  awe.  We  shall  be  softened 
with  sentiments  of  sorrow  and  repentance  if  we  examine  their  origin  and  cause. 
And  if  we  discover  the  remedies  and  resources  we  shall  be  animated  with  the 
sentiments  of  genuine  conversion.  II.  To  trace  the  causes  and  the  origin 
OF  our  calamities.  Micah  wished  the  Jews  to  comprehend  that  the  miseries 
under  which  they  groaned  were  a  consequence  of  their  crimes.  We  would  wish 
you  to  form  the  same  judgment  of  yours.  The  subject  has  its  difficulties.  Under 
a  pretence  of  entering  into  the  spirit  of  humihation,  there  is  danger  of  our  falling 
into  the  puerilities  of  superstition.  Temporal  prosperity  and  adversity  are  very 
equivocal  marks  of  the  favour  or  displeasure  of  God.  By  some,  the  shghtest 
adversity  is  regarded  as  a  stroke  of  God's  angry  arm.  It  is  better  to  form  the 
criterion  of  om:  guilt  or  innocence,  not  by  the  exterior  prosperity  or  adversity 
sent  of  God,  but  by  our  obedience  or  disobedience  to  His  Word.  But  adversity 
is  sometimes  occasioned  by  crimes.  This  is  apparent — L  When  there  is  a  natural 
connection  between  the  crimes  we  have  committed  and  the  calamities  we  suffer. 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Qod  has  placed  harmony  between  happiness  and  virtue.  Trace  this  harmony 
in  the  circles  of  society  and  in  private  life.  An  enlightened  mind  can  find  no  soUd 
happiness  bat  in  the  exercises  of  virtue.  The  happiness  procured  by  the  passions 
is  founded  on  mistake.  2.  When  great  calamities  follow  upon  great  crimes. 
III.  To  BXAMTNB  THBiB  CONSEQTTHNOBS  AKD  ooNNECTiONa.  Some  calamities 
are  less  formidable  in  themselves  than  in  the  awful  consequences  they  produce. 
There  are  calamities  whose  distinguished  characteristic  is  to  be  the  forerunners 
of  calamities  still  more  terrible.  1.  One  calamity  is  the  forerunner  of  a  greater 
when  the  people  whom  God  afflicts  have  recourse  to  second  causes  instead  of  the 
first  cause,  and  when  they  seek  the  redress  of  their  calamities  in  political  resources 
and  not  in  religion.  This  is  the  portrait  Isaiah  gives  of  Sennacherib's  first  ex- 
pedition against  Judsea.  2.  When,  instead  of  humiliation  on  reception  of  the 
warnings  God  sends  by  His  servants,  we  turn  those  warnings  into  contempt. 
Inquire  how  far  you  are  affected  by  this  doctrine.  Do  you  discover  a  teachable 
disposition,  or  do  you  revolt  against  the  Word  of  Goa's  ministers  7  3.  When 
the  anguish  it  excites  proceeds  more  from  the  loss  of  our  perishable  riches  than  from 
sentiments  of  the  insults  offered  to  God.  4.  When  the  plague  fails  in  producing 
the  reformation  of  those  manners  it  was  sent  to  chastise.  IV.  To  discovbb  thhib 
RBSOUECES  AND  REMEDIES.  We  found  Our  hopes  on  the  abundant  mercies  with 
which  God  has  loaded  us  during  the  time  of  visitation.  With  the  one  hand  He 
abases,  with  the  other  He  exalts.  We  found  our  hopes  on  the  resources  He  has 
still  left  our  state  to  recover,  and  to  re-estabhsh  itself  in  all  the  extent  of  its  glory 
and  prosperity.  Frustrate  not  these  hopes  by  a  superficial  devotion,  by  forget- 
fulness  of  promises  and  violation  of  vows.  {James  Saurin.)  Ood's  judgments: 
— Do  not  be  atheistical  in  the  time  of  affliction.  The  "  rod  "  means  judgment. 
Sometimes  judgment  takes  the  form  of  chastening.  We  are  not  always  to  suppose 
that  the  rod  means  mere  punishment, — an  action  of  the  strong  upon  the  weak, 
or  the  righteous  upon  the  wicked  ;  the  rod  may  be  an  instrument  of  education 
as  well  as  of  vengeance  and  of  penalty.  Do  not  suppose  that  the  devil  holds  the 
rod.  The  devil  is  the  weakest  of  aU  creatures  ;  his  is  only  the  strength  of  boister- 
ousness  ;  there  is  nothing  in  it  of  abiding  pith,  stability,  and  power.  Afflictions 
do  not  spring  out  of  the  dust.  When  the  rod  is  lacerating  your  back,  ask,  What 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  When  all  things  are  dull  and  distressing  and  disap- 
pointing, say,  This  is  the  ministry  of  God  ;  He  is  taking  out  of  me  some  elements 
of  vanity,  wliich  are  always  elements  of  weakness,  and  He  is  conducting  me  to 
the  altar  by  a  subtenanean  passage.  We  do  not  always  go  to  the  altar  along 
a  pathway  of  flowers ;  not  always  does  God  beckon  us  through  a  garden  to  follow 
Him  to  some  chosen  place  of  communion.  Sometimes  we  are  driven  to  the  altar  ; 
often  we  do  not  want  to  pray ;  the  soul  will  take  no  rest,  and  give  none  until  a 
great,  sweet,  holy,  burdened  prayer  has  gone  up  to  heaven  by  way  of  the  cross. 
Is  the  rod  lying  heavy  on  your  house  now  ?  Ejiow  ye  the  rod,  and  Him  who  hath 
appointed  it ;  examine  yourselves  carefully  and  searchingly,  and  see  if  there 
be  any  wicked  way  in  you,  and  drag  it  out :  it  will  rot  in  the  sunlight.  {Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.)  Grace  and  love : — Herein  are  three  things.  The  people  the 
Lord's  voice  crieth  unto,  and  that  is,  tmto  the  city.  You  have  the  exhortation  to 
hear  the  voice  of  the  rod.  You  have  an  argument  to  press  you  to  do  so.  There 
is  a  rod  of  power  and  dignity,  of  discrimination,  of  direction,  of  govern- 
ment, of  destruction.  It  is  a  rod  of  correction  that  we  are  to  understand  here. 
And  we  remark  that  when  God  visits  the  transgressions  of  His  people  with  a  rod, 
it  is  their  best  wisdom  to  hear  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  it.  1.  God  doth 
not  steal  upon  a  people  with  His  judgments,  but  He  first  warns  them  before  He 
smites  them.  He  sometimes  warns  by  His  Word,  and  sometimes  by  His  works 
and  dispensations.  By  His  judgments  upon  others,  and  by  His  afflictions  upon 
themselves.  He  brings  a  lesser  judgment  to  prevent  a  greater.  2.  When  God 
smites  His  own  people  He  deals  with  them  in  the  way  of  the  rod.  (1)  Because 
they  are  His  own  children.  (2)  As  they  are  children.  He  loves  them,  and  He 
that  spareth  the  rod  hateth  the  child.  (3)  God  doth  sometimes  correct  His  people 
because  of  their  folly.  It  may  be  said,  Doth  not  God  use  the  rod  with  the  wicked 
too  ?  There  is  a  whipping  rod,  and  a  breaking  rod  ;  a  whipping  rod  for  the  saints, 
and  a  breaking  rod  for  the  wicked.  God's  rod  for  His  people  only  chastises  "  in 
measure."  And  His  visitations  are  always  seasonable.  3.  God's  rod  is  a  teaching 
rod.  What  lessons  does  it  teach ;  and  how  does  it  teach  them  ?  4.  This 
message  is  sent  especially  to  the  great  cities  and  towns  of  a  nation  or  people. 
5.  When  God  visits  with  a  rod,  it  is  true  wisdom  to  hear  it  and  the  Sender.     You 


CHAP.  VI.]  MICAH.  97 

must  honour  God  in  His  dispensations.  That  is  the  way  in  which  to  get  the 
best  blessing  out  of  the  strokes,  and  to  prevent  further  strokes.  ( W.  Bridge,  M.A.) 
Fast-day  service  : — The  world  is  a  place  of  punishment  for  sin,  but  it  is  not  the 
place.  Because  God  does  not  usually  visit  each  particular  oflFence  in  this  life 
upon  the  transgressor,  men  are  apt  to  deny  altogether  the  doctrine  of  judgments. 
The  Indian  Mutiny  was  a  rod  of  God  for  our  nation,  but  it  was  an  appointed  rod. 
Hear  this  rod.  1.  It  would  have  been  as  well  if  we  had  heard  this  rod  before  it 
fell  upon  us.  The  wise  man  may  hear  God  s  rod  before  it  smiteth.  He  that 
understandeth  God's  moral  government  knows  that  sin  carries  punishment 
in  its  bowels.  2.  But  the  rod  has  fallen.  What  are  the  most  glaring  sins  for 
which  God  is  now  visiting  us  ?  (1)  There  are  sins  in  the  community  that  never 
ought  to  have  been  allowed.  Such  as  public  immorality.  (2)  There  are  class 
sins.  (3)  There  are  sins  of  trade.  (4)  Sins  in  the  relations  between  masters  and 
workmen.  (5)  Sins  of  iUiberality,  deceit,  bigotry,  lasciviousness,  carnality,  pride, 
covetousness,  and  laziness.  3.  Hear  ye  the  rod  when  it  shall  again  be  stilL 
(Anon,) 

Vers.  10,  11.  The  scant  measure  which  is  abomination, — Civic  sins  : — In  these 
verses  we  have  a  sample  of  the  crimes  which  abound  in  the  city,  and  which 
would  bring  on  the  threatened  judgment.  I.  Their  vabiety.  1.  Here  is  fraud. 
Fraud  is  one  of  the  most  prevalent  crimes  in  all  cities.  2.  Here  is  violence.  "  The 
rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  violence."  Wealth  has  a  tendency  to  make  men 
arrogant,  haughty,  heartless,  often  inhuman.  3.  Here  is  falsehood.  "  The  inhabit* 
ants  thereof  have  spoken  lies,  and  their  tongue  is  deceitful  in  their  mouth." 
There  is  scarcely  a  trade  or  profession  carried  on  without  deception.  Fortunes 
are  made  by  lies.  Such  are  samples  of  the  crimes  prevalent  in  Jerusalem. 
II.  Their  bbteibxttion.  All  these  crimes  are  offensive  to  the  Ruler  of  the  universe. 
1.  Disease.  "  Therefore  also  will  I  make  thee  sick  in  smiting  thee."  Crime  is 
inimical  to  physical  health  and  strength.  2.  Desolation.  "  In  making  thee 
desolate  because  of  thy  sins."  A  desolate  man  is  one  who  neither  loves  nor  is 
loved  ;  and  sin  produces  this  state.  Few  states  of  mind  are  more  awful  or  more 
crushing  than  the  sense  of  aloneness.  3.  Dissatisfaction.  "  Thou  shalt  eat, 
but  not  be  satisfied."  Sin  and  satisfaction  can  never  co-exist.  4.  Disappoint- 
ment. "  Thou  shalt  sow,  but  thou  shalt  not  reap  ;  thou  shalt  tread  the  olives, 
but  thou  shalt  not  anoint  thee  with  oil ;  and  sweet  wine,  but  shalt  not  drink 
wine."  A  sinful  soul  can  never  get  out  of  its  labour  that  which  it  expects. 
5.  Destruction.  "  Thy  casting  down  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  thee."  Conclusion. 
Mark  the  law  of  retribution.  Not  more  certain  is  it  that  the  rivers  follow  the  ocean, 
the  planets  the  sun,  than  that  suffering  follows  sin.     (Homiliat.) 

Ver.  12.  For  the  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  violence. — Trying  the  impossible : — 
The  folly  of  expecting  real  prosperity  by  committing  acts  of  injustice,  or  pursuing 
courses  of  sin,  is  here  forcibly  represented  by  comparing  it  to  the  absurdity  of 
attempting  to  run  horses  upon  a  rock,  or  to  plough  the  rock  with  oxen.  The 
strength  of  the  representation  is  increased  by  its  interrogative  form.  Our  subject 
is,  trying  the  impossible.     Men  are  constantly  doing  this. — I.  When  they  attempt 

TO   DESTROY  AN   ENEMY  BY  PHYSICAL  FORCE.      II.   When  they  attempt  to  MAEK 

SOCIETY  MORALLY  GOOD  BY  MERE  SECULAR  INSTRUCTION.  Dishonesty,  Uneducated, 
may  commit  petty  thefts  ;  but  educated,  it  will  legally  swindle  a  nation.  Know- 
ledge, alas  !  is  all  in  vain.  III.  When  they  attempt  to  get  happiness  from 
WITHOUT.  True  happiness  springs  from  within,  not  from  without;  rises  from 
holy  loves,  hopes,  aspirations,  and  aims.  In  one  word,  love  is  the  well  of  water 
that  springs  into  everlasting  life.  IV.  When  they  attempt  to  save  souls  by 
MINISTERING  TO  THEIR  SELFISHNESS.  The  man  who  trics  to  save  souls  by  constant 
appeals  to  the  selfishness  of  human  nature  acts  more  absurdly  than  he  who 
attempts  to  gallop  horses  upon  the  sharp  peaks  of  rugged  rocks.     V.  When  they 

ATTEMPT  TO  CONVERT  HEATHENS  ABROAD  BBFOEB  CONVERTINQ  THE  HEATHEN  AT 

HOME.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  Thou  shalt  sow,  but  thou  shalt  not  reap. — Useless  labour: — Mark 
the  vexation  of  it — sowing  and  not  reaping ;  sowing,  and  somebody  else  reaping. 
Here  is  the  uncontrollable  element  in  life.  A  man  says,  I  certainly  did  tread 
out  the  olives,  and  I  have  not  a  small  vessel  full  of  oil  with  which  to  anoint  myself ; 
working  for  others,  the  slave  of  slaves.     We  see  this  every  day.     We  need  not 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

invoke  the  supernatural  in  any  merelj^  metaphysical  sense  in  order  to  substantiate 
this  as  a  fact.  It  is  the  common  experience  of  life.  Men  put  money  into  bags, 
and  go  for  the  money,  and  it  is  not  t'lere.  Why  is  it  not  there  ?  The  prophet 
explains  that  there  were  holes  in  the  bag,  and  the  money  went  right  through. 
You  have  heard  of  a  man  all  day  long  trying  to  draw  water  with  a  sieve.  How 
industrious  he  is  !  See,  the  sieve  goes  down,  the  wheel  is  turned,  and  the  sieve 
is  brought  up,  and  there  is  no  water  in  it.  It  is  a  mystery.  Not  at  all.  Why 
is  there  no  water  ?  Because  the  vessel  is  a  sieve  ;  the  water  runs  out  as  quickly 
as  it  runs  in.  You  have  heard  of  one  who  was  rolling  a  stone  up  the  hill  all  day, 
and  the  more  it  was  rolled  up  the  more  it  rolled  down,  and  at  night  it  was  exactly 
where  it  was  before  the  process  of  rolling  began.  Worthless  labour,  useless 
labour,  vexatious  labour.  Thus  doth  God  puzzle  and  bewilder  and  perplex 
men.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  And  the  statutes  of  Omri  are  kept. — Omri  and  ATuib:  lessons  worth 
study  : — On  the  long  dark  roll  of  human  infamy  there  are  but  few  darker  names 
than  those  of  Omri  and  Ahab.  Learn — I.  The  eeligiotjs  sentiment  in  has 
IS  OFTEN  TERRIBLY  PERVERTED.  Omri  and  Ahab  were  not  idolaters  themselves, 
but  they  established  idolatry  in  their  country.  The  religious  sentiment  in  man 
is  perhaps  the  substratum  element  of  his  nature.  Man  is  made  to  worship,  and 
to  worship  the  one  true  and  living  God  only.  But  so  blinded  is  his  intellect,  so 
debased  his  nature,  so  utterly  corrupt,  that,  instead  of  worshipping  the  infinitely 
great,  he  falls  down  before  the  infinitely  contemptible.  The  perversity  of  the 
religious  sentiment — 1.  Explains  the  errors,  crimes,  and  miseries  of  the  world, 
Man's  strongest  love  is  the  spring  of  all  his  activities,  the  fontal  source  of  all  his 
influence.  When  this  is  directed  to  an  idol,  the  whole  of  his  life  is  corrupted. 
2.  Reveals  man's  absolute  need  of  the  Gospel.  There  is  nothing  but  the  Gospel 
of  Christ  that  can  give  this  sentiment  a  right  direction.  II.  That  obediencb 
TO  HUMAN  sovereigns  IS  SOMETIMES  A  GREAT  CRIME.  The  Worship  of  Baal  was 
enacted  by  the  "  statutes  "  of  Omri,  and  enforced  by  the  practice  of  Ahab.  A 
human  law,  enacted  by  the  greatest  sovereign  in  the  world  in  connection  with 
the  most  illustrious  statesmen,  if  it  is  not  in  accord  with  the  eternal  principles  of 
justice  and  truth,  as  revealed  in  God's  Word,  should  be  repudiated,  renounced, 
and  transgressed.     "  Whether  it  is  right  to  obey  God  rather  than  men,  judge  ye." 

III.   That  THE   CRIMES   OF   EVEN  TWO   MEN  MAY   EXERT  A   CORRUPTING   INFLUENCE 

UPON  MILLIONS  IN  FUTURE  GENERATIONS.  The  reigns  of  Omri  and  Ahab  were 
ages  before  the  time  when  Micah  lived.  Notwithstanding,  their  enactments 
were  still  obeyed,  their  examples  were  still  followed,  and  their  practices  were 
still  pursued.  The  wickedness  of  these  two  men  was  now,  ages  after,  perpetrated 
by  a  whole  nation.  How  great  the  influence  of  man  for  good  or  evil  I  Verily, 
one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good.     (HomUist.) 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Vbb.  .  1.  There  Is  no  cluster  to  eat.  —  The  unrevived  church  :  —  The 
picture  before  the  eye  of  the  prophet  is  that  of  famine  in  the  midst  of  plenty, 
want  in  time  of  harvest,  sterility  amid  summer  fruits,  soul-fasting  and  wretched- 
ness in  a  season  of  external  prosperity  and  fulness.  The  time  of  ingathering  is 
at  hand.  And  yet  Israel  knew  not  the  day  of  Divine  visitation ;  she  had  no 
appreciation  of  the  golden  fruit,  no  heart  or  no  capacity  to  pluck  and  eat  the  ripe 
clusters.  This  is  a  truthful  representation  of  the  experience  of  very  many  Christians 
and  churches.  There  is  no  heartfelt  appreciation  of  God's  outward  mercies,  or 
of  His  gracious  spiritual  manifestations.  He  comes  to  them  in  the  "  summer 
fruits,"  and  in  the  autumn  "  vintage  "  ;  but  so  dull  are  their  spiritual  perceptions, 
so  vitiated  are  their  tastes,  so  surfeited  are  they  with  the  "  apples  of  Sodom  " 
and  the  wild  grapes  of  sinful  indulgence,  that  they  know  it  not,  and  feel  no 
hungering  after  righteousness  ;  "  there  is  no  cluster  "  in  all  God's  vintage  which 
they  can  eat.  So  have  we  seen  souls  in  times  of  glorious  revival,  when  sinners 
were  pressing  into  the  kingdom,  and  many  souls  were  refreshed  and  full  of  rejoicing, 
unrevived,  unblest,  crying,  "  Woe  is  me  !  "  "  There  is  no  cluster  to  eat."     So  have 


CHAP.  VII.]  MICAH.  99 

we  seen  whole  churches  and  communities  left  to  darkness  and  desolation  and  death, 
while  the  mighty  God  had  bared  His  arm  for  salvation,  and  was  deluging  the  land 
with  a  wave  of  regenerating  and  sanctifying  power.  (Homiletic  Monthly.) 
My  soul  desired  the  first  ripe  fiiiit. — The  joy  of  the  harvest  inaugural : — 
The  nation  of  Israel  had  fallen  into  so  sad  and  backsliding  a  condition  that 
it  was  not  like  a  vine  covered  with  fruit,  but  like  a  vineyard  after  the 
whole  vintage  has  been  gathered,  so  that  there  was  not  to  be  found  a  single 
cluster.  The  prophet,  speaking  in  the  name  of  Israel,  desired  the  first  fruit, 
but  there  was  none  to  be  had.  The  lesson  of  the  text,  as  it  stands,  would 
be  that  good  men  are  the  best  fruit  of  a  nation  ;  they  make  it  worth  while  that 
the  nation  should  exist ;  they  are  the  salt  which  preserves  it ;  they  are  the  fruit 
which  adorns  it,  and  blesses  it.  But  I  take  the  text  out  of  its  connection,  and 
use  it  as  the  heading  of  a  discourse  upon  "ripeness  in  grace."  We  can  all  say, 
"  My  soul  desired  the  first  ripe  fruit."  We  would  go  on  to  maturity,  and  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  perfection,  to  the  honour  and  praise  of  Jesus  Christ.  I.  The 
MABKS  OF  RIPENESS  IN  GRACE.  1.  Beauty.  There  is  no  more  lovely  object  in  all 
nature  than  the  apple  blossom.  Much  lovehness  adorns  youthful  piety.  Can 
anything  be  more  delightful  than  our  first  graces  ?  Autumn  has  a  more  sober 
aspect,  but  still  it  rivals  the  glory  of  spring.  Ripe  fruit  has  its  own  peculiar 
beauty.  What  a  delicacy  of  bloom  there  is  upon  the  grape,  the  peach,  the  plum, 
when  they  have  attained  perfection  !  Nature  far  excels  art.  The  perfumed 
bloom  yields  in  value  to  the  golden  apple,  even  as  promise  is  surpassed  by  fulfil- 
ment. The  blossom  is  painted  by  the  pencil  of  hope,  but  the  fruit  is  dyed  in  the 
hue  of  enjoyment.  There  is  in  ripe  Christians  the  beauty  of  realised  sanctification 
which  the  Word  of  God  knows  by  the  name  of  the  "  beauty  of  holiness."  This 
consecration  to  God,  this  setting  apart  for  His  service,  this  avoidance  of  evil, 
this  careful  walking  in  integrity,  this  dwelling  near  God,  this  being  made  like 
unto  Christ, — in  a  word,  this  beauty  of  holiness,  is  one  of  the  surest  emblems  of 
maturity  in  grace.  2.  Tenderness.  The  young  green  fruit  is  hard  and  stone- 
like ;  but  the  ripe  fruit  is  soft,  yields  to  pressure,  can  almost  be  moulded,  retains 
the  mark  of  the  finger.  The  mature  Christian  is  noted  for  tenderness  of  spirit. 
I  think  I  would  give  up  many  of  the  graces  if  I  might  possess  very  much  tender- 
ness of  spirit.  An  extreme  delicacy  concerning  sin  should  be  cultivated  by  us 
all.  3.  Sweetness.  The  unripe  fruit  is  sour,  and  perhaps  it  ought  to  be,  or  else 
we  should  eat  all  the  fruits  while  they  were  yet  green.  As  we  grow  in  grace  we 
are  sure  to  grow  in  charity,  sympathy,  and  love.  We  shall  have  greater  sweetness 
towards  our  fellow  Christians.  4.  A  loose  hold  of  the  earth.  Ripe  fruit  soon 
parts  from  the  bough.  You  shake  the  tree  and  the  ripest  apples  fall.  You  should 
measure  your  state  of  heart  by  your  adhesiveness,  or  your  resignation,  in  reference 
to  the  things  of  this  world.  The  master  will  not  let  his  ripe  fruit  hang  long  on 
the  tree.  II.  The  causes  of  this  ripeness.  So  gracious  a  result  must  have  a 
gracious  cause.  1.  The  inward  working  of  the  sap.  The  fruit  could  never  be 
ripe  in  its  raw  state  were  it  taken  away  from  the  bough.  Outward  agencies  alone 
may  produce  rottenness,  but  not  ripeness  ;  sun,  shower,  what  not,  all  would 
fail, — it  is  the  vital  sap  within  the  tree  that  perfects  the  fruit.  It  is  especially  so 
in  grace.  Everything  between  hell  and  heaven  which  denotes  salvation  is  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  work  of  the  grace  of  Jesus.  That  blessed  Spirit, 
flowing  to  us  from  Christ,  as  He  is  the  former  of  the  first  blossom,  so  He  is  the 
producer  of  the  fruit,  and  He  is  the  ripener  of  it  until  it  is  gathered  into  the  heavenly 
garner.  2.  The  teaching  of  experience.  Some  fruit,  like  the  sycamore  fig,  never 
will  ripen  except  it  be  bruised.  Many  of  us  seem  as  if  we  never  would  be  sweet 
till  first  we  have  been  dipped  in  bitterness  ;  never  would  be  perfected  till  we  have 
been  smitten.  We  may  trace  many  of  our  sharp  trials,  our  bereavements,  and 
our  bodily  pains,  to  the  fact  that  we  are  such  sour  fruit ;  nothing  will  ripen  us  but 
heavy  blows.  Ripeness  in  grace  is  not  the  necessary  result  of  age.  Little  children 
have  been  ripe  for  glory.  Many  an  aged  Christian  is  not  an  experienced  Christian. 
Time  may  be  wasted  as  well  as  improved  ;  we  may  be  petrified  rather  than  perfected 
by  the  flow  of  years.  III.  The  desirability  of  ripeness  in  grace.  Many 
Christians  appear  to  think  that  if  they  are  just  believers  it  is  enough.  To  be  just 
alive  as  a  Christian  is  horrid  work.  The  fruit  which  under  proper  circumstances 
does  not  ripen  is  not  a  good  fruit ;  it  must  be  an  unwholesome  production.  Your 
soul  can  surely  not  be  as  it  should  be  if  it  does  not  ripen  under  the  influence  of 
God's  love  and  the  work  of  His  grace.  It  is  the  ripe  fruit  that  proves  the  excel- 
lence of  the  tree.     The  Church  wants  mature  Christians  very  greatly,  and  especially 


100  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

when  there  are  many  fresh  converts  added  to  it.  The  Church  wants,  in  these 
days  of  flimsiness  and  time-serving,  more  decided,  thorough-going,  well-instructed 
and  confirmed  believers.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.    2-6.     The   good  man   is   perished    out    of    the    earth.  —  The   wail 
of   a    true  •patriot  over  the  moral   corruption  of    his  country : — He    bemoans — 

I.  Thb,  dbpabttteb  of  bxcbllkncb  from  his  cottntby.  "  The  good  man  is 
perished  out  of  the  earth."  Probably  they  had  emigrated  to  distant  lands,  perhaps 
they  had  gone  into  eternity.  Good  men  are  the  "  lights  of  the  world."  Their 
influence  penetrates  the  mass  as  salt,  coimteracts  its  tendency  to  corruption, 
removes  its  moral  insipidity,  gives  it  a  new  spirit — a  spirit  pungent  and  savoury. 

II.  The  bampancy  of  avaeicb  in  this  countby.     1.  The  working  amongst  the 
general  community.     To  get  wealth  for  themselves  was  with  them  such  a  furious 
passion  that  the  rights  and  lives  of  others  were  disregarded.     2.  Its  working 
amongst  the  higher  classes.     "  That  they  may  do  evil  with  both  hands  earnestly, 
the  prince  asketh,  and  the  judge  asketh  for  a  reward ;  and  the  great  man,  he  uttereth 
his  mischievous  desire  :  so  they  wrap  it  up."     The  idea  seems  to  be  this  :  that 
the  "  great  man,"  the  "  prince,"  for  some  corrupt  motive,  seeks  the  condemnation 
of  some  innocent  person  ;  and  the  "  judge,"  for  a  bribe,  gratifies  his  wish.     A 
judge  from  avarice  will  pronoimce  an  innocent  man  guilty.     All  this  is  done  very 
industriously,  "  with  two  hands."     Possible,  lest  some  event  should  start  up  to 
thwart  them  ;  and  when  it  is  done  "  they  wrap  it  up."     "  So  they  wrap  it  up." 
Avarice,  like  all  sinful  passions,  seeks  to  wrap  up  its  crimes.     III.  Thb  mischibvous- 
NESS  of  thb  best  IN  HIS  conNTBY.     "  The  best  of  them  is  as  a  briar  ;  the  most 
upright  is  sharper  than  a  thorn  hedge."     There  is  a  gradation  of  wickedness  of 
the  men  in  the  country,  but  the  best  of  them  is  like  a  prickly  thorn,  and  worse 
than  a  thorn  hedge.     The  prophet  is  so  struck  with  this,  that  the  thought  of 
retribution  takes  hold  of  him,  and  he  says,  "  The  day  of  thy  watchmen  and  thy 
visitation  cometh  :  now  shall  be  their  visitation."     Another  thing  which  the 
patriot  here  bemoans  is — IV.  Thb  lack  of  truthfulness  in  the  country. 
"  Trust  ye  not  in  a  friend,  put  ye  not  confidence  in  a  guide,"  &c.     "  Place  no 
faith  in  a  companion  ;  trust  not  a  familiar  friend  ;  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy 
bosom  guard  the  doors   of   thy  mouth.     For  the   son  despiseth  the  father,  the 
daughter  riseth  up  against  her  mother,  the  daughter-in-law  against  her  mother- 
in-law,  a  man's  enemies  are  the  members  of  his  own  family." — Henderson.     All 
social  ifaith  was  gone ;  a  man  had  lost  all  confidence  in  his  brother.     Social  scepti- 
cism and  suspicion  prevailed  in  all  circles.     No  faith  was  to  be  put  in  a  friend. 
{Homilist.)        The  lack  of  good  men  : — These  words  are  the  cause  of  the  prophet's 
sorrow.     So  deep  a  concern  it  was,  that  the  words  of  verse  1  may  signify  not  only 
mourning  but  howling.     It  arises  from  the  scarcity  of  men  truly  good.     Such  a 
passion  as  this  for  the  want  of  good  men  became  the  prophet  in  all  capacities, — 
as  a  man,  as  a  subject,  and  as  a  prophet.     As  a  man,  he  could  not  but  be  con- 
cerned to  see  a  nation  of  men  so  changed  and  degenerated  by  vice  and  luxury. 
As  a  subject,  he  could  but  consider  what  misery  would  suddenly  betide  the  nation, 
for  want  of  goodness  and  religion.     As  a  prophet,  he  could  but  note  how  they 
slighted  his  errand,  and  were  sturdy  and  resolute  in  their  vices.     I.  Whbbbin 
thb  goodness  of  this  good  man,  the  peophet  mentions,  did  express  itself. 
The  Christian  Church,  as  well  as  the  prophet,  may  justly  bewail  her  barren  Chris- 
tians, and  the  scarcity  of  men  truly  good.     We  call  ourselves  saints  and  elect,  but 
where  is  the  patience,  the  temper,  and  the  spirit  of  them  ?     Let  our  religion  be 
never  so  primitive  and  apostolical,  except  it  makes  us  really  good  it  is  but  wrangling 
hypocrisy  and  noise.     1.  True  goodness   doth  express  itself  in  plainness  and 
sincerity  in  all  oxir  respective  dealings  with  men.     2.  Goodness  expresses  itself 
in  the  exercise  of  good  nature,  and  charitable  allowances  for  the  errors  of  others. 
3.  The  good  man  is   of  a   spirit   truly  public,  whose   care   and   attention  looks 
abroad.     4.  The  good  man  takes  up  religion  only  to  serve  a  spiritual  purpose. 
Religion  without  this   good   purpose   is   only  fashion   or   faction,  hypocrisy  and 
formality,  superstition  or  interest.     II.  What  grew  up  and  prevailed  in  thb 
prophet's  time  in  the  place  of  true  religion  OB  goodness.     1.  Superstition 
and  false  religion,  which  naturally  produce  trouble  and  disquiet  in  all  govern- 
ments.    2.  Wicked  lives  in  the  professors  of  the  true  religion,  which  will  surely 
cause  misery  and  ruin  in  a  nation.     3.  Atheistical  persuasions  prevailed,  or  there 
was  no  religion  at  all.     III.  What  particulab  reasons  may  move  us  to  bewail 
thb  want  of  real  goodness.     1.  The  want  of  it  is  the  principal  cause  of  our 


CHAP,  vn.]  MICAH.  101 

distractions  about  religion.  2.  Real  goodness  is  the  best  way  to  unite  us  among 
ourselves.  Real  goodness  purges  our  judgment,  removes  our  prejudices. 
{Gregory  Hascard,  D.D.)  Ancient  and  modern  pessimism  : — When  we  ourselves 
are  down  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  anybody  else  is  up  ;  when  our  prayer  is  choked 
in  our  throat  it  is  easy  to  believe  that  God  hears  no  prayer  at  all,  nor  cares  for 
petitioning  and  supplicating  men.  We  interpret  all  things  by  ourselves.  There 
is  a  curious  self-projection  of  the  soul  upon  the  disc  of  history,  and  we  read  accord- 
ing to  the  shadow  which  we  throw  upon  that  disc.  This  is  what  we  call  pessimism. 
We  are  always  inventing  strange  words,  and  imagining  that  thereby  we  are  making 
some  kind  of  progress.  Man  has  a  fatal  gift  of  giving  names  to  things,  and  once 
give  a  name  and  it  wiU  be  almost  impossible  to  obliterate  it.  We  call  this  pessim- 
ism,— that  is,  seeing  all  the  wickedness,  and  none  of  the  goodness  ;  seeing  all  the 
darkness,  and  none  of  the  light ;  seeing  the  utter  desolation  of  all  things,  and  not 
seeing  in  all  the  wilderness  one  green  blade,  one  tiny  flower,  or  hearing  in  the  grim 
silence  one  trill  of  lark  or  soft  note  of  thrush  or  nightingale.  There  are  persons 
gifted  with  the  genius  of  darkness.  It  may  do  us  good  to  visit  them  occasionally ; 
but  on  the  whole  it  is  better  to  live  in  the  sunshine,  and  to  hear  the  music,  and  to 
come  under  the  influence  of  intelligent  vivacity  and  cheerfulness.  If  people  will 
shut  themselves  up  in  their  own  little  houses — for  the  biggest  house  is  little,  the 
palace  is  a  mere  hut — and  never  keep  any  company  but  their  own,  they  will  go  down. 
It  is  so  ecclesiastically.  There  are  persons  who  never  see  the  universe  except 
through  their  own  church  window,  and  as  no  window  is  as  big  as  the  horizon, 
there  steals  insidiously  upon  the  mind  a  disposition  to  deny  the  existence  of  the 
horizon  itself.  It  is  so  with  reading.  There  are  those  who  read  only  a  certain 
set  of  books.  They  go  down  ;  there  is  no  mental  range,  no  scope,  no  variety,  no 
mystery  of  colour,  no  hopefulness,  no  imagination.  The  very  earth  needs  to  have 
its  crops  changed.  If  you  will  go  on  growing  the  same  crops  you  will  cease  to 
have  any  crop  that  is  worth  gathering.  There  is,  on  the  other  hand,  what  is 
termed  optimism.  That  is  the  exact  contrary  of  pessimism.  Optimism  sees  the 
best  of  everything.  There  is  a  danger  along  that  line  also  ;  the  danger  is  that  we 
may  not  be  stern  enough,  real  enough,  penetrating  enough,  going  into  the  heart 
and  inmost  fibre  of  things  to  find  out  reality  and  truth,  now  baa  or  good  soever 
the  case  may  be.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  That  they  may  do  evil  with  lioth  hands  earnestly,  the  prince  asketh, 
and  the  judge  asketh,  for  a  reward. — Success  in  sin :  how  it  comes,  and 
what  it  is  : — This  is  a  picture,  given  at  a  stroke,  of  a  proficient  in  sin  in  the 
highest  state  of  sinful  activity.  He  is  doing  evil  "  earnestly,"  systematically, 
persistently,  with  a  certain  enthusiasm  as  if  it  were  the  very  instinct  of  his  being 
and  the  very  business  of  his  life.  In  order  that  he  may  be  stimulated  and  kept 
at  it,  he  asks  a  reward,  a  pecimiary  consideration  from  those  who  are  to  profit 
by  his  villainy.  The  man  stands  at  the  uttermost  point  from  duty,  and  is  ready 
to  perish  in  his  own  corruption.  This  is  terrible  as  a  moral  phenomenon.  Terrible 
as  an  illustration  of  the  natural  history  of  sin,  and  its  tendency  to  run  out  to 
unspeakable  issues.  None  of  us  have  a  proper  and  adequate  idea  of  sin,  either 
as  in  God's  sight  or  in  its  deadly  influence  on  ourselves.  There  is  no  sin  which 
has  not  its  root  in  the  human  heart.  And  wherever  there  is  the  root  there  may 
be  the  fruit.  Wherever  there  is  the  germ  there  may  be  the  growth.  Upon  the 
development  of  this  possibility  God  does  not  put  any  mechanical  restraint.  He 
tells  us  our  duty ;  He  plies  us  with  motives ;  He  presses  ua  with  arguments, 
with  reasons,  with  threatenings,  with  promises.  He  does  not  override  our 
nature,  so  as  to  destroy  that  free  agency  which  makes  us  responsible,  and  without 
which  we  should  belong  to  a  totally  different  circle  of  life.  Sometimes  God  does 
make  His  providence  seem  to  stand  in  the  way,  as  when  He  made  the  angel  cross 
the  path  of  Balaam.  But  it  is  to  make  a  man  pause  and  reflect  before  he  goes 
ftirther,  not  to  compel  him  to  desist.  Is  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  God  should 
reward  men  with  success  who  are  breakers  of  His  laws  ?  But  these  men  are  not 
breaking  those  of  His  laws  from  which  they  receive  their  reward.  Whichever 
of  Grod's  laws  you  obey,  that  law  will  reward  you  according  to  its  kind,  just 
because  it  is  a  law.  Why  does  God  allow  the  ungodly  man  to  attain  wealth  ? 
Simply  because  that  imgodly  man  has  sought  wealth  with  all  his  might.  He  has 
made  it  the  one  aim  of  his  life,  and  In  order  to  secure  it  he  has  scrupulously  obeyed 
those  laws  with  which  the  attainment  of  it  stands  connected.  The  man  obeys 
the  law  of  success  in  that  department.     But  he  also  allows  the  law  which  he  du- 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

obeys  to  bring  to  him  the  natural  result  of  that  disobedience.  And  if  the  law 
which  he  disobeys  be  the  higher  law,  the  law  of  his  spiritual  life,  then,  whatever 
he  may  gain  in  the  lower  sphere,  he  is  a  loser  in  the  higher,  and  therefore  a  loser 
in  reality,  a  loser  in  the  end,  for  he  destroys  his  soul.  As  this  success  in  sin  is 
not  prevented  by  providence,  so  neither  is  it  prevented  by  the  circumstance  of 
possessing  religious  privileges.  Privileges  are  a  means  of  good  ;  but  the  more 
good  we  resist  the  more  hardened  we  become.  Learn — It  is  not  necessary 
that  we  should  disobey  the  laws  in  the  lower  sphere ;  they  can  be  obeyed  in  sub- 
ordination to  the  higher.  But  if  we  practically  make  the  lower  the  highest, 
then  that  which  is  really  highest  avenges  itself  by  destroying  the  soul.  The 
lesson  of  the  text  is  just  this — If  we  have  not  yet  turned  to  good,  the  sooner  we 
do  so  the  better.  There  must  be  a  great  turning  on  the  part  of  every  one. 
{A.  L.  Simpson,  D.D.)  "  With  both  hands  earnestly"  : — This  is  how  bad  men 
work.  At  least,  it  is  how  they  wrought  in  the  prophet's  time.  There  is  no 
excellence  in  mere  earnestness.  Earnestness  may  be  as  fiery  as  the  flame,  and  at 
the  same  time  as  destructive  to  real  life  and  goodness.  Yet  every  man  should 
be  in  earnest.  We  ought  to  live  our  life  and  do  our  work  "  with  both  hands 
earnestly."  I.  Without  hands.  There  are  some  good  men  who  seem  to  be 
without  hands  altogether.  From  dawn  of  life  until  dusk  they  do  nothing  expressly 
for  Christ.  They  could  work  with  hands,  because  they  do,  in  other  things,  a  song, 
a  political  struggle,  or  their  business.  I  know  the  excuses  that  will  be  pleaded, 
and  the  bars  that  will  be  put  in  for  arrest  of  judgment.  II.  With  one  hand. 
So,  many  of  Hia  servants  serve  Him.  And  this  is  well  when  it  is  just  at  the 
beginning  of  the  service.  A  little  is  attempted  at  first.  A  little  more  is  added, 
and  so  the  service  grows  into  some  fulness,  and  the  worker  into  some  strength. 
You  may  be  tender  with  the  green  blade  if  you  see  that  it  is  green  and  therefore 
growing.  A  man  may  be  touching  Christian  work  only  "  with  one  hand,"  but 
better  so  than  not  at  all.  More  will  come.  He  will  be  weary  soon  working 
with  one  hand.  He  will  need  the  other  for  his  own  relief.  He  will  take  if  he  is 
not  discouraged.  Let  all  the  one-handed  men  hear  the  "  God-speed  "  of  the 
older  workers.  HI.  With  both  hands.  For,  after  all,  there  is  no  perfection, 
even  of  a  relative  kind,  with  one.  And  the  con  tinued  use  of  one  only  is  a  shocking 
imperfection  in  the  Christian  service.  For  as  both  hands  have  been  given  for 
use,  the  other  will  not  be  idle.  It  will  be  working  in  forbidden  ways.  It  will  be 
undoing  what  is  done  by  the  other.  "  With  both  hands,"  then,  for  very  safety. 
When  we  think  of  it,  how  very  few  things  there  are  in  the  hovise,  or  in  labour,  or 
in  business  that  we  can  do  with  one  hand.  A  man  without  an  arm  is  considered 
disabled  as  a  workman.  IV.  With  both  hands  earnestly.  It  is  not  enough 
that  all  the  talents  are  laid  out ;  they  must  all  be  laid  out  to  the  best  advantage. 
It  is  not  enough  that  every  power  and  passion  shall  be  enlisted  in  the  Lord's 
service  ;  they  must  all  be  baptized,  inspired,  and  energised  with  a  Christian 
earnestness.  Thought  must  be  suffused  with  feeling,  and  work  must  be  filled 
and  vitalised  with  love.  There  are  those  who  work  "  with  both  hands,"  who 
keep  nothing  back.  There  is  no  conflict  of  principles  in  their  souls,  and  no  visible 
flaw  in  their  obedience.  But  the  mechanism  is  mechanical,  there  is  no  vital 
action.  The  Christian  earnestness  is  not  mere  vehemence  and  heat.  It  is 
essential  that  it  be  informed  with  full  intelligence.  The  difference  between 
fanaticism  and  zeal  is  chiefly  a  difference  in  knowledge.  Christian  earnestness 
is  wise  and  thoughtful  in  the  application  of  knowledge,  in  the  judgment  of  persons, 
events,  times,  or  seasons.  Christian  earnestness  is  very  patient.  Some  reasons 
for  an  earnest  life.  1.  Self-preservation  requires  it.  2.  Honesty  requires  it. 
3.  Benevolence  requires  it.  4.  Gratitude  requires  it.  5.  Time  requires  it.  6.  The 
text  requires  it.  This  text  is  one  taken  from  the  enemy.  We  have  seized  it  as 
from  the  devil.  It  describes  his  hosts.  We  thank  them  for  the  attitude.  We 
accept  the  challenge.  We  are  no  soldiers  unless  we  do.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
And  so  they  wrap  it  up. — Sin  wrappings  : — The  author  of  this  book,  though  a 
contemporary  of  Hezekiah,  evidently  sketches  a  period  in  Jewish  history  far 
more  corrupt  than  his  own  day.  The  period  he  refers  to  in  the  context  was  a 
period  when  the  good  man  had  "  perished  out  of  the  earth,"  and  when  "  upright 
men  existed  not "  ;  a  period  when  all  were  "  lying  in  wait  for  blood,"  and  every 
man  was  "  against  his  brother."  Yet  though  the  people  and  the  authorities  of 
this  period  were  so  corrupt,  they  had  not  entirely  lost  all  shame  of  the  abomina- 
tions, for  the  prophet  says,  "  they  wrap  it  up."  AH  were  busj'  in  artful  endeavours 
to  conceal  from  otiiers  the  wickedness  of  their  conduct.     Now,  the  endeavour  of 


CHAP,  vn.]  MIGAH.  103 

these  people  to  wrap  up  their  sin  in  concealment  is  worthy  our  attention,  for 
several  reasons — I.  Because  it  is  general.  Sin  seems  to  have  in  it  an  instinct 
of  self-concealment ;  it  cannot  bear  the  light.  Like  the  noxious  reptiles  of  the 
earth,  it  shrinks  from  observation.  Hence  no  sooner  does  a  man  commit  a  sin 
than  he  seeks  "to  ^vrap  it  up."  1.  He  seeks  "to  wrap  it  up"  from  society.  In 
all  grades  of  society,  in  all  departments  of  action,  men  are  active  in  wrapping  up 
their  sin.  The  dishonest  tradesman  wraps  up  the  thousand  sins  of  his  daily 
avaricious  life  in  the  bland  smile,  the  cringing  bow,  and  the  false  statement 
which  he  makes  to  his  customers.  Every  parcel  he  delivers  to  the  purchaser  is 
wrapt  up  in  falsehood.  In  the  professions  you  have  the  same  wrapping.  The 
lawyer,  the  physician,  the  priest,  each  has  his  sins,  and  each  has  his  method  of 
wrapping  them  up.  Candidates  for  public  offices  will  "  wrap  up "  the  sinful 
wishes  that  prompt  them  to  seek  the  post,  by  many  an  avowal  of  patriotism  and 
benevolence,  as  false  as  they  are  fair.  This  general  "  wrapping  up  "  of  our  sins 
from  the  eyes  of  our  fellow-men  shows  the  essential  hideousness  of  sin.  The 
conscience  of  universal  man  feels  that  it  is  an  execrable  thing,  therefore  he  seeks 
to  conceal  it.  2.  He  seeks  to  "  wrap  it  up  "  from  his  own  conscience.  This 
the  sinner  does  by  specious  excuses  which  he  offers  to  himself  for  his  wickedness. 
Sometimes  he  will  seek  to  "  wrap  "  his  sin  in  the  garb  of  custom,  so  as  to  hide  its 
enormity  from  his  conscience,  and  he  hopes  that  the  custom  of  his  trade  or  his 
profession  will  justify  his  doings.  Sometimes  he  will  "  wrap  "  his  sin  in  the 
infirmities  of  men  who  have  been  regarded  as  good,  and  he  will  seek  to  satisfy 
conscience  by  reference  to  the  imperfections  of  men  whom  the  world,  the  Church, 
and  even  the  Bible  itself,  canonise  as  saints.  Sometimes  he  will  endeavour  to 
"  wrap  up  "  his  sin  of  religious  neglect  by  promises  of  improvement  in  a  future 
time,  as  Felix  did  of  old.  The  endeavour  of  this  people  to  wrap  up  their  sin  ia 
important  to  notice — II.  Because  it  is  wicked.  It  is  adding  sin  to  sin ;  the 
concealment  of  a  sin  is  a  double  sin.  By  wrapping  a  sin  up,  however  strong  may 
be  your  motives  for  doing  so,  you  enhance  the  guilt,  and  make  the  matter  worse. 
The  serpent  hatches  its  brood  under  the  cover.  1.  Concealing  sin  is  a  sin  against 
our  constitution.  We  are  organised  to  be  open  and  revealing ;  we  have  organs 
made  to  reveal  fully  and  faithfully  what  is  in  us,  and  our  natural  instincts  urge 
us  to  this  revelation.  2.  Concealing  sin  is  a  sin  against  society.  We  have  no 
right  to  appear  to  others  what  we  are  not.  The  hypocrite  is,  of  all  forgers,  the 
most  wicked  and  dangerous.  3.  Concealing  sin  is  a  sin  against  God.  It  is  an 
insult  to  His  omniscience.  The  endeavour  of  these  people  to  wrap  up  their  sins 
is  important  to  notice — III.  Because  it  is  unwise.  1.  The  endeavour  must 
inevitably  prove  fruitless.  Even  here,  circumstances  often  occur  in  a  man's 
history  to  bring  out  to  the  full  view  of  his  contemporaries  his  hidden  sins.  The 
wrappage  gets  rent,  and  the  imswathed  monster  leaps  into  the  light,  and  men 
shudder.  "  Murder  will  out "  ;  and  not  only  murder.  Yes,  and  to  a  man's 
own  conscience  here,  often  by  the  force  of  moral  conviction,  all  the  monsters 
axe  unwrapt.  But  in  the  futiu-e  there  will  be  a  full  and  complete  unfoldment. 
Fold  after  fold,  however  intricately  and  numerously  winded  round  the  evil  thing, 
will  be  unloosed  and  thrown  away  in  the  flames  of  the  last  day.  "  God  will  bring 
every  work  into  judgment  with  every  secret  thing  "  (Eccles.  xii.  14  ;  Matt.  x.  26  ; 
1  Cor.  iv.  5).  2.  The  endeavour  is  eternally  inimical  to  happiness.  The  child 
who  commits  a  crime  against  his  parents  will  move  in  wretched  gloom  in  the 
happy  circle  of  love,  so  long  as  he  seeks  to  wrap  up  his  offence.  Let  him  confess 
it  in  tears,  and  the  dark  cloud  wiU  break,  and  the  sun  will  shine  again  into  his 
heart.  Thus  David  felt,  "  When  I  kept  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old  through 
my  roaring  all  the  day  long"  (Psa.  xxxii.  3).  "He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall 
not  prosper,  but  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  shall  have  mercy."  3.  The 
endeavour,  if  persisted  in,  wiU  involve  in  unutterable  ruin.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  7.  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord  (taken  with  Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  —  The  two 
looks  : — Man  is  a  creature  requiring  help.  Where  is  he  to  look  ?  I.  Man's  look. 
L  Personal — "I."  Whatever  it  may  cost,  whoever  else  will  not,  I  will.  2.  Reliance 
— "  unto."  In  weakness,  confusion,  difficulty  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord.  3.  Object 
— "  the  Lord."  Jehovah.  He  is  able,  willing,  has  promised  to  help.  II.  God's 
LOOK.  L  God  has  promised  to  look  to,  i.e.,  after.  "  I  will."  His  look  is  one 
of  power,  and  it  means  help  and  protection.  2.  Object — poor — needy.  "  Him 
that  hath  no  helper  "  applies  both  to  temporal  and  spiritual  concerns  of  God's 
people.     3.   Contrite — repentant.     Applies  to  spiritual  condition :  one  humbled 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

on  account  of  sin ;  sorrowful,  returning  one.  4.  Trembles  at  My  Word.  Not  as 
Felix,  but  one  who  has  reverence  for  it,  tries  to  keep  it,  fears  to  break  it.  To 
Him  will  I  look.  Others  may  despise  and  disregard  Him,  but  I  will  look  to  (after) 
Him.  Let  us  look  to  Grod,  and  God  will  look  to  us  (John  R.  Taft,  M.A.)  The 
Church  looking  and  waiting  for  the  Lord : — If  you  survey  the  human  race  you 
will  find  among  them  numberless  differences.  They  differ  in  their  condition, 
in  their  complexion,  their  statiire,  speech,  apparel,  manners.  Yet  there  is  a 
great  resemblance  among  them  too.  The  things  in  which  they  agree  are  far  more 
important  than  those  in  which  they  differ.  The  resemblance  regards  what  is 
essential  in  human  nature ;  the  variety  is  what  is  accidental  only.  This  is  an 
image  of  the  Church  of  God.  Differences  in  opinions,  speculations,  discipline, 
religious  usages,  forms  and  ceremonies,  only  concern  the  dress  of  religion;  the 
body  is  essentially  the  same.  In  every  age  of  the  world,  imder  every  dispensation 
of  society,  God's  people  have  been  the  same,  their  wants  the  same,  their  dependence 
the  same,  their  tastes  the  same,  their  principles  the  same.  Resolution  rashly 
formed  in  our  own  strength  not  only  fails,  but  often  proves  a  snare  to  the  soul. 
Resolution  made  in  reliance  on  the  power  of  Divine  grace  will  be  found  service- 
able to  remind  us,  to  humble  us,  to  stimulate  us,  and  to  bind  us.  Thus  resolution 
will  resemble  a  hedge  round  a  meadow,  to  keep  the  cattle  from  straying ;  and 
the  hemming  of  a  garment,  to  keep  the  threads  from  ravelling  out.  I.  To  whom 
DOKS  THE  RESOLTJTiON  OF  THIS  TEXT  REFER  ?  The  Lord.  This  term.  Lord,  is 
characterised  by  the  Church  in  two  ways.  The  one  regards  God's  work  for  them  ; 
the  other,  His  relation  to  them.  The  Church  calls  Him  "the  God  of  their  salva- 
tion." And  so  He  is,  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Every  kind  of  deliverance  is 
from  Him.  He  is  the  preserver  of  men.  But  there  is  a  deliverance  that  is 
emphatically  called  "  salvation  "  ;  a  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to  come,  from 
the  powers  of  darkness,  from  the  t5Tanny  of  the  world,  from  the  slavery  of  sin, 
— from  all  its  remains  and  its  consequences.  Of  this  salvation,  the  purpose,  the 
plan,  the  execution,  the  application,  and  the  consummation  are  of  God  and  of 
grace.  The  Chvurch  also  calls  Him  her  God.  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  This  is 
not  too  much  for  any  Christian  to  utter.  Every  Christian  has  a  much  greater 
propriety  in  God  than  he  has  in  an3rthing  else ;  indeed,  there  is  nothing  else  that 
^  his  own.  As  He  is  really,  so  God  is  to  us  eternally  and  imchangeably.  The 
relation  between  God  and  us,  so  as  to  authorise  us  to  call  Him  ours,  results  from 
two  things :  donation  on  our  side,  and  dedication  on  ours.  II.  By  what  is  this 
BKSOLTJTION  EXCITED  T  "  Therefore."  Read  the  preceding  verses.  The  prophet 
turned  away  from  creatures,  knowing  that  they  were  broken  cisterns,  cisterns 
that  could  hold  no  water.  A  designed  experience  this  is,  and  not  a  csisual  one 
(so  to  speak)  on  God's  side.  God  is  concerned  for  our  welfare,  infinitely  more 
than  we  are  ourselves,  and  therefore  He  does  not  wait  for  our  application,  but 
He  excites  it.  It  is  a  necessary  experience  on  our  part.  We  nave  a  strong 
propensity  to  make  flesh  om:  arm  and  earth  our  home.  It  is  the  privilege  of 
the  real  Christian,  that  he  knows  to  whom  he  can  go  in  the  hour  of  distress ; 
that  though  all  be  rough  \mder  foot,  all,  when  he  looks  up,  is  clear  overhead. 
III.  What  does  the  resolution  mcLtJDE  ?  Two  things — prayer  and  patience. 
Looking  to  Him  is  seeking  Him  in  prayer.  You  should  look  to  Him — 1.  For 
explanation  under  your  affliction.  2.  For  support  in  your  trouble.  3.  For  sancti- 
fication.  4.  For  deliverance.  And  you  are  to  "  wait."  Waiting  supposes  some 
delay  in  God's  appearance  on  the  behalf  of  His  people.  These  delays  have  always 
been  common.  IV.  What  is  it  that  strsTAiNS  this  relation  7  It  is  confidence 
in  God  as  the  hearer  and  answerer  of  prayer.  According  to  some,  the  success  of 
prayer  is  confined  entirely  to  its  exercise  and  influence.  But  we  can  recognise 
actual  interpositions  and  benedictions.  If  a  man  prays  aright,  he  will  believe 
that  God  does  something  in  answer  to  his  prayer.  {WHliam  Jay.)  Faith 
and  hope  in  God  : — The  Lord  Jehovah  is  a  never-failing  source  of  consolation  to 
His  believing  people.  In  Him,  therefore,  they  put  their  trust,  and  receive  ample 
supplies  of  mercy  and  grace  in  every  time  of  need.  In  the  preceding  verses 
Micah  addresses  the  few  who  were  pious  among  them  by  way  of  caution,  against 
treacherous  friendships  and  creature  confidence,  and  by  way  of  encouragement, 
to  trust  solely  in  the  Saviour  of  Israel  for  preservation  and  deliverance.  The 
words  of  the  text  announce — I.  The  prophet's  resolution.  "  I  will  look 
xuxto  the  Lord,"  &c.  This  pious  determination  was  evidently  the  result  of 
eminent  wisdom  and  prompt  decision  of  character  ;  it  discovers  a  devout  and 
gracious   state   of  mind,   and   regards   both   the — 1.  Active  character  of  faith. 


CHAP.  VII.]  MICAH.  105 

Looking  is  a  vigorous  act  of  the  mind.  This  vital  principle  includes  a  full  renunci- 
ation of  self-dependence  ;  an  implicit  confidence  in  the  Divine  perfections  and 
promises ;  and  an  entire  devotion  of  the  heart  and  life  to  His  service.  2.  The 
patient  exercise  of  hope.  "  I  will  wait  for  the  Grod  of  my  salvation."  Genuine 
faith  is  invariably  productive  of  practical  piety.  If  we  believe  in  God  we  shall 
delight  in  waiting  upon  Him  in  fervent  devotion,  and  waiting  for  Him  in  earnest 
expectation.  Waiting  for  the  Lord  is  not  a  suspension  of  mental  activity,  nor 
a  cessation  of  personal  exertion ;  it  is  a  lively  exercise  of  the  mind,  ardently 
desiring  and  diligently  seeking  the  blessings  of  salvation  in  all  the  duties  and 
ordinances  of  the  Gospel.  We  must  wait  for  God  humbly,  believingly,  faithfully, 
patiently,  and  perseveringly,  in  all  the  means  of  His  appointment.  II.  The 
prophet's  confidence.  "  My  God,  the  God  of  my  salvation."  This  is  the 
language  of  humble  assiurance.  Genuine  religion  is  its  own  evidence.  It  is 
attended  with  an  internal  witness  of  its  personal  enjoyment.  1.  The  inestimable 
portion  claimed  — "  My  God."  It  is  the  distinguishing  promise  of  the  new 
covenant,  "  I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  My  people."  This  is  happily 
realised  in  the  experience  of  all  the  saints.  God  is  not  only  theirs  in  the  natural 
relations  of  creation  and  preservation  ;  but  He  is  also  theirs  by  the  special  engage- 
ments of  His  covenant  and  the  benefits  of  salvation.  2.  The  unspeakable  privi- 
lege enjoyed.  "  The  God  of  my  salvation."  The  prophet  had  obtained  mercy 
of  the  Lord,  and  was  a  partaker  of  His  saving  influence.  But  he  still  believingly 
waited  for  the  progressive  and  perfect  accomplishment  of  the  work  which  He  had 
already  begun.  Thus  all  the  righteous  are  subjects  of  present  salvation,  and 
heirs  of  eternal  life.  III.  The  prophet's  encouragement.  "  My  God  will 
hear  me."  This  persuasion  afforded  him  inexpressible  consolation.  The 
rebellious  Jews  rejected  his  message ;  but  he  rejoiced  to  know  that  his  God 
would  propitiously  hear  and  answer  his  pious  devotions.  He  was  encouraged 
by — 1.  His  communion  with  God.  Fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with  His 
Son,  Je8\i8  Christ,  is  the  exalted  privilege  of  all  His  people.  They  not  only  deem 
it  their  bounden  duty,  but  they  also  esteem  it  their  highest  honour,  to  address 
the  God  of  all  grace.  2.  His  expectation  from  God.  "  My  God  will  hear  me." 
He  was  not  presumptuous  in  his  confidence,  nor  enthusiastic  in  his  anticipation. 
He  relied  on  Scripture  promises.  He  had  the  evidence  of  experience.  The 
promises  and  goodness  of  God  should  excite  our  confidence,  and  promote  gratitude 
and  praise.  Let  us,  then,  consider  the  folly  of  trusting  in  the  world  for  happiness, 
and  the  necessity  of  looking  to  God  for  salvation.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred 
Sermons.)  Looking  unto  Ood,  and  waiting  for  Him  : — Here  is  a  general  ground 
of  encouragement.  1.  The  Lord  makes  use  of  troublesome  and  dfeclining  times 
to  drive  His  people  the  more  to  their  duty  and  thrift.  2.  There  is  in  God  suflBcient 
matter  of  encouragement  to  counter- balance  any  difficulty  or  discouragement 
that  His  people  meet  with  in  the  world.  Looking  unto  the  Lord  is  an  all-sufficient 
remedy  to  keep  them  from  being  carried  away  in  a  declining  time,  and  from  dis- 
couragement in  a  sad  time.  3.  In  declining  and  sad  times  the  people  of  God 
ought  to  be  most  earnest  in  dealing  with  Him,  depending  on  Him,  and  expecting 
His  help.  Lukewarm  dealing  with  God,  however  it  may  please  fools  in  a  calm 
day,  yet  will  not  bear  out  in  a  time  of  public  defection.  4.  In  the  reeling  and 
turning  upside  down  of  things  here  below  the  people  of  God  are  not  so  much  to 
look  to  these  uncertainties  as  unto  the  immutaoility  of  God  in  what  He  is  to  His 
people.  5.  With  our  faith  and  ardency  in  expecting  God's  help,  patient  waiting 
is  also  to  be  conjoined,  by  keeping  His  way,  notwithstanding  difficulties  or  delays 
of  deliverance,  and  resolving  to  have  faith  exercised  before  it  get  the  victory. 
6.  In  all  the  waiting  of  the  people  of  God  upon  Him  there  is  still  hope  and  con- 
fidence, though  it  be  not  always  seen  to  the  waiter ;  for  the  same  word  in  the 
original  signifies  both  waiting  and  hoping.  (George  Hutcheson.)  Pious 
resolves  : — I.  The^ie  are  the  words  of  one  who  was  saddened,  and  chafed,  and 
perplexed.  The  depravities  of  society,  its  treacheries,  its  selfishness,  and  its 
furious  lust  overpowered  all  faith  but  faith  in  God,  and  compelled,  tlirough  a 
terrible  discipline,  and  yet  a  gracious  one,  to  that  Christlike  attitude  of  perfect 
resignation  and  perfect  devotion  and  perfect  hope  depicted  by  the  text.  The 
feeling  expressed  is  one  of  personal  devotion  and  social  separation.  2.  When 
the  oppressions  of  sin  bear  down  the  soul,  and  the  burden  on  the  conscience  is 
heavy  ;  when  convictions  lacerate  and  fears  overwhelm,  and  the  heart  is  agonised 
with  the  apprehension  of  the  wrath  of  an  angry  God ;  when  man  is  wearied  and 
distracted  with  the  world  and  sin,  wondrous  is  the  change  to  purity,  freedom. 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

and  peace,  when  the  vow  of  the  prophet  can  formulate  the  soul's  aspirations  as  in 
the  text.  3.  When  man  is  converted  and  saved,  the  spiritual  occupation  of  his 
new  life  is  a  looking,  a  waiting,  and  a  praying ;  that  occupation  is  permeated 
with  hope  and  perpetuated  by  faith,  and  the  certainties  of  a  glorious  issue 
illumine  the  path  and  lighten  the  soul.  4.  No  one  can  say  "My  God"  who 
cannot  also  say  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  Every  saved  soul  prays.  There  is  a 
necessary  connection,  in  virtue  of  an  essential  law  of  the  spiritual  life,  between 
the  "receiving  of  the  atonement"  and  the  offering  up  of  our  desires  unto  God. 
6.  Those  who  are  saved  were,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  "  lost."  Their  salva- 
tion is  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Their  Redeemer  is  the  Deity.  6.  The  words, 
"  God  of  my  salvation,"  "  My  God,"  indicate  the  exercise  of  that  appropriating 
faith  by  which  we  "  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us  "  in  the  everlasting  Gospel. 
{T.  Boston.)  My  God  will  hear  me. — Our  assuring  confidence. : — Faith  is 
"the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world."  God  is  the  object  of  that  faith; 
His  Word  is  the  ground  upon  which  it  rests,  and  confidence  and  peace  and 
assurance  for  ever  are  its  invariable  fruits.  When  confiding  in  God,  the  soul 
intrenches  itseK  in  God ;  it  is  unassailable  from  within  or  from  without ;  it  can 
triumph  over  the  most  adverse  circumstances,  and  cling  to  the  everlasting  rock 
amidst  the  swellings  of  the  angriest  sea.  Nothing  ought  at  any  time  to  shake 
our  confidence  in  God.  No  ground  for  distrust  in  God  can  possibly  exist.  It  is 
well,  when  faith's  trial  comes,  to  be  prepared  with  some  great  standard  truth 
to  which  we  may  hold  fast  under  all  circumstances.  The  whole  teaching  of 
Scripture  assures  us  that  confidence  in  God  cannot  be  misplaced — cannot  be  dis- 
appointed. I.  The  soul's  confidence  grounded  upon  Deity — upon  what  God 
IS.  This  is  the  highest  of  all  grounds  for  confidence, — what  God  is  in  Himself, 
irrespective  of  all  other  considerations  whatsoever.  There  is  no  deficiency  of 
resources  in  Him  ;  God  is  all-sufficiency.  No  want  of  inclination  in  Him ;  He 
is  all  goodness.  All  His  attributes  attest  Him  to  be  altogether  qualified  for  the 
supply  of  our  need,  and  His  promises  absolutely  pledge  Him  to  supply  the  need 
of  all  those  who  seek  unto  Him.  II.  The  soul's  confidence  is  here  grounded 
ON  relationship  to  God.  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  It  is  the  province  of  faith 
to  appropriate  God,  as  much  as  it  is  the  province  of  faith  to  believe  in  His  exist- 
ence. The  only  revelation  God  gives  us  of  Himself  in  His  Word  has  reference  to 
the  offices  He  sustains  for  His  i)eople,  and  the  relation  He  bears  to  poor  sinners. 
III.  The  soul's  confidence  is  founded  also  on  the  promise,  "  My  God 
will  hear  me."  It  is  not  a  question.  Will  God  hear  me  ?  "  My  God  will  hear  me." 
The  same  word  in  the  Hebrew  that  signifies  God  hears,  signifies  also  God  answers. 
Whensoever  we  call,  God  wiU  hear.  Howsoever  we  call,  God  will  hear.  A  look 
is  a  prayer ;  a  desire  is  a  prayer.  And  there  is  the  personal  element  in  the 
assurance — "  the  Lord  wiU  hear  me."  (Marcus  Rainsford.)  A  sweet  silver 
beU  ringing  in  each  believer^s  heart : — "  My  God  shall  hear  me."  What  a  charming 
sentence  !  There  is  more  eloquence  in  that  sentence  than  in  all  the  orations  of 
Demosthenes.  It  is  a  choice  song  for  a  lone  harp.  I.  The  title.  "  My  God." 
It  is  not  God  alone,  but  God  in  covenant  with  me,  to  whom  I  look  for  help.  To 
call  Him  "  My  God  "  means  election  and  selection.  "  My  God  "  supposes  an 
appropriation  of  faith.  "  My  God "  signifies  knowledge  and  acquaintance. 
"  My  God  "  implies  an  embrace  of  love.  "  My  God  "  implies  that  the  obedience 
of  your  life  is  rendered  to  Him  most  cheerfully.  A  man  cannot  call  God  his  God 
in  truth  unless  he  desires  to  obey  Him.  And  the  phrase  "  My  God  "  hints  at  a 
joy  and  delight  in  Him.  II.  The  argument.  The  title  contains  within  itself 
a  secret  logical  force.  As  siu-ely  as  He  is  my  God  He  will  hear  me.  Why  ? — 
1.  Because  He  is  God,  the  livmg  and  true  God.  The  oracles  of  the  heathen  are 
but  liars.  Those  who  sought  unto  the  false  gods  did  but  dote  upon  falsehoods. 
You  see  in  what  a  tone  of  confidence  this  prophet  speaks ;  and  why  should  not 
every  child  of  God  speak  with  the  same  confidence  ?  There  let  it  stand  like  a 
column  of  brass, — though  all  things  else  should  fail,  God  must  hear  prayer.  He 
may  do  this,  and  He  may  do  that,  but  He  must  hear  prayer.  2.  Because  He 
has  made  Himself  my  God  He  will  hear  me.  He  has  given  Himself  to  be  my 
God.  3.  Because  my  God  has  heard  me  so  many  times.  Therefore,  be  it  far 
from  me  to  doubt  His  present  and  future  favour.  4.  Because  in  the  covenant 
His  hearing  prayer  is  included.  5.  Because  if  He  did  not  hear  prayer.  He  would 
Himself  be  a  great  loser.  III.  The  favour.  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  It  is 
better  for  us  to  have  a  promise  that  God  will  hear  us,  than  a  promise  that  God 
will  alwavs  answer  us.     If   it  were   a  matter   of  absolute  fact  that  God  would 


CHAP.  VII.]  MICAH.  107 

always  answer  the  prayers  of  His  people  as  they  present  them,  it  would  be  an 
awful  truth.  The  text  means  that  He  will  hear  me — 1.  As  a  listener.  2.  As  a 
friend  full  of  sympathy.  3.  As  a  judge  patiently  hears  a  case.  4.  PiS  a  helper. 
IV.  The  person.  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  Will  He  hear  you  ?  Are  you  cast 
down  under  a  sense  of  sin  ;  persecuted  ;  or  disappointed  ?  Be  sure  that  God  will 
hear  you.  If  any  man  wills  to  have  God  to  be  his  God,  grace  is  given  him  so 
that  He  will.  If  you  desire  Christ,  you  may  have  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Keep  on  the  outlook : — A  beautiful  little  book,  entitled  "  Expectation  Corners," 
tells  of  a  king  who  prepared  a  city  for  some  of  his  poor  subjects.  Not  far  from 
them  were  large  storehouses  where  everything  they  could  need  was  supplied,  if 
they  but  sent  in  their  requests.  But  on  one  condition — they  should  be  on  the 
lookout  for  the  answer,  so  that  when  the  king's  messengers  came  with  the  answer 
to  their  petitions  they  should  always  be  found  waiting  and  ready  to  receive  them. 
The  sad  story  is  told  of  one  desponding  one  who  never  expected  to  get  what  he 
asked,  because  he  was  too  unworthy.  One  day  he  was  taken  to  the  king's  store- 
houses, and  there,  to  his  amazement,  he  saw,  with  his  address  on  them,  all  the 
packages  that  had  been  made  up  for  him,  and  sent.  There  was  the  garment  of 
praise  and  the  oil  of  joy  and  the  eye-salve,  and  so  much  more ;  they  had  been  to 
his  door,  but  foimd  it  closed ;  he  was  not  on  the  outlook.  From  that  time  on 
he  learnt  the  lesson  Micah  would  teach  us  :  "I  will  look  to  the  Lord  ;  I  will  wait 
for  the  God  of  my  salvation ;  my  God  will  hear  me."     (Andrew  Murray.) 

Ver.  8.  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy;  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise; 
when  I  sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light  unto  me. — The  rejoicing 
foe  rebuked  : — I.  The  kejoicino  fob.  At  the  moment  of  conversion,  the  soul 
enters  upon  a  conflict  which  continues  until  his  dying  day.  The  bugle  that  calls; 
him  to  peace  with  God,  calls  him  also  to  battle.  Over  and  above  the  conflict!  i 
arising  from  his  own  evil  heart,  and  the  temptations  of  a  godless  world,  the  saint 
has  in  Satan  a  sworn  foe.  Let  me  beseech  you  to  remember  that  in  Satan  you 
have  a  personal  living  foe.  In  order  to  forni  some  idea  of  the  foe  we  have  to  fight, 
look  at  the  names  given  to  him  in  Scripture.  These  best  reveal  his  character. 
ApoUyon,  the  destroyer.  Satan,  the  accuser.  The  Tevil,  or  murderer.  He 
comes  at  unawares.  He  assiults  our  weakest  part.  II.  The  rejoicing  fob 
rebuked.  In  our  text  there  is  no  attempt  to  deny  the  fact  of  the  fall,  or  excuse 
its  guilt.  Whence  does  the  fallen  Christian  obtain  his  comfort,  if  it  be  not  in 
ignoring  the  past  ?  He  rejoices  in  the  thought  of  restoration.  The  future  is 
his  reservoir  of  gladness.  I  shall  arise,  he  says,  a  wiser  man  ;  a  more  watchful 
man  ;  a  humbler  man.  God's  true  saints  shall  be  raised  from  the  ground,  however 
hard  their  fall.  Next  to  the  salvation  of  the  sinner,  the  recovery  of  the  saint 
brings  glory  to  our  Lord.  (A.  G.  Brown.)  Chequered  experience: — I.  The 
CONFLICT  SUPPOSED.  The  language  is  very  strong  ;  the  figurative  terms  employed 
suggest  their  own  images  ;  it  is  a  sad  but  not  a  desperate  case  ;  there  is  hope  in 
the  Lord  concerning  this  thing  ;  but,  meanwhile,  there  is  a  conflict  going  on  which 
puts  to  the  proof  the  strength  and  courage  of  Micah.  We  are  here  meditating 
upon  the  mental  warfare  that  went  on  in  the  battlefield  of  a  prophet's  heart. 
That  which  belonged  to"  him  is  common  to  us  all — not  always,  but  at  certain 
times.  Some  Christians  make  this  mistake  ;  they  seem  to  expect  that  because 
they  are  Christians  they  shall  be  exempt  from  the  temptations  and  evil  inclina-' 
tions  of  other  men.  II.  The  sources  of  this  spiritual  conflict.  We  want 
nothing  but  the  history  of  our  heart  to  explain  this.  The  soiirces  of  this  conflict 
of  thought  and  feeling  are  threefold, — the  world,  the  devil,  and  death.     III.  The 

FREQUENT  ANTICIPATION  OF  DEATH,  WHICH  IS  A  SOURCE  OF  PERPETUAL  CONFLICT 

TO  MANY.  The  fear  of  death  is  natural ;  it  is  probably  a  principle  implanted 
from  above,  to  prevent  man  from  rushing  unbidden  into  the  presence  of  Grod. 
And  to  this  fear  the  beUever  is  liable,  even  as  the  imbeliever.     (W.  Q.  Barrett), 

Ver.  9.  I  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  because  I  have  sinned  against 
Him. — The  believer,  conscious  of  God's  displeasure,  confessing  his  sin  .-—This  is 
the  language  of  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  It  is  a  sincere  and  upright  aclmow- 
ledgmcnt  of  her  own  fault.  She  saw  God  in  the  dealing  and  conduct  of  her 
enemies.  This  led  her  to  confession.  This  led  her  to  holy  determination  ;  and 
also  to  patient  wailing ;  and  a  believing  confidence.  I.  The  solemn  purpose 
OF  THE  SOUL.  "  I  Will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord."  She  saw  the  Lord's 
hand  in  her  afflictions.     It  is  no  small  wisdom,  when  we  are  enabled  to  see  clearly 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

the  mind  and  the  dealings  of  God  with  us  in  our  afflictions.  What  was  the 
"  indignation  "  that  the  Church  had  to  bear  ?  Not  that  which  God  shows  to 
those  who  despise  Him  and  rebel  against  Him  ;  but  the  eternal  display  of  God'a 
wrath  against  sin,  a  holy  indignation  against  iniquity ;  the  indignation  of  a 
Father's  displeasure.  It  is  not  the  less  painful  for  that.  It  is  the  very  love  of 
the  father  that  makes  his  displeasure  so  keen  to  the  heart  of  the  child.  II.  Thk 
BBASON  THAT  SHE  GIVES  FOR  IT.  "  Becausc  I  have  sinned  against  Him."  Sin 
should  be  regarded  in  three  different  points  of  view.  There  is  a  course  of  sin. 
There  are  sins  into  which  a  child  of  God  may  be  surprised.  There  is  the  missing 
of  the  aim  of  the  child  of  God.  There  are  two  features  in  her  confession.  She 
acknowledged  the  sin  to  have  been  against  God.  And  she  threw  the  blame  upon 
herself.  Excuse  mars  confession.  She  did  not  throw  the  blame  on  inward 
corruption.  Some  confess  sin,  but  they  only  confess  it  in  the  general.  If  a  man 
truly  confesses,  he  searches  sin  to  the  root.  Nothing  more  humbles  the  spirit 
than  such  thorough  and  sincere  confession,  (J.  E.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  child 
of  Ood  under  chastisement : — The  consequences  of  national  backsliding  could  only 
be  national  judgments.  This  the  prophet  foresees ;  and  in  the  name  of  the  pious 
remnant,  he  turns  to  God  for  that  hope  and  consolation  which  nothing  on  earth 
can  yield.  As  for  the  chastisement  which  the  Jewish  Church  was  about  to  suffer, 
ehe  is  taught,  in  our  text,  to  use  the  language  of  submission  and  of  hope.  Learn 
from  the  text,  what  are  the  feelings,  what  is  the  behaviour  of  a  child  of  God  under 
affliction.  I.  He  submits  himself  to  God.  Various  are  the  trials  which  the 
people  of  God  are  called  to  endure.  There  is  no  promise  that  they  shall  be  exempt 
from  distressing  circumstances.  Each  one  shares  the  common  sorrows  of  humanity. 
Each  one  has  fdso  sorrows  peculiar  to  himself,  arising  from  his  disposition  and 
circumstances.  Yet,  in  all,  the  real  child  of  God  beholds  God's  hand.  He  knows 
that,  whatever  he  may  have  to  suffer,  it  is  from  the  Lord.  Knowing,  then,  whence 
his  troubles  come,  the  child  of  God  bows  beneath  the  chastisement,  it  may  be 
with  a  keen  feeling  of  their  loss,  or  woe,  but  with  a  patient  submission  to  God's 
will.  II.  Hb  justifies  God.  Pride  may  sometimes  enable  a  man  resolutely  to 
bear  evils  which  cannot  be  avoided.  A  naturally  cheerful  temper,  also,  will 
not  feel  the  burden  of  sorrow  so  heavy  as  it  is  felt  by  a  mind  naturally  anxious 
and  desponding.  But  Christian  submission  is  accompanied  by  a  feeling  which 
mere  cheerfulness  cannot  produce,  and  which  pride  steadily  opposes — a  feeling 
of  conscious  guilt.  Every  grief  is  the  offspring  of  sin.  The  Lord  afflicts  us, 
either  that  we  may  not  forget  our  original  deserts,  as  children  of  wrath  ;  or, 
because  we  have  committed  some  new  transgression  ;  or,  as  a  means  of  correcting 
and  renewing  our  naturally  corrupt  hearts.  The  child  of  God,  therefore,  while  he 
smarts  beneath  the  stroke  of  chastisement,  acknowledges  the  propriety  of  it. 
He  submits,  for  he  knows  that  he  has  deserved  it.  This  is  the  state  of  mind 
which  God  desires  to  behold  in  every  sinner.  This  is  the  very  end  for  which 
earthly  trials  are  sent.  III.  Hopes  in  God.  "  Until  He  plead  my  cause." 
Trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  is  no  less  the  duty  of  a  true  Christian,  than  submission 
to  the  will  of  God,  and  an  acknowledgment  of  His  justice  in  afflicting  us.  The 
child  of  God  puts  his  trust  in  that  very  hand  which  smiteth  him.  Faith  enables 
him  to  see,  that  chastisement,  when  patiently  endured,  is  a  sign  of  his  adoption. 
Being  assured  of  this,  he  can  trust  his  Father's  kind  affection  for  removing  the 
trial  in  due  time.  Thus  doth  the  afflicted  child  of  God  "  lean  only  upon  the 
hope  of  His  heavenly  grace."  Worldly  sorrows  thus  become  light  and  tolerable, 
even  when  they  are  manifestly  the  consequences  of  sin.  As  I  have  cautioned 
you  against  a  merely  proud  submission  to  God,  and  against  an  impenitent  con- 
fession of  your  sinfulness,  let  me  also  warn  you  against  a  presumptuous  hope  of 
God's  mercy.  God  is  a  "  jealous "  God.  There  is  a  hope  which  will  prove  at 
last  no  better  than  a  vain  presumption :  and  the  Bible  does  not  leave  us  in  doubt 
as  to  what  that  hope  is.  It  is  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite.  It  is  the  hope  of  the 
careless,  thoughtless  sinner,  who  talks  loudly  about  God's  mercy.  There  is  but 
one  way  in  which  you  are  authorised  to  hope  in  God.  Approach  Him  with  deep 
and  heartfelt  penitence  ;  abhor  and  forsake  every  sin ;  and  then  your  confidence 
in  Him  will  stand  on  a  secure  foundation.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Cvlture  under 
trial : — Transfer  this  language  from  the  lips  of  the  Church  to  the  lips  of  the 
individual  Christian,  and  consider  it  as  an  indication  of  a  spirit  which  needs  to 
be  more  largely  cultivated.  I.  Determination  to  be  cultured  under  trial. 
"  I  wiU  bear,  &c.  .  .  .  against  Him."  Two  kinds  of  indignation  spoken  of  in 
Scripture.     Of  one  it  is  said,  "  Who  can  stand  before  His  indignation  ?  "     Of  the 


CHAP.  VII.]  MIOAH.  109 

other  the  Church  says,  "  I  will  bear  it."  The  one,  fiery  wrath  of  an  offended 
King  ;  the  other,  chastening  displeasure  of  a  loving  Father.  The  one,  hot  anger, 
which  utterly  consumes ;  the  other,  loving  correction,  which  melts,  refines,  and 
purifies.  While  before  one  none  can  stand,  before  the  other,  that  we  may  be 
partakers  of  His  holiness,  God  yearns  that  we  may  bow.  When  the  Christian 
sees  chastening  displeasure  issuing  from  a  Father's  wounded  love,  he  says, 
"I  wiU  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord."  But  something  more.  "  Because  I 
have  sinned."  I  will  bear  it,  because  it  is  less  than  I  deserve ;  because  I  know 
who  sends  it,  and  the  object  He  has  in  view.  Illustrate  Shimei's  conduct,  and 
David's  treatment  of  him  (2  Sam.  xvi.  5-14).  Recollect  that  God's  indigna- 
tion may  fall  on  us  through  others,  or  may  come  direct  from  Him.  II.  Limit 
OF  BNDUBANCB  TO  BE  PEOPOSBD.  "  Until  He  plead  my  cause,  and  execute  judg- 
ment for  me."  In  the  trials  which  the  Church  had  schooled  herself  to  bear, 
there  had  been  much  of  harshness,  injustice,  and  wrong.  God  permits  others  to 
afflict  us,  whose  purpose  may  be  different  to  His  own.  Though  the  wrath  of 
man  is  hatefvd,  God  makes  it  subservient  to  His  wise  purposes,  and  restrains  its 
exercise.  In  every  case  of  this  kind,  we  should  distinguish  between  man's  purpose 
and  God's  purpose,  or  patience  is  beyond  our  reach.  Illustrate  Joseph  in  Egypt ; 
and  Israel  in  Egypt.  If  then,  besides  looking  at  man's  purpose,  we  will  train 
ourselves  to  look  at  God's  purpose,  and  also  for  Grod's  limit,  we  shall  be  able  to 
appropriate  the  language  of  the  text,  and  so  follow  the  example  of  Christ,  who, 
under  trial,  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously.  III.  Expres- 
sion OP  CONPIDENCE  TO  BE  MAINTAINED.  "  He  wiU  bring  me  forth  .  .  .  light  .  .  . 
righteousness."  Observe  the  meaning  of  the  language.  Obviously  figurative  : 
sorrow,  trouble,  desolation  (whether  the  temporal  or  spiritual)  continually  spoken 
of  as  "  darkness,"  and  the  reverse  as  "  light."  But,  when  the  proper  season 
comes,  God  fulfils  His  promise  to  make  darkness  light  before  His  servants,  by 
turning  doubt  into  confidence,  affliction  into  prosperity,  sorrow  into  joy ;  and 
He  brings  them  forth  into  the  light  by  removing  their  burdens,  making  clear 
their  way,  vindicating  them  from  false  charges,  and  revealing,  at  least  in  some 
measure,  the  reason  and  benefit  of  their  grief.     {W.  D.  J.  Straton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  In  the  day  that  thy  walls  are  to  be  built.  —  The  good 
time  coming : — I.  It  will  be  a  time  for  bebuilding  the  ruined.  "  In  the  day 
that  thy  walls  are  to  be  built."  The  walls  of  Jerusalem  are  referred  to — the 
walls  of  fortification,  protection,  these  are  to  be  rebuilt.  There  is,  however, 
a  more  important  rebuilding  than  this — a  rebuilding  that  is  going  on,  and  will 
go  on,  imtil  the  great  moral  city  shall  be  complete.  1.  The  human  soul  is  a  build- 
ing ;  it  is  a  temple,  a  "  spiritual  house  "  reared  as  a  residence  for  the  Eternal. 
It  is  "  a  city  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  2.  The  human  soul  is  a  building 
in  ruins.  The  walls  are  broken  down ;  its  columns,  arches,  roof,  rooms,  all  in 
ruins.  3.  The  himian  soul  is  a  building  to  be  rebuilt.  Christ  is  to  be  the  foimdation 
stone,  &c.  This  rebuilding  is  going  on  according  to  a  plan  of  the  Great  Moral 
Architect ;  is  being  worked  out  by  agents  that  know  nothing  of  the  plan.  11.  It 
will  be  a  time  for  BEGATHERnrQ  the  scattered.  "  In  that  day  also  He  shall 
come  even  to  thee  from  Assyria,  and  from  the  fortified  cities,  and  from  the  for- 
tresses even  to  the  river,  and  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  moimtain  to  luoimtain." 
The  humsm  family,  which  heaven  intended  to  live  as  one  grand  brotherhood, 
has  been  riven  into  moral  sections,  antagonistic  to  each  other,  and  scattered  all 
over  the  world.  The  time  will  oome  when  they  shall  be  gathered  together,  not, 
of  course,  in  a  local  sense,  but  in  a  spiritual — in  unity  of  sentiment,  sympathy, 
aim,  soul.  All  shall  be  one  in  Christ.  They  wiU  be  gathered  in  spirit  together 
from  the  four  winds  of  heaven.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  13.  For  the  fruit  of  their  doings.  —  Man's  ruin  the  fruit  of  his 
oum  conduct : — Assuming  it  to  be  a  fact  that  man's  ruin  is  evermore  the  fruit 
of  his  own  conduct,  three  things  must  follow — I.  That  his  misery  will  be 
identified  with  eemoese.  Morally  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  ascribe  his 
ruin  to  his  organisation,  to  circumstances,  or  to  any  force  over  which  he  has  no 
control.  He  must  feel  that  he  has  brought  it  on  himself.  II.  That  in  his  suffer- 
ings HE  must  vindicate  THE  DiviNE  CHAEACTEE.  "  Just  and  right  art  Thou," 
&c.  As  fruit  answers  to  seed,  as  echoes  to  sound,  their  calamities  answer  to 
their  conduct.  III.  That  his  salvation  from  ruin  requires  a  change  of 
LIFE.     IV.  That  Christianity  is  the  only  system  that  can  meet  his  case. 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

The  mission  of  Christianity  is  to  change  the  heart,  to  renew  the  life,  and  effect 
a  spiritual  reformation.  This  it  is  designed  to  do,  this  it  is  fitted  to  do ;  and 
no  other  system  on  earth  is  capable  of  accomplishing  this  work.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  14.  Feed  Thy  people  with  Thy  rod,  the  flock  of  Thine  heritage,  wMcli 
dwell  solitarily  in  the  wood,  in  the  midst  of  Carmel :  let  them  feed  in  Bashan 
and  Gilead,  as  in  the  days  of  old. — Christ's  pastoral  care : — The  prophet  gives 
an  accomit  of  the  state  of  the  professing,  visible  Church,  which  he  looks 
upon  to  be  like  unto  a  field  or  vineyard  after  the  harvest  is  past  and  the 
vintage  over.  God  never  leaves  a  professing  Church  to  be  a  wilderness, 
unless  upon  the  utmost  apostasy ;  but  He  many  times  leaves  them  to  be  as  a 
field  after  harvest,  or  a  vineyard  after  the  vintage.  He  takes  down  the  hedge, 
He  suffers  the  wild  beasts  to  come  in,  lets  persons  spoil  at  their  pleasure ;  but 
there  will  come  a  time  of  culture  again,  when  He  will  have  fruit  brought  forth 
to  His  praise.  The  prophet  says  that  those  who  were  good  were  very  few ;  and 
that  those  who  were  evil  were  very  bad.  When  this  is  the  condition,  inevitable 
destruction  lies  at  the  door  of  that  place  or  nation.  If  either  of  these  be  otherwise, 
there  is  yet  hope.  This  being  the  state  and  condition  of  the  people  of  the  land, 
the  prophet  makes  in  the  name  of  the  Chiu'ch  a  threefold  application  of  himself — 
1.  To  God.  "  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord."  2.  To  her  enemies.  Who  is  this  enemy  ? 
Wherein  did  she  show  her  enmity  ?  3.  To  himself.  "  I  will  bear  the  indig- 
nation," &c.  Here  is  a  very  becoming  frame  under  the  present  state  of  affliction. 
In  this  state  and  condition,  the  prophet  puts  up  this  request,  "  Feed  Thy  people 
with  Thy  rod."  In  these  words  we  have — I.  What  is  prayed  for.  The  rod 
is  the  sign  of  the  shepherd.  Three  things  in  the  feeding  of  God's  people — 1.  That 
God  would  supply  their  spiritual  and  temporal  wants.  2.  That  God,  in  that 
state  which  is  coming  upon  them,  would  give  them  pledges,  singular  pledges 
of  His  own  tenderness  and  love.  3.  By  "  feeding  "  is  intended  rule,  protection, 
deliverance.  The  shepherd  has  to  preserve  his  flock  from  all  evil.  II.  The 
ARGUMENTS  OF  FAITH  TO  BE  PLEADED  IN  THIS  CASE.  1.  They  Were  the  people 
of  God  —  (1)  Upon  election.  (2)  By  purchase  and  acquisition.  (3)  By 
covenant.  2.  They  were  "  the  flock  of  Thine  heritage."  They  are  a  "  flock." 
And  as  such  they  are  helpless,  harmless,  useful — useful,  because  a  secret  blessing 
goes  with  them  ;  by  reason  of  their  good  example ;  and  by  reason  of  their 
industry.  They  are  "  the  flock  of  God's  heritage."  As  such,  if  God  take  not 
care  of  it,  no  one  else  will.  It  is  the  heritage  of  Him  whom  the  whole  world  looks 
upon  as  their  greatest  enemy.  3.  The  third  argument  is  taken  from  their  state 
and  condition.  The  first  argument  pleads  God's  glory.  His  love  and  faithfulness. 
The  second  pleads  God's  interest.  The  third  pleads  God's  pity  and  compassion. 
They  dwell  "  solitarily,"  that  is  disconsolately.  "  In  a  wood,"  that  is,  in  a  dark 
and  entangled  condition.  {J.  Owen,  D.D.)  A  prayer: — This  prayer  recog- 
nises three  things.  I.  An  interesting  relation  betweiIn  God  and  His  people. 
Flock  and  Shepherd.  1.  He  is  the  absolute  Owner  of  the  flock.  "  All  souls 
are  Mine."  2.  He  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  flock.  3.  He  has  an  infinite 
love  for  the  flock.     4.  He  has  abundant  supplies  for  the  flock.     II.  The  trying 

CONDITION    IN    which    God'S    PEOPLE    ARE    SOMETIMES    FOUND.       "  Which    dwell 

solitarily  in  the  wood,  in  the  midst  of  Carmel."  The  primary  reference  is  to 
their  captivity  in  Babylon.  1.  It  is  caused  by  self.  Souls  have  not  been  driven 
away  into  moral  captivity.  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  2.  It  is 
imdeliverable  by  self.  No  soul  ever  found  its  way  back  to  God  by  its  own  unaided 
efforts  ;  hence  Christ  came  to  "  seek  and  to  save  the  lost."  III.  The  importance 
OF  RESTORATION  TO  FORMER  ENJOYMENTS.  "  Let  them  feed  in  Bashan  and  Gilead, 
as  in  the  days  of  old."  The  regions  of  Bashan  and  Gilead,  on  the  east  of  the 
Jordan,  were  celebrated  for  their  rich  pasturage,  and  on  this  account  were  chosen 
by  the  tribes  of  Reuben  and  Gad  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  (Numb.  xii. ; 
Deut.  iii.  17).  Morally,  the  great  need  of  man  is  the  restoration  of  normal  rights, 
normal  virtues,  normal  enjoyments.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.    18.    Who    is    a    God    like    unto    Thee,    that    pardoneth    iniquity? — 

The  grace  of  God  to  sinners  : — Micah  and  Isaiah  were  contemporaries.  They 
lived  in  the  same  land,  they  lived  in  the  same  city  ;  they  ministered,  we  may 
say,  to  the  same  congregation,  and  they  preached  the  same  Gospel.  They  were 
very  unlike-  in  some  respects,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  remnants  of  their 
ministry  they  have  left  behind  them.     Isaiah  was,  perhaps,  the  most  eloquent 


CHAP.  VII.]  MICAH.  Ill 

man  that  God  ever  made,  and  He  made  him  for  the  most  splendid  of  service. 
Long  ago,  Jerome,  the  great  Latin  scholar,  in  translating  into  the  Vulgate  these 
books,  said  of  Isaiah  that  he  was  the  evangelical  prophet,  and  ever  since  that 
day  the  Church  of  Christ  in  all  her  branches  has  subscribed  to  that  striking 
description  of  Isaiah.  Micah,  again,  would  seem  to  be  a  man  of  different  kind, 
with  a  full  equipment  of  spiritual  experience.  His  sayings  are  short  and  penetrat- 
ing ;  not  so  captiv^ating  to  the  mind,  it  may  be,  as  Isaiah  s  eloquence,  but  piercing 
and  penetrating  to  the  understanding  and  conscience  and  heart  of  all  who  heard 
him.  We  have  an  epitome  of  his  ministry  in  these  closing  verses,  a  summary 
of  his  life-long  service  of  God  and  Jerusalem.  "  Who  is  a  God,"  he  says,  "  like 
unto  Thee  ?  "  He  begins  to  speak  to  the  people,  but  forgets  the  people  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  His  glorious  grace,  and  he  makes  his  sermon  begin  with  a 
doxology,  a  cry  of  wonder,  an  astonishment  at  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  not  written, 
but  I  can  read  it — I  am  as  sure  of  it  as  if  it  had  been  written — that  many  a  time 
before  he  exclaimed,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ?  "  he  said,  "  Who  is  a 
sinner  like  unto  me  ?  "  No  man  ever  is  amazed  at  the  grace  of  God  till  he  is 
confounded  with  his  own  sin.  There  is  a  thrill  of  astonishment  and  amazement 
at  the  grace  of  God  that  has  borne  with  him  for  so  long  and  fruitless  a  ministry 
and  so  sinful  and  imsanctified  a  life.  There  may  be  an  allusion,  as  allusions 
run  up  and  down  all  the  prophets,  comparing  the  God  of  Israel  with  the  gods 
of  the  nations  round  about.  The  form  of  the  exclamation  is,  no  doubt,  taken 
from  that  which  was  a  continual  debate  between  the  prophets  of  Israel  and  false 
prophets  and  false  gods  of  the  nations  roxmd  about.  They  had  their  gods — he 
admits  that  in  a  kind  of  way  for  argument's  sake — but  he  turns  and  says,  "  Who 
is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ?  "  What  priest  of  Baal  or  Ashtoreth  has  a  god  like 
unto  the  prophet  Micah  ?  They  had  their  gods  of  war  and  their  gods  of  wine ; 
gods  of  love,  gods  of  the  woods,  gods  of  the  streams,  gods  of  the  seas,  gods  of 
the  storm-clouds ;  but  never  did  any  prophet  outside  of  Israel  say,  "  Our  God 
pardoneth  iniquity."  The  thing  that  astonishes  him  is  that  God  forgives  iniquity. 
"  He  pardoneth  iniquity."  Rabbi  Adam  Duncan,  the  great  Hebrew  professor, 
a  man  of  genius  and  a  saint,  if  there  has  been  one  in  our  day  in  Scotland,  one 
day  was  tottering  along  the  street  to  his  class.  A  wag  of  a  fellow  came  out  of 
the  door  of  one  of  the  clubs  in  Edinburgh,  and  thought  he  would  have  a  joke 
out  of  the  old  Doctor,  a  story  to  tell.  "  Well,  Doctor,  any  news  the  day  ?  " 
"  Oh,  great  news,"  says  the  Doctor,  with  his  blazing  eyes  ;  "  great  news,  sir." 
It  staggered  the  youngster.  He  said,  "  What  is  it.  Doctor  ?  "  He  thought  it 
was  some  revolution,  some  tremendous  thing  that  bad  not  come  to  their  ears  in 
the  club  yet.  But,  says  the  Doctor,  laying  his  hand  on  the  youth's  shoulder, 
"  the  blood  of  Christ  still  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  There  is  grace  in  the  grammar. 
He  pardoneth  iniquity.  He  does  it  now.  The  school-boy  will  tell  you  this  is 
the  present  tense.  It  is  not  that  He  pardoned  in  Micah 's  day,  but  His  grace  is 
dried  up  this  day ;  or  will  pardon  some  time  again  when  there  is  more  prayer 
and  preparation  and  faith  ;  but  He  pardons  now — He  pardons  here.  This  is 
the  joy  of  the  Gospel ;  this  makes  it  fresh  every  morning ;  this  makes  every 
minister  experimental  and  autobiographical,  because  he  can  say,  like  Rabbi 
Duncan,  "  Come  all  ye  people,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  God  has  done  for  my  soul 
this  very  morning ;  He  pardoneth  iniquity — things  you  would  rather  drown 
yourself  than  hear  it  ever  said  you  had  done  ;  He  pardoneth  it,  and  you  will  go 
home  clapping  yowi  hands,  and  saying,  '  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ?  '  "  We 
need  many  things,  but  first  pardon.  If  you  went  into  your  prison  and  some 
man  lay  waiting  execution,  and  you  said,  "  What  can  I  do  for  you,  my  man  ? 
I  have  influence  with  the  magistrates,  the  Government,  the  King — what  can 
I  do  ?  "  He  would  reply,  "  Get  the  rope  off  my  neck,  get  that  scaffold  taken 
away,  and  then  there  may  be  other  things  you  can  do  ;  but  get  my  pardon,  and 
get  it  quick."  And  therefore  it  is  in  the  forefront  of  the  message  to  you  and 
me,  when  we  wakened  this  morning.  There  is  a  note  of  the  Passover  there. 
He  passe th  by,  He  does  not  see  it.  He  does  not  want  to  see  it.  "  He  retaineth 
not  His  anger  for  ever."  He  is  angry,  mind  you.  He  is  maybe  very  angry 
with  you  here  this  morning.  I  am  quoting  Goodwin,  but  I  am  in  a  good  atmo- 
sphere. He  says  :  "  The  conscience  is  a  little  window  in  the  soul  through  which 
God  throws  in  a  coal  of  hell-fire  to  let  a  man  taste  beforehand  what  it  will  be  to 
make  his  bed  in  hell."  You  say,  some  fine,  young  gentleman,  that  there  is  no 
fire  in  hell.  Wait  and  see  !  Says  Goodwin  again  :  Hell  is  not  culinary  fire." 
There  were  sceptics  in  his  day,  too,  and  he  said :    "  Oh,  no,  not  kitchen  fir©  j 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

quite  right.  You  know  better  than  the  apostles  and  prophets  and  the  Master 
Himself.  It  is  not  culinary  fire — that  could  be  put  out.  But  I  will  tell  you 
what  cannot  be  put  out,  remorse."  But  though  He  is  angry  for  a  little  season. 
He  delighteth  in  mercy.  It  is  worth  travelling  across  the  country  just  to  say 
that  to  a  feUow-sinner.  Our  Maker  and  Judge  and  Redeemer,  He  delighteth 
in  mercy.  It  is  never  said  He  delighteth  in  anger.  It  is  against  His  nature, 
but  mercy  is  His  very  innermost  nature.  If  the  devil  casts  my  sins  in  my  teeth, 
I  will  say,  "  Yes,  it  is  ail  true,  and  you  cannot  tell  the  half  of  it,  but  I  have  to  do 
with  One  who  delighteth  in  mercy."  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  He  enjoys 
it,  it  is  His  nature,  and  you  can  satisfy  His  mercy  as,  maybe,  no  one  else  can. 
There  may  be  some  sin  in  your  case  that  makes  you  a  peculiar  sinner,  and  makes 
you  a  peculiar  ornament  to  the  grace  of  God  to  all  eternity.  "  He  will  turn  again." 
Has  He  left  you  ?  Have  you  sinned  away  the  peace  of  God  out  of  your  conscience  ? 
But  He  will  turn  again.  He  is,  maybe,  turning  this  moment.  "  He  will  have 
compassion."  Samuel  Rutherford  was  once  at  the  Communion  season  talking 
to  the  elders  after  the  people  were  away,  and  said,  "  Now,  we  have  been  preaching 
about  justification  to-day;  whether  do  you  think  you  will  be  more  thankful 
in  heaven  for  justification  or  sanctification  ?  "  None  of  them  spoke  ;  then  an 
old  man  said,  '  Mr.  Samuel,  we'll  thank  Him  for  baith."  So  we  will  thank  Him, 
some  of  us,  "for  baith,"  for  a  pardon  that  passeth  all  understanding,  and  for  a 
sanctification  of  sinful  hearts  rotten  to  the  core  and  running  over  with  all  manner 
of  sin.  {A,  Whyte,  D.D.)  Pecviiarities  in  God's  pardoning  : — God  regards  you, 
and  the  Bible  describes  you  as  sinners ;  and  so  you  are.  Sinners  condemned,  and 
needing  pardon  ;  for  condemnation  follows  sin  as  a  matter  of  course.  When  a  man 
has  sinned  ha  must  receive  a  pardon,  or  suffer  the  penalty.  One  great  object  of 
revelation  b  to  tell  you  that  you  may  be  pardoned.  Revelation  declares  the 
ground,  the  manner,  the  conditions  of  pardon.  What  is  there  peculiar  and 
distinguishing  in  God's  exercise  of  pardon  ?  There  are  not  many  points  in  which 
creatures  resemble  God.  The  attributes  and  ways  of  creatures  are  for  the  most 
part  in  contrast  to  those  of  God.  In  nothing  is  God  more  unlike  other  beings 
than  in  pardoning.  I.  No  being  pardons  with  such  honour  to  the  law  broken, 
and  with  such  security  to  the  government  offended,  as  God.  2.  No  one  pardons 
at  such  an  expense  to  Himself  as  God  does.  3.  No  one  pardons  with  such  a  good 
effect  on  the  sinner  pardoned.  4.  No  one  pardons  so  many  as  Grod.  5.  God  also 
pardons  many  sins  of  each  sinner.  Men's  pardonings  are  limited  and  restrained. 
He  abundantly  pardons.  6.  Notice  the  peculiar  character  of  the  sins  which  God 
pardons.  7.  He  forgets  as  well  as  forgives.  8.  He  makes  provision  for  the 
pardon  of  future  sins.  9.  God  does  more  than  pardon  ;  He  justifies,  adopts, 
sanctifies,  and  eventually  glorifies  us.  10.  God  pardcns  on  the  most  reasonable 
conditions.  11.  These  very  conditions  of  pardon  God  fulfils  in  us.  He  gives  us 
repentance,  and  our  faith  is  the  gift  of  God.  {W.  Nt^ins,  D.D.)  Unparalleled 
pardon  : — In  the  Gospel  of  our  salvation,  all  God's  moral  perfections  are  developed 
and  glorified.  No  one  of  them  is  sacrificed  to  another,  nor  eclipsed  by  another's 
splendour.  Each  has  its  own  special  office,  but  freely  accords  their  claims  to  all 
the  rest.  But  there  is  one  of  these  perfections  on  which  the  sacred  writers  dwell 
with  peculiar  pleasure — mercy,  the  first  need  of  the  fallen,  the  everlasting  song 
of  the  redeemed.  It  is  the  theme  of  the  Old  Testament  prophecy,  and  the  charm 
of  the  New  Testament  history.  In  this  text  the  prophet  asserts,  not  merely 
that  God  is  merciful,  but  that  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  Develop  the  thought 
of  the  peculiarity  of  the  Divine  mercy  in  the  forgiveness  of  human  guilt.  I.  Who 
PAKDONBTH  AT  30  QEKAT  A  COST  ?  Take  parable  of  sending  only  son  to  the 
rebellious  husbandman.  The  affection  of  a  father  for  an  only  son,  though  the  best 
that  human  relations  can  fiurnish,  is  a  poor  emblem  of  God's  ineffable  delight  in 
His  co-equal  and  co-eternal  Beloved.  And  from  the  first  He  foresaw  what  His 
Son  must  suffer.  II.  Who  pardoneth  on  so  easy  a  condition  ?  Offenders 
are  frequently  forgiven  in  consideration  only  of  some  valuable  service  rendered. 
Many  imagine  that  they  can  merit  Divine  mercy  by  their  moral  virtues.  It  is  a 
fatal  delusion,  Man  is  a  creature.  His  Creator  has  the  unquestionable  right  to 
all  he  is,  and  all  he  has.  When  the  creature  has  done  his  utmost,  he  is  still  an 
unprofitable  servant.  And  man  Ls  a  fallen  and  guilty  creature.  As  such,  he  is 
already  in  arrears  with  God.  His  perfect  obedience  being  always  due,  he  can 
never  make  up  any  deficiencies.  There  is  no  possibility  of  doing  anything  beyond 
our  bounden  duty,  to  be  set  down  to  our  credit  over  against  any  record  of  former 
delinquency.     Moreover,  the  fallen  creature  cannot  keep  the  Divine  law,  without 


CHAP,  vn.] 


MIGAH.  113 


the  grace  of  its  Divine  Author— His  prevenient  grace  to  prepare  the  way— His 
co-operative  grace  to  assist  the  effort.     Not  through  any  worthiness  of  ovx  owii 
can  we  hope  for  absolution.     What  is  the  condition  of  a  sinner's  pardon  ?     Simple 
faith  in  Christ.     What  is  the  justifying  faith  ?     It  is  accepting  the  record  which 
God  hath  gi  en  of  His  Son,  and  relying  upon  that  Son's  mediatorial  merit  with  an 
undoubting  trust.     It  is  receiving  Christ  as  the  one  only  suitable  and  sufi&cient 
Saviour,  and  thus  appropriating  His  purchased  and  proffered  salvation.     It  is 
quite  conceivable  that  other  and  altogether  different  conditions  might  have  been 
imposed.     But  what  other  could  have  been  so  merciful  in  God,  so  suitable  to 
sinners,  and  so  easy  of   performance  as  this  ?     III.  Who  pardonbth  with  SO 
coRDtAi  A  UBBBAUTY  ?     What  heathen  divinity  ?     What  human  government  ? 
What  prince  or  potentate  ?     Often,  in  the  exercise  of  human  clemency,  the  rich 
and  the  powerful  are  preferred  to  offenders  of  inferior  rank;  and  generally,  small 
offences  are  more  readily  forgiven  than  greater.     But  God  pardoneth  without 
partiality,  and  without  respect  of  persons.     Alike,  to  His  all-forgivmg  love,  is 
the  debt  of  fifty  pence,  and  the  debt  of  five  hundred.     Though  men  may  pardon 
a  second  or  third  offence,  they  are  not  likely  to  pardon  the  same  offence  in  its 
frequent  repetition.     But  God  pardoneth  a  thousand  times,  pardoneth  the  same 
crime  a  thousand  times  committed.     Monarchs  and  governors  require  to  be 
petitioned  and  importuned  for  mercy :  often  it  is  necessary  that  others  with  their 
intercessions  should  enforce  the  plea  of  the  offender,  and  even  thus  pardon  is 
obtained  with  great  difficulty,  and  after  long  delay.     But  God  waiteth  to  be 
gracious,  hasteth  to  be  merciful,  more  ready  to  forgive  than  sinners  are  to  be 
forgiven.     Men  pardon  one  offence  out  of  many,  and  leave  the  rest  for  punish- 
ment ;  or  they  forgive,  but  never  forget.     But  God  pardons  all  offences  at  once, 
and  blots  them  from  His  memory  for  ever.     You  may  pardon  the  offender,  without 
giving  him  any  intimation  of  the  fact.     But  God  absolves  when  He  forgives. 
Such  is  the  mercy  of  God   in  the  forgiveness   of  human  guilt— rich  beyond 
all  parallel   in  earth   or   heaven— admirable  beyond   all  expression  of  men  or 
angels.     Then  who  can  despair  ?     Who  can  even  doubt  T    (J.  Cross,  D.D.,  LL.D.) 
A  pardoning  God  :—ln  this  marvellous   and   mysterious  world  alone  is  mercy 
harmonised  with  justice,  and  it  is  manifested  that  "  there  is  forgiveness  with  God 
that  He  may  be  feared."     None  pardons  like  God.     This  is  the  sublime  import 
of  the  text.     I.  None  pardons  so  freely  as  God.     He  acts  self-prompted,  self- 
guided.     Free  must  His  salvation  be,  for  it  was  devised  before  earth  began.     There 
is  no  other  fountain-head  whence  the  tide  of  boundless  love  gushes  forth  to  a 
ruined  race.     Will  it  be  thought  any  let  or  bar  to  the  freedom  of  God's  sovereign 
love  in  our  salvation,  that  His  love  flowed  to  us  through  the  channel  of  His  own 
Son  crucified  for  us,  bringing  to  us  pardon  and  forgiveness  ?     11.  None  pardons 
so  graciously  as  God.     Freely  as  He  has  prepared  forgiveness,  so  freely  does 
He  dispense  forgiveness.     If  we  think  to  purchase  it  with  a  price,  God  will  say 
unto  us,  "  Thy  money  perish  with  thee.'^     It  costs  the  poor  suppliant  smner 
nothing  but  acceptance, — nothing  but  simple,  humble,  self-abandoning  reception. 
III.  None  pardons  so  promptly  as  He.     God's  promptness  in  forgiving  is  a 
striking  peculiarity  which  ought  not  to  be  passed  over.     '  Before  they  ask,  I  will 
answer."     This  is  the  rule  of  God's  dealing.     IV.  None  pardons  so  perpectly  as 
God  does.     It  is  a  pardon  that  He  represents  as  so  absolute  that  it  utterly  puts 
away  all  that  is  past  as  if  it  never  had  been.     The  sinner  is  pardoned  completely, 
accepted  completely,  in  the  very  righteousness  of  God — the  Divine  righteousness 
wrought  out  by  Immanuel,  in  our  nature,  for  us,  and  imputed  to  us  when  we 
believe  in  Him.     V.  None  pardons  so  consistently  and  majestically  as 
God  does.     "  A  God  all  mercy  were  a  God  vmjust."     God  might  cease  to  be, 
rather  than  cease  to  be  just.     VI.  None  pardons  so  effectually  as  God  does. 
Then  "  shall  we  sin  in  order  that  grace  may  abound  "  ?     Nothing  slays  the  carnal 
mind  in  us  like  sovereign  grace.     (Hiigh  Stowell,  M.A.)        The  Lord's  pardoning 
mercy  : — The  ground  foundation  of  all  our  hope  and  comfort,  in  our  restoration 
after  our  distresses,  is  the  Lord's  pardoning  mercy.     "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto 
Thee  ?  "     This   abrupt   and   passionate   admiration   of  God's  pardoning  mercy 
showeth  that  all  these  promises  had  their  rise  there.     There  were  great  difficulties 
to  be  overcome  before  these  promises  could  take  place  ;  but  the  greatest  difficulty 
and  obstruction  lay  in  their  sins.     And  the  prophet  wondreth  rnore  at  His  grace 
subduing  sin,  than  at  His  power  overcoming  difficulties.     1.  Sin  is  the  greatest 
obstacle.     Take  that  out  of  the  way,  and  then  mercies  come  freely  from  God. 
If  there  be  any  restraint  of  God's  blessing,  it  is  because  of  man's  sm.     2.  Sin  is 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

the  cause  of  all  our  evils,  as  well  as  it  stoppeth  and  hindereth  our  mercies.  Sin 
being  pardoned,  the  cause  of  the  misery  is  removed,  and  the  cause  being  removed, 
the  effect  ceaseth.  3.  Outward  mercies,  were  they  never  so  great  and  full,  would 
never  yield  any  true  satisfaction,  unless  they  be  joined  with  reconciliation  with 
God,  and  pardon  of  sin.  No  solid  happiness  till  pardon.  Use  this  to  reprove — 
(1)  Them  that  look  not  after  pardon  of  sin  in  their  distresses,  but  temporal  blessings 
in  the  first  place.  (2)  Those  that  hope  to  remove  evil  either  by  sinful  means,  or 
b  n  itural  means,  without  being  reconciled  to  God.  (3)  Those  that,  lying  under 
the  fruits  of  sin,  have  not  a  heart  to  seek  their  recovery  from  the  Lord's  pardoning 
mercy.  Use  this — 4.  To  instruct  us,  what  should  most  affect  our  hearts.  Not 
so  much  Grod's  acts  of  power,  as  His  acts  of  grace.  Doctrine — That  the  chief 
glory  of  the  true  God  consisteth  in  the  pardon  of  sins,  wherein  there  is  none  like 
Him.  Evidence  this  by  these  considerations — 1.  We  have  not  a  true  apprehension 
of  God,  till  we  see  Him  singular  and  matchless  in  excellency,  and  do  give  Him  a 
distinct  and  separate  honom:,  far  above  all  other  things  which  are  in  the  world. 
2.  Among  all  His  excellences.  His  pardoning  mercy  shineth  forth  most  con- 
spicuously in  the  true  religion,  and  is  represented  with  such  advantages  as  cannot 
be  foimd  elsewhere.  The  business  of  a  religion  is  to  provide  sufficiently  for  two 
things  ;  to  provide  a  suitable  happiness  for  mankind,  and  a  sufficient  means  for 
the  expiation  of  the  guilt  of  sin.  Till  there  be  a  due  course  taken  for  the  pardon 
of  sin,  there  is  no  provision  made  for  establishment,  either  of  the  creature's  comfort 
or  duty.  Natural  light  giveth  some  evidence  of  this  truth,  that  God  is  placable. 
The  Gentiles  were  all  of  this  opinion,  that  their  gods  were  inclined  to  pardon. 
Thence  came  all  their  sacrifices  and  expiations.  They  thought  their  gods  would 
be  propitious  to  sinners,  if  they  did  come  humbly  and  ask  pardon.  God's  com- 
manding us  to  forgive  one  another  is  an  argument  that  mercy  and  forgiveness 
are  pleasing  to  God.  In  the  Christian  religion  all  things  are  provided  for  which 
are  necessary  to  establish  a  regular  hope  of  pardon.  1.  There  is  full  satisfaction 
given  to  Divine  justice,  and  the  foundation  laid  for  pardon  in  the  death  of  Christ. 
2.  We  have  privileges  offered  to  us  by  a  sure  covenant  in  Christ's  name.  3.  It  is 
dispensed  upon  rational  terms,  such  as  faith  and  repentance.  4.  In  the  manner 
of  dispensing  forgiveness.  God  doth  it  in  a  free,  full,  and  universal  remission 
of  ovu:  sins.  It  is  a  free  pardon.  It  is  not  given  without  ovir  desiring,  but  it  is 
without  OMi  deserving.  God  doth  it  for  His  name's  sake,  pitying  our  misery, 
and  for  the  glory  of  His  own  mercy.  And  there  is  no  renovation  of  any  one  sin, 
but  that  sin  for  which  men  will  not  ask  pardon.  Application — 1.  Information. 
To  show  us  the  excellency  of  the  Christian  religion  above  other  religions  in  the 
world ;  because  it  discovereth  pardon  of  sins  upon  such  terms  as  may  be  most 
commodious  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  satisfactory  to  our  souls.  The  heathen 
were  mightily  perplexed  about  the  terms,  how  God  might  dispense  it  with  honour, 
and  man  receive  it  with  comfort.  Somewhat  they  conceived  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  but  they  could  not  apprehend  Him  reconciled  to  the  sinner,  without  debasing 
His  holiness.  2.  To  put  us  upon  self-reflection.  Do  we  entertain  this  offered 
pardon  as  such  a  singular  thing  deserves  ?  What  impressions  should  it  leave 
upon  us  ?  1.  The  sense  of  God's  glorious  grace  in  pardoning,  should  work  in  us  a 
great  love  to  God,  and  commend  and  endear  Him  to  our  hearts.  2.  Where  it  is 
rightly  entertained,  it  breedeth  admiring  thoughts.  Everything  about  God  is 
marvellous,  but  especially  His  mercy.  3.  It  breedeth  a  reverence  of  God.  That 
sense  of  pardon  which  worketh  no  reverence,  but  rather  a  contempt  and  common- 
ness of  spirit  in  all  our  transactions  with  God,  is  justly  to  be  suspected.  4.  It 
confirmeth  us  in  the  true  religion.  Carnal  comforts  tickle  the  senses.  False 
religions  leave  us  in  darkness  and  perplexity.  But  the  grace  of  Christ  truly  pro- 
pounded, soon  brings  ease  and  peace.  5.  It  takes  off  the  heart  from  other  things, 
and  brings  us  back  from  the  flesh  to  God.  6.  It  giveth  us  strength  and  encoiu-age- 
ment  to  new  obedience.  7.  It  melteth  us  into  the  forgiveness  of  others.  We 
press  you  to  admire  the  grace  of  God  in  the  pardon  of  sins.  It  is  a  necessary 
mercy :  a  great  mercy.  This  truth  should  refresh  the  weary,  and  make  glad 
the  mournful  soul.  [T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  pardoning  God : — How  is  God 
magnified  in  pardoning  sin  ?  I.  In  the  pardon  of  sin,  we  see  a  manifestation 
OF  THE  Divine  sovereionty.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  God  to  give  law.  It  is 
equally,  and  on  the  same  grounds,  the  prerogative  of  God  to  forgive  the  breach  of 
law.  Hence  the  Jews  accused  Christ  of  blasphemy,  &c.  Human  forgiveness 
does  not  affect  guilt.     Divine  majesty  appears,  then,  in  forgiving.     II.  In  the 

PARDON    OF   sin,    we   SEE   A    MANIFESTATION    OF   MARVELLOUS    FORBEARANCE.       Siu 


CHAP,  vn.]  MIC  AH.  116 

denies  God's  propriety  in  us.  It  disclaims  His  authority  as  a  Ruler.  It  denies 
the  perfection  of  His  character  as  a  standard.  Hence  it  sets  aside  His  Godhead 
and  Being.  It  wars  with  and  injures  all  that  are  His.  III.  In  the  pardon  of 
SIN,  WE  SEE  A  GLORIOUS  MANIFESTATION  OF  MERCY.  1.  Consiuer  from  whence 
man  had  fallen,  and  there  w£is  nothing  to  awaken  compassion.  2.  Consider 
him  as  fallen,  and  there  was  seemingly  nothing  to  provoke  commiseration.  There 
is — (1)  Hatred  of  God.     (2)  Active  hostility.     (3)  Contempt  of  pardon.     IV.  In 

THE  PARDON  OF  SIN,  THERE  IS  A   BRIGHT  DISPLAY  OF  THE  INFINITE  LOVE  OF  GOD. 

In  order  that  sin  might  be  pardoned,  God  gave  His  Son  to  suffer  and  die.     We 
cannot  apply  this  measure  of  God's  love.     "The  love,  however,  like  the  gift,  must 
be  infinite.     V.  In  the  pardon  of  sin,  there  is  a  terrible  and  striking  pro- 
clamation OF  the  justice  of  God.     Justice  pronounces  the  pardon  of  sin.     And 
it  is  justified  in  doing  so.     He  who  sings  of  pardon,  sings  of  mercy  and  judgment. 
VI.  In  the  pardon  of  sin,  there  is  an  unequalled  display  of  the  unsearch- 
able WISDOM  of  God.     Seen  in  reconciling  what  seemed  necessarily  and  eternally 
at  variance.     Not  only  is  man's  salvation  made  consistent  with  God's  glory, 
but  God  is  glorified  thereby.      Apply — (1)  Seek  for  pardon  as  a  sovereign  gift. 
(2)  As  a  mighty  gift.     (3)  For  God's  name's  sake.     (4)  Through  the  only  channel 
in  which  it  can  be  attained.     (5)  Being  pardoned,   praise  God.     (J.  Stezvart.) 
Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ? — I.  The  chief  particuxars  of  God's  gracious 
DEALINGS  with  His  PEOPLE  (vcr.  18).     What  now  calls  forth  the  admiration  and 
praise  of  the  prophet,  is  the  manner  in  which  God  deals  with  His  people's  sins. 
Our  God  is  distinguished  from  all  others  as  a  God  that  pardoneth  iniquity.     All 
iniquity  is  rebellion  against  infinite  love  and  goodness,  a  trampling  upon  God's  laws, 
a  casting  off  of  His  authority,  a  doubt  of  His  holiness,  a  contempt  for  His  power. 
Then  it  surely  is  marvellous  that  the  Most  High  God  should  pardon  iniquity ; 
and  go  about  to  pardon  iniquity  in  such  a  costly  way,  even  by  the  incarnation 
and  death  of  His  own  co-equal  Son.     But  the  prophet  is  not  content  with  merely 
stating  this  precious  truth,  but  he  amplifies  it,  and  keeps  our   attention  fixed 
on  it,  by  adding  more  particularly,  "  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the 
remnant  of  His  heritage."     God  calls  His  Church  His  heritage  or  possession.  His 
"  peculiar  treasure."     His  heritage  is  only  a  remnant.     And  even  this  remnant  is 
not  pure  and  holy.     As  a  person   can  least   brook   faults   or  blemishes  in  that 
which  he  hath  especially  set  apart  for  his   own  honour  and  pleasure,  so  it  was 
least  to  be  expected  that  the  "  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  God's  heritage  " 
should  be  spared.     It  was  every  way  most  justly  to  be  feared  that  they  would 
be  cast  off  as  improfitable,  rejected  for  ever.     But  such  are  not  the  ways  of  our 
God.     He  passeth  by  their  transgression.     The  reason  is  not  in  them,  but  in  God 
Himself.    He  is  thus  merciful  to  them,  because  He  "  delighteth  in  mercy."     II.  The 
believer's   encouragement  in  the   expectation   OF  yet  future  mercies. 
This  is  the  invariable  result  of  a  lively  sense  of  God's  goodness,  it  leads  us  to  desire 
and  look  for  more.     The  Lord  hath  always  abundantly  more  grace  in  store  for 
His  people  than  they  have  appetite  to  enjoy.     The  prophet  adds  to  his  previous 
account  of  God's  great  mercy  to  His  people,  this  confiding  expectation  of  future 
blessing.     It  is  not  all  God's  desire  that  sin  should  be  forgiven,  He  would  also 
have  it  overcome.     He  will  subdue  our  iniquities.     III.  The  believer's  warrant 
for  his  hopeful  anticipations.     The  grounds  on  which  these  promises  rest  for 
their  fulfilment.     It  is  because  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  Abraham 
and  his  seed  for  evermore,  that  we  may  confidently  look  for  the  sure  performance 
of  God's  gracious  word  to  them  that  believe.     It  is  called  "  mercy  to  Abraham," 
because  it  was  made  with  him,  ui  the  first  instance,  entirely  of  God's  free  grace. 
This  covenant  was  "  truth  to  Jacob,"  because  the  faithfulness  of  God  was  now 
engaged  to  make  good  to  the  son  of  Isaac  what  He  had  freely  promised  to  his 
father.     And  God  confirmed  His  promise  to  Abraham  by  an  oath.     And  "  because 
God  could  swear  by  no  greater.  He  sware  by  HimseK."     This  covenant  was  made 
sure  in  Christ.     Can  we  then,  after  this  brief  review  of  God's  great  mercy  to  us  in 
Christ,  refuse  to  imite  with  the  prophet  in  ascribing  glory  to  His  name  ?     And 
must  we  not,  at  the  same  time,  be  careful  to  see  to  it,  that  we  answer  to  this  descrip- 
tion of  Christ's  covenant  members  :  and  that  we  "do  justly,  and  love  mercy,  and 
walk  humbly  with  our  God  "  ?     {W .  E.  Light,  M.A.)         An  end  to  sin  : — Micah  is 
so  struck  with  the  Divine  patience  as  to  break  out  in  the  adoring  language  of  the 
text,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ?  "     He  sees  a  day  coming  when  the  promises, 
frustrated  so  long  by  man's  unbelief,  shall  be  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  and  the  reproach 
of  prophecy  shall  be  rolled  away.     God's  matchless  way  of  redeeming  man  is  the 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vil 

subject  for  wonder  presented  by  the  text.  I.  God  is  without  His  like  in  for- 
giving OUR  SINS.  Micah  has  an  eye  to  the  notorious  sins  of  the  nation.  In 
saying  that  God  retains  not  His  anger  for  ever,  he  means  to  say  that  there  was 
cause  for  anger.  A  patience  that  bears  daily  with  many  provocations,  when  it 
can  deal  summarily  with  its  objects,  is,  indeed,  a  wonder.  It  is  more  agreeable 
to  God  to  forgive  than  to  pimish.  He  delighteth  in  mercy,  and  judgment  is  His 
strange  work.  He  forgives  to  the  uttermost,  and  that  is  only  saying  that  He 
forgives  like  Himself — royally,  absolutely,  omnipotently.  We  honour  God  when 
we  magnify  His  saving  power.  And  God  is  a  very  ready  God  to  pardon.  His 
compassion  is  ever  ready  to  awake  at  the  call  of  penitence.  Compassion  kindles 
within  His  merciful  bosom  without  any  constraint.  He  is  ever  only  too  ready  to 
turn  to  us,  and  it  takes  far  less  to  turn  Him  to  us,  than  it  takes  to  turn  Him  from 
us.  Our  sins  do  hurt  the  fatherly  heart  of  God.  We  must  not  think  that  God 
cannot  be  grieved.  II.  God  is  withottt  His  like  in  subduing  our  sins.  When 
Micah  said,  "  He  will  subdue  our  iniquities,"  he  probably  had  in  view  the  beneficial 
effect  of  the  captivity  on  the  religious  future  of  the  people.  Babylon  would  give 
the  deathblow  to  their  besetting  sin.  It  did  so.  They  never  returned  to  idolatry 
after  the  severe  lesson  of  those  seventy  years  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon.  They  were 
cured  of  that  great  defect  in  their  national  life  ;  but  even  Babylon  could  not 
cure  them  of  their  iniquities.  Idolatry  vanished,  but  their  iniquities,  like  the 
fabled  Hydra,  were  not  long  in  repairing  the  loss  of  this  one  severed  head  bv 
throwing  out  the  seven  new  and  deadly  heads  of  pharisaism.  The  words  teacL 
us  to  believe  in  a  power  which  is  death  to  sin,  even  as  sin  at  first  was  death  to 
man.  Man's  conqueror  is  to  be  in  turn  conquered  by  man.  If  Satan  had  the 
brief  pleasure  of  nailing  our  Saviour  to  the  accursed  tree,  it  was  at  the  expense  of 
being  himself  crushed  to  death  beneath  His  subduing  heel.  We  learn  from  this 
promise  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  to  renew  us  in  His  own  image,  to  fill  us  with 
that  hatred  of  iniquity  and  love  of  holiness  that  distinguish  His  own  nature. 
With  the  Gospel  freedom,  there  comes  the  call  to  take  on  the  yoke  of  Christ,  the 
yoke  of  obedience,  and  consequently  the  yoke  of  peace  and  joy.  Our  faith,  being 
assured  of  the  reality  of  Christ's  victory  over  sin,  gives  us  an  assurance  of  our  own 
victory  over  it,  and  summons  us  to  the  attempt.  Ideally,  in  the  mind  and  purpose 
of  God,  we  are  already  complete,  already  without  sin,  already  with  the  earnest 
of  eternal  life,  already  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  This  ideal 
is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  a  picture  of  the  imagination.  It  should  be  the  very 
best  help  to  the  working  out  of  a  high  practical  aim.  III.  God  is  without  His 
LIKE  in  removing  OUR  SINS.  Micah  here  warrants  us  in  believing  that  the  for- 
giveness of  our  sins  by  God  is  irrevocable.  When  he  says,  "  And  their  sins  Thou 
wilt  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,"  he  prophesies  a  complete  forgetfulness  of 
them,  a  total  burial  as  of  something  sunk  in  mid-ocean.  What  is  sunk  in  the 
depths  of  the  sea  never  rises  up  to  the  surface  again.  Such  will  be  the  merciful 
dealing  of  God  with  us  if  we  ask  Him  to  forgive  our  sins.  He  will  not  even  mention 
them  again,  as  having  no  desire  to  raise  one  thought  of  shame  in  the  pardoned 
breast  ever  after.  (David  Dames. )  On  venial  sin,  and  auricular  confession : — 
These  words  are  to  be  understood  as  ascribing  the  power  of  forgiving  sins  to  God 
only  ;  as  declaring  that  to  do  so  is  His  sole  prerogative  ;  and  that  He  is  jealous 
of  this  attribute.  Mercy,  as  an  attribute,  belongs  to  God  only.  We  must  ascribe 
to  God  the  whole  power  of  forgiving  sin.  This  doctrine  is  so  consonant  with  reason, 
so  agreeable  to  Scripture,  and  so  honourable  to  God,  that  it  might  seem  unnecessary 
to  say  anything  with  a  view  to  confirm  its  truth,  or  to  illustrate  its  importance. 
Yet  there  are  many  who  deny  it  in  substance,  and  more  who,  though  they  admit 
it  in  words,  do  not  act  as  if  they  believed  it.  Such  a  doctrine  goes  directly  to 
show  the  infinite  evil  which  sin  involves  in  every  case.  It  is  the  disposition  of  our 
corrupt  minds  to  think  lightly  of  the  evil  of  sin.  In  consequence  of  this  habit, 
multitudes  live  without  feeling  any  lively  concern  about  forgiveness  at  all.  Some 
with  but  an  imperfect  sense  of  guilt  in  their  consciences,  conceive  that  they  may 
merit  forgiveness  by  their  good  works,  or  by  doing  penance,  or  in  some  other 
way  equally  fallacious  and  unsatisfactory.  1.  As  all  sin  is  committed  against 
God,  and  is  an  offence  in  which  His  honour  is  concerned,  we  are  led  to  the  con- 
clusion that  forgiveness  is  an  act,  the  exercise  of  which  God  will  reserve  to  Himself, 
and  which  He  will  not  delegate  to  any  other.  Sin  is  a  transgression  of  His  law, 
and  implies  a  disregard  of  His  will,  and  a  contempt  of  His  authority.  The  kinds 
of  sins  that  men  may  be  guilty  of  are  various,  and  some  discover  a  greater  degree 
of  impiety  and  of  depravity  of  character  than  others.     But  the  very  first  departures 


CHAP,  vn.]  MICAH.  117 

from  the  line  of  duty  involve  the  guilt  of  despising  the  command,  of  contemning 
the  authority,  and  of  contravening  the  will  of  God,  and  are  therefore  exceedingly 
sinful.  From  overlooking  this,  many  seem  to  be  insensible  of  the  danger  of  first 
steps  in  sin,  which  are  usually  so  decisive  of  the  character  and  of  the  future  destiny 
of  a  man.  When  you  can  sin  against  God  without  remorse  or  fear,  you  have 
already  lost  the  only  principle  which  can  eflFectually  secure  your  continuance 
in  the  paths  of  righteousness.  As  every  sin  is  a  dishonour  done  to  God,  and  an 
offence  committed  against  His  government,  it  seems  peculiarly  appropriate  that 
God  should  reserve  the  exercise  of  mercy  wholly  to  Himself,  and  renoerit  necessary 
for  guilty  and  rebellious  creatures  to  humble  themselves  before  Him,  confess  their 
guilt,  and  seek  for  mercy.  No  repentance  can  be  considered  genuine  which  does 
not  originate  in  a  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin  as  committed  against  God.  2.  God 
alone  knows  what  the  honour  of  His  government,  and  the  maintenance  of  His 
glory,  render  necessary.  There  is  no  act  of  government  which  requires  greater 
wisdom  and  prudence  than  that  of  dispensing  pardon ;  for  if  it  be  done  without 
care,  it  is  calculated  to  give  rise  to  the  most  pernicious  results.  Injudicious 
and  indiscriminate  mercy  emboldens  offenders  to  go  on  in  wickedness,  induces 
others  to  be  lees  careful  to  avoid  transgression  than  they  would  be,  and  leads 
to  a  general  contempt  of  the  authority  of  law,  and  of  the  obligations  of  duty. 
To  conceive  that  God  would  surrender  to  a  mere  creature  the  power  of  forgiving 
sin,  is  as  difficult  to  be  believed  as  that  He  would  give  a  creature  power  to  govern 
the  material  creation.  In  what  sense  then  was  power  to  remit  or  retain  sins 
given  to  the  apostles  7  They  were  specially  inspired ;  and  were  only  agents  in 
stating  God's  forgiveness.  3.  In  exercising  His  power  to  forgive,  God  must  have 
regard  to  His  other  attributes.  The  work  of  mercy  must  oe  perfect,  as  every 
work  of  God  is  perfect.  God  will  exercise  mercy  only  in  perfect  consistency 
with  the  truth,  the  righteousness,  the  wisdom,  the  holiness  of  His  natiire.  That 
God  might  thus  exercise  mercy  in  consistency  with  all  the  i)erfections  of  His 
nature.  He  sent  His  Son  into  the  world,  to  die  in  our  room  and  stead.  Since  God 
has  appointed  this  way  of  forgiving  sins,  who  may  safely  act  in  opposition  to  it, 
either  for  himself,  or  by  leading  others  to  neglect  the  great  salvation  ?  The  way 
in  which  forgiveness  is  exercised,  is  the  way  in  which  God  has  seen  it  best  for  His 
glory,  and  most  consistent  to  His  perfection,  that  it  should  be  exercised.  He  is 
consulting,  in  the  work  of  redemption,  high  and  holy  ends.  4.  As  the  forgiveness 
of  sins  is  an  inestimable  blessing,  it  is  reserved  by  God  to  Himself  to  exercise  it, 
that  He  may  draw  forth  our  love  and  gratitude,  in  return  for  ffis  infinite  com- 
passion and  kindness.  The  blessing  implied  m  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  is  of  all 
others  the  most  precious  which  men  can  receive,  and  the  most  important  which 
they  can  seek  for.  How  daring  is  that  individual  who  would  step  in  between 
God  and  His  creatures,  and  lay  claim  to  the  power  of  exercising  pardon,  and 
dispensing  forgiveness  !  Four  grounds  of  practical  improvement — (1)  The  duty 
of  confessing  our  sins  to  Grod,  and  to  God  only.  (2)  The  insufficiency  of  all  human 
absolution  and  pardon  ;  and  the  delusive  nature  of  these  rites  as  practised  by  the 
Roman  Church.  (3)  The  danger  of  calling  any  sin  venial.  (4)  The  obligation 
of  those  who  have  obtained  forgiveness  to  devote  themselves  to  the  service 
of  God,  and  to  walk  before  Him  with  attached  and  dutiful  dispositions,  as 
becomes  the  children  of  so  many  mercies.  {John  Forbes. )  And  passeth  by 
the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  His  heritage.  —  The  prophet  speaks 
these  words  in  a  transport.  He  is  telling  us  something  about  God  which 
drew  his  wonder  ajid  amazement.  It  was  Grod's  pardoning  mercy  to  His 
sinful  creatures.  I.  Whom  God  pabdons.  "  The  remnant  of  His  heritage." 
The  reference  is  to  the  Jews,  but  the  expression  is  equally  descriptive,  in  all  ages, 
of  those  whom  the  Lord  pardons.  They  are  but  a  small  remnant  of  a  sinful 
world.  All  need  pardon,  but  multitudes  die  without  having  received  pardon. 
Men  like  to  hear  of  pardon,  but  they  like  not  the  way  in  which  God  offers  to  bestow 
it  on  them.  Those  whom  the  Lord  pardons  are  also  called  "His  heritage,"  or 
His  inheritance.  His  portion.  His  property.  The  term  is  frequently  applied  to 
Israel,  but  it  is  applicable,  in  a  stricter  sense,  to  that  company  of  pardoned  sinners 
who  constitute  the  Church  of  Christ.  They  are,  peculiarly,  eternally,  the  Lord's 
heritage.  How  many  belong  to  this  heritage  of  God  we  know  not.  II.  How  does 
God  pardon  ?  Observe  the  variety  of  expressions  which  the  prophet  uses. 
Literally  it  is  "  who  beareth  iniquity,"  and  it  refers  to  the  way  in  which  the 
Lord  pardoneth  sinners  by  bearing  their  iniquities  Himself.  He  hath  caused 
them  to  rest  like  a  tremendous  burden  on  His  own  sacred  head,  and  what  sinners 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

themselves  deserved  to  suffer.  He  hath  suffered  in  their  room.  The  prophet 
also  says,  "  He  passeth  by  the  transgression."  Here  is  the  consequence  of  a 
man's  coming  to  the  Cross,  of  his  putting  faith  in  what  the  Saviour  has  been 
doing  for  him.  God  "  passeth  by  "  that  man's  "  transgression,"  just  as  Ho 
passed  over  the  blood-sprinkled  houses  in  Egypt.  The  prophet  says,  "  He  will 
turn  again.  He  will  have  compassion  upon  us."  Here  is  another  representation 
of  the  riches  of  God's  pardoning  grace.  And  what  an  affecting  representation 
does  it  give  of  God's  tender  dealing  towards  the  penitent  transgressor  !  The 
prophet  says,  "  He  will  subdue  our  iniquities."  Here  our  iniquities  are  con- 
sidered in  the  light  of  formidable  enemies  rising  up  against  us  to  destroy  us.  What 
will  God  do  on  behalf  of  those  who  make  His  Son  their  Saviour  ?  He  will 
"  subdue"  both  their  past  and  their  present  iniquities.  The  last  expression  the 
prophet  uses  is,  "  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  Here  is 
indicated  the  extent  of  God's  pardon,  and  the  completeness  of  it.  The  pardon 
is  final,  unchangeable,  eternal.  III.  Why  does  God  pardon  ?  What  moves 
the  Holy  and  the  Just  to  save  a  remnant  of  His  guilty  creatvu-es  from  destruc- 
tion ?  The  text  does  not  answer  in  a  way  to  flatter  man;  as  if  any  estimable 
qualities  in  him  were  the  moving  cause  of  Divine  compassions.  The  reason  is — 
'  because  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  It  is,  as  it  were,  His  favovirite  attribute. 
He  hath  pleasure  in  mercy.  Gladly  do  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  ascribe  every 
tittle  of  their  blessedness  to  the  mercy  of  their  God.  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 
He  retaineth  not  His  anger  for  ever. — God's  anger  and  mercy : — Can  God 
be  angry  ?  The  ancient  philosopher,  and  the  modem  man  of  science,  represent 
the  Infinite  Spirit  as  incapable  of  any  emotion.  The  old  Greek  thinkers  tell 
you  that  the  Divine  existence  is  passionless  and  free  from  pain.  Our  modern 
men  of  science  laugh  at  us  if  we  attribute  feeling  to  the  Almighty.  They  tell  us 
we  are  guilty  of  anthropomorphism,  and  that  is  a  pitiable  weakness  in  their  eyes, 
if  not  a  sin.  Not  only  is  it  impossible  for  God  to  be  angry.  He  is  incapable  of 
any  emotion  at  all.  And  we  must  admit  there  is  considerable  difficulty  in  recon- 
ciling the  idea  of  anger  in  the  Divine  nature  with  any  large  and  spiritual  conception 
of  it.  Note  two  considerations — 1.  Anger,  as  shown  by  man  to  man,  always 
goes  along  with  some  measure  of  surprise.  But  God  cannot  be  surprised.  2.  la 
anger  there  is  a  desire  to  put  some  one  to  pain.  The  disobedient  child,  the  careless 
servant,  the  treacherous  friend,  shall  be  made  to  suffer  for  what  they  have  done. 
But  you  cannot  think  of  God  as  desiring  to  put  any  one  to  pain.  How  stand  the 
facts  of  the  case,  and  what  do  they  teach  ?  They  teach  that  we,  with  our  triple 
nature  of  body,  mind,  and  spirit,  stand  in  the  midst  of  an  everlasting  order,  and 
live  in  a  universe  of  imvarying  law.  This  constancy  of  nature,  this  unfailing 
order,  this  universality  of  law  is  the  great  postulate  upon  which  all  our  action 
proceeds,  and  all  our  thought.  The  cause  being  the  same,  the  effect  will  be  the 
same  always  and  everywhere.  Law  is  everywhere  ;  facts  teach  that.  But  they 
teach  something  besides.  That  to  disobey  the  laws,  to  violate  the  order,  brings 
punishment  and  pain.  These  two  truths  are  of  capital  importance  in  answering 
the  question  whether  psalmists,  prophets,  and  apostles  meant  anything  when 
they  spoke  of  the  anger  of  God.  We  say  that  the  fact  of  universal  law  is  not 
the  vdtimate  fact.  There  is  somewhat  behind  it — not  somewhat,  but  some  One. 
Eternal  Power,  Infinite  Life,  God.  This  law  and  order  we  call  the  will  of  God. 
Then  if  the  laws  under  which  we  live  are  to  us  the  declaration  of  the  personal 
will  of  the  Eternal,  then  it  is  no  figure  of  speech  to  say  that  the  pain  and  punish- 
ment that  follow  on  the  violation  of  the  laws  are  the  anger  of  the  Eternal.  Anger 
not  vindictive,  but  righteous.  "Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law."  Of  what 
law  ?  Of  the  law  which  unfolds  to  us  the  conditions  of  spiritual  life  and  health 
for  us  ;  the  law  which  stands  written  in  the  conscience  of  every  man,  which  may 
be  spelled  out  from  the  sacred  writings  of  all  nations,  of  whose  growing  clear- 
ness and  fulness  the  Bible  is  a  magnificent  record — the  law  which  tells  us  that 
if  we  would  enter  into  life,  we  must  keep  the  commandments.  To  love  God 
■ — that  is  religion.  To  love  man — that  is  morality.  Obedience  to  this  two- 
fold law  is  the  way  to  the  enjoyment  and  strengthening  of  the  very  highest  life 
possible  to  man.  If,  knowing  this  law,  you  do  not  obey  it,  there  will  come  to 
you  a  sense  of  defeat,  of  unrest,  of  dissatisfaction,  of  spiritual  weakness  and  decay, 
which  will  be  keen  and  crushing  in  proportion  to  your  knowledge  of  your  moral 
and  religious  duty.  This  experience  is  the  punishment  and  pain  which  always 
follow  upon  the  violation  of  God's  law.  It  is  His  anger.  It  is  anger  with  a  heart 
of  love  as  its  centre.     But  Grod  does  not  retain  ffis  anger  for  ever.     He  delights 


CHAP.  TO.]  MIC  AH.  119 

in  mercy,  He  pardons  iniquity,  He  passes  by  transgressions.  Are  these  things 
true  ?  In  one  sense  He  does  not  forgive  sin.  God  is  Infinite  Love  and  Infinite 
Law.  Forgiveness  of  sins,  as  commonly  understood,  means  one  of  two  things. 
Either  it  means  that  when  you  ask  Gk)d  to  forgive  you  your  sins,  you  ask  Him 
to  forbear  to  retaliate  ;  or  it  means  that  you  ask  Him  to  save  you  from  the  con- 
sequences of  them.  I3ut  the  first  meaning  is  inconsistent  with  God's  nature 
as  the  Infinite  Love.  What  does  your  request  signify  ?  This — that  you  entreat 
Him  not  to  serve  you  as  you  have  served  Him.  But  can  Infinite  Love  ever  be 
suspected  of  such  conduct  ?  And  the  second  meaning  is  inconsistent  with  God's 
nature  as  the  Eternal  Law.  The  law  of  God — the  expression  of  His  wiU — brings 
pain  and  punishment  to  him  who  transgresses  it.  This  is  the  case  in  all  spheres 
of  life,  bodily,  mental,  spiritual.  The  consequences  of  transgressions  are  natural, 
bound  up  with  the  very  constitution  of  things.  To  pray  for  the  forgiveness 
of  sins  is,  in  many  minds,  equivalent  to  a  prayer  for  deliverance  from  their  conse- 
quences. But  such  deliverance  would  involve  a  perpetually  repeated  miracle, 
the  suspension  of  the  action  of  those  very  laws  which  God  has  placed  us  under 
as  the  conditions  of  life  and  good  for  us.  Is  He,  then,  going  so  to  stultify  and 
contradict  Himself  ?  In  one  sense  for  God  to  forgive  sin  is  an  impossibility. 
Yet,  in  another  sense,  Grod  does  forgive  sin.  God  retains  His  anger  only  so  long 
as  you  are  transgressing  His  law.  The  moment  you  repent,  that  moment  His 
mercy,  in  which  He  delights,  comes  to  you,  bringing  healing  and  remedial  blessing 
on  its  soft  wing.  In  those  spiritual  relations  between  God  and  ourselves,  with 
which,  in  the  great  question  of  sin  and  its  forgiveness,  we  are  primarily  con- 
cerned, the  central  thought  of  the  soul  when  awaking  to  a  sense  of  sin,  is  not 
the  violation  of  the  impersonal  laws,  but  the  grieving  of  the  Father-spirit  behind 
the  laws,  whose  expression  they  are.  We  dare  not  attribute  to  the  Eternal  such 
anger  as  is  vindictive,  and  desires  to  put  the  cause  of  it  to  pain,  but  we  may 
attribute  to  Him  such  grief  over  human  sin  as  found  its  most  pathetic  earthly 
expression  in  the  broken  heart  of  Christ  upon  the  Cross.  {Henry  Varley,  B.A.) 
He  delighteth  in  mercy. — Ood  mercifvl : — For  the  proof  of  this  we 
are  entirely  dependent  on  revelation.  The  deist  is  challenged  to  produce  one 
valid  argument  in  demonstration  of  the  Divine  mercifulness.  The  light  of 
nature  discovers  nothing  beyond  mere  forbearance,  and  forbearance  does  not 
necessarily  imply  mercy.  Revelation — 1.  Announces  to  us  that  God  is  merci- 
ful, and  this  repeatedly,  and  in  terms  the  most  expUcit.  The  fact  is  declared 
that  God  is  merciful;  but  there  is  something  very  peculiar  in  the  manner  in 
which  this  doctrine  is  taught.  Notice  the  words  that  are  synonymous,  or  nearly 
so,  with  mercy ;  such  as  gracious,  long-suffering,  slow  to  anger,  pitiful.  Notice 
that  the  inspired  writers,  not  content  with  the  singvdar,  mercy,  by  a  felicitous 
fault  of  style,  employ  the  pliu-al  form,  mercies.  They  speak  of  "  the  multitude 
of  His  mercies."  Notice  that  they  speak  of  God  as  rich  in  mercy,  plenteous 
in  mercy,  and  full  of  compassion.  Notice  that  the  mercy  of  God  is  compared 
to  certain  human  exercises.  "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth,"  &c.  Notice  that  it 
is  said  of  God,  "  He  deUghteth  in  mercy."  Some  things  we  do  by  constraint, 
some  by  a  sense  of  duty ;  others  we  delight  to  do.  It  is  not  by  constraint  that 
God  is  merciful.  See  some  proofs  that  God  dehghts  in  mercy.  Infer  it  from 
the  fact  that  He  has  made  mercy  a  part  of  our  moral  constitution.  He  has  made 
it  a  part  of  our  duty,  not  merely  to  show  mercy,  but  to  love  it :  He  requires  us 
to  delight  in  it.  He  expresses  the  highest  displeasure  against  the  unmerciful. 
Infer  it  from  the  manner  in  which  God  exercises  mercy  to  sinners  of  the  human 
race.  Illustrate  by  following  particulars — 1.  He  shows  mercy  without  waiting 
to  be  asked  to  do  it.  2.  He  shows  mercy  at  great  expense  to  Himself.  3.  He 
lets  U8  see  how  it  is  that  He  can  consistently  exercise  mercy  towards  us  ;  dis- 
closes to  us  the  plan  of  salvation,  as  well  as  the  fact  of  its  possibility.  4.  The 
first  moment  that  sinners  manifest  a  willingness  to  comply  with  the  terms  on 
which  He  exercises  mercy,  they  are  met  by  His  mercy.  5.  The  terms  of  mercy 
are  brought  down  as  low  as  they  could  be.  6.  To  those  very  terms  His  mercy 
brings  us.  He  even  fulfils  in  us  the  conditions  of  salvation.  7.  He  waiteth  to 
be  gracious ;  spares  us  long,  and  overlooks  many  provocations.  8.  He  makes 
many  offers'  of  mercy.  9.  He  shows  mercy  to  many  sinners.  10.  He  shows 
mercy  to  His  enemies.  Then  what  shall  we  make  of  this  doctrine  ?  Shall  we 
infer  that  God  is  not  just,  not  holy,  not  faithful,  because  He  is  merciful  ?  Svurely 
sinners,  sensible  of  their  sins,  have  the  greatest  encouragement  to  hope  in  God's 
mercy.     If  God  delights  in  mercy,  what  can  be  plainer  than  that  men  should  ? 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

{W.  Nevins,  D.D.)  God's  deligM  in  mercy  : — When  we  speak  of  mercy  in  God, 
we  must  realise  that  it  differs  from  the  corresponding  affection  in  man.  In  God 
it  is  not  a  passion,  causing  any  mental  disturbance.  In  Him,  infinite  goodness, 
perpetually,  without  any  disquiet,  impels  to  the  manifestation  of  kindness.  In 
the  exercise  of  this  attribute  Jehovah  delights.  The  ministration  of  justice 
is  necessary,  that  of  mercy  is  voluntary.  I.  Considbb  the  naturh  of  God. 
His  very  essence  is  love,  and  mercy  is  but  one  of  the  forms  of  love.  1.  Take  a 
view  of  the  perfections  of  His  nature.  Infinite,  Eternal,  All- wise,  Just,  Almighty, 
Faithful.  Turn  to  whatever  perfection  of  Grod  you  may,  still  BQs  mercy  comes 
into  view.  2.  View  His  natiire  in  the  powers  which  He  exercises.  In  Scripture 
we  read  of  His  eyes,  ears,  lips,  hands,  &c.  He  is  said  to  think,  to  will,  to  remember. 
He  is  afflicted,  and  He  rejoiceth.  All  these  powers  are  set  forth  as  occupied 
in  the  exercise  of  mercy.  II.  Listen  to  the  words  of  God.  1.  The  words 
of  His  law.  Here  mercy  holds  a  distinguished  place.  It  requires  of  us  that 
we  "  be  merciful."  2.  His  words  in  the  Gospel.  Truly  these  are  full  of  mercy. 
Viewed  as  a  whole,  the  Gospel  is  simply  "  the  ^ace  of  God,  which  hath  appeared 
unto  all  men,  and  bringeth  salvation."  Doctrines,  promises,  and  invitations  are 
all  full  of  mercy.  III.  Survey  the  doings  of  God.  1.  What  God  does  in  the 
purchase  of  redemption.  2.  In  the  application  of  redemption.  IV.  Observe  thb 
GIFTS  OF  God.  1.  Their  value  and  variety.  2.  Their  constancy  and  permanence. 
Then  be  merciful,  as  God  is  merciful.  (1)  Deal  kindly  with  enemies.  (2)  Show 
compassion  to  the  afflicted.  (3)  Seek  the  salvation  of  sinners.  {E.  Brown.) 
He  will  have  compassion. — He  delighteth  in  mercy  : — My  text  is  the  kevnote  of  the 
Bible,  and  reveals  the  very  heart  of  God.  You  will  see  there  is  in  the  beginning  of 
the  passage  a  recitation  of  God's  wonderful  works,  "  pardoning  iniquity,  passing  by 
the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  His  heritage,  and  retaining  not  His  anger  for 
ever."  And  then  the  Prophet  gives  the  reason  for  it,  and  looks  joyously  out  into  the 
future  and  says,"  He  will  turn  again;  He  will  have  compassion  upon  us.  He  will 
subdue  our  iniquities ;  and  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea." 
I.  I  WANT  TO  explain  THE  TEXT,  "  God  delighteth  in  mercy."  What  is  meant  by 
mercy  ?  Of  course,  a  great  many  people  don't  think  about  God.  It  never 
enters  into  their  heads  to  ask  what  God  is,  what  His  intentions  are ;  and  there  are 
those  who  seem  to  confound  His  attributes  most  painfully.  Some  confoimd  this 
beautiful  word  mercy  with  others  of  His  attributes.  They  confound  it  with  love, 
with  pity,  with  justice.  We  cannot  make  an  error  in  this  matter  without  suffering 
more  or  less  from  doubts  and  fears.  Let  us  try  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  the  meaning 
of  this  blessed  word.  Now,  I  will  put  the  question  to  each  of  you,  what  do  you 
understand  to  be  the  meaning  of  this  word  mercy  ?  Let  my  illustration  help 
us.  Here  is  a  man  who  is  a  father  and  a  master.  Let  us  follow  him  five  minutes, 
and  I  think  we  shall  have  a  clear  idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  mercy.  The 
men  go  to  the  master  for  the  wages.  When  you  go  to  the  master  for  the  wages 
do  you  ask  for  mercy  in  that  transaction  ?  Your  labour  is  your  capital,  and 
you  have  entrusted  your  master  with  your  capital  for  six  days,  and  now  you  bring 
in  yom:  bill  for  your  master  to  pay ;  if  the  master  pays  you,  you  say  he  is  just ; 
if  he  does  not  pay,  you  say  he  is  unjust.  There  is  no  idea  of  mercy  in  that  transac- 
tion. We  have  not  found  mercy,  have  we  ?  We  have  found  justice,  having  to 
do  with  right.  Let  us  try  again.  I  said  this  man  was  a  father.  To-morrow  is 
his  child's  birthday.  He  has  had  a  good  week,  and  is  in  a  generous  mood.  He 
makes  up  his  mind  on  his  way  home  that  he  wiD  buy  a  book  that  will  gladden 
his  child's  heart.  He  reaches  the  bookseller's  shop,  piu-chases  the  book,  pays 
the  money,  and  goes  on  his  way.  What  was  that  ?  That  was  not  justice,  for 
he  had  not  promised  it  to  the  child.  You  say  at  once  it  was  love,  having  to  do 
with  the  lovable.  Now  then,  there  is  nothing  of  mercy  in  that.  We  have  found 
justice  having  to  do  with  right,  and  we  have  found  love  having  to  do  with  the 
lovable  ;  but  we  have  not  found  mercy  yet.  As  he  goes  along  he  sees  on  the  door- 
step a  little  half-naked,  hunger-bitten,  shivering  child.  He  hurries  by ;  but 
he  has  seen  that  face,  and  he  cannot  get  away  from  it.  He  compares  it  with  the 
little  sunny  faces  awaiting  his  arrival  at  home.  That  morning  when  he  was  with 
his  companions  he  said  what  a  wrong  thing  it  was  to  relieve  beggars,  it  did  harm 
to  the  recipient  and  it  did  harm  to  society,  and  it  ought  to  be  carefully  avoided. 
That  is  his  theory.  But  he  can  see  the  child's  face,  and  he  stops,  and  his  heart 
rims  away  with  his  head.  He  comes  back  to  the  child,  puts  his  hand  into  his  pocket 
for  the  third  time,  and  puts  something  into  the  httle  trembling  hand.  That  was 
not  justice.     The  claims  of  justice  were  met  in  the  Poor  Law  arrangement.     It 


CHAP.  VII.]  MICAH.  121 

was  not  love  ;  for  when  he  had  relieved  the  child  he  shrank  from  kissing  it.  What 
was  it  ?  Pity,  to  be  siire,  pity  having  to  do  with  misery ;  but  no  mercy  in  the 
sense  used  in  my  text.  Let  us  try  again.  A  concrete  instance.  I  said  this  man 
was  a  master.  He  has  in  his  employ  a  man  who  is  a  splendid  workman,  but  he 
is  a  drunkard.  He  knows  where  some  of  his  master's  property  is,  and  under 
the  shadow  of  evening  he  lays  his  hand  upon  it,  and  takes  it  to  the  pawn-shop, 
and  finds  his  way  to  the  drink-shop  again.  Just  after  the  master  had  relieved 
the  little  child  he  meets  this  man  full  face.  The  poor  man  wishes  there  was  a 
comer  to  rim  into ;  but  there  is  not  one.  The  master  says,  "  William,  you  have 
not  been  for  your  wages  to-day."  "  No,  sir ;  I  have  not  done  anything  this  week." 
"  And  you  knew  that  you  had  work  to  do  that  was  very  important,  and  you  knew 
that  I  should  suffer  by  your  absence."  "  I  am  very  sorry,  sir."  "  But  that  is 
not  the  worst  of  it ;  not  only  have  you  not  done  your  duty,  but  you  have  taken 
my  property,  and  you  have  applied  it  to  your  own  base,  sensual  purpose."  Tell 
me,  what  wUl  that  man  say  to  the  master.?  Will  he  say,  "  Be  jtist  "  ?  That 
would  be  to  imprison  him.  Will  he  say,  "  Love  me  "  ?  Such  a  thought  never 
presents  itself.  Will  he  say,  "  Have  pity  "  ?  He  wovdd  have  pity  on  the  drunkard's 
wife  and  children.  He  looks  at  the  master  and  he  says,  "  Do  have  mercy  on  me." 
When  the  master  says,  '*  Well,  William,  I  will.  The  past  shall  be  as  if  it  had 
never  happened,  and  shall  never  be  mentioned.  Here's  your  full  week's  wages. 
Go,  and  sin  no  more,"  would  not  that  man  know  what  mercy  was  ?  Mercy  is 
kindness  shown  to  the  guilty.  When  you  go,  then,  to  God  in  prayer,  let  this 
thought  be  before  you  :  I  am  coming  not  for  justice,  I  am  coming  for  mercy. 
If  I  am  wronged  I  can  appeal  to  God  s  justice,  and  He  will  take  my  part.  If  I 
am  in  trouble  I  can  appeal  to  His  pity  and  He  will  sympathise  with  me.  But 
if  I  am  guilty,  mercy  is  the  only  attribute  that  I  can  appeal  to.  There  is  an 
attribute  which  can  touch  the  sinner  without  damning  him.     II.  I  want  to 

OIVH  YOU  A  FHW  PEOOFS  THAT  THIS  BLESSED  DECLARATION  IS  TRUE.       Why  should 

I  do  that  when  it  is  expressly  stated  in  the  Book  ?  My  answer  is  this,  as  soon 
as  a  man's  eyes  are  opened  and  he  sees  his  sins,  then  despair  takes  hold  of  him. 
I  read  the  text  to  him  to-night,  "  God  delighteth  in  mercy,"  and  he  says,  "  Too 
good  to  be  true,  too  good  to  be  true."  The  Devil  brings  out  the  past  sins,  and 
aggravates  them  and  flings  them  into  our  heart  till  the  pangs  of  hell  get  hold  of 
us  and  we  dare  not  think  of  God.  Can  it  be  true.  He  delights  in  mercy  ?  Let  me 
give  one  or  two  proofs.  1.  First,  I  know  God  delights  in  mercy  because  He  says 
BO  much  about  it.  "  Out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  That 
is  so  with  man,  and  that  is  so  with  God.  I  go  to  a  home  where  I  hear  the  music 
of  children's  voices,  and  I  always  know  I  shall  bo  happy  with  such  music.  I 
sit  down  at  the  tea-table,  and  the  mother  tells  me  about  the  wonderful  things 
the  children  have  said  and  done,  and  she  goes  on  and  on,  and  I  listen  interestedly. 
I  try  to  say  a  little  about  my  own,  but  it  does  not  go,  so  I  listen  to  her  and 
thank  God  for  a  mother's  love.  When  I  get  home  they  ask  me,  "Well,  how 
did  you  get  on  7  "  "  Very  well,  but  how  she  does  delight  in  her  children."  They 
ask,  "  How  do  you  know  T  "  "  Because  she  was  never  tired  of  talking  about 
them,  that  is  how  I  know."  I  come  to  you  to-night  and  I  say  to  you  with  a  glad 
heart,  our  God  delights  in  mercy,  for  He  is  never  tired  of  talking  about  it.  Take 
the  Book.  What  did  I  say,  mercy  was  kindness  to  the  guilty  ?  To  whom  did 
God  give  the  Bible  T  Not  to  saints,  but  to  sinners.  Now,  I  find  that  this  word 
"  mercy  "  studs  the  pages  of  the  Bible  like  the  stars  stud  the  heavens.  God's 
mercy  is  higher  than  the  heavens,  is  longer  than  eternity.  God  is  rich  in  mercy, 
"  God  delighteth  in  mercy."  Over  and  over  you  have  it  in  one  of  the  Psalms. 
In  that  one  Psalm  we  are  told  twenty-six  times  God  delights  in  mercy,  becau.se 
"  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  2.  Again,  I  know  Gk)d  delights  in  mercy,  because 
so  many  people  have  foimd  mercy.  Look  at  the  millions  on  the  earth  in  all  lands, 
in  all  climes,  in  all  colours,  that  could  stand  before  us  and  bear  the  same  testimonj^ 
"  I  obtained  mercy."  If  we  could  write  out  the  names  of  the  people  who  had 
found  mercy,  and  were  to  unroll  it,  would  it  not  reach  from  the  gate  of  heaven 
to  hell  and  back  again  ?  And  hundreds  of  you  could  say,  My  name  is  there. 
Ah,  what  a  lot  of  trouble  God  took  to  get  us  to  yield  to  Him.  How  He  followed 
us,  how  He  knocked  at  the  door,  how  He  pleaded  with  us  many  long  rebeUious 
years.  When  at  last  we  cried  for  help  He  shewed  us  mercy,  and  our  names  were 
on  the  roll.  Thank  God,  if  your  name  is  not  there  it  may  be  there  to-night.  Does 
God  delight  in  mercy  ?  Yes.  How  do  I  know  it  ?  You  want  solid  ground  (o 
rest  upon.     How  do  I  know  that  God  delights  in  mercy  !     "  Behold  the  Lamb 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

of  God."  How  can  one  speak  in  His  presence,  beholding  the  bleeding  Saviour, 
and  hearing  Him  say,  "  I  suffered  this  for  thee."  See  Him  on  the  Cross.  Is 
it  too  easy  ?  Is  the  mercy  bought  at  such  a  price  too  easy  ?  Fling  thy  doubts 
to  the  wind.  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  "  It 
is  so  easy,"  said  a  young  girl ;  "  I  wonder  I  did  not  believe  before."  We  have  all 
felt  the  same,  I  daresay.  It  is  so  blessedly  easy  that  a  dying  man  may  find  mercy. 
And  now,  may  I  say  a  word  to  you  ?  When  you  go  to  the  Throne  of  Grace, 
never  forget  that  you  are  coming  for  mercy.  The  Devil  never  troubles  me  so 
much  as  in  prayer.  He  brings  up  the  horriole  past,  and  asks  me  how  dare  I  to 
stand  face  to  face  with  that  holy  God.  It  is  said,  in  the  time  of  Napoleon  one 
of  his  officers  was  accused  of  disloyalty  and  was  apprehended.  His  daughter 
prepared  a  petition.  One  day  when  the  Emperor  entered  Paris  she  approached 
with  her  petition.  The  Emperor  was  struck  with  her  looks,  and  the  earnest  words 
she  used  in  presenting  the  petition,  and  he  read  it.  He  said,  I  will  inquire  about 
it.  In  a  day  or  two  her  father  was  liberated.  Two  or  three  years  afterwards 
that  same  officer  was  involved  in  some  scheme  against  the  Emperor  and  was 
again  apprehended.  The  daughter  came  again  with  a  petition  to  the  Emperor. 
The  Emperor  saw  the  petition,  but  did  not  take  it.  He  said,  "  Child,  you 
came  to  me  before  for  your  father,  and  I  granted  your  request ;  I  cannot 
grant  it  again."  "  Sir,"  she  said,  '*  my  father  was  innocent  then,  and  I  asked 
for  justice ;  now  my  father  is  guilty,  and  I  ask  for  mercy."  Take  the 
name  of  Jesus  with  you ;  link  Him  with  your  prayers,  and  ask  for 
that  mercy  which  God  never  denies.  (C.  Oarrett.)  The  mercy  of  Ood : — 
The  deliverances  from  Egypt  and  Babylon  were  types  of  our  deliverance 
from  the  captivity  and  bondage  of  a  natural  state  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
I.  The  MEBcy  of  God.  1.  Mercy  is  an  essentitil  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature. 
Mercy  La  God  differs  in  two  important  respects  from  mercy  as  it  is  to  be  found 
in  any  of  His  rational  creatures.  Not  only  is  the  mercy  of  God  infinite,  while 
in  them  it  is  only  finite;  but  mercy  is  essential  to  God,  while  it  is  not  so  either 
to  men  or  angels.  In  them  mercy  is  only  a  quality  which  they  either  may  or 
may  not  possess.  2.  Guilty  and  miserable  creatures  are  the  proper  objects  of 
Divine  mercy.  Mercy  is  otherwise  named  bounty  or  grace.  The  bounty 
of  God  respects  all  the  creatures  as  creatures.  Grace  respects  the  creatures 
as  unworthy.  Sinners  are  the  proper  objects  of  mercy.  In  what  does  the  mercy 
of  God  towards  them  consist  ?  In  His  willingness  and  readiness  to  pity,  help, 
and  relieve  them.  Sympathy  with  the  distressed,  or  a  fellow-feeling  of  their 
sorrows  and  pains,  is  not  essential  to  mercy.  3.  The  exercise  of  mercy  in  God 
depends  entirely  on  His  sovereign  will  and  pleasure.  In  this  justice  differs. 
It  requires  that  every  sin  shall  be  punished.  Were  God  to  allow  sin  to  pass  with 
impunity  He  would  cease  to  be  what  He  is — the  infinitely  perfect  Jehovah  ; 
there  would  be  an  end  to  His  moral  government,  which  consists  in  governing 
His  rational  creatures  according  to  the  law  of  perfect  holiness  and  righteous- 
ness. But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  exercise  of  mercy.  It  is  as  natural  for 
God  to  exercise  mercy  as  justice ;  for  both  are  essential  to  His  nature.  The 
difference  lies  here.  The  existence  of  sin  in  His  rational  creatures  is  a  sufficient 
reason  for  the  exercise  of  justice ;  but  the  existence  of  misery  in  these  creatures 
is  no  reason  why  mercy  should  be  dispensed  to  them ;  for  misery  is  richly  deserved 
as  the  just  consequence  of  sin,  and  certainly  neither  sin  nor  its  consequence, 
misery,  can  entitle  the  sinner  to  mercy.  When  God  exercises  mercy,  it  is  of 
His  sovereign,  wise,  and  gracious  pleasure.  II.  How  does  it  appeab  that  God 
DEUtGHTBTH  IN  MERCY  ?  1.  From  the  express  testimony  of  Scripture.  2.  From 
the  astonishing  medium  through  which  mercy  flows  to  sinners,  namely,  the 
atonement  of  Christ.  By  a  single  act  of  His  will  the  scheme  of  human  redemp- 
tion was  devised  and  fixed.  3.  From  the  names  of  glory  which  God  takes  to 
Himself  from  the  exercise  of  mercy,  "  The  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious," 
&c.  &c.  4.  From  the  great  variety  of  means  which  God  employs  to  make  sinners 
partakers  of  His  mercy.  Such  as  the  mediation  of  Christ,  a  standing  ministry, 
gracious  providences,  &c.  5.  From  the  sins  that  mercy  pardons.  6.  From  the 
kindness  whi.h  He  shows  to  His  own  people  after  they  have  been  made  sharers 
of  mercy.  They  are  under  a  dispensation  of  mercy.  7-  From  His  merciful 
conduct  towards  siimers  in  this  world.  There  is  nothing  more  wonderful  than 
God's  unwearied  patience  and  mercy  towards  sinners.  (J.  Clapperton.)  A 
God  of  mercy  : — I.  The  mercy  of  God.  See  His  mercy  in  pardoning  iniquity. 
It  is  a  full  pardon-     It  is  a  free  pardon.     Observe  the  persons  to  whom  pardon 


CHAP,  vn.]  MICAH.  123 

is  extended.  The  promises  do  not  apply  to  the  careless,  thoughtless,  and  indif- 
ferent. This  full  pardon  is  not  promised  to  any  who  are  ignorant  of  the  scheme 
of  salvation  offered  to  us  in  Christ.  It  is  those  who  have  known  God,  who  have 
been  called  to  God,  and  who  have  been  sanctified  through  the  Spirit,  who  are 
pardoned.  But  mercy  and  anger,  on  the  part  of  God,  do  and  must  consist 
together.  Chastisements  are  fatherly  mercy.  II.  The  claims  that  mkboy  has 
ON  OUR  OBBDiBNCB.  It  has  a  claim  on  our  love.  We  are  always  to  remember 
that  ovir  love  does  not  purchase  God's  love,  but  that  God's  love  has  a  claim  upon 
ours.  If  we  would  have  our  love  increased  towards  Him  we  must  avoid  all 
those  things  that  would  lead  us  from  Him.  We  must  be  jealous  of  ourselves, 
lest  we  dishonour  Him  by  our  inconsistency.  {Montagu  VUliera,  M.A.)  The 
mercy  of  God : — Causes  are  best  discovered  in  their  effects.  We  judge  of  men's 
principles  and  dispositions  by  their  pursuits  and  conduct.  God  Himself,  so 
to  speak,  submits  to  be  examined  in  the  same  way.  To  ascertain  what  He  is, 
we  have  but  to  consider  what  He  does.  The  proofs  and  illustrations  of  this  text 
are  more  wonderful  than  the  assertion  itself.  "  What  hath  God  wrought "  to 
gain  the  confidence  of  our  guilty,  and  therefore  foreboding  and  misgiving,  minds  ? 
In  God's  sending  His  Son,  the  inspired  John  saw  most  clearly  that  "  God  is  Love." 
God's  soul  delights  in  His  own  Son,  yet  He  would  seem  to  delight  more  in  mercy. 
He  delights  not  only  in  the  exercise  of  mercy  to  us,  but  by  us.  He  therefore 
would  not  leave  mercy  to  the  operation  of  reason  and  religion  only ;  but  as  our 
Maker,  He  has  rendered  it  a  law  of  our  being.  By  our  very  physical  constitu- 
tion pity  is  an  unavoidable  emotion.  We  involuntarily  feel  an  uneasiness, 
which  prompts  us  to  succour  a  fellow- creature  in  distress,  even  to  relieve  our- 
selves. Though  this  be  originally  an  instinct  only,  by  cherishing  it  we  render 
it  a  virtue ;  and  by  exciting  and  exercising  it,  from  religious  motives,  we  turn 
it  into  a  Christian  grace.  See  what  stress  God  has  laid  upon  it  in  His  Word. 
He  has  told  us  that  no  clearness  of  knowledge,  no  rectitude  of  opinion,  no  fervour 
of  zeal,  no  constancy  of  attendance  on  ordinances,  no  talking  of  Divine  things, 
will  be  a  compensation  for  charity.  Let  us  therefore  not  only  believe  and 
admire,  but  let  us  be  followers  of  Him  who  delighteth  in  mercy.  We  cannot 
love  Him  unless  we  are  concerned  to  please  Him,  and  we  cannot  please  Him 
unless  we  are  like-minded  with  Him.  Neither  can  we  enjoy  Him.  Resem- 
blance is  the  foundation  of  our  communion  with  Him.  He  that  dwelleth  in 
love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him.  {William  Jay.)  The  grace  of  God 
in  pardoning  sin  : — There  is  scarcely  anything  in  religion  more  difficult  than 
deeply  to  feel  our  sins,  and  mourn  over  them,  and  yet  to  believe  firmly  in  the 
readiness  of  God  to  forgive  them.  It  is  easy  to  yield  to  despondency,  and  to 
consider  the  pardon  of  them  as  impossible.  To  oppose  such  gloomy  suggestions 
is  an  important  as  well  as  pleasing  duty.  I.  The  matchless  extent  of  God's 
pardoning  mercy.  The  uniform  character  of  God  in  His  dispensations  to  His 
Church  in  all  ages  is  that  of  a  God  who  "  pardoneth  iniquity,  transgression, 
and  sin."  Note  the  several  expressions  in  verse  18.  He  is  ever  engaged  in 
remitting  the  sins  of  those  who  plead  His  mercy.  "  He  pardoneth  iniquity." 
He  voluntarily  overlooks  offences.  "  Passeth  by  the  transgressions  of  the  rem- 
nant of  His  heritage."  He  does  not  allow  Himself,  as  He  justly  might,  to  be 
hindered  or  stopped  by  our  sins,  but  acts  as  one  who  sees  them  not.  When  God 
pardons  sin.  He  passes,  as  it  were,  over  it,  even  as  a  hastening  traveller  m-gea 
on  his  way,  and  neglects  the  impediments  in  his  road.  "  He  retains  not  His 
anger  for  ever."  He  is  provoked  with  the  obstinate  and  rebellious  ;  but  when 
they  truly  repent  and  tvirn  to  Him,  He  lets  go  His  wrath,  He  views  them  with 
infinite  compassion,  He  pardons  them.  He  passes  by  their  sins,  and  accepts 
them  "  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace."  The  spring  of  all  this  grace 
and  consideratio  i  is,  that  He  "  delighteth  in  mercy."  He  does  not  pardon 
reluctantly,  and  pass  by  our  sins  with  hesitation  or  backwardness,  but  with 
willing  promptitude  and  satisfaction.  There  is  a  force  in  the  original  phrase 
which  deserves  notice.  It  reads  literally:  "  Because,  as  for  Him,  He  delighteth 
in  mercy  "  ;  or  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy,  even  He."  His  very  nature  prompts 
Him  to  it.  Why,  then,  should  any  inquiring  and  self-condemned  penitent  despair 
of  pardon  ?  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  remission  may  be  great,  and  to  us 
may  appear  insurmovmtable,  but  the  glory  of  God  in  bestowing  it  is  therefore 
so  much  the  more  illustrious.  II.  The  consoling  application  op  this  mercy 
TO  the  case  of  the  penite  t  sinner.  In  the  text  this  general  truth  is  applied 
to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  Jewish   Church.     It  would  be  of  liltio 


124  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

moment  to  have  some  surprising  ideas  of  the  clemency  of  God  unless  this  applica- 
tion of  it  to  the  actual  circumstances  of  the  Church  were  added,  and  unless 
the  faithful  were  assured  for  themselves  that  God  would  be  merciful  to  them 
when  they  call  upon  Him.  And  this  is  indeed  the  true  reasoning  of  humble 
piety  in  every  age.  The  awakened  inquirer  may  be  assured  that  God  "  will 
turn  again."  Though  He  may  have  withdrawn  from  us  on  account  of  our  sins, 
yet  Hfe  wiU  return  and  bless  us  with  His  salvation.  And  how  will  He  return  ? 
"  He  will  have  compassion  upon  us."  All  the  misery  and  distress  which  we 
endure  wiU  be  observed  by  Him  ;  all  our  state  will  touch  His  heart,  and  move 
His  pity.  A  claim  to  merit  we  cannot  advance,  but  an  appeal  to  the  compas- 
sion of  God  in  Christ  will  never  fail.  And  what  will  be  the  effect  of  this  com- 
passion ?  "  He  will  subdue  our  iniquities  "  ;  that  is,  God  will  bestow  the  very 
blessing  we  need,  and  which  we  most  ardently  desire.  He  wiU,  by  His  grace, 
overcome  the  power  and  dominion  of  iniquity  in  the  heart,  and  enable  the  penitent 
to  love  and  obey  Him.  To  subdue  the  tyranny  of  our  sins  is  one  blessing  which 
flows  from  the  compassion  of  God.  But  what  shall  become  of  our  past  iniquities 
and  present  imperfections  ?  To  meet  this  question,  it  is  added,  "  God  wiU  cast 
all  our  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  His  forgiveness  shall  be  signal  and  com- 
plete. It  shall  be  as  if  the  whole  mass  of  ova  guilt  were  buried  in  the  mighty 
waters.  What  is  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  fathomless  ocean  sinks  never  to 
rise  again.     III.  The  oonfiemation  both  of  the  extent  of  God's  pakdonino 

MBBCY,   AND    OF   THE    CONSOLING   APPLICATION   OF   IT,    WHICH  IS   TO    BE   DERIVED 

FROM  THE  COVENANT  OF  MERCY  ITSELF.  God  had  chosen  Abraham,  and  had 
made  a  covenant  with  him  and  his  seed.  In  this  covenant,  pardon,  grace, 
strength,  consolation  were  assured  to  all  God's  heritage.  A  distinction  may 
be  observed  between  the  words  "  mercy "  and  "  truth,"  as  they  are  applied  to 
this  covenant.  God  is  said  to  "perform  His  truth  to  Jacob,  and  His  mercy  to 
Abraham."  Possibly  because  His  covenant,  as  it  was  given  to  Abraham,  was 
an  act  of  mere  mercy ;  but  in  ratifying  it  to  Jacob,  God  only  made  good  what 
He  had  before  promised.  Mercy  first  bestowed,  then  truth  confirmed,  the  cove- 
nant. So  still,  God  first  offers  Himself  freely  to  us,  and  then  is  faithful  and  true 
to  His  promises.  Application — 1.  Encourage  the  trembling  penitent  to  act 
on  the  views  thus  unfolded.  2.  Ascertain  your  interest  in  the  Everlasting  Cove- 
nant. 3.  Allow  that  possibly  your  sins  may  be  pardoned,  and  your  case  relieved. 
4.  Nay,  cherish  a  fuUy  assured  hope  of  being  pardoned  and  accepted.  {D.  Wilson, 
M.A.)  The  matchless  mercy  : — The  drift  and  scope  of  this  place  is  to  show 
God's  infinite  and  constant  mercies  to  His  children.  This  is  propoimded  in 
the  benefits  they  receive :  justification  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  sanctifica- 
tion  by  His  Spirit.  Justification  is  thus  set  forth.  He  shows  what  He  will  take 
away ;  even  original  sin,  and  om-  rebellion.  What  He  wiU  pass  by ;  "  the 
transgression  of  the  remnant  of  His  heritage."  Sanctification  is  amplified  in 
two  degrees :  in  this  life,  and  in  the  life  to  come.  The  reasons  moving  God  are 
taken  from  His  nature,  fiom  His  mercy,  and  from  His  truth.  Strengthened 
and  confirmed  from  divers  other  reasons,  from  antiquity,  from  the  often 
repetition  thereof;  and  God  has  even  sworn  it.  Doctrine  1.  There  is  none 
so  merciful  as  God.  Reasons — Mercy  is  God's  nature.  AU  creatures  in  heaven 
and  earth  have  their  mercy  by  derivation  from  this  mercy  of  God.  Mercy  in 
God  is  free,  without  any  cause  of  us  moving  Him  to  the  same.  Doctrine  2.  That 
it  is  the  mercy  of  all  mercies  to  have  our  sins  forgiven,  to  have  them  covered, 
buried,  and  done  quite  away.  Reasons — Because  other  mercies  reprobate  men 
may  have,  as  an  abstinence  from  some  sins,  a  show  of  sanctification,  some 
outward  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  &c. ;  but  this  mercy  of  forgiveness  none  can  have 
but  the  elect.  Because  this  benefit  is  the  chiefest  fountam  which  flowed  from 
Christ's  blood.  Because  it  brmgeth  unto  us  the  happiest  fruits  and  benefits 
here  and  hence.  Because  it  brings  us  to  an  everlasting  peace  in  heaven.  Doctrine 
3.  That  God  in  a  wonderful  and  special  manner  respecteth  His  heritage.  Reasons 
— Because  they  are  God's  purchase.  Because  of  His  providence,  in  that  He  kcepeth 
a  contmual  watch  over  them.  Because  He  dwelleth  amongst  His  Chm-ch, 
and  therefore  He  will  have  a  special  care  to  His  own  heritage,  to  do  them  all 
manner  of  kindnesses.  Doctrine  4.  That  the  people  of  God  be  but  a  remnant 
in  regard  of  the  wicked,  even  like  the  gleanings  of  the  com,  a  small  company. 
We  must  not  be  discouraged  though  we  see  few  go  with  us  in  the  way  to  heaven. 
Doctrine  5.  That  the  afflictions  of  God's  children  shall  have  a  seasonable 
and   a  speedy  end.     Reasons — Because   "  the   Lord  doth  not  afflict   willingly. 


OHAP.  vn.]  MICAH.  125 

nor  grieve  the  children  of  men."  Because  we  have  such  a  sure  Friend  in  the 
court  of  heaven.  Because  by  afflictions  we  gain  instruction.  Because  God 
correcteth  only  for  our  profit.  Doctrine  6.  Those  who  have  once  had  any  saving 
comfort  shall  have  it  again.  Reasons — Because  all  God's  saving  graces  be  given 
for  everlasting.  Because  He  will  turn  again  and  have  compassion,  for  His  heart 
is  near  unto  us.  Because  of  aU  burdens  the  absence  of  God's  favour  is  so  intoler- 
able. Doctrine  7.  Where  God  forgiveth  sin,  there  He  also  subdueth  sin.  Reasons 
— Because  the  virtue  of  Christ's  death  can  never  be  separated  from  the  merit 
of  the  same.  Because  without  this  subduing  of  sin  upon  forgiveness,  neither 
should  we  have  comfort  from  Him,  nor  He  glory  from  us.  Doctrine  8.  Those 
who  have  their  sins  subdued  whilst  they  live  shall  have  them  all  drowned  when 
they  are  dead.  Doctrine  9.  That  wherein  God  delighteth  it  is  impossible  but 
it  must  needs  come  to  paas.  And  He  delighteth  in  mercy.  Doctrine  10.  God 
is  bound,  in  regard  of  His  truth,  to  fulfil  all  His  former  mercies  to  His  children. 
Too  often  we  neglect  God's  promises,  because  we  do  not  receive  immediate  help. 
We  must  labour  by  all  means  to  remember  and  apply  the  promises,  and  so  turn 
them  into  prayers.  (R.  Sibbes.)  The  Qod  of  the  Christiana  a  God  delighting 
in  mercy : — Heathen  religions  rest  on  the  principle  of  terror.  This  appears  in 
the  very  aspect  of  their  gods.  The  enlightened  nations  even  formed  their  gods 
on  this  principle.  They  put  the  thunder  into  the  right  hand  of  their  Jupiter; 
they  placed  the  eagle  at  His  feet;  they  represented  Him  as  ruling  the  world 
by  terror.  It  was  reserved  for  revelation  to  present  the  Divine  character  in 
the  full  circle  of  His  perfections.  To  "  delight  in  mercy  "  was  a  conception,  in 
connection  with  the  Deity,  which  the  heathen  world  would  never  have  formed. 
I.  Thb  God  of  thb  Cheistians  is  Lovb.  "  God  is  Love,"  said  the  Apostle  John  ; 
and  all  His  various  perfections  are  but  so  many  modifications  of  love.  II.  All 
His  transactions  with  mbn  have  provbd  how  much  He  delights  in  mercy. 
Even  the  covenant  of  works  was  but  an  introduction  to  the  display  of  Divine 
mercy ;  and  if  sm  had  not  entered  into  the  world  we  should  not  have  known 
the  thousandth  part  of  His  love.  III.  The  God  of  the  Christians  has  written 
His  character  in  a  book.  Its  histories,  prophecies,  laws,  doctrines,  threaten- 
ings,  promises,  all  tell  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord.     IV.  All  the  works  of  God 

GO    TO    SHOW   that    THB    GOD    OF    TBTE    CHRISTIANS    DELIGHTETH   IN    MERCY.       The 

world  was  made  as  a  theatre  for  His  mercy.  His  providence  displays  His  mercy. 
Every  act  of  mercy  is  to  allure  men  to  the  provisions  of  mercy ;  every  act  of 
judgment  is  to  alarm  men  that  they  may  avail  themselves  of  His  mercy. 
V.  View  the  subject  in  regard  to  the  scheme  of  our  recovery.  This, 
from  first  to  last,  is  a  revelation  of  the  richest  mercy.  What  is  the  incarnation 
of  the  Son  of  God  ?  What  are  the  miracles  ?  What  were  His  sighs,  but  the 
heart's  breath  of  His  mercy  ?  What  His  death,  but  the  sacrifice  of  His  mercy  ? 
What  is  the  Gospel,  but  the  royal  proclamation  of  mercy  ?  VI.  All  the  per- 
fections OF  God  abb  employed  in  illustrating  His  mercy.  His  eyes  are 
employed  in  exercises  of  mercy,  in  watching  its  objects,  and  ascertaining  their 
wants.  His  ears  are  ever  open  to  the  cry  of  the  needy.  His  lips  are  employed 
in  uttering  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  mercy.  His  hands  are  engaged  in  works 
of  mercy.  His  feet  are  ever  hastening  to  the  relief  of  the  objects  of  His  mercy. 
His  wisdom,  power,  justice,  truth,  sovereignty,  immutability  are  all  occupied 
in  the  designs  of  His  mercy.     VTI.  The  innumerable  forms  in  which  God's 

MERCY  APPEARS   SHOW  THAT   He  DELIGHTETH  IN  MERCY.      The  wholc  of  the  water 

of  the  world  is  called  the  ocean,  but  this  takes  various  names,  according  to  the 
shores  it  weishes.  As  the  Atlantic,  German,  Pacific,  Indian,  &c.  So  it  seems 
with  the  mercy  of  God.  It  bears  different  names,  according  to  the  state  of  those 
whom  it  visits.  It  is  either  calling,  protecting,  pardoning,  or  comforting  mercy. 
How  unbounded  are  the  stores  and  resources  of  Divine  mercy.  Then  should 
not  we  too  be  merciful ;  delighting  in  mercy  even  as  doth  our  heavenly  Father  ? 
(A.  Waugh,  D.D.)  Ood'a  patience : — In  the  Old  Testament  much  is  special 
to  its  age,  and  has  to  us  only  a  secondary  value.  But  while  the  elements  that 
were  local  and  special  to  one  people  and  one  age  no  longer  have  to  us  the  import- 
ance which  they  had  to  them  to  whom  they  were  first  delivered,  yet  other  portions 
contain  universal  truths, — that  is,  truths  that  belong  to  men  everywhere,  in 
every  age.  Joys,  sorrows,  the  literatiu-e  of  those  sorrows,  universal  afflictions, 
remorse,  yearnings  after  goodness ;  in  short,  all  the  moral  sentiments,  and  all 
the  natural  affections,  are  the  same  under  all  governments,  under  all  laws,  and 
in  every  age.     The  Scriptures  that  relate  to  these  things  are  perennial.     If  you 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

cast  into  oblivion  the  Psalms  of  David,  you  throw  away  the  best  literature 
of  the  feelings  that  has  ever  appeared  in  human  language  ;  and  where  can  you 
replace  it  ?  The  noblest  applications  of  moral  principles  to  human  affairs  are 
to  be  found  in  the  prophets.  Let  anyone  ask  himself  where  he  will  find  a  sub- 
stitute for  that  sublime  conception  of  God  that  rules  throughout  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. There  are  not,  even  in  the  New  Testament,  any  descriptions  of  God  that, 
for  jnajesty  and  completeness  and  symmetry  and  harmony,  go  beyond  and 
higher  than  those  contained  in  the  oldest  parts  of  the  Old  Testament.  One 
of  these  Divine  elements  comes  before  us  this  morning — God's  great  patience 
with  men,  and  His  forgiveness  of  them.  1.  Our  sin  is  not  so  much  a  violation 
of  a  law  that  lies  outside  of  the  bosom  of  God,  as  it  is  a  disregard  of  the  feelings 
and  nature  of  God  Himself.  There  is  a  marked  distinction  between  personal 
feeling  infringed  upon  and  law  transgressed.  In  worldly  affairs  there  is  a  dis- 
tinction between  a  disregard  of  the  rules  of  business  and  a  personal  disagree- 
ment with  you  yourself.  When  a  man  offends  against  you,  his  wrong  is  more 
heinous  and  provoking  than  when  he  offends  against  your  rules  and  laws.  God 
and  His  laws  are  one,  in  such  a  sense  that  when  you  offend  against  His  moral 
law  you  offend  against  His  own  personal  feeling.  In  this  light  it  may  be  seen 
that  every  man  sins  every  day  of  his  life.  There  are  irmumerable  evils  and 
wrongs  and  injuries  against  God's  feelings  in  the  history  of  every  single  man. 
Men  have  been  living  in  a  perpetual  violation  of  all  the  thoughts  and  feelings 
of  God's  mind.  And  yet  the  race  has  thriven ;  there  have  been  joys,  there 
have  been  mercies  and  blessings,  there  have  been  reforming  and  stimulating 
influences  developed  in  the  world.  These  things  explain  what  is  meant  when 
God  is  spoken  of  as  being  so  patient,  so  long-suffering.  He  suffers  and  endures ; 
and  the  reason  is,  that  He  "  deUghteth  in  mercy."  He  delights  to  be  kind. 
Kindness  harmonises  with  His  nature.  Consider  the  literature  of  this  kindness 
as  it  is  represented  in  the  Bible.  He  is  the  one  who,  though  offended,  needs 
no  persuasion  to  forgive.  He  is  not  only  merciful.  He  is  magnanimous.  3.  Con- 
sider what  it  is  to  have  such  a  Being  as  this  at  the  centre  of  power  and  adminis- 
tration. The  most  intensely  thoughtful  and  the  most  intensely  active  of  any 
being  in  the  universe  is  God.  In  view  of  this  brief  opening  of  the  character 
of  God,  and  of  His  feelings  towards  men  that  are  sinning  and  trespassing  against 
Him,  I  remark — (1)  This  conception  of  God  should  quicken  every  moral  sensi- 
bility, and  make  a  life  of  sin  painful  and  distasteful  to  us.  (2)  There  is  in  this 
presentation  of  God's  character  an  argument  against  a  dishonourable  reliance 
on  God's  goodness  as  a  means  of  sinning.  (3)  Consider,  in  the  light  of  this  dis- 
course, how  we  ought  to  forgive  each  other  when  we  have  been  offended  one 
by  another.  Contrast  our  ordinary  mode  of  forgiveness  with  that  of  our  God. 
(4)  In  this  view  of  God  there  is  encouragement  to  all  who  are  honest,  and  who 
are  seeking  to  live  a  godly  life.     (Henry  Ward  Beecher.)  The  mercy  of  God  : 

— Consider  God's  mercy — I.  In  its  eisb.  II.  In  its  progress.  III.  In  its 
CONSUMMATION.  {Skeletons  of  Sermons.)  The  incomparableness  of  God  illus- 
trated in  His  forgiveness  of  sin  : — I.  Thh  nature  of  His  forgiveness.  The 
Bible  generally  sets  Divine  forgiveness  forth  under  figures  corresponding  to 
the  aspects  in  which  sin  stands  before  the  mind  of  the  writer  at  the  time.  For 
example — 1.  When  sin  appears  as  a  debt,  an  unfulfilled  obligation,  then  pardon 
is  spoken  of  as  cancelling.  2.  When  sin  appears  as  an  estrangement  from  God, 
then  forgiveness  is  represented  as  reconciliation.  3.  When  sin  appears  as  an 
indictment,  forgiveness  is  spoken  of  as  justification.  4.  When  sin  appears  as 
a  pollution,  forgiveness  is  represented  as  a  cleansing.  5.  When  sin  appears  as 
a  disease,  forgiveness  is  represented  as  a  healing.  6.  When  sin  appears  as  an 
obstruction  between  the  so\il  and  God,  forgiveness  is  represented  as  a  clearing. 
There   are   three   points   of  contrast  between   Divine   forgiveness  and   human. 

(1)  In  human  governments  forgiveness  is  exercised  with  most  cautious  limita- 
tions.    There  is  no  such  limitation  to  the  exercise  of  this  prerogative  in  God. 

(2)  In  human  forgiveness  there  is  no  guarantee  against  future  criminality.  But 
the  God-pardoned  man  is  a  changed  man.  (3)  Human  forgiveness  can  never 
put  the  criminal  in  such  a  good  position  as  he  had  before  his  transgression.  But 
in  Divine  forgiveness  the  criminal  is  raised  to  a  higher  status  even  than  that 
of  innocence.  II.  The  source  of  His  forgiveness.  Anger  in  God  is  not  passion, 
but  principle  ;  not  antagonism  to  existence,  but  to  the  evils  that  curse  existence. 
Here  is  the  source  of  forgiveness,  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  1.  Forgiveness  as 
a  merciful  act.     It  is  not  an  act  of  equity,  but  of  compassion  ;  not  of  justice,  but 


CHAP,  vu.]  MIC  AH.  127 

of  love.  2.  This  act  of  mercy  is  the  delight  of  God.  Mercy  is  a  modification 
of  benevolence.  (2)  If  He  delights  in  mercy,  then  hush  for  ever  the  pulpits  that 
blasphemously  represent  Him  as  malign.  (2)  If  He  delights  in  mercy,  then  let 
no  sinner  despair  on  account  of  the  enormity  of  his  sins.  (3)  If  He  delights  in 
mercy,  may  we  not  hope  that  one  day  there  will  come  an  end  to  all  the  misery 
of  the  moral  universe  ?  III.  The  completeness  of  His  forgiveness  (ver. 
19).  1.  The  entire  subjugation  of  all  sins.  Sin  is  the  enemy  of  all  enemies. 
Divine  forgiveness  is  the  destruction  of  sin  in  us.  2.  The  entire  submersion 
of  all  sin.  Forgiveness  is  deliverance  from  sin.  Figures  employed — "  Blotting 
out  of  a  thick  cloud."  "  Thou  hast  oast  all  my  sins  behind  Thy  back."  Casting 
sins  "  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  "  Remembering  sin  no  more."  All  true 
forgiveness  involves  forgetfulness.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.    19.  And  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths    of  the    sea. — 

Ood  putting  away  the  iniquity  of  His  peofle  : — The  mercies  and  promises  of  the 
Old  Testament  were  but  the  outline  of  the  glory  thereafter  to  be  revealed.  The 
latter  portion  of  this  chapter  abounds  with  assurances  of  Jerusalem's  restoration, 
involving  in  it  the  confusion  and  degradation  of  its  enemies.  The  prophet's 
apostrophe  to  Jehovah  in  the  last  verses,  both  in  the  clearness  of  its  views  and 
the  fulness  of  its  statements,  is  one  well  suited  to  the  Christian.  It  is  much  to 
be  released  from  sin's  captivity,  to  have  its  iron  yoke  removed,  and  the  foul 
garments  of  its  bondage  torn  away.  But  it  is  more  to  find  that  He  who  pardoneth 
iniquity  because  He  delighteth  in  mercy  wiU  also  have  compassion  on  us,  and 
subdue  our  iniquities;  not  merely  cleanse  us  from  their  stain  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  but  also  deliver  us  from  their  power  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  The  particular 
turn  of  the  language  of  the  text  appears  to  be  taken  from  the  destruction  of  the 
hosts  of  Egypt  in  the  Red  Sea.  As  their  ruin  was  so  utter  that  they  were  to  be 
seen  alive  no  more  for  ever,  it  implies  that  our  great  spiritual  tjTants  and  foes, 
our  sins,  shall,  when  God  by  His  Spirit  arises  to  subdue  them,  be  as  completely 
cast  out,  and  their  final  penalty  be  as  thoroughly  put  away,  as  though  they  were 
buried  in  the  depths  of  the  sea.  Sin  is  closely  connected  with  suffering.  If, 
then,  God  maybe  said  in  a  metaphor  to  cast  sin  into  the  sea,  may  we  not  hterally 
say  the  same  of  the  suffering  ?  ^Tiat  the  sea  is  said  typically  to  do  for  the  former, 
it  often  actually  does  for  the  latter.  With  so  much  of  injury  and  destructiveness 
connected  with  the  sea,  there  is  also  bound  up  much  of  benefit ;  benefit  especially 
to  suffering  humanity,  in  the  multiform  maladies  which  embitter  our  existence. 
Then  let  the  sea  remind  you  how  noble  is  the  gift  of  spiritual  health ;  how  all- 
important  that  the  moral  disease  of  evil  should  be  washed  away,  and  your  sins 
through  mercy  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea — that  ocean  of  heavenly  grace  and 
love  which  shall  hide  them  for  ever  from  merited  condemnation  !  {Edmund 
LiUey,  M.A.)  What  Ood  wovld  do  with  our  sins  : — "  Our  iniquities."  "  Our 
sins," — is  it  possible  for  us  to  be  quite  rid  of  these  ?  This  great  question  finds 
in  the  text  a  still  greater  answer.  The  words  are  two  clauses  of  promise,  each 
with  its  own  shade  of  figurative  meaning — a  strong  shade,  and  a  stronger.  I.  The 
Divine  One  as  effecting  the  conquest  of  human  sins.  "  He  will  subdue 
our  iniquities  " ;  that  is.  He  will  tread  them  down,  will  trample  them  in  triumph 
under  His  feet.  The  very  sound  of  the  words  suggests  that  it  is  no  easy  enter- 
prise, this  managing  of  our  sins.  We  are  apt  to  think  lightly  of  sins.  We  under- 
estimate the  terrible  capacity  of  wrong  and  death  which  lurks  in  them,  and  in 
each  one  of  them.  We  yield  them  quarter,  rations,  parole,  friendship.  They 
swarm  round  us,  and  we  caimot  subdue  them.  Give  your  welcome,  then,  to 
Him  who  conquers  this  haunting  throng  on  your  behalf.  Here  He  stands,  at 
your  side  and  mine.  With  Him  beside  us  the  whole  matter  passes  beyond  mere 
hopefulness  into  utter  assurance.  "  But,"  it  may  be  asked,  "  is  it  not  an  arduous 
and  a  daring  task  for  any  one  to  vmdertake  for  me  ?  "  It  is  so  much  this,  and  so 
much  more  this  than  you  can  think,  that  only  the  One  need  attempt  to  luider- 
take  it.  You  may  safely  entrust  the  great  task  to  Him.  See  the  comprehensive 
completeness  of  the  conquest.  Christ  not  only  conquers  all  the  bad  legions  that 
had  mustered  around  us  during  bygone  years,  but  He  tramples  down  the  up- 
springing  legions  as  they  venture  to  arise, — thinning  their  ranks  and  enfeebliiig 
their  energy,  and  impoverishing  their  condition,  with  the  sure  prospect  for  us 
that  soon  the  hour  will  have  struck  when  He  can  look  back  upon  nothing  but 
conquest,  and  forward  upon  nothing  to  conquer.  II.  The  Divine  One  as  effect- 
ing the  destructio2^  and  oblivion  of  human  sins.     The  new  ligure  substantially 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

repeats  the  sense  of  the  other ;  yet  it  advances  further,  and  is  more  vividly  full 
of  the  gracious  truth  upon  this  subject.  "  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea."  "  Sins,"  not  "  iniquities  "  only,  but  the  gravest  as  well  as 
the  lightest  violations  of  Divine  law.  "  Into  the  sea,"  and  into  the  deep  places 
of  the  sea ;  far  to  seaward,  where  the  sounding  line  descends  in  miles — buried, 
without  resurrection,  for  evermore.  Some  who  ^  have  entrusted  themselves  to 
God's  grace  are  still  timid  and  doubtful  as  to  whether  it  can  really  be  all,  and 
once  for  all,  and  irrecoverably,  settled  about  those  sins  of  theirs.  Be  sure  that 
when  God  pardons  at  all  He  pardons  altogether.  The  sins  of  a  Christ- trusting 
man  are  not  only  lost,  but  are  what  may  be  called  securely  lost.  A  thing  is  most 
safely  gone,  not  when  it  is  banished  we  know  not  whither,  but  when,  knowing 
where  it  is,  we  are  sure  that  it  is  absolutely  irrecoverable.  Apply.  Never  dream 
of  managing  your  sins  yourself.  When  God  haa  put  our  sins  into  forgetfulnesa 
we  ought  ourselves  no  more  to  remember  them.  (J,  A.  Kerr  Bain,  M.A.)  How 
God  forgives : — The  gist  of  the  two  verses  is  in  the  sentence,  "  And  Thou  wilt  cast 
all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  However  unlike  to  ea«h  other  we  may 
be,  we  all  have  need  of  pardon.  In  human  pardon  there  is  nothing  remarkable 
save  this,  that  it  is  often  remarkably  slow  in  coming,  and  as  remarkably  un- 
gracious when  it  does  come ;  and  that  when  it  is  bom  it  is  remarkably  short< 
lived.  Our  pardons,  like  ourselves,  are  full  of  imperfections.  What  a  painful 
operation  it  is  to  be  forgiven  !  A  man  seldom  forgives  without  first  humiliating. 
When  God  forgives  He  does  it  in  a  style  worthy  of  Himself.  There  is  a  dignity 
about  His  forgiveness ;  it  is  a  positive  luxury  to  be  forgiven  by  Him.  God 
only  is  perfect  in  the  art  of  pardoning.  In  the  text  God's  pardon  is  described  by 
four  words — I.  Pardon.  '  Pardoneth  iniquity."  While  in  everything  God 
is  incomparable.  He  is  most  unrivalled  in  the  matter  of  forgiving.  The  glory 
of  God  is  His  ability  and  willingness  to  forgive.  The  word  "  pardoneth  "  in 
the  Hebrew  means  "  to  Uft  up  and  carry  away.  '  Do  not  run  away  with  the  idea 
that  pardoning  is  only  a  matter  of  uttering  a  word.  God  cannot  forgive  at  the 
expense  of  His  own  righteousness.  He  is  a  God  that  lifteth  up  the  iniquity.  The 
Son  lifted  the  sin  up  on  His  shoulders,  and  He  walked  away  with  it.  II.  Passeth 
BY.  "  And  passeth  by  the  transgression."  Transgression  here  means  "  rebellion." 
"  Passeth  by," — that  is,  as  if  He  did  not  see  it.  Grod  deals  with  sin  as  if  He  did 
not  see  it.  He  has  seen  it  once.  He  saw  it  on  Christ.  He  does  not  see  it  on  me, 
because  He  saw  it  on  Him.  III.  Subdue.  The  R.V.  has,  "  He  wiU  trample 
under  foot  our  iniquities."  When  God  forgives  the  guilt  of  a  sinner's  sins  He 
breaks  their  power.  Have  you  ever  tried  to  trample  on  yoiur  own  iniquities  ? 
When  God  forgives  the  guilt  He  says :  "  I  will  do  more — I  will  put  My  foot  down 
on  the  neck  of  your  iniquities."  IV.  Cast  into  sea.  God  provides  that  His  act 
of  grace  shall  never  be  repealed.  He  will  never  take  back  the  pardon  He  has 
once  bestowed.  "  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  That 
is  how  God  puts  away  the  sins  of  His  people.  Wlien  God  pardons  a  man's  sins 
He  takes  the  sins,  and  drops  them  into  the  deepest  place  He  can  find,  and  there 
they  lie,  for  ever  forgiven,  for  ever  forgotten.  Micah  may  have  had  the  drowning 
of  the  Egyptian  host  in  his  mind  when  he  penned  this  passage.  When  God 
pardons,  the  tablets  of  His  memory,  if  I  may  so  put  it,  are  wiped,  and  there  is 
no  remembrance  for  ever  made  of  this  sin.  When  God  buries  our  sin  He  takes 
it  right  out  into  the  mid-ocean  of  Divine  pardon  and  Divine  forgetfulness,  and 
it  is  for  ever  forgotten.  {Archibald  O.  Brown.)  Divine  compassion  to  sinners  : 
— Though  the  Almighty  is  absolutely  incomprehensible,  and  cannot  be  found 
out  to  perfection,  yet  He  has  explicitly  revealed  Himself  as  a  God  "  merciful 
and  gracious,  slow  to  anger  and  ready  to  forgive."  And  this  propitious  character 
of  the  Deity  is  peculiarly  appropriate  and  interesting  to  mankind.  Infinite  mercy 
has  graciously  provided  a  way  of  salvation,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  which  is 
perfectly  consistent  with  Divine  justice,  and  admirably  suited  to  the  necessitous 
circumstances  of  the  "  world  that  lieth  in  wickedness."  I.  The  BLESsmas 
PIOUSLY  ANTICIPATED.  "  He  wiU  subdue  our  iniquities,"  &e.  There  may  be 
an  allusion  to  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  from  the  Egyptian  bondage.  As 
the  Lord  then  literally  subdued  Pharaoh  and  His  host,  so  He  will  spiritually 
"  subdue  the  iniquities  "  of  His  faithful  servants,  and  by  His  pardoning  mercy 
"  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  The  prophet  evidently  antici- 
pates— 1.  The  absolution  of  the  guilt  of  sin.  As  "  all  have  sinned,  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  we  must  certainly  either  be  pardoned  or  punished. 
When  sinners  return  unto  God  with  penitent -tmd  believing  hearts,  He  graciously 


CHAP,  vn.]  MIC  AH.  129 

forgives  their  transgressions,  and  heals  their  backslidings.  This  inestimable 
blessing  is  called  in  the  text,  "  casting  all  our  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea," 
which  is  a  mode  of  exprcvssion  that  intimates  both  the  extent  and  completeness 
of  pardon.  2.  The  subjugation  of  the  power  of  sin.  We  are  not  only  guilty, 
but  depraved.  Sin  is  frequently  personified  in  Scripture,  and  described  as  a 
vile  usurper  and  destructive  tyrant,  reigning  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  the  dis- 
obedient. Hence  it  is  not  only  necessary  that  the  guilt  of  sin  be  mercifully 
cancelled,  but  that  its  power  be  effectually  subdued.  Omnipotence  alone  is 
equal  to  this  glorious  achievement.  He  principally  accomplishes  this  work  of 
grace  by  His  Son,  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  by  His  Word  as  the  instrument  of 
salvation,  and  by  His  Spirit  as  the  agent  of  personal  religion.  II.  Their  sottbce 
DISTINCTLY  SPECIFIED.  "  He  will  tum  again ;  He  will  have  compassion  upon 
us."  The  prophet  attributes  the  pardon  and  destruction  of  sin  to  the  Lord 
Jehovah.  These  blessings  are  Divine  in  their  origin.  God  only  can  forgive  sin, 
and  save  the  sinner.  It  is  His  sole  prerogative  to  absolve  our  crimes  and  purify 
our   souls.     And  this  perfectly  harmonises  with  the  perfections  of  His  nature. 

2.  These  blessings  are  propitious  in  their  medium.  We  have  no  natural  right 
or  claim  to  the  Divine  mercies,  and  can  only  receive  them  by  way  of  sovereign 
favour,  "  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  For  this  purpose 
He  assumed  our  nature,  died  for  our  sins,  and  ever  lives  to  intercede  for  sinners. 

3.  These  blessings  are  gracious  in  their  bestowment.  We  cannot  receive  them  on 
the  ground  of  personal  worthiness  or  human  merit.  Nor  does  the  Lord  require 
any  previous  goodness  or  moral  fitness  to  render  us  worthy  of  the  blessings  of 
salvation.  He  freely  and  graciously  pardons  and  saves  the  truly  penitent,  for 
the  glory  of  His  name,  through  the  merits  of  the  Redeemer.  III.  The  con- 
fidence DEVOUTLY  EXPRESSED.  "  He  wUl  turn,"  &c.  This  is  not  the  language 
of  enthusiastic  presumption,  but  of  inspired  and  rational  assurance  ;  it  is  founded 
on — 1.  The  character  and  covenant  of  God.  2.  The  atonement  and  intercession 
of  Christ.  3.  The  doctrines  and  promises  of  the  Gospel.  We  may  infer  from 
this  subject — (1)  The  necessity  of  repentance  and  faith.  2.  The  possibility  of 
pardon  and  holiness.  3.  The  felicity  and  duty  of  the  saints.  {Eta,  in  "  Sketches 
of  Four  Hundred  Sermons")  Divine  forgiveness  : — Three  ideas  involved  in  figiu-es 
of  Divine  forgiveness.  I.  An  antecedent  liability  to  punishment.  AU  the 
terms  imply  something  wrong,  and  the  wrong  is  moral.  It  is  crime,  and  crime 
must  ever  expose  to  punishment.  Because  of  this  moral  wrong  there  must  be 
a  liability  to  punishment.  II.  The  exercise  of  a  merciful  prerogative. 
God  is  disposed  to  forgive.  Two  things  connected  with  this  pardoning  prerogative 
which  marks  it  ofE  from  its  exercise  in  human  governments.  1.  In  human  govern- 
ments it  is  exercised  with  most  cautious  limitations.  2.  In  human  govern- 
ments forgiveness  is  invariably  valued  by  those  to  whom  it  is  exercised. 
III.  An  actual  deliverance  from  all  liability  to  punitive  suffering. 
The  forgiven  man  is  delivered  from  punishment.  {HomUist.)  Sins  lost  in  the 
depths  of  the  sea : — You  see  the  Thames  as  it  goes  sluggishly  down  through  the 
arches,  carrying  with  it  endless  impurity  and  corruption.  You  watch  the  inky 
stream  as  it  pours  along  day  and  night,  and  you  think  it  will  pollute  the  world. 
But  you  have  just  been  down  to  the  seashore,  and  you  have  looked  on  the  great 
deep,  and  it  has  not  left  a  stain  on  the  Atlantic.  No,  it  has  been  rurming  down  a 
good  many  years  and  carried  a  world  of  impurity  with  it,  but  when  you  go  to  the 
Atlantic  there  is  not  a  speck  on  it.  As  to  the  ocean,  it  knows  nothing  about  it. 
It  is  full  of  majestic  music.  So  the  smoke  of  London  goes  up,  and  has  been  going 
up,  for  a  thousand  years.  One  woiild  have  thought  that  it  would  have  spoiled 
the  scenery  by  now ;  but  you  get  a  look  at  it  sometimes.  There  is  the  great 
blue  sky  which  has  swallowed  up  the  smoke  and  gloom  of  a  thousand  years,  and 
its  azure  splendour  ia  unspoiled.  It  is  wonderful  how  the  ocean  has  kept  its 
purity,  and  how  the  sky  has  taken  the  breath  of  the  millions  and  the  smoke  of 
the  furnaces,  and  yet  it  is  as  pure  as  the  day  God  made  it.  It  is  beautifvd  to  think 
that  these  are  only  images  of  God's  great  pity  for  the  race.  Our  sins,  they  are 
like  the  Thames ;  but,  mind  you,  they  shall  be  swallowed  up — lost  in  the  depths 
of  the  sea,  to  be  remembered  against  us  no  more.  Though  our  sins  have  been 
going  up  to  heaven  through  the  generations,  yet  though  thy  sins  are  aa  crimson, 
they  shall  be  as  wool,  as  white  as  snow.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

VSV  07  VOL.  I. 


Princeton  Theological  Semmary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01128  5006 


DATE  DUE 

--^.H-'-H"' 

MLJL^>^^ 

Atf««ai2<«l| 

r?* 

..««W^lg»l^ 

P 

m^^ 

Isfc- 

jrirr~^^^^pp 

1 

ifr*^^ 

Ifg^' 

MP" 

^ 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  US    A. 

Date  Due 


