; a) be aay oe 


oe 


£ 
Waist 


ee 


THE GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY. 


THE 


GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY. 


BY 


ROBERT ANDERSON, LLD., 


BARRISTER-AT-LAW ; ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF POLICE OF THE METROPOLIS ; 


AUTHOR OF ‘‘THE COMING PRINCE,” “HUMAN DESTINY,” ETC. 


Hitth Edition. 


LONDON: 
JAMES NISBET & CO., 21 BERNERS STREET. 
1890. 


EDINBURGH: 
PRINTED BY LORIMER AND GILLIES, 


SEST ANDREW SQUARE, 
= : 


NOTE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


For the reasons given in the “ Preface to the Fourth 
Edition,” these pages are again re-issued unaltered. 

As the years go by, the struggle for “the faith once 
delivered” is growing fiercer, and the importance of 
the truths here treated of is ever deepening. But 
their importance is by no means limited to the sphere 
of theology. They are truths for the busiest hours of 
a busy life; truths to keep the heart green in the 
midst of ungenial circumstances and pursuits, such as 
tend to degrade men to the level of believing that this 
present life is real and the life to come a dream, 


PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION. 


r 


In these days men have left off faith. The spirit of the’ 
martyrs is not inthem. Opinions have taken the place 
of convictions; and the result is a liberality which is 
the offspring, not of humility and love, but of indiffer- 
ence or doubt. Opinions are our own, and should not 
be too firmly held. Truth is Divine, and is worth living 
for and dying for. 

But what is truth? Each one, surely, must answer 
for himself; and does it not resolve itself therefore 
into a question of opinion after all? This is just what 
characterises the day we live in. Listening to the 
discordant voices that abound on every side, men are 
content to give heed only to the points on which the 
greater number appear to be agreed; and even these 
are held on sufferance till some new voice arises to 
challenge them. Fair is impossible. If an angel 
from heaven were heard above the discord, or an 
apostle should return to earth, then indeed the 
anarchy of opinion might yield once again to the 
reign of faith. Meanwhile, we must be content to 
drift on in darkness, blindly trusting that when the 


day dawns we shall find ourselves in safety. * 
vil 


vill PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION. 


Was it for this the Son of God lived and died on 
earth? Was it for this the glorious Gospel of the 
blessed God was preached “with the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven”? How different from the spirit of 
the age is the language of the inspired Apostle! 
“Though WE or an ANGEL FROM HEAVEN preach any 
other gospel unto you than that which we have 
preached unto you, let him be accursed.” Such warnings 
in Holy Writ are not the words of wild exaggeration. In 
the last days the new light which men seek for to 
dispel “the deepening gloom” will not be wanting; 
but it will prove a wrecker’s fire, though seemingly 
accredited as the beacon light of truth. 

God has given us a revelation. And, while doubt 
still lingers round innumerable questions on which we 
crave knowledge, Divine certainty is our privilege in 
respect of “all things that pertain unto life and 
godliness.” The man who would force his opinions 
on others is a boor. He who would die for his opinions 
isa fool. But Christianity has not to do with opinions. 
It is founded on established facts and Divine truth; 
and faith based thereon is the heritage of the 
Church. Her martyrs knew the power of faith. The 
truth they died for was not “the general sense of 
Scripture corrected in the light of reason and con- 
science,” and thus reduced to the pulp-like consistency 
of modern theology. In the solitude of the dungeon, 
or amidst the agonies of the rack, they calmly rested 
on the Word of God; and, even when assured that 
all others had recanted, they could stand firmly 
against both the world and the Church. Faith, 


PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION. IX 


which makes the unseen a present reality, brought 
all heaven into their hearts, and, refusing to accept 
deliverance, they braved death in every form. 

We are not called upon to wear the martyr’s crown, 
but it is ours to share the martyr's faith. We can have 
no toleration for the veiled scepticism which is passing 
for Christianity to-day. Agnosticism is Greek for 
ignorance, and ignorance is both shameful and sinful 
in presence of a Divine revelation. The Christian 
is not ignorant; neither is he in doubt. We do 
not think this or that: we KNow. “We know that 
the Son of God is come.” “We know that He was 
manifested to take away our sins.” “We know that 
we have passed from death unto life.” “We know 
that if our earthly house were dissolved, we have 
a building of God, eternal in the heavens.” “We 
know that when he shall appear we shall be like Him.” 
“We know that He is able to keep that which we have 
committed unto Him against that day.” 

It is in this spirit “The Gospel and Its Ministry ” is 
written. The book is designed to confirm faith, not to 
suggest doubts. And what distinguishes it from many 
other valuable works on the same great subject, is that 
it is not hortatory but doctrinal in character. Addressed 
to no special class, it is intended for all who are 
interested in the doctrine of the Gospel. In the past it 
has proved helpful to not a few inquirers after truth; 
and it has been used as a text-book by many who seek 
to teach the truth to others. 

When an Author turns to re-peruse the work of 
earlier years, he is tempted to revise with a free hand, 


x PREFACE TO THE FOURTH- EDITION. 


especially, as here, when dealing with pages written for 
publication anonymously and in an ephemeral form. 
But such a revision is open to objection; and as the 
book has made so many friends in its present state, and 
its circulation in America has passed entirely beyond 
the Author’s control, it is now re-issued without material 
alteration, 


39 LINDEN GARDENS, W. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. PAGE 

INTRODUCTORY ; é R 7 4 e 1 
CHAPTER IL 

GRACE a ; s C : 2 i 8 
CHAPTER III. 

THE CROSS . ; i ` 5 : k 22 
CHAPTER IV. 

FAITH % 5 A c . A A 35 
CHAPTER V. 

REPENTANCE AND THE SPIRIT’S WORK 5 A 2 51 


CHAPTER Vi. 

ELECTION . 5 0 ò : 5 ; 69 
CHAPTER VII. 

SUBSTITUTION 5 . . ; : 5 81 


CHAPTER VIII. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS f . . . : 5 93 
CHAPTER, IX. 

SANOTIFICATION : 5 ; . i 5 108 
CHAPTER X. 


RECONCILIATION . 4 s A è 6 126 


xii CONTENTS. 


APPENDIX, 

NOTE PAGE 
I. FAITH IN GOD : . : 7 ‘ 142 
II. MIRACLES . A ` ; - 2 146 

III, JUSTIFICATION BY WORKS . F ; - 149 
IV. JUSTIFICATION BY BLOOD . : 5 z 152 
V, HOLINESS AND SANCTIFICATION ` š z 155 
VI. CLEANSING BY BLOOD : - ; == 160 

VII. THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST ; , . 165 

VIII. THE GONHOOD OF GOD 5 ` ; 169 
INDEX 5 : : ; 3 - 3 174 


PASSAGES OF SChIPTURE EXPLAINED - > < 176 


THE GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY. 


CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTORY. 


Just as the smallest land can grasp the acorn which 
holds the mightiest oak within it, so the youngest child 
who can lisp the Nicodemus sermon, may with truth 
be said to know the gospel, and yet in every word of 
it there is a depth and mystery of meaning that God 
alone can fathom. Tell me what it means to perish, 
and enable me to grasp the thought of a life that is 
eternal. Measure for me the abyss of man’s wickedness 
and guilt during all the ages of his black and hateful 
history, that I may realise in some degree what that 
world is which God has loved; and then, pausing for a 
moment to try to teach a poor and selfish heart how 
such a world could be loved at all, hasten on to speak 
of love that gave the Son. And when you have enabled 
me to know this love, which cannot be known, for it 
passeth knowledge, press on still and tell me of the 


sacrifice by which it has measured and proved itself— 
A 


2 INTRODUCTORY. 


His Son, His only-begotten Son. Make me to know, in 
the fulness of knowledge, Him who declared that the 
Father alone could know Him. And when you have 
achieved all this, I turn again to the words of Christ, 
and I read that it was Gop who so loved the world, and 
I crave to know Who and What God is. I can rise to 
the thought of love, perhaps even to an evil world, and 
the conception of love giving up an only son, is not 
beyond me; but when I come to know that it was God 
who loved, that Cod was the giver, and God’s Son the 
gift, I stand as a wondering worshipper in the presence 
of the Infinite, and confess that such knowledge is too 
high for me. 

At the very threshold, therefore, I charge myself, as 
I charge my reader, to think becomingly of the gospel, 
remembering that it is the gospel of Gop. And His 
gospel is like Himself. The heaven of heavens cannot 
contain Him, and yet He owns the humble heart as a 
fitting home. So also, in its simplicity and plainness, 
the good news is within the reach of the youngest and 
most ignorant, aye, and even of the lowest and the 
worst, for such may hear and believe and live; but in 
its depth and fulness it is known to God alone, for it is 
a revelation of Himself. Hence it is that the old song 
of the redeemed on earth will be a new song throughout 
eternity ; for every advance we make in knowledge of 
Him will shed new light on the message we received in 
our sins and sorrows here, and awaken afresh the glad 
notes of our redemption song. 

But not only has the gospel a depth and dignity and 
glory all its own, because it is in a special sense a 
revelation of God, it has also a distinctive greatness and 
solemnity by virtue of its peculiar mission, and of the 


INTRODUCTORY. 3 


issues involved in the proclamation of it. It is written 
that it is “the power of God to salvation to every one 
that believeth.” The power of God! no words can add 
force to this, and words that detract from it are impious. 
The mighty power that made the worlds, and alone can 
raise the dead, such is its power to the sinner who 
believes. Let the preacher remember this ; and while he 
humbly consecrates to God every talent He has given 
him, let him take heed how he turns aside to seek 
aught to add attractiveness to such a message. 

And what solemn issues axe depending while it is 
being proclaimed! A man who addresses assembled 
Christians may indeed be as an empty cloud that serves 
but to hide the sunlight, but his words can never lead 
to judgment, except upon himself. But the preaching 
of the gospel must ever tend to life, or else to death, 
in those who hear. How terrible then to be guilty of 
lightness in such a ministry! 

In the iron days of Rome, public triumphs were 
sometimes accorded to victorious generals in ac- 
knowledgment of brilliant services. Clad in gold and 
purple, his feet bedecked with pearls, ‘and a golden 
crown upon his brow, the victor entered the city of the 
Empire in a chariot of ivory and gold. Triumphal 
music mingled with the rapturous shouts that greeted 
him, and the air was filled with the sweet perfume of 
flowers and spices scattered on his path. Waggons 
passed on before, filled with the spoils and trophies of 
his victories. The senate and the priesthood attended 
in his honour. In front of his chariot the doomed 
captives marched in chains, while behind him followed 
the company of those who had been set at liberty or 


2 Rom. i. 16. 


4 INTRODUCTORY. 


ransomed. All Rome kept holiday, and joined with one 
accord to swell the triumph of the conqueror. 

It is to such a scene St. Paul alludes in his second 
Epistle to the Corinthians, when speaking of the gospel ; 
for its ministry, whatever its results in those who hear, 
is Christ’s triumph none the less. “Thanks be unto 
God, who always carrieth us in triumph in Christ, and 
maketh manifest the savour of His knowledge by us in 
every place.” We are a savour of life to the ransomed 
throng, and of death to the doomed and fettered captives. 
But whether our ministry swell the glad company of 
the redeemed, or add to the condemnation of those that 
perish, we are none the less, in the one as in the other, 
a sweet savour of Christ unto God. 

Can any amount of education or of training make 
men “sufficient” for such a ministry as this? ‘“ Who,” 
the apostle demands, “is competent for these things ?” 
and the answer is not doubtful, “our competency is of 
God, who hath made us competent as ministers of the 
new covenant.”2 And how? The halo that encircled 
Moses’ face at Sinai, betokened the glory of his 
ministry. But that ministry, glorious though it was, 
had no glory in comparison with the ministry now en- 
trusted to men.? If then the face of Moses shone with 
such a brightness that the people could not bear to look 
on it, what shall we expect in him whom God has made 
competent as a minister of the new covenant? I turn 
to behold a poor creature, troubled on every side, 
perplexed, and persecuted, and cast down, in bodily 
presence weak, in speech contemptible, held in repute 
as so much filth and scum,‘ and I find in him the man 


1 2 Cor. ii. 14-16. 2 2 Cor. iii. 5, 6. 
3 2 Cor. iii. 7-11. 4 2 Cor. iv. 8, 9; 1 Cor. iv, 13, 


INTRODUCTORY. 5 


whom God deemed fit for a ministry so glorious and so 
great. And the secret of his fitness was in this, that 
the knowledge of the glory of God lit up his heart, and 
was reflected back with a heavenlier light than that 
which dazzled Israel’s gaze. 

Such was the great apostle, and such his fitness. 
And can any one suppose that mental training and 
moral culture can avail if this “sufficiency” be wanting; 
or that if men lack both culture and training they are 
in a better case! But this was not all. With natural 
advantages that were entirely exceptional,? and in 
spiritual attainments unsurpassed, pre-eminent among 
ministers of Christ in his labours and sufferings, and as 
to his office “not a whit behind the very chiefest 
apostles,” for, in proof of his apostleship,: he could 
appeal not only to his unexampled life, but tg “signs 
and wonders and mighty deeds” which he had wrought; 
yet, when “in the foolish confidence of boasting” he 
ransacked his history for a crowning proof of his 
“sufficiency” as a minister of Christ, he turned away 
from all these things to tell how, crushed doubtless, 
and sick at heart, he was once bundled out of Damascus 
in a basket to escape the Roman garrison that held the 
city to apprehend him.? Or if he goes on to tell of 
being caught up to the highest heaven, and of hearing 
there unspeakable words impossible for man to utter, 
he may glory indeed in such a Paul, for this was for 
him a brief foretaste of the day when the redeemed 
shall bear the image of the heavenly. But if he must 
boast of the servant and apostle here, he will point to 
the Damascus flight and the “thorn in the flesh,” 
“Satan’s messenger to buffet him.” * 


1 2 Cor. iv. 6. 2 Acts xxii. 3; Phil. iii. 4-6. 3 2 Cor. xi. 16-33. 
4 2 Cor. xii. 1-7. 


6 INTRODUCTORY. 


Would that every one who claims to preach the 
gospel, whether arrayed in silk and lawn, or clad in 
corduroy and frieze, would ponder this paradox of. the 
ministry of Paul. Let us picture to ourselves this 
mighty apostle, this greater and more glorious than 
Moses, smuggled out through a window in a buck- 
basket! and then let us search out the meaning of this 
mystery, that he appeals to this his shame as the 
crowning boast of his whole life’s labours. The answer 
in words is not far to seek, but which of us has grasped 
its meaning? ‘Most gladly will I rather glory in my 
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. 
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, 
in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ’s 
sake ; for when I am weak, then am I strong.”? 

What. God wants in those whom He will put in trust 
with the gospel, is not that they shall be polished and 
educated gentlemen, much less that they shall be coarse 
and ignorant boors; not that they shall be skilled in 
dogmatic theology, much less that they shall be un- 
learned in doctrine ; not that they shall be brilliant and 
eloquent, much less that they shall be ungifted and 
dull. All He seeks is a fitting instrument upon whom 
the power of Christ can rest, an empty earthen vessel 
that He can fill with His priceless treasure. The man, 
whoever he may be, whether on the highest round of 
the social ladder, or the lowest, who can say with Paul, 
“Most gladly will I glory in infirmities, that the power 
of Christ may rest on me,” and say it with unfeigned 
lips, and from a heart that has been taught it in the 
school of God, has gained the secret of this competency 
for the ministry of reconciliation. 

1 2 Cor. xii. 9,10. 


INTRODUCTORY, 7 


Apart from this fitness, the highest and the greatest 
are but “clouds without water,” while with it the low- 
est and the least may become “competent ministers of 
the new covenant.” 1 


1 The ministry of the Gospel is the special subject of these pages 3 but 
the same fitness is essential to the ministry of the Church. The 
Apostle Paul was called to the double ministry (“The gospel,. . . 
whereof I Paul am made a minister; . . . the church, whereof I am made a 
minister.” —Col. i. 23-25). Both these ministries are, no doubt, included 
in the title, ‘‘ ministers of God” (2 Cor. vi. 4), or “ ministers of Christ” 
(2 Cor. xi. 23), The ministers are specially named, along with the elders 
or bishops, in the address of the Epistle to the Philippians (Phil. i. 1) ; 
and the characteristics which were to be sought for in any who claimed 
that position are specified in 1 Tim. iii. 8-13. The word minister is 
derived from the Latin ; deacon from the Greek. Etymologically, and 
in their origin, the words are synonyms. But deacon has in English 
acquired a meaning of its own ; and itsretention in the Revised Version 
is a flagrant violation of the avowed principles on which the revision 
was conducted. It is hard to believe, moreover, that it was not com- 
mitted intentionally, to perpetuate the popular error of supposing that 
the deacon was a subordinate office-bearer in the church. That it is 
an error is sufficiently clear from the fact that the Apostle Paul 
so describes himself seven times. 

The word diéxeves occurs thirty times in the New Testament. In 
the gospels it is used eight times, where it means a servant in the 
ordinary sense, save only in John xii. 26. The other places where it 
is used are the following passages in the Epistles of Paul :—Rom. xiii. 4 ; 
xv. 83 xvi. 1; 1 Cor. iii. 5; 2 Cor. iii. 6; vi. 4; xi 15, 23; Gal. ii. 17; 
Eph. iii. 7 ; vi. 21; Phil. i. 1; Col. i. 7, 23, 253 iv. 7; 1 Thess. iii. 2; 
1 Tim. iii. 8, 12 ; and iv. 6, where Timothy is called a ‘‘ deacon.” The 
word is never applied to Stephen and his fellows (Acts vi.), with whem 
it seems to be popularly associated. Asaxovie is used in Acts vi. 1 
(ministration), and also in ver. 4 (ministry). It occurs thirty-four 
times in the New Testament; once in its ordinary acceptation of 
“ serving ” (Luke x. 40), and generally as equivalent to “ ministry” 
(eg. 2 Tim. iv. 5, 11). 


CHAPTER II. 
GRACE. 


“THE GOSPEL OF THE GLORY OF THE BLESSED GOD !”1 

“Show me Thy glory, I beseech Thee,” was the prayer 
of Moses; and God answered, “I will make all my 
goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name 
of Jehovah before thee, and will be gracious to whom I 
will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will 
show mercy.” ? God’s highest glory displays itself in 
sovereign grace, therefore it is that the gospel of His 
grace is the gospel of His glory. 

Let us take heed then that we preach grace. He 
who preaches a mixed gospel robs God of His glory, 
and the sinner of his hope. They for whom these 
pages are intended, need not be told that salvation is 
only by the blood ; but many there are who preach the 
blood of Christ, without ever rising to the truth of 
grace. Dispensational truth, as it is commonly called, 
is deliberately rejected by not a few; and yet without 
understanding the change which the death of Christ 
has made in God’s relationships with men, grace can- 
not be apprehended. 

It is not that God can ever change, or that the 

1 1 Tim. i. 11; not “the glorious gospel.” 2 Exod. xxxiii. 18, 19. 


GRACE. 9 


righteous ground of blessing can ever alter, but that the, 
standard of man’s responsibility depends on the measure 
and character of the revelation God has given of Him- 
self. God’s judgments are according to pure equity. 
They must have strange thoughts of Him who think it 
could be otherwise. In the Epistle to the Romans we 
have the great principle of His dealings with mankind. 
“He will render to every man according to his deeds ; 
to them who, by patient continuance in well-doing, 
seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life ;” 
but to the rest, indignation and wrath; tribulation and 
anguish upon evil-doers, but upon well-doers, glory, 
honour, and peace ; and this for all without distinction, 

whether Jews or Gentiles, under law or without law, 

for God is no respecter of persons.! 

But is the standard of well-doing the same for all ? 
Shall the same fruit be looked for from the wild olive 
as from the cultured tree; from the mountain side in 
its native barrenness, as from the vineyard on the fruit- 
ful hill? Far from it. The first two chapters of the 
Epistle to the Romans are unmistakable in this respect. 
The Gentile will be judged according to the light of 
nature and of conscience, neglected and resisted; the 
Jew, by the revelation God entrusted to him. St. 
Paul’s sermon at Athens is no less clear as regards the 
condition of the heathen. As he said at Lystra,? they 
were not left without a witness, in that God did good, 
aud gave rain and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts 
with food and gladness. By such things, he declares 
again in another place? God’s eternal power and God- 
head are clearly seen, so that they are without excuse. 


1 Rom. ii. 6-11 ; see also John v. 29, 2 Acts xiv. 8-18. 
3 Rom. i. 20. 


10 GRACE. 


And so here, God left the heathen to themselves, not 
that they should forget Him, but that they should seek 
Him, even though it were in utter darkness, so that 
they should need to grope for Him—“to feel after Him, 
and find Him.” And, though there was ignorance of 
God, He could wink at the ignorance and give blessing 
notwithstanding, for “He is a rewarder of diligent 
seekers.” Moreover, this is still the case with all 
whom the witness of the Holy Ghost has not yet reached. 
If it be asked whether any have, in fact, been saved thus, 
I turn from the question, though I have no doubt as to 
the answer.? There is no profit in speculations about 
the fate of the heathen; their judgment is with God. 
But there is profit and blessing untold in searching into 
His ways and thoughts towards men, that we may be 
brought in adoration to exclaim, “O the depth of the 
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!” 
But to resume: “The times of this ignorance God 
winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere 
to repent, because He hath appointed a day in the which 
He will judge the world in righteousness.”* And the 
change depends on this, that God has now revealed 
Himself in Christ, and therefore, ignorance of Him is a 
sin that shuts men up to judgment. See the Lord’s sad 
utterance in John xv. 24, as a kindred truth. Indeed, 
the whole Gospel of St. John is a commentary on it. 
Darkness had reigned, but God did not hold men ac- 
countable for darkness; it was their misfortune, not 
their fault. But He did hold them accountable to 
value and obey the little light they had, “the candle 
set up within them,” and the stars above their head— 


1 Acts xvii. 22-31. 2 Heb. xi. 6. 
3 See Acts x. 34,35. * Acts xvii. 30, 31. 


GRACE. ll 


those gleams of heavenly light, which, though they 
failed to illumine the way, might at least suffice to 
direct their course. But now, a new era dawned upon 
the world; “The Word was made flesh and dwelt among 
us.” 1 The Light had entered in; the darkness was 
past, the true Light was shining. To turn now to con- 
science or to law, was like men who, with the sun in 
the zenith, nurse their scanty rushlight, with shutters 
barred and curtains drawn; like men who cast their 
anchor because the daylight has eclipsed the stars. The 
principle of God’s dealings was the same, but the 
measure of man’s conduct was entirely changed. It 
was no longer a question of conscience or of law, but 
of the Only-begotten in their midst. It was no quirk 
or quibble, but the solemn, earnest truth, by which the 
blessed Lord Himself replied to the inquiry, “ What 
shall we do that we might work the works of God?” 
“ This (said He) is the work of God, that ye believe on 
Him whom He hath sent.” ? The question was a right 
one, and the answer enforced the same unchanging 
principle, that the light they had was the measure of 
their responsibility. The same great truth is no less 
plainly stated in the Nicodemus sermon. This was 
the condemnation, not that men’s deeds were evil, though 
for these too there shall be wrath in the day of wrath, 
but that, because their deeds were evil, they had brought 
upon themselves a still direr doom; light had come into 
the world, but they had turned from it and loved the 
darkness. 

But this is not all; even yet the reign of grace had 
not begun. Grace was there truly, for “grace came by 


' John i, 14, 2 John vi. 28, 29, 3 John iii. 19, 


12 GRACE. 


Jesus Christ ;” but, like Himself, it was in humiliation ; 
it had yet to be enthroned. Grace was there. No 
adverse principle came in to influence His ways and 
words; but though pure and unmixed, as it must ever 
be, it was restrained. He had a baptism to be baptized 
with, and how was He straitened till it was accom- 
‘plished! While there was a single claim outstanding, 
a single tie unbroken, grace was hindered, though it 
could not be alloyed. 

But now was about to come the world’s great crisis— 
the most stupendous event in the history of man, the 
only event in the history of God! He had laid aside 
His glory, and come down into the scene. At His 
own door! He had stood and knocked, but only to 
find it shut in His face. Turning thence, He had 
wandered an outcast into the world His power had 
made, but wandered there unknown. “His own re- 
ceived Him not;” “the world knew Him not.” As 
He had laid aside His glory, He now restrained His 
power, and yielded Himself to their guilty will In 
return for pity, He earned but scorn. Sowing kind- 
nesses and benefits with a lavish hand, He reaped but 
cruelty and outrage. Manifesting grace, He was given 
up to impious law without show of mercy or pretence 
of justice. Unfolding the boundless love of the mighty - 
heart of God, He gained no response but bitterest hate 
from the hearts of men. 

The Son of God has died by the hands of men! This 
astounding fact is the moral centre of all things A 
by-gone eternity knew no-other future:? an eternity to 
come shall know no other past. That death was this 


1 John i. 11. els rà tdva Oe, can scarcely be expressed in English. 
The French idiom is more apt : ‘‘Il est venu chez soi, et les siens ne 
Pont point regu.” 2 1 Peter i, 20; Rev. xiii. 8. 


GRACE. 13 


world’s crisis.1 For long ages, despite conscience out- 
raged, the light of nature quenched, law broken, promises 
despised, and prophets cast out and slain, the world had 
been on terms with God. But now a mighty change 
ensued. Once for all, the world had taken sides. In 
the midst stood that cross in its lonely majesty: God 
on one side, with averted face; on the other, Satan, 
exulting in his triumph. The world took sides with 
Satan: “His darling was in the power of the dog,” ? 
and there was none to help, none to pity. 

There, we see every claim which the creature had on 
God for ever forfeited, every tie for ever broken. 
Promises there had been, and covenants; but Christ 
was to be the fulfiller of them all. Ifa single blessing 
now descend on the ancient people of His choice, it 
must come to them in grace? Life, and breath, and 
fruitful seasons freely given, had testified of the great 
Giver’s hand, and declared His goodness; but if “ seed- 
time, and harvest, and the changing year, come on in 
sweet succession ” still, in a world blood-stained by the 
murder of the Son, it is no longer now to creation claims 
we owe it, nor yet to Noah’s covenant, but wholly to 
the grace of God in Christ. 

In proof of this I might cite prophecies and parables, 
and appeal to the great principles of God that are the 
basis of gospel doctrine, as above both parable and 
prophecy. Nay, I might leave it to men themselves, 
as Christ did, to decide between themselves and God.° 


1 John xii. 31. Nov xplots éort Tod Kbcmov Tovrov, 

2 Ps. xxii. 20. 

3 Rom. xi. leaves no room to question whether Israel will in fact be 
blessed hereafter ; but even their national blessings they will owe to 


grace. af 
4 Gen. ix. 11-17. 5 Matt. xxi. 40. 


14 GRACE. 


But I rather turn again to that solemn utterance of the 
Lord, in view of His lifting up upon the tree: “Now 
is the judgment of this world.” 

“These things the angels desire to look into.”* And 
if angels were our judges, what would be our doom! 
For ages they had both witnessed and ministered the 
goodness of God to men. But yesterday the heavens 
had rung with their songs of praise, as they heralded 
the Saviour’s birth in Bethlehem: “Peace on earth, 
goodwill to men.” Goodwill! and this was what had 
come of it! Peace! and this was what men turned it to ! 
What thoughts were theirs as, terror-struck, they beheld 
that scene on Calvary! Crucified amid heartless jeers, 
and cruel taunts, and shouts of mingled hate and 
triumph! Buried in silence and by stealth; buried in 
sorrow, but in silence. He who hears in secret, heard 
the stifled cry from the broken hearts of Mary and the 
rest, and the smothered sobs that tore the breasts of 
strong men bowed with grief—the last sad tribute of 
love from the little flock now scattered. But as for the 
world, no man’s lamentation, no woman’s wail was heard! 
They had cried, “ Away with Him, away with Him!” 
and now they had made good their ery: the world was 
rid of Him, and that was all they wanted. 

Angels were witnesses to these things. They pondered 
the awful mystery of those hours when death held fast 
the Prince of Life. The forty days wherein He lingered 
in the scenes of His rejection and His death—was it not 
to make provision for the little company that owned 
His name, to gather them into some ark of refuge from 
the judgment-fire, so soon to engulph this ruined world ? 
And now, the gates lift up their heads, the everlasting 

AE Et K L2 


GRACE, 15 


doors are lifted up, and with all the majesty of God, 
the King of Glory enters in. The Crucified of Calvary 
has come to fill the vacant throne, the Nazarene has 
been proclaimed the Lord of Hosts! 

But, mystery on mystery! the greatest mystery of all 
is now—the mystery of grace. That throne is vacant 
still. Those gates and doors that lifted up their heads 
for Him are standing open wide. Judgment waits. 
That sea of fire which one day shall close in upon this 
world to wipe out its memory for ever, is tided back 
by the word of Him who sits upon the Father’s throne 
in grace. When the Son of Man returns for judg- 
ment, “then shall He sit upon His glorious throne.” 2 
And how unutterably terrible will be that judgment! 
Half measures are impossible in view of the cross of 
Christ. The day is past when God could plead with 
men about their sins? The controversy now is not 
about a broken law, but a rejected Christ. If judg- 
ment, therefore, be the sinner’s portion, it must be 


1 Ps, xxiv. 7-10. 2 Matt. xxv. 31; comp. Rev. iii. 21. 

3 For the believer, the question of sin was settled at the cross ; for 
the unbeliever, it is postponed to the day of judgment. “ Who His 
own self bare our sins on His own body on the tree” (1 Pet. ii. 24), 
“The Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judg- 
ment to be punished” (2 Pet. ii. 9). 

The distinction between judgment and punishment is important. 
The criminal is judged before he leaves the court-house for the prison, 
but his punishment has yet to come—it is a consequence of judgment, 
not a part of it. All unbelievers are precisely on a level as regards 
judgment. “He that believeth on Him is not judged (the word is 
xpww), but he that believeth not is judged already, because he hath not 
believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God” (John iii. 18). 
Here the moral and the immoral, the religious and the profane, stand 
together, and share the same doom. But when judgment, in the sense 
of punishment, is in question, there can be no equality ; every sentence 
shall be apportioned to the guilt of each by the righteous and omniscient 
Judge. See Rev. xx. 13; Matt. xii, 36; Luke xii. 47, 48; Jude 15 ; 
and 2 Pet. ii, 9, already quoted, 


16 GRACE. 


measured by God’s estimate of the murder of His Son; 
a cup of vengeance, brimful, unmixed, from the tread- 
ing of the “winepress of the fierceness and wrath of 
Almighty God.” 1 

But if grace be on the throne, what limits can be set 
to it? If that sin committed upon Calvary has not 
shut the door of mercy, all other sins together shall not 
avail to close it. If God can bless in spite of the death 
of Christ, who may not be blest? Innocence lost, con- 
science disobeyed and stifled, covenants and promises 
despised and forfeited, law trampled under foot, pro- 
phets persecuted, and last and unutterably terrible, the 
Only-begotten slain. And yet there is mercy still! 
What a gospel that would be! 

But “the gospel of the glory of the blessed God” is 
something infinitely higher still. It is not that Calvary 
has failed to quench the love of God to men, but that 
it is the proof and measure of that love. Not that the 
death of Christ has failed to shut heaven against the 
sinner, but that heaven is open to the sinner by virtue 
of that death. The everlasting doors that lifted up 
their heads for Him are open for the guiltiest of Adam’s 
race, and the blood by which the Lord of glory entered - 
there is their title to approach. The way to heaven is 
as free as the way to hell. In hell there is an accuser, 
but in heaven there is no condemner. The only being 
in the universe of God who has a right to judge the 
sinner is exalted to be a Saviour now.2 Amid the 


1- Rev. xix. 15. - 

2 “The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son.” “I judge no man,” the Lord says again in another 
place. `“ If any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him not ; 
for I came not to judge the world but to save the world” (John v. 22, 
viii. 15, xii. 47). The day of grace must end before the day of judg- 
ment can begin. “The acceptable year of the Lord” must run its 


GRACE. 17 


wonders and terrors of that throne, He is a Saviour, 
and He is sitting there in grace. The Saviour shall yet 
become the Judge; but judgment waits on grace. Sin 
has reigned, and death can boast its victories: shall 
grace not have its triumphs too? As surely as the sin 
of man brought death, the grace of God shall bring 
eternal life to every sinner who believes. One sin 
brought death, but grace masters all sin. If sin 
abounded, grace abounds far more. Grace is conqueror. 
GRACE REIGNS. Not at the expense of righteousness, 
but in virtue of it. Not that righteousness requires 
the sinner’s death, and yet grace has intervened to give 
him life. Righteousness itself has set grace upon the 
throne in order that the sinner may have life: “That 
as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace 
reign, through righteousness, unto eternal life, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord.” 1! Such is the triumph of the 
cross. It has made it possible for God to bless us in 
perfect harmony with everything He is, and everything 
He has ever declared Himself to be; and in spite of all 
that we are, and all that He has ever said we ought 
to be. 
= I have already referred to St. Paul’s allusion to the 
ancient military triumphs, when writing to the Corin- 
thians.? The word there used occurs again in his 
Epistle to the Colossians :* “Having spoiled princi- 
palities and powers, He made a show of them openly, 
leading them in triumph in Him.” In the hour of His 


course before the advent of “the day of vengeance.” Compare Isa. lxi. 
1, 2, with Luke iv. 16, 20, and notice the precise point at which th- 
Lord “closed the book.” nde? 

1 Rom. v. 21. I have thus sought to epitomise the argument of the 
passage, beginning at verse 12. 4 

2. See p. 3, ante. 3 Col. ii. 15. 


18 GRACE, 


weakness, our enemies became His own, and fastened 
upon Him to drag Him down to death; but, leading 
captivity captive, He chained them to the chariot- 
wheels of His triumph, and made a public show of 
them. Just as Israel stood on the wilderness side of 
the sea, and saw Pharaoh and his hosts in death upon 
the shore, it is ours to gaze upon the triumphs of the 
cross. God there has mastered sin, abolished death, 
and destroyed him who had the power of death. 

God has become our Saviour. Our trust is not in 
His mercy, but in Himself. Not in divine attributes, 
but in the living God. “Gop is for us;” the Father is 
for us; the Son is for us; the Holy Ghost is for us. 
It is God who justifies ; it is Christ that died; and the 
Holy Ghost has come down to be a witness to us of the 
work of Christ, and of the place that work has given us 
as sons in the Father’s house. 

“Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust and not 
be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my 
song ; He also is become my salvation.” 


THE NIGHT OF THE BETRAYAL. 


Hell has gone forth in power, 
And ye should wake and weep: 
Could ye not watch one little hour ! 
This night is not for sleep, 


Earth trembles in the scale, 
Yet knows not of the fight, 

And if her fearful foe prevail, 
It will be always night. 


Unpitying as the grave, 
Fierce as the winter breeze, 

And mightier than the mountain wave 
That sweeps o’er midnight seas, 


GRACE. 


The Prince of Darkness came : 
Woe to the hated race! 

What man can meet that brow of flame, 
Or live before his face ! 


No seraph’s sword of light, 
Reddened in righteous wrath, 

Flashed downward from the crystal height 
To bar his onward path. 


No trumpet’s warning cry 
Rose through the silent air, 

No battle shout went forth on high 
From guarding squadrons there. 


Above, the holy light 
Slept on the mountain’s breast ; 
Beneath, the tender breath of night 
Hushed moaning woods to rest. 


Yet ne’er shall blackest night 
Such deepened horror know, 

While stars look down on Olives height, 
Or Kedron’s waters flow. 


For who shall. tell His woes, 
Whose grief out-gloomed the night, 
When His strong love, bright star ! arose, 
O’erfilling heaven with light ? 


The gentlest heart on earth 
Must taste her sharpest woe ; 
The tender plant of heavenly birth 
Hell’s fiercest blast must know. 


King! of the wounded breast, 
King! of the uncrowned brow, 

What faithful heart shall bring thee rest! 
What arm shall aid thee now! 


Lo, sheathed in shining light, 
Heaven’s wondering warriors stand, 
With pinions closed for downward flight, 
Waiting their Lord’s command, 


19 


20 


GRACE. 


But never comes that word, 
That night knows yet no dawn, 
And still must each impatient sword 
Sleep on each thigh, undrawn. 


Not Angels’ deathless feet 
May dare the darkening path, 

Arched by the thunder clouds that meet, 
Heavy with coming wrath. 


Alone His steadfast eye 
Can cleave the rolling gloom, 

Where that dread sentence flames on high, 
The sinner’s death of doom. 


Oh! all ye Stars of light 
Veil all your glowing spheres ; 

Weep out your radiance ; drown the night 
In dew of heaven’s tears. 


Poor Earth! Go mourn beneath 
Thy withered roses now ; 

Thy thorns alone may twine the wreath 
To crown the Victor’s brow. 


Firmer than Carmel’s might, 
When the long-leaping tide 

Shivers its thousand shafts of light 
Far up his patient side, 


His will unshaken stands, 
Though that wild sea of wrath, 

Upsurging to its outmost bands, 
Breaks foaming on His path, 


Soft breezes of the West 
That, sighing as ye go, 

Bear ever on, with kindly breast, 
Each whispered human woe ; 


Here droop your wings and die 
Low murmuring at His feet, 
Then rise and bear His victor cry 

Up the long golden street! 


GRACE, 


High Heralds of His birth,} 
Make His new honours known! 
Tell how the Blood, despised on earth, 
Sparkles before the Throne! 


Lo! struck from Star to Star, 
The gracious echoes fall 

To this poor world that rolls afar, 
Lowest and last of all ; 


Soft, as from weeping skies 
Drops the sweet summer rain, 

Yet clear through all earth’s Babel cries— 
Hear them ye sons of men ; 


Nor thrust His mercy back, 
Who claims your hearts to-day: 

Qh! kiss His feet. Their wounded track 
Hath crimsoned all the way. 


} Luke ii, 13. 


21 


CHAPTER IIL 
THE CROSS. 


“THE preaching of the cross.” It is on this the great 
truth of grace depends. Not the death of Christ merely, 
but “the cross.” Synonyms are few in Scripture, and 
a change of words is not to please fastidious ears, but 
to express a different or a fuller thought. “The 
preaching of the cross is foolishness to them that 
perish.” 1 Not so the preaching of the death of Christ, 
apart from the truths which cluster round “ the cross.” 
The whole fabric of apostate Christianity is based upon 
the fact of that death, and by virtue of it the scarlet 
woman shall yet sit enthroned as mistress of the world. 
The Saviour’s death is owned as part of the world’s 
philosophy. It is a fact and a doctrine which human 
wisdom has adopted and rejoices in as the highest 
tribute to human worth. How great and wonderful 
must be the creature on whose behalf God has made so 
marvellous a sacrifice! And thus God is made to 
pander to man’s pride of heart and sense of self- 
importance, 

And as with the world’s philosophy, so also with the 
world’s religion. The doctrine of the death of Christ, 

1 1 Cor. i. 18, 


THE CROSS. 23 


if separated from “the cross,” leaves human nature still 
a standing ground. It is consistent with creature 
claims and class privileges. Israel of old, and the 
better sort of sinners now, could accept it, and be 
raised morally and intellectually by it. But the 
preaching of the cross is “the axe laid to the root of 
the tree,” the death-blow to human nature on every 
ground and in every guise. It is not merely that 
Christ has died—the mighty fact on which our life 
depends; but that that death has been brought about 
by means and in a way which manifest and prove not 
only the boundless and causeless love of God to man, 
but also the wanton and relentless enmity of man to 
God; that that death, while it has made it possible for 
God, in grace, to save the guiltiest and worst of Adam’s 
race, has made it impossible, even with God, that the 
worthiest and best could be saved except in grace. It 
has measured out the moral distance between God and 
man, and has left them as far asunder as the throne of 
heaven and the gate of hell. If God will now give 
blessing, He must turn back upon Himself, and find in 
His own heart the motive, just as He finds the righteous 
ground of it inthe work of Christ. There is no salva- 
tion now for “the circumcision” as such—for diligent 
users of the means of grace, for earnest seekers, for 
anxious inquirers, for a privileged class under any name 
or guise. If such were granted special favour, “then 
were the offence of the cross ceased,”* and grace would 
be dethroned. 

Circumcision did not deny the death of Christ. On 
the contrary, it betokened covenants and class privileges 
granted by virtue of the great sacrifice to which every 

1Gal. v. 11, and see p. 27, post. 


24 THE CROSS. 


ordinance in the old religion pointed. But it utterly 
denied the cross, and grace as connected with the cross ; 
for there every covenant was forfeited, every privilege 
lost. Before the cross, therefore, circumcision was the 
outward sign of covenant blessing: after the cross, it 
became the token of apostasy. The cross has shut man 
up to grace or judgment. It has broken down all 
“partition walls,” and left a world of naked sinners 
trembling on the brink of hell. Every effort to recover 
themselves is but a denial of their doom, and a denial 
too of the grace of God, which stoops to bring them bless- 
ing where they are and as they are. The cross of Christ 
is the test and touch-stone of all things. Man’s philo- 
sophy, man’s power, man’s religion—behold their work, 
the Christ of God upon a gallows !! 

In distinguishing thus between the death of Christ 
and “the cross,” let me not be misunderstood. It is 
not that God ever separates them thus. On the con- 
trary, “the preaching of the cross” is the emphasising 
and enforcing of the very facts and truths which the 
heart of man always struggles to divorce from the doc- 
trine of redemption, but which God has inseparably 
connected with it. The idea of redemption was per- 
fectly familiar to the Jew, and every student knows how 
entirely it accords with human philosophy. The Jew 
and the Greek could shake hands upon it, and set out 
together to seek the realization of it. But the one de- 
manded signs of Messiahship, and the passion of the 
other was wisdom.? The death and resurrection of the 
Son of God, if accomplished in a manner worthy of the 


1 Religion, power, philosophy: Jerusalem, Rome, Athens; the Jew, 
the Roman, and the Greek, 
eRe COR L22; 


THE CROSS. 25 


$ 


Son of God, would have satisfied the one, as it did in 
fact, as soon as the cross was lost sight of, satisfy and 
charm the other. But the cross was a stumbling-block 
to the religious man, and folly to the wisdom-lover.! 
If human philosophy to-day adopts and glories in 
redemption, as in fact it does, it is just because the 
cross is forgotten ; and if, in spite of what Christianity 
is in the world and to the world, the Jew is still un- 
christianised, it is just because with him that cross can 
never be forgotten. 

It is not, I repeat, that God ever separates them, but that 
man always does. A gospel that points to the death of 
Christ in proof of God’s high estimate of man, and then 
turns the doctrine of that death into a syllogism, so that 
men,in no way losing self-respect, can sit down andcalmly 
reason out their right to blessing by it, will give no 
offence to any one, nor be branded as foolishness. Such 
a gospel pays due deference to human nature, and satis- 
fies man’s sense of need without hurting in the least his 
pride. Such a gospel has, in fact, produced that mar- 
vellous anomaly, a Christian world. Even in St. Paul’s 
day “the many”? were but hucksters of the Word of 
God. Their aim was to make their wares acceptable, 
to secure a trade, as it were, and so they sought popu- 
larity and an apparent success by corrupting the gospel 
to make it attractive to their hearers.2 “As of sincerity, 
as of God, in the sight of God,” says the apostle in con- 
trast with all this, “we speak in Christ.” St. Paul’s 
gospel would have created a church in the midst of a 


1 1 Cor. i. 23. 2 oi moNXol, 2 Cor. ii. 17. 

3 Such is the meaning of the passage. The word used means, first, 
“to retail,” and then, to resort to the malpractices common with huck- 
sters, to adulterate or corrupt. 


26 THE CROSS. 


hostile world. The gospel of “the many” has consti- 
tuted the world itself the church ; and the fable of our 
childhood finds a strange fulfilment here, though indeed 
the metamorphosis is so complete that we are at a loss 
to distinguish either wolf or sheep remaining. 
Rationalism and Ritualism are the two great enemies 
of the cross. The First Epistle to the Corinthians 
touches on the one: the Epistle to the Galatians deals 
with the other. A gospel which pays court either to 
man’s reason or man’s religion, will never fail to be 
popular. Well versed, no doubt, in Greek philosophy, 
and no careless student of human nature, St. Paul might 
have drawn all Corinth after him had he gone there 
“with excellency of speech or of wisdom” in announc- 
ing the testimony of God. He did “speak wisdom 
among the perfect,” as witness his letter to the Romans, 
or indeed his letter to the Corinthians themselves. His 
argument for the resurrection, the germ and pattern of 
Bishop Butler’s great masterpiece of reasoning, would ~ 
have charmed- and won not a few of the disciples of 
Plato and the rest—those brilliant men who raised 
unenlightened reason to its highest glory at the very 
time the voice of revelation was being hushed amid the 


1 “The design, then, of the following treatise will be to show . . . 
that the particular parts principally objected against in this whole dis- 
pensation, are analogous to what is experienced in the constitution and 
course of nature or providence ; that the chief objections themselves, 
which are alleged against the former, are no other than what may be 
alleged with like justness against the latter; where they are found in 
fact to be inconclusive,” &¢.—The Analogy (Introduction). 

This is precisely the argument of 1 Cor. xv. 41, &. The apostle’s 
aim is not at all to prove the truth of the resurrection by his appeal to 
nature, but to answer thereby the ‘“fool’s” objections against that 
truth : to show (I quote again from the same source) that in this mat- 
ter “‘the system of religion, considered only as a system, and prior to 
the proof of it, is not a subject of ridicule unless that of nature be so 
too,” 


THE CROSS. 27 


sad echoes of Malachi’s wail over the apostasy of Jeho- 
vah’s people. But just because the Greeks were wisdom- 
worshippers, he turned from everything that would 
pander to their favourite passion, and became a fool 
among them, a man of one idea, who knew nothing 
“save Jesus Christ, even Him crucified.” The enthrone- 
ment of Christ on high and the glories of His return, are 
inseparable from the Christian’s faith, but in Corinth it 
was the cross the apostle preached, the cross in all its 
marvellous attractiveness for hearts enlightened from on 
high, in all its intolerable repulsiveness for unregenerate 
men.! 

With the Galatians it was against the religion of the 
flesh he had to contend. He testified to them that if 
they were circumcised Christ should profit them no- 
thing? How was this? Had grace found its limits 
here, so that if any transgressed in this respect, they 
committed a sin beyond the power of Christ to cleanse? 
Far from it. Grace has no limits. But there are limits 
to the sphere in which alone grace can act. Circum- 
cision in itself was nothing; but it was the mark of, and 
key to, a position of privilege under covenant utterly 
inconsistent with grace. “The offence of the cross” 
was that it set aside every position of the kind; not 
that it brought redemption through the death upon the 
tree, but that because it so brought redemption all were 
shut up to grace. If Paul had so preached Christ as to 
pay homage to human nature, and respect and accredit 
the vantage ground it claimed by virtue of its religion, 
persecution would have ceased, for the cross would have 
lost its offence.® 


1 1 Cor. i 17, 18, 23; ii. 1-6. 2 Gal. v. 2 
3 Gal. v. 11; vi. 12. 


28 THE CROSS. 


Redemption as preached by “the many” of St. Paul’s 
day brought no persecution, because it left man a plat- 
form on which “to make a fair show in the flesh.” The 
cross set aside the flesh altogether. If the death of 
Christ be preached as a means of salvation, not for the 
lost sinner, but for the pious and devout, where is the 
offence? But the cross comes in with its mighty power 
to bring low as well as to exalt, for it exalts none save © 
those whom first it humbles, and calls upon the pious 
worshipper, if indeed he would have blessing, to come 
out from the shrine in which he trusts, and take his 
place in the market square beside the outcast and the 
vile. It tells the “earnest seeker” and the “anxious 
inquirer,” that by their efforts they are only struggling 
out of the pit where alone grace can reach them. It 
proclaims to the worthy “communicant” of blameless 
life and acknowledged zeal, whose mind is a treasury of 
orthodox doctrines, and whose ways are a pattern of 
all good, that he must come down, and stand beside 
the drunkard and the harlot, there to receive salvation 
from the grace of God to the glory of God. They who 
do thus preach the cross can testify that its offence has 
not ceased in our day and in our midst. 

Redemption is not an easy way of salvation for the 
sinner, first, and then a display of the character of God. 
God must be supreme. A man who makes self his 
chief aim is vile, but in the very nature of things God 
must be first in everything, else He would be no longer 
God. The obedience of Christ was infinitely precious to 
God, apart altogether from any considerations of the 
sinner ; and the cross is the expression of that obedience 
tried to the utmost. In this light, His death was but 
the crowning act of a life yielded up to God. “He was 


THE CROSS. 29 


obedient unto death, even the death of the cross ”—-the 
cross, as expressive beyond all else of agony and con- 
tempt to the full; and because it was this, an expression 
too, the completest and most blessed, of perfect love to 
God and man. That death was but the climax of His 
life. It had another character, doubtless, in which it 
stands alone, for there divine judgment fell on Him for 
sin, and He became the outcast sin-offering, We do 
well, truly, at times to think thus of Calvary ; but we 
do not well to think only of it thus. The great burnt- 
offering aspect of the cross ought ever to be first, and 
never to be forgotten. Even as we preach the sin- 
offering or the passover, the joy and strength of our own 
hearts ought to be the burnt-offering. And thus, 
whatever may be the results of our testimony, it will 
always be itself a continual burnt-offering, “a sweet 
savour of Christ unto God.” 1 

Alas! how we lower everything! In the Jewish ritual 
we find the passover, the dedication offering of the 
covenant, and the sacrifice of the red heifer—the 
foundation sacrifices which were offered once for all. 
We have further the burnt-offering, the meat-offering, 
the peace-offering, and the great yearly sin-offering, 
besides others still of which I will make no mention 
here. Each one of all these many types has found its 
antitype in Christ; but what do Christians know of them? 
The passover alone would more than satisfy the gospel 
of to-day, and even that is humanised and lowered. 


1 2 Cor. ii. 15. And the burnt-offering could never be accepted 
without the accompanying meat-offering. The work of Christ, even in its 
highest aspect, must never be separated from the intrinsic perfectness 
and majesty of His person. It was the burnt-offering with its meat- 
offering that Israel daily sacrificed to God ; and this aspect of the cross 
ought ever to be before us, and that for its own sake and not because 


of special need in us. 


30 THE CROSS. 


Christ has died, and that is everything. How he died 
is scarce thought of, and Who He is who did so die is 
well-nigh forgotten altogether. Christ has died—that 
is certain. Rationalists and Ritualists, Protestants and 
Romanists, all are agreed that Christ has died. Whether 
it be in our Houses of Parliament, as day by day their 
sittings are begun by prayer, or in the ragged Sunday 
schools of Whitechapel or St. Giles, the death of Christ 
is a fact which need not be asserted, because none but 
an infidel would question it. Inquire in what way and 
to what extent are sinners benefited by that death, and 
at once the harmony is broken. Upon this every school 
has its creed, and every “ism” its theories, and the 
theme is the signal for a scramble and a struggle between 
all the rival banners of Christendom. 
Here is Satan’s master-wile. He has made that 
which God intended should be an impossibility to the 
natural mind, the common creed of men. In the wildest 


1 The law of the leper may teach us a lesson here. Two sparrows 
were sold for a farthing, and no more was needed for the lepers 
cleansing. A farthing! if price was to be paid at all, could it possibly 
be less? It is impossible the outcast sinner can have high or worthy 
thoughts of Christ, nor does God expect it from him. The acknowledg- 
ment of Him suffices, if only it be true, how poor and low soever it may 
be. The bitten Israelite who looked upon the serpent, lived ; ‘‘as many 
as touched Him were made perfectly whole.” It was only the leper’s 
farthing offering, but it was enough. And so also now: ‘‘ whosoever 
shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved,” “they that hear shall _ 
live.” 

But after the sinner has been brought nigh to God, and found peace 
and pardon, and life, shall the poor estimate he formed of Christ and 
of His sacrifice, while yet an outcast, be still the limit of his gratitude, 
the measure of his worship? shall the farthing gospel that met the 
banished sinner’s need, satisfy the heart of the citizen, the saint, 
the child of God! The two sparrows restored the leper to the 
camp, but it then behoved him to bring all the great offerings the law 
enjoined, Christ in all His fulness is God’s provision for His people, and 
nothing less than this should be the measure of their hearts’ worship. 
(Lev. xiv.) 


THE CROSS. ol 


fables of false religions, there is nothing more utterly 
incredible than the story of the life and death of the 
Son of God. For one who knows who Jesus was, and 
what “the Christ” means, to believe that Jesus is the 
Christ is so entirely beyond the possibilities of human 
reason that it is proof of a birth from God He who 
believes that Jesus-is the Son of God, is a man with a 
supernatural faith, a faith that overcomes the world.? 
Yet just as in Him the carnal eye could find no beauty,? 
so in His gospel the carnal mind can see no wonders. 
But it behoves the Evangelist so to preach that gospel 
that the Holy Ghost may own the word to reveal thereby 
the mighty mysteries and marvels of redemption; not 
lowering and humanising it to bring it within the reach 
of the natural man apart from the work of the Holy 
Spirit. If Christians are commonplace in our day, may 
it not be because the gospel they believe is common- 
place? Divine faith is faith in the divine. The 
difference is not in the faith, but in the object of it. 
If we have really believed the gospel of God, we have 
each one of us received for himself a revelation from on 
high, a revelation that flesh and blood could never reach 
to. Let us remember this. These pages are proof how 
much I value clear and Scriptural statements of the 
truth; but it is not on clearness, or even orthodoxy, 
that the power depends. The gospel may be so sifted 
and simplified that none shall fail of understanding it, 
and yet souls may never be brought to God at all. The 
preaching that is wanted is not “with persuasive words 
of man’s wisdom,” reasoning out salvation, and cheapen- 


1 J John v. 1. 2 1 John v. 3. 3 Isa. liii. 2; Mark vi. 3. 

4 Some preachers seem to bring Christ to the sinner, but the true 
evangelist brings the sinner to Christ—in other words, Christ and not 
the sinner is the centre object in his testimony. 


32 THE CROSS. 


ing the gospel to suit the condition of the hearers; but 
“with demonstration of the Spirit and of power”— 
preaching that will be “foolishness to them that perish,” 
but to the saved “the power of God.” 

It is one thing to master Christianity, it is another to 
be mastered by it. And itis the cross that attracts and 
conquers. The cross, not as an easy way of pardon for 
the sinner, not as a “plan of salvation” (miserable 
words !), but as a fact and a revelation to change a 
heartless worldling into an adoring worshipper. The 
cross, not as the ruling factor in the equation of man’s 
redemption, but as a display of the love and righteous- 
ness and wrath of God, and the sin of man, to subdue 
the hardest heart, and turn the whole current of the 
most selfish and ungodly life. 

To faith the unseen is real; and with those who 
believe in the cross, “Jesus Christ has been evidently 
set forth before their eyes, crucified.”1 They have seen 
that marred and agonized face. They have been wit- 
nesses to the reproach that broke His heart, the scorn, 
the derision, and the hate, of all the attendant throng. 
They have heard “Emmanuel’s orphan cry” when 
forsaken of His God. And in gazing thus upon that 
scene their inmost being has sustained a mighty change. 
Till yesterday, the world and self ensnared their hearts, 
and filled the whole horizon of their lives. But now 
that cross has become a power to divorce themselves 
from self, and to separate them from that world which 
crucified their Lord. 

Oh! for power to preach the cross of Christ! so 
to preach that cross that it shall become a reality to all, 
whether they ‘accept it or despise it: that men who 

1 Gal. au. ik 


THE CROSS. 33 


never were conscious of a doubt, because they never 
really believed, shall see what priests and soldiers saw, 
and the rabble crowd that mocked His agonies, and see- 
ing, shall exclaim, “It is impossible that this can be the 
Son of God!” that some again shall see what John and 
Mary witnessed, and gazing, shall cry out, with broken 
hearts, in mingled love and grief, “My God, was this 
for me!” and turn to live devoted lives for Him who 
died and rose again. 

I conclude in borrowed words, more worthy than my 
own: “With the loyal-hearted believer, there is one 
master-object which in measure conceals every other by 
its surpassing glory; and this is not redemption, which, 
blessed as it is, is simply a matter of course, if Christ 
died for this end, but the cross itself, with its ignominy 
—the death of the Prince of Life, the crucifixion of the 
Lord of Glory: incredible antithesis! Not only the 
freedom from eternal and frightful slavery, but the 
divine price paid for that freedom. And this ‘not 
silver and gold’ (though we were not worth so much as 
brass), but ‘the precious blood of Christ.’ 

“ And so I would preach to those who hear, and say 
‘There is life, there is pardon, there is righteousness for 
you—nay, there is worth for you—and they are all 
divine, besides their own integrity ; and they are a free 
gift to the godless and lost. But I tell you more, and 
beg you to hasten on; this life, these riches, come 
to you through His poverty and death; and God and 
God’s love are revealed to you in this poverty, this 
death, even the death of the cross—even in that which 
forced from Him that cry of anguish.’ 

“And if I were to tell you of forgiveness of sins 


through His mercy, and leave you there; if I preached 
c 


34 THE CROSS. 


to you the results flowing of necessity from the cross to 
each believer, but not the cross itself, or the cross itself 
as a judicial work, but not the Crucified One, I should 
leave you still to self, and I desire to save you from 
self, as well as from everlasting shame and contempt. 
But I preach Christ Jesus the Lord, the Son of God, 
the brightness of His glory and express image of Him- 
self, on the cross made a curse and smitten there by the 
hand of God judicially for the guilty. See the dread- 
fulness of that cross, and know who it is that was 
lifted up on it, and for whom, and to what end, as it is 
written. Look steadily, mark, study, search into those 
unsearchable moral riches, and blessing after blessing 
will come to you, and so freely, from this one object, in 
which all truth and all love are alike declared, and in 
which you will learn to love, to worship and to obey, to 
abhor wrong, to forget yourself and think of Him, and 
to ‘count all things but loss,” as the apostle says, not 
for the grace of your deliverance, but ‘for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus your Lord,” 


CHAPTER IV. 
FAITH. 


FAITH is a mystery to many, a stumblingblock to not 
afew. By some it seems to be regarded as the con- 
dition upon which God compounds with men who 
ought to have righteousness, but have not: with others 
it is the last mite added to make up the price of our 
redemption. At times it appears like a new barrier 
set up between the soul and God, when the work of 
Christ had broken all the old barriers down; and not 
unfrequently it is represented as an operation, like the 
new birth itself, in which the sinner is a passive agent 
in the hands of God. There is the rationalist view of 
faith, making it merely the assent of the mind to truth 
demonstratively proved: there is the Romanist view of 
faith, which makes it a sort of good work of a mystical 
and spiritual kind; and again, there is what I may 
term the fatalist theory of faith, which regards it as a 
kind of grace imparted to the soul by God. 

But when we turn to Scripture all such subtleties 
and errors vanish like mists before the sun. “Faith 
cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.”? 
What simplicity, and yet what reality and power are 
here! “Faith coming by hearing,” whether it be faith 

1 Rom, x, 17. 


36 FAITH. 


of the gospel, or of the news of some temporal calamity 
or good. There are no two ways of believing anything. 
And hearing comes—the true hearing—by the Word 
of God: not by reasonings founded on it, it may be 
rightly founded on it; not by “enticing words of man’s 
wisdom,” 1! but by the Word of God. And here is where 
the difference lies, not in the character of the faith, but 
in the object of it. The sinner is brought into the 
presence of God. He hears God, he believes God, and 
he is blest with believing Abraham, and just on the 
same ground, for “ Abraham believed God,” and was ac- 
counted righteous.” 

Tn its first and simplest phase in Scripture, faith is 
the belief of a record or testimony. It is, secondly, 
belief in a person; and it has, lastly, the character of 
trust, which always points to what is future. To speak 
of trust as the only true phase of gospel faith, is wholly 
false and wrong. In fact, the word generally rendered 
“trust,” is never used in this connection once in Scrip- 
ture. It is etymologically “hope,” and the element of 
hope invariably enters into it. In what is pre-eminently 
the gospel book of the Bible, it occurs but once, and in 
the sermons of the Acts we shall seek for it in vain. 
“We are saved by trust,” is a statement at once true 
and scriptural, if only we understand salvation in its 
fullest sense, as yet to be made good to us in glory; 4 
but the salvation of our souls 5 is not matter of trust, 
but of faith in its simplest form. The redemption of 
our souls is a fact to us, because we believe the record 
God has given of His Son; no less so is the redemption 
of our bodies, but it is because of our trust in God. As 


1 1 Cor. ii. 4. 2 Rom. iv. 3. 8 John v. 45. 
4 Rom. viii. 24. 5 1 Pet. i. 9. 


FAITH. | 3T 


the apostle writes to Timothy, “ We trust in the living 
God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of those 
that believe! Trust springs from confidence in the 
person trusted; and that again depends on knowledge 
of the person confided in. In this sense, faith may 
be great or little, weak or strong. “I write unto you, 
little children” (says St. John) “because your sins are 
forgiven you for His name’s sake.” Here is a testi- 
mony and a fact. Upon our state of soul may de- 
pend the realization, the enjoyment of it, but our faith 
can admit of no degrees. But trust in God has as many 
degrees as there are saints on earth. Some believers 
could not trust Him for a single meal: others can look 
to Him, without misgivings, to feed a thousand hungry 
mouths, or to convert a thousand godless sinners. Our 
faith, in this sense, depends entirely on our knowing 
God, and on communion with Him; the faith of the 
gospel comes by hearing Him? 

At every pier along the new embankment of the 
Thames, there hangs a chain that reaches to the water's 
edge at its lowest ebb. But for this, some poor creature, 
struggling with death, might drown with his very hand 
upon the pier. An appeal to perishing sinners to trust 
in Christ is like calling on a drowning wretch to climb 
the embankment wall. The glad tidings, the testimony 
of God concerning Christ, is the chain let down for the 
hand of faith to grasp. Once rescued, it is not the 


1 1 Tim. iv. 10. See same word in 1 Tim. iii. 14; v. 5; vi. 17. 

2 1 John ii. 12. 

3 So much so, that hearing is sometimes taken to include faith, as 
e.g., John v. 25, and Col. i. 6. The gospel brought forth fruit in 
Colosse “ from the day they heard it.” 

4 The case of Cornelius affords a striking example of this. “A 
devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, and prayed 


38 | a FAITH. 


chain the river waif would trust for safety, but the 
rock immovable beneath his feet; yet, but for that 
chain, the rock might have only mocked his struggles. 
And it is not the gospel message the ransomed sinner 
trusts in, but the living Christ of whom the gospel 
speaks; but yet it was the message that his faith at 
first laid hold upon, and by it he gained an eternal 
standing-ground upon the Rock of Ages. 

He who truly hears the good news of Christ believes 
it just as the little child believes a mother’s word. And 
none but such shall ever enter the kingdom. There 
is neither mystery nor virtue in the faith, in the 
one case any more than in the other; the only differ- 
ence is in the testimony itself. He who believes the 
gospel, receives a word that is nothing less than “the 
power of God unto salvation.” If, in fact, none can 
believe apart from the work of the Holy Spirit, the 
difficulty depends on no peculiarity in the faith itself. 
It is not a question of metaphysics, but of moral de- 
pravity and spiritual death. As far as the act of faith 
is concerned, the gospel is believed in the same way 
as the passing news of the passing hour. The hindrance 
lies in the apostasy of the natural heart of man. And, 
doubtless, the reason faith is made the turning point of 
the sinner’s return to God is just because distrust was 
the turning point of his departure from Him? Dis- 
obedience was not the first step in Adam’s fall; it was 
the last, and it followed upon disbelief. 


to God alway,” it might well be asked, What did he lack? Yet 
to such an one the message came: “Send men to Joppa and call for 
Simon Peter, who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house 
shall be saved.” —-Acts xi. 14. 

1 Luke xviii. 17. 2 Rom. i. 16. 

3 See Appendix, Note I. 


FAITH. 39 
= 


Faith then in its simplest character is not trust, 
nor even faith in a person, but belief of a record. 
“Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born 
of God.” “Who is he that overcometh the world, but 
he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?” And 
so, if we read through the chapter from which these 
words are quoted,’ we find it is the record, or witness, 
or testimony of God, (for all these words represent but 
one in the original), that is in question between the 
sinner and Himself. “There are three that bear testi- 
mony, the Spirit and the water and the blood; and 
these three agree in one. If we receive the testimony 
of men, the testimony of God is greater ; for this is the 
testimony of God, which He hath testified of His Son. 
He that believeth on the Son of God hath the testimony 
in himself.2 He that believeth not God hath made Him 
a liar, because he believeth not the testimony that God 
gave of His Son.” And so also if we turn to the Gospel 
of St. John. The Book was written that we might be- 
lieve “that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and 
that, believing, we might have life through His name.’ 

Nor will this seem strange to any who understand 
the gospel. The gospel is not a promise or a covenant, 
but a message, a proclamation. It is the “good news 
of God, concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.” 5 
And the belief of that good news is life: not indeed 
when retailed as the word of man, to suit the whims or 
errors of the carnal heart, but when it comes in the 


1 1 John v. 

2 ie. it is no longer something in a book merely, outside himself, 
but it has become identified with the believer, and is part of his very being. 
Compare Jer. xv. 16, John v. 38, &c. I presume every one is aware 
that the words I have omitted in quoting verses 7, 8, are an interpolation. 

3 John xx. 31. 4 See e.g., 1 Cor. xv. 1-4; Acts xiii, 38, 39. 

5 Rom, i. 1, 3. 


40 _ FAITH. 


power of the Holy Ghost, and, “as it is in truth, as the 
word of God.” “The words that I have spoken unto 
you,” said Christ, “they are spirit and they are life,” 
when many of His disciples were offended at His 
teaching. The many heard but the words of Jesus the 
Nazarene, and were offended and went back. To the 
few, these same words were “ words of eternal life,” and 
called forth the confession of Him as the Holy One of 
God.t 

The 10th of Romans claims a notice here, confirming, 
as it does so fully, what the other Scriptures already 
quoted amply prove. God has brought the gospel as 
near to men as in the old time He brought the law. 
“This commandment which I command thee this day, 
it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off,’ said 
Moses in his parting charge to Israel?—“ It is not in 
heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for 
us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it 
and do it? Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou 
shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and 
bring it unto us, that we may hear it and doit? But 
the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in 
thy heart, that thou mayest do it.” 

Thus spake the righteousness of law; now, hear the 
righteousness of faith: “Say not in thine heart, Who 
‘shall ascend into heaven ? (that is, to bring Christ down 
from above:) or, Who shall descend into the deep? 
(that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead). But 
what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy 
mouth and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, 
which we preach; that if thou shalt confess with thy 
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart 

1 John vi. 69 (so all the oldest MSS.) 2 Deut, xxx. 12-14, 


FAITH. 41 


that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be 
saved.”1 It was for Israel to have the commandment 
in their mouth, and to do it with their heart; it is ours 
to have the gospel in our mouth, and to believe it with 
our heart. There is no mystery in the one case any 
more than in the other. Metaphysical distinctions 
between believing with the head and with the heart, 
are wholly untenable. A Christian believes with his 
heart, just as a Jew obeyed with his heart. It was 
the obedience of the inner man, the real man, that God 
required; and so it is with faith. In modern English 
“the heart” is synonymous with the affections ; but 
not in Scripture. The Lord speaks of “the heart” as 
the moral being, the true man as distinguished from the 
mere outward man.2 And so also here. With the 
mouth man speaks, but the confession of the lip may 
or may not be the expression of what is within, and 
therefore secret. The confession of Christ by the out- 
ward man is the sequel and complement of the faith of 
the inward man. A man cannot believe with his affec- 
tions. Indeed all such expressions are fanciful. Love 
and hope and faith and fear are not independent enti- 
ties with rival or co-ordinate rank in the complex being, 
man. It is the man himself who loves, and hopes, and 
believes, and fears. Just as he may say he loves, and 
never love at all, so he may say he believes, and the 
profession be a sham; but if he really believes,? and 
believes God, the gift of God is his. But there is no 
subtlety in the faith. “Faith comes by hearing ;” faith 
in God comes by hearing God. “ Every one that hath 


1 Rom. x. 6-10. 

2 Mark vii. 18-23. The mind is so used elsewhere. See p. 55 post. 

3 “Not, to be sure, in a speculative, but in a practical sense.” — 
Bp. Butler. 


42 FAITH. 


* 

heard from the Father,’”—said the Lord Himself, or per- 
haps, making due allowance for the English idiom, the 
verse would be better rendered: “ Every one that hath 
heard the Father, and hath learned of Him, cometh unto 
me.” But as for them to whom He spoke, “they could 
not hear.” 1 

Let us then get this great fact implanted firmly in 
our minds, that there is neither merit nor virtue in 
faith, nor even in the letter of the truth believed ; but 
that to believe God is eternal life. To believe God, 
whether it be, as with Abraham, the promise of a family,” 
or, aS with us, the testimony toa Person and a fact. 
Faith is the opened lattice that lets in the light of 
heaven to the soul, bringing gladness and blessing with 
it. It is only in ophthalmic hospitals that people are 
always thinking of their eyes, and it is due entirely to 
the prevailing errors and follies of moder: Christianity 
that so many Christians are hypochondriacs respecting 
faith. In Scripture, faith is like healthy eyesight, un- 
heeded and forgotten in the ease and enjoyment of its 
use. Now-a-days it is more like the glasses of people 
with failing or defective vision, sometimes lost, often 
dim, and constantly a trouble. 

But faith not only receives the word of Christ; it 
reaches on, and lays hold upon the person of Christ. 
Belief of His word leads to belief in Himself. And 


1 John vi. 45, and viii. 43.—Some men speak of the Spirit’s work in 
the soul, as though the sinner were an irresponsible vessel which God 
fills with faith ; and yet these same men, when faith itself becomes 
their theme, seem to forget the Spirit’s work entirely, and enlarge on 
subtle distinctions between head faith and heart faith, “faith in” and 
‘faith on,” faith of saving truth, and faith in general, until faith itself 
looms great and mysterious upon the burdened sinner, shutting Christ 
out altogether, 

2 Qen. xv. 6, 6: 


FAITH. 43 
* 


here, again, there is no difficulty, save such as men 
have made. To receive Christ, to come to Christ, to 
believe in Christ—for all these words are used in Scrip- 
ture—means to-day just what it meant when the Lord 
was living upon earth. To come to Christ, was not 
outward contact with the son of Joseph, but submission 
of heart to the Son of God. “No man can come to me 
except the Father draw him,” was His word to those 
who had followed Him from Capernaum to Tiberias, and 
back again across the sea. Any one might come to 
Jesus, and none need leave His presence without proof 
of His power and grace. He fed the hungry just be- 
cause they hungered. He healed the oppressed of Satan, 
just because they were oppressed, and His mission was 
to destroy the devil’s work. But how few there were 
of those who thus came to Jesus, that ever truly came 
to Christ! 

“Tf ye believe not that I am He, ye shall die in your 
sins.” “That I am He:” it was this that faith laid 
hold upon. They who did believe it as a divine revela- 
tion, came to believe in Himself, in a further and fuller 
sense, and this again led to confidence and trust, just in 
proportion as they were abiding in Him, and His word 
in them; and, moreover, as their knowledge of Him 
increased. “ How is it that ye have no faith?” was the 
Lord’s appeal to the terrified disciples on the Sea of 
Galilee, when they awoke Him with upbraidings for 
neglecting them. In the gospel sense they believed on 
Him then, as they ever did; and indeed their remon- 
strances were based on their unchanging confidence 
that, being the Christ the Son of God, He had power to 
deliver them, but did not. They believed on Him, but 
as yet they did not know Him, and therefore their 


44. FAITH. 
a 


knowledge of His power only led them to doubt His 
love. 

“ Acquaint now thyself with Him and be at peace,” 1 
is a word for the tempest-tossed believer. The faith 
that “comes by hearing,” brings us salvation and the 
knowledge of salvation. The faith that springs from 
abiding in Him and acquainting ourselves with Him, is 
the secret of a peace-ruled heart and a holy life. Like 
all the sons of faith, Saul of Tarsus believed God, and 
so set out upon the Christian course. And the “ faith- 
ful saying” that brought life and joy to him at the 
starting-post, was the strength of his heart even to the 
goal It isthe same gospel that is the resting-place 
for our feet as we lay hold upon the Rock of Ages, 
which becomes the pillow of our dying hour as we pass 
‘away from our service and our sins on earth to the 
glory yonder. Whether as the converted persecutor on 
the Damascus road, or the Apostle of the Lord at the 
close of that matchless life of labour and testimony, 
Paul’s faith in the gospel was the same. Here it is not 
growth we speak of, but steadfastness.? At the begin- 
ning, just as at the end of his race, he “ believed God,” 
but at the end, when looking back upon his life from 
his Roman prison, he could add, “ I know whom I have 
believed ;” and having come to know Him, he had 
learned to trust Him. 

Everybody understands what it means to believe in 
the claimant of a fortune or a title. It is just to receive 
him for what he represents himself to be. And be- 
lieving in Christ means primarily nothing more than 
this. It leads to more, doubtless; but that depends 
not on any peculiarity or virtue in the faith, but on 

1 Job xxii. 21. 21 Tim.i. 15. 3 Col. ii. 5. 


FAITH. 45 


Him who is the object of faith. They who thus believe 
in the Lord Jesus come to confide in Him, to trust 
Him, and to love Him; but to believe on Him is simply 
to “receive His testimony,” and thus to “set to our seal 
that God is true And yet, such faith is impossible 
apart from the work of the Holy Spirit in the soul. 
“ Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born 
of God.” Not, I repeat again, for it needs to be re- 
peated, that faith in Christ is a metaphysical achieve- 
ment so difficult that man is insufficient to accomplish 
it; but that the heart is utterly apostate, and man’s 
natural condition is that of pure distrust of God. Nay, 
more, “the carnal mind is enmity against God.”? Man 
is capable of the firmest and most implicit faith in him- 
self and in the world, aye, and in the devil too, as will 
be proved one day; but his whole moral and spiritual 
being is so utterly estranged from God that he not 
only knows Him not, but, if left to himself, is incapable 
of knowing Him. Just as a warped window-pane dis- 
torts all objects seen through it, so the human heart 
perverts even the truth of God itself, and changes it 
into a lie. A heart in fellowship with God would have 
found proof in every act and word of Jesus that He was 
divine; but men heard His words and saw His works— 
sincere men, too, and good and estimable—and adjudged 
Him an impostor notwithstanding. “Because He told 
them the truth, they believed Him not.”* And as it 
was then, so is it still. It is not the head that is at 
fault, but the heart; it is not that man is silly, but that 
he is sinful; not that he is weak, but that he is wicked. 

Indeed, if Christians were made, as certain writers 
upon evidences would lead us to suppose, by reasoning 

1 John iii. 33, 36. ? Rom, viii. 7. 3 Rom. i. 25. 4 John viii, 45. 


46 FAITH. 


out Christianity from the miracles of Christ, the com- 
pany of the Lord’s disciples would have numbered 
thousands more than the little band who owned His 
name. Those who believed on Him thus were not few, 
but many. But He who could judge the heart refused 
to commit Himself to such! The true faith is not based 
on evidences, but on the word of God; and these miracle- 
made believers could not and would not hear that word.” 
To acknowledge Jesus of Nazareth as the promised Son 
of David, on account of the miracles He did, was one 
thing; to receive eternal lifein Christ was quite apart 
from it. There had never risen a greater prophet than 
John the Baptist; and yet at the very time this testi- 
mony was given to him, his political faith, if I may use 
the expression, had broken down, and his disciples were 
on their way back to his prisen, to reassure him by the 
record of the Lord’s miracles.? And so it was at the last 
with His most favoured saints; “We trusted that it 
had been He which should have redeemed Israel,’ was 
their sad tribute to the memory of His name. Their 
faith had failed, their hope had died out, leaving only 
love to cling to Him; but still they were His own. In 
common with the rialtitade around them, they had seen 
His miracles, and hailed Him as their coming king. 
But more than this, they had themselves been the sub- 
jects of a miracle the multitude knew nothing of: they 
had been born again by the word of Him whom now 
they mourned. They had received the gift of life from 
God; and though they knew it not, that death, which 
seemed to them the end of all their hopes, secured to 
them eternal glory. 


1 John ii. 23, 24; and comp. John vii. 31 with viii. 30-47. 
2 John viii, 43, 47, And see Appendix, Note II, 3 Matt, xi. 


FAITH, 47 


“ However,” says Bishop Butler in summing up his 
argument on this point, “ the fact is allowed that Chris- 
tianity was professed to be received into the world upon 
the belief of miracles,” and “that is what its first con- 
verts would have alleged as their reason for embracing 
it.”1 True it is that no earnest, honest man, with the 
Scriptures at hand, could doubt the Messiahship of 
Jesus, while witnessing the miracles He wrought; but 
neither in those days, nor now, can men reason them- 
selves into Christianity. How different from Butlers 
account of it, is the story the early Christians told of 
their conversion! What is the testimony of those who 
were with Him in the Holy Mount, and witnessed that 
greatest miracle of all? ‘Which were born (writes 
the beloved disciple), not of blood, nor of the will of 
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.”? “Being 
born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorrup- 
tible by the word of God,” is the kindred witness of 
St Peter2 “Of His own will begat He us with the 
word of truth,” is the still terser statement of St James.* 
Nor did St Paul, as great a reasoner as Butler, strike a 
discordant note: “God, who commanded the light to 
shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts.”® 
Such was his glad but humble testimony. The multi- 
tudes followed Him because of the loaves His power 
supplied: they cared not for the bread of heaven. But 
His true disciples knew and owned Him as the One who 
had the words of eternal life. This was the bond that 
kept them at His side when the many were offended 
and drew back. The works of God might convince the 


1 The Analogy, Pt. 2 ch. vii. s. 3, 2 John i. 13. 
31 Pet. 1. 23. 4 James i. 18. 


5 2 Cor, iv. 6, 


48 FAITH, 


reason; but it was not thus the dead got life, -the 
troubled conscience peace. To weigh the evidences 
and embrace Christianity as the true religion, is the 
part of a fair and prudent man; but salvation is God’s 
work altogether. The blessing is not for the apt 
scholar, but for the outcast and lost. It is not for the 
clear head, but for the contrite heart. Not for the clever 
reasoner, but for the self-judged and guilty. Not for 
logicians, but for sinners ; not for the wise and prudent, 
but for babes. So it has been in everyage. The public 
revelation of God to man has varied again and again, 
but His secret revelation to the soul that turns to Him 
has ever been the same. “He brought me up out of a 
horrible pit and out of the miry clay, and set my feet 
upon a rock, and established my goings, and put a new 
song in my mouth.”! Thus sang His saints in the old 
days three thousand years ago; so sing they still. “It 
pleased God to reveal His Son in me,” is the testimony 
of Paul;? and if Peter owned Him as the Son of the 
living God, it was not a deduction from His miracles, 
but a revelation from the Father in heaven? And so 
with the rest. It was not that they saw His works, 
but that they heard His words. 

We are saved by faith; and faith is the reception as 
true of what is beyond the range of proof, either by 
demonstration or by evidence. It is the substance (or 
assurance) of things hoped or trusted for, the conviction 
of things not seen. Salvation is within the reach of 
all, but it is as suppliant sinners they must receive it. 
Grace does not place either the Saviour or the Gospel 


1 Pary. 2 Gal. i. 15, 16. 3 Matt. xvi. 17. 

4 “T have given unto them the words which Thou gavest me; and 
they have received them.” (John xvii. 8.) 

beHebsexiy 1; 


FAITH. 49 


down at the bar of human judgment; that is the 
arrogance of infidelity. As has been already seen, grace 
is based upon the cross, and assumes that man is guilty 
and lost. It does not place him in the dock, but it 
finds him there: it does not brand him as ruined and 
lost, but it comes to him thus branded already. And 
the very gospel which tells of life and peace and pardon, 
is itself the power to make good this testimony. It is 
not a question of God’s submitting either Himself or 
His revelation to the tribunal of the creature’s judg- 
ment, but of the sinner’s waking up from his death- 
sleep in sin to hear the voice of God. The houris come 
of which it is written, “The dead shall hear the voice 
of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.”4 

We are saved through faith, but faith is not our 
saviour. If faith had intrinsic virtue and could bring 
blessing with it, hell would be impossible; for there 
are no unbelievers, save on earth, and that, too, in the 
days of Christ’s humiliation and His absence. The day 
is coming when all shall believe and confess His name. 
And if that faith and confession bring blessing now, it 
is not because of any merit they possess, but because 
God is saving men in sovereign grace. If the blessing 
were not by grace, it never could be gained by such as 
we are. “Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by 
grace.”? As it is written, “By grace are ye saved 
through faith ; and that (salvation) not of yourselves, 
it is the gift of God.”* Salvation is the gift of God, 


1 John v. 25. 2 Rom. iv. 16. 

3 Eph. ii. 8. “The gift of God” here is salvation by grace through 
faith. Not the faith itself. “This is precluded,” as Alford remarks, 
` “by the manifestly parallel clauses ‘not of yourselves,’ and ‘not of 
works,’ the latter of which would be irrelevant as asserted of fuith.” It 
is still more definitely precluded, he might have added, by the character 

D 


50 FAITH. 


given on the principle of grace, and received on the 
principle of faith. And how does faith come? “Faith 
cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” 1 
This is the time Isaiah spoke of, in the which God is 
found of them that seek Him not;? the time in which 
the gospel is to be carried to the lanes and highways of 
the world, and men are to be compelled to come in ;? 
when forgiveness of sins is to be proclaimed far and 
wide, and all that believe are justified; when there is 
salvation for the lost, life for the dead, heaven for the out- 
cast sinner. The cross has been set up, not half way 
on the road to heaven, where man’s unbelieving heart 
would place it, but right down in the market square of 
the City of Destruction, that men may look and live. 
Such are “the exceeding riches of His grace in His 
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.” 


of the passage. It is given to us to believe on Christ, just in the same 
sense in which it is given to some “also to suffer for his sake.” (Phil. 
i. 29.) But the statement in Ephesians is doctrinal, and in that sense 
the assertion that faith is a gift, or indeed that it is a distinct entity at 
all is sheer error. This matter is sometimes represented as though God 
gave faith to the sinner first, and then, on the sinner’s bringing Him the 
faith, went on and gave him salvation! Just as though a baker, re- 
fusing to supply empty-handed applicants, should first dispense to each ~ 
the price of a loaf, and then, in return for the money from his own till, 
serve out the bread! To answer fully such a vagary as this would be to 
re-write the foregoing chapter. Suffice it, therefore, to point out that to 
read the text as though faith were the gift, is to destroy not only the 
meaning of verse 9, but the force of the whole passage. 
1 Rom, x. 17. 2 Rom, x. 20. 3 Luke xiv. 23. 


CHAPTER V. 
REPENTANCE AND THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 


PAGAN mythology had a three-headed monster at the 
door of hell, but modern Christianity has its Cerberus at 
the gate of heaven. Faith, repentance, and the Spirit’s 
work, by God intended to bring salvation to our very 
door, and master our hostile hearts, are turned by men 
into a threefold hindrance on the way to life. Or, to 
change the figure, faith is a rugged mountain on the 
pilgrim’s path, and repentance a dreary slough beyond 
it. The mountain and the marsh are passed in safety, 
only to find perplexities more hopeless still; for the 
fickle phantom of the Spirit’s work must then be 
grasped and made his own, before the pilgrim can cross 
the threshold of the pearly gate. What a burlesque 
upon the gospel! 

From the twilight days of prophetic testimony a 
Divine voice still vibrates in our air, “ As I LIVE,” saith 
the Lord God, “I HAVE NO PLEASURE IN THE DEATH OF 
THE WICKED.” And turning to the clearer light and 
surer word of Him who came to give a ghastly but 
most blessed proof of the deep meaning of God’s great 
oath, we gaze on Calvary, and as we gaze and worship, 
the words seem written there in judgment fire and 


52 REPENTANCE AND 


redeeming blood: “ GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD THAT HE 
GAVE HIS ONLY-BEGOTTEN Son.” Every fact and testi- 
mony of the gospel assures, and is intended to convince 
us, that God is on the sinner’s side, and “ will have all 
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the 
truth.”! Is the case so hopeless that man can do abso- 
lutely nothing for himself? Then righteousness is “to 
him that worketh not but believeth;” “It is of faith 
that it may be by grace.”2 Is man so utterly at enmity 
that even this would not suffice? The Holy Ghost has 
come down from heaven to turn our hearts to God and 
secure to us every blessing Christ has won. 

But here I have spoken only of faith and the Spirit’s 
work: What then about repentance? Are faith and 
the Spirit’s work enough ? or is not repentance no less a 
necessity, if men are to be saved ? I meet this question 
boldly and at once by denouncing it as based, not so 
much on ignorance, as on deep-seated and systematic 
error. The repentance which thus obtrudes itself and 
claims notice in every sermon, is not the friend of the 
gospel, but an enemy. It is like the officious guide who 
forces himself upon the traveller only to mislead him. 
Faith and repentance are not successive stages on the 
road to life; they are not independent guides to direct 
the pilgrim’s path; they are not separate acts to be 
successively accomplished by the sinner as a condition 
of his salvation. But, in different phases of it, they 
represent the same Godward attitude of soul, which the 
truth of God, believed, produces. 

Salvation there cannot be without repentance, any 
more than without faith; but the soundest and fullest 
gospel-preaching need not include any mention of the 

1 J Tim, ii. 4 2 Rom. iv. 5, 16. 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 5d 


word. Neither as verb or noun does it occur in the 
Epistle to the Romans—God’s great doctrinal treatise 
on redemption and righteousness—save in the warnings 
of the 2nd chapter. And the Gospel of St. John—- 
pre-eminently the gospel-book of the Bible—will be 
searched in vain for a single mention of it. The be- 
loved disciple wrote his Gospel, that men might be- 
lieve and live, and his Epistle followed, to confirm 
believers in the simplicity and certainty of their 
faith ;2 but yet, from end to end of them, the word 
“repent” or “repentance” never once occurs. It 
is to these writings, before all others, men have turned 
in every age to find words of peace and life; and yet 
some who profess to hold them as inspired will cavil at 
a gospel sermon because repentance is not mentioned 
in it: a fault, if fault it be, that marks the testimony 
of St. John, and the preaching of our Lord Himself, as 
recorded by the Fourth Evangelist. The repentance of 
the gospel is to be found in the Nicodemus sermon, and 
in the gracious testimony to the woman at the well. 
And, I may add, any repentance that limits or jars upon 
those sacred words, is wholly against the truth. 

What then is repentance? The question, bear in 
mind, concerns the truth of God and our own salvation. 
It is not a problem in etymology. Etymologically, 

1 John xx. 31. 2 1 John v. 13. 

3 This is the more remarkable from the fact that the word occurs so 
often in the Revelation. Any one can verify my statement by the help 
of a concordance. The word is used 58 times in the New Testament. 
Of these, 25 are to be ascribed to St. Luke in his Gospel and the Acts, 
and 12 to the Apocalypse. St. Paul uses it but 5 times. 

perapéouae is used in Matt. xxi. 29, 32; xxvii. 3; 2 Cor. vii. 8; 
and Heb. vii. 21. In 2 Cor. vii. both words are rendered “repent” in 
the Authorised Version. We might read the passage :—“ I do not 


regret it though I did regret it . . . ye sorrowed to repentance... . 
godly sorrow worketh repentance not to be regretted.” 


54 REPENTANCE AND 


nerdvora in Greek, and repentance in English, have 
exactly the same significance, an after-mind, the result 
of second thought or reflection. Moreover, the word in 
Greek is often used in this its primary sense. But, 
alas for humanity ! second thoughts too often involve 
regret, and not unfrequently remorse; and it will not 
seem strange to any who have studied the history of 
words, to find that metanoia should have come to cover 
the entire range of meaning from mere change of mind 
to sorrow and remorse. Our task is therefore to turn 
to Holy Writ, and comparing Scripture with Scripture, 
to discover what God means when He calls men to 
repentance. 

And here we do well to bear in mind a canon of 
interpretation, given specially regarding prophecy, but 
true of revelation as a whole. No Scripture “is of any 
private interpretation.” Itis not to be isolated, and 
expzained apart from other Scriptures. The words are 
to be interpreted consistently with what the same 
Spirit has elsewhere revealed. Taking heed then to 
the two rival errors towards one or other of which our 
creeds are always tending, Romanism on one side, and 
Rationalism on the other, we can clear the ground at 
once by deciding that repentance does not mean peni- 
tence or sorrow, or any condition of soul or change of 
heart that makes the sinner acceptable to God or has 
merit of its own. The Romanist view of repentance we 
reject at once, as opposed to the doctrinal teaching of 
the Epistle to the Romans, and the simple testimony of 
the Fourth Evangelist. Whatever repentance means, 
it must be something consistent with grace, and some- 
thing implied in the Gospel of St. John. 

1 2 Peter i. 20, 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK 55 


But while refusing to exalt repentance at the cost of 
grace, we must guard against the Rationalist extreme 
of reducing it to a mere mental change! Much of what 
I have said respecting faith might well be repeated here. 
God must have reality. If He demands “a change of 
mind,” it is not of the intellectual faculty He speaks, 
but of the man himself, the real man. So the apostle 
uses the word in the Epistle to the Romans and else- 
where, “ I myself, with the mind, serve the law of God.” ? 
Repentance is the turning of the mind or heart—the 
man himself. 

Repentance is not faith, nor faith repentance; but 
yet they are inseparable. Inseparable, that is, in con- 
nection with the gospel. Therefore it is that the word 
“repent” is so seldom used in Scripture sermons, and 
also that it sometimes stands alone, as the principle on 
which man receives the blessing. “He that believeth 
hath,” implies repentance; “repent and be converted,” 
involves faith. The hand that clutches the assassin’s 
knife must open ere it can grasp the gift its intended 
victim proffers ; and opening that hand, though a single 
act, has a double aspect and purpose. Accepting the 
gift implies a turning from the crime the heart was 
bent on, and it was the gift itself that worked the 
change. Faith is the open hand, relatively to the gift ; 
repentance is the same hand, relatively, not only to the 


1 It is but natural that the recoil from what I have termed “the 
Romanist view of repentance ” should have carried men into extremes ; 
and at this moment there is some danger of a reaction towards the old 
error of the Douay Bible, which confounds repentance with penitence. 
But the true antidote to the prevailing levity of the day is not a 
return to legality in preaching, but a more just appreciation of the 
solemnity of grace, and a worthier testimony to the greatness and 
majesty of the God with whom we have to do. 

2 Romans vii, 25; and see page 41, ante. 


56 REPENTANCE AND 


gift, but more especially to the dagger it has flung from 
it. The schoolmen would explain that, chronologically, 
faith comes first, and then, repentance; but that, in 
their logical order, repentance has precedence. But 
the question of priority, though an interesting problem 
in metaphysics, is a profitless study in theology. Prac- 
tically, they are simultaneous. He who truly believes 
in the Lord Jesus Christ may rest assured he has 
repented; and “repentance toward God” equally 
implies “faith toward Christ.” That is, under the 
preaching of the gospel. Judgment-warnings might 
produce repentance, as Jonah’s preaching did at 
Nineveh; but in the gospel, it is not the wrath, but 
the goodness of God, that leads to it. 

Repentance, as I have said, has a twofold bearing. 
The characteristic of gospel repentance is repentance to; 
under the past dispensation, it was repentance from. 
John the Baptist, for instance, preached repentance in 
order to faith in One then yet to come. A man is 
crossing a moor at night, his eye fixed upon a light 
that marks, as he supposes, the homestead of a friend. 
Presently he meets another traveller, belated like him- 
self, who tells him that the light he has been pressing 
towards is nothing but a gipsy’s tent. As for the house 
he seeks, the stranger only knows that it is in a 
different direction altogether, but where, he cannot say ; 
a shepherd will soon be passing who knows it well. 
Convinced of his mistake, he turns from the path he 
has been following, and sits down upon a stone to 
await the coming of the expected guide. Such was the 
repentance the Baptist preached, “a repentance from 
dead works, in order that they should believe in Him 

1 Romans ii. 4. 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. Si 


which should come after him.”! But the full gospel of 
Christ is like a friend who meets the erring wanderer, 
and, by the same testimony that convinces him he is 
on a wrong path, turns him to the destination which 
he seeks, 

According to an ingenious derivation suggested for it, 
the Greek word for “man” implies a face turned upwards. 
And such, in a moral sense, is the normal condition of the 
creature ; such was Adam as he came from the hand of 
God. But sin brought in estrangement; and our race 
springs, not from Adam in Eden innocence, but from the 
fallen outcast. By nature man’s face is now averted from 
his God.? He needs, therefore, to be turned right round 
again. There is no difficulty here save such as theology 
has made. The student of Scripture finds there in 
clear and simple language, what every one who has a 
spiritual history has learned as plainly from his own 
heart, that man by nature gravitates from God; morally 
“his countenance is fallen,” his back is turned upon his 
Maker. The need, therefore, is not that he should 
mend his ways, but that he should change his course 
altogether. The traveller’s gait may be slovenly, and 
his pace slow ; yet little does it matter, if every step is 
taking him farther from his home. His first and great 
need is to be turned right about; and this turning is 
conversion, the objective phase of the change which, 
when considered subjectively, Scripture calls repent- 
ance; a change, moreover, which depends upon faith of 
the gospel. “To the Gentiles hath God granted repent- 
ance unto life,’ we read in the Acts of the Apostles. 
Referring to the same event, Paul and Barnabas an- 
nounced at Antioch, that “God had opened the door of 


1 Acts xix. 4. 2 Man’s natural condition is now abnormal. 


58 REPENTANCE AND 


faith unto the Gentiles;” and elsewhere, again, it is 
alluded to as “the conversion of the Gentiles.” The 
same event was thus described in various aspects of it ; 
and yet another might have been added, bringing in 
the fact of the new birth. 

This change then, and the need of it, are indisputable 
realities. Whether we open the Scriptures, or turn to 
our own hearts, or look out upon the world around us, 
we find indisputable proofs and tokens that man’s 
course by nature leads downwards; that there is a con- 
troversy pending between the creature and his God. 
And from first to last that controversy has been the 
same in its nature and results; but, as already shown, 
the ground and subject of it changed when the Son of 
God was manifested. Repentance and conversion were 
not less necessary in presence of a rejected Christ, than 
in view of a broken law; but the whole controversy 
between God and man now became centred in Christ, 
and therefore, acknowledging Him, believing in Him, 
implied, and carried with it the great change, the turn- 
ing of the man to God. Hence the prominence which 
faith has in the gospel. The word “believe” occurs 
about a hundred times in the Gospel of St. John, and, 
as already stated, “repent” is not found even once. To 
believe in Christ involves turning of heart to Him, and 
that is the only true conversion, the only true repentance. 

I have mentioned the Spirit’s work as another hind- 
rance to man’s efforts after salvation, and in truth it is 
the crowning difficulty. Faith and repentance, how- 
ever they be regarded, seem to be within human 
capacity; but if the Holy Ghost must act, before a 
sinner can have life, man falls back helplessly in 
presence of the sovereignty of God. And here let me 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 59 


say, this is precisely the value of the new birth, as a 
doctrine, in connection with the gospel. It is to con- 
vince man that salvation is impossible as far as human 
effort is concerned, and thus to cast him wholly upon 
God. He who preaches the Spirit’s work without re- 
gard to the condition of his hearers, is like a quack 
who, because one patient has been cured by a certain 
remedy, administers it promiscuously to all “Ye 
must be born again” was addressed to Nicodemus, but 
not to the woman at the well, nor to the multitude 
around the pool of Bethesda. It was true, doubtless, 
for all, but it was not the special truth they needed; 
and the more the Lord’s words are weighed and studied, 
the more we shall be struck by the wisdom with which 
truth was ever ministered by Him. Indeed, in this 
view, the 3d, 4th, and 5th chapters of St. John demand 
the most earnest and unceasing study of all who preach 
the gospel. In the 5th chapter, the Lord’s hearers are 
the multitude, brought together by the miracle He has 
just performed, and further interested by the opposition 
of the Pharisees. And to such He gives a threefold 
testimony: first, to His own personal dignity and 
glory; then, to life for the sinner through His word; 
and lastly, to judgment coming upon those to whom 
that word does not bring life. Here we have a general 
testimony suited to the common need of all; but in 
each of the other chapters we have special dealing with 
the intricacies of a special case. In the 4th chapter 
we are face to face with a sinner living in open im- 
morality, yet without any sense of sin—a case more 
common than we are apt to think, where a sinful course 
is not so much the result of a depraved heart or aban- 
doned will, as of a conscience wholly dead, And here 


60 REPENTANCE AND 


He seeks, first to interest, and then to awaken her, and 
finally He declares Himself. 

But in Nicodemus we have a man who is ostensibly 
in the right path. His coming to Christ is itself a 
proof that he is a seeker after God. But he comes 
claiming a position that ousts grace altogether, and the 
Saviour must bring Him to His feet before He can be a 
Saviour to him. Supposing himself already in the 
kingdom, he comes to the Lord as a God-sent Teacher ; 
but the Lord “answers” him at once by declaring the 
need of the Spirit’s work. Had the Lord exposed sin 
in Nicodemus, he would earnestly have repented of it. 
Had He unfolded to him a higher morality than he had 
ever learned, he would eagerly have pursued it. But, 
“Ye must be born again” not only put him outside the 
threshold within which he claimed a place, but seemed 
withal to shut the door against him.! 


1 The common interpretation of John iii. 5, which connects it with 
“ Christian baptism,” not only fritters away the meaning of the passage, 
but involves a very glaring anachronism. It appears from the 12th verse 
that the doctrine related to the kingdom as known to Israel—it per- 
tained to “earthly things.” And from verse 10 we learn that the 
Lord’s word ought to have been understood by a Jewish Rabbi, i.e., 
that it was truth contained in the Old Testament Scriptures. The well- 
taught Scribe would at once have turned to Ezekiel’s prophecy, “I will 
sprinkle clean water upon you and ye shall be clean,. . . and I will 
put my spirit within you.” Orif he missed the reference at first, the 
words that follow, “The wind bloweth where it listeth, &c.,” might 
well afford the clew to the passage on which they are so plainly based : 
“Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain that 
they may live” (Ezek. xxxvi. 25-27, xxxvii. 9). The “clean water” 
alludes of course to the rite enjoined in Num. xix. (see p. 117 post). 
Nicodemus claimed his place within the kingdom by virtue of his 
nationality, as Israel might have done had they been faithful. But in 
the carnal and apostate condition of the nation, this showed thorough 
ignorance not only of the things of God, but of the plain teaching of 
the Scriptures. No one could have any part in the kingdom without 
the cleansing typified by the water of purification, and the regener- 
ation promised in Hzekiel’s prophecy. The reference in the Nicodemus 
sermon is to that rite and to that promise, and not, I need scarcely add, 
to a dogma which the Church in its apostasy based upon a false inter- 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 61 


It is no longer now “the teacher of Israel” seeking 
wisdom from “the Teacher come from God,” but the 
sinner in the presence of his Saviour, seeking pardon 
and life. The declaration of the love of God and of the 
lifting up of Christ, are not the answer to the difficulty, 
“How can these things be?” but the answer to the 
need which that difficulty has awakened in the heart of 
Nicodemus. The mystery which Nicodemus, “the 
teacher of Israel,” could not fathom, is solved for Nico- 
demus the sinner, in hearing and believing the word of 
Christ. 

It was thus the Master preached. With the profli- 
gate Samaritan, He probed with matchless grace and 
wisdom the festering but hidden wound of sin. For 
the ignorant and needy multitude He flung the door of 
mercy open wide, that all might enter there. But with 
the Pharisee, who slighted grace, He seemed to change 
His purpose, and to close that door against him ; yet no 
sooner did he take the sinner’s place than Nicodemus 
found the way as free and open as the power and love 
of God could make it. So was it again when He de- 
clared Himself to be the bread of God come down from 
heaven to give life unto the world. One and another 
may have hearkened, and to such the blessing was as 
full and free as grace itself. But with the rest who 
kicked against the word, the Lord withdrew behind the 
sovereignty of God, and rebuked their murmurs by the 
truth that “no one can come to Him except the Father 
draw him.” 1 


pretation of this very passage. And if without this new birth from 
God, the Jew, even on his high platform of privilege and covenant, could 
not receive his promised blessings, how doubly true must be the word 
to us, ‘‘ Ye must be born again.” 

1 John vi. 32-44. 


62 REPENTANCE AND 


Here, then, is the value of the Spirit’s work. For 
the humble penitent it bridges over and conceals the 
gulf that separates the sinner from his God. For the 
self-righteous or profane, it serves but to prove that gulf 
to be impassable. To the one it testifies of sovereign 
grace, to the other it testifies that grace is sovereign. 

The Holy Ghost has come, and now He gives a 
double testimony. He bears witness against the world’s 
rejection of the Son, and He testifies to the rejected 
One as now exalted to be a Saviour. It is His mission 
to convict the world of sin, of righteousness, and of 
judgment: sin, because the Son of God has been cast 
out by earth; righteousness, because the Outcast of 
earth has been welcomed by the Father in heaven; and 
judgment, because Satan, who put forth all his power 
against Him, has now himself been judged.? The pre- 
sence of the Comforter is proof that Christ has 
triumphed, and a token of judgment on the world now 
lying in the wicked one. 

But if God testifies to judgment in this day of 
mercy, it is in order thus to turn men’s hearts to grace; 
and to the sinner that looks up to heaven for pardon, 
the mission of the Comforter is only to speak of Christ. 
The Spirit is come down to bear witness to salvation 
and a Saviour. But His is not like the Baptist’s testi- 
mony, telling of a greater than Himself to follow. His 
word is itself the power by which dead souls are born 
again to God. The love of God to man, and the cross 


1 I am speaking here, of course, only of the Holy Ghost in connec- 
tion with the gospel testimony. His sealing and indwelling the 
believer, and the fruits thereof ; His baptism of all believers into the 
body of Christ, which is the Church of God, and the relationships and 
duties arising from that unity; and His presence in that Church on 
earth as Christ’s true and only Vicar—these are truths beyond the 
limits of my theme. 2 John xvi, 8-11. 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 63 


of Christ which manifests that love, and the inspired 
page which contains the record of it, would all be of no 
avail to save a single sinner, were it not for the 
Spirit’s work. But men draw strange inferences here. 
Preaching the Spirit’s work,” as it is usually under- 
stood, seems based upon the thought that the Holy 
Ghost has interests and claims distinct from the God of 
Calvary, and so the sinner must propitiate Him by 
prayer or worship in order to secure His aid. But all 
such thoughts are wholly false. Christianity is a great 
system of mediation, The Son came down to earth, 
not to supplant the Father, but to reveal Him; the 
words He spoke were not His own, but His that sent 
Him. The Spirit has come down, not to supplant the 
Son, but to bear witness to Him. He does not speak 
from Himself, but receives of Christ for us. “ He that 
hath seen Me hath seen the Father” was the word of 
Christ. He that has heard the Spirits voice has 
received both the Spirit and the Son. We are not 
regenerated in order to believe. The Word of God is 
itself the seed by which we are begotten Faith 
comes—not by prayer, for there can be no true prayer 
without it;? nor yet by any work of the Spirit in the 


1 1 Pet. i. 23. 

2 “Tn maintaining the duty of praying before believing, you cannot 
surely be asserting that it is your duty to go to God in unbelief? You 
cannot mean to say that you ought to go to God believing that He is 
not willing to bless you, in order that, by so praying, you may persuade 
Him to make you believe that He zs willing. Are you to persist in un- 
belief till in some miraculous way faith drops into you, and God com- 
pels you to believe ? 

“ Understanding prayer in the scriptural sense, I would tell every 
man to pray, just as I would tell every man to believe; for prayer in- 
cludes and pre-supposes faith. ‘ Whosoever shall call on the name of 
the Lord shall be saved.’ But then the apostle adds, ‘ How shall they 
call on Him in whom they have not believed.’” (‘‘God’s Way of Peace,” 
H. Bonar, D.D.) 

The logic of Rom. x. 18, 14, is absolutely inexorable on this point. 


64 REPENTANCE AND 


soul, apart from the message which He brings—faith 
comes by hearing, and it is by the hearing of faith that 
the Spirit is received. 

The prayer of Philip, that Christ would reveal to 
him the Father,? was not more unintelligent and wrong 
than a prayer for the Spirit to reveal the Saviour. 
Apart from the Holy Ghost no one can be saved. 
Therefore He has come that no one need be lost. 
Christians speak too often of His work as though it 
were a limitation upon grace. God intends it as a 
crowning proof that grace is boundless and triumphant. 

It is the sovereignty of God that makes the Spirit’s 
work so insurmountable a barrier on the way to life; 
but when the sinner comes to know that God’s sove- 
reignty is entirely on his side, the mountain which 
seemed to close heaven against him becomes a plain; 
nay, rather, it rises now behind him to bar the way to 
the City of Destruction. 

It may be important that the theologian should 
define these truths; but the work of the preacher is to 
set forth Christ, and it is thus alone the need of the 
true hearer can be met. The burdened sinner who 
came face to face with Jesus in the streets of Jerusalem 
or the village ways of Galilee, and heard words that 
revealed to him the Christ of God, received, with the 
revelation, peace and life and the birthright of heaven. 
He might have been unable to explain faith, or to 
define repentance, and wholly ignorant of the doctrine 


1 Gal. iii. 2. 2 John xiv. 8. 

3 I know no definition of repentance equal to that of the Westminster 
Divines (Shorter Catechism, Q. 87). But when men begin by confound- 
ing conviction with contrition, and go on to insist upon a certain amount 
of it as a condition precedent to receiving blessing, it is mere Popery. 
Moreover, it is wholly untrue that the convert must be subjectively 
conscious of the various elements of the change involved in repentance, 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 65 


of the Spirit; but yet he had repented, and believed, 
and been born again. And the blessing is as near to 
men now, as in the days of the Lord’s humiliation, and 
the way of life is just the same. There is blessing for 
the sinner as freely, and on the same ground. If then 
some reader of these pages should be kept from Christ 
by sad misgivings based on false thoughts of repentance 
or the Spirit’s work, let him turn away to Him who 
now speaks from heaven the words which once He 
uttered upon earth, and, hearing and believing, receive 
the blessing which the testimony brings: “ Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word and 
believeth on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, 
and shall not come into judgment, but is passed from 
death into life.” 


THE PRODIGAL’S RETURN. 


I think upon the past, and feel 
My heart sink hopelessly, and fears 
Of judgment seize on me ; I kneel 
Before my God, and own that years 
And years of deep, dark, deadly guilt 
Are dragging down my soul to hell. 
I know the wretched hopes I’ve built 
Of heaven, if His judgment fell 
On me, would vanish as a dream : 
Before the dreadful judgment throne, 
Such hopes, I know, though they may seem 
All fair and right, when by our own 
Poor godless hearts surveyed, would all 
But serve to prove what godless hearts 
We had, to cling to them at all. 
O God, my life no hope imparts, 


or even do¢trinally acquainted ‘with them. The qualities of the new 
nature may be latent for a time; and in the deepest repentance, all 
thought of self and sin may be lost in the overwhelming appreciation 
of present grace. 

E 


66 


REPENTANCE AND 


And yet I scarcely dare to hope 

In Thee. My heart is like a stone ; 
My soul is dead ; I blindly grope, 

And long for light. And yet I own 
It is not Thee, but only rest 

And safety for my soul, I seek, 
My guilty soul. O God, at best 

I’m godless, even while I speak 
To Thee! Not love but selfish fear 

It is that brings me to Thy feet ; 
My wretched sins are far more dear 

To me—but then, Thy judgment-seat ! 
Ah ! yes, I own, were there no hell, 

I would not seek Thy heaven, O God ; 
A Father’s love is not the spell 

That draws me, but Thy judgment rod, 


O God, I cannot ask for bread, 
For bread, I know, is children’s fare, 
And I’m a dog ;1 I bow my head, 
And own I’m but a dog: nor dare 
I seek to claim a higher place ; 
T have no right to children’s meat ; 
I only cast myself on grace, 
I lay me prostrate at Thy feet. 
O God, have mercy on my soul: 
Before th’ eternal night begins, 
O save my dark and guilty soul; 
Forgive my sins—O God, my sins ! 


Hast Thou not given Thine only Son 
To bear my sins upon the tree ? 
And wilt Thou now, when all is done, 
Refuse, my God, to pardon me ? 
And, O my God, hast Thou not said, 
‘He that believeth on the Son 
Hath life ?’ and I believe ; though red 
Like crimson are my sins, and one 
By one they rise before me now, 
Sins long forgotten, and they fain 


1 Matt. xv. 26. 


THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 


Would make me doubt Thy word: I bow 
My head in shame: yet wilt Thou deign 
To look on me? Tf I am lost, 
I need a Saviour: ’tis for such 
He came to die ; and what a cost 
To pay ! ’tis not for me to touch 
That finished work of His, or seek 
To add a sigh, or tear, or groan 
Of mine to what He bore, or speak 
Of aught in me but sin. Alone, 
O Christ, Thou hadst to bear my doom 
To take my deep dark curse on Thee, 
And bear it all; and now there’s room 
For grace to pardon even me. 


Then look on me, my Father. Yes, 
I call Thee Father, for I know 
Thy word is sure, and humbly bless 
The grace that deigned to stoop so low, 
That such as I can come to Thee, 
And as a sinner reconciled 
By His most precious blood, for me 
Once shed, can know that I’m Thy child. 


*Tis but a moment since I thought 

There scarce was hope for one like me; 
I heeded not the love that bought 

Me with the blood of Calvary. 
Yet now I dare to look above 

And call Thee Father; though my heart’s 
Defiled, my lips unclean—Thy love 

Has conquered fear—though Satan’s darts 
Fall thick around me, and within 

I dare not look—’tis like a sea 
That cannot rest, and full of sin— 

I now can look away to Thee, 
And find in Thee my peace, nor fear 

To rest my trembling sin-stained soul 
Upon Thy word, and so draw near. 

My Saviour’s blood has made me whole. 
T’m black and worthless, but I’m Thine ; 

My God, I’m Thine ; to Thee I owe 


67 


68 REPENTANCE AND THE SPIRIT’S WORK. 


My life, my life to Thee resign. 
O teach Thy child in life to show 

Thy praises forth. I bless Thy name; 
I worship, magnify, adore, 

And praise Thy great and glorious name ; 
O fill my soul yet more and more 

With praise to Thee. The “miry clay” 1 
Still clings to me, and yet I raise 

My triumph song and bless the day: 
O fill my soul yet more with praise ! 


1 Ps. xi. 2, 


~~ 


CHAPTER VL 
ELECTION. 


WuEN the gift of life was proffered us, we were con- 
scious in accepting it that we did so freely, voluntarily. 
Since then, we have come to see that grace did not 
exhaust itself even in working out our deliverance at a 
cost so priceless, and bringing it within our reach, but 
that our very acceptance of the gift was the Spirit’s 
work, and-as directly the action of grace as Calvary 
itself, But more than this, now that we have received 
the message, and are come within the scene of joy and 
blessing to which it bids us, we have to learn that in 
a sense deeper and fuller still, grace is sovereign. The 
gospel of our salvation spanned the open door of grace 
as we approached it; above the inner portal, we now 
read the solemn blessed words “ Chosen in Him before 
the foundation of the world.” 

And surely this mystery of election is both fitted and 
intended to bring deep blessing to the believing heart ; 
but the sad fact is too patent to be ignored, that with 
the vast majority of Christians, it is so inseparably 
linked with controversy as to be removed from blessing 
altogether. Upon one side, the plain testimony of 
Scripture is tampered with, if not rejected; upon the 
other, the doctrine is asserted with a narrowness which 


70 ELECTION, 


is uncongenial, if not absolutely incompatible with 
truth. 

To introduce into these pages a treatise upon election 
would be obviously a departure from their plan and 
purpose. I will content myself, therefore, with offering 
two remarks in passing, for the consideration of the 
thoughtful reader. First, the scriptural expression 
“God’s elect,” is not the mere statement of a 
fact, or even of a purpose, but, like “first born,” 1 
it is a title of dignity and privilege, applicable ex- 
clusively to the Christian. And secondly, the pro- 
minent thought in election, especially in this dispensa- 
tion of the Church (as the very word ecclesia suggests), 
is rank and privilege, not deliverance from perdition.? 
The distinctive truth of election must not be lost in the 
kindred but wider truth of the sovereignty of God. 

And if an exposition of election would here be out of 
place, still more so would be a defence of it. It needs 
not to be defended; it is plainly taught in Scripture, 
and that is enough for the believer. 

But the theological doctrine based upon it is too 
often pressed beyond the limits of the positive teaching 
of Holy Writ, and thus the divine mystery which 
crowns the great truth of sovereign grace, is degraded 
to the level of a narrow dogma, inconsistent alike with 
both sovereignty and grace. I desire therefore to treat 


1 Heb. xii. 23. 

2 A cogent proof of both these statements is afforded by the fact, 
that the title of “elect,” like that. of “first-born,” primarily applies to 
Christ Himself.—1 Peter ii. 4, 6 ; Luke xxiii. 35, 

3 One passage may suffice—“ We-are bound to give thanks alway to 
God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the 
beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit 
and belief of the truth ; whereunto He called you by our gospel.”— 
2 Thess. ii. 13, 


ELECTION. yl 


the subject only as it bears upon my theme, and to 
show that election cannot either warp or limit the plain 
meaning of the gracious words in which the gospel 
message comes to us. 

The most popular system of modern metaphysics is 
based upon the fact that certain of our ideas seem to 
spring from the essential constitution of the mind itself ; 
and these are not subject to our reason, but, on the 
contrary, they control it. A superficial thinker might 
suppose the powers of human imagination to be bound- 
less. He can imagine the sun and moon and stars to 
disappear from the heavens, and the peopled earth to 
vanish from beneath his feet, leaving him a solitary 
unit in boundless space ; but let him try, pursuing still 
further his madman’s dream, to grasp the thought of 
space itself being annihilated, and his mind, in obedience 
to some inexorable law, will refuse the conception 
altogether. Or, to take an illustration apter for my 
present purpose, wild fancy may thus change the 
universe into a blank, but, though there should remain 
no shadow and no dial, no sequence of events, the mind 
is utterly incapable of imagining how time could cease 
to flow. And the practical conclusion we arrive at is, 
that our idea of “ past, present, and future,” like that of 
space, is not derived from experience, but depends upon 
a law imposed upon our reason by the God who made 
us. 

I am far from appealing to German philosophy in 
defence of God’s truth, but I do enthusiastically appeal 
to it as a protest against man’s arrogance in limiting 
God by the standard of his own ignorance and frailty. 
What is, in plain words, the practical difficulty of elec- 
tion in its bearing upon the gospel? Why, that at some 


U2 ELECTION. 


epoch in the past, God decided that this or that indi- 
vidual was to be saved or lost; and, therefore, that his 
future depends, not on the present action of the grace 
or the righteousness of the living God, who can appeal 
through the gospel to his heart and conscience, but on 
what is nothing more or less than an iron decree of fate. 
May not the whole difficulty depend on the arrogant 
supposition that God Himself is bound by the same 
laws of thought which He has imposed upon His crea- 
tures ? 1 

But whatever we may think of the theories of Kant, 
this much at least, is certain, that there is no deception 
in the gospel as proclaimed by God to men. “ Truth is 
one;” and though, to our finite minds, election and 
grace may seem as far as the poles asunder, and 
as antagonistic as the magnetic currents which set 
towards them; to the infinite they may appear but 
inseparable parts of one great whole. Every truth has 
its own place; and there is no more reason why grace 
should be denied by dragging election into the gospel, 
than why election should be denied, because, when so 
thrust out of its proper sphere, it seems to be opposed 
to grace. “Rightly dividing the word of truth,” ? is a 
precept which we need to remember here. 

I repeat, there is no deception in the gospel. Some 
men who can preach with freedom to a multitude, are 
often sadly puzzled when face to face with an individual: 
the heart and the head are at issue directly, and they 
either throw their theology overboard, and preach grace 
boldly, or else they state the gospel so ingeniously that 
the difficulty created by their views about election is 
kept out of sight. In the gospel of God there is no re- 


1 See in passing Ps. xc, 4, and 2 Peter iii, 8. 2 2 Tim. i. 15. 


ELECTION. 73 


servation whatsoever, And let us remember that it is His 
gospel, “ God’s good news concerning His Son, Jesus Christ 
our Lord.” t Mark also that it is not “ concerning the 
sinner.” To some the distinction may appear self- 
evident, and to others it may seem so trifling as almost 
to savour of a quibble; but in fact it is at the root of 
half the difficulties and mistakes in gospel preach- 
ing. The gospel then is God’s good news about Christ. 
Now this gospel is as true for a single individual as for 
a crowd; and, moreover, it is absolutely and unequi- 
vocally true whether men believe it or not. 

Another most important practical distinction is that 
the gospel, in its strict sense, is not a doctrinal state- 
ment, but a divine proclamation. “Believe in the 
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved,” is not, 
strictly speaking, a statement of the gospel. It was 
Paul’s answer to the question of the jailer at Philippi, 
to explain to him that salvation was on the principle, 
not of doing, but of faith in Christ. The very next 
verse adds, “and they spake to him the word of the 
Lord ;” that is, they preached the gospel to him. Now 
some preachers, instead of proclaiming the gospel, 
appeal unceasingly to their hearers to believe in Christ ; 
and the consequence is too often that, instead of having 
their thoughts turned to the person and work of Him 
who is the Saviour, people are occupied with efforts to 
get faith. And the difficulty is frequently increased by 
reading the second chapter of Ephesians as though “the 
gift of God” there spoken of were faith? Salvation is 
the gift of God: “faith cometh by hearing, and hearing 
by the Word of God.” 

But the distinctions I have noticed, important though 

1 Rom. i 1-3, 2 Eph. ii. 8, see note, p, 49 ante, 


74 ELECTION. 


they be, serve only to clear the ground for the consider- 
ation of the real question here raised—How can grace be 
compatible with election ? The Gospel proclaims uni- 
versal reconciliation, and grace is “salvation-bringing 
to all men.”2 Election, on the other hand, assumes 
that the believer’s blessings are the result of a divine 
decree. These, it is objected, are wholly inconsistent, 
and one or other of them must be explained away. 
Doubtless they may appear to be incompatible, but to 
maintain that therefore they are so in fact, is to put 
reason above revelation, or in other words, to place man 
above God. Is the Christian to reject truths so plainly 
taught, because, forsooth, they are beset with difficulties 
such as these which even German metaphysics would 
suffice to solve ! 3 

Nor are the difficulties here involved at all peculiar 
to the present question, The very same objection 
which many Christians urge against the gospel, is used 
by the infidel to prove the absurdity of prayer. Will the 
great God, “with whom is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning,” * change His purpose at the cry of 
a sinful creature! A man once “prayed earnestly that 


1 See Chap. x. post. 

2 Not in fact, but in intention ; in its scope and purpose it is cwr7jpios 
maow avOpHros. Tit. ii. 11. 

3 True it is that what is clearly contrary to reason must be rejected ; 
but so far from what is here contended for being against reason, it is 
perfectly consistent with a recognised system of metaphysics, than which, 
moreover, when separated from the jargon of a certain school, none is 
more philosophical. This then is the object of my appeal to Kant. I 
should deprecate the pedantry of introducing a discussion of the critical 
philosophy in such a connection, and I do not pretend that it affords 
the true solution of the seeming paradox of election and grace; J 
notice it merely to show how easily the difficulty may be solved. Surely the 
Christian may be content to accept the mystery, and to trust God for 
the solution of it. 

4 James i. 17. 


ELECTION. 75 


it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the 
space of three years and six months; and he prayed 
again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought 
forth her fruit.”1 Nor can we tolerate the miserable 
figment that the prayer itself was but another result of 
the inexorable rule of fate. We do not trust in fate, 
but in “the diving God,” and we are taught the solemnity 
and reality of prayer, not merely by the record of the 
blessings.it has won, but by the ominous word, “ He 
gave them their own desire,” ? endorsed on many a 
rebellious cry sent up to heaven by His people. 

But there is another prayer, of which the solemn 
record should suffice to set at rest every doubt that a 
perverted use of the doctrine of election has cast upon 
the truth of grace. The Lord Himself, though come 
down to earth that He might drink the cup which 
brimmed over upon Calvary, could pray, upon the very 
eve of Calvary, that that cup might pass from Him. He, 
“the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world ”— 
He, who, ere a few days had passed, could chide His 
doubting disciples with the word “Ought not Christ to 
have suffered these things?” recapitulating in their 
wondering ears the oft-told record of prophecy which 
Calvary fulfilled—He found, neither in that record, nor 
in the divine purpose it unfolded, aught to hinder the 
prayer of Gethsemane, “O my Father, if it be possible, 
let this cup pass from me.”® With Him the dire 
necessity to drink it arose from no stern and irrevocable 
edict of the past, but from the sovereign will of a present 
living God, who, even then, would hearken to His cry 
if redemption could be won at any price less terrible 


1 James v. 17, 18. 2 Psalm lxxviii, 29, 
3 Matthew xxvi. 39 


76 ELECTION. 


and costly ;! and yet there are those who claim to have 
the faith of Christ, who would rebuke a Christian mother 
for pouring out her heart in prayer, without reserve or 
fear, that God would save the children He has given 
her !? 

Eternity is God’s domain, but no less is “the living 
present ” in His hand, and if the doctrine of election 
become a limitation of His power to bless and save, it 
degenerates into a denial of the very truth on which 
it rests—the sovereignty of Jehovah. 

The plausible but empty objection may perchance be 
urged, that the relations between the Father and the in- 
carnate Son, are so different from those which govern 
His dealings with sinful men, that the inference here 
drawn from the record of Gethsemane is worthless. I 
will therefore press the matter further, and call attention 
to the fact that this paradox of election and grace, so 
far from being in any sense without a parallel, is merely 
a single phase of the great mystery of divine sovereignty 
in relation to human will) A passage in St. Peters 
Pentecostal sermon may be cited to illustrate my mean- 
ing: “ Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel 
and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked 
hands have crucified and slain.”*? The murderers of 
Christ were acting in fulfilment of a divine decree, and 
yet their deeds were really and absolutely their own. 
Theirs were “ wicked hands,” and guilt of necessity sup- 


1 Or if the Lord were pleased unconditionally to claim deliverance.— 
See Matthew xxvi. 53. 

2 Among the strange phenomena of practical Christian life, one of the 
saddest is that so often witnessed of Christian parents attributing to a 
Divine decree the fact of their children growing up unconverted. 
“ Having believing children” was one of the qualifications of a bishop, 
because it was a pledge and proof of the parents’ faithfulness to God.— 
(Titus i 6.) 3 Acts ii. 23, 


ELECTION. 77 


poses the action of an independent will. When this can 
be explained, that they who set up the cross on Calvary 
were fulfilling a divine purpose, though acting in di- 
rect antagonism to the divine will, the clew will have 
been found to every difficulty here alluded to. 

Nor is this mystery peculiar to great and momentous 
events foretold in prophecy ; it surrounds our life from 
first to last. To recognise and act upon the fact of our 
own responsibility and freedom, and yet to accept the 
consequences of our acts as coming from the hand of 
God, is the part of a spiritual Christian. But to act 
upon the truth of divine sovereignty, yielding to blind 
impulse as guiding the execution of its decrees, is the 
part of a heathen fatalist. As I leave my door, I am 
conscious of being absolutely free to turn to the right 
hand or to the left. The one path may lead to the 
attainment of some signal blessing, the other to the com- 
mission of some terrible sin—I make choice, and in 
choosing the wrong path I am sensible, not only that 
I have power to take the other, but that I am going in 
direct violation of the will of God in not taking it. 
When the consequences are startling, as for instance if 
my error cost me my life, every one recognises the 
sovereignty of God in the whole matter, but that truth 
applies as really to the fall of a sparrow as to the death 
of a king! And thus every day of our lives we act 
upon a principle which appears to be absolutely incom- 
patible with sovereignty; and yet we recognize this 
truth of sovereignty in reviewing our actions and their 
consequences. 

And so it is precisely with the true evangelist. He 
goes forth with a proclamation which seems to ignore 

1 Matthew x. 29. 


78 ELECTION, 


election, as the full Gospel revealed to the Apostle of 
the Gentiles always does ; 1 but as he reviews his labours, 
his thought is “As many as were ordained to eternal 
life believed.” ? 

If the truth of election hinders or even shapes his 
testimony, it is proof that he has yet to learn the truth 
of grace. Sin reigned once. God was dealing with men 
on the ground of their being what they ought to be, 
while by their very nature they were what they 
ought not to be. God’s attitude towards the sinner 
therefore was adverse. There was a covenant truly, but 
that only served to make the doom of the world more 
definite. God was imputing sin, and the normal and 
legitimate result to men was death. But now sin is 
dethroned, and grace is reigning. God is no longer im- 
puting sin, but preaching peace. He to whom all 
judgment is committed? is now seated on a throne of 
grace. It is not that He has grace for the elect and 
judgment for all besides, but that grace is the great 
characteristic of His reign. He is a Saviour, and nota 
Judge.* He shall yet come to judge; but now, the 
amnesty has been proclaimed, and judgment waits. It 
is not, as in a bygone dispensation, that there is mercy: 
for a favoured class, but that there is mercy, and nothing 
else, for all without distinction, The day is coming 
when judgment will be as unmixed as grace is now, 
but during all this “acceptable year of the Lord,” His 
throne is a throne of grace, and the guiltiest sinner upon 
earth will find there only mercy. 

And this is “the good news of the grace of God.” 
Election can in no way limit it. To raise the question 


1 “My gospel,” Romans xvi. 25, and see also 1 Timothy i. 11. 
2 Acts xiii, 48. 3 John v. 22. 4 John xii. 47. ° Acts xx, 24, 


ELECTION. 79 


whether unconverted men around us are elect, is to be- 
tray ignorance both of election and of grace. “Secret 
things belong unto the Lord,” and it is not ours to 
attempt to fathom the deep mysteries of that death on 
Calvary ; but this much, at least, is plain as the noon- 
day sun, that that death has in such sense settled the 
question of sin, that sin is no longer a barrier between 
the sinner and his God.! The sin is still upon his head 
and judgment will overwhelm him if he die unsaved ; 
but it is none the less true that the death of Christ has 
made it a righteous thing in God to proclaim Himself a 
Saviour, and to preach pardon and peace to every creature. 
There is no shuffling of the cards ; there is no deception 
in it. If forgiveness is preached to all, it is because all 
may share it. If God beseeches men to be reconciled, 
it is because He has provided a reconciliation; if He 
appeals to them to come to Him, it is because the way 
is open right up to His throne and to His heart. It is 
impossible that election can ever limit the value of the 
death of Christ, or the power of that mighty name to 
save and bless. Sovereignty! Why, the universe will 
have no such proof of the depth of His counsels and 
the almightiness of His power, as that of heaven filled 
with sinners saved from hell. 

With some the difficulty springs from treating the 
gospel as though it were a problem as to the amount of 
suffering endured by Christ, and the numerical quantity 
of the sins atoned for. But God points us to the cross 
with a far different object; and the power of the gospel is 
to know what it is to Him. It is Himself that God 
would present before the sinner, and He points to that 
cross in proof of the vastness of the sacrifice, and the 

1 Judicially I mean, Morally, sin must always separate from God. 


80 ELECTION. 


boundlessness of the love that made it. He so loved 
the world that He gave His only-begotten Son—and 
He adds, not as a cold formula which the initiated 
know to be overshadowed by the doctrine of election, 
but as the expression of the longing of that mighty 
love—“ that WHOSOEVER believeth in Him should not 
perish but have everlasting life.” 


CHAPTER VII. 
SUBSTITUTION. 


In the days so lately passed away, when debt was treated 
as a crime, we can imagine how some dishonest and 
vindictive creditor may have received satisfaction of his 
claim without his debtor’s knowledge, and have kept 
him still in prison for the debt. If in some strange 
combination of circumstances such an event occurred, 
great must have been the indignation of all good men 
against him who traded upon his debtor’s ignorance to 
hold him still liable for a debt which was in fact dis- 
charged. 

And thousands there are of earnest people in whose 
minds the story of redemption seems to put God in the 
place of the dishonest creditor. Unmeasured love and 
grace are doubtless displayed on Calvary; but if that 
death be indeed the payment of His people’s debt, 
how can forgiveness now be preached as being of 
grace? Is it not a matter of the strictest justice, that 
they whose discharge was nailed to the cross of Christ 
eighteen centuries ago, should, at the earliest moment 
possible, be set free? How can it be honest, or true, 
or right, to urge men to flee from the wrath to come, 
seeing that for some all wrath has been already borne, 


and the infliction of it now would be an outrage 
E 


82 SUBSTITUTION. 


upon justice, and that for the rest there is no refuge 
open? Is not the proclamation of the gospel like hold- 
ing forth to the sinner the account of God’s outstanding 
claims against him, with the assurance that the hand of 
the great Creditor is ready to sign his discharge for ever, 
the moment he repents? And does not every principle 
of truth and right forbid that the elect should be scared 
into repentance by concealment of the fact that the ink 
upon their discharge was dry long centuries ago, and 
that others should be tantalized with deceptive promises 
of blessings they can never know, enforced by threats 
of judgment from which, for them, there is no escape ? 

For those who either ignore the great truth of divine 
righteousness in connection with our salvation, or fritter 
away the revelation of divine love to a lost world, such 
questions as these will only provoke a supercilious 
smile. But with such as have in any measure grasped 
the great twin truths which characterize Christianity, a 
juster estimate will be formed of these perplexities, and 
a worthier value set upon any honest effort towards the 
solution of them. It will therefore be here my aim to 
show that all such difficulties spring, not from the 
gospel itself, nor from the teaching of Holy Writ, but. 
solely from forms of expression, and modes of thought, ~ 
about the death of Christ, which are unwarranted by 
Scripture. And this end will perhaps be best attained by 
offering first a positive statement of the truth upon this 
subject, as it is unfolded in the types of the Old 
Testament and in the teaching of the Apostles of the 
Lord. 

Redemption is presented to us in the Scriptures in a 
twofold aspect, as connected both with power and with 
blood. Israel was redeemed out of Egypt—redeemed 


SUBSTITUTION. 83. 


“with an outstretched arm.”! In another sense Israel 
was redeemed in Egypt by the blood of the paschal 
lamb. But it is essential to remember that the redemp- 
tion of the people was complete ere ever they commenced 
their wilderness journey. It depended therefore not 
upon the offerings of the law, but upon the passover in 
Egypt. The rites enjoined in Leviticus were for a 
redeemed and holy people; it was by the sacrifices re- 
corded in Exodus that Israel attained that privileged 
position. It is specially to Exodus, therefore, we must 
turn to learn the truth of the death of Christ in its 
aspect toward the unsaved. 

I say this without wishing in the least to pander to 
the tendency that prevails to map out the Scriptures by 
hard and fast lines like the squares of a chess-board. 
The word of God is a two-edged sword, with a side both 
for saved and unsaved ; but the secret of attaining clear 
and scriptural thoughts is, first, to seek the primary 
application of every truth or text, and then, without 
danger of error or confusion, we can apply it in the 
widest sense. Israel’s title to the benefits of the sin 
offerings depended on the passover ;? let us then mark 
the difference between the two. 

In the case of the sin-offerings, the offerer came to 
the door of the tabernacle to give his life as the penalty 
for his sin, and there, having identified the victim with 
himself by laying his hand upon its head, the death of 
the sacrifice was accepted instead of his own. And 
this is what we understand by substitution; the sinner 
laid his sin upon the animal, and the victim died instead 


1 Exodus vi. 6 ; Deuteronomy vii. 8. 

2 As regards the distinctions hereinafter pointed out, the dedication 
offering of the covenant was in the same category with the passover. 

3 Leviticus iv, 4, 15, 24, 29; 2 Chronicles xxix. 23, &c. 


84 SUBSTITUTION. 


of him. And here the death was everything. Whatever 
ceremonial followed was the care of the priest, and not 
of the offerer; that is, of God, and not of the sinner. 
But, as we have seen, this was a provision for a people 
already redeemed. Israel’s right to the services of the 
priest depended on redemption accomplished. 

But with the great redemption sacrifice of the pass- 
over it was wholly different. The dread death-sentence 
had gone out against all the land of Egypt. None were 
excepted from it. It embraced alike king and captive, 
Hebrew and Egyptian. But for Israel that sentence 
was fulfilled in the blood of the paschal lamb. But 
how? ‘There was no laying of the hand upon the head 
of the victim, as with the sin-offerings. The death of 
the lamb, though doubtless the foundation of every 
blessing, would in itself have brought no deliverance. 
Beyond the threshold of the blood-stained door, the 
Israelite would have shared in Egypt’s doom; beneath 
the shelter of that blood, the Egyptian would have 
shared in Israel’s redemption. The death upon which 
their deliverance depended was accomplished; but 
their participation in the benefits of that death depended 
entirely upon the sprinkling of the victim’s blood. There 
was no question of substitution, in the sense of the sin- 
offering. The benefits of the sin-offering were secured 
to him whose hand had rested on the victim’s head, and 
they could neither be extended nor transferred. And 
so with the great day of atonement: it was only for 
Israel. The stranger within their gates might eat the 
passover, ? but he could have no part in the sin-offering. 

It was the same great sacrifice, doubtless, which all 


1 This point is fully treated of in chap. ix., post. 
2 Numbers ix. 14, 


SUBSTITUTION. - 85 


these types preficured for Israel and illustrate for us, 
but in different aspects of it. And the way to follow 
aright the teaching of the types is to regard their 
historical sequence only as marking their moral order. 
We thus learn the different aspects of the death of 
Christ, and the divine order of the truth concerning it. 
I have contrasted the types of Exodus with the offerings 
of the law; but there is one rite of Leviticus which 
presents all this truth at a single view, marking the 
moral order above distinguished. I allude, of course, 
to the cleansing of the leper. The leper’s birds are the 
correlative of no offering of the law, but of the Exodus 
sacrifices. Then followed the trespass offering, the sin- 
offering, and the burnt-offering with its meat-offering. 
I will here speak only of the birds and the sin-offering. 
According to the analogy of the great day of atonement, | 
the twofold aspect of the same offering is presented by 
two victims, the one being killed, the other sent out of 
sight. But mark here the same distinction as that 
already noticed between the sin-offering and the 
passover. The leper’s identification with the victim’s 
death depended on his being sprinkled with its blood; 
but when he came to offer his sin-offering he identified 
the victim with himself beforehand.? 

In respect of both, the death accomplished was for 
the leper, but in senses wholly different. The one 
blood-shedding was, as with the passover, a means by 
which deliverance might be gained, but until that blood 
was sprinkled the sinner had no part in it. The other 
was a substitutional sacrifice, and the result to the 
offerer depended immediately, and only, upon the 


1 Lev. xiv., and see note p. 30 ante. 
2 Compare Lev. iv. 29, 


86 SUBSTITUTION. 


victim’s death. In both cases the death was for the 
unclean person; but in the latter it was instead of him. 

These different aspects of the death of Christ, though 
carefully distinguished in Scripture, are hopelessly 
confounded in theology; and that confusion has given 
rise to the difficulties now under consideration, and 
others of a kindred nature. “Bearing sin” is a figura- 
tive expression, and the figure is derived from the sin- 
offering; substitution is essentially characteristic of it. 
But Scripture never speaks of the death of Christ in its- 
relation to the unbeliever—the unsaved—in language 
borrowed from the sin-offering? Contrast the words of 
1 Pet. ii. 24 with the recorded sermons of St. Paul to 
the idolators of Athens, and to the Jews of Pisidian 
Antioch,? and my meaning will be plainly seen. The 
latter were addressed to the unsaved; the former are 
for such as “have returned unto the Shepherd and 
Bishop of their souls.” Just as with the leper’s sparrow 
the death of the victim was typically the righteous 
ground on which God could pronounce him clean, but 
that death was nothing to him until he had been 
sprinkled with the blood, and then, and not till then, he 
was entitled to bring the sin-offering; so the death of 
Christ is the righteous ground on which God can cleanse 
the guiltiest and vilest, and proclaim forgiveness far 
and near, but until the gospel is received—for faith 
answers to the blood-sprinkling of the type—that death, 
though none the less precious to God, brings no pardon 
to the sinner. Thus identified with the sacrifice of 
Calvary, the sinner may then, but only then, adopt the 

1 There is one verse in the New Testament which may seem to be an 


exception to this, but I will not stop to discuss it here. 
2 Acts xiii. 16-41 ; xvii, 22-31. 


SUBSTITUTION. 87 


language of the sin-offering, and say “He His own self 
bare my sins in His own body on the tree.” As the 
utterance of faith, such words as these are absolutely 
and unequivocally true; as a doctrinal assertion upon 
the lips of the unconverted, they are utterly false, and 
the falsehood is all the deeper and more dangerous 
because of the perverted truth it seems to embrace, 
The work of Christ has a great and real aspect to the 
world, but to assert this truth of substitution of the 
unconverted is to pander to the false peace which is 
ensnaring tens of thousands around us, and at the same 
time to sap the foundations of the Christian’s faith. . If 
the 53d chapter of Isaiah be true of one who may yet 
be lost, the ground of the believer’s confidence is gone ; 
what seemed a rock beneath his feet is no better than 
shifting sand. 

But some, perhaps, will struggle to escape from this 
inevitable conclusion by the strange and subtle subter- 
fuge that, though the gospel is to be proclaimed to all, 
it is true only for the believer. This error is not more 
wicked than it is silly. If it be true only for the be- 
liever, it is false for all the rest; and does a good and 
righteous God hold men guilty for refusing what is false ! 
The thought is sheer blasphemy. “The gospel of the 
glory of the blessed God” is wholly and absolutely true 
to all, and for all, whether they believe it or reject it— 
a proclamation and an appeal from sovereign grace, now 
free in virtue of Calvary to bless without distinction or 
restriction, and leaving, if unheeded or despised, the 
certainty of judgment. The word comes forth from an 
open heaven, and if, even as he turns away from Christ, 
the sinner could look right up to the very throne and 
heart of God, he would see a throne of grace and a heart 


88 SUBSTITUTION, 


that gave the Only-begotten Son. When Jerusalem re- 
jected the glad tidings, they who were behind the scenes 
could testify that there was neither reserve nor artifice in 
the proclamation ; and if that guilty people could have 
witnessed what these were privileged to behold, they 
would have seen a mighty Saviour pouring forth his 
heart in tears because their unbelief had paralysed the 
hand stretched forth for their deliverance. 

But, it will be urged, if Christ did not die as our sub- 
stitute, salvation is impossible; and if He did so die 
for us, this fact must date from Calvary, and not from 
our conversion. This assumes that the death of Christ 
was instead of some, in such a sense as to make their 
salvation forensically a necessity , and as a corollary of 
this, that the salvation of any besides is a moral impos- 
sibility. Such difficulties only prove the danger of de- 
parting from the strict accuracy of scriptural expres- 
sions in dealing with these truths. To speak of Christ’s 
dying instead of us, or as our substitute is to adopt 
the language of theology, not of Scripture, and we must 
take care lest we use the words in a sense or a connec- 
tion inconsistent with the truth.? The teaching of Scrip- 


1 Luke xix., 41. 

2 The language of ancient Greece is far richer than our own in pre- 
positions, and “instead of” has its unequivocal correlative; but this 
word, though freely used by the lxx. (dv7l: see ex gr. Gen. xxx. 2, and 
xliv. 33), and found in the New Testament (ex. gr. Matt. ii. 22), is never 
employed in such passages as Rom. v. 6, 7, 8. The statement of Matt. 
xxii, 28, repeated in Mark x. 45, will not be considered an exception 
to this by any one who marks the form and purpose of the text. The 
word dep no doubt may have the same force, just as ‘‘for” in English. 
But in either case such a meaning is exceptional and forced; and in our 
own language we should in that case pronounce the word with emphasis, 
and print it in italics. A full and careful consideration of every passage 
where the word occurs will satisfy the student that it is never so used 
in the New Testament. The only text in which our translators have 
thus rendered it (2 Cor. v. 20) is a signal proof of this, An ambassa- 


SUBSTITUTION, 89 


ture is that He died for sinners (there is no emphasis 
on the preposition), and that, on believing, they become 
identified with Him in that death. 
~ Let the reader turn, for example, to St. Peter’s sermon 
to the household of Cornelius, and mark the character 
of the testimony given, ending with these words :—“ To 
_Him give all the prophets witness, that through His 
name whosoever believeth in Him shall receive remis- 
sion of sins.” 1 Christ was presented, not in identifica- 
tion with the sinner, but objectively to faith; and the 
word was added, “ Whosoever believeth in Him shall 
receive remission of sins.” The hearers believed the 
testimony, and then and there they were baptized with 
the Holy Ghost.? Then and not till then, the doctrine 
of the 6th of Romans became true of them. “We who 
died to sin, how any longer shall we live in it?”? If 
Christ died as our substitute, then we ourselves are deem- 
ed to have died to sin. Of whomis this true? The next 
verse gives the answer in unmistakeable terms: “Or are 
yeignorant that all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus* 
were baptized into his death?” And so on through the 
passage, which claims careful study throughout, ending 
thus at the 10th and 11th verses :—“ For the death which 
He died He died unto sin once for all, but the life which 
He liveth He liveth unto God. Thus do ye also account 
yourselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in 
Christ Jesus.” Words could not be plainer; all that 
Christ accomplished for us we, as believers, are to reckon 


dor speaks on behalf of, not in the stead of, the court which accredits 
him. 

I need not say that substitution is an extra-scriptural expression. 

1 Acts x. 34-43. 2 Acts x. 44, 

8 I quote from Dean Alford’s Greek Testament. 

4 Compare Acts x. 44, and 1 Cor, xii. 13. 


90 SUBSTITUTION. 


actually true of ourselves. In the face of this chapter, 
to maintain that substitution is a truth for the unsaved 
is either playing upon words or trifling with truth. 
Here then is the key to the difficulties stated in the 
opening paragraphs of the chapter. Theology with its 
subtleties has given rise to questions from which the 
simplicity of Scripture is entirely free. When the 
sinner believes in Christ he becomes so thoroughly 
identified with Him in all His vicarious work, that he 
can speak of Calvary as though the crucifixion were but 
yesterday, and he had there and then been justified 
thereby. But to speak of the death of Christ as having 
this substitutional relationship to the sinner, apart from 


1 But it will be asked, are not the closing verses of 2 Cor. v. addressed 
to the unconverted, and do not they teach substitution? To this ques- 
tion I give an emphatic negative. In common with all the rest of the 
Epistle, these verses were written to “the Church of God at Corinth 
and all the saints in all Achaia.” In the last two verses of chapter v. 
and the 1st verse of chapter vi. the apostle states the character and 
purpose of his ministry. But the “ Received Text,” by interpolating 
“for” at the beginning of verse 21, and separating it off from what 
follows, destroys the connection of the passage ; and the English Version, 
by introducing pronouns and altering the emphasis of the words, has 
utterly disguised its purpose. “On Christ’s behalf, then, we are ambas- 
sadors: as if God were exhorting by us, we beseech on Christ’s behalf, 
Be reconciled to God. Him who knew not sin on our behalf He made 
to be sin, that we might become the righteousness of Godin Him. And 
[dé] as fellow-workers (with God) we also exhort that you receive not 
the grace of God to no purpose.” “ Our entreaty to the world is, ‘Be 
reconciled ;’ to you who have received this grace our exhortation is, 
‘Receive it not in vain.’ In our ministry to the world we are ambas- 
sadors ; in our ministry to you we are His fellow-workers,.’”’ The 20th 
verse is in immediate connection with the 18th and 19th verses, and 
the last verse is introductory to the opening words of the 6th chapter, 
all being bracketed together as descriptive of the apostle’s ministry. 
And the prominent thought in the passage is not the identification of 
the sinner with Christ, but the purpose of God to usward in making 
Him to be sin: it was ‘“‘in order that we might become the right- 
eousness of God in Him.” It is not that He took this place instead of 
us (which, indeed, would have no meaning), and that we thereby stood 
free ; but that He became what we were in order that we might become 
what He is, 


SUBSTITUTION, 91 


the change which takes place on his believing, and thus 
to make his pardon appear to be an act of justice in such 
a sense that it ceases to be an act of grace, is wholly 
unwarranted and false. If there be those on earth 
whose case is beyond the scope of the work of Christ, 
it is not in the power of God to save them; and thus 
redemption has failed of its first and highest aim, which 
is not the saving of the sinner, merely, but the restoring 
to God His sovereignty compromised by sin. But if 
the death of Christ be substitutionally instead of the 
unbeliever, his conversion may alter his condition 
spiritually and morally, but it can in no wise affect his 
judicial state: he is saved in fact and of right, whether 
he believes or not. In either case, grace is in chains, and 
not enthroned + q 
There is absolutely no limit to the value of the death 
of Christ to Godward; and there is not between the 
poles a single child of Adam who may not know its 
power, and receive the reconciliation which it wrought. 
And on the ground of this accomplished reconciliation, 
forgiveness is proclaimed to all without reserve or 
equivocation. But it is only the “ all that believe” who 
are justified ;? and if it be demanded, why, beneath the 


1 Any who will, dismissing prejudice, compare the language of Scrip- 
ture with words and phrases popular among us, will be surprised to find 
how much there is which is unwarranted, even in what God seems to 
sanction by His blessing. We must not forget, however, that grace 
marks all His dealings with us, and we ought therefore to be the more 
careful and earnest to test our words and thoughts about Christ by 
Holy Writ. To make apparent success the test of what is right is just 
as immoral in the things of God as in the affairs of men. 

If any should oppose what is here urged by argument or influence, it 
would be an easy task to silence them with their own weapons. The 
imputation of sin and righteousness as taught in Scripture is reasonable 
in the highest sense ; but the doctrine here objected to might easily be 
shown to be not only false but absurd. This, however, is not the place 
to enter on a discussion of such a character. 

Acts xiii. 38, 39. 


92 SUBSTITUTION. 


supremacy of boundless love and almighty power, the 
few, and not the many should be saved, we can but 
fall back upon divine sovereignty, and exclaim, “O the 
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God! how unsearchable are His judgments and His 
ways past finding out !’’4 


1 Romans xi. 33. 

The distinctions here noticed between the different aspects of the work 
E Christ = clearly marked in the ritual of the Great Day of Atonement 

Lev. xvi. 

There were two methods by which the Israelite became identified with 
his sacrifice, viz., either by laying his hand upon the victim’s head before 
it was killed, as in the case of the ordinary sin-offerings (see p. 83, ante); 
or else by having the blood sprinkled upon him after the victim had been 
offered, as in the case of various special sacrifices. But in the ritual of 
the Day of Atonement there was no such identification with the goat 
‘‘upon which the Lord’s lot fell.” The ceremonial was entirely to God- 
ward. The blood was carried, not without to where the people stood, but 
within, to the presence of God. And the efficacy of that blood to God- 
ward was morally the foundation of the ceremonial respecting the scape- 
goat, which followed. Aaron, as the appointed representative of the 
people, laid his hands upon the head of the victim, and “ confessed over 
it all the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their transgressions 
in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat,” which, as the 
typical sin-bearer, was then led away ‘‘to a land not inhabited.” The 
efficacy to Godward of the atonement made through the blood of the first 
goat was absolute and complete, apart from aught that followed it; but 
its practical efficacy to the people depended on their becoming identified 
with the scape-goat, 

And so it is with the antitype. The perfectness of the work of Christ 
in no way depends upon the benefits which accrue therefrom to the 
sinner, Whether men receive it or reject it, atonement is accomplished, 
peace is made. But when the sinner believes in Christ, he enters into 
peace, he ‘‘receives the atonement” (Rom. v. 1, 11), Thus becoming 
identified with Christ, that identification reaches back to His death for 
sin on Calvary. 

Substitution, then, is merely a theological statement of one aspect of 
this scriptural truth of the believer's oneness with Christ, and if it be 
taught apart from that truth, it may degenerate into error. The gospel, 
instead of being a divine revelation, may become a mere problem in 
metaphysics. Instead of the heart being reached by the stupendous fact 
that ‘‘Christ died for the ungodly,” the intellect may seize upon the 
inference which obviously follows if a forced emphasis be put upon the 
“for.” (See Note 2, p. 88, ante.) That the danger is real, witness how 
great the number is in our day of those who seem to receive the gospel 
without any exercise of either heart or conscience. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
RIGHTEOUSNESS, 


THE sentence upon sin is death. Man has fallen be- 
neath that sentence; he is hopelessly, irretrievably 
doomed. No law-keeping therefore could bring him 
righteousness: if he is ever to be justified, it must be 
by the penalty being borne. He must be justified by 
death, “justified by blood,” 1 

Moreover, his moral condition is just as hopeless. 
He is incurably corrupt and bad. He cannot please 
God. So then, even if atonement be made for him by 
another, no blessing can ever reach him unless it come 
to him in spite of what he is, and not because of any 
good thing in him. Christ may have died, but the 
power and value of that death he can never prove, if he 
must needs raise himself one stép to reach the sphere 
of its efficacy. He must be justified on some principle 
as independent of self, as is the blood of the atonement 
—he must be “justified by grace.” ? 

But grace implies that there is no merit in him who 
is the object of it, no reason whatever in him why he 
should be blessed. How then, if the blessing be not 
arbitrarily limited, if it be really “unto all,” can a 
difference be made? how can one be justified and 

1 Rom. v. 9. 2 Rom. iii. 24. 


94 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


another not? It cannot depend on merit; it cannot 
depend on effecting a change in one’s self; it cannot 
depend on doing. It must be simply that one accepts 
and another rejects, a righteousness which is perfect 
independently of the sinner. How accepts? how re- 
jects? accepts by believing, rejects by disbelieving, the 
testimony of God. “Unto all and upon all them that 
believe.” “It is of faith that it may be by grace:” any 
other ground would be inconsistent with grace. A 
sinner must be “justified by faith.” 1 

Death then is the judicial ground of righteousness. 
Grace is the principle on which God acts in reckoning 
a sinner righteous. And it is on the principle of faith, 
as opposed to works or merit, that the sinner receives 
the blessing. 

The death of Christ has, I trust, received due pro- 
minence in these pages, and I have already dealt with 
the great truth of grace, and discussed at length the 
character of faith, But yet the question of righteous- 
ness is of far too great importance to be disposed of 
thus incidentally. I turn therefore to consider it more 
fully by the light of Scripture. 

And mark, the word is “justified.” It is not a 
question of pardon, therely, but of righteousness. The 
best of governments might find a reason to pardon the 
guiltiest inmate of its jails; but to justify a criminal 
would be morally to become partaker of his crime. 
Yet, with God, forgiveness is no mere remission of the 
penalty of sin: it reaches on, and embraces the justifi- 
cation of the sinner. Ours is the blessedness of those to 
whom God imputes righteousness. The believer is 


} Rom. v. 1. St. James speaks of justification by works. Upon 
this see Appendix, Note IIT. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS. 95 


pardoned, but that is not all; he is reckoned righteous. 
“To him that worketh not, but believeth on Him that 
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for right- 
eousness.” 1 

It is not that God compounds with the sinner, and 
accepts his faith instead of righteousness; but that He 
accounts him righteous, and that in virtue of his faith. 
The question, How this can be, is the thesis of the 
opening chapters of the Epistle to the Romans. 

“T am not ashamed of the gospel,” the apostle boasts, 
as he stands by anticipation in the midst of Rome, 
where power, the power of man, was wellnigh wor- 
shipped as divine: “I am not ashamed of the gospel, 
for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth, for therein is righteousness which is of 
God revealed on the principle of faith to faith.”? 

We have thus at the very threshold two important 
points established ; first, that the righteousness with 
which the believer has to do, is not human but divine; 
and, secondly, that it is a new revelation. Law and 
prophets bore witness to it, doubtless; but the burden 
of their testimony was a demand for righteousness from 
man; the gospel is a revelation of righteousness which 
is of God. But this revelation must of necessity be 
postponed until the close of the controversy respecting 
human righteousness. To faith, doubtless, God did 
reveal in the old time, that there was a divine remedy 
for man’s unrighteousness. It was “witnessed to,” as 


1Rom. iv. 5. 

2 Rom. i. 17,—“ The righteousness of God” is ambiguous, for it may 
mean the Divine attribute, as in chap. iii. 25. And “righteousness 
of God,” though literally accurate, is too abrupt for our English idiom. 
I have ventured therefore to render it ‘‘righteousness which is of God,” 
as idiomatically the most correct. I suppose it is equivalent to the 
6. ék eov, of Phil. iii. 9. 


96 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


I have already quoted, “by the law and the prophets.” 
But to make a public revelation of divine righteousness 
for man, while the express character of the dispensa- 
tion was a demand of human righteousness, would be, 
I speak with reverence, to put a premium upon un- 
righteousness.! The public revelation was a claim of 
righteousness from man on earth. The alternative 
was; to faith, forgiveness through His forbearance; to 
unbelief, an expectation of judgment coming. But 
now, in the gospel, human righteousness is set aside 
for ever, righteousness which is of God is revealed, and 
the only alternative, and that for all who fail to submit 
to this righteousness, is the revelation of the wrath of 
God from heaven.? 

But is it so clear a case that human righteousness 
has failed so signally ? for on this depends the oppor- 
tuneness of the new revelation given. To this, there- 
fore, the apostle forthwith addresses himself.* 

The creature claimed his liberty, and turned prodigal. 
God allowed him a long probation of 4000 years to 
prove what that liberty would come to, and the result 
was only evil. Tried by every possible test, man has 
proved himself to be utterly unrighteous. Left to the 


1 Such was precisely the charge brought against the gospel by those 
who judged it without giving up their standing under “ the law and the 
prophets” (see Rom. iii. 8); that is, under the past dispensation, for 
such is the meaning of the expression.—See e.g. Matt. vi. 12, and xxii. 
40. To do as we would be done by, is human righteousness, and there- 
fore the Lord says it is “the law and the prophets.” So again in the 
22d chap. This was the special character of the dispensation. See 
also Luke xvi. 16, which means, not that the Old Testament Scriptures 
had become obsolete, but that the ministry of John the Baptist inaugu- 
rated a change of dispensation. 

2 Ver. 18. 

3 This is the scope of the passage following, i.e., from ver. 19 of chap. 
i. to ver, 20 of chap. iii, Ini. 17 he states the thesis of the doctrinal 
portion of the Epistle, and returns to it in iii, 21. 


E 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. 97 


light of nature, he turned from it, and proved himself 
lawless. When the commandment came, he turned 
against it, and proved himself a transgressor.! In the 
first chapter, the condition of the heathen is depicted 
in colours dark but true. In the sequel, the exceptional 
advantages of the Jew are shown to have produced no 
adequate result. And the history of Israel, remember, 
is the history of human nature tried in the most favour- 
able circumstances. Abraham was of our own flesh and 
blood. If he differed from other men, it was only that, 
as judged by men, he was a splendid specimen of the 
race. God has recorded a mean and wicked act com- 
mitted by him, for God’s biographies are faithful, but 
the stress that men lay upon this single fault is no 
common tribute to the character of the patriarch. 
Abraham’s family, therefore, was the little Eden vine- 
yard reclaimed from nature’s wildness, and tended and 
nourished with the utmost care and wisdom.? If then, 


1 To say that man is precisely what God made him to be is sheer 
blasphemy. ‘‘ God made man upright.” But, it may be urged, God 
might have made manincapable of sin. That is, He might have created 
a being destitute of any independent will. Doubtless; but then such a 
creature must needs be of a far lower order than Adam and his race, 
But God might in fact have prevented Adam’s sin. That is, He might 
have created him capable of an independent will, but practically incap- 
able of exercising it. The fact of man’s apostasy is a terrible but most 
signal testimony to the greatness and dignity of the place from which 
he fell, and it ill becomes him to answer back his Maker, “ Why hast 
thou made me thus?” Moreover, God has been vindicated in this re- 
spect by the life of Christ on earth; for such an one as Adam was has 
perfectly obeyed Him, even in the midst of suffering and sin. Nor is 
God’s goodness at fault towards the fallen race. Man has chosen his 
own will, and turned from God in the pursuit of it. Let him now re- 
turn to God, and he will find not only pardon, but blessings far beyond 
what sin has robbed him of. But if he refuses grace, either through 
persisting in his wicked courses, or through going about trying to justify 
himself, to ‘‘ establish his own righteousness ” (Rom. x. 3), what can 
there possibly be for him but wrath ? 

2 Tsa, v. 1-7. 

G 


98 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


even here, no fitting fruit was yielded, the entire stock 
may fairly be condemned. If the Jew is shown to have 
utterly failed, it is the crowning and conclusive proof 
that Adam’s race is evil. 

But dreadful as was the outward condition of the 
heathen, the inward condition of the Jew was just as 
bad. The first chapter states what man without law 
openly showed himself to be ; the third chapter records 
the judgment which God, who reads the heart, has 
formed of man, even when the restraints of law produced 
an outward morality. Not that this was any new dis- 
covery with God. At the very outset, His judgment 
of the matter was declared in no doubtful terms. But, 
in His infinite wisdom, He decreed that the creature 
should prove it for himself. Now, he has done so. 
Every mouth, therefore, is stopped, and the whole world 
has become subject to the judgment of God.? The ques- 
tion of human righteousness is no longer open. Man’s 
period of trial with respect to it is at an end. 

Now human righteousness is conformity to law. 
Not the law, for that would limit it to the Jew, and the 
argument includes both Jew and Gentile; but to law 
in its wider sense. God alone is supreme; the creature 
must of necessity be subject to law.2 The law of Moses 
was the promulgation, and that for the most part in a 
negative or penal form, of the standard of creature per- 
fectness, the law of man’s nature, as we say. Murder 
and theft were as really sinful before the law as after it. 


1 “ When men began to multiply on the face of the earth, God saw 
that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every im- 
agination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.” Gen. 
vi, 1-5. 

2 Rom. iii. 19. 

3 Sin is precisely the denial of this. Sin and lawlessness (voula 
1 John iii, 4) are convertible times. See p. 132 post. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS. 99 


They were forbidden, not to make them wrong, but be- 
cause they were so. The Gentile therefore had, by 
virtue of his very being, the law which at Sinai was 
formally tabulated in commandments. “Having not 
the law he was a law to himself.” 1 Love to God and 
man, worked out in the life, is the fulfilment of the 
law ; it is, moreover, the attainment of creature perfect- 
ness. In fact, it is the one just because it is the other. 
Righteousness then would be the realization of this. 
To express it in the most popular way, it would be 
man’s being exactly what he ought to be. 

But the history of Adam’s race is God’s answer to 
every pretension of the kind. As has been already 
shown, man’s probation is at an end. The door is shut 
upon human righteousness altogether. It is not that 
by the deeds of the law, they who had the law can 
no longer be justified; but that by deeds of law,? 
upon that principle in any sense, no flesh living can be 
justified. : 

At the cost of repeating myself, I must insist on this, 
that man is in this sense no longer in a state of proba- 
tion at all. That era God has finally foreclosed. The 


1 Rom. ii. 14. 

2 Rom. iii. 20, é& čpywv vouov. On this, see Bloomfield and the autho- 
rities cited by him, whom I have followed. Alford’s reason for depart- 
ing from them (i.e. “that no such general idea of Jaw seems to have 
ever been before the mind of the apostle,”’) is not only a flagrant in- 
stance of petitio principii, but certainly wrong. See eg. Rom. vii. 8. 
“Without law sin is dead,” is a great and important principle. But 
the statement that “ without the law sin was dead,” is not only incor- 
rect, but opposed to the apostle’s teaching in chap. ii. 14, 15. “ With 
the article, véuos invariably denotes the Mosaic law, except when its 
meaning is limited by accompanying words. Without the article, in 
cases where the omission is not required by grammatical rule, the term 
appears to have a wider significance ; sometimes referring to the Mosaic 
law as the type of law in general, and sometimes to law in the abstract, 
including every form of divine command or moral obligation.” (8S. @. 
Green's “ Handbook to the Grammar of the Greek Test.,” § 234.) 


100 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


Holy Spirit has come, not to re-open the question of 
sin and righteousness and judgment, but to convince 
the world that it is closed for ever If then human 
righteousness, righteousness on the principle of con- 
formity to law; the principle of man’s being what he 
ought to be, is irrevocably set aside, there must be a 
revelation of righteousness which is of God, and there- 
fore, of course, on some different principle altogether. 
“But now, apart from law,” the apostle proceeds, “right- 
eousness which is of God is revealed, being borne wit- 
ness to by the law and the prophets.”? Hitherto, 
human righteousness has been demanded; but now, 
divine righteousness is revealed. We shall see pre- 
sently what the principle is on which it is based; but 
here, we have the point settled, that it is not on the 
principle of law. “By deeds of law no flesh living 
can be justified ;” righteousness is now “independently 
of law.” The contrast is not between personal, and 
vicarious law-keeping, but between righteousness on 
the principle of law-keeping at all, and righteousness 
which is entirely apart from law ; between righteousness 
of man, worked out on earth, and righteousness of God, 
revealed from heaven. 

But righteousness is a complex word. It expresses 
either a personal moral quality or a judicial state. If 
any one be personally righteous, he is, of course, and 
by virtue of it, judicially righteous also. On the other 
hand, to declare a person to be judicially righteous who 
personally is not righteous, is, according to human 

1 John xvi, 8-11. 

2 Romans iii. 21; vuvt dé xwpls vduov 6. ‘But now (2.e., under the 
present dispensation), a method of justification appointed by God, with- 


out reference to (lit., apart from) obedience to law of any kind, is 
revealed. ”— Bloomfield. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS. 101 


judgment, utterly unrighteous and immoral. But God 
has done this very thing, and the great wonder of the 
gospel is how He could do it. How can God be just, 
and yet the Justifier of ungodly sinners? Here is the 
great problem of our Epistle. 

To say that, although man has broken the law, God 
regards him as having kept it, is no solution of it. It 
is not an answer to the difficulty; it shelves it altogether. 
Ifa man keep the law, or, what comes to the same 
thing, if God deem him to have kept it, he is justified 
on that ground, and there is no room and no need for 
justification through redemption. If righteous living, 
whether personal or vicarious, can bring righteousness, 
then righteousness comes by law, and Christ need not 
have died.t But righteousness on that ground is shown 
to be absolutely impossible, and righteousness which is 
of God is revealed—righteousness on a different prin- 
ciple entirely. If God looks upon the believer as 
having kept the law there is an end of the whole 
matter, for to declare a person righteous who is right- 
eous is simply a matter of course. But the great 
marvel of the gospel, the great triumph of redemption, 
is that God can declare to be righteous those who per- 
sonally are not righteous; that He can justify the 
sinner, not by deeming him a law-keeper, but even 
while He judges him as a law-breaker. It is not that, 
being justified by the life of Christ on earth, we are 
saved by His blood-shedding; but that, “being now 
justified by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath 
through Him,” as now risen from the dead.? “We are 
justified without a cause, by God’s grace, through the 
redemption that is in Christ Jesus.” 3 


1 Ei yap dic vópov ô. dpa Xovords Swpedy aréavev.—Gal. ii 21. 
2 Romans v. 9, 3 Romans iii. 23. 


102 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


But, as we have already seen, the gospel of this 
righteousness was a new revelation. In the old time, 
God demanded righteousness from man, and pronounced 
a death-sentence upon sin, And yet saint after saint, 
from Abel downwards, went to heaven, though unright- 
eous, and in spite of sin. Instead of death they found 
forgiveness. How then about the righteousness of 
God? The law and the prophets bore witness that it 
would be manifested, but it remained a hidden mystery. 
The whole question of God’s righteousness was in abey- 
ance. But now, the time has come for bringing all 
things into light. God has not only manifested right- 
eousness for the sinner: He has set forth Christ, to 
declare and vindicate His own. “ Whom God set forth,” 
the chapter proceeds, “as a propitiation through faith 
in His blood, for the showing forth of His righteous- 
ness, because of the passing over of the former sins in 
the forbearance of God.” } 

It is no mere question here of a judicial standing- 
ground for the sinner, great though that question be, 
but the personal character of God Himself. So clear 
is the case against even the best of Adam’s sons in the 
judgment of all the great intelligences of the universe, 
so evil and polluted is this wretched race of ours, that 
even God thinks fit to vindicate His character in 
stooping to take up our cause. All darkness now is 
past; the day of full revelation has dawned. God loved 
His people in the old time, for God is love; but in this 


1 Romans iii. 25. I have here followed Alford’s English Testament, 
In his Greek Testament, he remarks: “ Observe, mápecıs is not forgive- 
ness, but overlooking, which is the work of forbearance (see Acts xvii. 
30); whereas forgiveness is the work of grace (see chapter ii. 4) ; nor is 
Tov Tpoyey. Åu., ‘thesins of each man which precede his conversion,’ but 
those oj the whole world before the death of Christ. See the very similar 
words, Heb. ix. 15,” 


RIGHTEOUSNESS. 103 


that love was manifested, that “God has sent His only- 
begotten Son into the world.” He spared not His Son, 
but freely gave Him up. 

Nor would a higher wisdom have found an easier 
redemption, nor sterner righteousness have required a 
fuller satisfaction. Vow is made known unto princi- 
palities and powers in heavenly places, the manifold 
wisdom of God.! Now, before earth and heaven, is de- 
clared His righteousness. “To declare, I say,” the 
apostle repeats, to give it fitting emphasis: “to declare, 
at this time, His righteousness, that He may be just, 
and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus.” 

Heaven peopled with the lost of earth, might well 
seem proof of God’s weakness in forgiving, but for “the 
Lamb as it had been slain,” who fills the throne. The 
blood-stained mercy-seat above is the sinner’s hope, his 
only right to enter there. The blood-stained mercy- 
seat above is God’s eternal witness to His own great 
attribute of righteousness. That blood is at once the 
sinner’s justification, and the proof that God Himself is 
just. When God imputed sin to Christ, He became so 
thoroughly identified with it that the Word declares 
“He was made sin for us.” When God now imputes 
His righteousness to the believer, we become so 
thoroughly identified therewith that the Word declares 
we are “made the righteousness of God in Christ.” ? 

But wonderful though this be, it will be asked, is 
even this enough? Must not the sinner have the 
personal quality of righteousness, as well as the judicial, 
to fit him for the presence of God?? Undoubtedly he 

1 Eph. iii. 10. 


2 2 Cor. v. 21. 
3 These are distinguished by divines as negative and positive right- 


104 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


must, and it remains to be considered What is the ground 
and source of it? But here, remember, we reach beyond 
the scope of the Scriptures we have been considering. 
The first four chapters of Romans deal with the great 
question of forensic righteousness ; now we pass from 
the forensic altogether. It is a question of moral 
fitness. The sinner must be not merely forensically 
justified, he must be righteous morally and in fact. In 
the picture of a parable, or the poetry of prophecy, 
judicial righteousness may fitly be represented as a 
“wedding garment,” ora “robe;”1 but here the question 
is, What lies beneath that robe, that garment? not the 
wearer’s title to be where he is, but his personal, moral 
fitness for the place he holds by virtue of that title.? 

Sin unatoned must needs be an insuperable barrier 
between the sinner and his God. Love and grace there 
may be, and pity for his ruin; but righteousness forbids 
their exercise, so long as ever its requirements are un- 
satisfied. But by the death of Christ, the believer is 
released from every claim and penalty pertaining to 
his former state. He is redeemed, bought back by 
God, and is, now, absolutely God’s. Pity, now, may 
stoop to save, and love and grace may flow unhindered. 
eousness. The latter is closely allied to sanctification, but it must by 
no means be confounded with it, as is commonly done. 

1 The doctrinal importance attached so generally to the expression 
‘“‘robe of righteousness” in the 61st of Isaiah, is one of the many strange 
phenomena of theology. The expression used in the 59th chapter 
might naturally have been expected to claim far more notice, on ac- 
count of its being adopted in the New Testament. (Eph. vi. 14.) 

2 The point of the parable of the Marriage Supper (Matt. xxii.) is 
not that the man was unbidden, nor that he was personally unfit for 
the scene ; but that, relying on his personal qualifications, he dispensed 
with the wedding garment. He had such an opinion of himself, that 
he thought he might attend court in his ordinary dress. It is the 


sinner, because of his personal righteousness, refusing “to submit to 
the righteousness of God.” 


RIGHTEOUSNESS. 105 


God may lavish blessings on the ransomed sinner. And 
He may raise him to what place He will! He may 
either repair the ruin of the Adam race, and restore the 
old creation, marred by sin; or else, dethroning him 
who is the head of that creation and that race, He may 
introduce the sinner into a new sphere altogether. And 
Scripture is not silent here, nor does it speak in doubt- 
ful terms. 

The pattern to which all the sons of faith are yet to 
be conformed, is not Adam in Eden innocence, but the 
risen Christ at the right hand of God. “Neither cir- 
cumcision, nor yet uncircumcision” now avails, “but a 
new creation ;”? and the believer's fitness for the home 
that is before him, depends upon the perfectness of 
Christ as Head of that creation, and his own part therein 
by virtue of his oneness with Him. It is not in His 
work we are accepted, but in Himself, and yet not in 
Himself as separated from His work. The Christ who 
now sits upon the throne is the Christ of Calvary, and 
the Christ of Calvary is the Jesus of Bethlehem and 
Bethany. There can be no union with Him save in 
resurrection, and we can have no part whatever in His 
life on earth until first we have been made one with 
Him in that death which justifies. But once united to 


1 Justification is in no sense a believer’s title to heaven, nor yet his 
fitness to be there. If British law justify an accused person, he walks 
forth free ; but he does not gain thereby a right to live in Windsor 
Castle, nor any fitness for such a position. He may already possess the 
title and the moral qualities befitting it; but these are wholly inde- 
pendent of his acquittal, though upon it might depend his power to 
profit by them. The same grace which justifies a sinner is itself the 
source of every blessing the justified enjoys. 

2 Gal. vi. 15. That is, it is no longer a question of human per- 
fectness, whether according to the standard of the law of nature, or of 
the revelation of it made at Sinai; but of passing out from that entire 
position, and gaining a new standing-ground in Christ, 


106 RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


Him, we stand accepted in all the perfectness of every- 
thing He is, and of everything He has ever proved Him- 
self to be. “If any man be in Christ, he is a new 
creature: old things are passed away; behold, all 
things are become new.” ‘The Only-begotten Son has 
not come down to patch up the ruined fabric of the 
old creation, or wipe out the traces of the creature’s 
fall; but, closing its history for ever by His death, to 
bring the redeemed of earth into a new creation of which 
He, the Lord from heaven, is the Head. “He is made 
unto His people from God wisdom, righteousness, sancti- 
fication, and redemption.” 

By the light of the full and final revelation of the 
gospel, I have thus sought to find the answer of the 
problem left unsolved upon the earliest page of Holy 
Writ : “How should a man be just with God ?”1 Ihave 
shown how the sinner can alone be justified—justified 
not on the principle of law obeyed, but on the principle 
of sin condemned; “justified freely by His grace through 
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.”?. Having thus 
described the sure foundation of the believer’s blessed- 
ness in Christ, I have gone on to speak of full salvation 
yet to be realized in glory, when “the new man which 
after God is created in righteousness and holiness of 
truth,” ? will be displayed in all the perfectness of Him 
who is the Head of that new creation. 

And now I close the chapter, but, though my task is 
done, I close it with a sigh. For I could wish some 
worthier pen were here to fill the page with exhortation 
fitting such a theme. If such be the Christian’s past, 
and such his destiny, what a present should be his! 
Blameless before his fellow men, as by grace he has 
1 Job ix, 2, ? Rom, iii, 24, See Appendix, Note IV, 3 Eph, iv, 24. 


RIGHTEOUSNESS. 107 


been freed from every charge before his God. Marked by 
strict, unswerving uprightness in all his ways on earth, 
for he is destined one day to be conformed to the image 
of Christ in glory. “For the grace of God hath appeared, 
bringing salvation to all men, instructing us to the intent 
that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should 
live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present 
world ; looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the 
glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ; who 
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all 
iniquity, and purify unto himself a people for his own 
possession, zealous of good works.”? 

1 Tit. ii, 11-13. The Revised Version, from which the above is quoted, 
seems even more definitely than the Authorised Version to make cwriesos 
predicate after txs¢évn. The teaching of the passage, however, is not 
that God’s grace in fact brings salvation to all men, but that such is 
its character and intention. This is clear in the original, but it is not 
easily conveyed in English. The text might be rendered thus: ‘‘ The 


grace of God, salvation-bringing to all men, hath appeared, disciplining 
us,” &c. (sce p. 74, ante), 


x 


CHAPTER IX. 
SANCTIFICATION. 


WE have thus seen how a sinner is once and for ever 
justified, when he believes in Christ, and stands thence- 
forth righteous before God, beyond every demand of 
law and every charge of sin. We have seen further how 
the personal moral-quality which is akin to such a 
standing, pertains to the new creation in which the 
believer has his place. And in conclusion, we have 
noticed how practical conformity to that standing, and 
cultivation of that quality, are characteristic of true 
Christian life. All this, moreover, springs from, and 
rests upon the truth that God is righteous. 

But God is not only righteous, He is also holy; and 
every requirement of righteousness has its correlative 
claim in regard to holiness. Sin not only brings the 
sinner before the judgment seat, it excludes him from 
the sanctuary. He is not only guilty, but defiled. 
And though faith accepts the blessings that are ours in 
Christ, and humbly takes the place they give, and the 
heart bounds forward to the day of full redemption, 
when the redeemed shall be presented faultless before 
God; yet, sure and full though the blessing be, and 
bright and clear the hope, the sad stern facts around us 


SANCTIFICATION. 109 


and within are no less real. Sinners in a world of sin, 
though justified, and born of God, and on our way to 
certain glory, how can we pray and serve and worship, 
here, for God is holy ? It is not a question, now, of our 
place in Christ at God’s right hand, nor yet of a new 
nature we possess by virtue of a new birth from heaven. 
It is what we know ourselves to be as we walk the 
streets or fall upon our knees to pray; ourselves, the 
responsible living persons in whom this new nature 
dwells. How can we approach a holy holy holy God ? 

In the Epistle to the Romans, the scene was laid in 
the hall of judgment. The righteous God was on the 
throne. At the bar there stood the sinner, guilty, con- 
demned, and silent. The righteous sentence had gone 
forth, and he had not a word to offer why it should not 
be fulfilled. And we saw how, when all hope was 
dead, sovereign grace could justify the guilty even as 
he stood, and call him from the very bar of judgment to 
fellowship with the Only-begotten in His glory. 

But now we turn to the Epistle to the Hebrews, and 
here a new scene presents itself. The centre object 
is a holy shrine, and not the throne of righteousness. 
It is surrounded, not by lost and guilty outcasts, but by 
a redeemed and happy people. They are in the wilder- 
ness, however, beset by need and infirmity and sin. 
But they have a great leader to provide for need on the 
journey to the rest before them, and a priest to help 
their infirmities and to make atonement for their sin. 
The priest is theirs in virtue of a covenant, and the 
covenant has also a sanctuary, an altar, and a sacrifice. 
Here then we have a people exactly like ourselves, in 
circumstances like our own. For our present difficulty 
is not at all how redemption can be obtained, or a 


110 SANCTIFICATION, 


home in heaven made sure; that question has been set 
at rest. But itis as to the place redemption gives us 
during our sojourn here on earth, and the provision 
made to maintain us in this place, seeing we are weak, 
and wayward, and sinful, and in circumstances of diffi- 
culty and trial. Let us seek then, by the help of the 
typical history of Israel, to trace out the truth we are in 
search of for ourselves. 

But, first of all, let this be clearly settled, that Israel’s 
redemption was accomplished ere ever they sang their 
hymn of triumph upon the wilderness shore of the sea. 
Their redemption depended solely on the passover in 
Egypt, and the wave that rolled between them and the 
House of Bondage—death in its spiritual significance, 
and death in its separating power. It was in no respect, 
therefore, the work of priesthood, or the result of priestly 
sacrifice. The sacrifice of the passover was not a 
priestly act. Priesthood pertained to the covenant, and 
this was not an ordinance of the covenant at all. The 
yearly festival which the covenant enjoined was but a 
memorial celebration of the one great passover of their 
redemption ; and it was as thus redeemed that Jehovah 
entered into covenant with them. We must remember 
therefore, that in following Israel’s story, the moment 
we turn the page of the 12th chapter of the Book of 
Exodus, we are dealing with a people whose first need 
was not redemption but SANCTIFICATION. | 

Here, then, is precisely the point at which we have 
ourselves arrived in this inquiry. Let us pursue the 
matter further, and seek to ascertain how Israel was 
sanctified, and thus to discern the truth with reference 
to ourselves. Israel was a redeemed people. But God 
had a purpose in their redemption, and that purpose 


SANCTIFICATION, EEI 


had yet to be fulfilled. He redeemed them from Egypt 
and from the power of Pharaoh, that He might establish 
them as a holy people in covenant with Himself. 
Covenant was based upon redemption, and followed as 
an inseparable consequence.! But the covenant was 
inaugurated with the blood of burnt-offerings and peace- 
offerings sacrificed to Jehovah, and it was by the blood 
of the covenant, sprinkled on the people, that their 
sanctification was accomplished. Thus it was that they 
were introduced into the place to which they were 
entitled by virtue of redemption, and became in fact 
what they were already by the promise and purpose of 
their God.? 
Christ is the great Paschal Lamb of our redemption. 
He is also the Burnt-offering of the covenant. We are 
“redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a 
lamb without blemish and without spot.” “We are 
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ 
once for all.”? The covenant is inseparable from redemp- 
tion: it is by the blood of the covenant that the believer 
is sanctified. And this is no mere form of words, no 
piece of idle rhetoric. Sanctification was a reality for 
Israel. Without it, there could have been no covenant, 
no priest, no sanctuary. And it is likewise a reality 
with us, and just as necessary. It is as much a fact as 
our justification, and as absolute and complete. By 
nature not righteous but guilty, we have seen how the 


1 Truth has many sides, but here I am dealing with but one. Inone 
sense redemption is a result of covenant, and here sanctification precedes 
it; for the meaning of sanctification is a setting apart for God. But 
in another sense, redemption is the foundation of covenant, and sancti- 
fication follows as a consequence. Both these seem to be included in 
the opening words of 1 Peter: “Elect through sanctification of the 
Spirit unto sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.” 

2 Exod, xxiv. SP Pet. 1.19) Heb; x) 10: 


112 SANCTIFICATION. 


sinner is justified. By nature not holy but defiled, he 
is likewise sanctified. 

And both depend alike, and only, upon blood. He 
is righteous, moreover, because God has declared him 
righteous; and it is by the call of God that he is holy. 
“ And such were some of you,” the apostle reminds the 
Corinthian Christians, after naming transgressors of the 
grossest kind, “but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 
but ye are justified”! “Sanctified in Christ Jesus, 
called saints,”? as he had described them in the saluta- 
tion of the epistle. 

Sanctification, therefore, in this sense is not a gradual 
change or progressive work, nor yet a moral attribute; 
it is an act, like justification, accomplished once for all.* 
Just as the guilty sinner passes, immediately when he 
believes, into a new condition relatively to sin and a 
righteous God, and is thereby and thenceforth righteous; 
so the defiled sinner gains, as immediately and in the 
same way, a new standing relatively to sin and a holy 
God, and is thereby and thenceforth holy. ‘“ Whatso- 
ever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put 
to it, nor anything taken from it.” 4 

But it will doubtless be argued, However true and 
blessed this may be, it fails to satisfy our need, for this 
is only the setting out upon our pilgrimage; and though 
perfectly sanctified when we believe, we may soon be- 
come defiled again. What provision then has been made 
to keep us holy on the way? This is precisely what we 
learn, in part by comparison and in part by contrast, 
from the Epistle to the Hebrews. And here let me 


Po Cor yi. all. 
2 Not “called to be saints,” but constituted saints by the call of 
God, 3 See Appendix, Note V. 4 Eccles. iii. 14, 


SANCTIFICATION, 113 


give the reader a threefold clew to the seeming difficul- 
ties which make that wonderful and blessed book so 
profitless to many. Judaism, first of all, is here regarded 
not as the apostate faith which crucified Messiah, but 
as that holy religion whose aim and work it was to lead 
to Him. The true Israelite had no need to be converted 
to Christianity. He had already, as a Jew, experienced 
the new birth of water and the Spirit, without which 
no one can see the kingdom ;! and he accepted Christ, 
not as the founder of a new religion, but as the author 
and fulfiller of the true and holy faith which had already 
knit his soul to God. It is to such the book is especially 
addressed. Secondly, the believer is looked at, not as 
seated in the heavens in Christ,? but as here ow earth; 
nor yet as a member of His Body, but as one of a com- 
pany of “holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling,” 
setting out on their wilderness journey home, And 
thirdly, the book takes up our spiritual history at the 
point which Israel had reached in the 24th chapter of 
Exodus. Redemption is complete. The covenant has 
been established. The people have been sanctified. 
And having thus made purification for sins, the Media- 
tor of the covenant is gone up to God.? 

And here it is that priesthood meets us. As yet we 
have known no priestly functions. It was not a priestly 
hand that killed the passover, or sprinkled the door of 
the dwelling with its blood. It was not a priestly hand 
that sacrificed the dedication offering of the covenant ; 
and the sanctification of the people was the work of the 
mediator, not of the priest. It is as “brought again 
from the dead, in virtue of the blood of the everlasting 

2 See Note p. 60 ante. 2 Eph. ii.6, 


8 Compare Exod. xxiv. 8, 9, with Heb, i, 3. 
H 


114 SANCTIFICATION, 


covenant,” and now passed into the heavens, purifica- 
tion for sin being made, that the Son of God has been 
proclaimed a Priest.? 

We have thus not only a great leader,—the Captain 
of our salvation, and a home to which He guides; but 
if through sin or frailty we fail to follow Him aright, 
and turn aside or stumble by the way, we know Him 
also as a great High Priest, who can sympathise and 
help. He can sympathise, for He was in all points 
tried as we are; He can help, for the trial found no 
sin.” 

But to sacrifice for sins was Aaron’s peculiar voca- 
tion. There are other priestly functions different from 
this, and higher; but this was the characteristic of the 
Aaronic order. It was founded on the necessity of 
atonement. If then the sacrifice had in fact accom- 
plished the work it typified, and sin had been put away, 


1 Here the type fails us. Moses went up to the Mount as mediator 
of the covenant, and would then have been called to the priesthood, 
had not the offices become separated, owing to his want of faith (Exod. 
iv. 14). Aaron, therefore, was made priest ; but it was then, and not 
not before, that he received the call. His formal consecration was still 
later. See Lev. viii. ix., whichis connected with Exod. xxiv., and gives 
us the fulfilment of that which took place on the Mount. And mark 
that it was Moses who officiated in regard of these offerings (comp. Exod. 
xxix.); and further, that he was associated with Aaron in the act 
which typified Christ’s coming forth hereafter as Royal Priest to bless 
His people (Lev. ix. 23). 

It is most important to see that the Lord’s priesthood dates from 
His enthronement in heaven. See Heb. ii. 17 (where the word is “that 
He might become”); v. 5-10, vi. 20, vii. 23, 24, viii. 1-4. He could 
not be a priest while on earth (Heb. viii. 4). 

2 Heb. iv. 15. Our English Version is ambiguous here, and the 
words have been very generally perverted to mean that the Lord’s 
temptations were exactly similar to ours, the result alone being different. 
Were this so, He must have known the power of sin within—the source 
of so many of our trials. But the words are ywpls duaprias, apart from 
sin. “So that throughout these temptations, in their origin, in their 
process, in their result,—sin had nothing in Him: He was free and 
separate from it.” —Alford. 


SANCTIFICATION. 115 


there would have been no need for the priesthood of 
the law. A priest there must have been truly, for 
there can be no worship without a priest and a sanctu- 
ary; but not a priest of the Aaronic type. Faith grasped 
the truth the sacrifice prefigured; but nevertheless sin 
was not, in fact, atoned for, and therefore, on account of 
the inefficacy of the blood with which they had to do, 
there was a remembrance again of sins continually, and 
every transgression demanded a new sacrifice to main- 
tain them in holiness befitting the covenant. 

But now, by the death of Christ, atonement has been 
made, sin has been for ever purged, and not only is the 
worshipper sanctified, but the sanctified ones are per- 
fected for ever. There is therefore no longer room for 
sacrifice, no need henceforth for blood-shedding. The 
Aaronic priesthood is at an end; the priesthood of the 
Son of God is of a different order altogether.—the order 
of Melchisedec. But the priesthood is connected with 
the covenant ; and if the one be changed, the other fol- 
lows as of course. And it is with the new covenant 
the believer has to do, a covenant in keeping with the 
priesthood of Melchisedec, a covenant based on the great 
fact that sins and iniquities are for ever expiated, and 
on the promise that God will remember them no more. 
To the covenant, again, there pertains a sanctuary. 
The sanctuary of the old covenant bore witness by its 
very structure that there was a place of access still 
closed against the worshipper, “a greater and more per- 
fect tabernacle” yet to be revealed. The new covenant 
and the priesthood of Christ have to do with this the 
true tabernacle in heaven itself. 

Ours, therefore, is an eternal redemption, and an 

1 Heb, vii. 12, 


116 SANCTIFICATION. 


everlasting covenant; we have the Son of God Himself 
as the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, the 
holiest in the heavens as our sanctuary, and the blood 
of Christ to perfect us, and make us fit for such a 
shrine. If, then, the question should still be pressed, 
What have we further that is akin to the great yearly 
sin-offering of the law, and the offerings for trespasses 
and sins of ignorance? I answer, the need of these 
repeated sacrifices arose entirely from the inefficacy of 
the blood of the covenant to which they pertained; but 
the blood of the new covenant has brought us remission 
fully and absolutely, and, “ where remission of these is, 
there is no more offering for sin.” We have seen how, 
when once justified by blood, we stand in perfect right- 
eousness ; so now we see how, once sanctified by blood, 
we stand in holiness as absolute and perfect. 

But though sin can no longer master the sacrifice 
which purges it, and is as powerless to exclude us from 
the sanctuary as to drag us into judgment, still we are 
in daily contact with what defiles ; is there then no need 
for cleansing? There is truly, and full provision for it, 
too, through the same death which justifies. Every 
ordinance of the old covenant that was required by 
reason of the “ weakness and unprofitableness” of the - 
sacrifices, we are for ever done with; but there was 
a special rite to meet the need that was inseparable 
from the circumstances of the people, and this has its 
abiding antitype for us. A Jew of blameless life might 
possibly have had no cause to resort to the offerings 
for sins and trespasses; yet he could not on that ground 
absent himself upon the great day of atonement, for that 
depended on the inherent inefficiency of the sacrifice. 
But even if sin had been fully purged, and the worship- 


SANCTIFICATION. 117 


per absolutely sinless, he would have been none the less 
liable at any moment to become defiled; for not only 
persons, but even things inanimate, became unclean by 
contact with death in any form. And this defilement 
was met by water, not by blood. But it was by water 
which owed its efficacy to a sacrifice accomplished. I 
allude, of course, to the offering of the red heifer, en- 
joined in the 19th chapter of Numbers. The victim was 
led forth without the camp, where it was slain and burnt 
to ashes, part of the blood being first brought in and 
sprinkled before the tabernacle of the congregation. The 
ashes were then laid up outside the camp, and water that 
had touched these ashes availed to purify. The Israelite 
who had become unclean was sprinkled with this “ water 
of separation,” and then, having washed his clothes, and 
bathed his person, he was cleansed from the defilement. 

It is impossible that the blood of Christ can do less 
than make perfect the sinner whom it sanctifies; 
but, though thus purged beyond the power of sin 
to stain, there can be no fellowship with a holy 
God, no access to His presence, if that be allowed 
which is opposed to Him. The touch of evil cannot 
but defile; and if we insist that there is no need to 
come back again to blood, it is not that we make light 
of sin, but that we pay due homage to the sacrifice that 
has once and for ever purged it. The blood has achieved 
its work; our future cleansing results from “the water 
of the Word,” as applied by the Holy Ghost.t The 
sprinkling of the water which had flowed over the ashes 
of the sacrifice, typified our bringing the Spirit’s testi- 
mony about the death of Christ to bear upon ourselves 
in regard to that which has defiled us. The washing 

1 See Appendix, Note VI., and especially p. 163. 


118 SANCTIFICATION, 


é 


which followed upon that sprinkling is the clearing 
ourselves practically from the evil. It is not enough to 
judge the evil, and yet continue in it; it is not enough 
to turn from it, however zealously, without having to 
do with God respecting it. But to turn therefrom, 
even as we judge it in the presence of the Cross by that 
Word which is sharper than a two-edged sword, isto bring 
us face to face with a Priest whose work secures to us 
divine compassion, and the grace our weakness needs.? 

And here it is, indeed, that true priestly work begins. 
I have already noticed that Israel was not only redeemed, 
but brought into covenant with God, and sanctified, 
apart from priesthood; and here in the 19th Chapter of 
Numbers, we have again a sacrifice and a rite which 
were in no way priestly. And this is the more remark- 
able because these, the three great sacrifices that were not 
sacerdotal, were precisely those which were offered once 
for all, and could never be repeated.? 

The death of Christ was not a priestly sacrifice. It 
was the foundation of the covenant, and as I have 
already said, it is to covenant that priesthood pertains. 
It was “after He had made purification for sins and sat 
down at the right hand of the Majesty on high” that 
the Son of God was proclaimed a Priest. Purification 
by blood, as we have seen, was not priestly work, but the 
prerogative of the Mediator of the covenant. The puri- 
fication by water was the work of neither priest nor 
mediator; and in keeping with the truth that any hand 


11 John teaches a kindred truth. Confession and advocacy are the 
correlatives of washing and priesthood. The one has to do with the 
Father's house, the other with “the house of God,” ie., the sanctuary, 
Christ is “a Son over His own house ;” He is “a Priest over the house 
of God.” We are the household of the Son; we have access to the 
house of God (Heb. iii. 6, and x. 21). 

2 See Appendix, Note VIL, and especially the last paragraph. 


SANCTIFICATION. 119 


could sprinkle the water of separation, there is the ex- 
hortation of St. Paul, “ Let us cleanse ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and spirit.” 1 

But the words which follow those I have this 
moment cited, in the 2d Epistle to the Corinthians, re- 
mind me that what I have said of righteousness is no less 
true of holiness: the word has various meanings. When 
I predicate of some one that he is holy, I may be giving 
expression, if I am speaking in scriptural language, to 
any one of three ideas, which, though allied, are by no 
means inseparable. I may mean simply that he is one 
of those who have been sanctified by the blood of Christ, 
or in other words that he is a Christian. All such 
are holy ina sense both true and deep, and that irres- 
pective of their conduct.? 


1 I have said that Hebrews teaches us partly by contrast and partly 
by comparison ; and in exemplification of that remark I may here give 
another key to that Epistle, and a clew by which to follow aright the 
teaching of the types. Everything pertaining to the old covenant, 
which existed in virtue of some unchanging principle, or of the con- 
dition and circumstances of the people, finds its exact correlative in the 
new covenant. But on the other hand, with respect to all in the old 
covenant, that depended on the powerlessness of the ordinance, the in- 
efficacy of the sacrifice, we learn from the absence of any antitype the 
perfectness of the new. They had a sanctuary, and so have we. But 
the veil that divided theirs is rent for us, and the holiest is open. 
Christ is the fulfilment of the great sacrifices I have enumerated ; but 
if we turn to seek the antitype of their continually repeated sin-offer- 
ings, we are reminded by their absence of the virtue of the blood shed 
on Calvary. They had a Priest, as we have. But Aaron’s special work 
arose from the special need which now has been for ever satisfied. The 
priesthood of the Son therefore is of another order. To make inter- 
cession and reconciliation for sins, and to offer gifts and sacrifices, 
here are the functions which belong essentially to priesthood: it was 
the peculiarity of the Aaronic priesthood that the sacrifices they offered 
were for sins. Our great High Priest has no need to sacrifice for sins. 
He did this once for all ere ever his priesthood was proclaimed, But, 
like Melchisedec of old, He receives and offers up to God the gifts of the 
believer’s service and the sacrifice of his praise and worship, feeding 
him in return with the bread and wine of heaven, and crowning all with 
the blessing of His God.—Gen. xiv. 18-20. 

2 “Holy ones” or “saints,” for the words are identical in the Greek, 


120 SANCTIFICATION, 


But I have shown that a holy person may become 
defiled, even as were the Corinthian saints at the very 
time the apostle wrote to them. They had been made 
holy in Christ Jesus, and were holy by their calling, 
and this was absolute and inviolable; but yet they were 
unclean through dreadful sin unjudged among them. 
I may speak of holiness therefore as describing a life, 
or practical condition, in keeping with the Christians 
calling. He is holy and separated to God by virtue of 
his calling: his daily life ought to be in accordance 
therewith. Christians are holy persons; they ought 
therefore to live “as becometh holy persons ;”* they 
ought to be holy in this practical and secondary sense. 

But it will be observed that in both these senses, 
holiness describes a relation rather than a quality ; it 
represents a condition, not an attribute. And this 
brings us to a third meaning of the word, a meaning 
which it bears in the verse I have quoted from the 
2d Epistle to the Corinthians: “Let us cleanse our- 
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfect- 
ing holiness in the fear of the Lord.” “Perfecting holi- 
ness,” observe; proving that the holiness he speaks of 
is incomplete and capable of degrees. Therefore he is 
not speaking here of attaining holiness by the blood, 
nor yet of maintaining ourselves in the position into 
which it brings us, but of cultivating in a practical way 
the character or attribute akin to such a state? 
oi yio, is in Scripture the ordinary title of the saved. The name of 
“Christian” was probably coined by the people of Antioch who were 
noted for that propensity. (See Alford on Acts xi. 26.) It occurs only 
in Acts xxvi. 28, and 1 Pet. iv. 16—in itself a proof that it was not 
God who so “called” them, The word “ called” is the same as in Rom. 
oi Eph. v. 3. 

* It is a different form of word that is here used. (See App., Note V.) 


SANCTIFICATION. 121 


Now, in either of the senses in which hitherto I 
have used the word, to speak of incomplete holiness 
or sanctification, is a mere contradiction in terms. An 
unconverted person is absolutely unholy, and a Chris- 
tian is absolutely holy. That, in virtue of the blood, 
the Christian is perfectly and for ever holy, is the most 
prominent truth of the Epistle to the Hebrews. “Christ 
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.” And 
again, in its secondary sense, holiness admits of no 
degrees. Here it is not advancing that we speak of, but 
continuing in holiness.1 The Israelite who touched 
defilement became not less holy, but unholy ; and, until 
his purification was accomplished, he was absolutely 
unclean ; but, when the rite was fulfilled, he became im- 
mediately and absolutely clean. If we forget this, we 
shall be betrayed into light and sinful thoughts of God. 
Lovingly to touch a dead wife’s hand, excluded the 
Jew as absolutely from the tabernacle, as would her 
blood if in guilty anger he had shed it.2 It was a severe 
and stern enactment, and must seem more than strange 
to those who fail to see its spiritual significance. There 
is no question of degrees in the holiness of a thrice holy 
God. Itisnot that great sins shut the sinner out, while 
allowance can be made for trifling faults. Perfection is 
the only standard that can avail with Him; and full 

le Pi, a Los 

2 An Israelite became defiled either by sin, or by touching what was 
unclean. Blood was needed to purge him in the one case, but the 
water availed in the other. But the necessity for blood arose from the 
inefficacy of the sacrifice. If the worshipper had been really purged, 
he would never have needed to come back to blood at all (see Heb. x. 
2); and in that case the “water of separation” would have supplanted 
the sin and trespass offerings in cases within the 4th, 5th, and 6th 
chaps. of Leviticus. This is precisely our case. It is not that sin has 


become less heinous than it was under the law (see ch. x. post), but that 
the blood of Christ has in fact accomplished purification. 


122 SANCTIFICATION. 


provision has been made, not only to make us, but to 
keep us, perfect. 

But yet, in saying this, I stand at an immeasurable 
distance from all the low thoughts of God, and light 
views of sin, that alone can lend an air of decent plausi- 
bility to such a delusion as that any cultivation of piety, 
or attainment in sanctity, can ever give us right to seek 
His presence, or fitness to be there. It is only and alto- 
gether in virtue of the blood of Christ, and the water of 
the Word by the Holy Ghost who ministers it, that the 
saintliest saint on earth can hold fellowship with God. 
A higher title is impossible, and no lower will avail. 

But this holiness is merely the correlative of forensic* 
righteousness. “Merely,” I say, not to make little of it, 
for the one is as real and as essential as the other, but 
because something more is needed for the home of 
God. No one shall be there who is not intrinsically 
holy? And here I would beg the reader to turn back 
to the preceding chapter, and read the latter part again, 
substituting holiness for righteousness throughout. Our 
moral fitness for heaven, in this respect as in the other, 
is entirely independent of attainments achieved on 
earth. As regards rewards for faithfulness and service 
here, no two of the redeemed, it may be, will stand 
upon a level; but the perfectness of the new creation 
will be shared alike by all. The standard is not what 
the Christian becomes by the work of the Spirit, here, 
but what Christ now is as seated at the right hand of 
God. I cite the words again, The new man “is 

1 I know of no corresponding word in this connection. Ceremonial 


holiness would give the direction of the thought, but entirely fail of 
conveying its force. 


2 I use the popular expression without stopping to consider its 
accuracy, for it means a right thing. 


SANCTIFICATION, 123 


created in righteousness and holiness of truth.” ! No 
change of scene can add virtue to the blood of Christ, 
therefore heaven itself can add nothing to the holi- 
ness in which we stand by reason of that blood. No 
holy living upon earth can add to the intrinsic per- 
fectness of Christ Himself; therefore it can add nothing 
to the holiness which shall be ours when made like 
unto Him who is the head of the new creation. 

T have thus endeavoured to unfold, and establish on 
the authority of Scripture, the truth of the believer's 
absolute and perfect sanctification in Christ. I have 
also spoken of what I may venture to term continuous 
sanctification, the constant conformity to that standard 
in his life on earth. Thirdly, I have alluded, though 
still more briefly, as being still further beyond the scope 
of my subject, to progressive sanctification, the cultiva- 
tion of holiness as a moral quality. And lastly, I have 
shown that the sinner’s meetness for heaven in this re- 
spect, as in regard of righteousness, depends not on 
attainment here, but on his perfectness as a part of the 
new creation in Christ. 

And now, it is once more with some feeling of re- 
luctance I lay down my pen. I cannot but fear 
lest the great truth I have sought to unfold should 
suffer in the estimation of some, through being 
divorced from practical exhortations to a holy life. 
But I take comfort from the hope that thoughtful 
minds will in no way share the prejudice. Valuable 
though exhortation be, truth has a power independent 


1 Eph. iv. 24. The words imply that these are qualities inherent in 
the new man in virtue of his very creation. It is not åyiaopós, there- 
fore, which is here used, but ósiórys. (See App., Note V.} 


124 SANCTIFICATION. 


of the appeals we base upon it ; and, therefore, no teach- 
ing that is truly doctrinal, can fail to be likewise prac- 
tical. In dealing with this subject I have already gone 
somewhat beyond the due limits of my theme, which 
is the gospel, and not the Christian life; but I have 
strugeled.in vain to keep within them. The unusual 
interest which the doctrine of holiness now excites, 
combined with the fact that the great truth of sancti- 
fication by blood is absolutely unknown to our creeds, 
and little noticed in our religious literature, has not only 
made my task important, but vastly increased my diffi- 
culties in the effort to fulfilit. I now dismiss it with 
a parting word. Even by those who own it, this truth 
is sometimes spoken of as though it were a fiction or a 
theory. But with the Israelite his sanctification was 
one of the most true and solemn facts of his existence. 
Upon it depended, not alone his citizenship in the com- 
monwealth, but his life itself. And shall it be deemed 
less real in this dispensation, when shadows have given 
way to substance, types to their fulfilment? Ifthe sancti- 
fication of the Jew was a great and practical reality, how 
much more the sanctification of the believer now. “If 
the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an heifer, 
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the 
flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ purge your 
conscience from dead works to serve the living God!” 
And again, the practical maintenance of holiness is 
the true effort of a heart that grace has mastered. But 
yet, as with the prisoner who struggles to his window, 
and wipes out every stain, making it shine again, witha 
zeal no sense of duty could arouse, his thought is only 
of the sunlight he is yearning for, so is it with the soul 


SANCTIFICATION. 125 


that is alive to God. All true life leads to Him, and 
holiness is eagerly pursued, only to be forgotten in the 
enjoyment of its end and aim. Hence the exhortation 
of the Word “ Follow holiness, without which no man 
shall see the Lord.” 


CHAPTER X. 
RECONCILIATION. 


“ HAPPY art thou O Israel! who is like unto thee, O 
people saved by Jehovah.” Such were the last words 
of the blessing wherewith Moses blessed the people ere 
he died. “Who is like unto thee, O people saved by 
Jehovah !” 1 

But if God is the Saviour of His people, He has a 
purpose towards them in salvation. “I bare you on 
eagles’ wings and brought you to myself’? was His word 
to Israel, and such is the great end and aim of the work 
of Christ to usward. God would have His people near 
Him. The death of Christ was “to bring us unto God.” 
By that blood we are “made nigh.” Here then is the 
climax of the gospel, and to stop short of this is to lose 
the highest blessing, in separating the Giver from His 
gifts. 

I have already treated of the doctrine of the opening 
chapters of the Epistle to the Romans. The great 
truth of righteousness by faith is there established, 
every objection answered, every difficulty met; and 
when we reach the fifth chapter, it no longer needs 
even to be asserted. That we are justified by faith may 
now be assumed as a truth beyond question, and a 


1 Deut, xxxiii. 29. 2 Exod, xix. 4. 


RECONCILIATION. 127 


fact beyond doubt, and so the apostle passes on to 
higher teaching still. And here the first word is PEACE. 
“ Being justified by faith, let us have peace with God.”1 
Our justification is not itself our peace, nor yet the 
source of peace. It only clears the way which leads to 
it. Righteousness once barred the door against us, it 
now flings that door wide open. Then let us enter in. 
As we stood without, it was “God the Justifier” we 
believed in; now we stand face to face with “ God the 
Reconciler.” We are justified through redemption in 
Christ, but our peace is not in redemption, but in Him- 
self. It is not merely what He did for us, overwhelm- 
ing though the record of it be, but what He is for us, 
and what He is to God. We have peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

And here, as we stand beneath a cloudless heaven, for 
Christ our peace is there, we come to discern in its ful- 
ness that He Himself was the way by which we entered. 
By Him it is that “we have access by faith into this grace 
wherein we stand.”” This grace; not righteousness, that 
he has treated of, and he has now passed beyond it, but 
reconciliation, peace. Being justified, we have access 
through Christ into this sphere where the sunlight of 
God’s presence is unhindered, then let us not remain 
without, where all is dark and cold. We have access, 
let us be eager to avail ourselves of it. It is not an in- 
ference from what goes before, but an exhortation based 

1 Rom. v. 1. Alford here remarks :—“ It is impossible to resist the 
strong MS, authority for the reading éxwpev in this verse,” though he 
struggles hard against it, and pleads that “every internal considera- 
tion tends to impugn it. If admitted, the sentence is hortatory.” I 
have no doubt whatever the sentence is hortatory, and I gladly accept 
the corrected reading, as in my judgment, so thoroughly in harmony 


with the doctrine and purpose of the passage. 
2 Rom. v. 2. 


128 RECONCILIATION. 


upon it. And it is an exhortation, moreover, than which 
none is more needed with those who have the faith of the 
Reformation. For us the great doctrine of righteous- 
ness has been rescued in a long and deadly struggle. 
It has come down to us through a bitter and bloody 
controversy, and it is but natural that we should attach 
to it exceptional importance. But let us take heed 
lest we exalt truth at the expense of Him through 
whom our every blessing comes. To make one blessing 
a mere corollary of another, and treat peace as a result 
of righteousness, is little better than pointing to a dead 
Christ upon a cross, and thence reasoning out salvation 
as a necessary consequence. 

Reconciliation is a step beyond redemption even in 
its fulness as including both righteousness and holiness. 
Reconciliation is, as I have said, the fulfilment of the 
purpose of redemption. It is a most superficial thought, 
from which a right sense of what God is, or even of 
what we are, would save us, that forensic or even moral 
fitness for the presence of God gives any title to ap- 
proach Him. The cross of Christ has obtained redemp- 
tion for us, but more than this, it has made peace. We 
are not only justified and sanctified, but, as a fuller and 
further blessing, “we are made nigh by the blood of 
Christ, for He is our peace.” Not that we would tole- 
rate the thought, more false and evil still, that God re- 
quired a victim in whose blood His wrath might quench 
itself. The cross was the work of Christ, but it was a 
work for God. God is Himself the Peace-maker. It 
is not that Christ has reconciled us to God, but that 
God has reconciled us to Himself. And God has done 
this, and we have now access to it, and stand init. I 

1 Eph, ii, 13. 


RECONCILIATION. 129 


insist on this, because there is scarcely any truth so 
little known. It is not only that we are pardoned, and 
justified, and sanctified, and have life in the Son of 
God, and in Him are become children of God. All this 
was true of saints before the cross, and it is not in virtue 
of all or any of these blessings that we can come near 
to God, for if it were, there would have been access, 
then, as now. But not even the elders of Israel could 
come nigh to Him; not even Aaron, until as High 
Priest he gained a typical position, in virtue of which 
he too could approach as Moses did. 

I do not speak here of the experience of the heart 
that learned of God, for there can be no experience 
higher than the Psalms. But what was then the attain- 
ment of the few, is now the privilege of all; what was 
then a secret known only to them that feared the Lord,” 
is now a public revelation to the Church.? It was, then, a 
promise faith could grasp; it is now no longer a promise, 
but a fact. And it is a fact for every saint who has 
ever lived on earth; but it was postponed for them of 
old, that they apart from us might not be made per- 
fect. It is in the Beloved that the believer is accepted, 
and in Him God is well pleased. The believer may 
fail to enter into this, but it is none the less a fact. 
God has reconciled us to Himself, let us then know the 
peace of it. 

But not only has the ministry of reconciliation an 
aspect towards the believer, and here it is too much 
neglected, but it is also the very essence of the gospel. 


1 Exod. xxiv. 1, 2. 2 Pa, xxv. 14: 

3 e.g. compare Ps. xxxiv. 2, with Rom. v.11. ‘‘ We joy (or boast) in 
God.” 

4 Heb, xi, 40. 


130 RECONCILIATION, 


Mark the words, “ we were reconciled by the death of 
His Son.” Righteousness is not spoken of thus. Justi- 
‘fication is an act of God’s grace towards the sinner who 
believes. Reconciliation is a work accomplished on the 
cross of Christ. It is a work done on Calvary for God 
and to God, apart from its consequences to the sinner 
altogether, and the believer has access thereto by faith 
through Christ as now risen from the dead. “We 
were reconciled through His death;” but here is a further 
and higher blessing, “ Through Him we have now re- 
ceived the reconciliation.” Righteousness is now the 
rock beneath our feet. The cloudless sky above is 
peace. Glory no longer threatens wrath, but fills the 
sinner’s breast with hope. And thus the purpose of 
creation is accomplished through redemption, God can 
rejoice in the creature of His hand, and the creature can 
rejoice in his God. 

And let us not fritter away the truth by supposing 
this reconciliation to mean a change in the sinner’s 
heart to God. That is not reconciliation, but the 
present work of the Holy Spirit. The change is in the 
attitude of God to men. Sin not only turned the 
creature’s face from heaven, but made the sinner the 
enemy of God. That there is enmity to God in the 
sinner’s breast is but too true, but it is not the truth here 
spoken of. It is impossible that God can be indifferent to 
His creature; He must be either for him or against him ; 
He must regard him either with a smile or with a frown ; 
and sin draws down a frown, and not a smile. Apart from 

1 Not “the atonement.” The word is xara\\ayy. It occurs again 
only in Rom. xi. 15, and 2 Cor. v. 18, 19. The kindred verb is used 
only here (Rom. v. 10), and in the 5th of 2 Cor. ; and droxata\\d7rw in 


Eph. ii. 16, and Col. i. 20, 21, The word in Heb. ii. 17, is different, 
(See Appendix, Note VIL) 


RECONCILIATION. 131 


the work of Christ, He cannot but be against the sinner ; 
He reckons him an enemy. But “when we were enemies 
we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son.” 1 
“God was reconciling the world to Himself in Christ.” 2 
It is not a present work, but a work past and finished. 
By that death we who -were enemies were reconciled. 
The appeal of the Gospel is now that men would receive 
the reconciliation. “Be reconciled to God,” 3 is not an 
entreaty to the sinner to forgive his God, but an appeal to 
him to come within the reconciliation God has wrought. 

And this is the free gift of the 5th of Romans.‘ It is 
not righteousness, it is not life; though it is unto 
righteousness, and brings life to the sinner who receives 
it. It has effects as widespread as the sin of Adam. 
“As by one act of sin judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation, so by one act of righteousness the benefit 
came upon all men to justification of life.” > Not that all 
men are in fact made righteous—that is for the many, 
not for all°—but that such was the direction and ten- 
dency of the grace. It is no question here of results 
to one sinner or another, but of what the Cross is to 
God, even though never a child of Adam should be 
blessed because of it. The sin of Adam turned the 
throne of God into a throne of judgment. The cross of 
Christ has changed that throne into a throne of grace. 
The throne of God cannot possibly be other than a 


throne of righteousness, but grace now reigns through 


1 Rom. v.10. This means either that when we were, in an active 
sense, enemies, we received God into our favour ; or that when we were 
enemies in a passive sense, He received us into His favour. Can any 
one doubt which is intended ? And see specially Rom. xi. 15, 28. 

2 2 Cor. v. 19. 3 2 Cor. v. 20. 

4 Rom. v. 15, 16,18. There are three words here used: yapioua, 
Swpea, and dwpnua. The first, translated “free gift,” signifies a benefit, 
or act of grace, or favour conferred. 

5 Rom, v. 18. ® Rom, v. 19. 


T32 RECONCILIATION. 


righteousness. It is not that there is mercy for 
those who seek it, but that God’s attitude to this 
world of ours is grace. Apart from the cross of Christ, 
righteousness could only deal forth death, and therefore 
sin was in fact supreme. Sin reigned: it made the very 
throne of God an agency for enforcing payment of its 
wages. But now, sin is mastered, and “grace reigns 
through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ 
our Lord.” 1 

To speak thus of the work of Christ as done to God- 
ward, and as having an importance infinitely beyond its 
results upon ourselves, may perhaps seem strange to 
many; and yet a due appreciation of what sin is would 
prepare the mind for such a truth. We are apt to 
think of sin only in connection with its consequences, 
just as those who live in crime come to estimate it solely 
by its penalties. But if the effects of sin be indeed 
both sad and terrible, these ought rather to turn our 
thoughts to the enormity of sin itself. If the stream 
be deadly to its most distant limits, how dire must be 
the source from which it springs! We do well to think 
upon. the results of sin, but let us not lose sight of what 
it is which leads to these results. It makes the sinner 
guilty and unholy, and calls down judgment and wrath 
from God. But there is more in sin than this. In its 
essential character it is neither guilt, nor yet defile- 
ment, though both these qualities pertain to it, but 
lawlessness. “Sin is lawlessness,’? the assertion of ` 
the creature’s independence, the repudiation therefore 
of the Creator’s supremacy, the denial of the Godhood 
of his Maker. Sin has “brought death into the world 


1 Rom. v. 21. 
2 ù duapria éorly ù dvouta, 1 John iii, 4, 


RECONCILIATION. 133 


and all our woes ;” but more and infinitely worse than 
this, it has compromised the sceptre and throne of God. 

I might pause here to mark how every attribute of 
God has thus been called in question; not righteous- 
ness and holiness alone, but wisdom, and power, and 
love. Nor, for proof, should I need to pollute the page 
by citing what infidelity has urged of the origin of evil. 
I might appeal to thoughts as wicked, which, like 
unclean birds of night, flit about dark corners of the 
Christian’s heart, and nought but the sunlight of the 
Gospel can drive forth. It is not that sin should 
go unpunished, nor yet that hell can be a doom too 
terrible for sinners guilty of the blood of Christ. But - 
if sin must lead to consequences so terrible, why was the 
Tempter’s whisper not restrained? why was not the 
mother of our race protected from his wiles? Nay, to 
go still further back, why did Lucifer himself turn 
Devil? why did a good and wise and mighty God allow 
His noblest creature thus to fall? Such thoughts as 
these afford no proof of mental vigour or exceptional 
sagacity. They are one of the sad fruits of sin itself, 
and shared by every child of Adam. The Christian 
looks off to Calvary, and awaits with patient confidence 
the day when all shall be made plain. But itis no mere 
flight of fancy, but sober truth which every thought- 
ful person will endorse, that, save for Calvary, the 
mystery must have remained unsolved for ever. Judg- 
ment fires might have avenged the majesty of Heaven, 
but the fact of a lost creation would have survived, an 
eternal proof that God had been thwarted in His work. 
Before Heaven all sin is treason, and though rebellion 
be stamped out by force irresistible, it must leave a stain 
behind. That sin should be punished and put down is 


134 RECONCILIATION; 


a mere matter of course with Almighty power; but if 
God were indeed a God to His creatures, would He not 
have prevented sin altogether? We see then that sin 
has effects reaching far beyond the ruin of the sinner, and 
gives rise to questions which the judgment of the sinner 
cannot settle. The Godhood of God is compromised.t 

And as far as ever sin has reached, Christ has 
followed it and triumphed over it. It is but natural 
that our mean and selfish hearts should slight the work 
of Christ, save in so far as it brings blessing to our- 
selves; but its highest character and its greatest glory 
depend, not on what it accomplishes for men, but on 
what it is to God. It is no mere remedy for the ruin 
of our race; it is God’s answer to every question sin 
has given rise to. Blessed be His name! it has -brought 
salvation to lost and guilty men; but it has a purpose 
and a scope as wide as creation itself. 

This gospel of the reconciliation “was preached in 
the whole creation under heaven.”? Mankind alone 
can intelligently hear it, and of mankind they alone 
who hearken shall be blessed thereby. But in its range 
and compass the benefit has got no limits, and the day 
is coming when all this sin-cursed world shall share it. 
“The whole creation groans,” but it shall one day be 
delivered from this bondage into the glorious liberty of 
the sons of God. Then shall all things indeed look up 
and put their trust in Him, and be satisfied from the 
fulness of His goodness. There shall be nothing more 
to hurt or to destroy. - God will again become indeed a 
God to every creature He has made.® 


1 See Appendix, Note VIII. 


2 Col. i. 23. év wdoy krise, not “ to every creature ;” and compare 
Rom. viii. 19, 22. 2 Ran exiv. Lost: 


RECONCILIATION. 135 


But if the reconciliation be for all, how is judgment 
possible? I answer, judgment is based upon this very 
truth. Sin is now no longer against law merely, it is an 
outrage upon grace. Light came into the world, but 
men quenched it. God has now set it on high, beyond 
the reach of wicked hands, and though men may hate 
it or despise it it shines none the less. The difficulty 
springs from that false view of the gospel I have 
already noticed,! which connects the sinner’s blessings 
with the eross of Christ in such a sense as to exclude 
the present action of the grace of God. That death has 
made it a righteous thing to justify ungodly sinners, 
and but for that death it were impossible; and yet 
when the blessing reaches us, it comes as direct from 
the hand and heart of God, and depends as absolutely 
on sovereign grace, and on what Christ is to God as now 
risen from the dead, as though the cross had no part in 
it at all. 

The great end and aim of the work of Christ from 
first to last, is to restore to God the place from which 
sin has struggled to dethrone Him. Its glory is that it 
has enabled Him to be gracious to whom He will, and 
to show mercy upon whom He will. It has set grace 
free, but it has not brought righteousness into bondage. 
It was first of all a work done to Godward, and for God; 
and here is at once the secret of the Christian’s confi- 
dence and of his highest joy, while it is the power of 
the gospel to bring peace to the sinner in his sins. It 
is because of what Gop has found in Christ and in His 
cross, that the lost sinner may be saved, and the saved 
sinner may rejoice in hope of glory, and exult in God 
Himself, 


1 See chap. vii. ante. 


136 RECONCILIATION. 


Adam walked in Eden beneath an open heaven, but 
sin called up black clouds that covered from horizon to 
horizon, leaving the world in darkness. Promises and 
covenants, and blessing upon blessing, pierced the 
gloom; and, like the Hebrew huts in Egypt, faith- 
ful hearts were filled with light from heaven while 
darkness reigned around And the clouds that shut 
out heaven were merciful. If the sunlight cannot bless 
and gladden, it must only scorch and wither. Judg- 
ment will be in flaming fire, with unshrouded glory, 
but judgment was not yet; and God, who could not 
smile upon a world of sin, in mercy hid His face. Nor 
was judgment His purpose toward the sinner. Wrath 
is but a last resource with power, and judgment must 
wait on grace. Before God will declare Himself to be 
the Judge, He must reveal Himself as RECONCILER. 

Judgment is still to come; but reconciliation is ac- 
complished. Now, God need hide His face no longer. 
An opened heaven will disclose a throne of grace, where 
the guiltiest sinner may draw nigh. The work of Christ 
has banished every cloud, and swept our sky as clear as 
when Adam walked in innocence with God. The light 
of this glorious gospel now shines unhindered upon 
earth. Blind eyes may shut it out, but they cannot 
quench or lessen it. Impenitent hearts may heap up 
wrath against the day of wrath, but they cannot darken 
this day of mercy or mar the glory of the reign of grace. 

But though we have reached the summit of this vast 
and glorious truth in its bearings upon Adam and his 
world, the Scripture points us higher still. And yet 
we may not follow. The height is too stupendous; and 
if we gaze with reverence and awe, it is that thereby 

1 Ex, x. 21-23. 


RECONCILIATION. 137 


we may shake free from the littlenesses of our poor and 
niggard hearts, and gain truer thoughts of our glorious 
Lord. The words}I have quoted from the Epistle to 
the Colossians are the sequel to a passage which is, 
perhaps, the most sublime in Holy Writ. The Gnostic 
philosophy, which made such havoc in the early Church, 
was gaining ground among the Christians of Colosse. 
Oriental theories of the creation of the world, the origin 
of evil, and the intrinsic corruptness of everything cor- 
poreal, were undermining the faith of Christ. The Son 
was thus degraded to the position of a creature, while 
yet the reality of “the body of His flesh” was set aside. 
Inferior beings were made the agents in our creation, 
thus gaining a title to our homage, and the Godhood of 
God was practically denied. But He who can “bring 
meat out of the eater, and honey out of the strong,” has 
made these evils and errors the occasion of the fullest 
and most glorious revelation to the Church, of Him 
before whom we bow as Lord.! Christ is, indeed, the 
First-born of all creation, yet not because He has His 
place within it. If He holds this title of dignity and 
precedence relatively to the universe, it is because it 
exists as His creature. The whole universe,—things in 
the heavens and things in the earth, things visible and in- 
visible, whether thrones, or dominions, or principalities, 
or powers,—all things have been created by Him, and 
for Him. He was the One who called them into being, 
and He is the end and aim of their existence. And He 


1 Col. i. 15-20, v. 15, all creation, ‘not every creature; v. 16, êv 
atré, not merely that He was the agent in creation—that is expressed 
afterwards in ô? av’rod, but that the universe is His creature. rà 
mávra, “the universe.” “Thus only can we give the force of the Greek 
singular with the collective neuter plural” (Alford). Compare Eph. 
i. 21, and 1 Cor. xv. 24, 27. Verse 17, év atrg, asin v. 16: v.19, com- 
pare chap. ii. 9; v. 20, “the universe,” as in v. 16. 


138 RECONCILIATION. 


Himself exists before all things, and it is in virtue of 
His power that the universe subsists. And He is the 
Head of the body, the Church, in that He is the be- 
ginning, the First-born from among the dead, that He 
may become in all things pre-eminent. And God was 
pleased that the whole fulness should dwell in Him. 
And He was pleased by Him to reconcile again the 
universe to Himself, having made peace by the blood 
of His cross; by Him, whether the things on the earth 
or the things in the heavens, the creation of God in 
every part and to its utmost limits. 

In the presence of words so plain and simple, faith will 
not dare to question or to doubt; and in view of truth 
so immeasurably vast and deep, no worshipping heart 
will venture upon argument or inference. “Secret 
things belong to the Lord our God,” and it is not given 


1 A valued and revered friend, to whose judgment these latter 
chapters have been submitted, suggests to me that the twenty-first 
chapter of the Revelation gives the complete fulfilment of the recon- 
ciliation spoken of in the first chapter of Colossians. The thought is 
full of interest. It is certain that millennial blessedness and glory will 
be a direct result and proof of the preciousness of the cross of Christ 
to God ; but it is no less certain that an eternity of glory and blessed- 
ness, still to follow, will depend upon that cross as really and immedi- 
ately. In our view, creation limits itself to our own race and sphere, 
but with God the universe is one great whole, of which the Adamic 
world is but a part. And as sin has disturbed the harmony of creation 
in this its widest sense, God’s answer and remedy are the cross of 
Christ and a new creation, It is not merely the kingdoms of this 
world that are given up to Christ, but the throne of the universe of 
God. And when “the end” shall come, and God shall assume again 
the sceptre, He will hold it in virtue of the blood of Calvary. If one 
could dare to speak thus of God, we might say that His moral right to 
make all things new depends on that blood. And the word is “I 
make ALL THINGS new.” The promise is not of a new earth only, but 
of new heavens too. And why “new heavens,” if sin and the cross 
concern only earth? “Tt is finished ” was the cry that rose amid the 
agonies of Calvary: * Behold I make all things new” is the response 
from the glory. The “It is finished” of the cross, shall still vibrate 
until it is lost in the “It is done” of the throne. (Rev. xxi. 5, 6.) 


RECONCILIATION. 139 


us to know what the death of Christ may bring to other 
worlds than ours. But “things which are revealed be- 
long to us and to our children,” and this at least is 
plain as God can make it, that that death shall bring 
either eternal life, or judgment, to every child of Adam 
to whom the gospel testimony comes. Men may reason 
of the Fatherhood of.God, and idly dream of universal 
blessing, or at least of the annihilation of the lost; and 
none would rejoice as would the Christian, if such 
might be the end of wicked men. But to construe 
Scripture thus is in fact to slip the anchor of our 
hope of life eternal; for it is in the very words which 
promise blessing, that God has warned of wrath. “These 
shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the 
righteous into everlasting life”! The day is near when 


1 This must account for the warmth which Christians sometimes mani- 
fest in insisting on a truth that surely ought not to be spoken of, save 
with solemnity and sadness. The Christian maintains that the punish- 
ment of the lost will be everlasting, not because he wishes it to be so, 
but only because he believes it to be so. The objection that it cannot be 
everlasting is either a denial of the supremacy of God, or a puerility 
beneath notice. The objection that the words which express the dura- 
tion of it do not, in ordinary or classical Greek, mean really “ everlast- 
ing,” is a mere quibble. Will such objectors tell us, What other words 
in the language would serve to convey the idea at all, assuming it ex- 
isted? The fact is, no language which is not based upon Christianity 
could possibly possess such a word, because, apart from Christianity, no 
one ever conceived such a thought. Plato comes nearer it than any 
one else among the heathen; but his “immortality” embraces only 
“the ages of ages :” Revelation alone pretends to speak of an eternity 
beyond “the end” (1 Cor. xv. 24). The only possible clew to the mean- 
ing of a word in the dead languages is the use of it ; and if, in the verse 
T have quoted, “everlasting life” means a life which shall have abso- 
lutely no limit to its duration, it is simply wanton to construe “ ever- 
lasting punishment” on a different principle. A man who would use 
words thus in the serious concerns of this life would be regarded as un- 
truthful and unprincipled. I may add that every objection of any 
weight which has been urged against eternal punishment, by those who 
have written against it, applies as really, though not perhaps to the 
same extent, to punishment for a millenium or a century. And if the 
Christian be wrong, no one will suffer from his error ; but if he be right, 


140 RECONCILIATION, 


God Himself shall be the only mystery unsolved; when 
faith and hope shall merge in the completeness of our 
knowledge, and the realisation of every promise that 
has cheered us here. But faith and hope are now the 
suide and beacon of our life, and we hail this unfathom- 
able mystery of reconciliation as placing yet another 
crown upon our Saviour’s brow. Upon His head are 
many crowns, but His pierced hand now holds the only 
sceptre; for the Father has given Him the kingdom, 
and all things are placed beneath His feet. The out- 
cast of the earth now fills the throne of God. 

“We see not yet all things put under Him,” for a 
long-suffering God still waits, and grace must spend 
itself ere judgment can sweep back on those whom 
grace has failed to win. But we do see Jesus, the re- 
jected and despised of men, now crowned with glory. 
He is the mighty God, the Father of Eternity, the Prince 
of Peace,’ and now the government is on His shoulder, 
and all power is His in heaven and earth. And He it 
is who is our Saviour, and through Him the weakest 
and the worst of men may gain deliverance from judg- 
ment and from sin. Willing knees now bow before 
Him, and willing hearts confess His name; but the day 
is hastening on when every knee, in heaven, earth, and 
hell, shall bow, and every tongue shall own Him Lord. 

“And then, THE END, when He shall have de- 
livered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; 
when He shall have put down all rule and all authority 
and power. For He must reign, till He hath put all 
enemies under His feet. And when all things shall be 


how terrible must be the discovery for those who trade upon the hope 
that he is wrong! 


1 Isa, ix. 6. 


RECONCILIATION. 141 


subdued unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be — 
subject unto Him that put all things under Him, that 
God may be all in all.””? 

Such then is the Christian’s faith, and such his 
hope: no day-dream of weak minds, no fable cunningly 
devised, but a hope both sure and steadfast, and a most 
holy faith. A vain philosophy may reason of the past, 
and dream about the future, but, in the calm confidence 
of faith, the Christian can look back to a past eternity, 
when, before all time, and ere there was a creature 
made, “ In THE BEGINNING” the Word was alone with 
God; and on, through the ages of ages, to “THE END,” 
when, time having run its course, in the midst of His 
creation, God shall be all in all: and in adoration he 
exclaims, “From everlasting to everlasting Thou art 


God !” 
11 Cor, xv. 24. 25, and 28. 


APPENDIX, 


NOTE I.—P. 38. 
FAITH IN GOD. > 


Every thoughtful person revolts against the idea that eternal 
blessedness depends upon apprehending aright a certain formula 
or creed respecting Christ, or upon believing certain facts con- 
cerning Him. No one represents this to be the doctrine of 
Scripture, save those who do so in order to bring Scripture into 
contempt. But there are many who, in a sense, are lovers of 
truth, that suppose this to be the view of evangelical Chris- 
tians, and who, in rejecting it, reject also the teaching of Holy 
Writ respecting faith. To such, therefore, a plain statement is 
due of what we do in fact deem to be the truth in this matter. 
` And I venture to think, moreover, that among Christians 
themselves there exists a great deal of confusion of thought, 
and somewhat perhaps of error too, with respect to it. The 
gospel will bear the test of the severest metaphysical inquiry, 
but yet it is addressed to plain people, and not to metaphy- 
sicians ; and we may be certain that the truth of faith is not a 
subtle difliculty, but within the reach of all. 

Now, as I have sought to show, to solve the difficulty by de- 
claring trust to be the true and only faith recognised by God is 
utterly wrong. Trust is a necessary fruit of faith in its 


APPENDIX. 143 


simplest phase, but not a part of it. Suppose in a money panic 
I am in fear of ruin, and I receive a letter telling me the bank 
in which my fortune is invested is absolutely safe, it is faith of 
the simplest kind to believe that testimony; and, simply be- 
lieving it, I dismiss my fears. But, it will be answered, such 
faith, simple though it be, depends entirely on the confidence 
I repose in my informant. Undoubtedly it does. The words of 
the letter, as it lies before me, are like counters that may stand 
for anything or nothing. These counters become gold in my 
estimation, because I import into them the element of pre- 
existing trust in the writer. It is clear then that, between 
man and man, faith, apart from proof, assumes trust, and is 
inseparable from it. 

But is this also true between God and the sinner? Belief of 
the Bible as a book merely, or even as a book recognised as 
true, is no doubt governed by the same principle. But when 
Gop speaks to the soul, His message is a living word, a word of 
power, and that quite independently of evidences, or of the con- 
dition of the hearer. It finds the sinner morally incapable of 
trust in God, for the essence of his nature is distrust of Him : 
“ the carnal mind is enmity against God ;” and spiritually he 
is no less incapable of trust, for he is spiritually dead. But the 
gospel itself brings life to the dead soul, and masters the 
enmity of the carnal heart. It brought forth fruit among the 
Colossians, ‘‘from the day they heard it.” By nature man is 
fallen and apostate: the gospel is itself the instrument for his 
recovery and conversion ; therefore in no sense, and in no degree, 
does it rely for its acceptance upon ars existing quality or con- 
dition of the human heart. 

Speaking thus, however, we must guard against the folly of 
supposing that any set of words in Greek or Hebrew, or their 
more or less accurate counterparts in English, have inherent 
power or virtue to bring salvation to the person who believes 
them. And if the words themselves can work no charm, the 


144 APPENDIX. 


belief of them will not help the matter. Nor can I consent ta 
fall back upon distinctions between “faith about Christ” and 
“faith in or on Christ,” as is sometimes done—distinctions 
which pertain either to etymology or metaphysics. The ety- 
mological question is interesting, and I will deal with it for any 
who have leisure and inclination to follow me. The metaphy- 
sical inquiry I must decline to enter on here. As I have said, 
the gospel is for those who are incapable of such a study; and, 
moreover, the distinction is based upon the assumption that, of 
the various sorts of faith, to use the popular expression, one is 
efficacious, and the other not—thus attaching merit to faith 
itself, and coming under the almost ironical remonstrance of St. 
James, ‘‘ Can faith save ?” 

If by ‘‘ faith about Christ” be meant the belief of facts con- 
cerning Him, to say that this is not-connected with salvation in 
Scripture is a statement so glaringly false as to need no answer. 
It is certainly inadequate as a definition of true faith of the gospel, 
as I will presently explain; but changing the preposition will in no 
way supply the defect. The distinction assumes that micrevew evs 
(translated in Authorised Version to believe in or on) implies trust 
in the person who is the object of the faith. But this is quite 
untenable. In saying I believe in any one, I may mean that I 
thoroughly rely upon him, or I may merely intend that I 
acknowledge him to be the person he claims to be. Every one 
will admit that the expression has this elasticity of meaning in 
our own language: it needs no schoiarship to ascertain for one’s- 
self that it has equal scope in Greek, and notably in the writings 
of St. John. The fact is, the difference between r. es Twa 
and r. rw is purely a matter of etymology or of style; and in 
every case the force of the words depends entirely upon the 
context. St. John uses them convertibly. See, for instance, 
John viii. 30, 31, where both are rightly translated “‘ believed 
on Him,” i.e., gave in their adhesion to His Messiahship. The 
29th and 30th verses of chap. vi. afford anotherexample. And 


APPENDIX. 145 


again compare 1 John iii. 23 (r. 7 évduarc) with v. 13 (m. eis rò 
övoua). Moreover, in John v. 24, Acts xvi. 34, xviii. 8, Rom. 
iv. 3, and elsewhere, the verb without the preposition denotes 
“ saving faith” beyond all question ; and in numerous passages 
m. ets is used where as plainly there is no thought of either sal- 
vation or trust. I myself would include John viii. 30, already 
quoted, in this category, as the context plainly demands ; but 
such passages as vii. 48, xi. 48, are unequivocal instances of it. 
m. ért does seem to include the idea of confidence or trust; but 
this is used but seldom, and never by St. John, though the word 
believe occurs in his writings well nigh as often as in all the rest 
of the New Testament. 

Having thus cleared the ground of difficulties and distinctions 
which I think both irrelevant and unworthy of the subject, I 
fall back upon the main inquiry, What is the element which 
connects faith with salvation ? 

It is not owing to any virtue or charm in the text of the mes- 
sage received, nor does it depend on any merit or vitality in 
faith, in what sense soever faith be understood. Still less is it 
to be accounted for by some fitness or worth in the recipient. 
If then it depends neither upon the message, nor yet upon the 
faith, nor upon the character of the faith, nor upon the condi- 
tion of him who exercises the faith, there is but one more alter- 
native remaining. And here, as the result of a circuitous 
inquiry that simple souls might perhaps refuse to follow, I reach 
once more a point where every true believer will enthusiastically 
side with me. It is not that the sinner believes, nor yet that he 
believes the gospel, but that he believes Gop. The belief of the 
facts of Christianity, however great and true, or even of the 
inspired record of them, can never bring life to a dead soul, nor 
change a sinner’s destiny. But that which makes the gospel a 
word of power and life to some, and links blessing with the faith 

1 m. él occurs Luke xxiv. 25; Acts ix. 42, xi. 17, xvi. 31, xxii. 19; 


Rom. iv. 5, 24, ix. 33, x. 11; 1 Pet. ii. 6. 
K 


146 APPENDIX. 


of it, is that to such it comes as a divine voice by the Holy 
Ghost now present upon earth to that end. “Faith cometh by 
hearing, and hearing by the word of God ;” not by the Bible as 
a volume purchased at a book shop, but by those sacred words 
when through them a present God speaks to the hearer’s soul. 

Tf it be objected that this is transcendentalism, I answer, It 
is Christianity. Grace is boundless, but it is sovereign; and if 
God has brought salvation within reach of all, it is not by 
making men independent of Himself, but by giving the Holy 
Ghost to bear witness to the finished work and glorified person 
of a Saviour. In apostolic days, the gospel was preached ‘‘ with 
the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven,” and this is still its 
only power. It is not asa true record merely, but as a living 
word from God, that it is indeed ‘‘ the power of God unto salya- 
tion to every one that believeth.” 


NOTE II.—P. 46. 
MIRACLES. 


THE subject of miracles, and of ‘‘ evidences” in general, is too 
large to treat of here ; but yet the reference I have made to 
them compels me to add a few remarks. 

1st. The mere fact of miracles is no proof of Divine interven- 
tion. A miracle is such an interference with the course of 
nature, as is beyond our own power. Any creature, therefore, 
entirely superior to us can perform what we deem a miracle. 
The miracles worked by Satan in the temptation of our Lord 
(Luke iv. 5) are far more wonderful (I do not say ‘‘ greater”) 
than all the miracles of all the apostles combined ; and Scripture 
testifies that the devil will again exert miraculous power on earth. 

2d. Miracles are never appealed to in Scripture as “an 


APPENDIX. 147 


evidence,” save in connection, with a preceding revelation to 
which they are referred. The gospel of Christ was not like the 
word to Abraham, “the beginning of the oracles of God ;” 
it was another chapter in a long-continued revelation. But it 
had a twofold aspect. He came to a people whose every hope 
for earth and heaven centred in a Messiah promised to their 
fathers, and He came, moreover, to a world that was ruined 
and lost. His mission, therefore, had a twofold character and 
purpose. He was the Messiah to the Jew; He was the bread 
of God to give life to the world. It was with the former that 
the miracles had specially to do. The knowledge of His higher 
mission and character was not an inference from miracles. It 
was the subject of a special revelation to John the Baptist, and 
through him to those who afterwards became the first disciples 
of the Lord (John i. 33-37). These all belonged to the little 
company spoken of in Luke ii. 38 as waiting for the redemption 
of Israel. They followed Him because they were already God’s 
people, and yet even these needed a word from God to enable 
them to know Him. 

3d. If this be so, we shall expect to find that it was to Jews 
that the testimony was based on miracles, and that when the 
kingdom gospel, or special national testimony, ceased, miracles 
became of secondary importance. Both these points are plain 
upon the face of Scripture. As soon as the Sanhedrim decreed 
the destruction of Christ, He sought to keep His miracles secret 
(Matt. xii. 14-16). He could not be face to face with need and 
refuse to meet it, but He no longer wished the fame of His 
power to go forth. And when, after His final rejection, the 
gospel became a purely spiritual testimony, miracles were never 
appealed to in confirmation of it. The national testimony 
which the apostles had been sent forth to render at the first was 
based on miracles (Matt. x. 7, 8). The gospel of Pentecost was 
a living power, independent of all extrinsic proof ; it was itself 
the means of the conversion of 3000 souls (Acts ii. 41). 


148 APPENDIX. 


“To the Jew first,” is characteristic of the Acts, and of the 
transitional period the book embraces. After the conversion of 
Cornelius, the public testimony was no longer confined to the 
Jew, but the Jew retained the right to priority in the offer of 
grace (Acts xiii. 46, e. g.). The miracles therefore continued, 
though without their former prominence. And when Paul 
went forth preaching to Gentiles, miracles seem to have been 
divorced from his testimony altogether. His miracle at Lystra 
was in response to the faith of the man who was the subject of 
it (Acts xiv. 9); and it had upon those who witnessed it its 
natural effect with heathens—they owned the apostles as gods, 
and prepared to sacrifice to them. So was it also at Melita 
(Acts xxviii. 6). 

That miraculous power existed in Gentile Churches the 12th 
of 1st Corinthians establishes; but the question is, Did the 
gospel which produced those Churches appeal to miracles to 
confirm it? Can any one read the first four chapters of that 
very Epistle, and retain a doubt as to the answer ? 

The great question here involved resolves itself, sooner or 
later, into this : When God speaks to man’s heart through the 
gospel, does He speak in such wise that the word carries with it 
the certainty that it is from Him? To say that God cannot 
do this is to deny that He is supreme ; and to deny a Supreme 
Being is sheer Atheism. To say that He does not is to remove 
the truth of revelation out of the region of certainty altogether. 
For the genuineness of miracles must, of course, depend on 
evidence ; and if, as Paley declares, the reality of a revelation 
must be proved by miracles, it is only by weighing evidences 
that we can determine what is revealed ; and that form of proof 
can never, in such matters, reach higher than probability. 
Indeed, no accurate or astute thinker has ever claimed more 
for it. The degree of conviction thus attainable is, doubtless, 
an overwhelming condemnation of the infidel, but it is a poor 
substitute for the faith of the Christian. 


APPENDIX. 149 


According to Paley, the value of the Christian revelation is 
determined by the miracles. According to Scripture, the value 
of the miracles was determined by the revelation. It was not 
that miracles were wrought, but that the miracles of Jesus were 
precisely what Isaiah prophesied the Messiah would accomplish. 

The whole system is false, and must drive simple souls to 
Rome ; for the many are quite incapable of reasoning out Chris- 
tianity from evidences, and, if that be our only foundation, 
they must trust the Church to do it for them. With what a 
sense of relief one turns from it to a word like this: ‘TI thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast 
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed 
them unto babes.” 


NOTE III.—P. 94. 
JUSTIFICATION BY WORKS. 


“ Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he had 
offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Thou seest how faith 
wrought with his works, and by works faith was made per- 
fect.” 

“¢ And go,” says many a one, closing the book, “we see how 
the Scripture which says ‘Abraham believed God, and it was 
imputed unto him for righteousness,’ is guarded and ex- 
plained.” 

“ And so,” continues the Apostle James, ‘‘ the Scripture was 
fulfilled, which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was im- 
puted unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend 
of God.” (James ii. 14-26.) ) 

Justification by works, as an article of man’s religion, is 
opposed to justification by faith, and therefore it denies the 


150 APPENDIX. 


grace of God, and dishonours the blood of Christ. Justification 
by works, according to the Epistle of James, is the complement, 
so to speak, of justification by faith. It owns grace, and does 
homage to the blood. 

But “it is of faith that it may be by grace;” and grace puts 
works, and. merit in every phase of it, out of court altogether. 
What then if a man regard his faith as a meritorious thing? 
He thereby denies grace entirely. He makes a saviour of his 
own faith; and “can faith save him?” It is no longer a 
question between God’s grace on the one side, and the sinner’s 
merit on the other; but merely a rivalry between faith and 
works. The Epistle to the Romans is essentially doctrinal, 
and the practical is based upon the doctrine. The Epistle ‘‘ to 
the twelve tribes scattered abroad,” is essentially practical, the 
doctrinal element being purely incidental. Pauľs Epistle 
unfolds the mind and purposes of God, revealing His righteous- 
ness and wrath. The Epistle of James addresses men upon 
their own ground. The one deals with justification as between 
the sinner and God, the other as between man and man. In 
the one, therefore, the word is, ‘‘To him that worketh not, but 
believeth.” In the other it is, “ What is the profit if a man say 
he hath faith, and have not works?” Not “If aman have 
faith,” but “If aman say he hath faith ;” proving that, in the 
case supposed, the individual is not dealing with God, but 
arguing the matter with his brethren. God, who searches the 
heart, needs not to judge by works, which are but the outward 
manifestation of faith within; but man can judge only by 
appearance. 

Faith identifies a sinner with a Saviour God. But it is 
nothing in itself. A man cannot show another his faith, any 
more than he can show him his charity. One who says he 
has faith, but whose conduct is not that of a believer, is like 
a man who says he has charity, but does no charitable ac- 
tions; who dismisses a starving beggar with kind words and 


APPENDIX. 151 


nothing more. ‘‘Even so,” says the Epistle, just in the same 
sense, ‘‘ faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone.” You 
believe in one God. Well, quite right: so do the devils; and 
what comes of it? They tremble, and so ought you. Believ- 
ing cannot, therefore, be in itself a meritorious thing. But if 
it be indeed, to use a favourite metaphor, a laying hold of God, 
it will declare itself by results. Abraham’s case is an instance, 
He believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteous- 
ness. That is, as I have elsewhere explained, Abraham be- 
lieved, and God blessed him, “ He was holden for righteous, in 
virtue of faith.” Well, the result was, Abraham acted: God 
discerned the faith ; man judged of the acts. He believed, and 
God declared he was justified. He acted, and man acknowledged 
he was justified. He was justified by faith when judged by 
God, for God knows the heart. He was justified by works 
when judged by his fellow-men ; for man can only read the life. 
And just as faith is made perfect, or fulfilled, by works, so the 
Scripture, which says, ‘‘ He was justified by faith,” is made 
perfect, or fulfilled, by the declaration, ‘‘ He was justified by 
works.” 

So then, though in one sense a man is justified by faith with- 
out works, in another sense we see how by works a man 
is justified, and not by faith only. Justified by faith before 
God ; justified by works before men. This is not mere asser- 
tion; nor is it a plausible piece of sophistry. It is not only 
that these Scriptures admit of no other explanation, but that 
this explanation is thoroughly in keeping with the respective 
characters of the two epistles. And, moreover, just as in the 
23d verse, St. James guards the truth of justification by faith ; 
so, in the Epistle to the Romans, St. Paul alludes to the aspect 
of the truth here insisted on—‘‘ If Abraham were justified by 
works,” he declares, “‘he hath whereof to glory, but not before 
God.” 


152 APPENDIX, 


NOTE IV.—P. 106. 
JUSTIFICATION BY BLOOD. 


JUDICIAL righteousness is theoretically possible in either of two 
ways. The law-keeper is righteous as such ; the law-breaker 
may become righteous through redemption. The law-keeper 
fulfils the demands of the law by his obedience ; the law-breaker 
may fulfil the demands of the law by enduring to the full its 
penalties in the person of Christ. Righteousness on the first 
ground is shown to be in fact impossible, and it is set aside alto- 
gether. The sinner is therefore shut up to “justification by 
blood.” Vicarious obedience is an idea wholly beyond reason ; 
against it, I think, but clearly above it: how could a God of 
righteousness and truth reckon a man who has broken law to 
have kept law, because some one else has kept it? The thief is 
not declared to be honest because his neighbour or his kinsman 
is a good citizen. Punishment may be remitted on this ground, 
but that is not justification. The merits of ten righteous men 
would have saved Sodom, but God would not therefore have 
called Sodom righteous. 

But is not the thought of vicarious judgment as much beyond 
reason as vicarious obedience? Undoubtedly ; but to accept what 
is above our reason, when revelation testifies to it, is the very 
highest exercise of reason ; otherwise it is mere superstition. 
The bearing of judgment in the person of a substitute is a 
foundation truth of Christianity. Obedience by a substitute is 
a mere theory, and one of the strangest I know of in the entire 
range of human thought. 

One poem may not constitute a man a poet, but one murder 


1 Vicarious death was in order that the believer might live: was 
obedience also made vicarious in order that he may disobey? Christ 
died : therefore the Christian need not die. Christ obeyed: am I to go 
on therefore the Christian need not obey. 


APPENDIX, 153 


makes a man a murderer, one sin makes a sinner. Nothing but 
the gallows can expiate a murder; death alone can atone for sin. 
The law is a standard, so to speak, to which man is subjected— 
not his acts merely, but himself. If he comes up to it, he is 
ipso facto justified, justified by law. If he fails, he is ipso facto 
condemned, and law can never justify him; for a law that 
could justify an offender would be an immoral and corrupt law. 
The law has pronounced its sentence, and nothing remains but 
the fulfilment of that sentence. This is the natural state of the 
Sinner under law. But here God reveals himself a Saviour. 
He gives up His only-begotten Son to take the place of the con- 
demned sinner, and die in his stead. He now points to that 
death as satisfying the righteous demand of law against the 
sinner, and on that ground He justifies him. Not that by 
virtue of His sovereignty, or by a legal fiction, as we say, He 
reckons the believer to be righteous, while leaving his condition 
in fact unchanged, but that He justifies him. The believer is 
‘* justified from all things from which he could not be justified 
by the law of Moses” (Acts xiii. 39). God imputes the death 
of Christ to the believer. 

If it be demanded, How can this be? I answer, It de- 
pends upon the fact that God imputed the sin of the believer 
to Christ, and that he died under sin, and for sin. Not that 
the guiltless died as guiltless for the guilty, which would 
be horrible; but that the guiltless passed into the position 
of the guilty, and as guilty, died to expiate the guilt im- 
puted to Him: ‘‘He who knew no sin was made sin for us.” 
If the inquiry be still further pressed, and the question be 
insisted on, How could sin be so imputed to the sinless as to 
make a vicarious death justifiable ? men may seek to reason out 
the answer, but, as Bishop Butler says, ‘‘ All conjectures about 
it must be, if not evidently absurd, yet at least uncertain.” 
“ Nor,” he adds, ‘‘has he any reason to complain from want 
of further information, unless he can show his claim to it, 


154 APPENDIX. 


Here it is that God retreats upon his own sovereignty, and the 
believer is satisfied with the divine ‘“‘It is written.” Reason 
bows before the God of reason, and the reasoner becomes a dis- 
ciple and a worshipper. 

Moreover, though the revelation of the death of Christ as a 
sin-bearer is in truth a great mystery, it is by no means so 
incredible as would be the story of His death apart from sin. 
The thorough infidel is consistent in his unbelief, and the true 
Christian in his faith ; but the most utterly unreasonable person 
in the world is the man who accepts the fact of the death of 
Christ the Lord of life and glory, and yet doubts whether it 
was a death for sin. That Jesus of Nazareth died upon a cross 
is mere matter of history ; that He who did so die was the Christ 
the Son of God is entirely a matter of revelation. And, as I 
have elsewhere said, the great impossibility of the gospel is the 
stupendous fact that Christ has died, not that that death was 
because of sin, nor yet that the sinner can be blessed in virtue 
of it. 

The 18th and 19th verses of the 5th of Romans are some- 
times quoted in support of the doctrine of vicarious obedience, 
but wrongly so. The word in verse 18 is not ‘‘the righteous- 
ness of one,” as given in the Authorised Version, but ô? éds 
ducarduaros. §*By means of one righteous act—the death of 
Christ viewed as the acme of His obedience. See Phil. ii. 8.” 
I quote from Alford, who rightly explains ‘‘the obedience of 
one” in verse 19 upon the same principle. Christ was obedient 
unto death, and by means of that obedience we are justified— 
“ justified by His blood,” as the apostle had already asserted 
in the 9th verse, and explained in the earlier chapters of the 
Epistle. 

The word ôkalwua occurs also in the 16th verse, where it 
means ‘‘a righteous sentence of acquittal.” In i. 32, the same 
word stands for “‘the righteous judgment” of God ; and in ii. 
26, in the plural, for ‘‘ the righteous requirements” of the law. 


APPENDIX. 155 


The only other passage in Romans where it is used is viii. 4. 
‘‘ The law of sin and death ”—the active principle of sin within 
—made it impossible for God’s law to obtain its demand from 
man, But the death of Christ redeemed them that were under 
the law; and “‘the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus” now 
frees them practically from “the law of sin and death.” It is 
an active principle of power within them, resulting in a walk 
after the Spirit, and not after the flesh. And thus the law 
receives its dicatwua, whereas it utterly failed of that, so long as 
the believer was under it. 

Everywhere else in the Epistle, the word translated right- 
eousness is õkacosúvn. Acxalwos occurs in iv. 25, and v.18. The 
gift was by one dicalwua unto dicalwors, 


NOTE V.—P. 112. 


HOLINESS AND SANCTIFICATION. 


Worps mean exactly what they pass current for, and with the 
English Bible before us, it is idle to insist on a distinction be- 
tween ‘‘holiness” and ‘‘ sanctification.” But I think an ex- 
amination of the various passages where the Greek correlatives 
of these terms occur, will help much towards accuracy of thought 
and a clear grasp of the truth upon this subject. 

The meaning of dyidtew in Scripture, (and I am not aware 
that it ever has any other meaning), is to separate, or set apart, 
for God, or to some sacred purpose ; and dyacuds means either 
the act of consecration, or the condition into which that act 
introduces the subject of it. There is no question, mark, of 
any change of essential qualities. The subject may be (a) in- 
trinsically holy already, or (b) be and continue to be intrinsically 
unholy, or (c) it may be incapable of moral qualities altogether. 
(a) Christ was sanctified by the Father, (John x. 36), (b) the 


156 APPENDIX. 


sinner is sanctified on believing (1 Cor. vi. 11); and an uncon- 
verted husband or wife is sanctified in virtue of marriage with 
a holy person, (1 Cor. vii. 14); and (c) the vessels of the temple 
were sanctified, as also the creatures we use for food are ‘‘ sancti- 
fied by the word of God and prayer,” (1 Tim. iv. 4, 5). 

‘Ayidgew is therefore to make a person or thing holy, in the 
sense in which to justify a person is to make that person right- 
eous. His condition is changed, but not necessarily his character. 
I subjoin a list of all the passages where the word occurs, and a 
careful perusal of them will show that in one case only does the 
word seem to bear a different meaning. I allude to the prayer 
of 1 Thess. v. 23. ‘‘The God of peace sanctify you wholly.” 
But a consideration of the context will show that ‘‘ wholly” 
refers not to progressive sanctification of the whole man regarded 
as a unit, but to the absolute sanctification of every part of the 
man considered as a complex being, made up of “ body, soul, and 
spirit.” So Bloomfield, Alford, &c., take it, notwithstanding 
their strong bias towards the other view. In John xvii. it is 
wholly unjustifiable to put a different meaning on the word 
“sanctify,” whenthe Lord uses it of Himself, and when Heapplies 
it to His disciples. Eph. v. 26 calls for notice only to point out 
that our translation is inaccurate. The right rendering is “that 
he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the washing of water by the 
word.” “He gave Himself for it, that He might sanctify it :” 
It is the burnt-offering again. (Ex. xxiv., see p. 111 ante.) 

It will be observed that we are said to be sanctified by God 
the Father, sanctified by the Spirit, sanctified in the name of 
the Lord Jesus, sanctified in Christ Jesus, and sanctified by 
blood. These all refer to one and the same sanctification. God 
is the Author, the Spirit the Agent, and the blood the means, 
of our sanctification, and it is in Christ that all this is ours. The 
attempt of some commentators to cut up the verse in the 6th 
of Ist Cor., and make ‘‘ justified” refer to Christ, and “ sancti- 
fied” to the Spirit, is mere special pleading. The believer is 


APPENDIX, 157 


sanctified absolutely and for ever, even as he is justified ; and 
of necessity it is by the Spirit, for through Him it is that every. 
blessing flows to us. 

All this is confirmed by a careful study of the passages where 
ayiacués is used. It is very remarkable, that when sanctification 
is spoken of as by the Spirit, it is connected with election, and 
precedes faith. And the reason of this seems to me to be that, 
though chronologically, faith and sanctification are simultaneous, 
there is nevertheless a moral order varying according as we 
view the subject from our own standpoint, or in the light of the 
sovereignty of God. In the former case, faith comes first, and 
sanctification follows as a consequence; but when election comes 
in, we see our faith to be the result of the Divine decree which 
set us apart to eternal life. 

It is further remarkable that neither continuous nor progressive 
sanctification is ever spoken of as being the work of the Spirit. 
But the reason of this is clear ; the truth is too obvious to need 
even to be stated. It is only by the help of the Holy Spirit 
that a believer can stand for a moment., Truth is emphasised 
in Scripture, not, as in a creed, according to its doctrinal im- 
portance relatively to other truths, but according to the practical 
need which exists for enforcing it upon the believer. 

Holiness means, as we have seen, not merely the state of 
being sanctified, but also the moral character akin to that state. 
And here the Greek, a language rich in such distinctions, is not 
confined to a single word. I have dealt with dyacpss. The 
quality or attribute of holiness is expressed in dy.wotvy, a word 
which, strange to say, is used but thrice, namely, Rom. i. 4, 
“í the Spirit of holiness ;” not the Holy Spirit, but the Spirit of 
Christ, in contrast with the flesh mentioned in the preceding 
verse : 2 Cor. vii, 1, upon which I have already commented (p. 
119, ante); and 1 Thess. iii. 13, “ unblamable in holiness,” a 
very solemn and significant word, especially in the connection 
where it occurs. The kindred word ayér7s is found only in Heb. 


158 APPENDIX. 


xii. 10. “That we might be partakers of His holiness.” And 
ootérns in Luke i. 75; and Eph. iv. 24. 

A comparison of Eph. iv. 24 with 1 Cor. i. 30, will give an 
insight into the difference between this last word and dyacpés. 
Israel’s sanctification, and indeed their entire position as a 
redeemed people, was maintained by the “middle wall of par- 
tition” which separated them from other nations. (See Lev. 
xx, 26.) But Christ Himself is to His people, now, what the 
“ middle wall of partition ” was to the Jew: He is made unto 
us sanctification. The first xa: in this verse has the force of 
both; I presume the last is equivalent to even; Christ is made 
unto us ‘‘ wisdom from God, and both righteousness and sancti- 
fication, even redemption.” It is only in virtue of what Christ 
has done for us that we can gain the place we hold in redemp- 
tion: it is entirely in virtue of what Christ now is to us that 
we can be maintained in that place. 

But in Eph. iv. 24, it is not a question of what Christ is to 
us, but of the essential qualities of the new creation of which 
He is the Head, and of what we ourselves ought to be in prac- 
tical conformity therewith. The new man is created in holiness. 
To ignore the truth that Christ is made unto us dyacuds, and 
that therefore the believer is holy, independently of his life on 
earth, is to abandon or deny the true position of the Christian ; 
but to suppose that Christ is made unto us holiness in this 
further sense also, would lead to the still deeper error of regard- 
ing holy living as of no account whatever. 


ayid tw. 


Matt. vi. 9.—“ Hallowed be thy name” (and Luke xi. 2). 

Matt. xxiii. 17, 19—The temple that sanctifieth the gold: the altar 
that sanctifieth the gift. 

John x. 86.—Say ye of Him whom the Father hath sanctified. 

John xvii. 17, 19.—Sanctify them through Thy truth. For their sakes 
I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the 
truth, 


APPENDIX. 159 


Acts xx, 32.—Inheritance among all them that are sanctified (and xxvi. 
18). y 

Rom. xv. 16.—That the offering up of the Gentiles might be accept- 
able, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. 

1 Cor. i, 2.—Sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

1 Cor. vi. 11.—But ye are sanctified . . . by the Spirit of our God. 

1 Cor. vii. 14.—The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and 
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband. 

Eph. v. 26.—That He might sanctify it (the Church), 

1 Thess, v. 23.—God of peace sanctify you wholly. 

1 Tim. iv. 5.—(Every creature) is sanctified by the Word of God and 
prayer. 

2 Tim. ii, 21.—A vessel sanctified and meet for the Master’s use. 

Heb. ii. 11.—He that sanctifieth and they that are sanctified. 

Heb. ix, 18.—If blood and ashes . . . sanctifieth to purifying of flesh. 

Heb. x. 10.—By which will we are sanctified. 

Heb. x. 14.—Hath perfected them that are sanctified. 

Heb. x. 29.—Blood . . . wherewith he was sanctified. 

Heb. xiii. 12,.—That He might sanctify the people. 

1 Pet, iii, 15.—Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. 

Jude 1.—To them that are sanctified by God the Father (the better 
reading is beloved of God the Father). 

Rev. xxii. 11,—Let him be holy still (i. e., let him be sanctified still). 


AYLATUOS. 

Rom. vi. 19.— Yield your members servants to righteousness unto 
holiness. 

Rom. vi. 22.—Ye have your fruit unto holiness, 

1 Cor. i. 80.—Christ is made unto us . . . sanctification. 

1 Thess. iv. 8.—This is the will of God, even your sanctification, that 
ye should abstain from fornication, 

1 Thess. iv. 4.—Possess his vessel in sanctification. 

1 Thess. iv. 7.—God hath not called you to uncleanness, but to holi- 
ness, 

2 Thess. ii. 18.—Salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and be- 
lief of the truth. 

1 Tim. ii. 15.—Saved in childbearing if they continue in holiness. 

Heb. xii. 14—Follow .. . holiness, without which no man shall see 
the Lord. 

1 Pet. i. 2,—Elect . . e through sanctification of the Spirit unto, &c, 


160 APPENDIX, 


NOTE VI—P. 117. 
CLEANSING BY BLOOD. 


CLEANSING with blood is a common expression in the book of 
Leviticus; but, in the New Testament, it is found only in the 
9th chapter of Hebrews, and the beginning of St. John’s Epistle.! 
Of Hebrews I have already spoken ; but the passage in 1 John 
claims some notice, not only because of its connection with the 
present subject, but also on account of the difficulties that seem 
to surround it. ‘If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, 
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus 
Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.” 

It is a canon of interpretation, that whenever the benefits or 
results of the death of Christ are ascribed to His blood, the figure 
therein implied is borrowed from the types. It behoves us, 
therefore, to turn back to the Old Testament, and seek out the 
particular key-picture to which it is intended to direct our 
minds. In 1 Peter i., for example, the second verse will natu- 
rally turn our thoughts to the only occasion on which blood was 
sprinkled on the people of Israel (Ex. xxiv.); while verse 19 
brings us back to their one great redemption sacrifice of the 
passover in Egypt. 

Here then we have a certain clew to the meaning of the text 
before us: ‘‘The blood of Jesus cleanseth us from all sin.” The 
particular type in the light of which we are to understand the 
word must be that of some offering which was for sin, and one 
moreover which was for the people generally, as distinguished 
from those which were for individuals, and thirdly, a sacrifice 
of which the benefits were abiding. This at once excludes all 
the offerings of the first fifteen chapters of Leviticus, and will I 
think confine our consideration to the great day of expiation, 


1 Heb. ix. 14, 22, 23, where, as in 1 John i. 7, the word is xa0apijw. 


APPENDIX. 161 


prescribed in the 16th chapter.. ‘For on that day” (was the 
word to Moses) ‘‘he shall make an atonement for you to cleanse 
you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord ” 
(Lev. xvi. 30). 

We can picture to ourselves some godly Israelite telling of his 
God to a heathen stranger, recounting to him the proofs of 
Jehovah’s goodness and faithfulness to His people, and going on 
to speak of His holiness, His terribleness—how for trifling acts, 
in which his guest would fail to see sin at all, God had visited 
them with signal judgments ; how He was ‘‘of purer eyes than 
to behold iniquity.” And we can conceive that, in amazement, 
the stranger might demand, Whether then this people were 
free from the weaknesses and wickedness of other men ; and, on 
his hearing an eager repudiation of all such pretensions, with 
what deepening wonder and awe he would exclaim: “How then 
can you live before a God so great and terrible ?” 

And here the heathen stranger within the gates of the Israel- 
ite, would have reached a point analogous to that to which the 
opening verses of St. John’s Epistle lead us. Eternal life has 
been manifested, and life is the only ground of fellowship with 
God. But “God is light,” and it is only in the light, as the 
sphere of its enjoyment, that such fellowship is possible. The 
light of God! how can sinners bear it? Is it by attaining sin- 
lessness? The thought is proof of self-deception and utter 
absence of the truth (v. 8). But just as the question of his 
guest would turn the thought of the Israelite to his great day 
of expiation, and call to his lips the word, “ It is the cleansing 
blood which alone enables us to live before Jehovah,” so the 
Christian turns to the great sin-offering, and his faith finds 
utterance in the blessed words, “ The blood of Jesus Christ His 
Son cleanseth us from all sin.” 

It is not “ has cleansed,” nor yet ‘‘ will cleanse,” but ‘ clean- 
seth.” It is not the statement of a fact merely, but of a truth, 


and truths are greater and deeper even than facts. 
L 


162 APPENDIX. 


But how ‘cleanseth ?”? 

Just as the blood of the sin-offering cleansed the Israelite. 
It was not by any renewal of its application to him, but by the 
continuance of its efficacy. With Israel its virtue continued 
throughout the year : with us, for ever. It is not mere acts of 
sin, mark, that are in question here, but the deeper problem of 
our condition as sinners (comp. v. 10 with v. 8). Neither the 


1 “ Washing with blood” is an expression wholly unknown to the 
law, and it conveys an idea which seems quite at variance with its teach- 
ing. This consideration surely must decide the otherwise doubtful con- 
troversy as to the correct reading of Rev. i. 5. “Unto Him that 
loveth us and loosed us from our sins in His own blood.” There is a 
difference of only one letter in the Greek, and the altered reading has 
at least equal MS. authority with that of our version. Ps. li. 7, must 
of course be explained by the law; and the student of Scripture will 
naturally turn to the 19th of Numbers, or the 14th of Leviticus, to 
seek its meaning (Lev. xiv. 6-9), A like remark applies to other similar 
passages in the Old Testament. Overlooking this, Cowper derived his 
extraordinary idea of a fountain of blood from the 13th of Zechariah, 
construed in connection with the received reading of Rev. i. 5. The 
fact is that cleansing with water was one of the most frequent and 
characteristic of the typical ordinances, but yet it has been almost en- 
tirely forgotten in our creeds. ‘‘In that day there shall be a fountain 
opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for 
sin and for separation for uncleanness.” (Zech. xiii. 1, see marginal 
reading, and compare Num. xix. 9.) “Jn that day”—the epoch re- 
ferred to-in verses 9-14 of the preceding chapter, Israel shall be admitted 
to the full benefits of the great sin-offering typified in the 19th of Num- 
bers. (See also Rom, xi. 25-29.) 

The washing of garments in blood is likewise wholly unscriptural, 
save in poetical language—as, e.g., Genesis xlix. 11. The meaning of 
Revelation vii. 14 is too often frittered away thus as though it were a 
merely poetical expression. But the figures used are typical, not poeti- 
cal: “These are they that come out of the great tribulation (compare 
Matt. xxiv. 21) and they washed their robes (compare Rev. xix. 8), 
and made them white by (év) the blood of the Lamb.” Their lives were 
purified practically from the defilements that surrounded them, and 
purged in a still deeper sense by the blood. In Rev, xxii. 14, also, the 
true reading is “ Blessed are they that wash their robes,” 


APPENDIX. 163 


difficulty, nor yet the answer to it, is the same. In regard of 
the one the Israelite turned to the day of atonement, and said 
“í the blood cleanseth ;” but in case of his committing some act 
of sin, he had to bring his sin-offering, according to the 4th or 
5th or 6th chapter of Leviticus. But as I have shown,! the 
need of these special offerings depended entirely on “ the weak- 
ness and unprofitableness” of the sacrifices of the old Covenant 
(Heb. x. 9-18). Therefore they have ceased ; and for us the 
purification typified in the rite of the 19th of Numbers has taken 
their place. It is the 9th verse of our Epistle, and not the 7th, 
to which we turn. For the believer who sins against God to 
dismiss the matter by “the blood cleanseth,” is the levity and 
daring of antinomianism. The word for such is, “ If we confess 
owr sins:” no flippant acknowledgment with the lip merely, 
but a solemn and real dealing with God ; and thus he obtains 
again and again a renewal of the benefits of the death of Christ. 
‘¢ He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us 
from all unrighteousness.” 

And this, no doubt, is the truth intended by the popular ex- 
pression “coming back to blood.” The Israelite “came back 
to blood” by seeking a fresh sacrifice ; but had he attempted to 
“come back to blood” in the sense of preserving the blood of 
the sin-offering in order to avail himself of it for future cleansing, 
he would have been cut off without mercy for presumptuous sin. 
(Num. xv. 30.) The most superficial knowledge either of the 
precepts or the principles of the book of Leviticus, will make 
us avoid a form of words so utterly opposed to both. With one 
great exception the blood of every sin-offering was poured round 
the altar of burnt-offering, and thus consumed ; and that ex- 
ception was the sacrifice of the 19th of Numbers, so often referred 
to in these pages. The red heifer was the sin-offering in that 
aspect of it in which the sinner can come back to it to obtain 
cleansing for every fresh act of sin. And here the whole beast 


1 See pp. 116, 119, note, and 121, note, ante, 


164 APPENDIX. 


and its blood was burnt to ashes outside the camp, and the un- 
clean person was cleansed by being sprinkled with water which 
had touched those ashes. But to confound the cleansing by 
blood—the 16th of Leviticus aspect of the sin-offering, with 
the cleansing by water—the 19th of Numbers aspect of it, be- 
trays much ignorance of Scripture. The one is a continuously 
enduring agency ; the other a continually repeated act. 

There is no question, observe, as to whether the benefit de- 
pends on the death of Christ. But with some, perhaps, it is a 
question merely of giving up the ‘‘ form of sound words ;” with 
others, the far more solemn one of depreciating the sacrifice of 
Christ, and denying to it an efficacy which even the typical sin- 
offering possessed for Israel. Christ has died and risen and 
gone up to God, and now His blood cleanses from all sin. It is 
not that it avails to accomplish a succession of acts of clean- 
sing for the believer, but that its efficacy remains to cleanse him 
continuously (els rò dunvxés Heb. x. 14). It is not in order that 
it may thus cleanse him, that the believer confesses his sin : 
his only right to the place he holds, even as he confesses, 
depends on the fact that it does thus cleanse him. The Israelite 
could avail himself of the ashes of the red heifer only in virtue 
of the place he had through the blood of the lamb. Our destiny, 
our hope, our life, depend entirely upon the enduring efficacy 
of that blood, that, whether in bright days of fellowship with 
God, or hours of sad wilderness rebellion, “the blood cleanseth 
from all sin :” here it is a question only of the preciousness of 
Christ to God, and the faithfulness and power of Him in whose 
hand we rest. 


APPENDIX. 165 


NOTE VII—P. 118. 
THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST. 


Tue writer of the Hebrews found the truth of the priesthood of 
the Lord Jesus hard to teach ; and the reason is obvious, that 
with the Jew the idea of atonement was inseparable from it. 
The fact of the priesthood of Christ thus reacted on the Jewish 
mind to cast discredit on the sufficiency of the atonement ; 
whereas the teaching of Scripture is unequivocal, that the priest- 
hood of the Son of God is based on atonement perfected. So 
much confusion of thought exists on this subject, that I may be 
pardoned perhaps for going into it somewhat closely, even 
though it involves the repetition of what I have elsewhere said 
of the nature.of sin.* 

Sin, as I have already explained, has a relation both to 
righteousness and to holiness, but, essentially, it is neither 
guilt nor defilement, but lawlessness: lawlessness and sin are 
synonymous, The answer to the guilt of sin is righteous- 
ness, and to its defilement, sanctification. In virtue of the 
blood we are both justified and sanctified. But the fact that 
for the believer guilt is not imputed, and sanctification is inviol- 
able, in no respect changes the essential character of sin. On 
the contrary, it intensifies the heinousness of it. This, more- 
over, is the clew to the true character of Christian life, though 
it is too often lost sight of. Sin against grace is far more 
heinous than sin against law. It isa greater outrage upon God, 
and if, as with the Christian, there be a true desire to avoid it, 
it is a greater proof of weakness. 

Here then is where we learn the power and value of 
Christ’s priestly work. It is not to justify, nor yet to 
sanctify. These blessings are secured to us in Him in 
virtue of Calvary. But if we have right thoughts of God 


1 See chap. x. 


166 APPENDIX. 


and of ourselves and of what sin is, we must know that all 
the blessings grace has crowned us with, would not avail to 
maintain us one hour in the place they give us before God, 
were it not for what Christ is to us and for us in heaven now. 
In regard to our position under God’s moral government, we 
know Him as a Saviour,—‘‘ we shall be saved from wrath 
through Him,” (Rom v. 9). In view of fellowship in the 
Father’s house we have a Paraclete, (1 John ii. 1); and for the 
sanctuary and the wilderness journey, we rejoice to own Him 
as a great High Priest. 

It is with sin then only in this its deepest character that 
priesthood has to do. For the believer, law has no penalties 
and the glory of the mercy-seat no terrors. The blood has for 
ever purged his conscience, and there is no question now 
of guilt ; and he stands in indissoluble relationship with God 
But it would indeed be strange levity to suppose because 
of this that sin could fail to cause estrangement. Just in pro- 
portion to his knowledge of God, and his appreciation of the 
blessings grace has given him, will be his sense of the moral 
distance between himself and God. The truth that his sin is 
purged, that he is a child of God, that he is accepted in the 
Beloved, can only serve to make his sin seem blacker. How 
then can he approach with confidence, and have a heart at rest ? 
Here it is the word comes home to him, seeing we have such a 
High Priest as the Son of God is declared to be, ‘‘ Let us come 
boldly to the throne of grace that we may obtain mercy.” 

The answer to the guilt of sin is righteousness ; the answer 
to its defilement is sanctification : and both the forensic and the 
ceremonial depend on the blood; the one on the blood shed, 
and the other on the blood sprinkled. But the answer to the 
practical estrangement sin produces is reconciliation, and this 
is the present work of priesthood, ‘‘ to make reconciliation for 
the sins of the people.”? 


1 (hdoxeoba, Every effort has been made to force a meaning on this 


APPENDIX. 167 


But this “reconciliation” must not be confounded with the 
reconciliation I have treated of in the 10th chapter. The 
latter is a finished work accomplished by the death of Christ, 
and the sinner enters into the benefit of it by faith: what I 
am now speaking of is the present work of priesthood. They 
have this in common, however, that both relate to sin in its 
essential character as an outrage upon God. Reconciliation for 
the sinner who believes, is a result of the death of Christ : 
reconciliation for the believer who sins, depends upon His 
priesthood. It is akin to the twofold aspect of forgiveness. 
We hawe forgiveness as a part of redemption, depending only on 
His blood. But again, in another sense, forgiveness depends 
upon confession. (Compare Eph. i. 7, and 1 John i. 9.) 

And by reason of this it is that, even as sinners, we can come 
boldly to the throne of grace, confident that we shall find com- 
passion, not as an encouragement to sin again, but allied with 
grace to help in time of need. The throne of ‘‘ the majesty on 
high” is a throne of grace, because of Him who is sitting at the 
right hand. 

I will not enter on the consideration of Christ’s priestly func- 
tions in relation to worship. Deeply interesting though this be, 
and urgent the need for unfolding and enforcing it, I must not 
allow myself to pass so far beyond my subject. But apart from 
worship, His priestly work, according to the Hebrews, is con- 
fined to making reconciliation and intercession. Everything 


word, in order to bring in a thought which is wholly opposed to the 
teaching of the passage. Luke xviii. 13, is the only other place 
it occurs ; but it answers in the Septuagint to the Hebrew to cover, re- 
move from sight, and, as used of sin, to forgive. Why then suppose 
it to have a different meaning here? If what I have said be just, it 
will be seen how perfectly it expresses the idea intended. It is pre- 
cisely the truth of 1 John i. 9, but in the Hebrews aspect of it. And 
note that confession is not to Christ as Priest. Nor does the priest 
absolve from sin. Here human priestcraft dares to meddle with what 
pertains to God alone, 


168 APPENDIX. 


beyond this is mere Judaism or Popery. (Heb. ii. 17 ; iv. 15; 
and vii. 25.) 

Putting aside special teaching, such as the cleansing of the 
leper, or the consecration of the priests, the four great types of 
the passover, the inauguration of the covenant, the sacrifice 
of the red heifer, and the great day of atonement, may be 
taken as giving a complete view of what the death of Christ is 
to us.+ 

I have already shown that the two first were not priestly 
sacrifices. In the third, it was a priest doubtless who led the 
victim forth, and sprinkled its blood before the tabernacle ; but 
observe, it was not Aaron. The act was typical of the work of 
Christ, but not of His high-priestly work. A like remark 
applies to the great day of atonement, when Aaron himself 
officiated. The ordinance consisted of two distinct parts—first, 
the sacrifice of sin-offerings, and afterwards of burnt-offerings. 
Both these were in the highest sense typical of the work of 
Christ ; but mark the difference in Aaron’s position respecting 
them. For the sin-offering he divested himself of all his high- 
priestly robes, and, having bathed, put on the holy linen gar- 
ments, teaching us that though his acts here were typical of 
what our High-Priest would do for us, this would not be 
accomplished by Him in His priestly character. The sin-offering 
concluded in all its parts, Aaron came out in high-priestly 
splendour, arrayed in his ‘‘ garments of glory and beauty,” and 
offered the burnt-offerings. This brings us to the 22d verse of 
Ps. xxii., Christ leading the praises of His people (Lev. xvi. 4, 
23, 24). 

1 And if we add the burnt-offering, the meat-offering, and the peace- 


offering (Lev. i. ii. iii.), His work in its highest character as to God- 
ward, we have the whole in its sevenfold perfectness. 


APPENDIX. 169 


NOTE VIII—P. 134. 
THE GODHOOD OF GOD. 


I CRAVE permission to use this word ‘‘Godhood,” for it is 
matter for reflection whether the want of such a term has not 
helped to let the thought it signifies die out. 

Whether men believe it or no, Jehovah is Gop. This is a fact 
absolute and certain. But is He my God? The Psalmist could 
say, “O God, Thou art my God!” Does this mean no more than 
that He was God? He was the God of Israel; but if any one 
imagines that He was the God of Pharaoh, or of the Philistines, 
or of the kings of Canaan, he must have strange ideas of what 
it is to have a God. Because he was the God of Israel, He 
destroyed the power of Pharaoh to deliver them. If the sea 
barred their way, He made a highway through it. If they 
hungered, the heaven rained bread ; if they thirsted, the rock 
gave forth water in the midst of the desert. And the tribes of 
the wilderness and the nations of the land, as they heard that: 
battle-shout from the puny armies of Israel, ‘‘The Lord of 
Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge,” could have 
taught the Christians of to-day what it means to have Jehovah 
for our God. God was not their God, but He was the God of 
Israel. 

And can any thoughtful man look abroad upon the world, and 
imagine for a moment that God is the God of creation now? 
“The whole creation groans.” The children of Israel groaned 
in Egyptian bondage, but when, their deliverance complete, 
they stood around their glorious king in their glorious city, it 
was no longer a groan that rose to heaven, but shouts of praise 
and the worship of full hearts. And when God becomes once 
again the God of all His creatures, their groans will no more be 
heard. The creation shall then be ‘‘ delivered from the bond- 


170 APPENDIX. 


age of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of 
God” (Rom. viii. 21). Then ‘shall the Lord rejoice in His 
works,” and from His opened hand the desire of every living 
thing shall be satisfied (Ps. civ. 31 and cxlv. 16). 

Men delight to speak of the Fatherhood of God, because they 
think it gives them claims on Him. And doubtless they who 
are indeed His children have real claims upon God in virtue of 
the tie. Though here, what need there is to remember that a 
relationship cannot be wholly on one side: “ If I am a Father, 
where is mine honour?” God may well demand. But what is 
usually meant by the Fatherhood of God is really His Godhood, 
And if God was the God of Israel there were mutual obligations 
involved in the relationship. And so it mustever be. But 
men speak as though the fact of their being His creatures gave 
them claims on God, while they utterly forget that sin is a 
repudiation of His claims on them—a denial of the very rela- 
tionship on which they insist so strongly when their own 
interests are concerned. Moreover, as I have shown elsewhere, 
by the rejection of Christ man has lost every claim of every 
kind on God ; while, in the gospel, the grace of God presents 
Christ as the fulfilment of them all, and of every blessing which 
a loving God can bestow. God has far different thoughts to- 
wards the ‘‘Canaanite” and the “ Philistine” of to-day than 
those which were expressed by the sword of Israel. It is not 
that the human heart is changed, still less the heart of God ; 
but that the work of Christ has enabled God to assume a new 
attitude towards men. ‘‘In Christ He was reconciling the world 
unto Himself ;” “ The God of our Lord Jesus Christ” can now 
become a God to all. I repeat once more, RECONCILIATION is 
accomplished. 

And this, I venture to believe, is the peace-offering aspect of 
the work of Christ—the fulfilment of the third great type which, 
with the burnt offering and the meat offering, represents the 
work of Christ in its Godward aspect. The burnt-offering is 


APPENDIX. 171 


His complete surrender of Himself to God; the meat-offering, 
the perfectness of the Man who did so dedicate Himself ; and 
the peace-offering, the results to Godward of that sacrifice. 

But if men reject Christ, and refuse the reconciliation, how 
can there possibly be mercy for them? In past dispensations, 
man’s sin and failure have always drawn out some better thing 
from God’s great goodness and wisdom and power; but now, the 
climax has been reached. His best gift has been given; His 
master-work has been achieved ; heaven is flung wide open, and 
the scum of the earth are called to oneness with Christ in His 
glory. The love and grace even of God are now exhausted, and 
the only possible alternative and sequelis VencEANcr. Ifmen 
insist on defying God, and maintain the place of adversaries, 
there is nothing for them but ‘‘ judgment and fiery indignation 
which shall devour the adversaries, à 

By Godhood, then, I mean the relationship existing between 
God and His creatures in virtue of His Godhead. That rela- 
tionship was outraged and set aside by sin, and even the lower 
creation shared the blight which fell upon our world because of 
it. But ‘‘ by the blood of the cross” God has reconciled all 
things to Himself. The enjoyment of this benefit (xapioua, Rom. 
v. 15) is postponed for ‘‘the creation,” until the ‘‘ manifestation 
of the sons of God ” (Rom. viii. 19); and, as I have said, it will 
be lost for ever to impenitent men. But the reconciliation is a 
fact and a truth for the believer, now, and he has access to it, 
and ought to be in the joy of it. 

But the Godhood of God towards the believer, is true only to 
faith. The Christian’s God is “the God of our Lord Jesus 
Christ ” (Eph. i. 17), for even such an one as He had a God, and 
the Lord Jesus knew what it was to be in want. The universe 
was His creature, and by a word He could make bread for 
starving thousands, or crown the provision for a feast with 
richest wine; but when it was Himself who hungered or was 


172 APPENDIX. 


athirst, He looked up and trusted in HisGod. He had a God, 
and yet He had not where to lay His head. 

And as it was with the Leader of Faith, so has it been with the 
Sons of Faith in every age. In the 11th of Hebrews we read of 
some ‘‘who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteous- 
ness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched _ 
the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weak- 
ness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight 
the armies of the aliens.” But we read of others who, none the 
less through faith, were tortured, not accepting deliverance, “ and 
of others again who had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, 
yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, 
they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the 
sword ; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, be- 
ing destitute, afflicted, tormented.” And it is of these last the 
word is written, ‘‘ of whom the world was not worthy.” 

The faith that bears and suffers, is greater than the faith that 
triumphs. How many there are who, through ignorance of this 
mystery of faith, have made shipwreck of their hopes, and are 
sunk under trial and disappointment. Faith must be prepared 
for a refusal. Faith trusts for safety, but never fails when 
perils come. Faith looks for food and shelter, but never falters 
when ‘‘ hunger, and thirst, and cold, and nakedness” become its 
portion. The faith that cries, with the Psalmist, ‘At midnight 
I will rise to give thanks unto Thee,” is truer and greater than 
the faith that could bid the sun stand still upon Gibeon; and 
the sufferings of Paul denote a higher faith than the mightiest 
acts of Elijah. ‘‘ A night and a day have I been in the deep!” 
Paul, the beloved child and saint of God, the faithful and 
honoured servant, the chosen vessel to bear His name before the 
world, the foremost of the apostles—clinging to some frail plank 
upon the wild lone sea, hour after hour for a whole sun’s round, 
in hunger, and thirst, and cold, the sport of every wave, lost to 
earth, and seemingly unknown to heaven; and yet he had a God 


APPENDIX. 173 


who could have delivered him by a word! And though deliver- 
ance came not, he kept his heart and eye fixed upon unseen 
realities, and reckoned the present suffering unworthy to be 
compared with the coming glory. 

Even in the midst of sorrow and trial, happiness is the 
Christian’s lot. Happiness: not the flippant gaiety of a care- 
less heart; for if, even in the world, such happiness is con- 
temptible—the uncoveted monopoly of fools—how utterly 
unworthy it is of those who have been called to fellowship with 
the sufferings of Christ! but in the truer and deeper sense in 
which alone the Scripture speaks of happiness.1 The highest 
type of existence is not the butterfly, but He of Tg marred 
visage and the melted heart, “the Man of sorrows.’ 

Such then is the Christian’s happiness. Through all circum- 
stances, and in spite of them, he is a prosperous man, a blessed 
man. He may indeed have care and trial and sorrow ; but his 
is the God who, while He could leave. His child to be a solitary 
and outcast wanderer, with no pillow but a stone, and no com- 
panion but a staff, could yet turn that stone into a memorial 
pillar of thanksgiving and praise, and make that loneliness the 
very gate of heaven! “ Happy is he that has the God of Jacob 
for his help!” “ Happy the people whose God is Jehovah !”— 
(Ps. cxliv. 15, and exlvi. 5.) 

1 There is no word for happy in the Bible, save in its good old 


meaning of fortunate, or blessed. (Compare, e. g., Matt. v. 10, 11, 
with 1 Pet. iii. 14, iv. 14. 


INDEX, 


Aaronic priesthood, the, 114, 119 
n., 168. 

Abraham, 36, 97, 151. 

Alford, Dean, quoted, 99 n., 102 
Nn., 114 n, 127 n., 187 n, 154. 


Blood of Christ, typical meaning 
of, Chap. IX., and App. Note 
VI., and see Justification, 
Sanctification, &c. 

Bloomfield quoted, 99 n., 100 n. 

Bonar, Dr. H., quoted, 67 n. 

Butler, Bp., quoted, 26, 41 n., 47, 
153. 


Christian, origin of name, 120 n. 
Cleansing by blood, App. Note VI. 
3 by water, 116-117,162n. 
Confession of sin, 118, 163-164, 
Conversion, 57. 
Cornelius, case of, 37 n. 
Creation, reconciliation for the, 
134, 169. 
A the New, 105, 122,138n. 
Cross, the, Chap. ITT. 
x, Offence of, 25, 26. 


Deacon, 7 n. 
Dispensational truth, 8, 96 n. 


Election, Chap. VI. 
Evil, origin of, 97 n., 133. 


Faith, Chap. IV., App. Note I. 
» of a record, 36-42. 
» ina person, 42, &c. 
» as trust, 36. 
„ with the heart, 41. 
» moron 144, 


Faith, why essential, 38, 145. 

s» supernatural, 29. 

» of theChristian life,172-173. 
Fatherhood of God, 189, 170. 


Gnostic philosophy, 137. 
Godhood of God, 134, App. Note 
VIII. 
Gospel, greatness of the, 2. 
»  incredibility of the, 30, 31, 
154, 
» scriptural statement of the, 
39, 73, 82-90. 

» true for all, 79, 87. 
Grace, Chap. II. and 78, 93, 107. 
Greek words— 

ayidgew, 155, 156, 158. 
åyiacuós, 123 n., 155, 159, 
ayiorns, 157. 

ayiwwotvn, 157. 

avrl, 88 n. 

dudxovos, S:axovia, 7 m. 
Sixaiwua, 154. 
Ocxalwous, 155. 
inNdoKkowat, 166 n. 
xabaplfew, 160 n. 
KaTad\ay#, 130 n. 
perapéropar, 53 n. 
perdvoa, 58 n., 54. 
vóuos, 99 n. 

dovdrns, 123 n., 158. 
mapeots, 102 n. 


motevew es, 144, m. èrl, 
145 n. 

owrnpwos, T4 n., 107 n. 

mép, 88 n. : 


Xapiona, 1381 n. 
Green, S. G., quoted, 99 n. 


Happiness of the Christian, 173, 


INDEX. 


Heathen, fate of the, 10. 

Hebrews, Ep. to the, 109, 112, 
113, 119 n., 165. 

Holiness (and see Sanctification), 
various Greek words for, App. 
Note V. 

Holy Spirit (see Spirit). 


James’ Epistle, character of, 150. 

Judgment, future, 15, 16 n., 136. 
es character of, 9, 15, 135, 
171. 

Justification by blood, 93, App. 
Note IV. 

> by grace,and by faith, 

93, &c. 

r by works, App. Note 

TII, 


Kant’s philosophy, 71, 72, 74. 


Law, the, 98. 
Leper, law of the, 30 n., 85. 


Marriage supper, parable of, 104 n. 

Ministry, fitness for, 4-7. 

Miracles as an evidence, 46, App. 
Note II. 


New birth, value of the doctrine 
of, 60. 
Nicodemus, case of, 60. 


Offerings, the typical, 29. 
a Burnt-offering, 29 n., 
111, 156, 170. 
Ss Day of atonement, 92n., 
160-163, 168. 
a Dedication of the Cove- 
nant, 111. 
5 Leper’s, 30 n., 85. 
Meat-offering, 29 n., 


f Passover, 83, 84, 110. 

A Peace-offering, 170. 
-Red Heifer, 60 n., 116, 

118, 121 n., 163. 

> Sin-offerings (ordinary), 

116, 121 n., 163. 


175 


Paley’s theory of miracles, 45, 149. 
Paul’s ministry, 4-6, 26-27, 172. 
Poetry— 
“The Night of the Betrayal,” 18. 
“The Prodigal’s Return,” 65. 
Prayer, 74, 75. 
», before believing, 63. 
Priesthood, 110, 113-115, 118. 
5 of Christ,115,118-119, 
and App. Note VII. 
Probation of man closed, 98-99. 
Punishment, eternal, 139. 
Byak 
Reconciliation, Chap. X. and 170- 
Priestly, 166-167. 
Redemption, twofold aspect of, 82. 
Repentance, Chap. V. 
5 use and meaning of 
metanoia, 58 n., 54. 
33 twofold bearing of,56. 
Righteousness (and see Justifica- 
tion), Chap. VIII. and App. 
Note IV. 
human, 98. 
Roman military triumphs, 3, 17. 
Romans, thesis of the Ep. to the, 
95, 126. 


Saints, meaning and use of the 
word, 119. 

Sanctification, Chap. IX. and App. 
Note V. 


5 absolute, 112, 123, 
155-156 

R continuous,116-118, 
123, 157 

S progressive, 120, 
157. 

a intrinsic, 122, 155. 


Sin, nature of, 98 n., 182-134, 166. 

Spirit, work of the Holy, 42 n., 
58-64. 

Substitution, Chap. VII. 


Washing with blood, 162 n. 
5 with water, 117, 162 n. 
Water, typical meaning of, 60 n., 
(and see Cleansing). rå 
Works, justification by, 149, 


SOME OF THE 
PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE EXPLAINED. 


Matt. xi. 2, 3, p. 46. 2 Cor. v. 19-21, pp. 90 n., 131. 


xxii, 11-13, p. 104 n. 


Luke iv. 16-20, p. 17 m. 
xvi. 16, p. 96 n. 


John i, 11, p- 12 n. 
li, 23, 24, p. 46. 
iii. 5, p. 60 n. 
vi. 28-29, p. 11. 
xii. 31, p. 13: 


xvi. 8-11, pp. 62, 99, 100. 


Acts xiii. 46, p. 148. 
xiv. 8-18, p. 9. 
xvii. 22-31, p. 10. 
xix. 4, p. 56. 


Rom. i. 17, p. 95. 
1 20, pa 9 
ii. 6-11, p. 9. 
iii. 8, p. 96 n. 
na APAI, 
ARTANA 
», 24, p. 93. 
»» 25, p. 102. 
CE R N EA 
»- 95 Pp. 93, 152. 
» 10, p. 1381 n. 
meL ps 130. 


», 12-21, pp. 17, 131, 132. 


»» 18, 19, p. 154. 
vi. 1-4, p. 89. 
viii. 19-22, pp. 134, 171. 
x. 5-10, p. 40. 
», 17, pp- 35, 50. 


1 Cor, i. 18, p. 22. 
n 00, p. 158. 
xv. 24-28, pp. 140, 141. 
s» 41, p. 26 n. 


2 Cor. ii. 14-16, pp. 4, 29. 
gy 17, p. 25. 
i as iii, 5-11, pp. 4, 5. 


vii. 1, pp. 119-120. 
xii. 9, 10, p. 6. 


Gal. ii. 21, p. 101. 
Vv. 2, p., 27. 
» 11, pp. 23, 27. 
vi 15, p: 105. 


Eph. ii. 8, pp. 49 n., 73. 
iv. 24; pp. 123 n., 158. 
v. 26, p. 156. 
Col. i, 15-20, pp. 187-138. 
9) 23, p. 134. 
t.15; p- L- 
1 Thess. v. 23, p. 156. 


1 Tim. i. 11, p. 8. 
iii, 8-13, p. 7 n. 


Tit. ii. 11, pp. 74, 107. 
Heb. i. 3, p. 113. 

ii. 17, p. 166. 

iv. 15, p. 1142. 

vii. 12, p. 115. 

x. 10, p. 111. 
James ii, 18-24, pp. 149-151. 
1 Pet. 1S ps Line 


2 Pet. i. 20, p. 54. 


1 Johni. 7-10, pp. 118 n., 160-164. 


iii. 4, pp. 98, 132. 
Ve Ld; p: ol. 
», 1-11, p. 39. 


Rev. i. 5, p. 162 n. 
vii. 14, p. 162 n. 
xxii. 14, p. 162 n. 


LORIMER AND GILLIES, PRINTERS, 31 ST. ANDREW SQUARE, EDINBURGH, 


THE GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY. 


see i 


SOME PRESS NOTICES OF THE FORMER EDITIONS, 


“This is in every way an uncommon work. It will be read by the 
intelligent student of Scripture with deep interest, and cannot fail to 
prove of great service towards the more accurate knowledge of the Word 
of God.”—Rev, Evan H. Hopkins, in The Christian’s Pathway of Power. 


“We need not say how strongly we recommend this volume, as we 
printed several of its chapters last year in the Evangelist. We have 
again perused it with the greatest pleasure and, we trust, profit. It is 
one of the freshest books on the foundation truths of the old, old story 
that we have ever read. We commend it especially to the notice of 
preachers of the Word.”—Dr. W. P. Maonay, in The British Evangelist. 


“ We have read this treatise with intense enjoyment. .. . We most 
heartily recommend all preachers and teachers of the gospel to purchase 
and study this valuable addition to our Christian literature.”— Word and 
Work. 


“ The leading points of the gospel are here treated in a thoughtful and 
earnest manner which cannot fail to impress the reader’s mind.” — Rock, 


‘Tt is clearly written, soberly argued, closely connected.” — Watchman. 


“Tt is an excellent publication. ... We commend Dr. Anderson’s 
work.” —Edinburgh Courant. 


“ A wonderfully full book, . . . which we intend to ponder again and 
again, and which we commend as supplying matter for the hearts and 
heads of all who are seeking so to know God for themselves, as to be 
able to lead others to Him.” — Young Men’s Magazine. 


“The essays before us contemplate the most stupendous subjects which 
can occupy human thought, and they are not unworthy of their themes. 
We quote a few lines, at the same time warmly commending the book to 
our readers’ prayerful study.”—The Christian. 


One has only to read carefully a few pages to become aware of the 
intense worth—usefulness is far too weak a word to use—of all that the 
author has to say upon a subject which is exhaustless. . . . A book like 
the present is deserving of far more than an ordinary measure of 
approbation. It will be appreciated by all who have at heart the spread 
of the glad tidings. . . . But it is not merely on this point of literary 
merit that the work before us seems to us worthy of commendation of 
the highest character, but for the genuine truths contained in its pages. 
. . . We can heartily recommend the volume to all students. . . .”— 


Belfast News Letter. 
M 


ae 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


THE COMING PRINCE; 


The Last Great Monarch of Christendom. 


THIRD EDITION, 5s. 
HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27 PATERNOSTER ROW, 
oe ——___— 


“The results of close study and diligent research are so clearly stated 
as to be within the easy apprehension of any intelligent reader who gives 
his mind to the subject, and there are few books on prophecy written in 
so fair and impartial a spirit ; with the evident intention not to advocate 
a system or a theory, but to expound the Word of God.”—Christian. 

“The book is written with great ability, and bears evidence of diligent 
study.”—London Quarterly Review. 

“ This book is well written, forcible and clever throughout, and gives 
much valuable information on prophetical subjects.” —Church Advocate. 

“It is the clearest exposition of the prophecy of the seventy weeks of 
Daniel that we have ever read. We gladly commend this volume, and 
hope that it may find a wide circle of readers.” —Gospel Watchman. 

** As a study in prophecy, characterised by strong common sense and 
remarkable subtlety of judgment, we cordially commend this volume,”— 
British and Foreign Evangelical Review. 

“He writes with self-restraint and moderation, as well as with com- 
petent knowledge of the literature of the subject.” —Church Bells. 


“The legal acumen which tests documents, examines witnesses, and 
with surprising accuracy fixes dates, was never better employed than in 
the composition of this invaluable work. The learned writer has, by a 
chain of evidences which only an able lawyer could have thought of, set 
at rest—so at least we think, —questions about the great prophetic epochs 
of Daniel, which have exercised the theologians time out of mind. 
Incisive in style, logical in thought, reverent in spirit, conclusive in 
arguments.”— Rainbow. 

“Deeply interesting from the first page to the last. The style is 
clear, and the arguments are arranged in admirable order.”—Home News. 

‘*An able book upon a very difficult subject. Chronology, astronomy, 
and ancient history, the fruits of modern research and travel in Bible 
lands, the conclusions of the ablest students, are all brought to the 
elucidation of the sacred text.”—Dundee Advertiser. 


sie Opts 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


HUMAN DESTINY. 


THIRD EDITION, CROWN 8v0, 38. 6D. 


HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27 PATERNOSTER ROW. 
* 
ee 
SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS. 


“Tt is seldom that we take up a book of which we wish that it had been 
longer, but Dr. Anderson’s is such a book, It summarises the conflict 
through which the writer passed in studying the question of the destiny 
of the lost. It is refreshing to read a work which goes fairly to the very 
root of each theory in turn, and so states the issues involved in it that 
the reader can easily form his own conclusions.” —Record. 


“A fuller perusal deepens our sense of its value. Its strength lies in 
its fidelity to revelation and its vigorous exposure of mere human specula- 
tions, which have whispered peace, when there"was no solid ground for 
peace. The various theories of the ‘larger hope’ are discussed with 
scholarly acumen and a keen regard to the teaching of the Bible on the 
future of the impenitent.”—Christian. 


“The author criticises, in a very clear and forcible way, the different 
writers who stand out prominently as advocates of the views known by 
name as Annihilation and Universalism. His remarks on those theories 
are trenchant and conclusive, and the book has in it the tone of decision 
and logical argument.”—Church Advocate. 


“The masterly treatise requires only to be known in order to secure 
wide acceptance; it ought, indeed, to become a treasured hand-book on 
the subject to which its pages are devoted.” —Christian Leader. 


“ This able work deserves well at the hands of the orthodox. Because 
it is thoroughly Biblical, and runs upon sound lines, it will be neglected 
by those Athenian readers whose craving is for the new; and for this 
very reason those who abide by the eternal verities should give it their 
attention.” —Sword and Trowel. 


“The book has distinctive merits which will find due recognition in this 
controversy.” — Rock. 

“The method of the author is sound, his exposition and argument clear 
and simple, and his conclusions, according to our view, sound and 
scriptural.”—Primitive Methodist. 


“ A brilliant contribution to the literature of the subject.” — Baptist. 


“We commend this volume as worthy of the careful attention of all 
who desire to form correct and scriptural views of ‘Human Destiny.’ ”— 
English Churchman. 


“ His work will be regarded as one of the most valuable contributions 
to doctrinal inquiry published in recent years. As a work of Christian 
philosophy ‘Human Destiny’ must be accorded the highest place,”— 
Belfast News-Letter. 


WORKS BY THE 
Rev. Hnodrew Murray. 


== 
Small Crown 8vo, Price 2s. 6d. 


THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST: Thoughts on the Indwelling of 
the Holy Spirit in the Believer and the Church. Eighth 
Thousand. 


HOLY IN CHRIST: Thoughts on the Calling of God’s Child- 
ren to be Holy as He is Holy. Fifth Thousand. 


“This is one of the best books we have seen upon a subject which is 
happily attracting much attention now-a-days. There is so much 
spurious sentimentalism abroad that we are glad to meet with a book 
in which this sacred theme—holiness—is dealt with so robustly and 
sceripturally.”—Methodist N. C. Magazine. 


“Free from the extravagances common to many works of this char- 
acter, it is yet instinct with spiritual fervour, and full of sober, earnest, 
scriptural teaching. « Arranged for a month’s daily readings with 
appropriate prayers, it will make an excellent companion for private 
devotions.” —Literary World. 


Fifty-third Thousand. Small Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 


ABIDE IN CHRIST: Thoughts on the Blessed Life of Fellow- 
ship with the Son of God. 


“ The varied aspects of this practical truth are treated with much 
freshness, power, and unction. It cannot fail to stimulate, to cheer, 
and to qualify for higher service,” — Mr. SPURGEON in the Sword and 
Trowel. 


Twenty-fifth Thousand. Small Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 


LIKE CHRIST: Thoughts on the Blessed Life of Conformity 
to the Son of God. A Sequel to “ Abide in Christ.” 


“ Everywhere may be felt a depth of devotion, true Scriptural 
earnestness, together with an affectionate simplicity.” — Churchman. 


“The author has written with such loving unction and spiritual 
insight that his pages may be read with comfort and edification by all.” 
— Literary Churchman. 


= ame 


Works by the Rev. Andrew Murray—continued. 


+ i 
Twenty-third Thousand. Small Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 


WITH CHRIST IN THE SCHOOL OF PRAYER : Thoughts 
on our Training for the Ministry of Intercession. 


“Contains very valuable thoughts and practical suggestions.” — 
Church Bells. od 


“ A volume of rare excellence, and one which is much needed.”— 
Christian News. 


“This book is a spiritual exercise on the gifts of prayer.” —Family 
Churchman. 


“Tt is a book full of noble, tender thoughts, of deep spiritual yearn- 
ing, and of strong inspiration to those who are seeking to get nearer to 
Christ.” — Christian Commonwealth. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST: Thoughts for Christian 
Parents on the Consecration of the Home Life. Fifth 
Thousand. Small Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. 


“There is a tone of fervour and devotion pervading the book that 
contrast pleasantly with the trivially inane tone some writers think fit 
to adopt in writing for and about children. All Sunday-school teachers 
and parents would do well to lay its lessons to heart.” —Methodist 
Recorder. 

“ All that this author writes is good, but this book is the best of all; 
not because it is more ably written than others, but because it treats a 
subject of supreme importance, and treats it for the most part in a 
manner well calculated to produce a deep impression.”—Christian 
Commonwealth. 


“ This is a golden book, full of holy wisdom and impulse, which can- 
not fail to stir the hearts of all parents.” —Christian. 


THE HIGHWAY OF HOLINESS: An Abridgment (in the 
Author’s own words) of the Gospel Mystery of Sanctification. 
By the Rev. WALTER MARSHALL, with an Introductory 
Note by A. M. Crown 8vo, 1s. 


London: 
JAMES NISBET & CO., 21 BERNERS STREET. 


=p 


Wisbet’s Theological Library. 


Extra Crown 8vo. 


VOX DET; or, The Doctrine of the Spirit. By Rev. R. A. REDFORD 
M.A., LL.B. ôs. 


THE CHRISTIAN FULFILMENTS “AND USES OF THE 
Levitical Sin-Offering. By the Rev. Henry BATCHELOR. 5s. 


“ This igs a treatise in which we know not whether to admire more the ability 
or the soundness of the author. As the second is the rarer quality just now, we 
award it our highest praise. Mr. Batchelor is altogether with us in the battle of 
the ‘Down-Grade’”—Mr. SPURGEON, in The Sword and Trowel. 


DANIEL 'I.-VI,: An Exposition of the Historical Portion of the 
Writings of the Prophet Daniel. By the Very Rev. R. PAYNE- 
Suitu, D.D., Dean of Canterbury. 6s. 


“These papers are of sterling value, and cover much ground that is imperfectly 
known, or not known at all. No one could possibly read the volume without add- 
ing greatly to their knowledge of this important prophecy.” —Literary Churchman. 

“ These papers are full of moral and spiritual application of the numerous 
instructive points in the histories dealt with. They contain much information 


drawn from modern discoveries, proving the authenticity and illustrating the 
details of Daniel’s narratives.”— Record. 


ZECHARIAH : His Visions and His Warnings. By W. LINDSAY 
ALEXANDER, D.D. 6s. 


‘Those who have found difficulty in grasping the brief and mysterious parables 
of the Hebrew Prophet will derive great help in their study of this prophecy from 
Dr. Alexander’s careful and painstaking discussion.” —Literary Churchman. 

“ As we pass from chapter to chapter of the Commentary we are impressed with 
the spiritual insight and the moral and intellectual force of the writer. For 
those who are studying the Hebrew Scriptures in the original there is much help. 
The exposition of the Prophet’s meaning in reference to his own age is sober and 
sound ; and the bearing of the writing upon the Church of God in all ages, and 


the spiritual import of the imagery and the history, are excellently brought out 
and illustrated.” —Church Bells. 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. PAUL: Studies in the First 


Eight Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans. By the Rev. J. 
OswALD Dyzers, D.D. 6s. 


“Dr. Dykes deserves the gratitude of readers of the New Testament for his 
clear and animated explanation.” —British Weekly. 


THE FIRST LETTER OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 
Timothy: A Popular Commentary. With a series of 48 Ser- 
monettes. By ALFRED Row.anp, B.A., LL.B. Crown 8vo, 6s. 


“ We have here a series of notes derived from the best authorities, and put in 
a shape that makes them intelligible to mere English readers. . . . The sermons 
are decidedly on a high level, well thought out, well expressed, and every way 
effective and useful.”—Chwrch Bells. 


ety eas 


Nisbet’s Theological Library—continued. 


THE SABBATICAL REST OF GOD AND MAN: A Study on 
Hebrews iv. 3, 9. By the Rev. Jonn Huemes, M.A. 7s. 6d. 


“This volume is the result of a careful and intelligent study of all the litera- 


ture of the subject, and has been made in a fresh and suggestive way.’’—Liverpool 
Mercury. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN: An Exposition with 
Homiletical Treatment. By the Rev. J, J. Lias, M.A. 7s. 6d. 


“ We cannot speak too highly of this volume. It is full of sober piety, guided 
by sound scholarship ; and Mr. Lias seems to have acquired, from his long study 
of St. John’s writings, something of the Apostle’s marvellous power of using such 
language as is simple and intelligible to the plainest folk, while at the same time 
it expresses the deepest thoughts and suggests reflections upon which the noblest 
intellects may worthily exercise their highest powers.” —Church Quarterly Review. 


CHRISTIANITY ACCORDING TO CHRIST. By the Rev. J. 
Monro Gizson, D.D, ôs. 


“ Almost every sentence in this book is plain and sensible, and full of judicious, 
useful teaching. The careful reader, seeking for the truths which are really 
original, for the first simplicity of the Gospel, will find much to reward his 
study.”—Scots Observer. 


LANDMARKS OF NEW TESTAMENT MORALITY. By the 
Rev. GrorcE MatTHEson, D.D. 6s. 


‘ For originality of treatment, firm grasp of the points of likeness and difference 
between Christian and heathen systems of morality, and clearness of style, we can 
speak in terms of commendation of this volume.”—G@uardian. 


CHRISTIANITY AND EVOLUTION ; or, Modern Problems of 
the Faith. By various Writers. 6s. 


“ Each writer takes up a distinct side of the subject and treats it always intelli- 
gently, sometimes with really striking ability and acuteness.’—Literary Church- 
man. 


NON-BIBLICAL SYSTEMS OF RELIGION : A Symposium. By 


various Writers. 6s. 


“ A volume which will be welcome to students of Comparative Religion. The 
papers give a comprehensive view of the various beliefs which had allegiance from 
man before the dawn of Christianity, and give such an account of them as any, 
but a special student will find at once profitable and enjoyable.”—Scotsman. 


INSPIRATION : A Symposium on In what Sense and within what 
Limits is the Bible the Word of God? By the Ven. Archdeacon 
FARRAR, the Revs. Principal CAIRNS, Professor STANLEY LEATHES, 
D.D., Prebendary Row, and others. 6s. 


“The volume is an interesting one, written throughout in a temperate and 
scholarly spirit, and likely to prove useful to the higher stamp of theological 
students.” —Church Times. 


Faw 


Nisbet's Theological Library—continued. 


THE MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OUR LORD. By the 
Rev. H. N, BERNARD, M.A. 6s. 


“ We have read the book with interest and profit, and the ninth chapter, ‘On 
the Prayers of the Lord Jesus Christ,’ is really very valuable.” —Record. 
D 


IMMORTALITY: A Symposium on What are the Foundations of 
the Belief in the Immortality of Man? By the Rev. Prebendary 
Row, M.A.; Rabbi HERMANN ADDLER ; Professor G. G. STOKES, 
F.R.S.; Rev. Canon Knox-Littte; Rev. EDWARD WHITE; and 
others. 6s. 


“ A work of great and absorbing interest, marked by extreme ability.” —Literary 
Churchman. 


THE PATRIARCHAL TIMES. By the Rev. THomas WHITELAW, 
D.D: 16s. 

“The essays form individually and as a whole an articulated chain of reasoning, 

the charm of which consists in the fact that, having presented to the reader a con- 


vincing conclusion, it leaves him in a state of wonder that he had never arrived 
there on his own account.”— Record. 


FUTURE PROBATION : A Symposium on the question, “ Is Salva- 
tion possible after Death ?” By the Rev. STANLEY Leatuss, D.D.; 
Principal J. Cairns, D.D., LL.D.; Rev. E>pwarD WHITE; Rev. 
Sroprorp Brooks, M.A.; Rey. Dr. LITTLEDALE ; Right Rev. the 
Bishop of AMYCLA, &c. 6s. 

“ To men affected with the ‘malady of thought’ this book will prove delightful 


reading ; and to men not so affected, we hope it will carry the infection.”—Irish 
Ecclesiastical Gazette. 


FOUR CENTURIES OF SILENCE; or, From Malachi to Christ. 
By the Rev. R. A. REDFORD, M.A., LL.B., Professor of Systematic 
Theology and Apologetics, New College, London. 6s. 

‘Carefully and intelligently done. The critical views expressed appear to us 
generally just. His account of Philo is particularly good.”—Literary Churchman. 
“ It would be difficult to speak too highly of the wide reading, the careful and 
discriminating thought, and the wise and cautious judgments by which, through- 


out, the work is characterised. Every chapter is full of most interesting informa- 
tion and discussion.” —British Quarterly Review. 


LONDON : 
JAMES NISBET & CO., 21 BERNERS STREET. 


sa 


Wa 
G d 


P 


WY Niit 


MQ 


