9   1922      * 


Divisio> 


THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTRATOR. 

ISAIAH. 


The  Biblical  Illustrator 

By  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 
This  remarkable  work  is  the  triumph  of  a  life  devoted  to 
Biblical  research  and  study.   Assisted  by  a  small  army  of  stu- 
dents, the  editor  has  drawn  upon  all  the  rich  stores  of  the 
great  minds  since  the  beginning  of  New  Testament  times. 
Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems  and  Illustrations  ;  Expository,  Sci- 
entific, Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic,  gathered  from  a  wide 
range  of  Home  and  Foreign  Literature,  on  the  verses  of  the  Bible. 
Old  Testament  Set. — Noiu  complete  in  28  'volumes. 
Each,  8'vo,  cloth,  $2.00. 
Genesis,  Vol.  I.  Proverbs. 

Genesis,  Vol.  II.  Ecclesiastes  and  the  Song  of 

Exodus.  Solomon. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Isaiah,  Vol.  I. 

Isaiah,  Vol.  11. 
Isaiah,  Vol.  III. 
Jeremiah,  Vol.  I. 
Jeremiah,  Vol.  II.,  and 

Lamentations. 
Ezekiel. 
I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra,    Daniel. 

Nehemiah,  Esther.  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I.    Ho- 

Job.  sea,  Joel,  Amos,  Obadiah, 

Psalms,  Vol.  I.  Jonah  and  Micah. 

Psalms,  Vol.  II.  Minor  Prophets, Vol.  II.   Na- 

Psalms,  Vol.  III.  hum,     Habakkuk,   Zepha- 

Psalms,  Vol.  IV.  niah,     Haggai,    Zechariah 

Psalms,  Vol.  V.  and  Malachi. 

New  Testament  Set. — In  2Q  ^volumes.     Each,  8'vo,  cloth,  $2.00. 


Deuteronomy. 
Joshua,  Judges,  Ruth. 

I.  Samuel. 

II.  Samuel. 

I.  Kings. 

II.  Kings. 


St.  Matthew. 

St.  Mark. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  I. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  II. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  IIL 

St.  John,  Vol.  I. 

St.  John,  Vol.  IL 

St.  John,  Vol.  IIL 

Acts,  Vol.  I. 

Acts,  Vol.  II. 

Acts,  Vol.  IIL 

Romans,  Vol.  I. 

Romans,  Vol.  II. 

Galatians. 

Ephesians. 

Philippians  and  Colossians. 


Thessalonians. 
First  Timothy. 
Second  Timothy,  Titus  and 

Philemon. 
Hebrews,  Vol.  I. 
Hebrews,  Vol.  II. 
James. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  L 
First  Corinthians,  Vol.  II. 
Second  Corinthians. 
First  and  Second  Peter. 
First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

and  Jude. 
Revelation. 
Index  Vol.  to  Entire  New 

Testament. 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  fi-om 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
literature,   on  the   Verses   ot    the    Bibie 


BV     / 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


ISAIAH   VOL  III 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell   Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 

ISAIAH. 

OHAFTEB  L. 

Ybbs.  1-S.  ThvM  laitli  the  Lord,  Where  it  the  bill  of  your  mother's  dlyoree- 

mmtl— Jehovah  and  wnfaithful  Israel: — These  Israelites  went  to  the  only  kind  of 
law  with  which  they  were  familiar,  and  borrowed  from  it  two  of  its  forms,  which 
were  not  only  suggested  to  them  by  the  relations  in  which  the  nation  and  the 
nation's  sons  respectively  stood  to  Jehovah,  as  wife  and  as  children,  but  admirably 
illustrated  the  ideas  they  wished  to  express.  (1)  There  was  the  form  of  divorce,  so 
expressive  of  the  ideas  of  absoluteness,  deliberateness  and  finality — of  absoluteness, 
for  throughout  the  East  power  of  divorce  rests  entirely  with  the  husband  ;  of  de- 
liberateness, for  in  order  to  prevent  hasty  divorce  the  Hebrew  law  insisted  that  the 
husband  muSt  make  a  bill  or  writing  of  divorce  instead  of  only  speaking  dismissal ; 
and  of  finality,  for  such  a  writing  in  contrast  to  the  spoken  dismissal,  set  the  divorce 
beyond  recall.  (2)  The  other  form  which  the  doubters  borrowed  from  their  law, 
was  one  which,  while  it  also  illustrated  the  irrevocableness  of  the  act,  emphasized 
the  helplessness  of  the  agent — the  act  of  the  father  who  put  his  children  away,  not 
as  the  husband  put  his  wife  in  his  anger,  but  in  his  necessity,  selling  them  to 
pay  his  debts  and  because  he  was  bankrupt.  (3)  On  such  doubts  God  turns  with 
their  own  language — "I  have  indeed  put  your  mother  away,  but  where  is  the  bill 
that  makes  her  divorce  final,  beyond  recall  ?  You  indeed  were  sold,  but  was  it 
because  I  was  bankrupt  I  To  which,  then,  of  My  creditors  (note  the  scorn  of  the 
plural)  was  it  that  I  sold  you !  Nay,  by  means  of  your  iniquities  did  ye  sell  your- 
selves, and  by  means  of  your  transgressions  were  ye  put  away.  But  I  stand  here, 
ready  as  ever  to  save,  I  alone.  If  there  is  any  difficulty  about  your  restoration  it 
lies  in  this,  that  I  am  alone,  with  no  response  or  assistance  from  men."  {Prof. 
O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  sinner's  responsibility: — I.  The  sinner's  misebabls 
CONDITION.  1.  Separated  from  God.  2.  Sold  under  sin.  II.  The  occasion  of  it. 
Not  the  will  of  God,  but  his  own  love  of  sin,  and  his  consequent  disregard  of  God's 
offers  of  deliverance  from  sin  and  sorrow.  (J.  Lyth,  B.D.)  Israel  self-ruined : — 
Those  who  have  professed  to  be  the  people  of  God,  and  yet  seem  to  be  severely  dealt 
with,  are  apt  to  complain  of  God,  and  to  lay  the  fault  upon  Him,  as  if  He  had 
severely  dealt  with  them.     But  in  answer  to  their  murmurings,  we  have  here — I.  A 

CHALLENGE  TO  PRODUCE  ANY  EVIDENCE  THAT  THE  QUARREL  BEGAN  ON  God's  SIDE 
(ver.   1).      II.    A  CHARGE  THAT   THEY   WERE  THEMSELVES  THE  AUTHOR    OF    THBIR 

BUIN.  "  Behold,  for  your  iniquities,"  etc.  III.  A  confirmation  of  this  chal- 
lenge AND  THIS  CHARGE  (vers.  2,  3).  1.  It  was  plain  that  it  was  their  own  fault 
that  they  were  cast  off,  for  God  came  and  offered  them  His  helping  hand,  either  to 
prevent  uieir  trouble  or  to  deliver  them  out  of  it,  but  they  slighted  Him  and  all  the 
tenders  of  His  grace.  2.  It  was  plain  that  it  was  not  owing  to  any  lack  of  power  in 
God  that  they  were  led  into  the  misery  of  captivity,  and  remained  in  it,  for  He  is 
almighty.  They  lacked  faith  in  Him,  and  so  that  power  was  not  exerted  on  their 
behaJfl    8o  it  is  with  sinners  still.     {M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  2-6.  Wherefore,  when  I  oame,  was  there  no  man  1 — Th$  Mediator:  DMnt 
mud  human  : — These  words  could  have  been  spoken  only  by  the  Mediator  between 
Ck>d  and  man,  tha  num  Christ  Jesus.     TImj  plao*  bmm  oar  thonglita— L  Hn 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  JLLU8TRAT0S.  [chap.i. 

Drviinc  POWBE  AND  OLOBT.  Power  is  naturally  calm.  The  power  that  sustains  the 
aniverse  is,  in  fact,  most  wonderful  when,  unseen,  unfelt,  with  its  Divine  silence 
and  infinite  ease,  it  moves  on  in  its  ordinary^  course  ;  but  we  are  often  most  impressed 
by  it  when  it  strikes  against  obstructions,  and  startles  the  senses  by  its  violence, 
blowing  our  frame,  and  dealing  with  ua  as  with  children,  our  Teacher  seeks  to 
impress  us  with  a  sense  of  His  Divine  power,  by  bidding  us  think  of  Him  as  work- 
ing by  inexorable  force  certain  awful  changes  and  displacements  in  nature.  '•  I  dry 
up  the  sea,"  etc.  II.  His  human  life  and  education.  "  The  Lord  God  hath 
given  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned,"  etc.  Gradually,  it  seems,  the  Divine  Spirit, 
like  a  mysterious  voice,  woke  up  within  Him  the  consciousness  of  what  He  was,  and 
of  what  He  had  come  on  earth  to  fulfil.  Morning  by  morning,  through  all  the  days 
of  His  childhood,  the  voice  was  ever  awakening  Him  to  higher  consciousness  and 
more  awful  knowledge.  III.  The  mediatokial  teaching  fob  which  He  had 
BEEN  THUS  PBEPABED.  1.  It  is  personal.  If  His  own  personal  teaching  had  not 
been  in  view,  there  would  have  been  no  need  for  all  this  personal  preparation. 
"The  Lord  hath  given  Me  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  that  I  should  know  how  to 
speak."  This  is  Hia  own  testimony  to  the  great  fact  that  He  Himself  personally 
teaches  every  soul  that  is  saved.  2.  It  is  suitable.  Suitable  to  our  weariness.  (1) 
While  we  are  yet  in  a  state  of  unregeneracy.  (2)  When  we  are  sinking  under  the 
burden  of  guilt.  (3)  When  fainting  under  the  burden  of  care.  (4)  When  burdened 
under  the  mtellectual  mysteries  of  theology.  (5)  When  under  the  burden  of  mortal 
infirmity.  3.  The  teaching  of  Christ  is  minutely  direct  and  particular.  When  I 
read  that  He  is  ordained  to  speak  "to  him"  that  is  weary,  I  understand  that  He 
does  not  speak  in  a  general,  impersonal,  unrecognizing  way  to  the  forlorn  crowd  of 
suflFerers,  but  to  every  man  in  particular,  and  to  every  man  apart.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
The  Bedeemer  described  by  Himself: — In  my  opinion,  these  verses  (2-6)  run  on  with- 
out any  break,  so  that  you  are  not  to  separate  them,  and  ascribe  one  to  the  prophet, 
another  to  the  Messiah,  and  another  to  Jehovah  Himself ;  but  you  must  take  the 
whole  as  the  utterance  of  one  Divine  Person.  That  Jehovah-Jesus  is  the  One  who 
is  speaking  here,  is  very  clear  from  the  last  verse  of  the  previous  chapter :  "I  the 
Lord"  ("I,  Jehovah,"  it  is,)  "am  thy  Saviour  and  thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One 
of  Jacob."  I.  Behold  THE  Messiah  AS  God.  Link  vers.  Sand  6:  "I  clothe  the 
heavens  with  blackness,  and  I  make  sackcloth  their  covering.  ...  I  gave  my 
back  to  the  smiters,"  etc.  He,  then,  who  suffered  thus,  and  whom  we  regard  as 
redeeming  us  by  His  death,  and  as  saving  us  by  His  life,  is  no  less  than  the  Almighty 
God.  I  think  the  first  reference,  in  these  words,  is  to  the  miracles  which  were 
wrought  by  the  plagues  in  Egypt.  It  was  Jehovah-Jesus  who  was  then  plaojuing 
His  adversaries.  In  a  later  chapter,  Isaiah  says  that  "  the  Angel  of  His  presence 
saved  them  ;"  and  who  is  that  great  "Angel  of  His  presence"  but  the  Angel  of  the 
covenant  in  whom  we  delight,  even  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour  ?  But  we 
must  not  restrict  the  text  to  that  which  happened  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  for  it  has  a 
far  wider  reference.  AH  the  great  wonders  of  nature  are  to  be  ascribed  to  Him  upon 
whom  we  build  all  our  hopes  for  time  and  for  eternity.  The  last  miracle  recorded  here, 
namely,  that  of  covering  the  heavens  with  sackcloth,  was  performed  by  our  Lord 
even  when  He  was  in  His  death  agony.  You  are  not  depending  for  your  salvation 
upon  a  mere  mam  He  is  man,  but  He  is  just  as  truly  Divine.  II.  Behold  thb 
MES8L4.H  AS  THE  INSTBUCTED  Teachek  (ver.  4).  I  call  your  special  attention  to  the 
condescension  of  our  Lord  in  coming  here  on  purpose  to  care  for  the  weak — to  speak 
consoling  and  sustaining  words  to  them  ;  and  also  to  the  fact  that,  before  He  per- 
formed that  service.  He  learned  the  sacred  art  from  His  Father.  For  thirty  years 
was  He  learning  much  in  Joseph's  carpenter's  shop.  Little  do  we  know  how  much 
He  learned  there ;  but  this  much  we  do  kpow,  "  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and 
stature,  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man."  And  afterwards,  when  He  entered  upon 
His  public  work  among  men.  He  spake  with  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  saying  10  His 
disciples,  "  All  things  that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father  I  have  made  known  uuto 
you."  All  through  His  time  of  teaching,  He  was  still  listening  and  learning.  III. 
Behold  Jesus  Chbist  as  the  sebvant  of  the  Loed  (ver.  5).  1.  He  speaks  of 
Himself  as  being  prepared  by  grace.  "  The  Lord  God  hath  opened  Mine  ear,"  as  if 
there  had  been  a  work  wrought  upon  Him  to  prepare  Him  for  His  service.  And  the 
Name  Spirit,  which  rested  upon  Christ,  must  also  open  our  ears.  2.  Being  thus  pre- 
pared by  grace,  He  was  consecrated  in  due  form,  so  that  He  could  say  to  Himself,  ' '  The 
Lord  God  hath  opened  Mine  ear."  He  heard  the  faintest  whispers  of  His  Father's 
voice.  8.  He  not  only  heard  His  Father's  voice,  but  He  was  obedient  to  it  in  all 
things     *'  I  WM  not  rebellioos."    From  th«  day  when,  as  a  child,  He  said  to  Hia 


CHAP.  I,.]  ISAIAH.  8 

parents,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business ! "  till  the  hour 
when,  on  the  cross,  He  cried,  "It  is  finished,"  He  was  always  obedient  to  the  will 
of  God.  4.  In  that  obedience.  He  was  persevering  through  all  trials.  He  says  that 
He  did  not  turn  away  back.  Having  commenced  the  work  of  saving  men.  He  went 
through  with  it.  IV.  Behold  the  Messiah  as  the  peerless  Sufferek  (ver.  6). 
It  has  been  asked,  "  Did  God  really  die  ?  "  No  ;  for  God  cannot  die,  yet  He  who 
died  was  God  ;  so,  if  there  be  a  confusion  in  your  mind,  it  is  the  confusion  of  Holy 
Scripture  itself,  for  we  read,  "  Feed  the  Church  of  God,  which  He  hath  purchased 
with  His  own  blood. "  In  addition  to  the  pain,  we  are  asked,  in  this  verse,  to  notice 
particularly  the  contempt  which  the  Saviour  endured.  The  plucking  of  His  hair 
was  a  proof  of  the  malicious  contempt  of  His  enemies,  yet  they  went  still  further,  and 
did  spit  in  His  face.  Spitting  was  regarded  by  Orientals,  and,  I  suppose,  by  all 
of  us,  as  the  most  contemptuous  thing  which  one  man  could  do  to  another  ;  yet  the 
vUe  soldiers  gathered  round  Him,  and  spat  upon  Him.  I  must  point  out  the  beautiful 
touch  of  voluntariness  here  :  "  I  hid  not  my  face."  Our  Saviour  did  not  turn  away, 
or  seek  to  escape.  If  He  had  wished  to  do  so,  He  could  readily  have  done  it.  Conclu- 
sion :  Notice  three  combinations  which  the  verses  of  my  text  will  make.  (1)  Verses 
2  and  6.  Those  verses  together  show  the  full  ability  of  Christ  to  save.  Here  we  have 
God  and  the  Sufferer.  (2)  Verses  4  and  5.  Here  you  have  the  Teacher  and  the 
Servant,  and  the  two  together  make  up  this  truth — that  Christ  teaches  us,  not  with 
words  only,  but  with  His  life.  What  a  wonderful  Teacher  He  is,  who  Himself 
learned  the  lessons  which  He  would  have  us  learn  !  (3)  Now  put  the  whole  text 
together,  and  I  think  the  result  will  be — at  least  to  God's  people — that  they  will 
say,  "This  God  shall  be  our  God'^for  ever  and  ever  ;  and  it  shall  be  our  delight  to  do 
His  bidding  at  all  times."  It  is  a  high  honour  to  serve  God  ;  and  Christ  is  God.  It 
is  a  great  thing  to  be  the  servant  of  a  wise  teacher  ;  and  Christ  has  the  tongue  of  the 
learned.  It  is  a  very  sweet  thing  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  a  perfect  Exemplar  ;  and 
Christ  is  that.  And,  last  and  best  of  all,  it  is  delightful  to  live  for  Him  who  suf- 
fered and  died  on  our  behalf.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  4-11.  The  Lord  God  hath  given  Me  the  tongue  of  the  learned. — The  LorcPa 

servant  rivade  perfect  through  sufferings: — In  vers.  4-9  the  servant  is  again 
introduced,  speaking  of  Himself  and  His  work,  as  in  chap.  xlix.  1-6.  He  describes — 
1.  The  close,  intimate,  and  continuous  communion  with  God  through  which  He  has 
learned  the  ministry  of  comfort  by  the  Divine  word,  and  His  own  complete  self- 
surrender  to  the  voice  that  guides  Him  (vers.  4,  5).  2.  His  acceptance  of  the 
persecution  and  obloquy  which  He  had  to  encounter  in  the  discharge  of  His  com- 
mission (ver.  6).  3.  His  unwavering  confidence  in  the  help  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
victory  of  His  righteous  cause,  and  the  discomfiture  of  all  His  enemies  (vers.  7-9). 
Vers.  10,  11  are  an  appendix  to  the  preceding  description,  drawing  lessons  for  the 
eneouiagement  of  believers  (ver.  10)  or  the  warning  of  unbelievers  (ver.  11). 
Although  the  word  "Servant"  never  occurs  in  this  passage,  its  resemblance  to  the 
three  other  "  Servant-passages  "  makes  it  certain  that  the  speaker  is  none  other  than 
the  ideal  character  who  comes  before  us  in  chaps,  xlii.  1-4,  xlix.  1-6,  and  lii.  13- 
liii.  15.  The  passage,  indeed,  forms  an  almost  indispensable  link  of  connection 
between  the  first  two  and  the  last  of  these.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  Messiah 
an  instructed  Teacher: — After  the  Messiah  had  been  exhibited  in  the  preceding 
discourse  labouring  in  vain  and  spending  His  strength  for  nought  among  the  Jewsj 
despised  of  men  and  abhorred  by  the  nations,  when  actually  employed  in  His  public 
nainistry,  it  became  necessary  to  explain  this  surprising  phenomenon.  It  is,  there- 
fore, affirmed  that  the  neglect  and  contempt  which  He  suffered  was  not  owing  to  any 
deficiency  on  the  part  of  this  celebrated  Teacher,  who  was  eminently  qualified  for 
acquainting  men  with  the  Will  of  God,  in  the  knowledge  of  which  He  was  perfectly 
instructed.  This  important  qualification  was  not  imparted  to  Him  by  any  human 
teacher,  neither  did  He  acquire  it  in  the  schools  of  philosophers  and  orators,  nor  was 
it  communicated  to  Him  by  the  most  eminent  of  the  prophets,  but  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  God,  to  whom  it  is  here  attributed.  (R.  Macculloch.)  The  tongue  of  the 
learned: — I.  The  character  described  as  needinij  the  Saviour's  grace. 
"Him  that  is  weary."  This  description  includes  a  very  large  class.  All  may  not 
ascribe  their  weariness  to  the  same  cause,  nor  may  all  be  sensible  of  their  weariness 
to  the  same  extent.  Yet  all  are  weary.  1.  Not  in  the  world  of  sense  only  do  you 
complain  of  weariness.  It  is  impossible  for  the  unrenewed  heart  to  find  rest  even  in 
things  that  are  SpirituaL  Heaven  itself  would  to  such  a  one  cease  to  be  heaven. 
What  a  weariness  do  you  find  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  1    Of  prayer,  of  public 


4  THE  BIBUCdL  ILLUSenULTOR,  [ckav.  b 

worship^  of  hetriog  sermons,  of  religioiu  conversation,  of  the  Mrvic*  and  work  of  the 
Lord  yon  aay,  "  What  a  weariness ! "  2.  The  description,  certainly,  includes  those 
who  are  tmlj  anxious  about  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  8.  The  Lord's  weaiy  ones 
include  His  own  quickened  people,  who  feel  the  burden  of  the  body  of  sin,  and  are 
cast  down  because  of  their  difficulties.  4.  The  assaults  of  the  adversary,  too,  con- 
tribute  not  a  little  to  the  sense  of  weariness,  which  often  prostrate  a  child  of  God. 
6.  Add  to  these  the  numerous  and  varied  trials  and  afflictions  which  beset  his  path- 
way to  heaven,  and  you  have  in  outline  the  picture  of  his  case.  II.  Christ's 
QUAiiiFiOATiONS  TO  MEET  THE  CASE  OF  SUCH.  1.  His  participation  of  our  nature. 
Absolute  Godhead  could  not  of  itself  have  conveyed  to  us  sinners  one  word  of 
sympathy  or  comfort.  Neither  could  the  angels  do  it.  They  are  total  strangers  to 
the  wearmess  to  which  sinful  children  of  men  are  heirs.  But,  the  man  Christ  Jesus 
becomes  a  partaker  of  the  very  nature  whose  burdens  He  sought  to  relieve.  "  For- 
asmuch as  the  children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  He  also  took  part  in  the 
same."  2.  As  He  thus  took  upon  Him  our  nature,  so  He  also  endured  our  sinless 
though  humbling  infirmities.  3.  In  addition  to  all  this,  the  Lord  God  had  given 
Him  the  tongue  of  the  learned  in  another  sense.  I  refer  to  the  communication  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  (Isaiah  Ixi.  1).  Never  was  there  a  tongue  like  Christ's— so 
learned,  so  skilled,  so  practised,  and  so  experienced.  "Never  man  spake  like  this 
man."  4.  The  purpose  for  which  this  tongue  of  the  learned  was  given  Him  is  thus 
described — "That  He  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is 
weary."  (1)  A  word,  (2)  a  word  in  season,  (3)  that  He  should  know  how  to  speak. 
5.  But  when  Christ  speaks  to  the  weaiy,  it  is  not  to  the  outward  ear  merely,  but  to 
the  heart — with  almighty  power.  And  the  resvdt  is  rest.  III.  The  rest  which 
Jestts  impahts,  when  He  speaks  the  word  in  season.  1.  We  are  seeking  rest  by 
nature  everywhere,  and  in  everything  but  in  Jesus.  Wo  seek  it  in  the  outward 
world,  in  the  moral  world,  in  the  religious  world — and  we  find  it  not.  We  seek  it 
in  conviction,  in  ordinances,  in  doing  the  works  of  the  law — and  still  it  evades  us. 
We  go  from  place  to  place,  and  from  means  to  means,  and  still  the  burden  presses, 
and  we  find  no  rest.  No,  and  never  will,  until  it  is  sought  and  found  in  Jesus. 
2.  Yet,  in  the  case  of  a  tried  believer,  the  rest  that  Jesus  imparts  does  not  always 
imply  the  removal  of  the  burden  from  which  the  sense  of  weariness  proceeds.  The 
burden  is  permitted  to  remain,  and  yet  rest  is  experienced.  Wonderful  indeed  I 
How  is  it  explained  ?  That  burden  takes  us  to  Jesus.  He  pours  strength  into  our 
souls,  life  into  our  spirits,  and  love  into  our  hearts,  and  so  we  find  rest.  It  is  also 
matter  of  much  practical  importance,  that  you  take  heed  not  to  anticipate  or  forestall 
His  promised  grace.  For  every  possible  emergency  in  which  you  can  be  placed,  the 
fulness  of  Christ  and  the  supplies  of  the  Covenant  are  provided.  But  that  provision 
is  only  meted  out  as  the  necessity  for  which  it  was  intended  occurs.  3.  There  is  an 
hour  approaching — the  last  great  crisis  of  human  life — when  we  shall  all,  more  than 
ever,  need  Him  who  hath  the  "tongue  of  the  learned."  It  will  be  of  all  seasons  the 
most  trying  and  solemn — the  season  that  separates  the  soul  from  the  body,  and 
ushers  the  immortal  spirit  into  eternity.  Is  it  not  our  highest  wisdom  to  know  this 
Saviour  now  ?  (C  Ross,  M.A.)  A  word  to  the  weary : — I.  The  power  of  speaking 
TO  the  weary  is  nothing  less  than  a  Divine  gift.  We  may  say  the  right  word 
in  a  wrong  tone.  II.  Though  the  gift  itself  is  Divine,  it  is  to  be  exercised 
seasonably.  It  is  not  enough  to  speak  the  right  word,  it  must  be  spoken  at  the 
right  moment.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ  speaking  a  word  in  season  to  the  weary  :— 
I.  Consider  the  state  and  character  of  those  that  ark  weary.  II.  Show, 
from  the  character  and  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  He  is  a 

SEASONABLE    AND    ALL-SUFFICIENT    SaVIOUR    TO    THOSE    WHO    ARE    WEARY.      The 

excellency  and  glory  of  Christ  may  not  only  be  perceived  by  viewing  Him  in  the 
whole  of  His  mediatorial  character  ;  but,  also,  by  fixing  on  specific  parts  of  it,  and 
showing  that  there  is  a  Divine  suitability  to  all  the  exigencies  of  ruined  men. 
1.  He  can  give  rest  to  the  mind  of  the  man  who  is  wearied  with  his  researches  after 
human  wisdom.  2.  He  can  give  rest  to  those  who  are  oppressed  under  a  sense  of 
guilt.  3.  He  can  speak  a  word  in  season  to  those  who  have  wearied  themselves  in 
attempting  to  establish  their  own  righteousness.  4. .  He  can  give  rest  to  those  who 
have  wearied  themselves  in  vainly  trying  to  overcome  their  corruptions  in  their  own 
strength.  5.  He  can  speak  a  word  in  season  to  those  who  are  weary  with  the  weight 
of  affliction  and  trouble.  6.  He  can  give  rest  to  those  who  are  oppressed  and  wearied 
with  the  cares  of  this  world.  7.  Christ  can  speak  a  word  in  season  to  those  who  are 
weary  of  living  in  this  world.  None  of  the  children  of  men  can  ei^'oy  rest,  or  real 
peac*  of  mind,  but  through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    {J.  Matheson.)     The 


CEAP.  I..]  ISAIAH.  5 

ministry  of  preaching  (with  Acts  xx.  27).  The  first  passage  is  spoken  by  the  Messiah, 
the  second  by  St.  Paul.  The  one  looks  forward,  the  other  backward.  The  one 
speaks  of  a  preparation  and  fitness  for  a  work  yet  to  be  done  ;  the  other  is  a  thankful 
record  of  a  mission  already  faithfully  accomplished.  I.  In  thb  first  passaqb  tott 
HAVE  THE  Chief  Minister  of  the  Church  anticipating  His  work  of  teaohino 
AND  announcing  His  FITNESS  FOR  THE  WORK.  1.  Observe  the  gift  with  which 
He  claims  to  be  endowed  as  one  element  of  special  fitness  for  His  ministry.  Speech 
was  the  chief  instrument  employed  by  Christ  for  conveying  truth  to  tlie  minds  of 
men.  The  dispensation  under  which  we  live,  so  emphatically  designated  the  dis- 
pensation of  the  Spirit ,  was  ushered  in  by  two  miracles,  both  of  which  related  to  the 
tongue.  The  Holy  Spirit  Himself  appeared  resting  upon  each  one  in  the  form  of 
cloven  tongues  as  of  fire.  A  second  miracle  was  wrought  on  the  uneducated  Galilean 
apostles,  enabling  them,  without  learning,  to  speak  intelligently  in  the  dialects  of  all 
the  nationalities  present,  so  that  every  man  heard  them  speak  in  his  own  language. 
And  why,  at  the  very  founding  of  Christianity,  was  this  twofold  miracle  wrought 
in  relation  to  the  tongue,  if  not  to  indicate  that  the  Holy  Spirit  purposed  to  employ 
speech  as  the  chief  instrument  in  the  regeneration  of  mankind  ?  2.  The  purpose  for 
which  this  gift  of  speech  is  to  be  employed.  ' '  To  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him 
that  is  weary."  (1)  You  will  have  to  speak  to  men  sufiFering  from  mental  weariness 
— men  who  have  long  searched  for  truth  and  failed  to  find  it.  See  that  ye  be  well 
furnished  with  the  Spirit,  who  has  promised  to  guide  you  into  all  truth,  and  who 
also  will  help  you  to  guide  others  into  all  truth.  (2)  You  will  have  others  wearied 
in  body,  through  excessive  labour  or  sore  affliction.  You  may  tell  them  of  the 
illustrious  Sufferer  of  Calvary  who,  though  innocent,  sufl'ered  for  our  sins ;  was  in 
all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are  ;  and  who,  therefore,  is  able  to  succour  all  those 
who  are  tempted.  (3)  You  will  have  others  wearied  in  heart,  by  reason  of  bereave- 
ment. Imitating  the  Great  Teacher  in  the  bereaved  family  of  Bethany,  you  must 
direct  the  thought  of  the  sorrowful  to  the  resurrection  power  of  Christ,  when  the 
mortal  shall  put  on  immortality,  and  the  corruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption. 
(4)  Others  will  come  to  you  weary  of  the  vicissitudes,  disappointments  and  reverses 
of  life.  With  the  Master,  you  may  speak  to  them  of  the  lily,  the  sparrow,  the  grass, 
the  flower  of  the  field  ;  how  your  Heavenly  Father  careth  for  these,  but  how  much 
more  He  will  care  for  those  who  have  faith  in  and  love  towards  Him,  even  to  the 
numbering  of  every  hair  on  the  whitening  brow.  (5)  Others  will  come  with  weary 
consciences,  burdened  with  sin,  fearing  the  wrath  to  come,  carrying  with  them,  it 
may  be,  the  dread  secret  of  undiscovered  and  unconfessed  crime.  Take  solemn  heed 
that  the  word  you  speak  is  a  word  in  season.  Do  not  heal  lightly  the  wounds  thus 
made  by  the  Spirit.  Do  not  attempt  to  soothe  the  agony  by  minifying  the  guilt,  or 
lessening  the  condemnation,  or  diminishing  the  penalty.  Do  what  the  Spirit  does. 
Take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them  unto  the  penitent ;  show  them  in  their 
preciousness,  their  efficacy,  and  their  all-sufficiency.  (6)  Otliers  may  come  to  you 
weary  of  inbred  sin.  Open  your  ear  to  hear  what  the  Lord  your  God  will  say  unto 
you  ;  humbly  wait  with  an  upward  look  to  your  Great  Teacher,  and  He  will  give  you 
the  tongue  of  the  learned.  .3.  This  learning  claimed  by  the  Redeemer  is  set  forth  as 
progressive.  "He  wakeneth  Me  morning  by  morning.  He  wakeneth  mine  ear 
that  I  may  hear  as  disciples  do."  If  our  Lord  found  it  necessary  to  place 
Himself  in  the  position  of  a  pupil  to  receive  daily  instruction  from  the 
Divine  Father,  how  much  greater  need  is  there  for  you  who  are  His  ministers? 
You  cannot  learn  in  one  lesson  all  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  to  communicate. 
Cultivate  a  sensibility  of  soul,  a  readiness  to  hear  the  softest,  gentlest  tone  of  God, 
whether  in  nature,  in  providence,  in  history,  in  the  inspired  word,  or  in  the  deep 
secrets  of  your  own  heart.  II.  The  noble  testimony  of  the  noblest  apostle 
AT  the  close  of  his  MINISTRY  AT  EpHEsus.  (B.  Bolerts.)  The  weary  world 
and  the  refreshing  ministry : — I.  The  weary  world.  It  is  not  one  man  that  is 
weary,  the  generation  is  weary,  the  world  is  weary.  All  sinners  are  weary.  Wearied 
with  fruitless  efforts  after  happiness.  There  is  the  ennui  yawn,  and  the  groan  of 
depression  heard  everywhere.  II.  The  refreshing  ministry.  "  The  Lord  God 
hath  given  me,"  etc.  1.  The  relief  comes  by  speech.  No  physical,  legislative,  or 
ceremonial  means  will  do  ;  it  must  be  by  the  living  voice,  charged  with  sympathy, 
truth,  light.  2.  The  eflfective  speech  comes  from  God.  "The  Lord  God  hath  given 
Me  the  tongue  of  the  learned."  No  man  can  speak  the  soul-refreshing  thing  unless 
God  inspires  and  teaches  him.  3.  The  speech  that  comes  from  God  is  a  "word  in 
season."  It  is  exactly  suited  to  the  mood  of  the  souls  addressed.  (HomUisL)  A 
loord  M  ataaon  to   the  weary   (with    Matt    zi.    2S-S0) : — L    We   may   nams 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

wotTNDED  AFFECTIONS  OS  a  Very  frequent  cause  of  weariaess.  We  do  not  kuow, 
until  the  blow  comes,  how  heavily  we  have  been  leaning  on  the  stafiF  of  friendly 
sympathy.  Breaking  beneath  our  weight,  it  leaves  us  tottering  and  weary.  But 
amidst  all  our  heart-troubles  the  voice  of  the  Saviour  is  heard  saying,  "Rest! 
Come  unto  Me  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  II.  The  disappointment  of  oub 
DESiBES  is  another  common  antecedent  of  lassitude.  All  of  us  are  furnished  with 
larger  appetites  than  we  have  ability  or  opporlunity  for  satisfying.  Pleasure ! 
Money !  Power !  Reputation !  How  seldom  do  men  know  when  they  have 
enough  of  that  which  they  most  desire.  So,  as  the  material  of  sensuous  enjoyment 
becomes  exhausted,  the  sense  of  emptiness  becomes  more  painful.  But  in  this  mood, 
too,  we  are  met  by  the  Divine  Saviour :  "  Come  unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
For  Christ  would  fill  the  soul  with  the  only  object  of  desire  that  cannot  disappear  in 
its  grasp :  with  the  Eternal  Himself.  III.  Vacancy  of  mind  and  the  sense  of 
MONOTONY  is  another  common  cause  of  weariness.  "Nature  abhors  a  vacuum,"  as 
the  old  philosophers  said.  The  mind  cannot  endure  its  own  emptiness.  It  is  so 
constituted  that  it  must  have  change  and  variety  of  impressions,  and  ideas  ;  otherwise 
it  turns  upon  itself,  and  its  fine  mechanism  is  worn  down  with  useless  friction.  But 
He  who  comes  to  reveal  the  Father  meets  us,  too,  in  this  mood  of  self-weariness.  It 
is  His  message  to  teU  us  of  a  new  self  which  it  is  the  will  of  God  to  impart  to  us  ; 
a  new  heart  in  which  it  may  please  God  to  dwell,  and  with  which  He  can  hold 
fellowship.  The  man  who  yields  himself  to  the  Spirit,  and  is  bom  of  the  Spirit, 
need  no  longer  be  disgusted  with  himself,  having  found  his  nature  anew  in  God. 
IV.  But  the  load  of  A  guilty  conscience  is  even  more  fatiguing  than  that  of  a 
vacant  mind.  Need  it  be  pointed  out  how  profoundly  Christ  meets  this  guilty 
dejection  of  the  human  heart  ?  V.  Quite  a  different  cause  of  weariness  is  to  be  found 
in  THE  BURDEN  OF  EARNEST  THOUGHT  AND  NOBLE  ENDEAVOUR.  For  the  Christian, 
it  is  enough  that  his  Saviour  has  "suffered  in  the  flesh" — has  borne  "the  weary 
weight  of  all  this  unintelligible  world " in  uncomplaining  meekness.  He  is  to  "arm 
himself  likewise  with  the  same  mind."  {E.  Johnson,  M.  A.)  Noble  gi/ts  for  lowly 
uses: — I.  God's  highest  gifts  have  their  definite  end  and  purpose.  In 
Nature,  for  instance,  nothing  has  been  created  in  vain.  And  so  it  ought  to  be  in 
human  life,  that  world  of  feeling  and  desire  within  the  breast  of  man.  You  see  that 
the  prophet  looked  upon  the  tongue  of  the  learned  as  a  gift  from  God,  holding  it  in 
trust,  where  many  would  have  counted  it  as  their  own.  And  he  saw  it  was  a  gift 
for  very  plain  and  apparent  purposes^for  men  are  stewards,  and  not  owners  of  all 
that  is  bestowed  upon  them.  This  splendid  administrative  genius  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race,  dominant  and  even  imperious,  but  only  because  it  has  seen  into  the 
heart  of  purposes  working  themselves  out  in  the  midst  of  the  ages,  the  wealth  it  has 
acquired,  the  influence  it  commands,  has  this  no  meaning  in  the  economy  of  nations  ? 
You  only  need  the  touch  of  Christ  to  consecrate  it  and  turn  it  into  right  channels, 
and  the  whole  world  is  blessed  thereby.  "We  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the 
infirmities  of  the  weak."  II.  This  definite  purpose  is  a  very  simple  one,  and 
POSSIBLY  at  first  SIGHT  INSUFFICIENT.  Ambition  would  say  so,  and  ambition  is 
as  natural  to  the  human  heart  as  desire  itself.     We  ask  great  things,  we  would  be 

freat  things,  we  would  do  them.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  no  sin  of  man 
as  been  more  constant  and  apparent  than  that  which  has  made  men  look  down 
upon  these  lowly  uses  belonging  unto  lofty  gifts.  A  proud  reserve  has  been 
considered  in  all  ages  as  appropriate  to  commanding  talents.  The  statesman's 
wisdom,  the  orator's  art,  the  poet's  fire,  what  are  they  side  by  side  with  all  that 
wondrous  wealth  lavished  upon  simple  fishermen  in  Galilee,  and  carried  into  the 
home  of  Lazarus,  and  spent  among  the  humble  poor.  Between  the  highest  bom 
among  men  and  the  humblest  service  henceforward  there  can  be  no  disparity.  "  If 
I,  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet,"  He  said  to  His  disciples, 
"ye  ought  also  to  wash  one  another's  feet."  And  as  with  individuals,  so  with 
nations.  God  gives  special  gifts  for  His  own  purposes.  III.  This  purpose  IS  A 
VERY  URGENT  AND  APPROPRIATE  ONE.  After  all,  the  end  is  not  beneath  the  means. 
It  needs  the  tongue  of  the  learned  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary, 
that  word  fitly  spoken  which  dries  the  tear  from  the  eye,  and  banishes  sorrow  from 
the  heart.  To  do  away  with  pain  and  assuage  grief,  is  not  that  a  noble,  a  Divine 
thing  ?  And  will  you  see  how  Christianity  has  been  doing  this  in  lower  and  yet 
very  important  directions,  permeating  society  by  its  subtle  influences  for  good  T 
And  more  when  you  understand  Isaiah's  words  in  their  true  and  spiritual  signifi- 
cance, what  a  field  of  usefulness  unfolds  itself  1  For  the  great  burdens  of  maukind 
ftre  not  physical,  bat  menttd  and  spirituaL     ( fV.  Bcaxndale,)     Words  tn  season  for 


CHAP,  i^]  ISAIAH.  7 

the  weary : — I.  The  education  of  thk  Divine  Seevant.  We  must  notice  the 
difference  between  the  authorized  version  and  the  new.  In  the  one,  "the  Lord  God 
hath  given  Me  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  that  I  should  know."  In  the  other,  "of 
them  that  are  taught" — or,  as  the  margin  reads,  "of  disciples."  The  thought  being 
that  the  Lor^I  Jesus  in  His  human  life  was  a  pupil  in  the  school  of  human  pain, 
under  the  tutelage  of  His  Father.  1.  His  education  was  by  God  Himself.  2.  It 
was  various.  He  passed  through  each  class  in  the  school  of  weariness.  3.  It  was 
constant.  "Morning  by  morning"  the  Father  woke  Him.  4.  It  dealt  with  the 
season  for  administering  comfort.  ' '  That  I  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  in 
season."  There  are  times  when  the  nervous  system  is  so  overstrained  that  it  cannot 
bear  even  the  softest  words.  It  is  best  then  to  be  silent.  A  caress,  a  touch,  or  the 
stillness  that  breathes  an  atmosphere  of  calm,  will  then  most  quickly  soothe  and 
heal.  This  delicacy  of  perception  can  only  be  acquired  in  the  school  of  suffering. 
5.  It  embraced  the  method.  "That  I  should  know  how."  The  manner  is  as 
important  as  the  season.  A  message  of  good-will  may  be  uttered  with  so  little 
sympathy,  and  in  tones  so  gruff  and  grating,  that  it  will  repel.  The  touch  of  the 
comforter  must  be  that  of  the  nurse  on  the  fractured  bone — of  the  mother  with  the 
frightened  child.  II.  His  besolution.  From  the  tirst,  Jesus  knew  that  He  must 
die.  The  Lord  God  poured  the  full  story  into  His  ojiened  ear.  With  all  other  men, 
death  is  the  close  of  their  life ;  with  Christ  it  was  the  object.  We  die  because  we 
were  bom  ;  Christ  was  born  that  He  might  die.  On  one  occasion,  towards  the  close 
of  His  earthly  career,  when  the  fingers  on  the  dial-plate  were  pointing  to  the  near 
fulfilment  of  the  time,  we  are  told  He  set  His  face  steadfastly  to  go  to  Jerusalem. 
What  heroism  was  here  !  Men  sometimes  speak  of  Chris  c  as  if  He  were  efieminate 
and  weak,  remarkable  only  for  passive  virtues.  But  such  conceptions  are  refuted  by 
the  indomitable  resolution  which  set  its  face  like  a  flint,  and  knew  that  it  would  not 
be  ashamed.  Note  the  voluntariness  of  Christ's  surrender.  The  martyr  dies  because 
he  cannot  help  it ;  Christ  dies  because  He  chose.  It  has  been  thought  that  the 
opened  ear  refers  to  something  more  than  the  pushing  back  of  the  flowing  Oriental 
locks  in  order  to  utter  the  secret  of  coming  sorrow.  It  is  supposed  to  have  some 
reference  to  the  ancient  Jewish  custom  of  boring  the  ear  of  the  slave  to  the  doorpost 
of  the  master's  house.  Under  this  metaphor  it  is  held  that  our  Lord  chose  with 
keen  sympathy  the  service  of  the  Father,  and  elected  all  that  it  might  involve, 
because  He  loved  Him  and  would  not  go  out  free.  The  images  may  be  combined. 
Be  it  only  remembered  that  He  knew  and  chose  all  that  would  come  upon  Him,  and 
that  the  fetters  which  bound  Him  to  the  Cross  were  those  of  undying  love  to  us  and 
of  burning  passion  for  the  Father's  glory.  III.  His  vindication.  "He  is  near 
that  justifieth  Me."  These  are  words  upon  which  Jesus  may  have  stayed  Himself 
through  those  long  hours  of  trial.  They  said  that  He  was  the  Friend  of  publicana 
and  sinners.  God  has  justified  Him  by  showing  that  if  He  associates  with  such,  it 
is  to  make  them  martyrs  and  saints.  They  said  that  He  was  mad.  God  has  justified 
Him  by  making  His  teaching  the  illumination  of  the  noblest  and  wisest  of  the  race. 
They  sai<l  He  had  a  devil.  God  has  justified  Him  by  giving  Him  power  to  cast  out 
the  devil  and  bind  him  with  a  mighty  chain.  They  said  that  He  blasphemed  when 
He  called  Himself  the  Son  of  God.  God  has  justified  Him  by  raising  Him  to  the 
right  hand  of  power,  so  that  He  will  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and 
great  glory.  They  said  that  He  would  destroy  the  temple  and  the  commonwealth 
of  Israel.  God  has  justified  Him  in  shedding  the  influence  of  the  Hebrew  people 
through  all  the  nations  of  the  world,  and  making  their  literature,  their  history, 
their  conceptions  dominant.  IV.  His  appeal  (ver.  16).  To  obey  the  Lord's 
servant  is  equifalent  to  fearing  the  Lord.  He  who  does  the  one  must  do 
the  other.  What  is  this  but  to  proclaim  His  Deity?  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A 
word  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary. — A  word  to  the  weary: — To  speak  a  word  is 
easy,  to  speak  a  word  in  season  is  difficult ;  but  to  speak  a  word  in  season  t»  him 
that  is  weary  is  more  difficult  still ;  and  yet  to  be  able  to  accomplish  this  end  wisely 
and  successfully  is  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  benefactors  to  our  race.  {E.  Mellor, 
D.D.)  Weariness — the  word  reveals  its  parentage  clearly  enough.  To  be  weary  is 
to  be  worn — or  worn  out — or  worn  down.  One  wears  his  coat  until  it  is  worn  out ; 
and  so  you  wear  your  strength  until  it  is  worn  out.  There  is  a  weariness  also  which  is 
not  the  residt  of  excessive  toil,  but  of  indolence.  For  no  man  sighs  so  much, 
complains  so  much,  fears  so  much,  as  the  man  who  sets  himself  the  task  of  passing 
through  life  doing  nothing.  Sometimes  weariness  is  a  virtue  ;  sometimes  it  is  a  sin. 
But  whether  it  be  virtue  or  sin,  there  is  no  man  who  does  not  know  well  what  it  is 
to  be  weaiy.    {Ibid.)     Wwrda  to  the  weary : — We  have  many  doors  in  our  nature, 


8  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.u 

and  at  every  one  of  these  weariness  may  enter.     I.  There  is — to  begin  at  the  lowest 
door  of  all — the  physical  one,  the  weariness  which  comes  to  its  from  bodily 
TOIL,  or  from  toil  which,  whether  bodUy  or  not,  tells  upon  the  body  by  wasting  for 
the  time  its  energies.     So  far  as  such  toil  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  very  funda- 
mental conditions  of  our  existence,  the  weariness  which  ensues  upon  it  is  a  Divine 
appointment,  and  the  most  benign  provision  has  been  made  for  meeting  and  banish- 
ing it.     You  need  no  word  in  season  for  such  Aveariness  as  this.     There  is  something 
better  than  a  word  for  you.     There  is  night  with  its  soothing  darkness.     There  is  your 
bed  with  its  repose ;  and  there  is  sleep,  ' '  Nature's  soft  nurse,  that  doth  knit  the  ravelled 
sleeve  of  care,  and  steep  your  senses  in  forgetfulness."     And  there  is  not  merely 
the  night,  but  the  Sabbath.     But  there  is  also  a  weariness  which  has  the  nature  of  a 
chastisement,  because  it  is  produced  by  excessive  and  needless  toil.     While  labour  is 
a  Divine  thing  in  just  measure,  yet,  when  it  becomes  care,  worry,  vexation,  hot  and 
insatiable  ambition,  greed,  it  becomes  criminal,  and  draws  after  it  sooner  or  later  grim 
consequences,  the  thought  of  which  ought  to  make  men  pause.    You  cannot  run  both 
quickly  and  long.     What  is  the  word  in  season  for  such  cases  as  these  ?    The  word 
may  not  be  pleasant,  for  the  words  in  season  which  God  utters  to  us  are  often  like 
thunderclaps  to  startle  us,  or  like  a  firm  grip  of  the  hand  which  seems  to  say,  ' '  Stop, 
or  you  are  undone. "    But  surely  the  word  in  season  to  many  is :  Release  your  strain, 
moderate  your  speed,  economize  your  energies,  stop  up  the  leak  through  which  your 
health  is  trickling  already,  and  may  soon  be  rushing  like  a  stream  ;  what  shall  it 
profit  you  if  you  gain  the   whole  world,  and  lose  your  life?     II.  Some  men  are 
WEARY  WITH  PLEASURE.     There  is  no  decree  of  God  more  stern  or  more  inflexible 
than  that  which  has  determined  that  misery  shall  be  the  constant  companion  of  the 
man  that  seeks  pleasure.    He  may  be  a  swift  runner,  but  pleasure  rims  more  swiftly 
still.     Let  us  accept  it  as  a  moral  axiom  which  has  no  exception,  that  the  fulfilment 
of  duty  is  the  condition  of  happiness  in  this  world.     The  word  in  season,  therefore, 
for  those  who  are  weary  in  pleasure  is  this :  Revise  and  reverse  your  whole  judg- 
ment as  to  what  you  are  and  as  to  your  relation  to  God,  and  this  world,  and  the  world 
which  is  to  come.     III.  Some  men  are  weary  with  well-doing  which  seems  to 
COME  TO  so  POOR  AN  END.     This  is  SO  common  a  tendency  that  we  are  warned 
against  it,   "Be  not  weary  in  well-doing,  for  in  due  season  ye  shall  reap  if  ye  faint 
not."     "Be  ye  steadfast,  unmovable,"  etc.     Men  who  are  working  for  God  in  this 
world  have  doubtless  a  heavy  task  in  hand.     The  soil  is  uncongenial.     It  is  beaten 
hard  with  sin  and  evil  habit ;  and  the  ploughshare  enters  it  with  difficulty,  and  with 
difficulty  makes  its  way.     Take  any  spliere  of  benevolence  you  like,  whether  the 
lower  one  of  sympathy  with  the  common  sufferings  of  man,  or    the  higher  one  of 
concern  for  their  spiritual  necessities  and  son-ows  and  dangers,  and  the  labour  is  no 
holiday  play.     Well-doing  appears  so  often  like  building  in  a  quagmue.     We  sow 
good  seed,  and  then  the  enemy  sows  tares.     We  root  up  one  evil,  and  another 
springs  up  in  its  stead.    Well-doing  in  the  shape  of  teaching  would  not  be  so  wearying 
if  the  children  were  not  so  listless,  so  rude,  so  dull,  so  forgetful,  so  disappointing. 
Well-doing  in  the  shape  of  charity  would  not  be  so  wearying  if  there  were  not  so 
much  of  ingratitude  and  imposture.     What  is  the  word  in  season  to  those  who  are 
weary  in  such  good  work  ?     Such  as  these  :  Think,  before  you  withdraw  from  what 
appears  to  be  unfruitful  labour,  that  God  still  holds  on  His  Divine  purpose,  and  is 
kind  to  the  unthankful  and  the  evil ;  think  that  He  is  good  and  doetli  good  con- 
tinually, and  that,   were  He  to  grow  weary  in  well-doing,  He  would  plunge  the 
world  into  desolation  in  a  moment.     Think,  too,  that  if  you  grow  weary,  all  others 
may  grow  weary  too,  and  that  then  the  world  will  be  left  to  itself :  ignorance,  vice, 
crime,  wretchedness  spreading  with  every  hour,  until  the  eartli  will  be  little  better 
than  a  suburb  of  hell  itself.     Think,  too,  that  in  well-doing  you  do  find  some 
results,  though  they  may  not  be  equal  to  >our  hope,  and  that  the  results,  though 
unseen,  may  still  be  there,  and  will  appear  some  (-ay,  and  be  reaped  by  another's 
hand.     And  be  sure  of  this,  that  nothing  good  is  ever  lost.     IV.  Tiiere  are  those 
who  are  weary  of  the  strife  with  sin.     This  is  emphatically  the  battle  of  life 
and  the  battle  for  life.     What  \&  the  word  in  season  to  him  who  is  thus  weary  f 
This — that  Christ  has  already  vanquished  your  most  powerful  foe,  and  will  make  you 
more  than  conqueror.     V.  There  is  one  word  more  in  season  for  those  who  are 
WEARY  IN  SIN,  BUT  NOT  YET  WEARY  OF  IT.     Would  to  God  they  were  weary  of  it  I 
for  to  feel  it  to  be  a  burden  and  a  woe  is  the  first  step  to  deliverance.     {Ibid.) 
Weary  souls:— So  far  as  we  can  tell,  all  life  is  joyous,  except  that  of  humanity. 
Even  those  creatures  which  are  under  the  care  of  man  have  not  the  joyousness  they 
might  have  if  they  were  roaming  the  fields  or  hilla.    Look  at  the  horse  on  the 


CHAP.  1.1  ISAIAH,  f 

I 

American  prairies  ;  see  him  in  some  of  the  cabs  and  coal  cArts  at  home  I  Thoagh 
the  life  of  birds  and  animals  is  naturally  a  happy  one,  the  life  of  humanity,  for 
the  most  part,  is  one  of  trouble.  People  who  fiirmly  resolve  to  act  rightly  and 
Christianly  in  this  world,  shall  certainly  "  have  tribulation."  In  the  Bible,  we 
have  the  record  of  many  people  who  knew  what  it  is  to  have  a  weary  souL  Above 
all  weaiy  souls,  let  us  remember  the  loving  Saviour,  who  was  "a  man  of  sorrows 
and  acquainted  with  grief."  L  You  may  be  wbabt  with  the  partiottlar 
BUBDKN  WHICH  WEIGHTS  YOUE  LIFE.  Every  One  of  US  has  a  special  burden  of  our 
own.  The  Christian  philosophy  of  burden-bearing  is  to  take  things  as  we  find  them 
and  make  the  best  of  them  ;  not  like  a  vicious  horse  to  kick  against  the  '*  splinter 
board,"  or  set  up  our  back  reb'elliously.  Directly  we  submit  to  the  yoke,  and  say 
"Thy  will  be  done,"  our  burden  becomes  lighter.  The  Divine  Word  teaches  that 
your  life  has  a  Divine  purpose,  II.  Perhaps,  your  soul  is  weary  because  of  the 
TJNKiNDNEss  OF  YOTTR  FRIENDS.  Let  your  only  aim  be  to  please  God  and  do  your 
duty ;  and  then,  though  the  action  of  friends  may  grieve  you,  it  shall  neither  hinder 
your  work  nor  give  you  a  weary  soul.  III.  But  another  may  say  that  his  weary 
soul  is  caused  by  His  sin.  When  you  behold  Jesus  on  the  Cross  you  will  see  what 
He  sutfered  for  sin ;  and  when  you  behold  Him  risen  from  the  dead,  you  will  see  the 
power  at  your  hand  to  enable  you  to  flee  from  every  temptation.  IV.  Some  of  you 
may  have  weary  souls,  because  Y0X7R  LIFE  is  very  bitter.  But  in  heaven  your 
sorrow  and  sighing,  like  that  of  the  apostle  John,  shall  flee  away.  {W.  Birch.) 
A  word  to  the  weary  : — I.  Are  there  any  weary  wordlings  here  t  The  soul  of  man 
once  found  its  rest  in  God.  Weary,  was  a  word  unknown  in  the  language  of  Eden ; 
for  Jehovah  was  then  the  spirit's  home.  Its  affections  reposed  upon  the  all-sufficient 
God.  He  was  a  Friend  of  whose  company  the  soul  could  never  tire,  and  in  whose 
serviee  it  never  could  grow  weary.  But  now  that  the  soul  has  taken  leave  of  God, 
it  has  never  found  another  rest  like  Him.  Till  it  comes  to  live  on  God  Himself,  the 
hungry  soul  of  man  never  will  be  satisfied.  Ye  worldlings,  who  wander  joyless 
through  a  godless  world,  with  weary  feet  and  withered  hearts,  seeking  rest  and 
finding  none,  come  to  Jesus,  and  He  will  give  you  rest.  II.  Are  there  any  weary 
WITH  the  burden  of  unpardoned  guilt?  You  remember  when  Christian  had 
panted  up  the  hill,  and  came  in  sight  of  the  Cross,  how  his  burden  fell  off  and  rolled 
away  down  into  the  sepulchre  ;  and  you  remember  how  he  wondered  that  the  sight 
of  a  cross  should  instantly  relieve  him  of  his  load.  Come  to  Christ  upon  the  Cross, 
and  you  will  understand  the  pilgrim's  wonder ;  for  your  burden  will,  in  like  manner, 
fall  off  and  disappear.  III.  Are  there  any  wearied  with  the  greatness  of 
THEIR  WAY  t  You  have  been  long  seeking  salvation.  Suppose  that  one  of  those 
winter  evenings  you  went  down  into  the  country  on  a  visit  to  a  friend.  It  is  a  dark 
night  when  the  stage  coach  stops ;  the  conductor  steps  down,  opens  the  door,  and 
lets  you  out.  He  tells  you  that  your  friend's  house  is  hard  by,  and  if  the  night  were 
a  little  clearer,  you  would  see  it  just  over  the  way.  "  'Tis  but  a  step,  you  cannot 
miss  it."  However,  you  contrive  to  miss  it.  Your  guide  springs  up  into  the  box — 
the  long  train  of  lamp  light  is  lost  in  misty  gloom,  and  the  distant  rumble  of  the 
wheels  is  drowned  in  the  rush  of  the  tempest.  You  are  left  alone.  The  directions 
you  received  were  quite  correct,  and  if  you  followed  them  implicitly,  you  could  not 
go  wrong.  But  you  have  a  theory  of  the  matter  in  your  own  mind.  "  What  did 
he  mean  by  saying,  that  it  was  just  a  step  t  He  cannot  live  so  very  near  the  high- 
way. "  You  pass  the  gate,  and  plod  away  up  the  hill,  till  at  last  you  become  impatient 
— for  there  are  no  symptoms  of  a  dwelling  here.  You  turn  aside  into  this  lane,  and 
you  climb  over  that  stile,  till  weary  with  splashing  through  miiy  stubble  fields,  and 
all  drenched  with  driving  rain,  you  find  yourself,  after  many  a  weary  round,  precisely 
where  you  started.  Half  dead  with  fatigue  and  vexation,  you  lift  the  latch  of  a 
cottage-door,  and  ask  if  they  know  where  snch-a-one  resides.  And  a  little  child 
undertakes  to  guide  you.  He  opens  a  wicket,  and  points  to  the  long  lines  of  light 
gleaming  through  a  casement  a  few  paces  distant.  "  Do  you  see  the  lights  in  yon 
window!  Well,  that  is  it;  knock,  and  they'll  open  the  door."  In  such  a  homely 
instance,  you  all  know  what  it  is  to  be  weary  in  the  greatness  of  yoar  way — to  spend 
your  strength  in  a  long  circuit,  when  a  single  step  might  have  sufficed.  But  are 
you  sure  ttiat  it  is  not  in  some  such  way,  that  you  "labour  and  find  no  rest," 
whilst  there  is  but  a  step  betwixt  you  and  Christ !  That  is  the  wisest  and  happiest 
course  which  the  sinner  can  take — to  go  at  once  to  the  Saviour.  {J.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
The  weary: — "Weary"  denotes  a  class  to  which  a  multitude  belong  that  no  man 
can  number,  of  every  nation,  kindred,  tribe,  and  people.  1.  Physical  weariness— 
•f  the  slay*  on  iib»  muchi  «f  th*  toiler  in  tbe  sweating  den ;  of  the  eeamstraei 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.u 

working  far  into  tlie  night  by  the  wasting  taper ;  of  the  mother  worn  with  watching 
her  sick  child.  2.  Mental  weariness — when  the  fancy  can  no  longer  summon  at  will 
images  of  beauty ;  and  the  intellect  refuses  to  follow  another  argument,  master 
another  page,  or  cast  up  another  column.  3.  Heart  weariness — waiting  in  vain  for 
the  word  so  long  expected  but  unspoken  ;  for  the  returning  step  of  the  prodigal ;  for 
the  long-delayed  letter.  4.  The  weariness  of  the  inner  conflict  of  striving  day  by 
day  against  the  selfishness  and  waywardness  of  the  soul  on  which  prolonged  resistance 
makes  so  slight  an  impression.  5.  Tlie  weariness  of  the  Christian  worker,  worn  by 
the  perpetual  chafe  of  human  sorrow,  sin,  and  need.  '  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The 
gift  of  consolation : — Nothing  so  clearly  betokens  a  tongue  befitting  the  disciples  of 
God  as  the  gift  of  consolation,  and  such  a  tongue  has  He  who  is  the  speaker  here  : 
"to  aid  with  words  him  who  is  exhausted" — through  the  pain  of  sufiFeiing  and 
mortification  of  spirit.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  He  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as  the 
learned. — God's  day  school: — '*  Morning  by  morning  He  openeth  mine  ear  to  hear  as 
the  scholars."  If  we  would  rightly  understand  this  Divine  application  of  Isaiah's 
words,  we  must  first  understand  the  human  application  of  them,  looking  through 
the  type  to  the  anti-type,  and  thus  beholding  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  as  "blind" 
and  "deaf,"  yet  "well-pleasing"  to  God  as  one  "magnifying  the  law  and  making 
it  honourable,"  and  both  shadowing  forth  and  preparing  the  way  for  the  perfect 
service  of  the  perfect  Servant.  Taking  first  then  this  human  view  of  the  text, 
observe — I.  The  closed  ears  of  God's  scholars.  "  He  openeth  mine  ear."  In  the 
earlier  description  of  Israel,  associated  with  Isaiah's  call  to  the  prophetic  oflBce  (a 
passage  more  frequently  quoted  in  the  New  Testament  than  any  other  words  of  the 
Old),  the  ear  is  said  to  be  "heavy,"  and  the  heart  "gross,"  and  the  eyes  "closed." 
Alas  !  this  is  the  sorrowful  condition  not  only  of  Israel  but  of  humanity.  II.  The 
closed  ears  Divinely  opened.  "He  openeth."  The  ear  is  too  heavy  for  the  word 
itself  to  penetrate  till  He  who  breathed  it  comes.  By  Him  it  is  opened,  at  a  time  of 
spiritual  crisis  oftentimes,  but  even  then  the  scholar  of  God  is  too  often  deaf  to  his 
Teacher's  voice.  His  ears  need  to  be  often  opened  anew.  "Morning  by  morning." 
We  must  all  be  day  scholars  in  the  school  of  God.  And  we  learn  "  as  the  scholars." 
The  double  meaning  of  this  word  "scholar"  suits  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
admirably.  A  "scholar"  is  one  who  is  learning  his  alphabet,  and  a  "scholar"  is 
also  one  that  knows  much  more  than  his  fellow-men,  and  can  teach  them  with  the 
"tongue  of  the  scholar."  But  there  must  be  learning  before  teaching,  and  if  we 
are  scholars  in  God's  school  we  shall  know  "more  than  the  ancients."  What 
then  are  His  lessons  ?  1.  The  first  lesson  God  teaches  is  a  lesson  of  obedience 
(ver.  5).  2.  The  second  lesson  God  teaches  is  a  lesson  in  patience  (ver.  6). 
Morning  by  morning  the  Divine  voice  calls  us  to  suffer  as  well  as  to  do.  3.  The 
third  lesson  God  teaches  is  a  lesson  in  boldness  (ver.  7).  Flint-like  are  the  true 
scholars  of  God.  Omnipotence  is  on  their  side  and  they  know  it.  4.  The  fourth 
lesson  God  teaches  is  a  lesson  in  service  (ver.  4).  The  ear  is  opened  that  the 
tongue  may  be  loosed  to  speak  for  Him  who  opened  it.  Every  scholar  must  be  a 
teacher.  Look  at  the  application  of  the  text  to  Jesus  Christ.  Isaiah  was  His 
favourite  book,  and  this  text  doubtless  was  often  in  His  mind,  as  it  was  once  upon 
His  lips.  (1)  Do  we  learn  obedience  ?  He  also  "  learned  obedience  by  the  things 
that  He  suffered,"  so  that  it  was  "  His  meat  "  to  do  the  will  of  God  always,  and  in 
Him  only  was  the  ideal  attitude  of  obedience  realized.  "  Lo  I  come  :  I  delight  to 
do  Thy  will,  0  My  God."  (2)  Do  we  painfully  learn  the  lesson  of  patience?  Let 
ns  "consider  Him  who  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners."  (3)  Do  we  gain 
something  of  His  boldness  ?  It  was  when  the  persecutors  of  the  earliest  disciples 
marvelled  at  the  boldness  which  they  showed  that  "  they  took  knowledge  of  them 
that  they  had  been  with  Jesus,"  for  at  His  feet  they  had  learned  this  manly 
virtue.  (4)  Do  we  attempt  service!  How  did  God's  holy  Servant  fulfil  His 
consoling  mission  by  speaking  words  in  season  to  the  weary  ?  And  the  old 
lesson  is  also  the  new,  "  Have  faith  in  God."  The  "  faith  "  of  the  New  Testament 
is  the  "trust"  of  the  Old.  (,H.  G.  Leonard,  M.A.)  The  inspiration  of  noble 
ideas: — ^Where  do  great  men  get  their  noblest  ideas?  Michael  Angelo  produced 
such  exquisite  faces  that  Fiesole  declared  he  must  have  been  in  paradise  to 
borrow  them.  A  watchful  heart  will  find  God  furnishing  thoughts  for  such 
a  generous  service.  One  wonders  whether  Goethe  had  not  been  lately  reading 
that  verse  (Isa.  1.  4)  when  he  said  that  his  best  thoughts  always  came  to  him 
unawares,  like  birds  pecking  at  his  windows,  and  saying,  "Here  we  are!"  (C. 
8.  Robinson,  D.D.)  God's  voice  hea/rd  in  stillness  :—%A\di  the  aged  Christian 
lady  to  Mark  Kutherford,  "  The  Toice  of  God,  to  me  at  least,  hardly  ever  comes 


CHAP.  L.]  ISAIAH.  11 

in  thunder,  but  I  have  to  listen  in  perfect  stillness  to  make  it  out."  Morning 
communion  with  Ood : — On  the  Ist  of  May,  in  the  olden  times,  many  inhabitants  of 
London  used  to  go  into  the  fields  to  bathe  their  faces  with  the  early  dew  upon  the 
grass  under  the  idea  that  it  would  render  them  beautiful.  This  may  have  been 
superstitious,  but  to  bathe  one's  face  every  morning  in  the  dew  of  heaven  by  prayer 
and  communion,  is  the  sure  way  to  obtain  true  beauty  of  life  and  character.  \C.  H. 
Spurgeon. ) 

Yer.  6.  I  gave  Mybaek  to  the  emitera. — T7i«  shame  amd  spitting: — I.  As  thb 
BEPREsENTATiVE  OF  GoD.  In  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus,  God  himself  came  into 
the  world,  making  a  special  visitation  to  Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  people,  but  at  the 
same  time  coming  very  near  to  all  mankind.  When  our  Lord  came  into  this  world 
as  the  representative  of  God,  He  came  with  all  His  Divine  power  about  Him  (ver.  2). 
He  did  equal  marvels  to  those  which  were  wrought  in  Egypt  when  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  was  made  bare  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  people.  It  is  true  He  did  not  change 
water  into  blood,  but  He  turned  water  into  wine.  He  did  not  make  their  fish  to 
stink,  but  by  His  word  He  caused  the  net  to  be  filled  even  to  bursting  with  great 
fishes.  He  did  the  works  of  His  Father,  and  those  works  bare  witness  of  Him  that 
He  was  come  in  His  Father's  name.  But  when  God  thus  came  among  men  He  was 
unacknowledged.  "What  saith  the  prophet?  "  "Wherefore  when  I  came  was  there 
no  man  ?  when  I  called  was  there  none  to  answer  \"  A  few,  taught  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  discerned  Him  and  rejoiced  ;  but  they  were  so  veir  few  that  we  may  say  of  the 
whole  generation  that  they  knew  Him  not.  Yet  our  Lord  was  admirably  adapted 
to  be  the  representative  of  God,  not  only  because  He  was  God  Himself,  but  because 
as  man  His  whole  human  nature  was  consecrated  to  the  work,  and  in  Him  was 
neither  flaw  nor  spot.  This  is  especially  the  sin  of  those  who  have  heard  the  Gospel 
and  yet  reject  the  Saviour,  for  in  their  case  the  Lord  has  come  to  them  in  the  most 
gracious  form,  and  yet  they  have  refused  Him.  II.  I  want  to  set  the  Lord  Jesos 
before  you  Ag  the  Stjrstittjte  for  His  people.  III.  As  the  Servant  of  God. 
1.  Christ  was  personally  prepared  for  service  (ver.  4).  2.  This  service  knew  no 
reserve  in  its  consecration.  Our  blessed  Master  was  willing  to  be  scoflFed  at  by  the 
lewdest  and  lowest  of  men.  3.  There  is  something  more  here  than  perfect  consecra- 
tion in  the  mere  form  of  it,  for  its  heart  and  essence  are  manifest  in  an  obedient 
delight  in  the  will  of  the  Father.  The  words  seem  to  express  alacrity.  It  is  not 
said  that  He  reluctantly  permitted  His  enemies  to  pluck  His  hair,  or  smite  His  back, 
bnt  "  I  gave  My  back  to  the  smiter,  and  My  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the 
hair."  4.  There  was  no  flinching  in  Him.  They  spat  in  His  face,  but  what  says 
He  in  the  seventh  verse  ?  "I  have  set  My  face  like  a  flint."  Oh,  the  bravery  of  our 
Master's  silence  !  Cruelty  and  shame  could  not  make  Him  speak.  5.  And  do  you 
notice  all  the  while  the  confidence  and  quiet  of  His  spirit  I  He  almost  seems  to 
say,  "  You  may  spit  upon  Me,  but  you  cannot  find  fault  with  Me.  You  may  pluck 
My  hair,  bnt  you  cannot  impugn  My  integrity.  You  may  lash  My  shoulders,  but 
you  cannot  impute  a  fault  to  Me,"  etc.  Be  calm  then,  0  true  servant  of  God  I  In 
patience  possess  your  soul.  Serve  God  steadily  and  steadfastly  though  all  men 
should  belie  you.  6.  The  last  two  verses  of  the  chapter  read  you  a  noble  lesson. 
"  He  gave  His  back  to  the  smiters  ; "  if,  then,  any  of  you  walk  in  darkness,  this  is 
no  new  thing  for  a  servant  of  God.  The  chief  of  all  servants  persevered,  though 
men  despised  Him.  Follow  Him,  then.  Stay  yourselves  upon  God  as  He  did,  and 
look  for  a  bright  ending  of  your  trials.  IV.  As  the  comforter  of  His  peoplb. 
1.  Our  blessed  Lord  is  well  qualified  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary, 
because  He  Himself  is  lowly,  and  meek,  and  so  accessible  to  us.  When  men  are  m 
low  spirits  they  feel  as  if  they  could  not  take  comfort  from  persons  who  are  harsh 
and  proud.  The  comforter  must  come  as  a  sufferer.  Your  Master  "gave  His  back 
to  the  smiters,  and  His  cheek  to  them  that  plucked  oft"  the  hair,"  and  therefore  He 
is  the  Comforter  you  want.  2.  Remark  not  only  His  lowliness,  but  His  sympathy. 
Are  you  full  of  aches  and  pains?  Jesus  knows  all  about  them,  for  He  "gave 
His  back  to  the  smiters."  Do  you  suffer  from  what  is  worse  than  pain,  from 
scandal  and  slander  ?  "He  hid  not  His  face  from  shame  and  spitting."  Have  you 
been  ridiculed  of  late  t  Jesus  can  sympathize  with  you,  for  you  know  what  unholy 
mirth  they  made  out  of  Him.  In  eveiy  pang  that  rends  your  heart  your  Lord  has 
borne  His  share.  Go  and  tell  Him.  3.  In  addition  to  His  gentle  spirit  and  His  power 
to  sympathize,  there  is  this  to  help  to  comfort  us — namely,  His  example,  for  He 
can  argue  thus  with  you,  "  I  gave  My  back  to  the  smiters.  Cannot  you  do  the 
like  t    Shall  the  disciple  be  above  his  master  t "    4.  His  «zampla  farther  comforts 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

ns  by  the  fact  that  He  was  calm  amid  it  all.  5.  Oar  Saviour's  tritunph  is  meant  to  be 
a  stimulus  and  encouragement  to  us.  (C  H.  S'pwrgeon. )  The  back  given  to  the  smUers  : 
— In  Ps.  cxxix.  3  the  same  figure  is  applied  to  the  sufferings  of  Israel  as  a  nation. 
(Prof.  J.  Skinner,  B.D. )  The  Bomcm  lash : — The  lash  is  nothing  among  us  com- 
pared with  what  it  was  among  the  Romans.  I  hare  heard  that  it  was  made  of  the 
sinews  of  oxen,  and  that  in  it  were  twisted  the  hucklebones  of  sheep,  with  slivers  of 
bone,  in  order  that  every  stroke  might  more  effectually  tear  its  way  into  the  poor 
quivering  flesh,  which  was  mangled  by  its  awM  strokes.  (C.  ff.  Spurgeon.) 
Plucking  off  the  havr : — Of  the  beard  (Ezra  ix.  8  ;  Neh.  xiii.  26) ;  an  extreme 
insult  to  an  Oriental,  to  whom  the  beard  is  the  symbol  of  dignity.  {Ptof-  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.) 

Yen.  7-9.  For  the  Lord  Ood  will  help  Me. — Messiah  neUhtr  ashxvmei  nor  put  to 

shame : — The  verse  is  better  rendered  thus :  "  But  the  Lord  Jehovah  helps  Me,  there* 
fore  I  was  not  ashamed"  {i.  e.  felt  no  shame);  "therefore  I  made  My  face  like 
flint"  (figure  for  determination,  Ezek.  iii  9),  "and  knew  that  I  should  not  be  put  to 
shame  "  (chap.  xlii.  4).  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  JD.D.)  Messiah  the  courageous  Champion : 
— The  Redeemer  is  as  famous  for  His  boldness  as  for  His  humili^  and  patience  ; 
and,  though  He  yield,  yet  He  is  more  than  a  conqueror.  Observe — I.  The  depend- 
ence He  hath  upon  God  (vers.  7,  9).  Whom  God  employs  He  will  assist,  and  will 
take  care  they  want  not  any  help  that  they  or  their  work  call  for.  Nor  will  He  only 
assist  Him  in  His  work,  but  accept  of  Him  (ver.  8).  By  His  resurrection  Christ  was 
proved  to  be  not  the  man  that  He  was  represented  ;  not  a  blasphemer,  etc.  II,  The 
CONFIDENCE  He  thereupon  hath  of  success  in  His  undertaking  (ver.  7).  III.  The 
DEFIANCE  which,  in  this  confidence.  He  bids  to  all  opposers  and  opposition.  God 
will  help  Me,  and  "therefore  have  I  set  My  face  like  a  flint."  {M.  Eenry.)  Tempta- 
tion to  shame  in  religion: — One  and  the  same  Divine  Person  speaks  in  all  this  section 
of  the  prophet  Isaiah.  One  and  the  same  Being  is  He,  throughout  this  section, 
who  speaks  as  "I ;"  "I  came,"  "  I  called:"  One  who  asks,  "Is  My  hand  short- 
ened that  it  cannot  save  ? "  and  then,  without  break,  without  transition,  speaks  of 
His  meritorious  obedience,  His  sufferings,  and  His  shame.  Our  Lord  Himself,  when 
prophesying  of  Himself  the  specific  humiliations  which  are  here  spoken  of  by  the 
prophet,  speaks  of  them  as  foretold  (Luke  xviii  31,  32).  But  how  then  as  to  the 
words  which  follow  ?  Our  Lord  came  into  the  world  to  suffer  ;  His  human  spirit 
was  straitened  until  those  sufferings  were  accomplished  ;  His  daily  sufferings  in  doing 
the  will  of  His  Father  were  His  daily  bread.  How  then  to  Him  belong  those  words 
which  seem  to  speak  of  human  struggle,  as  well  as  of  victory  :  "I  have  set  My  face 
like  a  flint,  and  I  know  that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed  "  ?  It  is  perhaps  best  explained 
by  that  great  rule  of  St.  Augustine:  "The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the 
Body.  For  He  willed  to  speak  too  in  us,  who  vouchsafed  to  die  for  us.  He  made 
ns  His  members.  Sometimes  therefore  He  speaks  in  the  person  of  His  members ; 
sometimes  in  His  own  Person,  as  our  Head ; "  "  and  the  whole  He  speaketh,  as 
though  it  were  one  Person."  The  words  of  prophecy  seem  to  be  tempered,  so  as  to 
include  us  His  members,  nay  rather  to  speak  of  our  victories  in  Christ,  and  of  our 
strength  supplied  by  Him,  the  Christian's  unashamed  boldness  in  the  cause  of  Christ. 
Those  holily  unashamed  of  God  now,  God  will  keep  from  shame  ;  on  those  ashamed 
of  Him,  He  will  bring  the  shame  they  shrink  from.  It  is  startling  to  see  how,  in 
the  account  of  the  last  severing  off  of  those  who  are  cast  out  for  ever  from  the  sight 
of  God,  the  first  place  is  occupied  by  cowards  (Rev.  xxi.  7,  8).  There  must,  then,  be 
something  far  more  malignant,  far  more  offensive  to  God,  and  more  destructive  to 
salvation,  than  men  think  of,  in  this  false  shame  before  men.  And  yet  no  one 
scarcely  gives  it  more  than  a  passing  thought ;  few  question  earnestly  their  own 
consciences  about  it ;  few  repent  of  it  towards  God,  or  ask  His  forgiveness  of  it.  It 
is  of  moment  to  know  the  intensity  of  the  first  temptation.  First,  men  cowardly 
disavow  what  they  know  to  be  right ;  then  they  profess  what  they  know  to  be  wrong ; 
then,  having  disavowed  God,  they  are  open  to  temptation,  from  whatever  quarter  of 
occasion,  or  surprise,  or  passion,  the  impulse  may  come.  They  have  kindled  their 
fire :  they  have  despised  the  grace  which  would  quench  it :  it  remains,  that  it  should 
consume  them.  And  yet,  while  its  influence  is  so  subtle,  that  it  escapes  men's 
observation,  unless  they  are  declaring  war  against  it,  it  is  the  earliest,  the  latest,  the 
most  infectious,  the  most  universal,  the  most  overspreading,  the  deadliest  disease  of 
the  soul.  It  antedates  passion,  and  it  outlives  it ;  it  occasions  countless  sins,  but 
itself  is  hid  under  the  sins  which  it  occasions  ;  it  destioys  the  goodness  of  all  which 
seems  good,  bat  is  nnfelt  like  paralysis ;  it  nijw  all  wakening  g(X>d,  bat  is  unseen  like 


CHAP.  I.]  ISAIAE.  13 

the  frost-wind ;  it  pleads  a  hatred  of  hypocrisy  and  of  profession,  and  is  itself  the 
worse  hypocrisy  of  the  two,  a  hypocrisy  of  evil ;  to  the  young,  it  puts  on  the  appear- 
ance of  good-nature  ;  to  the  elder,  of  courtesy  ;  to  the  saint,  of  charity  :  nothing  is  too 
low,  nothiug  too  high  for  its  attacks.     The  senselessness  of  the  sin  aggravates  its 
enormity.     What  is  it,  of  which  man  is  ashamed  ?     It  is  (and  this  is  a  yet  deeper 
aggravation),  it  is  uniformly  some  gift  or  grace  of  Almighty  God.     In  childhood,  it 
was  some  early  habit  of  piety,  which  God  had  vouchsafed  to  teach,  which  others  had 
not  been  taught  or  had  violated.     The  phases  of  the  sin  change  with  changing  years  ; 
its  essence  is  unchanged.     It  is  the  law  of  God,  or  the  truth  of  God,  or  the  friendship 
of  God,  and  God  Himself  in  all,  of  whom  man  stands  ashamed  before  man.     And 
what  is  this  world,  before  which  a  man  stands  ashamed  of  the  Infinite  God  ?    Away 
with  such  cowardly  thoughts  of  worshipping  God,  as  a  sort  of  Penates,  a  household 
god  who  is  to  be  owned  in  private  and  set  up  within  doors,  to  receive  his  lip-homage 
there,  and  be  forgotten  or  ignored  in  the  face  of  men.     Accustom  thyself  to  the 
thought  of  the  ever-present  Presence  of  thy  God ;  look  to  that  Eye  which  recalled 
Peter  to  Himself,  and  which  rests  on  thee ;  be  ashamed  to  be  ungrateful  to  thy 
Redeemer,  a  recreant  to  thy  God  ;  and  another  fear  will  displace  human  fear,  another 
shame  will  dispel  human  shame,  a  shame  which  maketh  not  ashamed,  a  shame  which 
is  the  earnest  of  everlasting  glory,  the  shame  to  be  ashamed  of  thy  God.     (E.  B. 
Pusey,  D.D.)    Therefore  have  I  set  My  face  like  a  flint. — I  set  My  face  like  a  flint : 
— "the  holy  hardness  of  perseverance  "  {Stier) ; — words,  too,  which  doubtless  have 
a  special  reference  to  the  historic  fulfilment.     "  When  the  time  was  come  that  He 
should  be  received  up,  He  steadfastly  set  His  face  (as  a  flint)  to  go  to  Jerusalem  " 
(Luke  ix.  51).    [Michaelis.)     The  strong  will: — The  happiest  of  gifts  for  a  man  to  be 
born  with  is  strength  of  will ;  not  that  a  man  can  by  it  avoid  suffering  and  sin  ;  but 
for  this — that  suffering  especially  raises  and  heightens  the  strong  will ;  that  when  it 
forsakes  sin  it  forsakes  it  without  a  sigh.     Happiness  within,  attractiveness  towards 
others,   ease  of  repentance  and  amendment,   firmness  against   opposition,  are  the 
splendid  dower  which  the  strong  will  brings  to  the  soul.     It  is  our  wisdom  then  to 
ask.  How  shall  we  keep  or  make  our  wills  strong  ?    1.  We  cannot  do  this  merely  by 
persisting  in  having  our  own  way,  as  we  call  it.     Our  own  way  may  be  wrong ;  and 
no  one  ever  uses  the  word  strength  in  connection  with  crime  or  fault — never  calls  a 
sinful,  a  wilful,  a  violent  man  a  strong  man.     The  reason  is  evident,  namely,  that 
wilful  sinning  is  only  using  a  will  in  the  direction  in  which  it  is  easiest  to  use  it. 
And  this  cannot  make  the  will  stronger,  any  more  than  a  mind  would  grow  strong, 
which  employed  itself  only  on  intellectual  work  which  presented  no  difficulty  to  it. 
The  will  must  make  progress  by  avoiding  things  to  which  it  is  prone,  and  by  aiming 
at  things  which  it  simply  knows  in  any  way  to  be  good,  although  for  the  time  being 
it  may  be  that  they  are  not  fully  desired.     2.  There  are  times  when  there  rises  before 
us  a  uoble  ideal  of  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  we  feel  an  impulse  to  believe  we  might 
be.     Wliat  is  that  ideal  ?     It  is  the  "  will  of  God  concerning  us."     It  is  what  we 
may  each  become  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     Into  this  ideal  we  cannot  at 
once  pass.     But  we  can  be  ever  approaching  it.     It  is  not  in  human  nature  to  make 
that  sudden  change,  but  it  is  perfectly  possible  to  make  a  beginning.     And  for  this 
purpose  we  must  call  in  the  aid  of  that  very  will  itself  to  act  upon  our  will ;  for  there 
is  no  power  in  us  higher,  more  primary,  than  the  will.     If  the  will  is  to  be  affected, 
the  will  itself  must  do  the  work.     Suppose  one  resolve  be  made  ;  then  here  at  once 
our  will  begins  to  be  of  constant  use  to  us,  and  to  grow  stronger  ru  itself.     Our  will 
is  not  really  acting  at  all  when  it  is  working  out,  however  strongly,  a  natural  inclina- 
tion.    The  will  is  only  strengthened  when  it  is  set  to  active  work,  something  which 
we   have  clearly  seen  to  be  our  duty,  although  when  we  come  to  do  it  we  find 
the  pursuit  of  it  tax  our  strength  exceedingly.     {Archbishop  Bens<m,  D.D.)     Tka 
Redeemer' s  face  set  like  a  flint : — I.  How  His  stern  resolve  was  tested.     1.  By 
the  offers  of  the  world.     The  populace  wanted  to  take  Him  by  force  and  make  Him 
a  king.     2.  By  the  persuasions  of  His  friends.      Christ's  kinsmen  said  that  He  was 
beside  Himself,  and  they  would  have  laid  hold  of  Him,  and  confined  Him  if  they  could. 
They  thought  His  zeal  had  carried  Him  beyond  the  bounds  of  reason  ;  and  when  He 
told  His  disciples  about  His  approaching  death  upon  the  cross,  ' '  Peter  took  Him, 
and  began  to  rebuke  Him,  saying,  Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord  :  this  shall  not  be  unto 
Thee  ; "  and  all  the  disciples  woiid  fain  have  persuaded  Him  to  choose  an  easier  path 
than  that  which  led  to  Calvary,  and  the  grave.     3.   By  the  unworthiness  of  His 
clients.     "He  came  unto  His  own,"  etc     4.  By  the  bitterness  which  He  tasted  at 
His  entrance  upon  His  great  work  as  our  substitutionary  sacrifice.     The  first  drops 
of  that  awful  tempest  which  fell  upon  Him  in  Gethsemane  were  hot  and  terrible.     5. 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

By  the  ease  with  which  He  could  have  relinquished  the  enterprise  if  He  had  wished 
to  do  80.  6.  By  the  taunts  of  those  who  scoffed  at  Him.  7.  By  the  full  stress  of 
the  death-agony.  II.  How  His  steadfast  resolve  was  sustained.  According 
to  our  text  and  its  connection — 1.  Our  Lord's  steadfastness  resulted  from  His  Divine 
schooling  (ver,  4).  2.  It  was  sustained  by  His  conscious  innocence  (ver.  8).  3.  It 
was  maintained  by  His  unshaken  confidence  in  the  help  of  God  (ver.  7).  4.  It  was 
sustained  by  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him  (Heb.  xii.  2).  III.  Christ's  stead- 
fast RESOLVE  imitated.  1.  If  there  is  anything  right  in  this  world,  be  on  the  side 
of  it.  2.  If  you  have  a  right  purpose  that  glorifies  God,  carry  it  out.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  Courage  in  danger : — Leonidas  being  told  that  the  Persian  archers  with 
whom  he  had  to  fight  were  so  numerous  that  their  arrows  would  darken  the  sun,  said, 
"So  much  the  better  ;  we  shall  then  fight  in  the  shade."  {E.  Macculloch.)  Fixed 
determination:  Joan  of  Arc: — It  was  in  vain  that  her  father,  when  he  heard  her 
purpose,  swore  to  drown  her  ere  she  should  go  to  the  field  with  men-at-arms :  it  was 
in  vain  that  the  priest,  the  wise  people  of  the  village,  the  captain  of  Vancoulers 
doubted  and  refused  to  aid  her.  "  I  must  go  to  the  king,"  persisted  the  peasant 
girl,  "  even  if  I  wear  my  limbs  to  the  very  knees.  I  had  far  rather  rest  and  spin  by 
my  mother's  side,"  she  pleaded,  with  a  touching  pathos,  "for this  is  no  work  of  my 
choosing  ;  but  I  must  goand  do  it,  for  my  Lord  willsit."  "And  who,"  they  asked, 
"is  your  Lord?"  "He  is  God."  Words  such  as  these  touched  the  rough  captain 
at  last ;  he  took  Jeanne  by  the  hand,  and  swore  to  lead  her  to  the  king.  {J.  H. 
Oreen. ) 

Vers.  8,  9.  He  is  near  that  jnstifieth  Me. — Jehovah  thejustifier : — ^The  conscious- 
ness of  innocence  is  expressed  (as  often  in  the  Book  of  Job)  under  the  conception  of 
a  legal  process.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  To  "justify"  is  to  show  to  be  in  the 
right,  by  giving  Him  victory  in  His  cause.  The  time-long  conflict  of  Israel  and  her 
religion  with  the  nations  and  their  idolatries  is  represented  under  the  figure  of  a 
process  or  pica  before  God's  tribunal.  The  triumph  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah  is 
Israel's  "justification,"  or  success  in  her  plea.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Messiah's 
justification : — By  His  resurrection  from  the  dead  and  ascension  to  the  right  hand 
of  God,  with  their  joyful  consequences,  He  was  declared  to  be  the  true  Messiah, 
and  the  Son  of  God  with  power  (Acts  ii.  36).  (R.  Macculloch.)  The  enemies  of 
Christ  as  a  moth-eaten  garment : — They  fall  into  decay  like  a  worn-out  garment,  and 
become  the  food  of  the  moth,  which  they  already  carry  within  them — a  figure  of 
destroying  power  which  works  imperceptibly  and  slowly,  yet  all  the  more  surely 
(chap.  11  8  ;  Job  xiii.  28  ;  Hos.  v.  12).     {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord! — Th^  fear  of  the  Lord 
blends  its  operations  with  the  exercise  of  every  other  grace.  It  intermixes  with 
faith,  and  renders  it  fruitful  ;  it  co-operates  with  love,  and  prevents  it  from 
becoming  secure  ;  it  unites  with  hope,  and  keeps  it  from  swelling  into  presumption  ;  it 
mingles  with  joy,  and  so  moderates  it  that  we  rejoice  with  trembling.  It  extends 
its  benign  influence  through  every  department  of  Divine  worship,  and  so  occupies 
the  mind  with  awful  respect  for  God  as  excites  to  caution  and  circumspection  in 
every  situation  and  service,  whilst  it  cherishes  amiable  humility  in  the  Divine 
presence.  {R.  Macculloch.)  "Light"  and  "darkness": — There  is  no  more  in- 
telligible image — none  more  interwoven  into  the  texture  of  popular  thought  and 
popular  phraseology — than  that  by  which  light  is  made  to  express  joy  and  felicity, 
while  darkness,  and  other  kindred  terms,  are  employed  to  denote  misery  and  dis- 
comfort. So  commonly  are  such  words  applied  in  a  metaphysical  sense,  that,  in  the 
case  of  some  of  them  (the  word  gloom,  for  example)  it  is  hardly  possible  to  say 
which  of  the  two  they  are  oftenest  used  to  indicate — a  certain  state  of  mind,  or  a 
certain  state  of  outward  nature.  {F.  M.  Goulbum,  D.C.L.)  The  child  of  light 
walking  in  darkness: — (1)  See  how  the  Lord  inquires  for  His  people.  In  every 
congregation  He  asks  this  question  :  "Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord  ? " 
These  are  the  wheat  upon  the  threshing-floor.  (2)  Observe,  how  clearly  the  Lord 
describes  His  own  people.  The  description  is  brief,  but  remarkably  full.  Holy 
reverence  within  the  heart,  and  careful  obedience  manifested  in  the  life,  these  are 
the  two  infallible  marks  of  the  true  man  of  God.  (3)  The  Lord  not  only  makes  an 
inquiry  for  these  people,  but  takes  note  of  their  condition.  I.  What  i.s  this 
CONDITION  INTO  WHICH  A  CHILD  OF  GoD  MAY  COME?  The  person  described  is 
one  that  fears  the  Lord,  and  obeys  the  voice  of  His  servant,  yet  "walketh  in 
darkness,    and  hath  no  light."     1.   To  many  who  know  nothing  of  Christian 


CHAP.  L.]  ISAIAH.  1* 

experience  this  condition  might  seem  to  be  a  surprising  one.  2.  This  condition  is  a 
aevere  test  of  grace.  3.  It  is  also  very  sorrowful.  4.  Perhaps  the  worst  feature  of 
this  darkness  is,  that  it  is  so  bewildering.  You  have  to  walk,  and  yet  your  way  is 
hidden  from  your  eyes.  5.  Yet  this  does  not  absolve  us  from  daily  duty.  The  walk 
has  to  be  continued,  though  the  light  has  departed.  "When  it  is  quite  dark,  it  is 
safe  to  sit  down  till  the  day  dawns.  If  I  cannot  sleep,  at  any  rate  I  can  quietly 
rest,  till  the  sun  is  up.  He  that  believe th  shall  not  make  haste.  But  what  if  you 
cannot  stand  still  ?  What  if  you  may  not  remain  where  you  are  ?  Something  has 
to  be  done,  and  done  at  once  ;  and  thus  you  are  compelled  to  walk  on,  though  you 
cannot  see  an  inch  before  you.     What  but  a  Divine  faith  can  do  this  ?    What  is 

THERE  TO  TRUST  TO  WHEN  YOTJ  ARE  IN  SUCH  A  CONDITION  AS  THAT  ?      1.    What  is 

there  to  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  ?  It  is  "  I  Am,"  and  signifies  His  self-existence. 
This  is  a  fine  foundation  for  trust.  2.  But  we  understand  by  "the  name"  the 
revealed  character  of  God.  When  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  then  open  this  Book 
and  try  to  find  out  what  sort  of  God  it  is  in  whom  thou  dost  trust.  3.  By  "  the 
name  of  the  Lord"  is  also  meant  His  dear  Son,  for  it  is  in  Jesus  Christ  that  Jehovah 
has  proclaimed  His  name.  4.  It  is  also  good  when  you  are  thinking  of  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  to  remember  that  to  you  it  signifies  what  you  have  seen  of  God  in  your 
own  experience.  This  is  His  memorial  or  name  to  you.  5.  But,  furthermore,  the 
text  says,  "Let  him  stay  upon  his  God."  Let  him  lean  upon  his  God ;  make  God 
his  stay,  his  prop,  his  rest.  This  is  a  variation  from  the  former  sentence.  He  was 
to  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  but  now  he  is  to  lean  upon  "  his  God."  You  have 
taken  God  to  be  your  God,  have  you  not  ?  If  so,  He  has  also  taken  you  to  be  His 
own.  There  is  a  covenant  between  you :  lean  on  that  covenant.  Treat  it  as  a  valid 
covenant  in  fuU  force.  III.  Why  should  we  trust  God  at  such  times  ?  1.  If 
you  do  not  trust  Him  now,  you  will  have  cause  to  suspect  whether  you  ever  did 
trust  Him  at  all.  2.  Because  His  promises  were  made  for  dark  hours.  3.  Here  a 
permit  is  especially  issued  for  you,  to  allow  you  to  trust  in  God  in  darkness.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  "Let  him  trust."  4.  More  than  this,  I  understand  this  verse  to  be 
a  command  to  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  It  is  an  order  to  trust  in  our  God  up 
to  the  hilt,  for  it  bids  us  "  stay  "  ourselves  upon  our  God.  We  are  not  fitfully  to 
trust,  and  then  to  fear ;  but  to  come  to  a  stay  in  God,  even  as  ships  enter  a  haven, 
cast  their  anchors,  and  then  stay  there  till  the  tempest  is  over-past.  5.  If  you  do 
not  stay  upon  God  in  the  dark,  it  would  seem  as  if,  after  all,  you  did  not  trust  God, 
but  were  trusting  to  the  light,  or  were  relying  on  your  own  eyesight.  6.  Remember 
one  thing  more,  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  was  not  spared  the  blackest  midnight 
that  ever  fell  on  human  mind.  IV.  What  will  come  of  it  if  we  do  trust  in 
God  in  the  dark.  1.  Such  a  faith  will  glorify  God.  It  does  not  glorify  God  to 
trust  Him  when  you  have  a  thousand  other  props  and  assistances.  2.  It  is  vert 
likely  that  through  this  darkness  you  will  be  humbled.  3.  If  thou  wilt  trust  God 
in  thy  trial,  tho';\  "vilt  prove  and  enjoy  the  power  of  prayer.  4.  If  in  your  darkness 
ou  go  to  God  anc-  nust  Him,  you  will  become  an  established  Christian.  5.  By  and 
y  we  shall  come  out  into  greater  light  than  we  have  as  yet  hoped  for.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Light  in  da/rkness: — I.  The  circumstance  expressed  by  the  words 
"walking  in  darkness,  and  having  no  light."  This  description  is  properly  applicable 
only  to  circumstances  of  the  deepest  distress.  In  our  darkest  hours  there  are  generally 
some  rays  of  light  left.  If  some  enjoyments  are  withdrawn,  others  remain.  If  we 
suffer  in  one  way,  we  receive  pleasure  in  another.  Seldom  does  it  happen  that  our 
condition  is  so  deplorable  as  to  be  entirely  gloomy  and  wretched.  In  such  circum- 
stances we  are  necessarily  led  to  look  out  for  comfort.  II.  Our  best  relief  is 
trusting  in  the  name  op  the  Lord  and  staying  ourselves  upon  God.  Let  us 
turn  our  thoughts  to  the  Deity,  and  reflect  on  His  perfect  government.  1.  In  such 
circumstances  we  should  consider  that  the  Deity  is  always  intimately  present  with 
ua,  and  sees  all  that  passes  in  the  world.  2.  We  should  further  consider  that  thi? 
Being  stands  in  the  nearest  relation  to  us.  He  is  our  parent,  we  are  His  ofl'spring 
8.  To  these  reflections,  let  us  add  that  this  Being  is  almighty,  all-wise,  and  all- 
benevolent.  III.  The  relief  derived  from  hence  can  be  enjoyed  only  by 
those  that  fear  the  Lord.  It  is  in  well-doing  that  we  are  commanded  to 
commit  our  souls  to  God.  {It.  Price,  D.D.)  The  believer  in  darkness: — I.  The 
character  mentioned.  II.  The  circumstances  stated.  He  walks  in  darkness, 
•tc.  No  spiritual  light  ?  No ;  he  who  has  Jesus  Christ  in  hia  heart  cannot  be 
ignorant.  Nor  is  he  miserable.  Nor  does  he  walk  in  the  darkness  of  sin.  The  text 
refers  to  providential  darkness.  III.  The  directions  given.  Trust  in  the  name 
«f  th«  Lord — in  His  power,  benerolenoe,  fidelity.    {J.  SummerjUld,  M.A.)    A 


I 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

day-star  for  dark  hearts : — 1.  If  this  were  the  only  word  Isaiah  had  ever  written,  it 
would  be  cherished  as  a  marvel  of  sweetest  wisdom  ;  just  as,  were  there  only  one 
star,  it  would  be  admired  with  surpassing  interest  and  wonder.  But,  one  amongst 
many,  the  brightest  star  and  the  richest  text  ceases  to  enkindle  the  enthusiasm  or 
attract  the  gaze  of  men.  2.  There  are  many  things  about  this  word  strikingly 
suggestive — (1)  The  Old  Testament  designation  of  a  saint — "  One  that  feareth  the 
Lord."  (2)  By  linking  this  verse  (ver.  10)  to  the  one  that  follows,  and  studying 
the  two  as  a  pair,  what  lessons  do  they  give — on  the  superiority  of  Divine  darkness 
to  human  light ;  on  the  blessedness  of  rather  being  under  the  cloud,  patiently 
waiting  God's  appearing,  than  striking  sparks  of  our  own  light  to  lead  us  in 
the  ways  of  common  life.  Heaven-sent  darkness — say  care  or  affliction,  is  better 
than  sparks  of  one's  own  kindling — say  gaiety,  mirth,  delusive  theories  of  life. 
3.  The  text  assumes  that,  although  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  ought  to  mark  every 
saint  of  God,  jet,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  truest  saints  have  to  endure  darkness, 
gloom,  and  trial.  And  it  requires  that  all  such  should  not  be  dispirited  by  the 
clouds  which  cross  their  sky,  but  that  even  when  long  patience  and  earnest  gazing 
fail  to  perceive  the  presence  of  God  they  should  still  rely  on  Him.  Many  would  say  : 
If  any  among  you  fears  the  Lord  and  walks  in  darkness,  let  him  suspect  there  is 
something  wrong ;  be  careful  to  examine  himself  whether  he  is  in  the  faith,  etc. 
But  where  we  would  say  "Examine,"  the  prophet  says  "Trust."  {R.  Glover,  D.D.) 
Encouragement: — The  prophet's  word — I.  Bids  the  penitent  hope.     II.  Brings 

COMFOKT    TO    THOSE   EMBARRASSED   BY    HONEST   INQUIRY.      III.     BRINGS   COMFORT 

TO  ALL  "  THE  TROUBLED."  There  are  a  multitude  whose  outward  or  inward  troubles 
produce  darkness  whatever  their  character  may  be.  Some,  for  instance,  are  troubled 
by  their  state  of  health  ;  it  is  such  as  produces  a  peculiar  tendency  to  gloom.  There 
are  others  who  are  troubled  with  the  course  of  Providence.  Others  are  troubled  in 
soul.  Such  temptations  beset  them !  Resisted,  these  renew  their  attack.  Over- 
come, they  rise  up  afresh  to  distress  them.  {Ibid.)  Depression: — I  suppose  that 
there  are  very  few,  if  any,  who  reach  old  age  or  even  middle  life  without  the 
painful  experience  of  times  of  depression  of  spirits.  There  come,  perhaps,  days  in 
the  life  of  every  one  when  all  things  seem  against  him.  Such  times  are  not  foreign 
to  the  experience  of  God's  greatest  saints,  and  Isaiah  appears  to  contemplate  them 
as  times  to  be  expected  by  the  servant  of  God.  1.  Isaiah  is  not  alone  in  this.  There 
are  numberless  instances  in  Holy  Scripture  which  show  how  true  it  is,  2.  But 
I  whatever  the  cause,  if  the  conscience  is  clear  from  wilful  sin,  what  is  our  duty  under 
such  a  state  of  depression?  The  text  sets  before  us  two  things  as  needful — (1) 
Obedience.  The  prophet  assumes  that  those  to  whom  he  is  speaking  will,  in  spite 
of  their  perplexity,  obey.  He  would  have  them  acquiesce  in  the  God-permitted 
darkness,  however  trying  and  painful  it  may  be.  Better  darkness  than  a  light  which 
is  not  kindled  from  above.  And  yet  not  seldom  it  is  such  a  time  of  depression 
which  drives  s  man  to  despair,  and  leads  him  in  the  end  to  give  up  his  faith 
altogether.  In  hours  of  darkness  great  is  the  temptation  to  have  recourse  to  fires  of 
our  own  kindling — to  seek  for  light  elsewhere  than  from  the  "Father  of  Lights  ;" 
and  so  in  the  verse  following  that  taken  as  the  text,  Isaiah  turns  to  those  who  are 
yielding  to  the  temptation,  and  warns  them  in  tones  of  scornful  irony  against  false 
lights  of  their  own  kindling.  (2)  Faith.  8.  This  week  we  are  watching  our  Lord 
in  His  path  through  the  dark  vale  of  suffering  and  along  the  way  of  sorrows.  Our 
eyes  are  fixed  on  but  one  figure.  To-day  we  contemplate  those  two  points  which 
the  Epistle  especially  brings  out — His  perfect  obedience,  and  His  perfect  trust.  Let 
us  learn  a  much-needed  lesson — "  It  is  suflBcient  for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his 
Master."    {E.  C.  S.  Gibson,  M.A.)     Trmt  in  God: — I.  The  character  and  statb 

OF  those  who  are  EXHORTED  TO  TRUST   IN  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LORD,      1.    They 

that  fear  God  may  signify — (1)  Those  who  have  a  sincere  regard  to  the  command- 
ments of  God,  and  have  chosen  Him  as  their  portion  and  hope.  Those  who  desire 
and  deserve  to  be  distinguished  from  the  profane  despiser,  the  secure  formalist,  or 
the  disguised  hypocrite.  Those,  in  a  word,  who  are,  and  who  desire  to  appear  upon 
the  Lord's  side  in  every  struggle,  and  who  resolve  with  Joshua,  that  whatever  others 
do,  they  will  serve  the  Lord.  (2)  But  we  may  explain  the  words  in  a  stricter  sense, 
and  suppose,  that  by  fearing  the  Lord  is  to  be  understood  a  due  reverence  for  His 
infinite  majesty,  a  humble  veneration  for  His  sacred  authority.  2.  The  next  part 
of  the  character  is,  "and  obeyeth  the  voice  of  His  servant;"  that  is  to  say  is 
willing  to  hearken  to  the  message  of  God  by  the  mouth  of  His  servants.  3.  "  That 
walketh  in  darkness,  and  hath  no  li^t."  (1)  Sometimes  light  signifies  knowledge, 
■ud  'iVrVnAaa  gignifjfts  iguoiuiM  (Eph.  T.  8;  Aots  xzvi.  18;  Job  xzztu.  19). 


CHAP,  t.]  ISAIAS,  17 

(2)  Sometimes  darkness  signifies  distress  or  trouble,  and  the  correspondent  significa- 
tion of  light  is  deliverance  and  joy  (2  Sam.  xxii,  28,  29  ;  Job  xix.  8  ;  Ps.  xcvii.  11 ; 
Esther  viii.  16).  None  of  these  senses  is  to  be  excluded  in  the  passage  before  us. 
Believers  may  walk  in  darkness,  when  ignorant  or  uncertain  as  to  what  nearly 
concerns  them,  as  well  as  under  distress  and  trouble.  They  have  also  a  mutual 
influence  upon,  produce,  and  are  produced  by  one  another.  A  good  man  may  walk 
in  darkness — when  he  is  in  doubt  or  uncertainty  as  to  his  iuterest  in  the  Divine 
favour.  When  he  is  under  the  pressure  of  outward  calamity.  When  the  state  of 
the  Church  is  such,  that  he  cannot  understand  or  explain,  in  a  satisfying  manner, 
the  course  of  Divine  providence.  II.  The  duty  of  trust  in  God  and  the 
FOUNDATION  OF  IT.  Trust  is  a  reliance  or  confidence  in  God,  that,  however 
discouraging  appearances  may  be  for  the  present  time,  yet,  by  His  power  and 
wisdom,  our  desires  and  exjpectation  shall  take  place,  whether  as  to  deliverance  from 
trouble,  or  the  obtaining  of  fnture  blessings.  Trust  rests  ultimately  on  the  promise. 
It  is  of  the  greatest  moment  to  understand  the  nature  and  tenor  of  the  promises. 
For  this  end,  it  may  be  proper  to  distinguish  the  promises  of  God,  as  to  futurity, 
into  two  heads,  absolute  and  conditional.  By  absolute  promises  I  understand  only 
those  that  are  so  in  the  most  unlimited  sense,  that  is  to  say,  revealed  as  a  part  of 
the  fixed  plan  of  Providence,  suspended  on  no  terms  but  what  all,  of  every  character, 
may  expect  will  certainly  come  to  pass.  Conditional  promises  divide  into  three 
diflFerent  heads. — (1)  Promises  made  to  persons  of  such  or  such  a  character,  or  in 
such  or  such  a  state.  (2)  Promises,  the  performance  of  which  is  suspended  on  our 
compliance  with  something  previously  required,  as  the  condition  of  obtaining  them. 

(3)  Promises,  not  only  suspended  on  both  the  preceding  terms,  but  upon  the 
supposition  of  some  circumstances  in  themselves  uncertain,  or  to  us  unknown. 
III.  Pkactical  APPLIOATion.  1.  See  what  judgment  you  ought  to  form  of 
inward  suggestions,  and  strong  or  particular  impressions  upon  your  minds.  The 
suggestion  of  a  passage  of  Scripture  of  itself  gives  no  title  to  the  immediate 
application  of  it,  because  the  great  deceiver  may  undoubtedly  suggest  Scripture,  as 
we  find  he  could  reason  from  it  in  our  Saviour's  temptation.  We  are,  in  every  such 
case,  to  consider  the  tenor  of  it,  if  it  be  a  promise  or  encouragement,  that  is,  how 
and  in  what  manner  it  may  be  safely  applied.  If  any  thing  happens  to  be  suggested 
that  expressly  suits  our  present  condition,  either  by  setting  home  the  obligation  of 
duty,  with  particular  evidence  upon  the  conscience,  or  pointing  out  the  grounds  of 
comfort,  it  ought  to  be  thankfully  acknowledged  as  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  See 
what  it  is  that  we  ought  to  seek  for  with  the  greatest  earnestness,  and  may  hope  to 
obtain  with  the  greatest  confidence.  3.  Adore  the  wisdom,  justice  and  mercy  of 
God,  in  the  order  He  hath  established,  according  to  the  difl'erent  nature  of 
the  promises.  That  which  is  of  unspeakable  value,  and  radically  contains  all  the 
rest,  is  placed  first  in  order,  and  offered  in  the  most  free  and  gracious  manner, 
without  money  and  without  price.  Salvation  is  preached  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  and 
a  Saviour  held  forth  as  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  to  God  by  Him. 
4.  Learn  what  is  the  plainest,  the  shortest,  and  indeed,  the  only  sure  way  to 
deliverance  from  distress  or  calamity  of  whatever  kind.  It  is  to  fly  to  the  mercy  of 
God  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  to  renew  the  exercises  of  faith  in  Him,  and  you 
will  perceive  every  other  covenant-blessing  flow  clear  and  unmixed  from  this 
inexhaustible  source.  {J.  Witherspoon,  D.D.)  The  want  of  assurance: — I.  The 
CHARACTER  ADDRESSED  is  distinctly  drawn.  It  is  "  a  child  of  light  walking  in 
darkness."  Poverty,  disease,  litigation,  oppression,  perplexity,  the  loss  of  intimate 
friends  and  relations,  doubts,  disappointments,  errors  in  religion,  actual  trans- 
gressions, and  the  temptations  of  the  adversary,  working  with  the  corruptions  of 
the  human  heart,  are  permitted  in  the  providence  of  God,  to  affect  Christians  in 
various  degrees  of  perturbation  and  sorrow,  until  they  "walk  in  darkness  and  have 
no  light."  II.  The  duty  recommended.  "Let  him  trust,"  etc.  {A.  McLeod, 
D.I).)  The  duty  of  those  who  have  not  assura/nce: — I.  Distinguish  doubts  of 
YOUR  OWN  piety,  FROM  THE  SIN  OF  UNBELIEF.  1.  Doubtiug  respects  ourselves ; 
and  calls  in  question  our  having  already  become  subjects  of  Divine  grace  :  but 
unbelief  respects  the  Lord,  and  calls  in  question,  either  the  reality  of  Divine  things, 
or  Christ's  willingness  and  power  to  save  them  that  believe.  2.  Doubting  of  our 
safety  does  no  more  than  reject  the  evidence  which  is  furnished  by  our  own  minds  ; 
an  evidence  which  is  often  very  imperfectly  delivered  and  received  :  but  unbelief 
always  rejects  the  testimony  which  God  has  given  us  of  His  own  Son,  and  so,  by 
contradicting  God,  makes  him  a  liar,  so  far  as  the  sinner  has  it  in  his  power. 
8.  Doubting  of  one's  piety  may  be  at  times  both  reasonable  and  profitable;  for 

VOL.  III.  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

when  a  man  has  but  a  small  measure  of  grace,  it  may  lead  him  to  seek  for  more :  but 
unbelief,  always  against  the  Word  and  attributes  of  the  God  of  our  salvation,  ia 
unreasonable,  unprofitable,  and  impious.     4.  Doubting  of  one's  personal  piety  often 
includes,  not  only  anxiety  to  be  saved  by  Divine  grace,  but  also  a  sincere  desire  to 
attain  to  an  assured  interest  in  the  everlasting  covenant :  but  unbelief  excludes  the 
idea  of  love  to  the  true  God,  rejects  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  distinctly  relinquishes 
the  mercy  which  is  offered  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     5.  Doubts  are  consistent,  not 
only  with  sincere  piety,  but  also  with  progress  in  sanctifioation  :  but  unbelief  is  the 
exercise  of  an  unregenerate  heart.     6.  Doubting  of  one's  holiness  humbles  under  a 
sense  of  sin,  and  produces  penitence  and  sorrow :    but  unbelief  hardens  the  heart 
into  negligence  or  despair ;  or  exasperates  the  sinner  more  and  more  against  Divine 
things.     II.  Ascertain,  with  all  diligence,  the  causk  of  tour  own  doubts 
AND  UNEASINESS :  for  it  is  by  understanding  your  disease,  you  will  be  qualified  to 
apply  the  remedy  provided  in  the  Gospel  of  God.     1.  Error  causes  darkness  and 
doubt.     Clear  views  of  Divine  truth  is  the  preventive  and  the  cure.    2.   Indolence,  and 
consequent  inattention  to  the  due  improvement  of  our  talents,  often  occasion  spiritual 
decline  and  despondence.     The  remedy  is  found  in  vigilance  and  Christian  activity. 
3,  The  passions,    through   the    remaining  corruptions  of   the  heart,  often    cause 
transgressions,  and  consequent  doubts  and  despondence.     4.  Satan  is  the  principal 
cause  of  those  doubts  and  fears  ;   and  resistance  to  his   exertions  is  the  means  of 
assurance.     5.  In  pointing  out  the  duty  of  Christians,  who  have  not  the  assurance  of 
salvation,  I  must  not  omit.  Steadfast  continuance  in  practical  obedience  to  all  the 
commandments.    {Ihid. )    God's  message  to  the  desponding : — When  such  an  experience 
comes  upon  the  saint,  it  will  not  be  always  safe  to  say  that  it  is  the  shadow  of  some 
special  sin.    The  security  of  the  saint  is  rooted  in  the  fact  that  God  has  a  hold  of  him, 
and  not  at  all  in  his  consciousness  that  he  has  a  hold  of  God.     His  comfort  may  be 
affected  by  the  latter,  but  his  safety  is  due  entirely  to.the  former.     Hence,  they  who 
roundly  aflBrm  that  if  a  man  be  walking  in  darkness  and  finding  no  light  he  cannot 
be  a  Christian,  are  making  salvation  depend,  not  on  God's  work  for  a  man  and  in 
him,  but  simply  and  entirely  on  his  own  emotions.     Moreover,  they  are  strangely 
oblivious  of  some  of  the  best-known  passages  in  the  history  even  of  the  most  eminent 
saints.     But  despondency  is  not  a  state  of  mind  in  which  any  one  desires  to  remain. 
And  he  should  be  encouraged  to  get  out  of  it  as  quickly  as  possible.     For  it  puts 
everything  about  him  into  shadow.     It  sets  all  his  songs  to  a  minor  key.     It  gives  to 
all  his  prayers  a  wailing  pathos.     It  takes  away  much  of  his  buoyancy  and  elasticity 
for  work.     I.  The  causes  of  spiritual  despondency.      1.   It  may  spring  from 
natural  temperament.     Each  of  us  is  bom  with  a  certain  predisposition  to  joy  or 
sadness,  to  irascibility  or  patience,    to  quickness  of  action   or  deliberateness  of 
conduct,  which  we   call  temperament.      While  conversion  may  Christianize  that 
temperament,  it  does  not  change  it.     2.  Spiritual  despondency  may  be  caused  by 
disease.     That  which  we  call  lowness  of  spirits  is  very  often  the  result  of  some 
imprudence  in  diet,  or  some  local  disturbance.     See  the  relief  which  this  affords.     It 
removes  from  religion  the  responsibility  for  the  depression  of  such  a  man  as  Cowper, 
and  traces  his  spiritual  gloom  to  disease  of  the  brain.     3.  Spiritual  despondency  is 
often  the  result  of  trial.     Think  of  Peter's  words:  "Ye  are  in  heaviness  through 
manifold  trials."     One  aflBiction  will  not  usually  becloud  our  horizon.     But  when  a 
whole  series  of  distresses  comes  on  us  in  succession,  the  effect  is  terrible.     First,  it 
may  be,  comes  sickness,  and  we  are  getting  round  from  that  when  business  diflBculties 
overwhelm  us.    These  are  scarcely  arranged  before  bereavement  comes  ;  and  while  we 
are  still  in  the  valley,  we  are  set  upon  by  ApoUyon  in  the  shape  of  some  scandalous 
accuser  who  seeks  to  rob  us  of  our  good  name.     4.  Spiritual  despondency  may  be 
caused  by  mental  perplexity.     The  old  beliefs  are  once  more  on  their  trial,  and  when 
a  youth  reaches  the  age  when  he  must  exchange  a  traditional  piety  for  a  personal 
conviction,  he  is  plunged  for  the  time  into  the  greatest  misery.     It  seems  to  him 
almost  as  if  everything  were  giving  way  beneath  him.    II.  The  counsels  to  the 
DESPONDING  which  are  given  or  suggested  by  this  text.     1.  The  Oppressed  spirit  must 
keep  on  fearing  the  Lord  and  obeying  the  voice  of  His  servant.     2.  To  the  desponding 
believer  the  second  thing  to  be  said  is,  keep  on  trusting  God.     3.  Then,  let   us 
not  fail  to  note  the  deep  meaning  of  that  word    "  stay."     It  encourages  you  to  lean 
your  whole  weight  upon  God,  and  to  do  that  continuously.     ( W".  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Desertion: — I.  The  character  of  him  to  whom  this  counsel  is  addressed. 
II.  The  state  in  which  such  an  one  is  sometimes  found.    1.  He  may  want 
the  li^ht  of  direction.    2.  He  may  want  the  light  of  knowledge.     8.  H«  may  want 
th«  light  of  comfort.    III.  What  shall  hb  so  in  this  xBTiNa  HOUBt    (A 


CHAP.  Ik]  ISAIAH.  19 

Verschoyle. )  Willing  and  unwilling  unbelief: — For  practical  purposes  we  may  make 
one  broad  distinction — that  between  willing  and  unwilling  unbelievers.  I  turn  to 
the  consideration  of  that  class  of  unbelievers  who  would  believe  if  they  could  ;  who 
are  neither  rebels  against  moral  restraint,  nor  consumed  by  a  morbid  pride  :  who 
love  good  deeds  and  good  men  and  desire  only  to  know  and  believe  what  is  true.  It 
is  strange  that  some  of  them  should  accuse  themselves  of  unbelief,  seeing  that  the 
very  wish  to  believe  is  a  sign  that  they  do  believe  already — a  proof  of  loyalty  to  their 
Father  in  heaven  rooted  deep  down  in  their  inmost  souls.  Their  faith  is  genuine 
though  not  strong  enough  to  bear  the  fruits  of  love  to  God  or  of  hope  and  consolation. 
There  are  those  to  whom  the  difficulty  of  believing  in  God  is  all  but  insuperable 
owing  to  the  constitution  of  their  minds.  To  such,  every  conception,  to  be  a  concep- 
tion at  all,  must  be  accurate  and  sharply  defined.  Reason  stands  like  a  sentinel 
before  the  door  of  the  imagination  and  feelings  and  will  let  nothing  pass  that  does 
not  carry  the  passport  of  clear  and  absolute  definition.  They  are,  therefore,  for  the 
time  incapable  of  realizing  any  of  the  joys  of  belief  and  can  no  more  be  blamed  for 
their  unbelief  than  for  not  being  able  to  fly.  I  do  not  think  religion  is  attainable  by 
the  mere  exercise  of  the  reason.  Another  source  of  difficulty  is  also  constitutional. 
When  people  are  of  a  desponding  and  melancholy  temperament,  they  naturally  dwell 
on  the  darker  side  of  things ;  and  as  this  is  the  exact  opposite  of  faith  in  God,  no 
wonder  it  should  be  so  much  more  difficult  for  them  to  believe.  It  is  true,  and  there 
are  numberless  instances  to  prove  it,  that  many  a  naturally  depressed  mind  has 
found  its  only  relief  from  apprehension  and  despondency  in  the  sense  of  God's  abiding 
friendliness.  It  has  been  said  to  me  more  than  once : — The  next  best  thing  to 
believing  for  one's  self  is  to  see  others  believe.  So  it  behoves  all  who  live  in  the 
celestial  sunshine  of  faith  and  hope  to  reflect  by  their  cheerful  and  pure  lives  as  much 
as  possible  the  light  that  shines  on  their  own  souls  upon  the  hearts  of  others  less 
happy  than  themselves.  (C.  Voysey,  M.A.)  Spiritual  darkness  {mt\i^\csh.yu.  S): — 
Isaiah  describes  the  experience.  Micah  besides  that  describes  himself  as  being,  or 
having  been,  in  the  heart  of  the  experience.  The  Bible  is  a  many-sided  book. 
I.  Darkness  as  a  fact  of  Chbistian  experience,  and  the  Christian's  proper 
EXERCISE  under  IT.  In  the  natural  world  it  is  not  always  light,  at  least  with  our 
planet.  The  sun  goes  down  and  darkness  spreads.  So  in  the  higher  life.  The 
spiritual  heavens  are  not  always  bright.  Some  sun  or  other  that  had  been  shedding 
its  light  on  the  soul  goes  down,  and  the  man  sits  in  darkness.  1.  It  may  be  the 
light  of  faith  that  is  darkened.  Spiritual  realities  are  withdrawn  into  shadow.  2. 
It  may  be  the  light  of  God's  face  that  is  felt  to  be  withdrawn.  3.  Darkness  may 
come  in  the  form  of  the  fading  away  of  some  Christian  hope — personal  hopes  or 
hopes  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  dark  experience  gives  a  striking  demonstration 
that  God  only  is  man's  Comforter.  II.  Darkness  as  a  means  of  spiritual 
DISCOVERT.  Perhaps  the  best  explanation  of  this  darkness,  and  it  is  a  vindication 
too,  is  found  in  the  results  which  it  works.  In  nature  the  darkness  of  night  lets  us 
see  what  we  cannot  see  when  the  sun  is  shining.  It  is  the  same  with  spiritual  night, 
or  may  be.  The  man  of  God  may  then  get  great  enlargement  of  spiritual  information 
and  understanding.  There  need  be  no  mystery  why  all  this  is  so.  The  man  that 
sits  in  darkness  is  by  the  pressure  of  his  position  made  a  more  diligent  searcher  into 
Divine  things.  III.  Darkness  as  a  discipline  of  the  Christian  character. 
It  may  secure  for  it  some  of  its  best  graces — the  mildest,  the  most  mellowed,  the 
most  hallowed.  There  are  plants  that  grow  best  in  a  dim  light.  Amongst  those 
Christian  graces  that  take  deeper  root  in  the  dark  are  :  1.  Humility.  2.  Trustful- 
ness. 3.  Self-surrender.  Conclusion — 1.  The  painfulness  of  this  discipline  must 
not  be  forgotten.  They  only  know  the  horrors  of  Divine  desertion  who  have  relished 
the  joys  of  Divine  communion.  If  these  things  are  done  in  the  green  tree  what  shall 
be  done  in  the  dry  ?  If  God  takes  such  means  to  improve  grace,  what  means  will 
He  take  to  punish  sin  ?  2.  Sympathize  with  the  deserted  child  of  God.  God  is  not 
angry  with  him.  "Behind  a  frowning  providence,"  etc.  God  does  earnestly 
remember  him  still  (Jer.  xxxi.  20).  3.  Ye  who  sit  in  darkness  beware  of  two 
things — impatience  and  sullen  indifference.  {J.  Wardrop,  D.I).)  Spiritual  dark- 
ness:— I.  'This  DARKNESS  may  arise  possibly — ].  From  over- occupation  in  the  affairs 
of  life.  The  questionable  has  been  acted  upon  as  the  admissible.  2.  From  a  dis- 
ordered state  of  the  body.  The  brain  has  not  been  kept  clear  by  rational  living. 
Late  hours,  undue  excitement  have  brought  on  spiritual  dyspepsia ;  or  excesses,  of 
youth  are  now  demanding  their  penalty,  or  an  inheritance  of  evils  has  caused  it.  3. 
From  a  non-apprehension  of  the  fulness  of  the  atonement  of  Christ  We  may  believe 
in  God's  ability  to  pardon,  bat  do  not  realize  how  He  leads  us  into  holiness ;  or 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

whether  we  have  come  to  Christ  in  the  right  way,  or  about  the  uncertainty  as  to  the 
time  of  our  conversion,  or  fear  lest  the  past  neglect  to  make  progress  in  the  Divine 
life  should  cut  us  oflF  from  all  hope  ;  or  the  gloom  comes  from  neglecting  the  Bible 
and  prayer  for  something  less  profitable,  or  from  over-religious  excitement  that  has 
given  us  a  distaste  for  obscurer  and  quieter  work,  or  disappointment  in  hopes  respect- 
uig  the  coming  of  Christ's  kingdom,  or  from  seeing  much  of  mysteiy  and  pain 
around,  or  from  trouble  how  to  save  the  masses,  or  from  the  spread  of  materialistic 
ideas,  and  so  on.  II.  How  ark  Cheistians  to  be  delivered  from  it  ?  "  Trust 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  We  know  how  a  name  can  cheer  men.  The  mention  of 
the  name  of  Caesar  and  of  Wellington  had  a  wonderful  effect  upon  their  men.  Trust 
in  Him  for  pardon  and  sanctifiication.  You  are  His  friend,  and  are  longing  for  Him. 
He  will  work  in  you.  Trust  absolutely  in  Christ ;  "  stay  "  upon  Him.  A  sutlerer 
of  fourteen  years  said,  "  I  can  bear  anything,  for  Christ  is  with  me."  (F.  Eastings.) 
A  child  of  light  walking  in  darkness.— I*  One  who  truly  fears  God,  and  is 

OBEDIENT  TO   HiM,  MAY   BE   IN   A  CONDITION   OF  DARKNESS,  AND   HAVE   NO  LIGHT ; 

and  may  walk  many  days  and  years  in  that  condition.  1.  Walking  in  darkness  is 
taken  (1  Johni.  6)  for  living  in  sin  and  ungodliness.  But  so  it  is  not  to  be  taken 
here  ;  for  Christ  would  not  have  encouraged  such  to  trust  in  God,  who  is  light,  and 
there  can  be  no  fellowship  between  Him  and  such  darkness,  as  the  apostle  tells  us. 
Nay,  the  Holy  Ghost  reproves  such  as  do  "lean  on  the  Lord"  and  yet  transgress 
(Mic  iii  11).  And  besitles,  the  text  speaks  of  such  who  for  their  present  condition 
fear  God  and  are  obedient  to  Him,  which  if  they  thus  walked  in  darkness  they  could 
not  be  said  to  do.  2.  Neither  is  it  to  be  meant  of  walking  in  ignorance,  as  m  John 
xii.  35.  For  one  that  hath  no  light,  in  that  sense,  can  never  truly  fear  God  nor 
obey  Him.  3.  He  means  it  of  discomfiture  and  sorrow,  as  often  we  find  in  Scripture 
darkness  to  be  taken  (Eccles.  v.  17) ;  as,  on  the  contrary,  light,  because  it  is  so 
"  pleasant  a  thing  to  heboid,"  is  put  for  comfort  (Eccles.  xi.  7).  And  that  so  it  is 
taken  here  is  evident  by  that  which  is  opposed  in  the  next  verse,  "  Walk  ye  in  your 
light,  yet  ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow."  But— 4.  Of  what  kind  of  sorrow  and 
for  what?  (1)  It  is  not  to  be  restrained  to  outward  afflictions  only,  which  are 
called  man's  infirmities,  as  being  common  to  man ;  which  arise  from  things  of  this 
world,  or  from  the  men  of  the  world  ;  though  to  walk  in  darkness  is  so  taken  (Isa. 
lix.  9).  For,  in  them  also,  a  man's  best  support  is  to  trust  in  God.  But  yet  that 
cannot  be  the  only  or  principal  meaning  of  it.  He  adds,  "and  hath  no  light,"  that 
is,  no  comfort.  Now,  as  philosophers  say,  there  is  no  pure  darkness  without  some 
mixture  of  light,  so  we  may  say,  there  is  not  mere  or  utter  darkness  caused  by 
outward  afflictions  :  no  outward  affliction  can  so  universally  environ  the  mind,  as  t<) 
shut  up  all  the  crannies  of  it,  so  that  a  man  should  have  no  light.  Besides,  God's 
people,  when  they  walk  in  the  greatest  outward  darkness,  may  have  most  light  in 
their  spirits.  But  here  is  such  an  estate  spoken  of,  such  a  darkness  as  hath 
no  light  in  it.  Therefore — (2)  It  is  principally  to  be  understood  of  the  want 
of  inward  comfort  in  their  spirits,  from  something  that  is  between  God  and 
them.  Because  the  remedy  here  provided  is  faith.  In  the  foregoing  verses  he 
had  spoken  of  justification.  But  because  there  might  be  some  poor  souls 
who,  though  truly  fearing  God,  yet  miglit  want  this  assurance,  and  upon  the 
hearing  of  this  might  be  the  more  troubled,  because  not  able  to  express  that  con- 
fidence which  he  did,  he  adds,  "Who  is  among  you,"  etc.  These  words  have  a 
relation  also  to  the  4th  verse,  where  he  says  that  God  had  given  him  the  "  tongue 
of  the  learned,  to  minister  a  word  of  comfort  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary  and 
heavy  laden  ;  "  and  thereupon,  in  this  verse,  he  shows  the  blessed  condition  of  such 
persons  as  are  most  weary  through  long  walking  in  darkness  ;  and  wirhal  he  dis- 
covereth  to  them  the  way  of  getting  out  of  this  darkness,  and  recovering  comfort 
again.  II.  What  is  the  condition  of  such  a  one  who  is  thus  in  darkness, 
AND  HATH  NO  LIGHT ?  1.  He  is  Said  to  have  no  light.  "Light,"  saith  the  apostle 
(Eph.  V.  13),  "  is  that  whereby  things  are  made  manifest,"  i.  e.  to  the  sense  of  sight, 
and  as  light  and  faith  are  here  severed,  so  sight  also  is  (2  Cor.  v.  7)  distinguished 
from  faith,  which  is  the  evidence  of  things  absent  and  not  seen  (Heb.  xi.  1).  When, 
therefore,  here  he  saith  he  hath  no  light,  the  meaning  is,  he  wants  all  present 
sensible  testimonies  of  God's  favour  to  him.  To  understand  this,  we  must  know  that 
God,  to  help  our  faith,  vouchsafeth a  threefold  light  to  Us  people,  to  add  assurance 
and  joy  to  their  faith  ;  which  is  to  faith  as  a  back  of  steel  to  a  bow.  (1)  The  imme- 
diate light  of  His  countenance.  (2)  The  sight  and  comfort  of  their  own  graces,  untn 
which  so  many  promises  belong.  So  that  often  when  the  sun  is  set,  yet  starlight 
appears.     (3)  Though  he  want  the  present  light  of  God's  countenance,  and  the  sight 


CHAF.  u]  ISAIAH.  21 

of  present  grace,  yet  he  may  have  a  comfortable  remembrance  of  what  once  before  he 
had  still  left.  2.  He  walks  in  darkness.  (1)  To  walk  in  darkness  implies  to  be  in 
doubt  whither  to  go.  (2)  Those  in  darkness  are  apt  to  stumble  at  everything. 
(3)  Darkness  is  exceedingly  terrible  and  full  of  horror.  ( T.  Goodwin. )  The  child 
of  God  in  darkness : — I.  The  efficient  causes  of  this  woeful,  desperate,  dark 
CONDITION  of  God's  child.  1.  God's  Spirit.  The  Spirit  is  not  the  direct  efficient 
or  positive  cause  of  them.  The  Spirit  of  God  may  concur  in  this  darkness  that  befalls 
His  child.  (1)  Privatively.  He  may  suspend  His  testimony,  and  the  execution 
of  his  office  of  witnessing  adoption.  (2)  Positively.  He  may  further  proceed  to 
reveal  and  represent  God  as  angry  with  His  child  for  such  and  such  sins  formerly 
committed,  aud  make  him  sensible  thereof ;  not  barely  by  concealing  His  love,  but 
by  making  impressions  of  His  wrath  upon  his  conscience  immediately,  and  not  by 
outward  crosses  only.  2.  A  man's  own  guilty  and  fearful  heart.  3.  Satan.  He 
works  upon  (1)  carnal  reason,  (2)  girilt  of  conscience,  (3)  jealousies  and  fears. 
II.  The  cases  wherein  God  leaves  His  children  unto  this  darkness. 
1.  Extraordinary ;  as — (1)  Out  of  His  prerogative.  (2)  In  case  He  means  to  make 
a  man  eminently  wise,  and  able  to  comfort  others.  (3)  In  case  of  extraordinary 
comforts  and  revelations.  2.  Ordinary.  (1)  In  case  of  carnal  confidence.  (2)  For 
neglecting  such  special  opportunities  of  comforts  and  refreshings  as  God  hath  vouch- 
safed ;  as  for  the  neglect  of  holy  duties,  wherein  God  did  offer  to  draw  nigh  to  us. 
(3)  In  case  of  not  exercising  the  graces  which  a  man  hath  ;  when  Christians  are,  as 
it  were,  between  sleeping  and  waking.  (4)  In  case  of  some  gross  sin  committed 
against  light,  unhumbled  for,  or  proving  scandalous,  or  of  old  sins  long  forgotten. 
(5)  In  case  of  a  stubborn  spiiit  under  outward  afflictions.  (6)  In  case  of  deserting 
His  truth,  and  not  professing  it  and  appearing  for  it  when  He  calls  us  to  do  it. 
(7)  In  case  of  un thankfulness,  and  too  common  an  esteem  had  of  assurance,  and  of 
freedom  from  those  terrors  and  doubtings  which  others  are  in.  III.  The  ends  for 
WHICH  God  leaveth  His  children  unto  this  darkness.  1.  To  show  His 
power  and  faithfulness,  in  upholding,  raising  up,  aud  healing  such  a  spirit  again  as 
hath  been  long  and  deadly  wounded  with  inward  terrors.  2.  As  to  know  the  power 
of  Christ's  resurrection,  so  the  * '  fellowship  of  His  sufferings  ; "  that  thereby  the  soul 
may  be  made  more  "  conformable  to  Him."  3.  To  put  the  greater  difference  between 
the  estate  of  God's  children  here,  and  that  hereafter  in  heaven.  4.  To  let  us  see  whence 
spiritual  comforts  and  refreshings  come :  that  God  alone  keeps  the  keys  of  that 
cupboard,  and  alone  dispenseth  them  how  and  when  He  pleaseth.  5.  Other  ends 
God  hath,  to  make  trial  of  our  graces  and  a  discovery  of  them.  The  same  end  that 
God  had  in  leading  His  people  through  "  the  great  wilderness,  where  no  water  was," 
where  "scorpions  stuug  them,"  which  was  to  prove  them,  etc.  ;  the  same  ends 
hath  God  in  suffering  His  people  to  go  through  this  desert,  barrenness,  and  dark- 
ness, where  no  light  is,  and  where  terrors  of  the  law  do  sting  them — for  His  dealings 
then  were  types  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  now — to  prove  them,  and  to  make 
trial  of  their  hearts.     (1)  There  is  no  grace  God  tries  more  than  the  grace  of  faith. 

(2)  Of  all  temptations   none    try  it  more  than  desertion  of  God's  countenance. 

(3)  In  these  conflicts  of  faith  with  desertions  consisteth  the  height  of  our  Christian 
warfare.  6.  As  it  makes  for  the  trial  and  discovery  of  graces,  so  it  is  a  means 
sanctified  to  increase  them,  and  to  eat  out  corruptions.  (1)  It  is  a  means  to  destroy 
the  flesh.     (2)  To   humble.     (3)   To  bring  in   more  assurance  and  establishment. 

(4)  It  trains  you  to  fear  God  more,  and  to  obey  Him.  (5)  To  set  believers'  hearts 
a-work  to  pray  more  and  more  earnestly.  (6)  It  causeth  them  to  prize  the  light  of 
God's  countenance  the  more  when  they  again  obtain  it,  and  so  set  a  higher  price 
upon  it,  and  to  endeavour  by  close  walking  with  God,  as  children  of  light,  to  keep  it. 
(Ibid.)  Counsel  to  those  who  walk  in  darkness: — 1.  Take  heed  of  rash,  desperate, 
impatient  and  unbelieving  speeches  and  wishes.  2.  Let  the  troubled  soul  make  diligent 
search.  3.  Keep  and  lend  one  ear,  as  well  to  hear  and  consider  what  makes  for  their 
comfort,  as  unto  what  may  make  against  them.  4.  Make  diligent  search  into,  and 
call  to  remembrance  what  formerly  hath  been  between  God  and  you.  The  remembrance 
of  former  things  doth  often  uphold,  when  present  sense  fails.  5.  But  now  if  former 
signs  remembered  bring  thee  no  comfort  in,  but  the  waves  that  come  over  thy  soul 
prove  so  deep  that  thou  canst  find  no  bottom  to  cast  anchor  on,  the  storm  and  stress 
so  great  that  no  cable  will  hold,  but  they  snap  all  asunder,  as  is  often  the  case  of  many 
a  poor  soul,  then  renew  thy  faith  and  repentance.  6.  Then,  stand  not  now  disputing 
it,  but  be  peremptory  and  resolute  in  thy  faith  and  turning  to  God,  let  the  issue  be 
what  it  will  be.  Faith  is  never  nonplussed.  7.  Let  him  trust  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.    i.  Wait  upon  God,  thus  trusting  bx  Hia  name,  in  the  constant  us«  of  all 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.L. 

ordinances  and  means  of  comfort.  "Waiting  is  indeed  but  an  act  of  faith  further 
stretched  out.  9.  Above  all  things  pray,  and  get  others  also  to  pray  for  thee. 
10.  Having  done  aU  this,  you  would  not  rest  in  ease  of  conscience  but  healing.  (Ibid. ) 
Triist  in  the  name  of  the  Lord : — The  name  of  God,  that  is,  God's  attributes,  and 
Christ's  righteousness  do  sufficiently,  and  adequately,  answer  all  wants  and  doubts, 
all  objections  and  distresses.  Whatsoever  our  want  or  temptations  be,  He  hath  » 
name  to  make  supply  (Ex.  xxxiv.  5,  6).  Art  thou  in  misery  and  great  distress  t 
"  The  Lord  merciful.  The  "  Lord,"  therefore  able  to  help  thee  ;  and  "merciful," 
therefore  willing.  Yea,  but  thou  wilt  say,  I  am  unworthy  ;  I  have  nothing  in 
me  to  move  Him  to  it.  Well,  He  is  "gracious;"  now  grace  is  to  show 
mercy  freely.  Yea,  but  I  have  sinned  against  Him  for  many  years  ;  if  I  had 
come  in  when  I  was  young,  mercy  might  have  been  shown  me.  To  this  He 
says,  I  am  "long-suffering."  But  my  sins  abound  in  number,  and  it  is  im- 
possible to  reckon  them  up,  and  they  abound  in  heinousness  ;  I  have  committed 
the  same  sins  again  and  again  ;  I  have  been  false  to  Him,  broke  promise  with  Him 
again  and  again.  His  name  also  answers  this  objection,  He  is  "abundant  in 
goodness ; "  He  abounds  more  in  grace  than  thou  in  sinning.  And  though  thou 
East  been  false  again  and  again  to  Him,  and  broke  all  covenants,  yet  He  is 
"abundant  in  truth  ; "  also  better  than  His  Word,  for  He  cannot  to  our  capacities 
express  all  that  mercy  that  is  in  Him  for  us.  But  I  have  committed  great  sins, 
aggravated  with  many  and  great  circumstances.  He  forgives  ' '  iniquity,  transgression, 
and  sin  ; "  sins  of  all  sorts.  But  there  is  mercy  thus  in  Him  but  for  a  few,  and  I  mav 
be  none  of  the  number.  Yes,  there  is  mercy  for  "thousands."  And  He  "keeps  ' 
it ;  treasures  of  it  lie  by  Him,  and  are  kept,  if  men  would  come  and  take  them. 
Object  what  thou  canst.  His  name  will  answer  thee.  Needest  thou  comfort  as  well 
as  pardon  ?  He  is  both  ' '  Father  of  mercies  "  and  ' '  God  of  all  comforts  "  (2  Cor.  i.  3). 
Needest  thou  peace  of  conscience,  being  filled  with  terrors?  He  is  the  "God  of 
peace  "  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  But  I  have  a  heart  empty  of  grace  and  holiness,  and  full 
of  corruptions.  He  is  the  "God  of  all  grace"  to  heal  thee,  as  well  as  of  peace  to 
pardon  thee.  Needest  thou  wisdom  and  direction  ?  He  is  the  "  Father  of  lights," 
as  the  apostle  says.  Is  thy  heart  inconstant  and  full  of  double-miudedness  ?  He  is 
"unchangeable"  also.  Thus  aU  objections  that  can  be  made  may  be  answered  out 
of  His  name.  Therefore  it  is  aU-sufficient  for  faith  to  rest  upon.  (Ibid.)  Darkness 
and  light,  and  light  and  darkness : — One  cannot  listen  to  these  words  without  feeling 
that  one  needs  to  distinguish  between  the  appearance  and  the  reality  of  things. 
There  are  peculiarities  in  the  lot  of  both  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  which  baffle 
our  expectations.  The  sufferings  of  the  godly  and  the  prosperity  of  the  ungodly 
have  always  been  a  puzzle  to  thoughtful  men.  However  confusing  facts  of  this 
order  may  be,  they  very  plainly  constitute  a  most  serious  part  of  our  earthly  test  and 
discipline.  I.  The  darkness  and  the  light  of  the  righteous.  1.  The  character 
of  the  righteous.  (1)  He  is  animated  by  devout  and  reverential  feeling  towards  God 
— he  "  feareth  the  Lord."  This  inward  sentiment  of  reverence  is  the  living  root  of 
all  practical  godliness.  (2)  He  rules  his  heart  and  life  by  the  inspired  Word  of  God 
— He  "obeyeth  the  voice  of  His  Servant."  "His  Servant"  is  the  Servant  of 
prediction,  the  Messiah  of  promise.  2.  His  trials.  "That  walketh  in  darkness 
and  hath  no  light."  It  is  literally,  "darknesses."  The  shadows  which  fall  upon 
our  path  are  not  one,  but  many.  It  is  very  startling,  that  men  who  revere  God 
Himself,  and  obey  His  servants,  obey  even  His  chosen  Servant  of  all,  should  ever 
"walk  in  darkness  and  have  no  light."  Yet  that  is  sometimes  their  lot.  They 
may  not  only  be  in  darkness  for  a  short  while,  but  may  be  called  to  "walk  "  in  it. 
Walking  denotes,  not  what  is  occasional,  but  what  is  habitual.  Be  thankful  that 
you  walk  not  in  the  pitch  darkness  of  many  a  poor  soul  in  our  day,  to  whom  nothing 
exists  but  matter  and  motion  and  force.  3.  The  consolations  of  the  righteous, 
(1)  Study  the  "name  of  the  Lord."  His  name  declares  His  nature.  (2)  Have  faith 
in  God.  Trust.  (3)  Leave  the  issue  entirely  to  the  Almighty.  Let  him  "stay 
upon  his  God."  The  word  is,  "lean  upon  his  God."  The  illustration  is,  a  weak 
person  leaning  all  his  feebleness  on  a  strong  one,  and  being  upheld  by  his  strength. 
II.  The  light  and  the  darkness  of  the  wicked.  1.  The  illusions  of  the  wicked. 
Observe  their  activity.  (1)  They  "  kindle  a  fire."  The  fire  is  kindled  for  the  sake 
of  its  light,  not  for  the  sake  of  its  warmth.  The  righteous  often  ' '  walk  in  darkness 
and  have  no  light ; "  not  so  the  wicked.  They  know  how  to  make  their  own  light. 
They  have  great  confidence  in  their  own  resources.  They  ply  their  abilities  to  banish 
their  ills,  and  to  provide  themselves  with  satisfeictions.  Men  must  have  at  least  the 
semblance  of  good,  if  destitute  of  the  reality.    The  industry  of  men  in  the  pursuit  of 


CHAP.  L.]  ISAIAH.  SS 

imaginary  blessings  is  very  noteworthy,  very  melanclioly,  and  very  pitifuL  They 
"  compass  themselves  with  sparks."  I  am  not  sure  that  "  sparks  "  is  the  exact  word 
that  should  have  been  used  here.  But  it  seems  to  be  fire  in  some  minute  form.  The 
impotence  of  man  is  set  forth  and  the  inefficiency  of  his  endeavours.  He  is  very 
laborious.  He  surrounds  himself  with  his  artificial  glimmers,  and  hopes  to 
compensate  their  feebleness  by  their  multitude.  There  are  no  Divine  lights  in 
the  firmament  of  his  night,  and  he  fancies  that  the  dim  and  dusky  flickerings  which 
his  own  hands  have  multiplied  about  him  are  sufficient  for  his  needs.  2,  The 
seeming  success  of  the  wicked.  "  "Walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire  and  in  the  sparks 
that  ye  have  kindled."  It  is  as  if  the  Almighty  said  to  wilful  and  rebellious 
creatures  :  "Take  your  own  way.  Pursue  your  dream,  and  eat  the  fruits  of  your 
folly. "  The  light  of  the  wicked,  like  the  darkness  of  the  righteous,  is  not  single 
but  manifold.  They  "walk,"  too,  amidst  these  lights,  they  live  and  delight 
themselves  in  "the  light  of  their"  own  fires,  and  surrounded  by  "the  sparks  that 
they  have  kindled."  3.  The  doom  of  the  wicked.  "This  shall  ye  have  at  My 
hand  ;  ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow."  (1)  Men  must  lie  down  in  sickness.  Projects 
which  flashed  such  alluring  brightness  grow  very  pale  when  health  is  gone  and 
powers  of  enjoyment  have  fled.  "Shade  me  from  the  lying  glare,"  cries  the 
defrauded  sufferer,  when  the  head  is  sick  and  the  heart  is  weary.  (2)  Every  man 
must  lie  down  to  die.  When  that  solemn  hour  arrives,  the  wasted  fingers  will 
enkindle  no  more  lights,  and  the  shrunken  limbs  move  no  more  amidst  them.  The 
whole  circle  of  self-deceptions  with  which  you  have  encompassed  your  soid,  shall 
sink  and  vanish  together,  like  the  last  glimmer  forsakes  the  erpiring  wick,  and 
leave  only  a  noisome  ash  behind.  How  different  are  the  righteous  and  the  wicked 
in  their  darkness!  The  righteous  "leans,"  the  wicked  "lies  down."  "Leaning" 
is  an  act  of  spiritual  power  ;  "lying  down"  in  the  languors  of  dissolution,  with 
chilling  perspirations  crawling  on  breast  and  brow,  is  impotent  endurance.  The 
righteous  "leans"  on  God;  the  wicked  sinks  helpless  and  "lies  down"  to  die. 
The  righteous  finds  succour  and  salvation  ;  the  wicked,  sorrow.  "Leaning"  is  the 
moment  of  triumph  ;  "lying  down,"  of  utter  overthrow  and  ruin.  {H.  Batchelor.) 
"  The  clovd  across  the  sun: " — Contrary  to  the  teaching  of  those  who  affirm  that 
religion's  ways  are  invariably  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace,  and  that  the 
world's  ways  are  invariably  rough  and  disappointing,  it  is  the  religious  man 
who  "walketh  in  darkness,  and  hath  no  light,"  and  it  is  the  worldly  man 
whose  pathway  is  illumined  and  whose  prosperity  is  assured.  I.  The  two 
CONTRASTED  TYPES  OF  CHARACTER.  1.  By  "the  fear  of  the  Lord"  in  the  language 
of  the  Old  Testament  is  meant  a  religious  disposition,  combining  reverence  and 
love.  There  are  two  kinds  of  fear — one  wholesome,  the  other  unwholesome ;  one 
the  offspring  of  knowledge,  the  other  of  ignorance  ;  one  which  liberates  the  soul, 
the  other  which  brings  it  into  bondage.  And  it  is  the  reverential  fear  to  which 
the  prophet  refers  as  attached  to  the  character  under  consideration.  Then,  He 
"obeyeth  the  voice  of  His  Servant."  That  is  a  fuller  characterization  of  the 
godly  man,  which  takes  into  account  conduct  as  well  as  disposition.  This  twofold 
description  completes  the  picture.  The  interior  Ufe  and  the  outward  walk  correspond. 
The  character,  then,  is  not  that  of  an  empty  religious  professor.  Nor  is  he  a 
backslider.  2.  The  character  which  comes  before  us  in  the  second  half  of  the  text  is 
not  so  fully  described  as  is  that  of  the  godly  man  in  the  preceding  verse.  Neverthe- 
less, the  constrast  which  is  suggested  enables  us  to  complete  the  outline  without 
difficulty.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  think  of  one  who  is  outwardly  and 
notoriously  immoral.  But  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  think  of  one  who  is 
uninfluenced  by  the  fear  of  God,  and  whose  character  is  lacking  in  all  the  root- 
elements  of  a  sincere  piety.  And  how  full  of  suggestion  the  words  "  He  kindleth  a 
fire  "  !  That  is  to  say,  he  warms  himself  from  without  rather  than  from  within.  He 
contemplates  life  on  its  physical  and  material  side  only.  He  finds  himself  in  a  world 
well  suited  to  his  requirements  and  capable  of  affording  him  many  pleasurable  excite- 
ments, and  so  he  proceeds  to  gather  together  the  materials  for  a  good  fire.  To  the 
superficial  observer  the  difference  between  the  godly  man  and  the  worldly  man, 
especially  when  the  latter  happens  to  be  respectable  and  moral,  may  not  be  very 
striking.  Yet  the  difference  is  vital.  It  is  a  difference  in  kind  as  well  as  degree. 
They  belong  to  different  realms.  II.  The  two  conteasted  walks — the  one  in 
darkness,  the  other  encompassed  with  sparks.  Health  and  material  prosperity  are 
not  necessarily  signs  of  the  special  favour  of  God.  Nor  are  sickness  and  adversity  any 
sure  indication  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  1.  It  is  the  portion  of  a  good  man  some- 
timea  to  have  to  walk  in  darkness.     (1)  There  is  the  darkness  of  adversity.  ^2)  There 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

is  the  darkness  of  religious  doubt.  A  good  man  may  find  himself  in  this  transition 
period  drifting  away  from  the  old  moorings — drifting  away  he  hardly  knows  whither. 
He  has  to  re-make  his  creed,  and  dm'ing  that  period  of  re-making  he  is  compelled  to 
walk,  more  or  less,  in  darkness.  (3)  There  is  the  darkness  of  spiritual  drought.  The 
man  whose  faith  is  greatly  tried  is  counselled  to  exercise  a  stronger  faith.  2.  In 
contrast  to  all  this,  there  is  the  "walking"  of  those  who  walk  in  the  light  of  the 
fires  of  their  own  kindling.  Is  this  world,  with  all  its  absorbing  interests,  really 
empty  and  unsatisfying  ?  No  doubt  it  is,  sooner  or  later.  But  for  the  present  the 
majority  of  those  around  us  are  satisfied  with  it  as  a  sphere  of  habitation.  And  sup- 
posing there  be  no  God  and  no  hereafter — then  one  may  almost  ask  whether  the 
worldly  have  not  the  advantage  over  the  unworldly,  and  whether  this  life,  with  all 
its  struggles  and  efforts,  is  reaUy  worth  living.  But  if  there  be  a  God  and  a  here- 
after ;  if  the  kingdom  of  the  soul  is  as  great  a  reality  as  the  kingdom  of  the  senses  ; 
if  character  is  eveiything — then  we  are  fools  indeed  if  we  accept  the  creed  of  the 
materialist,  and  live  the  life  of  the  sensualist.  There  are  only  two  philosophies  of 
life  possible  to  us  ;  and  one  of  them  is  not  a  philosophy.  The  man  who  follows  the 
first  is  he  who  walks  in  the  light  of  the  Sun — the  sun's  Sun,  the  great  source  and 
fountain  of  all  illumination.  The  man  who  follows  the  second  is  he  who  walks  in 
the  light  of  Chinese  lanterns  and  all  kinds  of  pyrotechnic  devices,  and  who  in  con- 
sequence never  arrives  at  the  goal.  III.  The  two  lives  with  their  contrasted 
ENDINGS.  1.  There  can  be  no  real  and  lasting  success  in  life  apart  from  God.  In 
the  domain  of  literature,  science  and  art ;  in  the  field  of  material  enterprise  and 
industry  ;  in  the  haunts  and  abodes  of  pleasure,  how  brightly  the  world's  bonfiires  are 
brnmng  !  How  the  flames  sparkle,  and  dance  and  leap  !  What  crowds,  what  gaiety, 
what  laughter  !  Soon,  however,  the  laughter  wDl  die  away,  and  all  that  will  be  left 
of  that  brilliant  human  assemblage  on  this  side  the  grave  will  be  a  few  brief  epitaphs 
and  a  few  handfuls  of  dust.  "  He  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow,"  or  as  Matthew  Henry 
quaintly  paraphrases  it,  "He  shall  go  to  bed  in  the  dark."  That  is  a  reminiscence 
of  our  childhood.  And  that  is  what  it  aU  comes  to  sooner  or  later,  if  we  read  Goethe 
and  Byron  instead  of  our  Bible  ;  if  we  worship  the  beautiful  instead  of  the  holy  ;  if 
we  live  the  life  of  the  senses  instead  of  the  life  of  the  soul.  2.  Elsewhere  we  are  told 
that  "to  the  upright  there  ariseth  a  light  in  the  darkness."  And  again  it  is  said, 
"  Mark  the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the  upright ;  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace." 
(T.  Sanderson.)  False  and  true  in  character: — I.  The  darkness  of  the  true 
AND  their  relief.  1.  The  true  have  a  distinctive  principle  and  conduct.  All 
character  is  made  up  of  principles  and  acts.  The  principle  is  "  fear,"  not  of  a  crouch- 
ing serf,  but  of  a  loving  child — filial  reverence  ;  the  conduct  is,  obeying  the  voice  of 
His  Servant — Christ.  Here  is  the  true  spirit  and  its  true  development.  Piety  may 
listen  to  the  voice  of  philosophies,  but  obeys  the  voice  of  Christ.  His  whole  life  was 
a  voice.  2.  The  true  have  their  seasons  of  darkness — "  walketh  in  darkness. "  Jacob, 
Job,  Asaph,  Jeremiah.  The  cloud  is  not  spread  by  a  Divine  hand  over  the  heart, 
but  rises  from  the  corrupt  elements  of  our  moral  nature.  A  dark  day  is  not  the  sun's 
fault ;  he  shines  in  his  own  great  orbit  in  November  as  in  June  ;  the  darkness  arises 
from  the  vapours  of  the  earth  ;  so  with  moral  gloom — cause  not  in  God,  but  in  us.  3. 
The  true  in  seasons  of  darkness  have  a  sure  reKef — "  they  trust  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  " — in  His  disposition,  and  power  to  help.  Christianity  a  proof  of  the  former, 
the  universe  of  the  latter.  II.  The  lights  of  the  false  and  their  ruin. 
"Walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire,"  etc.  1.  The  false  have  their  lights.  Such  as 
general  custom,  temporal  expediency,  corrupt  religions,  pseudo-philosophies.  These 
lights  are  their  guides  and  comforts  in  their  relations  to  both  worlds.  2.  The  false 
will  have  their  ruin.  "This  shall  ye  have  at  My  hand."  The  "candle  of  the 
wicked  shall  be  put  out."  All  their  lamps,  however  luminous,  shall  be  quenched  in 
a  midnight,  without  a  ray  of  moon  or  star.  {Humilist. )  Darkness  the  elr/ment  of 
trial : — -What  is  it  that  is  tried  in  us  ?  Even  the  same  which,  it  has  pleased  God  to 
promise,  shall  be  rewarded  in  us,  if  we  hold  it  fast — our  faith  in  Christ.  And  this 
consists  of  several  parts ;  which,  however,  may  be  summed  up  in  three  heads — 1. 
Belief  in  what  He  has  revealed  to  us.  2.  Belief  in  what  He  has  promised  to  us.  3. 
Belief  in  what  He  has  required  of  us.  But  the  text  calls  our  attention  particularly 
to  the  two  latter,  as  arising  out  of  the  former  ;  and  in  the  particular  shape  of  obedi- 
ence to  His  commands  ;  and  trust  in  His  care  of  us.  But  it  is  plain,  that  if  we  are 
thus  tried,  there  must  be  the  possibility  of  a  difi'erent  result.  There  must  be  a 
choice;  a  choice  between  doing  right  aud  doing  wrong;  between  the  things 
which  we  see  and  the  things  which  we  do  not  se* ;  between  acting  for  ourselves, 
and  trusting  in  God  to  act  for  us.    And  aocordinglj,  the  text  goes  on  to  set  before 


CHAP,  u]  ISAIAH.  25 

as  the  other  class  of  persons,  who  find  themselTes  in  the  same  darkness  and  per« 
plexity,  but  seek  a  different  way  out  of  it.  "  Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,"  etc 
These  are  the  men  of  the  world,  the  prudent  ones ;  those  who  will  not  venture, 
but  wUl  make  sure  of  everything !  They  will  not  be  kept  in  the  dark  1  {B. 
Scott,  M.A.)  The  prophet's  sublimity  and  sarcasm: — As  the  holy  prophet,  here, 
addresses  himself  to  two  very  different  sorts  of  men,  whom  he  accordingly  describes 
by  two  very  opposite  characters ;  so  he  varies  his  manner  of  expression,  in  just 

{)roportion  to  the  figure  which  they  make.  To  the  one,  his  style  is  serious,  and  sub- 
ime,  and  full  of  enlivening  encouragement ;  equal  to  the  dignity  of  the  holy  rule 
they  walk  by :  to  the  other,  like  their  own  way  of  thinking,  disdainful,  and  sarcas- 
tical ;  laughing  at  their  foolish  devices,  their  unsuccessful  projects,  and  mocking  at 
the  bitter  calamity,  which,  with  aU  their  conceited  wisdom,  in  the  end,  they  bring 
upon  themselves.  {L.  Blaclhurne,  D. D. )  Light  in  darkness :  true  and  false : — In 
every  time  of  distress  or  doubt,  in  every  dark,  perplexed,  and  gloomy  season,  it  is  as 
reasonable,  as  it  is  natural  for  every  man,  who  is  not  wholly  lost  to  all  sense  or  fore- 
sight, to  cast  about,  and  to  look  out  for  any  glimpse  of  light  that  may  suffice  to 
guide  him  through  it.  This  is  a  turn  which  every  thinking  man  wUl  find  his  mind 
must  surely  take  in  any  present  misery,  or  visibly  approaching  danger.  But,  here, 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked  part  asunder  ;  and  persevering  in  the  different  routes 
they  take,  they  come  no  more  together.     I.  The  only  tkue  sectjeitt,  in  times  of 

AFFLICTION  OE  DANGEE,  IS  IN  THE  WAT  OF  DUTY.  II.  ThEEE  IS  NO  WILFUL 
DEVIATION   FEOM    IT,    THAT   DOES    NOT    LEAD   TO   DESTEUCTION.      (Ibid.)      He  who 

endured  the  hiding  of  His  Father's  countenance  when  bearing  our  sins,  bids  you 
"stay  "  on  Him  as  your  God.  What  an  illustration  of  Isa.  xlii.  16  !  {E.  Avriol, 
M.A.)  Encouragement  and  warning : — I.  Comfoet  is  here  spoken  to  disconsolate 
saints,  and  they  are  encouraged  to  trust  in  God's  grace.  II.  Conviction  is  here 
^oken  to  presuming  sinners,  and  they  are  warned  not  to  trust  in  themselves.  {M. 
Henry.)  Unwilling  darkness: — The  peculiarity  of  the  case  of  those  here  stated  is, 
that  it  is  an  unwilling  darkness.  {J.  M.  Macduff,  D.D.)  F.  W.  Robertson's  expert,' 
eTice  and  counsel: — Very  instructive  in  this  regard  is  the  experience  recorded  by 
Frederick  "W.  Robertson,  of  his  striving  toward  the  light,  in  that  terrible  spiritual 
conflict  which  he  fought  out  among  the  solitudes  of  the  Tyrol.  In  one  of  his  letters 
written  there  he  says :  "Some  things  I  am  certain  of,  and  these  are  my  Ursachen, 
which  cannot  be  taken  away  from  me.  I  have  got  so  far  as  this :  Moral  goodness 
and  moral  beauty  are  realities,  lying  at  the  basis  and  beneath  all  forms  of  the  best 
religious  expressions."  And,  generalizing  from  his  own  case,  he  thus  addressed  the 
working-men  of  Brighton  :  "  It  is  an  awful  hour — let  him  who  has  passed  through  it 
say  how  awful — when  this  life  has  lost  its  meaning  and  seems  shrivelled  into  a  span; 
when  the  grave  appears  to  be  the  end  of  all,  human  goodness  nothing  but  a  name, 
and  the  sky  above  this  universe  a  dead  expanse,  black  with  the  void  from  which 
God  Himself  has  disappeared.  In  that  fearful  loneliness  of  spirit,  when  those  who 
should  have  been  his  friends  and  counsellors  only  frown  upon  his  misgivinga 
and  profanely  bid  him  stifle  his  doubts,  I  know  but  one  way  in  which  a  man  may 
come  forth  from  his  agony  scatheless  ;  it  is  by  holding  fast  to  those  things  which 
are  certain  still — the  grand,  simple  landmarks  of  morality.  In  the  darkest  hour 
through  which  a  human  soul  can  pass,  whatever  else  is  doubtful,  this,  at  least,  is 
certain.  If  there  be  no  God  and  no  future  state,  yet  even  then  it  is  better  to  be 
generous  than  selfish  ;  better  to  be  chaste  than  licentious ;  better  to  be  true  than 
false  ;  better  to  be  brave  than  to  be  a  coward.  Blessed  beyond  all  earthly  blessedness 
is  the  man  who,  in  the  tempestuous  darkness -of  the  soul,  has  dared  to  hold  fast 
these  venerable  landmarks.  Thrice  blessed  is  he  who,  when  aU  is  cheerless  within 
and  without,  when  the  teachers  terrify  him  and  his  friends  shrink  from  him,  has 
obstinately  clung  to  moral  good.  Thrice  blessed,  because  his  night  shall  pass  into 
clear,  bright  day. "  Melancholy  Christiana : — Serious  Christians  are  apt  to  be  melan- 
choly ones,  and  those  who  fear  always  to  fear  too  much.  {M.  Henry.)  Looking 
Godwards : — Believe  in  God — if  only  by  way  of  experiment,  and  for  a  moment — with 
all  perplexing  questions  imperially  commanded  for  a  time  into  silence  ;  believe,  I 
mean,  in  One  worthy  to  be  God,  the  Best  conceivable,  aU  that  a  God  ought  to 
be  ;  then  remember  how  such  a  One  has  aU  time  and  all  resources  at  His  command ; 
that  He  must  necessarily  be  working  on  a  vast  scale ;  and  then  believe  that 
you,  as  a  living  part  of  one  living  whole,  are  necessarily  cared  for  and  included 
in  His  all-perfect  plan.  The  experiment  is,  at  least,  a  pleasant  one,  and  quite 
within  our  power ;  and  I  should  not  wonder  if,  in  the  temporary  belief,  the 
idea  became  as  light,  which  evidences  itself,  and  needs  no  proof  but  itself  that  it 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

is  light.  {H,  H.  Dohney.)  Ood  in  "the  thick  darkness:" — Do  not  fear  to  draw 
near,  like  Moses,  even  "to  the  thick  darkness,"  for  God  is  there.  Out  of  the 
night  is  bom  the  morning,  and  chaos  comes  before  the  kosmos.  (Ibid.) 
"Polish  up  the  dark  side:" — "Look  on  the  bright  side,"  said  a  young  man  to 
a  friend,  who  was  discontented  and  melancholy.  "But  there  is  no  bright  side," 
was  his  doleful  reply.  "Very  well,  then  polish  up  the  dark  one,"  said  the  young 
man  promptly.  {The  New  Age.)  Security  in  the  darkness  of  life: — I  remember 
once  nearing  a  devout  engine-driver  relate  his  religious  experience.  He  said: 
"The  other  night  when  I  was  on  duty  there  was  a  dense  fog;  we  could  not 
see  a  yard  before  us,  but  I  knew  that  the  permanent  way  was  under  us,  and  every 
now  and  then  we  caught  a  glimpse  of  some  signal  or  other,  and  in  time  came  safely 
to  the  journey's  end  ;  so,"  he  said,  "  I  know  if  I  am  true  to  the  great  command- 
ments and  promises,  God  wiU  guide  and  bring  me  through. "  In  the  darkest  hoiirs, 
when  reason  and  experience  utterly  fail,  remember  that  the  permanent  way  is  there  ; 
be  true  to  the  line  of  trust  on  one  side,  and  obedience  on  the  other,  and  God  will 
vouchsafe  you  comforting  signals,  and  in  due  season  bring  you  to  the  appointed  rest. 
( W.  L.  Watkinson. )  Spiritual  darkness  : — The  tree  that  waves  its  branches  so 
freely  in  the  great  expanse  and  spreads  out  its  leafy  surface  towards  heaven,  so  eager 
for  light  and  for  heat,  struck  its  root  in  secret  underground,  in  great  darkness  and 
bondage.  Take  heed  that  you  do  not  undervalue  your  time  of  spiritual  darkness  and 
conflict.  The  joy  of  eternity  often  strikes  its  root  in  very  bitterness  of  spirit. 
Meekly  fulfil  all  your  groaning  and  patiently  abide  your  time  in  darkness,  "  looking 
unto  Jesus."  Do  you  know  that  you  would  not  so  painfully  feel  your  darkness  if  the 
Holy  Sunlight  did  not  underlie  it  ?  The  diviner  the  sunlight  at  centre,  the  pain- 
fuller  is  the  encompassing  night.  {J.  Pulsford,  D.D.)  Faith  useful  in  dark  days  : 
— On  ancient  churches  we  see  the  dial,  the  quaint  invention  of  our  fathers  ;  but  this 
is  the  pathetic  failure  of  the  dial,  it  is  of  use  only  as  long  as  the  sun  shines.  But 
what  we  want  is  the  faith  that  helps  us  when  it  is  dark,  when  disappointment 
lacerates  the  soul,  when  the  grave  is  being  dug,  when  trials  lay  us  low,  and  when 
guilt  darkens  the  day  and  puts  the  shutters  up  on  the  windows  of  the  heart.  (/.  A. 
Davies,  B.D.)  Facing  Godwards : — In  the  old  myth,  Orion  whose  eyes  had  been  put 
out  whUst  he  slept  on  the  sea  shore,  recovered  sight  by  gazing  toward  the  rising 
sun.  If  our  inner  vision  has  been  blinded,  and  all  the  grand  truths  and  hopes  of 
life  lost  to  sight,  let  us  turn  our  blind  face  toward  heaven  and  keep  it  there,  until 
He  who  looseth  the  bands  of  Orion  turns  for  us  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning. 
^W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  11.  Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire. — A  child  of  darkness  walking  in  light : — 
By  the  "  fire  "  and  "  the  light  of  their  fire  "  which  wicked  men  are  said  to  walk  in, 
two  things  must  be  meant.  I.  Their  own  natural  righteodsness  and  the 
sparks  and  acts  thereof  II.  The  light  of  outward  comfouts  from  the  creatures, 
which  in  this  world  they  enjoy,  and  the  sparkling  pleasures  thereof  which  they  walk 
in,  and  content  themselves  with,  newlef^ting  communion  with  God,  being  estranged 
from  the  life  of  God,  and  living  without  Him  in  the  world.  ( T.  Goodwin,  D.D. )  Sparks 
of  our  ovm  kindling : — Our  mistake  is,  not  that  we  seek  hapjnness  (for  to  do  so  is 
inherent  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature),  but  that  we  seek  it  from  fictitious  and 
artificial  sources,  which  are  not  naturally  calculated  to  yield  it.  The  many  fictitious 
sources,  from  which  men  seek  to  derive  happiness,  are  compared  to  a  fire  kindled, 
and  sparks  struck  out,  by  way  of  relieving  the  darkness  of  the  night.  It  is,  of 
course,  implied  in  the  metaphor,  that  true  happiness,  the  real  and  adequate  comple- 
ment of  man's  nature,  resembles  the  Divinely-created  and  golden  sunlight.     I.  This 

COMPARISON  DOES  NOT  LEAD  US  TO  DENY  THAT  PLEASURE  AND  GRATIFICATION  OF 
A    CERTAIN    KIND    ARE    DERIVABLE    FROM    WORLDLY    SOURCES.       Just    aS    man    Can 

relieve  himself  in  great  measure  from  the  discomfort  and  inconvenience  of  natural 
darkness,  by  kindling  a  fire  and  surrounding  himself  with  sparks,  so  can  he  alleviate, 
to  a  certain  extent,  the  instinctive  sense  of  disquietude  and  dissatisfaction,  so  irksome 
to  him  at  intervals  of  leisure,  by  the  various  enjoyments  which  life  has  to  offer. 
II.  The  drawbacks  op  worldly  enjoyments.  1.  Unsatisfactoiiness  inheres  in 
their  very  nature,  inasmuch  as  they  are  all  more  or  less  artificial.  They  are  miserable 
substitutes,  which  man  has  set  up  to  stand  him  in  stead  of  that  true  happiness, 
which  is  congenial  to  his  nature,  and  adapted  to  his  wants.  The  light  of  the  sun  is 
nature's  provision  for  man.  That  light  answers  all  the  purposes  for  which  light 
is  required,  far  more  beautifully,  as  well  as  far  more  simply,  than  the  most  splendid 
artificial  illamination.     Bat  the  shedding  abroad  of  the  golden  sunlight  ia  not 


CHAP.  L.]  .    ISAIAH,  27 

dependent  on  man's  will,  or  within  the  compass  of  his  ability.  Effectually  to  remova 
the  pall  of  darkness  from  the  face  of  nature,  and  to  spread  the  morning  upon  th« 
mountains,  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Divine  Being.  Whereas  in  the  alleviation  of 
the  darkness,  man  has  a  share.  He  can  kindle  a  fire,  and  compass  himself  about 
with  sparks.  During  the  period  of  the  sun's  absence,  he  can  replace  his  light,  by 
the  sorry  substitute  of  torch  and  taper.  The  glare,  however,  which  these  shed 
around,  is  not  like  the  genial,  cheering,  cherishing  light,  which  proceeds  from  the 
great  luminary  which  rules  the  day.  It  exercises  no  quickening  influence  on 
vegetable  life, — its  clear  shining  brings  not  out  the  bloom  and  perfume  of  the  flower, 
nor  the  verdure  of  the  tender  grass,  nor  sends  a  thrill  of  joy  through  the  whole 
realm  of  nature.  Now,  every  fact  which  has  here  been  stated,  in  regard  to  things 
natural,  finds  its  counterpart  in  things  spiritual.  2.  The  fitful  character  of  the 
enjoyment  derived  from  worldly  sources  renders  it  comparable  to  a  fire  and  sparks 
struck  out.  The  glow  of  a  kindled  fire  is  not  equable.  It  casts  a  flickering  and 
uncertain  light,  now  smouldering  beneath  the  fuel  which  feeds  it,  now  bursting 
forth  into  bright  and  vivid  flashes.  Thus  it  presents  us  with  a  lively  emblem  of 
worldly  joy,  which  is  subject  to  repeated  alternations  of  revival  and  decay,  and 
whose  high  pitch  can  be  sustained,  only  for  a  very  short  period  of  time.  Not  so 
the  peace  and  pleasantness  derived  from  walking  with  God.  If  it  be  not  a  light 
80  dazzling  as  that  which  is  sometimes  shed  abroad  by  the  kindled  firebrands  of 
worldly  joys,  it  is  at  least  subject  to  no  such  variations  of  lustre.  8.  A  fire  requires 
continually  to  be  fed  with  fresh  fuel,  if  its  brilliancy  and  warmth  are  to  be  maintained. 
Hence  it  becomes  an  apt  emblem  of  the  delusive  joy  of  this  world,  falsely  called 
happiness,  which  is  only  kept  alive  in  the  worldling's  heart  by  the  fuel  of  excite- 
ment. 4.  But  perhaps  the  chief  drawback  of  the  worldling's  so-called  happiness 
la  that  it  is  consistent  with  so  much  anxiety — that  it  is  subject  to  frequent  intrusions 
from  alarm,  whenever  a  glimpse  of  the  future  untowardly  breaks  in  upon  the  mind. 
And  possibly  this  feature  of  it  too  is  symbolized  in  the  prophetic  imagery,  which 
is  here  employed  to  denote  it.  It  is  in  the  night-time,  when  the  kindled  fire  glows 
upon  the  hearth,  and  man  pursues  his  employments  by  the  light  of  torch  and  taper, 
that  apprehensions  visit  his  mind,  and  phantom  forms  are  conjured  up  which  scare 
the  ignorant  and  the  superstitious.  Would  that  the  forebodings  of  the  worldling 
were  equally  groundless  with  the  fears  of  the  superstitious !  What  makes  the 
Christian's  joy  so  intrinsically  preferable  to  his,  is  that  it  can  endure  the  survey 
of  the  hour  of  death,  and  of  the  day  of  judgment.  {E.  M.  Goulbv/m,  D.C.L.)  False 
religions : — I.  Man  creates  them.  "  Ye  have  kindled  the  fires."  What  are  they  t 
There  are  at  least  five  false  religions  that  prevail  in  Christendom,  and  under  the 
name  of  Christianity.  ].  The  religion  of  creed.  A  sound  creed  is  essential  to  a 
sound  religion,  but  is  not  itself  a  sound  religion.  2.  The  religion  of  moods.  Desires 
for  heaven,  dread  of  hell,  sensuous  sympathy  with  Christ's  sufferings,  these  are  the 
religious  "sparks."  3.  The  religion  of  ordinance.  4.  The  religion  of  proxyism. 
Many  are  depending  upon  services.  5.  The  religion  of  merit.  All  these  are  false 
religions  prevalent  amongst  us,  as  man  is  the  creator  of  them.  II.  Heaven  allows 
THEM.  "Walk  in  the  light,"  etc.  1.  The  permission  is  strange.  2.  The  permission 
is  significant.  (1)  It  shows  God's  respect  for  that  freedom  with  which  He  has 
endowed  human  nature.  (2)  It  suggests  that  in  giving  the  Gospel,  He  has  given 
all  that  is  necessary  for  man  to  get  tlie  right  religion.  III.  Misery  follows  them. 
"This  shall  ye  have  at  My  hands,"  etc.  Death  will  put  out  all  false  light  from 
the  soul.  Who  shall  imagine  the  "sorrow"  that  follows  the  extinction  of  all  the 
religious  lights  of  the  soul !  1.  There  is  the  sorrow  of  bitter  disappointment ;  2.  of 
poignant  remorse;  8.  of  black  despair.  All  hopes  of  improvement  gone.  No 
religion  will  beam  on  with  increased  radiance  up  to  and  beyond  the  grave  for  ereif 
bat  the  religion  of  Chtist.    {Homilid,) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTSATOR.  [chaf.u. 


CHAPTER  LL 

Vers.  1-8.  Hearken  to  Me. — The  thrice  " Searken** t — These  paragraphs  are 

exceedingly  di'amatic.  "We  become  conscious  that  we  are  approaching  a  revelation 
of  unparalleled  sublimity  which  shall  be  in  Scripture  what  heart  or  brain  or  eye  is 
in  the  human  body.  And  as  we  consider  the  thrice  "  Hearken  "  of  this  paragraph, 
and  the  thrice  "Awake"  of  the  succeeding  one,  we  realize  that  we  are  entering  the 
presence-chamber  of  the  profoundest  mysteries  of  love  and  redemption.  The  people, 
notwithstanding  the  promises  of  deliverance  from  exile  and  the  summons  to  depart, 
seemed  unable  to  believe  that  they  were  destined  to  become  again  a  great  nation,  or 
that  Zion's  wastes  would  be  repaired  !  Already  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  had  sought 
to  answer  their  anxious  questionings,  and  reassure  them  by  announcing  a  love  that 
would  not  let  them  go.  And  in  these  words  He  betakes  Himself  to  the  same  strain. 
He  prefaces  His  words  by  the  thrice-repeated  "  Hearken,"  addi'essed  to  those  "  that 
foUow  after  righteousness  "  in  the  first  verse  ;  and  to  "those  that  know  righteousness  " 
in  the  seventh.  These  are  always  the  stages  in  the  development  of  character :  they 
that  follow  presently  possess.  I.  The  lessons  of  ketrospect.  It  was  for  her 
encouragement  that  Israel  was  primarily  directed  to  this  retrospect.  Let  us  recount 
the  steps  of  Abraham's  pruning,  on  which  God  lays  stress  in  saying,  "  When  he  was 
but  one,  I  called  him."  1.  He  stood  alone.  First,  Terah  died,  after  having  started 
with  him  for  the  Land  of  Promise,  emblem  of  those  who  in  old  age  start  on  the 
pilgrimage  of  faith  and  hope,  not  too  much  tied  by  the  conservatism  of  nature,  or 
the  traditions  of  the  past.  Then  Lot  dropped  away,  and  went  down  to  Sodom ; 
and  it  must  have  been  difficult  for  the  old  man,  as  he  saw  the  retreating  forms  of 
his  camp  followers,  to  be  wholly  unmoved.  Then  Sarah's  scheme  miscarried,  and 
Hagar  was  thrust  from  his  tents  with  her  chUd.  Lastly,  his  Isaac  was  laid  upon 
the  altar.  By  successive  strokes  the  shadows  grew  deeper  and  darker  ;  and  he  stood 
alone,  face  to  face  with  God  and  His  purpose.  But  the  fire  that  bm-ned  in  his  heart 
rose  higher,  shone  brighter,  and  has  ignited  myriads  with  its  flame.  2.  His  faith 
was  sorely  tried.  3.  His  history  is  the  type  of  God's  dealings  with  men.  Not  once 
nor  twice  in  the  record  of  the  Church  the  cause  of  truth  has  been  entrusted  to  a  tiny 
handful  of  defenders,  who  have  deemed  it  forlorn  or  lost.  Sir  "Walter  Scott's  picture 
of  the  apparently  empty  glen  suddenly  teeming  with  armed  men  at  the  sign  of  the 
chieftain  has  often  had  its  counterpart  in  the  great  army  which  has  arisen  from  the 
life,  or  words,  or  witness,  of  a  single  man.  Art  thou  a  cypher  ?  but  thou  mayest 
have  God  in  front  of  thee  !  Art  thou  but  a  narrow  strait  ?  yet  the  whole  ocean  of 
Godhead  is  waiting  to  pour  through  thee  1  The  question  is  not  what  thou  canst  or 
canst  not  do,  but  what  thou  art  willing  for  God  to  do.  II.  The  impekishableness 
OF  SPIRITUAL  QUALITY.  In  the  following  verses  there  is  a  marvellous  contrast 
between  the  material  and  the  unmaterial,  the  temporal  and  the  eternal.  The  gaze 
of  the  people  is  directed  to  the  heavens  above  and  the  earth  beneath.  Those  heavens 
seem  stable  enough.  Yet  they  shall  vanish  like  a  puff  of  smoke  borne  down  the 
wind.  And  as  for  the  earth,  it  shall  wax  old.  But  amid  the  general  wreck,  spiritual 
qualities  will  remain  imperishably  the  same.  "  My  salvation  shall  be  for  ever,  and 
My  righteousness  shall  not  be  abolished."  1.  This  shall  be  for  ever  true  of  God. 
God  will  be  the  same  in  His  feelings  and  dealings  towards  us  amid  the  crash  of 
matter  and  the  wreck  of  worlds  as  He  is  to-day.  The  Jews  took  great  comfort  in 
the  thought  of  God's  unchangeableness.  2.  This  shall  be  for  ever  true  of  man. 
When  we  partake  of  God's  righteousness  and  assimilate  it,  we  acquire  a  permanence 
which  defies  time  and  change.  What  a  lesson  is  given  in  these  words  of  the  relative 
value  of  things  1  III.  The  impotence  of  man.  These  exiled  Jews  hardly  dared 
to  hope  that  they  would  be  able  to  break  away  from  their  foes.  To  us,  as  to  the 
exiles  in  Babylon,  the  Divine  word  comes,  "Fear  ye  not,  neither  be  dismayed" 
(ver.  7).  The  paragraph  closes  with  an  application  of  the  word  used  by  the  great 
Servant  of  Himself.  "The  moth  shall  eat  them  up,"  we  heard  Him  saying  to 
Himself;  "they  shall  all  wax  old  as  a  garment"  (chap.  L  9).  But  now  we  are 
bidden  to  apply  those  same  expressions  to  ourselves  (ver.  8).  With  these  assurances 
behind  us,  we  majr  face  a  world  in  arms.  Men  may  try  to  wear  out  the  saints, 
but  they  must  fail.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A  bright  light  in  deep  shades: — ^The 
remembrance  of  God's  mercy  in  the  past  is  helpful  to  us  in  many  ways.  Isaiah  was 
led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  admonisE  the  Israelites  to  look  back  that  they  might  be 
•hMred  and  encouraged  in  a  tiuM  of  gloom  and  sadness,  and  that  they  might  be 


CHAP,  u.]  ISAJAH.  29 

animated  with  fresh  confidence  in  God's  power  to  bring  them  up  again  from  their 
sad  condition,  as  they  thought  of  all  that  He  had  done  for  them  in  times  past,  when 
they  were  equally  low,  or  when,  peradventure,  they  were  even  in  a  worse  plight  than 
they  were  at  present.  It  is  a  great  thing  for  people  to  be  encouraged.  I.  We  shaLl 
EXPOUND  THE  TEXT  IN  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  ISRAEL  LiTEEALLX.  They  are  bidden 
t?  look  back  to  the  origin  of  their  nation,  in  order  that  the>  may  be  comforted. 
Abraham  was  the  stock  out  of  whicti  the  nation  of  Israel  came.  Moreover,  the  man 
was  well  stricken  in  years.  As  for  his  wife,  she  also,  it  is  said,  was  barren  ;  and  yet 
from  these  two,  who  seemed  the  least  likely  of  all  flesh  and  blood,  God  was  pleased 
to  create  a  people  countless  as  the  stars.  Abraham  was  not  a  man  in  a  commanding 
position,  with  large  armies  at  his  feet,  who  could  make  a  show  in  the  world.  He 
was  a  dweller  in  tents,  a  Bedouin  sheik,  wandering  through  the  plains  of  Palestine, 
yet  was  he  never  injured  ;  for  God  had  sent  forth  a  secret  mandate,  which  fell, 
though  they  knew  it  not,  upon  men's  hearts.  Ifow,  the  prophet  turns  to  the 
Israelites,  and  says,  "You  say  God  can  never  restore  us,  we  have  been  thinned  out 
by  innumerable  invasions,  the  sword  of  war  hath  slain  the  tribes,  Judah  and  Israel 
can  never  rise  again.  But  are  there  not  more  left  of  you  than  there  were  at  first  ? 
There  were  but  two,  Abraham  and  Sarah,  that  bare  you,  and  yet  God  made  you  a 
people.  Can  He  not  make  you  a  people  again  ? "  etc.  The  thoughts  which  would 
be  awakened  in  the  heart  of  a  Jew  by  these  reflections  would  be  eminently  consolatory. 
They  ought  to  be  consolatory  to  us  now  with  regard  to  the  Jewish  people.  "We  are 
encouraged  from  the  very  origin  of  Israel  to  hope  that  great  things  shall  yet  be  done 
for  her.  II.  Our  text  may  be  used  in  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  Church 
OF  God  in  the  world.  1.  I  know  many  of  the  people  of  God  who  scarcely  dare 
look  for  brighter  times,  because  they  say  the  people  of  God  are  few.  Was  not  the 
Church  very  small  at  the  first  ?  It  could  all  be  contained  in  one  upper  room.  Has 
it  not  been  very  small  many  times  since  then  ?  But  did  not  the  Lord  strengthen 
His  Church  in  the  apostolic  times  ?  And,  in  the  dark  ages,  how  very  speedily  did 
the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  come  !  God  had  but  to  speak  by  His  servant  Luther, 
and  brave  men  came  to  His  side,  and  right  soon  His  Church  sprang  up.  2.  But,  la 
it  possible,  you  say,  while  the  Church  of  God  in  these  days  possesses  so  few  men  of 
influence?  Did  not  inspiration  say,  "Not  many  great  men  after  the  flesh,  not 
many  mighty  have  been  called,  but  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  "  ?  Do 
ye  suppose  that  God  has  changed  His  plans,  or  that  men's  hearts  have  changed  their 
bias  ?  3.  But  alas,  saith  one,  I  see  grave  cause  for  sorrow,  for  in  these  days  many 
have  departed  from  the  faith,  and  truth  lies  in  the  streets  bespattered.  There  have 
been  eras  and  epochs  in  which  gross  heresies  spread  a  contagion  through  the  entire 
Church.  4.  Again,  I  hear  the  voice  of  lamentation,  "It  is  not  merely  that  error 
spreads  in  the  land,  but  the  Church  is  lukewarm  in  these  times."  The  Church  has 
been  in  a  like  listless  state  before,  and  out  of  that  languid  condition  God  has  roused 
her  up  and  brought  her  forth.  5.  There  is  a  complaint  made  by  some,  and  I  fear 
there  is  some  truth  in  it,  that  we  have  not  many  valiant  ministers  now-a-days.  But, 
for  all  that,  there  have  been  periods  in  the  Church's  history  when  she  lacked  for 
men  of  valour,  and  God  has  found  them.     Why  should  He  not  find  them  again  ? 

III.  Our  text  may  be  viewed  as  instructive  to  ourselves.  Our  experience 
varies.  It  sometimes  happens  to  men  who  are  truly  saved,  that  they  fall  from  the 
condition  which  they  occupied  when  they  were  in  their  fiirst  love.  Your  present 
condition  is  not  what  your  past  one  was,  and  yet  the  Lord  visited  you  when  in  your 
lost  estate.     There  is  the  same  God  to-day  as  there  was  when  first  you  sought  Him. 

IV,  Our  text  may  be  fittingly  used  to  encourage  our  hope  for  others. 
Do  you  say  of  some  sinner,  "  I  am  afraid  his  is  a  hopeless  case  "  ?  look  unto  the  rock 
whence  you  were  hewn,  and  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  were  digged.  Remember 
again,  that  that  poor  sinner  whose  soul  you  are  going  to  seek  is  where  the  best  and 
brightest  of  the  saints  were.  And,  recollect,  that  that  sinner  you  are  going  to  speak 
with  is,  to-day,  where  those  that  are  in  heaven  once  were.  {0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
benefit  of  reflection : — It  is  the  duty,  and  will  be  for  the  benefit  of  every  true  servant 
of  God,  occasionally  to  reflect,  with  due  seriousness,  on  his  own  original  state,  on 
the  rise  and  progress  of  religion  in  his  own  soul,  and  of  the  experience  which  he  has 
thus  individually  had  of  the  Divine  power,  goodness  and  mercy.  I.  The  persons 
here  addressed.  Those  who  "follow  after  righteousness"  and  "seek  the  Lord." 
How  exactly  does  this  description  accord  to  the  true  people  of  God  under  the  Christian 
Church  ?  II.  The  exhortation  addressed  to  them.  "  Look  unto  the  rock,"  etc. 
The  meaning  is  obvious,  "  Look  back  unto  yourselves.  Consider  what  you  once  were  ; 
in  what  a  depth  of  misery  you  were  originally  sunk.    Reflect  on  the  natural  hardness 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

of  your  heart :  on  its  insensibility  to  spiritual  things  ;  on  its  dreadful  alienation  from 
God. "  See  this  state  of  things  exemplified — 1.  In  your  original  conversion  to  God. 
2.  In  your  subsequent  conduct  towards  God.  Since  the  time  in  which  you  first 
knew  Him  in  truth,  and  gave  yourself  up  to  serve  Him  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son, 
what  has  been  the  state  of  your  heart,  of  its  afi'ections,  its  tempers,  and  its  dis- 
rositions?  Have  all  these  been  uniformly  such  as  this  surrender  and  profession 
imply  and  require  ?  Application :  "What  lessons  do  these  reflections  teach  ?  1. 
Humility  and  self-abasement.  2.  Patience,  contentment  and  resignation.  3.  The 
neces«ty  of  a  continual  dependence  on  Divine  grace  to  work  in  you  both  to  will  and 
to  do.  4.  Hope  and  encouragement.  But  the  subject  admits  also  of  another  less 
exclusive  application.  It  furnishes  one  lesson  of  general  importance :  for  it  teaches 
us  how  holy  and  practical  in  its  tendency  is  true,  evangelical  religion.  {E.  Cooper.) 
Seekinrr  gtmls  directea .- — Ail  the  invitations  and  exhortations  of  the  Word  of  God 
for  spiritual  blessings  are  accompanied  with  a  description  of  character.  I.  The 
WORSHIPPERS  DESCRIBED.  1.  These  characters  who  follow  after  and  seek  after  must  be 
spiritually  alive.  It  would  be  strange  to  talk  of  a  corpse  in  a  churchyard  following 
after  or  seeking  any  favours  at  our  hands.  As  strange  would  it  be  to  talk  of  a  post 
in  the  street  following  after  us,  and  pursuing  us  for  the  same  purpose.  2.  There  is  a 
stirring  in  the  living  persons  that  begins  to  render  them  somewhat  conspicuous. 
Wherever  there  is  this  stirring  inquiry,  this  dissatisfaction  with  self,  and  a  stirring 
to  be  right  for  eternity,  there  is  life  Divine.  3.  Then,  there  must  be  sincerity. 
"Then  shall  ye  find  Me,  when  ye  seek  Me  with  your  whole  heart."  4.  We  wUl  go 
on  to  notice  their  eager  following  after  righteousness.  It  must  be  a  righteousness 
that  wUl  justify.  A  righteousness  that  will  sanctify.  A  righteousness  that  wUl 
glorify.  It  is  imperishable.  5.  FoUow  on  to  the  next  description  of  character. 
"Ye  that  seek  the  Lord."  Mark  a  few  characteristics  of  these  seekers.  They  seek 
Him  privately.  They  seek  Him  in  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelleth.  In  His 
Word.     Perseveringly.     Seeking  souls  are  weU  known  in  heaven,  earth  and  heU. 

II.  The  EXHORTATION  GIVEN.  "  Look  unto  the  rock, "  etc.  {J.  Irons.)  TheLorcCs 
people: — I.  A  description  OF  THE  Lord's  people.  They  " foUow  after  righteous- 
ness. "  If  you  ask  what  righteousness  is,  I  call  upon  you  to  behold  Jesus !  He  is 
righteousness.  The  Lord's  people  "follow  after  righteousness."  They  therefore 
follow  Him.  Far  better  for  a  man  to  strive  to  love  Christ  than  to  be  trying  to  lay- 
down  certain  rules  of  morality.  They  "follow  after  righteousness."  Does  not  this 
imply  that  they  cannot  find  it  in  themselves  ?  Some  follow  after  righteousness  in 
fear.  Others  with  many  slips.  The  Lord's  people  follow  after  righteousness  with 
humility.  They  follow  after  righteousness  in  love.  WUlingly.  Perseveringly.  I 
saw  a  steamer  on  the  canal  drawing  after  it  three  large  boats.  The  steamer  contained 
its  own  motive  power,  but  had  there  been  an  engine  and  boiler  in  each  of  those  boats 
they  also  would  have  gone  on  to  Liverpool  urged  on  by  inward  strength.  Well,  we 
follow  after  righteousness,  not  because  Christ  has  placed  some  band  between  Himself 
and  us,  but  because  He  has  Himself  entered  our  hearts.  Christ  is  the  living  and 
moving  power  in  our  souls.  II.  A  kindly  remembrance.  The  Lord  speaks  very 
kindly  to  those  who  seek  but  have  not  yet  found  Him.  Many  are  seeking  the  Lord 
without  a  light.  Some  may  seek  the  Lord  in  unbelief.  Some  in  a  v?rong  way. 
Somebody  else  replies,  "Ah,  sir,  I  have  no  spiritual  life,  such  as  I  had  once."  Well, 
who  gave  it  to  you  in  days  gone  by  ?    The  Lord.     And  will  He  not  restore  it  again  ? 

III.  A  WORD  OF  encouragement.  1.  Is  your  soul  cast  down  ?  Well,  remember 
■what  God  has  done  for  you.  Did  He  not  hew  you  from  the  rock  of  the  world  ?  2. 
if  God  has  hewn  us  from  the  rock  we  ought  to  hope  for  all  humanity.  (  W.  Birch.) 
Look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn.  — Looking  to  beginnings : — 1.  Look  back  to 
beginnings  ;  look  along  the  line  from  the  beginning  to  the  sensations  of  to-day.  A 
man  should  have  his  whole  self  before  him  in  making  his  forecast  of  the  future.  His 
whole  self  should  be  a  Bible,  chaptered  and  versed,  well  numbered  and  properly 
displayed,  having  its  Genesis,  and  running  straight  on  through  prophecy  and 
tragedy,  and  music  and  Gospel,  into  mysterious  Apocalypse.  You  have  expurgated 
this  life  Bible,  killed  the  promises  and  Psalms,  and  have  only  failures  left.  2.  Take 
in  aU  your  life :  if  God  has  made  so  much  of  you,  He  can  make  still  more.  The 
miracle  is  not  in  the  great  \mibrageous  tree  ;  it  is  in  that  little  green  blade  that 
pierces  the  earth  and  looks  like  a  thing  that  means  to  pray.  It  is  not  the  universe, 
out  the  molecule,  that  is  a  miracle  to  me.  Looking  back  at  what  we  were,  it  is  easy 
to  believe  and  yearn  to  be  more.  3.  If  God  has  made  so  much  of  you,  he  can  make 
as  much  of  others.  Therefore,  do  not  contemn  any  man.  God  shows  us  in  cathedrals 
what  can  be  done  with  all  stones ;  He  shows  us  in  gardens  what  can  be  made  of  all 


CHAP,  u.]  ISAIAH.  31 

waste  places.  I  do  not  read  that  there  are  two  rocks  out  of  which  men  are  dug — one 
a  very  low  and  disreputable  rock,  and  the  other  a  very  high  and  grand  piece  of 
masonry.  We  are  all  from  the  same  rock  and  the  same  pit ;  we  all  have  one  Father, 
and  we  have  all  suffered  the  catastrophe  of  a  common  apostasy.  Have  pity  upon 
those  who  are  far  behind.  4.  Whence  are  ye  hewn — digged  ;  not  whence  ye  hewed, 
digged  yourselves.  Are  you  well  educated?  It  is  because  others  made  the  way 
plain  and  smooth.  Are  you  successful  ?  It  is  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  power 
to  get  wealth.  How  much  you  owe  father,  mother  !  As  we  rise,  the  account  grows, 
and  if  God  do  not  forgive  us  we  are  lost.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Comparisons  are 
odious  ;  comparisons  are  highly  profitable.  They  are  odious  if  prompted  by  malice 
or  meanness.  A  genius  who  had  risen  to  a  seat  in  the  Commons  was  reminded  by  a 
shallow  aristocrat  in  the  lobby  that  he  had  formerly  been  his  servant.  "Well," 
retorted  the  man  of  talent,  "  and  did  I  not  serve  you  well  ? "  Such  comparisons  are 
hateful ;  but  they  may  also  prove  beneficial  as  promoting  due  humility  and  appreci- 
ative thankfiilness.  Take  the  case  of  Paul,  who,  though  an  apostle  of  very  ex- 
ceptional ability,  would  remind  himself  that  he  was  the  chief  of  sinners.  As  though 
he  had  said,  "Now,  Paul,  look  unto  the  rock  whence  you  were  hewn,  and  to  the 
hole  of  the  pit  whence  you  were  digged."  (  W.  J.  Acomb.)  Spiritual  statuary : — 
It  is  doubtless  serviceable  for  each  of  us,  however  devoted  and  pure,  to  be  now  and 
then  presented  with  a  photograph  of  our  former  selves.  We  can  thus  see  what  we 
should  have  remained  if  grace  had  not  refined  us.  We  can  measure  our  growth  and 
development.  We  can  certainly  better  understand  the  obligations  arising  from 
improved  conditions.  I.  The  retrospect  that  was  recommended  to  this  godly 
remnant  of  Israel.  In  all  ages  have  existed  those  to  whom  God  could  thus  appeal. 
Their  characteristics  are  ever  the  same — viz.  the  endeavour  to  live  righteously  and 
the  instinctive  craving  for  a  fuller  knowledge  of  God.  Such  were  here  bidden  to 
recall  the  period  when  their  great  father,  Abraham,  had  been  separated  from  heathen 
surroundings^  led,  and  instructed  by  the  Divine  Spirit  till  worthy  of  the  appellation, 
Friend  of  God.  The  nation  had  been  a  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands 
and  fashioned  into  something  like  beauty  and  grace.  In  regard  to  individual  stones, 
it  would  appear  that  the  work  of  the  Divine  statuary  is  threefold — 1.  Detachment 
from  the  common  mass  of  material.  A  stone  has  no  ability  to  leap  from  its  place. 
The  quarryman  must  by  pick  and  gunpowder  and  hammer  set  the  granite  free. 
There  is  grace  at  the  outset,  either  in  national  or  individual  life.  People  need 
graciously  saving.  You  have  to  be  rescued,  separated  from  the  power  of  death,  lifted 
from  the  sphere  of  human  passion.  To  do  this,  various  agencies  are  employed — some 
almost  dynamic,  others  more  gentle.  2.  Moulding  by  religious  education  and 
attrition  of  association.  Quarried  stones  need  moulding,  whether  granite,  limestone 
or  freestone.  Hammer  and  chisel  must  be  applied.  So,  when  detached  must  expect 
to  submit  to  peculiar  processes.  Some  stones  necessitate  great  labour ;  others  can 
easily  be  wrought  to  any  form.  Heaps  of  stones  about  and  in  every  one  an  angel ! — 
only  the  angel  requires  to  be  modelled  out,  chiselled  out,  filed  out.  We  can't  see 
the  angel ;  God  can.  None  can  be  a  holy  person  without  pain.  Salvation  is  not 
the  deed  of  a  moment,  but  is  a  giadual  work,  stage  by  stage,  here  a  little  and  there 
a  little.  3.  Vivification  of  spiritual  faculties  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Many  of  you  have 
been  extracted  from  the  quarry  and  rough-hewn  by  Christian  civilization  ;  but  you 
require  the  grandest  thing  of  all,  the  breath  of  spiritual  life.  Like  the  child- 
delighting  marionettes  that  are  so  skilfully  moved  by  invisible  machinery,  but 
which  have  no  appreciation  of  the  part  they  play,  you  may  be  actuated  by  the 
forces  of  custom,  or  ambition,  or  fear,  but  remain  dead  to  all  sensations  of  a  purely 
spiiitual  nature.  II.  The  purposes  of  the  suggested  retrospection.  Judging 
from  the  context,  the  intention  was — 1.  To  promote  humility.  2.  To  stimulate  hope- 
fulness. We  instinctively  argue,  "If  so  much,  why  not  more?"  God  has  always 
some  better  thing  in  store  for  us.  Have  we  not  a  sure  word  of  prophecy  which 
declares  that  Christ  is  able  to  present  each  one  of  us  faultless  before  the  throne? 
(Ibid.)  Characters:  unhewn  and  hevm: — Shakespeare  is  given  to  present  abstract 
ideas  in  concrete  forms  to  suit  the  ordinary  obtuse  Englishman.  Thus  we  understand 
Caliban.  This  low-type  creature  stands  before  us  destitute  of  moral  sense  ;  his 
strongest  motive  to  action  fear  of  punishment ;  he  hates  unreasonably  the  best  of 
beings ;  he  luxuriates  in  grossest  vice  ;  his  brain  so  feeble  that  he  kneels  to  a 
drunkard.  Now  the  national  poet  has  contrasted  this  brute-man  with  Prospero,  the 
refined  courtiei-,  the  gentle  father,  the  magnanimous  Duke  of  Milan,  thus  exhibiting 
the  diverse  effects  of  Christian  culture  and  heathen  neglect.  In  one  you  behold  the 
rough,  angular,  unhewn  block  j  in  the  other  the  exquisitely  moulded  statue.    To 


32  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  li. 

assimilate  them,  what  a  complicated  miracle  would  be  requisite  !  This  is  the  mission 
of  our  Lord  and  Redeemer.  {Ibid.)  Nature  and  grace: — It  is  good  for  those  that 
are  privileged  by  a  new  birth  to  consider  what  they  were  by  their  first  birth  ;  how 
they  were  conceived  in  iniquity  and  shapen  in  sin.  That  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh 
is  flesh.  How  hard  was  that  rock  out  of  which  we  were  hewn,  unapt  to  receive 
impressions  ;  and  how  dirty  the  hole  of  the  pit  out  of  which  we  were  digged  !  The 
consideration  hereof  should  fill  us  with  low  thoughts  of  ourselves,  and  high  thoughts 
of  Divine  grace.  {M.  Henry.)  A  humble  origin:  John  Bunyan: — "I  was  of  a  low 
and  inconsiderable  generation,  my  father's  house  being  of  that  rank  that  is  meanest 
and  most  despised  of  all  families  in  the  land.  I  never  went  to  school  to  Aristotle 
or  Plato,  but  was  brought  up  in  my  father's  house  in  a  very  mean  condition,  among 
a  company  of  poor  countrymen.  Nevertheless,  I  bless  God  that  by  this  door  He 
brought  me  into  the  world  to  partake  of  the  grace  and  life  that  is  by  Christ  in  His 
Gospel."  This  is  the  account  given  of  himself  and  his  origin  by  a  man  whose 
writings  have  for  two  centuries  affected  the  spiritual  opinions  of  the  English  race  in 
every  part  of  the  world  more  powerfully  than  any  book  or  books,  except  the  Bible. 
(J".  A.  Froude.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Look  unto  Abraham  your  father. — Abraham,  or  the  Christianas  rock : 
— I.  The  dealings  of  God  with  Abeaham.  1.  God  "called  him  alone."  How 
merciful  this  call !  Our  own  call  to  renounce  this  world,  and  to  seek  a  better, 
even  a  heavenly  country,  is  to  be  traced,  like  Abraham's,  to  the  undeserved  mercy 
of  our  heavenly  Father.  2.  The  Lord  "blessed"  Abraham.  And  has  He  not 
"blessed"  us?  Has  He  not  given  to  us  many  of  the  blessings  of  this  life?  And, 
what  is  much  more  than  these,  has  He  not  redeemed  us  from  sin  and  misery  by 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord?  3.  The  Lord  "increased"  him.  The  worldly  possessions 
of  Abraham  were  many.  But  Abraham  was  increased  further  in  his  posterity.  But 
his  spiritual  descendants  are  yet  more  numerous.  So  likewise  is  the  faithful 
Christian,  the  spiritual  child  of  Abraham,  "increased;"  not  indeed,  it  may  be, 
in  this  world's  riches  and  honours,  but  in  spiritual  wealth  and  dignity.  IL  The 
CHARACTER  AND  CONDUCT  OF  ABRAHAM.  1.  His  faith.  Let  US  look  to  Abraliam 
as  an  example  in  this  point  of  view,  2.  His  obedience.  Let  no  one  whose  works 
contradict  his  profession  of  faith  suppose  himself  to  be  a  believer  in  God.  (  W.  D. 
Johnston,  M.A.)  Sarah : — That  Sarah  is  mentioned  chiefly  for  rhythmical  effect  may 
be  inferred  from  the  writer's  now  confining  what  he  says  to  Abraham  alone.  (/.  A, 
Alexander.)  Hearken  and  look ;  or,  encouragement  for  believers: — The  second  verse 
contains  my  actual  text.  It  is  the  argument  by  which  faith  is  led  to  look  for  the 
blessings  promised  in  the  third  verse.  It  is  habitual  with  some  persons  to  spy  out 
the  dark  side  of  every  question  or  fact :  they  fix  their  eyes  upon  the  "  waste  places," 
and  they  study  them  till  they  know  eveiy  ruin,  and  are  familiar  with  the  dragons 
and  the  owls.  They  sigh  most  dolorously  that  the  former  times  were  better  than 
these,  and  that  we  have  fallen  upon  most  degenerate  days.  The  habit  of  looking 
continually  towards  the  widemesses  is  injurious  because  it  greatly  discourages  ;  and 
anything  that  discourages  an  earnest  worker  is  a  serious  leakage  for  his  strength. 
My  text  has  near  to  it  three  times,  "Hearken  to  Me."  You  have  listened  long 
enough  to  dreary  suggestions  from  within,  to  gloomy  prophecies  from  desponding 
friends,  to  the  taunts  of  foes,  and  to  the  horrible  whisperings  of  Satan  :  now  hearken 
to  Him  who  promises  to  make  the  wilderness  like  Eden,  and  the  desert  like  the 
garden  of  the  Lord,  0  ye  whose  eyes  are  quick  to  discover  evil,  there  are  other 
sights  in  the  world  besides  waste  places  and  deserts,  and  hence  my  text  hath  near 
to  it  twice  over  the  exhortation,  "Look" — "Look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are 
hewn  ; "  "  Look  unto  Abraham  your  father,  and  unto  Sarah  that  bare  you  ; "  for 
there  we  may  find  comfort,  I,  We  shall  first  look  towards  Abraham  that  we  may 
see  in  him  the  original  of  God's  ancient  people.  1.  The  founder  of  God's  first 
people  was  called  out  of  a  heathen  family.  Abraham,  the  founder  of  the  great 
system  in  which  God  was  pleased  to  reveal  Himself  for  so  long  a  time,  and  to  whose 
seed  the  oracles  of  God  were  committed,  was  a  dweller  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  the 
city  of  the  moon-god.  We  cannot  tell  to  what  extent  he  was  actually  engrossed 
in  the  superstition  of  his  fathers,  but  it  is  certain  that  the  family  was  years  after- 
wards tainted  with  idolatry  ;  for  in  Jacob's  day  the  teraph  was  still  venerated,  and 
Rachel  stole  her  father's  images.  Abraham,  therefore,  was  called  out  from  the 
place  of  his  birth,  and  from  the  household  to  which  he  belonged,  that  in  a  separated 
condition,  as  a  worshipper  of  the  one  Gk)d,  he  might  keep  the  truth  alive  in  the 
world.    Why,  then,  might  not  tiie  Lord,  if  the  cauBe  of  truth  were  this  day 


CHAP.  11.]  ISAIAH.  83 

reduced  to  its  utmost  extremity,  again  raise  up  a  Church  out  of  one  man  ?  "  Ah," 
you  say,  "but  men  are  not  called  now,  as  Aoraham  was,  by  miraculous  calls  from 
heaven."  Where  ordinary  means  are  so  plentiful  wisdom  resorts  not  to  signs  and 
wonders.  The  same  Spirit  who  called  Abraham  by  a  supernatural  voice  can  call 
others  by  the  word  of  truth.  "  Ah,"  say  you,  "but  Abraham  was  naturally  a  man 
of  noble  mould.  Where  do  you  find  such  a  princely  spirit  as  his  ? "  I  answer. 
Who  made  him  ?  He  that  made  him  can  make  another  like  him.  2.  Look  again, 
and  observe  that  Abraham  was  but  one  man.  If  we  should  ever  be  reduced,  as  we 
shall  not  be,  to  one  man,  yet  by  one  man  will  God  preserve  His  Church,  and  work 
out  His  great  purposes.  Think  of  the  power  for  good  or  evil  which  may  be  enshrined 
in  a  single  human  hfe.  3.  This  one  man  was  a  lone  man.  He  had  no  prestige  of 
parentage,  rank  or  title.  The  fulfilment  of  his  calling  rested  on  his  loneliness ; 
for  he  must  get  away  from  his  kindred,  and  wander  up  and  down  with  his  flocks, 
even  as  the  Church  of  God  now  does,  dwelling  in  a  strange  land,  and  feeding  her 
flock  apart.  "  I  called  him  alone,  and  blessed  him,  and  increased  him."  If  in  the 
town  or  district  where  you  live  you  seem  to  lose  all  your  helpers  ;  if  they  die  one 
by  one,  and  it  seems  as  if  nobody  would  be  left  to  you,  still  persevere,  for  it  is 
tne  lone  man  that  God  will  bless.  4.  He  was  a  man  who  had  to  be  stripped  yet 
further.  He  must  come  away  from  his  kindred  and  his  father's  house,  and  must 
dwell  in  Palestine  till  the  promised  seed  was  bom.  But  how  long  he  waited  for  the 
expected  heir  !  What  a  feast  there  was  that  Isaac  was  born,  filling  the  house  with 
laughter.  But  he  must  die  !  The  grand  old  man  is  sure  that  even  if  he  should 
actually  slay  his  son  at  God's  command  the  promise  would  somehow  be  kept. 
Look,  then,  to  Abraham  your  father,  and  say  is  he  not  the  grandest  human  repre- 
sentative of  the  great  Father  God  Himself,  who  in  the  fulness  of  time  spared  not 
His  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all  ?  If  in  all  these  trials  Abraham 
was  yet  blessed,  and  God's  purposes  were  accomplished  in  him,  can  we  not  believe 
that  the  same  God  can  work  by  us  also,  despite  our  downcastings  and  humiliations  ! 
Here  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  this  first  head  of  my  discourse :  in  looking  to  the 
rock  whence  we  are  hewn,  we  have  to  see  the  Lord,  working  the  greatest  results 
from  apparently  inadequate  causes.  This  teaches  lis  to  cease  from  calculating 
means,  possibilities  and  probabilities,  for  we  have  to  deal  with  God,  with  whom 
all  things  are  possible.  II.  The  main  characteristic  of  this  chosen  man. 
The  text  says,  "Look  unto  Abraham  your  father,  and  unto  Sarah  that  bare  you," 
and  it  must  mean — consider  him  and  see  what  he  was,  that  you  may  leam  from 
him.  His  grand  characteristic  was  his  faith.  Abraham's  faith  was  such  that  it 
led  him  to  obedience.  The  man  of  faith  is  God's  man.  Why  ?  Because  faith  is 
the  only  faculty  of  our  spirit  which  can  grasp  God's  ideal.  Faith,  too,  has  a  great 
power  of  reception,  and  therein  lies  much  of  her  adaptation  to  the  Divine  purpose. 
Then,  again,  faith  always  uses  the  strength  that  God  gives  her.  Faith,  too,  can 
wait  the  Lord's  time  and  place.  God  loveth  faith  and  blesseth  it,  because  it  giveth 
Him  aU  the  glory.  III.  Our  relationship  to  that  one  man.  "Know  ye 
therefore  that  they  which  are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  children  of  Abraham." 
Something,  surely,  is  expected  of  the  children  of  such  a  man  as  Abraham.  Because 
we  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  apostle  declares  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham 
has  come  upon  us  also.  What  is  it  ?  It  is  a  covenant  favour  that  belongs  to  all 
who  are  the  servants  of  God  by  faith.  Here  is  the  substance  of  it :  "  Surely  bless- 
ing, I  wUl  bless  thee,  and  in  multiplying,  I  will  multiply  thee."  The  blessing  is 
attended  with  multiplying.  The  blessing  of  the  Church  is  the  increase  of  the 
Church.  The  success  of  truth  is  the  battle  of  the  Lord,  and  the  increase  of  His 
Church  is  according  to  His  own  promise  ;  therefore  in  quietness  we  may  possess 
our  souls.  IV.  Our  position  before  Abraham's  God.  "  Look  to  Abraham,  but 
only  as  to  the  rock  from  which  the  Lord  quarried  His  people :  "  your  main  thought 
must  be  Jehovah  Himself.  "I,  I  called  him  alone,  and  blessed  him."  Let  us 
joyfully  recollect  that  the  Lord  our  God  has  not  changed,  nay,  not  in  one  jot  or 
tittle.  "His  arm  is  not  shortened  that  He  cannot  save,"  etc.  The  covenant  of 
God  has  not  changed.  Read  the  covenant  words,  "In  blessing  I  will  bless  thee, 
and  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,"  etc.  But 
there  is  this  also  to  be  added,  that  this  work  which  we  desire  the  Lord  to  do  is  in 
some  respects  even  less  than  that  which  He  has  done  with  Abraham.  What  ask 
we?  Not  that  He  should  begin  with  one  man  to  buUd  up  a  nation,  or  create  a 
Church  ?  No,  but  that  Zion  being  builded,  He  should  comfort  her,  and  causa 
her  waste  places  to  rejoice.  What  marvellous  things  hath  God  done  on  the  fao« 
of  the  earth  since  Abraham's  days  ! — the  stupendoos  marvel  of  incarnation ;  th« 
vol.  hi.  S 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  li. 

wondrous  work  of  redemption,  the  highest,  grandest,  Divinest  achievement  of  the 
Deity — all  this  is  done  ;  what  may  we  not  expect  after  this  ?  You  know  more  of 
God  than  Abraham  could  know.  TVust  Him,  at  least  up  to  the  level  of  the  patriarch. 
How  shaU  we  forge  an  excuse  if  we  do  not  ?    (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  3.  For  the  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion. — Zion  comforted: — I.  There  is  a  low 

ESTATE,  OF  THE  CATHOLIC  tTNIVERSAL  ChUECH,  AND  OF  PARTICULAR  BRANCHES 
OF     IT,    AND     LIKEWISE     OF     INDIVIDUAL     MEMBERS.      II.    ThERE     ARE     GRACIOUS 

PROMISES  OF  REVIVAL,  of  restored  fertility  and  productiveness.     III.  The  mode 

IN    WHICH    these    blessed    EFFECTS   MAY   BE    LOOKED    AND   SOUGHT   FOR.      When 

the  eye  of  faith  is  directed  towards  Christ,  when  we  believe  in  Him  as  the  Lord  our 
righteousness,  when  the  prayer  of  faith  ascends  to  heaven,  when  the  ear  hearkens  to 
the  inspired  Word,  then  we  may  expect  that  God  will  be  gracious  to  His  inheritance, 
and  refresh  it  when  it  is  weary.  We  may  not  look  for  the  supplies  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  unless  we  earnestly  ask  for  them.  {ff.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.)  The  depression, 
prosperity  and  delight  of  the  Church: — Taking  these  words  as  the  prophet's  statement 
with  regard  to  the  spiritual  Church  of  God,  under  the  appellation  of  Zion,  we 
propose  from  these  words  to  call  attention — I.  To  the  depression  of  the  Church. 

1.  This  depression  arises  from  the  small  number  of  those  who  belong  to  the  Church. 

2.  The  depression  consists  also  in  the  want  of  spiritual  vigour  on  the  part  of  those 
who  belong  to  the  Church.     II.  To  the  prosperity  of  the  Church.     Observe — 

1.  The  source  to  which  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  is  assigned.  "For  the  Lord 
shall  comfort  Zion, "  etc.    Christianity  is,  emphatically,  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit. 

2.  The  nature  of  the  prosperity  by  which  the  Church  will  be  distinguished.  What 
is  the  precise  import  of  this  comforting  of  Zion,  this  comforting  of  her  waste  places, 
making  her  wilderness  like  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  her  desert  like  the  garden 
of  the  Lord  ?  Here  you  will  observe,  that  a  vast  augmentation  of  the  numbers  of 
the  Church  must  plainly  be  regarded  as  included.  A  great  purification  and  refine- 
ment in  the  characters  of  those  who  do  pertain  to  the  Church  will  signalize  those 
future  days.  3.  The  means  to  be  adopted  by  the  true  friends  of  the  Church  in 
order  that  the  period  of  this  predicted  prosperity  may  arrive.  III.  To  the  delight 
of  the  Church.  "Joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  therein,  thanksgiving  and 
the  voice  of  melody."  This  emotion  may  properly  arise  from  contemplating — 
1.  The  wonderful  change  which  shall  have  been  accomplished  in  the  condition  of 
the  Church  itself.  2.  The  connection  between  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  and  the 
glorification  of  God.  3.  The  connection  between  the  prosperity  of  the  Chui-ch  and 
the  happiness  of  mankind.  Conclusion :  1.  Our  first  anxiety,  of  course,  must  be, 
that  you  may  individually  belong  to  the  Church  of  God  yourselves.  2.  What  we 
next  desire  of  you  is,  that  you  will  labour  in  all  the  appointed  means  and 
instrumentalities  by  which  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  of  God  is  to  be  secured. 
{J.  Parsons.)  Zion  comforted: — (1)  The  land  of  bliss  is  (2)  full  of  human  beings 
(3)  in  festive  frame  and  active  enjoyment,  (i^.  Delitzsch,  D.B.)  A  cheerful 
prospect: — I.  Heavenly  comfort  promised.  This  is  a  promise  to  God's  Church. 
The  Church  of  God — captured  as  it  has  been  by  Christ  from  the  world,  chosen  to 
be  the  palace  where  He  dwells,  builded  together  for  a  temple  wherein  He  is 
worshipped — is  frequently  called  "Zion."  1.  The  object  of  this  comfort.  "The 
Lord  will  comfort  Zion.  Well  He  may,  for  she  is  His  chosen.  "The  Lord  has 
chosen  Zion. "  He  would  have  those  upon  whom  His  choice  is  fixed  be  glad  and 
happy.  2.  The  Lord  Himself  is  the  Comforter.  There  are  sorrows  for  which  there 
is  no  solace  within  the  reach  of  the  creature  ;  there  is  a  ruin  which  it  would  baffle 
any  mortal  to  retrieve.     Happy  for  us  that  the  Omnipotent  comes  to  our  aid. 

3.  How  does  the  Lord  propose  to  comfort  Zion  ?  If  you  read  the  verse  through 
you  will  find  it  is  by  making  her  fertile.  The  true  way  to  comfort  the  Church  is  to 
build  her  synagogues,  restore  the  desolation  of  former  times,  to  sow  her  fields,  plant 
her  vineyards,  make  her  soil  fruitful,  call  out  the  industry  of  her  sons  and  daughters, 
and  fill  them  with  lively,  ardent  zeal.  4.  The  promise  is  given  in  words  that 
contain  an  absolute  pledge.  He  "shall"  and  He  "will"  are  terms  that  admit  of 
no  equivocation.  IL  The  mournful  cases  favoured.  "He  will  make  her 
wilderness  like  Eden,  and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord."  1.  Are  there 
not  to  be  found  in  the  visible  Church  persons  whose  character  is  here  vividly 
depicted?  (1)  There  are  those  who  once  were  fruitful,  but  are  now  comparable  to 
wastes.  I  remember  one  Monday  afternoon,  when  we  had  been  waiting  upon  the 
Lord  in  prayer  ever  since  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  that  there  came  a  most 
remarkable  wave  of  prayer  over  the  assembly.    And  then  two  backsliders  got  up 


CHAP.  LI.]  ISAIAH.  35 

and  prayed  one  after  the  other.  According  to  their  own  account,  they  had  been 
very  bad  fellows  indeed,  and  had  sorely  transgressed  against  God ;  but  there  they 
were,  broken-hearted  and  fairly  broken  down.  It  was  a  sight  to  make  angels 
rejoice  as  their  tears  flowed.  Certainly  their  sobs  and  cries  touched  the  hearts  of  all 
of  us  who  were  assembled.  I  thought  to  myself,  "Then  God  is  blessing  us,  for 
when  backsliders  come  back  it  is  a  proof  that  God  has  visited  His  people. "  (2)  Then 
a  second  department  of  the  promise  is,  "He  will  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden." 
I  take  the  wilderness  here  to  be  a  place  of  scanty  vegetation.  Oh,  how  many  there 
are  in  the  Church  of  God  who  are  just  like  that !  They  are  Christians,  but  sorry 
Christians  they  are.  (3)  A  third  character  is  implied  in  the  desert — the  deserted 
places  where  no  man  dwells,  where  the  traveller  does  not  care  to  linger.  How  many 
professors  of  religion  answer  to  this  description  of  the  soil  I  They  are  like  deserts. 
You  not  only  never  did  bring  forth  fruit,  but  you  never  concerned  yourself  to  do  so. 
2.  Ask  ye  now,  what  does  the  Lord  say  He  will  do  for  them  ?  He  says  that  He 
will  make  the  wilderness  like  Eden.  You  know  what  Eden  was.  It  was  the  garden 
of  the  earth  in  the  days  of  primeval  purity.  So  the  Lord  says  that  when  He  visits 
His  Church  He  will  make  these  poor  backsliders,  these  immature  Christians,  these 
nominal  professors,  like  Eden.  Moreover,  as  if  to  strengthen  the  volume  of  His 
grace  and  of  our  hope.  He  says  that  He  wiU  make  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the 
Lord.  He  shall  come  to  you  and  delight  your  heart  and  soul  with  His  converse. 
III.  Certain  desirable  results  which  are  predicted.  "Joy  and  gladness 
shall  be  found  therein,  thanksgiving,  and  the  voice  of  melody."  You  notice  the 
doubles.  The  parallelism  of  Hebrew  poetry,  perhaps,  necessitated  them.  Still 
I  remember  how  John  Bunyan  says  that  "all  the  flowers  in  God's  garden  bloom 
double."  We  are  told  of  "manifold  mercies,"  that  is,  mercies  which  are  folded  up 
one  in  another,  so  that  you  may  unwrap  them  and  find  a  fresh  mercy  enclosed  in 
every  fold.  Here  we  have  "joy  and  gladness,  thanksgiving,  and  the  voice  of 
melody."  The  Lord  multiplies  His  grace.  Oh,  what  a  delightful  thing  must  a 
visitation  from  God  be  to  His  Church  !  "Without  God  all  she  can  do  is  to  groan. 
Nay,  she  will  not  always  do  that.  She  sometimes  indulges  a  foolish  conceit,  and 
says  :  "I  am  rich  and  increased  in  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  After  that 
Avill  soon  be  heard  the  hooting  of  dragons  and  the  cry  of  owls.  Let  God  visit  His 
Church,  and  there  is  sure  to  be  thanksgiving  and  the  voice  of  melody.  This  is  the 
mark  of  a  revived  Church  everywhere.  New  impetus  is  given  to  the  service  of 
song.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  garden  of  the  Lord. — The  garden  of  God  (for 
children) : — Here  and  elsewhere  Holy  Scripture  pictures  a  gathering  of  the  upright 
and  holy  as  a  garden,  and  Christly  people,  whether  men  or  children,  as  the  trees 
and  plants  and  flowers  in  such  a  garden.  In  His  garden — I.  God  w^ill  have  no 
"WEEDS.  This  reminds  us — 1.  What  a  number  of  evils  must  be  destroyed.  Idleness, 
falsehood,  cowardice,  disobedience,  etc.,  are  weeds  that  must  be  plucked  up  and 
destroyed.  2.  The  ways  by  which  evils  are  to  be  destroyed.  (1)  Like  weeds,  they 
are  to  be  plucked  up  and  burnt.  There  must  be  no  half  measures  in  dealing  with 
sin.  We  must  get  at  the  roots  and  then  burn  the  whole.  (2)  Like  weeds,  they 
must  be  cleared  by  better  life  taking  their  place.  In  New  Zealand,  where  the  hoe 
of  the  settlers  failed  to  destroy  the  rank  vegetation  that  had  rooted  there  for 
centuries,  they  have  successfully  adopted  the  plan  of  planting  among  it  our  common 
English  clover.  And  as  it  grows  it  actually  is  rooting  out  the  formidable  flax-weed 
with  its  fibrous  leaves  and  strong  woody  roots.  So  truth,  courage,  love,  will  root 
out  lying,  cowardice,  selfishness.  We  get  rid  of  evil  from  hearts  and  lives  by 
"the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  afi'ection."  II.  There  is  a  great  variety  of 
FLOWERS.  Rich  rose,  stately  tulip,  sweet  lily  of  the  valley,  etc. — a  thousand 
varieties  all  helping  us  to  understand  the  famous  preacher  who  said,  ' '  Flowers  are 
the  sweetest  things  God  ever  made  and  forgot  to  put  a  soul  into."  So  there  is  great 
variety  in  the  virtues  ;  no  monotony  in  Christian  character.  There  are  virtues  that, 
like  lofty  trees  and  brilliant  flowers,  make  heroes  and  martyrs.  And  there  are 
others  like  flowers  with  tiny  petals  and  delicate  tints.  St.  Francis  of  Sales  said, 
' '  How  carefully  we  should  cherish  the  little  virtues  which  spring  up  at  the  foot  of 
the  Cross."  What  are  they?  some  one  asked  him.  "Humility,  meekness,  kind- 
ness, simplicity,  candour, "  he  replied.  III.  He  Himself  has  joy.  Over  true  souls 
•He  rejoices.  The  prophet  says,  God  rejoices  "over  them  with  singing."  God  seems 
to  sing  over  those  of  whom  He  says,  as  of  David,  "a  man  after  God's  own  heart ; " 
as  of  Daniel,  ' '  0  man  greatly  beloved  ; "  as  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  ' '  My  well- 
beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  weU  pleased."  IV.  All  the  beauty  of  all  the 
FLOWXBJS  IS  TO  BB  T£AC£D  TO  His  CAR£.     1.  He  is  the  Owner.    2.  He  is  the 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

Sower.  3.  He  is  the  Gardener — Clmst  called  God  the  Husbandman.  4.  He  is  the 
Source  of  all  life  and  beauty.  For  He  is  Sun,  and  Wind :  is  as  dew — and  showers 
also.     {U.  R.  Thomas,  B.A.) 

Vers.  4-6.  Hearken  unto  Me,  My  people. — The  absolute  in  himian  history : — Time 
works  mighty  changes  in  human  life.  Amidst  the  ceaseless  whirl  of  mutation,  is 
there  nothing  unchangeable !  Is  life  made  up  entirely  of  volatile  contingencies  ? 
Has  it  no  absolute  elements  ?  Oh,  for  a  rock  in,  this  ebbing  sea,  where  we  might 
stand  secure  as  the  wreck  of  years  floats  by !  This  Scripture  responds  to  our 
questions,  and  meets  our  aspirations.  The  word  "law  "  designates  God's  revelation  ; 
"judgment "  and  *'  righteousness  "  are  interchangeable  terms,  expressing  the  one  idea 
— rectitude.  The  great  truths,  therefore,  enfolded  in  this  rich  oriental  garb,  are  that 
rectitude  and  salvation  are  the  elements  of  God's  revelation  ;  and  that  these  elements 
are  the  absolute  in  human  history.  I.  They  aee  foe  all  lands — world-wide  in 
their  aspect — "a  light  of  the  people."  Man  is,  confessedly,  a  corrupt  intelligence  ; 
and,  in  the  nature  of  things,  a  knowledge  of  his  state  is  esselitial  to  his  improvement. 
Will  he  ever  seek  a  remedy  or  ask  for  a  refuge  until  he  has  felt  the  disease  or  descried 
the  peril  ?  Whence  comes  this  discovery  1  Nothing  less  than  a  special  revelation 
of  rectitude  can  meet  the  case.  "  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  Next  comes 
the  other  element — "salvation."  Each  of  these  two  elements  of  our  religion  is 
equally  necessary  for  man  everywhere.  The  value,  however,  of  each  depends  upon 
mutual  connection  ;  each  is  useless  by  itself.  II.  These  blessings  are  for  all 
TIMES,  AS  WELL  AS  FOR  ALL  LANDS.  "The  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like 
smoke,"  etc.  These  words  suggest  three  solemn  considerations — 1.  That  man 
is  related  to  two  distinct  systems  of  things,  the  one  involving  the  "heavens 
and  the  earth,"  the  other  "righteousness  and  salvation" — the  one  material, 
the  other  spiritual.  This  twofold  relation  is  a  peculiarity  of  our  history.  The 
other  tenants  of  the  globe  are  related  to  the  materia]  as  we  are.  But  with  the 
spiritual  they  appear  to  have  no  connection.  2.  That  one  of  the  systems  to  which 
man  is  related  is  transient,  the  other  is  permanent.  3.  That  the  permanent  system 
shoiild  command  man's  chief  concern.  Hear  the  simi  of  this  address  : — Beware  of 
practical  materialism.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Righteousness  arid  salvation: — I.  The 
CHARACTER  OF  THOSE  SPECLALLY  ADDRESSED.  By  Comparing  the  first  and  the 
seventh  with  the  fourth  verse  of  the  chapter,  we  find  four  leading  features  of  their 
character  set  forth :  1.  They  are  said  to  know  righteousness.  2.  To  follow  after 
righteousness.  3.  To  seek  the  Lord.  4.  To  have  the  law  of  God  in  their  hearts. 
II.  The  ADDRESS  ITSELF.  It  coustitutes  a  sublime  prophetic  description  of  those 
spiritual  blessings  to  be  ripened  by  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  It  foretells  the 
setting  up  of  that  kingdom  which  cometh  not  by  outward  observation,  but  which  is 
"righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost" — the  publication  of  "that 
better  covenant  established  on  better  promises. "  Many  topics  of  deep  interest  are 
suggested  by  this  prophetic  setting  forth  of  the  blessings  and  triimiphs  of  the  Gospel. 
The  text  fully  asserts — 1.  Their  certainty.  2.  Their  perpetuity.  {T.  Page,  M.A.) 
An  evangelical  law : — The  ' '  law  "  here  meant  (ver.  4)  is  that  of  Zion  (chap.  ii.  3), 
as  distinguished  from  that  of  Sinai — the  Gospel  of  redemption.    {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  My  righteousness  is  near. — Ood's  righteousness  and  salvation: — The 
Gospel  of  Christ  shaU  be  preached  and  published  to  the  world.  "A  law  shall 
proceed  from  Me  "  (ver.  4),  an  evangelical  law,  the  law  of  Christ,  the  law  of  faith 
(chap.  ii.  3).  I.  This  shall  bring  with  it  righteousness  and  salvation,  shall 
open  a  ready  way  to  the  children  of  men  how  they  may  be  justified  and  saved.  It 
is  called  God's  righteousness  and  salvation — 1.  Because  of  His  contriving  and 
bringing  it  about.  2.  It  is  a  righteousness  that  He  will  accept  for  us,  and  accept  us 
for.  3.  And  a  righteousness  which  He  will  work  in  us.  4.  It  is  the  salvation  of 
the  Lord,  for  it  ariseth  from  Him,  and  terminates  in  Him.  Observe,  there  is  no 
salvation  without  righteousness,  and  wherever  there  is  the  righteousness  of  God, 
there  shall  be  His  salvation.  II.  This  righteousness  and  salvation  shall  very 
shortly  appear.  It  is  near,  it  is  gone  forth.  It  is  near  in  time.  It  is  near  in 
place,  not  far  to  seek  (Rom.  x.  8).  III.  This  evangelical  righteousness  and 
salvation  shall  not  be  confined  to  the  Jewish  nation,  but  shall  be  ex- 
tended TO  the  Gentiles.  (J/.  Henry.)  God!s  arm  shall  judge  the  people  that 
are  impenitent,  and  yet  on  His  arm  shall  others  trust  and  be  saved  by  it.     {Ibid. ) 

Yer.  6.  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens. — The  eternity  qf  religion: — From  th« 


CHAP,  u.]  ISAIAH.  87 

thought  of  the  universality  of  religion  the  prophet  rises  to  that  of  its  eternity,  which 
is  here  expressed  by  a  contrast  of  surprising  boldness  between  the  "things  which  an 
seen  "  and  the  "things  which  are  not  seen."  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  present 
and  the  fviure : — I.  We  have  to  speak  to  jon  of  created  things — the  heavens 
above  and  the  earth  beneath — as  temporal  either  in  themselves,  or  in  regard  to  us 
who  "must  die  in  like  manner."  There  may  be  much  room  for  questioning  whether 
there  will  be  the  actual  annihilation  of  matter  ;  whether  even  this  earth  is  to  be  so 
destroyed  that  no  vestige  of  it  shall  remain.  We  know  that  our  bodies  at  least  are 
not  to  be  annihilated  ;  but  that  having  gone  through  certain  processes,  they  are  to 
be  united  to  the  soul,  and  remain  in  that  re-union  for  ever.  Without,  however, 
supposing  the  actual  annihilation  of  matter,  ,we  may  speak  of  the  universe  as  destined 
to  be  destroyed,  seeing  that  the  systems  which  are  to  succeed  to  the  present  will  be 
whoUy  different,  and  wear  all  the  traces  of  a  new  creation.  Our  text  marks  out  a 
second  way  in  which  our  connection  with  visible  things — the  heavens  and  the  earth 
— may  be  brought  to  a  close — "they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner." 
II.  A  CONTRAST  is  drawn  between  God — His  salvation  and  His  righteousness — and 
the  heavens  and  the  earth.  It  seems  the  design  of  the  passage  to  affix  a  general 
character  to  the  objects  of  faith  as  distinguished  from  the  objects  of  sense — the 
character  of  permanence  and  distinguished  from  that  of  decline.  {R.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Looking  heavenward : — Man  hath  a  muscle  more  than  ordinary  to  draw  up  his  eyes 
heavenward.    {J.  Trapp.)    The  perishing  arid  the  stable : — I.  The  perishing  natxtre 

OF  ALL  WORLDLY  OBJECTS,  PURSUITS,  AND  COMFORTS.     II.    ThE  STABILITY  OF  THOSE 

WHICH  THE  Gospel  proposes.  ( J'F.  Richardson. )  An  eternal  salvation : — We  must 
never  expect  any  other  way  of  salvation,  any  other  covenant  of  peace,  or  rule  of 
righteousness,  but  what  we  have  in  the  Gospel,  and  what  we  have  there  shall 
continue  to  the  end.  {M.  Henry.)  God's  everlasting  salvation: — There  are  brought 
before  us  in  the  text,  three  great  varieties  of  existence,  viz.  those  of  man,  the  earth, 
and  the  starry  heavens ;  and  contrasted  with  God's  salvation  and  righteousness. 
I.  God's  salvation  is  independent  of,  and  will  outlive,  everything  human. 
"When  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner,"  i.  e.  like  the  old  earth 
itself.  "My  salvation  shall  be  for  ever."  Not  only  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  independent  of  its  friends,  but  unconquerable  by  its  foes.     II.  The  grass 

WITHERETH,  the  flower  FADETH  ;  AND  so,  TOO,  WILL  THE  EARTH  OUT  OF  WHICH 

THEY  SPRING.  It  "  shaU  wax  old  like  a  garment."  To  the  same  intent  speaks 
science.  Will  religion  wax  old  too?  When  the  aged  planet's  voice  is  low  and 
Indistinct,  will  the  truth  of  God  also  be  less  clear  and  defined  ?  I  trow  not.  The 
world,  in  its  youth  and  beauty,  was  but  a  great  symbol.  The  symbol  is  gone  ;  the 
truth  remains.  The  time  may  come  when  the  resources  of  earth  may  be  dried  up  ; 
not  so  the  resources  of  Heaven.  There  may  be  no  sunshine  to  cheer  the  earth  ;  there 
will  be  sunshine  for  the  hearts  of  men  ; — no  dew  to  refresh  a  thirsty  earth  ;  there 
will  be  life-giving  dew  for  the  soul  of  man.  III.  Over  the  whole  earth  broods 
THE  mighty  law  OF  CHANGE.  Everywhere  there  are  births  and  dissolutions. 
Almost  everything  yields  to  its  power.  From  the  tiny  flower,  to  the  huge  mountain  ; 
from  the  life  of  the  insect  that  is  bom  and  dies  in  a  day,  to  the  life  of  men,  of 
nations,  of  the  whole  world.  The  dominion  of  the  changeable,  however,  is  not 
confined  to  this  world  ;  it  extends  to  all  worlds.  And  why  should  it  remain  aiy 
longer  when  a  grander  universe  has  begun  ?  The  work  of  the  old  one  is  done,  ft 
came  into  being  only  to  speak  the  great  truths  of  God.  It  has  done  so  ;  let  it  pass. 
Its  bright  suns,  the  centres  of  life  and  light,  all  spoke  of  one  Eternal  Sim  from  whom 
comes  all  life  and  all  light.  Let  the  changing,  decaying  systems  of  the  old  universe 
now  disappear ;  their  existence  would  be  but  a  mockery  beside  the  one  everlasting 
system  of  righteousness.  Let  all  that  must  pass  away  now  pass.  The  watchword  is, 
"  For  ever  and  ever,"  for  ever  one  system,  one  wUl,  one  obedience,  one  atmosphere  of 
love.  {D.  Johnson,  M.A.)  The  eternity  of  God's  salvation: — This  is  evidently  one 
of  those  predictions  having  special  reference  to  the  introduction  of  the  Gospel 
dispensation,  with  which  this  book  is  so  thickly  studded.  We  may  regard  vers.  4 
and  5  as  forming  a  kind  of  preface  to  ver.  6  ;  and  in  that  preface  the  clue  is  given  in 
four  ruling  words,  viz.  law,  judgment,  righteousness,  and  salvation.  1.  The  Gospel 
is  a  law — not  written  upon  tables  of  stone,  but  upon  the  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  ;  it  is  a  law  of  faith,  and  love,  and  obedience  ;  it  is  the 
law  by  which  God  will  henceforth  govern  men.  As  the  prophet  in  another  place 
says,  "The  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our  king ;  He 
will  save  us."  His  law  is  in  order  to  His  rule ;  and  His  rule  is  in  order  to  the 
salvation  of  men.      2.  The  word  "judgment"  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  a  body  or 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

code  of  laws,  such  as  form  the  basis  of  the  constitution  of  a  kingdom.     It  must 
point  to  the  body  of  Gospel  truth  which  God  is  about  to  reveal  to  the  world.     The 
doctrines,    precepts,    promises,   which   centre  upon  the  person  and  work,  which 
together  are  bound  up  in  the  New  Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
these  form  the  basis,  the  foimdation  which  God  will  "make  settled"  for  a  light  to 
the  people.      3.   "  My  righteousness  is  near."    It  is  about  to  be  signally  manifested, 
and  in  an  unheard-of  way,  by  the  death  of  My  only  begotten  Son.     Therein  am  I 
about  to  be  seen,  just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus.     4.  ' '  My 
salvation  is  gone  forth,"  etc.     The  good  news  that  men  are  to  be  saved  by  the  fi-ee 
grace  of  God,  is  already  published,  and  it  shall  awaken  loving  trust  in  Me  wherever 
it  is  known.    Then  comes  the  climax  upon  this  preface  ;  the  eternal  endurance  which 
is  the  destiny  of  this  saving  rule  of  the  Almighty — "Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the 
heavens,"  etc.      Three  things  here  present  themselves  for  our  consideration — I.  Thb 
DESTINY  OF  THE  HEAVENS  AND  THE  EARTH.      1.  Let  US  think  of  their  nature. 
They  are  an  emanation    from  the  mind  of  God.     2.  The  design  of  the  creation. 
(1)  This  is  its  inamediate  design — to  subserve  the  well-being  of  man.     (2)  But  what 
is  the  ultimate  design  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ?    Like  all  else,  to  declare  the 
glory  of  God.     But  upon  this  two  remarks  must  be  made — This  declaration  is  by 
itself  alone  imperfect,  as  all  material  signs  of  truth  must  be.     The  printed  page  may 
teU  us  many  truths,  but  there  are  truths  which  the  printed  page  of  itself  can  never 
tell.     Creation  cannot  declare  to  us  all  that  we  ought  to  know  of  God.     There  are 
apparent  contradictions  in  nature :    there  is  the  genial  sim,  the  gentle  dew,  the 
balmy  wind  ;  but  there  is  also  the  fiery  volcano,  the  awful  earthquake,  the  furious 
hurricane.     Creation  cannot  reconcile  its  own  phenomena  ;   its  testimony  is  im- 
perfect without  some  higher  and  concurrent  light.     The  testimony  of  creation  is  too 
often  rendered  void  or  perverted  through  human  sinfulness.     Either  men  do  not  see 
God  at  all  in  nature,  or  they  view  Him  with  vision  all  awry.     (3)  Carry  your 
thoughts  forward  to  the  revealed  destiny  of  the  heavens  and  earth.     They  are  to 
pass  away  utterly.     "Seeing,  then,  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  etc." 
II.  The  DESTINY  OF  THE  MORTAL  RACE  OF  MAN.     "  They  that  dweU  therein  shall 
die  in  like  manner."     Man  and  the  world  date  from  the  same  origin,  and  are  formed 
of  the  same  material.      1.  Let  us  consider  the  nature  of  the  mortal  race  of  man.     It 
is  simply  a  part  of  the  visible  material  creation.      2.  Think  again  of  the  design  of 
our  mortal  race.     It  is  pre-eminently  to  declare  the  glory  of  God.     "  I  have  created 
him  for  my  glory,  I  have  formed  him  ;  yea,  I  have  made  him."    But  this  glory  that 
excelleth  God  is  to  derive  not  so  much  from  our  bodily  nature,  for  this  is  but  the 
kind  of  glory  that  all  His  other  works  render  to  Him,  an  unconscious  glory  ;  as  from 
our  spiritual  nature,  from  renovated  wills,  from  purified  affections,  from  a  redeemed 
and  sanctified  nature.     3.  We  shall  gain  further  light  upon  the  purpose  of  God  with 
regard  to  our  earthly  race,  if  we  glance  at  the  analogy  between  the  individual  life  and 
that  of  the  whole  race.     Each  man  among  us  is  the  miniature,  the  epitome  of  the 
history  of  the  world.     He  is  the  microcosm  ;  you  trace  in  yourself  imperfections  of 
bodily  and  mental  powers  ;  you  are  conscious  of  the  seeds  of  death  within  you  ;  all 
connected  with  your  present  condition  speaks  plainly  the  lesson  that  you  are  in  a 
dissolving,  uncertain,  precarious,  transitory  condition.     It  is  fitly  described  in  the 
emblems  of  Scripture,  a  tent,  not  a  fixed  habitation,  a  lodging,  not  a  final  rest. 
Now,  I  say  you  may  trace  a  close  analogy  to  all  this  in  the  history  of  the  whole  race. 
The  world  grows  old  ;  there  are  wrinkles  on  its  brow.      4.  Then  remember  that  this 
is  the  predicted  destiny  of  our  mortal  race.     All  living  men  and  aU  their  sensuous 
surroundings  shall  be  utterly  swept  away.     III.  The  destiny  of  God's  saving 
RULE. — "My  salvation,"  etc.     By  the  saving  rule  of  God  we  mean  that  rule  which 
God  has  revealed  in  the  Gospel,  in  conforming  to  which  man  enjoy  salvation  ;  the 
rule  which  demands  repentance,  implicit  faith  in  the  Mediator  and  obedience  to  the 
Holy  Ghost.     It  is  God's  plan,  or  rule,  or  way  of  salvation,  and  it  is  founded  upon 
the  immutable  attribute  of  His  righteousness.      1.  Look  at  its  nature.     The  Gospel 
is  the  full  and  perfect  exhibition  of  the  mind  of  God.      2.  Look  at  its  design.     It  is 
in  order  to  the  complete  blessedness  of  our  immortal  spirits  in  earth  and  heaven — 
here  and  hereafter,  and  for  ever  and  ever.      3.  God's  saving  rule  shall  endure  for 
ever  and  ever.     Conclusion :    The  rule  of  God  must  either  save  and  bless,   and 
eternally  exalt  you,  or  it  must  crush  and  destroy  you.     {E.  Johnson,  B.A.)     The 
contrast: — I.  A  changing,  passing  world.     " Lift  up  your  eyes, "  etc.     God  calls 
on  us  to  interrupt  for  a  short  season  our  busy  occupations,  and  to  meditate  on  things 
seen  and  unseen,  things  temporal  and  things  eternal.     1.  The  framework  of  creation 
is  changing, —passing.      2.  The  riches,  the  comforts,   the  enjoyments  of  life  are 


CHAP.  LI.]  ISAIAH.  39 

passing.  3.  The  cares,  and  anxieties,  and  sorrows  of  life  are  passing,  4.  Life 
itself  is  passing.  II.  An  unchanging,  eternal  salvation.  1.  The  blessing 
itself  is  salvation,  2.  It  has  God  for  its  author.  3.  Eternity  is  its  duration. 
4.  Sinners  are  the  partakers  of  this  blessing.  Which  has  your  heart — ^your  hopes  ? 
The  love  of  both  cannot  dwell  in  the  same  breast,  "  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the 
love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."     {F.  Storr,  M.A.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Hearken  unto  Me,  ye  that  know  righteousness, — Christians  encouraged 
against  the  fear  of  man: — I.  The  persons  addressed.  1.  Those  who  "know 
righteousness."  2,  They  have  the  law  of  God  in  their  heart.  II.  The  address 
made  to  them.  "  Hearken  unto  Me,"  etc.  1.  Let  us  remember  who  is  the  speaker 
of  these  words.  2.  The  address  may  be  considered  as  containing  an  encouraging 
exhortation  enforced  by  powerful  arguments.  3.  Consider  by  what  powerful 
arguments  this  exhortation  is  enforced  :  They  who  now  revile  the  people  of  God  will 
quickly  be  brought  to  an  end.  If  their  malice  be  not  extinguished,  yet  the  means 
of  gratifying  it  will  be  no  more.  They  are  mortals,  and  as  such  they  must  soon  die. 
4.  On  the  other  hand,  "My  righteousness  (saith  the  Lord)  shall  be  for  ever,  and 
My  salvation  from  generation  to  generation. "  In  vain  do  ungodly  men  speak  evil 
of  His  cause.  It  shall  survive  all  their  attacks  ;  and  shall  increase,  when  they  who 
reviled,  or  opposed  it,  shall  be  silent  in  darkness.  In  vain  are  His  people  re- 
proached. They  cannot  be  really  injured  by  such  attempts.  {E.  Cooper.)  Man's 
mortality : — The  matter  is  not  great  which  they  say  of  us  who  must  be  worm's  meat 
shortly.  {M.  Henry. )  Futility  of  human  opposition  to  the  Gospel : — Clouds  darken 
the  sun,  but  give  no  obstruction  to  its  progress.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord. — The  awaking 
of  Zion  (with  chap.  Hi.  1  (a) ) : — Both  these  verses  are,  I  think,  to  be  regarded  as 
spoken  by  one  voice,  that  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord.  In  the  one,  as  Priest  and 
Intercessor,  He  lifts  the  prayers  of  earth  to  heaven  in  His  own  holy  hands — and  in 
the  other,  as  Messenger  and  Word  of  God,  He  brings  the  answer  and  command  of 
heaven  to  earth  on  His  own  authoritative  lips — thus  setting  forth  the  deep  mystery 
of  His  person  and  double  office  as  mediator  between  man  and  God.  But  even  if  we 
set  aside  that  thought  the  correspondence  and  relation  of  the  two  passages  remain 
the  same.  In  any  case  they  are  intentionally  parallel  in  form  and  connected  in 
substance.  The  latter  is  the  answer  to  the  former.  The  cry  of  Zion  is  responded  to 
by  the  call  of  God.  The  awaking  of  the  arm  of  the  Lord  is  followed  by  the  awaking 
of  the  Church.  He  puts  on  strength  in  clothing  us  with  His  might,  which  becomes 
ours.     I,  We  have  here  a  common  principle  underlying  both  the  clauses,  namely, 

THE  occurrence  IN  THE  ChURCH's  HISTORY  OF  SUCCESSIVE  PERIODS  OF  ENERGY  AND 

OF  LANGUOR,  It  is  freely  admitted  that  such  alternation  is  not  the  highest  ideal  of 
growth,  either  in  the  individual  or  in  the  community.  Our  Lord's  own  parables  set 
forth  a  more  excellent  way — the  way  of  uninterrupted  increase.  So  might  our 
growth  be,  if  the  mysterious  life  in  the  seed  met  no  checks.  But,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  Church  has  not  thus  grown.  Rather,  at  the  best,  its  emblem  is  to  be 
looked  for,  not  in  corn  but  in  the  forest  tree — the  very  rings  in  whose  trunk  teU  of 
recurring  seasons  when  the  sap  has  risen  at  the  call  of  spring,  and  sunk  again  before 
the  frowns  of  winter.  In  our  own  hearts  we  have  known  such  times.  And  we  have 
seen  a  like  palsy  smite  whole  regions  and  ages  of  the  Church  of  God.  Where  is 
the  joyful  buoyancy  and  expansive  power  with  which  the  Gospel  burst  into  the 
world  ?  If,  then,  there  be  such  recurring  seasons  of  languor,  they  must  either  go 
on  deepening  till  sleep  becomes  death,  or  they  must  be  broken  by  a  new  outburst  of 
vigorous  Iffe.  And  it  is  by  such  times  that  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  always  has 
grown.  Its  history  has  been  one  of  successive  impulses  gradually  exhausted,  as  by 
friction  and  gravity,  and  mercifully  repeated  just  at  the  moment  when  it  was  ceasing 
to  advance  and  had  begun  to  slide  downwards.  II.  The  twofold  explanation 
OF  THESE  VARIATIONS.  That  bold  metaphor  of  God  sleeping  and  waking  is  often 
found  in  Scripture,  and  generally  expresses  the  contrast  between  the  long  years  of 
patient  forbearance,  during  which  evil  things  and  evil  men  go  on  their  rebellious 
road  unchecked  but  by  Love,  and  the  dread  moment  when  some  throne  of 
iniquity  is  smitten  to  the  dust.  Such  is  the  original  application  of  the  expression 
here.  But  the  contrast  may  fairly  be  widened  beyond  that  specific  form  of  it,  and 
taken  to  express  any  apparent  variations  in  the  forth-putting  of  His  power.  We 
may,  then,  see  here  implied  the  cause  of  these  alternations  on  its  Divine  side,  and 
then,  in  the  corresponding  verse  addressed  to  the  Church,  the  cause  on  tha  human 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

side.  1.  As  to  the  former.  We  have  to  distinguish  between  the  power,  and  what 
Paul  calls  "the  might  of  the  power."  The  one  is  final,  constant,  unchangeable. 
It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  other  is.  The  rate  of  operation,  so  to  speak, 
and  the  amount  of  energy  actually  brought  into  play  may  vary,  though  the  force 
remains  the  same.  2.  Our  second  text  tells  us  that  if  God's  arm  seems  to  slumber, 
and  really  does  so,  it  is  because  Zion  sleeps.  He  works  through  us  ;  and  we  have 
the  solemn  and  awful  power  of  checking  the  might  which  would  flow  through  us. 
III.  The  beginning  of  all  awaking  is  the  Church's  earnest  cry  to  God.  It 
is  with  us  as  with  infants,  the  first  sign  of  whose  awaking  is  a  cry.  For  every  such 
stirring  of  quickened  religious  life  must  needs  have  in  it  bitter  penitence  and  pain 
at  the  discovery  flashed  upon  us  of  the  wretched  deadness  of  our  past.  Nor  is 
Zion's  cry  to  God  only  the  beginning  and  sign  of  all  true  awaking ;  it  is  also  the 
condition  and  indispensable  precursor  of  all  perfecting  of  recovery  from  spiritual 
languor.  Look  at  the  passionate  earnestness  of  it — and  see  to  it  that  our  drowsy 
prayers  be  like  it.  Look  at  the  grand  confidence  with  which  it  founds  itself  on  the 
past,  recounting  the  mighty  deedl  of  ancient  days,  and  looking  back,  not  for  despair, 
but  for  joyful  confidence  on  the  generations  of  old  ;  and  let  our  faint-hearted  faith 
be  quickened  by  the  example,  to  expect  great  things  of  God.  IV.  The  answering 
call  from  God  to  Zion.  Our  truest  prayers  are  but  the  echo  of  God's  promises. 
God's  beat  answers  are  the  echo  of  our  prayers.  As  in  two  mirrors  set  opposite  to 
each  other,  the  same  image  is  repeated  over  and  over  again,  the  reflection  of 
a  reflection,  so  here,  within  the  prayer,  gleams  an  earlier  promise,  within  the  answer 
is  mirrored  the  prayer.  And  in  that  reverberation,  and  giving  back  to  us  of  our 
petition  transformed  into  a  command,  we  are  not  to  see  a  dismissal  of  it  as  if  we  had 
misapprehended  our  true  want.  The  very  opposite  interpretation  is  the  true  one. 
The  prayer  of  Zion  is  heard  and  answered.  God  awakes,  and  clothes  Himself  with 
might.  Then,  as  some  warrior  king,  himself  roused  from  sleep  and  girded  with  flash- 
ing steel,  bids  the  clarion  sound  through  the  grey  twilight  to  summon  the  prostrate 
ranks  that  lie  round  his  tent,  so  the  sign  of  God's  awaking  and  the  first  act  of  His 
conquering  might  is  this  trumpet  call — "The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand " 
— "  put  off  the  works  of  darkness,"  the  night  gear  that  was  fit  for  slumber — "and  put 
on  the  armour  of  light,"  the  mail  of  purity  that  gleams  and  glitters  even  in  the  dim 
dawn.  Nor  is  it  to  be  forgotten  that  this,  like  all  God's  commands,  carries  in  its 
heart  a  promise.  But  the  main  point  which  I  would  insist  on  is  the  practical  discipline 
which  this  Divine  summons  requires  from  us.  1.  The  chief  means  of  quickened  life 
and  strength  is  deepened  communion  with  Christ.  2.  This  summons  calls  us  to  the 
faithful  use  of  the  power  which,  on  condition  of  that  communion,  we  have.  So,  let 
us  confidently  look  for  times  of  blessing,  penitently  acknowledge  that  our  own 
faithlessness  has  hindered  the  arm  of  the  Lord,  earnestly  beseech  Him  to  come  in 
His  rejoicing  strength,  and,  drawing  ever  fresh  power  from  constant  communion 
with  our  dear  Lord,  use  it  to  its  last  drop  for  Him.  (^A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Th« 
Church's  cry  and  the  Divine  answer  (with  chap.  lii.  1) : — The  Church's  call  on 
God.  "Awake,  awake,  0  arm  of  the  Lord."  1.  The  figure  used  here  is  simple 
enough.  The  "arm"  is  a  natural  symbol  of  power,  for  it  is  through  it  that  we 
execute  our  purpose.  If  it  is  benumbed,  insensitive,  and  motionless,  we  say  that  it 
is  asleep  ;  but  when  it  is  stretched  out  for  action  it  is  awake.     And  what  the 

Erophet  pleads  for  is  that  some  display  of  Divine  power  might  be  granted,  such  as 
ad  once  been  seen  in  Egypt,  when  "Rahab"  (the  fierce  and  boastful  power  of 
heathenism)  had  been  broken  in  pieces,  and  "the  dragon"  (or  rather  the  crocodile, 
the  recognized  symbol  of  Egypt)  had  been  sorely  wounded.  Now,  the  uses  to  which 
we  put  our  arm  may,  any  of  them,  suggest  the  actions  to  which  we  would  summon 
our  God  in  earnest  prayer.  The  arm  of  the  warrior  bears  the  shield  which  protects 
his  own  body  and  those  of  weak  and  wounded  friends  lying  at  his  feet ;  and  we  want 
such  overshadowing  protection  against  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked.  The  arm  is 
naturally  outstretched  to  point  the  way  to  one  who  is  ignorant  and  bewildered,  and 
when  we  are  perplexed  as  to  doctrine  or  duty,  we  find  it  is  not  a  vain  thing  to  pray : 
"Teach  me  Thy  way,  0  Lord."  What  is  needed  now,  as  of  old,  is  the  realization 
and  the  manifestation  of  the  presence  of  God  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  His  Son  ;  so 
that  now  there  may  come  about  a  true  revival  of  religion,  a  living,  unshakable 
belief  that  God  is  amongst  His  people  of  a  truth.  If  only  He  reveals  Himself  in  and 
through  His  Church,  sin  will  be  conquered  and  the  world  redeemed.  2.  The 
necessity  for  this  prayer  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  work  which  lies  before  us  as 
Christian  Churches  cannot  be  done  by  human  power.  II.  God's  call  upon  thb 
OHxntOH.    "  Awake,  awake ;  put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion,"  etc.    God  never  does  for 


CHAP  ll]  ISAIAH.  4X 

His  people  what  they  can  do  for  themselves.     1.  The  Church  is  called  upon  to 
arouse  from  slumber — and  whether  it  is  the  result  of  despondency,  or  of  indolence, 
sleep  must  be  shaken  off.     2.  The  Church  is  also  to  endue  herself  with  strength,  to 
resume  courage,  and  renew  effort  with  a  fresh  sense  of  her  responsibility.     3.  But 
let  us  be  thankful  that  there  is  room  in  God's  heart  for  quieter  service.     They  who 
fail  to  put  on  strength,  can  at  least  put  on  the  "beautiful  garments"  of  holiness ; 
and  although  these  should  endue  the  most  active  worker,  they  can  transform  into  a 
saintly  witness  the  solitary  sufferer.     4.  The  Church  is  summoned  here  to  consecrate 
herself  anew  to  God.     She  is  represented  as  a  female  captive  in  degrading  servitude, 
whose  hour  of  deliverance  has  come,  and  who  is  to  shake  herself  free  from  the  bands 
which  have  held  her,  and  rejoice  in  new  found  liberty.     It  is  not  only  sin  which 
holds  the  Church  in  bondage,  but  sometimes  formalism  and  ceremonialism,  and  we 
must  beware,  lest,  with  our  love  for  order,  we  become  thereby  crippled  and  hindered. 
Let  us  be  ready  to  make  any  change  of  mode  or  organization,  to  cast  off  any 
prejudices,  if  they  prevent  successful  whole-hearted  service  for  our  God,  and  let  us 
regard  this  as  a  time  for  renewed  consecration  to  Him,  to  whom  we  owe  ourselves, 
our  time,   our  all.     {A.    Rowland,   LL.B.)     The  arm  of  the  Lord  invoked: — I. 
Explain  what  it  is  to  which  the  invocation  is  addeessed.     "0  arm  of  the 
Lord."    IL  The  objects  which  this  invocation  involves.     "Awake,  awake," 
etc.     It  is  an  earnest  application  on  the  part  of  the  prophet,  that  God  would  come 
forth  as  He  had  done  in  former  periods.     We  may  refer  to  a  number  of  great  events, 
of  which  the  people  of  old  could  scarcely  form  an  idea.     We  remember  what  God  did 
in  the  fulness  of  time  when  He  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  restore  mankind. 
We  remember  what  He  did  on  the  hill  of  Calvary.     We  remember  what  He  did 
when  He  "raised  Him  up  from  the  dead,  and  set  Him  on  His  own  right  hand,  and 
gave  Him  to  be  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church."    We  remember  what  He  did 
on  the  Pentecostal  day,  when  He  sent  down  His  Holy  Spirit.     After  allusion  has 
thus  been  made  to  the  former  displays  of  the  Divine  power,  there  is  an  evident 
contrast  as  to  what  was  the  state  of  things  in  the  prophet's  day.     There  seemed  to 
be  a  suspension  of  this  energy ;  the  heritage  of  God  was  wasted.  His  truth  was 
insulted.    His  worship  was  slighted.   His   requirements  were    contemned.      And 
what  is  it  we  want  ?    We  want  His  power  to  accompany  the  preaching  of  the  Word. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  no  manifestation  of  the  Divine  power  so  glorious 
as  that  which  is  seen  in  the  extension  of  the  Gospel,  and  its  power  on  the  souls  of 
men.     III.  The  encgitragements  we  have  tg  believe  the  invocation  shall 
BE  fuxfilled.     1.  Consider  the  care  of  God  over  the  Church  in  past  ages  of  the 
world.     2.  From  the  character  of  God  as  the  hearer  and  answerer  of   prayer. 
3.  From  the  nature  of  the  promises  recorded  in  the  sacred  pages.     {J.  Parsons.) 
Prayer  for  rMtional  prosperity,  and  for  the  revival  of  religion,  inseparably  con- 
nected:— I.  The  import  of  this  peatee.     "Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  O 
arm  of  the  Lord ! "     In  general  such  a  petition  as  this  suggests  to  us  that  our 
prayers  for  Divine  interposition  and  deliverance  from  public  calamities  should  be 
supremely  directed  to  the  glory  of  God.     A  just  regard  to  the  glory  of  God  in  our 
prayers  implies  the  two  following  things :  1.  That  we  expect  deliverance  from  God 
alone,  desire  that  it  may  be  attended  with  such  circimistances  as  His  hand  and  power 
may  be  seen  in  it,  and  are  willing  to  acknowledge  Him  as  the  supreme  and  only 
Author  of  it.     2.  We  ought  also  to  pray  for  a  dispensation  of  His  grace  and  mercy 
that  a  revival  of  religion  may  accompany  temporal  relief.     (1)  We  have  no  warrant 
to  ask  the  last  of  these  without  the  first.     (2)  We  have  no  reason  to  expect  that  it 
will  be  separately  bestowed.     (3)  If  it  should,  in  any  degree,  it  would  not  be  a 
blessing  but  a  curse.     II.  The  encottragement  to  peatee.     "Awake  as  in  the 
ancient  days,  as  in  the  generations  of  old, "  etc.     The  prophet  animates  his  faith,  and 
encourages  his  own  dependence,  and  that  of  others,  upon  the  promises  of  God, 
by  celebrating  the  greatness  of  His  power,   as  manifested  in  former  memorable 
deliverances  granted  to  His  chosen  people.     Consider  the  effect  of  such  a  view  upon 
the  mind,  and  its  influence  in  prayer.     1.  It  satisfies  us  of  the  power  of  God,  and 
His  ability  to  save.     2.  The  same  view  serves  to  ascertain  us  of  the  mercy  of  God, 
and  His  readiness  to  help  us  in  distress.     III.  Apply  the  teuths  on  this  subject  to 
our  own  present  situation  as  to  public  affairs.     Let  us  remember  that  we  serve  an 
unchangeable  God.     {J.  Wither  spoon,  D.D.)     Christ  the  arm  of  God : — Christ  is  here 
called  the  arm  of  the  Lord.     The  arm  of  the  Lord  means  God  in  action.     The  grand 
purposes  of  redemption,  conceived  in  eternity,  were  dead  thought,  if  lawful  so  to 
speak,  in  the  mind  of  God,  until  they  were  revealed  in  Christ,  the  executor  of  the 
thoughts  of  the  Godhead.    Ohrist  was  ever  called  the  Logos,  the  ezpresaion  of 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

Divinity.  When  the  hand  is  spoken  of  in  the  Bible,  it  means  the  exact  working  of 
God  in  nature,  providence  and  grace.  The  arm  is  that  which  sends  the  hand  into 
action.  "The  outstretched  arm"  is  the  far-reaching  power  of  God.  By  the  right 
hand  or  arm  of  God  we  are  to  understand  a  more  special  and  dazzling  display  of 
God's  power.  In  all  instances  the  hand  or  arm  of  God  means  Christ.  The  prophet 
appeals  to  the  past,  "Awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,"  etc.  In  the  context  he  looks 
to  the  future  and  catches  glimpses  of  the  glory  of  the  Advent,  and  he  cries,  It  is  the 
arm  of  God  !  The  text  is  an  invocation  for  Christ  to  come  in  the  Advent.  This  arm 
of  God  is  the  revelation — I.  Of  God's  glory.  II.  Of  His  saving  power.  It  is  an 
arm  that  can  reach  everywhere.  There  is  no  height  so  high  or  depth  so  deep  as  to 
be  beyond  its  reach  to  save.  III.  A  universal  revelation  of  God.  It  means 
the  revealing  of  God  in  creation,  in  providence,  in  redemption,  in  the  family,  in  the 
closet,  in  the  soul,  in  death,  at  the  judgment,  in  eternity,  where  it  will  secure  the 
eternal  triumph  of  those  whose  faith  will  then  merge  into  sight.  Conclusion :  1. 
What  are  your  relations  to  this  arm  of  God  ?  Has  it  been  to  you  only  an  object  of 
wonder  as  the  bow  in  the  clouds,  or  has  it  been  an  arm  bared  to  the  shoulder, 
entwined  about  you,  fiUed  with  a  vitality  which  it  imparted  to  you  as  it  defended 
and  lifted  you  ?  2.  Have  you  thought  what  this  arm  hath  wrought  for  you  ?  How 
it  suffered,  itself  to  be  shorn  of  its  strength  that  you  might  be  strong? 
8.  Have  you  not  thought  of  the  final  triumph  of  that  arm?  {N.  Schenck,  D.D.) 
Thy  strength !  my  strength  (with  chap.  lii.  1) : — 1.  Everything  seemed  to  have 
gone  against  the  exUe.  Life  had  no  longer  for  him  a  programme,  but  only  a  retro- 
spect ;  no  longer  a  radiant  hope,  but  only  a  fading  reminiscence  ;  no  longer  an 
alluring  vision,  but  only  a  distinguished  history.  Here  he  lay  in  captivity ;  the 
songs  of  Zion  had  fled  from  his  lips,  and  his  mouth  was  fUled  with  wailing  and 
complaint.  "The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me." 
"Where  is  He  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the  sea  with  the  Shepherd  of  His  flock? 
Where  is  He  that  put  His  Holy  Spirit  within  us  ? "  And  now  and  again  the  exile 
half- turned  himself  in  angry,  hopeless  cry,  "Oh,  that  Thou  wouldst  rend  the 
heavens,  that  Thou  wouldst  come  down  !  "  And  again  he  relapsed  into  the  low  and 
cheerless  moan:  "My  Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  And  yet  again  he  pierced  the 
heaven  with  his  searching  supplication:  "Awake,  awake,  put  on  Thy  strength,  _0 
arm  of  the  Lord,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the  generations  of  old. "  2.  What  will 
be  the  Lord's  reply  to  the  cry  of  the  exile  ?  Here  it  is :  "Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy 
strength,  0  Zion!"  The  Divine  response  is  a  sharp  retort.  "It  is  not  thy  God 
who  sleepeth  !  It  is  thou  thyself  who  art  wrapt  about  in  a  sluggish  and  consuming 
indolence  !  Thou  art  crying  out  for  more  strength  ;  but  what  of  the  strength  thou 
hast  ?  Thy  trumpet  is  silent,  and  thine  armour  is  rusting  upon  the  walls  !  Thou 
art  like  a  vagrant  asking  for  help,  when  thou  hast  a  full  purse  hidden  between  the 
covers  of  an  idle  bed  !  Thou  art  pleading  for  reinforcements,  and  thy  soldiers  are  on 
the  couch  !  Thy  prayer  is  the  supplication  of  a  man  who  is  not  doing  his  best ! 
Clothe  thyself  in  thy  present  powers,  consecrate  thine  all  to  the  purpose  of  thy 

Erayer,  and  stand  forth  in  battle  array. "  I  need  not  say  that  there  is  nothing  in  the 
rord's  response  which  disparages  the  ministry  of  prayer.  It  does,  however,  tend  to 
put  prayer  in  its  right  place,  and  to  give  a  true  apprehension  of  its  purpose  and 
ministry.  Prayer  is  not  a  talisman,  to  be  used  as  an  easy  substitute  for  our  activity 
and  vigilance.  Prayer  is  a  ministry  in  which  our  own  powers  can  be  quickened  into 
more  vigorous  and  healthy  service.  God  has  given  us  certain  endowments.  Certain 
talents  are  part  of  our  original  equipment.  We  are  possessed  of  powers  of  judgment, 
of  initiative,  of  sympathy ;  and  the  primary  implication  of  all  successful  prayer  is 
that  these  powers  are  willingly  placed  upon  the  altar  of  sacrifice.  Any  prayer  is  idle 
when  these  powers  are  indolent.  We  too  frequently  pray  to  be  carried  like  logs,  and 
it  is  the  Lord's  will  that  we  should  contend  like  men  !  The  principle  is  this — our 
"strength  "  must  back  our  supplications.  Is  the  backing  always  present  ?  (1)  "Take 
the  matter  of  our  personal  salvation.  Every  one  is  conscious  how  immature  he  is  in 
the  Divine  life.  We  know  how  dim  is  our  spiritual  discernment.  We  know  how 
few  and  infrequent  are  our  brilliant  conquests,  and  how  many  and  common  are  our 
shameful  defeats.  And  again  and  again  we  supplicate  the  Almighty:  "Awake, 
awake,  put  on  strength,  O  arm  of  the  Lord  !  "  Is  it  possible  that  the  response  of  the 
Lord  may  be  the  retort  of  the  olden  days  :  "Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength,  0 
Zion  "  ?  We  are  so  prone  to  divide  the  old  psalmist's  counsel,  and  to  pay  heed  to 
one  part  and  to  ignore  the  other.  "  Bring  unto  the  Lord  glory  !  "  And  so  we  do  ! 
We  bring  our  glorias,  our  doxologies,  our  hvmns,  and  our  anthems,  and  we  do  well, 
but  it  is  a  maimed  and  lifeless  offering  if,  with  the  glory,  we  do  not  bring  our 


CHAP.  LI.]  ISAIAH.  43 

strength.  "Bring  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength  !"  It  is  in  this  lacking  of 
strength  in  our  personal  religion  that  we  are  so  woefiuly  deficient.  We  need  to  bring 
to  om-  religion  more  strength  of  common-sense — more  inventiveness,  more  fertility  of 
ideas,  more  purpose,  more  steady  and  methodical  persistence.  And  we  need  to  bring 
a  more  commanding  strength  of  will.  So  many  of  us  would  like  to  be  saints  without 
becoming  soldiers,  and  the  desire  can  never  be  attained.  Let  me  tell  you  a  story. 
Two  little  girls  in  the  same  class,  one  at  the  top  and  the  other  at  the  bottom.  The 
one  at  the  bottom  consults  the  one  at  the  top.  ' '  How  is  it  that  you  are  always  at 
the  top  of  the  class  ?  "  "  Oh,  I  ask  Jesus  to  help  me  !  "  "  Then  I  will  do  the  same," 
said  the  imdistinguished  member,  and  she  forthwith  put  the  counsel  into  practice. 
Next  day  their  relative  positions  were  unaltered,  one  at  the  top,  and  the  other  at 
the  bottom.  The  consultation  is  renewed.  "  I  thought  you  said  that  Jesus  would 
help  me,  and  here  I  am  at  the  bottom  again  !  "  "  Well,  so  He  will,  but  how  long 
did  you  work?"  "Oh,  I  never  opened  a  book!"  (2)  Take  the  matter  of  the 
salvation  of  the  home.  We  have  interceded  for  our  little  ones  at  the  throne  of  grace. 
Are  we  putting  our  "strength"  into  the  salvation  of  the  home  ?  I  do  not  know  a 
better  pattern  of  a  home  than  Charles  Kingsley's,  but  he  brought  his  strength  to  its 
creation.  It  was  a  home  whose  moral  atmosphere  was  like  the  air  on  Alpine  heights, 
a  home  in  which,  in  all  perplexities,  the  only  referendum  was  the  Lord  Himself,  a 
home  all  of  whose  ministries  were  clothed  in  grace  and  beauty.  I  shall  never  forget 
hearing  a  long  conversation  between  two  men,  one  of  whom  had  inquired  of  the  other 
the  size  of  his  family.  "  I  have  ten,"  he  said.  "What  a  responsibility  !  "  replied 
the  other.  To  which  there  came  at  once  the  glad  response  :  "  And  what  a  privilege, 
for  they  are  all  workers  on  the  side  of  God."  (3)  There  is  the  matter  of  social 
redemption.  How  often  have  we  prayed  for  the  city:  "Awake,  awake,  put  on 
strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord  !  "  And  still,  I  think,  there  comes  the  Divine  retort, 
"  Put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion  !  "  We  abuse  the  privilege  of  prayer  when  we  make 
it  a  minister  of  personal  evasion  and  neglect.  That  is  my  message.  There  is  no  true 
prayer  without  a  full  consecration.     {J.  H,  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  11.  Therefore  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  return. — Great  deliverances: — 
The  return  of  the  light  of  morning  after  the  darkness  of  the  night  ;  of  a  fine  siunmer 
after  a  cold  and  cheerless  winter  ;  of  health  and  strength  after  a  season  of  sickness 
and  pain,  is  refreshing  and  delightful,  and  demands  the  gratitude  of  the  heart. 
The  deliverance  of  a  nation  from  temporal  slavery  or  subjection  has  often  kindled  a 
fire  in  the  breast  of  the  patriot,  the  painter,  the  poet  and  the  historian  ;  but  what 
are  all  earthly  blessings  when  compared  with  those  which  are  spiritual  and  eternal  ? 
{New  Irish  Pulpit. )  The  present  and  future  joy  of  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  : — There 
is  the  greatest  harmony  throughout  the  whole  Bible,  and  its  glowing  descriptions  of 
future  events  have  always  some  relation  to  the  spiritualizing  effects  of  the  Gospel  of 
Christ.  1.  Who  can  with  such  propriety  be  called  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  as  they 
whom  He  has  delivered  from  the  power  as  well  as  penalty  of  sin  ?  2.  Who,  again, 
can  with  such  propriety  be  called  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  as  they  whom  He 
ransoms  from  that  all-conquering  foe,  who  puts  all  things  under  his  feet  ?  3.  But 
must  the  soul  lie  insensible  with  the  body  until  this  general  redemption  ?  Must 
ages  pass  before  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  enjoy  a  foretaste  of  their  redemption  I 
No  !  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."  4.  But  are  there  not  some  con- 
siderations to  be  taken  by  us  into  account  on  this  subject?  Is  there  not  some 
blessing — a  blessing  beyond  all  other  blessings,  which  makes  these  a  matter  of  ever- 
lasting joy  to  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  ?  In  bringing  many  sons  to  glory  Jesus  has 
been  made  perfect  through  sufferings  ;  He  has  made  reconciliation  for  sin.  (  JV.  M. 
Harte. )  The  joy  of  the  ransomed : — No  New  Testament  utterance  could  be  more 
beautiful  than  this  picturing  of  the  return  of  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  to  Zion.  1. 
It  points,  at  the  outset,  to  the  grounds  of  their  confidence  and  joy.  They  are 
ransomed  travellers:  they  have  found  the  "righteousness"  and  the  "salvation" 
spoken  of  at  the  commencement  of  the  chapter.  They  go  on  their  pilgrim  way 
exulting  in  Him  whose  arm  "hath  wounded  the  dragon" — the  "Man  of  God's 
right  hand,"  who  in  His  cross  and  passion  hath  "destroyed  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil,  ana  delivered  them  who  through  fear  of  death 
were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage."  They  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
Him  that  loved  them.  2.  They  are  further  here  truthfully  represented,  even  in  the 
course  of  their  journey  through  the  wilderness,  as  filled  "with  peace  and  joy  in 
believing,"  "  abounding  in  hope."  The  Christian  is  a  joyful  man.  Though  it  be  a 
wilderness  he  treads,  and  though  sorrow  and  mourning  are  also  depicted  as  tracking 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHAP.U. 

his  footsteps,  yet  he  has  elements  of  tranqviil  happiness  within  him  which  make  the 
song,  not  the  tear,  the  appropriate  exponent  of  his  thoughts  and  emotions.  It  were 
strange,  indeed,  were  it  otherwise.  At  peace  with  God ;  sin  forgiven  ;  the  heart 
changed  ;  the  affections  elevated  ;  grace  moulding,  sustaining,  quickening,  sanctify- 
ing ;  and,  rising  above  all,  the  assured  hope  of  glory  hereafter.  3.  The  words,  too, 
seem  to  tell  of  an  ever-augmenting  joy.  As  the  portals  of  glory  draw  nearer,  the 
song  deepens  in  melody  and  strength.  They  come  to  Zion  "  with  singing  ; "  then 
"  everlasting  joy  is  on  their  head. "  Then,  they  obtain  a  new  anointing  of  "glad- 
ness ;"  and  finally  "sorrow  and  mourning  " — these  two  companions  of  the  wilder- 
ness— rise  on  their  sombre,  gloomy  wings,  and  speed  away  for  ever !  {J.  R. 
Macduff,  D.D.)  Journey  and  song : — I.  A  eedeemed  people.  II.  The  eedeemed 
OF  THE  Lord  as  travelleks.  III.  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  as  singers. 
(J.  M.  Blackie,  LL.B.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  comforteth  you. — Divine  comfort  is 
strength : — They  prayed  for  the  operations  of  His  power  (ver.  9) ;  He  answers  them 
with  the  consolations  of  His  grace,  which  may  well  be  accepted  as  an  equivalent. 
{M.  Henry.)  Our  true  Comforter ; — I.  The  Lord  comforts  all  who  trust  Him, 
BT  revealing  His  relationship.  It  is  a  delight  to  know  that  if  the  Almighty 
be  a  king,  He  is  spated  on  a  throne  of  grace,  to  which  every  man  is  at  liberty  to 
come  ;  but  it  is  a  much  more  comforting  consolation  to  know  that  the  Lord  does  not 
wish  to  be  known  to  us  as  our  king  ;  it  is  His  desire  for  us  to  approach  Him  as  our 
Father.  If  you  gather  the  record  of  all  the  good  and  lovable  fathers  who  have  ever 
existed,  and  can  imagine  them  welded  into  one  being,  you  will  have  some  idea  of 
our  Heavenly  Father.  II.  The  Lord  comforts  us,  by  His  continual  presence. 
Have  you  thought  what  it  means,  in  prayer,  when  you  close  your  eyesi  III. 
The  Lord  comforts  us,  by  proving  His  hxtraordinary  love.  Perhaps  you 
may  have  sinned  grievously,  and,  though  you  have  repented,  and  are  struggling 
bravely,  the  unfeeling  world  may  point  its  finger  of  scorn  ;  but  do  not  despair. 
Listen  to  the  voice  of  your  Heavenly  Father,  "  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  comforteth 
you ! "  IV.  The  Lord  comforts  us,  by  show^ing  that  he  governs  all 
things.  Fear  hath  torment,  and  it  is  the  parent  of  all  our  cares  and  anxieties. 
{W.  Birch.)  Who  art  thou,  that  thou  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  man? — The 
comparative  fear  of  God  and  man : — I.  There  are  two  parties  here  spoken  of — 
"man  that  shall  die,"  "the  son  of  man  that  shall  be  made  as  grass  ;"  and  "the 
Lord  our  Maker,  that  stretched  forth  the  heavens,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth. "  It  appears  to  be  a  main  object  of  the  Scriptures,  elsewhere  as  in  the  text,  to 
set  in  the  most  vivid  contrast  with  each  other  the  meanness,  the  emptiness,  the 
nothingness  of  man  ;  and  the  aU-sufiiciency,  the  majesty,  and  the  glory  of  God.  II. 
In  the  common  intercourse  of  the  world,  the  former  of  these  parties,  rather 

THAN    THE     LATTER,    IS    PRACTICALLY    THE    OBJECT  OF  REVERENCE,    RESPECT  AND 

FEAR.  Indeed,  the  whole  system  of  society  seems  founded  on  the  principle  that 
human  sanctions  are  above  Divine.  III.  The  meaning  of  that  emphatic  ques- 
tion with  v»^ich  THESE  words  COMMENCE,  " WHO  ART  THOU?"  1.  The  inquiry 
seems  to  have  been  primarily  addressed  to  those  whose  prevailing  fear  of  man  was 
the  result  rather  of  weakness  under  trying  circumstances,  than  of  carnal  blindness 
and  depravity  of  heart.  It  seems  intended  for  the  encouragement  of  God's  people 
when  threatened  with  dangers,  and  particularly  when  harassed  by  the  terrors  which 
cruel  enemies  inspire.  2.  But  in  another  sense,  and  with  far  different  emphasis, 
does  it  apply  to  those  who,  in  the  genuine  spirit  of  the  world,  and  with  the  full 
agreement  of  the -will,  pay  that  homage  to  man  which  they  deliberately  refuse  to 
God.  Well  may  it  be  said  to  such,  in  a  tone  of  mingled  indignation  and  surprise, 
"  Who  art  thou  ? "  {ff.  Woodward,  M.  A.)  Fear  of  man  removed  by  reflecting  upon 
God : — If,  being  children  of  God,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  we  duly  reflected  on  our 
"  high  calling,"  and  wisely  valued  our  privileges,  we  should  certainly  neither  stand 
80  much  in  awe  of  one  another,  nor  be  so  guilty  as  we  are  of  forgetfulness  of  the 
Almighty.  I.  "Who  art  thou?"  The  question  was  put  to  Israel,  with  reference, 
not  to  what  they  were  in  themselves-^in  dependence  upon  their  own  strength  or 
holiness  ;  for  they  were  weak  and  miserable  oflfenders,  suffering  the  punishment  of 
their  ofi'ences  ;  conquered,  and  carried  into  exile  by  heathen  enemies  ;  friendless  and 
hopeless :  but  it  referred  to  Jehovah's  choice  of  them  as  a  peculiar  people,  to  their 
experience  of  the  Divine  protection,  and  their  covenanted  right  in  the  Divine 
promises.  And,  without  reference  to  God,  and  His  salvation,  what  can  be  the 
answer  of  any  human  being  to  the  qnestion,  "  Who,  or  what  art  thou  t " — nothing, 


CHAP.  11.]  ISAIAE.  45 

and  less  than  nothing ;  a  vapour,  that  is  exhaled  and  is  not ;  an  atom,  that  perishes 
and  is  forgotten  ;  a  sinful  and  miserable  being,  the  child  of  perdition,  "at  his  best 
estate  altogether  vanity."  It  is  not  so,  however,  that  God  sees  us.  He  beholds  all 
things  here  below  in  His  blessed  Son,  Redemption  enables  every  believer  to  return 
a  lofty  answer  to  the  inquiry,  "  Who  art  thou  ? "  II.  If  such  be  a  correct  draught 
of  the  reply  which  the  faithful  Christian  can  make  to  the  question,  *'  "Who  art  thou  ?  " 

THE   UNFITNESS,   THE    IMPKOPRIETT    OF    HIS     YIELDING    TO    THE    FEAR  OF   MAN    IS 

MANIFEST.  1.  It  saps  the  vital  strength  of  the  Christian  character,  in  undermining 
our  faith.  I  cannot  truly  believe  in  God,  as  He  has  revealed  Himself,  and  yet  stoop 
to  this  fear.  2.  It  leads  men  to  vain  and  unworthy  expedients — to  trust  in  the 
*'  arm  of  flesh  "  and  in  "refuges  of  lies."  3.  Carnal  fear  is  the  very  worst  form  of 
that  unreasonable  care  and  anxiety,  against  the  encroachments  of  which  our  Lord 
cautions  us.  4.  "  But,"  asks  the  prophet,  "  who  art  thou,  that  thou  shouldest  be 
afraid  ?  "  Art  not  thou — thou,  the  child  of  God — of  so  high  a  dignity,  of  a  strain 
and  lineage  so  glorio\is,  that  thou  oughtest  not  to  be  suspected  of  so  degrading  a 
passion  as  ignoble  fear?  III.  Always  connected  with  fear  of  man,  is  for- 
6ETFTJLNESS  OF  Almighty  God.  {R.  Cattermole,B.D.)  God  more  to  he  feared  than 
man : — That  of  two  evils  the  greatest  is  most  to  be  feared,  is  a  self-evident  principle, 
which,  as  soon  as  it  is-  proposed,  commands  our  assent ;  that  he  who  can  inflict  a 
greater  evil  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  he  who  can  inflict  only  a  less,  is  an  immediate 
consequence  of  that  self-evident  principle ;  that  "  the  Lord  our  Maker,  who  hath 
stretched  forth  the  heavens,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth, "  is  armed  with 

freater  power,  and  can  inflict  greater  and  more  durable  evils  than  "  man  who  shall 
ie,  and  the  son  of  man  who  shall  be  made  as  grass, "  is  more  forcibly  expressed 
than  if  it  were  in  direct  terms  declared  in  the  expostulation  of  the  text :  that  man 
therefore  is  not  to  be  feared,  and  that  God  is  ;  or  that  man  is  not  to  be  feared  in 
comparison  with  God  ;  not  equally  to  be  feared  with  Him  ;  not  at  all  to  be  feared, 
when  the  fear  of  man  would  betray  us  to  do  things  inconsistent  with  the  fear  of  God, 
and  such  as  would  argue  us  to  have  forgotten  "  the  Lord  our  Maker,"  is  a  truth  as 
clearly,  plainly  and  fully  demonstrable  as  any  proposition  in  mathematics.  I.  It 
is  certain  matter  of  fact,  that  in  the  conduct  op  our  lives  we  are  more 
awed  by  the  fear  of  man  than  we  are  by  the  fear  of  God.  This  is 
proved  from  experience  and  observation.  As  evident  as  it  is,  that  men  commit 
those  sins  in  secret  which  they  dare  not  commit  openly  ;  that  they  take  more  care 
to  appear  religious  than  really  to  be  religious  ;  that  in  a  licentious  age  they  are 
afraid  to  own  themselves  to  be  under  the  influences  of  religion  ;  that  they  commit 
greater  sins  to  hide  less  ;  that  they  choose  rather  obstinately  to  persist  in  an  error, 
than  to  own  they  were  in  the  wrong  ;  that  they  choose  rather  to  break  the  laws  of 
God  than  to  be  out  of  fashion  ;  that  they  are  time-servers,  and  play  fast  and  loose 
with  their  principles,  in  order  to  secure  or  to  promote  their  interest ;  that  they 
*'  make  shipwreck  of  their  faith  "  when  storms  arise,  and  fall  away  in  times  of 
persecution  ;  so  evident  is  it,  that  in  the  conduct  of  their  lives  they  are  more 
swayed  by  the  fear  of  men  than  they  are  by  the  fear  of  God.  II.  Inquire  how 
this  comes  to  pass.  1.  As  to  the  case  of  habitual,  profligate,  daring  sinners,  their 
conduct  in  this  matter  is  easily  accounted  for.  By  a  constant,  uninterrupted  course 
of  sinning  they  have  worn  out  all  sense  of  religion,  all  notions  of  God,  all  appre- 
hensions of  a  fiiture  state,  and  a  judgment  to  come.  2.  Every  disciple  of  Christ  is 
not  so  great  a  proficient  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  as  to  reach  up  to  that  fulness  of 
stature  in  Christ  to  which  St.  Paul  was  arrived,  when  he  could,  without  arrogance, 
declare  his  undaunted  courage  and  resolution  of  mind  in  that  magnanimous,  but 
sincere,  profession,  which  we  find  him  making,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  Christ  ?  "  etc.  3.  If  persecution  is  proved  to  be  so  strong  a  temptation,  and 
the  faith  of  the  generality  of  Christians  is  so  weak,  it  is  no  great  matter  of  surprise, 
that  men  should  often  yield  to  the  violence  of  such  pressing  trials,  and  should  be 
overawed  into  sinful  compliances,  by  the  fear  of  those  evils,  which,  though  they  bear 
no  proportion  to  the  wrath  of  God,  that  shall  be  revealed  in  the  last  day,  are  yet 
strong  enough  to  betray  the  succours  which  reason  and  religion  ofier.  4.  But  still 
what  account  can  be  given  why  men  venture  the  loss  of  their  immortal  souls,  to 
avoid  evils  of  a  much  less  magnitude  ;  such  as  are  shame,  disrepute,  the  displeasure 
of  superiors,  the  dislike  of  equals,  or  even  sometimes  the  disapprobation  of  inferiors  ? 
The  best  account  I  am  able  to  give  of  such  extravagant  and  unjustifiable  conduct  is 
this :  the  sins  to  which  men  are  drawn  by  such  slight  temptations  are  not  usually  of 
that  heinous  kind,  as  those  are  to  which  they  are  tempted  by  the  terrors  of  greater 
evils  ;  as  the  temptation  is  much  weaker,  so  the  sins  1x>  which  they  are  tempted  are 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caAP.  u. 

much  lighter :  though  therefore  they  cannot  plead  the  violence  of  the  temptation, 
yet  they  are  apt  to  hope,  that  the  sins  into  which  they  are  so  easily  betrayea,  being 
not  of  the  deepest  die,  will  the  sooner  be  blotted  out.  III.  Show  the  extreme 
FOLLY  AND  UNEEASONABLENESS  OF  IT.  By  the  Order  of  nature  our  passions  ought 
to  be  under  the  government  of  reason  ;  by  the  laws  of  God  they  ought  to  be  subject 
to  the  rules  of  religion.  Our  reason  tells  us,  that  the  greatest  evils  are  most  to  be 
feared  ;  our  religion  teaches  us,  that  the  evils  to  come  are  exceedingly  greater  than 
any  we  can  feel  at  present :  both  reason,  therefore,  and  religion  agree  to  condemn  the 
avoiding  lesser  evils,  by  running  into  greater,  which  we  always  do,  when  out  of  fear 
to  offend  men  we  presume  to  sin  against  God.      IV.  Give  some  rules  how  wb 

MAY  CONQUER  THIS  VICIOUS  AND   IMMODERATE  FEAR  OF  MAN.       1.   "We    fear    men 

more  than  God,  because  the  evils  threatened  by  men  are  apprehended  to  be  nearer 
than  those  threatened  by  God.  To  weaken  the  force  of  this  motive  to  the  fear  of 
men,  we  should  consider  that  this  apprehension  of  ours  may  be  false  ;  for  though  the 
sentence  of  God  against  evil  works  is  not  always  executed  speedily,  yet  the  judg- 
ments of  God  do  sometimes  seize  upon  the  sinner,  even  in  the  very  act  of  sinning. 
But  allowing  them  to  be  as  yet  far  removed,  and  to  advance  with  the  slowest  pace, 
yet  the  disproportion  which  they  bear  to  the  sorest  evils  men  can  inflict,  is  so  great, 
that  if  we  view  them  together,  tne  "treasures  of  wrath  which  are  laid  up  against  the 
day  of  wrath  "  cannot  appear  light  and  inconsiderable,  notwithstanding  their  present 
distance.  But  to  take  away  all  danger  of  our  being  imposed  upon  by  viewing  them 
as  far  remote,  we  ought  in  our  thoughts  to  bring  them  nearer  to  us.  2.  It  will  be 
further  expedient  for  us  to  strengthen  our  good  resolutions  by  considering  those 
supports  which  we  may  expect  from  God,  if  we  bravely  bear  up  against  those  trials 
by  which  our  virtue  is,  at  any  time,  assaulted.  The  same  power  of  God  which  wiU 
be  manifested  in  our  punishment,  if  we  give  way  to  the  vicious  fear  of  men,  will 
exert  itself  in  OTir  assistance,  that  we  may  efl"ectually  overcome  it.  Having,  therefore, 
these  threats  and  promises  of  the  Lord,  let  us  act  like  men  who  are  endued  with 
reason,  and  like  Christians  who  are  strong  in  faith.  {Bp.  Smalridge. )  Foolish  and 
impious  fears : — I.  The  absurdity  of  those  fears.  It  is  a  disparagement  to  us 
to  give  way  to  them.  In  the  original  the  pronoun  is  feminine,  "  Who  art  thou,  0 
woman  ; "  unworthy  the  name  of  a  man,  such  a  weak  and  womanish  thing  is  it  to 
give  way  to  perplexing  fears.  It  is  absurd — 1.  To  be  in  such  a  dread  of  a  dying 
man.  2.  To  fear  "continually  every  day"  (ver.  13);  to  put  ourselves  upon  a 
constant  rack,  so  as  never  to  be  easy,  nor  have  any  enjoyment  of  ourselves.  Now  and 
then  a  danger  may  be  imminent  and  threatening,  and  it  may  be  prudence  to  fear  it ; 
but  to  be  always  in  a  toss,  to  tremble  at  the  shaking  of  every  leaf,  is  to  make  our- 
selves aU  our  lifetime  subject  to  bondage,  and  to  bring  upon  ourselves  that  sore  judg- 
ment which  is  threatened  (Deut.  xxviii.  66,  67).  3.  To  fear  beyond  what  there  is 
cause  for.  Thou  art  afraid  of  "the  fury  of  the  oppressor."  It  is  true  there  is  an 
oppressor,  and  he  is  furious.  He  designs,  it  may  be,  when  he  has  an  opportunity,  to 
do  thee  mischief,  and  it  wUl  be  thy  wisdom,  therefore,  to  stand  upon  thy  guard ; 
but  thou  art  afraid  of  him  "  as  if  he  were  ready  to  destroy,"  as  if  he  were  just  now 
going  to  cut  thy  throat,  and  there  were  no  possibility  of  preventing  it.  A  timorous 
spirit  is  thus  apt  to  make  the  worst  of  everything,  ana  sometimes  God  is  pleased 
presently  to  show  us  the  folly  of  it.  "  Where  is  the  fury  of  the  oppressor  ? "  It  is 
gone  in  an  instant,  and  the  danger  is  over  ere  thou  art  aware.  His  heart  is  turned, 
or  his  hands  are  tied.  II,  The  impiety  of  those  fears.  Thou  "forgettest  the 
Lord,  thy  Maker,"  etc  Our  inordinate  fearing  of  man  is  an  implicit  forgetting  of 
God.     (M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  13.  And  forgettest  the  lord  thy  Uaker. — God  the  Creator : — What  is  it  to 
create  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ?  Who  has  seen  the  process  of  creation  ?  I  see  a 
man  shape  a  piece  of  iron  or  of  wood  into  a  useful  instrument,  and  the  process  seems 
simple  enough.  But  here  I  see  the  hand  that  works  and  the  material  on  which  it 
works.  But  that  is  not  creation — creation  out  of  nothing.  I  see  no  hand  shaping 
the  trees  and  hills  ;  I  never  see  something  rising  out  of  nothing.  I  can  watch  the 
growth  of  a  flower,  as  I  can  the  building  of  a  house.  And  I  know  that  in  the 
former  case,  as  in  the  latter,  there  is  some  force  in  activity.  But  force  is  not  God. 
Behind  that  force  God  is  still  hidden,  and  the  mysterious  question  remains,  Who  is 
He  T  More  mysterious  still  when  I  have  to  reflect  that  millions  of  flowers  all  the 
world  over  are  being  formed,  and  that  a  similar  force  is  in  operation  through  all  the 
worlds  of  boundless  space.  And  evervwhere  behind  this  force  God  is.  God  is  my 
Mi^Ear  toOi    I  eat  and  drink,  I  live  and  grow,  and  feel  Um  energy  of  life.    And  that, 


CHAP,  ix]  ISAIAH.  47 

too,  is  God.  So  near  to  me — so  imineasiiTably  distant ;  and  yet  nowhere  visible. 
How,  then,  shall  I  think  of  Him,  and  answer  to  my  heart  the  question,  Who  is  God  f 
(S.  Edger,  B.A.) 

Ver.  16.  And  I  have  put  My  words  in  thy  mouth.—  The  seed-corn  of  a  new  vxyrld:— 
The  words  in  their  mouth  are  the  seed-corn  of  a  new  world  in  the  midst  of  the 
old.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Commissionsd,  endowed,  preserved: — Like  the  first 
creation,  the  new  is  a  gradual  process,  advancing  from  age  to  age.  I.  In  this  work 
God  employs  His  servants.  When  it  is  said,  "That  I  may  plant,"  etc.,  it  is 
obvious  that  it  is  through  Israel  the  work  is  to  be  done  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).  II.  Foe 
THIS  WORK  God  arms  His  servants.  "  I  have  put  My  words  in  thy  mouth." 
III.  For  this  work  and  in  it  God  peesebves  His  servants.  "  I  have  covered 
thee,"  etc.     {W.  Guthrie,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  Awake,  awake,  stand  up,  0  Jerusalem. — Brighter  times/or  exiled  Israel : — 
Jerusalem  is  pictured  as  a  woman,  prostrate  through  misfortune,  lying  helplessly 
as  though  drunken,  on  the  roadside,  her  sons  unable  to  guide  or  assist  her :  but  she 
is  to  stand  up  ;  the  past  is  now  solemnly  reversed  ;  and  the  cup  of  "  reeling  "  which 
she  has  drunk  is  to  be  given  to  them  that  afiBicted  her  (vers.  17-23).  {Prof.  S.  B, 
Driver,  D.D.)  A  call  to  abandon  despair : — It  is  a  call  to  awake,  not  so  much  out 
of  the  sleep  of  sin  (though  that  also  is  necessary,  in  order  to  their  being  ready  for 
deliverance),  as  out  of  the  stupor  of  despair.  {M.  Henry. )  The  cup  of  trembling. — 
The  cup  of  trembling : — Such  a  cup  is  sooner  or  later  placed  in  all  our  hands.  Some 
may  ask  us,  indeed,  if  Christianity  is  not  a  religion  of  joy  ?  Yes  !  But  it  i"  not  a 
religion  of  hUarity.  The  Christian  life  is  the  reproduction  of  the  Master's  ir.k.ge  in 
the  world !  And  as  He  was  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  so  beneath  all  there  will  be  tribula- 
tion in  our  hearts,  even  when  we  share  the  legacy  of  the  Master's  joy  1  The  cup 
must  be  taken.  The  red  wine  is  poured  out  by  the  good  hand,  and  the  child  with 
bowed  knee  and  bruised  heart  says,  "  Even  so.  Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in 
Thy  sight. "  Good  in  the  sight  which  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning,  which  cul- 
minates in  the  ultimate  issues  of  glory  and  reward.  I.  The  constitution  of  the 
present  life  creates  a  spirit  of  trembling.  We  are  in  a  world  of  instability 
and  uncertainty.  Tremendous  possibilities  are  involved  in  our  daily  lives.  Health 
is  so  soon  undermined.  Disaster  so  suddenly  comes.  This  life  needs  indeed  a 
Brother  and  a  Saviour.  There  must  be  with  the  Christian  an  element  of  sobriety  in 
all  human  joys.  II.  The  all-surrounding  presence  of  temptation  creates 
A  SPIRIT  OF  trembling.  Vain  self-confidence  is  contemptible.  III.  The  law  of 
dependence  on  others  creates  a  spirit  of  TREMBLING.  1.  lUness  comes,  and 
we  are  dependent  on  the  wisdom  of  the  physician  and  the  watchfulness  of  the  nurse  ; 
great  risk  comes,  and  we  are  dependent  on  the  command  of  the  captain  and  the 
sobriety  of  the  crew  ;  or  we  need  the  safety  of  the  wisest  jurisprudence,  and  we  are 
dependent  on  the  carefulness  of  the  lawyer  and  the  skill  of  the  counsel.  2.  Or  we 
have  to  take  care  of  others.  Wives  and  children  who  may  presently  be  alone  in  the 
world — alone  where  there  is  such  eager  competition  and  self-concern,  such  neglect  of 
the  weakest  and  the  neediest ;  and  we  must  leave  our  simple  savings  to  directors  or 
to  others  who  may  mismanage  our  affairs,  or  to  trustees  who  may  be  false  to  their 
trust.  And  who  shall  say  that  this  is  not  to  many  anxious  parents  a  "cup  of 
trembling  "  ?  3.  Then  we  are  citizens — men  who  have  vast  interest  in  all  that  apper- 
tains to  the  life  and  honour  of  the  fatherland  ;  and  all  these,  representatively,  we  have 
to  leave  in  the  hands  of  men,  who  may  through  pride  or  ambition  risk  the  nation's 
highr-^'-  weal.  4.  Then  we  are  living  souls,  dependent  on  the  great  law  of  moral 
influence  around  us  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  we  think.  And  we  cannot  alto- 
gether escape  from  the  contagion  of  the  fashion  of  this  present  world.  IV.  The 
near  approach  of  the  great  account  creates  a  spirit  of  trembling.    Have 

you  ever  thought  how  nearness  affects  you  1    Disease  in  a  near  city — in  your  city 

m  your  street — next  door  to  your  house  I  Have  you  ever  thought  how  even  the 
judgment  of  earth,  as  it  comes  nearer  and  nearer,  afifects  the  indifiference  of  the 
criminal  ?  But  I  am  supposing  that  we  are  Christians.  We  have  an  account  to 
render  of  life's  stewardship.  Into  each  of  our  hands  God  has  placed  the  cup  of 
personality,  responsibility  and  accountability;  and  now,  after  a  long  time,  "the 
Lord  of  those  servants  cometh  and  reckoneth  with  them."  This  is  no  mere  figure 
of  speech.  V.  The  season  of  submission  to  the  Divine  will  creates  a 
SPIRIT  of  trembling.  We  can  in  no  sense  ever  feel  this  as  Christ  our  Lord  and 
Master  did.     But  though  in  this  He  stands  alone.  His  whole  earthly  history  was  «, 


48  THE  SIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

spectacle  of  submission.  Every  man  must  bear  his  own  burden,  must  drink  hui 
own  cup.  But  Christ's  comfort  is  ours  !  With  trembling  heart  we  seek  the  quiet 
pavilion  of  our  Father.  Better  anything  than  a  God-emptied  life.  Christ  our 
Brother  and  Saviour  alone  can  succour  us  in  hours  of  submission.  (W.  M. 
Statham.) 

Ver.  22.  Thus  Baith  thy  Lord. — God  our  Advocate : — How  can  God  be  both  judge 
and  advocate?  Maybe  Isaiah  would  have  said,  "I  see  it  not  clearly  myself  yet." 
But  the  riddle  is  all  explained  when  you  bear  in  mind  the  distinction  of  the  persons 
in  the  Godhead.  He  pleads  His  people's  cause  for  them  by  the  Son,  and  in  them 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  wonderful  title,,  "God  that  pleadeth  the  cause  of  His 
people,"  has  been  already  vindicated  in  the  history  of  Israel.     But  what  is  it  God 

f leads?  We  may  go  very  much  astray  unless  we  emphasize  that  word  "r^-'se." 
t  is  not,  He  pleadeth  the  whims  of  His  people.  Everything  that  I  may  \  ■  or 
like  God  is  not  going  to  provide.  That  word  "cause  "  means  the  strife,  the  hattle, 
the  controversy.  The  Church  of  God  is  just  the  expression  of  a  great  conflict  that 
has  been  going  on  for  ages.  I  want  to  show  you  how  Jesus  has  pleaded  the  cause  of 
His  people,  and  He  has  done  it  in  different  courts.  I.  He  pleaded  the  cause  of  His 
people  first  in  the  cotjrt  of  judgment  that  was  situated  at  Golgotha.  As  to 
proving  men  innocent,  that  is  impossible  ;  they  are  guilty  and  condemned  and  yet 
Christ  steps  forward  and  says,  "1  wiU  plead  their  cause."  And  He  stood  in  my 
place  and  yours,  and  pleaded  our  cause :  but  pleading  our  cause  took  Him  to  the 
Cross  and  into  the  tomb.  XL  Having  pleaded  my  cause  in  the  court  of  judgment, 
He  now  pleads  my  cause  in  the  court  of  law  and  justice.  It  is  not  enough  for 
a  soul  to  be  free  from  sin  ;  that  is  the  negative  side.  How  can  any  man  enter 
heaven  apart  from  righteousness  ?  I  will  suppose  for  a  moment  that  tlds  difficulty 
is  raised  m  court.  Yes,  the  past  sin  is  atoned  for  ;  but  where  is  the  man's  righteous- 
ness ?  I  say,  "  Oh,  my  Lord,  Thou  who  didst  plead  for  me  just  now,  plead  again  I  " 
and  I  hear  Him  say,  "  I  lived  the  life  of  perfect  righteousness,  I  obeyed  the  Jaw  in 
every  jot  and  tittle,  I  had  Thy  word  hidden  in  My  heart."  And  the  answer  comes, 
"The  plea  is  perfect :  sinner,  thou  art  not  only  forgiven,  thou  art  justified  ;  thy  God 
hath  pleaded  thy  cause."  III.  Jesus  now  pleads  my  cause  in  heaven  itself.  If 
I  am  a  saint,  I  am  sure  to  pray,  but  being  an  earthly  saint  I  am  sure  to  pray  very 
badly  ;  being  a  believer,  I  am  sure  to  sing,  but  having  an  earthly  nature  I  am  sure 
there  are  many  low  grovelling  notes.  How  are  my  prayers  to  enter  heaven  ?  how 
are  my  prayers  to  be  accepted  ?  He  who  pleaded  my  cause  on  Golgotha,  and  He 
who  pleaded  my  cause  in  the  court  of  law,  He  now  as  High  Priest  pleads  my  cause 
before  the  golden  altar.  IV.  And  Jesus  has  not  yet  concluded  His  pleading  work. 
Personally  I  am  looking  for  a  day  that  is  yet  to  dawn  when  Jesus  will  perfectly 

PLEAD  on  behalf  OF  HiS  PEOPLE  THAT  THEY  MAY  RECEIVE  ALLTHE  RIGHTS  OF  REDEMP- 
TION. V.  I  have  only  dealt  thus  far  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  but  it  is  the  whole 
Trinity  that  pleads  the  cause  of  His  people,  and  therefore  our  final  point  is  this,  that 
whilst  Jesus  has  pleaded  for  me  at  Golgotha  and  does  plead  for  me  yonder  in  the  court 
of  Heaven,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  pleading  my  cause  within.  {A.  O.  Brown.)  The 
Advocate  on  high : — How  majestic  are  these  appellations  ;  and  if  we  mark  the  varia- 
tion of  the  appearance  of  the  word  "  Lord,"  it  opens  to  our  view  at  once  a  fund  of 
information  and  comfort  which  would  be  lost  if  that  were  overlooked.  The  first 
time  the  word  is  used,  thy  "Lord,"  the  translators  have  given  it  to  us  in  small 
letters,  simply  signifying  a  sovereign  ruler  and  governor.  The  second  time  they 
have  given  it  in  capital  letters,  which  method  they  adopted  to  dLstinguish  the  wora 
"Jehovah"  from  the  word  "Adonai,"  or  Lord.  When  the  word  "Jehovah" 
presents  itself  to  our  view,  we  are  at  once  filled  with  a  consciousness  of  the 
presence  of  a  self-existent  Being,  giving  being  to  all,  deriving  being  from  none,  with 
ail  worlds  at  His  command,  and  all  creatures  under  His  sway.  And  then  to  have 
the  sovereign  governor,  the  self-existent  Deity,  presented  to  our  view  in  Hia 
covenant  character  as  "thy  God,"  is  peculiarly  sweet.  There  is  a  sevenfold  pre- 
ciousness  in  this  introduction  which  Jehovah  gives  of  Himself  to  the  notice  of 
His  people,  and  that,  too,  under  circumstances  particularly  affecting  ;  because  what 
the  Lord  was  about  to  say  to  them  was  just  called  for  by  the  exigencies  in  which 
they  Avere  placed.  I.  The  appellations  that  are  employed.  "  Thy  Lord  ;""  the 
Lord  ;"  "thy  God."  II.  Our  claim  to  an  interest  in  them,  as  warranted  by 
Scripture.  I  will  refer  to  the  infinite  perfections  of  the  Deity  to  be  claimed  by  the 
poor  worm  of  the  earth.  What,  I  allowed  to  claim  Omniscience,  Omnipotence  to 
watch  over  me,  Omnipresence  to  be  my  company,  Immutability  to  be  my  security, 


CHAP,  in.]  ISAIAH.  4» 

eternity  the  open  prospect  for  me  I  What,  I  view  all  the  perfections  and  attributes 
of  the  Deity,  such  as  His  justice,  His  holiness.  His  truth,  His  mercy.  His  faithful- 
ness, everlastingly  pledged  for  my  salvation  ?  This  is  something  solid.  What  is 
requisite  to  prove  the  claim?  You  will  find  substantial  proof  nowhere  but  in 
spiritual  life  imparted  to  the  souh  III.  The  transaction  referred  to.  "That 
pleadeth  the  cause  of  His  people."  1.  Let  us  first  glance  at  the  Divine,  the  sacred 
office  assumed,  as  stated  in  the  text,  "If  any  man  sin  we  have  an  Advocate  with 
the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  That  glorious  Advocate  is  wise,  faithful, 
condescending,  aflfectionate.  2.  The  extraordinary  nature  of  the  cause  of  God's 
people.  (1)  There  are  three  points  in  the  pleading  of  the  cause  that  must  be  kept 
in  view.  God  pleads  thy  cause.  Precious  Advocate  1  (2)  Moreover,  He  hath  to 
plead  for  His  people  among  the  heathen  ;  and  this  is  implied  in  the  text.  When 
the  people  of  Israel  of  old  transgressed  by  idolatries  and  superstitions,  by  departures 
from  God,  and  mingling  with  the  heathen,  Jehovah  sent  them  into  captivity, 
allowed  their  enemies  to  break  in  upon  them,  and  to  desolate  their  city  and  temple. 
And  the  heathen  mocked  them.     "Where  now  is  your  God?     Where  is  the  God 

Jou  serve  ?  Do  you  think  the  King  of  glory  can  regard  such  beings  as  you  ? "  But 
ehovah  pleads  His  own  cause,  and  vindicates  His  own  honour  among  the  heathen. 
(3)  But  there  is  a  worse  feature  relative  to  the  cause,  and  that  is  rebellion  in  the 
heart  of  His  own  people.  3.  The  legal  process.  The  only  great  mark  of  the  legal 
process  is  for  God's  holiness  to  be  vindicated.  Then  the  process  must  be  by  exacting 
or  by  surety  ;  and  it  must  be  by  His  life  of  obedience  and  His  death  of  ignominy. 
If  the  legal  process  be  pleading  with  the  guilty,  ruined  sinner,  there  are  two  or 
three  things  I  shdl  name.  (1)  He  is  apprehended.  (2)  He  is  accused.  (3)  He  is 
acquitted,    Acquitted,  bat  He  is  oondenmed  first.    (/.  /rons.) 


OHAPTEE  LII. 


Vers.  1-6.  Awake,  awake. — The  essential  elements  of  a  Chv/rch'a  strength: — I. 
The  constitutional  elements  of  .strength.  I  use  the  word  constitution  in  a 
legitimate  sense,  as  including  both  the  creed  and  the  polity  of  a  Church.  1.  The 
creed.  As  a  man's  life  is  the  outcome  of  what  he  believes,  or  does  not  believe,  pre- 
cisely so  is  the  Church's.  But  is  not  the  Bible  the  acknowledged  creed  of  aU  the 
Churches  ?  No  ;  no  more  than  the  stars  are  astronomy,  or  the  flowers  botany. 
The  Bible  is  the  source  of  the  creed  of  all,  but  it  is  the  creed  of  none,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  the  Bible,  like  every  other  writing,  must  be  construed  ;  and  on  many 
points  it  cannot  be  construed  in  the  same  way  by  aU.  2.  The  government.  Here 
also  that  which  is  true  of  man  is  true  of  the  Church.  An  army  is  stronger  than  a 
mob.  II.  Administrative  elements.  But  a  Church  is  not  only  obliged  to  have 
certain  constitutional  and  other  laws,  it  is  also  obliged  to  administer  them  for  the 
twofold  purpose — 1.  Of  protecting  itself  against  corruption  and  disintegration.  2. 
In  order  that  it  may  efficiently  fulfil  its  mission  of  witnessing  for  Christ,  whereunto 
it  was  Divinely  called.  III.  Spiritual  elements  of  strength.  1.  Peace.  There 
must  be  battles  with  the  common  enemy,  but  no  battles  with  itself.  2.  Unity.  3. 
Co-operation.  4.  Purity.  5.  The  Holy  Spirit.  {R.  V.  Foster,  D.D.)  Gocts  call 
to  a  sleeping  Church: — 1.  This  chapter  is  a  trumpet-call  to  holiness.  Jerusalem  is 
called  the  holy  city,  and  yet  the  passage  is  full  of  her  sins.  She  was  holy  in  the 
intention  of  God.  So  we  are  called  not  to  be  famous  or  wealthy  but  to  be  holy. 
2.  Her  condition  was  characterized  by — (1)  Unhallowed  intercourse  with  the  world 
(ver.  1).  The  uncircumcised  and  unclean  in  her  midst.  (2)  Slavish  subserviency  to 
the  world  (chap.  li.  23).  The  moment  the  world  sees  Christians  turning  to  it  for 
pleasure  or  patronage,  it  becomes  a  very  tyrant  over  them.  (3)  Utter  helplessness 
and  impotence.  The  figure  of  a  "wild  bull  in  a  net"  means  strength  reduced  to 
helplessness  by  little  things,  Satan  forged  fetters  of  persecutions  in  early  days,  now 
he  tries  the  "  net  business."  Many  Christians  are  worthless  because  caught  in  a  net 
of  little  compromises  with  the  world  and  with  conscience.  The  "  fainting  "  (ver.  20) 
points  to  the  helplessness  of  the  Christian  Church  in  the  presence  of  the  moral  and 
social  evils  of  the  day.  (4)  They  were  asleep  to  it  all.  3.  The  man  who  called 
"Awake"  to  Zion,  had  previously  cried  "Awake"  to  God  (chap.  IL  9).  4.  To  be 
Tou  m.  4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lii. 

awakened  is  not  enough.  If  we  go  no  further  we  shall  go  back  either  into  indiffer- 
ence, or  into  rebellion,  or  into  despair.  The  call  is  "put  on  thy  strength,  put  on 
thy  beautiful  garments."  Garments  of  praise,  cloth  of  zeal,  beautiful  covering  of 
humility.  In  this  the  Christian  must  be  always  arrayed,  for  we  are  children  of  a 
King,  and  God  wants  us  always  to  appear  in  Court  dress.  (C.  Inwood.)  Awake, 
0  Zlon: — "  0  Zion  !  "  This  is  a  case  in  which  a  place  is  named  for  the  inhabitants. 
Leaving  what  is  local  and  temporary  and  particular  in  the  reference  of  these  words, 
we  proceed  to  consider  them  as  addressed  by  the  redeeming  God  to  His  Church  now, 
and  as  calling  upon  Christians  to  arouse  themselves  and  revive,  to  bestir  themselves, 
and  to  rise  into  a  state  of  intelligent  and  Godlike  activity.  These  words  assume  the 
presence  of  life  in  the  people  addressed.  Those  called  to  awake  are  not  dead,  but 
they  sleep  ;  and  they  sleep,  so  far  as  inactivity  is  concerned,  as  though  they  were 
dead.  I.  Certain  objects  of  vision  are  important  to  the  Church  of  God, 
and  that  these  maybe  kept  in  view,  God  saith,  "Awake  awake!"  Among  the 
objects  which  we  need  to  see  are  things  behind  us  ;  and  things  before  us  ;  such 
things  as  are  presented  by  sacred  history  and  by  inspired  promise  and  prophecy. 
But  the  objects  which  I  would  now  emphaticallv  name,  are  ever-existent  and  ever- 
present  spiritual  objects — God  our  one  Father,  the  Son  of  God  our  only  Saviour,  and 
the  Comforter,  who  proceedeth  from  the  Father  and  the  Son — especially  the  Son  of 
God,  as  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  as  the  propitiation  which  God  has 
set  forth.  The  things  we  need  to  see  are  the  wondrous  things  contained  in  God's 
Word,  things  of  God  and  of  man,  things  which  accompany  salvation,  things  of 
angels  and  of  devils,  things  of  Christ,  things  of  the  world  around  us  and  above  us 
and  beneath  us.  The  Church  of  God  may  be  awake  to  lower  and  inferior  things, 
and  may  be  asleep  to  these  highest  things,  or,  if  not  asleep,  but  half  awake,  so  that 
men  seem  like  trees  walking.  II.  Certain  sources  of  supply  and  fountains 
OF  pleasure  and  means  of  help  are  important  to  the  Chttrch  of  God,  and 
that  these  may  be  possessed  and  enjoyed  and  used,  God  saith,  "Awake,  awake  !" 
III.  There  is  good  and  godly  work  to  be  done  by  Zion,  therefore  God  saith, 
"Awake,  awake."  Zion  is  like  a  nursing  mother,  with  her  heart  fall  of  cares  and 
her  hands  full  of  work.  Zion  is  a  worshipper,  and  she  has  the  incense  of  prayer  and 
the  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  to  provide  and  to  offer ;  Zion  is  an  intercessor,  and  it 
is  expected  that  in  ceaseless  prayer  she  will  keep  no  silence,  nor  give  the  hearer  of 
prayer  rest ;  Zion  is  an  almoner,  and  it  is  expected  that  having  freely  received  she 
will  freely  give  ;  Zion  is  a  servant  of  the  most  high  God,  and  she  is  bound  to  do  all 
that  her  hands  find  to  do  with  all  her  might.  Her  work  is  so  various  that  Zion  is 
as  a  husbandman,  and  as  a  builder,  and  as  a  vine-dresser.  For  work  and  service 
Zion  is  Divinely  endowed,  taught  of  God  that  she  may  teach  godliness,  consoled  by 
God  that  she  may  comfort  others,  guided  by  God  that  she  may  lift  up  her  voice 
with  strength,  and  cry  to  the  bewildered  and  the  lost,  "This  is  the  way,  walk 
ye  in  it."  There  are  two  objects  in  the  sphere  of  our  present  thought,  toward 
which  the  Church  of  God  requires  to  be  faithful  and  therefore  wakeful.  1.  Her 
own  endowments.  2.  Her  opportunities.  IV.  There  are  battles  "wbich  Zion 
is  called  to  fight,  and  victories  to  be  won  which  Zion  alone  can  win  ; 
therefore  God  bids  Zion  awake.  Having  interpreted  the  voice,  let  us  note  some 
of  its  features  and  characteristics — 1.  The  voice  that  would  awaken  us  is  Divine. 
It  is  the  voice  of  a  Ruler  to  His  subjects,  of  a  Master  to  His  servants,  of  a  Parent 
to  His  sons,  of  a  Redeemer  to  His  Redeemed.  2.  The  voice  that  would  awaken 
lis  is  powerful  and  full  of  majesty,  a  voice  therefore  that  stirs,  and  that  strengthens 
while  it  stirs  him  who  listens  to  it.  3.  The  voice  that  would  awaken  us  has 
in  it  a  tone  of  reproach.  It  seems  to  say,  "What!  Zion  asleep!  Zion,  already 
and  recently  quickened  from  the  death  of  sin?  Zion,  who  can  see  God,  and 
the  things  that  are  eternal  ?  Zion,  who  can  possess  the  exceeding  riches  of  God's 
grace  ?  Zion,  who  can  handle  as  her  own  the  things  which  angels  desire  to  look 
into  1  Zion  asleep  in  the  day  of  her  work,  and  in  the  hour  of  her  conflict  ? "  4. 
Yet  this  is  a  gracious  voice.  It  is  a  voice  that  woos  and  wins  while  it  stimulates 
and  arouses.  5.  The  voice  that  cries,  "Awake,  awake,"  is  the  voice  of  Zion's  God. 
There  are  degrees  of  wakefulness  ;  and  regarding  the  text  as  calling  us  to  the  most 
complete  open-eyedness  and  watchfulness,  let  us  arouse  ourselves  at  God's  bidding. 
{S.  Martin.)  The  Church  asleep: — Look  at  this  solemn  fact — the  Church  of  the  liv- 
ing God  asleep  1  Here  are  thev  who  have  been  quickened  from  the  death  of  sin  into 
newness  of  life,  and  who  have  been  called  to  walk  with  the  living  God,  asleep.  The 
people  who  are  summoned  to  work  in  the  field  of  the  world,  and  to  labour  in  the 
Tineyaid  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  asleep.    The  only  people  who  can  reasooablj  ba 


CHAP,  ui.]  ISAIAH.  51 

expected  to  be  awake  and  wide-awake,  are  asleep.  Asleep,  not  in  healthful,  season- 
able, necessary  slumber,  but  asleep  in  the  slumber  of  the  sluggard,  or  the  sleep  of 
the  drunkard,  or  the  torpor  of  one  smitten  by  atrophy  or  by  apoplexy,  or  of  one  in 
a  fatal  swoon,  {Ibid.)  What  sends  the  Church  to  sleep  ?— The  intoxicating  draught 
of  some  sinful  carnal  pleasure,  or  the  opiate  of  some  false  doctrine,  or  the  quietude 
of  sinful  inertness,  or  the  darkness  of  cherished  ignorance,  or  the  monotony  of 
formality,  or  the  syren  music  of  false  teaching,  hath  sent  Zion  to  sleep,  {Ibid.) 
The  sleeping  Church: — Thus  sleeping,  Zion  doth  not  sympathize  with  the  cir- 
cumstances by  which  she  is  surrounded,  she  does  not  see  the  objects  within  range 
of  her  vision,  she  does  not  feel  the  influences  which  are  moving  and  working 
around  her,  she  does  not  meet  the  claims  made  for  exertion,  she  does  not  enjoy 
her  mercies,  or  take  possession  of  her  lawful  inheritance,  {Ibid. )  The  Church : 
its  strength  and  its  weakTiess : — I.  The  text  is  a  forcible  reminder  of  the  fact  that 
THE  Church  of  God,  in  all  ages,  mat  have  its  times  of  weakness  as  well 
AS  ITS  TIMES  OF  POWER.  When  the  Chui-ch  first  went  forth  from  Jerusalem,  a  little 
flock,  scattered  hither  and  thither  by  the  storm  of  persecution,  it  was  a  time  of 
power.  It  was  then  but  an  infant  of  days,  but  it  sprang  into  a  giant  of  strength. 
It  was  a  day  of  power  when  the  Church  of  Christ,  as  Paul  Eichter  has  said,  "lifted 
empires  ofl'  their  hinges,  and  turned  the  stream  of  centuries  out  of  its  channel,"  But 
a  thousand  years  roll  on,  and  a  time  of  weakness  follows  this  era  of  power.  The 
giant  sleeps  ;  his  strength  is  put  off ;  he  reposes  amidst  the  scarlet  traj)pings  and 
gilded  blazonry  of  the  Papacy,  and  seems  to  have  wilted  into  a  senile  imbecility. 
But  again  there  came  a  time  of  power  when,  on  the  morning  of  the  Reformation,  the 
Church  heard  the  cry,  "Awake,  awake  1  "  and,  springing  up  with  renewed  youth,  it 
put  on  its  strength.  There  was  a  time  of  weakness  when  the  chill  of  formalism  fol- 
lowed in  the  track  of  the  Reformation,  and  the  Church  sank  into  the  coma  of  a  wide- 
spread paralysis  ;  again,  when  a  disguised  Romanism  riveted  her  fetters  ;  and  still 
again  when  the  Socinian  apostasy  spread  its  blight  over  Great  Britain.  But  then 
came  times  of  power  when  the  Church  arose  in  quickened  majesty  to  smite  the  tyrant 
with  the  broken  fetters  which  had  eaten  into  its  own  soul ;  and  still  again,  times  of 
wondrous  spiritual  revival,  when  the  call  sounded  by  Wesley  and  Whitefield,  like 
the  voice  of  the  prophet  in  the  valley  of  vision,  seemed  to  awake  the  dead.  Why 
these  periods  of  weakness  ?  The  principle  is  plain  :  Divine  power  and  human  strength 
must  work  together,  each  in  its  appropriate  sphere.  As  the  terror  of  the  iron 
chariots  of  the  enemy  paralyzed  the  strength  of  Judah,  so  that,  the  himian  part 
being  wanting,  the  victory  was  lost ;  so,  in  the  Church,  if  any  cause  supervenes  to 
weaken,  or  render  ineti'ective,  the  strength  which  God  expects  us  to  put  forth,  He 
will  not  depart  from  His  plan,  or  interpose  to  save  us  from  the  results  of  our  own 
weakness,  or  to  hide  us  from  the  scorn  and  derision  of  the  world.  II,  What  is  the 
STRENGTH  OF  THE  Church,  AND  WHEN  IS  IT  PUT  OFF  ?  In  other  words,  what 
causes  may  supervene  to  weaken  or  render  it  ineffective  ?  1.  The  first  element  of 
power  is  the  Gospel,  the  Word,  the  truth  of  God.  If  the  truth  of  God  is  the  instnmient 
of  power,  and  the  human  part  of  the  work  is  simply  its  manifestation,  then  the 
strength  of  the  Church  must  be  weakened  whenever  the  Gospel  is  subordinated  ta 
human  themes,  2,  Let  us  pass  to  the  second  element  of  the  Church's  power — the 
ministry.  The  Church  is  a  giant ;  the  Gospel  is  the  instrument  of  his  work — the 
weapon  of  his  warfare.  But  what  wields  the  weapon  1  The  giant's  arm — this  is  the 
ministry.  It  is  not  an  original  power  inherent  in  itself,  but  a  delegated  power. 
This  is  the  power  that,  beginning  at  Jerusalem,  went  forth  upon  its  mission  of  con- 
quest— that  made  the  heathen  cry :  "  These  men  that  have  turned  the  world  upside 
down  are  come  hither  also  1 "  (1)  The  ministry,  as  an  arm  of  power,  may  be 
withered  by  a  perfunctory  education.  (2)  The  ministry  may  be  ineffective  from 
misdirected  efibrt,  (3)  The  ministry  must  be  a  source  of  weakness  instead  of  power 
to  the  Church,  if  it  is  not  in  sympathy  with  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  the  souls 
of  perishing  men,  3,  The  thu-d  and  principal  element  of  the  Church's  power  is  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Since,  then,  the  Spirit's  power  is  the  strength  of  the  Church,  the 
want  of  the  Spirit  is  the  weakness  of  the  Church.  If  the  Church  is  not  an  effective, 
aggressive  power  in  the  world,  it  is  because  it  puts  off'  or  puts  away  the  strength  of 
the  Spirit.  This  is  done  when  we  subordinate  the  Divine  Spirit  to  human 
agency  ;  when,  by  organization  or  by  human  eloquence,  or  by  methods  and  ap- 
pliances, or  by  running  the  Church  on  business  principles,  we  seek  to  eff"ect  tliat 
which  it  is  the  special  oflBce  of  the  Spirit  to  accomplish.  It  is  greatly  to  be 
feared  that  we  put  away  the  strength  of  the  Spirit  when  the  Church — the  whole 
'Jhurch,  the  ministiy  and  the  people,  fail  to  realize  our  profound  and  absolute 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

dependence  upon  the  power  of  the  Spirit  for  success  in  all  work.  III.  Let 
Tifl  listen  to  God's  call  to  the  Church  to  put  on  and  to  put  forth  hee 
BTEENGTH.  How  shall  we  put  on  this  strength?  Power  with  God,  in  its  first 
element,  is  the  sense  of  our  own  weakness.  How,  then,  shall  we  put.  on  strength  ? 
1.  On  our  knees.  2.  Let  us  put  on  the  strength  of  the  Word,  as  the  apostle  did, 
when  he  shunned  not  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  3.  Let  us  put  on  the 
strength  of  the  ministry,  as  Paxil  did  when  he  went  forth  in  the  fulness  of  the 
blessing  of  the  Gospel  of  peace.  4.  Let  us  put  on  the  strength  of  the  Spirit,  as  the 
early  Church  did  when  it  was  endued  with  power  from  on  high.  Then  shall  our 
work  be  "mighty,  through  God,  to  the  pulling  down  of  strongholds."  {W.  M. 
Paxion,  D.D. )  * '  Awake,  Awake  I " — Let  us  take  the  central  paragraph  first  (chap.  li. 
17).  There  Jerusalem  is  addressed  as  stupefied  by  some  intoxicating  potion.  But 
her  drunkenness  is  not  of  wine,  nor  of  strong  drink  ;  she  has  drunk  at  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  "the  cup  of  His  fury."  Such  imagery  is  often  used  by  the  prophets,  of 
the  cup  of  God's  wrath  drunk  down  by  those  on  whom  it  descends,  and  inflicting  on 
them  the  insensibility  and  stupefaction  with  which  we  are  but  too  familiar  as  the 
effect  of  excessive  drinking.  The  whole  city  has  succumbed  under  the  spell.  Her 
sons  have  fainted,  and  lie  strewn  in  all  the  streets,  like  antelopes  snared  in  the 
hunters'  nets,  from  which  their  struggles  have  failed  to  extricate  them.  Amid  such 
circumstances,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  introduced,  crying,  "Awake,  awake  !  stand 
up,  0  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord  the  cup  of  His  fury. " 
There  are  other  soporifics  than  the  wrath  of  God  :  the  air  of  the  enchanted  ground  ; 
the  laudanum  of  evil  companionship  ;  the  drugs  of  worldly  pleasure,  of  absorption 
in  business,  of  carnal  secmity.  The  army  of  the  Lord  is  too  apt  to  put  off  the 
armour  of  light,  and  resign  itself  to  heavy  slumbers,  till  the  clarion  voice  warns  it 
that  it  is  high  time  to  awake.  L  Zion's  appeal  to  God.  "Awake,  awake!  put 
on  strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord."  1.  The  first  symptom  of  awaking  is  a  cry.  It  is 
80  with  a  child.  It  is  so  with  the  soul.  When  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  converted,  the 
heavenly  watchers  said,  ' '  Behold,  he  prayeth. "  It  is  so  with  the  Church.  2.  The 
cry  in  this  case  was  founded  on  a  mistake.  If  there  are  variations  in  our  inner  life,  it 
is  because  our  rate  of  reception  differs  from  time  to  time.  It  is  not  God  who  sleeps, 
but  we.  It  is  not  for  God  to  awake,  but  for  us.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the  Divine 
arm  to  gird  on  strength,  but  for  the  human  to  take  that  which  is  within  its  easy 
reach.  3.  The  cry  is  short  and  earnest.  Earnestness  is  good,  even  though  at  first 
it  may  be  in  a  wrong  direction.  4.  The  best  basis  for  our  cry  is  memory  of  the 
past.  "Art  thou  not  it  that  cut  Rahab  {i.e.  Egypt)  in  pieces,  that  pierced  the 
dragon  "  {i.  e.  of  the  Nile)  ?  It  is  well  to  quote  past  experiences  as  arguments  for 
faith.  5.  The  arm  of  God  is  strong  (chap.  li.  13).  6.  The  arm  of  God  is  far-reaching. 
However  low  we  sink,  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms.  7.  The  arm  of  God  is 
tender  (chap.  li.  12).  II.  The  appeal  to  Zion.  It  is  blessed  to  be  awaked  out  of 
Bleep.  Life  is  passing  by  so  rapidly  ;  the  radiant  glory  of  the  Saviour  may  be 
missed  unless  we  are  on  the  alert,  or  we  may  fail  to  give  Him  the  sympathy  He 
needs,  and  an  angel  will  be  summoned  to  do  our  work.  Besides,  the  world  needs 
the  help  of  men  who  give  no  sleep  to  their  eyes  nor  slumber  to  their  eyelids,  but  are 
always  eager  to  help  it  in  its  need.  Being  awake,  we  shall  discover  two  sets  of  attire 
awaiting  us.  The  first  is  strength,  the  other  beauty  ;  and  each  has  its  counterpart 
in  the  New  Testament  (Eph.  vi.  ;  Col.  iii.).  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God.  Put 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ— His  temper,  spirit,  and  character.  1.  We  must  put  on 
our  beautiful  garments.  We  cannot  weave  these.  We  are  not  able  to  spin  such  a 
cocoon  out  of  our  own  nature,  nor  are  we  required  to  do  so.  They  are  all  prepared 
for  us  in  Jesus  ;  we  have  only  to  put  them  on,  by  putting  Him  on.  This  can  only 
be  done  when  the  heart  is  at  leisure.  2.  We  must  put  on  strength.  We  are  not 
bidden  to  purchase  strength,  or  generate  it  by  our  resolutions,  prayers,  and  agoniz- 
ings  ;  but  to  "put  it  on."  It  is  already  prepared,  and  only  awaits  appropriation. 
8.  We  must  expect  to  be  delivered  from  the  dominion  of  sin.  Babylon  had  been  bidden 
to  descend  from  her  throne  and  sit  in  the  dust ;  Jerusalem  is  commanded  to  arise 
from  the  dust  and  sit  on  her  throne.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A  call  to  exertion: — 
I.  The  considerations  w^hich  justify  this  appeal.     1.  It  is  obvious  that  the 

Sassage  assumes  the  possession  of  sufficient  strength  for  accomplishing  the  end 
esigned.  As  to  effectual  agency,  all  things  are  of  God.  With  respect  to  our  own 
province,  that  of  instrumental  action — our  strength  is  ample,  though  the  conversion 
of  the  world  be  the  object  of  it.  But  wherein  does  our  strength  for  the  reconciliation 
of  the  world  consist?  Strength,  in  all  cases,  is  the  possession  of  adapted  and 
aofficient  means.    Now  the  means  of  converting  a  sinner  is  the  truth  of  the  GospeL 


CHAP,  ul]  ISAIAH.  88 

Is  Divine  truth  adapted  and  sufficient  to  this  end  ?  To  this  point  inspired  testimony 
is  most  direct  and  express.  Matters  of  fact  bring  ns  to  the  same  point.  If  any 
attempt  should  be  made  to  evade  the  argument,  by  referring  to  the  necessity  of 
Divine  influence,  we  reply  that  Divine  influence  is  undoubtedly  necessary  to  give 
the  Gospel  success.  But  it  is  also  necessary  to  give  success  to  the  use  of  means  in 
every  other  case.  If  there  be  in  our  hands  adapted  and  sufficient  means  for  bringing 
about  the  universal  triumphs  of  the  Gospel,  there  is  manifest  justice  in  the  stirring 
appeal  by  which  we  are  roused  into  action.  "Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength, 
0  Zion  !  "  Persons  who  would  reply  to  such  a  call,  "  What  is  the  use  of  telling  me 
to  labour  ? — it  is  God  who  must  d!o  everything,"  would  merely  subject  themselves  to 
a  severe  reproof,  and  a  direct  charge  of  makmg  their  pretended  want  of  power  a 
pretext  for  their  love  of  sloth.  2.  The  text  assumes  the  existence  of  inadequate 
exertion.  It  is  appropriate  only  to  a  state  of  comparative  indolence  and  slimiber. 
The  language  calls  not  for  a  partial,  but  for  an  entire  employment  of  our  resources. 
"  Put  on  thy  strength."  The  meaning  cannot  be  less  than  this :  The  scenes  which 
are  in  prospect  will  require  your  utmost  efi^orts  ;  the  victory  will  be  quite  as  much 
as  you  will  be  able  to  win ;  put  into  requisition,  therefore,  all  your  powers,  and 
exert  your  whole  strength.  II.  The  topics  by  which  this  call  may  be  enforced. 
1,  Notice  the  interesting  character  of  the  object  to  be  attained.  The  end  con- 
templated in  the  text  was  personally  and  directly  interesting  to  the  parties  addressed. 
Zion  was  called  to  exert  herself  for  her  own  triumphs.  It  was  for  their  restoration 
to  the  land  of  their  fathers  that  the  slumbering  exiles  were  summoned  to  awake. 
We  also  should  remember  that  the  triumphs  of  Christianity  are  our  triumphs,  and 
the  increase  of  the  Church  is  our  enlargement.  Are  we  willing  that  the  ChiU"ch 
should  continue  to  be  small  and  despised,  or  do  we  reaUy  wish  to  see  her  arrayed  in 
celestial  beauty,  and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ?  The  interests  of  Zion  are  identified 
with  those  of  a  guilty  and  perishing  world.  The  advancement  of  Zion  is  identified 
with  the  glory  of  her  Lord.  2.  The  proximity  of  the  most  blessed  results.  Triumphs, 
and  even  our  ultimate  triumphs  are  at  hand.  The  prospect  of  success  is  one  of  the 
most  natural  stimulants  to  exertion.  3.  The  necessity  of  exertion  in  order  to  the 
expected  results.  4.  The  actual  suspension  of  the  issue  upon  our  obedience.  It 
suggests  the  animating  sentiment,  that  the  final  glories  of  the  Church  are  waiting 
for  her  awaking,  and  for  that  alone.  {J.  E.  Eivion,  M.A.)  The  Church's  duty 
towards  the  world : — In  verse  9,  of  the  former  chapter,  the  Church  prays  God  to 
interfere  on  her  behalf,  to  exert  His  omnipotent  arm.  In  the  seventeenth  verse  He 
calls  upon  the  Church  to  do  something  to  gain  this  object.  And  in  my  text,  which 
is  connected  with  that  exhortation,  He  repeats  it:  "Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy 
strength,  0  Zion,"  etc.  If  then,  we  would  have  the  arm  of  the  Lord  with  us  in  any- 
thing we  do  for  His  cause,  we  must  do  more  than  pray.  I.  The  spirit  which  God 
ENJOINS  His  Church  to  evince.  The  language  of  the  text  is  metaphorical,  and 
highly  poetical ;  but  it  inculcates  upon  us,  that  we  put  on — 1.  A  spirit  of  wakeful- 
ness. Wakefulness  is  opposed  to  indifference  and  sloth.  2.  A  spirit  of  aggression. 
"  Put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion."  For  what  purpose  ?  Certainly  to  oppose  her  foes  ; 
to  make  aggressions  on  the  territory  of  the  master  spirit  of  evil.  And  what  is  the 
Church's  "strength,"  which  she  is  to  put  on?  It  consists  in  a  large  measure  of 
Divine  influences.  The  Church's  "strength"  consists  in  spiritual  wisdom  and 
spiritual  courage.  The  "  strength  "  of  the  Church  consists  in  the  cheerful  assurance 
of  God's  love  to  us  individually — ^in  having  it  "shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us,"  "The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength." 
And  it  consists  in  daily  communion  with  God.  Come  with  me  back  to  Pentecostal 
days,  and  see  how  the  Church  acted  when  thus  equipped.  She  "put  on  her  strength," 
and  went  forth  in  a  spirit  of  aggression.  3.  A  spirit  of  piety.  "Put  on  thy 
beautiful  garments,  0  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city."  (1)  What  are  the  "beautiful 
garments  "  of  the  Church  ?  Let  the  prophet  expound  his  own  language  (chap.  Ixi. 
10).  These  they  are  to  "  put  on,"  as  on  marriage  days,  as  on  holy-days,  as  on  days 
of  rejoicing.  (2)  As  garments  are  for  dignity  and  beauty,  so  the  Church  is  only 
beautiful  when  thus  clothed.  They  are  for  defence  and  protection  also,  and  in  them 
as  in  a  movable  garrison  we  go  about,  resisting  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  ; 
and  these  guard  us  against  the  curses  of  God's  law,  and  all  the  evils  resulting  from 
our  misery  and  wretchedness.  They  distinguish  between  the  sexes,  and  denote  the 
station  ;  and  so  the  Church's  garments  distinguish  her  from  the  world.  (8)  The 
Church  "  puts  on  "  these  garments,  when  she  applies  to  Christ  by  faith  and  exhibits 
the  fruits  of  His  salvation  in  her  life  and  conduct.  Our  Lord  so  interprets  it :  "Thou 
hast  a  few  names  ereu  in  Sardis,  which  have  not  defiled  their  garmenta."    And  whea 


54  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  tcHAP.ui. 

holiness  and  faith  meet  in  the  character,  how  beautiful  is  it,  and  how  fit  for  action  ! 
II.  The  effects  which  will  necessaeilt  and  certainly  result  if  the  Church 
OBEYS  the  injunction  OF  HER  LoRD.  1.  The  Conversion  of  souk.  "  There  shall  no 
more  come  into  thee  the  uncircumcised  and  the  unclean  ;  "  metaphors  descriptive  of 
pollution  arising  from  an  unconverted  state.  Unregenerate  souls  shall  not  be  found 
within  her  borders.  This  has  been  the  result  everywhere.  2.  The  union  of  th3 
ministers  of  the  Gospel.  "Thy  watchmen  shaU  lift  up  the  voice ;  with  the  voice 
together  shaU  they  sing. "  3.  The  renovation  of  the  world  (ver.  10).  {J.  Sherman. ) 
The  Church's  strength : — Strength  is  that  which  resides  in  a  man,  but  is  not  exhi- 
bited save  in  so  far  as  it  is  exercised  and  produces  results.  His  garments,  on 
the  other  hand,  are  visible  to  those  who  look  at  him  ;  they  constitute  his  outward 
appearance.  So  that  this  text  refers  both  to  the  inward  powers  and  capabilities 
of  Christ's  Church,  and  to  the  visible  aspect  which  it  presents  to  the  world.  Zion 
has  strength.  The  Church  has  sufficient  means  ana  power  at  its  disposal  to 
effect  the  purposes  for  which  the  Lord  founded  it.  Those  purposes  are  various 
in  form,  but  perhaps  they  may  be  all  summed  up  in  the  phrase — to  impart  to 
men  the  knowledge  of  their  Saviour.      I.    Let  me  mention  one  or  two  things 

which  are  GOOD  AND  USEFUL  FOR  THEIR  PROPER  WORK,  BUT  OF  WHICH  IT 
CANNOT  BE  SAID  THAT    ZiON'S   STRENGTH    LIES    IN   THEM.      1.    The    recognition    of 

religion  by  the  State  and  its  establishment  by  law.  "We  find,  as  a  matter  of 
history,  that  in  many  cases  when  the  favour  of  the  governing  powers  has  been 
most  decided,  the  efficacy  of  the  Church  in  converting  sinners  and  spreading  the 
Gospel  has  been  feeble  and  languid  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  some  of  Zion's  most 
energetic  and  successful  efforts  have  been  made  without  any  support  at  all  from 
the  secular  authority,  and  even  in  spite  of  its  opposition.  2.  An  active  ministry. 
There  are  two  aspects  of  this  activity — by  activity  I  understand  diligence  in  preacn- 
ing,  in  visiting  the  sick,  in  holding  services,  and  so  on.  If  the  clergy  are  active 
because  the  people  are  zealous,  then  it  is  altogether  well :  it  is  a  mark  of  strength. 
But  if  the  clergy  are  active  because  no  one  else  is,  then  it  is  a  mark  of  weakness. 
S.  The  multiplication  of  religious  societies  and  other  machinery.  They  are  good, 
useful,  necessary  things.  But  they  are  too  often  made  the  excuse  for  serving  God  by 
proxy.  The  strength  of  the  Church  lies  in  the  zeal  for  Christ  of  its  individual 
members.  II.  "Put  on  the  garments  of  thy  dignity,"  continues  the  prophet,  "0 
Jerusalem,  the  Holy  City."    The  outward  appearance  of  the  Church  ought 

TO   BE  such  as   to    COMMAND    THE    ADMIRATION    EVEN    OF    THOSE    WHO  DO    NOT 

BELONG  TO  IT.  We  may  instance — 1.  The  garment  of  righteousness.  The  people  of 
God  ought  to  present  unmistakably  the  aspect  of  a  righteous  people.  2.  The 
garment  of  unity.  It  must  be  confessed  that  the  servants  of  God  do  not  present  to 
the  world  the  aspect  of  a  imited  people.  It  is  not  simply  difference  of  opinion  that 
separates  them  :  but  there  are  slanders,  mutual  recriminations,  misrepresentations 
of  motives  and  conduct,  suspicions,  jealousies,  party -spirit  in  all  its  hideous  forms, 
combining  to  rend  and  ruin  the  beautiful  garment  of  brotherhood  in  which  Jerusalem 
ought  to  be  clad.  3.  The  garment  of  worship.  The  Church  ought  to  appear  before 
all  men  as  a  city  wherein  the  Lord  is  worshipped,  where  He  receives  the  honour  due 
unto  His  name.  The  true  beauty  of  holiness  is  the  sincere  devotion  of  the  people, 
and  the  natural  result  of  such  devotion,  viz.  a  really  united  offering  of  prayer  and 
praise  ascending  to  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  {J.  C.  Btist,  M.A.)  Relapses  in 
the  history  of  the  Church  : — Only  two  or  three  centuries  after  the  death  of  the  last  of 
the  apostles,  history  informs  us.  Christians  were  scarcely  distinguishable  from  pagans. 
The  golden-tongued  and  spiritually-minded  Chrysostom  would  go  home  on  Simdavs 
from  his  pulpit  in  Antioch  in  Syria  only  to  weep  bitterly  over  the  indifference  of  the 
Church  and  its  defection  from  its  first  love.  One  has  only  to  glance  at  the  history  of 
the  Church  during  the  Middle  Ages  to  see  that,  through  all  those  dark  centuries,  the 
Church  was  about  as  dark  as  the  world,  and  but  little  less  corrupt.  The  common  people 
imiversally  were  forbidden  to  read  the  Bible,  and  would  not  have  been  able  to  read 
it  had  they  been  permitted  to  do  so.  Popes  and  cardinals,  archbishops  and  bishops 
and  aU  the  lower  orders  of  clergy  had  out  little  more  hesitancy  in  committing 
murder,  and  all  the  sins  in  the  decalogue,  than  they  had  in  attending  mass.  The 
Savonarolas  who  stood  up  here  and  there  and  preached  a  better  morality  and  a  purer 
Gospel  may  be  counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  And  the  Church  manifested 
its  gratitude  to  them  by  burning  them  at  the  stake.  {B.  V.  Foster,  D.D.)  The 
Ch^..  ch  temuAous  of  its  life  .-—The  Church,  by  reason  of  the  heavenly  element  in  it, 
i*  like  a  tree  of  the  forest — tenacious  of  its  life  ;  when  the  old  trunk  dies  a  fresh 
twig  spriiigi)  from  its  roots ;  aod  when  this  decays  another  fresh  twig  sfringa  op 


SHAP.  ui.]  ISAIAH.  55 

in  its  turn.  So  Lnther  and  his  collaborators,  by  the  ^race  of  God,  evoked  from 
the  dead  Church  of  the  Middle  Ages  a  fresh  and  vigorous  Protestantism.  So 
Wesley  and  his  co-workers  evoked  from  the  deadnesa  of  the  later  Anglicanism  a 
still  fresh  and  vigorous  Methodism.  The  Presbyterian  Church  of  John  Knox  also 
fflrew  old,  and  has  had  its  athletic  offshoots.  "  Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength, 
0  Zion  " — and  Zion  after  the  awakening  is  never  the  Zion  of  the  pre-awakenmg. 
{Ibid.)  Zion  3  awakening  : — Is  the  injunction  obsolete?  By  no  means.  And  the 
Church-catholic  to-day  is  in  the  act  of  obeying  it.  Let  us  notice  two  or  three 
significant  indications — 1.  Never  in  any  period  of  the  world's  history  has  the 
Bible  been  more  imiversally  and  intensely  studied  than  it  is  now.  And  the  study  of 
it  is  far,  very  far,  from  being  prevailingly  hostile.  2.  As  another  indication  of  this 
fact  I  quote  the  old  saying,  In  union  there  is  strength  ;  "  especially  is  it  true  when 
other  essential  elements  of  strength  are  not  wanting.  In  this  day  there  is  a  visible 
tendency  towards  union.  3.  Another  indication  is  the  rapid  progress  in  mission 
work.  {Ibid.)  Put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion.— Zion's  strength: — What  is  the 
strength  of  Zion  ?  The  strength  of  any  commimity  is  primarily  in  the  individuals 
who  constitute  it ;  so  that  the  strength  of  the  Church  of  God  is,  not  entirely,  but 
first  of  all,  in  the  separate  members  of  that  body.  The  strength  of  Zion  is  also  the 
power  of  every  religious  principle.  It  is  the  power  of  faith  and  hope  and  love  ;  the 
power  of  patience  and  perseverance  and  courage  and  meekness.  There  is  strength  in 
all  Hfe,  and  Zion  lives  with  the  rich  and  full  and  eternal  life  of  God  within  her. 
Knowledge  is  power,  and  the  Church  of  the  living  God  has  the  highest  kind  of 
knowledge.  A  settled  faith  is  power,  and  Zion  has  a  fixed  and  positive  belief. 
Confidence  and  trust  are  power,  and  the  Church  of  God  relies  upon  God.  Hope  is 
power,  and  the  hope  of  the  Church  is  as  an  anchor  sure  and  steadfast.  Love  is  power, 
and  godly  charity  never  faileth.  Patience,  perseverance  and  courage  are  powers, 
before  which  obstacles  yield  and  dangers  flee  away,  and  the  Church  of  God  is  trained 
to  be  patient  and  steadfast  and  brave.  The  strength  of  Zion  is  the  power  of  certain 
agencies  and  influences.  The  Church  has  power  in  her  testimony  to  truth,  in  her 
intercession  before  God,  and  in  her  character  as  the  leaven  of  society  and  the  salt  of 
the  nations.  Union  is  strength  where  alliance  is  wise  and  entire  ;  where  heart 
sympathizes  with  heart  and  hand  joins  in  hand.  We  proceed  to  state  reasons  why 
God  should  thus  speak  to  His  Church.  I.  God  bids  Zion  put  on  her  stkength 
FOR  SBLF-MANIFESTATION.  Not  for  sclf-magnification.  Self-magnification  is  dis- 
loyal, traitorous  and  impious  ;  self-manifestation  is  a  plain  duty  (Matt.  v.  16). 
The  Church  of  God  can  walk  and  work  and  endure  ;  then  why  appear  impotent 
and  helpless  ?  Strong  winds  make  themselves  heard.  Strong  sunshine  makes 
itself  felt.  Strong  life  shows  itself,  whether  in  the  animal  or  vegetable  kingdom. 
And  the  Church,  to  be  heard  and  seen  and  felt  and  known,  must  be  strong. 
II.  God  bids  Zion  put  on  her  strength  that  He  may  be  glorified.  A 
redeemed  man  is  a  new  creation  and  a  Divine  workmanship.  A  congregation  of 
believing  men,  and  the  whole  visible  Church,  are  of  God's  founding.  Ye  are 
God's  husbandly  ;  ye  are  God's  building.  Now  if  the  husbandry  appear  as  the 
field  of  the  slothfiu,  and  as  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  understanding ; 
if  it  be  all  grown  over  with  thorns,  and  nettles  cover  the  face  thereof,  and  tne 
stone  wall  thereof  be  [broken  down  ;  if  the  building  appear  to  be  defective  in 
foundation,  imperfect  in  construction,  and  framed  together  with  bad  material — the 
name  of  God,  instead  of  being  honoured,  wiU  be  blasphemed  (1  Peter  ii.  9,  10  ; 
Isa.  xliii.  21).  III.  GoD  requires  Zion  to  put  out  her  strength  for  thb 
sake  of  her  own  well-being.  If  the  powers  of  the  Church  be  inactive,  they 
win  decline.    The  staff  of  faith,  if  never  used,  will  decay,  etc.    IV.  Zion  is  required 

TO  PUT  ON  her  strength  IN  ORDER  TO  MEET  THE  CLAIMS  OF  A  SINFUL  AND 
SUFFERING  WORLD.  V.  GOD  DIRECTS  ZiON  TO  PUT  ON  HER  STRENGTH  BECAUSE 
STRENGTH  HAS  BEEN  GIVEN  HER  TO  PUT  ON.  VI.  Is  NOT  THIS  PUTTING  ON  OF  STRENGTH 
AS    ESSENTIAL    TO    ZION's    PEACE    AND    JOT    AS    TO    HER    OUTWARD    PROSPERITY  ? 

(S.  Martin. )  The  strength  of  Zion  is  the  strength  of  human  nature.  It  is  masculine 
energy,  feminine  susceptibility,  the  vivacity  of  childhood,  the  buoyancy  of  youth, 
and  the  force  of  maturity.  It  is  the  power  of  body,  soul  and  spirit.  It  is  intellectual 
power,  emotional  force,  and  moral  strength.  It  is  the  strength  of  regenerated 
humanity,  therefore  spiritual  and  religious  power  ;  the  strength  of  man  redeemed 
unto  God,  and  as  redeemed,  allied  to  God,  dwelt  in  by  God,  and  made  strong  by 
nnion  with  God.  The  strength  of  Zion  is  the  strength  of  all  that  redeemed  humanity 
is,  and  of  all  that  is  within  human  nature  when  regenerated  and  sanctified  by  the 
grace  of  Ood.    {Ibid.)    Strength  put  on  by  being  jmt  out: — If  s  man  pat  oat  his 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lii. 

strenetli,  he  puts  on  strength,  he  appears  clothed  with  strength  as  with  a  garment. 
Virgil  ftunishes  us  with  an  illustration  :  ^Eneas  visits  Drepanum  in  Sicily,  and  there 
by  various  games  celebrates  the  anniversary  of  his  father's  death.  The  combatants 
with  the  cestus  are  described.  Dares  first  shows  his  face  with  strength  prodigious, 
and  rears  himself  amid  loud  murmurs  from  the  spectators.  He  uplifts  his  lofty  head, 
presents  his  broad  shoulders,  brandishes  his  arms  and  beats  the  air  with  his  fists. 
And  Entellus  accepted  his  challenge,  flung  from  his  shoulders  his  vest,  bared  his 
huge  limbs,  his  big  bones  and  sinewy  arms,  and  stood  forth  of  mighty  frame  in  the 
middle  of  the  field.  Forthwith  each  on  his  tiptoes  stood  erect,  and  undaunted 
raised  his  arms  aloft  in  the  air.  Dares  and  Entellus,  as  they  put  out  strength,  put 
on  strength.  A  working-man  and  a  trained  athlete,  when  asleep  or  otherwise  in 
repose,  appear  clothed  with  weakness.  AU  the  muscles  are  relaxed,  and  the  limbs 
are  motionless  and  apparently  powerless,  as  the  parts  of  a  marble  statue.  But  when 
the  athlete  is  engaged  in  some  bodily  exercise,  or  the  working-man  is  handling  his 
tools  and  lifting  his  materials,  his  appearance  is  that  of  one  arrayed  with  power. 
As  he  puts  out  strength  he  puts  on  strength,  nor  can  he  put  it  out  without  putting 
it  on.  Adapting  the  expression  of  the  idea  to  common  utterance,  we  may  read  our 
text,  '*  Put  out  thy  strength,  0  Zion."  [Ibid.)  Injunctions  to  be  strong : — My  text 
harmonizes  with  words  frequently  addressed  to  Zion  and  to  her  sons  (1  Kings  ii. 
2  ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  10  ;  Isa.  xxxv.  4  ;  xl.  9,  31  ;  Haggai  ii.  4  ;  Zech.  viii.  9  13  ; 
1  Cor.  xvi.  13  ;  Eph.  vi.  10  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  1).  {Ibid.)  God's  call  to  be  strong : — It  ia 
interesting  to  observe  by  how  many  voices  God  speaks  as  in  our  text.  By  the  smarting 
of  the  conscience  when  the  strength  is  withheld,  and  by  the  glowing  of  the  con- 
science when  the  strength  is  consecrated  ;  by  the  breadth  of  love  which  God's  law 
requires,  and  by  the  depth  of  privilege  which  the  Gospel  provides  ;  by  the  correction 
administered  when  we  are  inactive  and  inert,  and  by  the  blessedness  experienced 
when  we  abound  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  God  is  continually  saying,  "  Put  on  thy 
strength,  0  Zion."  (Ibid.)  Some  elements  of  Church  strength : — 1.  Soundness  in  doctrine. 
2.  Purity  of  life  among  the  members  of  the  Church.  3.  Thoroughness  of  organization 
for  Church  work.  4.  Faithfulness  in  individual  effort  to  do  good.  5.  Regularity 
of  attendance  upon  the  services  of  the  Church.  6.  Pecuniary  liberality.  7.  Unity 
among  the  members.  8,  A  prayerful  spirit.  9.  An  abiding  faith  in  the  presence  of 
God  with  the  Church.  Where  these  are  to  be  found  the  Church  will  be  strong. 
(Z).  Winters.)  The  elements  of  the  Church's  strength: — I.  The  greatness  of  her  aims. 
Great  aims  enthused  great  souls,  and  the  Church  proposed  the  conquest  of  the  world 
for  Christ.  II.  The  matchless  power  of  Christian  truth,  which  may  be  illus- 
trated by  the  distinctively  Christian  doctrines  of  our  moral  ruin,  redemption  through 
a  Divine-human  Saviour,  the  possibility  of  a  regenerate  life,  and  the  blessedness  of  an 
immortal  hope.  III.  But  these  doctrines  needed  a  voice  ;  hence  another  element 
of  the  Church's  strength  is  A  witnessing  membership.  All  Christians  may  witness 
for  the  truth  by  the  testimony  of  the  lips,  and  also  by  the  silent  but  potent 
ministry  of  the  life.     IV.  Another  mighty  force  in  the  service  of  the  Church  is  A 

CO-OPERATIVE  PROVIDENCE.      V.  ThE  ENDOWMENT  OF  THE  HoLY  GhOST.     (Bp.  W.  X. 

Winde. )  The  supreme  point  of  energy : — Men  can  rouse  themselves  to  action.  We  can- 
not live  continuously  in  ecstasy  ;  we  must  live  under  ourselves,  so  to  speak,  or  life  will 
become  a  pain  and  a  failure.  We  are,  however,  to  have  periods  of  special  effort, 
hours  of  rapture,  times  of  inspiration  and  sense  of  mightiness  beyond  all  that  is 
ordinary.  There  is  more  power  in  man  than  he  may  be  aware  of,  and  he  should 
inquire  what  objects  and  pursuits  are  worthy  of  his  enthusiastic  devotion.  Drive  a 
horse  from  home,  and  in  the  course  of  the  day  he  will  show  weariness  which  you  may 
regard  as  a  sign  of  utter  exhaustion  ;  but  turn  his  head  homeward,  and  see  what  a 
change  takes  place  I  How  willingly  he  runs  !  How  swiftly  !  He  has  "put  on  his 
strength  "  !  Work  for  a  person  who  is  not  a  favourite,  and  the  hands  soon  tire : 
every  effort  is  a  weariness  to  the  flesh,  every  thought  wears  the  mind  ;  on  the  other 
hand,  serve  a  person  who  is  beloved,  etc.  Undertake  any  engagement  which  does 
not  excite  the  interest  of  the  heart,  and  how  soon  it  becomes  irksome.  The  mother 
waits  upon  her  sick  child,  and  wonders  how  she  can  endure  so  much.  The  mystery 
is  in  tlie  love.  We  are  strong  when  we  work  in  the  direction  of  our  will.  Where 
the  win  is  right,  the  strength  will  assert  itself.  The  question  is  not  one  of  muscle 
but  of  purpose.  What  objects,  then,  are  worthy  of  "all  our  strength,  all  our  mind, 
and  all  our  heart "  1    We  may  get  at  the  answer  negatively  as  well  as  positively.     I. 

No  OBJECT  WHICH   BEARS    UPON   THIS  WORLD   ONLY   IS  WORTHY  OF  THE    SUPllEMB 

ENERGY  OF  MAN.  Even  in  secular  affairs  we  work  by  laws  of  proportion  and  adapta- 
tion.   If  a  man  employed  a  steam-engine  to  draw  a  cork,  we  should  justly  accuse  hia 


CHAP.  LU.]  ISAIAH.  57 

of  wasting  power.  If  a  man  spent  his  days  and  nights  in  carving  cherry-stones,  we 
should  say  he  was  wasting  his  life.  "We  have  a  common  saying — "  the  game  is  not 
worth  the  candle  " — showing  that  in  common  afifairs  we  do  recognize  the  law  of  pro- 
portion, and  the  law  that  results  do  determine  the  value  of  processes.  If,  then,  in 
the  lower,  how  much  more  in  the  higher  !  Think  of  a  being  like  man  spending  his 
lifetime  in  writing  his  name  in  the  dust !  There  is  a  success  which  is  not  worth 
securing.  Suppose  a  man  should  get  all  the  money  he  can  possibly  accumulate  ;  aU 
the  fame  ;  all  the  luxury — what  does  it  amoimt  to  ?  II.  Spiritual  objects  are 
ALONE  WORTHY  OF  THE  SUPREME  ENERGY  OF  MAN.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thv 
God  with  all  thy  heart,"  etc.  1.  They  are  akin  to  his  own  nature.  2.  They  touch 
every  point  of  his  being.  3.  They  prepare  him  for  the  solemnity  and  service  of  the 
future.  'Boundless  are  the  prospects  of  the  spiritual  thinker  !  His  library,  the  uni- 
verse !  His  companions,  the  angels  !  His  Teacher,  God  !  In  view  of  such  prospects, 
how  time  dwindles,  and  how  earth  passes  as  a  wreath  of  smoke  !  The  spiritual  thinker 
is  independent  of  all  the  influences  which  make  up  the  small  world  of  the  materialist 
— his  citizenship  is  in  heaven.      III.  The  fact  that  spiritual  objects  alone 

ARE    worthy     of   THE   SUPREME    ENERGY    OF    MAN    SHOULD    IMPEL    TO    DECISIVB 

ACTION.  Put  on  thy  strength — 1.  For  the  time  is  short.  2.  For  the  enemy  is  on 
the  alert.  3.  For  the  Master  is  worthy.  The  text  addresses  a  call  to  the  Church. 
The  call  is  to  activity.  He  who  gives  the  call  will  give  the  grace.  The  Church  is 
not  to  be  feeble  and  tottering  ;  it  is  to  be  strong,  valiant,  heroic.  He  who  can  do 
without  the  help  of  the  strongest  is  graciously  pleased  to  accept  the  service  of  the 
meanest.  (J".  Parker,  D.D.)  Effort  gives  strength: — I,  Put  on  strength  BY 
WAKEFULNESS.  A  slumbering  life  results  in  moral  death.  II.  Put  on  strength 
BT  ACTIVITY.  Activity  imparts  physical  strength.  We  have  only  to  look  at  the 
compact  and  knotted  limip  of  muscle  on  the  blacksmith's  forearm.  The  rower's  cheat 
is  expanded  by  his  exertions.  The  practised  wrestler  grips  with  an  ironlike  grasp  the 
limbs  of  his  opponent.  Even  a  Samson  is  divested  of  his  prowess  by  lolling  in  the 
lap  of  a  Delilah.  We  put  on  intellectual  strength  by  keeping  the  brain  forces  con- 
stantly moving.  But  most  of  all  the  moral  and  spiritual  nature  is  strengthened  by 
exercise.  Great  is  the  power  of  habit.  It  is  a  kind  of  second  nature,  and  is  the 
grand  resultant  of  repeated  acts.  III.  Put  on  strength  by  development.  Art 
thou  but  a  bruised  reed,  ^ut  on  thy  strength  1  Hast  thou  but  one  talent,  put  it  out 
to  usury.  Moral  and  spiritual  strength  may  be  developed  to  the  latest  hour  of  a 
Methuselah's  life,  and  eternity  wiU  be  but  an  ampler  sphere  for  the  enlargement  of 
the  soul's  vast  powers.  I V .  Pur  on  strength  by  joyfulness.  Joy  begets 
strength,  and  strength  increases  joy.  V.  Put  on  strength  by  hopefulness.  The 
despairing  are  weak  ;  but  the  hopeful  are  strong.  I  will  endeavour,  is  the  insjjiring 
language  of  the  hopeful.  The  Church  may  well  be  hopeful,  for  God's  promise  is 
given  for  her  encouragement.  VI.  Put  on  strength  by  united  prayer.  The 
Church's  prosperous  times  are  the  praying  times.  The  praying  man  is  the  strong 
man.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Strength  increased  by  use: — A  lady  was  watching  a 
potter  at  his  work,  whose  one  foot  was  kept  with  "never-slackening  speed  turning 
his  swift  wheel  round,"  while  the  other  rested  patiently  on  the  ground.  When  the 
lady  said  to  him,  in  a  sympathizing  tone,  "How  tired  your  foot  must  be  !  "  the  man 
raised  his  eyes  and  said,  "No,  ma'am  ;  it  isn't  the  foot  that  works  that's  tired  ;  it's 
the  foot  that  stands.  That's  it."  If  you  want  to  keep  your  strength,  use  it ;  if  you 
want  to  get  tired,  do  nothing.  {Christian  Budget.)  The  danger  of  inaction: — ^A 
magnet  is  sometimes  seen  in  a  chemist's  laboratory,  suspended  against  a  wall,  and 
loaded  heavily  with  weights.  We  ask  the  reason,  and  the  scientist  replies,  "The 
magnet  was  losing  power,  because  it  had  not  been  used  for  some  time.  I  am  restoring 
its  force  by  giving  it  something  to  do."    {Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 

Ver.  2.  Shake  thyself  from  the  dust. — Sin  as  dust : — It  is  very  often  what  we  call 
little  sins  which  mar  the  beauty  of  the  Church.  They  are  like  dust.  Dust  comes 
imperceptibly,  it  settles  down  so  silently,  that  not  an  insect  hears  it  fall ;  it  is 
caused  by  our  ordinary  avocations  and  not  by  exceptional  events  ;  and  if  neglected 
long,  becomes  thicker  and  thicker,  till  all  that  is  fair  and  beautiful  is  lost.  "  Shake 
thyself  from  the  dust,"  etc.  {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)  "  Ariae,  and  sit  down,  0  Jeru- 
salem " : — Bather,  Arise,  sit  up,  0  Jerusalem.  When  Vespasian  had  subdued  Judtea, 
money  was  stamped  with  a  woman  sitting  in  the  dust,  with  this  inscription,  "  Judsa 
■ubacta."    {J.  Trapp.) 

Yer.  8.  7or  thni  saitli  the  lord,  Te  hav*  sold  yoorselvei  for  nought. — Sold  for 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lii, 

nought;  redeemed  without  price : — "Ye  have  sold  yourselves  for  nought."  You  got 
nothing  by  it,  nor  did  I.  God  considers  that  when  they  by  sin  had  sold  themselves, 
He  Himself,  who  had  the  prior,  nay,  the  sole  title  to  them,  did  not  increase  His 
wealth  by  the  price  (Ps.  xliv.  12).  They  did  not  so  much  as  pay  their  debts  to  Him 
with  it.  The  Babylonians  gave  Him  no  thanks  for  them,  but  rather  reproached  and 
blasphemed  His  name  upon  that  account ;  and  therefore  thev,  having  so  long  had 
you  for  nothing,  shall  at  last  restore  you  for  nothing  ;  you  shaU  be  redeemed  without 

frice,  as  was  promised  (chap.  xlv.  13).  {M.  Henry.)  Selling  oneself  for  nought: — 
t  appears  to  have  been  no  unusual  thing  amongst  the  ancient  Jews  for  a  man  who 
was  sunk  in  debt  and  difficulties,  and  reduced  to  the  extreme  of  poverty,  to  sell 
himself,  or  to  be  sold  by  his  creditors,  as  a  bondsman  for  a  certain  term  of  years. 
There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  this  circumstance  in  the  text  before  us.  In  its 
strict  and  primary  sense  it  relates  peculiarly  to  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  who  by  a 
long  course  of  wicked  and  rebellious  conduct  had  sold  themselves,  as  it  were,  into 
the  hands  of  their  enemies  ;  that  is  to  say,  their  wickedness  had  been  the  immediate 
cause  of  their  being  delivered  up  by  God  into  the  hands  of  the  Babylonians,  who  had 
reduced  them  into  abject  slavery.  And  they  are  said  to  have  sold  themselves  "for 
nought,"  inasmuch  as  there  was  nothing  in  the  fruits  and  consequences  of  their  sin 
to  compensate  for  the  miserable  state  into  which  it  had  reduced  them.  (A.  Roberta, 
M.A.)  Redeemed  without  money: — Did  the  Lord  perform  His  word?  Yes;  for, 
after  they  had  remained  in  their  bondage  during  the  time  God  had  appointed  it  to 
last.  He  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  a  heathen  king,  to  set  them  free.  And  on 
what  terms !  Captive  exiles  commonly  pay  dear  for  their  deliverance.  But  what 
sum  did  Cyrus  ask  when  he  gave  the  Jews  their  liberty  ?  Nothing  whatsoever.  He 
literally  sent  them  home  without  the  smallest  recompense ;  without  requiring  or 
expecting  anything  at  their  hands.  ' '  They  were  redeemed  without  money. "  {Ihid. ) 
Accusation  and  promise: — A  redemption,  far  more  precious  than  the  temporal 
redemption  of  Israel  from  their  Babylonish  bondage,  is  to  be  considered  as  here 
hinted  at.  I.  The  awful  accusation.  It  is  twofold,  1.  That  we  have  sold 
ourselves.  The  figure  here  employed  is  used  in  other  passages  of  Scripture,  to 
express  the  conduct  of  the  sinner  in  abandoning  himself  to  Satan's  service.  Thus 
of  Ahab  it  is  said,  "  he  did  sell  himself  to  work  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  ;"  and  of  the  people  whom  he  governed,  "  they  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord  to  provoke  Him  to  anger."  St.  Paul  adopts  a  similar 
expression  in  reference  to  himself,  "The  law  is  spiritual,  but  I  am  carnal,  sold 
under  sin."  In  all  these  places  the  idea  under  which  the  conduct  of  sinners  is 
described  is  that  of  a  man  selling  himself  for  a  slave.  And  under  this  guilt  we  are 
every  one  of  us  included.  2.  That  we  have  sold  ourselves  "  for  nought."  (1)  Look 
at  the  inducements  of  our  sins — at  the  motives  which  led  us  to  commit  them.  0 
how  lightly  and  how  cheaply  have  we  yielded  ourselves  up  to  Satan's  service  !  He 
has  not  needed,  as  in  our  Lord's  case,  to  promise  all  "the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
and  the  glory  of  them  ; "  he  has  not  needed  to  tempt  us  with  large  offers  or  golden 
baits.  (2)  Look  again  to  the  consequences  of  our  sins.  There  have  been  many 
times,  no  doubt,  when  we  have  committed  sin  in  expectation  of  some  great 
advantage  to  be  gained  by  it.  But  what  has  been  the  price  ?  Bitter  disappoint- 
ment, pain,  grief,  anguish,  and  in  the  end,  everlasting  death.  Such  have  been  the 
only  fruits  which  men  have  ever  gathered  from  their  sins.  II.  The  most  gracious 
PROMISE  OR  PROPOSAL.  "Ye  shall  be  redeemed,"  etc,  "As  freely  as  you  have 
given  yoiu-selves  up  to  ruin,  so  freely  am  I  ready  to  deliver  you  from  that  ruin. " 
Considered  in  this  light,  in  what  a  striking  manner  does  my  text  present  to  us  the 
riches  of  God's  grace  towards  a  ruined  world!  But  to  comprehend  this  matter 
more  distinctly,  look  at  the  Cross  of  Jesus!  {Ihid.)  Self -selling : — The  whole 
world  is  an  emporium  ;  buying  and  selling  are  going  on  everywhere.  The  text 
refers  to  the  sale  of  self.  I,  It  is  the  most  common  sale  in  the  emporium  of  the 
world.  What  do  I  mean  by  self?  Not  the  body,  not  the  mere  bundle  of 
intellectual  faculties,  but  the  conscience,  the  moral  ego,  the  "inner  man,"  that 
which  works  the  faculties  and  which  will  live  when  the  body  is  dust.  Now,  men 
are  selling  this  manhood  for  a  variety  of  things,  1.  For  pleasure.  The  voluptuary 
and  the  debauchee  have  sold  it,  and  it  is  gone  far  into  the  mud  of  sensuality.  2. 
For  wealth.  "The  worldling  has  sold  it,  and  it  is  gone  into  the  miserly  grub.  S. 
For  fame.  The  aspirant  for  worldly  honours  and  distinctions  has  sold  it,  and  it  is 
lost  in  the  rolling  current  of  fashion.  II,  It  is  the  most  foolish  sale  in  the 
emporium  of  the  world.  "Sold  yourselves  for  nought."  The  man  who  has  sold  it 
for  pleasure,  what  has  he  goti     "Nought."    WaaX  u  Mnsoal  pleasure  but  th« 


CHAP,  ui.]  ISAIAH.  W 

pleasure  of  ammals  at  best?  and  this  wears  out  as  animal  life  decays.  "Desire 
faileth."  The  man  who  has  sold  it  for  wealth,  what  has  he  gott  That  which  will 
soon  "  take  wings  and  fly  away."  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  1 "  etc.  The  man 
who  has  sold  it  for  fame,  what  has  he  got  1  That  which,  if  aromatic  to-day,  may 
be  a  stench  to-morrow,  and  never  at  any  time  self-satisfying.  Charles  Lamb  had 
fame,  and  what  did  he  say?  "  I  walk  up  and  down,  thinking  I  am  happy,  but 
knowing  I  am  not. "  III.  It  is  the  most  unrighteotjs  sale  in  the  emporium  of  the 
world.  No  man  has  a  right  to  sell  his  soul.  "AU  souls  are  Mine,"  saith  God. 
Reason  says  you  have  no  right  to  sell  your  soul ;  you  are  not  self-produced  nor  self- 
sustained.  Conscience  says  you  have  no  right  to  sell  your  soul ;  as  you  barter  it 
away,  it  groans  damnation  at  you.  God  made  the  soul  to  investigate  His  works, 
adore  His  character  and  serve  His  will.  {Homilist.)  Man  unregenerate  and 
regenerate: — I.  What  is  the  condition  of  mankind  when  unregenerate? 
In  a  state  of  sin,  the  text  hath  represented  us  as  selling  ourselves  for  nought ; 
where  each  word  is  emphatical,  and  carries  a  peculiar  sting  in  it.  1.  We  take 
upon  us  to  drive  a  bargain  where  we  have  no  propriety  in  what  we  expose  to  sale. 
What  the  prophet  here  charges  us  with  exposing  to  sale  is  ourselves ;  and  this,  in 
other  words,  implies  our  souls,  with  all  the  interest  which  they  have  elsewhere 
depending  upon  our  behaviour.  Now  in  these  our  propriety  is  strictly  and  truly 
derivative  and  borrowed  ;  it  was  God  who  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves  ;  and  every 
faculty  and  every  power  wherewith  He  hath  entrasted  us  are  employed  injuriously 
whenever  they  run  counter  to  His  will  and  pleasure.  2.  Let  us  consider  what  we 
are  doing  when  we  are  selling  ourselves.  Our  souls  which  were  made  to  be  immortal 
are  the  things  we  are  bartering  in  this  foolish  bargain.  And  when  once  we  have 
parted  with  them,  what  would  we  not  give  in  exchange  for  them,  to  have  them 
again,  and  save  them  ?  3.  The  folly  is  yet  farther  aggravated  by  the  consideration 
whereupon  we  are  induced  to  this  wretched  bargain.  For  the  text  hath  charged  us 
with  "selling  ourselves  for  nought."  II.  What  when  regenerate?  What 
Christ  hath  done  for  us  in  the  affair  of  our  redemption,  by  cancelling  the  hand- 
writing which  lay  against  us,  was  on  His  part  free  grace  and  bounty.  Our 
redemption  being  conditional,  proceed  we  to  consider  the  terms  whereunto  it  is 
limited.  1.  Eepentance  from  dead  works.  2.  Faith.  3.  A  sincere  obedience  will 
naturally  follow.  {N'.  Marshall,  D.D.)  The  sinner's  ruin  and  recovery: — I.  The 
solemn  statement.  II.  A  JOYFUL  PROMISE.  "And  ye  shall  be  redeemed  without 
money."  1.  This  redemption  could  not  be  effected  by  human  means.  2.  Nor  is 
this  redemption  provided  by  the  law  which  the  sinner  has  transgressed.  8.  It  must 
be  effected  in  a  way  that  will  secure  the  honour  of  the  Divine  law,  as  well  as  the 
salvation  of  the  sinner.  There  is  redemption  by  price,  and  redemption  by  power, 
and  each  is  suited  to  our  state.  4.  The  redemption  of  man  was  effected  by  Christ 
at  a  great  price.  "Ye  shall  be  redeemed  without  money."  As  the  misery  to  which 
the  sinner  was  exposed  was  infinite,  so  his  deliverance  required  infinite  means.  5. 
The  effect  of  these  sufferings  is  our  redemption  from  captivity,  and  deliverance  from 
the  curse  of  the  law.  By  faith,  therefore,  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Saviour  deliverance  is 
to  be  obtained.  [Helps  for  the  Pulpit.)  Ye  shall  be  redeemed  without  money. — 
The  cheapness  of  moral  redemption: — Redemptions,  social,  commercial,  and  political, 
are  generally  very  costly  things.  Millions  of  lives  have  been  sacrificed,  and  untold 
treasures  of  gold  expended  in  order  to  redeem  from  temporal  bondage.  But  true 
moral  redemption — the  redemption  of  the  soul  from  error  to  truth,  from  selfishness 
to  benevolence,  from  the  devQ  to  God — is  cheap.  "  Without  money. "  I.  The 
MEANS  OF  MORAL  REDEMPTION  COST  NOTHING.  1.  You  have  Christ  for  nothing. 
He  1  as  given  Himself.  2.  You  have  the  Bible  for  nothing.  3.  You  have  the 
Spirit  for  nothing.  No  man  can  excuse  himself  for  his  moral  bondage  on  the 
ground  that  he  is  too  poor  to  obtain  the  means  of  redemption.  II.  The  labottr 
INVOLVES  NO  SACRIFICE.  Every  moral  bondsman  must  labour  if  he  would  be  free, 
there  is  no  moral  emancipation  irrespective  of  individual  effort.  Each  captive  must 
strike  some  hearty  strokes  ere  his  chains  can  be  broken.  But  in  this  work  there  is 
no  effort  involving  secular  sacrifice.  It  need  not  prevent  a  man  pursuing  his 
ordinary  avocations.  He  can  be  working  out  his  freedom  as  well,  if  not  better, 
when  cultivating  his  farm,  plying  his  handicraft,  pursuing  his  merchandise,  as 
alone  in  his  chamber  on  his  knees.  III.  The  struggles  conduce  to  temporal 
PROSPERITY  (Matt.  vi.  33  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  8).     {Homilitt.) 

Yer.    5.    My  name  continually  every  day  is  blasphemed. — Ood  pitiful,  yet 
indignaTii : — 1.  The  captives  are  so  dispirited  that  they  cannot  praise  Him ;  but, 


flO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOS.  [chap.  in. 

instead  of  that,  they  are  continually  howling,  which  grieves  Him,  and  moves  His 
pity.  2.  The  natives  are  so  insolent  that  they  will  not  praise  Him  ;  but,  instead  of 
that,  they  are  continually  blaspheming,  which  afiFronts  Him  and  moves  His  anger. 
(if.  Henry.)  Blasphemy: — I.  Its  nature.  II.  Its  guilt.  III.  Its  awful 
PREVALENCE.  IV.  Its  CERTAIN  PUNISHMENT.  (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Blaspheming 
God's  nnine  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  name  of  the  Lord  1  His  perfections, 
titles,  etc.  II.  The  various  ways  in  which  it  is  blasphemed.  1.  By  denying 
His  existence  (Ps.  x.  4  ;  xiv.  1  ;  liii.  1).  2.  By  denying  His  sovereignty  (Job  xxu 
14,  15  ;  Ex.  V.  2).  3.  By  denying  His  truth  (Gen.  iii.  4  ;  Isa.  xxxvi.  15  ;  2  Pet. 
iii.  3,  4).  4.  By  denying  His  power  (2  Kings  vii.  2  ;  xviii.  30,  32-35  ;  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  19,  20).  5.  By  denying  His  omnipotence  and  omniscience  (Job  xxii.  13, 
14  ;  Ps.  X.  11  ;  Ixxiii.  11  ;  xciv.  7  ;  Isa.  xxix.  15  ;  Ezek.  viii.  12).  6.  By  accusing 
Him  of  injustice  (Jer.  xii.  1  ;  Ezek.  xviii.  25  ;  xxxiii.  17  ;  Mal.  ii.  17  ;  iii.  15).  7. 
By  murmuring  against  His  cfespensations  (Isa.  xlv.  9  ;  Exod.  xiv.  11,  12).  8.  By 
false  swearing,  oaths  and  curses,  etc.  III.  The  excuses  usually  made  for  it. 
Ignorance,  custom,  example,  surprise,  passion,  confirmation  of  what  is  said,  mean- 
ing no  harm,  inconsistencies  of  professors,  etc.  (2  Sam.  xii,  14  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  20  ; 
Rom.  ii.  24 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  2).  IV.  The  evil  consequences  of  it.  Destroys  the 
little  remains  of  the  fear  of  God.  Leads  to  the  disobedience  of  all  His  commands. 
Sets  a  horrid  example  to  others,  especially  to  the  young.  V.  The  powerful  argu- 
ments against  it.  The  Lord  is  our  glorious  and  lawful  Sovereign,  who  sees  and 
hears  all  things.  He  is  a  holy  and  jealous  God,  before  whose  bar  we  must  appear. 
He  is  fully  able  to  punish,  and  has  assm-ed  us  that  He  will  (2  Kings  xix.  22,  28  ; 
Isa.  xxxvii.  23,  36-38  ;  Ezek.  xx.  27,  33  ;  xxxv.  12-14).     {A.  Tucker.) 

Vet.  7.  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains. — Messengers  of  redemption : — Messen- 
gers coming  over  the  mountains  announce  to  Jerusalem  the  people's  redemption  from 
Babylon,  and  the  advent  of  Jehovah's  eternal  kingdom.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
BeautifuZ  feet : — The  exclamation  does  not  refer  to  the  pretty  sound  of  their  foot- 
steps, but  their  feet  are  as  if  they  were  winged,  because  it  is  a  joyful  message  which 
they  bring.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  of  the  swift-footed  messengers  is  the 
Gospel  of  the  kingdom  of  God  which  is  at  hand.  {Ibid. )  Good  tidings  of  good  : — I. 
The  primary  meaning.  The  passage  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  sending  forth  the 
heralds  of  the  conquering  Persian  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  Jews  that  groaned  under 
captivity  in  Babylon  (Ezra  i.  2,  3.)  In  order  fully  to  understand  the  joy  and  glad- 
ness which  such  a  proclamation  as  this  must  necessarily  bring  to  the  poor  Jew 
mourning  in  captivity,  we  must  have  some  conception  of  their  condition,  and  the 
feelings  that  swelled  in  their  hearts  during  that  period  of  degradation  and  suffering. 
Of  this,  some  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  which  speak 
the  language  of  the  believing  Israelite,  mourning  over  the  fall  of  Zion  ;  and  again, 
in  Ps.  cxxxvii.  we  find  the  captive  Jews  describing  their  bitter  sorrows.  Even  as 
the  prophet  Isaiah  foretold,  this  deliverance  came  to  the  people  of  God,  great  and 
sudden  ;  but  God  had  promised,  and  He  surely  brought  it  to  pass.  In  vain  the 
might  and  power  of  Babylon  interposed  ;  the  dominion  and  empire  of  Babylon  fell 
for  ever,  even  in  one  hour,  because  the  day  for  the  redemption  of  Israel  was  folly 
come.  II.  This  passage  has  A  secondary  fulfilment  far  more  glorious  and 
extensive,  in  the  sending  forth  those  who  shall  preach  good  tidings  of  salvation  to 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  and  the  message  thus  conveyed  has  an  analogy  with  that 
proclaimed  by  the  heralds  of  Cyrus  ;  for  it  bears  to  man — fallen  and  degraded,  the 
captive  of  sin,  fast  bound  in  slavish  chains — the  tidings  of  deliverance.  The  blowing 
of  the  trumpet  of  the  Gospel  tells  of  restoration  to  the  forfeited  inheritance.  It 
proclaims  a  full  and  yet  the  only  mode  of  deliverance  to  enslaved  man  ;  the  only 
mode  of  reconciliation  with  an  offended  God.  The  state,  then,  of  the  multitude  of 
the  heathen  should  excite  our  earnest  attention,  and  rouse  our  warmest  sympathies. 
III.  The  mode  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  appoint  for  making  thb 
JOYFUL  sound  known  TO  MAN.  The  preaching  of  the  Word  of  God  by  his  fellow- 
man.  The  message  must  be  received  by  faith.  IV.  The  character  of  the 
PREACHER  SHOULD  CORRESPOND  WITH  HIS  MESSAGE,  that  he  should  show  forth  in 
his  life  and  conversation,  that  the  glorious  tidinc;s  he  was  commissioned  to  convey 
to  others  had  been  received  by  himself.  Pray  that  the  feet  of  the  missionaries  in 
foreign  lands  may  be  beautiful  in  holiness  and  love.  V.  The  authority  on  which 
THIS  proclamation  IS  MADE.  It  was  the  conqueror  of  Babylon,  the  victorious 
Persian,  that  gave  liberty  to  the  captive  Jew  ;  it  is  the  Conqueror  of  death  anfl  lioll, 
the  risen  and  triumphant  Saviour,  who  gave  commandment  that  the  Gospel  siiould 


CHAP.  Lii.]  ISAIAH,  61 

be  proclaimed  to  all  people.  (C.  Caulfield,  M.A.)  The  cuimunciation  of  peace: — 
1.  The  tidings  of  the  deliverance  from  Babylon  were  joyful.  But  the  prophet  sees 
more  joyfol  tidings  than  these,  and  Ja  jnightier  deliverance  from  a  more  terrible 
bondage  than  even  that  of  Babylon.  "  2.  It  is  not  said,  "  How  lovely  are  the 
messengers  !"  but  "How  beautiful  are  their -feet  I "  Not  what  they  are  in  them- 
selves, but  what  they  bring,  as  sent  from  God,  and  running  in  obedience  to  Him,  is 
here  presented  to  the  view.  3.  Observe  how  the  message  is  dwelt  upon  !  as  if  it  was 
so  fuU  of  everything  joyM  and  good  that  words  fail  to  express  it.  It  is  "good 
tidings,"  "peace,"  "good  tidings  of  good,"  "salvation."  What  a  mine  is  there 
here  for  him  who  has  eyes  to  see,  a  mind  to  understand,  a  soul  to  love,  and  a  heart 
to  overflow  with  gratitude !  4.  Observe  how  the  message  ends.  It  is  a  glorious 
note  of  jubilee.  It  is  a  veritable  shout  of  joy.  It  is  a  summing  up  in  very  deed  of 
the  glorious  news.  It  is  a  pledge  of  peace  and  of  salvation  with  which  the  good 
news  is  concluded:  "Thy  God  reigneth."  {R.  W.  Close,  M.A.)  The  peace  ^the 
Gospel : — 1.  The  rich  blessing,  to  which  the  text  refers  in  such  emphatic  language, 
is  conveyed  in  that  single,  but  comprehensive  word,  "Peace."  2.  To  whom,  then, 
is  the  Word  of  this  salvation  sent  ?  To  whom  is  the  minister  of  the  Gospel  com- 
missioned to  preach  the  message  of  peace  ?  The  very  mission  implies  the  existence 
of  previous  enmity.  With  whom  has  God  this  controversy  ?  Who  stand  in  need 
of  so  free  an  amnesty  ?  Where  are  the  objects  of  His  immerited  grace  ?  3.  Whose 
heart  should  not  bum  within  him  at  the  thoughts  of  his  privilege  in  being  employed 
on  such  a  ministration  of  love  ?  4.  Let  me  add  one  word  on  the  responsibility  of 
those  to  whom  the  message  of  reconciliation  is  sent.  (C.  R.  Sumner,  D.D.) 
Advent: — I.  The  state  implied  in  the  words  before  us  is  to  be  collected  from  the 
view  of  iheir  primary  meaning.  They  originally  refer  to  the  Jews  captive  in 
Babylon,  banished  from  their  country,  and  deprived  of  the  ordinances  of  Divine 
worship,  under  the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty,  and  oppressed  by  a  haughty  and 
idolatrous  enemy.  But  this  is  only  a  faint  emblem  of  that  spiritual  captivity  in 
which  mankind  are  naturally  involved,  and  from  which  the  Son  of  God  came  to 
deliver  us.  II.  In  what  manner  is  this  gbacious  dispensation  described? 
As  the  proclamation  of  good  tidings,  as  the  message  of  reconciliation  and  peace,  as 
the  publication  of  deliverance  and  salvation.  III.  We  are  now,  in  some  measure, 
prepared  to  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  exclamation  and  to  participate  in  the  joyful 
reception  of  the  message  which  it  announces.  Practical  remarks :  1.  The  true  nature 
of  the  Gospel.  It  is  not,  as  some  would  represent  it,  a  mere  system  of  morality.  It 
comprises  this,  but  infinitely  more.  It  contains,  first  and  principally,  the  ofifer  of 
pardon  to  the  guilty,  of  deliverance  to  the  oppressed,  of  salvation  to  the  lost.  2.  If 
such,  however,  be  the  nature  of  the  Gospel,  how  highly  should  we  value  it,  and  how 
anxious  should  we  be  to  profit  by  it !  3.  While  we  rejoice  in  the  good  tidings  which 
have  been  proclaimed  to  ourselves,  let  us  pray  that  the  multitudes  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  to  whom  they  have  not  yet  been  announced,  may  speedily  hear  the  same 
delightful  sound;  and  may  exult  in  the  joyful  message  of  the  Gospel,  until  "all 
flesh"  shall  at  length  "see  the  salvation  of  God,"  and  "the  whole  earth  be  filled 
with  His  glory  !  "  {Hugh  Pearson,  D.D.)  The  best  news : — When  bad  news  is  abroad, 
this  is  good  news  ;  and  when  good  news  is  abroad,  this  is  the  best  news  :  that  Zion's 
God  reigns,  (if.  Henry. )  The  joy  of  the  Christian  ministry : — I.  The  minister  op 
Christ  is  held  in  commitnion  with  the  greatest  realities  in  the  universe. 
The  Hebrew  prophets  were  strenuous  men,  living  in  the  coils  of  battle,  wrestling  with 
great  serpents,  struggling  up  bare  cliff's,  and  giving  their  lives  for  the  ransom  of  the 
people  ;  but  we  cannot  doubt  that  they  were  happy  men  as  well,  because  of  the 
intellectual  and  spiritual  glories  in  which  their  lives  were  set,  and  their  cheering  and 
inspiring  comradeship  witn  the  wonderftd  words  of  God.  The  "  Hymn  to  the  Sun  " 
and  the  "  Sermon  to  the  Birds  "  of  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  bear  witness  to  a  soid  that  was 
enriched,  ennobled,  purified,  simplified,  magnified,  and  made  to  ripple  with  gladness 
and  to  sing  the  songs  of  victory  and  peace  because  of  perpetual  communion  with  the 
high  and  holy  thoughts  of  its  heavenly  Father.  The  artist  whose  soul  is  seeing  visions 
of  the  great  creations  of  Raphael  and  Angelo,  the  general  on  the  eve  of  a  campaign 
for  the  emancipation  of  a  people,  the  philanthropist  pouring  out  his  tears  upon  the 
miseries  and  sins  of  the  world,  will  sleep  on  planks  and  find  them  soft  as  down,  will 
eat  coarse  food  and  get  good  blood  out  of  it,  and  so  far  forget  themselves  in  their 
sublime  consecrations  and  so  populate  with  their  holiest  passions  the  thought- world 
and  spirit- world  within  them  as  to  realize  Hawthorne's  parable  of  "the  Great  Stone 
Face,"  and  grow  into  the  image  of  the  mountain  on  which  their  ^e  is  fixed.  So 
it  is  with  the  preacher,  and  mors  so.    He  is  smroonded  by  an  imperial  goard  of 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS.  [chap.  lh. 

holiest  inspirations.  II.  The  Cheistian  ministry  is  bound  to  win.  III.  Thb 
Chbistian  ministbt  has  the  bulk  of  good  men  in  the  world  behind  it, 
CHEERING  it  ON.  {W.  J.  McKiUrick,  D.D.)  The  missionary  theme  : — Dr.  Judson 
when  at  home  on  a  visit,  addressed  a  large  meeting,  his  theme  being  "The 
Preciousness  of  Christ,"  and  sat  down,  deeply  afifected.  On  his  way  home  a  friend 
said  to  him,  "The  people  are  much  disappointed  ;  they  wonder  you  did  not  talk  of 
something  else."  "Why,  what  did  thejr  want?"  said  the  missionary.  "I  pre- 
sented to  the  best  of  my  ability  the  most  interesting  subject  in  the  world."  "  But," 
said  the  man,  "they  nave  heard  that  before  ;  they  wanted  something  new  from  s 
man  who  has  just  come  from  the  antipodes."  "Then,"  said  the  great  man, 
kindling,  "  I  am  glad  to  have  it  to  say  that  a  man  from  the  antipodes  had  nothing 
better  to  teU  them  than  the  wondrous  stoiy  of  the  dying  love  of  Ohxist."  (^Tht 
Wellspring.) 

Vers.  8-12.  Thy  watohmen  shall  lift  up  tha  Toioa. — The  return  from  exQe  : — 
From  the  glowing  periods  of  this  paragraph  we  can  reconstruct  the  picture  of  the 
return  from  exile,  as  it  presented  itself  to  the  seer.  It  was  notably  the  return  of  the 
Lord  to  Zion  (ver.  8,  R.v.).  The  stately  procession  moves  slowly  and  fearlessly.  It 
is  not  the  escape  of  a  band  of  fugitive  slaves,  dreading  pursuit  and  recapture  :  "Ye 
shall  not  go  out  in  haste,  neither  shall  ye  go  by  flight."  Before  it  speed  the 
messengers,  appearing  on  the  sky-line  of  the  mountains  of  Zion,  with  good  tidings  of 
good,  publishing  peace,  and  publishing  salvation.  The  main  body  is  composed  of 
white-robed  priests,  bearing  with  reverent  care  the  holy  vessels,  which  Nebuchad- 
nezzar carried  from  the  temple,  which  Belshazzar  introduced  with  mockery  into  his  feast, 
but  which  Cyrus  restored.  Their  number  and  weight  are  carefully  specified,  5, 400  in  all 
(Ezra  i.  7-11).  As  the  procession  emerges  from  its  four  months  of  wilderness  march 
on  the  mountains  which  were  about  Jerusalem,  her  watchmen,  who  had  long  waited 
for  the  happy  moment,  lift  up  their  voice ;  with  the  voice  together  do  they  sing. 
They  see  eye  to  eye.  And  the  waste  places  of  Jerusalem,  with  their  charred  wood 
and  scorched  stones,  break  forth  into  joy  and  sing  together.  The  valleys  and  hills 
become  vocal,  constituting  an  orchestra  of  praise ;  and  the  nations  of  the  world  are 
depicted  as  coming  to  behold,  and  acknowledge  that  the  Lord  had  made  bare  His  holy 
arm.  But  they  do  not  see — what  is  hidden  from  all  but  anointed  eyes — that  the  Lord 
goes  before  His  people,  and  comes  behind  as  their  rearward  ;  so  that  their  diflSculties 
are  surmounted  by  Him  before  they  reach  them,  and  no  foe  can  attack  them  from 
behind.  The  literal  fulfilment  of  this  splendid  prevision  is  described  in  the  Book  of 
Ezi"a.  There  we  find  the  story  of  the  return  of  a  little  band  of  Jews,  1,700  only  in 
number.  They  halted  at  the  River  Ahava,  the  last  station  before  they  entered  the 
desert,  for  three  days,  to  put  themselves  with  fasting  and  pi-ayer  into  God's  hand. 
They  had  no  experience  of  desert  marching.  Their  caravan  was  rendered  unwieldy 
by  the  number  of  women  and  children  in  it.  They  had  to  thread  a  district  infested 
by  wild  bands  of  robbers.  But  they  scorned  to  ask  for  an  escort  of  soldiers  and 
horsemen  to  protect  them,  so  sure  were  they  that  their  God  went  before  them  to  open 
np  the  way,  and  came  behind  to  defend  against  attack.  In  the  midst  of  the  march 
were  priests  and  Levites,  with  their  sacred  charge  of  which  Ezra  had  said,  "Watch 
and  keep  them,  until  ye  weigh  them  in  the  chambers  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.** 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Expectation  and  accomplishment: — In  several  respects  there 
seems  a  falling  short  between  the  radiant  expectations  of  the  prophet,  and  the  actual 
accomplishment  in  the  story  of  Ezra  :  but  we  must  remember  that  it  is  the  business 
of  the  historian  to  record  the  facts,  rather  than  the  emotions  that  coloured  them,  as 
the  warm  colours  of  the  sun  colour  the  hard,  grey  rocks.  And  is  it  not  always  so, 
that  through  our  want  of  faith  and  obedience  we  come  short  of  the  fulness  of  blessing 
which  our  God  has  prepared  for  us!  {Ibid.)  Eye  to  eye: — "Eye  to  eye  do  they 
behold  the  Lord's  return  to  Zion."  "Eye  to  eye"  is  face  to  face  with  the  event. 
{A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Eye  to  eye: — The  expression  plainly  intimates  the  clear  and 
satisfying  manifestations  of  the  presence  and  glory  of  Jehovah  to  be  enjoyed  by  His 
servants  at  the  period  wherein  the  foundations  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom  were  to  b* 
laid.    {R.  Maceulloch.) 

Vers.  9, 10.    Break  forth  into  joy. — The  retnvm  of  the  Jewish  nation  : — I.  Consideb 

CERTAIN    CHANGES  WHICH   SHALL    HAVE    TAKEN    PLACE   AMONG   THE   GeNTILES   OF 

Christendom,  at,  or  about,  the  establishment  of  the  Jewish  nation  in 
THEIR  OWN  LAND  (Matt.  xiii.  24-80).  The  signal  destruction  of  all  false,  hypo- 
critical, nnbelieving  professors  of  religion,  hen  called  "  the  children  of  the  wicked 


fXAP.  ul]  ISAIAH.  63 

one,"  or  "the  tares;"  and,  secondly,  the  gathering  in  of  the  elect  members  of 
Christ's  mystical  body,  or  the  gathering  of  "the  wheat  into  the  barn."    11.  Thb 

BLESSING  WHICH  THB  JEWISH  NATION   WILL  PROVB   TO    ALL  THB  PEOPLB    OF  THB 

EARTH.  It  appears  that  the  plan  and  purpose  of  God,  as  revealed  in  His  Word,  is, 
after  having  finished  the  dispensation  of  the  (Jentiles  as  He  finished  the  dispensation 
of  the  Jews,  and  having  "concluded  all  in  unbelief,"  the  period  will  then  arrive 
when,  according  to  the  language  of  Paul,  "  He  will  have  mercy  upon  all."  III.  Thb 
NATURE  AND  DURATION  OF  THIS  BLESSING.  1.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  blessing.  This 
is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  true  and  saving  conversion,  terminating  in  salvation. 
Not  a  bringing  of  them  back  to  the  state  in  which  Adam  was  before  his  fall ;  not  a 
grafting  them  into  the  mystical  body  of  Christ ;  but  a  true,  a  sound  conversion  from 
all  that  is  evil,  and  the  full  enjoyment  of  God's  great  salvation.  2.  As  to  the  duration 
of  this  blessing.  With  reference  to  converted  individuals  the  effect  will  be  eternal  : 
but  there  will  be  a  limit  to  this  state  of  things  as  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  {H. 
McNeile,  M.A.)  Matter  for  joy  a/nd  'praise  : — Those  that  share  in  mercies  ought  to 
join  in  praises.  Here  is  matter  for  joy  and  praise.  I.  God's  people  will  have 
THE  COMFORT  OF  THIS  SALVATION  ;  and  what  is  the  matter  of  our  rejoicing  ought 
to  be  the  matter  of  our  thanksgiving.  II.  God  will  have  the  glory  of  it  (ver. 
10).  III.  All  the  world  will  have  the  benefit  of  it.  "  All  the  ends  of 
the  earth,"  etc.     {M.  Hemry.) 

Yer.  10.  The  Lord  hath  made  bare  His  holy  arm. — OocPs  wrm  madt  hare:— 
When  the  heroes  of  old  prepared  for  the  fight  they  put  on  their  armour  ;  but  when 
God  prepares  for  battle  He  makes  bare  His  arm.  Man  has  to  look  two  ways — to  his 
own  defence,  as  well  as  to  the  offence  of  his  enemy  ;  God  hath  but  one  diiection  in 
which  to  cast  His  eye — the  overthrow  of  His  foeman  ;  and  He  disregards  all  measures 
of  defence,  and  scorns  all  armour.  He  "  makes  bare  "  His  arm  in  the  sight  of  all  the 
people.  When  men  would  do  their  work  in  earnest,  too,  they  sometimes  strip 
themselves,  like  that  warrior  of  old,  who,  when  he  went  to  battle  with  the  Turks, 
would  never  fight  them  except  with  the  bare  arm.  "Such  things  as  they,"  said 
he,  ' '  I  need  not  fear ;  they  have  more  reason  to  fear  my  bare  arm  than  I  their 
scimitar."  Men  feel  that  they  are  prepared  for  a  work  when  they  have  cast  away 
their  cumbrous  garments.  And  so  the  prophet  represents  the  Lord  as  laying  aside 
for  awhile  the  garments  of  His  dignity,  and  making  bare  His  arm,  that  He  may  do 
His  work  in  earnest,  and  accomplish  His  purpose  for  the  establishment  of  His  Church. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  great  revival : — I.  The  cause  of  a  true  revival.  The 
Holy  Spirit.  While  this  is  the  only  actual  cause,  yet  there  are  instrumental  causes  ; 
and  the  main  instrumental  cause  of  a  great  revival  must  be  the  bold,  faithful,  fearless 
preaching  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Added  to  this,  there  must  be  the  earnest 
prayers  of  the  Church.  II.  The  consequences  of  a  revival  of  religion.  The 
minister  begins  to  be  warmed.  The  members  of  the  Church  grow  more  serious. 
Family  duties  are  better  attended  to ;  the  home  circle  is  brought  under  better  culture. 
There  is  an  inquirers'  meeting  held.  The  revival  of  the  Church  then  touches  the  rest 
of  society.  III.  A  caution.  "Let  all  things  be  done  decently,  and  in  order." 
Distinguish  between  man  and  man.  While,  during  a  revival  of  religion,  a  very  large 
number  of  people  will  be  really  converted,  there  will  be  a  very  considerable  portion 
who  will  be  merely  excited  with  animal  excitement,  and  whose  conversion  will  not  be 
genuine.  Take  care,  ye  that  are  officers  in  the  Church,  when  ye  see  the  people 
stirred  up,  that  ye  exercise  still  a  holy  caution,  lest  the  Church  become  lowered  in  its 
standard  of  piety  by  the  admission  of  persons  not  truly  saved.  IV.  With  these  words 
of  caution,  I  shall  now  stir  tou  up  to  seek  of  God  a  great  revival  of 
religion  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  this  land.  The  Lord  God  hath 
sent  us  a  blessing.  One  blessing  is  the  earnest  of  many.  {Ibid.)  All  the  ends  of 
the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  Ood. — Tidings  of  salvation  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth:—!.  The  salvation  of  God.  "Salvation"  carries  our  meditations  direct 
unto  the  names  and  the  offices  of  Him,  of  whom  it  hath  been  said,  "  Thou  shalt  call 
His  name  Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."  And  in  this  con- 
nection the  whole  scheme  of  mercy  and  eternal  life  bursts  at  once  upon  our  view.  1. 
It  is  a  great  salvation.  2.  An  everlasting  salvation.  8.  A  complete  salvation.  4.  A 
salvation  all  of  God  and  of  grace.  II.  The  certainty  of  the  accomplishment 
OF  THIS  promise,  as  an  encom-agement  to  us  to  do  our  duty.  If  "  all  the  ends  of 
the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God,"  an  imperious  necessity  is  laid 
upon  us  to  favour  every  opportunity  which  offers  of  sending  the  report  of  this 
salvation  to  all  parts  of  the  earth.    The  truth  of  the  promise,  and  the  certainty 


M  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iifc 


of  its  accomplishment,  might  be  argued— 1.  From  the  Divine  purposes  taken  in 
connection  with  the  first  promise.  2.  From  the  settlement  with  Abraham  respecting 
the  coming  of  his  promised  seed.  3.  From  the  style  of  the  prophets,  and  the 
expectations  which  they  excite.  4.  From  the  progress  of  Christianity  through  the 
world,  in  defiance  of  all  the  opposition  which  has  been  combined  against  it.  ( W.  Taylor. ) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Depart  ye. — A  peremptory,  yet  encouraging  call: — 1.  Thus  per- 
emptorily were  the  Jewish  exiles  called  home.  Nearly  three  generations  had  fled 
since  their  fathers  had  been  forcibly  settled  on  the  plains  of  Shinar ;  but  during 
that  period  the  temporal  lot  of  the  Jews  had  been  gradually  bettering.  Time  had 
healea  many  wounds,  a  milder  administration  had  weakened  the  memory  of  many 
Borrows.  In  "the  strange  land,"  strange  no  longer,  homes  had  been  gathered, 
wealth  accumulated,  honours  won.  The  land  of  their  fathers  was  far  away,  was 
personally  known  to  few,  and  lay  on  the  other  side  of  a  pathless  wilderness.  To 
men  so  circumstanced,  the  call  to  depart  was  far  from  welcome.  Many  ties  must 
be  severed  if  that  call  were  obeyed  ;  many  sacrifices  made,  much  travail  endured. 
The  present  good  seemed  far  better  than  the  future.  Besides,  who  did  not  know, 
at  least  by  report,  something  of  the  perils  of  that  barren  waste  over  which  their 
march  must  be  made  ?  Who  could  ensure  them,  during  the  progress  of  that  march, 
against  serious  harm  and  loss?  Who  could  demonstrate  the  certain  gain  to  the 
majority  of  exchanging  Babylon  for  Jerusalem,  the  level  land  of  Shinar  for  the  hill 
country  of  Judah  ?  Thus,  excuses  for  remaining  sprung  readily  to  their  lips; 
difiiculties  in  obeying  the  summons  grew  palpably  before  their  eyes.  It  was  an 
unwelcome  demand,  and  therefore  seemed  impossible.   2.  But  if  the  prophet's  call  were 

Seremptory,  it  was  not  unsupported  by  arguments  of  the  weightiest  kind.  However 
ifficult,  the  separation  must  be  made,  the  departure  undertaken ;  but  there  need 
be  no  hurry  in  their  flight,  as  when  Israel  went  forth  from  Egypt.  The  preparation 
might  be  deliberate  and  careful,  but  one  end  must  be  kept  steadily  in  view — return 
to  Palestine.  Make  all  just  allowances,  meet  all  just  claims,  settle  all  needful 
matters  of  business ;  but  still,  Prepare  to  depart.  Be  ready  to  leave  behind  all 
taint  of  idolatry.  And  yet,  Take  heart,  ye  fearful  ones,  and  be  of  good  courage. 
The  desert  may  be  trackless,  but  God  shall  lead  you.  The  perils  of  the  journey  may 
be  nvunerous,  but  God  shall  defend  you.  The  nomadic  tribes  majr  harass  your 
hindmost  companies,  but  God  shall  be  your  rearward.  Such  is  the  interpretation 
of  the  original  purpose  of  the  prophet's  stirring  words.  (/.  J.  Goadhy.)  Spiritual 
progress: — Let  us  take  these  words  as  helping  to  illustrate  some  of  the  broader 
features  of  spiritual  progress,  I.  Spirittjal  progress  demands  separation  and 
SACRIFICE.  What  are  some  of  these  things  from  which  we  must  separate  ourselves, 
even  at  the  cost  of  sacrifice,  if  spiritual  progress  is  to  be  made?  1.  It  is  no 
tmcommon  thing  to  find  an  easy  contentment  with  the  truth  already  attained.  The 
conceit  begotten  of  little  knowledge  is  a  fatal  bar  to  progress.  The  voice  of  truth 
may  call  loudly  at  our  door,  "Depart  ye ;  go  ye  out  from  thence ;"  but  to  heed 
that  voice  sacrifice  is  inevitable.  There  is  no  other  method  of  attaining  large 
spiritual  advantage  than  the  destruction  of  our  ignorant  self-complacency.  2. 
Spiritual  progress  largely  depends  upon  the  renunciation  of  the  idea  of  the  present 
perfection  of  our  character.  Many  would  start  back  at  the  notion  of  laying 
to  claim  "being  already  perfect"  who  virtually  live  as  though  it  were  the  first 
article  of  their  belief.  They  merely  dream  over  the  possibility  of  improvement.  In 
some  cases  the  error  is  traceable  to  the  mistakes  committed  at  the  very  beginning 
of  their  spiritual  life.  Conversion  is  made  "the  be-all  and  the  end-all "  of  their 
religion.  Life  seems  to  travel  upward  until  it  reaches  that  ^oint,  and  to 
travel  downward  ever  afterward,  3.  But  there  is  another  form  in  which  error 
crops  out  in  older  men.  For  example,  when  all  the  inspiration  of  life  is  drawn  from 
the  past,  not  with  a  view  of  further  advancement,  but  rather  as  an  apology  for 
present  repose.  "  Our  best  inspiration  is  not  gained  from  what  is  behind,  but  from 
what  is  before,  and  what  is  above."  4.  Still  further,  no  spiritual  progress  is  possible 
unless  we  are  willing  to  give  up  our  personal  indolence.     II.  Spiritual  piioghess 

TOLERATES  NO  DELAY  BUT  THAT  WHICH  IS  SPENT   IN    PREPARATION.      It  WOuld  have 

been  a  strange  perversion  of  the  prophet's  words  if  the  Jews  had  regarded  tlie 
assurance  that  "  they  should  not  go  out  with  haste,  neither  by  fliglit,"  as  teaching 
that  they  were  to  protract  their  preparations  indefinitely,  protract  them  so  as 
ultimately  to  relinquish  their  journey.  They  rather  encourage  them,  while  not 
neglecting  the  judicious  settlement  of  their  affairs,  to  make  suitable  provisior.  for 
their  march  across  the  wildemeaa.    There  need  be  neither  bustle  nor  confusion, 


CRAP,  ul]  ISAIAE.  85 

ainoe  their  exodua  will  not  be  either  sudden  or  stealthy.  It  is  Oynis  who  reigns, 
not  Pharaoh.  But  stiU,  it  is  a  journey  for  which  they  are  to  prepare,  not  a 
lengthened  residence  in  Babylon.  The  bearing  of  aU  this,  as  an  illustration  of 
spiritual  progress,  it  is  not  very  difficult  to  see.  The  delay  which  is  spent  in 
preparation  is  progress.  This  may  spring,  for  example,  from  a  careful  acquisition  of 
Divine  truth.  The  same  thing  holds  good  in  regard  to  character.  "We  cannot  force 
maturity,  but  we  can  prepare  for  it ;  and  all  such  preparation  hastens  the  desired 
consummation.  Before  the  Jew  reached  the  land  of  promise,  every  stage  between 
Babylon  and  Jerusalem  had  to  be  faithfully  traversed.  There  are  stages,  also,  in 
the  development  of  character,  no  one  of  which  can  be  omitted  without  subsequent 
loss.  Seasons  of  suffering  of  enforced  idleness,  of  dark  and  apparently  irreparable 
bereavement,  are  some  of  the  necessary  elements  out  of  which  real  character  is  born. 
The  time  consumed  by  such  discipline  is  not  delay,  but  progress.  All  systems, 
therefore,  which  attempt  to  force  maturity  are  as  delusive  as  they  are  mischievous. 
Christian  work  furnishes  another  illustration  of  the  same  general  truth.  Bracing 
ourselves  up  for  present  duty,  and  mastering  it,  is  the  best  qualification  for  future 
success.  III.  Spiritual  PROGRESS  IS  UNDER  Divine  DIRECTION.  "The  Lord  will 
go  before  you. "  Here  was  encouragement  for  the  timid  Jew.  As  a  general  leads 
nis  army,  and  a  shepherd  his  flock,  so  will  Jehovah  "go  before  "  the  returning  exile. 
Nay  more :  He  shall  lead  them  as  a  conqueror  and  a  king.  But  observe  more 
PM-tieularly — 1.  God  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  our  journey.  2.  God  is  ever  near. 
Whatever  the  stage,  and  whatever  the  necessities  of  the  march.  He  was  nigh  at 
hand,  even  to  the  ancient  Jew.  Much  closer  has  He  now  come  to  us,  He  is 
Immanuel.  Here,  then,  is  most  powerful  stimulus  to  the  flagging  Christian.  3.  He 
never  leads  us  where  He  has  not  Himself  already  been.  Are  we  severely  tested  ? 
"  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are."  Are  we  finding  that  maturity  can 
only  come  through  travail  of  soul?  "He  was  made  perfect  through  suff"erings." 
He  asks  us  to  undertake  no  difficult  service  without  first  showing  us  His  own 
obedience.  "When,  therefore,  murmurs  arise  within  us,  and  rebellious  feelings 
agitate  and  disturb,  let  this  be  the  sufficient  check  of  them  all — -"  It  is  enough  for 
the  disciple  to  be  as  his  Master."  4.  He  is  ever  before  us.  "We  have  One  in  advance 
of  us  who  knows  the  possibilities  of  our  nature  ;  and  while  never  overtaxing  us,  He 
expects  no  relaxation  of  our  eflfort.  Let  us,  therefore,  forget  the  things  that  are 
behind,  and  reach  forth  unto  those  that  are  before,  "looking  unto  Jesus,  the 
Leader  and  Perfecter  of  our  faith."  IV.  Spiritual  progress  is  assured  of 
Divine  protection.  "  The  God  of  Israel  shall  be  yoiir  rereward. "  The  "  rereward  " 
is  the  hindmost  part  of  the  army,  where  the  reserves  are  stationed.  By  this 
arrangement  various  important  ends  are  served.  For  one  thing,  the  stragglers  who 
drop  out  of  the  line  during  a  long  and  toilsome  march  are  effectually  gathered  up 
and  saved.  For  another,  the  army  is  better  prepared  to  meet  unexpected  attack 
by  being  able  rapidly  to  change  its  front.  "The  God  of  Israel  shall  be  your 
rereward. "  Here  was  the  pledge  of  security  for  their  march  across  that  desert  which 
swarmed,  as  it  swarms  now,  with  scores  of  robber  tribes  who  have  this  in  common, 
that  they  are  all  equally  agile,  all  equally  thirsty  for  plunder,  and  all  equally 
unscrupulous.  Here,  also,  lies  our  truest  security  in  spiritual  progress.  "The  God  of 
Israel  is  our  rereward."  1.  There  wUl,  therefore,  be  no  surprises  which  we  are  not 
able  to  meet,  no  sudden  attack  from  which  He  will  not  prove  a  sufficient  Defender. 
Our  sharpest  vigilance  wiU  not  always  serve  us  ;  and  while  sweeping  the  horizon  in 
one  direction,  our  present  danger  may  approach  from  another.  2.  Then  protection 
is  afforded  against  permanent  relapse.  If  we  look  forward,  our  Defender  is  there. 
If  we  look  backward,  behold.  He  is  there.  3.  Then  there  is  a  reserve  of  power  and 
of  available  help  which  no  saiat  has  ever  ftdly  tested.  {Ihid. )  The  march  through 
the  desert-world  to  the  city  of  God : — "We  may  learn  some  of  those  qualities  which 
should  characterize  us  in  this  march.  I.  There  should  be  perpetual  exodus. 
In  all  lives  there  are  Babylons,  which  have  no  claim  on  the  redeemed  of  Jehovah. 
"We  may  have  entered  them,  not  without  qualms  of  conscience ;  but,  as  time  has 
passed,  our  reluctance  has  been  overcome.  A  comradeship  has  grown  up  between  us 
and  one  from  whose  language  and  ways  we  once  shrank  in  horror.  An  amusement 
now  fascinates  us,  which  we  regarded  with  suspicion  and  conscientious  scruple.  A 
habit  of  life  dominates  us  from  which  we  once  shrank  as  from  infection.  A  method 
of  winning  money  now  engrosses  us  ;  but  we  can  well  remember  how  difficult  it  was 
to  coax  conscience  to  engage  in  it.  These  are  Babylons,  which  cast  their  fatal  speU 
over  the  sou]",  and  against  which  the  voice  of  God  urgently  protests :  "  Depart  ye, 
depart  ye !  ito  ye  out  from  thence."  "When  stepping  out  from  Babylon  to  $m 
i'Mu  ITT.  6 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lil 


unwonted  freedom,  we  naturally  shrink  back  before  the  desert  march,  the  sandy 
■wastes,  the  ruined  remnants  of  happier  days.  But  we  shall  receive  more  than  we 
renounce.  II.  It  should  be  without  haste.  "Ye  shall  not  go  out  in  haste." 
There  are  many  English  proverbs  which  sum  up  the  observation  of  former  days  and 
tell  how  foolish  it  is  to  be  in  a  hurry.  But,  outside  of  God,  there  is  small  chance 
of  obeying  these  wise  maxims.  The  age  is  so  feverish.  No  great  picture  was  ever 
painted  in  a  hurry.  No  great  book  was  ever  written  against  time.^  No  great 
discovery  was  ever  granted  to  the  student  who  could  not  watch  in  Nature's 
antechamber  for  the  gentle  opening  of  her  door.  The  greatest  naturalist  of  our 
time  devoted  eight  whole  years  almost  entirely  to  barnacles.  Well  might  John 
Foster  long  for  the  power  of  touching  mankind  with  the  spell  of  "  Be  quiet,  be  quiet. " 
In  this  our  Lord  is  our  best  exemplar.  This  hastelessness  was  possible  to  Israel  so 
long  as  the  people  believed  that  God  was  ordering,  preceding,  and  following  their 
march.  III.  "We  must  be  at  peace  about  the  way.  In  early  life  our  path  seems 
clearly  defined.  "We  must  follow  the  steps  of  others,  depend  on  their  maxims,  act 
on  their  advice.  It  is  only  when  the  years  grow  upon  us  that  this  sense  of 
"  waylessness,"  as  it  has  been  termed,  oppresses  us.  So  the  exiles  must  have  felt 
when  they  left  Ahava  and  started  on  the  desert  march.  At  such  times  the  lips  of 
Christ  answer,  "I  am  the  Way."  His  temper.  His  way  of  looking  at  things,  His 
will,  resolves  all  perplexities.  AH  this  was  set  forth  in  the  figure  before  us. 
''The  Lord  will  go  before  you."    When  the  people  came  out  of  Egypt,  Jehovah 

Preceded  the  march  in  the  Shechinah  cloud  that  moved  softly  above  the  ark. 
'here  was  nothing  of  this  sort  when  Ezra  led  the  first  detachment  of  exiles  to  Zion  ; 
but,  though  unseen,  the  Divine  Leader  was  equally  in  the  forefront  of  the  march. 
Thus  it  is  also  in  daily  experience.    Jesus  is  ever  going  before  us  in  every  call  to 
duty,  every  prompting  to  self-sacrifice,  every  summons  to  comfort,  help  and  save. 
I"V.  We  MUST  BE  PURE.    "  Touch  no  uuclcan  thing.    Be  ye  clean, "  etc.   Those  vessels 
were  very  precious.     The  enumeration  is  made  with  minute  accuracy  (Ezra  viii.  26). 
But  they  were  above  all  things  holy  unto  the  Lord.     Thus  they  passed  across  the 
desert,  holy  men  bearing  the  holy  vessels.    Through  this  world,  unseen  by  mortal  eye, 
a  procession  is  passing,  treading  its  way  across  continents  of  time.     It  bears  holy 
vessels.     Testimony  to  God's  truth,  the  affirmation  of  things  unseen  and  eternal, 
the  announcement  of  the  facts  of  redemption — such  are  our  sacred  charge.     What 
manner  of  persons  ought  we  not  to  be,  to  whom  so  high  a  ministry  is  entrusted  ! 
Before  that  procession  we  are  told  that  waste  places  would  break  forth  into  song. 
It  is  a  fair  conception,  «is  though  their  feet  changed  the  aspect  of  the  territories 
through  which  they  passed.     What  was  desert  when  they  came  to  it,  was  paradise 
as  they  left  it !     "What  were  ruins,  became  walls  !    "Where  there  had  been  hostility, 
suspicion  and  misunderstanding,  there  came  concord  and  peace,  the  watchmen  seeing 
eye  to  eye.    This  is  a  true  portraiture  of  the  influence  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  over  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  men.   But  let  us  never  forget  the  importance  of  prayer,  as  a  necessttry 
link  in  the  achieving  of  these  marvels.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)    Marching  orders :_ — 
We  have  here,  under  highly  metaphorical  forms,  the  grand  ideal  of  the  Christian 
life.     I.  We  have  it  set  forth  as  A  march  of  warrior  priests.     Note  that  phrase, 
"Ye  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."    The  returning  exUes  as  a  whole  are  so 
addressed,  but  the  significance  of  the  expression,  and  the  precise  metaphor  which  it 
is  meant  to  convey,  may  be  questionable.     The  word  rendered  "  vessels  "  is  a  wide 
expression,  meaning  any  kind  of  equipment,  and  in  other  places  of  the  Old 
Testament  the  phrase  rendered  is  translated  "armour-bearers."      Such  an  image 
would  be  quite  congruous  with  the  context  here,  in  which  warlike  figures  abound. 
And  if  so,  the  picture  would  be  that  of  an  army  on  the  march,  each  man  carrying 
some  of  the  weapons  of  the  great  Captain  and  Leader.     But  perhaps  the  other 
explanation  is  more  likely,  which  regards  "the  vessels  of  the  Lord"  as  being  an 
allusion  to  the  sacrificial  and  other  implements  of  worship,  which,  in  the  first 
Exodus,  the  Levites  carried  on  the  march.     And  if  that  be  the  meaning,  then  the 
figure  here  is  that  of  a  company  of  priests.     I  venture  to  throw  the  two  ideas 
together,  and  to  say  that  we  may  here  find  an  ideal  of  the  Christian  community  as 
bemg  a  great  company  of  warrior  priests  on  the  march,  guarding  a  sacred  deposit 
which  has  been  committed  to  their  charge.     1.  Look,  then,  at  that  combination  in 
the  true  Christian  character  of  the  two  apparently  opposite  ideas  of  warrior  and 
priest.     It  suggests  that  all  the  life  is  to  be  conflict,  and  that  all  the  conflict  is  to  be 
worship.     It  suggests,  too,  that  the  warfare  is  worship,  that  the  office  of  the  priest 
•nd  of  the  wamor  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  and  both  consist  in  their  mediating 
between  man  and  God,  bringing  God  in  His  Gtospel  to  men,  and  bringing  men  through 


CHAP,  ui.]  ISAIAH.  67 

their  faith  to  God.  The  combination  suggests,  likewise,  how,  in  the  true  Christian 
character,  there  ought  ever  to  be  blended,  in  strange  harmony,  the  virtues  of  the 
soldier  and  the  qualities  of  the  priest ;  compassion  for  the  ignorant  and  them  that 
are  out  of  the  way  with  courage  ;  meekness  with  strength  ;  a  quiet  placable  heart, 
hating  strife,  joined  to  a  spirit  that  cheerily  fronts  every  danger  and  is  eager  for  the 
conflict,  in  which  evil  is  the  foe  and  God  the  helper.  2.  Note,  farther,  that  in  this 
phrase  we  have  the  old,  old  metaphor  of  life  as  a  march,  but  so  modified  as  to  lose  all 
its  melancholy  and  weariness  and  to  turn  into  an  elevating  hope.  3.  Again,  this 
metaphor  suggests  that  this  company  of  marching  priests  have  in  charge  a  sacred 
deposit.  Paul  speaks  of  the  "glorious  Gospel  which  was  committed  to  my  trust. " 
And,  in  like  manner,  to  us  Christians  is  given  the  charge  of  God's  great  weapons  of 
warfare,  with  which  He  contends  with  the  wickedness  of  the  world — viz.  that  great 
message  of  salvation  through,  and  in,  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  there  are 
committed  to  us,  further,  to  guard  sedulously,  and  to  keep  bright  and  untarnished 
and  undiminished  in  weight  and  worth,  the  precious  treasures  of  the  Christian  life 
of  communion  with  Him.  And  we  may  give  another  application  to  the  figure  and 
think  of  the  solemn  trust  which  is  put  into  our  hands,  in  the  gift  of  our  own  selves, 
which  we  ourselves  can  either  waste,  and  stain,  and  lose,  or  can  guard  and  polish 
into  vessels  meet  for  the  Master's  use.  Gathering,  then,  these  ideas  together,  we 
take  this  as  the  ideal  of  the  Christian  commimity — a  company  of  priests  on  the 
march,  with  a  sacred  deposit  committed  to  their  trust.  II.  The  separation  that 
BEFITS  THE  MARCHING  COMPANY.  ' '  Depart  ye,  depart  ye  !  go  ye  out  from  thence, "  etc. 
In  the  historical  fulfilment  of  my  text,  separation  from  Babylon  was  the  preliminary 
of  the  march.  Our  task  is  not  so  simple  ;  our  separation  from  Babylon  must  be  the 
constant  accompaniment  of  our  march.  The  order  in  the  midst  of  which  we  live  is 
not  organized  on  the  fundamental  laws  of  Christ's  kingdom.  And  wheresoever 
there  are  men  that  seek  to  order  their  lives  as  Christ  would  have  them  to  be  ordered, 
the  first  necessity  for  them  is,  "  Come  out  from  amongst  them,  and  be  ye  separate." 
This  separation  wUl  not  only  be  the  result  of  union  with  Jesus  Christ,  but  it  is 
the  condition  of  aU  progress  in  our  union  with  Him.  They  that  are  to  travel  far 
and  fast  have  to  travel  light.  Many  a  caravan  has  broken  down  in  African 
exploration  for  no  other  reason  than  because  it  was  too  well  provided  with  equipments, 
and  so  collapsed  of  its  own  weight.  Therefore,  our  prophet,  in  the  context,  says, 
"Touch  no  unclean  thing."  There  is  one  of  the  differences  between  the  new  Exodus 
and  the  old.  When  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt  they  spoiled  the  Egyptians,  and  came 
away  laden  with  gold  and  jewels  ;  but  it  is  dangerous  work  bringing  anything  away 
from  Babylon  with  us.  Its  treasure  has  to  be  left  if  we  would  march  close  behind 
our  Lord  and  Master.  "We  must  touch  "no  unclean  thing,"  because  our  hands  are 
to  be  fUled  with  the  "  vessels  of  the  Lord."  It  is  man's  world  that  we  have  to  leave, 
but  the  loftiest  sanctity  requires  no  abstention  from  anything  that  God  has  ordained. 
III.  The  purity  which  becomes  the  bearers  of  the  vessels  of  the  Lord.  "Be 
ye  clean."  The  priest's  hands  must  be  pure,  which  figure,  being  translated,  is, 
transparent  purity  of  conduct  and  character  is  demanded  from  all  Christian  men 
who  profess  to  carry  God's  sacred  deposit.  You  cannot  carry  it  unless  your  hands 
are  clean,  for  all  the  gifts  that  God  gives  us  glide  from  our  grasp  if  our  hands  be 
stained.  Monkish  legends  tell  of  sacred  pictures  and  vessels  which,  when  an  impure 
touch  was  laid  upon  them,  refused  to  be  lifted  from  the  place,  and  grew  there,  as 
rooted,  in  spite  of  all  efforts  to  move  them.  Whosoever  seeks  to  hold  the  gifts  of 
God  in  His  Gospel  in  dirty  hands  will  fail  miserably  in  the  attempt ;  and  all  the 
joy  and  peace  of  commimion,  the  assurance  of  God's  love,  and  the  calm  hope  of 
immortal  life,  will  vanish  as  a  soap  bubble,  grasped  by  a  child,  turns  into  a  drop  of 
foul  water  on  its  pahn,  if  we  try  to  hold  them  in  foul  hands.  And,  further, 
remember  no  priestly  service  and  no  successful  warfare  for  Jesus  Christ  is  possible, 
except  on  the  same  condition.  One  sin,  as  well  as  one  sinner,  destroys  much  good, 
and  a  little  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  us  professing  Christians  neutralizes  all  the 
efforts  that  we  may  ever  try  to  put  forth  for  Him.  IV.  The  leisurely  confidence 
which  should  mark  the  march  that  is  guarded  by  God.  "Ye  shall  not  go  out 
with  haste,  nor  go  by  flight,"  etc.  This  is  partly  an  analogy  and  partly  a  contrast 
with  the  story  of  the  first  Exodus.  The  unusual  word  translated  "  with  haste  "  is 
employed  in  the  Pentateuch  to  describe  the  hurry  and  bustle,  not  altogether  due  to 
the  urgency  of  the  Egyptians,  but  partly  also  due  to  the  terror  of  Israel  with  which 
that  first  flight  was  conducted.  And,  says  my  text,  in  this  new  coming  out  of 
bondage  there  shall  be  no  need  for  tremor  or  perturbation,  lending  wings  to  Any 
man's  feet ;  but,  with  quiet  deliberation,  like  that  with  which  Peter  was  brought 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hO, 

ont  of  Ms  dungeon,  because  God  knew  that  He  could  bring  him  out  safely,  the  new 
Exodus  shall  be  carried  on.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  There  is 
a  very  good  reason  why  we  need  not  be  in  any  haste  due  to  alarm.  For,  as  in  the  first 
Exodus,  the  guiding  pillar  led  the  march,  and  sometimes,  when  there  were  foes 
behind,  as  at  the  Red  Sea,  shifted  its  place  to  the  rear,  so  "  the  Lord  will  go  before 
you,  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  rereward. "  (A  Maclaren,  D. D.)  All  the  lift 
for  God  : — I  have  seen  in  a  shop  window,  "  The  bulk  of  our  goods  are  of  English 
manufacture."  Not  the  bulk  only,  but  all  our  life  must  be  given  over  to  God. 
{£.  F.  Marsh.) 

Ver.  12. — ^Por  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste. — Seemly  and  unseemly  haste:— 
They  were  to  go  with  a  diligent  haste,  not  to  lose  time  nor  linger  as  Lot  in  Sodom  ; 
but  they  were  not  to  go  with  a  diffident,  distrustful  haste,  as  if  they  were  afraid  of 
being  pursued,  as  when  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  or  of  having  the  orders  for  their 
release  recalled  and  countermanded.  (M.  Henry. )  The  Lord  shall  go  before  you : — 
No  beaten  rout  of  fugitives,  but  a  band  of  kingly  conquerors,  robed  and  crowned, 
will  assemble  in  heaven.  I.  The  essentially  symbolic  character  of  the 
CAPTIVITIES  AND  DELIVERANCES  OF  THE  JEWISH  PEOPLE.  The  history  of  Israel 
is  the  Divine  key  to  the  history  of  man.  Through  all  the  confusion  of  hvunan 
society,  its  wars,  its  movements,  its  industries,  its  woes,  that  history,  rightly  read, 
will  guide  us.  There  is  no  crisis,  no  confusion,  no  sad  experience  of  society,  of 
which  we  have  not  the  pattern  and  the  explanation  in  the  Word  of  God.  The 
history  of  their  captivities  is  the  history  of  man's  captivity.  There  were  two  great 
captivities  and  two  great  deliverances.  The  people  were  bom  in  the  one  captivity — 
it  was  the  dark  accident  of  nature  ;  the  other  they  earned  by  sin.  These  represent 
our  natural  bondage,  and  the  self-earned  serfdom  of  the  soul.  There  is  one  Deliverer 
and  one  deliverance  from  both.  The  method  of  His  deliverance  was  the  same  out 
of  both  captivities  ;  a  glorious  manifestation  of  the  might  of  the  redeeming  arm  of 
God.  But  at  first  sight  there  is  a  contrast  here  as  well  as  a  likeness.  Taking  a 
superficial  view  of  the  Exodus,  we  should  say  that  they  did  go  out  with  haste  and 

fo  forth  by  flight ;  and  this  visible  contrast  was  before  the  prophet's  mind  when 
e  wrote  the  words  of  our  text  (Deut.  xvi.  3  ;  Ex.  xii.  .31-39).  But  from  Babylon 
they  went  forth  in  orderly  array,  with  the  king's  good- will,  by  his  royal  command 
(E2xa  i. ).  Yet  under  the  surface  the  grand  features  were  identical.  In  neither  case 
did  they  steal  away.  They  went  because  God  would  have  them  go  ;  the  Angel  of 
His  presence  guided  them,  and  His  shattering  judgments  were  on  all  who  sought 
to  withstand  their  march  to  their  promised  land.  If  the  contrast  occurred  to  the 
prophet  as  he  wrote  the  first  clause,  surely  the  likeness  stands  out  in  the  last, 
"The  Lord  shall  go  before  you,  and  the  God  of  Israel  shall  be  your  rereward" 
(Ex.  xiii.  21,  22  ;  xiv.  19,  20).     II.  We  have  the  image  here  of  the  great 

DELIVERANCE  WHICH   IS  FREELY  OFFERED   IN  THE  GoSPEL,  Wrought  for  US  by  His 

redeerning  hand  who  "rules  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  1.  The  reason 
of  our  protracted  discipline.  God  will  not  have  us  "Go  out  with  haste,  nor  go 
forth  by  flight."  I  dare  say  there  are  few  Christians  of  any  earnestness  who  do 
not  look  back  to  some  past  season  in  their  experience,  and  say.  Would  God  that 
I  had  then  been  taken  home.  The  soul  was  then  fuU  of  a  Divine  serenity,  with  the 
clear  heaven  of  God's  love  above  it,  and  a  clear  assurance  that  the  Rock  was  beneath 
it.  It  seemed  to  be  attuned  to  heavenly  fellowship.  But  it  had  been  a  young  and 
immature  deliverance,  had  God  caught  you  then  in  the  first  freshness  of  your  joy 
and  hope  to  His  home  in  heaven  ;  not  by  the  short,  straight  way,  but  by  the  long, 
weary,  desert  path  God  led  His  pilgrims  ;  a  band  of  trained  veterans  they  entered  at 
length  into  Canaan  ;  able  to  hold  it,  and  to  hold  to  the  national  unity,  through 
the  stormy,  struggling  ages  in  which,  but  for  their  desert  nurture  and  discipline, 
they  must  have  been  shattered  to  fragments,  and  lost  to  history  for  ever.  It  is  this 
experience  which  at  sore  cost  of  pain  God  is  laying  up  within  us.  2.  The  Lord  will 
go  before  you,  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  rereward.  The  Lord  has  gone 
before  us.  It  is  this  which  makes  our  progress  a  triumph.  He  has  gone  before  us — 
(1)  In  bearing  to  the  uttermost  the  penalty  of  sin.  (2)  In  breaking  the  power  of 
evil  (John  xiv.  27  ;  xvi.  33).  (3)  In  the  way  of  the  wilderness,  through  life's 
protracted  discipline,  to  glory  (Heb.  v.  7-9).  And  the  God  of  Israel  shall  be  your 
rereward.  He  shall  gather  up  the  stragglers  of  the  host.  This  promise  seems 
to  run  parallel  with  Isa.  xl.  10,  11.  It  shall  be  no  crush  or  throng  in  which  the 
weak  ones  shall  be  down-trodden,  and  the  halting  left  hopelessly  in  the  rear.  The 
Lord  has  special  tenderness  for  the  timid,  the  trembling,  tne  fainting  ;  He  is  behind 


CHAT,  ui.]  ISAIAH.  69 

them  to  guard  them  from  every  purstiing  foe.     If  you  hare  faith  but  m  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed,  fear  not.    (J".  B.  Brown,  B.A.)    For  the  Lord  will  go  before  yon. — 

The  vanguard  and  rereward  of  the  Church : — The  Ohurch  of  Christ  is  continually 
represented  under  the  figure  of  an  army ;  yet  its  Captain  is  the  Prince  of  Peace ; 
its  object  is  the  establishment  of  peace,  and  its  soldiers  are  men  of  a  peaceful 
disposition.  Nevertheless,  the  Church  on  earth  has,  and  until  the  second  advent 
must  be,  the  Church  militant,  the  Church  armed,  the  Church  warring,  the  Church 
conquering.  It  is  in  the  very  order  of  things  that  so  it  must  be.  Truth  could  not 
be  truth  in  this  world  if  it  were  not  a  warring  thing.  How  comforting  is  this  text 
to  the  believer  who  recognizes  himself  as  a  soldier,  and  the  whole  Church  as  an 
army  !  The  Church  has  its  vanguard  :  "Jehovah  will  go  before  you."  The  Church 
is  also  in  danger  behind ;  enemies  may  attack  her  in  her  hinder  part,  ' '  and  the 
God  of  Israel  shall  be  her  rereward."  I.  Consider  the  whole  Church  of  God 
AS  AN  ARMY.  Remember  that  a  large  part  of  the  army  are  standing  this  day  upon 
the  hills  of  glory ;  having  overcome  and  triumphed.  As  for  the  rear,  it  stretches 
far  into  the  future ;  some  portions  are  as  yet  imcreated.  Now,  cast  your  eyes 
forward  to  the  front  of  the  great  army  of  God's  elect,  and  you  see  this  great  truth 
coming  up  with  great  brilliance  before  you :  "  Jehovah  shall  go  before  you."  Is  not 
this  true  1  Have  you  never  heard  of  the  eternal  counsel  and  the  everlasting  covenant  ? 
Did  that  not  go  before  the  Church  ?  Has  Jehovah  not  gone  before  His  Church  in 
act  and  deed  ?  Perilous  has  been  the  journey  of  the  Church  from  the  day  when 
first  it  left  Paradise  even  until  now.  Why  need  I  go  through  all  the  pages  of  the 
history  of  the  Church  of  God  in  the  days  of  the  old  dispensation  ?  Hath  it  not 
been  true  from  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist  until  now  ?  How  can  ye  account  for ' 
the  glorious  triumphs  of  the  Church  if  ye  deny  the  fact  that  God  has  gone  before 
her  ?  God  had  gone  beforehand  with  his  Church,  and  provided  stores  of  grace  for 
stores  of  trouble,  shelter  and  mercy  for  tempests  and  persecution,  abundance  of 
strength  for  a  superfluity  of  trial.  "  And  the  God  of  Israel  shall  be  the  rereward." 
The  original  Hebrew  is,  "  God  of  Israel  shall  gather  you  up."  Armies  in  the  time 
of  war  diminish  by  reason  of  stragglers,  some  of  whom  desert,  and  others  of  whom 
are  overcome  by  fatigue  ;  but  the  army  of  God  is  "  gathered  up  ;  "  none  desert  from 
it  if  they  be  real  soldiers  of  the  Cross,  and  none  drop  down  upon  the  road  The 
Church  of  Christ  has  been  frequently  attacked  in  the  rear.  It  often  happens  that 
the  enemy,  tired  of  opposing  the  onward  march  by  open  persecution,  attempts  to 
malign  the  Church  concerning  something  that  has  either  been  taught,  or  revealed, 
or  done  in  past  ages.  Now,  the  God  of  Israel  is  our  rereward.  I  am  never  at 
trouble  about  the  attacks  of  infidels  or  heretics,  however  vigorously  they  may 
assault  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  If  they  look  to  be  resisted  by  mere  reason, 
they  look  in  vain.  If  they  must  attack  the  rear  let  them  fight  with  Jehovah 
Himself.  But  I  am  thinking  that  perhaps  the  later  trials  of  the  Church  may 
represent  the  rereward-  There  are  to  come,  perhaps,  to  the  Church,  fiercer  per- 
secutions than  she  has  ever  known.  But  however  fierce  those  troubles  shall  be, 
God,  who  has  gone  before  His  Church  in  olden  times,  will  gather  up  the  rear,  and 
she  who  has  been  Ecclesia  victrix — the  Church,  the  conqueror,  will  still  be  the 
same,  and  her  rear  shall  constitute  at  last  a  part  of  the  Church  triumphant,  even 
as  already  glorified.  Can  you  now  conceive  the  last  great  day  when  Jehovah,  the 
rereward,  shall  gather  up  His  people  ?  II.  As  it  respects  tts,  as  individttai. 
BELIEVERS.  Two  troubles  present  themselves,  the  future  and  the  past.  Remember, 
you  are  not  a  child  of  chance.  1.  Stop  and  realize  the  idea  that  God  has  gone 
before,  mapping  the  way.  (1)  God  has  gone  before  you  in  the  decree  of  His 
predestination.  (2)  In  the  actual  preparations  of  His  providence.  (3)  In  the 
incarnation  of  Christ.  As  to  our  future  troubles  Jesus  Christ  has  borne  them  all 
before.  As  for  temptation.  He  "  has  been  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet 
without  sin."  As  for  trials  and  sorrows,  He  has  felt  all  we  can  possibly  feel,  and 
infinitely  more.  As  for  our  diflBculties,  Christ  has  trodden  the  road  before.  We 
may  rest  quite  sure  that  we  shall  not  go  anywhere  where  Christ  has  not  gone. 
(4)  There  is  this  reflection  also,  that,  inasmuch  as  Christ  has  gone  before  us,  He 
has  done  something  in  that  going  before,  for  He  has  conquered  every  foe  that  lies  in 
his  way.  2.  I  hear  one  say,  "  The  future  seldom  troubles  me  ;  it  is  the  past — what 
I  have  done  and  what  I  have  not  done — the  years  that  are  gone — how  I  have  sinned, 
and  how  I  have  not  served  my  Master  as  I  ought."  The  God  of  Israel  shall  be  your 
rereward.  Notice  the  different  titles.  The  first  is  "  Jehovah  " — "  Jehovah  will  go 
before  you."  That  is  the  I  AM,  fall  of  omniscience  and  omnipotence.  The  second 
ii  "  God  of  Israel,"  that  is  to  say,  the  God  of  the  Covenant.    We  want  the  God  of 


70  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

the  Covenant  behind,  because  it  is  not  in  the  capacity  of  the  I  AM,  the  omnipotent, 
that  we  require  Him.     Let  me  always  think,  that  I  have  God  behind  me  as  well 
as  before  me.     Let  not  the  memories  of  the  past,  though  they  cause  me  grief,  cause 
me  despair.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)     Ood  our  Ghiard  and  Guide: — I.  The  good  man's 
PATH  IS  BESET  WITH  PERIL.     1.  There  are  perils  that  come  up  from  behind.     The 
deadliest  foes  are  those  that  attack  us  in  the  rear.     The  traveller  may  be  oveilaken 
by  pestilence  and  death,  that  lay  all  unsuspected  in  the  very  places  he  passed  in 
laughter  and  in  song.    Man  never  gets  away  from  his  past.    (1)  Perils  come  upon  us 
from  the  mistakes  of  the  past.    Mistakes  may  be  innocent  enough,  but  unfori;unately 
for  us,  Nature  punishes  blunders  as  though  they  were  crimes.     Fire  burns  just  the 
same,  whether  it  be  kindled  innocently  or  of  malice.     Water  drowns  irrespective 
of  the  way  people  get  in.     Accident  or  crime,  it  is  all  the  same  to  Nature.     An 
indiscretion  may  ruin  your  health,  bring  your  business  to  the  dust,  and  wreck 
the  peace  of  your  home,  just  as  surely  as  deliberate  sin.     Sheer  inexperience  is 
responsible  for  many  a  disaster.     And  every  blunder  of  to-day  sends  forward  an 
enemy  to  imperil  the  life  of  to-morrow.     Further  complications  arise  from  the  fact 
that  much  of  our  life  is  bound  up  with  the  lives  of  others.     The  follies  as  well  as 
the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  to  the  third  or  fourth  generation.     (2)  Perils  come 
upon  us  from  the  sins  of  the  past.     "  It's  the  eleventh  commandment  I'm  most 
afraid  of,"  hiccoughed  a  drunken  man  to  an  evangelist  one  day.     "And  what  is 
that?"  asked  the  seeker  of  souls.     "Be  sure  your  sin  wiU  find  you  out."    And 
if  sheer  mistakes  survive  and  pursue,  how  much  more  our  sins.     There  is  no  greater 
delusion  than  to  imagine  that  sin  can  be  committed,  covered  up,  forgotten,  and 
done  with.     Sin  breeds.     And  its  progeny  slays  the  transgressor.     The  sowing  of 
wild  oats  is  followed  by  the  inevitable  harvest.     An  evil  deed  once  done  can  never 
be  undone  :  not  even  by  the  grace  of  God.     And  in  it  there  may  lurk  an  enemy  that 
years  after  may  rise  up  and  strike  his  deadly  weapon  in  your  back.     Old  age  may 
find  you  full  of  the  sins  of  your  youth.     Sins  long  left  behind  may  live  on  in  your 
memory.     Man  never  forgets.     A  chance  word,  an  unconscious  look,  an  innocent 
gesture  may  strike  a  slumbering  chord,  and  the  whole  scene  lives  as  vividly  as  ever. 
Neither  remorse  nor  repentance  can  blot  out  the  horrid  thing  from  before  your  eyes. 
It  wiU  startle  you  in  the  very  holy  of  holies,  and  disturb  your  very  communion  with 
Goi     If  unpardoned  it  will  fill  your  old  age  with  terror,  and  your  dying  moments 
with  the  horrors  of  hell.     The  most  terrible  temptations  lurk  in  the  memory  of  past 
transgression,  even  after  the  sin  is  forsaken  and  forgiven.     I  have  known  a  saint 
turned  eighty  lament  with  tears  that,  while  he  was  forgetting  the  hymns  which  had 
been  his  delight  for  sixty  years,  the  lewd  songs  of  his  teens  came  back  upon  him 
with  overwhelming  viAddness  and  force.     He  couldn't  pray,  but  some  rollicking, 
filthy  chorus  would  insist  on  being  sung.     It  is  from  behind  that  the  devil  strikes 
home,  and  strikes  hard.     Look  at  the  consequences  of  sin  if  you  would  realize  the 
terrible  forces  that  come  up  from  behind.     The  devil  persuaded  you  there  would 
be  no  consequences.     It  was  a  passing  pleasure.     You  were  all  right  in  the  morning, 
nnd  thought  it  was  all  over.     It  is  never  over.     That  was  only  the  beginning. 
Drink,  gambling,  lust,  passion,  and  greed,  have  followed  stealthily  for  years,  and 
sprung  upon  men  unawares.     The  terrible  results  of  sin  may  pursue  you  in  your 
body.     A  man  who  never  but  once  went  into  the  house  of  the  woman  of  whom 
Solomon  says  such  terrible  things,  for  nearly  half  a  century  went  through  the  world 
crooked  and  in  pain.     The  most  awful  thing  I  know  that  can  come  to  a  man  out 
of  his  past,  is  to  see  his  own  sin  working  ruin  in  the  soul  of  another.     What  a  host 
follows  hard  after  us  !     All  the  way  is  crowded  with  malignant  and  vicious  enemies 
that  seek  to  destroy  us.     And  nearly  all,  if  not  every  one  of  them,  our  oAvn  creation. 
They  are  the  ofl'spring  of  our  folly,  our  sin,  our  shame.     2.  There  are  perils  ahead. 
Happily  no  man  can  see  very  far  ahead.     II.  The  good  man's  path  is  also 
BESET  WITH  GoD.     The  Lord  is  in  the  rear  to  protect,  and  in  the  van  to  guide. 
1.  God  stands  between  us  and  our  past.     (1)  To  forgive  its  sin.     (2)  To  cut  off  our 
retreat.     The  old  Egyptian  life  had  a  strange  fascination  over  the  delivered  people. 
The  backsliding  tendency  is  in  us  all.    But  the  Rearguard  is  between  us  and  Egypt. 
He  will  prevent  our  retreat,  and  by  a  sharp  command  urge  us  forward  to  the  land 
of  grapes.     We  need  to  be  saved  from  ourselves,  and  He  will  so  completely  deliver 
us  that  the  last  longing  for  Egypt  shall  die,  and  all  our  desire  shall  be  for  the 
Canaan  of  perfect  love.     (8)  To  defend  against  its  assaults.     Our  worst  enemies  are 
at  our  backs,  where  we  are  most  helpless.     The  devil  strikes  from  behind.     But 
be  not  afraid,  God  is  in  the  rear.     (4)  To  make  our  enemies  His  slaves.     The  forces 
of  hell  as  well  as  the  hosts  of  heaven  are  under  His  control.     2.  God  goes  befor* 


CHAP.  Ml.]  ISAIAH.  71 

lis  in  all  the  way  of  the  future.  "We  don't  know  the  way,  but  He  does — every  inch 
of  it.  For  he  prepared  and  appointed  it.  And  more  than  that.  He  has  trodden 
and  tested  it  before  our  feet  touch  it.  He  knows.  That  is  enough.  He  leads. 
I  follow.  We  tread  the  same  path.  We  share  the  same  road.  Why  should  I 
fear  ?  He  goes  before  us  in  all  our  service  for  Him.  Philip  found  the  eunuch 
already  prepared  for  his  message.  And  Ananias  found  Saul  waiting  to  receive  his 
ministrations.  So  as  we  go  to  our  service  we  shall  find  the  Lord  has  been  there 
before  us  preparing  our  way.  The  Divine  movement  is  always  forward.  God  is 
behind,  but  He  never  turns  back.  He  goes  before,  and  the  whole  host  moves 
forward.     Our  only  safety  is  in  progress.     (S.  Chadwick.) 

Vers.  lS-15. — Behold,  My  Servant  shall  deal  prudently. — Th«  humiliation  and 

exaltation  of  Christ: — I.  The  state  of  Christ's  humiliation.  "As  many  were 
astonied  at  Thee,"  etc.  1.  Consider  His  outward  or  bodily  sufiTerings.  2.  His 
inward  sorrows,  the  agonies  of  His  mind;  have  no  parallel.  II.  OuR  Saviour's 
EXALTATION.  "Behold,  My  Servant  shall  deal  prudently,"  etc.  The  exaltation  of 
Christ  may  be  considered  under  four  particulars.  1.  His  resurrectiom  from  the 
dead.  2.  His  ascension  into  heaven.  3.  His  glorification  at  the  Father's  right 
hand.  4.  His  coming  again  to  judgment.  Practical  improvement :  1.  What  hath 
been  said  on  the  subject  of  the  Redeemer's  sufferings,  should  excite  aU  our  gratitude 
and  love  to  Him,  who  readUy  entered  upon,  and  went  through,  all  this  scene  of 
sorrow  for  our  sake.  2.  Let  this  excite  us  to  greater  zeal  and  diligence  in  His 
service  ;  as  the  best  expression  of  our  gratitude  and  love.  3.  The  consideration  of 
Christ's  love  and  sufferings  for  us  should  inspire  us  with  the  firmest  fortitude  and 
fidelity,  in  defending  His  cause  and  the  honour  of  His  Gospel  against  aU  opposition, 
and  in  suflFering  for  it.  4.  Under  every  affliction  of  life  let  us  turn  our  eyes  to  our 
suffering  Redeemer,  as  a  perfect  pattern  of  patience.  5.  Let  us  triumph  in  the 
faith  and  views  of  a  triumphant  Saviour.  {A.  Mason,  M.A.)  The  sure  triumph  of 
the  crucified  One: — I.  The  character  of  our  Lord's  dealings.  He  is  called 
"My  Servant,"  a  title  as  honourable  as  it  is  condescending,  and  it  is  said  that  He 
deals  prudently.  He  who  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant  acts  as  a  wise 
servant  in  everything ;  and  indeed  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  for  "in  Him  are  hid 
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  1.  This  prudence  was  manifest  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh,  from  His  childhood  among  the  doctors  in  the  temple  on  to  His 
confession  before  Pontius  Pilate.  Our  Lord  was  enthusiastic  ;  but  that  enthusiasm 
never  carried  Him  into  rashness.  Our  Saviour  was  full  of  love,  and  that  love  made 
Him  frank  and  open-hearted;  but  for  all  that  He  was  ever  prudent,  and  "committed 
Himself  unto  no  man,  for  He  knew  what  was  in  man. "  Too  many  who  aspire  to  be 
leaders  of  the  people  study  policy,  craft  and  diplomacy.  The  Friend  of  sinners  had 
not  a  fraction  of  that  about  Him  ;  and  yet  He  was  wiser  than  if  diplomacy  had  been 
His  study  from  His  youth  up.  2.  He  who  on  earth  became  obedient  unto  death 
has  now  gone  into  the  glory,  but  He  is  still  over  the  house  of  God,  conducttag  its 
affairs.  He  deals  prudently  still.  Our  fears  lead  us  to  judge  that  the  affairs  of 
Christ's  kingdom  are  going  amiss,  but  We  may  rest  assured  that  all  is  well,  for  the 
Lord  hath  put  all  things  under  the  feet  of  Jesus.  All  along  through  the  history  of 
the  Church  the  dealings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  with  His  people  have  been  very  remark- 
able. The  wisdom  in  them  is  often  deep,  and  only  discoverable  by  those  who  seek  it 
out,  and  yet  frequently  it  sparkles  upon  the  surface  like  gold  in  certain  lands  across 
the  sea.     Note  now  the  Lord  has  made  His  Church  learn  truth  by  degrees,  and 

Surified  her  first  of  one  error  and  then  of  another.  The  wise  physician  tolerates 
isease  until  it  shall  have  reached  the  point  at  which  he  can  grapple  with  it,  so  as 
to  eradicate  it  from  the  system,  so  has  the  good  Lord  allowed  some  ills  to  fester  in 
the  midst  of  His  Church,  that  He  may  ultimately  exterminate  them.  Study  the 
pages  of  ecclesiastical  history,  and  you  will  see  how  Jesus  Christ  has  dealt  wisely  in 
the  raising  up  of  fitting  men  for  aU  times.  I  could  not  suppose  a  better  man  for 
Luther's  age  than  Luther,  yet  Luther  alone  would  have  been  very  incomplete  for  the 
full  service  needed  had  it  not  been  for  Calvin,  whose  calm  intellect  was  the  com- 
plement of  Luther's  fiery  soul.  3.  Another  translation  of  the  passage  is,  "My 
Servant  shall  have  prosperous  success. "  Let  us  append  that  meaning  to  the  other. 
Prosperity  wUl  grow  out  of  our  Lord's  prudent  dealings.  4.  In  consequence  of  this 
the  Lord  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled.  II.  The  stumbling-block  in  the  way 
of  ouh  Lord.  It  is  His  Cross,  which  to  Jew  and  Greek  is  ever  a  hindrance. 
As  if  the  prophet  saw  Him  in  vision,  he  cries  out,  "As  many  were  astonied  at 
lliee,"  eto.    1.  He  haa  riflen  from  the  grave  and  gone  into  His  glory,  bat  the  offenot 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lii. 

of  the  Cross  has  not  ceased,  for  upon  His  Gospel  there  remains  the  image  of  His 
marred  visage,  and  therefore  men  despise  it.  The  preaching  of  the  Gross  is  foolish- 
ness to  many.  2.  The  practical  part  of  the  Gospel  is  equally  a  stumbling-block  to 
ungodly  men,  for  when  men  inquire  what  they  must  do  to  De  saved,  they  are  told 
that  they  must  receive  the  Gospel  as  little  children,  that  they  must  repent  of  sin, 
and  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Very  humbling  precepts  for  human  self- 
sufficiency  !  And  after  they  are  saved,  if  they  inquire  what  they  should  do,  the 
precepts  are  not  those  which  commend  themselves  to  proud  human  nature — for  they 
are  such  as  these — "Be  ye  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another,"  "forbearing  one 
another  and  forgiving  one  another  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  has  forgiven  you." 
To  the  world  which  loves  conquerors,  and  blasts  of  trumpets,  and  chaplets  of  laurel, 
this  kind  of  teaching  has  a  marred  visage,  and  an  uncomely  form.  3.  Then,  what 
seems  even  more  humbling,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His  prudent  dealing  sends  this 
Gospel  among  us  by  men  who  are  neither  great  nor  noble,  nor  even  among  the  wise 
of  this  world.  4.  Worse  still,  if  worse  can  be,  the  people  who  become  converted 
and  foUow  the  Saviour  are  generally  of  the  poorer  sort,  and  lightly  esteemed. 
IIL  The  certainty  of  the  removal  of  this  stumbling-block  and  the  spread 
of  Christ's  kingdom.  As  His  face  was  marred,  so  surely  "shall  He  sprinkle  many 
nations  ; "  by  which  we  understand,  first,  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  are  to 
fall  in  a  copious  shower  over  all  lands.  This  sprinkling  we  must  interpret  according 
to  the  Mosaic  ceremonies.  There  was  a  sprinkling  with  blood,  to  set  forth  pardon 
of  sin,  and  a  sprinkling  with  water  to  set  forth  purification  from  the  power  of  sin. 
The  influence  of  His  grace  and  the  power  of  His  work  shall  be  extended  not  over 
the  common  people  only,  but  over  their  leaders  and  rulers.  "The  kings  shall  shut 
their  mouths  at  Him  ; "  they  shall  have  no  word  to  say  against  Him  ;  they  shall  be 
so  subdued  by  the  majesty  of  His  power  that  they  shall  silently  pay  Him  reverence, 
and  prostrate  themselves  before  His  throne.  IV.  The  manner  of  its  accomplish- 
ment. How  wUl  it  come  to  pass?  "WiU  there  be  a  new  machinery?  Will  the 
world  be  converted,  and  the  kings  be  made  to  shut  their  mouths  by  some  new  mode 
of  operation  ?  I  do  not  think  so.  Will  the  saints  take  the  sword  one  day  ?  No, 
the  way  which  has  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  dispensation  wiU  last  to  its  close. 
It  pleases  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe.  1.  Accord- 
ing to  this  passage,  these  kings  and  nations  are  first  of  all  to  hear.  "  Faith  coming 
by  hearing. "  If  they  are  to  hear,  we  must  preach  and  teach,  so  that  our  clear  line 
of  duty  is  to  go  on  spreading  the  Gospel.  2.  These  people  appear  not  only  to  have 
heard,  but  to  have  seen.  "That  which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they  see." 
This  seeing  is  mot  with  their  bodily  eyes  but  by  the  perceptions  of  their  minds. 
Faith  comes  by  the  soul  perceiving  what  the  Gospel  means.  3.  After  they  had 
seen,  it  appears  from  the  text  that  they  considered.  "That  which  they  had  not 
heard  shall  they  consider."  This  is  how  men  are  saved:  they  hear  the  Gospel, 
they  catch  the  meaning  of  it,  and  then  they  consider  it.  When  they  had  seen  and 
considered  silently,  they  accepted  the  Lord  as  their  Lord,  for  they  shut  their 
mouths  at  Him  ;  they  ceased  from  all  opposition  ;  they  quietly  resigned  their  wills, 
and  paid  allegiance  to  the  great  King  of  kings.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  character 
cund  work  of  the  Messiah: — I.  The  introduction  of  Christianity  into  the 

WORLD,    BY   the    MYSTERIOUS    SUFFERINGS    OF    ITS    DiVINE    FOUNDER.       "Behold, 

My  Servant !  "  The  "astonishment  of  many"  evidently  refers  to  the  inconsistency 
apparent  between  the  high  pretensions  and  the  depressed  condition  of  this  Servant 
of  God.  In  truth,  the  plan  of  Christianity,  with  its  introduction  into  the  world, 
is  far  above  the  calculations  of  human  sagacity.     II.  The  declaration  of  the 

PROPHET  WITH  REGARD  TO  THE  UNIVERSAL  DIFFUSION  OP  THE  RELIGION  OF  CHRIST 

ON  THE  EARTH.  "My  Servant  shall  deal  prudently.  He  shall  be  exalted,  and 
extolled,  and  be  very  high."  1.  The  expression,  "He  shall  deal  prudently,"  is,  in 
the  margin,  translated,  ' '  He  shall  prosper  ; "  and  thus  the  whole  clause  is  declarative 
of  the  same  truth — the  triumph  and  success  of  the  Son  of  God.  If  many  were 
astonished  at  His  humiliation,  a  far  greater  number  shall  be  astonished  at  His 
exaltation.  2.  This  grand  and  glorious  achievement  He  eff'ected  by  means  that 
came  not  within  the  range  of  mortal  discernment.  It  was  by  death  that  He 
conquered  death.  It  was  by  a  perfect  obedience  in  action  and  in  suffering,  that 
He  became  the  second  Adam — the  spiritual  Head  of  a  new  and  happier  race.     He 

Slanted  His  religion  in  the  earth,  opposed  by  hostile  scorn  and  relentless  malice  and 
espotic  pjwer.  The  cause  of  Chnst  achieved  its  victories  by  its  own  inherent 
power.  Its  adherents  were,  indeed,  strong ;  but  it  was  in  faith,  and  purity,  and 
duritj.    Thus  the  Servant  of  God  prospered,  and  was  extolled,  and  became  ruy 


CHAP.  Ln.]  ISAIAB.  73 

high.  3.  But  His  reign  on  the  earth  is  yet  very  limited,  and  His  conquests 
incomplete.  III.  What  we  mat  oathee  feom  this  prophetic  AccotrNT  re- 
specting THE  PROCESS  BT  WHICH  THE  KINGDOM  OF  THE  MESSIAH  SHALL  THUS 
BE  FULLY  AND  FINALLY  ESTABLISHED.  " As  many  Were  astonied  at  Thee:  so 
shall  He  sprinkle  many  nations ;  the  kings,"  etc.  We  are  led  to  infer — 1.  That 
there  shall  be  a  wide  dispersion  of  Divine  knowledge  over  heathen  and  Mohammedan 
nations  ;  for  men  cannot  see  or  consider  that  which  is  not  first  presented  to  their 
notice.  2.  The  nations  shall  fix  their  anxious  attention  on  the  truths  declared  to 
them.  3.  Impressed  with  holy  awe,  they  shall  assume  the  attitude  of  abasement 
and  submission.  I  apprehend  that  the  expression,  the  "kings  shall  shut  their 
mouths  at  Him,"  implies  the  submission  of  whole  nations,  here  represented  by 
kings  ;  for,  as  the  reception  of  Christianity  on  the  part  of  the  rulers  of  a  countiy 
requires  the  overthrow  of  every  system  of  religious  polity  previously  established, 
such  a  reception  publicly  made,  implies,  more  or  less,  the  submission  of  the  mass 
of  the  people.  4.  He  shall  forgive  their  iniquities  and  sanctify  their  hearts.  "He 
shall  sprinkle  many  nations  ; "  that  is,  in  allusion  to  the  aspersions  under  the  law, 
by  which  the  people  were  sanctified,  the  Son  of  God  shall  apply  to  the  souls  of 
regenerated  multitudes  the  blood  of  His  great  atonement,  and  the  sacred  influences 
of  His  Holy  Spirit.  Then,  "  a  nation  shall  be  bom  in  a  day."  [O.  T.  Noel,  M.A.) 
A  threefold  view  of  the  Person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ: — I.  His  WORK  BELOW. 
He  is  called  the  "Servant"  of  the  Lord.  "As  many  were  astonied  at  Thee,"  etc. 
The  disciples  saw  Him  on  the  Cross ;  they  gazed  on  Him  with  amazement,  and 
scarcely  recovered  themselves  by  the  third  dtay.  The  women  who  followed  Him 
from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  stood  afar  off,  and  smote  their  breasts  as  they  killed 
Htm  ;  and  the  thousands  of  men  whom  He  had  healed  and  cured,  looked  with 
astonishment  at  the  ignominious  termination  of  such  a  life.  Even  the  elements 
seemed  to  join  in  the  universal  consternation;  the  sun  refused  to  shine,  and  hid 
himself  in  darkness ;  the  light  of  the  moon  was  clouded.  II.  Think  of  Him 
SITTING  in  glory  UPON  His  THRONE.  "He  shaU  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and 
be  very  high. "  1.  He  shall  be  exalted.  This  relates  to  His  authority  and  power. 
Verily,  a  name  is  written  in  His  vesture  and  on  His  thigh,  and  that  name  is 
"King  or  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  2.  He  shall  be  extolled.  It  has  been 
the  delight  of  every  apostle,  of  every  evangelist,  of  every  missionary,  of  every 
minister,  of  every  Christian,  to  extol  Him  ;  and  when  we  have  done  our  best,  it  is 
our  grief  and  shame  and  humility  that  we  cannot  extol  Him  more.  3.  "He  shall 
be  very  high,"  or,  if  you  prefer  the  language  of  the  apostle,  "In  all  things  He 
shall  have  the  pre-eminence."  III.  The  works  of  mercy  which  the  Saviour  is 
accomplishing  in  His  exalted  state.  He  sets  forth  His  Gospel  according  to  Hi> 
promise.  ' '  He  shall  sprinkle  many  nations. "  This  denotes  the  office  of  Christ. 
"The  kings  shall  stop  their  mouths  at  Him."  This  text  is  best  explained  by 
quoting  a  passage  in  which  Job,  speaking  of  himself  as  the  chief  magistrate,  says, 
"  When  I  went  out  to  the  gate  through  the  city,  when  I  prepared  my  seat  in  the 
street !  the  young  men  saw  me,"  etc.  (Job  xxix.  7-10).  Such  was  the  respect  for 
the  dignity  of  this  man  of  God,  that  in  his  presence  the  nobles  and  the  elders 
spake  not,  but  imposed  silence  on  their  lips ;  so  shall  it  be  with  the  potentates 
and  monarchs  of  the  earth  in  the  presence  of  Him  "who  is  greater  than  all." 
(/.  Straiten. )  The  face  of  Christ : — Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  bore  from  of  old  the 
name  of  "  Wonderful,"  and  the  word  seems  all  too  poor  to  set  forth  His  marvellous 
person  and  character.  It  is  an  astonishing  thing  that  there  should  have  been  a 
Christ  at  all ;  the  Incarnation  is  the  miracle  of  miracles  ;  that  He  who  is  the 
Infinite  should  become  an  infant.  I.  He  was  a  great  wonder  in  His  griefs. 
II.  He  was  a  great  wonder  in  His  glory.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  He  shall  be 
exalted  and  extolled,  and  he  very  high. — The  Saviour's  exaltation: — We  obtain 
the  following  series  of  thoughts,  "He  will  rise,  He  will  be  still  more  exalted.  He 
will  stand  high. "  The  three  verbs  thus  signify  beginning,  progress  and  result,  or 
the  climax  of  the  exaltation.    {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  As  many  were  astonied  at  Thee. — The  dbasemera  of  Christ  amd  its 
consequences: — I.  The  unequalled  abasement  and  sorrow  of  the  Messiah. 
Unequalled — 1.  Because  of  the  previous  dignity  from  which  He  descended.  2.  If 
we  trace  the  various  stages  of  His  humiliation.  Was  He  bom?  It  was  of  no 
opulent  parents.  As  He  grew  up  he  became  the  object  of  envy.  When  He  sprang 
into  youth,  it  was  not  to  sway  a  sceptre  or  to  govern  millions,  but  to  work  with  His 
reputed  father.    As  He  went  on  in  His  course  He  was  exposed  to  the  soofis  and 


74  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ui. 

malice  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  etc.  Eye  the  Saviour's  sufferings  in  what  light  yon 
please,  and  you  will  find  His  sufferLugs  were  various  as  well  as  intense.  He  suffered 
as  a  man  ;  from  want — from  fatigue — from  poverty — from  the  crown  of  thorns  placed 
on  His  head,  etc.  He  suffered  civilly,  as  a  member  of  society.  An  insurrectionist  and 
a  murderer  was  preferred  before  Him.  He  suffered  spiritually — from  the  thick  volleys 
of  fiery  darts  which  were  showered  at  Him,  and  from  the  hidings  of  His  Father's 
countenance.  And  observe  the  associations  which  were  likely  to  aggravate  His 
sufferings.  "  They  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  3.  Our  Saviour's  sufferings  and  woes 
derived  additional  poignancy  and  exquisiteness  from  the  very  character  which  He 
bare.  ' '  Many  were  astonied  at  Thee. "  The  spectators  were  so,  who  smote  upon 
their  breasts,  and  returned,  after  having  seen  these  things.  Devils  were  astonished, 
when  they  saw  how  aU  the  shafts  of  their  malice  recoiled.  Angels  were  astonished 
as  they  ministered  unto  Him.  So  He  is  still  a  wonder  unto  many  ;  and  if  He  be  not 
80  to  us,   it  is  because  of  our  criminal  insensibility  and  indifference.     II.  The 

MOMENTOUS  CONSEQITENCES  BY  WHICH  HiS  SUFFERINGS  AND  SOEROWS  WERE  TO  BE 

FOLLOWED.  "So  shall  He  sprinkle  many  nations. "  There  is  a  direct  reference  to 
the  various  aspersions  and  ablutions  under  the  law  of  Moses.  These  were  of  three 
kinds — 1.  An  aspersion  of  the  blood  of  atonement  once  a  year.  2.  An  aspersion  of 
water  on  the  unclean  person,  called  the  water  of  separ?,tion,  by  which  a  person  was 
separated  to  a  holy  purpose.  3.  An  aspersion  both  of  water  and  of  blood  on  the  leper, 
by  which  he  was  pronounced  clean,  and  needed  no  longer  to  remain  without  the 
camp.  Combine  these  ideas,  and  they  will  give  the  two  grand  designs  of  our  Saviour's 
deatn — a  propitiation,  and  a  purification.  And  recollect  that  these  two  great  and 
important  ends  of  our  Saviour  s  death  must  always  be  associated.  Here  we  see  their 
superiority  over  the  legal  aspersions.     {J.  Clayton,  M.A.)    A  twofold  wonder: — 

I.    The   ASTONISHMENT    PRODUCED   BY   OUK    SaVIOUR'S   HUMILIATION.      1.    "  Manj 

were  astonied  at  Thee" — astonished,  doubtless,  at  the  disappointment  of  their 
expectations.  They  had  looked  for  a  second  Joshua,  who  should  march  at  their 
head,  and  lead  them  forth  from  victory  to  victory  till  all  their  enemies  should  have 
fallen  beneath  their  feet.  They  had  expected  another  son  of  Jesse,  who  should  make 
the  name  of  Israel  terrible  to  surrounding  nations.  And  when  they  saw  the  world's 
Redeemer,  and  found  Him  possessed  of  none  of  those  external  attributes  which  they 
deemed  essential  to  His  character,  they  were  offended  at  Him,  and  their  astonish- 
ment was  that  of  indignation  and  bitter  disappointment.  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's 
son  ? "  2.  But  our  text  goes  on  to  describe  some  special  causes  of  this  astonishment. 
"His  visage  was  so  marred,  more  than  any  man,  and  His  form  more  than  the  sons 
of  men."  Whilst  further  on  the  prophet  adds,  "  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness  ; 
and  when  we  shall  see  Him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  Him. "  I  do 
not  believe  that  such  expressions  as  these  are  intended  to  represent  the  person  of  the 
Saviour  as  naturally  defective  in  comeliness  or  dignity,  though  they  have  been  often- 
times so  understood,  for  we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  the  form  which  God  gave 
His  own  Son  was  one  of  the  best  and  the  most  perfect,  and  that  the  features  of  His 
countenance  were  as  expressive  as  human  features  could  be  of  intelligence,  of  dignity, 
and  of  love.  Yet  there  was  a  marvellous  mixture  of  meekness  with  this  intelligence, 
of  abasement  with  this  dignity,  and  of  sorrow  with  this  love.  Never  was  there  a 
countenance  which  so  beamed  with  holiness ;  yet  never  was  there  one  so  deeply 
furrowed  with  the  lines  the  curse  had  made.  Unrepenting  sinners,  like  the  Jews  of 
fild,  are  to  this  day  astonished  without  being  benefited  at  the  sight  of  the  Redeemer's 
offerings.  11.  Tne  text  says,  alluding  to  the  ceremonial  law,  "He  shall  sprinkle 
many  nations,"  etc.  We  here  perceive  the  difference  of  effect  produced  by  that 
astonishment  which  flows  from  contempt,  and  that  which  is  produced  bv  reverential 
regard  for  an  object  of  infinite  worth  and  dignity.  The  first  opens  the  lips,  and  the 
latter  seals  them.  The  first  accumulates  epithets  of  scorn.  But  very  different  shall 
l/e  the  result  of  that  wonder  which  shall  fill  the  breast  when  the  Saviour  begins  to 
give  convincing  proof  of  the  greatness  and  universality  of  His  triumph.  ' '  Kings 
shall  then  shut  their  mouths  at  Him."  "Seeing  the  progress  of  His  kingdom," 
says  Vitringa,  ' '  they  shall  revoke  their  edicts  against  it,  and  thus  shut  their  mouths 
at  Htm. "  The  wonder  shall  then  become  too  great  for  expression.  Again,  ' '  That 
which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they  see. "  The  general  ignorance  which  prevails 
amongst  men,  even  the  most  noble  and  the  most  educated,  on  religious  subjects,  is 
oftentimes  most  astounding.  To  cleanse  the  heart,  to  sanctify  the  soul,  there  is  no 
power  but  of  God  ;  and  so,  whenever  a  sinner  is  converted  from  the  error  of  his  ways, 
he  T&  brought  to  acknowledge,  "this  is  the  Lord's  doing."  But  the  true  accomplish- 
ment of  the  prediction  before  us  rec^uires  greater  things  than  these.    There  shall  be 


CHAP,  ui.]  ISAIAH.  76 

a  time  when  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  kings  and  subjects,  shall  aU  stand  in 
amazement  at  the  triumphs  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.     "What  they  had  not  heard 
shall  they  consider."    They  shall  lay  to  heart  those  things  which  shall  arrest  their 
attention.     It  will  not  be  enough  for  them  to  be  mere  spectators  of  the  Saviour's 
triumph  ;  they  shall  become  deeply  interested  in  it ;  all  their  thoughts,  affections, 
effort;s,  shall  tend  towards  it.     {S.  Bridge,  M.A.)     Christ* s  endurance  and  success: — 
I.  The  Savioux's  endttrance.     II.  The  Saviotjii's  sxtocess.     {Ibid.)    His  visage 
was  so  marred  more  than  any  man. — The  marred  face: — I.  Christ's  face  being 
BO  BEAXTTiFUL  "WAS  EASILY  MARRED.     The  perfect  beauty  of  God  was  the  reflected 
loveliness  of  Christ.     Perfection  is  easily  blemished  ;  the  more  beautiful  anything  is, 
the  more  easily  it  is  injured.     II.  Christ's  face  was  an  index  of  His  life  and 
WORK.     His  face  told  the  story  of  His  iimer  life.    This  was  the  chief  reason  for  the 
loveliness  of  Jesus'  face.     His  heart  was  ftdl  of  pure,  white  thoughts,  and  con- 
sequently rays  of  beauty  shot  out  through  His  gentle  eyes.     There  burned  within 
Him  the  light  of  tranquillity,  which  found  expression  in  His  calm,  peaceful  counten- 
ance.    All  the  grandest  virtues  of  this  life  could  be  seen  in  Jesus'  face.     And  yet 
this  beauty  was  marred,  the  light  from  His  inner  light  suffered  a  black  eclipse.     His 
face  was  also  an  index  of  His  work.     When  you  see  a  man  in  the  street  you  can  often 
tell  whether  he  is  student,  artist  or  working-man.     The  employment  makes  a  certain 
impression  upon  the  face.     Christ's  employment  must  have  told  upon  His  counten- 
ance.    In  His  compassion  for  souls  "He  sighed  deeply  in  spirit,"  "He  groaned 
and  was  troubled."    Words  such  as  these  convey  some  idea  of  the  wear  and  tear 
Jesus  had  to  endure.    III.  There  are  special  instances  given  of  the  marring 
OF  His  FACE.     At  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  when  the  sisters  were  lamenting  for  their 
dead  brother,  Christ  joined  in  the  sorrow  and  wept,  His  face  being  stained  with 
tears.     On  the  brow  of  Olivet  as  He  stood  looking  at  the  beloved  city  He  began  to 
weep,  and  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  as  the  sweat  dropped  from  Him  in  drops  like 
blood,  He  fell  on  His  face  and  prayed  ;  in  the  judgment-hall  when  standing  in  the 
presence  of  His  accusers,  we  read,  "  And  some  began  to  spit  on  Him  and  to  cover  His 
face,  and  to  buffet  Him,  and  to  say  unto  Him,  Prophesy,  and  the  servants  did  strike 
Him  with  the  palms  of  their  hands."    They  degraded  Jesus  as  much  as  possible, 
directing  their  blows  and  insults  to  His  face ;  such  treatment  would  tell  heavily 
upon  His  appearance.     IV.  There  mxtst  have  been  something  attractive  in 
THE  FACE  OF  Jesus.     The  average  man  could  see  no  beauty  in  Jesus  ;  still,  the 
children  were  attracted  by  Him,  and  children  as  a  rule  are  either  repelled  or  won  by 
a  look.     It  was  by  a  look  that  Jesus  won  Peter  from  a  state  of  backsliding.     In 
conclusion,  we  like  to  think  of  God  as  having  a  face  the  same  as  that  of  Jesus. 
Scientists-  talk  of  "an  essence,"  " a  great  first  cause,"  "something  in  the  abstract," 
but  with  such  definitions  we  wander  and  cannot  understand  God.     By  faith,  as  Dr. 
Saphir  says,  "  we  see  the  face  of  our  dear  God  and  seek  Him  as  a  friend  "  or,  like 
one  of  old,  we  say,  "Thy  face.  Lord,  will  I  seek."    We  look  forward  to  one  day 
seeing  the  face  of  Jesus.     ( W.  K.  Bryce.) 

Yer.    15.    So   shall   He   sprinkle   many  nations. — Sprinkling  the  nations: — 

"Sprinkle;"  possibly  "startle,"  cause  to  rise  up  in  wonder  and  reverence.  The 
nations  were  familiar  with  the  afflictions  and  abjectness  of  the  Servant ;  suddenly, 
and  without  intimation  of  it,  they  see  His  elevation  and  stand  up  in  reverentifj 
silence  'before  Him.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  peculiar  doctrines  of  Christi- 
anity the  subject  of  ancient  prophecy : — I.  The  accomplishment  of  this  prophecy 
in  general.  This  prophecy  hath  been  in  part  already  accomplished,  in  the 
diffusive  spread  of  the  Gospel  throughout  the  world :  many  nations  whereof  have 
been  plentifully  sprinkled  with  its  Divine  doctrines,  and  made  nominal  Christians  ; 
and  many  individuals  in  those  nations  been  made  real  converts,  by  virtue  of  that 
"blood  of  sprinkling  which  speaketh  better  things  than  the  blood  of  Abel."  II. 
Some  of  those  peculiar  doctrines  of  Christianity  wbicts.  we  may  suppose  to 
BE  here  referred  TO,  most  of  which  were  in  a  great  measure,  and  some  of  them 
altogether,  unknown  to  the  world,  before  the  Messiah  came.  1.  The  doctrine  of 
man's  apostacy,  and  the  way  wherein  moral  evil  made  its  first  entrance  into  the 
world.  2.  The  method  of  man's  recovery  from  the  miseries  of  his  apostate  state, 
by  the  mediation  and  redemption  of  Chnst.  3.  The  renovation  of  our  natures  by 
the  gracious  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  ever-blessed 
Trinity.  5.  The  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.  6.  The  doctrine  of  grace.  7.  The 
gracious  and  effectual  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  heart  of  man.  8.  The 
resurrection  of  the  body.    9.  Several  particular  oinnunstances  relating  to  the  final 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

judgment  are  the  peculiar  discoveries  of  the  Christian  revelation,  that  Christ  will 
be  the  Judge,  etc.  10.  The  undoubted  certainty  of  a  future  state  of  rewards  and 
punishments.  {A.  Mason,  M.A.)  The  risen  Christ  unnning  the  nations: — Bishop 
George  Augustus  Selwyn  was  a  splendid  type  of  the  muscular  Christian.  As  s 
missionary  he  was  a  mighty  force,  and  as  a  friend  he  was  universally  beloved.  An 
incident  in  his  career  as  Missionary  Bishop  of  New  Zealand  well  shows  what  manner 
of  man  he  was.  Governor  Grey  and  Bishop  Selwyn  were  out  together  on  a  walking 
expedition,  and  it  was  Easter  Sunday.  "Christ  has  risen  I "  Selwvn  reverently 
welcomed  the  day,  and  his  companion  joined,  "  He  has  risen  indeed  1  '  They  were 
communing  in  that  spirit  when  a  bundle  of  letters  was  brought  into  the  tent.  One 
to  Selwyn  bore  the  news  of  the  death  of  Siapo,  a  Loyalty  Islander,  who  had  become 
a  Christian  under  his  teaching,  and  who  was  being  educated  with  other  natives  at  his 
seminary  in  Auckland.  The  Bishop,  overcome  with  grief,  burst  into  tears  ;  then  he 
broke  some  moments  of  silence  with  the  words,  "Why,  you  have  not  shed  a  single 
tear!"  "No,"  said  the  Governor,  "I  have  been  so  wrapped  in  thought  that  I 
could  not  weep.  I  have  been  thinking  of  the  prophecy  that  men  of  every  race 
were  to  be  assembled  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  I  have  tried  to  imagine  the 
wonder  and  joy  prevailing  there  at  the  coming  of  Siapo,  the  first  Christian  of  his 
race.  He  would  be  glad  evidence  that  another  people  of  the  world  had  been  added 
to  the  teaching  of  Christ."  "Yes,  yes,"  said  Selwyn,  drying  his  tears,  "that 
is  the  true  idea  to  entertain,  and  I  shall  not  weep  any  more."  {Christian  Age.) 
The  kings  shall  shut  their  moaths  at  Him. — The  wondrous  monarchy: — I.  The 
UNIQUE  SPECTACLE  WHICH  CHRIST  PRESENTS.  All  that  is  great  in  this  spectacle 
gathers  round  what  this  Servant  is  to  be  and  do.  "We  observe  five  distinguishing 
features — 1.  "Wondrous  wisdom.  "My  Servant  shall  deal  prudently."  Jesus  was 
filled  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding ;  with  a  keen  and  piercing 
glance  He  saw  men  through  and  through.  But  it  was  not  only  in  confounding  His 
enemies  that  His  superhuman  wisdom  was  shown ;  it  was  also  in  the  means  He 
used  for  establishing  that  kingdom  which  He  came  to  found.  Means  on  which  the 
world  would  have  relied  He  forbade  and  abjured.  Means  never  tried  before  were 
the  only  ones  He  would  use.  He  would  have  no  sword  employed  either  to  defend 
Himself,  or  to  extend  His  sway,  but  equipped  His  warriors  only  with  "power 
from  on  high"!  2.  "Wondrous  sorrow  (ver.  14).  He  was  "a  man  of  sorrows." 
8.  "Wondrous  elevation.  "He  shall  arise,  and  be  lifted  up,  and  be  glorified  ex- 
ceedingly." These  words  exactly  indicate  the  resurrection,  the  ascension  and  the 
exaltation  to  mediatorial  gloiy.  4.  "Wondrous  redeeming  efiScacy.  ' '  So  shall  He 
sprinkle  many  nations."  As  His  sorrow  was  intense,  so  shall  His  redeeming  power 
be  large,  as  if  the  one  were  a  recompense  for  the  other.  There  were  (among  others) 
two  kinds  of  sprinkling  enjoined  by  the  Mosaic  law,  to  either  or  to  both  of  which 
a  reference  may  be  intended  here.  The  sprinkling  of  blood,  being  towards  and  on 
the  mercy-seat,  was  God-wards  ;  the  sprinkling  of  water,  as  on  the  Levite  or  leper, 
was  on  the  person,  man-wards.  So  the  work  of  Christ  has  this  double  aspect.  The 
blood-shedmng  was  God's  own  atoning  act  in  Him,  for  us  ;  the  cleansing  grace  is 
God's  purifying  act,  through  Him,  in  us.  5.  "Wondrous  uniting  power.  "  So  shall 
He  sprinkle  many  nations."  He  would  absolve  and  sanctify,  not  the  Jew  only, 
but  also  the  Greek,  "and  thus  abolish  the  wall  of  partition  between  Israel  and  the 
heathen,  and  gather  into  one  holy  Church  with  Israel,  those  who  had  hitherto  been 
pronounced  unclean. "  How  vividly  is  the  fulfilment  of  this  portrayed  in  Acts  x. 
11.  "What  is  there  here  that  should  lead  kings,  in  particular,  to  do  this  T 
Is  it  that  though  kings  and  princes  know  aU  that  earth  has  to  give  of  luxury  and 
splendour,  they  see  here  a  pomp  that  outshines  aU  beside  ?  That  may  be  so,  but 
we  think  the  reason  lies  deeper  still.  It  is  evidently  on  account  of  something 
before  unknown  that  they  are  to  "  shut  their  mouths,"  for  the  text  goes  on  to  say, 
"  That  which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they  see,  and  that  which  they  had  not 
heard  shall  they  consider."  Around  what  do  the  thoughts  and  associations  of 
kings  gather?  Do  they  not  gather  round  the  sceptre,  crown  and  empire?  Do 
they  not  naturally  weigh  in  the  balance  one  monarchy  against  another  ?  Surely. 
"Well,  here  is  such  a  monarchy  as  earth  had  never  known  before,  and  one  that 
will  ever  stand  absolutely  alone.  1,  In  this  monarchy  alone  right  and  might  are 
entirely  equal.  2.  This  monarchy  is  based  on  the  King's  own  self-sacrifice.  8. 
How  did  He  set  up  this  kingdom  I  A  few  poor  fishermen  undertook  to  instruct 
and  convert  the  world.  The  success  was  prodigious.  4.  This  monarchy  was  based 
on  the  King's  own  priesthood.  5.  The  power  of  love  is  the  only  power  that 
gather!  men  round  th*  OrMS.    A.  This  monarchy  was  inaugurated  bj  th«  iasot 


CHAP,  tin.]  ISAIAH.  77 

of  a  royal  pardon  offered  to  the  worst  of  sinners,  "beginning  at  Jerusalem."  7. 
This  is  a  monarchy  that,  vmiting  men  under  its  sceptre,  creating  a  new  power  of 
love  towards  itself,  creates  also  a  new  power  of  love  for  man  towards  man,  as  well 
as  of  man  for  Jesus  ;  and,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  in  gathering  men  of  every 
tribe  and  tongue  under  its  sceptre,  it  makes  them  forget  their  diversity,  and  brings 
them  to  feel  their  oneness  in  one  common  God  and  Father  ;  and  by  the  pulse-beat 
of  a  common  life  in  all  the  nations,  solves  the  long-vexed  problem  of  the  unity  of 
the  human  race !  Nor  is  this  all.  8.  Everywhere  the  one  force  which  holds 
together  the  subjects  of  this  Monarch  is  love  ! — not  fear,  not  constraint,  but  love. 
Is  there  nothing  in  such  a  monarchy  as  this  to  give  a  clue  to  the  meaning  of  the 
expression,  ' '  Kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  Him  "  ?  The  expression  evidently 
denotes  the  effect  which  the  report  or  the  sight  of  such  a  monarchy  should  produce 
upon  them.  Some  take  it  as  meaning  that  they  should  shut  their  mouths  in  silent 
fear.  Others,  that  they  should  withdraw  the  edicts  against  Christianity.  We 
rather,  with  Mr.  Urwick,  take  it  as  indicating  "the  awe-inspiring  power"  of 
Christ.  There  may  be  yet  a  deeper  meaning  in  the  expression,  ' '  sh^  shut  their 
mouths" — a  meaning  which  applies  only  to  Christian  kings,  and  not  to  them 
simply  as  kings,  but  rather  as  Christians  in  common  with  others.  The  words 
may  indloata  ths  ulenoe  induced  by  deep  emotion.    (/.  Culro$$,  D.D.) 


OHAPTEE  LIIL 


Vbks.  1-12.  Wlio  hath  helieved  our  report  1 — The  Messiah  referred  to  in  Isaiah 
im. : — By  some  it  has  been  supposed,  in  ancient  times  and  in  modem,  that  the 
prophet  was  referring  to  the  sufferings  of  the  nation  of  Israel — either  of  Israel  as  a 
whole  or  of  the  righteous  section  of  the  nation — and  to  the  benefits  that  would 
accrue  from  those  sufferings  to  the  surrounding  peoples,  some  of  whom  were  con- 
temptuous of  Israel,  all  of  whom  may  be  described  as  ignorant  of  God.  But  to 
defend  that  opinion  it  is  necessary  to  paraphrase  and  interpret  some  of  the  state- 
ments ta  a  way  that  no  sound  rules  of  exposition  will  allow.  Even  Jewish  historians 
are  wont  to  represent  the  sufferings  of  their  people  as  the  consequence  of  sin,  whereas 
these  verses  speak  repeatedly  of  sufferings  that  are  vicarious.  St.  Paul  says  in  one 
place  that  the  fall  of  the  Jews  "is  the  riches  of  the  world,  and  their  loss  the  riches 
of  the  Gentiles  ; "  but  he  is  so  far  from  meaning  that  the  Jews  suffered  in  the  stead 
of  the  Gentiles,  that  he  proceeds  at  once  to  argue  by  implication  :  If  the  world  has 
been  blessed  notwithstanding  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  Jew,  how  much  more  would 
it  have  been  blessed  if  Israel  had  been  true?  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  great 
figure  of  "the  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  standing  in  the  front  of  all  these  verses,  was 
designed  to  have  more  than  a  single  interpretation,  to  be  reverently  approached  from 
many  sides,  to  be  full  of  appeals  to  the  patriotism  and  to  the  piety  of  the  Israelite  ; 
but  at  the  same  time  it  is  no  mere  abstract  conception,  but  the  figure  of  a  living  and 
separated  Person,  ' '  more  perfect  than  human  believer  ever  was,  uniting  in  himself 
more  richly  than  any  other  messenger  of  God  everything  that  was  necessary  for  the 
salvation  of  man,  and  finally  accomplishing  what  no  mere  prophet "  ever  attempted. 
And  some  of  the  authorities  of  the  synagogue  even  might  be  quoted  in  favour  of  the 
almost  universal  Christian  opinion,  that  the  Man  of  Sorrows  of  this  chapter  despised, 
and  yet  triumphant,  is  no  other  than  the  Messiah  of  Israel  and  the  Saviour  of  the 
world,  who  over-trod  the  lowest  levels  of  hiunan  pain  and  misery,  and  who  hereafter 
will  sit  enthroned,  on  His  head  many  crowns,  and  in  His  heart  the  satisfaction  of 
assiired  and  unlimited  victory.  (M.  W.  Moss,  D.D.)  The  Jewish  nation  a  vicarious 
sufferer : — Isaiah  liii.  has  been  supposed  by  many  to  refer  to  the  Jewish  nation  as  a 
whole,  and  not  to  Christ  or  any  other  individual.  And,  in  truth,  it  is  in  many  ways 
singularly  applicable  to  Israel  as  a  nation.  As  a  nation  Israel  was  "despised  and 
rejected,"  and  "bore  the  sins  of  many."  This  people  was  the  chief  medium  through 
which  the  Eternal  was  made  manifest  on  earth.  Hence  came  the  peculiarities  and 
deficiencies  of  the  Hebrew  nature.  The  Jews  were  haunted  by  the  Infinite  and 
Eternal ;  and  therefore  they  knew  not  the  free  and  careless  joyousness  of  Greece. 
The  mountains  are  scarred  and  rent  by  storms  and  tempests  abnost  unknown  in  tiie 
TaUeys.    Th«  deepest  religion  necessarily  involves  prolonged  suffering.    The  near 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lin. 

presence  of  the  Infinite  pierces  and  wounds  the  soul.  To  Greeks  or  Romans  Israel 
was  a  sort  of  Moses,  veiling  even  while  revealing  the  terrific  lineaments  of  Jehovah. 
The  face  of  Israel  did  indeed  shine  with  an  unearthly  glory  after  communing  with 
God  on  the  moimtain  ;  but  it  was  a  glory  utterly  uncongenial  to  the  gaiety  of  joyous 
Athens.  Most  truly  might  Greeks  and  Romans  say  of  the  devout  Jew,  "  He  is  despised 
and  rejected  of  men  ;  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief ;  and  we  hid,  as  it 
were,  our  faces  from  him  ;  he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him  not."  Yet  was 
Israel  a  mighty  benefactor  to  the  human  race.  "The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the 
iniquity  of  us  aU."  Salvation  came  by  the  Jews.  They  had  more  genuine  moral 
inspiration  than  any  others  of  the  sons  of  men.  To  them  alone  was  clearly  disclosed 
the  true  Jacob's  ladder  connecting  earth  with  heaven.  To  the  Greeks  the  Infinite 
was  a  mere  notion,  a  thing  for  the  intellect  to  play  with,  or  a  kind  of  irreducible 
surd  left  after  the  keenest  philosophical  analysis.  To  the  Hebrews,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  Infinite  was  an  appalling  and  soul-abasing  reality,  an  ever-menacing  guide, 
as  the  fiery  flamiag  sword  of  the  cherubims  "which  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the 
way  of  the  tree  of  Ufe."  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  "  Israel  for  the  sake  of  the 
whole  world.  By  being  "numbered  with  the  transgressors,"  Israel  found  out  the 
real  righteousness.  {A.  Crauford,  M.A.)  The  Jewish  nation  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
and  of  all  natures  at  once  spiritual  and  sympathetic  throughout  the  ages.  AU  real 
prophets  in  every  age  have  in  them  much  of  the  true  Hebrew  nature,  with  its  depths 
and  its  limitations.  {Hid.)  The  servant  and  Israel: — "Who  believed  what  we 
heard,  and  to  whom  did  the  arm  of  the  Lord  reveal  itself  ? "  Who  believed  the 
revelation  given  to  us  in  regard  to  the  Servant,  and  who  perceived  the  operation  of 
the  Lord  in  His  history?  The  speakers  are  Israel  now  believing,  and  confessing 
their  former  unbelief.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Christ  in  Isaiah: — As  an  artisan, 
laying  a  mosaic  of  complicated  pattern  and  diverse  colours,  has  before  him  a  working- 
drawing,  and  carefully  fits  the  minute  pieces  of  precious  stone  and  enamel  according 
to  it,  tUl  the  perfection  of  the  design  is  revealed  to  all,  so  do  the  evangelists  and 
apostles,  with  the  working-drawing  of  Old  Testament  prophecy,  and  Old  Testament 
types  and  shadows  in  the  tabernacle  services  and  ceremonies,  in  their  hands,  fit 
together  the  details  of  Christ's  life  on  earth.  His  atoning  death  and  His  resurrection, 
and  say,  "  Behold,  this  can  be  none  other  than  the  long  looked- for  Messiah."  The 
central  knop,  or  flower  pattern,  of  the  mosaic,  from  which  aU  other  detaUs  of  the 
design  radiated,  was  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah.  {F.  Sessions. )  The  suffering 
Saviour: — I.  We  are  led  to  the  anticipated  lowliness  of  God's  righteous 
Servant,  the  Messiah.  He  would  be  low  in  the  esteem  of  men,  even  of  those  He 
comes  to  serve.  The  Jews  and  llessianic  prophecy : — From  the  Jews  wresting  this 
text,  observe — 1.  That  there  is  an  evil  disposition  in  men  to  turn  off  upon  others 
that  which  nearly  concerns  themselves.  2.  That  it  is  no  new  thing  in  persons  to 
vouch  that  for  themselves  which  makes  most  against  them.  Thus  the  Jews  do  this 
chapter  against  the  GentUes.  3.  When  God,  for  the  wickedness  of  a  people, 
hardeneth  their  hearts,  they  are  apt  to  mistake  in  that  which  is  most  plain. 
4.  From  the  prophet's  great  admiration,  observe,  that  when  we  can  do  no  good  upon 
a  people,  the  most  efi"ectual  way  is  to  complain  of  it  to  God.  5.  Those  that  profess 
the  name  of  God  may  be  much  prejudiced  against  the  entertainment  of  those  truths 
and  counsels  that  He  makes  known  to  them  for  their  good.  6.  It  is  a  wonder  they 
should  not  believe  so  ;^ain  a  discovery  of  Christ,  though  by  the  just  judgment  of 
God  they  did  not.  7.  The  first  believing  of  Christ  is  a  believing  the  report  of  Him  ; 
but  afterwards  there  are  experiences  to  confirm  our  belief  (1  Pet.  ii.  3  ;  John  iv.  42). 
{T.   Manton,   D.D.)     Christ  preached,    but    rejected: — I.  Jesus    Christ   mat    be 

CLEARLY  REPRESENTED  TO  A  PEOPLE,  AND  YET  BUT  FEW  WON  TO  BELIEVE  IN   HiM. 

II.  The  Gospel  is  the  arm  and  power  of  God.  III.  So  few  believe,  because 
God's  arm  is  not  revealed  to  them  :  the  power  of  the  Word  is  not  manifested  by 
the  Spirit.  {Ibid.)  Jewish  prejudice  against  Christ : — At  the  time  of  Christ's  being 
in  the  flesh  there  were  divers  prejudices  against  Him  in  the  Jews.  1.  An  erroneous 
opinion  of  the  Messiah.  2.  A  fond  reverence  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  as  if  it 
were  derogatory  to  them  to  close  with  Christ  (John  ix.  29).  3.  Offence  at  His  out- 
ward meanness  (that  is  the  scope  of  this  chapter),  and  the  persecution  He 
met  with.  {Ibid.)  Gentile  prejudice  against  Christ : — 1.  Pride  in  the  understanding 
(1  Cor.  L  23).  2.  The  meanness  of  the  reporters — poor  fishermen.  3.  The  hard 
conditions  upon  which  they  were  to  entertain  Christ.  {Ibid.)  Christ  rejected  in  our 
time : — The  mndrances  to  beUeving  in  Him  are  these :  1.  Ignorance.  Men  hear 
of  Ohrist,  bat  au:e  not  acquainted  with  Him.  2.  An  easy  slightness  ;  men  do  not 
labour  after  faith.    8.  A  careless  security.    They  think  themselves  well  enough 


CHAP.  Liii.]  ISAIAH.  T9 

without  Him.  4.  A  light  esteem  of  Ohrist.  Aa  we  do  not  see  our  own  needs, 
80  not  His  worth.  5.  A  presumptuous  conceit  that  we  have  entertained  Ohrist 
already.  Many  think  every  slight  wish,  every  trivial  hope,  will  serve  the  turn. 
6.  Hardness  of  heart.  7.  Self-confidence.  8.  Carnal  fears.  These  hinder  the  soul 
from  closing  with  that  mercy  that  is  reported  to  be  in  Christ.  They  are  of  divers 
sorts.  (1)  Fear  of  God's  anger,  as  if  He  were  so  displeased  with  us  that  certaialy 
He  did  not  intend  Christ  for  us.  (2)  Fear  of  being  too  bold  with  the  promises. 
(3)  Fear  of  the  sin  of  presumption.  9.  Carnal  reasonings  from  our  sins.  10.  Carnal 
apprehensions  of  Christ.  {Jbid.)  TJie  credibility  arid  importance  of  the  Gospel 
report : — I.  We  WILL  contemplate  this  kbport,  and  inquire  whether  it  is  not 
WORTHY  OF  OTTR  ATTENTION  AND  BELIEF.  1.  The  report  which  we  hear,  is  a  most 
instructive  report.  It  brings  us  information  of  many  things  which  were  before  un- 
known, and  which,  without  this  information,  never  could  have  been  known  to  the 
sons  of  men.  ' '  That  which  had  not  been  told  us,  we  see. "  The  Gospel  for  this 
reason  is  called  a  message,  good  tidings,  and  tidings  of  great  joy.  The  leading 
truths  of  natural  religion  are  agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  reason  ;  and  perhaps  might 
be,  in  some  measure,  discovered  without  revelation.  At  least  they  were  known 
among  those  who  had  never  enjoyed  a  written  revelation,  though,  indeed,  we  cannot 
say  how  far  these  might  be  indebted  to  traditional  information.  But  certainly 
those  truths,  which  immediately  relate  to  the  recovery  and  salvation  of  sianers, 
human  reason  could  never  investigate.  2.  The  Gospel  is  a  report  from  heaven.  It 
was,  in  some  degree,  made  known  to  the  patriarchs,  and  afterwards  more  folly  to  the 
prophets.  But  "God  .  .  .  has  in  these  last  days,  spoken  to  us  by  His  Son." 
3.  The  Gospel  is  a  credible  report.  Many  reports  come  to  us  without  evidence  :  we 
only  hear  them,  but  know  not  what  is  their  foundation,  or  whether  they  have  any. 
And  yet  even  these  reports  pass  not  wholly  unregarded.  But,  if  any  important 
intelligence  is  brought  to  us  which  is  both  rational  in  itself,  and  at  the  same 
time  supported  by  a  competent  number  of  reputable  witnesses,  we  may  much 
rather  judge  it  worthy  of  our  attention  and  belief.  With  this  evidence  the 
Gospel  comes.  It  is  credible  in  its  own  nature.  The  doctrines  of  the  Gospel, 
though  beyond  the  discovery  and  above  the  comprehension  of  reason,  are  in  no 
instance  contrary  to  its  dictates.  They  are  all  adapted  to  promote  real  virtue 
and  righteousness.  Besides  this  internal  evidence,  God  has  been  pleased  to  give 
it  the  sanction  of  His  own  testimony.  Errors  have  sometimes  been  introduced 
and  propagated  by  the  artful  reasoning  of  interested  men.  But  Christianity  rests 
not  on  the  basis  of  human  reasoning,  or  a  subtle  intricate  train  of  argumentation  :  it 
stands  on  the  ground  of  plain  facts,  of  which  every  man  is  able  to  judge.  The  life, 
miracles,  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  are  the  facts  which  support  it. 
If  these  did  really  take  place,  the  Gospel  is  true.  Whether  they  did  or  not, 
men  of  common  abilities  were  as  competent  to  judge,  as  men  of  the  profoundest 
learning.  We,  who  live  in  the  present  age,  have  not,  in  every  respect,  the 
same  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  as  they  had,  who  were  eye-witnesses  of 
those  facts.  But  we  have  their  testimony,  in  the  most  authentic  manner,  conveyed 
to  us.  Some  advantages  we  have,  which  they  had  not.  We  have  the  examination 
of  preceding  ages.  We  see  Christianity  still  supporting  itself  against  all  the  opposition 
of  the  world.  We  see  the  unwearied  attempts  of  its  enemies  to  subvert  it,  rendered 
fruitless  and  vain.  We  see  many  of  the  predictions  contained  in  these  records, 
already  verified  ;  and  others,  to  all  appearance,  hastening  on  towards  an  accomplish- 
ment. 4.  It  is  an  interesting  report.  From  the  Gospel  we  learn  that  the  human 
race  have,  by  transgression,  fallen  under  the  Divine  displeasure.  This  report 
corresponds  with  our  own  experience  and  observation.  The  Gospel  brings  us  a 
joyful  message.  5.  This  is  a  pubKc  report.  It  is  what  we  have  all  heard,  and 
heard  often.  II.  We  will  consider  the  complaint.  "Who  hath  believed  our 
report?"  (/.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Do  the  prophets  believe? — "Who  hath  believed  our 
report  ? "  This  inquiry  has  been  read  in  various  ways.  Each  of  the  ways  has  had 
its  own  accent  and  good  lesson.  1.  For  example,  the  figure  might  be  that  of  the 
prophets  gathered  together  in  conference  and  bemoaning  in  each  other's  hearing  that 
their  sermons  or  prophecies  had  come  to  nothing.  We  have  preached  aU  this  while, 
and  nobody  has  believed  ;  why  preach  any  more  ?  If  this  thing  were  of  God  it  would 
result  in  great  harvests :  it  resvdts  in  barrenness,  and  we  are  disappointed  prophets. 
That  is  one  way.  Many  excellent  remarks  have  been  made  under  that  construction 
of  the  inquiry.  2.  But  that  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  prophecy.  The  Revised 
Version  helps  us  to  see  it  more  clearly,  by  reading  the  word  thus: — "Who  hath 
believed  that  which  we  have  heard  ? "    l^e  idea  is  tmit  the  prophets  are  not  rebuking 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  un. 

other  people  ;  the  tremendous  idea  is  that  the  prophets  are  interrogating  themselves 
and  saying,  in  effect  at  least,  Have  we  believed  our  own  prophecy  I  is  there  a  believer 
in  all  the  Church?  is  not  the  Church  a  nest  of  unbelievers?  That  puts  a  very 
different  face  upon  the  interrogation.  "We  shall  now  come  to  great  Gospels  ;  when 
the  prophets  flagellate  themselves  we  shall  have  some  good  preaching.  We  might 
put  the  inquiry,  if  not  literally,  yet  spiritually  and  experimentally,  thus : — Which 
of  us,  even  the  prophets,  have  believed  ?  We  have  said  the  right  thing ;  people 
might  listen  with  entranced  attention  to  such  eloquence  as  ours  :  but  is  it  red  with 
the  blood  of  trust,  has  it  gone  forth  from  us  taking  our  souls  with  it  ?  If  not,  we 
are  as  the  voice  of  the  charmer  ;  men  are  saying  of  each  of  us,  He  hath  a  pleasant 
voice,  what  he  says  is  said  most  tunefully,  but  the  man  himself  is  not  behind  it  and 
in  it  and  above  it :  it  is  a  recitation,  not  a  prophecy.  3.  Who  can  find  fault  with 
the  prophets  ?  Not  one  of  us,  least  of  all  myself.  They  had  some  hard  things  to 
believe  ;  men  do  not  willingly  believe  in  wildernesses  ana  barren  rocks,  and  declara- 
tions that  have  in  them  no  poetry  and  on  them  no  lustre  from  heaven,  hard  and 
perilous  sayings.  Who  can  believe  this,  that  when  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord  shall 
come,  the  Chosen  One,  He  shall  be  "as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground:  He  hath  no 
form  nor  comeliness ;  and  when  we  shall  see  Him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should 
desire  Him  ? "  It  is  incredible  ;  if  He  is  God's  own  Son  He  will  be  more  beautiful 
than  the  dawn  of  summer.  But  God  will  not  flatter  His  servants  ;  He  says  to  each 
of  them,  even  the  loftiest  in  stature  of  soul.  Go  out  and  proclaim  a  Cross.  It  is 
always  so  with  this  Christ ;  He  is  all  Cross  at  the  first :  but  what  a  summer  there 
is  hidden  in  the  clouds  I  and  it  will  come  as  it  were  suddenly.  The  prophets  worked 
their  own  way  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  out  of  this  darkness.  Having 
dwelt  more  largely  upon  the  tragical  aspect  of  the  life  of  this  great  One,  they  say 
towards  the  close,  "  He  shall  see  His  seed."  That  is  a  new  tone  ;  "  He  shall  prolong 
his  days,"  that  is  a  new  tone  ;  "  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  His 
hand."  Why,  they  have  turned  the  comer ;  they  are  getting  up  into  the  sunshine, 
they  are  unfurling  the  flag  on  the  mountain-top.  ' '  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of 
His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied : "  His  blood  snail  buy  the  universe.  This  is  the 
other  end  ;  this  the  other  aspect  of  the  Gospel.  You  will  never  profitably  read  the 
Scriptures  until  you  take  the  darkness  with  the  light.  4.  What  is  the  application 
of  this?  Why  are  you  wondering  that  other  people  do  not  believe?  The  voice 
says,  Friend !  didst  thou  believe  thine  own  sermon  ?  Was  it  alive  with  thine 
heart?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  heavy  complaint  and  lamentation: — I.  To  whom  it 
WAS  MADE.  We  find  from  parallel  Scriptures  that  it  is  made  to  the  Lord  Himself 
(John  xii.  38 ;  Rom.  x.  16).  II.  Whom  it  bespects.  It  respects  the  hearers  of 
the  Gospel  in  the  prophet's  time,  and  in  after  times  too.  III.  The  makee  of  this 
HEAVY  LAMENTATION.  1.  The  unsuccessfulness  of  the  Gospel,  and  prevailing  unbelief 
among  them  that  heard  it.  Consider — (1)  What  the  Gospel  is.  A  "report."  The 
word  signifies  a  "hearing,"  a  thing  to  be  heard  and  received  by  faith,  as  a  voice  is 
received  and  heard  by  the  ear.  Hence  that  expression,  "the  hearing  of  faith" 
(Gal.  iii.  2).  (2)  What  faith  is.  It  is  a  giving  credit  to  the  Gospel,  and  a  trusting 
our  souls  to  it,  as  on  a  word  that  cannot  fail.  (3)  How  rar«  that  faith  is.  "Who 
hath  believed  ? "  The  report  is  brought  to  multitudes  ;  but  where  is  the  man  that 
really  trusts  it,  as  news  from  heaven,  that  may  be  relied  on !  2.  The  great  with- 
drawing of  the  power  of  God  from  ordinances.  "To  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
revealed  ? "  This  implies  (1)  That  there  is  a  necessity  of  the  mightypower  of  God 
being  exerted  on  a  man,  to  cause  him  to  believe  (Jolm  vl.  44).  (2)  That  few,  very 
few,  felt  this  power.  (3)  That  hence  so  few  believed.  (T.  Boston,  M.A.)  The 
little  siiccess  of  the  Gospel  matter  of  lameniation : — I.  What  18  THAT  strcoESS  which 
THE  Gospel  sometimes  hath?  It  is  successful — 1.  When  sianers  are  thereby 
brought  to  faith  in  Christ  (Rom.  i.  17).  2.  When  they  are  thereby  brought  to 
holiness  of  life  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  II.  What  is  that  Divine  power  which  some- 
times comes  along  with  Gospel-ordinances  ?  1.  A  heart  and  Kfe  discovering 
power  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25).  The  word  comes,  and  the  Lord's  arm  comes  with  it, 
and  opens  the  volume  of  a  man's  heart  and  the  life,  and  it  is  as  if  the  preacher  were 
reading  the  secret  history  of  a  man's  thoughts  and  actions  (Heb.  iv.  12).  2.  A  sharp, 
convincing  power,  whereby  the  sinner  does  not  only  see  his  sin,  but  sees  the  Ul  and 
danger  of  it,  and  is  touched  to  the  heart  with  it  (Acts  xxiv.  25).  3.  A  drawing  and 
converting  power  (John  xii.  32  ;  Ps.  xix.  7).  4.  A  quickening  power  (Ps.  cxix.  50). 
5.  A  clearing  power,  resolving  doubts,  removing  mistakes  and  darkness  in  certain 
particulars,  whereby  one  is  retarded  in  their  spiritual  course  (Ps.  xix.  7,  8).  6.  A 
comforting  power  (Ps.  cxix.  49,  60).     7.  A  strengthening  power.     The  Spirit,  with 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAS.  81 

the  Word  blowing  on  the  dry  bones,  makes  them  stand  on  their  feet  like  a  great 
army,  8.  A  soul-elevating  and  heart-ravishing  power  (Luke  xxiv.  32).  III.  The 
EEASONS  OF  THE  DOCTRINE.  1.  It  must  be  a  matter  of  lamentation  to  the  godly 
in  general.  For — (1)  The  honour  of  Christ  is  thereby  overclouded.  (2)  The  glory 
of  the  glorious  Gospel  is  thereby  veiled.  (3)  Souls  are  thereby  lost,  while  salvation 
is  come  to  their  door.  (4)  The  godly  themselves  suffer  loss,  the  thronger  Christ's 
family  is,  the  better  thriven  are  the  children  ;  and  contrariwise.  If  there  were 
more  converting,  there  would  be  more  confirming  work  too.  2.  Particularly  to 
godly  ministers.  (1)  Thereby  their  care  and  pains  are  much  lost,  and  in  vain. 
(2)  Their  work  is  rendered  more  difficult  and  wearisome.  (3)  The  seals  of  their 
ministry  are  but  small.  {Ibid.)  Evidences  of  non-sticcess : — 1.  The  slighting  of 
Gospel  ordinances  that  so  much  prevails.  2.  Little  reformation  of  life  under  the 
dispensation  of  the  Gospel.  3.  Much  formality  in  attendance  on  ordinances. 
4.  Little  of  the  work  of  conversion  or  soul-exercise.  (Ibid.)  The  Gospel-report: — 
I.  Consider  the  Gospel  as  it  is  a  REfOHT.  View  it — 1.  In  the  nature  of  a 
report  in  general.  (1)  There  is  the  subject  of  a  report,  or  the  thing  that  is  reported, 
some  design,  action,  or  event,  true  or  false.  The  subject  of  the  Gospel-report  is,  a 
love-design  in  God  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  of  mankind  (2  Tim.  i.  9,  10).  It  is 
the  report  of  an  act  of  grace  and  kindness  in  God,  in  favours  of  them,  whereby  He 
has  given  them  His  Son  for  a  Saviour  (John  iii.  16  ;  Isa.  ix.  6),  and  eternal  life  in 
Him  (1  John  v.  11).  The  report  of  the  event  of  Christ's  dying  for  sinners.  (2)  There 
is  the  place  whence  the  report  originally  comes.  And  the  place  here  is  heaven. 
Hence  the  Gospel  is  called  "  heavenly  things  "  (John  iii.  12),  revealed  from  the  bosom 
of  the  Father.  (8)  The  matter  of  a  report  is  something  unseen  to  them  to  whom 
the  report  is  made.  And  so  is  the  matter  of  the  Gospel-report.  It  is  an  unseen 
God  (John  L  18) ;  an  unseen  Saviour  (1  Pet.  L  8) ;  and  unseen  things  (2  Cor.  iv.  18), 
that  are  preached  unto  you  by  the  Gospel.  So  the  Gospel  is  an  object  of  faith, 
not  of  sight  (Heb.  xi.  1).     We  receive  it  by  hearing,  not  by  seeing  (Isa.  Iv.  3). 

(4)  There  is  a  reporter  or  reporters.  And  in  this  case  the  report  is  made  by  many. 
The  first-hand  reporter  is  an  eye-witness,  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  Himself  was  the 
raiser  of  the  report  of  the  Gospel  (Heb.  ii.  3).  And  who  else  could  have  been  so  ? 
(John  i.  18).  What  He  reported  He  saw,  and  gives  us  His  testimony  of  the  truth 
of  it  on  His  eyesight  (John  iii.  11).  Hence  He  is  proposed  to  us  as  "the  faithful 
and  true  Witness"  (Rev.  iii.  14),  who  was  from  eternity  privy  to  the  whole  design 
revealed  to  us  in  the  Gospel.  The  prophets  and  apostles,  and  ministers  of  the 
Grospel.  They  are  the  second-hand  reporters.  (5)  There  is  a  manifestation  of  the 
thing  by  the  report,  to  the  parties  to  whom  the  report  is  made.  So  is  the  grace  of 
God  to  poor  sinners  manifested  to  them  by  the  Gospel  (2  Tim.  i.  9,  10).  2.  In  the 
nature  of  a  report  to  be  trusted  to,  for  some  valuable  end.  And  so  it  is — (1)  A  true 
and  faithful  report,  that  one  may  safely  trust  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  (2)  An  infallible 
report.  A  report  may  be  true  where  there  is  no  infallibility :  but  the  report  of  the 
Gospel  is  an  infallible  truth  (Acts  i.  3),  for  it  is  "the  Word  of  God  that  cannot 
lie  "  (1  Thes.  ii.  13).  And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  demonstrates  it  to  believers,  as 
Divine  truth  (1  Cor.  ii.  4).  (3)  A  good  and  comfortable  report.  (4)  A  weighty 
report,  even  of  the  greatest  weight,  as  concerning  man's  greatest  possible  interest 
(Isa.  Ixi.  6),  II,  Consider  faith  as  it  is  a  trusting  to  this  report.  Faith 
is — 1.  A  trusting  of  the  Gospel-report  as  true.  (1)  In  the  general,  with  respect  to 
the  multitude  whom  it  concerns.  "It  is  a  faithful  saying,  Christ  came  to  save 
sinners."  (2)  In  particular,  with  respect  to  oneself.  Faith  believes  that  there 
is  a  fulness  in  Chnst  for  poor  sinners,  and  for  oneself  in  particular.  Hence  it 
appears — That  there  is  an  assurance  in  the  nature  of  faith,  whereby  the  beKeving 

Con  is  sure  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel,  and  that  with  respect  to 
self  particularly  (1  Thes.  i.  5).  That  there  is  a  necessity  of  an  inward  illumination 
by  the  Spirit,  in  order  to  the  faith  of  the  Gospel  (1  Cor.  ii  10-14).  2.  A  trusting 
to  the  Gospel-report  as  good.  It  implies — (1)  Not  only  a  willingness,  but  a  sincere 
desire  to  be  delivered  from  sin,  as  well  as  from  wrath.  (2)  A  renouncing  of  aU  other 
confidence  for  his  salvation,  (3)  A  hearty  approbation  of  the  way  of  salvation 
manifested  in  the  report  of  the  Gospel  (Matt,  xL  6),  (4)  A  betaking  one's  self 
entirely  to  that  way  of  salvation,  by  trusting  to  it  wholly  for  our  own  salvation. 

(5)  A  confidence  or  trust,  that  He  will  save  us  from  sin  and  wrath,  according  to 
His  promise  (Acts  xv,  11).  Ill,  Consider  the  report  of  the  Gospel,  and  thb 
trusting  to  it,  conjunctlt.  The  Gospel  is  a  report  from  heaven — 1.  Of  salvation 
for  poor  sinners,  from  sin  (Matt.  L  21),  and  from  the  wrath  of  God  (John  iiL  16), 
freely  made  over  to  you  in  the  Word  of  promise.    Faith  trusts  it  aa  a  true  report 

you  in.  o 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat>.  liii. 

believing  that  God  has  said  it ;  and  trusts  to  it  as  good,  laving  our  own  salvation 
upon  it.  2.  Of  a  crucified  Chiist  made  over  to  sinners,  as  tne  device  of  Heaven  for 
their  salvation.  The  soul  concludes,  the  Saviour  is  mine ;  and  leans  on  Him  for 
all  the  purchase  of  His  death,  for  life  and  salvation  to  itself  in  particular  (1  Cor.  ii.  2). 
3.  Of  a  righteousness  wherein  we  guilty  ones  may  stand  before  a  holy  God  (Rom.  i.  17). 
And  by  faith  one  believes  there  is  such  a  righteousness,  that  it  is  sufficient  to  cover 
him,  and  that  it  is  held  out  to  him  to  be  trusted  on  for  righteousness  ;  and  so  the 
believer  trusts  it  as  his  righteousness  in  the  sight  of  God,  disclaiming  all  other,  and 
betaking  himself  to  it  alone  (Gal.  ii.  16).  4.  Of  a  pardon  under  the  great  seal  of 
Heaven,  in  Christ,  to  all  who  will  take  it  in  Him  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).  The  soul  by 
faith  believes  this  to  be  true,  and  applies  it  to  itself,  saying.  This  pardon  is  for  me. 
6.  Of  a  Physician  that  cures  infallibly  all  the  diseases  of  the  soul.  The  soul  believes 
it,  and  applies  it  to  its  own  case.  6.  Of  a  feast  for  hungry  souls,  to  which  all  are 
bid  welcome,  Christ  Himself  being  the  Maker  and  matter  of  it  too.  The  soul  weary 
of  the  husks  of  created  things,  and  believing  this  report,  accordingly  falls  a-feeding 
on  Christ.  7.  Of  a  victory  won  by  Jesus  Christ  over  sin,  Satan,  and  death,  and 
the  world.  The  soul  truste  to  it  for  its  victory  over  all  these,  as  already  foiled 
enemies  (1  John  v.  4).  8.  Of  a  peace  purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ  for  poor 
sinners,  and  offered  to  them.  Faith  believes  it ;  and  the  soul  comes  before  God  as 
a  reconciled  Father  in  Christ,  brings  in  its  supplications  for  supply  before  the 
throne.  (Ibid.)  The  rarity  of  believing  the  Gospel-report: — I.  Confirm  this  point. 
1.  Take  a  view  of  the  Church  in  ail  ages,  and  the  entertainment  the  Gospel  has  met 
with  among  them  to  whom  it  came.     It  has  been  a  despised  and  disbelieved  Gospel. 

(1)  Under  the  patriarchal  dispensation,  from  Adam  to  Moses.  By  Adam  and  Eve  it 
was  believed,  and  Adam  preached  it ;  but  Cain  slew  Abel  and  headed  an  apostasy,  etc. 

(2)  Under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  they  had  the  Gospel,  though  veUed  with  typea 
and  figures.  But  the  body  of  the  generation  that  came  out  of  Egypt,  believed  not, 
but  feU  in  the  wilderness  (Heb.  iv.  2).  (3)  Under  the  Christian  dispensation 
(John  xii.  37,  38  ;  Rom.  x.  16).  At  the  Reformation  the  Gospel  had  remarkable 
success  ;  yet  believers  were  but  few  comparatively  ;  and  there  have  been  but  few  all 
along  since  that  time.  2.  Take  a  view  of  the  Church,  setting  aside  those  whom 
the  Scripture  determines  to  be  unbelievers  ;  and  we  will  soon  see  that  but  few  do 
remain.  Set  aside — (1)  The  grossly  ignorant  of  Christ,  and  of  the  tniths  of 
the  Gospel.  How  can  they  believe  the  Gospel,  that  know  not  what  it  is  ?  (2)  The 
profane,  who  are  Christians  in  name,  because  they  live  in  a  Christian  country  ; 
but  have  not  a  shape  of  Christianity  about  them.  Surely  these  do  not  believe 
the  Gospel  (Tit.  i.  16).  (3)  The  carnal  and  worldly,  who  make  the  world  their 
chief  good,  mainly  seeking  that,  and  favouring  it  only.  These  undoubtedly  are 
unbelievers  (Phil.  iii.  19,  20).  (4)  Mere  moralists,  all  whose  religion  is  confined  to 
some  pieces  of  the  second  table  (Matt.  v.  20).  (5)  Gross  hypocrites.  That  Gospel 
that  cleanses  not  a  man's  hands  from  unjust  dealing,  his  mouth  from  lying,  swear- 
ing and  filthy  speaking,  is  certainly  not  believed.  (6)  Close  hypocrites,  whose  out- 
ward conversation  is  blameless  in  the  eye  of  the  world,  but  in  the  meantime  are 
inwardly  strangers  to  God  and  Christ  (Rev.  iii.  1).  (7)  All  imregenerate  persons ; 
for  they  are  certainly  unbelievers,  as  believers  are  regenerate.  Set  aside  then  all 
these,  few  remain  who  trust  to  the  Gospel  report.  II.  The  reasons  why  so  few 
BELIEVE  THE  REPORT  OF  THE  GosPEL.  1.  There  is  a  natural  impotency  in  all 
(John  vi.  44).  Believing  the  report  of  the  Gospel  is  beyond  the  power  of  nature. 
Yea,  everything  in  nature  is  against  it,  till  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  overcome  them  into 
belief  of  the  report  of  the  Gospel.  2.  The  predominant  power  of  lusts,  to  which  the 
Gospel  is  an  enemy.  There  our  Lord  lodges  it  (John  iii.  19).  3.  There  is  a  judicial 
blindness  on  many  (2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).  {Ibid. )  Divine  power  necessary  for  believing  the 
Gospel  report : — There  is  no  true  believing  or  trusting  to  the  report  of  the  Gospel,  but 
what  is  the  effect  of  the  working  of  a  Divine  power  on  the  soul  for  that  end.  I. 
Evince  the  truth  of  the  doctrine.  Consider  for  it — 1.  Express  Scripture 
testimony  (John  vi.  44).  2.  The  state  that  by  nature  we  are  in,  "dead  in  sin" 
(Eph.  ii.  1).  Faith  is  the  first  vital  act  of  the  soul,  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  life 
from  Jesus  Christ.  3.  There  can  be  no  faith  without  knowledge :  and  the  knowledge 
of  spiritual  things  man  is  by  nature  incapable  of  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  4.  Man  is  naturally 
und^r  the  power  of  Satan,  a  captive  of  the  devil,  who  with  his  utmost  efforts  will 
hinder  the  work  of  faith  (2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).  Such  a  case  the  Gospel  finds  men  in  ;  and 
it  is  the  design  of  the  Gospel  to  bring  tiiem  out  of  it  (Acts  xxvL  17,  18).  6.  Man's 
trust  is  by  nature  firmly  preoccupied  by  those  things  which  the  Gospel  calls  them  to 
renoouoa.    He  is  wedded  to  other  oo&fidenoeB  naturally,  which  therefore  he  will  hold 


CHAP.  Liii.]  ISAIAE.  83 

I 

by,  till  a  power  above  nature  carry  him  ofif  from  them — self-confidence,  creature- 
confidence,  law-confidence.  6.  Man  has  a  strong  bias  and  bent  against  believing  or 
trusting  to  the  Gospel  (John  v.  40  ;  Rom.  x.  3).  7.  It  is  the  product  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  wherever  it  is.  II.  What  is  that  woeking  op  Divine  power  whereby 
THE  SOUL  IS  BROUGHT  TO  TRUST  TO  THE  GoSPEL  REPORT  ?  There  is  a  twofold  work 
of  Divine  power  on  the  soul  for  that  end.  1.  A  mediate  work,  which  is  preparatory 
to  it ;  whereof  the  Spirit  is  the  author,  and  the  instnmient  is  the  law.  (1)  An 
awakening  work.  (2)  A  humbling  work,  whereby  the  proud  sinner  is  brought  low 
to  the  dust :  not  only  finding  a  need  of  salvation,  but  an  absolute  need  of  Christ  for 
salvation.  So  he  is  broken  off  from  self-confidence,  creature-confidence,  law-con- 
fidence. 2.  An  immediate  work,  whereby  faith  is  produced  in  the  soul ;  whereof 
the  Spirit  is  the  author,  and  the  Gospel  the  instrument.  It  is — (1)  A  quickening 
work,  whereby  the  dead  soul  is  caUed  again  to  spiritual  life  (Eph.  ii.  1).  (2)  An 
illuminating  work.  There  is  a  knowledge  in  faith.  {Ibid.)  The  Monarch  in 
disguise: — ^There  are  four  distinctive  featmes  predicted — 1.  The  lowliness,  obscurity 
and  sorrow  of  the  coming  Servant  of  God.  2.  The  putting  forth  of  "  the  arm  of  the 
Lord"  in  Him  and  in  His  work.  3.  The  setting  forth  of  this  in  a  message  or 
"report."  4.  The  concealing,  as  it  were,  of  the  *'  arm  of  the  Lord,"  owing  to  the 
lowly  appearance  of  this  Servant.  {C.  Clemance,D.D.)  Preaching  and  hearing : — I. 
The  GREAT  SUBJECT  OF  PREACHING,  and  the  preacher's  great  errand,  is  to  report 
concerning  Jesus  Christ — to  bring  good  tidings  concerning  Him.  II.  The  great 
DUTY  OF  HEARERS  is,  to  belicve  this  report  and,  by  virtue  of  it,  to  be  brought  to 
rest  on  Jesus  Christ.      III.  The  great,  though  the  ordinary,  sin  of  thb 

GENERALITY  OF  THE  HEARERS  OF  THE  GoSPEL  is  Unbelief.  IV.  ThE  GREAT  COM- 
PLAINT,   WEIGHT  AND  GRIEF  OF  AN    HONEST    MINISTER  OF    THE  GoSPEL   is   this — 

that  his  message  is  not  taken  ofif  his  hand  ;  that  Christ  is  not  received,  believed  in 
and  rested  on.  (/.  Durhain.)  Tlie  offer  of  Christ  in  the  Gospel: — I.  The  ofiFering 
of  Christ  in  the  Gospel  is  warrant  enough  to  believe  in  Him.  Otherwise  there  had 
beau  no  just  gi'ound  of  expostulation  and  complaint  for  not  believing.  The  com- 
plaint is  for  the  neglect  of  the  duty  they  were  called  to.  II.  They  to  whom  Christ 
is  offered  in  the  Gospel  are  called  to  believe.  It  is  their  duty  to  do  it.  III. 
Saving  faith  is  the  way  and  means  by  which  those  who  have  Christ  offered  to 
them  in  the  Gospel  come  to  get  a  right  to  Him,  and  to  obtain  the  benefits  that  are 
reported  of  to  be  had  from  Ilim.  {Ibid.)  The  necessity  of  faith : — 1.  Look  to  all  the 
promises,  whether  of  pardon  of  sin,  peace  with  God,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  holiness 
and  conformity  to  God — there  is  no  access  to  these,  or  to  any  of  them,  but  by  faith. 
2.  Look  to  the  performance  of  any  duty,  or  mortification  of  any  lust  or  idol,  and 
faith  is  necessary  to  that.  3.  Whenever  any  duty  is  done,  there  is  no  acceptation  of 
it  without  faith  (Heb.  iv.  2  ;  xi.  6).  {Ibid.)  A  faithful  minister's  sorrow : — It  is  most 
sad  to  a  tender  minister  to  see  unbelief  and  unfruitfulness  among  the  people  he  hath 
preached  the  Gospel  to.  There  is  a  fourfold  reason  of  this — 1.  Respect  to  Christ  Jesus 
his  Master,  in  whose  stead  he  comes  to  woo  souls  to  Christ.  2.  The  respect  he  hath 
to  people's  souls.  3.  The  respect  he  hath  to  the  duty  in  hand.  4.  Concern  for  his  own 
joy  and  comfort  (Phil.  ii.  16).  {Ibid.)  The  prevalence  of  unbelief : — I.  The  char- 
acter here  given  of  the  Gospel.  A  "report."  Let  us  see — 1.  In  what  respects 
it  resembles  a  report.  A  report  is  the  statement  of  things  or  facts  done  or  occurring 
at  some  distance  of  time  or  place  ;  of  things  which  we  ourselves  have  not  seen,  but 
of  which  an  account  has  been  brought  to  us  by  others,  and  to  which  our  belief  ia 
demanded  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  credibility  which  attaches  to  those  who 
bring  us  the  account.  Such  is  the  Gospel.  2.  In  what  respects  this  report  differs 
from  aU  other  reports.  This  difference  may  be  traced  in  the  importance  of  the  truths 
which  it  professes  to  communicate,  no  less  than  in  the  evidence  by  which  it  is  con- 
firmed. II.  The  question  which  the  prophet  asks  in  reference  to  it, 
' '  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ? "  This  question  is  evidently  the  language  of 
complaint,  of  surprise,  and  of  grief.  And  has  there  not  been  always  occasion  for  such 
language  as  this?  {E.  Cooper.)  Ministerial  solicitvde: — Every  minister  of  Jesus 
Christ,  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  his  oflBce,  is  anxious — (1)  To  make  a  faithful  report ; 
(2)  Then,  in  many  Living  witnesses,  to  behold  the  illustration  of  an  apostle's  asser- 
tion, "Faith  Cometh  by  hearing,"  eto.  I.  The  report  which  the  ministers  of 
the  Gospel  make.  The  "  report "  of  Isaiah  is  the  "saying "  of  Paul  (1  Tim.  i.  15). 
1.  It  demands  and  deserves  your  attention,  for  we  bring  it  from  heaven.  2.  It  is  a 
report  of  universal  interest,  for  it  is  to  be  made  to  all  the  world.  3.  Our  report  is 
of  the  very  highest  importance,  for  it  refers  to  the  state  of  the  soul.  4.  It  ia  a  report 
of  the  strictest  veracity,  being  confirmed  by  many  credible  witnesses.     II.  TttB 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  liu. 

ANXIETY   WHICH   THE  MINISTERS  OF    THE   GoSPEL  FEEL.       1.   TMs    report    IS    Very 

generally  neglected.  2.  This  neglect  is  the  result  of  unbelief.  3.  This  neglect  is, 
to  those  who  make  it,  a  subject  of  devout  solicitude  and  of  deep  regret.  4.  Wlien 
this  report  is  believed,  it  operates  with  Divine  efficiency.  "What  think  you  of  our 
report?  {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer,)  And  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  tht 
Lord  revealed? — The  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed : — I.  What  is  meant  by  "tue  arm 
OF  the  Lord."  II.  "What  is  meant  by  the  revealing  of  the  arm  of  the 
Lord.  III.  The  scope  and  dependence  of  these  words  on  the  former. 
(J.  Durham.)  The  arm  of  the  Lord : — "  To  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  I " 
It  has  been  made  bare  these  many  centuries,  and  how  few  have  seen  it,  or  recognized 
it,  or  called  it  by  its  proper  name  1  "We  have  had  continuity,  and  succession,  and 
evolution,  and  development,  and  progress,  and  laws  of  nature  ;  but  not  "the  arm  of 
the  Lord."  (/.  Parker ,  D.D.)  The  might  of  the  saving  arm,  and  how  to  obtain  it 
(with  John  xi.  40) : — A  lawyer  whom  I  know  took  me  to  see  the  fire-proof  strong- 
room in  which  he  keeps  valuable  deeds  and  securities.  It  is  excavated  under  the 
street,  and  a  passage  leads  far  into  the  interior,  lined  on  either  side  with  receptacles 
for  the  precious  documents.  On  entering,  he  took  up  what  appeared  to  be  a  candle, 
with  a  cord  attached  to  it ;  the  other  end  he  deftly  fastened  to  a  switch  at  the 
entrance,  by  means  of  which  the  electricity  which  was  waiting  there  poured  up  the 
wire  hidden  in  the  cord,  glowed  at  the  wick  of  the  china  candk,  and  we  were  able  to 
pass  to  the  end  of  the  passage,  uncoiling  cord  and  wire  as  we  went.  That  unlighted 
candle  resembles  the  Christian  worker  apart  from  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Faith  may  be  compared  to  the  switch  by  means  of  which  the  saving  might  of  God 
pours  into  our  life  and  ministry.  It  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  on,  that  oar 
faith  is  the  absolute  condition  and  measure  of  the  exertion  of  God's  saving  might. 
No  faith,  no  blessing ;  little  faith,  little  blessing ;  great  faith,  great  blessing.  The 
saving  might  of  God's  glorious  arm  may  be  waiting  close  against  us  ;  but  it  is  inopera- 
tive unless  we  are  united  to  it  by  faith.  The  negative  and  positive  sides  of  this 
great  and  important  truth  are  presented  in  the  texts  before  us :  one  of  which  com- 
plains that  the  arm  of  God  is  not  revealed,  because  men  have  not  believed  the 
inspired  report ;  the  other  affirms  from  the  lips  of  the  Master,  that  those  who  believe 
shall  see  the  glory  of  God.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  arm  of  God  and  human  faith 
(with  John  xi.  40) : — I.  The  arm  of  God.  This  expression  is  often  used  in  the  older 
Scriptures,  and  everywhere  signifies  the  active,  saving  energy  of  the  Most  High.  We 
first  meet  with- it  in  His  own  address  to  Moses :  "I  will  redeem  them  with  a  s&etched- 
out  arm. "  Then,  in  the  triumphant  shout  that  broke  from  two  million  glad  voices 
I  beside  the  Red  Sea — and  frequently  in  the  book  of  Deuteronomy — we  read  of  the 
stretched-out  arm  of  Jehovah.  It  is  a  favourite  phrase  with  the  poets  and  prophets 
of  Israel — the  arm  that  redeems  ;  the  holy  arm  ;  the  glorious  arm  ;  the  bared  arm  of 
God.  The  conception  is  that,  owing  to  the  unbelief  of  Israel,  it  lies  inoperative, 
hidden  under  the  heavy  folds  of  Oriental  drapery ;  whereas  it  might  be  revealed, 
I  raising  itself  aloft  in  vigorous  and  effective  effort.  All  that  concerns  us  now  is  the 
'  relation  between  faith  and  the  forth-putting  of  God's  saving  might.  II.  The  life 
OF  THE  Son  of  Man.  As  this  chapter  suggests,  it  seemed,  from  many  points  of 
view,  a  failure.  The  arm  of  the  Lord  was  in  Him,  though  hidden  from  all  save  the 
handful  who  believed.  III.  A  specimen  case.  Even  though  our  Lord  went  to 
Bethany  with  the  assurance  that  the  arm  of  the  Lord  would  certainly  be  made  bare, 

fet  He  must  of  necessity  have  the  co-operation  and  sympathy  of  some  one's  faith.  1. 
uch  faith  He  discovered  in  Martha.  Her  admissions  showed  that  faith  was  already 
within  her  soul,  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  awaiting  the  summertide  of  God's 
presence,  the  education  of  His  grace.  There  are  many  earnest  Christians  whose 
energies  are  taxed  to  the  uttermost  by  their  ministry  to  others.  They  have  no  time 
to  sit  quietly  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  or  mature  great  schemes  of  loving  sympathy  with 
His  plans,  as  Mary  did  when  she  prepared  her  anointing-oil  for  her  Lord's  burial. 
And  yet  they  are  capable  of  a  great  faith.  Christ  will  one  day  discover,  reveal  and 
educate  that  faith  to  great  exploits.  2.  He  putja  promise  before  her — "Thy  brother 
shall  rise  again."  Faith  feeds  on  promises.  8.  He  showed  that  its  fulfilment  might 
be  expected  here  and  now.  Jesus  said,  "  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  Here 
and  now  is  the  power  which,  on  that  day  of  which  you  speak,  shall  awaken  the  dead  ; 
do  but  believe,  and  you  shall  see  that  resurrection  anticipated."  Ponder  the  force  of 
this  I  AM.  It  is  the  present  tense  of  the  Eternal.  4.  He  aroused  her  expectancy. 
For  what  other  reason  did  He  ask  that  the  stone  might  be  rolled  away?  She 
believed,  and  she  beheld  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  one  aim 
for  each  of  us  should  be  to  bring  Christ  and  the  dead  Lazarus  together.     Let  us  ask 


CHAP.  LHi.]  ISAIAH.  85 

Christ,  oiir  Saviour,  to  work  such  faith  in  U8 ;  to  develop  it  by  every  method  of 
education  and  discipline  ;  to  mature  it  by  his  nurturing  Spirit,  untU  the  arm  of  God 
is  revealed  in  us  and  through  us,  and  the  glory  of  God  is  manifested  before  the  gaze 
of  men.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  not  well  to  concentrate  our  thought  too  much  on 
faith,  lest  we  hinder  its  growth.  Look  away  from  faith  to  the  Object  of  faith,  ani 
faith  will  spring  of  itselfL    {Ibid.) 

Yer.  2.  For  He  shall  gn^ow  up  before  Him  ag  a  tender  plant. — Qod  accomplishes 
great  things  by  unlikely  means : — 1.  God  prosecuteth  and  accomplisheth  His  greatest 
designs  by  the  most  unlikely  and  despised  mesms.  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  Saviour 
of  the  world,  was  but  a  tender  plant,  which  a  man  would  be  more  apt  to  tread  upon 
and  crush,  than  to  cherish.  2.  God  cometh  in  for  the  deliverance  of  His  people  in 
times  of  greatest  despair  and  unlikelihood.  For  when  the  branches  of  Jesse  were 
dried  up,  and  had  no  verdure,  even  then  sprung  up  the  greatest  ornament  of  that 
stock,  although  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground!.  3.  Mean  beginnings  may  grow  up  to 
great  matters  and  glorious  successes.  Christ,  the  tender  plant,  was  to  be  a  tall  tree. 
( T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Ood  to  he  trusted : — You  have  no  cause  to  distrust  God ;  though 
He  doth  not  find  means.  He  can  create  them.  The  root  of  Jesse,  though  there  be 
no  branches,  it  can  bear  a  sprig.  God,  that  could  make  the  world  out  of  nothing, 
can  preserve  the  Church  by  nothing.  {Ibid.)  Christ  a  tender  plant : — 1.  Christ  in 
His  humiliation  appeared  in  great  feebleness ;  bom  a  helpless  babe,  He  was  in  His 
infancy  in  great  danger  from  the  hand  of  Herod,  and  though  preserved,  it  was  not  by 
a  poweiiul  army,  but  by  flight  into  another  land.  His  early  days  were  not  spent 
amid  the  martial  music  of  camps,  or  in  the  grandeur  of  courts,  but  in  the  retirement 
of  a  carpenter's  shop— fit  place  for  "a  tender  plant."  His  life  was  gentleness.  He 
was  harmless  aa  a  lamb.  At  any  time  it  seemed  easy  to  destroy  both  Him  and  His 
eystem.  When  He  was  nailed  to  the  Cross  to  die,  did  it  not  appear  as  if  His  whole 
work  had  utterly  collapsed  and  His  religion  would  be  for  ever  stamped  out  ?  The 
Cross  threatened  to  be  the  death  of  Christianity  as  well  as  of  Christ ;  but  it  was  not 
so,  for  in  a  few  days  the  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit  came  upon  the  Church.  2.  At 
its  first  setting  up,  how  feeble  was  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  !  When  Herod  stretched 
out  His  hand  to  vex  certain  of  the  Church,  unbelief  might  have  said,  "There  will  be 
an  utter  end  ere  long."  When,  in  after  years,  the  Roman  emperors  turned  the  whole 
imperial  power  against  the  Gospel,  stretching  forth  an  arm  long  enough  to  encompass 
the  entire  globe,  and  uplifting  a  hand  more  heavy  than  an  iron  hammer,  how  could 
it  be  supposed  that  the  Christian  Church  would  still  live  on  ?  It  bowed  before  the 
storm  like  a  tender  shoot,  but  it  was  not  uprooted  by  the  tempest ;  it  survives  to 
this  day  ;  and  although  we  do  not  rejoice  at  this  moment  in  all  the  success  which 
we  could  desire,  yet  still  that  tender  shoot  is  full  of  vitality,  we  perceive  the 
blossoms  of  hope  upon  it,  and  expect  soon  to  gather  goodly  clusters  of  success. 
3.  Christianity  in  our  own  hearts — the  Christ  within  us — is  also  a  "tender  plant." 
In  its  upspringing  it  is  aa  the  green  blade  of  com,  which  any  beast  that  goeth  by 
may  tread  upon  or  devour.  Oftentimes,  to  our  apprehension,  it  has  seemed  that  our 
spiritual  life  would  soon  die  :  it  was  no  better  than  a  lily,  with  a  stalk  bruised  and 
all  but  snapped  in  twain.  The  mower's  scythe  of  temptation  has  cut  down  the 
outgrowth  of  our  spiritual  Ufe,  but  He  who  cometh  down  like  radn  upon  the  mown 
grass  has  restored  our  verdtire  and  maintained  our  vigour  to  this  day.  Tender  as 
our  religion  is,  it  ia  beyond  the  power  of  Satan  to  destroy  it.  (C.  JI.  Spurgeon.) 
Growth  before  God : — There  is  one  word  which  marks  the  difference  between  the 
work  of  God  and  the  work  of  man.  It  is  the  word  "growth."  No  human  work 
can  grow.  For  though  we  speak  of  a  picture  growing  under  the  bmsh  of  the  painter, 
or  of  a  statue  growing  under  the  chisel  of  the  sculptor,  thia  is  only  a  figure  of 
speech,  1.  But  there  is  no  work  of  God  that  cannot  grow.  This  world  itself  grew 
into  being.  It  grew  up  before  God  as  the  wUd  flower  does — grew  out  of  chaos,  into 
order  and  beauty,  and  we  can  read  on  the  rocks  the  story  of  its  growth.  There  is 
a  greater  world  than  this — the  world  of  Divine  truth.  And  this  also  has  been  a 
growth  from  the  beginning.  2.  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  Son  of  God  grew  up 
before  the  Lord — that  the  Lord  of  nature  conformed  to  the  law  of  nature.  Th« 
sacred  historian  is  not  to  be  found  tripping  here,  like  the  mediaeval  romancist.  He 
does  not  outrage  the  order  of  nature  by  a  single  stoiy  of  monstrous  precocity.  There 
is  not  a  part  of  the  being  of  Jesus  which  he  excludes  from  the  order  of  growth.  In 
body,  mind  and  spirit  he  declares  the  child  grew  up  before  the  Lord.  3.  What 
hope  is  there  here  for  man  1  The  Son  of  God  had  to  grow,  and  the  meanest  child 
of  man  can  grow.    If  we  had  no  power  of  growth  but  that  which  we  possess  ia 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  uxu 

common  with  the  animal  and  the  tree,  then  were  we  of  all  creatures  the  most 

miserable.     Because  we  have  in  us  the  power  of  an  endless  growth  in  aJl  that  is 

great  and  good,  we  are  creatures  of  the  Most  Blessed,     And  we  must  grow.     That  is 

our  destiny.     Our  Christianity  is  not  a  piece  of  mechanism  that  was  finished  off  at 

the  date  of  conversion.     It  is  a  life  that  has  been  bom  within  the  soul,     "We  are 

growing,  either  upwards  or  downwards,  either  better  or  worse,  either  to  honour  or  to 

shame,     4.  But  how  may  a  noble  and  Divine  growth  be  ensured  ?    It  is  a  question 

that  is  not  left  unanswered  in  my  text.     For  we  are  told  that  the  plant  of  which  it 

speaks  grew  up  before  the  Lord.     It  was  the  fondest  desire  of  the  Hebrew  mother's 

heart  that  her  son  should  grow  up  before  the  Lord.     She  would  rather  have  him 

grow  up  before  the  Lord  in  the  temple  than  before  the  king  in  the  palace.     There 

can  be  no  higher  position  or  nobler  prospect  for  a  man  than  to  grow  up  before  his 

God.     The  child  Samuel  and  the  child  Jesus  grew  up  before  the  same  God,  but  how 

differently.     The  former  under  the  very  shadow  of  the  altar,  under  the  wing  of  the 

old,  bUnd  priest,  utterly  secluded  from  the  common  ways  of  men  ;  but  Jesus,  at  His 

mother's  knee  in  the  village  home,  in  the  midst  of  His  little  relatives  and  playmates, 

among  the  workmen  at  the  bench,  and  the  old  familiar  faces  in  street  and  synagogue. 

And  so  it  has  become  a  Christian  commonplace  that  you  can  grow  up  before  the  Lord 

anywhere.     5,  But  we  are  fmrther  informed  of  the  special  fashion  in  which  Jesus 

grew  up  before  the  Lord,     "  As  a  tender  plant  and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground," 

we  read.     But  the  Hebrew  contains  a  more  explicit  meaning.     It  is  this:   "He 

grew  up  before  God  like  a  fresh  sucker  from  a  root  springing  out  of  a  dry  ground." 

The  old  plant  is  the  house  of  David,  once  so  glorious  in  flower  and  fruitage,  at  last 

cut  down  and  withered.     The  dry  soil  is  the  barren  religious  life  of  Israel.^  The 

fresh  young  sucker  is  the  Son  of  Man.     That  it  did  grow  to  what  we  see  is  the 

supreme  miracle  of  Christianity.     Its  principal  evidence  is  in  its  own  marvellous 

growth.    This  is  the  dilemma  in  which  Christianity  still  keeps  its  foes,  and  to  which 

all  additional  thought  and  investigation  can  only  add  strength.     From  such  a  root, 

in  such  a  soil,  how  did  Jesus  grow  to  be  the  Christ  of  history  ?    It  must  either  be 

acknowledged  to  be  the  supreme  miracle  or  the  supreme  mystery  of  time.    And  this  is 

the  one  Christian  miracle  which  keeps  repeating  itself  century  after  century.     From 

the  withered  plant,  and  out  of  the  desert  soil,  God  is  evermore  producing  His  plants 

of  renown.    How  was  it,  for  example,  that  Luther  grew  to  be  the  man  he  was,  and  to 

wield  the  power  he  did  1    Was  it  from  the  withered  root  of  the  mediaeval  Church  or 

the  desert  soU  of  the  monasteiy  that  he  derived  his  power  ?    Or  was  he  right  when 

he  declared  the  conviction  of  his  heart  that  it  was  all  by  the  grace  of  God  through 

faith?    History  discloses  to  us  nothing  so  glorious  as  these  Divine  developments 

of  the  soul  of  man.     The  grace  that  has  achieved  these  things  is  in  the  world  aa 

much  as  ever,     6.  Why  is  it,  then,  that  so  many  young  men  are  excluding  from 

their  ambition  in  life  that  of  growth  in  Christ  ?     Why  is  it  that  so  many  of  them 

murmur  that  the  old  creeds  are  dry,  and  the  old  Bible  and  the  old  familiar  Church 

service,  and  that  even  the  fountain  of  private  devotion  has  ceased  to  water  the 

wilderness  ?    It  is  because  they  are  not  rooted  in  God  and  His  truth,  but  are,  many 

of  them,  like  plants  thrown  out  of  a  country  nursery,  which  lie  bleaching  in  the 

sun  or  are  blown  about  by  the  wind.     No  wonder  that  religion  seems  dry  to  those 

who  are  not  rooted  in  it.     Young  men  !  see  to  it  that  you  go  down  into  the  truth 

which  you  profess  to  stand  by,  whether  of  creed,  of  catechism,  or  Bible,  and  you 

wiU  find  as  much  good  in  it  as  your  fathers  did.     Thus  settled  and  grounded,  seek 

to  grow  in  everything ;  put  on  nothing.     All  pretence  is  worse  than  waste  of  time 

and  strength.     And  abjure  all  forced  and  unnatural  growth,  all  ambition  to  fill 

rapidly  a  large  space.     Be  content  to  occupy  the  ground  that  God  has  allotted  to 

you,  according  to  the  nature  that  God  has  given.     {P.  J.  Rollo.)    As  a  root  out  of 

a  dry  ground. — The  root  out  of  a  dry  ground : — Owing  to  their  geographical  position, 

the  central  and  western  regions  of  South  Africa  are  almost  constantly  deprived  of 

rain.     They  contain  no  flowing  streams,  and  veir  little  water  in  the  wells.     The 

soil  is  a  soft  and  light-coloured  sand,  which  reflects  the  sunlight  with  a  glaring 

intensity.     No  fresh  breeze  cools  the  air ;  no  passing  cloud  veils  the  scorching  sky. 

We  should  naturally  have  supposed  that  regions  so  scantily  supplied  with  one  of  the 

first  necessaries  of  life,  could  he  nothing  else  than  waste  and  lifeless  deserts :  and 

yet,   strange    to  sa^,   they  are  distinguished  for    their  comparatively  abundant 

vegetation,  and  their  immense  development  of  animal  life,     Tne  evil  produced  by 

want  of  rain  has  been  counteracted  by  the  admirable  foresight  of  the  Creator,  in 

providing  these  arid  lands  with  plants  suited  to  their  trying  circumstances.     The 

vegetation  is  eminently  local  and  special.    Nothing  like  it  is  seen  elsewhere  on  the 


CHAP,  tin.]  ISAIAH.  91 

face  of  the  earth.  Nearly  all  the  plants  have  tuberous  roots,  buried  far  beneath  the 
ground,  beyond  the  scorching  effects  of  the  sun,  and  are  composed  of  succulent 
tissue,  filled  with  a  deliciously  cool  and  refreshing  fluid.  They  have  also  thick,  fleshy 
leaves,  with  pores  capable  of  imbibing  and  retaining  moisture  from  a  very  diy 
atmosphere  and  soil ;  so  that  if  a  leaf  be  broken  during  the  greatest  drought,  it 
shows  abundant  circulating  sap.  Nothing  can  look  more  unlike  the  situations  in 
which  they  are  found  than  these  succulent  roots,  full  of  fluid  when  the  surrounding 
soil  is  dry  as  dust,  and  the  enveloping  air  seems  utterly  destitute  of  moisture  ; 
replete  with  nourishment  and  life  when  all  within  the  horizon  is  desolation  and 
death.  They  seem  to  have  a  special  vitality  in  themselves  ;  and,  unlike  all  other 
plants,  to  be  independent  of  circumstances.  Such  roots  are  also  found  in  the  deserts 
of  Arabia ;  and  it  was  doubtless  one  of  them  that  suggested  to  the  prophet  the 
beautiful  and  expressive  emblem  of  the  text,  "He  shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a 
root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  Christ's  growth  be/ore  God: — 
Commentators  usually  connect  these  words  with  the  next  clause  of  the  verse,  and 
regard  them  as  implying  that  the  promised  Messiah  would  have  no  form  or  comeli- 
ness in  the  estimation  of  men,  no  outward  beauty,  that  they  should  desire  Him. 
This,  I  think,  is  a  wrong  interpretation.  The  words  of  the  text  are  complete  and 
separate.  They  speak  not  of  the  appearance  of  Christ  to  men,  but  of  His  growth  in 
the  sight  of  God.  They  refer  not  to  His  attractiveness,  but  to  His  functions ;  and 
the  point  that  seems  to  be  most  insisted  upon  is,  that  His  relation  to  the  circum- 
stances in  which  He  should  be  placed  would  be  one  of  perfect  independence  and 
self-suflBciency.     (Ibid.)     The  root  out  of  a  dry  ground:— In  the  light  of  this  ex- 

Elanation  let  us  look  at  the  three  ideas  which  the  subject  suggests  to  us — 1.  The 
ving  root.  2.  The  dry  ground.  3.  The  effect  of  the  living  root  upon  the  dry 
ground.  {Ibid.)  Christ  the  living  root: — 1.  This  emblem  is  peculiarly  appropriate 
when  applied  to  Christ.  He  is  called  the  "  Branch,"  to  show  that  He  is  a  member 
of  the  great  organism  of  human  life,  in  all  things  made  like  xmto  His  brethren,  yet 
without  sin.  He  is  a  branch  of  the  tree  of  humanity,  nomished  by  its  sap,  pervaded 
by  its  life,  blossoming  with  its  affections,  and  yielding  its  fruits  of  usefulness.  But 
He  is  more  than  the  Branch.  "There  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of 
Jesse,  and  a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots,"  is  the  spiritual  language  of  prophecy 
relative  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  ;  but  the  figure  is  speedily  changed,  and  the 
Branch  is  also  called  "the  Root  of  Jesse."  This  language  is  most  strange  and 
paradoxical.  It  reveals  the  mystery  of  godliness,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  Jesus 
IS  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  Branch  and  the  Eoot,  the  root  of  Jesse  and  the 
offspring  of  Jesse,  David's  Lord  and  David's  son,  because  He  is  Emmanuel,  God 
with  us,  God  and  man  in  two  distinct  natures  and  one  person  for  ever ;  deriving 
His  human  life  by  natui'al  descent  from  man,  and  possessing  Divine  life  in  Himself, 
and  the  author  of  spiritual  Hfe  to  others.  The  root  of  plants  growing  in  a  dry 
ground  is  the  most  important  part  of  their  structure.  It  lies  at  the  basis  of,  and 
involves  the  whole  plant.  The  whole  growth  of  a  lily,  for  instance,  lies  folded  up 
within  its  bulb.  And  so  Christ  lies  at  the  basis  of,  and  involves  the  whole  spiritual 
life.  2.  It  is  assuredly  the  most  precious,  as  it  is  the  most  distinguishing,  feature  of 
the  Christian  religion,  that  it  places  the  foundation  of  eternal  Hfe  in  living  relations 
with  a  living  Person,  rather  than  in  the  profession  of  a  creed  or  the  practice  of  a  duty. 
(1)  One  of  the  principal  functions  which  the  root  performs  in  the  economy  of  vegeta- 
tion is  to  attach  the  plant  to  the  soil,  and  prevent  it  from  moving  hither  and  thither 
at  the  mercj^  of  the  elements.  So  Christ  is  the  living  root  of  our  spiritual  life,  con- 
necting it  with  the  whole  system  of  grace,  the  whole  economy  of  redemption.  It  is 
only  when  united  to  Christ  by  a  living  faith  that  the  soul  can  lay  hold  on  heaven 
and.  immortality.  (2)  Another  purpose  which  the  root  serves  in  the  economy  of 
vegetation  is  to  feed  the  plant.  Through  the  spongioles  of  the  root,  the  plant 
imbibes  from  the  soil  in  which  it  is  placed  the  needful  sap  by  which  it  is  sustained ; 
and  in  this  simple  way  the  whole  important  and  compKcated  processes  are  carried 
on,  by  which  crude  soil  is  converted  into  the  needful  constituents  of  vegetable 
matter.  For  this  purpose  the  root  possesses  certain  structural  peculiarities  adapting 
it  to  its  special  functions.  Just  as  there  is  provision  made  for  the  growth  of  the 
germ  in  the  starchy  contents  of  the  seed,  until  it  has  attained  an  independent 
existence ;  so  there  is  provision  made  in  the  nutritive  tissue  of  the  bulb  or  tuber  for 
the  support  of  the  plant  which  it  produces.  This  ftmction  also  the  Root  of  Jesse 
performs  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  rooted  in  Him.  He  is  the  mediator  of  the 
New  Covenant ;  the  only  channel  by  which  spiritual  blessings  can  be  communicated 
to  us.    i/bid.)    Th4  uiifoldinfft  qf  the  Hoot  (^  Jeaae: — All  ti^  individual  li£i  of  ths 


19  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lhi. 

Christian,  with  its  blossoms  of  holiness  and  its  fiiiits  of  righteousness  ;  all  the 
Christian  life  of  society,  with  its  things  that  are  pure,  and  honest,  and  lovely,  and 
of  good  report,  is  but  a  development  and  a  manifestation  of  the  life  of  Christ  in  the 
heart  and  in  the  world  ;  a  growth  and  unfolding  of  the  power,  the  beauty,  and  the 
sweetness  that  are  hid  in  the  Root  of  Jesse,  (Ibid.)  The  dry  grmtnd : — There  is 
usually  a  very  intimate  connection  bet  jen  a  plant  and  the  circumstances  in 
which  it  grows.  Modifications  of  specific  cliaracter  are  produced  by  varieties  of  soil ; 
and  the  wide  diflference  between  a  wild  flower  or  fioiit,  and  a  garden  flower  or 
fruit,  is  entirely  owing  to  the  diff"erence  between  rich  cultivated  soil  and  the  poor 
untilled  soil  of  nature.  The  plants  of  a  dry  ground,  however,  are  less  dependent 
upon  the  nature  of  their  soil  tnan  others  ;  they  receive  from  it,  in  most  cases,  mere 
mechanical  support  and  room  to  expand  in,  while  their  means  of  growth  are  derived 
entirely  from  the  atmosphere.  Looking  at  the  emblem  of  the  text  in  this  light,  we 
may  suppose  the  '*  dry  ground  "  here  to  mean — I.  That  humanity  out  of  which 
Chbist  sprang.  There  are  many  who  regard  Jesus  as  the  natural  product  of 
humanity — the  highest  development  of  human  nature,  the  blossom,  so  to  speak,  of 
mankind.  But  we  look  upon  Him  as  a  Divine  germ  planted  in  this  wilderness,  a 
Divine  Being  attaching  Himself  to  men,  wearing  their  nature,  dwelling  in  their 
world,  but  still  not  of  them — as  distinct  from  humanity  as  the  living  root  is  distinct 
from  the  dry  gi-ound  in  which  it  grows.  The  soil  of  humanity  is  indeed  (Ivy  gi  ound- 
Sin  has  dried  up  its  life,  its  fertility,  turned  its  moisture  into  summer's  drought, 
and  reduced  it  to  perpetual  barrenness.  By  the  law  of  natural  development,  man- 
kind could  never  have  given  birth  to  a  character  in  every  way  so  exceptional  as  that 
of  Christ.  It  is  true  indeed  that  a  few  individuals  have  ever  and  anon  emerged 
from  the  dark  chaos  of  fallen  humanity,  and  exhibited  a  high  type  of  intellectual 
and  moral  worth  ;  but  such  individuals  have  been  completely  identified  with  the 
human  race,  and  have  shared  in  its  sins  and  infirmities.  In  Jesus,  on  the  contrary, 
there  was  a  remarkable  remoteness  and  separate ness  from  men.  His  life  ran  parallel 
with  man's,  but  it  was  never  on  the  same  low  leveL  He  was  independent  of  worldly 
circumstances,  and  superior  to  worldly  conventionalities.  He  had  no  joys  on  earth 
save  those  He  brought  with  Him  from  heaven.  He  was  alone,  without  sympathy, 
for  no  one  could  understand  Him  ;  without  help,  for  no  mortal  aid  could  reach  the 
necessities  of  His  case.  Like  a  desert  well.  He  was  for  ever  imparting  what  no  one 
could  give  Him  back.  II.  The  expectations  of  the  Jews  regap.ding  the 
Messiah.  There  are  scientific  men  who  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  or 
equivocal  generation.  And  so  there  are  theologians  who  assert  that  Christ  was 
merely  the  natural  product  of  the  age  and  the  circumstances  in  which  He  lived ; 
the  mere  incarnation,  so  to  speak,  of  the  popular  expectation  of  the  time.  In  aU 
their  attempts  to  account  for  His  life,  without  admitting  Him  to  be  a  Divine 

ferson,  they  bring  prominently  into  view  whatever  there  was  in  Jewish  history, 
elief,  and  literature,  to  prepare  for  and  produce  such  a  personality  and  character  as 
those  of  Jesus  ;  they  endeavour  to  show  that  the  condition  of  the  Jewish  world, 
when  Christ  appeared,  was  exactly  that  into  which  His  appearing  would  fit ;  and  that 
all  these  preparatory  and  formative  conditions  did  of  themselves,  by  a  kind  of 
natural  spontaneous  generation,  produce  Christ.  In  reply  to  these  views,  it  may  be 
admitted  as  an  unquestionable  historical  fact,  that  the  expectation  of  a  Messiah 
ran  like  a  golden  thread  throughout  the  whole  complicated  web  of  the  Hebrew 
religion  and  polity.  The  expectations  of  the  Jews  did  no  more  of  themselves 
produce  the  Saviour,  than  the  soil  and  climate  produce,  of  their  own  accord,  any 
particular  plant.  There  was  nothing  in  the  age,  nothing  in  the  people,  nothing  in 
the  influences  by  which  he  was  smTounded,  which  could  by  any  possibility  have 
produced  or  developed  such  a  remarkable  character  as  He  exhibited.  There  was  no 
more  relation  between  Him  and  His  moral  surroundings,  than  there  is  between  a 
Bucctdent  life-full  root  and  the  arid  sandy  waste  in  which  it  grows.  The  counterfeit 
Messiahs  were  not  roots  out  of  a  dry  ground,  but,  on  the  contrary,  mushrooms 
developed  from  the  decaying  life  of  the  nation.  There  was  a  complete  harmony 
between  them  and  their  moral  surroundings.  They  were  really  and  truly  the  pro- 
ducts of  the  popular  longing  of  the  time  ;  they  agreed  in  every  respect  with  their 
circumstances.  The  prevailmg  notions  concerning  the  Messiah  were  worldly  and 
carnal.  III.  The  characteb  of  the  Jewish  people.  Nothing  can  be  more 
marked  and  striking  than  the  contrast  between  the  character  of  Christ  and  the 
general  character  of  the  Jewish  nation — between  the  excellences  which  He  displayed 
and  those  which  they  held  in  most  esteem.  It  is  said  that  a  man  represents  the 
■pint  and  character  of  the  age  and  the  laM  to  which  he  belon|pb    He  seldom  rises 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAH.  89 

above  their  general  level.  But  here  we  have  a  man  who  not  only  rose  high  above 
the  level  of  His  age  and  nation,  but  stands  out,  in  all  that  constitutes  true  moral 
manhood,  in  marked  and  decided  contrast  to  them.  He  was  descended  from  the 
Jewish  people,  but  He  was  not  of  them.  He  was  rooted  in  Jewish  soil,  but  His  life 
was  a  self-derived  and  heavenly  life.  This  is  a  great  and  precious  truth.  Some- 
thing has  come  into  this  world  which  is  not  of  it.  A  supernatural  power  has 
descended  into  nature.  A  man  has  lived  on  our  earth  who  cannot  be  ranked  with 
mankind.  A  Divine  Being  has  come  from  God,  to  be  incarnate  with  us,  and  to  lift 
us  up  to  God.  {Ibid.)  Christ  hinds  humanity  into  a  brotherhood: — The  roots  of 
the  desert,  by  their  extensive  ramifications,  fix  the  constantly  shifting  sands,  and 
prevent  them  from  being  drifted  about  in  blinding  clouds  by  every  wind  that  blows. 
So  the  Root  of  Jesse  binds  the  dry  groimd  of  humanity  by  its  endless  fibres  of 
benevolence  and  love.  The  despised  and  apparently  feeble  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was 
lifted  up  on  the  Gross,  and  then  followed — according  to  His  own  prophecy — the 
drawing  of  all  men  to  Him  and  to  one  another.  Sin  is  selfishness  ana  isolation  ; 
the  love  of  Ohrist  is  benevolence  and  attraction.  Jesus  unites  us  to  the  Father, 
and  therefore  to  one  another.  The  love  of  Christians  is  not  to  be  confined  to  their 
own  society  and  fraternity.  In  Christ  they  have  received  expansion,  not  limitation 
— universal  benevolence,  not  mere  party  spirit.  (Ibid.)  A  root  owt  of  a  dry  ground: 
— I.  The  historical  meaning  of  this  metaphor.  It  applies  to  the  person  of  the 
Lord,  and  also  to  His  cause  and  Kingdom :  to  Himself  personally  and  to  Himself 
mystically.  A  root  which  springs  up  in  a  fat  and  fertile  field  owes  very  much  to 
the  soil  in  which  it  grows.  Our  Saviour  is  a  root  that  derives  nothing  from  the 
soil  in  which  it  grows,  but  puts  everything  into  the  soil.  1.  It  is  quite  certain  that 
our  Lord  derived  nothing  whatever  from  His  natm-al  descent.  He  was  the  Son  of 
David,  the  lawful  heir  to  the  royal  dignities  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  ;  but  His  family 
had  fallen  into  obscurity,  had  lost  position,  wealth,  and  repute.  2.  Nor  did  our 
Lord  derive  assistance  from  His  nationality  ;  it  was  no  general  recommendation  to 
His  teaching  that  He  was  of  the  seed  of  Abraham.  To  this  day,  to  many  minds, 
it  is  almost  shameful  to  mention  that  our  Saviour  was  a  Jew.  The  Romans  were 
peculiarly  tolerant  of  religions  and  customs  ;  by  conquest  their  empire  had  absorbed 
men  of  all  languages  and  creeds,  and  they  usually  left  them  undisturbed  ;  but  the 
Jewish  faith  was  too  peculiar  and  intolerant  to  escape  derision  and  hatred.  After 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  the  Jews  were  hunted  down,  and  the  connection  of 
Christianity  with  Judaism  so  far  from  being  an  advantage  to  it  became  a  serious 
hindrance  to  its  growth.  3.  Nor  did  the  Saviour  owe  anything  to  His  followers. 
Shall  a  world-subduing  religion  be  disseminated  by  peasants  and  mariners  1  So  did 
He  ordain  it.  4.  Our  Saviour  is  "  a  root  out  of  a  my  ground  "  as  to  the  means  He 
chose  for  the  propagation  of  His  faith.  5.  Neither  did  the  Saviour  owe  anything  to 
times  in  which  He  lived.  Christianity  was  bom  at  a  period  of  history  when  the 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  and  men  were  most  eflfectually  alienated  from  Him. 
The  more  thinking  part  of  the  world's  inhabitants  were  atheistic,  and  made  ridicule 
of  the  gods,  while  the  masses  blindly  worshipped  whatever  was  set  before  them. 
The  whole  set  and  current  of  thought  was  in  direct  opposition  to  such  a  religion  as 
He  came  to  inculcate.  It  was  an  age  of  luxury.  6.  Neither  did  the  religion  of 
Jesus  owe  anything  to  human  nature.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  it  commends 
itself  to  human  nature.  It  is  false :  the  religion  of  Jesus  opposes  unrenewed 
human  nature.  II.  OuE  knowledge  of  its  truth  experimentally.  You 
remember  your  own  conversion.  When  Jesus  Christ  came  to  you  to  save  you,  did 
He  find  any  fertile  soil  in  your  heart  for  the  growth  of  His  grace  ?  III.  This  whole 
subject  affords  much  encouragement  to  many.  1.  Let  me  speak  a  word  to  those 
who  are  seeking  the  Saviour,  but  are  very  conscious  of  your  own  sinfulness,  Christ 
is  all — does  that  not  cheer  you  ?  2.  The  same  thought  ought  also  to  encourage  any 
Christian  who  has  been  making  discoveries  of  his  own  barrenness.  When  at  any 
time  you  are  cast  down  by  a  sense  of  your  nothingness,  remember  that  your  Lord  is 
"a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  3.  The  same  comfort  avails  for  every  Christian 
worker.  When  you  feel  you  are  barren,  do  not  fret  or  despair  about  it,  but  rather 
sav,  "Lord,  here  is  a  dry  tree,  come  and  make  it  bear  fruit,  and  then  I  shall  joy- 
fully confess,  from  Thee  is  my  fruit  found."  4.  Ought  not  this  to  comfort  us 
with  regard  to  the  times  in  which  we  live  ?  Bad  times  are  famous  times  for  Christ. 
5.  And  thus  we  may  be  encouraged  concerning  any  particularly  wicked  place.  Do 
not  say,  "It  is  useless  to  preach  down  there,  or  to  send  missionaries  to  that 
uncivilized  country."  How  do  you  know?  Is  it  very  dry  ground ?  Well,  that  is 
hopefnl  soil ;  Ohrist  it  a  "root  out  a  dry  ground,"  and  the  more  t^ere  is  to  discourage 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  liu. 

the  more  you  should  be  encouraged.  6.  The  same  is  true  of  individual  men ; 
you  should  never  say,  "Well,  such  a  man  as  that  wUl  never  be  converted."  IV. 
The  glory  which  all  this  displays.  Christ's  laurels  at  this  day  are  none  of 
them  borrowed.  When  He  shall  come  in  His  glory  there  will  be  none  among  His 
friends  who  will  say,  "0  King,  Thou  owest  that  jewel  in  Thy  crown  to  me." 
Every  one  will  own  that  He  was  the  author  and  the  finisher  of  the  whole  work,  and 
therefore  He  must  have  aU  the  glory  of  it,  since  we  who  were  with  Him  were  dry 
ground,  and  He  gave  life  to  us  but  borrowed  nothing  from  us.  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ  not  the  product  of  Palestine : — According  to  Renan,  the  excellence  of  Jesus  was 
due  to  the  climate  and  soil  of  Palestine  I  But  he  forgets  to  ask  how  it  is  that  the 
climate  and  soil  of  Palestine  have  never  produced  such  another  !  ( 0.  Clemance,  D.  D. ) 
He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness. — Clirist's  humble  appearance: — While  we  see  no 
"necessity  for  the  Savioiu*  of  the  world  appearing  in  pomp  and  splendour,  we  can 
point  out  many  important  ends  that  may  be  answered  by  His  having  been  made 
humble  and  of  no  reputation.  1.  In  this  state  His  all-perfect  example  was  of  the 
most  extensive  benefit.  He  could  exhibit  virtues  more  in  number,  more  difficult  to 
practise,  and  more  generally  necessary,  than  there  could  have  been  room  for  in  a 
higher  rank  and  in  less  trying  circumstances.  And  the  virtues  which  such  a  state 
rec[uired  from  Him,  as  they  are  the  most  difficult  to  practise,  so  are  they  those  which 
are  universally  useful.  The  virtues  which  belong  to  sovereign  power  and  regal 
dignity  a  few  only  have  occasion  to  exercise.  The  virtues  of  that  station  which  He 
assumed  are  useful  for  all  to  acquire.  2.  By  His  appearing  in  the  humble,  suff'ering 
state  He  teaches  us  how  very  insignificant  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  in  the  eyes  of 
true  wisdom,  are  all  the  possessions  of  this  world  and  all  the  flattering  distinctions 
of  a  present  state.  3.  By  appearing  in  a  humble,  sutfering  state  He  shows  us  that 
earthly  distress  is  no  proof  of  a  bad  character  ;  that  sutfering  is  no  sure  intimation 
of  God's  displeasure  at  the  sufferer.  4.  By  appearing  in  this  state  He  shows  us  that 
it  was  only  the  force  of  truth  that  engaged  and  influenced  His  followers.  So  strongly 
are  men  impressed  by  the  circumstances  of  high  birth,  of  eminent  rank,  of  gre;it 
power,  the  splendid  acts  of  a  monarch  or  a  conqueror,  that  wherever  these  are  found 
they  are  eager  to  show  deference  and  respect.  But  Jesus  had  none  of  these  worldly 
attractions.  {R.  Bogg,  D.D.)  The  real  character  of  the  Messiah: — I.  As  to  tub 
OBJECTION,  that  Jesus  was  not  the  true  Messiah,  because  He  did  not  answer  the 
universal  expectation  which  the  Jews  had  of  His  being  a  mighty  temporal  prince. 
Considering  the  natural  temper  of  mankind,  and  how  strongly  addicted  they  are  to 
their  worldly  interests,  and  how  jealous  of  everything  that  thwarts  and  oi)poses 
them,  we  must  allow  it  to  be  a  jirejudice  not  easy  to  overcome.  It  requires  a  greater 
zeal  for  the  honour  of  God  and  religion  than  most  men  are  possessed  of,  to  adhere  to 
truth  when  we  are  likely  to  be  losers  by  it.  Few  there  are  that  have  resolution 
enough  to  abide  by  a  religion  in  which  they  have  been  educated,  when  once  it  <omes 
to  be  opposed  by  the  secular  powers,  and  the  profession  of  it  to  be  attended  with 
nothing  but  poverty  and  affliction  :  how  much  more  courage  then,  and  firmness  of 
mind,  is  necessary  to  make  men  enter  into  a  religion  newly  set  up,  and  that  is 
attended  with  the  like  disadvantages  ?  But  can  any  one  seriously  think  this  excuse 
of  any  force?  Let  him  urge  it  in  its  true  light,  and  thus  must  he  plead  when 
arraigned  at  the  tribunal  of  God  for  unbelief :  "I  would  willingly  have  embraced  the 
religion  of  Jesus  Christ  had  it  been  made  more  suitable  to  my  carnal  inclinations 
and  interests ;  had  the  rewards  it  promises  been  temporal  instead  of  eternal,  none 
should  have  more  industriously  and  cheerfully  sought  after  them  ;  but  when  He  told 
me  that  His  'kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,'  and  that  I  could  not  follow  Him 
without  '  taking  up  the  cross  ; '  without  losing,  or  being  in  danger  of  losing,  every- 
thing that  was  valuable  in  life,  nay,  life  itself,  for  His  sake — my  flesh  irenibled  at 
the  thought,  and  human  nature  du-ected  me  to  take  care  of  myself,  and  to  run  no 
hazards  for  the  sake  of  religion."  What  sentence  can  such  an  oue  e-\'i)eut  but  this  : 
"Thou  hast  preferred  thy  temporal  to  thy  eternal  interest,  thou  hast  had  thy 
reward  on  earth,  and  canst  therefore  expect  no  other  in  heaven  "  ?  But  the  Jew 
perhaps  thinks  he  has  somewhat  further  to  say  in  behalf  of  his  unbelief — that  l.o  wa< 
persuaded,  from  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  that  the  Messiah  would  really  be, 
what  the  Gentiles  might  only  wish  Him  to  be,  a  temporal  prince ;  and,  finding 
Jesus  not  to  be  so,  they  thought  it  a  good  reason  for  rejecting  Him.  But  was  tliis 
(supposing  it  true)  the  only  mark  by  which  the  Messiah  was  to  be  known '!  How 
often  do  we  read  of  His  sufferings  and  ill-usage  in  the  world  ?  Did  anybody  appear 
that  answered  the  character  of  the  Messiah,  in  any  one  instance,  so  exactly  as  Jesus 
did  I    The  Jews  made  another  objection  against  Him  of  much  the  same  kind  :  that; 


CHAP,  ini.]  ISAIAS.  W 

He  was  brought  up,  and,  as  they  supposed,  bom  at  Nazareth,  in  Galilee ;  a  country 
much  despised  by  the  Jews,  as  li  there  was  anything  in  the  nature  of  the  soil  or  air 
of  the  country  that  rendered  the  inhabitants  of  it  less  acceptable  to  God  than  they 
might  otherwise  be,  and  He  could  not,  if  He  would,  produce  eminent  and  bright 
spirits  out  of  the  most  obscure  parts  of  the  world.  The  Ohaldees  were  an  idolatrous 
people,  and  yet  God  made  choice  of  Abraham,  a  man  of  that  country,  with  whom  to 
establish  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  in  whose  seed  to  bless  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  The  prophet  Jonah,  a  type  of  Christ,  was  bom  at  a  place  called  Gath-hepher, 
a  town  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulon,  in  Galilee  itself,  though  no  prophet  is  said  by  the 
Jews  to  come  from  thenoe :  and  Isaiah  moreover  plainly  declares  to  us,  in  the 
description  he  is  giving  of  the  universal  joy  and  comfort  that  will  be  occasioned  by 
the  birth  and  kingdom'  of  Christ,  that  "in  Galilee  of  the  nations"  this  shall  be  seen. 
"The  people  (says  he)  that  walked  in  darkness,  have  seen  a  great  light ;  they  that 
dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined."  So 
that  this  objection  is  as  groundless  as  it  is  weak  and  foolish.  II.  Application  to 
ourselves.  1.  It  greatly  behoves  us  to  take  care  that  worldly  interest  and  advan- 
tage be  not  the  principal  motive  that  engages  us  to  perform  our  duty  ;  lest,  after  the 
example  of  the  Jews,  we  fall  away  from  it,  when  that  motive  feils ;  lest,  being 
disappointed  of  the  hopes  we  had  conceived  from  our  attachment  to  religion  and 
religious  men,  we  become  enemies  instead  of  friends.  2.  How  hard  it  is  for  truth  to 
prevail  over  the  prejudices  and  settled  notions  of  men.  (C.  Moore,  M.A.)  Religion 
a  weariness  to -the  natural  man: — Putting  aside  for  an  instant  the  thought  of  the 
ingratitude  and  the  sin  which  indifference  to  Christianity  implies,  let  us,  as  far  as 
we  dare,  view  it  merely  as  a  matter  of  fact,  after  the  manner  of  the  text,  and  form  a 
judgment  on  the  probable  consequences  of  it.  1.  "  Religion  is  a  weariness  ; "  alas  ! 
so  feel  even  children  before  they  can  well  express  their  meaning.  Exceptions,  of 
course,  now  and  then  occur.  I  am  not  forgetful  of  the  peculiar  character  of  children's 
minds  :  sensible  objects  first  meet  their  observation  ;  it  is  not  wonderful  that  they 
should  at  first  be  inclined  to  limit  their  thoughts  to  things  of  sense.  A  distinct 
profession  of  faith,  and  a  conscious  maintenance  of  principle,  may  imply  a  strength 
and  consistency  of  thought  to  which  they  are  as  yet  unequal.  Again,  childhood  is 
capricious,  ardent,  light-hearted ;  it  cannot  think  deeply  or  long  on  any  subject. 
Yet  all  this  is  not  enough  to  account  for  the  fact  in  question — why  they  should  feel 
this  distaste  for  the  very  subject  of  religion.  2.  "  Religion  is  a  weariness."  I  will 
next  take  the  case  of  young  persons  when  they  first  enter  into  life.  Is  not  religion 
associated  in  their  minds  with  gloom  and  weariness  ?  This  is  the  point :  that  the 
feelings  of  our  hearts  on  the  subject  of  religion  are  different  from  the  declared  judg- 
meut  of  God ;  that  we  hg,ve  a  natural  distaste  for  that  which  He  has  said  is  our 
chief  good.  3.  Let  us  pass  to  the  more  active  occupations  of  life.  The  transactions 
of  worldly  business,  speculations  in  trade,  ambitious  hopes,  the  pursuit  of  knowledge, 
the  public  occurrences  of  the  day,  these  find  a  way  directly  to  the  heart ;  they  rouse, 
they  influence.  The  name  of  religion,  on  the  other  hand,  is  weak  and  impotent. 
4.  But  this  natural  contrariety  between  man  and  his  Maker  is  stiU  more  strikingly 
shown  by  the  confessions  of  men  of  the  world  who  have  given  some  thought  to  the 
subject,  and  have  viewed  society  with  somewhat  of  a  philosophical  spirit.  Such 
men  treat  the  demands  of  religion  with  disrespect  and  negligence,  on  the  ground 
of  their  being  unnatural.  The  same  remark  may  be  made  upon  the  notions 
which  secretly  prevail  in  certain  quarters  at  the  present  day,  concerning  the  unsuit- 
ableness  of  Christianity  to  an  enlightened  age.  The  literature  of  the  day  is  weary  of 
revealed  religion.  5.  That  religion  is  in  itself  a  weariness  is  seen  even  in  the  conduct 
of  the  better  sort  of  persons,  who  really  on  the  whole  are  under  the  influence  of  its 
spirit.  So  dull  and  uninviting  is  calm  and  practical  religion,  that  religious  persons 
are  ever  exposed  to  the  temptation  of  looking  out  for  excitements  of  one  sort  or 
other,  to  make  it  pleasurable  to  them.  6.  Even  the  confirmed  servants  of  Christ 
witness  to  the  opposition  which  exists  between  their  own  nature  and  the  demands  of 
religion.  Can  we  doubt  that  man's  wiE  runs  contrary  to  God's  will — that  the  view 
which  the  inspired  "Word  takes  of  our  present  life,  and  of  our  destiny,  does  not 
satisfy  ns,  as  it  rightly  ought  to  do  ?  That  Christ  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness  in  our 
eyes;  and  though  we  see  Him,  we  see  no  desirable  beauty  in  Him!  "Light  is 
come  into  the  world,  and  men  lore  darkness  rather  than  light."  If  onr  hearts  are 
by  nature  set  on  the  world  for  its  own  sake,  and  the  world  is  one  day  to  pass 
away,  what  are  they  to  be  set  on,  what  to  delight  in  then?  What  are  to  be 
the  pleasures  of  the  soul  in  another  life !  Oan  they  be  the  same  as  they  are  here  t 
They  cannot ;  Scripture  teUs  us  they  cannot ;  the  world  passeth  away — now  what 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  liii. 

is  there  left  to  love  and  enjoy  through  a  long  eternity !  It  ia  then  plain  enough, 
though  Scripture  said  not  a  word  on  the  subject,  that  if  we  would  be  happy  in 
the  world  to  come,  we  must  make  us  new  hearts,  and  begin  to  love  the  things 
we  naturally  do  not  love.  "He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness,"  etc.  It  is 
not  His  loss  that  we  love  Him  not,  it  is  our  loss.  {J.  R.  Netvman,  B.D.) 
The  love  of  beauty  {in  art) : — Let  us  fix  our  thoughts  on  one  example  of  that 
contrast  which  inspired  prophecy  and  the  life  of  Christ  have  agreed  to 
reconcile.  It  is  decisively  expressed  in  the  contradictory  words  of  Zechariah  and 
Isaiah  :  the  former  heralding  the  King  of  Sion  as  one  whose  beauty  should  surpass 
the  utmost  praise  of  human  words  or  thoughts  (Zech.  ix.  7) ;  the  latter  declaring 
that  those  who  should  see  that  self-same  Chnst  should  find  in  Him  no  beauty  that 
they  should  desire  Him.  I  would  try  to  suggest  something  in  regard  to  the  actual 
fulfilment  of  both  prophecies  in  the  claims  addressed  to  our  sense  of  beauty,  by  the 
revelation  of  Christianity  ;  believing  that  there  is  a  deep  meaning  in  that  strange 
and  blended  force  of  stem  restraint  and  irresistible  charm  which  this  sense  has  so 
often  owned  in  the  presence  of  the  Crucified  ;  and  hoping  to  show  that  this  too  is  an 
instinct  of  our  human  nature,  which,  if  we  suffer  it  to  act  in  sincerity  and  truth, 
wiU  find  its  rest  for  ever  in  the  Person  of  its  Redeemer.  Let  i\s,  then,  notice  first 
that  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  is,  if  we  take  it  alone  and  superficially,  in  accord  with 
much  that  has  been  written  or  implied  about  the  influence  of  Christianity  upon  the 
genius  of  Art.  For  we  are  sometimes  told,  and  more  ofben  made  to  feel,  that  there 
IS  something  irksome  and  hindering  to  the  free  appreciation  and  enjoyment  of  beauty, 
in  those  dogmas  about  the  conditions  and  issues  of  human  life,  which  are  inseparable 
from  the  work  of  our  Lord.  In  various  ways  it  is  suggested  or  proclaimed  that 
Christianity  has  unduly  and  too  long  presumed  to  thrust  its  doctrines  between  the 
human  soul  and  the  beauty  which  is  about  it,  and  disturbed  that  free  entrance  into 
the  pleasures  of  sight  and  sound,  through  which  eveiy  energy  might  go  out  to  find 
its  satisfaction  and  its  rapture.  And  so  some  have  already  returned  to  feed  and 
foster  their  sense  of  beauty  by  the  works  and  thoughts  of  those  who  lived  before  tliis 
tyrannous  restraint  was  preached  ;  others  are  looking  forward  to  a  time  when  Art 
may  avail  itself  of  the  triumph  of  scepticism,  and  renounce  all  hindering  allegiance 
and  regard  to  the  discredited  formulae  of  religion  ;  while  many  more  are  conscious  of 
a  vague  expectation  that  the  life  of  passion  henceforward  will  and  should  be  freer  and 
fuller  than  it  has  been :  that  hitherto  we  have  been  unnecessarily  cautious  and  sober 
in  our  pleasures,  and  timidly  patient  of  undue  restrictions  ;  but  that  now  all  is 
going  to  be  much  more  passionate  and  unfettered  and  absorbing,  and  that,  by  the 

Eursuit  of  Art  for  Art's  sake,  we  enter  into  an  earthly  paradise,  wliich  has  at  length 
een  relieved  from  certain  gloomy  and  old-fashioned  regulations,  and  in  which  it 
may  now  be  hoped  that  our  sense  of  beauty  will  be  a  law  unto  itself.  And  in  this 
temper  very  many  who  little  know  the  consistent  significance  of  their  choice  are 
falling  in  with  a  course  of  life  and  thought  which  has,  as  a  whole,  turned  away  from 
the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ :  turned  away  to  seek  elsewhere  the  full  desire  of  their  eyes, 
because  He  hath,  as  He  dies  for  us,  no  form  nor  comeliness,  and  when  we  see  Him, 
there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  Him.  For  in  truth  there  is  a  challenge  and 
a  law  with  which  Christianity  must  ever  meet  the  lover  of  beauty  as  he  goes  out  to 
seek  by  whatever  way  the  gratification  of  this  sense.  The  Church  of  Christ  cannot, 
while  she  remembers  His  message,  her  Master,  and  her  trust,  consent  to  be  dis- 
missed from  the  sphere  of  taste,  or  let  it  be  thought  that  she  has  no  counsel  for  her 
sons,  as  they  turn  to  those  high  and  thrilling  pleasures,  no  means  or  right  of  judg- 
ing the  tone  and  the  ideals  of  contemporary  Art.  (Ibid.)  Christianity  and  the 
sensuous: — We  were  going  to  throw  ourselves  without  reserve  into  this  or  that 
enthusiasm  of  beauty,  to  steep  our  souls  in  the  excitement  of  music,  or  poetry,  or 
art,  to  forget  all  else  in  the  engrossing  delight  of  their  eager  sympathy,  to  lay  aside 
every  hindering  thought,  to  trust  the  strong  desire  of  our  heart,  and  measure  our 
interests  by  their  intensity  :  and  Christianity  recalls  us  to  ourselves.  It  sets  before 
us,  in  the  compass  of  a  single  life,  the  full  expression  of  that  deep  and  marring 
discord  which  has  broken  up  the  harmony  of  this  world,  and  it  urges  us  to  seek 
within  ourselves  for  the  secret  of  the  disturbance  and  misery.  It  shows  us  the 
Perfect  Love  rejected.  Perfect  Purity  reviled,  Perfect  Holiness  blasphemed,  Perfect 
Mercy  scorned ;  God  coming  to  His  own  and  His  own  receiving  Him  not ;  the 
righteous  Judge  condemned ;  the  Lord  of  Life  obedient  unto  death  ;  and  it  says  that 
the  cause  of  this  anomaly,  the  condition  which  made  this  the  earthly  life  of  the 
Incarnate  Son  of  God,  is  to  be  found  within  our  own  souls  ;  and  we  know  that  there 
is  gomethiag  there  which  seems  at  times  as  though  it  would  crucify  the  Son  of  God 


CHAP.  Mil.]  ISAIAB.  83 

afresh :  something  which  would  distort  our  choice  from  the  high  and  spiritual  to  the 
bestial  and  mean :  something  which  has  often  made  us  cruel  and  unjust  to  other 
men,  and  contemptible  to  ourselves.  And  as  before  the  Cross  which  mankind 
awarded  to  its  Redeemer  we  feel  the  havoc  and  tumult  which  sin  has  brought  upon 
the  order  and  truthfulness  of  our  inner  life,  we  must  surely  hesitate  before  we  say 
that  no  restraint  shall  rest  upon  oiir  sense  of  beauty,  that  there  is  no  need,  whatever 
adversaries  may  be  moving  about  us,  to  be  sober  and  vigilant  in  the  world  of  Art. 
But  for  those  who  humbly  take  the  yoke  upon  them,  who,  as  they  turn  to  the 
manifold  wealth  of  beauty,  do  not  thrust  away  the  knowledge  of  their  own  hearts 
and  the  thought  of  Him  whose  death  alone  has  saved  them,  and  whose  strong  grace 
alone  sustains  and  shelters  them — for  those  the  best  delights  of  Art  and  Nature 
appear  in  a  new  radiance  of  light  and  hope,  and  speak  of  such  things  as  pass  man's 
understanding.  The  moments  of  quickened  and  exalted  life  which  music  and ' 
painting  stir  within  them,  the  controlling  splendour  of  the  simset,  the  tender  glory 
of  the  distant  hills,  the  wonder  of  a  pure  and  noble  face — these  no  longer  come  as 
passing  pleasures,  flashing  out  of  a  dark  background,  which  is  only  the  gloomier 
when  they  are  gone,  half  realized  and  little  understood  :  for  now  all  are  linked  and 
held  together  as  consistent  tokens  of  the  same  redeeming,  sanctifying  Love  ;  they  see 
the  Hand,  the  pierced  Hand,  which  holds  the  gift ;  they  know  the  Love  which 
fashioned  and  ad!omed  it ;  they  have  read  elsewhere  the  thought  which  is  embodied 
in  the  outward  beauty  ;  for  it  is  He  who  spared  not  His  own  Son  who  with  Him 
freely  gives  them  all  things.  And  all  that  He  gives  them  prophesy  of  Him. 
{Ihid. )  Christ's  beauty : — It  was  not  a  beauty  of  form,  it  was  the  beauty  of  ex- 
pression. It  was  not  the  beauty  of  statuary,  it  was  the  beauty  of  life.  It  is  the 
purpose  of  God  to  disappoint  the  senses.  He  has  victimized  the  eyes,  and  the  ears, 
and  the  hands  of  men.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.).  No  beauty  in,  Christ: — Look  not  on  the 
pitcher,  but  on  the  liquor  that  is  contained  in  in.  {J.  Trapp.)  Christ's  meanness 
on  earth  no  objection  against,  but  confirmation  of,  Christianity: — I.  Show  against 
unbelievers,  that  the  accomplishment  of  the  pkophecies  which  concerned  thIi 
Messiah  are  a  convincing  argument  of  the  truth  of  the  Ohristiajt 
RELIGION.  It  is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  there  can  be  no  human  or  natural  reason 
assigned  for  such  future  and  remote  events  as  have  no  visible  or  natural  cause  to 
produce  them  ;  but  are  of  a  contingent  nature,  and  many  times  depend  on  the  free 
choice  and  will  of  man  ;  and  therefore  the  prediction  of  such  events  must  be  supposed 
to  proceed  from  some  supernatural  revelation.  It  is  the  argument  whereby  God 
proves  Himself  to  be  the  Lord,  and  that  there  is  no  other  Saviour  beside  (Isa.  xliii.  11, 
12).  By  the  same  reason,  he  proves  the  gods  of  the  nations  to  be  idols,  and  no  gods 
(Isa.  xli.  21,  22,  29).  The  prophecies  of  Scripture,  which  referred  to  the  Messiah, 
were  of  things  at  such  a  distance,  and  of  such  a  nature,  that  there  could  not  be  any 
probable  reason  assigned,  or  tolerable  conjecture  made  of  them.  And  yet  there  was 
not  one  tittle  of  all  the  prophecies  which  relate  to  the  manner  or  design  of  Christ's 
appearance  in  the  world  that  fell  to  the  ground.      II.  Show  against  the  Jews,  that 

THE  MEAN  APPEARANCE  OF  OhRIST  IN   THE  WORLD  IS  NO  GOOD  ARGUMENT  AGAINST 

THE  Christian  religion,  or  of  ant  force  to  prove  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
WAS  NOT  the  Christ  ;  and  that  upon  the  two  following  accounts — 1.  As  the 
grounds  upon  which  the  Jews  expected  a  temporal  Messiah,  were  false  and  im- 
practicable ;  false  with  respect  to  the  spirituality  of  His  kingdom  ;  impracticable 
with  respect  to  the  extent  and  universality  of  its  blessings  and  privileges.  2.  As 
the  state  and  condition  of  life  which  our  Saviour  chose  in  the  world  was  most 
agreeable  to  the  great  ends  and  design  of  His  coming  into  it.  (1)  It  gave  a  strong 
confirmation  to  the  truth  of  that  holy  religion  which  He  came  to  plant  in  the  world. 
Had  our  Saviour  been  a  victorious  prince,  that  had  given  laws  to  the  world,  and 
backed  the  authoritjr  of  them  with  the  sword,  the  atheist  might  then  have  pre- 
tended, that  the  Christian,  as  well  as  other  religions  in  the  world,  was  the  daughter 
of  force,  and  a  mere  politic  invention,  contrived  by  its  Author  the  better  to  settle 
»nd  confirm  His  government  to  Him,  if  He  should  find  a  favourable  juncture  to 
possess  Himself  of  it.  But  now  the  effects  of  the  Christian  religion  on  the  minds  of 
men,  and  the  methods  of  propagating  it,  cannot  be  ascribed  to  any  human  power  or 
authority.  Instead  of  employing  the  secular  arm  to  compel  men  to  come  into  the 
Church,  God  put  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  into  the  hands  of  Christ :  He  authorized 
Htm  to  give  such  a  body  of  holy  and  righteous  laws  to  His  Church  as  might  be 
proper  to  work  upon  their  minds  by  the  gentle  methods  of  reason  and  persuasion. 
He  made  choice  of  such  for  His  companions  and  disciples  as  were  men  of  mean 
occupations  and  low  fortunes  ;  men  as  to  their  natural  capacities  no  way*  ([oalified 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  liii. 

for  80  diflSciilt  and  high  an  undertaking  as  the  establishing  a  new  religion  against 
the  settled  laws  and  powers,  the  prejudices  and  passions,  the  vanities  and  vices  of  a 
corrupt  world.  The  design  of  the  holy  Jesus  in  all  this  was  to  show  that  the 
excellency  of  the  power  which  attended  Himself  and  His  apostles,  in  preaching  the 
doctrine  of  salvation,  might  not  be  ascribed  unto  men,  but  unto  God.  He  would 
make  way  for  the  reception  and  establishment  of  the  Gospel  in  the  world  by  no  other 
means  but  by  the  evidence  of  its  truth,  the  excellency  of  its  morals,  the  number  of 
the  miracles  wrought  to  confirm  it,  and  the  simplicity  of  those  who  were  the  first 
preachers  and  promoters  of  it.  And,  indeed,  that  the  Christian  religion,  by  such 
mean  and  unlikely  instruments,  should  in  so  short  a  time  extend  itself  so  wide,  and 
that  they  should  reap  such  a  harvest  of  triumphs  over  so  many  enemies,  seems  to 
have  been  the  greatest  miracle  of  all.  (2)  The  state  and  condition  of  life  which  our 
Saviour  chose  in  the  world  was  also  a  wise  and  excellent  method  to  recommend  the 
practice  of  religion  to  it.  The  holy  Jesus  did  not  think  it  enough  to  reveal  the  -n-ill 
of  God  to  mankind  ;  this  He  might  have  done,  as  God  delivered  the  law  in  the 
Mount,  by  speaking  to  some  extraordinary  prophet,  and  committing  what  He  spoke 
to  a  standing  writing,  without  rendering  Himself  visible.  But  God  gave  Him  a 
body,  that  men  might  from  His  own  mouth  hear  the  words  of  eternal  life.  (3)  The 
circumstances  wherein  our  Saviour  made  His  appearance  in  the  world  were  most 
agreeable  to  His  design  of  becoming  a  sacrifice  and  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the 
world  :  for  though  our  redemption  is  attributed  more  especially  to  His  sufferings  and 
death  upon  the  Cross,  as  His  sacrifice  was  there  finished,  yet  we  ought  to  look  upon 
it  as  begun  as  soon  as  he  was  bom  into  the  world.  III.  Practical  improvement. 
1.  If  the  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies  concerning  our  Saviour  be  an  evident 
proof  of  His  being  the  great  Prophet  that  was  to  come  into  the  world,  then  what- 
ever doctrines  He  taught  are  certainly  true  and  Divinely  revealed.  2.  From  the 
circimistances  of  our  Saviour's  appearance  in  the  world  let  us  learn  the  duties  of 
patience,  charity  and  humility.  3.  In  order  to  humble  the  pride  of  our  hearts, 
when  we  are  tempted  to  bear  ourselves  high  upon  any  worldly  advantages,  which 
give  us  a  superiority  above  our  brethren,  let  us  consider  how  Jesus  Christ,  the  best 
and  wisest,  judged  of  these  things.  {R.  Fiddes).  Christ  uncomely  and  yet 
heaiotiful : — How  can  it  be  said  of  Christ  that  He  had  neither  comeliness  nor  beauty, 
since  it  is  said  (Ps.  xlv.  2),  that  "He  is  fairer  than  the  children  of  men,"  or  "than 
the  sons  of  Adam  "  ?  And  in  Cant.  v.  10-16  He  is  described  by  the  spouse  to  be 
well-coloured,  and  likewise  well-.featured,  and  she  goeth  on  from  part  to  part,  from 
head  to  feet;  and  then  concludeth,  "He  is  altogether  lovely."  To  this  I 
answer — 1.  It  is  one  thing  what  Christ  is  to  the  spouse,  another  what  He  is 
to  the  xmbelieving  Jews.  Christ's  beauties  are  inward,  seen  of  none  but  those 
that  are  inwardly  acquainted  with  Him.  The  spouse  speaketh  of  Him  in  a 
epiritual  sense.  2.  We  must  distinguish  between  Christ's  humiliation  and 
exaltation.  His  Godhead  and  His  manhood.  In  His  Godhead  He  is  "the 
brightness  of  His  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,"  and  con- 
sequently full  of  beauty.  In  His  humiliation  He  is  not  only  a  man,  but  a 
mean  man  (Phil.  ii.  9).  3.  In  Christ's  humiliation  we  must  distinguish  as  to  what 
He  is  in  Himself  and  as  to  what  He  is  in  the  eye  of  the  world.  {T.  Manton,  D.I>.) 
The  mean  not  necessarily  despicable : — Do  not  despise  things  for  their  meanness,  for 
so  thou  mayest  condemn  the  ways  of  God.  (Ibid.)  God's  use  of  the  mean: — As 
there  was  meanness  in  the  outward  habitude  of  Christ's  person,  so  there  is  now  in 
the  administration  of  His  kingdom  ;  as  appears  by  considering — 1.  That  the  ordin- 
ances are  weak  to  appearance ;  there  is  nothing  out  plain  words,  plain  bread  and 
wine,  in  one  ordinance,  and  only  water  ii-  anothsr.  The  simple  plainness  o*"  the 
ordinances  is  an  obstacle  to  men's  believing ;  they  would  fain  bring  in  pomp,  but 
that  will  mar  all.  2.  These  ordinances  are  administered  by  weak  men.  Our  Saviour 
sent  fishermen  to  conquer  the  world,  and  made  use  of  a  goose-qiiill  to  wound  Anti- 
christ. Moses,  the  stammering  shepherd,  was  commissioned  to  deliver  Israel ;  God 
makes  use  of  Amos,  who  was  a  herdsman,  to  declare  His  will.  So  Elisha  the  great 
prophet  was  taken  from  the  plough.  And  many  times  God  made  use  of  young  men, 
such  as  Paul,  whose  very  person  causeth  prejudice  ;  young  Samuel,  young  Timothy, 
men  of  mean  descent,  low  parentage,  and  of  no  great  appearance  in  the  world.  3. 
The  manner  how  it  is  by  them  managed,  which  is  not  in  such  a  politic,  insinuating 
way  as  to  beguile  and  deceive,  and  as  if  they  were  to  serve  their  own  ends  (2  Cor.  i. 
12).  4.  The  persons  by  whom  it  is  entertained,  the  poor  (James  ii.  5).  Usually 
God's  true  people  are  the  meanest,  not  being  so  noted  for  outward  excellency  as 
others.    This  has  been  always  a  great  prejudice  against  Christ's  doctrine  (John  vii. 


CHAP.  Liii.]  ISAIAH.  95 

48).  5.  The  general  drift  of  it  is  to  make  men  deny  their  pleasures,  to  overlook  their 
concernments,  to  despise  the  world,  to  hinder  unjust  gam,  to  walk  contrary  to  the 
ordinary  customs  and  fashions  of  the  world.  {Ihid. )  Christ  assumed  an  appearance 
of  meajiness : — This  meanness  of  Christ  was  willingly  taken  up  by  Him.  1.  In  His 
birth.  (1)  For  the  time  of  it.  It  was  when  the  royal  stock  of  David  was  come  so 
low  that  Joseph  was  but  a  carpenter  by  profession.  Therefore  is  the  genealogy  of 
Joseph  and  Mary  so  carefully  sought  out  by  the  evangelist,  because  it  was  not  com- 
monly and  publicly  known  that  they  were  of  that  lineage.  The  throne  of  David 
was  occupied  by  Herod,  who  was  an  Ascalonite.  (2)  The  place,  Bethlehem,  a  small 
place.  Then  He  was  not  born  in  any  stately  room,  but  in  a  manger  in  the  stable. 
(3)  Consider  how  in  everything  He  was  found  in  shape  like  another  child,  being 
circumcised  the  eighth  day.  (4)  Consider  the  oblation  that  was  made  for  Him, 
such  as  was  made  for  poor  people.  Yet  we  may  observe  there  was  something  Divine 
still  mingled  with  Onrist  s  outward  meanness,  as  the  appearing  of  the  star,  the 
trouble  of  the  Jews,  the  wise  men's  report  and  offerings.  By  these  things  God 
would  leave  them  without  excuse,  and  under  this  poverty  discover  some  glimpses 
of  the  Deity.  2.  In  His  life  and  manner  of  appearance  in  the  world.  He  was 
altogether  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  ;  to  outward  appearance  just  as  other  men,  for 
His  giowth  was  as  other  men's,  by  degrees:  "And  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and 
statm-e,  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man. "  His  life  was  spent  in  much  toil  and 
labour,  etc.  (Ibid.)  Poverty: — 1.  Poverty  and  meanness  are  not  disgraceful. 
Christ  Himself  was  a  carpenter,  Paul  a  tent-maker,  and  the  apostles  fishermen. 
Christ,  you  see,  scorned  that  glory,  pomp  and  greatness  which  the  world  doteth 
upon.  2.  Poverty  should  not  be  irksome  to  us.  Christ  underwent  it  before  you  ; 
His  apostles  were  base  in  the  world's  eye  (1  Cor.  iv.  13).  Poverty  is  a  great  burden, 
and  layeth  a  man  open  to  many  a  disadvantage — scorn,  contempt  and  refusal.  But 
consider,  Christ  hath  honoured  it  in  His  own  person,  and  He  honoureth  it  to  this 
very  day.  {Ibid.)  Missing  Christ's  beaut]/: — There  have  been  two  traditions 
respecting  Christ's  person.  Some  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  have  declared  that 
He  was  Divinely  beautiful,  "the  fairest  among  ten  thousand  and  the  altogether 
lovely."  Others  have  spoken  of  Him  in  the  words  of  Isaiah,  "  He  hath  no  form  nor 
comeliness. "  For  my  own  part  I  like  to  think  of  Him  as  Divinely  beautiful.  If  in 
all  things  He  is  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  why  not  here  as  well  as  there  ?  Certain 
it  is  that  there  must  have  shone  through  Him  some  transfiguring  splendour,  that 
awed  and  fascinated.  Men  were  conquered  as  much  by  His  look  as  by  His  word. 
If,  however,  these  descriptions  of  Isaiah  refer  to  His  person,  and  are  to  be  taken 
literally,  then  they  are  very  far  from  being  attractive.  "As  a  root  out  of  a  dry 
ground."  "He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness."  "There  is  no  beauty  that  we 
should  desire  Him."  "We  esteemed  Him  not,"  or,  as  Luther  translates,  "We 
thought  Him  nothing."  The  picture  seems  to  be  that  of  a  mean  and  miserable  life, 
tragic,  unsettled,  menaced,  lined  with  grief,  disfigured  with  wounds.  I  say  "seems." 
For,  after  aU,  the  fault  may  not  be  so  much  in  Him  as  in  us.  Beauty  may  be  all 
about  men,  yet  they  may  never  perceive  it,  because  their  foolish  hearts  are  darkened  ; 
because  they  are  short-sighted,  blind,  impure.  Ruskin's  dictum  is  that  joy,  affec- 
tion, veneration  are  necessary  to  the  beholding  of  beauty.  If  that  be  so,  and  men 
know  nothing  of  "the  joy  that  rises  in  one  like  a  summer's  mom  ;"  if  they  have 
never  experienced  the  "love  that  greatens  and  glorifies  all  things  ;"  if  they  know 
nothing  of  that  reverence  which  recognizes  and  bows  before  the  highest,  it  is  no 
wonder  that  they  miss  the  spirit  of  the  beautiful.  Men  may  have  missed  Christ's 
beauty  from  many  causes,  as  men  are  missing  it  to-day.  Let  us  seek  to  discover  what 
these  things  are  that  blind  us  to  the  holiest,  the  highest,  the  loveliest.  I.  The 
SPIRIT  OF  CONTEMPT  BLINDS  TO  BEAUTY.  Jesus  Came  into  this  world  a  Galilean 
peasant,  poor,  obscure,  straitened  in  every  way.  And  judging  Him  by  the  measure 
of  the  scale  on  which  He  appeared,  men  treated  Him  with  disdain,  contempt,  scorn, 
remarking,  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter  ? "  How  many  there  are  who  live  continually 
in  the  spirit  of  contempt.  They  continually  look  down.  They  seem  to  forget  that 
some  of  the  choicest  spirits  of  earth  have  dined  on  "homely  fare  "  and  worn  "  hodden 
grey,"  and  that  the  millionaires  of  ideas  have  frequently  been  bankrupts  in  pocket. 
How  contemptuously  the  great  spirits  of  the  world  have  been  treated  by  those  who 
were  not  worthy  to  unloose  their  shoe-latchets  !  Think  of  Mozart  being  sent  by  an 
archbishop  in  whose  retinue  he  was  to  dine  with  the  servants  in  the  kitchen.  Think 
of  that  same  Mozart  occupying  a  nameless  grave,  for  "no  man  knoweth  of  his 
sepulchre  unto  this  day."  "  Odd  world,  is  it  not,  that  will  send  its  Bunyans  to 
prison  and  give  its  jockeys  ten  thousand  a  year ! "    Aristotle  paints  his  magnanimous 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS.  [chap.  un. 

man  as  "not  apt  to  admire,  for  to  him  there  is  nothing  great."  What  a 
number  of  these  magnanimous  men  there  must  be  ;  men  so  held  in  the  grip  of  con- 
tempt that,  standing  in  a  world  crammed  full  of  the  rich  glories  of  creation,  they  see 
nothing  to  admire.  Now  contempt  springs  from  two  things :  lack  of  understanding 
and  lack  of  love.  The  wise  man  never  despises.  "God  is  great,  yet  He  despiseth 
not  any,"  and  those  who  are  great  after  the  greatness  of  God  have  ever  felt  their 
smallness  beside  the  humblest  and  poorest  of  men.  They  see  that  behind  the  dullest 
life  there  may  be  angelic  light.  Where  true  wisdom  is  there  contempt  is  not. 
Charles  V.  was  truly  great  when,  picking  up  the  brush  of  Titian  which  the  painter 
had  dropped,  he  remarked  that  he  was  "proud  to  wait  on  so  supreme  a  genius." 
Men  see  no  beauty  in  Christ  because  they  have  been  too  ready  to  despise  Him. 
Contempt  springs  from  lack  of  love.  "  They  thought  Him  nothing  "  because  they 
never  looked  at  Him  with  the  heart.  If  you  want  to  discover  all  that  is  brightest 
and  best  in  men  you  must  look  at  them  with  the  look  of  love  ;  then  will  God  become 
"aglow  to  the  loving  heart  in  what  was  mere  earth  before."  Love  is  wonderful 
always.  There  is  a  magic  power  about  it  which  can  make  plain  faces  shine  as  the 
faces  of  angels.  It  can  nU  with  light  and  radiance  a  cottage  home  as  no  gold  can  do. 
It  can  convert  worthless  trifles  into  precious  heirlooms.  So  if  men  would  only  look 
at  Christ  Avith  the  supreme  look  of  the  soul  they  would  discover  that  He  who  seems 
to  have  no  form  nor  comeliness  will  then  be  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  II. 
Men  miss  the  beauty,  too,  by  the  critical  tempek.  Some  men  there  are  who 
start  out  always  with  a  disposition  to  criticize  rather  than  to  admire.  When  a 
young  lady  once  expressed  the  wish  to  Hogarth  that  she  might  be  able  to  draw 
caricature,  the  great  satirist  replied,  "  It  is  not  a  faculty  to  be  envied ;  take  my 
advice  and  never  draw  caricature.  By  the  long  practice  of  it  I  have  lost  the  enjoy- 
ment of  beauty.  I  never  see  a  face  but  distorted,  and  have  never  the  satisfaction  to 
behold  the  human  face  divine."  The  great  caricaturist  had  so  accustomed  himself  to 
look  for  faults  that  he  could  see  nothing  else.  Criticism  blinds  to  beauty.  Was 
not  that  true  with  regard  to  Christ  ?  Look  for  the  beauty  in  Him  and  you  will  dis- 
cover a  loveliness  that  cannot  be  chiselled  in  marble  or  expressed  in  colour,  but  a 
beauty  which,  when  the  soul  sees  it  is  ravished  for  ever,  and  rapt  into  an  ecstasy  of 
admiration  and  love.  III.  We  mat  miss  the  beattty  through  envt.  Did  not 
men  miss  His  beauty  in  that  way  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  ?  Pilate  was  keen  enough 
to  perceive  that  behind  the  seeming  air  of  justice  assumed  by  His  traducers  the  fires 
of  envy  burned.  "He  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered  Him."  The  artist 
who  portrayed  Envy  as  a  man  of  mean  and  misshapen  figure,  with  crouching 
shoulder,  craning  neck,  distended  ears,  and  serpent  tongue,  was  endowed  with  a 
more  than  ordinary  gift  of  insight.  Where  envy  exists  there  can  be  no  vision  of  the 
beautiful.  For  it  bUnds  the  mind  and  poisons  the  heart,  and  lifts  not  to  a  throne, 
but  to  a  cross.  How  it  blinded  the  eyes  of  those  Scribes  and  Pharisees  1  They  saw 
the  beautiful  deeds  of  the  Man,  how  He  succoured  the  weak,  the  sufi"ering,  the  sad  ; 
they  heard  His  words,  fragrant,  uplifting,  strengthening ;  they  beheld  a  life  spent 
in  doing  good  ;  yet  so  blinded  were  they  by  the  spirit  of  envy  that  this  supreme 
vision  of  loveliness  did  not  dawn  upon  them.  The  penalty  of  envy  is  blindness,  and 
until  those  scales  fall  from  the  eyes,  all  things  true  and  beautiful  and  of  good  report, 
everything  of  worth  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  our  fellow-men,  all  the  charm  and 
sweetness  of  the  Son  of  Man,  will  remain  undiscovered  by  us.  IV.  Preoccupation 
MAY  BLIND  TO  BEAUTY.  Men  are  so  feverishly  busy  in  these  days,  they  live  at  such 
express  speed,  that  they  often  miss  the  angel  at  the  door.  When  men  are  busy  here 
and  there  they  miss  the  charms  of  the  Eternal.  A  little  more  quiet,  a  little  abiding 
in  one's  own  room,  and  it  would  be  discovered  that  Christ  is  lovelier  than  painter's 
sublimest  dream,  and  that  finding  Him  one  finds  a  joy  for  ever.  (Cecil  R.  Wright. ) 

Vers.  3-7.  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men. — Ttu  mean  appearance  of  th« 
Bedcemer  foretold: — I.  The  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  in  determining  to 
8BND  His  Son  into  the  world  in  a  state  of  poverty  and  affliction.  1.  With 
regard  to  His  beinga  teacher,  His  sufferings  set  Him  above  the  reach  of  suspicions. 
What  ends  could  He  have  to  serve  by  His  doctrine,  who  met  with  nothing  but 
misery  and  affliction,  as  the  reward  of  His  labour  ?  2.  With  regard  to  our  Lord's 
being  an  example  of  holiness  and  obedience  set  before  us  for  our  instruction  and 
imitation.  His  sufferings  render  the  pattern  perfect,  and  show  His  virtues  in  their 
truest  lustre,  and  at  the  same  time  silence  the  pleas  which  laziness  or  self-love  would 
otherwise  have  suggested.  3.  With  regard  to  His  Divine  mission.  His  sufferings 
were  an  evident  token  that  the  hand  of  God  was  with  Him.     He  only  can  prodnoa 


CHAP,  ijn.3  ISAIAH.  97 

strength  out  of  weakness,  and  knows  how  to  confound  the  mighty  things  of  the 
world  by  things  which  are  of  no  account.  Add  to  this  the  evidence  of  prophecv, 
which  is  so  much  the  stronger  by  how  much  the  weaker  Christ  was :  so  admirably 
hasthewisdomof  God  displayed  itselfin  this  mystery  of  faith.     II.  The  evidence  of 

PROPHECY  CONCERNING  THE  MEAN  APPEARANCE  OTJB  LORD  "WAS  TO  MAKE.  III.  ThI 
HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE  V^E  HAVE  FOR  THE  COMPLETION   OF  THESE   PROPHECIES.      (T. 

Sherlock,  D.D.)     Christ  despised  and  rejected  of  men : — I.  In  WHAT  respects  IT  MAT 

STILL  BE  SAID  THAT  OhRIST  IS  DESPISED  AND  REJECTED  OF  MEN.     1.   Men  may  be  Said 

to  despise  Christ  when  they  do  not  receive  Him  as  their  alone  Saviour,  the  tone  and 
only  way  to  the  Father.  2.  When  they  practically  deny  His  authority  by 
breaking  His  Commandments.  3.  When  they  do  not  give  Him  the  chief  room  in 
their  hearts,  nor  prefer  Him  in  their  choice  to  everything  else.  4.  When  they  do 
not  publicly  confess  Him  before  men.  II.  The  causes  of  this  contempt.  1.  The 
main  cause  is  a  secret  unbelief.  2.  Love  of  this  would.  3.  Ignorance  of  their  own 
condition.  4.  An  opinion  that  they  may  obtain  His  aid  at  what  time  soever  they 
shall  choose  to  ask  it.  III.  The  malignity  of  this  sin.  To  despise  and  reject 
such  a  Saviour,  is  the  blackest  ingratitude  that  can  possibly  be  imagined.  2.  Your 
ingratitude  is  heightened  by  the  most  iasolent  contempt  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  of  God.  3.  By  despising  and  rejecting  Christ,  you  openly  proclaim  war 
against  the  Most  High,  and  bid  Him  defiance.  {JR.  Walker.)  Despised  and  rejected: 
— I.  Christ  was  an  object  of  scorn  and  contempt.  1.  He  was  despised  as  an 
impostor.  2.  Despised  in  His  teachings.  3.  In  his  work.  4.  In  His  claims  to  a 
righteous  judgment  at  the  national  tribunal.  II.  Not  only  was  Jesus  an  object 
OF  contempt  and  SCORN  BUT  OF  ABSOLUTE  REJECTION.  If  the  word  had  read 
"neglected," — deserted,  coldly  passed  by — this  would  have  revealed  an  kidifi"erence 
that  would  have  covered  His  nation  and  age  with  reproach,  and  would  have  stood 
out  a  lasting  moniunent  of  their  base  ingratitude.  But  here  is  a  word  conveying  the 
idea  of  the  most  inveterate  and  active  hatred.  But  why  this  active  hostilify  to 
Christ?  (/.  Higgins.)  Despised  and  rejected  of  men: — In  the  Gospel  we  see  this 
rejection  in  actual  occurrence.  I.  He  was  despised  and  rejected  by  the 
worldly-minded  (John  vi.).  Following  Christ  for  the  sake  of  bread  may  lead 
to  much  enthusiastic  and  self-denying  exertion.  Here,  the  very  meanest  view  of 
Christ  is  preferred  to  those  lofty  and  spiritual  truths  by  which  He  tried  to  aUure 
and  save  their  souls.  In  his  presence,  before  His  face,  while  listening  to  His  voice, 
and  with  the  splendour  of  the  miracle  before  them — all  are  passed  by  for  the  bread. 
Is  not  this  the  essence  of  worldly -mindedness  ?  Christianity  is  the  religion  of 
many,  not  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  Himself,  nor  His  gracious  words,  nor  even  His 
miracles,  but  for  the  bread,  for  reputation's  sake,  and  social  character  and  respect- 
ability. II.  He  was  despised  and  rejected  by  the  rationalist  (Matt.  xiii. 
54-57).  It  was  in  "  His  own  country."  There  men  thought  they  knew  Him  ;  His 
family  had  long  dwelt  there.  Parents,  brothers,  sisters  were  aU  familiarly  known 
— all,  down  to  their  very  trade:  "Is  not  this  the  carpenter?"  The  facts  of  the 
case,  as  the  rationalist  is  so  fond  of  saying,  were  all  clearly  apprehended,  and  stood 
forth  in  their  true  dimensions.  "Whence  hath  this  man  this  wisdom  and  these 
mighty  works  ? "  Is  it  real  ?  is  it  not  on  the  face  of  it  absurd,  this  mere  carpenter's 
son  ?  This  is  the  inmost  spirit  of  rationalism.  It  rejects  everything  above  the 
level  of  visible  and  tangible  fact,  everything  that  cannot  be  weighed  and  measured, 
everything  spiritual  in  Scripture  doctrine  and  supernatural  in  Scripture  history. 
III.  He  is  despised  and  rejected  by  the  ecclesiastic  (Matt.  xxi.  15-23). 
The  ecclesiastical  temper  is  not  found  solely  or  chiefly  amongst  those  who  are 
ecclesiastics  by  profession.  The  religious  spirit  may  be  crushed — indeed,  has  often 
been  ;  rigid  and  severe  forms  may  take  the  place  of  the  easy  and  graceftd  motions  of 
vital  Christianity.  This  is  the  rejection  of  Christ  in  the  freedom  by  which  His 
Holy  Spirit  "distributes  to  every  man  severally  as  He  wiU."  IV.  He  is  despised 
AND  REJECTED  BY  MEN  OF  BRUTE  FORCE  (Luke  xxiii.  11).  To  somc  theteudemess  of 
the  Gospel  religion  is  an  offence.  Humanity  is  a  peculiarly  Christian  virtue,  and 
meekness  and  resignation.  The  calm  tranquillity  of  meditation,  the  tearful  eye  of 
compassion,  the  sublime  courage  of  patience,  the  daring  heroism  of  forgiveness, 
excite  no  sympathy  or  admiration  in  some  breasts.  Theirs  is  the  rejection  of  Christ 
through  a  false  manliness.  V.  Christ  is  despised  and  rejected  by  His  ows 
(John  i.  11).  Some,  from  a  natural  sweetness  and  amiability  of  disposition,  seem 
in  a  certain  degree  adapted  to  be  Christians.  The  restraming  efiects  of  home 
discipline  and  generous  education  have  restrained  them  from  open  transgression. 
Yet  their  rejection  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour  from  sia  is  often  most  decided  and  eren 

VOL.  UL  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  liii. 

disdainful.    They  think  the  charge  of  sin  inapnropriate,  for  they  have  no  con- 
sciousness of  it,  and  no  felt  need  of  a  Saviour.     The  sinfulness  of  rejecting  Christ  is 
seen  in  its  being  a  rejection  of  the  Father  (Luke  x.  16).     It  is  not  possible  to  reject 
Christ,  and  be  right  with  God.     {S.  H.  Tindall.)    Failure: — In  a  life  that  is  lived 
with  the  thoughts  of  eternity,  in  one  aspect  failure  is  inevitable :  in  another  aspect 
failure  is  impossible.     1.  Failure  is  inevitable.     If  I  accept  for  myself  an  ideal 
which  is  beyond  the  limits  of  here  and  now,  then  manifestly  it  is  impossible  that  I 
can  here  and  now  realize  it.     There  must  be  always  with  me,  so  long  as  I  am 
faithful  to  that  ideal,  a  sense  of  incompleteness,  a  ceaseless  aspiration,  an  efifort  that 
only  the  grave  can  close.     He  knows  if  he  is  faithful  that  he  has  before  him  an 
eternal  career,  that  the  end  to  which  he  is  moving  is  likeness  to  Jesus  Christ ;  that 
he  has  to  pass  into  the  unveiled  presence  of  God  and  hold  communion  with  Him. 
If  that  be  the  end,  can  it  be  otherwise  than  that,  in  the  meanwhile,  there  should  be 
failure,  humiliation,  penitence,  and  ceaseless  and  unwearied  discipline  of  self?    2. 
Failure,  in  another  aspect,  is  impossible.    Only  be  sure  that  deep  down  at  the  root  of 
life  there  is  loyalty  to  God,  and  then  begin  where  we  are  placed — in  the  effort  to  find 
Him  He  will  Mfil  the  search.     The  miracle  of  the  failure  of  Calvary  is  our  assurance 
of  that  truth.    It  is  this  living  for  the  Eternal,  as  a  venture  of  faith,  which  has  always 
appealed  to  the  eternal  God,  which  His  own  nature  is  pledged  to  meet.     Do  we 
stumble  ?    It  is  only  that  we  may  realize  His  readiness  to  help.    Are  we  bewildered  f 
It  is  only  in  order  that  we  may  find  how  sure  He  guides.     Are  we  humiliated  by  our 
confessions  ?    It  is  only  that  we  may  realize  the  readiness  of  His  pardon.     Are  we 
conscious  and  stricken  with  the  sense  of  our  weakness  ?    It  is  only  that  we  may  find 
His  strength  perfected  within  us.    If  we  have  only  taken  sides  with  Him  in  the  great 
issues  of  human  life,  then  He  will  justiftr  our  choice.    (C.  O.  Lang.)    Failure  may  be 
welcomed : — Our  failure  in  the  light  of  the  Cross,  our  spiritual  failm-es,  are  things  to 
be  welcomed ;  they  prevent  the  torpor  of  dull  assurance  creeping  over  us  like  a 
poison ;  they  prevent  our  falling  under  imperfect  standards  of  life,  they  prove,  so 
long  as  they  are  constant  with  us,  that  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God  has  not  left 
ns  to  ourselves ;  they  witness  to  us  that  we  recognize  the  truth  that  our  souls  can 
find  their  rest  and  satisfaction  only  in  God.     {Ibid.)     The  despised  Saviour : — To  all 
God  grants  some  dim  vision  of  what  He  intends  man  to  be.     The  holiest  men  have 
had  the  clearest  glimpses  of  that  character.     One  nation  was  separated  to  keep  the 
ideal  before  the  world.     The  majority  corrupted  the  representation,  but   some 
prophets  saw  it  clearly.     I.  God's  ideal  foe  man,   and  its  realization  in 
Christ.     The  majority  thought  He  would  be  another  Solomon,  David's  greater  son. 
The  prophet  saw  that  He  would  be  a  Sinless  Sufferer  ;  what  it  had  been  intended 
that  the  nation  should  be,  that  the  Suffering  Servant  would  be.     The  voice  of  God, 
which  set  forth  the  ideal  by  the  lips  of  prophets,  now  speaks  through  our  own 
highest  desires.     II.  "The  world's  reception  of  the  revealed  ideal.     Pilate 
has  brought  Fini  forth  that  His  suffering  may  excite  their  pity,  but  His  pure  and 
loving  life  has  made  them  relentless  in  their  hate.     There  is  no  beauty  that  they 
should  desire  Him.     Barabbas,  the  bold  and  reckless,  is  the  people's  choice.     While 
boon  companions  crowd  round  him,  cold  looks  and  scornful  smUes  are  reserved  for 
Christ.     Christ  had  headed  no  revolt  against  the  powers  that  be,  and  therefore  He 
was  not  popular.     Political  emancipation  is  more  popular  than  spiritual.     The  path 
of  righteousness  ends  on  Calvary ;  its  crown  is  one  of  thorns,  its  throne  a  cross. 
III.  The  meaning  of  the  revelation  of  this  ideal.     The  world  says,  Blessed 
are  the  wealthy,  the  powerful,  the  great,  and  the  wise.     Christ  says,  Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit,  the  pure  in  heart,  the  meek,  the  mourners,  the  persecuted.     At  first 
we  pity  Christ,  and  reserve  our  indignation  for  His  persecutors.     But  He  was  the 
least  pitiable  of  all  that  group.     PUate  was  a  pitiable  victim,  the  people  were 
pitiable  because  carried  away  by  passion,  and  the  priests  by  desire  for  revenge.     The 
greatness  of  apparent  weakness  is  here  revealed.     Yet  we  despise  weakness.     Here  is 
a  dramatic  representation  of  weighty  decisions  made  every  day  in  human  hearts. 
When  we  choose  ease  and  worldly  glory  in  preference  to  holiness  and  self-denial,  we 
despise  and  reject  Christ.     Here  our  choice  is  seen  worked  out  to  the  bitter  end. 
Th^  is  a  revelation  of  the  meaning  of  sin.     IV.  The  effect  of  this  revelation. 
The  world  can  never  forget  that  spectacle.     In  the  dark  ages,  when  the  Bible  was  a 
hidden  book,  a  representation  of  tMs  scene  was  to  be  found  in  every  church. 
Though  obscured  by  superstition,  the  ideal  was  still  held  up,  and  was  still  moulding 
the  minds  and  stimulating  the  holy  endeavours  of  men.     In  an  open  Bible  we 
have  the  ideal  more  truthfully  set  forth.    The  love  there  revealed  nas  been  tiie 
eonstraining  motive  which  moved  apostles  to  preach,  martyrs  to  suffer,  miasionariea 


CHAP,  im.]  ISAIAH.  99 

to  forgo  the  joys  of  home,  and  humble  men  and  women  to  labour  in  countless 

ways  to  advance  the  interests  of  Christ.     His  patience  shames  our  murmuring: 

His  burning  love  to  us  kindles  our  love  to  Him.     {R.    C.   Ford,   M.A.)     The 

world's  regard  for  the  outward : — The  great  cause  assigned  by  the  prophet  for  the 

astonishment  of  men  at  the  Messiah  and  for  their  rejection  of  Him  is,  that  His 

real  glory  is  hidden  beneath  humiliation  and  sorrow.     The  world,  that  is,  which 

always  looks  at  the  outward  appearance  of  things,  judges  them  according  to  their 

material  splendours ;  having  a  carnal  eye,  it  can  but  dimly  discern  moral  beauty. 

It  renders  homage  to  thrones  and  crowns,  and  wealth  and  power,  and  does  not  care 

to  see  the  moral  iniquity  and  the  spiritual  repulsiveness  there  may  be  behind  them  ; 

it  feels  pity  and  contempt  for  sufiTering  and  poverty  and  obloquy,  and  does  not  care 

to  see  the  moral  grandeur  that  these  may  cover  or  radicate.     There  are  few  of  us  so 

reverent  to  a  poor,  godly  man,  as  to  a  rich  godless  one.     We  may  not  refuse  to  utter 

words  commending  the  one  and  condemning  the  other,  but  we  utter  them  very 

tenderly  ;  the  goodness  of  a  rich  man  causes  us  to  exhaust  our  expletives,  and  almost 

ourselves,  in  admiring  praise ;   the  wickedness  of  a  poor  man  is  denounced  by  U3 

without  mercy ;  but  when  the  conditions  are  reversed  we  have  a  great  deal  more 

reserve.     Our  praise  is  a  concession  that  we  cannot  withhold.     We  blame  "with 

bated  breath,  and  whispering  humbleness."    The  ragged  garments  of  poverty  have 

a  wonderful  transparency  when  vice  lies  behind  them  ;  whUe  riches  usurp  the  powers 

of  charity,  and  "hide  the  multitude  of  sins."    {R.  Allan,  D.D.)    The  art  of  seeing 

the  spiritual : — The  Jews  did  not  look  for  spiritual  meaning  in  their  dispensation, 

but  simply  at  material  and  mechanical  ordinances,  and  they  became  Pharisees — 

regarding  religion  as  a  thing  of  phylacteries  and  tithes  and  street  prayers :  they  did 

not  look  for  spiritual  glory  in  their  expected  Messiah,  or  for  spiritual  blessings  in 

His  coming,  and  they  became  absorbed  in  the  conception  of  a  temporal  prince,  and 

were  incapable  of  seeing  anything  else  in  Him  ;  and,  because  He  was  not  this,  in 

their  astonishment  and  anger,  they  rejected  and  crucified  Him.     The  lesson  is  a 

universal  one  ;  it  affects  the  spiritual  education  of  every  soul,  our  own  daily  habits 

of  interpreting  things.     We  may  look  at  God's  world  until  we  see  nothing  of  God's 

presence  in  it ;  nothing  but  mechanical  forces.     A  scientific  or  philosophical  eye  may 

soon  educate  itself  to  see  nothing  but  science  and  philosophy ;  a  material  eye,  to 

see  nothing  but  materialism.     We  may  look  upon  creation,  and  see  no  Creator ; 

upon  providence,  and  see  no  Benefactor.     So  we  may  read  the  Bible,  and  see  nothing 

but  sacred  history,  or  scientific  philosophy — the  letter  and  not  the  spirit.     So  we 

may  look  at  Christian  things  on  their  material  rather  than  their  spiritual  side.     We 

may  speculate  upon  a  millennium  coming  of  Christ,  until  we  forget  His  spiritual 

presence — even  upon  heaven  itself,  until  we  forget  the  inward  grace,  and  holiness 

and  Divine  communion  that  chiefly  make  it  heaven.     Let  us  carefully  cultivate  the 

Divine  art  of  seeing  spiritual  aspects  and  meanings  in  all  things,  of  judging  of  all 

things  by  their  spiritual  importance,  of  valuing  them  for  their  spiritual  influence,  of 

applying  them  to  spiritual  uses.     "The  pure  in  heart  see  God  ; "  " spiritual  things 

are  spiritually  discerned. "    {Ibid.)    Christ  rejected : — I.  The  first  reason  assigned  for 

the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  by  the  Jews  was  the  gradual  and  unostentatious 

MANNER  OF  His  MANIFESTATION.     "  He  shall  grow  up  before  Him  as  a  tender  plant, 

and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,"  etc.     The  general  reference  is,  no  doubt,  to  Hia 

parentage,  and  His  manner  of  entering  the  world — so  contrasted  with  the  probable 

expectations  of  the  Jews.     Not  like  a  cedar  of  Lebanon  did  the  world's  Messiah 

appear  ;  not  as  a  scion  of  a  noble  and  wealthy  house  ;  not  as  the  son  of  a  Herod  or 

a  Caiaphas — but  as  a  "tender  plant,"  as  "a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground."     It  is  a 

repetition  of  the  figure  in  the  eleventh  chapter,   "There  shall  come  forth  a  Shoot 

out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  ;  and  a  Scion  shall  spring  forth  from  his  roots. "    Just  as 

the  descendants  of  the  Plantagenets  are  to  be  found  amongst  our  English  peasantry, 

the  glory  of  the  family  had  departed.     Nothing  could  be  farther  from  the  thought 

of  the  carnal  Jews  than  that  Messiah  the  Prince  should  be  a  scion  of  such  a  forgotten 

house.     How  wonderful  in  its  obscurity  and  helplessness  was  His  childhood  ;  not 

hastening  towards  His  manifestation,  not  hastening  even  towards  His  ministry  to 

the  perishing,  but  waiting  until  "the  fulness  of  time  was  come  ; "  growing  into  the 

child,  the  youth,  the  man  ;  for  more  than  thirty  years  giving  scarcely  a  sign  that 

He  was  other  than  an  ordinary  son  of  humanity  ;  at  first  helplessly  dependent  upon 

His  parents  for  support  and  direction,  then  obediently  "subject  to  them,"  fulfilling 

all  the  conditions  and  duties  of  childhood,  a  child  with  children  as  well  as  a  man 

with  men  ;  then  a  youth  labouring  as  an  artisan,  fulfilling  His  great  mission  to  the 

world  in  a  carpenter's  shop.    And  then  fulfilling  His  ministry,  not  amongst  the 


100  TSE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tin, 

rich,  but  amongst  the  poor ;  not  in  acts  of  rule  and  conquest,  but  in  deeds  of  benefi- 
cence and  words  of  spiritual  life  ;  and  consummating  it  by  a  death  on  a  cross.  II. 
The  second  reason  for  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  by  the  Jews,  which  the  prophet 
assigns,  is  His  unattractite  appearance  when  manifested.  This  he  puts  both 
negatively  and  positively.  1.  Negatively,  He  was  destitute  of  all  attractions  ;  He 
ha!a  "no  form  nor  comeliness  ; "  He  was  without  "beauty"  to  make  men  "desire 
Him."  2.  But  there  were  positive  repulsions ;  everything  to  offend  men  who  had 
Buoh  prepossessions  as  they  had.  A  Messiah  in  the  guise  of  a  peasant  babe — the 
Divine  in  the  form  of  a  servant  and  a  suflferer.  Ohieflv,  however,  we  are  arrested  by 
the  phrase,  which,  because  of  its  touching  beauty,  has  almost  become  one  of  the 
personal  designations  of  the  Messiah — "A  Man  of  sorrows" — literally,  a  Man  of 
Bufferings,  or  of  many  sufferings — One  who  possesses  sufferings  as  other  men  possess 
intelligence,  or  physical  faculty — One  who  was  "acquainted  with  grief,"  not  in  the 
casual,  transient  way  in  which  most  men  are,  but  with  an  intimacy  as  of  companion- 
ship ;  the  utmost  bodily  and  mental  sorrow  was  endured  by  Him.  The  emphasis  of 
the  description  lies  not  in  the  fact  that  one  who  came  to  be  a  Prophet  and  Eeformer 
was  subjected  to  martyr  treatment,  for  such  men  have  ever  been  rejected  and 
persecuted  by  the  ignorance,  envy  and  madness  of  their  generation.  It  is  that  He 
who  was  the  Creator  and  Lord  of  all  things  should  have  submitted  to  this  condition, 
borne  this  obloquy,  endured  this  suffering ;  that  the  Lord  of  life  and  blessedness 
should  appear  in  our  world,  not  only  as  a  Man,  but  as  so  suffering  a  Man,  as  that 
He  should  be  known  amongst  other  suffering  men  as  pre-eminently  "a  Man  of 
Borrows " — a  Man  whose  sorrows  were  greater  than  other  men's  sorrows.  Now,  we 
cannot  think  that  this  designation  is  given  to  Him  merely  because  of  the  bodily 
Bufferings,  or  social  provocations,  that  were  inflicted  upon  Him.  We  shall  touch  but 
very  distantly  the  true  heart  of  the  Redeemer's  sorrows,  if  we  limit  the  cause  of  them 
to  the  mere  stubbornness  of  His  generation,  or  to  the  mere  physical  agonies  of  His 
death.  It  is  doing  no  wrong  to  the  pre-eminence  of  the  Saviour's  agonies  to  say,  that 
many  teachers  of  truth  have  been  opposed  and  persecuted  more  than  He  was,  and 
that  many  martyrs  have  endured  deaths  of  more  terrible  physical  agony.  If  this 
were  all,  we  should  be  compelled,  I  think,  to  admit  that  the  prophetic  description  is 
somewhat  exaggerated.  How,  then,  is  it  to  be  accounted  for  ?  Only  by  the  fact  of 
His  having  also  endured  transcendent  inward  sorrow ;  sorrow  of  mind,  sorrow  of 
heart,  of  which  ordinary  men  have  no  experience  ;  only  by  His  own  strange  expression 
in  His  agony,  when  no  human  hand  touched  Him — "My  soul  is  exceedingly  sorrowful, 
even  unto  death."  Then  comes  the  mystery  of  such  a  pure  and  perfect  soul  ex- 
periencing such  a  sorrow.  If  He  were  only  a  prophet  and  martyr  for  the  truth  of 
God,  why,  as  distinguished  from  all  other  prophets  and  martyrs,  should  He  have 
endured  so  much  inward  anguish  ?  Here  we  touch  the  great  mystery  of  atonement, 
and  we  are  bold  to  say  that  this  alone  interprets  Christ's  peculiar  sorrow.  {Ibid.) 
Lessons  from  the  manner  of  Christ's  appearing : — 1.  Great  things  may  be  found  in 
very  lowly  forms.  We  judge  of  things  by  material  magnitudes  ;  the  spiritual  God 
judges  them  by  moral  qualities.  The  great  forces  that  have  ruled  the  world  have 
mostly  been  bom  in  lowly  places  ;  they  have  been  moulded  to  greatness  in  the  school 
of  necessity  ;  trained  to  greatness  in  the  school  of  endurance.  He  who  has  not  to 
endure  can  never  be  great.  Let  us  cultivate  the  spiritual  eye,  that  can  recognize 
spiritual  qualities  everywhere,  and  neither  in  others  nor  in  ourselves  disparage  "  the 
day  of  small  things,"  the  germs  of  virtue  and  strength  ;  for  we  know  not  what  they 
may  achieve.  The  acorn  becomes  an  oak  ;  the  "  solitary  monk  shakes  the  world  ; 
the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  becomes  the  Christ  of  Christianity.  Your  solitary  scholar 
may  be  the  nucleus  of  a  great  system  of  education ;  your  solitary  convert  may 
evangelize  a  nation  (Matt.  xiii.  31-32).  2,  The  power  of  Divine  patience.  God 
waits,  even  in  His  great  redeeming  purpose,  until  "the  fulness  of  time  is  come,"  and 
then  untU  the  "tender  plant  grows  up  before  Him."  We,  in  our  impatience,  wish 
to  do  all  things  at  once,  to  convert  the  world  in  a  day.  Our  zeal  becomes  fanaticism 
the  more  difficult  to  check  because  it  takes  so  holy  a  form.  (Ibid.)  Aversion  to 
Christ : — The  reason  for  this  aversion  to  Christ  may  probably  be  found  in  the  fact  of-— 
1.  His  sorrowful  face.  2.  His  serious  manner.  3.  His  spiritual  teaching.  4.  His 
consecration  to  His  Father's  business.  5.  His  single  walk  with  God,  His  habits  of 
retirement  and  prayer.  Men  hate  and  reject  Christ  for  these  characteristics.  The 
world's  spirit  "and  all  worldly  religion  resent  these  aspects  of  spiritual  life.  {G.  F. 
Pentecost,  D.D.)  Handel'x  '^Messiah": — Of  Handel,  it  is  said,  that  when  com- 
posing his  "Messiah,"  and  he  came  to  these  words,  he  was  affected  to  tears ;  and 
well  might  he  weep,  for  history  furnishes  no  parallel  to  this  case.    [J.  Higgins.) 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAH.  101 

A  man  of  Borrows. — The  eatcses  of  Chriafs  sorrows: — I.  The  daily  oontaoIi 
OF  His  puile  and  piotts  soul  with  sinful  and  sinnino  men.  And  who  may 
oonceive  the  constancy  and  intensity  of  the  anguish  that  would  spring  from 
this  ?  There  wonld  be  the  sense  of  human  relationship  to  a  race  that  had  aimed 
and  fallen  ;  they  were  men,  and  He  was  a  Man  too  :  "He  likewise  took  part  of  ths 
same  ; "  they  were  His  proper  brothers  ;  He  was  allied  in  blood  to  men  so  guilty 
and  degraded.  It  was  as  if  a  vicious  brother,  a  prodigal  son,  were  guilty  of  nameless 
and  constant  crime.  The  sense  of  men's  guilt,  degradation,  misery,  ingratitude, 
would  bow  down  His  pure  soul  with  unspeakable  sorrow  and  shame.  Then  there 
was  His  daily  practical  contact  with  acts  and  hearts  of  sin  ;  the  touch  on  every  side, 
and  wherever  He  felt  humanity,  of  what  was  unloving  and  unholy ;  the  sight  of 
their  hate  to  His  loving  Father ;  of  their  rebelliousness  against  His  holy  law ;  a 
sinfulness  and  unspiritualness  that  led  them  to  reject  and  hate  Him  ;  to  turn  away 
with  dislike  and  determination  from  His  holy  words  and  deeds.  His  great  human 
love.  His  perfect  hmnan  holiness,  would  wonderfully  combine  to  wring  His  soul  with 
anguish.  The  apostle  intimates  how  great  this  sorrow  was,  when  he  says  that  "  He 
endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself;"  that  He  "resisted  unto 
blood,  striving  against  sin. "  And  we  can  understand  the  mysterious  agony  of  His 
soul  in  Gethsemane  only  by  supposing  that  it  was  the  sense  of  the  world's  guilt 
that  lay  upon  it :  that  made  His  soul  so  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death.  "We 
have  only  to  think  of  His  pure  nature ;  that  He  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners  ; "  and  to  remember  the  men  that  He  came  into  contact  with  ; 
the  world  in  which  He  lived ;  the  treatment  which  His  message  of  holiness  and 
mercy  received :  to  understand  how  sore  the  sorrow  of  His  soul  would  be.  II.  Thi 
temptations  op  the  devil.  He,  the  pure  and  perfect  Son  of  the  Father,  was 
doomed  to  listen  to  polluting  and  hateful  thoughts  of  distrust  and  sin :  He  who  so 
loathed  evil  was  plied  with  evil.  III.  The  great  but  inexplicable  sorkovit  of 
whatever  constituted  His  atonement — of  whatever  is  meant  by  its  "pleasing 
the  Father  to  bruise  Him  " — to  "put  Him  to  grief" — to  "make  His  soul  an  offering 
for  sin" — to  "lay  upon  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all" — to  "forsake  Him"  on  BBa 
cross.  These  were  the  chief  elements  of  His  sorrow — a  sorrow  that  has  had  no 
equal,  and  that,  in  many  of  its  ingredients,  has  had  no  likeness,  {ff.  Allan,  D.D.y^ 
Christ  a  Man  of  sorrows ; — I.  It  is  here  predicted  that  Christ  should  be  a 
Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.  This  prediction  was  literally  ful- 
filled. It  has  been  supposed  that  His  sufferings  were  rather  apparent  than  real ; 
or,  at  least,  that  His  abundant  consolations,  and  His  knowledge  of  the  happy 
consequences  which  would  result  from  His  death,  rendered  His  sorrows  compar- 
atively light,  and  almost  converted  them  to  joys.  But  never  was  supposition  more 
erroneous.  His  suff"erings  were  incomparably  greater  than  they  appeared  to  be. 
No  finite  mind  can  conceive  of  their  extent.  His  sufferings  began  with  his  birth, 
and  ended  but  with  His  Ufe.  1.  It  must  have  been  exceedingly  painful  to  such  a 
person  as  Christ  to  live  in  a  world  like  this.  2.  Another  circumstance  which 
contributed  to  render  our  Saviour  a  Man  of  sorrows  was  the  reception  He  met  with 
from  those  He  came  to  save.  3.  Another  circumstance  that  threw  a  shade  of  gloom 
over  our  Saviour's  life  was  His  clear  view  and  constant  anticipation  of  the  dreadful 
agonies  in  which  it  was  to  terminate.  He  was  not  ignorant,  as  we  happUy  are, 
of  the  miseries  which  were  before  Him.  How  deeply  the  prospect  affectea  Him  is 
evident  from  His  own  language :  "I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how 
am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished ! "     II.  We  have  in  this  prophetic  passage 

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  OUR  SAVIOUR'S  CONDUCT  UNDER  THE  PRESSURE  OF  THESE  SORROWS. 

"  He  was  oppressed,"  etc.  "  He  was  brought  as  a  Lamb,"  etc.  Never  was  language 
more  descriptive  of  the  most  perfect  meekness  and  patience ;  never  was  prediction 
more  fiilly  justified  by  the  event  than  in  the  case  before  us.  If  His  lips  were 
opened,  it  was  but  to  express  the  most  perfect  submission  to  His  Father's  will, 
and  to  breathe  out  prayers  for  His  murderers.  Christian,  look  at  your  Master,  and 
learn  how  to  suffer.  Sinner,  look  at  your  Saviour,  and  learn  to  admire,  to  imitate, 
and  to  forgive.  But  why  is  this  patient,  innocent  Sufferer  thus  afflicted?  "He 
was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,"  etc.  III.  Our  text  describes  the  manner  in 
WHICH  Christ  was  treated  when  He  thus  came  as  a  Man  of  sorrows  to  atone  for 
our  sins.  "Despised  and  rejected  of  men."  "We  hid,  as  it  were,  our  faces,"  etc. 
He  has  long  since  ascended  to  heaven,  and  therefore  cannot  be  the  immediate  object 
of  men's  attacks.  But  His  Gospel  and  His  servants  are  still  in  the  world ;  and 
the  manner  in  which  they  are  treated  is  sufficient  evidence  that  the  feelings  of 
the  natural  heart  toward  Christ  are  not  materially  different  from  tiiose  of  the 


102  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  uu. 

Jews.  His  servants  are  hated,  ridiculed  and  despised,  His  Gospel  is  rejected,  and 
His  institutions  slighted.  Every  man  who  voluntarily  neglects  to  confess  Christ 
before  men,  and  to  commemorate  His  dying  love,  must  say,  either  that  He  does 
not  choose  to  do  it,  or  that  he  is  not  prepared  to  do  it.  If  a  man  says,  I  do  not 
choose  to  confess  Christ,  he  certainly  rejects  Him.  {E.  Pay  son,  D.D.)  The  human 
race  typified  by  the  Man  of  sorrows : — I.  The  lot  of  humanity  in  this  woeld. 
This  is  the  portrait  of  the  species — "  A  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief." 
II.  The  treatment  vv^hich  depressed  humanity  commonly  experiences  :  "  Wa 
hid,  as  it  were,  our  faces  from  Him."  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  Man  of 
sorrows: — I.  "A  man."  He  who  was  God,  and  was  in  the  beginning  with  God, 
was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us.  Remembering  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  it 
behoves  us  to  recollect  that  His  manhood  was  none  the  less  real  and  substantial. 
It  differed  from  our  own  humanity  in  the  absence  of  sin,  but  in  no  other  respect. 
TTiis  condescending  participation  in  our  nature  brings  the  Lord  Jesus  very  near 
to  us  in  relationship.  Inasmuch  as  He  was  man,  though  also  God,  He  was, 
according  to  Hebrew  law,  our  goel — our  kinsman,  next  of  kin.  Now  it  was 
according  to  the  law  that  if  an  inheritance  had  been  lost,  it  was  the  right  of  the 
next  kin  to  redeem  it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  exercised  His  legal  right,  and  seeing  us 
sold  into  bondage  and  our  inheritance  taken  from  us,  came  forward  to  redeem  both 
us  and  all  our  lost  estate.  Be  thankful  that  you  have  not  to  go  to  God  at  the  first, 
and  as  you  are,  but  you  are  invited  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  through  Him  to 
the  Father.  Then  let  me  add,  that  every  child  of  God  ought  also  to  be  comforted  by 
the  fact  that  our  Redeemer  is  one  of  our  own  race,  seeing  that  He  was  made  like 
unto  His  brethren  that  He  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest ;  and  He 
was  tempted  in  all  points,  like  as  we  are,  that  He  might  be  able  to  succour  them 
that  are  tempted.  The  sympathy  of  Jesus  is  the  next  most  precious  thing  to  His 
sacrifice.  II.  "A  Man  of  sorrows."  The  expression  is  intended  to  be  very 
emphatic  ;  it  is  not  "a  sorrowful  man,"  but  "a  Man  of  sorrows,"  as  if  He  were 
made  up  of  sorrows,  and  they  were  constituent  elements  of  His  being.  Some  are 
men  of  pleasure,  others  men  of  wealth,  but  He  was  "a  Man  of  sorrows."  He  and 
sorrow  might  have  changed  names.  He  who  saw  Him,  saw  sorrow,  and  he  who 
would  see  sorrow,  must  look  on  Him.  "Behold,  and  see,"  saith  He,  "if  there 
was  ever  sorrow  like  unto  My  sorrow  which  was  done  unto  Me."  1,  Our  Lord  is 
called  the  Man  of  sorrows  for  peculiarity,  for  this  was  His  peculiar  token  and 
special  mark.  "We  might  well  caU  Him  "a  man  of  holiness  ;"  for  there  was  no 
fault  in  Him  :  or  a  man  of  labours,  for  He  did  His  Father's  business  earnestly  ;  or 
"a  man  of  eloquence,"  for  never  man  spake  like  this  man.  "We  might  right 
fittingly  call  Him  "  The  man  of  love,"  for  never  was  there  greater  love  than  glowed 
in  His  heart.  Still,  conspicuous  as  all  these  and  many  other  excellencies  were,  j^et 
had  we  gazed  upon  Christ  and  been  asked  afterwards  what  was  the  most  striking 
peculiarity  in  Him,  we  should  have  said  His  sorrow.  Tears  were  His  insignia,  and 
the  Cross  His  escutcheon.  2.  Is  not  the  title  of  ' '  Man  of  sorrows  "  given  to  our 
Lord  by  way  of  eminence?  He  was  not  only  sorrowful,  but  pre-eminent  among 
the  sorrowful.  All  men  have  a  burden  to  bear,  but  His  was  heaviest  of  all.  The 
reason  for  this  superior  sorrow  may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  with  His  sorrow 
there  was  no  admixture  of  sin.  Side  by  side  with  His  painful  sensitiveness  of  the 
evil  of  sin,  was  His  gracious  tenderness  towards  the  sorrows  of  others.  Besides 
this  our  Saviour  had  a  peculiar  relationship  to  sin.  He  was  not  merely  afiSicted 
with  the  sight  of  it,  and  saddened  by  perceiving  its  eflFects  on  others,  but  sin  was 
actually  laid  upon  Him,  and  He  was  himself  numbered  with  the  transgressors.  3. 
The  title  of  "  Man  of  sorrows,"  was  also  given  to  our  Lord  to  indicate  the  constancy 
of  His  afflictions.  He  changed  His  place  of  abode,  but  He  always  lodged  with 
sorrow.  Sorrow  wove  His  swaddling  bands,  and  sorrow  spun  His  winding  sheet. 
4.  He  was  also  "a  Man  of  sorrows,"  for  the  variety  of  His  woes ;  He  was  a  man 
not  of  sorrow  only,  but  of  ' '  sorrows. "  As  to  His  poverty.  He  knew  the  heart- 
rendings  of  bereavement.  Perhaps  the  bitterest  of  His  sorrows  were  those  which 
were  connected  with  His  gracious  work.  He  came  as  the  Messiah  sent  of  God,  on 
an  embassage  of  love,  and  men  rejected  His  claims.  Nor  did  they  stay  at  cold 
rejection  ;  they  then  proceeded  to  derision  and  ridicule.  They  charged  Him  with 
every  crime  which  their  malice  could  suggest.  And  all  the  while  He  was  doing 
nothing  but  seeking  their  advantage  in  all  ways.  As  He  proceeded  in  His  life 
His  sorrows  multiplied.  He  preached,  and  when  men's  hearts  were  hard,  and 
they  would  not  believe  what  He  said,  "He  was  grieved  for  the  hardness  of 
their  hearts."    Hia  sorrow  was  not  that  men  iiyured  Him,  but  that  they  destroyed 


CHAP.  Lin.]  ISAIAH.  103 

themselves  ;  this  it  was  that  pulled  up  the  sluices  of  His  soul,  and  made  His  eyes 
o'erflow  with  tears :  "0  Jerusalem  !  Jerusalem  !  how  often  would  I  have  gathered 
thy  children  together,"  etc.  But  surely  He  found  some  solace  with  the  few  com- 
panions whom  He  had  gathered  around  Him  ?  He  did  ;  but  for  all  that  He  must 
nave  found  as  much  sorrow  as  solace  in  their  company.  They  were  dull  scholars  ; 
they  were  miserable  comforters  for  the  Man  of  sorrows.  The  Saviour,  from  the  very 
dignity  of  His  nature,  must  sufier  alone.  The  mountain-side,  with  Christ  upon  it, 
seems  to  me  a  suggestive  symbol  of  His  earthly  life.  His  soul  lived  in  vast 
solitudes,  sublime  and  terrible,  and  there,  amid  a  midnight  of  trouble.  His  spirit 
communed  with  the  Father,  no  one  being  able  to  accompany  Him  into  the  dark 
glens  and  gloomy  ravines  of  His  unique  experience.  In  the  last,  crowning  sorrows 
of  His  life,  there  came  upon  Him  the  penal  inflictions  from  God,  the  chastisement 
of  our  peace  which  was  upon  Him.  III.  "Acquainteb  with  grief."  1.  With 
grief  he  had  an  intimate  acquaintance.  He  did  not  know  merely  what  it  was  in 
others,  but  it  came  home  to  Himself.  We  have  read  of  grief,  we  have  sympathized 
with  grief,  we  have  sometimes  felt  grief :  but  the  Lord  felt  it  more  intensely  than 
other  men  in  His  innermost  soul.  He  and  grief  were  bosom  friends.  2.  It  was  & 
continuous  acquaintance.  He  did  not  call  at  griefs  house  sometimes  to  take  a 
tonic  by  the  way,  neither  did  He  sip  now  and  then  of  the  wormwood  and  the  gall, 
but  the  quassia  cup  was  always  His,  and  ashes  were  always  mingled  with  His 
bread.  Not  only  forty  days  in  the  wilderness  did  Jesus  fast ;  the  world  was  ever 
a  wilderness  to  Him,  and  His  life  was  one  long  Lent.  I  do  not  say  that  He  was 
not,  after  all,  a  happy  man,  for  down  deep  in  His  soul  benevolence  always 
supplied  a  living  spring  of  joy  to  Him.  There  was  a  joy  into  which  we  are  one 
day  to  enter — the  "joy  of  our  Lord" — the  "joy  set  before  Him"  for  which  "He 
endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame  ; "  but  that  does  not  at  all  take  away 
from  the  fact  that  His  acquaintance  with  grief  was  continuous  and  intimate  beyond 
that  of  any  man  who  ever  lived.  It  was  indeed  a  growing  acquaintance  with 
grief,  for  each  step  took  Him  deeper  down  into  the  grim  shades  of  sorrow.  3.  It 
was  a  voluntary  acquaintance  for  our  sakes.  He  need  never  have  known  a  grief 
at  all,  and  at  any  moment  He  might  have  said  to  grief,  farewell.  But  He 
remained  to  the  end,  out  of  love  to  us,  griefs  acquaintance.  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ  as  a  Sufferer: — 1.  Jesus  suflfered  from  what  may  be  called  the  ordinary 
privations  of  humanity.  Bom  in  a  stable,  etc.  We  may  not  be  able  to  assert 
that  none  ever  suffered  so  much  physical  agony  as  He,  but  this  is  at  least  probable  ; 
for  the  exquisiteness  of  His  physical  organism  in  all  likelihood  made  Him  much 
more  sensitive  than  others  to  pain.  2.  He  suffered  keenly  from  the  pain  of 
anticipating  coming  evil.  3.  He  suffered  from  the  sense  of  being  the  cause  of 
suffering  to  others.  To  persons  of  an  unselfish  disposition  the  keenest  pang 
inflicted  by  thefr  own  weakness  or  misfortunes  may  sometimes  be  to  see  those 
whom  they  would  like  to  make  happy  rendered  miserable  through  connection  with 
themselves.  To  the  chUd  Jesus  how  gruesome  must  have  been  the  story  of  the 
babes  of  Bethlehem,  whom  the  sword  of  Herod  smote  when  it  was  seeking  for 
Him !  Or,  if  His  mother  spared  Him  this  recital,  He  must  at  least  have  learned 
how  she  and  Joseph  had  to  flee  with  Him  to  Egypt  to  escape  the  jealousy  of  Herod. 
As  His  life  drew  near  its  close,  this  sense  that  connection  with  Himself  might  be 
fatal  to  His  friends  forced  itself  more  and  more  upon  His  notice.  4.  The  element 
of  shame  was,  all  through,  a  large  ingredient  in  His  cup  of  suffering.  To  a  sensitive 
mind  there  is  nothing  more  intolerable  ;  it  is  far  harder  to  bear  than  bodily  pain. 
But  it  assailed  Jesus  in  nearly  every  form,  pursuing  Him  all  through  His  life. 
He  was  railed  at  for  the  humbleness  of  His  birth.  The  high-bom  priests  and  the 
educated  rabbis  sneered  at  the  carpenter's  son  who  had  never  learned,  and  the 
wealthy  Pharisees  derided  Him.  He  was  again  and  again  called  a  madman. 
Evidently  this  was  what  Pilate  took  Him  for.  The  Roman  soldiers  adopted  an 
attitude  of  savage  banter  towards  Him  all  through  His  trial  and  crucifixion, 
treating  Him  as  boys  torment  one  who  is  weak  in  the  mind.  He  heard  Barabbas 
preferred  to  Himself  by  the  voice  of  His  fellow-countrymen,  and  He  was  crucified 
between  thieves,  as  if  He  were  the  worst  of  the  worst.  A  hail  of  mockery  kept 
falling  on  Him  in  His  dying  hours.  Thus  had  He  who  was  conscious  of  irresistible 
strength  to  submit  to  be  treated  as  the  weakest  of  weaklings,  and  He  who  was  the 
Wisdom  of  the  Highest  to  submit  to  be  used  as  if  He  were  less  than  a  man.  5. 
But  to  Jesus  it  was  more  painftd  still,  being  the  Holy  One  of  God,  to  be  regarded 
•nd  treated  as  the  chief  of  sinners.  To  one  who  loves  God  and  goodness  there  can 
be  nothing  so  odious  as  to  be  suspected  of  hypocrisy  and  to  know  that  he  is  believed 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ua. 


to  be  perpetrating  crimes  at  the  opposite  extreme  from  his  public  profession.  Yet 
this  was  what  Jesus  wm  accused  of.  Possibly  there  was  not  a  single  human  being, 
when  He  died,  who  believed  that  He  was  what  He  claimed  to  be.  6.  If  to  the 
holy  soTil  of  Jesus  it  was  painful  to  be  believed  to  be  guilty  of  sins  which  He  had 
not  committed,  it  must  have  been  still  more  painful  to  feel  that  He  was  being  thrust 
into  sin  itself.  This  attempt  was  often  made.  Satan  tried  it  in  the  wilderness,  and 
although  only  this  one  temptation  of  his  is  detailed,  he  no  doubt  often  returned  to 
the  attack.  Wicked  men  tried  it ;  they  resorted  to  every  device  to  cause  Him  to 
lose  His  temper  (Luke  xi.  53,  54).  Even  friends,  who  did  not  understand  the  plan 
of  His  life,  endeavoured  to  direct  Him  from  the  course  prescribed  to  Him  by  the  will 
of  God — so  much  so  that  He  had  once  to  turn  on  one  of  them,  as  if  he  were  tempta- 
tion personified,  with  "  Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan."  7.  "While  the  proximity  of  ain 
awoke  such  loathing  in  His  holy  soul,  and  the  touch  of  it  was  to  Him  like  the  touch 
of  fire  on  delicate  flesh,  He  was  brought  into  the  closest  contact  with  it,  and  hence 
arose  His  deepest  suffering.  It  pressed  its  loathsome  presence  on  Him  from  a  hundred 
quarters.  He  who  could  not  bear  to  look  on  it  saw  it  in  its  worst  forms  close  to  His 
very  eyes.  His  own  presence  in  the  world  brought  it  out ;  for  goodness  stirs  up  the 
evil  lying  at  the  bottom  of  wicked  hearts.  It  was  as  if  all  the  sin  of  the  race  were 
rushing  upon  Him,  and  Jesus  felt  it  as  if  it  were  all  His  own.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 
The  Man  of  sorrows: — I.  The  language  does  not  describe  the  case  of  one  who 

ENCOUNTERED  ONLT  THE  ORDINARY  OR  THE  AVERAGE  AMOUNT  OF  THE  TRIALS  WHICH 

BELONG  TO  HUMAN  LIFE.  There  is  implied  in  it  a  pre-eminence  in  sorrow,  a  peculiarly 
deep  experience  of  grief.  II.  Of  all  the  many  griefs  of  the  Divine  Redeemer 
IN  His  human  life,  there  was  not  one  which  He  Himself  either  needed  oe 
DESERVED  TO  BEAR.  When  the  apostle  tells  us  that  He  was  made  perfect  through 
suffering,  the  meaning  is  that  He  was  by  this  means  made  officially  perfect  as  a 
Saviour,  as  the  Captain  of  salvation,  and  the  High-Priest  of  His  redeemed,  and  not 
that  He  lacked  any  moral  excellence,  to  acquire  which  suffering  was  needful.  So 
again,  when  it  is  said  that  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered, 
the  meaning  obviously  is,  that  by  putting  Himself  in  a  state  of  humiliation,  and  in 
the  condition  of  a  servant  under  law.  He  came  to  know  by  experience  what  it  was  to 
render  obedience  to  the  law,  and  not  at  all  that  He  was  ever  defective  in  the  least, 
as  to  the  spirit  of  obedience  to  the  Father's  will.  As  He  had  no  need  of  any 
improvement  of  His  virtues,  He  had  no  faults,  no  sins,  which  called  for  chastisement. 
III.  All  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  vtere  endured  with  unwavering 

FORTITUDE.  IV.  In  all  THE  GRIEFS  AND  SORROWS  WHICH  THE  BLESSED  SaVIOUB 
SUFFERED,  HiS  MIND  WAS  CHIEFLY  OCCUPIED  WITH   THE  GOOD   RESULTS  IN   WHICH 

His  SUFFERINGS  WERE  TO  ISSUE.  He  deliberately  entered  on  His  singular  career  of 
humiliation  and  self-sacrifice  for  the  good  of  man  and  the  glory  of  God.  Practical 
lessons :  1.  If  even  the  Son  of  God,  when  on  earth,  was  a  Man  of  sorrows  and 
acquainted  with  grief,  we  certainly  should  not  think  it  strange  that  days  of  trial  are 
appointed  unto  us.  2.  If  our  blessed  Lord  felt  keenly  what  He  suffered,  and  was 
even  moved  to  tears,  we  need  not  reproach  ourselves  because  we  deeply  feel  our  trials, 
and  cannot  but  weep  in  the  fulness  of  our  grief.  3.  If  Christ  was  a  willing  sufferer, 
deliberately  choosing  to  suffer  for  the  good  of  others,  we  siurely  should  consent  to 
suffer  for  our  own  advantage.  4.  If  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  made  less  account 
of  what  He  suffered  than  of  the  good  results  that  were  to  follow,  it  is  wise  at  least 
in  us  to  do  the  same.  {Ray  Palmer,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Man,  of  sorrows: — While  on 
earth  He  was  surrounded  by  many  sources  of  pleasure.  The  earth  teemed  with 
every  form  of  life,  and  the  air  was  melodious  with  music.  The  sceneries  of  His 
native  country  suggested  the  sublimest  imagery,  and  inspired  poetry  of  the  highest 
kind :  and  had  He  possessed  none  of  these.  He  would  have  been  perfectly  happy  ;  for 
He  was  the  Infinite  ;  His  sorrows  arose  from — I.  The  felt  relation  of  a  loving 

BEING  to  a  ruined  RACE.  II.  ThE  CRUSHING  PRESSURE  OF  HiS  MEDIATORIAL 
WORK.  III.  His  CERTAIN  KNOWLEDGE  THAT  THE  RESULT  OF  HiS  MISSION  WOULD 
NOT  BE  EQUAL   TO   THE   BENEVOLENCE   OF    HiS    WILL.      {Evan   Lewis,    B.A.)      The 

mystery  of  sorrow :— I.  Consider  its  relation  to  man.  There  are  facts  which 
know  no  frontiers.  In  the  inner  life  of  thought  and  feeling  such  is  sorrow.  It  is  a 
universal  language,  it  obliterates  space,  it  anniliilates  time  ;  it  is  the  great  leveller, 
it  ignores  rank,  it  stands  head  and  shoulders  above  any  dignity.  Tliink  again,  it  ia 
too  sacred  to  be  only  universal.  It  is  also  an  intimate  fact.  None  can  comfort. 
TTiere  may  be  sweet  help,  deep  and  real  sympathy,  not  comfort,  no,  for  none  can 
undo  the  tragic  truth.  Yes,  there  is  One.  One  can  come  nearest  to  the  feeling, 
•nd,  in  onr  eternal  life,  in  a  sense  He  can  undo.    One,  only  One,  has  gathered  uf 


CSAP.  Lni.]  ISAIAH.  105 

the  representative  experiences  of  all.  II.  The  thought  gains  precision  when  we 
remember  that  it  beaks  a  witness  for  God.  Let  Love  meet  death  or  trouble,  and 
the  result  is  sorrow.  This  noblest  human  sorrow  so  begotten  is  a  witness  to  the 
Source  of  its  being.  Love,  the  love  of  the  creature,  is  his  highest  endowment  from 
the  Love  of  God.    III.  Sorrow  gains  a  clearer  outline  to  its  frail  and  misty 

FORM  AS  seen  IN  ITS  RELATION  TO  WHAT  IS  CALLED  THE  "SCHEME  OF  REDEMP- 
TION ; "  seen,  that  is,  in  its  place  in  the  awakening  and  restoring  of  the  human 
spirit,  great  though  fallen.  Sorrow  here  is  a  power.  It  takes  varymg  tints.  1.  At 
the  darkest,  it  is  a  power  of  warning,  of  prophecy.  It  warns  of  a  stern  reality  in 
this  world — the  dreadfulness  of  sin.  2.  Better,  it  is  a  power  to  transfigure.  Repent- 
ance is  the  one  path  to  pardon,  and  it  is  a  certain  path.  Whence  comes  true 
repentance  ?  It  comes  from  God's  love  seen  in  fairest,  saddest  image  in  "the  Man 
of  sorrows."  3.  It  is  a  power  to  purify.  Sorrow  sends  you  in  on  self.  Godless 
sorrow  would  make  self  more  selfish,  "working  death  ;"  not  so  sorrow  firom  the 
Cross  of  Christ.  A  life  searched  out,  repented  o^  is  a  spirit  purified.  ( W.  J.  Knox- 
Little,  M.A.)  The  suffering  Christ : — I.  The  matter,  what  He  suffered.  II.  Thb 
MANNER,  how  He  Came  to  suffer.  III.  The  reasons  and  ends  why,  for  our  good. 
Here  are  three  chief  lessons  for  a  Christian  to  learn : — 1.  Patience  and  comfort.  2. 
Humility.  3.  In  the  end,  love.  All  this  was  for  you.  What  wUl  you  do  for  God 
again  ?  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Sir  Noel  Paton's  "  Man  of  Sorrows" : — ^To  the  painter 
ere  he  sat  down  to  produce  this  work  of  art  many  questions  would  suggest  them- 
selves. Among  them,  doubtless,  would  be  these  : — 1.  What  shall  be  the  scene  ?  Of 
course,  the  artist  would  naturally  think  of  many  scenes  in  our  Lord's  life  more  or 
less  appropriate  for  such  a  representation.  The  painter  seems  to  have  recognized  the 
great  truth  which  we  all  must  have  proved  to  some  extent,  that  man  tastes  deepest 
of  sorrow  in  loneliness,  that  the  cross  which  weighs  heaviest  on  any  shoulder  is  not 
the  cross  which  the  world  can  see,  but  which  is  borne  out  of  sight,  when  the  heart, 
and  no  one  else  save  God,  knoweth  its  own  bitterness.  Thus  Sir  Noel  Paton  has 
represented  "  The  Man  of  Sorrows  "  as  isolated  from  His  fellows,  far  away  from  the 
habitations  of  men  and  shut  out  of  the  world.  The  whole  picture  is  one  of  desolation. 
In  its  centre  and  foreground  is  represented  "The  Man  of  Sorrows"  sitting  upon  a 
jagged  rock.  And,  oh,  what  sorrow  is  depicted  there  !  Those  large,  full,  liquid 
eyes  brim  over  with  tears  ;  every  expression  of  the  countenance  is  charged  with 
grief ;  the  lips  are  wan,  and  a  deep  furrow  crosses  that  young,  manly  brow.  The 
swollen  veins  in  the  neck  and  temple,  the  powerful  muscular  action  in  the  right 
hand,  as  with  open  fingers  it  rests  heavily  upon  the  rock,  and  in  the  left  clenched 
tightly  as  it  presses  upon  the  thigh,  and  in  the  feet  as  they  press  the  earth  con- 
vulsively underneath — for  the  Man  of  Sorrows  is  represented  with  head  uncovered 
and  feet  unsandaUed — all  these  tell  the  story  of  an  awful  tension  of  a  withering 
sorrow.  2.  Closely  and  inseparably  connected  with  the  question  of  scene  is  that  m 
the  period  in  our  Lord's  life  in  which  He  can  most  appropriately  be  represented  as  the 
Man  of  sorrows.  The  artist  chooses  the  eve  of  the  Temptation,  and  thus  selects  the 
greatest  transitional  period  of  our  Saviour's  life — ^that  beginning  with  the  Baptism 
and  closing  with  the  Temptation.  The  time  of  day  chosen  is  the  twilight  of  morn- 
ing. There  is  something  in  the  twilight  that  is  consistent  not  only  with  solemn, 
but  also  with  sad  thoughts  and  feelings.  3.  What  can  account  for  the  sorrow! 
You  look  to  the  picture  in  vain  for  the  solution.  The  painting  is  a  problem,  an 
enigma.  It  is  purposely  so.  The  painter  presents  to  us  the  great  fact,  not  its 
explanation.  He  goes  to  Inspired  Writ  for  that,  and  thus  refers  the  perplexed 
spectator  to  the  words  of  Isaiah  as  supplying  the  key  to  the  whole  painting :  "  He 
hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows,"  etc.  (vers.  4-6).  These  are  the 
words  which  Sir  Noel  Paton  adopts,  and  practically  says,  "There!  that  is  what 
I  mean."  "We  did  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of  God  and  aflBiicted."  How 
shall  this  false  estimate  of  Him  be  corrected  ?  Look  at  the  picture  ;  that  Man  of 
sorrows  looks  up  and  holds  communion  with  the  skies ;  see  the  half-open  mouth 
expressive  of  expectation,  and  those  eyes  so  full  of  tears  and  yet  so  full  of  vision. 
Verily  He  is  not  alone — the  Father  is  with  Him  ;  for  itora.  the  heavens  and  from  a 
source  other  than  the  sun  there  descends  through  a  rift  of  the  clouds  a  shaft  of  light 
that  looks  like  the  light  of  the  Father's  countenance,  and  rests  upon  the  face  of  this 
Sorrowing  One.  This  human  countenance  thus  lit  up  by  the  light  of  the  Divine 
countenance  is  the  painter's  sublime  answer  to  the  old-world  estimate  of  the  Man  of 
sorrows.  What  need  of  any  morel  (D.  Davies.)  Christ's  life  a  model  for  His 
people: — ^The  more  deeply  we  enter  into  the  meaning  of  Christ  considered  as  the 
Divine  Man,  the  more  distinctly  revealed  it  becomes  to  us  that  what  His  life  was  our 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  un. 

life  is  intended  to  be.  There  are  instincts  and  there  are  impulses  and  ambitions  that 
shrink  from  coming  under  the  sovereignty  of  a  commitment  so  cordial  and  entire. 
That  accounts  for  the  disproportionate  emphasis  so  customarily  laid  upon  the  com- 
mercial feature  of  the  atonement.  It  is  easier  and  it  is  lazier  to  believe  in  a  Christ 
that  is  going  to  pay  my  debts  for  me,  than  it  is  to  grow  up  in  Christ  into  a  Divine 
endowment,  that  shall  be  itself  the  cure  for  insolvency  and  the  material  of  wealth 
Divine  and  inexhaustible.  You  have  really  done  nothing  for  a  poor  man  by  paying 
his  debts  for  him,  unless  in  addition  to  squaring  his  old  accounts  you  have  in  such 
manner  dealt  with  him  as  to  guarantee  him  against  being  similarly  involved  in  the 
time  to  come.  Emphasize  as  we  may  the  merely  ransoming  work  of  Christ,  we  are 
not  made  free  men  by  having  our  fetters  broken  off,  and  we  are  not  made  wealthy 
men  by  having  our  debts  paid.  It  is  not  what  Christ  delivers  us  from,  but  what 
He  translates  us  into  that  makes  us  saved  men  in  Christ.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 
Our  Lord's  life  lived  in  shadow : — No  fair  reading  of  the  narrative  of  Christ's  life 
will  leave  the  impression  that  sorrow  of  heart  was  a  grace  that  Christ  cultivated. 
The  pathetic  was  not  a  temper  of  spirit  which  He  encouraged  in  Himself  or  in  others. 
Heaviness  of  mind  was  not  a  thing  to  be  sought  in  and  for  itself.  There  is  no  gain- 
saying the  fact  that  one  great  object  of  His  mission  was  to  make  the  world  glad. 
Still  for  all  that  He  was  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.  It  needs  also 
to  be  said  that  for  us  to  be  heavy-hearted  merely  because  Christ  was,  to  be  sorrowful 
by  a  sheer  act  of  imitation,  is  distinctly  repugnant  to  everything  like  Christian 
sense,  and  at  the  farthest  possible  remove  from  all  that  deserves  to  be  called 
Christian  sincerity.  Neither  can  we  leave  out  of  the  account  all  those  passages, 
especially  in  the  New  Testament,  where  particular  praise  is  accorded  to  gladness  of 
heart.  The  problems  of  life  involve  sorrow : — N  evertheless,  when  all  these  caveats 
have  been  entered  and  gladness  of  heart  eulogized  to  the  Mlest  extent,  authorized 
by  multitudinous  expressions  occurring  throughout  the  entire  Scriptures,  it  still 
remains  beyond  dispute  that  our  Lord's  life  was  lived  in  shadow,  and  that  He  died 
at  last  less  because  of  the  nails  and  the  spear-wounds,  than  He  did  of  a  broken  heart. 
(Ibid.)  The  sorrow  of  strained  powers: — He  came  to  interfere  with  the  natural 
current  of  event.  And  it  made  Him  tired.  And  a  man,  even  a  Divine  man,  is  less 
apt  to  laugh  when  He  is  tired.  A  good  deal  of  what  we  call  our  gladness  of  heart, 
if  we  will  care  to  scrutinize  it,  is  simply  the  congenial  luxury  of  drifting  down  the 
current  of  event.  If  you  are  pulling  your  boat  up-stream  you  will  be  sober  while 
you  are  about  it.  Strained  powers  are  serious.  It  is  the  farthest  from  our  thought 
to  disparage  exuberance  or  even  hilarity ;  nevertheless,  it  remains  a  fact  that  hilarity 
is  feeling  out  at  pasture  and  not  feeling  under  the  yoke.  It  is  steam  escaping  at  the 
throttle  because  it  is  not  pushing  at  the  piston.  I  venture  to  say  that  Christ  could 
not  shake  His  purpose  off.  He  was  here  to  stay  the  downward  drift  of  event ;  the 
purpose  was  too  vast  to  be  easily  flung  aside,  and  His  muscles  were  too  solidly 
knotted  to  it  to  be  easily  unknotted  and  relaxed.  And  we  shall  have  to  go  on  and 
say  that  it  was  an  inherent  part  of  Christ  to  have  a  purpose  and  to  be  mightily  bent 
to  its  achievement ;  and  not  only  that,  it  was  an  inherent  part  of  Christ  as  the 
Saviour  of  this  world  to  seize  upon  the  current  of  event  and  of  history  and  to  under- 
take to  reverse  it.  Exactly  that  was  the  genius  of  the  Christ-mission.  (Ibid.)  The 
Christ-life  in  the  Christian : — You  cannot  drift  down  the  tide  of  event  and  be  a  Christ 
man  or  a  Christ  woman.  The  world  is  to  be  saved ;  the  tide  is  to  be  reversed. 
Man  inspired  of  God  is  to  do  it  ;  and  you  cannot  buckle  yourself  down  to  that 
problem  in  Christian  whole-heartedness  and  not  grow  sober  under  it.  Now  you 
see  the  philosophy  of  the  sober  Christ.  He  flung  Himself  against  forty  centuries 
of  bad  event,  and  the  Divine  Man  got  bruised  by  the  impact.  He  stood  up  and 
let  forty  centuries  jump  on  Him ;  He  held  His  own,  but  blood  broke  through  His 
pores  in  perspiration,  and  about  that  there  is  nothing  humorous.  The  edge  of  this 
truth  is  not  broken  by  the  fact  that  Christ  took  hold  of  the  work  of  the  world's 
saving  in  a  larger  way  than  it  is  possible  for  us  to  do,  and  that  therefore  the  burden 
of  His  undertaking  came  upon  Him  in  a  heavier,  wider,  and  more  crushing  way 
than  it  can  come  upon  us  ;  and  that  therefore  while  it  overwhelmed  Him  in  sorrow, 
our  smaller  mission  and  lighter  task  can  with  entire  propriety  leave  us  buoyant  and 
gladsome.  All  of  that  conception  of  the  case  lacks  dignity  and  reach.  You  can't 
take  hold  of  a  great  matter  in  a  small  way.  {Ibid.)  The  sorrow  of  love : — It  is  but 
a  step  now  to  go  on  and  speak  of  the  saddening  effect  necessarily  flowing  from  the 
circumstances  under  which  in  this  world  Christiau  work  has  to  be  done.  It  was 
the  love  which  Christ  had  for  the  world  that  made  Him  sad  while  doing  His  work  in 
the  world ;  and  the  inflnitude  of  His  love  la  what  explains  the  onntterableness  of 


CHAP,  uii.]  ISAIAH.  107 

Hia  pain  ;  for  the  world  in  which  Christ  falfilled  His  mission  was  a  suffering  world. 
Now  a  man  who  is  without  love  can  be  in  the  midst  of  suffering  and  not  suffer.  A 
loveless  spirit  grieves  over  his  own  pain,  but  has  no  sense  of  another's  pain,  and  no 
feeling  of  being  burdened  by  another's  pain.  Love  has  this  peculiar  property,  that 
it  makes  the  person  whom  we  love  one  with  us,  so  that  his  experience  becomes  a  part 
of  our  own  life,  his  pain  becomes  painful  to  us,  his  burdens  make  us  tired.  The 
mother  feels  her  child's  pain  as  keenly  as  though  it  were  her  own  pain,  perhaps 
more  so.  In  its  Divine  relations  this  is  all  expressed  in  those  familiar  words  of 
Scripture,  "In  all  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted."  Sympathy  is  the  form  which 
love  takes  in  a  suffering  world.  Love  is  the  finest  type  of  communism.  (Ibid.) 
Christ's  great  capacity  for  suffering : — The  measure  of  our  being  is  our  capacity  for 
sorrow  or  joy.  Captain  Conder  speaks  of  the  shadow  cast  by  Mount  Hermon  being 
as  much  as  seventy  miles  long  at  some  periods.  Was  it  not  the  very  greatness  of 
Christ  that  made  His  joys  and  His  griefs  equally  imique  ?  {E.  0.  Mackey. )  We 
hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  Him. — A  sad  confession : — In  the  marmn  of  your  Bibles 
this  passage  is  rendered,  "  He  hid  as  it  were  His  face  from  us. "  The  literal  translation 
of  the  Hebrew  would  be,  "He  was  as  a  hiding  of  faces  from  Him,"  or  " from  us." 
Some  critical  readers  think  these  words  were  intended  to  describe  our  Lord  as  having 
so  humbled  Himself,  and  brought  Himself  to  such  a  deep  degradation,  that  He  was 
comparable  to  the  leper  who  covered  his  face  and  cried,  "  Unclean,  unclean,"  hiding 
himself  from  the  gaze  of  men.  Abhorred  and  despised  by  men,  He  was  like  one  put 
aside  because  of  His  disease  and  shimned  by  all  mankind.  Others  suppose  the  meaning 
to  be  that  on  account  of  our  Lord's  terrible  and  protracted  sorrow  His  face  wore  an  ex- 
pression so  painful  and  grievous  that  men  could  scarcely  bear  to  look  upon  Him.  They 
hid  as  it  were  their  faces  from  Him — amazed  at  that  brow  aU  carved  with  lines  of 
anxious  thought,  those  cheeks  all  ploughed  with  furrows  of  deep  care,  those  eyes  all 
sunk  in  shades  of  sadness,  that  soul  bowed  down,  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death  ! 
It  may  be  so  ;  we  cannot  tell.  I  have  a  plain,  practical  purpose  to  pursue.  Here  is 
an  indictment  to  which  we  must  all  plead  guilty.  I.  Sometimes  men  hide  their  faces 
from  Jesus  in  cool  contempt  of  Him.  How  astounding !  how  revolting !  He  ought 
surely  to  be  esteemed  by  all  mankind.  1.  Some  show  their  opposition  by  attempting 
to  ignore  or  to  tarnish  the  dignity  of  His  person.  2.  Are  there  not  others  who 
affect  great  admiration  for  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  an  example  of  virtue  and  benevolence, 
who  nevertheless  reject  His  mediatorial  work  as  our  Redeemer  1  As  a  substitutionary 
sacrifice  they  do  not  and  cannot  esteem  Him.  3.  Then  they  will  pour  contempt 
upon  the  various  doctrines  of  His  Gospel.  4.  And  with  what  pitiful  disdain  the 
Lord's  people  are  slighted  1  Do  I  address  anybody  who  has  despised  the  Lord  Jesus 
Clirist  ?  Your  wantonness  can  offer  no  excuse  but  your  ignorance.  And  as  for  your 
ignorance,  it  is  without  excuse.  II.  A  far  more  common  way  in  which  men  hide 
their  faces  from  Christ  is  BY  their  heedlessness,  their  indifference,  their 
NEGLECT.  III.  "We  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  Him  by  preferring  any  other 
MODE  OF  SALVATION  TO  SALVATION  BY  FAITH  IN  CHRIST.  IV.  After  we  Were  quite 
sure  that  we  could  not  be  saved  other  than  by  the  one  Mediator,  do  you  remember 
how  we  continued  to  hide  our  face  from  Jesus  by  persistent  unbelief  in  Him  ? 
V.  But  there  are  some  of  us  who  must  plead  guilty  to  another  charge  ;  we  have 
hidden  as  it  were  our  faces  from  Him  since  He  has  saved  us,  and  since  we  have 
known  His  love,  by  our  silly  shame  and  our  base  cowardice.  VI.  Many,  if 
not  all,  of  us  who  are  believers  will  penitently  confess  that  we  have  sometimes 
hidden  our  faces  from  Christ  by  not  walking  in  constant  fellowship  with 
Him.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  "We  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  Him."  Literally, 
"as  one  from  whom  there  is  hiding  of  face,"  as  if  shrinking  from  a  horrible  sight. 
(Canon  Cook.)  The  impersonal  form  refers  to  the  men  just  named,  or  all  those  of 
note  and  influence.  Their  faces  were  averted  from  Him,  as  a  lunatic,  beside 
Himself,  or  one  possessed,  as  a  deceiver  and  a  blasphemer.     (T.  H.  Birks.) 

Vers.  4-6.  Surely  He  hath  home  our  griefs. — ChrisVs  love  amd  man's  urvthanJcful- 
ness: — I.  Christ's  love.  1.  The  certainty  of  what  is  averred  of  Christ:  "Surely." 
2.  The  acts  of  Christ's  obedience,  set  forth  in  two  words:  He  hath  "borne,"  He 
hath  "carried."  3.  The  objects.  They  are  "griefs,"  "sorrows."  II.  Man's  UN- 
thankfulness,  in  censuring  Christ  and  despising  Him ;  and  there  consider — 1. 
The  persons:  "We."  2.  The  guilt.  Esteeming  Christ  stricken  and  smitten  of 
God.  (T.  M anion,  D.D.)  Hie  pressure  of  the  owrden  on  God: — My  positions  are 
these — 1.  The  Lord — electing  to  perpetuate  the  sinful  race,  to  endure  all  the 
•orrow  which  Heaven  would  look  upon,  and  the  question  which  would  fall  upon  Hia 


108  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tin. 

government  through  the  existence  of  a  world  so  full  of  wrong  and  wretchedness,  in  a 
universe  whose  order  was  his  charge — stooped  at  once,  in  infinite,  tender  pity,  to 
lift  the  burden,  and  to  become  a  feUow-wayfarer  in  the  sorrowful  pOgrimage  to 
which  man  had  doomed  himself  by  his  sin.  Suffering  sin  to  live  on  and  reproduce 
itself,  with  aU  its  bitter  firuits,  in  the  universe  which  He  made  to  be  so  blest.  He 
needs  must  become  its  sacrifice  ;  making  the  atonement  for  the  sin  which  He  did  not 
on  the  moment  crush,  and  bearing  the  burden  of  the  sorrow  which  He  did  not  at 
once  destroy.  And  this  is  Divine  love.  It  must  share  the  sorrow  which  it  allows  to 
live  on,  though  the  fountain  of  the  sorrow  be  a  sin  which  he  hates  ;  it  must  lift  and 
bear  the  burden  which  most  righteous  necessities  lay  heavily  upon  erring  souls.  "We 
none  of  us  know,  even  dimly,  what  is  meant  by  "  Emmanuel,"  "  God  with  us."  God 
always  with  us,  incarnate  from  the  hour  when  He  announced  Himself  as  the  woman's 
seed,  and  the  destroyer  of  her  foe.  God  with  us,  our  fellow  in  aU  the  dread  experi- 
ence into  which  our  sharing  in  the  sin  of  Adam  has  driven  us  ;  knowing  Himself  the 
fall  pressure  of  its  burdens,  and  infinitely  more  nearly  touched  than  we  are  by  every- 
thing that  concerns  the  dark,  sad  history  of  mankind.  2.  The  fellowship  of  God 
with  the  race  in  the  very  hour  of  the  transgression  infused  at  once  a  tincture  of 
hope  into  the  experience  of  the  sinner,  and  made  it,  from  the  first,  a  discipline  unto 
life  instead  of  a  judgment  unto  death.  3.  This  first  promise  to  man,  this  fellowship 
of  God  with  the  sinning,  sufiiering  race,  whose  existence  He  perpetuated,  pledged 
Him  to  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  the  baptism  of  Pentecost,  and  the  abiding  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter,  with  the  world.  {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Christ  the 
Burden-bearer : — There  are  two  questions  which  here  suggest  themselves — I.  What 

BURDENS  PRESSED  ON  ChRIST,   WHICH    COULD    NOT    HAVE   BEEN    HiS,    UNLESS  HE 

HAD  TAKEN  THEM  UP  ?  1.  By  His  incamatiou  He  inserted  Himself  into  our  race, 
and  by  assuming  our  own  nature.  He  felt  whatever  sorrows  press  on  man  as  man. 
2.  By  His  position  He  represented  our  race.  As  the  Son  of  God,  He  is  Heaven's 
representative  on  earth.  As  the  Son  of  Man,  He  is  our  Great  High  Priest,  to  inter- 
cede with  Heaven.  Thus  all  earth's  spiritual  concerns  rested  on  Him.  Could  such 
a  work  be  entrusted  to  man,  and  He  be  otherwise  than  "a  man  of  sorrows"  ?  8. 
By  His  own  personal  sympathy  He  so  felt  for  man,  that  He  made  the  sorrows  of 
others  His  own.  His  was  no  heartless  officialism.  4.  By  suffering  and  sorrow, 
Christ  not  only  discloses  His  own  human  sympathy,  but  by  reason  of  the  two- 
foldness  of  His  nature,  that  human  sympathy  was  an  incarnation  of  the  Divine ! 
5.  But  we  have  to  take  one  more  step,  in  accounting  for  the  burden  which  lay  upon 
Christ.  He  came,  ' '  not  to  be  ministered  imto,  but  to  minister  and  to  give  His  life, 
a  ransom  for  many."     II.   What  burdens  do  not  rest  upon  us,  that  must 

HAVE  BEEN   OURS  IF  ChRIST  HAD  NOT  BORNE  THEM  AWAY?       1.     The    burden    of 

unatoned  guilt  rests  on  none  !  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  beareth  away  the  sin 
of  the  world  !  "  2.  The  burden  of  hopeless  corruption  of  nature  need  rest  on  none. 
When  the  Son  of  God  came  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  us.  He  came  to  be  also  a  Living  Root 
in  us.  He  allied  Himself  with  human  weakness,  and  joined  it  to  His  almighti- 
ness,  that  in  Him  that  weakness  might  be  lost,  and  be  substituted  by  "ever- 
lasting strength."  3.  The  burden  of  unshared  sorrows  rests  on  none.  Does  our 
sorrow  arise  from  the  sin  without  us?  That  pressed  more  heavily  on  Christ 
than  ever  it  can  do  on  us.  Does  it  come  from  personal  trial  ?  Christ's  were  far 
heavier  than  ours.  Does  it  come  from  the  temptations  of  Satan  ?  He  was  in  all 
points  tempted  like  as  we  are.  But  perhaps  it  may  be  said,  "By  reason  of  the 
infirmities  of  the  flesh,  I  am  betrayed  into  impatience,  murmuring  and  fretfulness 
and  I  cannot  feel  that  Christ  has  lifted  oS'  that  burden,  for  I  am  sure  Christ  never 
felt  any  fretfulness  or  impatience,  and  so  He  cannot  sympathize  with  mine."  But, 
strange  as  it  may  seem  at  first  sight,  it  is  just  here  that  the  perfection  of  Christ's 
sympathy  ia  seen.  In  this  last-named  course  of  sorrow  there  is  a  mixture  of  what  is 
frail  with  what  is  wrong.  But  since  Christ's  nature  was  untainted  by  sin,  He  can 
draw  exactly  the  line  between  infirmity  and  sin,  which  sinful  natures  cannot  do. 
Now,  we  do  not  want,  and  we  ought  not  to  wish  for  sympathy  with  the  wrong,  but 
only  with  weakness  and  frailty.  How  does  Christ,  then,  meet  this  complex  case  f 
Distinguishing  most  clearly  between  the  two.  He  looks  on  the  infirmity,  and  has  for 
it  a  fulness  of  pity ;  He  discerns  the  sin,  and  has  for  that  fulness  of  power  to  forgive 
it,  and  fulness  of  grace  to  remove  it !  "In  that  He  Himself  hath  suff'ered  being 
tempted,  He  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted. "  4.  The  burden  of  dreaded 
death  need  rest  on  none.  Christ  passed  through  death  that  He  might  deliver  them 
who  through  fear  of  death  are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  6.  The  great 
burden  of  the  destiny  of  the  human  race  rests  not  on  us.    Christ  I^  taken  that  up. 


CHAP,  uii.]  ISAIAH.  109 

(C.  Clemanee,  D.D.)  The  death  of  Christ  a  propitiation  for  sin: — Two  things  are 
asserted — I.  That  the  Messiah  should  suffer  not  for  His  own  sins,  but 
FOB  OURS  (vers.  4-5).  This  indeed  is  what  His  enemies  would  deny,  esteeming 
Him  "stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted,"  for  His  own  sins.  His  imposture, 
usurpation  and  blasphemy.  But  if  we  peruse  the  history  of  His  life  we  shall  find 
that  the  sum  of  all  they  had  to  lay  to  His  charge  was  His  presuming  to  act  in  a 
character  which  really  did  (but  which  they  would  not  believe  did)  belong  to  Him : 
that  the  whole  course  of  His  behaviour  exemplified  the  most  perfect  iutegrity  of 
heart  and  life,  and  showed  Him  to  be  the  spotless  Lamb  of  God,  in  whom  there  was 
no  sin.  Hence  it  follows  that  He  must  have  suffered  for  the  sins  of  others.  1. 
Some  have  put  this  gloss  upon  the  words,  "  He  was  wounded  for  " — i.  e.  (they  say) 
"  by  our  transgressions,"  and  "  bruised  by  our  iniquities."  Or,  that  it  was  owing  to 
the  sins  of  the  Jews  that  He  suffered  so  much  as  He  did.  It  was  their  malice,  un- 
righteousness and  envy  that  was  the  cause  of  all  His  suffering.  But  this  construc- 
tion is  not  only  apparently  forced,  but  is  confuted  by  the  whole  scope  and  tenor  of 
the  prophecy.  For  He  is  not  said  to  be  smitten  by  the  Jews,  but  for  them ;  nay, 
that  He  was  smitten  of  God  for  them,  for  it  was  ' '  the  Lord  "  that  laid  on  Him  the 
punishment  of  their  iniquities.  2.  Others  say  that  He  bore  our  sins  by  imputation, 
and  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  because  our  transgressions  were  imputed  to 
Him,  or  reckoned  as  His.  But  you  will  say,  perhaps,  "  Were  not  our  sins  then 
imputed  to  Christ  1 "  I  answer,  I  find  no  fault  with  the  word,  provided  it  be  rightly 
understood  and  explained.  If  by  "imputation"  be  meant,  that  our  sins  were 
actually  made  over  or  transferred  to  Him,  so  as  to  become  His,  I  do  not  see  how 
this  can  be  conceived  possible.  "  But  might  they  not  be  reckoned  His  ? "  No,  for 
that  would  be  to  reckon  them  what  they  were  not,  and  what  it  was  impossible  they 
should  be.  But  if  by  our  sins  being  ' '  imputed  "  to  Christ  be  understood  no  more 
than  that  the  punishment  thereof  was  actually  laid  upon  Him,  this  is  easUy  con- 
ceived, and  readUy  granted  :  that  is  what  the  sacred  Scriptures  everywhere  say.  If 
anything  further  be  necessary  to  illustrate  this  affair,  we  may  explain  it  by  the  case 
of  the  propitiatory  sacrifices  under  the  law,  all  which  pointed  at  or  prefigured  the 
great  Christian  sacrifice  under  the  Gospel.  Those  piacular  victims  were  of  Divine 
appointment.  The  sin-offerings,  over  the  heads  of  which  the  priest  was  to  confess 
the  sins  of  the  people,  were  substituted  in  the  room  of  the  offenders,  and  cUed 
instead  of  those  sinners  for  whom  they  were  offered.  The  sins  of  the  people  were 
not  transferred  over  to  the  victim,  but  the  victim  was  slaia  for  the  sins  of  the 
people.  Lev.  xvi.  21,  22  must  of  necessity  be  taken  in  a  figurative  construction: 
because  the  sins  of  a  man  can  in  no  other  sense  be  transferred  to,  or  laid  upon  a 
beast,  than  by  transferring  upon  it  the  punishment  of  them.  3.  Others  there  are 
who  acknowledge  that  Christ  died  for  us,  meaning  thereby  that  He  died  for  our  sakes 
or  for  our  good,  and  to  set  us  a  perfect  example  of  patience  and  submission  under 
sufferings  ;  but  not  for  our  sins,  or  in  our  room  and  stead.  But  if  Christ  died  for 
us  as  our  Sacrifice,  or  as  the  sacrifices  under  the  law  died  for  the  offenders  (as  He 
certainly  did  if  they  were  proper  types  of  Him),  then  He  must  have  died  in  our 
room,  and  as  substituted  ia  our  place.  4.  Others  think  that  all  those  places  of 
Scripture  which  speak  of  Christ's  death  as  a  "  propitiation  "  are  to  be  explained  in  a 
figurative  sense :  that  the  apostles  borrowed  those  sacrifical  terms  from  the  Jewish 
law,  and  applied  them  to  the  death  of  Christ,  only  by  way  of  accommodation  or 
analogy,  not  that  the  blood  of  Christ  did  really  and  properly  expiate  or  atone  for  sin, 
any  more  than  that  of  the  Jewish  sacrifices  ;  but  that  He  only  died  for  us  as  a  pledge 
to  assm'e  us  that  God  would  pardon  and  accept  us  upon  our  repentance.  To  which 
it  may  suffice  to  say,  that  the  apostle  does  not  speak  of  the  death  of  Christ  merely 
by  way  of  analogy  to  the  Jewish  sacrifices,  but  as  typified,  represented  and  prefigured 
by  them  (Eph.  v.  2 ;  Heb.  ix.  13,  14  ;  x.  4).  II.  That  the  great  end  and 
DESIGN  OF  Christ's  suffering  for  our  sins,  was  to  make  our  peace  with 
God.  "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him,"  etc.  These  words  plainly 
intimate  to  us  the  way  whereby  our  peace  is  made  with  God,  viz.  by  our  justification 
and  sanctification.  (/.  Mason,  M.A.)  Vicarious  Sacrifice  of  Christ: — In  these 
words  Isaiah  declares  the  end  of  Christ's  sufferings.  The  Jews,  who  put  Him  to 
death,  did  "esteem  Him  smitten  of  God,"  that  is,  crucified  according  to  the  will  of 
God,  for  attempting  to  turn  away  men  from  the  law  of  Moses.  And,  to  this  day, 
they  speak  of  Jesus  as  one  who  suffered  according  to  the  law  of  God,  for  seducing  the 
Israelites  from  the  faith  of  their  forefathers.  The  prophet  gives  a  different  view  of 
Christ's  death.  Instead  of  dying  for  His  own  sins,  He  was  woimded  for  our  trans- 
gressionB.     1.  There  is  no  passage  of  Scripture  in  which  the  substitution  of  Christ's 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.im. 

■offerings,  in  place  of  those  of  the  sinner,  is  more  clearly  revealed  than  in  onr  text. 
2.  All  agree  that  men  are  sinners,  and  that  sin  deserves  punishment.  But  when  we 
come  to  ask  how  it  may  be  forgiven,  and  for  what  consideration  God  forgives  it,  we 
begin  to  differ.  The  Trinitarian  doctrine  is,  that  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  the  un- 
created, and  equal  with  the  Father,  became  incarnate,  and  suffered  the  punishment 
of  our  sins,  as  our  Substitute  ;  and  that  for  the  sake  of  what  He  has  done,  we  may 
be  forgiven.  They  who  are  opposed  to  us,  on  the  other  hand,  believe  that  Christ,  a 
created  being,  but  still  so  very  exalted  that  He  va&j  be  called  a  God — ^yet  not  the 
supreme  God— took  our  nature  upon  Him,  that  He  might  teach  men  a  purer  religion 
than  was  ever  before  known,  and  set  before  them  a  perfect  example,  and  thus  draw 
them  away  from  their  sins  ;  so  that  He  saves  us  from  our  sins,  not  by  atoning  for 
them,  but  just  as  any  merelygood  man  does,  who  so  teaches  and  practises  as  to  lead 
men  from  sin  to  holiness.  While  engaged  in  this  work,  they  assert  further,  that  the 
Jews  seized  upon  the  Saviour  and  put  Him  to  death  ;  and  Jesus,  to  show  that  He 
was  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  what  He  had  taught,  gave  Himself  up  to  die,  just  as 
Latimer  and  Ridley  sealed  their  testimony  with  their  blood  ;  and  that  thus  Christ 
may  be  said  to  have  died  for  us,  because  He  met  His  death  in  seeking  to  do  us  good. 
Some  go  a  little  further,  and  believe  that  God  was  so  pleased  with  the  holy  life,  and 
the  martyr-death  of  His  Son,  that  for  His  sake  He  is  graciously  inclined  to  forgive 
sin,  j\ist  as  the  good  conduct  of  one  child  may  procure  favours  for  an  erring  brother, 
for  whom  he  pleads.  They  expect  to  be  saved  through  their  repentance,  liy  the 
mercy  of  God  ;  we  expect  salvation  through  the  alone  merits  of  the  suffering  Son  of 
God.  3.  Now  let  us  go  on  to  see  how  this  great  doctrine  of  our  Church  is  sustained 
by  Scripture.  4.  But  again,  we  ask  attention  to  the  fact,  that  Christ's  sufferings 
were  not  so  much  from  man  as  from  God,  not  bodily  so  much  as  of  the  soul.  How 
do  we  account  for  this  1  If  He  was  seized  upon  by  the  Jews,  and  died  merely  as  a 
martyr,  would  God  have  withdrawn  His  presence  from  Him  in  His  last  agonies? 
"Would  He  not  then  have  had,  as  other  good  men  have  had,  the  brightest  views  of 
the  Divine  presence  and  comfort?  But  it  was  just  the  reverse.  "The  Lord  hath 
laid  upon  Him  the  iniquity  of  u»  all."  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him."  It 
is  said  God  made  Christ's  soul,  not  His  body  alone,  an  offering  for  sin ;  it  was 
foretold  that  it  should  be  mental,  not  merely  corporal  suffering,  that  He 
should  endure.  And  such,  in  fact,  was  the  case.  5.  How  can  these  facts  be 
explained  on  the  Unitarian  system?  (W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  Redemption: — I.  The 
KEED  (ver.  6).  Sheep,  but  astray ;  through  following  their  own  inclinations. 
Divine  pity  is  on  the  selfish  and  the  lost.  II.  The  means.  1.  The  reality 
of  the  redemption  seen  in  the  fact  that  Christ  died.  He  did  not  die  for  His 
own  sin ;  "I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  man,"  said  His  judge.  He 
did  not  die  through  His  own  feebleness;  "I  have  power  to  lay  down  My  life," 
etc.,  said  Christ.  He  did  not  die  by  accident;  "the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him 
the  iniquity  of  us  all : "  it  was  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  foretold,  and  a  fact. 
2.  The  form  of  the  redemption.  (1)  The  humiliation  of  Christ.  The  humiliation 
of  Christ  teaches  the  intensity  of  sin.  Where  sin  is  not  felt  His  humiliation 
is  misunderstood.  "We  did  esteem  Him  stricken,"  etc.  (2)  The  substitution  of 
Christ.  The  substitution  of  Christ  teaches  the  wealth  in  our  redemption  ;  where 
Christ  is  not  known  in  His  Divine  nature  the  riches  of  salvation  not  fully  appre- 
ciated. III.  The  effect  (ver.  5).  1.  Sin  atoned  for,  iniquity  borne  away.  2. 
Peace.  "The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him."  "Being  justified  by 
faith  we  have  peace."  3.  Healing.  We  are  free  from  sin  to  be  the  servants 
of  God.  The  depth  of  His  love  the  measure  of  our  obligation.  As  that  cannot  b« 
fathomed  our  obligation  can  never  be  fully  realized.  \R.  V.  Pryce,  M.A.,  LL.B.) 
Vicarious  suffering: — Great  is  the  power  of  vicarious  suffering  in  its  endless 
varieties.  By  the  struggles  and  the  obstinate  questionings  of  deep  souls  the  world 
of  ordinary  men  is  redeemed  and  elevated.  It  is  by  His  suffering  prophets  that 
God  most  truly  saves  the  world.  By  the  untold  miseries  of  Job,  by  the  deep  grief 
of  Isaiah,  by  tne  piercing  sorrows  of  Paul,  by  the  weary  restlessness  of  Augustine, 
by  the  fieiy  agonies  of  Luther,  by  the  sore  trials  of  John  Bunyan,  by  the  spiritual 
travail  of  Wesley  and  Whitfield,  by  the  brave  endurance  of  Theodore  Parker,  by  the 
torn  heart  of  Robertson  of  Brighton,  by  the  manifold  disquietudes  and  internal 
gloom  of  the  great  army  of  bewildered  doubters  and  baffled  pioneers — by  all  these 
we  have  been  led  from  the  house  of  bondage  and  the  city  of  destruction,  from  the 
Talley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 
LA.  Crauford,  M.A.)  Luther  and  Bunyan: — By  their  "agony  and  bloody  sweat," 
it  is  given  to  sympathetic  souls  in  every  age  to  deliver  the  world  to  some  extentr 


CHAP.  LIU.]  ISAIAH.  Ill 

Thus  by  the  stripes  of  Luther  John  Bunyan  was  healed.  From  Luther's  commentary 
on  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  Bunyan  received  peace  and  victory.  (Ibid.) 
Vicarious  suffering,  with  its  far-reachmg  influence,  pervades  the  whole  world. 
Assuredly  this  is  not  due  to  any  after-thought  of  God.  It  is  an  essential  part  of 
the  original  arrangement.  "No  man  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth  to 
himself."  (Ibid.)  Society  an  organism: — The  English  Deists  certainly  erred  in 
rejecting  the  true  inner  meaning  of  the  doctrine  of  salvation  hj  vicarious  suffering. 
The  Deists  did  not  realize  the  truth  that  society  is  an  organism.  And  our  per- 
ception of  this  fact  in  the  present  day  enables  us  to  appreciate  the  real  meaniag  of 
the  doctrine  of  vicarious  suffering.  This  truth  shines  all  the  more  clearly,  owing 
to  the  light  of  modem  science,  which  has  discredited  the  old  Deism  even  more 
effectually  than  Bishop  Butler  did.  {Ibid.)  Sadder  and  mysterious  anpects  of 
vicariotis  suffering : — Some  of  these  aspects  are  so  unspeakably  sad  that  it  is  only 
in  the  light  of  a  future  life  that  I  can  bear  to  gaze  upon  them.  We  do  but  skim 
over  the  surface  of  the  deep  mystery  of  vicarious  suffering,  unless  we  recognize  the 
fact  that  the  spiritual  world  is  full  of  wasted  lives,  of  marvellous  abortions,  of 
grand  and  heroic  failures,  of  illustrious  scapegoats  dying  ia  the  bleak  wUdemess 
of  ignominy  and  defeat,  bearing  away  the  sins  of  the  many,  and  yet  by  them 
misunderstood,  condemned,  and  anathematized.  In  many  respects  these  outcast 
scapegoats  of  the  spiritual  world  are  the  truest  saviours  of  our  race,  though  by 
commonplace  religionists  they  "are  numbered  with  the  transgressors,"  and  die 
unhealed  and  unredeemed,  and  "make  their  graves  with  the  wicked."  {Ibid.) 
The  world! s  ^najestic  failures  are  a  sorrowful  hint  of  God's  inexhaustible  resources. 
{Ibid.)  The  failure  of  one  the  gain  of  another: — I  suppose  that  no  thoughtful 
person  would. think  of  denying  the  fact  that  predestined  failure  is  the  lot  of  many 
noble  natures  here  on  earth.  They  are  stepping-stones  on  which  others  "rise  to 
higher  things. "  Of  each  of  them  we  might  truly  affirm  that  he  is  thus  addressed 
by  others,  "Bow  down,  that  we  may  go  over."  And,  in  meek  obedience,  he 
complies  ;  so  that  we  write  concerning  him,  "And  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  on  the 
ground,  and  as  the  street  to  them  that  went  over."  Such  souls  are  scapegoats  of 
the  race,  bearing  away  the  deficiencies  and  the  sins  of  many  into  the  wilderness  of 
isolation,  despondency,  and  disaster.  They  drink  to  the  very  dregs  the  cup  of 
ancestral  sinftilness,  and  their  brethren  thereby  escape  that  fatal  heritage  of  the 
soul.  It  seems  as  if  it  were  necessary  that  they  should  be  lost,  in  order  that  others 
may  be  saved.  Consciously  or  unconsciously,  they  suck  out  the  poison  from  the 
wounds  of  the  human  race.  {Ibid.)  Vicarious  sacrifice  in  the  intellectual  world: — 
In  the  intellectual  world  it  is  often  expedient  that  one  man  should  be  sacrificed  for 
the  race.  For  instance,  David  Hmne's  total  want  of  spirituality,  though  extremely 
injurious  to  him  individually,  was  probably  highly  beneficial  to  the  race  in  one  way, 
viz.  by  showing  to  what  monstrous  conclusions  intellect  by  itself  was  likely  to  lead. 
And  the  very  infirmities  and  aberrations  of  the  intellect,  in  some  men,  are  full  of 
instruction  for  the  race  at  large.  Unrestrained  imagination  often  mars  or  destroys 
the  life  of  its  possessor,  as  did  that  of  Rousseau,  but  adds  much  to  the  world's 
abiding  mental  wealth.  {Ibid.)  Poisons  as  tonics: — The  spiritual  poisons  of 
individuals  are  often  turned  into  tonics  for  the  race.  {Ibid. )  Stricken,  smitten  of 
God,  and  afflicted. — Jesus,  smitten  of  God: — Smitten  as  with  a  loathsome  leprosy — 
the  curse-mark  of  judicial  vengeance  upon  Him,  for  so  it  is  rendered  by  St.  Jerome, 
"We  thought  Him  to  be  a  leper."  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  "Stricken"  is  the 
expression  used  when  God  visits  a  man  with  severe  and  sudden  sickness  (Gen.  xiL 
17  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  9),  especially  leprosy,  which  was  regarded  as  pre-eminently  the 
"stroke"  of  God's  hand  (Joo  xix.  21 ;  2  Kings  xv.  5  ;  Lev.  xiii.  3,  9,  20),  and  the 
direct  consequence  of  sin.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  Servant  of  the  Lord 
pictiired  as  a  leper : — That  the  Servant  is  pictured  as  a  leper  is  suggested  by  several 
particulars  in  the  description,  such  as  His  marred  and  disfigured  form,  and  His 
isolation  from  human  society,  as  well  as  the  universal  conviction  of  His  con- 
temporaries that  He  was  a  special  object  of  the  Divine  wrath  ;  and  the  impression 
is  confirmed  by  the  parallel  case  of  Job,  the  typical  righteous  sufferer,  whose  disease 
was  elephantiasis,  the  most  hideous  form  of  leprosy.  It  has  to  be  boftie  in  mind, 
of  course,  that  the  figure  of  the  Servant  is,  in  some  sense,  an  ideal  creation  of  the 
prophet's  mind,  so  that  the  leprosy  is  only  a  strong  image  for  such  sufferings  as  are 
the  evidence  of  God's  wrath  against  sin.  {Ibid.)  The  mystery  of  our  Lord's 
sufferings: — I.  The  mystery  of  Christ's  sufferings — man's  explanation 
OF  IT.  "We  did  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of  Grod  and  afflicted."  Anditia 
impossible  to  say  that  this  is  other  than  a  iais  view  to  take  firom  man's  position  and 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  lio. 

■with  man's  knowledge.  1.  Let  us  try  and  realize  the  process  of  mind  in  a  man  who 
was  told  of  Christ's  suflFerings  and  death,  but  had  no  knowledge  of  His  personal 
innocence;  no  conception  of  Him  as  the  "spotless  One,"  separate  from  sinners. 
Such  a  man  would  only  decide  that  He  was  "stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and 
afflicted. "  To  such  a  man  it  would  be  plain  enough  that  God  has  established  an 
immediate  connection  between  sin  and  sufiFering.  And  yet  we  know,  we  feel,  that 
this  explanation  of  the  mystery  of  our  Lord's  sufferings  is  insufficient  and  incorrect. 
It  does  not  lift  the  veil.  It  is  altogether  too  commonplace.  Good  enough  if  Christ 
were  a  fellow-man.  Worthless — nay,  wholly  wrong — if  He  be  the  spotless  Lamb  of 
God ;  if  He  be  the  "Son  of  God  with  power."  2.  Then  let  us  try  to  realize  the 
process  of  mind  in  a  man  who  has  some  ^owledge  of  Christ's  life,  and  especially  of 
His  personal  innocence,  as  one  who  "did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His 
mouth."  Such  a  man  might  say,  Christ's  sufferings  were  a  specially  and  extra- 
ordinary Divine  judgment.  "He  was  smitten  of  God."  Such  a  knowledge  of 
Christ's  life  would  convince  the  man  that  Jesus  must  have  been  a  most  amiable  and 
excellent  person,  an  obedient  Son,  a  loving  Friend,  a  gentle-hearted  Brother  ;  one 
who  could  claim  to  be  a  firm  and  wise  moral  Teacher.  The  man  would  feel  sure 
that  the  influence  of  such  an  one  as  Jesus  must  have  been  very  great  upon  His  age. 
The  fast  departing  moral  life  of  Judaism  ought  to  have  had  its  flickering  flame 
fanned  afresh  by  the  presence  and  teachings  of  such  a  Master-Spirit.  And  then,  as 
he  saw  Him  despised,  persecuted,  and  at  last  put  to  the  ignominious  slave's  death 
of  the  cross,  what  could  he  think  about  it  all  but  this  ?  It  was  a  sad  calamity,  one 
of  those  mysterious  Divine  judgments  that  seem  to  come  in  eveiy  age,  and  puzzle 
sorely  the  sons  of  men.  Man  can  only  say  of  the  sufferer — "Smitten  of  God." 
In  this  way  a  man  might  fairly  regard  the  innocent  Jesus.  Nay ;  this,  too,  is 
insufficient ;  it  is  but  the  beginning  of  an  explanation.  A  calamity  I  Yes,  but 
only  a  seeming  calamity,  seeing  that  oy  dying  He  conquered  death,  "  led  captivity 
captive,"  and  "opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  Man  cannot  of 
himself  explain  tke  mystery  of  Christ's  sufferings.  But  he  can  be  humble,  and 
learn  so  much  of  the  mystery  as  God  may  be  pleased  to  reveal.  II.  The  mystery 
OP  Christ's  sufferings — God's  explanation  of  it.  "He  was  wounded  for 
our  transgressions,"  etc.  1.  We  may  first  notice  that  God  sustains  man's  view,  that 
the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  His  appointment ;  but  He  further  declares  that  they 
were  an  unusual  and  altogether  singular  appointment.  2.  Then  God's  explanation 
declares  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  bore  no  relation  whatever  to  His  own  guilt. 
3.  God  affirms,  further,  that  Christ  suffered  as  the  Representative  or  Substitute,  for 
others.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  an  absorbing  love  should  .ejow  in  our  souls  toward 
tMs  vicariously-suffering  Saviour  I  In  the  restoration  of  i^^au  to  the  Divine  favour ; 
in  the  great  and  gracious  work  of  "reconciliation,"  we  can  recognize  three  stages— 
(1)  A  loving  purpose  cherished  in  the  deep  heart  of  the  Holy  Father,  that  He  would 
recover,  deliver,  and  save  His  lost,  rebellious,  prodigal  children.  (2)  That  Divine 
and  loving  purpose  effectually  wrought  out  by  God's  weU-beloved  and  only  begotten 
Son,  in  His  incarnate  life,  labours,  sufferings,  sacrifice  and  death.  (8)  The  third 
stage  is  yet  incomplete.  It  is  the  voluntary  and  hearty  acoeptanoe,  by  the  lone 
soughtchildren,  of  the  redemption  thus  gloriously  wrought  for  them.  (.fi.  Tuck,B.Ai^ 

Vers.  6.  But  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions. — The  mfferings  of  Christ  .— 
Three  things  suggest  themselves  as  requiring  explanation  to  one  who  seriously  con- 
teno^lates  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  An  innocent  man  suffers. 
2.  'The  death  of  Jesus  is  the  apparent  defeat  and  destruction  of  one  who  possessed 
extraordinary  and  supernatural  powers.  3.  This  apparent  defeat  and  ruin,  instead 
of  hindering  the  progress  of  His  work,  became  at  once,  and  in  all  the  history  of  the 
progress  of  His  doctrine  has  been  emphatically,  the  instrument  whereby  a  world  is 
'  conquered.  The  death  of  Jesus  has  not  been  mourned  by  His  followers,  has  never 
'  been  concealed,  but  rather  exulted  in  and  prominently  set  forth  as  that  to  which  all 
men  must  chiefly  look  if  they  would  regard  Christ  and  His  mission  right.  The 
shame  and  the  failure  issue  in  glory  and  completest  success.  What  is  the  philosophy 
of  this  ?  Has  any  ever  been  given  which  approaches  the  Divinely  revealed  meaning 
supplied  by  our  text?  "He  was  wounded?  for  our  transgressions,  etc.  We  learn 
here — I.  The  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ  resulted  from  our  sins.     II.  The 

BUFFERINGS  OF  JeSUS  WERE  RELATED  TO  THE  DiVINE   LAW.      III.   ThE  SUFFERINGS 

OF  Jesus  became  remedial  of  human  sinfulness,  (L.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  A  short 
catechism: — 1.  What  is  man's  condition  by  nature?  (1)  Under  transgression.  (2) 
Under  iniquities.  (S)  At  feud  with  God.   (4)  Under  wounds  and  most  loathsome 


csAP.  ijn.]  ISAIA3.  118 

diseases  of  a  sinful  nature.  2.  How  are  folks  freed  from  this  sinftj  and  miserable 
condition  ?  (1)  Jn  general,  before  the  quarrel  can  be  taken  away,  and  their  peace  can 
be  made,  there  must  be  a  satisfaction.  (2)  More  particularly  there  must  be  a  satis- 
faction, because  there  is  the  justice  of  God  that  hath  a  claim  by  a  standing  law  ;  the 
holiness  of  God,  that  must  be  vindicated ;  the  faith  of  God,  that  must  cause  to 
come  to  pass  what  it  hath  pledged  itself  to,  as  well  in  reference  to  threatening 
as  to  promise.  3.  Who  maketh  this  satisfaction?  The  text  says,  "He"  and 
"Him."  TheMessiah.  4.  Howdoes  He  satisfy  justice?  (1)  He  enters  Himself  in  our 
room.  (2)  Christ's  performance  and  payment  of  the  debt  according  to  His  under- 
taking, implies  a  covenant  and  transaction  on  which  the  application  is  founded. 
(3)  Our  Lord  'Jesus,  in  fulfilling  the  bargain,  and  satisfying  justice,  paid  a  dear 
price  :  He  was  wounded,  bruised,  suffered  stripes  and  punishment.  5.  What  are  ' 
the  benefits  that  come  by  these  suflerings  ?  (1)  The  benefits  are  such  that  if  He 
had  not  suffered  for  us,  we  should  have  suffered  all  that  He  suffered  ourselves. 
(2)  More  particularly  we  have  peace  and  pardon.  Healing.  6.  To  whom  hath  Christ 
procured  all  these  good  things  1  (1)  The  elect ;  (2)  who  are  guilty  of  heinous  sins. 
7.  How  are  these  benefits  derived  from  Christ  to  the  sinner  ?  (1)  Justly  and  in  a  legal 
way  ;  (2)  freely.  {J.  DurJiam,)  Sin : — Verses  5  and  6  are  remarkable  for  the  numerous 
and  diversified  references  to  sin  which  they  make.  Within  the  short  compass  of 
two  verses  that  sad  fact  is  referred  to  no  less  than  six  times,  and  on  each  occasion  a  ^ 
diflFerent  figure  is  used  to  describe  it.  It  is  transgression — the  crossing  of  a  boundary 
and  trespassing  upon  forbidden  land.  It  is  iniquity — the  want  of  equity :  the 
absence  of  just  dealing.  It  is  the  opposite  of  peace — the  root  of  discord  and 
enmity  between  us  and  God.  It  is  a  disease  of  the  spirit — difBcult  to  heal.  It  is  a 
foolish  and  wilful  wandering,  like  that  of  a  stray  sheep.  And  it  is  a  heavy  burden, 
which  crushes  him  on  whom  it  lies.  So  many  and  serious  are  the  aspects  of  sin. 
{JS.  J.  Gibbon. )  The  sufferings  of  Christ : — I.  Attend  to  the  sufferings  of  the 
Son  of  God,  as  described  in  the  text.  The  sufferings  of  the  Saviour  are  described 
in  the  Scriptures  with  simplicity  and  grandeur  combined.  Nothing  can  add  to  the 
solemnity  and  force  of  the  exhibition.  1.  The  prophet  tells  us  that  the  Son  of  God 
was  "wounded."  The  Hebrew  word  here  translated  "woimded,"  signifies  to  run 
through  with  a  sword  or  some  sharp  weapon,  and,  as  here  used,  seems  to  refer  to 
those  painful  wounds  which  our  Lord  received  at  the  time  of  His  crucifixion. 
2.  The  prophet  tells  us  that  the  Son  of  God  was  ' '  bruised. ' '  This  expression  seems  to 
have  a  reference  to  the  labours,  aflBictions,  and  sorrows  which  our  blessed  Lord 
sustained,  especially  in  the  last  scenes  of  His  life.  3.  The  prophet  teUs  us  that  the 
Son  of  God  bore  chastisements  and  stripes.  II.  Consider  the  prooubino 
OATiSE  OF  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  SoN  OF  GoD.  " Our transgrcssions. "  "Our 
iniquities."  III.  Attend  to  thb  gracious  design  and  happy  effects  of  thb 
BXTFFERiNGS  OF  THE  SoN  OF  GoD.  "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him, 
and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  1.  One  gracious  design  and  blessed  effect  of 
the  su9"erings  of  the  Son  of  God  was  to  procure  for  us  reconciliation  with  God. 
2.  The  renovating  of  our  nature.  {D.  Dickson,  D.D.)  Substitution: — There 
is  no  more  remarkable  language  than  this  in  the  whole  of  the  Word  of  God. 
It  is  so  clear  a  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  the  substitution  of  the  innocent  for  the 
guilty,  that  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  no  words  could  teach  it  if  it  be  not  taught 
here.  We  are  distinctly  told — I.  That  there  belongs  to  us  a  sad  and  grievous 
■WEIGHT  OF  SIN.  There  are  three  terms  expressive  of  what  belong  to  us  :  "our 
transgressions, "  "  our  iniquities, "  "  gone  astray. "  These  three  phrases  have  indeed  a 
common  feature  ;  they  all  indicate  what  is  wrong — even  sin,  though  they  represent 
the  wrong  in  different  aspects.  1.  "  Transgressions."  The  word  thus  translated\ 
indicates  sin  in  one  or  other  of  three  forms — either  that  of  missing  the  mark  through  \ 
aimlessness,  or  carelessness,  or  a  wrong  aim  ;  or  of  coming  short,  when,  though  the  | 
work  may  be  right  in  its  direction,  it  does  not  come  up  to  the  standard  ;  or  of 
crossing  a  boundary  and  going  over  to  the  wrong  side  of  a  line  altogether.  In  all 
these  forms  our  sins  have  violated  the  holy  law  of  God.  2.  "  Iniquities."  This 
word  also  has  reference  to  moral  law  as  the  standard  of  duty.  The  Hebrew  word  is 
from  a  root  which  signifies  "to  bend,"  "to  twist,"  and  refers  to  the  tortuous, 
crooked,  winding  ways  of  men  when  they  conform  to  no  standard  at  aU  save  that 
suggested  by  their  own  fancies  or  conceits,  and  so  walk  * '  according  to  the  course  of  this 
world. "  3.  The  third  phrase  has  reference  rather  to  the  God  of  Law,  than  to  the  law 
of  God,  and  to  Him  in  His  relation  to  us  of  Lord,  Leader,  Shepherd,  and  Guide. 
There  is  not  only  the  infringement  of  the  great  law  of  right,  but  also  imiversal 
neglect  and  abandonment  of  Divine  leadership  and  love  ;  and  as  the  result  of  this, 
VOL.  III.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  UII. 

grievous  mischief  is  sure  to  follow.  "Like  the  sheep,"  they  find  their  way  out 
easily  enough ;  they  go  wandering  over  "the  dark  mountains,"  each  one  to  "his 
own  way,"  but  of  themselves  they  can  never  find  the  way  home  again.  And  so  far 
does  this  wandering  propensity  increase  in  force,  that  men  come  to  think  there  is  no 
home  for  them  ;  the  loving  concern  of  God  for  the  wanderers  is  disbelieved,  and  the 
Supreme  Being  is  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  terrible  Judge  eager  to  inflict  retribution. 
And  all  this  is  a  pressure  on  God.  He  misses  the  wanderers.  And  through  the 
prophet,  the  Spirit  of  God  would  let  men  know  that  the  wanderings  of  earth  are  the 
care  of  Heaven.  Nor  let  us  fail  to  note  that  in  these  verses  there  is  an  entirely 
different  aspect  of  human  nature  and  action  from  that  presented  in  the  verso 
preceding.  There,  the  expressions  were  "our  griefs,"  "our  sorrows."  Here,  they 
are  "  our  transgressions,"  etc.  Griefs  and  sorrows  are  not  in  themselves  violations 
of  moral  law,  though  they  may  be  the  results  of  them,  and  though  every  violation 
of  moral  law  may  lead  to  sorrow.  Still  they  must  not  be  confounded,  though 
inseparably  connected.  Grief  may  solicit  pity  :  wrong  incurs  penalty.  And  the  sin  x 
is  ours.  The  evil  is  wide  as  the  race.  Each  one's  sin  is  a  personal  one  :  "  Every 
one  to  his  own  way."  Sin  is  thus  at  once  collective  and  individual.  No  one 
can  charge  the  guUt  of  his  own  sin  on  any  one  else.  On  whom  or  on  what  will 
he  cast  the  blame  ?  On  influences  ?  But  it  was  for  him  to  resist  and  not  to 
yield.  On  temptation !  But  temptation  caimot  force.  In  the  judgment  of  God 
each  one's  sin  is  his  own.  II.  This  Servant  of  God  being  laden  with  oub 
SINS,  SHAKES  CUE  HERITAGE  OF  WOE.  How  remarkable  is  the  antithesis  here — 
Transgressions  ;  iniquities  ;  wanderings,  are  ours.  "Woimds  ;  bruises  ;  chastise- 
ments ;  stripes,  are  His.  There  is  also  a  word  indicating  the  connection  between 
the  two  si(^s  of  the  antithesis,  "wounded  for  our  transgressions" — on  account  of 
them  ;  but  if  this  were  all  the  explanation  given,  it  might  mean  no  more  than 
that  the  Messiah  would  feel  so  grieved  at  them  that  they  would  bruise  or  wound 
Him.  But  there  is  a  far  fuller  and  clearer  expression :  "  The  Lord  hath  laid 
on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  This  expression  fixes  the  sense  in  which  the 
Messiah  was  wounded  and  bruised  on  our  account.  In  pondering  over  this,  let 
us  work  our  way  step  by  step.  1.  The  inflexibility  of  the  moral  law  and  the 
absolute  righteousness  and  equity  of  the  Lawgiver  in  dealing  with  sin  are 
thoughts  underlying  the  whole  of  tms  chapter.  The  most  high  God  is  indeed  higher 
than  law  ;  and  though  He  never  violates  law.  He  may,  out  of  the  exuberance  of  His 
own  love,  do  more  than  law  requires,  and  may  even  cease  to  make  law  the  rule  of 
His  action.  But  even  when  that  is  the  case,  and  He  acts  x*'/'^*  v6iJ.ov  (apart  from 
law,"  Rom.  iii.  21),  whUe  He  manifests  the  infinite  freedom  of  a  God  to  do  what- 
soever He  pleaseth,  He  will  also  show  to  the  world  that  His  law  must  be  honoured 
in  the  penalties  inflicted  for  its  violation.  This  is  indicated  in  the  words,  "The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Him,"  etc.  Nor  ought  any  one  for  a  moment  to  think  of  this  as 
"  exaction."  Exactness  is  not  exactingness  ;  it  would  not  be  called  so,  nor  would 
the  expression  be  tolerated  if  applied  to  a  judge  who  forbade  the  dishonouring  of  a 
national  law,  or  to  a  father  who  would  not  suffer  the  rules  of  his  house  to  be  broken 
with  impunity.  2.  It  is  revealed  to  us  that  in  the  mission  of  this  servant  of 
Jehovah,  the  Most  High  would  act  on  the  principle  of  substitution.  When  a  devout 
Hebrew  read  the  words  we  are  now  expounding,  the  image  of  the  scapegoat  would 
at  once  present  itself  to  him.  3.  The  Messiah  was  altogether  spotless  ;  He  fulfilled 
the  idcEil  typified  by  the  precept  that  the  sacrificial  lamb  was  to  be  without  blemish. 
Being  the  absolutely  sinless  One,  He  was  fitted  to  stand  in  a  relation  to  sin  and 
sinners  which  no  being  who  was  tainted  with  sin  could  possibly  have  occupied. 
4.  The  twofold  nature  of  the  Messiah— He  being  at  once  the  Son  of  God  and  Son 
of  man,  qualified  Him  to  stand  in  a  double  relation  ; — as  the  Son  of  God,  to  be 
]  Heaven's  representative  on  earth — as  the  Son  of  man,  to  be  earth's  representative  to 
I  Heaven.  Thus,  His  offering  of  Himself  was  God's  own  sacrifice  (John  iii.  16  ; 
1  John  iv.  10  ;  Rom.  v.  8  ;  2  Cor.  v.  19),  and  yet,  in  another  sense,  it  was  man's 
own  sacrifice  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  21  ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  5.  By  His  incarnation,  Christ  came 
and  stood  in  such  alliance  with  our  race,  that  what  belonged  to  the  race  belonged 
to  Him,  as  inserted  into  it,  and  representative  of  it.  We  need  not  use  any  such 
expression  as  this — "Christ  was  punished  for  our  sin."  That  would  be  wrong.  But 
sin  was  condemned  in  and  through  Christ,  through  His  taking  on  Himself  the 
liabilities  of  a  world,  as  their  one  representative  Man  who  would  stand  in  their 
stead  ;  and  by  the  self-abandonment  of  an  unparalleled  love,  would  let  the  anguish 
of  sin's  burden  fall  on  His  devoted  head.  Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  Philemon 
pleads  for  Onesimos  tiius,  "If  he  hath  wronged  thee  or  oweth  thee  ought,  put 


CHAP.  Liii.]  ISAIAH.  116 

that  to  my  account."  So  the  Son  of  God  has  accepted  our  liabilities.  Only  thus 
can  we  explain  either  the  strong  language  of  the  prophecy,  or  the  mysterious  sorrow 
of  Christ  depicted  in  the  Gospel  history.  On  whatever  grounds  sin's  punishment 
was  necessary  had  there  been  no  atonement,  on  preciselj^  those  grounds  was  an 
atonement  necessary  to  free  the  sinner  from  deserved  pumshment.  This  gracious 
work  was  in  accord  with  the  appointment  of  the  Father  and  with  the  will  of  the  Son. 
6.  Though  the  law  is  honoured  in  this  substitution  of  another  for  us,  yet  the  substi- 
tution itself  does  not  belong  to  law,  but  to  love  I  Grace  reigns  ;  law  is  not  trifled  with  ; 
it  is  not  infringed  on  :  nay,  it  is  "  established."    III.  Christ  having  accepted  ottk 

HERITAGE  OF  WOE,  WE  RECEIVE  THROUGH  HiM  A  HERITAGE  OF  PEACE.  (C.  CUmance, 

D.D.)  Vicarious  suffering : — In  a  large  family  of  evil-doers,  where  the  father  and 
mother  are  drunkards,  the  sons  jail-birds  and  the  daughters  steeped  in  shame,  there 
may  be  one,  a  daughter,  pure,  sensible,  sensitive,  living  in  the  home  of  sin  like  a  lily 
among  thorns.  And  she  makes  all  the  sin  of  the  family  her  own.  The  others  do  not 
mind  it ;  the  shame  of  their  sin  is  nothing  to  them  ;  it  is  the  talk  of  the  town,  but  they 
do  not  care.  Only  in  her  heart  their  crimes  and  disgrace  meet  like  a  sheaf  of  spears, 
piercing  and  mangling.  The  one  innocent  member  of  the  family  bears  the  giult  of 
all  the  rest.  Even  their  cruelty  to  herself  she  hides,  as  if  all  the  shame  of  it  were 
her  own.  Such  a  position  did  Christ  hold  in  the  human  family.  He  entered  it 
voluntarily,  becoming  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh  ;  He  identified  Himself 
with  it ;  He  was  the  sensitive  centre  of  the  whole.  He  gathered  into  His  heart  the 
shame  and  guilt  of  all  the  sin  He  saw.  The  perpetrators  did  not  feel  it,  but  He  felt 
it.  It  crushed  Him;  it  broke  His  heart.  {J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  "With  His  stripes 
we  are  healed. — The  disease  of  sin : — I.  It  is  a  wasting  disease  ;  it  bringeth  the 
soul  into  a  languishing  condition,  and  wasteth  the  strength  of  it  (Rom.  v.  6).  Sin 
hath  weakened  the  soul  in  all  the  faculties  of  it,  which  aU  may  discern  and  observe 
in  themselves.  II.  It  is  A  painful  disease,  it  woundeth  the  spirit  (Prov.  xviii. 
14).  Greatness  of  mind  may  support  us  under  a  wounded  body,  but  when  there  is 
a  breach  made  upon  the  conscience,  what  can  relieve  us  then  ?  But  you  will  say, 
They  that  are  most  infected  with  sin  feel  little  of  this  ;  how  is  it  then  so  painful  a 
disease  ?  1.  If  they  feel  it  not,  the  greater  is  their  danger  ;  for  stupid  diseases  are 
the  worst,  and  usually  most  mortal.  2.  The  soul  of  a  sinner  never  sits  so  easy  but 
that  he  has  his  qualms  and  pangs  of  conscience,  and  that  sometimes  in  the  midst  of 
jollity ;  as  was  the  case  of  Belshazzar,  while  carousing  in  the  cups  of  the  temple. 
3.  Though  they  feel  not  the  diseases  now,  they  shall  hereafter.  III.  It  is  a 
LOATHSOME  DISEASE.  IV.  It  IS  AN  iNFECTioxTs  DISEASE.  Sin  cometh  iuto  the 
world  by  propagation  rather  than  imitation  :  yet  imitation  and  example  hath  a  great 
force  upon  the  soul.  V.  It  is  a  mortal  disease,  if  we  continue  in  it  without 
repentance.  {T.  MarUon,  D.D.)  Recovery  by  Christ's  stripes  : — 1.  None  but  Christ. 
can  cure  us,  for  He  is  the  Physician  of  souls.  2.  Christ  cureth  us  not  by  doctrine 
and  example  only,  but  by  merit  and  suffering.  We  are  healed  by  "His  stripes," 
8.  Christ's  merit  and  sufierings  do  effect  our  cure,  as  they  purchased  the  Spirit  for 
us,  who  reneweth  and  healeth  our  sick  souls  (Titus  iii.  5,  6).  {Ibid.)  Healed  by 
Christ's  stripes: — "  With  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  We  are  healed — of  our  inatten- 
tion and  unconcern  about  Divine  things.  Of  our  ignorance  and  unbelief  respecting 
these  things.  Of  the  disease  of  self-righteousness  and  self-confidence.  Of  our  love  to 
sin,  and  commission  of  it.  Of  our  love  to  the  riches,  honours  and  pleasures  of  this 
world.  Of  our  self-indulgence  and  self-seeking.  Of  our  lukewarmness  and  sloth.  Of 
our  cowardice  and  fear  of  sufiering  (1  Pet.  iv.  1).  Of  our  diffidence  and  distrust,  with 
respect  to  the  mercy  of  God,  and  His  pardoning  and  accepting  the  penitent.  Of  an 
accusing  conscience,  and  slavish  fear  of  God,  and  of  death  and  hell.  Of  our  general 
depravity  and  corruption  of  nature.  Of  our  weakness  and  inability ;  His  sufferings 
having  purchased  for  us  "  the  Spirit  of  might."  Of  our  distresses  and  misery,  both 
present  and  future.  {J.  Benson,  D.D.)  His  stripes: — This  chapter  is  not  mainly 
an  indictment.  It  is  a  Gospel,  It  declares  in  glad  whUe  solemn  language  that, 
terrible  as  sin  is,  it  has  been  dealt  with.  The  prophet  dwells  purposely  upon  the 
varied  manifestations  of  the  evil  in  order  to  emphasize  the  varied  forms  and  abso- 
lute completeness  of  its  conquest.  He  prolongs  the  agony  that  he  may  prolong  the 
rapture.  I.  Our  need  of  hbalino.  There  is  no  figure  which  more  aptly 
represents  the  serious  nature  and  terrible  consequences  of  sin  than  this  one  of  booily 
sickness.  We  know  how  it  prostrates  us,  takes  the  brightness  out  of  life,  and, 
unless  attended  to,  cuts  life  short.  Sickness  in  its  acutest  form  is  a  type  in  the 
body  of  sin  in  the  sold.  Sin  is  a  mortal  disease  of  the  spirit.  A  common  Scriptural 
emblem  for  it,  found  in  both  Old  and  New  Testaments,   is  leprosy — the  most 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  un. 

firightfol  disease  imaginable,  loathsome  to  the  observer  and  intolerably  painful  to  the 
sufferer,  attacking  successively  and  rotting  every  limb  of  the  body,  and  issuing  slowly 
but  certainly  in  death.  1.  It  is  complicated.  It  affects  every  part  of  the  moral 
being.'N  It  is  blindness  to  holiness,  and  deafness  to  the  appeals  of  God.  There  ia  a 
malady  known  as  ossification  of  the  heart,  by  which  the  living  and  beating  heart  is 
slowly  turned  to  a  substance  like  bone.  It  is  a  type  of  the  complaint  of  the  sinner. 
His  heart  is  hard  and  impenitent.  He  suffers,  too,  from  the  fever  of  unhallowed 
desire.  The  lethargy  of  spiritual  indifference  is  one  of  his  symptoms  ;  a  depraved 
appetite,  by  which  he  tries  to  feed  his  immoi-tal  soul  on  husks,  is  another  ;  while 
his  whole  condition  is  one  of  extreme  debility — absence  of  strength  to  do  right.  In 
another  part  of  the  book  our  prophet  diagnoses  more  thoroughly  the  disease  of 
which  he  here  speaks  (chap.  i.  5,  6).  No  hospital  contains  a  spectacle  so  sicken- 
ing and  saddening  as  the  unregenerate  human  heart.  2.  The  disease  is  universal. 
"There  is  none  righteous;  no,  not  one."  What  the  Bible  declares,  experience 
confirms.  The  ancient  world,  speaking  through  a  noble  literature  that  has  come 
down  to  us,  rconfesses  many  times  the  condition  expressed  ^by  Ovid,  "I  see  and 
approve  the  better  things,  while  I  follow  those  which  are  worse."  Christendom 
finds  its  mouthpiece  in  the  apostle  Paul,  who,  speaking  of  himself  apart  from  the 
help  of  Christ,  mournfully  says,  "  When  I  worild  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me." 
And  modem  culture  reveals  its  deepest  consciousness  in  the  words  of  Lowell,  the 
ambassador-poet,  "  In  my  own  heart  I  find  the  worst  man's  mate."  It  is  a  feature 
of  the  mala(fy  that  the  patient  is  often  insensible  to  it.  But  from  every  lip  there  ia 
at  least  occasional  confession  of  some  of  its  symptoms.  There  is  discomfort  in  the 
conscience ;  there  is  dissatisfaction  at  the  heart ;  and  there  is  dread  in  the  face  of 
death  and  the  unknown  beyond.  The  Scriptures  are  the  Rontgen  rays  of  God,  and 
their  searching  light  reveals  behind  an  uneasy  conscience,  behind  a  dissatisfied  heart, 
behind  the  fear  of  death,  behind  all  the  sorrows  and  evils  of  life,  that  which  is  their 
primary  cause — the  malady  of  sin.  3.  This  disease  is  incurable — that  is,  apart  from 
the  healing  described  in  the  text.  "The  end  of  these  things  is  death" — spiritual 
death  ;  insensibility  to  God,  and  absence  of  the  life  of  fellowship  with  Him  which  is 
life  indeed — physical  death,  in  so  far  as  that  natural  process  is  more  than  mere  bodUy 
dissolution,  and  is  a  fearftd  and  hopeless  leap  into  the  dark  ;  for  "the  sting  of  death 
is  sin" — and  eternal  death.  jMen  are  great  at  quack  remedies,  and  the  world  is 
equally  flooded  with  nostrums  for  the  disease  of  sin.  And  what  is  the  result  of  these 
loudly-hawked  specifics?  They  are  as  useless  as  the  charms  which  our  grand- 
mothers used  to  scare  away  diseases.  The  Physician  is  He  who  gave  His  back  to 
the  smiters;  the  balm  is  the  blood  which  flowed  from  "His  stripes."  II.  Oxtb. 
MEANS  OF  HEALING.  "With  His  stripes."  "Stripes"  does  not  mean  the  lashes 
that  fell  on  His  back,  but  the  weals  which  they  left.  We  remember  how  He 
"suffered  under  Pontius  PUate"  before  He  "was  crucified,  dead  and  buried."  His 
back  was  bared.  His  hands  were  tied  to  a  low  post,  and  a  coarse,  muscular  giant 
flourished  a  whip  above  Him.  It  was  a  diabolical  instrument,  that  Eoman  whip — 
made  of  leather  with  many  thongs,  and  in  the  end  of  each  of  them  a  piece  of  iron, 
pt  bone,  or  stone.  Every  stroke  fetched  blood  and  ripped  open  the  quivering  flesh, 
pie  Jewish  law  forbade  more  than  forty  stripes  being  given,  but  Christ  was  scourged 
f  by  Romans,  who  recognized  no  such  merciftil  limit.  But  as  we  know  that  Pilate 
1  intended  the  scourging  to  be  a  substitute  for  crucifixion,  and  hoped  that  its  severity 
f  would  so  melt  the  Jews  to  pity  that  they  would  not  press  for  the  worse  punishment 

^which  end,  however,  was  not  reached — we  may  infer  that  He  was  scourged  until 

He  could  bear  no  more,  until  He  could  not  stand,  imtU  He  fell  mangled  and  faint- 
ing at  His  torturer's  feet.  Nearly  two  thousand  years  have  passed  since  that 
awful  affliction,  but  its  significance  is  eternal.  But  how  can  the  sufferings  of  one 
alleviate  the  sufferings  of  another  ?  1.  Because  the  sight  of  them  moves  us  to 
sorrow.  There  are  certain  maladies  of  the  mind  and  heart  for  which  there  is  hope 
if  the  emotions  can  be  stirred  and  the  patient  made  to  laugh  or  cry.  There  is  hope 
for  the  sinner  when  the  thought  of  his  sin  melts  his  heart  to  sorrow  and  his  eyes  to 
tears.  Sorrow  for  sin — repentance  of  wrong-doing — is  the  first  stagje  in^  recovery. 
And  there  is  nothing  that  will  cause  penitence  like  a  sight  of  the  Saviour's  woundis. 
2.  The  sight  of  them  relieves  our  consciences.  For  as  we  look  at  those  livid  weals 
we  know  He  did  not  deserve  them.  We  know  that  we  did  merit  punishment  direr 
far.  And  we  know  that  He  endured  them,  and  more  mysterious  agonies  of  which 
they  were  the  outward  sign,  in  our  stead.  Then,  gradually,  we  draw  the  inference, 
i  If  He  suffered  for  us,  we  are  free.  If  our  load  was  laid  on  Him,  it  is  no  longer  upon 
/  1U.      Conscience   accepts   that   logic.      8.  The   sight  of  them    prevents    furtner 


CHAP.  Lui.]  ISAIAH.  117 

outbreaks.  This  core  is  radical.  It  not  only  heals,  it  also  strengthens.  It  gradually 
raises  the  system  above  its  tendency  to  sin.  For  the  more  we  gaze  upon  those  livid 
stripes,  the  more  intolerable  and  hateful  sin,  which  caused  them,  appears,  and  the 
more  diflBcult  it  becomes  for  us  to  indulge  in  it.  Our  medicine  is  also  a  strong  tonic, 
which  invigorates  the  spiritual  nature  and  fortifies  its  weaknesses.  Stanley,  in  one 
of  his  books  on  African  travel,  tells  of  the  crime  of  Uledi,  his  native  coxswain,  and 
what  came  of  it.  Uledi  was  deservedly  popular  for  his  ability  and  courage,  but 
having  robbed  his  master,  a  jury  of  his  fellows  condemned  him  to  receive  "  a  terrible 
flogging."  Then  uprose  his  brother,  Shumari,  who  said,  "Uledi  has  done  very 
wrong ;  but  no  one  can  accuse  me  of  wrong-doing.  Now,  mates,  let  me  take  half  the 
whipping.  I  will  cheerfully  endure  it  for  the  sake  of  my  brother."  Scarcely  had  he 
finished  when  another  arose,  and  said,  "Uledi  has  been  the  father  of  the  boat  boys. 
He  has  many  times  risked  his  life  to  save  others  ;  and  he  is  my  cousin ;  and  yet  he 
ought  to  be  punished.  Shumari  says  he  will  take  half  the  punishment ;  and  now  let 
me  take  the  other  half,  and  let  Uledi  go  free. "  Surely  the  heart  of  the  guilty  man  must 
have  been  touched,  and  the  willing  submission  by  others  to  the  punishment  he  had 
merited  must  have  restrained  him  from  farther  outbreaks  as  the  strict  infliction  of 
the  original  penalty  never  could.  By  those  stripes  he  would  be  healed.  Even  so,  the 
stripes  of  our  Lord  deliver  us  from  the  very  tendency  to  sin.  For  the  disease  to  be 
healed  the  medicine  must  be  taken.  Om*  very  words  "recipe"  and  "receipt" 
remind  us  of  this.  They  are  related,  and  signify  "to  take."  The  selfsame  word 
describes  the  means  of  cure,  and  commands  that  it  be  used.  Lookupon  His  wounds  I 
-And  let  those  of  us  who  have  looked  for  our  cure,  still  look  for  our  strengthening. 
"We  should  not  have  so  many  touches  of  the  old  complaint  if  we  thought  oftener  of 
the  stripes  by  which  we  are  healed.  Look  aU  through  life,  and  you  will  grow 
stronger  and  holier.  {B.  J.  Gfibbon.)  The  universal  remedy: — Not  merely  His 
bleeding  wounds,  but  even  those  blue  bruises  of  His  flesh  help  to  heal  us.  There  are 
none  quite  free  from  spiritual  diseases.  One  may  be  saying,  "Mine is  a  weak  faith  ; " 
another  may  confess,  "  Mine  is  distracted  thoughts  ; "  another  may  exclaim,  "Mine 
is  coldness  of  love  ; "  and  a  fourth  may  have  to  lament  his  powerlessness  in  prayer. 
One  remedy  in  natural  things  will  not  suffice  for  aU  diseases ;  but  there  is  a  catholicon, 
a  universal  remedy,  provided  in  the  Word  of  God  for  all  spiritual  sicknesses,  and 
that  is  contained  in  the  few  words — "With  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  I.  The 
MEDICINE  ITSELF  WHICH  IS  HERE  PRESCRIBED — the  stripes  of  our  SaviouT.  By  the 
term  "stripes,"  no  doubt  the  prophet  understood  here,  first,  literally,  those  stripes 
which  fell  upon  our  Lord's  shoulders  when  He  was  beaten  of  the  Jews,  and  afterwards 
scourged  of  the  Koman  soldiery.  But  the  words  intend  far  more  than  this.  No 
doubt  with  his  prophetic  eye  Isaiah  saw  the  stripes  from  that  unseen  scourge  held  in 
the  Father's  hand  which  fell  upon  His  nobler  inner  nature  when  His  soul  was 
; scourged  for  sin.  It  is  by  these  that  our  souls  are  healed.  "But  why?"  First, 
,'  then,  because  our  Lord,  as  a  sufferer,  was  not  a  private  person,  but  suffered  as  a 
I  public  individual,  and  an  appoipted  representative.  Our  Lord  was  not  merely  man, 
'  or  else  His  sufferings  could  not  have  availed  for  the  multitude  who  now  are  healed 
thereby.  He  was  God  as  weU  as  man.  Our  Saviour's  sufferings  heal  us  of  the  curse 
by  being  presented  before  God  as  a  substitute  for  what  we  owe  to  His  Divine  law. 
But  healing  is  a  work  that  is  carried  on  within,  and  the  text  rather  leads  me  to- 
speak  of  the  effect  of  the  stripes  of  Christ  upon  our  characters  and  natures  than  upon 
lihe  result  produced  in  our  position  before  God.  II.  The  matchless  cures  WROtrGHT 
BY  THIS  REMARKABLE  MEDICINE.  Look  at  two  pictures.  Look  at  man  without  the 
stricken  Saviour ;  and  then  behold  man  with  the  Saviour,  healed  by  His  stripes. 
III.  The  maladies  which  this  wondrous  medicine  removes.  1.  The  mania  of 
despair.  2.  The  stony  heart.  3.  The  paralysis  of  doubt.  4.  A  stiffness  of  the 
knee-joint  of  prayer.  6.  Numbness  of  soul.  6.  The  fever  of  pride.  7.  The  leprosy 
of  selfishness.  8.  Anger.  9.  The  fretting  consumption  of  worldliness.  10.  The 
cancer  of  covetousness.  IV.  The  curative  properties  of  the  medicine.  1.  It 
arrests  spiritual  disorder.  2.  It  quickens  all  the  powers  of  the  spiritual  man  to 
resist  the  disease.  3.  It  restores  to  the  man  that  which  he  lost  in  strength  by  sin. 
4.  It  soothes  the  agony  of  conviction.  5.  It  has  an  eradicating  power  as  to  sin. 
V.  The  modes  of  the  working  of  this  medicine.  The  sinner  hearing  of  the 
death  of  the  incarnate  God  is  led  by  the  force  of  truth  and  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  believe  in  the  incarnate  God.  The  cure  is  already  begun.  After  faith  come 
gratitude,  love,  obedience.  VI.  Its  remarkably  easy  application.  VII.  Since 
the  medicine  is  so  efficacious,  since  it  is  already  prepared  and  freely  presented,  I  do 
beseech  you  take  it.    Take  it,  you  who  have  Known  its  power  in  years  gone  by. 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tin. 

Let  not  backslidings  continue,  but  come  to  His  stripes  afresh.  Take  it,  ye  doubters, 
lest  ye  sink  into  despair  ;  come  to  His  stripes  anew.  Take  it,  ye  who  are  beginning  to 
be  self-confident  and  proud.  And,  0  ye  who  have  never  believed  in  Him,  come  and 
trust  in  Him,  and  you  shall  live.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  simple  remedy : — I.  These 
ARE  SAD  WORDS.  Tliev  are  part  of  a  mournful  piece  of  music,  which  might  be  called 
"  the  requiem  of  the  Messiah."    1.  These  are  sad  words  because  they  imply  disease. 

2.  There  is  a  second  sorrow  in  the  verse,  and  that  is  sorrow  for  the  suffering  by 
which  we  are  healed.  There  was  a  cruel  process  in  the  English  navy,  in  which  men 
were  made  to  run  the  gauntlet  all  along  the  ship,  with  saUors  on  each  side,  each 
man  being  bound  to  give  a  stroke  to  the  poor  victim  as  he  ran  along.  Our  Saviour's 
life  was  a  running  of  the  gauntlet  between  His  enemies  and  His  friends,  who  all 
struck  Him,  one  here  and  another  there.  Satan,  too,  struck  at  him.  II.  These 
ARE  GLAD  WORDS,  1.  Because  they  speak  of  healing.  2.  There  is  another  joy  in 
the  text — joy  in  the  honour  which  it  brmgs  to  Christ.  III.  These  are  suggestive 
WORDS.  Whenever  a  man  is  healed  through  the  stripes  of  Jesus,  the  instincts  of 
his  nature  should  make  him  say,  "  I  wUl  spend  the  strength  I  have,  as  a  healed  man, 
for  Him  who  healed  me."  {Ibid.)  Christopathy : — I.  GoD  here  treats  siN  AS  A 
DISEASE.  Sin  is  a  disease — 1.  Because  it  is  not  an  essential  part  of  man  as  he  was 
created.     It  is  something  abnormal.     2.  Because  it  puts  all  the  faculties  out  of  gear. 

3.  Because  it  weakens  the  moral  energy,  just  as  many  diseases  weaken  the  sick 
person's  body.  4.  Because  it  either  causes  great  pain,  or  deadens  all  sensibility,  as 
the  case  may  be.  5.  Because  it  frequently  produces  a  manifest  pollution.  6.  Because 
it  tends  to  increase  in  the  man,  and  wiU  one  day  prove  fatal  to  him.  II.  God  here 
DECLARES  THE  REMEDY  WHICH  He  HAS  PROVIDED.  1.  Behold  the  heavenly 
medicine.  2.  Remember  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  vicarious.  3.  Accept 
this  atonement  and  you  are  saved  by  it.  4.  Let  nothing  of  your  own  interfere  with 
the  Divine  remedy.  Prayer  does  not  heal,  but  it  asks  for  the  remedy.  It  is  not 
trust  that  heals  ;  that  is  man's  application  of  the  remedy.  Repentance  is  not  what 
cures,  it  is  a  part  of  the  cure,  one  of  the  first  tokens  that  the  blessed  medicine  has 
begun  to  work  in  the  soul.  The  healing  of  a  sinner  does  not  lie  in  himself,  nor  in 
what  he  is,  nor  in  what  he  feels,  nor  in  what  he  does,  nor  in  what  he  vows,  nor  in 
what  he  promises.  It  is  in  His  stripes  that  the  healing  lies.  III.  The  remedy  is 
IMMEDIATELY  EFFECTIVE.  How  are  wc  healed?  1.  Our  conscience  is  healed  of 
eveiy  smart.  2.  Our  heart  is  healed  of  its  love  of  sin.  3.  Our  life  is  healed  of  its 
rebellion.  4.  Our  consciousness  assures  us  that  we  are  healed.  If  you  are  healed 
by  His  stripes  you  should  go  and  live  like  healthy  men.  {Ibid. )  Healed  by  Chrisffs 
stripes : — Mr.  Mackay,  of  Hull,  told  of  a  person  who  was  imder  very  deep  concern  of 
soul.  Taking  the  Bible  into  his  hand,  he  said  to  himself,  "Eternal  life  is  to  be 
found  somewhere  in  this  Word  of  God ;  and,  if  it  be  here,  I  will  find  it,  for  I  will 
read  the  Book  right  through,  praying  to  God  over  every  page  of  it,  if  perchance  it 
may  contain  some  saving  message  for  me."  The  earnest  seeker  read  on  through 
Genesis,  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  so  on  ;  and  though  Christ  is  there  very  evidently, 
he  could  not  find  Him  in  the  types  and  symbols.  Neither  did  the  holy  histories 
yield  him  comfort,  nor  the  Book  of  Job.  He  passed  through  the  Psalms,  but  did 
not  find  his  Saviour  there  ;  and  the  same  was  the  case  with  the  other  books  till  he 
reached  Isaiah.  In  this  prophet  he  read  on  till  near  the  end,  and  then  in  the  fifty- third 
chapter,  these  words  arrested  his  delighted  attention,  "With  His  stripes  we  are  healed." 
"  Now  I  have  found  it,"  says  he.  "  Here  is  the  healing  that  I  need  for  my  sin-sick 
soul,  and  I  see  how  it  comes  to  me  through  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  . 
Christ.  Blessed  be  His  name,  I  am  healed!"  {Ibid.)  Self-sufficiency  prevents 
healing : — I  saw  a  pedlar  one  day,  as  I  was  walking  out ;  he  was  selling  walking- 
sticks.  He  followed  me,  and  offered  me  one  of  the  sticks.  I  showed  him  mine — a 
far  better  one  than  any  he  had  to  sell — and  he  withdrew  at  once.  He  could  see  that 
I  was  not  likely  to  be  a  purchaser.  I  have  often  thought  of  that  when  I  have  been 
preaching :  I  show  men  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  they  show  me  their 
own,  and  all  hope  of  dealing  with  them  is  gone.  Unless  I  can  prove  that  their 
righteousness  is  worthless,  they  will  not  seek  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by 
faith.  Oh,  that  the  Lord  womd  show  you  your  disease,  and  then  you  would  desire 
the  remedy!  {Ibid.)  Sin  deadens  sensibility: — It  frequently  happens  that,  the 
more  sinful  a  man  is,  the  less  he  is  conscious  of  it.  It  was  remarked  of  a  certain 
notorious  criminal  that  many  thought  him  innocent  because,  when  he  was  charged 
with  murder,  he  did  not  betray  the  least  emotion.  In  that  wretched  self-possession 
there  was  to  my  mind  presumptive  proof  of  his  great  familiarity  with  crime ;  if  an 
innocent  person  is  charged  with  a  great  offence,  the  mere  charge  horrifies  him.  {Ibid.) 


CHAP,  un.]  •  ISAIAH.  119 

Ver.  6.  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray. — Astray  from  the  fold: — I.  The  first 

part  of  my  text  is  AN  indictment.  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  Says 
some  one,  "  Oan't  you  drop  the  first  word  ? "  And  some  one  rises  and  loots  ofif  and 
says,  ' '  There  is  a  man  who  is  a  blasphemer,  he  is  astray.  Yonder  is  a  man  who  la 
impure,  he  is  astray.  Yonder  is  a  man  who  is  fraudulent,  he  is  astray."  Look  at 
home,  for  the  first  word  of  the  text  takes  you  and  me  as  well  as  the  rest.  1.  I  have 
studied  the  habits  of  sheep,  and  I  know  they  lose  their  way  sometimes  by  trying  to 
get  other  pasture.  There  are  many  of  you  who  have  been  looking  for  better  pasture. 
You  have  wandered  on  and  on.  You  tried  business  successes,  you  tried  worldly 
associations,  you  tried  the  club-house.  You  said  that  the  Church  was  a  short 
commons,  and  you  wanted  to  find  the  rank  grass  on  the  bank  of  distant  streams,  and 
to  lie  down  under  great  oaks  on  the  other  side  of  the  hills.  Have  you  foimd  the 
anticipated  pasture  that  was  to  be  so  superior?  2.  I  have  noticed,  also,  that  the 
sheep  get  astrajr  by  being  frightened  with  dogs.  Oh,  man,  that  is  the  way  you  got 
astray.  You  said,  ' '  Where  is  God,  that  He  allows  an  honest  man  to  go  down,  and 
thieves  to  prosper  ? "  You  were  dogged  by  creditors  ;  and  some  of  you  went  into 
misanthropy,  and  some  of  you  took  to  strong  drink,  and  some  of  you  fled  from  aU 
Christian  associations  ;  and  in  that  way  the  sheep  got  astray.  II.  But  the  last  part 
of  my  text  opens  a  door  wide  enough  to  let  us  all  out,  and  wide  enough  to  let 
all  heaven  in.  "The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  Says  some 
one,  "That  is  not  generous.  Let  every  one  bear  his  own  burden."  And  there  is 
something  in  that.  If  I  owe  a  debt,  and  I  have  money  to  pay  it,  and  I  come  to  you 
and  ask  you  to  cancel  my  obligations,  you  will  be  right  in  saying  to  me,  "  Pay  your 
own  debte."  If  I  am  walking  along  the  street  with  you,  and  we  are  both  hale  and 
hearty,  and  I  want  you  to  carry  me,  you  are  right  in  saying,  '  *  "Walk  on  your  own  feet. " 
But  suppose  you  and  I  were  in  a  regiment  together,  and  I  was  fearfully  wounded  in 
the  battle,  and  I  fell  unconscious  at  your  feet  with  gunshot  fractures  and  dislocations, 
five  bullets  having  struck  me  at  once — ^you  would  say  to  your  comrades,  "Here, 
this  man  is  helpless.  Let  us  carry  him  to  the  ambulance  ;  let  us  take  him  out  to  the 
hospital."  Would  it  have  been  mean  to  let  you  carry  me  then?  You  certainly 
would  not  have  been  so  unkind  as  not  to  carry  me.  Now,  that  is  Christ  to  the  soul. 
If  we  could  pay  our  spiritual  obligations  we  might  go  up  to  God  and  say,  "Lord, 
there  is  so  much  debt,  and  here  I  have  the  means  with  which  to  cancel  it.  Now 
cross  it  all  out. "  But  the  fact  is  we  are  pierced  through  and  through  with  the  sabres 
of  sin.  We  have  goue  down  under  the  hot  fire,  and  we  are  helpless  and  undone. 
We  will  die  on  the  field  unless  some  help  comes  to  us.  God  sends  His  ambulance, 
yea.  He  dispatches  His  only  Son  to  carry  us  out,  and  bind  up  our  gashes,  and  take 
us  home.  Is  there  any  man  who  is  under  the  delusion  that  he  can  carry  his  own 
sins?  You  cannot.  You  might  as  well  try  to  transport  a  boulder  of  the  sea,  or 
carry  on  one  shoulder  the  Alleghanies,  and  on  the  other  shoulder  Mount 
Washington.  Then  let  us  shift  the  burden.  {T,  de  W.  Talmage,  D.B.)  Salvation 
for  the  straying  sheep: — I.  Look  at  the  sheep  that  have  gone  astray.  The 
text  implies  they  were  once  in  the  fold.  You  cannot  go  astray  except  you  have 
been  in  the  right  place  first.  II.  Each  sheep  walks  its  own  path.  There  la 
almost  an  infinite  variety  in  sinning.  Some  go  along  a  path  of  licentiousness; 
others  the  money-making  road ;  others  the  gamester's  path ;  others  take  the 
Christless  morality  road.  III.  What  is  god's  way  of  saxvation?  "The  Lord 
laid  on  Him, "  etc.  Who  is  that  ' '  Him  "  ?  The  One  described  in  the  previous  verses. 
Let  Christ  he  the  object  of  your  trust,  and  you  shall  be  saved.  (A.  G.  Broum.) 
Our  misery  and  its  remedy : — I.  Our  misery  by  sin.  1.  Our  sin  is  charged  upon  ua 
collectively  in  common :  we  have  all  gone  astray.  2.  Distributively.  "Everyone 
to  his  own  way."  We  all  agree  in  turning  aside  from  the  right  way  of  pleasing  and 
enjoying  of  God ;  and  we  disagree,  as  each  one  hath  a  by-path  of  his  own,  some 
running  after  this  lust,  some  after  that,  and  so  are  not  only  divided  from  God, 
but  divided  from  one  another,  while  every  one  maketh  his  will  his  law.  II.  OuB 
bemedy  by  Christ.  "The  Lord  hath  laid,"  etc.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Departing 
from  God: — This  departing  from  God  and  His  ways  is  fitly  represented  by  the 
straying  of  sheep.  In  the  general  it  impKeth — 1.  That  we  are  brutish  in  our  sin  and 
defection  from  God :  it  could  not  be  expressed  but  by  a  comparison  fetched  from  the 
beasts.  2.  Proneness  to  err.  No  creature  is  more  prone  to  wander  and  lose  his  way 
than  a  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  3.  Our  inability  to  return,  or  to  bring  ourselTes 
into  the  right  way  again.  4.  Our  readiness  to  follow  evil  example.  Sheep  run  one 
after  another,  and  one  straggler  draweth  away  the  whole  flock.  Austin  saith,  "I 
ooold  wander  by  myself,  andcoold  not  return  oy  myself."    And  God  saith  as  much 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \caAr,uxi. 

(Hosea  xiii  9).  5.  The  danger  of  straying  sheep,  which  when  out  of  the  pasture  are 
often  in  harm's  way,  and  exposed  to  a  thousand  dangers  (Jer.  1.  6,  7).  {Ibid. )  "We 
have  tamed  every  one  to  his  own  way. — Every  man  to  his  own  way: — Though 
there  be  one  path  to  heaven,  yet  there  are  several  ways  of  sinning  and  going  to  hell. 
The  reasons  how  this  cometh  to  pass  are — 1.  Because  of  the  activeness  of  man's 
spirit.  It  is  always  a-devising  wickedness.  2.  It  happeneth  through  diversity  of 
constitution.  3.  It  happeneth  from  their  business  and  occasions  in  the  world. 
Many  men  are  engaged  to  ways  of  sin  because  they  suit  best  with  their  employ- 
ments, the  sin  of  their  calling,  as  vainglory  in  a  minister.  4.  Custom  and  educa- 
tion. 5.  Company  and  example.  {T.  Manton,  D.B.)  His  ownway : — This  is  the 
sin  of  men  in  their  natural  condition,  that  they  turn  to  their  own  way.  The  phrase 
implieth  these  two  things — 1.  A  defect  or  want  of  Divine  guidance.  2.  A  rejection 
of  the  ways  of  God  when  made  known  to  us.  {Ibid.)  Caiaphas:  Cephas:  Jesus: — 
The  forms  of  human  sinfulness  are  as  numerous  and  varied  as  are  men's  natural 
inclinations :  but  near  the  cross  may  be  found  a  representative  of  every  one  of  these. 
Three  figures  will  demand  our  attention — Caiaphas,  the  high  priest,  with  his  sur- 
roimdings  ;  and  then,  amidst  the  obscurity  of  the  twilight  scene,  and  the  crowd  of 
spectators,  we  must  single  out  the  figure  of  Simon,  then  at  the  moment  of  his 
deepest  shame.  And  then,  turning  our  eyes  away  from  these  subordinates,  we  must 
fix  them  lastly  on  Jesus  of  Nazareth  Himself.  I.  Caiaphas  is  the  president  of  the 
High  Ecclesiastical  Court  then  assembled,  and  no  judge  ever  could  produce  higher 
credentials  than  he.  The  Gospels  all  acknowledge  nim,  without  the  slightest 
apparent  doubt,  as  the  legitimate  successor  of  Aaron.  He  is  descendant  of  a  priestly 
dynasty  some  1,500  years  old,  whose  origin  was  confessedly  Divine.  Besides,  the 
highest  power  of  all  had  owned  his  legitimate  position,  by  giving  to  him  the  spirit 
of  unconscious  prophecy.  Now  the  priesthood  of  Aaron,  which  he  bore,  had  never 
been  a  bloodthirsty  one.  There  are,  I  think,  only  two  examples  of  that  priesthood 
shedding  blood.  One  of  these  was  the  stroke  of  the  spear  of  Phinehas — an  act  of 
wild  justice,  suited  to  the  times,  which  received  praise  and  blessing  from  above : 
and  the  other,  the  just  punishment  by  Jehoiada  of  AthaKah,  who  had  murdered 
all  the  royal  family  but  one.  "Whatever  other  faults  they  may  have  had,  the  priests, 
the  sons  of  Aaron,  had  never  erred  before  on  the  side  of  intolerance  and  cruelty. 
And  Caiaphas  himself  was  no  fanatic.  Like  all  the  family  to  which  he  belonged,  ne 
was  a  Sadducee.  He  had  the  views  of  a  politician  rather  than  of  an  ecclesiatic  ; 
and,  having  coolly  judged,  several  weeks  before,  that  the  proceedings  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  were  politically  dangerous,  he  had  determined  that  it  would  be  well  to 
put  Him  out  of  the  way.  But,  in  the  council  that  surrounded  him,  there  were 
,  many,  and  perhaps  a  majority,  of  strong  religious  belief  and  feelings.  So,  for  their 
sakes,  he  afi"ectea  a  horror  which  he  could  hardly  have  felt  himself.  The  high 
priest  asked  Him,  "Art  Thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  ? "  And  Jesus  said, 
"  I  am  ;  and  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes — the 
original  word  in  St.  Mark  seems  to  imply  that  one  of  these  was  the  seamless  tunic 
of  the  high  priest — in  sign  of  a  horror,  which  can  hardly  have  been  otherwise  than 
hypocritical  in  a  cool  man  of  the  world  like  him,  and  said,  "  What  need  we  any 
further  witnesses.  Ye  have  heard  the  blasphemy.  What  think  ye  t "  And  then 
the  question  being  thus  put,  they  all — the  whole  council,  all  the  scribes,  all  the 
elders,  all  the  chief  priests,  the  whole  representative  body  of  the  universal  Church 
of  God — condemned  Him  to  be  guilty  of  death.  What  a  lesson  for  us  arises  out  of 
this  fact,  that  ovu:  Lord's  death  was  wholly  a  sin  of  the  religious  world  under  the 
guidance  of  their  Divinely-appointed  leaders.  And  in  that  religious  world  we  may 
distinguish  all  the  chief  tendencies  both  of  that  time  and  of  all  times — the  Sadducees 
and  the  Pharisees,  the  liberal  and  the  orthodox,  the  men  with  the  minimum  of 
belief  in  the  supernatural,  and  those  with  the  maximum  of  that  belief,  the  tradi- 
tionists  and  the  anti-traditionists — in  fact,  the  High  Church,  and  the  Broad  Church, 
and  the  Low.  The  lesson  is  for  our  times.  In  those  days  authority  and  tradition 
utterly  faUed  those  who  relied  upon  them,  while  the  light  within  the  heart  lighted 
those  who  possessed  it  to  the  cross  and  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  of  Truth.  II.  Let 
us  turn  our  eyes  away  now  from  Caiaphas  and  the  splendid  array  around  him  to  the 
lower  end  of  the  courtyard  near  the  door,  where  the  lower  classes  are  collected.  All 
these  are  within  sight  of  the  proceedings  at  the  upper  end  of  the  hall,  which  no 
doubt  is  well  lighted.  Perhaps  they  are  also  near  enough  to  hear.  Amongst  them 
is  one  whose  speech  betrays  him  to  be  a  Galilean.  We  know  his  name  (though 
those  around  mm  do  not)  to.  be  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  who  has  also  the  surname 


CHAP.  Liii.]  ISAIAH.  121 

Cephas.  He  is  thrice  recognized  as  a  follower  of  the  accused,  and  thrice  denies  the 
charge.  Then  the  cock  crows  at  early  morning,  and  the  Master  turns  on  him  with 
a  glance  which  he  feels  to  single  him  out,  even  in  the  darkness  and  the  crowd  ;  and 
he  goes  out  at  the  door,  weeping  bitterly.  This  strange  character,  so  made  up  of 
contradictions  as  to  have  been  pronounced  by  that  Being  who  knew  him  best,  at 
one  moment  a  "rock,"  and  at  the  next  a  Satan,  full  of  boldness  and  full  of 
cowardice,  the  first  to  confess  and  the  first  to  deny  ;  this  picture  of  the  weakness  of 
aU  hmnan  strength,  of  the  frailty  of  all  earthly  goodness,  is  now  at  the  very  depths 
of  his  weakness  and  shame.  He  stands  there  a  sinner  who  has  just  committed  a 
sin — a  very  mean  and  cowardly  sin.  Yet  there  is  an  eye  upon  him,  searching  for 
him,  busied  with  him.  "We  who  have  betrayed  Him  and  denied  Him,  the  Lord 
hath  turned  and  looked  on.  He  is  seeking,  let  Him  find.  III.  We  see  Jesus  in 
the  midst  of  all  this  crowd  of  representative  sinners,  amongst  whom  a  little  honest 
search  will  soon  enable  each  of  us  to  detect  himself.  Betrayed  by  covetous  Judas, 
forsaken  by  unwatchful,  unprayerful,  and  therefore  easily  tempted  disciples,  denied 
by  self-confident,  self-willed  Simon-,  condemned  by  worldly-minded,  unscrupulous 
Caiaphas,  condemned  again  by  timid  time-serving  Pilate,  persecuted  to  the  death 
by  sanctimonious,  theologicaUy-hating  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  shouted  at  by  a  rude, 
ignorant  multitude,  tortured  in  cruel  sport  by  barbarous  soldiers — what  species  of 
human  sin  is  absent  there  ?  Let  us  consider  the  exceeding  beauty  of  the  figure  pre- 
sented to  us,  and  also  how  that  figure  is  produced.  Compare  for  one  moment  any 
character  in  a  work  of  fiction.  These,  too,  are  beautiful,  but  how  is  their  beauty 
produced  ?  By  word-paiuting  of  the  most  exquisite  kind.  But  in  the  narratives  of 
the  Gdspels  there  is  no  word-painting  at  all,  except  perhaps  a  little  in  St.  John. 
It  is  not  the  narratives  that  are  sublime,  but  the  Being  who  becomes  known  to  ns 
through  their  simple  inartificial  language.  And  now  the  end  of  this  should  be,  that 
every  one  of  us  should  bring  the  matter  as  closely  as  possible  home.  It  was  all 
done  for  me  ;  it  was  I  that  created  the  necessity.  Let  Htm,  in  each  of  us,  see  of 
the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  be  satisfied.  ( W.  E.  Rawstome,  M.A.)  The  Lord  hath 
laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  ns  all. — Sin  laid  on  Jesus : — 1,  The  verse  opens  with 
a  confession  of  sin  common  to  all  the  persons  iatended  in  the  verse.  2.  The  con- 
fession is  also  special  and  particular.  3.  This  confession  is  very  unreserved.  There 
is  not  a  single  syllable  by  way  of  excuse  ;  there  is  not  a  word  to  detract  from  the 
force  of  the  confession.  4.  It  is,  moreover,  singularly  thoughtful,  for  thoughtless 
persons  do  not  use  a  metaphor  so  appropriate  as  the  text :  "  All  we  like  sheep  have 
gone  astray."  I  hear  no  dolorous  wailings  attending  this  confession  of  sin  ;  for  the 
next  sentence  makes  it  almost  a  song.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all. "  It  is  the  most  grievous  sentence  of  the  three  ;  but  it  is  the  most 
charming  and  the  most  full  of  comfort.  Strange  is  it  that  where  misery  was  con- 
centrated mercy  reigned,  and  where  sorrow  reached  her  climax  there  it  is  that  a 
weary  soul  finds  sweetest  rest.  The  Savioui-  bruised  is  the  healing  of  bruised  hearts. 
I.  Exposition.  1.  It  may  be  well  to  give  the  marginal  translation  of  the  text, 
"Jehovah  hath  made  to  meet  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  The  first  thought 
that  demands  notice  is  the  meeting  of  sin.  Sin  I  may  compare  to  the  rays  of  some 
evil  sun.  Sin  was  scattered  throughout  this  world  as  abundantly  as  light,  and 
Christ  is  made  to  sufi'er  the  full  eflfect  of  the  baleful  rays  which  stream  from  the  sun 
of  sin.  God  as  it  were  holds  up  a  burning-glass,  and  concentrates  all  the  scattered  rays 
in  a  focus  upon  Christ.  Take  the  text  in  our  own  version,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on 
Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all ; "  put  upon  Him  as  a  burden  is  laid  upon  a  man's  back 
aU  the  burdens  of  all  His  people  ;  put  upon  His  head  as  the  high  priest  of  old  laid 
upon  the  scapegoat  all  the  sin  of  the  beloved  ones  that  he  might  bear  them  in  his 
own  person.  The  two  translations  are  perfectly  consistent ;  all  sins  are  made  to 
meet,  and  then  having  met  together  ana  been  tied  up  in  one  crushing  load  the 
whole  burden  is  laid  upon  Him.  2.  The  second  thought  is  that  sin  was  made  to 
meet  upon  the  suffering  person  of  the  innocent  Substitute.  3.  It  has  been  asked, 
Was  it  just  that  sin  should  thus  be  laid  upon  Christ  ?  We  believe  it  was  rightly  so. 
(1)  Because  it  was  the  act  of  Him  who  must  do  right.  "The  Lord  hath  laid  on 
Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all. "  (2)  Remember,  moreover,  that  Jesus  Christ  voluntarily 
took  this  sin  upon  Himself.  (3)  There  was  a  relationship  between  our  Lord  and 
His  people,  which  is  too  often  forgotten,  but  which  rendered  it  natural  that  He 
should  bear  the  sin  of  His  people.  Why  does  the  text  speak  of  our  sinning  like 
sheep  ?  I  think  it  is  because  it  would  call  to  our  recollection  that  Christ  is  our 
Shepherd.  It  is  not  that  Christ  took  upon  Himself  the  sins  of  strangers.  There 
always  was  a  union  of  a  most  mysterious  and  intimate  kind  between  those  who  sinned 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lhi. 

and  the  Christ  who  suffered.  (4)  This  plan  of  salvation  is  precisely  similar  to  the 
method  of  our  ruin.  The  fall  which  made  me  a  sinner  was  wholly  accomplished 
long  hefore  I  was  bom  by  the  first  Adam,  and  the  salvation  by  which  I  am  deKvered 
was  finished  long  before  I  saw  the  light  by  the  second  A(mm  on  my  behalf.  4. 
Lying  upon  Christ  brought  upon  Him  all  the  consequences  connected  with  it.  God 
cannot  look  where  there  is  sin  with  any  pleasure,  and  though  as  far  as  Jesus  is 
personally  concerned,  He  is  the  Father's  beloved  Son  in  whom  He  is  well  pleased  ; 
yet  when  He  saw  sin  laid  upon  His  Son,  He  made  that  Son  cry,  "  My  God  I  My 
God  !  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ? "  5.  Think  of  the  result  of  all  this.  Sin  meets 
on  Christ  and  Christ  is  punished  with  sin,  and  what  then  ?  Sin  is  put  away.  6. 
The  "us"  here  intended.  II.  Application.  There  is  a  countless  company  whose 
sins  the  Lord  Jesus  bore  ;  did  He  bear  yours  ?  Do  you  wish  to  have  an  answer  ? 
Let  me  read  this  verse  to  you  and  see  if  you  can  join  in  it.  If  there  be  in  you  a 
penitential  confession  which  leads  you  to  acknowledge  that  you  have  erred  and 
strayed  like  a  lost  sheep  ;  if  there  be  in  you  a  personal  sense  of  sin  which  makes  you 
feel  that  you  have  turned  to  your  own  way,  and  if  now  you  can  trust  in  Jesus,  then 
a  second  question  is  not  wanted  ;  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  your  iniquity.  III. 
Contemplation.  I  will  give  you  four  things  to  think  of.  1.  The  astounding  mass 
of  sin  that  must  have  been  laid  on  Christ.  2.  The  amazing  love  of  Jesus  which 
brought  Him  to  do  all  this.  3.  The  matchless  security  which  this  plan  of  salvation 
offers.  4.  What,  then,  are  the  claims  of  Jesus  Christ  upon  you  and  me  ?  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  Going  astray  as  sheep : — 1.  The  sheep  is  a  creature  exceedingly  quick- 
witted upon  the  one  matter  of  going  astray.  2.  The  sheep  goes  astray,  it  is  said, 
all  the  more  frequently  when  it  is  most  dangerous  for  it  to  do  so  ;  propensities  to 
stray  seem  to  be  developed  in  the  very  proportion  in  which  they  ought  to  be  subdued. 
Whereas  in  our  own  land  a  sheep  might  wander  with  some  safety,  it  wanders  less 
than  it  will  do  in  the  Oriental  plains,  where  for  it  to  go  astray  is  to  run  risks  from 
leopards  and  wolves.  3.  The  sheep  goes  astray  ungratefully.  It  owes  everything 
to  the  shepherd,  and  yet  forsakes  the  hand  that  feeds  it  and.  heals  its  diseases.  4. 
The  sheep  goes  astray  repeatedly.  If  restored  to-day  it  may  not  stray  to-day  if  it 
cannot,  but  it  will  to-morrow  if  it  can.  5.  The  sheep  wanders  further  and  farther, 
from  bad  to  worse.  It  is  not  content  with  the  distance  it  has  reached,  it  will  go  yet 
greater  lengths  ;  there  is  no  limit  to  its  wandering  except  its  weakness.  See  ye  not 
your  own  selves  as  in  a  mirror  !  {Ibid.)  Sin  meeting  on  Jesus : — I.  The  meeting- 
place  OF  SIN  IS  THE  Cross  of  Christ.  In  the  margin  these  words  are  rendered, 
"  The  Lord  hath  made  to  meet  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  aU."  The  Hebrew,  Greek, 
Latin,  Persian,  and  Egyptian  tongues  were  spoken  about  that  cross.  The  inscription 
was  in  different  languages  that  all  mi?ht  read.  This  is  the  representation  of  the  world 
now  looking  upon  the  Crucified.  His  embrace  encircled  the  race  of  man.  1.  The 
cross  was  the  focus  of  sins.  2.  The  burdens  of  sin  here  meet.  3.  Here  the  responsi- 
bilities of  the  sinner  are  assumed  by  one  competent  to  discharge  them.  4.  The 
sufferings  of  the  sinner  are  gathered  in  the  agonies  of  the  cross.  II.  The  meeting- 
place  of  sin  is  the  mercy-seat  of  sinners.  Conclusion :  1.  The  imperative 
claim  Christ  has  upon  the  soul.  2.  If  you  will  not  consent  that  your  iniquities 
shall  meet  on  Christ,  bear  them  you  must  yourself.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  The  nature 
andpower  of  the  atonement : — 1.  It  has  been  suggested  that  there  was  injustice  in  the 
sacrifice  of  One  who  had  never  sinned  in  the  place  of  sinners,  and  that  it  involved 
the  idea  that  God  liked  suffering  for  its  own  sake.  This  statement  is  one-sided  :  it 
forgets  mercy,  it  shuts  its  eyes  to  the  tnith  that  the  power  of  any  sacrifice  is  in  its 
voluntary  and  representative  character.  Facts  must  be  respected,  and  what  is  the 
fact  which  is  before  us  all  1  Pain  and  sorrow  !  2.  The  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Calvary 
is  the  work  of  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Trinity.  Men  speak  as  if  the  Son  devised 
the  plan  of  His  own  death  to  save  man  from  the  Father's  wrath.  It  was  the  work 
of  the  whole  Three  Persons  in  the  Godhead.  If  the  justice  of  the  Divine  life 
demanded  the  atonement,  the  mercy  of  the  Divine  love  devised  the  means  of  pardon 
and  the  sacrifice  on  Calvary.  3.  There  is  yet  another  thought  which  illuminates 
the  gloom.  We  know  the  power  of  sin  which,  like  some  mysterious  shape,  some 
wild  and  wandering  shadow  in  a  forest,  stands  or  flits  about  the  portals  of  the 
opening  life  of  man.  Nature  brings  us  within  its  reach,  our  own  will  places  us  in 
its  iron  grasp,  it  paralyzes  the  spiritual  power,  it  chills  our  desires  for  better  things  ; 
we  cannot  rise  up  as  once  we  could  when  we  are  lying  under  the  weight  of  unfor- 
given  sin.  This  sense  of  the  awfulness  of  sin  illuminates  the  power  of  the  atone- 
ment, for  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  must  at  least  be  commensurate  in  its 
awfolness  with  what  we  know  of  human  sin.     4.  If  the  awfiilness  of  sin  and  the 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAH.  123 

majesty  of  God  bring  home  the  sense  of  what  vicarious  sacrifice  is,  and  we  are  able 
in  its  power  to  raise  our  hearts  to  God  and  to  feel  renewed  life  and  holier  aspira- 
tions, how  about  the  past  ?  Florence  rose  and  wept  over  the  grave  of  Dante,  but 
Florence  could  not  then  undo  the  edict  which  banished  the  man,  and  Dante's  ashes 
rest  beside  the  pinewoods  and  the  Adrian  Sea,  and  Florence  is  undone.  And  for 
each  of  you  there  was  a  day  when  you  told  your  first  lie,  a  day  when  you  acted 
your  first  pretence,  a  da^  when  you  did  your  first  act  of  dishonesty,  when  you 
first  degraded  yourself  with  some  burning  vice  and  destroyed  the  innocency  which 
God  had  given  you.  In  your  better  moments  you  look  back  to  such  a  day,  and 
you  feel  as  if  you  were  standing  by  an  open  grave,  as  you  remember  the  hard 
words,  the  unkind  looks,  the  want  of  sympathy,  to  him  or  her  who  lies  beneath. 
The  past  is  gone  beyond  recall.  How  will  you  meet  it  ?  With  scorn  ?  Will  you 
turn  away  and  drown  its  memories  in  pleasure  1  You  cannot.  You  have  a  spirit 
bom  for  eternity.  But  there  is  one  other  way.  Christ  on  the  Cross  bore  man's 
sin  in  all  its  intensity,  gave  Himself  as  a  sacrifice,  and  purchased  for  the  race  com- 
plete forgiveness.  No  sorrow  is  so  deep  but  He  can  assuage  it,  no  memory  so 
black  but  He  can  cleanse  it.  ( W.  J.  Knox-Little,  M.A.)  The  universal  burden 
and  Us  bearer: — It  is  of  prime  importance  to  mark  that  the  only  office  which 
the  prophet  describes  the  Servant  as  filling  is  the  function  of  sufi'ering.  He  is 
neither  Teacher  nor  Conqueror  nor  Lawgiver  nor,  here,  King ;  he  is  only  a 
Sufferer.  That  is  what  the  Saviour  of  the  world  has  to  be,  first  of  aU.  The 
rabbis  have  a  legend,  far  wiser  than  most  of  their  follies,  which  tells  how  Messias 
is  to  be  found  sitting  amongst  the  lepers  at  the  gate  of  the  city.  The  fable 
has  in  it  the  deep  truth  that  He  who  saves  the  world  must  suffer  with,  and  for, 
the  world  He  saves.  I.  Considek  the  universal  burden.  Of  course  the 
speakers  in  my  text  are  primarily  the  penitent  Jewish  nation,  who  at  last  have 
learned  how  much  at  first  they  had  misunderstood  the  Servant  of  the  Lord.  But 
the  "  we "  and  the  "all "  may  very  fairly  be  widened  out  so  as  to  include  the  whole 
world,  and  every  individual  of  the  race,  and  iniquity  is  the  xmiversal  burden  of  us 
iJl.  I  believe  that  almost  all  of  the  mistaken  and  unworthy  conceptions  of 
Christianity  which  have  afflicted  and  do  afflict  the  world  are  directly  traceable  to 
this — the  failure  to  apprehend  the  radical  fact  affecting  men's  condition  that  they 
are  all  sinful,  and  therefore  separated  from  God.  The  evil  that  we  do,  going  forth 
from  us  as  deed,  comes  back  upon  us  as  guilt.  And  so,  we  are  all  staggering  under 
this  burden.  'The  creatures  that  live  at  the  bottom  of  the  doleful  sea,  fathoms 
deeper  than  plummet  has  ever  sounded,  have  to  bear  a  pressure  upon  their  fi-ames 
all  inconceivable  by  the  men  that  walk  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth.  And  the 
deeper  a  man  goes  in  the  dark  ocean  of  wrongdoing  and  wrongbeing,  the  heavier  the 
weight  of  the  compressed  atmosphere  above  him,  crushing  him  in.  And,  yet,  like 
those  creatures  that  crawl  on  the  slime,  miles  down  in  the  dreary  sea,  where  no 
light  has  come,  they  know  not  the  weight  that  rests  upon  them,  and  never  have 
dreamed  of  how  blessed  it  is  to  walk  in  the  lighter  air  with  the  sun  shining  above 
them.  TheTe  are  some  of  you,  grovelling  down  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  to 
whom  the  liberty  and  illumination,  the  lightness  and  lightsomeness  of  the  pure  life 
which  is  possible,  would  seem  miraculous.  If  these  things  be  at  all  true,  then  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  fact  of  universal  sinfulness,  with  all  its  necessary,  natural,  and 
inevitable  consequences,  must  be  the  all-important  fact  about  a  man.  What  we 
think  about  sin  will  settle  all  our  religious  ideas.  II.  Look  at  the  one  bearer  of 
THE  BURDEN.  "  'The  Lord  has  made  to  light  upon  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all. "  III. 
Mark  the  men  that  are  freed  from  the  burden.  "Us  all."  And  yet  it  is 
possible  for  a  man  included  in  the  "  aU  "  to  have  to  stagger  along  through  life  imder 
his  burden,  and  to  carry  it  with  him  when  he  goes  hence.  "  Be  not  deceived,  God 
is  not  mocked,"  says  the  foremost  preacher  of  the  doctrine  that  Christ's  death  takes 
away  sin.  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.  Every  man  shall 
bear  his  own  burden."  So  your  sins,  taken  away  as  they  are  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Jesus  Christ,  may  yet  cling  to  you  and  crush  you.  There  is  only  one  way  by  which 
the  possibilities  open  to  all  men  by  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  may  become  the  actual 
experience  of  every  man,  or  of  any  man — and  that  is,  the  simple  laying  your  burden, 
by  your  own  act  of  quiet  trust,  upon  the  shoulders  of  Him  that  is  mighty  to  save. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  God^s  forgiving  love  in  Christ: — Rev.  G.  Barber,  assistant  to 
Dr.  Dale  of  Birmingham  says :  I  remember  going  to  him  on  one  occasion  in  great 
distress  ;  I  wanted  to  preach  on  "Christ  died  for  our  sins,"  and  I  thought  that  if 
I  could  only  show  how,  through  the  death  of  Christ,  it  was  made  possible  for  God 
to  forgive  sm,  many  whom  I  knew  might  be  led  to  believe.    He  replied :  Give  up 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mi. 

troubling,  my  friend,  about  how  it  was  possible  for  God  to  forgive  sin,  and  go  straight 
and  tell  the  people  that  God  does  forgive  sin,  and  tell  them  straight  that  Christ  med 
for  their  sins.  It  is  the  fact  the  people  want  most  to  know,  and  not  your  theory, 
nor  mine,  as  to  how  it  was  or  is  possible."  {Life  of  R.  W.  Dale.)  Peace  in  the  true 
hnmvledge  of  Jesits : — I  was  sent  for  to  see  a  lady — a  stranger — who  was  dying  in 
Brighton.  I  found  her  to  be  a  person  of  means  and  education,  but  quite  ignorant 
of  the  salient  facts  of  the  Christian  faith.  To  her,  Jesus  was  simply  a  great  moral 
teacher,  standing  in  line  with  other  religious  masters.  Of  Christianity,  as  the 
religion  of  redemption,  she  had  no  knowledge.  Her  life  story  had  been  a  sad  one, 
stained  deeply  by  both  sorrow  and  sin.  "  Oh,"  she  sighed,  "  that  it  were  possible 
for  some  great,  strong  friend  to  take  my  conscience  as  though  it  were  his  own,  that 
I  might  have  a  little  peace  1 "  I  learned  more  from  that  sentence  concerning  the 
mystery  of  redemption  than  up  to  that  moment  I  had  ever  thought  of.  Here  was  a 
soul  who  knew  and  stated  the  need  of  just  such  a  salvation  as  we  are  bidden  to 
proclaim.  She  asked,  without  knowing  that  there  was  any  answer,  for  the  Saviour 
who  was  made  sin  for  us,  who  could  take  man's  conscience  as  though  it  were  His 
own  and  leave  in  its  place  His  peace.  The  sense  of  guilt  had  awakened  with  power 
in  this  poor  dying  woman.  To  have  told  her  that  the  Most  High  could  forgive  her 
sins  would  have  carried  no  comfort  to  her  heart.  The  only  possible  relief  for 
her  was  to  hear  of  Him  on  whom  the  Lord  hath  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all. 
{R  J.  Campbell,  M.A.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  He  was  oppressed. — Christ's  sufferings  and  His  deportment  wnder 
them: — I.  The  nature  of  the  sufferings,  "He  was  oppressed,  and  He  was 
aflaicted."  II.  The  carriage  of  Christ  under  them.  "He  opened  not  His 
mouth,"  which  is  amplified  and  illustrated  by  two  similitudes,  of  a  lamb  going  to  the 
slaughter,  and  a  sheep  before  her  shearers.  1.  "  He  opened  not  His  mouth."  This 
shows  two  things.  (1)  The  great  patience  of  Christ.  (2)  His  great  love  to  man, 
shown  in  His  wonderful  silence,  even  when  He  might  justly  have  spoken  in  His  own 
defence,  but  would  not  seem  to  interrupt  the  design  of  God.  2.  The  particular 
resemblance.  (1)  "  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter."  It  is  an  emblem  of 
innocence,  meekness,  and  patience.  It  may  import  weakness  and  slendemess  of 
appearance  in  the  world.  Christ  is  nothing  in  show,  though  mighty  in  power.  It 
noteth  the  meekness  and  sweetness  of  Christ,  willingly  yielding  to  be  a  sacrifice  for 
us.  (2)  "As  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb."  Christ  did  not  open  His  mouth, 
mnless  to  pray,  instruct,  and  reprove.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Chrises  patience  in 
suffering : — Christ  upon  the  Cross  is  as  a  doctor  in  his  chair,  where  He  readeth  unto 
us  all  a  lecture  of  patience.  (J.  Trapp.)  The  monarch  surrenders  ffimself: — In 
vers.  7,  8  there  are  five  specific  predictions : — (1)  That  the  Messiah  would  be  subject 
to  oppression.  (2)  That  amidst  the  oppression  He  would  maintain  silence.  (3)  That 
from  the  midst  of  oppression  and  judicial  procedure  He  would  be  hurried  ofiF. 

(4)  That  beneath  all  the  outer  incidents  in  which  men  had  a  hand,  there  would  be 
another  work  going  on  of  which  the  men  of  His  generation  would  never  dream. 

(5)  That  this  work,  unthought  of  by  His  generation,  was,  that  He  was  being 
"stricken  for  them."  How  each  of  these  predictions  was  fulfilled  in  the  event  we 
know.  It  win  be  simplest  for  us,  as  we  stand  this  side  of  the  history,  to  note  the 
several  points  as  history.  1.  The  oppression  to  which  Christ  was  subjected  was 
of  no  ordinary  kind.  The  first  three  Gospels  indicate  to  some  extent  the  spirit  of 
hostility  which  animated  the  people,  though  in  the  fourth  Gospel  the  advancing 
stages  of  that  hostility  are  most  clearly  marked.  •  At  the  last  we  find  Jesus  hurried 
off  to  trial.  There  were  two  trials :  first,  the  Jewish,  and  then  the  Roman  one.  In 
the  first,  so  far  was  the  mind  of  the  accusers  set  against  Christ,  that  neither  the 
fairness  nor  even  the  form  of  proper  judicial  procedure  was  observed.  In  the  facts 
of  (1)  the  trial  being  begun,  continued,  and  finished,  apparently,  in  the  course  of 
one  night,  (2)  witnesses  against  the  accused  being  sought  for  by  the  judges,  (3)  the 
evidence  of  one  witness  not  being  sustained  by  another,  (4)  questions  being  put  to 
the  accused  which  Hebrew  law  did  not  sanction,  (5)  a  demand  being  made  for 
confession,  which  Jewish  doctors  expressly  forbade,  and  (6)  all  being  followed  by  a 
sentence  pronoimced  twenty-four  hours  too  soon — in  all  these  six  main  features  the 
Jewish  '*  trial "  was  an  outa^ge  on  Hebrew  law.  Nor  was  the  second  trial  a  whit 
more  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  Roman  procedure.  In  the  first  trial  the  point 
of  law  was,  the  claim  of  Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God  ;  and,  without  any  proof,  that 
was  pronounced  invalid,  and  therefore  blasphemous.  In  the  Roman  accusation  the 
question  concerned  the  claim  of  OhrlBt  to  be  a  king ;  and  the  point  on  which  the 


CHAP,  ini.]  ISA  IAS.  125 

whole  matter  turned  was  this,  "Did  Christ's  Kingdom  clash  with  Caesar's  rights?" 
And  though  the  Lord  Jesus  had  expressed  Himself  with  a  clearness  on  this  point 
which  ought  to  have  made  mistake  impossible,  yet  men  came  with  lies  on  their  lips 
to  charge  Him  with  plotting  against  the  Roman  Government.  Pilate,  the  governor, 
who  shows  by  turns  indecision,  complaisance,  bluster  and  subserviency,  evasion, 
protest,  compromise,  superstitious  dread,  conscientious  reluctance,  cautious  duplicity 
and  sheer  moral  cowardice — is  overcome  at  last,  and  decides  against  his  knowledge 
to  please  the  people,  perhaps  (as  men  on  the  incline  of  scepticism  must  sooner  or 
later  be)  "  stricken  with  inward  paralysis  irom  want  of  a  motive  and  a  hope."  It 
would  not  be  easy  to  say  in  which  of  the  two  trials  the  injustice  was  the  more 
glaring ;  there  was  a  more  striking  violation  of  form  in  the  Hebrew  trial ;  but, 
perhaps,  a  grosser  violation  of  conscience  in  the  president  at  the  Roman  one. 
2.  Amid  this  oppression  there  was  no  defence  of  Himself.  Once  He  called  attention 
to  His  rights  as  a  Hebrew  ;  once  and  again  He  reaffirmed  His  claims  when  challenged 
on  oath.  But  "when  He  was  reviled.  He  reviled  not  again."  Why  this  silence ? 
He  knew  His  hour  was  come,  and  He  yielded  Himself  to  the  stroke.  He  knew  that 
His  words  would  not  tell  rightly  on  His  accusers  in  the  state  of  mind  which  they 
cherished.  With  the  far-distant  future  before  Him,  He  saw  that  the  sequel  would 
vindicate  His  honour,  and  He  could  wait.  He  loved,  too,  to  show  patience  rather 
than  to  display  power  ;  and  He  would  show  us  the  Divine  grandeur  of  keeping  power 
in  reserve.  3.  Underlying  all  this  there  was  a  Divine  purpose  being  wrought  out, 
of  which  the  men  of  that  generation  had  no  conception.  Man  meant  one  thing,  God 
was  intending  another.  4.  This  great  work,  of  which  the  men  of  that  generation 
never  dreamt,  was  that  the  Messiah  was  cut  off,  "  a  stroke  for  them,"  for  the  people 
who  sought  His  life  and  crucified  Him.  Let  us,  then,  (1)  Give  the  full  and  loving 
consent  of  our  hearts  to  this  Divine  arrangement.  (2)  Learn  to  see  sin  in  the  light 
in  which  God  views  it.  (3)  Live  a  life  of  faith  on  Jesus  Christ  as  being  ever  in  His 
own  glorious  person  our  atoning  sacrifice.  (4)  Be  perpetually  thankful  and  devoted 
to  Him  who  consented  to  lay  down  His  life  for  us.  (5)  Imitate  OTir  Saviour.  In  its 
relation  to  the  government  of  God,  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  must  ever  stand  absolutely 
alone.  But  in  that  aspect  of  it  which  represented  fidelity  to  the  truth,  and  devotion 
to  man,  we  can  imitate  it,  even  though  at  a  far  remove.  It  is  precisely  in  connection 
with  this  view  of  it  that  Peter  tells  us.  He  "left  us  an  example  that  we  should 
follow  His  steps."  But  how  can  we  follow  such  steps  ?  By  patience  under  wrong. 
By  being  willing  to  renounce  our  own  ease  and  comfort,  if  thereby  we  may  advance 
the  welfare  of  others.  By  taking  the  sorrows  of  others  on  ourselves,  not  only  by 
suffering  for  them,  but  by  suffering  with  them.  Suffering  for  others  is  the  divinest 
form  of  life  in  a  sinful  world.  By  bearing  others  on  our  hearts  in  prayer,  even 
though  they  may  be  our  bitterest  foes.  (C.  Chmance,  D.D.)  Yet  He  opened  not 
His  month. — The  silence  of  Christ  (with  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  xxvii.  14) : — What  can  be 
said  of  the  silence  of  Christ  ?  Much  has  been  said  of  the  words  He  spake,  and  too 
much  can  never  be  said  of  them,  for  He  spake  as  never  man  spake.  Much  has  been 
said  of  the  sacrifice  He  made.  Much  has  been  said  of  His  miracles,  etc. ,  but  how 
little  of  His  silence,  and  yet  how  full  of  meaning  to  every  thoughtful  and  inquiring 
mind.  I.  It  was  wonderful.  Wonderful  that  Christ  should  remain  silent, 
especially  under  false  accusations — false  witnesses  giving  testimony  against  Him,  and 
a  wicked  judge  about  to  deliver  the  charge.  He  who  could  with  one  word  have  made 
the  world  tremble,  witnesses,  judge  and  jury  fall  dead  before  Him,  testifying  to  His 
innocence  as  well  as  His  Divinity  by  their  lifeless  bodies.  The  silent  years  of 
Christ — how  wonderful  1  He  who  knew  so  well  how  to  speak  and  what  to  say.  But 
we  can  understand  something  of  this — ^it  was  a  time  of  restraint,  of  growth,  of 
preparation.  But  the  preparation  is  over  and  Christ  Jesus  has  asserted  Himself. 
He  has  declared  Himself  by  His  life  and  by  miracles  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  He  is 
falsely  and  basely  accused,  declared  an  impostor,  sentenced  and  condemned  to  die, 
scourged  mocked  and  spit  upon,  arrayed  in  a  gorgeous  robe  and  finally  crucified,  but 
silent  amid  it  all.  Do  you  ask  why  ?  The  wonder  is  only  increased.  It  was  for  our 
sake.  II.  His  silence  was  fttll  of  suffering,  suffering  that  was  vicarious  and 
expiatory.  We  are  not  to  attribute  the  justification  of  sinners  to  the  death  of  Christ 
alone.  It  was  the  sinless  purity  of  perfect  obedience  of  His  whole  life.  III.  It  was 
OMINOUS  ;  that  is  full  of  foreboding,  portentous,  inauspicious,  foreshowing  ills.  It 
told  of  the  utter  degradation  of  the  men  before  whom  He  stood.  He  had  already 
said  and  done  everything  that  was  necessary  to  establish  His  claims  to  the  Messiah- 
ship.  His  silence  said,  what  more  can  I  do  unto  My  vineyard  than  I  have  already 
done  unto  it,  and  having  done  all  He  could  do,  He  answered  now  to  never  a  wora. 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lin. 

It  is  an  appalling  sign  when  Christ  ceases  to  plead  with  any  of  us.  It  shows  that 
we  have  seared  our  hearts — that  we  are  bent  on  ruin.  IV.  Christ's  silence  was 
INSPIRED,  and  therefore  full  of  instruction  as  well  as  the  words  He  spake.  I  refer 
now  to  the  general  silence  of  Christ.  If  His  words  were  inspired  must  not  His 
silence  have  been  also  1  It  is  absolutely  inconceivable  that  He  who  is  Himself  the 
Truth  coiild  have  connived  at  heresy  in  any  of  the  great  doctrines  He  taught,  or 
desired  that  should  be  taught  even  through  silence.  1.  Take  the  great  doctrine  of 
our  Lord's  Deity,  and  was  it  not  the  very  question  under  dispute  and  for  which  He 
had  been  accused  "  of  making  Himself  equal  with  God  "  ?  Now  this  fundamental 
doctrine  is  established  by  a  vast  and  varied  mass  of  evidence,  but  no  stronger  proof 
of  it  is  anywhere  to  be  found,  as  it  seems  to  me,  than  that  to  be  drawn  from  the 
silence  of  Christ.  "We  know  how  Peter  checked  the  homage  of  Cornelius,  and  how 
the  angel  shrank  in  alarm  from  the  worship  which  John  offered  him.  But 
Christ  never  acted  so  ;  He  held  His  peace  ;  He  spake  not  a  word.  He  never  so  much 
as  hinted  that  this  devotion  should  not  be  paid  Him,  and  when  His  enemies  accused 
Him  of  making  Himself  equal  with  God,  He  did  not  repel  the  charge  with  horror. 
Meek  and  lowly  as  He  was  He  accepted  all  the  worship  that  men  offered  Him  ;  He 
welcomed  it,  and  by  His  silent  approval  seemed  to  claim  it.  2.  Apply  it  to  the 
authenticity  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  what  an  argument  we  find  !  He 
held  His  peace  in  regard  to  aU  these  criticisms  that  are  being  made.  He  condemned 
the  unscriptural  traditions  of  the  Jews,  but  He  at  no  time  questioned  the  purity  or 
integrity  of  the  Old  Testament  Canon.  3.  Apply  His  silence  to  the  perpetuity  of 
the  Sabbath  law  and  with  what  force  it  speaks.  There  are  those  amongst  us  who 
maintain  that  the  Sabbath  was  only  an  institution  for  the  Jews,  and  that  its 
observance  is  not  binding  now  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  but  Christ  nowhere 
says  so.  He  often  spoke  in  reference  to  Sabbath  observance.  He  foimd  the  Sabbath  ' 
a  standing  ordinance  of  God,  and  He  left  it  such,  only  freshened  by  the  dew  of  His 
blessing.  V,  Christ's  silence  was  beautiful,  especially  during  His  dread  trial. 
It  is  difficult  to  speak  aright  amid  enemies  and  detractors,  but  it  is  even  more 
difficult  to  be  silent  right  before  them.  The  lip  is  ever  ready  to  curl  unbidden,  the 
light  of  malice  hurries  to  the  eye,  in  s  moment  the  crimson  of  anger  moimts  to  the 
cheek  before  we  are  aware,  but  not  so  with  Christ.  VI.  Christ's  silence  is 
exemplary  to  us  all.  Self-imposed  silence  often  becomes  a  duty.  There  are 
calumnies  good  men  cannot  refute.  There  are  accusations  which  they  must  leave 
unanswered.  1.  Because  of  the  perils  of  speech.  In  self-justification  we  are  liable 
to  self-glorification,  to  irritability,  to  extravagance.  2.  Because  of  the  blessings  of 
the  discipline  of  silence.  If  we  spend  our  time  in  self-vindication,  then  farewell 
labour  for  Christ,  for  we  will  have  no  time  for  anything  else.  {J.  I.  Blackburn.) 
Silent  suffering : — Is  it  not  always  true  with  those  that  are  called  to  sufi"er  that  they 
sufier  most  at  times  when  one  hears  no  sound  from  their  lips  ?  It  is  considered  a 
relief  to  cry  out  in  the  midst  of  pain.  So  long  as  one  can  plead  his  case  the 
excitement  of  pleading  enables  him  to  forget  the  painfulness  of  his  position.  When 
the  tongue  is  sUent  then  it  is  that  the  brain  is  busy.  What  miist  have  been  the 
thoughts  of  Christ  when  He  held  His  peace  1  Must  they  not  have  been  of  the  most 
painful  nature  ?  The  silence  of  Christ  was  full  of  the  most  awful  sufi'ering  and  that 
suffering  was  expiatory  and  vicarious.  Because  He  was  wounded,  we  are  healed  ; 
and  because  He  kept  silent  before  this  earthly  tribunal,  we  shall  hereafter  speak. 
{IMd. )  Christ's  speechlessness : — Why  this  speechlessness  ?  In  part  it  was  due  to  the 
Saviour's  clear  apprehension  of  the  futility  of  arguing  with  those  who  were  bent  on 
crucifying  Him.  It  was  also  due  to  the  quiet  rest  of  His  soul  on  God,  as  He  com- 
mitted Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously,  and  anticipated  the  hour  when  the 
Father  would  arise  to  give  Him  a  complete  vindication.  But  it  was  due  also  to  His 
consciousness  of  carrying  in  His  breast  a  golden  secret,  another  explanation  of  His 
Bufierings  than  men  were  aware  of,  a  Divine  solution  of  the  mystery  of  human  guUt. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter. — The  sufferings 
of  Christ : — St.  Peter  makes  it  almost  a  description  of  a  Christian,  that  he  loves 
Him  whom  he  has  not  seen.  Unless  we  have  a  true  love  of  Christ,  we  are  not 
His  true  disciples ;  and  we  cannot  love  Him  unless  we  have  heartfelt  gratitude 
to  Him  ;  and  we  cannot  duly  feel  gratitude,  unless  we  feel  keenly  what  He 
suffered  for  us.  No  one  who  will  but  solemnly  think  over  the  history  of  those 
sufferings,  as  drawn  out  for  us  in  the  Gospels,  but  will  gradually  gain,  through 
God's  grace,  a  sense  of  them.  1.  As  to  these  sufferings,  our  Lord  is  called  a  lamb  in 
the  text ;  He  was  as  defenceless,  and  as  innocent  as  a  lamb  is.  Since  then  Scripture 
compares   Him  to  this  inoffensive    and    unprotected  animal,    we  may,    without 


CBAP.  Mil.]  ISAIAH.  127 

presumption  or  irreverence,  take  the  image  as  a  means  of  conveying  to  our  minds  those 
feelings  which  our  Lord's  sufferings  should  excite  "within  us.  Consider  how  very 
horrible  it  is  to  read  the  accounts  which  sometimes  meet  us  of  cruelties  exercised  on 
brute  animals.  What  is  it  moves  our  very  hearts,  and  sickens  us  so  much  at  cruelty 
shown  to  poor  brutes  ?  First,  that  they  have  done  no  harm  ;  next,  that  they  have 
no  power  whatever  of  resistance  ;  it  is  the  cowardice  and  tyranny  of  which  they  are 
the  victims  which  makes  their  sufferings  so  especially  touching.  He  who  is  higher 
than  the  angels,  deigned  to  humble  Himself  even  to  the  state  of  the  brute  creation. 
2.  Take  another  example,  and  you  will  see  the  same  thing  still  more  strikingly. 
How  overpowered  should  we  be,  nay  not  at  the  sight  only,  but  at  the  very  hearing 
of  cruelties  shown  to  a  little  child,  and  why  so  ?  for  the  same  two  reasons,  because  it 
was  so  innocent,  and  because  it  was  so  unable  to  defend  itself  You  feel  the  horror 
of  this,  and  yet  you  can  bear  to  read  of  Christ's  sufferings  without  horror.  Our  Lord 
was  not  only  guiltless  and  defenceless,  but  He  had  come  among  His  persecutors  in 
love.  3.  And  now,  let  us  suppose  that  some  venerable  person  whom  we  have 
known  as  long  as  we  could  recollect  any  thing,  and  loved  and  reverenced, 
suppose  such  a  one,  who  had  often  done  us  kindnesses,  rudely  seized  by*  fierce 
men,  made  a  laughing-stock,  struck,  spit  on,  severely  scourged  and  at  last 
exposed  with  all  his  wounds  to  the  gaze  of  a  rude  multitude  who  came  and 
jeered  him,  what  would  be  our  feelings  ?  But  what  is  all  this  to  the  suffering  of 
the  holy  Jesus,  which  we  bear  to  read  of  as  a  matter  of  course  !  A  spirit 
of  grief  and  lamentation  is  expressly  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  a  characteristic 
of  those  who  turn  to  Christ.  If  then  we  do  not  sorrow,  have  we  turned  to  Him  ? 
{J.  H.  Newman,  B.D.)  CJirist  the  victim  and  the  example: — 1.  There  is  only  One 
in  whom  are  fulfilled  all  the  prophecies  of  this  wonderful  Lesson  (Acts  viii.  34,  35). 
2.  It  may  be  noticed  how  animals  are  chosen  in  Holy  Scripture  as  symbols  of  Divine 
Persons  and  mysteries ;  and  Christian  art  has  perpetuated  the  association.  The 
dove  has  been  the  symbol  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  earliest  times.  The  man,  the 
calf,  the  lion,  and  the  eagle  represent  the  four  Evangelists,  and  are  types  of  the 
Incarnation,  Passion,  Resurrection,  and  Ascension  of  Christ.  Christ  is  represented 
by  a  lamb,  for  this  was  the  symbol  of  our  Lord  both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the 
New.  Indeed,  it  was  such  a  popular  symbol  in  the  early  ages  of  the  Church,  that 
authority  was  invoked  to  check  it  as  a  substitute  for  His  human  body.  3.  Through- 
out Holy  Scripture,  by  hints  and  prophecies,  by  types  and  fulfilment,  Christ  is 
depicted  by  the  lamb  (Gen.  xxii.  8  ;  the  Paschal  lamb  ;  the  daily  sacrifice  in  the 
temple  ;  St.  John's  exclamation,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God !  "  John  xix.  36  ;  1  Cor. 
V.  7  ;  1  Pet.  i.  19  ;  Rev.  v.  6, 12  ;  vi.  1  ;  vii.  14,  etc.).  The  symbol  has  two  aspects — 
that  of  the  victim,  and  that  of  the  example.  Let  us  look  at  it  in  both  lights.  I. 
The  Victim.  1.  The  text  expresses  the  willingness  of  the  Sufferer.  "  He  was  ill- 
treated  whilst  He  bowed  Himself,"  i.  e.  "  suffered  voluntarily,"  as  the  simile  of  the 
unresisting  animal  explains.  It  is  a  prophecy  of  the  self-oblation  of  Christ  (John 
X.  15,  18).  The  oblation  was  the  result  of  love.  He  was  led  to  the  slaughter  with 
the  full  knowledge  of  all  that  was  before  Him.  The  voluntariness  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings is  a  ground  of  merit  and  a  secret  of  attractiveness.  Sacrifice  must  "  be  the  blood 
of  the  soul,"  the  offered  wiU,  to  have  value  before  God  ;  and  it  must  be  spontaneous, 
to  touch  and  win  the  hearts  of  men.  2.  "  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter  " 
reminds  us  of  the  greatness  of  Christ's  sufierings.  He  was  "  obedient  unto  death," 
a  sacrificial  death — different  from  a  mere  martyr's  death,  as  the  words  just  before  the 
text  show.  The  Lord  had  laid  on  Him  the  punishment  of  Israel's  guilt — nay, 
"  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  There  can  be  no  getting  rid  of  "  the  posTia  vicaria  here  " 
(Delitzsch).  This  is  a  great  mystery.  But  it  is  not  one  man  suffering  for  another, 
for  "  no  man  can  deliver  his  brother  ; "  but  God  Himself  in  man's  nature  suffering. 
Those  who  think  such  a  mode  of  redemption  unjust,  it  will  be  found,  have  not 
grasped  the  dogma  of  the  Incarnation,  or  the  oneness  of  will  in  the  Divine  Persons 
of  the  Blessed  Trinity.  It  was  an  act  of  love.  Death  is  the  test  of  love,  and  the 
worst  kind  of  death,  that  of  the  cross,  the  most  convincing  test.  "  He  was  brought 
as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter  "  is  a  sentence  which  at  once  would  bring  up  before  the 
mind  of  the  Jew  the  sacrificial  worship  in  which  he  had  often  taken  part.  In  the 
language  of  St.  Paul,  Christ  "became  sin  for  us" — a  Sin  Offering — "who  knew  no 
sin."  In  the  language  of  St.  Peter,  we  were  redeemed  "with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish. "  II.  The  Example.  1.  One  of  the  purposes 
for  which  Christ  came  was  to  be  an  Example.  The  truth  is  sometimes  obscured  by 
dwelling  too  exclusively  upon  the' mystery  of  redemption  ;  as,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  have  not  been  wanting  those"  who  have  been  too  much  absorbed  in  that  view  of 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  liii. 

our  Lord  as  the  True  Light  which  meets  the  cravings  of  the  human  intellect.  To 
keep  the  proportion  of  faith  is  not  always  easy,  especially  as  personal  needs  and 
experiences  are  apt  to  exaggerate  some  one  aspect  of  a  mystery.  2.  Christ's  life 
throughout  has  this  twofold  view — sacrificial  and  exemplary.  We  might  have 
expected  that  the  latter  view  would  be  associated  chiefly  with  His  public  ministry, 
and  the  former  with  His  Passion.  But  it  is  not  so.  Both  culminate  on  the  cross. 
"  Christ  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  21) ;  and,  as  the  context 
shows,  the  final  sufferings  are  before  tbe  apostle's  gaze.  A  suffering  world  needs  a 
suffering  Example.  The  Passion  brought  out  to  view  the  virtues  which  man  is  ever 
requiring  to  exercise,  and  in  a  manner  which  exercises  a  spell  upon  all  who  look  upon 
"  that  sight."  Even  those  who  are  blind  to  the  atoning  efiicacy  of  the  mystery  are 
touched  by  its  moral  loveliness.  3.  "  Brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter  ; "  "  dumb 
before  her  shearers."  This  is  a  difiicult  virtue  which  the  words  unveil — patience,  or 
meekness.  What  we  read  in  the  prophecy  we  see  in  the  Passion  (Matt,  xxvii.  12, 
14  ;  John  xix.  9)  and  upon  the  cross.  "  All  three  hours  His  silence  cried."  "  When 
He  was  reviled,  He  reviled  not  again."  The  lamb,  innocent  and  silent,  aptly 
represents  the  Lamb  of  God,  meek  and  patient  in  the  midst  of  His  slaughterers.  Ill, 
Lessons.  1.  Let  us  seek  through  the  sufferings  of  Christ  to  realize  the  enormity 
and  malice  of  sin.  Pardon  without  any  revelation  of  Divine  justice  and  holiness 
might  have  demoralized  mankind.  We  know  not  "how  that  satisfaction  operated 
towards  God,"  and  the  Church  has  not  attempted  to  define  this.  That  Christ 
died  "for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation"  is  all  that  we  are  required  to  believe, 
and  that  is  the  kernel  of  the  doctrine.  2.  Seek  to  imitate  the  patience  of  Jesus 
— to  be  silent  when  "reviled,"  and  to  still  within  the  movements  of  anger 
and  pride,  3.  To  be  able  to  do  this  we  must  meditate  upon  Christ's  sufferings, 
and  see  in  all  things,  as  they  reach  us,  the  will  of  God,  though  our  sufferings 
may  arise  from  the  faults  and  sins  of  others.  We  must  "  commit  our  cause  to 
Him  that  judgeth  righteously,"  accepting  calmly  aU  that  we  may  have  to  bear. 
1.  We  must  pray  for  the  help  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  which  we  cannot 
grow  in  patience  and  meekness,  which  are  "fruits"  of  the  Spirit.  {The  Thinker.) 
And  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb. — The  sheep  before  the  shearers : — L  Otjr 
Saviotje's  patience.  Our  Lord  was  brought  to  the  shearers  that  He  might  be 
shorn  of  His  comfort,  and  of  His  honour,  shorn  even  of  His  good  name,  and  shorn 
at  last  of  life  itself ;  but  when  under  the  shearers  He  was  as  silent  as  a  sheep.  How 
patient  He  was  before  Pilate,  and  Herod,  and  Caiaphas,  and  on  the  cross.  1,  Our 
Lord  was  dumb  and  opened  not  His  mouth  against  His  adversaries,  and  did  not 
accuse  one  of  them  of  cruelty  or  injustice,  2,  As  He  did  not  utter  a  word  against 
His  adversaries,  so  He  did  not  say  a  word  against  any  one  of  us,  Zipporah  said  to 
Moses,  "  Surely  a  bloody  husband  art  thou  to  me,"  as  she  saw  her  child  bleeding  ; 
and  surely  Jesus  might  have  said  to  His  Church,  "  Thou  art  a  costly  spouse  to  Me, 
to  bring  Me  all  this  shame  and  bloodshedding, "  But  He  giveth  liberally.  He  openeth 
the  very  fountain  of  His  heart,  and  upbraideth  not.  3.  There  was  not  a  word 
against  His  Father,  nor  a  syllable  of  repining  at  the  severity  of  the  chastisement 
laid  upon  Him  for  our  sakes.  You  and  I  have  murmured  when  imder  a  comparatively 
light  grief,  thinking  ourselves  hardly  done  by.  But  not  so  the  Saviour,  Many  are 
the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  but  few  are  tne  lamentations  of  Jesus.  Jesus  wept, 
and  Jesus  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  but  He  never  murmured  nor  felt  rebellion  in 
His  heart.  I  see  in  this  our  Lord's  complete  submission.  There  was  complete  self- 
conquest  too.    There  was  complete  absoi-ption  in  His  work,     II.  View  our  own 

CASE    UNDER   THE    SAME    METAPHOR   AS    THAT  WHICH    IS    USED    IN    REFERENCE   TO 

OUR  Lord,  As  He  is  so  are  we  also  in  this  world.  Just  as  a  sheep  is  taken  by  the 
shearer,  and  its  wool  is  cut  off,  so  doth  the  Lord  take  His  people  and  shear  them, 
taking  away  aU  their  earthly  comforts,  and  leaving  them  bare,  1,  A  sheep  rewards 
its  owner  for  all  his  care  and  trouble  by  being  shorn.  Some  of  God's  people  can 
give  to  Christ  a  tribute  of  gratitude  by  active  service,  and  they  should  do  so  gladly 
every  day  of  their  lives  ;  but  many  others  cannot  do  much  in  active  service,  and 
about  the  only  reward  they  can  give  to  their  Lord  is  to  render  up  their  fleece  by 
Buffering  when  He  calls  upon  them  to  suffer,  submissively  yielding  to  be  shorn  of 
their  personal  comfort  when  the  time  comes  for  patient  endurance.  The  husband, 
or  perhaps  the  wife,  is  removed,  little  children  are  taken  away,  property  is  shorn 
off,  and  health  is  gone.  Sometimes  the  shears  cut  off  the  man's  good  name  ;  slander 
follows  ;  comforts  vanish.  Well,  it  may  be  that  you  are  not  able  to  glorify  God  to 
any  very  large  extent  except  by  undergoing  this  process.  2.  The  sheep  is  itself 
benefited  by  the  operation  of  shearing.     Before  they  begin  to  shear  the  sheep  the 


eHAP.  Mil.]  ISAIAS.  129 

wool  is  long  and  old,  and  every  bush  and  briar  tears  off  a  bit  of  the  wool,  untU  the 
dieep  looks  ragged  and  forlorn.  If  the  wool  were  left,  when  the  heat  of  summer 
came  the  sheep  would  not  be  able  to  bear  itself.  So  when  the  Lord  shears  us,  we 
do  not  like  the  operation  any  more  than  the  sheep  do  ;  but  first,  it  is  for  His  glory ; 
and  secondly,  it  is  for  our  benefit,  and  therefore  we  are  bound  most  willingly  to 
submit.  There  are  many  things  which  we  should  like  to  have  kept  which,  if  we 
h&d  kept  them,  would  not  have  proved  blessings  but  cm^es.  A  stale  blessing  is  a 
curse.  3.  Before  sheep  are  shorn  they  are  always  washed.  If  the  Good  Shepherd  ia 
going  to  clip  your  wool,  ask  Him  to  wash  it  before  He  takes  it  off ;  ask  to  be  cleansed 
in  spirit,  soul  and  body.  4.  After  the  washing,  when  the  sheep  has  been  dried,  it 
actually  loses  what  was  its  comfort.  You  also  will  have  to  part  with  your  comforts. 
The  next  time  you  receive  a  fresh  blessing  call  it  a  loan.  A  loan,  they  say,  should 
go  laughing  home,  and  so  should  we  rejoice  when  the  Lord  takes  back  that  which 
He  had  lent  us.  5.  The  shearers  take  care  not  to  hurt  the  sheep :  they  clip  as  close 
as  they  can,  but  they  do  not  cut  the  skin.  When  they  do  make  a  gash,  it  is  because 
the  sheep  does  not  lie  stiU :  but  a  careful  shearer  has  bloodless  shears.  The  Lord 
may  clip  wonderfully  close :  I  have  known  Him  clip  some  so  close  that  they  did 
not  seem  to  have  a  bit  of  wool  left,  for  they  were  stripped  entirely.  6.  The  shearers 
always  shear  at  a  suitable  time.  It  would  be  a  very  wicked,  cruel,  and  imwise  thing 
to  begin  sheep-shearing  in  winter  time.  Have  you  ever  noticed  that  whenever  the 
Lord  afllicts  us  He  selects  the  best  possible  time  ?  7.  It  is  with  us  as  with  the 
sheep,  there  is  new  wool  coming.  Whenever  the  Lord  takes  away  our  earthly 
comforts  with  one  hand,  one,  two,  three.  He  restores  with  the  other  hand,  six,  a 
score,  a  hundred  ;  we  are  crying  and  whining  about  the  little  loss,  and  yet  it  is 
necessary  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  receive  the  great  gain.  If  the  Lord  takes 
away  the  manna,  as  He  did  from  His  people  Israel,  it  is  because  they  have  the  old 
com  of  the  land  of  Canaan  to  live  upon.  If  the  water  of  the  rock  did  not  follow 
the  tribes  any  longer,  it  was  because  they  drank  of  the  Jordan,  and  of  the  brooks. 
III.  Let  its  endeavour  to  imitate  the  example  of  our  blessed  Lord  when 
OUR  turn  comes  to  be  shorn.  (C.  H.  Spiorgeon.)  Eastern  sheep-shearing: — 
Those  who  have  seen  the  noise  and  roughness  of  many  of  our  washings  and  shearings 
win  hardly  believe  the  testimony  of  that  ancient  writer  Philo-Judaeus  when  he 
aflBrms  that  the  sheep  came  voluntarily  to  be  shorn.  He  says :  "  Woolly  rams  laden 
with  thick  fleeces  put  themselves  into  the  shepherd's  hands  to  have  their  wool  shorn, 
being  thus  accustomed  to  pay  their  yearly  tribute  to  man,  their  king  by  nature. 
The  sheep  stands  in  a  silent  inclining  posture,  unconstrained  under  the  hand  of  the 
shearer.  These  things  may  appear  strange  to  those  who  do  not  know  the  docility 
of  the  sheep,  but  they  are  true."  {Ibid.)  Lrying  still  under  the  Divine  hand: — 
I  went  to  see  a  friend,  the  other  day,  who  has  had  a  great  number  of  sore  afflictions, 
yet  I  found  her  singularly  cheerful  and  content ;  and  when  I  was  speaking  with  her 
about  the  matter,  she  said,  "  I  have  for  years  enjoyed  perfect  submission  to  the 
Divine  will,  and  it  was  through  what  I  heard  you  say."  So  I  asked  her,  "What 
did  I  say  % "  She  repUed,  "  Why,  you  told  us  that  you  had  seen  a  sheep  that  was 
in  the  hands  of  the  shearers,  and  that,  although  all  the  wool  was  clipped  off  its 
back,  the  shears  never  cut  into  its  flesh  ;  and  you  said  that  the  reason  was  because 
the  sheep  was  lying  perfectly  still.  You  said,  *  Lie  stiU,  and  the  shears  will  not 
cut  you ;  but  if  you  kick  and  struggle,  you  will  not  only  be  shorn,  for  God  has 
resolved  to  do  that,  but  you  wiU  be  wounded  into  the  bargain.' "    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  judgment. — "Re  was  taken 
from  prison  and  from  judgment : " — Every  word  here  is  ambiguous.  The  principal 
interpretations  are  as  follows — 1.  "Without  hindrance  and  without  right  He  was 
taken  away,"  i.  e.  He  was  put  to  death  without  opposition  from  any  quarter,  and  in 
defiance  of  justice.  2.  "Through  oppression  and  through  judgment  He  was  taken 
away"  (so  virtually  R.V.).  "Judgment"  here  means  judicial  procedure,  and  the 
rendering  " oppression "  is  guaranteed  by  Ps.  cvii.  39.  3.  "From  oppression  and 
from  judgment  He  was  taken  away,"  i.  e.  released  by  death,  or  taken  by  God  to 
Himself  (2  Kings  ii.  10).  Of  the  three  interpretations,  the  last  seems  the  most 
natiu-al.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Christ's  imprisonmeTit  (with  John  xviii.  12, 13) : — 
The  word  "  prison  "  should  not,  perhaps,  be  taken  to  designate  a  particular  place  of 
incarceration  ;  for  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  Christ  was  ever  confined  in  any 
such  penal  cell.  He  was,  however,  a  prisoner.  His  limbs  were  bound,  and  He  was 
held  in  the  custody  of  the  iron-hearted  officers  of  the  Roman  government.  We  shall 
look  upon  Christ's  imprisonment  in  three  aspects.     I.  As  the  most  XHBlLiiiKa 

TOL.  III.  9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lin. 

CHAPTER  IN  THE  HISTORY  OP  Ohrist.  1.  He  was  first  taken  a  prisoner  from 
Gethsemane.  2.  He  was  then  taken  as  a  prisoner  from  Annas  to  Caiaphas  (John 
xviii.  19-24  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  59-68),  3.  He  was  next  taken  a  prisoner  from  the  palace 
of  Caiaphas  to  the  hall  of  the  Sanhedrim.  4.  He  was  next  taken  as  a  prisoner  from 
the  hall  of  the  Sanhedrim  to  PUate  (John  xviii.  28-38  ;  Luke  xxiii,  1-7  ;  Mark 
XV.  1-5  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  11-14).  5.  He  was  then  taken  as  a  prisoner  from  Pilate  to 
Herod  (Luke  xxiii.  8-12).  6.  He  was  then  taken  as  a  prisoner  back  from  Herod 
to  Pilate  (Luke  xxiii.  13-25  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  15-26  ;  Mark  xv.  6-15).  7.  He  was 
finally  taken  as  a  prisoner  from  Pilate  to  Calvary  (Matt,  xxvii.  27-50).  The  cross 
is  the  culmination  of  the  whole.  II.  As  the  greatest  enormity  in  the  annals 
OF  CRIME.  1.  His  imprisonment  combined  all  the  chief  elements  of  crime.  (1)  Here 
was  the  foulest  injustice.  Imprisonment  is  for  criminals  ;  but  had  Christ  ever  been 
guilty  of  a  crime  ?  (2)  Here  too  is  the  basest  ingratitude.  Was  there  one  in  Judea, 
or  Galilee,  or  Samaria,  who  could  refer  to  one  single  act  of  rmkindness  which 
He  had  ever  committed  towards  anj^?  Not  one.  **He  went  about  doing  good." 
(3)  Here  is  astounding  impiety.  This  Prisoner  was  the  "  Son  of  God,"  the  "  Prince 
of  Life."  2.  His  imprisonment  was  eflFected  in  the  name  of  law  and  religion.  (1)  The 
law  they  referred  to  (Deut.  xviii.  20)  had  no  just  application  to  the  case  of  Clirist, 
and  they  must  have  been  conscious  of  its  irrelevancy.  Christ  was  not  a  "  prophet " 
who  had  presumed  to  speak  a  word  in  "  the  name  of  Jehovah  "  which  "  He  had  not 
commanded  ; "  nor  had  He  spoken  in  the  name  of  "  any  other  god  ; "  and  therefore 
by  this  old  law  of  Moses  He  was  not  guilty  of  death.  But  what  if  a  law  authorize 
a  morally  criminal  act,  is  the  act  less  criminal  ?  In  no  measure.  (2)  But  it  was  in 
the  name  of  religion  as  well  as  law.  This  makes  the  crime  greater  still.  The  men 
that  instigated  the  crucifixion  of  the  Son  of  God  were  professedly  religious  men ; 
they  were  the  religious  authorities  of  the  country.  Under  profession  of  respect  for 
truth  and  God,  they  wrought  all  the  enormities  which  blackened  the  page  of  evangelic 
history.  III.  As  the  most  w^onderful  enigma  in  the  government  of  God. 
I  know  of  nothing  more  wonderful  in  the  imiverse  than  the  sight  of  Jesus  in  bonds. 
1.  "Why  does  Eternal  Justice  allow  unsullied  holiness  thus  to  suffer?  2.  "Why  does 
Almighty  God  give  men  the  power  to  perpetrate  such  enormities  ?  3.  Why  does 
All-powerful  Emanuel  Himself  submit  to  these  enormities  ?  Does  not  the  vicarious 
principle  stand  out  in  sunny  prominence  ?  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Chrisfs  ignominious 
death  and  glorious  resurrection: — I.  The  scandal  itself,  laid  down  in  the  most 
aggravating  terms — "prison,"  "judgment,"  "cutting  off  from  the  land  of  the 
living,"  and  a  "stroke  upon  Him  for  transgression  ;"  as  if  the  prophet  had  said, 
Grant  all  that  you  will  charge  upon  Him,  prison,  judgment,  strokes,  cutting  off — 
express  it  the  worst  way  you  can,  all  this  will  not  impeach  the  glory  of  His 
excellency.  II.  The  defence  in  other  terms.  "  He  was  taken  "  from  those  things, 
and  "  who  shall  declare  His  generation  ? "  If  you  think  it  is  not  enough  to  say  that 
He  died  for  others,  and  that  He  was  stricken  for  the  transgression  of  My  people,  yet 
He  did  not  as  every  man  that  dieth  for  others  ;  He  perished  not  in  this  expression 
of  His  love,  as  others  do :  He  was  taken  from  prison,  and  from  judgment,  and  now 
liveth  gloriously.  There  are  two  things  in  the  defence — 1.  His  resurrection.  ' '  He 
was  taken  from  prison  and  from  judgment ; "  He  got  out  from  under  it.  2.  His  life 
and  duration  in  that  state.  "Who  shall  declare  His  generation?"  The  sense  is, 
who  shall  declare  His  age  or  duration  ?  who  can  tell  those  endless  ages  that  Christ 
shall  live?  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Who  shall  declare  His  generation  1 — "  IFho  shall 
declare  His  generation  f  " — The  Hebrew  word  for  ' '  generation  "  is  translated  "  age  "  in 
Isa.  xxxviii.  12,  but  it  more  properly  means  "lifetime."  The  Septuagint  translators 
have,  however,  hit  the  true  idea  of  this  passage  in  making  the  Greek  word  yevedy, 
instead  of  plov  or  aluva,  for  the  thought  regards  the  apparent  brevity  of  Messiah's 
career.  *  He  comes,  and  He  goes,  and  there  is  an  end  of  Him.  Who  will  take  the 
trouble  to  think  about  a  life  that  is  cut  off  so  soon,  and  leaves,  apparently,  no 
trace '  He  has  no  successor,  no  family,  no  descendants  to  preserve  His  name. "  The 
Septuagint  reading,  therefore,  while  not  a  literal  translation  of  the  Hebrew,  follows 
its  thought.  The  Hebrew  literally  is,  "  Who  shall  think  upon  His  career?"  The 
Septuagint  is,  "  Who  shall  describe  or  recount  His  race  or  generation?"  The  one 
refers  directly  to  His  lifetime,  but  indirectly  to  His  posterity ;  the  other  confines 
itself  to  the  posterity.  Now,  both  questions  are  answered  in  verse  10  :  "He  shall 
see  His  seed.  He  shall  prolong  His  days. "  The  Messiah  will  have  a  spiritual  seed 
on  the  earth,  and  in  them  He  will  continue  His  own  earthly  life.  (Howard 
Crosby,  LL.D.)  "JFJio  shall  declai'e  His  generation?  " — Meyer,  Alford,  and  others 
understand  this  as  equivalent  to,  "  Who  can  describe  the  wickedness  of  the  men  of 


eHAP.  Lui.]  ISAIAH.  131 

this  time  ? "  Hengstenberg  interprets  it,  "  Who  shall  declare  His  posterity  ? "  i.  e. 
His  spiritual  children,  bom  of  the  travail  of  His  soul.  Delitzsch  translates,  "Of 
His  contemporaries,  who  considered  this  :  '  He  was  snatched  out  of  the  land  of  the 
living,  seeing  that,  on  account  of  the  transgression  of  My  people,  vengeance  fell  on 
Him  ? ' "  "  Who  shall  declare  His  generation  ?"  A  difficult  clause.  The  Hebrew  word 
for  "  generation  "  {d6r)  may  mean — (1)  The  time  in  which  He  lived.  (2)  The  circle  of 
His  contemporaries.  (3)  Those  like-minded  with  Him  (Ps.  xii.  7  ;  xiv.  5  ;  Prov.  xxx. 
11,  etc.)  ;  but  \s  never  used  with  any  such  significance  as  "  length  of  life,"  or  "  life- 
history,"  or  ' '  posterity. "  We  may  take  it  in  the  sense  (2),  and  render  with  R.  V.  "  and 
as  for  His  generation  who  (among  them)  considered,"  etc.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
For  the  transgression  of  My  people  was  He  stricken. — Christ "  smitten  unto  death : " 
— There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  original  text  has,  in  this  instance,  undergone 
some  alteration,  and  that  it  anciently  stood  thus,  ' '  He  was  smitten  unto  death. "  It  was 
thus  written  by  Origen,  who  assures  us  that  a  certain  Jew,  with  whom  he  disputed, 
seemed  to  feel  himself  more  pressed  by  this  expression  than  by  any  other  part  of  the 
chapter.  It  is  thus  rendered  by  the  Septuagint  in  our  present  copies  ;  and  if,  in  this 
instance,  it  had  not  concurred  with  the  original,  neither  could  Origen  have  urged  it 
with  good  faith,  nor  the  Jew  have  felt  himself  embaiTassed  by  the  argument  which 
is  suggested.  {E.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  Person  stricken: — The  Jews  pretend  that  no 
single  person  is  designed  in  this  portion  of  prophecy  ;  but  that  the  people  of  Israel 
collectively  are  denoted  under  the  figure  of  one  man,  and  that  the  purport  of  the 
chapter  is  a  delineation  of  the  calamities  and  sufi'erings  which  that  nation  should 
undergo,  with  a  view  to  its  correction  and  amendment.  The  absurdity  of  this 
evasion  will  be  obvious  to  him  who  considers  that  the  person  who  is  represented  as 
"stricken"  is  carefully  distinguished  by  the  prophet  from  the  people  for  whose 
benefit  He  suffered.  "For  the  transgression  of  My  people  was  He  stricken:"  in 
addition  to  which.  He  is  affirmed  to  be  stricken  "even  to  death,"  which,  as  Origen 
very  properly  urged,  agrees  well  with  the  fate  of  an  individual,  but  not  with  that 
of  a  people.  {Ibvd. )  The  substitution  of  the  innocent  for  the  guilty : — Let  us  consider 
what  circumstances  met  in  this  case,  and  must  be  supposed  to  concur  on  any  occasion 
of  this  kind,  to  render  fit  and  proper  the  substitution  of  an  innocent  person  ta  the 
place  of  the  guUty ;  and  what  is  peculiar  in  the  character  of  our  Saviour,  which 
renders  it  worthy  of  God  to  set  Hun  apart  as  "a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the 
world,"  and  annex  the  blessings  of  eternal  life  to  such  as  believe  in  the  doctrine  of 
the  Cross,  and  repent,  and  turn  to  God.  I.  It  is  obvious  that  such  a  procedure  as 
we  are  now  contemplating,  in  order  to  give  it  validity  and  efiect,  mtjst  be  sanc- 
tioned BY  THE  SUPREME  AUTHOEITT.  For  a  private  person,  whatever  might  be 
his  station  in  society,  to  pretend  to  introduce  such  a  commutation  of  pimishment  as 
is  implied  in  such  a  transaction,  would  be  a  presumptuous  invasion  of  legislative 
rights,  which  no  well-regulated  society  would  tolerate.  This  condition  was  most 
unequivocally  satisfied  in  the  mystery  of  Christ's  substitution.  II.  Another  indis- 
pensable circumstance  in  such  a  proceeding,  is,  that  it  should  be  peefectly 
VOLUNTARY  ON  THE  PART  OF  THE  SUFFERER.  Otherwise,  it  would  be  an  act  of  the 
highest  injustice ;  it  would  be  the  addition  of  one  oflPence  to  another,  and  give  a 
greater  shock  to  all  rightly-disposed  minds  than  the  acquittal  of  the  guilty  without 
any  atonement.  Here  there  appears,  at  first  sight,  an  insuperable  difficulty  in  the 
way  of  human  salvation.  How  could  that  be  rendered  which  was,  at  once,  due  to 
sin  and  mankind  at  large  ?  Where  could  one  be  found  that  would  endure  the  penalty 
freely,  which  was  incurred  by  a  sinful  world  ?  This  our  Saviour  did.  No  sacrifice 
should  go  unwillingly  to  the  altar.  It  was,  indeed,  reckoned  a  bad  omen  when  any 
one  did  so.  None  ever  went  so  willingly  as  He.  III.  It  is  farther  necessary  that 
the  substitute  not  only  undertake  voluntarily,  but  that  he  be  perfectly  free  from 
THE  offence  which  RENDERS  PUNISHMENT  NECESSARY.  Accordingly,  in  the  case 
of  man  Divine  justice  cannot  be  willing  to  acquiesce  in  a  substitute  who  is  a  sharer  in 
guilt ;  for  the  law  has  a  previous  hold  upon  him  ;  there  is  a  debt  due  on  his  own 
account.  But  Jesus  Christ,  though  a  man,  was,  by  reason  of  His  miraculous  concep- 
tion, free  from  the  taint  of  original  sin.  IV.  There  would  be  a  great  propriety  in 
this  also,  that  the  innocent  person  substituted  for  the  guilty,  should 
STAND  IN  SOME  RELATION  TO  HIM.  Now,  OUT  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  related  to 
mankind  ;  one  like  them  whom  He  came  to  redeem.  This  was  shadowed  forth  in 
the  law  of  a  Redeemer  of  a  lost  estate.  The  person  who  was  to  redeem  must  be 
related :  hence  a  redeemer  and  a  relation  were  expressed  by  one  term,  and  the 
nearest  relation  was  to  redeem.  Hence,  then,  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  waa  neces* 
sary.     V.  If  the  substitution  of  the  innocent  in  the  room  of  the  guilty  is  at  all 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lio, 

permitted,  it  seems  requisite  that  no  advantage  should  be  taken  of  a  homen- 
TABT  enthxtsiasm,  a  sudden  impulse  of  heroic  feeling,  which  might  prompt  a 
generous  mind  to  make  a  sacrifice,  of  which,  on  cool  deliberation,  he  repented.  In 
the  case  we  are  now  contemplating,  nothing  could  reconcile  the  mind  to  such  a  pro- 
cedure but  such  a  settled  purpose  on  the  part  of  the  substitute  as  precludes  the 
possibility  of  a  vacillation  or  change.  But  this  condition  is  found'  in  the  highest 
perfection  on  the  part  of  the  blessed  Redeemer.  His  oblation  of  Himself  was  not  the 
execution  of  a  sudden  purpose,  the  fruit  of  a  momentary  movement  of  pity  ;  it  was 
the  result  of  deliberate  counsel,  the  accomplishment  of  an  ancient  purpose,  formed 
in  the  remotest  recesses  of  a  past  eternity.  VI.  In  the  case  of  the  substitution  of  the 
innocent  for  the  guilty,  it  seems  highly  requisite  that  he  who  offers  himself  as 

THE  SUBSTITUTE  SHOULD  JUSTIFY  THE  LAW  BY  WHICH  HE  SUFFERS.  In  the  Sub- 
stitution of  the  Redeemer  of  mankind  were  conjoined  the  most  prompt  and  voluntary 
endurance  of  the  penalty,  with  the  most  avowed  and  cordial  approbation  of  the 
justice  of  its  sanctions.  It  was  a  great  part  of  the  business  of  His  life  to  assert  and 
vindicate  by  His  doctrine  that  law  which  He  magnified  and  made  illustrious  by  His 
passion.  Never  had  the  law  such  an  expounder  as  in  the  person  of  Him  who  came 
into  the  world  to  exhaust  its  penalties,  and  endure  its  curse.  VII.  That  the  volun- 
tary substitution  of  an  innocent  person,  in  the  stead  of  the  guilty,  may  be  capable  of 
answering  the  ends  of  justice,  nothing  seems  more  necessary  than  that  the  substi- 
tute  SHOULD  BE  OF  EQUAL  CONSIDERATION,   AT  LEAST,  TO  THE  PARTY  IN  WHOSE 

BEHALF  HE  INTERPOSES.  The  interests  sacrificed  by  the  suffering  party  should  not 
be  of  less  cost  and  value  than  those  which  are  secured  by  such  a  procedure.  But 
the  aggregate  value  of  those  interests  must  be  supposed  to  be  in  some  proportion  to 
the  rank  and  dignity  of  the  party  to  which  they  belong.  As  a  sacrifice  to  justice, 
the  life  of  a  peasant  must,  on  this  principle,  be  deemed  a  most  inadequate  substitute 
for  that  of  a  personage  of  the  highest  order.  We  should  consider  the  requisitions  of 
justice  eluded,  rather  than  satisfied,  by  such  a  conmiutation.  It  is  on  this  ground 
that  St.  Paul  declares  it  to  be  "impossible  for  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  to 
take  away  sins. "  In  this  view  the  redemption  of  the  hvmian  race  seemed  to  be  hope- 
less ;■  for  where  could  an  adequate  substitute  be  found  ?  The  mystery  hid  from  ages 
and  generations,  the  mystery  of  Christ  crucified,  dispels  the  obscurity,  and  presents, 
in  the  person  of  the  Redeemer,  all  the  qualifications  which  human  conception  can 
embody  as  contributing  to  the  perfect  character  of  a  substitute.  VIII.  However 
much  we  might  be  convinced  of  the  competence  of  vicarious  suffering  to  accomplish 
the  ends  of  justice,  and  whatever  the  benefits  we  may  derive  from  it,  a  benevolent 

MIND  COULD  NEVER  BE  RECONCILED  TO  THE  SIGHT  OF  VIRTUE  OF  THE  HIGHEST  ORDER 

FINALLY  OPPRESSED  AND  CONSUMED  BY  ITS  OWN  ENERGIES ;  and  the  more  intense 
the  admiration  excited,  the  more  eager  would  be  the  desire  of  same  compensatory 
arrangement,  some  expedient  by  which  an  ample  retribution  might  be  assigned  to 
such  heroic  sacrifices.  If  the  suflTering  of  the  substitute  involved  his  destruction, 
what  satisfaction  could  a  generous  and  feeling  mind  derive  from  impunity  procured 
at  such  a  cost  ?  "While  we  rejoice  in  the  cross  of  Christ  as  the  source  of  pardon,  our 
satisfaction  is  heightened  by  beholding  it  succeeded  by  the  crown.  IX.  If  the 
principle  of  substitution  be  at  all  admitted  in  the  operations  of  criminal  law,  it  is  too 
obvious  to  require  proof  that  IT  should  be  introduced  very  sparingly,  only  on 
very  rare  occasions,  and  never  be  allowed  to  subside  into  a  settled  course.  It 
requires  some  great  crisis  to  justify  its  introduction,  some  extraordinary  combination 
of  difficulties,  obstructing  the  natural  course  of  justice  ;  it  requires,  that  while  the 
letter  of  the  law  is  dispensed  with,  its  spirit  be  fuUy  adhered  to  ;  so  that,  instead  of 
tending  to  weaken  the  motives  to  obedience,  it  shall  present  a  salutary  monition,  a 
moral  and  edifying  spectacle.  The  substitution  of  Christ  in  the  room  of  a  guilty 
race  receives  aU  the  advantage  as  an  impressive  spectacle  which  it  is  possible  to 
derive  from  this  circumstance.  It  stands  amidst  the  lapse  of  ages,  and  the  waste  of 
worlds,  a  single  and  solitary  monument.  X.  "Whenever  the  ex[iedient  of  vicarious 
Buffering  is  adopted,  A  publication  of  the  design  of  that  transaction  be- 
comes as  indispensably  necessary  as  of  the  transaction  itself  ;  since 
none  of  the  eflFects  which  it  is  intended  to  produce  can  be  realized  but  in  propor- 
tion as  that  is  imderstood.  Hence  we  see  the  infinite  importance,  in  the  doctrine 
of  the  Gross,  that  not  merely  the  fact  of  our  Lord's  death  and  sufferings  should  be 
announced,  but  that  their  object  and  purpose,  as  a  great  moral  expedient,  should  be 
published  to  all  nations.  The  doctrine  of  remission  of  sins,  through  the  blood  of 
that  Victim  which  was  once  offered  for  the  sina  of  the  world,  forms  the  grand  pecu- 
Kari^  of  the  Gospel,  and  was  the  principal  theme  of  the  apostolic  ministiy,  and  it 


CHAP,  im.]  ISAIAH.  18S 

BtUl  pre-eminently  "tJie  power  of  God  to  salvation."  {Ibid.)  The  erueifixum >-• 
I.  The  suffering  itself.  "He  was  stricken."  The  greatness  of  this  suffering 
will  be  made  out  to  us  upon  these  three  accounts.  1.  Of  the  latitude  and  extent  ot 
it.  2.  Of  the  intenseness  and  sharpness  of  it.  3.  Of  the  person  inflicting  it.  II. 
The  nature  of  the  suffering,  which  was  penal,  and  expiatory,  "He  was 
stricken  for  transgression."  III.  The  ground  and  cause  of  this  suffering, 
which  was  God's  propriety  in,  and  relation  to,  the  persons  for  whom  Christ  was 
stricken,  implied  in  this  word,  "  My  people."  Conclusion :  Christianity  is  a  suffer- 
ing religion,  and  there  are  two  sorts  of  suffering  to  which  it  wiU  certainly  expose  every 
genuine  professor  of  it.  1.  A  suffering  from  himself;  even  that  grand  suffering  of 
self-denial  and  mortification,  the  sharpest  and  most  indispensable  of  all  others,  ia 
which  every  Christian  is  not  only  to  be  the  sufferer,  but  himself  also  the  executioner. 
"He  who  is  Christ's,"  says  the  apostle,  "has  crucified  the  flesh  with  its  affections 
and  lusts."  2.  From  the  world.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  The  stricken  Christ : — I.  "Who 
WAS  stricken  ?  II.  Refer  to  His  sufferings.  How  was  He  stricken  ?  1.  "With 
reproach.  "  As  for  this  feUow,  we  know  not  whence  He  is."  2.  "With  ingratitude. 
His  very  "disciples  forsook  Him,  and  fled."  3.  "With  poverty.  4.  Chiefly  by  the 
rod  of  His  heavenly  Father.  III.  The  object  of  these  sufferings.  "For  the 
transgression  of  My  people  was  He  stricken. "  1.  Justice  is  satisfied.  2.  Conscience 
is  at  peace.  I"V'.  The  fruits  of  His  sufferings,  ia  connection  with  our  own 
feeUngs  and  experience.  1.  The  devil  is  now  destroyed.  However  formidable  an 
enemy,  the  power  of  his  arm  is  foUed.  2.  The  soul  is  saved.  8.  All  possible 
consolation  is  secured.    {J.  Parsons.) 

Ver.  9.  And  He  made  His  grave  with  the  wicked. — "  With  the  rich  in  His 
death:" — "Rich"  must  mean  "wicked,"  just  as  "poor"  often  means  godly. 
{A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  suffering  Servant  given  a  convict's  grave: — Having 
conceived  Him  to  have  been  lawfully  put  to  death,  they  consistently  gave  Him 
a  convict's  grave ;  "they  made  His  grave  with  the  wicked,  and  He  was  with  the 
felon  in  His  death,"  though  He  was  an  innocent  man — "He  had  done  no  harm ; 
neither  was  guile  ia  His  mouth."  {Prof.  6.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  "  With  the  rich  in 
His  death : " — The  meaning  is,  "  His  grave  was  assigned  to  Him  with  criminals,  and 
with  a  rich  man  after  He  had  actually  died  a  painfal  death,"  i.  e.  He  was  to  have 
been  laid  where  the  bodies  of  dead  criminals  lie,  but  He  came  after  His  death  to  lie 
in  a  grave  that  had  been  intended  for  the  corpse  of  a  rich  man.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
A  prophecy  of  Messiah: — I.  Something  foretold  concerning  the  Messiah, 
that  is,  that  He  shall  make  His  grave,  etc.  II.  A  reason  subjoined,  taken  from 
His  innocency.  {J.  Durham.)  Christ  laid  in  the  grave: — In  all  the  Evangelists  it 
is  clear  that  after  death  He  was  laid  in  the  grave,  and  very  particular  notice  is 
taken  of  it.  Take  here  some  reasons  of  this  necessity.  1.  That  the  unstainedness 
and  purity  of  Divine  justice  may  appear,  and  that,  therefore,  the  perfection  of  His 
satisfaction  may  be  confirmed,  2.  It  is  much  for  the  manifestation  of  the  great 
love  of  God,  and  of  the  rich  condescending  grace  of  the  Mediator,  who  is  not  only 
content  to  die,  but  to  be  laid  in  the  grave,  and  to  suffer  death  to  have  a  kind  of 
dominion  over  Him  for  a  time.  3.  It  is  for  the  consolation  of  the  believer  and 
serves  mightily  to  strengthen  him  against  the  fear  of  death  and  the  grave.  He  may 
lie  down  quietly  in  the  grave,  because  it  was  Christ's  bed,  warmed,  to  say  so,  by 
Him.     4.  It  serves  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.     {Ibid.) 

"Vers.  10,  11.  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him. — "It  pleased  the  Lord  to 
bruise  Him : " — The  Lord's  hand  was  supreme  in  the  business — 1.  In  respect  of  His 
appointing  Christ's  sufferings.  It  was  concluded  in  the  counsel  of  God  that  He 
should  -suffer.  2.  In  respect  of  the  ordering  and  overruling  of  His  sufferings.  He, 
who  governs  all  the  counsels,  thoughts  and  actions  of  men,  did,  in  a  special  manner, 
govern  and  overrule  the  sufferings  of  the  Mediator ;  though  wicked  men  were 
following  their  own  design,  and  were  stirred  and  acted  by  the  devil,  who  is  said  to 
have  put  it  rato  the  heart  of  Judas  to  betray  Christ — yet  God  had  the  ordering  of 
aU  who  should  betray  Him,  what  death  He  should  die,  how  He  should  be  pierced, 
and  yet  not  a  bone  of  Him  be  broken.  3.  In  respect  of  His  having  had  a  hand 
actively  in  them  (John  xix.  11 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  46  ;  Rom.  viii.  32 ;  Zech.  xiii.  7). 
(J.  Durham. )  The  good  pleasure  of  God  in  redemption : — The  good  pleasure  of  God. 
Which  the  prophet  marks  to  show — 1.  That  all  the  good  that  comes  by  Christ  to 
sinners  is  bred  in  the  Lord's  own  bosom.  2.  The  concurrence  of  aU  the  Persons  of 
the  Triniiy  in  promoting  the  work  of  the  redemption  of  sinners.    {Ibid.)    Th$ 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  liu. 

Divine  complacency  in  the  sorrows  of  Christ: — There  are  many  expressions  in 
Scripture,  which,  without  explanation,  are  repugnant  to  human  instincts  of  justice, 
and  shocking  to  our  intuitions  of  love.  This  is  a  case  in  point.  He  had  done 
nothing  overtly  or  morally  to  deserve  severity,  "yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise 
Him."  It  revolts  our  first  feeling  of  equity  and  compassion  ;  and  when  the  state- 
ment is  applied  to  Him  of  whom  we  are  taught  that  God  is  love,  we  shrink  at  the 
sternness  of  the  words.  Had  it  been  said  the  Lord  found  it  necessary  to  put  Him 
to  grief,  it  would  have  been  mysterious  enough,  and  we  should  have  found  ourselves 
asking  ' '  Why  ? "  and  catechizing  our  speculative  ideals  of  Divine  equity  and  of 
moral  necessity.  But  to  read  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  inflict  this  bruise  and  to 
impose  this  grief  is  a  riddle  which  seems  as  harsh  as  it  is  contradictory.  {A .  Mursell. ) 
The  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  atonement: — All  this  confusion  and  injustice 
arises  from  sustaining  too  literally  in  our  minds  the  figure  of  duality  which  excludes 
the  Father  from  participation  in  the  sacrifice,  and  the  Son  from  the  acquiescent 
wiUinghood  of  its  executive.  It  is  not  the  punishment  of  an  innocent  Son  by  an 
angry  Father  that  we  have  to  consider,  but  rather  the  co-operation  of  the  entire 
Godhead  in  the  tragedy  of  sorrow  out  of  which  the  redemption  of  mortality  was 
born.  Under  the  figure  of  Father  and  Son,  the  Deity  devoted  the  full  strength  and 
tenderness  of  the  Divine  character  and  resource  to  the  salvation  of  our  race.  And, 
in  this  respect,  there  was,  and  ever  will  be,  a  Divine  complacency  in  the  sorrow 
and  suffering  from  which  that  redemption  sprang.  {Ibid.)  Christ's  complacency  in 
the  Divine  sorrows : — Our  topic  is  the  Divine  complacency  in  the  sorrows  of  Christ. 
It  will  bear  transposition  ;  and  we  can  speak  of  Christ's  complacency  in  the  Diviiie 
sorrows.  Here  is  a  blending  of  pleasui-e  and  pain,  of  joy  and  sorrow,  as  fall  of 
mystery  as  of  love,  but  the  key  to  whose  mystery  is  carried  in  the  bosom  of  its  love. 
The  sorrows  of  Christ  were  endured  in  pursuance  of  the  settled  and  ancient  purpose 
of  God.  Not  of  the  purpose  of  a  Father  to  afflict  His  Son,  but  of  the  purpose  of  the 
Divine  Creator  to  redeem  His  universe.  There  was  a  compact  of  pity  and  of  power 
in  the  heart  and  arm  of  God  as  soon  as  man  had  lapsed,  that  his  lapse  should  be 
atoned  and  his  fall  restored.  The  Creator  was  not  to  be  baffled  in  His  plan.  His 
life  was  bound  up  in  that  of  His  Maker  ;  and  because  He  lived  man  must  live  also. 
Not  only  because  He  loved  us,  but  because  He  would  not  be  defeated,  did  the  mind 
of  Deity  set  itself  to  untie  the  knot  which  the  serpent  had  encoded  around  the 
creature  of  God's  image.  (Ibid.)  Divine  love  and  Divine  suffering: — 1.  The 
sorrows  which  atonement  involved  became  a  source  of  complacency  to  the  Divine 
mind,  inasmuch  as  the  Lord  foresaw  their  certain  issues.  2.  Nor  could  this 
complacency  in  sorrow  fail  to  be  augmented  by  the  thought  of  the  universal  interest 
those  sorrows  would  awaken.  Earth,  for  whose  sake  they  were  endured,  was  the 
last  to  show  that  interest.  3.  This  complacency  was  made  complete  because  the 
sorrows  it  confi'onted  removed  the  barrier  from  the  exercise  of  infinite  beneficence 
and  love.  "What  is  more  tantalizing  to  a  soul  aflame  than  love  restrained  ?  {Ibid. ) 
The  bruising  of  the  Son  of  God  the  pleasure  of  His  Father: — I.  Whom  did  Jehovah 

BRUISE?      II.    How   DID    He    BRUISE    HiM  ?      III.    WhY   DID    He   TAKE    PLEASURE 

IN  BRUISING  Him  1  1.  That  He  might  execute  His  pleasant  decrees.  2.  That  He 
might  fulfil  His  pleasant  promises.  3.  That  He  might  redeem  the  chosen  objects 
of  His  love.  4.  That  He  might  promote  His  Son  to  the  highest  honours.  5.  That 
He  might  exalt  His  own  glory  to  the  uttermost.  (fT.  Taylor.)  The  bruising  of 
Jesus: — The  Father  was  "pleased"  to  bruise  Emmanuel.  I.  Because  of  the 
HOLY  Sufferer's  perfect  sympathy  with  His  purpose,  as  being  the  vindication 
of  the  Divine  holiness,  "the  magnifying  of  the  Divine  law,"  and  the  upholding  of 
the  Divine  government.  II.  Because  under  this  "bruising"  Jesus  was 
manifesting  the  Divine  love  and  sympathy  for  and  with  us — perfect  as 
it  was  God's,  and  yet  true  brotherly,  as  it  was  man's.  III.  Because  of  what 
He  desired  to  see  in  us.  (/.  Wylie,  D.D.)  God's  purpose  in  the  auful  tragedy 
of  the  Cross : — It  is  so  utter  a  perversion  of  justice,  so  signal  a  triimaph  of  wrong 
over  right,  so  final  a  disappearance  into  oblivion  of  the  fairest  life  that  ever  lived, 
that  men  might  be  tempted  to  say,  God  has  forsaken  His  own.  On  the  contrary, 
God's  own  will  and  pleasure  have  been  in  this  tragedy.  "Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord 
to  bruise  Him."  The  line  as  it  thus  stands  in  our  English  Version  has  a  grim, 
repulsive  sound.  But  the  Hebrew  word  has  no  necessary  meaning  of  pleasure  or 
enjoyment.  All  it  says  is,  God  so  willed  it.  His  purpose  was  in  this  tragedy. 
{Pr(^.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Christ's  sufferings;  their  cause,  nature  and  fruits :— 
The  prophet  is  still  dealing  with  the  Jews'  scandals.  Whilst  you  look  only  to  th« 
outward  meanness  and  sufferings  of  Christ,  you  overlook  the  design  of  God  in  Him. 


CHAP,  uii.]  ISAIAH.  135 

L  The  will  of  God.     "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him,"  etc.,  that  is  the  cause 
of  His  suflFerings.     II.  The  nature  of  His  sufferings.     "When  Thou  shalt 
make    His  soul    an  offering  for    sin."    III.  The    fruits    of    His    suffering. 
(r.  Manton,  D.D.)     Christ's  sufferings  Divinely  ordained: — All  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus  Christ  were  laid  on  Him  by  the  ordination  and  appointment  of  God  the 
Father.     This  appears  by  Scripture,  which  asseri;s — 1.  The  choice  of  Christ's  person, 
and  the  designation  and  deputation  of  Him  to  the  office  of  Mediator  (Isa.  xlii.  1 ; 
John  vi.  27  ;  Rom.  iii.  25  ;  1  Pet.  1.  20).     2.  The  bestowing  the  person  of  Christ 
upon  us,  so  that  He  was  made  ours  (John  iii.  16).     3.  The  determining  of  all  the 
sufferings  of  Christ ;  not  a  sorrow,  but  God  had  it  in  His  thoughts  before  all  worlds 
(Acts  ii.  23  ;  Luke  xxii.  22  ;  Acts  iv.  27,  28).     4.  There  are  some  expressions  which 
seem  to  imply  as  if  there  were  more  than  a  bare  knowledge  and  permission  in  this 
great  affair,  as  if  there  were  some  kind  of  action  in  Christ's  sufferings.     It  will  bo 
worthy  the  inquiring,  then,  what  acts  of  God,  what    efficiency  there  was  from 
Him  towards  the  suSerings  of  Christ?     (1)  Thus  far  God  concurred,  by  a  with- 
drawing of  His  presence  and  the   sight   of   His   favour.     (2)  By  sustaining  the 
wicked    instruments    in    their    natures,   beings,   and    actings,   whilst    they  were 
drawing  out  their  spite  and  violence  against  Christ  (Acts  xvii.  28  ;  John  xix.  11). 
(3)  By  serving  His  love  and  glory  by  their  wickedness,  that  bi-uised  and  afflicted 
Christ.     The  reasons  of   this  point  are — 1.  Because  all    things   fall    imder  His 
decrees  and  the  care  of  His  providence,  and  thei'efore  certainly  this  matter  of 
Christ  does.     2.  Because  this  was  the  special  design  and  contrivance  of  Heaven 
to  bring  forth  Christ  into  the  world  ;  all  other  dispensations  looked  this  way. 
(Ibid. )     God's  eternal  pleasure  revealed  in  Christ : — The  plot  of  the  Gospel  was 
long  since  drawn  in  heaven,  and  lay  hid  in  God's  breast,   till  He  was  pleased 
to  copy  out  His  eternal  thoughts,  and  give  the  world  a  draught  of  them.     {Ibid.) 
Ood  working  His  own  counsel  through  human  agency : — How  is  the  creature  to  blame, 
then,  for  smiting  and  bruising  of  Christ  ?    Or  if  to  blame,  how  is  God  clear  ?     1. 
For  the  creatures'  blame.     They  are  faulty — (1)  Because  God's  secret  thoughts  and 
intents  are  not  their  rule.     Hidden  things  belong  to  God  ;  and  it  is  He  that  worketh 
according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own  wiU.     (2)  They  had  other  ends,  though  God 
turned  it  for  good.     "With  wicked  hands  ye  have  taken,  and  crucified,  and  slain." 
(3)  God's  decrees  did  not  compel  them  to  evil ;  it  implieth  things  will  be,  though  it 
doth  not  affect  them.     2.  For  the  justifying  of  God  when  He  judgeth.     His  justice 
cannot  be  impeached,  because  He  infuseth  no  evil,  enforceth  to  no  evil,  only  ordaineth 
what  shall  be.     His  goodness  cannot  be  impeached  for  suffering  things  which  He  can 
turn  to  such  advantage  for  His  own  glory  and  the  creature's  good.     God's  decrees 
are  immanent  in  Himself,  working  nothing  that  is  evil  in  the  creatures.     (Ibid.) 
When  Thou  shalt  make  His  Soul  an  offering  for  sin. — Christ  an  offering  for  sin: — 
1.  It  is  here  supposed  that  there  is  sin  on  the  person,  and  that  wrath  due  for  sin  is 
to  be  removed.     2.  That  there  is  an  inability  in  the  person  to  remove  the  sin,  and 
yet  a  necessity  to  have  it  removed,  or  else  he  must  suffer.     3.  The  intervening,  or 
coming  of  something  in  the  place  of  that  person  who  is  guilty  of  sin,  and  liable  to 
wrath.     4.  The  acceptance  of  that  which  interveneth  by  God,  the  party  offended, 
and  so  a  covenant  whereby  the  Lord  hath  condescended  to  accept  that  offering.     {J. 
Durham.)     Christ  a  guilt-offering  (R.Y.,  marg.) : — Heb.  dsham  (Lev.  v.  14  ;  vi  7), 
to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  sin-offering  (Heb.  chattdh,  Lev.  iv.  1  ;  v.  13). 
Sin  is  viewed  as  a  sacrilege,  an  invasion  of  God  s  honour :  the  dsham  is  the  satis- 
faction paid  for  it,  viz.  the  innocent  life  of  the  Righteous  Servant.     {Prof.  S.  B. 
Driver,  D.D.)     The  gtnlt-offering : — There  is  a  historical  passage  which,  though  the 
term  ' '  guilt-offering  "  is  not  used  in  it,  admirably  illustrates  the  idea.     A  famine  in 
David's  time  was  revealed  to  be  due  to  the  murder  of  certain  Gibeonites  by  the 
house  of  Saul.     David  asked  the  Gibeonites  what  reparation  he  could  make.     They 
said  it  was  not  a  matter  of  damages.     But  both  parties  felt  that  before  the  law  of 
God  could  be  satisfied  and  the  land  relieved  of  its  curse,  some  atonement,  some 
gmlt-offering,  must  be  made  to  the  Divine  law.     It  was  a  wild  kind  of  satisfaction 
that  was  paid.     Seven  men  of  Saul's  house  were  hung  up  before  the  Lord  in  Gibeon. 
But  the  instinct,  though  satisfied  in  so  murderous  a  fashion,  was  a  true  and  a  grand 
instinct — the  conscience  of  a  law  above  all  human  laws  and  rights,  to  which  homage 
must  be  paid  before  the  sinner  could  come  into  true  relations  with  God,  or  the  Divine 
curse  be  lifted  off.     {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)     The  Monarch's  self -surrender,  a 
trespass-offering  and  a  sin-offering : — What  this  suffering  meant,  the  prophet  indicates 
in  several  phrases  which  we  will  link  together.     "  His  soul  shall  make  a  gmlt-offer- 
ing"   (ver.   10).     "He  shall  bear  their  iniquities"  (ver.   11).     "He  bare  tlw 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lot, 

ein  of  many  "  (ver.  12).  These  three  expressions  are  derived  from  the  Mosaic  ritnal ; 
the  first,  from  the  trespass-oflfering,  the  second,  from  the  law  concerning  the  scape- 
goat, the  third  from  the  sin -offering.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  the  sending  away  of 
the  scapegoat  was  a  part  of  the  ceremonial  connected  with  the  sin-offering  on  the 
great  day  of  atonement,  we  may  let  the  second  and  third  expressions  blend  into  one. 
And  then  we  get  the  thought  that  this  suffering  Servant  would  at  once  fill  up  the 
varied  meanings  of  the  sin-offering  and  of  the  guilt-offering.  (C.  Olemance,  D.D.) 
In  Messiah's  offering,  the  meanings  of  the  trespass-offerings  and  the  sin-offerings  were 
all  included: — 1.  That  there  was  a  distinction  between  the  significance  of  the 
trespass-offerings  and  that  of  the  sin-offerings  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  each  kind  of 
offerings  had  its  own  specific  ritual  and  set  of  laws  (Lev.  xi.  25  ;  vii.  1).  But  it  is 
not  so  easy  to  point  out  wherein  that  distinction  lay.  They  had  some  points  in 
common.  Both  recognized  siu  in  some  form  or  other.  Though  every  sin  might  not 
be  a  trespass,  yet  every  trespass  was  a  sin,  hence  (at  least  in  one  case)  the  trespass 
was  to  be  atoned  for  by  a  sin-offering  (Lev.  v.  6).  Both  of  them  were  for  sins  of 
omission  and  for  sins  of  commission.  Both  were  for  inadvertent  and  for  known  sins. 
Both  were  for  sins  against  conscience  and  against  God.  Both  were  for  some  sins 
against  property.  Both  were  for  open  and  for  secret  sins.  So  that  it  is  not  surpris- 
ing that  the  two  frequently  seem  to  overlap.  Still  a  careful  study  will  help  us  to 
draw  out  some  distinctions  between  them — (1)  The  sin-offering  recognized  sinfulness 
as  uncleanness  common  to  the  race  ;   the  trespass-offering  recognized  sin  in  the 

Secific  acts  of  any  person  among  them  (cf.  Lev.  v.  17  with  Lev.  xvi.  15,  16).  (2) 
le  sin-offering  regarded  all  sin  ;  the  trespass-offering  only  some  sins  (Lev.  xvi.  34  ; 
V.  1,  14,  15),  (3)  The  sin-offering  was  for  all  the  people,  recognizing  their  oneness  ; 
the  trespass-offering  was  for  distinctive  cases,  recognizing  their  individuality  (Lev, 
xvi,  21  ;  V,  1,  14,  17).  (4)  The  sin-offering  conveyed  the  idea  of  propitiation  ;  the 
trespass-offering  embodied  that  of  satisfaction,  as,  over  and  above  its  recognition  of 
injury  done  towards  God  or  man,  there  were  specific  injunctions  concerning  restitu- 
tion, intimating  a  certain  value  as  the  standard  required  (Lev,  xvi.  21,  22  ;  v.  18  ; 
Num.  V.  5-8),  (5)  The  sin-offering  had  its  aspect  God-ward ;  the  trespass-offering 
rather  looked  man-ward  (Lev,  iv.  4-6  ;  xiv,  14).  (6)  The  ritual  of  the  sin-offering 
symbolized  pardon,  "covering,"  the  "bearing  away"  of  sin  ;  that  of  the  trespass- 
offering  symbolized  pm-ification  or  cleansing  from  sin  (cf.  Lev,  xvi.  16,  17  ;  xiv.  14). 
(7)  The  treatment  of  the  sia-offering  indicated  far  deeper  reproach  than  the  treat- 
ment of  the  trespass-offering  (Lev,  iv,  11,  12  ;  vii.  6).  As  the  sin  that  poisons  all  is 
far  more  serious  than  the  transgressions  which  mark  each  one,  so,  on  the  day  of 
expiation,  "the  victim,  because  it  was  (symbolically)  laden  with  the  uncleanness 
and  guilt  of  the  whole  people,  and  was  consequently  unclean,  must  be  taken  outside 
the  camp  and  there  burned  "  (Delitzsch).  (8)  The  attitude  of  the  sinner  in  the  sin- 
offering  was  that  of  believingly  recognizing  the  sacrifice  as  his  substitute  God-ward  ; 
but  in  the  case  of  the  trespass-offering  he  must  also  be  ready  with  his  compensations 
man-ward  (Lev.  xvi.  20-22  ;  v.  16  ;  vi.  1-7),  (9)  In  the  sin-offering  the  priest  is 
always  the  representative  of  the  offerer  ;  in  the  trespass-offering  he  is  generally  the 
representative  of  God.  ' '  Thus  the  trespass-offering  was  a  restitution  or  compensation 
made  to  God,  in  being  paid  to  the  priest,  a  payment  or  penance  which  made  amends 
for  the  wrong  done — a  satisf actio  in  a  disciplinary  sense. "  2.  The  prophet  in  the 
chapter  before  us  declares  that  the  trespass-offering  and  the  sin-offering  will  be 
fulfilled  in  this  Servant  of  God  ;  that  His  work  for  man,  towards  God  in  reference  to 
sin,  will  take  into  accoimt  all  the  aspects  of  sin,  will  honour  all  the  claims  of  God, 
and  will  meet  all  the  need  of  man.  And  so,  in  fact,  we  find  it  when  we  come  to 
examine  the  representations  of  the  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  as  given  us  in  the  New 
Testament.  (1)  Our  Saviour  as  the  sia-offering,  "  suffered  without  the  gate  "  (Heb. 
xiii.  11,  12).  (2)  He  atones  for  sin,  and  for  sins  (Heb.  ix.  26  ;  Gal.  i.  4).  (3)  He 
"  bears  away  "  a  world's  sin,  yet  "  gave  Himself  for  our  sins  "  (John  i.  29  ;  Gal.  i.  4). 
(4)  The  sins  of  all  are  laid  on  Him,  and  yet  the  individual  can  say,  "He  gave  Him- 
self for  me  "  (1  John  ii.  2  ;  Gal.  ii.  20).  (5)  He  is  the  propitiation,  and  yet  the 
ransom-price  (1  John  iv.  10  ;  Matt,  xx,  28).  (6)  His  sacrifice  avails  towards  God, 
yet  is  effective  towards  man  (Heb.  ix.  12-24  ;  x.  10).  (7)  By  His  work  our  gmlt  is 
pardoned,  our  sin  covered  ;  through  it  our  natures  are  cleansed  (Rom.  iv.  7 ,  8  ;  1 
Peter  i.  2).  (8)  As  He  is  our  propitiation,  there  is  a  reconciliation  to  be  accepted  ; 
as  He  is  our  ransom-price,  our  acceptance  of  Him  is  attended  with  repentance 
towards  God,  and  restitution  towards  man  (Rom.  v.  8-11  ;  Acts  xxvi.  20  ;  Matt.  v. 
23,  24  ;  Luke  xix,  7-10),  (9)  As  our  mediating  High  Priest,  He  is  our  representative 
before  Qod.    He  pleads  His  blood  before  the  throne ;  yet  is  He  also  the  voice  of  God 


CBAP.  un.]  ISAIAH.  187 

to  us,  through  whom  our  pardon  is  proclaimed  (Heb.  vL  20 ;  vii  25 ;  Matt,  ix,  6). 
Thus  all  the  ground  is  covered  by  the  one  great  Sacrifice,  and  nothing  is  left  undone ! 
3.  Let  us  learn,  then — (1)  The  unity  there  is  between  the  law  and  the  Gospel.  We 
have  this  prophecy  standing  seven  hundred  years  after  the  giving  of  the  one,  seven 
hundred  years  before  the  announcement  of  the  other :  yet  we  find  the  very  phrasea 
of  the  prophet  are  adopted  from  the  Mosaic  ritual,  pointing  to  its  fulfilment  in  the 
Messiah  ;  while  the  New  Testament  teachings  as  to  the  work  of  Christ  are  based  on 
both  ritual  and  prophecy,  carrying  them  both  on  to  their  fulness  of  meaning,  and 
revealing  their  wealth  of  glory.  (2)  "We  may  well  look  on  with  profound  reverence 
as  the  Most  High  brings  out,  in  ritual,  prophecy,  and  Gospel,  that  truth  which  men 
are  most  ready  to  let  slip — viz.  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin !  (3)  In  Gospel, 
prophecy,  and  ritual,  there  is,  in  order  to  meet  the  world's  need,  not  only  a  central 
Figure,  but  a  central  fact.  In  the  ritual,  the  priest  and  the  ofiFering.  In  the 
prophecy,  the  Messiah  and  His  ofiering.  In  the  Gospel,  the  Christ  and  His  ofiFering. 
Here  is  a  threefold  cord,  "not  easily  broken."  (4)  Never  let  us  forget  the  double 
aspect  of  the  work  of  Christ — large  enough  to  cover  all  the  ground ;  minute  enough 
to  point  out  me  and  to  save  me  !  (5)  We  are  not  saved  in  sin  but  from  it.  (6)  Let 
us  not  fail  to  catch  the  keynote  of  the  law  and  of  the  Gospel,  viz.  that  nothing  is 
right  with  a  sinfiil  man  till  relations  between  him  and  God  are  right.  {Ibid.) 
Expiation : — Both  Jews  and  Gentiles  knew  pretty  well  what  an  offering  for  sin  meant. 
The  Gentiles  had  been  in  the  habit  of  offering  sacrifices.  The  Jews,  however,  had  by 
far  the  clearer  idea  of  it.     I.  Sin  deserves  and  demands  punishment.     II.  Thb 

PKOVISION   AND  ACCEPTANCE   OF  A  SUBSTITTTTE  FOR  SINNERS  IS  AN   ACT  OF   GRACE. 

III.  Jesus  is  the  most  fitting  Person  to  be  a  substitute,  and  His  work  is  thk 

MOST  fitting  work  TO  BE  A  SATISFACTION.  IV.  ChRIST'S  "WORK,  AND  THE  EFFECTS 
OF  THAT  WORK  ARE  NOW  COMPLETE.  (C.  J7".  Spurgeon.)  Christ's  death  and  the  law 
of  God : — By  His  death  the  Servant  did  homage  to  the  law  of  God.  By  dying  to  it 
He  made  men  feel  that  the  supreme  end  of  man  was  to  own  that  law  and  be  in  a 
right  relation  to  it,  and  that  the  supreme  service  was  to  help  others  to  a  right 
relation.  As  it  ia  said  a  little  farther  down,  "  My  Servant,  righteous  Himself,  wins 
righteousness  for  many,  and  makes  their  iniquities  His  load."  {Prof.  O.  A.  Smith, 
D.D.)  The  guilt-offering : — It  is  strange  but  true,  that  the  saddest,  darkest  day  that 
ever  broke  upon  our  world  is  destined  to  cure  the  sadness  and  dissipate  the  darkness 
for  evermore.  It  is  to  the  passion  of  the  Redeemer  that  loving  hearts  turn  in  their 
saddest,  darkest,  most  sin-conscious  hours  to  find  solace,  light,  and  help.  As  though 
to  obviate  the  possibility  of  mistaking  its  meaning,  we  are  reminded  again,  and  yet 
again,  that  the  death  of  the  Divine  Servant  was  no  ordinary  episode ;  but  dis- 
tinguished from  all  other  deaths,  from  aU  martyrdoms  and  sacrifices,  in  its  unique 
and  lonely  grandeur — the  one  perfect  and  sufllcient  sacrifice  and  oblation  for  the  sins 
of  the  whole  world.  The  prophet's  thought  will  become  apparent,  if  we  notice — 
I.  The  common  lot  of  man.  It  may  be  summed  up  in  three  words — suffering,  sin, 
death.  II.  The  notable  exception  of  this  chapter.  The  Divine  Servant  pre- 
sents a  notable  exception  to  the  lot  of  man  ;  not  in  His  sufferings,  for  He  was  "a 
Man  of  Sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief ; "  nor  in  His  death,  for  He  died  many- 
deaths  in  one  (ver.  9,  E.V.,  marg.) ;  but  in  His  perfect  inntfcence  and  goodness. 
"He  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any  deceit  in  His  mouth."  The  Divine 
Servant  has  passed  through  every  painful  experience  ;  has  drunk  to  its  dregs  eveiy 
cup  ;  has  studied  deeply  every  black-lettered  volume  in  the  library  of  pain.  In  Hut 
case,  at  least,  man's  hastily-formed  conclusions  are  falsified.  Generally  we  pass  from 
singular  suffering  to  discover  its  cause  in  some  hidden  or  remote  transgression.  In 
the  case  of  Jesus  Christ,  however,  this  explanation  of  His  unique  sufferings  was 
altogether  at  fault.  Another  explanation  must,  therefore,  be  forthcoming  to  account 
for  the  sufferings  of  the  innocent  Saviour.  The  explanation  lay  hid  as  a  secret 
concealed  in  a  hieroglyph,  in  the  vast  system  of  Levitical  sacrifice,  which  foreshadowed 
the  "offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  aU."  So,  under  the  Divine 
guidance,  men  were  led  from  the  conclusions  of  ver.  4  to  those  of  ver.  5.  These 
conclusions  expressed  here  as  the  verdict  of  the  human  conscience,  after  scanning 
the  facts  in  the  light  of  history,  are  confirmed  and  clenched  by  the  unanimous  voice 
of  the  New  Testament.  This  is  the  great  exception  which  has  cast  a  new  light  on 
the  mystery  of  pain  and  sorrow.  It  may  be  that  there  is  other  suffering,  which,  in 
a  lower  sense  and  in  a  smaller  measure,  is  also  redemptive,  fulfilling  Divine  purposes 
in  the  lives  of  others  ;  though  no  sufferer  is  free  from  sin  as  Christ  was,  and  none 
has  ever  been  able  to  expiate  sin  as  He.  III.  The  personal  application  of  thess 
TBUTHS.     "Thon  most  make  his  aool  a  goilt-offering  "  (E.Y.,  maig.).    This  tenn. 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  im. 

"guilt-offering,"  occurs  in  the  Book  of  Leviticus.  If  a  man  committed  a  trespass  in 
the  holy  things  of  the  Lord,  he  was  directed  to  select  and  bring  from  his  flock  a  ram 
without  blemish.  This  was  his  "  guUt-offering  " — the  word  used  here.  He  was  to 
make  a  money  restitution  for  his  offence  ;  but  the  atonement  was  made  through  the 
ram  (Lev.  v.  1-16).  Similarly,  if  a  man  sinned  against  his  neighbour,  either  in 
oppressing  him  or  withholding  his  dues,  or  neglecting  to  restore  property  which  had 
been  entrusted  to  him,  he  was  not  only  to  make  restitution,  but  to  bring  his  guilt- 
offering  to  the  Lord — a  ram  without  blemish  out  of  the  flock — and  the  priest  made  an 
atonement  before  the  Lord,  and  he  was  forgiven  concerning  whatsoever  he  had  done  to 
be  made  guilty  thereby  (Lev.  vi.  1-7).  Is  there  one  of  us  who  has  not  committed  a 
trespass  and  sinned  in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord  ?  Is  there  one  of  us  who  has  not 
failed  in  his  obligations  to  neighbour  and  friend  ?  How  certainly  we  need  to  present 
the  guilt-offering  !  There  is  no  mention  made  of  the  necessity  of  summoning  priestly 
aid.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  when  we  consider  the  strict  Levitical  system  in 
which  Israel  was  cradled.  It  would  seem  that  in  the  great  crisis  of  its  need,  the  soul 
of  man  reverts  to  an  earlier  cult,  and  goes  back  beyond  the  elaborate  system  of  the 
temple  to  the  practice  of  the  patriarchal  tent,  where  each  man  acted  as  his  own  priest, 
and  offered  the  guilt-offering  with  his  own  hand.  No  third  person  is  needed  m  thy 
transactions  with  God.  Jesus  is  Priest  as  well  as  Sacrifice.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  atonement  and  its  results: — I.  The  thing  done.  "  When  thou  shaltmake  His 
soul  an  offering  for  sin."  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  This 
sentence,  written  by  the  finger  of  God  on  the  page  of  Scripture,  is  also  written  as  a 
received  truth  on  every  page  of  the  history  of  heathenism.  However  we  may  recoil 
from  the  fearful  superstitions  of  Paganism,  and  weep  over  that  sad  ignorance  which 
can  suppose  God  delighted  even  with  human  sacrifice,  never  let  it  be  forgotten  that 
in  the  bloodiest  rites  of  idolatry  there  are  the  vestiges  of  a  truth  which  is  the  very 
sum  and  substance  of  Christianity.  We  can  turn  our  gaze  to  the  evidence  of  what  is 
called  natural  religion,  accompanied,  it  may  be,  and  loaded  with  what  is  abomin- 
able ;  and  there  we  find  monuments  in  every  age  that  God,  at  some  time  or  another, 
hath  broken  the  silences  of  eternity,  and  spoken  to  His  apostate  creatures,  and 
taught  them  that  unless  there  could  be  found  a  suSicient  sin-offering,  the  sinful  must 
bear  for  ever  the  burden  of  His  displeasure.  Thus  from  the  first  God  gave  notices  of 
the  plan  of  redemption,  and  gradually  prepared  the  way  for  that  oblation  which 
could  alone  take  away  sin.  In  the  deep  recesses  of  Christ's  undefiled  spirit  was  paid 
down  the  debt  which  man  owed  to  God.  II.  Its  consequences.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
He  shall  see  His  seed. — Notable  effects  following  Christ's  sufferings: — 1,  "He  shall 
see  His  seed."  Men  by  the  suffering  of  death  are  incapacitated  to  increase  their  off- 
spring, but  this  is  a  quickening  suffering  and  death  that  hath  a  numerous  offspring. 
2.  "He  shall  prolong  His  days,"  which  seems  to  be  another  paradox;  for  men's 
days  are  shortened  by  their  sufferings  and  death  ;  but  though  He  be  dead  and  buried 
yet  He  shall  rise  again  and  ascend,  and  sit  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father 
and  live  for  ever,  to  make  intercession  for  His  people.  3.  A  third  effect,  which  is 
the  upshot  of  aU,  is,  "  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hand."  God 
hath  designed  Him  for  a  work — the  great  work  of  redemption — even  the  bringing  of 
many  sons  to  glory.  He  shall  pull  many  captives  from  the  devil,  and  set  many 
prisoners  free  ;  He  shall,  by  His  sufferings,  overcome  the  devil,  death  and  the  grave, 
and  aU  enemies  ;  shall  gather  the  sons  of  God  together  from  the  four  comers  of  the 
earth.  {J.  Dwrham.)  Christ  seeing  His  seed : — 1.  A  relation  implied  betwixt  Christ 
and  believers.  They  are  "His  seed,"  such  as  in  the  next  verse  are  said  to  be 
"justified  "  by  Him.  2.  A  prophecy  of  the  event  that  should  follow  Christ's  suffer- 
ings. Our  Lord  Jesus  should  not  only  have  a  seed,  but  a  numerous  seed.  3.  Con- 
sideiing  the  words  as  a  promise  they  hold  out  this — that  though  our  Lord  Jesus 
suffer  and  die  He  shall  not  only  have  a  seed,  but  shall  "see  His  seed."  He  shall 
outlive  His  sufferings  and  death  and  shall  be  delighted  in  seeing  them  who  shall  get 
the  good  of  His  sufferings.  {Ibid.)  Believers  Christ's  seed: — 1.  They  have  their 
being  of  Him.  2.  In  respect  of  the  likeness  that  is  betwixt  Him  and  them.  3.  In 
respect  of  the  care  that  He  hath  of  them.  4.  In  respect  of  the  portion  which  they 
get  from  Him.  5.  Because  of  the  manner  of  thefr  coming  to  the  possession  of  that, 
which  through  Him  they  have  a  claim  to.  They  have  a  claim  to  nothing,  but  by 
being  heirs  to  and  with  Him.  {Ibid.)  Christ  serAng  His  seed: — In  "shall  see 
His  seed  and  have  long  life,"  the  figure  of  a  patriarch  blessed  with  longevity  and 
numerous  descendants  (Gen.  1.  22,  etc.)  is  in  the  prophet's  thoughts.  {Prof.  S.  B. 
Driver,  D.D.)  The  Atonement  indicates  che  dignity  of  man.  Men  do  not  launch 
lifeboats  to  pick  up  corks,  and  we  may  rest  assured  that  in  the  atonement  there  is  a 


CHAP.  Lin.]  ISAIAR.  139 

just  proportion  between  means  and  ends.  {Ja/mes  Duckworth.)  Messiah  contemplating 
Sis  spiritual  offspring : — I.  He  shall  see  them  all  bokn  and  beotjght  in.   II.  He 

SHALL  SEE  THEM  ALL  EDUCATED  AND  BROUGHT  UP.  III.  He  SHALL  SEE  THEM  ALL 
SUPPORTED  AND  BROUGHT  THROUGH.   IV.  He  SHALL  SEE  THEM  ALL  PERFECTED 

AND  BROUGHT  HOME.    (iZ.  Mwter,  D.D.)    Christ's  spiritual  offspring  : — I.  Messiah's 

GLORY  IS  INSEPARABLY  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  HiS  OFFSPRING.  II. 
The  APPLICATION  IS  NOT  LESS  CERTAIN  THAN  THE  PURCHASE  OF  REDEMPTION. 
III.  A  SEASONABLE  AND  POWERFUL  ANTIDOTE  AGAINST  UNDUE  DEPRESSION  OB 
ALARM  ABOUT  THE  LOW  STATE  OF  RELIGION  IN  THE  OhURCH.  IV.  It  IS  OUE 
DUTY    AND     HONOUR    TO    CONCUR    IN    CARRYING     THIS    SCRIPTURE    INTO    EFFECT. 

(Ibid.)  Seeing  His  seed  [-mth.  John  xvii.  2,  and  Eph.  v.  25-27): — "His  Seed." 
This  clearly  implies  that  the  Messiah  should  be  the  Tiving  Head  of  a  new  spiritual 
race.  As  Adam  was  the  head  of  the  human  family,  and  Abraham  the  head  of  the 
Hebrew  people,  so  the  Lord  Jesus  was  to  be  the  head  of  a  spiritual  seed.  The 
Psalmist  in  the  second  Psahn,  plainly  a  Messianic  one,  declares :  "  Ask  of  Me,  and  I 
will  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Tnine  inheritance  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth 
for  Thy  possession. "  Our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  spoke  of  those  who  would  be  saved  by 
Him  as  given  to  Him  by  the  Father.  And  apostles  speak  of  the  Church  as  composed 
of  men  gathered  to  the  Lord,  and  belonging  to  Him.  Precisely  this  thought  is 
expanded  in  Ephesians  v.  25-27.     I.  Christ's  surrender  of  Himself  was  the 

EXPRESSION  OF  HiS  LOVE.      II.   A  LIVING   ChURCH,   THE  CREATION  OF  HiS  LOVE. 

Just  as  the  sculptor,  before  he  begins  to  chip  the  marble  into  shape,  sees  with  his 
mind's  eye  the  figure  which  is  first  conceived  by  his  genius  and  then  fashioned  by  his 
skill — so  with  our  Divine  Redeemer.  He  from  eternity,  before  man  was  created, 
beheld  him  coming  into  being,  placed  on  His  own  footing,  falling,  redeemed,  saved. 
And,  as  the  result  of  Hi.q  atoning  work,  there  rises  up,  through  His  Spirit,  the  fufil- 
ment  of  His  own  ideal,  a  new  creation,  a  living  Church,  distinguished  by  the  marks 
of  forgiveness,  justification,  renewal  and  eternal  life.  III.  Cleansing  the  Church, 
THE  CONTINUOUS  ACTION  OF  His  LOVE.  "That  He  might  sanctify  and  cleanse 
it. "  Then  He  does  not  love  the  Church  because  it  is  clean,  but  He  first  loves  it  that 
He  may  make  it  clean.  IV.  Perfecting  the  Church,  the  far-off  vision  of 
His  love.  "A  glorious  Church,  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing." 
V.  Presenting  the  Church  to  Himself,  the  realization  of  the  ideal  of 
His  love.  (C  Clemance,  D.D.)  The  posterity  of  Christ: — Jesus  is  still  alive,  for 
to  see  anything  is  the  act  of  a  living  person.  Do  not  be  afraid  that  Christ's  work 
win  break  down  because  He  is  dead.  He  lives  to  carry  it  on.  I.  The  death  of 
Christ  has  produced  a  posterity.  "We  do  not  read  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
followers.  That  would  be  true  ;  but  the  text  prefers  to  say  He  has  a  seed.  1.  All 
who  truly  follow  Christ  and  are  saved  by  Him  have  His  life  in  them.  2.  Believers 
in  Christ  are  said  to  be  His  seed  because  they  are  like  Him.  3.  They  prosecute 
the  same  ends,  and  expect  to  receive  the  same  reward.  "We  are  towards  Christ  His 
seed,  and  thus  heirs  to  all  that  He  has — heirs  to  His  business  on  earth,  heirs  to  His 
estate  in  heaven.  They  speak  of  the  seed  royal.  What  shall  I  say  of  the  seed  of 
Christ  ?  You  may  be  a  poor  person,  but  you  are  of  the  imperial  house.  You  are 
ignorant  and  unlettered,  it  may  be,  and  your  name  will  never  shine  on  the  roll  of 
science,  but  He  who  is  the  Divine  "Wisdom  owns  you  as  one  of  His  seed.  It  may  be 
that  you  are  sick  ;  by  and  by  you  will  die.  But  you  are  of  His  seed,  who  died,  and 
rose,  and  is  gone  into  gloiy.  You  are  of  the  seed  of  Him,  "who  only  hath  immor- 
tality. "  It  follows  if  we  are  thus  of  a  seed,  that  we  ought  to  be  united,  and  love 
each  other  more  and  more.     Christian  people,  you  ought  to  have  a  clannish  feeling  ! 

II.  That  posterity  of  His  remains.  If  it  had  been  possible  to  destroy  the 
Church  of  God  on  earth,  it  would  have  been  destroyed  long  ago.  1.  Only  read  the 
story  of  the  persecutions  under  Nero,  etc.  As  to  our  own  country,  read  the  story  of 
persecutions  here.  2.  There  have  been  laborious  attempts  to  destroy  the  Church  of 
Christ  by  error.     3.  "Worldliness  has  gone  a  long  way  to  destroy  the  Church  of  God. 

III.  This  posterity  is  always  under  the  immediate  eye  of  Christ.  "He 
shaU  see  His  seed. "  He  sees  them  when  they  are  first  bom  anew.  "Wherever  His 
seed  may  wander,  He  still  sees  them.  This  look  of  Christ  is  one  of  intense  delight. 
He  will  see  aU  His  seed  to  the  last.  "What  a  seed  He  will  have  to  see  in  the  morning. 
It  wiU  be  apart  of  His  heaven  for  Him  to  look  upon  His  redeemed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
He  shall  prolong  His  days  (with  Heb.  vii.  15,  16,  25). — The  endmring  life  of  Christ 
after  His  sufferings: — In  these  passages  we  have  given  to  us,  firat  in  Hebrew 
prophecy,  and  then  in  Christian  teaching,  the  doctrine  of  the  enduring  life  of  the 
Chmt  after  His  sufferings  are  over.    The  Old  Testament  prophet  sees  from  afar  the 


140  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tm. 

new  life  of  the  Messiah,  in  a  blaze  of  glory.     The  New  Testament  prophet  declares 
the  life  already  begun,  and  indicates  the  purposes  for  which  that  life  is  being  spent 
as  well  as  the  glory  with  which  it  is  crowned.     The  words  qnoted  from  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  are  a  goal  rather  than  a  starting-point.     They  teach  the  following 
truths — 1.  Jesus  Christ  is  now  exalted :  He  is  a  Priest  upon  His  throne.    2.  In  Him 
there  is  the  power  of  an  indissoluble  life.     3.  Because  of  an  indissoluble  life,  there 
is  an  intransmissible  priesthood.     4.  This  life  and  this  priesthood  are  in  action  for 
the  purpose  of  saving.     5.  Siace  the  life  is  indissoluble,  and  the  priesthood  intrans- 
missible, there  is  an  infinitude  of  saving  power.     (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)    The  pleasure 
of  the  lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hand. — The  "pleasure  of  Jehovah  "  is  the  Servant's 
religious  mission  (chap.  xlii.  1,  4,  6 ;  xlix.  6,  8).    {Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.)     The 
success  of  Christ  in  His  work: — I.   What    are  we   to  understand   by  the 
PLEASURE  OF  THE  LoRD,  the  work  which  is  here  said  to  prosper  ?    1.  What  is  the 
work  to  which  the  declaration  refers?    The  term  "pleasure  of  the  Lord,"  as  here 
used,  must  be  considered  as  expressive  of  His  gracious  design  to  save  a  number  of 
the  human  race  from  sin  and  aU  its  fatal  consequences  ;  to  render  them  perfect  in 
holiness  ;  and  put  them  in  full  possession  of  happiness  in  the  heavenly  state.     It 
includes  in  it,  therefore,  what  has  been  termed  the  work  of  grace  in  the  soul  while 
here,  and  the  full  fruition  of  glory  hereafter.     In  this  work  there  are  two  things  to 
be  considered — (1)  The  purchase  of  redemption.    (2)  Its  application.    2.  Why  is  this 
work  called  "  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  "  ?    (1)  It  is  the  free  and  sovereign  purpose  of 
His  wUl.    (2)  It  is  a  purpose  in  the  accomplishment  of  which  He  takes  great  delight. 
II.  What  part  has  the  Redeemer  in  this  work  ?    The  management  of  it  is 
wholly  committed  to  His  care.     It  is  "in  His  hand."    1.  Reconciling  sinners  unto 
God  IS  a  principal  part  of  the  work  of  salvation  committed  to  the  care  of  the 
Redeemer.     2.  It  belongs  to  the  Redeemer,  as  their  Saviour,  to  preserve  His  people 
from  every  thing  that  is  evil  in  death.     3.  The  Redeemer  has  it  m  charge  to  perfect 
the  salvation  of  His  people,  by  putting  them  in  full  possession  of  glory,  honour  and 
immortality,  in  the  heavenly  state.     III.  What  assurance  we  have,  that  this 
WORK  shall  prosper  IN  THE  HAND  OF  THE  Eedeemer,  80  as  to  be  fuUy  and 
finally  accomplished.     The  language  of  the  text.     What  is  here  asserted  is  supported 
by  many  other  passages  of  the  Word  of  God.     Consider — 1.  The  character  of  Him  to 
whom  the  work  is  entrusted.     2.  The  merit  of  His  obedience,  and  the  perfection  of 
His  atonement.     3.  The  progress  He  has  already  made  in  the  work.     {G.  Campbell. ) 
The  salvation  of  sinners  the  pleasure  of  God  : — This  will  appear  if  we  glance  at  the 
means  which  He  has  graciously  provided  for  its  accomplishment.     I.  He  has  given 
His  only-begotten  Son.     II.  He  has  given  us  His  Word.     III.  He  has 
ESTABLISHED  A  GosPEL  MINISTRY.     The  Salvation  of  sinners  is  the  pleasure  of  the 
Lord,  and  this  shall  prosper  in  the  hands  of  Christ.     1.  Omnipotence  has  promised 
it,  as  the  reward  of  His  obedience  and  death.    2.  He  is  gone  to  cany  it  on  before  the 
throne  of  God.     3.  He  will  descend  to  complete  it  when  He  shall  come  to  judge  the 
world  in  righteousness.     Have  we  entrusted  our  souls  into  His  hands?    {Essex 
Bemembrancer.)      Human    redemption  a  pleasure    to  the  Almighty: — I.    Human 
REDEMPTION  IS  A  PLEASURE  TO  THE  ALMIGHTY.     It  is  not  a  mere  work  of  intellect, 
it  is  a  work  of  the  heart.     It  is  "  His  good  pleasure."    It  is  the  highest  qualification 
of  His  benevolence.     It  is  benevolence  restoring  the  rebellious  to  order,  the  sinful  to 
holiness,  the  miserable  to  blessedness.     What  is  most  pleasing  to  a  being  alw^s — 1. 
Engages  most  of  his  thoughts.      2.  Enlists  most  of  his  energies.     II.   HuMAH 
REDEMPTION  IS  ENTRUSTED  TO  CHRIST.     It  shall  "prosper  in  His  hands."    He  has 
undertaken  the  work.     Four  things  are  necessary  to  qualify  a  being  to  succeed  in 
any  imdertaking.     1.  He  should  enter  on  it  from  a  deep  sympathy  with  it.     We 
persevere  most  in  the  work  we  most  love.     2.  He  should  foresee  aU  the  difiiculties 
that  are  destined  to  occur.    When  difficulties  arise  which  we  never  anticipated,  we 
often  get  baffled  and  disheartened.   8.  He  should  have  power  equal  to  aU  the  emergen- 
cies of  the  case.     4.  He  should  have  sufficient  time  for  its  accomplishment.     Death 
often  prevents  us  from  finishing  our  work.     Christ  has  all  these  qualifications.     III. 
Human  redemption  is  destined  to  succeed.     It  "shall  prosper."    An  argimient 
for  the  certainty  of  its  accomplishment.    1.  Therefore  do  not  be  perplexed  by  the  dis- 
pensations of  Providence.     The  result  of  all  the  outcome  of  the  chaos  will  be  glorious. 
2.  Therefore  do  not  be  discouraged  in  your  Christian  labours.    {Somilist.)    The  Divine 
purpose  fufilled: — I.  God  has  formed  a  purpose  of  mercy  toward  mankind. 
This  is  intended  by  the  expression  "the  pleasure  of  the  Lord."    Notwithstandinff 
the  state  to  which  mankind  had  been  reduced  by  sin,  a  state  in  which  God,  with 
jostice,  might  have  abandoned  them  to  hopeless  punishment,  that  God  has  adopted 


CHAP.  Lin.]  ISAIAE.  141 

towards  them  a  far  different  mode  of  procedure.  In  these  mysterious  depths  of 
eternity  there  was  a  Divine  determination  that  a  way  of  recovery  should  be  opened 
for  the  guilty.  This  ia  styled  "the  eternal  purpose  of  grace,"  "the  good  pleasure 
which  the  Father  had  purposed  in  Himself,"  "the  good  pleasure  of  His  will,"  "the 
good  pleasure  of  His  goodness."  The  manifestation  of  this  pleasure  of  the  Lord 
began  on  earth  as  soon  as  the  need  of  mercy  existed.  The  new  economy,  established 
at  an  ever-memorable  era,  has  explained  what  might  be  ambiguous,  has  illuminated 
what  might  be  dark,  has  supplied  what  might  be  deficient  under  preceding  dispensa- 
tions, and  it  lays  open  before  us  in  substance  the  whole  counsel  of  the  Eternal.  We 
now  discern  that  the  entire  fabric  of  creation,  and  the  entire  system  of  Providence, 
are  subordinated  to  the  stupendous  achievements  of  redemption,  those  achievements 
the  attributes  of  the  Divine  nature  being  united  in  harmony  to  conduct  and  to 
perform.  II.  The  fulfilment  of  this  pttrposb  of  mercy  is  committed  to 
THE  LoKD  Jesus.  "The  pleasure  of  the  Lord  is  in  His  hand,"  the  hand  of  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  committed  to  Him  to  be  by  Him  accomplished.  That  the 
Lord  Jfsus  does  sustain  this  momentous  trust  is  obvious  from  the  entire  testimony 
of  revelation.  The  Lord  Jesus  performs  the  purpose  of  B^s  mercy,  we  observe  more 
particularly,  hj  His  own  atonement  for  sin,  and  by  the  communication  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.     TIL  Under  the  administration  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  purpose  of 

MERCY  SHALL  BE  PERFECTLY  AND  TRIUMPHANTLY  ACCOMPLISHED.       "  The  pleasure 

of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hand."  1.  The  certainty  of  the  accomplishment 
must  appear  from  the  mere  existence  of  a  Divine  purpose  to  that  effect.  The  supreme 
majesty  of  the  perfections  of  God  itself  secures  the  fulfilment  of  whatever  He  haa 
designed.  2.  The  certainty  rests  upon  the  inherent  excellency  of  His  own  character 
and  work.  The  proper  deity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  renders  failure  in  His  work 
impossible.  3.  We  observe  the  Divine  assurances  solemnly  pledged  to  that  effect. 
Besides  general  declarations  to  which  we  might  easily  appeal  there  are  recorded 
assurances  addressed  by  the  Father  to  the  Son  in  His  mediatorial  capacity  respecting 
the  exaltation  He  was  to  receive  as  a  specific  recompense  of  the  shame  and  suffering 
which  on  behalf  of  men  He  had  endured.     (/.  Parsons.) 

Ver.  11.  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul. — Christ's  soul-trwoaU  and  Us 
outcome: — 1.  The  word  translated  "travail"  has  not  the  special  force  which  the 
English  reader  might  infer  from  it ;  it  is  a  word  of  much  more  general  use,  of  much 
less  intensity  and  much  greater  variety  in  the  notion  of  sorrow  which  it  conveys. 
It  is  used  some  sixty  times  in  the  Old  Testament  and  means  trouble  of  any  kind,  as 
in  the  following  passages :  ' '  Man  is  bom  to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward. "  "  God 
made  me  forget  all  my  toU"  "If  by  reason  of  strength  they  be  fourscore  years, 
yet  is  their  strength  labour  and  sorrow."  In  all  these  cases  the  same  word  is  used  as 
in  the  text.  It  denotes  strong  effort,  attended  with  pain  and  grief.  2.  Again,  the 
clause  is  usually  supposed  to  mean  that  the  glorious  results  which  would  follow, 
would  be  so  glorious,  that  when  beheld,  the  Messiah  should  look  on  them  and  be 
satisfied.  Th^  is  a  truth  ;  but  it  is  one  developed  by  necessary  inference  from  the 
text.  The  clearer  and  more  exact  rendering  would  be,  "  He  shall  look  out  from  his 
sorrow,  and  be  satisfied : "  not  only  satisfied  with  the  results  of  the  sorrow,  as  if 
amply  rewarded  by  them  ;  but  satisfied  in  the  sufferings,  in  the  fact  of  having 
undertaken  them,  because  of  the  grand  reason  which  was  ever  present  to  His  view. 
Even  in  the  midst  of  the  sorrow  He  could  look  out  above  and  beyond  it.  Thus 
we  see  in  this  text  a  most  helpful  and  gladdening  light  on  those  aspects  of  the 
atoning  work  which  are  set  forth  in  this  chapter  :  we  are  taught  not  only  that  Christ 
would  be  satisfied  when  the  outcome  of  His  work  was  complete,  but  that  He  was 
satisfied  with  his  errand  on  earth  while  in  the  very  depths  of  His  sorrow  and  care. 
At  the  same  time,  this  view  of  the  text  does  not  exclude  the  more  usual  one.  So 
far  from  that  it  intensifies  it.  For  if  there  was  satisfaction  even  at  the  very  hour  of 
the  suffering,  much  greater  must  be  the  joy  when  the  suffering  is  past  and  the  glory 
secured.  {C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  The  aspect  of  the  Redeemer's  work  which  afforded 
E-im  satisfaction: — I.  There  must  have  been  a  sublime  satisfaction  in  knowino 
THAT  THE  SUFFERING  WAS  ON  BEHALF  OF  OTHERS  ;  and  that,  however  unworthy 
they  might  be  of  such  entire  devotion,  they  would  through  it  be  relieved  of  a 
burden  which  would  have  crushed  them.     II.  There  must  have  been  a  satisfaction  in 

ASSERTING  THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  AND  LOVE  OF  THE  SUPREME   GOVEUNOR.      In   the 

work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "righteousness  and  peace  kissed  each  other."  III. 
The  Messiah  would  experience  an  intense  satisfaction  at  the  prospect  of  the  new 
iTAioc  WHICH  He  would  acquire,  even  that  of  "  Savioub."    IV.  The  Messiah 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tin. 

BEHELD  FROM  AFAB  MEN  WHO  ONCE  WERE  REBELS,  STANDING  BY  HiS  SIDE,  AS  SONS 

AND  HEIRS  OF  GoD :  and  this  satisfied  Him.  V.  Our  Saviour  foresaw  the 
CLOSE  union  BETWEEN  THE  SAVED  AND  HiMSELF,  and  was  satisfied.  He  knew  that 
after  He  had  died  for  them,  He  should  live  in  them,  and  that  there  would  be  such 
an  outgoing  of  life  from  Him  to  them,  as  to  form  out  of  the  human  race  men  of 
finer  mould  and  of  higher  character  than,  apart  from  Himself,  woiild  ever  have 
been  possible.  VI.  The  Messiah  was  satisfied  in  beholding  from  afar  the 
EELATION  OF  SAVED  MEN  TO  EACH  OTHER.  He  saw  the  Church  "perfect  in  One," 
its  discords  hushed,  its  sounds  aU  attuned  to  perfect  harmony.  He  beheld  the  believers 
sharing  His  glory,  aU  with  Him,  seated  with  Him  on  His  throne.  [lUd.)  Christ's 
mfferings fruitful : — I.  The  aspect  in  which  that  work  is  here  represented 
BY  which  our  Saviour  accomplished  His  great  undertaking.  The  sufferings 
of  Christ  were — 1.  Expiatory  and  piacular.  2.  Voluntary.  3.  Most  intense  and 
awful.  "The  travail  of  His  souL"  He  had  a  spirit  imequalled  for  sensibility  and 
affection,  and  keenness  of  feeling.  To  form  a  just  conception  of  His  sorrow,  we 
must  unite  the  ideas  of  compassion  for  the  grief  of  the  distressed,  and  horror  at  what 
was  cruel  and  unjust ;  of  indignation  at  the  oppressor,  and  pity  for  the  oppressed  ; 
of  a  wish  to  deliver  the  guilty,  and  an  abhorrence  of  their  sin.  We  must  connect 
all  the  iniquity  which  He  witnessed,  and  all  the  knowledge  He  had  of  the  human 
heart.  "We  must  think  of  all  the  wickedness,  the  hardness  of  heart,  the  unbelief  of 
man.  We  know  nothing  of  the  nature  of  this  sacrifice  ;  but  this  we  know,  that  it 
was  an  act  of  amazing  energy,  of  strenuous  labour.  It  was  not  submission  merely  ; 
it  was  a  direct  and  positive  consecration  of  His  whole  being ;  as  if  He  would  place 
Himself  on  the  altar,  and  become  Himself  the  sacrificing  Priest.     II.  The  sublime 

AND  heavenly  SATISFACTION  ARISING  TO  THE  REDEEMER  IN  CONTEMPLATING  THE 

EFFECT  OF  His  SUFFERINGS.  1.  It  is  the  pleasure  arising  from  the  expectation  of 
success.  2.  It  is  the  pleasiire  of  the  most  pure  and  exalted  benevolence.  3.  It  is 
such  satisfaction  as  springs  from  the  great  importance  and  difficulty  of  the  event 
brought  to  an  accomplishment.  4.  It  is  satisfaction  arising  from  the  peculiar 
relation  of  His  character  and  work,  to  the  event  itself,  and  aU  its  consequences. 

III.     The   CERTAINTY    THAT   THIS    SALVATION    SHALL    BE    FINALLY    REALIZED.      1. 

The  sufferings  of  Christ  are  assumed  as  the  basis  of  this  assurance,  and  lead  us  to 
observe  the  natural  and  inherent  attraction  of  this  doctrine.  But  this  certainty 
arises — 2.  From  the  tendency  of  the  Gospel  to  an  unlimited  and  ceaseless  diffusion. 
8.  From  its  conferring,  wherever  it  is  embraced,  the  greatest  temporal  advantages 
in  connection  with  its  spiritual  benefits.  4.  From  its  amazing  progress.  5.  From 
the  promises  of  final  success,  and  the  encouraging  appearances  in  the  circumstances 
of  the  Church  in  the  present  day.  {Ji.  S.  McAll,  M.A.)  The  connection  between 
Messiah's  sufferings  and  subsequent  triumphs: — I.    The  sufferings   of  Christ 

FORMED  A  PART  OF  THE  PREDETERMINATION  OF  GOD,  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE 

SALVATION  OF  MAN.  "It  became  Him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by  whom  are 
all  things,"  etc.  1.  Contemplate  the  character  of  that  purpose,  in  reference  to  its 
objects  as  manifesting  the  benevolence  of  God.  2.  The  wisdom  of  God.  3.  The 
holiness  of  God.     II.   The  indissoluble  connection  that  subsists  between 

THOSE  SUFFERINGS  AND  THE  REDEEMER'S  SUBSEQUENT  TRIUMPHS.     1.    The  character 

of  the  triumphs  of  Christianity  on  earth.     2.    The  certainty  of  those  triumphs. 
3.  Their  extent.     (/.    W.  Etheridge.)     The  travail  of  Christ's  soul  .—I.  Wherein 
THIS  SOUL-SUFFERING  DID  NOT  CONSIST.     1.    We  are  not  to  suppose  any  actual 
separation  betwixt  His  Godhead  and  His  manhood.    2.  There  was  no  sinful  fretting, 
no  impatience,  nor  carnal  anxiety  in  our  Lord.     3.  There  was  not  in  him  any 
distrust  of  God's  love,  nor  any  imbelief  of  His  approbation  before  God,  neither  the 
least  diffidence  as  to  the  residt.     4.  Neither  are  we  to  conceive  that  there  was  any 
inward  confusion,  challenge  or  gnawing  of  conscience  in  Him,  such  as  is  in  desperate 
sinners,  cast  under  the  wrath  of  God,  because  there  was  no  inward  cause  of  it,  nor 
anything  that  could  breed  it.     II.  Wherein  it  did  consist.     1.  It  consisted  in 
the  Godhead's  suspending  its  comfortable  influence  for  a  time  from  the  human 
nature.     Though  our  Lord  had  no  culpable  anxiety,  yet  He  had  a  sinless  fear, 
considering  Him  as  man.     The  infinite  God  was  augry,  and  executing  angrily  the 
sentence  of  the  law  against  Him.     2.  He  had  an  inexpressible  sense  of  grief,  not 
only  from  the  outward  afflictions  that  He  was  under,  but  also  from  the  current  of 
the  wrath  flowing  in  on  His  soul.     3.  It  consisted  in  a  sort  of  wonderful  horror 
which  the  marching  up  of  so  many  mighty  squadrons  of  the  highly  provoked  wrath 
of  God,  making  so  fiinous  an  assault  on  bIs  innocent  human  nature,  was  necessarily 
attended  with.     {J.  Durham.)    Chriat'M  aovi-tramiil :—l.    Oheist'b  travail  o» 


CHAP.  Lm.]  ISAIAH,  143 

SOTTL    IN    THE    WORK    OP    OTJE    REDEMPTION.       H.     THE    CERTAINTY    OF    SUCCESS. 

"He  shall  see."  III.  His  contentment  therein.  "He  shall  be  satisfied."  He 
counts  the  salvation  of  lost  sinners  to  be  satisfaction  enough  for  all  His  pains. 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Christ's  soul-s-ufferings : — In  Christ's  soul-sufferings  we  may 
take  notice  of  two  things — His  desertion  and  agonies.  {JMd. )  Christ's  satis/action 
in  the  salvaiion  of  sinners : — Jesus  Christ  taketh  an  infinite  satisfaction  in  the 
salvation  of  sinners.  I.  Evidences  of  it.  1.  Christ  pleased  and  entertained 
HimseK  in  the  thought  of  it  before  the  world  was  (Prov.  viii.  31).  2.  This  was  the 
end  and  aim  of  His  coming  into  the  world  ;  and  it  is  pleasant  when  a  man  hath 
attained  his  end,  especially  if  it  be  greatiy  desired  and  much  laboured  for.  For 
delight  is  according  to  the  degree  of  the  desire  and  labour.  3.  Now,  in  heaven  it  is 
His  rejoicing  to  see  the  work  thrive.  4.  When  He  shall  come  from  heaven  to  judge 
the  world,  with  what  triumph  and  rejoicing  will  He  come,  when  He  shall  deliver  up 
the  kingdom  to  the  Father !  II.  The  reasons  of  it.  His  love  was  the  cause  of 
aU — His  love  to  the  Father,  and  His  love  to  the  saints.  {Ibid. )  The  satis/action 
of  the  Messiah : — Satisfied  I  Very  few  can  say  that  word  on  this  side  of  heaven. 
There  is  no  satisfaction  for  those  who  are  self-centred  ;  and  we  say  reverently  that 
God  Himself  could  not  have  known  perfect  blessedness  unless  He  had  been  able  to 
pour  Himself  forth  in  blessing  upon  others.  "We  might  put  the  truth  into  four 
sentences.  There  is  no  satisfaction  apart  from  love.  There  cannot  be  love  for 
sinning  suflfering  souls  without  travail.  There  cannot  be  travail  without  com- 
pensating joy.  In  proportion  to  the  travail,  with  its  pangs  and  bitterness,  wiU  be 
the  resulting  blessedness.  I.  The  travail  of  Christ's  soul.  He  suffered 
because  of  His  quick  sympathy  with  the  anguish  that  sin  had  brought  to  man. 
He  probably  saw,  as  we  cannot,  the  timid  oppressed  by  the  strong  ;  the  helpless 
victim  pursued  by  rapacity  and  passion.  He  heard  the  wail  of  the  world's  sorrow, 
in  which  cries  of  little  children,  the  shriek  or  moan  of  womanhood,  and  the  deep 
bass  of  strong  men  wrestling  with  the  encircling  serpent- folds,  mingle  in  one  terrible 
medley.  He  sighed  over  the  deaf  and  dumb,  had  compassion  on  the  leper,  wept  at 
the  grave.  As  the  thorn-brake  to  bare  feet,  so  must  this  world  have  been  to  His 
compassionate  heart.  He  must  also  have  suffered  keenly  by  the  rejection  of  those 
whom  He  would  have  gathered,  as  a  hen  gathers  her  chickens  imder  her  wing,  but 
they  would  not.  But  these  elements  of  pain  are  not  to  be  compared  with  that 
more  awful  sorrow  which  He  experienced  as  the  substitute  and  sacrifice  of  human 
guilt.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  He  could  not  have  loved  us  perfectly  vrithout 
becoming  one  with  us  in  the  dark  heritage  of  om-  first  parent.  Dost  thou  love 
Christ  ?  The  first  duty  He  will  lay  on  thee  will  be  love  to  others.  And  if  thou 
dost  truly  love,  thou  too  shalt  find  thy  meed  of  soul-travail.  II.  The  certainty 
OF  INFINITE  compensation.  "  He  shaU  see."  It  is  impossible  to  suffer  voluntarily 
for  others,  and  not  in  some  way  benefit  them.  Thy  pain  may  sometimes  seem 
abortive — the  mighty  throes  that  rend  thee  for  the  souls  of  others  appear  in  vain  ; 
but  it  is  not  really  so.  Drop  by  drop  thy  tears  shall  presently  turn,  the  scale. 
Patience  shall  have  her  perfect  work.  The  laws  of  the  harvest  in  this  sphere  are  as 
certain  in  their  operation  as  in  that  of  nature.  III.  The  nature  of  Christ's 
COMPENSATION.  It  wiU  come — 1.  In  the  glory  that  shall  accrue  to  the  Father. 
2.  In  the  redemption  of  untold  myriads.  Great  as  the  harvest  of  sin  has  been,  we 
believe  that  the  saved  shall  vastly  outnumber  the  lost.  Nothing  less  will  satisfy 
Christ.  Remember  that  in  the  first  age,  before  mention  is  made  of  the  latter 
triumphs  of  the  Gospel,  John  beheld  in  heaven  a  multitude  which  no  man  could 
number.  3.  In  the  character  of  the  redeemed.  He  shall  present  them  to  Himself 
without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  4.  In  the  destruction  of  the  devil's 
work.  What  is  involved  in  the  majestic  promise  that  He  should  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil,  is  not  yet  made  manifest.  In  due  time  we  shall  see  it  aU.  IV.  The 
GREATNESS  OF  THOSE  RESULTS.  1.  They  must  be  proportionate  to  the  glory  of  His 
nature.  It  is  not  difficult  to  satisfy,  at  least  temporarily,  a  little  child.  But  as  its 
nature  develops,  it  becomes  increasingly  hard  to  content  it.  But  surely  there  is 
more  difference  between  the  capacity  of  an  angel  and  that  of  a  man,  than  between 
the  capacities  of  a  man  and  a  babe.  But,  great  as  an  angel  is,  his  capacity  is 
limited  and  finite.  What  then  must  be  the  measure  of  that  blessedness,  of  that 
harvest  of  souls,  of  that  result  of  His  travail,  which  can  content  the  Divlae 
Redeemer  ?  2.  They  must  be  proportionate  to  the  intensity  of  His  suffering.  The 
results  of  God's  work  are  always  commensurate  to  the  force  He  puts  forth!  You 
cannot  imagine  the  Divine  Being  going  to  an  immense  expenditure  without  a  snre 
prescience  that  He  would  be  recouped.    Satia&ed  1    We  shall  hear  His  si^  of  deep 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  utn, 

content,  and  see  the  triumph  on  His  face.  And  if  Christ  is  satisfied,  we  shall  bei 
On  this  let  us  rest.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Messiah  suffering  and  Messiah  satisfied  :— 
I.  A  few  thoughts  illustrative  of  THE  MEANING  of  the  text.  II.  Two  or  three 
PRACTICAL  OBSERVATIONS  to  show  how  we  Ought  to  be  affected  who  believe  that 
meaning.  1.  The  "satisfaction"  of  Messiah  m  relation  to  the  present  world  is 
yet  incomplete.  This  should  promote  humility.  2.  In  spite  of  all  past  dis- 
appointments, we  confidently  expect  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy.  3.  The 
subject  ought  to  lead  us  individually  seriously  to  examine  whether  we  are  con- 
tributing to  the  Saviour's  satisfaction,  either  by  what  we  are  or  by  what  we  are 
doing.  {T.  Binney,  D.D.)  The  reward  of  the  Redeemer's  sufferings: — He  sees 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  is  satisfied.  1.  In  the  free  remission  of  sins 
which,  through  His  blood  and  in  His  name,  has  been  proclaimed  to  the  children 
of  men.  2.  In  the  actual  return  of  sinners  to  God.  {R.  Gordon,  D.D.)  Christ's 
travail  and  saiiff action : — ^The  travail  is  the  agony  of  one  Divine  as  well  as  human, 
and  that  word  leads  us  to  the  deepest  depths  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary — deeper 
than  any  plmnmets  of  angels'  sympathetic  imagination  could  ever  sound ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  satisfaction  spoken  of  is  similarly  the  satisfaction  of  one 
Divine  as  well  as  human,  and  projects  before  us  something  higher  than  the  usual 
serenity  of  God,  something  more  bUssftil  than  the  usual  gladness  of  the  skies,  some 
harvest  home,  some  exquisite  ecstasy  that  fills  and  overflows  the  Father-heart  of 
God.     I.  Whatever  there  may  be  in  this  word,  there  is  a  lesson  of  this  sort,  that 

■WTTHOUT  SACRED  TRAVAIL  IN  THE  SENSE  OF  LABOUR,  SACRIFICE,  PATIENCE,  THERE 

IS  NEVER  ANY  ABIDING  SATISFACTION.  Not  even  for  God.  There  are,  I  doubt  not, 
indeed,  many  things  which  yield  satisfaction  to  God,  which,  perhaps,  involve  no 
Divine  travail  of  proportionate  amount.  I  dare  say  it  might  be  the  case  that 
creation  came  easuy  to  Him,  to  the  overflowing  energy  of  Divine  omnipotence. 
'Diat  it  was  easy  for  His  infinite  wisdom  to  adapt  every  organism  to  its  place,  and 
every  creature  to  its  circumstances ;  and  He  has  satisfaction  in  that  work  of  His 
hands.  Perhaps  providence  comes  easily  to  Him.  But  when  He  aims  at  the  greater 
objects  that  engage  His  heart,  when  He  would  not  make  but  save  the  world,  when 
He  would  get  back  to  Him  the  love  of  His  suspicious  and  wandering  children,  when 
He  would  fill  His  house  with  guests,  and  when  He  would  make  these  guests  eternally 
worthy  of  His  fellowship,  and  capable  of  communion  with  Him,  then  not  easily  even 
for  Him  can  that  work  be  done  ;  but  between  Him  and  this  joy  that  He  sets  before 
Him  there  is  the  travail  of  Bethlehem,  with  its  lowliness,  of  His  lonely  pilgrim  path 
of  misunderstanding,  of  the  weakness  of  feeble  friends,  and  the  bitterness  of  hateful 
foes : — there  is  Gethsemane,  there  is  Calvary.  Do  not  let  us  dream  of  doing  anything 
effective  for  ourselves  or  others  cheaply,  lightly,  easily.  "  If  any  one  will  be  My 
disciple,"  says  Christ,  "let  him  take  up  the  cross— the  gibbet— and  follow  Me "— 
bidding  farewell  to  dreams  of  ease,  thoughts  of  self-indulgence,  and  copying  the 
pattern  set  upon  the  Mount  of  Calvary.  There  is  no  sorrow  in  the  world  which  you 
and  I  cannot  materially  relieve  if  we  will  but  share  it,  but  there  is  no  sorrow  that 
can  be  touched  till  we  share  it.  II.  Wherever  there  is  saored  travail  there 
IS  always  abiding  satisfaction.  There  may  be  travail  in  other  directions  without 
any  satisfaction.  Travail  for  wealth  often  leaves  a  man  in  poverty ;  travail  for  the 
sake  of  honour  leaves  him  still  insignificant  and  unknown.  Do  not  spend  your 
labour  for  that  which  will  not  profit,  but  aspire  to  the  grand  reward,  to  the  noble 
results  of  existence,  and  put  forth  the  saored  travail  wmch,  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think,  is  rewarded  and  blessed  of  heaven.  III.  Our 
text  suggests  a  third  lesson  which  it  is  desirable  for  all  Christian  workers  to 
remember — the  salvation  of  man  is  the  satisfaction  of  God.  IV.  The 
salvation  of  men  will  be  on  such  a  scale,  as  to  give  complete  and  perfect 
satisfaction  to  God.  The  word  "satisfaction"  is  a  large  word.  You  know  it  is 
easy  to  please  a  man,  but  it  is  hard  to  satisfy  him  ;  and,  as  some  one  has  said,  it  is 
the  same  with  God ;  He  is  easily  pleased,  but  hard  to  satisfy.  (iJ.  Olover,  D.D.) 
Christ's  soul-travail : — I.  The  travail  of  His  soul.  Think  of  tiie  travail  of  our 
Lord's  soul  between  Bethlehem  and  Calvary.  1.  The  travail  of  waiting  during  the 
long  years  of  the  life  at  Nazareth,  during  the  tedious  process  of  training  the  disciples 
that  followed  (Luke  xii.  50).  2.  The  travail  of  His  own  personal  temptation,  in  the 
solitude  of  the  wilderness,  the  protests  of  Peter,  the  impulses  and  the  spiritual 
aloofiiess  of  the  multitudes,  and  the  actual  hostility  of  their  leaders  (John  i.  11). 
8.  Omitting  many  other  particulars,  the  travail  of  Gethsemane  and  the  cry  upon 
the  cross  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  4.  The  travail  with  sin.  "Upon  Him  was  laid  the 
iniquity  of  ua  idL"    A  pure  spirit  is  alway  pained,  even  at  the  sight  of  meanness  or 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAH.  145 

vice.  Ohrist's  spirit  was  so  pure  that  Satan  could  find  notlung  in  Him  (John  xiv.  30) ; 
and  yet  in  the  loneliness  of  the  passion  He  suffered  the  penalty  of  sins  not  His  own, 
wrestled  with  them  in  prolonged  agony,  triumphed  over  them  for  ever  on  the  Cross. 
And  if  the  travail  of  His  soul  be  measured  by  the  distance  between  His  holiness  and 
the  guUt  with  which  He  consented  to  be  charged,  it  will  be  seen  to  be  absolutely 
without  pau-aUel  in  human  history.  II.  This  tea  vail,  so  it  is  sometimes 
STATED,  HAS  PBOVED  SHEER  WASTE,  Or  at  least,  has  uot  accomplished,  and  is  not 
likely  to  accomplish,  anything  like  what  Christ  in  enduring  it  expected.  1. 
'*  Clmstianity  a  failure  "  has  been  the  theme  of  many  a  critic  of  our  faith  ;  and  the 
feilure  has  been  alleged  to  occur  in  almost  every  department  of  thought  and  morals 
and  mission.  It  must  be  confessed  that  Christianity  has  not  yet  succeeded 
completely  anywhere.  Even  in  places  where  it  has  had  on  its  side  almost  every 
possible  advantage — been  supported  by  governments,  illustrated  by  every  kind  of 
genius,  in  control  of  the  influences  of  education  and  public  opinion — it  has  not 
made  society  quite  pure,  or  even  the  average  character  of  ite  own  agents  and 
adherents  faultless.  And  at  present  there  is  no  part  of  the  earth  upon  which  the 
Saviour  can  be  imagined  to  look  and  to  be  satisfied  with  what  He  sees.  The 
complaint  sometimes  takes  a  more  personal  form.  Every  Christian  is  occasionally 
tempted  to  think  that  religion  is  proving  for  himself  personally  something  of  a 
failure.  After  years  of  sincere  trust  and  service,  there  are  faults  of  temper,  elements 
of  discontent  and  self-seeking  and  sin  present  in  the  nature,  and  often  apparently 
•ven  supreme  there.  And  instead  of  imagining  that  our  Saviour  is  satisfied  with  us, 
the  disposition  is  rather  to  imagine  that  we  can  never  satisfy  Him,  never  become 
"perfect"  and  matured,  but  that  we  shall  have  to  go  on  stumbling  and  faulty  to 
the  end.  2.  There  are  two  obvious  modes  of  dealing  with  these  complaints  and 
suspicions.  It  would  be  possible  to  plead  the  intractability  of  the  material,  and  to 
imitate  natural  science  in  her  ceaseless  demand  for  time.  Or,  we  may  place  ourselves 
with  this  prophet  at  the  ultimate  end  of  our  Lord's  career,  and  see  whether  there 
are  not,  in  society  and  in  the  heart  of  man,  processes  of  progress  that  are  tending  to 
success.  The  conclusion  will  probably  be  that  the  success  of  Christianity,  in  relation 
to  everything  that  concerns  morality  and  religion,  has  already  been  so  great  as  even 
to  guarantee  the  eventual  satisfaction  concerning  which  this  verse  speaks.  (1)  In 
regard  to  the  thoughts,  which  in  reasoning  men  must  underlie  and  to  some  extent 
determine  their  practice.  Think  what  an  incalculable  improvement  Christianity  has 
effected  in  the  prevalent  conception  of  God.  From  these  new  thoughts  of  God  the 
early  Christians  deduced  their  conclusions  as  to  the  infusion  of  a  Divine  element 
into  the  spirit  of  man,  by  means  of  which  he  may  be  lifted  up  to  God.  (2)  In 
matters  of  social  progress  and  the  amelioration  of  the  race,  is  Christianity  a  failure  t 
The  more  personal  suspicion,  that  religion  is  proving  a  failure  as  far  as  we  ourselves 
are  concerned,  is  a  natural  fear,  due  sometimes  to  the  ease  with  which  our  best 
aspirations  are  forgotten,  sometimes  to  the  weight  of  this  "  body  of  sin."  But  it  is 
impossible  to  imagine  the  Saviour,  now  "expecting  until  His  enemies  be  made  His 
footstool,"  ever  turning  to  His  Father  in  tones  of  protest,  "After  My  travail  and 
death,  is  this  penitent  sinner  to  be  rejected?  this  man,  struggling  with  the  sin 
within  him  and  about  him,  to  be  worsted  ? "  Did  He  not  once  actually  say  to  His 
Father,  thereby  pledging  both  to  pardon  and  help  us,  "For  their  sakes  I  sanctify 
Myself,  that  they  also  may  be  sanctified  in  truth  ? "  And  therefore  as  certain  as  the 
Cross  of  Christ  are  the  pardon  of  every  worst  sinner  who  comes  to  God  through  Him, 
and  the  perfecting  of  every  believer  who  with  inflexible  purpose  cleaves  in  devotion 
to  Him.  This  word  "satisfied"  again,  in  its  Scriptural  use,  suggests  as  much. 
Almost  the  only  place  where  a  man  is  spoken  of  as  being  really  satisfied  with  what 
he  perceives  himself  to  be  is  in  one  of  the  psalms,  and  even  there  it  is  an  emotion 
that  is  not  reached  until  after  death :  "  When  I  awake,  I  shall  be  satisfied  with  Thy 
likeness."  It  seems  to  imply  that,  as  long  as  a  man  lives,  he  will  have  some  fault 
to  find  with  himself,  weakness  or  immaturity  or  aptitude  to  sin.  But,  clinging  to 
his  Saviour  when  he  dies,  all  these  miseries  will  fall  away  from  him,  and  at  last  the 
sinner  and  the  Saviour  will  be  satisfied.  (.Prof.  R.  W,  Moss,  D.D. )  The  effects  of 
owr  Lord! 8  passion : — I.  The  sufferings  of  otjr  Lord.    These  sufferings  were — 

I.  Continual.    2.  Extreme.    3.  Voluntary.    4.  Expiatory.    5.  Completely  effectuaL 

II.  The  satisfaction  which  He  feels  in  viewing  the  effects  of  His 
SUFFERINGS.  1.  The  sight.  Our  Lord  has  seen  of  the  travail  of  His  souL 
(1)  From  the  beginning  He  beheld  in  contemplation  all  the  finits  of  His 
sufferings ;  this  was  the  joy  which  was  set  before  Him.  (2)  During  the  various 
dispensations  preceding  His  actual  coming  in  the  flesh  He  saw  the  effects  of  the 

VOL.  III.  10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  un. 


eacrifice  which  He  had  engaged  to  make.  (3)  But  it  was  on  the  cross  itself  that  the 
Lord  Christ  saw  with  one  unemng  view  the  fiill  and  splendid  results  of  His  under- 
taking. (4)  After  His  ascension  into  heaven,  however,  the  prospect  of  the  salvation 
of  men  began  to  be  realized  in  a  more  ample  manner.  (5)  Throughout  the  succeeding 
ages  of  the  Church  the  Saviour  has  still  continued  to  behold  the  fruits  of  His  travail. 
(6)  But  not  only  has  our  Lord  already  seen  of  the  travail  of  His  soul.  He  stiU  does 
Bee  of  it.  "  His  arm  is  not  shortened,  that  it  cannot  save  ;  neither  is  His  ear  heavy, 
that  it  cannot  hear."  (7)  But  the  Saviour  shaU  see  hereafter  in  a  still  more  amme 
measure  this  glorious  sight.  2.  The  satisfaction.  "We  are  not  merely  to  consiaer 
the  salvation  of  sinners  as  satisfying  the  Saviour,  but  as  satisfying  Him  after  all 
the  preceding  anguish  of  His  sufferings.  Conclusion:  l.The  light  which  the 
subject  casts  on  the  value  of  the  soul  of  man.  Both  the  inconceivable  agony  of 
our  Lord's  passion,  and  the  satisfaction  He  derives  from  its  effects,  suppose  the 
unspeakable  worth  of  the  human  soul.  2.  The  light  which  this  subject  reflects  on 
the  hope  of  a  penitent's  acceptance  with  Christ.  Surely,  if  He  endured  such  a 
travail,  such  anguish  of  soul  and  body,  and  that  for  the  redemption  of  sinners, 
He  wiU  never  reject  any  one  who  sincerely  renounces  his  sins  and  flies  to  Him. 
Surely  His  atonement  can  reach  the  case  of  the  worst  offender.  3.  The  illustra- 
tion which  this  subject  supplies  of  the  powerful  motive,  by  which  the  Christian 
is  constiained  to  obey  his  Saviour.  What  can  claim  and  fix  our  love  and  obedience, 
if  such  sufferings,  voluntarily  endured  for  us,  cannot  ?  4.  The  light  this  subject 
throws  on  the  future  propagation  of  the  Gospel  throughout  the  world.  For,  if 
the  engagement  of  the  Covenant  of  redemption  expressly  be  that  our  Lord  "shall 
see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied,"  then  we  may  go  forth  in  the  cause 
of  missions  and  of  the  Bible  with  a  humble  confidence.  (D.  Wilson,  M.A.)  The 
salvation  of  onan,  the  joy  of  the  Redeemer : — Some  of  those  objects  which  it  is 

DECLARED  THE   MESSIAH   SHALL  BEHOLD,  AS  THE  RESULT  OF  HiS  StrFFEBINGS.    _  1. 

To  remove  obstructions  out  of  the  way  of  the  sinner's  salvation.  2.  The  salvation 
of  His  own  people.    3.  To  rectify  the  moral  disorders  of  our  nature.     II.  The 

SATISFACTION  WITH  WHICH  THE   SaVIOTTR  WILL  BEHOLD  THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OP 

His  purposes.  1.  The  completion  of  any  great  undertaking^  is  accompanied  with 
satisfaction.  2.  Another  source  of  satisfaction  to  the  Saviour  must  be  in  the 
consciousness  of  having  accomplished  a  work  of  infinite  beneficence.  {S.  Summers.) 
The  satisfaction  of  Christ's  sufferings:—!.  What  was  the  travail  of  Christ! 
II.  Why  He  submitted  to  it.  III.  Why  and  when  He  is  satisfied  that  He 
ENDURED  it.  1.  He  is  satisfied  when  He  sees  any  penitent  transgressor  alarmed  by 
His  warnings,  or  touched  by  His  merciful  invitations,  and  turning  to  the  obedience 
which  he  owes  to  God.  2.  When  He  sees  those  whom  He  has  redeemed  walking 
uprightly  before  God.  3.  The  last  and  fullest  recompense  of  the  Eedeemer's  suffer- 
ino's  is  still  to  come  ;  to  come  in  that  great  and  joyful  day,  when  He  shaU  see  the 
family  which  He  has  ransomed  with  His  blood  surrounding  His  throne  in  glory. 
(/.  B.  Sumner,  M.A.)  The  sympathy  and  satisfaction  of  the  Redeemer: — I.  THE 
deep,  Divine,  impassioned  sympathy  of  the  Redeemer.  1.  If  we  analyze  the 
expression,  "the  travail  of  His  soul,"  we  shaU  find  that  its  meaning  is  not  ex- 
hausted, if,  indeed,  it  is  Ulustrated  at  all,  by  a  reference  to  the  physical  sufferings 
of  our  Lord.  In  the  writings  of  the  Fathers ;  in  the  devotional  Uterature  of  the 
Middle  Ages ;  in  much  of  the  sacred  poetry  of  ancient,  and  even  of  more  recent, 
times  ;  and  more  specially  in  the  highly  realistic  conception  of  sacred  and  legendary 
art,  the  physical  sufferings  of  the  Redeemer  are  treated  with  an  emphasis  and  detail, 
which  is  not  authorized  by  the  Inspired  record,  and  which  imperils  the  clearness  of 
our  insight  into  the  deeper  meaning  and  mystery  of  His  passion.  It  is  not  denied 
that  physical  suffering,  most  acute,  most  varied  in  form,  and  far  transcending  aU 
power  of  description  or  of  imagination,  was  the  Divinely  appointed  lot  of  Him 
whom  "  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise."  Yet  there  is  a  reticence  on  the  part  of  the 
inspired  writers  in  relation  to  the  physical  sufferings  of  our  Lord  which  is  profoundly 
8Uf<^estive,  not  only  as  implying  that  a  too  realistic  conception  of  the  Passion  is 
profific  of  unhealthy  and  morbid  tendencies,  but  as  indicating  that  it  is  not  within 
the  range  of  His  bodily  anguish  that  we  are  to  discover  the  true  gauge  and 
meaning  of  His  "travaiL"  2.  If  we  contemplate  the  more  subjective  phases 
of  the  Redeemer's  suffering,  we  see  the  impossibUity  of  appreciating,  from  the 
standpoint  of  our  human  experience  and  intelligence,  the  travaU  of  a  sinless 
soul,  "smitten  of  God  and  afflicted."  8.  But  "the  travaU  of  His  soul"  involves 
more  than  this.  It  includes  that  profound  and  indescribable  sympathy,  that 
jearning  pity  for  fallen  man,  that  self-denying  and  soul-absorbing  love  of  souls, 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAH.  147 

•wMch  led  the  Eternal  Son  of  God  to  surrender  Himself  to  humiliation  and  suffer- 
ing, to  empty  Himself  and  become  "  obedient  unto  death — the  death  of  the  Cross  " — 
that  sympathy  which  perhaps  has  told  more  powerfully  upon  the  human  heart  than 
the  most  picturesque  and  stirring  incidents  m  His  life  of  lowliness  and  pain.  It 
was  in  respect  of  His  sorrow  for  the  fallen  and  the  lost  that  there  was  "  no  sorrow 
like  unto  His  sorrow."  I  linger  on  the  study  of  this  "  travail  of  His  soul "  because 
of  its  intimate  relation  to  the  success  of  all  truly  Christian  toil.  With  many  of  us 
the  gravest  problem  of  life  is  the  comparative  fruitlessness  of  our  work.  Does  not 
the  secret  lie  in  the  feebleness  of  our  sympathy,  in  the  absence  of  that  which  has 
been  called  a  "passion  for  saving  souls    \    II.  The  calm  and  tranqttil  assttrance 

WITH  WHICH  THE  DiVINE  REDEEMER  SURVEYS  THE  COURSE  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

His  toil.  A  single  word  in  the  original  is  responsible  for  this  deduction,  which, 
however,  is  sustained  not  only  by  the  highly  elliptical  character  of  the  passage,  but 
by  the  general  tenor  of  the  references  of  Holy  Scripture  to  the  mediatorial  function. 
These  passages  more  particularly  which  refer  to  the  session  of  the  Redeemer  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,  and  notably  the  memorable  passage  in  the 
Hebrews  :  "  But  this  Man,  after  He  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat 
down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  from  henceforth  expecting  till  His  enemies  be  made 
His  footstool,"  establish  the  doctrine  which  the  Hebrew  original,  with  characteristic 
conciseness,  enshrines  in  one  word.  The  same  doctrine  is  reflected  in  the  history  of 
the  Christian  Church,  which,  even  in  its  varying  cycles  and  its  intermittent  fortunes, 
bears  witness  to  a  Divine  Headship,  calm,  patient,  and  undisturbed.  This  tranquil 
survey  of  the  development  and  fruitage  of  His  past  travail  in  the  moral  histo^  of 
the  world  does  not  involve  the  idea  of  the  personal  inactivity  of  the  ascended  Son. 
But  this  ceaseless  activitj^  is  not  fretted  by  the  anxieties  which  wait  upon  human 
toil.  Our  noblest  work  is  harassed  and  hampered  by  conscious  weakness,  oy  distrust 
of  our  methods,  by  the  precarious  conditions  under  which  we  labour,  by  actual 
failures,  or  by  the  dread  of  prospective  defeats.  We,  too,  are  baffled  by  contin- 
gencies not  calculable  by  human  foresight :  and  in  front  of  us  there  looms  that 
inevitable  end  of  all  work  which  comes  alike  to  all.  It  is  not  under  such  conditions 
that  the  enthroned  Redeemer  surveys  the  fields  of  His  toil.  In  the  calm  assurance 
which  these  words  imply,  there  lies  a  tacit  rebuke  of  the  recklessness  and  feverish 
impatience  of  the  Church  in  regard  to  the  conversion  of  the  world.     III.  The 

CERTAINTY  OF  HiS  FINAL  AXD   ETERNAL  SATISFACTION.      It  is   obvioUS  that  if  thls 

passage  is  to  be  taken  literally,  the  ultimate  issues  of  redemption  will  far  transcend 
the  loftiest  anticipations  which  the  Church  has  ventured  to  entertain.  For  though 
there  be  a  few  passages  even  in  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  which  seem  to  look  towards 
a  less  cheering  sequel,  a  study  of  their  surroundings  will  show  that  there  is  no 
collision  between  them  and  the  most  hopeful  interpretation  of  the  words  of  the  text. 
No  conclusions  drawn  from  merely  human  analogies  can  be  fairly  applied  in  the 
endeavour  to  ascertain  the  limits  within  which  the  satisfaction  of  the  Reedemer  is 
to  be  understood.  Human  nature  is  governed  by  sentiment.  Judging  of  the  Divine 
administration  by  its  own  feelings,  it  has  assumed  that  nothing  less  than  the  final 
restoration  of  every  fallen  man  can  satisfy  the  travail  of  the  soul  of  the  Redeemer. 
But  the  Divine  economy  is  not  an  economy  of  sentiment.  The  infinite  love  of  the 
Father  acts  only  in  harmony  with  the  other  attributes  of  the  Divine  nature.  Law 
must  be  satisfied  as  well  as  love  ;  and  the  human  will  must  not  be  coerced  in  its 
acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  proArisions  which  mercy  has  devised.  But  while  we 
decline  to  indulge  even  a  larger  hope,  which  rests  only  on  sentiment  and  on  the 
subtle  perversion  of  the  Sacred  text,  no  limitations  which  must  necessarily  be 
assigned  to  its  exposition  can  spoil  it  of  its  overpowering  significance.  No  human 
mind  can  indicate  the  sources  or  measure  the  depths  of  that  satisfaction.  The 
practical  application  of  this  ancient  prophecy  is  furnished  by  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.  58). 
IB.  N.  Young,  D.D. )  Christ's  vision  on  the  Cross : — It  was  m  the  crisis  of  His  mental 
and  spiritual  horror,  and  agony  and  darkness,  that  a  vision  broke  on  the  eyes  of 
Jesus  which  made  even  His  death  on  the  Cross  to  be  even  a  satisfaction  to  Him. 

I.  He   saw  THE  COMPLETION   OF  THE   MOST   STUPENDOUS  UNDERTAKING   OF   GoD. 

II.  The  VISION  gave  Him  the  satisfaction  of  a  conqueror.     III.  In  that 

VISION   WAS   a   sight   OF   THE   SUCCESS   OF  THE   GoSPEL  IN  WINNING   THE   HEARTS 

OF  MEN  TO  God.  (C.  F.  Deems,  LL.D.)  He  shall  he  satisfied: — The  satisfaction  of 
which  the  prophet  speaks  is  not  the  joy  of  a  sinner  in  the  Saviour  who  redeems  him, 
but  the  joy  of  the  Saviour  over  sinners  whom  He  has  redeemed.  I.  The  Travail 
OF  His  soul.  We  may  take  note  of  some  of  the  ingredients  that  entered  into  the 
cap,  although  we  cannot  measure  the  degree  of  their  bitterness.     1.  He  who  was 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lin. 

from  all  eternity  the  beloved  of  His  Father  put  His  glory  off,  and  put  on  our 
nature.  2.  He  severed  Himself  from  the  company  of  the  holy  who  loved  and 
worshipped  Him,  for  the  company  of  the  unholy  who  in  feeble  friendship  vexed  or 
In  open  enmity  crucified  Him.  3.  "He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made  sin  for  us,  that 
we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  4.  He  met  personally  with 
the  person  of  the  wicked  one  in  our  quarrel.  5.  His  heart  was  often  sore  vexed  by 
ignorance,  selfishness,  unfaithfulness,  even  of  His  own  selected  disciples.  6.  The 
people  for  whose  sake  He  came  into  the  world — the  Israel  among  whom  he  was  bom 
ana  bred — would  none  of  Him.  7.  The  oflBce  of  the  priesthood,  which  He  loved  and 
honoured  as  God's  institute  to  hold  up  the  promise  of  redemption,  was  by  those  who 
held  it  prostituted  to  reject  the  counsel  of  God.  8.  But  alone,  and  above  all, 
incomprehensible  to  us,  yet  awful  both  for  the  part  that  we  know  and  the  part  that 
we  know  not,  is  the  desertion  by  the  Father,  and  the  final  descent  of  wrath,  due  to 
sin,  on  the  Redeemer's  soul.  II.  The  fkuit  that  besttlts  from  the  travail  op 
His  80TTL.  It  is  not  to  the  sufferings  in  themselves  that  the  Redeemer  looks.  Herein 
appears  the  greatness  of  His  love.  He  looks  over  and  past  the  travail  of  His  soul, 
and  fixes  His  regards  on  the  results  that  it  secures.     III.  The  satisfaction  which 

THE  SaVIOITE  experiences  IN  THE  RESITLTS  OF  THE  TRAVAIL  OF  HiS  80TJL.      HoW 

comes  it  that  this  new  creature  is  graven  more  deeply  on  the  heart  of  the  Eternal 
Son  than  all  His  other  works  I  Those  other  possessions  were  created  by  His  word, 
or  fashioned  by  His  hand,  but  this  springs  from  the  travail  of  His  souL  ( W. 
Arnot,  D.D.)  ''The  travail  of  His  soul:" — In  dealing  with  the  travail  of  our 
Redeemer's  soul,  we  are  like  a  child  writing  down  in  figures  the  national  debt 
of  the  country.  The  figures  are  soon  written,  and  they  are  all  correct ;  but  how 
much  of  the  mighty  meaning  has  entered  the  mind  oi  that  child.  {Ibid.)  The 
frwit  of  Christ's  sacrifice  included  three  things : — I.  The  glort  that  should 
ACOEXTE  TO  THE  FATHER  from  the  ucw  splendours  reflected  on  all  the  perfections  of 
His  character  by  the  work  of  human  redemption.  II.  The  reward  that  should 
accrue  to  the  Saviour  Himself,  His  personal  exaltation,  mediatorial  authority. 
His  Father's  approbation,  and  the  blessings  of  countless  millions  ransomed  by  Efis 
blood.  III.  The  benefit  that  should  accrue  to  His  people,  the  blissful 
change  produced  upon  their  condition,  character,  and  prospects — children  of  wrath 
snatched  from  hell,  servants  of  corruption  rescued  from  their  debasing  servitude, 
rebels  against  God  subdued  by  the  sweet  influence  of  His  grace,  cleansed  from  all 
moral  defilement,  arrayed  in  the  beauties  of  holiness,  purified,  refined,  ennobled, 
rendered  worthy  associates  of  unfaUen  angels,  and  made  to  people  heaven,  who,  but 
for  Christ's  interposition,  must  have  been  the  tenants  of  hell.  This  last  is  the 
cause  of  His  satisfaction  specially  refeiTed  to  in  the  text.  (/.  Eoxburgh,  M.A.) 
The  siiccess  of  the  Gospel : — How  few  of  us  are  satisfied !  The  prophet  himself 
seems  far  from  being  satisfied  ;  for  in  the  first  verse  of  the  chapter  he  laments, 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ? " 
And  yet  so  complete  shall  be  the  Gospel  at  last,  so  entirely  shall  it  fulfil  all  that 
God  meant  it  to  accomplish,  that  Jesus  Himself  shall  be  satisfied.  I.  Why  this 
success  of  the  Gospel  is  called  the  travail  of  Jesus'  soul.  Because  Gospel 
blessings  are  given  us  on  account  of  Christ's  sufferings.  II.  If  we  would  see  a  little 
more  clearly  the  final  success  of  the  Gospel,  let  us  ask,  "When  did  He  see  thb 
travail  of  His  soul,  and  was  satisfied  ?  at  what  time  ?  This  chapter,  I 
think,  tells  us  when.  ""When  thou  shalt  make  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,"  says 
the  tenth  verse,  "  He  shall  see  His  seed."  III.  If  we  would  ask  in  what  respects 
Jesus  was  satisfied,  we  may  answer  at  once,  in  every  respect.  All  the  purposes 
for  which  He  died  will  be  accomplished.  "We  may  hence  learn — 1.  That  the 
number  of  those  finally  saved  will  be  exceedingly  great.  2.  The  complete  final 
sanctification  of  believers.  3.  Another  reason  for  which  Christ  poured  out  His  soul 
unto  death  was,  to  obtain  for  us  the  grace  and  help  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  {E.  Bradley. ) 
The  promised  fruit  of  Chrisfs  sufferings: — I.  The  prediction  before  us  has 
already  been  partially  fulfilled.  Already  has  our  Redeemer  seen  much 
of  the  fruit  of  His  sufferings.  Our  once  barren  world,  watered  by  His  tears  and 
His  blood,  has  afready  produced  a  large  harvest  of  righteousness  and  salvation. 
II.  During  the  period  which  must  elapse  before  time  shall  end,  this 
prediction  shall  receive  a  much  more  ample  accomplishment.  III.  It  is 
TO  the  final  consummation  of  all  things,  it  is  to  eternity,  that  wb 

MUST    look    for  thb   COMPLETE    FULFILMENT   OF    THIS    ANIMATING    PREDICTION. 

Our  Redeemer  wiU  see  that  spiritual  edifice,  the  foundation  of  which  was  laid  in 
His  blood,  which  has  been  so  long  erecting,  standing  before  Him  finished,  resplendent 


oup.  un.]  ISAIAH.  14» 

in  glory,  and  perfect  in  beauty.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  The  prophecy  of  the  Cross: — 
In  foncy  we  can  see  the  Son  of  God  standing  before  the  world  began  upon  the  heights 
of  heaven,  His  ancestral  home,  and  there  with  conflicting  emotions  at  work  within 
His  heart,  and  mirrored  on  His  face,  He  sees  the  great  drama  of  Calvary  unrolled 
before  His  eyes,  I.  Jesus  saw  the  necessity  for  the  Cross.  1.  He  knew  that 
God  the  Father  had  plans  for  man.  He  was  a  being  of  order  and  intelligence.  Man 
was  to  be  created  in  the  image  of  Grod.  He  was  to  nave  happiness  within  his  reach. 
It  was  to  come  by  a  perfect  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  That  was  all  man 
needed  for  happiness.  2.  Jesiis  saw  that  men  would  go  away  from  the  plan  of  God. 
II.  Jesxjs  saw  the  reality  of  the  Cross.  Jesus  knew  as  He  looked  with 
prophetic  eye  that  there  must  be  some  satisfaction  rendered  for  the  law  that  had 
been  violated.  He  saw  that  He  must  render  that  satisfaction.  III.  Jestts  saw 
THE  fruit  of  the  Oross.  {A.  W.  Bealer,  D.D.)  The  Saviour's  ultimate  joy: — 
May  we  not  safely  say  that  the  joy  will  be  aa  varied  as  the  relationships  which  our 
Saviour  bears  to  us  ?  It  will  be  the  joy  of  the  Sufferer  whose  agony  is  forgotten  in 
the  abundance  of  bliss, — the  joy  of  the  Sower  in  reaping  the  abundance  of  the 
harvest, — the  joy  of  the  Shepherd  in  seeing  all  the  sheep  as  one  flock,  safe  for  ever 
in  the  heavenly  fold, — the  joy  of  the  Friend  in  seeing  all  His  friends  by  His  side  in 
a  union  with  Him  and  with  each  other,  that  no  misapprehension  shall  ever  mar,  and 
no  sin  shall  ever  stain, — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  Warrior  when  the  battle  is  over, 
when  every  enemy  is  still  as  a  stone,  and  the  summons  to  tight  is  exchanged^  for 
victorious  rest, — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  Leader,  who  has  brought  all  His  host  into 
the  promised  land, — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  Mediator,  who  has  discharged  His  trust 
and  surrendered  it  to  the  Father,  saying,  "  Of  those  whom  Thou  gavest  Me  I  have 
lost  none," — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  King  who  is  to  reign  for  ever  over  a  kingdom 
in  which  revolt  has  been  made  impossible  through  the  achievements  of  almighty 
grace, — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  Redeemer  when  the  redemption  is  complete, 
fulfilling  His  longings  and  His  prayers, — ^it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  First-bom 
Son  at  seeing  every  member  of  the  new-bom  family  safe  in  a^  happy  home, 
which  no  sin  can  oisturb  and  no  death  invade, — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the  Son 
of  man  in  witnessing  the  ideal  of  human  perfection, — it  will  be  the  joy  of  the 
Son  of  God,  as  to  principaKties  and  powers  in  heavenly  places  He  reveals  through 
a  glorified  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  showing  to  worlds  on  worlds 
what  Infinite  Love  devised  and  Infinite  Power  achieved!  (0.  Clemance,  D.D.) 
Travail  of  soul  and  satisfaction: — I  have  known  an  eminent  portrait-painter,  who, 
when  the  crisis  of  his  picture  came  at  which  it  was  to  be  determined  whether  or  not 
he  had  produced  a  likeness  of  the  features  only,  or  a  picture  of  the  soul  and  character 
of  his  subject,  used  to  fall  into  perfect  paroxysms  of  excitement,  weeping,  wringing 
his  hands  and  grovelling  on  the  ground  ;  but  when  it  was  over  and  the  true  likeness 
stood  embodied  on  the  canvas,  gave  way  to  equally  extravagant  exultation.  {J. 
Stalker,  D.D.)  Messiah  satisfied: — Small  things  will  satisfy  a  small  mind.  It 
requires  great  things  to  satisfy  a  great  mind.  What  must  be  required  to  satisfy  the 
mind  of  an  angel  ?  above  all,  what  must  be  required  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  God  T 
The  salvation  of  ruined  mankind  does  so  1  {J.  JR.  Macduff,  D.D. )  The  satisfaction  of 
realized 'purpose : — There  is  intense  joy  in  work  when  it  is  done  and  well  done.  The 
humblest  mechanic  feels  this  pleasure  when  he  sees  the  article  he  has  been  making 
passing  out  of  his  hands  perfect.  The  poet  surely  feels  it  when  he  writes  Finis  at 
the  end  of  the  work  into  which  he  has  poured  the  full  force  of  his  genius.  What 
must  it  have  been  to  William  Wilberforce  to  hear  on  his  deathbed  that  the  cause  to 
which  he  had  devoted  the  toil  of  a  lifetime  had  triumphed,  and  to  know  that,  when 
he  died,  there  would  not  be  a  single  slave  breathing  in  any  of  the  dependencies 
of  Britain !  (/.  Stalker,  D.D.)  By  His  knowledge  shall  My  righteous  Servant 
justify  ma,ny.— Justification  by  the  knowledge  of  Christ: — I.  The  great  benefit 
THAT  FLOWS  FROM  Christ's  SUFFERINGS.    Justification.    II.  The  parties  made 

PARTAKERS   OF  THE   BENEFIT.      "Many."      III.    ThE  FOUNTAIN  FROM  WHICH   THIS 

BENEFIT  FLOWS  TO  MANY.  "My  rightoous  Servant."  IV.  The  way  Christ 
JUSTIFIES.  Not  simply  by  forgiving,  but  by  His  satisfying  for  them.  "He  shall 
bear  their  iniquities.'^  V.  The  means  by  which  this  benefit  is  derived.  "  By 
His  knowledge."  (J.  Durham. )  " My  righteous  Servant : " — Consider  the  title  that 
Christ  gets  in  these  words.  I.  He  is  called  the  Lord's  Servant.  It  looks  to  Him 
as  Mediator.  It  imports — 1.  A  humiliation  and  inferiority  in  respect  of  God 
(Phil.  iL).  2.  His  prerogative  as  being  singularly  and  eminently  God's  Servant.  8. 
The  particular  task  or  work  that  is  laid  on  Him,  and  the  commission  that  He  hath 
got  to  prosecute  that  work.    4.  That  our  Lord  Jesus,  in  performing  the  work  of 


150  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  im. 

redemption,  canoot  but  be  acceptable  to  Jebovah,  because  it  is  a  performing  of 
that  with  which  He  hath  entrusted  Him.  II.  He  is  called  the  Lord's  righteous 
Servant.  He  is  an  excellent  Servant ;  not  righteous  simply  as  He  is  God,  nor  as 
He  is  man,  but  righteous  in  the  administration  of  His  offices,  and  in  the  discharge  of 
the  great  trust  committed  to  Him.  He  administrates  His  offices — 1.  "Wonderfully 
wisely,  2.  Very  tenderly.  3.  Most  diligently  and  eflfectuaUy.  4.  With  all  faith- 
fulness. (Ibid. )  Justification : — There  are  commonly  six  causes  made  necessary  to 
concur  in  justification.  1.  The  efficient  cause — God,  the  Party  that  doth  justify. 
2.  The  final  cause — His  own  glory.  3.  The  meritorious  cause — Christ's  merit.  4. 
The  inward  instrumental  cause — faith.  5.  The  formal  cause,  or  that  wherein  justifica- 
tion consists.  6.  The  external,  instrumental  cause — the  Word  of  God.  {Ibid.) 
Knowledge  and  faith : — Faith,  where  it  is  saving,  hath  always  knowledge  going 
along  with  it.  1.  Faith  is  nothing,  but  as  it  lays  hold  on  some  object.  How  can 
&ith  lay  hold  on  an  object,  except  it  know  it  ?  2.  Faith,  as  justifying,  is  always 
holden  forth  as  making  use  of  and  giving  credit  to  that  which  is  revealed  in  the 
Word.  3.  In  justification,  God  would  have  a  sinner  proceed  as  a  man  doth  who 
defends  himself  before  an  earthly  tribunal.  As  it  is  dangerous  in  a  weighty  cause 
to  have  an  ignorant  advocate,  who  puts  in  a  wrong  defence,  so  is  it,  in  this  case,  to 
be  ignorant  (Rom.  x.  3).  4.  There  must  be  repentance  ere  a  sinner  can  be  justified, 
which  supposeth  knowledge.  He  must  needs  know  his  sin,  and  that  his  own 
righteousness  will  not  do  his  turn.  5.  Look  forward  to  the  duties  of  holiness,  which 
are  necessary,  though  not  to  justify  you,  yet  that  ye  may  live  as  it  becomes  justified 
persons.  Now,  can  any  know  or  do  duties,  who  are  ignorant  ?  6.  Consider  your 
own  peace,  and  how,  in  order  to  it,  there  is  a  necessity  of  knowledge.  (Aid.) 
Justifying  faith : — 1.  The  necessity  of  it.  2.  The  Object  of  it.  3.  The  act  of  it.  4. 
The  effects  that  flow  from  it.  5.  The  manner  of  its  concurring  in  the  attainment  of 
justification.  (Ibid.)  Justification  by  the  knowledge  of  Christ : — 1.  It  is  the  privilege 
of  the  Gospel  to  discover  a  way  for  the  justification  of  sinners  "  by  His  knowledge." 
2.  Faith  is  knowledge,  or  an  apprehension  of  Christ.  "  The  knowledge  of  Him."  8. 
By  faith  we  are  justified.  He  saith  by  His  knowledge,  but  He  meaneth  faith  ;  such 
apprehensions  of  Christ  as  cause  answerable  dispositions  in  the  spirit.  (T.  Manton, 
D.D.)  The  knowledge  of  Christ : — I.  What  is  the  nature  of  the  knowledge  to 
WHICH  THE  PROPHET  ASCRIBES  SUCH  EFFICACY  ?  It  is  Well  to  cultivate  the  Under- 
standing, if,  perchance,  the  Spirit  of  enlightening  grace  might  employ  this  faculty  as 
an  avenue  to  the  heart.  And  yet  we  must  beware  of  substituting  the  means  for  the 
end.  Others  have  acquired  a  more  clear  view  of  the  Gospel  revelation,  who  know 
much,  but  employ  their  knowledge  to  no  better  purpose  than  to  maintain  an  empty 
parade  of  religious  profession.  What  is  the  knowledge  to  which  we  allude — the 
knowledge  which  involves  privileges  so  inestimable  1  The  prophet  calls  it,  the 
knowledge  of  the  righteous  Servant  of  God.  This  is  no  other  than  the  holy  Jesus, 
the  righteous  Messiah.  1.  There  must  be  the  knowledge  of  self.  2.  The  knowledge 
which  the  sinner  acquires  of  his  own  character,  though  connected  with  that  to  which 
the  prophet  alludes,  is  not  the  thing  itself.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Saviour, 
Christ.  To  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to  renounce  all  virtue  in  ourselves,  and 
to  look  to  Him  alone  for  salvation.  But  there  is  a  further  particular  comprehended 
in  the  knowledge  which  the  believer  has  of  Christ.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  called  the 
"righteous  Servant  of  God."  If  we  love  Him,  we  must  love  Him  as  a  righteous 
Saviour.  II.  The  benefits  which  such  a  knowledge  is  made  instrumental  in 
PROCURING.  1.  The  believer  enjoys  justification  from  sin  by  the  sufferings  and  death 
of  Christ.  2.  As  he  is  united  by  faith  with  the  Saviour,  he  partakes  in  His  righteous- 
ness. 3.  As  he  is  designed  for  the  heavenly  inheritance,  he  must  be  made  meet  for 
its  enjoyment ;  and  therefore  he  has  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  sanctify 
his  heart.  ( fF,  North,  M.A.)  "  By  His  knowledge : " — That  is,  either  by  His  own 
knowledge,  or  by  their  knowledge  of  Him.  And,  as  Dean  Plumptre  puts  it,  the 
prophet  may  have  been  directed  to  an  expression  which  included  both.  For  both 
are  true  of  Christ.  Men  ai-e  saved  by  knowing  Him  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is 
His  knowledge  of  the  Father  that  enables  Him  to  lead  men  to  the  Father.  (Exposi- 
tory Times.)  Justifying  the  many : — 1.  Here  is  a  state  supposed  with  regard  to  the 
many — that  they  would  need  to  be  justified.  Look  at  history.  Let  us  look  into  our 
own  hearts.  Let  us  look  at  the  pure  and  holy  law.  2.  The  prophet  foresees  One 
who  would  be  an  exception  to  the  many.  While  to  them  iniquities  belong,  this  one 
would  be  the  "righteous  Servant."  There  has  been  but  One  m  all  history  to  whom 
tiiis  expression  could  completely  and  unreservedly  apply.  3.  Nor  did  the  prophet 
foresee  this  One  merely  as  one  Eighteoos  One  amid  a  desolate  waste  of  sin,  but  he 


CHAP,  un.]  ISAIAH.  151 

foresees  Him  taking  on  Himself  the  lia,bilities  of  the  race.  *'  He  shall  bear  their 
iniquities."  4.  The  knowledge  of  this  Righteous  One  should  have  peculiar  value. 
'*  By  His  knowledge  ; "  this  and  no  more  will  the  Hebrew  term  bear.  But  we  may 
understand  either — by  the  knowledge  He  has,  or  by  the  knowledge  that  He  imparts, 
or  by  the  knowledge  of  Himself  that  men  should  gain.  Either  way  a  sense  is  conveyed 
that  is  intelligible  and  true.  5.  Where  the  Righteous  One  is  thus  known,  He 
accomplishes  a  glorious  justifying  act.  By  means  of  the  saving  acquaintance  with 
Him  which  believing  penitents  make,  when,  confessing  their  sin,  they  rely  on  Him 
for  pardon,  He,  in  the  exercise  of  His  own  royal  rights,  absolves  them  from  all  their 
guilt,  and  releases  them  from  the  condemning  sentence  of  the  law  of  God.  6.  As 
the  result  of  this  release  the  penitents  are  re-set  in  a  position  of  favour,  grace,  and 
love.  7.  The  ground  or  reason  of  His  justifying  the  many,  is  that  He  bore  their 
iniquities.  The  justifying  is  not  only  a  sequence,  but  the  consequence  of  His  bearing 
our  sins.     {C.  Ctemaifiee,  D.D.) 

Yet.  12.  Therefore  will  I  divide  Him  a  portion  with  the  gfreat.— 0%r£»<'«  conflict 
and  conquest: — I.  Christ's  Cohfliot.  II.  Christ's  Conqitest.  The  conflict  is 
last  in  the  order  of  the  words,  but  first  in  order  of  nature  and  time.  {T.  Manton, 
D.D.)  The  greatness  of  the  Sin-iearer: — It  is  the  voice  of  God  Himself;  and  it  is 
befitting  that,  as  He  introduced  His  Servant  in  the  opening  verses  of  this  marvellous 
portraiture,  so,  in  these  closing  words.  He  should  pronounce  His  verdict  on  His 
career.  Two  things  are  clearly  predicated  of  the  Sin-bearer.  1.  That  He  should  be 
great.  2.  That  He  should  attain  His  commanding  position,  not  as  the  founder  of  a 
new  school  of  thought,  nor  as  the  leader  of  a  social  reformation,  nor  as  possessed  of 
exceptional  saintliness — but  as  a  Sufferer.  I.  The  greatness  given  by  the 
Father  as  the  reward  for  Christ's  obedience  to  death.  It  was  meet  that 
such  a  reward  should  be  bestowed,  for  the  sake  of  those  who  should  afterwards  follow 
in  the  footsteps  of  their  Divine  Master.  ITone  could  ever  deserve  more  or  better 
than  Christ ;  and  if  He  were  without  recognition  or  reward,  might  it  not  be  thought 
that  Heaven  had  no  prize  to  give  for  faithful  service?  Surely  He  must  have  a 
reward,  or  the  very  order  of  the  universe  might  be  deemed  at  fault  ?  But  what 
reward  should  He  have  ?  "What  could  compensate  Him  for  having  laid  aside  the 
exercise  of  His  Divine  prerogative  ;  for  having  assumed  our  nature ;  for  having 
passed  through  the  ordeal  of  temptation,  sorrow,  and  pain  ;  for  having  become 
obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross  ?  All  worlds  were  His  by  native 
right ;  all  holy  beings  owned  His  sway  as  Creator  and  God  ;  all  provinces  of  thought, 
emotion,  power,  and  might,  sent  Him  their  choicest  tribute.  What  reward  could 
He  claim,  or  have  ?  The  answer  may  be  suggested  by  recalling  our  own  pleasure  in 
conferring  pleasure,  our  joy  in  giving  joy.  Let  the  limitations  imposed  by  our 
mortality  or  circumstances  be  removed ;  let  us  be  able  to  realize  to  the  fuU  the 
yearnings  and  promptings  of  our  noblest  hours  ;  let  the  wish  to  help  be  accompanied 
by  a  sympathy  that  cannot  hurt  the  most  sensitive,  a  wisdom  that  cannot  mistake, 
a  power  that  cannot  be  daunted  or  thwarted  ;  and  probably  we  should  at  once  drink 
deep  draughts  of  blessedness  like  God's.  This  is  the  blessedness  of  Christ,  and  this 
is  the  reward  which  the  Father  has  given  Him.  God  Himself  could  not  give,  nor 
the  Saviour  ask  for,  a  greater  reward  than  this.  And,  in  its  magnificence,  it  appeals 
to  all  who  would  tread  in  His  steps.  This  is  Heaven's  supreme  reward :  that  all 
who  pour  out  their  souls  to  death  shall  obtain  enlarged  opportunities  and  possibilities 
of  service.  II.  The  greatness  that  Christ's  death  has  seoitred  Him  AMONa 
MEN.  He  is  worthy  to  take  the  mysterious  scroll  of  destiny,  and  break  its  seaU, 
because  of  the  light  He  has  cast  on  the  great  mysteries  by  which  our  lot  is  shadowed. 

1.  Pain.  When  it  enwraps  us  in  its  fiery  baptism,  we  are  apt  to  accuse  ourselves  or 
to  doubt  God.  But  Jesus  has  taught  us  that  there  is  yet  a  third  way  of  regarding 
pain.  He  had  not  sinned,  yet  He  suflFered  as  none  of  woman-bom  ever  did. 
Evidently,  then,  pain  is  not  always  symptomatic  of  special  sin.  He  was  once 
so  submerged  in  anguish  that  for  a  time  He  lost  the  sense  of  His  Father's  love  ;  but 
He  never  suggested  that  there  was  failure  or  obliquity  in  the  moral  government  of 
the  world.  The  death  of  Jesus  has  therefore  robbed  death  of  these  two  implications, 
and  has  taught  us  that  it  is  often  sent,  and  must  be  borne,  with  the  view  of  benefit- 
ing others.  What  a  priceless  service  was  this — to  transform  pain ;  to  persuade 
sunerers  that  by  their  travail  of  soul  they  were  enriching  the  whole  world  of  men. 

2.  Death.  Men  dread  it.  But  He,  by  His  dying,  has  abolished  death,  and  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  li^t.  For  this  we  count  Him  great,  that  throiigh  death  He 
undid  death.     3.  Sio.     When  Jesus  died  on  the  Cross,  He  was  numbered  with 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  un. 

transgressors ;  but  He  stood  over  against  all  transgressors,  distinct  fit)m  them  and 
bearing  their  sin.  This  surely  constitutes  an  overmastering  claim  for  us  to  count 
Christ  great.  III.  The  greatness  which  His  death  will  win  for  Cheist  in 
THE  estimation  OF  OTHER  RACES  OF  BEING.  Not  to  the  Mount  of  Beatitudes,  but 
to  the  Cross,  will  distant  worlds  send  tlieir  deputations  in  all  coming  ages,  to  learn 
the  manifold  lessons  which  it  alone  can  teach.  There  they  will  learn  to  know  the 
very  heart  of  God,  His  hatred  against  sin.  His  love  for  the  ainner,  His  fidelity  to 
covenant  engagements.  His  righteousness,  His  truth.  The  Cross  is  the  heavenly  prism 
that  enables  us  to  distinguish  the  constituents  of  the  Divine  nature.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  BA. ) 
He  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong. — "He  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the 
strong : " — This  is  generally  interpreted  as  picturing  a  conqueror  sharing  with  other 
fellow-conquerors  in  the  booty  of  the  conquered.  But  could  that  figure  have  any 
analogy  in  Christ's  triumph  ?  Who  could  be  His  fellow-conquerors  ?  What  could 
be  the  booty  of  His  conquered  ones?  Much  better  is  it  to  consider  "the  stiong," 
or  "the  mighty  ones,"  to  represent  the  powers  of  darkness,  who  have  made  spoil  of 
the  human  race,  and  the  di\ision  of  the  spoil  with  them  by  Messiah  to  be  the  rescue 
of  souls  from  their  grasp.  The  "many"  (ver.  11)  whom  He  saves  will  then  be  the 
spoil  He  snatches  from  the  great  enemy,  and  we  can  read  the  whole  passage:  "By 
the  knowledge  of  Him  shall  My  righteous  Servant  give  righteousness  to  many,  and 
He  Himself  shall  bear  their  iniquities.  Therefore  will  I  divide  Him  the  many  as 
His  portion,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  mighty  ones."  This  allusion  to 
the  powers  of  evil  gives  completeness  to  the  prophetic  description.  The  humble 
birth,  unattractive  position  in  society,  and  unfavoured  career  through  life,  are  given 
in  vers.  2,  3.  Hia  partnership  with  distress  and  His  own  sufferings  are  exhibited  in 
vers.  4,  6,  6.  His  meekness  is  portrayed  in  ver.  7.  Then  come8  the  apparent 
failure  of  His  life,  followed  by  its  complete  triumph  in  saving  souls.  We  need  a 
word  regarding  the  enemy  triumphed  over  to  make  the  wonderful  prophetic  sketch 
complete.  (Howard  Crosby,  LL.D.)  The  Lord  Jesus  a  glorious  Conqueror:— 
Dividing  of  the  spoil  is  the  effect  of  a  sure  and  a  great  conquest.  The  eminency  of 
it  lieth  in  these  four  things— (1)  Either  in  the  power  of  the  adversaries.  There  is 
no  triumph  in  prevailing  over  weak  things.  (2)  The  unlikelihood  of  the  means.  A 
thousand  men  were  slain  by  the  jawbone  of  an  ass  by  the  hands  of  Samson  ;  and  a 
numerous  host  discomfited  by  Gideon's  pitchers  and  three  hundred  lamps.  Such 
things  as  these  make  the  success  memorable.  (3)  The  manner  or  nature  of  the 
victory.  Total  defeats  are  most  noted.  (4)  A  conquest  is  glorious  in  the  effects  or 
result  of  it.  If  it  be  of  great  importance  and  consequence  to  the  good  of  a  people, 
when  fears  are  removed,  and  privileges  are  granted  and  enlarged,  spoilers  taken,  a 
kingdom  subdued — these  things  make  for  the  glory  of  the  victory.  Let  us  see  if 
such  things  be  not  found  in  the  conquest  of  Chn^t.  The  adversaries.  They  are 
always  expressed  by  such  notions  as  do  imply  great  strength  and  power  (Ool.  iL  15  ; 
Eph.  iv.  8).  1.  There  is  the  devil,  who  is  a  powerful  adversary.  But  "  the  prince 
of  this  world  is  judged  "  (John  xvi.  11).  2.  The  law  was  an  enemy,  as  it  condemns 
us  (Col.  ii.  14 ;  Eph.  ii.  16).  3.  Death  and  hell  (1  Cor.  xv.  54  ;  2  Tim.  L  10 ; 
Eev.  i.  18).  4.  The  flesh  (Rom.  viii.  3).  5.  The  world  (John  xvi.  83).  6.  All 
the  adverse  powers  in  the  world  (Ps.  ii.  10-12).  II.  The  means.  The  weapons  of 
this  warfare  are  not  camaL  1.  As  to  His  death.  2.  By  the  Word  of  the  Cross, 
called  the  foolishness  of  preaching.  3.  By  His  Spirit ;  a  great  force,  but  secret  and 
undiscemed.  4.  By  His  prayers  and  intercessions.  III.  The  manner  or  nature 
OF  thb  conquest,  how  it  is  achieved.  1.  The  enemies  are  overcome  and  terribly 
broken :  there  is  a  total  dissipation  of  all  the  powers  of  darkness.  2.  Not  barely 
overcome,  but  spoiled  and  rifled  (Col.  ii.  15).  3.  Such  a  victory  as  endeth  in  a 
solemn  triumph  ;  as  conquerors  in  public  view  carried  their  spoils  and  their  enemies 
tied  to  their  chariots,  so  Christ  would  expose  them  to  open  shame.  IV.  What 
special  benefits  we  have  Br  THE  conquest  op  Christ.  1.  The  banishment  of 
distracting  fear  (Heb.  ii.  15).  2.  An  encouragement  to  the  spiritual  conflict.  8. 
Joy  unspeakable  and  glorious.  4.  Hopes  of  glory  ;  we  shall  conquer  with  Him,  and 
reign  with  Him.  6.  The  very  exaltation  of  Christ  is  a  great  comfort  to  us.  6. 
Christ's  conquest  is  a  token,  earnest  and  pledge  of  our  victory.  7.  What  Christ  did 
in  this  conquest,  He  did  it  for  our  sakes.  He  will  have  nothing  but  we  shall  share 
in  it.  8.  Another  benefit  is  usefulness  and  serviceableness  for  all  that  befalls  us. 
Christ  doth  so  effect  it  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  (Rom.  viii.  28). 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.)  He  hath  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death. — The  conflict  of 
Christ  explained:— I.  His  death.  "He  bath  poured  ouL"  etc.  II.  The  ignominy 
OF  it.    "  He  was  numbered  with  the  transgresson."    IIL  Thb  (Uvsa  ov  rr.    "H« 


CHAP.  Liii.]  ISAIAH.  158 

bare,"  etc.  IV.  The  noted  ciectjmstance  in  it.  "  He  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors."  {T.  MarUon,  D.D.)  The  love  of  Chrisi : — He  gave  Himself.  I.  The 
GIFT.  "His  soul."  II.  The  manner  of  giving.  "Poured  out."  III.  The 
intent.  {Und.)  Christ  killed  hy  the  inner  Cross: — It  was  not  the  Cross  of  wood 
that  kUled  the  Saviour,  but  the  inner  Cross,  which  lay  heavily  on  His  souL 
(C   Clemance,  D.I).)     Christ's  connection  with  sinners  the  source  of  His  glory:— 

1.  The  first  source  of  the  Mediator's  glory  is,  that  He,  out  of  His  love  to  guilty  men, 
has  POURED  OUT  His  soul  unto  death.  The  penalty  of  sin  is  death.  "  The  soul 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die. "  The  Lord  Jesus  came  into  such  connection  with  men 
that  He  bore  the  death  penalty  which  guilty  men  had  incurred.     Remark  the  ex- 

Sression:  "  He  hath  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death."  It  is  deliberate.  It  is  a 
bation  presented  with  thought  and  care  ;  not  the  mere  spilling  of  His  blood,  but  the 
resolute,  determinate  pouring  out  of  His  whole  life  unto  its  last  drop — the  pouring  it 
out  unto  death.  Christ's  resolve  to  die  for  you  and  me  was  not  that  of  a  brave  soldier 
who  rushes  up  to  the  caimon's  mouth  in  a  moment  of  excitement ;  but  He  was  practi- 
cally pouring  out  His  life  from  the  day  when  His  public  ministry  commenced,  if  not 
before.     He  was  always  dying  by  living  at  such  a  rate  that  His  zeal  consumed  Hitti. 

2.  It  was  most  real  and  true.  I  pray  you  do  not  think  of  Christ  as  pouring  out  His 
soul,  as  though  it  made  Him  spend  a  sort  of  ecstatic  life  in  dream-land,  and  suffer 
only  in  thought,  latent,  and  sympathy.  My  Lord  suffered  as  you  suffer,  only  more 
keenly  ;  for  He  had  never  injured  His  body  or  soul  by  any  act  of  excess,  so  as  to 
take  off  the  edge  from  His  sensitiveness.  3.  See  how  complete  it  was.  Jesus  gave 
poor  sinners  everything.  His  every  faculty  was  laid  out  for  them.  Put  your  trust 
in  Him,  then,  without  reserve.  II.  Our  Lord  w^as  numbered  with  sinners. 
"He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors."  There  is  a  touch  of  nearness  to  the 
sinner  about  this  which  there  is  not  in  the  first  clause.  He  bears  death  for  the 
sinner ;  but  you  could  not  suppose,  if  you  had  not  read  it,  that  He  would  be  written 
in  the  sinner's  register.  He  was  not,  and  could  not  be,  a  siuner ;  but  yet  it  is 
written,  "He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors."  Is  there  a  census  taken  of 
sinners  ?  Then,  the  name  of  Jesus  is  written  down.  How  was  He  numbered  with 
the  transgressors  ?  This  makes  it  the  more  marvellous,  because  it  is  so  hurtful  to  a 
man  who  is  pure,  to  be  numbered  with  the  impure.  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  numbered 
with  the  transgressors — 1.  By  the  tongue  of  slander.  They  called  Him  a  drunken 
man  and  a  wine-bibber :  they  even  called  Him  Beelzebub.  That  was  sharp  enough 
for  Him  to  bear,  whom  all  the  angels  salute  as  "Holy,  holy,  holyi"  2.  In  ttie 
earthly  courts  of  justice.  He  stood  at  the  bar  as  a  common  felon,  though  He  was 
judge  of  all.  Though  they  could  not  find  witnesses  whose  testimony  agreed,  yet 
they  condemned  Him  (Mark  xv.  28).  3.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  on  earth,  was 
treated,  in  the  providence  of  God,  as  transgressors  are  treated.  Transgression 
sometimes  brings  on  men  poverty,  sickness,  reproach,  and  desertion ;  and  Jesus 
Christ  had  to  take  His  share  of  all  these  with  sinful  men.  AH  things  in  this  world 
that  are  so  keen  and  terrible  to  man,  because  man  has  become  so  guilty,  were  just  as 
keen  and  terrible  to  Him.  The  nails  that  pierced  Him  tore  His  tender  flesh  as  they 
would  have  torn  that  of  the  sinful.  Fever  parched  Him  till  His  tongue  cleaved  to 
His  jaws.  4.  The  Holy  God  treated  Him  as  if  He  were  one  of  us.  "  It  pleased  the 
Father  to  bruise  Him  ;  He  hath  put  Him  to  grief."  God  not  only  turned  His  back 
on  transgressors,  but  He  tinned  His  back  iipon  His  Son,  who  was  numbered  with 
them.  III.  The  third  matter  by  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  won  His  victories, 
and  earned  reward  of  God,  is  this :  "  He  bare  the  sin  of  many."  IV.  The  last 
thing  is  this:  "He  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors."  Who  among 
us  will  take  up  the  part  of  the  guilty  ?  Who  wHl  plead  for  the  guUty  ?  I  know,  in 
certain  cases,  the  lawyer  will  sell  his  tongue  to  the  most  polluted  ;  but  if  a  man  were 
perfectly  pure,  you  would  not  find  him  saying  a  word  in  defence  of  the  guilty.  So 
far  as  the  man  was  guilty  he  could  not  be  defended.  But  our  Lord  made  intercession 
for  transgressors.  When  He  was  here  on  earth  how  tender  He  was  with  trans- 
gressors !  He  bore  on  His  heart  the  names  of  guilty  men.  He  was  always  pleading 
their  cause,  and  when  He  came  to  die  he  said,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do. "  He  took  their  part.  He  would  exculpate  them  if  a^ 
could.  I  dare  say  that  He  has  often  prayed  like  that  for  you.  Now  He  has  gone 
up  yonder  He  is  pleading  still.  ^  Application :  (1)  Jesus  Christ  does  not  shrink  from 
sinners  ;  ye  sinners,  do  not  shrink  from  Him.  (2)  As  Jesus  does  not  shrink  from 
sinners,  do  not  yourselves  shrink  from  them.  {C.  H.  Spu/rgeon.)  He  was  numbered 
with  the  transgresBors.— 2!fte  Friend  of  sinmers : — I.  To  the  sinner,  troubled  and 
ahmned  on  account  of  guilt,  there  will  be  much  comfort  in  the  thoi^t  that  Ohust 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  liii. 

IS  ENROLLED  AHONO  SINNERS.  "  He  was  nmnbered  with  the  transgressors."  1.  In 
■what  sense  are  we  to  understand  this  ?  (1)  He  was  numbered  with  them,  in  the 
census  of  the  Roman  empire.  (2)  Years  rolled  on,  and  that  child  who  had  been 
early  numbered  with  transgressors,  and  had  received  the  seal  of  transgression  in  the 
circumcision,  which  represents  the  putting  away  of  the  flesh — that  child,  having 
come  to  manhood,  goes  forth  into  the  world  and  is  numbered  with  transgressors 
in  the  scroll  of  fame.  Ask  public  rumour  "What  is  the  character  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth?"   and  it  cannot  find  a  word  in  its  vocabulary  foul  enough  for  Him. 

"  This "  they  sometimes   said ;  and  our  translators  have  inserted  the  word 

"  fellow "  because  in  the  original  there  is  an  ellipsis,  the  evangelists,  I  suppose, 
hardly  liking  to  write  the  word  which  had  been  cast  upon  Christ  Jesus.  They  called 
the  Master  of  the  house,  Beelzebub  !  (3)  But  to  make  the  matter  still  more  forcible, 
"He  was  numbered  with  transgressors  in  the  courts  of  law."  The  ecclesiastical 
ooTirt  of  Judaism,  the  Sanhedrim,  said  of  Him,  "Thou  blasphemest ; "  and  they 
smote  Him  on  the  cheek.  Written  down  among  the  offenders  against  the  dignity 
of  God  and  against  the  security  of  the  Jewish  Church,  you  find  the  name  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  which  was  crucified.  The  courts  civil  also  asserted  the  same.  (4)  Then, 
the  whole  Jewish  people  nimibered  Him  with  transgressors ;  nay,  they  reprobated 
Him  as  a  more  abominable  transgressor  than  a  thief  and  a  murderer  who  had  excited 
sedition.  (5)  His  name  is  written  in  the  calendar  of  crime  by  the  whole  universe  ; 
for  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  of  all  men  is  He  accounted  to  be  the  off- 
scouring  of  all  things,  and  is  put  to  grief.  2.  Why  was  Christ  numbered  with 
transgressors?  (1)  Because  He  could  the  better  become  their  advocate.  I  believe, 
in  legal  phraseology,  in  civil  cases,  the  advocate  considers  himself  to  be  part  and 
partner  with  the  person  for  whom  he  pleads.  You  hear  the  counsellor  continually 
using  the  word  "we;"  he  is  considered  by  the  judge  to  represent  the  person  for 
whom  he  is  an  advocate.  (2)  That  He  might  plead  with  them.  Suppose  a  number 
of  prisoners  confined  in  one  of  our  old  jails,  and  there  is  a  person  desirous  to  do  them 
good,  imagine  that  he  cannot  be  admitted  unless  his  name  is  put  down  in  the 
calendar.  Well,  out  of  his  abundant  love  to  these  prisoners  he  consents  to  it,  and 
when  he  enters  to  talk  with  them,  they  perhaps  think  that  he  will  come  in  with 
cold  dignity ;  but  he  says,  "Now,  let  me  say  to  you  first  of  all  that  I  am  one  of 
yourselves."  "Well,"  they  say,  "but  have  you  done  aught  that  is  wrong  ? "  "I 
will  not  answer  you  that,"  saith  he  ;  "but  if  you  will  jiist  refer  to  the  calender  you 
will  find  my  name  there  ;  I  am  written  down  there  among  you  as  a  criminal."  Oh, 
how  they  open  their  hearts  now  !  (3)  That  sinners  may  feel  their  hearts  drawn  to 
Him.  (4)  That  we  might  be  written  in  the  red  roll  of  His  saints.  H.  We  are 
taught  in  the  next  sentence,  that  Christ  "  bare  the  sins  of  many."  1.  Here  it  is 
as  clear  as  noon-day  that  Christ  dealt  with  sinners.  2.  As  He  did  bear  their 
sins,  other  texts  tell  us  that  He  did  bear  them  away.  3.  There  is  now  no  sin 
abiding  upon  those  for  whom  Jesus  died.  III.  Oiu'  third  sentence  tells  us  that 
Jesus  INTERCEDES  FOR  SINNERS.     "And  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors." 

1.  He  pleads  for  their  forgivenesss.  2.  He  next  prays  that  those  for  whom  He 
intercedes  may  be  saved,  and  may  have  a  new  life  given  them.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ  numbered  voith  the  transgressors: — He  became  a  sinner,  though  sialess — 1. 
By  imputation.  2.  By  reputation.  {J.  Trapp. )  Made  intercession  for  the  trans- 
gressors.— Christ's  intercession  for  transgressors: — Christ  in  this  and  such  Uke 
actions  is  to  be  considered  in  a  double  regard — 1.  As  a  holy,  godly  man  ;  so  He  was 
to  fulfil  all  righteousness.  2.  As  a  mediator  and  public  person,  that  was  to  be  our 
High  Priest,  to  satisfy  and  intercede.  {T.  MarUon,  D.  D.)  Christ's  intercession: — 1. 
WTio  prayeth.     Christ,  one  that  could  destroy  them  with  His  glory  easily  enough. 

2.  When  He  prayed.  In  the  very  act  of  His  sufferings.  3.  For  whom  He  prayed. 
For  them  that  offered  Him  all  the  indignities  in  the  world.  4.  How  He  prayed. 
He  pleadeth  for  them  ;  "Forgive  them,"  etc.  (Ibid.)  Jeims  interceding  for  trans- 
gressors : — Our  blessed  Lord  made  intercession  for  transgressors  in  so  many  words 
while  He  was  being  crucified,  for  He  was  heard  to  say,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do. "  Our  Lord  fixed  His  eye  upon  that  point  in  the 
character  of  His  persecutors  which  was  most  favourable  to  them,  namely,  that  they 
knew  not  what  they  did.  He  could  not  plead  their  innocence,  and  therefore  He 
pleaded  their  ignorance.  Our  great  Advocate  will  be  sure  to  plead  wisely  and 
efficiently  on  our  behalf ;  He  will  urge  every  argument  which  can  be  discovered,  for 
His  eye,  quickened  by  love,  will  suffer  nothing  to  pass  which  may  tell  in  our  favour. 
The  prophet,  however,  does  not,  I  suppose,  intend  to  confine  our  thoughts  to  the 
one  incident  which  is  recorded  by  the  evangelists,  for  the  intercession  of  Christ  was 


CHAP.  LHi.]  ISAIAH.  156 

an  essential  part  of  His  entire  life-work.  Jesus  Himself  is  the  reasoning  vaA.  logio 
of  prayer,  and  He  Himself  is  an  ever-living  prayer  unto  the  Most  High.  It  was 
part  of  our  Lord's  official  work  to  make  intercession  for  the  transgressors.  He 
18  a  Priest,  and  as  such  He  brings  His  ofiFering,  and  presents  prayer  on  the  behalf  of 
the  people.  I.  I  have  to  direct  your  attention  to  our  ever-living  Lord  making 
intercession  for  the  transgressors ;  and  I  shall  pray  God  that  aU  of  us  may  be 
roused  to  admiration  foe  His  grace.  1.  If  you  will  consider  His  intercession 
for  transgressors  I  think  you  will  be  struck  with  the  love,  and  tenderness, 
and  graciousness  of  His  heart,  when  you  recollect  that  He  ofiTered  intercession 
verbally  while  He  was  standing  in  the  midst  of  their  sin.  Sin  heard  of  and  sin  seen 
are  two  very  dififerent  things.  Our  Lord  actually  saw  human  sin,  saw  it  at  its 
worst.  He  saw  it  aU,  and  felt  the  sin  as  you  and  I  cannot  feel  it,  for  His  heart  was 
purer,  and  therefore  tenderer  than  ours :  He  saw  that  the  tendency  of  sin  was  to  put 
Him  to  death,  and  all  like  Him,  yea  and  to  slay  God  Himself  if  it  could  achieve  its 
purpose,  for  man  had  become  a  Deicide  and  must  needs  crucify  His  God — and  yet, 
though  His  holy  soul  saw  and  loathed  aU  this  tendency  and  atrocity  of  transgression, 
He  stUl  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors.  2.  Another  point  of  His  gracious- 
ness was  also  clear,  namely,  that  He  should  thus  intercede  wMle  in  agony.  3.  But 
it  is  marvellous  that  He  being  pure,  should  plead  for  transgressors  at  all :  for  you 
and  for  me  amongst  them — let  the  wonder  begin  there.  4.  Further,  it  is  to  me  a 
very  wonderful  fact  that  in  His  glory  He  should  stUl  be  pleading  for  sinners. 
5.  Again,  it  is  gloriously  gracious  that  our  Lord  should  continue  to  do  this.  He 
hath  never  ceased  to  make  intercession  for  transgressors.  II.  I  do  earnestly  pray 
that  we  may  be  led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  so  to  view  His  intercession  for  transgressors  as 
to  put  our  CONFIDENCE  IN  HiMSELF.  There  is  ground  for  a  sinner's  confidence  in 
Christ,  and  there  is  abundant  argument  for  the  believer's  complete  reliance  in  EQm, 
from  the  fact  of  His  perpetual  intercession.  1.  Because  His  intercession  succeeds. 
2.  There  is  reason  for  transgressors  to  come  and  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  seeing  He 
pleads  for  them.  3.  I  am  sure,  too,  that  if  Jesus  Christ  pleads  for  transgressors  aa 
transgressors,  while  as  yet  they  have  not  begun  to  pray  for  themselves.  He  wiU  be 
sure  to  hear  them  when  they  are  at  last  led  to  pray.  4.  In  order  that  our  confidence 
may  be  increased,  consider  the  effect  of  our  Lord's  intercession  for  transgressors. 
(1)  Many  of  the  worst  of  transgressors  have  been  preserved  in  life  in  answer  to 
Christ's  prayer.  (2)  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  needful  for  the  quickening 
of  transgressors  was  the  result  of  Christ's  intercession.  (3)  It  is  through  Qhrist'a 
intercession  that  our  poor  prayers  are  accepted  with  God.  (4)  It  is  through  the 
prayers  of  Christ,  too,  that  we  are  kept  in  the  hour  of  temptation.  Remember  what 
He  said  to  Peter,  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not,"  when  Satan 
desired  to  have  him  and  sift  him  as  wheat.  '*  Father,  keep  them  from  the  evil "  is  a 
part  of  our  Lord's  supplication,  and  His  Father  hears  Him  always.  (5)  Indeed,  it  is 
because  He  pleads  that  we  are  saved  at  all.  He  is  "able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  them. "  III.  I  pray  that  our  text  may  inspire  us  with  the  spirit  of  obedience  TO 
His  example.  I  take  the  example  of  Christ  to  be  an  embodied  precept  as  much 
binding  upon  us  as  His  written  commands.  1.  Imitate  Him  by  forgiving  aU  trans- 
gressions against  yourself.  2.  Imitate  Christ,  in  pleading  for  yourselves.  Since 
you  are  transgressors,  and  you  see  that  Jesus  intercedes  for  transgressors,  make  bold 
to  say,  "  If  He  pleads  for  such  as  I  am,  I  will  put  in  my  humble  petition,  and  hope 
to  be  heard  through  Him."  3.  If  we  have  been  forgiven  our  transgressions,  let  ua 
now  intercede  for  transgressors,  since  Jesus  does  so.  4.  Let  us  take  care,  that  if  we 
do  plead  for  others  we  mix  with  it  the  doing  of  good  to  them,  because  it  is  not 
recorded  that  He  made  intercession  for  transgressors  imtil  it  is  first  written,  "He 
bare  the  sin  of  many."  5.  If  Christ  appears  in  heaven  for  us,  let  us  be  glad  to 
appear  on  earth  for  Him.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  The  Morutrch  becomes  an  intercessor 
for  Bis  foes  (with  Luke  xxiii.  34) : — Here  prophecy  and  history  unite  in  teking  us  to 
the  place  which  is  called  Calvary.  I.  In  what  light  should  we  regard  thesk 
WORDS?  II.  What  is  the  request?  For  whom?  "Forgive  them,"  those  who 
were  the  instruments  and  agents  in  His  crucifixion.  These  were — 1.  The  people. 
2.  The  chief  priests  and  scribes.  3.  The  rulers.  4.  The  soldiers.  5.  The  Koman 
governor.  6.  The  passers-by,  who  were  reviling  Him.  7.  Those  who  were  crucified 
with  Him,  joining  in  the  mockery  and  jeste.  What  is  the  plea  by  which  the  petition 
is  urged  ?  "  They  know  not  what  they  do."  Not  one  of  them  knew  the  full  extent 
of  the  crime.  Not  even  the  disciples  could  have  estimated  the  guilt  of  the  people 
(Acts  iiL  16 ;  1  Oor.  ii.  6).    There  was  only  One,  even  the  Sufferer  Himself,  who 


166  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  un. 

could  view  that  sin  in  all  its  manifold  complications,  and  hold  evenly  and  righteously 
the  scales  of  judgment.  III.  What  a  spirit  of  love  thbsb  words  breathe  1 
Their  self-forgetfulness  is  wonderful.  The  sin  of  those  thus  wronging  the  Saviour 
was  a  far  greater  cause  of  distress  to  Him  than  all  the  degradation,  ignominy,  and 
pain  He  was  enduring ;  on  these  things  He  could  be  altogether  silent,  in  order  to 
plead  for  the  forgiveness  of  others'  sin.  We  see  here,  too,  a  love  which,  rising  above 
human  repulsiveness  and  guilt,  ever  regards  itself  as  sent  to  save  ;  a  love  which 
Would  carry  on  a  redeeming  work,  even  when  stretched  in  agony  on  the  Cross.  Here, 
too,  is  not  only  the  love  of  One,  whose  saving  energy  could  neither  be  repulsed  nov 
trammelled,  but  of  One  who,  though  He  is  most  folly  acquainted  with  the  greatness 
of  their  guilt,  pleads  before  Him,  to  whom  sin  is  an  abominable  thing,  the  mitigation 
of  their  crime.  Truly,  it  is  a  marvel  of  comfort  that  He,  who  judges  sin  most 
exactly,  deals  with  the  sinner  most  tenderlv  1  Here,  too,  is  Divine  love  making 
intercession  for  the  transgressors ;  not  for  the  good,  but  for  the  bad ;  not  for  the 
penitent,  but  for  the  impenitent ;  that  they  may  be  brought  to  repent ;  showing  ns 
how  Christ's  love  goes  after  men  always,  under  aU  circumstances,  in  the  lowest 
depths  of  guilt.  Nevertheless,  Divine  love  so  pleads,  as  to  imply  that  if  this  sin 
had  been  committed  with  full  understanding  of  its  enormity.  He  dared  not  have 
asked  for  its  forgiveness.  "  For  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Thus  the  spirit  of 
this  prayer  has  its  terrors  as  well  as  its  comforts.  "  There  is  a  sin  unto  death,"  for 
which  the  Redeemer  does  not  intercede,  and  for  which  we  have  no  commission  or 
authority  to  pray.  Where  that  sin  lies,  what  is  its  precise  character,  whether  this 
or  that  man  has  committed  it,  we  dare  not  say.  We  can  tell  four  things  about  it : — 
we  know  the  region  in  which  it  lies,  the  sign  it  has  been  committed,  the  sign  it  has 
not  been  committed,  and  why  there  is  no  mercy  for  it.  Where  one  who  has  the 
fullest  light  indulges  in  the  greatest  sin,  he  is  getting  very  near  the  unpardonable 
sin.  The  sign  that  it  has  been  committed,  would  be  hard,  final,  impenitence.  True 
repentance  is  a  sure  sign  it  has  not  been  committed.  It  is  not  pardonable,  because 
at  such  a  stage  the  sinner  will  not  repent.  IV.  What  are  the  doctrines  these 
words  involve?  1.  They  teach  us  that  the  Father  saves  us  through  the  Son. 
2.  That  sins  of  ignorance  need  forgiveness.  Paul  sinned  "ignorantly  in  unbelief," 
and  yet  was  the  ' '  chief  of  sinners. "  3.  Whatever  palliation  of  guilt  may  be  allowed, 
owing  to  ignorance,  full  recognition  is  taken  thereof  by  the  great  Intercessor.  4.  We 
are  taught  that  the  fuller  the  light  the  greater  the  sin  (Heb.  x.  26,  27).  5.  That 
forgiveness  of  sin,  by  God,  is  so  precious  to  us,  because  it  is  made  over  to  us  in 
perfect  knowledge  of  every  aggravation  and  mitigation.  V.  What  results  did 
this  intercession  secttre  ?  We  are  sure  that  this  prayer  was  answered.  It  did 
not  indeed  avert  the  destruction  of  the  doomed  city,  but— 1.  It  secured  the  forgive- 
ness of  every  penitent  who  might  be,  nevertheless,  involved  in  its  temporal  disasters. 
2.  The  Great  Pleader's  work  soon  proved  its  power  in  the  salvation  of  the  thief  on 
the  Cross,  and  shortly  after  of  thousands  more.  3.  By  means  of  the  intercession  of 
our  Lord,  begun  on  earth,  and  now  carried  on  in  heaven,  we  are  "not  under  the  law, 
but  under  grace."  (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  Meaning  of  intercession: — The  question, 
"What  is  meant  by  intercession?"  being  asked  in  a  Sunday  school,  one  of  the 
children  replied,  "Speaking  a  word  to  God  for  us,  sir."  Intercession  for  the  trcmt' 
gressors: — "  I  shall  never  forget,"  wrote  Miss  Plumptre  to  a  friend,  "the  day  of  the 
sadness  and  the  gladness  of  my  heart,  the  day  when  a  chafed  and  disappointed  spirit 
found  healing  and  rest  in  One  whom  I  had  done  my  utmost  to  be  independent  of. 
The  joy  of  the  astronomer  over  his  newly-discovered  planet  is  nothing  to  the  rapture 
with  which  I  gazed  upon  the  word  transgressors  in  the  last  sentence  of  Isaiah  liii.  12 : 
*He  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors.'  I  well  remember  being  so  dazzled 
that  for  a  time  I  thought  it  a  delusion,  a  misprint.  It  was  something  so  altogether 
new  to  my  proud,  hard-working  spirit,  that  I  could  almost  wonder  that  I  did  not 
erase  it  and  put  in  '  the  penitent '  or  '  the  humble '  or  one  of  nature's  prond  epithets. 
Yes,  I  think  that  word  '^transgressors '  was  the  first  that  ever  glowed  on  me  with  all 
the  attraction  of '  free  grace. ' 


CHAP.  Liv.]  ISAIAB.  167 


OHAPTEE  LIV. 

Vers.  1-17.  Sing,  0  l)arren. — Jerusalem,:  barren,  then  fruitful: — ^The  direct 
address  refers  to  Jerusalem,  which  resembled  Sarah  in  her  early  barrenness  and  later 
fruitfulness  (chap,  11.  1-3).  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  relation  between  Isaiah  liii. 
and  liv. ) : — From  Oalvin  to  Ewald  and  Dillman,  critics  have  all  felt  a  close  connection 
between  chaps,  lii.  13-liii.  and  chap.  liv.  "After  having  spoken  of  the  death  of 
Christ,"  says  Calvin,  "  the  prophet  passed  on  with  good  reason  to  the  Church  :  that 
we  may  feel  more  deeply  in  ourselves  what  is  the  value  and  efficiency  of  His  death." 
Similar  in  substance,  if  not  in  language,  is  the  opinion  of  the  latest  critics,  who 
understand  that  in  chap.  liv.  the  prophet  intends  to  picture  that  full  redemption 
which  the  Servant's  work,  culminating  in  chap,  liii.,  could  alone  effect.  Two 
keywords  of  chap.  liii.  had  been  "a  seed"  and  "many."  It  is  "the  seed  "and 
the  "many"  whom  chap.  liv.  reveals.  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  two  chap- 
ters deal  with  the  same  subject  from  two  distinct  standpoints.  Whatever  view 
be  held  as  to  the  Servant's  personality,  there  is  no  doubt  that  His  exaltation 
implies  the  restoration  of  Israel,  and  that  His  work  is  the  indispensable  condition 
of  that  restoration  being  eiccomplished.  Thus  while  chap.  liii.  describes  the  inward 
process  of  conversion  by  which  the  nation  is  made  righteous,  chap.  liv.  describes 
the  outward  deliverance  which  is  the  result ;  and  the  impression  is  probably  correct 
that  the  glowing  hopes  here  uttered  are  sustained  in  the  last  resort  by  the  con- 
templation of  the  Servant's  mission  as  described  in  chap.  lui.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner, 
D.D.)  Isaiah  liv.  is  peculiarly  a  missionary  chapter.  After  the  death  and  resur- 
rection of  the  Saviour  nas  been  foretold,  the  great  results  that  would  foUow  thereon 
are  appropriately  described.  In  vers.  1-3,  she  that  was  "barren"  (whether  a 
reference  is  made  to  the  Jews  on  their  return  from  captivity,  or  to  the  Gentiles  to 
whom  the  Gospel  began  to  go  forth  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  or  to  the  enlargement 
of  the  true  Church  by  the  gathering  in  of  souls  from  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike)  is 
exhorted  to  rejoice  in  the  increase  of  her  offspring.  God's  mercy  in  gathering  this 
Church  and  bestowing  upon  her  His  favour  is  described  (vers.  4-10)  ;  the  attrac- 
tiveness of  this  Church  follows  (vers.  11,  12) ;  and  lastly  (vers.  13-17)  her  establish- 
ment in  righteousness  and  her  permanence  are  set  forth.  ( W.  H.  Barlow,  B.D.) 
•■  The  Church  of  the  future : — The  prophecy  of  this  chapter  follows  naturally  on,  and 
is  a  continuation  of,  that  in  the  fifty-third.  The  former  foretells  "  the  sufferings  of 
Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow."  The  latter  speaks  of  the  Church,  the 
foundations  of  which  the  Saviour  died  to  lay,  the  superstructure  of  which  He  lives 
to  build.  I.  We  have  a  picture  of  the  Church  in  her  sadness.  The  figures 
used  by  the  prophet,  while  easy  enough  to  apply  generally,  present  some  points  of 
difficulty  when  we  attempt  the  detail.  1.  At  the  first  glance  of  the  opening  verses 
of  the  chapter  we  see  that  the  figures  are  drawn  from  the  very  closest  tie  that  nature 
knows,  even  that  of  the  marriage  relationship.  This  figure,  so  frequently  used  in 
the  Old  Testament,  is  based  on  a  profound  truth.  The  truth  on  which  it  is  based 
is  this  :  that  as  both  male  and  female  are  incomplete  without  each  other,  so  the 
happiness  of  God  is  incomplete  without  the  love  of  the  creature  whom  He  has  made 
to  love  Him,  and  the  happiness  of  man  is  incomplete  without  an  object  above  him 
in  which  his  love  can  rest.  Such  a  figure  served  a  holy  educating  purpose  to  Israel, 
and  ought  still  to  do  so  to  us.  In  one  direction  it  shows  us  how  holy  and  tender  is 
the  relationship  between  man  and  God,  and  how  loving  is  the  heart  of  God  towards 
man  ;  in  another  direction  it  lifts  up  the  sacred  tie  of  marriage  into  a  higher  and 
Diviner  light,  and  lets  us  see.it  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  idea,  as  not  only  a  union  of 
bodies  but  also  of  spirits,  in  a  tie  which  can  never  be  broken  without  a  rupture  of  the 
laws  of  God  1  2.  Another  truth  lying  at  the  foundation  of  the  chapter  is  this,  that 
the  Church,  in  God's  eye,  is  seen  at  a  glance,  through  all  the  vicissitudes  of  her 
chequered  career,  till  her  completion  in  the  fulness  of  time.  That  Church,  chosen 
in  Christ  "  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  in  Him  is  one.  He  sees  that  Church 
passing  through  gloom  to  glory  I  And  truly,  sad  enough  is  the  picture  of  the 
Church's  sorrow  which  is  presented  here.  She  is  like  one  whose  husband  has  for- 
saken her.  She  is  barren,  desolate,  rejected,  contemned ;  and  is  consequently  sad, 
afiSicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  and  not  comforted.     The  chief  question  is,  at  what 

¥}riod  was  God's  Church  like  this,  and  what  Church  was  ever  in  such  gloom  ?    (1) 
he  Hebrew  Church  was  primarUy  intended.      Her  bondage  in  Egypt  was  "tha 
shuue  of  her  youth,"  her  captivity  in  Babylon  was  "  the  reproach  of  her  widowhood." 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iiv. 

(2)  The  figures  would  apply,  to  some  extent,  to  that  ideal  Gentile  Church  which  the 
Saviour  saw  in  vision  when  He  said,  '  *  Other  sheep  I  have, "  etc. ,  including  all  those  in 
the  east  and  west  and  north  and  south  who  were  yearning  after  God,  but  to  whom 
the  Lord  had  not  yet  revealed  His  love,  and  who  were  not  yet  brought  to  rest  in 
the  Infinite  heart  of  God.  (3)  The  description  will  apply  also  to  the  whole  Church 
of  God  now :  which,  during  the  transition  period  through  which  we  are  now  passing, 
while  the  great  problem  of  sin  and  its  treatment  is  being  worked  out,  is  often 
in  shade,  often  mourning  the  paucity  of  those  who  join  her  ranks,  often  the 
object  of  the  world's  ridicule  and  scorn !  (4)  The  passage  will  befit  also  the  in- 
dividual believer,  in  whose  chequered  experience  of  sorrow,  temptation  and  care 
aU  the  varied  phases  of  the  troubles  of  the  Church  are  presented  in  miniature. 
II.  "We  have  a  second  picture  as  bkight  as  the  first  is  dark.  The  second 
is  given  on  account  of  the  gloom  of  the  first,  for  the  special  purpose  of  cheering  the 
Baints  of  God,  throughout  tne  period  of  shade.  In  the  picture  given  with  this  view, 
an  entirely  dififerent  set  of  figures  is  made  use  of ;  even  such  as  belong  to  the  erection 
of  a  buil(ung.  And  there  are,  scattered  throughout  this  chapter,  no  fewer  than  nine 
main  features  which  go  to  make  up  the  outline  of  this  beauty  and  glory  which,  in 
spite  of  present  gloom,  the  prophet  sees  far  ahead.  Regarding  the  Church  of  the 
future,  then,  under  the  figure  of  a  building,  let  us  observe — 1.  God  Himself  is  the 
Founder  of  it.  The  foundation  is  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Men  from  every  nation  under 
heaven  will  gather  within  it.  "The  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  He  be  called." 
The  restrictions  of  the  past  shall  be  done  away.  3.  Righteousness  shall  be  its 
basis  (ver.  14).  4.  Close  and  endearing  relationship  with  God  will  be  its  privilege 
(ver.  5).  "  Thy  Maker  is  thine  Husband."  He  who  formed  you  by  the  hand  of  His 
power,  will  make  Himself  known  to  you  in  the  tenderest  love.  5.  Light  will  be 
its  heritage.  "All  thy  children  shall  he  taught  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  13).  6.  Peace 
will  be  its  possession.     "  Great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children "   (ver.   13). 

7.  Beauty  will  be  its  adornment.  "  Behold  I  will  set  thy  stones  in  stibium  "  (ver. 
11).  Stioium  was  a  peculiar  dye  with  which  the  Hebrew  women  tinged  the  eye- 
lashes, in  order  that,  being  surrounded  with  this  tinge,  the  beauty  of  the  eye  might 
flash  forth  more  brightly.  So  the  stones  with  which  this  building  of  God  was  to  be 
erected,  were  to  be  set,  as  it  were,  in  cement  of  so  rich  a  dye  as  to  set  forth  their 
lustre  in  richer  beauty.  "  And  thy  battlements  of  rubies,  thy  gates  of  flashing  gems, 
and  all  thy  borders  of  precious  stones. "  Thus  the  mineral  world  is  made  to  yield 
its  meed  of  illustration ;  its  choicest  gems  are  used  as  symbolic  of  the  glory  and 
beauty  of  the  Church.  Why?  Because  aU  beauty  and  glory  of  jasper,  amethyst, 
ruby,  sapphire,  and  pearl,  when  so  set  that  their  radiance  gleams  out  most  bril- 
liantly, are  but  a  reflection  of  that  higher  spiritual  beauty  of  Him  who  created  all. 

8.  Divine  protection  will  be  its  safeguard  (vers.  14,  15).  "Thou  shalt  be  far  from 
oppression  ;  for  thou  shalt  not  fear :  and  from  terror ;  for  it  shall  not  come  near 
thee.  Behold,  they  (thine  enemies)  shall  surely  gather  together,  but  not  by  Me 
(not  by  My  consent) :  whosoever  shall  gather  together  against  thee  shall  fall  for 
thy  sake"  (rather,  shall  fall  upon  thee).  "Whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone 
shall  be  broken."  Adverse  weapons  shall  be  blunted.  Adverse  tongues  shall  be 
condemned — both  by  the  force  of  powerful  argument,  and  by  the  mightier  de- 
monstration of  a  holy  life  (ver.  16).  "I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy," 
the  same  power  which  builds  the  Church,  has  created  all  her  foes ;  hence  the 
inference  is  inevitable,  God  will  not  suffer  those  who  are  opposed  to  Him  to  use  their 
power  so  as  to  destroy  that  part  of  His  work  which  He  values  most.  9.  Perpetuity 
shall  be  its  everlasting  law  (vers.  7-10).  This  is  expressed  in  various  forms  of 
antithesis.  Everything  is  vrrapped  up  in  this  ninefold  glory  !  (C.  Clemance,  D.D.) 
"Sing,  0  barren/" — In  the  previous  chapters  we  have  heard  the  exiles  summoned 
to  leave  Babylon,  and  beheld  the  Divine  Servant  becoming  the  Sin-bearer  for  them 
and  the  world.  Here  our  attention  is  startlingly  recalled  to  the  desolate  city  of 
Jerusalem.  "  Barren  ; "  "  Forsaken  ; "  "  Desolate  " — such  are  the  terms  applied  to 
her  by  One  who  cannot  err.  And  they  are  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  a  con- 
temporary (Neh.  i.  3  ;  ii.  3,  13-17).  But  how  is  this?  Have  we  not  learnt  that 
the  Mediator  has  put  away  sin  at  the  cost  to  Himself  of  wounds  and  bruises,  stripes 
and  death  ?  Is  that  redemption  complete  which  fails  to  grapple  with  all  the  results 
and  consequences  of  wrong-doing?  This  opens  up  a  great  subject,  and  one  that 
touches  us  all.  Though  our  sin  is  forgiven,  yet  certain  consequences  remain,  of 
which  that  ruined  city  is  a  type.  We  cannot  undo  the  past ;  God  Himself  cannot 
undo  it.  It  can  never  be  as  though  it  had  never  been.  The  seventy  years  of 
captivity,  the  shame,  the  sorrow,  the  anguish  to  God,  the  forfeited  opportunities, 


CHAP,  uv.]  ISAIAH.  159 

the  thistledown  so  thoughtlessly  scattered  1  God  can  forgive  ;  but  these  things 
cannot  be  altered  now.  I.  The  natural  consequences  of  sin.  1.  We  must 
distinguish  between  them  and  the  punitive  or  penal.  Suppose  that  a  man  is  taken 
into  custody  for  being  drunk  and  disorderly.  There  are  two  results  of  that  outbreak 
of  uncontrolled  passion  ;  on  the  one  hand  he  has  broken  the  law  of  his  country,  for 
which  a  penalty  of  imprisonment  or  a  fine  must  be  inflicted  ;  but  on  the  other,  and 
in  addition,  he  has  brought  on  himself  the  racking  headache,  the  depression  of  spirits, 
the  awful  nervous  reaction,  which  is  the  natural  and  inevitable  result.  These  will 
pursue  and  scourge  him  as  with  the  whip  of  the  furies,  even  when  his  standing  is 
adjusted  with  his  country's  laws.  So,  when  we  sin  against  God,  two  consequences 
accrue.  2.  This  distinction  is  Scriptural.  "When,  in  response  to  Nathan's  parable, 
David  broke  the  long  silence,  and  cried,  "  I  have  sinned  1 "  the  prophet  immediately 
answered,  "The  Lord  hath  put  away  thy  sin;"  but  he  added,  "The  sword  shall 
never  depart  out  of  thy  house. "  So  far  as  the  sin  lay  between  God  and  David's 
soul,  it  was  removed  immediately  on  his  confession  ;  but,  so  far  as  the  natural 
consequences  were  concerned,  they  followed  him  for  many  a  long  year.  3.  These 
natural  consequences  are  bitter-  to  bear.  II.  How  God  overrules  sin's  natural 
CONSEQUENCES.  Jehovah  says,  "  Sing,  0  barren  ;  break  forth  into  singing,  and  cry 
aloud  I"  "How  can  I  sing?"  says  Israel.  "  Nevertheless, "  is  the  Divine  reply, 
"  the  time  for  singing  is  come.  Sing,  not  because  of  what  thou  hast,  but  of  what  I 
have  promised  to  give.  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent ;  lengthen  thy  cords ; 
strengthen  thy  stakes  ;  make  room  for  the  incoming  of  a  great  host  that  shall  own 
thee  mother."  "  But  the  results  of  our  backshdings  remain.  Thou  canst  not  undo 
them,  though  Thou  mayest  forgive.  Thou  canst  not  give  us  back  the  seventy  years  of 
exUe.  Thou  canst  not  obliterate  the  scar  of  bruise  and  wound  and  sore.  Thou 
canst  not  intercept  the  inevitable  recoil  of  our  sins."  Yet  Jehovah  answers,  "0 
barren  one  !  thou  must  sing  as  thou  didst  when  thou  camest  from  Egypt.  Not  with 
the  same  exuberant  joy  ;  but  with  a  deeper  insight  into  that  grace  which,  in  addition 
to  its  abimdant  pardon,  can  transform  the  irreparable  past.  So  God  our  Father  is 
able  to  make  men  and  women  in  middle  life  sing  again,  as  in  the  days  of  their  youth, 
with  a  joy  chastened  by  their  memory  of  the  failures  and  transgressions,  which  yet 
have  yielded  honey  like  the  carcase  of  Samson's  lion.  As  in  the  great  world,  Adam's 
sin  has  been  overruled  to  the  great  enrichment  of  the  race,  so  in  the  small  world  of 
our  individual  experience,  we  rise  by  our  falls.  Let  us  illustrate  this  in  the  history 
of  the  exUe.  Terrible  as  was  the  immediate  loss  inflicted  by  the  national  back- 
sliding, demanding  the  penalty  of  the  captivity,  yet  in  three  respects  that  captivity 
was  overruled  to  enrich  the  religious  life  of  the  chosen  people,  and  ultimately  of  the 
world.  1.  They  conceived  new  and  enlarged  ideas  of  God.  They  learnt  that  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  should  be  called  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  (ver.  5).  2.  They 
better  understood  the  nature  of  true  religion.  Before  the  captivity,  in  the  estimation 
of  the  majority,  it  consisted  in  outward  observances.  In  the  captivity  we  first 
meet  with  the  institution  of  the  synagogue,  where  devout  souls  could  worship  God 
in  simplicity  and  spirituality.  3.  They  realized  their  world-wide  mission.  So  still. 
In  those  who  have  suffered  from  the  results  of  their  sins,  there  is  a  humility,  tender- 
ness, softness  in  speech,  delicacy  in  understanding  the  temptations  and  failures  of 
others,  the  soul  of  the  prophet,  the  intercession  of  the  priest,  which  are  beyond 
price.  Whilst  we  mourn  our  sins,  and  bitterly  lament  their  cost  and  pain,  yet  we 
can  see  how  God  is  at  work  taking  up  the  very  waste  of  our  Kves  and  making  it  up 
again  into  the  fairest  fabrics  ;  as  rich  dyes  are  made  from  the  produce  of  gas-retorts, 
and  white  paper  from  old  and  disused  rags.  In  our  exile  we  get  new  thoughts  of 
God,  of  religion,  and  of  our  mission  among  men.  Probably  we  should  have  reached 
them  in  some  other  way  had  we  never  wandered ;  but  we  may  have  learnt  them 
under  conditions  which  will  for  ever  give  a  special  flavour  and  tone  to  our  affirmation 
of  these  mighty  truths.  III.  Words  of  help  to  ant  who  may  be  suffering 
FROM  THE  RESULTS  OF  PAST  WRONG-DOING.  The  past  Cannot  be  altered  ;  but  it  is  a 
comfort  to  know  that  it  can  be  forgiven,  and  the  soul  made  white  and  clean.  There 
is  a  world  of  difi'erence  between  punishment  and  chastisement.  God  calls  us  back  to 
Himself  as  a  wife  forsaken  and  grieved  in  spirit.  He  knows  the  disappointment  and 
shame  of  the  downcast  soid  (ver.  6).  He  waits  to  gather  with  great  mercies,  and  to 
show  mercy  with  everlasting  kindness  (vers.  7,  8).  Let  us  heed  His  call,  and  return 
to  Him.  We  must  also  believe  in  His  inalienable  love.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Songs 
for  desolate  hearts : — I.  The  text  shall  first  of  aU  be  taken  in  its  reference  TO  THE 
Church  of  God.  For  a  long  season  before  the  coming  of  Christ  the  Church  of  God 
was  desolate.     Few  were  her  sons  and  daughters.     Her  solemn  feast-days  wen 


leo  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  uy. 

I _ 

attended  by  a  multitude  of  hypocrites,  and  her  courts  were  crowded  with  formalists, 
but  the  genuine  children  of  Israel  were  sadly  few  ;  and  when  the  Lord,  the  Husband 
of  the  Church,  Himself  arrived,  the  Church  was  in  no  happy  condition.  After  that 
the  Lordihad  been  lain  in  the  grave  and  risen  again  and  ascended  and  left  the 
Church,  then  were  the  days  of  refreshing,  and  the  times  of  the  visitation  of  the 
Spirit.  At  all  seasons  when  the  Church  has  been  desolate  and  has  become  barren, 
God  has  appeared  to  her.  II.  I  now  intend  to  use  the  text  in  reference  to  any  onb 
Chttrch.  1.  There  are  some  separate  Churches  which  are  in  a  veiy  sad  condition, 
and  may  most  truly  be  said  to  be  barren  and  desolate.  2.  Breturen  will  ask  me 
•what  is  their  present  duty  as  members  of  such  Churches  ?  Your  duty  is  very  plain. 
Labour  to  be  conscious  of  the  sad  barrenness  of  the  Church  to  which  you  belong. 
Spread  the  case  before  Jehovah,  and  be  sure  that  you  look  away  from  everything 
that  you  yourself  can  do  to  Him,  and  to  him  alone.  But  mind  you  do  not  pray 
without  proving  the  sincerity  of  your  prayers  by  action.     III.  The  poor  helpless 

8INNEB  HAS  HIS  CASE  WELL  DESCKIBED  BY  THE  PROPHET  AS  BARREN  AND  DESOLATE. 

"  Barren  I  ah,  that  I  am.  I  have  not  one  meritorious  fruit  that  I  can  bring  before 
God. "  You  are  desolate,  too ;  no  one  can  comfort  you.  Yoiir  barrenness  is  barren- 
ness for  ever  if  left  to  itself,  and  your  desolation  is  utter  and  helpless  unless  some 
one  intervene.  May  I  ask  you  to  look  at  the  chapter  which  precedes  my  text? 
Jesus  has  taken  the  sinner's  sin  upon  Himself,  and  made  a  complete  atonement ; 
therefore,  "  Sing,  0  barren ! "  The  mighty  Redeemer  has  come  out  of  His  dwelling- 
place,  and  has  fought  the  enemy,  and  won  the  victory.  "  Sing,  0  barren  !  "  IV. 
Does  not  this  text  belong  to  the  depressed  believhr  ?  You  and  I,  though  we 
have  brought  forth  some  fruit  unto  the  Lord  Jesus,  yet  sometimes  feel  very  barren. 
"What  are  we  to  do  ?  "  Sing,  0  barren,"  etc.  But  what  can  I  sing  about  ?  I  cannot 
sing  about  the  present ;  I  cannot  even  sing  concerning  the  past.  Yet  I  can  sing  of  Jesus 
Christ.  What  is  my  barrenness  ?  It  is  the  platform  for  Divine  power.  What  is  my 
desolation  ?  It  is  the  black  setting  for  the  sapphire  of  His  everlasting  love.  v. 
Our  text  ought  to  have  a  special  voice  to  those  Christians  who  have  not  been 
SXTCCESSFUL  IN  DOING  GOOD.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  The  Gentile  Church  a  joyful  mother : 
— I.  The  childless  modrnee.  The  passage  is  the  present  heritage  of  the  Gentile 
Church.  Gentiledom  was  for  a  long  time  without  a  spiritual  child.  Now  she  may 
sing  over  a  multitudinous  family  of  true  Christians.  Addressed  to  the  Jews  as  a 
prophecy — showing,  in  their  sadiiess  and  depression,  that  though  matters  looked  so 
dark  for  the  cause  of  God  now,  yet  there  was  a  bright  and  blessed  hope.  Cheers  them, 
I  not  so  much  by  showing  grounds  of  present  rejoicing,  but  by  providing  a  telescope 
by  which  they  might  behold  "  the  good  time  coming."  We  may  here  note — 1.  One 
great  use  of  prophecy.  It  can  cheer  when  things  immediately  around  cause 
depression.  (1)  To  a  sad  Church  the  minister  should  speak  much  of  imfulfiUed 
prophecy.  (2)  The  Christian,  in  the  "present  distress'  should  do  the  same  for 
himself  (2  Pet.  i.  19).  2.  The  imagery.  It  rings  poetic  changes  on  the  idea  of 
'  childlessness.  Expressive  imagery  to  Jewish  women,  who  so  longed  for  children,  in 
hope  of  Messiah.  (1)  Such  should  be  the  Church's  longing.  Her  prayer  should  be, 
"  Give  me  children,  or  I  die  I "  Bad  sign  when  a  Church  seems  content  to  be  barren 
or  to  have  no  spiritual  increase.  (2)  When  she  remains  without  new  births  (or 
conversions),  she  should  mourn.  Contemplate  the  once  barrenness  of  Christendom. 
Its  comparative  barrenness  in  vast  tracts  now,  even  in  Christian  England  1  II.  Thb 
BEJOiciNG  mother.  GeutUedom  for  ages  "unmarried " — "  desolate."  When  Christ 
came.  He  "  called  her  by  name,"  and  espoused  her.  Then  how  rapidly  a  family  was 
brought  forth.  In  Pentecostal  times,  what  "multitudes  were  added  to  the  Lord" 
(Acts  vi.  7  ;  xvi.  5).  What  joy  this  caused !  (Acts  ii.  46,  47,  etc.)  1.  The  great 
subject  of  the  verse,  the  joy  of  the  Church  in  multitudes  of  conversions.  This  jov 
of  the  Lord  is  her  strength  (Neh.  viii.  10).  She  is  then  encouraged  to  labour  with 
fresh  zeal  and  hope  in  works  of  evangelization.  Therefore-"  new  births  "  should  be, 
as  it  were,  registered  ;  the  successes  of  the  Gospel  should  be  published  to  evoke  this 
healthful  joy.  Hence  the  reflex  benefits  of  missionary  gatherings.  2.  Keasons  for 
such  joy.  Not  only  because  souls  are  saved,  but  because — (1)  Increase  is  a  sign  that 
God's  power  is  with  His  Church.  (2)  It  confirms  our  own  faith.  The  more  they 
are  who  believe  what  we  believe,  the  more  confident  we  must  feel  in  the  truth  of  our 
faith.  (8)  It  makes  heaven  appear  attractive  by  the  "  sympathy  of  numbers."  We 
may  use  the  text  as  a  test :  flow  for  are  we  in  sympathy  witn  the  Ohoroh  in  joy  over 
conversions  to  God  f    {R.  Olover,  M.A.) 

Yen.  2,  8.  Enlarge  the  place  «f  thy  tent— .^n  enlarged  Churtih  ^-The  Jcwlik 


CHAP.  UT.]  ISAIAH.  161 

nation,  after  its  return  from  captivity,  never  attained  so  remarkable  a  degree  of 
prosperity  and  power  as  fully  to  answer  all  the  terms  of  this  prophecy.  It  is  true 
that  they  became  a  very  numerous  people ;  so  that  from  forty -two  thousand,  the 
number  of  those  that  went  out  of  Babylon,  they  had  increased  to  nearly  three 
millions  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  death  ;  but  they  can  hardly  be  said,  in  respect 
of  territorial  limits,  to  have  broken  "forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left," 
nor  to  have  "inherited  the  Gentiles."  We  must  therefore  look  for  another  in- 
terpretation of  the  prophecy ;  and  we  can  be  in  no  doubt  as  to  its  application  to 
the  Church  of  God.  (C  J.  Blomfield,  D.D.)  Jew  and  Gentile  in  one  Church: — 
"He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied,"  are  words  of 
comfort  interposed  amidst  forebodings  of  suffering  and  woe  ;  and  the  mode  of  their 
accomplishment  is  more  clearly  pointed  out  by  an  image  drawn  from  the  habits 
of  pastoral  Kfe,  familiar  to  the  people  of  eastern  countries,  where  the  nomad  chief, 
as  his  family,  and  cattle,  and  goods  increase,  finds  it  necessary  to  "enlarge  the 
place  of"  his  "tent,  and"  to  "stretch  forth  the  curtains  of"  his  "habitation." 
Under  this  image  is  represented  the  gradual  increase  of  the  Church,  from  the 
moment  when,  to  human  eyes,  it  appeared  to  have  been  crushed  by  the  disgrace  and 
death  of  its  Founder,  to  the  time  when  the  "fulness  of  the  Gentiles"  shall  have 
"  come  in,"  and  God's  ancient  people  shall  be  brought  back  to  the  same  fold  with 
them,  and  all  "the  kingdoms  of  this  world"  shall  "become  the  kingdoms  of  our 
Lord,  and  of  His  Christ."  {Ibid.)  Enlargement: — According  to  the  prophet  the 
relation  of  God  to  His  people  is  a  relation  that  assures  enlargement  of  beneficence 
on  every  hand.  God  and  His  Church  are  not  locked  up  together,  in  some  secret 
place,  enjoying  spiritual  luxuries,  whilst  all  the  world  is  dying  of  starvation.  If 
we  could  find  such  a  hint  in  the  Scripture  we  should  bum  the  book.  The  Scripture 
is  aU  for  enlargement.  The  feast  cannot  be  increased ;  but  if  it  were  neediul  to 
increase  the  space  within  which  the  guests  are  to  be  accommodated  God  would 
thrust  back  the  horizon,  rather  than  any  man  should  starve  for  want  of  room  to 
sit  down  in.  If  any  messenger  shall  return,  saying,  "Yet  there  is  room,"  God 
would  send  that  messenger  out  again  to  compel  the  hungering  and  homeless  to 
come  that  they  might  enjoy  a  Father's  gracious  bounty.  So  we  find  in  the  opening 
verses  of  this  chapter — enlargement.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  William  Carey  and 
missions : — William  Carey's  sermon  on  this  text,  preached  at  Nottingham,  marked 
an  epoch  in  the  history  of  Christianity,  for  it  aroused  the  Church  of  Christ  to  a 
sense  of  its  responsibility  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  and  the  evangelization 
of  the  world.  The  interest  awakened  by  that  sermon  led  to  the  formation  of  the 
Baptist  Missionary  Society,  and  to  the  ushering  iu  of  the  Evanglistic  era,  which 
has  already  brought  a  great  revenue  of  glory  to  Christ,  and  priceless  blessings  to 
every  branch  of  His  Church.  From  this  remarkable  text  Carey  deduced  and 
enforced  two  important  practical  principles,  which  were  afterwards  embodied  in 
the  motto  of  the  Baptist  Mission — "Attempt  great  things  for  God."  "Enlarge," 
"stretch  forth,"  "lengthen,"  "strengthen."  "Expect  great  things  from  God" 
(ver.  4).  If  Carey  had  done  nothing  but  shape  this  formula  for  evangelistic  work, 
he  would  have  achieved  much  for  the  cause  he  loved  so  dearly.  It  is  easily 
remembered.  Rather,  it  is  not  easily  forgotten.  {J.  T.  McGaw,  D.D.)  The 
enlargement  of  the  Church : — The  tent  is  the  simplest  and  most  primitive  form  of 
the  human  habitation.  Wherever  a  pole  can  be  found,  with  cords  or  strips  of 
leather,  a  little  bark  or  cloth  or  canvas  or  skin,  a  tent  can  be  set  up — as  easily 
Btnick  as  pitched,  and  almost  as  easily  enlarged  ;  for  when  the  growing  necessities 
of  a  family  demand  larger  shelter  and  room,  all  you  have  to  do  is  to  get  a  little 
longer  pole,  a  little  thicker  cords,  a  little  more  bark  or  skin  or  canvas,  and  you 
can  stretch  forth  the  curtains  of  your  habitation  to  accommodate  the  needs  of  the 
growing  family.  And  so  this  is  made  the  type  of  the  enlargement  of  the  canopy  of 
the  Church  over  her  growing  family  of  children.  "Thou  shalt  burst  forth,"  as 
the  Hebrew  is — the  grand  old  Hebrew — "Thou  shalt  burst  forth  on  the  right  and 
on  the  left. "  A  symmetrical  growth  in  this  direction  and  that  direction  alike  ; 
not  like  a  family  that  has  a  one-sided  development — she  is  going  to  gather  her 
children  from  east  and  west  and  north  and  south,  and  every  clime  and  every  tongue 
and  every  people  ;  and  because  her  family  is  to  come  from  aU  quarters  of  the  earth, 
her  canopy  must  stretch  to  every  quarter  of  the  earth  to  cover  her  increasing  family. 
iA.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  ^^  Lengthen"  and  *' strengthen" : — What  is  the  duty  of  the 
Church  in  these  days?  "Lengthen"  and  "strengthen."  The  word  " lengthen " 
■uggests  extensity  ;  the  word  "  strengthen  "  suggests  intensity,  and  there  is  always 
danger  in  eztenaive  movement  that  is  not  accompanied  by  intensive  movement. 

VOL.  III.  11 


182  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  UT. 

You  are  lengthening  your  cords,  but  if  you  do  not  strengthen  your  stakes  what 
■will  happen  ?  Your  lengthening  your  cords  will  be  a  disaster  to  you  and  the  tent 
itself.  1.  How  shall  we  lengthen  cords?  By  sending  out  our  organizations  in 
every  direction — a  cord  here  to  Europe,  another  cord  to  Asia,  another  to  Africa, 
and  another  to  the  islands  of  the  sea.  Towards  the  North  Pole  and  the  South 
Pole  ;  in  every  direction,  from  the  great  centres  of  Christendom,  let  your  missionary 
organizations  reach !  With  the  enterprise  that  has  dash  and  push  in  it  let  these 
cords  be  carried  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  until  the  network  of  missions  overspread? 
the  whole  famUy  of  man  !  And,  if  we  are  going  to  have  this  lengthened  cord  you 
must  add  your  own  length  to  it.  As,  when  we  rescue  a  man  from  a  burning 
building,  and  the  ladder  wiU  not  reach  those  that  are  in  peril,  the  fireman  stands 
on  the  top  rung  of  the  ladder  and  adds  his  own  length,  over  which  men  and  women 
climb  down  into  safety,  so  if  you  are  going  to  have  this  organization  reach  over 
the  world  in  a  spirit  of  hallowed  enterprise  tiU  the  canopy  is  co-extensive  with 
the  family  of  man,  your  length  has  got  to  be  added  to  the  cord.  You  have  read 
of  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  Carthaginian  maidens  when  they  cut  ofif  their  raven 
ringlets  that  they  might  be  braided  into  bowstrings  for  Hannibal's  archers  ;  or 
of  the  Tyrian  maidens  when  they  sacrificed  their  golden  hair  for  cordage  for  the 
Tyrian  navy.  The  cords  of  enterprise  by  which  this  Gospel  is  to  be  carried  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth  are  woven  out  of  the  very  fibres  of  human  hearts !  You  cannot 
make  them  with  money,  and  you  cannot  make  them  with  commercial  interests, 
and  you  cannot  make  them  with  public  enthusiasm.  They  are  woven  on  the  loom 
of  personal  consecration  in  the  secret  place  with  God.  2.  We  must  not  only  have 
lengthened  cords,  but  strengthened  stakes.  If  there  is  one  weak  stake  on  the 
circumference  of  a  tent,  and  it  pulls  out  or  is  broken,  then  it  puts  a  greater  stress 
on  the  other  tent-pegs  round  it,  and  one  by  one  they  are  loosened  or  pulled  out, 
untU  the  whole  tent  collapses.  What  does  that  mean  ?  It  means  that  any  Chiurch 
on  the  circumference  of  Christian  effort  that  does  not  plant  itself  firmly  to  hold  up 
the  cord  of  organization  is  responsible  for  the  collapse  of  Christian  missions.  Ana 
it  means  that  any  man  or  woman  or  child  in  the  Church  of  God,  among  God's 
professed  believing  children,  that  does  not  become  a  stake  down  deep  into  the 
ground  and  holding  on,  is  responsible  for  any  disaster  that  comes  to  the  whole 
work  of  Christ  by  lack  of  personal  co-operation.  {Ihid. )  Strengthening  the  stakes : — 
How  are  you  going  to  strengthen  the  stakes  ?  1.  By  faith  in  Almighty  God.  This 
is  His  work.  2.  By  the  power  of  believing  prayer.  A  beloved  Japanese  convert 
and  trainer  of  native  teachers  said  with  his  dying  breath,  "  Advance  on  your  knees." 
3.  By  a  firm  confidence  in  this  Gospel  as  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  that  this  Word 
is  the  Word  of  God,  4.  We  must  have  sanctified  giving.  5.  Holy  living.  Stanley 
says  that  he  owes  to  the  months  he  spent  with  Livingstone  the  transformation  of 
his  character ;  and  yet  Livingstone  never  said  a  word  to  him  about  his  soul's 
salvation.  (Ibid.)  The  Church's  duty  and  encouragemettts : — I.  The  duty  of 
THE  Church.  II.  Her  encouragements.  {A.  W.  Brown,  M.A.)  Foreign 
missions: — I.  The  magnitude  and  supreme  importance  of  our  object.  The 
conversion  of  the  world.  We  know  that  the  conversion  of  the  world  is  not  our 
work,  but  God's.  But  we  also  know  that  the  Lord  works  with  suitable  instnmients, 
and  that  the  degree  of  our  success  may  be  influenced  by  our  devotedness,  and  the 
skill  with  which  we  adapt  our  efibrts  to  our  end.  The  conversion  of  the  world  I 
Who  can  realize  what  that  means?  I  think  of  one  soul  living  and  dying  in 
rebellion  against  God — of  its  possibilities  for  misery  and  for  mischief — how  much 
it  may  itself  endure,  how  much  injury  it  may  inflict,  how  much  grief  occasion, 
throughout  God's  holy  universe  ?  I  think  of  that  soul  as  converted,  of  the  blessed- 
ness it  may  experience,  the  beneficent  influence  it  may  exert,  the  joy  its  conversion 
will  difl'use  throughout  the  ranks  of  sinless  intelligences.  Of  the  sublime  satis- 
faction with  which  He  wiU  regard  it,  who  for  its  sake  endured  the  Cross  and 
despised  the  shame,  when  it  becomes  a  jewel  in  His  crown,  a  trophy  of  His  saving 
love  and  power,  fruit  of  His  soul's  travail.  Then  I  extend  the  thought  to  the 
coimtless  myriads  of  the  himian  race  whom  that  soul  represents,  and  of  whom  the 
same  thing  may  be  predicated.  The  thought  is  to  me  absolutely  overpowering. 
"  Oh,  the  magnitude — the  momentous  importance  of  the  object  at  which  we  aim ! 
Oh,  the  miserable  smallness  of  the  means  we  use  for  such  a  purpose !  "  II.  "The 
VASTNESS  OF  THE  FIELD  NOW  OPEN  TO  US.  With  more  forcc  than  at  any  previous 
period  of  the  world's  history  we  can  say  of  missions,  "  The  field  is  the  world."  III. 
The  FACiLiTrBS  we  now  have  for  carrying  on  our  work.  The  Lord  in  Hia 
high  providence  haa  funushed  the  Church  with  most  favourable  opportunities  of 


CHAP.  IJT.]  ISAIAH.  163 

oonducting  her  great  enterprise  in  all  parts  of  the  earth.     IV.  The  miserable 

CONDITION  AND  URGENT  CLAIMS  OF  THE  HEATHEN.  V.  ThE  DiVINE  INTEREST  IN 
THIS    GREAT    ENTERPRISE.      VI.    THE   OBLIGATIONS    UNDER   WHICH    WE   ARE   LAID 

BECAUSE  OF  THE  FAVOURS  WE  HAVE  RECEIVED.  Forgivsn  rebels  as  we  are,  our 
forgiveness  having  been  procured  for  us  by  the  sufiFerings  and  death  of  our  Lord, 
and  granted  to  us  as  the  gift  of  His  grace  ;  redeemed  by  His  blood  as  we  are  from 
the  destruction  which  was  pending  over  us  ;  admitted  as  we  are  to  aU  the  privileges 
of  loyal  and  obedient  subjects,  free  access  into  the  Divine  presence,  not  only 
permission,  but  encouragement  to  make  known  to  God  the  desire  of  our  hearts, 
with  the  assurance  that  He  hears  us  always  ;  born  as  we  are  of  the  Spirit  into  the 
Divine  family,  made  children  and  heirs  of  God,  entitled  to  call  God  Father ; 
delivered  as  we  are  from  the  fear  of  heU,  and  animated  by  the  hope  of  a  glorious 
immortality ;  indebted  as  we  are  to  the  influence  of  the  Gospel  even  for  those 
temporal  blessings  which  are  so  conducive  to  our  comfort  and  enjoyment  during  the 
present  life,  and  in  respect  of  which  we  can  truly  say,  "The  lines  have  fallen  to 
us  in  pleasant  places,  and  we  have  a  goodly  heritage  ; "  honoured  by  God  in  being 
called  as  we  are  to  share  in  His  great  work  of  winning  the  world  to  Himself,  by 
which  He  shows  how  completely  He  has  forgiven  us,  and  what  confidence  He  places 
in  us ;  assured,  too,  that  "they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the 
firmament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever  and 
ever " — is  not  ours  confessedly  a  position  of  imspeakable  privilege  ?  What 
are  we  doing?  Compare  our  actions  with  our  object  and  our  obligations. 
{W.  LaTidels,  D.D.)  Arguments  for  missions: — 1.  Christ  owns  the  whole  world. 
2.  The  Gospel  of  Christ  is  adapted  to  all  men.  3.  Our  Lord's  commission 
to  the  apostles  contemplates  a  universal  kingdom.  {J.  T.  McGaw,  D.D.) 
Modern  missions: — 1.  This  great  utterance  feU  from  the  lips  of  a  man  who  had 
newly  seen  God,  and  caught  thereby  an  original  conception  of  His  redemptive  work 
for  the  world  through  captive  and  desolate  Israel.  No  one  can  miss  the  meaning  of 
this  joyous  outburst.  It  is  an  evangel.  Sursum  corda,  he  cries.  Do  not  give  way 
to  repining  though  you  are  lonely  and  heartsore  as  a  childless  woman.  Say  not 
"  my  tent  is  destroyed  and  all  my  tent-pins  are  plucked  up  :  my  children  are  gone 
away  and  there  is  none  to  spread  out  my  tent  any  more,  or  to  set  up  my  tent- 
curtains"  (Jer.  X.  20).  Get  up  and  make  your  tent-pins  strong:  lengthen  your 
cords  and  fasten  your  plugs.  Be  not  content  with  a  little  space.  Roominess  and 
magnificence  befit  your  prospects.  Your  expulsion  will  be  your  expansion,  your 
desolation  your  increase,  your  captivity  your  exaltation.  The  area  covei'ed  by  your 
race  shaU  be  larger  than  of  yore.  The  prophet  covdd  speak  that  word  of  hope  and 
endeavour  because  he  had  received  his  new  vision  of  God.  Insight  was  the  warrant 
for  utterance.  He  knew  the  meaning  of  the  Exile  through  his  purer  conception  of 
the  character  and  purposes  of  Jehovah.  He  saw  the  supreme  and  universal  sovereignty 
of  God  ;  the  universal  brotherhood  of  man  ;  the  essential  spirituality  of  the  Hebrew 
religion,  that  it  could  and  would  exist  without  a  temple  and  without  a  priest,  without 
an  altar  and  without  a  land,  without  anything  save  the  soul  and  God  ;  that  it  was 
to  cease  to  be  a  local  religion  and  become  universal,  and  instead  of  remaining  a 
national  luxury  would  become  an  aggressive  missionary  and  world-saving  agency. 
He  looked  along  the  highways  of  the  future,  and  saw  the  approach  of  the  delivering 
God,  and  cried,  "  Behold  your  God  !  "  Man  has  a  fatal  and  pathetic  facility  both 
for  losing  himself  and  his  best  treasures.  Apostolic  Christianity  went  everywhere 
preaching  the  Word.  It  was  essentially  aggressive.  It  placed  itself  by  the  side  of 
the  ancient  religions  of  Greece  and  Eome,  always  absorbent  of  their  good,  but  finally 
replacing  them  by  its  richer  ideas  and  stronger  spiritual  impulses.  The  fires  of  the 
Christ-given  passion  to  save  all  men  burnt  on,  although  alas  !  with  diminishing 
intensity,  for  more  than  two  centuries.  The  Reformation  itself  had  little  or  no 
missionary  passion,  and  the  desponding  leader  said,  with  unfathomable  sadness — a 
fore-gleam  of  the  agony  and  pity  that  stirred  the  Churches  at  a  later  date  :  "  Asia 
and  Africa  have  no  Gospel ;  another  hundred  years  and  all  will  be  over.  God's 
Word  will  disappear  for  want  of  any  to  preach  it. "  Surely  not,  0  prophet  of  God  1 
The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  When  the  night  is  darkest,  then  up  leap 
the  stars.  The  living  God  is  always  at  work.  An  astronomer  gazed  so  long  on  the 
sun  that  he  could  see  nothing  else.  The  image  was  burned  into  him.  For  years 
before  May  31,  1792,  the  vision  of  God  as  the  God  of  Missions  had  arrested,  leld, 
moulded,  and  swayed  the  soul  of  Carey.  Isaiah  repeats  Micah,  Luther  repeats  the 
psabnist,  Carey  repeats  the  prophet,  and  so  the  Word  of  the  Lord  has  free  course 
and  is  multiplied.     2.  It  is  a  revealing  fact  that,  though  Carey  gained  bis  message 


184  TEE  BIBLICAL  JLLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lit. 

from  the  words  of  prophecy,  he  expressed  it  in  the  simple  and  characteristic  language 
of  the  closing  years  of  the  eighteenth  century — the  century  of  the  expansion  of 
England  and  of  the  great  evangelical  revival.  "  Expect  great  things,"  said  he — in 
that  he  voiced  the  thought  of  his  generation ;  "  expect  them  from  God  " — in  that  he 
expressed  the  knowledge  and  insight  of  men  taught  by  the  Spirit.  3.  George  Sand 
reminds  us :  "  It  is  the  heart  that  governs  the  world  ;  it  is  feeling  that  performs  the 
real  miracles  of  history."  Carey's  persistent  determination  that  the  Church  should 
evangelize  the  world  was  fed  by  what  Vinet  calls  "the  passion  for  souls."  His 
perception  of  evil  was  acnte.  His  sense  of  sin  strong.  His  reliance  on  Christ 
unhesitatingly  entire.  He  scarcely  seems  to  have  had  a  thought  apart  from  Christ 
and  His  salvation.  And  yet  at  the  root  of  all,  and  over  all,  and  through  all  was  a 
self-consuming  love  of  men,  of  all  men,  and  of  "  heathen  "  men  most  of  all ;  and 
therefore  forgetting  himself  this  one  thing  he  did,  he  founded  modern  missions  by 
the  gift  of  himself,  out  and  out,  in  serving  and  suffering  so  that  he  might  save  men. 
Ah  I  it  is  here  we  fail.  "We  do  not  love  men  for  their  own  sake  or  for  God's  sake. 
We  need  to  change  our  style  ;  it  is  cramped  and  fettered.  [J.  Clifford,  D.D.) 
Spare  not,  lengthen  thy  cords  and  strengthen  thy  stakes.' — Happy  influence  of 
foreign  missums  on  the  Church  : — The  whole  passage  refers  to  the  conversion  of  the 
heathen  ;  and  furnishes  the  important  suggestion,  that  there  is  no  system  of  means 
so  well  calculated  to  give  expansion  and  stability  to  the  Church  of  Christ  as  foreign 
missionary  operation.  There  are  several  reasons  which  are  supposed  by  many  to 
favour  the  opinion,  that  Christian  exertion  is  less  productive  among  pagan  nations 
than  at  home.  1.  There  are  preliminary  barriers  which  oppose  the  efforts  of  the 
missionary,  and  which  do  not  exist  in  Christian  lands.  The  most  important  are 
strange  languages,  and  strong  prejudices.  There  is  also  the  systematic  and  stubborn 
opposition  which  the  Gospel  meets  from  the  established  forms  of  civil  government 
and  pagan  superstition.  Further,  there  is  the  risk  and  waste  of  life  which  foreign 
missionary  labour  involves.  This,  however,  is  but  one  view  of  the  subject.  There 
are  arguments  which  favour  the  opposite  opinion — that  the  direct  results  of  Gospel 
efforts  are  greater  in  pagan  than  in  Christian  lands.  Among  the  reasons  for  such  an 
opinion,  is  that  one  which  induces  almost  all  ministers  of  the  sanctuary  to  exchange 
the  sphere  of  their  labour  at  home  ;  and  which  would,  if  they  were  consistent  with 
their  principles,  send  great  numbers  of  them  abroad.  The  souls  to  be  saved  are  much 
more  numerous — much  more  needy.  Another  reason  is,  the  means  of  usefulness  are 
both  more  various  and  extensively  operative.  A  further  reason  is  the  activity  of 
native  converts.  2.  "We  believe  that  foreign  missions  are  the  best  means  of  length- 
ening the  cords  and  strengthening  the  stakes  of  the  Church,  because  they  establish 
and  promote  an  action  and  reaction  between  themselves  and  the  Churches,  which  ia 
most  powerful  and  advantageous  to  both  parties.  This  may  be  demonstrated  by 
several  facts.  I.  Missionary  labour  increases  the  piety  and  energy  of  thb 
Churches.  The  missionary  spirit  includes  among  its  essential  endowments,  faith, 
prayer,  self-denial,  deadness  to  the  world,  charity,  beneficence,  heavenly -mindedness, 
a  willingness  to  submit  to  sufferings  and  hazards,  and  a  supreme  regard  for  the  gloiT 
of  God.  1.  There  is  the  stimulus  of  example,  than  which  nothing  is  more  influential. 
Hold  up  to  the  Churches  those  with  whom  they  are  under  equal  obligations,  but 
who  have  far  exceeded  them  in  the  "  work  of  faith,  and  labour  of  love,"  and  you 
bring  a  motive  to  bear  upon  them  which  piety  cannot  resist.  2.  It  operates  through 
sympathy.  Our  work,  our  aim,  our  strongest  desires,  our  highest  honoiir,  our  dearest 
interests,  our  eternal  recqpapense  are  the  same.  3.  There  is  the  duty  and  blessedness 
of  necessary  co-operation.  4.  It  diverts  the  mind  from  those  unimportant  points  of 
doctrinal  difference,  and  metaphysical  distinction  and  abstruse  speculation,  which 
squander  the  time  and  pervert  the  talents,  and  ruin  the  souls  of  thousands.  5.  It 
operates,  too,  through  the  influence  of  its  own  greatness.  It  expands  the  mind, 
liberalizes  the  soul,  elevates  the  aim  ;  arouses  faculties  and  feelings  which  nothing 
else  could  have  addressed  ;  and  produces  effects  and  results  which  no  other  object 
could  command.     II.  Missionary  operations  not  only  increase  the  piety  and 

ENERGY   OF  THE    CHURCHES,    BUT  GREATLY  ASSIST  IN  SUPPLYING  THEIR  DOMESTIO 

DESTlTxn'iON.  Many  a  converted  youth  has  had  his  attention  directed  to  the 
ministry  through  the  reading  of  missionary  journals.  "When  we  speak  of  the  vigour 
which  missionary  exertions  throw  into  our  domestic  institutions,  we  refer  to  a  very 
natural  operation.  That  man  who  has  courage  to  attempt  a  great  enterprise,  despises 
the  diflSculties  of  a  small  one.  The  enerOT  produced  oy  the  one,  overlooks  all  the 
appalling  trifles  of  the  other.     III.  The  Ohukoh,  through  missionary  efforts, 

VLA.CES  HERSELF  IN  THE  BEST,  AND,  INDEED,  IN  THE  ONLY  F08ITI0N  FOB  BEOEIVINa 


OHAP.  LIT.]  ISAIAS.  165 

THB  MOST  ABUNDANT  SPIRITUAL  BLESSINGS.  1.  These  efforts  have  a  direct  tendency 
to  remove  the  most  serious  obstructions  to  piety  and  efficiency.  Where  the  work  of 
evangelizing  the  world  is  carried  on  vdth.  energy,  it  indicates  and  produces  self-denial 
and  liberality.  "We  need  not  stop  to  show  that  nothing  is  more  repugnant  to  eminent 
holiness,  or  usefulness,  than  a  selfish  parsimonious  spirit.  It  is  abhorrent  in  the 
eyes  of  a  holy  God  (Isa.  Ivii.  17).  2.  They  secure  to  us  those  promises  which  are 
connected  with  enlarged  exertions  (Prov.  xi.  25  ;  Isa.  Iviii.  10,  11).     TV.  It  must 

ENCOURAGE  AND  ENABLE  THE  ChURCH  STILL  MOBB  TO  EXTEND  HER  LIMITS,  AND 
THUS  TO  RETURN  TO  THE  HEATHEN  WORLD  THE  FULL  INFLUENCE  OF  HER  IMPROVED 

CONDITION.  Application  :  This  subject  teaches,  that  lengthening  the  cords  of  the 
Church  is  strengthening  her  stakes.     (D.  Abeel.) 

Ver.  4.  Fear  not;  for  thou  shalt  not  he  ashamed. — Shame: — Here,  as  in  many 
other  cases,  shame  includes  the  disappointment  of  the  hopes,  but  with  specific  refer- 
ence to  previous  misconduct  (Job  vi.  20).  The  first  clause  declares  that  the  Church 
has  no  cause  for  despondency,  the  second  disposes  of  the  causes  which  might  seem  to 
be  suggested  by  her  history.  The  essential  meaning  is,  thy  former  experience  of  My 
displeasure.  (J".  A.  Alexander.)  Thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  youth. — Shall 
I  remember  my  sitis  in  heaven  f — In  looking  forward  to  heaven,  two  questions  have 
stirred  the  minds  and  hearts  of  most  Christians:  "Shall  I  remember  my  sins  in 
heaven  ? "  and  "  If  I  remember  my  sins  in  heaven,  will  not  the  recollection  mar  my 
joy,  and  interfere  with  my  blessedness?"  These  questions  are  not  idle.  They 
originate  with  that  consciousness  of  depravity  which  is  the  first  step  towards  our 
personal  salvation,  and  they  recur  in  connection  with  the  dispensation  of  Divine 
mercy.  Our  condition  prompts  the  inquiry,  and  the  reply  will  reveal  to  us  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Divine  grace.  The  questions  resolve  themselves  into  this : 
Win  the  dispensation  of  Divine  mercy,  when  it  has  done  its  work,  blot  out  aU  the 
mischievous  consequences  of  sin  ?  The  text  guides  our  reply.  There  was  a  people 
taken  up  by  God  when  in  circumstances  of  great  degradation.  They  are  brought 
into  the  closest  connection  with  Him — into  such  a  connection  as  that  the  conjugal 
I  union  is  the  best  possible  representation  of  it.  God  is  faithful  to'  this  people,  but 
I  they  are  faithless  to  Him.  He  institutes  means  to  bring  them  back  to  Himself,  and 
He  does  bring  them  back.  Then,  speaking  of  their  restoration.  He  says,  *'  Fear  not, 
for  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed, "  etc.  In  the  realization  of  their  restoration,  they 
shall  (in  a  certain  sense)  forget  their  apostacy.  We  declare  our  belief  that,  in 
heaven,"you  wUl  not  so  remember  your  sins  as  to  have  your  happiness  interfered  with 
by  the  recollection,  and  that  whatever  remembrance  you  have  of  the  apostacy  and 
depravity,  will  rather  be  the  occasion  of  increasing  your  blessedness  and  joy,  than 
of  interfering  with  the  one,  or  of  marring  the  other.  The  remembrance  of  sin  did 
exist  under  the  Levitical  dispensation  ;  but  in  the  dispensation  of  Christ  there  is 
nothing  at  all  analogous  to  the  annually  recurring  day  of  atonement  (Heb.  x.  17). 
So  far  as  our  intercourse  with  God  and  the  cherishing  of  bright  prospects  are  con- 
cerned there  is  to  be  a  complete  forgetfulness  of  sin.  With  respect  to  heaven,  we 
put  before  you  two  remarks.  I.  There  is  a  recollection  inevitable.  The 
identity  of  passions  will  involve  an  identity  of  consciousness.  What  are  the  recol- 
lections which  are  inevitable  ?  1.  "  I  was  a  sinner. "  2.  "  I  was  restored  to  God  by 
such  means  and  under  such  influences."  II.  There  is  a  remembrance  of  sins 
impossible.  There  is  one  suggestion  that  seems  of  importance  here.  It  is  that  by 
and  by  memory  will  not  be  the  faculty  chiefly  exercised  and  put  forth.  When  is  it 
that  we  live  most  in  the  past  ?  It  is  when  we  are  sad.  In  heaven  there  will  be  no 
Badness,  no  solitude,  no  fear,  no  carefulness.  Memory,  therefore,  will  not  be  goaded 
as  now.  Memory  will  then  have  an  inferior  place.  Observation  and  penetration 
wiU  be  the  chief  mental  exercises  of  heaven.  A  man  will  be  surrounded  by  objects 
of  intense  interest,  all  connected  with  God.  The  commanding  recollection  of  sin  will 
therefore  be  impossible.  The  remembrance  of  sin  in  heaven  will  always  be  connected 
with  the  consciousness  that  sin  has  been  blotted  out.  This  will  awaken  thankful- 
ness ;  and  joy,  with  gratitude,  will  flow  through  the  soul  as  a  large  and  mighty  river. 
Nothing  in  God's  conduct  in  heaven  will  put  sin  forward.  Then,  within  yoiu"selves 
there  will  be  complete  and  conscious  holiness.  Look  at  another  fact.  You  may 
have  had  companions  here  in  iniquity,  but  you  wiU  have  no  unsaved  companions  in 
tan.  with  you  there.  You  may  recognize  persons  with  whom  you  trod  the  broad  road, 
but  you  wlU  there  recognize  them  as  redeemed  beings  ;  and,  just  as  in  your  own  case, 
the  commanding  thought  is  not  sin  but  forgiveness,  so  with  them  the  commanding 
•ssociation  wiU  be  the  wonderfulness  of  their  redemption  ;  not  the  depth  of  their 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lit. 

apostacy  and  the  length  of  their  wanderings  ;  so  that  their  presence,  instead  of  forcing 
upon  you  a  remembrance  of  guilt,  will  only  magnify  before  your  eye  and  your  heart 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  God's  grace  and  mercy.  You  mil  be  employed  by  and 
by.  Your  employment  will  be  all-absorbing,  and  it  will  be  constant.  Why  should 
we  talk  to  you  about  this  ?  If  you  have  a  secret  idea,  or  rather  an  impression,  that 
there  must  be  some  limitation  to  God's  mercy,  that  it  will  not  secure  all  this  blotting 
out,  what  is  the  consequence  ?  The  eflFect  is  to  limit  your  application  to  this  pro- 
vision— you  do  not  take  full  advantage  of  the  riches  of  God's  mercy.  {S.  Martin.) 
God's  gift  of  forgetfulness : — To  many  religious  people  the  burden  of  the  past  is  the 
heaviest  of  their  lives.  No  difficulties  and  trials  of  the  present  can  match  it  for 
bitterness.  They  look  forward  calmly  and  hopefully  to  whatever  the  years  may 
bring.  Even  the  valley  of  the  shadow  has  little  terror  for  them,  believing  as  they 
do  that  they  will  be  shepherded  through  that  to  the  eternal  fold.  And  yet  they  are 
often  weighted  by  a  sore  burden  of  the  past ;  they  are  hag-ridden  by  shadows  of  dead 
days.  Sometimes  it  is  the  very  greatness  and  success  and  joy  of  the  past  which 
induce  this  constant  recollection.  But  the  burden  of  the  past,  which  is  more  in 
keeping  with  the  thought  of  our  text,  is  not  the  recollection  of  some  joy  or  success, 
but  of  some  failure,  some  sorrow,  some  loss,  some  sin,  some  shame.  And  to  some 
who  live  ever  imder  the  shadow  of  this  memory  it  would  mean  new  life  to  them  if 
the  promise  came  to  them  with  the  meaning  it  had  in  the  prophet's  lips,  "  Thou  shalt 
forget  the  shame  of  thy  youth,  and  shalt  not  remember  the  reproach  of  thy  widow- 
hood any  more."  Of  course,  there  is  a  certain  sense  in  which  we  cannot  forget,  and 
are  not  meant  to  forget.  Experience  has  its  lessons  to  teach.  All  religion  begins 
with  repentance,  and  the  appeal  to  repentance  is  an  appeal  to  memory.  But  the 
promise  of  our  text  is  a  tacit  condemnation  of  the  sentimental  brooding  on  the  past, 
whatever  that  past  may  be,  which  weakens  the  present  life,  which  keeps  a  man  from 
gathering  up  the  fragments  of  his  life  that  remain,  keeps  him  from  doing  his  duty 
calmly,  andT  giving  himself  to  whatsoever  things  are  true  and  piu-e  and  lovely  and  of 
good  report.  If  we  believe  in  the  eternal  love  of  God  we  must  not  let  any  pale  ghost 
of  the  past,  spectral  figures  of  the  night,  chUl  our  blood  and  keep  us  from  our 
pilgrimage.  Do  not  fear  that  this  Christian  doctrine  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin  will 
make  sin  easy ;  it  is  the  only  thing  that  can  make  sin  impossible — the  light  that 
drives  out  the  darkness,  the  love  of  Ood  that  fills  the  heart  and  leaves  no  room  for 
evil,  not  even  for  evil  memory.  {Hugh  Black,  M.A.)  A  blessed  forgetfulness : — 
"  The  reproach  of  thy  widowhood  "  clearly  refers  to  the  period  of  the  exile  when  Zion 
regarded  herself  as  cast  oS"  by  Jehovah.  The  sense  of  "  the  shame  of  thy  youth  "  ia 
less  obvious.  Since  the  conception  has  some  affinities  with  the  striking  allegory  in 
Ezek.  xvi. ,  it  is  probable  that  the  reference  goes  back  to  the  origin  of  the  nation 
(Ezek.  xvi.  4-8),  the  reference  being  rather  to  the  Egyptian  oppression.  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.)  Forgetting  the  shame  of  youth: — A  man  who  had  lived  for  many 
years  the  Christian  life,  told  me  how  there  was  a  place  in  a  street  in  Edinburgh  which 
was  associated  with  a  sin.  Every  time  in  his  early  life  he  passed  it,  it  brought  back 
again  the  keen  remorse  and  shame.  It  seemed  to  stain  his  life  afresh  whenever  he 
saw  the  very  place.  But  when  he  came  to  God  and  gave  his  heart  and  life  to  Christ, 
the  first  time  he  passed  that  place  afterwards  his  soul  was  filled  by  a  great  transport 
of  joy  that  all  that  was  done,  that  it  was  no  longer  part  of  his  life,  that  God  had  for- 
given and  forgotten  and  cast  it  behind  His  back.  And  he  entered,  for  a  moment  at 
least  in  foretaste,  into  the  perfect  joy  of  soul,  and  he  forgot  the  shame  of  his  youth 
and  remembered  the  reproach  no  more.     {Hugh  Black,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  For  thy  Maker  is  thine  Husband. — The  Lord  His  people's  hushamd : — I. 
Consider  some  things  which  are  implied  in  this  relation  wherein  Christ 
STANDS  TO  His  people,  that  naturally  tend  to  encourage  their  faith  and 
JOY  in  Him.  1.  This  relation  intimates  that  nearness  and  union  which  there  ia 
between  Christ  and  His  Church.  Among  men  the  marriage  imion  ia  the  nearest  and 
most  strict  of  any  that  can  possibly  be.  And  because  there  is  no  higher  allusion 
whereby  to  express  the  union  of  believers  to  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost  useth  this  to 
give  us  the  more  lively  apprehension  of  this  admirable  privilege  (Eph.  v.  30)  ;  1  Cor. 
vi.  17).  2.  In  this  relation  is  implied  the  greatest  love  and  tenderest  affection. 
3.  The  utmost  care  of  and  concern  for  those  who  are  espoused.  4.  The  utmost  pity 
and  sympathy.  5.  The  having  all  convenient  supplies  which  are  in  the  power  of 
a  tender  husband  to  give.  6.  The  relation  of  a  husband  gives  his  spouse  a  right  to 
■hare  with  him  everything  that  is  properly  his.  II.  Show  the  ground  or  reason 
WHICH  His  psoflb  hays  to  depend  upon  His  answering  to  theh  all  that  is 


CHAP.  LIT.]  ISAIAH.  167 

THUS    INCLUDED     UNDER     THIS     RELATION     OP     A    HUSBAND.      III.    MAKE    PROPER 

IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  WHOLE.  1.  This  affords  US  an  admirable  instance  of  the  riches 
of  Divine  grace,  and  the  wonderful  condescension  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  He  should 
demean  Himself  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  be  ashamed  of  being  styled  a  husband  to 
such  sinful  worms  as  the  best  of  His  people  are.  2.  If  it  be  the  happiness  of  all 
God's  people  that  their  Maker  is  their  Husband  ;  how  much  does  it  stand  us  in  stead 
to  examine  whether  we  are  of  this  number  1  3.  Does  Christ  stand  in  this  relation 
to  His  people  ?  This  may  administer  matter  of  great  comfort  and  joy  to  them  at  all 
times,  and  under  all  circumstances.  4.  If  believers  are  Christ's  spouse,  how  heinous 
and  aggravated  must  their  wilful  trangressions  be  ?  5.  From  the  relation  believers 
stand  in  to  Christ  we  learn  that  the  most  ardent  affection  is  due  to  Him  from  aU  EUs 
chosen.  6.  This  also  teaches  us  how  highly  it  concerns  every  Christian  to  pay  a 
just  regard  to  all  the  ordinances  of  our  glorious  Redeemer,  and  to  take  great  satisfac- 
tion in  yielding  obedience  to  Him  therein.  How  pleasant  is  it  to  a  loving  and  an 
affectionate  wife  to  wait  in  those  paths  in  which  her  kind  and  absent  spouse  had 
appointed  to  meet  her.  7.  This  relation  Christ  stands  in  to  His  people  calls  for  their 
cheerful  and  constant  dependence  upon  Him.    {E.  Walker.)    The  Divine  Husharui : — 

1.  The  DOCTRINE  THESE  WORDS  CONTAIN.  1.  "  Husband  "  means  house-band — the 
head  and  band  of  the  family.  Hence  the  word  denotes  unison,  community  of 
interests,  and  special  affection.  2.  We  learn  that  the  Maker  of  all  things,  who 
fainteth  not,  condescends  to  bear  to  His  creatures  the  closest  and  most  sacred 
relationship.  In  Hosea  ii.  19,  20,  He  says — "  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  Me  for  ever." 
And  the  Christian  in  reply  says,  ' '  My  Beloved  is  miae  and  I  am  His. "  The  parallel 
is  carried  on  in  the  New  Testament  (Matt.  vs..  14,  15).  St.  Paul  refers  to  it — 
"Husbands,  love  your  wives,  as  Christ  loved  the  Church."  3.  Observe  that  in  the 
original  the  word  is  in  the  plural — "Thy  Makers  are  thy  Husband,"  evidently 
alluding  to  the  Trinity.  We  learn,  then,  that  the  love  of  the  Father,  the  atonement 
of  the  Son,  and  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  all  pertain  to  saving,  blessing,  and 
comforting  those  who  love  God.  II.  The  application  of  the  trxh'hs  to  our- 
selves. 1.  The  wonderful  sympathy  of  our  God.  He  feels  for  our  woes.  We  see 
a  picture  of  widowhood,  orphanage,  a  woman  bereaved,  forsaken  in  spirit.  What 
vcHumes  of  suffering  are  depicted  in  the  words  mourning,  solitude,  and  woe  !  So  with 
orphanage,  want  of  protection,  and  love.  To  them  our  Redeemer  speaks,  and  Christ 
repeats  the  promises,  for  He  says  to  His  disciples,  ' '  I  will  not  leave  you  orphans. " 
The  Divine  Being  cannot  see  His  children  suffer.  He  will  be  their  Husband,  Friend,  and 
Protector.  2.  The  wonderful  efficacy  of  our  God's  assistance.  He  will  be  the  Husband 
of  His  people.  This  indicates  nearness  of  relationship.  It  also  indicates  His  right  to 
help,  xhe  husband  is  the  natural  protector,  stay,  and  support  of  his  wife.  It  is  he 
who  makes  all  things  conduce  to  the  safety  and  happiness  of  his  household.  3.  The 
wonderful  efficiency  of  our  God's  protection.  "  Thy  Maker  is  Thy  Husband."  It  is 
as  if  He  said.  He  who  is  able  to  create  thee  is  also  able  to  preserve.  And,  oh,  what 
is  implied  in  that  word  "  Maker  1 "  What  power,  what  skiU,  what  marvellous  fore- 
sight !  And  all  is  concentrated  also  in  human  preservation.  Here  is  a  word  to  the 
bereaved,  the  sorrowing,  the  tried,  the  longing.  Here  is  a  fulness  for  him  that 
craves  for  sympathy  and  yearns  for  love.  Here  is  blessedness  for  him  that  desires 
peace  and  protection.  {Homilist.)  Christ  the  Hicsband  of  His  Chv/rch: — I.  The 
DIGNIFIED  CHARACTER  OF  the  BRIDEGROOM.    1.  His  Creating  power.    "Thy  Maker." 

2.  His  glorious  sway.  "The  Lord  of  hosts  is  His  name."  3.  His  redeeming  love, 
"Thy  Redeemer."  4.  His  spotless  holiness.  "The  Holy  One  of  Israel. "  5.  His 
universal  dominion.  "  The  God  of  the  whole  earth. "  II.  The  interesting  nature 
OF  the  union.  1.  Its  qualities.  (1)  It  is  gracious  in  its  origin.  (2)  Powerful  in 
its  accomplishment.  (3)  Spiritual  in  its  nature.  (4)  Permanent  in  its  duration. 
2.  Its  privileges.  (1)  Communion.  (2)  Riches.  (3)  Protection.  3.  Its  terms. 
(1)  Undivided  affection.  (2)  Mutual  consent.  Conclusion  :  1.  I  haU  those  who  are 
married  to  the  Lord.  2.  I  would  address  such  as  are  wedded  to  sin.  What  profit  ?  etc. 
{E.  Temple. )  God  as  ffusband : — If  I  marry  the  Merchant,  the  old  Puritans  said  in 
their  quaint  and  homely  fashion,  all  His  wares  shaU  be  mine.  The  God  of  the  whole 
earth. — The  mission  of  the  Jewish  nation : — A  candle  does  not  belong  to  the  candle- 
stick that  holds  it,  but  to  every  one  in  the  room  where  it  shines  ;  and  the  knowledge 
of  God,  the  preciousness  of  the  Divine  revelation,  does  not  belong  to  the  nation  in 
which  it  is  first  and  most  clearly  disclosed.  They  hold  it  as  a  torch  ;  but  it  is  that 
all  may  have  the  benefit  of  its  shining,  {H.  W.  Beecher. )  The  God  of  the  whoU 
earth : — If  God  is  the  God  of  the  whole  earth.  He  must  be  the  God  of  the  whole  earth 
just  as  it  ia ;  and  I  remark  that  while  beUevers  in  the  true  God  were  tribal  and 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ut. 

national,  the  natural  mistake  which  was  made,  and  which  should  put  us  on  our  guard 
lest  we  fall  into  it  again  in  substance,  was  that  of  supposing  that  God  was  in  a  special 
manner  the  God  of  a  particular  class.  So  let  us  not  forget  that  if  He  is  the  God  of 
the  whole  earth  He  is  the  God  of  all  those  physical  conditions  under  which  men  are 
bom.     He  is  the  God  of  those  laws  of  descent  which  make  the  character  of  the  parent 

fo  down  to  the  children  through  many  generations.  Hq  is  the  God  of  those  decrees 
y  which  the  drunkard's  children  inherit  the  drunkard's  proclivities  ;  by  which 
deceit  proj>agates  deceit ;  by  which  honour  breeds  honour  ;  by  which  motives  brought 
to  bear  upon  parents  have  an  effect  on  the  welfare  of  their  children  reaching  down  to 
the  depths  of  futiirity.  He  is  the  God  of  the  climate  in  which  every  person  lives — 
of  that  climate  which  drives  the  Esquimaux  under  ground  during  most  of  the  months 
of  the  year,  and  that  climate  which  brings  the  swarthy  African  all  the  year  into  the 
open  air,  without  clothes  and  without  a  dwelling.  If  He  is  the  God  of  all  the  earth, 
then  He  is  the  God  that  establishes  those  laws  which  determine  the  occupations  of 
men,  and  their  characters,  in  a  large  degree.  He  is  the  God  of  the  physical  globe, 
in  this  sense  :  that  whatever  affects  men  by  its  nature,  by  its  unconscious  and  con- 
tinuous influence  upon  them,  is  of  His  ordination.  Being  the  God  of  the  whole  earth. 
He  is  the  God  of  the  mountains  and  of  the  valleys  ;  of  the  winter  and  of  the  summer  ; 
of  industry  and  of  commerce  ;  of  all  the  arrangements  of  life  by  which  men  are 
influenced.  Men's  places  of  abode,  and  their  nature,  are  largely  determined  by  their 
circumstances;  and  these  circumstances  are  God's  decrees.  {Ibid.)  An  unchristiwn 
patriotism : — God  is  the  God  of  all  nations.  The  Bible  says  that  He  is  the  God  of 
all  the  earth,  and  I  suppose  there  are  people  enough  in  other  nations  besides  our  own 
to  occupy  a  considerable  part  of  His  sympathy  and  heart  and  attention,  WeU, 
patriotism  is  a  good  thing,  but  when  patriotism  is  the  influence  that  separates  us 
from  the  other  nations  of  the  earth,  it  is  a  very  narrow,  mean  thing,  it  is  only 
another  name  for  selfishness.  {Ibid. )  All  nations  and  all  classes  belong  to  God,  the 
superior  and  the  inferior  ;  the  men  of  knowledge  belong  to  God's  sympathy  and  care, 
the  men  of  virtue,  the  men  of  great  acquisitions,  the  men  of  great  capacity  to  acquire, 
the  active,  the  popular,  the  administrative,  the  successful  men  ;  they  are  all  the 
Lord's  because  they  are  men.  And  the  poor,  and  the  lower  classes,  the  lowest,  the 
very  slaves  are  all  God's.  I  have  sometimes  thought  that  He  reveals  more  of  Himself 
to  them  than  He  does  to  their  superiors.  In  other  words,  their  utter  helplessness, 
the  necessity  of  leaning  upon  something  to  support  them  in  their  weakness,  has 
brought  them  into  such  moods'^f  mind,  that  God  has  shown  some  elements  and 
attributes  of  His  character  to  them,  to  true  Christian  slave  mothers  and  fathers,  that 
other  men  have  not  had.  There  are  things  that  happen  among  them  that  look  as 
much  like  miracles  as  those  in  the  Gospels.  There  are  things  that  happen  among 
them  that  look  almost  as  if  God  had  opened  the  heavens  and  had  personally  spoken 
to  them.  It  agrees  with  the  exhibition  of  the  sympathy  of  God,  to  give  ourselves  to 
the  lower  rather  than  to  the  higher,  because  they  need  it  most.  {Ibid.)  God'sfowr* 
fold  relationship : — There  are  four  great  names  by  which  Almighty  God  is  most 
commonly  called  in  Christendom — Creator,  King,  Judge,  Father.  The  first  and  last, 
Creator  and  Father,  are  probably  absolute  and  literal  descriptions  of  Him  ;  there  is 
no  other  Creator  but  He,  and  aU  parentage  but  shadows  the  great  fact  of  His  Father- 
hood. The  other  two  names.  King  and  Judge,  are  figurative  and  illustrative  only. 
But  all  four  are  revealed  names  ;  authorized  names  ;  names  given  by  God  Himself  to 
the  yearning,  importunate  inquiries  of  men  who,  like  wrestling  Jacob,  cry  to  Him, 
"  Tell  me,  I  pray  Thee,  Thy  name."  We  must  know  God  by  more  than  His  names 
if  we  are  in  any  true  sense  to  know  Him  ;  we  must  realize  His  presence  ;  be  quickened 
by  His  life  ;  the  presence  everywhere  revealed  ;  the  life  everywhere  felt.  Yet  on  a 
consideration  of  each  of  His  names  we  may  find  some  interpretation  of  what  is  meant 
by  the  declaration  that  He  is  "  the  God  of  the  whole  earth."  I.  He  is  the  God  as 
being  the  Creator  of  the  whole  earth.  The  earth  would  not  have  come  into  existence, 
and  would  not  be  to-day,  but  for  the  will,  the  power,  the  goodness  of  God.  In  the 
architecture  of  the  whole  earth  there  is  God's  design  ;  in  the  structure  there  is  God's 
might ;  in  both  there  is  God's  love.  II.  He  is  the  God  as  being  the  King  of  the 
■whole  earth.  Kingship  is  often  a  very  conventional  conception  ;  royalty  often  a  very 
conventional  idea.  Back  of  it  all,  in  essential  reality,  is  intended,  not  pomp  and 
splendour,  not  rank  and  arbitrary  authority,  but  genuine  supremacy,  the  supremacy 
that  must  govern,  that  ought  to  control,  and  the  glory  that  is  inherent  in  such 
supremacy.  "We  do  not  find  much  help  to  understanding  the  government  of  God  in 
the  kings  and  queens  whose  empire  is  but  as  an  inch,  whose  reign  an  hour.  Christ's 
kingship,  and  not  Otesar's,  nor  Alexander's,  nor  Solomon's,  nor  Pharaoh's,  is  the  tru« 


CHAP.  Liv.]  ISAIAH.  169 

specimen  of  monarchy,  of  Divine  sovereignty.  He  is  Lord  of  a  moral  dominion,  T^ing 
of  a  spiritual  empire,  and  yet,  when  He  willed  it,  His  sceptre  controlled  material 
nature,  multiplying  the  handful  of  loaves  and  fishes  into  a  sudden  harvest  by  a  touch, 
and  calming  the  tempestuous  winds  and  waves  by  a  word.  III.  He  is  the  God  as 
being  the  Judge  of  the  whole  earth.  A  world  in  which  there  is  iniquity  demands  a 
Judge.  Nay,  the  necessities  of  God's  own  righteous  nature  compel  Him  to  be  a  Judge. 
The  whole  earth's  God  must  be  a  universal  Judge  ;  between  nations  like  France  and 
Madagascar,  between  man  and  man,  and  between  man  and  law,  the  God  of  all  must 
be  the  supreme  Judge.  Unerring  in  His  aU-pervading  knowledge,  righteous  in  Hia 
infinite  inspiration,  infallible  in  His  verdicts,  "shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
do  right  ? "  IV.  He  is  the  God  as  being  the  Father  of  the  whole  earth.  The  heart 
of  himianity  cries,  "  Show  us  the  Father  and  it  sufficeth  us,"  and  Jesus,  by  the  words 
of  His  lips  and  by  the  works  of  His  hands — ^yet  more  exceedingly  by  Hia  Cross,  by  His 
character,  and  by  Hia  Spirit  is  ever  revealing  the  Father.     (U.  B.  Thomas,  B.A.) 

Vers.  6-13.  For  the  Lord  hath  oalled  thee  as  a  woman  forsaken. — Ood  is  love: — 

None  of  those  who  came  before  the  Lord  Jesus  ventured  to  define  God  as  love.  But 
it  does  not  follow,  as  we  sometimes  assume,  that  the  holy  men  who  were  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  before  Christ  came  into  the  world  did  not  know  and  teach  the 
fatherly  and  redeeming  love  of  God.  They  could  not  be  so  familiar  with  that  love 
as  we  are  ;  but  that  they  recognized  it,  and  insisted  on  it  with  rare  force  and  pathos, 
that  they  did  aU  that  mere  words  could  do  to  convince  and  persuade  men  of  it,  no 
candid  student  of  the  Old  Testament  wiU  deny,  although  when  they  were  most 
profoundly  moved  by  it  we  can  still  detect  in  their  language  a  certain  accent  of 
almost  incredulous  surprise.  Isaiah,  for  example,  as  he  utters  these  pathetic  phrases 
of  my  text,  can  hardly  believe  for  joy  and  wonder.     Again  and  again  he  is  oom- 

?ellea  to  remind  himself  that  it  is  God  who  is  speaking  in  bim  and  through  bim- 
he  tender  phrases  which,  were  they  not  so  tender,  might  run  on  with  even  flow, 
are  again  and  again  broken  with  such  words  as  "saith  thy  God,"  or  "  saith  the 
Lord  thy  Redeemer,"  or  "  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  compassion  on  thee."  Do  you 
wonder  that  Isaiah,  who  knew  God  so  well,  found  it  hard  to  believe  in  a  love  so 
tender  and  true,  and  so  feared  that  his  hearers  would  find  it  quite  impossible  to  believe  J 
Ah,  but  consider  who  and  what  they  were  on  whom  he  was  toM  that  God  had  set 
His  heart,  and  all  the  treasures  of  His  love  and  compassion  !  God  had  lavished  on 
them  every  possible  means  of  grace,  insomuch  that  He  both  could,  and  did,  appeal 
to  them  whether  there  was  even  one  single  thing  He  could  have  done  for  him 
which  He  had  not  done.  Yet,  despite  His  singular  and  boundless  grace,  they  had 
sunk  to  the  level,  and  below  the  level,  of  the  heathen  around  them.  Was  it  likely 
that  God  should  love  them  ?  Consider,  too,  how  stern  and  dreadful  was  the  burden 
which  Isaiah  had  been  commissioned  to  denounce  upon  them.  And  God  had  been 
as  good  as  Hia  word.  Assyrian  and  Chaldean  armies  had  swept  the  land  of  its 
inhabitants  ;  their  cities  were  burned  with  fire,  and  the  once  fertile  and  wealthy 
land  turned  into  a  desert.  All  who  were  left  of  the  people  were  carried  away 
captive,  and  left  to  weep  for  seventy  years  over  their  unstrung  harps  as  they  sat  by 
the  waters  of  Babylon.  It  was  to  these  sinful,  miserable  captives  and  exiles  that 
the  prophet  was  moved  to  proclaim  the  tender  and  inalienable  love  of  God  I  The 
words  authenticate  thenMefves.  None  but  God  could  have  spoken  them.  No  man 
would  have  dared  to  conceive  of  God — no  man,  untaught  of  Heaven,  ever  has  con- 
ceived of  God,  as  yearning  with  love  for  the  human  race  ;  and  stiU  less  could  any 
man  have  invented  the  tender,  melting,  beseeching  phrases  in  which  Isaiah  has  clothed 
that  conception.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  wonderful  love  of  God : — Mark  what  the  words 
do  convey.  God  is  speaking  to  men  who  had  persistently  sinned  against  all  the 
influences  of  His  love  and  grace,  to  men  who  were  being  consumed  by  the  inevitable 
results  of  their  transgressions.  And  He  tells  these  poor  miserable  creatures  that  they 
are  as  dear  to  BUm  as  the  bride  to  her  husband  ;  that,  though  their  ofi"ences  against 
Him  have  been  so  many  and  so  deep.  He  cannot  tear  His  love  for  them  out  of  His 
heart.  Nay,  as  if  this  were  not  enough,  He  goes  on  to  say  that,  though  the  blame 
ia  none  of  His,  He  is  willing  to  take  all  the  blame  of  their  offences  on  Himself. 
Instead  of  reproaching  them  for  their  sins  against  His  love.  He  compares  them  to  a 
wife  forsaken  and  grieved  in  spirit,  to  a  young  and  tender  bride  whose  husband  has 
despised  and  disgraced  her,  refusing  to  hve  with  her  and  sending  her  away  from  his 
tent.  It  is  He  who  has  abandoned  her,  not  she  who  has  abandoned  Him.  It  is  He  who 
has  been  hard  and  stem,  not  she  who  has  been  wilful  and  gone  astray.  But  He  never 
meant  to  be  hard  and  stem.    It  was  only  for  a  brief  moment  that  He  left  her,  and 


170  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixf. 

in  a  momentary  flush  of  anger.  If  she  will  retmii  to  Him,  and  give  Him  anothei 
chance,  He  will  welcome  her  with  "  great  mercies  "  and  comfort  her  with  an  '*  ever- 
lasting kindness."  How  shall  He  persuade  her  to  return,  to  trust  in  Him?  how 
convince  her  that  He  will  be  angry  with  her  no  more  1  He  calls  heaven  and  earth 
to  witness  to  His  truth,  His  fidelity,  His  deathless  and  unchanging  love.  He  can 
appeal  to  His  covenant  with  her,  with  Israel.  She  may  think  that  that  has  been 
broken  both  by  Him  and  by  herself.  But  there  was  one  of  His  covenants  that  had 
never  been  broken,  an  unconditional  covenant,  the  covenant  with  Noah,  which  did 
not  depend  on  men  and  their  obedience,  which  depended  only  on  God  and  on  His 
faithfulness  to  His  word.  Henceforth  His  covenant  with  her  shall  be  as  the 
"  waters  of  Noah  ; "  He  will  no  more  fail  in  His  love  to  her  than  He  will  suffer  the 
earth  to  be  wasted  by  another  flood.  He  will  never  forsake  her,  even  though  she 
should  forsake  Him  ;  never  be  wroth  with  her,  nor  rebuke  her,  even  though  she 
should  still  be  wilful  and  provoke  Him  to  anger.  Nay,  more  ;  as  if  even  this  great 
promise  were  not  enough.  He  casts  about  for  another  and  a  still  more  reassuring 
figure,  and  goes  on  to  say :  The  moimtains  were  planted  and  the  hills  stood  firm 
before  the  Deluge  swept  over  the  earth  ;  even  the  waters  of  Noah  could  not  wash 
them  away,  nor  as  much  as  make  them  quake.  And  His  love  shall  henceforth  be 
firm  and  unchanging  as  the  mountains  and  hills  ;  nay,  more  firm  and  imchanging. 
The  mountains  may  remove  and  the  hiUs  may  quake  ;  but  His  lovingkiadness  shall 
never  remove.  His  covenant  of  peace  shall  never  quake.  Even  all  this,  wonderful  and 
incredible  as  it  is,  is  not  enough.  There  is  the  sigh  of  an  infinite  compassion  and 
truth  in  the  exclamation,  "  0  thou  aflBicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  not  comforted  !  " 
There  is  an  xmbounded  and  Divine  generosity  in  the  promise  to  the  bride,  to  the 
woman,  that,  if  she  will  only  come  back  to  Him,  her  very  palace  shaU  be  built  of 
rare  gems  ;  and  in  the  promise  to  the  mother,  than  which  no  promise  could  be  more 
dear  to  a  mother's  heart,  "  AH  thy  children  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,  and  great 
shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children."  Is  that  a  fable  of  man's  invention  ?  Can  it 
be  ?  Would  any  man  have  dared  to  give  it  as  a  statement  of  the  facts,  or  possible 
facts  of  human  life  %    {Ibid. ) 

Vers.  7-10.  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee. — Affliction  and 
consolation: — This  is  a  word  of  blessed  comfort  from  One  who  is  able  to  give 
it.  Here  is — I.  Temporary  affliction.  Observe — 1.  Its  Author.  "I  have 
forsaken."  All  trial  comes  from  the  hand  of  God  Himself.  Means  may  be  em- 
ployed, but  He  works  through  and  by  the  means.  2.  Its  method.  "Forsaken." 
The  greatest  sorrow  of  Christ  was  that  He  was  forsaken  of  God.  The  terror 
of  hell  will  be  that  it  is  a  God-forsaken  world.  3.  Its  duration.  "  A  small 
moment."  It  is  nothing  in  comparison  to  time,  less  than  nothing  in  the  face 
of  eternity.  Affliction  may  endure  for  a  moment.  II.  Permanent  consolation. 
Here  is — 1.  The  joy  of  reunion.  How  blessed  the  meeting  of  friends,  separated,  it 
may  be,  by  a  quan-el  or  a  sin.  2.  The  joy  of  forgiveness.  "  With  great  mercies," 
etc.  The  past  will  be  overlooked,  the  future  guaranteed.  AH  this  will  be  under- 
taken by  God.  As  He  sends  the  trials  so  He  sends  the  mercies.  (HomUist.)  The 
believer  for  a  small  moment  forsaken,  but  with  great  mercies  gathered : — I.  What 
is  the  view  here  given  us  of  God's  manifested  displeasure  towards  the 
individual  mentioned  in  the  text?  "For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee." 
God's  forsaking  His  people  cannot  be  at  all  in  sovereignty,  but  must  always  be  in 
justice  ;  the  very  next  verse  tells  us,  in  fact,  that  it  was  in  wrath" — that  it  was 
on  account  of  sin.  As  to  the  manifestation  of  displeasure,  God  speaks  here  of  His 
"  forsaking  "us.  1 .  He  is  sometimes  said  to  forsake  His  people,  when  He  leaves  them 
under  temporal  affliction.  This  was  very  frequently  the  meaning  of  such  words  in 
reference  to  God's  ancient  people,  the  Jews.  2.  Sometimes  this  phrase  is  used,  we 
apprehend,  when  there  seems  to  be  an  obstruction  of  access  to  the  Throne  of  Grace — 
•vmen  our  approach  to  it  seems  barred  and  obstnicted.  3.  Sometimes  the  phrase  \a 
used  in  reference  to  the  spiritual  declension  of  God's  people.  II.  The  gentleness 
AND  ughtness  OF  His  MANIFESTED  DISPLEASURE  are  likewise  referred  to :  "  For  a 
small  moment."  Now,  putting  these  two  words  together — "  small  moment" — and 
connecting  likewise,  this  verse  with  the  succeeding  verse,  we  may  understand  that 
both  the  degree  and  the  duration  of  the  punishment  are  referred  to  in  the  text.  ' '  For 
a  small  moment " — a  moment  of  smallness,  or  of  lightness  ;  and  again,  "  In  a  little 
wrath  I  hid  My  face  firom  thee  for  a  moment."  This  will  appear  to  us  more  par- 
ticularly, if  we  place  in  comparison  with  those  afflictions  to  which  we  have  referred 
certain  other  circumstances.     1.  For  instance,  only  compare  the  afflictions  which 


CHAP.UT.]  ISAIAH.  171 

you  have  endured  with  your  deserts.  2,  Then  compare  your  sufferings  with  your 
mercies.  3.  Compare  your  sufferings  with  those  of  others.  4.  Compare  your  suffer- 
ings with  those  of  Jesus.  5.  Think  of  your  present  sufferings  compared  with  ever- 
lasting torment.  III.  Let  us  turn  to  the  declaration  of  God  respecting  the  mercy 
which  He  has  in  reserve  for  his  people — His  gracious  design  towards  His  people. 
"  With  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee."  This  gathering,  as  it  has  referenceto  the 
Church  of  God,  will  be  seen  to  have  several  meanings.  1.  As  to  individuals,  it  may 
very  fairly  express  the  deaim  of  God  to  gather  to  Himself  those  that  are  far  from 
Him  by  wicked  works.  2.  Then,  "  I  wiU  gather"  you  to  the  possession  and  enjoy- 
ment of  all  the  privileges  of  My  people — tMs,  of  course,  must  be  included — to  the 
fellowship  of  the  saints.  3.  Perhaps  this  may  be  very  fairly  applied  to  God's 
gathering  His  saints  to  Himself  by  death.  4.  There  will  be  the  final  gathering, 
the  universal  gathering  at  His  second  coming.  IV.  ""With  great  mercies,"  He 
says,  "will  I  gather  thee."  God,  then,  is  telling  His  people  what  are  His  inten- 
tions, and  is  showing  them  what  are  His  dispositions  to  them,  in  association  with 
these  great  designs.  Let  us  apply  the  phrase — 1.  To  the  originating  mercy.  2.  To 
the  procuring  cause.  3.  To  the  efficient  cause — the  operation  of  the  Spirit.  4.  To 
the  providential  course  of  means  which  God  employs.  5.  To  the  nature  of  the 
blessings  which  God  has  vouchsafed  to  you,  and  which  He  will  vouchsafe  to  you. 
{J.  Griffin. )  The  beneficence  of  apparent  alienation : — Sometimes  it  is  needful  to  be  for- 
saken for  the  moment  that  we  may  be  properly  gathered.  We  have  seen  some  lov- 
ing one  teaching  a  child  to  walk  ;  the  arms  were  taken  away  from  the  child,  but  not 
far.  The  child  could  never  be  taught  to  walk  if  the  arms  were  round  about  it ;  it 
must  be  left  for  a  little  moment,  but  the  protection  must  be  always  near.  Alienation 
does  not  always  mean  penalty,  it  sometimes  means  education.  Alienation  may 
mean  penalty,  and  then  the  arms  are  in  very  deed  a  long  way  off — indeed,  they 
may  be  lifted  up  to  smite  the  transgressor,  the  wanderer  whose  heart  has  gone 
astray,  having  loved  lies  and  darkness  rather  than  truth.  {Ibid.)  Spiritual  depres- 
sion may  have  physical  causes : — ^A  good  many  supposed  alienations  are  merely  the 
result  of  physical  causes.  If  our  physical  nature  were  better  understood  our  spiritual 
depressions  would  be  a  great  deal  less  thought  of.  Many  a  man  suffers  from 
melancholy  who  supposes  that  God  has  forsaken  him,  simply  because  he  has  in- 
herited a  constitution  that  has  been  vitiated,  or  because  he  has  tampered  with  the 
laws  and  ordinances  of  nature,  or  because  he  is  undergoing  a  process  which  may 
be  absolutely  necessary  for  his  purification  and  strengthening.  Do  not  suppose  that 
God  is  moved  by  moods  and  whims  as  we  are,  that  he  favours  a  chUd  to-day, 
and  rebukes  the  child  to-morrow,  without  any  reason  or  sense  of  justice.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  My  face  from  thee.— God's  face  hidden: — To  say 
God  hath  cast  me  off  because  He  hath  hid  His  face  is  a  fallacy  fetched  out  of  the 
devil's  topics.  When  the  sun  ia  eclipsed,  foolish  people  may  think  it  will  never 
recover  light,  but  wise  men  know  it  will.  During  the  eclipse,  though  the  earth 
wanteth  the  light  of  the  sun  for  a  time,  yet  not  the  influence  thereof.  {J.  Trapp.) 
God's  little  wrath  and  God's  great  wrath : — This  precious  passage  is  the  property  of 
all  true  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  might  not  have  ventured  to  say 
this  if  it  were  not  for  the  last  verse  of  the  chapter,  which  assures  us  that  it  is  so. 
"This  is  the  heritage."  I.  What  the  Lord  calls  His  "little  wrath."  Let  us 
speak  of  it  and  its  modifications.  1.  Our  view  of  that  wrath,  and  God's  view  of  it 
may  very  greatly  differ.  To  a  child  of  God  in  a  right  state  even  the  most  modified 
form  of  Divine  anger  is  very  painful.  This  pain  of  heart  is  a  v^  proper  feeling, 
but  it  may  be  perverted  by  unbelief  into  the  occasion  of  sin.  We  may  conclude 
from  the  chastening  rod  that  the  Lord  is  about  to  destroy  us,  though  he  has  plainly 
said,  "  Fury  is  not  in  Me."  This  dark  estimate  of  our  affairs  is  not  God's  view  of 
them.  It  is  but  a  partial  departure  under  which  the  saint  is  suffering ;  the  small 
moment  will  soon  be  over.  I  will  now  call  your  attention  to  two  or  three  things 
which  should  greatly  modify  the  view  we  take  of  the  hidings  of  God's  face.  (1)  As 
to  time  ;  the  time  during  which  our  God  withdraws  Himself  is  very  short :  "  for  a 
moment,"  He  says  ;  but  He  puts  it  less  than  that,  "  For  a  small  moment."  Think 
of  how  long  He  has  loved  us,  even  from  before  the  foimdation  of  the  world  !  The 
time  in  which  He  hides  His  face  is  very  short  compared  with  that.  Think  of  how 
long  He  will  love  us :  when  all  this  universe  shall  have  subsided  into  its  native 
nothingness,  He  will  love  us  for  ever  1  The  time  during  which  He  chastens  us  is, 
compared  with  that,  a  very  small  moment.  Think  of  how  long  we  deserved  to  have 
been  in  hell,  to  lie  for  ever  beneath  His  indignation :  the  little  moment  in  which 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lw. 

His  heavy  hand  is  upon  us  is  indeed  as  nothing  compared  with  the  eternal  misery 
which  our  sins  have  merited.  When  you  come  forth  from  the  hiding  of  His  face 
into  the  light  again,  this  gloom  will  seem  to  have  heen  but  a  small  moment.  (2) 
The  recompense  which  is  promised.  "  With  great  mercies  wiU  I  gather  thee." 
The  Lord  will  make  up  to  you  all  your  losses,  your  crosses,  and  your  chastisements. 
God's  dealings  with  us  never  seem  to  be  so  merciful  as  after  a  time  of  trial.  The 
bitterness  makes  the  sweet  the  sweeter,  and  the  sorrow  makes  the  joy  more 
aboimding.  The  text  does  not  say  that  God  will  give  us  mercy  after  He  has  for 
awhile  left  us  ;  the  word  is  in  the  plural,  "mercies,"  multitudes  of  mercies.  Nay, 
it  does  not  merely  say  "mercies,"  but  "great  mercies,"  for  they  are  all  the  greater 
because  we  so  greatly  need  them,  are  plunged  in  such  great  distress  for  want  of  them, 
and  filled  with  so  many  great  fears  as  to  our  future  estate.  The  Lord  not  only 
promises  us  these  great  favours,  but  promises  that  He  Himself  will  bring  them. 
They  are  not  to  be  sent  to  us  by  angels  or  by  external  providences.  "  With  great 
mercies  will  I  gather  thee."  (3)  The  wrath  is  in  itself  little.  2.  The  expression  of 
His  little  anger  is  not  after  all  so  extremely  severe,  for  what  does  it  say  ?  "I  hid 
My  face. "  The  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,  to  cut  off  the  re- 
membrance of  them  from  the  earth,  but  our  text  does  not  say,  "  I  turned  My  face 
against  thee,"  but  only,  "I  hid  My  face  from  thee."  This  is  painful,  but  still 
there  is  this  sweet  reflection — why  does  He  hide  His  face  ?  It  is  because  the  sight  of 
it  would  be  pleasant  to  us.  It  is  a  face  of  love  ;  for  if  it  were  a  face  of  anger  He 
would  not  need  to  hide  it  from  His  erring  child.  If  it  were  an  angry  face,  and  He 
wished  to  chasten  us.  He  would  unveil  it ;  therefore,  we  may  be  sure  that  He  covers 
it  because  it  is  so  bright  with  everlasting  love  that  if  it  could  be  seen  no  chastise- 
ment would  be  felt  by  us.  3.  Observe,  too,  for  we  must  not  leave  out  a  word  here, 
that  this  little  wrath  is  perfectly  consistent  with  everlasting  love.  "In  a  little 
wrath  I  hid  My  face  from  thee  for  a  moment,  but  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I 
have  mercy  on  thee. "  The  Lord  is  fiEed  with  everlasting  kindness  at  the  very  time 
when  He  is  making  the  promise,  for  if  you  promise  a  person  that  you  will  love  him 
you  do  love  him  already ;  love  alone  could  prompt  a  promise  such  as  that  which  I 
nave  read.  You  have  no  right  to  infer  from  the  greatness  of  your  griefs  that  God  is 
ceasing  to  love  you,  or  that  He  loves  you  less.  II.  The  great  wrath  of  God  and 
OUR  SECURITY  AGAINST  IT.  Ouf  Security  against  it  is  this  :  "  This  is  as  the  waters 
of  Noah  unto  Me :  for  as  I  have  sworn,  etc.  Until  God  drowns  the  whole  world 
again.  He  can  never  let  out  His  great  wrath  against  His  people.  1.  My  text 
suggests  that  we  have  ample  security  that  the  wrath  of  God  will  never  break  out 
against  us,  for  it  has  broken  out  against  us  once.  The  waters  of  Noah  did  go  over 
the  earth  once,  but  never  twice.  Now,  the  wrath  of  God  can  never  break  forth 
against  His  redeemed,  because  it  has  already  broken  forth  against  them.  "Who 
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is 
he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died."  Is  not  that  answer  enough  for  all 
the  charges  of  hell  ?  2.  The  text  gives  us  next  the  oath  of  God  as  our  security. 
."  As  I  have  sworn  that  the  waters  of  Noah  should  no  more  go  over  the  earth,"  etc. 
It  is  always  a  solemn  occasion  when  Jehovah  lifts  His  hand  to  heaven  and  swears. 
Then  is  a  matter  confirmed  indeed  when  it  is  secured  by  the  oath  of  God.  3.  Next, 
we  have  before  us  the  fact  that  the  Lord  has  guaranteed  our  security  by  a  covenant. 
' '  Neither  shall  the  covenant  of  My  peace  be  removed. "  4.  What  blessed  illustrations 
of  our  security  are  added  in  the  further  declaration  of  the  Lord's  mind  and  wilL 
The  Lord  looks  on  the  mountains  and  the  hills,  and  declares  that  these  and  all 
things  visible  wiU  pass  away,  for  time's  grandest  birth  shall  perish  when  eternity 
resumes  its  sway.  The  mountains  and  the  hills  may  represent  the  most  stable  of 
earthly  hopes  and  confidences :  these  all  must  fail  us  when  most  we  need  them. 
The  Lord  Himself  assures  us  of  this,  and  therefore  does  not  at  all  guarantee  to  us 
any  security  in  the  things  which  are  seen,  nor  any  peace  that  can  be  drawn  from  the 
creature;  our  consolation  lies  elsewhere.  "The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the 
hiUs  be  removed,  but  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall 
the  covenant  of  My  peace  be  removed,  saith  Jehovah,  the  Pitier. "  Under  no  con- 
ceivable circumstances  shall  the  covenant  fail ;  the  Lord  who  made  it  cannot  change, 
Jesus  who  sealed  it  cannot  die,  the  love  which  dictated  it  cannot  cease,  the  power 
which  executes  it  cannot  decay,  and  the  truth  which  guarantees  it  cannot  be 
questioned.  As  for  you  who  have  no  portion  in  Divine  realities,  what  do  you  possess 
that  is  worth  having  ?    (C.  H.  Spurgeon). 

Ver.  9.  For  this  is  as  the  waters  of  Noah  unto  VL^.—The  Lord  no  more  wroth 


CHAP,  iiv.]  ISAIAH.  173 

vnth  His  people : — I.  What  XXR  Ki-TU  most  to  fbak.    All  men  who  are  unsaved 
ought,  with  fear  and  trembling,  to  dread  the  wrath  of  God — the  wrath  present,  and 
the  wrath  to  come.    The  text  speaks  of  the  Lord's  being  wroth,  as  of  an  evil  to  be 
feared.     Man  has  cause  to  be  afraid  of  "  the  rebuke  of  God  " — that  stem  rebuke  of 
the  Holy  One  which  is  the  prelude  to  the  lifting-up  of  His  unsheathed  sword,  and 
the  destruction  of  His  adversaries.     1.  God's  wrath  is  matter  for  fear,  because  to  be 
in  union  with  God  is  necessary  to  the  happiness  of  the  creature.     2.  This  wrath  of 
God  is  to  be  feared  all  the  more  because  there  is  no  escaping  from  it.     A  man  who  ia 
\mder  the  wrath  of  a  monarch  can  escape  to  another  kingdom ;  a  man  who  has 
incurred  the  anger  of  the  most  mighty  enemy  can  find,  somewhere  in  this  great 
world,  a  nook  wherein  he  can  conceal  himself  from  his  relentless  pursuer.     But  he 
that  has  exposed  himself  to  the  wrath  of  God  cannot  save  himself  from  the  Almighty 
hand.     3.  There  is  this  also  to  be  dreaded  in  the  wrath  of  God,  that  there  is  no 
cure  for  it.     Nothing  can  possibly  give  a  man  ease  or  safety  when  the  rebuke  of  God 
has  gone  forth  against  him.     He  may  be  surrounded  with  temporal  comforts,  but 
his  nches  will  only  mock  his  iimer  poverty.     Friends  may  utter  words  of  cheer,  but 
miserable  comforters  shall  they  all  be.     Instead  of  the  mercies  of  this  life  becoming 
any  comfort  to  him,  when  a  man  has  the  wrath  of  God  resting  upon  him,  it  ia 
written,  "I  will  curse  all  your  blessings."    4.  The  rebuke  of  God,  if  we  live  and  die 
impenitent,  is  one  against  which  we  cannot  harden  ourselves.     We  cannot  gather 
strength  to  endure  when  God  strikes  at  the  heart  and  dries  up  the  spirit.     5. 
Eemember  the  overwhelming  fact  that  the  wrath  of  God  does  not  end  with  death. 
II.  What  the  saints  need  never  feak.     Dreadful  as  it  is,  and  more  than 
sufficient  to  overwhelm  the  spirit  with  dismay,  a  fear  of  the  wrath  of  God  need 
never  disturb  the  believer's  heart.     God  has  sworn  that  He  will  never  be  wroth  with 
His  people.     He  does  not  say  that  He  wUl  never  be  so  angry  with  their  sins  as  t* 
chasten  them  sharply  ;  for  anger  with  our  sins  is  love  to  us.     He  does  not  say  that 
He  will  not  be  so  angiy  as  to  punish  us  ;  although  there  would  be  great  mercy  even 
in  that ;  but  He  goes  much  further,  and  says  that  He  will  never  be  so  wroth  with 
His  people  as  even  to  rebuke  them.     "What!"  say  you,   "then  doth  not  God 
rebuke  His  people  ? "    Ah,  verily,  that  He  doth,  and  chasten  them  too !  but  those 
rebukes  and  those  chastisements  are  in  love,  and  not  in  wrath.     The  text  before  us 
is  to  be  read  thus :  "  I  will  not  be  wroth  with  thee  so  as  to  rebuke  thee  in  indigna- 
tion. "    There  shall  never  be  so  much  as  a  word  of  wrath  from  the  Ups  of  God, 
touching  any  one  of  His  servants  whose  righteousness  is  of  Him.    1.  This,  to  make  ua 
sure  of  it,  is  first  of  aU  confirmed  by  an  oath.     We  ought  to  believe  God's  bare  word : 
we  are  bound  to  accept  His  promise  as  certainty  itself ;  but  who  will  dare  to  doubt 
the  oath  of  the  Eternal  ?    2.  As  if  further  to  illustrate  the  certainty  of  this,  He  ia 
pleased  to  draw  a  parallel  between  His  present  covenant  oath  and  that  which  He 
made  in  the  days  of  Noah  with  the  second  great  father  of  the  human  race.     (1)  The 
covenant  made  with  Noah  was  a  covenant  of  pure  grace.     This  covenant  is  paralleled 
by  the  covenant  in  your  case.     (2)  The  first  covenant  with  Noah  was  made  after  a 
sacrifice.     The  same  reason  so  works  with  God  that  He  will  not  be  wroth  with  you, 
nor  rebuke  you.     (3)  That  covenant  which  God  made  with  Noah  was  openly  pro- 
pounded in  the  ears  of  the  whole  race.     Noah  and  his  sons  heard  it,  and  we  have 
all  heard  it.     Now,  when  a  man  makes  a  promise,  if  it  is  in  private  he  is  bound  by 
it,  and  his  honour  is  engaged  thereto  ;  but  when  his  solemn  promise  becomes  public, 
he  stakes  his  character  among  men  upon  the  fulfilment  of  his  word.     Now,  since  the 
Lord  has  made  public  this  gracious  word — "  I  will  not  be  wroth  with  thee,  noi 
rebuke  thee,"  does  He  not  intend  to  do  as  He  has  said?     (4)  God  never  has  broken 
the  covenant  which  He  made  with  Noah.     If  the  Lord  be  so  faithful  to  one  covenant, 
why  should  we  imagine,  even  in  our  worst  moments,  that  He  wUl  be  unfaithful  to 
His  other  word  which  He  has  spoken  concerning  our  souls  1    3.  If  this  be  the  case, 
that  God  will  not  be  wroth  with  us,  nor  rebuke  us,  then  the  greatest  fear  that  can 
ever  fall  upon  us  is  gone,  and  it  is  time  that  all  our  lesser  fears  were  gone  with  it. 
For  instance,  there  is  (1)  the  fear  of  man.     When  we  clearly  understand  that  God  is 
not  wroth  with  us,  we  feel  raised  above  the  rage  of  mortals.     (2)  So,  too,  we  need 
not  fear  the  devil.     If  God  will  not  be  wroth  with  me,  nor  rebuke  me,  why  should 
I  fear  though  all  hell's  legions  should  march  against  me  1     (3)  If  God  will  never  be 
wroth  with  us,  nor  rebuke  us,  we  need  not  fear  any  of  the  chastisements  which  He 
may  lay  upon  us.     There  is  a  vast  difference  between  a  blow  that  is  given  in  anger 
and  a  pat  that  is  given  in  love.     (4)  How  this  alters  the  look  of  death.     If  death  be 
a  punishment  to  a  believer,  then  death  wears  gloomy  colours ;  but  if  death  itself  has 
changed  its  character,  ^how  delightfol  is  this  1      (5)  After  death  shall  come  the 


174  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ut. 

judgment,  and  in  that  last  great  day  the  Lord  will  not  be  wroth  with  His  people  ;  if 
the  reading  out  of  all  His  people's  sins  before  an  assembled  world  must  imply  a 
rebuke,  then  it  shall  not  be  done,  for  He  will  not  rebuke  them.  So  then,  what 
Bhould  we  fear !  What  indeed  ?  The  Lord  grant  us  to  be  afraid  of  being  afraid  I 
Conclusion :  If  it  be  so,  that  God  has  sworn  that  He  will  not  be  wroth  with  us, 
then — (1)  Believe  it.  (2)  Rejoice.  (3)  Be  resigned.  (4)  Impart.  If  you  have 
learned  this  love  in  your  own  heart,  then  tell  it  out  to  others.    (G.  H.  Spu/rgeon,) 

Ver.  10.  For  the  mountains  shall  depart. — Mountains  stable,  yet  crumbling:— 
Those  who  have  been  reared  and  nurtured  among  the  everlasting  hills  always  look 
upon  them  as  old  friends.  To  them  there  is  in  mountain,  valley  and  glen  a  peace 
reposing  in  the  bosom  of  strength  that  soothes  the  heart  to  rest.  Jean  Paul  savs 
"  that  the  great  hills  are  like  great  men — the  first  to  catch  and  the  last  to  lose  the 
light ; "  and  he  might  further  say  that,  like  great  men,  they  aflFord  kindliest  shelter  in 
their  mighty  bosoms  to  the  weary  and  heart-sore.  While  the  idea  of  stability  is 
connected  with  the  everlasting  huls,  science,  with  stern  truthfulness,  affirms  that 
they  are  gradually  crumbling  away.  They  say  that  the  Alleghanies,  in  their  prime, 
were  three  thousand  feet  higher  than  human  eyes  have  ever  seen  them.  There  was  a 
time  when  the  igneous  forces  possessed  the  advantage,  and  island  and  continent  and 
alp  rose  triumphant  over  the  sea.  But  for  thousands  of  years  the  energies  of  fire 
have  been  wastmg,  and  earthquake  and  fire  have  been  smitten  with  the  palsy  of  age. 
Kiver  and  stream  are  filching  soil  from  mountain  and  plain  and  restoring  it  again  to 
the  sea.  Defiant  granite,  which  baffled  the  lightnings  that  rent  Sinai,  and  frowned 
upon  the  flood  that  drowned  the  world,  shall  yet  be  brought  down  by  the  continuoiis 
pelting  of  rain  and  the  insidious  sapping  of  frost.  {A.  Macfarlane.)  The  imcTiange' 
able  duration  of  God's  kindness  and  covenant: — I.  The  changeable  state  and 
FRAME  OF  THIS  WORLD,  which  shaU  issue  in  its  final  dissolution.  "  The  mountains 
shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed."    In  opposition  hereunto  we  have — II.  The 

ITNCHANGEABLE  DTTRATION  OF  GOD's  KINDNESS  TO,  AND  COVENANT  WITH  HiS  PEOPLE. 

"  But  My  kindness  shaU  not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenants  of  My 
peace  be  removed."  III.  The  confirmation  and  reason  of  this,  as  contained  in 
the  words,  "saith  the  Lord,  that  hath  mercy  on  thee."  {J.  Gv,yse,  D.D.)  The 
enduring  in  the  universe : — I.  The  good  man's  existence  is  more  dttrable  than 
the  mountains.  This  is  here  implied.  The  people  here  addressed  are  supposed  to 
live  after  the  mountains  have  departed.  The  fact  that  a  man  is  more  durable  than 
the  mountains  gives  consistency  to  our  life — and  grandeur.  II.  God's  kindness  is 
MORE  DURABLE  THAN  THE  MOUNTAINS.  "  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee." 
God's  kindness  is  more  durable  even  than  man.  Though  man  will  never  have  an 
end,  he  had  a  beginning.  God's  kindness  never  had  a  beginning,  and  will  never 
have  a.n  end.  Kindness  is  the  very  essence  of  the  Eternal,  the  root  of  all  existence, 
the  primal  font  of  all  blessedness  in  all  worlds.  1.  His  kindness  will  continue  not- 
withstanding the  sins  of  hmnanity.  2.  His  kindness  continues  notwithstanding  the 
sufferings  of  humanity.  In  fact.  His  kindness  is  expressed  in  hvmian  suffering. 
Does  not  the  loving  father  often  show  more  love  to  his  child  in  correcting  him  for  his 
offences  than  in  gratifying  his  desires  ?  There  is  kindness  in  the  judgments  that 
befall  men.  The  most  terrible  judgments  are  but  God's  mercy  weeding  the  world  of 
its  evils.  III.  The  union  between  both  will  be  more  durable  than  the 
MOUNTAINS.  "My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee."  These  words  were 
addressed  to  His  own  people,  and  not  to  men  in  general ;  and  the  idea  is,  that  His 
kindness  will  continue  for  ever  in  connection  with  the  truly  good.  God's  kindness  is 
indissolubly  associated  with  the  good.  St.  Paul  challenges  the  imiverse  to  effect  a 
separation.  "  Who  shaU  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ? "  (Z>.  Thornas,  D.D.) 
Fears  and  their  aMidote : — When  God  called  the  Jewish  captives  to  go  forth  to  their 
own  land,  they  began  to  be  full  of  fears  about  the  future.  They  mused  over  possible 
or  imaginary  difficulties.  They  groaned  under  prospective  burdens.  How  should 
they  get  across  the  wilderness  ?  From  whence  snould  they  receive  their  supplies  ? 
Who  would  protect  them  from  the  roving  bands  of  robbers  ?  And  even  if  they  should 
really  live  through  aU  the  perils  of  the  wilderness,  and  get  safe  again  into  Palestine, 
how  would  they  find  the  country  ?  Would  it  be  desolate  and  waste,  or  cultivated  and 
attractive  ?  Would  it  be  free  from  enemies,  or  full  of  foes  ?  Who  was  then  to  be 
their  shield  and  buckler,  their  strong  tower,  their  rock  of  defence  to  save  them  ?  It 
was  this  temper  of  mind  which  the  prophet  was  commissioned  by  Jehovah  to  remove. 
Why,  said  the  fervid  son  of  Amos,  are  you  so  fearful !  Think  of  God's  momentary 
anger,  and  eternal  mercy  (vers.  7,  8).    "rhink  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  ^  the 


CHAP.UT.]  ISAIAH.  176 

preacher  of  righteousness  (ver.  9).  Think  of  the  most  stable  and  enduring  things  of 
which  you  know :  not  of  fortresses — they  can  be  demolished,  and  not  one  stone  be  left 
upon  another  that  is  not  thrown  down ;  nor  yet  of  temples,  though  they  rear  their 
heads  and  smite  the  stars,  like  the  temple  of  Belus  in  the  city  which  has  so  long  been 
your  home.  Think,  not  of  those,  but  of  the  everlasting  mountains.  What  so 
secure,  so  deep-rooted,  so  enduring?  Yet,  "the  mountains  shall  depart,"  etc 
(ver.  10).  I.  The  temper  of  the  Jewish  captives  is  ai^o  the  temper  of  many 
GODLY  MEN  IN  OUR  DAY.  The  words  of  the  prophet  are  words  which  they  also  need 
to  hear,  to  be  reassured  and  to  recover  their  confidence  and  hope.  1.  We  have  fears 
about  matters  purely  secular.  _  2.  There  are  fears  which  spring  from  matters  aa 
purely  spirituaL  3.  Fears  also  arise  from  temptations.  These  temptations  are  very 
many  and  very  subtle.  4.  There  are  foes  to  face,  other  foes  than  Satan,  but  who 
may  be  prompted  by  his  evil  counsels.  What  will  be  our  condition  in  relation  to 
them  ?  There  are  foes  in  our  own  heart,  foes  in  our  own  house,  foes  in  our  daily  toil 
and  our  rest.  Shall  we  be  able  to  meet  and  overcome  them  ?  5.  Perhaps,  with  a 
very  large  number  of  devout  and  godly  men,  the  greatest  source  of  fear  is  the  possi- 
bility of  the  coming  on  of  an  hour  of  darkness.  6.  In  numberless  other  instances,  the 
fear  originates  through  a  morbid  apprehension  of  death,  a  hatred  of  it  that  is  far  more 
Pagan  than  Christian,  a  shrinking  back  from  the  thought  of  dissolution,  and  all  that 
dissolution  carries  with  it.  II.  Let  us  now  look,  not  at  the  fears,  but  at  theie 
TRUE  ANTIDOTE.  "  For  the  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  lulls  be  removed,"  etc. 
1.  Here  is  the  declaration  of  the  perpetual  providence  of  God.  2.  Another  antidote 
to  fear  is  given  in  the  Divine  pledge  of  peace.  "  The  covenant  of  My  peace  shall 
not  be  broken."  When  the  sacred  writers  speak  of  God's  covenant,  it  is  at  once 
apparent  that  they  are  describing  the  things  of  heaven  in  the  language  of  earth.  But 
when  the  word  is  used  as  in  the  case  before  us,  it  stands  for  a  Divine  pledge  or 
promise.  Eemember,  still  further,  that  ' '  peace  "  was  a  word  which,  in  the  estima- 
tion of  the  Jew,  carried  with  it  every  possible  earthly  advantage.  It  meant  more 
than  the  cessation  of  hostility.  It  meant,  opportunity  for  business ;  success  in 
commercial  ventures ;  home-life,  home-joys,  to  which  the  ancient  Hebrew  was  so 
partial ;  quiet,  love,  happiness.  The  blessings  which  Jehovah  promised  to  the  Jews 
were  manifold  ;  but  all  those  blessings  were  summed  up  in  this  one  expressive  word 
— peace.  So  also  to  us,  in  the  later  economy.  Gods  pledge  to  us  is — "peace," 
putting  the  still  larger  Christian  meaning  into  that  word.  But  when  God  promises 
that  the  covenant  of  His  peace  shall  not  be  broken.  He  expects  us  to  fulfil  our  part 
of  the  covenant.  He  gives  no  assurance  of  peace,  if  we  swerve  from  Him.  3.  The 
Divine  assurance  of  mercy  is  another  antidote  to  fear.  "  The  Lord,  who  hath  mercy 
on  thee."  Mercy  was  the  basis  of  all  God's  treatment  of  the  ancient  Jews.  Mercy 
is  still  the  foundation  of  God's  dealings  with  us.  («7.  J.  Ooadby.)  The  uncTiange- 
ableness  of  God's  covenaTit  the  saint's  security : — I.  An  account  given  of  a  covenant, 
which  is  ascribed  to  God,  and  said  to  be  a  covenant  of  peace.  II.  The  spring  and 
SOURCE  OF   this    COVENANT.      "  Kindness    and    mercy."     III.  A  most    solemn 

assurance    of  the  STABILITY,  PERPETUITY,  AND  UNCHANGEABLENESS  OF  IT.      "It 

shall  not  depart  nor  be  removed."  IV.  The  amplification  or  farther  illustra- 
tion OF  this  security.  "  This  is  as  the  waters  of  Noah  unto  Me,  and  though  the 
mountains  may  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed,"  etc.  {S.  Wilson.)  My  kindness 
shall  not  depart  from  thee. — Kindness : — There  is  something  very  suggestive  in  that 
word  "kindness."  Kindness  is  originally  that  which  is  felt  and  shown  to  one's  kind 
or  kin.  Kind  is  "  kinned  ; "  so  that,  according  to  the  primitive  signification  of  the 
word,  kindness  grows  out  of  natural  relationship.  And  this  is  really  the  basis  of 
God's  kindness.  Men  are  His  children :  and  the  relation  of  parent  and  child  implies 
kindness,  (if.  B.  Vincent,  D.D.)  The  kindness  qf  God: — The  word  kindness  as 
applied  to  Deity  is  a  very  comprehensive  term.  It  embraces  the  attributes  of  love 
and  mercy  in  all  thefr  manifestations  and  numerous  relations,  and  ma^  be  understood 
to  be  one  with  pity,  compassion,  sympathy,  and  tenderness.  I.  The  kindness  of 
Deity  is  unchangeable.  It  is  contrasted  with  the  mutabUity  of  earthly  objects — 
even  with  the  mightiest  and  the  most  endurable — "  The  moimtains  shall  depart,  and 
the  hills  be  removed."  II.  The  kindness  of  God  is  universal,  while  in  some  cases 
it  is  SPECIAL.  III.  The  perpetuity  of  this  kindness.  "  It  shall  not  depart  from 
thee."  The  kindness  of  Deity  has  its  law.  It  may  be  granted,  or  it  may  be  with- 
drawn, conditionally  ;  and  the  law  of  kindness  acts  in  union  with  the  law  of  justice. 
(  W.  D.  Horwood. )  The  covenant  of  My  peace. — Ood^a  peace-giving  covenant : — ' '  The 
oovenant  of  My  peace  "  does  not  give  the  sense  as  fully  as  "  My  covenant  of  peace ;" 
a. «.  My  peace-giving  covenant.    {J.  A.  Aleaanitr.)    The  bUanngs  and  stabilUjf  </  A* 


17«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  UT. 

covemuni  of  grace: — I.  A  view  of  the   parties  concerned  in  making   this 

COVENANT.  II.  A  VIEW  OF  THE  BLESSINGS  CONTAINED  IN  IT.  III.  A  VIEW  OF  THB 
STABILITY   AND    CERTAINTY    OF    THIS    COVENANT,   WITH    ALL    ITS    BLESSINGS    AND 

BENEFITS,  TO  EVERY  TRUE  BELIEVER.  {J.  Kidd,  D.D.)  The  Covenant  of  Ood's 
peace: — 1.  It  proceeds  from  Him  as  the  God  of  peace.  2.  In  this  way  He  hath 
formed  between  Himself  and  His  people  the  most  intimate,  endearing  connection, 
ratified  by  the  Mediator,  who  is  our  peace.  8.  All  the  blessings  rec[m8ite  to  their 
peace  and  felicity  are  therein  bestowed.    {E.  Macculloch.) 

Vers.  11-17.  0  thou  afflicted. — The  city  of  God: — The  reference  is  still  to  Jerusa- 
lem. In  the  former  paragraph,  she  was  addressed  as  a  barren  wife  ;  here  as  destined 
to  arise  from  her  encumbering  ruins,  and  become  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.  Of 
course,  the  primary  reference  is  to  that  actual  rebuilding  which  took  place  under  the 
direction  of  Nehemiah.  But  there  is  a  further  and  more  spiritual  meaning.  These 
words  must  refer  to  that  city  of  God  which  is  ever  arising  amid  the  ruins  of  all  other 
structures.  Watched  by  the  ever-attentive  eye  of  the  great  Architect,  wrought  by 
unseen  hands,  tested  by  the  constant  application  of  the  line  of  truth  and  the  plummet 
of  righteousness,  and  emerging  slowly  from  heaps  of  rubbish  into  strength  and  beauty. 
A  description  is  given  of  the  pricelessness  of  the  structure,  the  privileges  of  tne 
inhabitants,  and  the  safely  which  is  assured  by  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  let  us  not 
hesitate  to  appropriate  this  blessed  vision.  It  is  put  clearly  within  our  reach  by  the 
assurance  with  which  the  chapter  closes,  that  this  is  the  heritage  of  all  the  servants 
of  the  Lord.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  OwTs  promise  to  the  afflicted  Church: — I.  Thb 
LOW  AND  AFFLICTED  STATE  OF  THE  Chttrch.  1,  She  Is  deeply  distressed  ;  and  the 
language  of  Divine  compassion  towards  her  is,  "Oh  thou  afflicted  I "  Piety  exempts 
from  future  wrath,  but  not  from  present  trouble.  Saints  have  their  afflictions  in 
common  with  others.  2.  The  Church  of  God  is  also  described  as  being  * '  tossed  with 
tempests,"  like  a  ship  driven  from  her  anchors,  carried  to  and  fro  by  the  boisterous 
waves,  and  ready  every  moment  to  be  swallowed  up.  A  storm  at  sea  also  well 
represents  the  terrors  or  an  awakened  conscience,  and  the  agonies  of  a  mind  in  deep 
distress ;  when  awful  providences  are  joined  with  inward  darkness,  so  that  one 
trouble  excites  and  sharpens  another.  3.  The  Church  is  afflicted,  "  and  not  com- 
forted." Sometimes  light  arises  out  of  darkness,  and  God  comforts  His  people  in  all 
their  tribulations :  but  here  every  species  of  relief  is  withheld,  II.  The  compassion 
OF  God  towards  His  afflicted  people,  and  the  promise  made  for  their  relief. 
"  Behold,  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours,"  etc.  This  is  as  if  the  Lord  had 
said,  I  wUl  turn  thy  sorrow  into  joy,  thy  tears  into  triumphs.  1.  The  Church  is  here 
represented  as  a  building,  whether  as  a  common  dwelling  or  a  temple  is  immateriaL 
The  materials  are  various.  Some  are  placed  in  a  more  conspicuous  situation  than 
others  ;  but  all  are  useful  and  necessary,  in  different  degrees.  The  various  parts  of 
the  edifice  require  to  be  united,  in  order  to  form  an  entire  structure ;  a  confused 
heap  of  materials,  scattered  and  unconnected,  afford  no  idea  of  a  building.  A  temple 
is  designed  for  worship,  and  a  house  for  habitation ;  the  Church  of  God  is  designed 
for  both.  2.  The  several  parts  of  this  building  are  next  described  ;  the  stones  that 
are  to  be  laid,  and  also  the  foundations.  None  but  spiritual  materials,  none  but 
living  stones  are  fit  to  make  a  part  of  this  building.  The  foundation  of  this  building 
is  Christ  Jesus.  AU  true  believers  are  united  to  Him,  and  rest  their  eternal  all  upon 
Him,  as  a  building  rests  upon  its  foundation.  3.  We  have  a  promise  of  future 
felicity,  and  glory  to  the  Church.  "  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours,  and 
thy  foundations  with  sapphires."  These  expressions  may  imply — (1)  The  Church's 
worth  and  excellency.  (2)  Its  comeliness  and  beauty.  (3)  Its  firmness  and  stability. 
The  precious  stones  and  the  sapphires,  with  which  this  building  is  to  be  erected,  are 
durable  as  well  as  beautiful,  and  expressive  of  the  perpetuity  of  the  Gospel  Church. 
(4)  Its  future  glory.  The  Church  shall  indeed  be  raised  to  a  greater  degree  of  glory 
in  this  world  ;  but  she  shall  be  transcendently  and  etemallv  glorious  in  the  world  to 
come.  The  future  glory  of  the  Church,  as  predicted  by  the  prophet,  is  similar  to 
that  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  the  apostle  saw  descending  from  God  out  of 
heaven.  Let  then  the  afflicted  Church,  and  individual  believers,  bless  God  for  such 
a  promise  I  Let  them  exercise  faith  and  patience,  and  wait  its  fiill  accomplishment 
{B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  city  of  God: — 1.  The  pricelessness  of  the  structure. 
What  an  enumeration  of  precious  stones  !  Let  us  consider  what  jewels  are.  A  jewel 
is  a  bit  of  ordinary  earth  which  has  passed  through  an  extraordinary  experience. 
Then  there  is  a  special  fitness  in  this  address  to  the  afflicted  people  of  God.  1.  Found- 
ations of  sapphire.     Underneath  our  lives,  underpinning  the  history  of  the  world  of 


CKAF.UT.]  ISAIAH.  177 

men,  the  one  nltimate  fact  for  ns  all  is  the  love  of  God.  They  are  stable.  They 
are  fair.  2.  Windows  of  agates.  Agates  are  varieties  of  quartz,  and  bear  evi- 
dently in  their  texture  the  mark  of  fire.  Indeed,  they  are  always  found  in  the 
igneous  rocks,  from  which  they  drop  out  when  such  rocks  decompose  under  the 
action  of  water  and  air.  The  agate  is  partially  transparent ;  not  opaque,  as  flint ; 
not  transparent,  as  rock-crystal — it  admits  light,  tempering  it  as  it  passes.  God 
makes  windows  of  agates  ;  He  takes  our  sorrows  and  makes  them  windows  through 
which  we  may  gaze  into  the  unseen.  In  sorrow  we  see  the  unsatisfying  nature  of 
the  world,  and  the  reality  of  the  unseen  ;  we  learn  to  appreciate  the  tenderness  and 
delicacy  of  human  love  ;  we  have  insight  into  the  meaning  of  God's  providences  ;  we 
behold  the  value  and  truth  of  Scripture.  3.  Gates  of  carbuncles.  There  is  a  good 
deal  of  uncertainty  as  to  the  precise  stone  indicated  by  the  Hebrew  word  rendered 
"carbuncle."  It  seems  better,  therefore,  to  take  the  suggestion  of  the  duplicate 
vision  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  to  think  of  gates  of  pearl.  The  pearl  is  said  to  result 
from  the  infliction  of  a  wound  in  the  oyster,  which  leads  it  to  throw  out  the  precious 
fluid  that  congeals  into  a  pearl.  If  so,  every  pearl  on  the  neck  of  beauty  is  the  lasting 
memento  of  a  stab  of  pain.  At  any  rate,  each  pearl  commemorates  the  hazard  of 
human  life  in  the  diver's  descent  into  the  ocean  depths.  It  is  true  of  life  ;  all  our 
outgoings  into  wider  ministry,  nobler  life,  greater  responsibility  of  blessedness,  are 
due  to  the  precious  action  of  sorrow,  self-sacrifice,  and  pain.  There  is  no  gate  into 
the  life,  which  is  life  indeed,  which  has  not  cost  us  dear.  II.  The  privileges  of 
THE  CHILDREN  OF  THE  CITY.  1.  They  shall  be  all  taught  of  God.  It  is  a  deep  and 
helpful  thought  that  God  has  opened  a  school  in  this  dark  world,  and  has  Himself 
undertaken  to  act  as  Schoolmaster.  It  is  the  Father  who  teaches.  "  He  knows  our 
frame,"  etc.  To  be  taught  of  God  is  to  be  led  by  His  own  hand  into  a  perfect  know- 
ledge of  the  mysteries  of  redemption.  2.  "  Great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children." 
We  have  first  peace  with  God,  through  faith  in  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ ; 
then  the  peace  of  God,  which  here  is  called  "great,"  and  elsewhere  "that  passeth 
understanding,"  Some  parts  of  the  ocean  laugh  the  soimding-line  to  scorn.  You 
may  let  out  1,000,  2,000,  even  6,000  fathoms,  and  stUl  the  plumb  falls  clear.  So  it 
is  when  God's  peace,  driven  from  aU  the  world,  comes  to  fold  its  wings  of  rest  in  the 
heart.  It  is  better  than  joy,  which  falters  and  fluctuates  ;  better  than  the  ecstacy 
which  may  have  its  reactions.  And  these  two  rest  on  each  other.  The  more  you 
know  God,  the  more  peace  you  have  ;  because  you  find  Him  more  worthy  of  your 
trust.  III.  Their  Sapety.  The  waster  fulfils  a  useful  function :  the  knife  that 
cuts  away  the  dead  wood  ;  the  fire  that  eats  out  the  aUoy  ;  the  winnowing  fan  that 
rids  the  wheat  of  the  chafi" ;  the  east  wind  tearing  through  the  forest ;  the  frost 
crumbling  up  the  soil ;  the  vast  army  of  animals  that  devour  and  destroy.  "  I  have 
created  the  waster  to  destroy. "    This  is  the  strong  Hebrew  way  of  saying  that  God 

Sennits,  and  overrules,  and  brings  out  good  by  means  of  the  evil  that  had  seemed 
estructive  of  all  good.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Zion'sfoundatwns,  vnndows,  gates, 
amd  hordera: — I.  The  state,  character,  and  condition  op  the  sttfferino 
Church  of  God.  "  0  thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  and  not  comforted." 
Every  one  of  these  expressions  is  pregnant  with  heavenly  meaning.  1.  '.'  0  thou 
afflicted."  Affliction  is  one  of  the  marks  that  God  stamps  upon  His  people. 
2.  "  Tossed  with  tempest."  Some  are  tossed  with  a  tempest  of  doubts  and  fears ; 
others  with  a  tempest  of  lusts  and  corruptions  ;  others  with  a  tempest  of  rebellion 
and  fretfulness  ;  others  with  a  storm  of  guilt  and  despondency  ;  others  with  gloomy 
forebodings  and  dismal  apprehensions.  Thus  are  they  driven  from  their  course,  their 
sun  and  stars  all  obscured  ;  no  clear  evidences,  no  bright  manifestations  ;  darkness 
above  and  a  raging  sea  beneath  ;  breakers  ahead,  and  no  harbour  in  sight.  3.  But 
the  Lord  adds  another  word,  "not  comforted" — that  is,  not  comforted  by,  not 
capable  of  comfort  from,  man.  This  I  look  upon  as  a  very  decisive  mark  of  a  work 
of  grace  upon  the  soul.  God  has  received  the  Church's  comfort  in  His  own  hands ; 
from  His  lips  alone  can  consolation  be  spoken  into  her  soul.  II.  The  blessed 
CLUSTER  of  Gospel  promises  that  God  makes  to  His  suffering  Church.  "  Be- 
hold," He  says,  as  though  He  would  draw  her  special  attention  to  the  work  that  He 
was  about  to  perform.  "  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours."  The  Lord  here 
seems  to  take  the  figure  of  a  building ;  or  rather  of  a  temple,  for  His  people  are  com- 
pared to  a  temple.  His  work  upon  their  soul  He  compares  to  the  work  of  an 
architect,  or  a  builder  who  lays  stone  upon  stone  until  he  puts  on  the  top-stone  with 
Bhoutings  of  grace,  grace,  imto  it.  1.  The  first  promise  that  He  makes  relative  to 
this  building  of  mercy  is — "  I  will  lay  her  stones  with  fair  colours. "  This  seems  to  be 
a  general  description  of  the  work  of  GUxl  in  rearing  up  the  spiritual  building  before  He 
vol.  in.  12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lit. 

proceeds  to  nicer  particulars.  But  what  may  we  specially  understand  by  these ' '  stones  " 
that  the  Lord  promises  to  lay  "  with  fair  colours  "1  I  think  we  may  understand  by 
these  the  blessed  truths  of  the  Gospel.  These  are  laid  into  the  soul  bv  the  hand  of  God. 
However  fair  or  beautiful  any  word  of  God  be  in  itself,  it  only  experimentally 
becomes  so  as  inlaid  by  His  own  Divine  hand  into  the  souL  This  bnngs  out  the 
fair  colouring.  But  in  the  words,  "  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours,"  there 
seems  to  be  a  reference  also  to  the  cement  in  which  the  stones  are  laid,  as  well  as  to 
the  stones  themselves.  What  is  this  cement  t  Is  it  not  blood  and  love  ?  2.  But 
the  Lord  goes  on  to  particularize  His  work.  He  speaks  of  her  "  foundations,"  her 
"  windows,"  her  "gates,"  and  "  borders,"  and  He  tells  us  how  they  are  all  severally 
framed  and  made.  Beginning  at  the  beginning.  He  describes  the  material  ana 
laying  of  her  foundations — "I  will  lay  thy  foundations  with  sajpphires."  Before 
we  can  stand  firmly  in  the  things  of  God,  we  must  have  a  good  foundation,  some- 
thing solid  for  our  faith,  our  hope,  our  love,  our  all  to  rest  upon.  But  what  is  a 
sapphire  ?  A  precious  stone,  the  distinguishing  feature  of  which  ia  its  peculiar 
clear  and  beautiful  colour — a  heavenly  blue.  I  would  not  press  the  figure  too 
closely,  but  may  it  not  fitly  represent  from  its  nature  and  colour  a  special  gift  from 
heaven  ?  What  a  mercy  for  you  if  your  faith  has  such  a  sapphire  for  its  foundation  ; 
when  you  do  not  rest  upon  the  bare  letter  of  God's  word,  but  upon  the  testimony  of 
God  laid  into  your  soul.  3.  But  the  Lord  also  adds — "  and  I  will  make  thy 
windows  of  agates."  What  is  a  window  for!  Chiefly  to  admit  light  and  air,  and 
also  to  give  us  a  prospect  of  the  scenery  without.  But  the  windows  are  of  "  agate." 
Glass  in  those  days  was  not  used  for  windows  ;  it  was  known  for  various  other 
purposes  ;  for  it  has  been  lately  found  in  Nineveh,  as  well  as  in  the  tombs  of  Egypt ; 
but  its  use  for  windows  is  of  comparatively  modem  date.  But  why  are  they  made 
of  agate  ?  Though  not  as  clear  as  glass,  it  is  what  is  called  semi-transparent,  that 
is,  sufficiently  transparent  to  admit  a  considerable  amount  of  light.  The  sun  shining 
through  a  window  of  agate  mi^ht  lose  a  portion  of  its  brightness,  but  not  much  of 
its  light.  Upon  Zion  in  her  tmie-state  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  does  not  shine  in 
all  his  brightness.  The  windows  of  agate  whilst  she  is  in  the  flesh  temper  his  rays. 
Her  prospects,  too,  are  not  fully  bright  and  clear.  We  have  not  those  clear  views 
which  the  saints  have  in  glory  where  they  see  Jesus  face  to  face.  4.  But  the  Lord 
speaks  also  of  Zion's  "  gatea."^*  These  gates  are  to  give  admission  to  the  temple 
which  He  is  rearing  for  His  own  habitation.  But  of  what  material  are  the  gates  ? 
These,  too,  like  the  foundations  and  windows,  are  of  precious  stones.  "  And  thy 
gates  of  carbuncles."  Now  we  must  not  be  too  fanciful  in  our  interpretation  of 
God's  word  ;  yet,  doubtless,  the  Spirit  of  God  chose  these  jewels  with  some  peculiar 
meaning.  The  carbuncle  is  of  a  blood-red  colour.  And  why  should  the  Lord  have 
chosen  that  Zion's  gates  should  be  of  this  peculiar  colour  ?  May  we  not  believe 
that  there  is  some  mystic  allusion  here  to  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ?  But  what 
are  gates  for  ?  Entrance  and  exit.  Zion  has  her  gates  of  exit  and  entrance.  She 
has  her  gates  of  access  to  Grod,  entrance  into  the  presence  of  the  Most  High. 
And  who  has  opened  the  door,  or  rather  who  has  not  only  opened  it,  and  made  it, 
but  Himself  is  it  ?  "  I  am  the  door,"  saith  Jesus  ;  and  was  not  the  door  opened 
through  His  rent  flesh  ?  (Heb.  x.  19,  20).  But  gates  not  onlv  give  admission  but 
exit.  Not  only  do  prayers,  supplications  and  tears,  rise  up  witn  acceptance  through 
the  gates  of  carbuncle,  and  thus  enter  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  but 
promises  also,  tokens,  testimonies  and  visits  come  down.  And  as  every  prayer,  to 
be  a  prayer,  is  breathed  through  the  gate  of  carbuncle,  through  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  so  every  answer,  that  is  an  answer,  comes  down  through  the  same  consecrated 
channel.  5.  But  the  Lord  also  speaks  of  Zion's  borders.  He  tells  us  He  will  vaake 
"all  her  borders  of  pleasant  stones."  There  shall  be  nothing  common  about  her. 
No  architect  pays  the  same  attention  to  the  courts  and  outbuildings  that  he  pays 
to  the  mansion  itself.  If  the  mansion  be  of  stone  these  may  be  of  brick.  Not  so 
with  God,  Zion's  Divine  Architect.  Zion's  very  borders,  courts,  outbuildings,  are 
all  of  the  same  material  with  the  mansion  itself.  Thus  God's  providential  dealings, 
which  often  form  the  outward  setting  of  His  inward  mercies,  are  of  pleasant  stones. 
But  for  whom  are  these  mercies  ?  The  meritorious  ?  the  diligent  ?  the  industrious  ? 
We  read  not  so.  "  0  thou  afflicted,"  etc.  What  I  are  all  these  mercies  for  such  as 
they !  They  are  the  only  persons  who  will  prize  them,  or  glorify  God  for  them. 
(J.  C.  PMlpot.)  Behold,  I  will  lay  thy  Btones  with  fair  colours.— 2^e  decoration  of 
Nature : — Nature's  temple  is  not  a  hueless,  monotonous  structure  like  the  pyramids 
of  Egypt.  It  is  richly  decorated.  It  is  overlaid  with  chaste  and  beautiful  orna- 
mentation.    Every  stone  is  painted  with  fair  colours,  accurately  toned,  and  in 


CHAP.tiv.]  ISAIAH.  179 

perfect  keeping.  Not  a  rock  that  peers  above  the  surface  of  the  earth  but  ia  clothed 
with  the  rainbow  tints  of  moss  and  lichen,  and  wreathed  with  the  gracefal  tender- 
ness of  fern  and  wild-flower.  Every  mountain  is  clothed  with  the  variegated  verdure 
of  forest  and  pasture,  blending  gradually  upwards  into  the  sober  grey  of  crag,  and 
the  silvery  whiteness  of  snow,  and  the  qmet  blue  of  the  cloud-flecked  sky.  And 
when  the  living  hues  of  plants  are  absent,  there  is  compensation  in  the  rich  colours 
of  the  rocks,  or  in  the  bright  reflections  of  the  heavens.  The  brilliant  crimson  of 
Sinai's  granite  and  sandstone  cliSs  makes  up  for  their  naked  sterility  ;  and  if  the 
mountain  ranges  of  northern  Europe  are  destitute  of  the  emerald  verdure  of  the 
Alps,  they  are  covered  instead  with  purple  light  as  with  a  robe,  and  gather  out  of 
the  sky  at  sunrise  and  twilight  hues  softer  than  the  plumage  of  a  dove,  and  more 
radiant  than  the  petals  of  rose  and  violet.  Even  works  of  human  art  are  decorated 
by  nature  with  a  picturesque  glory  of  colour  and  light,  in  harmony  with  her 
own  landscapes.  The  castle  or  the  abbey,  left  untenanted,  falls  into  ruin ;  but 
Nature — whose  profound  peace  succeeds  all  strife  of  man,  and  whose  passive  per- 
manency mocks  his  fast-perishing  creeds — steps  in  to  claim  her  reversion ;  and 
wherever  her  soft  finger  touches,  there  new  beauties  spring  up  and  shame  the  artist's 
proudest  triumphs.  (5.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  The  adornments  of  grace : — As  Nature 
deals  with  the  materials  of  her  framework,  so  the  Divine  Artificer  deals  with  th« 
living  materials  of  His  spiritual  temple.  Every  stone  that  is  fit  to  be  built  into  the 
waUs  of  His  holy  habitation  is  richly  sculptured  and  decorated.  He  leaves  none  in 
the  meanness  and  vileness  of  their  natural  state.  He  digs  them  out  of  the  fearful 
pit  and  the  miry  clay  that  they  may  be  chiselled  and  polished,  so  as  to  be  ornaments 
of  the  structure  in  which  they  stand.  He  makes  the  Sun  of  righteousness  to  shine 
upon  the  dark  vapour-cloud  of  their  nature,  and  thus  paints  it  with  the  rainbow 
hues  of  grace.  Black  in  themselves,  He  makes  them  comely  in  the  reflected  light  of 
His  love.  From  the  moment  that  the  favour  of  God  is  restored  to  them,  they  are 
wakened  to  a  new  existence  and  a  better  principle.  {Ibid. )  Stones  with  fair  colours : — 
I.  What  are  the  fair  colours  with  which  the  Christian  character  is 
ADORNED  ?  1.  Humility  is  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  them.  It  is  the  soft  purple 
hue  of  the  lowly  violet,  hid  among  its  leaves,  and  known  only  by  its  fragrance  ;  of 
the  fruit  when  it  is  ripest  ;  of  the  hills  when  most  saturated  with  sunset  light,  and 
most  like  Heaven.  It  is  the  ornament  which,  in  the  sight  of  God,  is  of  great  price  ; 
it  is  the  secret  of  true  refinement  and  distinction  in  the  eyes  of  men  ;  it  is  the  glory 
of  the  inner  man  renewed  in  sanctified  self-denial  and  self-forgetfulness.  By  nothing 
is  the  genuine  believer  distinguished  from  the  mere  formalist  and  hypocrite  more 
than  by  his  humility.  2.  Patience.  It  is  the  tender  green  of  the  grass,  which, 
through  summer's  heat  and  winter's  frost,  remains  unchanged,  which  may  be  trampled 
under  foot  and  injured  in  every  way,  and  yet  retains  its  vitality  unimpaired. 
3.  Benevolence.  It  is  the  quiet  blue  of  the  sky,  which  shines  upon  the  just  and  the 
unjust,  which  sends  down  rain  and  dew  upon  the  evil  and  the  good.  This  is  the 
virtue  which  counteracts  the  natural  selfishness  of  the  heart,  and  takes  us  out  of 
ourselves.  It  is  by  the  uniform  and  enlarged  exercise  of  it  that  the  disciples  of  the 
Lord  are  distinguished  from  the  people  of  the  world,  who  are  ever  intent  only 
upon  their  own  interests  and  pleasures.  It  is  by  their  benevolence  that  they  are 
assimilated  to  the  Universal  Giver,  whose  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works,  and 
are  never  exhausted — to  the  compassionate  Saviour,  who  though  He  was  rich  yet  for 
our  sakes  became  poor,  that  we  through  His  poverty  might  become  rich,  and  whose 
meat  and  drink  on  earth  was  to  go  about  continually  doing  good — to  the  holy 
angels,  whose  happiness  is  increased  by  seeing  sinners  repenting  on  earth,  and  by 
being  sent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  4.  Zeal.  It  is  the  ruby  hue 
of  the  blood  which  circulates  through  the  veins,  and  animates  the  whole  body  with 
life  and  vigour.  It  is  the  crimson  heat  which  energizes  or  melts  everything  before 
it,  and  pervades  aU  with  its  own  glow.  It  stimulates  to  the  performance  of  eveiy 
duty,  infuses  life  into  every  experience,  fervour  into  aU  devotion,  spirit  into  all 
work,  and  overcomes  difficulty  as  fire  overcomes  every  resisting  object.  5.  Modera- 
tion or  temperance.  It  is  the  golden  mean  between  two  extremes — the  safe  though 
narrow  path  between  opposite  evils  that  come  very  close  to  each  other.  It  is  the 
soul's  centre  of  gravity.  6.  All  these  and  other  graces  are  summed  up  in  charity. 
As  every  lovely  hue  la  light,  so  every  lovely  grace  is  love.  This  is  the  rainbow 
which  gathers  up  and  harmonizes  all  other  qualities,  and  bends  its  Divine  beauty 
over  the  whole  life  of  the  Christian.  It  is  the  genus  of  which  all  the  Christian 
virtues  are  the  species.  Patience  is  the  attitude  of  love,  zeal  is  the  ener^  of  love, 
humility  is  the  aspect  of  love,  benevolence  is  the  acting  of  love.    XL  What  abi 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ut. 

THE  PEOPEETIES  OF  THESE  FAIR  COLOITRS !  1.  They  should  be  harmonioua.  They 
should  be  developed  proportionally,  so  that  each,  instead  of  detracting  from,  may 
add  lustre  to  the  other.  Though  the  graces  are  possessed  by  the  believer  in  various 
degrees  of  perfection,  yet  in  every  person  some  one  or  other  is  predominant,  becomes 
BO  conspicuous  as  to  colour  the  rest,  and  give  the  whole  character  its  prevailing  hue. 
The  New  Jerusalem  above  will  be  a  glorious  city,  because  there  shall  be  gathered 
together,  in  varied  but  harmonious  splendour,  the  brightness  of  the  diamond,  the 
ruddy  flame  of  the  topaz,  the  deep  green  of  the  emerald,  the  shining  gold  of  the 

I'asper,  the  milk-white  filminess  of  the  onyx,  the  heavenly  blue  of  the  sapphire,  the 
ovely  violet  of  the  amethyst,  the  burning  changes  of  the  opal,  and  the  soft  beauty 
of  the  pearl  1  2.  The  fair  colours  with  which  God  lays  the  stones  of  His  spiritual 
temple  are  not  superficial.  There  is  no  plating,  or  enamelling,  or  veneering.  Grace 
works  from  within  outwards,  renews  the  heart,  and  thus  transforms  the  life. 
III.  How  ABE  THESE  FAIE  COLOTJKS  PEODUCED  !  God  is  their  author.  It  is  He  who 
says,  "  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours."  They  are  not  the  spontaneous 
products  of  our  own  corrupt  nature,  nor  even  the  forced  growths  of  our  own  careful 
cultivation.  The  beauties  of  holiness  are  no  mere  fancy-sketch,  no  original  picture. 
They  are  a  copy  of  the  Great  Master.  {Ibid.)  The  co-operation  of  providence  and 
fp-ace : — The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  aided  by  God's  providential  dealings  without.  It 
IS  to  the  "  afflicted,  tempest- tossed,  and  not  comforted,"  that  God  says,  "  Behold,  I 
will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  colours."  I  have  seen  a  literal  fulfilment  of  these 
words  in  Nature.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  the  most  brilliant  colours  of 
plants  are  to  be  seen  on  the  highest  moimtains,  in  spots  that  are  most  exposed  to 
the  wildest  weather.  The  brightest  lichens  and  mosses,  the  loveliest  gems  of  wild- 
flowers,  abound  far  up  on  the  bleak  storm-scalped  peak.  One  of  the  richest  displays 
of  organic  colouring  I  have  ever  beheld  was  near  the  summit  of  Mont  Chenelettaz,  a 
hill  about  10,000  feet  high,  inmiediately  above  the  great  St.  Bernard  Hospice.  The 
whole  face  of  an  extensive  rock  was  covered  with  a  most  vivid  yellow  lichen,  which 
shone  in  the  sunshine  like  the  golden  battlement  of  an  enchanted  castle.  There, 
in  that  lofty  region,  amid  the  most  frowning  desolation,  exposed  to  the  fiercest 
tempests  of  the  sky,  this  lichen  exhibited  a  glory  of  colour  such  as  it  never  shows  in 
the  sheltered  valley.  I  have  two  specimens  of  the  same  lichen  before  me,  one  from  the 
great  St.  Bernard,  and  the  other  from  the  wall  of  a  Scottish  castle  deeply  embosomed 
among  sycamore  trees  ;  and  the  difi"erence  in  point  of  form  and  colouring  between  them 
is  most  striking.  The  specimen  nurtured  amid  the  wild  storms  of  the  mountain- 
peak  is  of  a  lovely  primrose  hue,  and  is  smooth  in  texture  and  complete  in  outline ; 
while  the  specimen  nurtured  amid  the  soft  airs  and  the  delicate  showers  of  the 
lowland  valley  is  of  a  dim  rusty  hue,  and  is  scurfy  in  texture  and  broken  in  outline. 
And  is  it  not  so  with  the  Christian  who  is  afflicted,  tempest-tossed,  and  not  com- 
forted ?  Till  the  storms  and  vicissitudes  of  God's  providence  beat  upon  him  again  and 
again,  his  character  appears  marred  and  clouded  by  selfish  and  worldly  influences. 
But  trials  clear  away  the  obscurity,  perfect  the  outlines  of  his  disposition,  and  give 
brightness  and  beauty  to  his  piety.  {Ibid. )  The  world  unfavourable  to  beauty  of 
Christian  character : — But  though  the  trials  of  life  are  well  fitted  to  bring  out  the  fair 
colours  of  the  Christian  character,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  world  may  be  said  to 
be  imfavourable  to  them.  Its  climate  is  not  like  the  glowing  air  and  the  clear  sunny 
Bky  of  Egypt  or  Italy,  which  embalm  architectural  remains  in  imperishable  beauty, 
and  present  the  temples  erected  ages  ago  as  sharply-defined  in  their  sculpture,  and 
as  fresh  and  undimmed  in  their  colouring  as  if  built  only  yesterday.  It  is  like  our 
own  misty  climate.  It  is  difficult  to  preserve  the  beauty  of  holiness  in  a  world 
lying  in  wickedness,  to  keep  the  garments  unspotted  from  the  flesh.  The  fair 
colours  of  grace  require  to  be  constantly  renewed,  polished,  brightened.  But  as 
Christians,  another  Will  than  your  own  has  begun  to  work  in  you  both  to  will  and 
to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  And  your  holiness  will  surely  spread  in  spite  of  every 
opposition  over  your  whole  nature  and  life,  transforming  you  in  the  renewing  of 
your  mind,  preserving  you  from  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  and  preparing  you  for 
being  presented  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceemng  joy. 
{Ibid.)  The  beaviifying  power  of  Divine  grace: — These  fair  colours  of  grace  are 
within  reach  of  aU.  In  nature  there  is  hardly  a  stone  that  is  not  capable  of 
ciystaUizing  into  something  purer  and  brighter  than  its  normal  state.  Coal,  by  a 
slightly  different  arrangement  of  its  particles,  is  capable  of  becoming  the  radiant 
diamond.  The  slag  cast  out  from  the  furnace  as  useless  waste,  forms  into  globular 
masses  of  radiating  crystals.  From  tar  and  pitch  the  loveliest  colours  are  now 
manufactured.    The  very  mud  on  the  road,  trampled  under  foot  as  the  type  of  all 


CHAP.uv.]  ISAIAH.  181 

impnrity,  can  be  changed  by  chemical  art  into  metals  and  gems  of  surpassing 
beauty.  And  so  the  most  nnpromising  materials,  from  the  most  worthless  mor^ 
rubbish  that  men  cast  out  and  despise,  may  be  converted  by  the  Divine  alchemy 
into  the  gold  of  the  sanctuary,  and  made  jewels  fit  for  the  mediatorial  crown  of  the 
Kedeemer.  (Ibid.)  "Fair  colours:" — Antimony  was  the  costly  black  mineral 
powder  with  which  the  Eastern  women  painted  their  eyelids  to  throw  up  the  lustre 
of  their  eyes.  The  dark  cement  in  which  the  gems  of  the  walls,  gates,  battlements, 
and  even  the  foundations  of  the  Oity  were  to  be  set,  and  which  was  to  enhance  their 
brilliance,  was  to  be  composed  of  this  costly  pigment.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  And  lay 
thy  foundations  with  sapphires. — FovmdatioTis  qf  sapphires: — By  the  sea-shore  we 
find  samples  of  many  of  the  rocks  which  form  the  crust  of  the  earth.  The  commonest 
specimen  among  them  has  something  to  commend  it  either  in  colour  or  in  form. 
H  is  assuredly  not  of  worthless  and  unsightly  materials  that  the  hidden  parts  of  the 
earth  are  constructed.  Unlike  man's  work,  which  is  carefully  elaborated  only  where 
the  eye  is  intended  to  see  it,  God's  work  is  the  same  throughout.  Not  only  is 
beauty  lavished  upon  the  superstructure — upon  the  grass,  and  the  flowers,  and  the 
trees,  that  are  to  meet  the  gaze — but  the  very  foundations  are  composed  of  onyx 
stones  and  stones  to  be  set,  glistering  stones  and  of  divers  colours,  and  aU  manner 
of  precious  stones,  and  marble  stones  in  abundance.  A  similar  principle  appears 
throughout  the  spiritual  creation,  of  which  the  scheme  of  nature  is  only  the  visible 
picture.  In  the  moral  works  of  God  as  well  as  in  the  natural,  beauty  is  combined 
with  utility — grace  with  strength.  He  lays  the  foundations  of  the  general  Ohristiau 
Church,  and  of  the  individual  Christian  character,  with  sapphires.  Those  hidden 
principles  and  motives  upon  which  the  grand  superstructure  of  faith  and  charity  ia 
built,  are  not  only  strong  and  steadfast,  but  beautiful.  {H.  Macmilla^,  LL.D.) 
The  sapphire  is  one  of  the  brightest  and  most  valuable  of  those  mysterious  unfading 
flowers  of  the  inner  earth  which  we  caU  jewels.  Bom  of  darkness,  stranger  to  the 
light,  it  yet  holds  in  its  core  of  focussed  rays  the  blue  of  heaven.  Gentians,  violets, 
forget-me-nots,  cabn  lakes  and  summer  skies,  glacier-depths  and  living  springs,  have 
their  passing  and  perishing  loveliness  enshrined  and  concentrated  in  its  heart  of 
rock.  There  is  one  variety,  of  a  singularly  soft  pure  azure,  which  has  the  power  of 
retaining  its  lovely  memory  of  heaven,  even  by  candlelight,  when  an  ordinary 
sapphire  looks  black.  It  is  sometimes  found  in  masses  of  considerable  size,  and  may 
therefore  appropriately  be  spoken  of  in  connection  with  foundations.  It  formed  the 
pavement,  like  the  body  of  heaven  in  its  clearness,  under  the  feet  of  the  God  of 
Isrsiel,  as  seen  by  the  elders  in  Exodus  ;  and  the  throne  of  glory  which  appeared  to 
Ezekiel  in  vision  resembled  a  sapphire  stone.  It  was  the  fifth  precious  stone  in  the 
breastplate  of  the  Jewish  high-priest,  and  had  the  name  of  Simeon  engraved  upon 
it ;  and  the  second  foundation  of  the  New  Jerusalem  is  a  sapphire.  The  minute 
account  in  Exodus  and  Revelation,  of  this  and  other  jewels  that  adorned  the 
sacerdotal  apparel  and  the  waUs  of  the  heavenly  city,  indicates  the  symbolic 
reverence  attached  to  their  use  by  the  Jews.  And  this  belief  in  their  mystio 
qualities  passed  from  India  and  Persia  to  Greece  and  Rome,  and  after  playing  a 
considerable  part  in  the  Gnostic  systems  of  Alexandria,  became  finally  transferred 
to  the  Christian  Church,  as  we  find  Bishop  Marboeuf  of  Rennes,  in  the  eleventh 
century,  versifying  their  tahsmanic  influences  in  his  curious  "Lapidarium."  Even 
St.  Jerome  praises  the  sapphire  for  its  use  in  "  conciliating  to  its  wearer  the  favour 
of  princes,  quelling  his  enemies,  dispersing  sorceries,  setting  free  the  captive,  and 
even  assuaging  the  wrath  of  God  himself."  {Ibid.)  £ltie  is  an  exceedingly  lovely 
colour.  It  is  quiet  and  subdued,  attracting  without  dazzling  the  eye,  suggestive  of 
peace  and  repose.     It  is  the  most  universally  distributed  of  all  hues.     It  forms  the 

S leasing  background  of  nature,  on  which  the  more  brilliant  colours  of  tree  and 
ower  and  field  come  forth  to  arrest  our  attention,  not  only  by  their  own  beauty, 
but  also  by  the  force  of  contrast.  We  see  it  in  the  boundless  expanse  of  the  sky 
which  bends  over  and  idealizes  our  dull  cold  earth,  and  forms,  with  its  varied 
changes,  a  part  of  the  landscape,  not  the  mere  empty  space  that  surrounds  it.  We 
see  it  in  the  distant  hiUs,  that  assume  on  the  horizon  the  azure  colour  of  the  sky, 
from  sympathy  of  beauty  and  peace.  We  see  it  in  the  far-stretching  ocean  that 
covers  three-fourths  of  the  surface  of  the  globe ;  in  the  lake,  the  river,  and  the 
stream,  the  mirrors  which  reflect  and  spiritualize  the  changeable  beauty  of  earth  and 
heaven.  We  see  it  in  the  blue-bell  that  rings  out  the  pensive  requiem  of  nature's 
mutability  on  quiet  autumn  eves ;  and  in  the  hiunan  eye,  the  most  wonderfol  of 
God's  works,  which  reflects  the  world  without  and  the  world  within — which  is  at 
once  useful  as  an  organ  of  vision,  and  beautiful  as  a  spiritual  and  expressive  window 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS.  [chap.  liv. 

of  the  soul.  And  as  in  the  temple  of  nature,  from  the  viewless  air  to  the  ethereal 
lustre  of  childhood's  innocent  eye,  the  hue  of  the  sapphire  predominates,  so  in  the 
tabemEicle  and  temple  of  old  it  was  pre-eminent,  being  always  mentioned  in  con- 
nection with  gold  in  the  eniuneration  of  the  sacred  furniture.  As  the  gold  was 
emblematic  of  the  glory  and  majesty  of  God,  so  the  blue  combined  with  it,  in  the 
sacred  appointments  of  the  tabernacle,  might  be  aptly  employed  to  represent  His 
love  and  grace.  Such  an  interpretation  would  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the 
symbolism  of  nearly  all  nations,  among  whom  blue  has  always  been  associated  with 
ideas  of  love.  {Ibid.)  Sapphire  fourwiatioTis.: — We  may  therefore  understand  the 
sapphire  foundations  of  the  Christian  life  which  God  lays,  to  be,  in  general  terms, 
the  love  of  God  in  Christ ;  His  general  love  in  providence,  and  His  particular  and 
surpassing  love  in  redemption.  It  is  on  this  beautiful  and  serene  background  that 
all  the  great  manifestations  of  grace  given  to  mankind  are  displayed.  The  temple 
of  Solomon  was  built  on  the  rocky  foundation  of  Mount  Moriah,  a  place  consecrated 
to  the  work  of  redemption,  from  the  time  when  Abraham  offered  there  the  ram 
which  the  Lord  had  provided,  instead  of  his  son  Isaac,  and  the  destroying  angel 
sheathed  there,  by  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah,  the  sword  of  judgment,  on 
account  of  David's  sacrifice.  And  so  the  spiritual  temple  is  also  built  upon  the 
work  of  redemption  as  its  sapphire  foundation.  What  beautiful  emblems  of  Christ's 
love  are  the  two  grandest  objects  of  nature — sapphire  sea  and  sapphire  sky  1  The 
boundless  extent  of  heaven's  blue  field  cannot  be  measured  even  by  the  astronomer, 
so  the  length  and  breadth,  and  height  and  depth  of  the  love  of  Christ  surpass  all 
knowledge.  Or,  to  take  the  sea  as  the  comparison,  the  sea  touches  the  shore  along 
one  narrow  line,  and  all  the  beauty  and  fertility  of  that  shore  are  owing  to  its  life- 
giving  dews  and  rains  ;  but  it  stretches  away  from  the  shore,  beyond  the  horizon, 
into  regions  which  man's  eye  has  never  seen,  and  the  further  it  recedes,  the  deeper 
and  the  bluer  its  waters  become.  And  so  the  love  of  Christ  touches  us  along  the 
whole  line  of  our  life,  imparts  all  the  beauty  and  fruitfulness  to  that  life,  but  it 
stretches  away  from  the  point  of  contact  into  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  the 
measureless  fulness  of  the  Godhead — that  ocean  of  inconceivable,  incommunicable 
love  which  no  plummet  can  sound,  or  eye  of  angel  or  saint  ever  scan.  The  Hebrew 
word  sappir,  translated  sapphire  in  our  version,  is  derived  from  the  same  root  as  the 
words  that  signify  a  book,  writing,  or  engraving  ;  and  according  to  the  Talmud,  the 
two  tables  of  stone,  on  which  the  Law  was  written  on  Sinai,  were  formed  of 
sapphires.  Blessed  be  God,  it  is  not  on  the  sapphire  foundations  of  the  Law  that 
we  are  now  to  build  our  trust.  The  obedience  that  can  rest  on  these  foundations 
must  be  perfect  in  every  jot  and  tittle,  and  perpetual,  without  cessation  or  suspense, 
•without  question  or  doubt,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  life.  But  such  an 
obedience  we  cannot  rear.  Christ's  finished  work  is  now  our  sapphire  foundation. 
{Ibid.)  "  I  will  lay  thy  foundaiions  with  sapphires : " — The  structure  of  our  faith  is 
four-square,  like  that  of  the  temple  of  old.  The  chief  comer-stone  which  binds  the 
whole  together  is  the  redemption-love  of  Christ ;  but  connected  with  it  as  a 
foundation  for  the  believer's  stability  and  hope,  is — 1.  The  covenant  of  grace, 
embracing  every  blessing  from  the  first  moment  of  incipient  peace  in  the  soul  to 
the  consummation  of  that  peace  in  heaven,  extending  in  its  administration  to  the 
most  minute  particulars,  making  ample  provision  for  every  evil  that  can  possibly 
happen  to  us,  and  securing  calmness  in  the  prospect  and  in  the  hour  of  death. 
2.  The  revealed  truth  of  God  is  another  sapphire  foundation  connected  with  the 

J>recious  comer-stone.  3.  The  experience  of  the  believer  is  yet  another  sapphire 
oundation-  The  objective  revelation  of  the  Gospel  has  been  followed  by  the 
subjective  operation  of  the  Spirit.  The  outward  teaching  of  inspiration  has  become 
an  inward  Divine  illumination.  The  doctrine  has  become  a  Uving  power  whose 
strength  has  been  tried  and  proved ;  the  Divine  announcement  has  passed  into  the 
form  of  ah 
incantation, 
bottom 

^rpes  and  prophecies,  revealed  in  the  Gospels,  preached  in  the  Apostolic  Acts  and 
lipistles,  has  become  Cluist  formed  in  the  soul  the  hope  of  glory.  The  sapphire  is 
one  of  the  most  precious  jewels ;  ranking  next  to  the  diamond  in  value.  It  is 
precious  for  its  own  beauty  and  rarity,  and  precious  on  account  of  the  labour 
mvolved  in  obtaining  it.  And  who  can  estimate  the  preciousness  of  the  sapphire 
foundations  of  our  faith,  the  work  of  redemption  which  cost  the  humiliation,  suffer- 
ing, and  death  of  the  Son  of  God  to  accompIiBh  ;  and  the  exi>erience  of  the  truth  in 
the  sool  wroo^t  out  throtigh  matih.  sorrow,  through  doubts,  and  fears,  and  terriblt 


CHAP,  uy.]  I8AIAE,  189 

straggles?  The  sapphire  is  also  one  of  the  purest  of  the  precious  stones.  The 
ancient  meteoric  stone  called  the  Kaaba,  built  into  the  sacred  mosque  at  Mecca,  and 
still  pressed  with  devotion  by  the  lips  of  every  pilgrim,  may  be  taken  to  represent 
in  its  blackness  and  earthliness,  the  Mohammedan  religion.  But  the  foundation  of 
Christianity  is  a  pure  transparent  sapphire.  It  has  no  flaws,  no  dross,  no  earthy 
ingredients.  These  foundations  are  steadfast  and  enduring.  They  are  not  composed 
of  perishable  materials — not  even  of  rocks  that  weather  and  crumble  away — but  of 
sapphires,  next  to  the  diamond  the  hardest  of  the  precious  stones.  Jewels,  as  a 
class,  are  the  most  lasting  of  all  earthly  objects — the  most  beautiful  as  well  as  tho 
most  imperishable  form  m  which  matter  appears.  They  are  therefore  expressive 
types  of  stability  and  pennanence.  The  sapphire  foundations  of  the  Ohiistiau  life 
are  everlasting.     {Ibid!) 

Yer.  12.  And  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  agates. — Agates  are  preoioos  stones, 

partially  transparent  and  uncrystaUized.  They  are  mere  varieties  of  quartz,  variously 
coloured  by  admixtures  of  different  earths  ;  although  the  neutral  tints  are  the  most 
frequent.  They  generally  occur  in  rounded  nodules,  or  in  veins  in  igneous  rocks, 
dropping  out  when  such  rocks  decompose  by  the  action  of  the  elements,  and  being 
washed  down  to  the  places  where  they  are  found  by  mountain  streams.  They  seem 
to  be  the  product  of  elements  fused  by  fire  ;  and  in  this  respect  they  cany  out  most 
faithfully  the  analogy  between  the  condition  of  the  Church  and  the  nature  of  the 
promise,  *'  0  thou  afflicted,  tempest-tossed,  and  not  comforted,  behold,  I  will  make 
thy  windows  of  agates. "  Out  of  those  fiery  trials  precious  media  of  spiritual  vision 
will  be  constructed  for  it.  {H.  Macmillan,LL.D.)  Agate tmndows: — -l.  Looking  at 
the  emblem  in  this  light,  we  may  suppose  windows  of  agates  to  mean  windows  or 
FAITH.  Agates  are  neither  transparent  as  rock  crystal,  nor  opaque  as  flint ;  so 
neither  is  faith  dim  as  sense,  nor  bright  as  heavenly  vision.  Many  things  in  crea- 
tion, providence,  and  redemption  are  inscrutable  to  us ;  and  the  wider  the  circle  of 
light  spreads  around  us,  the  wider  does  the  dark  line  of  our  ignorance  extend  also 
and  touch  it  at  every  point.  Gazing  through  these  windows  we  behold  things  which 
we  see  nowhere  else.  We  obtain  such  a  realizing  view  of  God's  presence,  such  an 
evidence  of  His  perfections,  as  elevates  and  spiritualizes  our  minds,  while,  at  the 
same  time,  it  humbles  us  low  by  the  contrast  of  our  own  imperfections  and  un- 
worthiness.  We  behold  His  glory  as  in  a  glass,  and  are  changed  into  the  same 
image,  saturated  with  the  reflected  light  of  His  holiness,  permeated  with  the 
warmth  and  the  purity  of  His  love.  The  "  altogether  lovely  One  "  looketh  forth  at 
these  windows,  snowing  Himself  through  the  lattice  in  aU  the  beauty  of  His  person, 
the  perfection  of  His  righteousness,  and  the  sufficiency  of  His  grace.  We  have  a 
satisfying  and  transforming  view  of  His  person.  His  atonement,  His  intercession. 
His  example,  His  commands  and  promises,  His  government  and  kingdom,  as  re- 
vealed in  the  Gospel ;  so  that  we  can  enjoy  His  own  prophetic  benediction,  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  From  these  upper  windows  of 
the  soul  we  obtain  the  widest  view  of  the  horizon  around  us,  and  see  glorious 
glimpses  of  the  land  that  is  very  far  off.  Looking  down  from  that  elevation,  how 
small  and  insignificant  do  the  things  that  appeared  great  from  their  own  level 
appear  ;  how  imworthy  of  the  thought  we  bestowed  upon  them,  or  the  anxiety  with 
which  we  regarded  them.  On  these  western  windows  of  the  soul,  too,  the  departing 
sun  shines  with  concentrated  radiance  when  all  the  rest  of  the  horizon  is  wrapped 
in  twilight  gloom.  It  is  from  thence  that  another  and  a  brighter  world  is  discerned 
opening  upon  our  view,  while  this  world  is  sinking  in  shadow.  II.  We  may  regard 
these  windows  as  windows  of  feeling.  By  tMs  it  is  meant,  not  that  God  will 
smite  the  smitten,  af^ct  the  afficted,  but  that  He  will  make  those  afflictions  which 
the  Church  already  experiences  windows  of  agates — mediums  of  communication 
between  the  soul  and  the  unseen  world — means  of  deeper  insight  into,  and  richer 
experiences  of  spiritual  things.  The  afflicted  Christian  is  the  o^y  one  who  has  just 
views  of  life.  It  takes  a  long  and  painful  discipline  to  correct  our  early  impressions, 
and  show  us  things  in  their  true  aspects  and  relations.  Through  the  fJiTn  windows 
of  affliction  how  changed  is  the  aspect  of  the  world,  how  cold,  and  grey,  and  deso- 
late ;  all  its  radiant  glow  departed ;  all  its  beauteous  hues  reduced  to  one  dull  leaden 
sadness.  The  tears  of  sorrow  are  like  spiritual  lenses,  showing  us  the  world  in  its 
true  character  as  a  poor,  empty,  unsatisfying  inheritance.  One  glimpse  through  the 
agate  windows  of  sickness,  bereavement,  or  adversity  will  impress  us  more  with  the 
vanity  of  the  world's  portion,  and  of  a  life  of  sense,  than  aU  that  the  most  pensive 
poetiy  ever  sang,  or  uie  most  cynical  philosophy  ever  taught.    "  I  will  make  tbj 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  LIT. 

windows  of  agates ; "  not  bright  and  transparent,  for  our  weak  eyes,  dimmed  with 
pain  and  weeping,  cannot  bear  the  strong  sunshine  ;  not  dark  and  opaque,  for  the 
soul  climbing  up  and  straining  to  look  out  and  see  the  light  behind  the  cloud — the 
beauty  beyond  the  shadow — and  baffled  in  its  efforts — would  fall  back  upon  itself 
morbid  and  despairing.  They  are  windows  of  agates — neither  transparent  nor 
opaque — but  mercifully  tempered  by  Him  who  best  knows  the  requirements  of  each 
individual  case,  and  who  in  aU  our  afflictions  is  afflicted.  III.  We  may  suppose 
agate  windows  to  be  windows  of  spiritual  character.  In  admiring  a  piece  of 
beautiful  scenery,  we  find  nothing  in  it  except  what  we  ourselves  brought  to  it. 
Nature  wears  the  colour  of  the  spirit ;  and  her  charms  are  reflections  of  charms 
within  ourselves.  It  is  so  also  in  moral  things.  To  the  pure  aU  things  are  pure ; 
while  the  polluted  heart  finds  impurity  in  the  most  innocent  things.  So  also  in  the 
spiritual  world.  Its  objects  become  real,  tangible,  true,  worthy  of  love,  and  capable 
of  influencing  us,  only  so  far  as  we  ourselves  are  spiritualized.  There  is  no  window 
so  clear  as  holiness  of  character,  spirituality  of  mind,  purity  of  heart,  singleness  of 
aim.  Agate  windows  are  most  expressive  symbols  of  our  spiritual  character.  The 
purest  agates  are  only  semi-pellucid:  while  the  great  majority  of  specimens  are 
clouded  with  dim  spots,  and  streaked  with  dark  lines.  And  so  the  purest  spiritual 
character  in  this  world  is  imperfect.  The  essential  transparency  remains,  but 
objects  seen  through  it  are  dim,  distorted,  and  discoloured.  Our  indistinct  and  im- 
perfect views  of  God,  of  providence,  of  the  scheme  of  grace,  of  the  eternal  realities 
and  transcendent  glories  of  a  perfect  state — are  owing  to  the  imperfection  of  our  own 
spiritual  character,  and  the  imperfect  affinity  of  our  hearts  for  what  is  best  and 
purest.  These  windows  of  agates  are  of  great  practical  importance.  The  principal 
use  and  design  of  ordinary  windows  in  a  dwelling  is  to  admit  light  into  the  rooms, 
80  that  the  inmates  may  see  to  perform  their  various  household  duties.  And  so,  the 
use  of  these  windows  of  agates,  whether  they  be  windows  of  faith,  of  feeling,  or  of 
spiritual  character,  is  to  let  the  light  of  heaven  shine  in  upon  our  life,  that  we  may 
discharge  our  various  duties  as  members  of  the  household  of  faith.  We  are  not  to 
sit  all  day  long  with  folded  hands  at  these  windows,  looking  out  listlessly  or  sadly, 
in  mere  religious  reverie,  or  in  despondent  abstraction.  The  light  which  we  get 
through  them  is  given  to  us  to  work.  The  light  of  heaven  itself  is  given  for  useful- 
ness as  well  as  for  beauty.  It  warms  and  fertilizes  the  earth,  and  ripens  the  com. 
So  let  the  light  which  streams  ia  upon  us  through  these  windows  of  agates— <!Ostly 
light  obtained  from  faith  tried  in  the  furnace  ;  lambent  light  gleaming  from  painfiu 
afflictions,  from  the  decays  of  nature ;  sparkling  light  struck  from  sore  struggles 
with  sia  and  self ;  light  coloured  by  the  experience  through  which  it  has  passed ; 
let  that  light  warm,  and  quicken,  and  ripen  our  souls.  [Ibid.)  "  Thy  windows  qf 
" — Rather,  as  R.V.,    "pinnacles."     The  word  is  derived  from  that  for 


"sun,"  and  appears  to  denote  those  parte  of  the  building  which  glitter  in  the  sun's 
rays.  Compare  the  Arab  "minaret,"  used  primarily  of  a  lantern  or  lighthouse. 
"Agates"  (Ezek.  xxvii.  16),  "sparkling"  stone,  perhaps  "rubies"  (R.V.).  {Prof. 
J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  clarified  vision: — The  Hebrew  word  here  for  window  is 
unusual  (shemashoth),  and  this  is  the  only  instance  of  ite  translation  by  "  window." 
It  means  "an  opening  for  the  sun."  It  implies  the  admission  into  the  house  of 
more  than  ordinary  reflected  daylight — the  sun  streams  through  it.  The  agate 
{kadbod)  is  a  glass-clear  stone.  The  writer  uses  it  evidently  more  because  of  its 
clarity  than  becavise  of  its  preciousness.  As  a  clear  way  for  the  sun,  the  agate  window 
suggests  the  desirability  of  keeping  the  soul's  windows  transparently  clear.  I.  That 
God,  the  soul's  sun,  mat  shine  in  without  impediment.  1.  The  Bible  may  be  the 
agate  window.  Through  it  G  od  shines  in  on  man's  mind  and  spirit.  2.  This,  similarly, 
should  be  the  office  of  religious  teaching,  as  in  creed  and  sermon.  How  important  to 
keep  the  media  of  truth  transparent.  II.  That  the  soul,  looking  out,  may  see 
accurately.  Bad  glass,  steam,  or  stain  on  a  wiadow  confuses  outlines.  A  fly  in 
the  telescope  may  twist  the  observer's  astronomy.  AU  our  views  of  life's  landscapes 
greatly  depend  on  the  window  through  which  we  look  out.  Sin  stains  it.  Cynicism 
discolours  it.  The  sun  can  shine  through  a  hide  or  a  thin  shutter.  But  the  soul 
can  look  out  only  through  the  clear  window.  God  sees  us,  shines  on  us,  when  we 
do  not  see  Him.  Salvation  depends  not  on  His  seeing  us,  but  on  our  seeing  Him. 
III.  That  our  light  may  shine  out  to  others.  Some  one  wandering  in  the 
darkness  may  see  the  light  that  shines  from  our  life,  and  be  guided  to  safety. 
{Homiletic  Review. )  Thy  gates  of  earbancleB. — The  carbuncle : — This  precious  stone 
is  found  in  the  East  Indies,  in  colour  ia  an  intense  scarlet,  and  held  up  between  your 
eye  and  the  sun  it  is  a  burning  coaL    The  poet  puts  it  into  rhythm  as  he  writes — 


CHAP,  uv.]  ISAIAH.  185 

"  Like  to  the  burning  coal  whence  comes  its  name ; 
Among  the  Greeks  as  Anthrax  known  to  fame." 

Gfod  sets  it  high  up  in  Bible  crystallography.  He  outs  it  with  a  Divine  chisel, 
shapes  it  with  a  precise  geometry,  and  kindles  its  fire  into  an  almost  supernatural 
flame  of  beauty.  Its  law  of  symmetry,  its  law  of  zones,  its  law  of  parallelism, 
something  to  excite  the  amazement  of  the  scientist,  chime  the  cantos  of  the  poet, 
and  arouse  the  adoration  of  the  Christian.  No  one  but  the  infinite  God  could 
fashion  a  carbuncle  as  large  as  your  thumb-nail,  and  as  if  to  make  all  ages  appreciate 
this  precious  stone  He  ordered  it  set  in  the  first  row  of  the  high-priest's  breast-plate 
in  olden  time  and  higher  up  than  the  onyx  and  the  emerald  and  the  diamond,  and  in 
Ezekiel's  prophecies  concerning  the  splendours  of  the  Tyrian  court,  the  carbuncle  is 
mentioned,  the  brilliancies  of  the  walls  and  of  the  tessellated  floors  suggested  by  the 
Bible  sentence,  "  Thou  hast  walked  up  and  down  in  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  ure  1 " 
(T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  Gates  of  carbuncles: — In  my  text  it  is  not  a  solitary 
specimen  that  I  hand  you,  as  the  keeper  of  a  museum  might  take  down  from  the 
shelf  a  precious  stone  and  allow  you  to  examine  it.  Nor  is  it  the  panel  of  a  door  that 
you  might  stand  and  study  for  its  unique  carvings  or  bronzed  traceries,  but  there  is 
a  whole  gate  of  it  lifted  before  our  admiring  and  astounded  vision,  ay  I  two  gates  of 
it ;  ay  !  many  gates  of  it:  "I  will  make  thy  gates  of  carbuncles.  What  gates? 
Gates  of  the  Church.  Gates  of  anything  worth  possessing.  Gates  of  successful 
enterprise.  Gates  of  salvation.  Gates  of  national  achievement.  Isaiah,  who  wrote 
this  text,  wrote  also  all  that  about  Christ  "  as  the  lamb  to  the  slaughter,"  and  spoke 
of  Christ  as  saying,  "  I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone,"  and  wrote,  "  Who  is  this 
that  Cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ? "  And  do  you  tMnk 
that  Isaiah  in  my  text  merely  happened  to  represent  the  gates,  as  red  gates,  aa 
carmine  gates,  as  gates  of  carbuncle  ?  No.  He  means  that  it  is  through  atonement, 
through  blood-red  struggle,  through  agonies  we  get  into  anything  worth  getting  into. 
Heaven's  gates  may  well  be  made  of  pearl,  a  bright,  pellucid,  cheerful  crystalliza- 
tion, because  all  the  struggles  are  over  and  there  is  beyond  those  gates  nothing  but 
raptures  and  cantata  and  triumphal  procession  and  everlasting  holiday  and  kiss  of 
reunion,  and  so  the  twelve  gates  are  twelve  pearls,  and  could  be  nothing  else  than 
■  pearls.  But  Christ  hung  the  gates  of  pardon  in  His  own  blood,  and  the  marks  of 
eight  fingers  and  two  thumbs  are  on  each  gate,  and  as  He  lifted  the  gate  it  leaned 
against  His  forehead  and  took  from  it  a  crimson  impress,  and  aU  those  gates  are 
deeply  dyed,  and  Isaiah  was  right  when  he  spoke  of  those  gates  as  gates  of  carbuncle. 
(Ibid. )  Gate  of  carbuncle  before  gate  of  pearl : — Mark  well  and  underscore  with 
heavy  dashes  of  the  pen  the  order  of  the  gates.  Gate  of  carbuncle  before  gate  of 
pearl.  Isaiah  the  Prmce  saw  the  one  gate  centuries  before  St.  John  the  Exile  saw 
the  other.  The  one  you  must  push  open.  The  other  stands  open.  Gate  of  a 
SavioTir's  atonement  before  the  gate  of  Divine  pardon.  Gate  of  poverty  before  gate 
of  affluence.  Gate  of  earthly  trial  before  gate  of  heavenly  satisfaction.  Through 
much  tribulation  you  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  if  you  ever  enter  it  at  alL     {Ibid.) 

Yet.  13.  And  all  thy  children  shall  he  taught  of  the  Lord. — Disciples  of  Jehovah: 
— The  expression  is  probably  suggested  by  what  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  says  of 
Himself  in  chap.  1.  4  ;  the  idea  being  that  the  citizens  of  the  New  Jerusalem  shall  be 
the  spiritual  seed  of  the  Servant.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Inward  illumination 
the  spiritual  glory  of  the  Church : — The  outward  glory  of  the  city  (vers.  11,12 )  is  but 
the  sense-representation  of  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  Church  that  dwells  therein 
(ver.  13).  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  school  of  the  highest  culture: — I.  The  natttrk 
OF  THIS  CTTLTXTRE.  True  Culture  is  threefold — physical,  intellectual,  and  moraL 
Otit  text  relates  to  the  highest  form,  and  implies  all  the  rest.  It  is  complete  culture, 
the  development  of  the  whole  man.  1.  The  text  presupposes  man's  ignorance.  Man 
needs  teaching,  the  imparting  of  truth.  (1)  There  is  man's  ignorance  of  self.  (2) 
Of  duty.  (3)  Of  God.  (4)  Of  destiny.  2.  The  statement  of  the  text  implies  the 
Divine  intention.  It  is  not  God's  will  that  man  remain  in  ignorance.  3.  The  state- 
ment of  the  text  announces  the  Divine  plan.  "  All  thy  chUdren  shall  be  taught  of 
the  Lord."  (1)  The  student— "Thy  children."  (2)  The  Teacher— "The  Lord." 
He  is  an  omniscient  Teacher,  knowing  the  truths  to  be  taught,  and  the  tempera- 
ment and  disposition  of  the  students.  He  is  a  patient  Teacher.  He  is  an  omnipre- 
sent Teacher.  (8)  The  subjects  taught.  Language  (Zeph.  iii.  9).  The  language 
of  faith,  of  prayer,  of  love.  Mathematics  (Mark  viii.  36  ;  2  Pet.  L  6  ;  Acts  xii.  24 ; 
Isa.  liii.  12 ;  PhlL  liL  8).    Political  soienoe.    The  kingdom  of  God.    Oar  dtizenabip 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lit. 

is  in  Heaven:  citizens  of  the  commonwealth  of  IsraeL  Natural  and  spiritual  science. 
Of  Origins  (John  i.  1-3).  Of  preservation  (Col.  i.  17  ;  Heb.  i.  3).  Of  the  Divine  (John 
xvii.  3).  Of  the  human  (Gen.  i.  26).  God,  man,  sin,  salvation,  duty  and  destiny 
are  all  studied.  (4)  The  methods  of  teaching.  The  "  "Word  "  method  (John  v.  39  ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  15).  The  object  method  (Psalm  xix.  1-6).  The  Holy  Spirit  method 
(John  xvi.  13).  The  conscience  method  (Rom.  ii.  15).  The  corrective  method 
(Prov.  iii.  12).  II.  The  great  result.  "And  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy 
children."  1.  This  teaching  shall  result  in  enlightenment.  Culture  meaiis  light. 
2.  In  elevation.  All  true  culture  leads  that  way.  3.  In  spiritual  strength  (Heb.  v. 
12-14).  4.  In  peace.  There  is  a  threefold  peace,  peace  with  God,  peace  with  con- 
science, peace  with  fellow-men.  This  school  appeals  for  students.  Will  you  enter  ! 
The  condition  of  entrance  is  given  in  John  i.  11, 12.  The  completion  of  a  life  course 
in  this  school  develops  the  soul  for  promotion  to  the  University  of  the  New  Jerusa- 
lem. Every  graduate  receives  the  degree  of  * '  Sinner  saved, "  and  then  begins  the  higher 
course  in  the  University  where  boundless  prospects  and  boundless  possibilities  lie  before 
the  student.  What  other  school  offers  attractions  such  as  these  ?  {W.C.  Kantner,  D.  D. ) 
The  teaching  miction  and  common  knowledge : — 1.  In  the  writings  of  all  the  apostles, 
as  well  as  in  the  anticipations  of  evangelical  prophets,  this  place  of  the  Spirit  as 
instructor  and  guide  of  the  elect  individual  is  ungrudgingly  recognized.  James 
speaks  of  a  wisdom  that  comes  to  every  believing  suppliant  direct  from  the  Father 
of  lights.  Paul  speaks  of  an  enlightenment  and  revelation  that  are  gifts  of  the 
Spirit,  and  says  that  " no  man  can  call  Jesus  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  And 
John  speaks  of  "the  anointing  of  the  Holy  one"  through  which  all  doubts  may 
be  resolved,  and  the  lowly  disciple  made  safe  against  current  sophistry  and  error. 
Peter  asserts  that  no  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpretation. 
Such  testimony  coming  from  leading  and  honoured  apostles  has  a  peculiar  emphasis 
and  impressiveness  about  it.  The  best  barrier  against  heresy  which  could  be 
raised  up  was  that  which  consisted  in  the  common  knowledge  possessed  by  all  who 
had  received  the  Spirit,  and  none  of  the  apostles  shows  the  slightest  jealousy  of 
the  growing  insight  of  their  converts.  They  were  quite  content  that  the  Church 
official  should  be  abased  and  even  superseded,  so  that  the  work  of  the  teaching 
Spirit  should  be  magnified.  2.  The  spirit  of  man  has  been  degraded  by  evil,  warped 
by  prejudice  and  mistaken  training,  distracted  and  torn  in  opposite  directions  by 
the  fickle  and  contradictory  movements  of  a  flesh  inflated  with  egotisms  and  bubbling 
self-sufficiencies.  It  must  undergo  some  radical  transformation  before  it  can  become 
the  test  of  what  is  true.  One  might  as  weU  caU  in  a  boiler-riveter  organically  deaf 
with  the  din  of  his  occupation  to  settle  conflicting  criticisms  respecting  a  quarter  tone 
in  music,  or  some  spirit-drinker  with  burnt-up  tongue  and  palate  to  do  the  work  of 
an  accomplished  tea-taster,  as  appeal  subtle  spiritual  questions  to  such  a  court  as 
that.  It  is  only  after  the  Spirit  has  come  to  possess  the  nature  of  a  man,  and  to 
make  the  undefiled  conscience  rule  the  life,  that  the  nature  can  become  in  any 
sense  a  test  of  religious  truth.  The  heart  of  man  must  be  disengaged  from  its  old 
embarrassments  and  distractions,  redeemed  from  the  bias  of  its  passion  and  wilful- 
ness, chastened  into  docility  and  meekness  and  humility,  quickened,  purified,  exalted, 
before  it  can  discern.  It  is  this  specific  anointing  with  the  Spirit  which  confers 
upon  the  conscience  its  new  prerogative  as  a  competent  judge  of  truth.  {T.  G. 
Selby.)  Truth  developed  in  the  life  by  the  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God: — When  a 
strip  of  wood  or  forest  has  been  destroyed  by  fire,  it  will  sometimes  happen  that 
new  and  better  species  of  trees  grow  up  and  take  the  place  of  those  which  have 
been  burned.  The  seed  had  been  long  buried  within  the  ground,  but  all  to  no 
purpose,  because  it  was  forestalled  and  overshadowed  by  the  growths  which  first 
got  possession  of  the  soil.  The  earlier  species  were  like  feudal  lords,  who  had  seized 
the  land  and  monopolized  all  the  mists  and  the  dews  and  the  rains  that  came  to 
moisten  the  sunburnt  earth.  But  in  their  downfall  hidden  and  worthier  seeds  had 
a  chance  of  light  and  life  and  dominion.  And  is  it  not  thus  with  human  nature  ? 
The  seed  of  every  truth  is  within  us,  although  there  may  often  be  little  outward 
sign  of  that  significant  fact.  The  proud  growths  of  the  flesh  overshadow,  stifle, 
and  choke  down  the  inner  growths  of  the  conscience  and  the  moral  life.  But  at 
last  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  to  us  like  a  consuming  fire,  and  then  the  superficial 

Eowths  of  passion  and  prejudice  are  burnt  away,  and  seeds  of  sublime  truth  that 
,d  been  slumbering  from  the  time  of  man's  creation  in  the  image  of  God  flower 
out  into  strange  life,  splendour,  and  fruitfulness.  (Ibid.)  The  Holy  Spirit  in 
relation  to  the  Bible,  the  Church  and  the  religious  teacher : — If  we  accept  this  idea 
of  the  oommon  knowledge  possessed  bj  believers  in  Ohrist  who  receive  the  promised 


CBAF.  UT.]  I8AIAS.  187 

Spirit,  what  will  be  our  attitude  towards  the  Bible,  the  Ohuroh,  the  Christian 
teacher,  and  all  those  forma  of  religious  authority  so  jealously  upheld  in  the  past  t 
Does  not  this  idea  of  common  knowledge  introduce  a  competing  authority,  and 
bid  fair  to  prove  a  solvent  of  ecclesiastical  rule  and  prerogative,  and  produce  a  new 
confusion  of  tongues  ?  The  Churches  of  the  Keformation  rightly  make  the  Bible  a 
test  of  faith,  and  bring  all  teaching  to  the  tribunal  of  its  impartial  balances.  The 
New  Testament  is  mamly  a  statement  of  historical  facts  from  the  lips  or  pens  of 
eye-witnesses,  to  which  there  can  be  no  addition  by  subsequent  revelation.  In  so 
far  as  it  is  a  statement  of  the  doctrinal  interpretations  identified  with  those  facts, 
it  furnishes  a  permanent  record  of  what  was  taught  by  the  Spirit  to  the  first 
generation  of  believers,  and  of  what  was  approved  and  attested  in  their  own 
experiences  by  those  representatives  of  the  early  Churches  who  received  the  com- 
ponent parts  of  the  New  Testament  into  the  canon.  It  gives  absolutely  trustworthy 
notes  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  saving  and  instructing  and  sanctifying  men. 
The  unchanging  Spirit  is  not  likely  to  contradict  HimseK  now,  and  teach  divergent 
doctrines  to  a  docile  recipient  of  His  ministries  ;  and  the  Church  whose  members 
are  inwardly  led  to  the  acceptance  of  the  truths  which  accord  with  the  original 
standards  of  the  Bible  proves  itseK  so  far  a  recipient  of  the  same  inspiration.  The 
Bible  is  the  seal  by  which  we  are  to  measure  our  own  inspiration  and  spiritual 
insight ;  but  it  will  not  do  our  seeing  for  us,  and  each  man  must  perceive  for 
himself  and  acquire  by  the  use  of  his  spiritual  senses  this  conmion  Knowledge. 
2.  But  some  tell  us  that  the  Church  is  the  assay-house  of  religious  thought,  and  that 
all  statements  of  doctrine  must  be  weighed  in  the  scale  of  ecclesiastical  balances. 
What  have  the  early  councils  said  ?  What  does  the  congregation  of  cardinals  or 
the  House  of  Convocation  say  to-day  ?  Our  reply  is  that  the  spiritual  discernment 
of  the  rulers  of  a  Church  must  be  tested  by  the  scale  or  standard  presented  in  the 
Bible  and  handed  down  from  those  who  were  themselves  both  personal  followers  of 
Christ  and  the  first  recipients  of  Pentecostal  gifts.  A  Church  may  fall  and  grope 
in  darkness  as  woefully  as  an  individual,  and  then  its  authority  ceases.  The  mere 
shell  of  a  Church  corporation  caimot  possibly  be  a  centre  of  authority,  for  its 


directing  personnel  is  ever  changing,  and  if  it  be  found  in  conflict  with  the  primitive 
revelations  of  the  Spirit,  the  very  sanctity  of  the  Church  is  lost  and  its  right  to 
teach  forfeited.  3.  It  is  sometimes  argued  that  the  teacher  duly  certified  by  the 
Christian  Church  is  a  specialist,  and  that  we  must  give  ourselves  implicitly  into  his 
hands,  just  as  we  give  ourselves  into  the  hands  of  any  other  professional  man  who 
has  the  technical  Knowledge  we  lack.  Well,  we  may  recognize  that  within  certain 
limits  he  who  has  not  yet  received  the  Spirit  must  be  indebted  for  such  second-hand 
knowledge  as  he  possesses  to  the  Church  and  its  ministries.  But,  after  all,  there 
is  no  specialism  in  connection  with  the  truths  which  concern  the  daily  life  and 
experience  of  believers.     All  specialism  is  in  non-essentials,  and  the  cry  for  the 

Secialist  not  only  reflects  on  the  impartiality  of  the  Spirit,  and  implies  that  Hia 
umination  is  particular  rather  than  universal,  but  assumes  that  religion  is  a  thing 
of  intermittent  rites  and  functions  rather  than  a  daUy  life  in  which  the  humblest 
is  schooled  to  knowledge  and  insight.  {Ibid.)  Religious  education  the  safeguard 
qf  the  Tuition : — There  are  three  radical  defects  in  the  theory  of  a  secular  education. 
I.  It  ignores  the  existence  and  the  functions  of  conscience.  Whatever 
conscience  may  be,  all  agree  that  it  is  that  which  is  educable.  That  it  is  a  moral 
something  in  man,  that  may  be  trained  to  be  in  him  a  monitor  and  a  guide- 
something  that  will  respond  to  every  voice  of  truth  and  of  justice.  While  it  is 
true  that  some  well-informed  or  enlightened  consciences  may  go  astray,  yet  the 
rule  is,  that,  as  ia  the  conscience  so  is  the  virtue  of  the  individual.  What  are  the 
prime  factors  in  an  educated  conscience  ?  1.  Belief  in  a  personal  God — the  Author 
and  Creator  of  the  human  mind — He  who  is,  in  Himself,  the  supreme  reason  of 
virtue.  2.  Eeverence  for  God's  laws.  3.  The  dread  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  By 
what  force  would  you  deter  man  from  vice  and  crime?  By  the  displeasure  of 
good  citizens  ?  But  that  displeasure  is  the  creation  of  a  religious  education.  By 
the  beneficence  of  public  morals?  But  that  beneficence  is  written  all  over  the 
constitution  of  nature,  whose  author  is  God.  Without  this  recognition  of  a  personal 
God — ^whose  laws  are  to  be  revered,  whose  displeasure  is  to  be  dreaded — without  such 
an  educated  conscience  there  can  be  no  authority,  as  there  can  be  no  standard, 
either  for  private  or  public  virtue.  II.  It  overlooks  the  fact  that  secxtlab 
BDtrcATiON  contains  NO  ELEMENT  TO  PITEIFT  AND  REFORM.  Science  enlightens, 
but  it  cannot  renew  and  elevate  human  nature  which  is  depraved  in  principle  and 
■infill  in  practice.    ELnowledge  ia  power ;  but  it  is  a  power  for  good  or  evil,  according 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tiv. 


to  the  controlling  motives.    III.  It  overlooks  the  facts  that  the  stabilitt 

OF  OUR  GOVERNMENT  IS  IN  THE  MORAL  CONVICTIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.     {J.  P.  Newman, 

D.D. )  Great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children. — The  great  peace  of  God's  pupils : — 

"Thy  children" — whose?    To  answer  this  question  is  to  get  at  the  true  key  to 

the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  prophecy.     The  words  were  spoken  to  the  exiled  Jews 

in  Babylon,  but  were  plainly  meant  to  cover  more  than  their  needs.     They  are 

words  which  picture  and  promise  the  condition  which  should  one  day  embrace  the 

whole  earth.    I.  They  are  men  who  have  got  over  the  great  difiBculty  in  all  teaching  ; 

THEY  ARE  WILLING  TO  LEARN.     They  are  eager.    Thev  come  cheerfully  to  that 

which  has  grown  to  be  a  pleasure.     They  are  on  the  outlook  for  knowledge.     Now, 

if  any  man  is  really  on  the  outlook  for  knowledge  he  will  be  sure-  to  get  it ;  perhaps 

not  aU  at  once,  but  little  by  little.    There  has  already  been  some  progress  made 

in  learning  where  this  is  the  temper  of  the  pupil.     How  much,  only  those  various 

and  manifold  testings  of  their  knowledge  which  come  up  in  every  man's  life,  can 

really  reveal.     II.  If  this  be  the  character  of  the  learners,  WHAT  shall  we  sat  of 

THE  TEACHER  ?   The  pupil  leams  what  is  the  character  of  the  Teacher  in  the  lessons 

he  gives.     The  lessons  He  gives  are  according  to  the  wants  and  capacities  of  His 

pupils.     And  if  only  we  will,  we  may  learn  this  about  the  Teacher,  from  the  lessons 

He  gives  us,  how  great  is  His  interest  in  each  of  us  ;  how  accurate  His  knowledge 

of  us  ;  how  constant  His  regard  for  us ;  how  completely  fitted  His  wise  treatment ; 

how  full  His  whole  conduct  is  of  care  and  love ;  now,  in  a  word,  God  is  as  loving 

as  He  is  wise,  as  tender  as  He  is  strong,  and  as  constant  in  His  affection  towards  us 

as  He  is  persistent  in  bringing  the  same  lesson  before  our  eye,  until  we  have  learnt 

it  by  heart.     Again  ;  the  pupil  leams  what  is  the  character  of  the  Teacher  from  the 

bearing  of  the  Teacher  toward  him  after  He  has  given  him  his  lessons.     Does  He 

turn  away  and  leave  the  pupil  to  himself?    Does  He  set  the  task,  and  then  vanish 

out  of  sight  ?    Does  He  leave  the  lesson  with  the  pupU,  and  the  pupil  with  the 

lesson,  and  make  no  further  sign  ?    We  know  that,  in  regard  to  God,  this  is  not  so. 

It  is  true,  that  when  God  wishes  us  to  work  out  some  great  lesson  of  our  Ufe,  He 

withdraws  from  us,  as  it  were,  that  we  may  put  forth  all  our  strength,  that  we  may 

grapple  with  it,  and,  if  we  can,  master  it.     But  it  is  also  true  that  God  never 

leaves  His  pupils  altogether.     His  eye  is  still  resting  upon  them  when  they  think 

Him  a  great  way  off.     His  very  presence  is  with  them  when  they  think  that  they 

are  utterly  alone.     And  when  He  sees  that  the  right  moment  has  come  He  speaks 

the  cheery  word ;  He  parts  asunder  the  thick  storm  cloud,  and  lets  the  light  of 

His  countenance  shine  upon  us  and  illumine  our  path.     Nay,  still  more  ;  how  many 

hard  and  soul-searching  questions  has  God  helped  us  to  spell  out ;  how  frequently 

the  guiding  and  sustaining  hand  has  been  over  our  own,  when,  with  painfulness  and 

much  sorrow,  we  have  been  trying  to  write  out  in  our  lives  some  fair  copy  of  a 

simple  coromand !     Even  after  the  lesson  is  given,  how  patient  God  is,  how  ready 

to  help,  how  gentle,  how  loving,  how  merciful.    The  pupil  also  leams  what  the 

Teacher  is,  from  the  great  example  of  His  own  lessons  which  He,  the  Teacher,  shows 

Himself.    III.  What  will  come  of  the  pupil's  learning  these  lessons.    He 

may  not  learn  any  one  of  them  thoroughly.     He  m&j  feel,  in  regard  to  much  of 

his  knowledge  of  God,  for  example,  that  it  needs  revision,  correction,  enlargement. 

He  may  be  conscious  that  some  of  the  most  elemental  truths  in  Divine  wisdom  have 

to  be  teamed  and  releamed.     There  does,  however,  come  a  result  from  all  his 

application  which  will  be  all  the  more  pronounced  when  the  education  itself  is 

perfected.     And  what  is  this  result?    "Great  peace."    1.  The  peace  comes  after 

the  learning,  not  before.    The  peace  is  after  the  victory,  not  before  the  battle.     2. 

Another  thing  is  also  to  be  noted:  this  "great  peace"  does  not  come  to  us  by 

mastering  every  lesson  at  once,  however  hard  and  difficult  it  may  be,  but  in 

patiently  resting  in  Him  who  has  sent  it.     (/.  J.  Ooadhy.)     The  Oospel  of  the 

children: — In  every  age  the  children  were  included  in  the  promise  and  in  the 

Church.     I.  The  period.     1.  It  is  impressible.     The  photographer's  plate  is  very 

sensitive.    When  he  removes  the  covenng  which  keeps  off  the  ught  from  the  sun, 

the  image  of  the  object  directly  opposite  is  instantaneously  impressed  on  the  plate. 

So  is  the  child's  mind.     Whatever  is  the  object  of  its  observation — good  or  bad — 

the  image  ia  made.     What  care  should  be  taken  lest  that  sensitive  plate  should  be 

exposed  to  that  which  is  sinful  1    2.  It  expands  its  impressions.     When  any  one 

outs  the  initials  of  his  name  on  the  bark  of  a  young  tree,  as  the  tree  grows  so 

the  letters  will  become  larger.    The  child  receives  impressions  to  grow  with  its 

being.     8.  It  is  a  period  when  correction  is  possible.     Evil  impressions  may  cling 

to  a  diild,  but  we  can  stop  their  influence  by  admonition  and  warning.     II.  Ths 


CHAP.  Liv.]  ISAIAH.  189 

LEARNING.  Instruction  is  the  birthright  of  every  child ;  national  prosperity 
depends  on  the  eariy  training  of  its  families.  Spiritual  instruction  is  the  best 
gift  that  parents  can  give  to  their  children.  The  prophet  saw  a  vision  in  this 
chapter  which  was  far  removed  from  his  own  time — the  Gospel  period.  Let  us  look 
at  the  adaptation.  1.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  childhood.  Some  look  on  the  Gospel  as 
only  comprehensible  by  men  of  mature  age.  This  is  an  error.  The  child  can 
learn  the  alphabet  of  the  language,  although  it  cannot  pronounce  its  long  words. 
Timothy  from  a  child  knew  the  Scriptures.  2.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  growth.  The 
story  01  Bethlehem  grows  into  a  fact.  Accounts  of  miraculous  cures,  which  only 
appear  to  a  child  wonderful,  become  the  evidences  of  divinity.  The  great  fact  of 
the  Crucifixion,  which  only  creates  pity  in  a  child's  heart,  grows  to  the  importance 
of  life  itself.  The  prayer  repeated  by  infant  lips  becomes  the  "fervent  prayer  of 
the  righteous  man."  3.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  maturity.  Generally  the  things  of 
childhood  are  unfit  for  youth,  and  those  of  youth  are  unsuitable  for  manhood  ;  but 
the  Gospel  expands,  and  is  abreast  of  every  experience.  III.  The  blessing.  It 
will  be  a  great  peace.  This  is  the  fruit  of  Divine  instruction.  1.  God's  Word 
brings  peace  to  the  heart.  The  child  as  well  as  the  man  needs  that  peace.  God's 
Word  brings  peace  to  the  home.  3.  Peace  in  death.  The  tranquil  spirit  which 
the  child  knew  sixty  years  before  is  the  sheet-anchor  which  stays  the  soul  in  every 
trying  hour.  We  appeal  to  the  children  and  say  that  if  they  are  to  be  taught  of 
the  Lord,  they  must  be  willing  to  learn.  Then  we  further  urge  the  children  to 
obedience  and  prayer  in  respect  of  their  teachers.  {J.  Davies,  M.A.)  Spiritual 
teaching : — I.  Divine  teaching.  1.  We  all  need  Divine  teaching.  2.  We  are  all 
by  nature  opposed  to  it.  3.  Divine  teaching  is  promised.  II.  Its  effect.  Peace, 
great  peace.  Learn — 1.  Our  relationship  to  God.  "The  children  of  Zion"  are  also 
children  of  God.  2.  Our  rightful  privileges.  Spiritual  instruction  and  abiding 
peace.     (C.  Clayton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  15.  Behold,  they  shall  surely  gather  together.— 2%«  adversaries  of  the 
Chxirch  defeated : — The  unwearied  mischievous  attempts  of  the  adversaries  of 
God's  people  in  the  world,  as  they  are  made  without  God,  so  they  shall  end  in 
shame  to  themselves.  I.  The  adversaries  of  god's  people  will  be  ttn- 
WEARiEDLT  ATTEMPTING  MISCHIEF  AGAINST  THEM.  "They  shall  surely  gather 
together."  This  is  sure  upon  various  grounds.  1.  He  who  foreknows  all  their 
thoughts,  inclinations  and  purposes  from  everlasting  hath  foretold  it.  2.  So  long 
as  there  are  any  of  the  children  of  the  devil  out  of  heU,  he  will  be  inspiring  them 
with  malice  against  the  Church  of  God  on  earth.  3.  The  very  defeats  and  dis- 
appointments which  the  enemies  of  the  Church  receive  make  them  renew  their 
attempts  with  greater  violence  and  fury.  They  are  not  the  more  disheartened, 
but  the  more  exasperated.  4.  The  fearful  expectation  of  future  vengeance  is  a 
spur  to  their  diligent  use  of  aU  the  present  opportunities  of  sinning.  II.  These 
ATTEMPTS  ARE  WITHOUT  GOD.  "Not  by  Me."  1.  The  Church's  enemies  can 
neither  do  nor  contrive  the  doing  of  anything  absolutely  without  God.  No 
creature  can  subsist,  no  faculty  can  perform  any  of  its  operations,  if  Providence 
did  not  concur.  AU  the  plots  which  are  formed  beneath  prove  vain  and  fruitless 
nnless  there  be  permission  given  from  above.  2.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  can  do 
nothing  eflFectually  but  as  God  really  employs  them  to  be  the  instruments  of  His 
just  displeasure  (Hab.  i.  12  ;  Psa.  xvii.  13,  14  ;  Isa,  x.  5,  17,  xiii.  5).  3.  The 
attempts  of  enemies  against  God's  people  are,  notwithstanding,  without  His 
approbation.  4.  The  attempts  of  enemies,  when  they  have  most  success,  are  without 
God's  truly  favourable  presence.  5.  The  attempts  of  enemies  at  the  time  which  the 
prophet  here  refers  to  wiU  be  without  God's  assistance,  and  consequently  without 
success.  III.  These  attempts  will  issue  in  ruin  to  themselves.  "  Whoso- 
ever shall  gather  together,"  etc.  1.  The  greatest  attempt  which  was  ever  made  by 
the  devil  against  the  Church,  in  the  Person  of  Christ  Himself,  became  the  means  of 
subverting  his  own  kingdom.  2.  The  standing  of  the  Church's  enemies  is  the 
most  precarious  and  uncertain  thing.  3.  AU  that  they  have,  or  can  have,  to 
support  and  defend  them,  wiU  not  be  sufficient  when  their  appointed  destruction 
comes  (Isa.  xxxi.  3).  4.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  are  raised  up  for  this  purpose 
that  God  may  honour  himself  upon  them.  5.  The  greatest  of  enemies  that  the 
Church  of  God  ever  yet  had  have  faUen,  though  once  as  likely  to  stand  as  any  now 
or  hereafter  can  be.  6.  The  present  enemies  of  the  Church  have  indeed  begun  to 
&U,  which  is  a  hopeful  token  that  they  shaU  surely  fall.  IV.  Why  shall  thb 
attempts  op  the  enemies  of  god's  people  end  thus  in  theib  own  euin  f 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lit. 

"For  thy  sake."  1.  Some  read  the  words,  They  shall  fall  "before  thee,"  that 
thou  mayest  see  it.  2.  "  For  thy  sake  "  cannot  mean  for  thy  merit,  but  for  thy 
benefit.  3.  "  For  thy  sake  "  may  mean,  for  the  kindness  and  care  which  I  bear  to 
thee.  V.  Use.  1.  Security  and  distrust  are  sinful  extremes  and  both  to  be 
avoided.  2.  A  people  dear  to  God  and  peculiarly  interested  in  Him,  are  in  a  far 
more  blessed  condition  than  all  the  earth  besides.  3.  The  greatest  danger  which 
God's  people  are  or  can  be  in,  is  when  they  engage  God  against  them  by  sin,  and 
provoke  Him  to  favour  their  adversaries.  4.  The  obstructions  of  mercy  are  on  our 
part,  not  on  God's.  5.  The  memorials  of  past  mercies  are  to  be  preserved  for  our 
support  in  future  difiSculties.    {T.  Cruso.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Behold,  I  have  created  the  smith. — Hope  for  the  Church  in  the 
tovereignty  of  God : — The  general  meaning  evidently  is,  that  God  can  certainly 
redeem  His  pledge,  because  all  instruments  and  agents  are  alike  at  His  disposal 
and  under  His  control.  (/.  A.  AleoMnder.)  The  Church's  fears  silenced : — The  idea 
is  that  the  Church  has  been  saying,  Where  is  that  awful  man  the  smith  ?  The 
Lord  says  in  reply,  You  see  that  smith?  The  Church  answers.  Yes,  too  well 
The  Lord  retorts,  I  made  him,  I  hold  him  within  the  bend  of  My  fingers,  and  one 
quiver,  and  there  is  no  more  smith  to  be  seen.  But  the  Church  says.  He  is  blowing 
his  bellows.  The  Lord  says,  I  made  those  bellows.  The  Church  says.  See  what  a 
fire  he  is  kindling  !  The  Lord  says.  He  got  the  coals  from  My  mines,  and  I  could 
shut  down  that  mining  shaft  so  that  he  could  never  get  another  cinder.  As  for  all 
these  little  tyrants  and  enemies  and  mockers  and  jibers  and  sceptics  and  infidels 
and  others,  have  no  fear  of  them ;  if  any  of  them  have  any  sincerity  the  reward 
shall  not  be  withheld,  and  that  sincerity  may  turn  by-and-by  to  intelligence  and 
to  faith,  but  in  so  far  as  they  mock  and  sneer  and  contemn  have  no  fear  of  them  ; 
they  are  creatures,  not  creators  ;  the  smith  is  only  a  mechanic  of  a  low  degree^  or 
high  ;  he  is  not  Divine,  he  is  most  human.  But,  saith  the  Church,  yet  there  is  a 
weapon  formed  against  me.  The  Lord  says.  So  there  may  be,  but  it  has  no  edge, 
and  it  has  no  handle  ;  and  if  any  man  were  foolish  enough  to  take  it  up  to  strike 
with,  it  would  curl  up  in  his  hand.  But,  Lord,  there  are  tongues  that  rise  against 
me  in  judgment,  fluent  tongues,  yea  eloquent  tongues,  and  it  is  not  in  my  power  to 
answer  their  wordy  arguments  or  to  follow  the  tortuous  train  of  their  reasoning. 
And  the  Lord  replies.  Let  them  talk  ;  they  will  soon  exhaust  their  vocabulary. 
Never  interrupt  a  man  who  has  a  bad  cause.  He  trusts  to  interruption.  He 
thinks  the  interruption  may  create  for  him  an  opportunity  of  abandoning  the  main 
line  of  his  impeachment.  The  way  to  answer  a  foolish  and  unjust  accuser  is  to 
listen  to  htm  in  silence.     {J.  Pwrker,  D.D.) 

Ver.   17.   No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper. —  Worthless 
weapons: — I.  Glance  at  the  weapons  which  have  been  used  against  the 
Ohttuch  collectively.     1.  The  first  weapon  that  we  notice  is  an  old  one — In- 
fidelity.    Nothing  can  be  more  palpable  than  this — humanity  refuses  to  be  infidel. 
2.  Behold  another  of  these  hostile  implements  is  the  weapon  of  persecution.     A 
weak  weapon,  nevertheless.     II.  As  regards  the  Church  individually  "  no 
■WEAPON  that  is  FORMED  AGAINST  IT  SHALL  PROSPER."    1.  The  Weapon  of  slander 
shall  not  prosper.     2.  The  weapon  of  doubt.     3.  The  weapon  of  death.     {T.  R. 
Stevenson.)    The  godly  man's  heritage : — I.  The  armoury  of  satan.    The  enemy  of 
souls  is  likened  by  oiu-  Lord  to  "  a  strong  man  armed  ; "  He  commands  principalitie*» 
and  powers  ;  skilled  in  hostilities,  He  has  difi'erent  modes  of  attack  ;  He  employs  a 
great  variety  of  weapons.    1.  Persecution.    And  yet,  when  we  estimate  the  results  of 
persecution,  we  have  to  confess  it  has  not  prospered.    It  has  been  mightily  restrained, 
and  its  remains  have  been  turned  to  the  praise  of  God.     It  has  purified  the  Church, 
and  given  new  impetus  to  the  truth.     Sometimes  it  has  united  the  despised  forces 
of  Zion,  so  that  their  strength  has  been  gi-eatly  increased.     2.  Temptation.     With 
this  weapon  the  archer  sorely  woimded  our  first  parents,  and  he  has  ever  since  too 
successfully  hurled  it  against  their  progeny.     But  it  does  not  prosper  ;  it  strips  us 
of  self-confidence,  eradicates  pride,  drives  us  for  safety  to  the  Hiding  Place,  and 
presses  upon  us  the  constant  necessity  for  that  shield  of  faith  which  "quenches  all 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."     You  cannot  afford  to  despise  temptations  ;  but  you 
need  not  despair  under  them  while  you  call  in  the  aid  engaged  to  you.     3.  False 
teaching.     Clothed  as  an  angel  of  light,  the  tempter  first  instilled  error  into  the 
mind  of  Eve,  before  he  could  produce  disobedience.     It  is  no  light  affliction  to  have 
the  mind's  view  of  Divine  truth  perverted.     Various,  however,  as  are  the  shades  of- 


CHAP.  utJ  ISAIAH.  191 

false  teaching,  they  do  not  prosper — they  flourish  for  a  time  like  grass  upon  the 
housetops,  but  they  fill  no  man's  bosom  with  harvest  sheaves.  The  Word  of  God 
outlives  them  all.  Each  of  those  weapons  was  directed  with  fullest  force  against 
the  Son  of  God.  II.  The  worldly  man's  malice.  "  Every  tongue  that  shall  rise 
against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shaJt  condemn."  The  slightest  whisper  of  suspicion 
is  greedily  sought  after,  if  it  cast  but  a  shadow  on  the  character  of  any  saint,  and  it 
is  repeated  till  it  grows  to  calumnious  dimensions,  and  "eateth  as  doth  a  canker." 
The  worst  manifestation  of  this  malignant  plague  is  that  which  makes  its  appear- 
ance within  the  Church :  when  those  who  shoidd  be  the  guardians  become  the 
assailants  of  a  brother's  character,  and  prejudice  and  suspicion  displace  confidence 
and  charity.  In  the  case  of  the  true  Christian,  integrity  of  life  will  disappoint  all 
the  aspersions  of  the  wicked.  III.  The  godly  man's  vindication.  "This  is  the 
heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  their  righteousness  is  of  Me,  saith  the 
Lord.'  What  an  inheritance  it  is  I  It  comprises  all  the  blessings  contained  in 
God's  Word ;  and  the  fulfilment  of  all  His  gracious  promises.  ( W.  G.  Lends.) 
The  Christian's  heritage: — I.  The  Oheistian's  experience.  1.  Weapons  are 
formed  against  him.  No  Christian  need  expect  aught  else.  As  Israel's  experience 
in  the  mldemess,  so  the  Christian's  in  the  world.  2.  Tongues  rise  against  him. 
From  the  days  of  Cain  it;  has  been  so,  and  will  be  so  to  the  end.  So  they  treated 
the  Lord,  and  so  they  will  treat  His  disciples.  II.  The  Christian's  security. 
1.  No  weapon  shall  prosper.  The  Christian's  enemies  may  be  mighty,  malignant, 
crafty,  constant ;  but  more  mighty,  more  wise,  more  watchftd,  more  indefatigable 
and  loving  is  his  protector.  2.  Every  tongue  he  shall  condemn.  (1)  He  shall  do 
it  himself  by  well-doing  (1  Pet.  ii.  15).  (2)  God  shall  do  it  for  him.  (3)  It  shall 
be  done  sufficiently  on  earth  (Ps.  xxxvii.  6).  (4)  Perfectly  in  eternity  (Job  xix.  25). 
See  also  Zechariah  iii.  Let  Christians  see  to  it  that  they  so  live  that  men  speaking 
evil  of  them  shall  do  it  "  falsely,"  and  God  shall  fully  vindicate  them.  Who  has 
this  security  ?  and  in  answer  see — III.  The  Christian's  character.  "  The 
servants  of  the  Lord."  This  security  is  described  as — IV.  The  Christian's 
HERITAGE ;  and  this  description  may  teach  us — 1.  That  while  the  Christian  is  a 
servant,  he  is  also  a  son  and  heir.  2.  That  his  security  is  a  thing  not  of  merit,  but 
of  inheritance.  It  is  a  legacy  secured  to  him  by  the  death  of  Christ.  It  is  the 
Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  them  the  kingdom.  3.  We  may  be  sure  that  a 
heritage  from  God  is  a  certain  possession.  He  is  "without  variableness  or  shadow 
of  turning."  V.  The  Christian's  title.  Perhaps  this  last  clause  had  been  better 
translated  uniformly  with  previous  one :  "And  this  is  their  righteousness  (justifica- 
tion) from  Me. "  But  taking  it  as  we  have  it,  we  may  interpret  it  as  teaching  us — 
1.  That  the  Christian's  justification  is  of  God.  It  is  "  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  faith."  2.  That  the  Christian's  sanctification  is  of  God.  It  is  He  who 
worketh  in  him  "to  will  and  to  do  of  God's  good  pleasure."  3.  That  boasting  is 
excluded. '  "What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received?"  4.  That  security  is 
perfect ;  for  if  God  justify,  who  can  condemn  (Kom.  viii.  34)  ?  and  if  God  sanctify, 
He  will  "  perfect  that  which  concemeth  "  us.  This  clause  thus  explains  as  well  as 
ratifies  the  promise,  and,  farther,  it  teUs  us  how  we  may  secure  this  promise  for 
ourselves.  Righteousness  we  have  not  by  nature,  righteousness  we  cannot  attain  of 
ourselves — but  righteousness  we  may  receive  from  God.  {D.  Jamison,  B.A.)  Their 
righteousness  is  of  Me,  saith  the  Lord. — Jv^tification  through  imputed  righteous- 
ness : — In  these  words,  which  are  spoken  of  aU  true  believers,  more  particularly,  we 
may  observe — I.  The  foundation  of  their  acceptance  with  God,  and  of  all 

THE   GLORIOUS   PRIVILEGES   THAT  THEY   ENJOY   OR    ARE   ENTITLED  TO.      It   is    "a 

righteousness  ; "  such  a  righteousness  as  answers  all  the  demands  of  the  Divine  law, 
a  righteousness  with  which  God  is  well  pleased.  II.  How  believers  becomb 
POSSESSED  OF  THIS  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  They  have  it  not  of  themselves.  It  is  not  a 
righteousness  wrought  out  by  them  or  inherent  in  them,  but  a  righteousness  which 
they  have  of  God.  God,  in  the  person  of  the  Father,  devised  and  provided  it ;  God, 
in  the  person  of  the  Son,  wrought  it  out  for  them.  It  is  also  through  the  gracious 
operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  enabling  them  to  believe  the  report  of  the  Gospel,  and 
receive  Christ  exhibited  and  freely  ofiered  to  them  in  it,  that  they  come  to  be 
actually  possessed  of  this  righteousness.  III.  The  interest  that  believers  havb 
IN  that  righteousness  which  is  the  ground  of  their  justification.  It  is 
called  "their  righteousness."  Though  it  is  not  theirs  originally  or  subjectively,  it 
is  theirs  really.  It  is  theirs  by  the  free  gift  of  God.  IV.  The  certainty  of  the 
GREAT  AND  IMPORTANT  TRUTH  ASSERTED  IN  THE  TEXT,  namely,  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  believerB,  or  that  righteousness  by  which  they  are  justified,  and  on  which 


192  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lt. 


their  title  to  everlasting  life  and  all  the  blessings  of  salvation  ia  whoUy  founded,  i» 
a  righteousness  which  they  have  not  of  themselves,  but  of  God,  or  by  His  free  gift 
and  gracious  imputation.  This  is  what  Jehovah  Himself  declares^ and  attests  in 
the  plainest  manner :  "  Their  righteousness  ia  of  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  (D.  Wilson,) 
The  excellerU  properties  and  qualities  of  that  righteousness  by  which  believers  are 
justified.  It  is— 1.  A  perfect  righteousneaa,  2.  A  Divine  righteousness.  8.  A 
justice-satisfying  righteousness.  4.  A  law-magnifying  righteousness.  6.  A  God- 
glorifying  righteousness.  6.  A  righteousness  that  is  freely  given  to  the  onworthj 
•nd  the  guilty.    7.  An  everlasting  righteousness.    {Ibid.) 


OHAPTEE  LV. 

Vers.  1-13.    Ho,  eyeryone  that  thixsteth.— The  cries  of  the  water-earrien  :^ 

Public  messages  [Isaiah]  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  deliver  publicly  in  the 

frequented  streets  and  bazaars,  and  in  khans,  and  in  the  temple  area,  frequently 

using  the  common  cries  of  the  forerunners  of  the  nobles,  the  morning  call  of  the 

temple  watchmen,  who  had  been  waiting  to  proclaim  the  striking  of  the  sun's  first 

rays  upon  the  pinnacles,  the  groans  of  the  sabbals  (or  burden-bearers),  the  tumult  of 

the  buyers  and  sellers,  and  the  sing-song  invitation  of  the  water-carriers,  and 

purveyors  of  wine  and  cooling  drinks,  as  his  texts, — just  such  cries  and  invitations 

as  one  may  hear  to-day  in  Cairo,  Jerusalem,  or  Damascus.     Standing  at  a  street 

comer  he  hears  a  voice,  "  All  ye  that  are  thirsty,  buy  my  cooling  waters,  and  refresh 

your  hearts,"  and  he  forthwith  bursts  out  with  his  own  competitive  cry,  "Ho, 

every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,"  etc.     {F.  Sessions.)     Water,  vrims 

y  and  milk : — Hitzig,  Hendewerk  and  Knobel  understand  water,  wine  and  milk  as  the 

rich  material  enjoyments  which  the  exiles  have  in  prospect  on  returning  to  their 

fatherland,  whereas  they  are  now  paying  tribute  in  Babylon,  and  rendering  personal 

service  to  their  masters  without  deriving  any  benefit  therefrom.    But  the  prophet 

knows  of  a  water  even  higher  than  natural  water  (chap.  xUv.  8  ;  of.  xH.  17),  and  a 

higher  than  the  natural  wine  (chap.  xxv.  6) ;   he  knows  of  an  eating  and  drinking 

surpassing  mere  material  enjoyment  (chap.  Ixv.  18).    As  shown  by  the  very  fact  that 

water  is  placed  first,  water,  wine  and  milk  are  not  the  products  of  the  Holy  Land, 

but  figures  of  spiritual  revival,    refreshing   and   nourishment   (1  Pet.  ii.    2,  rh 

\oyiKhv  &So\ov  yd\a).     {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)    Ood  eager  for  sinners: — Grod  would 

have  the  attention  of  sinners  ;  He  calls  for  it.     Are  not  sinners  eager  for  God  I 

Oh,  no  1     It  is  God  who  is  eager  for  sinners  ;  and  so  He  caUeth  "  Ho  1 "    Men  pass 

•  by  with  their  ears  fuU  of  the  world's  tumult ;  and  God  calleth,  again  and  again, 

*•  Ho  I  ho  1 "    (C  H.  Spurgeon.)     The  Gospel  first  addressed  to  human  necessity : — ^A 

great  appeal  is  addressed  to  those  who  are  athirst.     Thus  the  Lord  accommodates 

His  ministry  to  himian  necessity.     When  men  are  thirsting  for  water  He  does  not 

offer  them  sublime  visions  of  the  future,  or  stately  ideas  concerning  the  economist 

and  dominions  of  time.     He  would  say  to  men,  Let  us,  in  the  first  place,  supply 

your  need  ;  until  your  thirst  is  quenched  your  mind  cannot  be  at  rest ;  until  your 

bodily  necessities  are  supplied  your  imagination  wiU  be  unable  to  exercise  itself  in 

high  thoughts.     The  promises  of  God  are  addressed  to  our  necessities  for  more  than 

merely  temporary  reasons.    There  is  a  whole  philosophy  of  government  in  such 

appeals.     Only  at  certain  points  can  we  profess  to  understand  God,  and  those  points 

touch  our  need,  our  pain,  our  immediate  desire  ;  when  we  are  quite  sure  that  God 

gives  ua  water  for  our  bodily  thirst  we  may  begin  at  least  to  feel  that  there  ia  a 

possibility  that  He  may  not  neglect  the  more  burning  thirst  of  the  soul.     God 

approachea  the  apirit  through  the  body.    The  God  who  growa  com  for  our  hunger 

may  also  have  bread  for  our  spirit's  cry  of  weakness.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)    Gome! 

ecrniel — It  is  "  Come — come."    That  ia  the  most  familiar  word  in  the  Bible  1     It 

seems  to  be  a  favourite  word.    The  word  "  Gome  "  occurs  six  hundred  and  forty-two 

times  in  the  Bible.     Itia  "Come  to  the  supper ;"  Gome  to  the  waters;"  "The 

Spirit  and  the  Bride  aay,  Oome."    Through  all  aorrows,  through  all  triala,  through 

afi  nights  of  darkness,  through  all  calamities,  through  all  temptations,  it  rings  out, 

"  Oome  I    Oome !    Ooma  1 "    I  remember,  when  I  was  a  boy  in  the  country,  being 

envioos  of  the  old  sexton  who  used  to  lay  hold  of  the  bell-rope,  and  start  the  beU 


CHAP.iv.]  ISAIAH,  198 

that  shook  the  meeting-house,  calling  the  people  for  miles  aronnd  to  prayer.  The 
poorest  man,  trudging  along  the  tumpike-road,  knew  that  the  bell  called  him  just 
as  much  as  it  called  the  rich  farmer  riding  behind  his  prancing  and  capering  pair. 
And  so  this  Gospel  bell  calls  to  palaces  and  to  huts,  to  robes  and  to  rags,  saying, 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  When  the  sexton  had  struck  one  stroke,  why  did 
he  not  wind  up  the  rope  and  stop  ?  The  people  had  all  heard  it.  But  no  ;  he  kept 
on  ringing,  untU,  besweated  and  exhausted,  he  sat  down.  When  he  began  to  ring 
there  were  none  present.  When  he  concluded  ringing,  the  roads  were  full  of  waggons, 
and  the  church  door  was  thronged  with  people  who  had  come  to  worship  God.  And 
BO  we  must  keep  on  ringing  this  Gospel  bell.  Though,  perhaps,  few  may  now  come, 
we  will  keep  on  ringing,  until,  after  a  while,  men  shall  come  as  clouds,  and  as  "  doves 
to  their  windows."  {T.  Be  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Spiritual  Thirst: — In  a  man 
spiritually  athirst  there  are  seven  quahties  answerable  to  those  in  a  man  naturally 
athirst.  1.  Emptiness.  2.  Exquisite  sense — a  painful  sense.  3.  Peculiar  cares  and 
thoughts.  All  a  man's  thoughts,  in  such  a  condition,  are  for  water  to  cool  and 
refresh  him  (Acts  ii.  37,  xvi.  30).  4.  Impatience  (Ex.  xvii.  3).  5.  Veheniency  of 
desire.  6.  Diligent  endeavour.  7.  Constant  languishing.  Delay  doth  but  increase 
the  thirst  the  more.  Nothing  will  put  an  end  to  spiritual  thirst  but  Jesus  Christ. 
(0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  The  Jews  in  exile  prosperovs  yet  thirsting: — Who  are  these 
thirsty  souls,  panting  for  a  satisfaction  which  they  have  not  yet  found  ?  They  are 
the  people  of  the  hill  countiy,  now  exiled  to  the  plains.  They  have  been  bereft  of 
the  companionable  apocalypse  of  the  heights,  and  they  are  now  immured  in  the 
unsuggestive  monotony  of  the  plains.  I  do  not  think  you  willjfind  a  single  helpful 
figure  in  the  entire  Bible  borrowed  from  the  plains.  The  plains  lie  prone  as  a  speechless 
sphinx.  The  hill  country  is  full  of  voices,  loud  in  their  intimations,  prodigal  in  revela- 
tions. Its  phenomena  are  the  messengers  of  the  infinite.  There  towers  the  rugged 
height,  firm  and  immovable,  standing  sure  and  steadfast  through  the  fickle  and  varied 

?ears.  What  is  its  suggestion  ?  "  Thy  righteousness  is  like  the  great  mountains." 
onder  come  the  treasure-laden  clouds,  driving  in  from  the  great  deep.  They  unburden 
their  wealth  upon  the  shoulders  of  Carmel,  clothing  it  with  a  garment  of  rare  and 
luxuriant  beauty.  What  is  their  significance  ?  "  Thy  mercy  reached  even  unto  the 
clouds."  Here,  on  these  bare,  basaltic  heights  the  tired  and  heated  traveller  rests  in 
the  cool  and  healing  shadow  of  a  friendly  rock.  What  is  the  speech  of  the  shadow  1 
"  He  that  dwelleth  in  the  secret  place  of  the  most  high  shall  abide  under  the  shadow 
of  the  Almighty. "  In  the  hill  country  all  things  are  but  the  vestures  and  vehicles 
of  larger  things  of  spiritual  import.  The  light,  soft  wind  that  stirs  and  breathes  in 
the  dawn — it  is  God  who  rides  upon  a  cherub,  yea,  who  "  flies  upon  the  wings  of  the 
wind. "  The  gentle,  mollifying  rain  falling  upon  the  parched,  bruised,  broken  stems 
of  grass:  "He  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass."  The  end  of  the 
drought ;  the  unsealing  of  the  springs  among  the  hills  ;  the  gladsome  sound  of  the 
river  as  it  laughs  and  dances  down  the  bare  and  rocky  gorge :  what  is  its  significance  ? 
"  Thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the  river  of  Thy  pleasures. "  It  was  an  expressive, 
voiceful,  suggestive  land.  Its  features  interpreted  the  face  and  character  of  God. 
Land  and  people  were  in  communion,  and  their  intercourse  concerned  the  nearness 
and  the  favour  and  the  providence  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  But  now  the  land  and  the 
people  are  divorced.  The  people  are  borne  away  into  captivity.  They  leave  the 
hiU-country,  so  rich  in  interpreting  speech,  and  they  pass  into  the  speechless 
monotony  of  the  plains.  Their  environment  is  dumb.  Their  dwelling-place  is  no 
longer  a  sacrament :  it  is  common,  insignificant,  speechless.  They  have  passed 
from  nature  to  art,  and  from  art  to  artifice.  They  have  left  the  shepherd  and  have 
met  the  merchant.  They  have  left  the  work  of  the  labourers  in  pastures  and 
dressers  of  vineyards  for  a  swift  and  feverish  civilization.  Now,  take  the  people  of 
the  bracing,  speaking,  hill  country,  and  immure  them  in  this  sweltering  and 
superficial  plain.  In  all  the  crowded  interests  by  which  they  are  engirt  there  is 
nothing  suggestive  of  God.  There  was  grandeur,  but  the  grandeur  had  no  voice. 
It  was  grandeur  without  revelation,  and  grandeur  without  revelation  is  never 
creative  of  awe.  Where  there  is  no  awe,  men  step  with  flippant  tread.  The  exile 
felt  the  glamour,  felt  the  power  of  the  grandeur,  but  in  the  glamour  and  grandeur 
forgot  his  God.  His  vision  was  more  and  more  horizontal,  and  less  and  less  vertical. 
Ambition  waxed  feverish,  and  aspiration  waxed  faint.  The  spirit  of  the  conqueror 
infected  the  captive.  The  babble  of  Babylon  entered  into  Israel.  Success  was 
enthroned  in  place  of  holiness,  and  the  soul  bowed  down  and  worshipped  it.  The 
•zile  embraced  the  world,  and  shut  out  the  infinite.  Now,  what  was  the  issue  of 
that  ?  The  exile  made  money.  His  body  revelled  in  conditions  of  ease.  His  carnal 
▼ou  m.  18 


194  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciulp.  lt. 

appetites  delighted  themselves  in  fatness.  He  climbed  into  positions  of  eminence 
and  power.  What  else?  "  In  the  fulness  of  his  sufficiency  he  was  in  straits. "  The 
body  luxuriated  ;  the  soul  languished.  He  drenched  the  body  with  comforts  ;  but 
he  couldn't  appease  its  tenant.  "  Soul,  thou  hast  much  gooas  laid  up,  eat,  drink, 
and  be  merry  1  "  And  still  the  soul  cried  out,  "  I  thirst,"  and  disturbed  him  like 
an  unquiet  ghost.  He  spent  money  and  more  money,  but  was  never  able  to  buy  the 
appropriate  bread.  He  plunged  into  increased  labours,  but  his  labours  reaped  only 
that  "  which  satisfied  not."  The  body  toiled,  the  brain  schemed,  the  eyes  coveted, 
and  still  the  soul  cried  out,  "  I  thirst.  '  Now,  when  there  sits  in  the  soul  a  hungry 
unrest  and  a  feverish  thirst,  life  will  drop  into  faintness,  weariness  and  despair.  AU 
things  become  stale,  flat,  and  unprofitable.  We  "  spend  our  money  for  that  which 
is  not  bread,  and  we  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not."  "All  is  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit."  {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  true  imperialism: — Has  this  no 
pertinency  for  our  own  day  ?  Acquisition  and  expansion  are  the  primary  notes  of 
modem  Life.  And  is  there  no  thirst,  no  disquietude  of  spirit  ?  Our  novels  and  our 
poetry  are  ftdl  of  the  drooping  leaf.  Behind  the  droop  there  is  the  thirst.  The 
literature  only  reflects  the  people.  Business  circles  never  abounded  as  they  do 
to-day  in  faint  and  weary  men.  They  get  and  spend,  and  spend  and  get,  but 
through  it  all  persists  the  inward  thirst.  England  is  thirsting  for  life.  What  we 
need  is  the  infinitely  gracious  ministry  of  the  Eternal  Son  of  God.  "  Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  I.  There  is  to  be  the  discipline  of  the 
EAE.  There  is  to  be  a  determined,  resolute  effort  to  listen  to  God.  When  I  turn 
over  the  pages  of  the  New  Testament,  and  the  Old  Testament  as  weU,  I  am  greatly 
surprised  at  the  emphasis  with  which  is  given  the  injunction  to  hear.  "  Hear,  ye 
deaf."  Every  page  sends  out  the  cry  of  the  herald — Hearken,  listen,  incline  your 
ear.  It  is  wonderful  how  often  the  Master  repeated  the  injunction,  "  He  that  hath 
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  That  is  not  a  kind  of  mild,  kindly  counsel,  but  an 
urgent,  strenuous  appeal  to  men  and  women  in  imminent  peril.  As  though  they 
were  disinclined,  or  did  it  lazily  and  easily.  He  seems  to  say,  Put  work  into 
hearing,  make  it  a  business,  put  some  intenseness  into  it.  The  voices  of  the  world 
are  so  clamorous,  so  fascinating,  so  easily  enticing,  that  you  are  in  great  danger  of 
being  allured  unless  you  set  yourself  resolutely  to  attend  to  God.  "Hearken 
diligently  unto  Me ; "  put  work  into  listening  to  Me,  in  the  Parliament,  in  the 
Council  House,  on  the  Exchange,  in  the  shop  and  the  warehouse,  and  in  the  pulpit. 
There  are  many  clamorous  voices  around  you,  those  of  Mr.  Worldly- Wiseman,  Mr. 
Pliable,  Mr.  Time-Server,  Mr.  Love-of-the- World.  Then  pull  yourself  together,  says 
the  Master  and  the  prophet ;  engage  yourself  with  such  intenseness  amidst  all  the 
bustling  clamour,  that  you  may  catch  the  upward  calling  of  your  God.  II.  The 
discipline  of  the  ear  is  accompanied  by  the  discipline  of  the  heart.  Listen  and 
then  yield.  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way"  (and  then  something  infinitely 
harder),  "and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts."  I  find  it  a  comparatively  easy 
thing  to  forsake  a  way  ;  but  I  find  it  almost  insuperably  difficult  to  forsake  a 
thought.  Hear  the  Highest  and  then  uncompromisingly  obey.  You  say  im- 
possible !  Idleness  creates  the  impossible,  says  Robert  South.  I  think  perhaps  one 
of  the  great  needs  of  our  time  in  personal  and  national  life,  is  that  some  nation 
should  resolutely  address  itself  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  and  when  she  has 
resolutely  listened  and  confidently  heard,  then  to  resolutely  and  deliberately  attempt 
the  impossible.  Let  her  begin  by  forsaking  her  own  wicked  ways.  Let  her  hearken 
diligently  to  the  Divine  voice  and  then  definitely  and  unwaveringly  follow  in 
pursuit,  even  though  the  way  lead  apparently  to  an  impassable  height.  Let  her 
return  to  the  Lord,  and  let  there  be  no  longer  a  democracy,  an  aristocracy,  a 
plutocracy,  but  a  Theocracy  willing  gladly  to  be  counselled  by  Jehovah.  III. 
what  is  the  issue  of  this  obedience  ?  Suppose  the  tliirsty  nation  oppressed, 
turned  herself  to  listen  to  Jehovah  and  began  to  interpret  the  voice  Divine,  and 
suppose  she  addressed  herself  with  all  the  majesty  of  Divine  power  to  the  pursuit  of 
the  ideal  discerned,  what  would  happen?  The  issue  of  such  a  demeanour  is 
portrayed  for  us  with  wonderful  prodigality  in  the  chapter.  1.  Tliere  is  the  assured 
promise  of  fuller  life.  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  Hitherto  life  had  been  a 
thin  existence,  a  mere  surface  glittering,  a  superficial  movement.  Now  there  shall 
be  vitality,  awakening  and  stirring  in  undreamed-of  depths.  Life  shall  be  no  longer 
confined  to  the  channels  of  the  appetites  ;  life  shall  no  longer  be  a  mere  matter  of 
senses  and  sensations  confined  to  tne  outer  courts  and  corridors  of  the  life,  but  you 
shall  begin  to  live  in  the  innermost  self.  The  unused  shall  be  aroused  and  exercised ; 
the  nnerolved  shall  be  unpacked;  benumbed  instincts  shall  be  liberated;  buried 


CHAP.  LV.]  ISAIAH.  195 

powers  of  discernment  shall  come  trooping  from  the  grave  ;  new  intelligence  shall  be 
born,  and  the  sea  of  iniquity  shall  ebb,  and  the  sea  shall  give  up  ita  dead.  Life  shall 
be  no  longer  scant  and  scrimpy.  You  shall  delight  yourself,  not  in  leanness  but  in 
fatness,  every  tissue  of  yourself  shall  bo  fed,  and  the  outer  life  shall  bear  all  manner 
of  fruit,  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  shall  be  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  2.  Mark 
the  succession,  and  we  get  an  exceedingly  pregnant  suggestion.  We  have  got  a 
'  nation  listening,  we  have  got  a  nation  doing,  we  nave  got  a  nation  now  living,  with 
its  powers  evolved,  and  in  active  exercise.  What  next?  "Behold,  thou  shalt  call 
a  nation  that  thou  knowest  not."  What  is  that  ?  It  means  that  a  true  and  glorified 
national  life  is  to  be  followed  by  a  true  and  glorified  imperialism.  ' '  Nations  that 
knew  not  thee  shall  run  unto  thee  because  of  the  Lord  thy  God."  That  is  the  true 
imperialism — empire  by  moral  and  spiritual  sovereignty,  allurement  of  dominion  by 
the  fascinating  radiance  of  a  pure  and  satisfied  life.  ••  Gentiles  shall  come  to  the 
light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  the  rising."  It  is  empire  not  merely  by  the  aid 
of  Maxim  guns,  but  by  great  heartening  Gospels  proclaimed  by  a  great  redeemed, 
glorified  people.  This  is  to  be  the  shiuing  goal  of  true  national  ambition.  The 
mission  of  the  great  people,  according  to  this  chapter,  is  to  be  this  :  We  are  to  be 
witnesses  to  the  people,  leaders  and  commanders  of  the  people,  witnesses  ceaselessly 
reiterating  the  truths  of  the  hearteniDg  Gospel,  proving  in  the  power  of  our  own 
redemption  our  fitness  to  be  leaders  of  the  people,  going  out  as  path-finders  amongst 
the  benighted  peoples.  ' '  They  shall  be  called  "  (I  want  no  more  glorious  title  for 
the  countiy)  "the  restorer  of  paths  to  dwell  in."  3.  Now,  mark  further  the  issue. 
A  true  imperialism,  I  will  not  say  is  to  be  succeeded,  but  is  to  be  accompanied  by 
a  splendid  magnanimity.  When  the  nation  has  hearkened  diligently  unto  God,  and 
follows  determinedly  in  the  pursuit  of  His  will,  all  little-mindedness  has  to  pass 
away  in  the  great  spacious  ambitions.  The  pure  and  the  exalted  people  are  to  share 
the  spacious  thought  of  God,  and  this  I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  word,  "  My 
thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts."  "What  are  Thy  thoughts  like?"  "As  the 
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth. "  God's  thoughts  are  lofty,  spacious,  broad  ;  so 
our  thoughts  must  be  comprehensive,  full  of  an  all-inclusive  sympathy  which 
vibrates  to  the  interest  of  each,  as  though  each  contained  the  welfare  of  the  other. 
The  truly  imperial  people  are  to  share  this  largeness  of  idea  and  ideal  and 
all  inclusive  sympathy.  All  parochial  peddling  and  sterile  individualism  shall 
yield  to  a  pregnant  altruism,  and  mean  patriotism  is  to  be  supplanted  by  a  generous 
fructifying  cosmopolitanism.  The  annexation  of  territory  will  be  regarded  as 
infinitely  inferior  to  the  salvation  of  the  world.  Influence  shall  not  be  measured 
by  mileage,  but  by  magnanimity.  Empire  will  not  be  computed  by  so  many 
leagues  of  earth,  but  by  the  multitude  of  redeemed  and  liberated  souls.  And 
the  outskirts  of  sovereignty  will  not  be  contained  by  bristling  guns,  but  "They 
shall  call  her  walls  salvation  and  her  gates  praise."  4.  We  have  an  exalted, 
glorified  empire,  and  according  to  this  prophet,  there  is  to  be  nothing  wavering 
or  uncertain  about  the  moral  empire  of  such  a  people.  For  them  a  help-giving 
ministry  will  be  inevitable.  "As  the  rain  cometh  down  and  the  snow  from 
heaven,"  etc.  The  rain  cometh  down  and  the  snow  from  heaven,  the  bringers  of 
the  spring  time ;  and  the  nation  truly  imperial,  and  filled  with  the  living 
Spirit  of  the  living  God,  shall  be  the  spring-time  maker  amongst  the  children  of 
men,  and  the  creator  of  gladness  and  music  and  song.  The  prophet  himself  bursts 
into  song :  "  The  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break  forth  before  you  into  singing, 
and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap  their  hands. "  That  is  to  be  the  ministry  of 
the  nation.  "  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir  tree."  The  thorn  with  the 
sharp-piercing,  pain-giving  spikes  :  instead  of  that  shall  come  up  the  fir  tree — from 
which  were  made  the  musical  instruments,  and  especially  the  framework  of  the  harp  ; 
"instead  of  the  thorn,  the  pain-making  thing,  shall  come  up  the  fir  tree,"  the 
music-making  thing ;  the  glorified  people  shall  move  among  the  scattered  peoples, 
and  shall  exercise  the  beautiful  ministry  of  changing  the  creators  of  pain  into  the 
makers  of  melody  and  praise.  "Instead  of  the  briar,"  with  its  bitter,  poisonous 
sting,  "  shall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree,"  with  its  glossy  leaves,  and  white  flowers  and 
grateful  perfume.  Tne  redeemed  and  consecrated  nation  shall  exult  in  a  missionary 
enterprise  which  shall  change  the  poisonous  enmities  and  jealousies  of  the  people 
into  the  perfume  of  sweet  and  gracious  sentiments,  and  the  chastened  delights  of  a 
holy  and  blameless  life.  Is  not  this  an  ambition  worthy  of  the  English  people  of 
our  own  day?  {Hid.)  The  gracious  invitation: — I.  The  invitation  itself.  1.  ^Z 
The  universality  of  the  offer.  2.  The  freeness  of  the  gift.  "  He  that  hath  no 
money  " — he  that  ia  in  spiritual  bankruptcy.     3.  The  fulness  of  the  blessings  which 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lv. 

this  aalvation  contains.  They  are  represented  by  the  three  terms,  water,  wine  and 
milk.  II.  The  encotjkagements  to  accept  the  invitation.  These  are  manifold 
and  various.  1.  There  is,  the  contrast  between  the  blessings  offered  and  those  for 
which  men  are  now  so  laboriously  toiling.  2.  The  character  of  Him  through  whom 
the  blessings  are  to  be  obtained.  3.  The  present  nearness  of  God  to  us  and  Hia 
abundant  willingness  to  pardon.  4.  The  fact  that  God's  "ways  are  not  our  ways, 
nor  His  thoughts  our  thoughts."  He  pardons  like  a  God.  5.  God's  Word  "shall 
not  return  unto  Him  void."  There  is  profoimd  encouragement  in  the  thought  that 
back  of  these  agencies  of  the  Gospel,  which  seem  so  weak  as  compared  with  those 
powers  of  depravity  in  the  soul  witn  which  thev  must  contend,  lies  the  changeless 
purpose  of  Him  who  "  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will. "  6.  The 
OTofound  interest  felt  by  all  holy  beings  everywhere  in  the  salvation  of  the  sinner, 
lliat  profound  sympatny  with  man  in  his  efforts  for  salvation  which  our  Lord  so 
beautifally  represents  by  the  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one 
ginner  that  repenteth,  tne  inspired  prophet  here  represents  by  the  joy  of  inanimate 
nature  over  this  return  of  the  sinner  to  Him  who  is  the  Fountain  of  life.  7.  The 
beneficent  results  of  the  acceptance  of  this  invitation.  "  Instead  of  the  thorn,"  etc. 
Divine  grace  works  a  complete  transformation  in  the  heart  into  which  it  comes.  It 
roots  out  the  thorns  and  briars  of  selfishness,  of  pride,  of  avarice,  of  unbelief  and 
every  hurtful  lust.  It  implants  in  their  room  all  the  graces  that  adorn  the  Christian 
character.  {T.  D.  Wither  spoon,  D.D.)  Gospel  invitationwithout  restriction  : — Man 
may  erect  his  barriers  around  that  fountain,  God  erects  none.  It  is  not,  Come  1^ 
laboured  preparation — by  penance  and  fasting,  by  pUgrimage  and  mortification.  It 
is  not,  "  Come  " — but  you  must  come  by  dogma  and  rubric,  by  sect  and  shibboleth. 
Neither  is  it,  "  Come  " — but  you  must  come  with  some  golden  or  jewelled  bucket  to 
fetch  up  the  water  ;  you  must  come  like  Naaman  of  old,  laden  with  costly  offerings, 
talents  of  silver  and  gold,  and  changes  of  raiment.  But,  "  Come,"  just  as  you  are, 
"without  money  and  without  price;"  without  distinction,  whether  natural  or 
spiritual,  of  class  or  rank  or  caste,  birth  or  blood  or  pedigree,  "  Come,"  though  you 
may  have  but  an  earthen  pitcher  to  draw  with;  "come,"  though  you  can  only  Jat* 
up  the  water  in  the  rough  pahn  of  your  hands.  (J.  R  Macduff,  D.D.)  "  Come  to 
the  waters:" — ^The  Lord  even  thirsteth  to  be  thirsted  after.  (/,  Trapp.)  Man's 
misery  and  God's  call: — I.  Sin  is  miseky,  failxjue,  keen  and  urgent  want. 
Isaiah  draws  a  picture  which  Orientals  would  appreciate  far  more  vividly  than  we, 
whose  utmost  pain  from  thirst  only  means  that  on  some  holiday  excursion  we  have 
felt  the  heat  inconvenient,  and  have  not  happened  immediately  upon  a  fountain. 
He  speaks,  not  of  one  thirsty  man,  but  of  a  nvmiber,  evidently  a  caravan  of  travellers. 
No  one  who  heard  him  would  fail  to  think  of  the  burnt  and  sandy  plains,  a  little  to 
the  south,  on  which  sometimes  a  whole  company  of  travellers  might  wander  from 
their  way,  and  exhaust  their  provisions,  and  grow  feeble  and  gaunt  and  desperate. 
The  hot  breeze  whirls  the  burning  sand  aroimd  them.  The  simoom  wind  wails  in 
the  distance.  Phantom  waters  gleam  with  a  cruel  mockery  on  this  side  or  that. 
Their  own  fever  creates  illusions  which  distract  them.  The  skeletons  of  others,  lost 
like  themselves,  glare  upon  them.  Their  steps  are  feeble,  and  their  tongues  cleave 
to  their  mouths,  when  suddenly  all  that  they  could  not  find  finds  them,  and  a  glad 
voice  calls,  "Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  1  This  fountain 
is  deep  enough  for  all,  and  here,  in  our  tents,  is  Oriental  hospitality  besides ;  buy 
ttnd  eat,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  price. "  Our  own  country- 
men, exploring  the  deserts  of  Australia  even  now,  would  understand  it  well.  Many 
a  brave  man  has  sunk  down  there  and  died.  One  band  of  early  explorers  survived 
to  tell  how  in  their  extremity  they  climbed  a  hill  and  saw  below  them  a  rolling 
water,  right  into  which  with  one  consent  they  rushed,  and  eagerly  drank,  only  to 
find  that  it  was  salt  as  brine.  O  mockery,  like  the  mockery  of  earthly  pleasure 
when  the  heart  is  athirst !  II.  God  calls  the  disappointed,  the  fevered,  the  men 
and  women  who  have  found  the  world  desolate  and  dry ;  whose  very  wishes  give 
them  not  their  wish,  who  succeed  perhaps,  and  are  all  the  more  unhappy  because 
they  know  that  success  also  is  vanity  ;  whose  affection  prospers,  only  to  teach  them 
that,  after  aU,  there  are  depths  in  every  heart  which  resound  to  no  human  voice. 
You 'may  not  as  yet  feel  any  more  than  this  burning,  secret  want;  but  this  is 
enough,  if  only  it  leads  you  to  the  fountain.  Does  not  the  very  word  "come" 
imply  the  leaving  of  something,  as  well  as  approach  to  something  else  1  And  this 
purchasing  is  not  entirely  defined  in  the  woms,  "  Let  the  wicked  man  forsake  his 
way  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,"  for  much  more  than  sin  must  be 
mnendered.    St.  Paul  tells  us  of  the  price  he  himself  paid  when,  having  reckoned 


CRAP.  LT.]  I8AIAK.  197 

np  his  advantages,  and  how,  as  touching  the  righteoosness  that  is  by  the  law,  hft 
was  blameless,  he  adds,  "  What  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for 
Christ,"  etc.  Yes,  for  Christ.  For  it  is  He  who  interprets  this  verse  of  Himself, 
though  it  is  plainly  spoken  of  Jehovah.  He,  on  the  great  day  of  the  feast,  stood 
and  cried,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."  Here,  then,  is 
the  one  test  of  earnestness :  WUl  you,  at  the  bidding  of  your  God,  renounce  what 
has  failed  to  quench  your  thirst,  for  the  sake  of  the  waters  of  life?  {Q.  A.  ^ 
Chadwick,  D.D.)  The  great  proclamation: — I.  To  whom  this  offer  is  made.  It  \/ 
is  to  every  one  thirsty  and  penniless.  That  is  a  melancholy  combination,  to  be 
needing  something  infinitely,  and  to  have  not  a  farthing  to  get  it  with.  But  that  is 
the  condition  in  which  we  all  stand,  in  regard  of  the  highest  and  best  things.  1. 
"Everyone  that  thirsteth."  That  means  desire.  But  it  means  need  also.  And 
what  is  every  man  but  a  great  bundle  of  yearnings  and  necessities  ?  There  are 
thirsts  which  infallibly  point  to  their  true  objects.  If  a  man  is  hungry,  he  knows 
that  it  is  food  that  he  wants.  "We  have  social  instincts  ;  we  need  love ;  we  need 
ftiendship  ;  we  need  somebody  to  lean  upon  ;  we  thirst  for  some  breast  to  rest  our 
heads  upon,  for  hands  to  clasp  ours ;  and  we  know  where  the  creatures  and  the 
objects  are  that  wiU  satisfy  these  desires.  And  there  are  higher  thirsts  of  the  spirit, 
and  a  man  knows  where  and  how  to  gratify  the  impulse  that  drives  him  to  seek 
after  some  forms  of  knowledge  and  wisdom.  But  besides  all  these  there  come  in  a 
whole  set  of  other  thirsts  that  do  not  in  themselves  carry  the  intimation  of  the 
place  where  they  can  be  slaked.  And  so  you  get  men  restless,  dissatisfied,  feeling 
that  there  is  something  wanting,  yet  not  knowing  what.  You  remember  the 
old  story  in  the  "Arabian  Nights,"  of  the  man  who  had  a  grand  palace,  and 
lived  in  it  quite  contentedly,  until  somebody  told  him  that  he  needed  a  roc's  egg 
hanging  from  the  roof  to  make  it  complete,  and  he  did  not  know  where  to  get  that, 
and  was  miserable  accordingly.  We  build  our  houses,  we  fancy  that  we  are  satisfied ; 
and  then  there  comes  the  stinging  thought  that  it  is  not  all  complete  yet,  and  we 
go  groping  in  the  dark,  to  find  out  what  it  is.  Do  you  know  what  it  is  that  you 
want  ?  It  is  God  I  Nothing  else,  nothing  less.  There  are  dormant  thirsts.  It  is 
no  proof  of  superiority  that  a  savage  has  fewer  wants  than  you  and  I  have,  for  the 
want  is  the  open  mouth  into  which  supply  comes.  And  it  is  no  proof  that  you  have 
not,  deep  in  your  nature,  desires  which  unless  they  are  awakened  and  settled,  you 
will  never  be  blessed,  that  these  desires  are  all  unconscious  to  yourselves.  And  yet 
there  are  no  desires — that  is  to  say,  consciousness  of  necessities — so  dormant  but 
that  their  being  ungratified  makes  a  man  restless.  You  do  not  want  forgiveness, 
but  you  will  never  be  happy  till  you  get  it.  You  do  not  want  to  be  good  and  true 
and  holy  men,  but  you  will  never  be  blessed  till  you  are.  You  do  not  want  God, 
but  you  will  be  restless  tUl  you  find  Him.  2.  "And  he  that  hath  no  money." 
Who  has  any  ?  Notice  that  the  persons  represented  in  our  text  as  penniless  are,  in 
the  next  verse,  remonstrated  with  for  spending  "money."  So  then  the  penniless 
man  had  some  pence  away  in  some  comer  of  his  pocket  which  he  could  spend.  He 
had  the  money  that  would  buy  shams,  "that  which  is  not  bread,"  but  he  had  no 
money  for  the  true  thing.  Which,  being  translated  out  of  parable  into  fact,  is 
simply  this,  that  our  efibrts  may  win,  and  do  win,  for  us  the  lower  satisfactions 
which  meet  the  transitory  and  superficial  necessities,  but  that  no  effort  of  ours  can 
secure  for  us  the  loftier  blessings  which  slake  the  diviner  thirsts  of  immortal  souls. 
II.  In  what  it  consists.  They  tell  an  old  story  about  the  rejoicings  at  the 
coronation  of  some  great  king,  when  there  was  set  up  in  the  market-place  a  triple 
fountain,  from  each  of  whose  three  lips  flowed  a  different  kind  of  rare  liquor  which 
any  man  who  chose  to  bring  a  pitcher  might  fill  from,  at  his  choice.  Notice  my 
text,  "  come  ye  to  the  waters  "  .  .  .  "  buy  wine  and  milk."  The  great  fountain  is 
set  up  in  the  market-place  of  the  world,  and  every  man  may  come ;  and  whichever 
of  this  glorious  trinity  of  efiQuents  he  needs  most,  there  his  lip  may  glue  itself  and 
there  it  may  drink,  be  it  "water"  that  refreshes,  or  "wine"  that  gladdens,  or 
"  mUk  "  that  nourishes.  They  are  all  contained  in  this  one  great  gift  that  flows  out 
from  the  deep  heart  of  God  to  the  thirsty  lips  of  parched  humanity.  And  what 
does  that  mean  t  We  may  say  salvation  ;  or  we  may  use  many  other  words  to  define 
the  nature  of  the  gifts.  I  venture  to  take  a  shorter  one,  and  say,  it  means  Christ. 
He  is  the  all-sufficient  supply  of  every  thirst  of  every  human  soiil.  III.  How  do 
WE  GET  THE  GIFTS?  The  paradox  of  my  text  needs  little  explanation.  "Buy 
without  money  and  without  price."  The  contradiction  on  the  surface  is  but  intended 
to  make  emphatic  this  blessed  truth  that  the  only  conditions  are  a  sense  of  need  and 
•  willingness  to  take — nothing  else  and  notmng  more.     {A.  Madaren,  D.JD.) 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Vf, 

Soul  thirst : — Men  know  what  bodily  hunger  is,  some  have  felt  it  to  an  agony,  but 
there  is  a  soul  hunger  far  more  distressing  than  this.  It  is  depicted  on  the  counten- 
ances of  those  whose  bodies  fare  sumptuously  every  day.  Men  also  know  what 
bodily  thirst  is.  But  there  is  a  soul  thirst  infinitely  worse  than  that  which  was 
ever  felt  by  the  most  parched  of  Oriental  travellers.  That  all  unregenerate  souls 
are  thirsting,  with  more  or  less  intensity,  for  that  which  they  have  not,  will  neither 
be  debated  nor  denied.  Christianity  is  a  provision  for  such,  and  as  a  provision  it  is 
marked  by  three  things.  I.  It  is  efficacious.  It  is  "water."  The  Gospel  is 
to  the  thirsty  soul  what  the  cool  refreshing  stream  is  to  a  thirsty  body.  It  satisfies 
— 1.  The  guilty  conscience,  2.  The  longing  heart,  3.  The  worshipping  spirit  of  man. 
All  who  have  truly  received  the  Gospel  give  this  testimony.  II.  It  is  gratuitous. 
"Without  money  and  without  price."  Water  is  one  of  the  freest  things  in  the 
world.  It  is  a  ubiquitous  element ;  it  not  only  floats  in  the  cloud,  descends  in  the 
showers,  and  rolls  in  the  rivers,  but  bubbles  up  at  our  feet  and  oozes  out  in  all  the 
things  around  us.  III.  It  is  unrestricted.  "Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth." 
The  Gospel  is  not  for  any  type  of  mind,  any  class  of  character,  any  condition 
of  society,  any  tribe  of  men.  Like  the  light  of  heaven,  it  is  for  aU.  {Homilist.) 
The  spiritual  appetite  and  its  gratification : — I.  The  spiritual  appetite.  1.  It  results 
from  the  constitution  of  our  nature.  We  cannot  go  deeper  than  nature.  We  cannot 
go  behind  or  beyond  it,  for  nature  is  what  has  been  bom  (Latin  natura),  bom  out  of 
God's  thought  by  God's  power.  When  we  speak  of  nature  we  must  pass  in  thought 
from  her  to  her  parent  God,  and  find  a  sufficient  answer  to  all  questions  and 
difficulties  by  saying:  "God  has  so  willed  it,  therefore  it  is  as  it  is."  All  the 
strong  basal  instincts  of  human  nature  must  be  traced  back  to  the  make  of  our  moral 
being  as  it  was  planned  by  almighty  wisdom,  and  wrought  by  infinite  power.  We 
hunger  and  thirst,  because  our  physical  nature  has  been  so  created  that  it  must  needs 
go  out  of  itself  for  its  supplies  of  nutriment.  Similarly,  God  made  our  souls  for 
Himself.  Deep  within  us,  He  has  put  necessities  and  desires,  that  crave  for  satisfac- 
tion from  the  Unseen,  Eternal,  and  Divine.  2.  It  produces  pain.  There  are  many 
sources  of  pain  ;  but  perhaps  primarily  God  has  instituted  it  to  compel  us  to  take 
measures  for  our  health  and  salvation.  The  pain  of  hunger  and  thirst  is  designed  to 
force  us  to  take  food,  without  which  the  body  would  become  exhausted  and  die.  So, 
in  the  moral  sphere,  we  should  be  thankful  when  we  are  discontented  with  ourselves, 
when  in  self-abhorrence  we  cry  out  for  God's  unsullied  righteousness,  when  we  go 
about  smitten  with  infinite  unrest.  3.  It  is  universal.  As  we  have  never  met  man 
or  woman  incapable  of  hunger  or  thirst,  so  there  is  no  human  soul  which  is  not 
capable  of  possessing  God,  and  does  not  need  Him  for  a  complete  life.  Often  the 
spiritual  appetite  is  dormant.  The  invalid,  who  has  long  suffered  under  the  pressure 
of  a  wasting  illness,  may  have  no  appetite,  but  at  any  moment  it  may  awake.  Thus 
with  the  hunger  of  the  soul  for  God.  II.  The  nurture  of  spiritual  appetite. 
III.  'The  certain  gratification  of  this  appetite.  God  never  sends  mouths, 
the  old  proverb  says,  but  He  sends  with  them  the  food  to  fill  them.  Young  lions 
never  seek  that  which  His  hand  does  not  open  to  give.  The  fish,  and  the  fly  at 
which  it  snatches  ;  the  bird,  and  the  berries  on  the  hawthorn  bush  ;  the  babe,  and 
the  milk  stored  in  its  mother's  breast,  are  perfectly  adapted  to  each  other.  What- 
ever you  and  I  have  longed  for  in  our  best  and  holiest  moments  may  have  its 
consummation  and  bliss,  because  God  has  prepared  for  our  perfect  satisfaction.  {Life 
of  Faith.)  A  gracious  invitation: — I.  'The  state  of  the  persons  addressed. 
II.  The  nature  of  the  provision  prepared.  III.  The  force  of  the 
invitation  offered.  What  is  it  to  come  ?  coming  signifies  believing.  Observe 
how  this  invitation  is  reiterated.  It  comes  in  with  a  shout ;  then  it  is  plainly 
stated — then  it  is  repeated — and  a  third  time  it  is  urged.  1.  Let  the  extent  of  the 
call  induce  you  to  come.  2.  Let  the  freeness  of  the  supply  induce  you  to  come. 
3.  Let  the  sufficiency  of  the  provision  induce  you  to  come.  4.  Let  the  impossibility 
of  finding  redemption  elsewhere  induce  you  to  come.  Conclusion  :  1.  Some  of  you 
have  heard  in  a  spirit  of  levity.  2.  Some  in  a  spirit  of  neglect.  8.  Some  in  a  spirit 
of  doubt  and  despondency.     (J.  Parsons. )     Water  for  the  thirsty : — I.  What  these 

WATERS  ABE  WHICH  ARE   PROVIDED  FOR  THIRSTY  SINNERS.      II.    EVERY  THIRSTY 

SINNER  MAY  AND  OUGHT  TO  COME  TO  THEM.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  True  satisfaction 
in  Christ: — There  are  eight  things  which  thirsty  sinners  should  set  together.  1.  All 
their  sins  and  Christ's  merits.  2.  All  their  distresses  and  Christ's  compassions.  8. 
AU  their  wants  and  Christ's  fulness.  4.  AU  their  unworthiness  and  Christ's  freeness. 
5.  Their  desires  and  Christ's  invitations.  6.  Their  thirstings  and  the  promises  of 
Christ.    7.  Their  own  weakness  and  Christ's  strength.    8.  Satan's  objections  and 


CHAP.  LV.]  ISAIAH.  199 

Christ's  answers.  {Ibid.)  The  best  bargain: — Dr.  Faustus  was  very  dear  to  legend 
in  the  Middle  Ages.  He  burned  with  desire  to  drink  his  fiU  of  all  the  pleasures  of 
this  life  ;  but  he  could  not  gain  them  by  his  own  unaided  skill.  He  therefore  made 
a  contract  with  Satan.  It  was  drawn  out  in  the  most  lawyer-like  style,  and  Fauatua 
signed  it  with  his  own  blood.  It  was  stipulated  that  during  the  next  twenty  years 
he  should  have  the  run  of  all  earth's  pleasures,  and  then  his  soul  and  body  were  to 
be  given  over  to  Satan.  He  began  with  the  sweets  of  knowledge,  but  soon  he  forsook 
them  in  disgust,  and  plunged  into  the  fiercer  and  coarser  excitements  of  the  senses. 
Amid  many  horrors  the  body  and  soul  of  Faustus  were  seized  by  Satan  just  as  the 
clock  struck  twelve  at  night  on  the  last  day  of  the  specified  period.  These  legends 
hold  some  of  the  most  solemn  secrets  of  life.  They  teach  that  every  man  has  a  soul 
to  dispose  of ;  that  men,  like  the  fallen  angels,  may  ruin  themselves  with  their  eyes 
open ;  and  that  the  greatest  transactions  of  the  soul  may  be  likened  to  buying  and 
bargaining.  I.  When  I  but,  I  desire.  And  I  desire  what  I  must  fetch  from  with- 
out. Were  I  entirely  self-supporting,  had  I  everything  I  need  "within  myself,"  aa 
the  saying  is,  I  should  never  go  to  any  market.  Isaiah's  words  for  "buy  "means 
to  buy  provisions.  Lost  in  the  desert,  parched  by  thirst,  gnawed  by  hunger,  duped 
by  the  mirage,  ready  to  perish — that  is  the  standing  biblical  picture  of  a  sinful  man 
when  he  realizes  his  soul's  needs.  It  is  he  who  is  urged  to  come  to  the  waters,  and 
to  buy  wine  and  milk.  "  But  I  have  no  heart,  no  desire  for  these  things  :  what  am 
I  to  do  ? "  That  is  the  great  trouble  ;  indifference  or  downright  indolence  of  soul  is 
the  most  common  obstacle.  But  God's  appeal  is,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason 
together. "  He  sets  forth  the  alternatives  as  to  a  reasonable  being.  Water,  wine, 
nmk,  good,  fatness,  life,  covenant-mercy — all  these  are  freely  ofi'ered  instead  of 
starvation  and  death.  How  unreasonable  you  must  be  if  anything  on  earth  can  keep 
you  from  what  you  know  to  be  your  highest  good !  II.  When  I  but,  I  choose. 
The  essence  of  a  bargain  is  an  act  of  choice.  Choose  1  the  Bible  keeps  that  word 
ever  ringing  in  our  ears.  And  so  does  profane  literature.  Hercules,  the  greatest 
hero  of  heathendom,  was  made  by  his  deliberate  choice  of  virtue  and  rejection  of 
vice.  Pythagoras  put  this  great  truth  into  one  of  the  most  popular  of  object-lessons. 
He  compared  life  to  the  letter  Y-  The  parting  of  the  ways  is  symbolized  by  the 
two  limbs  of  the  letter.  A  man  must  go  forward  ;  and  he  must  go  left  or  right ;  he 
must  walk  in  the  way  of  evil  or  in  the  way  of  good.  This  choosing  is  the  biggest 
thing  you  can  do  in  this  world.  When  I  buy  I  consent  to  the  price.  Buying  is 
simply  avowed  consent  in  action.  "Come  buy  .  .  .  without  money  and  without 
price."  By  this  double  phrase  the  prophet  assails  the  deep-seated  self-righteousness 
of  the  heart.  And  he  assails  it  with  its  own  favourite  ideas  and  phrases.  You  will 
buy.  Well,  then,  let  him  buy  who  has  no  money,  and  let  him  buy  without  money 
and  without  price.  Buying  has  a  legal  suggestion  ;  but  buying  without  money  more 
than  neutralizes  every  such  suggestion.  The  most  capacious  mind,  the  liveliest 
imagination,  could  not  suggest  a  more  effective  way  of  setting  forth  the  utter  freenesa 
of  God's  grace.  III.  What  I  but,  I  own.  The  Gospel  is  here  stated  in  the 
language  of  the  market-place,  so  that  all  may  perfectly  understand  it.  All  just 
laws  and  our  moral  instincts  make  me  the  undoubted  possessor  of  that  which  I  have 
fairly  bought  and  paid  for.     It  is  my  very  own.     This  buying  is  all  you  need.     The 

foods  are  yours  in  offer  ;  and  they  are  yours  in  full  possession  if  you  accept  them. 
V.  What  I  but,  I  use.  Unused  milk  and  flesh  are  of  no  value  to  me.  The  bread 
of  life,  which  Christ  is  and  offers,  is  ours  only  in  so  far  as  we  appropriate  and 
assimilate  it.  "Buy  and  eat."  The  buying  is  useless  without  the  eating.  Eating 
is  the  most  vital,  personal,  and  experimental  thing  in  the  world.  The  bread 
eaten  becomes  part  and  parcel  of  myself.  {Monthly  Visitor.)  The  proclamation  and 
expostulation  of  merqj : — I.  The  proclamation  of  merct.  1.  The  blessings  offered. 
(1)  "Waters."  Men  need  cleansing  and  refreshing.  The  word  is  "waters,"  not 
water.  Some  waters  are  good  for  domestic  purposes  only,  others  for  medicinal 
purposes,  and  others  again  for  purposes  of  cleansing.  Thus,  the  water  that  may  be 
suitable  for  one  purpose  may  be  unsuitable  for  other  purposes.  Not  so  the  blessings 
of  the  Gospel  ;  not  so  Christ,  who  is  the  Gospel.  He  meets  all  the  needs  of  the 
soul.  He  pleases  the  imagination,  satisfies  uie  affections,  calms  the  conscience, 
purifies  the  heart.  (2)  "  Wine."  Christ  is  like  wine,  in  that  He  gladdens  the  heart. 
He  is  imlike  wine  in  this — while  we  may  have  too  much  wine,  we  can  never  have 
too  much  of  Christ.  (3)  "Milk."  Milk  is  nourishing  food;  milk  ia  natural  food. 
A  taste  for  milk  is  possibly  the  only  taste  we  have  by  nature.  All  our  other  likings 
are  more  or  less  acquired.  But,  we  refuse  Christ,  because  what  we  popularly  caJl  a 
■tate  of  nature,  is  not  a  state  of  nature.    To  live  naturally  we  most  feed  naturally. 


SOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lt. 

He  only  so  lives  who  feeds  on  Christ.  2.  The  terms  propounded.  (1)  "We  must 
"  thirst "  for  Christ.  "We  shall  be  blessed  as  soon  as  we  wish  to  be.  "We  are  welcome 
to  Christ  when  He  is  welcome  to  us.  (2)  "We  must  come  to  Christ.  II.  Thb 
GLORiOTTS  RESULTS  which  accrue  from  compliance  with  these  conditions.  Men  are 
invited  to  buy,  etc.,  so,  of  those  who  comply  it  may  be  said — 1.  They  "  buy  "  soul- 
food,  i.  e.  they  appropriate  as  verily  their  own  the  blessings  purchased  by  Christ. 
2.  They  "eat,"  i.e.  they  have  experimental  knowledge  of  Christianity.  3.  Their 
Boul  "delights  itself  in  fatness."  The  more  of  Christ  men  have,  the  more  they 
desire.  III.  The  Lord's  gracious  expostulation.  It  is  an  appeal  to  their  reason 
and  their  experience.  God  knows  what  man  is,  and  what  he  feels.  It  is  as  if  God 
had  said :  "1  know  your  case  entirely  ;  you  are  toiling  for  happiness  and  toiling  in 
vain,  and  you  know  it.  You  are  always  pursuing  some  ideal  good,  with  which, 
when  you  get  it,  you  are  satiated.  "Why  go  on  thus,  when  peace  and  rest  may  be 
had  ? "  The  argument  used  by  God  teaches  that  sin  is — 1.  Costly.  "  "Wherefore  do 
ye  spend  money  ? "  etc.  Sin  is  costly  in — (1)  A  pecuniary  sense.  (2)  A  mental  sense. 
(3)  A  moral  sense.  (4)  A  spiritual  sense.  It  costs  money,  health,  mental  quiet, 
character,  heaven.  2.  Laborious.  (1)  Men  labour  to  accomplish  their  evil  purposes. 
(2)  Men  labour  to  conceal  their  evil  deeds,  etc.  3.  Unsatisfying.  {J.  S.  Swan.) 
Invitation;  expostulation;  entreaty: — I.  An  evangelical  invitation.  "Come 
ye."  1.  The  persons  invited.  2.  The  matter  of  the  invitation.  Jesus  Christ  is  an 
only  good,  and  He  is  an  universal  good,  "  "Waters  ;  bread  ;  milk  ;  wine."  3.  The 
maimer  of  the  invitation.  (1)  Earnest.  "Ho!"  (2)  Serious.  "  Come,  come,  come  ; 
buy,  buy."  (3)  General.  "Every  one."  (4)  Gracious.  "Buy  wine  and  imlk, 
without  money  and  without  price. "  There  is  much  good  to  be  had,  and  at  a  very 
easy  rate.  Jesus  Clirist,  and  the  things  of  Christ,  are  above  price  and  without  price. 
II.  A  COMPLAINING  EXPOSTULATION.  "  "Wherefore,"  etc.  Here  we  have  charged  on 
sinners — 1.  Their  neglect.  2.  Their  folly.  III.  A  renewed  solicitation  or 
ENTREATY.  How  patient  is  God,  even  to  sinners  who  neglect  the  offers  of  His  grace  ! 
This  renewed  entreaty  is — 1.  Very  vehement.  "Hearken  diligently;  incline  your 
ears;  hear."-  2.  Very  persuasive.  3.  Very  satisfactoiy.  "I  will  make  an  ever- 
lasting covenant  with  you,"  etc.  "  I  wiU  give  My  bond  for  it ;  all  this  shall  be  as 
surely  made  good  as  the  mercies  which  I  performed  to  My  servant,  David."  {0. 
Sedgwick,  B.  D. )  Food  a  supreme  need : — "What  does  the  hungry  man  want  ?  Money  ? 
Not  at  all.  Fame  ?  N"o.  Good  clothes  ?  Not  a  bit.  He  wants  food.  "What  does 
the  thirsty  man  want  ?  Reputation  ?  Bonds  and  stocks  ?  No !  He  wants 
water.  "When  we  are  dead  in  earnest,  and  want  the  bread  of  heaven  and  the 
water  of  life,  we  shall  not  stop  till  we  get  them.  {Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 
He  that  hath  no  money;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat. — Buying  without  money : — We  have 
before  us  the  figure  of  a  merchant  selling  his  wares,  and  crying  like  a  chapman  in 
the  market,  "  Ho  !  "  To  attract  attention  he  calls  aloud,  "  Come  !  Come  !  Come  I  " 
three  several  times  ;  and  he  adds  to  this  the  cry  of  "  Buy  I  Buy  !  "  Shall  the  Great 
King  thus  liken  Himself  to  a  trader  in  the  market  earnest  to  dispose  of  his  goods  ? 
It  is  even  so,  and  I  therefore  call  upon  you  to  admire  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  In 
the  fifty-third  and  fifty-fourth  chapters  this  Divine  Merchantman  has  been  spreading 
out  His  wares.  "What  treasures  they  are  !  I.  A  description  of  the  buyer.  It 
is  the  portrait  of  a  poor,  penniless,  broken-down  creature  reduced  to  the  extremity 
of  want:  "He  that  hath  no  money."  Of  course,  by  this  is  meant  the  man  who 
literally  has  no  money.  Having  nothing,  you  may  yet  possess  all  things.  But  we 
understand  the  reference  of  the  text  to  be  mainly  spiritual,  and  so  the  portrait  here 
is  that  of  a  man  who  has  no  spiritual  money,  no  gold  of  goodness,  no  silver  of 
sanctity.  1.  His  fancied  stock  of  natural  innocence  is  spent.  2.  He  thought  that 
he  had  accumulated  some  little  savings  of  good  works  ;  but  his  imaginary  righteous- 
ness turns  out  to  be  counterfeit.  3.  He  is  in  a  still  worse  plight,  for  he  is  also  too 
poor  to  get  anything  ;  the  procuring  power  is  gone,  for  he  has  "  no  money  ;  "  that 
is  to  say,  nothing  wherewith  he  can  procure  those  good  things  which  are  necessary 
to  salvation  and  eternal  life.  4.  Moreover,  his  stock  with  which  to  trade  is  gone. 
Money  makes  money,  and  he  that  has  a  little  to  begin  with  may  soon  have  more  ; 
but  this  man,  having  no  stock  to  start  with,  cannot  hope  to  be  rich  towards  God  in 
and  by  himself.  No  money  !  (1)  Then,  he  cannot  pay  his  old  debts.  His  sins 
rise  up  before  him,  but  he  cannot  make  amends  for  them.  (2)  Moreover,  he  cannot 
meet  his  present  expenses.  (3)  He  cannot  face  the  future.  (4)  The  only  hope  for  a 
man  who  has  no  money  must  be  outside  himself.  II.  The  selection  of  the 
BUYER.  It  is  a  strange  choice,  and  it  leads  to  a  singular  invitation,  "  He  that  hath 
no  money ;  come,  buy,  and  eat. "    "What  is  the  reason  t    1.  These  need  mercy  most. 


CHAP.  LT.]  ISAIAH,  SOI 

2.  This  character  is  chosen  becaiise  he  is  snch  a  one  as  will  exhibit  in  his  own  peTson 
thepower  of  Divine  grace.  8.  The  Lord  Jesus  delights  to  make  evident  the  freeriess 
of  ms  grace.  4.  He  is  the  kind  of  man  that  will  listen.  A  wretched  sinner  jumps 
at  mercy  like  a  hungry  fish  leaping  at  the  bait.  5.  Such  an  empty,  penniless  som, 
when  he  does  get  mercy,  will  prize  it  and  praise  it.  He  that  has  been  shut  up  in  the 
dark  for  years  values  the  Light  of  the  sun.  He  that  has  been  a  prisoner  for  months, 
how  happy  he  is  when  the  prison  doors  are  opened,  and  he  is  at  liberty  again  !  Let 
a  man  once  get  Christ,  who  nas  bitterly  known  and  felt  his  need  of  Him,  and  he  will 
prize  Him  beyond  all  things.  IIL  luE  invitation.  The  man  who  has  no  money 
IS  to  come,  buy,  and  eat.  It  looks  odd  to  tell  a  penniless  man  to  come  and  buy, 
does  it  not  ?  and  yet  what  other  word  could  be  used  ?  Come  and  buy,  has  a  meaning 
of  its  own  not  to  be  otherwise  expressed.     In  buying  there  are  three  or  four  stages. 

1.  Desiring  to  have  the  thing  which  is  exhibited.  2.  This  means  next,  to  agree  to 
terms.  3.  When  the  terms  are  carried  out,  the  buyer  appropriates  the  goods  to 
himself.  4.  But  the  text  says,  "  Buy,  and  eat,"  as  much  as  to  say,  make  it  yours 
in  the  most  complete  sense.  If  a  man  buys  a  loaf  of  bread  it  is  his :  but  if  he  eata 
it,  then  all  the  lawyers  in  the  world  cannot  dispute  him  out  of  it — he  has  it  by  a 
possession  which  is  not  only  nine  points  of  the  law,  but  all  the  law.  Christ  fed  upon 
IS  ours  beyond  aU  question.  IV.  By  way  of  assueance,  to  show  that  this  is  all 
real  and  true,  and  no  make-believe.  1.  It  is  not  God's  way  to  mock  men.  He  hath 
Himself  declared,  "  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  seek  ye  My  face  in  vain." 

2.  God  is  under  no  necessity  to  sell  His  benefits.  He  is  not  impoverished :  He  is  so 
rich  that  none  can  add  anything  to  His  wealth.  8.  There  is  no  adequate  price  that 
we  could  bring  to  God  for  His  mercy.  4.  Remember  that  Jesus  must  be  meant  for 
ainners,  for  if  sinners  had  not  existed  there  never  would  have  been  a  saviour. 
6.  It  must  be  true  that  God  wiU  give  these  blessings  to  men  who  have  no  merits, 
and  will  bestow  them  as  gifts,  because  Jesus  Himself  is  a  gift.  6.  Beside  that, 
Christ  is  all.  7.  The  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  blessedly  free  from  all  clogging 
conditions,  because  all  supposed  conditions  are  supplied  m  Christ  Jesus.  (C.  M. 
Spurgeon.)  Oospel  blessings  to  be  bought: — You  may  have  seen  persons  in  a  shop 
who,  when  they  have  been  shown  almost  all  the  contents  of  the  shop, — when  article 
after  article  has  been  brought  down  from  the  shelves  for  their  inspection,  have  at 
last,  to  the  no  small  disappointment  of  the  shopkeeper,  gone  out  without  buying 
anything.  And  we  who  have  the  Gospel  wares  to  dispose  of,  are  subject  to  like 
disappointments.  We  also  have  customers  who,  when  they  have  looked  at,  and 
turned  over,  so  to  speak,  again  and  again,  the  goods  which  we  ofiFer  them,  as  though 
they  would  make  an  offer  for  them,  content  themselves  with  the  looking  at  them, 
hear  and  listen  to  the  Gospel,  that  you  would  think  they  were  going  to  embrace  it, 
yet  go  out  of  Church,  ah  1  and  out  of  the  world,  without  embracing  it.  ( W.  Cleaves, 
M.A.)  Buyers  will  show  that  they  possess: — It  will  be  seen  whether  we  have  been 
indeed  buyers,  or  like  those  who  content  themselves  with  looking  at  what  is  to  be 
sold  without  buying.  If  a  man  has  been  buying  clothes,  for  instance,  he  will  be 
seen  wearing  the  clothes  ;  if  he  has  been  buying  cattle,  he  will  stock  his  land  with 
the  cattle  ;  if  he  has  been  buying  provisions,  his  table  will  be  supplied  with  the  pro- 
visions ;  if  he  has  been  buying  furniture,  his  house  will  be  furnished  with  it ;  and  if 
we  have  been  buying  of  Chnst,  the  heart  and  mind  wUl  be  furnished,  we  shall  be 
clothed,  we  shall  be  adorned  with  what  Christ  has  for  those  who  buy  of  Him-  {Ibid.) 
The  fulness  of  Christ  offered  to  the  needy  sinner : — 1.  In  Christ  there  is  very  good  fare  to 
be  had  for  poor  sinners.  2.  The  enjoyment  of  it  is  limited  by  their  coming  to  Christ 
and  buying  of  Him.  3.  Upon  their  coming  to  Christ  all  that  good  doth  certainly  come 
to  them.  {0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  Willingness  to  buy  of  Christ : — He  that  is  willing  to 
buy — 1.  Will  go  to  the  market.  2.  Doth  like  the  wares  which  are  to  be  bought. 
8.  Will  come  up  to  the  price  at  which  they  are  to  be  bought.  4.  WUl  watch  the  time, 
and  take  the  time  of  buying.  5.  Is  wUling  to  sell  that  he  may  compass  the  things  he 
is  very  desirous  to  buy  (Gen.  xlvii.  17-19  ;  Matt.  xiii.  44).  There  are  three  "  aUs  " 
which  a  poor  sinner  is  willing  to  sell  that  he  may  have  Christ.  (1)  All  his  sinful  lusts 
and  his  former  sinful  courses  of  life.  (2)  All  his  worldly  estimations  and  advantages 
(Heb.  xi.  24-26).  (3)  All  his  self.  His  self-wisdom,  his  self-wiU,  his  self- 
righteousness,  his  self-sufficiencies  and  his  self-confidence,  his  self-seekings  and  his 
self-advantages  (PML  iii  8).  {Ibid.)  Buying  of  Christ : — ^You  may  know  that  you 
have  indeed  bought  of  Christ  by  something  in  yourselves.  1.  Your  hearts  will  be 
much  endeared  to  Christ  for  what  He  hath  sold  imto  you.     2.  You  wUl  spend  what 

?oa  have  bought  of  Christ,  upon  Christ.     S.  Yon  will  so  like  the  bargain  that 
Ihrist  shall  have  your  custom  as  long  as  you  live.    4.  You  will  not  sell  what  you 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

have  bought.  {Ibid.)  Drwing  a  trade  with  Christ : — ^There  are  seven  arguments  to 
persuade  poor  sinners  to  come  and  buy  of  Christ.  I.  The  excellence  of  thjc 
v?AREs.  II.  The  necessity  of  the  purchase.  III.  The  goodness  of  the 
SELLER.  IV.  The  easiness  of  the  price.  V.  The  opportunity  of  the 
market.  VI.  The  benefit  of  the  bargain.  VII.  The  loss  by  neglect. 
(Ibid.)  The  benefit  of  trading  unth  Christ: — By  buying  of  Christ  you  gain — 
1.  Losses.  It  is  no  gain  to  lose  a  soul,  yet  it  is  an  exceeding  gain  for  a  soul  to  lose 
some  things — the  dominion  of  sin,  the  love  of  sin,  a  condemning  conscience,  our 
corrupt  vices,  etc.  2.  Yourselves.  We  never  come  to  enjoy  ourselves  until  we 
come  to  enjoy  Christ.  3.  Your  own  souls — they  are  safe  and  secured  for  ever. 
4.  All.  All  the  purchase  of  Christ,  all  the  good  of  all  the  offers  of  Christ,  aU  the 
firuits  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  all  the  promises  of  God  in  Christ,  all  the  revealings  of 
the  ordinances  of  Christ,  all  the  immunities  and  privileges  of  Christ,  all  the  hopes 
by  Christ.  You  gain  all  the  good  which  concerns  soul  and  body  in  this  life,  and  all 
tne  good  which  concerns  them  in  the  life  to  come.  {Ibid. )  Spiritiuzl  merchandise : — 
Those  who  have  bought  of  Christ  are — I.  The  wisest  merchants.  II.  Thb 
SUREST  possessors.  {Ibid.)  "Buy  and  eat:" — It  is  a  virtue  here  to  be  a  holy 
glutton.  {J.  Trajyp. )  Yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk. —  Wine  ami  milk : — As  water, 
on  account  of  its  commonness  and  abundance,  is  often  apt  to  be  despised,  the 
prophet  farther  speaks  of  the  blessings  of  salvation  under  the  symbols  of  wine  and 
milk.  {B.  Jones,  M.A.)  A  free  salvation : — I.  I  have  to  preach  wine  and  MILS. 
The  Gospel  is  like  wine  which  makes  us  glad.  Let  a  man  truly  know  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  will  be  a  happy  man,  and  the  deeper  he  drinks  into 
the  spirit  of  Christ,  the  more  happy  will  he  become.  The  Gospel  is  like  milk  too, 
for  there  is  everything  in  it  that  you  want.  Do  you  want  something  to  bear  you  up 
in  trouble  ?  It  is  in  the  Gospel — "a  very  present  help  in  time  of  trouble."  Do  you 
need  something  to  nerve  you  for  duty  ?  There  is  g-ace  all-sufficient  for  everything 
that  God  calls  you  to  undergo  or  to  accomplish.  Do  you  need  something  to  light 
up  the  eye  of  your  hope  ?  There  are  joy -flashes  in  the  Gospel  that  may  make  your 
eye  flash  back  again  the  immortal  fires  of  bliss.  Do  you  want  something  to  make 
you  stand  steadfast  in  the  midst  of  temptation  ?  In  the  Gospel  there  is  that  that 
can  make  you  immovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  The  Gospel 
was  evidently  meant  for  manhood  ;  it  is  adapted  to  it  in  its  every  part.  There  la 
knowledge  for  the  head  ;  there  is  love  for  the  heart ;  there  is  guidance  for  the  foot. 
And  I  think  there  is  another  meaning  in  the  two  words  "  wine  and  nulk."  Wine  is 
a  rich  thing,  something  that  requires  much  time  to  manufacture.  There  has  to  be 
vintage  and  fermentation  and  preservation  before  wine  can  come  to  its  full  flavour. 
The  Gospel  is  like  that ;  it  is  an  extraordinary  thing  for  feast  days  ;  it  gives  a  man 
power  to  use  a  vintage  of  thought,  a  fermentation  of  action,  and  a  preservation  of 
experience,  till  a  man's  piety  comes  forth  like  the  sparkling  wine  that  makes  the 
heart  leap  with  gladness.  But  milk  is  an  ordinary  thing ;  you  get  it  every  day, 
anywhere.  So  is  it  with  the  Gospel :  it  is  a  thing  for  every  day.  II.  Having  thus 
exhibited  the  article,  my  next  business  is  to  bring  the  bidders  up  to  the  auction 
BOX  and  sell  it.  My  difficulty  is  to  bring  you  down  to  my  price.  Here  comes 
some  one  up  to  the  sacred  desk,  transformed  for  the  moment  into  an  auction-box, 
and  he  cries,  "  I  want  to  buy."  What  will  you  give  for  it  ?  He  holds  out  his  hands, 
and  he  has  such  a  handful ;  he  has  to  lift  up  his  very  lap  with  more,  for  he  can 
hardly  hold  all  his  good  works.  He  has  Ave-Marias  and  Paternosters  without 
number,  and  all  kinds  of  crossings  with  holy  water,  and  bondings  of  the  knee,  and 
prostrations  before  the  altar,  and  reverence  of  the  host,  and  attending  at  the  mass, 
and  so  on.  And  so,  Sir  Romanist,  you  are  coming  to  get  salvation  are  you  ?  and  you 
have  brought  all  this  with  you.  I  am  sony  for  thee,  but  thou  must  go  away  from 
the  box  with  all  thy  performances,  for  it  i3  "  without  money  and  without  price," 
and  until  thou  art  prepared  to  come  empty-handed  thou  canst  never  have  it.  Then 
another  comes  up  and  says,  "  I  am  glad  you  have  served  the  Romanist  like  that.  I 
hate  the  Church  of  Rome  ;  I  am  a  true  Protestant,  and  desire  to  be  saved."  What 
have  you  brought,  sir  ?  "  Oh  I  have  brought  no  Ave-Marias,  no  Paternosters.  But  I 
say  the  collect  every  Sunday  ;  I  am  very  attentive  to  my  prayers.  I  go  to  church 
almost  as  soon  as  the  doors  are  open,"  or  '*  I  go  to  chapel  three  times  on  the  Sabbath, 
and  I  attend  the  prayer-meetings  ;  and  beside  that,  I  pay  everybody  twenty  shillings 
in  the  pound  ;  I  would  not  like  to  hurt  anybody  ;  1  am  always  liberal,  and  assist 
the  poor  when  I  can.  I  may  make  a  little  slip  just  now  and  then.  Still,  if  I  am 
not  saved  I  do  not  know  who  will  be.  I  am  as  good  as  my  neighbours,  and  I  think 
I  certainly  ought  to  be  saved,  for  I  have  very  few  sins,  and  what  few  there  are  do 


CHAP.  IV.]  ISAIAH.  203 

not  hurt  other  people  ;  they  hurt  me  more  than  any  one  else.  Besides,  they  are 
mere  trifles."  I  will  send  you  away ;  there  is  no  salvation  for  you,  for  it  is  "  without 
money  and  without  price  ; "  and  as  long  as  you  bring  these  fine  good  works  of  yours, 
you  cannot  have  it.  Mark,  I  do  not  find  any  fault  with  them,  they  are  good  enough 
m  their  place,  but  they  won't  do  here,  but  they  won't  do  at  the  judgment  bar 
of  God.  Suppose  I  see  a  man  building  a  house,  and  he  were  fool  enough  to  lay  the 
foundation  with  chimney-pots.  If  I  should  say,  *'  My  dear  man,  I  do  not  like  these 
chimney-pots  to  be  put  into  the  foundation,"  you  would  not  say  I  found  fault  with 
the  chimney-pots,  but  that  I  found  fault  with  the  man  for  putting  them  in  the 
wrong  place.  So  with  good  works  and  ceremonies ;  they  will  not  do  for  a  foundation. 
The  foundation  must  be  built  of  more  solid  stuff.  But  see  another  man.  He  is  a  long 
way  off,  and  he  says,  "  Sir,  I  am  afraid  to  come ;  I  could  not  come  and  make  a  bid  for 
the  salvation.     Sir,  I've  got  no  lamin',  I'm  no  scholard,  I  can't  read  a  book,  I  wish 


I  could.     My  children  go  to  Sunday-school ;  I  wish  there  was  such  a  thing  in  my 
at  read,  and  it's  no  use  my  hoping  to  go  to  heaven.     I  goes  to  church 


time  ;  I  can  ' 


sometimes,  but  oh  dear  1  it's  no  good  ;  the  man  uses  such  long  words  I  can't  under 
stand  'em,  and  I  goes  to  chapel  sometimes,  but  I  can't  make  it  out. "  It  wants  no 
scholarship  to  go  to  heaven.  Now,  I  see  a  man  come  up  to  the  stall,  and  he  says, 
"  Well,  I  will  have  salvation,  sir ;  I  have  made  in  my  will  provisions  for  the  building 
of  a  church  or  two,  and  a  few  almshouses  ;  I  always  devote  a  part  of  my  substance  to 
the  cause  of  God  ;  I  always  receive  the  poor,  and  such -like ;  I  have  a  pretty  good  share 
of  money,  and  I  take  care  not  to  hoard  it  up  ;  I  am  generous  ana  liberal.  "Won't 
that  carry  me  to  heaven  ? "  Well,  I  like  you  very  much,  and  I  wish  there  were  more 
of  your  sort.  But  if  you  bring  these  things  as  your  hope  of  heaven,  I  must  undeceive 
you.  You  cannot  buy  heaven  with  gold.  Why,  they  pave  the  streets  up  there  with 
it.  Wealth  makes  distinction  on  earth,  but  no  distinction  at  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
You  must  all  come  alike  to  the  footstool  of  Jesus,  or  else  not  come  at  all.  I 
knew  a  minister  who  told  me  he  was  once  sent  for  to  the  dying  bed  of  a  woman  who 
was  very  well  to  do  in  the  world,  and  she  said,  "Mr.  Baxter,  do  you  think  when 
I  get  to  heaven  Betsy  my  servant  will  be  there?"  "Well,"  he  said,  "I  don't 
know  much  about  you,  but  Betsy  will  be  there ;  for  if  I  know  any  one  who  is  a 
pious  girl,  it  is  she.  '  "  Well,"  said  the  lady,  "  don't  you  think  there  will  be  a  little 
distinction  ?  for  I  never  could  find  it  in  my  heart  to  sit  down  with  a  girl  of  that  sort ; 
she  has  no  taste,  no  education,  and  I  could  not  endure  it.  I  think  there  ought 
to  be  a  little  diiference."  "Ah  1  you  need  not  trouble  yourself,  madam,"  he  said, 
"there  will  be  a  great  distinction  between  you  and  Betsy,  if  you  die  in  the 
temper  in  which  you  now  are  ;  but  the  distinction  will  be  on  the  wrong  side  ;  for  you 
will  see  her  in  Abraham's  bosom,  but  you  yourself  will  be  cast  out.  As  long  as  you 
have  such  pride  in  your  heart,  you  can  never  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
The  highway  is  as  much  for  the  poor  man  as  the  rich  man  ;  so  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven — "  without  money  and  without  price."  III.  I  have  to  use  a  few  akgumekts 
with  you.  1.  I  would  speak  to  you  who  never  think  about  these  things  at  all. 
2.  I  have  now  the  pleasing  task  of  addressing  men  of  another  character.  You 
do  feel  your  need  of  a  Saviour.  Remember,  Chnst  died  for  you.  {C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 
The  desire  to  bring  something  to  Christ : — I  dare  say  in  this  congregation  I  have  a 
hundred  different  phases  of  this  singular  fatuity  of  man — the  desire  to  bring  something 
to  Christ.  "  Oh, '  says  one,  "  I  would  come  to  Christ,  but  I  have  been  too  great  a 
sinner."  Self  again,  sir,  your  being  a  great  sinner  has  nothing  to  do  with  that. 
Christ  is  a  great  Saviour,  and  however  great  your  sin.  His  mercy  is  greater  than  that. 
He  invites  you  simply  as  a  sinner.  Another  says,  "  Ah,  but  I  do  not  feel  it  enough." 
Self  again.  He  does  not  ask  you  about  your  feelings ;  He  simply  says,  "  Look  unto 
Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth. "  * '  But,  sir,  I  cannot  pray. "  Self  again. 
You  are  not  to  be  saved  by  your  prayers  ;  you  are  to  be  saved  by  Christ,  and  your 
business  is  simply  to  look  to  Christ ;  He  will  help  you  to  pray  afterwards.  "But," 
says  another,  "if  I  felt  as  So-and-so  did."  Self  again.  "Yes,"  you  say,  "I  think 
He  would  receive  anybody  but  me."  Please,  who  gave  you  any  leave  to  think  at  all 
in  the  matter?  Does  He  not  say,  "Him  that  cometh  unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out "  ?  Give  up  thinking,  and  believe.  Are  your  thoughts  as  God's  thoughts  ? 
"But,"  says  one,  "I  have  sought  Him,  but  I  have  not  found  Him."  Can  you 
truly  say  that  you  have  come  to  Christ  with  nothing  in  your  hand,  and  have  looked 
iJone  to  Him,  and  yet  He  has  cast  you  away  ?  Do  you  dare  to  say  that  ?  No :  if  God's 
Word  be  true,  and  you  are  true,  you  cannot  say  that.  If  you  will  come  down  to  this 
price,  and  take  Christ  for  nothing,  just  as  He  is,  "without  money  and  without  price," 
yon  ahall  not  find  Him  a  hard  Master.   {Ilnd.)  **  WUhout  money  emd  toithout  price :— 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

I.  The  sitkprising  natxtee  of  this  fact,  for  it  is  very  surprising  to  mankind  to 
hear  that  salvation  is  "without  money  and  without  price."  It  is  so  surprising  to 
them  that  the  plainest  terms  cannot  make  them  understand  it ;  and,  though  you 
tell  them  a  thousand  times  a  day,  yet  they  persist  in  thinking  that  you  mean  some- 
thing el8e.  Why  is  it  when  man  does  see  it  he  is  surprised  at  it  ?  1.  Because  of  man's 
relation  to  God,  and  his  wrong  judgment  of  Him.  Man  thinks  that  God  is  a  hard 
master.  2.  No  doubt,  also,  the  condition  of  man  under  the  fall  makes  it  more  difficult 
for  him  to  comprehend  that  the  gifts  of  God  are  "  without  money  and  without  price," 
for  he  finds  that  he  is  doomed  to  toil  for  almost  everything  ne  needs.  8.  Again, 
man  recollects  the  general  rule  of  men  towards  each  other,  for  in  this  world  wliat 
is  to  be  had  for  nothing  except  that  which  is  worth  nothmg  ?  4.  Another  matter 
helps  man  into  this  difficulty,  namely,  his  natural  pride.  BLe  does  not  like  to  be 
a  pauper  before  God.  5.  Once  more,  all  religions  that  ever  have  been  in  the  world 
of^  man's  making  teach  that  the  gifts  of  God  are  to  be  purchased  or  merited. 
Though  I  have  thus  shown  grounds  for  our  surprise,  yet  if  men  would  think  a  little 
they  might  not  be  quite  so  unbelievinglv  amazed  as  tney  are  ;  for,  after  all,  the  best 
blessings  we  have  come  to  us  freely.  What  price  have  you  paid  for  your  lives  ?  and 
yet  they  are  very  precious.  What  price  do  you  pay  for  the  air  you  breathe  I  What 
price  does  a  man  pay  for  the  sunlight  ?  Life  and  air  and  light  come  to  us  "  without 
monev  and  without  price."  And  our  faculties,  too — who  ^ays  for  eyesight?  The 
ear  which  hears  the  song  of  the  bird  at  dawn,  what  price  is  given  for  it  ?  The  senses 
are  freely  bestowed  on  us  by  God,  and  so  is  the  sleep  which  rests  them.  It  is  clear 
then  that  some  of  the  best  blessings  we  possess  come  to  us  by  the  way  of  free  gift ; 
and  come  to  the  undeserving,  too,  for  the  dew  shall  sparkle  to-morrow  upon  the 
grass  in  the  miser's  field,  and  the  rain  shall  fall  in  due  season  upon  the  rising  com 
of  the  wretch  who  blasphemes  his  God.  II.  The  necessity  of  the  fact  men- 
tioned in  our  text.  1.  From  the  character  of  the  Donor.  It  is  God  that  gives. 
Would  you  have  Him  sell  His  pardons  t  2.  Because  of  the  value  of  the  boon.  As 
one  has  well  said,  "it  is  without  price  because  it  is  priceless."  3.  From  the 
extremity  of  human  destitution.  The  blessings  of  grace  must  be  given ' '  without  money 
and  without  price,"  for  we  have  no  money  or  price  to  bring.  III.  The  salutaet 
INFLUENCE  OF  THIS  FACT.  If  it  be  "without  money  and  without  price,"  what 
then  ?  1.  That  enables  us  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  2.  This  fact 
has  the  salutary  efi"ect  of  excluding  aU  pride.  If  it  be  "  without  money  and 
without  price,"  you  rich  people  have  not  a  halfpennyworth  of  advantage  above 
the  poorest  of  the  poor  in  this  matter.  3.  It  forbids  despair.  4.  It  inspires 
with  gratitude,  and  that  gratitude  becomes  the  basis  of  holiness.  5.  It  engenders 
in  the  soul  the  generous  virtues.  The  man  who  is  saved  for  nothing  feels  first  with 
regard  to  his  fellow-men  that  he  must  deal  lovingly  with  them.  Has  God  forgiven 
me  ?  Then  I  can  freely  forgive  those  who  have  trespassed  against  me.  He  longs  to 
see  others  saved,  and  therefore  he  lays  himself  out  to  bring  them  to  Jesus  Christ. 
If  he  had  bought  his  salvation  I  dare  say  he  might  be  proud  of  it,  and  wish  to  keep 
it  to  himself.  Then  the  free  gifts  of  grace,  working  by  the  power  and  energy  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  create  in  us  the  generous  virtues  towards  God.  6.  I  cannot  think  of  any- 
thing that  will  make  more  devout  worshippers  in  heaven  than  this.  {Ibid. )  ' '  Come :  "— 
Linger  not,  loiter  not,  frame  not  excuse,  strain  not  courtesy,  hang  not  ofif  by  a 
sinful  bashfolness :  it  is  good  manners  to  fall  to  your  meat.  {J.  Trapp.)  "With- 
out money  and  vxithyut  price:  " — 1.  This  gracious  way  of  a  sinner's  full  enjoyment  of 
Christ  stands  not  in  opposition  to  praying,  attendance  upon  the  ministry  of  the 
Word,  or  believing.  2.  This  is  to  be  understood  in  an  opposition  to  the  price  and 
value  of  our  works.  You  can  lay  down  nothing  that  hath  merit  or  recompense  in 
it ;  that  hath  answerable  value,  or  any  value  in  it.  (0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  Christ's 
gracious  terms : — All  that  poor  sinners  need  may  be  bought  of  Christ  upon  gracious 
terms.  Six  things  demonstrate  it.  1.  The  sinner's  insufficiency.  2.  His  un worthi- 
ness. 3.  The  inconsistency  of  any  other  way  of  trading  with  Christ  (Rom.  iv.  4, 
xL  6).  4.  The  invaluableness  of  the  commodities.  5.  The  quality  of  the  contract. 
"Ask."  "Believe."  6.  The  work  of  the  Seller.  (1)  He  is  to  find  all  that  poor 
sinners  need.  (2)  Upon  His  own  proper  costs  and  charge.  (3)  He  is  to  give  all  to 
them.  {Ibid.)  Trying  to  buy  salvation: — Mr.  Webb-Peploe  tells  of  a  wealthy 
man  whom  he  had  never  known  to  give  five  farthings  a  year  in  charity,  who  sent  for 
him  once  when  Ul  with  paralysis.  The  man  said  to  tne  minister,  "  I  am  afraid  I 
may  die.  I  have  sent  for  you  that  I  may  do  what  is  right  before  God ;  I  want  to  go  to 
heaven,  and  I  want  you  to  take  a  hnndred  pounds  for  the  poor. "  The  man  of  God  looked 
tha  sinner  straight  in  the  faoe  and  aud,  "  Do  yon  think  yon  are  going  to  buy  your 


CHAP,  rv.]  ISAIAH.  205 

sours  way  to  glory  with  a  dirty  hundred  pounds !  Give  your  money  where  you  like, 
I  will  not  touch  it."  That  was  bitter  medicine,  but  some  diseases  require  sharp 
treatment.  The  man  lived,  and  learned  that  salvation  is  not  to  be  bought  with 
money.  {Christian  Budget.)  "  Without  money  and  withmU  price: — Eoland  HiU 
was  once  preaching  at  a  fair  within  earshot  of  the  rival  gongs  of  the  vagrant  mer- 
chantmen. Pointing  to  them,  he  said,  "  They  and  I  are  both  ofifering  goods  for  sale. 
But  their  difficulty  is  to  get  you  up  to  their  price  ;  my  difficulty  is  to  get  you  down 
to  mine.  I  offer  you  goods  without  money  and  without  price."  {Ibid.)  Too 
valuable  to  be  bought: — Zeuxis  gave  his  pictures  to  his  native  city  for  nothing, 
because  they  were  too  good  to  be  bought  with  gold.  To  oflFer  money  for  them  was 
to  undervalue  them.  Can  I  buy  pardon  with  anything  I  can  call  mine?  {Ibid.) 
No  coinage  can  buy  spiritual  good : — A  man  lands  in  a  far  country  with  English 
shillings  in  his  pocket,  but  he  finds  that  no  coins  go  there  but  thalers,  or  francs,  or 
dollars,  or  the  like  ;  and  his  money  is  only  current  in  his  own  land,  and  he  has  got 
to  get  it  changed  before  he  can  make  his  purchases.  So  with  a  pocketful  of  it  he 
may  as  well  be  penniless.  And,  in  like  fashion,  you  and  I,  with  all  our  strenuous 
efiforts,  which  we  are  bound  to  make  and  which  there  is  joy  in  making,  after  these 
lower  things  that  correspond  to  our  efforts,  find  that  we  have  no  coinage  that  ^dll 
buy  the  good  things  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  without  which  we  faint  and  die. 
{A.  Maclaran,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money. —  Weighing  money: — In  the  first  clause 
there  is  reference  to  the  primitive  custom  of  weighing  instead  of  counting  money, 
fipom  which  have  arisen  several  of  the  most  familiar  denominations,  such  as  the 
Hebrew  "shekel,"  the  Greek  "talent,"  the  French  "livre,"  and  the  English 
"pound."  The  essential  idea  is  that  of  paying.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  folly  of 
man  as  a  worker: — I.  Here  is  the  kecognition  op  the  fact  that  man  is  a 
VOLTTNTART  WORKER.  The  appeal  implies  that  he  is  free  both  in  the  expenditure  of 
his  "money"  and  the  prosecution  of  his  "labour."  Every  part  of  the  universe 
works,  but  man  only  is  a  free  worker.  He  works,  not  as  material  bodies  work,  by 
an  outward  force,  nor  as  brutes,  by  blind  impulses,  but  by  his  own  deliberate  pur- 
pose,— by  choice  and  plan.  There  are  at  least  four  considerations  which  bind,  with 
indissoluble  bonds,  our  faith  to  the  doctrine  of  man's  voluntary  action.  1.  It  is  not 
impossible  for  the  Almighty  to  create  a  being  that  shall  be  wholly  free  in  action. 
2.  There  is  an  antecedent  probability  that  He  would  create  such  a  being.  A  creature 
endowed  with  this  independency  of  action  would  of  all  creatures  be  most  like 
Himself,  most  fitted  to  show  forth  His  glory.  And  as  He  created  the  universe  for 
the  manifestation  of  Himself,  would  it  not  be  probable  that,  having  the  power  to  do 
so.  He  would  create  beings  of  a  type  that  should  most  fully  reflect  Himself  ?  "  How 
would  it  now  look  to  you,"  says  the  philosophic  Saxon,  King  Alfred,  "  if  there  were 
any  very  powerful  king,  and  he  had  no  freemen  in  all  his  kingdom,  but  that  all  were 
slaves  ? "  "  Then,"  said  I,  "  it  would  be  thought  by  me  neither  right  nor  reasonable 
if  men  that  were  in  a  servile  condition  only,  should  attend  upon  him."  "  Then  " 
quoth  he,  "it  would  be  more  unnatural  if  God,  in  all  His  kingdom,  had  no  free 
creatiire  under  his  power."  Therefore,  He  made  two  rational  creatures,  free  angels 
and  men,  and  gave  them  the  great  gift  of  freedom.  3.  The  mental  constitution  of 
man  seems  to  provide  for  this  freedom  of  action.  Man  is  so  formed  that  he  always 
acts  from  purpose.  4.  The  consciousness  of  universal  man  attests  the  fact  of  human 
freedom.     II.  Here  is  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  man  as  a  voluntary 

WORKER  should  AIM  AT  THE  ATTAINMENT  OF  MORALLY  STRENGTHENING  AND 

satisfying  GOOD.  "What  is  the  moral  bread  ?  Ask  first  what  is  the  strength  of  the 
soul,— the  moral  stamina?  Godliness.  Where  is  the  "bread"  which  both 
strengthens  and  satisfies  the  soul  ?  Christ  says,  "  I  am  the  Bread  of  life." 
III.  Here  is  the  recognition  op  the  fact  that  man,  as  a  voluntary 
WORKER,  FREQUENTLY  MISAPPLIES  HIS  POWER.  He  spends  his  "money"  for  that 
which  is  not  "bread,"  and  his  labour  for  that  which  " satisfieth  not."  What  is  it 
to  expend  your  property  and  labour  in  vain  ?  1.  To  strive  after  power  as  the  chief 
end  is  to  do  so.  2.  To  strive  after  wealth  as  the  chief  end  is  to  do  so.  3.  To  strive 
after  knowledge  as  the  chief  end  is  to  do  so.  Neither  scientific  ideas,  nor  poetic 
creations,  nor  artistic  embellishments  are  bread.  4.  To  strive  after  happiness  as  the 
chief  end,  is  to  do  so.  From  this  subject  we  may  infer — (1)  The  immense  amount 
of  waste  human  labour  that  is  constantly  going  on  in  the  world.  (2)  The  well-being 
of  man  consists  not  in  the  form  of  his  laboxir,  but  in  the  principle  that  inspires  ana 
Mntrola  it.  (3)  The  exquisite  fitness  of  Christiamty  to  man's  condition.   {Homilist.) 


908  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lv. 

Folly  and  Wisdom: — I.  A  foolish  cottrsb  to  be  avoided.  II.  A  wiss  method 
TO  BE  PUBSTTED.  (5.  W.  Pritchard,  Ph.D.)  Ood's  provision  for  man's  need: — 
"What  ia  man's  way  of  meeting  this  great  need  ?  Spending  money  and  kbour  for 
that  which  does  not  satisfy ;  in  other  words,  using  every  means  he  can  command, 
■ave  the  only  right  and  true  means,  to  satis^  the  cravings  of  his  immortal  nature  ; 
a  course  that  will  prove  fatal  to  his  deathless  interests  if  persisted  in.  But  God 
meets  him  and — I.  Challenges  this  fatal  error.  "Wherefore  do  ye  spend 
money,"  etc.  The  "  wherefore  "  of  the  text  implies  three  things  on  the  part  of  God, 
— benign  condescension ;  surprise ;  and  gentle  chiding.  TVue  life  is  impossible  where 
the  bread  of  life  is  not  eaten.  1.  Observation  proves  this.  2.  Experience  sustains 
the  same  truth.  3.  History  illustrates  the  same  fact.  4.  The  Bible  affirms  the  same 
doctrine.  II.  Men  who  seek  these  things  as  the  highest  good  are  in  a  state 
OF  constant  httnger  and  unrest.  It  is  not  bread,  it  does  not "  satisfy."  III.  God's 
plan  of  meeting  the  sottl's  true  wants.  Three  terms  are  used  of  similar  import, 
and  that  are  of  first  importance  to  us,  if  we  would  put  ourselves  into  harmony  with 
the  plan  of  God  in  relation  to  our  good,  "Hearken,"  "hear,"  and  "incline  your 
ear.  These  terms  imply  humUity,  docility  and  reverent  attention.  1.  God  credits 
man  with  the  capacity  to  receive  and  obey  His  communications.  2.  (Jod  speaks  to 
man,  revealing  His  will,  unfolding  His  way  of  meeting  the  deepest  needs  of  our 
nature.  8.  These  Divine  conmiunications  relate  to  our  highest  good.  "Eat  ye  that 
which  is  good."  4.  These  provisions  are  richly  abundant.  "  Let  your  soul  delight 
itself  in  fatness."  "  Delight "  and  ' '  fatness  "  are  two  very  prolific  words  and  supply 
the  fancy  with  almost  boundless  range.  5.  There  is  life  through  obedience  to  the 
Divine  plan.  "Hear,  and  your  soiu  shall  live."  6.  The  blessings  God  offers  are 
lasting  as  they  are  excellent.  "  I  wiU  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,"  etc. 
"  An  everlastmg  covenant  "  points  to  God's  unchangeableness,  and  to  His  being  ever 
ready  to  redeem  all  the  pledges  of  His  love  and  mercy.  What  should  be  the  soul's 
attitude  towards  God  while  He  makes  these  rich  communications  ?  "  Hearken  dili- 
gently," "Incline  your  ear,"  "Come  unto  Me."  How  striking  the  order!  The 
attention  is  first  arrested,  then  absorbed,  then  the  soul  draws  near  to  God  with  pro- 
found interest  in  the  revelation,  ready  to  take  the  offered  grace.  {J.  Biggins.) 
The  false  and  true  in  pleasure: — I.  The  false.  1.  The  false  is  expensive.  All 
false  pleasure  is  sought  from  one  or  other  of  the  following  sources — sensual  gratifica- 
tion, secular  wealth,  or  popular  fame — each  very  expensive.  They  cost  what  is 
infinitely  more  precious  than  gold — time,  energy,  moral  peace,  mental  independency, 
and  frequently  health.  2.  The  false  is  not  sustaining  :  it  is  not  "  bread."  "Were  it 
obtained,  it  would  not  strengthen.  It  does  not  give  mental  strength :  sensuality 
enervates  the  intellect.  The  love  of  gain  makes  man  a  tactician,  not  a  thinker. 
The  breath  of  mammon  is  poison  to  a  free  intellect,  and  the  love  of  fame  fills  the 
mind  with  the  unhealthy  sentiment  of  vanity  ;  nor  does  it  give  spiritual  strength — 
strength  to  resist  temptation — to  bear  trials — to  help  humanity — to  serve  God— to 
face  death.  It  destroys  this.  3.  The  false  is  not  satisfactory.  "  Satisfieth  not" 
II.  The  true.  1.  True  pleasure  consists  in  spiritual  communications  from  God. 
"  Hearken  diligently  unto  Me,"  etc.  Three  things  are  implied  in  this  language  : — 
(1)  That  God  has  made  spiritual  communications  to  man.  This  is  a  fact.  They  are 
the  substance  of  the  Bible.  (2)  That  man  has  a  capacity  to  appreciate  these  com- 
munications. A  wonderful  argument  this  for  the  native  dignity  of  the  soul. 
(3)  That  to  appreciate  these  communications  requires  the  most  diligent  study.  The 
Bible  ia  a  diflicult  book,  challenging  the  concentration  of  intellectual  power.  2.  That 
the  pleasure  thus  derived  is  of  the  highest  conceivable  description  (1)  Essentially 
excellent; — "good."  (2)  Abimdantly  sufficient — "delights  itself  in  fatness."  (3) 
Spiritually  quickening — "your  soul  shall  live."  3.  That  the  continuation  of  this, 
the  highest  pleasure,  is  guaranteed  by  the  solemn  assurance  of  God.  "And  I  will 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you."  Here  is  a  pledge  of  its  perpetuity.  If  a 
promise  is  not  fulfiUed,  it  must  be  for  one  of  three  reasons :  either  that  the  author 
was  insincere  when  it  was  made,  or  that  he  subsequently  changed  his  mind,  or  lacked 
the  necessary  power  to  redeem  the  pledge.  Neither  of  these  suppositions  is  admis- 
■ible;  therefore,  this  true  pleasure  is  everlasting.  {Homilist.)  Food  for  the  soul : — 
1.  Everything  that  has  life  must  have  food.  2.  Man  has  the  nature  and  wants  of  an 
animaL  He  also  has  a  higher  nature  that  takes  hold  of  truth  and  God.  He  has, 
therefore,  to  oare  for  a  double  life.  8.  The  text  means  that  we  put  much  into  one 
■ide  of  life,  hoping  vainly  for  an  equivalent  of  happiness  on  the  other.  The  soul 
miut  have  other  food.  4.  For  this  want  there  is  a  kind  of  borderland  provision  in 
Ohmeh  forma.    But  religion  cannot  tany  ia  this  borderland.    6.  So  wa  riae  to  tha 

I 


CHAP.  LT.]  ISAIAH.  207 

troth  that  the  soul's  life  is  in  God.  [H.  W.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Foolish  neglect  and 
fruitUss  labour: — 1.  All  the  good  that  Christ  doth  offer,  and  all  the  gracious  terms 
npon  which  He  doth  offer  are  sometimes  slighted  and  refused  by  sinners.  2.  Sinnera 
are  earnestly  labouring  and  trading  for  vain  and  unprofitable  things,  when  the  great 
things  of  Christ  are  offered  to  them.  3.  All  the  cost  which  men  lay  out,  and  all  the 
pains  which  men  do  take  for  salvation  from  anything  besides  Christ,  or  in  any  other 
way  than  Christ's  way,  are  utterly  fruitless.  {0.  Sedgvnch,  B.D.)  The  folly  of 
pursuing  that  which  does  not  satisfy : — I.  All  other  things  besides  those  which 
Christ  doth  offer,  are  vain  and  unprofitable.  II.  Sinners  do  laboriously 
PURSUE  them,  when  yet  Christ  doth  offer  unto  them  the  chiefest  good  for  their  souls. 
III.  Wht  sinners  do  this.  IV.  The  extreme  folly  of  this.  [Ibid.) 
"No  bread: " — The  Hebrew  term,  "for  that  which  is  not  bread,"  reads  more  cor- 
rectly, "for  that  which  is  no-bread."  It  means  that  for  which  men  spend  their 
energies  is  "no-bread,"  it  is  the  negative  of  bread;  it  is  the  very  opposite  of 
bread.  It  is  that  which  not  only  does  not  alleviate  our  hunger,  but  makes  us 
more  hungry !  It  does  not  fill  our  emptiness,  but  makes  us  more  empty  than 
ever.  Not  only  does  it  fail  to  satisfy,  but  it  makes  us  more  dissatisfied !  Just  as 
salt  water  not  only  fails  to  quench  the  thirst,  but  aggravates  it.  {A.  S.  Gumbart.) 
Hearken  diligently  unto  Me. — Hearkening  a/nd  eating .- — Two  thoughts  are  brought 
to  our  attention,  as  indicating  the  steps  by  which  we  bring  ourselves  into  that 
blessed  experience  in  which  we  may  be  conscious  of  having  received  the  gift  of  God. 
1.  "We  must  listen  diligently.  "  Hearken  diligently  unto  Me."  That  is,  hearken  with 
intense  desire  and  eagerness.  In  the  third  verse  God  says  :  "  Incline  your  ear,  and 
come  unto  Me."  Thjs  word  "  incline  "  is  a  strong  word  ;  it  carries  with  it  the  idea 
of  stretching  the  neck,  as  one  anxiously,  eagerly  listening,  or  as  a  hound  in  pursuine 
game.  2.  The  second  thing  is,  Eat.  "  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good. "  [A.  S.Gumbart?^ 
God's  call  should  be  heeded : — There  are  six  arguments  which  I  would  make  use  of  to 
persuade  you  to  embrace  this  coimsel.  1.  Christ  offers  you  the  best  things — better 
things  than  the  world  can  afford  you.  2.  Christ  offers  unto  you  the  things  that  are 
best  for  you.  3.  You  may  have  these  earthly  things  upon  better  terms  if  you  could 
close  with  the  things  which  Christ  doth  offer.  4.  Christ  alone  is  a  portion,  infinitely 
better  than  all  the  world  alone.  5.  You  wiU  lose  Christ,  and  all  these  things  of  the 
world  too,  by  neglecting  Christ,  and  preferring  before  Him  these  things  of  the  world, 
6.  You  cannot  dnve both  these  trades  together.  {0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)  Hearkening: — 
There  are  five  things  which  that  word  doth  denote.  1.  A  taking  into  our  ears 
sounds,  words,  messages,  reports,  spoken  unto  us.  2.  Sometimes  to  hear  is  the 
same  with  to  understand.  3.  Sometimes  the  same  with  to  believe.  4.  Sometimes 
to  regard  and  approve.  5.  Sometimes  to  obey,  to  follow  what  is  said.  {Ibid.) 
Diligent  hearkening  to  Christ : — I.  "What  this  diligent  hearkening  to  Christ 
DOTH  contain  in  it.  He  diligently  hearkens  to  Christ.  1.  Who  doth  carefully 
and  regardfully  observe  Christ  in  His  gracious  offers.  2.  Who  seriously  considers 
all  the  gracious  offers  of  Christ.  3.  Who  judges  highly  of  the  offers  of  Christ. 
4.  Who  obeys  the  voice  of  Christ.  II.  How  it  mat  appear  that  Jesus  Christ 
18  earnest  and  importunate  with  sinners,  diligently  to  hearken  unto  Him. 
1.  By  the  gradations  of  His  dealings  with  sinners.  (1)  He  opens  and  proclaims  the 
way  of  Kfe  and  happiness  to  them  (John  xiv.  6).  (2)  He  presents  this  salvation  to 
them  (Acts  xiii.  26).  (3)  He  encourages  them  to  come  from  the  certainty  of  all 
good,  from  the  graciousness  of  His  own  terms — "  Come,  and  bn?  without  money  ; " 
and  from  the  acceptance  of  their  persons  (John  vi.  37).  (4)  He  entreats  them  to 
hearken  unto  Him  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  (5)  He  commands  them  authoritatively  to  obey 
His  voice  (1  John  iii.  23).  (6)  He  allures  them  with  all  sorts  of  promises.  (7)  Efe 
shows  them  the  greatness  and  inevitableness  of  their  danger,  if  they  refuse  to  hearken 
(John  viii.  24  ;  Heb.  ii.  3).  (8)  He  expressly  threatens  a  peremptory  damnation,  if 
sinners  ■will  not  hearken  (Mark  xvi.  16).  (9)  He  furnishes  ambassadors  with  all 
sorts  of  gifts,  to  enable  them  to  deal,  and  treat,  and  woo,  and  work  on  sinners  to 
hearken.  (10)  He  is  content  to  pass  by  all  the  days  of  ignorance.  (11)  He  lets  a 
light  into  their  minds  which  shows  them  a  personal  and  absolute  need  of  Himself. 
(12)  He  disproves,  confutes  and  shames  all  the  carnal  arguments  of  sinners.  (13) 
He  affects  the  hearts  and  wills  of  sinners  by  many  strivings  of  His  Spirit.  (14)  He 
rouses  the  drowsy,  careless  sinner  by  outward  special  affictions.  (15)  He  breaks  up 
the  consciences  of  sinners,  so  that  the  terms  of  God  fall  on  them.  (16)  He  cuts  off 
all  their  confidence  in  this  distressed  condition,  so  that  no  course  shall  ease  or  quiet 
or  help.  (17)  He  takes  the  opportunity,  and,  in  this  broken  condition,  sends 
messengers  of  hope  and  mercy  to  the  sinner  (Acts  ix,  10,  11).    (18)  He  answen  all . 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

the  fears  and  doubts  of  sinners,  both  in  respect  of  Himself  (1  John  ii.  1 ;  Rev.  iiL 
20) ;  and  in  respect  of  themselves — assuring  them  that  neither  the  multitude  of 
fonner  sins  nor  abundance  of  present  wants  shall  hinder  mercy  and  salvation,  if  they 
■will  hearken  and  come.  (19)  He  advances  instances  how  sinners  have  fared  by 
hearkening  and  coming  to  Him,  e.  g.  the  jailor,  Mary  Magdalene,  Saul  of  Tarsus 
(1  Tim.  i.  16).  (20)  If  none  of  these  prevail  with  sinners  to  hearken,  then  doth 
Christ  take  His  utter  farewell  of  them  with  sighs  and  tears  (Luke  xix.  41,  42). 
2.  By  the  qualities  of  His  voice.  It  is — (1)  a  plain  voice,  easy  to  be  understood. 
(2)  A  high  voice  (John  vii.  37).  (3)  Long  and  patient  (Rom.  x.  21).  (4)  In  season 
and  out  of  season.  (5)  Quick.  To  the  ear,  thence  to  the  mind,  thence  to  the 
conscience.  (6)  Expostulating.  (7)  Very  pressing.  III.  Why  Jesus  Christ  is 
so  IMPORTTTNATE  WITH  SINNERS  TO  HEARKEN  UNTO  HiM.  There  are  reasons  for 
this:  1,  In  respect  of  sinners.  (1)  Because  of  their  dulness  and  slowness.  (2) 
Because  sinners  are  careless.  (3)  Because  they  are  very  unteachable.  (4)  Because 
they  are  backward  to  hearken,  and  accept  His  gracious  offers.  (5)  Because  they 
are  very  perverse  and  desperate  (Zech.  vii.  11,  12 ;  Acts  vii.  51).  2.  In  respect  of 
Christ  Himself.  (1)  Because  He  is  Christ,  full  of  compassion.  (2)  Because  He 
knows  the  condition  of  our  souls  :  (a)  their  worth,  (&)  their  lost  condition,  (c)  the 
wrath  which  will  certainly  befall  disobedient  souls,  {d)  wherein  real  happiness  lies, 
(e)  the  difficulty  of  gaining  souls,  (/)  what  power  Satan  hath  with  our  souls.  {Ibid.) 
Eat  ye  that  which  is  good. — Feeding  on  the  Word: — I.  Here  is  food.  "  Eat  ye 
that  which  is  good."  1.  How  is  it  presented  to  us?  Freely.  There  was  a  word 
about  buying  ;  but  that  was  soon  covered  up  with,  "  Buy  without  money  and  with- 
out price."  While  it  is  thus  presented  freely  as  to  any  labour  with  which  to  procure 
it,  it  is  also  presented  freely  as  to  its  quality,  its  highest  quality.  You  are  not  per- 
mitted to  drink  freely  of  water,  and  then  to  purchase  wine.  The  richest  dainties  of 
God's  house  are  as  free  as  the  bread  He  gives  to  hungry  souls.  The  only  limitation 
is  no  limitation  at  all :  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth  !  "  2.  What  is  this  food  ? 
(1)  The  Word  of  God.  (2)  Better  still,  the  incarnate  Word  of  God.  (3)  The  grace 
of  God.  3.  What  is  the  nature  of  this  food  ?  It  is  in  every  sense  of  the  word 
"good."  It  is  satisfying.  It  is  pure  ;  no  harm  can  ever  come  by  eating  it.  This 
heavenly  food  is  good  for  you  at  any  time,  good  for  you  living,  good  for  you  dying. 
All  other  foods  uiat  men  seek  after  are  unsubstantial ;  they  can  surfeit,  but  they 
cannot  satisfy  ;  they  can  cloy,  but  they  cannot  content ;  but  the  food  that  has  come 
down  from  heaven,  if  a  man  does  but  take  it  into  himself,  shall  be  the  best  food  he 
ever  ate.  Moreover,  this  food  is  described  here  as  being  fatness.  *'  Let  thy  soul 
delight  itself  in  fatness."  Within  the  Word  of  God,  there  are  certain  choicer 
truths  ;  in  Christ,  there  are  certain  choicer  joys  ;  in  grace,  there  are  certain  choicer 
experiences  than  men  at  first  realize.  II.  Here  is  feeding.  One  of  the  most 
important  words  in  our  text  is  that  little  word  "  eat."  Food  is  of  no  use  until  it  is 
eaten.  You  ought  not  to  need  any  instruction  on  this  point.  We  take  a  great 
many  orphans  into  the  Orphanage,  and  some  of  them  are  very  ignorant,  and  we 
have  to  teach  them  a  great  many  things  ;  but  we  have  no  class  for  teaching  them  to 
eat.  If  men  were  hungry,  they  would  know  how  to  eat,  if  they  had  the  bread.  It 
is  because  men  are  not  reaUy  hungry  on  account  of  sin  that  they  come  and  ask  us, 
"What  do  you  mean  by  this  eating?"  Yet  it  may  be  that  some  are  sincere  in 
asking  the  question,  so  I  will  answer  it.  1.  To  eat  is  to  believe.  2.  To  eat  is 
chiefly  to  appropriate.  3.  The  fuU  process  of  eating  includes  digestion.  How  do  I 
digest  the  Word  of  God?  When  I  meditate  upon  it.  4.  Feeding  also  means 
trusting  yourself  wholly  to  Christ.  III.  Welcome.  What  does  the  Lord  say  ? 
"  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness."  1.  Here  is 
no  stint.  It  is  not  said,  "  Here  is  a  pair  of  scales  ;  here  is  a  plate  ;  here  is  a  knife. 
The  law  allows  so  many  ounces  of  meat  to  you,  just  so  much,  and  yon  must  not  have 
half-an-ounce  over."  Nothing  of  the  kind.  You  are  just  taken  to  the  table,  and 
the  exhortation  is,  "Eat  to  your  heart's  content."  2.  As  there  is  no  stint,  so 
there  is  no  reserve.  It  is  not  said,  "  Now  you  may  eat  those  two  things  ;  but  you 
must  not  touch  that  nice  fat  morsel  over  there  ;  that  is  for  the  particular  favourite, 
not  for  you."  No,  when  God  invites  you  to  His  table,  you  may  have  anything 
there  is  on  the  table.  3.  So,  too,  there  is  no  end  to  the  feast.  "  Keep  on  delight- 
ing yourself  in  fatness.  You  will  never  use  it  all  up. "  I  read  of  a  country  once, 
though  I  hardly  believed  the  description  of  it ;  for  it  was  said  that  the  grass  grew 
faster  than  the  cows  could  eat  it.  Well,  there  is  a  country  that  I  know  of,  wnera 
the  CTass  grows  faster  than  the  sheep  can  eat  it.  You  may  eat  all  you  will  out  of 
the  Divine  Word ;  but  you  wiU  find  that  there  is  more  left  than  you  have  taken  ; 


CHIP.  iT.l  ISAIAH.  209 

and  it  seems  as  if  there  were  more  after  you  had  taken  it,  as  if  the  grass  grew  deeper 
as  you  fed  more  ravenously  upon  it.  IV.  Delight.  1.  There  is  no  peril  in  holy 
joy,  in  delighting  yourself  in  God's  Word,  and  delighting  yourself  in  Christ. 
2.  There  Tipill  be  no  idleness  or  selfishness  produced  by  this  fat  feeding.  3.  May  you 
also  attain  a  sense  of  holy  security  1  4.  Then,  may  you  come  into  a  state  of  perfect 
rest !  5.  May  you  also  come  into  a  state  of  complete  resignation  to  the  will  of  God ! 
6.  May  you  be  filled  with  a  happy  expectancy !  {C.  H.  Sjntrgeon.)  The  soul's  best 
food: — I.  The  reason  for  the  exhortation  in  our  text:  " Eat  ye  that  which 
is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness."  1.  The  exceeding  bountifulness 
of  God  ia  Christ  Jesus.  The  invitation  here  given  is  in  accordance  with  the  character 
of  the  God  who  gives  it.  2.  The  abundant  provision  that  He  has  made  for  the 
supply  of  our  needs.  If  any  of  you  prepared  a  feast,  it  would  be  very  grievous  to 
you  if  your  friends  did  not  eat  what  you  had  provided.  It  is  the  very  heart  of  God 
speakiag  in  these  words,  and  it  is  the  provision  of  God's  grace  claiming  to  be  con- 
sumed,— God's  love  pleading  that  what  He  has  provided  so  bountifully  should  not  be 
lost  or  wasted.  3.  The  Divine  desire  for  fellowship.  Almost  always,  when  fellow- 
ship is  spoken  of  in  relation  to  God,  expressions  which  concern  eating  are  used. 
Fellowship  begins,  as  it  were,  at  the  passover,  at  the  eating  of  the  lamb.  In  the 
tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  the  oQ'erings  were  not  all  burnt  upon  the  altar ;  many 
of  them  were  partaken  of  by  both  the  oSerer  and  the  priest,  and  by  God  as  repre- 
sented by  the  devouring  flame.  So,  when  Jesus  instituted  that  blessed  memorial 
supper,  He  said  to  His  disciples,  concerning  the  bread,  "Take,  eat;"  and, 
concerning  the  cup,  "Drink  ye  all  of  it."  When,  in  the  Revelation,  He  said 
to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Laodicea,  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and 
knock,"  you  know  how  He  goes  on  to  say,  "If  any  man  hear  My  voice,  and 
open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  wiU  sup  with  him,  and  he  with 
Me."  This  appears  to  be  God's  favourite  image  to  express  fellowship.  4.  Our 
exceeding  great  necessities.  You  must  eat,  so  "eat  ye  that  which  is  good." 
Your  soul  needs  the  best  food,  so  "  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness," 
in  the  fat  and  dainty  morsels  which  the  great  God,  who  understands  us  even 
better  than  we  understand  ourselves,  has  so  bountifully  provided  for  us. 
5.  Our  extreme  foolishness.  What  a  stupid  animal  man  must  be  to  need  to  be  told 
to  eat,  and  be  urged  to  eat  that  which  is  good  I  The  little  lamb,  in  the  meadow, 
has  scarcely  come  into  the  world  before  it  finds  out  where  its  mother's  milk  is,  and 
very  soon  it  begins  to  crop  the  tender  herbage,  and  to  find  food  for  itself.  Most 
creatures,  by  what  we  call  instinct,  discover  their  own  natural  food ;  but  here  ia 
man,  so  foolish,  so  mad,  so  much  more  wild  than  the  wild  ass's  colt,  that  he  needs 
to  be  told  to  eat,  spiritually.  One  part  of  human  foolishness  lies  in  the  fact  that  we 
so  often  seek  that  which  is  not  good  for  us,  so  that  the  Lord  has  to  say  to  us, 
"  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ? "  Man  is  described  in 
Scripture  as  feeding  upon  ashes.  It  is  not  only  that  we  are  willing  to  eat  that  which 
is  evU,  but  that  we  are  imwilling  to  eat  that  which  is  good.  Many  persons  will  hear 
that  which  is  good,  and  wUl  evenassent  to  our  declaration  that  it  is  good ;  yet  they 
do  not  eat  it.  What  is  spiritual  eating  ?  It  is  the  inward  reception  of  the  truth  of 
God  into  the  souL  To  hear  the  truth  is,  as  it  were,  to  see  the  bread.  To  think 
upon  the  truth  is,  as  it  were,  to  cut  the  bread,  and  put  it  on  the  plate.  But  this 
will  never  nourish  any  man ;  he  must  take  the  bread  into  his  inward  parts,  and 
digest  and  assimilate  it.  There  is  this  folly  even  about  God's  own  children,  that 
they  do  not  eat  that  which  is  good  according  to  the  lavish,  inexhaustible  fulness 
provided  by  God.  * '  Let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness. "  How  very  few  minutes 
m  a  day  most  of  us  spend  in  feeding  our  souls  I  6.  Our  fears.  There  is  many  a 
child  of  God,  who  longs  for  spiritual  food,  but  he  is  afraid  that  he  would  be  guilty 
of  presumption  if  he  ate  it ;  so,  when  there  is  a  very  fat  piece  that  is  just  going  into 
his  mouth,  he  says,  "  No,  that  cannot  be  for  me,"  and  he  draws  back  from  it.  Just 
look  at  the  text :  "  Let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness."  II.  The  benefits  of 
OBEYING  THE  COMMAND  OF  THE  TEXT.  1.  The  pleasure  of  it.  "  Let  your  soul 
delight  itself  in  fatness."  2.  The  great  preserving  power  of  good  spiritual  food.  It 
helps  to  keep  us  out  of  temptation.  3.  Spiritual  food  comforts  mourners.  The 
analogy  of  this  will  be  found  in  Neh.  viiL  9,  10.  It  was  of  this  that  Mary  sang, 
"He  hath  fiUed  the  hungry  with  good  things."  4.  It  revives  the  fainting  ones. 
5.  Spiritual  eating  is  also  a  great  strength  for  service.  6.  It  fits  us  to  feed  others. 
Ezekiel  had  to  go  and  speak  to  the  house  of  Israel  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ;  do  you 
remember  his  preparation  for  that  task, — the  college  to  which  he  went  ?  He  saw  a 
hand,  which  held  a  roU  of  a  book,  and  a  voice  said  to  him,  "  Son  of  man,  eat  that 
YOU  lu.  14 


aiO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  lt^ 

thou  findest ;  eat  this  roll,  and  go  speak  unto  the  house  of  Israel."  He  cannot 
preach  till  he  has  eaten  the  roll.  I  believe  that,  in  the  courts  of  law,  young  men 
nave  to  eat  themselves  into  the  profession  ;  beside  all  other  qualifications,  they  must 
eat  a  certain  number  of  dinners  before  they  can  be  fully  certificated.  It  is  a  strange 
regulation  with  regard  to  earthly  courts,  but  it  is  a  right  and  proper  thing  in  the 
courts  of  heaven.  7.  It  is  the  best  mode  of  fellowship.  Feed  on  the  Word  of  God ; 
especially  feed  on  the  Incarnate  Word ;  otherwise,  you  cannot  possibly  enter  into 
true  spiritual  fellowship  with  God.  8.  Feeding  upon  the  Word  is  the  best  way  of 
promoting  praise.  You  know  how  the  103rd  Psalm  begins :  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my 
soul :  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  His  holy  name."  Then,  a  little  further  on, 
the  psalmist  says,  "  Who  satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  good  things  ;  so  that  thy  youth 
is  renewed  like  the  eagle's. "  A  hungry  soul  cannot  sing  well ;  the  soul  that  best 
sings  the  praises  of  God  is  the  one  that  has  delighted  itself  with  the  fatness  of  the 
Divine  provision.  (^Ihid.)  "  Fatness  "  in  the  Scriptures  is  used  to  denote  the  richest 
food  (Gen.  xxviL  28-39  ;  Job  xxxvi.  16  ;  Ps.  Ixv.  11),  and  hence  is  an  emblem  of  the 
rich  and  abundant  blessings  resulting  from  the  favour  of  God  (Ps.  xxxvi.  8  ;  Ixiii.  5). 
{A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  The  path  of  life : — Professor  George  Adam  Smith  talks  about 
what  he  considers  the  greatest  pathos  of  our  life  on  earth — it  is  the  fact  that  so  many 
million  souls  are  unconsciously  starving  right  within  reach  of  the  food  they  need. 
They  have  only  to  stretch  out  their  hands  and  take  the  bread  of  life,  but  their  handa 
are  glued  to  their  sides.  An  v/asuUable  diet : — Some  German  women  have  fallen  into 
the  habit  of  "naschen,"  i.e.  of  nibbling  comfits  and  cakes  all  day  long.  They 
carry  "  comets  "  of  bon-bons  in  their  pockets,  and  nibble  at  them  continually.  No 
one  wonders  that  they  suffer  greatly  from  disordered  digestion's,  and  become  sallow, 
and  irritable,  and  old  before  their  time.  And  does  not  plain  common-sense  teach  us 
that,  when  people  feed  their  souls  upon  a  diet  of  novels,  or  of  gossip,  or  of  frivolities 
of  every  kind,  they  must  necessarily  suffer  from  languor  of  spiritual  life,  debility  of 
spiritual  digestion,  Mlure  of  vitaUl^,  and  a  oreeping  moral  paralysis,  (ifrt.  S.  W. 
Smith.) 

Ver.  3.  Incline  your  ear. — OocTs  voice : — ^To  incline  your  ear  and  hearken  diligently 
unto  God  is  to  follow  the  Divine  teachings  as  to  the  aims  and  methods  of  life.  And 
God  has  a  thousand  voices  for  those  who  will  hearken.  1.  The  voice  of  experience 
is  His,  and  experience  is  loud  and  emphatic  in  assuring  us  that  "  if  we  live  after  the 
flesh  we  shall  die  ;  but  if  we,  through  the  Spirit,  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body 
we  shall  live."  2.  The  voice  in  the  heart  and  conscience  is  His,  and  if  you  will  listen 
in  the  silence  of  the  mind  you  will  hear  the  sweet  parental  accents  speaking  to  your 
deepest  filial  affection,  and  saying,  "My  son,  give  Me  thine  heart."  3.  And  the 
voice  of  inspiration  is  His,  speaking  through  those  who  have  seen  most  deeply  into 
the  Divine  meaning  of  life,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  with  them  has 
been,  "  Fear  God  and  keep  His  commandments,  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man." 
4.  And  the  voice  of  Christ  is  the  voice  of  God,  and  "Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying, 
If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."  (C  Sh,ort,  M.A.)  "  Incline 
your  ear  :  " — Hold  it  near  the  mouth  of  the  gracious  Speaker.  Be  wUling  to  hear 
what  God  has  to  say.  Take  out  that  wool  of  prejudice  that  has  prevented  you  from 
hearkening  to  God's  voice.  {C.  H.  Spwrgeon. )  The  Divine  call  and,  promise : — ^The 
institution  of  public  worship  derives  a  peculiar  value  from  its  tendency  to  dispose 
men  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God.  I.  'The  gracious  proposal  on  the  part  of 
God.  "  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,"  etc.  The  covenant  here 
proposed  is  a  covenant  of  promise,  that  ia,  a  covenant  in  which  God  promises  to 
bestow  freely  upon  His  creatures  a  variety  of  the  greatest  and  most  necessary 
blessings.  1?wo  things  here  call  for  our  attention — 1.  The  extent  here  specified  of 
the  engagements  of  the  covenant.  "The  sure  mercies  of  David."  This  covenant 
was  first  discovered  to  Adam,  more  fully  to  Abraham,  stUl  more  so  to  David,  who 
was  an  eminent  type  of  Christ.  Now  Christ,  the  spiritual  David,  is  come ;  what 
these  sure  mercies  are,  we  know  more  fully-  But  they  are  "sure  mercies,"  which 
lead  to — 2.  The  ground  of  dependence.  The  covenant  is  founded  upon  the  good- 
ness of  God.  Think  of  the  fidelity  of  His  promises  ;  of  His  ability ;  of  the  pledge 
He  has  given  us.  "He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  etc.  Think  of  the  great 
cloud  of  witnesses  who  all  testify  to  the  Divine  character,  and  speak  the  mercies  to 
be  sure.  They  are,  therefore,  "sure  mercies."  Sure  to  all  who  humbly  apply  for 
them  without  exception.  Sure  in  the  effects  they  produce.  Sure  in  all  cnanges. 
These  never  faiL  Sure  in  another  state  of  existence,  for  it  is  an  everlasting  covenant 
administered  by  an  Eternal  Being.    IL  Thx  keans  of  oub  sscubino  these  bukm 


CHAP.  Lv.]  ISAIAH.  211 

MEKciES  OF  David.  "Incline  yonr  oar,  and  come  nnto  Me."  1.  The  Person 
speaking  ought  to  induce  attention.  It  is  the  Lord,  our  Maker,  Preserver, 
Redeemer.     2.  The  interest  we  have  in  the  subject  ought  to  induce  attention. 

3.  Our  attention  must  lead  us  to  God.     "  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  Me." 

4.  The  amazing  issues  which  depend  on  our  obedience  should  lead  us  at  once  to 
obey.  "Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  {J.  Bolton,  B.A.)  Ghd's  own  Oospel 
call: — ^This  very  memorable  chapter  may  be  called  God's  own  Gospel  sermon. 

I.  Two  SAVING  PEECEPTS,  wMch  are  pressed  upon  you.  These  are  of  simple 
character.  1.  "Incline  your  ear."  This  is  placed  in  another  form,  "Hearken 
diligently  unto  Me  ;  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  You  have  ears  to  hear  with, 
therefore  hear.  Consider  and  think  upon  eternal  things.  Think  about  Divine 
matters  as  God  sets  them  before  you.  This  attention,  this  hearkening,  must  be 
hearty,  honest,  continual,  earnest  and  believing.  2.  The  second  precept  grows  out 
of  the  first :  "  Come  unto  Me."  "  How  can  I  come  to  God  1 "  saith  one.  1.  Come, 
at  least,  by  thinking  much  of  Him.  2.  Come,  by  your  desires.  3.  Come,  by 
confession  of  sin.  4.  Come,  in  humble,  believing  prayer.  These  are  the  two 
precepts — "Hear"  and  "Come."    They  are  neither  exacting  nor  unreasonable. 

II.  To  encourage  you,  and  come  to  my  second  head,  which  deals  with  saving 
PEOMISES.  Here  are  two  promises  corresponding  to  the  two  precepts — 1.  "Your 
soul  shall  live."  2.  "I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you."  (1)  Observe, 
how  He  promises  condescending  intercourse.  It  is  in  the  Hebrew,  "  I  will  cut  s 
covenant. "  Covenants  were  made  by  cutting  a  victim  in  two,  and  they  who  made 
a  covenant  passed  between  the  two  halves  of  the  sacrifice  to  make  the  covenant  sure. 
The  Lord,  m  effect,  says,  "Poor,  wretched  sinner,  you  that  have  not  a  penny  to 
buy  water  with,  if  you  will  come  to  Me,  I  will  enter  into  a  sacred  agreement  and 
covenant  with  you."  (2)  God  is  ready  to  enter  into  a  binding  contract  with  you. 
(3)  God  will  thus  enter  into  an  unending  alliance  with  you.  (4)  "We  liken  what  He 
gives  to  the  sinner  to  what  He  did  to  David  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  The  covenant  is  all 
in  Christ.  III.  Urge  the  Lord's  own  saving  pleas.  1.  God  Himself  speaks  to 
you.  2.  Your  day  of  mercy  is  not  ended  (ver.  6).  3.  He  is  ready  and  willing  to 
forgive  the  whole  of  your  past  offences  (ver.  7).  4.  Then  comes  in  the  great 
persuasive  of  the  magnanimity  of  God  (vers.  8,  9).  5.  Hear  how  the  Lord  pleads 
the  power  of  His  Gospel  (vers.  10,  11).  Hearken  to  God's  voice,  and  let  it  enter 
your  heart ;  then  it  will  quicken  and  save  you  as  surely  as  the  sun  and  the  rain 
water  the  earth.  6.  The  Lord  persuades  men  to  come  to  Him  by  telling  them  of 
the  joy  they  will  obtain  in  coming  (ver.  12).  7.  He  calls  you  to  Him  by  the 
effectual  nature  of  His  work  (ver.  13).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  call  to  the  tieedy 
and  sinful : — I.  An  invitation,  addressed  to  us  by  Jehovah  Himself,  to  hearken 
diligently  unto  Him,  to  incline  our  ear,  and  to  come  to  Him.  There  is  something 
peculiarly  touching  in  the  invitations  of  the  Word  of  God,  which,  if  men  would  but 
pause  and  reflect,  could  not  fail  to  make  an  impression  upon  their  hearts.  "  Hearken 
diligently  unto  Me,"  God  says  ;  "  incline  your  ear."  He  would  take  you,  as  it  were, 
each  one  separately  by  himself,  and  reason  and  counsel  with  you.  The  matters  of 
which  He  would  treat  with  you  are  too  important  to  be  handled  in  a  crowd,  too 
sacred  to  be  discussed  amid  the  noise  and  bustle  of  worldly  avocations.  The  Lord 
will  have  sinners  "come"  to  Him  ;  He  will  have  all  distance  annihilated  between 
your  souls  and  Him ;  He  will  have  you  brought  into  the  closest  relationship  and 
communion  with  Himself ;  He  will  have  you  not  only  within  hearing  of  His  voice, 
but  in  His  very  embrace.  II.  The  reasons  foe  otje  closing  with  this  invitation 
are  two,  and  each  of  them  is  very  weighty.  1.  You  will  be  vast  gainers  if  you 
foUow  the  leadings  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  go  into  conference  with  God,  and 
embrace  His  terms.  "  Your  soul  shall  delight  itself  in  fatness."  "  Your  soul  shall 
live."  2.  To  refuse  the  offer  is  to  lose  the  soul.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Salvation 
through  the  ear : — God  hath  ordained — as  it  were  to  cross  the  devil — that  as  death 
entered  into  the  world  through  the  ear,  by  our  first  parents  listening  to  that  old 
man-slayer,  so  should  life  enter  into  the  soul  by  the  same  door.  (/.  Trajyp.)  Hear, 
and  your  soul  shall  live. — The  highest  life : — Life  is  more  than  mere  existence ; 
it  is  the  natural,  healthful,  and  joyous  activity  of  every  part  of  the  being.  It  is- 
eternal  life.  {Christiam  Age.)  The  way  to  life : — I.  The  message  implied.  When  we 
are  commanded  to  "  hear,"  it  is  supposed  that  something  is  spoken :  there  is  a  voice 
which,  in  one  way  or  other,  addresses  us.  This  is  none  else  than  the  voice  of 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  truth,  the  God  of  love,  the  God  of  aU  patience  and  consolation. 
He  speaks  to  us  in  His  good  Word.  II.  The  kegaed  which  this  messagb 
BBHAKDS.     "  Hear."    There  can  be  no  impropriety  in  understanding  this  literally ; 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

and,  in  this  view,  it  condemns  such  as  do  not  hear  the  Gospel  when  it  is  brought  to 
them,  and  they  have  the  opportunity  of  hearing  it.     It  a&o  reproves  such  as  only 
occasionally  hear  the  Gospel.     But  more  is  meant  by  hearing,  in  the  text,  than  your 
presence  in  the  place  where  the  Gospel  is  preached.     1.  Hear  with  attention.     Thus 
the  expression  is  varied,  both  in  this  and  the  preceding  verse  :  "  Hearken  diligently 
unto  Me  ',"  "  iacline  your  ear,"  as  persons  peculiarly  and  closely  attentive.     Some 
marks  of  inattention,  under  the  sound  of  the  Gospel,  are  obvious  enough.     But  we 
cannot  always  judge  of  attention  by  outward  appearances.     Then,  mU  you  heap 
•with  attention,  when  you  are  deeply  convinced  of  the  truth  of  what  you  hear  ;  when 
you  feel  its  vast  importance ;  when  you  are  thoroughly  satisfied  that  the  word  of  the 
Gospel  is  indeed  the  Word  of  God.     2.  Hear  with  affection.     It  is  a  gi-eat  thing  to 
love  the  Gospel.     When  the  Gospel  is  heard  affectionately,  there  is  an  earnest 
concern  to  enjoy  its  invaluable  blessings :    prejudice  falls  before  it ;   there  ia  a 
growing  conformity  to  it.     3.  Hear  with    believing  application.     4.  Hear  with 
obedient  compliance.    This,  indeed,  is  nearly  allied  to  what  has  last  been  mentioned, 
yet  it  includes  something  farther.     Thus  it  is  said,  "  Incline  your  ear,  and  come 
unto  Me : "  not  only  believe  that  these  blessings  of  salvation  are  adapted  to  your 
state,  and  ready  for  your  reception,  but  apply  to  Him  who  has  them  to  bestow.     He 
is  "the  Author  of  eternal  salvation ;"  to  whom?  "to  aU  them  that  obey  Him." 
5.  Hear  with  humble  prayer.     III.  The  advantage  peomised.     "  Your  soul  shall 
live."    Several  things  are  here  observable.     1.  It  is  a  personal  advantage.     Many 
advantages  are  relative  and  distant.     Persons  may  attend  to  various  means  with 
a  view  to  the  good  of  others.     But  this  advantage  is  personally  your  own.     2.  It  ia 
a  spiritual  advantage.     Your  "soul."    To  benefit  the  body  is  something;  to  pre- 
serve its  life,  to  maintain  and  to  improve  its  health,  are  objects  of  real  moment ; 
but  they  sink  into  nothing  compared  with  what  relates  to  the  soul.     3.  It  is  a 
great  advantage.     "  Your  soul  shall  live."    "We  aU  have  some  idea  what  life  is,  and 
we  know  how  highly  it  is  valued.    This  advantage  must  be  of  peculiar  magnitude, 
as  the  soul  is  unspeakably  more  excellent  than  the  body,  and  as  eternity  is  of 
infinitely  higher  moment  than  the  fleeting  shadow  of  time.     The  life  of  the  soul  I 
What  does  it  denote  ?    What  does  it  include  ?    The  commencement  of  the  life  of 
the  soul  is  in  regeneration.     4.  It  is  a  sure  advantage.     Application:    1.  The 
message  of  the  Gospel  is  brought  to  you.     2.  What  is  the  regard  which  you  are 
giving  to  this  message  ?    3.  What  is  your  experience  of  this  advantage  ?    {T.  Kidd.) 
Life  in  Christ : — I.  What  life  that  is  which  a  soul  shall  have  by  comino 
TO  Christ.     II.  How  it  may  be  demonstkated  that  the  soul  shall  livb 
THAT  HEARS  AND  COMES  TO  Ohrist.     {0.  Sedgwick,  B.D.)    And  I  will  make  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  you. — The  covenant  with  Israel: — Nothing  is  required  on 
the  part  of  Israel  but  hearing  and  coming  and  taking ;  through  these,  it  becomes 
pervaded  by  new  life,  and  Jehovah  presents  it  with  an  everlasting  covenant,  namely, 
the  unchangeable  mercies  of  David.    {F.  Delitzsch,  B.D.)   Twelve  covenant  mercies : — 
I.  Saving  knowledge  (Jer.   xxxi.  31-34).     II.  God's    law  written    in   thb 
HEART  (ver.   33).     III.  Free   pardon  (end    of   ver.   34).     IV.  Reconciliation 
(Jer.  xxxii.  38).    "V.  True  godliness  (ver.   39).    "VI.  Continuance  in  grace 
(ver.    40).    VII.  Cleansing   (Ezek.    xxxvi.   25).    VIII.  Renewal   of   nature 
(ver.  26).     IX.  Holy  conversation  (ver.  27).    X.  Happy  self-loathing  (ver. 
31).    XI.  Communion  with  God  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  26-28).    XII.  Needful  chastise- 
ment (Ps.  Ixxxix.  30).     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)    God's  covenant: — We  should  hear  much 
less  of  the  doubts  and  fears  of  Christians  about  their  own  acceptance,  if  they  would 
think  more  of  God  and  His  act,  His  call.  His  promise  and  His  covenant,  than  of 
their  own  unworthiness,  which,  indeed,  is  frankly  assumed  throughout.     {G.  A. 
Chadwick,  D.D. )    The  sure  mercies  of  David. — "  The  sure  mercies  of  David : " — i.  e. 
the  mercies  (loving-kindnesses)  irrevocably  promised  to  David  and  his  house  (comp. 
2  Sam.  xxiii.  5  ;  Ps.  xviii.  50,  Lxxxix.  28,  49),  and  the  great  promise  to  which  s5l 
these  passages  point  (2  Sam.  vii.  8-16).     The  comparison  of  the  everlasting  covenant 
to  these  Davidic  "mercies "  cannot  mean  simply  that  the  one  is  as  sure  as  the  other. 
It  is  identity  rather  than  comparison  that  is  implied,  the  idea  being  that  the 
contents  of  the  covenant  are  the  same  as  the  mercies  promised  to  David,  and  that 
it  will  be  the  fulfilment  of  the  hopes  that  clustered  round  the  Davidic  dynasty. 
{Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)   "  The  sure  mercies  of  David : " — What  is  this  ' '  everlasting 
covenant "  ?  What  are  these  ' '  sure  mercies  of  David  "  ?  Two  sorts  of  authors  deserve 
to  be  heard  on  this  article,  though  on  different  accounts,  the  first  for  their  ignorance 
and  prejudice,  the  last  for  their  knowledge  and  impartiality.     The  first  are  the 
Jews,  who,  in  spite  of  their  obstinate  blindness,  cannot  help  owning  that  these 


CHAP.LT.]  ISAIAH.  213 

words  promise  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  Eabbi  David  Kimchi  gives  this  exposition 
of  the  words:  "  'The  sure  mercies  of  David,'  that  is,  the  Messiah,  whom  Ezekiel 
calls  David,  They  shall  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  have  given  them,  they,  and  their 
children,  and  their  children's  children  for  ever ;  and  My  servant  David  shall  be 
their  prince  for  ever."  The  other  authors,  whom  we  ought  to  hear  for  their 
impartial  knowledge,  are  the  inspired  writers,  and  particularly  St.  Paul,  whose 
comment  on  this  passage,  which  he  gave  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  determines  its 
meaning.  There,  the  apostle,  having  attested  the  truth  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ,  affirms  that  the  prophets  had  foretold  that  event ;  and,  among  other 
passages,  which  he  alleged  in  proof  of  what  he  had  advanced,  quotes  this,  "  I  will 
give  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David"  (Acts  xiii.  34).  (/.  Saurin.)  "The  sure 
mercies  of  David  " : — The  Gospel  is  the  exhibition  and  the  bestowment  of  all  those 
blessings  which  were  promised  to  David,  as  the  type  of  Christ,  and  His  forefathers 
according  to  the  flesh.  Those  blessings  are  indeed  unspeakably  valuable  ;  in  them 
is  the  charter  of  our  hope,  and  the  record  of  our  salvation.  And  this  consideration 
above  all  adds  value  to  them — they  are  "sure."  1.  Sure,  as  respects  the  fountain 
from  which  they  are  derived,  the  love  and  f^orapassion  of  the  holy  and  eternal  one. 
2.  Sure,  as  respects  the  intention  of  Him  who  proposes  them  to  us.  8.  Sure, 
because  of  the  price  at  which  they  are  offered,     (ff.  J.  Eastings,  M.A.) 

Vera.  4-6.  Behold  I  have  given  Him  for  a  Witness  to  the  people. —  Witness; 
Leader;  Commander: — 1.  Most  modem  authorities  hold  that  the  person  spoken 
of  in  ver.  4.  is  the  historical  David,  and  that  vers.  4,  5  institute  a  parallel  between 
the  position  he  occupied  in  the  heathen  world  of  his  tune  and  that  wnich  Israel  shall 
occupy  in  the  future  ;  the  thought  expressed,  therefore,  is  that  the  Messianic  hope  ia 
transferred  from  the  dynasty  to  the  nation.  The  view  is  thus  succinctly  stated  bj 
Driver :  "As  David  became  ruler  of  subject  nations  (2  Sam.  viii.),  a  knowledge  of  his 
religion,  however  imperfect,  spread  among  them ;  thus  he  was  a  '  witness '  to  them. 
This  position  of  David  is  idealized  in  Isa.  xviii.  43  ('Thou  makest  me  a  head  of 
nations ;  a  people  whom  I  have  not  known  shall  serve  me ') ;  and  the  position, 
as  thus  idealized,  is  here  enlarged,  and  extended  in  a  spiritual  sense  to  Israel 
(ver.  5)."  2.  Others  think  that  the  reference  in  ver.  4  is  to  the  future  Messianic 
king  (who  is  called  David  in  Jer.  xxx.  9  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23  f.),  so  that  the  two  verses 
represent  under  two  aspects  the  future  greatness  of  Israeh  3.  An  intermediate 
position  is  taken  by  some,  viz.  that  ver.  4  goes  back  to  the  promise  made  to  David, 
but  regards  it  as  one  destined  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  person  of  his  Son,  the  Messiah. 
It  is  very  difficult  to  decide  between  these  conflicting  explanations.  The  third  view 
seems  on  the  whole  the  best ;  the  original  covenant  guarantees  an  endless  dominion 
to  the  family  of  David,  and  after  the  restoration  this  will  assume  a  spiritual  character 
and  expand  into  universal  empire  in  the  reign  of  the  Messiah.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.  D. ) 
Christ  a  vritness  to  the  people : — One  who  stood  forth  to  bear  solemn  testimony  in 
regard  to  God — to  His  law,  and  claims,  and  plans ;  and  One  who  was  therefore 
designated  to  be  the  Instructor,  Guide,  and  Teacher  of  men.  {A.  Barnes,  B.I).) 
Christ  the  Father's  Witness : — I.  The  qualifications  which  were  requisite.  A 
witness  is  one  who  gives  evidence,  even  at  the  expense  of  Hfe.  This  has  been  so 
generally  received  as  its  meaning,  that  the  original  word  "martyr"  has  been  trans- 
ferred to  our  own  language,  without  any  material  alteration  of  its  signification — not 
that  every  person  who  is  willing  to  lay  down  his  life,  is  therefore  a  true  witness,  but 
he  cannot  be  a  true  witness  without  it.  There  are  many  qualifications  requisite 
beside  this,  and  we  shall  now  examine  how  far  they  were  possessed  by  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  1.  He  must  have  been  an  eye-witness  of  the  things  He  related.  He  came 
to  bear  testimony  to  things  of  which  the  world  at  large  were  entirely  ignorant,  and 
concerning  which  He  could  derive  no  information,  except  by  being  intimately  con- 
versant with  them.  But  He  who  "came  for  a  Witness,  to  bear  witness  unto  the 
truth,"  could  say,  "I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world." 
"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him. "  2.  But  He  might  have  possessed  this  and  every 
other  qualification  without  the  willingness  to  communicate  what  He  knew  as  an  eye- 
witness. And  herein  is  manifested  the  exceeding  love  of  the  three  Persons  in  the 
Trinity,  towards  man.  The  Father  sets  Him  forth  as  His  gift  to  sinners — "  Behold 
I  have  given  Him."  The  Son,  when  before  His  imjust  judge,  declares,  "To  this 
end  was  I  bom,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness 
unto  the  truth."  And  He  was  "anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  power" 
for  this  partionlar  work.    3.  It  is  also  required  in  a  witness  that  He  declare  the 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.lt. 

whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  In  Revelation,  L  6  we  read — "  Je»ua  Chriat 
is  the  faithful  Witness ;  and  in  the  third  chapter  He  calls  Himself  "  the  Amen,  the 
faithful  and  true  Witness."  Hence  it  follows  that  His  testimony  must  contain  aJl 
needful  truth :  that  natural  religion  is  not  sufficient — that  as  it  is  a  testimony,  it  can 
be  received  only  by  faith,  and  no  prerequisites  are  placed  by  God  in  the  way  of  a 
sinner  coming  to  Him.  That  whilst  this  testimony  is  before  the  mind,  it  does  work 
effectually  in  all  those  who  believe,  i.  e.  receive  it  on  testimony ;  and  that,  as  it 
came  from  God,  it  is  the  imperative  duty  of  all  who  hear,  to  believe  it,  and  that  God 
is  just  in  condemning  those  who  believe  not.  II.  What  that  truth  was  to  which 
He  bore  testimony.  "  I  am  come,"  says  He,  "a  light  into  the  world,  that  who- 
soever followeth  Me  should  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  have  the  light  of  life."  By 
this  He  means  to  say,  that  all  the  world  was  lying  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death,  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  by  the  ignorance  that  was  in  them,  because  of 
the  blindness  of  their  hearts  ; "  and  it  was  to  strike  at  the  root  of  every  false  religion, 
and  every  garbled  form  of  Hi  own,  that  He  puts  Himself  forth  as  the  only  Witness, 
who,  from  His  perfect  acquaintance  with  what  He  spoke,  was  qualified  to  teach  those 
truths  which  mankind  had  so  perverted.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  to  restore 
the  true  knowledge  of  God,  and  this  He  did  by  testifying,  in  the  first  place,  to  the 
character  of  the  Father,  that  "God  is  love."  2.  Having  thus  borne  testimony  to 
the  Father,  He  proceeds  to  bear  testimony  to  Himself.  Of  Himself  He  testified  that 
He  was  the  promised  Messiah,  and  that,  though  man.  He  was  also  God.  3.  The 
Lord  Jesus  likewise  was  a  Witness  in  declaring  that  it  was  the  belief  of  His  word, 
received  as  a  testimony,  which  should  bring  salvation.  4.  We  shall  now  examine 
what  He  says  of  Himself  as  being  a  King,  and  consequently  having  a  kingdom  in  the 
world.  Whether  He  has  a  kingdom  or  not  in  the  world  is  a  question  we  are  com- 
petent to  decide  by  our  own  observation  of  the  characters  we  meet  with  in  our 
passage  through  life.  But  if  we  can  see  no  signs  of  it,  we  must  suspend  our  judg- 
ments till  we  see  what  the  end  will  be.  If  He  has  already  established  one,  it  will  be 
an  additional  proof  that  He  is  a  faithful  and  true  Witness.  Now  when  examined  by 
Pilate,  the  question  was  expressly  put  by  him  to  Jesus,  "  Art  thou  a  king  then  ? "  to 
which  in  the  most  unequivocal  manner  He  replied,  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king." 
The  nature  of  that  kingdom  He  had  as  expressly  borne  testimony  to — "My 
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world ;  now  is  My  kingdom  not  from  hence."  But  He  bore 
testimony  to  this  fact  not  only  on  His  trial  before  Pilate  (though  this  is  called  the 
good  confession,  because  he  immediately  after  sealed  it  with  His  blood),  but  in  the 
whole  of  His  public  ministry.  III.  The  witness  of  the  Spirit.  While  Christ  was 
in  the  world  He  bore  witness  to  the  truth,  but  when  He  went  hence  to  the  Father, 
the  Spirit  was  commissioned  to  lead  into  all  truth  those  whom  He  left  behind,  and 
they,  Dy  His  inspiration,  have  committed  it  to  writing.  The  Holy  Scriptures  are, 
therefore,  the  testimony  of  Christ,  as  it  has  been  witnessed  to  us  by  the  Spirit.  Of 
this  testimony,  the  whole  world  are  ignorant  by  nature,  and  as  soon  as  it  is  made 
known  to  them,  the  pride  and  carnal  enmity  of  the  unrenewed  mind  rises  in  opposi- 
tion to  it.  This  opposition  to  the  truth  of  God,  it  is  the  especial  province  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  overcome,  and  the  way  in  whicli  He  effects  this  is  by  "  taking  of 
things,"  i,  e.  the  testimony  "  of  Christ,  and  showing  them  to  us,"  and  this  He  does 
in  such  a  manner  as  commends  to  us,  as  most  lovely,  what  we  before  thought  most 
hateful.  Many  of  the  children  of  God  are  led  into  and  kept  in  a  state  of  doubt  as  to 
their  acceptance  with  God,  from  thinking  that  the  only  witness  which  the  Spirit 
bears  is  to  the  life  and  conversation,  forgetting  that  these  evidences  can  only  flow 
from  the  primary  witness  which  He  bears  to  the  testimony  of  Christ.  This  con- 
sideration will  also  show  what  it  is  so  important  to  remember,  the  connection  between 
soundness  and  clearness  of  doctrinal  truth  with  consistency  of  life.  {R.  Jessop,  M.A.) 
Christ  as  a  Witness: — Christ  as  a  Witness  is — I.  Most  gloriously  communicative. 
Some  witnesses  are  so  ignorant  that  they  have  but  little  to  say,  and  others,  though 
better  iniformed,  have  but  little  to  communicate  of  importance.  What  does  Christ 
testify?  1.  Of  God.  2.  Of  man.  (1)  Man's  spiritual  existence.  (2)  Moral  de- 
pravity. (3)  Imminent  danger.  (4)  Future  retribution.  3.  Of  duty.  He  lived 
duty.  4.  Of  man's  restoration.  II.  Most  unquestionably  credible.  Witnesses 
are  often  incredible  from  two  reasons.  1.  Their  ignorance.  They  are  found  to  be  so 
imperfectly  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  of  the  case  to  which  they  testify,  that 
their  evidence  is  either  received  with  suspicion,  or  rejected  as  worthless.  But  is 
Christ  incredible  on  this  ground  f  No.  His  knowledge  is  infinite.  He  knows  all 
about  everything  of  which  He  testifies.  He  knows  God,  man,  the  universe. 
2.  Untruthfialneas.    Many  are  placed  in  the  witness-box  who,  though  they  have  a  com* 


CHAP.  LT.]  ISAIAH.  216 

Setent  intelligence,  have  no  inviolable  attachment  to  truth.  Their  prevarication 
estroys  the  worth  of  their  evidence.  Infinitely  removed  is  Christ  from  this.  He  is 
the  T^uth.  Truth  is  dearer  to  Him  than  life.  False  witnesses  abound ;  but  here  ia 
One  on  whose  testimony  we  may  and  ought  to  repose  with  unbounded  trust. 
{Homilist.)  Christ  given  as  a  Witness: — I.  The  pecttliak  fitness,  ob  qualifica- 
tions, OF  Jestts,  to  act  as  a  Witness  for  God  to  the  people.  1.  Jesus  was 
singularly  qualified  to  act  as  a  Witness  to  the  people,  because  of  His  being  acquainted 
with  the  whole  counsel  of  God  :  whilst  His  own  mind  as  the  Son  was  in  perfect 
accordance  with  that  of  His  Father.  2.  Jesus  was  specially  qualified  to  act  as  a 
Witness,  because  of  His  necessary  freedom  from  all  temptation  to  suppress  or  mistake 
any  pai-t  of  the  truth.  He  was  from  time  to  time  knowingly  putting  Himself  into 
situations,  and  bearing  testimony  to  such  views,  as  were  prejudicial  to  His  safety, 
and  endangering  His  Ufe.  3.  Jesus  was  specially  qualified  to  be  a  Witness  for  God 
to  the  people,  because  of  His  alliance  with  both  in  His  nature,  together  with  His 
zeal  for  God's  glory  and  the  good  of  men.  In  matters  where  ordinary  witness-bearing 
is  required,  the  interests  of  at  least  two  parties  are  generally  concerned,  and,  in  so 
far,  it  augurs  favourably  for  the  ends  of  justice,  that  persons  acting  as  witnesses  in 
the  case  feel  something  like  equal  interest  in  both.  II.  The  mode  of  His  acting 
IN  discharging  the  duties  of  His  office  as  a  Witness.  1.  He  witnessed  to  the 
effect  of  confirming  that  portion  of  the  Scriptures  which  God  had  previously  given  to 
the  Church,  as  a  revelation  of  His  wUL  That  portion  is  contained  in  the  Old 
Testament  exclusively,  such  as  known  to  us,  and  therefore  shutting  out  all  Jewish 
Apocryphas,  Tahnuds,  or  Mishnas.  To  none  of  these  mere  human  productions  did 
the  Lord  Jesus  ever  testifv,  but  in  the  course  of  His  public  teaching  He  witnessed 
again  and  again  to  the  autnenticity  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  in  quoting  from  them 
certain  things  written  concerning  Himself  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty. 
2.  Christ  was  also  a  Witness  for  God  to  the  people,  not  only  in  testifying  to  what  had 
already  been  written,  but  in  farther  adding  to  the  revelation  of  Heaven.  This 
revelation  includes  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament,  for  this  has  been  added  to  the 
Old  by  the  Great  Witness  of  whom  we  now  speak,  as  all  it  contains  He  either 
delivered  orally  in  the  course  of  His  personal  ministry,  or  by  the  apostles,  whose 
several  epistles  were  written  by  His  inspiration.  3.  Jesus  was  still  farther  a  Witness 
for  God  to  the  people,  in  the  miracles  He  wrought,  and  in  the  holy  exemplary  life 
which  He  led.  The  many  marvellous  things  He  did  afforded  abundant  proof  that 
He  came  from  God,  and  that  consequently  His  doctrines  were  true.  As  God-man 
He  witnessed  in  the  flesh  to  His  own  holy  law,  and  in  that  hath  set  ns  an  example  that 
we  should  follow  His  steps.  4.  Jesus,  in  acting  as  a  Witness  for  God  to  the  people, 
sealed  and  ratified  His  testimony  in  His  cruel  and  ignominious  death.  {J.  Allan.) 
Christ's  triple  character: — There  is  no  Gospel  apart  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Hence,  it  is  not  at  all  wonderful  that,  after  the  glorious  Gospel  invitations, 
expostulations,  and  exhortations  of  the  first  three  verses  of  this  chapter,  we  should 
come,  in  the  fourth  verse,  to  these  words :  "  'Behold,  I  have  given  Him.'  I  have 
talked  to  you  about  waters,  and  about  wine  and  milk,  and  about  bread,  and  about 
fatness ;  but,  'behold,  I  have  given  Him,'  for  He  is  all  these, — water,  wine,  milk, 
bread,  fatness.  I  have  spoken  to  you  about  '  an  everlasting  covenant,  even  the 
sure  mercies  of  David ; '  but  I  mean  Him,  for  He  is  the  great  Surety  of  the  covenant, 
and  I  have  given  Him  for  a  covenant  of  the  people."  We  cannot  do  without  a 
personal  Chnst.  The  first  word  in  our  text,  ''Behold,"  reminds  us  that  this  is  a 
theme  for  wonder.  A  part  of  the  wonder  concerning  Christ  consists  in  the  fact  that 
His  Father  has  given  Him  to  the  people.  Not  to  you,  0  kings  and  princes ; — not 
to  you,  a  few  aristocrats  picked  here  and  there ;  but, ' '  I  have  given  Him  for  a  witness  to 
the  people."  He  is  the  people's  Christ,  the  people's  Leader,  the  people's  Friend, 
the  people's  King.  And  the  wonder  increases  when  you  recollect  that  the  word 
translated  "people"  might  be  just  as  accurately  rendered  "nations."  No  doubt, 
the  Lord's  intention  here  is  to  refer  to  the  Gentiles: — not  to  the  chosen  people, 
Israel,  alone;  but  even  to  as,  "sinners  of  the  Gentiles,"  who  were  outside  the 
favoured  family  of  the  Jews.  I.  Let  as,  with  believing  eye,  see  cub  Lord  in 
THREE  CHARACTERS  OB  RELATIONSHIPS.  1.  Our  blessed  Lord  is  a  Witness  for  the 
Father, — a  Witness  concerning  the  Father.  We  should  never  have  known  what 
God  was  like  if  it  had  not  been  that  "  the  only-begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  If,  indeed,  I  do  see  God  in  Christ,  what  a 
blessed  God  He  is  to  me  I  For  who  would  not  love  Jesus !  Nor  is  Christ  merely  th« 
Witness  concerning  God's  character,  but  also  concerning  God's  bearing  towards  as. 
Bow  does  God  feel  with  regard  to  His  rabeUioas  creatures  t    He  alao  oama  to  b*  • 


Sie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP-tT. 

"Witness  of  another  matter,  namely,  that  God  has  set  u^  a  kingdom  among  the  sons  of 
men.  There  is  no  way  of  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  Divine  grace  except  by  regenera- 
tion ;  and  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Witness  of  that  great  truth.  Whatever  Christ  nas  taught 
concerning  any  truth  which  has  to  do  with  our  salvation,  is  His  witness  upon  that  point ; 
and  if  we  want  to  know  the  truth  about  anything,  we  must  go  to  Christ  to  learn  it.  2. 
The  second  oifice  of  Christ,  mentioned  in  the  text,  is  that  of  a  Leader  to  His  own  people. 
The  word  "  leader  "  might  be  rendered  "  the  foremost ; "  and,  truly,  Christ  is  the  fore- 
most of  all  His  people, — the  standard-bearer  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether 
lovely.  In  the  Church  of  God,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Leader,  because  His  life  is  the 
perfect  example  of  practical  holiness.  First,  He  is  God's  witness  revealing  to  tifl 
the  truth  ;  then,  next,  He  is  our  Example,  working  out  the  practical  part  of  that 
revelation  in  His  own  life.  3.  The  third  character  our  Lord  bears,  according  to  our 
text,  is  that  of  Commander.  There  may  be  many  meanings  given  to  that  title, 
but  it  seems  to  me  that  it  must  relate  mainly  to  those  of  His  people  who  are  not  yet 
saved.  To  them.  He  is  a  Commander ;  to  tnem  He  issues  laws  as  a  law-giver,  for 
such  is  also  the  sense  of  the  term.  But  I  think  there  is  more,  in  this  title  of  Christ, 
than  the  mere  fact  of  His  making  the  law,  and  bidding  us  publish  it  abroad  in  His  name. 
He  is  also  a  Commander  because  He  has  power  to  enforce  His  proclamations.  He  calls 
a  nation  that  knew  Him  not,  and  then  they  learn  to  know  Him.  II.  The  thbee  ex- 
cellences OF  Christ  in  connection  with  these  three  offices.  1.  Is  Christ  a 
Witness  ?  Then  He  is  a  true  Witness.  There  are  no  falsehoods  or  mistakes  in  the 
witness  which  Christ  bears.  2.  If  our  Lord  be  a  Leader,  he  has,  in  that  capacity,  the 
quality  of  holiness.  You  may  safely  follow  wherever  He  leads  you.  3.  If  He  be  a  Com- 
mander, you  see  in  Him  Divine  power.  It  is  no  use  having  a  commander-in-chief  who 
issues  proclamations,  but  who  has  neither  wit  nor  wisdom  in  the  day  of  battle.  III. 
These  relationships  and  excellences  demand  from  its  three  duties.  1.  Is 
Christ  a  true  Witness  ?  Then,  believe  Him.  2.  If  He  be  a  Leader,  and  holiness  is  the 
mark  of  His  Leadership,  then,  let  us  imitate  Him.  3.  Then,  if  He  be  a  Commander, 
what  does  He  require  of  us  ?    Obedience.     IV.  There  are  three  benefits  which 

WILL  BE  secured   BY  THE  PERFORMANCE  OF  THESE  DUTIES.      1.    If  yOU  do  believe 

Christ,  "the  faithful  and  true  Witness,"  then  you  have  certainty  as  to  what  you 
believe.  2.  Then,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  our  Example,  and  we  imitate  Him,  the  next 
benefit  we  obtain  is  safety.  3.  If  Christ  be  our  Commander,  and  He  hath  all 
power,  and  we  obey  Him,  then  victory  is  sure.  (C.  ^.  Spurgeon.)  The  greatest 
Gift  in  time  or  eternity : — I.  A  Divine  Gift.  1.  The  Father  has  given  His  Son. 
2.  The  Son  consented  to  be  given.  3.  We  have  the  purpose  of  this  Gift  avowed. 
"  For  a  Witness,"  etc.  4.  The  persons  thus  favoured.  "  The  people."  II.  A 
DIVINE  PROMISE  made  to  this  Leader  and  Commander.  1.  To  call  those  whom  He 
does  not  know  (ver.  5).  That  must  be  a  strange  nation  which  Christ  does  not  know. 
There  will  be  people  at  the  last  to  whom  Christ  will  say,  "  I  never  knew  you ;"  and 
there  are  such  people  now,  whom  Christ  has  never  known  in  this  sense.  He  never  spoke 
with  them.  He  never  heard  their  voice  in  prayer.  He  never  knew  them  by  mutual  ac- 
quaintance. And  there  are  nations  of  this  kind  of  people.  2.  Christ  is  to  make  run 
tnose  who  do  not  know  Him.  People  who  did  not  know  anything  about  Christ,  and 
who  did  not  want  to  know  about  Him,  shall  on  a  sudden  hear  of  Him,  and  they  shall 
mn  to  Him.  I  have  often  noticed  that,  when  such  people  do  come  to  Christ,  they 
always  run  to  Him.  3.  Here  is  a  Divine  promise  to  exeit  a  singular  motive  power. 
"  Because  of  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc.  A  glorified  Christ  makes  men  run  to  Him. 
III.  A  Divine  EXHORTATION."  {Ihid.)  A  Leader  and  Commander  to  the  people. — Our 
glorified  Leader : — 1.  He  was  typified  in  David.  He  has  been  constituted  Prince. 
His  name  is  made  great.  His  throne  shall  be  for  ever.  His  kingdom  shall  be  made 
sure.  For  a  great  while  to  come  His  house  shall  stand.  His  name  shall  be  continued 
as  long  as  the  sun,  and  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him.  All  nations  shall  call  Him  happy 
(Ps.  Ixxii.).  The  type  was  spoilt  by  David's  infidelity  and  sin.  But,  even  though 
this  was  so,  on  God's  side  there  was  no  vacillation,  no  swerving  from  His  purpose. 
His  mercies  were  sure.  Much  more  in  the  case  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  purpose 
cannot  miscarry.  2.  This  title  is  applied  to  Christ  after  His  resurrection.  Four 
times  only  in  the  New  Testament  is  Christ  called  Leader  or  Prince,  and  always 
in  resurrection.  (Acts  iii.  14,  16 ;  v.  31 ;  Heb.  IL  9,  10 ;  xii.  2.)  However 
translated,  whether  by  "Author,"  "Prince,"  "Captain,"  or  "Leader,"  it  is  the 
same  Greek  word,  and  is  applied  to  Christ  as  risen.  3.  The  original  meaning  of  the 
word  is  very  interesting.  Etymologically,  it  means  the  first  of  a  file  of  men,  and  there- 
fore their  leader  and  commanding  officer.  This  conception,  therefore,  is  presented 
to  oar  mind,  that  oar  Lord  is  the  first  of  a  long  procession  of  soals  whom  He  is 


CHAP.  Lv.]  ISAIAH.  217 

leading  up  from  the  grave,  with  its  darkness  and  corruption,  through  the  steeps  of 
air,  past  principalities  and  powers,  to  the  very  throne  of  God.  He  is  the  First-born 
from  the  dead,  and  therefore  Ruler  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  He  tirst,  by  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead,  has  obtained  the  right  to  proclaim  Light  to  the  Gentiles. 
If  this  thought  of  Christ  being  the  first  of  a  long  procession  is  carried  out,  in  respect 
to  the  passages  mentioned  above,  it  yields  great  results.  (1)  He  leads  the  dead  out  of 
death  into  life.  (2)  He  leads  the  vanquished  into  the  victory  of  the  heavenlies.  (3) 
He  leads  sufferers  through  suffering  to  the  perfection,  which  is  only  possible  as  the  effect 
of  grievous  pain,  sanctified  through  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (4)  He  leads  also  the 
ranis  of  beUevers.  (Heb.  xi.,  xii.  2.)  (5)  These  conclusions  suggested  by  the  New 
Testament  are  substantiated  and  confirmed  by  the  expression  used  here.  "  Thou 
ehalt  call  a  nation  that  Thou  knowest  not."  To  whom  can  this  refer,  save  to  th« 
Gentiles,  who  were  once  farofif?  "Nations  that  knew  not  Thee,  shall  run  unto 
Thee. "  Of  whom  can  this  be  true,  save  of  that  vast  ingathering  suggested  to  our 
Lord  by  the  Greeks  who  came  to  Him  before  He  died,  and  concerning  whom 
He  said,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me  "  ?  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Christ  given  as  a  Leader : — He  is  peculiarly  fitted  to  be  a  Leader  and  Commander — 
I.  Because  He  is  invested  with  fitll  powers  and  authoeity  to  act  accobdino 
TO  His  pleasuke.  IL  Because  of  His  knowing  all  the  difficulties  they 
have  to  encounter  in  their  sojourning  and  warring  condition,   in.  Becausb 

OF  POSSESSING  FULL  ABILITY  TO  INFLUENCE,  IN  ANY  MANNER  He  SEES  FIT,  THB 
HEARTS  OF  ALL  MEN.  IV.  BECAUSE  OF  THE  EXAMPLE  HE  GAVE  IN  HiS  PERSONAL 
CONFLICTS  WITH  HiS  ENEMIES,  OF  WISDOM,  FAITHFULNESS,  AND  COURAGE.  V.  BB- 
CAUSE  OF  POSSESSING  FULL  ABILITY  TO  REWARD  EVERY  FAITHFUL  FOLLOWER.     Who, 

then,  would  not  wish  to  fight  under  the  banners  of  such  a  Commander  ?  It  is  no 
dubious  cause,  but  one  that  always  ends  ia  glory.  {J.  A  llan. )  The  people's  Leader  :— 
I.  God  has  appointed  Jesus  Christ  to  lead  us  in  the  Way  of  Truth.  II.  God 
HAS  GIVEN  Jesus  Christ  to  be  our  Leader  in  the  paths  of  righteousness. 
1.  Jesus  leads  us  by  showing  that  God  gives  us  power  to  walk  in  the  path  of  righteous- 
ness. 2.  In  following  Jesus  in  the  path  of  righteousness  we  must  employ  self-eflfort. 
God  gives  power,  but  it  is  requisite  for  us  to  use  it.  Without  earnest  self-efibrt, 
righteousness  is  impossible.  Notice  the  crawling  worm,  how  it  wriggles  and  struggles 
to  escape  from  its  old  self,  and  how  it  is  rewarded  with  wings  to  fly  from  flower  to 
flower  in  the  garden.  Hear  the  wee  bird  pecking  itself  out  from  its  shell.  III.  God 
HAS  GIVEN  Christ  to  be  our  Leader  to  the  Calvary  of  self-surrender.  Tha 
inner  chamber  of  the  heart  is  required  for  the  indwelling  of  God.  If  the  inner  man 
be  true,  temptation  has  but  little  power  over  us.  IV.  Jesus  Christ  has  been  given 
to  be  our  Leader  in  the  warfare  of  holiness.  V.  God  has  given  Jesus  to 
be  our  Leader  in  the  wrestlings  of  prayer.  Remember  that  our  Leader  spent 
whole  nights  in  prayer  to  God.  VI.  God  has  given  Jesus  to  be  our  Leader  ik 
the  invincibility  of  faith.  1.  Let  us  copy  His  faith  in  the  loving  care  of  our 
Father.  2.  Let  those  who  are  teachers  of  others  foUow  our  Leader  in  His  faith  in 
the  power  of  the  GospeL  3.  With  our  Leader,  let  us  have  faith  that  our  paths  ara 
Divinely  directed.  VII.  God  has  given  Christ  to  be  our  Leader  in  the  con- 
fidence of  hope.  VIII.  God  has  given  Christ  to  be  our  Leader  in  thb 
campaign  of  love.  Wishing  well  is  a  good  thing,  but  doing  is  better.  Jesus  Christ 
is  our  Leader  in  loving  words  and  active  deeds.  ( fV.  Birch.)  The  grand  Chieftain  ;— 
Assuming  that  these  words  apply  to  Christ,  they  present  Him  ia  a  capacity  with 
which  the  world  has  ever  associated  its  loftiest  ideas  of  heroism,  glory  and  renown. 
In  many  other  places  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  an  illustrious  Chieftain  (Josh.  v.  13,  16  ; 
Isa.  Ixiii.  1-5  ;  Heb.  ii.  10  ;  Rev.  xix.  11-16).  He  is  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's 
hosts.  His  relation  of  Commander  to  His  people  suggests  to  us  certain  ideas  con- 
cerning the  Church.  I.  The  conflict  of  the  Church.  The  state  of  the  good  hers 
is  not  a  state  of  conquest  but  of  battle.  1.  The  enemies  are  principles,  not  persons. 
Error,  corruptions,  impiety,  immorality,  wrong  in  all  its  forms.  2.  The  inspiration 
is  benevolent,  not  selfish.  None  of  the  selfish  passions,  ambition,  avarice,  revenge, 
fire  the  heart  and  nerve  the  arm  of  the  true  Church  in  battle.  It  is  pure  benevo- 
lence, that  benevolence  which  seeketh  not  its  own,  which  bears  each  other's  burdens. 
3.  The  weapons  are  spiritual,  not  carnal.  Not  civil  law,  worldly  policy,  but  truthj 
example,  love :  we  persuade  men.  Moral  suasion,  founded  on  truth,  iastinct  with 
love,  backed  by  example,  is  the  grand  weapon.  II.  The  unity  of  the  Church. 
All  the  members  of  the  true  Church  are  as  one  united  army,  in  one  campaign,  under 
one  Commander.  1.  They  unite  in  the  aims  of  their  Commander.  All  loyal  armies 
are  of  one  mind  as  to  aim,  and  that  aim  is  the  purpose  of  their  chieftain.    His  a.i»B 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

is  to  establish  judgment,  rectitude  on  the  earth,  and  every  member  of  the  true  Ohurch 
has  this  one  master-aim.  2.  They  unite  in  the  direction  of  their  Commander.  Hi* 
will  is  their  law.  3.  They  imite  in  the  spirit  of  their  Commander.  Every  commander 
seeks  to  give  his  master-passion  to  his  army.  It  is  only  as  he  succeeds  it  can  be  true 
to  him.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  united  by  the  spirit  of  Christ,  that  spirit  permeates, 
centralizes  and  controls  all.  III.  The  suboedination  of  the  Church.  The  sub- 
ordination of  the  Church  to  Christ  is — 1.  Unconditional.  2.  Cordial.  It  is  not  so 
in  the  martial  life  of  men.  Many  a  soldier  is  forced,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  his 
heart,  to  subordination  to  the  will  of  Ms  commander.  All  the  instincts  of  Ms  manhood 
often  recoil  at  it.  Not  so  with  those  under  the  command  of  Christ.  3.  Permanent. 
Human  commanders  die  while  the  campaign  is  being  accomplished,  and  soldiers 
recover  their  independent  wiUs  and  become  their  own  masters.  Not  so  with  the 
soldiers  of  Christ.  IV.  The  glory  of  the  Church.  1.  Your  Commander  is  aU 
wise.  He  knows  the  number,  the  resources,  the  stratagems  of  your  antagonists. 
Nothing  in  the  future  will  take  Him  by  surprise.  2.  Your  Commander  is  aU-mighty. 
There  are  no  difficulties  He  cannot  overcome  ;  no  exigencies  that  He  cannot  sup^. 
8.  Your  Commander  is  all-generous.  4.  Christ  is  a  Commander  who  leads  all  His 
soldiers  to  glory.  He  makes  them  kings  and  priests  vmto  God.  Conclusion :  Let 
the  battle  of  our  life  be  a  battle  fought  under  this  banner.  Let  this  love  inspire  us 
to  brave  deeds.  It  is  said  of  Trajan  that  he  won  the  heart  of  his  army  because  he 
tore  up  his  robe  to  bind  up  the  wounds  of  a  soldier  who  had  been  stricken  down  in 
the  field.  Let  the  memory  of  Christ's  unparalleled  love  win  our  Mghest  sympatMes 
and  undivided  powers.     {Homilist.) 

Yer.  5.  Behold,  Thon  shalt  call  a  nation  that  thou  knowest  not. — Isaiah's 
anticipation : — We  cannot  tell  what  picture  was  in  Isaiah's  mind  and  hovering  before 
his  eyes.     We  do  not  know  just  what  degree  of  visible  sovereignty  he  hoped  to  see 
Jerusalem  attain — but  the  essential  idea  is  clear  enough.     He  believea  that  all 
people  were  to  turn  to  the  Hebrews  because  the  Hebrews  were  especially  God's 
eople,  because  the  nations  would  all  feel  that  the  God  whom  they  all  must  have 
ad^been  made  known  with  the  completest  clearness  and  purity  among  the  Jews. 
How  clearly  that  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled  all  subsequent  history  can  tell.     The 
Hebrew  Book,  the  Hebrew  men,  have  been  the  magnets  which  have  drawn  the 
world's  devotion.     Into  the  midst  of  Judaism  was  set  the  incarnation  of  the  God- 
head, which,  shining  out  from  thence,  has  been  the  light  which  has  enlightened 
every  man.     The  Bible  is  the  very  epitome  of  Judaism,  and  the  Bible  is  the  centre 
more  and  more  completely  of  the  world's  devotion.     "  Nations  that  know  not  thee 
shall  run  unto  thee."    What  words  like  those  could  prophesy  the  scenes  which  have 
come  in  these  modern  days — Englishmen,  Italians,  Germans,  Americans  seeking  the 
law  of  inspiration  of  their  life  in  the  old  Hebrew  Bible,  turning  those  venerable 
pages  to  learn  how  they  ought  to  live,  drinking  at  the  foimtain  of  the  ideas  of  Israel 
the  strength  and  cleansing  which  their  own  modern  life  demanded.     We  abase  the 
Jew,  sometimes  we  sneer  at  him  and  despise  him — but  we  live  upon  the  thoughts 
which  he  has  thought,  and  the  visions  which  he  saw  of  God  make  the  very  sunshine 
of  our  life.     {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks,  D.  D. )     The  helpfulness  of  spirituality : — There 
is  a  certain  sort  of  man  who  is  among  his  fellow-men  what  Israel  was  among  the 
nations.     Other  men  are  richer,  other  men  are  mightier  than  he.     Often  their  riches 
and  their  might  seem  to  crowd  upon  him,  as  Assyria  and  Egypt  crowded  upon 
Judea,  and  leave  him  no  chance  to  breathe  ;  but  in  the  long  run  he  is  the  king  of 
life.     Men  turn  to  him  in  their  deepest  moments  and  with  their  deepest  needs.     He 
helps  men  very  diSerent  from,  very  much  greater  than,  himself.     To  become  such  a 
man  is  the  truest  and  wortMest  ambition  of  a  human  soul.     To  be  content  to  live 
without  being  such  a  man  in  some  degree  shows  a  pusillanimous  and  feeble  nature. 
{Ibid. )   The  spiritual  man : — What  is  it  to  be  a  spiritual  man  and  to  live  spiritually  T 
A  spiritual  man  is  a  man  who  deals  with  the  spirits  and  the  souls  of  things,  and 
lives  for  them.     Here  are  two  money -making  men.     One  of  them  values  his  money 
for  the  comfortable  uses  he  can  put  it  to  ;  the  other  is  not  satisfied  untU  he  has  got 
at  the  heart  of  riches,  and  absorbed  his  wealth  into  his  character,  and  made  himself 
by  it  a  richer  nature  and  a  fuller  man.     Here  are  two  religious  men.     One  of  them 
rejoices  in  religion  for  the  good  it  does.     He  says  that  it  secures  order  in  this  world, 
and  saves  suffering  in  the  world  to  come.    Another  man  feeds  his  heart  on  the  very 
substance  of  religion  itself.     To  commune  with  God,  and  love  Him  and  obey  Him, 
is  the  very  life  of  life.     Spirituality  is  not  an  attainment,  an  acquisition  of  the 
nature ;  it  is  a  quality  of  the  nature.    It  is  not  a  thing  to  be }  it  is  a  way  of  being 


E 


Our.LT.]  ISAIAH.  119 

•Terything.    It  must  be  very  sweet  and  strong  when  this  Judea-oonsciousneM  really 
takes  possession  of  a  man  and  fills  him.     It  is  not  pride  or  conceit.     It  is  something 
far  sacreder  than  that.     But  into  his  ears  there  comes  a  message  from  God:    "I 
have  appointed  you  to  help  your  brethren.     I  have  taught  you  to  see  the  soul  of 
things.     I  have  filled  you  with  the  mystery  of  living,  the  awfulness  of  the  souL" 
"  Behold,  thou  shalt  call  a  nation  which  thou  knowest  not,  and  nations  which  knoyr 
not  thee  shall  run  unto  thee,  because  of  the  Lord  thy  God  1  "    If  in  any  way  God  ia 
making  you  a  Judea — if  He  is  using  you  for  one  of  His  gathering  and  distributing 
points  of  spiritual  life,  be  satisfied.     There  is  no  nobler  work  which  anybody  in  this 
world  can  do  than  that.     To  know  God  so  that  other  souls  may  know  Him  from  us ; 
to  be  in  any  way  a  deepener  and  enlightener  of  the  lives  of  our  brethren — what  is 
there  for  a  man  to  thank  God  for  like  that  t    Do  we  question  that  question  for  a 
moment?    Then  look  at  Jesus!    See  how  in  Him  you  nave  the  very  pattern  and 
perfection  of  that  life.    Jesus  was  among  men  what  Judea  was  among  the  nations. 
The  other  exhortation  is  for  Assyria  and  Egypt — for  men  of  worldly  ways  and  hard, 
unyielding  natures.     If  you  do  not  feel  the  power  of  Judaism,  you  ought  to  be  very 
much  afraid  about  yourself.     If  a  spiritual  life  can  be  lived  right  by  your  side,  and 
you  receive  from  it  no  rebuke  or  invitation,  then  beware!      That  is  a  terrible 
condition.     The  spring  wind  calls  to  the  rock,  and  it  has  no  green  answer  to  send 
back.     God  calls  to  you  by  His  voice  in  an  enlightened  soul,  and  you  are  dead. 
{Ibid.)    He  hath  glorified  thee. — Christ  glorified: — I  shall  invite  your  attention  to 
the  declaration  of  my  text— 1.  As  it  relates  to  the  headship  of  Christ  oveb 
His  Church  and  over  all  things  for  His  Church.    Look  at  the  solemn  position 
in  which  our  Lord  stood  to  be  glorified,  relative  to  His  headship ;  that  the  headship 
of  authority,  of  influence,  of  life,  aU  should  be  concentrated  m  Him ;  that  in  the 
Church  there  should  positively  be  no  authority,  no  life,  no  Divine  influence  but 
what  we  have  in  Christ  our  Head  ;  that  His  headship  over  the  Church  being  that 
of  authority,  holds  all  worlds  in  abeyance,  all  enemies  in  subjection,  aU  circumstances 
under  His  control,   aU  souls  at  His  command,  all  servants  at  His  bidding,  all 
ordinances  and  privileges  for  His  bestowing  ;  and  it  is  by  His  authority  alone  that 
they  are  communicated.     The  centurion  of  old  seemed  to  be    conscious  of  this 
authority  when  he  wanted  Him  to  come  and  heal  Ma  servant.     "Lord,  trouble  not 
Thyself,    said  he,  "  for  I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldst  enter  under  my  roof." 
Whether  it  is  for  the  breaking  of  a  sinner's  heart,  comforting  the  mourner's  soul,  or 
loosening  of  legal  bonds,  it  requires  but  His  word,  and  it  is  done.  _  II.  As  rr 
MCLATES  to  THE  ECONOMY  OF  GRACE,  in  which  He  is  pre-eminently  glorified.    This 
economy  of  salvation  is  complete,  perfect  and  infallible.     III.  As  it  relates  to 
THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF  His  LIFE  AND  DEATH,  in  all  wMch  He  manifested  forth  His 

flory,  as  it  is  wiitten  of  Him.     If  God  has  glorified  Jesus  thus,  how  shall  I  glorify 
lim?    The  most  effectual  way  in  which  a  poor  sinner  can  glorify  Christ,  is  by 
trusting  to  Him,  and  leaving  everything  with  Him.     IV.  As  IT  relates  TO  THB 

DIGNITY  OF  His  THRONE,  UPON  WHICH   HE   IS  NOW  GLORIFIED  WITHIN  THE  VEIL. 

The  prophet  Daniel  had  a  vision  of  this,  when  he  was  directed  to  speak  of  the 
different  kingdoms  that  should  be  set  up.  This  exactly  accords  with  tne  language 
of  the  apostle,  who,  speaking  of  this  glorious  kingdom  of  Christ,  says;  "  that  it  is  at 
the  right  hand  of  the  Father  in  the  heavens,"  "far  above  all  principality,  and 
power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this 
world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come."  Christ,  in  His  dignity  and  glorification, 
upholds  the  national  glory  of  Zion  ;  the  national  glory  of  His  redeemed  kingdom. 
[J.  Irons.)  The  glorified  OAm« ;— "  He  hath  glorified  Thee."  1.  By  raising  Thee 
triumphant  from  the  dead.  2.  By  exalting  Thee  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 
on  high.  3.  By  committing  into  Thy  hands  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth. 
(JR.  MaccuUoch.) 

Vers.  6-9.  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found. — The  Lord  to  he  sought: — 
Notice  how  it  reads :  "  Seek  the  Lord."  It  don't  say  seek  happiness ;  it  don't  say 
seek  peace ;  it  don't  say  seek  joy.  A  good  many  people  seek  after  joy,  after  peace, 
after  nappiness.  I  cannot  find  any  place  in  the  Bible  where  we  are  told  to  seek  for 
peace  or  joy.  If  you  have  the  Spirit,  you  wiU  have  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  and  you 
won't  have  the  fruit  without  the  Spirit  itself.  You  might  as  well  look  for  an  apple 
or  an  orange  without  a  tree.  You  get  a  good  tree  and  you  have  good  fruit.  There- 
fore, what  we  want  is  to  seek  the  Lord  Himself,  and  if  I  have  Christ  formed  in  me, 
the  hope  of  gloiy,  I  will  have  peace,  and  joy,  and  rest.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Seeking 
ihe  Lord: — L  TiSE.  absolute  necessity  fOK  seekino  XEX  Lobd.    Man  by  nature 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lt. 

is  estranged  from  God ;  knows  not  his  Creator ;  is  "  alienated  from  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel ; "  cut  off  from  God,  who  is  "  not  in  all  his  thoughts."  As  such,  he 
is — 1.  Helpless.  "He  hath  nothing  in  himself  whereby  he  may  help  himself." 
"Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  2.  Hopeless.  "Without  God  and  without  hope 
in  the  world."  Cannot  look  forward  into  the  future  with  cheering  expectations. 
8.  Unhappy.  "  Poor  and  miserable,  and  blind  and  naked."  "  No  peace,  saith  my 
God,  to  the  wicked."  II.  The  cektaintt  of  finding  Him.  1.  He  does  not  ask 
of  us  impossibilities.  He  is  a  reasonable  God,  and  never  gives  a  command  without 
giving  also  the  power  to  perform  it.  2.  His  promises  are  sure.  "  If  ye  seek  Me,  I 
wiU  be  found  of  you."  "Seek  and  ye  shall  find."  He  never  saith,  "Seek  ye  My 
face  in  vain."  III.  The  fittest  tim:e  to  seek  Him.  1.  Now.  "  Now  is  the  accepted 
time  ;  now  the  day  of  salvation."  "  To-day  if  ye  wiU  hear  His  voice."  No  promise 
is  made  of  to-morrow.  IV.  Thb  consequent  blessings.  1.  Pardon  of  Sin.  "  I 
win  pardon  all  their  iniquities."  2.  A  new  heart.  "  A  new  heart  will  I  give  you." 
8.  Adoption  into  His  famUy.  "Heirs  of  God."  4.  Kestoration  to  His  favour.  "A 
new  creature. "  ";Made  nigh  by  blood  of  Christ."  5.  Love  to  God  and  man.  "Love 
of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart."  6.  Life  everlasting.  "He  that  believeth  hath 
everlasting  life."  {F.  Q.  Davis.)  The  lost  Lord: — 1.  To  "seek  the  Lord  while  He 
may  be  found  "  implies,  among  other  things,  this,  that  the  Lord  is  lost  by  and  to 
those  thus  called  to  seek  Him.  "We  speak  of  a  lost  sinner ;  we  may  with  equal 
truth  speak  of  a  lost  Lord.  The  lost  sinner  and  the  lost  Lord  are  correlative.  The 
sinner  is  lost,  because  he  has  lost  the  Lord.  The  Lord's  finding  the  sinner,  is  the 
sinner's  finding  the  Lord.  It  is  not  that  the  Lord  has  ceased  to  be,  to  govern  the 
world,  to  support  His  creatures.  His  providence  indeed  is  exercised  (Acts  xvii. 
27,  28)  that  men  should  seek  the  Lord  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  Him,  and  find 
Him.  Nor  is  He  far  from  every  one  of  us,  for  in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being.  But  the  Lord  is  lost  in  this  sense,  that  He  is  practically  lost  as 
Father,  Friend  and  Portion,  God  and  Guide,  not  recognized  and  accepted  as 
Lord,  by  sinful  men.  2.  Apart  from  redeeming  grace,  the  sinner  is  hopelessly  lost 
to  God,  because  God  is  hopelessly- lost  to  the  sinner.  The  evidences  of  this  loss 
are  many  and  various.  The  providential  rule  of  God  over  men  is  carried  on  that 
they  "might  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  Him,  and  find  Him." 
The  whole  scheme  of  grace  rests  upon,  as  it  was  rendered  necessary  by,  men's  loss 
of  God.  It  is  not  merely  'God's  plan  for  seeking  lost  men,  but  God's  plan  for 
coming  near  to  men  and  being  found  of  them.  3.  If  we  look  at  men  them- 
selves, it  is  evident  that,  to  all  that  have  not  found  Him  in  His  appointed  way 
of  grace,  the  Lord  is  lost.  "Witness  the  conscious  or  unconscious  expression  of  this 
loss,  in  manifold  ways  and  forms ;  in  men's  corrupt,  miserable  condition,  their 
restlessness  and  aimlessness,  their  hunt  for  substitutes  of  the  lost  Lord,  their  self- 
righteousness,  their  strange  discontents,  until  they  seek  and  find  the  Lord.  Is  not 
the  Lord  lost  out  of  men's  hearts,  creating  by  His  absence  a  void  there  which  only 
Himself  can  fiU  ;  out  of  men's  consciences,  so  that  the  fear  of  man  has  more  authority 
and  power  with  them  than  the  fear  of  God ;  out  of  men's  minds,  so  that  God  is 
rarely,  if  ever,  in  all  their  thoughts,  or  is  misunderstood  and  misinterpreted,  and 
spiritual  things  cannot  be  discerned  or  welcomed ;  and  finally,  out  of  their 
lives,  so  that  men  can  live  and  love  without  Him,  can  live  to  themselves,  can 
live  as  though  there  were  no  God?  4.  This  is  the  greatest  loss  of  all.  "What 
more  has  a  man,  if  he  has  lost  the  Lord,  and  has  not  again  found  Him,  in  a 
world  where  the  Lord  is  needed  so  much,  where  nothing  else  can  make  good  the 
loss,  and  where  yet  the  lost  Lord  may  be  found?  How  welcome  to  men  should 
be  the  voice  from  heaven  that  tells  them  that  the  lost  Lord  has  come  near,  and 
may  be  found,  and  how  and  where  and  when.  {Alex.  Warrack,  M.A.)  No 
delay: — If  Adam  and  Eve  were  somewhat  ignorant,  as  we  suppose  them  to  have 
been,  of  God's  omniscience,  no  wonder  that  they  attempted  to  escajjf  His  notice. 
Their  interest  appeared  to- lie,  not  in  seeking  the  Lord,  but  in  fleeing  from  Him. 
"Why  so?  Ignorant  as  yet  of  a  mercy  which  was  about  for  the  first  time  to  be 
revealed,  they  knew  Him  only  as  a  God  of  justice  and  of  truth.  But  what  makes  it 
your  plain  as  weU  as  highest  interest  to  seek  the  Lord,  is  that  you  know  that  He  is 
very  pitiful  and  of  great  mercy.  I.  Consider  v?hat  we  are  to  ttnderstand  by 
seeking  the  Lord.  The  sense  in  which  this  is  to  be  taken  is  explained  by  the 
succeeding  verses,  "  Let,"  etc.  It  is  as  a  God,  who  will  have  mercy  on  the  worst, 
and  abundantly  pardon  the  wickedest,  that  we  are  to  seek  the  Lord — seeking  Him 
without  an  hour's  delay.  "We  may,  as  man  has  often  done,  stand  at  a  human  bar 
oonscious  of  our  innocence.    We  may  refuse  to  put  in  a  plea  for  mercy ;  boldly 


CHAP.  LV.]  r/lAr47T  221 

declaring  that  we  want  nothing  more,  and  will  accept  of  nothing  less,  than  impartial 
justice.  At  God's  tribunal,  however,  it  is  very  different.  There,  simple  justice  were 
sure  damnation.  It  is  as  just  and  the  justifier  of  them  that  believe  in  Jesus,  that 
we  are  to  seek  the  Lord  ;  and  all  the  blessings  which  in  that  gracious  character  He 
has,  and  He  promises,  to  bestow.  II.  iNQtriRE  WHEN  these  things  are  to  be 
OBTAINED.  1.  The  Lord,  as  bestowing  the  pardon  of  sin  and  salTO,tion  of  the  soul, 
is  to  be  found  in  this  world,  not  in  another.  2.  The  Lord  is  not  to  be  found  on  a 
deathbed.  3.  The  Lord  is  more  likely  to  be  found  now  than  at  any  future  time. 
"We  can  foretell  neither  what,  nor  where  we  shall  be  to-morrow.  Sin  is  like  the 
descent  of  a  hill,  where  every  step  we  take  increases  the  difficulty  of  our  return.  Sin 
is  like  a  river  in  its  course  ;  the  longer  it  runs,  it  wears  a  deeper  channel,  and  the 
farther  from  the  fountain,  it  swells  in  volume  and  acquires  a  greater  strength.  Sin 
is  like  a  tree  in  its  progress ;  the  longer  it  grows,  it  spreads  its  roots  the  wider ; 
grows  taller ;  grows  thicker  ;  till  the  sapling  which  once  an  infant's  arm  could  bend, 
raises  its  head  aloft,  defiant  of  the  storm.  Sin  in  its  habits  becomes  stronger  every 
day — the  heart  grows  harder ;  the  conscience  grows  duller ;  the  distance  between 
God  and  the  soul  grows  greater ;  and,  like  a  rock  hurled  from  the  mountain's  top, 
the  farther  we  descend,  we  go  down,  and  down,  and  down,  with  greater  and  greater 
rapidity.  How  easy,  for  example,  is  it  to  touch  the  conscience  of  childhood  ;  but 
how  difficult  to  break  in  on  the  torpor  of  a  hoary  head  I     III.  The  shortness  and 

TJNCERTAINTY  OF  LIFE  ARE  STRONG  REASONS  FOR  SEEKING  PARDON  AND  SALVATION 

NOW.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Opportunity: — How  much  depends  upon  timing  things, 
as  to  advantage,  and  usefulness,  and  necessity  1  In  this  view,  how  important  is 
opportunity.  ( W.  Jay. )  Importance  of  seeking  God  at  the  present  moment : — Let  us 
consider  these  words — I.  As  an  injttnction  to  duty.  This  seeking  of  God  is  to  be 
considered,  not  only  as  initial,  but  as  repeated  and  constant.  II.  As  an  encottrage- 
MENT  TO  HOPE.  "Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found."  "We  have  the  very 
same  thought  in  the  thirty-second  Psalm,  where  it  is  said,  "For  this  shall  every 
one  that  is  godly  pray  unto  Thee  in  a  time  when  Thou  mayest  be  found."  "  "We  are 
saved  by  hope."  And  what  a  foundation  is  laid  for  this  confidence !  "What  a 
foundation  is  laid  in  the  "Word  of  the  Gospel.  "What  a  foundation  is  laid  in  His 
invitations.  How  encouraging  is  all  this  !  If  possibility  will  sometimes  move  people, 
and  if  probability  will  commonly  move  them,  how  much  more  will  actual  certainty 
influence  them ;  especially  when  the  prize  is  nothing  less  than  the  possession  of 
God — the  God  of  all  grace  and  of  glory  !  III.  As  a  security  from  presumption. 
Though  God  is  to  be  found,  He  is  not  always  to  be  found.  {Ibid. )  The  times  and 
places  for  seeking  God : — I.  "Where  ?  1.  The  mercy-seat,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  In  the  Gospel.  "What  is  the  Gospel  ?  Just  the  tones  of  the  voice  of  Jesus 
Christ,  prolonged  and  perpetuated  in  the  language  of  man.  3.  In  the  preaching 
of  His  "Word.  4.  At  the  communion-table.  II.  "When?  1.  In  time  as  opposed 
to  eternity.  2.  On  the  Sabbath.  3.  In  the  season  of  affliction.  4.  In  an 
emphatic  sense,  seek  God  now,  for  "  now  is  the  accepted  time,"  etc.  {J.  Gumming, 
D.D.)  The  God-seeking  work,  and  God-seeking  season: — Implied  in  the  text  is 
the  appalling  fact  that  man  has  lost  the  Lord,  the  true  sovereign  and  God  of  his 
being.  But  there  is  another  fact  which  is  yet  more  appalling,  that  man  is 
unconscious  of  the  terrible  catastrophe  which  has  befallen  him.  But  God  does 
not  abandon  the  lost  one  to  his  fate.  He  reminds  him  of  his  forfeited  state  and 
place  ;  He  urges  him  to  return  to  the  home  which  he  has  left,  and  regain  the  royalty 
which  he  has  lost,  and  become  one  with  the  God  from  whom  he  has  alienated  him- 
self. I.  The  God-seeking  WORK.  "Seek  the  Lord."  But  the  Scriptures  represent 
God  as  seekingman :  this  being  the  case,  is  it  not  strange  to  urge  man  to  seek  God  ! 
The  fact  that  He  seeks  us  is  the  ground  and  reason  why  we  should  seek  Hkn.  The 
call  of  God  to  us,  and  His  search  for  us,  is  our  greatest  encouragement  in  seeking 
Him  ;  for  ii  is  a  pledge  that  our  calling  and  seeking  will  not  be  frmtless.  The  text, 
in  the  words  "  seek  "  and  "  call,"  indicates  the  method  by  which  we  should  "  seek 
the  Lord."  "We  must  return  to  Him  by  humble,  penitential  prayer.  Seek  Him  by 
the  guidance  of  His  word :  under  the  inspiration  of  His  Spirit :  through  the 
mediation  of  His  Son.  Prove  the  sincerity  of  your  search  by  endeavouring  to 
comply  with  His  will.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake,"  etc.  This  is  the  most  urgent  duty 
of  sinful  man.  "We  can  be  truly  blessed  only  in  union  with  God.  II.  The  God- 
seeking  SEASON.  1.  There  is  a  season  when  the  Lord  may  be  found — a  time  when 
He  is  near.  He  may  be  found  when  we  feel  Him  near  to  us.  There  are  times  of 
spiritual  awakening  and  revival,  when  we  feel  the  presence  and  power  of  God  ;  then 
may  He  be  found.    There  are  occasions  when  we  hear  His  voice,  and  feel  His 


322  THS  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cbat  m. 

influence  in  the  events  of  life  ;  then  may  He  be  found.  There  are  seasons  when  hj 
the  preaching  of  His  word  He  awakens  saraest  thought,  carries  conviction  to  th« 
conscience,  and  inspires  the  heart  with  noble  desires ;  then  may  He  be  found.  Now  may 
He  be  found.  2.  There  will  come  a  season  when  the  Lord  may  not  be  found — a  time 
when  He  will  not  be  near.  Locally,  He  wUl  be  near  to  all  beings  everywhere  and  for 
ever ;  but,  if  any  one  persist  in  neglecting  His  merciful  caUs  and  gracious  ofifers,  there 
■will  come  a  time  when  such  an  one  will  hear  no  kindly  voice  from  Him,  will  feel  no 
saving  influence  from  Him.  There  came  such  a  time  in  the  life  of  King  Saul ;  and  the 
lost  man  cried  in  agony, — "God  is  departed  ftt)m  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more, 
neither  by  prophets,  nor  by  dreams. "  By  your  own  interest,  I  urge  you  to  seek  Him  at 
once.  By  the  solicitude  of  God  for  your  well-being.  ( W.  Jones. )  I.  The  object, 
whom  we  must  seek.  1.  God  hath  made  Himself  an  Object  to  be  sought.  2.  He  ia 
the  sole  and  adequate  Object  of  our  desires.  II.  The  act  ;  what  it  is  to  seek  Him. 
III.  The  time  ;  when  we  must  seek  the  Lord.  "  While  He  may  be  found."  There 
is  no  time  to  seek  Him  but  now.  For — 1.  It  is  the  greatest  foUy  in  the  world  thus 
to  play  with  danger,  to  seek  death  first  in  the  errors  of  our  life,  and  then,  when  we 
have  run  our  course,  and  death  is  ready  to  devour  us,  to  look  faintly  back  upon 
life.  The  later  we  seek,  the  less  able  we  shall  be  to  seek  ;  the  further  we  stray,  the 
less  willing  to  return.  2.  It  is  dangerous  in  respect  of  God  Himself,  whose  call  we 
regard  not,  whose  counsels  we  reject,  whose  patience  we  dally  with,  whose  judgments 
we  slight,  and  so  tread  that  mercy  under  our  feet  which  should  save  us,  and  will 
not  seek  Him  yet,  because  we  presume  that,  though  we  grieve  His  Spirit,  though 
we  resist  His  Spirit,  though  we  blaspheme  His  Spirit,  yei,  after  all  these  scorns  and 
contempts.  He  will  yet  sue  unto  us,  and  oSer  Himself,  and  be  found  at  any  time  in 
which  we  shall  think:  convenient  to  seek  Him.  {A.  Farvndon,  B.D.)  The  delay  of 
conversion: — I.  "We  shall  endeavoue  to  prove  from  our  own  constittttion, 

THAT  IT  IS  DIFFICULT,  NOT  TO  SAY  IMPOSSIBLE,  TO  BE  CONVEBTED  AFTER  HAVING 
WASTED  LIFE  IN  VICE.  It  is  clear  that  we  carry  in  our  own  breasts  principles  which 
render  conversion  difficult,  and  I  may  add,  impossible,  if  deferred  to  a  certain 
period.  To  comprehend  this,  form  in  your  mind  an  adequate  idea  of  conversion, 
and  fully  admit,  that  the  soul,  iri  order  to  possess  this  state  of  grace,  must  acquire 
two  essential  dispositions  ;  it  must  be  illuminated ;  it  must  be  sanctified.  1.  You 
cannot  become  regenerate  unless  you  know  the  truths  of  religion.  Now,  every 
period  of  life  is  not  alike  proper  for  disposing  the  body  to  this  happy  temperature, 
which  leaves  the  soul  at  liberty  for  reflection  and  thought.  If  we  defer  the 
acquisition  of  religious  knowledge  till  age  has  chilled  the  blood,  obscured  the 
understanding,  enfeebled  the  memory,  and  confirmed  prejudice  and  obstinacy,  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  be  in  a  situation  to  acquire  that  information  without  which 
our  religion  can  neither  be  agreeable  to  God,  aff"ord  us  solid  consolation  in  affliction, 
nor  motive  sufficient  against  temptation.  2.  The  soul  not  only  loses  with  time  the 
facility  of  discerning  error  from  truth,  but  after  having  for  a  considerable  time 
habituated  itself  to  converse  solely  with  sensible  objects,  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
attach  it  to  any  other.  In  order  to  conversion,  we  must  have  a  radical  and  habitual 
love  to  God.  This  principle  being  allowed,  all  that  we  have  to  say  against  the  delay 
of  conversion  becomes  self-established.  The  whole  question  is  reduced  to  this ;  if 
at  the  extremity  of  hfe,  if  in  a  short  and  fleeting  moment,  you  can  acquire  this 
habit  of  Divine  love,  then  we  will  preach  no  more  against  delay.  But  if  time, 
labour,  and  will,  are  required  to  form  this  genuine  source  of  love  to  God,  you  should 
frankly  acknowledge  the  folly  of  postponing  so  important  a  work  for  a  single 
moment.  This  being  allowed,  we  shall  establish,  on  two  principles,  all  that  we 
have  to  advance  upon  this  subject.  (1)  We  cannot  acquire  any  habit  without  per- 
forming the  correspondent  actions.  (2)  When  a  habit  is  once  rooted,  it  becomes 
difficult  or  impossible  to  correct  it,  in  proportion  as  it  is  confirmed.  Habits  of  the 
mind  are  formed  as  habits  of  the  body ;  the  former  become  as  incorrigible  as  the 
latter.  As,  then,  in  the  acquisition  of  a  corporeal  habit,  we  must  perform  the  corre- 
spondent actions,  so  in  forming  the  habits  of  religion,  of  love,  humility,  patience, 
charity,  we  must  habituate  ourselves  to  the  duties  of  patience,  hiimility  and  love. 
Further,  we  must  not  only  engage  in  the  offices  of  piety  to  form  the  habit,  but  they 
must  be  frequent ;  just  as  we  repeat  acts  of  vice  to  form  a  vicious  habit.  We  make 
a  rapid  progress  in  the  career  of  vice.  But  the  habits  of  holiness  are  directly 
opposed  to  our  constitution.  When  we  wish  to  become  converts,  we  assume  a 
double  task  ;  we  must  demolish,  we  must  bmld.  Such  is  the  only  way  by  which 
we  can  expect  the  establishment  of  grace  in  the  heart ;  it  is  by  unremitting  labour, 
by  perseverance  in  duty,  and  by  perpetual  vigilance.     Now,  who  does  not  perceive 


CHAP.  IT.]  ISAIAH.  228 

the  folly  of  those  who  procrastinate  their  conversion  T  who  imagine  that  a  word 
from  a  minister,  a  prospect  of  death,  a  sudden  resolution,  can  instantaneously  ' 
produce  perfection  of  virtue!  II.  We  shall  demonstrate  that  eevelation 
PERFECTLY  ACCORDS  WITH  NATURE  ON  THIS  HEAD ;  and  that  whatever  the  Bible 
has  taught  concerning  the  efficiency  of  grace,  the  supernatural  aids  of  the  Spirit, 
and  the  extent  of  mercy,  favours,  in  no  respect,  the  delay  of  conversion.  1.  The 
first  proofs  of  which  people  avail  themselves,  to  excuse  their  negligence  and  delay, 
and  the  first  arguments  of  defence,  which  they  draw  from  the  Scriptures,  in  order  to 
oppose  us,  are  taken  from  the  aids  of  the  Spirit,  promised  in  the  new  covenant. 
To  this  objection  we  must  reply.  We  shall  manifest  its  absurdity — (1)  By  the 
ministry  God  has  established  in  the  Church.  (2)  By  the  efforts  He  requires  us  to 
make,  previously  to  our  presuming  that  we  have  received  the  Holy  Spiiit — (3)  By 
the  manner  in  which  He  requires  us  to  co-operate  with  the  Spirit,  when  we  have 
received  Him.  (4)  By  the  punishments  He  has  denounced  against  those  who  resist 
His  work.  (5)  By  the  conclusions  which  the  Scripture  itself  deduces  from  our 
natural  weakuess,  and  from  the  necessity  of  grace.  2.  The  notion  of  the  mercy  of 
God  is  a  second  source  of  illusion.  "  Goid  is  merciful,"  say  they,  "  the  covenant  He 
has  established  with  man  is  a  covenant  of  grace.  A  general  amnesty  is  granted  to 
every  sinner.  Hence,  though  our  conversion  be  defective,  God  will  receive  our 
dying  breath,  and  yield  to  our  tears.  What,  then,  should  deter  us  from  giving  free 
scope  to  our  passions,  and  deferring  the  rigorous  duties  of  conversion,  till  we  are 
nothing  worth  for  the  world  ? "  Detestable  sophism !  Here  is  the  highest  stage 
of  corruption,  the  supreme  degree  of  ingratitude.     III.  We  shall  endeavour  to 

CONFIRM   THE  DOCTRINES   OF   REASON   AND   REVELATION   BY  DAILY   OBSERVATIONS 

ON  THOSE  WHO  DEFER  THE  CHANGE.  1.  You  may  oppose  to  US  two  classes  of 
examples.  In  the  first  class,  you  may  arrange  tnose  instantaneous  conversions 
which  grace  has  effectuated  in  a  moment  by  a  single  stroke  ;  and  which  apparently 
destroy  what  we  have  advanced  on  the  force  of  habits,  and  on  the  economy  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  In  the  second  class,  you  wiU  put  those  other  sinners  who,  after  the 
perpetration  of  enormous  crimes,  have  obtained  remission  by  a  sigh,  by  a  wish,  by 
a  few  tears ;  and  afford  presimiptive  hopes,  that  to  whatever  excess  we  may  carry 
our  crimes,  we  shall  never  exceed  the  terms  of  mercy,  or  obstruct  reception  at  the 
throne  of  grace.  Consider  that  many  of  these  conversions  ai-e  not  only  out  of  the 
common  course  of  religion,  but  also  that  they  could  not  have  been  effectuated  by 
less  than  miraculous  powers.  Consider  that,  among  all  those  sinners,  there  was  not 
one  in  the  situation  of  a  Christian  who  delays  conversion  to  the  close  of  life. 
Consider  that  you  are  enlightened  with  meridian  lustre,  which  they  had  scarcely 
seen.  Consider  that  you  are  pressed  with  a  thousand  motives  unknown  to  them. 
Consider  that  they  continued,  for  the  most  part,  but  a  short  time  in  sin  ;  but  you 
have  wasted  life  in  foUy.  Consider  that  they  possessed  distinguished  virtues, 
which  rendered  them  dear  to  God  ;  but  you  have  nothing  to  offer  Him  but 
dissipation  or  indolence.  Consider  that  they  were  distinguished  by  repentance, 
which  afforded  constant  proof  of  their  sincerity :  whereas  it  is  still  doubtful  whether 
you  shall  ever  be  converted,  and  you  go  the  way  to  make  it  impossible.  See,  then, 
whether  your  arguments  are  just,  and  whether  your  hopes  are  properly  founded. 
2.  Hitherto  we  have  examined  the  cases  of  those  sinners  who  apparently  contradict 
our  principles ;  let  us  briefly  review  those  by  which  they  are  confirmed.  Let  ua 
prove  that  the  long-suffering  of  God  has  its  limits  ;  and  that  in  order  to  find  Him 
propitious,  we  must  "seek  Him  while  He  may  be  found,  and  call  upon  Him  while 
He  is  near."  Three  distinguished  classes  of  examples  confirm  these  Ulustrious 
truths.  (1)  Public  catastrophes.  (2)  Obdurate  sinners.  (3)  Dying  men.  Happy 
are  they  who  are  cautioned  by  the  calamities  of  others  I  (J.  Saurin.)  Scripture 
blessings  conditional : — The  blessings  promised  in  the  Scriptures  are  always,  more  or 
less,  conditional.  1.  Here  is  a  condition  of  time.  "While  He  may  be  found." 
"WMle  He  is  near."  2.  Then,  there  are  conditions  on  the  part  of  men.  The 
wicked  is  to  forsake  his  way,  etc.  {J.  Pwrker,  D.D.)  The  best  time  to  seek  tlie 
Lord : — These  verses  (6,  7)  are  vitally  connected.  We  must  not  overlook  the  fact 
that  while  salvation  is  offered  to  all,  there  is  a  time  when  it  can  be  best  sought ; 
and,  because  of  the  moral  barriers  which  maturity  in  sin  makes,  can  be  more  easUy 
obtained.  The  text  teaches  us — I.  That  the  Lord  is  specially  near  to  some. 
1.  To  the  young.  It  is  not  mere  poetry,  but  a  literal  fact,  that  "Heaven  lies 
about  us  in  our  infancy."  The  soul  then  is — (1)  Purer.  (2)  More  tender.  (3)  Less 
rebellious.  2.  To  those  who  are  convinced  of  sin  and  are  conscious  of  their  need  of 
Him.    The  distance  between  the  soul  and  Qod  is  not  a  physical,  but  a  moral  one. 


224  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it, 

God  cannot  come  near  to  the  sonl  that  clings  to  Ita  guilt  with  a  culpable  pertinacity. 
But  when  that  pertinacity  gives  way  to  penitence  He  draws  near  and  presents  a  pardon, 
and  then  the  hand  of  faith  has  only  to  be  stretched  out  to  receive  It.     IL  That 

THOSE  TO  WHOM  THE  LORD  IS  THUS  NEAE  MAT  EASILY  FIND  HjM  NOW,  BUT  MAT 

iriND  Him  only  with  difficulty  jn  after  years,  ob  may  not  find  Him  at 
ALL.  Childhood  and  youthhood,  how  soon  they  are  succeeded  by  manhood,  and, 
unless  there  be  early  and  immediate  reformation,  by  maturity  in  selfishness  and  sin ! 
Convictions,  deep,  fervent,  strong,  how  soon  they  are  consumed  by  contact  with  the 
world,  unless  they  are  immediately  turned  to  good  account !  Delay  will  bring — 
1,  More  difficiilty.     2.  More  danger.     3.  Damnation  1    III.  That  there  is  hope 

FOR  THE  OLDEST  AND  MOST  HARDENED  SINNERS  WHO  HAVE  ALLOWED  THEIE  BEST 

TIME  FOR  SEEKING  THE  LoRD  TO  PASS.  Salvation  is  offered  them ;  but  there  are 
conditions  which  they  will  find  it  difficult  to  comply  with.  1.  The  casting  off  of 
evil  habits.  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way."  2.  The  abandonment  of  impious, 
iniquitous,  thoughts.  "And  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts."  3.  The  sub- 
mission and  surrender  of  the  soul  to  God.  "And  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord.** 
Are  you  prepared  to  comply  with  these  conditions,  hard,  rigorous,  only  because 
your  sins  have  made  them  so  I  If  so,  you  are  offered — (1)  Mercy  sufficient,  com- 
prehensive, to  cover  your  sins.  (2)  Multiplied  pardon  to  cancel  your  multiplied 
transgressions  and  crimes.  Oonclusion:  Do  not  defer  your  soul's  safety  until — 
(1)  To-morrow.  Christ  may  not  be  "near"  then;  may  not  be  found  though 
you  "call."  (2)  Your  dying  hour.  You  may  be  deUrious,  or  so  surprised  or 
so  stultified  by  your  affliction  as  to  be  "disinclined  to  seek."  {E.  D.  Solomon.) 
Ahtundarvt  pardon: — In  these  words  there  is  both  exhortation  and  promise. 
There  is  exhibited — I.  Something  that  should  be  done.  II.  Something 
THAT  MAY  BE  ENJOYED.  {Principal  Morison,  D.D.)  Dwty  ani  frivilege : — L 
Duty  is  inculcated  on  the  one  hand.  II.  Blessing  is  held  out  to  view  on  the 
other.  (Ibid. )  The  lost  Lord  : — God  is  near  us  in  His  works.  But,  in  startling 
contrast  to  this  evident  nearness  of  God  in  His  works,  comes  the  injunction 
of  our  Scriptures — Seek  ye  the  Lord.  Why?  Because  ye  have  lost  Him. 
I.  Consider  two  or  three  evidences  of  this  startling  fact.  1.  Here  is 
a  company  of  persons.  It  is  the  time  for  pleasant  talk  and  the  happy  methods 
by  which  men  give  the  hours  wing.  What  wide  circle  the  conversation  sweeps. 
And  yet  through  all  the  company  there  is  a  severe  proscription  of  one  subject. 
There  is  a  certain  rule  of  breeding  or  taste  or  custom  to  which  aU  defer.  Suppose, 
for  a  moment,  that  one  should  break  the  rule  and  begin  to  talk  of  God  in  a 
reverent  way,  would  not  all  feel  that  a  dissonant  chord  was  struck?  Would 
not  talk  about  God  be  very  apt  to  be  voted  out,  even  in  such  a  rightfully  glad 
company  1  Is  it  not  a  quick,  true  test  of  the  way  they  feel  about  Him  ?  They 
have  no  sense  of  a  blessed  intimacy  with  Him.  2.  Behold,  also,  the  fact  of  a 
lost  Lord  in  the  imiversal  feeling  that,  w^hile  it  is  natural  for  a  man  to  love 
certain  earthlv  objects — his  children,  for  example — it  is  somehow  not  natural 
for  a  man  to  love  God  as  he  feels  all  the  time  he  ought.  3.  See,  too,  a  further 
evidence  of  the  fact  in  the  attitude  of  the  conscience  toward  Him.  Man  cannot 
get  out  of  himself  the  conviction  that  the  condition  of  soul  which  God  intended 
for  him  is  that  of  a  sweet  intimacy  with  Himself.  And  yet,  like  the  cherubim 
at  the  gates  of  Eden  with  the  naming  swords  flashing  every  wav,  conscience 
stands  preventing  entrance  into  such  condition.  Man  is  consciously  a  criminal 
at  the  oar  of  the  inviolable  law ;  and  standing  there  speechless  and  helpless, 
God  is  the  most  fearful  being  in  the  universe  to  the  man.  And  yet,  never 
with  his  Lord  thus  lost  can  man  be  at  peace.  II.  A  method  of  search  fob  ths 
lost  Lord.  1.  "Let  the  wicked  forsake,"  etc.  2.  "Let  him  return,"  etc.  Re- 
pentance is  double-sided.  Not  only  must  the  man  forsake,  he  must  return. 
III.  The  sure  result  of  such  rigid  search — the  Lord  will  have  mercy  and 
will  abundantly  pardon.  IV.  The  time  for  such  rigid  search  for  the  lost 
Lord — "While  He  may  be  found."  That  time  is  now,  because  refusal  to  seek 
God  forces  one  into  iJie  &iner  habit  of  hostility  to  Him.  (W.  Eoyt,  D.D.) 
God  wnknovm,  yet  known : — 1.  If  you  mentally  retire  a  few  steps  from  it,  and 
look  at  it  reflectively  and  from  a  general  point  of  view,  you  will  •  find  in  the 

rsage  tMs  notable  paradox ;  that  it  invites  you  to  seek  a  God  who  yet  cannot 
found,  to  know  a  God  who  yet  cannot  be  known.  For  where  should  we  seek 
God  if  not  in  His  "  wayi ; "  or  how  shall  we  know  Him,  except  by  coining  to 
know  Hii  "  thoughts  "t  And  yet,  while  we  are  urgently  invited  to  seek  Him, 
we  §n  azpreaaly  told  that  there  is  the  widest  disparity  between  His  thoughts 


CHAP.  LT.]  ISAIAH.  225 

and  our  thoughts,  between  His  ways  and  our  ways.  Now  this  strange  paradox 
opens  up  to  us  what  is,  and  is  likely  to  remain,  the  great  reli^ous  question  of 
the  time.  "Whether  there  is  a  religion  at  all,  whether  there  is  any  revelation 
of  the  will  of  God,  nay,  whether  there  is  any  God  to  speak  to  us  and  to  reveal 
His  will ;  and,  if  there  is,  whether  we  know  or  can  know  anything  about  Him. 
In  its  higher  modem  form,  atheism  does  not  so  much  deny  the  existence  of 
God  as  declare  that,  if  there  be  a  God  it  is  impossible  to  demonstrate  His  existence, 
impossible  to  have  any  true  knowledge  of  Him  and  of  His  will  ;  impossible, 
therefore,  to  have  any  real  fellowship  with  Him.  If  the  atheism  of  to-day 
arect  any  altar  at  all — and  some  of  ite  representatives  are  men  of  a  profoundly 
religious  temperament,  and  must  have  some  form  of  worship — the  only  altar  they 
will  consent  to  erect  is  one  which,  like  that  at  Athens,  bears  the  inscription, 
"To  an  unknown  God."  If  He  does  exist,  they  are  sure  that  He  cannot  be  what 
men  have  for  the  most  part  taken  Him  to  be,  nor  like  what  even  the  best  men  are  ; 
■are  that,  bein^  infinite  and  eternal,  all  virtues,  all  moral  qualities  and  graces,  must 
take  a  very  diiiereut  form  in  Him  to  that  which  they  take  in  us.  Their  assumption, 
together  with  their  cahn  and  reasoned  assertion  that  Science  yields  no  proof  of  Hiq 
existence,  have  bred  some  doubt  even  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church  itself.  What 
we  think  of  the  sim  does  not  much  matter  to  the  sun  and  cannot  possibly  alter 
its  nature  or  put  an  end  to  its  existence.  And  what  men  think  of  God  does  not 
and  cannot  change  Him.  Science  says,  or  some  of  her  disciples  say  for  her :  "  In 
the  whole  range  of  visible  and  observed  phenomena  we  find  no  proof  of  God." 
What  theni  If  men  will  go  to  the  visible  for  the  invisible,  to  phenomena 
for  realities,  how  can  they  hope  to  find  what  they  seek?  They  might  as 
well  go  to  the  sand  of  the  desert  for  water,  or  to  the  troubled  sea  for  a  solid 
foundation.  The  Bible  claims  to  be  the  very  Word  of  God.  And  yet  does 
it  not  everywhere  affirm,  what  Science  and  Philosophy  are  proclaiming  as  a 
discovery  of  their  own,  that  God  is  past  finding  out ;  that  He  is  tmsearchable, 
neither  to  be  discovered  nor  comprehended  by  man's  feeble  powers?  The 
Scriptures,  then,  do  proclaim  God  to  be  unknowable,  above  our  reach,  in  a 
great  variety  of  forms  ;  they  declare  that  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the 
earth,  so  high  are  His  ways  above  our  ways,  and  His  thoughts  above  our  thoughts. 
So  that  modem  scepticism,  original  as  it  takes  itself  to  be,  is  simply  announcing, 
as  its  last  discovery,  what  the  apostles  and  prophets  fotmd  out  centuries  on 
oentui'ies  ago.  2.  But  you  will  natui'ally  ask:  "Does  not  the  Bible  teach  as 
something  more  than  this?  something  more  than  that  God  cannot  be  found 
out  by  dint  of  intellectual  research  ? "  Yes !  Admitting  God  to  be  unknowable, 
it  yet  affirms  that  He  may  be  known.  We  cannot  find  Him  out  to  perfection, 
but  He  sufficiently,  and  most  truly,  reveals  Himself  to  us  in  His  works,  in 
TTia  Word,  in  His  Son.  God's  thoughts  and  ways,  we  are  told,  are  as  high 
above  ours  as  the  heavens  above  the  earth.  But  the  heavens,  high  as  they  are, 
are  yet  known  to  us ;  and,  though  known,  are  yet  unknown.  We  none  of 
us  know  all  that  the  heavens  contain  and  reveal,  nor  all  the  laws  which  are 
at  work  upon  and  within  them.  But  though  "heaven"  be  so  imperfectly  known 
to  US,  does  any  sane  man  doubt  that  there  is  a  heaven,  or  that  it  holds  within  it 
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars?  Does  any  sane  man  doubt  that  we  know  something 
of  the  mechanical  and  ehemical  structure  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  of  the  laws 
by  which  their  movements  are  governed  and  controlled,  of  the  mode  in  which 
they  afi'ect  us,  and  the  world  in  which  we  live,  and  the  other  worlds  related 
to  them  ?  Unknown  to  us,  and  even  unknowable,  not  to  be  fotmd  out  to  per- 
fection, we  nevertheless  know  them — know  at  least  enough  of  the  heavens  to 
be  sure  that  they  exist,  and  to  guide  us  in  all  the  practical  purposes  of 
life.  And  it  is  precisely  in  the  same  sense  that  God  is  both  known  to  us,  and 
unknown.  We  have  not  learned,  we  cannot  learn,  all  that  He  is,  all  that  He 
does,  or  all  the  reasons  which  determine  the  several  aspects  and  movements  of 
ffia  providence :  but  we  may  know,  we  do  know  and  are  sure,  that  He  is,  and 
that  He  rules  over  alL  No  doubt  we  know  Him,  in  part,  by  our  reason.  It 
is  not  to  reason  alone,  nor  to  reason  mainly,  that  the  Bible  appeals.  The 
Bible  nowhere  deals  with  God  as  a  problem  to  be  demonstrated,  nor  professes 
to  giveVa  complete  or  a  philosophical  view  of  His  Being  and  the  qualities  of 
His  Being.  It  shows  us  a  more  excellent  way  of  finding  Him.  It  affirms  that 
as  we  ourselves  grow  in  righteousness  we  shall  come  to  know  Him  who  is 
righteous  ;  that  as  we  grow  in  purity  we  shall  see  Him  who  is  pure  ;  tiiat  as 
we  grow  in  love  we  shall  become  one  with  Him  who  is  love.     "Blessed  an 

TOL.  lU.  16 


226  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  And  is  that  not  the  way  in  which 
we  come  to  know  all  persons,  and  especially  ^ood  persons  ?  The  child  does 
not  know  Ms  father  perfectly  :  but  need  he  doubt  that  he  has  a  father  ?  The 
child  can  never  know  the  goodness  of  a  good  father  untU  he  becomes  good  himself 
and  a  father :  but  need  we,  therefore,  doubt  whether  his  father  be  a  good  man  ? 
And  may  not  we  in  like  manner  know  that  God  is ;  do  we  not  know  that  He 
is,  although  we  are  but  children  in  understanding  ?  If  you  have  once  come 
to  know  God  for  yourselves  in  this  most  natural  yet  Divine  way,  you  will 
cleave  to  Him,  and  to  your  faith  in  Him,  though  the  heavens  should  fall  and 
time  should  be  no  more.  Your  feet  are  on  the  rock,  and  the  everlasting  arms 
are  about  you  for  evermore.  (5.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  incredible  mercy  of  God: — 
If  there  be  some  who  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  there  is  a  God,  there  are 
others  who  find  it  equally  hard  to  believe  that  He  is  good, — so  good  that 
He  can  forgive  all  sins,  even  theirs.  Look  at  these  verses  again,  then,  and 
mark  their  ruling  rutention.  The  prophet  had  been  commissioned  to  carry  a 
message  to  the  captive  Jews  who  sat  by  the  waters  of  Babylon  and  wept  when 
they  remembered  Zion.  The  message  was  that,  heinous  as  their  iniquity  had 
been,  their  iniquity  was  pardoned.  But  sinful  men,  especially  when  they  are 
sufi'ering  the  bitter  punishment  of  their  sins,  are  apt  to  be  hopeless  men.  As 
nothing  is  possible  to  doubt  and  despair,  as  above  all  the  energy  of  active  moral 
exertion  is  impossible,  God  sets  Himself  to  remove  the  natural  incredulity  and 
hopelessness  of  the  men  He  was  about  to  save.  That  His  mercy  is  incredible,  He 
admits  ;  but  He  afl5rms  that  it  is  only  incredible  in  the  sense  of  being  incredibly 
larger  and  better  than  they  imagine  it  to  be.  They  might  have  found  it  impossible 
to  forgive  those  who  had  sinned  against  them  as  they  had  sinned  against  Him. 
"  But,"  pleads  God,  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways 
My  ways."  It  is  a  mercy  which  does  not  condone  men's  sins,  but  a  mercy  which 
saves  them  from  their  sins,  which  calls  upon  them  and  compels  them  to  abandon 
their  "  wicked  ways  ""  and  their  "  unrighteoiis  thoughts."  No  mercy  short  of  this 
would  be  true  mercy.  To  make  men  happy  in  their  sins  is  impossible,  as  impossible 
as  to  make  them  good  in  their  sins.  For  sin  is  misery  ;  sin  is  a  bondeige  to  an  alien 
and  malignant  power  which  every  free  spirit  must  resent  and  abhor.  And  even  if 
this  ignoble  miracle  were  possible,  if  a  man  could  be  made  happy  while  violating  the 
very  law  of  his  being,  who  that  is  capable  of  reflection,  of  virtue,  of  goodness,  would 
care  to  have  such  a  miracle  wrought  upon  him  t  To  be  happy  in  sin  he  must  cease 
to  be  himself,  cease  to  be  a  man.  The  mercy  of  God,  viewed  as  saving  men  from 
evil  thoughts  and  ways — which  is  the  only  true  mercy — is  simply  incredible  :  so 
the  prophet  aflBLrms,  so  we  profess  to  think  and  believe.  But  do  we  really  believe  it  ? 
Do  we  act  as  if  we  did  ?  Many  hardly  believe  that  they  have  sins  which  need  a  great 
act  of  Divine  forgiveness.  Many  more  do  not  know  that,  in  order  to  forgive,  God 
must  punish  their  sins.  When  the  punishment  comes,  they  take  it  as  proving  that 
He  has  not  forgiven  them,  as  proving  the  severity,  the  anger  of  God,  not  His 
mercy.  In  our  turn,  indeed,  we  all  doubt  the  mercy  of  God  when  we  most  need  to 
believe  in  it,  distrust  it  when  we  most  need  to  cast  ourselves  upon  it.  Any  profound 
consciousness  of  sin  is  apt  to  make  that  mercy  incredible  to  us.  In  our  cooler 
moments  it  may  help  us  to  remember  that  the  very  punishments  that  wait  on  sin, 
since  they  wait  on  it  by  a  constant  and  invjaiable  law,  are  designed  for  our  good. 
All  natural  and  universal  laws  must  subserve  our  welfare,  if  the  world  and  human 
life  be  ruled  by  God  ;  and,  among  others,  the  law  which  metes  out  to  every  man  the 
due  reward  of  nis  iniquities.  In  part  we  can  even  see  how  this  law  contributes  to 
our  welfare.  It  makes  us  terribly  aware  that  we  have  sinned — a  fact  we  are  very 
slow  to  realize.  We  must  expect  to  be  convinced  of  the  compassion  of  God,  not  so 
much  by  having  the  kindness  of  His  laws  demonstrated  to  us,  as  by  listening  to  the 
men  whom  we  believe  to  have  had  the  largest  experience  of  His  ways  and  to  enjoy 
the  profoundest  sympathy  with  His  thoughts.  Just  as  we  come  to  know  the 
righteous  God  by  becoming  righteous,  so  we  may  hope  to  learn  more  of  TTim  from  the 
men  whose  righteousness  is  far  more  eminent  and  conspicuous  than  our  own.  Just 
as  we  come  to  know  the  mercy  of  God  by  becoming  merciful,  so  we  may  hope  to 
acquaint  ourselves  more  fuUy  with  Him  by  listening  to  men  far  more  merciful  and 
gracious  than  ourselves.  Such  a  man,  a  teacher  such  as  this,  now  stands  before  us 
in  the  prophet  who  penned  these  words.  (Ibid.)  A  fatal  delusion: — If  Satan  ever 
gnules,  it  is  surely  when  he  sees  the  transgressor  lay  the  flattering  unction  to  his 
Boul  that  he  may  take  the  devil's  opiates,  and  take  his  own  time  for  waking. 
(Arum.)    The  peril  qf  neglect : — God  hath  promised  pardon  to  the  penitent,  but  He 


CHAP.  I.T.]  ISAIAH.  227 

hath  not  promised  to-morrow  to  the  negligent.  {Ambrose.)  Missing  the  tide : — Ian 
Maclaren  writes  of  being  at  the  seaside  and  of  watching  the  fishing-boats  as  they 
returned  in  the  evening.  "  They  used  to  wait  outside  till  the  tide  rose  high  enough 
for  them  to  enter  the  harbour.  One  night  a  boat  missed  the  entrance.  The  laen 
were  careless,  or  they  did  not  tack  properly.  The  others  were  all  inside.  A  feeling 
of  pity  for  that  boat  came  over  me  just  as  if  it  had  been  a  living  creature.  I  rose  at 
night  to  look  out  of  the  window.  There  it  was — it  had  missed  the  tide.  Men  and 
women,  the  greatest  tide  that  runs  is  the  tide  that  carries  us  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
The  most  splendid  effort  of  wisdom  within  a  man's  power  is  to  seize  the  tide  when  it 
is  at  its  flow. "  Opportunity : — I  remember  one  day  as  I  went  thiough  the  woods 
near  Mount  Hermon  School,  I  heard  bees,  and  asked  what  it  meant.  "  Oh,"  said 
one  of  the  men,  *'  they  are  after  the  honey-dew."  "  What  is  that  ? "  I  asked.  He 
gave  me  a  chestnut  leaf,  and  told  me  to  put  my  tongue  to  it.  I  did  so,  and  the 
taste  was  as  sweet  as  honey.  Upon  inquiry  I  found  that  all  up  and  down  the 
Coimecticut  valley  what  they  call  "  honey-dew"  had  fallen,  so  that  there  must  have 
been  altogether  hundreds  of  tons  of  honey-dew  in  this  region.  Where  it  came  from 
I  don't  know.  It  sometimes  seems  as  if  the  honey-dew  of  Heaven  has  fallen  for  us, 
and  if  any  one  has  not  tasted  its  sweetness  it  is  his  own  fault.  (B.  L.  Moody.) 
"  Call  ye  upon  Him  while  He  is  near :  " — In  one  sense  God  is  always  near  us,  but 
there  is  another  kind  of  nearness.  We  may  live  in  the  same  house  with  persons, 
and  yet  in  sympathy,  in  mutual  understanding  and  helpfulness,  we  may  be  as  far 
away  as  if  a  Chinese  wall  was  built  between  us.  We  cannot  help  them  because  we 
cannot  get  near  them.  So  at  times  God  is  nearer  to  us  than  at  others  ;  we  feel  His 
presence  ;  the  heart  is  receptive.  Then,  of  all  times,  we  should  seek  the  Lord. 
{Christian  Age.)  Delay  in  seeking  God  .-—Seek  God  whUst  thou  canst  not  see  Him  ; 
for  when  thou  seest  Him,  thou  canst  not  find  Him.  Seek  Him  by  hope,  and  thou 
sha^  find  Him  by  faith.  In  the  day  of  grace  He  is  invisible,  but  near  ;  in  the  Day 
of  Judgment  He  is  visible,  but  far  off.  {Gregory.)  The  preserU  all-importani  : — 
Under  each  clock  in  a  certain  paint  factory  is  hung  a  neat  glass  sign,  reading,  "  Do 
It  Now. "  It  is  the  motto  of  the  company,  and  serves  to  remind  the  employ^  that 
the  present  is  the  all-important  time.  {Sunday  School  Chronicle.)  The  merciful 
God  near,  yet  unrecognized : — There  is  a  story  of  a  prodigal  who  came  back  from  the 
far  country  and  could  not  find  his  father's  house.  He  wandered  on  and  on,  and  at 
last,  in  the  gathering  night,  sank  down,  heart-sick  and  faint,  on  the  steps  of  a  little 
cottage.  Without  knowing  it,  he  was  on  his  own  father's  door-step.  Inside  sat  the 
aged  father  and  mother,  their  hearts  hungering  for  their  long-lost  boy.  Outside, 
bowed  and  crushed  and  longing  for  love  and  for  home,  lay  the  weary,  homesick  son — 
on  the  very  threshold  of  home,  but  not  knowing  it.  So  near  to  the  gates  of 
Heaven  is  every  human  soul  that  is  penitent,  weary  of  sin,  longing  for  Divine 
mercy  and  love.     {J.  R.  Miller,  B.D.) 

Vers.  7-9.  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way. — The  way  of  return  to  God  and  Ua 
enccntragements : — 1.  Here  there  are  apparently  two  things  expressed — a  negative 
and  a  positive,  two  lines  of  conduct  expressed — a  forsaking  one  way  of  living  and  the 
adoption  of  another,  but  in  reality  the  two  things  are  but  one.  They  are  two  in^ 
thought  and  expression,  but  only  one  in  conduct.  The  forsaking  the  wicked  way  7 
and  the  wicked  thought  is  no  other  than  the  returning  with  all  our  heart  to  God.  K 
You  cannot  separate  them.  If  I  were  to  say  to  a  man  going  out  to  his  day's  work,  '  \ 
"  N'ow,  do  not  go  to  the  public-house  this  evening  when  you  have  done  work,  but 
return  straight  home  to  your  wife  and  children,"  you  will  see  that  the  two  pieces  of 
advice  resolve  themselves  into  one,  and  he  would  have  only  to  go  straight  home 
from  work  to  fulfil  both  duties.  And  so  we  can  forsake  no  evil  way  or  evil  thought 
but  by  beginning  to  walk  in  the  right  way  and  cherishing  the  right  thought.  2. 
There"  are  two  methods  of  forsaking  evil  ways  and  evil  thoughts.  The  one  by  means  of 
self-denial  and  self-repression  when  a  man's  conscience  arrests  him  and  sternly 
forbids  him  to  continue  any  longer  in  his  evil  way  of  life,  and  he  makes  a  strong 
resolve  that  he  will  root  out  the  passion  or  the  habit  that  has  hitherto  mastered 
him.  Then  a  tremendous  struggle  begins  between  the  spirit  and  the  flesh,  and  by 
the  force  of  sheer  will  he  holds  down  the  rebellious  appetite.  The  sense  of  duty 
gives  him  strength  for  a  time,  but,  alas  !  the  tension  of  the  will  is  too  strained  to 
last,  and  a  rebound  comes,  and  he  says,  "  I  cannot  maintain  the  strife  any  longer. 
I  must  yield."  The  other  method  begins  at  a  difi'erent  point.  Instead  of  fighting 
the  evil  in  pitched  battles,  he  seeks  to  conquer  by  diverting  the  mind  into  a  different 
channel  of  activity,  and  awakening  within  himself  a  different  order  of  sentiments  and 


S28  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

affections.  8.  You  observe  that  the  wicked  is  not  only  to  forsake  his  vay,  but  his  / 
thoughts  also,  so  that  the  regeneration  is  to  extend  not  only  to  the  outward  ways,  ) 
but  to  the  very  inward  thoughts  of  the  mind,  indicating  how  thorough  and  universal  t 
the  change  is  to  be.  Now  consider  how  firmly  established  men  are  in  evil  ways  and  / 
evil  thoughts,  and  how  they  delight  in  them,  and  how  completely  they  are  surren-  ? 
dered  to  their  power.  They  do  not  want  to  change,  and  they  do  not  believe  they  / 
•re  capable  of  it.  They  say  human  nature  is  human  nature,  and  that  it  is  Utopian 
to  expect  men  to  give  up  ways  of  living  common  to  all  the  world  and  to  all  the 
ages  ;  and  so  they  go  on  beating  the  everlasting  round  of  human  ways  and  human 
Bin,  till  at  length  life  becomes  weary,  and  they  die,  and  go  we  know  not  where. 
But  there  are  some  who  are  seized  at  intervals  with  better  thoughts  and  nobler 
desires,  who  see  before  them  a  good  in  life  after  which  they  make  convulsive 
snatches.  4.  I  want  to  point  out  to  any  who  are  lamenting  their  failures,  who  have 
tried  to  conquer  themselves,  but  have  sunk  back  defeated,  what  is  the  Divine 
method  as  pointed  out  in  the  Bible— both  in  the  Old  and  in  the  New  Testament. 
It  is  what  I  have  called  the  positive  method — not  the  direct,  but  the  indirect  and 
Buccessful.  Here  it  is  called.  Seeking  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found,  calling 
upon  Him  while  He  is  near,  and  a  returning  unto  the  Lord.  Christ  calls  it  a 
coming  unto  Him  in  our  weariness,  believing  on  Him  so  as  to  come  into  everlasting 
life.  It  is  faith,  the  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Him,  to  His  goodness,  to  His  love,  to 
His  Spirit,  and  example,  and  wiU.  (C.  Short,  M.A.)  The  wicked,  whose  name,  in 
the  Hebrew  language,  is  derived  from  a  word  that  signifies  to  be  unquiet.  This 
designation  will  agree  with  the  turbulent  dispositions  for  which  people  of  this 
character  are  often  remarkable.  Unquiet  is  their  name,  and  unquietness  is  with 
them.  They  cannot  cease  from  sin,  which  renders  them  unstable  and  fluctuating, 
and  ofttimes  uneasy  to  themselves  and  troublesome  to  society.  In  contempt  of  God 
and  His  authority,  they  are  restless  and  assiduous  in  the  practice  of  iniquity. 
{R.  MaccuUoch.y  Conversion: — I.  The  conversion  of  a  sinner  is  expressed  in 
three  degrees.  1.  In  the  forsaking  of  wicked  ways.  2.  In  the  forsaking  of  evil 
thoughts.  3.  In  returning  again  to  the  Lord.  II.  The  condition  wherein  hb 
8TANDS  WHO  HATH  DONE  ALL  THIS  is  uo  state  of  merit,  but  of  mercy  ;  no,  not  so 
much  as  a  little  merit,  but  even  abundant  mercy.  {J.  Mede.)  An  offer  of  mercy  :— 
1.  The  counsel  :  which  is  to  amendment  of  life.  1.  The  act  of  aversion.  (1)  For 
his  course.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way."  (2)  As  it  reaches  to  a  man's  mind. 
"  The  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts."  The  law  of  God  does  reach  to  our  thoughts 
for  ordering  and  regulating  them.  The  thoughts  of  men  are  the  proper  issue  and 
emanation  of  their  souls,  and  so  for  that  reason  more  especially  to  be  rectified  in 
them.  The  thoughts  are  such  as  whereto  the  Gospel  and  ministry  of  the  Word  does 
especially  extend  itself  (Heb,  iv,  12  ;  2  Cor,  x.  5).  God  Himself  is  a  searcher  and 
trier  of  the  thoughts  and  inward  man.  2.  The  act  of  conversion.  '*  Let  him  return 
unto  the  Lord. "  This  is  the  nature  of  true  repentance — it  is  a  turning  from  sin  to 
God.  II.  The  promise  or  argument  to  enforce  this  counsel  and  invitation.  That 
is  taken  from  God's  readiness  to  the  forgiveness  of  sin  upon  that  condition.  {T. 
Morton,  D.D. )  Unrighteous  thoughts : — These  evil  thoughts  which  are  to  be  forsaken 
may  be  ranked  into  three  sorts.  1.  As  to  matter  of  opinion.  Take  a  man  in 
his  natural  condition,  and  he  has  many  strange  conceits  in  his  head,  whilst  he 
80  remaias  (Rom.  i.  21).  (1)  The  thoughts  of  sin — when  a  man  is  converted  he 
forsakes  these.  In  his  natural  condition,  he  many  times  makes  nothing  of  sin. 
"Fools  make  a  mock  of  sin."  (2)  So,  also,  his  thoughts  of  grace,  and  godliness  and 
godly  men.  (3)  So  again,  for  his  thoughts  of  God  Himself,  he  must  forsake  these  and 
think  otherwise  of  Him.  2.  As  to  jmatter  of  contemplation,  he  must  forsake  his 
thoughts  here  also.  Take  a  carnal  man,  and  where  are  all  his  thoughts  ?  What  is 
that  which  his  mind  does  most  run  on  ?  Why,  upon  the  world,  and  the  things  of 
the  world.  3.  As  to  matter  of  contrivance  and  design.  Wicked  men,  as  they  are 
full  of  vain  meditations,  so  they  are  commonly  full  of  sinful  devices.  And  they 
are  still  laying  a  train  for  future  wickedness  in  themselves — "  making  provisions  for 
the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof."  (Ibid.)  Divine  counsels  to  tJie  wicked : — I.  The 
Counsellor.  The  Father  of  the  wicked  is  here  speaking  to  the  wicked.  He  who 
speaks  knows  every  wicked  man.  He  who  speaks  hates  evil.  He  who  speaks  hath 
power  to  destroy  the  wicked  in  hell.  He  desireth  not  the  death  of  one  transgressor, 
out  rather  that  he  should  turn  unto  Him  and  live.  It  is  the  redeeming  God  who 
is  here  addressing  the  wicked  man.  II.  His  counsel.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake," 
etc.  We  have  ways  in  common  ;  but  we  have  ways  that  are  individual  and  peculiar 
to  oarselves.    £very  man  has  his  way  of  thinking,  and  reasoning,  and  imH^ning^ 


OOKAT.LT.]  ISAIAB,  229 

and  feeling,  and  willing,  and  acting.  Now,  "  the  wicked  setteth  himself  in  •  war 
that  is  not  good,"  and  God  says,  "Get  out  of  it,  forsake  it."  This  advice  is  based 
upon  the  following  facts.  The  way  of  the  wicked  and  the  thoughts  of  the  unright- 
eous are  absolutely  wrong.  They  are  injurious — injurious  to  the  wicked  man  himselfl 
Further,  repentance  now  is  possible  ;  for  the  Son  of  the  Father  now  speaking  to  the 
wicked  man,  is  exalted  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  Further,  God 
Himself  seeks  it.  This  advice  requires — 1.  Self-inspection.  It  asks  the  wicked 
man  to  look  at  his  way.  It  says  to  him.  Look  back — it  has  been  a  rough  way,  some- 
times covered,  it  is  true,  with  bright  green  grass,  and  with  soft  enticing  moss  ;  but 
the  flints  have  come  through  it  all,  and  have  made  the  feet  often  bleed :  so  that  if 
the  wicked  man  will  look  back,  he  will  find  blood-marks  on  his  way,  an  evidence 
that  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard.  The  wicked  man  is  not  only  to  look  at  his 
way,  but  the  unrighteous  man  at  his  thoughts.  He  is  to  consider  his  purposes. 
2.  The  admission  of  truth  as  to  the  character  of  the  way,  and  as  to  the  nature  of 
the  thoughts.  It  is  quite  possible  that  a  wicked  man  looking  back,  and  seeing  his 
path  to  be  hard,  wUI  try  to  forget  it.  God  says,  admit  the  truth.  3.  The  resist- 
ance of  an  inclination  to  go  on.  4.  Submission  to  the  conviction  that  the  way  is 
evil,  and  the  abandonment  of  every  unrighteous  purpose,  with  actual  departure  from 
the  path  of  open  and  actual  transgression.  It  is  just  possible  that  in  the  midst  of 
a  multitude  of  transgressions,  there  is  one  master  sin  ;  and  that  master  sin,  it  may 
be,  the  key-stone  of  all  your  transgressions.  Take  that  away,  and  your  habits  of 
siiming  are  broken  up.  This  advice  requires  appeal  to  God  for  mercy,  and  for  help 
and  reconciliation.  III.  The  counselled.  If  you  take  a  Concordance  and  look 
through  it  at  the  word  "wicked,"  I  think  you  will  be  astonished  to  find  how  often 
the  wicked  are  recognized  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  men  often  talk  about  the  wicked. 
But  God  and  men  do  not  always  mean  the  same  thing.  Men  unduly  limit  the 
application  of  this  word.  Thej^  call  the  immoral  wicked,  and  only  the  unmoraL 
Now  hear  what  the  Lord  says  m  describing  a  wicked  man.  "  God  is  not  in  aU  his 
thoughts  ; "  so  that  he  is  a  wicked  man  who  does  not  recognize  God  in  God's  own 
world.  IV.  The  promise  ob  assurance  by  which  this  adticb  is  sanctioned 
AND  SUSTAINED.  It  is  like  the  promise  made  to  faith  ;  you  must  believe  in  order 
to  realize  the  promise.  It  is  like  the  promise  made  to  repentance :  you  must  repent 
in  order  to  realize  the  promise.  The  promise  is  conditional ;  and  yet,  mark,  it  is 
sure.  The  promise  is  made,  further,  to  characters.  There  is,  therefore,  an  indefi- 
niteness  about  it  which  may  well  encourage  you.  It  is  not  necessary  I  should  go 
into  your  wickedness,  or  that  I  should  at  all  define  or  describe  your  thoughts. 
{S.  Martin. )  The  need  and,  nature  of  conversion : — This  is  not  a  merely  legal  demand  ; 
it  is  a  Gospel  demand,  found  in  the  centre  of  a  Gospel  chapter  in  the  writings  of  the 
most  evangelical  of  all  the  prophets.  I.  The  necessity  of  conversion.  "Right 
about  face  !  "  is  the  marching  order  for  every  sinner.  1.  This  will  be  at  once  evident 
when  I  ask.  How  would  it  be  consistent  with  the  holiness  of  God  for  Him  to  put  aside 
our  past  sin,  and  then  to  allow  us  to  go  on  sinning  as  we  did  before  ?  2.  Neither  is 
there  a  single  case  in  fact,  nor  one  emblem  in  parable,  that  would  lead  any  man  to 
hope  that  he  coidd  keep  his  sins,  and  yet  be  saved.  3.  Besides,  our  common-sense 
tells  us  that  it  would  be  highly  dangerous  to  society  if  men  were  to  be  pardoned, 
and  yet  were  not  to  be  renewed  in  character  and  life.  4.  Moreover,  it  would  be  a 
serious  injury  to  the  man  himself.  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  very 
worst  form  of  character  is  produced  in  the  man  who,  for  some  reason  or  other, 
thinks  himself  to  be  a  favourite  of  Heaven,  and  yet  continues  to  indulge  in  sin. 
II.  The  NATURE  OF  THIS  CONVERSION.  How  is  it  described  here?  1.  It  deals 
with  the  life.  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way."  It  is  "his  way  "that  he 
is  to  forsake  ;  that  is  his  natural  way,  the  way  in  which  he  says  he  was  brought  up, 
the  way  that  his  natural  aifections,  and  propensities,  and  passions  lead  him.  He 
must  forsake  this  way,  even  though  it  is  the  way  in  which  he  has  walked  these 
thirty,  forty,  fifty,  sixty,  seventy,  or  even  eighty  years ;  he  will  have  to  get  out  of 
this  way,  however  much  he  may  delight  in  it.  "I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do," 
says  one  ;  "  I  will  still  keep  to  my  old  way,  but  I  wUl  not  travel  quite  so  rapidly  in 
it ;  I  wUl  not  live  such  a  fast  life  as  I  have  done."  I  tell  thee  that  thou  must  for- 
sake that  old  way  of  thine  altogether  if  thou  wouldst  be  saved.  "That  is  pretty 
strong  language,"  says  some  one.  Do  you  think  so  ?  I  shaU  have  to  use  stiU 
stronger  expressions  presently,  for  the  next  point  concerning  the  nature  of  this  re- 
pentfmce  is  that — 2.  It  deals  with  the  man's  thoughts.  In  thought,  is  often  the  very 
essence  of  sin.  A  deed  might  in  itself  be  colourless ;  but  the  motive  for  doing 
it— the  thought  at  the  back  of  it-^puts  the  venom,  and  vinu,  and  guilt  into  the 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

deed.     As  that  is  the  case,  what  sort  of  thoughts  must  the  unrighteous  man  give 
up  ?    He  must  give  up  a  great  many  fine  opinions  of  which  he  is  very  proud  ;  his 
opinion  about  God,  for  instance.     To  the  ungodly  man  it  is  often  quite  a  treat  to 
sit  down,  and  think  of  what  he  calls  the  jolly  days  of  his  youth,  when  he  sowed 
his  wild  oats.     We  must  also  forsake  our  thoughts  in  the  sense  of  turning  from  all 
purposes  of  evil.     That,  indeed,  is  the  main  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  word  used 
here :  "  Let  the  unrighteous  man  forsake  his  purposes."    You  say  that  you  will  do 
this  or  that,  without  any  thought  of  whether  God  would  have  it  so  or  not.     Possi- 
bly it  is  your  purpose,  as  you  express  it,  "  to  have  your  fling."    You  have  come  rp 
from  the  country,  young  man,  you  are  pleased  that  you  have  got  away  from  your 
mother's  apron  stnngs,  and  now  you  are  going  to  have  your  own  way.     Forsake  all 
such  thoughts,  I  implore  you.     8.  The  text  further  says,  "  and  let  him  return  unto 
the  Lord,"  so  that  this  conversion  deals  with  the  sinner  in  his  relation  to  God.     He 
who  would  find  mercy  must  return  to  God  to  obtain  it.     (1)  You  must  begin  to 
think  about  God.     (2)  Then  you  must  yield  to  Him,  give  up  your  will  to  His  will ; 
and,  doing  that,  you  must  pray  to  Him,  cry  to  Him  for  mercy  ;  and  then  you  must 
trust  Him.     Especially,  you  must  accept  His  way  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,     in.  The  gospel  of  this  conversion.     Possibly  somebody  says,  "You 
have  been  preaching  to  us  the  law,  sir."    No,  I  have  not.     The  law  says  nothing 
about  repentance.     The  law  curses  you  from  the  very  first  moment  when  you  have 
broken  it.     That  gracious  message,  "Repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that 
your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,"  is  not  the  utterance  of  law,  but  of  the  Gospel. 
1.  The  Gospel  of  it  lies  in  the  fact  that  God  has  promised  that  He  will  abundantly 
pardon  those  who  turn  from  their  evil  "ways.     2.  Not  only  does  God  bid  men  turn 
to  Him>  but  He  enables  them  to  turn  to  Him  ;  so  the  Gospel  of  this  passage  is, 
that  God  the  Holy  Ghost  is  freely  given  to  sinners  to  turn  them,  first  in  their 
hearts,  and  then  in  their  lives.     3.  Jesus  Christ  Himself  came  into  the  world  on 
purpose  that  this  Divine  Spirit  might  be  given  in  connection  with  the  exercise',  by 
men,  of  faith  in  Him.     4.  God  gave  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  to  ofi'er  a  full  and  complete 
atonement  for  sin.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)    From  desert  to  garden: — This  verse  leaves 
nothing  unsaid  that  needs  to  be  said  to  the  inquiring  soul.     In  simple  and  orderly 
declaration,  it  lays  before  us  the  whole  fact  of  human  responsibility  and  Divine 
promise  concerning  man's  salvation.     We  shall  best  understand  our  text  by  seeing 
its  relation  to  the  context.     This  chapter  is  a  perfect  prophetic  message  in  itself. 
Intimately  related  to  that  which  has  preceded  it,  vitally  connected  with  that  which 
is  to  follow,  it  may  yet  be  taken  as  one  direct  utterance  of  the  prophet  of  God  to 
people  living  under  certain  conditions  of  life.     The  chapter  presents  a  remarkable 
and  striking  contrast.     The  conditions  described  in  the  first  part  are  utterly  diff'erent 
from  those  described  in  the  last.     The  figures  made  use  of  are  difi'erent.     Mark  the 
condition  of  life  to  which  the  prophet  was  addressing  himself.     "Every  one  that 
thirsteth,"  "he  that  hath  no  money,"  "ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread," 
"your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not,"  " a  people  who  are  thirsty,  and  hungry, 
and  hard-working,  and  never  satisfied. "  Towards  the  close  of  the  chapter,  different 
conditions  are  described : — "  Ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth  with  peace  " 
(vers.  12,  13).     You  see  the  contrast.     In  the  one  case  you  have  the  desert,  in  the 
other  the  garden  ;  in  the  one,  hot,  restless,  dissatisfied  life  ;  in  the  other,  joy,  peace, 
singing.     In  each  the   language  is    figurative,   but  figurative  of   a  very  positive 
condition  of  Ufe.     But  how  can  I  get  from  the  desert  into  the  garden  ?    Half-way 
through  this  chapter,  by  a  coincidence  of  arrangement,  in  the  central  verse,  is  the 
gateway  through  which  a  man  may  leave  the  desert  and  get  into  the  garden. 
"  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  etc.     In  this  verse  I  have  the  perfect  laying 
out  of  the  plan  of  salvation.     In  an  analysis  of  the  verse  I  discover  the  philosophy 
of  salvation,  and  in  the  structure  of  the  verse  I  find  the  simple  programme  of 
salvation.     There  are  two  parts  to  this  verse.     I.  Something  fob  man  to  do. 
Here  are  three  things  the  prophet  declares  to  be  necessary.     They  are  not  three,  but 
one  ;  each  merges  into  the  other,  and  it  is  only  as  the  final  one  is  obeyed  that 
the  former  ones  are  obeyed  ;  and  yet  let  us  take  them  in  their  sequence.     1.   "  Let 
the  wicked  forsake  his  way."  2.  "  The  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts. "   8.  "Let  him 
return  unto  the  Lord."     As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  prophet  here  is  beginning  in  the 
outer  reaches  of  life,  passing  to  the  inner  circle,  untiLhe  comes  to  the  central  fact  of 
man's  nature.     We  will  begin  in  this  outer  court.  f^The  Hebrew  word  translated 
"  way  "  at  this  point  means  a  beaten  track,  the  way  along  which  a  man  habitually 
walks  ;  and  it  is  used  figuratively  in  Hebrew  writings  of  the  general  set  and  direc-     j 
tion  of  a  man's  life,  and  the  prophet  says  that  the  first  thing  a  man  has  to  do  if  he    ( 


CHAP.  LV,]  ISAIAB.  231 

is  to  come  back  into  the  garden  is  to  leave  his  way,  the  outward  set,  and  direction 
of  his  life.  Then  he  comes  to  another  word,  "  Let  the  unrighteous  man  forsake  his 
thoughts,"  and  the  Hebrew  word  here  means  literally  a  web,  figuratively  a  plan, 
a  conception,  an  ideal.  So  that  the  prophet  now  has  come  to  something  deeper 
than  the  outward  set  of  a  man's  life.  He  is  to  give  that  up  by  giving  up  his 
inward  conception  of  Ufe.  And  how  is  a  man  to  give  up  his  outward  way  and  the 
inward  conception,  and  why  is  a  man  to  give  up  his  outward  way,  and  his  inward 
conception  ?  He  is  to  give  it  up  by  returning  to  the  Lord,  and  he  is  to  give  it  up 
because  it  is  not  the  Lord's  way  and  the  Lord's  thought.  Notice  what  immediately 
foUows  this  seventh  verse.  In  the  Authorized  Version,  at  ver.  8,  there  is  a  para- 
graph mark  that  we  need  to  dispense  with.  The  paragraph  mark  is  put  in  to 
indicate  the  fact  that  the  prophet  there  begins  a  new  subject.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  \ 
he  does  nothing  of  the  sort ;  he  goes  right  on  with  the  same  subject.  Here  we  are 
touching  the  fundamental  question  of  sin.  When  the  prophet  calls  a  man  to  forsake  1 
his  way,  it  is  not  that  he  asks  him  to  give  up  drinking,  or  thieving,  or  lying,  or  j 
impurity.  "AH  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray  ;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  Ms  i 
own  way. "  That  is  the  essence  of  sin.  The  essential  trouble  is  not  that  a  man  i 
drinks,  or  swears ;  it  is  that  he  has  elected  to  go  his  own  way,  instead  of  God's  way.  / 
The  underlying  root  sin  of  humanity  is  rebellion  against  tne  government  of  God.  ^ 
That  sin  may  manifest  itself  in  vulgar  forms,  against  which  we  sign  pledges  ;  or  it 
may  manifest  itseK  in  the  cultured  and  refined  paganism  that  attempts  to  live  with- 
out prajrer  and  without  worship.  I  will  tell  you,  in  the  name  of  God,  what  is  the 
trouble  in  your  life  !  It  is  godless,  that  is  the  trouble.  I  will  tell  you  why  you  are 
in  the  desert.  You  have  tiimed  your  back  upon  God.  I  will  tell  you  why  you  are 
never  satisfied  with  water  or  bread.  It  is  because  you  have  left  the  place  of  intimate 
/and  first-hand  relationship  to  God.  Do  you  want  to  get  from  the  desert,  back  to 
i  God !  Forsake  your  way  ;  take  His.  Give  up  your  thought ;  take  His.  "  But,"  says 
some  man  mTiis  pride,  "  why  should  I  give  up  my  way,  and  take  God's  way  ?  And 
why  should  I  give  up  my  thought,  and  take  God's  thought  ? "  Go  right  on,  and  see 
what  the  prophet  says  (ver.  8).  God's  thought  for  you  is  the  thought  of  Heaven. 
Yours  is  the  thought  of  earth.  God  thinks  infinitely  more  of  you  than  you  think  of 
yourself.  Yours  is  a  degraded  estimate  of  your  own  life.  Will  you  say,  "  Yes,  that 
18  true,  I  will  return  to  the  Lord."  Then  I  know  immediately  your  face  b  set 
toward  God's  high  conception,  toward  God's  great  highway,  the  next  consciousness 
will  be  that  of  your  sin,  the  wasted  years  will  come  sweeping  back  upon  you  like  an 
avalanche.  If,  indeed,  thou  art  at  this  wicket  gate,  and  thy  face  is  set  back 
toward  God,  then  hear  the  evangel,  "He  will  have  mercy.  He  will  abundantly 
pardon."  II.  Something  that  God  will  do.  You  are  to  do  what  He  tells  you, 
and  He  wiU  do  what  He  promises.  You  are  to  obey  ;  that  is  repentance.  Yon  are 
to  trust  Him ;  that  is  faith.  That  is  the  whole  programme  of  salvation.  (<?.  C. 
Morgan,  D.D.)  The  way  to  pardon: — I.  A  \IVID  portkait.  1.  It  introduces 
the  man  of  evil  deeds.  2.  We  have  likewise  the  portrait  of  the  man  of  unholy  pur- 
poses. What  a  mirror  the  text  holds  up  to  society !  II.  An  earnest  exhorta- 
tion. 1.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake,"  etc.  The  sinner  is  required  to  forsake,  to  abandon 
his  sin.  2.>'Let  him  return  unto  the  Lord."  The  sinner  lives  abnormally,  un- 
naturally. /He  is  a  prodigal  away  from  home,  a  wandering  sheep  beyond  the  protec- 
tion of  the^ld,  a  lost  piece  of  silver.^  Hence  religion  is  a  return  to  God,  to  first 
relations,  to  natural  courses  of  behaviour.  Sinners  are  like  wandering  stars  escaped 
from  their  orbit.  Conversion  restores^them  to  their  proper  place  in  the  onwMd  sweep 
of  the  Divine  purposes  The  text  is  a  disclosure  of  the  nature  of  true  repentance  ana 
of  saving  faith.  Illr  An  exceeding  great  and  precious  promise.  1.  "  And 
He  wiU  have  mercy  upon  him."  Mercy  is  God's  wealth.  "Rich  in  mercy." 
2.  "  Abundantly  pardon. "  What  music  is  in  these  words !  {Homiletic  Review.)  Be- 
peniance : — In  the  exhortation  to  repentance  in  ver.  7,  both  sides  of  the  fierdvoia  find 
egression — the  forsaking  of  sinful  selfishness,  and  return  to  the  God  of  salvation. 
{F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Repentance: — I.  The  obligations  to  an  early  repent- 
ance. II.  The  TRUE  NATURE  OF  repentance.  {J.  Taylor,  LL.D.)  The  surrender 
of  the  thoughts : — Another  thing  we  have  to  give  up,  and  which  is  harder,  I  think, 
tiian  giving  up  the  will  and  the  way,  is  our  thoughts.  Most  men  have  their 
thoughts  about  the  way  in  which  they  are  to  be  saved.  Because  God  does  not  con- 
vert them  in  the  way  they  have  planned,  or  think  He  should,  they  think  they 
cannot  be  saved.  Man  thinks  he  can  repent  when  he  is  sick  and  about  to  die.  H» 
thinks  that  is  better  than  repenting  in  early  life  ;  and  some  go  further  and  say,  "  I 
think  A  man  can  repent  after  death ;  I  tnink  there  will  be  another  oh«noe  tf  h* 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTSATOS.  [chap.  rr. 

misses  his  chance  in  this  life."    And  another  class  says,  "  I  think  we  are  all  going  • 
to  be  saved  ;  the  pure  with  the  impure  are  all  going  to  be  swept  into  the  Kingdom  \ 
of  God."    That  is  man's  thought ;  but  that  is  not  God's  thought.     Man  thinks  he    j 
can  be  saved  by  works.     God's  thoughts  are  altogether  diiferent.     It  is  to  him  that    I 
worketh  not,  but  believeth.     After  a  man  is  bom  into  the  Kingdom  of  God,  he  ought  / 
to  show  his  faith  by  works  ;  but  we  do  not  work  for  salvation.     Others  think  that  / 
you  must  be  saved  by  ordinances.   Ordinances  are  all  right  in  their  place  ;  but  when/ 
you  come  to  put  ordinances  in  the  place  of  salvation,  that  is  a  great  mistake.    Some 
people  say,  "  I  should  like  very  much  to  get  rid  of  my  sins,  and  if  I  could  get  rid  of 
Ihem  I  would  come  to  Christ.'     Here  a  great  many  fall  into  a  pit.     If  we  could  get 
rid  of  our  sins,  we  shoidd  not  want  a  Saviour.     It  is  because  we  cannot  get  rid  of 
our  sins  that  we  need  to  come  to  Christ.     (D.  L.  Moody.)     The  moral  disparity 
between  man's  thoughts  and  ways,  and  God's  thoughts  and  ways,  an  argument  for 
a  moral  change  on  man's  part: — I.   God  has  endowed  man  with  capacities 

TO    ACT    IN    SOME    MEASUEE    LIKE    HiMSRLP,     INASMUCH    AS     BOTH     HAVE     THEIE 

"thoughts  and  ways."  1.  God  has  His  thoughts — thoughts  about  Himself — 
the  universe ;  about  all  actualities  and  possibilities.  Some  of  His  thoughts  have 
been  embodied  and  their  forms  destroyed,  centuries  ago.  Some  are  now  embodied  in 
creation,  in  historical  events,  in  redemption,  etc.  Some  are  yet  to  be  embodied  in 
new  universes,  etc.  And  some  will  never  take  form.  There  is  an  infinite  ocean  of 
thought  in  the  Divine  mind  that  has  never  yet  taken  form,  and  never  will.  2.  God 
has  His  ways.  He  has  settled  methods  of  action.  He  has  a  method  of  creating, 
governing,  destroying,  and  saving.  Hence  science  and  art,  which  imply  settled 
methods.  3.  Man  has  his  thoughts.  He  is  full  of  thought,  of  some  sort  or  other  ; 
he  thinks  by  a  necessity  of  his  nature  ;  his  power  to  think  is  the  glory  of  his  nature. 
4.  Man  too  has  his  ways.     He  has  his  methods  of  doing  things.    II.  Between  the 

THOUGHTS  AND  WAYS  OF  WICKED    AND    UNRIGHTEOUS    MEN    AND    THOSE    OF    GOD 

THESE  IS  AN  IMMENSE  MORAL  DISPARITY.     "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts," 
etc.     We  say  moral  disparity,  for  natural  disparity  must  exist  by  an  eternal  neces- 
sity.    "We  may  mention  two  points  of  moral  difiference.     One  in  relation  to  being  in 
general,  and  the  other  in  relation  to  enemies.     1.  As  to  the  former,  God's  thoughts  \ 
and  ways  are  concerned  for  the  general  happiness,  those  of  wicked  men  for  personal  1 
ends.     2.  As  to  the  latter,  God's  thoughts  are  concerned  for  the  pardon  of  the  J 
ofiFender,  those  of  the  wicked  for  punishment.     (1)  God  graciously  offers  pardon  to' 
the  offender.     Do  the  wicked  do  so  ?     (2)  God  graciously  offers  pardon  to  offenders 
much  beneath  Him.     Do  the  wicked  do  so  ?    (3)  God  graciously  offers  pardon  to 
offenders  who  have  repeatedly  rejected  His  overtures.     Do  the  wicked  do  so? 
(4)  God  graciously  offers  pardon  tihrough  a  wonderful  sacrifice — His  Son.     Would 
the  wicked  do  sol    III.  The  moral  disparity  between   the  thoughts  and 

WAYS  OF  wicked  MEN  AND  THOSE  OF  GOD  RENDERS  A  CHANGE  ON  THE  PART 

OF  THE  FORMER  urgently  NECESSARY.  " Let  the  wicked, "  etc.  Why?  Because 
"My  thoughts,"  etc.  Two  thoughts  are  implied  here,  and  will  show  the  strength 
of  this  reason.  1.  A  moral  disparity  of  thought  and  way  between  the  creature 
and  the  Creator  is  eternally  incompatible  with  the  creature's  well-being.  God's 
thoughts  and  ways  are  the  resistless  forces  of  the  universe.  He  who  thinks  and 
acts  contrary  battles  against  every  wind  and  wave  of  being  and  the  mighty 
Spirit  in  all.  He  must  be  crushed.  2.  The  removal  of  this  disparity  will  never 
take  place  by  any  change  on  God's  part.  The  words  imply  this,  and  it  is  a  great 
truth.  God  cannot  change,  and  there  is  no  need  for  Him  to  change.  Here,  then, 
is  the  argument ;  if  a  moral  disparity  exists,  and  if  the  removal  is  essential  to  our 
well-being,  and  if  God  cannot  change,  "let  the  wicked,"  etc.     IV.  This  great 

CHANGE   ON  THE  PART  OF  THE  WICKED   18  ENCOURAGED   BY  THE  ASSURANCE  THAT 

God  will  mercifully  deal  with  him  on  his  return.  "He  will  have  mercy 
on  him;"  "He  will  abundantly  pardon."  {EomUist.)  God  sways  and  man' sways: 
— I.  Why,  in  so  far  as  God's  nature  differs  from  man's,  He  may  be  sup- 
posed less  likely  to  forgive.  1.  God  knows  us  more  thoroughly  than  any 
human  being  ;  He  knows  the  worst  of  us,  and  He  knows  the  great  hidden  element 
of  character  which  is  only  occasionally  betrayed.  2.  He  knows  the  motives,  and 
knows  that  there  are  bad  motives  even  for  good  actions.  3.  He  judges  our  sins  by 
an  infinitely  higher  standard  than  man's.  II.  Why  God  is,  just  because  of  that 
DIFFERENCE,  INFINITELY  MORE  LIKELY  TO  FOEGIVB.  1.  Among  men  the  best  and 
purest  are  not  the  severest  censors  and  judges,  for  human  goodness  is  the  more 
merciful  in  proportion  as  it  approaches  nearer  to  perfection.  2.  In  God  there  is  no 
penonal  irascibility  or  resentment.    Christ's  life  on  earth  was  the  itory  of  a  long. 


csap.lt.]  ISAIAH.  233 

silent,  immovable  patience,  of  absolute  lifelong  superiority  to  personal  feeling. 
8.  Although  to  justice  or  righteousness  it  is  some  satisfaction  that  a  bad  man  shouM 
be  miserable,  yet  it  is  another  nobler  and  sweeter  satisfaction  that  he  should  become 
a  good  man.  (/.  Caird,  D.D.)  Pardon  for  the  penitent: — "We  find  in  the  text — 
I.  An  exhortation  to  eepentanoe.  Here,  in  few  words,  we  are  given  plainly  to 
understand  in  what  genuine  repentance  consists.  II.  The  promise  op  pardon 
ANNEXED  to  THE  EXHORTATION.  If  the  wicked  wUl  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  return  unto  the  Lord,  He  will  have  mercy 
upon  him,  and  will  abimdantly  pardon  him.     Repentance^is.here  enjoined  as  a, 

{g-erequiaite-tQ. pardon.     And  do  not  other  passages  of  Scripture  speak  the  same 
anguage  ?    We  must  not,  however,  suppose  that  there  is  anything  meritorious  in  our 
repentance.   It  possesses  no  virtue  or  efficacy  to  expiate  our  gmlt.    It  is  our  bounden 
duty,  but  it  makes  no  compensation  for  past  failures,  no  atonement  for  past  trans- 
gressions.    It  is  itself  the  gift  of  God,  who  has  exalted  His  beloved  Son  to  be  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour,  in  order  to  bestow  it  on  the  rebellious.     It  can  therefore 
deserve  nothing.     Nevertheless,  it  is  to  the  penitent  alone  that  God  extends  His 
pardoning  mercy.     Why  ?    It  would  be  enough  to  answer,  that  such  is  the  good 
pleasure  of  His  will ;  but  we  can  also  add,  that  the  penitent  alone  is  qualified  to 
receive  and  appreciate  the  blessing.     But  it  may  be  asked,  How  can  God  be  favour- 
able to  the  sinner  ?    For  an  answer  we  must  turn  to  the  Gospel  of  His  grace,  which 
alone  informs  us  how  He  can  be  a  just  God  and  yet  a  Saviour.     III.  An  encottr- 
agement  to  lat  hold  of  the  promise.     What  answer  do  you  makeY    1.  Some 
one,  perhaps,  in  the  brokenness  of  his  heart  may  reply,  "Yes,  I  must  believe  that 
God  is  indeed  merciful  and  gracious.     I  perceive  also  that  He  can,  in  the  Son 
of  His  love,  be  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour.     But,  alas  1  my  sins  have  been  so 
numerous  that,  though  He  may  forgive  others,  I  cannot  persuade  myself  He  will 
extend  pardon   to  me."    But  what  saith  Godt     "My  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts.    As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  My  thoughts  higher 
than  your  thoughts."    2.    "But,"  says  another,  "my  sins  have  been  not  only 
numerous,  but  highly  aggravated."    If  you  had  sinned  so  often  and  so  heinously 
against  your  ffellow-creatures,  you  might  well  despair  of  forgiveness.    It  is  too  much, 
alas  1  our  way  to  retaliate  evil  for  evil.     But  "your  ways  are  not  My  ways,"  etc. 
3.  I  seem  to  hear  a  third  in  anguish  of  spirit  exclaiming,  "  I  am  one  of  those 
awful  charactenj  known  in  Scripture  by  the  name  of  backsliders."    The  words  here 
translated  "  abundantly  pardon,"  are  rendered  on  the  margin  "multiply  to  pardon." 
The  Lord  will  pardon,  not  once  only,  but  again,  and  again,  and  again.     Conclusion : 
It  is  painful  to  think  that  any  one  should  be  so  wicked,   and  so  lost  to  every 
grateftd  feeling,  as  to  pervert  such  a  subject.     Yet  it  is  a  fact  that  many  are  guilly 
of  so  doing.     There  are  two  characters  especially  who  come  under  this  charge.     One 
of  them  is  the  hardened  and  impenitent  transgressor,  who  takes  encouragement  to 
proceed  in  his  sinful  career  from  the  consideration  that  God  is  merciful,  and  will  not 
fail  to  pardon  him  at  the  last.     2.  The  other  is  the  antinomian  professor  of  religion, 
who  professes  to  know  God,  but  in  works  denies  Him,  and  endeavours  to  lull 
conscience  to  rest  by  extolling  His  sovereign  and  superabounding  grace.     The  grace 
of  God  was  never  meant  to  embolden  us  in  a  course  of  transgression ;  nor  does  it 
ever  produce  this  effect  on  those  who  know  it  in  truth.     (J9.  Rees.)    Refuge  in  Ood^a 
mercy : — There  is  a  story  of  a  man  who  dreams  he  is  out  in  an  open  field  in  a  fierce, 
driving  storm.     He  is  wildly  seeking  a  refuge.     He  sees  one  gate  over  whidi 
"  Holmess  "  is  written.    There  seems  to  be  shelter  inside,  and  he  knocks.    The  door 
in  opened  by  one  in  white  garments,  but  none,  save  the  holy,  can  be  admitted  ;  and    ' 
he  is  not  holy.     So  he  hurries  on  to  seek  shelter  elsewhere.     He  sees  another  gate  I 
and  tries  that,  but  "  Truth  "  is  inscribed  above  it,  and  he  is  not  fit  to  enter.    He  '^ 
hastens  on  to  a  third,  which  is  the  palace  of  Justice  ;  but  armed  sentinels  keep  the  \ 
door,  and  only  the  righteous  can  be  received.    At  last,  when  he  is  almost  in  despair,    ) 
he  sees  a  light  shining  some  distance  away  and  hastens  toward  it.    The  door  stands    \ 
wide  open,  and  beautiful  angels  meet  him  with  welcomes  of  joy.     It  is  the  house  of     / 
Mercy,   and  he  is  taken  in  and  finds  refuge  from  the  storm  and  is  hospitably     ( 
entertained.     None  of  us  can  ever  find  a  refuge  at  any  door,  save  at  the  door  of     ) 
Mercy.     But  here  the  vilest  sinner  can  find  eternal  shelter;  and  not  mere  cold  / 
shelter  only,  for  God's  mercy  is  tender.     (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)    He  will  abundantly  / 
pardon. — Pardonvng  mercy  abundant: — I.  The  abundance  of  God's  pardonino 

MERCY  IS  EVINCED  BY  THE  REMOVAL  OF  THE  OBSTACLES  TO  ITS  EXERCISE.      It  WaS 

not  by  annihilating  sin — ^by  scattering  our  iniquities  in  the  regions  of  oblivion  with 
no  evidence  of  the  Divine  abhorrence — ^that  the  way  ia  open  for  their  remission.  But 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

God  laid  upon  His  Son  the  iniquities  of  us  all.     II.  The  abttndancb  of  God's 

PABDONING  MERCY  MAT  BE  ARGUED  FROM  HIS  BENEVOLENCE.      The  gOodneSS  of  God 

— i.  e.  His  whole  character — is  intent  on  the  promotion  of  the  greatest  good.  When 
this  end  demands  the  punishment  of  sin,  this  goodness  dictates  it,  and  in  this 
consists  what  we  call  justice.  When  this  end  is  tne  pardon  of  the  sinner,  the  same 
goodness  dictates  it,  and  in  this  consists  mercy.     III.  The  abundance  of  God's 

PARDONING  MERCY  MAY  BE  EVINCED  FROM  THE   RICHES  OF  HiS  FORBEARANCE  AND 

LONGSUFFERING.  Consider — 1.  The  objects  of  the  Divine  forbearance  ;  a  world, 
our  whole  species  in  rebellion.  2.  Its  design  ;  their  repentance  and  salvation  with 
eternal  glory.  8.  Its  circumstances  ;  how  easy  for  Omnipotence  to  break  the  thread 
that  holds  us  over  the  pit,  and  yet  He  spares  us — He  spares  sinners,  while  He  regards 
them  with  all  the  abhorrence  that  is  due  to  sin — He  spares  them,  while  He  can 
glorify  Himself  in  their  instant  and  eternal  destruction — He  spares  them,  when  in 
the  midst  of  great  and  repeated  provocations,  when,  from  the  very  patience  of  God, 
they  derive  only  hardihood  in  rebellion — He  spares  them  that  He  may  use  every 
possible  means  for  their  conversion  and  salvation.  He  comes  to  them  in  His  Wora 
and  in  His  providence ;  by  the  chastisements  and  the  bounties  of  His  hand ;  by 
every  moment's  preservation  ;  in  the  counsels  and  prayers  and  example  of  the  pious  ; 
in  visible  displays  of  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead  ;  by  the  heralds  of  the  Gross, 
who  warn  them  night  and  day  with  tears  ;  in  the  opened  gates  of  heaven,  and  the 
uncovered  mouth  of  the  pit ;  m  full  displays  of  the  beauty  and  glory  and  sufficiency 
of  an  incarnate  Saviour.  Why  these  efforts  to  bring  to  repentance,  if  He  has  no 
mercy  for  the  penitent  ?  {N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Ahwndard  pardon : — The  certainty 
of  their  finding  pardon  was  the  tempting  bait  with  which  this  ancient  fisher  of  souls 
endeavoured  to  "catch  men."  I.  God  does  abundantly  pardon.  We  will  turn  that 
truth  over  and  over,  and  see  it  in  many  lights.  1.  The  pardon  of  God  may  well  be 
abundant,  for  it  weUs  up  from  an  infinite  fountain  ;  "mercy,  which  endureth  for 
ever. "  2.  The  objects  to  which  this  pardon  has  been  extended  are  abundant  too. 
Well  is  it  said,  "  He  will  abundantly  pardon,"  for  God  has  already  pardoned  sinner* 
more  numerous  than  can  be  estimated  by  human  arithmetic.  3.  His  pardon  is 
abundant  when  we  consider  the  abundance  of  the  sins  which  the  love  of  God  blots , 
out.  (1)  Sins  of  thought — rebellious  thoughts,  proud  thoughts,  blasphemousj 
thoughts,  atheistical  thoughts,  covetous  thoughts,  lustftd  thoughts,  impatient 
thoughts,  cruel  thoughts,  false  thoughts,  thoughts  of  ill  memory,  and  dreams  of  an 
unholy  future ;  what  swarms  are  there  1  Moreover,  the  omission  of  thoughts 
which  should  have  been,  such  as  thoughts  of  repentance,  gratitude,  reverence,  faith, 
and  the  like,  these  are  equally  numerous :  with  the  double  list  my  roll  is  written 
within  and  without  with  a  hideous  catalogue.  As  the  gnats  which  swarm  the  air  at 
eventide,  so  numerous  are  the  transgressions  of  the  mind.  (2)  Sins  of  word.  What 
words  have  vexed  the  pure  and  holy  ear  of  God  !  Words  against  Himself,  against 
EUs  Son,  against  His  law  and  Gospel,  against  our  neighbour,  against  everything  that 
is  good  and  true  1  Words  proud  and  hectoring,  words  defiant  and  obstinate,  words 
untruthful,  words  lascivious,  words  of  vanity,  and  words  of  wilful  unbelief.  (3)  Sins 
of  deed,  which  in  very  truth  are  but  the  fruits  which  grow  out  of  sins  of  thought. 
(4)  Perhaps  the  sins  we  do  not  know  are  more  numerous  than  the  sins  we  are 
conscious  of.  Conscience  may  not  be  properly  enlightened,  and  hence  many  a  thing 
may  not  seem  to  be  sinful  which  really  is  so  ;  but  God's  clear  eye  perceiveth  every- 
thing that  is  obnoxious  to  His  holy  law.  Innumerable  sins  are  forgiven  by  one  word 
from  the  lips  of  Divine  love.  4.  We  can  see  the  truth  of  this  in  the  abundant  sin 
of  those  sins  which  are  pardoned.  Did  you  ever  find  a  spider's  nest  just  when  the 
young  spiders  have  all  come  to  life,  it  is  a  city  of  spiders  ;  now,  such  is  any  one  sin, 
it  is  a  colony  of  iniquities,  a  living  mass  of  oflence.  In  addition  to  there  being  many 
sins  in  one  sin,  I  want  you  to  remember  how  much  virus  of  sin  we  sometimes  manage 
to  stow  away  in  a  sin.  A  man  has  done  wrong  and  smarted  for  it,  yet  he  does  the 
veiy  same  thing  again  wilfully,  against  his  own  conscience  and  against  the  warning 
he  has  received.  A  man  will  sometimes  acknowledge  what  a  fool  he  has  been,  and 
yet  play  the  fool  again.  Some  men  sin  for  no  motive  whatever — for  mere  wantonness 
of  sin.  5.  The  Lord  "  abundantly  pardons,"  when  we  consider  the  abundant  means 
of  pardon  which  he  has  been  ever  pleased  to  provide  for  sinners.  6.  The  abundant  ease 
of  the  terms  of  pardon.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake,"  etc.,  that  is  all !  No  man  can 
expect  to  be  forgiven  if  he  goes  on  with  his  sin.  7.  The  abundance  of  this  pardon 
may  be  seen  in  the  fulness  of  it.  8.  He  doth  "  abundantly  pardon,"  because  of  the 
abundant  blessings  which  attend  that  pardon.  II.  The  inferences  which  flow 
OVT   or   ABUNDANT   PARDON.     1.  There   is   no   room  for  anybody   to   despair. 


CHAP.  LT.]  ISAIAR.  235 

2.  There  is  a  loud  call  to  every  one  who  has  not  repented  to  do  so  ;  for  who  would 
be  80  base  as  to  offend  so  good,  so  kind  a  Lord  ?  S.  If  there  is  anybody  in  this 
house  the  text  especially  cam,  it  is  the  biggest  sinner  here  ;  because  tnere  cannot  be 
abundant  pardon  where  there  is  not  abundant  sin.  4.  For  such  a  forgiving  God  we 
ought  in  return  to  have  great  love.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Mohammedism  or  Christi- 
anity : — I  have  heard  men  say,  often,  Why  is  it  Jesus  Christ  has  so  few  disciples  ? 
The  Gospel  has  been  preached  for  1,800  years,  and  yet  Mohammed  has  more 
disciples  than  Jesus  Christ.  The  question  is  very  easily  answered.  A  man  can  be 
a  follower  of  Mohammed,  and  not  give  up  his  sin.  He  may  be  a  follower  of 
Confucius  without  giving  up  his  sin  ;  and  the  reason  Jesus  Christ  has  so  few  disciples 
is  that  men  are  not  willing  to  part  with  their  sin.  If  men  could  only  get  into  the 
Kingdom  of  God  without  giving  up  anything,  they  would  push  into  it  by  the 
thousand.  (Z>.  L.  Moody.)  Free  pardon: — When  I  was  preaching  in  YorksMre  at 
some  mission  services,  a  collier  came  to  me  at  the  close  of  one  of  the  services,  and 
said  to  me,  "  I  would  like  to  be  a  Christian,  but  I  cannot  receive  what  you  have 
said  to-night."  I  said,  "  My  brother,  why  not  ? "  He  said,  "  I  would  give  anything 
to  believe  that  God  would  forgive  my  sin  ;  but  I  cannot  believe  He  will  just  forgive 
it  if  I  turn  to  Him.  It  is  too  cheap."  I  looked  at  him,  and  I  said,  "My  dear 
friend,  have  you  been  to  work  to-day  ?  '  "  Yes."  '*  Where  have  you  been  working  ? " 
He  looked  at  me  slightly  astonished,  and  said,  "  I  was  down  in  the  pit,  as  usual." 
"  How  did  you  get  home  ? "  "  Oh,  I  walked  home  along  the  road."  "  But  how  did 
you  get  out  of  the  pit?"    "The  way  I  always  do.     I  got  into  the  cage,  and  I  was 

{(ulled  up  to  the  top."  "How much  did  you  pay  to  come  out  of  the  pit?"  He 
ooked  at  me  astonished,  and  said,  "Pay?  Of  course,  I  don't  pay  anything."  I 
said  to  him,  "Were  you  not  afraid  to  trust  yourself  in  that  cage  ?  Was  it  not  too 
cheap  ? "  "  Oh,  no,"  he  said.  "  It  was  cheap  for  me,  but  it  cost  the  company  a  lot 
of  money  to  sink  that  shaft."  And  without  another  word  the  truth  of  that 
admission  broke  upon  him,  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up,  and  he 
saw  if  he  could  have  salvation  without  money  and  without  price,  it  had  cost  the 
Infinite  God  a  great  price  to  sink  that  shaft  and  rescue  lost  men.  {O.  Campbell 
Morgan,  D.D.) 

Yers.  8,  9.     For  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts. — Oo^a  thoughts: — ^The 

thought  of  God !  Who  can  fathom  it  ?  Astronomers  tell  us  of  stars  in  the  sky 
at  such  infinite  distances  that  their  light,  shooting  through  space  at  the  inconceiv- 
able rate  of  185,000  miles  a  second,  would  require  3,500  years  to  reach  this  earth. 
And  yet  God's  thought  placed  them  thus  far  away  in  space,  arranged  the  laws  that 
govern  them,  not  unlikely  has  set  whirling  around  them  planets  like  our  own, 
peopled  with  sentiment  and  responsible  beings  like  ourselves.  To  such  distance  , 
u  reach  the  thoughts  of  God  with  the  same  clearness  and  wisdom  as  on  this  little 
j  globe.  Shall  not  these  thoughts,  piercing  the  sublime  avenues  of  infinite  space, 
/find  a  way  whereby  we  maybe  saved?  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  thoughts  of 
/  God: — We  can  form  some  conception  of  them  through  the  works  of  BUs  hand, 
^  whether  in  nature,  providence,  or  redemption.  The  psalmist  describes  them  as 
permanent  in  their  endurance ;  as  surpassing  the  reckoning  of  human  arithmetic  ; 
and  as  being  a  fathomless  deep.  It  is  told  of  Kepler  that,  one  night,  after  hours 
spent  in  observing  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  he  exclaimed,  "  I  have  been 
thinking  over  again  the  earliest  thoughts  of  God."  But  there  are  earlier  thoughts 
than  those  impressed  on  nature.  The  love  that  led  to  the  choice  of  man  in  Christ, 
and  will  culminate  in  the  glory,  is  older  far.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God  a  thinker : — 
"  I  think,  therefore  I  am,"  was  the  formula  in  which  the  great  mind  of  Descartes 
found  peace.  We  may  reverently  adapt  it,  and  say,  "  God  thinks,  therefore  God 
is  ; "  and  the  proof  that  He  thinJiS  is  the  great  universe  around  us  bearing  every- 
where the  marks  of  a  designing  hand.  The  quality  of  any  mind  is  determined  by 
its  product.  The  rare  quality  of  the  mind  of  Shakespeare  found  expression  in 
"Hamlet"  and  "Macbeth,"  that  of  Milton  in  "Paradise  Lost,"  and  that  of 
Tennyson  in  the  "Idylls  of  the  King."  Stephenson  demonstrated  the  wonderful 
mechanical  power  of  his  brain  in  the  production  of  the  steam  engine,  and  Edison 
has  shown  what  he  thinks  by  inventing  the  telephone  and  phonograph.  You 
stand  and  gaze  with  reverential  awe  at  St.  Paul's,  with  its  lofty  dome,  its  magnificent 

Eortico,  its  beautiful  windows.  What  is  it?  A  church.  Yes,  a  church  in  the 
eart  of  the  busiest  city  in  the  world ;  a  constant  witness  to  the  hurrying,  bargain- 
making  crowd,  that  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.  It  is  a  fine  building — a 
veritable  poem  in  stone — begrimed  by  the  smutty  fingen  of  old  Father  Time,  bat 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tT. 

strangely  weird  and  solemn,  as  I  have  seen  it  bathed  in  the  moonlight,  with  the 
mighty  city  sleeping  around  it,  silent  and  stiU,  or  at  least  as  stiU  as  London  ever 
is.  It  is  one  of  the  peep-holes  through  which  London  gets  a  view  of  Heaven.  But 
it  is  something  more.  It  is  the  visualized  thought  of  a  great  man  ;  mute  witness 
to  the  fact  that  mind  is  the  great  thing  in  the  world.  Sir  Christopher  Wren 
thought  cathedrals,  they  were  on  his  brain,  he  saw  them  before  a  single  stone  was 
laid,  and  then  he  selected  one  and  put  it  on  paper  and  said  to  the  bmlder,  "  Now 
go  to  work.  Put  this  thought  of  mine  in  stone,  and  let  it  stand  there  in  the  midst 
of  the  city,  so  that  aU  men  may  see  the  kind  of  thing  my  brain  is  capable  of 
producing."  So  this  world,  so  fuU  of  wondrous  forma  and  lovely  colours,  is  but 
the  outward  expression  of  the  thought  of  God.  {S.  Horton.)  Man,  like  God,  a 
thinker: — 1.  The  power  of  thought  is  one  point  in  which  man  is  made  in  the  image 
of  God.  Other  animated  creatures  which  are  put  in  subjection  to  the  thinking, 
intelligent  creature  man,  have  no  fellowship  with  God  in  thought;  into  His 
world  of  pure  spirit  they  cannot  enter.  When  men  do  not  think,  and  especially 
when  they  do  not  think  of  the  highest  and  most  important  matters,  they  degrade 
themselves  from  the  true  position  and  occupation  of  immortal  minds.  2.  In  the 
text  we  have  two  persons  thinking ;  and  as  the  result — man's  thoughts  and  God's 
thoughts.  God's  thinkings  are  declared  by  Himself  to  be  exceedingly  above  man's, 
and  yet  if  ever  man  is  to  dwell  with  God,  he  must  think  as  God  thinks.  "  How 
can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ? "  What,  then,  can  I  do  to  rise  to 
'  Him  ?  Think  as  much  as  I  please,  thinking  only  sets  me  on  my  feet,  and  so  far 
does  me  service,  but  it  stUl  leaves  me  on  the  earth,  and  God  is  yonder  far  above 
me,  and  my  thoughts  can  no  more  attain  unto  Him  than  an  infant  can  touch  the 
stars  with  his  finger.  Still  it  is  a  comfort  to  me  if  I  am  sincerely  thoughtful  after 
God,  that  He  is  thinking  about  me,  for  if  my  thoughts  cannot  bear  me  up  to  Him, 
His  thoughts  can  bring  TTitti  down  to  me,  and  when  He  has  established  a  connection 
between  the  heaven  which  is  above  me  and  the^  earth  which  is  beneath  Himself, 
then  I,  laying  hold  on  His  thoughts,  and  believing  what  He  has  thought  out  for 
me,  shall  be  drawn  up  to  His  elevation,  and  I  shall  come  to  think  His  thoughts, 
and  so  to  be  in  communion  with  the  Most  High.  (C.  B.  Spurgeon.)  God  forgiving 
sin : — ^At  first,  men  have  very  low  ideas  of  sin.  But  when  the  Holy  Spirit  begins 
to  deal  with  them,  sin  grows  to  be  an  intolerable  burden,  a  fearsome  thing.  While 
the  thought  of  sin  becomes  clear,  the  thought  of  pardon  is  not,  at  first,  so  clear. 
Sin  is  great,  and  for  that  reason  the  sinner  thinks  it  cannot  be  pardoned,  as  if  he 
measured  the  Lord  by  his  sin.  In  our  text  God  in  condescension  helps  the  sinner 
to  btlieve  in  pardon  by  elevating  his  idea  of  God.  Because  God  is  infinitely  superior 
to  man.  He  can  abundantly  pardon.  I.  Yoitr  own  thoughts  judge  pardon  to 
BE  impossible.  1.  To  some  it  seems  impossible  that  there  can  be  forgiveness  for 
them,  because  of  some  special,  secret,  gross,  and  grievous  sin.  Most  persons,  when 
they  remember  their  past  lives,  see  a  certain  spot  blacker  than  the  rest.  2.  To 
others  the  difficulty  of  pardon  seems  to  lie  not  so  much  in  some  special  ofi'ence,  as 
in  the  nimiber  of  their  sins,  and  the  long  continuance  of  them.  3.  Others  have 
been  grievously  oppressed  with  the  idea  that  they  could  not  be  pardoned  because 
of  the  wilfiilness  of  what  they  have  done.  Certainly  this  is  a  very  ^evous  eviL 
Wilfulness  is  the  very  damnableness  of  sin.  4.  "  Sir,"  says  one,  "  I  sinned  with  a 
great  falseness  and  treachery  of  heart ;  for  I  was  baptized  and  joined  a  Church."  6. 
I  hear  one  say,  "There  is  about  my  sin  this  peculiar  heinousness,  that  I  have 
injured  myself  and  others  by  my  sin."  6.  Perhaps  one  may  even  say,  "But,  sir, 
my  sin  was  of  this  kind,  that  I  dishonoured  God:  I  denied  the  Deity  of  Christ." 
II.  God's  thoughts  of  other  things  are  far  above  yours.  It  is  quite  certain 
that  the  best  thoughts — the  most  logical  thoughts,  the  most  original  thoughts,  the 
most  correct  thoughts  you  have  ever  had — are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
God's  thoughts.  Look  in  nature.  The  things  you  see  in  nature  were,  at  first, 
thoughts  in  God's  mind,  and  He  embodied  them.  Did  you  ever  think  such  thoughts 
as  God  has  thought  in  creation  ?  God's  thoughts  in  providence — how  wonderfully 
they  £««  above  ours  1  You  read  history,  and  everything  seems  to  be  a  tangle.  Yet, 
before  you  have  read  through  the  chapter,  you  see  in  it  all  a  plan  and  a  method. 
It  has  ever  been  so  in  your  own  mind  as  to  the  future.  Read  the  prophecies,  and 
see  what  is  yet  to  be.  III.  His  thoughts  about  pardon  are  above  yours.  1. 
Are  you  not  slow  to  forgive?  "He  delighteth  in  mercy."  2.  You  come  to  an 
end  of  your  forgiveness  before  long.  But  God  goes  on  to  seventy  times  seventy 
times — on,  and  on,  and  on,  and  never  comes  to  the  end  of  pardoning  mercy  so  long 
M  a  wal  ones  to  Him  for  forgiTflueM.    i.  Some  things  you  find  it  hJard  to  forgive. 


CHAP,  LV.]  I8AIAS.  237 

God  does  far  more  in  the  way  of  pardon  than  we  ask  or  even  think.  4.  I  am 
afraid  I  must  say  of  some  of  you  that  you  forgive,  but  you  do  not  forget.  God 
promises  to  forget  our  iniquities.  "  I  will  cast  aU  their  sins  behind  My  back." 
''  I  win  cast  their  iniquities  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  They  shall  not  be 
remembered  against  them  anymore  for  ever."  5.  We  forgive,  and  yet  feel  some 
returns  of  anger.  "I  have  blotted  out,"  says  He,  "thy  transgressions."  Once 
blotted  out,  they  are  done  with  for  ever,  6.  I  do  not  slander  you  when  I  say 
that  you  are  not  very  eager  to  pardon.  He,  the  offended  One,  seeks  the  offender 
and  proposes  to  make  peace  with  him.  7.  Do  you  think  that  any  of  us  would 
suffer  much  for  the  sake  of  being  able  to  forgive  another  ?  Should  there  be  a  very 
serious  difficulty  in  the  way,  so  that  you  cannot  rightly  forgive  without  some 
atonement  being  made,   would  you  make    the  atonement  yourself?    IV.  God's 

THOUGHTS  ARE  ABOVE  YOURS  IN  ALL  THINGS  WHICH  CONCERN  HiS  GRACE.      See  the 

first  verse  as  to  the  freeness  of  His  grace.  Your  thought  is  that  you  can  get 
nothing  without  paying  for :  God's  thoughts  are,  "  Come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he 
that  hath  no  money ;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk 
without  money  and  without  price,"  But  you  think  that  if  God  were  to  save  you 
He  would  perform  it  in  a  second-rate  style.  Not  He  I  He  will  have  no  niggard 
salvations.  If  He  supplies  His  people,  it  shall  be  most  richly  and  freely.  Listen 
to  this :  "  Hearken  diligently  unto  Me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let 
your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness."  It  is  not  a  sip  of  the  water,  or  a  crust  of  the 
bread,  or  a  drop  of  the  milk  ;  but  when  Christ  invites  poor  sinners  to  come.  He 
invites  them  to  a  high  festival.  You  that  are  the  guiltiest  may  come  to  Christ, 
and  be  among  the  happiest  and  the  best  of  His  saints.  Nobody  would  ever  imagine 
that  a  sinner  could  ever  enter  into  covenant  with  God — that  God  should  strike 
hands  with  guilty  men,  and  pledge  Himself  to  grace.  Listen  to  this:  "Incline 
your  ear,  and  come  unto  Me,"  etc.  (ver.  3).  I  remember  a  man,  shut  up  in  prison, 
under  a  long  sentence,  and  he  was  so  violent  that  he  was  put  into  a  solitary  cell. 
The  chaplain  had  done  all  he  could  as  to  bringing  him  to  repentance  ;  but  one  day 
he  read  to  him  this  verse,  "  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you."  The 
man  said,  "  I  never  heard  of  such  a  thing.  Can  God  make  a  covenant  with  such  a 
wretch  as  I  am?  Sir,"  said  he,  "it  will  break  my  heart;"  and  it  did  break  his 
heart  and  he  became  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus  under  the  power  of  that  amazing 
thought,  that  God  would  enter  into  covenant  with  such  a  wretch  as  he  was.  In 
ver.  5  Christ  is  said  to  call  a  people  so  ignorant  that  they  did  not  know  Him.  This 
is  to  be  His  glory,  that  He  is  to  call  them  by  His  grace.  It  is  not  one  of  your 
thoughts,  but  one  of  the  thoughts  of  God,  that  He  will  glorify  Christ  in  the  saving 
of  great  sinners.  "  Ah,  well !  "  says  one,  "  I  wiU  go  home,  and  cry  to  God  for 
mercy."  That  is  your  thought.  Listen  to  God's  thought.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord 
while  He  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon  Him  while  He  is  near,"  Ah !  still  you 
think,  "How  can  I  be  pardoned?"  Listen  to  this,  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  Ms 
way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,"  etc,  Eead  the  rest  of  the  chapter, 
and  say  to  yourself,  over  each  verse,  "  This  was  not  my  thought ;  this  was  not  my 
way."  End  all  your  doubts  with  the  last  verse,  "  Instead  of  the  thorn,"  etc,  {Ibid.) 
The  Greatness  of  God : — Until  we  believe  in  the  greatness  of  God,  not  only  in  action, 
but  in  thought,  we  shall  misunderstand  our  Bibles,  the  world  in  which  we  live, 
and  ourselves.  We  use  such  words  as  omnipotence,  omniscience,  omnipresence, 
infinite,  but  how  little  we  grasp  their  meaning  !  They  are  but  the  poor,  etymological 
husks  in  which  we  try  to  thrust  that  which  no  words  can  express.  There  are  some 
things  that  you  cannot  describe,  you  can  only  feel.  Language  is  too  poor,  too 
clumsy  a  mediimi  to  express  God's  best,  or  biggest  things,  much  less  to  describe 
Him.  It  is  like  the  colours  with  which  the  artist  tries  to  reproduce  the  glory  of 
a  sunset.  It  is  not  a  reproduction  ;  at  best,  it  is  but  a  far-off  resemblance.  You 
look  up  on  a  cloudless  day  and  there  is  not  one  speck,  not  one  bit  of  white  cloud 
against  the  vast  expanse  of  xmdimmed  azure,  and  yet  feel,  but  cannot  describe  the 
infinity  of  space.  Let  that  feeling  of  infiniteness  rest  upon  you,  soak  into  your 
mind,  for  it  is  good  for  man,  the  creature  of  a  day,  the  heir  of  eternity,  to  linger 
amongst  great  expanses,  and  to  learn  that  his  geography  is  but  a  petty  science,  and 
his  astronomy,  with  its  measurements  of  millions  of  mUes,  does  but  nibble  at  the 
edge  of  the  great  universe  of  God,  Thus  you  will  preserve  a  reverent  spirit,  keep 
alive  the  faculties  of  wonder  and  admiration,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  be  saved  from 
the  positive  assertion  of  little  narrow  dogmas  which  have  been  adopted  by  certain 
sections  of  the  Church,  and  declared  with  as  much  assurance,  and  fought  for  with 
•a  much  bitterness,  as  though  an  angel  from  heaven  had  proclaimed  them  eveiy 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tT. 

moming  since  the  creation.  {S.  Horton.)  OodCa  ihov^TUa  higher  tJian  man's:— 
Theology  ought  to  be  the  science  of  God  ana  Divine  things.  Often  it  is  systematized 
misrepresentations  of  Divine  things.  It  is  not  the  revelation  of  God's  greatness, 
but  of  man's  littleness ;  it  starts  with  theories,  instead  of  facts.  Our  text  is  God's 
appeal  against  human  misrepresentation.  There  is  always  a  danger  of  putting  our 
own  limitations  of  thoughts  and  speech  upon  the  Almighty,  and  of  making  our 
thinking  and  doing  the  measure  of  His.  Have  we  not  all  met  with  the  man  who 
sees  nothing  in  the  Church  but  bricks  and  timber,  in  its  devotions  only  so  many 
needful  exercises  to  be  got  through  as  speedily  as  possible,  and  in  the  great  re- 
demption plan  nothing  but  convenient  fire  escape  from  the  miseries  of  hell,  and  in 
God  only  a  High  Commissioner  of  Police  ?  It  is  vastly  important  that,  as  far  as 
it  is  possible,  we  should  get  right  ideas  of  God,  for  our  whole  character  and  conduct 
will  DC  coloured  by  our  thoughts  of  Him,  And  though  it  must  ever  be  that  our 
thoughts  are  as  much  beneath  His  thoughts  as  the  earth  is  beneath  the  heavens, 
yet  if  He  reveal  Himself  to  us,  as  He  is  always  willing  to  do  to  the  humble  soul, 
we  shall  at  least  be  saved  from  thoss  mental  caricatures  of  Him  that  have  darkened 
many  a  life,  and  been  the  fruitful  soil  in  which  imbelief  has  found  its  foothold. 
1.  llie  setting  of  the  text  takes  us  at  once  to  the  central  doctrine  of  the  Christian 
faith.  The  verse  before  it  proclaims  the  pardon  of  God  for  the  sinner,  who,  repent- 
ing of  his  sins,  returns  to  the  Lord.  How  can  a  sinless  God  forgive  a  sinful  man, 
and  yet  maintain  the  majesty  of  His  own  law  ?  And  there  rises  before  our  eyes  at 
once  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  on  it  One,  who,  struggling  in  the  death  agony,  exclaims, 
"  It  is  finished."  All  the  wonder  and  mystery  of  the  ages  gathers  round  that  cross. 
If  you  can  explain  that  you  can  explain  all.  Was  it  possible  for  sin  to  take  upon 
itself  a  deeper  shade  of  guilt  than  the  sin  of  the  people  of  Judah  in  Isaiah's  time  f 
Crimson-hued  and  scarlet-dyed,  what  could  even  God  do  with  such  sinners  as  these  ? 
Sweep  them  away  with  the  strength  of  His  right  arm.  Yea,  and  all  heaven  and  all 
earth  would  approve  the  justice  of  the  sentence.  But  He  can  do  something  else. 
He  can  forgive  them.  At  first  we  revolt  at  the  very  idea.  Forgiveness  for  them  I 
And  then  once  more  we  hear  the  voice  which  says,  "My  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  My  ways."  "I  will  never  forgive  him"  is  the 
language  of  the  man  who  has  been  wronged.  But  God  says,  "  I  will  give  My  best 
and  dearest  if  I  may  but  win  the  wrong-doer  to  love  that  which  is  good.  I  will  save 
him  by  showing  him  what  love  can  do. "  Do  you  know  it  is  the  hardest  thing  in  the 
world  to  persuade  men  to  believe  that  God  loves  them  with  a  love  like  that  ?  There 
is  a  good  deal  of  truth  in  the  sarcasm  of  a  scoffing  French  writer  "  that  man  has 
made  God  in  his  own  image."  2.  Let  us  apply  our  text  to  the  many  problems  that 
gather  round  our  life,  to  those  many  difficulties  behind  which  as  yet  we  can  see  nc 
meaning.  Life  for  many  is  a  prolonged  agony.  It  is  a  burden,  a  paia,  a  puzzle  te 
which  we  have  not  yet  the  key.  Behind  the  pain,  and  the  tears,  and  the  smart,  God 
is,  and  His  plan  for  us  is  the  best  possible  plan.  He  is  but  a  poor  shallow  fool  who 
says,  I  will  accept  nothing  that  I  cannot  understand.  As  a  matter  of  fact  he  is 
always  accepting  what  he  does  not  understand.  Does  he  understand  sleep  ?  Does 
he  imderstand  why  a  seed  grows?  why  a  child  thinks?  why  men  die?  And 
yet  there  are  many  men  who  reject  the  idea  of  a  personal  God  because  they  cannot 
understand  His  works  and  ways.  They  declare  life  to  be  without  purpose,  and  an 
aimless  consciousness  between  two  eternities.  To  all  such  our  text  is  a  rebuke.  Faith 
is  a  bird  of  stronger  wing  than  reason.  Two  texts  are  sufficient  for  me.  Upon  them 
I  stake  all  for  time  and  for  eternity,  "God  is  very  great,"  "  God  is  love,"  Socrates 
has  put  our  belief  once  and  for  all  into  a  convenient  formula,  "What  God  is  I  know 
not ;  what  He  is  not  I  know,"  God  is  not,  cannot  be  cruel,  God  is  not,  cannot  bo 
pitiless,  God  is  not,  cannot  be  making  useless  experiments  at  our  expense.  Without 
that  faith,  how  could  we  face  the  hopeless  poverty,  the  misery  of  our  slums  ?  Oh  1 
wearied  heart,  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him.  When  faith  falters, 
when  the  sun  goes  out  in  darkness,  when  the  storm  beats  loud  and  fierce,  when  over 
a  coffin-lid  hope  drops  its  head  and  weeps,  wait  for  God,  Give  Him  time  to  discover 
Himself.  It  is  at  the  midnight  hour  that  Christ  walks  on  the  tempest-lashed  sea. 
Hush  all  your  questionings  and  wait ;  simply  wait.  Is  that  easy  ?  No  ;  it  is  the 
hardest  thing  of  all  to  do  ;  but  wait,  only  wait.  What  we  cannot  know — what  it 
would  not  be  wise  for  us  to  know  now — we  shall  know  hereafter,  (Ibid. )  Ood'a 
thoughts  and  ways : — I.  Specify  some  instances  in  which  this  declaeation  is 
STRIKINGLY  ILLUSTRATED.  1,  In  His  production  of  the  most  stupendous  resiilte 
from  insignificant  causes.  Nature  abounds  with  illustrationfl.  Providence  is  still 
Biore  abundant.    Consequences  the  most  stupendous,  inrolviiig  the  destinies  of 


CHAP.  LT.]  ISAIAH.  239 

individuals,  of  families,  of  empires,  have  arisen  out  of  causes  which  we  deem  insig- 
nificant. But  the  most  abundant  proofs  are  derived  from  the  history  of  the  Gospel. 
Our  Lord  has  suggested  this  view  of  the  subject  in  His  own  illustrations — "The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,"  and  so  on.  And  this  is 
an  illustration  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  Messiah's  Gospel.  Who,  and  what  was 
the  Founder  of  the  Gospel — as  to  His  human  appearance  ?  2.  In  the  accomplishment 
of  the  most  glorious  designs  by  the  weakest  and  most  insignificant  instruments.  Who 
were  the  first  propagators  of  the  Gospel  ?  In  what  school  were  they  educated  ?  With 
what  armour  did  they  go  forth  to  the  war !  3.  In  the  sovereign  exercises  of  His 
grace,  in  connection  with  its  freedom  and  fulness.  II.  Assign  some  reasons  for 
THIS.  1.  His  knowledge  is  more  extensive  than  our  information.  2.  His  judgment 
is  more  accurate  than  our  decisions.  3.  His  purposes  and  plans  are  iminfluenced  hj 
our  prejudices  and  passions.  4.  It  is  His  determination  to  humble  pride,  and  His 
fixed  resolution  that  no  creature  should  glory  in  His  presence.  III.  Learn  lessons 
OF  HUMILITY,  GRATITUDE,  AND  CONFIDENCE.  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  GocPs  thoughts: — 
The  word  "  thought "  is  used  here  objectively.  It  expresses  a  result  and  not  a  pro- 
cess. I.  Illustration.  Here  we  need  only  contrast  the  human  with  the  Divine 
style  of  thinking.  Observe  some  particulars : — 1.  Creation.  The  visible  creation 
that  surrounds  us  on  every  side  and  spreads  away  into  immensity  beyond  us,  is  only 
an  embodied  thought  of  the  infinite,  uncreated  Intelligence.  Tell  me  if  it  be  at  all 
like  one  of  man's  thoughts.  Equip  man  with  omnipotence,  and  set  him  to  create  a 
universe — and  would  it  resemble  the  imiverse  as  it  is  ?  By  no  means  1  (1)  Man's 
universe  would  be  absolutely  consolidated.  Into  one  immense  continent  would  all 
these  world-islands  be  cast,  and  all  tribes  and  types  of  life  inhabit  it  as  a  common 
dwelling !  His  agonizing  regret  this  day  is  that  he  cannot  fling  the  line  of  a  mighty 
telegraph  from  ster  to  star,  and  thus,  even  in  face  of  the  immutable  ordinances  of 
heaven,  gather  these  isolated  islands  of  life  into  one  vast  virtual  consolidation !  (2) 
A  universe  proj  ected  by  man  would  be  motionless  and  steadfast.  We  build  our  homes, 
not  on  the  waters,  that  they  may  be  locomotive,  but  on  the  shore,  that  they  may  be 
fixed.  But  God's  universe  is  in  everlasting  motion.  Or,  descending  from  the  survey 
of  a  imiverse  of  worlds  to  consider  the  economy  of  a  single  world,  even  with  greater 
force  shall  we  feel  the  same  truth.  Such  a  world  as  this  no  wise  man  would  have 
created.  He  would  have  filled  up  the  ocean  with  plough-ground,  and  sloped  the 
mountains  gently  for  vineyards,  and  covered  with  rich  verdm-e  the  sands  of  the 
wilderness.  And  the  waters  would  have  brought  forth  after  their  kind  only 
beautiful  things,  and  every  creature  moAong  in  the  forests  would  have  been 
musical  and  fair ;  and  the  sky  would  have  been  without  cloud  on  its  rich  blue, 
and  the  year  without  winter  or  storm  in  its  long  summer  of  loveliness.  2. 
Providence.  And  whether  we  regard  the  entire  economy  of  providence  as  a 
stupendous  whole,  or  each  successive  development  in  its  separation,  the  same  truth 
will  be  manifest.  Man  certainly  would  have  ordered  the  whole  thing  difiFerently. 
Instead  of  those  mysterioiis  periods  of  slowly  ascending  life,  he  would  have  rounded 
earth  into  beauty  at  first  as  a  home  for  immortals,  and  breathed  Divine  life  into  man 
made  in  God's  image.  Place  at  the  head  of  human  affairs  an  omnipotent  philanthro- 
pist, and  how  soon  would  every  dark  thing  be  swept  from  a  groaning  creation.  How 
the  captive  would  leap  from  his  chain,  and  the  conqueror  lay  off  his  maU,  and  the 
cries  of  violence  cease,  and  the  rod  of  the  oppressor  be  broken !  How  these  dark 
places  of  cruelty  would  be  irradiated  with  heavenly  light,  and  Christianity,  borne  as 
on  angel-wings,  circle  the  round  world  1  II.  Application.  1.  Our  first  remark  la 
addressed  to  this  very  class  who  reject  the  Bible  because  to  their  finitude  it  seems 
either  unwise  or  incomprehensible.  The  poor  erring  creature  of  an  hour,  who  cannot 
build  a  hovel  that  will  not  leak,  nor  weave  a  perfect  garment  to  cover  him,  he — 
wonderful  man  that  he  is — would  lift  his  thoughts  into  brotherhood  with  God's 
thoughts,  and  adjust  the  complicate  sublimities  of  revelation  by  the  square  and  the 
line  of  his  insignificant  faculties !  Why,  the  sceptic  should  begin  further  back  and 
earlier  with  his  scepticism,  as  his  arguments  lie  as  strongly  against  creation  and 
providence.  2.  Within  our  own  time  a  new  philosophy  hath  invaded  the  Church  of 
Christ,  with  its  watchwords  "spiritual  insight,"  and  "the  moral  reason,"  and 
"  intuitional  capacity,"  setting  itself  to  overthrow  the  indispensable  condition  of  all 
true  piety — the  entire,  unquestioning,  adoring  submission  alike  of  life,  and  conscience, 
and  mtellect  unto  God.  And  while  the  Church  receives  not  this  philosophy  formally 
—for  this  were  openly  to  deny  the  faith — ^yet,  under  its  insidious  and  malign  influence, 
there  has  come  to  pass  a  setting  up  within  Zion  of  our  own  intellectual  and  moral 
jjoig/aiaxitt  am  oritio  and  arbiter  of  the  great  doctrines  of  nvelation.    Doctrines  that 


240  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tT. 

are  profound  or  mysterious,  if  not  openly  rejected,  are  at  least  modified  to  square 
with  our  pMlosophy.  And  the  positive  declarations  of  God  are  lowered  to  the  com- 
prehension of  our  natural  reason.  We  are  as  yet  learners  in  God's  school-room,  not 
advisers  in  His  council-chamber !  We  shall  understand  things  better  by  and  by, 
when  eternity  flings  its  full  light  on  the  page  of  oiu-  scholarship  !  But  until  then 
humility  is  the  apt  temper  of  a  learner.  And  faith,  not  comprehension,  the  great 
law  of  tne  scholarship  !  Till  then  ours  must  be  the  submission  of  an  infantile  mind 
to  an  infinite  Intelligence — the  trust  of  a  short-sighted  child  in  an  all-seeing  Father. 
3.  But  the  thought  under  consideration  applies  as  well  to  the  phenomena  of  Chris- 
tianity as  to  its  facts.  Take,  for  example,  its  gradual  increase  and  development. 
The  characteristic  of  the  age  is  impatience  of  anything  but  a  demonstrative  and 
headlong  progress.  Tell  me  where,  either  in  creation  or  providence,  God  thus  hurries 
to  conclusions  ?  So  far  from  discouragements  in  this  slow  progress  of  Christianity, 
we  have  therein  only  fuller  proof  of  its  Divine  origin,  nobler  prophecy  of  its  ultimate 
consummation.  4.  There  is  a  still  more  consoling  application  of  this  truth  to  things 
unseen  and  eternal — immortality.  The  grand  characteristic  and  charm  of  the  eternal 
world  is  its  utter  unlikeness  to  the  temporal  and  earthly.  (C.  Wadsworth.)  God' a 
ways  and  man's  ways: — There  is  nothing,  perhaps,  in  which  God's  thoughts  and 
ways  are  more  seen  to  be  **  higher  "  than  man's  than  in  the  matter  of  salvation  ;  and  it 
is  in  renouncing  his  own  ways,  and  yielding  to  God's,  that  the  main  difficulty  of 
salvation  on  man's  part  lies.  Because  there  is  nothing  more  simple  than  the  plan  of 
salvation — substitution.  I.  God's  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts  in  the  matter 
OF  PAEDON.  This  is  proclaimed  freely,  without  any  condition  on  man's  part  in  the 
way  of  satisfaction  to  God's  holy  and  broken  law.  Salvation  is  represented  in  Scripture 
as  something  which  God  Himself  has  achieved,  God  has  "  delivered  man  from  going 
down  into  the  pit ;  He  has  found  a  ransom ; "  and  therefore,  in  every  point  of  view, 
this  salvation  is  perfect  and  complete.  It  is,  further,  proclaimed  to  sinners  as  a  gift 
which  they  cannot  earn  or  deserve,  but  which  they  are  entreated  to  accept  as  a  gift 
on  accoimt  of  what  Christ  has  done  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Men  are  called  on  to  believe  it 
instantly,  to  receive  it  and  enjoy  it  at  once,  as  the  gift  of  God's  love  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Now,  to  this  the  world  objects,  because  such  a  plan  of  salvation  knocks  down  man's 
pride,  and  leaves  him  in  the  position  of  a  rebellious  sinner  dependent  wholly  on  God'a 
grace  and  mercy.  To  escape,  therefore,  from  such  an  ignominious  admission,  some 
go  on  to  argue  that  by  this  view  God's  law  is  dishonoured,  sin  is  treated  as  if  of  no 
consequence,  and  the  pardoned  sinner  is  left  without  any  obligation  to  obey  God. 
But  is  this  true?  II.  God's  "thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  neither  are  our  ways 
His  ways,"  IN  thb  wat  in  which  peace  and  joy  follow  on  believing  the 
Gospel.  This  is  proclaimed  in  Scripture  as  instant  (Rom.  v.  1).  But  the  world 
objects  to  this,  and  calls  it  presumption  ;  and  if  they  hear  of  a  notorious  sinner  being 
converted,  and  entering  into  peace,  they  immediately  set  him  down  as  a  hypocrite. 
The  question  is  not  whether  tney  are  hypocrites,  but  whether  a  man  who  believes  the 
Gospel,  and  is  fall  of  joy  and  peace  in  consequence,  is  a  hypocrite.  Whatever  the 
world  says  on  the  subject.  Scripture  does  not  so  represent  him.  We  must  take  care 
and  not  conclude  that  where  there  is  no  peace  there  is  no  faith.  This  would  be  as 
wrong  as  to  conclude  that  where  there  is  not  perfect  health  there  is  no  life.  III.  There 
is  still  another  point  in  which  "  God's  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  neither  are  our 
ways  His  ways,"  namely,  His  longsttffering.  In  preaching,  I  have  no  limit  to 
make  in  the  Gospel.  If  you  say,  "  This  surely  is  abusing  the  goodness  of  God,"  I 
reply,  "  God's  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  neither  are  our  ways  His  ways."  {J.  W. 
Beeve,  M.A.)  God's  thoughts: — The  very  act  of  thinking  implies  imperfection.  But 
it  is  a  way  of  picturing  the  Divine  nature  by  a  comparison  with  man.  Man  thinks, 
reasons,  and  so  arrives  at  certain  results.  These  he  calls  thoughts  or  conclusions.  It 
is  not  so  with  God.  He  has  no  need  to  arrive  at  conclusions  by  any  mental  process. 
He  knows  everything.  It  is  difficult  to  find  any  English  word  wherewith  to  express 
the  idea  intended.  The  word  "  feelings  "  might  partly  do  so— method  of  action  as 
the  result  of  "  feelings  " — "  dealings."  It  is  really  the  whole  of  the  Divine  nature. 
"  My  nature  is  not  as  your  nature,  nor  My  ways  of  action  as  your  ways  of  action." 
The  grand  idea  is  a  consciousness  of  the  vast  difference  which  exists  between  ourselves 
and  God,  and  to  certain  practical  inferences  to  be  devolved  therefrom.  These  are — 
I.  That  we  are  not  to  judge  of  God  by  our  own  feelings.  How  can  we 
for  one  moment  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  the  great  and  mighty  King  of  kings  ? 
1.  Consider  our  ignorance  compared  with  His  perfect  knowledge — our  wealcness  com- 
pared with  His  almighty  power — our  short  life  compared  with  His  eternity  of  exist- 
ano*.    All  these  things  point  oat  the  foUy  of  setting  ourselves  to  judge  of  the  Divin* 


ORAP.  LT.]  ISAIAH.  aU 

acts  or  the  Divine  method  of  providence,  by  the  methods  which  we  would  pursue.  And 
yet  people  say,  or  think  if  they  do  not  say,  in  so  many  words,  that  they  could  carry 
on  the  world  far  more  wisely  than  God.  2.  Consider  our  sin  in  comparison  with 
God's  holiness.  Sin  prevents  aU  feeling,  aU  right,  aU  truth.  It  has  changed  aU 
men's  views  with  respect  to  propriety  or  justice.  And  yet  there  are  men  who  would 
dispute  the  jitstice  of  the  Almighty's  dealings  with  men.  II.  That  we  are  not  to 
JUDGE  OF  oina  OWN  POSITION  BY  OUR  OWN  THOUGHTS.  The  ways  of  every  man 
are  right  in  his  own  eyes.  We  think  we  are  acting  for  the  best  when  we  are  acting 
for  the  worst.  We  think  we  are  serving  God  when  we  are  bribing  the  deviL 
We  think  we  are  setting  an  example  of  all  virtue  to  our  neighbours,  when  aU 
the  while  we  are  nought  but  hypocrites.  We  are  not  to  judge  of  our  position 
of  holiness  by  our  own  thoughts.  What  a  criteria  of  judgment  are  human 
thoughts  1  They  go  astray  from  the  beginning,  they  are  altogether  depraved. 
How  can  we  estimate  our  own  advancement  by  them?  Woe  be  to  those  who 
do,  for  they  will  only  court  destruction.  Our  thoughts  are  not  God's  thoughts. 
Some  are  nearer  the  kingdom  of  heaven  than  they  suppose,  while  others  are  further 
off.  III.  That  we  abb  not  to  judge  of  ant  of  the  mysteries  of  the 
FUTURE  BY  OUR  OWN  THOUGHTS.  The  world  has  a  way  of  either  perverting 
revelation,  or  inventing  new  theories  from  its  own  imagination.  {Homilist.) 
Disparity  of  thoughts,  Divine  wnd  Tvmnan : — I.  God  and  man  differ  in  their 
THOUGHTS  regarding  LIFE — the  meaning  of  our  present  existence,  as  we  live  in  this 
world  day  by  day.  Man's  general  conception  is  that  he  has  been  sent  into  this 
world  endowed  with  certain  powers  of  body  and  mind  that  he  may  get  on,  and  rise 
commercially,  socially,  and  in  those  things  which  are  hemmed  in  by  things  seen  and 
temporal.  As  men  are  thus  employed  God  looks  down  upon  them  with  the  tender 
eve  of  a  mother  and  the  pitying  heart  of  a  father,  and  says  to  His  erring  children, 
*'  Why  do  ye  spend  your  time  and  destroy  your  immortal  powers  in  such  a  vain 
pursuit  ?  Y  ou  have  mistaken  the  meaning  of  your  present  life,  and  the  reason  I  sent 
you  into  the  world.  My  thoughts  concerning  it  are  not  your  thoughts,  and  My 
ways  are  not  your  ways.  Your  life  was  given  that  you  might  grow  in  wisdom, 
experience,  and  Divine  likeness  in  character,  and  the  earth  is  a  school  in  which  you 
are  to  be  trained,  educated  for  highest  worship  and  noblest  service."    II.  God  and 

MAN    DIFFER  IN   THEIR   THOUGHTS   REGARDING  DIFFICULTIES  AND  SORROWS.      The 

human  and  natural  way  of  looking  at  these  things  is  to  view  them  as  unmiti- 
gated evils,  and  that  either  God  knows  and  cares  nothing  about  those  who  endure 
them,  or  that  they  are  manifestations  of  His  ill-will  and  judicial  anger.  These  are 
not  the  thoughts  of  God.  As  seen  in  the  light  of  heaven  they  are  either  the  result 
of  the  violation  of  the  law  of  love,  of  selhshness  and  sin,  or  are  educative  agencies  to 
make  the  soul  strong,  tender,  and  true.  III.  God  and  man  differ  in  their 
THOUGHTS  regarding  THE  TREATMENT  OF  ENEMIES.  Hatred  has  been  met  by 
hatred ;  scorn  has  been  answered  by  scorn ;  and  for  evil  rendered  evil  has  been 
repaid  in  full  measure,  pressed  down  and  running  over.  Far  otherwise  has  it  been 
with  God.  Kegarding  treatment  of  enemies,  God  says,  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts,  and  My  ways  are  not  your  ways.  Ye  would  render  evil  for  evil,  hate  for 
hate,  blow  for  blow.  I  love  Mine  enemies,  I  seek  to  bless  the  greatest  sinner,  I  cause 
My  sun  to  shine  on  the  unjust,  and  unthankful,  and  am  ready  to  take  all  prodigals 
into  My  forgiving  embrace."  This  has  been  God's  action  from  the  first  man  till  now. 
IV.  God  and  man  differ  in  their  thoughts  regarding  death.  Men's  thoughts 
on  the  matter  are  full  of  sadness,  and  they  beget  a  melancholy  most  difficult  to  bear. 
But  God  understands  life  and  He  understands  death,  and  if  we  are  filled  with  His 
thoughts  and  walk  in  His  ways,  the  supposed  enemy  that  seems  to  be  a  fiend  and 
the  destroyer  of  our  existence  shall  appear  in  the  glorious  position  of  being  the  con- 
dition of  a  higher,  purer,  fuller  life,  that  shall  never  cease  to  be,  and  like  the  echoes 
of  the  soul  "  shall  giow  for  ever  and  for  ever."  ( W.  Adamson,  D.D.)  The  mystery 
a/nd  the  glory  of  redemption : — The  whole  Bible  is  but  an  expansion  of  one  utterance 
of  the  Eternal,  "I  am  Jehovah."  Hence  the  revelation  must  be  incomplete,  for  a 
God  who  could  fully  reveal  Himself  to  His  creatures  would  be  no  God  ;  and  it  must 
also  be  astonishing  and  amazing,  for  a  professed  record  of  any  part  of  God's  thoughts 
and  ways  that  did  not  land  in  mystery  and  tend  to  wonder,  would  be  self-condemned, 
and  proved  to  be  neither  true  nor  Divine.  I.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,  nor  Hia 
thoughts  our  thoughts,  in  regard  to  the  need  of  redemption.  The  lessons  of 
Scripture,  while  leaving  the  entrance  of  evil  in  its  awful  mystery,  assist  our  faith  by 
showing  that  our  misgivings  in  regard  to  God,  which  thence  arise,  are  groundless, 
and  also  that,  however  strange,  yet  aa  a  matter  of  fact,  evil  can  be  overruled  for 

TOI..  lU.  !• 


S42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

good.  II.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  our  thoughts,  in  regard 
to  THE  PURPOSE  OF  REDEMPTION.  Man,  as  we  learn  from  Scripture — the  only  source 
whence  we  can  expect  to  know  it — is  not  the  only  being  who  has  fallen  ;  but  man  ia 
the  only  being  wno  is  redeemed.  There  are  those  who  profess  not  to  believe  in 
Scripture,  but  who  arraign  this  supposed  procedure  as  unfair  and  unequal ;  and  there 
are  those  also  who  accept  Scripture,  and  yet  reject  its  apparently  clear  testimony  as 
to  the  exclusion  of  fallen  angels  from  mercy.  Both  classes  of  objectors  go  upon  the 
same  principle  that  God  cannot  justly  punish  with  a  final  sentence  of  rejection  those 
who  have  sinned  against  Him,  no  matter  how  aggravated  their  offences  may  be  ;  but 
that  in  some  way  having  given  them  being.  He  is  bound  to  make  that  being  ulti- 
mately good  and  happy.  But  this  runs  counter  to  the  whole  Bible  doctrine  of 
grace  ;  for  on  this  footing,  redemption  is  a  clear  debt ;  and  whether  it  be  fallen 
angel  or  fallen  man  God  is  not  entitled  to  withhold  it.  Men  may  stand  in  their 
views  either  upon  justice  or  upon  grace ;  but  they  are  not  entitled  to  stand  upon 
both.  III.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  our  thoughts,  in  regard 
to  THE  PLAN  OF  REDEMPTION.  How  utterly  Unlike  to  any  means  of  man's  devising 
are  those  which  God  has  chosen  for  the  recovery  of  His  lost  creatures  to  His  favour 
and  image  !  All  the  opposition  to  evangelical  religion  with  which  we  are  surrounded, 
and  which  incessantly  repeats,  "  Give  us  a  Christianity  that  is  rational  I  Give  us  s 
Christianity  that  we  can  oelieve  I  Give  us  a  Christianity  that  meets,  as  everything 
else  is  doing,  the  advancement  of  the  age  1 " — what  does  it  amount  to  but  this, 
"  Give  us  a  Christianity  without  God  I  Give  us  a  Christianity  without  that  element 
of  ^andeur,  of  mystery,  of  overwhelming  superiority  to  man's  thoughts  and  ways, 
which  compels  awe  ana  humbles  pride  I "  "We  accept  the  demand,  come  from  what 
quarter  it  may,  as  an  involuntary  homage  to  the  superhuman  glory  of  the  faith  we 
stand  by.  IV.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  our  thoughts,  in 
regard  to  the  progress  of  redemption.  Kedemption  has  a  history ;  and  this  of  all 
others  the  most  difficult  to  scan,  not  only  as  it  lies  in  the  Bible,  but  in  uninspired 
records.  It  has  been  said,  "  Interpret  the  Bible  as  any  other  book  ;"  but  though 
there  is  a  certain  truth  in  this,  if  we  take  it  roundly  it  ultimately  means,  "  Inter- 
pret God  as  you  interpret  man. "  You  cannot  even  interpret  Church  history  as  you 
interpret  any  other  history.  It  is  in  a  sense  which  belongs  to  no  other  history,  the 
story  of  a  battle  not  yet  fought  out,  of  a  campaign  not  yet  ended  ;  and  there  are 
combatants  at  work  beyond  the  range  of  human  observation,  and  a  supreme  celestial 
leader,  whose  point  of  survey  none  can  share.  I  shall  illustrate  this  union  of  mystery 
and  greatness  in  regard  to  three  features  in  the  progress  of  redemption.  1.  The  rate 
of  its  progress.  2.  The  instruments  of  its  progress.  3.  The  hindrances  to  its  pro- 
gress. Man  would  have  thought  that  hindrances  would  have  speedily  been  removed, 
or  that  if  they  were  suffered  to  remain  or  to  return,  they  would  have  proved  un- 
mingled  evils  to  the  Church,  But  God,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  now  so  far  see, 
by  giving  the  victory  slowly,  trains  the  faith  and  courage  of  successive  generations, 
and  by  permitting  old  enemies  to  return,  or  new  ones  to  spring  up,  shows  the  un- 
exhausted and  inexhaustible  energy  of  His  Gospel,  to  face  and  put  down  every  hostile 
power.  V.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add  a  few  words  in  regard  to  the  limits  of 
redemption.  Here  also  God's  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  as  our 
thoughts.  And  hence  the  real  and  painftd  difficulty,  which  has  always  been  felt  in 
regard  to  the  Gospel,  and  perhaps  never  more  openly  expressed  than  in  our  own  day. 
-      -  -  --  Qq^  wishes,  "  be  saved,  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of 


Why  should  not  all  men,  as 

the  truth  "  ?  Why  should  redemption,  in  the  case  of  the  human  family,  have^anv 
limits  at  all  ?  Can  we  aspire  to  take  in  all  God's  view  of  what  a  tremendous  evil, 
like  sin,  and  especially  the  rejection  of  the  Son  of  God,  may  demand  ?  (J.  Cairns,  D.D.) 
Sovereign  thoughts : — I.  The  thoughts  of  God  are  eternal  and  immutable  ; 
the  thoughts  of  men  are  temporal  and  changeable.  Reflections  on  things 
older  and  less  changeable  than  ourselves  are  the  best  guides  to  the  unknown  heights 
of  the  Father's  wisdom.  They  lead  us  some  distance,  but  only  to  show  us  the  way. 
These  mountains  were  long  seated  on  their  rocky  seats  ere  the  plan  of  the  pyi'amids 
of  Egypt  was  conceived  in  the  heart  of  man.  These  rivers  had  flown  majestically  in 
their  channels  for  thousands  of  years  before  man  made  his  aqueducts  to  entice  tnem 
from  their  course.  The  revolving  sun  poured  its  ceaseless  floods  of  light  on  the 
universe  myriads  of  ages  before  the  scientist  made  the  first  telescope.  Astronomy 
teUs  us  that  the  worlds  which  occupy  distant  locations  in  space  have  swept  silently 
through  their  trackless  regions  for  periods  of  indefinite  duration.  Geology  unfolds 
the  rocky  leaves  of  the  earth's  crust,  and  deciphers  hieroglyphics  which  roU  us  back- 
ward beyond  animal  and  vegetable  life  to  primeval  rocks  whose  age  no  historian  nap 


OHAP.LY.]  ISAIAH.  24S 

compute.  Thus  we  are  famished  with  materials  to  write  a  grand  history  of  by-gona 
generations,  stretching  into  the  past  beyond  our  comprehension.  This  history  is  the 
A  B  0  of  the  eternal.  The  fact  that  the  thoughts  of  God  are  eternal,  fixes  His 
immutable  counsel  and  purpose.  The  redemption  of  fallen  man  is  a  thought  without 
beginning,  and  is  not  subject  to  any  variation.  This  is  the  rock  on  which  we  build 
our  Christian  faith.  Through  the  varying  scenes  of  life  there  runs  the  one  purpose 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  save  our  souls  and  reconstruct  human  society.     II.  Thb 

THOUGHTS   OF   GOD    ABE   PRIMARY  CATJSES,   WHILE   OURS   ARE    MERE    IMPRESSIONS. 

1.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  manifestations,  not  only  of  power  and  wisdom,  but 
of  mind.  2.  No  less  evident  is  it  that  the  revelation  of  Himself  as  the  Saviour  of 
man  through  human  consciousness  is  the  product  of  His  thoughts.  (1)  God's  thoughts 
in  the  Gospel  are  greater  than  man's  thoughts.  So  great  are  some  of  them  that  they 
are  above  human  comprehension  (Rom.  xi.  33).  (2)  God's  thoughts  are  better  than 
man's  thoughts.  The  whole  of  the  chapter  is  a  declaration  of  sovereign  mercy.  The 
offender  is  called  to  repentance,  and  offered  a  free  pardon.  Human  wisdom  would 
ask.  How  can  this  be  ?  How  shall  moral  government  stand  without  punitive  justice. 
Can  God  be  just  if  He  justify  the  repentant  sinner  1  There  is  but  one  answer :  "  As 
the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  My  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and 
My  thoughts  than  your  thoughts."  Mercy  is  inexplicable  except  in  its  operations. 
III.  God's  methods  are  inscrutable,  like  unto  His  thoughts  ;  but  men's  ways 
ARE  CROOKED  AND  PERVERSE.  The  Scriptural  meaning  of  the  word  "  way  "  is  the 
character  vrith  which  actions  are  stamped.  Actions  reveal  the  thou^ts  and  motives 
of  the  actor.  They  are  a  reflex  of  himself.  The  ways  of  God  are  His  thoughts  in 
operation.  "Thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  Thy  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  Thy 
footsteps  are  not  known."  These  words  echo  those  of  an  older  book,  or,  at  least, 
they  are  the  echo  of  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients — "  By  His  Spirit  He  hath  garnished 
the  heavens ;  His  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked  serpent.  Lo,  these  are  parts  of 
His  ways :  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  Him  ?  but  the  thunder  of  His  power 
who  can  understand  ? "  "  Great  and  marvellous  are  Thy  works,  Lord  God  Almighty ; 
just  and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Thou  King  of  saints."  Fix  your  minds  on  the  way  of 
His  goodness  and  mercy  unto  us.  Think  of  the  wonderful  display  of  wisdom  in  the 
redemption  of  mankind.  Jesus  has  appeared  to  remove  our  ofi'ences  by  the  sacrifice 
of  Himself.  This  great  manifestation  of  eternal  thought  is  the  banquet  at  which 
the  intelligences  of  heaven  will  sit,  world  without  end.  IV.  The  thoughts  and 
WAYS  OF  God  are  before  us  for  correction  and  imitation.  V.  The  thoughts 
OF  God  are  with  us  as  our  inheritance.  He  who  has  passed  through  the  process  of 
examining  the  casket  to  the  possession  of  its  contents,  can  say,  "  How  precious  also 
are  Thy  thoughts,  0  God!  how  great  is  the  sum  of  them."  {T.  Davies,  M.A.) 
The  incomprehensibility  of  the  mercy  of  God: — "Lo,  these  are  parts  of  His  ways, 
but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  Him  1 "  This  is  one  of  the  most  sententious 
sayings  of  Job,  and  it  expresseth,  in  a  very  emphatic  manner,  the  works  of  God. 
What  this  holy  man  said  of  the  wonders  of  nature,  we,  with  much  more  reason,  say 
of  the  wonders  of  grace.  Collect  all  that  pagan  philosophers  have  taught  of  the 
goodness  of  the  Supreme  Being.  To  the  opinions  of  philosophers  join  the  declarations 
of  the  prophets.  Add  the  discoveries  of  the  evangelists  and  apostles.  To  the  whole 
join  your  own  experience  ;  your  ideas  to  their  ideas,  your  meditations  to  their 
meditations,  and  then  believe  that  ye  are  only  floating  on  the  surface  of  the  good- 
ness of  God,  that  His  love  hath  dimensions,  a  "breadth,  and  length,  and  depth, 
and  height,"  which  the  human  mind  can  never  attain :  and,  upon  the  brink  of  this 
ocean,  say,  "  Lo,  these  are  only  parts  of  His  ways,  and  how  little  a  portion  is  heard 
of  Him ! "  Three  things  are  necessary  to  explain  the  text.  I.  The  meaning 
must  be  restrained.  It  is  certain,  that,  in  many  respects,  God's  ways  are  our 
ways,  and  His  thoughts  our  thoughts.  I  mean,  that  there  are  many  cases  in  which 
we  may  assure  ourselves  that  God  thinks  so  and  so,  and  will  observe  such  or  such 
a  conduct.  To  contrast  the  supreme  grandeur  of  the  Creator  with  the  insignificance 
of  the  creature  ;  to  persuade  mankind  that  the  great  Supreme  is  too  lofty  to  concern 
Himself  with  us,  that  our  conduct  is  entirely  indifferent  to  Him  ;  that  it  signifies 
nothing  to  Him  whether  we  be  just  or  unjust,  humane  or  cruel,  happy  or  miserable : 
to  say  in  these  senses,  that  "God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,"  that  "His  thoughts 
are  not  our  thoughts,"  these  are  the  arms  that  infidelity  hath  sometimes  employed 
with  success,  and  against  the  attacks  of  which  we  would  guard  you.  For  these 
reasons,  the  meaning  of  the  text  must  be  restrained,  or  it  will  totally  subvert 
religion  and  morality.  The  exercise  of  my  reasoning  powers  produceth  in  me  some 
incoutestabLa  notioiu  of  Qod,  and,  firom  these  notions  immediately  follow  some  son 


S44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  LT. 

eonse^nences,  which  become  the  immovable  basis  of  my  faith  in  His  "Word,  of  my 
■ubmissioQ  to  His  will,  and  of  my  confidence  in  His  promises.  These  notions,  and 
these  consequences  compose  the  body  of  natural  religion.  Let  it  be  granted  that 
God  is,  in  many  respects,  c[uite  Lucomprehensible,  that  we  can  obtain  only  a  small 
degree  of  knowledge  of  this  infinite  Object,  yet  it  will  not  follow  that  the  notions 
which  reason  gives  us  of  Him  are  less  just,  or,  that  the  consequences,  which 
immediately  follow  these  notions,  are  less  sure.  If  reason  affords  us  some  adequate 
notions  of  God,  if  some  necessary  consequences  follow  these  notions,  for  a  much 
stronger  reason  we  may  derive  some  adequate  notions  of  God,  and  some  sure  con- 
sequences, from  revelation.  II.  The  object  must  be  determined.  The  prophet's 
expressions  would  have  been  true,  had  they  been  applied  to  all  the  attributes  of 
God ;  however,  they  are  applied  here  only  to  one  of  them,  that  is,  to  His  good- 
ness. Wherein  do  the  thoughts  of  God  differ  from  ours  ?  In  God  there  are  treasures 
of  mercy,  the  depth  of  which  no  finite  mind  can  fathom.  In  Him  goodness  is  as 
inconceivable  as  all  His  other  attributes.  In  God,  a  sinner,  who  seems  to  have 
carried  his  sin  to  its  utmost  extravagance,  and  to  have  exhausted  all  the  treasures 
of  Divine  grace,  shall  still  find,  if  he  "return  unto  the  Lord,"  and  cast  himself  at 
the  foot  of  Him  who  "abundantly  pardoneth,"  a  goodness,  a  compassion,  a  love 
that  he  could  not  have  imagined  to  find.  III.  The  proofs  must  be  produced. 
(1)  The  means  by  which  God  conciliated  His  justice  with  His  love.  (2)  His  patience 
with  those  who  abuse  this  means.  (3)  His  intimate  union  with  those  who  fall  in 
with  the  design  of  His  patience.  Let  tis  address  the  text  to  the  gloomy  mind  of 
a  melancholy  person,  who,  having  failed  in  the  courage  necessary  to  resist  tempta- 
tions, fails  again  in  that  which  is  necessary  to  bear  the  thought  of  having  fallen  into 
them.  What  madness  possesseth  thy  melancholy  mind  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  assures 
thee  that  "though  thy  sins  be  as  scarlet"  He  will  make  them  "white  as  snow  ;" 
that  "  though  they  be  red  like  crimson  "  He  will  make  them  "  as  wool ; "  and  dost 
thou  think  that  thy  sins  are  too  aggravated  to  be  pardoned  in  this  manner !  The 
Holy  Spirit  gives  thee  a  long  list  of  the  most  execrable  names  in  nature  ;  a  list  of 
idolaters,  murderers,  extortioners,  adulterers,  persecutors,  highway  robbers,  and 
blasphemers,  who  obtained  mercy  when  they  sought  it :  and  art  thou  obstinately 
bent  on  excluding  thyself  from  the  number  of  those  sinners  to  whom  mercy  is 
promised ;  and  because  thou  dost  not  believe  it  attainable,  dost  thou  obstinately 
refuse  to  ask  for  it  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  hath  lifted  up  a  Cross,  and  on  that  Cross 
a  Redeemer,  who  is  "able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by 
Him ;"  and  who  Himself  saith  to  all  sinners,  "Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour, 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  And  dost  thou  flee  from  this  Cross, 
and  rather  choose  to  sink  under  the  weight  of  thy  sins  than  to  disburden  them  on 
a  Redeemer  who  is  willing  to  bear  them  ?  But,  passing  aU  these,  let  us  return  to 
the  text.  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,'  etc.  This  is  suflBcient  to  refute 
the  whole  system  of  a  despairing  mind.  {J.  Saurin.)  God's  ways  arid  mcm's: — 
These  words  are  'grand  poetry  and  noble  theology,  but  they  are  meant  practically 
and  in  fiery  earnestness.  The  "  for"  at  the  beginning  of  each  clause  points  us  back 
to  the  previous  statement,  and  both  of  the  verses  of  our  text  are  in  different  ways 
its  foundation.  So  we  have  here  two  things  to  consider  in  reference  to  the  relation 
between   the  Divine  pui-poses  and  acts  and  man's  purposes  and  acts.     I.  The 

AHTAGONISM,  AND  THE  INDICTMENT  AND  EXHORTATION  THAT  ARE  BASED  UPON 

THAT.  1.  Notice  the  remarkable  order  and  alternation  of  pronouns  in  the  first 
yerse.  *'  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,"  saith  the  Lord.  The  things  that 
God  thinks  and  purposes  are  not  the  things  that  man  thinks  and  purposes,  and 
therefore,  because  the  thoughts  are  different,  the  outcomes  of  them  in  deeds  are 
divergent.  God's  "ways"  are  His  acts,  the  manner  and  course  of  His  working 
considered  as  a  path  on  which  He  moves,  and  on  which,  in  some  sense,  we  can  also 
journey.  Our  "ways" — our  manner  of  life — are  not  parallel  with  His,  as  they 
should  be.  But  that  opposition  is  expressed  with  a  remarkable  variation.  Observe 
the  change  of  pronouns  in  the  two  clauses.  First,  "My  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts  " — ^you  have  not  taken  My  truth  into  your  minds,  nor  My  purposes  into 
your  wiLLs  ;  you  do  not  think  God's  thoughts.  Therefore — "your  ways  (instead  of 
'  My,'  as  we  should  have  expected,  to  keep  the  regularity  of  the  parallelism)  are  not 
My  ways" — I  repudiate  ana  abjure  your  conduct  and  condemn  it  utterly.  Now,  of 
course,  in  this  charge  of  man's  unlikeness  to  God  there  is  no  contradiction  of,  nor 
reference  to,  man's  natural  constitution,  in  which  there  are,  at  one  and  the  same 
time,  the  likeness  of  the  child  with  the  parent  and  the  unlikeness  between  the 
ereature  and  the  Creator.     If  our  thoughts  were  not  like  God's  thoughts  we  should 


CHAP.  IT.]  ISAIAS.  245 

know  nothing  about  Him.  If  our  thoughts  were  not  like  God's  thoughts  we  should 
have  no  standard  for  life  or  thinking.  Righteousness  and  beauty  and  truth  and 
goodness  are  the  same  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  alike  in  God  and  man.  "We 
are  made  after  His  image,  poor  creatures  though  we  be.  But  that  very  necessary 
and  natural  likeness  between  God  and  man  makes  more  solemnly  sinful  the  voluntary 
unlikeness  which  we  have  brought  upon  ourselves.  Mark  how  wonderfully,  in  the 
simple  language  of  my  text,  deep  truths  about  this  sin  of  ours  is  conveyed.  Notice 
its  growth  and  order.  You  begin  with  a  heart  and  mind  that  does  not  take  in  God's 
thoughts,  truths,  purposes,  desires,  and  the  alienated  will  and  the  darkened  under- 
standing and  the  conscience  which  has  closed  itself  against  His  imperative  voice  all 
issue  after  (vards  in  conduct  which  He  cannot  accept  as  in  any  way  corresponding 
with  His.  First,  the  thought  unreceptive  of  God  s  thought,  and  then  the  ways 
contrary  to  God's  ways.  2.  Notice  the  profound  truth  here  in  regard  to  the 
essential  and  deepest  evil  of  aU  our  evil.  "  Your  thoughts  ; "  "  your  ways."  Self- 
dependence  and  self-conJ5dence  are  the  master-devils  of  humanity.  And  the  root  of 
all  sin  lies  in  these  two  strong,  simple  words,  "  Your  thoughts  not  Mine ;  your  ways 
not  Mine. "  3.  Notice,  too,  now  there  are  suggested  the  misery  and  retribution  of 
this  unlikeness.  "  If  you  will  not  make  My  thoughts  your  thoughts,  I  shall  not 
take  your  ways  as  My  ways.  I  will  leave  you  to  them.  You  will  be  filled  with  the 
fruit  of  your  own  devices."  The  question  rises  in  many  a  heart,  "How  am  I  to 
forsake  these  paths  on  which  my  feet  have  so  long  walked  ?  And  if  I  do,  what 
about  all  the  years  behind  me,  fuU  of  wild  wonderings  and  thoughts,  in  aU  of  which 
God  was  not?"  The  second  verse  of  our  text  meets  that  despairing  question. 
II.  The  akalogy  but  superiority,  and  the  exhortation  and  hope  that 
ARE  BUILT  UPON  THAT.  This  clause  begins  with  God's  ways,  from  which  alone 
men  can  reach  the  knowledge  of  His  thoughts.  The  first  follows  the  order  of  God's 
knowledge  of  man  ;  the  second,  that  of  man's  knowledge  of  God.  1.  God's  way  of 
dealing  with  sin  is  lifted  up  above  all  human  example.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
pardoning  mercy  amongst  men.  It  is  a  faint  analogy  of,  as  it  is  an  ofiFshoot  from  the 
Divine  pardon,  but  all  the  forgivingness  of  the  most  placable  and  long-suffering  and 

fladly  pardoning  of  men  is  but  as  earth  to  heaven  compared  with  the  greatness  of 
lis.  2.  Again,  God's  way  of  dealing  with  sin  surpasses  aU  our  thought.  All 
religion  has  been  pressed  with  this  problem,  how  to  harmonize  the  perfect  rectitude 
of  the  Divine  nature  and  the  solemn  claims  of  law  with  forgiveness.  We  have 
Jesus  Christ.  The  mystery  of  forgiveness  is  solved,  in  so  far  as  it  is  capable  of 
solution,  in  Him  and  in  Him  alone.  3.  We  are  taught  here  that  God's  way  of 
dealing  with  sin  is  the  very  highest  point  of  His  self-revelation.  If  we  want  to  see  up 
into  the  highest  heavens  of  God's  character,  we  must  go  down  into  the  depths  of  the 
consciousness  of  our  own  sin,  and  learn  first  how  unlike  our  ways  and  thoughts  are 
to  God,  ere  we  can  understand  how  high  above  us,  and  yet  beneficently  arching  over 
us,  are  His  ways  and  thoughts  to  us.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  God's  thoughts  and  ways 
far  above  ours: — I.  There  is  rebuke  administered.  The  Lord  says,  "Forsake 
your  way,  for  it  is  not  My  way ;  leave  your  thoughts,  for  they  are  not  My  thoughts." 
The  rebuke  is  enveloped  in  love,  and  made  into  a  sugar-coated  piU ;  the  sweet 
promise  of  abundant  pardon  conceals  the  reproof.  Let  us  take  the  rebuke,  and 
notice — 1.  The  fault  of  man's  thoughts.  "My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts." 
(1)  As  between  each  other,  God's  thoughts  are  not  man's,  though  they  ought  to  be. 
God's  thoughts  are  love,  pity,  tenderness ;  ours  are  forgetfalness,  ingratitude,  and 
hard-heartedness.  (2)  Your  thoughts  as  to  your  conduct  are  npt  God's  thoughts. 
He  considers  that  the  creatures  He  has  made  should  obey  Him,  but  you  judge  that 
it  matters  not  what  a  man  does  towards  his  Maker  so  long  as  he  is  just  towards  his 
fellow-men.  (3)  God's  thoughts,  again,  as  to  the  life  which  a  man  needs  in  order 
to  salvation  are  very  different  from  man's  thoughts.  In  this  chapter  He  says, 
"  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  He  reckons,  then,  that  man  is  dead  tiU  he  has 
heard  the  word  of  God  in  his  soul.  Man  reckons  that  he  is  alive  enough.  (4)  God's 
thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  again,  in  reference  to  the  truth.  Man  thinks 
himself  so  wise  and  good  that  he  does  not  like  God's  thoughts  concerning  himself, 
his  fall,  his  guilt,  and  his  danger.  (5)  In  the  matter  of  salvation  God's  thoughts 
are  not  man's  thoughts,  for  God  thinketh  that  man  has  so  sinned  that  he  must  ^  e 
condemned  except  a  substitute  be  foimd.  Man  thinks  not  so.  God  sets  before  him 
pardon  freely  presented  through  the  precious  blood :  man  thinks  to  buy  it  by  his 
devotions,  or  to  win  it  by  his  merits.  2.  The  text  advances  to  say  that  man's  ways 
are  not  like  God's.  Our  ways  are  the  outward  actions  which  spring  out  of  onr 
thoughts.    Qod's  ways  are  ways  of  holiness  and  purity.    Otod  hath  nevBr  dons 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lv. 

aaything  unjust  to  His  creatures  or  unrighteous  to  Himself.  But  our  ways  are  not 
so  ;  they  are  full  of  error,  marred  with  evil,  polluted  with  impurity.  By  nature  we 
love  that  which  we  ought  to  hate.  Two  cannot  walk  together  in  heaven  except 
they  be  of  one  mind  ;  so  that  our  ways  and  God's  ways  must  be  made  to  be  alike 
in  character.  Now,  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  conceive  of  God's  making  His 
thoughts  to  be  like  our  thoughts.  What  then  T  We  must  rise  to  Him.  3.  I  ask 
you  to  consider  the  difficulty  of  this.  "As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth, 
so  are  My  ways  higher  than  your  ways."  How  are  we  to  be  lifted  up  from  earth  to 
heaven?  The  word  that  answers  the  question  is  that  matchless  syllable,  "grace." 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,  by  His  almighty  grace,  must  raise  us  up  together  with  Christ. 

II.  We  have  repentance  encouraged.  "Let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and 
He  will  have  mercy  upon  him  ;  and  to  our  God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon. 
For  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts. "  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  connecting 
link  between  the  abundance  of  pardon  and  the  lofty  character  of  God,  and  that 
men  are  encouraged  to  forsake  their  ways  and  thoughts  by  the  hope  of  pardon 
derived  from  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  thoughts  and  ways.  1.  Do  not  stand  back 
because  you  cannot  understand  God.  It  is  not  needful  that  you  should  comprehend 
His  ways  and  thoughts.  2.  Neither  start  back  because  you  cannot  find  a  parallel  to 
the  grace  which  God  declares  that  He  will  display  towards  you.  3.  According  to 
our  text,  whatever  your  ways  towards  God  shall  be  in  the  future.  He  will  exceed 
them.     And  as  to  your  thoughts — can  you  think  of  how  He  will  receive  you? 

III.  Expectation  excited.  This  time  the  link  is  forward  instead  of  backward. 
"  For  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven,  and  returneth  not 
thither."  1.  You  are  to  expect  that  the  Lord's  word  will  be  unfailing  to  you. 
2.  Next  that  you  are  returning  to  a  God  whose  ways  are  so  much  above  your  ways, 
and  His  thoughts  so  much  above  your  thoughts,  that  your  heart  shall  be  filled  with 
joy — "  ye  shall  go  out  with  joj^,  and  be  led  forth  with  peace."  God  will  not  merely 
oreak  off  your  chains  and  say  in  cold  accents,  "  You  are  free  ;  "  but  He  will  release 
you  amid  the  music  of  the  spheres.  3.  Next  to  this,  all  your  surroundings  shall 
minister  to  your  gladness.  "The  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break  forth  before 
you  into  singing,  etc.  The  mountain  which  you  feared  shall  break  forth  into  song, 
and  the  forest  at  which  you  trembled  shall  become  an  orchestra  in  which  every  tree 
shall  clap  its  hands  for  joy.  4.  And  then,  there  shall  happen  to  you  wonderful 
transformations.  Evil  habits  shall  be  withered  and  holy  principles  nourished. 
5.  This  mercy  is  to  endure  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Mans  thoughts  and  God^s 
thoughts: — I.  Compare  yoiir  thoughts  of  the  possibility  of  pardon  with  God's 
thoughts  about  it.  You  naturally  form  your  ideas  of  God's  ways  from  what  you 
conceive  would  be  yours  if  you  were  in  His  position.  1.  I  take  you  on  that  ground, 
and  we  will  suppose  that  some  wicked  person  has  very  grossly  injured  you  and  that 
the  question  of  your  forgiving  him  is  now  mooted.     We  will  suppose  you  to  be  of  a 

fsnerous,  frank,  forgiving  disposition,  and  in  a  calm  and  judicious  state  of  mind, 
ou  are  ready  to  act  most  leniently,  but  still  the  case  in  hand  is  no  trifle  and  requires 
consideration.  After  well  pondering  the  matter,  you  feel  boimd  to  say,  "  I  could 
forgive  this  person,  but  his  offence  is  of  a  peculiarly  grievous  kind.  With  the  most 
sincere  desire  to  pass  over  it,  I  feel  that  I  must  not,  but  must  let  the  law  take  its 
course."  There  have  been  many  occasions  when  persons  aggrieved  have  thus  spoken, 
and  when  no  reasonable  person  coxild  have  blamed  them.  Such,  0  awakened  sinner, 
is  your  case  as  before  the  Lord,  and  if  He  should  think  of  you  as  one  man  would 
think  of  another,  you  must  own  Him  to  be  just.  You  have  offended  God  in  the  very 
tenderest  point ;  you  have  denied  His  right  to  you,  though  you  are  His  creature. 
Though  you  have  been  a  pensioner  upon  His  bounty,  you  have  constantly  insisted 
upon  it  that  you  were  your  own  master,  and  had  a  right  to  do  just  as  j^ou  pleased. 
You  have  thus  invaded  the  crown  rights  of  the  King  of  kings,  and  committed  treason 
against  His  sovereignty :  worst  of  all,  you  have  committed  sin  against  His  only 
begotten  and  most  dear  son,  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  it  were  your  case,  you  could  not 
forgive  ;  but  be  astonished  as  you  hear  that  your  thoughts  are  not  God's  thoughts, 
and  His  ways  of  forgiveness  are  as  high  above  your  ways  as  the  heavens  are  above  the 
earth.  2.  It  is  supposable  that  when  you  are  weighing  the  case  of  an  offender  you 
c"  ^ide  upon  it  thus :  "I  could  forgive  him,  bad  as  the  sin  is,  if  I  thought  he  had 
fallen  into  it  from  inadvertence  or  carelessness,  or  if  I  supposed  that  he  was  moved 
by  some  great  hope  of  ^in  for  himself,  but  the  offence  was  intentional,  malicious,  and 
wanton,  and  therefore  I  cannot  remit  it."  Naturally  you  transfer  these  thoughts  of 
yours  to  the  Lord  of  heaven,  and  you  say,  "  He  will  never  pardon  me,  for  I  have 
ti«8paa»ttd  wilfully.    I  haye  nnned  without  excuse."    Such  language  as  this  befits  « 


CHAP.  !.▼.]  ISAIAH.  247 


penitent's  tongue ;  men  cannot  forgive  their  fellows  when  they  perceive  wanton 
malice  in  their  crimes,  but  God  can  forgive  you.  3.  You  will  in  some  cases  also  bo 
obliged  to  say,  **  I  could  very  readily  have  overlooked  this  fault,  but  it  has  been  re- 
peated." Such  to  the  full,  is  your  case,  0  troubled  sinner,  with  regard  to  God. 
Though  you  hardly  dare  to  think  of  forgiveness,  God  can  not  only  think  of  it,  but 
bestow  it.  4.  I  can  conceive  a  person  greatly  injured  sayiug,  "  I  would  overlook  all 
these  injuries  which  have  been  hurled  against  me,  but  I  cannot  see  any  reason  why  I 
should  have  been  the  particular  object  of  this  man's  spite  ;  it  has  been  quite  un- 
deserved on  my  part,  and  unprovoked."  That  would  be  a  very  excellent  reason _ia 
a  court  of  justice  for  insisting  on  the  punishment  of  an  oflFender.  Listen  to  the  voice 
of  the  good  God  whom  you  have  injured  (chap.  i.  2,  3).  What  is  the  sequel  to  this 
very  just  but  sad  complaint  ?  (i.  18).  5.  "Yes,"  says  an  ofiFended  person,  "  I  might 
overlook  the  fault  if  1  thought  the  man  were  wholly  humbled  now ;  but  you  see  he 
asks  me  to  pardon,  but  he  has  not  a  suflBcient  sense  of  his  guilt."  'Troubled  sinner, 
this  is  very  much  your  case.  You  are  somewhat  broken  down,  but  you  must  confess 
that  your  heart  is  hard  stiU,  compared  with  what  it  ought  to  be.  But  God  says,  "  I 
will  take  away  the  heart  of  stone,  and  I  will  give  them  a  heart  of  flesh."  6.  "  Still," 
exclaims  the  aggrieved  party,  "  I  think  the  man  ought  to  make  me  some  compensa- 
tion." This  principle  is  very  properly  recognized  in  courts  of  justice.  Now,  poor 
sinner,  you  feel  that  you  cannot  bring  any  compensation.  But  our  loving  God  does 
not  ask  you  for  any  compensation  ;  He  says,  "  Only  return  unto  Me."  Sm  is  freely 
forgiven  for  Jesus'  sake.  7.  Natm-ally,  many  a  just-minded  person  would  say,  "If 
I  were  most  gracious,  yet  I  could  not  find  it  in  my  heart  freely  to  forgive  when  I  ses 
the  consequences  always  -before  my  eyes."  Suppose  that  somebody  had  wantonly 
injured  your  child ;  suppose  he  had  broken  one  of  your  child's  limbs,  for  instance  ;  I 
think  I  hear  you  say,  "  I  could  forgive  him,  but  look  at  my  poor  limping  child." 
But  sinner !  God  sees  before  Him  daily  tokens  of  what  you  have  done !  You  can 
never  unwrite  the  past,  nor  restore  the  lost  one.  All  that  accursed  past  of  sin  must 
live  on.  If  you  light  the  fire,  it  will  bum  on  to  the  lowest  hell.  God  may  forgive 
your  incendiarism,  but  the  fire  itself  still  continues.  With  all  the  consequences  of 
your  sin  before  Him,  He  forgives  you  freely  if  you  rest  on  Jesus.  8.  Furthermore,  I 
can  conceive  a  case  in  which  the  offended  party  can  fairly  say,  "  I  do  feel  from  my 
heart  fully  prepared  to  forget  this  offence  against  me,  but  it  was  public,  and  therefore 
highly  obnoxious  and  injurious."  Trembling  sinner,  you  also  may  well  think, 
"  Surely  God  will  never  forgive  me,  for  against  Him  only  have  I  sinned,  and  done 
this  evil  in  His  sight.  I  sinned  in  the  face  of  the  sun.  I  sinned  unblushingly,  and 
gloried  in  my  shame."  Eejoice,  poor  mourner,  that  this  is  no  reason  why  the  Lord 
should  not  forgive  you,  for  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth  so  high  are 
His  thoughts  above  your  thoughts.  9.  I  can  imagine  it  possible  that  an  offended 
one  might  add,  by  way  of  clenching  all  his  arguments  against  pardon,  "My  forgive- 
ness he  has  already  despised.  I  have  put  myself  to  great  expense  in  order  to  subdua 
his  hatred,  and  yet  he  has  stood  out  against  me.  How  can  reason  and  justice  expect 
me  to  do  any  more  ? "  I  might,  perhaps,  answer,  No ;  neither  of  them  can  well 
expect  more  of  you ;  but  what  we  cannot  expect  of  you,  the  guilty  siuner  may  yet 
expect  of  God.  II.  Contrast  your  thoughts  about  the  plan  of  pardon  with  God's 
thoughts.  If  you  have  advanced  far  enough  to  believe  that  God  can  pardon,  and 
have  to  this  extent  laid  hold  upon  God's  thoughts,  it  is  well ;  but  still  another  of 
your  own  thoughts  drags  you  down,  for  you  have  a  wrong  idea  of  the  way  of  pardon. 
1.  I  will  suppose  that  there  are  persons  who  ignorantly  say,  "  If  it  be  true  that  the 
Lord  will  pardon  sin,  let  Him  do  it  outright ;  let  Him  just  take  the  pen  and  mark 
through  aU  my  transgressions,  and  have  done  with  them.  He  has  but  to  say,  '  I 
forgive  thee,'  and  there  is  an  end  of  it."  But  God's  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts 
in  this  case.  You  have  evidently  become  so  impure  in  heart  as  to  look  upon  sin  as  a 
trifle  ;  but  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  is  of  another  mind.  The  great  Rules  cannot 
suffer  sin  to  go  unpunished.  2.  Others  have  a  notion  that  God  may,  perhaps,  forgive 
them  by  putting  them  through  a  course  of  affliction.  It  is  still  a  superstitious  notion 
lingering  in  England,  that  poor  persons  are  the  special  objects  of  Divine  favour,  and 
that  hard  work  and  poverty,  and  especially  a  long  lingering  sickness,  are  a  means  of 
putting  away  sin  ;  for  persons  so  afflicted  nave  had  so  much  misery  in  this  life  that 
they  do  not  deserve  to  suffer  more.  But  your  thoughts  on  this  matter  are  not  God's 
thoughts.  You  may  be  as  poor  as  Lazarus,  but  never  lie  in  Abraham's  bosom  ;  you 
may  endure  as  many  suffermgs  here  as  fell  to  the  lot  of  Job,  and  yet  may  go  from 
Job's  dunghill  to  helL  Oast  out  any  idea  that  these  sufferings  or  privations  of 
yoTUi  can  make  atonement  fiv^dn.    8.  A  more  oorrent  idea^stUI  is,  maX  God  will 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR;  [cau*.  LT. 

put  away  the  past  and  give  men  a  new  start,  and  that  if  they  go  on  well  for  the 
rature,  then  in  their  dying  hour  God  will  speak  pardon.  But  there  is  nothing  of 
that  kind  in  the  Word  of  God.  4.  There  is  a  very  current  supposition,  however, 
that  God  pardons  sin  in  this  way :  that  He  says,  "  Well,  now,  I  forgive  you  the  past. 
My  law  was  a  little  too  severe  for  you,  but  I  will  try  you  again  under  a  more  lenient 
rule.  Do  as  well  as  you  can,  and  I  will  save  you.  '  But  God  does  nothing  of  the 
kind !  The  forgiveness  which  is  given  to  a  sinner  reaches  to  the  sins  which  are  yet 
to  be  committed  as  well  as  to  the  sins  which  he  has  already  done.  Christ  stood  for 
you,  and  therefore  God  is  severely  just  while  He  is  bountiftilly  merciful  to  you.  In 
the  next  place,  when  God  forgives  you  He  does  it  imconditionally.  III.  Thb 
PEESENT  POSSESSION  OF  THIS  PARDON.  1.  There  is  an  idea  in  the  mind  of  many 
that  the  plan  of  just  trusting  in  Christ,  and  being  pardoned  on  the  spot,  is  too 
simple  to  be  safe.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  simplest  remedies  are  the  most 
potent  and  safe ;  and,  certainly,  the  simplest  rules  in  mechanics  are  just  those  upon 
which  the  greatest  engineers  construct  their  most  wonderful  erections.  Do  not  despise 
the  Gospel  because  it  is  simple.  2.  I  think  I  hear  you  say,  '*  It  is  too  good  to  be  true." 
But  it  is  just  like  our  God.  3.  I  think  I  hear  your  heart  say,  "  It  seems  to  me  to  be  a 
plan  too  swift  to  be  sure."  This  is  no  human  nostrum,  this  is  a  Divine  prescription. 
"Believe  and  livel"  Have  done  with  thyself,  and  begin  with  Christ,  (ibid.) 
Neither  are  your  ways  My  ways,  saith  the  Lord. — The  great  contrast: — Nature, 
Providence  and  Grace  abound  in  eloquent  illustrations  of  the  text.  I.  Observb 
KATURE.  1.  God's  works  are  characteristic.  They  manifest  His  character.  Man's 
do  not.  We  cannot  tell  infallibly  what  a  feUow-creature  is  by  remarking  what  he 
does.  A  garment  is  made  for  you.  Are  you  able,  as  you  look  at  it,  to  discover 
what  the  maker  is  ?  A  carpenter  constructs  a  box,  table  or  chair ;  but  nothing  in 
its  manufacture  informs  the  spectator  of  the  workman's  holiness  or  sinfiilness.  ft  is 
even  so  with  books.  The  productions  of  the  pen  sometimes  oppose  the  deeds  of  the 
life.  But  God's  works  show  us  Himself.  The  purity  and  power,  the  mercy  and 
majesty  of  Jehovah,  are  all  displayed  in  creation.  2.  God's  works  will  bear  the 
most  minute  examination.  In  yonder  gallery  of  art  is  a  painting.  Stand  from  it  at 
a  certain  distance  and  you  are  struck  with  its  beauty.  Look  at  it  closely  and  it 
becomes  a  mere  confusion  of  colours.  But  ascend  a  hill.  Gaze  at  the  landscape. 
Here  it  is  a  Divine  picture.  The  fields  are  emerald  with  grass,  golden  and  white 
with  prolific  wild-flowers.  Beheld  afar  off,  the  scene  is  glorious.  Come  down  the 
hill,  however.  Go  into  the  meadow.  Pluck  one  of  the  flowers,  and  gaze  at  it 
minutely  ;  gather  a  blade  of  grass,  and  subject  it  to  a  most  scrutinizing  examination. 
It  wiU  bear  it.  It  is  as  beautiful  as  ever.  A  piece  of  lace  which  looks  delicate  and 
fine  to  the  naked  eye  becomes  coarse  and  clumsy  under  a  microscope.  Not  so  the 
wing  of  a  fly  or  a  moth.  Magnify  the  finest  needle  ever  made,  and  it  immediately 
looks  rude  and  rough  ;  but  magnify  the  sting  of  a  bee  a  million  of  times,  and  its 
surface  is  still  smooth  and  unvarying.  3.  God's  works  are  inexhaustible  in 
sttractiveness.  We  never  tire  of  nature.  Human  achievements  are  limited  in  the 
interest  which  they  yield.  II.  Study  providence.  How  opposed  to  men's 
expectations  have  been  many  of  God's  dealings.  Placed  in  His  position  they  would 
have  done  the  very  opposite  of  what  He  was  pleased  to  accomplish.  S.  g.  Israel 
when  brought  out  of  Egypt ;  Joshua  and  Jericho ;  Gideon  and  the  Midianites ; 
Naaman  and  his  leprosy.  "  Man  proposes,  God  disposes."  We  form  our  plans  ;  He 
frequently  leaves  them  where  they  are,  and  never  allows  them  to  crystallize  into 
action.  Brains  are  racked  and  hearts  made  anxious  touching  divers  schemes  and 
sundry  intentions,  when,  lo !  He  who  has  the  disposing  of  the  lot  quietly  ignores 
them,  and  leads  us  into  an  altogether  different  path  from  that  which  we  expected. 
I  once  visited  the  house  of  a  friend.  While  waiting  for  admission  my  attention  was 
arrested  by  a  trivial  but  suggestive  object.  Beside  the  door  an  evergreen  had  been 
planted.  It  was  drooping  and  dying.  Close  to  it,  however,  was  a  wild  flower. 
Dropped  by  a  passing  bird,  or  cast  there  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  some  seed  had 
taken  root.  It  flourished  and  grew  strong.  Nor  is  it  otherwise  with  human  events. 
Schemes  which  we  set,  water,  and  watch,  disappoint  us  and  fail,  while  God  gives  to 
something  very  different  vigour  and  life.  III.  Consider  grace.  In  His  spiritual 
dealings  with  us,  '*  Neither  are  your  ways  Mjr  ways,  saith  the  Lord."  1.  God  loves 
all.  We  do  not.  Large-hearted  philanthropists,  whose  affection  takes  in  the  whole 
race,  are  exceptional.  2.  God  makes  allowance  for  our  difficulties.  Physical 
infirmities  commonly  awaken  pity.  We  take  them  into  account  when  we  judge. 
"Would  that  we  carried  out  the  same  rule  a  little  further !  Not  seldom  when  we 
Judge  of  our  fellows  morally  and  spiritually,  we  lose  sight  of  the  difficulties  which 


CHAP.  Lv.]  ISAIAH.  24Si 

they  have  to  encounter.  If  we  remembered  their  peculiar  trials  and  temptations, 
we  should  speak  a  little  less  harshly  of  them.  God  makes  fiill  and  large  allowance 
for  our  difficulties.  He  sees  and  appreciates  the  obstacles  with  which  we  grapple. 
"He  remembereth  that  we  are  dust."  3.  God  helps  us  through  our  difficulties. 
Adversity  is  a  severe  ordeal.  Tried  thereby,  many  friendships  are  found  wanting. 
Fair  weather  and  smooth  sailing  on  life's  sea  will  win  feUow-voyagers,  but  clou& 
and  breakers  few  will  share  with  us.  How  different  is  it  with  God  ;  "I  will  never 
leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee  " — not  even  in  trial.  Nay,  He  is  nearer  to  us  then  than 
ever.  He  not  only  makes  allowance  for  our  difficulties,  but  helps  us  through  them. 
Two  children  were  once  overheard  talking  about  the  Good  Shepherd.  "What  does 
He  do?"  said  one.  "He  feeds  the  sheep,  and  drives  away  tie  wild  beasts,"  was 
the  reply.  "But,"  rejoined  the  first,  "He  does  more  for  the  sheep;  He  carries 
them  up  hUl."  4.  God  is  very  forgiving.  Man  is  not :  he  is  slow  to  pardon  (ver. 
7).  {T.  R.  Stevenson.)  God's  longsuffering  surpasses  man's: — An  evangelist  was 
conducting  special  services  in  a  Yorkshire  village  and  urged  his  Gospel-hardened 
audience  to  immediate  decision.  As  he  pictured  the  longsuffering  of  God  his  face 
beamed  with  holy  excitement.  Then,  falling  on  his  knees,  he  cried,  "Lord,  Lord, 
how  stubborn  they  are  !    If  I  had  been  Thee,  I'd  a  had  'em  aU  in  hell  long  since." 

Ver.  9.  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth. — The  nea/r  and  heofoerUy 
horizoTis: — I.  The  heavens  are  so  far  above  the  earth,  and  therefore  so 
PURE.  By  nature,  the  trend  of  our  thinkings  and  activities  is  downward,  earthly, 
sensual,  devilish.  Hence  the  awful  disparity  between  the  ways  and  thoughts  of  God 
and  ours.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  for  the  natural  man  to  understand  God,  or,  to 
please  God.  It  is  impossible,  also,  for  the  natural  man  to  live  with  God  for  ever, 
unless  the  wicked  forsake  his  ways,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts.  II.  So 
tar,  and  THEREFORE  SO  ABUNDANT.  This  is  the  thought  which  the  apostle  expands 
in  one  of  the  most  glowing  passages  on  the  page  of  revelation  (Rom.  v.  12-21).  His 
point  is,  that  whatever  was  done  by  sin,  and  through  sin,  must  be  paralleled  and 
outdone  by  the  grace  of  God.  There  is  no  parallel  between  our  forgiveness  and  God's. 
When  God  forgives,  He  ceases  to  remember ;  He  blots  out  iniquities  as  a  cloud, 
and  sins  6is  a  thick  cloud  ;  He  does  not  treat  us  simply  as  pardoned  criminals,  but 
takes  us  to  His  heart  as  beloved  sons,  He  transforms  the  saa  consequences  of  our  sins 
into  blessings,  instead  of  the  thorn  comes  up  the  fir-tree,  and  instead  of  the  briar 
the  myrtle-tree.  This  surely  is  as  much  above  man's  notions  of  forgiveness  as  the 
heavens  are  high  above  the  earth.  III.  So  far,  and  therefore  so  beneficent. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  transcendent  elevation  of  God: — It  is  a  wonderful  and 
beautiful  turn  which  the  prophet  here  gives  to  the  thought  of  the  transcendent 
elevation  of  God.  The  heavens  are  the  very  type  of  the  imattainable  ;  and  to  say 
that  they  are  "  higher  than  the  earth  "  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  be  but  to  say,  "  No 
man  hath  ascended  into  the  heavens,"  and  you  sinful  men  must  grovel  here  down 
upon  your  plain,  whilst  they  are  far  above,  out  of  your  reach.  But  the  heavens 
bend.  They  are  an  arch,  and  not  a  straight  line.  They  touch  the  horizon  ;  and 
there  come  from  them  the  sweet  influences  of  sunshine  and  of  rain,  of  dew  and  of 
blessing,  which  bring  fertility.  So  they  are  not  only  far  and  unattainable,  but 
friendly  and  beneficent,  and  coromunicative  of  good.  lake  them  in  true  analogy, 
but  yet  infinite  superiority  to  the  best  and  noblest  in  man,  is  tiie  boundless  mercy 
of  our  pardoning  God.    (^.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-13.  For  as  the  rain  cometh  down. — Bain,  snow,  symbolic  of  the  Word  qf 

Ood : — The  fitness  of  the  symbolism  is  apparent  even  to  the  most  casual  observer. 
1.  Snow  and  rain  are  characterized  by  gentleness  which  merges  into  force.  One 
drop  of  rain  falls  upon  my  hand,  and  I  crush  it,  and  it  is  not ;  but  when  the  drop 
is  multiplied,  aud  the  great  storm  sweeps  along  the  valley,  it  is  almost  resistless  in 
its  onrush.  One  feathery  flake  of  snow  falls  through  the  atmosphere  ;  I  touch  it, 
and  it  passes  and  is  lost,  its  crystal  beauty  gone  for  ever  at  the  rudeness  of  my 
human  hand  ;  but  let  that  flake  be  multiplied  and  the  falling  snow  wiU  take  hold  of 
the  thundering  locomotive,  clog  its  wheels,  check  its  progress,  bury  it  beneath  its 
soft  and  noiseless  whiteness.  2.  Rain  and  snow  are  characterized  by  helplessness 
which  grows  into  beneficence.  We  ask  :  What  can  this  drop  of  rain  do  for  man  ? 
What  can  this  flake  of  snow  do  for  humanity  ?    And  yet  we  know  that  when  we 

Eiss  from  the  individual  drop  to  the  great  rain,  that  in  falling  makes  the  earth 
ugh  back  in  harvest,  and  crowns  the  labour  of  the  hands  of  men.     There  is  no 
more  exquisite  word  in  all  Scripture  about  Nature  than  that  simple  and  sublim* 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

passage,  "  He  giveth  Hia  snow  like  wool."  Like  a  warm  mantle,  it  wraps  the  earth 
in  winter-time,  and  keeps  it,  itself  of  the  nature  of  cold,  from  the  penetration  of  intenser 
cold.  And  so  we  find  that  rain  and  snow,  helpless  as  they  seem,  are  the  very  messengers 
of  beneficence  to  men.  3.  Rain  and  snow  come  to  us  characterized  by  unfruitfulness, 
yet  generating  fruitfulness,  wherever  they  fall.  (<?.  Campbell  Morgan,  D.D.)  The 
Word  of  God : — Let  us  take  this  symbolism  of  the  prophet  and  consider  it  exactly  as  he 
has  stated  it — I.  As  to  the  similarities  suggested.  Let  me  first  tabulate  the  phrase 
that  we  are  to  consider  in  this  verse :  *'  Cometh  from  heaven,  retumeth  not  thither  ; 
watereth  the  earth,  making  it  bring  forth,  and  bud,  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the 
sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater."  1.  Man  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  coming  of  the 
rain  and  the  snow.  In  the  midst  of  that  wonderful  questioning  of  Job  by  God 
occur  these  two  inquiries :  "Hast  thou  entered  into  the  treasuries  of  the  snow?" 
which,  being  translated,  from  poetry  into  prose,  means,  "  Do  you  understand  the 
snow  ? "  Do  you  know  from  whence  it  comes  ?  Can  you  analyze  the  mystery  of  its 
crystallization  and  deposit?  Then,  "Hath  the  rain  a  father?"  Are  you  able  to 
generate  it,  to  produce  it  ?  The  Word  of  God  is  a  message  from  God  to  man  which 
no  man  was  able  to  find  out  for  himself.  It  is  never  a  philosophy  formulated  by 
human  wisdom  ;  it  is  always  a  revelation  made.  The  supreme  quality  of  the  Word 
of  God  is  that  however  men  may  occupy  their  time  in  discussing  the  methods  by 
which  we  have  come  into  possession  of  these  documents,  there  is  stamped  upon  every 
page  of  it  the  sign  manual  of  Jehovah,  great  unveilings  of  His  nature,  great  revela- 
tions of  the  deepest  secrets  of  human  life,  great  illumination  of  the  problems  that 
confront  men  by  Divine  revelation.  It  is  the  gift  of  God  and  not  the  contrivance  of 
man.  2.  But  it  "returneth  not  thither."  The  snow  and  the  rain  pour  themselves 
out  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  they  melt  and  pass,  and  within  a  very  few  hours  of  the 
great  rainfall  which  has  sweetened  everything  in  its  coming  the  roads  are  dusty 
again,  and  we  say,  "  How  soon  the  rain  has  passed."  So  after  the  snow  has  once 
come  under  the  influence  of  the  sun  it  is  gone.  Judged  by  first  appearances,  it 
seems  as  though  this  gift  of  heaven  had  been  poured  upon  earth  to  be  spoiled,  con- 
taminated, wasted.  So  the  Word  of  God.  The  Word  of  God  has  been  given  to  men 
in  figure  and  symbol,  in  prophecy  and  song,  and  at  last  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  and 
since  He  came,  in  exposition  and  explanation,  for  centuries  ;  and,  how  perpetually 
it  seems  to  us,  as  we  watch  the  openings  of  the  decades,  and  even  of  the  centuries, 
as  though  this  great  outpouring  of  Divine  revelation  was  lost,  falling  upon  man  but 
to  be  spoiled.  3.  But  it  "  watereth  the  earth."  Take  this  dust  as  it  lies  upon  the 
highway  and  over  the  furrowed  field,  and  within  the  dust  is  the  making  oJt  every- 
thing that  is  beautiful  and  fruitful.  But  the  dust  does  not  laugh  in  flowers  ;  it  ia 
capable  and  incapable.  Lying  within  it  are  all  the  forces  of  life.  AU  the  mysterious 
magnificence  of  your  personality  on  the  physical  side  lies  within  the  dust  at  your 
feet,  and  all  flowers  that  bloom  lie  there  in  potentiality.  As  the  rain  and  snow 
water  the  earth,  which  is  at  once  characterized  by  capacity  and  yet  unable  to  fulfil 
the  possibilities  that  lie  sleeping  within  its  own  being,  it  makes  all  Nature  laugh 
with  new  beauty.  So  also  the  Word  of  God  comes  to  men  in  whose  nature  are  the 
potentialities  but  not  the  realizations.  The  Word  of  God  falls  upon  the  centuries, 
upon  society,  upon  individuals,  and  we  thought  it  touched  them  but  to  be  spoiled 
and  soiled  and!^  pass,  but  we  watched  and  we  found  that  by  its  falling  the  soil 
became  productive.  There  is  in  every  human  being  the  capacity  for  Deity.  There 
are  in  every  human  life  the  potentialities  of  the  highest  and  the  noblest  and  the 
best.  4.  The  prophet  now  adds  a  further  truth  concerning  these  elements  in  the 
statement,  "making  it  bring  forth."  After  the  rain  and  the  snow  the  dull  russet 
ground  becomes  beautiful  with  emerald  and  opal  and  ruby  and  diamond,  and  you 
know  that  when  God's  rain  and  snow  touch  the  dust  it  makes  the  dust  bring  forth. 
So  with  the  Word  of  God.  The  Word  of  God  makes  the  dormant  forces  in  man 
move  to  fulfilment.  All  men  that  have  ever  realized  the  possibilities  of  their  own 
life  have  done  so  in  response  to  some  part  of  the  Word  of  God,  to  the  Word  spoken, 
to  the  Word  written,  to  the  Word  lived.  5.  Yet  another  word  that  I  have  taken 
separately,  because  I  think  it  really  is  separate.  It  is  a  stronger  word  than  the 
former — "maketh  it  bring  forth,  and  bud."  I  feel  inclined  to  use  here  the  literal 
Hebrew  word,  "and  sprout."  That  is  to  say,  the  rain  and  the  snow  not  merely 
touch  the  dust  into  generation,  but  come  again  in  the  grass,  the  flowers,  the  fruitage. 
And  the  Word  of  God  has  come  from  Him  to  touch  the  failure  of  human  life,  and  it 
has  been  returning  to  Him  laughing  with  the  harvest  of  ransomed  souls.  The  Word 
was  incarnate  in  the  Christ  supremely,  and  in  a  less  and  diflierent  degree,  but  never- 
theless as  truly,  God's  Word  has  been  re-incarnate  in  human  lives  in  all  the  passing 


CHAP,  LT.]  ISAIAS.  251 

centuries.  6.  Yet  that  is  not  alL  "That  it  ma^  give  seed  to  the  sower."  What 
Ib  this  harvest  for  ?  You  say  for  the  sustenance  of  human  life.  That  is  not  the  first 
thing.  Bread  to  the  eater  is  a  secondary  thing.  Bread  to  the  eater  is  provision  for 
the  toiler  that  he  may  continue  his  sowing  and  reap  his  harvests  ;  but  the  first  thing 
is  that,  in  the  new  form  in  which  the  rain  and  snow  return  to  God,  there  is  always 
found  the  potentiality  of  propagation  waiting  for  new  showers  and  new  transmuta- 
tions and  new  harvests.  So  with  the  Word  of  God.  The  "Word  of  God  taking  hold 
of  human  life,  changing  it,  becoming  incarnate  in  it,  communicates  propagative 
power  ;  it  makes  a  centre  from  vrYMa.  the  seed  may  be  scattered  still  further  afield, 
and  from  one  life  re-made  and  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  there  must  go  forth 
the  seed  that  will  affect  yet  other  fields,  and  stretch  out  into  great  lines  of  blessed 
harvest.  7.  "And  bread  to  the  eater."  The  man  that  ploughed  and  sowed  and 
reaped  feeds.  The  Word  of  God  is  also  the  bread  of  life  to  the  toiler.  II.  As  to 
THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  REVEALED.  The  symbolism  of  this  great  prophetic  Word 
teaches — 1.  That  the  Word  of  God  is  purposeful.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  given  to 
be  possessed ;  it  is  given  that  it  may  possess.  2.  That  the  Word  of  God  is  powerful. 
It  shall  not  return  to  Him  void.  And  why  not  ?  Because  it  never  comes  void  from 
Him.  Every  word  of  God  thrills  with  fi  uitfulness.  If  we  but  know  how  to  receive 
it  and  how  to  respond,  then  it  shall  return  to  Him  not  void,  but  fruitful,  in  lives 
changed,  re-moulded,  re-fashioned,  sanctified.  3.  That  the  Word  of  God  is  prosper- 
ous. The  word  "accomplish"  means  it  does  something,  it  makes  something,  it 
realizes  something;  and  the  Hebrew  word  "prosper"  Uterally  means  it  "pushes 
forward."  It  is  a  great  dynamic  force.  III.  As  to  the  responsibilities  en- 
tailed. Bain  and  snow  might  fall  upon  the  earth  a  long  time  and  there  be  no 
harvest  imless  the  earth  is  prepared.  The  rain  and  snow  may  fall  in  all  their  prodigal 
munificence  and  magnificence  upon  the  earth,  and  there  will  be  no  harvest  unless  the 
seed  is  sown.  And  rain  and  snow  may  fall  and  make  the  earth  laugh  with  harvest, 
if  the  earth  be  ready  and  the  seed  be  sown,  and  yet  men  get  no  benefit  imless  the 
bread  be  eaten.  Here,  then,  are  three  things  at  least  that  I  would  say :  The  earth 
must  be  prepared ;  "take  heed  how  ye  hear."  The  seed  must  be  sown;  "preswh 
the  Word. "  The  bread  must  be  eaten ;  "let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly." 
The  laws  of  grace  as  effectual  as  the  laws  of  riature : — I.  The  laws  of  nature  abb 
EFFECTTTAL.  "For  as  the  rain,"  etc.  1.  Rain  and  snow  are  heaven-sent  agents. 
2.  They  effectually  answer  their  purpose.  3.  Their  beneficent  results.  (1)  Earthly 
beauty.  "  Maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud."  (2)  Husbandman  supplied.  "  Giveth 
seed  to  the  sower."  (3)  The  citizen  fed.  "Bread  to  the  eater.  '  (4)  Processes 
always  repeated.  II.  The  laws  or  Christianity  are  as  effectual  as  the  laws 
OF  NATURE.  "  So  shall  My  Word  be,"  etc.  1.  The  Divine  origin  of  Christianity. 
•'  My  Word. "  ' '  Out  of  My  mouth. "  2.  Christianity  will  not  be  defeated.  ' '  Shall 
not  return  unto  Me  void."  3.  Christianity  will  ultimately  accomplish  God's  will 
and  pleasure.  "  Shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please."  4.  Christianity  shall  produce 
its  Divinely  intended  results.  "  Shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it.  '  5.  As 
in  nature,  the  process  slow  but  certain.  (  W.  Unsworth.)  Divine  grace  and  human 
responsibility : — 1 .  Repeatedly  has  one  come  across  good  people  making  out,  to  their  asm 
satisfaction  and  comfort,  that  the  non-return  of  God's  Word  to  Him  void  just  means 
that,  when  it  does  not  soften  and  save  it  hardens,  convicts,  and  condemns  a  man.  And 
they  think  that  dire  result  is  the  accomplishment  of  God's  pleasure — is  prosperity  in 
the  thing  whereto  He  has  sent  His  Word.  It  is  true,  of  course,  that  where  God's  Word 
does  not  save,  it  condemns.  But  this  is  not  the  truth  of  these  two  verses.  There  is 
no  reference  in  them  to  God's  sovereignty  as  bent  upon  getting  something  or  other  out 
of  the  work  of  His  Word  ;  or  to  alternative  purposes  of  His  in  sending  it ;  or  to  some 
unknown,  mysterious  will  of  His  that  is  served  by  the  apparent  or  actual  failure  of 
His  revealed  will ;  or,  indeed,  to  any  judicial,  punitive  purpose  or  after-thought  of 
His  that  comes  into  operation  when  His  6rst  and  gracious  purpose  proves  abortive. 
The  verses  contain  no  warning  to  impenitent  sinners,  but  an  encouragement  to 
doubting  believers  in  front  of  promises,  like  those  in  this  chapter,  which  seem 
almost  too  good  to  be  true.  They  do  not  set  forth  God's  sovereign  purpose  in 
sending  His  Word  as  other  than  a  sovereignly  gracious  purpose,  and  always  gracious. 
They  give  a  definite  assurance,  enforced  and  illustrated  by  "the  rain  and  the  snow 
from  heaven,"  of  God's  kindness,  of  His  power  to  make  good  His  gracious  Word,  of 
His  faithfulness  to  His  beneficent  promises.  The  similitude  of  the  fertilizing,  fruit- 
producing  snow  and  rain,  and  the  statement  of  vers.  12,  13,  forbid  other  than  a 
rracious  purpose  in  God's  sending  His  Word.  When,  therefore,  it  is  asserted  that 
His  Word  shall  not  return  to  Him  void,  all  thftt  is  meant  is  that  this  graoioaa 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.lt. 


purpose  shall  be  effected,  by  His  Word,  before  it  goes  back  to  Him.     It  does  not 
fail.     There  is  no  lack  of  life,  virtue,  or  grace  in  it.     As  regards  its  saving  purpose, 
it  never  does  return  to  Him  void.     2.  But  how  ?    Now,  here  we  come  to  the  true 
causes  of  the  failure  of  God's  Word  to  produce  its  legitimate  and  Divinely  intended 
results,  where  it  happens  to  faiL     Just  as  the  rain  and  the  snow  may,  in  some  cases 
and  under  some  conditions,  very  exceptional  and  mostly  incidental,  become  a  curse 
and    not  a  blessing,  so  may  God's  Word  fail  to  save  men  and  only  harden  and 
condemn  them.     Men  may  be  condemned  in  spite  of  Christ's  coming  to  save  the 
world.     Men  may  bring  upon  themselves  the  wrath  to  which  God  didT  not  appoint 
them.     If  so,  it  is  in  eveij  case  because  God's  purpose  was  resisted  or  thwarted  ; 
or  the  conditions  of  its  fulfilment  dependent  on  men  were  not  complied  with.     The 
failure  is  not  owing  to  God's  pleasure  that  it  should  occur.     It  is  an  indirect 
consequence  of  His  purpose,  for  which  men  alone  are  responsible.     For,  in  the  case 
of  the  rain  and  snow,  God's  purpose  is  realized  only  as  men  comply  with  the  fitting 
and  necessary  conditions  of  using  these  aright.    The  rain  and  snow  from  heaven  must 
be  met  by  suitable  conditions  on  earth  by  man's  contribution  of  active  preparation, 
careful  husbandry,  and  seasonable  watchfulness  and  diligence.     Rain  will  not  make 
sea-sand  fertile.     Rain  will  not  make  seed  grow  even  in  rich  soil  where  no  seed  ia 
sown,  or  where  the  seed,  if  sown,  may  be  choked  by  weeds.     There  wiU  be  no  seed 
to  the  sower  who  sows  none  ;  no  bread  to  the  eater  who  eats  none.     And  so  one  can 
see  that  where  God's  Word  fails  to  effect  His  purpose  of  grace,  it  is  simply  and  solely 
from  causes  for  which  man  is  responsible.    It  does  not  work  mechanically,  by  lifeless 
necessity,  regardless  of  man's  freedom  and  man's  contribution  to  its  success.   _  God's 
Word  fails,  wherever  it  does  fail,  just  because  men  do  not  comply  with  the  simple, 
ordinary,   conmionplace,   but  essential   conditions  of   spiritual    husbandry.      {A. 
Warrack,  M.A.)    The  efficacy  of  the  Divine  Word  .—The  thoughts  of  God  have  been 
shown  to  be  high  above  men's  thoughts.     Now  He  indicates  that  His  words,  what- 
ever may  appear  to  the  contrary,  are  efficacious  with  a  like  Divine  efficacjr.     1.  It  is 
to  be  received  as  an  encouragement.    It  is  not  given  as  an  explanation  or  justification 
for  the  want  of  results.     It  is  meant  to  give  new  heart  to  the  messenger  who  fancies 
his  words  are  falling  fruitless  and  all  his  efforts  proving  vain  before  the  inert, 
immovable  mass  of  sin  and  evil  in  the  world.     Most  who  have  essayed  to  be 
messengers  of  God  have  been  conscious  of  the  sense  of  failure  at  times,  and  this 
thought  would  be  fitted  to  buoy  them  up.     2.  It  declares  the  fact  that  God's  Word 
is  never  altogether  a  failure.     It  may  seem  to  our  ej^es  to  be  producing  no  result. 
It  works  secretly  but  certainly.      The  law  of  its  working  is  the  law  of  working  with 
all  seeds,  at  first  slow  and  secret  and  unseen.     Who  does  not  believe  that,  although 
unseen,  the  seed  is  still  duly  germinating?    Even  the  words  of  Christ  did  not  prove 
uniformly  successful  with  His  hearers,  but  in  the  end  how  like  the  seed,  has  been 
their  great  and  ever-increasing  influence  !     3,  It  gives  the  correct  idea  of  preaching. 
Preaching  should  be  the  uttering  of  a  word  of  God.    It  rebukes  the  notion  that 
preaching  in  the  sense  of  speaking  our  words  about  God  is  useful  or  effectual.      This 
w  what  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  did.     This  is  what  happens  always  in  the  age  of 
cold  dogmatism,  when  men  do  not  forthtell  what  they  have  felt  of  God  in  their  own 
souls,  but  substitute  explanations,  traditions,  and  views  about  the  truth  that  make 
it  powerless.     4.  It  tel&  us  of  the  never-failing  benefit  of  public  worship.     Men  say 
that  such  and  such  preachers  are  not  worth  hearing.     But  this  reminds  as  that  in 
every  service  there  is  the  Word  of  God  declared.    Even  if  prayers  be  slovenly,  praises 
be  harsh,  and  sermons  be  dull,  and  the  occupant  of  pulpit  unworthy,  vet  we  nave  a 
sure  word  of  prophecy  to  rest  upon, ' '  It  shall  not  return  to  Me  void. '    {j.  Robertson. ) 
The  law  of  growth: — I.  The  uniform  action  of  law.     "The  rain  .  .  .  returneth 
not  thither,"  void,  without  having  effected  the  purpose  for  which  it  came.     How  is 
it  that  farmers  are  willing  to  put  forth  the  labour  of  a  whole  year  in  order  that  they 
may  have  a  gathering  in  at  harvest-time  I    How  is  it  that  during  the  winter,  and 
the  spring,  and  the  summer,  they  labour  so  hopefully,  and  wait  so  patiently? 
Because  they  know  that  the  principles  on  which  God  carries  on  the  processes  of  the 
material  world  are  imiform  and  constant.     So  we  conclude  it  is  in  the  domain  of 
spirit.     There  is  uniform  action  of  law.     Notice  this  fact — 1.  In  our  own  nature. 
Effects  always  follow  causes  in  our  life;  actions  always  produce  effects.     2.  In 
relation  to  God.    This  is  but  one  expression  of  the  truth  that  He  is  faithful.    (1)  His 
purposes  will  gnraly  be  fiilfiUed.     His  ways  are  not  as  our  ways.     (2)  His  Word  is 
powerful ;  it  cannot  be  void.     (3)  His  promises  are  sure.     II.  The  combination  o» 
V0R0E8.    The  harvest  which  whitens  the  fields  has  not  been  produced  by  the  action 
of  one  cause  or  process  only.    There  have  been  mechanical  action,  physical  action, 


CHAP.  LV.]  ISAIAH.  253 

chemical  action,  vital  action.  The  germ  of  life  in  the  seed  has  been  stimulated  by 
heat,  quickened  by  rain,  fed  by  minerals,  tended  by  man.  Many  unlikely  things, 
too,  have  contributed  to  the  result.  The  long,  cold  winter  caused  the  land  to  lie 
dead  ;  but  that  was  a  necessary  preparation  for  the  activity  of  spring.  Storms  and 
tempests  beat  upon  the  ground,  snows  in  winter  covered  it  as  with  a  pall ;  but  these 
were  necessary  in  their  place  and  at  their  time.  The  changes  in  the  atmosphere,  the 
variations  in  the  temperature,  the  rest  and  coolness  of  night  after  the  heat  and  glare 
of  day,  aE  helped  to  swell  the  grain,  to  draw  forth  the  blade,  to  fill  the  ear.  The 
processes  of  nature  are  carried  on  by  the  combination  of  numberless  causes,  many  of 
these  small  and  perhaps  insignificant  in  themselves ;  and  by  the  intermingling  of 
various  laws  in  almost  infinite  variety.  So  in  our  inner  lives  we  find  this  fact,  that 
many  causes  combine  to  produce  results.  Life  is  made  up  of  an  infinite  combination 
of  forces.  1.  God  has  bestowed  upon  us  many  gifts.  To  one  He  has  given  quickness 
of  perception  ;  to  another,  clearness  of  reasoning  powers  ;  to  another,  strength  of 
will ;  to  another,  power  of  invention  ;  and  so  on.  But  these  are  not  the  only  gifts 
He  has  bestowed  upon  each  :  and  it  is  not  by  the  use  alone  of  one  particular  power 
that  life  is  to  be  carried  on.  It  is  by  the  due  combination  of  all.  So  in  spiritual 
things,  it  is  not  by  faith  alone,  or  by  hope  alone,  or  by  love  alone,  or  by  endurance 
alone,  or  by  reading  God's  Word  alone,  or  attending  the  means  of  grace  alone,  that 
our  souls  are  to  grow,  that  our  characters  are  to  be  moulded.  And  sometimes  the 
things  which  go  to  the  moulding  of  our  characters  seem  to  us  strange  :  the  snows  of 
winter  sorrows  settle  round  our  hearts ;  the  storms  of  diflBculty  and  trial  beat  down 
upon  us.  We  do  not  see  how  these  can  be  necessary.  But  God  sees,  and  He 
combines  all  causes,  that  He  may  lead  to  the  best  result.  2.  So  also  it  is  with 
temptation.  Hardly  any  sin  is  presented  to  us,  or  presents  itself  to  us,  in  its  naked 
reality.  It  comes  clothed  often  in  garments,  if  not  of  seeming  righteousness,  at 
least  of  negative  purity.  No  temptation  comes  isolated ;  but  mixed  motives  move 
us.  We  are,  as  it  were,  not  so  much  in  danger  of  being  overwhelmed  in  a  river,  as 
of  being  beaten  upon  by  successive  drops  of  rain.  3.  The  possibility  of  usefulness 
comes  to  us  not  in  one  great  offer,  but  a  constant  succession  of  small  opportunities. 
III.  Effects  are  slowly  attained  to.  Not  all  at  once,  not  in  a  few  moments, 
do  the  operations  of  nature  efi"ect  their  results.  So  it  is  in  the  working  of  life. 
There  are  no  sudden  eff"ects.  1.  Growth  in  grace  should  be  our  daily  aim. 
2.  Growth  in  knowledge,  too,  is  our  privilege,  not  only  of  outward  things,  of  the 
mysteries  of  creation,  of  the  history  of  the  past  or  the  work  of  the  present ;  but  of 
God's  Word.  3.  Growth  in  strength  may  also  be  ours.  The  muscle  that  is  used 
grows  stronger  by  use.  The  spirit  that  exerts  itself  in  the  things  of  God,  by  God's 
blessing  gains  strength  therein.  {J.  S.  Shields,  D.D.)  Analogy  of  the  natural  and 
the  sjyiritual : — I.  The  analogy  of  nature  teaches  tts  that  when  god  creates 
A  need  in  His  creatttres.  He  makes  arrangements  to  supply  that  need. 
"  Bread  to  the  eater."  Our  bodies  are  so  constituted  as  to  need  food.  He  who  has 
so  made  them,  has  also  arranged  that  the  food  shall  be  supplied.  What  about  the 
soul's  needs?  God  has  so  created  it  that  it  needs  a  food  which  the  "constitution 
and  course  of  natvire  "  cannot  give.  It  looks  beyond  the  natural,  and  craves  for  the 
supernatural.  We  long  for  knowledge  of  things  spii-itual ;  for  guidance  and  comfort 
in  daily  life ;  for  a  hope  beyond  the  grave  ;  for  a  sphere  less  trammelled  by 
limitations  and  temptations.  We  feel,  even  the  most  careless,  that  sin  is  a  burden 
which  weakens  and  defiles  and  condemns.  Has  the  great  Architect  and  Designer 
made  no  provision  for  such  wants  as  these  ?  Yes.  As  it  is  in  His  workings  in 
creation,  so  in  the  spiritual  sphere :  "So  shall  My  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out  of 
My  mouth."  God's  Word  is  sent  forth  to  give  the  knowledge  of  Himself.  It  tells 
of  the  living  Bread  which  alone  can  satisfy  the  soul's  need.  It  comes  direct  from 
God  Himself.  Written  down  by  man,  it  is  applied  to  the  heart  by  God  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Notice,  therefore — 1.  Its  absolute  truth.  It  is  not  a  series  of  speculations, 
or  philosophizings,  or  aspirations  ;  guesses  of  good  or  wise  men,  which  may  or  may 
not  be  perfectly  accurate.  It  is  the  Word  of  truth.  2.  Its  binding  authority.  It 
is  the  Word  of  a  King.  8.  Its  unchanging  faithfulness.  It  is  ever  reliable.  Its 
promises  are  always  "yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus."  They  are  bank  notes  for 
which  there  is  always  a  reserve  of  gold  in  the  treasuries  of  heaven.  4.  Its  unutter- 
able blessing.  It  tells  of  full  comfort  for  the  sorrowing  ;  perfect  rest  for  the  weary  ; 
abiding  peace  for  the  distressed.  Never  grateful  showers  fell  with  greater  refresh- 
ment on  the  parched  and  thirsty  fields  than  the  dew  of  God's  Word  on  the  weary 
and  longing  hearts  of  men.  How  important  that  we  should  receive  that  Word,  obey 
its  commands,  rest  on  its  promises,  take  heed  to  its  warnings  1    IL  Thb  analoot 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lv. 

OF  KATTTRE  TEACHES  ITS  THAT  WE  MAT  CO-OPERATE  WITH  GoD   IN  THE  WORK  OF 

ENLIGHTENING  MANKIND.     The  harvest-ficlds  supply  not  only  bread  to  the  eater, 
but  "seed  to  the  sower."    The  grain  is  not  merely  food — it  is  seed.     Each  contains 
the  embryo  of  a  plant.     Placed  in  proper  environment  at  the  right  time,  that  little 
life  will  cause  movement  amongst  its  surroundings,  will  weave  a  shoot,  a  blade,  and 
an  ear  full  of  corn.     Next  year's  harvest  will  not  be  gained  by  a  direct  creation  of 
God,  but  by  a  due  use  of  the  grain  of  this.     This  in-gathering  contains  the  promise 
and  power  of  future  crops ;   it  not  only  will  satisfy  present  needs,  but  it  has  an 
expansive,  and  extensive,  and  far-reaching  possibility.     So  it  is  in  the  kingdom  of 
grace.     1.  The  Christian's  life  should  be  extensive  as  well  as  intensive.    He  receives, 
not  only  that  he  may  gain  benefit,  but  that  he  may  help  others.     2.  The  effects  of 
truth  are  germinant  as  well  as  satisfying.     3.  The  rule  of  work  prevails  in  the 
spiritual  as  weU  as  the  natural  harvest-fields.     Because  the  grain  is  seed,  the  work 
of  the  husbandman  becomes  possible.     If  the  life  were  not  there,  the  labour  of  the 
year  would  be  in  vain.     Because  the  grain  is  seed,  the  work  of  the  husbandman  is 
obligatory.     It  is  God's  rule  that  part  of  this  harvest  should  be  used  for  the  next. 
It  is  God's  command  that  man  should  co-o*perate   in   this    great  plan.      It  is 
also  man's  interest  to  do  so.     The  produce  of  the  ground  is  the  fundamental 
and    dominating    source    of   wealth.      So    it    is    in   spiritual   things.     Think   of 
the  possibilities  of  the  Christian  life.     Think  of  the  obligatory  nature  of  Christian 
service.      We  may  even    speak  of  the  analogy  of   our   own   interest.       {Ibid.) 
The  rain  and  the   Word: — The  Gospel  is  compared  to  rain  and  snow. — I.  In  its 
Origin.      "From    heaven."     AU   truth    is    Divine.      II.  In    its    Operation. 
"Watereth  the  earth."    The  Gospel  changes  the  human  heart  and  promotes  and 
nourishes  all  that  is  good.     III.  In  its  Benefits.     "  That  it  may  give  seed  to  the 
sower  and  bread  to  the  eater."    The  Gospel  gives  instruction,  comfort,  and  strength 
to  men,  and  brings  forth  a  harvest  of  fruit  for  God.     IV.  In  its  final  results. 
"It  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."     {Homilist.)     Christianity: — 
These  words  suggest  several  ideas  concerning  Christianity.     I.  Variety.     It  is  com- 
pared to  the  rain  and  the  snow.     1.  How  varied  in  form.     The  rain  comes  down 
softly  and  gently,  and  sometimes  in  torrents ;  and  the  snow,  too,  has  a  variety  of 
form.     2.  How  varied  in  distribution !     How  much  falls  on  oceans,  how  much  on 
sands  and  desert  wastes  and  rocks,  as  well  as  on  fertile  soils !     It  is  so  with 
Christianity.     As  the  Word  of  God,  its  forms  are  varied,  it  comes  in  history,  poetry, 
philosophy,  precept,  example,  menaces,  and  promises.     How  varied  in  distribution  ! 
It  falls  on  every  class  of  mankind,  the  literate  and  the  illiterate,  the  hardened,  the 
tender,  the  rich,  the  poor,  etc.     II.  Preciousness.  How  inestimably  valuable  the 
rain  and  snow  to  nature.     How  precious  Christianity  1     It  is  the  "water  of  life," 
etc.     III.  Divinity.     "The  rain  cometh  down  and  the  snow  from  heaven."    It  is 
manifestly  from  above.     So  is  Christianity.     "It  is,"  says  God,  "Mv  Word  that 
goeth  forth  out  of  My  mouth."     The  Divinity  of  Christianity  is  clear  from  its 
congruity  with  the  facts  of  universal  history,  the  soul's  a  priori  notions  of  a  God,  the 
spiritual  intuitions  and  longings  of  mankina,  and  the  deep  moral  wants  of  the  world. 
It  is,  indeed,  the  "Word  of  God."     IV.  Inevitableness.     "It  shall  not  return 
nnto  Me  void."    Not  a  drop  of  raiu  or  a  flake  of  snow  is  wasted.     It  may  be 
swallowed  up  in  the  desert,  but  it  is  not  lost.     Every  drop  has  a  mission,  and  its 
mission  will  oe  fulfilled.     1.  God  in  giving  Christianity  to  the  world  had  a  purpose. 
2.  That  purpose  will  be  inevitably  accomplished.     If  God  has  made  a  promise  to  the 
world  and  that  purpose  is  not  accomplished,  it  must  be  for  one  of  three  reasons: 
either— (1)  He  was  insincere  when  He  made  it ;  or  (2)  He  subsequently  changed  His 
mind ;  or  (3)  difficulties  arose  in  the  future,  that  baffled  Him,  which  He  never 
anticipated.     All  these  are  inadmissible,  so  that  His  Word  shall  not  return  unto  Him 
void.     {Homilist. )     The  errand  of  the  Word : — Upon  what  errand  has  God  sent  forth 
His  Word  ?     "  "Ten  thousand  thousand  are  its  tongues,"  and  yet  its  work  is  one.     It 
publishes  "salvation"  with  all  its  tongues.     For  if  it  speak  to  the  mourner,  it 
would  save  him  from  the  wasting  effects  of  his  grief ;  and  if  it  speak  to  the  wanderer, 
it  would  save  him  from  the  further  loss  of  his  time,  and  the  final  loss  of  himself,  in 
the  wrong  paths  on  which  he  has  entered :  and  if  it  speak  to  the  busy,  it  would  save 
them  from  spending  labour  on  that  which  satisfieth  not.     This  is  the  lesson  He 
would  have  sink  into  the  heart  of  dull  imbelieving  man  as  the  rain  does  into  the 
earth,  that  the  heavenly  errands  of  Nature  are  not  more  sure  of  success  than  the 
heavenly  errands  of  Grace ;  that  the  God  of  husbandry  is  even  more  the  God  of 
the  husbandman ;  that,  if  water  nourishes  the  earth,  much  more  truth  nourishes 
the  soul :  that  if  God's  bidding  is  done  by  the  winds  that  carry  about  the  clouds  to 


CHAP,  iv.]  ISAIAH.  255 

•water  the  world,  so  also  is  it  done — as  surely,  and  in  a  higher  way — by  the  Spirit 
that  brings  and  dispenses  to  us  the  words  of  holy  instruction  and  comfort. 
{T.  T.  Lynch.)  Theretv/mof  Ood's  Word: — I.  The  certainty.  The  great  purpose 
of  God  cannot  fail.  II.  The  manner.  But,  then,  we  read  of  messengers  who  went 
to  the  husbandmen  that  kept  God's  vineyard,  and  returned  to  Him  empty-handed. 
"  Why  have  ve  not  brought  the  fruit  of  the  vineyard  ? "  "  There  was  no  fruit.  Lord, 
to  bring.  They  have  wasted  the  hours  of  labour,  or  consumed  Thy  fruit  in  their 
own  revels."  This  is  quite  according  to  God's  will — that  men  should  be  free  to 
taste  and  try  what  manner  of  god  folly  is,  what  manner  of  reward  sin  can  offer. 
God's  messengers  go  once,  twice,  seven  times.  And,  if  needed,  the  Word  goes  forth 
to  banish  the  husbandmen  from  the  vineyard.  The  Word  returns  to  God  in  many 
ways.  It  yields,  by  its  operation,  proofs  that  His  charge  against  men  is  true  ;  it 
yields  fruits  of  patience  in  the  souls  of  those  who  carry  for  God  the  rejected  message  ; 
it  produces,  by  the  results  of  its  rejection,  the  acknowledgment  that  it  ought  to 
have  been  accepted,  and  the  disposition  to  accept  it  if  it  be  again  offered.  If  Hia 
word  of  mercy,  on  which  men  might  rely,  is  not  received  by  them,  then  His  word  of 
punishment,  for  which  the  rejected  word  has  opened  the  way,  goes  forth  into  act ; 
6nd  this,  by  its  action,  may  in  turn  prepare  the  way  for  another  word  of  mercy, 
which  is  ready  to  go  forth  on  its  errand.  So  God's  Word  is  always  fruitful,  how- 
ever unfruitful  we  may  be.  III.  The  meastjee.  In  one  sense  all  God's  words  are 
effective  ;  that  is  to  say,  none  shall  be  without  its  use,  none  without  service  rendered 
in  illustration  of  His  power  and  character.  But  some  possible  effects  may  not  result, 
others  coming  in  their  stead  ;  the  conversion  of  a  sinner,  for  instance,  may  not  now 
result,  but,  in  its  place,  there  may  be  a  display  of  God's  forbearance  toward  him. 
And  so  a  hundredfold  may  not  now  be  the  measure  of  success,  but  only  sixtyfold  or 
thirty.  In  measure,  as  in  manner,  God's  always  powerful  Word  returns  to  Him 
variously.  IV.  The  time.  Our  time  is  short,  and  God's  time  long.  Therefore 
many  of  the  returns  His  Word  shall  make  Him,  returns  in  the  abundance  and  glory 
of  wnich  we  too  are  interested,  are  of  necessity,  and  most  wisely,  delayed.  {Ibid.) 
The  Word  of  God  likened  to  rain: — I.  In  regard  to  its  origin.  II.  From  its 
ADAPTATION  TO  THE  END  WHICH  IT  IS  INTENDED  TO  SERVE.  The  rain  that  descends 
from  above  softens  and  subdues  the  stubborn  clod  ;  it  furnishes  food  for  the  whole 
vegetable  kingdom,  and  thus  also  for  the  animal  kingdom  ;  it  mollifies  and  warms 
the  atmosphere — and  as  it  is  the  means  of  dissipating  those  clouds  of  cold  that 
intercept  the  genial  rays  of  the  sun,  it  is  no  less  necessary  for  the  progress  and 
perfection  of  vegetation  than  the  sun  in  all  his  glory.  One  of  the  finest  objects  in 
nature  is  the  appearance  which  the  earth  presents  after  having  been  saturated  with 
rain,  when  warmed  and  invigorated  by  the  rays  of  the  sun ;  and  accordingly  the 
Messiah  is  thus  represented,  "  He  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  morning,  when  the  sun 
ariseth,  even  a  morning  without  clouds  ;  as  the  tender  grass  springing  out  of  the 
earth  by  the  clear  shining  after  the  rain."  The  Word  of  God  is  no  less  fitted  for  all 
those  purposes  of  enlightening,  convincing,  converting,  and  comforting  for  which  it 
is  sent.  III.  With  regard  to  the  manner  of  its  operation.  The  falling  of  the 
rain  from  the  clouds  in  small  drops  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  wisdom  of  Him 
who  is  perfect  in  knowledge.  When,  at  any  time,  as  in  the  case  of  storms,  it 
descends  in  torrents,  this  truth  appears  to  us  more  obvious,  as  then,  instead  of 
refreshing  the  vegetable  tribes,  it  carries  desolation  in  its  train.  Such,  in  general,  is 
the  manner  in  which  the  Word  operates  upon  the  heart  of  man.  The  Spirit  of  God 
worketh  where,  and  when,  and  how  He  pleaseth,  by  the  Word  generally,  yet  not 
always — sometimes  by  alarming  dispensations  of  providence,  and  sometimes  by  the 
voice  of  conscience  speaking  within  us.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  great  means  which 
He  employs  for  the  salvation  of  sinners ;  the  rain  is  the  great  means  which  He 
employs  for  the  fructifying  the  earth  :  in  the  ordinary  course  of  providence,  the  one 
acts  in  a  gradual  imperceptible  manner  ;  in  the  ordinary  course  of  His  grace,  this  is 
the  way  in  which  the  other  operates.  IV.  The  Word  is  likened  to  rain  in  this 
respect — "  It  watereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it  to  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it 
may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eater."  The  great  benefits  that  flow 
to  the  people  of  God  from  the  Word,  are  set  forth  under  the  figures  of  bread  to  the  eater, 
and  seed  to  the  sower ;  or,  in  other  words,  present  support  and  ftiture  provision. 
V.  The  Word  mat  be  likened  to  rain,  with  regard  to  the  certainty  op 
ITS  producing  the  intended  effect.  VI.  The  Word  may  be  likened  to  rain, 
inasmuch  as  its  efficacy  depends  entirely  upon  the  Divine  blessing. 
VII.  The  Word  may  be  likened  to  rain,  inasmuch  as  while  the  efficacy  in 

BOTH  CASES    DEPENDS    UPON    THS   BLESSING    07    GOD,    IN    NEITHER    CASE   IS  THIS 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

BLESSING  TO  BE  EXPECTED  TO  THE  EXCLTTSION  OF  OTTR  ENDEAVOTJES.  (C.  Adie,  D.  D.^ 
The  certain  success  of  evangelistic  labour: — ^We  argue  the  certainty  of  success  in 
evangelistic  labour.  I.  From  the  nature  of  Divine  truth.  There  is  something 
in  the  quality  and  characteristics  of  the  doctrine  which  we  are  commanded  to  preach  to 
every  creature,  that  promises  and  prophesies  a  triumph.  The  Word  of  God  is  both 
living  and  quickening.  This  is  implied  in  the  figure  which  the  prophet  Isaiah 
employs  in  the  text.  This  is  the  declaration  of  God  Himself,  who  understands  the 
intrinsic  nature  of  His  own  revelation  ;  and  by  it  teaches  us  that  there  is  no  greater 
adaptedness  in  moisture  to  fructify  the  ground,  and  germinate  a  com  of  wheat,  than 
there  is  in  Biblical  doctrine  to  renew  and  convert  a  human  soul.  For  the  truth 
which  the  evangelist  scatters  upon  the  printed  page,  or  teaches  from  his  own  lips,  is 
superhuman.  In  this  fact,  there  is  great  encouragement  to  diligence  and  per- 
severance, upon  the  part  of  every  disciple  of  Christ,  to  proclaim  Divine  truth  in 
every  form  and  manner  possible.  Revealed  truth  is  immortal.  It  can  never  perish. 
Not  only  is  Divine  truth  immortal  in  its  nature,  but  it  can  never  be  expelled  from 
the  mind.  Teach  a  chUd  or  a  man,  for  example,  the  true  Biblical  doctrine  of  sin  ; 
fix  it  in  his  mind  that  God  abhors  wickedness,  and  will  punish  it  everlastingly,  and 
you  have  imparted  something  to  him  which  he  can  never  get  rid  of.  And  on  the 
other  side  of  revelation,  all  this  is  equally  true.  The  peace-speaking  promises  of 
'  mercy,  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  pity,  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  the  preparation 
for  eternal  life — all  this  portion  of  Divine  truth  when  once  imparted  is  never  again 
expelled.  Even  if,  owing  to  the  inveteracy  of  vice,  or  the  torpidity  of  the  conscience, 
or  the  obstinacy  of  the  proud  heart,  the  soul  goes  into  the  presence  of  God  unforgiven, 
still  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  will  be  a  portion  of  the  soul's  knowledge  through  all 
eternity  ;  the  evidence  of  what  it  might  have  secured,  and  the  index  of  what  it  has 
lost.  II.  From  the  fact  that  God  feels  a  special  interest  in  His  own  Word. 
The  Scriptures  warrant  us  in  asserting  that  God  is  more  profoundly  concerned  for 
the  success  of  that  body  of  truth  which  He  has  revealed  to  mankind  in  the  Scriptures, 
than  for  the  spread  and  influence  of  all  other  ideas  and  truths  whatsoever.  This  is 
the  only  species  of  truth  which  He  personally  watches  over,  and  accompanies  with 
a  Divine  influence.  The  "wisdom  of  this  world"  is  "foolishness"  with  Him. 
"My  Word,"  says  God,  "shall  not  return  unto  Me  void  ;  but  it  shall  accomplish 
that  which  I  please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  Here  is 
personal  interest,  and  personal  supervision.  You  may  proclaim  all  your  days  your 
own  ideas,  or  those  of  your  fellow-men,  but  you  will  say  with  Grotius,  at  the  close  of 
a  long  and  industrious  career  which  had  by  no  means  been  exclusively  devoted  to 
humanistic  learning,  "I  have  spent  my  life  in  laboriously  doing  nothing." 
III.  From  the  actual  instances  of  success  furnished  by  the  annals  of  such 
LABOUR.  Christianity  must  be  from  God,  argued  Justin  Martyr  and  Tertullian, 
"because  it  makes  the  voluptuous  man  chaste,  the  avaricious  man  liberal,  the  man 
of  cursing  a  man  of  prayer,  the  implacable  enemy  a  forgiving  friend,  converts  wrath 
into  gentleness,  debauchery  into  temperance,  and  vice  of  manifold  form  into  manifold 
virtue."  The  fruits  evince  the  reality,  and  the  quality  of  the  tree.  We  find  what 
we  may  call  the  realism  of  Christianity  in  the  evangelizing  operations  of  the  Church. 
The  power  of  Biblical  truth  even  when  not  proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  the  evangelist 
is  continually  receiving  demonstration  from  this  same  source.  The  records  of  Bible 
and  Tract  Societies  are  full  of  instances  in  which  the  bare  text  of  Scripture  led  to 
the  conversion  of  a  human  soul.  There  is  no  surer  evidence  that  the  truths  of  the 
Gospel  are  destined  to  prevail,  than  the  fact  that  they  do  prevail.  From  the  subject 
as  thus  discussed,  we  infer  the  duty  of  great  courage,  and  confidence,  in  the  work 
of  evangelizing  men.     {Q.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  So  shall  My  Word  be. — Finality  of  the  Divine  purpose : — I.  Truth  in 
ITS  MISSION.  "  It  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please,"  etc.  1.  We  may  take  our 
first  illustration  of  this  mission  from  the  spirit  and  contents  of  the  truth  itself.  It 
is  "the  Word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  Nature  is  the  Word  of 
His  power.  The  Bible  is  the  Word  of  His  mouth.  That  belongs  to  the  few  who 
have  the  key  or  can  find  it :  this  is  in  language  vernacular  to  the_  race.  These 
two  records  are  equally  true  in  what  they  teach  ;  but  their  teaching  is  in  different 
dialects.  Nature  is  a  system  of  material  facts ;  the  "  Word "  is  a  revelation^  of 
supernatural  thought.  One  is  a  manifestation  of  being :  the  other  is  a  declaration 
of  will.  The  one  appeals  to  the  senses  and  thence  to  the  reason,  making  science : 
the  other  is  a  voice  from  within  the  veil,  speaking  to  the  consciousness  of  faith, 
treating  a  religion.     Hence,  while  the  teaching  of  the  two  records  is  equally  Divine 


CHAP,  iv.]  ISAIAH.  257 

and  true,  their  metliods  of  teaching  are  essentially  distinct.  That  something  is  at 
the  back  of  all  the  complex  and  orderly  working  of  nature,  accounting  for  and 
actuating  it,  which  itself  is  not  nature,  is  patent  to  aU  who  think.  What  that 
something  is,  is  nowhere  apparent.  "We  see  only  phenomena.  But  "  the  entrance 
of  Thy  Word  giveth  light ;  it  giveth  understanding  to  the  simple."  The  one  grand 
secret  that  has  put  the  Bible  down  into  the  heart  of  man  and  made  it  the  most 
precious,  as  it  is  the  most  potent,  of  his  treasures,  is  this  directness  and  power  of 
its  witness.  2.  Then,  there  is  the  regeneration  the  truth  is  intended  to  effect. 
"  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  It  "  effectually  worketh."  There  is  a 
method  ia  this  regenerating  process.  First  of  all,  life  is  to  be  infused  into  dead 
souls.  In  the  prospective  history  of  humanity  as  that  contemplates  a  state  of  future 
perfected  being,  we  have  a  still  further  insight  into  this  mission  of  truth.  Paul, 
when  affirming  the  scope  of  his  own  ministry,  enunciates  this  thought :  **  Whom  we 
preach,  warning  every  man,  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  wisdom,  that  we  may 
present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus.  '  The  one  type  after  which  this  perfection 
IS  to  be  constructed  is  "  Christ  Jesus."  There  is  this  final  result.  "That  we  may 
present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ " — man  in  his  nationalities,  in  his  generations, 
in  his  separate  individualities,  to  the  end  of  the  ages,  perfected  by  the  truth.  This 
is  its  mission.  II.  The  obstructions  the  truth  has  to  encoxtnter.  "  It  shfdl 
not  return  void,"  etc.  On  the  magnitude  of  the  conliict  depends  the  greatness  and 
glory  of  its  victory.  There  are  obstructions  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  truth 
itself,  and  from  the  disposition  of  man.  1.  Truth  is  a  holy  thing  ;  it  can  fraternize 
only  with  what  is  kindred  to  its  own  spirit:  man  is  not  a  holy  being.  Hence 
antagonism.  "Light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than 
light  because  their  deeds  were  evil."  In  the  natural  world,  there  are  ten  thousand 
things  which  we  cannot  see  with  the  naked  eye :  they  can  be  reached  only  by 
an  extra-natural  sense.  So  it  is  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  ' '  They  are  spiritimlly 
discerned."  2.  Truth  is  dogmatic  in  its  teaching.  It  speaks  "as  one  having 
authority."  It  has  little  consideration  for  the  whims  or  passions  of  men.  It 
postulates  rather  than  argues  its  positions.  Against  this  lofty  dogmatism  of  inspired 
truth  man  lifts  up  his  heel  of  proud  contempt.  3.  It  was  said  by  a  distinguished 
sceptic  of  the  eighteenth  centiuy,  that  if  the  solution  of  one  of  Euclid's  problems 
coiQd  be  shown  to  war  against  the  selfishness  or  the  pride  of  the  human  heart, 
there  would  not  be  wanting  men  to  contradict  it.  A  startling  concession,  and  yet 
a  conceivable  fact.  Euclid's  problems  do  not  touch  our  moral  nature.  They  provoke 
no  suspicion.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  truth.  It  reveals  what  we  are  shy  of 
discovering.  It  affirms  what  we  dislike  to  believe,  and  therefore  wish  to  doubt.  It 
asks  what  we  are  unwilling  to  yield.  It  puts  in  a  plea  for  aU  rights  which  place 
themselves  on  the  side  of  God  ;  and  so  makes  confession  of  our  wrong-doing  a  first 
step  in  our  becoming  right  with  God.  III.  Under  these  difficulties,  truth  has 
ITS  ENCOURAGEMENTS.  "  As  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven — so 
shall  My  Word  be."  Here  are  grounds  of  confidence.  1.  There  is  the  relation  truth 
sustains  to  a  purpose.  2.  There  is  the  connection  of  truth  with  a  suitable  agency. 
And  this  directness  of  supernatvu-al  agency  carries  over  the  truth  from  its  relation 
to  a  purpose  into  the  efficiency  of  an  act.  When  the  telegraph  sends  its  message 
through  the  air  or  under  the  sea,  there  is  something  more  than  electricity  at  work. 
There  is  a  mind,  a  personal  intelligence,  from  whose  directive  will  that  electricity 
gets  its  action.  So  in  the  efficiency  of  truth.  It  supposes  a  power  not  in  the  truth, 
not  in  man,  but  in  God ;  a  power  which,  however  inscrutably  to  us,  works  after  its 
own  methods — §oing  down  to  the  conscience,  and  up  to  the  intellect,  conquering 

Erejudice,  and  silencing  doubt,  and  turning  men  "from  darkness  unto  light,  and 
■om  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God."  3.  There  is  confidence  in  the  end  which  this 
Word  is  to  accomplish.  "  It  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  What 
is  that  thing  ?  There  is  the  promise  of  the  Father :  "  Ask  of  Me,  and  I  shall  give 
thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for 
thy  possession."  This  is  already  done  in  purpose,  but  not  in  effect.  There  is  the 
advent  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  the  glory  of  the  Church.  There  is  the  millennium  of 
man.  There  is  the  triumph  of  the  Cross.  God's  time-plan  sweeps  through  our 
human  centuries,  making  a  day  out  of  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  into 
a  day.  4.  There  is  the  calm,  dignified  attitude  of  truth  in  view  of  opposition.  "  It 
shall  not  return  unto  Me  void ;  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please ;  it  shall 
prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  Shall  it  ?  Then  the  Divine  and  the  human 
plans  are  manifestly  in  collision.  Men  say  it  shaU  not  prosper.  "  It  shall  prosper." 
Then  the  fears  of  the  timid  and  the  calm  determinatioii  of  the  Divme  mind  are  not 
VOL.  in.  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

in  Lannony.  "It  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please."  Then  the  machinations 
of  the  adversary  must  be  defeated.  "  It  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent 
it."  Then  man  imiversaUy  shall  receive  and  know  and  obey  the  truth  ;  for  to  man 
singly,  and  to  man  as  a  race,  "is  the  Word  of  this  salvation  sent."  (/.  Burton.) 
The  efficierwy  of  God's  Word : — The  rain  and  the  snow  are  sapped  into  the  earth, 
and  then  incorporated  in  the  grain,  resulting  in  seed  to  the  sower  and  bread  to  the 
eater.  Similarly,  the  published  Word,  being  assimilated  into  the  human  mind, 
fashions  thought,  moulds  character,  regenerates  life  ;  and  therefore  it  does  not 
return  void  to  its  Author.  And  even  though  it  should  be  humanly  rejected,  it  still 
would  not  return  void ;  individual  hearing  creates  individual  responsibility,  and 
hence  leaves  no  one  in  the  same  place.  Tae  horizon  of  hope  being  unbrightened, 
the  reverse  side  of  despair  casts  up  sooner  or  later.  The  operations  of  the  Word 
are  partly  visible  and  partly  invisible.  Finite  creatures  observe  the  former ;  it 
wants  Omniscience  to  penetrate  the  latter.  For  this  reason  God  only  can  determine 
what  His  Word  is  really  doing.  Let  us  then  consider — I.  The  Word  in  its 
PECULIAR  REVERSES.  These  are  more  apparent  than  real.  The  Word  of  God  has 
sometimes  carried  His  forces  up  to  the  heights  of  actual  and  visible  victory  ;  and  at 
other  times  they  have  been  allowed  to  fall  back  as  if  into  shades  of  retreat,  per- 
adventure  beneath  bowers  of  sanctified  cabn.  But  retreat  does  not  stand  for 
surrender,  though  it  may  appear  so  to  the  unspiritual  mind.  Things  are  not 
necessarily  what  they  seem  ;  there  are  under-currents,  silent  influences,  which 
demonstrate  themselves,  in  some  instances,  only  after  a  time.  Denominations, 
associations,  Churches,  missions,  and  individual  Christians  have  been  known  to  get 
down  to  a  low  spiritual  level ;  and  yet,  as  if  out  of  the  ruins  of  a  once  flourishing 
past,  great  waves  of  revival  have  risen  up  and  borne  them  into  celestial  altitudes, 
where  they  have  gone  on  their  way  rejoicing.  II.  The  Word  in  its  actual 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS.  "It  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please."  We  are  here  con- 
fronted with  the  Word  under  four  divisions — Promise,  Law,  Prophecy,  Gospel.  The 
outstanding  promise  of  the  Abrahamic  period  that  Christ  should  arise  from  the  seed 
of  Abraham  became  an  accomplished  fact  when  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem.  The 
law,  with  its  manifold  observances,  also  saw  its  end  and  accomplishment  in  Christ. 
Prophecy,  although  it  covers  a  wide  range,  has  waited  long  enough  to  see  itself 
come  true  for  the  most  part ;  it  shall  wait  a  little  longer,  and  then  it  will  see  itself 
worked  out  in  full.  Through  this  treble  word — Promise,  Law,  Prophecy — God  was 
pleased  to  accomplish  what  may  be  summed  up  as  the  prelude  to  a  spiritual  kingdom. 
Then  there  is  the  further  word,  the  Gospel,  which  outlines  the  principles  on  which 
the  spiritual  kingdom  is  founded  and  worked.  The  Gospel  is  our  charter  ;  through 
it  God  accomplishes  that  which  pleases  Him  even  now — namely,  the  salvation  of 
sinners.  How  far  the  Gospel  has  wrought  towards  the  fulfilling  of  God's  saving 
purpose  up  to  the  present,  no  one  can  tell  but  Himself.  III.  The  Word  in  its 
DISTINCTIVE  AIM.  It  shaU  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  What  is  that 
thing?  To  bring  mankind  to  a  knowledge  of  His  will.  Whoever  has  felt  the 
power  of  the  Word  within  his  own  soul  is  himself  an  illustration  of  its  efficacy. 
Also,  whatever  spiritual  advancement  accrues  to  believers  through  perusing  the 
Word,  in  them  likewise  it  may  be  said  to  prosper.  But  above  all,  when  the 
mansions  of  glory  are  possessed,  God  may  then  point  to  that  great  multitude  which 
no  man  can  number,  and  say,  "These  are  they  that  have  come  out  of  great 
tribulation."  They  wiU  be  His  witness  that  His  Word  had  prospered  in  the  thing 
whereto  He  sent  it.  Considering  the  verse  as  a  whole,  it  gives  out  an  explicit 
promise.  It  contains  a  fourfold  "shall."  What  scope  for  the  exercise  of  faith  f 
{H.  Edwards.)  Spring4ime  in  nature  and  grace: — I.  The  down-coming.  "As 
the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven."  Our  spring  begins  with  April 
showers  alternating  with  rough  winds.  So  it  is  spiritually ;  the  down-coming  of 
the  Word  of  God  is  to  our  hearts  like  the  falling  of  the  rain  from  heaven.  Con- 
cerning this  down-coming,  I  may  say — 1.  It  is  usually  unpleasant.  We  are 
accustomed  to  speak  of  rainy  weather,  and  especially  of  snowy  weather,  as  "bad" 
weather.  When  we  spiritually  begin  to  live,  it  is  usually  rough  weather,  and  we 
are  apt  to  think  it  is  bad  weather.  Drip,  drip,  drip,  fall  showers  of  repentance. 
Snowflake  after  snowflake  faUs,  and  buries  all  our  hopes ;  our  joys  axe  covered,  as 
with  a  winding-sheet.  2.  It  difiers  very  much  in  its  method,  for  rain  and  snow  do 
not  always  come  down  in  the  same  way.  Sometimes  the  rain  falls  very  gently,  we 
can  hardly  tell  whether  it  is  rain  or  not.  Our  Scotch  friends  would  call  it  "  a  mist." 
At  another  time,  the  rain,  like  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi,  drives  furiously.  So,  there 
are  some  to  whom  God's  Word  comes  very  softly.    There  are  others  to  whom  it 


CHAP.  LV.]  ISAIAH.  259 

comes  very  terribly.  3.  It  differs  also  in  time  and  in  quantity.  One  shower  ia 
quickly  over,  and  another  lasts  all  day  and  all  night.  The  snow  may  in  one  season 
fall  heavily  for  a  few  hours  only;  at  another  time,  a  week  of  snow  may  be  experienced. 
So,  the  work  of  Divine  grace,  when  it  begins  in  the  soul,  is  not  very  manifestly  the 
same  in  different  persons.  Some  of  us  were  for  years  subject  to  the  operations  of 
God's  Spirit,  and  endured  much  pain  and  sorrow  before  we  found  peace  in  believing. 
Others  find  Christ  in  a  few  minutes,  and  leap  out  of  darkness  into  light  by  a  single 
spring.  4.  It  is  always  a  blessing,  and  never  a  curse.  If  the  rain  should  pour  down 
very  heavily,  and  continue  to  fall  until  we  might  be  led  to  think  that  the  very 
heavens  would  weep  themselves  away,  yet,  it  never  can  produce  a  flood  that  would 
drown  the  world,  for  yonder  in  the  heavens  is  the  bow  of  the  covenant.  These  rains 
must  mean  blessing.  And  if  the  snow  should  fall  never  so  deep,  yet  not  even  by 
snow  will  God  destroy  the  earth  any  more  than  by  a  flood.  So,  when  God's  grace 
comes  streaming  into  the  heart,  it  may  produce  deep  conviction,  it  may  sweep  away 
the  refuges  of  lies,  it  may  cover  up  and  bury  beneath  its  fall  every  carnal  hope  ; 
but  it  cannot  be  a  flood  to  destroy  you.  There  shall  yet  come  a  change  of  weather 
for  you,  and  your  soul  shaU  Uve.  II.  The  abiding.  "It  retumeth  not  thither, 
but  watereth  the  earth. "  So  is  it  spiritually  ;  when  God's  grace  faUs  from  heaven, 
it  comes  to  stay.  1.  When  God  sends  His  grace  from  heaven,  you  may  know  it  by 
this  sign,  that  it  soaks  into  your  soul.  2.  It  fertilizes  it,  it  makes  the  soul  bring 
forth  and  bud.  The  metaphor  of  my  text  cannot  set  forth  the  whole  truth,  for  this 
Word  of  God,  which  is  the  raia,  is  also  the  seed.  What  should  we  think  of  clouds 
that  rained  down  the  seeds  ?  The  Word  of  God  is  the  incorruptible  seed,  which 
liveth  and  abideth  for  ever;  and  whenever  that  seed  is  sown,  God's  Word  comes 
soaking  into  the  soul,  making  the  soul  to  live.  3.  It  works  in  the  man  whatsoever 
God  pleases,  all  His  Divine  purpose.  "  It  shall  accomplish, "  etc.  III.  The  results 
of  the  down-coming  and  the  abiding.  What  happens  ?  1.  It  makes  the  earth  to 
bring  forth  and  bud.  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  than  the  rosebud  ;  it  is  more 
charming  by  far  than  the  full-blown  rose  ;  and  the  buds  of  aU  manner  of  flowers 
have  a  singular  charm  about  them.  But  when  the  grace  of  God  has  come  into  a 
young  man's  heart,  we  very  soon  see  his  buds  ;  he  has  gracious  purposes,  holy 
resolves,  the  beginnings  of  prayer  ;  he  has  the  makings  of  a  man  of  God  about  him. 
2.  If  you  are  what  the  Lord  would  have  you  to  be,  you  will  not  long  be  content 
with  buds.  If  you  serve  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  continues  to  visit  you  with  showers 
of  blessing,  you  wiU  soon  bring  forth  seed  for  the  sower.  You  yourself  wiU  become 
useful  to  others ;  your  experience,  your  knowledge,  your  service,  will  Ibecome  the 
seed  of  good  for  other  people.  3.  Grace  also  makes  us  produce  bread  for  the  eater. 
If  you  consecrate  yourselves  to  Christ,  and  come  under  the  saturating  iufluence  of 
the  Divine  Word,  you  do  not  know  how  many  lips  you  may  feed,  nor  how  many 
your  word  may  convert  to  Christ.  4.  The  result  of  Divine  grace  upon  the  heart  is 
very  singular,  so  that  I  can  hardly  bring  it  under  the  metaphor  of  rain  and  snow, 
for  it  works  a  transformation.  When  rain  falls  on  a  plot  of  ground,  if  it  is  covered 
with  weeds,  it  makes  the  weeds  grow  ;  but  in  the  spiritual  realm,  the  rain  that 
comes  down  from  heaven  itself  sows  the  ground  with  good  seed.  What  is  more 
singular,  where  it  falls,  it  transforms  the  ground,  and  the  plants  that  come  under 
its  influence  change  their  nature.  "  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir  tree." 
When  the  grace  of  God  comes  into  the  soul,  it  takes  the  obnoxious  things  in  us,  and 
transmutes  them  into  blessings.  IV.  The  rejoicing.  The  music  of  the  year  is 
fuU  in  spring-time.  1.  In  spring-time,  one  cause  of  happiness  is  new  Ufe.  We 
have  come  into  a  new  life  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  has  breathed  upon  us.  2.  Another 
source  of  joy  in  spring-time  is  to  be  found  in  our  happy  surroundings.  It  ia 
beginniag  to  be  warm  ;  we  hope  soon  to  be  able  to  sit  out  of  doors  in  the  sunshine. 
And  is  it  not  so  with  us  spiritually?  We  are  no  longer  in  bondage  and  fear. 
Reconciled  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  joy  in  God.  3.  Spring-time  is 
peculiarly  pleasant  because  of  its  large  promise.  We  are  thinking  of  the  hay  harvest 
and  of  the  fruit  of  the  field.  We  are  reckoning  upon  luscious  grapes,  and  upon  the 
various  fruits  which  faith  sees  to  be  hidden  within  the  blossoms.  But  may  not  our 
hopes  be  disappointed  if  we  reckon  upon  earthly  fruits  ?  But  you  and  I  have  come 
by  grace,  into  a  land  of  hope  most  sure  and  steadfast.  We  have  hopes  grounded  on 
God's  Word,  and  they  shall  never  be  disappointed.  4.  In  spring-time  there  always 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  peculiar  sense  of  Divine  power  and  Divine  presence  throughout 
all  nature.  It  is  as  if  Nature  had  swooned  awhile,  and  lay  in  her  cold  fit  through 
the  winter  ;  but  now  she  has  been  awakened,  her  Lord  has  looked  her  in  the  face 
»nd  charmed  her  back  to  life  again.     Some  say  that  there  is  no  God.     We  have 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


had  dealings  with  God,  j^ersonal  dealings  with  Him,  as  when  the  sun,  though  it  be 
ninety-five  millions  of  miles  away,  has  commerce  with  the  earth,  and  the  bulbs  that 
sleep  beneath  the  black  mould  begin  to  swell  and  upheave,  and  by  and  by  the 
yeUow  cup  is  held  up  to  be  filled  with  the  light  of  the  sun.  (C  E.  Spurgeon.)  God's 
Word  productive  of  good : — A  distributor  gave  a  tract  to  a  young  man,  accompanying 
it  with  some  words  expressive  of  a  serious  and  afiectionate  desire  for  his  salvation. 
The  young  man,  upon  the  departure  of  the  missionary,  threw  the  pages  into  the 
fire  ;  but  as  they  curled  up  in  the  flame,  his  eye  caught  the  words :  "  Heaven  and 
earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away. "  As  these  words  turned 
to  ashes  in  the  fire,  they  turned  to  fire  in  his  mind.  He  found  no  rest,  until  he 
found  it  in  the  blood  of  atonement.  This  was  an  actual  occurrence.  ((?.  T, 
Shedd,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12, 18.  For  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy. — The  reversals  of  pardoning  mercy : — 
The  wealth  of  God's  abundant  pardon  is  here  set  forth  ia  metaphors  which  the  least 
imaginative  can  understand.  Not  only  were  the  exiles  forgiven,  their  warfare 
accomplished,  their  iniquity  pardoned ;  but  they  would  be  restored  to  the  land  of 
their  fathers — "Ye  shall  go  out  ...  ye  shall  be  led  forth  ..."  Not  only  were 
they  to  be  restored  ;  but  their  return  was  to  be  one  long  triumphal  march.  Nature 
herself  would  celebrate  it  with  joyful  demonstration  ;  mountains  and  hUls  would 
break  forth  into  singing,  and  aU  the  trees  of  the  field  would  clap  their  hands.  But 
even  this  was  not  all.  One  of  the  necessary  results  of  the  depopulation  of  the  land 
of  Israel  was  the  deterioration  of  the  soil.  Vast  tracts  had  passed  out  of  cultivation  ; 
the  terraces,  reared  on  the  slopes  of  the  hills  with  so  much  care,  had  become  heaps 
of  stones ;  where  corn  had  waved  in  the  rustling  breeze,  or  luscious  fruits  had 
ripened  in  the  autumn  sunshine^  there  was  the  sad  fulfilment  of  the  prediction, 
"  They  shall  smite  upon  their  breasts  for  the  pleasant  fields,  for  the  fruitful  vine. 
Upon  the  land  of  My  people  shall  come  up  thorns  and  briars  "  (Isa.  xxxii.  12,  13). 
But  this,  too,  was  to  be  reversed.  Literally  and  metaphorically,  there  was  to  be  a 
complete  reversal  of  the  results  of  former  sins  and  backslidings.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
OocOs  dealings  with  the  soul  in  grace: — To  the  Jew  in  Isaiah's  time  this  promise 
doubtless  bore  reference  to  three  things :  the  return  from  the  seventy  years'  captivity  ; 
their  ultimate  restoration,  first  to  their  own  land,  and  then  to  Christ ;  and  God's 
way  of  dealing  with  each  individual's  own  soul.  To  us  it  stands  only  in  the  last 
reference  ;  to  us  the  words  are  simply  spiritual.  I.  The  going  out  appears  to 
relate  to  that  great  moral  exodus  when  a  man  emerges  from  a  state  of  nature  into  a 
state  of  grace,  from  bondage  to  liberty,  from  darkness  to  light,  from  the  world  to 
Christ.  This  is  indeed  to  be  with  joy.  II.  The  being  led  forth  denotes  the 
further  experiences  of  the  Christian, — God's  conduct  of  him  by  the  way  ;  his  future 
courses,  and  especially  the  manner  in  which  he  is  brought  out  at  last— out  of  this 
life  into  a  better  ;  and  all  this  is  to  be  "  with  peace."  (/.  Vaiighan,  M.A.)  What 
is  joy?  1.  Novelty  of  perception.  It  is  a  wonderfully  new  feeling  when  a  soul  first 
tastes  the  promises  and  grasps  its  own  interest  in  Christ.  2.  Keenness  of  perception. 
Keen  is  the  first  sense  of  sin  to  a  penitent,  and  keen  is  the  first  sense  of  pardon  to  a 
believer.  In  that  early  dawn  tne  soid's  atmosphere  is  so  clear  that  every  object 
stands  out  in  its  distinctness.     3.  Sweetness  of  perception.     Sweeter  are  those 

Perceptions  than  they  are  keen.  Are  they  not  the  touches  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
hey  are  all  about  beautiful  things — saints  and  angels,  a  holy  heaven,  and  a  perfect 
Jesus.  {Ibid.)  "  And  he  led  forth  with  peace:" — As  we  go  on  in  the  spiritual  life 
the  sense  of  sin  grows  deeper  and  deeper ;  and  a  deep  sense  of  weakness,  nothing- ' 
ness,  and  guilt,  combining  with  a  fuller  sense  of  pardon  and  love,  makes  joy  peace. 
To  a  mind  led  and  taught  of  God  all  the  changes  and  chances  of  life  lend  themselves 
to  peace.  A  great  affliction  is  a  deep  fountain  of  peace  ;  the  very  agitation  hushes, 
and  it  makes  all  troubles  afterwards  so  very  small.  Another  and  another  promise 
fulfilled  every  day  is  always  enlarging  the  rock  underneath  our  feet.  Another  and 
another  answer  to  prayer  is  always  strengthening  the  arguments  for  the  future. 
Another  and  another  new  drop  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  always  swelling  the 
tide,  till  the  "peace  flows  like  a  river,"  because  we  see  the  "righteousness  of 
Christ "  as  the  waves  of  the  sea.  {Ibid. )  The  effect  produced  by  the  Gospel : — I.  An 
EFFECT  the  MOST  JOYFUL.  Joy  to  whom  ?  1.  To  themselves.  "  The  redeemed  of 
the  Lord  shall  return,  and  come  with  singing  unto  Zion  ;  and  everlasting  joy  shall 
be  upon  their  head. "  Lord  Chesterfield  said,  "I  hope  I  shall  never  be  what  they 
call  converted,  for  I  should  be  the  most  miserable  man  upon  earth  ; "  not  consider- 
ing that  this  change  would  have  produced  a  change  in  his  taste,  and  that  he  would 


CHAP.  IT.]  ISAIAE.  261 

have  been  able  to  relish  things  which  he  disliked  before.  He  to  talk  of  religion 
making  him  miserable !  Why,  does  he  not,  in  one  of  his  letters,  teU  us  that  he 
had  always  been  wretched — that  he  had  always  found  the  world  a  cheat — and  that 
he  was  now  leaving  it,  not  because  he  was  reconciled  to  it,  but  because  he  was  com- 
pelled  ;  and  that,  since  time  had  become  his  enemy,  he  was  endeavouring  to  sleep 
away  the  remainder  of  it  in  a  carriage  ?  Bolingbroke,  too,  said,  "  I  now  find  in  my 
aflfliction  that  my  philosophy  fails  me. "  But  the  Christian's  religion  does  not  fail 
him  in  the  day  of  trouble.  2.  To  their  fellow-Christians.  There  is  no  room  for 
envy  here,  for  there  is  enough  for  others  as  well  as  for  yourselves,  and  enough  for  alL 
8.  To  their  pious  friends,  connections  and  relations.  They  had  given  them  many  a 
pang  before.  4.  Joy  to  ministers.  When  they  observe  the  success  of  their  labours, 
they  resemble  the  husbandman,  who,  after  his  ploughing,  manuring  and  sowing, 
goes  forth  and  sees,  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  and  after  that  the  full  com  in  the 
ear.  5.  Joy  to  the  angels.  6.  Joy  to  the  Mediator.  7.  Joy  to  God  Himself. 
"  The  pleasure  of  the  Lord,"  says  Isaiah,  "  shall  prosper  in  his  hand."  "  The  Lord 
thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty ;  He  will  save.  He  will  rejoice  over  thee 
with  joy  ;  He  will  rest  in  His  love  ;  He  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing."  11.  An 
EFFECT  THE  MOST  TRANSFORMING.  "  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir 
tree,"  etc.  III.  An  effect  the  most  honourable  to  God.  "  It  shall  be  to  the 
Lord  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign,  that  shall  not  be  cut  oflF."    (^W.  Jay.) 

Yer.  13.  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  np  the  flr  tree. — The  hriwr: — ^The 
■word  for  briar  {sirpdd)  is  unknown.  LXX.  renders  KSw^a  (fleabane).  All  that 
can  be  said  is  that  some  desert  plant  is  meant.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The 
Lord^s  name  and  memorial : — These  words  are  a  poetical  description  of  great  moral 
changes  which  the  Gospel  works  wherever  it  comes.  At  the  same  time  they  are  not 
solely  poetical,  for  wherever  the  spiritual  change  comes  the  physical  change  is  almost 
sure  to  follow.  As  men  are  elevated  the  earth  yields  her  increase  more  largely. 
Look  at  the  field  of  the  sluggard,  and  the  garden  of  the  industrious !  Look  over  the 
•wild  wastes  of  Africa,  and  then  see  the  fertility  of  the  same  soil  when  tilled  by  the 
missionary's  converts!  The  surest  way  to  benefit  men  in  their  outward  circum- 
stances is  to  bless  them  spiritually.  I.  The  effective  agency  here  spoken  of.  I 
do  not  find  in  this  fifty-fifth  chapter  of  Isaiah  that  the  cause  of  the  spiritual  miracles 
of  my  text  is  a  gospel  of  forms  and  ceremonies.  Nor  do  I  find  here  a  gospel  of 
dogmas  and  orthodoxies,  of  rigid  creeds,  and  infallible  statements.  But  I  learn  a 
Gospel  of  quite  another  sort,  more  Divine,  more  glorious  by  far.  1.  A  Gospel  reveal- 
ing Divine  provision  for  man's  necessity,  and  earnestly  invitiag  man  to  partake  of  it 
(ver.  1).  2.  This  Gospel  is  as  free  as  the  air,  for  do  we  not  read  over  and  over  again, 
"  Buy  without  money  and  without  price, "  and  are  not  those  invited  to  come  who 
have  no  money?  3.  It  is  a  Gospel  of  hearing  and  not  of  doing.  "Hearken  dili. 
gently."  "Incline  your  ear."  "Hear  and  your  soul  shaU  Kve."  Death  came  to  us 
first  through  the  eye,  but  salvation  comes  through  the  ear.  4.  Running  your  eye 
down  the  chapter  you  will  notice  that  the  great  means  God  makes  use  of  for  turning 
deserts  into  gardens  is  the  Gospel  founded  on  a  covenant,  a  covenant  made  with 
David's  Lord  and  Son.  "  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the 
Bute  mercies  of  David. "  5.  Isaiah  describes  a  Gospel  whose  success  is  guaranteed. 
"Thou  shalt  call  a  nation  that  thou  knowest  not.  But  you  may  call  often,  and 
men  wiU  not  come;  in  this  case,  however,  they  shall  come.  "  Nations  that  knew 
not  thee  shall  run  unto  thee."  "For  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow,"  etc. 
6.  The  Gospel  which  Isaiah  speaks  of  is  fall  of  grace  and  encouragement  (vers.  6-9). 
II.  The  beneficial  resttlts  of  the  Gospel.  The  change  depicted  in  this  verse  is 
very  radical,  for  a  little  observation  will  convince  you  that  it  is  a  change  in  the  soil. 
The  verse  does  not  say,  "  Instead  of  the  thorn  God  shall  plant  the  fir  tree."  No  !  but 
as  the  thorn  coming  up  naturally  by  itself  indicates  such-and-such  a  condition  of 
soil,  so  fir  trees  shall  spring  up  by  themselves  spontaneously,  indicating  an  altogether 
radical  change  in  the  earth  beneath.  When  God  encloseth  a  heart  that  has  laid 
common,  does  He  cut  down  the  thorns  and  the  briars,  and  then  plant  fir  trees  ?  No ! 
but  He  so  changes  the  soil  that  from  the  ground  itself  there  spontaneously  starts  up 
the  fir  tree  and  the  myrtle.  This  is  a  miracle  which  man  cannot  accomplish,  a 
marvel  which  only  the  grace  of  God  can  work,  and  which  gives  to  God  His  highest 
gloiy.  Note  the  poetic  metaphor  which  describes  the  outward  change.  1.  A  thorn 
IS  the  conspicuous  emblem  of  the  curse.  Upon  niany  ungodly  men  there  is  very 
evidently  the  curse,  while  upon  all  it  really  rests.  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the 
house  of  the  wicked.     2.  A  thorn  is  a  fruitless  thing.    Look  at  it,  and  see  how 


262  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lt. 

barren  it  is.  God  gets  neither  prayer  nor  praise  from  the  ungodly  man,  3.  A 
thorn,  too,  is  a  repulsive  thing — there  is  nothing  inviting  about  it ;  nobody  would 
choose  to  make  it  a  pillow  or  a  companion.  Some  Ohristless  persons  are  naturally 
amiable  ;  but  many  and  many  a  man,  especially  when  sin  has  come  to  a  head  with 
him,  is  a  thorn-hedge,  a  churl,  an  unsympathizing,  selfish  beiug.  4.  Again,  the 
thorn  is  a  rending  thrQg,  offending,  noxious.  So  has  it  been  with  ungodly  men, 
when  unrestrained  by  grace.  Like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  they  breathe  out  vengeance 
against  God  and  His  people.  5.  As  for  the  metaphor  of  the  briar  used  in  the  text, 
it  was  always  the  emblem  of  desolation.  The  briar  came  up  on  the  desolate  walls  of 
Babylon  and  Nineveh  ;  the  briar  covered  the  land  of  Israel,  when  the  inhabitants 
were  carried  away  captive.  In  how  many  human  hearts  whore  the  Gospel  has  not 
come  is  there  desolation,  sadness,  despair?  6.  The  briar,  too,  is  a  thing  that 
cumbers  the  ground  ;  it  occupies  the  place  of  the  palm  or  of  the  fig  ;  and  so  ungodly 
men  cumber  the  ground  ;  they  do  no  good  ;  they  occupy  spheres  in  which  others  might 
have  served  God ;  they  are  altogether  wasters,  they  rob  God,  they  bring  Him  no 
revenue  of  glory.  7.  The  briar  is  soon  to  be  cut  down,  and  when  cut  down  no  use 
can  be  made  of  it ;  it  is  burnt ;  it  is  put  away.  Such  is  the  future  history  of  the 
unconverted  man.  III.  The  glorious  issue.  "  It  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  a  name, 
for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut  off. "  Jehovah  might,  if  He  willed,  have 
taken  other  names ;  He  might  have  selected  other  works  of  His  hands  to  be  the 
ensigns  of  His  glory,  but  He  has  chosen  the  results  of  the  Gospel  to  be  His  proudest 
honours ;  He  has,  if  I  may  use  such  a  term,  staked  His  eternal  majesty  upon  the 
effects  of  Gospel  grace.  With  the  heathen  their  gods  took  names  from  what  were 
thought  to  be  their  most  glorious  work.  "We  read  of  Jove,  the  thunderer,  because 
they  imagined  that  he  launched  the  bolt  from  his  hand.  They  spoke  of  the  far- 
darting  Apollo — the  rays  of  light  flashing  from  the  sim.  They  talked  of  the  cruel 
Juno  in  the  wars  of  Troy.  If  Jehovah,  the  one  only  true  God,  had  chosen.  He 
might  have  been  "Jehovah,  the  Thunderer  ; "  we  might  have  read  of  the  far-darting 
God  ;  we  might  have  had  Him  constantly  portrayed  in  Scripture  as  the  terrible  and 
avengiag  Lord  ;  but  He  hath  not  chosen  such  a  name  ;  He  hath  not  been  pleased  to 
select  anything  that  is  terrible  as  His  peculiar  glory,  but  that  which  is  full  of 
melting  mercy  and  tender  pity.  The  Lord  has  acted  wisely,  as  He  always 
does,  in  selecting  such  a  matter  as  this  to  be  His  name,  to  be  a  display  of 
Himself,  because  it  is  everlasting.  Let  this  encourage  Christians.  If  it  is  God's 
glory  to  save  man,  expect  to  have  them  saved  and  go  to  work  to  save  them.  To 
you  who  are  unconverted  !  How  this  ought  to  encourage  you  to  come  to  God  in  Christ 
Jesus!  Is  it  to  His  glory  to  save  you?  Then  He  will  do  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  effects  of  the  Gospel: — I.  The  character  of  the  transformation.  "  Instead 
of  the  thorn,"  etc.  1.  Naturally,  there  is  no  difference  between  men  as  to  their  state. 
2.  Grace  makes  a  difference.  II.  The  relation  of  this  transformation  to  God. 
"  And  it  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  a  name,"  etc.  1.  It  is  supposed  that  this  work  is 
the  work  of  God.  And  it  is,  and  must  be  so  ;  and  the  very  quality  of  the  effect 
shows  its  origin  and  Author.  2.  This  is  to  be  to  Him  for  "a  name,"  that  is  a 
praise  ;  and  therefore  you  will  find  both  words  used  together  in  another  passage — 
"They  shall  be  to  Me  for  a  name  and  a  praise."  And  the  latter  is  explanatory  of 
the  former.  3.  It  "shall  be  to  the  Lord,"  not  only  for  "a  name,"  but  for  "a sign." 
A  sign  is  a  manifestation,  a  token.  Now  the  conversion  of  souls  to  God  is  a  kind 
of  moral  miracle  ;  it  is  a  striking  display  on  the  part  of  God  towards  man. 
4.  Observe  the  duration  of  this.  "An  everlasting  sign."  {W.  Jay.)  Spiritual 
development: — This  is  the  predicted  result  of  the  things  that  are  described  and 

Eromised  in  the  former  part  of  the  chapter.  I.  The  necessary  growth.  The 
uman  soul  will  grow.  It  will  put  forth  from  its  soil  and  substance  natural  and 
moral  products  of  some  kind.  There  may  be  thorn  and  briar,  or  there  may  be  fir 
tree  and  myrtle  tree,  but  there  will  be  something.  There  are  no  responsible  human 
souls  absolutely  barren.  There  seems  to  be  a  certain  amount  of  force  in  the  human 
soul — a  certain  amount  of  what  may  be  called  organic  vitality,  which  will  be  out  into 
forms  and  habits,  speech  and  behaviour,  character  and  life  ;  and  you  cannot  keep  it 
down,  do  what  you  will.  II.  The  first  crop  is  the  thorn  and  briar.  These 
are  indigenous  to  the  soil ;  the  things  that  will  appear  if  nothing  is  done.  Our 
state  is  so  depraved  that  evil  principles,  affections  and  habits  will  take  priority  of 
anything  good  that  may  be  left  in  us.  Our  views  of  sin  will  affect  our  views  of 
almost  everything  else.  III.  There  is  a  second  crop.  These  trees  are  taken, 
apparently,  as  emblems  of  thb  better  life,  on  account  of  theie  great  beauty 
AMD  usefulness.     We  find  the  fir  tree  very  often  used  by  the  sacred  writers,  with 


CHAP.LT.]  ISAIAH.  26S 

the  cedar.  Thus — "The  beams  of  our  house  are  cedar,  and  our  rafters  are  fir." 
Hiram  sent  to  Solomon,  saying,  "  I  will  do  all  thou  desirest  concerning  timber  of 
cedar,  and  concerning  timber  of  fir."  "Yea,  the  fir  trees  rejoice  at  thee,  and  the 
cedars  of  Lebanon. "  Indeed,  some  think  that  the  tree  here  mentioned,  called  the 
fir  tree,  was  the  cedar,  and  some  think  it  was  the  cypress.  Probably  the  word  is 
generic,  and  has  reference  to  trees  of  that  kind.  Trees,  like  the  cypress  and  cedar, 
were  grand  to  the  sight  and  refreshing  to  the  traveller  who  stood  under  their  shadow  ; 
and  the  wood  of  them  was  so  hard  and  excellent  that  it  was  much  used  for  the 
building  of  temples,  for  ships,  for  musical  instruments,  for  lances  to  be  used  in  war, 
and  even  for  statues,  on  account  of  its  great  durability.  We  see  the  idea  here 
suggested.  What  is  strong,  useful,  beautiful,  takes  the  place  of  what  is  prickly, 
useless,  wasteful.  A  change  like  that  in  a  landscape  would  be  an  emblem  of  what 
takes  place  in  a  human  soul  and  life,  when  a  natural  man  becomes  a  spiritual  man. 
In  a  well-tilled  Gospel  field  we  should  not  see  much  of  a  thorn  and  briar  from  the 
very  first.  In  family  gardens  they  should  not  be  suffered  to  grow — at  least,  every 
endeavour  should  be  made  to  prevent  it,  and  to  rear  the  fir  tree  and  the  myrtle  tree, 
and  to  draw  out  unto  them  the  strength  which  otherwise  will  certainly  go  to  nourish 
the  hurtful  and  wasteful  things.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  some  Christians,  parents 
and  others,  have  radically  erroneous  conceptions  on  this  point.  They  hold  the 
doctrine  of  natural  depravity  shelteringly,  almost  lovingly,  the  same  almost  as  if 
they  held  it  to  be  their  duty  to  draw  out  that  depravity  in  order  to  prove  it. 
Certainly  these  thorns  and  briars  will  grow  up  if  we  let  them,  but  instead  of  them 
let  us  have  the  fir  tree  and  the  myrtle  tree  so  early  and  so  fully  that  we  shall  never 
see  the  former  at  all.  IV.  The  perpetual  beauty.  That  must  be  beautiful  and 
good  which  the  Lord  takes  for  a  name,  and  regarding  which  He  says,  "  Let  Me  be 
known  by  it."  It  is  so  even  now.  When  God  speaks  of  Himself  He  does  not  point 
to  His  name  up  amid  the  stars — systems  and  fields  of  wide  illimitable  space.  He 
does  not  speak  of  earthquakes  and  violence ;  of  majestic  clouds,  and  stormy  seas. 
He  points  to  His  new-born  children — who  bear  His  image,  who  reflect  His  glory — 
whose  souls  enshrine  His  awful  name — who  are  set  for  ever  to  be  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  His  grace,  "  for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut  off"."  The  Gospel 
even  in  this  world  is  an  indestructible  thing.  It  is  erecting  signs  of  its  power  far 
more  enduring  than  the  pictures  of  the  learned  and  the  statues  of  the  brave. 
{A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Good  latent  in  the  heart: — A  gentleman  who  has  had  long 
experience  of  life  in  America,  and  who  has  watched  the  forests  of  Canada,  told  me 
that  when  they  cut  down  there  the  natural  growth — the  thorns  and  the  briars — the 
wild  birch,  that  is  not  good  for  much — the  maple,  and  other  such  trees — there  do 
not  grow  up  again  the  same  trees  that  were  cut  down.  Strange  to  say,  the  fir  tree 
springs  up  all  over  the  ground.  It  is  as  if  the  seeds  of  the  fir  were  held  there  latent, 
waiting  the  opportunity,  and  no  sooner  is  the  opportunity  given  than  they  spring 
up  and  grow.  Is  not  that  an  emblem  of  grace,  the  seeds  of  which  may  have  been 
sown  in  the  heart  long  ago  by  early  instruction,  by  impressions  made  in  former  years, 
or  by  more  recent  impressions  of  a  religious  kind  ?  Is  not  that  an  indication  of  how 
these  seeds  wiU  spring  up  at  once  if  you  but  lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  these  other 
trees,  and  bring  them  to  the  grovmd  ?  {Hid. )  The  transformation  of  God's  grace : — 
"  An  everlasting  sign  I  "  That  surely  indicates  that  sacred  lessons  are  hidden  under 
this  prediction,  which  are  of  permanent  interest  and  importance.  Let  us  seek  them  in 
the  light  of  other  Scriptures.  ' '  Unto  Adam  He  said.  Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  ; 
in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life  ;  thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it 
bring  forth  unto  thee."  "  And  the  soldiers  plaited  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  ft  on 
His  head."  "  There  was  given  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh.  .  .  .  Concerning  this  thing 
I  besought  the  Lord  thrice,  that  it  might  depart  from  me.  And  He  said  unto  me. 
My  grace  is  suflBcient  for  thee.  I.  The  thorns  and  briars  of  life.  In  many 
cases  we  reap  what  others  have  sown  ;  in  some  we  sow  for  ourselves  ;  in  others  we 
Buffer  from  our  neglect.  We  have  failed  to  use  our  opportunities ;  and  therefore 
crops  of  rank  growth  cover  the  acres  of  the  past,  and  thistledown  hovers  in  clouds, 
threatening  the  future.  1.  Ill-health  is  surely  one.  For  some,  the  excesses  of  their 
ancestors — for  others,  their  own — have  sown  the  furrows  with  the  seeds  of  bitter 
harvests,  which  they  have  no  alternative  than  to  reap.  Dyspepsia,  cancer,  the  slow 
progress  of  paralysis  along  the  spinal  cord,  nervous  weakness  and  depression — these 
are  some  of  the  many  ills  to  which  oiir  flesh  is  heir,  and  they  are  thorns  indeed. 
Paul's  thorn  was  probably  ophthalmia.  2.  Bad  children  are  another.  Did  David 
not  mean  this  when  he  said  that  his  house  was  not  so  with  God ;  and  that  the 
ungodly,  like  thorns,  must  be  thrust  away  with  the  armed  hand?    When  the 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

daughters  make  unfortimate  marriages,  and  sons  spread  their  sails  to  every  gale  of 
passion,  there  are  thorns  and  briars  enough  to  make  misery  in  the  best-appointed 
and  most  richly  furnished  homes.     3.  Strong  predispositions  and  tendencies  towards 
eril  may  be  classed  among  the  thorns.     To  be  of  a  jealous  or  envious  temperament ; 
to  have  an  inordinate  love  for  praise  and  flattery ;  to  be  cursed  with  the  clinging 
habit  of  impurity,  intemperance  or  greediness  ;  to  be  of  an  irascible  or  phlegmatic 
disposition  ;  and  to  be  so  liable  to  doubts  that  all  the  affirmations  of  fellow-disciples 
faU  on  dull  and  irresponsive  ears — this  is  to  be  beset  with  thorns  and  briars,  as 
though  all  the  goodness  of  a  field  should  go  to  waste  in  weeds.     4.  Compulsory 
association  with  imcongenial  companions  in  the  workshop  or  the  home.     5.  Diffi- 
culties that  bar  our  progress,  like  hedges  of  prickly  thorns  in  some  tangled  forest, 
may  be  included  in  this  enumeration.     Competition  in  commercial  life  makes  thorny 
the  path  of  many  a  man  of  business.     Perplexities  and  worries,  annoyances  and 
vexations,  fret  us  almost  beyond  endurance.     Each  life  has  experiences  like  these. 
Surely,  we  argue,  we  could  five  nobler  and  more  useful  lives,  if  only  we  were  free. 
"  Not  so,"  says  the  Lord.     "  I  cannot  take  away  the  thorn — it  is  the  only  means  of 
royalty  for  thee ;  but  I  wiU  give  thee  My  all-sufficient  grace. "    II.  Royalty 
THKOUGH  THORNS.     It  is  Very  remarkable  that  the  sign  of  the  curse  became,  on  the 
brow  of  Christ,   the  insignia  of  royalty.      The  lesson  is  obvious — that  He  has 
transformed  the  curse  into  a  blessing  ;  that  He  has  discovered  the  secret  of  compel- 
ling it  to  yield  royalty.     There  was  some  dim  hint  of  this  in  the  words  of  the 
primaeval  curse  on  the  ground,  "  Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  ;  thorns  also  and 
thistles  it  shall  bring  forth  unto  thee."    What  can  this  mean,  except  that  there  was 
an  ulterior  design  in  this  infliction  on  the  material  world  ?    It  is  not  very  clear  what 
is  implied  in  this  sentence  on  the  grovmd.     Almost  certainly  there  were  thorns  and 
thistles  before  Adam's  sru  brought  a  blight  on  God's  fair  world  ;  but  probaMy  from 
that  moment  they  became  more  prolific,  or  the  conditions  that  had  been  imfavour- 
able  to  their  growth  became  more  favourable,  or  malign  hands  were  permitted  to 
scatter  their  seeds  afar.     But,  however,  it  befeU,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  God's 
purpose  was  wholly  benevolent.     Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  ;  that  is,  out  of 
the  obduracy  of  the  soil,  and  its  tendency  to  breed  thorns  and  thistles,  wiU  come  to 
thee  the  best  and  highest  blessing.     Surely  this  has  been  verified.     Where  has  man 
attained  his  noblest  development  ?    In  lands  where  kindly  Nature  has  been  most 
prodigal  of  her  good  gifts  ?  where  the  soil  has  only  needed  scratching  to  yield  a 
bountiful  return?  where  life  has  been  free  from  care,  as  that  of  bees  among  the 
limes  ?    No  !  not  there.     By  the  bountiful  provision  of  all  they  needed  for  their 
sustenance  and  comfort,  Nature  has  enervated  her  children,  men  have  become  inert 
and  sensual,  ease-loving  and  muscleless.     But  where  the  soil  has  been  unkindly,  the 
climate  inhospitable,  the  struggle  for  existence  hard,  the  presence  of  the  thorn  ever 
menacing  the  cultivated  patch,  and  threatening  to  invade  garden  or  field  ;  where 
every  endeavour  has  been  required  to  wring  subsistence  from  the  unwilling  ground — 
there  man  has  arisen  to  his  full  height,  and  put  forth  all  his  glorious  strength  of 
brain  and  sinew.     Probably  this  is  what  is  meant  in  the  thorn-crown  on  the  brow  of 
Christ.     It  teaches  that  man  can  only  attain  his  true  royalty  by  meeting,  enduring 
and  overcoming  these  elements  in  life  which  forebode  only  disaster  and  loss.    What  a 
magnificent  conception  this  gives  of  the  possibilities  of  sorrow  !    In  proportion  as  we 
patiently  submit  ourselves  to  our  Father's  appointment,  we  come  to  see  the  reason- 
ableness and  beneficence  of  His  design,  and  find  ourselves  adopting  the  thistle  as  our 
badge  ;  we  discover  that  it  has  been  the  means  of  imfolding  and  perfecting  our 
character,  of  giving  royalty  and  dignity  to  our  demeanour,  and  making  us  kings  by 
right  of  conquest,  as  weU  as  by  right  of  birth.     III.  The  TRANSFORkATioNs  of 
GRACE.     "  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir  tree  ;  and  instead  of  the  briar 
the  myrtle  tree."    "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ;  for  My  strength  is  made  perfect 
in  weakness."     "I  will,  therefore,  glory  in  My  infirmities."     1.  God  gives  us  new 
views  of  dark  things.     What  we  thought  was  punishment,  turns  out  to  be  the 
chastening  of  a  Father's  love.     The  thorns  change  to  myrtles  when  God  shows  His 
reasons.   2.  God  makes  our  sorrow  and  losses  occasions  for  giving  more  grace.   There 
are  two  ways  of  helping  the  soul  bent  double  under  some  crushing  burden.     It  may 
be  removed  ;  or  additional  strength,  equal  to  its  weight,  may  be  inbreathed.     The 
latter  is  God's  choice  way  of  dealing  with  His  children.     And  if  we  were  wise,  we 
should  not  pray  for  the  extraction  of  the  thorn,  but  claim  the  greater  grace. 
3.  The  grace  of  God  actually  transforms  awkward  and  evil  dispositions,  both  in  our- 
selves and  others.   Softness  becomes  meekness  ;  cowardice  gentleness  ;  impulsiveness 
enthusiasm  ;  meanness  thrift ;  niggardliness  generosity ;  crueltj'  consideration  for 


CHAP,  ivi.]  ISAIAE.  265 

others  ;  irritability  and  vehemence  patience  and  longsuffering.  God  did  not  destroy 
the  Roman  Catholic  pulpits  at  the  Reformation — He  did  better,  He  filled  them  with 
Gospel-preachers.  Similarly,  He  does  not  destroy  any  of  our  natural  characteristics, 
when  He  brings  us  to  Himself ;  He  only  eliminates  the  evil  and  develops  the  good. 
The  thorns  of  passion  and  temper  are  replaced  by  fir  trees,  and  the  briars  by  m^les. 
4.  When  the  discipline  has  done  its  work,  it  is  removed.  These  glowing  predictions 
were  partially  fulfilled  in  the  restoration  of  Israel  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  ;  and 
no  doubt  they  would  have  been  more  fully  realized  if  there  had  been  more  perfect 
faith  in  the  Divine  promises.  These  glowing  words,  however,  shall  be  perfectly 
fulfilled  in  those  coming  days  when  Israel  shall  turn  to  the  land  from  all  lands 
whither  her  people  have  been  scattered.  Their  conversion,  the  apostle  tells  us, 
shall  inaugurate  the  times  of  refreshing,  of  which  the  prophets  have  spoken  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  An  everlasting  sign. — A  token  and  sign 
of  Gospel  redemption: — 1.  The  redemption  of  the  Jews  out  of  Babylon  shall  be  a 
ratification  of  those  promises  that  relate  to  Gospel  times.  2.  It  shall  be  a  representa- 
tion of  the  blessings  promised,  and  a  type  and  figure  of  them.  (1)  Gospel  grace  will 
Bet  those  at  liberty  tnat  were  in  bondage  to  sin  and  Satan.  They  shall  go  out,  and 
be  led  forth.  Christ  shall  make  them  free.  (2)  It  will  fill  those  with  joy  that  were 
melancholy  (Ps.  xiv.  7).  (3)  It  wUl  make  a  great  change  in  men^  oharaoten. 
(4)  In  all  this  God  shall  be  glorified.    (Jf.  Senry.) 


OHAPTEE  LVL 


Yeb.  1.  Thns  aalfh  the  Lord,  Keep  ye  judgment. — Privilege  and  responsibility  f^ 
The  doctrine  of  the  passage  is  simply  this,  that  they  who  enjoy  extraordinary 
privileges,  or  expect  extraordinary  favours,  are  under  corresponding  obligations  to 
do  the  will  of  God  ;  and,  moreover,  that  the  nearer  the  manifestation  of  God's  mercy, 
whether  in  time  or  eternity,  the  louder  the  call  to  righteousness  of  Ufe.  These 
truths  are  of  no  restricted  application,  but  may  be  applied  wherever  the  relation  of 
a  Church  or  chosen  people  can  be  recognized.  {F.  A.  Alexander.")  Ood's  mercy  and 
mem' 8  duty : — When  God  is  coming  towards  us  in  a  way  of  mercy,  we  must  go  forth 
to  meet  Him  in  a  way  of  duty.  {M.  Henry. )  Reformation  the  precursor  of  regenera- 
tion:— God  does  not  demand  of  a  man,  when  He  sends  to  him  the  gracioua 
announcement  of  the  Gospel,  that  he  should  change  his  heart,  in  order  to  his  having 
a  share  in  His  proffered  mercy.  He  does  not  say  to  him,  You  are  now  a  disloysS 
sabject,  and  before  you  can  have  an  interest  in  the  blood  of  My  Son,  I  require  you 
to  become  loyal.  But  He  does  require  that  he  should  set  himself  to  the  giving  up 
the  overt  acts  of  disloyalty.  He  sends  the  tidings  of  a  free  pardon  to  His  alienated 
subjects,  but  He  bids  them,  as  it  were,  get  ready  for  its  reception.  "Keep  ye 
judgment,  and  do  justice,"  etc.  The  manner  in  which  the  doctrines  of  Scripture 
are  oftentimes  propounded  has  a  distinct  tendency  to  repress  men's  energies,  or  to 
give  them  an  altogether  wrong  direction.  The  Bible  addresses  itself  unreservedly 
to  sinners,  as  though  they  had  a  moral  power  of  action,  for  which  they  were,  in  the 
largest  sense,  accountable,  and  through  which  they  might  make  some  progress 
towards  deliverance.  Hence,  it  calls  on  the  wicked  to  forsake  his  ways,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  to  turn  imto  the  Lord.  It  bids  them  cease  to 
do  evil,  and  learn  to  do  well ;  it  clearly  demands  a  preparatory  reformation,  and 
such  an  attention  to  the  conduct  as  shall,  in  some  sense,  make  way  for  the  free 
pardon  of  the  Gospel.  I.  Show  what  lies  within  the  power  of  the  uncon- 
verted ;  AND  WHAT,  THEREFORE,  THEY  ARE  BOXTND  TO  DO  IF  THET  HOPE  FOR 
CONVERSION.  We  apply  this  dfrection  to  the  case  of  every  individual,  whatever  his 
station  in  society  ;  and  we  consider  it  as  requiring  of  him  a  more  diligent  attention 
to  the  duties  of  that  station,  as  preliminary  to  his  obtaining  a  single  share  in  the 
mercies  of  redemption.  If  he  be  living  in  any  known  sin,  let  him  renounce  it. 
God's  Spirit,  so  to  speak,  is  scared  away  by  his  intemperance,  his  lust,  his  uncon- 
trolled tempers,  and  if  he  would  hope  for  visitation  from  this  Spirit,  let  him  strive  to 
sweep  the  chamber,  and  to  garnish  it  for  its  reception.     II.  The  perfect  harmony 

OF  THESE  STATEMENTS  WITH  THE  DOCTRINES  OF  QRAOE.      We  are  aCCOStomed  tO 

preach  to  you  the  insuffioienoy  of  works,  in  helping  forward  that  justification  which 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lvl 

ia  purely  of  faith ;  and  now  we  seem  to  teach  the  vast  importance  of  works,  and 
those,  too,  works  wroiight  by  mere  human  strength,  as  distinctly  instrumentel  to 
human  salvation.  1.  The  throwing  of  a  man  upon  certain  resources  which  we  hold 
liiTTi  to  possess,  ia  not  representing  him  as  able  to  advance  one  step  without  God. 
It  is  God's  own  appointment  that  we  should  use  the  strength  which  we  have,  before 
more  is  imparted ;  and  since  we  only  teach  submission  to  this  appointment,  there 
can  be  nothing  of  interference  with  the  freeness  of  grace.  2.  Our  representation  of 
the  duties  of  the  unconverted,  if  they  desire  conversion,  must  be  correct,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  formed  altogether  on  a  Scriptural  model.  We  refer  you  to  the  preaching  of 
John  the  Baptist,  as  furnishing  this  model.  3.  There  is  a  difficult  passage  in  the 
history  of  our  Lord's  ministrations,  which  can  only  be  explained  on  the  supposed 
truth  of  what  we  have  advanced.  When  the  young  man  came  to  Jesus,  and  demanded 
what  good  thing  he  must  do  that  he  might  have  eternal  life,  the  Saviour  replied, 
"  If  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments."  4.  We  admit  that,  if  a 
man  reform  his  life  under  the  idea  that  the  reform  is  meritorious,  he  may  possibly  be 
no  nearer  conversion  ;  but  if  he  attempt  to  reform,  simply  as  a  preliminary,  he  shall, 
surely,  be  thereby  brought  unto  greater  fitness  for  the  reception  of  grace  ;  and  yet 
the  grace  when  it  comes  shall  have  lost  none  of  its  characteristics,  but  still  be  grace 
the  very  freest  and  the  most  undeserved.  5.  Again,  salvation  is  a  thing  of  faith, 
-not  of  works.  The  very  desire  after  conversion  pre-supposes  faith.  If  a  man  do 
not  believe  in  the  coming  wrath,  he  can  have  no  wish  for  a  change  that  is  to  secure 
him  against  the  outbreak  of  that  wrath  ;  and  in  exhorting  him  unto  an  immediate 
fighting  against  sin,  we  exhort  him  to  bring  his  faith  into  practice.  6.  The 
individual  who  goes  out  into  the  arena  of  life  and  makes  an  effort  in  his  own  strength 
to  overthrow  evil,  will  be  a  hundredfold  better  taught  the  moral  decrepitude  of 
man,  by  the  little  progress  that  he  makes,  or  the  defeat  that  he  sustains,  than 
another  who  sits  down  in  his  closet  and  seeks  to  ascertain  his  native  insufficiency  by 
throwing  his  power  into  a  balance,  or  computing  it  by  a  process  of  mathematical 
calculation.     {H.  Melvill,  B.I).) 

Ver.  2.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  doeth  this. — The  blessedness  of  rigM-doing : — 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  that  doeth  this."  It  must  be  so,  for  in  doing  judgment  and 
justice  he  in  some  measure  resembles  the  blessed  God,  who  exerciseth  judgment  and 
righteousness  in  the  earth,  and  delighteth  in  these  things.  (iJ.  Macculloeh.) 
1.  Comprehensive  righteousness: — The  duties  of  the  first  table  are  typified  by  the 
observance  of  the  Sabbath  ;  those  of  the  second  table  are  signified  in  the  comprehensive 
expression,  "That  keepeth  his  hand  that  it  do  no  evil."  {Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.) 
Sabbath-keeping : — A  great  variety  of  reasons  have  been  given  for  the  special  mention  of 
the  Sabbath  here.  The  true  explanation  is  afforded  bv  a  reference  to  the  primary  and 
secondary  ends  of  the  Sabbatical  institution,  and  the  belief  involved  in  its  observance. 
1.  It  implied  a  recognition  of  Jehovah  as  the  omnipotent  Creator  of  the  universe 
(Ex.  XX.  11,  xxxi.  17).  2.  As  the  Sanctifier  of  His  people,  not  in  the  technical  or 
theological  sense,  but  as  denoting  Him  by  whom  they  had  been  set  apart  as  a  peculiar 
people  (Ex.  xxxi.  13  ;  Ezek.  xx.  12).  3.  As  the  Saviour  of  this  chosen  people  from 
the  bondage  of  Egypt  (Deut.  v.  15).  Of  these  great  truths  the  Sabbath  was  a  weekly 
remembrancer,  and  its  observance  by  the  people  a  perpetual  recognition  and  profes- 
sion, besides  the  practical  advantages  accruing  to  the  maintenance  of  a  religious 
firit  by  a  weekly  recurrence  of  a  day  of  rest.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  Sabbath-keeping  :^ 
The  duty  required.  To  keep  the  Sabbath,  to  keep  it  as  a  talent  we  are  to 
trade  with,  or  a  treasure  we  are  entrusted  with ;  keep  it  holy,  keep  it  safe,  keep  it 
with  care  and  caution,  keep  from  polluting  it ;  allow  neither  yourselves  nor  others 
either  to  violate  the  holy  rest  nor  omit  the  holy  work  of  that  day.  II.  The 
ENCOURAGEMENT  WE  HAVE  TO  DO  THIS  DUTY.  Blessed  is  he  that  doeth  it.  The 
way  to  have  the  blessing  of  God  upon  our  employments  aU  the  week  is  to  make 
conscience  and  business  of  Sabbath  sanctification  ;  and  in  doing  so  we  shall  be  the 
better  qualified  to  do  judgment  and  justice.  The  more  godliness  the  more  honesty 
(1  Tim.  ii,  2).  {M.  Henry.)  Sabbath-keeping  and  justice: — We  are  not  just  if  we 
rob  God  of  His  time.  {Ibid.)  Resoluteness  in  Sabbath  observance: — Those  that 
would  keep  the  Sabbath  from  polluting  it  must  put  on  resolution  ;  must  not  only 
do  this,  but  lay  hold  on  it,  for  Sabbath  time  is  precious  ;  but  it  is  very  apt  to  slip 
away  if  we  take  not  great  care  ;  therefore  we  must  lay  hold  on  it,  and  keep  our  hold  ; 
must  do  it,  and  persevere  in  it.  {Ibid. )  The  utility  of  the  Sabbath : — ^As  the  Sabbath 
was  instituted  while  man  was  yet  within  the  precincts  of  Paradise,  and  unseduced 
bj  the  wiles  of  the  devU,  we  are  warranted  to  conclude  that  a  day  of  holy  rest  was 


CHAP.  iTi.]  ISAIAH.  267 

useful  and  necessary  to  him,  even  in  a  state  of  innocence  ;  and  if  it  was  of  use  and 
advantage  to  him  then,  how  much  more  must  it  be  now  I  Man  is  now  become  so 
sinful,  so  earthly,  so  forgetful  of  God,  so  careless  of  his  highest  interests,  that  were 
it  not  for  the  solemnities  of  the  Sabbath,  he  would  speedily  lose  aU  sense  of  religion, 
and  utterly  neglect  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  {D.  Eees. )  An  unpolluted  Sabbath  : — 
The  text  gives  us  to  understand  that  in  order  to  keep  the  Sabbath  from  polluting  it, 
we  must  keep  our  hands  from  doing  any  evil.  Nor  can  we  suppose  that  the  day  is 
to  be  sanctified  merely  by  acts  of  negative  holiness,  but  also  by  acts  of  positive 
goodness.  [Ibid.)  Sabbaths  and  week-days: — "That  keepeth  the  Sabbath  from 
polluting  it,  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any  evil."  The  best  evidence  of  our 
having  kept  the  Sabbath  well  will  be  a  care  to  keep  a  good  conscience  all  the  week, 
(if.  Henry.)  The  blessedness  of  keeping  God's  holy  day: — What  are  we  to 
understand  by  "polluting"  the  Lord's  day?  1.  This  holy  time  is  certainly  thus 
abused  when  it  is  spent  in  mere  idleness.  2.  When  it  is  devoted  to  worldly  amuse- 
ment. 3.  Bv  all  labour  which  may  not  fairly  come  under  the  description  of  work  of 
necessity  and  mercy.  [J.  N.  Norton. )  Sabbath  observance : — A  little  boy  was  on  a  visit 
to  his  uncle,  and  when  the  morning  of  the  Lord's  Day  came,  the  uncle  said,  * '  Come, 
my  man,  you  and  I  will  go  out  and  fish  awhile  !  "  "  Uncle,"  answered  the  boy,  very 
gravely  and  somewhat  puzzled,  "  does  God  require  us  to  fish  here  on  Sunday  ? 
At  our  house  He  doesn't  allow  us  to  do  it."  The  fishing  excursion  was  given  up, 
and  good  came  of  the  child's  pointed  sermon.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  3-5.  Neither  let  the  son  of  the  stranger. — "  The  son  of  the  Granger " 
means  simply  the  individual  foreigner  (R.V.,  "the  stranger"),  not  one  whose 
father  was  a  foreigner.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  non-Israelite.  {A.  B.  Davidson, 
D.D.)  Consolation  for  proselytes: — The  case  supposed  is  that  if  a  foreigner  who 
has  "joined  himself  to  the  Lord,"  i.  e.  has  become  a  proselyte  by  accepting 
the  symbols  of  Jewish  nationality  (circumcision,  etc.),  but  now  has  reason  to 
fear  that  his  qualifications  will  be  disallowed.  It  is  likely  that  the  immediate 
cause  of  apprehension  was  some  manifestation  of  an  exclusive  and  intolerant 
spirit  amongst  the  leaders  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  Against  this  spirit  (if  it 
existed)  the  prophet's  words  enter  a  strong  protest.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
Unbelief  many  times  suggests  things  to  the  discouragement  of  good  people 
which  are  directly  contrary  to  what  God  Himself  hath  said  ;  things  which  He 
hath  expressly  guarded  against.  {M.  Henry. )  The  eunuch. — Uunuchs : — We  must 
understand  those  of  IsraeUtish  descent.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  evm^u^h  "  a  dry 
tree": — The  eunuch  being  "a  dry  tree"  feels  that  having  no  children  he  will 
have  no  permanent  place  or  name  in  the  kingdom.     {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-7.  For  thus  saith  the  lord. — Characteristics  and  privileges  of  God's 
people : — The  pride  of  ancestry,  and  boast  of  ceremonial  exclusiveness  and  glory- 
ing in  the  flesh,  the  Lord,  by  His  prophet,  looking  forward  to  Gospel  days,  now 
abolishes,  and  marks  out  the  true  distinctions  of  His  people  to  be  that  which  is  , 
moral  and  spiritual,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  bodily  defects  or  natural  peculiarities. 
Observe — I.  The  marks  and  distinctions  of  God's  people.  1.  Keeping 
the  Sabbath.  2.  Choosing  the  things  that  please  Him,  3.  Taking  hold  of 
His  covenant.  4.  Being  joined  to  Him  to  serve  Him.  5.  Loving  His  name. 
6.  Serving  Him.  II.  The  graciotts  and  glorious  privileges  of  God's  people. 
1.  Incorporation  with  His  Church.  2.  Joy  in  the  sanctuary.  3.  Acceptance  of 
their  spiritual  worship.  {J.  Gemmel,  M.A.)  And  take  hold  of  My  covenant. — 
Taking  hold  of  God's  covenard : — By  a  lively  faith,  although  the  devil  rap  her 
on  the  fingers  for  so  doing.  {J.  Traj)p.)  Holding  fast  by  God's  covenant,  (Si.Y.) : — 
"Hold  fast"  (as  ver.  2).  By  holding  fast  My  covenant  is  meant  adhering  to 
his  compact  with  Me,  which  includes  obedience  to  the  precepts  and  faith  in 
the  promises.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  Taking  hold  of  God's  covenant: — It  was 
generally  supposed  by  the  Jews  that  no  one,  except  the  descendants  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  could  be  in  covenant  relationship  with  God.  Paul,  however, 
says,  in  writing  to  the  Romans,  "But  Esaias  is  very  bold;"  and  he  is  so  in 
this  instance.  He  declares  that  men  may  take  hold  of  the  covenant  of  God 
though,  heretofore,  they  appeared  to  be  shut  out  from  its  privileges.  I.  What 
IS  THIS  covenant  1  It  has  been  well  said,  "  He  who  understands  the  covenants 
holds  the  key  of  all  theology."  There  was,  first  of  aU,  a  covenant  made  with 
our  father,  Adam ; — not,  perhaps,  in  set  terms,  but  virtually, — that,  if  he 
should  do  the  will  of  God,  he  should  lire.     Bat,  alas  1  our  great  covenant  head. 


268  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvi. 

Adam  the  first,  could  not  keep  that  covenant.  I  shotdd  think  that  none  of  xxa 
■want  to  take  hold  of  that  covenant,  for  we  are  all  sufferers  by  it  already. 
There  is  a  second  covenant,  made  with  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  by  that  covenant,  it  was  provided  that  He  should  Himself 
perfectly  keep  the  law,  and  that  He  should  suffer  the  penalty  due  from  His 
people  for  their  breaches  of  the  law;  and  that,  if  He  did  both  these  things, 
then  all  those  who  were  represented  in  Him  should  live  for  ever.  1.  The  new 
covenant  is  a  covenant  of  pure  grace.  2.  It  is  a  "covenant  ordered  in  all 
things  and  sure."  3.  The  ensign  of  this  covenant  is  faith.  II.  How  can  wb 
LAY  HOLD  OF  IT  ?  1.  I  must  loose  my  hold  of  the  old  covenant.  2.  The  main 
plan  is  by  believing  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  the  salvation  of  thy  soul.  3.  But  I 
have  known  those  laying  hold  on  the  covenant  begin  in  different  ways.  Some 
have  laid  hold  upon  it  by  a  confession  of  sin  ;  and  the  Lord  has  said,  "  He 
that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper  :  but  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh 
them  shall  have  mercy."  4.  Another  way  of  laying  hold  of  it  is,  by  seeking 
the  Lord  in  prayer.  "Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall 
be  saved."  5.  When  you  have  once  accepted  Christ,  I  like  you  to  get  a  hold 
of  the  covenant  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  We  have  only  two  hands,  but  there  are 
some  creatures  that  have  a  great  many  hands,  or  feelers,  or  suckers  ;  and  when 
they  want  to  be  quite  safe,  they  seize  hold  with  all  their  hands.  Christ  has 
made  a  covenant  with  His  Church,  and  I  like  to  lay  hold  of  that  covenant  by 
imiting  with  His  people.  It  will  be  a  great  help  to  you  to  lay  hold  of  the 
covenant  by  availing  yourself  of  all  Church  privileges.  The  right  thing  for  every 
sinner  to  say  is  just  this,  "  The  covenant  of  grace  exactly  suits  my  case.  Jesus 
Christ  has  come  to  save  the  guilty  and  the  needy ;  that  is  the  sort  of  person  I 
am,  80  I  will  lay  hold  of  His  covenant.  I  have  got  a  grip  of  it,  and  there  I 
hang.  If  His  Gospel  be  true,  I  am  a  saved  man."  III.  What  is  there  to  lay 
HOLD  OF  ?  1.  An  atonement.  2.  There  is  another  place  where  you  can  lay 
hold  of  the  covenant,  and  that  is,  the  mercy-seat.  Go  and  bow  before  God  in 
prayer,  Christ  being  your  Intercessor,  plead  with  God  for  mercy,  through  His 
atoning  blood,  and  then  say,  "  I  will  never  leave  off  praying  till  I  get  the 
blessing."  3.  It  is  also  a  grand  thing  to  lay  hold  of  a  promise  in  God's  Word. 
4.  There  is  another  thing  which  you  should  lay  hold  of,  and  that  is,  an  invitation. 
IV.  Why  should  I  not  lay  hold  of  god's  covenant  ?  1.  One  reason  for 
doing  so  is  this.  Others,  who  are  like  yourself,  have  done  so.  2.  Out  of  all 
who  have  ever  come  to  Christ,  there  has  never  been  one  rejected.  3.  You  are 
the  very  sort  of  character  that  is  bidden  to  come.  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners." 
4.  There  is  nothing  else  for  you  to  hold  to.     (C.  R.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  5.  Even  unto  them  will  I  give. — God  gives,  hiit  not  indiscriminately: — Again 
and  again  the  Lord  says  "  will  I  give,"  and  "  I  will  give."  He  is  always  giving  ;  He 
lives  to  give.  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  ;  His  hands  are  outstretched  in 
continual  dispensation  of  blessing.  Observe  here  the  usual  condition  upon  which 
great  honours  are  promised.  This  is  not  an  indiscriminate  rain  of  benediction,  clouds 
emptying  themselves  without  regard  to  character  ;  it  is  not  a  confusion  of  man  with 
man  ;  but  there  is  a  principle  of  discrimination,  election,  selection,  or  choice  running 
through  the  whole  action.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  place  and  a  name. — "  A  place" : — 
The  noun  offers  several  meanings  suitable  in  this  passage.  It  signifies  a  "  monu- 
ment "  or  "  memorial,"  as  a  lofty  indicator  or  pointer  (Ezek.  xxi.  24),  as  a  finger-post 
pointing  to  the  person  for  whom  it  has  been  erected  (2  Sam.  xviii.  18  ;  1  Sam.  xv. 
12) ;  in  this  sense,  however,  the  word  would  declare  more  than  the  promise  permits 
one  to  expect.  The  Semitic  term  also  signifies  a  place  (Num.  ii.  17  ;  Deut.  xxiii. 
12  ;  Jer.  vi.  3),  and  a  "share"  or  portion  (2  Sam.  xix.  43).  {F.  Delitzsch,  DD-) 
Gud's  promise  to  pious  eunuchs : — There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  promise  is 
to  be  understood  literally.  An  illustration  of  what  is  meant  is  found  in  2  Sam. 
xviii.  18,  where  we  read  that  Absalom,  in  the  prospect  of  dying  childless,  erected 
the  pillar  to  his  own  memory  which  was  known  as  ' '  Absalom  s  hand  "  (also  1  Sam. 
XV.  12,  R.V.  marg.).  The  case  of  those  here  spoken  of  is  precisely  similar.  They 
have  "no  son  to  keep  their  name  in  remembrance,"  but  their  memory  shall  be 
perpetuated  by  a  monument  erected  within  the  temple  walls  ;  and  such  a  memorial, 
testifying  to  the  esteem  of  the  whole  community,  is  "  better  "  (and  more  enduring) 
"  than  sons  and  daughters."  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Better  than^  sons  and 
daughters  may  either  mean  better  than  the  comfort  inunediately  derived  from 
children  (as  in  Euth  iv.  15),  or,  better  than  the  perpetuation  of  the  name  by 


CHAP.  LYi.]  JSAIAS.  269 

hereditary  succession.  Most  interpreters  prefer  the  latter  sense,  but  both  naay  be 
included.  A  beautiful  coincidence  and  pertiiLl  fulfilment  of  the  promise  is  pointed 
out  by  J.  D.  Michaelis,  in  the  case  of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch,  whose  conversion  ia 
recorded  in  Acts  viii.  7,  and  whose  memory  is  far  more  honoured  in  the  Church  than 
it  could  have  been  by  a  long  line  of  illustrious  descendants.  (/.  A.  Alexander.) 
I  will  give  them  an  everlasting  name. — Names : — Our  greatest  poet  asks,  ' '  What's  in 
a  name  ? "  but  whoever  reads  his  Bible  carefully  wOl  see  that  the  Jews  attached  very 
great  importance  to  names.  Thus  we  often  nnd  in  the  Bible  that  the  name  of  a 
person  is  used  when  the  person  himself  is  meant,  as  for  example,  "  The  name  of  the 
God  of  Jacob  defend  thee  ; — we  will  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  ; — let  their 
name  be  blotted  out  that  they  may  be  no  more  a  nation."  Jewish  parents  never 
gave  their  children  a  name  for  the  sake  of  its  sound,  but  because  it  expressed  some 
peculiarity  in  the  child,  or  some  circumstance  connected  with  its  birth,  or  some 
wish  for  its  future  career.  God  Himself  set  this  example  when  He  named  the  first 
man  Adam — "red  earth" — to  commemorate  the  fact  that  dust  he  was,  and  unto 
dust  he  should  return.  The  noblest  name: — 1.  Every  Christian  parent  who  now 
takes  a  child  to  the  font  of  baptism  should  try  and  choose  a  name  with  some  good 
meaning  in  it,  and  should  endeavour  to  bring  up  the  chUd  to  live  a  life  worthy  of 
its  name,  even  as  the  parents  of  Timothy  gave  him  a  name  which  means  "  one  who 
fears  God,"  and  early  taught  him  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  he  might  learn  what 
God  would  have  him  to  do.  2.  No  matter  what  name  our  parents  may  have  given 
us,  all  who  are  baptized  have  the  very  best  of  names.  It  is  the  name  of  Christ,  the 
name  of  *  *  Christian. "  (1 )  It  is  the  oMest  name,  older  than  all  the  Howards  or  Sydiieys 
of  England,  older  than  Saxon  or  Norman,  or  Jew,  or  Greek,  or  Roman.  The  name 
of  Christ,  which  we  bear,  is  from  everlasting.  (2)  It  is  the  noblest  name ;  most  great 
families  derive  their  name  from  some  famous  act  of  their  founder,  some  great  victory, 
or  some  wide  estate  ;  our  name  is  better  than  all,  for  we  are  named  after  the  greatest 
Conqueror,  one  who  triumphed  at  the  price  of  His  own  blood,  one  who  conquered 
Death  and  Satan,  and  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  Ijelievers.  We  are  a 
royal  family,  for  we  bear  the  name  of  the  King  of  kings,  a  better  name  than  that  of 
Caesar,  or  Pharaoh,  or  Tudor,  or  Stuart :  all  old  families  have  a  crest  and  a  coat  of 
arms,  but  our  arms  are  the  best,  and  they  are  the  Cross.  (3)  It  is  an  ever- 
lasting name  ;  some  of  the  grandest  old  names  in  England  have  died  out,  many  of  the 
proudest  family  names  are  only  to  be  seen  on  a  tomb,  but  the  name  of  our  family  will 
never  be  extinct,  it  becomes  better  known  every  year,  and  will  be  spread  far  and 
wide  till  *•  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  the  waters  cover 
the  sea."  What,  then,  is  required  of  us  who  bear  such  a  name  ?  The  son  of  a  good 
father  would  not  willingly  disgrace  the  name  which  has  been  made  famous,  so  we 
must  remember  whose  name  we  bear.    {J.  W.  Buxton.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Also  the  sons  of  the  stranger. — Gentiles  enjoying  GfocCs  favour : — ^This 
is  a  clear  prophecy  of  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  Church  of  Christ.  Let  us 
attend  to  this  description  of  those  who  are  objects  of  the  Divine  favour,  and  entitled 
to  the  privileges  of  His  house.  1.  They  join  themselves  to  the  Lord.  This  supposes 
a  former  distance  and  alienation  from  Him.  But  that  is  removed  by  humble 
repentance  and  returning  to  the  Lord.  It  includes,  renouncing  all  their  idols  ;  for- 
saking all  their  sin,  everything  contrary  to  the  nature  and  will  of  God  :  a  deliberate 
choice  of  Him,  as  their  portion  and  felicity  ;  and  of  His  people,  as  their  friends  and 
associates.  2.  The  design  of  their  thus  joining  themselves  unto  the  Lord  is  to 
serve  Him.  This  is  further  expressed  in  the  phrase,  to  be  His  servants  ;  not  only 
to  serve  Him  occasionally,  or  for  a  while,  but  perpetually  ;  to  adhere  to  Him  and 
His  ways,  from  a  deep  conviction  that  nothing  can  be  more  reasonable,  important, 
and  advantageous  than  to  hear  what  He  saith,  and  to  do  it.  3.  It  is  added,  and 
to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord.  They  take  delight  in  His  service  ;  they  perform  it 
not  from  fear  and  a  servile  dread,  but  from  a  sincere  and  strong  affection.  They 
love  His  name  ;  that  is,  they  love  him.  His  worship  and  His  ways,  and  j)ursue  His 
work  with  delight.  It  is  opposed  to  narrow,  selfish,  mercenary  views,  which  render 
the  service  less  acceptable  and  comfortable.  They  esteem  it  their  meat  and  drink 
to  do  His  will.  4.  Another  thing  expected  from  God's  people  is,  that  they  keep 
His  Sabbath  from  polluting  it.  This  is  an  essential  character,  a  distinguishing 
mark,  of  good  men.  5.  God's  people  take  hold  of  His  covenant.  They  enter  into 
serious,  deliberate,  solemn  engagements  to  observe  and  keep  His  laws,  in  order  to 
obtain  the  blessings  which  He  hath  promised  ;  and  which,  in  so  doing,  they  cheer- 
ftally  expect.    They  take  hold  of  it ;  which  implies  a  hearty  consent  to  God's  terms, 


870  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

a  oheerfal  approbation  and  acceptance  of  them  and  delight  in  thom.  It  likewise 
impliea  a  steady  resolution.  They  take  hold  of  it,  as  those  who  are  determiaed  not 
to  let  it  go.  {J.  Orton.)  The  rewards  of  God's  servants: — The  text — I.  Holds 
otTT  xmiVERSAL  ENCOTTKAGEMENT  TO  MAN.  1.  By  the  transfer  of  the  priesthood 
from  Aaron  to  Christ.  2.  By  the  change  of  sacrifice.  From  the  blood  of  bulls  and 
of  goats  to  the  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  By  the  removal  of  place.  From 
Jerusalem  to  the  temple  of  the  universe.  4.  By  a  change  of  worship.  From  ritual 
to  spiritual.  What  an  encouraging  prospect!  (Eph.  ii.  11-22.)  II.  Inctjlcates 
TTNivERSAL  PIETY.  Piety  in  heart  and  practice.  The  duties  enumerated  may  be 
divided  into  three  classes.  1.  Those  which  relate  to  Christ,  expressed  by  taking 
hold  of  His  covenant — accepting — agreeing  to  it.  2.  Those  which  relate  to  God  as 
the  Governor  of  the  world.  (1)  His  servants.  (2)  Walk  by  His  laws.  (3)  Keep  His 
Sabbaths.  3.  Those  which  relate  to  the  Church.  III.  Promises  universal 
HAPPINESS.     1.  Access  to  heaven.     "  I  will  bring  them  to  My  holy  mountain." 

2.  Joyfulness  in  His  service.     "  I  will  make  them  joyful  in  My  house  of  prayer." 

3.  The  Divine  acceptance  of  their  religious  engagements.  * '  Their  bumt-oflferings  and 
sacrifices  shall  be  accepted  upon  Mine  altar."    \R.  Watson.) 

Ver.  7.  Even  them  will  I  bring  to  My  holy  mountain. — The  house  of  prayer  ; — 
If  we  accept  the  interpretation  that  the  second  Isaiah  has  given  us  the  prophecies  of 
the  restoration,  we  may  regard  this  chapter  as  a  description  of  Israel  after  the  return 
from  the  Chaldean  captivity,  and,  further,  the  condition  of  worship  in  the  reign  of 
the  Messiah.     We  place  before  you  the  whole  matter  as  a  plea  for  God's  house  in  the 
present  day.     I.  The  location  of  worship.     "Mine  house."    With  God  every- 
where, what  need  is  there  of  setting  apart  any  particular  spot  for  worship  ?    While 
all  creation  is  God's  magnificent  temple,  why  should  we  consecrate  any  particular 
place  or  building  for  the  purpose  of  worship  ?    We  have  a  promise  in  the  Book  itself 
that  a  period  w3l  dawn  when  there  shall  be  no  need  for  exhortation  or  public  help 
(Jer.  xxxi.  33,  34).     But  we  must  suppose  conditions  of  thought,  and  degrees  of 
piety,  which  do  not  exist,  in  order  to  worship  God  in  the  general  terms  implied  in 
these  statements.   We  infer  from  the  history  of  public  worship  that  God  has  adapted 
its  forms  to  the  state  of  mankind  in  the  various  periods  of  the  past.   To-day  worship 
must  be  conducted  with  a  view  to  the  position  of  the  religious  thought  which  prevails. 
1.  The  first  essential  element  of  worship  is  concentration.     The  circumstantial  in 
religion  must  be  framed  to  centre  thought  upon  God  in  His  nearness  to  man.     The 
patriarch's  altar,  the  tabernacle  of  Moses,  and  the  temple  of  Solomon  did  this.     In 
the  teaching  of  Christ  we  meet  with  an  expansion  of  the  geography  of  worship.   The 
temples  on  Moriah  and  Gerizim  were  doomed,  both  by  the  force  of  circumstances 
and  the  Incarnation.     God  in  Christ  became  the  consummation  of  the  central  idea  of 
God.     But  Christ  was  human  as  well  as  Divine.   We  find  Him  both  in  the  synagogue 
and  the  temple.    He  drew  His  disciples  together,  sometimes  into  a  house,  other  times 
on  the  mountain  slopes,  or  in  secluded  spots,  for  instruction  and  fellowship.     He 
introduced  a  simplicity  into  worship  which  indicated  a  more  spiritual  thought  than 
that  which  obtained  when  gorgeous  ritualism  formed  its  environment.     The  time 
had  arrived  when  He  would  introduce  a  method  by  which  we  would  worship  the 
Father  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth."     But  never  has  Jesus  Christ  hinted  at  the  proba- 
bility that  such  a  worship  would  consist  of  abstract  thought,  universal  observation, 
or  individual  reflection,  apart  from  the  offices  of  time  and  space.     When  God  and 
man  meet  they  must  meet  somewhere.     Although  the  necessity  for  a  restricted  spot 
had  passed  away,  and  the  whole  earth  became  a  consecrated  temple,  when  the  eternal 
Son  chose  it  as  His  imperial  palace,  yet  the  limitations  of  the  spiritual  man,  while 
dwelling  in  a  tabernacle  of  clay,  suggest  the  setting  apart  of  places  for  worship.     In 
an  age  when  life  is  at  a  higher  pressure  than  ever  it  has  been,  and  consequently,  an 
age  when  our  thoughts  are  agitated,  scattered,  embittered,  and  inflamed,  of  what 
incalculable  value  must  the  house  of  prayer  be.     2.  Our  next  point  is  association. 
We  have  been  told  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  abstract  thought,  but  where  is 
abstract  life  ?    How  far  can  one  go  on  the  path  of  life  without  the  aid  of  others  ?    It 
seems  absurd  that  people  should  assume  so  much  piety  as  not  to  require  any  associ- 
ation or  assistance.     If  the  Hall  of  Science  is  needed,  why  not  the  Hall  of  Prayer  ? 
8.  Our  third  plea  for  the  house  of  prayer  is  memorial.     Every  place  of  worship  in 
Ihigland  is  a  vritness  to  the  Being  of  God,  and  to  His  providence  and  salvation. 
"  Mine  house  "  is  a  significant  designation,  showing  His  acceptance  of  the  gift.     It 
is  the  language  of  love  in  response  to  the  gift  of  love.     II.  The  essence  of  wor- 
"  House  of  prayer. "    Prayer  is  a  oomprehendve  term,  having  devotion  as  iti 


CHAP,  tvi.3  ISAIAH.  271 

central  idea.    There  would  have  been  an  appropriateness  in  oaUing  it  the  house  of 

{iraise,  for  from  no  other  house  has  so  much  and  so  grand  music  ascended  to  heaven, 
t  might  have  been  called  the  house  of  preaching,  because  the  word  is  gone  forth  out 
of  Zion  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.     But  why  did  God  name  it  the  house  of  prayer  ? 
Under  the  old  dispensation,  sacrifice  occupied  the  most  prominent  place  in  the 
services,  but  even  then  its  name  was  the  house  of  prayer.     Reverence  for  God  is  the 
first  step  of  the  ladder.     Waiting  upon  God  is  the  next  step.     {T.  Varies,  M.A.) 
And  make  them  joyful  in  My  house  of  prayer. — My  house  of  prayer : — Jesus  Christ, 
when  in  a  sublime  act  of  indignation  He  drove  out  the  desecrators  of  the  temple, 
applied  the  words  to  the  outer  courts  of  that  noble  material  building.     But  He 
Himself  has  taught  us  not  to  limit  the  phrase,  but  to  give  it  the  widest  possible 
meaning.     It  is  not  for  us  to  speak  of  God's  house  of  prayer  as  if  it  were  restricted 
to  any  one  locality,  or  as  if  it  described  any  particular  kind  of  structure.     God's 
house  of  prayer  may  be  found  anywhere,  everywhere.     "Wherever  the  human  heart 
reaches  out  with  holy  longing  towards  the  Divine  Father,  and  craves  the  blessing  of 
His  presence  ;  wherever  He  unveils  the  glory  of  His  truth  and  the  beauty  of  His 
love,  responding  to  the  eager  desires  of  His  pleading  children,  there  is  His  house  of 
prayer.     It  may  be  grand  in  form,  or  poor  and  mean ;  there  may  be  no  material 
structure  at  aU,  but  the  solemn  temple  of  Nature  itself,  yet  shall  it  be  consecrated 
for  worship  by  the  prayers  which  ascend  to  God.     Yet,  we  still  find  it  necessary  to 
establish  and  set  apart  places  of  worship,  and  because  we  frequent  them  for  this 
holiest  of  purposes,  we  speak  of  each  of  them  as  a  house  of  prayer.   As  it  is  necessary 
that  we  should  consecrate  one  day  out  of  the  week  for  the  special  purposes  of  religion, 
80  we  find  it  desirable  to  meet  at  some  regularly  appointed  spot  to  engage  with  our 
fellows  in  acts  of  devotion.     And  the  reasonableness  becomes  apparent.     We  want 
such  places  for  convenience'  sake.     If  social  religion  is  to  have  any  existence  at  all, 
if  the  communion  of  the  saints  is  to  be  a  reality,  if  there  are  to  be  united  praise  and 
prayer  and  instruction  in  Divine  truth,  then  men  and  women  must  know  where  they 
are  to  gather  for  these  purposes.     Further,  it  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  convenience  ; 
it  is  helpful  to  our  spiritual  and  daily  life.     We  want  as  places  of  worship  some 
which  are  unassociatea  with  our  secular  affairs — places  which  seem  to  stand  away 
from  the  cares  and  worries  and  strivings  of  our  common  life — where  we  can  give  our 
minds  and  hearts  a  season  of  rest — an  opportunity  of  calmly,  and  without  distrac- 
tion, contemplating  and  estimating  the  character  and  meaning,  the  worth  or  worth- 
lessness  of  the  work  we  are  doing  in  the  world.     Of  course  this  might  be  done  at 
home,  in  the  shop,  in  the  ofl5ce,  in  the  chamber,  but  not  so  effectually,  not  so 
thoroughly,  as  in  the  quiet  place  specially  devoted  to  religious  worship.     There, 
seeming  to  stand  at  a  distance  from  worldly  avocations,  we  judge  them  and  our 
relation  to  them  more  impartially  and  honestly.     ( W.   Braden. )    Joyfulness  in 
worship: — I.  There  should  be  a  natural  association  between  the  two.    I 
reach  this  conclusion  by  remembering  two  things.     1.  That  we,  as  human  beings, 
have  in  us  the  capacity  for  joy.   2.  That  the  religion  we  profess,  when  rightly  under- 
stood, is  a  joy-producing  religion.   II.  Worship  is  the  expression  of  our  noblest 
RELIGIOUS  feelings  IN  THE  PRESENCE  OP  GoD.     It  is  not  a  mere  ceremonial  act,  an 
observance  of  prescribed  ritual  on  certain  days  and  in  appointed  places.     It  is  the 
going  forth  of  the  man  towards  God.     Therefore,  our  joy  must  utter  itself,  ought  to 
utter  itself,  when  we  enter  into  the  courts  of  His  house.     I  believe  that  the  Divine 
Father  has  no  sympathy  with  those  who  would  turn  His  house  of  prayer  into  a  place 
for  gloomy,  and  unhappy  thoughts,  and  who  would  exclude  from  His  service  every- 
thing pleasant  and  beautiful.     They  misunderstand  and  libel  Him  by  their  desire 
for  dreariness.     If  God  has  taught  us  anything  with  distinctness  in  the  outer  world 
of  nature  it  is  that  He  loves  all  that  is  pleasant  and  sweet  and  joyous.     Is  there  not 
something  joy-exciting  in  the  very  thought  and  act  of  worship  ?    This  has  been  the 
thought  of  most  peoples.     1.  The  Greeks  who  worshipped  gods  of  uncertain  passions 
and  dispositions,  nevertheless  seem  to  have  made  the  worship  a  season  of  joy — "  they 
wreathed  themselves  with  flowers,  they  anointed  themselves  with  sweet  perfumes, 
they  surrounded  their  temples  with  every  attraction,  they  invoked  every  pleasure 
they  could  think  of,  the^  sought  to  make  the  hour  of  their  worship  a  charming  and 
beautiful  hour."    Their  joy  in  this  respect  was  of  a  sensuous  character,  more  animal 
than  spiritual,  and  we  do  not  need  to  imitate  them  ;  but  even  the  heathen  had  the 
idea  of  indulging  in  gladness  in  the  presence  of  their  gods.     2.  The  same  emotion 
was  constantly  expressed  by  the  Hebrews.    We  often  regard  the  religion  of  the  Jews 
•8  harsh,  stem,  dreary,  a  constant  pressure  upon  the  minds  and  souls  of  the  people. 
Never  was  there  a  greater  mistake,  as  a  carefid  study  of  their  numerous  festivals  and 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvi. 

rites  woTild  prove.  Remember  the  worship-literature  of  the  Jews,  that  magnificent 
collection  of  psalms  which  is  one  of  the  most  precious  treasures  handed  down  to  us 
from  the  past.  It  is  full  of  jubilance.  Expressions  of  personal  sorrow  there  are  in 
abundance  ;  but  even  they  are  turned  into  subjects  of  song.  3.  If  it  was  possible 
for  Jews  to  enjoy  worship,  if  it  was  natural  for  them  to  give  expression  to  gladness 
of  heart  when  coming  into  the  Divine  presence,  is  there  not  more  abundant  reason 
why  we,  as  Christians,  possessing  a  fuller  and  purer  and  more  intimate  revelation  of 
God,  should  rejoice  before  Him  ?    III.  Fob  those  who  seek  to  worship  God  in 

SPIRIT  AND  IN  TRUTH  THIS  JOT  IS  ASSURED  BY  THE   PROMISE,  "  I  will  make  thom 

joyful  in  My  house  of  prayer."  Our  anticipation  of  the  worship  of  God's  house,  and 
the  manner  in  which  we  present  ourselves  to  Him,  should  be  gladsome.  Why? 
Because  we  go  expecting  to  meet  God,  and  receive  the  gracious  fulfilment  of  the 
promise.  Our  hope  of  blessing  to  come  already  fills  us  with  delight.  When  we 
nave  entered  into  the  engagements  of  Divine  worship,  if  we  have  been  in  the  right 
spirit  of  desire,  God  has  drawn  near  us  and  fulfilled  our  largest  hopes.  He  has 
apparently  devised  the  means  by  which  this  shall  be  brought  about  through  the 
three  exercises  of  our  worship — our  praise,  our  prayer,  and  our  study  of  His  truth. 
These  seem  in  themselves  calculated,  ordained,  consecrated  for  the  very  object  of 
exciting  our  joy.  1.  Think  of  the  very  act  of  praise.  What  does  it  mean  ?  That  we 
are  recalling  to  mind  the  Divine  mercy,  and  tenderness,  and  compassion,  and  love 
which  have  come  into  onr  life.  We  praise  God  for  what  He  is  ;  for  what  His  works 
reveal  Him  to  be  ;  for  what  He  has  done  for  us  ;  and  you  cannot  do  that  without 
some  inspiration  of  gladness  filling  your  soul.  Praise  itself  springs  from  and  excites 
to  joy.  2.  The  same  glorious  result  is  wrought  by  means  of  prayer.  That  man  who 
has  never  vet  held  conscious  communion  with  his  God  in  prayer,  has  never  yet 
experienced  one  of  the  noblest  and  purest  joys  of  which  his  nature  is  capable. 
3.  And  shall  I  add  the  same  of  the  other  exercise — the  study  of  His  truth  ?  As  the 
man  who,  digging  for  gold,  is  flushed  with  delight  when  his  toil  is  rewarded  by  some 
rich  nugget ;  as  the  student  of  Nature,  when  investigating  her  secrets,  is  gladdened 
as  he  perceives  the  traces  of  some  new  law,  or  a  possible  combination  of  well-known 
causes  that  will  produce  a  new  result,  so  Christians  know  the  thrill  of  satisfaction 
that  springs  from  a  fresh  realization  of  the  meaning  of  Divine  truth.  God  stands 
revealed  in  clearer  light,  and  all  the  wonders  of  His  work  for  man  through  the 
history  of  the  world,  and  especially  in  the  person  of  Christ,  are  understood  and  loved 
as  they  were  never  understood  or  loved  before.  These  awakenings  to  joy  are 
always  taking  place  in  God's  house.  One  comes  there  perplexed  concerning  his 
path  of  duty,  and  to  him  there  is  uttered  some  wise  precept,  which  makes  the  way 
clear  once  more.  Another  is  troubled  concerning  the  terrible  mystery  of  life,  its 
inequalities  and  sorrows  ;  but  to  him  is  revealed  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  that 
means  perfect  love  and  assurance  of  blessedness  for  man  as  the  ultimate  issue  of  all 
things.  Does  not  that  oppressed  soul  rejoice?  And  how  many,  conscious  of 
unforgiven  sin,  venture  into  the  holy  place.  And  they  see  a  vision  of  Calvary 
with  its  sacred  Victim ;  the  heavens  seem  to  open  for  them,  and  they  behold 
the  ascended  Christ,  the  Mediator.  Who  shall  measure  the  joy  of  these  ?  {Ihid.) 
Mine  honse  shall  be  called  an  house  of  prayer  for  all  people. — Ood^s  house : — The 
thing  here  spoken  of  is  God's  house,  described — I.  By  its  appropriation  unto 
Him.  "My  house."  II.  By  its  extent  of  recbipt  in  respect  of  others. 
"For  all  people."  III.  By  the  employment  of  its  inhabitants.  "It  shall  be 
called  a  house  of  prayer."  {J.  Owen,  D.D.)  The  Church  of  Christ: — I.  Christ's 
Church  of  saints,  of  believers,  is  God's  house.    II.  The  Church  of  Christ 

UNDER  THE  GoSPEL  IS  TO  BE  GATHERED  OUT  OF  ALL  NATIONS.  III.  THERE  ARE 
ESTABLISHED  ORDINANCES,  AND  APPOINTED  WORSHIP  FOR  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST 
UNDER  THE  GosPEL.  {Ibid. )  FuMic  worship : — I  shall  endeavour  to  make  it  appear 
that  the  best  homage  which  we  can  pay  to  God  is  that  which  is  most  public. 
I.  This  is  the  way  of  giving  the  greatest  honour  to  God.  When  a  multitude 
of  people  meet  together  to  worship  the  Almighty,  and  to  set  forth  His  praises,  il- 
makes  some  little  figure  of  heaven  ;  it  raises  our  minds  to  more  magnificent  concep 
tions  of  God,  and  more  fully  represents  Him  to  us  as  the  Governor  of  the  world 
whereas,  if  we  look  upon  Him  as  only  intending  our  private  interest,  as  busied  only 
to  serve  our  present  wants,  we  may  be  thought  to  conceive  of  Him  rather  as  an  idol 
than  as  that  infinite  Being  whose  care  and  providence  are  extended  to  the  concerns 
of  the  whole  creation.  "To  worship  God  truly  is  to  make  Him  known  to  be  the  Lord 
of  the  universe,  the  common  Parent,  Preserver,  and  Benefactor  of  all  mankind  ;  and 
therefore  public  assemblies  are  the  best  signification  of  His  glorious  perfections  and 


CBAT.vrh]  ISAIAH,  S78 

vast  dominion.  They  who  cannot  use  their  minds  to  any  abstracted  ways  of  think- 
ing,  may  be  wonderfully  confirmed  and  heightened  in  their  acknowledgments  and 
thoughte  of  a  Deity,  when  they  see  how  the  learned  and  the  rich  and  the  honourable, 
and  the  greatest  persons  upon  the  earth,  do  bow  and  kneel  before  their  Maker,  and 
humble  themselves  in  the  dnst  of  the  sanctuanr  to  witness  their  profound  veneration 
of  an  infinite  wisdom,  power  and  goodness.  II.  The  nature  of  religion  is  such 
THAT  IT  ESPECIALLY  REQiTiRES  A  PUBLIC  EXERCISE.  Christians  are  not  to  look  upon 
themselves  as  single  persons,  of  distinct  and  separate  interests  ;  but  as  members  of 
the  same  mystical  Body,  as  parts  of  the  same  spiritual  Society ;  that  they  are 
redeemed  as  a  Church,  and  are  to  glorify  God  as  a  Church  ;  that  their  chief  blessings 
are  those  they  enjoy  in  common.  III.  There  is  nothing  that  so  much  pro- 
motes A  spirit  of  universal  charity  as  a  due  esteem  and  practice  of 
public  worship.  What  can  bring  ns  to  a  greater  concern  for  one  another,  and 
more  unite  our  afifections,  than  a  frequent  meeting  at  the  same  place  of  worship,  and 
joining  together  in  the  same  duties  of  religion  ?  IV.  Frequenting  public  wor- 
ship, with  that  preparation  and  with  those  dispositions  which  it  re- 
quires, IS  the  best  way  whereby  we  may  attain  to  solid  piety.  We  have 
many  times  a  Divine  truth  more  strongly  imprinted  on  our  minds,  or  more  fully 
confirmed  unto  us,  when  our  hearts  are  tender  and  devout,  than  when  our  heads  are 
exercised  in.  the  deepest  thinking.  It  is  farther  observable,  that  men  are  generally 
mu6h  more  subject  to  impressions  and  afiections  when  they  are  assembled  than 
when  they  are  alone.  ( T.  Mannitigham,  D.D.)  God's  house  (he  house  of  prayer  for 
all  people: — 1.  In  order  to  the  realization  of  the  glorious  scene  in  which  the  world 
shall  fiiiallv  be  seen  prostrate  before  God  in  prayer,  the  first  and  earliest  step  neces- 
sary was  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  existence ;  "for  he  that  cometh  to  God  must 
beheve  that  He  is."  "How  shall  they  call  upon  Him  of  whom  they  have  not 
heard  ? "  2.  But  does  He  take  an  interest  in  the  aflairs  of  the  world  f  If  not, 
prayer  to  Him  is  useless.  In  answer  to  this  inquiry  Sinai  rises  to  view.  ■  God  is 
there,  legislating  for  sinfiil-man.  Listen  to  His  law  as  He  proclaims  it,  and  mark 
how  much  of  it  relates  directly  to  your  welfare.  Apart  from  the  Gospel,  nothing  in 
the  universe  displays  the  Divine  benevolence  so  much  as  the  giving  of  the  law.  3.  But 
is  the  great  God  accessible  ?  That  He  takes  a  benevolent  interest  in  human  affairs  is 
evident.  If,  however,  the  terrors  of  Sinai  are  not  laid  aside — if  that  is  a  specimen  of 
His  usual  stat<>— who  can  venture  to  approach  Him  ?  The  temple  on  Sion  is  an  answer 
to  the  inquiry.  "  Let  the  people  build  Me  a  sanctuary,"  saith  God,  "  that  I  may  dwell 
among  them."  This  was  another  stage,  a  vast  advance  in  the  Divine  condescension. 
To  show  His  own  sense  of  its  importance,  He  supplied  the  model,  and  selected  the 
spot,  and  superintended  the  erection  of  the  building.  When  completed,  the  Majesty 
of  Heaven  came  down  and  visibly  took  possession.  When  it  was  rumoured  abroad 
that  the  Lord  of  Heaven  had  a  house  upon  earth,  did  not  the  guilty  race  come  to 
cast  themselves  at  His  feet  and  sue  for  mercy  ?  4.  But,  it  might  have  been  asked  in 
the  next  place,  ' '  WiU  He  pardon  ?  Accessible  He  may  be,  but  is  He  propitious  ? " 
Approach  and  read  the  inscription  over  its  gates,  "The  house  of  prayer."  Then 
there  is  hope  for  the  penitent.  Let  us  enter  and  ascertain.  On  crossing  the  thresh- 
old and  looking  around,  we  find  that  it  is  distributed  into  three  parts.  We  find 
ourselves  at  first  in  the  court  of  the  temple  ;  here  the  principal  objects  are  a  great 
altar  of  sacrifice,  and  a  laver  in  which  the  sacrifices  are  washed.  "  What  mean  that 
cleansing  water,  and  that  bleeding  lamb  ? "  They  say,  as  plainly  as  they  can,  that 
"without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sins,"  and  that  the  victim 
whose  blood  is  shed  must  be  spotless.  We  advance,  and  find  ourselves  in  the  second 
part,  the  holy  place.  Here  the  principal  objects  are  a  golden  candlestick,  a  table  of 
shewbread,  and  an  altar  of  incense  ;  and  what  mean  these  objects  ?  They  denote 
that  the  sacrifice  is  accepted,  that  God  is  propitiated,  that  He  is  waiting  to  illumin- 
ate and  anoint  His  worshippers  with  His  Spirit,  to  feast  their  souls  on  living  bread, 
and  to  accept  their  praises  as  grateful  incense.  "  But  what  means  that  mysterious 
veil  which  conceals  the  third  part  of  the  temple,  the  holiest  of  all  ? "  It  denotes 
that  sinful  man  can  fully  approach  a  holy  God  only  through  a  IDivine  Mediator,  and 
that  that  Mediator  is  not  yet  come.  But  we  know  what  is  within.  There  stands 
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  the  mercy-seat  resting  upon  it,  denoting  mercy  resting 
on  faithfulness  ;  and  there  are  the  cherubim  overshadowing  the  mercy-seat,  intimat- 
ing the  reverence  with  which  even  mercy  itself  should  be  sought,  and  the  profound 
mystery  which  it  involves.  "  But  what  means  that  mass  of  dazzling  light  above  ? " 
It  is  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  "  And  why  dwells  He  there  ? "  That  men 
may  come  and  fall  down  before  Him,  and  that  He  may  commune  with  them  from 

VOL.  III.  18 


274  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvi. 

off  the  mercy-seat.  He  makes  it  His  rest,  that  men  may  come  to  Him,  and  make  it 
their  rest.     Numbers  through  successive  ages  availed  themselves  of  His  grace. 

5.  But  everything  there — gracious  as  it  was,  calculated  as  it  was  to  bring  all  people  in 
homble  prostration  before  God — existed  only  in  type  and  promise.  It  may  be  asked, 
therefore,  in  the  next  place,  "  Have  those  types  been  accomplished  ? "  The  fulness  of 
time  arrives,  and,  behold,  God  sending  forth  His  Son  I  Calvaiy  appears  ;  there,  as 
our  Substitute  ;  He  is  making  an  infinite  compensation  for  our  aemerit.  The  day  of 
Pentecost  arrives — behold  in  its  scenes  a  proof  that  our  Advocate  has  entered  on  His 
office  of  intercession  above,  and  that  His  sacrificial  plea  prevails.  Is  it  then  still 
asked  if  the  ancient  promises  have  been  fulfilled  ?  Let  the  tears  of  the  sinner,  the 
joy  of  the  saint,  the  success  of  the  Gospel  in  every  subsequent  age,  bear  witness. 

6.  But,  again,  adinitting  that  God  is  thus  accessible  and  gracious,  is  He  thus  accessible 
and  gracious  to  all  ?  Is  the  Gosppl  Church  less  open  and  free  than  the  Jewish 
temple?  Its  gates  are  never  to  be  shut,  night  nor  dayl  Its  blessings  are  to  be 
offered  without  money  and  without  price.  "My  house  shall  be  called  a  house  of 
prayer  for  all  people."     '*  0  Thou  that  hearest  prayer,  to  Thee  shall  all  flesh  come." 

7.  And  is  there  ground  to  conclude  that  this  sublime  result  shall  be  realized ?  "I 
have  sworn  by  Myself,  the  word  hath  gone  out  of  My  mouth  in  righteousness,  and 
shall  not  return.  That  unto  Me  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall  swear." 
Conclusion — (1)  To  this  point  everything  in  the  mediatorial  government  of  Christ  is 
tending  with  the  directness  and  force  of  a  law.  To  this  end,  therefore,  every  event 
in  His  Church,  every  movement  of  His  people,  should  be  intentionally  subordinated. 
(2)  The  question  wul  be  entertained,  then,  by  every  Christian  mind,  How  may  this 
sacred  place  be  made  most  effectually  to  subserve  this  great  end?  By  makmg  it 
literally  a  house  of  prayer.  The  very  presence  of  a  church  or  chapel  is  to  be  viewed 
as  a  perpetual  protest  against  all  prayerlessness  and  irreligion.  (3)  Here  everything 
is  to  be  done  with  the  view  of  leading  to  prayer.  (4)  Here,  too,  the  salvation  of  the 
world,  and  whatever  may  be  instrumentally  necessary  to  that  salvation,  should  be 
made  the  subject  of  prayer.     {J.  Harris,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  The  Lord  Ood  whieh  gathereth  the  ontoasts  of  Israel  saith. — An 
important  Divine  declaration: — "Declaration  of  the  Lord,  Jehovah:  gathering 
the  outcasts  of  Israel,  I  will  further  gather  beyond  it  to  its  gathered  ones."  That 
ver.  8  declares  something  of  importance,  and,  because  it  might  possibly  seem 
strange,  something  to  be  solemnly  confirmed,  is  shown  by  the  expression,  which 
is  in  itself  solemn,  and  is  here  placed  at  the  head  of  the  declaration.  So  far  is  it 
from  being  the  case  that  Gentiles  who  love  Jehovah  will  be  excluded  from  the 
congregation,  that  it  is  rather  the  design  of  Jehovah  to  gather  some  from  among 
the  Gentiles  and  add  them  to  the  gathered  diaspora  of  Israel.  The  double  name 
of  God  likewise  points  to  something  important.  {F.  Belitzsch,  D.D.)  Others  to  be 
gathered : — God's  work  now  is  that  of  gathering.  There  was  a  time  when  it  was 
scattering.  Man  built  the  tower  of  Babel,  which  was  intended  to  be  the  centre 
of  unity,  the  armoury  of  power,  and  the  seat  of  dominion,  whence  some  mighty 
Nimrod  might  sway  ms  sceptre  over  aU  the  human  race :  but  the  Lord  would  not 
have  it  so.  Infinite  wisdom  baffled  finite  ambition.  Now  the  Lord  is  gathering 
together  in  one  the  children  of  God  which  are  scattered  abroad.  Jesus  hath  made 
both  Jew  and  Gentile  one,  breaking  down  every  wall  of  partition.  This  ingathering 
process  is  going  on  every  day  by  the  testimony  of  the  Word,  and  it  is  to  be  con- 
tinued until  the  end  of  time.  I.  The  instances  mentioned  :  instances  ol 
gathering  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  who  is  described  as  "The  Lord  God  which 
gathereth  the  outcasts  of  Israel."  Outcasts  have  been  gathered,  and  this  is  the 
token  that  others  shall  be  gathered.  I  suppose  Isaiah  first  alludes  to  the  banished 
who  had  been  carried  away  captive  to  Babylon  and  to  all  parts  of  the  East,  but  who 
were  at  different  times  restored  to  their  land.  But  I  prefer  to  use  the  text  in 
reference  to  our  Divine  Lord,  seeing  that  to  Him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people 
be.  1.  When  He  was  here  below  He  gathered  the  outcasts  of  Israel  by  His  ministrv. 
2.  He  gathered  them  by  forgiving  their  sins.  This  brought  them  nearer  stiU, 
and  held  them  there.  3.  Our  Lord  gathered  many  by  graciously  helping  them. 
He  met  with  some  whose  great  trial  was  sore  affliction,  temptation  and  sorrow. 
Ms^dalene  is  a  chief  instance.  4.  He  gathered  them,  also,  so  as  to  enrol  them 
under  His  banner.  It  was  a  marvellous  moment  for  Levi,  when  he  sat  at  the 
receipt  of  custom,  when  Jesus  called  him.  You  will,  perhaps,  think  that  my 
Master's  gathering  power  lay  in  His  being  here  Himself.  It  is  true  there  was  a 
matchless  charm  about  Him,  and  jet  to  let  us  know  that  we  must  know  Him  no  longer 


CHAP.  Lvi.]  JSAIAH.  275 

after  the  flesh,  there  was  not  even  in  the  charms  of  Christ's  most  blessed  Person 
enough  of  power  to  prevent  the  people  crying,  "Crucify  ECim,  craoify  Him."  His 
power  is  spiritual,  the  power  of  His  own  Spirit,  and  therefore  it  is  exercised  now 
though  His  bodily  presence  is  removed.  II.  The  promise  uttered.  "The  Lord 
God  which  gathereth  the  outcasts  of  Israel  saith,"  etc.  1.  This  promise  is  very 
wide.  It  means  in  the  first  place  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  brought  to  know  the 
Lord.  It  was  a  bright  day  when  first  of  all  the  centurion  of  Caesarea  sent  men 
to  Joppa,  and  received  a  visit  from  Peter,  and  was  baptized  of  him.  Fair  also  was 
the  day  when  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  was  baptized  of  Philip.  How  strange  it  must 
have  seemed  at  first  to  the  apostles,  who  were  all  Jews,  and  very  strongly  Jewish 
too,  especially  Peter,  to  see  the  Gentiles  gathered.  One  marvels  that  Paid  was 
not  more  narrow  in  heart,  considering  his  birth  and  education,  but  he  had  vanquished 
his  old  notions,  and  gloried  in  being  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is  delightful 
to  think  of  men  of  divers  colours  coming  to  Christ,  and  in  the  best  possible  manner 
proving  the  unity  of  our  race.  What  would  the  twelve  have  thought  if  they  could 
have  foreseen  that  the  Gospel  which  they  preached  would  bind  in  one  brotherhood 
all  races  of  men?  2.  The  promise  is  pontinuous.  "Yet  will  I  gather  others." 
That  was  true  when  Isaiah  stated  it ;  it  would  have  been  true  if  Peter  had  quoted 
it  on  the  morning  of  Pentecost.  It  was  quite  true  when  Carey  acted  upon  it,  and 
started  on  what  men  thought  his  mad  enterprise,  to  go  as  a  consecrated  cobbler 
to  convert  the  learned  Brahmins  of  India.  It  is  quite  as  true  now.  If  the  promise 
had  been  written  this  morning  and  the  ink  were  not  yet  dry  it  would  be  no  more 
true  than  it  is  now : — "  Yet  will  I  gather  others  to  Him."  3.  The  promise  is  most 
graciously  encouraging,  because  it  evidently  applies  very  pointedly  to  outcasts. 
Has  there  strayed  into  this  house  of  prayer  an  outcast  from  society  ?  Hearken  thou 
to  this  word.  But  if  not  an  outcast  from  society,  it  may  be  you  are  an  outcast 
in  your  own  esteem.  4.  The  promise  is  absolute.  This  is  the  kind  of  language 
which  only  an  omnipotent  being  can  use  as  to  men's  minds.  III.  The  facts  which 
SUSTAIN  OUE  faith  IN  THIS  PROMISE.  1.  The  perpetuity  of  the  Gospel.  Still  is 
the  good  news  preached  among  you.  2.  The  blood  of  atonement  has  not  lost  its 
power.  3.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  with  us  still.  4.  The  glory  and  majesty  of  the 
Gospel,  or  rather  the  greatness  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  Gospel,  demands  that  many 
more  should  be  gathered  than  have  as  yet  been  enfolded  in  the  Church.  5.  There 
must  be  many  more  souls  to  be  ingathered  because  of  the  longings  of  the  saints. 
They  are  not  satisfied  unless  they  see  conversions.  The  Church  needs  more  conversions. 
We  never  prosper  as  a  Church  unless  we  have  a  fresh  stream  of  yoimg  blood  running 
into  us.  IV.  The  conduct  consistent  with  this  promise.  1.  To  believe  it, 
and  then  to  pray  about  it.  2.  If  you  pray,  you  must  work,  for  prayer  without 
endeavour  is  hypocrisy.  3.  Expect  to  see  others  gathered.  4.  Those  who  have  not 
yet  been  gathered  should  be  encouraged  to  hope.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  9-12.  All  ye  beasts  of  the  field,  come  to  devour. — The  defenceless  condition 
of  the  comrmmiiy  owing  to  the  incompetence  of  its  spirittial  leaders: — 1.  All  the  wild 
beasts  of  the  field  and  the  forest  are  invited  to  come  and  devour  the  unprotected  flock. 
2.  For  its  rulers  neglect  their  duty ;  they  are  inefiicient  as  dumb  dogs ;  they  are 
slothful,  greedy,  and  sensual.  3.  In  consequence  of  their  incapacity  the  righteous 
perish,  none  regarding  their  fate  (chap.  IviL  1,  2).  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The 
metaphor  of  wild  beasts : — The  people  being  represented  in  the  foUowiug  verses  as  a 
flock,  their  destroyers  are  naturally  represented  here  as  wild  beasts.  {J.  A. 
Alexander.)  That  a  new  chastisement  at  the  hands  of  the  heathen  is  actually  con- 
templated need  not  be  assumed.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  flock:  its  guardiama 
a/nd  its  devourers : — These  words  (ver.  9)  are  to  be  understood  as  a  note  of  warning, 
a  sound  of  alarm.  It  is  not  that  God  wishes  His  flock  to  be  devoured  that  He  thus 
summons  the  beasts  of  prey  to  gather  round  the  fold ;  on  the  contrary,  He  is  con- 
cerned for  thefr  safety,  and  warns  them  of  the  danger  in  which  they  stand.  No  style 
of  address  was  better  fitted  to  startle  both  flock  and  shepherds  from  their  careless 
security.  God's  flock  is  stiU  surrounded  by  ravenous  beasts.  I.  The  unprotected 
state  of  the  flock.  1.  In  the  case  before  us  the  sheep  are  shamefully  neglected. 
2.  The  opposite  course  must  tend  to  secure  the  safety  and  well-being  of  the  flock. 
Pray,  then,  for  your  minister.  II.  The  wild  beasts  that  threaten  to  devoub 
THE  FLOCK.  Some  are  open  and  undisguised ;  others  are  wily  and  insidious. 
Conclusion :  We  point  you  to  the  Chief  Shepherd.    ( W.  Qvihrie,  M.A.) 

Yen.  10,  11.  His  watchmen  are  blind. — The  old  Hebrew  pulpit  a  beaeon  to  vudem 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ltx. 

precushen  (with  Jer.  viii.  11): — I.  The  old  Hebrew  pulpit  at  this  time  was 
lONOKANT.  The  "watchmen  "  are  said  to  be  "blind"  and  "ignorant."  They  did 
not  see  and  "understand  "  the  things  that  ought  to  have  been  clear  to  their  vision 
and  intelligible  to  their  judgment.  An  ignorant  pulpit,  though  a  contradiction  in 
terms,  has  ever  been  too  prevalent.  There  may  be  profound  pulpit  ignorance  where 
there  are  the  most  distinguished  scholastic  acquirement  and  literary  charms.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  may  be  considerable  pulpit  intelligence  where  there  is  but 
a  very  smaU  degree  of  mere  scholastic  attainment.  Many  a  noble-souled,  Gospel- 
inspired  man,  who  knew  no  book  but  the  Bible,  no  language  but  his  own,  and  could 
not  speak  even  that  with  grammatical  propriety,  has  done  the  true  work  of  the 
pulpit.  That  pulpit  is  an  ignorant  pulpit  that  does  not  "discern  the  things  of  the 
Spirit " — things  tnat  the  Spirit  of  God  approves,  and  the  spirit  of  man  requires. 
I  call  that  an  ignorant  pulpit  which  ministers  to  the  speculative  in  man  rather  than 
to  the  spiritual,  to  the  intellect  rather  than  the  heart,  and  presents  a  dead  creed 
rather  than  a  living  Christ.  I  call  that  an  ignorant  pulpit  which  ministers  to  sects 
rather  than  to  souls,  represents  Christ  as  one  sent  to  save  a  favourite  few,  rather 
than  as  "the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  I  caU  that  an 
ignorant  pulpit  that  does  not  practically  feel  that  all  Divine  truth  to  man  is  but 
infinite  love  for  man  speaking  through  the  intellect  to  the  heart.  II.  The  old 
Hebbbw  pulpit  AT  THIS  TIME  WAS  MARKED  BY  SLOTHFULNESS.  The  watchmeu  are 
called  "dimib  dogs  that  cannot  bark."  It  is  because  these  animals  have  ever  been 
used  by  man  as  sentinels  whose  bark  warns  of  approaching  danger ;  and  because 
they  are  only  useful  as  they  bark,  that  they  are  employed  as  symbols  of  indolent 
preachers.  There  are  men  who,  when  they  speak,  speak  with  a  drowsy  soul,  and 
their  words  are  somnific.  Perhaps  there  are  more  in  these  times  dumb  from 
expediency  than  from  slothfiilness.  They  echo  only  the  opinions  that  are  current 
in  their  Church.  They  add  nothing  to  the  stock  of  Christian  intelligence.  III.  The 
OLD  Hebrew  pulpit  at  this  time  was  marked  by  selfish  greed.  "Yea  they 
are  greedy  dogs  which  can  never  have  enough,"  etc.  Such  strong  language  expresses 
their  ravenous  selfishness.  It  would  seem  that  these  corrupt  prophets  cared  for  no  one 
but  themselves.  How  stands  the  modem  pulpit  in  this  respect  ?  This  selfish  greed 
shows  itself  in  other  ways  besides  the  striving  after  "filthy  lucre."  There  is  the 
greed  for  popularity.  IV.  The  old  Hebrew  pulpit  at  this  time  was  marked 
BY  superficiality.  "They  have  healed  the  daughter  of  My  people  slightly." 
Dr.  Blaney,  in  his  translation,  substitutes  the  word  "superficially  for  "slightly." 
Although  these  words  are  taken  from  another  book  they  refer  to  the  same  subject, 
and  to  the  same  class  of  men.  The  words,  however,  from  Isaiah  describe  their 
character,  these  words  describe  their  work.  They  did  something,  but  it  was  partial 
and  ineffective.  They  did  not  seek  to  eradicate  the  disease,  but  merely  administered 
temporary  palliatives,  which,  whilst  they  deadened  the  pain,  fostered  the  virus  of  the 
malady.  The  idea  undoubtedly  is,  that  instead  of  endeavouring  to  work  into  the  moral 
heart  of  the  people  profound  convictions  as  to  the  enormity  of  their  sins,  and 
fulminate  in  their  ears  the  righteous  denunciations  of  Heaven,  they  presented 
considerations  of  false  comfort.  This  superficial  healing  of  souls  is  an  immense 
injury.  It  deludes  the  patient.  It  wastes  the  restorative  season.  That  pulpit  is 
superficial  which  fails  either  to  generate  supreme  love  to  the  great  God  in  hearts 
where  it  is  not,  or  to  strengthen  it  in  hearts  where  it  is.     {HomUist.) 

Ver.  12.  To-morrow^shall  be  as  this  day. — Faith  ami  preswnyption : — The  future 
is  very  differently  contemplated  by  different  individuals.  Men  of  a  sanguine 
temperament  gild  it  with  golden  visions  that  are  never  realized.  Such  persons 
meet  with  many  disappointments.  It  is  quite  right  to  expect  good  in  the  future, 
providing  we  eagerly  seize  the  opportunities  and  avail  ourselves  of  the  advantages  of 
the  present.  But  it  is  in  the  field  of  to-day  that  we  must  sow  the  seed  of  what  we 
are  to  reap  on  the  morrow.  Men  of  a  directly  opposite  temperament  are  constantly 
foreboding  evil.  This  desponding  disposition  is  itself  a  very  heavy  burden  to  bear. 
If  there  be  evil  in  the  future,  it  doubles  it  by  the  anticipation,  and  the  anticipation 
is  frequently  a  heavier  burden  than  is  the  reality  ;  and  if  the  future  brings  no  such 
evil,  we  have  been  carrying  a  burden,  when  in  reality  there  was  no  burden  to  bear. 
How  wise  are  the  words  of  Jesus,  "Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,"  etc.  Both 
these  dispositions  need  to  be  corrected.  There  is  still  another  class  who  are  morally 
reckless  about  the  future.  This  results  neither  from  temperament  nor  imagination, 
but  from  their  moral  condition  :  the  madness  is  in  their  hearts.  They  were  persons 
of  this  class  who  made  use  of  the  words  contained  in  our  text.     These  words, 


chap.lvl]  ISAIAH.  27T 

although  pollated  by  the  sense  and  circumstances  in  which  they  are  here  nsed, 
express  a  truth  as  well  as  a  falsehood.     I.  They  hat  be  the  expbession  of  a 

PERFECTLY  RATIONAL  FAITH  AND  REASONABLE  SENTIMENT.      1.   It  is  reasonable  tO 

expect  that  nature  will  be  as  productive  in  the  future  as  it  has  ever  been  in  the  past. 
"Why  should  we  fear  that  seed-time  and  harvest  or  summer  and  winter  will  fail,  or 
that  the  soil  will  be  less  productive  than  it  has  been  t  Surely  if  we  are  to  expect  any 
change,  it  is  a  change  for  the  better ;  the  sun  will  shine  as  brightly  as  it  has  done, 
and  the  rains  will  fall  as  abundantly,  and  the  earth  will  be  more  extensively 
reclaimed  and  better  cultivated.  The  soil  yields  a  great  deal  more  now  than  it  used 
to  do  ;  and  still  there  remaineth  much  land  to  be  possessed.  2.  This  is  a  reasonable 
sentiment  when  used  in  the  light  of  human  progress.  The  progress  made  in  arts 
and  sciences  ought  greatly  to  increase  the  resources  of  society.  Labour  is  the 
wealth  of  a  nation,  and  therefore  the  more  labour  can  be  made  to  produce,  the 
wealthier  a  nation  must  be.  Not  only  so,  but  the  productions  of  one  countir  have 
by  these  means  been  brought  within  easy  access  of  other  countries,  so  that  failure  in 
one  part  is  largely  compensated  for  by  a  more  abxmdant  supply  in  other  places. 
3.  This  is  also  a  rational  sentiment  when  we  remember  the  goodness  and  unchange- 
ableness  of  God.  His  goodness  to  us  in  the  past  ought  to  inspire  us  with  confidence 
in  Him  for  the  future ;  and  this  confidence  ought  to  have  respect  to  all  the  concerns 
of  life.  4.  This  is  a  reasonable  sentiment  when  you  consider  the  promises  of  God 
and  the  predictions  concerning  the  future.  Is  it  not  said  that  the  desert  shall 
rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose  ?  Let  the  Gospel  be  preached  to  the  savage  and  the 
uncivilized  ;  if  they  receive  it  they  will  not  only  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  but  they 
will  also  soon  become  clothed,  and  begin  to  cultivate  the  soil,  and  the  change  thus 
produced  on  the  face  of  nature  wiU  correspond  with  the  change  in  their  moral  and 
spiritual  condition.  5.  Then  there  is  a  future  beyond  the  present  life  in  relation  to 
which  these  words  may  be  used  with  stUl  deeper  emphasis.  The  man  who  has  fled 
for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  him,  and  has  striven  to  walk  with  God  here,  may 
say  with  confidence,  as  he  enters  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  "  I  will  not 
fear,"  for  "to-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more  abundant."    II.  This 

MAT  ALSO  BE  THE  LANGUAGE  OF  WICKED  PRESUMPTION.      1.    It  18  SO  when  it  is  the 

utterance  of  idleness.  No  man  has  a  right  to  neglect  the  duties  of  to-day,  and  to 
flatter  himself  that  his  life  will  be  crowned  with  increased  abundance  on  the  morrow. 
2.  It  is  so  when  it  is  the  language  of  extravagance  and  profligacy.  The  latter  is  the 
spirit  in  which  it  is  used  in  this  verse.  "Come  ye,  say  they,  I  will  fetch  wine," 
etc.  The  men  who  used  these  words  had  evidently  closed  their  ears  to  warning, 
and  given  themselves  up  to  a  life  of  self-indulgence.  This  was  no  doubt  the  feeling 
of  the  prodigal,  who  wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living.  He  promised  himself  that 
the  debauches  of  to-day  should  be  succeeded  by  still  greater  debauches  on  the  morrow. 
We  are  not  to  burden  ourselves  with  anxious  cares  about  the  future,  but  neither  are 
we  to  pledge  our  future  income  to  meet  our  present  expenses.  Nor  are  we  to  use,  as 
bread  for  to-day,  what  God  has  sent  to  be  sown  aa  seed  for  the  morrow.  We  ought 
to  study  the  law  of  proportion,  and  to  live  in  proportion  to  our  income,  to  give  in 
proportion  to  our  income,  and  to  save  in  proportion  to  our  income  and  the  position 
of  responsibility  in  which  we  are  placed,  either  as  to  family  or  work-people.  3.  This 
is  the  language  of  sinful  presumption  when  it  is  used  as  an  excuse  for  the  neglect  of 
present  privileges  and  opportunities.  (1)  It  is  often  so  used  in  relation  to  secular 
things.     (2)  But  it  is  still  more  frequently  used  in  relation  to  religion.     Many 

?leaa  this  as  an  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  religion.  The  time  is  not  convenient. 
hey  are  too  young,  or  their  temptations  and  diflSculties  are  at  present  too  great. 
They  hope  that  their  circumstances  will  undergo  a  change.  But  some,  who  have 
flattered  themselves  that  they  were  too  young,  have  not  lived  to  become  old.  This 
excuse  is  also  pleaded  by  some  who  have  in  them  some  good  thing  towards  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel,  for  delay  in  publicly  avowing  themselves  on  the  Lord's  side,  and 
casting  in  their  lot  with  His  people.  There  is  something  in  the  way  to-day  which 
they  expect  will  be  removed  to-morrow.  But,  perhaps  when  to-morrow  comes  the 
difiiculties  are  increased,  and  the  resolve,  which  was  almost  formed,  is  wholly 
abandoned.  This  excuse  is  also  pleaded  for  not  entering  into  some  sphere  of 
usefulness  to  which  you  were  clearly  called.  But  the  door  closes  and  it  is  too  late. 
{A.  Clark.)  Optimism,  false  amd  true: — Whether  we  are  warranted  in  expecting 
the  future  to  be  better  than  the  present,  depends  upon  our  standpoint ;  upon 
whether  we  look  at  the  future  as  men  of  the  world,  purely  and  simply,  or  as 
followers  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  may  be  the  height  of  folly  to  say  by  our  lips,  or  by 
oar  lives,  "  To-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more  abundant ; "  but,  on  the 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lvi. 

other  hand,  oar  so  saying  may  involve  the  highest  wisdom.    I.  How  IK  peophestiko 

GOOD  OF  THE  MOKEOW,   WE  MAY  NOT  BE  SPEAKING  COEEECTLT.      1.    It  18  follv  tO 

prophesy  good  of  to-morrow  in  respect  to  worldly  things.  2.  It  is  folly  to  prophesy 
good  of  to-morrow  just  because  the  future  promises  development.  If  to-morrow  be 
more  abundant  than  to-day,  it  will  be  because  we  have  weU  spent  to-day,  and  have 
not  dreamed  away  our  time  and  our  opportunities.  8.  It  is  foUy  to  prophesy  good 
of  to-morrow  unless  we  take  steps  to  bring  the  good  to  pass.     II.  How    in 

PEOPHESYING    GOOD    OF    THE    FUTCTBE    WE    MAY    BE    SPEAKING    ABSOLTTTB    TEUTH. 

Is  there  anything  about  which  we  may  say  with  certainty,  "To-morrow  shall  be 
as  this  day,  and  much  more  abundant "  ?  Ability  to  tali  thus,  however,  pre- 
supposes two  things — 1.  That  we  know  the  grace  of  God.  2.  Patient  continuance 
in  well-doing.  {J.  S.  Swan.)  Discounting  the  future: — In  this  picture,  that 
exaggerated  hopefulness  which  it  describes  seems  to  have  been  the  result  of 
intoxication.  It  is  one  who  has  filled  himself  with  strong  drink,  who,  from  the 
midst  of  his  revels,  cries  out,  "To-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  nay,  much  more 
abundant."  In  point  of  fact,  however,  such  artificial  stimulus  is  in  no  wise 
necessary  for  the  excitement  of  extravagant  hopes.  Such  hopes  are  bom  out  of 
circumstances  the  most  discouraging  and  amid  surroundings  the  most  dismal  and 
dreary.  Let  us  bless  God  that  it  is  so.  I  doubt  whether  life  would  be  long 
endurable  if  it  were  otherwise.  In  fact,  it  is  at  the  point  when  the  spring  of 
hopefulness  fairly  snaps  that  men  and  women  break  down.  And  jet,  like  some 
other  forms  of  so-called  nourishment,  this  is  one  which  has  a  perilous  power  of 
enervation.  It  is  worth  while  to  remember  that  the  future  is  simply  and  inevitably 
and  inexorably  the  outgrowth  and  outcome  of  the  present.  The  man  or  woman  of 
ungovemed  temper  imagines  that  age  will  cool  their  blood  and  so  diminish  their 
provocations.  But  age  weakens  nothing  save  our  powers  of  demonstration.  And 
so  of  the  rest  of  the  infirmities  of  our  nature.  Does  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  or  the 
lust  of  the  eye,  or  the  pride  of  life — do  our  covetousness  and  our  selfishness  and  our 
tmtruthfulness  go  through  a  sort  of  transformation-scene  process,  and  emerge  at 
some  givenpoint  in  our  future  in  the  guise  of  the  Christian  graces  or  the  caminal 
virtues  ?  The  future  does  not  create  progress,  but  only  reveals  it.  And  thus  we 
see  the  province  and,  if  I  may  so  speak,  the  function  in  the  moral  and  spiritual 
world  of  Hope.  That  function  is  to  inspire  the  present.  And,  therefore,  if  I  were 
asked  to  inmte  that  legend  or  motto  which  should  be  the  rule  and  law  for  every 
young  life  among  us,  I  would  write  the  one  word  "Now."  {H.  C.  Potter,  D.D.) 
To-morrow : — They  were  wicked  men  who  spoke  these  words.  Just  think  of  what 
these  words  are  in  the  mouth  of  a  wicked  man.  1.  To-morrow  shall  be  another  day  in 
which  I  shall  rob  God  of  His  due.  2.  I  wiU  tempt  God  another  day ;  I  will  stand 
out  against  God.  3.  Or,  looking  at  God's  mercy,  he  says,  "  "WeU,  God  is  merciful,  God 
is  willing  to  bless  me,  but  I  will  not  be  blessed. "  4.  If  the  man  says  this,  it  implies  that 
he  will  give  another  day  to  fasten  the  fetters  of  sin  firmer  upon  him.  5.  Again,  the 
wicked  man  says,  ' '  I  will  encourage  sinners  another  day  to  continue  in  their  sin ;  I  will 
set  them  the  example  of  sinning  still  further  than  I  have  done  hitherto."  But  what 
are  you  doin^  when  you  are  thus  encouraging  men  in  sin !  You  are  doing  your  best 
to  seal  that  smner's  doom.  You  are  doing  your  best  to  make  that  sinner's  death-bed 
terrible.  You  are  doing  the  best  you  can  to  harden  that  sinner  in  defiance  of  God 
and  in  his  rejection  of  all  that  mi^ht  save  his  soul ;  you  are  making  that  man  laugh 
his  life  away  in  frivolity  and  evil.  6.  You  are  strengthening  Satan  in  his  great 
argument  to  keep  men  from  Christ.  What  ia  that  great  argument  ?  No  hope  for 
you ;  how  can  you  expect  to  be  saved  t  Have  you  not  been  living  away  from  God  t 
You  have  sinned  away  the  day  of  grace.  7.  If  you  say,  "  To-morrow  shall  be  as 
this  day,"  then  what  is  your  state  ?  Why,  that  if  you  die  to-morrow  you  shall  go  to 
hell.  If  you  were  to  die  to-day  in  your  sins,  you  would  go  to  hell.  Then,  u  to- 
morrow is  to  be  as  to-day,  you  are  deciding — I  shall  live  to-morrow  in  such  a  state 
that  if  I  die  to-morrow  1  shall  go  to  hell.  7.  You  are  keeping  Christ  another  day 
standing  at  the  door.  8.  You  mean  to  have  another  day  of  resisting  the  strivings 
of  God's  spirit.  {J.  M.  ffussey. )  Can  we  make  sure  of  to-morrow  ? — These  words,  as 
they  stand,  are  the  call  of  boon  companions  to  new  revelry.  They  are  part  of  the 
prophet's  picture  of  a  corrupt  age  when  the  men  of  influence  and  position  had  thrown 
away  their  sense  of  duty,  and  had  given  themselves  over,  as  aristocracies  and 

f>lutocracies  are  ever  tempted  to  do,  to  mere  luxury  and  good  living.  Base  and 
oolish  as  they  are  on  such  lips,  it  is  possible  to  lift  tnem  from  the  mud,  and  take 
them  as  the  utterance  of  a  lofty  and  calm  hope  which  will  not  be  disappointed,  and 
of  a  firm  and  lowly  resolve  which  may  ennoble  life.    Like  a  great  many  other  sayings^ 


CHAF.  LYI.]  ISAIAH.  279 

they  may  fit  the  month  either  of  a  sot  or  a  saint.    I.  This  expbctatiok,  if  BiSEcmcs 

TO  ANY  OXJTWAKD  THINGS,  IS  AN  ILLUSION  AND  A  DREAM.      It  18  base  and  foolish  tO 

be  forecasting  our  pleasures,  the  true  temper  is  to  be  forecasting  our  work.  But, 
leaving  that  consideration,  let  us  notice  how  useless  such  anticipation,  and  how  mad 
such  confidence,  as  that  expressed  in  the  text  is,  if  directed  to  anything  short  of  God. 
"We  are  so  constituted  as  that  we  grow  into  a  persuasion  that  what  has  been  will  be, 
and  yet  we  can  give  no  sufficient  reason  to  ourselves  why  we  expect  it.  "  The 
uniformity  of  the  course  of  nature  "  is  the  comer-stone,  not  only  of  physical  science, 
but,  in  a  more  homely  form,  of  the  wisdom  which  ^ows  with  experience.  We  all 
believe  that  the  sun  will  rise  to-morrow  because  it  rose  to-day,  and  for  aU  the 
yesterdays.  But  there  was  a  to-day  which  had  no  yesterday,  and  there  will  be  a 
to-day  which  will  have  no  to-morrow.  The  sun  will  rise  for  the  last  time.  The 
uniformity  had  a  beginning  and  wiU  have  an  end.  So,  even  as  an  axiom  of  thought, 
the  anticipation  that  things  wUl  continue  as  they  have  been  because  they  have  been, 
seems  to  rest  on  an  insufficient  basis.  How  much  more  so,  as  to  our  own  little  lives 
and  their  surroundings !  We  shall  be  nearest  the  truth  if  we  take  due  account,  as 
we  do  so  to-day,  of  the  undoubted  fact  that  the  only  thing  certain  about  to-morrow 
is  that  it  will  not  be  as  this  day.     II.  But  yet  there  is  a  possibility  of  so  fsino 

THE  words  as  to  MAKE  THEM  THE  TTTTERANOE  OF  A  SOBER  CERTAINTY  WHICH  WILL 

NOT  BE  PITT  TO  SHAME.  We  may  send  out  our  hope  like  Noah's  dove,  not  to  hover 
restlessly  over  a  heaving  ocean  of  change,  but  to  light  on  firm,  solid  certainty,  and 
fold  its  wearied  wings  there.  Forecasting  is  ever  close  by  foreboding.  Hope  is 
interwoven  with  fear,  the  golden  threads  of  the  weft  crossing  the  dark  ones  of  the 
warp,  and  the  whole  texture  gleaming  bright  or  glooming  black  according  to 
the  angle  at  which  it  is  seen.  So  is  it  always  until  we  turn  our  hope  away  from 
earth  to  God,  and  fill  the  future  with  the  light  of  His  presence  and  the  certainty  of 
His  truth.  We  have  an  imchanging  and  an  inexhaustible  God,  and  He  is  the  true 
guarantee  of  the  future  for  us.  The  more  we  accustom  ourselves  to  think  of  Him  as 
shaping  all  that  is  contingent  and  changeful  in  the  nearest  and  in  the  remotest 
to-morrow,  and  as  being  Himself  the  immutable  portion  of  our  souls,  the  calmer  will 
be  our  outlook  into  the  darkness,  and  the  more  bright  will  be  the  clear  light  of 
certainty  which  bums  for  us  in  it.     III.  Looked  at  in  another  aspect,  these 

WORDS    MAY   BE  TAKEN  AS  THE  VOW  OF  A  FIRM  AND  LOWLY   RESOLVE.      There  is  a 

future  which  we  can  but  very  slightly  iofluence,  and  the  less  we  look  at  that  the 
better  every  way.  But  there  is  also  a  future  which  we  can  mould  as  we  wish — the 
future  of  our  own  characters,  the  only  future  which  is  really  ours  at  all.  In  that 
region,  it  is  eminently  true  that  "to-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more 
abundant."  The  law  of  continuity  shapes  our  moral  and  spiritual  characters.  The 
awful  power  of  habit  solidifies  actions  into  customs,  and  prolongs  the  reverberation 
of  every  note,  once  sounded,  along  the  vaulted  roof  of  tne  chamber  where  we  live. 
To-day  is  the  child  of  yesterday  and  the  parent  of  to-morrow.  That  solemn  certaintv 
of  the  continuance  and  increase  of  moral  and  spiritual  characteristics  works  in  both 

food  and  bad,  but  with  a  diflFerence.  To  secure  its  full  blessing  in  the  gradual 
evelopment  of  the  germs  of  good  there  must  be  constant  eflbrt  and  tenacious 
resolution.  As  we  grow  in  years,  we  shall  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  until  the  day  comes  when  we  shall  exchange  earth  for 
heaven.  That  will  be  the  sublimest  application  of  this  text,  when,  dying,  we  can 
calmly  be  sure  that  though  to-day  be  on  this  side  and  to-morrow  on  the  other  bank 
of  the  black  river,  there  will  be  no  break  in  the  continuity,  but  only  an  infinite 
growth  in  our  life,  and  heaven's  to-morrow  shall  be  as  earth's  to-day  and  much 
more  abundant.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  cTuzngeful  and  the  abiding: — To-day's 
wealth  may  be  to-morrow's  poverty,  to-day's  health  to-morrow's  sickness,  to-day's 
happy  companionship  of  love  to-morrow's  aching  solitude  of  heart,  but  to-day's  God 
will  be  to-morrow's  God,  to-day's  Christ  will  be  to-morrow's  Christ.  Other  fountains 
may  dry  up  in  heat  or  freeze  in  winter,  but  this  knows  no  change,  "  in  summer  and 
winter  it  shall  be."  Other  fountains  may  sink  low  in  their  basins  after  much  draw- 
ing, but  this  is  ever  full,  and  after  a  thousand  generations  have  drawn  from  it  its 
stream  is  broad  and  deep  as  ever.  Other  fountains  may  be  left  behind  on  the  march, 
and  the  weUs  and  pahn  trees  of  each  Elim  on  our  road  be  succeeded  by  a  dry  and 
thirsty  land  where  no  water  is,  but  this  spring  foUows  us  all  through  the  wilderness, 
and  makes  music  and  spreads  freshness  ever  by  our  path.  What  may  be  roimd  the 
next  headland  we  know  not ;  but  this  we  know,  that  the  same  sunshine  wiU  make  a 
broadening  path  across  the  waters  right  to  where  we  rock  on  the  unknown  sea,  and 
the  same  umuoving  mighty  star  will  bum  for  our  guidance.    So  we  may  let  the 


S80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvii. 

waves  and  currents  roll  as  they  list — or  rather  as  He  wills,  and  be  little  concerned 
about  the  incidents  or  the  companions  of  our  voyage,  since  He  is  with  us.  {Ibid.) 
Experience  and  hope : — Experience  is  ever  the  parent  of  hope,  and  the  latter  can 
only  build  with  the  bricks  which  the  former  gives.  {Ibid.)  The  power  of  habit : — 
How  dreadfully  that  law  of  the  continuity  and  development  of  character  works  in 
some  men  1  By  slow,  imperceptible,  certain  degrees  the  evil  gains  upon  them. 
Yesterday's  sin  smooths  the  path  for  to-day's.  The  temptation  once  yielded  to 
gains  power.  The  crack  in  the  embankment  which  lets  a  drop  or  two  ooze  through 
IS  soon  a  hole  which  lets  out  a  flood.  It  is  easier  to  find  a  man  who  has  done  a  wrong 
thing  than  to  find  a  man  who  has  done  it  only  once.  Peter  denied  his  Lord  thrice, 
and  each  time  more  easily  than  the  time  before.  So,  before  we  know  it,  the  thin 
gossamer  threads  of  single  actions  are  twisted  into  a  rope  of  habit,  and  we  are  "tied 
with  the  cords  of  our  sin."  {Ibid.)  Character  the  result  of  trivial  actions : — How 
important  the  smallest  acts  become  when  we  think  of  them  as  thus  influencing 
character!  The  microscopic  creatures,  thousands  of  which  will  go  into  a  square 
inch,  make  the  great  white  cliffs  that  beetle  over  the  wildest  sea  and  front  the  storm. 
So,  permanent  and  solid  character  is  built  up  out  of  trivial  actions,  and  this  is  the 
solemn  aspect  of  our  passing  d^s,  that  they  are  making  us.  {Ibid.)  Hope  for  men 
in  the  Christian  redemption : — ^We  might  well  tremble  before  such  a  thought,  which 
would  be  dreadful  to  the  best  of  us,  if  it  were  not  for  pardoning  mercy  and  renewing 
grace.  The  law  of  reaping  what  we  have  sown,  or  of  continuing  as  we  have  begun,  may 
be  modified  as  far  as  our  sins  and  failures  are  concerned.  The  entail  may  be  cut  off,  and 
to-morrow  need  not  inherit  to-day's  guilt,  nor  to-day's  habits.  The  past  may  be  all 
blotted  out  through  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  No  evil  habit  need  continue  its 
dominion  over  us,  nor  are  we  obliged  to  carry  on  the  bad  tradition  of  wrong-doing  into  a 
fiiture  day,  for  Christ  lives,  and  "if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  anew  creature  ;  old 
things  are  passed  away,  all  things  are  become  new. "  {Ibid. )  Presuming  on  the  future: — 
We  have  aU  read  of  that  Persian  prince  who,  having  grown  to  man's  estate  and 
completed  his  education,  divided  his  life  into  four  decades.  The  first  ten  years  of 
his  life  he  would  devote  to  travel,  since  travel,  he  rightly  argued,  was  as  much  an 
educator  as  were  books.  The  second  decade  he  would  employ  in  the  affairs  of  govern- 
ment, since  government  is  part  of  the  duty  of  a  prince.  The  third  decade  he  would 
reserve  for  the  pleasures  and  the  benefits  of  friendship,  since  friendship  is,  after  all, 
the  melody  and  fragrance  of  life.  And  then  the  fourth  decade  he  would  give  to  God. 
It  was  a  most  taking  and  attractive  plan  of  Ufe.  But  it  was  marred  by  one 
considerable  defect.  During  the  first  ten  years  the  prince  died,  and  for  that 
contingency  he  had  made  no  provision  whatever.  {H.  C.  Potter,  D.t).)  To-morrow 
is  the  most  wonderful  of  days,  or,  as  Isaiah  has  it,  "a  day  great  beyond  measure." 
Its  history  outshines  the  record  of  centuries.  It  is  the  day  on  which  idle  men 
labour  and  fools  reform.  It  is  the  day  when  every  man  does  his  duty.  It  is  the 
harvest-time  of  good  intentions.  To-morrow  the  worst  of  sinners  will  be  a  saint. 
To-morrow  the  frivolous  pleasure-seeker  will  be  transformed  into  a  serious-minded 
devotee,  a  whole-souled  worker  for  the  good  of  humanity.  To-morrow  the  dishonest 
man  will  be  honest,  the  immoral  man  will  be  pure,  the  selfish  man  wiU  be  benevolent. 
To-morrow  bad  habits  wiU  be  resolutely  overcome,  evil  tempers  will  be  conquered, 
wrong  desfres  wUl  be  banished.  To-morrow  myriads  of  men  and  women  will  heed 
the  call  of  Christ.  If  the  world  could  but  see  the  bright  dawning  of  its  mythical 
glory  I  But  it  never  can.  To-morrow  is  like  the  rainbow's  end,  which  continually 
moves  on  and  keeps  its  distance  undiminished  when  foolish  ohUdren  seek  its  golden 
treasoie.    {O.  E.  Eubba/rd.) 


CHAPTER  LVII. 


Veks.  1,  2.  The  righteous  perisheth. — The  righteoua  perishing: — In  view  of  this 
prevailing  demoralization  and  worldliness  (chap.  Ivi.  9-12),  the  righteous  one 
succumbs  to  the  grinding  weight  of  external  and  mtemal  sufferings :  he  "  perishes," 
dies  before  his  time  (Eccles.  vii.  15),  from  the  midst  of  his  contemporaries,  dis- 
appearing from  this  life  (Ps.  xii.  1 ;  Micah  vii,  2),  and  no  man  lays  it  to  heart, 
».  e.  no  one  considers  the  Divine  accusation  and  threatening  implied  in  this  early 
death.    {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)    "  Merciful  men  " ; — Literally,  men  of  piety.     (iV^.  /. 


CHAP.  LTii.]  ISAIAH.  281 

Skinner,  D.  D. )  Good  men  die : — Righteousness  delivereth  from  the  sting  of  death,  but 
not  from  the  stroke  of  it.  {M.  Henry.)  Death  of  the  righteous: — 1.  One  reason 
why,  when  the  righteous  dieth,  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart  is  because  the  world  do 
not  know  the  righteous.  2.  Another  reason  is,  disinclination  of  all  men  by  nature 
to  lay  such  things  to  heart.  3.  They  do  not  think  it  of  much  importance.  But  the 
death  of  eveiy  good  man  is  a  loss  to  the  world,  a  loss  to  the  Church  militant — the 
people  of  God  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  the  more  taken  away  and  the  less  left, 
the  less  likely  are  we  to  be  blessed  as  a  nation.  {James  Wells.)  Early  deaih: — 
Such  early  removals  form  a  problem  insoluble  by  our  poor  reason.  They  seem,  at 
first  sight,  inconsistent  alike  with  the  Divine  wisdom  and  power  and  love.  They 
look  almost  like  the  frustration  of  God's  plans  and  purposes,  a  failure  in  His 
sovereign  designs.  It  is  the  architect  just  completing  His  work,  when  that  work 
comes  with  a  crash  to  the  ground.  It  is  the  scmptor  putting  the  finishing  strokes 
of  his  chisel  on  the  virgin  marble,  when  the  toil  of  months  or  years  strews  the  floor 
of  his  studio.  It  is  the  gardener  bringing  forth  from  his  conservatory  the  long- 
husbanded  plants  in  their  freshness  and  beauty,  to  bask  in  early  summer  sun,  when 
a  frost  or  hailstorm  unexpectedly  comes,  and  in  one  night  they  have  perished  I 
{J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Early  death : — "Why  is  the  young  soldier  stricken  down  just 
when  the  armour  of  life  has  been  assayed !  Wherefore  hath  God  apparently  thus 
made  His  noblest  work  in  vain  ?  The  words  of  Isaiah  give  a  twofold  answer  to  these 
questions  and  mysteries ;  the  one  negative,  the  other  positive.  I.  The  keqativb 
ANSWER.  "The  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evU  to  come."  It  was  so  in 
the  case  of  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxii.  18-20).  II.  The  positive  explanation.  "He 
shall  enter  into  peace :  they  shall  rest  in  their  beds,  each  one  walking  in  his  up- 
rightness ; "  or  rather,  as  it  has  been  rendered,  ' '  each  one  walking  straight  before 
him  ;"  or  as  Bishop  Lowth  translates  it,  "he  that  walketh  in  the  straight  path." 
1.  Josiah,  the  good,  the  pious,  when  he  died,  "entered  into  peace."  It  is  a 
beautiful  Old  Testament  evidence  of  the  immediate  blessedness  of  the  departed 
righteous.  His  body  rested  in  the  tomb,  as  in  a  "bed"  or  couch  ;  his  spirit — the 
spirit  that  walked  so  "uprightly  "on  earth,  with  no  divergence  from  the  path  of 
duty  and  piety — continues,  in  a  loftier  state  of  existence,  this  elevated  "walk." 
The  work  cut  short  in  this  lower  world  is  not  arrested  ;  it  is  only  transferred.  In  a 
higher  and  loftier  sphere  he  stUI  pursues  these  active  ministries  of  righteousness. 
There  is  an  evident  contrast  between  these  opening  words  of  the  chapter  and  the 
terrible  refrain  with  which  it  closes — "There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the 
wicked ;"  none  in  life,  none  in  death,  none  in  their  limitless  future.  But  "the 
righteous,"  thus  taken  away,  "enter  into  peace."  2.  Another  thought,  too,  ia 
brought  out  in  the  original  which  we  miss  in  our  translation,  and  which  suggests  the 
same  assurance  of  immediate  bliss.  It  occurs  in  the  words  just  quoted — "The 
righteous  is  taken  away,"  "  Merciful  men  are  taken  away  ; "  this  in  the  Hebrew  is, 
"The  righteous,  the  mercifol,  are  gathered" — ^gathered  to  their  fathers.  3.  One 
other  thought  on  early  death  may  be  suggested  by  these  words.  While  the  spirit 
is  pursuing  its  onward  path  of  bliss  and  glory,  it  has  not,  in  the  truest  sense,  bid 
farewell  to  its  earthly  sphere.  The  lips  are  silenced,  the  music  of  the  voice  is 
hushed,  the  blank  of  the  absent  is  too  painfully  realized.  But  "the  righteous" 
survive  dissolution  even  in  this  world ;  in  their  deathless  memories  of  goodness  and 
worth,  they  continue  to  "walk."  The  old  promise  dictated  by  the  sweet  singer  of 
Israel  (apparently  paradoxical)  becomes  literally  true,  regarding  those  prematurely 
taken  away — "With  long  life  will  I  satisfy  him,  and  show  him  My  salvation. 
For  what,  after  aU,  is  long  life?  Is  it  measured  and  computed  by  formal 
arithmetic  ?  counted  by  days,  or  weeks,  or  months,  or  years  ?  No !  the  fourscore 
years  of  a  misspent  life  is  no  life  at  all.  It  is  a  bankruptcy  of  being.  It  may  be 
a  life  only  sowing  and  perpetuating  baneful  influences  ;  an  untimely  birth  would  be 
better,  "whereas,  that  is  the  truest  length  of  days,  where,  it  may  be  for  a  brief 
but  bright  and  consecrated  season,  some  young  life  has  shone  gloriously  for  God, 
and  which,  though  now  a  fallen  meteor,  has  left  a  trail  of  light  behind  it,  for 
which  parent  ana  brother  and  sister  wUl  for  ever  bless  Him  who  gave  the  transient 
boon  I  {Ibid.)  The  deaih  of  the  good: — I.  Their  death  is  the  perishing  of  the 
BODY. — 1.  Why,  then,  pamper  the  body  ?  2.  Why  centre  interests  on  the  wants 
and  enjoymente  of  the  Dody  ?  II.  Their  death  is  generally  disregarded  by 
MANKIND.  How  soon  the  best  of  men  are  forgotten.  There  are  two  reasons  for 
disregarding  the  death  of  the  good.  1.  The  thought  of  death  is  repugnant  to  the 
heart.     2.  The  concerns  of  life  are  all-absorbing.     III.  Their  death  is  A  deliybe- 

ANCE  FROM  ALL  TEE  BYIL8  THAT  ABS  COMINQ  ON  THE  WORLD.      "  Taken  awaj  from 


282  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tvn. 

the  evil  to  come."  IV.  Thbie  death  is  a  step  into  a  higher  life.  "He 
shall  enter  into  peace:  they  shall  rest  in  their  beds."  1.  The  death  of  the  good 
as  to  the  body  is  only  slee^ — natural,  refreshing,  temporary.  2.  Their  souls  march 
on.  "Each  one  walking  in  his  uprightness."  Endless  progress.  "It  doth  not 
yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  {Romilist.)  The  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the 
evil  to  come. — Spared  future  evil: — 1.  It  may  be  from  the  evil  of  personal  suffering. 
The  prolongation  of  life  to  old  age  often  involves  an  immense  amount  of  bodily  iUia 
and  pains.  2.  It  may  be  to  spare  the  heart  of  affection  sore  trials.  How  often  do 
children  grow  up  to  break  the  hearts  of  fond  parents.  3.  It  may  be  to  take  His 
chUdout  of  harm's  way.  4.  It  may  be  to  shield  him  from  some  impending  calamity 
that  is  coming  upon  the  Church  or  the  world.  6.  Or  (if  we  accept  the  marginal 
reading)  it  is  to  save  them  "from  that  which  is  evil."  Life  itself,  under  the  ciirse 
of  sin,  is  evU,  even  in  its  best  estate,  and  the  God  of  mercy  cuts  it  short  and  receives 
His  loved  one  into  His  bosom.  {Homiletic  Review.)  The  blessings  of  short  life: — 
We  all  spend  much  time  in  panegyric  of  longevity.  But  I  propose  to  preach  about 
the  blessings  of  an  abbreviated  earthly  existence.     I.  It  makes  one's  life  work 

VERT  compact.  II.  MORAL  DISASTER  MIGHT  COME  UPON  THE  MAN  IF  HE  TARRIED 
LONGER.  III.  One  is  THE  SOONEB  TAKEN  OFF  FROM  THE  DEFENSIVE.  IV.  OnE 
BSCAPES  80  MANY   BEREAVEMENTS.      V.   It  PUTS  ONB  SOONEB  IN  THE  CENTRE  OF 

THINGS.     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  He  shall  enter  into  peace. — The  believer  in  life,  death,  and  eternity: — 
Taking  them  together,  the  words  of  the  text  will  lead  us  to  contemplate  the  child  of 
God— I.  In  the  strength  and  vigour  of  life.     II.  In  the  suffering  and 

THE  article  of  DEATH.  III.  In  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OP  DISSOLUTION,  AS  THET 
AFFECT  BOTH  BODY  AND  SOUL.  (/.  EosUgrave,  M.A.)  A  glimmering  of  New 
Testament  consolation : — Here  is  a  glimmering  of  the  consolation  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, that  the  death  of  the  righteous  man  is  better  than  the  present  life,  because 
it  is  the  entrance  into  peace.     {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Among  the  smooth  stones  of  the  stream  is  thy  portion. — Smooth  aUmes: — 
The  term  "portion"  suggests  that  the  "smooth  stones"  were  fetishes.  {A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.)  False  gods  the  idolater* s  portion: — In  stony  valleys  they  set  up 
their  gods,  which  they  called  their  portion,  and  took  for  their  lot,  as  God's 
people  take  Him  for  their  lot  and  portion.    {M.  Eenry.) 

Ver.  10.  Then  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way. — The  weariness  of  sin : — 
The  text  is  a  striking  representation  of  the  sinner's  conduct  in  fruitless  efforts  to  obtain 
happiness  anywhere  but  from  heaven.  He  wanders  from  object  to  object,  he  becomes 
weary  in  his  pursuit,  yet  he  will  not  abandon  it.  I.  He  ruRSUES  a  wearisome 
COURSE.  Nothing  is  so  wearisome  as  fruitless  efforts  for  happiness.  1.  The  sensual 
course  for  happiness  is  a  wearisome  one.  The  voluptuary  and  the  debauchee  very 
soon  show  exhaustion.  2.  The  secular  course  for  happiness  is  a  wearisome  one. 
He  who  seeks  happiness  in  the  pursuit  of  gain  will  soon  find  it  wearisome.  3.  The 
intellectual  course  for  happiness  is  a  wearisome  one.  He  who  looks  for  true  happi- 
ness in  study  and  research  will  soon  find  it  a  weariness.  4.  The  superstitious  course 
is  a  wearisome  one.  Millions  are  sinking  into  religious  superstition — pilgrimages, 
penances,  prayers,  and  devotional  routine.  What  millions  are  found  wearied  in  this 
path  1  II.  Though  the  course  is  wearisome  he  perseveres.  "Yet  saidst 
thou  not.  There  is  no  hope."  Although  Israel  was  wearied  in  seeking  foreign  help, 
still  it  continued ;  so  with  the  sinner.  To  persevere  in  these  wearisome  methods 
for  happiness  is  very  foolish.  1.  Because  they  will  never  become  easier  than  they 
are.  On  the  contrary,  he  who  pursues  these  methods  of  happiness  wQl  become  more 
and  more  weary  on  his  way.  2.  Because  there  is  a  pleasant  way  to  true  happiness. 
What  is  that  ?  The  loving  surrender  of  your  nature  to  God.  The  religious  way  to 
happiness  is  pleasant,  because — (1)  It  is  worthy  of  your  natore.  (2)  Agreeable  to 
your  conscience.  (3)  Promising  to  your  hope.  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness 
and  all  her  paths  are  peace. "  How  suited  is  the  invitation  of  Clyist  to  the  wearied 
millions  of  earth  who  are  seeking  for  happiness  in  wrong  directions  :  "Gome  unto 
Me,  all  ye,"  etc.  (Eomilist.)  Mam's  weary  way: — I.  The  way  which  is  herb 
SUGGESTED  TO  US.  " Thou  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way."  The  way 
which  the  Israelites  took  was  their  own  way  as  distinguished  from  God's  way.  Th« 
way  in  which  a  man  is  walking,  and  by  which  he  is  seeking  for  salvation,  until  he 
has  found  peace  through  Ohnst,  is  more  or  less  directly  his  own  way.    IL  Teis 


CB&P.  LYii.]  ISAIAB.  28S 

WAY,  WHICH   IS  man's  OWN   WAT,   18  SPOKEN  OF  AS  A  GREAT  WAY.       "  ThoU  Sit 

wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way."  Looking  at  salvation  as  it  is  in  itself,  at  the 
deliverance  which  is  desired,  a  great  deliverance  is  necessary  ;  looking  to  the  eSbrti 
which  man  will  make  to  effect  and  attain  this  deliverance,  great  efforts  are  evidently 
necessary,  and  great  efforts  are  frequently  made.  Micah  speaks  of  a  man  giving 
thousands  of  rams  and  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil,  yea,  giving  the  life  of  his 
firstborn  for  the  sin  of  his  soul,  if  perchance  he  may  save  that  soul.  And  it  ia 
perfectly  marvellous  to  see  the  efforts  which  men  have  made,  and  are  making,  in 
false  religions,  to  secure  that  which  they  desire,  namely,  their  soul's  salvation.  III. 
This  way  of  man's  own  seeking  is  a  weary  way.  What  disappointments  the 
Israelites  met  with !  So  with  a  man  seeking  salvation  in  his  own  way  as  distinct 
from  God"s  way.  Just  in  proportion  as  a  man  is  in  earnest,  just  in  proportion  to 
tiie  depth  of  his  convictions  of  sin  and  righteousness,  just  in  proportion  to  the  sense 
which  he  has  of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  realities  of  eternity,  wUl  be  the  man's 
dissatisfaction  with  his  own  efforts  and  his  own  acts  of  self-denial.  IV.  Although 
tiis  is  a  weary  way,  and  an  unsatisfying  way,  yet  it  has  in  it  some  promises  of 

SXrCCOUR  AND  SOME  POWER  OF  SATISFACTION,   WHICH   PREVENTS  THE    MAN    FROM 

WHOLLY  DESPAIRING.  The  man  "finds  life  to  his  hand."  There  is  enough  in  what 
he  is  doing,  there  is  enough  in  what  he  is  finding,  to  prevent  him  from  wholly 
despairing.  These  persons  are  not  prepared  to  "say  there  is  no  hope;"  they  are 
not  prepared  to  despair  of  salvation  in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  seeking  it ; 
they  are  not  wholly  cast  down.  "Therefore  thou  wast  not  grieved,"  not  wholly 
disheartened.  They  go  on  persevering  and  pressing  forward,  hoping  that  a  brighter 
day  will  come.  Contrast  with  this  way  of  man  God's  way.  The  way  of  salvation 
sought  and  followed  by  the  Jews  resembles  very  much  the  way  of  salvation  which 
the  natural  heart  of  man  follows  when  he  pursues  and  seeks  that  salvation ;  but 
now,  what  is  the  way  which  God  would  have  us  to  walk  in,  as  contrasted  with  this 
way  of  man's  own  devising?  That  which  marks  God's  way,  and  distinguishes  it 
especially  from  man's  way,  is  this — that  man's  way  is  a  way  of  fear  and  dread,  while 
God's  way  is  a  way  of  love.  "  But  how, "you  will  say,  "are  we  to  pass  firom  this 
state,  which  is  man's  natural  state  of  seeking  for  salvation,  to  that  state  which  ia 
described  as  God's  method  of  seeking  and  conferring  salvation  ? "  The  prophet  tells 
us  (vers.  18,  19).  {E.  Bayley,  M.A.)  **  The  life  of  thine  hand"  may  mean,  "a 
revival  of  thy  vigour."  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Yet  saidBt  thou  not,  There  is  no 
hope. — Hope,  yet  no  hope:  no  hope,  yet  hope  (with  Jer.  xviii.  12,  "And  they  said. 
There  is  no  hope,"  etc.) : — The  subtlety  of  the  human  heart  exerts  itself  to  the 
utmost  to  prevent  that  heart  from  trusting  in  the  Saviour,  and  while  evil  is  always 
cunning,  it  shows  itself  to  be  supremely  so  in  its  efforts  to  guard  the  Cross  against 
the  approaches  of  sinners.  By  the  Cross,  as  the  Saviour  said,  the  thoughts  of  many 
hearts  are  revealed.  There  are  two  phases  in  spiritual  life  which  well  illustrate  the 
deceitfulness  of  the  heart.  The  first  is  that  described  in  my  first  text,  in  which  the 
man,  though  wearied  in  his  many  attempts,  is  not  and  cannot  be  convinced  of  the 
hopelessness  of  self-salvation.  When  you  shall  have  hunted  the  man  out  of  this, 
you  will  then  meet  with  a  new  difficulty,  which  is  described  in  the  second  text. 
Finding  there  is  no  hope  in  himself,  the  man  draws  the  unwarrantable  conclusion 
that  there  is  no  hope  for  him  in  God.  It  is  self-righteousness  in  both  cases.  In  the 
one  case  it  is  the  soul  content  with  self-righteousness,  in  the  second  place  it  is  man 
sullenly  preferring  to  perish  rather  than  receive  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  I.  We 
have  to  speak  of  A  hope  which  is  no  hope.  "Thou  art  wearied  in  the  greatness 
of  thy  way  ;  yet  saidst  thou  not.  There  is  no  hope,"  etc.     This  well  pictures  the 

Eursuit  of  men  after  satisfaction  in  earthly  things.  They  are  content  because  they 
ave  found  the  life  of  their  hand.  Living  from  hand  to  mouth  is  enough  for  them  ; 
that  they  are  still  alive,  that  they  possess  present  comforts  and  present  enjoyments, 
this  contents  the  many.  As  for  the  future,  they  say,  "  Let  it  take  care  of  itself." 
They  have  no  foresight  for  their  eternal  state  ;  the  present  hour  absorbs  them.  1. 
The  text  applies  very  eminently  to  those  who  are  seeking  salvation  by  ceremonies. 
2.  A  great  mass  of  people,  even  though  they  reject  priestcraft,  make  themselves 
priests,  and  rely  upon  their  good  works.  'The  wot  of  salvation  by  works,  if  it 
were  possible,  would  be  a  very  wearisome  way.  How  many  good  works  would 
carry  a  man  to  heaven,  would  be  a  question  which  it  were  very  hard  to  answer. 
8.  Many  are  looking  for  salvation  to  another  form  of  self-deception,  namely  the  way 
of  repentance  and  reformation.  II.  We  shall  now  turn  to  the  second  text.  "And 
they  said.  There  is  no  hope,"  etc.  Here  we  have  no  hope — and  yet  hope.  When 
the  sinner  has  at  last  been  driven  by  stress  of  weather  from  the  roadstead  of  Ml 


284  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvii. 

own  confidence,  then  he  flies  to  the  dreary  harbour  of  despair.  Despair  is  the 
mother  of  all  sorts  of  evil.  When  a  man  says,  "  There  is  no  hope  of  heaven  for  me  ; " 
then  he  throws  the  reins  upon  the  neck  of  his  lusts,  and  goes  on  from  bad  to  worse. 
There  is  hope  for  you  in  Him  whom  God  has  provided  to  be  the  Saviour  of  such  aa 
you  are.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  14.  And  ihall  say,  Cast  ye  up. — Ood  r^hteous,  yet  gracious : — The  second 
half  of  ver.  13  forms  a  transition  to  the  next  section,  which  is  a  promise  of  salvation 
to  the  true  Israel.  In  striking  contrast  to  the  menacing  tone  of  ver.  3  f.  is  the  im- 
pressive and  elevated  language  in  which  the  prophet  now  sets  forth  the  gracious 
thoughts  of  Jehovah  towards  His  erring  but  repentant  people.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
A  road  to  God : — In  this  passage  the  cry  goes  forth,  not  on  behalf  of  a  conqueror,  or 
a  sovereign,  but  on  behalf  of  God's  people.  They  are  the  honoured  procession  for 
which  a  road  is  to  be  prepared.  "Cast  up,  cast  up" — that  is,  heap  up,  fill  in — 
"prepare  the  way,  take  up  the  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way  of  My  people."  The 
figure,  then,  is  striking.  As  royalty  demanded  for  itself  a  smooth  path,  a  road  from 
which  all  dangers  and  obstructions  were  taken  away,  so  a  soul  that  is  on  its  way  to 
God  has  thrown  over  it,  as  it  were,  something  of  the  sovereignty  which  it  approaches, 
and  a  mysterious  voice  is  heard,  crying,  "Clear  the  way  !  heap  up  !  heap  up  !  cast 
out  the  stumbling-stones."  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Spiritual  stumbling-blocks : — 1.  The 
want  of  a  true  and  large  ideal  of  Christian  life,  as  an  inward,  spiritual  and  Divine 
disposition,  and  the  attempt  to  live  in  mere  conformity  to  rules,  and  with  a  vague 
impression  that  if  one  conforms  to  the  Church  he  shall  in  some  way,  he  knows 
scarcely  how,  be  saved,  is  itself  one  of  the  causes  of  perpetual  stumbling.  The 
attempt  to  live  merely  for  the  fulfilment  of  social  moralities  ;  the  attempt  to  live  so 
that  all  the  rules  which  are  prescribed  by  all  those  who  are  governing  in  the  Lord, 
shall  be  obeyed  ;  the  attempt  to  live  upon  any  such  low  conception  as  that  of  regu- 
lations, conventions,  observances,  is  sure  to  make  the  Christian  life  poor,  and  the 
travel  uncertain.  For  "  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus"  is  the  apostolic  definition  of 
a  Christian.  Our  aspiration  and  effort  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  and  the 
ideality,  if  I  may  so  say,  of  our  conception  of  what  religion  is.  If  we  suppose  it  to 
be  simply  not  doing  evil,  we  shall  put  forth  but  very  little  exertion,  and  we  shall 
receive  but  very  little  stimulus.  2.  The  attempt  to  live  the  Christian  life  with  a 
low  tone  of  feeling  is  a  reason  why  men  do  not  make  greater  progress.  In  all  the 
writings  of  the  New  Testament  you  will  find  that  fervour,  intensity  is  required  in 
every  feeling.  We  not  only  need  to  have  moralities,  but  we  need  to  have  Christian 
graces,  which  are,  as  it  were,  orchids,  epiphytes,  and  fed  upon  higher  and  purer  things 
— flight,  and  moisture,  and  other  elements  that  the  air  contains.  Now,  none  of  these 
can  thrive  in  our  temperate  climate.  A  temperate  climate  is  good  for  temperate 
things  ;  but  for  intensities  it  is  not  good.  And  many  dominant  and  characteristic 
traits  of  Christian  character  are  such  as  never  can  be  brought  out  without  fervour. 
3.  Lack  of  deep  and  continuous  devotion.  This  is  either  from  the  want  of  a  sense  of 
the  great  spint-world  on  whose  border  we  live  perpetually,  or  it  is  the  result  of 
excessive  occupation,  over-occupation,  which  crowds  £dl  the  time,  and  prevents  one 
from  ripening  in  a  true  Christian  devotion.  4.  Another  hindrance  which  men  find 
on  the  road  of  progress  in  their  Christian  life,  is  their  ignorance  as  to  the  effect  of 
outward  activity  in  developing  inward  fervour,  and  the  effect  of  inward  fervour  in 
developing  outward  activity — as  to  the  effect  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  the  inward 
and  the  outward  life.  Men  are  accustomed  to  separate  these  qualities,  which  should 
never  be  disjoined.  Men  should  be  active  that  they  may  be  emotive ;  and  they 
should  be  emotive,  that  emotion  may  work  into  activity.  5.  A  very  common 
hindrance  to  Christian  development  is  the  attempt  of  men  to  perform  their  Christian 
work  outside  of  their  appropnate  spheres.  Wherever  you  are,  there  begin  the  battle; 
there  subdue  everything  that  stands  in  conflict  with  the  law  of  conscience,  and  the 
law  of  love,  and  the  law  of  purity,  and  the  law  of  truth.  Begin  the  fight  wherever 
God  sounds  the  trumpet,  and  He  will  give  you  grace  that  as  your  day  is,  so  your 
strength  shall  be.  But  until  we  cease  dividing  our  life  into  two  parts — secular  and 
religious — we  never  shall  be  very  eminent  and  consistent  as  Christians ;  we  never 
shaU  make  any  very  great  progress  in  the  Christian  life.  6.  Too  much  companion- 
ship is  not  good.  7.  This  stands  closely  connected  with  another  social  hindrance  to 
the  development  of  true  Christian  life,  and  that  is,  the  addiction  of  men  to  pleasure. 
I  mean  not  indulgence  in  wasting  and  disallowable  pleasures,  but  an  excessive  ad- 
diction to  recreation  of  any  kind.  We  are  bound  to  grow  in  grace.  If  we  do  not 
grow,  we  are  bound  to  know  the  reason  why.     {Ibid.)    The  way  of  religion  is  now 


CHAP.  LYii^  ISAIAH,  S85 

cast  ap ;  it  is  a  highway ;  ministers'  basiness  is  to  direct  people  in  it,  and  to  help 
them  over  the  discouragements  they  meet  with,  that  nothing  may  offend  them. 
{M.  Henry.)  The  way  of  Christ  prepared: — I.  Thb  stumbling-blocks  which 
Christians  hate  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  Jews.  1.  Persecution.  2.  Con- 
tempt. 3.  Idolatry.  4.  Neglect  of  the  law  of  Moses.  5.  Unbelief  of  the  prophets. 
II.  The  stttmbling-blocks  which  the  Jews  have  put  in  their  own  _wat. 
1.  Self-righteousness.  2.  Traditions  of  men.  3.  Oovetousness.  4.  A  false  view  of 
God.  5.  Unbelief  in  the  Son  of  God.  III.  The  blessed  fruits  of  their  removal. 
These  fruits  are  set  before  us  in  the  verses  which  foUow  our  text.  1.  Humiliation 
and  contrition  (ver.  15).  2.  Revival  and  healing.  The  promise  goes  on  thus: 
"  To  revive  the  spirit  of  the  humble,  and  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones.  I 
have  seen  his  ways  and  will  heal  him."  3.  Comfort  and  peace.  "  I  wiU  lead  him 
also,  and  restore  comforts  unto  him "  (vers.  18,  19).  4.  Gladness  and  glory.  To 
these  the  prophet  calls  our  attention  in  the  latter  chapters  (Ixv.  18,  19,  Ixvi.  12). 
{E.  Bickersteth. )  Roads  cleared : — What  is  the  way,  the  way  of  salvation  ?  Jesus 
Christ  says,  "I  am  the  way."  This  is  the  entrance  iato  the  way,  and  this  is  the 
track  of  that  way  even  to  the  end — trust  in  Christ.  "  Are  not  good  works  needed  ? " 
says  one.  They  always  flow  from  faith  in  Christ.  Such  being  the  way,  it  is  very 
simple.  Straight  as  an  arrow,  is  it  not  ?  And  yet  in  this  way  there  are  stumbliag- 
blocks.  I.  Let  us  show  why  this  is.  1.  The  way  of  believing  is  suwi 
an  imcommon  way.  Men  do  not  understand  the  way  of  trusting.  They  want 
to  see,  to  reason,  to  argue.  How  very  difficult  it  would  be  for  a  cow,  that  has 
always  lived  by  the  day  the  short  life  that  can  be  fed  on  grass,  if  it  had  to  live  by 
reason,  as  men  do.  And  when  man  has  to  live  by  faith  he  is  as  awkward  at  it  as 
a  cow  would  be  at  reasoning.  He  is  out  of  his  element.  2.  Men,  when  they  are 
really  seeking  salvation,  are  often  much  troubled  in  mind.  They  feel  that  if  God 
be  just  He  must  punish  them  for  their  wrong-doing.  And  when  they  are  told  that  if 
they  believe  in  Jesus- Christ  all  manner  of  sin  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven,  they 
wonder  how  it  can  be.  Conscience  makes  unbelievers  of  us  all ;  and  stumbling- 
blocks  are  created  by  our  trembling  condition.  3.  Besides  this,  men  are  often 
ignorant  of  the  way  of  salvation.  I  am  not  speaking  now  as  though  I  blamed  them. 
I  was  brought  up  myself  to  attend  the  house  of  God  regularly.  Yet  when  I  began 
to  see  the  Lord,  I  did  not  know  the  way  of  salvation.  I  knew  the  letter  of  it,  but 
not  the  real  meaning :  how  can  a  man  know  it  till  the  Spirit  of  God  reveals  it  to 
him?  4.  Satan  is  always  ready  to  prevent  souls  from  finding  peace  in  Christ. 
Thus  have  I  shown  why  there  are  so  many  stumbling-blocks.  II.  Now  I  am  going 
to  try  to  lift  some  of  them  out  of  the  way.  1 .  Here  is  one  of  them.  One 
man  says,  "  I  would  fain  believe  in  this  Jesus  Christ  of  whom  you  tell  me,  but  if  I 
were  to  come  to  God  through  Christ,  would  He  receive  me  ? "  "  Him  that  cometh 
to  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  In  all  the  history  of  the  human  race  there  never 
has  been  found  a  man  that  came  to  Jesus  Chnst  whom  Christ  rejected  yet. 
2.  "  But,"  says  another,  "  I  am  a  very  peculiar  person.  I  could  very  well  beheve 
that  any  man  in  the  world  who  trusted  Christ  would  be  saved  except  myself ;  but  I 
cannot  think  that  He  would  save  me,  for  I  am  so  odd. "  Ah,  I  am  odd  myself,  and 
I  had  the  same  feeling  that  you  have.  I  thought  that  I  was  a  lot  left  out  of  the 
catalogue.  If  you  knew  other  people  you  would  find  that  there  are  other  strange 
people  besides  yourself ;  and  if  God  saves  so  many  strange  people,  why  should  He 
not  save  you  1  He  delights  to  do  wonders.  He  will  crowd  heaven  with  curiosities 
of  mercy.  3.  But  I  hear  another  say,  "Sir,  I  have  such  a  horrible  sense  of  sin  ;  I 
cannot  rest  in  my  bed  !  I  cannot  think  that  I  shall  be  saved."  "Wait  a  bit  there ; 
let  me  speak  to  this  person  over  here.  "What  ia  your  trouble  ?  "  My  trouble  is,  sir, 
that  I  have  no  sense  of  sin.  I  know  that  I  am  a  sinner,  and  a  great  sinner  ;  but  I 
do  not  think  that  I  shall  be  saved,  for  I  have  no  horrible  thoughts."  "Will  you 
change  with  the  other  man !  "WiU  he  change  with  you  ?  I  should  not  advise  either 
of  you  to  make  any  change ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  despairing  thoughts  are  not 
necessary  to  salvation ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  so  long  as  you  know  yourself  a 
sinner,  and  are  wiUing  to  confess  it,  such  thoughts  are  untrue.  Despairing  one,  look 
to  the  Cross  and  live  ;  and  thou  who  dost  not  despair,  look  to  the  same  Cross  and 
live  ;  for  there  is  salvation  for  every  eye  that  looks  to  Jesus  crucified.  4.  A  trembler 
cries,  "I  am  afraid  to  come  and  trust  Christ,  because  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am 
one  of  the  elect."  If  you  trust  Jesus  Christ  I  will  teU  you  then  that  you  are  God's 
elect,  to  a  certainty.  6.  "Ah,"  says  another  person,  "  I  think  I  have  committed  the 
nnpatrdonable  sin.  Do  you  long  to  be  delivered  from  the  j)ower  of  sin !  Then  you 
have  not  committed  the  unpardonable  sin,  because  it  is  a  sm  unto  death,  and  after  a 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ltii. 

man  commits  it  he  never  has  a  living  wish  or  desire  after  God  from  that  moment. 

6.  "Oh,  but,"  says  another  person,  "my  stumbling-block  is  this:  that  the  whole 
thing  seems  too  good  to  be  true,  that  I,  by  simply  believing  in  Jesus  Christ,  shall  be 
saved."  I  confess  that  it  does  seem  too  good  to  be  true,  but  it  is  not.  God  in  Christ 
Jesus  is  clearly  capable  of  marvellous  deeds  of  grace.  There  are  some  stimibling- 
blocks  that  I  cannot  remove ;    they   must   always   stand   there,    I    am   afraid. 

7.  An  objector  says  to  me,  "  I  would  believe  in  Jesus  ;  I  have  no  fault  to  find  with 
Him,  but,  then,  look  at  His  followers,  many  of  them  are  hypocrites."  "We  do  look  at 
His  professed  followers,  and  the  tears  are  in  our  eyes,  for  the  worst  enemies  He  has 
are  tney  of  His  own  household.  Suppose  Judas  does  betray  Christ,  is  Christ  any 
the  worse  for  that  ?  You  are  not  asked  to  trust  in  Judas,  you  are  asked  to  trust  in 
Christ.  The  reason  why  it  pays  to  make  bad  sovereigns  is  because  good  ones  are  so 
valuable  ;  and  that  is  why  it  pays  certain  people,  as  they  think,  to  pass  themselves 
ofif  as  Christians.  If  there  were  no  real  Christians,  there  would  be  no  pretenders  to 
that  name.  8_.  "But,"  says  another,  "here  is  my  stumbling-block:  if  I  were  to 
believe  in  Christ,  and  become  a  Christian,  I  should  have  to  alter  my  whole  life." 
Just  so.  There  would  have  to  be  a  turning  of  everything  upside  down ;  but  then 
He  that  sits  upon  the  throne  says,  "Behold,  I  make  all  things  new."  9.  "Oh, 
but,"  says  one,  "  I  should  have  to  run  the  gauntlet  in  my  family  if  I  became  a 
Christian."  Which  is  the  better  thing,  do  you  think — ^to  be  sneered  at  for  doing 
right  or  to  be  commended  for  doing  wrong?  (C.  H.  Spwrgeon.)  Take  up  the 
stumbling-block. — Stumbling-blocks : — As  a  Conqueror  the  Messiah  was  coming,  but 
there  was  great  sin  and  unpreparedness.  Hence  the  prophet  cried,  "Take  up,  take 
up  the  stumbling-blocks."  Cnrist  is  still  advancing  in  power  in  the  worli  TTm 
truth  is  the  direct  and  permanent  way  by  which  man  may  tread  to  heaven  and 
immortality.  Various  stumbling-blocks  of  human  placing  need  removal.  I.  There 
is  the  stumbling-block  of  selfishness.  This  has  always  cumbered  the  way. 
Ananias  and  Judas  yielded  to  it.  II.  Close  by  this  block  is  another,  that  of 
INTOLERANCE.  The  Church,  strong  outwardly,  was  impatient  of  divergence  of 
opinion.  III.  Terrorism  had  also  to  be  rolled  out  of  the  way.  Figure  was  taken 
for  fact.  The  great  Father  was  presented  in  the  guise  of  an  implacable  judge. 
Harsh  representations  of  God  and  future  punishment  caused  revolt.  IV.  There  is 
the  stumbling-block  of  an  elaborate  ceremonial  system.  V.  The  block  of 
indifferentism,  on  the  other  hand,  also  needs  removaL  IndiflFerentism  is  only 
another  name  for  selfism.  It  should  matter  to  each  man  if  his  fellow  suflFers. 
VI,  Some  will  say  that  all  the  stumbling-blocks  mentioned  are  nothing  compared 
with  those  formed  by  the  inconsistencies  of  Christian  people.  The  last  is  a 
conglomerate  rock.  Worldly  attractions,  amusements,  desires,  lusts,  are  often  too 
strong  for  those  who  profess  to  be  unworldly.  Byron  said,  "  The  inconsistencies  of 
professing  Christians  made  me  an  infidel."  Was  he  alone!  Conclusion:  How  are 
these  evils,  these  blocks  of  offence  to  be  removed,  and  a  way  made  for  the  coming  of 
our  King  Jesus  ?  There  must  be  more  faith  in  the  presence  and  potency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  Church.  (Ibid.)  The  road-mender  (with  Iviii.  12,  "the  restorer  of 
paths  ") : — Few  are  the  exceptionally  gifted  men  and  women  whom  God  calls  to  be 
pioneers,  discoverers  and  creators  of  new  paths — road-makers.  "Primal  needed 
work,"  to  use  Walt  Whitman's  phrase,  is  not  possible  for  the  majority  of  us.  We 
have  not  the  genius,  the  energy,  the  courage,  the  self-reliance,  the  independence  of 
intellectual  comradeship  which  characterize  the  select  company  who  are  able  to  hew 
their  way,  like  Stanleys  men  in  "  Darkest  Africa,"  through  forests,  and  force  their 
way  through  wildernesses  and  deserts,  thus  opening  up  new  highways  for  human 
thought  and  life,  and  action,  and  civilization,  and  new  highways  for  God.  But  we 
can  all  be  road-menders.  We  can  all  aid  in  removing  the  stumbling-blocks  out  of 
the  way.  We  can  all  be  restorers  of  paths.  This  is  the  humbler  task.  It  demands 
fewer  talents,  less  daring,  less  originality  than  pioneer  work,  but  who  can  gauge  its 
value  ?  Who  will  venture  to  affirm  that  it  is  less  honouring  or  less  acceptable  to 
God,  and  less  of  a  boon  to  man  and  the  world !  Perhaps,  after  all,  to  mend  the  old 
roads,  to  restore  the  former  paths  which  have  fallen  out  of  repair,  and  make  them 
straighter,  safer,  and  more  comfortable  to  the  feet  of  travel-worn  pilgrims,  is  as 
noble  and  useful  a  vocation  as  any  to  which  God  calls  His  servants.  I.  What  need 
there  is  for  road-menders  and  restorers  of  paths  in  the  economic  and  social  world  ! 
To  protect  the  widow  and  orphan  ;  to  stand  by  the  oppressed  ;  to  ameliorate  the  lot 
of  the  starving  poor  and  the  slaves  of  the  sweater  ;  to  grapple  with  the  drink  curse, 
the  gambling  curse,  the  curse  of  impurity,  the  curse  of  an  inordinate  love  of  gold 
and  pleasure ;  tht  onrse  of  preventable  poverty,  preventable  disease,  preventable 


ivn.]  ISAIAH,  287 

premature  old  age  and  death — ^what  a  field  of  seirice  for  God  and  man  I  II.  What 
need  there  is  for  road-menders  and  restorers  of  paths  in  cue  national  affairs  I 
As  lovers  of  onr  countiy ;  as  patriots  who  have  a  share  in  shaping  the  home  and 
foreign  policies  of  our  Uovemments  and  moulding  public  thought  and  national 
conduct  and  character,  let  us  do  what  we  can  to  lead  our  nation  into  saner  and  safer 
and  nobler  paths.  III.  "What  need  there  is  for  road-menders  and  restorers  of  paths 
in  THE  BELiGious  WORLD  !  Is  not  much  of  our  Churchianity  to-day  an  empty  form, 
a  mere  show  ?  How  far  removed  from  our  professedly  Christian  life  in  the  Church 
are  our  commercial  life,  our  political  life,  our  home  life,  our  society  life  in  the 
world !  What  an  amount  of  nominal  Church  membership  and  formal  Christianity 
there  is  nowadays  !    IV.  What  need  there  is  for  road-menders  and  restorers  of  paths 

in   THE   SPHERE  OF  PERSONAL  GOODNESS  AND  HELPFULNESS  !     After  aU,   the  best 

contribution  any  one  of  us  can  make  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  man  is 
that  of  a  really  good  life  ;  a  life  fashioned  after  the  pattern  given  us  by  our  Lord 
and  Master ;  a  life  filled  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  life  of  fnendship  and  filial  fellowship 
with  God.     {R.  BHggs,  M.A.) 

Yers.  15-21.  For  thus  saith  the  High  and  Lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity. — 
A  royal  manifesto : — In  His  character  as  Sovereign,  God  brings  before  us,  and  before 
His  loyal  subjects  in  every  age,  what  we  may  regard  as  His  two  titles  and  His  two 
palaces.  I.  His  two  titles.  1.  "The  High  and  Lofty  One."  The  nation  had 
lapsed  into  unblushing  idolatry.  They  had  made  surrender  of  their  traditional 
creed,  and  specially  of  its  fundamental  article — the  personality  and  unity  of  Jehovah  ; 
degrading  it  with  the  abominations  of  the  Phoenician  and  Assyrian  mythologies. 
In  addition  to  altars  to  Baal,  crowning  the  high  places,  statues  of  Astarte  were 
erected  amid  the  groves  of  Terebinth.  This  latter  goddess  seemed  to  have  been 
adopted  by  Ahaz  as  his  tutelary  deity ;  an  awful  and  debasing  counterfeit  truly  of  the 
Supreme :  sitting  on  a  lion,  holding  a  thunderbolt  and  sceptre  in  either  hand,  and 
her  head  surrounded  with  the  crescent  moon.  No  king,  before  or  since,  so  defiled 
and  desecrated  the  holy  temple.  Isaiah  himself,  amid  this  awful  deterioration,  this 
widespread  atheism,  might  well  be  apt  to  give  way  to  despair.  His  faith  at  times 
could  hardly  fail  to  be  clouded.  But  the  God  he  served  calmed  his  fears  and  allayed 
his  apprehensions  by  a  special  proclamation  of  His  glory  and  goodness,  "  I  am  the 
alone  High  and  Lofty  One."  2.  "Whose  name  is  Holy."  The  worst  characteristic 
of  these  heathen  deities  was  their  unholiness.  II.  His  two  palaces.  1.  The  palace 
of  eternity.  "  That  inhabiteth  eternity."  In  nothing  do  we  feel  how  puny  we  are, 
as  when  we  attempt  to  scan  the  marvels  and  glories  of  this  Divine  dwelling-place, 
with  its  illimitable  corridors  of  space  and  time.  2.  What  a  transition,  from  the 
halls  and  corridors  of  eternity,  to  the  human  bosom  I  There  is  a  twofold  description 
here  given  of  this  humbler  tabernacle  where  Jehovah  dwells — a  twofold  characteristio 
of  the  human  heart.  (1)  It  is  contrite.  (2)  After  contrition,  or  as  the  sequel  and 
complement  of  it,  comes  humility.  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The  High  gracious  to  the 
lowly: — I.  Let  us  consider  who  is  speaking  in  the  text.  This  is  necessary  to  a 
right  apprehension  of  what  He  says,  and  particularly  to  a  clear  perception  of  those 
riches  of  condescension,  compassion,  and  grace,  which  His  words  imfold  to  our  view. 
1.  He  is  "the  High  and  Lofty  One."  2.  He  inhabiteth  eternity.  He  is  therefore 
as  different  as  possible  from  the  children  of  men.  3.  His  name  is  Holy.  II.  Let  ua 
consider  what  is  said  by  Him.  1.  He  tells  us  that  He  "dwells  in  the  high  and 
holy  place  ; "  that  is,  in  the  heaven  of  heavens,  the  peculiar  residence  of  the  Deity, 
where  His  glory  is  chiefly  manifested,  and  His  favour  is  chiefly  enjoyed.  Heaven  ia 
not  only  high,  but  the  highest  place  in  the  whole  creation.  There  is  no  other  place 
that  can  for  a  moment  be  compared  with  it,  either  in  glory  or  felicity.  Nor  is  there 
any  other  place  so  holy.  2.  God  here  says  that  He  dwells  also  with  him  that  is  of  a 
contrite  and  humble  spirit.  By  the  man  thus  described  we  are  to  understand  the 
sinner  who  has  been  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  has  been  convinced  of  his 
sinfulness,  and  brought  to  true  repentance.  3.  God  here  tells  us  what  is  the  end  He 
has  in  view  in  dwelling  with  such  characters.  It  is  to  "revive  the  spirit  of  the 
humble,  and  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones."  The  same  God  that  afflicts 
the  sinner  revives  and  cheers  him.  Learn — (1)  To  entertain  right  thoughts  of  God. 
(2)  To  harbour  just  thoughts  of  the  contrite,  humble,  and  penitent  ofiender.  (3)  How 
we  may  obtain  solid  happiness.  (2).  Reea.)  God  in  hea/ven  ami  in  the  heart : — God 
has  two  special  dwellings — ^the  high  and  holy  place,  i.  e.  the  heaven  not  merely  of 
space,  but  of  pure  and  blessed  spirits ;  and  the  hearts  of  men  who  have  felt  their  sin 
uid  their  need  of  God.    1.  These  two  dwellings  are  fax  apart.    How  wide  and  great 


288  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvii. 

the  one,  how  small  and  narrow  the  other  I  How  pennanent  the  one,  how  passing 
the  other  !  How  bright  and  untroubled  the  one,  how  dark  and  troubled  the  other  I 
2.  They  have  yet  something  in  common.  The  high  place  is  akin  to  the  humble 
spirit,  for  to  see  the  far  and  high,  and  to  long  for  it,  is  to  rise  ;  to  have  something 
ot  God  within  lifts  up.  The  holy  place  is  akin  to  the  contrite  heart ;  for  to  feel  the 
sin  and  separation  is  to  reach  to  the  holy,  and  this  comes  from  having  God  already 
in  the  heart  at  work.  3.  They  are  to  be  brought  into  one.  God  dwells  in  them  to 
unite  them,  to  revive  the  spirit,  to  give  life.  And  where  God  gives  true  life,  He  gives 
the  earnest  of  heaven  and  eternity.  These  hearts  are  therefore  on  the  way  to  being 
God's  pei-petual  home.  4.  The  mil  end  of  these  words  is  in  Christ.  He  came  from 
the  high  and  holy  place  to  dwell  among  men,  and  find  a  way  into  human  hearts — to 
make  heaven  and  the  heart  one  and  eternal.  {British  Weekly.)  Man's  greatness  and 
God's  greatness: — I.  That  in  which  the  greatness  of  God  consists.  1.  The  first 
measurement,  so  to  speak,  which  is  given  of  God's  greatness,  is  in  respect  of  time. 
He  inhabiteth  eternity.  2.  There  is  a  second  measure  given  us  of  God  in  this  verse. 
It  is  in  respect  of  space.  He  dwelleth  in  the  high  and  lofty  place.  He  dwelleth, 
moreover,  in  the  most  insignificant  place— «ven  the  heart  of  man.  Aik.  the  idea  by 
which  the  prophet  would  here  exhibit  to  us  the  greatness  of  God  is  that  of  His  eternal 
omnipresence.  It  is  difficult  to  say  which  conception  carries  with  it  the  greatest 
exaltation — that  of  boundless  space  or  that  of  unbounded  time.  3.  "The  third 
measure  which  is  given  us  of  God  respects  His  character.  His  name  is  Holy — 
(1)  The  chief  knowledge  which  we  have  of  God's  holiness  comes  from  our  acquaint- 
ance with  unholiness.  We  know  what  impurity  is — God  is  not  that.  "We  scarcely 
can  be  rightly  said  to  know,  that  is  to  feel,  what  God  is.  And  therefore  this  is 
implied  in  the  very  name  of  holiness.  Holiness  in  the  Jewish  sense  means  simply 
separateness.  From  all  that  is  wrong,  and  mean,  and  base,  our  God  is  for  ever 
separate.  (2)  There  is  another  way  in  which  God  gives  to  us  a  conception  of  what 
this  holiness  implies.  Holiness  is  only  a  shadow  to  our  minds,  till  it  receives  shape 
and  substance  in  the  life  of  Christ.  (3)  There  is  a  third  light  in  which  God's  holi- 
ness is  shown  to  us,  and  that  is  in  the  sternness  with  which  He  recoils  from  guilt. 
Revelation  opens  to  us  a  scene  beyond  the  grave,  when  this  shall  be  exhibited  in  full 
operation.  There  will  be  an  everlasting  banishment  from  God's  presence  of  that 
impurity  on  which  the  last  efforts  had  been  tried  in  vain.  But  it  is  quite  a  mistake 
to  suppose  that  this  is  only  a  matter  of  revelation.  Traces  of  it  we  have  now  on  this 
side  the  sepulchre.  Human  life  is  fuU  of  God's  recoil  from  sin.  II.  That  in  which 
man's  greatness  consists.  1.  The  nature  of  that  greatness.  In  these  two  things 
the  greatness  of  man  consists.  One  is  to  have  God  so  dwelling  in  us  as  to  impart 
His  character  to  us  ;'and  the  other  is  to  have  God  so  dwelling  in  us  that  we  recognize 
His  presence,  and  know  that  we  are  His  and  He  is  ours.  2.  The  persons  who  are 
truly  great.  These  the  Holy  Scripture  has  divided  into  two  classes — those  who  are 
humble  and  those  who  are  contrite  in  heart.  Or  rather,  it  will  be  observed  that  it 
is  the  same  class  of  character  under  different  circumstances.  _  Humbleness  is  the 
frame  of  mind  of  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  innocence,  contrition  of  those  who  are 
in  a  state  of  repentant  guilt.  Let  not  the  expression  "  innocence  "  be  misunderstood. 
Innocence  in  its  true  and  highest  sense  never  existed  but  once  upon  this  earth. 
Innocence  cannot  be  the  religion  of  man  now.  But  yet  there  are  those  who  have 
walked  with  God  from  youth,  not  quenching  the  spirit  which  He  gave  them,  and 
who  are  therefore  comparatively  innocent  beings.  They  are  described  here  as  the 
humble  in  heart.  Two  things  are  required  for  this  state  of  mind.  One  is  that  a 
man  should  have  a  true  estimate  of  God,  and  the  other  is  that  he  should  have  a  true 
estimate  of  himself.  The  other  class  of  those  who  are  truly  great  are  the  contrite  in 
spirit.  Conclusion : — 1.  The  danger  of  coming  into  collision  with  such  a  God  as  our 
God.  Day  by  day  we  commit  sins  of  thought  and  word  of  which  the  dull  eye  of 
man  takes  no  cognizance.  He  whose  name  is  Holy  cannot  pass  them  bv.  God  can 
wait,  for  He  has  a  whole  eternity  before  Him  in  which  He  may  strike.  2.  The 
heavenly  character  of  condescension.  It  is  not  from  the  insignificance  of  man  that 
God's  dwelling  with  him  is  so  strange.  But  the  marvel  is  that  the  habitation  which 
He  has  chosen  for  Himself  is  an  impure  one.  If  we  would  be  Godlike,  we  must 
follow  in  the  same  steps.  Our  temptation  is  to  do  exactly  the  reverse.  We  are  for 
ever  wishing  to  obtain  the  friendship  and  the  intimacy  of  those  above  us  in  the 
world.  3.  The  guilt  of  two  things  of  which  the  world  is  full—vanity  and  pride. 
The  distinction  consists  in  this — the  vain  man  looks  for  the  admiration  of  others — 
the  proud  man  requires  nothing  but  his  own.  (J''.  W.  Bobertson,  M.A.)  A  voiet 
/rom  eternity  to  the  children  qftime: — I.  This  voice  reveals  as  existence  thai 


<]EAP.i.Tn.]  ISAIAH.  280 

STAinW  IN  STTBLIMB  CONTRAST  WITH  ALL  THAT  IS  HUMAN.     II.   ThIS  VOICE  KEVEALS 

A  PRIVILEGE  OF  IMMENSE  VALUE  TO  THE  GOOD.  1.  This  VOICE  reveals  God's  special 
regard  for  a  ^ood  man's  experience.  This  High  and  Lofty  One  condescends  to  regard 
■with  special  interest  those  of  a  "contrite"  and  "humble"  spirit.  2.  This  voiOB 
reveals  God's  special  contact  with  a  good  man's  existence.  He  not  only  dwells  in  the 
"  high  and  holy  place,"  but  "with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit." 
"  Dwelling  "  implies  a  close  intimacy.  He  is,  by  the  influences  of  His  love,  nearer 
to  the  good  than  He  is  to  others  ;  near  to  guide,  to  succour,  to  strengthen.  Dwelling 
implies  not  only  a  close  intimacy,  but  a  permanent  one.  He  does  not  come  and  go 
as  an  occasional  sojourner ;  He  continues  as  a  settled  resident  in  the  soul.  He  is 
always  with  His  people,  in  sorrow  and  joy,  in  life  and  death.  3.  This  voice  reveals 
Ood's  special  quickening  of  a  good  man's  spirit.  "  To  revive  the  spirit  of  the  himible, 
and  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones."  God  comes  down  to  the  spirit,  not  to 
crush  it,  but  to  revive  it,  to  give  it  a  new  life,  to  bring  out  by  the  sunshine  of  Hia 
presence  all  its  dormant  germs,  and  to  make  it  fruitful  in  all  good  works.  He  gives 
it  a  life,  over  which  circumstances,  time,  and  death,  have  no  power.  (Z>.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Ood: — He  is  a  God,  saith  one,  whose  nature  is  majesty,  whose  place  is  immensity, 
whose  time  is  eternity,  whose  life  is  sanctity,  whose  power  is  omnipotency,  whose 
work  is  mercy,  whose  wrath  is  justice,  whose  throne  is  sublimity,  whose  seat  ia 
humility,  (t/.  Trapp.)  Ood's  eternity : — Though  intellectually  incomprehensible, 
the  thought  of  it  is  inestimably  valuable.  1.  It  furnishes  us  with  the  only  satis- 
factory account  of  the  origin  of  the  universe.  Creation  is  but  God's  eternal  thoughts 
in  shape.  His  eternal  will  in  action.  2.  It  shows  to  us  our  incapability  of  pro- 
nouncing upon  His  ways.  During  our  existence  here.  He  is  working  out  a  plan  that, 
like  Himself,  never  had  a  beginning  and  wiU  never  have  an  end.  3.  It  enables 
us  to  give  an  eternal  freshness  to  the  Bible.  Being  eternal,  what  He  thought 
when  He  inspired  men  to  write  the  Book  He  thinis  now.  {D.  TTwmas,  D.D.) 
The  contrite  spirit: — The  word  "contrition"  in  the  text  is  a  very  strong  word. 
It  literally  means  a  pounded  state,  as  of  a  stone  which  by  blow  on  blow  of  hea-vy 
hammers,  or  the  grinding  of  wagon  wheels,  has  been  crushed  into  dust.  By  this 
vigorous  metaphor  it  strives  to  make  vivid  to  us  the  moral  state  of  a  man  whose 
whole  strength  of  self-reliance  and  erectness  of  moral  carriage  has  been  broken 
down  through  the  sense  of  guUt  and  moral  weakness ;  one  who  by  repeated  trials 
of  his  own  instability,  and  blow  after  blow  of  discouraging  rebuke  from  God,  feels 
himself  left  in  the  path  of  evil  a  heart-broken  man,  over  whom  the  trampHng 
feet  of  innumerable  masterful  sins,  with  all  their  evil  followers,  seem  to  find 
free  passage ;  a  man  beaten  down  and  crushed  out  of  spirit  by  vain  struggles 
against  sin  and  inescapable  poimdings  from  the  violated  laws  of  God.  Now  this 
moral  condition,  though  it  looks  hopeless,  is  really  a  hopeful  one.  It  is  the  only 
hopeful  one.  And  the  hopefulness  of  it  lies  here,  that  no  man  is  ever  so  crushed  in 
heart  by  sin  unless  he  hates  sin.  {J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  High  and  Lofty  One 
dwelling  with  the  contrite  man  (with  Ixvi.  1,  2) : — I.  We  remark  that,  from  eternity, 

THE  residence  OF  GOD  HAS  ALWAYS  CORRESPONDED  WITH  HiS   INFINITE  NATUEB 

AND  PERFECTIONS.  TMs  scems  to  be  implied  in  the  text  in  three  particulars :  being 
eternal.  He  has  inhabited  eternity  ;  as  the  High  and  Lofty  One,  He  has  occupied  the 
throne  of  supremacy ;  and  His  name  being  Holy,  He  has  dwelt  in  the  high  and  holy 
place.  II.  If  He  condescend  to  hold  intercourse  with  man,  it  can  only  bb 
IN  harmony  with  the  same  principle.  He  has  not  one  principle  for  one  world 
and  another  principle  for  another.  Select  any  principle  of  His  conduct,  and  you 
will  find  that,  like  Himself,  it  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting ;  and  aU  this  owing 
to  that  infinite  perfection  of  His  nature  which  neither  requires  nor  admits  of  a 
change.  1.  Why  is  it  that  He  comes  forth  and  gives  us  this  description  of  Himself? 
Why,  but  to  show  us  that,  if  He  condescends  to  hold  any  intercourse  with  us,  the 
terms  of  that  intercourse  must  be  prescribed  entirely  by  Himself.  "You  judge  "  (as 
if  He  had  said)  "  of  what  a  fellow-creature  may  expect  from  you  by  his  titles ;  hear 
My  titles — 'Jehovah,  the  High  and  Lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name 
is  Holy. ' "  What  distinction  can  you  add  to  them  ?  You  estimate  a  mortal's  rank  by 
the  remoteness  of  Ms  ancestry — "  I  am  the  First,  the  unoriginated  Being. "  You  judge 
of  a  mortal's  rank  by  the  mansion  he  inhabits,  and,  on  occasion,  you  prepare  for  his 
reception  accordingly.  "I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place."  You  can  be  awed  by 
the  presence  of  even  human  worth  ;  what,  then,  should  you  feel  in  the  presence  of 
Him  whose  name  is  Holy — who,  if  He  looks  on  iniquity,  can  only  look  on  it  to  scorch 
and  wither  it  up !  You  think  of  erecting  a  temple  which  shall  attract  the  Majesty 
•f  heaven  by  its  splendours,  as  if  you  should  invite  a  monarch  to  descend  from  hif 
▼ounx.  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lvn. 

throne  by  gilding  his  footstool.  On  account  of  His  greatness,  you  would  enlarge  its 
dimensions.  "  But  do  not  I  ffl  heaven  and  earth  ? "  On  account  of  His  grandeur, 
you  would  multiply  its  priests  and  bedizen  them  with  costly  robes.  Think  of  His 
Btate  and  retinue  above,  wh«re  His  train  fiUeth  the  temple,  where  thousand  thousands 
minister  unto  Him,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stand  before  Him  !  On 
account  of  His  supremacy,  you  would  multiply  His  sacrifices.  * '  WiU  I  eat  the  flesh 
of  bulls,"  saith  God,  "  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats  ? "  Multiply  them  as  you  will,  set 
all  Lebanon  in  a  blaze,  and  offer  up  all  its  herds  as  a  bumt-otfering,  still  He  can  say, 
"  Every  beast  of  the  forest  is  Mine,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thoiisand  hiUs."  Offer  up 
the  whole  material  world,  and  He  could  say,  "The  world  is  Mine,  and  the  fulness 
thereof."  But  because  man  may  have  convicted  himself  of  folly  in  these  respects,  is 
he,  therefore,  to  retire  mortified  and  in  despair  of  ever  securing  the  Divine  presence  ? 
Let  us  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  yet  say  to  us.  "I  dwell .  .  .  with  him  also  that 
is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit.  What  1  is  the  transition  from  that  height  to 
that  depth  nothing  to  Him,  that  He  speaks  of  it  in  one  sentence — in  the  same 
breath?  "With  him  also" — as  if  it  made  little  or  no  difference  to  His  greatness 
whether  He  dwelt  there  or  here  1  2.  Having  thus  humbled  Himself,  we  see  the 
reasonableness  of  His  selecting  the  humble  and  the  contrite  as  the  objects  of  His 
Divine  regard.  It  is  only  such  that  are  prepared  to  receive  Him.  As  the  infinite 
and  eternal  Spirit,  He  comes  to  commune  with  our  spirit ;  but  in  the  case  of  every 
class  except  the  humble,  He  finds  the  ground  already  occupied,  and  He  has  to  stand 
at  the  door  and  knock.  As  the  High  and  Lofty  One,  He  comes  to  have  His  supremacy 
recognized,  to  receive  us  at  His  footstool ;  but  all  except  the  hmnble  are  seated  on 
little  thrones  of  their  own,  and  will  not  come  down  to  receive  Him.  As  the  Being 
•whose  name  is  Holy,  He  comes  to  imprint  on  us  the  likeness  of  His  own  image  ;  but 
none  save  the  humble  and  those  melted  in  contrition  are  in  a  state  to  receive  the 
sacred  impress.  He  comes  to  be  honoured,  appreciated,  adored ;  but  all  save  the 
humble  are  busied  in  asserting  their  own  Httle  claims — are,  in  effect,  prepared  to 
quarrel  with  His  supremacy,  and  to  pluck  at  His  sceptre.  Can  we  wonder,  then, 
that  if  He  comes  to  commune  with  us.  His  abode  should  be  with  the  humble  ?  Where 
should  goodness  dwell  but  with  gratitude  ?  Where  should  the  fulness  of  the  Creator 
pour  itself  forth  but  into  the  emptiness  of  the  creature  ?  3.  But  will  He  commune 
even  with  the  contrite  ?  For  here  the  wonder  presents  itself,  that  He  should  con- 
descend even  to  this.  And  what  part  of  His  conduct  towards  us  is  not  marked  with 
condescension  %  And  what  part  of  His  condescension  is  not  an  abyss  of  wonder  ? 
III.  From  this  it  follovfs,  that  no  religious  woeship  can  be  acceptable 
TO  God,  except  as  it  harmonizes  with  the  character  of  God.  Indeed,  if 
this  harmony  were  not  necessary — if  the  individual  or  the  Church  could  obtain  access 
to  God  without  such  harmony  with  His  character,  it  could  not  conduce  to  their  real 
advantage.  That  in  which  the  happiness  of  our  spiritual  natiu-e  consists  must  be 
something  congenial  to  that  nature,  and  something  which  is  capable  of  imparting 
itself  to  that  nature.  1.  If  supremaw  comes  here.  He  expects  to  behold  subordination, 
and  what  is  that  but  himulity  ?  Humility  does  not  necessarily  and  of  itself  imply 
a  sense  of  guilt.  Angels  are  among  the  most  humble  of  His  creatures,  for  they  never 
lose  sight  of  their  entire  dependence  on  Him.  And  the  greatest  example  of  excellence 
which  earth  ever  saw,  though  unstained  by  a  single  pollution,  could  say,  ' '  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  of  heart."  2.  Humility  is  not  enough  for  man.  If  they  who  have 
never  sinned  are  humble,  more  than  humility  must  be  proper  for  man — there  must 
be  contrition  also.  The  text  implies  this :  it  intimates  that  if  the  High  and  Holy 
One  comes  amongst  us.  He  expects  to  be  received  amidst  the  sighs  of  penitence  and 
the  tears  of  godly  sorrow.  3.  But  more — if  this  voice  of  mercy  is  to  be  heard — if 
He  comes  amongst  us  to  address  us.  He  expects  that  we  should  tremble  at  His 
word — that  is,  that  our  hearts  should  vibrate  and  respond  to  every  accent  He  utters. 
But  if  the  very  perfection  of  His  nature  makes  this  correspondence  necessary,  so.also 
do  the  wants  and  the  well-being  of  our  natuie.  Everything  in  creation  trembles 
and  responds  to  the  voice  of  God  but  the  stony  heart  of  man  ;  and  the  welfare  of 
everything  depends  on  its  power  thus  to  respond.     IV.  The  subject  inti  mates 

THAT  ALL  HUMAN  INSTRUMENTALITY,  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD,  DEPENDS  FOR 
ITS  EFFICIENCY   ON  THE  SAME  CONDITION — THAT  OF   HARMONY  WITH  THE   DiVINE 

CHARACTER.  {J.  Harris,  D.D.)  The  High  and  Lofty  One  {v/iih  c)ia^.\s.\\.  1,  2) : — 
I.  The  Divine  majesty.  Consider — 1.  The  grandeur  of  His  state.  "Heaven  is 
My  throne,  and  the  earth  is  My  footstool,"  a  throne  being  an  emblem  of  authority 
andpower.  2.  His  attributes.  II.  The  Divine  condescension.  1.  The  objects 
of  Tfi«  regard.    The  qualities  which  attract  His  attention  belong  to  the  mind  and 


CHAP.  Lvii.]  ISAIAH.  291 

heart.     (1)  God  dwells  not  with  the  wise  because  of  their  wisdom — not  with  the 
great  because  of  their  greatness — not  with  the  rich  because  of  their  riches — not  with 
the  poor  because  of  their  poverty,  but  with  all — whether  wise  or  great,  rich  or  poor — 
who  possess  a  contrite  spirit.     (2)  Again :  those  with  whom  God  dwells  are  the 
humble.    God's  grace  is  at  war  with  pride.    (3)  Those  with  whom  God  dwells  cherish 
a  spirit  of  reverence  for  His  Word.     "To  that  man  will  I  look  that  trembleth  at 
My  Word."    There  is  little  doubt  that  we  should  tremble  at  God's  word  if  it  were 
addressed  to  us  by  an  audible  voice.     Viewed  in  whatever  light,  stUl  the  Bible  is 
a  wonderful  book.     But  what  reverence  is  due  to  it  as  the  oracle  of  truth,  as  the 
rule  of  life,  as  the  lamp  which  God  has  kindled  to  be  a  light  to  om:  path  1     We 
reverence  this  Word  when  we  receive  all  Scripture  as  given  by  inspiration  of  God, 
and  ' '  thus  saith  the  Lord "  settles  with  us  every  religious  controversy.     2.  The 
expressions  of  the  Divine  regard.    (1)  "To  this  man  wiU  I  look,"  figurative  language 
denoting  the  interest  which  God  takes  in  contrite  and  humble  souls,  and  the  com- 
placency with  which  He  regards  them.     (2)  It  is  added,  "  With  him  will  I  dwell." 
First  of  all  the  question  is  proposed,  "  Where  is  the  house  that  ye  will  build  Me  ?" 
My  temple  is  the  universe,  I  inhabit  eternity,  I  dwell  iu  the  high  and  holy  place. 
"  Where  is  the  house  that  ye  will  build  Mc  ?  '  What  a  mystery  is  here,  God  dwelling 
by  His  Spirit  in  the  heart,  restoring  the  reign  of  holiness,  setting  up  His  law, 
establishing  His  authority,  shedding  abroad  His  gracious  influences,  filling  it  with 
light  and  peace  and  love  !     (3)  But  He  is  said  to  dwell  there  for  a  special  purpose, 
"to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones."    There  are  many  things  in  life  to  depress 
and  discourage  us — some  are  cast  down  by  adversities,  some  are  harassed  by  spiritual 
doubts,  some  are  suffering  from  a  consciousness  of  sin  ;  and  with  all  such  the  High 
and  Lofty  One  dwells.     {H.  J.  Gamble.)     The  dignity  and  condescension  of  God : — 
God  is  set  before  us — I.  Ik  the  dignity  of  His  characteb.     We  have — 1.  His 
rank  as  supreme.     "  The  High  and  Lofty  One."    2.  His  existence  as  eternal.    "That 
inhabiteth  eternity."     3.  His  nature  as  unsullied.     "  Whose  name  is  Holy. "    And 
as  His  name  is,  so  is  He.     II.  His  wonderful  condescension.     "With  him  also 
that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,"  etc.     1.  Permanence.     He  "dwells  "  in  the 
high  and  holy  place  ;  it  is  His  chosen,  His  special.  His  fixed  abode.     When  it  is, 
therefore,  added,  "with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,"  the  same 
idea  is  set  forth.    "  If  any  man  love  Me,"  said  the  Saviour,  "  he  will  keep  My  words  ; 
and  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  Avith 
him. "    2.  Attachment.    We  may  have  to  do  with  those  for  whom  we  feel  no  regard  ; 
but  we  would  not,  if  invited,  take  up  our  residence  with  such.     When  persons  dwell 
together  as  a  matter  of  free  choice,  it  is  evident  that  there  is  something  to  attract 
them  to  each  other.     3.  Communion.     4.  Consolation.     Where  He  comes.  He  comes 
to  bless  ;  and  how  valuable  is  the  blessing  which  is  here  specified — "to  revive  the 
spirit  of  the  humble,"  etc.    This  He  does  by  the  quickening  and  comforting  influences 
of  that  Divine  Spirit  which  is  promised  to  all  them  that  believe.    III.  His  fatherly 
REBUKES  AND  CORRECTIONS.     1.  Their  measure.     He  whose  name  is  Holy  cannot 
but  show  His  displeasure  against  sin,  whether  it  be  found  in  the  openly  rebeUious 
or  in  His  own  people.     But,  in  reference  to  the  latter,  there  are  gracious  limits 
within  which  His  righteous  anger  is  restrained.     "For  I  wiU  not  contend  for 
ever,"  etc.  (ver.  16).     2.  Their  cause.     "  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I 
wroth,"  etc.  (ver.  17).     It  seems  that  a  covetous  spirit  pervaded  the  people  of  that 
generation  at  large.     Covetousness  is  an  abominable  thing  iu  the  sight  of  God. 
3.  Their  final  issue.     For  a  time  the  chastisements  were  unavailing,  but  the  people 
were  brought  at  length  to  a  state  of  penitence.     It  is  therefore  said,  "  I  have  seen 
his  ways,  and  wUl  heal  him,"  etc.  (ver.  18).     IV.  The  offers  of  His  love  and 
MERCY.     "  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips  ;  Peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  ofl",  and  to 
him  that  is  near,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  (ver.  19).     The  expression  "  fruit  of  the  lips  " 
sometimes  denotes  praise,  as  when  the  apostle  says,  "By  Him,  therefore,  let  us 
offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually  ;  that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips,  giving 
thanks  to  His  name."     But  while  what  is  here  announced  might  well  excite  our 
warmest  gratitude,  it  is  probable  that  the  above  phrase  is  used  here  in  a  more  general 
signification.     The  fruit  of  the  lips  is  what  the  lips  produce,  even  words  ;  and  those 
which  we  have  now  to  consider  are  pre-eminently  gracious  words.     In  reference  to 
this  proclamation  we  notice — 1.  Its  nature.     There  is  a  twofold  view  in  which  the 
word  "peace  "  may  be  regarded.     The  first  is  that  of  good- will,  which  was  the  sense 
in  which  it  was  employed  in  ordinary  salutations.     But  in  its  more  restricted  sense 
it  means  reconciliation.     2.  Its  objects.     "  Peace,  peace,  to  him  that  is  far  off,  and 
to  him  that  is  near,  saith  the  Lord."    The  Jews  are  described  as  "a  people  near 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.tvn. 

unto  Him,"  There  are  those  among  ourselves  who  may  be  regarded  as  farther  from 
God  and  from  righteousness  than  others.  To  the  chief  of  sinners  we  are  permitted 
to  say,  "  I  bring  vou  good  tidings,  of  great  joy."  3.  Its  efficiency.  "And  I  will 
heal  him."  I  will  make  the  message  effectual.  V.  His  feelings  towakds  His 
INCORRIGIBLE  ENEMIES  (vers.  20,  21).  {Anon.)  Eternity. — The  contemplation  of 
tiemity : — There  are  some  subjects  on  which  it  would  be  good  to  dwell,  if  it  were 
only  for  the  sake  of  that  enlargement  of  mind  which  is  produced  by  their  con- 
templation. And  eternity  is  one  of  these,  so  that  you  caimot  steadily  fix  the 
thoughts  upon  it  without  being  sensible  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  elevation,  at  the  same 
time  that  you  are  humbled  by  a  personal  feeling  of  utter  insignificance.  You  have 
come  in  contact  with  something  so  immeasurable — beyond  the  narrow  range  of  our 
common  speculations — that  you  are  exalted  by  the  very  conception  of  it.  Now  the 
only  way  we  have  of  forming  any  idea  of  eternity  is  by  going,  step  by  step,  up  to 
the  largest  measures  of  time  we  know  of,  and  so  ascending,  on  and  on,  till  we  are 
lost  in  wonder.  "We  cannot  grasp  eternity,  but  we  can  learn  something  of  it  by 
perceiving  that,  rise  to  what  portion  of  time  we  will,  eternity  is  vaster  than  the 
vastest.  {F.  W.  Eohertson,  M.A.)  Eternity: — 1.  Eternity  is  the  most  distasteful 
subject  to  the  natural  man.  2.  Whether  ignored  or  not  its  importance  remains  the 
same.  3.  In  eternity  there  will  be  some  marvellous  revelations.  4.  The  nature  of 
your  eternity  wUl  be  decided  at  the  Cross.  It  is  not  the  number  or  the  heinousness 
of  your  sins  that  will  condemn  to  hell,  nor  the  beauty  or  strictness  of  your  morality 
that  wiU  bring  to  heaven.  Eternity  will  be  decided  by  your  relation  to  a  crucified 
Jesus.  {A.  G.  Breton.)  Eternity — definitions: — "Eternity,"  saith  the  puritan, 
Chamock,  "is  a  perpetual  duration  which  has  neither  beginning  nor  end.  Time 
hath  both.  Those  things  we  say  are  in  time,  that  have  beginning,  grow  up  by 
degrees,  have  succession  of  parts.  Eternity  is  contrary  to  time,  and  is  therefore  a 
permanent  and  immutable  state,  without  any  variation.  It  comprehends  In  itself 
aU  years,  aU  ages,  all  periods  of  ages.  It  never  begins !  It  endures  after  every 
duration  of  time,  and  never  ceaseth.  It  doth  as  much  outrun  time  as  it  went  before 
the  beginning  of  it.  Time  supposeth  something  before  it,  but  there  can  be  nothing 
before  eternity  ;  it  were  not  then  eternity.  Time  hath  a  continual  succession  ;  the 
former  time  passeth  away,  and  another  succeeds,  the  last  year  is  not  this  year,  nor 
this  year  the  next.  We  must  conceive  of  eternity  contrary  to  the  notion  of  time. 
As  the  nature  of  time  consists  in  the  succession  of  parts,  so  the  nature  of  eternity  is 
an  infinite  immutable  duration.  Eternity  and  time  differ  as  the  sea  and  rivers  ;  the 
sea  never  changes  place,  but  the  rivers  glide  along,  and  are  swallowed  up  in  the  sea ; 
80  is  time  by  eternity. "  A  simpler,  but  perhaps  more  striking  definition,  was  that 
given  by  one  of  the  pupils  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Institution  at  Paris,  who,  in  answer 
to  the  question,  "What  is  eternity?"  replied,  "The  lifetime  of  the  Almighty." 
"Eternal" : — The  word  "eternal"  is  the  unknown  quantity  of  revelation,  tran- 
scending present  experience,  and  not  to  be  represented  by  heaps  of  ages,  or  to  be 
defined  as  endless.     It  is  the  timeless  state.     {N.  Smyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16-18.  For  I  will  not  contend  for  ever. — God's  contendings  vnth  mam: — 
I.  Let  us  advert  to  the  controversy  itself — ^what  it  is,  why  it  is,  and  how 
IT  IS  CARRIED  ON.  What  this  quarrel  is  we  know.  It  is  a  part  of  that  ancient  strife 
for  mastery,  which  has  been  going  on  ever  since  the  fall,  between  truth  and  error, 
light  and  darkness,  holiness  and  sin.  "The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God." 
Unconverted  men  may  demur  to  these  representations  ;  they  tell  us  that  they  merely 
withhold  from  the  Divine  Being  the  homage  which  He  expects  and  claims  ;  but 
repugnance,  hatred,  enmity  towards  Him,  they  have  none.  But  do  they  not  hate 
the  law  of  God  ?  Would  they  not,  if  it  were  in  their  power,  have  Him  alter  the 
scheme  of  His  entire  moral  government.  His  permissions,  His  requirements  ?  This, 
speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  makes  God  angry — sometimes  the  contendings  of 
God  with  man  take  a  judicial  form.  They  are  to  condemn  the  sinner  out  of  his  own 
mouth,  in  that  he  did  not  see,  in  the  bitter  experiences  of  a  life  of  evil,  how  the 
goodness  of  God  was  leading  him  to  repentance.  See  a  form  of  this  contending  with 
us,  in  that  fixed  and  universal  law  of  our  being,  which  always  makes  us  unhappy, 
when  we  are  striving  with  God,  when  we  reject  His  counsels,  or  resist  His  will,  or 
try  to  ^et  from  under  His  yoke,  or  wrestle  with  all  the  obstructions  of  His  provi- 
dence, m  order  to  have  our  own  way.  But,  further,  and  more  directly,  God  contends 
with  ns  by  His  Word,  and  Spirit,  and  outward  providences — ^by  powerful  awakenings 
•t  the  heart  when  we  look  not  for  them,  or  by  interposed  checks  and  barriers  when 
we  ate  bent  on  the  way  of  sin.    There  are  restraints  upon  us  often  bom.  without. 


CHAP.  LTii.]  ISAIAH.  29S' 

And  there  are  restraints  upon  us  from  within  from  the  suggestions,  and  the  admoni-  j 
tions,  and  remonstrances  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  our  hearts.     But  a  more  comforting '' 
view  of  our  text,  and  one  more  in  harmony  with  its  general  spirit,  is  that  which 
supposes  God  to  be  contending  with  us,  avowedly  for  the  purposes  of  His  own- 
Fatherly  correction,  and  only  for  the  fulfilment  of  those  ends  ;  waiting  to  remove 
from  us  His  heavy  hand.     These  contendings  of  God  with  His  own  children  take 
many  forms.     Chastening  is  a  universal  discipline.     Very  hard  to  bear  is  this 
contending  of  God  with  us  ;  there  is  only  one  thing  harder,  and  that  is,  the  state  in 
which  He  should  not  contend  with  us  at  all,  but  should  leave  us  to  ourselves. 
II.  The  limits  vthxch  God  has  Himself  assigned  to  this  controversy  with 

THE  SOULS  OF  MEN,  AND  THE  REASONS  MOVING  HiM  THERETO.      Contend  with  US 

He  must,  and  be  wroth  with  us  He  must.  It  is  a  necessity  forced  upon  Him  by  the 
circumstances  of  our  fallen  nature  ;  but  He  will  not  contend  for  ever.  Wisdom  and 
goodness  have  decreed  the  bounds  of  this  flooding  wave  and  it  shall  go  no  farther. 
Now,  in  the  case  of  the  obstinately  wicked  and  impenitent,  we  have  seen  why  God 
will  not  contend  for  ever.  They  have  their  day  of  visitation  and  they  outlive  it ; 
their  accepted  time  and  they  sin  on.  The  Judge  wastes  not  scourges  upon  them ; 
they  will  make  scourges  enough  for  themselves.  Hell  itself  is  but  Heaven's  assisting 
grace  withdrawn,  and  man  left  to  the  evil  of  his  own  heart.  But  in  His  own 
children,  the  limits  of  God's  chastening  are  merciful  limits.  "  He  for  our  profit " — 
here  is  the  imiversal  law  of  the  scourge ;  it  will  cease  whenever  our  souls'  profit 
ceases.  "  I  wiU  not  contend  for  ever  ; "  nor  longer  than  may  be  necessary  to  try  our 
faith,  to  OTove  our  repentance,  to  see  what  there  is  in  our  hearts,  whether  we  will 
keep  the  Divine  commandments  or  not.  These  seasons  of  sadness  are  sometimes 
permitted  to  take  us  off  from  a  false  theology  and  a  false  rest.  "For  the  spirit 
should  fail  before  Me. "  Very  instructive  are  those  Scriptures,  and  very  comforting, 
which  tell  us  how  largely  the  thought  of  our  mortal  frailness  enters  into  the 
considerate  care  of  Heaven.  The  uppermost  thought  which  our  subject  should  leave 
upon  the  mind,  and  which  the  heart  should  cleave  to  with  all  the  energies  of  a  loving 
faith  is,  that  it  goes  very  hard  with  God  to  afflict  man  at  all ;  and  that  He  has  in 
some  mysterious  sense  to  wrestle  with  the  conflicting  powers  of  the  Godhead  before 
He  can  give  up  a  soul  altogether.  It  seems  as  if  God  could  take  every  step  towards 
the  sinner's  condemnation  but  the  last.  He  can  admonish,  rebuke,  threaten ;  but 
when  it  comes  to  smiting,  then  comes  the  hesitation,  then  begins  God's  strange 
work.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Contention  ended  and  grace  reigning: — ^The  Lord  is 
holding  high  soliloquy.  He  allows  His  prophet  to  stand  where  he  can  hear  the 
sacred  soliloquy  of  the  great  Supreme ;  and  he  does  hear  it,  and  then  under  the 
dictate  of  the  Divine  Spirit  he  records  it  in  the  inspired  book,  where  it  remains  to 
this  day  for  our  instruction.  I.  God  contends  with  men,  and  the  DivrNi 
CONTENTION  IS  WELL  DESERVED  ON  THEIR  PART.  He  says,  "  I  wHl  not  Contend  for 
ever,"  in  which  it  is  implied  that  He  does  contend  sometimes.  Smiting  comes 
before  saving.  1.  I  would  speak  of  this  to  the  seeking  sinner.  Anything  is  better 
than  the  horrible  cabn  of  the  dead  sea  of  spiritual  indifference.  The  Lord's  design 
in  contending  with  you  is  to  convince  you  of  your  sin.  The  next  reason  for  l£e 
Lord's  contending  with  you  will  begin  to  operate  when  the  first  purpose  has  been 
accomplished.  You  will,  in  your  self-abasement,  be  driven  to  look  to  the  grace  of 
God.  It  is  hard  to  part  a  man  from  his  sin,  it  is  still  harder  to  divorce  him  from 
his  self-righteousness :  and  this  is  a  part  of  the  Lord's  contention  with  awakened 
souls.  Moreover,  no  one  can  be  surprised  that  the  Lord  lets  forth  a  measure  of  His 
wrath  upon  seeking  sinners  when  we  see  how  they  behave,  even  while  they  are 
seeking.  We  have  known  them  red  hot  one  day  and  icy  cold  another,  and  albeit 
that  they  long  for  mercy,  you  will  see  them  at  certain  seasons  acting  as  if  they 
despised  it.  2.  But  now  I  turn  to  the  people  of  God.  Sometimes  our  Lord  hath  a 
contention  with  us.  This  is  not  at  aU  wonderful  when  we  consider  how  unworthily 
we  often  live  towards  His  sacred  name  ;  indeed,  "it  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that 
we  are  not  consumed."  His  contention  with  us  will  show  itself  occasionally  in 
adverse  providences.  Even  more  severe  are  His  blows  when  it  comes  to  be  • 
controversy  carried  on  by  His  Spirit  within  the  mind.  II.  This  Divine  conten- 
tion WILL  comb  to  AN  END  WITH  THE  CONTRITE.  "  I  will  uot  Contend  for  ever," 
etc.  The  question  arises :  When  may  we  expect  that  this  promise  wiU  be  fulfilled  f 
Notice  the  verse  which  precedes  the  text,  for  that  assures  us  that  God  hath  no 
controversy  with  the  humble  and  the  contrite.  This  is  self-evident,  for  He  declares 
that  with  such  He  will  dwell,  and  the  God  of  grace  wiU  not  dwell  in  a  house  that  is 
ftill  of  contention.    He  contends  when  He  oom  not  abide,  but  where  He  abides^ 


2M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lvu. 

there  is  peace.  It  is  wonderful  how  the  pity  of  God  has  in  some  cases  been  excited, 
even  by  a  temporary  repentance.  When  wicked  Ahab  rent  his  clothes  and  put 
sackcloth  upon  himself,  the  Lord  took  note  of  it  and  said,  "Seest  thou  how  Ahab 
humbled  himself  before  Me  ?  Because  he  humbled  himself  before  Me  I  will  not 
bring  the  evil  in  his  days."  When  the  Ninevites  repented,  though  probably  there 
was  very  little  that  was  spiritual  about  their  humbling,  the  Lord  turned  from  His 
fierce  anger  and  there  was  a  reprieve  for  the  wicked  city.  He  has  given  a  promise  of 
grace  which  runs  thus,  "  Humble  yourselves  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  He  shall 
lift  you  up."  He  cannot  spurn  those  who  submit  themselves  before  Him,  for  it  is 
written,  "Though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  He  respect  unto  the  lowly."  Con- 
descension to  the  lowly  is  His  glory,  as  the  blessed  Virgin  sang  of  old,  and  as  many 
fainting  ones  may  sing  at  this  moment  if  they  will :  "He  hath  put  down  the  mighty 
from  their  seats,  and  exalted  them  of  low  degree  :  He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with 
good  things:  and  the  rich  He  hath  sent  empty  away."  Lowlv  roofs  attract  the 
Deity.  He  comes  to  those  who  are  broken  in  heart,  and  when  He  comes  the 
contention  is  over.  And  what  else  doth  the  Lord  promise  to  do !  He  says  He  will 
dwell  with  the  humble,  and  He  adds  that  He  wiU  revive  them.  IIL  God  Himself 
FINDS  REASONS  FOR  ENDING  THE  CONTENTION.  We  could  not  have  fouud  any,  for 
in  ourselves  there  is  much  cause  for  the  Lord's  anger,  but  none  for  His  grace. 

1.  The  first  is  found  in  human  weakness,  and  its  inability  to  bear  the  Divine 
contention.  2.  His  second  reason  is,  to  my  mind,  even  more  extraordinary.  It  is 
given  in  the  next  verse :  "  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth  and 
smote  him :  I  hid  Me,  and  was  wroth,  and  he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his 
heart."  This  argument  is  founded  on  the  inoperativeness  of  the  Divine  contention 
upon  the  heart  which  is  to  be  won.  If  wrath  will  not  humble  us  the  Lord  may  yet 
in  His  grace  try  what  love  can  do.  He  will  love  us  to  a  better  mind.  IV.  God 
Himself  having  found  a  reason  why  He  should  cease  from  contention,  nay,  two 
reasons.  He  Himself  invents  and  proposes  another  method  for  ending  His 
CONTENTIONS  and  making  us  right  with  Himself.  1.  It  is  an  astonishing  method. 
"  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him."  2.  It  is  an  efiectual  method.  "  I  will 
heal  him," — not  "  I  will  smite  him  again,"  but  "  I  will  treat  his  sin  as  if  it  were  a 
disease. "  It  is  true  that  sin  is  much  more  than  a  disease,  and  God  might  treat  us 
altogether  and  only  from  its  criminal  side,  but  still  it  is  a  disease,  and  therefore  He 
resolves  to  treat  it  as  such.  3.  It  is  a  tender  way.  "  I  will  lead  him  also." 
4.  Observe,  how  complete  is  this  method.  As  if  all  that  went  before  were  not 
enough,  it  is  added,  "  I  will  restore  comforts  unto  him  and  to  his  mourners."  He 
will  take  away  the  sorrow  as  well  as  the  sin,  the  killing  grief  as  well  as  the  kUling 
disease.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  17-19.  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth. — The  punishment 
of  backsliders ;  hut  their  encouragement  when  penitent: — These  words  remind  us  of 
the  language  of  the  apostle  to  the  Romans :  "Where  sin  abounded  grace  did  much 
more  abound."  I.  The  accusatory  part.  1.  The  evil  complained  of— "The 
iniquity  of  his  covetousness."  Then  covetousness  is  iniquity.  So  the  apostle  con- 
sidered it,  or  he  would  not  have  called  it  "idolatry."  AU  idolatry  is  not  gross  or 
corporeal.  Much  of  it  is  refined  and  mental.  It  is  lamentable  to  think  that  this 
evil  so  commonly  prevails.  You  will  find,  by  the  sacred  writers,  that  the  Jews  were 
always  given  to  it.     Is  it  not  awful  to  see  how  this  vice  prevails  in  our  country  f 

2.  The  reward  of  transgression.  "  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth 
and  smote  him."  Sin  is  the  same  in  whomsoever  it  is  found.  The  evil  is  not 
lessened  when  it  is  found  in  the  people  of  God;  it  is  even  increased.  They 
stand  in  nearer  relation  to  God  than  others.  They  sin  under  greater  obligations 
to  God  than  others.  They  sin  against  a  renewed  nature  and  an  enlightened  con- 
science. Hence  God  is  peculiarly  angry,  "because  of  the  provoking  of  His  sons 
and  of  His  daughters."  Hence  He  says,  *'  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families 
of  the  earth,  therefore  will  I  punish  you."  "For  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given, 
of  him  shall  be  much  required ;  and  to  whom  men  have  committed  much,  of  him 
they  will  ask  the  more."  "Sin  never  hurts  the  believer,"  is  an  antinomian  senti- 
ment: but  what  saith  the  Scriptures?  Turn  back  to  the  history  of  Moses  and 
Aaron.  Turn  to  the  history  of  David,  even  when  God  assured  him  that  his  sin  was 
pardoned.  How  wise,  how  merciful,  are  those  hidings  and  those  smitings  He 
employs  to  bring  His  people  to  Himself.  3.  The  perverseness  under  this.  "  He  went 
on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart."  It  is  said  of  Ahaz  that,  in  his  affliction,  he 
finnaH  yet  mor8  uid  more  against  the  Lord.    So  Jeremiah  says,  "  Thou  hast  stricken 


CHAP.  X.TU.]  ISAIAH.  295 

them,  but  they  have  not  grieved ;  Thou  hast  consumed  them,  but  they  have  refused 
to  receive  correction ;  they  have  made  their  faces  harder  than  a  rock ;  they  have 
refused  to  return."     "Do  afflictions  produce  no  benefit?"    Let  us  distinguish. 
There  are  many  who  have  been  afflicted,  and  yet  have  not  been  humbled  by  the 
dispensations  of  Providence,  by  which  they  haveoeen  exercised.    But,  you  say,  "  Can 
this  be,  in  any  measure,  the  case  with  real  Christians  ?    Will  they  require  the  rebukes 
of  Divine  Providence  ?    WUl  they  go  on  in  the  frowardness  of  tneir  hearts  ? "     Yes, 
for  a  while  ;  and,  sometimes,  for  a  long  while.     There  is  Jonah — he  was  disobedient 
to  the  word  of  the  Lord.     4.  Here  is  God's  knowledge  of  all  the  ways  and  works  of 
men.     "I  have  seen  his  ways."    Therefore  the  speaker  is  authorized  to  say,  "Be 
sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out. "    And  now,  after  all  that  He  has  seen,  what  shall 
we  certainly  expect  to  near  next  from  Him  ?    I  have  tried  long  enough,  I  have  em- 
ployed means  long  enough,  I  will  now  "avenge  Me  of  My  adversaries."    But  no, 
"I  have  seen  his  ways" — and  what  ways! — "and  will  heal  him,"  etc.     IL  The 
PKOMissoBY  PART.     Observe  the  extensiveness  of  the  engagement.      It  takes  in  four 
things.     1.  "I  will  heal  him."    All  sin  is  a  disease,  and  it  affects  the  soul  much 
in  the  same  way  as  affliction  affects  the  body  ;  depriving  it  of  liberty,  of  enjoyment, 
of  usefulness.     It  is  the  same  with  backsliding.    2.  "  I  will  lead  him  also."    Bishop 
Hall  says,  "Though  God  has  a  large  family,  not  one  of  them  can  go  alone."    Ana 
there  is  none  so  dull,  but  He  can  teach  them.    3.  "  I  will  restore  comforts  unto  him." 
4.  "And  I  wUl  restore  comforts  unto  Ms  mourners," — for  he  had  made  others  to 
mourn  as  well  as  himself.   This  is  always  the  case.    The  wicked  are  not  only  corrupt, 
but  they  are  "children  who  are  corrupters."     But  who  are  they  of  whom  the 
Prophet  here  speaks  ?    Not  men  of  the  world.     They  are  not  his  mourners.     They 
rather  rejoice.     They  say,  "  Ah  !  so  would  we  have  it,"  instead  of  grieving  over  the 
falls  of  professors  of  religion  and  of  the  people  of  God.     But  "his  mourners?" 
They  are  his  ministers — they  who  only  live  when  you  "standfast  in  the  Lord." 
They  are  the  humble  believers  in  Jesus,  who  are  "sorrowful  for  the  solemn  assem- 
bly, '  and  to  whom  the  reproach  of  it  is  a  burden.    ( W.  Jay. )  A  cluster  of  promises : — 
I.  Here  are  promises,  reaching  to  the  vert  root  op  all  our  sinful  iraED, 
made  to  sinners  as  sinners,  nay,  to  the  very  worst  sinners.     1.  The  promise  of  healing. 
"  I  will  heal  him."     2.  A  promise  of  leading.     The  Hebrew  is,  I  will  conduct  him 
safely  to  his  own  country.     3.  "I  will  restore  comforts  to  him."    It  is  not  the 
singular  word,  it  is  not  comfort,  but  "comforts ;"  all  sorts  of  comforts,  and  this 
though  I  have  seen  his  ways.     This  is  just  the  language  we  have  in  chap.  Uv.  8-12. 
4.  There  is  a  fourth  promise,  "  Peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  off,  and  to  him  that  is 
neaj,  saith  the  Lord  ; "  a  liberal  promise  !  to  those  afar  off — aye,  far  as  the  ends  of 
the  earth — from  God,  from  light,  and  rest,  and  truth.     II.  The  persons  to  whom 
these  promises  are  made.     I  said  God  makes  promises  to  sinners,  as  sinners  ;  will 
you  observe  the  persons  to  whom  these  promises  are  made,  as  God  describes  them 
nere  ?   (ver.  17.)   Covetousness  is  the  root  of  all  sin  ;  covetousness  sets  up  self  instead 
of  God  in  the  heart,  and  everything  that  ariseth  in  practice  contrary  to  God  and  His 
Word  has  its  root  in  covetousness — selfism ;  but  here  is  not  merely  covetousness, 
but  the  "  iniquity  of  covetousness,"  a  state  of  mind  that  rests  at  nothing  likely  to 

? ratify  or  minister  to  self,  but  wUl  go  through  hell-fire  to  ^et  at  what  it  wants, 
hen,  again  (ver.  17),  God  smote,  but  the  soul  was  no  better ;  it  is  a  terrible  aggra- 
vation of  a  sinful  state,  when  the  correcting  hand  of  God  does  not  mend  it ;  see 
what  God  says  (chap.  i.  5).  Now,  says  God,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,"  obstinate, 
incorrigible,  in  sin,  and  "I  will  heal  him."  Such  is  the  divinely  gracious  way  in 
which  peace  is  proclaimed  to  him  that  is  afar  ofiF.  {M.  Ra/insford^  He  went  on 
firowardly. — The  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  tenth  respect  to  adversity: — 1.  This  some- 
times appears  by  despising  afflictions.  Many  attempt  to  outbrave  calamity,  as  if 
they  were  stronger  than  God.  (1)  Those  may  be  said  to  despise  His  chastening, 
who  account  it  a  small  matter,  who  from  a  principle  of  pride  and  presumption 
think  it  unworthy  of  them  to  seem  affected  with  it,  or  refuse  to  turn  to  the  hand 
that  smiteth.  (2)  Again,  we  despise  affliction,  if  we  consider  not  its  origin,  which 
is  the  corruption  of  our  whole  nature  by  sin.  (3)  Adversity  is  also  despised,  when 
the  subjects  of  it  do  not  consider  the  more  immediate  cause  of  it,  which  is  the 
anger  of  God  because  of  sin,  and  confess  with  Moses,  the  man  of  God:  "We  are 
consumed  by  Thine  anger,  and  by  Thy  wrath  are  we  troubled,"  (4)  Further,  afflic- 
tion is  despised,  if  we  do  not  consider  the  design  of  it.  2.  By  repining  under 
adversity.  3.  By  keeping  death  at  a  distance,  if  the  affliction  be  of  a  bodily  kind. 
4.  By  forming  empty  resolutions  of  repentance  and  reformation,  while  imder  afflic- 
tion.   6.  By  exciting  men  to  make  lies  their  refuge.     The  deceitful  heart  prompts 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Lvn. 

them  to  trust  in  earthly  means  for  deliverance  from  affliction.  6.  By  making  them 
despise  means.  We  have  seen  again  and  again  how  the  deceitfolness  of  the  heart 
works  by  contraries,  in  its  opposition  to  God.  If  it  prevail  not  with  those  under 
affliction  to  depend  absolutely  on  means,  it  will  strenuously  urge  the  total  neglect  of 
them.  7.  By  seeking  deliverance  from  the  affliction  itself,  rather  than  the  sanctified 
use  of  it.  8.  By  abusing  adversity,  as  an  occasion  of  hardening  itself  against 
(lod.    {J.  Jameson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him. — Observing  and  healing : — 
This  could  only  be  said  of  God — He  alone  can  see  the  ways  of  man.  We  have  here — I. 
A  Divine  attribute.  Intimate  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  men.  "  I  have  seen."  God 
has  no  need  to  be  told.  Tale-bearers  exaggerate  and  lie.  God  does  not  even  trust  His 
angels.  They  go  about  the  world  observing  the  evil  and  the  good.  But  it  is  not 
upon  their  reports  He  acts.  "I  know,"  He  says,  "  their  thoughts. "  "  I  have  seen 
his  ways."  How  solemnly  should  the  fact  impress  us  !  1.  There  is  the  man  who 
makes  a  profession  of  religion.  But  that  man  knows  how  within  him  there  exist 
the  root  and  seeds  of  evil,  that  his  life  is  a  constant  struggle,  and  sin  with  all  its 
might  is  contending  for  the  mastery.  The  deeper  that  man's  piety  is,  he  realizes 
with  the  greater  pain  his  weakness  and  imperfection,  and  is  horrified  at  the  list 
which  is  written  up  against  him  by  an  observing  God.  2.  Not  only  the  righteous  are 
the  subjects  of  Divine  observation,  but  the  wicked  as  well.  The  observations  of 
Almighty  God  produce  very  different  results  according  to  the  character  of  the  person 
He  observes.  To  the  man  who  strives  after  the  way  of  righteousness  it  is  an 
encouragement  and  a  warning.  But  to  him  who  neglects  religion  and  follows  sin  it 
is  filled  with  terrible  dread  and  is  the  precursor  of  ineffable  judgment.  II.  A  DiyiNB 
PEOMISE.  The  humblest  efforts  after  holiness  are  regarded  by  the  great  Bong,  and 
are  noted  equally  with  the  failures.  He  sees  the  whole — the  follies,  the  weaknesses, 
the  struggles,  and  the  regrets,  and  He  is  filled  vrith  pity.  He  knows  that  unaided 
man  cannot  divert  his  way,  and  therefore  He  vouchsafes  to  give  a  promise,  "  I  will 
heal."  In  this  promise  we  have — 1.  A  manifestation  of  love.  2,  A  manifestation 
of  authority,  "Will  heal."  It  is  God  only  who  can  heal  man.  Application :  1. 
God  will  come  to  those  who  seek  Him.  They  draw  nigh  to  Him,  He  draws  nigh  to 
them.  2.  How  joyous  is  the  sound  of  healing  to  a  sick  man  !  Much  more  the 
promise  of  forgiven  sin.  3.  Time  is  passing  quickly.  What  are  your  ways  ?  Are 
they  such  as  encourage  the  Divine  advances  or  repel  infinite  love  ?  {Homilist.) 
The  Divine  Healer : — I.  Divine  knov^ledge.  II.  Divine  mercy.  1.  "  I  will 
heal  him,"  "  I  will  lead  him  also."  We  all  need  guidance,  as  we  move  on  through 
this  wilderness.  2.  Another  part  of  the  healing  is  the  happiness  of  mind  which 
Christ  bestows  upon  His  reconciled  people.  "  I  will  heal  him  and  restore  comforts 
unto  him.  3.  Then,  too,  will  follow  praise.  ' '  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips. "  The 
songs  of  heaven  will  be  begun  in  your  souls,  even  now  upon  earth.     4.  Peace,  settled 

Ejace.  "  Peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  off,  and  to  him  that  is  near,  saith  the 
ord  :  and  I  will  heal  him."  There  is  in  that  one  word,  "peace,"  a  treasury  of 
blessedness  which  you  may  forego  all  else  to  buy.  (C.  Clayton,  M.A.)  WoTider  at 
God's  grace : — There  are  a  few  objects  in  nature  which  never  cease  to  astonish  the 
beholder.  I  think  Humboldt  said  he  could  never  look  upon  the  rolling  prairies 
without  astonishment :  and  I  suppose  some  of  us  will  never  be  able  to  look  upon  the 
ocean,  or  to  see  the  sun  rise  or  set,  without  feeling  that  we  have  before  us  something 
always  fresh  and  always  new.  Now,  I  have  been,  not  only  for  the  love  of  it,  but 
because  of  my  calling  of  preaching  it,  a  constant  reader  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  yet  after 
these  five-and-twenty  years  and  more  I  frequently  alight  upon  well-known  passages 
which  astonish  me  as  much  as  ever.  As  if  I  had  never  heard  them  before,  they  come 
upon  me,  not  merely  with  freshness,  but  even  so  as  to  cause  amazement  in  my 
soul.  This  is  one  of  those  portions  of  Scripture.  When  I  read  the  chapter  describing 
the  horrible  wickedness  of  Israel — when  I  notice  the  strong  terras  which  inspiration 
uses,  and  none  of  them  too  strong,  to  set  forth  the  horrible  wickedness  of  the  nation 
— it  staggers  me.  And  then  to  see  mercy  following  instead  of  judgment !  It  over- 
whelms me  !  "I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  " — it  is  not  added,  "  I  will  destroy  him  ; 
I  will  sweep  him  away,"  but,  "  I  will  heal  him."  Verily  God's  grace,  like  the  great 
mountains,  cannot  be  scaled  ;  like  the  deeps  of  the  sea,  it  can  never  be  fathomed, 
and,  like  space,  it  cannot  be  measured.  It  is,  like  God  Himself,  matchless, 
boundless.  "Oh,  the  depths!  Oh,  the  depths!"  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Amazing 
grace  : — I.  The  text  declares  that  THE  sinner  has  been  observed  of  the  Lord. 
Notice,  1.  That  God's  omniscience  has  observed  the  sinner.     Man  while  living  in 


CHAP.  Lvn.]  ISAIAH.  J97 

rebellion  against  God  is  as  mnoh  onder  His  eye  as  the  bees  in  a  glass  hive  are  under  year 
eye  when  you  stand  and  watch  all  their  movements.  The  eye  of  Jehovah  never  sleeps — 
it  is  never  taken  off  from  a  single  creature  He  has  made.  He  sees  man — sees 
him  everywhere — sees  him  through  and  through  ;  so  that  He  not  only  hears  hia 
words,  but  knows  his  thoughts — does  not  merely  behold  his  actions,  but  weighs  hia 
motives,  and  knows  what  is  in  the  man  as  well  as  that  which  comes  out  of  the  man. 
God  has  seen  your  ways  at  home,  your  ways  abroad,  your  ways  in  the  shop,  your 
ways  in  the  bed-chamber,  your  ways  within  as  well  as  your  ways  without — the  ways 
of  your  judgment,  the  ways  of  your  hope,  the  ways  of  your  desire,  the  ways  of 
your  evil  lustings,  the  ways  of  your  murmurings,  the  ways  of  your  pride.  He  has 
"seen  them  all,  and  seen  them  perfectly  and  completely ;  and  the  wonder  is  that, 
after  seeing  all,  He  has  not  cut  us  down,  but  instead  of  it  has  proclaimed  this 
amazing  word  of  mercy,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him."  2.  But  God 
had  not  only  seen  their  ways  in  the  sense  of  omniscience,  but  He  had  inspected  their 
ways  in  the  sense  of  judgment.  He  says,  "  I  was  wroth  and  I  hid  Myself."  Do  not 
think  because  we  preach  free  grace  and  dying  love  to  you,  and  proclaim  full  pardon 
through  the  blood  of  Jesus,  that  therefore  God  winks  at  sin.  No,  He  is  a  terrible 
God,  and  will  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty.  And  yet  He  whom  the  angels  call 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth  " — the  jealous  God,  the  God  who  revengeth, 
and  is  furious  against  sin — even  He  has  said,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal 
him."  3.  The  Lord  had  tested  him.  If  you  read  the  chapter  through  you  will  see 
that  God  says  He  had  attempted  to  reclaim  him  by  chastisements.    II.  The  sinnsb 

IS  THE  OBJECT  OF  DiVINE  MEBCY  TO  AN  EXTRAORDINARY  DEGREE.      1.   Notice  hoW 

God  speaks.  "  I  will,  I  will."  Now,  "  I  will "  and  "  I  shall "  are  for  the  King  ; 
nay,  in  the  highest  sense  they  are  only  becoming  when  used  by  God  Himself.  It  is 
not  for  you  and  me  to  say  •'  I  will "  ;  we  shall  speak  more  wisely  if  we  declare  that 
we  will  if  we  can.  2.  The  disease  that  we  suffer  from  is  a  disease  He  knows  aJl 
about,  because  the  text  says,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways. "  3.  Then  the  text  goes  on  to 
say,  "  I  will  lead  him  also."  The  poor  soid  of  man,  even  when  healed,  does  not 
know  which  way  to  go.  There  is  not  a  more  bewildered  thing  in  this  world  than 
a  poor  sinner  when  first  he  is  awakened.  Have  you  ever  gone  with  a  candle  into  a 
barn  where  a  number  of  birds  have  roosted  ?  Have  you  disturbed  them  1  Have 
you  not  seen  how  they  dart  hither  and  thither,  and  do  not  know  which  way  to  fly  ? 
The  light  confuses  them.  So  it  is  when  Christ  comes  to  poor  sinners.  They  do  not 
know  which  way  to  go  ;  they  see  a  little,  but  the  very  light  confuses  them.  Now, 
the  loving  Lord  comes  in,  and  He  says,  "  I  will  lead  him  also."  4.  "  I  will  restore 
comforts  to  him."  God  begins  by  knocking  our  comforts  away.  He  takes  away  the 
comfort  we  once  had  in  our  false  peace,  and  He  makes  us  mourn  for  sin.  But  after 
a  whUe  He  restores  comfort  to  us.  What  sort  of  comfort  ?  The  comfort  of  perfect 
forgiveness,  the  comfort  of  complete  acceptance.  The  Father  sets  a  warm  kiss  upon 
the  child's  cheek,  and  that  is  the  comfort  of  adoption.  Whereas  we  were  heirs  of 
earth,  we  become  heirs  of  heaven,  and  have  the  comforts  of  hope.  We  receive  the 
comfort  of  daily  fellowship,  for  we  are  admitted  to  speak  with  God,  and  to  draw  near 
to  Him  ;  the  comfort  of  perfect  security,  for  we  are  led  to  feel  that  whether  we  live 
or  die  we  are  safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus  ;  the  comfort  of  a  blessed  prospect  beyond  the 
grave  in  the  land  of  the  hereafter,  where  the  flowers  shall  never  wither ;  the  comfort 
of  knowing  that  all  things  work  together  for  good ;  the  comfort  of  having  the 
angels  for  our  servants,  and  heaven  for  our  home.  "I  will  restore  comforts  to 
him  ;  "  and  all  this  to  the  man  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  Thou  didst  debase  thyself  even 
unto  hell."  {Ibid.)  God  sees  the  sinner: — In  the  old  time,  when  the  Grecians 
worshipped  images  of  their  gods,  it  was  said  that  when  spiders  stretched  their  webs 
across  the  eyelids  of  the  image  of  Jupiter,  the  people  were  regular  in  their  attendance 
to  worship  him.  They  liked  to  feel  that  the  spiders'  webs  prevented  Jupiter  from 
seeing  their  sins,  and  in  their  poor,  feeble  way  were  no  doubt  grateM  to  the  insects 
for  covering  the  eyes  of  a  god  who,  they  thought,  would  punish  them  for  their 
sins  if  he  could  see  their  ways.  {W.  Birch.)  And  restore  comforts  unto  him. — 
Comfort : — The  word  "  comfort "  comes  originally  from  two  Latin  words,  con  and 
fortis,  meaning  much  strength.  In  time  of  trouble,  when  you  lift  up  your  heart  and 
bravely  bear  the  burden,  the  strength  which  enables  you  to  do  it  is  called  comfort. 
(  W.  Birch.)  Comforts : — 1.  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  have  peace  of  mind.  Many  people 
have  sought  to  obtain  wealth,  hoping  it  would  give  peace  of  mind  ;  but  they  have  been 
mistaken.  But  what  a  comfort  it  is  to  those  who  have  obtained  it  I  It  flows  from 
the  knowledge  that  our  sins  are  forgiven.  2.  Another  comfort  is  that  God  is  with 
1U.    8.  What  a  comfort  to  know  that  Qod  is  our  helper.    His  fingers  are  tender,  and 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

Hia  heart  is  loving  as  that  of  a  gentle  mother.  4.  It  is  a  comfort  to  know  that  God  is 
our  strength  in  time  of  temptation.  When  an  engine  has  to  lift  a  weight  which  ia 
beyond  ite  usual  work,  the  engineer  stands  at  the  steam  gauge,  and  when  the  finger 
reaches  near  the  danger  point,  he  cries,  "  Hold  hard  ;  it  can  do  no  more  !  "  If  he 
allowed  the  engine  to  be  pressed  beyond  the  safety  point,  there  might  be  an  accident. 
Likewise,  God  knows  the  gauge  of  every  man's  heart.  He  knows  exactly  what 
trials  you  can  bear,  and  how  much  temptation  you  can  stand.  He  declares  that  no 
man  shall  be  tempted  above  that  he  is  able.  5.  It  is  our  comfort  to  know  that  God 
is  our  support  in  the  pathway  of  our  life.  6.  Here  ia  another  comfort — that  our 
God  is  the  Friend  of  sinners.    ( W.  Birch.) 

Ver.  19.  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips. — Peace,  peace : — I.  The  grand  strBjBOT  of 
THE  Gospel  PROCLAMATION.  "Peace,  peace!  saith  the  Lord."  It  implies  a  state 
of  previous  enmity  and  quarrel :  a  state  of  alarm  and  disquietude :  and  a  remedy  for 
both.  1.  And  does  not  the  message  of  the  Gospel  find  us  in  a  state  of  enmity  ?  We 
are  not  only  "by  natiire  children  of  wrath,"  but  by  voluntary  choice  we  have 
rebelled  against  our  God.  2,  And  in  a  state  of  alarm  and  disquietude  ?  II.  The 
TNLIMITED  OFFER  OF  ITS  BENEFITS.  "  To  him  that  is  far  off,  and  to  him  that  is  near, 
Peace,  peace,  saith  the  Lord."  1.  In  respect  of  outward  privileges,  the  Jewish  Church 
was  "  near,"  and  aU  other  nations  were  *  far  off.'  2.  In  respect  of  moral  character, 
some  may  be  thought  nearer  to  God,  some  further  off ;  and  still  no  difference  is  made. 
3.  In  respect  of  inward  experience,  again,  some  may  feel  discouraged  by  the  idea  that 
others  have  greater  nearness  to  God  than  themselves.  4.  In  respect  of  local  distance, 
"God  is  still  no  respecter  of  persons."  He  orders  that  His  Gospel  be  "preached 
in  aU  the  world."  III.  The  holy  change  invariably  connected  vpith  the 
BECEPTION  OF  THEM.  "I  will  heal  him."  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  fruit  of  the 
lips : — Our  text  teUs  us  that  God  creates  the  fruit  of  the  lips ;  but  this  must  be 
understood,  of  course,  with  a  reservation.  He  does  not  create  the  fruit  of  the 
lips  as  we  commonly  see  it,  but  the  good  fruit,  the  true  fruit,  the  fruit 
worth  gathering.  Because  the  natural  fruit  is  so  evil  it  needs  the  Creator  again 
to  step  in,  and  make  us  new  creatures,  and  our  fruit  new  also,  or  else  it  \sdll  remain 
so  bad  that  the  verdict  upon  it  must  be  "Vanity  of  vanities,  aU  is  vanity." 
And  what  is  that  fruit  which  the  Creator  produces  from  a  source  which  is 
naturally  so  barren?  1.  The  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  (Heb.  xiii.  15).  The  fruit 
of  the  lips  which  God  creates  should  be,  above  all  things,  praise.  2.  Prayer. 
3.  Testimony.  4.  There  is  one  renowned  topic  upon  which  the  lips  ought  always 
to  be  able  to  speak,  and  that  is  summed  up  in  the  two  words,  "Peace,  peace." 
From  the  mouth  of  truth  should  come  kisses  of  peace,  words  of  peace,  the  breath 
of  peace.  This  is  the  best  lip-salve — "Peace,  peace."  Nothing  can  so  sweeten 
the  breath  as  "Peace,  peace.  Nothing  can  so  flavour  the  palate  and  delight 
the  heart  as  this  "Peace,  peace,"  felt  within,  and  breathed  without.  No  teeth 
of  ivory,  nor  lips  of  coral,  are  complete  in  loveliness  till  over  aU  there  glistens 
the  brightness  of  peace.  Fierce  speech  becomes  not  loveliness,  and  threatening  and 
clamour  destroy  beauty,  but  the  charm  of  the  lips  is  peace.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Bare  fruit: — We  shall  employ  these  words — I.  As  the  cry  op  the  avi^akened. 
When  men  are  awakened  by  the  grace  of  God  into  a  consciousness  of  their  true 
condition  they  find  themselves  at  war  with  God  and  at  war  with  their  own  con- 
sciences, and  consequently  they  begin  to  cry,  "Peace,  peace:"  longing  eagerly 
to  end  the  dreadful  conflict  in  which  they  fmd  themselves  engaged.  Then  there 
visits  the  man  one  who  knowingly  whispers,  "You  need  not  disturb  yourself. 
These  things  are  not  so.  Do  you  not  know  that  these  are  all  bugbears  of  a  past 
generation  ?  We  men  of  moaem  thought ,  have  made  great  discoveries,  and 
changed  all  the  fears  of  our  benighted  ancestors  into  a  brave  unbelief.  You  can 
live  at  ease.  Do  not  fret  yourself  about  sin,  or  heaven,  or  hell,  or  eternity." 
Yain  are  these  stale  scepticisms,  the  man  is  too  much  in  earnest  to  be  drugged  with 
such  soporifics.  Boastful  unbelief  has  small  power  over  an  agonized  soul.  God 
Himself  has  convinced  this  man  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment,  and 
though  he  tries  to  disbelieve  he  cannot.  Mr.  Worldly  Wiseman  calls  upon  him, 
with  his  friend  Dr.  Legality,  and  his  assistant-surgeon  Mr.  Civility,  and  these  try 
their  Balm  of  Conceit  and  Plaist-er  of  Natural  Goodness.  But  u  God  has  been 
dealing  with  this  man,  he  will  say,  "  But  I  am  not  right.  I  feel  that  I  deserve 
the  wrath  of  God,  and  that  goodness  is  not  in  me."  No,  the  leprosy  lies  deep 
within,  and  no  outward  form  can  cleanse  away  the  deep-seated  pollution.  II.  This 
u  THE  ANSWER  07  THE  Saviottr.    It  is  the  firoit  of  the  Saviour's  lips.    He  comes 


OHAF.  LYii.]  ISAIAH.  299 

to  a  soul  and  says,  "  Peace,  peace."  Did  you  ever  see  Him  as  dying  of  sin  ?  11 
you  have  never  seen  Him  with  the  eye  of  faith  you  do  not  know  what  peace  means. 
But  did  you  ever  see  Christ  as  He  is  risen  from  the  dead  ?  Here  is  another  vision 
of  consolation,  another  fount  of  peace.  Did  you  ever  see  Jesus  as  He  sits  there 
triumphant  at  the  Lord  God's  right  hand  ?  A  poor,  tried  spirit  is  greatly  comforted 
by  that  sight.  If  I  were  to  go  on  picturing  our  glorious  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  any 
and  all  of  His  relationships  to  us,  we  should  in  each  case  hear  Him  say,  "Peace, 
peace."  III.  As  the  song  of  the  tbxje  believbe.  He  who  haa  reaUy  seen 
Christ,  and  placed  his  trust  in  Him,  can  now  sing,  "Peace,  peace,  peace.  '  IV. 
This  should  be  the  motto  of  eveby  believeb.  1.  TMs  should  be  his  spirit  and 
desire  in  the  Church,  "Peace,  peace."  2.  "We  should  labour  to  carry  out  the  same 
quiet  spirit  in  the  family.  When  you  get  home  do  not  change  "  Peace,  peace,"  into 
scolding  and  nagging.  "If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live  peaceably 
with  all  men."  3.  When  peace  reigns  in  your  own  family,  go  into  the  world 
with  the  same  watchword — "Peace,  peace.'  Do  not  set  dogs  by  the  ears,  but 
tame  lions  and  tigers.  Compose  differences,  and  make  people  friends.  4.  What 
a  difference  there  will  be  when  this  is  taken  up  among  all  Christian  sects— when 
there  shall  be  no  more  envying  and  strife  between  this  denomination  and  that, 
but  each  one  shall  be  saying  in  Christ's  name,  "  We  are  brethren — peace,  peace." 
(IMd.) 

Yer.  20.  But  the  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea. — The  restlessness  of  sin: — 
Who  are  the  wicked  ?    Not  only  all  who  think  and  feel  and  do  the  wrong,  but  all 
who  have  not  the  right  spirit  within  them — supreme  sympathy  with  the  supremely 
good.     There  are  degrees  in  wickedness  as  well  as  in  goodness.     There  are  certain 
things  that  render  it  impossible  for  wicked  men  to  have  true  repose.     What  are 
they  ?    I.  Disappointments.     The  sinner  is  doomed  to  perpetual  disappointments. 
He  expects  happiness  in  certain  pursuits  and  objects  that  cannot  according  to  the 
constitution  of  his  soul  yield  him  true  satisfaction.     He  reposes  trust  in  objects  as 
frail  as  the  reed  and  as  uncertain  as  the  clouds,  and  he  is  doomed  to  have  his  plans 
broken   up  and  his  confidence  destroyed.     Hence  he  is  the  subject  of  perpetual 
vexations  and  annoyances,  for  disappointment  is  evermore  a  soul-agitating  power  ; 
it  comes  down  sometimes  upon  the  heart  like  a  strong  south-wester,  stirring  it  to  its 
very  depths.     II.  Compunctions.     Where  there  is  sin  there  must  come  sooner  or 
later  remorse.     An  accusing  conscience  is  not  a  mere  wind  that  passes  over  the  soul, 
rippling  its  surface  ;  it  is  a  volcanic  force  in  its  centre,  shaking  every  part.     It  gave 
Cain  no  rest,  it  made  Belshazzar  totter  and  Felix  tremble  ;  it  drove  Judas  to  the 
rope.     III.  Selfish  passions.     Selfishness,  which  is  the  essence  of  wickedness,  ia 
the  great  disturbing  force  in  the  moral  universe.      Avarice,  ambition,  jealousy, 
revenge,  envy,  anger,  are  some  of  its  fiendish  progeny.     {Homilist.)     "  ITie  trmMed 
sea  " ; — In  order  that  the  wicked  may  understand  how  far  from  peace  they  really  are, 
the  prophet  points  seaward,  and  bids  the  people  listen  to  the  moaning  of  the  ocean. 
He  bids  them  hearken  to  its  thunders,  as  it  pounds  upon  the  rock-bound  coast,  and 
says  eloquently  and  graphically,  "  The  wicked  are  like  yon  troubled  sea,  for  it  cannot 
rest ;  its  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt."    I.  The  bestlessness  of  the  ocean  is  an 
emblem  of  the  wicked.     1.  The  sea  is  never  still.     We  have,  indeed,  beheld  it 
'*  like  a  millpond,"  as  we  say  ;  its  surface  so  glassy  and  mirror-like  that  some  would 
conclude  that  it  was  perfectly  still.     The  sails,  and  masts,  and  hull  of  the  ship  were 
reflected  in  its  glassy  bosom.    Yet  even  then  the  deep  was  not  perfectly  still.    There 
was  a  solemn  heave  about  it,  as  the  flapping  of  the  sails  and  the  rolling  of  the  yards 
plainly  revealed.     Moreover,  even  if  the  swell  could  have  altogether  subsidedf,  the 
sea  was  not  still  for  all  that.     There  were  currents,  imperceptible  save  when  the  log 
was  heaved  and  the  reckoning  taken,  that  bore  the  ship  silently  along.     Further- 
more, even  if  it  were  possible  to  get  into  a  place  where  there  were  neither  swell  nor 
currents,  the  tides  are  everywhere  upliftmg  and  depressing  the  vessel  at  regular 
intervals  to  high  or  low  watermark.     The  sea,  therefore,  is  perhaps  one  of  the  best 
emblems  of  restlessness,  for  it  has  several  motions  and  movements,  even  in  its 
serenest  moods.     But  it  is  not  to  the  sea  in  a  state  of  calm,  but  when  it  is  lashed  to 
foam,  that  the  prophet  compares  the  wicked.     There  is  to  them  no  permanent 
enjoyment :  their  pleasures  are  fleeting :  they  have  no  real  rest  of  heart.     Un- 
©omfoi-table  thoughts  and  painful  pricings  of  conscience  come  when  they  are  leaat 
welcome.     Conscience  is  ill  at  ease,  fear  of  death  and  of  judgment  can  by  no  means 
be  altogether  set  aside.     Those  who  have  been  converted  to  God  after  a  life  of 
dissipation  and  a  career  of  sin  have  honestly  confessed  that  though  there  was  • 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

certain  sort  of  pleasure  in  the  ways  of  wickedness,  there  was  meanwhile  a  strange 
unrest.  Like  Marcellus,  the  Roman  general,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  whether 
conqueror  or  conquered  he  was  still  dissatisfied,  they  were  never  content.  The 
reference  here  is  principally  to  the  fierce  passions  that  are  in  every  human  breast. 
In  the  breast  of  the  saint  they  are  restrained  by  the  power  of  the  reigning  Christ, 
but  in  the  life  of  the  wicked  they  remain  uncurbed,  unbridled,  let  loose  upon  the 
world.  2.  How  readily  the  sea  is  stirred  I  At  one  moment  it  is  comparatively 
C{Jm,  the  surface  smooth  and  glistening,  but  presently  the  accustomed  eye  notices 
in  the  distance  the  cat's  paw  of  the  wind — a  little  ruffling  of  the  surface  m  quite  a 
circumscribed  area.  But  the  puffs  become  frequent  and  grow  in  force ;  the  ripples 
become  wavelets,  and  the  wavelets  waves  ;  the  waves  soon  rise  to  billows,  and  by  and 
by  the  sea  runs  mountains  high.  It  is  identically  the  same  with  the  wicked.  How- 
soever gently  the  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  blows  upon  them  at  first,  all  too 
soon  the  angry  passions  rear  ana  rage  and  roar.  Pride  and  envy,  lust  and  covetous- 
ness,  ambition,  malice,  revenge,  all  these,  little  in  their  beginnings,  grow  in  size 
and  increase  in  number  untU  they  become  adulteries,  murders,  blasphemies,  and  the 
like.  3.  To  what  an  awfal  pitch  the  agitation  of  the  sea  can  attain.  Oh,  the 
"dreadful  length  to  which  wickedness  is  carried  I  4.  How  long,  also,  the  agitation 
of  the  sea  remains.  Some  seas,  indeed,  are  always  rough.  They  never  know  repose. 
Off  some  headlands  the  waves  run  mountains  high  at  ail  seasons  of  the  year,  but  in 
other  places  the  storm  that  rises  so  readily  takes  long  to  subside.  I  have  encountered 
the  after-swell  of  a  storm  that  must  have  raged  some  days  before ;  long  after  the 
hurricane  had  blown  itself  out  our  vessel  came  into  the  region  where  its  tracks 
remained.  We  crossed  the  pathway  of  the  storm,  though  we  were  fortunate  enough 
to  miss  the  tempest  itself.  Oh,  how  long  the  agitation  of  sin  remains.  With  some, 
indeed,  there  is  a  temporary  lull,  an  attempt  at  reformation,  more  or  less  successful. 
Sometimes  a  man  will  curb  his  passions  with  philosophy,  or  become  suddenly  im- 
pressed that  for  his  own  reputation's  sake  he  must  hold  himself  in  check,  but  he  has 
scarcely  done  so  ere  Satan  raises  another  vehement  wind  and  begins  to  arouse  his 
passions  in  a  different  direction.  I  have  known  sinners  get  into  just  such  a  case  that 
they  have  overcome  this  temptation  ;  they  have  managed,  by  sheer  force  of  character 
and  strength  of  purpose,  to  restrain  certain  unholy  passions,  and  then  the  devil,  fear- 
ing that  he  may  miss  his  hold  of  them,  raises  another  wind,  in  a  contrary  direction  ; 
and  the  remains  of  the  previous  storm  come  clashing  with  the  beginnings  of  a  new 
one,  and  the  poor  sinner  is  likely  to  be  swamped  betwixt  the  twain.  5.  What  a 
mighty  noise  the  sea  makes  when  it  is  troubled.  There  is  a  pleasant  murmur  with 
it  in  the  time  of  calm,  but  when  the  winds  of  heaven  begin  to  play  upon  it  it 
thunders  as  it  rolls  and  breaks  on  the  beach,  and  hisses  as  it  surges  on  the  shore. 
B6hold  here  another  emblem  of  sin  and  of  sinners.  The  wicked  seem  to  delight  in 
making  loud  proclamation  of  their  siu.  6.  When  the  sea  is  troubled  it  works  havoc 
on  every  hand.  Thus  do  the  wicked  work  destruction  in  our  midst.  Alas !  for 
those  who  are  the  prey  of  their  passions.  The  great,  the  learned,  the  aged  are  not 
spared.  Huge  liners  founder  in  the  gale.  Alas  !  that  wicked  men  are  constantly 
compassing  the  destruction  of  the  smaller  ships  ;  and  the  children  of  our  families 
and  our  schools  are  wrecked  while  yet  their  years  are  few.  Moreover,  wickedness  is 
so  insidious  that  some  who  have  thought  to  rescue  men  from  sin  have  been  them- 
selves engulfed  by  it.  They  had  it  in  their  hearts  to  be  as  lifeboats  to  them,  but 
they  themselves  have  gone  down  too.  Law  and  order,  like  great  cliffs  and  granite 
walls,  have  been  torn  down  by  the  grasping  hands  of  iniquity,  while  proprieties  and 
decencies  which  one  would  have  thought  that  even  sinners  would  observe,  have  been 
levelled  or  overridden  by  men  who  ran  to  an  excess  of  riot.     II.  The  sea  is  an 

EMBLEM  OF  WICKED  MEN  BECAUSE  OF  THE  DEBRIS  THAT  IT  OASTS  UP.      The  ejecta  of 

the  sea  is,  in  God's  esteem,  a  fit  image  of  the  outcome  of  wicked  men's  hearts.  When 
the  storm  has  subsided  you  will  find  a  good  deal  of  objectionable  matter  littering  the 
beach — the  vomit  of  the  sea.  How  apt  an  emblem  of  that  which  the  Christless  heart 
produces  !  What  evil  deeds  the  unregenerate  heart  is  capable  of  I  And  what  shall 
we  say  about  the  words  of  wicked  men  ?  What  shall  the  end  be  ?  Is  the  storm 
evermore  to  last?  I  see  no  cure  for  aU  this  unless  the  Lord  speaks  peace.  '*  Oh, 
where  is  He  that  trod  the  sea  t "  He  is  on  the  mountain  top  ;  He  is  on  His  high 
and  holy  hill.  It  is  dark,  and  Jesus  has  not  yet  come  to  us,  but  He  has  not  forgotten 
us.  Tlirice  happy  day  when  the  Christ  of  Galilee  says,  "  Peace,  be  still,"  to  a  sin- 
stirred  world  1  {T.  Spurgeon.)  Bad  men  omd  good:  a  contrast: — What  a  contrast 
with  the  calm  of  God's  "  holy  mountain  "  (ver.  18),  high  above  all  sublunary  storms. 
{J.  B.  Macduff,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  iTii.]  ISAIAH.  801 

Ver.  21.  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked. — The  standard  of  right- 
eousness Tnaintained : — The  fifty-seventli  chapter  ends  with  a  declaration  which  shows 
that  amid  all  the  goodness  and  graciousness  of  the  Divine  way  the  standard  of 
righteousness  is  never  lowered :  never  is  the  dignity  of  law  impaired.  Read  these 
awful  yet  gracious  words  :  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  If 
we  thought  that  God  was  about  to  lose  righteousness  in  sentiment,  we  are  thus 
suddenly,  with  a  very  startling  abruptness,  brought  back  to  the  remembrance  of  the 
fact  that  wickedness  is  infinitely  and  eternally  hateful  to  God,  and  that  peace  and 
wickedness  are  mutually  destructive  terms.  The  wicked  man  may  create  a  wilder- 
ness and  call  it  peace,  but  real  contentment,  benignity,  resignation,  or  harmony,  he 
can  never  know  in  wickedness.  Herein  we  find  the  testimony  of  the  Divine  presence, 
the  assertion  and  glory  of  the  Divine  law.  God  does  not  take  away  peace  from  the 
wicked  in  any  arbitrary  sense.  Wickedness  is  itself  incompatible  with  peace  :  the 
wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea  when  it  cannot  rest,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and 
dirt.  The  unrest  is  actually  in  the  wickedness ;  the  tumult  does  not  come  from 
without,  it  comes  from  within.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  character  and  misery  of  the 
loicked  :■ — I.  Who  come  under  the  description  of  the  wicked  ?  In  general,  all 
who  have  never  undergone  a  change  of  heart.  1.  Some  are  grossly  ignorant  of  the 
plain  and  essential  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion,  amidst  the  best  means  to  gain 
an  acquaintance  with  them.     2.  Some  break  out  into  open  acts  of  wickedness. 

3.  Others,  though  free  from  gross  immoralities,  are  yet  wicked,  because  they  neglect 
the  duties  of  religion.     There  are  sins  of  commission,  and  there  are  sins  of  omission. 

4.  There  are  some  who  adopt  loose  and  dangerous  principles,  who  allege,  either  that 
the  Scripture  is  not  true,  or  that  the  great  doctrines,  as  generally  taught,  are  not 
contained  in  it.  5.  Among  the  wicked  we  must  also  rank  the  formalist  and 
hypocrite.  6.  They  are  impatient  of  restraint  and  reproof.  II.  In  what  respects 
there  is  no  peace  to  such.  1.  There  is  no  peace  to  them  with  God.  By  their 
wickedness  they  wage  war  with  Heaven,  and  the  almighty  King  is  angry  with  them 
every  day.  2.  There  is  no  peace  in  their  own  conscience.  3.  There  is  no  peace  to 
the  wicked  in  a  dying  hour.  By  this  is  not  meant  that  they  shall  undergo  more 
pain  of  body  than  others.  The  pangs  of  dissolution  are  the  same  to  all.  Those, 
indeed,  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  have  often  suffered  the  most  cruel  and 
violent  deaths.  Nor  is  it  meant  that  the  wicked  have  never  any  composure  in  death, 
or  hope  of  well-being  hereafter.  Some  of  them  die  as  they  have  lived,  stupid  and 
thoughtless  as  beasts.  Some  good  men  may  have  fears  and  perplexities  to  the  very 
last ;  and  some  bad  men  may  remain  unshaken,  and  die  with  more  apparent  con- 
fidence than  the  others.  The  fears  of  the  good  man  caimot  render  his  state  less  safe, 
nor  the  confidence  of  the  bad  render  his  less  dangerous.  Whatever  their  own  senti- 
ments are,  it  shall  be  "well  with  the  righteous,  and  ill  with  the  wicked."  What 
awful  spectacles  have  some  of  the  wicked  exhibited  on  a  death-bed  !  4.  There  is  no 
peace  to  the  wicked  after  death.  They  enjoyed  with  others  the  common  bounties  of 
Providence,  and  were  sensible  of  pleasure.  In  these  they  placed  their  only  happiness ; 
but  now  all  is  gone,  and  they  are  tormented.  Conscience  can  be  quieted  no  more. 
(  JV.  Linn,  D.D.)  No  comfort  for  the  vncked: — The  wicked  would  not  be  healed  by 
the  grace  of  God,  and  therefore  shall  not  be  healed  by  His  comforts.  {M.  Henry.) 
No  peace  to  the  wicked: — 1.  The  man  who  lives  in  a  habitual  course  of  sinning  has 
no  real  comfort  of  mind  from  the  pleasures  of  this  world.  2.  He  must  necessarily 
want  all  effectual  support  under  the  many  evUs  and  calamities  of  life.  3.  He  cannot 
but  be  sometimes  troubled  with  the  reproofs  of  his  conscience.  4.  He  can  never 
get  rid  of  all  the  unwelcome  thoughts  of  death,  and  of  what  is  to  be  his  portion 
in  a  future  state.  (Bishop  Pearce.)  No  peace  to  the  vncked: — I.  Who  are  thb 
characters  described  ?  "The  wicked."  This  description  includes  the  outwardly 
immoral  and  profane — those  who  seem  lost  to  every  principle  of  virtue  and  religion 
— who  have  not  the  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes — and  who  are  equally  indifferent 
to  the  censure  and  approbation  of  their  fellow-creatures.  But  the  words  of  the  text 
are  applicable  to  all  those  whose  hearts  have  not  been  renewed  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
II.  The  affecting  declaration  respecting  such  characters.  "There  is  no 
peace,"  etc.  1.  They  cannot,  while  in  this  state,  enjoy  peace  with  God.  Peace 
includes  in  it  mutual  reconciliation  and  agreement.  2.  The  wicked  cannot  enjoy 
peace  with  themselves.  As  the  favour  and  presence  of  God  are  the  only  sources  of 
real  happiness,  a  state  of  enmity  and  separation  from  Him  must  be  attended  with 
misery.  Subjection  to  His  authority,  and  conformity  to  His  wUl  and  ima^e, 
promotes  peace  and  order,  but  where  these  do  not  exist,  there  must  be  confusion 
and  discord.    The  unruly  passions  will  then  agitate  and  distress  the  mind ;  pride, 


301  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lvm, 

and  envy,  and  hatred,  and  other  unholy  affections  will  struggle  for  the  ascendency. 
Having  no  principle  to  check  or  govern  them,  they  will  increase  in  violence  and 
hurry  their  possessor  onward  in  the  path  of  sin  and  danger.  Conscience  will  also 
exert  its  influence  to  alarm  and  terrify  them.  In  vain  do  the  wicked  seek  peace  of 
conscience  by  partial  reformation  or  by  the  performance  of  outward  duties.  The 
accusations  of  a  guilty  conscience  can  be  silenced  only  by  an  application  to  the 
blood  of  sprinkling.  8.  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked  in  the  world.  Alienation 
from  God  necessarily  leads  to  strife  among  men.  It  excites  those  corrupt  passions 
and  principles  which  render  man  the  enemy  of  his  fellow-man,  as  well  as  the  source 
of  misery  to  himself.  4.  The  wicked  have  no  peace  under  the  various  afflictions  of 
life.  In  the  season  of  worldly  prosperity,  they  may  appear  to  others  peaceful  and 
happy,  but  no  sooner  does  adversity  come  upon  them,  than  we  see  the  transient  and 
unsubstantial  nature  of  their  enjoyment.  5.  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked  in  the 
hour  of  death.  6.  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked  through  eternity.  {Essex  Con- 
gregational Remembrancer.')  Wickedness  an  obstntction  to  social  peace  and  Jiappi- 
ness : — In  order  to  the  proving  of  this,  I  shall  insist  on  these  three  arguments — 
I.  The  nattjual  tekdency  of  wickedness.    II.  The  consideration  of  God's  peo- 

VIDENCE,  AKD  HiS  RIGHTEOUS  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  WORLD.     III.    ThE  EXPERIENCE 

OF  ALL  AGES.  {B.  Colamy,  D.I).)  No  peace  to  the  vncked: — I.  A  positive  asser- 
tion, an  unlimited  proposition,  "There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  II.  The 
authority  upon  which  the  proposition  is  established^  even  the  testimony  of  God  Him- 
self, "There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  (/.  Lambe.)  The  dismal 
reflections  of  the  unbelieving  mind: — It  is  said  of  the  infidel  Hobbes,  "that  though 
he  would  speak  very  strange  and  unbecoming  things  of  God,  yet  in  his  study  in  the 
dark,  and  m  his  retired  thoughts,  he  trembled  before  Him.  If  his  candle  happened 
to  go  out  in  the  night,  he  awoke  in  terror  and  amazement.  He  was  unable  to  bear 
the  dismal  [reflections  of  his  dark  and  desolate  mind  ;  and  knew  not  how  to  extin- 
guish, nor  how  to  bear  the  light  of  the  candle  of  the  Lord  within  him."  Mr.  False 
Peace,  so  John  Bunyan  has  it  in  his  "Holy  War,"  was  the  son  of  Mr.  Flatterer, 
and  his  mother's  name  before  she  was  married  was  Mrs.  Sooth-up.  He  liked  to  be 
called  Mr.  Peace,  but  there  were  witnesses  enough  to  prove  that  time  was  when  he 
delighted  to  boast  that  his  real  name  was  not  Peace,  but  False  Peace.  "There  is 
no  peace  (except  false  peace),  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."    {T,  Spwrgeon.) 


CHAPTER  LVIII. 


Vbbs.  1-4.  Cry  aloud,  spare  not. — "Cry  aloud": — "Ory  with  the  throat." 
Crying  with  the  throat  or  from  the  lungs  is  here  opposed  to  a  simple  motion  of  the 
lips  and  tongue  (1  Sam.  i.  13).  The  common  version,  "Ory  aloud,"  is  therefore 
substantially  correct,  though  somewhat  vague.  The  LXX  in  Hke  manner  para- 
phrases it  ^v  4Vx<5«.  J.  D.  Michaelis  reads,  "as  loud  as  thou  canst."  The  positive 
command  is  enforced  by  the  negative  one,  "spare  not,"  as  in  chap.  liv.  2.  The 
loudness  of  the  call  is  intended  to  suggest  the  importance  of  the  subject,  and, 
perhaps,  the  insensibility  of  those  to  be  convinced.  The  prophet  here  seems  to 
turn  away  from  avowed  apostates  to  hypocritical  professors  of  the  truth.  {J.  A. 
Alexander.)  Conviction  before  comfort: — When  our  Lord  Jesus  promised  to  send  the 
Comforter,  He  added,  "  When  He  is  come,  He  shall  convince  ; "  for  conviction  must 
prepare  for  comfort,  and  must  also  separate  between  the  precious  and  the  vile,  and 
mark  out  those  to  whom  comfort  doth  not  belong.  God  had  appointed  this  prophet 
to  comfort  His  people  (chap.  xl.  1) ;  here  He  appoints  him  to  convince  them,  and 
show  them  their  sins.  {M.  Henry. )  The  minister  must  be  faithful : — He  must  be 
vehement  and  in  good  earnest,  must  cry  aloud,  and  not  spare.  Not  spare  them, 
nor  touch  them  with  his  reproofs  as  if  he  were  afraid  of  hurting  them,  but  search 
the  wound  to  the  bottom  ;  lay  it  bare  to  the  bone  ;  not  spare  himself,  or  his  own 
pains,  but  cry  as  loud  as  he  can.  Though  he  spend  his  strength,  and  waste  his 
spirits  ;  though  he  get  their  ill-will  by  it,  and  get  himself  into  an  ill-name  ;  yet  he 
must  not  spare.  The  trumpet  doth  not  give  an  uncertain  sound,  but,  though  loud 
and  shrill,  is  intelligible.  So  must  his  alarms  be,  giving  them  warning  of  the  fatal 
ooDsequences  of  sin  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  3,  4).     (Ibid.)    Natumal  tint  protested  against:— 


CBAP.LTni.]  ISAIAH.  SOS 

I.   TeSTIFT  against   SOJIIi   OF  THE   PREVAILING  SINS  AND  OKTING  ABOMINATIONS 

or  THIS  LAND.  1.  Pride.  2.  Luxuiy.  3.  Pleasure.  4.  Gluttony.  5.  Drunken- 
ness. 6.  Swearing.  7.  Sabbath-breaking.  8.  Lying.  9.  Avarice.  10.  Adultery 
and  fornication.  11.  Profanecontemptof  holy  things.  12.  The  evil  passions  which 
agitate  the  bosoms  of  men,  and  which  receive  the  sanction  of  a  large  portion  of  the 
community — not  as  casual  evils,  but  as  principles  of  action,  and  tests  of  what  is 
called  highmindedness  and  honour.  Some  of  the  most  prevailing  of  these,  when 
stripped  of  their  specious  coverings,  and  exhibited  in  their  proper  character,  are — 
ambition,  envy,  malice,  and  revenge.  13.  Flagrant  insincerity,  and  wicked  abuse  of 
professed  acts  of  public  worship.  14.  Hardened  impenitence.  11.  Urge  with  faith- 
fulness AND  IMPARTIALITY  THE  SENTENCE  OF  GOD  DENOUNCED  UPON  EACH.      {R, 

Shittler.)  /S'e?^A-^'e^y  is  the  popular  piety  of  this  age  and  land.  I.  It  IS  very  earnest. 
The 


power; 

(ver.  %.    _. „--        _     ,  „       .  . 

etc.  3.  It  is  earnest  in  its  self-sacrifice.  It  endures  fastings  and  self-mortifications 
(ver.  3).  4.  It  is  earnest  in  its  churchism.  "Ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate,"  etc. 
It  woTild  seem  that  the  Israelites  were  divided  into  religious  parties  or  factions, 
some  professing  to  be  more  orthodox  than  others.  There  was  a  rivalry,  therefore,  in 
their  devotion ;  one  tried  to  excel  the  other,  and  the  competition  ran  so  high  that 
they  began  to  "smite  each  other  with  the  fist."  5.  It  is  earnest  in  its  professions. 
They  made  "their  voice  to  be  heard  on  high."  II.  It  is  terribly  reprehensible. 
The  prophet  is  here  called  upon  to  "  Cry  aloud,  spare  not,"  etc.  1.  It  is  an  insult 
to  God.  "He  abhors  the  sacrifice  where  not  the  heart  is  found."  This  selfish 
piety  is  the  most  abhorrent  of  all  impieties.  2.  It  is  pernicious  to  souls.  This 
selfish  piety  inflicts  incalculable  injury  upon  its  possessor :  it  warps  the  jud^ent,  it 
deadens  the  conscience,  it  awakens  false  hopes,  generates  diseased  aflFections  and 
dehumanizes  the  man.  Kor  is  the  injury  confined  to  the  possessor  himself. 
(Homilist.) 

Ver.  2.  Tet  they  seek  Me  daily. — Hypocritical  religion: — When  the  prophet 
went  about  to  show  them  their  transgressions,  they  pleaded  they  could  see  no  trans- 
gressions they  were  guilty  of ;  for  they  were  diligent  in  attending  God's  worship,  and 
what  more  would  he  have  of  them  ?  Now,  1.  He  owns  the  matter  of  fact  to  be  true. 
Afl  far  as  hypocrites  do  that  which  is  good,  they  shaU  not  be  denied  the  praise  of  it ; 
let  them  make  their  best  of  it.     It  is  owned  that  they  have  the  form  of  godliness. 

(1)  They  go  to  church,  and  observe  their  hours  of  prayer.     "They  seek  Me  daily." 

(2)  They  love  to  hear  good  preaching.  "  They  delight  to  know  My  ways,"  as  Herod, 
who  heard  John  gladly,  and  the  stony  ground,  that  received  the  seed  of  the  "Word 
with  joy  ;  it  is  to  them  as  a  lovely  song  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  32).  (3)  They  seem  to  take 
a  great  pleasure  in  the  exercises  of  religion,  and  to  be  in  their  element  when  they  are 
at  their  devotions.  "  They  delight  in  approaching  to  God,"  not  for  His  sake  to  whom 
they  approach,  but  for  the  sake  of  some  pleasing  circumstance — the  company  or  the 
festival.  (4)  They  are  inquisitive  concerning  their  duty,  and  seem  desirous  only  to 
know  it,  making  no  question  but  that  then  they  should  do  it.  ' '  They  ask  of  Me  the 
ordinances  of  justice,"  the  rules  of  piety  in  the  worship  of  God,  the  rules  of  equity  in 
their  dealings  with  men,  both  which  are  ordinances  of  justice.  (5)  They  appear  to 
the  eyes  of  the  world  as  if  they  mside  conscience  of  doing  their  duty.  They  are  "as 
a  nation  that  did  righteousness  and  forsook  not  the  ordinances  of  their  God."  But, 
2.  He  intimates  that  this  was  so  far  from  being  a  cover  or  excuse  for  their  sin,  that 
really  it  was  an  aggravation  of  it.  Show  them  their  sins  that  they  go  on  in,  not- 
withstanding their  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  sin  and  duty,  and  the  convictions  of 
their  consciences  concerning  it.  (iJf.  Henry. )  Religious,  but  u/nsaved : — Men  may  go 
a  great  way  towards  heaven,  and  yet  come  short ;  nay,  may  go  to  hell  with  a  good 
reputation.  {Ibid. )  Two  great  problems : — The  prophet  and  the  world  mav  be  con- 
sidered as  engaged  in  two  opposite  problems.  The  problem  which  the  world  is  ever 
seeking  to  discover  is  to  find  out  what  is  the  least  religion  they  may  have,  and  yet 
be  saved ;  the  problem  which  the  prophet  is  here  endeavouring  to  solve,  is  what  is 
the  most  religion  you  may  have,  and  yet  be  lost.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Forms  of  r«- 
ligion : — There  are  four  distinct  forms  of  Gospel  service,  aU  of  which,  if  accompanied 
l^  right  afiFections  towards  God,  afford  just  and  scriptural  evidence  of  an  accepted  or 
reconciled  state.  These  four  forms  of  service  are — the  habit  of  daily  prayer,  a  lov» 
for  the  preached  Word,  an  open  profession  of  Christ,  and  an  apparent  earnestness  in 
inqairing  after  the  ways  and  wul  of  God.    These,  however,  are  not  in  themsdves 


304  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  LVin. 

decisive  tests  of  spiritual  character ;  causes  may  operate  to  induce  these  outward  ob- 
servances, wholly  distinct  from  the  love  of  God  in  its  governing  and  ruling  power. 
Education  mav  prompt  a  man  to  acts  of  daily  worship  ;  by  local  sympathies,  or  by 
the  power  of  w.shion,  a  man  may  be  induced  to  make  a  religious  profession  ;  and  he 
may  with  much  apparent  earnestness  be  inquiring  which  is  the  way  to  life  eternal, 
when  he  has  a  secret  mental  reservation  to  keep  the  joys,  the  comforts,  and  the  for- 
bidden delights  of  the  present  world.  {lUd.)  Formalism: — I.  "Why  men  go  so 
FAR.  1.  It  is  a  sentiment  of  moral  uneasiness  which  makes  the  formalist  of  every 
grade  and  character.  2.  But  in  estimating  the  causes  which  induce  men  to  go  certain 
lengths  in  a  religious  life,  we  should  not  entirely  omit  the  expectation  of  a  consider- 
able degree  of  credit  in  the  world ;  a  secret  pride  at  being  numbered  among  the 
people  of  God — an  indefinite  notion  of  outward  prosperity  as  usually  following  on  a 
bold  religious  profession.  II.  Why  it  is  that  they  will  not  go  ftjuther.  For 
this  I  shall  assign  two  reasons.  1.  Defective  knowledge — an  imperfect  acquaintance 
with  the  way  of  salvation.  Men  know  not  the  end  of  Christ's  work,  they  know  not 
the  jealousy  with  which  He  regards  any  interference  with  that  work.  2.  Defectiv* 
obedience — they  stop  short  of  some  form  of  Gospel  requirement  with  which  they 
should  comply.    III.  Apply  bomb  tests  of  spiritital  sincerity.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  3-7.  "Wherefore  have  we  fasted  1 — Fasts  were  a  common  feature  of  the  old 
Israelitish  religion  (1  Kings  xxL  9,  12  ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  9).  In  Zech.  viii.  19  we  learn 
expressly  that  during  the  exile  four  days  were  observed  annually  as  fasts,  in  com- 
memoration of  dates  connected  with  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  {Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 
Fasting: — I.  Consider  in  general  the  DtrTY  of  fasting,  its  nature,  ends 
AND  USES.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  word,  fasting  is  only  an  abstinence  from  food. 
Whether  this  abstinence  shomd  be  total  or  partial,  and  how  long  it  should  be  con- 
tinued, cannot  be  determined  by  any  general  rule  that  can  reach  all  persons  ;  but  th« 
constitations  and  strength  of  particular  persons  must  be  considered,  and  such  absti- 
nence used  by  them  respectively  as  will  best  answer  in  each  the  ends  and  uses  of  fast- 
ing. We  are  not  to  look  upon  fasting  in  itself  as  a  thing  that  recommends  us  to 
Grod.  But  there  are  good  ends  for  which  fasting  is  appointed,  and  which  are  pro- 
moted by  it,  that  make  it  acceptable  to  God :  regard,  therefore,  must  ever  be  had  to 
those  ends,  and  such  measures  taken  as  may  be  most  conducive  to  them,  and  they 
are  chiefly  these — 1.  For  subduing  and  mortifying  the  sinful  appetites  of  the  body. 
2.  For  the  better  disposing  the  mind  to  prayer  and  other  spiritual  exercises.  Tne 
corruptible  body  is  too  apt  to  press  down  the  immortal  soul.  3.  For  the  testifying 
our  shame  and  sorrow  ;  our  anger  at  ourselves  for  our  sins.  We  have  God's  express 
command  for  it  to  His  people  the  Jews.  The  prophet  Joel  frequently  and  earnestly 
presses  them  to  this  duty.  Holy  men  of  old  practised  it,  as  we  find  in  the  instances 
of  Ezra,  David,  Daniel,  etc.  And  that  we  mav  not  think  this  to  be  such  a  Jewish 
rite,  as  concerned  only  those  that  lived  under  their  dispensation,  we  read  that  when 
the  prophet  Jonah  denounced  God's  judgment  against  Nineveh,  those  Gentiles  pro- 
claimed a  fast,  and  observed  it  universally  from  the  greatest  to  the  least.  And  to 
put  this  matter  out  of  all  doubt,  the  blessed  Author  of  our  holy  religion,  in  His 
8«rmon  on  the  Mount,  though  He  does  not  directly  command  fasting,  yet  supposes  it 
a  duty  to  be  practised  by  Christians,  gives  directions  for  the  right  performance  of  it, 
and  upon  such  a  performance  assures  us  of  a  blessing  frova.  our  Father  in  heaven. 
II.  Reflect  upon  those  faitlts  of  the  Jews  recorded  in  my  text,  which 
made  their  fasts  unacceptable  to  God.  1.  Though  they  used  great  outward 
austerity,  and  severe  discipline  towards  the  body,  there  was  no  inward  change. 
2.  Their  divisions  and  contentions.  "Ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate,"  etc.  8.  Their 
want  of  compassion  and  charity  to  those  that  were  in  affliction  (ver.  7).  A  like 
thread  of  hypocrisy  ran  through  their  fasts,  and  prayers,  and  alms,  and  all  their 
services  in  our  Saviour's  time.     III.  Inquire  whether  we  of  this  nation  are  not 

JUSTLY  CHARGEABLE  WITH  THE  SAME  SINS  WHICH  THEY  COMMITTED,  and  80  Severely 

■marted  for  ;  and  whether  we  have  not  too  much  reason  to  fear  that  Grod  may  expos- 
tulate with  us  about  our  public  fasts,  as  He  did  with  them,  "  Are  they  such  fasts  as 
I  have  chosen?"     IV.    Press  you  to  the  practice  of  such  things  as  may 

MAES  this  day   OF    HUMILIATION   AN   ACCEPTABLE    DAY    UNTO    THE    LORD.        And 

what  can  do  this  but  our  careful  avoiding  those  sins  which  the  Jews  are  here  re- 
proved for,  and  practising  their  contrary  duties  ?  1.  We  must  be  sure  to  avoid  that 
lOoUsh  and  provoking  sin  of  hypocrisy.  2.  Also  all  strife  and  division.  3.  Let  ua 
take  heed  of  nnmercifnlness  and  hard-heartedness  to  those  that  are  in  want  and 
miseiy ;  for,  with  what  face  can  we  ask,  with  what  reason  can  we  expect  from  God, 


CHAP,  unn."]  ISAIAH.  30ft 

supplies  for  our  wants,  or  succour  in  our  distress,  if  we  refuse  such  lielp  as  we  can 
give  to  our  poor  brethren  in  their  affliction  ?  {Bp.  Talbot.)  IndpieTit  Pharisaism : — 
There  is  an  incipient  Pharisaism  in  their  evident  expectation  that  by  external  works 
of  righteousness  they  would  hasten  the  coming  of  the  Messianic  salvation.  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.)  Ye  fast  for  strife: — J.  D.  Michaelis  tells  a  stoir  of  a  lady  who  was 
never  known  to  scold  her  servants  so  severely  as  on  fast  days,  which  he  says  agrees 
well  with  physiological  principles  and  facts  !     {J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Vers.  5-9.  Is  it  such  a  fast  that  I  have  chosen  ! — The  fast  which  God  Tims  chosen: 
— I.  God's  purpose  ik  commanding  men  to  fast.  1.  To  lead  us  to  prayer 
(ver.  4),  prayer  so  real  that  our  voices  are  "heard  on  high,"  that  God  will  hear 
and  answer.  2.  To  aid  us  in  realizing  communion  with  Him  (ver.  9) ;  that  His 
voice  be  heard  by  us  as  truly  as  ours  by  Him ;  our  voice  to  Him  (ver.  8),  His  to 
us.  3.  To  aid  in  repressing  self  in  all  its  forms.  In  John  iii.  30,  we  have  the 
general  principle,  also  in  Phil.  ii.  3.  II.  The  nature  or  character  of  true 
abstinence.  1.  To  loose  our  bands  (Luke  xiii.  16),  "whom  Satan  hath  bound" 
(Luke  xi.  21,  22  ;  Matt.  v.  29,  30).  2.  To  undo  our  burdens  (Ps.  Iv.  22 ;  Matt, 
xi.  28-30).  3.  To  break  every  yoke,  every  habit  that  enslaves  (Eom.  xiv.  21 ;  1  Cor. 
vi.  12-18).  "  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any."  4.  To  bring  the  flesh 
into  subjection  to  the  spirit  (Gal.  v.  17).  III.  The  effect  of  true  abstinence. 
1.  "Then"  thy  light  shall  break  forth  like  morning  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16;  Matt.  v. 
16).  2.  "Thy .righteousness  shall  go  before  thee"  as  a  leader  to  higher  grace 
and  glory  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  3.  Thy  prayer  shall  be  heard  (ver.  9).  4.  There  shall 
be  light  from  on  high,  and  His  guidance  for  ever  (ver.  10 ;  Ps.  xxxii.  8  ;  Exod. 
xxxiii.  14).  Conclusion  :  To  keep  this  season  properly,  we  must  be  ourselves 
"  free  "  as  new  creatures  in  Him.  We  must  act  habitually  in  the  spirit  of  freedom  . 
(Gal.  V.  1).  "We  must  do  what  in  us  lies  to  make  others  free  (Numb.  x.  29). 
{H.  Linton,  M.A.)  Philanthropic  piety : — In  these  verses  you  have  the  religious 
instinct  working,  not  through  selfishness,  but  through  love,  not  in  formal  religious 
devotions,  but  in  earnest  philanthropic  services.  I.  Irs  ritual  is  philanthropic 
SERVICE.  "  Pure  religion  and  undefiled  is  this,  to  visit  the  widow  and  fatherless," 
etc.  II.  Its  influence  is  gloriously  beneficent.  What  is  it?  "Light." 
"Then  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning."  Prosperity  will  come  on 
them  as  the  genial  dawning  of  a  long  and  blessed  day.  "  Health. "  "  Thine  health 
shall  spring  forth  speedily."  All  weakness  and  disease  will  depart,  and  healthful 
vigour  will  come  into  the  soul.  "Righteousness."  "Thy  righteousness  shall  go 
before  thee."  The  eternal  law  of  rectitude — not  expediency,  not  caprice,  not 
passion,  not  morbid  sentiment,  will  guide  the  footsteps  as  a  leader  through  the 
winding  path  of  life,"  "Glory."  "The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rereward" 
(margin,  "  shall  gather  thee  up,  that  ye  shall  bring  up  the  rear  " ).  III.  Its  spirit 
IS  acceptable  to  God.  "Then  shalt  thou  call  and  the  Lord  shall  answer  ;  thou 
shalt  cry,  and  He  shall  say.  Here  I  am."  The  idea  is  that  if  men  would  only  be 
real  in  their  religion,  show  their  love  to  Him  by  labouring  earnestly  for  the  good 
of  suffering  humanity,  then  He  would  respond  to  their  prayers,  and  grant  them 
their  request.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen  1 — Practical  fasting : — In  reply 
to  the  question,  how  the  acts  here  mentioned  could  be  described  as  fasting,  J.  D. 
Michaelis  says  that  they  are  all  to  be  considered  as  involving  acts  of  conscientious 
self-denial,  which  he  illustrates  by  the  case  of  an  American  slaveholder  brought 
by  stress  of  conscience  to  emancipate  his  slaves.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  Oppression: — 
People  may  be  oppressed  in  their  reputation  by  unmerited  reproaches.  {R.  Mae- 
culloch.)  A  foretokening  of  Gospel  morality: — This  passage  is  one  of  those  in 
which  the  holiness  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  seems  to  be  foretokened  in  the  morality 
of  the  prophetic  canon.  The  twilight  clouds  were  red  with  the  coming  Sun.  1. 
Isaiah  and  his  brother-prophets  were  holier  and  heavenlier  and  richer  in  the 
works  of  love  upon  an  anticipated  Christ  than  we  are  in  a  Christ  already  our 
crucified  Example.  These  men  of  God  knew  no  divorce  between  belief  and  love, 
between  living  perpetually  in  the  presence  of  a  benevolent  Lord  and  imitating 
His  benevolence  to  their  feUow-creatureo.  As  it  is  the  spirit  of  truth  that  has 
solemnized  the  union  of  the  principle  of  faith  with  the  works  of  charity,  so  it  is, 
and  in  aU  ages  has  been,  the  master  policy  of  the  spirit  of  evil  to  effect  their 
separation.  2.  The  whole  religious  providence  towards  man  in  every  age  has 
been  a  system  operating  by  the  combined  influence  of  faith  and  love — ^both  directed 

VOL.  ui.  20 


306  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA^.Mni. 

towards  His  own  perfect  essence.  In  oar  existing  condition,  what  is  faith  but  love 
relying  on  support?  What  is  love  but  faith  forgetting  the  support  in  the 
Supporter  ?  Every  progressive  step  in  attaining  habits  of  compassion  and  kindness 
upon  earth  must  necessarily  be  a  step  towards  estimating  and  loving  Him  who 
is  the  essential  Spirit  of  benevolence.  The  love  of  man  is  the  type  and  shadow 
of  the  love  of  God.  The  people  of  God  are  here  engaged  with  the  rudiments  and 
images  of  those  affections  which  are  to  be  the  dvty  smd  happiness  of  their  eternity. 
(  W.  Archer  Butler,) 

Ver.  7.  Is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry! — Almsgiving: — Why  there  are 
so  many  evils  in  the  world  is  a  question  that  has  been  agitated  ever  since  man  felt 
them.  It  becomes  not  us,  with  too  presumptuous  a  curiosity,  to  assign  the  causes 
of  the  Divine  conduct,  or,  with  too  daring  a  hand,  to  draw  aside  the  veil  which 
covers  the  councils  of  the  Almighty.  But  from  this  state  of  things  we  see  many 
good  effects  arise.  The  enjoyments  of  life  are  grafted  upon  its  wants  ;  from  natural 
evil  arises  moral  good,  and  the  sufferings  of  some  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  alL 
Such  being  the  state  of  human  affairs,  charity,  or  that  disposition  which  leads  us  to 
supply  the  wants,  and  alleviate  the  sufferings,  of  unhappy  men,  as  well  as  bear  with 
their  infirmities,  must  be  a  duty  of  capital  importance.  Accordingly,  it  is  enjoined 
in  our  holy  religion  as  being  the  chief  of  the  virtues.  It  is  assigned  as  the  test  and 
criterion  by  which  we  are  to  distinguish  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  and  it  will  be 
selected  at  the  great  day  as  being  that  part  of  the  character  which  is  most  decisive 
of  the  life,  and  according  to  which  the  fast  sentence  is  to  turn.  Charity,  in  its  most 
comprehensive  sense,  signifies  that  disposition  of  mind  which,  from  a  regard  and 
gratitude  to  God,  leads  to  do  aU  the  good  in  our  power  to  man.  But  all  that  I 
mtend  at  present  is,  to  consider  that  branch  of  charity  which  is  called  almsgiving. 
I.  What  is  the  most  proper  method  of  bestowing  charity.  1.  The  best 
method  of  bestowing  charity  upon  the  healthy  and  strong  is  to  give  them  employ- 
ment. One  half  of  the  vices  of  men  take  their  origin  from  idleness.  To  support 
the  indolent,  therefore,  to  keep  those  idle  who  are  able  to  work,  is  acting  contrary 
to  the  intention  of  God  ;  is  doing  an  injury  to  society,  which  claims  a  right  to  the 
services  of  all  its  members  ;  is  defrauding  real  objects  of  charity  of  that  which  is 
their  proper  due,  and  is  fostering  a  race  of  sluggards  to  prey  upon  the  vitals  of  a 
State.  But  he  is  a  valuable  member  of  society,  and  merits  well  of  mankind,  who, 
by  devising  means  of  employment  for  the  industrious,  delivers  the  public  from  a 
useless  incumbrance,  and  makes  those  who  would  otherwise  be  the  pests  of  society, 
useful  subjects  of  the  Commonwealth.  2.  Another  act  of  charity,  of  equal  import- 
ance, is  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  really  indigent  and  necessitous.  If  the 
industrious,  with  all  their  efforts,  are  not  able  to  earn  a  competent  livelihood  ;  if  the 
produce  of  their  labour  be  not  proportionable  to  the  demands  of  a  numerous  family  ; 
then  they  are  proper  objects  of  your  charity.  3.  Another  class  of  men  that  demand 
our  charity  is  the  a^ed  and  feeble,  who,  after  a  life  of  hard  labour,  are  grown 
unfit  for  rarther  business,  and  who  add  poverty  to  the  other  miseries  of  old  age. 
4.  Children  also  bereft  of  their  parents,  orphans  cast  upon  the  care  of  Providence, 
are  signal  objects  of  compassion.  5.  But  there  is  a  class  of  the  unfortunate  who 
are  the  greatest  objects  of  all ;  those  who,  after  having  been  accustomed  to  ease 
and  plenty,  are  by  some  unavoidable  reverse  of  fortune  condemned  to  bear,  what 
they  are  least  able  to  bear,  the  galling  load  of  poverty ;  who,  after  having  been 
perhaps  fathers  to  the  fatherless  in  the  day  of  their  prosperity,  are  now  become  the 
objects  of  that  charity  which  they  were  wont  so  liberally  to  dispense.  II.  Exhort- 
ations to  the  practice  of  this  duty.  This  duty  is  so  agreeable  to  the 
common  notions  of  mankind,  that  every  one  condemns  the  mean  and  sordid  spirit 
of  that  wretch  whom  God  has  blessed  with  abundance,  and  consequently  with  the 
power  of  blessing  others,  and  who  is  yet  relentless  to  the  cries  of  the  poor  and 
miserable.  The  practice  of  this  duty  is  incumbent  upon  all.  1.  To  the  perform- 
ance of  it  you  are  drawn  by  that  pity  and  compassion  which  are  implanted  in  the 
heart.  2.  Consider  the  pleasure  derived  from  benevolence.  {J.  Logan,  F.R.S.) 
Dealing  bread  to  the  hungry : — Thine  "own  bread"  it  must  be,  and  that  especially 
whereof  thou  hast  on  the  fast-day  abridged  thyself ;  for  what  tie  rich  spare  on  such 
a  day  the  poor  should  spend.  Hereby,  1.  Men's  prayers  shall  speea  the  better 
(Acts  X.  4).  2.  They  shall  make  God  thefr  debtor  (Prov.  xix.  17).  8.  That  is  beat 
and  most  pleasing  alms  to  God  that  is  given  in  Church  assemblies  ;  for,  (1)  it  is  an 
ordinance  of  God,  and  a  Sabbath  duty  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2) ;  (2)  Christ  there  sitteth, 
•nd  seetJi  the  gift  and  mind  of  every  almsgiver  (Luke  zxi.  1,  2),  setting  it  down  in 


CHAP.  LYiii.  ISAIAH.  807 

His  book  of  remembrance  (Mai.  iii.  16).  {J.  Trapp.)  "  To  break  bread,"  meaning 
to  distribute,  from  the  Oriental  practice  of  baking  bread  in  thin  flat  cakes.  {J.  A, 
Alexander.)  Breaking  bread  to  the  hungry : — Not  only  to  give  them  that  which  is 
already  broken  meat,  but  break  bread  on  purpose  for  them ;  give  them  loaves  and 
do  not  put  them  off  with  scraps.     {M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  8-14.  Then  shall  thy  light  break  forth. — The  $eeret  of  prosperity  to  nationt, 
churches,  and  men  (vers.  8,  9, 10, 14,  "  Then,"  "  then,"  "  then,"  *'  then  ") : — I.  Men 
AND  Churches  charge  God  foolishly,  and  complain  without  cause  of  theib 

OWN  LOW  ESTATE.  II.  GOD  REBUTS  THEIR  BLASPHEMOUS  CHARGE,  AND  ASSERTS 
THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  HiS  DEALINGS  IN  AN  APPEAL  TO  THEIR  (  'VN  CONSCIENCES 
AND  COMMON-SENSE.  III.  GOD  RETURNS  THE  CHARGE  AGAINST  HiMSELF  ON  THE 
sinners'  OWN    HEADS,   AND    REVEALS    HiS    SECRET,    IF  MEN   WILL    HAVE    EARS  TO 

HEAR.  "Then"  is  the  secret  of  light  and  darkness ;  of  health  and  sickness,  or 
want  of  spiritual  vigour  and  vitality ;  of  covenant  righteousness  in  the  enjoyment 
of  covenant  blessings,  or  apparent  breach  of  covenant  in  the  withholding  of  what  is 
good  ;  of  glory,  such  as  that  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  when  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
was  "their  rereward,"  when  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  was  in  the  midst  of  them 
by  day  and  night,  or  shame,  as  when  the  ark  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines, 
or  the  Assyrian  or  Babylonian  invaded  God's  heritage  and  profaned  His  temple  ;  of 
prayers  answered,  or  unanswered ;  of  God's  presence  manifested  in  undeniable 
tokens,  or  denied,  undiscemed,  apparently  withdrawn ;  of  power  to  be  God's  wit- 
nesses and  workmen  in  doing  good  to  others,  or  impotence,  conscious  inability  to  b« 
fellow-labourers  with  God  and  for  God,  want  of  spiritual  life  and  energy.  "Then" 
is  the  secret — then,  and  not  till  then — then,  and  not  otherwise — then  certainly^ 
then  according  to  the  promise  of  the  covenant,  and  in  the  way  of  the  covenant  and 
kingdom.  In  further  application  of  the  text  to  ourselves  learn  such  lessons  as  the 
following — 1.  The  salvation  of  the  Gospel  is  salvation  from  sin  itself.  2.  In  the 
Gospel,  accordingly,  blessedness  and  righteousness  go  together,  and  so  also  sin  and 
misery.  3.  There  is  under  the  Gospel  no  substitute  for  repentance.  4.  Man,  in 
all  the  work  of  salvation,  from  beginning  to  end,  must  co-operate  with  God. 
[B.  Paisley.)  God  the  rewarder: — If  a  person,  a  family,  a  people  be  thus  disposed 
to  everything  that  is  good,  let  them  know  for  their  comfort  that  they  shall  find  God 
their  bountiful  rewarder.  1.  God  shall  surprise  them  with  the  return  of  mercy 
after  great  affliction,  which  shall  be  as  welcome  as  the  light  of  the  morning  after  a 
long  and  dark  night  (vers.  8,  10).  They  that  are  cheerful  in  doing  good,  God  will 
make  them  cheerful  in  enjoying  good.  They  that  have  showed  mercy  shall  find 
mercy.  Those  that  have  helped  others  out  of  trouble,  God  will  help  them  when  it 
is  their  turn.  2.  God  wiU  put  honour  upon  them.  Good  works  shall  be  recom- 
pensed with  a  good  name.  This  is  included  in  that  light  which  riseth  out  of  obscurity. 
8.  They  shall  always  be  safe  under  the  Divine  protection.  "Thy  righteousness 
shall  go  before  thee,"  as  the  vanguard,  to  secure  thee  from  enemies  that  charge  thee 
in  the  front ;  and  "the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rearward,  "the  gathering  host, 
to  bring  up  those  of  thee  that  are  weary  and  are  left  behind,  and  to  secure  thee 
from  the  enemies  that,  like  Amalek,  fall  upon  thy  rear.  4.  God  will  be  always  nigh 
unto  them  to  hear  their  prayers  (ver.  9).  As,  on  the  one  hand,  "he  that  shuts  his 
ears  to  the  cry  of  the  poor  shall  himself  cry  and  God  will  not  hear  him,"  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  that  is  liberal  to  the  poor,  his  prayers  shall  come  up,  with  his  alms, 
for  a  memorial  before  God  (Acts  x.  4).  5.  God  will  direct  them  in  all  difficult  and 
doubtful  cases  (ver.  11).  6.  God  will  give  them  abundance  of  satisfaction  in  their 
own  minds  (ver.  11).  7.  They  and  their  families  shall  be  public  blessings  (ver.  12). 
{M.  Henry.)  "  Break  forth  as  the  davm" : — "Break  forth"  is  the  verb  used  in 
chap.  XXXV.  6 ;  Gen.  vii.  11 ;  Ps.  Ixxiv.  15,  of  the  bursting  of  waters  through  a 
fissure  in  the  earth's  surface ;  by  a  vivid  metaphor  the  dawn  was  conceived  as 
"splitting "  the  heavens  and  flooding  the  world  with  light.  The  same  word  occurs 
on  the  Moabite  Stone  in  the  phrase  "from  the  splitting  of  the  dawn."  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.)  Thine  health  shall  spring  forth  speedUy. — A  healthy  Church: — 
I.  Essentials  of  a  healthy  Church.  1.  A  Scriptural  constitution.  2.  Nutritious 
food.  3.  Pure  air.  4.  Regular  exercise.  II.  Characteristics  of  a  healtht 
Church.  1.  Health  is  sometimes  known  by  outward  appearances.  The  rosy  cheeks^ 
the  sparkling  eyes,  the  sonorous  voice,  all  testify  to  health.  A  healthy  Church  may 
be  known  by  its  prayer-meetings,  contributions,  missionary  spirit,  etc.  2.  Health 
is  known  by  tastes.  A  sickly  man's  taste  is  bad.  Unwholesome  dainties  are  pre- 
ferred to  strong  meat.    So  with  regard  to  an  unhealthy  Church.    Silly  anecdotes 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lviii. 

are  preferred  to  good  scriptural  teaching.  Thinks  much  of  forms  and  ceremoniea. 
3.  Cfontentment  of  mind.  An  unhealthy  man  is  querulous  and  difficult  to  please. 
So  an  unhealthy  Church.  It  is  a  fault-finding  Church.  4.  Work.  Sickness  dis- 
ables a  man  for  labour.  Health  stimulates  to  work.  A  healthy  Church  may  be 
known  by  its  labour.  III.  The  desirability  of  a  healthy  Church.  A  healthy 
Church — 1.  Is  one  of  great  comfort  to  itself.  2.  Will  survive  through  many  trials. 
The  healthy  man  is  needless  of  east  winds,  etc.  So  a  healthy  Church  survives 
persecutions,  etc.  3.  Is  attractive.  People  shun  unhealthy  Churches  as  they  do 
fever  dens.  4.  Is  one  likely  to  live.  Lessons :  1.  A  morally  sick  Church  is  a  great 
curse  to  a  neighbourhood.  2.  The  sooner  the  better  that  many  a  Church  should 
apply  to  the  great  Phvsician  for  spiritual  healing.  3.  The  Church  will  by  and  by 
become  perfectly  whole.  4.  When  perfectly  whole,  diseased  persons  will  no  longer 
be  admitted  into  its  fellowship  (Rev.  xxi.  27).     {J.  Williams.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Then  shalt  thou  call. — GodCa  vmnderful  response  to  His  people' $ 
prayers: — When  God  calls  to  us  by  His  Word,  it  becomes  us  to  say,  "  Here  we  are  ; 
what  saith  our  Lord  unto  His  servants  ? "  But  that  God  should  say  to  us,  "  Behold 
Me,  here  I  am,"  is  strange.  When  we  cry  to  Him,  as  if  He  were  at  a  distance,  He 
will  let  us  know  that  He  is  near,  even  at  our  right  hand,  nearer  than  we  thought 
'  He  was.  "  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  When  danger  is  near,  our  Protector  is  nearer,  a 
very  present  help.  "  Here  I  am,"  ready  to  give  you  what  you  want,  and  do  for  you 
what  you  desire.  What  have  you  to  say  to  Me  ?  God  is  attentive  to  the  pr^ers  of 
the  upright  (Ps.  crxx.  2).  No  sooner  do  thejr  call  to  Him,  but  He  answers,  Keady, 
ready.  Wherever  they  are  praying,  God  saith,  Here  I  am  hearing ;  I  am  in  the 
midst  of  you,  nigh  unto  them  in  all  things  (Deut.  iv.  7).  {M.  Henry.)  If  thou 
take  away  from  the  midst  of  thee  the  yoke. — One  path  to  prosperity : — In  the  figures 
implied  the  prophet  represents  extreme  adversity ;  and  by  metaphors  which  he 
distinctly  puts  forth  he  describes  renewed  prosperity  ;  and  he  connects  the  marvellous 
change  from  the  deepest  adversity  to  the  highest  prosperity  with  the  avoidance  or 
laying  aside  of  three  sins  which  then  beset  the  people  of  God,  and  with  the  perform- 
ance of  two  ordinary  duties.  1.  The  besetting  sins.  (1)  Oppression.  "  If  thou 
take  away  from  the  midst  of  thee  the  yoke, "  i.  e.  oppression.  (2)  Scorn  and 
contempt.  "The  putting  forth  of  the  finger"  is  the  spirit  that  speaks  in  the, 
"Thou  fool!"  (Sy  "And  speaking  vanity" — evil  speaking  generally.  2.  The 
duties.  (1)  "  And  if  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry,  and  satisfy  the  afflicted 
soul" — i.e.  give,  serve,  minister,  according  as  men  about  you  have  need,  and 
according  as  you  have  ability  and  opportunity.  (2)  "  And  satisfy  the  afflicted  soul " 
— i.  e.  visit  the  widow  and  fatherless  in  their  affliction — comfort  those  that  mourn — 
endeavour  according  to  your  power  to  wipe  away  the  tears  from  the  eyes  of  aU  the 
sorrowful.  {S.  Martin.)  Oppression: — The  oppression  of  others  is  an  early  sin,  a 
sin  which  you  often  see  rampant  among  children — among  very  little  children. 
Oppression  is  a  household  sin,  it  will  be  found  more  or  less  in  almost  every  family. 
There  may  be  some  cases  where  it  is  not,  but  they  are  decided  exceptions.  And  it 
is  a  sin  in  connection  with  all  family  relations.  The  godly  husbana  is  charged  to 
love  the  wife  even  as  himself,  and  even  as  Christ  loveth  the  Church  ;  but  there  are 
many  husbaads — some  professing  to  be  Christ's  disciples — who  are  the  wretched 
oppressors  of  wives.  Oppression  is  a  household  sin — seen  in  parents — seen  in  brothers 
and  sisters — seen  in  the  husband.  And  it  is  a  social  sin — seen  in  all  the  walks  of 
life.  1.  Especially  where  men  employ  each  other,  and  take  advantage  of  each  other's 
skill,  and  of  each  other's  strength.  It  is  a  national  sin — seen  more  or  less  in  all 
rulers ;  and  an  international  sin — seen  in  the  conduct  of  nations  to  each  other. 
Manifestly,  therefore,  a  very  common  sin  is  this  putting  on  of  the  yoke — seen  where 
men  have  no  right  to  put  on  the  yoke  at  all ;  and  seen  in  a  heavy  yoke  where  men 
have  only  the  right  to  put  on  a  light  yoke,  and  they  impose  a  heavy  yoke ;  and  seen 
in  thus  keeping  on  of  the  yoke  after  the  yoke  should  be  removed.  (Ibid.)  Creed 
and  outward  ordinances  not  the  supreme  things : — 1.  Nothing  is  here  said  about  this 
people  having  declined  from  religious  belief,  or  in  this  case  from  the  observance  of 
religious  rites.  God  had  to  find  fault  with  them  on  these  grounds,  but  what  I  want 
you  to  notice  is,  that  God  is  not  speaking  of  such  declension  here.  What  does  this 
show  t  It  shows  that  a  man,  so  far  as  the  creed  on  his  lip  is  concerned,  may  maintain 
his  orthodoxy,  and  that  a  man,  so  far  as  religious  ordinances  are  concerned,  may 
maintain  his  devoutness,  and  yet  have  a  heart  thoroughly  declining  from  God's 
statutes.  2.  There  is  an  eternal  connection  between  righteousness  and  blessedness. 
8.  The  true  state  of  individual  saints  and  of  congregations  of  saints  is  light,  not 


OHAP.  LTiii.]  I8AIAK.  309 

obscurity ;  brightness,  not  dulness ;  happiness,  not  misery ;  spiritual  health,  not 
moral  sickness  ;  usefulness,  not  sterility  and  barrenness  ;  continuance,  not  declension. 
{Ibid.)  "  Putting  forth  of  the  finger" : — A  gesture  of  derision.  Hence  the  middle 
finger  is  called  by  Persius,  digitus  mfcmiis.     {J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Yers.  10,  11.  And  if  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry. — TTte  reflex  influeivee 
of  missionary  enterprise: — I.  Missionaky  entebprise  exalts  Christian  char- 
acter.    The  whole  life  of  the  Christian  after  his  conversion  is  a  discipline  fitted  to 
purify  and  exalt  his  character.     What,  then,  are  the  works  and  exercises  that  tend 
most  to  build  up  Christian  character  to  a  lofty  height  ?    I  know  nothing  equal  to 
work  that  engages  us  directly  in  seeking  the  conversion  of  our  fellow-men,  and 
especially  of  those  whose  conversion  seems  naturally  most  diflScult,  such  as  we  find 
in  the  mission  field.     1.  The  first  test  I  set  before  you  is  the  tendency  of  this  work 
to  exercise  the  Christian  graces.     Whatever  exercises  these  most,  must  produce 
the  highest  Christian  result ;  for  Christian  character  is  just  the  Christian  graces 
consolidated  and  fixed  in  the  soul  by  cultivation.     Take,  then,  a  grace  like  faith. 
What  can  call  this  into  play  like  the  work  of  missions  from  first  to  last  ?    This  is 
the  very  objection  that  worldly  men  have  to  it.     Again,  take  love.     How  does  this 
grace,  when  fully  called  out,  exalt  Christian  character !     But  there  is  no  working 
of  love  like  the  sending  of  the  Gospel  to  the  perishing  souls  of  men  at  the  ends  of 
the  earth.    I  grant  that  charity  in  a  true  and  important  sense  begins  at  home.    But 
I  confidently  ask  if  home  chanty — needful  and  precious  as  it  is — be  as  lofty  a  kind 
of  charity  as  that  which  deals  with  want  and  woe,  enforced  by  the  naked  claim  of 
humanity  in  distress.     Is  it  not  an  exalted  feature  of  British  commerce  that  every 
great  calamity  strikes  to  its  heart,  so  that  immediately  a  subscription  is  opened  on 
every  stock-exchange  ?    But  why  should  missions  be  less  expansive,  and  the  soul  be 
less  provided  for  than  the  body  ?    2.  Our  second  test  shall  be  resemblance  to  God. 
From  beginning  to  end,  God  takes  a  missionary  attitude.     He  sends  the  Son  ;  He 
sends  the  Spirit ;  apart  even  from  grace,  He  sends  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the 
unjust.     As  the  true  God  delights  in  mercy,  truth,  and  righteousness,  we  claim  for 
the  works  that  foster  these  in  the  soul,  as  the  most  God-like,  the  highest  stamp  of 
worth  and  sacredness !     3.  Our  third  test  shall  be  the  example  of  Jesus  Chnst. 
What  was  He  if  not  a  missionary — the  missionary  that  travelled  the  farthest,  stooped 
the  lowest,  gave  up  the  most,  suffered  the  worst  ?    The  very  world  has  learned  new 
ideas  of  greatness  and  goodness  from  Jesus  Christ ;  and  this  central  idea  of  self- 
sacrificing  love,  as  the  very  element  of  moral  grandeur,  stands  out  like  a  new 
revelation.     4.  I  mention  a  fourth  test,  which  is,  our  imitation  of  the  greatest 
Christians.    Can  one  be  mentioned  that  has  not  sympathized  with  the  spread  and 
difl'usion  of  the  Gospel  ?    II.  The  second  way  in  which  missionary  enterprise  reacts 
beneficially  on  the  Church  is  in  incrisasing  Christian  jot.    This,  of  course, 
would  follow  from  improving  Christian  character.     But  I  take  another  line  of 
illustration.    1.  Missions  remove  hindrances  to  Christian  joy.   It  is  a  great  hindrance 
to  think  that  the  world  is  still  in  so  backward  a  state.     But  the  faithful  Christian 
can  say,  '*  Well,  this  is  not  my  fault.     I  am  doing  something  to  remedy  it ;  and 
the  more  that  we  all  do,  the  sooner  will  the  evil  be  cured."    It  is  also  a  great 
hindrance  to  Christian  joy  that  the  Church  is  so  divided.     But  here,  generally,  in 
the  mission  field,  matters  are  at  their  best.     I  will  only  mention  another  hindrance 
to  joy  which  missions  remove — the  sceptical  doubts  and  questionings  as  to  the  truth 
of  Christianity.     Now  the  visible  living  power  of  the  Gospel,  as  seen  on  the  mission 
field,  is  not  only  an  evidence  of  divinity,  but  meets  some  current  objections  and 
diflBculties.     Objections  are  taken  to  the  unity  of  the  human  race.     But  here,  in 
point  of  fact,  the  race  is  shown  to  be  one.     And  this  casts  indirect  light  on  the 
question  as  to  the  antiquity  of  man.     A  book  that  casts  more  light  on  the  history 
of  the  human  race  than  any  other,  that  goes  more  to  the  depths  of  human  nature, 
and  that  works  more  stupendous  and  blessed  changes  on  man  in  every  country  and 
clime,  is  not  likely  to  be  mistaken  as  to  his  age,  and  the  conviction,  which  every 
day's  experience  of  missions  deepens,  that  the  Bible  is  the  God-given  book  for  the 
race,  may  help  us  to  wait  calmly  and  hopefully  as  occasional  difficulties  arise,  till 
time  and  study  clear  them  away.     2.  While  missions  thus  remove  hindrances  to 
Christian  joy,  they  also  give  positive  occasions  to  it.    The  triumphs  of  the  Gospel 
in  these  new  scenes  must  delight  every  Christian  heart.    The  Christian,  as  it  were, 
lives  over  again  his  own  Christian  experience  in  coining  to  the  Saviour  and  tasting 
the  riches  of  His  grace.     He  enters  into  the  gladness  of  the  missionary  who,  after 
many  a  hard  and  sore  struggle,  rejoices  that  he  has  not  ran  in  yain,  neither  laboured 


810  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciiAP.  tvnt. 

in  vain.  He  rises  even  to  the  joy  of  angels,  as  fellow-helpers  to  conversion,  and  aa 
assuming  the  guardianship  of  imlooked-for  heirs  of  salvation  to  whom  they  minister. 
Nay,  the  Christian's  joy  is  not  complete,  till  he  thinks  of  his  God  and  Saviour,  who 
for  this  hour  came  to  tne  Cross,  with  all  its  shame  and  sorrow,  and  now,  in  looking 
back  on  it  all,  sees  here  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  is  satisfied.  III.  The  third 
way  in  which  I  shall  show  that  missionary  enterprise  reacts  beneficially  on  the 
Church  is  IN  enlarging  its  reward.  I  might  nave  dwelt  on  the  impulse  to 
usefulness  and  success  in  all  other  directions  which,  with  the  foregoing  enhance- 
ments of  character  and  joy,  constitute  reward  in  this  life.  But  I  pomt  rather  here 
to  "the  recompense  of  the  reward"  hereafter.  Our  term  of  labour  is  bounded. 
Ought  we  not,  then,  to  take  home  the  truth  that  heaven,  with  its  rewards,  is 
dependent  for  its  degrees  on  the  effects  of  time  t  The  missionary  field  thus  holds 
out  a  glorious  opportunity  of  brightening  heaven.  It  will  be  brightened  by  the  very 
results  of  our  labours  in  peopling  it  with  ransomed  souls ;  but  over  and  above,  there 
are  glorious  rewards  and  honours  of  which  we  can  only  speak  here  like  men  that 
dream.     {J.  Cairns,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  And  the  Lord  shall  gnide  thee  oontinually. — Our  Guide : — Our  earthly 
existence  is  a  pilgrimage  which  none  can  successfully  perform  without  Divine  aid. 
I.  All  men  need  a  guide.  There  are  many  who  have  been  determined  to  have 
their  own  way ;  and  when  that  way  has  led  them  into  the  path  of  sin  and  ended  in 
shame  and  unhappiness,  they  have  said,  "Ah,  I  wish  I  had  known  this  in  time  1 " 
Many  persons  often  wish,  "0  that  I  could  begin  my  life  again  with  my  present 
knowledge  of  what  is  best  for  me  ! "  In  the  pUgrimage  of  earthly  existence  there 
are  many  perils.     There  is  often  the  uncertainty  of  darkness.     We  are  beset  by  the 

¥Bril  of  false  leaders.  There  are  spiritual  robbers  who  meet  us  on  every  hand, 
here  are  snares  of  sinful  pleasure  and  selfish  indulgence.  There  is  the  intoxication 
of  prosperity.  Some  allow  themselves  to  be  broken  down  byadversity.  We  are  in 
peril  from  flatterers.  II.  The  Lord  is  ottr  guide.  1.  He  is  a  compassionate 
guide.  2.  A  faithful  guide.  3.  A  perfect  guide.  4.  He  knows  your  life  at  the 
end  as  well  as  the  beginning.  III.  To  what  will  the  Lord  guide  us  ?  1.  To 
truth.  2.  To  success  in  life.  True  success  is  to  be  able  to  do  the  will  of  God.  8. 
The  Lord  will  guide  the  burdened  to  the  arms  of  strength.  {W.  Birch.)  The 
promised  guidance : — I.  It  is  a  necessary  promise.  What  could  the  children  of 
Israel  have  done  in  the  wilderness,  without  the  cloudy  fiery  pillar  to  lead  them  over 
its  trackless  wastes?  This  world  is  just  such  a  wildemess  to  us.  II.  It  is  a 
REASONABLE  PROMISE.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  reasonable  for  us  to  expect  it.  No, 
indeed,  we  have  no  right  to  look  for  a  blessing  so  great  and  so  gracious.  I  mean  it 
is  a  reasonable  promise  so  far  as  God  is  concerned.  It  is  what  He  can  easily  fulfil. 
III.  It  is  a  comforting  promise.  It  meets  our  wants  as  the  children  of  God,  and 
meets  them  fuUy.  If  we  are  depending  on  our  fellow-creatures  for  help,  there  are 
always  two  difficulties  in  our  way.  One  is  that  our  friends  may  not  know  just  what 
help  we  are  needing  ;  or  if  they  know  it,  they  may  not  be  able  to  reach  us  with  the 
help  we  need.  But  God  is  aole  to  concentrate  His  power,  His  presence,  and  His 
sufficiency  in  the  case  of  each  of  His  people,  as  thoroughly  and  as  effectually  as 
though  that  single  case  were  the  only  one  existing  to  claim  His  attention  or  to 
enlist  His  power.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  A  happy  Christian: — Observe  in  what 
connection  this  sunny  sketch  of  prosperity  occurs.  It  is  set  in  a  frame  that  excitei 
the  strong  prejudice  of  some  professing  Christians.  The  setting  is  a  framework  of 
duties.  The  blessings  are  not  promised  to  every  Christian  unconditionally,  but  are 
fenced  in  with  terms :  "  If  thou  doest  this,  and  if  thou  doest  that,  then  shall  such- 
and-such  blessings  be  thine."  Though  salvation  is  of  grace,  the  happiness  of  the 
Christian  does  depend  upon  his  obedience.  I.  These  people,  who  are  thus  full  of 
God's  Spirit,  are  described  as  possessing  continual  guidance.  "  The  Lord  shall 
guide  thee  continually."    1.  There  come  to  them,  as  to  other  men,  dilemmas  in 

Srovidence.  He  goes  not  amiss  who  goes  in  the  company  of  God.  2.  The  path  of 
octrine,  also,  is  sometimes  difficult.  The  Holy  Ghost  will  lead  us  into  all  truth. 
So  shall  it  be,  likewise,  in  matters  of  spiritual  experience.  8.  Our  experience  often 
seems  to  be  as  though  it  had  no  rule.  If  we  are  enabled  by  grace  to  seek  close  and 
vital  union  with  Christ,  and  to  live  upon  Him  continually,  we  may  rest  assured  that 
whether  our  experience  be  gloomy  or  delightful,  and  whether  our  inward  conflicts  or 
joys  be  paramount,  He  will  still  be  at  the  helm,  and  will  guide  us  continually.  II. 
TTie  second  blessing  promised  in  the  text  is  inward  satisfaction.  "  And  satisfy 
thy  aool  in  drought.      It  is  •  blessed  thing  to  have  the  soul  satisfied,  for  the  sou 


CHAP.  LTin.]  ISAIAH.  311 

is  of  great  capacity.  The  Christian  has  got  what  his  soul  wants.  He  has  a  removal 
of  all  that  which  marred  his  peace,  blighted  his  prospects,  and  made  his  sonl  em^ty 
and  hungry.  His  sin  is  pardoned  ;  he  is  reconciled  to  God.  He  is  satisfied  with 
God's  dispensation.  He  is  satisfied  with  God's  love.  He  is  satisfied  with  promises 
that  can  never  be  broken,  with  covenants  that  can  never  be  violated,  with  oaths  that 
stand  fast  like  mountains,  and  with  the  words  of  God  which  are  great  as  the  fathom- 
less sea.  He  is  satisfied  with  his  God.  The  consequence  of  such  a  satisfaction  as 
this  is  that  the  Christian  is  as  well  satisfied  at  one  tmie  as  at  another,  if  his  soul  be 
right.  He  shall  be  satisfied  in  times  of  drought.  In  the  vast  times  of  distress  the 
Christian  is  still  satisfied.  III.  The  next  blessing  is,  Spibittjal  health  and 
HAPPINESS.  "And  make  fat  thy  bones."  Note  the  figure.  It  is  not  "make  fat 
thy  flesh."  When  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  he  kicked.  Sometimes  abundance  in  earthly 
things  makes  poverty  in  heavenly  things.  But  fatness  here  is  to  be  upon  the  man's 
hardest  and  most  necessary  part  of  his  frame.  A  man  is  really  buUt  up  when  his 
bones,  the  solid  pUlars  of  the  house  of  his  manhood,  have  been  strengthened. 
Vigour  has  been  put  into  his  constitution  where  it  was  most  required.  The  figure 
seems  to  me  to  indicate  two  or  three  things  in  one.  There  is  health  here,  the  soul 
is  purged  from  its  vices,  sicknesses,  and  unbelief,  pride,  sloth,  and  such  Hke.  There 
is  vigour  here,  no  lukewarmness.  There  is  growth,  the  man  is  not  stunted. 
Christian  joy  is,  after  all,  Christian  strength.  IV.  The  fourth  blessing  is  this, 
"  And  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  garden."  This  figure  of  a  garden  is  a  very 
sweet  and  attractive  one.  Our  fancy  is  soon  at  work  to  invent  a  picture  of  flower- 
beds, and  fruit-trees,  shady  walks,  and  pleasant  fountains,  laid  out  close  to  some 
grand  mansion,  and  opening  its  fairest  views  to  the  best  apartments  of  the  palace. 
Such  a  garden  needs  constant  care,  and  then,  although  it  may  be  more  beautiful  at 
one  season  than  another,  it  will  never  be  like  a  wUd  heath,  or  totally  bereft  of 
charms.  But,  alas !  some  professors  of  religion  are  not  like  this :  there  is  little 
evidence  of  diligent  cultivation  in  their  character.     V.  There  is  the  blessing  of 

CONTINXTED  STRENGTH,  CONTINtJED  FRESHNESS,  CONTINUED  SUPPLY.       "  As  a  Well  of 

water  whose  waters  fail  not. "  There  are  many  wells  in  the  East  which  do  faU,  and 
many  apparent  springs  which  deceive  the  traveller.  I  observe  that  the  margin  has 
it,  whose  waters  deceive  not,  or  lie  not."  And  how  many  a  man  who  has  appeared 
like  a  Christian  has  been  but  a  mere  deceiver !  Not  so  God's  true  people.  They 
shall  have  so  much  grace  that  when  a  Christian  friend  expects  to  find  grace  in  them, 
he  shall  not  be  disappointed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered 
garden. — A  watered  garden: — Cannot  a  garden  water  itself?  No.  That  is  the 
answer,  definite,  cold — discouraging,  encouraging,  as  we  may  take  the  term.  Is  it 
not  enough  to  be  a  garden  ?  what  matter  about  the  sunshine  ?  who  cares  about  the 
rain  or  the  dew  ?  Is  it  not  enough  to  be  a  garden,  a  geometric  form,  pearled  and 
diamonded  with  many  a  flower  ?  The  king  s  gardens  cannot  do  without  rain ; 
Solomon's  parterres  wither  away  but  for  the  morning  dew  and  the  summer  shower. 
We  need  something  from  without.  Cannot  a  man  sustain  himself  by  his  own 
resources  ?  He  cannot.  What  do  you  mean  by  beiag  a  man  ?  A  figure  is  not  a 
man  ;  a  corpse  is  not  a  man ;  a  mere  personality,  if  it  could  be  detached  from  all 
other  personalities,  would  not  be  a  man.  We  cannot  live  upon  stature  or  figure  or 
aught  that  our  hand  can  hold.  Life  is  deeper ;  there  is  a  sanctuary  of  life,  a  well 
far  away,  where  spring  water  bubbles  and  gurgles  and  flashes  out  m  the  sunlight 
like  a  great  gospel  preached  to  the  thirst  of  man.  Self-sustenance  is  not  the  law  of 
the  body ;  why  should  it  be  the  law  of  the  mind  ?  The  mind  is  not  sustained  by 
itself.  You  have  books  ;  lay  them  down,  be  your  own  book.  You  cannot.  What 
do  you  want  with  all  these  libraries,  and  museums,  and  academies,  and  colleges,  and 
schools  of  every  name  and  degree  ?  These  are  the  wheatfields  which  the  soul  reaps, 
and  it  needs  them  every  one,  for  the  soul  is  bigger  than  literature.  The  soul  lives 
by  friction  with  some  other  soul.  God  is  fire.  To  come  into  happy  attrition  with 
Him,  or  contact,  or  friction,  who  can  tell  what  may  come  out  of  that  soul  touching 
soul,  man  praying  to  God  ?  We  are  continually  undergoing  a  process  of  education. 
What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received  ?  Have  you  ever  seen  a  garden  that  has 
been  left  to  itself?  What  do  you  think  of  it  ?  God  waits  to  ^ve  us  every  one  more 
water,  more  sustenance,  more  sunshine.  What  we  might  be  if  we  would  enjoy  our 
privileges  I  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  garden  of  God: — 1.  The  Church  is  appropriately 
compared  to  a  garden  because  it  is  the  place — I.  Of  choice  flovoibs.  Christ 
comes  to  His  garden,  and  plants  there  some  of  the  brightest  spirits  that  ever  flowered 
upon  the  world.  Some  of  them  are  violets,  inconspicuous,  but  sweet.  You  have  to 
search  and  find  them.    Ton  do  not  see  them  very  often,  perhaps,  bat  yon  find  where 


SH  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  vna. 

they  have  been  by  the  brightened  face  of  the  invalid,  and  the  sprig  of  geranirun  on 
the  stand,  and  the  new  window-curtains  keeping  out  the  glare  of  the  sunlight. 
These  flowers  in  Christ's  garden  are  not  like  the  sunflower,  gaudy  in  the  light,  but 
wherever  darkness  hovers  over  a  soul  that  needs  to  be  comforted,  there  they  stand, 
night-blooming  cereuses.  2,  But  in  Christ's  garden  there  are  plants  that  may  be 
better  compared  to  the  Mexican  cactus — thorns  without,  loveliness  within ;  men 
with  sharp  points  of  character.  They  wound  almost  every  one  that  touches  them. 
They  are  hard  to  handle.  Men  pronounce  them  nothing  but  thorns,  but  Christ 
loves  them  notwithstanding  all  their  sharpnesses.  Many  a  man  has  had  a  very  hard 
ground  to  cultivate,  and  it  has  only  been  through  severe  trial  he  has  raised  even  the 
smallest  crop  of  grace.  A  veiy  harsh  minister  was  talking  to  a  very  placid  elder, 
and  the  elder  said,  "Doctor,  I  do  wish  you  would  control  your  tem^r."  "Ah," 
said  the  minister,  "  I  control  more  temper  in  five  minutes  than  you  do  in  five  years." 
8.  There  are  others  planted  in  Christ's  garden  who  are  always  radiant,  always 
impressive — more  like  the  roses  of  deep  hue  that  we  occasionally  find  ;  the  Martin 
Luthers,  St.  Pauls,  Chrysostoms,  Wyckliffes,  Latimera,  and  Samuel  Rutherfords. 
What  in  other  men  is  a  spark,  in  them  is  a  conflagration.  When  they  sweat,  they 
sweat  great  drops  of  blood.  When  they  pray,  their  prayer  takes  fire.  When  they 
.preach,  it  is  a  Pentecost.  When  they  fight,  it  is  a  Thermopylae.  When  they  die, 
it  is  a  martyrdom.  4.  In  this  garden  of  the  Church  I  also  find  the  snowdrop, 
beautiful  but  cold-looking,  seemingly  another  phase  of  winter.  I  mean  those 
Christians  who  are  precise  m  their  tastes,  unimpassioned,  pure  as  snowdrops  and  aa 
cold.  5.  But  I  have  not  told  you  of  the  most  beautiful  flower  of  aU  this  garden. 
If  you  see  a  century  plant  your  emotions  are  started.  You  say,  "Why,  this  flower 
has  been  a  hundrea  years  gathering  up  for  one  bloom,  and  it  will  be  a  hundred  years 
more  before  other  petals  will  come  out. "  But  I  have  to  tell  you  of  a  plant  that  was 
gathering  up  from  all  eternity,  and  that  nineteen  hundred  years  ago  put  forth  its 
bloom  never  to  wither.  It  is  the  passion  plant  of  the  Cross !  II.  The  Church  is  a 
place  OF  SELECT  FBUITS.  The  coarser  fiiiits  are  planted  in  the  orchard  or  they  are 
set  out  on  the  sunny  hillside  ;  but  the  choicest  fruits  are  kept  in  the  garden.  So  in 
the  world  outside  the  Church,  Christ  has  planted  a  great  many  beautiful  things — 
patience,  charity,  generosity,  integrity ;  but  He  intends  the  choicest  fruits  to  be  in 
the  garden,  and,  if  they  are  not  there,  then  shame  on  the  Church.  Religion  is  not 
a  mere  sentimentality.  It  is  a  practical,  life-giving,  healthful  fruit — not  posies,  but 
apples.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  glorious  garden  and  it  is  full  of  fruit.  I  know 
there  is  some  poor  fruit  in  it ;  but  are  you  going  to  destroy  the  whole  garden 
because  of  a  little  gnarled  fruit  1  There  is  no  grander,  nobler  collection  in  all  the 
earth  than  the  collection  of  Christians.  III.  The  Church  is  the  place  of  thorough 
lEElGATlON.  No  garden  could  prosper  long  without  plenty  of  water.  I  have  seen 
a  garden  in  the  midst  of  a  desert,  yet  blooming  and  luxuriant.  All  around  was 
dearth  and  barrenness  ;  but  there  were  pipes,  aqueducts,  reaching  from  this  garden 
vp  to  the  mountains,  and  through  those  aqueducts  the  water  came  streaming  down 
and  tossing  up  into  beautiful  fountains,  until  every  root  and  leaf  and  flower  was 
saturated.     That  is  like  the  Church.     The  Church  is  a  garden  in  the  midst  of  a 

g-eat  desert  of  sin  and  suffering  ;  but  it  is  well  irrigated.  From  the  moimtains  of 
od's  strength  there  flow  down  rivers  of  gladness.  Preaching  the  Gospel  is  one  of 
the  aqueducts.  The  Bible  is  another.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  aqueducts. 
Everything  comes  from  above;  pardon,  joy,  adoption,  sanctification.  (2*.  De  JVitt 
Talmage.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  Sabbath. — Sabbath  observance 
a  Godward  ditty : — If  the  true  fast  (vers.  3-7)  typifies  the  Israelite's  duties  towards 
his  neighbour,  the  Sabbath  represents  his  duties  towards  God.  {Prof.  S.  B. 
Driver,  D.D.)  Turning  the  foot  from  the  Sabbath: — "If  thou  tumest  thy  foot 
away  from  the  Sabbath"  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "  If  thou  dost  not  tread  its  holy 
ground  with  the  foot  of  week-day  work."  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  Sabbath  day: — 
We  shall  consider  the  words  of  the  text — I.  With  regard  to  the  Jews.  With 
that  view  we  shall  state — 1.  The  reasons  for  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath.  2.  The 
manner  in  which  the  prophet  required  it  to  be  celebrated.  3.  The  promises  made 
to  those  who  worthily  hallow  the  Sabbath  day.  II.  With  regard  to  Christians. 
1.  Are  Christians  obliged  to  observe  a  day  of  rest  ?  2.  Is  that  day  celebrated  with 
all  the  sanctity  it  requires  ?  {J.  Saurin, )  The  institution  of  the  Sabbath : — Four 
considerations  gave  occasion  for  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath  day,  1.  Gk)d  was 
wishful  to  perpetuate  two  original  truths  on  which  the  whole  evidence  of  religion 


CHAP.  Lvin.]  ISAIAH.  313 

devolves ;  the  first  is,  that  the  world  had  a  beginning ;  the  second,  that  Grod  is  its 
Author.  2.  The  second  reason  was  to  prevent  idolatry.  This  remark  claims  peculiar 
attention,  many  of  the  Mosaic  precepts  being  founded  on  the  situation  in  which  the 
Jews  were  placed.  Let  this  general  remark  be  applied  to  the  subject  in  hand.  The 
people,  on  leaving  Egypt,  were  separated  from  a  nation  that  worshipped  the  sun,  the 
moon,  and  the  stars.  "The  ancient  Egyptians,"  says  Diodorus  of  Sicily,  "struck 
with  the  beauty  of  the  universe,  thought  it  owed  its  origin  to  two  eternal  diviuitiea, 
that  presided  over  all  the  others :  the  one  was  the  sun,  to  whom  they  gave  the  name 
of  Osiris;  the  other  was  the  moon,  to  whom  they  gave  the  name  of  Isis."  God,  to 
preserve  His  people  from  these  errors,  instituted  a  festival  which  sapped  the  whole 
system,  and  which  avowedly  contemplated  every  creature  of  the  universe  as  the 
production  of  the  Supreme  Being.  And  this  may  be  the  reason  why  Moses  remarked 
to  the  Jews,  on  leaving  Egypt,  that  God  renewed  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath 
(Dent.  v.  15).  3.  God  was  wishful  to  promote  humanity.  4.  In  a  word,  the  design 
of  God,  in  the  iostitution  of  the  Sabbath,  was  to  recall  to  the  minds  of  men  the 
recollection  of  their  original  equality :  he  requires  masters  and  servants  aKke  to 
abstain  from  labour,  so  as  in  some  sort  to  confound  the  diversity  of  their  conditions, 
and  to  abate  that  pride,  of  which  superior  rank  is  so  common  a  source.  {Ibid.) 
Sabbath  observance: — I.  The  duty  is  thus  stated:  "If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot 
from  the  Sabbath,"  etc.  1.  This,  then,  is  the  first  point  to  be  noticed  with  respect 
to  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath.  It  is,  says  God,  "  My  holy  day,"  the  day  which 
I  have  hallowed  for  Myself,  which  I  have  reserved  for  My  own.  We  are  no  more 
at  liberty  to  determine  for  ourselves  how  we  will  employ  the  Sabbath,  than  the 
\  Israelites  were  at  liberty  to  determine  for  themselves  to  what  uses  they  would  put 
\  the  tabernacle,  or  the  temple,  which  had  been  built  and  sanctified  for  God,  according 
]  to  His  direction  and  for  His  own  peculiar  service;  and,  by  regarding  any  of  the 
Sabbath  hours  as  being  at  our  own  disposal,  we  are  guilty  of  the  same  profanation 
with  which  the  Jews  would  have  been  chargeable,  had  they  determiaed  to  do  their 
pleasure  with  respect  to  the  uses  which  they  would  make  of  God's  holy  habitation, 
respecting  which  He  had  said,  "This  is  My  rest  for  ever:  here  will  I  dwell." 
2.  Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  we  have  turned  away  our  foot  from  trampling  upon 
Grod's  day,  by  con;ulting  our  own  wiU  and  inclination  as  to  the  way  in  which  we 
employ  it,  and  are  wishing  and  waiting  to  know  what  is  the  will  of  God  concerning 
it.  Tne  text  thus  proceeds :  "And  call  the  Sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord, 
honourable."  To  call  anything  is  to  give  it  a  name  corresponding  with  its  nature, 
or  to  describe  it  by  its  qualities.  We  are  to  call  the  Sabbath  "  a  delight ; "  or  are 
to  call  "  the  holy  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.  the  holy  day  of  the  Lord,  "honourable."  Here, 
then,  are  two  properties  of  the  Sabbath,  two  points  of  view  in  which  we  are  to 
regard  it.  It  should  be  so  distinguished  from  other  days  by  the  peculiar  delight 
which  it  afifords,  as  well  as  by  the  pre-eminent  dignity  with  which  it  is  invested- 
8.  The  honour  to  be  paid  to  the  Sabbath  is  our  part :  the  delight  to  be  found  in  the 
Sabbath  is  God's  part.  And  the  text  proceeds  to  show  that  u  we  honour  His  day, 
Grod  will  surely  keep  His  promise  of  making  it  a  delight.  Let  us,  then,  carefully 
consider  the  way  in  which  we  should  "  honour  "  the  Sabbath.  What  is  said  to  be 
"  om"  own "  is  evidently  distinguished  from  what  belongs  to  the  Sabbath.  It 
comprehends  whatever  we  have  to  do,  or  to  delight  in,  which  appertains  to  the  six 
days'  work  from  which  God  ceased,  and  which  He  had  ended  on  the  seventh  day, 
in  contradistinction  to  what  appertains  to  the  seventh  day  which  God  set  apart  and 
sanctified  and  blessed.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reference  in  these  words  to  sinfiil 
ways,  or  to  unlawful  pleasures  ;  but  to  the  appointed  duties  and  allowed  delights  of 
the  six  days  which  God  has  given  to  us  for  these  purposes.  Heaven — the  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God — is  described  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  as  a 
Sabbath-keeping,  a  Sabbath-rest.  The  Sabbath  is  a  figure  of  that  blessed  and  holy 
state.  "  Oirr  own  ways  and  pleasures,"  then,  are  those  which  belong  to  this  lower 
creation ;  and  which  we  shall  have  done  with  when  we  depart  out  of  the  world ; 
and  for  these  things  six  days  are  given  to  us.  The  things  of  the  Sabbath  are  all 
such  things  as  shadl  be  perfected  and  enjoyed  for  ever  in  that  city  of  God,  in  those 
courts  above,  where  Sabbaths  never  end.  These  remarks  will  famish  us  with  a 
practical  rule  for  determining  what  may  be  done  and  what  may  not  be  done  on  the 
Sabbath  day.  Where  there  is  the  "single  eye,"  that  is,  the  simple  aim,  to  do  the 
wiQ  of  God,  aU  doubts  will  be  readily  solved  and  difficulties  disappear,  and  the  duty 
be  made  plain  by  asking  such  questions  as  these :  Is  this  secular  work  necessary  for 
the  supply  of  our  daily  wants,  for  the  relief  of  suSering  nature,  for  the  accomplishing 
the  wm.  and  serrioe  of  God  !    I8  it  indispensable  to  these  ends  that  it  shoold  ba 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obap.ltiu. 

done,  and  done  on  the  Sabbath  dayl  If,  in  the  conscientious  exercise  of  an 
enlightened  judgment,  we  decide  in  the  affirmative,  then  we  may  do  such  necessary 
things  with  confidence  and  comfort.  But,  even  in  these  thmgs,  care  must  be 
exercised  that  they  do  not  interfere,  beyond  the  just  and  reasonable  limits  of 
necessity  and  charity,  with  the  appropriate  duties  and  employments  of  the  day. 
"Not  finding  thine  own ' pleasure.  Pleasure  is  here  evidently  contrasted  with 
business.  God  has  given  to  us  not  only  our  six  days'  labour  and  work,  but  also  our 
six  days'  gratifications  and  sources  of  enjoyment.  There  are  the  delights  of  earth, 
as  well  as  the  duties  of  earth.  There  is  Nature,  with  all  her  various  works.  There 
are  also  the  pleasures  of  literature,  in  all  their  vast  and  various  extent.  There  is, 
further,  the  enjoyment  of  social  intercourse,  and  an  almost  countless  number  of 
modes  of  refreshment,  for  both  body  and  mind,  which  God  would  have  us  to  use, 
as  opportunity  is  given  and  need  may  be,  to  invigorate  us  for  the  more  serious 
•nployments  of  the  head  or  the  hands.  But  these  are  "our  own  pleasure ; "  and 
this  we  are  not  to  find  on  God's  holy  day.  Mark  the  expression,  "  not  finding  thine 
own  pleasure."  In  order  to  "find,"  we  seek.  "Our  own  pleasure"  may  casually 
come  in  our  way ;  but  we  must  not  look  for  it,  endeavour  after  it,  or  pursue  it  as 
our  object,  in  any  manner  or  measure,  upon  the  Sabbath.  The  pleasures  which  we 
must  endeavour  on  this  day  to  "  find  "  must  be  such  as  are  not  of  earthly  origin  or 
of  man's  invention,  but  such  as  will  endure  when  the  world  shall  be  no  more,  and 
will  furnish  a  part  of  the  business  and  the  bliss  of  the  Christian's  happy  and  eternal 
home.  Further,  * '  not  speaking  (thine  own)  words. "  ' '  Thine  own, "  here,  is  in  italics ; 
it  is  inserted  by  the  translators,  and  only  encumbers  the  passage.  The  meaning  is, 
not  doing  thine  own  ways,  not  finding  thine  own  pleasure,  "nor  speaking  words  ;" 
that  is,  not  speaking  words  concerning  thine  own  ways  and  thine  own  pleasure. 

II.   To    SUCH   AN    OBSERVANCE    OF    THE    SaBBATH    A    SPECIAL    PROMISE*  IS    MADE. 

"Then  shalt  thou  deKght  thyself  in  the  Lord."  If  we  make  the  Sabbath  a  holy 
day,  God  will  make  it  a  happy  day.  In  th.e  application  of  this  promise  to  ourselves, 
we  must  suppose  and  take  it  for  granted  that  we  are  reconcHed  to  God.  Then,  in 
the  very  measure  in  which  we  honour  the  Sabbath,  God  will  make  the  duties  and 
employments  of  the  day  channels  of  joy  and  peace  and  sacred-pleasure  to  the  soul. 
t^"And  I  will  cause  thee  to  ride  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,"  etc.  This  is  a 
promise  of  national  prosperity  and  temporal  advancement,  with  a  confirmation  of  the 
Blessing  pronounced  by  Isaac  upon  Jacob  and  his  posterity.  And,  although  these 
were  shadows  of  better  things  to  the  Christian  Church,  and  the  fulfilment  of  this 

Eromise  is  now  to  be  looked  for  in  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings,  yet  it  has 
•equently  been  testified,  on  observation  and  experience,  that  a  holy  Sabbath  has 
been  followed  by  a  happy  week ;  and,  when  we  honour  God's  holy  day,  we  shall  not 
fail  to  find  that  His  blessing  stiU  rests  upon  it.  {T.  Best,  M.A.)  Early  English 
law  on  the  Sabbath: — In  almost  the  earliest,  if  not  the  earliest,  code  of  English 
law — the  laws  of  Enach,  King  of  Wessex — ^there  was  a  provision  made  for  the 
observance  of  Sunday.  Accordmg  to  these  laws  if  a  slave  was  forced  by  his  master 
to  work  upon  Sunday,  he  was  by  that  very  fact  set  free,  and  the  lord  had  to  pay  a 
fine.  If  uie  slave  worked  by  his  own  will  and  without  the  direction  of  his  lord,  he 
was  subjected  to  corporal  chastisement,  and  if  a  freeman  worked  on  the  Holy  Day 
he  became  a  slave.  He  lost  his  freedom,  or  else  he  had  to  pay  what,  at  that 
time,  was  the  almost  impossible  fine  of  sixty  shillings.  "N&sr  that  law  at  the  very 
beginning  of  English  legislation  may  have  had  very  much  to  do  with  the  position 
that  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  has  taken  in  the  world.  According  to  the  promise 
of  this  old  prophet  the  word  of  the  Lord  has  said,  "I  will  make  thee  to  ride 
npon  the  high  places  of  the  earth  if  thou  keepest  the  Sabbath  day."    (iZ.  F.  Horton.) 

The  Sabbath  a  rest  from  self: — I  suppose  the  essence  of  this  Omistian  Sabbath  was 
never  more  perfectly  described  than  in  the  words  of  the  prophet.  1.  The  first  principle 
of  the  Christian  Sabbath  is  that  there  should  be  one  day  in  the  week  on  which  we 
are  not  doing  our  own  ways,  nor  finding  our  own  pleasvire,  nor  speaking  our  own 
words,  that  is  to  say,  the  Christian  Sabbath  is  not  to  be,  like  the  civic  Sunday,  a 
rest  from  work,  important  as  that  may  be,  but  it  is  a  rest  from  self,  which  is  all- 
important,  and  is,  indeed,  the  creation  and  the  preservation  of  the  spiritual  in  man. 
It  IS  a  rest  from  self,  not  to  speak  our  own  words  on  that  day,  not  to  take  our  own 
pleasures,  not  to  adopt  our  own  way.     I  think  we  see  what  is  meant  if  we  put  it  in 

this  way.  Our  life  as  men  is  literally  rooted  in  God,  and  its  health  depends  on  our 
knowing  it  and  recognizing  it.     2.  Now,  when  we  have  recognized  that  this  is  the 

norpose  of  the  day  we  stiU  have  to  consider  how  that  purpose  is  best  accomplished. 

3^^«^i«mting  to  the  practice  of  the  Old  Testament,  and,  apparently,  according  to  the 


CHAP.i.vni.]  ISAIAH.  S15 

intention  of  the  New,  the  sanotuaiy,  the  place  of  pnblio  worship,  is  the  means  faj 
which  that  can  be  accomplished.  S.  I  think  we  ought  to  honestly  face  the  question 
which  is  often  raised  at  the  present  time,  whether  the  life  I  am  describing  cannot 
be  maintained  without  the  sanctuary.  Men  say  frequently  to-day  that  they  find 
they  can  really  worship  better  in  their  own  homes,  and  still  more  in  the  open 
country,  than  m  the  assembly  of  the  house  of  God.  Now,  the  only  danger  I  see  in 
that  position  is  that  by  the  very  necessity  of  the  case  it  violates  the  first  require- 
ment of  the  Sabbath  as  it  is  here  stated.  Tou  stay  at  home  in  your  house  or  you  go  t 
out  into  the  country  on  Sunday.  In  doing  that  /ou  are  going  your  own  way,  you  are 
seeking  your  own  pleasure,  you  are  foUoTving  your  own  bent— that  is  to  say,  you  are 
violating  the  very  principle  on  which  this  Sabbath  rests.  And  it  does  not  seem 
very  improbable  that  when  you  have  violated  the  very  principle  at  the  beginning 
you  wiU  succeed  in  recovering  it  at  the  end.  {IMd. )  A  Sabbath-week : — Common- 
sense  must  tell  us  that  no  man  who  is  going  his  own  way,  finding  his  own  pleasure, 
and  speaking  his  own  words,  for  six  days  in  the  week,  will  abstain  from  them  on 
the  seventh.  The  devotion,  the  obedience,  and  forgetftilness  of  self  which  should 
mark  the  devout  worshipper  on  Simday,  must  be  his  companions  all  the  week 
through.  And  the  exercise  of  those  graces  through  the  week  must  be  our  habitual 
preparation  for  the  Lord's  Day.  So  that,  in  fact,  the  teaching  of  the  prophet 
amounts  to  this — that  the  true  servant  of  God  will  at  no  time  do  his  own  ways,  find 
Ids  own  pleasure,  or  speak  his  own  words,  where  ways,  pleasure,  or  words  will  not  * 
be  such  as  God  would  love  to  look  upon.  The  Christian  will  seek  God's  grace,  that 
in  all  things  he  may  follow  the  example  of  his  Lord,  who  declared,  "  I  came  not  to 
do  Mine  own  will,  but  the  wUl  of  Him  that  sent  Me."  I  appeal  to  your  own  hearts 
and  consciences,  to  what  you  know  of  vourselves  or  have  seen  in  others,  whether 
any  good  has  ever  come  to  any  of  us,  from  going  our  own  way,  finding  our  own 
pleasure,  speaking  our  own  words?  (F.  E.  Paget,  D.D.)  "  Thine  ovm  ways" : — 
It  is  supposed  that  Isaiah  required  the  Jews  to  keep  what  has  been  called  a  Puri- 
tanical Sabbath.  I  believe  that  this  is  a  complete  misconception  of  the  prophet's 
meaning.  Their  "own  ways,"  which  the  people  were  forbidden  to  foUow  on  the 
Sabbath,   were  the  common  secular  labours  of  the  week.     Doing  their    "own 

Sleasure  "  has  no  reference  to  recreation  or  amusement.  Some  translators  render  it 
oing  their  "own  business;"  but  it  probably  means  here,  as  it  constantly  mean* 
elsewhere,  doing  "what  theyUked."  Luther  translates  it  admirably,  doing  their 
"own  will."  They  were  to  spend  the  Sabbath,  as  God  had  commanded  them,  in 
rest ;  they  were  not  at  liberty  to  follow  their  own  inclination  by  carrying  on  their 
ordinary  trade.  Their  "own  words,"  which  they  were  not  to  speak  on  the 
Sabbath,  were  the  words  in  which  their  business  was  transacted  ;  words  which,  like 
the  business  itself,  belonged  to  the  other  days  of  the  week.  What  the  prophet 
forbids  on  the  seventh  day  is  what  the  Commandment  forbids — not  pleasure,  but 
work.  {fi.  W.  Bale,  LL.D.)  Rabbinical  prohibitions: — The  stricter  Rabbinical 
schools  built  upon  this  general  prohibition  of  all  work  innumerable  minute  precepts, 
many  of  which  are  so  grotesque  that  to  quote  them  would  be  to  answer  no  other 
purpose  than  to  amuse.  One  ingenious  commentator,  who  happily  appears  to  have 
had  only  a  very  few  disciples,  insisted  that  as  it  was  a  duty  to  rest  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end  of  the  Sabbath,  all  muscular  exertion  was  sinful ;  and  that,  therefore, 
strict  fidelity  to  the  Commandment  required  that  a  man  should  remain  during  all 
the  twenty-rour  hours  of  the  Sabbath  in  exactly  the  same  position,  without  moving 
a  limb  or  a  finger,  a  kind  of  "rest"  which  must  have  been  very  much  more 
exhausting  than  hard  work.  {Ibid. )  The  Sabbath  compared  to  the  best  room  of  the 
Jumse : — 1.  Every  house  of  any  consideration  has  in  it  a  best  room.  It  is  usually 
the  largest  in  the  house,  and  the  most  comely.  It  usually  is  furnished  with  the 
choicest  things  which  the  owner  can  afford,  and  represents  the  best  outward  estate 
of  his  household.  Here  is  the  best  carpet.  Here  are  the  best  colours.  Here  is  the 
best  furniture.  Here  are  hung  the  best  pictures.  Here  are  the  chairs  burnished 
and  covered.  And  here,  it  may  be,  is  the  sofa,  luxurious  with  extra  springs.  The 
few  choice  treasures  are  put  upon  the  mantelpiece,  or  on  some  comer  shelf.  Whatever 
there  is  that  stands  apart  from  common  uses  by  being  a  little  better  the  parlour 
receives.  And  this  room  is  scrupulously  kept — too  scrupulously,  often.  AH  festive 
occasions  are  celebrated  in  it.  It  is  the  room  of  honour.  It  is  here  that  we  devote 
ourselves  to  our  company  when  we  would  show  them  hospitality.  It  stands  in  the 
house  as  a  perpetual  reminder  of  beauty — what  little  beauty  we  can  command  ;  of 
hospitality — so  much  as  we  are  able  to  exercise  of  it ;  of  superiority.  A  best  room  is 
not  simply  an  emblem  of  vanity,  as  cynics  would  say.     To  have  a  room  which  has 


816  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  .  [chap.  Lvm, 

in  it  ehoice  things,  is  rather  the  nnconscions  inspiration  of  ideality,  it  is  a  desire  to 
maintain  it  in  the  household  ;  and  it  is  a  silent  but  real  influence  for  refinement  and 
for  higher  living.  2.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  see  a  person  or  a  famUy  that  makes  one 
day  just  like  another  ;  that  does  not  care  to  make  one  day  better  than  any  of  the 
others  ;  that  regards  all  things  as  good  enough.  On  a  low  level,  it  is  a  moral 
influence  that  leads  one  to  desire  to  dress  better  on  some  occasions  than  on  others, 
and  to  spread  a  better  table  on  some  occasions  than  on  others.  It  is  aspiration  in 
one  of  its  lower  forms.  Now,  what  the  parlour  is  to  the  house,  the  Jewish  Sabbath 
and  its  substitute,  the  Christian's  Lord's  Day,  were  meant  to  be  to  the  week.  The 
week  is  a  house,  and  Sunday  is  the  best  room  in  it,  and  it  ought  to  have  the  best 
things  put  into  it,  and  it  ought  to  be  kept  religiously  ;  and  it  is  to  exercise  upon  all 
our  time  just  the  same  imconscious  influence,  or  conscious  influence,  as  the  case 
may  be,  which  a  well-prepared  and  well-kept  parlour  does  invariably  exercise  upon 
aU  the  occupants  of  the  house.  Every  week  was  to  have  its  parlour  day.  It  was  to 
be  a  day  that  should  be  looked  up  to  by  the  young  and  the  old  as  the  best  day  of 
the  week.  In  other  words,  it  was  to  be  "a  delight."  It  was  to  be  "  honourable," 
and  so,  memorable,  (fl.  W.  Beecher.)  And  call  the  Sabbath  a  delight.— Ti^ 
luxury  of  the  Sabbath: — The  word  is  a  strong  one.  Delight,  Delicacy,  Luxury. 
{Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)     The  Sabbath  a  delight: — I.  Point  out  a  few  paeti- 

CITLARS  WHY  THB   TRUE  BELIEVER  ESTEEMS  AND  CALLS  THE  SaBBATH   A  DELIGHT  ; 

showing  at  the  same  time  why  the  natural  man  should  find  no  delight,  at  least  no 
holy  delight,  in  that  day.  1.  Because  it  brings  with  it  a  cessation  and  rest  from. 
worldly  cares.  2.  Because  on  that  day  he  hopes  to  learn  much  in  the  school  of 
Christ.  3.  Because  of  that  holy  communion  which  it  allows  with  the  people  of 
God.  4.  Because  of  the  remembrances  which  that  day  brings  with  it.  On  the 
Sabbath  God  rested  from  His  work.     On  the  Sabbath,  how  many  of  our  Saviour's 

Sacious  ndracles  were  wrought !  On  the  Sabbath,  how  many  spiritual  miracles  doth 
e  still  work  !  On  our  Sabbath  day  it  was  that  our  Lord  burst  the  bonds  of  death. 
Is  not  here  matter  of  pleasurable  meditation  ?  Salvation  is  finished ;  and  man 
restored  to  the  favour  and  presence  and  image  of  God  I  5.  Because  it  is  a  type  and 
foretaste  of  the  heavenly  rest — of  the  eternal  Sabbath.  II.  Show  how  we  mat 
EMPLOY  IT  so  AS  TO  MAKE  IT  MOST  DELIGHTFUL.  By  giving  the  whole  day  to 
God,  so  far  as  possibly  can  be  done,  in  spiritual  exercises.  (C  Neale,  M.A.)  The 
brightest  of  days : — "We  are  to  find  in  this  day — 1.  The  joy  of  healthy  repose.  2.  The 
joy  of  domestic  reunion  and  consecration.  3.  The  joy  of  eternal  Sabbatism.  {T.  D« 
W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  Sabbath  a  delighi: — The  day  of  worship  should  be  a  day 
of  gladness.  1.  It  brings  rest  from  the  toils  and  cares  of  the  week.  From  the  dust 
and  the  sweat,  the  grime  and  the  languor,  I  shake  myself  free  for  a  while.  I  reach 
an  oasis,  with  palm-trees  and  a  well,  in  my  pilgrimage  through  the  deserts.  I  sit 
down  under  God's  shadow.  2.  It  invites  to  the  noblest  exercises  and  employments. 
Mind  and  heart,  lips  and  soul  and  all  my  nature,  unite  in  prayer,  in  praise,  in  the 
study  and  contemplation^of  the  things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal.  There  is  no 
work  on  earth  to  compare  with  it.  3.  It  introduces  to  the  communion  of  souls. 
I  go  up  to  God's  house  in  company  with  many  others.  I  realize  that  I  am  not 
alone,  that  I  am  a  member  of  a  brotherhood  and  family,  that  all  around  me  are 
kindred  souls.  It  is  a  thought  that  brings  me  strength,  and  that  satisfies  my  love. 
4.  It  lifts  me  into  the  presence  of  my  Lord — Father,  and  Son,  and  Spirit.  I  dwell 
in  His  sanctuary.  I  hearken  to  His  voice.  I  feel  His  quickening  and  invigorating 
touch.  I  receive  afresh  His  baptism  and  unction.  Benold,  God  is  in  this  place, 
and  it  is  for  me  the  gate  of  heaven.  {A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  The  Sahbath  a  delight.-— 
"If  thou  callest  the  Sabbath  a  delight,"  because  it  leads  thee  to  God  ;  not  "• 
burden,"  because  it  leads  thee  from  thine  everyday  life  (Amos  viii.  5).  {F. 
Delitzseh,  D.D. )  The  Sabbath  a  festive  time : — "  It  is  a  festival  time  for  man's  higher 
nature  in  communion  with  the  unseen.  As  the  tired  eye,  which  has  been  strained 
by  long  and  close  application  to  some  work  near  at  hand,  rests  itself  by  gazing  on 
the  far  horizons  or  the  stars,  so  there  is  a  rest  in  lifting  thought  from  the  near  and 
the  lower  objects  which  too  often  engross  us,  and  fixing  it  upon  the  unseen  and 
eternal.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  grand  reason  for  our  Saviour's  own  conmient:  "The 
Sabbath  is  made  for  man,  not  man  for  the  Sabbath."  (A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.) 
Honourable. —  The  Sabbath  made  "honourable"  : — When  do  we  make  the  Sabbath 
an  "honourable,"  glorious  day?  1.  When  we  make  honourable  preparation  for  it. 
2.  When  we  give  it  honourable  entertainment.  3.  When  we  have  a  precious  esteem 
of  every  moment  of  Sabbath  time,  and  are  jealous  lest  any  drop  of  it  should  run 
waste.     4.  When  we  have  a  singular  esteem  of  all  the  institutions  and  ordinances  of 


OEAF.  LYin.]  ISAIAH.  817 

the  day.  5.  When  it  is  the  grief  of  our  souls  that  we  can  keep  Sabbaths  no  better, 
and  we  strive  cordially  and  conscientiously  to  keep  the  next  better  than  we  did  the 
last.  {T.  Case,  M.A.)  Nor  speaking  thine  own  words. — Sabbath-speaking: — "Nor 
speaking  thine  own  words."  ' '  Talking  talk."  (/.  A.  Alexander.)  Useless  loords, 
Toid  of  meaning,  and  of  needless  number :  the  phrase,  as  in  Hos.  x.  4,  is  here  applied 
to  unspiritual  gossip  and  bombast.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Speech  rest  on  Sunday: — 
Hitzig  on  this  passage  remarks  that  "the  law  regarding  the  Sabbath  has  here 
already  received  the  Jewish  addition,  that  'speaking  is  work.'"  But  from  the 
promise  that  God's  Sabbath-rest  was  a  rest  from  His  speaking  the  creative  words 
(Ps.  xxxiii.  6),  the  only  conclusion  drawn  was  that  one  must  rest  on  the  Sabbath, 
in  a  certain  measure,  from  speaking  as  well  as  working ;  and  when  Rabbi  Simon 
ben  Jochai  called  to  his  talkative  old  mother  on  the  Sabbath,  ' '  Sabbath-keeping  ia 
called  sile'iice,"  this  was  not  meant  to  be  underst3bd  as  if  speaking  in  itself  were 
working,  and  all  speaking  on  the  Sabbath  was  therefore  forbidden.  The  Rabbinical 
explanation  of  the  present  passage  is  as  follows:  "Let  not  thy  speaking  on  the 
Sabbath  be  the  same  as  that  on  working  days. "  {Ibid. )  Better  for  the  Sunday 
rest : — Scientists  say  that  telegraph  wires  are  better  conductors  on  Monday  than  on 
Saturday,  on  account'  of  their  Sunday  rest.  The  well-proved  fact  that  human 
beings  profit  by  a  weekly  rest-day  emphasizes  the  protest  of  Christian  people  against 
the  secularization  of  the  Sabbath.     {Christian  Budget.) 

Ver.  14.  Then  shalt  thou  delight  thyself  in  the  Lord. — Delighting  in  God: — I.  "WHAT 
IS  IMPLIED  IN  DELIGHTING  OTTRSELVES  IN  THE  LoRD.  1.  A  Contemplation  of  His  infinite 
and  adorable  perfections  ;  such  a  contemplation  as  to  derive  the  highest  satisfaction 
from  them  ;  to  see  in  them  aU  that  is  amiable  and  lovely.  2.  A  well-grounded 
hope  of  interest  in  Him  ;  for  though  this  is  not  the  primary,  it  is  a  subordinate 
ground  of  the  believer's  joy,  and  one  of  unspeakable  importance.  3.  Commvmion 
with  God  in  holy  duties.  4.  A  sanctified  use  of  all  our  common  mercies,  receiving 
them  as  His  gift,  and  esteeming  them  on  that  account.  5.  Contentment  in  Him, 
even  in  the  absence  of  every  other  good.  6.  Delighting  in  God  is  accompanied  with 
the  cheering  prospect  of  being  for  ever  with  Him.  II.  View  some  of  the  advan- 
tages ARISING  FROM  THIS  HEAVENLY  STATE  OF  MIND.  Delighting  oursclves  in  the 
Lord  will  weaken  the  influence  of  sin,  and  strengthen  aU  the  Christian  graces.  It 
will  be  an  antidote  against  fretfulness  and  discontent,  carnality  and  worldly -minded- 
ness,  presumption  and  self-confidence.  It  will  confirm  our  faith,  inflame  our  love, 
and  brighten  our  hopes  and  prospects.  Communion  with  God  disarms  our  spiritual 
enemies,  or  secures  us  from  their  attack.  It  is  of  eminent  use  in  all  the  parts  of 
practical  religion.  It  makes  active  in  doing,  and  steadfast  in  sufiering  the  will  of 
God  ;  it  infuses  life  into  our  prayers  and  praises,  and  causes  us  to  come  with  bold- 
ness and  cheerftdness  to  the  house  and  table  of  the  Lord.  Sorrow  and  dejection 
enfeeble  the  mind ;  but  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength.  The  joys  of  religion 
will  convert  this  miserable  world  into  a  little  heaven,  and  make  the  Church  militant 
resemble  the  Church  triumphant  above,  where  there  are  no  mourning  garments,  no 
dejected  countenances,  or  hearts  consumed  with  grief.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Duty 
the  road  to  prosperity: — I.    Delight  in  the   Lord    is    connected  with  the 

OBSERVANCE  OF  THE  SaBBATH.      II.    TrTTE  PROSPERITY  DEPENDS  UPON  OBEDIENCE 

TO  Divine  command.  III.  There  can  be  no  permanent  prosperity  apart 
FROM  morality.  (Homiletic  Review.)  Riding  over  the  heigMa: — ^The  meaning  is^ 
"I  will  cany  thee  triumphantly  over  all  obstacles"  (Dent.  t-nW,  H),  iProf^ 
J.  Skiwner,  D.D.) 


OHAPTEE  LIX. 


Yebs.  1-9.  Behold,  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened. — Isaiah  Iviii.  and  liae.  .• In 

the  former  address,  to  the  dead  works  on  which  the  people  founded  their  claim  to 
redemption,  there  were  set  in  contrast  the  virtues  well-pleasing  of  God,  and  for  which 
Jehovah  promises  redemption  as  a  gracious  reward ;  in  this  discourse,  the  sins 
which  hinder  the  accompLLshment  of  redemption  are  stiU  more  directly  laid  bare. 
{F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Sin  and  grace: — In  this  chapter  we  have  sin  appearing 
exceeding  sinful,  and  grace  appearing  exceeding  gracious.    {M.  Eev/ry.)     Why  same 


818  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B.  [chap.  ux. 

ieekers  are  not  saved: — I.  The  fact  confessed.  1.  The  people  of  whom  I  am 
«pecially  thinking  have  been  hearers  of  the  Gospel,  and  diligent  hearers  too.  2. 
TRxey  have  become  men  of  prayer,  after  a  fashion  (chap.  Iviii.  2).  3.  These  people 
are  greatly  disappointed  with  themselves :  not  altogether  so,  for  they  know  to  a 
great  extent  where  the  blame  lies,  but  yet  they  had  hoped  better  things  of  them- 
selves. II.  The  imputation  implied  and  met.  Notice  the  first  word  of  our  text : 
"  Behold  !  "  This  is  like  our  nota  bene  ;  mark  well,  turn  your  eye  this  way.  If  you 
•are  not  saved,  it  is  not  because  God  is  unable  to  save  you,  nor  is  it  because  He  U 
unwilling  to  hear  your  prayers.  III.  The  accusation  pressed  and  explained. 
Your  accusation  may  be  turned  against  you.  You  thought  that  God's  hand  was 
fihortened,  that  it  could  not  save ;  but  it  is  your  hand  that  is  shortened,  for  you 
have  not  laid  hold  upon  Christ.  The  real  reason  why  you  have  not  found  peace  is 
sin.  It  may  be — 1.  Sin  unconfessed.  2.  Sin  unforsaken.  3.  Sin  hankered  after. 
4.  Sin  of  which  you  are  unaware.  5.  Some  sin  of  omission.  6.  An  ugly  temper. 
7.  An  intellectual  sin.  8.  Gross  or  secret  sin.  (C  ff.  Spurgeon.)  Hindrances  to 
.  the  conversion  of  all  nations : — 1.  The  lack  of  deep,  earnest  svmpathy  with  Christ  on 
the  part  of  His  people.  2.  An  evU  heart  of  imbelief.  3.  The  unconsecrated  wealth 
of  tne  Church.  (/.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  sad  issues  of  sin: — I.  It  beings 
separation.  Instead  of  running  to  God,  we  flee  from  Him.  His  dazzling  majesty 
appals  us.  His  righteousness  and  puri^  compel  us  to  hide  from  Him.  II.  It 
BEINGS  disenchantment  AND  DISILLUSIONMENT.  For  a  little  we  are  fascinated, 
beguiled,  befooled;  but  soon  there  is  a  rude  awakening.  "Their  webs  shall  not 
become  garments,"  etc.  (ver.  6).  The  mirage  fades  away  and  we  discover  to  our 
dismay  that  there  is  nothing  around  or  within  us  but  a  aesert  of  sand  and  thorns. 
III.  It  brings  BEWILDERMENT  AND  PERPLEXITY  (ver.  9).  We  are  in  doubt 
regarding  the  most  elementary  matters  of  belief  and  behaviour.     {A.  Smellie,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  But  your  iniquities  have  separated  between  yon  and  your  Qod. — Sin 

separates  Qod  omd  men: — I.  A  deeadful  evil  that  this  people  was  under. 
Separation  from  God.  II.  The  paety  at  whose  dooe  the  blame  lies,  they  who 
have  made  the  breach.  III.  The  peocxtring  cause  of  this  evil,  "your  iniquities." 
{T.  Boston.)  The  dreadful  efficacy  of  sin:—l.  What  is  that  separation  which 
SIN  MAKES  betwixt  God  AND  SOULS?  Not  a  local  separation,  for  "He  is  not  far 
from  every  one  of  us,  for  in  Him  we  live, "  etc.  1.  In  it  there  is  something  negative  ; 
t.  e.  the  Lord  denies  them  the  influences  of  His  grace,  countenance  and  fellowship. 
2.  There  is  something  positive  in  it :  sin  kindles  a  fire  against  the  soul.  (1)  There 
is  a  standing  controversy  God  has  against  sinners  (Amos  iii.  3).  (2)  There  is  a 
pursuing  of  this  controversy  against  the  sinner ;  some  positive  outgoings  of  God's 
anger  against  the  soul.  II.  The  geeatness  of  the  evil  of  separation  from  God, 
which  many  go  so  light  under.  Alas  !  many  reign  like  king  Saul,  when  God 
departed  from  him  ;  but  how  sad  a  thing  this  is,  will  appear  if  we  consider — 1. 
What  God  is.  Everything  in  God  speaks  terror  to  those  that  are  separated  from 
Him.  (1)  God  is  the  chief  good ;  and  therefore  to  be  separated  from  God  is  the 
chief  evU.  (2)  God  is  all-sutficient  in  Himself,  and  to  the  creatures.  The  enjoy- 
ment of  Him  makes  truly  happy  ;  therefore  to  be  separated  from  Him  is  a  dreadful 
evil.  (3)  The  omnipotence  of  God.  (4)  The  absoluteness  of  God.  (5)  God  is 
eternal.  2.  All  created  things  are  empty  and  unsatisfactory.  3.  To  be  separated 
fix)m  God  is  the  saddest  plague  out  of  hell.  4.  It  is  a  very  hell  to  be  separated  from 
God.  5.  Those  that  continue  in  a  state  of  separation  from  God,  have  no  quarter  to 
which  they  can  turn  for  comfort  in  an  evil  day.  III.  How  sin  makes  this 
SEPAEATION  BETWIXT  GoD  AND  A  SOUL.  1.  There  is  a  guilt  of  sin,  whereby  the 
sinner  is  bound  over  to  misery  for  his  sin.  2.  There  is  the  stain  of  sin.  (Ibid.) 
Sin  the  great  separator : — I.  Sin  sepaeates  MAN  from  God  as  to  place.  Of  course 
it  remains  true  of  every  inhabitant  of  earth,  and  even  of  hell,  that  God  is  not  far 
from  every  one  of  us.  But  sin  has  blunted,  has  even  destroyed  the  sense  of  His 
nearness,  has  led  men  to  feel  as  though  He  were  far  distant.  As  a  man's  iniquities 
increase  God  seems  farther  and  farther  from  him,  until  at  last  he  feels  that  heaven 
is  too  distant  for  him  to  reach,  and  God  too  far  off"  to  hear  his  prayers.     II.  Sin 

SEPARATES  MAN  FROM  GOD  AS  TO  CHAEACTER.      III.    SiN  SEPARATES  MAN  FROM  GOD 

AS  TO  WILL.  Separation  of  will  is  the  most  complete  of  all  kinds  of  separation. 
Continents  and  oceans  may  divide  men,  and  yet  they  may  be  one  in  heart  and  aim. 
IV.  Sin  separates  man  from  God  as  to  interest.  It  is  to  the  interest  of  the 
sinner  that  there  should  be  opportunity  for  indulgence  in  sin,  that  the  punishment 
of  sin  shoidd  be  removed,  that  the  restraints  of  virtue  should  be  broken  down.     We 


COAP.  ux.]  ISAIAH.  319 

may  well  rejoice  that  God's  interest  is  with  all  that  is  the  opposite  of  this.  It  is 
God's  aim  that  sin  should  be  destroyed.  Hence  by  fearful  sufferings  He  brands  it 
with  disgrace.  But  God  in  His  wonderful  love  has  taken  means  to  destroy  this 
separation,  and  to  draw  us  back  to  Him.  {Homilist.)  The  tragic  schism : — When 
separation  comes  to  pass,  the  force  of  disaeverment  and  alienation  can  only  be  that  of  sin. 
1.  He  who  is  the  spring  of  life  can  know  neither  impoverishment  nor  limitation,  and 
the  changes  and  fluctuations  of  the  universe  can  no  more  project  themselves  into  His 
being  than  the  casting  of  a  leaf  or  the  shedding  of  a  blossom  from  the  tree  can 
impair  the  vital  force  entrenched  in  its  roots.  The  heathen  man  will  sometimes  say, 
"The  gods  are  growing  old  ;  they  are  not  so  ready  in  helping  their  worshippers  as 
when  we  were  young."  An  eternal  Spirit  is  secure  agaiast  such  an  innuendo. 
"  His  arm  is  not  shortened  that  it  cannot  save."  2.  And  there  can  be  no  failure  of 
care  for  our  welfare  or  slackening  off  in  His  inclination  to  help  us.  Unless  God  be  a 
fiction  of  the  brain  He  must  be  predisposed  to  save  and  succour  the  people  He  has  formed 
for  Himself.  The  age-long  impulse  by  which  He  draws  men  to  religion  is  a  sufficient 
proof  of  that.  When  we  take  into  account  what  God  really  is,  the  chief  mystery  of  the 
world  is  that  any  prayer  in  it  should  go  unanswered,  and  the  mystery  is  one  with  the 
mystery  of  iniquity  itself.  It  was  no  wonder  that  He  whose  everlasting  home  had 
been  in  the  bosom  of  infinite  love  should  marvel  at  that  which  is  so  commonplace  to 
us — unbelief.  What  a  side-light  does  this  cast  upon  the  terrible  significance  of  sin ! 
It  is  the  one  thing  which  keeps  God  and  His  creatures  apart.  3.  The  conditions  of 
modem  business  life  are  sometimes  adduced  as  an  excuse  for  the  waning  spirit  of 
prayer  and  the  outfading  consciousness  of  Divine  help.  If  business  does  unfit  its 
votaries  for  realizing  God's  presence  and  power,  it  can  only  be  for  one  of  three  reasons, 
all  alike  bearing  the  taint  of  sin  and  justifying  the  declaration  of  the  prophet.  You 
seek  unlawful  ends  in  business,  or  you  seek  lawful  ends  by  unlawful  means,  or  the 
methods  of  conducting  business  tend  to  kindle  within  you  unlawful  passions.  4. 
We  are  sometimes  ready  to  put  down  this  tragic  schism  to  the  progress  of  scientific 
thought.  Men's  hearts  are  petrified  by  the  new  dogma  that  the  order  of  the  universe 
is  unalterable,  along  with  its  godless  corollary,  that  to  pray  is  to  fritter  away  time, 
strength,  and  vital  force,  and  to  vex  one's  own  soul.  Let  the  difficulties  raised  by 
the  new  science  be  freely  allowed.  Upon  even  devout  minds  these  views  of  the 
uniformity  of  Nature  and  her  methods,  be  they  proven  or  unproven,  may  so  act  as 
to  check  the  temper  of  prayerfulness.  Temptation  does  take  on  intellectual  forms 
as  it  addresses  itself  to  thinking  people.  If  a  child  were  to  find  out  that  his  father's 
estate  had  been  signed  over  to  trustees,  and  that  for  a  certain  term  of  years  that 
father  could  not  be  altogether  a  free  agent  in  providing  for  the  wante  of  his  house- 
hold, all  immediate  expenditure  being  determined  by  some  outside  authority,  and  if 
on  that  ground  the  child  were  to  break  off  relations  with  his  father,  would  not  that 
be  the  mark  of  a  mean,  depraved,  repulsive  character?  Supposing  that  God  had 
made  Nature  His  plenipotentiary,  or  trustee,  and  for  the  time  being  had  surrendered 
His  own  power  of  answering  supplication  for  temporal  benefits,  it  would  surely  be 
base  in  us  to  use  that  as  a  plea  whereby  to  justify  ourselves  in  restraining  prayer 
before  Him.  5.  The  problems  of  temperament  are  sometimes  brought  in  to  explain 
this  tragic  schism.  Men  palliate  their  callousness  to  prayer  and  their  misgivings 
concerning  its  benefits  by  putting  them  down  to  deficiency  of  sentiment  or  imagina- 
tion, matter-of-factness,  poverty  of  the  religious  instinct,  congenital  disability 
answering  to  colour  blindness  in  the  physical  realm.  It  is  assumed,  upon  very 
slender  proof,  that  a  peculiar  poise  of  the  faculties  disqualifies  for  enthusiastic 
spiritual  DeHefs.  It  may  be  allowed  that  from  the  intellectual  standpoint  people  are 
variously  endowed  and  equipped  ;  but  a  man's  religious  history  is  not  determined  by 
the  quality,  condition,  or  specialized  habite  of  the  brain.-  It  is  simply  impossibfe 
for  a  man  to  have  capacity  for  common  truth,  practical  righteousness,  philanthropy, 
family  life  and  friendship,  and  yet  to  have  no  capacity  for  converse  with  God,  whose 
nature  is  the  spring  and  animating  principle  of  all  these  qualities.  Man  is  religious 
by  constitution  and  irreligious  only  by  errancy  of  habit  and  practical  life.  Does 
prayer  seem  barren  and  God  unresponsive  and  heaven  very  far  off?  It  can  only  be 
explained  by  our  lack  of  oneness  with  the  Divine  wiU  and  law.  6.  The  inscrutable 
methods  of  God's  sovereignty  are  sometimes  adduced  to  explain  away  this  ominous 
separation  referred  to  by  the  prophet.  Now  and  again  occasions  arise  when  the 
Lord  does  seem  to  withdraw  Himself  from  His  people.  There  are  inexplicable 
factors  in  God's  dealings  with  us,  but  those  factors  belong  chiefly  to  the  sphere  of 
providence  rather  than  to  that  of  grace.  More  often  than  not,  it  is  sin  which  veils 
God  and  His  goodness  from  the  sad,  breaking,  woe-begone  heart,  and  we  shall  not 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ux. 

get  out  of  the  gloom  by  closing  our  eyes  to  the  explanation  and  assuming  that  thi» 
terrible  silence  of  the  Most  High,  tms  apparent  indisposition  to  help,  at  the  mere 
thought  of  which  the  heart  sickens  and  faints,  is  one  of  the  decrees  of  His  unsearoh- 
able  sovereignty.  7.  This  separation  is  often  veiled  from  us  by  the  illusions  of  the 
senses  and  the  pomps  of  this  present  evil  world.  It  needs  much  coTirage  and  sobriety 
of  mind  to  realize  the  perils  with  which  it  is  fraught.  The  form  assumed  by  our 
personal  sin  may  be  so  secret  and  subtle  that  it  is  easy  for  us  to  think  that,  in  our 
case  at  least,  this  is  not  the  malign  force  which  separates  from  God  and  makes  Hi» 

Sresence  fleeting  as  a  dream.  We  have  not  been  guilty  perchance  of  glaring, 
agitious,  anti-social  transgressions  which  provoke  the  reproaches  of  those  who 
watch  our  behaviour.  Yet  spiritual  sins  may  cleave  to  us  which  work  portentoua 
mischief  in  the  religious  life.  (T.  G.  Selby.)  Visions  which  lure  to  destruction : — 
Near  the  source  of  one  of  the  great  rivers  of  the  East  there  stands  a  Buddhist 
monastery  of  widespread  fame,  built  on  the  edge  of  a  beetling  cliff.  In  the  chasm 
beneath  clouds  are  often  seen  floating,  upon  which  the  pilgrims  who  have  climbed 
"  to  the  shrine  look  down.  Under  certain  conditions  of  the  sun  and  atmosphere  a 
magnificent  phenomenon  appears.  The  sun,  greatly  enlarged  and  begirt  with 
coruscations  of  prismatic  splendour,  is  reflected  upon  the  screen  of  vapours.  From 
the  central  disc  shafts  of  gold  and  purple  and  violet  pulse  and  throb.  The  devotees 
call  the  sight  "  the  glory  of  Buddha,'  and  when  the  prismatic  marvel  appears,  half 
mad  with  religious  frenzy,  they  cast  themselves  into  tne  palpitating  mass  of  colour, 
falling  unconscious  suicides  into  the  grim  gulf  below,  to  which  only  vultures  and 
jackals  can  approach.  And  the  separating  chasm  between  ourselves  and  God  is  often 
fiUed  up  with  a  meretricious  pomp  that  disguises  its  tragedies,  and  men  are  again 
and  again  betrayed  into  self-destruction.  Perhaps  it  is  a  vision  of  the  world  with 
its  wealth  and  power  that  scintillates  there,  the  gorgeous  phantoms  which  passed 
before  the  eye  on  the  mount  of  the  temptation.  All  the  hues  of  Vanity  Fair  shimmer 
beneath  our  feet,  and  we  think  surely  we  may  plunge  into  the  iridescence  that  seems 
to  beckon  us.  Or  it  may  be  the  glory  of  Nature  spreads  itself  athwart  the  yawning 
gulf.  She  interposes  the  magic  of  her  shows,  entices  with  the  glory  of  her  stately 
order,  usurps  the  nimbus  of  a  factitious  sovereignty,  and  takes  the  very  place  of  God 
Himself.  The  gulf  dividing  from  God  is  hidden  by  her  enchantments.  Or,  the 
rainbow  glories  of  an  aesthetic  religion  veil  the  deep  moral  separation.  Men  sometimes 
commit  ethical  suicide  under  the  cover  of  an  ornate  worship.  We  cultivate  art, 
music,  the  devices  that  enthral  the  senses,  and  call  the  product  piety,  forgetting  that 
we  are  in  no  sense  at  one  with  God.  Pageants  superimpose  themselves  upon  un- 
welcome facts,  and  underneath  the  circles  of  deceitfiil  splendour  there  gape  gulfs  of 
deep  and  irretrievable  perdition.  If  sin  is  ignored,  unconfessed,  unforsaken,  if 
unflattering  truths  are  obstinately  disguised,  we  shall  find  at  last  that  our  capacity 
for  communion  with  God  is  lost  and  our  doom  is  an  abyss  from  which  there  can  be 
no  uplifting,  (Ibid.)  Inconspicumjis  sins  may  hinder  communion  with  God; — 
Pathologists  found  difficulty  in  identifying  the  bacillus  of  an  epidemic  that  haa 
become  sorrowfully  familiar  to  us ;  not  only  because  it  was  one  of  the  tiniest  of  all 
microscopic  organisms,  but  chiefly  because  it  could  not  be  stained  with  the  dyes  used 
in  studying  other  minute  forms  of  life.  Yet  what  a  messenger  of  sorrow  and  death 
it  was  1  This  hideous  trifle  brought  swift  and  cruel  separation  to  husband  and  wife, 
parent  and  chUd,  lover  and  friend,  and  put  the  silence  and  deep  gloom  of  the  grave 
between  thousands  of  victims  and  the  sweet  sunny  homes  in  which  they  would  fain 
have  tarried.  Now  some  sins  have  a  criminal  dye  put  upon  them  by  statutory  law, 
are  branded  by  the  damnatory  force  of  public  opmion,  or  show  red  like  crimson 
because  of  the  disintegrating  influence  they  begin  to  exert  at  once  upon  the  individual 
and  the  society  to  which  he  belongs.  Other  sins  do  not  stand  out  in  conspicuous 
colours.  Men  have  no  apparent  interest  in  describing  them  as  atrocities.  Unless 
we  are  watchful  and  cultivate  keen  spiritual  perceptions,  these  more  obscure  forms  of 
sin  are  apt  to  elude  our  consciousness.  And  yet  they  may  separate  between  as  and 
our  God.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  5,  6.— They  hatch  eookatrioe'  eggi. —  Wicked  devices: — I.  The  dbvices  of 
THE  WICKED.  1.  Like  eggs — productive.  2.  Like  cockatrice'  eggs — injurious. 
8.  Like  spiders' webs — fiB,il,  useless.  II.  Theik  effect.  1.  Upon  others — mischief, 
death.  2.  Upon  themselves — disappointment,  retribution.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
achemes  of  the  ungodly  : — The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  persons  spoken  of  brood 
over  and  bring  to  maturity  projects  of  wickedness,  whose  effects  are  almost  equally 
&tal  to  those  who  acquiesce  in  them  and  to  those  who  oppose  them.     "He  that 


OUF.  uz.]  ISAIAH,  WL 

Mteth  of  their  eggs,"  t.  e.  either  he  who  enters  into  their  schemes  or  he  who  is 
their  victim.  "  That  which  is  crushed  breaketh  out  into  a  viper."  Should  one  try 
to  stamp  out  one  of  their  diabolical  plans,  its  deadly  nature  viU  only  be  the  more 
dearly  manifested.     Ver.  6  is  the  development  of  the  second  image  of  ver.  5,  the 

Soint  of  comparison  being  the  uselessness  for  any  good  social  end  of  the  schemes 
evised  by  the  ungodly.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  And  weave  the  spider's  web. — 
SypocrituxU  religion: — See  the  spider's  web  and  behold  in  it  a  most  suggestive 
picture  of  the  hypocrite's  religion.  1.  It  is  meant  to  catch  his  prey ;  the  spider 
fettens  himself  on  flies.  Foolish  persons  are  easily  entrapped  by  the  loud  professions 
of  pretenders,  and  even  the  more  judicious  cannot  always  escape.  2.  A  spider's  web 
18  a  marvel  of  skill ;  look  at  it  and  admire  the  cunning  hunter's  wUes.  Is  not  a 
deceiver's  religion  equally  wonderful  ?  How  does  he  make  so  barefaced  a  lie  appear 
to  be  a  truth  I  3.  A  spider's  web  comes  all  from  the  creature's  own  bowels.  Even 
60  hypocrites  find  their  hope  and  trust  within  themselves.  4.  But  a  spider's  web  is 
Tery  frail.  Hypocritical  cobwebs  will  soon  come  down  when  the  broom  of  destruction 
begins  its  purifying  work.  5.  Which  reminds  us  of  one  more  thought,  viz.  that 
•uch  cobwebs  are  not  to  be  endured  in  the  Lord's  house.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Spiders'  webs : — As  the  spider  weaveth  her  web  to  catch  the  smaller  flies,  so  do  they 
lay  their  plots  to  take  the  poorer  sort  of  people,  and  them  which  are  most  destitute 
of  friends.     ( W.  Day,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  Their  webs  shall  not  become  garments. — The  art  of  weaving  is  older 
than  human  history  ;  figures  drawn  from  it  are  found  in  the  earliest  literature  of  all 
nations.  It  is  frequently  employed  in  the  Word  of  God  to  set  forth  the  sublimest 
truths  of  life,  and  in  the  classical  mythologies  it  occupies  an  even  more  important 
place.  The  three  fates  preside  over  the  lives  of  men,  and  they  practise  the  weaver's 
art.  Olotho  holds  the  threads,  Lachesis  introduces  the  warp,  and  the  grim  goddess 
Atropos  cuts  the  web  when  the  fabric  of  himian  destiny  is  complete.  In  later  times 
we  find  the  figure  with  a  still  wider  import.  The  spirit  of  Goethe's  "Faust" 
labours  in  the  workshop  of  the  spring-time  to  weave  the  garment  for  Nature  by  which 
God  Himself  may  be  seen  by  mortals.  Thus  in  all  the  ages  of  the  world  the  figure 
of  the  loom  has  commended  itself  as  one  most  aptly  setting  forth  the  deepest  truths 
of  human  experience.  {J.  Wallace,  M.A.)  Character  as  a  wei : — The  prophet  Isaiah 
has  laid  hold  on  the  idea,  now  a  commonplace  of  our  thought,  that  all  character  is 
A  web.     In  the  case  of  all  the  web  is  variegated  ;  in  the  case  of  some  the  piece  is 

gioUed  by  rotten  threads.  As  our  days  fly  past  they  dart  across  the  warp  of  the 
ivine  purposes  the  woof  of  human  action  and  human  thought,  and  the  marvel 
is  that  multitudes  live  on  in  brutish  carelessness  while  the  loom  of  life  spins  on. 
We  look  back  on  a  misspent  day  with  the  wretched  consolation  that  it  will  be  all 
the  same  a  hundred  years  hence.  Will  it  1  If  threads  missing  in  the  web  do  not 
i^oU  its  market  value,  then  it  may  ;  but  if  one  false  thread  ruins  the  whole,  then 
life  with  one  day  misspent  is  by  so  much  of  less  value  in  the  sight  of  God.  {Ibid.) 
Mqpeless  weaving: — From  our  text  we  wish  to  look  at  one  or  two  methods  of 
character- weaving  which  are  doomed  to  miserable  failure  when  the  web  of  life  is 
epim.  I.  There  are  half-done  duties.  Multitudes  perform  their  duty  in  such  a 
way  that  it  is  but  half  done.  In  the  ordinary  routtae  of  life  they  are  always  a  littie 
late,  and  consequently  have  to  work  with  haste.  Or  take  the  higher  duty  of  man 
to  love  God  and  keep  His  commandments.  There  are  moments  of  Pisgah  vision, 
but  what  weary  leagues  of  plain  are  there  unredeemed  by  any  thought  of  God  !  This 
half-done  duty  is  life's  shuttle  plied  with  a  palsied  hand,  and  the  fabric  of  character 
is  such  as  in  the  end  will  put  the  weaver  to  the  blush.  II.  There  are  half- 
CONQUERED  TEMPTATIONS.  Many  a  man  is  conquered  who  does  not  fall.  III.  What 
is  the  secret  of  duties  half  done,  of  temptation  half  conquered  ?  The  secret  is  half- 
CONSECRATED  LIVES.  If  all  the  provinces  of  the  soul  do  not  obey  the  Divine 
mandate,  we  need  not  be  astonished  if  rebellion  sometimes  shows  its  head.  When 
we  have  done  our  best  to  weave,  we  are  not  to  go  to  heaven  in  our  own  garments. 
Christ  has  provided  raiment  for  His  people,  woven  on  the  Gross  and  dyed  there  in 
colours  more  enduring  than  Tyrian  purple.  We  have  to  weave  as  those  who  have 
to  prove  their  calliag,  not  win  it.  {Ibid.)  Projects  injurious  to  others  are  hurtfvl 
to  self: — They  may  do  hurt  to  others  with  their  projects,  but  can  never  do  any  real 
service  or  kijidness  to  themselves  by  them.  There  is  nothing  to  be  got  by  sin. 
(M.  Henry. )  Unprofitable  Weaving : — Our  text  speaks  of  works  which  are  inadequate 
to  the  purpose  for  which  they  are  performed.  An  unprofitable  and  useless  mana- 
fikcture  is  denounced.     What  should  we  think  of  a  manufacturer  who  persisted  ia 

TOL.  III.  21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ldc 

making  a  kind  of  cloth  so  flimsy  and  rotten  that  it  would  hardly  hold  together — so 
weak  and  threadbare  that  either  it  could  not  be  made  up  into  garments,  or,  if 
it  were,  they  would  be  useless  for  either  adornment  or  comfort.  And  how  great 
would  be  our  astonishment  if  this  imprudent  man  actually  proceeded  to  clothe  himself 
with  the  flimsy  stuff  he  had  made  I  Yet  such,  in  a  moral  sense,  is  the  conduct  of 
those  who  are  condemned  in  our  text.  They  weave  a  web  with  which  they  try  in  vain 
to  effectually  clothe  themselves.  The  "  web  "  is  the  fabric  of  their  own  righteousness, 
or  works.  The  persons  spoken  of  are  they  who  are  self-sufficient  in  their  wickedness 
and  pride  of  heart.  They  are  unrighteous  people,  who  think  themselves  righteoua, 
or  who  desire  to  be  thought  so  by  others.  But  the  material  they  produce  is  as 
flimsy  as  a  spider's  web ;  and  it  will  serve  for  neither  decency  nor  comfort,  for 
neither  ornament  nor  use.  Let  us  think  of  the  purposes  a  garment  is  intended  to 
serve,  and  we  shall  be  supplied  with  various  illustrations  of  the  utter  inadequacy  of 
self-righteousness.  I.  A  garment  is  dbsignbd  for  personal  comfort.  A 
garment  is  useless,  and  even  intolerable,  unless  it  affords  warmth  and  ease.  We  ate 
quite  unable  to  produce  a  fabric  which  will  afford  either  substantial  comfort  or 
permanent  peace.  1.  However  genuine  our  present  righteousness  might  be,  it  would 
not  absolve  us  from  the  guUt  of  past  sin.  2.  Our  own  righteousness  is  insufficient 
for  comfort  because  it  leaves  untouched  the  passions  of  the  unregenerate  heart. 
3.  Our  own  righteousness  is  inadequate  for  comfort  because  it  affords  no  effectual 
protection  against  temptation.  II.  The  second  purpose  a  garment  is  intended 
TO  SERVE  is  decency.  A  garment  which  ia  ill-fitting,  or  of  unseemly  pattern,  or 
formed  of  coarse  and  worfliless  material,  is  unpleasing  to  others  no  less,  and 
possibly  more,  than  to  the  wearer  himself.  And  one's  own  righteousness — that  is 
the  righteousness  which  is  not  produced  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit — will 
no  more  bear  the  scrutiny  of  one's  fellow-men,  than  would  a  ragged  coat  or  a  di-aggled 
and  threadbare  dress.  Like  an  inferior  garment,  it  may  pass  muster  in  the  crowd, 
or  escape  criticism  on  a  casual  view,  but  it  will  not  bear  close  inspection.  A  man 
cannot  so  cover  himself  with  his  own  righteousness  as  to  appear  at  all  times  decently 
and  respectably  clothed.  1.  The  garment  is  so  thin  that  it  does  not  hide  the  natural 
ugliness  of  the  soul.  2.  It  is  likewise  so  limited  ra  its  dimensions  as  to  cause 
serious  disfigurement  of  the  life.  3.  The  garment  of  self-righteousness  is  undurable. 
III.  The  garment  of  self-righteousness  is  intended  to  secure  for  its 
WEARER  acceptance  WITH  GoD.  There  are  garments  which  are  necessary  for 
certain  occasions,  or  for  admission  to  particular  places.  Such  was  the  wedding 
garment  in  the  East,  and  such  is  the  modem  court  dress.  The  garment  of  outward 
works  is  designed  by  the  wearer  to  serve  a  similar  purpose.  It  is  intended  as  a 
recommendation  to  the  favour  of  God  and  a  passport  to  heaven.  But  it  will  answer 
neither  of  these  ends.  If  we  would  sustain  the  scrutiny  of  God,  we  must  be  clothed 
in  something  of  finer  texture,  of  stronger  substance,  and  of  richer  hue,  than  the 
flimsy  and  bedraggled  garment  of  our  own  righteousness.  1.  It  will  not  cover  us  to 
the  satisfaction  of  God  because  of  its  insufficient  dimensions  and  its  many  flaws. 
2.  Nor  is  it  in  fact  any  real  covering  in  the  sight  of  God.  Let  us  learn  the  worth- 
lessness  of  merely  outward  righteousness,  and  the  absolute  necessity  of  repentance, 
regeneration,  and  holiness  of  heart.  {J.  W.  Key  worth.)  JVebs  and  garments : — A 
mere  web  of  cloth  might  be  said  to  be  of  no  practical  use.  It  may  lie  on  the  shelves 
in  the  draper's  shop  for  a  time,  but  it  is  intended  for  something  beyond  that.  The 
ultimate  purpose  in  connection  with  it  ia  the  garments  that  may  be  made  from  it. 
It  has  possibilities — the  possibility  of  garments  in  it — and  that  was  intended  from 
the  first.  It  has  not  reamed  the  intention  regarding  it  until  it  is  ultimately  turned 
into  garments.  So  when  the  prophet  says,  ' '  Their  webs  shall  not  become  garments, " 
he  is  referring  to  the  wicked  plans  of  wicked  men  among  the  Israelites,  and  means 
that  their  plans  would  not  reach  the  final,  the  complete  and  practical  stage.  Their 
purposes  would  be  frustrated  by  a  higher  Hand.  The  words  may  be  applied  to 
ourselves,  and  in  various  ways.  I.  Some  purposes  are  frustrated  because  of 
SOMETHING  LACKING  IN  OURSELVES — iudoleuce,  Want  of  energy,  or  want  of  ability 
to  complete  our  purposes.     II.  Some  purposes  are  frustrated  because  of 

POSITIVE  HINDRANCES  IN  THE  WAT  THAT  WE  CANNOT  SURMOUNT,  AND  THAT 
PERSONALLY  WE  MAY   HAVE   NOTHING  TO   DO  WITH.      It  is  tO   US    one  of  the   mOSt 

inexplicable  things  in  Providential  dealing,  how  men  who  devote  themselves  to  a 
great  and  good  object,  and  who  seem  to  us  essential  for  its  success,  are  often  out 
down  in  the  mid-time  of  their  days,  just  when  to  our  eyes  their  presence  seemed 
most  needed.  Why  should  it  be  so !  No  doubt  we  should  see  thmgs  differently, 
however,  if  with  wider  vision  we  ooold  look  before  and  after ;  and  find  that,  in 


CHAP,  ux.]  ISAIAH.  823 

higher  ways  than  we  can  dream  of,  men  whose  plans  seem  to  be  frustrated  are  more 
than  satisfied  with  the  Divine  mode  of  dealing.  In  the  text  it  is  wicked  purposes 
that  are  referred  to,  and  though  often  a  good  purpose  seems  to  be  checked  as  well, 
yet  there  will  be  no  real  failure  in  life's  plans  if  we  live  according  to  our  light. 
Working  in  line  with  God  there  is  a  deeper  sense  in  which,  instead  of  our  webs  not 
becoming  garments,  it  might  be  said  that  the  very  stars  in  their  courses  will  fight 
for  us.  The  great  purpose  of  our  life  will  be  fulfilled  if  we  keep  near  to  God. 
Conclusion  :  1.  This  true  success  is,  above  all  and  first  of  all,  an  inward  thing.  It 
refers  pre-eminently  to  the  inward  condition.  It  must  begin  there.  2.  "  We  see 
not  yet  aU  things  put  under  Him,  but  we  see  Jesus. "  Whether  as  to  humanity  as 
a  whole,  or  as  to  individuals,  that  is  true ;  all  things  are  not  yet  put  under,  but 
there  is  ever  one  source  of  help  and  hope,  and  only  one.  Looking  vmto  Jesus,  if 
that  be  the  attitude  of  our  life,  then  it  cannot  be  said,  whatever  befall,  that  life's 
purpose  has  failed,  and  in  higher  ways  than  we  can  tell  our  webs  shall  become 
garments,  the  beautiful  and  durable  garments  of  the  souL     {J.  S.  Maver,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  Their  feet  run  to  evil. — A  picture  of  moral  corruption : — This  verse  and 
the  first  part  of  the  following  have  been  interwoven  by  Paul,  in  Rom,  iii.  15-17, 
into  his  description  of  universal  moral  corruption.  The  representation  of  Ufe  as  a 
road,  and  of  one's  mode  of  action  as  a  manner  of  walking,  is  a  common  feature  in 
gnomic  compositions,  where  its  terminology  has  been  ftuly  developed.  From  the 
beginning  of  ver.  7,  one  may  perceive  that  steadfast  believers,  during  the  exile,  Were 
persecuted  even  to  death  by  their  feUow-covmtrymen  who  had  forgotten  God.  The 
verbs  "run"  and  "hasten"  depict  the  delight  felt  in  wickedness,  when  the 
conscience  is  completely  asleep.     {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Therefore  is  judgment  far  from  ns. — Dejection  and  trouble  the  outcome 
tf  sin : — The  sorrow  and  dejection  of  the  people  is  depicted  in  striking  and  pathetic 
images.  It  is  the  better  mind  of  the  community  which  is  here  expressed — its 
intense  desire  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promises,  its  weariness  through  hope 
deferred  making  the  heart  sick.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  A  sad  sequence: — 
"  Therefore," — on  account  of  these  sins  and  disorders,  and  not  on  account  of  Jehovah's 
remissness  (vers.  1,2).  {Ibid. )  We  wait  for  light. — Help  for  seekers  of  the  light : — I. 
Descriptive,  1.  These  persons  are  in  some  degree  aware  of  their  natural  darkness. 
They  are  looking  for  light.  2.  They  have  a  high  idea  of  what  the  light  is. 
"  Brightness."  3.  They  have  some  hope  that  they  may  yet  obtain  this  light  ;  in 
fact  they  are  waiting  for  it,  hopefully  waiting.  4.  They  are  such  as  have  learned  to 
plead  their  case  with  God,  for  our  text  is  a  complaint  addressed  to  the  Lord  Him- 
self. 5.  The  person  I  am  desirous  of  comforting  is  quite  willing  to  lay  bare  his 
heart  before  God,  to  confess  his  desires  whether  right  or  wrong,  and  to  expose  his 
condition  whether  healthy  or  sound.  II.  Assistance.  It  shaU  be  my  happy  task 
to  assist  into  the  light  those  who  would  fain  flee  from  the  darkness.  We  will  do  so 
by  tiring  to  answer  the  query,  "  How  is  it  that  I,  being  desirous  of  light,  have  not 
found  it  yet  ? "  1.  You  may  have  been  seeking  the  light  in  the  wrong  place.  You 
may  have  been  the  victim  of  the  false  doctrine  that  peace  with  God  can  be  found  in 
the  use  of  ceremonies.  It  is  possible,  too,  that  you  have  been  looking  for  salvation 
in  the  mere  belief  of  a  certain  creed.  You  have  thought  that  if  you  could  discover 
pure  orthodoxy,  and  could  then  consign  your  soul  into  its  mould,  you  would  be  a 
saved  man.  2.  You  may  have  sought  it  in  the  wrong  spirit.  Some  appear  to  deal 
with  God  as  if  He  were  bound  to  give  salvation  ;  as  if  salvation,  indeed,  were  the 
inevitable  result  of  a  round  of  performances,  or  the  deserved  reward  of  a  certain 
amount  of  virtue.  3.  Others  have  not  obtained  peace  because  they  have  not  yet  a 
clear  idea  of  the  true  way  of  finding  it.  What  thou  hast  to  do  is  but  to  accept  what 
Jesus  has  finished.  4.  Perhaps  thou  hast  not  found  light  because  thou  hast  sought 
it  in  a  half-hearted  manner.  5.  Is  it  not  possible  that  there  may  be  some  sin  within 
thee  which  thou  art  harbouring  to  thy  soul's  peril  ?  6.  It  may  be  that  you  have  only 
sought  peace  with  God  occasionally.  7.  The  great  reasj;:  nfter  all,  why  earnest 
souls  do  not  get  speedy  rest  lies  in  this,  that  they  are  diso  'ient  to  the  one  plain 
Gospel  precept,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  etc.  III.  A  few  words  by  way 
of  AROUSING.  What  an  unhappy  state  is  thine  !  You  have  been  in  the  dark  year 
after  year,  when  the  sun  is  shining,  the  sweet  flowers  are  blooming,  and  everything 
waiting  to  lead  thee  forth  with  gladness.  What  joys  you  lose  by  being  an  unbe- 
liever !  What  sin  you  are  daily  committing  I  for  you  are  daily  an  unbeliever ! 
Unless  Jesus  Christ  be  your  shield  and  help  you  are  undone  1    IV.  Encouragement. 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lix. 

There  are  many  around  you  who  have  trusted  Jesus  and  found  light.  They 
once  suffered  your  disappointments,  but  have  now  found  rest  to  uieir  soola. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  And  judgment  is  turned  away  backward.— i^o^umo^  sin: — The 
tin  of  a  nation  becomes  national,  and  brings  public  judgments,  when  it  is  not 
restrained  by  public  justice.     (^M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  16-19.  And  He  saw  that  there  was  no  man. — Ood,  man's  great  Redeemer: 
—Do  not  let  us  suppose  this  is  mere  poetry.  Conceive  what  inspires  it, — the  great 
truth  that  in  the  Infinite  there  is  a  heart  to  throb  for  men,  and  a  will  to  strike  for 
them.  This  is  what  the  writer  desires  to  proclaim,  and  what  we  believe  the  Spirit 
of  God  moved  his  poor  human  lips  to  give  their  own  shape  to, — the  simple  truth 
that  there  is  One,  however  hidden  He  may  be  to  men's  eyes,  who  feels  for  men, 
who  feels  hotly  for  men,  and  whose  will  is  quick  and  urgent  to  save  them.  [Prof. 
G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  **  He  wondered  thai  there  was  tw  intercessor" : — "He  stood 
aghast  that  there  was  no  one  interposing."  The  common  version  ("  wondered  "), 
though  substantially  correct,  is  too  weak  to  express  the  full  force  of  the  Hebrew 
word,  which  strictly  means  to  be  desolate,  and  is  used  in  reference  to  persons  for 
\he  purpose  of  expressing  an  extreme  degree  of  horror  and  astonishment.  (/.  A. 
Alexander.)  Prophetic  certainty: — That  the  whole  description  refers  to  a  future 
event  can  hardly  be  questioned.  The  perfects  in  this  verse  (ver.  16)  and  the  next 
are  those  of  prophetic  certainty.     (Pro/.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  For  He  put  on  righteousness. — Self-manifestations  of  God's  holy  natwrt : — 
Just  as  in  Eph.  vi.  the  manifold  self-manifestations  of  the  inner  life  of  the  soul  are 
^mbolized  under  each  of  the  diflerent  pieces  of  armour,  so,  under  the  pieces  of 
Jehovah's  armour  there  are  set  forth  the  manifold  self-manifestations  of  His  holy 
nature,  formed  out  of  wrath  and  love  combined.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  armour  of 
the  redeeming  God : — Judiciously  and  beautifully  is  the  inexorable  justice  of  (Jod 
compared  to  the  impenetrable  brazen  coat-of-mail ;  His  gladdening  salvation  to  the 
protecting  helmet  glittering  afar  ;  His  vengeance,  having  many  modes  of  inflicting 
effective  chastisement,  to  the  bright-coloured  garments  over  the  coat-of-mail ;  and 
His  wrathful  jealousy  to  the  fiery  red  military  cloak.  No  weapon  is  mentioned — 
neither  sword  nor  bow — for  His  arm,  and  this  alone,  procures  Him  help.  {Hid. )  The 
Head  of  the  Church  a  mighty  Hero : — 1.  "  He  put  on  righteousness  as  a  breastplate." 
He  assumed  the  exercise  of  that  right  which  appertained  to  Him,  of  vindicating  His 
Church  from  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  of  rendering  them  victorious  over  their 
oppressors,  and  of  restoring  them  to  liberty  and  tranquillity.  Righteousness 
peculiarly  belongeth  to  him.  His  heart  is  set  on  advancing  its  interests  ;  it  is  not 
more  conspicuous  in  the  equity  of  His  laws  than  in  the  dispensations  of  His  provi- 
dence, whereby  He  repays  fully  to  His  adversaries,  and  exalts  His  upright  servants 
to  happiness  and  comfort.  This  righteousness  He  is  said  to  have  put  on,  so  as 
openly  to  show  that  it  belonged  to  Him,  and  that  every  hostile  weapon  directed 
against  Him  and  those  He  was  going  to  avenge,  should  rebound  on  themselves  with 
irresistible  force.  Furnished  with  righteousness  for  a  covering,  the  Most  Mighty  went 
forth  with  invincible  courage  to  attack  His  enemies,  well  knowing  that  all  their 
efforts  were  incapable  of  wounding  Him,  or  of  preventing  Him  from  obtaining  the 
victory.  2.  "And  a  helmet  of  salvation  on  His  head."  The  Son  of  God  is  repre- 
sented, having  on  a  helmet  of  salvation  because  it  affords  Him  perfect  security  from 
all  the  insults  that  are  aimed  at  Him  by  His  foes,  and  preserves  Him  in  complete 
safety  when  contending  for  conquest  with  those  that  rise  up  against  Him.  3.  "And 
He  put  on  the  garments  of  vengeance  for  clothing. "  The  expression  may  refer  to  the 
nnder  garment  that  was  anciently  worn  by  some  Eastern  nations  below  their  coat  or 
cloak.  The  garments  of  vengeance  may  denote  the  sword,  the  bow,  and  the  spear, 
with  the  other  instruments  that  were  to  be  employed  in  executing  awfiil  vengeance 
on  His  persecuting  foes,  and  in  showing  Himself  strong  in  behalf  of  those  who  trast 
in  His  name.  These  He  put  on  when  He  determined  immediately  to  avenge  the 
wron^  done  to  Himself  and  His  Church.  4.  "And  was  clad  with  zeal  as  a  cloak." 
Zeal  IS  not  properly  a  detached  principle,  but  it  is  a  mixed  affection,  combined  of 
love  and  displeasure,  manifested  by  vigorous  exertions  to  advance  the  welfare  of  the 
beloved  object,  by  every  proper  expedient,  to  express  displeasure  against  those  who 
have  injured  the  persons  m  whose  nappiness  it  is  interested.  Properly  speaking,  it 
Is  not  a  single  passion,  but  an  essential  ingredient  necessary  to  the  lively  exercise  of 


CTUP.  XTX.]  ISAIAR.  82S 

every  other  affection.  When  attributed  to  Jehovah,  it  denotes  His  tender  regard  for 
the  interests  of  His  kingdom  and  glory,  and  His  just  indignation  of  everything  that 
opposes  their  establishment  and  prosperity.  With  this  zeal  He  was  clad  as  with  a 
cloak  worn  by  the  warriors  of  ancient  times.  The  words  may  import  that  the  Lord 
God  would  publicly  demonstrate,  by  His  interposition  in  favour  of  His  servants,  that 
He  was  truly  solicitous  to  promote  their  safety  and  happiness  ;  and,  by  the  execution 
of  righteous  vengeance  upon  their  enemies,  that  He  would  not  permit  those  who 
disturbed  the  peace  of  His  Church  to  remain  unpimished.  (i?.  Macculloch, )  Clad  with 
teal  as  a  cloke. — The  best  cloak : — The  solitary  champion  who  is  here  spoken  of  is  the 
Prince  of  the  house  of  David,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  a  man  has  all  other 
excellences,  then  zeal  is  still  needed  to  elevate  and  perfect  his  entire  manhood. 
Behold  the  altar,  built  of  unhewn  stones,  and  after  God  s  own  law  ;  behold  the  wood 
laid  thereon  ;  see  the  victim  slain  and  the  blood  flowing ;  but  you  cannot  make  a 
sacrifice  without  fire.  Behold  in  the  altar  the  figure  of  the  man ;  he  has  faith, 
courage,  love,  consecration  ;  but  if  he  lacks  the  fire  of  fervent  zeal  his  life  will  be  a 
failure.  I.  Zeal  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  cloak  that  covers  all.  The  Christian 
man  is  to  wear  zeal  as  we  wear  an  outward  garment  which  covers  all  the  rest  of  our 
garments — a  flowing  robe  which  encompasses  the  entire  person.  1.  Zeal  is  all  envelop- 
ing :  zeal  should  envelop  all  the  powers  of  the  Christian.  He  is  to  invest  himself 
with  faith  and  love,  with  patience  and  perseverance,  with  hope  and  joy ;  but  zeal 
must  be  over  all  these.  We  are  not  to  be  zealous  with  one  part  of  ourselves,  nor 
zealous  in  one  particular  duty  only,  nor  zealous  at  one  special  season ;  but  to  be 
altogether  zealous,  for  all  Christ's  work,  for  all  Christ's  truth :  and  at  all  times 
zealous  not  only  in  one  good  thing,  but  in  all  good  things.  2.  We  are  to  wear  holy 
zeal  as  a  cloak,  in  order  to  preserve  the  different  parts  of  our  soul  from  danger.  Zeal 
is  preserving.  Zeal  is  to  wrap  up  the  whole  man,  so  that  when  he  is  subject  to  a 
furious  haU  of  persecution,  or  a  biting  wind  of  poverty,  or  a  torrent  of  down-pouring 
griefs,  the  pilgrim  to  the  skies  may  hold  on  his  way,  and  bid  all  weathers  brave 
defiance.  3.  Zeal  is  comforting,  even  as  the  cloak  when  wrapped  about  the  traveller 
fh  the  snow-storm.  The  man  who  is  possessed  by  an  irresistible  passion  for  carrying 
out  his  life-work,  will  gird  this  gracious  ardour  well  around  himj  and  let  the  snow- 
flakes  come  as  they  may,  they  wiU  only  fall,  as  it  were,  into  a  furnace,  and  wUl  melt 
before  they  can  injure.  4.  We  may  regard  zeal  as  a  cloak  by  reason  of  its  adorning 
a  man's  character.  Many  a  person  looks  all  the  more  comely  because  of  the  garment 
in  which  he  has  arrayed  himself.  There  is  no  more  becoming  garment  to  the 
Christian  when  he  possesses  all  the  virtues  than  an  all-enveloping  zeal.  5.  We  must 
take  care  to  put  on  zeal  as  a  cloak  and  not  as  a  hood.  Nobody  wears  his  cloak  over 
his  head,  and  yet  I  have  known  some  persons  whose  zeal  has  blindfolded  their 
judgment.  Zeal,  like  fire,  is  "a  good  servant,  but  a  bad  master."  6.  Zeal  is  a 
cloak,  and  therefore  not  intended  to  supersede  the  other  graces.  We  do  not  put  on 
our  great  coats  and  leave  ofi'  all  our  other  clothes.  7.  Zeal  is  a  cloak,  and  therefore 
we  are  not  to  regard  it  as  an  extraordinary  robe  to  be  worn  only  occasionally  on  high 
days  and  holidays.  Zeal  for  God  should  be  exhibited  in  workshops,  should  be  worn 
in  the  market-house,  in  the  senate,  or  wherever  we  may  labour.  Since  the  storm  is 
always  on,  and  we  are  always  pilgrims,  it  will  be  like  the  cloak  which  we  cannot  bear 
to  lay  aside.  8.  While  I  say  that  zeal  is  not  everything,  recollect  that  the  cloak 
covers  everything,  and  do  not  let  your  zeal  be  such  a  scanty  thing  that  it  will  only 
hang  like  a  girdle  round  your  loins.  Remember  our  Lord  put  on  zeal.  While  the 
Christian  religion  is  an  internal  thing,  there  is  no  religion  in  the  world  which  shows 
itself  so  much  externally.  II.  How  our  Lord  exhibited  this  zeal.  1.  In  His 
earliest  childhood  you  have  tokens  of  His  inward  zeal.  "  Wist  ye  not,"  etc.  1  2.  In 
after  life  you  see  His  burning  zeal  in  leaving  the  comforts  of  life.  3.  His  very  dress 
showed  His  zeal,  because  it  was  not  ostentatious,  but  in  every  way  suitable  for 
incessant  labour  and  humble  service.  4.  He  showed  His  earnestness  in  persevering 
in  His  work  under  all  manner  of  rebuffs.  5.  And,  as  a  clearer  proof  of  His  zeal  still, 
all  the  blandishments  of  the  world  could  not  attract  Him.  6.  Look  at  His  incessant 
labours,  7.  In  His  preaching  you  see  His  zeal.  8.  Probably  you  see  His  zeal  most 
of  all  in  His  prayers,  for  a  man's  intensity  of  heart  may  eminently  be  judged  of  by 
his  secret  devotion  before  God.  9.  He  proved  His  zeal  again  by  giving  up  Himself. 
10.  Observe  what  His  zeal  was  made  of.  (1)  It  was  zeal  for  God,  (2)  Zeal  for  truth. 
(3)  Zeal  for  souls.  Ill,  What  was  it  that  the  zeal  of  Christ  fed  ixpoNt 
1.  Cluist's  zeal  was  based  upon  a  defined  principle.  He  had  of  old  said,  "Lo,  I 
come :  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  Me,  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  My 
Qod :  yea,  Thj  law  is  within  My  heart. "    He  had  set  his  heart  upon  a  great  purpose, 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ux. 

He  had  weighed  it,  counted  the  cost,  looked  at  it  on  all  sides,  and  now  He  was  not 
to  be  turned  from  it.  2.  The  zeal  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  occasioned  by 
intense  love.  He  loved  His  Father  ;  He  could  not,  therefore,  but  do  His  wiU.  He 
loved  His  people  ;  He  could  not,  therefore,  do  otherwise  than  seek  their  good.  Oh, 
how  He  loved  the  souls  of  men  !  It  was  a  passion  with  Him.  3.  The  zeal  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  an  eye  to  the  recompense.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before 
Him  He  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  sname."  4.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  so 
zealous  because  He  had  a  greater  spiritual  discernment  than  you  and  I  have.  We  are 
not  zealous  because  we  cannot  see.  We  can  see  these  houses,  these  streets,  and  th's 
money.  We  can  hear  those  people's  tongues,  and  we  can  look  at  these  creature 
comforts.  But  our  ears  are  as  though  they  were  stopped  up  with  wax,  and  our  eyes 
as  though  they  were  blinded  to  better  things.  When  Jesus  was  here  He  saw  angels, 
and  He  beheld  the  spirits  of  men  ;  He  looked  upon  men,  not  as  flesh  and  blood,  but 
as  immortals.  Best  of  all.  He  saw  God.  He  could  say,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always 
before  Me :  because  He  is  at  My  right  hand  I  shall  not  be  moved."    (C.  E.  Sturgeon. ) 

Ver.  19.  When  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood. — Moral  invasions: — 
These  words  suggest — I.  The  moral  invasion  of  humajj  souls.  1.  The  soul 
has  an  arch  enemy.  This  enemy  is  called  by  different  names.  The  old  serpent, 
the  devil,  Satan,  roaring  lion,  etc.  He  is  characterized  by  great  power,  malignity, 
craft.  He  has  mighty  armies  imder  his  power.  Principalities  and  powers,  eto. 
2.  This  arch  enemy  sometimes  makes  a  tremendous  onslaught.  "Cometh  in  like  a 
flood."  There  are  times  in  the  human  soul  when  evil  seems  to  rush  on  it  as  an 
overwhelming  torrent.  II.  The  all-sufficient  guardian  of  human  souls. 
"The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him."  The  soul  that 
gives  itself  up  to  Divine  guardianship  has  an  impregnable  fortress.  1.  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is  stronger  than  the  enemy.  2.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  wiser  than 
the  enemy.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  has  an  intellect,  that  overrules,  battles,  sub- 
ordinates all  the  workings  of  the  foe.  He  makes  his  hellish  discord  swell  the  har- 
monies of  the  universe.  3.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  nearer  to  the  soul  than  the 
enemy.  The  soul  does  not  live  in  the  devil,  but  the  soul  lives  in  the  Spirit ;  the  soul 
can  live  without  the  devU,  the  soul  cannot  live  without  the  Spirit.  (1)  How  ^eat 
is  man  1  The  objects  both  of  hellish  and  of  heavenly  interests  and  efforts.  (2)  How 
critical  ig  destiny !  We  are  in  an  enemy's  territory.  {Homilist. )  The  great 
enemy's  opposition  overcome: — I.  The  enemy.  1.  Worldliuess..  (1)  Fashion.  (2) 
Business  cares.  (3)  Pleasures.  2.  Political  sins.  (1)  Party  spirit.  (2)  License  of 
vice.  II.  Character  OF  THE  enemy's  opposition.  1.  Active.  "Shall  come  in," 
etc.  2,  Vehement.  "Like  a  flood."  III.  The  enemy  confronted.  "The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him."  1.  In  the  faithful,  earnest  preach- 
ing of  the  Gospel.  2.  In  the  social  services  of  the  Church.  3.  In  the  godly  example 
of  Christians.  {J.  S.  Cromer. )  The  standard  of  heaven  lifted  up  against  the  powers 
of  hell  and  their  auxiliaries: — I.  An  attack  made  by  hell  and  its  auxiliaries  upon 
the  kingdom  and  interest  of  Christ.  "The  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood." 
Notice — 1.  By  whom  the  attack  is  made.  "The  enemy."  The  Church  of  God,  or 
His  saints  in  this  world,  have  many  enemies.  They  are  expressed  in  the  singular 
number,  because  of  their  unity  in  their  designs  against  Christ  and  His  kingdom, 
and  because  they  attack  under  one  principal  leader  and  commander,  namely,  the 
god  of  this  world,  whose  kingdom  Christ  came  to  overthrow.  2,  The  manner  of 
the  enemy's  attack.  He  comes  in  like  a  flood,  with  great  violence  and  noise,  as 
though  he  would  sweep  away  all  clean  before  him  (Rev.  xii.  15).  It  is  no 
unusual  thing,  in  Scripture,  to  repiesent  the  irruptions  of  hell  and  its  armies  upon 
the  Church  of  God  under  the  notion  of  a  rapid  flood  or  river,  which  threatens  the 
ruin  of  everything  that  stands  in  its  way  (Ps.  xciii.  3).  3.  The  progress  of  the 
enemy,  or  how  far  the  attack  may  be  carried.  He  shall ' '  come  in  " :  he  shall  not  stay 
without  the  walls  or  borders,  like  an  enemy  laying  siege,  and  going  no  further ; 
but  he  shall  "come  in,"  and  "overflow  even  to  the  neck."  Satan  has  a  party 
within  the  Church  to  take  him  by  the  hand  ;  yea,  he  has  a  party  within  the  very 
heart  of  the  elect  to  side  with  him.  4.  The  certainty  of  all  this.  It  is  not 
a  peradventure.  "The  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood.'  II.  The  repulse  given 
to  the  enemy  after  all  his  progress.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a 
standard  agamst  him."  Where  again  we  may  notice — 1.  By  whom  the  repulse  is 
given.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  by  the  might  of  the  Church,  it  is  not 
by  any  created  strength,  but  by  "My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  2.  How 
the  repulse  is  given.     It  ia  by  "lifting  up  a  standard  against  him."    By  the 


CHAP.  LIS.]  ISAIAH,  2S7 

"standard"  I  understand  Christ,  who  is  not  only  a  standard-bearer  "among  ten 
thousand "  (Cant,  v,  10),  but  the  Standard  or  ensign  itself  (Is.  xi.  10).  By  the 
"lifting up"  of  the  standard  I  understand  the  displays  of  the  glory  of  Christ  in 
a  Gospel  dispensation,  accompanied  with  the  efficacy  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  8. 
The  repulse  itself  given  to  the  enemy  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  He  is  "put  to 
flight "  {Marg. ) ;  or,  as  Calvin  reads  it,  the  Spint  of  the  Lord  shall  drive  him  back 
like  the  waters  of  Jordan,  which  were  driven  back  towards  their  fountain,  when 
they  stood  in  the  way  of  Israel's  entry  upon  the  possession  of  the  promised  land. 
4.  The  certainty  of  tnis  promise  of  driving  back  the  enemy — it  is  not  a  may-be, 
but  a  shall-be.  {E.  Erskine.)  The  enemy  of  the  people  ofOod: — I.  Who  is  the 
ENEMY  THAT  COMES  IN  LIKE  A  FLOOD?  The  devil.  Called  sometimes  "the  god  of 
this  world."  1.  Satan  has  a  strong  party  within,  to  wit,  indwelling  sin.  2.  The 
world  without  us  is  another  main  auxiliary  of  heU — the  profits,  pleasures  and  prefer- 
ments of  the  world,  called  by  the  apostle,  "the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the 
OTCS  and  the  pride  of  life."  II.  Why  this  enemy  is  likened  to  a  flood.  1. 
Because  of  the  noise,  made  by  error,  persecution,  defections,  and  violences  of  all 
kinds.  The  poor  soul  is  many  times  put  in  such  confusion,  through  the  noise  of 
these  mighty  waters,  that  it  cannot  hear  the  voice  of  God  either  in  His  Word  or 
providences.  2.  Because  of  their  multitude.  3.  Because  of  their  vmity  in  bending 
all  one  way  in  their  opposition  against  Christ  and  His  cause,  4.  Floods  are  mighty, 
violent  and  rapid  in  their  motion.  5.  They  are  of  a  sweeping  nature,  and  are 
ready  to  hurl  down  everything  that  is  not  well  fixed.  6.  A  flood  is  in  a  continual 
motion ;  so  the  actings  of  sin  and  Satan  and  the  world,  against  Christ  and  His 
cause,  are  incessant.  III.  The  progress  of  the  enemy.  How  far  may  he  come 
in!  1.  The  enemy  may  come  in  within  the  borders  of  Zion  (Mic.  v.  5,  6).  2. 
The  enemy  comes  in,  not  only  Avithin  the  borders,  but  even  into  the  palaces  of  Zion, 
her  public  assemblies  for  divine  worship  (Job  i.  6).  3.  The  enemy  may  come  into 
the  pulpits  of  the  Church  by  an  erroneous  and  corrupt  ministry  (Jude  4).  4.  The 
enemy  may  come  into  the  judicatories  of  the  Church,  which  are  the  thrones  of 
judgment ;  so  far  may  the  enemy  come  in  as  to  influence  those  judicatories  to  join 
hands  with  the  spoilers  and  oppressors  of  the  people  of  God,  instead  of  defending 
them.  5.  The  enemy  may  come  into  the  dwellings  of  Jacob.  The  devil  lodgeth  in 
the  house  of  the  wicked,  and  he  may  come  in  and  work  much  mischief  in  the  house 
of  a  godly  David.  6.  He  may  come  into  your  closets,  and  go  along  with  you  to 
your  knees,  when  you  would  be  alone  with  God.  7.  The  enemy  may  come  into 
your  very  heart.  IV.  The  certainty  of  all  this.  1.  Plain  Scripture  testimony 
(Eev.  ii.  10).  2.  The  state  of  the  believer  in  this  world — a  militant  state.  3.  The 
experience  of  the  saints  of  God  in  all  ages.  V.  Inferences.  1.  This  world  is  not 
the  believer's  resting-place.  If  it  were,  of  all  men  he  would  be  the  most  miserable. 
2.  See,  hence,  why  it  is  the  believer  frequently  expresseth  such  longing  desire  to  be 
away.  3.  See,  hence,  the  need  that  we  have  of  Christ  in  his  kingly  office,  to  subdue, 
restrain,  and  conquer  all  His  and  our  enemies.  4.  See,  hence,  encouragement  to 
poor  tossed  and  tempted  believers.  Though  the  enemy  come  in  like  a  flood,  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him.  {Ibid.)  Encouragement:—' 
1.  Thy  enemies  are  God's  as  well  as  thine.  2.  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  thee :  God 
is  upon  thy  side.  3.  The  enemy  is  already  defeated  and  baffled  by  thy  glorious  Head 
and  General ;  thou  hast  only  a  shattered  enemy  to  grapple  with.  4.  There  are 
many  triumphing  in  glory,  against  whom  the  floods  did  run  with  as  great  violence  as 
they  do  now  against  thee.  5.  The  battle  will  soon  be  over.  6.  The  word  of  com- 
mand is  given  by  the  glorious  General,  "  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  stand  fast 
in  the  faith,  quit  yourselves  like  men,  be  strong."  {Hid.)  The  en^my coming  in  a» 
a  flood : — 1.  He  sometimes  casts  out  a  flood  of  error ;  he  studies  to  corrupt  the 
simplicity  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  turn  men  away  from  the  pure  and  precious  truths  of 
God.  2.  Sometimes  the  enemy  comes  in  with  a  flood  of  open  persecution.  3. 
Sometimes  he  comes  in  with  a  flood  of  manifold  corruptions  upon  the  visible 
Church.  Sometimes  he  studies  to  corrupt  the  worship  of  God  by  superstition, 
mingling  in  ceremonies  of  man's  inventions  with  the  pure  ordinances  of  Divine 
institution.  Sometimes  he  breaks  in  upon  the  government  and  discipline  of  the 
Church,  attempting  to  introduce  schemes  of  government  not  warranted  by  the  Word 
of  God.  Sometimes  he  comes  in  with  a  flood  of  profanity  corrupting  the  lives  of 
professors,  to  the  scandal  of  religion  ;  sometimes  with  a  flood  of  neutrality  and 
mdiSerency  about  the  things  of  God,  under  the  colour  of  moderation.  {Ibid.) 
Temptation  overcome: — I.  The  conflict.  "The  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood." 
It  is  •  startling  metaphor.    Away  up  on  the  hills  there  is  a  lake  or  reservoir  dammed 


S28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ux. 

up.  Suddenly  the  barrier  breaks  ;  and  there  comes  a  great  rush  of  water  down  the 
hulside  upon  the  unsuspecting  valley  beneath,  sweeping  away  before  it  the  hay -ricks, 
the  stables  of  the  cattle,  the  hovels  of  the  poor,  and  the  mansions  of  the  great, 
overwhelming  all  life  in  one  common  watery  grave,  leaving  presently,  when  it  is 
passed,  a  desert  where  there  had  bloomed  a  garden  of  the  Lord.  Evil  is  always 
imminent  just  as  the  reservoir  is  always  threatening.  Not  to  watch  against  it,  not 
sometimes  to  lift  the  eye  to  see  whether  the  barrier  holds,  not  to  know  that  you  are 
in  danger,  is  insensate  foUy.  But  there  are  special  crises  of  temptation  comparable 
to  the  moment  when  the  barrier  breaks  and  the  water  pours  down  upon  the  land. 
So  is  it  with  the  temptation  of  despair.  So  it  is  when  we  are  tempted  to  sudden 
y  passion.  Is  this  not  true  of  the  evil  in  society  around  us  ?  The  dragon  has  been 
pouriag  forth  streams  of  water  to  sweep  away  the  Word  of  God  upon  our  world.  It 
was  so  in  the  days  of  Pagan  persecution  ;  it  was  so  in  the  days  of  mediaeval  darkness  ; 
it  was  so  just  before  Wyclif,  our  morning  star,  and  Luther,  the  minor  sun,  protested 
against  the  evils  of  their  time  ;  it  was  so  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when 
the  parsons  were  dissolute  and  drunken  and  fox-hunting  ;  and  when  Socinian  heresy 
filled  Nonconformist  pulpits,  and  when  the  masses  of  the  people  were  drenched  in 
stupidity  and  sin.  Such  times  as  these,  when  the  enemy  comes  in  like  a  flood,  recur 
with  periodicity  in  the  history  of  men.  We  do  well,  then,  to  confess  our  impotence. 
You  cannot  resist  that  flood  by  your  resolutions,  by  your  pledges,  by  your  en- 
deavours ;  you  may  as  well  throw  up  your  hands  at  once  and  cry  with  Jehoshaphat, 
"We  have  no  might  against  this  great  company  that  cometh  against  us  ;  neither 
know  we  what  to  do  :  but  our  eyes  are  upon  Thee."  At  such  times  we  may  always 
count  upon  God.  II.  The  august  and  lonely  Warrior  depicted  in  the  text.  It 
would  seem  almost  in  this  chapter  as  though  He  was  like  a  warrior  resting.  He  has 
put  off  His  helmet  and  His  breastplate,  and  divested  Himself  of  His  garments.  But 
suddenly  He  sees  the  encroachment  of  the  enemy  over  the  lonely  spirit  or  over  the 
world.  He  steps  forward  and  wins.  He  sees  that  there  is  none  to  help  ;  He  wonders 
that  there  is  no  intercessor,  therefore  His  arm  brings  salvation.  Mark  that  word — 
the  arm  of  the  living  Christ  brings  salvation  to  man  when  no  one  else  can  help  him. 
III.  Our  fatal  limitations.  Why  is  it  that  we  are  not  always  conquerors  ?  The 
answer  comes  in  verses  1-3.  There  is  some  fatal  hindrance  in  your  life  that  saps 
Christ's  power.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  standard  uplifted  in  the  face  of  the  foe: — 
I.  We  shall  take  the  general  statement  of  the  text  as  referring  to  the  conflict 
WHICH  IS  raging  in  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  INNER  MAN.  1.  It  IS  Well  for  iis  distinctly 
to  understand  the  position  of  the  Christian.  This  is  not  the  land  of  owe  triumpli, 
neither  is  this  the  period  of  our  rest.  There  is  one  whose  name  is  called  "the 
enemy,"  the  "evil  one  "  ;  he  is  the  leader  among  your  adversaries  ;  hating  God  with 
all  his  might,  he  hates  that  which  he  sees  of  God  in  you.  2.  The  text  leads  us  to 
look  for  seasons  when  this  position  will  be  more  than  ordinarily  perilous.  3.  It  will 
be  well  for  you  who  know  the  spiritual  conflict  to  be  thoroughly  conscious  of  your 
own  utter  impotence  against  this  terrific  danger.  What  can  a  man  do  against  a 
flood  ?  4.  The  text,  after  having  plainly  bidden  us  thoroughly  realize  our  position, 
and  after  suggesting  to  us  our  weakness,  bids  us  turn  to  oui-  only  help,  a  Helper 
mysterious  but  Divine.  5.  We  have  then  to  fall  back  as  to  our  present  difficulty, 
whatever  it  may  be,  upon  spiritual  power.  If  the  battle  of  salvation  were  to  be 
fought  by  man  alone,  then  you  and  I  might  throw  down  sword  and  shield  and 
despairingly  give  it  all  up,  but  when  we  understand  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  laid 
bare  His  holy  arm  to  save  us,  we  are  not  afraid  of  the  worst  moment  in  the  fight. 
6.  Let  us  now  take  two  or  three  instances  in  which  this  great  truth  is  conspicuous. 
This  is  true  of  a  soul  under  conviction  of  sin.  After  conversion  it  frequently  happens, 
and  especially  to  those  who  have  been  guilty  of  gross  sin  before  conversion,  that 
temptation  comes  in  with  unusual  force.  Another  case  sometimes  occurs  to  a 
Christian,  when  it  is  not  so  much  enticement  to  sin  as  temptation  to  doubt.  II. 
Let  us  now  turn  to  the  holt  war  without  us.  The  Christian  Chiu-ch  is  too 
conspicuous  an  object  of  Divine  love  not  to  be  the  butt  of  the  malice  of  the  powers 
of  darkness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  In  time  of  flood: — These  heartening  words  were 
epoken  to  exiles  who  were  preparing  to  return  to  the  homeland.  When  they  lifted 
their  eyes  to  the  possibilities  of  return  they  seemed  to  gaze  upon  range  after  range  of 
accumulating  diflBculties  which  would  obstruct  their  journey  home.  As  often  as  the 
prophet  proclaimed  their  deliverance  they  proclaimed  their  fears.  Their  fears  were 
laid  one  by  one,  but  as  soon  as  one  was  laid  another  arose  !  The  enemies  on  the 
right  hand  and  the  left  hand,  what  about  them  ?  The  hostile  peoples  will  accept 
their  chance,  and  will  come  down  upon  the  returning  oompany  in  destructive  array  1 


CHAP,  ux.]  ISAIAH.  329 

"When  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a 
standard  a,gainst  him."    "We,  too,  are  exiles  returning  to  the  homeland.     "We,  too, 
have  been  in  the  dark  realms  of  captivity,  and  by  His  redeeming  grace  our  eyes  have 
been  lifted  toward  the  better  country.     And  we,  too,  are  full  of  uncertainties  and 
fears.     There  is  a  desert  to  traverse,  a  wilderness  to  cross,  waters  to  pass  through, 
mountains  to  climb,  and  we  know  not  how  we  may  safely  reach  our  journey's  end. 
And  particularly  are  we  beset  by  the  enemy,  who  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  roara 
down  upon  our  path.     But  if  we  have  the  fears,  ours,  too,  are  the  promises.     Between 
the  enemy  and  ourselves  there  shall  be  erected  the  standard  of  the  Lord.     1.  "  "When  > 
the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood."    The  figure  is  surely  taken  from  the  river-  \ 
beds  of  their  native  land.     They  had  looked  upon  the  dry,  bleached  ravines  in  time  I 
of  drought,  when  scarcely  a  rivulet  lisped  down  its  rocky  course.     And  then  the  rain 
had  fallen  on  the  hills,  or  the  snow  had  melted  upon  the  distant  mountains,  and  the 
waters  had  torn  down  like  a  flood.      I  have  picnicked  away  up  in  the  solitudes  of  the 
higher  Tees,  when  there  was  only  a  handful  of  water  passing  along,  a  little  stream 
which  even  a  chUd  could  cross.     And  once  I  saw  what  the  natives  call  the  "roll" 
coming  away  in  the  distance.     Great  rains  had  fallen  upon  the  heights,  and  this  was 
their  issue ;  in  a  moment  the  quiet  stream  became  a  roaring  torrent,  and  shouted 
along  in  thunderous  flood.  _  That,  I  think,  is  the  figure  of  my  text. .  Now,  what  are 
some  of  these  flood  times  in  life  when  the  enemy  comes  against  us  in  overwhelming 
power  ?    (1)  There  is  the  flood  of  passion.     Floods  always  destroy  something  valuable  i 
and  beautiM.     And  so  it  is  with  the  flood  of  passion  that  sweeps  through  the  soul.  ] 
It  always  damages  the  life  through  which  it  flows.     Some  seed  of  the  kingdom,  just  I 
beginning  to  germinate,  is  washed  out  of  the  ground.      Some  tender  growth  ia 
impaired  or  destroyed,  some  little  plant  of  meekness,  or  gentleness,  or  faith,  or  hope,  I 
or  love.     Even  onlookers  can  freq^uently  see  the  ruin  ;  and  to  the  Lord  the  finiitful 
J  place  must  become  a  desert.     (2)  Sometimes  the  flood  is  in  the  form  of  a  great  / 
sorrow,  and  we  are  engulfed  by  it.     There  is  a  sorrow  appointed  of  the  Almighty, 
but  it  is  never  ordained  to  hurt  or  destroy.     And  yet  how  often  this  particular  flood, 
rushing  into  a  life,  works  havoc  with  spiritual  things.     In  one  of  our  churches  a 
little  whUe  ago  a  flood  occurred,  and  the  two  things  that  were  injured  were  the  heat- 
ing apparatus  and  the  organ.     I  could  not  but  think  of  the  destructiveness  wrought 
in  the  soul  by  the  gathering  waters  of  sorrow.     "Very  frequently  they  put  out  the 
fires  of  geniality,  and  they  silence  the  music  and  the  song.     And  so  it  is  with  all  the 
perilous  waters  that  arise  in  human  life.     (3)  Sometimes  the  flood  gathers  from  a 
multitudinous  contribution  of  petty  cares.     Now,   whenever  a  flood  in  the  life 
damages  a  life  the  work  ia  the  work  of  the  devil.     "When  I  am  tempted  into  over- 
flowing passion,  or  into  excessive  sorrow,  or  into  overwhelming  care,  it  is  the  work 
of  the  enemy.     I  think  that  if  we  coiild  realize  this  we  should  be  greatly  helped  in 
these  perilous  and  frequently  recurring  seasons.     If  we  could  only  practise  our  eyes 
so  as  to  see  in  the  tempting  circumstance  the  face  of  the  evil  one  we  should  be  less 
inclined  to  the  snare.    2.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will  lift  up  a  standard  against  I 
him."    King  Canute  had  his  regaf  chair  carried  down  to  the  flowing  tide,  and  he  I 
commanded  the  waters  to  retreat.     The  waters  paid  no  heed,  and  the  mighty  flood  I 
advanced.     But  our  King  raises  His  standard  against  the  threatening  flood,  and  the  » 
retreat  is  absolutely  assured.     Have  you  noticed  that  wonderfully  suggestive  passage 
in  the  Book  of  Kevelation  where  a  promise  is  made  of  help  in  the  time  of  flood? 
"And  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a  flood  after  the  woman,  that  he 
might  cause  her  to  be  carried  away  at  the  flood.    And  the  earth  helped  the  woman, 
and  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed  up  the  flood  which  the  dragon  cast 
out  of  his  mouth."    That  great  promise  has  been  aoundantly  confirmed  in  countless 
lives.     Even  the  earth  itself  is  our  ally  in  contending  with  the  foe.    The  beauties  of 
nature  will  help  us  to  contend  with  the  forces  of  evil  desire.     But  we  have  more  than 
nature  as  our  defence  ;  we  have  the  Lord  of  nature,  the  Lord  in  nature,  not  so  much 
the  supernatural  as  the  Spirit  who  pervades  nature  and  all  things.     And  so,  too,  it 
is  in  the  flood  times  of  sorrow.     The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will  engage  for  us,  "lest  we 
be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow. "    Have  I  not  seen  sorrow  come  into  a  life, 
and  it  has  been  entirely  a  minister  of  good  and  never  of  ill  ?    The  devil  has  not  got 
hold  of  it,  and  used  it  as  a  destructive  flood.     It  has  been  a  minister  of  irrigation 
rather  than  destruction,  and  in  the  moist  place  of  tears  beautiful  ferns  have  grown, 
the  exquisite  graces  of  compassion  and  long-suffering  and  peace.     "  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  will  lift  up  a  standard  1 "    "Well,  then,  let  Him  do  it.    Do  not  let  us  attempt 
to  do  it  for  ourselves.    Let  us  hand  it  over  to  Him.     "  Undertake  Thou  for  me,  0 
Lord."    The  life  of  faith  just  consists  in  s  quiet,  conscious,  realizing  trust  in  the 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAy.iax, 

all-willing  and  all-powerful  Spirit  of  God.  {J.  R.  Jowett,  M.A.)  An  overpowering 
manifestation  of  God : — We  explain  the  passage  thos :  Jehovah  wiU  come  like  a  river, 
one  hemmed  in,  which  a  wind  of  Jehovah  {i.  e.  a  violent  tempest)  rolls  along  in 
rapid  course.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  np  a  standard 
against  him. — The  opposing  standard: — I.  The  Standard-bearer.  "The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord."  II.  The  Standard.  Christ.  He  is  fitly  resembled  to  a  standard  on 
the  following  accounts.  1.  The  standard  is  a  signal  of  war.  When  Christ  descended 
to  this  lower  world,  and  came  upon  an  expedition  of  war  against  the  god  of  this 
world,  and  his  usurped  empire  over  the  children  of  men,  this  war  was  proclaimed 
(Gen.  iii.  15).  2.  A  standard  ia  a  signal  of  peace.  When  peace  is  proclaimed  the 
white  flag  or  ensign  is  displayed.  As  the  appearance  of  God  in  the  nature  of  man 
was  a  signal  of  war  against  hell,  death  and  sin  ;  so  it  was  a  signal  of  peace  to  man 
upon  earth.  3.  A  standard  is  an  ensign  of  victory.  So  a  risen  and  living  Redeemer 
is  a  signal  of  His  victory  over  the  powers  of  hell.  4.  A  standard  is  a  signal  of 
gathering.  When  the  standard  is  set  up,  the  army  is  to  gather,  volunteers  are  to  be 
enlisted.  The  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh,  and  the  revelation  of  Him  in  the 
Gospel,  is  a  signal  to  lost  sinners  to  shake  off  the  tyrannical  yoke  of  sin  and  Satan, 
that  they  may,  under  Christ's  conduct,  recover  their  ancient  liberty  (Gen.  xlix.  10 ; 
Is.  xi.  10).  5.  A  standard  is  for  direction  and  order ;  when  the  army  is  to  march, 
the  standard  goes  before,  and  the  soldiers  know  whereaway  to  move  by  the  motion  of 
their  standard.  III.  The  lifting  ttp  of  this  blessed  Standard.  1.  The  flrst 
uplifting  of  it  was  in  the  eternal  counsel  of  Heaven,  before  ever  the  foundation  of  the 
world  was  laid  (Prov.  viii.  23).  2.  It  was  lifted  up  in  the  first  promise  (Gen. 
iii.  15).  3.  In  tiie  actual  incarnation,  obedience  and  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  4. 
By  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  and  His  exaltation  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  high.  5.  In  the  dispensation  of  the  everlasting  Gospel.  6.  When 
there  is  any  remarkable  appearance  for  Christ  and  His  cause,  in  a  Church  or  nation, 
in  opposition  to  any  of  the  works  of  the  devil.  7.  When  God  in  His  providence 
breaks  and  baffles  wicked  and  blood-thirsty  persecutors,  who  were  making  havoc  of 
His  Church,  granting  them  respite  and  deliverance  from  trouble.  8.  This  royal 
Standard  is  lifted  up  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  in  the  morning  of  conversion,  when 
through  discoveries  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  the  soul  is  determined  to  make  a  surrender 
of  its  heart,  and  to  lift  up  the  everlasting  doors,  that  this  King  of  glory  may  come 
in.  9.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  lifts  up  the  Standard  in  every  renewed  manifestation 
and  discovery  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  especially  after  a  dark  night  of  desertion,  tempt- 
ation, and  despondency.      IV.  Whence  is  it  that  the  lifting  up  of  thb 

STANDARD,  OR  THE  DISPLAYING  OF  THE  OLORT  OF  CHRIST  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THB 

Lord,  gives  a  repulse  to  the  enemy,  or  drives  him  back  ?  1.  The  displaying 
of  the  glory  of  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  sets  faith  in  a  lively  exercise,  which 
is  the  great  engine  whereby  we  are  enabled  to  overcome  Satan,  the  world,  and  all  our 
enemies.  2.  By  displays  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  love  ia  inflamed.  3.  Displays  of 
the  glory  of  Chjist  inspire  the  soul  with  courage  and  strength  to  oppose  the  enemy, 
when  he  comes  in  like  a  flood.  4.  Displays  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  by  the  Word  and 
^irit  of  the  Lord,  dispirit  the  enemy,  though  coming  in  like  a  flood.  {E.  Erskine.) 
The  Church's  power: — See,  hence,  what  it  is  that  makes  a  Ohuroh  "terrible  as  an 
army  with  banners,"  to  the  powers  of  hell,  and  the  wicked  of  the  world.  It  is  not 
carnal  wisdom  and  policy  ;  it  is  not  a  yielding  to  the  humours  of  men  in  the  matters 
of  Christ ;  it  is  not  a  squaring  our  conduct  according  to  the  wisdom  of  this  world ; 
no,  it  is  the  presence  of  the  Spiiit  of  the  Lord,  and  a  following  the  standard  of  the 
Word,  which  He  has  given  for  "a  lamp  unto  cor  feet,  and  a  light  onto  car  paths." 
(Ibid.) 

Yen.  20,  21.  And  the  Bedeemer  shall  come  to  Zion. — The  Bedeemer  coming  to  Eia 
Chv/rch: — I.  The  Person  of  whom  the  Father  speaks,  and  His  coming.  1. 
"The  Redeemer,"  the  kinsman,  who,  by  assuming  our  nature,  is  nearly  related  to  us 
(Heb.  ii.  11,  17).  To  Him,  as  our  kinsman,  the  right  of  redemption  belongs.  2. 
"Shall  come  to  Zion,  and  unto  them  that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob.'  The 
coming  which  is  here  spoken  of  is  for  the  above  purposes,  and  not  chiefly  His  coming 
in  the  flesh,  which  does  not  so  well  suit  the  context.  It  is  His  spiritual  coming 
which  is  meant ;  His  coming  in  His  kingdom.  To  the  Jews,  as  a  people,  to  ' '  turn  awaj 
ungodliness  from  Jacob,"  as  the  LXX  read  it,  and  St.  Paul  in  Rom.  xi.  26.  To  His 
Church  in  general,  often  called  Zion,  Jacob,  and  Israel ;  to  introduce  the  millennium, 
and  spread  religion  through  all  the  world  (Eev.  xix.  11-16).  To  the  hearts  of  His 
people  (John  xiv.  18,  19,  23  ;  Rev.  iii.  20).    Then  have  W9  "  Christ  in  ns  the  hope 


OBJUP.iz.]  ISAIAH.  831 

of  glor^ ; "  Ohript  "dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  faith  "  (Eph.  iii.  14,  17 ;  Gal.  ii.  20, 
21).  lI.  The  alessings  conseqttent  on  His  coming  in  these  senses.  "  My 
Spirit  that  is  upon  Thee,  and  My  words  which  I  have  put  in  Thy  mouth,  shall  not 
depart  out  of  Thy  mouth,"  etc.  These  are  the  words  oi  the  Father  to  the  Redeemer. 
III.  The  persons  to  whom  these  blessings  abe  promised  ;  the  way  in  which 

THEY  ARE  OBTAINED  ;   AND  THE  CERTAINTY   OF  OBTAINING  THEM   IN  THAT  WAY. 

They  are  promised  to  those  that  are  "in  Jacob,"  members  of  Christ's  Church.  To 
those  that  "  turn  from  transgression."  To  those  who  are  the  "  seed  "  of  Christ  by 
faith  (Gal.  iii.  9,  26).  The  certainty  of  obtaining  them  may  be  found  in  God  8 
Covenant.    (/.  Benson.  D.D.) 


OHAPTEB  IX 


Vers.  1-12.  Arise,  shine;  for  thy  light  is  come. — Ths  glory  tf  Gts  spiritual 

Israel : — Having  repeatedly  and  fuUy  shown  that  the  national  pre-eminence  of  Israel 
was  not  to  be  perpetual,  that  the  loss  of  it  was  the  natural  consequence  and  righteous 
retribution  of  iniquity,  and  that  their  loss  did  not  involve  the  destruction  of  the  true 
Church  or  spiritual  Israel,  the  prophet  now  proceeds  to  show  that,  to  the  latter,  the 
approaching  change  would  be  a  glorious  and  blessed  one.  {J.  A.  Alexander.) 
Isaiah  Ix.  is  the  spiritual  counterpart  of  a  typical  Eastern  day,  with  the  dust  laid  and 
the  darts  taken  out  of  the  sunbeams, — a  typical  Eastern  day  in  the  sudden  splendour 
of  its  dawn,  the  completeness  and  apparent  permanence  of  its  noon,  the  spaciousness 
it  reveals  on  sea  and  land,  and  the  barbaric  profusion  of  life,  which  its  strong  light 
is  sufficient  to  flood  with  glory.  {Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Sunrise  in  tJie  East: — 
In  the  East  the  sim  does  not  rise ;  the  word  is  weak  for  an  arrived  almost  too 
sudden  for  twilight.  In  the  East  the  sun  leaps  above  the  horizon.  You  do  not  feel 
that  he  is  coming,  but  that  he  is  come.  TMs  first  verse  is  suggested  by  the  swiftness 
with  which  he  bursts  upon  an  Eastern  city,  and  the  shrouded  form  does  not,  as  in 
our  twilight,  slowly  unwrap  itself,  but  "shines"  at  once,  aU  plates  and  points  of 
glory.  Then  the  figure  yields  :  for  Jerusalem  is  not  merely  one  radiant  point  in  a 
world  equally  lighted  by  the  sun,  but  is  herself  Jehovah's  unique  luminary.  {Ibid.) 
"  Thy  light  is  come  " : — The  perfect  tenses  are  used  from  the  ideal  standpoint  of  the 
future.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Light  breaking  on  the  mmmtains: — ^Any  one  who 
has  spent  much  time  among  mountains  will  appreciate  the  imagery.  Around  is 
absolute  blackness  ;  the  valleys  are  in  gloom  ;  trees,  rivers,  towns  have  been  obscured  ; 
nothing  is  visible  but  that  dim  shaft  of  granite  rising  into  the  sUence  of  the  sky. 
Suddenly  we  may  imagine  a  spirit's  voice  crying,  ' '  The  light  has  come. "  Instantly 
there  is  a  glow  on  the  mountain — trees,  rivers,  towns  begin  to  take  shape  ;  the  whole 
world  has  changed.  The  point  to  be  observed  here  is  that  the  light  was  from  God. 
The  city  was  exhorted  to  be  in  a  condition  in  which  the  glory  of  God  might  be  reflected 
from  it.  The  chapter  describes  the  degradation  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  the  eifeot 
of  the  light  on  other  peoples,  how  they  would  be  attracted  toward  it ;  and  contains 
near  the  end  this  outburst  of  victorious  joy :  "The  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an  ever- 
lasting light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory."  This  prophecy  was  never  literally  fulfilled, 
and  yet  hundreds  of  years  later  a  light  did  pour  itself  upon  Mount  Zion ;  it 
shone  on  the  thickest  darkness  of  the  nations,  and  imto  it  ever  since  the  people 
have  been  attracted.  That  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  Christ.  He  is  the  Light. 
(A.  H.  Bradford,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  era: — I.  The  Gospel  era  is  distinguished 
BY  A  special  revelation  OF  DiviNE  GLORY.  The  light  that  has  come  to  the 
world  is  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  What  is  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  I  We  take  the 
answer  which  the  Eternal  gave  to  the  request  of  Moses,  "  I  beseech  Thee,  show  me 
Thy  glory."  The  reply  was  not,  "  I  wiU  show  thee  the  infinitude  of  My  possessions, 
the  boundlessness  of  My  dominions,  the  almightiness  of  My  power,  the  immeasurable 
depths  of  My  wisdom,"  but,  "I  wiU  cause  all  My  goodness  to  pass  before  thee." 
The  Gospel  is  a  wonderful  revelation  of  God's  goodness,  in  the  form  of  amazing  mercy 
towards  a  guilty  world.  1.  The  glory  of  His  goodness  is  seen  in  the  gift  of  His 
Son.  "  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  etc.  2.  The  glory  of  His  goodness  is  seen  in 
the  entire  history  of  His  Son.  All  the  compassion,  the  tender  love  and  mercy, 
which  Ohrist  displayed  when  on  earth,  were  the  reflected  raja  of  Infinite  goodness. 


832  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  UK. 

II.  The  Gospel  eba  imposes  a  special  obligation  upon  the  world.     "Arise, 
shine."    1.  Arise.     Do  not  sleep  while  the  rays  of  Divine  goodness  are  streaming  on 

Jou.  Arise  to  thought,  to  penitence,  to  gratitude,  to  worship.  Arise,  discharge  the 
uties  and  enjoy  the  advantages  of  a  day  flooded  with  the  sun  of  mercy.  2.  Shine. 
Reflect  the  rays  of  this  goodness.  Let  this  love  of  God  be  so  "  shed  abroadin  thy 
head;,"  that  it  stream  foith  its  radiance  in  thy  every  action,  and  bless  the  circle  in 
which  thou  livest.  Do  not  be  as  an  opaque  body,  obstructing  the  rays  and  throwing 
a  shadow  over  thy  sphere  ;  but  be  a  mirror,  to  reflect  every  falling  beam.  {Romilisti) 
Christ  the  light  of  the  world : — The  words  of  the  text  comprise  an  exhortation  to 
"  arise  "  and  "  shine  "  ;  and  a  reason  to  enforce  it, — "thy  light  is  come,  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee. "  I.  The  reason.  There  is  such  a  connection  between 
ignorance  and  darkness,  that  the  one  is  constantly  put  for  the  other  in  Scripture. 
If  ignorance  is  justly  termed  darkness,  so  knowledge  is  properly  compared  to  light. 
At  the  dawn  of  day,  the  traveller  takes  fresh  courage ;  he  perceives  the  path  in 
which  he  should  go,  and  proceeds  on  it  rejoicing.  In  the  same  manner  religious 
knowledge  enlightens  a  man  as  to  his  true  business  in  this  life,  and  sets  him  to  work 
out  his  salvation.  And  Christ  is  the  Sun  which  sends  forth  this  religious  knowledge. 
1.  The  sun,  when  it  rises  in  the  morning,  dispels  all  clouds  and  mists  and  dews,  and 
shows  every  object  in  its  true  colours.  So,  without  that  light  which  Christ  has 
furnished  by  His  Gospel,  we  cannot  perceive  those  truths  which  it  is  most  needful 
we  should  perceive.  2.  The  s\m,  when  it  shines  above  us,  does  more  than  enlighten 
every  object.  It  nourishes,  it  invigorates.  Without  it,  the  sickly  plant  droops  and 
decays,  and  brings  no  fruit  to  perfection.  And  the  effect  of  the  sun  upon  outward 
nature  is  a  striking  emblem  of  the  influence  of  Christ  upon  the  heart.  In  Him  is 
life,  vigorous,  spiritual  life  ;  and  the  Ufe  is  the  light  of  men.  II.  The  exhortation. 
"Arise,  shine.  1.  When  the  sun  rises,  and  scatters  the  mists  of  night,  he  gives  a 
summons  to  mankind  to  rise  also,  and  set  themselves  to  the  discharge  of  their  various 
duties.  In  the  same  manner,  the  appearance  of  Christ  in  the  world  is  a  summons  to 
all  who  hear  of  His  revelation,  to  "  suise."  To  awake  out  of  the  sleep  of  ignorance, 
the  sleep  of  thoughtlessness,  the  sleep  of  sin,  which  are,  in  truth,  the  sleep  of  death  ; 
and  to  apply  themselves,  before  "the  night  cometh  in  which  no  man  can  work,"  to 
the  business  which  God  has  appointed  them  to  perform  both  for  themselves  and  for 
Him.  2.  The  text  requires  that  you  not  only  "arise,"  but  that  you  "shine." 
That  Christ  has  risen  in  the  world  is  nothing,  unless  He  illuminates  your  hearts  also. 
When  the  sun  is  up,  and  shines  brightly  upon  any  object,  that  which  before  was 
dark  shines  too  ;  receives  a  brilliancy  not  its  own,  not  natural  to  it.  So  is  it  likewise, 
when  Christ  Uluminates  the  heart.  It  takes  a  new  colouring,  a  light  which  by 
nature  it  had  not.  Enlightened  by  the  Gospel,  the  simple  becomes  wise,  and  acquires 
the  knowledge  which  is  most  truly  valuable — the  knowledge  of  duty  towards  God 
and  man.  Enlightened  by  the  Gospel,  he  who  was  selfish  and  covetous  is  made 
liberal,  and  abounds  in  the  feelings  of  brotherly  kindness,  and  in  the  works  of  charity. 
Enlightened  by  the  Gospel,  he  who  was  sensual  becomes  temperate  and  pure,  and 
" lets  his  moderation  be  known  unto  all  men."  The  " lover  of  this  world '  becomes 
a  "lover  of  God,"  and  "sets  his  aS"ections  on  things  above."  In  this  way  the  light 
which  has  shone  upon  them  is  reflected  in  their  conduct,  and  is  visible  in  their  whole 
charswter.  The  sun  shines ;  but  some  objects  stUl  continue  dark  and  gloomy. 
Between  them  and  the  sun's  light  other  objects  interpose,  and  prevent  his  beams 
from  shining  upon  them.  And  so  it  is  in  the  world  of  grace.  {J.  B.  Sumner,  M.A.) 
The  dawning  of  God's  light  and  its  awakening  call : — I.  The  dawning  of  the  light. 
"Thy  light  is  come."  If  the  light  is  always  near,  but  the  darkness  is  in  man's 
heart  and  the  blindness  in  his  soul,  we  have  to  ask  how  the  darkness  passes  away, 
and  to  point  out  the  manner  in  which  the  glory  of  God  dawns  upon  it,  in  order  that 
we  may  see  why  its  dawning  is  a  summons  to  arise  and  shine.  There  are  three 
requisites  for  its  dawning — three  stages  in  the  history  of  the  soul's  enlightenment. 
1.  Spiritual  penitence.  2.  Spiritual  penitence  must  pass  into  spiritual  love. 
3.  Spiritual  love  necessitates  spiritual  prayer.  II.  The  awakening  call.  "Arise, 
shine."  That  summons  is  the  inevitable  result  of  the  dawning  of  the  light.  When 
God  is  felt  to  be  near  a  man  thus — in  penitence,  love,  and  prayer,  that  man  is 
imperatively  bound  to  reflect  the  glory  which  has  risen  in  his  heart ;  to  bear  witness 
of  the  light  which  has  pierced  and  transformed  his  soul.  Let  us  again  observe  that 
this  is  also  based  on  a  great  principle,  viz.  the  deepest  emotion  in  a  man's  nature 
must  reveal  itself  in  his  life.  I  proceed  to  show  the  wav  in  which  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  thus  manifests  itself  in  life.  1.  In  the  majesty  of  holiness.  2.  In  the  beauty 
of  unselfishness.    8.  In  the  eanxestness  of  your  efforts  for  men.    {JE,  L.  Evil,  B.A.)> 


CHAP.  IX.]  ISAIAH.  833 

The  everlasting  light: — I.  The  voice  speaks  to  individttals.  How  few  even 
realize  their  possibilities.  We  have  had  religious  training,  we  have  been  taught  to 
consider  all  questions  as  they  appear  in  relation  to  God,  we  have  grown  up  in  a 
religious  atmosphere,  and  yet  the  consciousness  that  no  man  is  a  true  man  until  he 
reflects  Jesus  Christ  in  words,  business,  pleasures  and  thoughts  is  dim,  and  not  even 
desired.  The  light  has  come  ;  what  does  it  find  ?  It  finds  men  absorbed  and 
heedless,  thinking  only  of  what  thev  can  keep  for  a  little  while  at  best ;  not  caring 
for  their  fellow-men  ;  selfish  and  as  impervious  to  higher  motives  as  a  granite  rock  to 
sunshine.  The  true  glory  of  a  man  is  to  reflect  Christ.  II.  The  voice  of  thk 
PBOPHET  reaches  THE  Chuech,  both  local  and  universal.  The  Church  realizes  its 
true  mission  only  as  it  reflects  the  Divine  light,  which  means,  simply,  realizes  the  life 
which  was  in  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  Church  should  reflect  Jesus  in  its  worship.  With 
Him  worship  was  something  essential  and  vital.  Before  every  great  act  of  His 
career  He  went  apart  from  men  to  pray.  The  sources  of  His  ufe  were  in  God. 
Worship  and  prayer  are  the  conduits  along  which  flow  streams  of  spiritual  vitalitv. 
Is  the  Church  a  praying  Church  ?  Then  it  is  continuing  Christ's  work.  2.  The 
Church  lives  to  repeat  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  3.  In  like  manner  the  Church  should 
reflect  Jesus  in  the  service  of  humanity.  It  lives  to  continue  His  ministry.  The 
most  hospitable  place  in  every  community  ought  to  be  the  Church  of  Christ.  Has 
any  one  a  OTief  ?  Let  him  go  to  the  Church.  Are  any  lonely  ?  Let  them  go  to  the 
Church.  Have  any  disgraced  themselves  and  their  friends?  Let  them  seek  the 
Church  and  its  help.  But  will  all  these  various  classes  find  there  a  welcome  ?  Not 
only  within  its  walls,  but  outside  also  the  Church  should  serve  humanity  in  the 
spirit  of  Christ.  III.  This  cry  of  the  prophet  comes  to  nations.  Nations,  as 
well  as  individuals  and  Churches,  exist  to  continue  the  Incarnation.  That  nation 
has  not  begun  to  realize  its  possibilities  which  has  not  learned  that  its  superlative 
privilege  is  the  manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ.  What  do  I  mean !  That  the  function 
of  government  is  not  only  the  protection  of  the  people,  but  the  service  of  humanity. 
John  Milton  truly  said  that  the  State  is  only  a  huge  man.  In  the  vision  of  the 
prophet  when  the  light  broke  upon  the  sides  of  Mount  Zion  the  nations  saw  the  glory 
and!^  were  attracted  by  it  (vers.  3,  14).  The  most  beautifol  thing  in  this  world  is  the 
character  of  Jesus  Christ ;  nothing  else  so  wins  men.  {A.  H.  Bradford,  D.D.) 
"Arise,  shine/" — I.  To  whom  the  charge  is  addressed.  To  the  Church  of 
Christ.  This  is  evident  from  the  context.  Further,  it  appears  from  the  nature  of 
the  charge  that  it  can  apply  only  to  the  Church.  There  is  none  else  on  earth  capable 
of  at  once  fulfilling  the  charge.  The  world  cannot,  for  it  is  essentially  dark — "dark- 
ness covers  the  earth."  The  Church  is  compared  to  reflected  and  artificial  lights. 
Christ  enlightens  the  world  through  His  Church.  II.  The  charge  itself.  This 
is  a  twofold  charge  implying  two  distinct  acts.  1.  "  Arise."  This  implies  that  the 
Church  is  in  the  meantime  in  a  prostrate  condition  ;  her  place  is  in  the  dust.  This 
may  be  partly  in  penitence.  It  may  indicate  a  state  of  affliction  and  mourning ; 
the  Church  may  be  sitting  in  sackcloth.  But  chiefly  it  implies  a  state  of  sloth, 
worldliness,  carnality.  Whatever  be  the  cause  of  this  prostration  the  Church  is 
directed  to  rise  from  the  dust  now.  2.  "Shine."  "Christ  shall  give  thee  light" 
for  this  very  purpose  ;  not  merely  to  enlighten  yourself,  to  impart  life  and  joy  to  you, 
but  that  you  may  "shine,"  give  light  to  the  world.  And  this  applies  both  to  the 
Church  as  a  whole  and  to  the  members  of  the  Church  individually.  There  are  two 
ways  in  which  those  who  have  been  enlightened  by  Christ  may  give  light.  On  the 
one  hand,  by  simply  shining,  each  one  in  his  sphere,  as  a  separate  light,  perhaps  in 
the  midst  of  darkness.  On  the  other  hand,  by  kindling  other  lights.  III.  Thb 
ARGUMENT  BY  WHICH  IT  IS  ENFORCED.  "Thy  light  is come,"  etc.  The  Church  has 
no  independent  light  of  her  own,  cannot  shine  of  herself ;  and  so,  such  an  encourage- 
ment as  this  is  needed.  "Thy  light" — this  must  mean  Christ  Himself,  for  He  is 
the  light  of  the  Church.  "Is  come" — Christ  did  not  come  till  seven  or  eight 
hundred  years  after  this  prophecy  was  delivered.  But  the  prophet  refers  to  Gospel 
times.  Accordingly  the  Church  did  arise  and  shine  at  that  time  more  brightly  and 
auspiciously  than  she  had  ever  done  before.  (C.  G.  Scott. )  An  arousing  call : — There 
are  some  Christian  men  who  have  wasted  a  large  part  of  their  lives  for  want  of  some- 
body or  something  to  wake  them  up.  There  is  more  evil  wrought  in  the  world  by 
want  of  thought  than  by  downright  malice,  and  there  is  more  good  left  undone 
through  want  of  thought  than  through  any  aversion  to  the  doing  of  good.  Some 
Christians  appear  to  have  been  bom  in  the  land  of  slumber,  and  they  continually  live 
in  their  native  country  of  dreams.  They  rub  their  eyes  occasionally,  and  suppose 
themselves  to  be  wide  awake ;  but  they  are  in  the  Enchanted  Ground,  and,  though 


884  THF  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ut. 

they  know  it  not,  they  are  little  better  than  sleep-walkers  the  most  of  their  days. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Shining  Christians: — T.  To  God's  own  people  this  is  my  filst 
message,  remember  YOtrB  privilege.  Your  light  has  come.  1.  Recollect  out  of 
•what  darkness  that  light  has  delivered  you.  2.  This  light,  which  God  has  given 
yon,  is  His  own  glory.  "And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee."  Byron 
speaks  of  God's  face  being  mirrored  in  the  sea  ;  but  there  is  not  space  enough  for  the 
face  of  Deity  to  be  fully  reflected  in  the  broad  Atlantic,  or  in  all  the  oceans  put 
together.  The  image  of  God  is  to  be  fuUy  seen  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  nowhere  else  ; 
for  there  you  behold  attributes  which  Creation  cannot  display.  3.  There  is  also  this 
blessed  thing  to  be  said  about  this  light ;  you  will  never  lose  it  (ver.  20).  II.  I  want 
TO  ROTTSE  YOTT  TO  SERVICE.  "Arise,  shine;  for,"  etc.  Since  your  light  has  come, 
shine — 1.  By  holy  cheerftilness.  2.  By  a  gracious  godliness.  3.  By  zealous 
earnestness.  4.  By  a  secret  bravery.  IIL  I  want  to  rally  you  to  this  shining  bt 
ONE  OR  TWO  arguments.     1.  By  the  world's  great  need  (ver.  2).     2.  Because  of  the 

freat  results  that  wiU  surely  come  of  it  (ver.  3).     3.  Because  of  the  great  blessing  it  will 
ring  to  the  Church  (ver.  18,  etc.).     4.  "  That  I  may  be  glorified  "  (ver.  21).     {.Ibid.) 
The  Epiphany :  Christ  manifested: — I.  The  state  of  the  world  before  the 

LIGHT  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AROSE.      II.    ThE   OBJECT    OF   THE  PRESENT  DISPENSATION. 

III.  The  FUTURE  consummation.    ((?.  Huntington,  M.A.)    The  Ood-lit  Church : — 
The  old  story  is  repeated ;  Zion  sits  in  the  light  while  Egypt  cowers  in  gloom.  The  light 
which  shines  upon  her  is  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  the  ancient  brightness  that  dwelt 
between  the  cherubim  within  the  veil  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and  is 
now  come  out  in  the  open  world  to  envelop  the  desolate  captive.    Thus  touched 
by  the  light  she  becomes  light,  and  in  her  turn  is  bidden  to  shine.    There  is  a  very 
remarkable  correspondence  reiterated  in  my  text  between  the  illuminating  God  and 
the  illuminated  Zion.    The  word  for  '  *  shine  "  \s  connected  with  the  word  for  ' '  light, " 
and  might  fairly  be  rendered  "lighten"  or  "be  light."  Twice  the  phrase  "  thy  light " 
is  employed  ;  once  to  mean  the  light  which  is  thine  because  it  shines  on  thee  ;  once  to 
mean  the  light  which  is  thine  because  it  shines  from  thee.     The  other  word,  three 
times  repeated,  for  "  rising  "  is  the  technical  word  which  expresses  the  sunrise,  and 
it  is  applied  both  to  the  flashing  glory  that  falls  upon  Zion,  and  to  the  light  that 
gleams  from  her.     'Touched  by  the  STin  she  becomes  a  sim,  and  blazes  in  her  heaven 
in  a  splendour  that  draws  men's  hearts.     I.  As  TO  THE  fact.     Beneath  the  poetry 
of  my  text  there  lie  very  definite  conceptions  of  a  very  solemn  and  grave  character, 
and  these  conceptions  are  the  foundation  of  the  rmging  summons  that   follows 
and  which  reposes  upon  a  double  basis — viz.  "for  thy  light  is  come,"  and  "for 
darkness  covers  the  earth."    There  is  a  double   element   in   the   representation. 
We  have  a  darkened  earth  and  a  sunlit  and  a  sun-like  Church,  and  unless  we 
hold  these   two  convictions   in  firm  grasp,  and    that  not  merely  as  convictions 
that  influence  our  understanding,  but  as  ever-present  forces  acting  on  am  emotions, 
our  consciences,  our  wills,  we  shall  not  do  the  work  God  has  set  us  to  do  in  the 
world.      If  we  take  the  sulphurous   and  smoky  pall  that  wraps  the  earth  and 
analyze  its  contents,  they  are  these :  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  the  darkness  of 
sorrow,  the  darkness  of  sin.     On  the  other  side,  remember  the  contrasted  picture 
here  of  the  sunlit  and  sunny  Church.     The  incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  fulfil- 
ment of  my  text.     "We  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the 
Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."    If  you  and  I  are  Christians,  we  are  bound  to 
believe  in  Him  as  the  exclusive  source  of  certainty.     We  hear  from  Him  no  "  Per- 
adventure,"  but  His  word  is  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,"  and  on  that  we  rest 
all  our  knowledge  of  God,  of  duty,  of  man,  and  of  the  future.     If  we  have  the  light 
we  shall  be  light.     That  is  but  putting  in  a  picturesque  form  the  very  central  truth 
of  Christianity.     The  last  word  of  the  Gospel  is  transformation.     We  become  like 
TTim  if  we  live  near  to  Him,  and  the  end  for  which  the  Master  became  like  unto  us 
in  His  incarnation  and  passion,  was  that  we  might  become  like  to  Him  by  the 
reception  of  His  very  own  life  unto  our  souls.    These  two  convictions  of  these  two 
facts,   the  dark  earth,  the  sunlit,  sun-like  Church,   lie  at  the  basis  of  all  our 
missionary  work.     11.  We  have  based  upon  these  two  facts  the  summons 
TO  THE  Church.     "  Shine,  for  thy  light  is  come."    If  we  have  light,  we  are  light. 
If  we  are  light,  we  shall  shine  ;  but  the  shining  is  not  altogether  spontaneous  and 
effortless.     Stars  do  not  need  to  be  bidden  to  shine,  nor  candles  either  ;  but  we 
need  the  exhortation  because  there  are  many  things  that  thwart  the  brilliance  and 
the  clearance  of  our  minds.     The  command  suggests  effort,  and  the  effort  may  be  in 
the  direction  of  the  specific  vocal  proclamation  of  His  name.     If  we  are  light,  we 
■hill  be  able  to  shine ;  if  we  are  light,  we  are  bound  to  shine ;  if  we  are  light, 


esiF.uc.]  ISAIAH.  885 

we  shall  want  to  shine.  III.  Thb  confident  pbomisb.  "The  Gentiles  shall 
come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising."  If  we  have  the  light 
we  shall  be  light ;  if  we  are  light  we  shall  shine,  and  if  we  shine  we  shall  attract. 
A  painter  will  fling  upon  Ms  canvas  a  scene  that  you  and  I,  with  our  purblind  eyes, 
have  looked  at  hundreds  of  times  and  seen  no  beauty  in  it,  but  when  we  gaze  on  the 
picture  then  we  see  how  fair  it  is.  There  is  an  attractive  power  in  the  light  of 
Christ  shining  from  the  face  of  a  man.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  An  imperial  ministry: — 
This  is  a  great  statesman's  vision  unveiling  the  moral  and  spiritual  possibilities  of  a 
people.  The  prophet  is  primarily  addressing  his  speech  to  an  awakening  nation. 
To  direct  a  nation's  views  is  to  shape  its  policies,  and  to  determine  the  trend  and 
colour  of  its  life.  What,  then,  shall  be  the  elements  of  an  efficient  and  fioiitful 
ideal?  "The  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,"  etc.  (vers.  2,  3).  What  are  the  con- 
stituent elements  in  the  vision?  "Light"  and  "glory."  A  certain  light,  the 
element  of  illumination,  charity,  and  simplicity  of  thought ;  a  certain  heat,  the 
element  of  fervour,  warm  and  expansive  sympathies  ;  a  certain  gravity,  the  element 
of  impressiveness,  weight  and  strength  of  moral  principle.  But  the  glory  of  the 
ideal  is  still  further  enriched  and  intensified.  We  cannot  take  Isaiah's  ideal  and 
employ  it  with  Isaiah's  limitation  ;  we  must  carry  over  his  vocabulary  into  the 
fuller  day  and  let  it  receive  enlargement  in  the  life  and  mind  of  Christ.  "  Light," 
interpreted  by  the  character  of  the  Master,  means  the  absence  of  shady  compromise, 
sunlit  definiteness  of  purpose,  the  clear  discernment  of  essentials.  "Heat,"  inter- 
preted by  the  character  of  the  Master,  means  an  ardent  inclusiveness  of  sympathy, 
cosmopolitan  in  its  pervasion.  "Gravity,"  glory,  interpreted  by  the  character  of 
the  Master,  is  significant  of  moral  weight,  incorruptible  spiritual  ambition,  uncon- 
querable virtue,  whether  illustrated  in  the  light  of  a  marriage-feast,  or  in  the 
sombre  experience  of  Pilate's  judgment-bar.  "  Arise  !  "  Stand  erect  and  set  thy 
face  towards  the  burning  vision,  and  thou  shalt  "shine  "  with  reflected  glory.  By 
contemplating  the  Divine  thou  shalt  incarnate  the  heart  of  thy  contemplation. 
"The  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  His  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee,"  and  thy 
imperial  treasure  shall  be  found  in  thyshining  notabilities,  in  the  radiant  motives 
and  ambitions  of  thy  common  life.  We  have  seen  this  transfiguring  ministry  at 
work  in  the  life  of  the  individual.  But  we  may  be  more  than  a  little  doubtful  as  to 
whether  the  vision  will  also  serve  and  ennoble  the  community.  Well,  where  is  the 
line  of  transition  ?  Surely,  even  in  the  nation  we  have  again  and  again  witnessed 
the  transforming  influence  of  the  grand  ideal.  It  was  even  so  with  the  later  expe- 
riences of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  breaking  up  of  formality,  the  melting  of 
callousness,  the  opening  out  of  rivers  of  philanthropy,  the  enlarged  and  sweetened 
life  of  our  people,  the  enlightened  measure  of  emancipation,  can  be  directly  traced  to 
a  "  strange  warming  of  the  nation's  heart,"  resulting  from  a  restored  contemplation 
of  the  light  and  glory  of  God.  The  prophet's  vision  reveals  an  imperial  ideal,  and 
unveils  the  only  permanent  imperial  treasure.  1.  The  imperial  character  is  to  be 
creative  of  imperial  unity  (ver.  4).  There  is  to  be  an  enrichment  of  the  home,  a 
consolidation  of  the  family,  a  knitting  together  of  the  finer  fellowships  of  the 
nation.  And  mark  how  tms  statesman  describes  the  large  characteristics  of  the 
conomunion.  "  Then  shalt  thou  see  and  flow  together. "  It  is  to  be  an  open-eyed 
communion,  an  illumined  society,  a  fellowship  of  transparent  aims  and  aspirations. 
"  Thine  heart  shall  fear  ;  "  the  fellowship  is  not  to  be  flippant,  light-heaj^d,  and 
vain  ;  it  is  to  be  possessed  by  the  pervasive  influence  of  reverence,  that  saving 
element  which  preserves  the  sense  of  true  perspective,  and  gives  everything  the 
setting  of  a  just  proportion.  "  And  be  enlarged  ; "  the  fellowship  is  not  to  be  fixed 
and  exclusive  ;  its  sympathies  are  to  be  elastic  and  expansive,  reaching  out  in  ever- 
enlarging  circles  of  interest  and  regard.  2.  The  imperial  unity  is  to  be  the  minister 
of  a  world-wide  illumination.  "  And  nations  shall  come  to  thy  light,"  etc.  (ver.  3). 
If  this  be  the  true  portrayal  of  imperial  welfare,  may  we  not  infer  the  consequent 
obligations  which  rest  upon  the  leaoers  of  the  people  ?  The  first  essential  of  efficient 
public  ministry  is  a  large  and  exalted  aim.  The  true  aim  of  every  true  leader 
IS  to  buUd  up  the  moral  energy  of  the  people.  To  give  ourselves  to  the  production 
of  superior  men — this  is  the  aim  which  should  possess  the  minds  and  hearts  of  sdl 
who  exercise  leadership  among  their  feUow-men.  An  aim  like  this,  definitely  and 
personally  expressed,  and  pursued  with  undeviating  consistency,  will  preserve  a 
man  from  those  perils  of  benumbment  which  seem  to  attach  themselves  to  every 
public  ministry.  (/.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  privilege  and  prerogative  of  the  Christicm 
Vhv/rch : — The  Church  is  promised  an  extraordinary  measure  of  light  and  glory  ;  «ai 
immense  increase  in  the  number  of  her  adherents,  nniyersal  exaltation  in  t^e  eyes  of 


838  T3E  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i* 

her  enemies,  and  permanent  safety  and  happiness.  I.  Thb  Divine  illxjminatiok 
WHICH  THE  Church  received.  "Thy  light  is  come,"  etc.  The  text  suggests — 
1.  The  nature  of  this  illumination.  It  embraces — (1)  The  light  of  Divine  revelation- 
(2)  The  light  of  the  Gospel  dispensation.  (3)  The  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  teach- 
ing. 2.  The  necessity  of  this  illumination.  The  Church  existed  in  a  dark  age  ; 
intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual  darkness  prevailed  everywhere.  This  was  pre- 
eminently the  case  when  Christ  came.  This  was — (1)  The  darkness  of  moral  gmlt. 
(2)  The  darkness  of  religious  error.  (3)  The  darkness  of  spiritual  ignorance.  This 
darkness  was  deep,  profound,  awfoL  8.  The  beauty  of  this  illumination.  "The 
glory  of  the  Lord,'  etc.  Allusion  is  probably  made  to  the  Shechinah.  God 
manifested  Himself  to  His  people,  and  shone  upon  them  in  the  glory  of  His  grace 
and  mercy.  4.  The  source  of  this  illumiaation.  "Thy  light  \s  come,"  etc.  It 
emanated  from  a  Divine  source.  It  was  derived,  not  inherent.  The  Church  is 
not  the  fountain  of  light,  but  the  medium  of  it.  It  is  called  "  thy  light "  because 
it  was  the  exclusive  or  peculiar  prerogative  of  the  Church.  It  does  not  come 
from  the  Church,  but  is  given  to  it,  for  its  benefit  and  use.     II.  The  permanent 

OBLIGATION    WHICH    THE    ChTTRCH    INCURS    IN    RELATION    TO     IT.       The     Church 

is  a  Divine  institution,  raised  up  for  a  specific  purpose.  Its  work  is  to  teach  men 
the  truth  of  God  and  to  testify  of  the  grace  of  God.  But  she  sometimes  fails 
fulljr  to  realize  her  obligations,  privileges,  prerogatives,  and  responsibilities.  Here 
she  is  enjoined — 1.  To  arise.  She  must  arise  from  spiritual  apathy,  lethargy,  and 
obscurity,  take  her  legitimate  position  before  the  world,  and  faithfully  discharge  her 
obligations.  Here  is  a  loud  call — (1)  To  behold  the  light,  and  hail  it  with  joy. 
(2)  To  receive  the  light.  (3)  To  utilize  the  light.  2.  To  shine.  Privilege  confers 
responsibility.  Every  fresh  accession  of  spiritual  illumination  or  power  increases 
her  influence  and  responsibility.  The  Church  is  a  luminous  body,  and  must  shine 
with  heavenly  lustre.  (1)  For  its  own  sake  and  benefit.  It  must  gladly  participate 
in  the  light  that  shines  upon  it  from  above,  and  be  encompassed  with  light  and 
glory.  It  should  at  all  times  be  radiant  with  the  beauty  of  holiness.  (2)  For  the 
sake  and  benefit  of  others.  Not  only  is  it  to  participate  m  the  light,  but  to  become 
the  grand  medium  and  means  of  imparting  it.  Like  the  reflector  to  the  lamp,  it  is 
to  collect,  receive,  and  reflect  its  rays  for  the  benefit  of  those  needing  its  light. 
How  is  the  Church  to  shine  I  By  the  beauty  of  her  teaching.  By  the  perfection  of 
her  example.  By  the  purity  of  her  doctrine.  By  the  exemplification  of  her  prin- 
ciples. By  the  grandeur  of  her  life.  By  the  vitality  of  her  organizations.  By  the 
vigour  of  her  activity.  Like  the  light  in  the  lighthouse,  the  light  of  the  Church, 
in  every  age,  is  to  shine  conspicuously,  constantly,  cheerfully,  and  without  fail. 
III.  The  grand  prediction  which  the  Church  is  ultimately  to  realize. 
"And  the  Gentiles,"  etc.  This  was  partially  accomplished  soon  after  the  rise  of 
the  Church,  when  thousands  of  the  Gentiles  walkedT  in  this  light. "  When  a  few 
years  elapsed,  the  Roman  Emperor  and  many  other  kings  ostensibly  opened  their 
eyes  to  the  beams  of  light  shed  on  the  world  by  the  Church.  Large  accessions  are 
being  made,  and  her  power  and  influence  are  growing  and  wUl  extend  till  the 
Gospel  shall  universally  triumph  over  error,  dgnorance,  and  ungodliness.  {J.  S. 
Spilsbury.)  The  Chv/rch:  her  functions  and  her  blessedness : — I.  The  Church  has 
the  largest  scope.  Nations  "  come  to  her  light,  kings  to  the  brightness  of  her 
rising."  She  is  world-wide  and  universaL  II.  The  Church  bears  the  clearest 
WITNESS.  She  "  arises."  She  "  shines."  When  she  pulses  and  palpitates  with  the 
life  of  God,  how  impressive  is  her  trumpet-call  I  It  penetrates  far.  It  arouses 
multitudes.  III.  The  Church  dobs  the  most  OLOEioua  work.  "Who  are  these 
that  fly  to  her  as  a  cloud,  and  as  the  doves  to  their  windows ! "  Her  Lord  in  her 
saves  and  edifies  His  sons  and  daughters,  convinces  and  converts  and  comforts.  IV. 
The  Church  enjoys  the  most  lasting  blessedness.  In  His  favour  her  King 
"  has  mercy  on  her. "  He  never  fails  nor  forsakes  her.  He  leads  her  members  just 
now  in  green  pastures  and  by  the  waters  of  quietness.  He  will  bring  them  by-and- 
by  to  the  "  Lovely  city  in  a  lovely  land."  {A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  The  true  light  of 
man: — I.  The  true  light  of  man  is  the  mediatorial  revelation  of  God 
(ver.  1).  II.  This  true  light  of  man  will  one  day  be  universally  diffused 
(ver.  8).    III.  The  universal  diffusion  of  this  light  will  effect  a  wonderful 

EEVOLUTION     IN   THE    WORLD    (verS.    6-11).      IV.   ThE  PEOPLE   WHO,    UNDER   THIS 

uoht,  will  not  serve  the  true  God,  must  inevitably  be  ruined  (ver.  12). 
{Homilist.)  Christ  our  Light : — Light  makes  many  a  surface  on  which  it  falls  flash, 
but  it  LB  the  rays  which  are  not  absorbed  that  are  reflected  in  the  optics  of  earth  ; 
but  in  this  loftier  region  the  deviation  is  not  superficial  but  inward,  and  it  is  tht 


CBAP.ix.]  ISAIAH.  837 

light  which  ifl  swallowed  up  within  as  that  then  oomes  forth  from  us.  Christ  will 
dwell  in  our  hearts,  and  we  shall  be  like  some  poor  little  diamond-shaped  bit  of 
glass  in  a  cottage  window  which,  when  the  s\m  smites  it,  is  visible  over  miles  of  the 
plain.  And  if  that  sun  falls  upon  us,  its  image  will  be  mirrored  in  our  hearts,  and 
flashing  in  our  lives.  The  clouds  that  lie  over  the  svmset,  though  in  themselves 
they  be  but  poor,  grey  and  moist  vapour,  when  smitten  by  its  benej&cent  radiance 
become  not  unworthy  ministers  and  attendants  upon  its  glory.  So  it  may  be  with 
us,  for  Christ  comes  to  be  our  light.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  shining  of  the  common- 
place : — One  summer  day,  when  walking  in  Surrey,  on  the  slope  of  a  hill — the  sun 
setting  behind  me — right  away  across  the  valley  I  espied  a  most  remarkable  light. 
It  was  more  brUliant  than  electric  light,  and  seemed  to  rise  from  the  ground.  At 
first  I  supposed  that  some  one  had  lit  a  fire  with  resinous  wood  that  sparkled  and 
flashed,  but  there  was  evidently  no  smoke.  It  seemed  as  though-  some  angel  had 
dropped  a  brUliant  star  down  there  upon  the  ploughed  field,  and  that  it  was 
burning  itself  out.  Finally,  on  my  reaching  the  spot,  I  discovered  that  an  old 
piece  of  broken  glass  had  caught  the  light  of  the  setting  sun,  and  was  bathed  in 
a  supernatural  glow.  An  old  piece  of  bottle-glass — ^yet  so  brilliant — the  bottle-glass 
not  being  visible,  because  of  the  light  that  shone  on  it  1     {Id/e  of  Faith.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  For,  behold,  the  darkness  shall  cover  the  earth. — The  m/mifestation 
of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles : — 1.  The  first  token  that  was  shown  to  the  GentUe  world 
that  the  great  Light  had  arisen  which  was  to  cast  its  beams  over  them  as  well  as 
over  the  small  nation  which  alone  hitherto  had  known  God,  was  the  wonderftd  star 
which  was  seen  in  the  sky.  This  appeared  but  twice  to  the  Magi — once  to  teU 
them  to  set  out,  and  once  to  tell  them  that  they  had  arrived.  All  the  rest  was  faith. 
2.  It  was  the  manifestation  of  the  Redeemer,  the  Light  of  the  world,  to  the  Gentiles. 
But  much  had  yet  to  be  done  before  the  Gentiles  were  received  into  the  fall 
equality  of  privilege  and  grace  with  the  Jews.  It  was  above  thirty  years  yet 
before  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the  temple  showed  that  the  partition-wall  was  broken 
down  by  the  death  of  Christ,  which  divided  Jew  from  Gentile ;  still  longer  before 
the  commission  was  given  to  go  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  into  the 
name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  ;  still  longer  before  the  vision  at  Joppa  and  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  at  Csesarea  bade  St.  Peter  baptize  Cornelius,  the  first  Gentile 
Christian,  into  the  Church.  8.  Let  us  claim  our  share  in  that  exceeding  great 
joy  with  which  the  wise  men  saw  the  first  brightness  of  that  star  when  they  saw 
it  in  the  East.  If  we  do  truth — that  is  to  say,  if  we  really  try  to  please  God, 
by  living  according  to  His  will — then  we  "come  to  the  light,"  and  our  deeds  will 
be  made  manifest  that  they  are  wrought  in  God.  {O.  Moherly.)  ZunCs  glvry: — 
■  The  prophet  here  reverts  for  a  moment  to  the  previous  condition  of  the  world,  in 
order  to  describe,  with  more  eflfect,  the  glorious  change  to  be  produced.  He  is  not, 
therefore,  to  be  understood  as  saying  that  Zion  shall  be  glorious  because,  while  the 
nations  are  in  darkness,  she  is  to  enjoy  exclusive  light,  but  because  the  light 
imparted  to  her  first  shall  draw  the  nations  to  her.     (/.  A.  Alexander.) 

Yer.  8.  And  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light. — The  attractiveness  of  an 
enlightened  a/nd  light-giving  Church: — What  shall  invite  such  multitudes  to  the 
Church  ?  They  shall  be  allowed  to  join  themselves  to  thee — 1.  By  the  light  that 
shines  upon  thee.  2.  By  the  light  with  which  thou  shinest.  {M.  Henry.)  The 
Jews  unconsciously  giving  light  to  the  Gentiles: — I  have  read  in  one  of  George 
Macdonald's  novels  of  a  bom  blind  lamplighter.  He  illumined  the  city  at  night ; 
but  he  had  no  sense  of  what  he  was  doing.  So  has  it  been  with  this  land.  She 
has  presented  the  Portrait  to  the  gallery ;  she  has  heard  the  plaudits  of  the 
spectators,  and  she  has  refused  to  join  in  them.  In  all  history  there  is  nothing  so 
unique.  It  is  the  enemies  of  this  land  that  have  crowned  her  world-king ;  it  is 
the  Gentiles  that  have  come  to  His  light.  The  lamplighter  has  been  blind  to 
the  beauty  of  that  throne  which  she  has  illuminated.  Palestine  has  lit  up  the 
scene  ;  she  has  listened  to  the  crowd  shouting  their  applause,  and  she  has  wondered 
why.  She  has  been  like  a  deaf  mute  in  a  concert-room.  She  has  struck  by 
accident  the  notes  of  a  harp,  and  by  accident  they  have  burst  into  music.  The 
audience  has  cheered  the  performance  to  the  echo  ;  but  the  performer  knows  not  her 
triumph.  {G.  Matheson,  D.D.)  Blessings  of  light: — Miss  Florence  Nightingale, 
as  the  result  of  her  wide  observation,  remarks: — "One  of  the  greatest  observers 
of  human  things  says,  'Where  there  is  sun  there  is  thought.'"  All  physiology 
goes  to  confirm  this.    Where  is  the  shady  side  of  deep  valleys,  there  is  cretinism. 

VOL.  IIL  22 


838  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lx. 

Where  are  cellars  and  the  unsunned  side  of  narrow  streets,  there  ia  the  degeneracy 
of  the  human  race  ;  mind  and  body  equally  degenerating.     Put  the  pale,  withering 

Elant  and  human  being  into  the  sun,  and,  if  not  too  far  gone,  each  will  recover 
eart  and  spirit.  In  France  there  are  hospitals  where  they  trust  almost  entirely 
to  light  for  the  cure  of  disease.  Surely  there  is  here  an  earthly  analogue  to  a 
apiritual  fact.    \W.  O.  Border.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  abont. — The  Oentiles  gathered: — I.  Thb 
OATHEBiNO  OF  THE  Gentiles  TO  ZiON.  From  every  quarter — from  far — from 
beyond  the  sea.  With  all  the  forces.  II.  Zion's  emotions.  She  sees  and  over- 
flows with  joy.  {R.  A.  Bertram.)  "Nursed  at  thy  side": — Rather,  "on  thy 
side,"  i.  e.  carried  on  the  hip,  the  Eastern  mode  of  carrying  young  children  (chap. 
Ixvi.  12).  {Prof.  J.  Skirmer,  D.D.)  Chtcrch-membership : — The  Church's  children 
must  be  nursed  at  her  side,  not  sent  out  to  be  nursed  among  strangers.  They  that 
would  enjoy  the  dignities  and  privileges  of  Christ's  famUy  must  submit  to  the 
.discipline  of  it.     {M.Henry.) 

Vers.  5-8.  Then  thou  shalt  see. — The  glory  of  the  millennial  Chwrch : — ^Wealth, 
Commerce,  and  Agriculture  are  three  great  interests  and  powers  on  earth — a  trinity 
of  forces  which  have  in  all  ages  engrossed  mankind.  Each  one  of  the  three  will 
have  its  representatives  in  that  vast  multitude  who  are  to  ask  the  way  to  Zion  with 
their  faces  thitherward.  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The  enlargement  of  the  Church: — 
We  are  likewise  told  how  the  Church  shall  be  afifected  with  this  increase  of  her 
numbers  and  enlargement  ot  her  borders.  1.  She  will  be  in  a  transport  of  joy 
upon  this  account  (ver.  5).  2.  There  will  be  a  mixture  of  fear  with  this  joy. 
"Thine  heart  shall  fear,"  as  though  it  were  a  thing  imlawful  to  join  with  the 
Gentiles,  etc.  3.  She  shall  be  enlarged  with  Love,  so  as  to  leave  room  for  all 
the  Gentile  converts.  4.  She  shall  be  struck  with  surprise  and  wonder,  saying, 
"  Who  are  these  that  fly  1 "  etc.     {E.  Erskine.) 

Vers.  6-9.  The  multitude  of  camels  shall  cover  thee. — ConvmereiaZ  nations  and 
nomad  tribes  aiding  the  Chwrch : — The  nations  engaged  in  commerce  bring  their 
wares  to  the  Church ;  the  tribe  of  MidiUn,  descended  from  Abraham  and  Keturah 
(Gen.  XXV.  2),  and  of  which  the  Ephaens  formed  a  branch,  dwelling  on  the  east 
coast  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf  in  the  town  of  Madyan,  lying  five  days'  journey  south 
from  Aila  (according  to  the  Arabic  geographers) — these  come  in  caravans  so 
numerous  and  so  long  that  the  country  round  Jerusalem  swarms  with  cameb. 
All  these,  Midianites  and  Ephaens,  come  from  Sheba,  of  which  Virgil  says,  solis 
est  turea  virga  Sabaeis,  and  which,  according  to  Strabo,  was  a  populous  country  of 
ample  resources,  producing  myrrh,  incense  and  cinnamon.  There  (viz.  in  Yemen), 
where  spices,  precious  stones  and  gold  are  found,  they  have  brought  gold  and 
incense  ;  and  these  valuable  gifts  they  now  bring  to  Jerusalem,  not  as  unwilling 
tribute,  but  with  cheerful  proclamation  of  the  glorious  doings  and  attributes  of 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel.  As  the  trading  nations  come,  so  also  do  the  nomad 
tribes :  Kedar,  i.  e.  the  Kedarenes,  armed  with  bows  (chap.  xxi.  17),  and  dwelling 
in  fortified  settlements  (chap.  xlii.  11)  in  the  desert  between  Babylon  and  Syria ; 
and  Nebaioth  (likewise  of  Ishmaelitish  origin,  according  to  Gen.  xxv.  23),  a  nomad 
tribe  which,  though  still  of  no  importance  during  the  Israelitish  monarchy,  rose  in 
the  first  century  B.C.  to  eminence  as  a  civilized  nation,  whose  territory  extended 
from  the  Elanitic  Gulf  to  the  country  lying  east  of  the  Jordan,  across  Belka  and  as 
far  as  Hauran — for  the  monumental  inscriptions  they  have  left  behind  reach  from 
Egypt  to  Babylon,  though  Arabia  Petrcea  is  the  chief  place  where  they  are  found. 
The  Kedarenes  drive  their  flocks  of  small  cattle,  when  collected,  to  Jerusalem,  and 
the  rams  of  the  Naboteans,  brought  by  this  nation,  are  placed  at  the  service  of  the 
Church,  and  ascend,  for  good  pleasure,  the  altar  of  Jehovah.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
Dromedaries: — Properly  "young  camels."  The  word  does  not  occur  in  the  Old 
Testament  elsewhere  ;  amongst  the  Arabs  it  denotes,  according  to  some  of  the  native 
lexicographers,  a  camel  less  than  nine  years  old.     {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  All  the  flocks  of  Eedar  shall  be  gathered  together  unto  thee. — Sacrificial 
service : — None  of  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  is  able  to  think  of  the  worship 
of  God  by  the  Israel  of  the  latter  days  without  the  offering  of  sacrifices ;  but  it 
would  be  a  return  to  the  limited  conceptions  of  the  Old  Testament  if  one  were  to 
conclude  that  animal  sacrifice  will  ever  be  restored.    The  dividing- wall  of  national 


CHAP.  Lx.]  ISAIAH.  339 

particularism  and  ceremonial  observances  forming  shadows  of  things  to  come  will 
never  be  re-established  ;  and  with  the  cessation  of  sacrificial  worship  since  the^  fiery 
judgment  fell  upon  the  second  temple,  there  has  for  ever  passed  away  the  restriction 
of  worship  to  any  one  central  spot  on  earth  (John  iv.  21),  but  the  stream  of 
salvation  which  proceeded  from  Jerusalem  wiU,  nevertheless,  ultimately  empty  its 
waters  there,  and  make  the  city  once  more  a  fountain  of  blessing.  As  the  prophet 
has  said  (chap.  Ivi.  7),  the  house  of  God  in  Jerusalem  will  become  "a  house  of 
prayer  "  for  all  nations :  Jehovah  here  calls  it  "  My  house  of  glory,"  as  that  which 
was  built  for  His  honour  and  filled  with  His  gracious  presence.  He  will  make  its 
internal  glory  like  the  external,  by  adorning  it  with  the  gifts  brought  in  homage  by 
the  woild  of  converted  Gentiles.  {F.  Delitzseh,  D.D.)  I  will  glorify  the  house  of 
My  glory. — A  prosperoiis  Church : — I.  What  is  now  the  house  of  God  ?  A  house 
is  a  place  of  residence  ;  the  house  of  God,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  phrase,  is  the 
place  of  His  residence.  In  this  sense,  the  universe  is  His  house,  for  He  inhabits  all 
space,  and  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  confined  to  any  one  spot.  Solomon  felt  this  when 
he  built  the  magnificent  temple  at  Jerusalem.  "  Behold,"  said  he,  addressing  him- 
self to  God,  "the  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Thee  ;  how  much 
less  this  house  that  I  have  builded  ? "  Stephen  felt  it  when,  in  allusion  to  the  same 
house,  he  said,  "  Howbeit  the  Most  High  dweUeth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands ; 
as  saith  the  prophet,  heaven  is  My  throne  and  earth  is  My  footstool :  what  house 
will  ye  bmld  Me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  or  what  is  the  place  of  My  rest  ? "  "Whilst,  how- 
ever, the  universe  is  thus  the  only  proper  house  of  God,  there  are  places  which,  in 
condescension  to  our  weakness,  are  specially  denominated  His  house,  to  denote  that 
He  specially  manifests  His  presence  there,  is  specially  worshipped  there,  and  bestows 
there  special  spiritual  blessings,  rich  spiritual  banquets.  The  dispensation  of  the 
law  was  intended  to  foreshadow  good  things  to  come,  and  accordingly  under  that 
dispensation  there  was  a  typical  sanctuary,  a  house  intended  to  typify  the  spiritual 
house  of  this  dispensation — the  Church.  In  that  typical  sanctuary  there  was  a 
visible  emblem  of  the  Divine  presence,  a  cloud  overshadowing  the  mercy-seat,  the 
same  cloud  which  had  gone  before  the  children  of  Israel  when  journeying  through 
the  wilderness,  as  a  pUlar  of  a  cloud  by  day,  and  as  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night. 
This  visible  emblem  was  a  type  of  the  spiritual  presence  of  God  in  His  Church.  In 
the  same  typical  sanctuary  where  this  visible  emblem  was  vouchsafed,  typical 
sacrifices  were  offered  and  typical  blessings  bestowed.  The  new  dispensation  being 
the  antitype  is  spiritual.  Hence  we  have  not  now  a  typical  temple,  but  every 
believer  individually,  and  especially  every  Christian  Church,  is  a  spiritual  temple. 
The  house  of  God,  then,  imder  this  dispensation,  is  not  the  building  where  the 
saints  meet,  but  the  assembly  of  the  saints  be  it  where  it  may ;  it  is  a  spiritual 
house  built  of  living  stones,  a  house  where  spiritual  sacrifices  are  offered,  the 
sacrifices  of  praise  and  thanksgiAdng,  which  are  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus 
Christ.  At  the  same  time,  whilst  the  bmlding  is  not  the  house  of  God,  there  is  a 
subordinate  sense  in  which  it  may  be  so  denominated.     II.  Under  vithat  cikctjm- 

STANCES  MAT  THE  HOUSE  CALLED   "THE   HOUSE   OF  GoD "  BE  DESCRIBED  AS   "THE 

HOUSE  OF  His  glory  "1  It  is  the  house  of  His  glory,  when  His  glory  is  the  grand 
object  in  view.  This  house  of  His  glory  must  not  only  be  buUt,  but  also  used  for 
His  glory.  We  have  applied  the  phrase  "  house  of  God  "  in  its  subordinate  sense  to 
the  building  ;  let  us  proceed  to  apply  it  in  a  higher  sense  to  the  assembly  of  the 
saints,  to  the  Church  meeting  in  the  building  ;  and  we  ask,  When  is  such  a  Church 
properly  denominated  the  house  of  God's  glory  ?  1.  It  is  so,  when  the  object  of  its- 
original  formation,  and  that  of  its  assembhng  from  time  to  time,  is  the  glory  of  God. 
Let  professing  Christians  meet  together  as  a  mere  matter  of  form,  meet  without  any" 
definite  end  in  view,  or  meet  with  any  other  end  than  the  glory  of  their  Lord,  th& 
Church  is  no  longer  the  house  of  His  glory  ;  nay,  if  even  they  meet  for  praise,  for 
their  own  spiritual  improvement  and  for  the  conversion  of  sinners,  yet  if  the  glory 
of  God  be  not  the  ultimate  end  of  all  this,  their  assembly  cannot  be  looked  upon  as 
the  house  of  His  glory.  2.  The  Church  is  the  House  of  God's  glory,  when  His  glory 
is  kept  in  view  in  all  Church  acts ;  for  example,  in  receiving  members,  exercising 
discipline,  choosing  officers.  3.  The  Church  is  the  house  of  God's  glory,  when  a 
spirit  in  accordance  with  His  glonr  is  cherished  and  manifested  by  every  individual 
member.  It  is  for  -the  glory  of  God  that  love  should  prevail  in  His  house.  It  is 
for  the  glory  of  God  that  there  should  be  peace  in  His  Church.  And  that  the 
members  of  Churches  should  be  characterized  by  humility.  III.  The  promise 
THAT  God  will  glorify  the  house  of  His  glory.  There  is  no  promise  that 
He  will  glorify  the  house  which  may  be  called  by  His  name,  if  it  be  not  the  house 


940  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nc 

of  Hifl  gloty.  The  glory  is — 1.  When  He  makes  the  house  the  place  of  nimierous 
conversions.  2.  When  He  makes  it  the  place  of  edification  to  His  people. 
(B.  Alliot,  LL.D.)  I  vrill  glorify  the  house  of  My  glory :— I.  The  place.  For 
what  reasons,  or  with  what  propriety,  may  the  Christian  Church  be  called  the  house 
of  the  glory  of  God  ?  Chiefly  on  these  accounts — 1.  Because  it  is  planned  and  built 
by  the  purpose  and  power  of  the  Most  High.  2.  Because  it  contains  the  special 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence  and  glory.  (1)  Christ  Himself  is  the  exact 
image  of  God.  He  is  the  true  Shechinah,  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  (2)  In  the  gifts 
and  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  By  the  development  of  the  Divine  glory  in 
the  preaching  of  the  Word.  II.  The  promise.  "  I  will  glorify,"  etc.  God  did  so  in 
the  first  temple,  by  making  it  an  object  of  beauty^  and  glory  to  all  His  people,  and 
by  causing  it  to  excite  the  admiration  of  surrounding  nations  also  ;  and  still  further, 
by  sending  Christ  finally  to  minister  in  that  temple.  God  will  glorify  the  house  of 
TTia  glory — 1.  By  accepting  the  services  and  ofierings  which,  in  connection  with  it, 
are  performed.  2.  By  ms^ing  it  the  place  of  special  communion  and  fellowship 
with  Himself.  3.  By  protectmg  it  permanently  against  all  the  efibrts  of  hostile 
powers.  4.  By  extending  its  i^uence,  and  increasing  its  celebrity  in  the  earth. 
5.  By  consummating  it,  finaUy,  in  the  splendour  and  happiness  of  heaven. 
(j.  Parsons.)  God  glorifying  the  house  of  His  glory : — ^The  vision  is  inspiring, 
and  can  only  be  fulfilled  in  the  moral  grandeur  of  the  Church.  I.  It  begins  to 
be  accomplished  when  she  is  made  a  light  to  dispel  spiritual  darkness. 
At  times  she  has  not  laid  sufficient  emphasis  on  her  mission  as  a  teaching  Church. 
Unquestionably  philanthropy  is  a  function  of  the  Church.  But  she  ought  not  to 
permit  the  teaching  side  of  her  work  to  be  thrust  into  the  background.  Her  special 
business  is  to  fight  darkness  with  light.  II.  God  also  glorifies  her  when  He  makes 
her  the  arena  of  heavenly  victories.  III.  God  glorifies  the  Church  in  making 
HER  THE  SCHOOL  OF  SAINTLY  VIRTUES.  AU  educational  institutions  are  to  be 
admired,  but  the  Church  is  foremost  among  them.  To  know  the  world,  to  know 
self,  to  know  God,  cover  the  entire  domain  of  knowledge  and  mark  its  distinctive 
steps  and  progress.  In  the  Church  we  are  trained  in  the  knowledge  of  self  and  God. 
IV.  But  beyond  all  this  the  Almighty  glorifies  her  when  He  makes  it  a  garden 
FOR  THE  growth  OF  HUMAN  FELLOWSHIPS.  We  must  not  forget  that  what  society 
knows  of  brotherhood  has  come  from  the  Church.  In  the_  Roman  Empire  there 
were  provident  societies,  especially  burial  guilds,  before  Christianity,  but  the  real 
idea  of  fellowship  began  with  the  household  of  faith.  The  people  were  taught  \>j 
Christ  to  love  one  another.  And  when  the  Church  realizes  her  calling  in  this 
respect,  and  rich  and  poor  meet  together  in  her  communion  on  equal  footing,  then 
is  she  resplendent  with  heavenly  glory.     {G.  C.  Lorimer,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  a  cloud  1 — Accessions  to  the  Church: — It  is 
a  fine  conception  of  Vitringa,  that  the  ships  expressly  mentioned  in  the  next  verse 
are  here  described  in  their  first  appearance  at  a  distance  resembling  with  their  out- 
spread sails  and  rapid  course  a  fleecy  cloud  driven  by  the  wind,  and  a  flight  of  doves 
returning  to  their  young.  Both  comparisons  are  used  as  here  to  indicate  rapidity  of 
motion  (Job  xxx.  15 ;  Ps.  Iv.  6,  7 ;  Hos.  xi.  11 ;  Jer.  iv.  13).  {J.  A.  Alexander.) 
As  doves  to  their  windoivs : — I.  The  movement  which  is  here  stated.  It  is  a 
flight.  The  expression  is  intended  to  signify  the  coming  of  men  from  the  distant 
regions  of  the  earth  to  the  Church  of  God,  of  which  such  glorious  things  are  here 
said.  1.  The  movement  signifies  that  state  into  which  these  men  are  transformed, 
and  in  which  they  come  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  designs  of  mercy.  It  is  the 
abandonment  of  all  their  idolatrous  worshij) ;  it  is  the  renunciation  of  all  that  is 
opposed  to  God  and  to  salvation ;  it  is  their  coming  back  to  "  the  Shepherd  and 
Kshop  of  souls  " ;  it  is  their  looking  to  God  as  the  alone  source  of  happiness  and 
peace ;  it  is  their  believing  in  Him,  who  alone  is  able  to  save  and  to  bless  them. 
2.  It  is  under  the  Gospel  dispensation  that  this  is  to  be  exemplified,  3.  Divine 
influence  must  be  imparted  to  effect  this.  4,  This  change  arises  from  the  statements 
of  Gospel  truth  as  they  are  contained  in  the  written  Word.     II.  What  is  intended 

BY  THE   MANNER  IN  WHICH  THIS   MOVEMENT  IS  SAID  TO  BE  MADE?     The   figures 

denote— 1.  Eagerness.  2.  Their  number.  8.  Their  unity.  The  clouds  are  sup- 
posed to  fly  in  one  body,  and  to  be  driven  to  one  part  of  the  horizon :  the  doves 
fly  together  to  attain  one  home.  So  it  will  be  with  all  who  have  been  conducted  by 
the  Spirit  into  the  way  of  life  everlasting.  III.  What  is  implied  in  the  inquiry 
WHICH  THE  contemplation  OF  THIS  MOVEMENT  EXCITES.  1.  Surprise.  2.  Joy. 
(j,  Fartona. )    Corwerts  coming  imto  the  Chnvrch : — ^They  come  as  doves  to  the  windows. 


CHAP.  LX.]  I8AJAE.  341 

I.  Becattse  they  fly  low.  The  eagle  darts  up,  as  if  to  strike  its  beak  into  the 
son.  There  are  birds  that  seem  to  dwell  under  the  eaves  of  heaven  ;  yon  see  them 
as  little  specks  against  the  sky,  so  far  off  that  you  cannot  guess  the  style  of  their 
plumage  or  the  shape  of  their  bodies.  They  float  so  far  away  that  if  the  hunter's 
gun  be  discharged  at  them  they  do  not  change  their  course.  Not  so  with  the  doves 
or  pigeons  ;  they  never  take  any  high  excursions.  They  fly  around  your  roof  and 
alight  on  the  fence,  and  seem  to  dislflie  great  altitudes.  So  these  souls  who  come  to 
Christ  and  to  His  Church  fly  low.  They  ask  no  great  things ;  they  seek  a  humble 
place  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  II.  Because  they  fly  fob  shelter.  The  albatross 
makes  a  throne  of  the  tempest ;  the  sea-gulls  find  their  grandest  frolic  in  the  storm. 
Not  30  with  doves ;  at  the  first  blow  of  the  north-easter  they  fly  to  the  coop. 
Eagle  contends  with  eagle  in  mid-air,  and  vulture  fights  vulture  on  the  bosom  of  the 
carcass  ;  but  doves  at  the  first  dash  of  the  bird  of  prev  speed  for  shelter  from  fiery 
eye  and  iron  beak  and  loathsome  talon.  So  these  souls  come  for  shelter.  Christ  is 
the  only  shelter  of  the  soul  in  trouble.  III.  Because  they  fly  home.  Most  of 
the  winged  denizens  have  no  home  ;  now  they  are  at  the  north  and  now  at  the  south, 
as  the  climate  indicates.  This  year  a  nest  in  one  tree,  next  year  a  nest  in  another 
tree.  But  the  pigeons  alluded  to,  summer  and  winter  and  alway^,  have  a  home  in 
the  dovecot.  And  so  Christ  is  the  home  of  those  who  come  to  Him.  He  is  a  warm 
home !  they  rest  under  the  "  feathers  of  the  Almighty."  IV.  Because  they  come 
IN  flocks.  The  buzzard,  with  dripping  beak,  fluttering  up  from  the  ca,rrion,  is 
alone.  You  occasionally  look  up  against  the  wintry  sky  and  see  a  solitary  bird  wing- 
ing past.  But  doves  or  pigeons  are  in  flocks  ;  by  scores  and  hundreds  do  they  fly. 
So  to-day  we  see  a  great  flock  coming  into  the  kingdom.  {T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.) 
A  flight  of  doves : — I.  The  first  thought  which  the  verse  suggests,  in  connection  with 
our  Communion  services,  is  that  of  blissful  association.  As  the  dovecot  may 
have  its  difierent  apertures,  so  each  Church  retains  its  own  denominational  entrance. 
But  the  glorious  meeting-place,  the  spiritual  Shelter,  is  the  same.  II.  In  connection 
with  our  sacred  rite,  the  emblem  suggests  a  public  profession.  The  prophet  is 
arrested  ;  or,  possibly,  in  the  poetical  imagery  here  employed,  a  chorus  of  spectators 
— in  which  he  veils  his  own  personality — are  arrested  by  the  spectacle.  The  doves 
are  not  spoken  of  as  flying  under  screen  of  night  or  darkness ;  neither  were  they 
beheld  winging  a  solitary  or  circuitous  flight,  as  if  dreading  and  evading  observation. 
But  the  midday  sun  looked  down  on  a  whole  cloud  of  them,  their  golden  iridescent 
plumage  flashing  in  his  beams.  It  is  no  unimportant  or  insignificant  feature  in  your 
Divinely-appointed  ordinance,  this  open,  dove-like  flight  to  the  Covenant  Ark.  III. 
The  cloud  of  doves,  as  here  represented,  betokens  the  character  of  Christians 
AND  OF  Christian  communicants.  They  are,  or  ought  to  be,  dove-like.  The  dove 
has  these  among  other  characteristics — 1.  It  is  the  complex  symbol,  in  sacred  poetry 
and  art,  of  peace  and  love,  of  meekness  and  gentleness,  purity  and  harmlessness 
(Cant.  L  15,  vi.  9  ;  Matt.  x.  16).  In  the  rude,  early  Christian  symbolism  of  the 
Roman  catacombs,  the  dove,  as  the  bird  of  hope,  is  generally  represented  in  con- 
nection, variously  treated,  with  the  olive  branch.  What  a  lesson  for  us  all  as 
believers  ia  Jesus.  2.  A  second  characteristic  of  the  dove  is,  that  it  is  swift  of  wing. 
The  prophet  saw  them,  not  sailing  like  a  cloud,  or  drifting  like  a  cloud,  but  flying  ; 
borne  along  with  whirlwind  speed.  The  carrier  dove  is  well  known  for  the  swiftness 
— the  length  and  steadiness — of  its  arrowy  course,  surpassing  the  proverbial  flight  of 
the  eagle.  This,  coupled  with  Isaiah's  figure,  surely  suggests  the  activities  of  the 
Christian  life.  IV.  The  figure  of  the  dove  fleeing  to  its  window  reminds  and 
suggests  that  it  is  a  bird  which  requires  A  safe  shelter.  It  does  not,  like  some 
others,  cower  in  hedgerows  or  farrows.  The  wild  pigeon  may  build  its  nest  on  the 
forest  tree  ;  but  the  tame  one  seeks  its  secure  dovecot.  The  Eastern  dove,  which  had 
no  artificial  home,  had  its  equally  secure  dwelling  in  the  rock-clefts  (Sol.  Song  ii.  14). 
A  little  way  from  the  north-west  shores  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret  there  is  a  recess 
in  the  hills  called  the  "  W^dy  Hyman,"  or  "Valley  of  Doves,"  the  sides  of  which  are 
perforated  with  their  retreats.  You  who  are  communicants  have  been  fleeing  anew 
to-day  for  refuge  to  the  "  Rock  of  Ages."  It  is  a  special  characteristic  of  the  dove, 
that,  however  far  it  goes — though  at  a  distance  of  hundreds  of  mUes — it  will  fly  back 
with  unerring  aim,  sureness,  and  safety  to  its  abode.  So  with  "the  dove  of  Christ." 
V.  The  cloud  of  doves  on  wing  to  their  windows  reminds  one  of  young 
oommunioants.  In  the  LXX  the  words  of  this  verse  are  remarkable  I  "Who  are 
these  that  fly  like  doves  with  their  young  ? "  The  doves  fly  to  their  dovecot,  but  not 
alone  ;  they  have  their  off"spring  with  them.  Not  the  least  beautiful  thing  about  a 
Communion  Sunday  is  the  snectacle  of  young  doves ;  those  who  have  just  risen  from 


J42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

their  early  perches,  the  perches  of  the  morning  of  life,  and  are  winging  their  way, 
bright  and  nnsoiled,  to  the  Rock !  VI.  One  other  thought  is  suggested,  by  tne 
remembrance  of  a  large  class  of  those  who  are  always  to  be  found  at  the  Sacrament 
of  Communion — I  mean  THE  afflicted.  This  image  of  doves  flying  to  their 
windows  reminds  of  storm.  They  were  seen  flying ;  drifting  along  like  a  tempestuoua 
cloud.  The  dove  flies  to  its  dovecot,  or  to  the  rock-clefts,  when  the  storm  is  brewing. 
{J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The  joy  of  the  Church  on  the  multiplication  of  converts  to 
Christ: — I.  The  description  given  of  converts  in  evangelical  times.  1. 
Whence  do  they  fly?  These  persons  are  represented  as  coming  from  among  the 
Gentiles,  the  Pagan  world.  2.  Whither  do  they  fly  ?  They  repair  to  Him,  who  is 
designated  in  the  sixteenth  verse  as  "the  Lord,  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  the  Holy 
One  of  Jacob. "  But  this  is  not  the  whole.  These  converts  are  also  represented  as 
repairing  to  the  Church  as  to  their  rest  and  home.  3.  What  is  the  mode  in  which  they 
are  represented  as  flying  from  their  former  position,  to  Christ  and  to  the  Church  I 
The  images  are  very  beautiful  and  impressive.  (1)  "  As  the  cloud,"  which  overspreads 
the  heavens  ;  intimating  the  vast  numbers  who  should  turn  from  darkness  to  light 
and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  "As  the  cloud,"  with  great  speed  and 
celerity.  "As  the  cloud,"  openly  and  conspicuously;  not  as  though  they  were 
desirous  of  concealment,  but  in  the  spirit  of  those  who  are  ready  to  deny  themselves 
and  take  up  their  cross  and  follow  Christ,  or  of  him  who  exclaimed,  "  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  eveir 
one  that  believeth."  "  As  the  cloud,"  powerfully  ;  so  that  nothing  shall  resist  their 
course.  "  As  the  cloud,"  which  drops  many  a  shower  as  it  passes  along  the  sky,  and 
which  refreshes  and  fertilizes  the  earth,  so  shall  these  converts  be  useful  in  their 
advancement,  like  those  of  whom  we  read  in  the  history  of  the  Gospels,  who  as  they 
travelled  through  the  towns  and  villages  and  diff"erent  parts  of  the  coimtry,  spread 
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  pressed  others  to  become  His  disciples  also.  (2)  Look  also  at 
the  other  admiralsle  similitude:  "As  the  doves."  This  not  only  expresses  some 
similar  ideas,  such  as  that  of  numbers  and  of  rapidity  and  of  strength — but  some 
others  which  we  must  not  omit  carefiilly  to  notice.  It  denotes,  then,  general 
unanimity.  They  are  aU  bent  on  one  grand  object — "What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ? "  They  have  all  one  Saviour  to  whom  they  look — one  method  of  salvation 
which  they  embrace.  The  multitude  is,  in  this  respect,  of  one  heart  and  one  soul. 
It  describes  their  cordial  fellowship.  In  the  happy  days  when  the  Gospel  shall  thus 
win  its  way  among  men,  not  one  or  two  of  a  family  and  of  a  tribe  alone,  scattered 
here  and  there,  shall  hold  communion  with  each  other,  but  the  body  of  believers 
shall  be  joined  together  in  the  unity  of  the  spirit  and  in  the  bond  of  peace.  And  in 
fine,  as  the  doves  repair  to  their  windows,  and  enter  their  cote,  as  their  rest  and 
home,  when  wearied  with  their  long  flight ;  so  the  subjects  of  Divine  grace  take 
refuge  in  the  Church  from  the  storms  without,  and  there  find  a  repose  which  is  not 
to  be  obtained  in  the  world.  II.  The  sentiments  and  emotions  with  which  wb 
SHOULD  VIEW  THESE  ACCESSIONS  TO  THE  Chttrch.  "Who  are  these,  that  fly  as  a 
cloud,  and  as  doves  to  their  windows  %"  1.  This  is  the  language  of  surprise  and 
admiration  ;  for  the  conversion  of  a  soul  to  God  is  in  all  cases  a  wonder.  2.  It  is 
the  language  of  gratitude  and  pleasure.  3.  It  is  the  language  of  complacency.  4. 
This  is  the  language  of  prospective  hope.  For,  if  it  be  admitted  that  already  many 
have  come  and  yielded  themselves  up  to  Christ,  it  is  a  pleasing  thought  that  ther 
are  only  as  the  early  drops  of  the  copious  shower.  {J.  Clayton,  jr.,  M. A.)  Gods 
doves  flying  to  His  windows : — I.  A  sweet  sight  that  the  old  testament  Church 

GETS  OF  THE  STATE  OF  MATTERS  UNDER  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  UpOU  the  revelation 

of  Christ  in  the  Gospel  among  the  Gentiles.  She  sees  poor  souls  upon  the  wing,  in 
great  multitudes,  flying  to  a  Saviour  ;  and  a  sweeter  sight  cannot  be  seen  upon  earth. 
II.  The  manner  of  their  flight.  "  As  a  cloud,  and  as  doves."  III.  The  term 
OR  object  of  their  flight.  They  fly  to  the  windows  for  their  relief.  Like  the 
windows  of  the  ark  of  Noah,  whereat  the  dove  entered,  when  she  could  find  no  place 
for  the  sole  of  her  foot,  because  of  the  deluge.  IV.  The  pleasant  surprise  that 
THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  Ohurch  IS  PUT  INTO  AT  THIS  SIGHT.  {E.  ErsMne.)  Marvel- 
lous increase  of  the  Church : — The  Church,  when  she  uttered  these  words,  appears  to 
have  been  the  subject  of  three  kinds  of  feeling.  I.  Wonder.  1.  The  Church 
wondered  at  the  number  of  her  converts.  2.  The  Chaldee  has  the  idea  in  it  of  swift- 
ness. "  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  swiftly  as  a  cloud  ? "  3.  The  Targum  has  another 
idea,  that  of  publicity.  The  cloud  flies  so  that  everybody  can  see  it.  So  do  these 
converts  fly  openly  before  the  world.  4.  There  is  another  idea  here,  which  Dr.  Gill 
gives  ns  in  his  veiy  valuable  oommentaiy.     "  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  a  cloud,"  for 


CHAP.  EX.]  ISAIAH.  343 

imanimity  ?  Not  as  clonds,  but  "  as  a  cloud  " ;  not  as  two  or  three  bodies,  but  as  one 
united  and  compact  mass  1  5.  Again,  there  is  the  idea  of  power.  "Who  is  he  that 
shall  bridle  a  cloud  and  stop  it  in  its  march  ?  II.  Pleasuee.  1.  The  Church  is 
exceedingly  pleased  at  the  character  of  those  who  come  to  her.  "  Doves."  2.  The 
Church  feels  pleasure  in  their  condition  :  They  "fly."  3.  The  translation  of  the 
LXX  gives  us  another  idea.  * '  Who  are  these  that  fly  like  doves  with  their  young? " 
The  Church  rejoices  at  the  company  that  the  converts  bring  with  them.  4.  The 
Church  feels  pleasure  at  the  direction  in  which  these  doves  move.  "To  their 
windows. "  The  joy  of  the  Church  is  that  the  poor  sinner  does  not  fly  to  man,  nor 
to  the  law,  but  to  Christ,  the  dovecot.  III.  Anxiety.  "  Ah !  "  says  the  Church, 
"it  is  all  very  well  their  flying  like  a  cloud  ;  it  is  all  right  their  going  as  doves  to 
their  windows  ;  but  who  are  they  ? "  She  anxiously  desires  to  be  sure  that  it  is  all 
gold  that  is  put  into  her  treasury.  "Who  are  they?"  I  address  myself  to  an 
anxious  Church  to  answer  it.  1.  They  are  those  that  fly.  They  fly  because  they 
cannot  stop  where  they  were,  and  they  are  flying  somewhere  else  for  reftige.  2.  They 
fly,  not  on  the  ground,  but  like  a  cloud,  up  nigh.  They  were  persons  that  did  not 
care  about  the  world,  but  wanted  heaven.  3.  They  were  persons  driven  by  the  wind, 
just  as  the  clouds  are — who  have  no  power  of  themselves  to  move,  but  nave  some- 
thing driving  them  behind.  4.  They  are  persons  who  have  been  regenerated,  for 
they  are  "doves."  They  are  changed  from  ravens  into  doves,  from  lions  into  lambs. 
5.  They  are  those  who  have  fled  to  their  windows,  and  found  a  refuge  in  Christ. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  doud  of  doves: — I.  Who  aee  they  that  they  should  be 
so  MANY  ?  The  answer  to  that  inquiry  is  another  question :  Why  should  they  not 
be  many  ?  1.  There  are  a  great  many  sinners  in  the  world  ;  why  should  not  a  great 
number  be  converted?  When  many  souls  are  brought  to  Christ,  they  are  only 
relatively  many.  Usually,  alas !  they  are  relatively  small.  2.  Has  not  Christ 
brought  into  tne  world  a  great  redemption?  3.  Why  should  they  not  come  in 
crowds  when  the  spirit  of  God  is  quite  able  to  lead  them  to  come  ?  4.  Heaven  is 
very  great,  and  the  preparations  which  grace  has  made  are  very  large.  II.  Who  aee 
THEY  that  they  SHOULD  FLY  ?  1.  They  fly  to  Christ,  because  they  are  driven,  and 
cannot  help  flying  to  Him.  2.  They  may  well  fly,  because  they  are  in  danger.  3. 
Besides,  these  flying  sinners  have  strong  desires  within  them.  I  sometimes  see  a 
man  throw  a  pigeon  up  into  the  air,  that  it  may  find  its  way  home.  It  usually 
wheels  about  for  a  little  whUe,  as  though  it  were  uncertain  which  direction  it  should 
take  ;  but,  presently,  its  quick  eye  catches  sight  of  some  familiar  landmark,  and  by 
instinct  it  knows  which  \s  its  way  home,  and  then,  away  it  goes.  So  is  it  with  a 
soul  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  once  quickened.  It  longs  for  Christ.  It  may 
hesitate,  and  look  about  to  find  the  way  it  is  to  go  to  find  Htm  ;  but  at  last,  it  says 
within  itself,  "There  He  is,"  and  away  it  goes,  like  the  doves  to  their  windows. 
4.  They  may  well  fly,  because  they  have  such  a  short  time  in  which  to  reach  the 
Saviour.  III.  Why  do  they  fly  as  doves,  that  is,  in  a  covey,  so  that  they  look 
like  a  moving  cloud  ?  1.  Because  they  are  aU  in  one  common  danger.  They  are 
too  much  taken  up  with  the  solemnities  of  their  condition  before  God  to  have  time 
or  wish  for  contention  ;  and,  therefore,  they  do  not  quarrel  and  fight,  as  a  number 
of  hawks  might  do,  but  they  fly  together  in  one  band.  2.  Because  they  are  seeking 
one  common  refuge.  lY.  Who  are  they  that  they  should  fly  this  way  ?  I 
mean,  what  makes  them  fly  to  Christ  ?    What  makes  them  fly  to  His  Church  t 

1.  Because  they  are  seeking  safety,  and  there  is  no  safety  for  them  except  in  Clirist. 

2.  They  also  need  rest,  and  a  dovecot  is  a  place  of  rest  to  a  dove.  3.  You  like  to 
come  where  God's  people  assemble  because  your  food  is  there.  4.  Our  companions 
are  there.     6.  Some  of  us  fly  there  because  our  young  are  there.     {IMd.) 

Yer.  9.  Surely  the  isles  shall  wait  for  Me. — The  ships  of  Tarshish,  coming  from 
the  extreme  end  of  the  European  island-region,  as  the  leaders  of  the  fleet  bringing 
Zion's  children  from  afar.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Missiona/ry  ships: — The  ships  of 
Tarshish,  transport-ships,  shall  lie  ready  to  carry  members  from  far  distant  regions 
to  the  Church,  or,  which  is  equivalent,  to  carry  the  ministers  of  the  Church  to 
remote  parts  to  preach  the  Gospel,  and  to  bring  in  souls  to  join  themselves  to  the 
Lord.  (if.  Henry.)  The  enlargement  of  the  Church: — I.  Who  aee  brought. 
"Thy  sons,"  i.  e.  such  as  are  designed  to  be  so,  those  "children  of  God  that  are 
scattered  abroad  "  (John  xi.  52).  11.  What  they  shall  being  with  them.  They 
live  at  such  a  distance  that  they  cannot  bring  their  flocks  and  their  rams  ;  but,  like 
those  who  live  remote  from  Jerusalem,  when  they  come  up  to  worship  at  the  feast, 
they  shall  bring  "their  silver  and  their  gold  with  them."    When  we  give  up 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

ourselves  to  God  we  must,  with  ourselves,  give  up  all  we  have  to  Him.  If  we  honour 
Him  with  our  spirits,  we  wiU  honour  Him  with  our  substance.     III.  To  whom  thbt 

SHALL  DEVOTE  AND  DEDICATE  THEMSELVES  AND  ALL  THEY  ARE  WORTH.      To    "the 

name  of  the  Lord  thy  God ; "  to  God  as  the  Lord  of  all,  and  the  Church's  God 
and  King,  even  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  whom  Israel  worships  as  a  holy  One,  in 
the  beauty  of  holiness,  "because  He  hath  glorified  thee."  The  honour  God  puts 
upon  His  Church  and  people  should  not  only  engage  us  to  honour  them,  but  invite 
us  to  join  ourselves  to  them.  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for  God  is  with  you  "  (Zech. 
viii.  23).     {Ibid,) 

Ver.  11.  Therefore  thy  gfates  shall  he  open  continually. — Open  gate* : — "  Therefore 

thy  gates,"  etc.  1.  Because  thou  hast  no  reason  to  fear  thine  enemies.  2.  Because 
thou  hast  reason  to  expect  thy  friends.  {M.Henry.)  The  ever-ready  Christ : — Christ 
is  always  ready  to  entertain  those  that  come  to  Him,  is  never  out  of  the  way,  nor  can 
they  ever  come  unseasonably.     {Ibid.) 

Yer.  12.  For  the  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  Thee  shall  perish. — Th» 
eharacter  and  doom  of  a  corrupt  nation : — I.  The  character  of  a  corrttpt  nation. 
The  text  implies — 1.  That  there  is  a  certain  course  of  human  life  which  the  Bible 
recognizes  as  serving  the  Lord.  2.  That  nations  as  well  as  individuals  are  bound  to 
pursue  that  course.  There  is  no  sentiment  more  common,  none  more  philosophically 
absurd,  none  more  morally  pernicious  than  this :  that  communities  of  men  are 
relieved  from  obligations  whicn  are  binding  upon  individuals.  II.  The  doom  of  A 
corrupt  nation.  "  They  shall  perish,  yea,  those  nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted." 
1.  The  doom  is  most  calamitous.  "It  shall  perish."  (1)  Perish  as  to  their  national 
existence.  Their  commerce  shall  waste  away  ;  their  government  shall  be  dissolved  ; 
all  the  institutions  they  glory  in  shall  die  out.  The  whole  land  shall  be  desolate  as 
an  old  castle.  Many  great  nations  have  thus  died.  Where  are  the  empires  of  the 
Pharaohs,  the  Belshazzars,  the  Alexanders  and  the  Csesars  ?  They  have  perished, 
they  have  utterly  wasted.  (2)  But  there  is  a  more  solemn  sense  still  m  which 
nations  perish,  that  is,  in  a  spiritual  sense.  They  shall  lose  their  souls.  Not  their 
existence,  not  their  consciousness,  not  their  memories ;  but  their  mercies,  their 
friendships,  their  hopes,  their  heaven,  their  God.  2.  The  doom  is  most  certain.  It 
is  here  threatened  with  emphasis — "  they  shall  perish,  yea,"  etc.  AU  analogy  indi- 
cates its  certainty.  Our  subject  explains — (1)  National  convulsions.  (2)  The  true 
method  of  promoting  national  stability.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  13.  The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come  unto  thee. — Trees  employed  in  the  8ervte$ 
of  the  Church: — It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  the  reference  be  to  bmlding  materials 
for  the  sacred  edifice,  or  to  ornamental  trees  planted  in  the  temple-courts.  {Prof, 
J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Variety  in  unity: — Variety  of  instrumentality  and  operation 
subordinate  to  unity  of  purpose  is  a  striking  feature  in  all  the  works  of  God.  This  law 
provides  for  beauty  as  well  as  use.  The  text  teaches  us  that  the  method  by  which 
God  works  in  nature  is  also  the  method  by  which  He  works  in  grace — that  the  law 
of  variety  in  unity  is  the  law  according  to  which  He  consolidates  and  extends  His 
kingdom  among  mauMnd.  The  allusion  and  the  doctrine  are  equally  clear.  The 
allusion  is  to  the  various  trees  of  Lebanon  employed  by  Solomon  for  utility  and 
beauty  in  the  erection  of  the  temple  in  Jerusalem.  Varying  in  size,  and  quality, 
and  appearance  of  wood,  they  were  all  deemed  necessary  for  the  i)urpose  of  beautt- 
fying  the  place,  that  was  to  be  made  more  beautiftd  and  glorious  still  by  the  majesty 
and  grace  of  the  indwelling  God.  The  doctrine  is  that,  in  like  manner,  various 
agencies — men  of  difierent  periods  and  nations,  men  of  diflFerent  positions,  talents, 
and  attainments,  men  of  opposite  creeds  and  mental  tastes — are  used  by  God  in  the 
erection  and  adornment  of  that  spiritual  temple  which  He  makes  His  special  abode, 
the  magnificence  and  glory  of  which,  outliving  the  desolations  of  time,  shall  shine 
to  His  praise  through  the  ages  of  eternity.  (  W.  Walters.)  Diverse  agencies  in  the 
ChMrch : — I.  The  illttstrations  of  this  doctrine  are  manifold.  1.  The  first  I 
notice  is  that  which  is  supplied  us  in  the  structure  of  the  Bible.  To  a^  superficial 
observer  the  Bible  seems  a  collection  of  small  books  bound  together  without  any 
connecting-link.  But  if  we  come  to  study  this  collection  of  books  carefuUy,  we  shall 
see,  underlying  all  diversities,  a  unity  which  indicates  that  all  have  been  originated 
and  guided  by  one  supreme  mind.  2.  Certain  periods  require  certain  orders  of  men 
and  certain  gifts,  not  necessary  at  other  times.  8.  Further,  the  peculiar  qualities  of 
various  races  and  tribes  serve  to  extend  the  truth  of  God,  and  promote  the  growth 


CHAP.  Lz.]  ISAIAH.  345 

and  perfection  of  His  Chnrch.  Christianity  does  not  recognize  nationalities  as  such. 
Jew  and  Gentile,  Greek  and  Barbarian,  European  and  African,  American  and  Asiatic, 
— all  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  Still,  God  sanctifies  all  national  characteristics  to  His 
OTacious  piirpose  of  making  Christianity  universally  triumphant.  Jewish  reverence, 
Grecian  intelligence  and  taste,  Eoman  courage  and  honour,  Scandinavian  enterprise, 
the  practical  energy  of  the  Anglo-Saxon,  the  speculative  inquiry  and  patient  toil  of 
the  German,  the  Frenchman's  brilliant  vivacity  and  grace,  the  Italian's  glowing 
imagination,  the  ardent  negro,  and  the  Oriental  full  of  subtlety  and  disputation — 
all  are  wrought  by  the  Master-BuUder  iuto  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  structure 
He  is  rearing  to  His  honour.  4.  Nor  can  denominational  distinctions  be  regarded 
as  altogether  an  evil ;  for  (Jod  makes  them  all  subserve  the  complete  manifestation 
of  His  many-sided  Gospel,  and  the  wider  extension  of  His  kingdom.  5.  Original 
differences  of  mental  constitution  and  temperament  have  also  their  place  and  fanction. 
There  are  diversities  of  gifts,  yet  there  is  the  same  Spirit ;  there  are  differences  of 
administrations,  yet  there  is  the  same  Lord  ;  there  are  diversities  of  operations,  yet 
it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in  aU.  II.  Peactical  bemarks.  1.  We  nmy 
be  sure  that  where  God  has  designed  and  qualified  men  for  work  in  His  Church  H!e 
will  prepare  the  way  for  their  usefulness.     2.  Every  man  should  try  to  find  his  true 

Ksition,  and  prove  faithful  iu  it.  3.  The  subject  affords  encouragement  to  the 
iblest  of  the  Lord's  servants.  All  have  their  place  and  use.  4.  Are  we  not 
reminded  of  the  duty  of  charity  towards  all  engaged  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  ?  Too 
often  the  diversities  of  Christian  men  are  occasions  for  jealousy  and  strife.  If  we 
are  Christians,  we  are  all  plants  of  God's  right  hand  planting ;  let  us  be  content  to 
bloom  after  our  kind,  and  rejoice  in  that  we  aU  contribute  something  to  the  glory  of 
the  Master's  garden.  {IMd.)  I  will  make  the  place  of  My  feet  glorious. — "  The 
place  ofMyfeef": — I.  The  scene  of  this  special  Divine  glory.  "The  place  of 
My  feet."  The  sacred  writers  speak  of  God's  feet  as  indicating  His  personal  presence. 
The  place  of  God's  feet,  or  His  footstool,  was,  in  ancient  times,  the  temple  at  Jeru- 
salem. The  allusion  of  the  language  is  to  a  royal  throne.  Jehovah  is  conceived  of 
as  the  King  of  Israel,  the  King  of  kings,  whose  throne  is  in  heaven,  but  His  footstool 
in  the  earthly  temple  ;  and  thither  the  Israelites  as  His  true  subjects  were  required 
to  repair,  to  render  homage  to  their  great  King,  and  bend  lowly  before  His  footstool. 
AU  this  was,  in  turn,  a  figure  of  the  better  things  reserved  for  us.  The  Jewish 
particularity  has  been  broadened  out  into  the  compass  of  the  great  household  of 
faith,  whose  sons  and  daughters  are  drawn  from  all  the  earth's  kindreds,  and  peoples, 
and  tongues.  The  true  Church,  composed  of  all  believers  of  whatever  name  or  nation, 
is  God's  temple — "  the  place  of  His  feet  I "  In  a  real  and  important  sense  the  wide 
earth,  and  the  whole  material  creation,  is  His  footstool,  marked  everywhere  by  the 
broad  footprints  of  the  Creator  revealing  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead.  The  signs 
of  Providence  reveal  the  movements  of  a  present  and  ever-working  God,  exercising 
wise,  and  righteous,  and  benignant  control  over  His  creatures.  II.  The  glory  of 
THE  SCENE.  It  was  the  glory  of  Eden  that  there  God  talked  with  man  face  to  face. 
So  it  is  the  glory  of  heaven  that  there  He  replenishes  His  saints  with  the  joys  of  His 
eternal  fellowship.  It  was  the  glory  of  Sinai  that  there  He  displayed  His  grandeur 
and  proclaimed  His  law ;  and  of  Tabor  and  Calvary  that  there  He  unfolded  His 
hidden  majestjy,  and  the  fulness  of  His  mercy.  And  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Church 
that  it  is  distmguished  by  the  clearest  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence  and 
grace.  What  are  these  manifestations  ?  God  makes  the  place  of  His  feet  glorious — 
1.  By  the  worship  that  is  there  rendered  and  accepted.  2.  By  the  spiritual  glory 
that  is  there  created.  "  The  glory  of  Lebanon,"  etc.  The  glory  of  the  Church  lies 
in  the  possession  and  exercise  of  the  grandest  and  noblest  moral  principles — those 
that  are  most  assimilated  to  the  Divine  nature.  The  true  purpose  of  the  Church, 
the  final  end  of  its  warfare,  is  to  be  a  living  witness  to  mankind  of  these  moral 
principles,  to  be  an  embodied  protest  against  aU  the  money-worship  and  pleasure- 
worship,  and  therefore  worship  of  the  world  ;  to  be  a  revelation  to  man  of  higher 
interests  and  blessings,  and  a  Diviner  greatness.  It  is  when  she  is  most  distinctly 
Godlike  and  Ohristlike  that  men  fall  down  and  confess  that  God  is  in  her  of  a  truth. 
"The  glory  of  the  Lord  is  then  risen  upon  her."  3.  By  attracting  immense  and 
various  multitudes  from  aU  quarters  of  the  globe  to  His  Church.  Though  numbers 
be  not  the  chief,  they  sure  a  real  element  of  glory.  4.  By  the  blessedness  there  con- 
ferred. All  the  elements  of  the  Church's  glory  hitherto  enumerated  are  elements  of 
blessedness ;  but  there  are  other  special  sources  of  that  blessedness.  (1)  There  is 
the  blessedness  of  inviolable  security.  The  greatest  earthly  monarchy  has  no  power 
to  protect  itself  against  assault,  against  even  successfiil  assault.    It  is  the  glory  of 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  uc. 

(Jod's  house  that  it  is  safe.  It  is  founded  on  a  rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  cannot 
prevail  against  it.  (2)  The  absolute  and  unspeakable  splendour  of  the  Church — 
the  splendour  of  her  purity — the  splendour  of  her  joy.    {J.  Riddell.) 

Yer.  14.  The  sons  also  of  them  that  afSicted  thee  shall  come  bending  unto 
thee. — Honour  done  to  the  Church : — A  promise  like  this  is  made  to  the  Church  of 
Philadelphia  (Rev.  iii.  9)  ;  and  it  is  intended  to  be — 1.  A  mortification  to  the  proud 
oppressors  of  the  Church.  2.  An  exaltation  to  the  poor,  oppressed  ones  of  the 
Church.  2.  And  this  is  the  honour  that  shall  be  done  them  :  they  shall  have  au 
opportunity  of  doing  good  to  those  who  have  done  evil  to  them,  and  saving  those 
alive  that  have  afflicted  and  despised  them.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  a  good  man,  and  he 
accounts  it  an  honour,  to  show  mercy  to  those  with  whom  he  has  found  no  mercy. 
{M.  Henry.)  The  city  of  the  lord. — The  dty  of  the  Lord : — 1.  He  hath  built  it  for 
the  honour  of  His  majesty.  2.  It  bears  His  name.  3.  He  hath  fortified  it  with 
impregnable  walls  and  bulwarks.  4.  He  hath  beautified  it  with  the  graces  of  His 
spirit.  5.  He  hath  replenished  it  with  the  blessings  of  His  goodness.  6.  He  hath 
jfelicitated  it  with  His  gracious  presence.  7.  It  is  the  city  wherein  reside  the 
peculiar  people  of  God,  who  are  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  on  whom  His  eyes  and 
His  heart  are  continually  fixed.  8.  He  esteems  it  above  all  the  kingdoms  and 
empires  of  the  world.  {E.  Macculloeh.)  An  ideal  city: — That  city  is  truly  great 
and  honourable,  it  is  strong,  it  is  rich,  it  is  safe,  it  is  beautiful,  it  is  the  most 
desirable  place  that  can  be  to  live  in,  which  is  the  city  of  the  Lord,  which  He 
owns,  in  which  He  dwells,  in  which  religion  is  uppermost.     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  16.  Thou  shalt  also  suck  the  milk  of  the  Gentiles. — The  Church  served  by 
nations  and  kings : — The  nations  and  their  kings  now  give  up  to  the  Church  their 
vital  substance,  as  a  mother  or  nurse  gives  to  the  chUd  the  milk  of  her  breasts  ;  and 
the  Church  thereby  has  rich  nourishment  for  prosperous  growth,  ever  fresh  material 
for  joy  and  thanksgiving.  We  can  by  no  means  think  of  enrichment  by  plunder  ; 
the  sucking  is  that  of  a  child,  not  a  vampire.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Religion 
ad/oanced  by  wealth  and  power : — All  interpreters  agree  with  the  Targum  in  applying 
this  verse  to  the  influx  of  wealth  and  power  and  whatever  else  the  kings  and  nations 
of  the  earth  can  contribute  to  the  progress  of  the  true  religion.  The  figure  is 
derived  firom  Deut.  xxxiii.  19.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  perpetual  excellencies  of  the 
Oospel  Church  (vers.  15,  16) : — Considering  how  short  Jerusalem's  excellency  was, 
and  how  short  it  came  of  the  vast  compass  of  this  promise,  we  must  look  for  the 
full  accomplishment  of  it  in  the  perpetual  excellencies  of  the  Gospel  Church,  far 
exceeding  those  of  the  Old  Testament  Church,  and  the  glorious  privileges  and 
advantages  of  the  Christian  religion,  which  are  indeed  the  "joy  of  many  genera- 
tions." Two  things  are  here  spoken  of  as  her  excellency  and  joy,  in  opposition  to 
her  having  been  forsaken  and  hated.  1.  She  shall  find  herself  countenanced  by  her 
neighbours.  The  nations  and  their  kings  that  are  brought  to  embrace  Christianity 
shall  lay  themselves  out  for  the  good  of  the  Church,  and  maintain  its  interests  with 
the  tenderness  and  afi'ection  that  the  nurse  shows  to  the  child  at  her  breast.  2.  She 
shall  find  herself  countenanced  by  her  God.  "Thou  shalt  know  that  I,  the  Lord, 
am  thy  Saviour,"  etc.  {M.  Henry.)  Sucking  the  milk  of  the  nations: — Not  suck 
their  blood — that  is  not  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  17.  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold. — Th^  kingdom  of  God: — This  passage 
occurs  amid  the  glowing  prophecies  concerning  the  millennial  kingdom.  It  has, 
however,  its  application  to  the  kingdom  in  its  present  state.  I.  The  kingdom  of 
Christ  recognizes  different  grades,  qualities,  valttes,  uses.  Each  of  these 
is  most  effective  in  its  own  place.  We  would  much  sooner  commit  ourselves  to  a 
vessel  of  steel  than  to  one  whose  hull  was  made  of  gold.  No  greater  calamity  could 
happen  to  the  world  than  to  turn  all  substances  into  gold.  In  the  Church  variety 
of  talent  and  gifts,  differences  of  classes  are  essential  to  prosperity.  God  never 
repeats  Himself.  Equality  is  impossible,  and  if  possible  would  be  disastrous. 
II.  All  things  take  on  enhanced  value  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  "For 
brass  I  wUl  bring  gold, "  etc.  Wherever  the  Church  of  Christ  comes,  instantly  all 
things  leap  into  higher  value — property,  schools,  trade,  institutions,  government, 
the  ramily,  the  individual.  You  may  interrogate  in  just  four  different  directions — 
Nature,  the  Rational  World,  Sin,  the  Kingdom.  Nature  replies:  "I  change 
nothing.  I  fiimiah  the  ore  ;  I  cannot  bring  out  the  metal ;  I  can  t  change  even  the 
place  of  a  stone."    Rational  World  replies :  "  I  oan  change  the  shapes,  the  places, 


CHAP.  LX.]  ISAIAH.  347 

the  combinations  of  things,  but  I  cannot  change  the  substances.  I  cannot  turn  iron 
into  silver,  wood  into  brass,  stones  into  iron."  Sin  rises  in  its  black  monstrosity,  and 
says  :  "  Yes,  I  have  power  to  change.  I  can  reach  up,  lay  my  hand  on  the  twenty- 
two  carat  gold  and  drag  it  down  to  silver  ;  I  can  drag  the  silver  down  to  brass,  the 
brass  to  iron,  the  iron  to  stone,  the  stone  to  wood,  the  wood  I  can  bum  with  the 
torch  of  hate,  and  scatter  the  ashes  on  the  red-hot  floor  of  heU — I  can  do  that ! " 
Sin  can  drag  the  genius  or  the  archangel  down  to  the  abyss  of  a  hopeless  hades.  It 
is  only  the  Biagdom  that  can  say :  "Everything  I  touch  shall  increase  in  value.  I 
can  take  even  the  devil's  outcasts  and  change  them  into  burning  seraphs."  III.  This 

ENHANCEMENT  OF  VALUES  IS  BY  AND  THEOXJGH  SUCCESSIVE  GRADES — WOod,  stoue, 

iron,  brass,  silver,  gold.  God's  method  of  working  is  by  development  through 
grades.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  reaching  perfection  at  a  bound.  It  is  a  walk,  a 
race — meaning  steady  progress  by  steps.  IV.  The  divine  agency  is  emphasized. 
"I  will  bring."  Transformations  in  human  nature  are  effected  through  Divine 
power  and  grace.  {A.  McE.  IVylie.)  The  golden  age: — The  golden  age  of  humanity 
IS  in  the  future.  This  age  is  here  represented  as  so  far  excelling  all  future  ages  as 
gold  excels  brass.  Morafly  this  may  include  three  things.  I.  That  fob  practical 
atheism  there  will  be  Godliness.  II.  That  for  dominant  materialism 
there  will  be  spirituality.  III.  That  for  controlling  selfishness  there 
will  be  benevolence.  {Homilist.)  The  wonderful  exchange: — This  seems  like 
a  very  unthrifty  kind  of  commerce.  It  promises  only  the  most  speedy  and  utter 
bankruptcy.  Surely  one  making  such  an  offer  must  have  great  treasures,  and  great 
love.  There  must  be  a  perfect  confidence  that  there  can  be  no  exhaustion  of  treasure, 
nor  any  exhaustion  in  the  delight  of  perpetually  giving  others  the  best  end  of  the 
bargain.  No  one  can  have  such  confidence  and  feeling  but  God.  It  is  God,  the 
infinite,  who  proposes  to  give  gold  for  brass.  It  is  just  what  He  is  constantly  doing 
in  nature,  giving  out  the  best  for  the  worst.  God  always  sees  and  seeks  the  highest 
possible  thing  in  every  nature.  And  He  wants  us  to  catch  His  penetrative  insight. 
"  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  the  heart  of  man  conceived  the  glories  God 
hath  prepared  for  those  who  love  Him."  But  God  is  constantly  trying  to  reveal 
them  imto  us  by  His  Spirit.  He  is  ever  trying  to  give  us  gold  for  brass,  and  silver 
for  iron.  This  ought  to  be  good  news  for  man.  He  is  always  willing  to  get  the 
best  end  of  a  bargain.  Now  there  are  various  kinds  of  life,  and  many  degrees  of 
each  kind.  There  is  what  is  known  as  physical,  mental,  emotional  and  spiritual 
life.     Evidently  there  is  life  that  is  as  clay,  as  ore,  as  iron,  as  brass,  as  silver,  as 

fold.  God  all  the  time  offers  to  every  man  to  change  his  hard  iron  of  life  into 
rass,  his  brass  into  silver,  his  sUver  into  gold.  How  does  He  propose  to  do  it  ? 
On  precisely  the  principles  that  man  acts  in  every-day  life.  Indeed,  God  has  made 
it  impossible  for  men  to  succeed  at  all  in  the  life  that  now  is,  except  in  the  laws 
that  give  success  in  the  life  to  come.  Just  as  man  gives  muscle  for  bread,  or  exertion 
of  muscle  that  all  the  delights  of  life  may  be  his,  just  as  he  gives  a  few  midnights 
to  study  that  he  may  be  everlastingly  wise,  just  as  he  gives  self-denial  that  he  may 
have  exuberance  of  strength,  just  as  he  gives  aU  the  things  that  he  hath,  in  order 
that  he  may  keep  his  life,  so  God  always  asks  your  iron  when  He  would  give  brass, 
asks  your  brass  when  He  would  give  silver,  asks  your  silver  when  He  would  give 
gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  you  may  be  rich,  and  have  crowns  of  eternal  glory.  The 
trouble  with  men  is  they  give  their  muscle  for  bread,  but  will  not  give  iron  to  God 
for  brass.  I  think  it  is  a  statement  capable  of  vindication,  that  God  does  not  enrich 
by  legacy,  but  by  exchange.  Every  one  that  is  endowed  is  in  great  peril.  Look  at 
tne  great  heroes  that  God  has  made  in  our  history :  they  fill  the  earth  and  rise  into 
the  skies.  Were  they  endowed  ?  Not  one,  except '  with  faculties ;  they  had  to 
develop  their  virtues.  So  in  the  case  of  all  moral  greatness.  God  gives  the  con- 
ditions, the  opportunities ;  but  man  must  work  with  God.  Did  the  hmnan  soul 
that  Christ  associated  with  Himself  submit  to  this  plan  of  development,  and 
especially  did  the  Son  of  God,  begotten  in  holiness  and  perfection,  submit  Himself 
to  this  law  that  has  been  applied  to  aU  men  ?  If  this  shall  be  answered  in  the 
afBrmative,  we  must  conclude  that  there  is  no  other  possible  way  to  greatness  and 
road  to  perfection.  It  is  evident  at  first  glance,  that  the  man  Christ  Jesus  con- 
stantly accepted  this  law.  He  was  obedient  to  His  parents,  giving  up  His  will  to 
them.  His  announced  principle  of  life  was :  "  I  came  not  to  do  My  own  will,  but 
the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me."  He  gave  up  the  riches  of  silver,  and  for  our  sakes 
became  poor.  He  vacated  the  throne  of  the  universe  and  became  Servant  of  servants 
of  men.  The  Lord  of  life  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross. 
He  gave  up  all  sHver,  brass,  iron,  stones,  and  wood.    Was  there  any  gold  in  return  t 


348  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.ix. 

"Wherefore,  because  of  this,  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him."  There  can  be  no 
mistake.  We  see  plainly  the  way  to  highest  strength  of  character  and  greatest 
height  of  glory.     It  is  not  the  way  of  present  gratification,  of  selfishness,  of  the 

Eursuit  of  personal  and  family  ends,  but  a  giving  up  of  personal  good  for  God's 
igher  good,  a  selling  of  lower  for  higher.  Once  God  opened  the  windows  of 
heaven  and  poured  out  water  enough  to  drown  a  world.  Then  He  takes  that  great 
deluge  of  abundance  and  makes  it  an  emblem  of  the  abundance  of  spiritual  bless- 
ing. Bring  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse,  the  little  tenths  of  daUy  gain,  and  see 
if  I  wiU  not  open  the  windows  of  heaven  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing  that  there 
shall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it.     {Homiletic  Bevieto.) 

Yer.  18.  But  thou  shalt  call  thy  walls  Salvation. —  Walls,  salvation;  gates, 
praise : — Consider  how  salvation  is  a  wall,  and  how  gates  are  praise.  1.  There  are 
three  safeties  which  a  sinner  wants.  He  wants  to  be  saved  (1)  From  the  condemna- 
tion of  his  sins.  (2)  From  the  power  of  his  sins.  (3)  From  the  conflict  and  presence 
of  His  sins.  Therefore  a  man's  salvation  comes  to  him  with  three  unfoldings.  This 
threefold  salvation  is,  to  every  man  that  receives  it,  as  a  wall.  On  the  one  side, 
towards  the  adversary,  it  is  a  wall  of  fire ;  on  the  other  side,  as  it  shows  itself  to 
him  that  is  within  it,  it  is  shelter.  It  is  beauteous,  as  with  all  bright  and  precious 
stones,  inlaid  with  all  the  loveliness  and  the  attributes  of  God.  And  whatever 
comes  through  that  wall  to  touch  a  man  has  first  touched  and  pierced  his  Saviour ; 
for  aU  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  aU  the  power  of  God,  and  all  the  glory  of  God, 
and  aU  the  work  of  the  great  Mediator,  go  to  make  the  eternity  and  the  sufficiency 
of  that  great  bulwark.  2.  "Thou  shalt  call  thy  gates  Praise."  What  is  praise! 
The  joy  of  a  happy  spirit,  pouring  itself  back  into  the  bosom  of  God  as  itis  only 
fountain.  Through  the  walls  of  salvation,  the  Christian  enters  into  a  perfect  peace 
— that  with  a  happy  heart  he  may  go  out  praisingly.  In  every  object  m  nature,  he 
likes  to  see  some  reflection  of  an  unseen  world  ;  m  every  providence,  he  traces  a 
Father's  hand.  He  has  thoughts  high  above,  that  make  him  walk  this  world  an 
independent  man.  Heaven  is  gilding  all  the  distance  to  him.  He  comes  at  last  to 
Zion  "with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  his  head."  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Thy 
gates  Praise. — Sotigs  and  hymns  have  ever  been  the  most  interesting  and  inspiring 
of  human  compositions  ;  if  we  draw  a  line  of  arbitrary  distinction  between  the  two, 
then  I  would  say  that  Song  represents  the  music  of  the  blood,  while  the  Hymn 
represents  the  music  of  the  soul.  It  is  in  song  that  we  utter  the  music  of  Nature  ; 
it  is  in  the  hymn  we  utter  the  music  of  grace  and  Divine  holiness.  {E.  Paxton  Ifood.) 
The  gates  of  Praise: — I  do  not  wonder  that  the  gates  of  the  Church  are  called 
Praise.  I  do  not  wonder  at  it,  because  it  is  clear  that  praise  opens — no  !  we  cannot 
tell  what  are  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  until  we  have  passed  through  the 
gates  of  Praise.  We  do  not  know  what  God  hath  reserved  for  them  that  love  Him, 
untU  we  have  passed  through  the  gates  of  Praise.  As  we  sometimes  walk  on  from 
step  to  step,  from  landing-place  to  landing-place,  and  scene  to  scene,  imtU  at  last 
we  reach  some  elevation,  when  the  whole  of  the  grand  panorama  bursts  upon  our 
astonished  vision,  and  the  walk,  and  the  steep  ascent,  and  the  hiU,  and  even  the 
beauties  of  the  way,  are  alike  forgotten  in  the  overwhelming  splendour  of  the  scene ; 
so  is  it  when  we  are  able  to  pass  through,  or  even  to  look  through,  the  gates  of 
Praise  ;  even  the  consolations  of  prayer  are  all  lost  by  reason  of  the  glory  that 
excelleth  ;  we  step  from  the  finite  to  the  infinite,  when  we  look  over  the  scenery,  or 
breathe  the  atmosphere  of  praise.     {Ibid.)     The  gates  of  Praise : — I.  Praise  is  thx 

GATE    BY  WHICH  WE    PASS  OUT   OF    OURSELVES.      II.    It    IS    BY  THIS    PATH    THAT 

THE  BELIEVER  PASSES  INTO  NEW  RELATIONS.     He  enters  the  Church  through  "the 

fates  of  Praise."    It  is  impossible  that  there  can  be  an  ungrateful  Christian. 
II.  Gates  within  gates,  gates  to  the  city,  and  gates  within  the  city ;  the  gate- 
way   BY    WHICH    WE    PASS    TO    HIGHER    KNOWLEDGE,    AND    TO    HIGHER    LIFE,     IS 

Praise.  {Hid.)  Praise  because  of  salvation: — The  Rabbins  say  that  when  (Jod 
created  the  universe  He  asked  the  highest  seraph  what  he  thought  of  the  work  of 
His  hands — and  he  replied  that  nothing  was  wanting  but  that  it  should  become 
vocal,  and  be  able  audibly  to  speak  its  Maker's  praise.  But  in  the  work  of  salvation 
it  is  80 :  "to  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne "  it  rises  in  the  grandeur  of  loud  peals 
of  harmony.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  19.  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day. — The  lower  giving  place  to 
the  higher : — The  prophet  bids  his  people  look  forward  to  a  time  when  even  the  sun 
and  moon  shall  become  needless  to  them ;  when  in  some  new  and  more  direct 


CHAP.  LX.]  ISAIAH,  349 

experience  of  God  they  shall  need  nothing  to  reflect  His  light  to  them,  but  drink 
immediately  from  Himself  His  strength  and  inspiration.     That  seems  to  be  the 
meaning  of  the  words ;  and  so  it  points  us  to  one  feature  which  belongs  to  every 
progress,  the  power  to  do  without  one  thing  after  another  which  has  before  been 
essential,  the  way  in  which,  as  we  advance  to  higher  and  higher  supplies,  we  are 
able  to  gather  out  of  them  what  we  used  to  get  from  lower  sources.     It  is  like  that 
verse  in  St.  John's  description  of  the  New  Jerusalem :  "I  saw  no  temple  therein, 
for  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it."    Or  like  these 
soberer  words  of  St.  Paul's  autobiography:   "When  I  became  a  man  I  put  away 
childish  things."    This  life  that  rises  to  the  highest  helps  and  companies  is  able 
easily  to  do  without  the  lower.     {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)     Things  once  needed  may 
cease  to  be  n,ecessary : — As  we  climb  a  high  mountain  we  must  keep  our  footing  strong 
upon  one  ledge  until  we  have  fastened  ourselves  strongly  on  the  next.     Then  we 
may  let  the  lower  foothold  go.     The  lives  of  men  who  have  been  always  growing  are 
strewed  along  their  whole  course  with  the  things  which  they  have  learned  to  do 
without.     As  the  track  of  an  army  marching  deep  into  an  enemy's  country  is 
scattered  all  along  with  the  equipage  which  the  men  seemed  to  find  necessary  when 
they  started,  but  which  they  have  learned  to  do  without  as  the  exigencies  of  their 
march  grew  greater,  and  they  found  that  these  provisions  and  equipments  were 
partly  such  as  they  did  not  need  at  all,  and  partly  such  as  they  could  gather  out 
of  the  land  through  which  they  marched ;  so  from  the  time  when  the  child  casts 
his  leading  strings  aside  because  his  legs  are  strong  enough  to  carry  him  alone,  the 
growing  man  goes  on  for  ever  leaving  each  help  for  a  higher,  until  at  last,  in  that 
great  change  to  which  Isaiah's  words  seem  to  apply,  he  can  do  without  sun  and 
moon  as  he  enters  into  the  immediate  presence  and  essential  life  of  God.     {lUd.) 
A^  token  of  growth : — As  we  grow  we  come  to  the  capacity  of  higher  pleasures  and 
higher  occupations,  and  so  let  go  the  lower  ones ;  not  by  compulsion,  because  we 
cannot  hold  them  any  longer,  but  from  the  satisfaction  of  our  newer  lives  ;  because 
we  have  got  something  else  better  than  they  are,  and  can  do  without  them  now. 
(Ibid.)     The  symbol  and  th^  reality : — Let  us  take  two  or  three  instances  of  those 
things  which  are  valuable  as  symbols,  but  which  he  is  able  to  do  without  who  has 
got  beyond  the  symbol  and  gained  the  reality  which  it  represents.     1.  Take  the 
instance  of  wealth.     There  are  some  men  who  can  do  without  being  rich — plenty  of 
men  who  have  to,  but  some  men  who  can,  can  easUy,  can  without  discontent  or 
trouble.     They  love  comfort  and  respectability  as  much  as  these  their  neighbours. 
What  is  the  difference?     Simply  this,  that  they  have  found  that  comfort  and 
respectability,  whUe  money  is  their  natural  symbol,  are  not  dependent  upon  money, 
and  that  one  may  reach  past  the  symbol,  and  take  the  reality,  and  let  the  symbol 
go.     2.  Or  take  another  symbol.     Praise  is  good.     To  be  applauded  by  our  fellow- 
men,  to  hear  our  ambitions  about  ourselves  caught  up  by  their  testifying  cheers,  to 
have  our  own  best  hopes  for  our  own  lives  confirmed  by  their  appreciation  of  us,  that 
is  a  true  delight  for  any  man.     To  be  able  to  do  without  men's  praise  because  we  do 
not  feel  its  value,  because  morosely  and  selfishly  we  do  not  care  what  men  think, 
that  is  bad ;  that  is  a  sign  of  feebleness  and  conceit.     To  feel  it  is  wretched,  and  to 
affect  to  feel  it  is  detestable.     But  to  be  able  to  do  without  men's  praise  because 
that  which  their  praise  stands  for  is  dearer  to  us  than  the  praise  is,  and^it  so  happens 
that  we  cannot  have  both  of  them,  that  is  a  wholly  different  thing.     Men's  praise 
stands  for  goodness.     Every  man  feels  that  if  it  does  not  mean  that,  if  it  is  given 
to  iniquity  just  as  freely  as  to  goodness,  praise  loses  all  its  value.     Praise  is  the 

rbol ;  goodness  is  the  reality.  3.  So  it  runs  everywhere.  The  symbols  of  the 
^)er  pleasures  are  the  mere  animal  indulgences — eating  and  drinking,  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh.  They  stand  for  intellectual  and  spiritual  joys.  How  natural  their 
symbolism  is.  The  Bible  talks  of  "hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness." 
David  says,  "Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good."  Jesus  tells  His  disciples  about 
"eating  His  flesh  and  drinking  His  blood."  The  superficial  emotions  of  the  senses 
stand  for  and  represent  the  profound  emotions  of  the  soul.  In  the  harmonious  life 
the  two  will  live  in  harmony.  The  symbol  and  reality,  the  body's  and  the  soul's 
enjoyment,  will  be  complete  together.  But  when  in  this  unharmonious  life  which 
we  Uve  the  symbol  and  reality  come  into  unnatural  conflict,  when  either  the  soul 
must  be  sacrificed  to  the  body  or  the  body  to  the  soul,  he  who  really  knows  what 
the  soul's  happiness  is  does  not  hesitate.  Here  is  the  power  of  true  self-sacrifice  ; 
here  is  the  secret  which  takes  out  of  it  all  the  bitterness  and  brutality.  Always  it 
is  the  ^ving  up  of  a  symbol  that  you  may  have  the  reality.  In  the  great  sacrifice 
of  aU,  Olmst  lays  down  His  life,  bat  it  is  that  He  may  take  it  again.    Do  you  think 


S80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lx. 

that  Christ  did  not  care  for  life  and  all  that  makes  life  beautiful  to  us  ?  Surely  He 
did  ;  but  He  cared  more  for  that  which  they  represent — the  living  purely,  the  doing 
of  His  Father's  will,  and  the  serving  of  His  brethren.  4.  I  am  very  much  impressed 
by  the  truth  of  all  this  as  concerns  the  Christian  Church.  She  has  her  symbols  and 
her  ordinances,  and  she  has  her  true  and  inner  life.  Her  outward  ways  of  living 
really  belong  with  her  inward  power.  In  a  perfectly  harmonious  world  there  never 
oould  be  any  conflict.  In  heaven  the  outward  and  the  inward  Church  shall  absolutely 
correspond  ;  but  here  and  now  the  Church  may  be  so  set  upon  her  symbols  and  her 
regularities  that  she  shall  fail  of  doing  her  most  perfect  work  and  living  her  most 
perfect  Ufe.  The  Christian  may  be  so  bound  to  rites  and  ceremonies  that  he  loses 
the  God  to  whom  they  ought  to  bring  him  near.  Here  it  certainly  is  true  that  no 
symbol  is  doing  its  true  work  unless  it  is  educating  those  who  use  it  to  do  without 
itself  if  need  be.  {Ibid.)  Importami  questions: — 1.  First  you  wUl  ask.  How  can  I 
tell  the  symbol  from  the  reality,  and  so  know  what  things  it  is  good  to  hold  less 
and  less,  what  things  it  is  good  to  hold  more  and  more  indispensable  ?  It  is  not 
easy  to  give  the  answer  in  a  rule.  But  the  answer  no  doubt  lies  in  a  certain  feeling 
of  spirituality  and  infiniteness  and  eternity,  which  belongs  to  those  things  which  it 
is  good  for  a  man  not  to  be  able  to  do  without.  Those  things  which  serve  the  soul 
rather  than  the  body,  those  which  serve  the  whole  of  us  and  not  one  special  part, 
and  those  which  can  serve  us  longest — those  are  the  things  which  we  want  to  make 
more  and  more  indispensable.  Those  things  whose  usefulness  belongs  mainly  to  the 
body,  those  things  which  help  some  part  of  us  and  not  the  whole,  and  those  things 
whose  use  is  temporary — it  is  not  good  for  any  of  us  to  have  to  say,  "  I  cannot  do 
without  these  things."  This  is,  perhaps,  the  nearest  that  we  can  come  to  rules ; 
but  he  who  lives  in  the  spirit  of  these  rules  acquires  a  certain  sort  of  feeling  of  the 
infiniteness  of  some  things  and  the  finiteness  of  others,  so  that  renown,  wealth, 
dignity,  sympathy,  comfort,  friendship,  amusement,  life,  stand  on  one  side  ;  and 
honour,  truth,  bravery,  purity,  love,  eternity,  God,  stand  on  the  other.  These  last 
he  must  have.  Those  others  he  can  do  without.  The  moment  that  he  touches  any 
new  gift  he  can  tell  to  which  order  it  belongs.  2.  But  then  you  say.  What  then  1 
When  I  have  felt  this  difference,  when  I  know  what  things  I  must  not  aUow  to 
become  indispensable  to  me,  what  shall  I  do  then  ?  Shall  I  throw  all  those  things 
away  1  Shall  I  strip  my  life  instantly  of  all  that  is  not  indispensable,  and  live  only 
in  those  things  which  I  cannot  live  without  ?  No  ;  certainly  not.  That  effort  to 
cast  away  the  symbol  as  soon  as  it  was  seen  to  be  a  symbol  has  been  the  source  of 
much  religious  unhappiness  and  failure,  and  of  much  of  the  wrong  kind  of  separation 
between  religious  and  irreligious  Ufe,  Not  to  give  up  the  symbol,  but  to  hold  it  as 
a  symbol,  with  that  looser  grasp  which  lets  its  inner  reality  escape  into  us,  and  at 
the  same  time  makes  us  always  ready  to  let  it  go  when  the  reality  shall  have  wholly 
opened  from  it,  that  is  the  true  duty  of  the  Christian  as  concerns  the  innocent  things 
of  the  world.  That  was  the  way  in  which  Jesus  always  seemed  to  be  holding 
friendship,  home,  nature,  and  His  own  human  life  ;  never  grasping  them  so  tightly 
that  their  spiritual  meanings  might  not  come  forth  from  them  freely,  nor  that  ELe 
could  not  give  them  up  when  a  higher  vocation  summoned  Him.  3.  And  that  brings 
US  to  the  last  question.  How  shall  I  come  to  count  nothing  indispensable  but  what 
I  really  ought  to,  what  I  really  cannot  do  without  ?  The  answer  to  that  question  is 
in  Christ,  who  holds  the  answers  of  aU  our  questions  for  us.  As  I  read  the  Gospels 
I  can  see  how,  little  by  little,  JesTis  lifted  those  disciples  past  one  conception  of 
necessity  after  another,  until  at  last  they  knew  nothing  that  was  absolutely  necessary 
except  God.  They  began  as  fishermen  who  could  not  do  without  their  nets  and 
boats  and  houses  and  fishing  friends  and  sports  and  gains  and  gossipings.  He  carried 
them  up  till  they  were  crying,  "Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and!^  it  sufficeth  us." 
(Bid.) 

Ver.  20.  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down. — The  world  of  light: — I.  The  sottrob 
OF  THE  LIGHT.  "The  Lord."  TMs  is  true  even  of  the  present  world.  The  light 
which  reason  sheds  on  our  path  is  a  ray  of  His  kindling.  But  here,  in  this 
world  of  ours,  there  are  generally  intermediate  sources  through  which  the  light  we 
have  is  conveyed  to  us.  It  does  not  come  directly  from  God.  In  the  heavenly 
world,  however,  it  will  be  different.  There,  every  intermediate  agency  will  be  done 
away,  and  the  light  that  shines  will  shine  immediately  from  God.  There  are  four 
things  symbolized  in  the  Bible  by  this  word  "light,"  and  all  that  we  shall  know  or 

Jossess  of  each  of  these  four  things  in  heaven,  we  shall  know  or  possess  through 
esus.     1.  Knowledge  (Ps.  cxix.  130).     2.  Holiness  (Rom.  xiii.  12).     8.  Happiness 


CHAP.  IX.]  ISAIAH.  351 

(Ps.  xcvii.  11).  4.  Beauty  or  glory  (John  xviL  24).  In  this  lower  world  we  know 
how  true  it  is  that  there  is  no  beauty  or  glory  that  the  eye  takes  in  for  which  we  are 
not  indebted  to  the  light  that  shines  from  yonder  natui-al  sun.  In  heaven  Jesus  ia 
the  Sun  that  shines  on  alL  II.  The  character  of  the  light.  Three  elements 
of  it  are  mentioned  in  our  text.  "When  we  decompose  the  light  of  the  natural  sun, 
seven  rays  or  colours  are  the  result  of  the  analysis.  But  these  seven  we  know  may 
be  resolved  into  three — the  red,  the  yellow,  and  the  blue.  Thus  there  is  a  trinity  of 
rays  oi  elements  in  the  light  which  the  natural  sim  is  pouring  forth  continually. 
And  it  is  an  interesting  thing  to  find  that  when  we  come  to  analyze  the  light  of  the 
heavenly  world,  the  same  feature  is  found  to  mark  it.  1.  There  is  one  ray  in  this 
light  which  may  be  called  the  continuous  ray.  ' '  Thy  sim  shall  no  more  go  down, 
neithei  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself."  2.  We  have  here  a  perpetual  ray.  "An 
everlasting  light. "  To  speak  of  the  perpetual,  as  weU  as  the  continuous  nature  of 
this  light,  is  not  a  distinction  without  a  difference.  You  may  have  light  that  is 
continuous  for  a  season  even  when  you  know  that  it  cannot  be  perpetual.  3.  The 
third  ray  may  be  characterized  as  a  joyous  ray.  "  The  days  of  thy  mourning  shall 
be  ended."  (iZ.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  aaint  on  earth  aind  in  heaven: — The  words 
present  us  with  two  different  views  of  truth.  I.  They  tell  us  of  our  present 
state.  1.  It  is  a  state  of  change — vicissitude — perpetual  alteration.  The  sun  rises 
to  set ;  it  sets  to  rise.  The  moon  waxes  and  wanes.  2.  The  words  point  us  to  our 
present  state  of  comparative  darkness  ;  for  the  contrast  is  between  the  minor  light  of 
the  sun,  the  lesser  light  of  the  moon,  and  the  glorious  light  of  the  Lord.  3.  The 
words  present  us,  too,  with  a  picture  of  a  state  of  mourning:  "The  days  of  thy 
mourning  shall  be  ended."  II.  They  open  to  us  a  glorious  prospect.  There 
are  two  blessings  especially  pointed  out  to  us  here.  1.  Perfect  light.  2.  Perfect 
happiness.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  present  and  future  staJte  of  the  people  of 
God : — I.  The  present  state  of  the  people  op  God.  A  state  of  darkness  and 
of  sorrow.  To  what  causes  can  such  experience  be  ascribed  ?  1.  To  their  remaining 
ignorance,  and  the  imperfection  of  their  present  views.  2.  This  may  be  the  case 
under  a  sense  of  the  prevalence  of  sin,  and  especially  of  imbelief.  3.  They  may  be 
in  such  a  situation  also,  from  the  Lord  withdrawing  from  them  the  sensible  com- 
munications of  spiritual  light  and  comfort.  II.  Their  future  state.  A  state 
of  uninterrupted  light,  of  perpetual  cessation  from  sorrow,  consequently  of  endless 
joy.  The  Lord  shall  be  the  everlasting  light  of  His  people.  1.  As  He  will  give 
them  a  more  enlarged  capacity  of  knowing  and  enjoying  Him.  2.  He  will  afford 
them  more  perfect  discoveries  of  Himself.  3.  He  will  afford  them  more  enlarged 
views  of  His  works  and  ways.  4.  He  will  impart  to  them  the  fullest  assiirance  of  their 
interest  in  His  peculiar  regard.  5.  He  will  be  their  everlasting  Light.  (D.  Dickson.) 
The  eternal  day : — 1.  Israel  of  old  had  light  while  all  the  rest  of  the  world  sat  in 
darkness.  This  typical  Church  of  God  abode  not  in  the  light  continually,  its  history 
was  chequered  with  alternate  brightness  and  gloom,  repentance  and  relapse,  prosperity 
and  adversity.  2.  Another  dispensation  came  ;  Jesus  Christ  was  born  at  Betlilehem, 
"a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel,"  and  the  sun 
shone  upon  the  earth  as  it  had  never  done  oefore.  A  visible  Church  was  called  out 
to  walk  in  the  light,  which  Church  still  exists  upon  the  earth,  and  from  the  days  of 
Pentecost  until  now  its  sun  has  never  altogether  gone  down,  neither  has  its  moon 
withdrawn  herself.  The  light  has  not  been  always  equally  clear,  but  it  has  been 
still  day.  3.  But  there  is  a  Church  upon  the  earth  which  is  within  the  visible 
Church,  and  is  its  central  life.  I  refer  to  the  spiritual  Church.  This  secret  Church, 
this  Church  mystical,  this  true  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  may  claim  to  have 
had  this  text  fulfilled  in  its  experience  in  a  far  larger  sense.  "  If  we  walk  in  the 
light  as  He  is  in  the  Ught,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Yet  even  to  the  Church  spiritual 
the  text  has  not  been  fulfilled  in  its  largest  conceivable  sense,  for  I  fear  me  that  to 
the  most  spiritual  some  darkness  comes.  Their  light  is  sown,  but  it  has  not  yet 
sprung  up  to  its  full  harvest.  4.  We  must,  therefore,  refer  to  a  fourth  form  of  the 
Church.  If  we  see  it  not  at  all  in  the  typical,  a  little  in  the  visible,  very  much  in 
the  spiritual,  we  find  it  aU  in  the  Church  triumphant.  The  full  triumph  of  the 
Chm-ch  of  Christ  shall  begin  in  the  millennium.  I.  The  light  of  the  triumphant 
Church  shall  be  incessant.  "Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down,"  etc.  There  wiU 
be  no  intervening  nights  of  darkness,  but  one  long  noonday  of  purity  and  felicity, 
"the  days  of  her  mourning  shall  be  ended."  And  why  will  this  be  ?  1.  Because  the 
light  of  heaven  is  independent  of  creatures.  In  heaven  the  saints  will  need  no 
teacher.    When  God  sends  a  true  preacher  he  ig  •  star  in  Good's  right  hand,  and  the 


S52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  lx» 

Ohurch  is  bound  to  value  his  light,  which  is  the  gift  of  heaven,  but  we  shall  need  n< 
teachers  there ;  we  shall  see,  not  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face.  Up  then 
they  need  no  comforters  to  succour  them  in  the  time  of  their  distress,  for  God  Himself 
has  wiped  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes.     Poor  saints  will  not  then  be  dependent 

Xn  the  alms  or  the  consolations  of  others,  though  once  their  generous  friends  were 
sun  and  moon  to  them.  2.  Because  it  is  cleared  of  all  clouoing  elements.  Here 
below  in  the  Ohurch  of  God,  whatever  by  God's  grace  may  be  our  light,  errors  will 
arise  to  cloud  it ;  evil  men  come  in  unawares  and  distract  God's  saints.  There  are 
none  such  up  yonder.  Satan  himself  shall  be  shut  out.  3.  The  saints  themselves 
shall  be  so  purified  that  nothing  in  them  shall  darken  their  light.  Here  to-day  Christ 
changes  not,  but  we  change,  and  hence  our  joy  departs.  It  shall  not  be  so  there. 
]!^otice  that  the  text  hints  that  both  the  major  and  the  minor  necessities  of  saints 
willbe abundantly  supplied.  Have  you  not  found  sometimes  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  withdrawn  Himself  from  you  ?  Then  your  "  sun  "  has  gone  down.  You 
-re  prospering  in  business  ;  God  gives  you  all  that  heart  can  wish,  the  moon  does  not 
withdraw  herself,  but  the  sun  has  gone,  and  woe  beclouds  your  spirit.  It  will  never 
be  so  in  heaven,  you  shall  see  your  Lord  face  to  face  without  a  veil  between,  and  that 
eternaUv.  Here,  on  the  ether  hand,  at  times  Jesus  has  shone  upon  you,  and  as  to 
spiritual  things  yon  have  been  rich,  but  then  earthly  trouble  has  hovered  over  you, 
tne  "moon "has  withdrawn  herself.  Not  often  have  both  sun  and  moon  been  as 
flesh  and  blood  would  have  them.  True,  you  have  been  able  to  do  without  the  moon 
in  the  presence  of  the  sun,  but  you  would  have  preferred  both  spiritual  and  temporal 
prosperity.  Now  in  heaven  all  the  wants  of  our  nature  will  be  completely  supplied. 
4.  The  Church  triumphant  will  be  delivered  from  the  vicissitudes  of  those  seasons 
which  cause  the  going  down  of  sun  and  moon.  I  do  not  refer  to  summer  and  winter, 
but  to  ecclesiastical  and  temporal  arrangements,  such  as  the  Sabbath  and  times  of 
assembly  and  Church  fellowship.  It  was  a  glad  day  for  Israel  when  the  trumpets 
rang  out  the  morning  of  the  Jubilee,  for  every  slave  was  fi«e,  and  every  debtor  found 
his  liabilities  discharged.  Back  came  each  man's  lost  inheritance,  and  the  whole 
nation  was  glad.  With  sound  of  trumpet  and  of  comet  they  saluted  the  rising  of 
the  sun  on  the  first  day  of  that  Jubilee  year ;  but  the  jubUee  year  went  by,  and  lands 
were  mortgaged  and  forfeited,  and  slaves  fell  again  into  slavery,  and  bankrupts  were 
acain  seized  by  their  creditors.  We  are  coming  to  a  jubilee,  of  which  the  trumpets 
snal  ound  for  ever.  II.  Thb  light  of  the  triumphant  Chttrch  is  everlasting. 
"TLo  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light."  Why  will  the  perfection  and  bliss  of 
the  saints  triumphant  never  end?  1.  Because  the  God  from  whom  it  comes  is 
eternal.    2.  The  covenant  by  which  the  saints  stand  in  heaven  is  a  sure  one.    8.  The 

Eaarantee  of  that  covenant  can  never  fail,  seeing  it  is  Christ  Himself.  "Because  I 
ve  ye  shall  live  also"  is  the  great  seal  set  upon  the  indentures  by  which  we  hold 
our  inheritance  in  the  skies.  4.  Those  who  possess  heaven  are  also  themselves 
immortal.  III.  The  light  of  the  Ohttroh  triumphant  shall  be  boundless. 
"  The  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light."  The  Lord  is  infinite.  If  He  is  our  sun 
there  can  be  no  limit  to  the  light  in  which  we  shall  rejoice.  1.  If  God  is  to  be  our 
light,  then  in  every  separate  believer  there  will  be  a  perfect  light  of  bliss  and 
holin(  ss.  You  are  aged,  you  feel  also  that  you  are  fall  of  mfirmities  and  sins ;  now, 
these  will  all  vanish,  and  that  weakened  form  of  yours  shall  be  raised  in  power. 
Your  ignorance  will  give  place  to  the  light  of  knowledge,  your  sin  to  the  hght  of 
purity,  your  sorrow  to  the  light  of  joy.  2.  In  addition  to  your  possessing  personal 
light,  you  will  enjoy  the  closest  possible  fellowship  with  God.  3.  This  glorious  light 
will  give  us  the  clearest  views  of  Gospel  truth.  4.  There,  no  doubt,  we  shall  under- 
stana  more  of  Providence.  Here  our  sun  goes  down  sometimes  as  to  the  Divine 
dealings  ;  we  cannot  make  out  what  He  means  ;  the  lines  are  dark  and  bending ;  we 
thought  He  would  have  led  us  by  a  straight  course,  but  we  wind  to  and  fro  in  the 
wilderness.  All  the  happiness  which  knowledge  and  understanding  can  bring  to 
intelligent  beings  shall  be  at  our  feet.  5.  There  we  shall  receive  the  utmost  endurable 
joy.  Some  have  thought  the  joy  of  heaven  would  lie  in  knowledge  ;  they  shall  have 
it.  Others  have  rejoiced  in  the  prospect  of  continued  service  ;  they  shall  serve  Him 
day  and  night  in  His  temple.  The  sweetest  thought  of  heaven  to  me  is  rest,  and  I 
shall  have  it,  for  "  there  remaineth,  therefore,  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  Peace  I 
O  quif't  soul,  do  you  not  long  for  it  I  You  shall  have  it.  Security  and  a  sense  of 
calm  !  0  tempest-tossed  one,  you  shall  have  them.  Strength,  power — some  have 
wished  for  that.  You  shall  be  raised  in  power.  Fulness,  the  filling  up  of  every 
vacuum !  You  shall  have  it ;  you  shall  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  GocL 
IT.  The  uqht  or  the  Ohxtboh  tbiumphant  is  unmiitolsi).    "The  days  of  tfaj 


CHAP.  LX.]  ISAIAH.  S53 

momning  shall  be  ended."  1.  The  monming  from  a  persecuting  world.  2.  There 
■will  be  no  more  mourning  from  the  common  trials  of  life.  3.  Then  shall  we  be 
delivered  from  all  mourning  caused  by  our  inward  sin.  4.  We  shall  be  delivered 
from  every  kind  of  mourning  as  to  an  absent  God,  for  we  shall  never  grieve  Him  any 
more.  5.  I  find  that  one  version  reads  it,  "The  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  oe 
recompensed,"  and  I  say  this  to  those  who  hare  to  mourn  more  than  others:  you 
sluJl  nave  a  recompense.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  21.  Thy  people  also  shall  be  all  righteons. — The  people  of  Ood  considered  eu 
righteous: — I.  As  they  are  all  interested  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
Jesus.  II.  As  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  have  an  inherent 
righteousness  wrought  in  them.  III.  By  abounding  in  works  of  righteous- 
ness TO  THE  praise  AND  GLORY  OF  GoD.  Here  two  cautions  are  necessary,  to 
prevent  mistakes.  1.  Virtuous  actions  do  not  constitute  a  person  inherently 
righteous,  ]put  declare  him  so  ;  as  good  fruit  is  rather  a  declaration  of  the  goodness 
of  the  tree,  than  the  thing  which  constitutes  that  goodness.  Therefore,  2.  Virtuous 
actions  cannot  be  said  to  be  necessary  to  salvation,  in  the  same  sense  in  which 
inherent  holiness  is  so.  It  is  possible  that,  where  holiaess  is  implanted,  life  may 
be  so  quickly  taken  away  that  there  shall  be  no  room  for  its  discovering  itself  by 
the  outward  behaviour.  Taking  these  cautions  along  with  us,  the  necessity  of  worl^ 
of  righteousness,  though  not  as  a  ground  of  our  justification,  yet,  as  an  evidence  of 
it,  can  never  be  too  strongly  asserted.  Every  motive,  whether  from  interest  or 
gratitude,  whether  from  the  beauty  of  religion  or  the  pleasures  of  a  virtuous  life, 
BtUl  remains  in  full  force.  "We  further  observe,  that  the  reward  of  saints  hereafter 
shall  bear  some  proportion  to  their  progress  in  holiness  here  below.  {J.  Erskine,  D.  D. ) 
A  righteous  people : — The  prophet  here  predicts  the  elevation  of  the  Church  to  its 
normal  or  ideal  state,  a  change  of  which  we  may  already  see  the  rudiments,  however 
far  we  may  get  from  its  final  consummation.     {J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Yet.  22.  A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand. — The  amplitude  of  the  Church: — 
The  Church  of  Christ  has  been  often  subject  to  persecution  in  past  ages  ;  but  at  a 
future  time  it  will  obtain  general  protection  and  patronage.  I.  The  import  of  the 
PROPHECY.  After  a  careful  examination  of  the  text  in  connection  with  the  former 
part  of  the  chapter,  I  am  led  to  conclude  that  it  refei's,  primarily  and  in  part,  to  the 
time  when  our  Lord  appeared  as  " the  Light  of  men,"  a  "Sun  of  righteousness "  to 
illuminate  a  benighted  world,  and  graciously  introduced  His  kingdom  and  dispensa- 
tion upon  earth  :  but  that  the  principal  and  pre-eminent  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  is 
reserved  for  a  future  and  happier  era  than  men  have  ever  yet  witnessed.  The  slight 
and  partial  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  in  the  primitive  age  seems  to  have  been  only 
a  shadowy  resemblance  of  its  more  complete  accomplishment  hereafter.  II.  At 
WHAT  PERIOD  THE  PREDICTION  WILL  BE  FULFILLED.  "  I  the  Lord  will  hasten  it  in 
his  time  " — not  before  the  proper  time — but  in  its  season — in  due  time.  We  are  not 
justified,  by  the  spirit  of  our  religion,  in  cherishing  an  unhallowed  curiosity  or 
presumptuous  confidence  in  our  attempts  to  ascertain  the  purposes  of  God.  It  is  on 
the  wings  of  faith  and  hope,  not  those  of  pride  and  speciilation,  that  the  Christian 
is  authorized  to  soar.  Yet  whilst  a  sacred  obscurity  invests  the  whole  of  this 
mysterious  subject,  there  seems  to  be  ample  encouragement  given  to  those  who  are 
disposed  to  pursue  their  investigations  with  a  devout  and  docile  disposition — with  a 
sober  and  humble  mind.  III.  Concluding  remarks.  1.  The  certainty  of  these 
events.  2.  Our  duty  in  prospect  of  such  events.  (1)  To  anticipate  with  delight 
the  approaching  happiness  of  the  world.  (2)  The  crisis  that  is  approaching  calls 
upon  us  to  aim  at  a  superior  degree  of  piety.  {T.  Sims,  M.A.)  The  miraculous 
propagation  of  the  Gospel : — I.  The  matter  of  fact  itself,  to  which  this  prophecy 
refers, — how  swift  and  strange  a  progress  the  Gospel  made  at,  and  after  its  first  setting 
out  in,  Jerusalem.  II.  This  success  of  the  Gospel  was  certainly  miraculous, 
and  owing  chiefly  to  the  mighty  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  for  this  plain 
reason  :  because  the  natural  and  visible  causes  which  concurred  to  the  production  of 
this  great  efl'ect  were  not  any  ways  equal  to  the  effect  produced.  The  Gospel  of 
Christ,  at  its  earliest  appearance,  had  all  the  probabilities  in  the  world  against  its 
success :  for  it  was  possessed  scarcely  of  any  one  of  those  advantages  which  do  most 
signally  recommend  a  new  doctrine,  and  make  it  thrive.  It  had  no  complying 
tenets,  to  soothe  men's  appetites  and  passions.  It  had  no  encouragement,  no  pro- 
tection from  the  civil  power  ;  no  force  or  cunning  to  uphold  it ;  no  men  of  eminence 
and  esteem  to  engage  on  its  side.    The  age  which  was  pitched  upon  for  the  discoveiy 

TOL.  ni.  28 


854  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBiP.ufc 

of  it  was  more  discerning  and  enlightened,  more  curious  and  inquisitive,  than, 
perhaps,  any  that  either  preceded  or  followed  it ;  and  therefore  the  success  of  this 
doctrine  could  not  be  owing  to  men's  ignorance  or  supineness.  Finally,  its  pro- 
mulgators delivered  it  out  not  by  parcels,  as  is  the  way  of  cunning  and  designing 
men  ;  but  ofiFered  the  whole  of  it  to  be  altogether  examined  and  compared.  Never- 
theless, though  pressed  with  all  these  encumbrances,  it  sprang  forth,  and  made  its 
way  into  the  world  by  s  wift  and  incredible  progress.  The  inference  from  hence  is 
plain  and  indubitable :  that  a  Divine  power  and  virtue  certainly  went  along  with  it, 
to  supply  what  waa  wanting  to  it  upon  other  accounts.     III.  Consider  what 

SHIFTS  THE  ENEMIES  OF  THE  GoSPEL  MAKE  USB  OF,  TO  EVADE  THE  FOKCE  OF  THIS 

PRESSING  ARGUMENT.  It  is  true,  they  will  own.  Christians  multiplied  very  fast,  and 
the  increase  of  them  was,  in  some  sense,  miraculous :  that  is,  it  was  wonderful ;  as 
every  unusual  thing  is  to  those  who  do  not  know  or  consider  the  causes  of  it.  But 
to  a  man,  they  say,  who  dares  to  go  out  of  the  common  road,  and  to  think  for 
himself,  it  will  appear  that  there  was  at  that  time  a  set  of  natural  causes  on  foot, 
sufficient  to  account  for  this  effect,  without  any  recourse  to  a  Divine  and  super- 
natural agent.  E.  g.  The  sufferings  of  the  martyis  made  mighty  impressions  upon 
men.  The  purity  of  the  Christian  morals  was  a  mighty  argument  to  oring  the  men 
of  probity  and  virtue  into  the  interests  of  the  Gospel.  The  analogy  of  some  of  its 
mystical  truths  to  the  doctrines  of  Plato  (then  in  great  esteem)  was  a  very  good  bait 
to  the  men  of  learning.  The  distribution  of  goods  which  the  first  Christians  made, 
and  their  living  together  in  common,  was  a  good  reason  for  many  men's  embracing 
that  faith  which,  they  were  sure,  would  maintain  them.  The  casual  cessation  of 
oracles  was  immediately  turned  to  the  advantage  of  the  religion  of  Christ,  as  if  that 
had  procured  it.  And  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  State  contributed  greatly  to 
the  increase  of  the  Christian  numbers  ;  because  it  seemed  to  have  been  foretold  by 
the  Founder  of  their  faith :  and,  therefore,  luckily  coming  to  pass  about  that  time, 
raised  a  high  opinion  in  men  of  His  Person  and  doctrine.  The  causes  here  assigned 
were  utterly  insufficient  to  produce  the  event  for  which  they  are  assigned.  IV. 
Show  how  great  an  advantage  it  is  to  the  Christian  institution  to  havb 

BEEN  propagated  AFTER   SO   SWIFT  AND  TJNACCOUNTABLE  A  MANNER.      No  other 

religion  ever  had  so  large  an  increase  with  so  little  of  human  aid.    V.  Inquire  into 

THE  TIME  WHEN,  AND  THE  MANNER  HOW,  THIS  MIRACLE  CEASED,  and  make  Suitable 

reflections  upon  it  with  regard  both  to  those  who  lived  then,  when  this  check  was 
given  to  the  Gospel,  and  to  us  who  live  now.  The  plain  answer  to  the  inquiry 
proposed  is  that  the  miracle  ceased  when  the  civil  power  began  to  declare  openly 
in  behalf  of  Christianity  ;  that  is,  soon  after  Constantine  came  to  the  throne.  For 
it  was  no  longer  a  wonder  that  our  religion  should  thrive  and  flourish  when,  instead 
of  bitter  persecutions,  it  met  with  all  manner  of  encouragements.  For  a  century 
after  Constantine,  and  upwards,  the  number  of  Christians  multiplied  exceedingly  in 
all  the  parts  of  the  world  in  which  it  had  already  been  planted,  and  to  which  the 
empire  of  the  Eomans,  or  their  influence,  did  extend.  For  above  a  century  after  that, 
Christianity  seems  to  have  been  at  a  stand.  But  then  it  declined  apace  every  day ; 
dissensions  among  Christians  grew  hot,  and  their  zeal  for  religion  waxed  cold.  The 
great  honours  and  endowments  which  religious  princes  had  bestowed  on  the  Church 
did  too  often  occasion  ambition  and  luxury  in  those  who  contended  for  them,  or 
possessed  them.  In  a  word,  aU  the  vices  of  prosperity  abounded,  together  with  the 
advantages  of  it.  So  that  the  name  of  Christianity  was  no  longer  venerable  in  the 
eyes  of  men ;  and  its  holy  doctrine,  not  producing  an  answerable  sanctity  of  life, 
made  no  farther  impressions  upon  them.  This  unhappy  opportunity  Mohammed 
laid  hold  of  to  set  up  his  religion  ;  which,  being  suited  to  the  voluptuous  manners 
of  the  East,  and  seconded  by  the  power  of  the  sword,  made  large  inroads  into 
Christendom,  and  tore  away  entire  provinces  at  once  li-om  the  profession  of  the 
Gospel.  {F.  Atterbury,  D.D.)  The  law  of  life  and  increase: — So  is  it  with  every 
institution  planted  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God,  with  an  aim  to  advance  His  glory 
and  man's  good.  Its  life  and  increase  are  assured,  for  it  becomes  God's  work  and 
enlists  God's  aid.  The  first  hospital  was  founded  by  a  Christian  woman  in  her  own 
house  just  outside  the  gates  of  Rome.  Now  there  are  hundreds  in  every  land.  So 
we  may  trace  the  rise  and  growth  of  institutions  for  the  poor  and  the  insane  ;  of  the 
universities,  once  small  conventual  schools  where  Christian  truth  was  taught, 
developing  into  comprehensive  and  influential  seats  of  learning.  So,  notably,  the 
growth  of  the  missionary  enterprise.  The  latter  was  almost  imknown  a  century  ago. 
It  began  in  the  "  reveries  "  of  men  or  the  dreams  of  Christian  women,  who  began  oy 
oolleoting  small  unonnta  and  consecrating  them  to  Christ.    Now  modem  missiont 


CHAP.  M.]  ISAIAH.  855 

are  a  power,  immense,  world-embracing.  They  emphatically  illustrate  the  grace  of 
Christ,  present  and  dominant  in  the  world.  So  it  is  with  every  endeavour.  That 
which  has  the  element  of  righteousness  in  it,  God  will  care  for.  It  has  a  vast  future 
before  it.  Here,  then,  is  Uliistrated  the  indebtedness  of  the  race  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ. 
Men  of  the  world  sometimes  fancy  that  this  matter  of  reli^on  is  an  obstacle  to  their 
secular  plans.  But,  for  the  very  instruments  they  use  m  art  and  commerce  and 
literature,  they  are  more  or  less  directly  indebted  to  Christianity.  {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.) 
SpirituaZ  growth : — This  law  of  life  and  increase  obtaios  in  the  growth  of  gracious 
affections  in  our  own  hearts.  We  seem  at  times  to  be  making  but  little  progress ; 
but  we  have  this  pledge,  "A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand  and  a  small  one  a 
strong  nation."  Christ's  mighty  energy  is  at  work  in  us,  as  in  society,  impressing 
His  image  on  all  things.  {IMd.)  The  tTumsand  and  the  one: — There  is  a  threefola 
line  of  thought  in  this  passage  ;  three  poiats  of  contrast  in  the  prophet's  mind 
between  the  old  world,  the  world  in  which  he  himself  lived,  and  that  new  world,  our 
world,  of  Christ  and  Christianity.  I.  He  says  that  the  old  world  magnified  masses, 
the  thousands ;  whereas  in  that  new  world  which  Christ  is  to  bring,  oe 

BATHER  HAS  NOW  BROUGHT,  NOT  THE  MASS  BUT  THE  INDIVIDUAL  IS  TO  BE  THB 

POWERFUL  THING.  Imagine  if  an  angel  were  to  come  to  me  to-day  to  offer  to  prepare 
me  for  the  study  of  ancient  history.  I  say  to  him,  "  WUl  you  show  me  the  secret  of 
the  old  world's  greatness  ? "  And  in  answer  he  takes  me  up  on  a  lofty  mountain  and 
shows  me  immense  masses.  "  Do  you  see  that  Chinese  Empire,"  he  says,  "  do  you 
see  that  long  line  of  ancestors  gomg  back,  back,  back  further  than  the  eye  can 
see  ?  That  is  the  secret  of  China's  greatness.  Do  you  see  that  great  Indian  Continent 
— that  long  line  of  caste  going  back  into  antiquity ;  the  thousand  ?  That  is  the 
secret  of  India's  greatness.  Do  you  see  that  Jewish  Empire?  Do  you  see  that 
long  family  tree  going  back  to  Abraham,  and  further  back  stUl  to  the  very  founda- 
tion of  all  things?  That  is  the  secret  of  Judea's  greatness."  The  old  world 
magnified  the  thousand.  But  now  let  us  take  another  side  of  it.  Suppose  this 
angel  came  to  me  and  said,  "I  have  come  to  prepare  you  for  a  study  of  modem 
history,  of  the  world  of  Christ's  time,"  and  I  say,  "Well,  I  should  like  very  much 
to  get  a  specimen  of  the  difference  here.  I  wish  you  to  show  me  the  secret  of 
England's  greatness  during  the  last  century  (the  nineteenth).  Let  me  see,  first  of 
all,  the  secret  of  England's  greatness  in  mechanical  powers."  I  have  not  the  slightest 
doubt  that  in  answer  he  is  going  to  take  me  at  once  into  the  dockyards  whei'i  the 
thousand  hammers  are  clanging  and  all  the  mechanical  powers  are  at  work. 
Instead  of  that,  to  my  astonishment,  he  takes  me  through  to  Glasgow ;  he  passes 
down  the  Clyde  ;  he  comes  to  Greenock,  and  he  never  looks  at  the  shipping ;  he 
passes  it  altogether.  He  takes  me  through  the  streets,  turns  into  a  gloomy,  narrow 
entry,  climbs  the  stair,  opens  the  door,  and,  lo !  in  a  humble  room  and  in  a  very 
small  crib  there  lies  a  delicate  infant,  and  he  points  to  it  and  says,  "That  is  the 
secret  of  England's  mechanical  greatness."  "What!"  I  say,  "that  puny  thing 
that  a  breath  would  put  out  like  a  candle  ? "  "  Yes,"  he  says,  "  that  is  the  secret  of 
England's  mechanical  greatness.  That  is  James  Watt ;  that  is  the  one  that  has 
taken  the  place  of  the  thousand."  Or  suppose  I  say  to  him,  "I  want  to  see  the 
secret  of  England's  scientific  greatness  in  the  last  century. "  I  have  no  doubt  what- 
ever that  he  is  going  to  take  me  into  the  laboratories  where  the  thousand  workmen 
are  plying  with  the  crucible,  the  pestle,  and  the  mortar.  Instead  of  that  he  takes 
me  up  to  Grantham,  into  the  village  school,  and  there,  at  the  very  foot  of  the  class, 
sits  a  very  dull-looking  boy,  more  distinguished  for  fighting  than  for  anything  else. 
He  says,  "That  is  the  secret  of  England's  greatness  in  science.  That  is  Isaao 
Newton.  That  one  is  going  to  take  the  place  of  the  thousand  in  years  to  come."  Or 
yet  again,  suppose  I  say  to  him,  "I  wish  you  would  show  me  the  secret  of  England's 
religious  greatness  in  the  last  century. "  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  he  is  going 
to  take  me  into  the  great  cathedrals  where  the  aisles  are  dark  with  worshippers. 
Instead  of  that  he  takes  me  up  to  a  little  place  called  Epworth  at  midnight,  where 
there  is  a  minister's  manse  on  fire,  and  they  are  carrying  out  a  screaming  infant  from 
the  house.  And  the  angel  cries,  "  That  is  the  secret  of  England's  religious  greatness. 
That  is  John  Wesley,  one  time  to  have  his  screams  heard  all  over  England,  all  over 
Europe.  The  one  little  fire-burned  child  will  in  time  to  come  take  the  place  of  the 
thousand."  And  why  is  it  that  I  attribute  this  to  Christianity?  You  might  say, 
"  What  has  Christ  to  do  with  this  ? "  It  is  because  if  you  and  I  go  back  nineteen 
centuries  we  shall  see  all  Europe  sleeping  in  an  egg-shell :  a  little  child ;  a  little 
child  laid  outside  in  a  stable.  There  it  lay,  holding  all  Europe  in  its  little  breast ; 
iti  evolutions,  its  rerolntions,  its  conTolutions ;  ite  wars  and  nimonrs  of  wars ;  it*, 


856  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  jx. 

cries  for  bread  ;  its  cries  for  light ;  its  cries  for  liberty.  The  One  has  taken  the  place 
of  the  thousand.     II.  The  second  point  of  the  prophet  I  take  to  be  this :  that  in 

THa  NEW  WOELD  THAT  ChRIST  HAS  BROUGHT  IK,  THB  GLOET  CONSISTS  IN  THIS, 
THAT  THE  ONE  INDIVIDXTAL  CAN  PASS  BY  SYMPATHY  THROUGH  MYRIAD  TYPES  OF 

OHAEACTSR.  One  has  become  a  thousand.  Let  me  try  to  illustrate  this  by 
the  case  of  two  boarding-schools.  I  will  call  the  one  the  boarding-school  of 
the  old  worid,  and  the  other  the  boarding-school  of  the  new.  The  boarding-school 
of  the  old  worid  says,  "  Do  you  see  these  girls  ?  In  a  few  months  you  will  not 
know  your  own  little  girl  n-om  any  other.  They  will  all  become  so  like  that 
no  one  could  possibly  distinguish  the  difference  between  them.  The  thousand  shall 
become  one — thoroughly  Chinese."  But  the  second  boarding-school,  Christ's  board- 
ing-school, says,  "  Will  you  give  me  this  little  girl  of  yours  ?  She  is  just  now  very 
like  other  people.  There  is  not  much  difference  ;  but  I  will  undertake  to  send  thM 
little  girl  through  My  school,  and  she  will  catch  a  little  bit  of  everybody  in  the  now 
vacant  mirror  of  her  mind,  she  wiU  catch  a  little  bit  of  every  light.  '  Why  is  it  that 
-I  attribute  this  to  Christ?  It  is  because  Christ  Himself  is  many  members  in  one 
body.  Christ  is  our  Representative  before  the  throne  of  God.  What  does  that  mean ! 
"What  is  a  representative  before  the  throne?  Why,  it  is  a  Member  of  Parlia- 
ment. What  is  the  function  of  a  member  for  Glasgow  ?  He  has  to  take  into  the 
mirror  of  his  mind  aU  the  different  wants  of  the  thousand,  and  give  them  due  con- 
sideration. III.  As  a  result  of  these  points,  the  course  of  the  old  world  has  been 
still,  stagnant,  unprogressive ;  whereas  IN  the  new  world  which  Christ  has 

BROUGHT  IN  THINGS  ARE  TO  MOVE  WITH  TEEMENDOUS  SPEED.      "I  the  Lord  Will 

hasten  it  in  its  time"  (R.V.).  We  commonly  read  it  that  God  will  hasten  the 
time  of  its  coming.  I  understand  it  to  mean  that  there  are  times  of  acceleration, 
times  when  everything  moves  with  double  quick  march  ;  times  when  you  take  up  the 
newspaper  and  find  the  unexpected  has  happened.  This  is  what  I  understand,  an 
accelerated  progress  ;  "The  Lord  will  hasten  it  in  its  time."  I  wonder  if  there  is 
any  man  here  between  eighty  and  ninety  years  old  ?  If  there  is,  that  man  has  seen 
more  events  than  all  the  history  of  the  Cliinese  Empire  from  the  beginning  up  till 
now  !  Think  what  he  has  seen.  He  has  seen  wings  of  steam — the  steamboat ;  then 
he  has  seen  wings  of  fire — the  railroad  ;  then  wings  of  light — the  telegraph  ;  then 
wings  of  sound — the  telephone.  Aye,  and  he  has  seen  something  more  than  that ; 
he  has  seen  physical  wings  of  memory — the  phonograph.  He  has  seen  the  voice 
bottled  up  in  jars,  and  carried  across  the  Atlantic.  He  has  seen  greater  things  than 
these.  He  has  beheld  social  changes  of  the  most  momentous  type.  He  has  seen  the 
institution  of  the  rights  of  man ;  he  has  seen  something  greater  still — the  institution 
of  the  rights  of  woman.  He  has  seen  the  bursting  of  the  fetters  of  the  slave  ;  he  has 
Been  the  birth  of  charity.  It  has  been  a  world  of  wondrous  acceleration.  The  power 
that  can  pass  through  these  thousand  changes  must  be  Divine.  You  tell  me  that 
Christianity  has  not  lived  so  long  as  some  of  the  Eastern  religions  ;  that  Buddhism, 
Brahmanism,  and  Parseeism  have  lived  longer  than  Christianity.  Yes,  so  they  have  ; 
it  is  easy  to  be  steadfast  in  a  stagnant  pool.  "  Better  thirty  years  of  Europe  than  a 
ovcle  of  Cathay."  The  power  of  my  Lord's  religion  is  not  its  duration,  it  is  the  fact 
tnat  its  duration,  such  as  it  is,  has  been  against  tremendous  odds.  It  is  that  the 
one  has  been  battling  ever  with  the  thousand.  {Q.  Matheson,  D.D.)  I  the  Lord 
will  hasten  it  in  his  time. — The  ministries  of  time : — God  is  Sovereign  and  omnipo- 
tent, but  He  waits  the  ministration  of  time.  He  could  force  seasons  and  laws,  but  it 
is  His  way  rather  to  work  through  them  and  by  them.  He  has  ordained  them  as 
servitors  of  His  will.  His  purposes  on  the  earth,  in  the  conduct  of  human  affairs, 
had,  in  respect  to  their  accomplishment,  a  germination,  a  process,  and  a  harvest-hour 
of  consummation.  Time  is  the  prime-minister  of  Providence,  and  brings  to  pass  in 
due  order,  at  their  full  periods,  and  at  the  appointed  juncture,  the  patient  counsels 
of  the  Most  High.  There  is  no  hurrying  ana  no  sickness  of  deferred  hope  on  that 
eternal  and  tranquil  Mind.  "One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a 
thousand  years  as  one  day."  It  lends  a  new  dignity  and  a  sterner  and  loftier  majesty 
to  time,  when  we  consider  it  thus,  not  impersonally,  as  the  passing  away  of  our  days 
—the  swift,  mute  lapse  of  the  stream  of  hfe  sliding  down  the  vale — but  as  a  strong 
executive  angel,  a  sceptred  and  conscious  force  that  has  it  in  charge  to  reveal  and 
ftilfil  the  hidden  plan  of  God.  {A,  L.  Stone,  D.D.)  Time  is  among  men  the  re- 
Tealer,  the  attester,  the  vindicator,  the  rectifier,  the  fulfiller.  (Ibid.)  Time  a  test: 
—1.  Time  tests  the  principles  of  human  conduct.  2.  Time  is  the  test  of  friendships. 
S.  Time  tries  his  tests  upon  character.  4.  God  even  commits  His  own  vindication 
^te  tiiiMi    {Ibid.)    Oad'a  purpose  »wrt  qf/ulfihatnt : — ^All  that  is  here  said  relating  to 


OHAP.  tau.]  ISAIAH.  857 

the  Jewish  and  Christian  Chnroh,  to  the  militant  and  triumphant  Ohnrch,  and  to 
every  particnlar  believer, — 1.  It  may  seem  too  difficult  to  be  brought  about,  and 
therefore  may  be  despaired  of ;  but  the  God  of  almighty  power  hath  undertaken  it. 
I,  the  Lord,  will  do  it,  who  can  do  it,  and  who  have  determined  to  do  it.  2.  It  may 
seem  to  be  delayed  and  put  oflF  so  long  that  we  are  out  of  hopes  of  it ;  but,  as  the 
Lord  will  do  it,  so  He  wul  hasten  it ;  wiU  do  it  with  all  convenient  speed — though 
much  time  may  be  passed  before  it  is  done,  no  time  shall  be  lost ;  He  will  hasten  it 
in  its  time,  in  the  proper  time,  in  the  season  wherein  it  will  be  beaatafiiL  (if. 
Hem-y.) 


OHAPTEB  LXL 


YzBS.  1-8.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Ood  is  upon  Mo. — The  Speaker;  probably  the 
Servant  of  Jehovah: — Who  is  the  speaker  here  ?  The  Targum  prefaces  the  passage 
with  the  words,  "The  prophet  says,"  and,  except  a  few,  all  modem  expositors  make 
the  author  of  this  book  of  consolation  to  be  the  speaker  who,  after  having  (in  chap. 
Ix.)  let  the  Church  behold  the  summit  of  her  glory,  now,  with  grateftd  look  directed 
to  Jehovah  and  rejoicing  in  spirit,  extols  his  grand  commission.  But  this  view  is 
objectionable,  for  the  following  reasons — 1.  Nowhere  has  the  prophet  yet  spoken  of 
himself  as  such  in  lengthy  utterances,  but  rather  (except  in  the  closing  words, 
"saith  my  God,"  in  chap.  Ivii.  21)  everywhere  studiously  kept  himself  in  the  back- 
ground. 2.  On  the  other  hand,  whenever  another  than  Jehovah  began  to  speak, 
and  made  reference  to  the  work  of  his  calling  and  his  experiences  connected  therewith 
(as  in  chaps,  xlix.  1  ff.,  1.  4  flF.)  it  was  in  such  cases  this  self-same  Servant  of 
Jehovah  of  whom  and  to  whom  Jehovah  speaks  (see  chaps,  xlii.  1  flF. ,  lii.  13  on  to 
end  of  liii.).  8.  All  that  the  person  here  speaking  says  of  himself  is  again  met  with 
in  the  picture  of  the  one  uniq^ue  Servant  of  Jehovah  ;  he  has  been  endowed  with  the 
Spirit  of  Jehovah  (chap.  xlu.  1) ;  Jehovah  has  sent  him,  and  with  him  sent  His 
Spirit  (chap,  xlviii.  16)  ;  he  has  a  tongue  that  has  been  taught  of  God,  to  assist 
with  words  him  who  is  wearied  (chap.  1.  4) ;  those  who  are  almost  despairing  and 
destroyed  he  goes  to  spare  and  save,  preserving  the  broken  reed  and  expiring  wick 
(chap.  xlii.  3) ;  "to  open  blind  eyes,  to  lead  prisoners  out  of  the  prison,  those  who 
are  sitting  in  darkness  out  of  the  house  of  confinement," — ^this  is  what,  above  all, 
he  has  to  do  in  word  and  deed  for  his  people  (chap.  xlii.  7,  xlix.  9).  4.  After  the 
prophet  has  represented  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  of  whom  he  prophesies,  as  speaking 
m  such  dramatic  directness  (as  in  chaps,  xlix.  1  flf.,  1.  4  flF.,  and  also  xlviii.  16  ft.), 
one  could  not  expect  that  he  would  now  place  himself  in  the  foreground  and  claim 
for  himself  official  attributes  which  he  has  set  down  as  characteristic  features  in  the 
picture  of  the  predicted  One,  who  (as  Vitringa  well  says)  not  merely  proclaims  but 
dispenses  the  new  and  great  gifts  of  God.  For  these  reasons  we  (with  Nagelsbach, 
Cheyne,  Driver  and  Orelli)  consider  that  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  is  the  speaker  here. 
(F.  Delitzxch,  D.D.)  The  speaker:  probably  the  prophet  himself: — The  speaker  is 
not  introduced  bv  name.  Therefore  he  may  be  the  prophet  himself,  or  he  may  be 
the  Servant.  The  present  expositor,  while  feeling  that  the  evidence  is  not  con- 
clusive against  either  of  these  .  .  .  inclines  to  thmk  that  there  is,  on  the  whole, 
less  objection  to  its  being  the  prophet  who  speaks  than  to  its  being  the  Servant. 
But  it  is  not  a  very  important  question  which  is  intended,  for  the  Servant  was 
representative  of  prophecy ;  and  if  it  be  the  prophet  who  speaks  here,  he  also  speaks 
with  the  conscience  of  the  whole  ftmction  and  aim  of  the  prophetic  order.  That 
Jesus  Christ  fulfilled  this  programme  does  not  decide  the  question  one  way  or  the 
other  ;  for  a  prophet  so  representative  was  as  much  the  antetype  and  foreshadowing 
of  Christ  as  the  Servant  Himself  was.  On  the  whole,  then,  we  must  be  content  to 
feel  about  this  passage,  what  we  must  have  already  felt  about  many  others  in  our 
prophecy,  that  the  writer  is  more  anxious  to  place  before  us  the  whole  range  and 
ideal  of  the  prophetic  gift  than  to  make  clear  iu  whom  this  ideal  is  realized  ;  and  for 
the  rest  Jesus  of  Nazareth  so  plainly  fulfilled  it,  that  it  becomes,  indeed,  a  very 
minor  question  to  ask  whom  the  writer  may  have  intended  as  its  first  application. 
{Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  lofty  mission  and  its  great  results  are  not  too  lofty 
or  great  for  our  prophet,  for  Jeremiah  received  his  oflice  in  terms  as  large.  That 
the  prophet  has  not  yet  spoken  at  such  length  in  his  own  person  is  no  reason  why 


858  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tn. 

he  should  not  do  so  now,  especially  as  this  is  an  occasion  on  which  he  smns  up  and 
enforces  the  whole  range  of  prophecy.  {Ibid.)  The  Spir>i  in  the  Son  of  man : — The 
fact  that  Christ's  earthly  life  became  effectual  through  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
within  Him,  and  not  alone  through  the  inherent  virtue  and  power  He  brought 
with  Him  from  His  pre-existent  state,  has  become  one  of  the  commonplaces  of 
theology ;  and  yet  how  little  do  we  realize  its  true  import,  and  cultivate  that 
humility  and  dependence  of  soul  which  would  distinguish  us  if  the  great  truth  were 
ever  in  view  !  In  spite  of  our  formal  adhesion  to  this  doctrine,  it  seems  still  strange 
to  us  that  one  whom  we  think  of  as  holy  and  Divine  should  be  indebted  at  every 
stage  of  His  earthly  life  to  that  inward  mystic  ministry  which  is  so  necessary  to  us 
because  of  our  sinfulness.  We  speak  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  Deliverer  from  inbred 
corruption,  and  are  ready  to  assume,  quite  unwarrantably,  that  where  there  is  no 
corruption  in  the  nature,  the  stimulating  forces  and  fervours  of  His  benign  indwell- 
ing are  needless.  We  are  accustomed  to  look  upon  this  ministry,  which  perpetuates 
in  our  souls  the  saving  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  though  it  were  a  special  antidote 
to  human  depravity  only.  For  the  Spirit  to  abide  moment  by  moment  with  Jesus 
Christ,  and  work  in  His  humanity,  seems  like  painting  the  lily,  gUding  fine  gold, 
and  bleaching  the  untrampled  snow.  But  that  is  a  mistaken  view.  When  the 
universal  Church  shall  have  been  built  up  and  consecrated  to  its  high  uses,  it  will 
be  "by  the  Spirit "  that  God  will  dwell  in  the  temple.  And  the  temple  of  Christ's 
sacred  flesh  needed  this  same  indwelling  presence.  The  great  Sanctiner  blends  the 
essential  forces  of  His  personality  into  this  Divinest  type  of  goodness,  to  show  that 
goodness  in  even  the  only  begotten  Son  is  not  self-originated.  In  the  less  mature 
stages  of  Christ's  expanding  himianity  implicit  and  docile  dependence  on  this  inward 
leading  was  the  test  of  His  entire  acceptability  to  the  Father.  {T.  G.  Selby.)  The 
Spirit  a  compensation  for  the  self-emptying  of  Jesus: — The  Spirit  seems  to  have  been 
given  to  compensate  for  that  renunciation  of  power  involved  in  the  mystery  of  the 
incarnation,  and  as  an  earnest  of  its  coming  restitution.  The  wonderful  works  accom- 
plished by  the  Son  of  Man  took  their  rise,  not  so  much  in  the  superhuman  qualities  of 
His  personality  as  in  the  power  of  that  Spirit  with  which  He  was  anointed.  Although 
there  is  no  clearly  developed  doctrine  of  the  Spirit  in  the  older  portions  of  the  Old 
Testament  writings,  Isaiah  at  least  in  his  day  was  made  to  see  that  the  Messianic 
works  of  healing  and  deliverance  and  redemption  would  flow  out  of  that  anointing 
by  the  Spirit  which  would  single  out  the  elect  Servant  of  the  Lord  from  His  fellows. 
And  Peter  enforces  the  same  thought  in  the  household  of  Cornelius,  declaring  how 
that  "God  anointed  Jesus  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power,  who  went  about 
doing  good  and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil.  '  His  own  experiences 
in  the  Pentecost  had  taught  Peter  the  secret  of  his  Master's  power.  Perhaps  the 
discovery  had  come  to  him  through  his  own  recent  mastery  over  the  pride  and 
boastfulness  of  his  nature,  and  may  have  helped  to  confirm  him  in  his  new  habits 
of  childlike  trust  upon  another.  In  the  days  of  his  self-sufficiency  it  would  have 
been  quite  impossible  for  Peter  to  believe  that  He  who  had  been  supematurally 
revealed  as  the  very  Son  of  God,  and  glorified  by  a  strange  transfiguration  splendour 
that  seemed  to  make  Him  the  fellow  of  the  Most  High,  should  need  to  achieve  His 
mighty  works  by  leaning  upon  another.  Could  Peter  have  been  told  that  his 
Master's  marvellous  gifts  were  held  upon  this  tenure,  he  might  have  looked  upon  it 
as  an  affront  to  the  Divine  dignity  of  his  hero,  and  have  exclaimed,  as  about  the 
death  of  shame,  "Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord."  Sometimes  Christ's  miracles  are 
quoted  as  proofs  of  His  Divine  nature.  They  are  certainly  proofs  of  His  Divine 
authority,  but  they  illustrate  the  energies  of  this  attending  Spirit  rather  than  the 
attributes  of  Christ's  own  proper  personality.  Christ  cast  out  devils  and  opened 
prison  doors  and  raised  the  dead,  but  it  was  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
alone.  The  tempter  once  tried  to  induce  Him  to  work  in  His  own  strength, 
in  the  power  of  His  inherent  Godhead,  so  that  He  might  undo  and  reverse 
the  self-renouncing  humility  of  His  own  incarnation,  but  in  vain.  All  He  did  was 
in  loyalty  to  this  inward  Guide  who  made  known  to  Him  the  will  of  the  Father  and 
gave  Him  power  for  His  appointed  tasks.  Fools  that  we  are,  we  attempt  much  in 
our  own  strength,  but  the  Son  in  His  humiliation  received  back  His  infinite  forces 
of  life  and  dominion  only  through  this  Divine  messenger  from  the  Father.  {Ibid.) 
A  faithful  Gospel  ministry  :—l.  The  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spibit  makes  a 
8TTCCESSFUL  GosPEL  MINISTRY,  So  it  was  in  Christ's  ministry.  II.  The  subject- 
matter  of  all  faithful  preaching.  1.  A  faithful  minister  preaches  good  tidings 
to  all  distressed  consciences.  2.  A  faithful  pastor  comforts  mourners  in  Zion.  8.  A 
faithful  watchman  preaches  a  free  Saviour  to  all  the  world.     {R.  M.  McCheyTie.)    A 


CSAP.  LSI.]  ISAIAH.  859 

true  ministry: — I.  The  true  ministry  is  always  inspired  and  directed  by 
THE  Holy  Ghost.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me."  II.  The  true 
ministry  is  animated  by  the  sublimest  benevolence.  If  you  read  the 
statement  given  by  the  prophet,  you  will  find  throughout  a  tone  of  kindliness, 
benevolence,  sympathy,  gentleness,  pity,  for  aU  human  sorrow.  Therein  may  be 
known  the  true  ministiy  of  the  Gospel.     III.   The  true  ministry,  whether 

public  or  PRIVAIE,  NEVER  SHRINKS  FROM  ITS  MORE  AWFUL  FUNCTIONS.      Observe 

this  sentence  in  the  midst  of  the  declarations  of  the  text :  "To  proclaim  the  day  of 
vengeance  of  our  God. "  {J.  Parker,  B.B. )  To  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek. 
Jesus  a  Preacher  of  good  tidings  to  the  meek : — I.  The  work  itself  in  which  the 
Son  of  God  was  employed,  and  to  which  He  was  called.     * '  To  preach  good  tidings. " 

II.  The  special  object  of  this  part  of  the  work.  "The  meek."  In  the 
parallel  place,  it  reads  "poor,"  and  the  one  explains  the  other.  ^By  the  meek  here 
IS  meant  the  poor  in  spirit,  those  who,  as  being  convinced  by  the  law,  have  seen 
themselves  to  be  poor,  that  they  have  nothing  in  which  they  could  stand  before  God 
as  righteous,  but  look  on  themselves  as  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked.  And  it  is  remarkable  that  our  Saviour's  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
begins  with  good  tidings  to  such  persons  (Matt.  v.  3).  Our  Lord  preached  to  aU  who 
heard  Him  promiscuously  these  good  tidings,  but  in  effect  they  were  not  good  to 
any  but  to  the  poor  in  spirit  among  them.  ( T.  Boston. )  Jesus  and  the  meek : — 
I.  Consider  this  meekness  and  poverty,  and  show  who  are  these  meek  poor 
ONES.  This  meekness  comprehends  in  it — 1.  A  pressing  sense  of  utter  emptiness  in 
one's  self  (Rom.  vii.  18).  2.  A  pressing  sense  of  sinfulness.  3.  A  pressing  sense 
of  misery  by  sin.  Like  the  prodigal,  they  see  themselves  ready  to  perish  with 
hunger.  Debt  is  a  heavy  burden  to  an  honest  heart,  and  filthiness  to  one  that 
desires  to  be  clean.  Their  poverty  presses  them  down.  4.  A  sense  of  utter  inability 
to  help  one's  self.  They  find  the  sting  in  their  conscience,  but  cannot  draw  it  out ; 
guilt  is  a  burden,  but  they  cannot  throw  it  off ;  lusts  are  strong  and  uneasy,  but 
they  are  not  able  to  master  them ;  and  this  presses  them  sore.  5.  A  sense  of 
the  absolute  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  of  help  from  heaven.  6.  A  sense  as  to  utter 
tmworthiness  of  the  Lord's  help  ;  they  see  nothing  which  they  have  to  recommend 
them  to  the  Lord's  help.  7.  An  earnest  desire  as  to  the  supply  of  soul- wants  (Matt. 
V.  6).  8.  A  hearty  contentment  in  submitting  to  any  method  of  help  which  the 
Lord  prescribes.     II.  Explain  the  good  tidings  of  the  Gospel,  and  show  that 

THEY  are  good  AND  WELCOME  TIDINGS  TO   SUCH   PERSONS.      1.    Gospcl   tidiugS  aTO 

tidings  of  a  complete  salvation.  2.  These  tidings  relate  to  a  redemption,  to  a 
ransom  paid  (Gal.  iii.  13).  3.  To  an  indemnity,  a  pardon  to  criminals  who  will 
come  to  Jesus  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).  4.  To  a  glorious  Physician  of  souls,  who  never 
fails  to  cure  His  patients.  5.  These  tidings  are  the  tidings  of  a  feast  (Isa.  xxv.  6, 
Iv.  2  ;  Ps.  xxii.  26).  6.  These  tidings  relate  to  a  treasure  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  7.  To  a 
marriage,  a  most  happy  match  for  poor  sinners  (Hos.  ii.  19,  20).  8.  To  a  glorious 
victory  (Isa.  xxv.  8 ;  Rev.  iii.  21).     9.  To  a  most  desirable  peace  (Eph.  ii.  14). 

III.  Show  how  this  great  work  of  preaching  is,  and  hath  been,  performed 
BY  Christ.  1.  He  performed  this  work  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation, 
(1)  Personally,  by  Himself  in  paradise  (Gen.  iii.  15).  (2)  By  His  ambassador,  in  His 
name,  the  prophets,  and  ordinary  teachers.  (3)  By  His  written  Word.  2.  He 
preached,  and  preaches,  imder  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  (1)  By  His  own 
personal  preaching  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  when  He  went  about  among  the  Jews, 
preaching  to  them  as  the  Minister  of  the  circumcision  (Rom.  xv.  8).  (2)  By  inspiring 
His  apostles  to  preach  and  write  the  doctrines  of  salvation  contained  in  the  New 
Testament,  on  whom  He  poured  out  His  Spirit,  and  by  their  writings,  they  being 
dead,  yet  speak  to  us  from  Him  and  by  Hrm.  (3)  By  raising  up  and  continuing 
always  a  Gospel  ministry  in  the  Church  (Eph.  iv.  11-13  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  20).  (Ibid!) 
To  bind  up  the  broken-hearted. — Jestis  hinds  up  the  hrokefi-hearted : — I.  Inquire 

WHAT  IS  THAT  BROKENNESS  OF  HEART  WHICH  IS  HERE  MEANT.      The  brokeu-hcarted- 

ness  is  of  two  kinds.  1.  Natural,  arising  from  natural  and  carnal  causes  merely, 
which  worketh  death  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  Many  who  are  very  whole-hearted  in  respect  of 
sin,  complain  that  their  hearts  and  spirits  are  broken  by  their  crosses,  afflictions, 
and  ill-usage  which  they  meet  with  in  the  world.  Thus  Ahab,  Haman,  and  Nabal, 
their  hearts  were  broken  with  their  respective  crosses.  2.  Religious,  which  arises 
from  religious  causes,  namely,  sin  and  its  consequences.  There  is  a  twofold  religious 
breaking  of  heart.  (1)  A  mere  legal  one  (Jer.  xxiii.  29).  When  the  heart  is  broken 
by  the  mere  force  of  the  law,  it  is  broken  as  a  rock  in  pieces  by  a  hammer,  each  part 
remaining  haj:d  and  roo^  stilL    This  breaks  the  heart  for  sin,  but  not  from  it.    (2) 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  LXt 

An  evangelical  one,  when  not  only  the  law  does  its  part,  bnt  the  Gospel  also 
breaks  the  sinner's  heart  (Zech.   xiL   10).      II.  Inquibe  what    it  is  in  and 

ABOTTT    sin    WHICH    BKEAK8   THE    MAN'S    HEAKT,    WHO    IS    THUS    EVANGBLIOALLT 

BKOKEN-HEARTED.  There  18 — 1.  The  guilt  of  sin,  by  which  he  is  bound  over  to  the 
wrath  of  God.  2.  The  domineering  power  of  sin,  or  its  tyranny,  by  which  he  ia 
led  captive  to  it.  3.  The  contrariety  which  is  in  sin  to  the  holy  nature  and  law  of 
God.  4.  The  indwelling  of  sin,  and  its  cleaving  so  close  to  a  person  that  he  cannot 
shake  it  oflF  (Eom.  vii.  24).  5.  Sin's  mixing  itself  with  all  he  does,  even  with  his 
best  duties  (Rom.  vii.  21).  6.  Frequent  backslidings  (Jer.  xxxi.  18).  7.  Deser- 
tions,  hiding  of  the  Lord's  face,  and  interruptions  of  the  soiil's  communion  with 
God  (Isa.  liv.  6;  Lam.  iii.  18,  44).  8.  A  Christian's  sinfulness,  with  the  bitter 
fruits  springing  from  his  sin  (Rom.  vii.  19).  III.  Show  what  sort  of  ▲ 
HEART  a  broken  HEART  IS.  1.  It  is  a  Contrite  or  bruised  heart  (Ps.  IL  17). 
Not  only  broken  in  pieces  like  a  rock,  but  broken  to  powder,  and  so  fit  to 
receive  any  impression.  The  heart  is  now  kiadly  broken  and  bruised  betwixt 
the  upper  and  nether  mill-stones ;  the  upper  mill-stone  of  the  law,  a  sense 
of  God's  wrath  against  sin ;  and  the  nether  mill-stone  of  the  Gospel,  of 
Divine  love,  mercy,  and  favour,  manifested  in  word  and  providences.  2.  An 
aching  heart  (Acts  ii.  37).  3.  A  shameful  heart  (Ezra  ix.  6 ;  Ps.  xl.  12).  4.  A 
tender  heart  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26).  5.  A  rent  heart  (Joel  ii.  13).  6.  A  pliable 
heart.  7.  A  humble  heart  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  IV.  Show  how  the  Lord  Christ 
BINDS  UP  AND  HEALS  THE  BROKEN-HEARTED.  The  great  Physician  uses  two  sorts  of 
bands  for  a  broken  heart :  He  binds  them  up  with  inner  and  with  outward  bands. 

1.  "With  inner  bands,  which  go  nearest  the  sore,  the  pained  broken  heart.  And 
these  are  two.  (1)  The  Spirit  of  adoption.  (2)  Faith  in  Christ  (the  hand  of  the 
covenant),  which  He  works  in  the  heart  by  His  Spirit.  Faith  is  a  healing  band,  for 
it  knits  the  soul.  2.  Outward  bands.  There  are  also  two.  (1)  His  own  word, 
especially  the  promises  of  the  Gospel.  (2)  His  own  seals  of  the  covenant  (Acts  iL 
38).  {T.  Boston.)  Jesus  and  the  hrolcen-hearted : — I.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
BBOKEN  HEARTS — ^THE  NATURAL  AND  THE  SPIRITUAL.  They  may  be  United.  Often 
they  are  divided.  Every  broken  heart  becomes  the  subject  of  Jesus'  care,  and  is  dear 
to  Him,  if  for  no  other  reason  in  the  world  but  for  this — because  it  is  unhappy. 
II.  Christ  was  Himself  well  trained  in  the  school  of  suffering  hearts, 
THAT  He  might  learn  to  bind  the  mourners.  All  which  goes  to  break  men's 
hearts  He  felt.    No  wonder,  then,  that  the  bindings  are  what  they  are.    1.  Delicate. 

2.  Very  wise.  3.  Sure  and  thorough.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  half-cure  in  that 
treatment.  No  heart  which  has  not  known  a  breaking  knows,  indeed,  what  strength 
is.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  A  broken  heart: — Many  things  are  valuable  when  whole, 
which,  being  broken,  are  little  worth  ;  but  it  is  otherwise  with  the  human  heart. 
{R.  Macculloch.)  To  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives. — Jesus  proclaims  liberty 
to  the  captives : — I.  Men's  natural  state.  A  state  of  captivity.  They  are  captives 
to  Satan  (2  Tim.  ii.  26).  II.  Christ's  work  with  respect  to  them.  To  proclaim 
liberty  to  them.  {T.Boston.)  Liberty  for  Satan's  captives: — I.  Sinners  in  their 
unregenerate  state  are  Satan's  captives.  II.  Jesus  Christ,  with  the 
express  consent  of  His  Father,  has  issued  His  royal  proclamation  of 
LIBERTY  TO  Satan's  CAPTIVES.  (Ibid.)  The  sinner's  captivity: — The  properties  of 
it.  It  is — 1.  A  spiritual  captivity,  a  captivity  of  the  soul.  2.  Universal.  It  extends 
to  all  the  powers  and  facvdties  of  the  soul,  the  inner  man.  3.  A  hard  and  sore 
captivity.  4.  A  perpetual  captivity.  This  conqueror  will  never  quit  his  captives, 
unless  they  be  taken  from  him  by  Almighty  power.  5.  A  voluntary  captivity,  and 
thus  the  more  hopeless.  Though  they  were  taken  in  war,  and  bom  captives,  yet 
now  he  is  their  master  by  their  own  consent  and  choice,  while  they  choose  to  serve 
the  devil,  and  cannot  be  brought  to  give  themselves  to  the  Lord.  It  is  a  bewitching 
captivity.  {Ibid.)  The  Oospel proclamation : — 1.  It  is  a  jubilee  proclamation  (Lev. 
XXV.  10).  2.  It  is  a  conqueror's  proclamation  to  captives.  Satan  warred  against 
mankind,  he  carried  them  all  captive  into  his  own  kingdom  ;  and  there  was  none  to 
deliver  out  of  his  hand.  But  King  Jesus  had  engaged  him,  routed  all  his  forces, 
overturned  his  kingdom,  and  taken  the  kingdom  to  Himself  (Col.  iL  15  ;  1  John  iii. 
8).  And  now  being  settled  on  His  throne.  His  royal  proclamation  ia  issued,  that 
Satan's  captives  may  again  return  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  {Ibid.)  Liberty  to  the 
eaptvve : — ^Onr  Lord  Himself  directs  us  to  consider  Him  as  speaking  in  these  words. 
I.  Thk  deplorable  objects  He  regards.  Captives.  This  slavery — 1.  So 
universal  as  to  our  species.  2.  Dreadful  in  its  operations  upon  the  individuaL 
8.  Yolontary,  and  sabmitted  to  as  though  it  were  a  blessing  rather  than  a  curse. 


CHAP.  LZi.]  ISAIAH.  861 

4.  Diversified  as  to  the  degree  of  its  influence  and  the  manner  of  its  operations. 

6.  Cruel  in  its  present  effects  and  inconceivably  more  wretched  in  its  final  results. 
Men  are  guilty  as  weU  as  enslaved.  II.  The  geacious  dssion  of  the  offiok 
"WHICH  He  sustains.  To  effect  deliverance  for  the  captives.  To  this  He  is  con- 
secrated by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  1.  By  Him  the  claims  of  justice  are  perfectly 
satisfied.  2.  Christ  dissolves  or  breaks  the  power  which  leads  us  captive.  3.  Hie 
induces  the  captive  to  accept  deliverance  when  it  is  offered  to  h\m,  4.  He  renders 
their  deliverance  permanent,  and  prevents  them  from  being  again  entangled  in  the 
yoke  of  bondage.  III.  The  coeeespondino  manner  in  which  His  gracious  design 
18  TO  BE  MADE  KNOWN.  By  proclamation.  1.  It  indicates  that  His  office  and  its 
design  are  to  be  made  umversally  known.  2.  It  is  intended  to  excite  universal 
attention — to  create  the  most  deep  and  lively  interest.  It  is  a  proclamation  which 
at  once  demands  and  deserves  attention.  3.  It  shows  that  deliverance  is  to  be 
effected  in  a  way  perfectly  consistent  with  the  freedom  of  human  agency.  4.  It  is 
in  such  a  way  as  to  secure  the  glory  of  their  deliverance  to  Him  who  thus  proclaims 
it.  {Essex  Congregational  Bemembrancer.)  Jesus  the  Liberator: — It  is  a  blessed 
name  of  Jesus,  and  as  true  as  it  is  blessed — the  Liberator.  We  can  scarcely  conceive 
anything  grander,  or  more  delightful,  than  to  be  always  going  about  makmg  every- 
thing free.  To  this  end,  Christ  first  liberated  Himself.  1.  As  in  Him  there  was  no 
sin,  He  never  indeed  could  know  the  worst  of  all  bondage — the  bondage  of  the  spirit 
to  the  flesh.  But  He  did  know  the  restraints  of  fear ;  He  did  feel  the  harassing  of 
indecision  ;  He  did  experience  the  irksomeness  of  the  sense  of  a  body  too  narrow  for 
the  largeness  of  His  soul ;  and  He  did  go  through  the  contractions  of  all  that  is 
material,  and  the  mortifying  conventionadities  of  life — for  He  was  hungry,  thirsty, 
weary,  sad,  and  the  sport  of  fools.     From  all  this  Christ  freed  Himself — distinctly, 

J)rogressively,  He  freed  Himself.  Step  by  step.  He  led  captivity  captive.  He  maae 
or  Himself  a  spiritual  body  which,  in  its  own  nature,  and  by  the  law  of  its  being, 
soared  at  once  beyond  the  trammels  of  humanity.  Therefore  He  is  the  Liberator, 
because  He  was  once  Himself  the  Prisoner.  2.  And  all  Christ  did,  and  all  Christ 
was,  upon  this  earth — His  whole  mission — was  essentially  either  to  teach  or  to  give 
liberty.  His  preaching  was,  for  the  most  part,  to  change  the  constraint  of  law  into 
the  largeness  of  love.  Every  word  He  said,  in  private  or  in  public,  proved  expansion. 
8.  When  Christ  burst  through  aU  the  tombs — the  moral  tombs  and  the  physical 
tombs  in  which  we  all  lay  buried — and  when  He  went  out  into  life  and  gk)ry.  He 
was  not  Himself  alone — He  was  at  that  moment  the  covenanted  Head  of  a  mystical 
body,  and  all  that  body  rose  with  Him.  If  so  be  you  have  union  with  Christ,  you 
are  risen ;  bondage  is  past ;  you  are  free.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  opening  of 
the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound. — Sirmers  worse  than  captives: — 1.  They  are 
also  prisoners.  Every  captive  is  not  a  prisoner,  but  all  natural  men,  being  Satan's 
captives,  are  held  prisoners.  2.  They  are  prisoners  in  chains,  bound  in  the  prison. 
8.  They  are  blinded  too  in  their  prison  (compare  Luke  iv.  18).  It  was  a  custom  much 
nsed  in  the  Eastern  nations  to  put  out  the  eyes  of  some  of  their  prisoners,  adding  t.}n> 
misery  to  tneir  imprisonment.  So  the  Phifistines  did  with  Samson  (Judges  xvi.  21) ; 
and  Nebuchadnezzar  with  Zedekiah  (2  Kings  xxv.  7).  This,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  is  tibe 
case  of  all  prisoners  in  their  natural  state.  {T.  Boston.)  Causes  0/ sinners'  impriatm- 
ment : — 1.  As  debtors  to  Divine  justice.  2.  Ajb  malefactors  condemned  in  law  (John  liL 
18).  (Ibid.)  Satan'sbands: — 1.  The  band  of  prejudices.  2.  Of  ill  company.  3.  Of 
earthly-mindednesa.   4.  Of  unbelief.   6.  Of  slothfulness.  6.  Of  delays  (Acts.  xxiv.  26), 

7.  Of  delusion  (Isa.  xliv.  20  ;  Eev.  iiL  17).    8.  Of  divers  Insts  (2  Tim.  iiL  6).    (Ibid.) 

Yer.  2.  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord. — The  year  qf  Jubilee: — It 
may  be  profitable  to  trace  out  the  analogies  between  the  year  of  jubilee  which 
rejoiced  the  hearts  of  Israel,  and  that  more  comprehensive  era  of  which  it  was 
broadly  typical,  and  which  was  to  bring  gladness  to  all  peoples  unto  the  end  of  the 
dispensation,  when  the  loving  ministry  of  God  is  finished.  1.  The  Jewish  jubilee 
commenced  at  the  close  of  the  day  of  atonement.  Is  not  this  a  very  true  type  of  the 
way  in  which  spiritual  blessings  are  exclusively  introduced  to  mankind  ?  There  can 
be  no  jubilee  for  us,  a  race  of  lost  and  guilly  rebels  tf^en  in  arms,  traitors  convicted 
of  treason,  unless  an  all-prevalent  atonement  had  previously  purchased  our  pardon. 
2.  There  was  rest  from  exhausting  labom.  By  a  providential  arrangement  similar  to 
that  which  secured  a  double  supply  of  manna  on  the  sixth  day,  the  land  had 
imusual  fertility  in  the  sixth  year,  so  that  in  the  seventh,  which  was  the  ordinary, 
and  in  the  fiftieth,  which  was  the  special  sabbatical  year,  there  was  a  suspension  of 
the  common  duties  of  husbandly.    Both  the  land  and  labourers  had  lest*  and  yet 


862  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lxi. 

the  supply  did  not  fail,  for  there  was  plenty  in  every  bam,  and  there  was  gladness 
in  every  heart.  And,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  is  not  rest  for  the  weary  just  what  our 
spirits  so  fervently  require — just  what  the  Gospel  has  been  itself  inspired  to  provide  T 
3.  The  next  blessing  pertaining  to  the  year  of  jubilee  was  the  restoration  of  alienated 

})roperty.  When  a  man,  through  misfortune  or  extravagance,  had  contracted 
labilities  that  were  beyond  his  means,  and  had  sold  his  possessions  to  discharge 
them,  if  he  were  not  himself  able  to  redeem  them,  and  if  none  of  his  kindred  were 
at  once  wealthy  and  willing,  these  possessions  remained  as  the  property  of  the 
creditor  imtil  the  year  of  jubilee,  and  then  it  was  provided  by  the  law  that 
they  should  return  to  him  who  had  parted  from  them  for  a  season.  We,  the 
whole  race  of  us,  had  a  bright  inheritance  once — God's  favour,  God's  feUowsMp, 
God's  image,  all  were  ours  by  birth — but,  alas !  we  alienated  it  by  sin.  We 
are  not  ourselves  able  to  redeem  it.  But,  through  infinite  compassion,  this  our 
inheritance  has  not  been  suffered  to  pass  out  of  the  family.  Christ  our  kins- 
man,  our  elder  brother,  has  paid  down  the  price,  and  has  rescued  this  our 
heritage  from  the  fangs  of  the  harpies  who  would  fain  have  usurped  it  for  their  own. 
We  had  sold  our  birthright  as  a  common  thing,  but  it  has  been  redeemed,  and  it  is 
ofiered  to  us  without  a  price  by  a  love  that  is  surely  without  parallel.  The  accept- 
able year  did  dawn  upon  the  world  indeed  when  it  witnessed  the  birth  of  the 
Messiah,  and  that  sun,  like  that  of  Gideon,  stood  still  at  His  bidding,  and  hasted 
not  to  go  down  until  now.  4.  Another  blessing  which  is  mentioned  in  the  history 
is  the  restoration  of  freedom.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  custom  among  the  Hebrews, 
as  among  other  Eastern  nations,  for  a  debtor  who  had  become  hopelessly  involved  to 
sell  himself  to  his  creditors,  in  order  that  by  his  personal  service  he  might  discharge 
the  debt  that  he  was  otherwise  unable  to  pay.  Of  course,  it  was  provided  that  for 
the  amelioration  of  his  condition,  and  for  its  termination  in  the  year  of  jubilee,  the 
man  was  not  to  be  a  slave,  but  a  hired  servant  and  a  soldier,  and  he  was  to  remain 
until  the  year  of  jubilee,  and  then  he  and  his  children  should  all  go  out  and  return 
unto  their  possession.  All  sinners  are  in  bondage,  bound  with  the  chain  of  their 
sins,  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will.  How  I  delight  to  proclaim  it  in  your 
hearing,  '"The  year  of  jubilee  is  come,"  "If  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be 
free  indeed,"  (W.  M.  Punshon.)  No  light  unthout  a  shadow: — There  is  a  tremen- 
dous alternative  before  men — acceptation  or  vengeance.  When  we  speak  of  ven- 
geance in  this  connection,  and  as  a  Divine  act,  it  must  be  understood  not  in  a 
malignant  and  revengeful  sense,  but  in  a  judicial.  It  must  be  regarded  as  an  act 
of  eternal  justice.  We  propose  to  interrogate  Nature  and  ask  her  what  she  has  to 
tell  us  of  this  alternative.  We  would  greatly  prefer  to  present  Christ  as  the  light 
of  the  world,  but  we  know  of  no  light  without  a  shadow.  Observe,  however,  the 
terms  in  which  the  light  and  the  shadow  are  expressed  in  the  prophet's  language. 
It  is  the  "year  "  of  acceptation,  and  only  the  "day"  of  vengeance.  This  is  a  very 
natural  description.  The  light  always  attracts  us  most :  we  scarcely  think  of  the 
shadow.  The  idea  of  hell  is  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  nature,  and  cannot  be 
eliminated  from  thought.    I.  Antitheses  belong  to  the  fundamental  nattieb 

OF  THINGS  ;  HENCE,  ARE  TO  BE  FOTJND  EVEN  IN  FINALITIES.      All  positive  things 

involve  a  corresponding  negative ;  and  are  comprehensible  only  by  contrast  with 
their  negative.  If  you  paint  a  picture  all  white,  you  have  nothing  but  a  white- 
washed canvas  and  no  picture  ;  it  is  only  by  contrast  between  lights  and  shadows 
tliat  you  can  give  it  expression  and  form.  What  is  there  in  the  world  that  has  not 
its  corresponding  negative  ?  If  there  is  light  there  is  also  darkness ;  if  there  is 
height  there  is  also  depth  ;  if  there  is  joy  there  is  also  sorrow ;  if  there  is  perfec- 
tion there  is  also  deformity ;  if  there  is  beauty  there  is  also  ugliness ;  if  there  la 
upward  there  is  also  downward  ;  if  there  is  heat  there  is  also  cold  ;  if  there  is  good 
there  is  also  bad ;  if  there  is  reward  there  is  also  punishment ;  if  there  is  heaven  there 
is  also  hell.  II.  Alternatives  are  necessary  to  moral  beings.  A  moral  being 
is  one  who  has  power  of  choice  ;  and  there  can  be  no  choice  except  as  between 
alternatives.  Our  whole  life  is  a  choosing  between  alternatives.  It  would  then, 
indeed,  be  singular  if  this  choice  was  only  possible  in  matters  of  secondary  import- 
ance, but  eliminated  from  matters  of  the  highest  importance.  If  there  is  no 
alternative  over  against  heaven,  then  heaven  is  not  a  matter  of  choice ;  if  not  a 
matter  of  choice,  then  it  must  be  arbitrarily  conferred,  and,  there  being  no  alterna- 
tive, it  must  of  necessity  be  conferred  arbitrarilyupon  good  and  bad  alike.  III. 
The  law  of  conseqitences  reveals  a  hell,  who  can  compute  the  consequences 
of  an  act  T  It  may  be  but  momentaryjVet  consequences  of  the  most  momentous 
ehaiaoter  are  entailed  upon  the  world.    Iv.  Thie  law  of  obowih  &xv£AL8  ▲  hell. 


CHAP,  in.]  ISAIAH.  863 


of  evil  around  it.  This  Ss  the  law  or  its  existence,  which  forecloses  any  prospect  of 
remedy  from  within.  Moreover,  sin  grows  by  evolution.  Sin  propagates,  and  it 
propagates  nothing  but  itself.  Hence  it  cannot  become  extinct.  It  must  propagate 
itself  in  the  soul  for  ever  unless  some  external  power  shall  eliminate  it.  It  cannot 
outgrow  itself.  The  soul,  therefore,  which  is  identified  with  sin,  must  partake  of 
this  eternal  process.  That  there  is  an  external  remedy  we  will  confess :  out  we  can 
readily  perceive  that  the  growing  processes  of  sin  must  more  and  more  repel  this 
remedy.  The  history  of  a  sinning  soul,  then,  unfolds  an  ever-diminishing  nope  of 
reclamation.  V.  Thb  evident  tendency  of  chakacter  to  assume  stability  is 
INDICATIVE  OF  A  HELL.  This  final  stability  is  what  we  call  second  nature — the 
outcome  and  ultimate  form  of  the  plastic  powers  of  the  soul.  Hence  the  welfare  of 
the  creature  demands  a  limited  probation.  Man's  happiness  demands  that  he  should 
be  able  to  work  towards  an  assured  future :  but  the  laws  which  facilitate  stability  in 
goodness  must  also  facilitate  stability  in  evil.  Hence  it  will  be  seen  why  it  is  that 
the  ambassadors  of  God  are  for  ever  proclaiming:  "Now  is  the  day  of  salvation," 
and  warning  you  to  "  seek  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found."  Hence  it  is  we  are 
telling  you  that  the  fittest  time  for  giving  yourselves  to  God  is  in  your  youth.  VI. 
Conclusion.  Nature  has  told  us  there  is  a  hell.  Thus  nature  is  a  school-master  to 
bring  us  to  Christ.  {Southern  Pulpit.)  Proclamation  of  acceptance  and  vengeance : — 
Notice  well  the  expression,  "  to  proclaim,"  because  a  proclamation  is  the  message  of  a 
king,  and  where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  announce  the  will  of  the  King  of  kings.  Nor  let  it  be  forgotten 
that  a  proclamation  must  be  treated  with  profound  respect,  not  merely  by  receiving 
attention  to  its  contents,  but  by  gaining  obedience  to  its  demands.  There  are  three 
points  in  the  proclamation  worthy  of  our  best  attention.  I.  Jesus  proclaims  the 
ACCEPTABLE  YEAR  OF  THE  LORD.  There  can  be  very  little  question  that  this  relates 
to  the  jubilee  year.  The  reason  for  all  the  jubilee  blessings  was  found  in  the  Lord. 
II.  The  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God.  1.  Whenever  there  is  a  day  of  mercy  to 
those  who  believe,  it  is  always  a  day  of  responsibility  to  those  who  reject  it,  and  if 
they  continue  in  that  state  it  is  a  day  of  increased  wrath  to  unbelievers.  2. 
Another  meaning  of  the  text  comes  out  in  the  fact  that  there  is  appointed  a  day 
of  vengeance  for  all  the  enemies  of  Christ,  and  this  will  happen  in  that  bright  fature 
day  for  which  we  are  looking.  3.  However,  I  consider  that  the  chief  meaning  of 
the  text  lies  in  this — that  "the  diay  of  vengeance  of  our  God "  was  that  day  when 
He  made  all  the  trangressions  of  Hia  people  to  meet  upon  the  head  of  our  great 
Surety.  Look  at  the  instructive  type  by  which  this  truth  was  taught  to  Israel  of 
old.  The  year  of  jubilee  began  with  the  day  of  atonement.  4.  The  day  of  ven- 
geance, then,  is  intimately  connected  with  the  year  of  acceptance  ;  and  mark,  they 
must  be  so  connected  experimentally  in  the  heart  of  all  God's  people  by  the  teaching 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  whenever  Christ  comes  to  make  us  live,  the  law  comes  first 
to  kill  us.  Ill  The  comfort  for  mourners  derivable  from  both  these 
THINGS.  "To  comfort  all  that  mourn."  Oh,  ye  mourners,  what  joy  is  here,  joy 
because  this  is  the  year  of  acceptance,  and  in  the  year  of  acceptance,  or  jubilee,  men 
were  set  free  and  their  lands  were  restored  without  money.  No  man  ever  paid  a  penny 
of  redemption  money  on  the  jubilee  morning :  every  man  was  free  simply  because 
jubilee  was  proclaimed :  no  merit  was  demanded,  no  demur  was  offered,  no  delay 
allowed,  no  dispute  permitted.  Jubilee  came,  and  the  bondman  was  free.  And  now, 
to-day,  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  is  saved,  pardoned,  freed,  without  money,  with- 
out merit,  without  preparation,  simply  because  he  believeth.  An  equal  joy-note  rings 
out  from  the  other  sentence  concerning  the  day  of  vengeance.  If  the  day  of  vengeance 
took  place  when  our  Lord  died,  then  it  is  over.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Preaching  God's 
judgment  on  sin : — A  member  of  the  congregation,  at  the  close  of  a  sermon  that  lasted 
for  an  hour,  and  had  been  preached  amid  a  stillness  most  painful,  nothing  heard  but 
the  tones  of  the  preacher,  and  during  the  pauses  the  ticking  of  the  clock — a  sermon 
on  the  sad  and  awful  issues  of  a  sinful  life,  and  the  glory  and  the  joy  of  a  life  lived 
in  Chiist — said,  "  If  Dr.  Dale  intends  to  preach  like  that  I  shall  not  come  and  hear 
him,  for  I  cannot  stand  it ;  it  goes  through  me."  I  spoke  to  Dr.  Dale  afterwards 
about  the  stillness  and  said  it  was  simply  awful.  "Ah !  yes,"  he  said  ;  "  but  it  was 
more  awM  to  me  ;  it  is  hard  to  preach  like  that,  but  it  must  be  done."  {Geo.  Barber, 
inDr.  Dale's  Life.)  To  comfort  all  that  mourn. — Tea^s  dried : — Some  seek  to  comfort 
by  telling  as  that  sorrow  ia  wrong.    They  say  that  w«  should  be  brave  and  not 


864  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [CHAP.ui. 

allow  our  feelings  to  become  so  deep.  It  is  tnie  there  may  be  excessive  grief,  and  80 
grief  may  become  sinful.  But  to  say  that  we  must  not  sorrow  is  to  try  to  induce  na 
to  outrage  our  nature  and  to  deprive  us  of  one  of  the  most  efiFectual  means  whereby 
God  educates  and  purifies.  Christ  is  not  come  to  deliver  us  from  sufi'ering,  but  to 
enable  us  to  derive  good  from  the  suffering.  How  does  Christ  "comfort  all  that 
mourn  "  ?  I.  By  Himself  becoming  the  sufferer  fok  us,  to  take  away  sin. 
Christ  bore  the  curse  of  it  for  us,  and  in  doing  this  He  removed  the  root  of  our 
mourning.  II.  By  His  sympathy.  He  feels  with  us  and  for  us,  and  by  oneness 
with  us  in  sorrow  gives  us  comfort.  Sympathy  means  suffering  along  with  another. 
Job  spoke  of  it  when  he  said,  "  Did  I  not  weep  for  him  that  was  in  trouble  t  was  not 
my  soul  grieved  for  the  poor ! "  III.  Bv  .owing  us  the  oeigin  and  pukposb 
OF  suffering.  Nowhere  except  in  God's  revelation  in  Christ  do  we  learn  how  and 
why  afl9iction  and  sorrow  come  upon  ns.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  explains  all.  And 
His  explanation  goes  down  to  the  very  root  of  the  matter.  Suffering  is  necessary  in 
order  that  we  enter  into  the  fulness  of  God's  love  in  the  gift  of  His  Son.  He  who 
has  received  Christ  as  his  Saviour  is  instructed,  sanctified,  made  more  meet  for  the 
Master's  use,  becomes  more  heavenly  minded,  by  means  of  all  the  affliction  through 
which  his  Heavenly  Father  causes  nim  to  pass.  To  suffer  in  Christ  is  to  live  more 
deeply.     "  Love  and  sorrow  are  the  two  conditions  of  a  profound  life."    IV.     Bt 

ASSURING  those  WHO  BELIEVE  THAT  THEY  SHALL  BE  EVERLASTINGLY  WITH   HiM 

TO  BEHOLD  His  GLORY.  We  leam — 1.  That  the  comfort  Christ  imparts  is  effectuaL 
It  is  not  limited  or  partial.  See  how  fully  this  is  set  forth  in  flie  passage  with 
which  the  text  is  connected.  What  variety  of  imagery  is  used  to  picture  to  us  the 
fulness  and  perfection  of  the  remedy  Christ  brings  for  human  guilt  and  miseiy. 
The  healing  He  effects  is  for  our  whole  nature,  for  heart,  mind  and  conscience.  He 
completely  redeems  and  blesses.  2.  The  comfort  Christ  gives  is  enduring.  It  is  no 
momentary  or  temporary  assuaging  of  grief.  It  wiU  never  fail,  it  will  increase  in  its 
influence  and  power.  3.  The  comfort  Christ  bestows  is  offered  to  all  and  is  adapted 
to  all.  "To  comfort  all  that  mourn."  "  All  ye  that  labour,"  etc.  Whatever  burden, 
whatever  sorrow,  there  is  in  Him  comfort  for  all.     {O.  W.  Humphreys,  B.A.) 

Yet,  8.  -To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion. — Mowmers  in  Zion,  may  mean 
either  those  that  mourn  for  Zion  (chap.  Ixvi.  10)  or  those  that  mourn  in  her. 
{Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Mourners  in  Zion: — I.  The  character  of  thosb 
PERSONS  WHO    HAVE  A  PRESEWT    INTEREST  IN  THE  MEDIATION  OF    CHRIST.      Such 

as  "mourn  in  Zion."  They  differ  from  others — 1.  In  respect  of  the  spring 
or  principle  of  their  mourning.  They  mourn,  as  others  do,  in  a  natural  way,  for 
what  is  contrary  to  their  natures  and  is  considered  hurtful  to  them.  But  they 
likewise  mourn  for  what  is  most  agreeable  to  their  nature,  in  its  present  corrupt 
state.  The  corruption  of  their  nature  is  itself  a  principal  cause  of  their  mourning, 
and  therefore  can  proceed  from  no  principle  inherent  in  corrupt  nature.  It  is  the 
fruit  of  "the  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication."  2.  In  respect  of  the  object  for 
whom  they  mourn.  Self  is  always  the  reigning  principle  with  unrenewed  men. 
The  inhabitant  of  Zion  mourns  also  for  himself,  and  while  actuated  by  a  principle  of 
self-preservation  it  must  be  so.  But  he  mourns  also — (1)  For  his  brethren  ;  for  every 
fellow-creature  whom  he  sees  in  misery ;  even  for  his  enemies  if  any  evQ  befall  them. 
(2)  For  Zion,  for  the  Church  of  God.  (3)  For  Christ.  They  have  a  believing  view 
of  their  own  sin  as  laid  upon  Christ ;  therefore  they  consider  every  sin  they  have 
committed  as  a  mortal  wound  given  to  Him.  3.  In  respect  of  the  subject  of  their 
grief,  or  the  thing  for  which  they  mourn.  (1)  For  sin  as  well  as  for  suffering.  (2) 
For  the  filthiness  as  well  as  the  guilt  of  sin.  (3)  For  the  sin  of  their  nature  as  well 
as  of  their  life.  (4)  For  sins  against  Christ  and  the  Gospel,  as  well  as  against  God 
and  the  law.  (5)  For  the  sins  of  others  as  well  as  for  their  own.  4.  In  respect  of 
the  fruits  and  effects  of  their  sorrow  (2  Cor.  vii.  10,  11).  (1)  Whereas  the  sorrow  of 
the  world  excites  men  to  take  methods  of  their  own  devising  to  still  the  clamours  of 
conscience,  the  mourning  here  intended  leads  to  that  remedy  which  God  Himself  hath 
provided.  (2)  Whereas  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death,  crucifies  the  false 
hopes  the  man  had  entertained  of  safely  in  the  way  of  sin,  and,  when  rising  to  excess, 
tends  to  drive  him  to  despair,  the  Christian  mourning  is  a  happy  means  of  his  being 
begotten  again  to  a  lively  hope.  (3)  The  sorrow  of  the  world  mflames  the  person's 
enmity  against  God,  but  the  Christian's  mourning  stirs  him  up  to  embrace  the  offers 
of  reconciliation  with  God.  Being  accompanied  with  hatred  of  sin,  it  serves  to  increase 
his  love  to  God,  His  holy  law  and  His  service.  (4)  In  a  word,  that  sorrow  for  sin 
that  may  be  found  in  an  unrenewed  man  leaves  him  as  it  found  him.    Godly  sorrow, 


CHAP.  Lxi.]  ISAIAS.  865 

on  the  contrary,  worketh  ' '  repentance,  not  to  be  repented  of. "  The  person  convinced 
of  the  evil  and  folly  of  sin,  and  encouraged  by  a  heart-aifecting  view  of  the  mercy  of 
God  in  Christ,  turns  from  sia  w^+V  loathing  of  it,  turns  to  God  with  full  purpose  of 
heart,  and  from  that  time  foriL  ^rsists  m  a  consu>c»  ^n^i^avour  to  walk  with  E>jn  in 
all  the  ways  of  new  obedience.  II.  The  coNLtliioN  that  these  pebbons  ar3  IN, 
FOR  THE  MOST  PAKT,  ^r!.'3  VS  Ihi.  fivKi^.  Ti^  -r«  S0T5i«»i  with  "ashcs"; 
employed  in  "mourning";  and  under  the  prevailing  influence  of  "the  spirit  of 
heaviness."  1.  They  are  subject  to  all  the  ordinary  miseries  of  this  life,  in  common 
with  other  men.  2.  They  are  affected  to  a  great  depth  of  sor  ow  by  many  things 
which  are  no  affliction  to  ths  rest  of  mankind.  They  are  affecteu  u  ith  spiritual  as 
well  as  temporal  evils  ;  sin,  the  hiding  of  God's  face,  the  low  state  of  the  Church, 
the  divisions  among  Chmrch  members,  spiritual  judgments,  etc.  3.  They  are  subject 
to  many  causes  of  mom-ning  that  either  fall  not  upon  others  or  befall  them  only 
in  a  small  degree.  They  live  in  a  foreign  land  while  others  consider  themselves  as  at 
home.  They  run,  and  agonize,  and  strain  themselves,  in  the  race  that  is  set  before 
them,  while  others  sit  still  and  are  at  ease,  4.  They  are  often  subject  to  groundless 
discouragements  through  the  prevalence  of   temptation  and  unbelief.     III.  this 

HAPPY  CONDITION  TO  WHICH  THESE  MOURNERS  SHALL  BE  BROUGHT.       "  Beauty  for 

ashes, "  etc.  1.  Even  while  the  causes  of  their  mourning  continue,  they  are  supported, 
encouraged,  and  comforted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  afford  them  a  happiness  superior 
to  what  others  enjoy  in  their  best  times.  2.  They  shall  be  completely,  though 
gradually,  delivered  from  all  their  mourning,  and  from  all  the  causes  of  it.  3.  They 
shall,  at  length,  enjoy  all  that  positive  happiness  which  their  natures  are  capable  of. 
4.  They  shall,  at  last,  be  fully  sensible  of  all  the  happiness  of  their  condition, 
and  shall  express  their  sense  of  it  in  songs  of  eternal  praise.  IV.  The  manner  in 
WHICH  Christ  will  bring  about  this  happy  change.  1.  He  is  commissioned  to 
appoint  these  things  for  them.  The  word  signifies  to  ordain  by  a  judicial  sentence. 
Christ,  as  King  in  Zion,  is  invested  with  the  highest  authority  :  God  has  committed 
to  Him  all  judgment.  2.  He  is  sent  to  give  unto  them  what  He  has  thus  appointed 
forthem.  {J.  Young.)  Beauty  for  ashes. — "Beauty"  : — "  A  crest, "  any  insignia  or 
ornament  for  the  head.  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  I). JD.)  Beauty  for  ashes : — 1.  The  well- 
known  fable  of  the  Phoenix  is  one  that  has  been  often  truthfully  enacted  on  our  earth. 
Successive  platforms  of  creation,  with  all  their  varied  life  and  loveliness,  have  been 
reduced  to  ruin,  and  out  of  the  wreck  new  life  and  beauty  have  emerged.  The  earth 
has  reached  its  present  perfection  of  form  through  repeated  geological  fires.  The  fair 
Eden,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  history  of  the  human  race  begins,  was  developed 
from  the  ashes  of  previous  less  lovely  Edens.  The  soil  of  the  earth  is  composed  of 
the  ashes  of  substances  that  have  been  oxidized,  burned  by  the  slow,  soft  caresses  of 
the  very  air  that  breathed  upon  them — and  whose  gentle  smile  gave  them  colour  and 
form.  The  building  of  the  world  was  a  process  of  burning,  and  its  foundations  were 
undoubtedly  laid  in  flames.  Its  crust  was  originally  like  a  burnt  cinder.  The  rocks 
and  the  earths,  the  sands  and  the  clays,  the  very  seas  themselves  are,  as  it  were, 
the  ashes  of  a  long-continued  and  universal  conflagration.  But  during  the  long 
geological  periods,  by  the  silent  agency  of  vegetable  life  working  in  unison  with  the 
sunshine,  the  work  of  the  fire  has  been  partially  undone,  and  a  considerable  amount 
of  combustible  matter  has  been  slowly  rescued  from  the  wreck  of  the  first  confla- 
gration. Whatever  now  exists  on  the  earth  unbumt  is  owing  to  the  wonderful 
co-operation  of  plant  life  and  solar  light.  These  two  forces  have  given  to  us  all  the 
beauty  which  now  spreads  over  the  ashes  of  the  world.  Nay,  the  very  ashes  of  the 
earth  themselves  contributei  in  the  most  marvellous  manner  to  its  beauty.  How 
much  does  the  scenery  of  our  world  owe  to  its  picturesque  rocks,  and  sandy  deserts, 
and  lonely  seas,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  but  the  ashes  of  the  primeval  fire ! 
What  wonderful  beauty  God  has  brought  out  of  water  !  It  is  strange  to  think  of 
water  being  the  ashes  of  a  conflagration — the  snow  on  the  mountain-top,  the  foam  of 
the  waterfall,  the  cloud  of  glory  in  the  heavens,  the  dewdrop  in  the  eye  of  the 
daisy.  Without  the  intervention  of  vegetable  life  at  all,  God  has  thus  directly,  from 
the  objects  themselves,  given  beauty  for  ashes.  He  might  have  made  these  ashes  of 
our  globe  as  repulsive  to  the  sight  as  the  blackened  relics  of  forest  and  plain,  over 
■which  the  prairie  fire  has  swept,  while,  at  the  same  time,  they  might  have  subserved 
all  their  ends  and  uses.  But  He  has,  instead,  clothed  them  with  incomparable 
majesty  and  loveliness,  so  that  they  minister  most  richly  to  our  admiration  and^enjoy- 
ment ;  and  some  of  the  noblest  conceptions  of  the  human  mind  have  been  borrowed 
from  their  varied  chambers  of  imagery.  2.  Like  the  old  processes  of  nature  are 
the  new  ones  that  take  place  still.     Oat  of  the  ashes  of  the  local  conflagration 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txi. 

that  has  reduced  the  fields  and  forests  to  one  uniform  blackened  waste  comes 
forth  the  beauty  of  greener  fields  and  forests  of  species  unknown  there  before. 
Very  strikingly  is  this  seen  on  the  dry  hill-sides  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  covered  with 
dense  scrub  which  is  often  swept  by  fire.     All  the  trees  in  the  groves  of  pine  that  grow 
on  these  hill-sides,  however  unequal  in  size,  are  of  the  same  age,  and  the  cones  which 
they  produce  are  persistent,  and  never  discharge  their  seeds  until  the  tree  or  the 
branch  to  which  they  belong  dies.     Consequently,  when  one  of  the  groves  is  destroyed 
by  fire,  the  burning  of  the  trees  causes  the  scales  of  the  cones  to  open,  and  the  seed 
which  they  contain  is  scattered  profusely  upon  the  ground  ;  and  on  the  bare,  blackened 
site  of  the  old  grove  a  young,  green  plantation  of  similar  pines  springs  forth.     This 
curious  adaptation  explains  the  remarkable  circumstance  that  all  the  trees  of  the  grove 
are  of  the  same  age.     In  an  equally  remarkable  way  the  fiires  in  the  Australian  bush, 
which  are  so  destructive  to  the  forests  of  that  country,  are  made  the  very  means  of 
reproducing  the  vegetation.     3.  Another  illustration  of  the  principle  may  be  derived 
from  volcanic  regions.     No  scenes  of  earth  are  lovelier  than  those  which  are  subjected 
to  the  frequent  destructive  action  of  volcanoes.     The  Bay  of  Naples  is  confessedly  one  of 
those  spots  in  which  scenic  beauty  has  culminated.     And  yet  this  second  Eden  is  the 
creation  of  volcanic  fires.     No  soil  is  so  fertile  as  crumbling  lava  and  volcanic  ashes. 
The  destroyer  of  the  fields  and  gardens  is  thus  the  renovator.     The  ashes  of  the  burning 
that  has  devastated  homestead  and  vineyard  reappear  in  the  delicate  clusters  of  the 
grape,  and  the  vivid  verdure  of  the  vine-leaves  which  embower  a  new  home  of  happiness 
on  the  site.     4.  And — a  case  of  extremes  meeting — frost  has  the  same  effect  as  fire. 
No  meadows  are  greener,  no  corn-fields  more  luxuriant,  than  those  which  spread  over 
the  soU  that  has  been  formed  by  the  attrition  of  ancient  glaciers.     The  cedars  of 
Lebanon  grow  on  the  moraines  left  behind  by  ice-streams  that  had  sculptured  the 
mountains  into  their  present  shape  ;  and  over  the  ranges  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  the 
coniferous  forests,  the  noblest  and  most  beautiful  on  earth,   are   spread  in  long, 
curving  bands,  braided  together  into  lace-like  patterns  of  charming  variety — an 
arrangement  determined  by  the  course  of  ancient  glaciers,  upon  whose  moraines  all 
the  forests  of  the  Nevada  are  growing,  and  whose  varied  distribution  over  curves  and 
ridges  and  high  rolling  plateaus,  the  trees  have  faithfully  followed.     Elsewhere 
throughout  the  world  pine-woods  usually  grow,  not  on  soil  produced  by  the  slow 
weathering  of  the    atmosphere,   but  by  the  direct  mechanical  action  of  glaciers, 
which  crushed  and  ground  it  from  the  solid  rocks  of  mountain  ranges,  and  in  their 
slow  recession  at  the  end  of  the  glacial  period,  left  it  spread  out  in  beds  available 
for  tree-growth.     5.  Is  there  not  beauty  for  ashes,  when  the  starchy  matter  which 
gives  the  grey  colour  to  the  lichen  is  changed  by  the  winter  rains  into  chlorophyl, 
and  the  dry,   lifeless,   parchment-like  substance  becomes  a  bright  green  pliable 
rosette,  as  remarkable  for  the  elegance  of  its  form  as  for  the  vividness  of  its 
colour  ?    Does  not   the   corn   of  wheat,    when   God,    as  Ezekiel    strikingly  says, 
"  calls  "  for  it  and  increases  it,  develop  out  of  the  grey  ashes  that  wrap  round 
and  preserve  the   embers  of  its  life,   the  long  spears  of  bright  verdure  which 
pierce    through  the  dark  wintry  soil  up  to  the  sunshine  and  the  blue  air  of 
heaven  ?    All  the  beauty  of  the  green  fields  and  woods,  springing  from  the  root, 
or  the  seed,  or  the  weed,  is  produced  from  the  ashes  of  previous  vegetation.     Some 
plants  are  found  only  where  something  has  been  burnt.     Farmers  say  that  wood 
ashes  will  cause  the  dormant  white  clover  to  spring  up  ;  and  fields  treated  in  this 
manner  wiU  suddenly  be  transfigured  with  the  fragrant  bloom.    A  lovely  little  moss, 
whose  seed-vessels,   oy  the  twisting  and  untwisting  of  their  stems,  indicate  the 
changes  of  the  weather  like  a  barometer,  grows  on  moors  and  in  woods  in  spots 
where  fires  have  been ;  and  it  covers  with  its  bright  green  verdure  the  sites  of 
buildings,  marking  with  its  soft,  delicate  cushions  where  the  hearthstone  had  been. 
From  its  fondness  for  growing  in  such  places,  it  is  known  in  France  by  the  familiar 
name  of  La  CharhonnUre.     After  the  great  London  fire,  a  species  of  mustard  grew 
up  on  every  side,  covering  with  its  yellow  blossoms  the  charred  ruins  and  the 
recently  exposed  soil  strewn  with  ashes  ;  and,  as  if  to  show  some  curious  affinity 
between  the  conflagration  of  cities  and  the  mustard  tribe,  after  the  more  recent 
burning  of  Moscow,  another  species  of  the  same  family  made  its  appearance  among 
the   ruins,   and   is  still   to  be   met  with  in   the    neighbourhood    of    that    city. 
{H.    Macmillan,   D.D.)    Beauty  for  ashes:    Judaism: — Out  of  the  ashes  of  the 
burnt-offering  all  the  beauty  of  the  Hebrew  faith  emanated.     {Ibid. )    Beauty  for 
ashes :  the  cUonement : — How  expressive  was  this  type  of  the  atoning  death  of  the 
Son  of  God  1    The  Victim  in  His  case  too  was  reduced  to  ashes.     We  see  as  clearly 
on  the  cross  on  which  was  stretched  His  lifeless  body,  that  the  work  of  atonement 


CEAP.  txi.]  ISAIAE.  867 

was  finished,  and  that  a  complete  satisfaction  had  been  made  to  God  for  human  sin, 
as  the  priest  saw  in  the  ashes  on  the  altar  how  entirely  the  sacrifice  had  met  with 
the  Divine  approval  and  acceptance.  As  the  ashes  were  laid  beside  the  altar  for  a 
while,  so  the  body  of  Jesus  remaiaed  upon  the  cross  some  time  after  death,  exposed 
to  the  idle  and  mocking  gaze  of  the  multitude,  but  most  precious  in  the  sight  of 
HiTTi  whose  law  He  had  magnified  and  made  honourable  by  His  obedience  unto  death. 
As  the  ashes,  further,  were  placed  on  the  east  side  of  the  altar,  because  from  that 
quarter  the  bright  light  of  the  morning  sun  arose — a  natural  symbolism  common  to 
nearly  all  religions,  Christians,  Mohammedans,  and  Pagans  alike  turning  to  the 
east  in  prayer,  and  laying  their  dead  and  building  their  sacred  shrines  in  that 
direction — so  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  rose  from  that  point  of  the  compass,  and 
cast  back  the  light  of  the  glory  of  the  resurrection  upon  all  the  incidents  and 
circumstances  of  His  death.  The  radiance  of  the  ristug  sun  shone  on  the  ashes 
beside  the  Jewish  altar,  making  it  manifest  that  the  lamb  had  been  entirely  con- 
siuned ;  the  sun  rose  upon  the  morning  of  the  Sabbath  after  Christ's  crucifixion 
upon  a  cross  from  which  the  slain  Lamb  of  God  had  been  taken  away,  and  upon  a 
sepulchre  nigh  at  hand,  wherein  bad  lain  the  body  of  Him  who  was  the  end  of  the 
law  for  righteousness.  And,  lastly,  as  the  Jewish  priests  carried  the  ashes  of  the 
sacrifice  without  the  camp  into  a  clean  place,  so  the  body  of  Jesus  was  laid  outside 
the  city  of  Jerusalem  in  a  new  sepulchre  wherein  no  man  had  ever  before  been  laid. 
His  grave  was  in  a  garden  which  was  close  to  Golgotha,  where  He  was  crucified. 
Truly  God  gave  great  beauty  for  ashes  in  that  garden  sepulchre  !  {Ibid.)  Beauty 
for  ashes:  sin  and  grace: — To  the  sinner  who  repents  and  believes  in  this  great 
atoning  Sacrifice,  God  gives  beauty  for  ashes.  Sin  is  an  infringement  of  God's  law 
of  order,  through  which  alone  all  the  brightness  and  variety  of  life  can  be  evolved. 
It  disintegrates,  decomposes,  reduces  to  ashes.  Its  great  characteristic  is  its 
wearisome  sameness  and  monotony,  a  dreary  movement  without  variety  from 
iniquity  to  iniquity.  It  is  a  defacement  and  destruction  passing  over  the  soul  and 
life  of  man,  like  an  earthquake  over  a  city,  overthrowing  into  one  common  heap  of 
similar  ruins  aU  the  fair  variety  of  its  architecture  ;  or  like  a  fire  through  a  forest, 
reducing  all  the  multitudinous  life  and  variety  of  vegetation  to  the  same  uniform 
dreary  level  of  black  cinders  and  grey  ashes,  on  which  no  dew  falls,  and  on  which 
the  sun  itself  shines  with  a  ghastly  and  mocking  smile.  Out  of  this  melancholv 
wreck  the  grace  of  God  constructs  the  fresh  and  infinite  variety  of  blessedness  which 
belongs  to  the  converted  soul.  {Ibid. )  Perfect  through  suffering : — To  the  sorrowful 
God  gives  beauty  for  ashes.  Sorrow  and  suffering  play  a  gracious  part  in  the  moral 
economy  of  the  world.  They  are  all  the  furnace  in  which  our  evil  nature  is  reduced 
to  ashes.  We  are  laid  with  the  great  Sufferer  of  our  race  upon  the  altar  and  share 
the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  and  like  Him  are  made  perfect  through  suffering. 
On  the  most  awful  battlefields  of  life  grow  the  greenest  pastures  of  peace  ;  on  the 
fierce  lava  streams  that  have  desolated  the  heart,  bloom  the  sweetest  virtues  and 
flourish  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  (Ibid.)  Beauty  for  ashes :  death  and 
eternal  life : — The  ashes  of  the  dead  speak  of  the  greatest  humiliation,  the  uttermost 
loss,  highest  hopes  extinguished,  and  noblest  ideas  perished.  The  gifts  and  gains  of 
our  civilization  have  made  himian  life  more  precious  than  of  old;  the  results  of 
science,  showing  through  what  long  stages  and  by  what  wonderful  processes  it  has 
reached  its  present  perfection,  have  greatly  exalted  the  conception  of  its  importance  ; 
the  revelation  of  Divine  grace  has  made  known  to  us  that,  for  its  sake,  the  Son  of 
God  Himself  died,  and  what  unspeakable  issues  hang  upon  it ;  and  the  experience 
of  every  heart  that  deeply  loves,  confirms  the  truth  that  in  this  human  life  love  la 
by  far  the  greatest  and  most  blessed  thing,  "the  most  Divine  flower  that  Nature,  in 
the  long  course  of  her  evolutions,  has  evoked. "  And  here,  in  the  ashes  of  the  dead, 
it  has  all  come  to  an  end.  Other  wastes  may  be  repaired.  Every  spring,  the  earth 
rises  in  fresh  loveliness  from  the  baptism  of  the  autumnal  fire.  But  what  shall 
repair  the  waste  of  human  death  ?  To  the  pagan  all  was  hopeless  !  Even  the 
Hebrew  faith  itself  could  scarcely  imagine  that  any  conscious  beauty  could  ever 
come  from  such  ashes ;  and  its  helpless  cry  ascended  up  to  the  pitiless  heaven, 
"  Wilt  Thou  show  wonders  to  the  dead  ? "  And,  in  our  days,  cruel  science  comes 
and  employs  all  its  strength  in  ruthlessly  rolling  a  great  stone  to  the  mouth  of  the 
sepulchre.  But  the  Christian  religion  assures  us  that  for  the  ashes  of  our  dead  we 
shall  yet  have  immortal  beauty.  (Ibid.)  Beauty  for  ashes: — I.  Who  gives  this 
WORD  ?  It  comes  from  Him  who  said,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  Me  ; " 
*'  He  hath  sent  Me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted."  Now,  in  a  subordinate  sense, 
Christian  ministers  have  the  Spirit  of  God  resting  upon  them,  and  they  are  sent  to 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txi. 

bind  up  the  broken-hearted  ;  but  they  can  only  do  so  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  in 
strength  given  from  Him.  This  word  is  not  spoken  by  them,  nor  by  prophets  or 
apostles  either,  but  by  the  great  Lord  and  Master  of  apostles  and  prophets,  and 
ministers,  even  by  Jesus  Chnst  Himself.  If  He  declares  that  He  will  comfort  us, 
then  we  may  rest  assured  we  shall  be  comforted  !  The  stars  in  His  right  hand  may 
fail  to  penetrate  the  darkness,  but  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  effectually 
scatters  the  gloom.  If  the  Consolation  of  Israel  Himself  comes  forth  for  the  up- 
lifting of  His  downcast  people,  then  their  doubts  and  fears  may  well  fly  apace,  since 
His  presence  is  light  and  peace.  But  who  is  this  anointed  One  who  comes  to 
comfort  mourners  ?  1.  He  is  described  in  the  preface  to  the  text  as  a  preacher. 
Remember  what  kind  of  preacher  Jesus  was.  "Never  man  spake  like  this  Man." 
He  was  a  son  of  consolation  indeed.  It  was  said  of  Him,  "A  bruised  reed  shall  He 
not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench. "  2.  In  addition  to  His  being 
a  preacher,  He  is  described  as  a  physician.  ' '  He  hath  sent  Me  to  bind  up  the 
broken-hearted. "  Some  hearts  want  more  than  words.  The  wounds  are  deep,  they 
are  not  flesh  cuts,  but  horrible  gashes  which  lay  bare  the  bone,  and  threaten  ere 
long  to  kill  unless  they  be  skilfully  closed.  It  is,  therefore,  a  great  joy  to  know 
that  the  generous  Friend  who,  in  the  text,  promises  to  deal  with  the  sorrowing,  is 
fully  competent  to  meet  the  most  frightful  cases.  Jehovah  Rophi  is  the  name  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  '*  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  3.  As  if  this  were  not  enough, 
our  gracious  Helper  is  next  described  as  a  liberator.  "  He  hath  sent  me  to  proclaim 
liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound." 
There  were  many  downcast  persons  in  Israel  in  the  olden  times — persons  who  had 
become  bankrupt,  and,  therefore,  had  lost  their  estates,  and  had  even  sunk  yet 
further  into  debt,  tUl  they  were  obliged  to  sell  their  children  into  slavery,  and  to 
become  themselves  bondsmen.  But  the  fiftieth  year  came  round,  and  never  waa 
there  heard  music  so  sweet  in  all  Judea's  land  as  when  the  silver  trumpet  was 
taken  down  on  the  jubilee  mom,  and  a  loud  shrill  blast  was  blown  in  every  city, 
and  hamlet,  and  village,  in  all  Israel,  from  Dan  even  to  Beersheba.  It  meant : 
"  Israelite,  thou  art  free.  If  thou  hast  sold  thyself,  go  forth  without  money,  for 
the  year  of  jubilee  has  come. "  Jesus  has  come  with  a  similar  message.  4.  As  if 
this  were  not  all,  one  other  matter  is  mentioned  concerning  our  Lord,  and  He  is 
pictured  as  being  sent  as  the  herald  of  good  tidings  of  all  sorts  to  us  the  sons  of 
men.  "To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord."  Behold  in  the  person  of 
the  incarnate  God  the  sure  pledge  of  Divine  benevolence.  "  He  that  spared  not  His 
own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  aU,  "etc.  II.  To  whom  is  this  word  spoken  ? 
To  those  who  mourn  in  Zion.  They  are  in  Zion  ;  they  are  the  Lord's  people,  but 
they  mourn.  To  mourn  is  not  always  a  mark  of  grace.  Nature  mourns.  Fallen 
human  nature  will  have  to  mourn  for  ever,  except  grace  shall  change  it.  But  the 
mourning  here  meant  is  a  mourning  of  gracious  souls.  It  assumes  various  shapes. 
1.  It  begins  in  most  hearts  with  lamentation  over  past  sin.  2.  True  hearts  also 
sorrow  over  their  present  imperfections.  3.  The  Christian  mourner  laments,  also, 
because  he  cannot  be  more  continuously  in  communion  with  God.  A  native  of 
sunny  Italy  deplores  the  absence  of  heaven's  bright  blue,  when  made  to  dwell  in  this 
land  of  the  fleecy  clouds ;  and  he  who  has  dwelt  in  unclouded  fellowship  with  the 
Lord  bemoans  his  hard  lot,  if  even  for  awhile  he  beholds  not  that  face  which  is  as 
the  sun  shining  in  its  strength.  4.  The  real  Christian  mourns,  again,  because  he 
cannot  be  more  useful.  5.  Moreover,  like  his  Lord,  he  mourns  for  others.  He 
mourns  in  Zion  because  of  the  deadness  of  the  Christian  Church,  its  divisions,  its 
errors,  its  carelessness  towards  the  souls  of  sinners.  But  he  mourns  most  of  all  for 
the  unconverted.  III.  What  is  that  which  is  spoken  in  the  text  to  those  that 
mourn  t  Come,  mourning  souls,  who  mourn  in  the  way  described :  there  is  comfort 
appointed  for  you,  and  there  is  also  comfort  given  to  you.  It  is  the  prerogative  of 
Eang  Jesus  both  to  appoint  and  to  give.  Observe  the  change  Christ  promises  to 
work  for  His  mourners.  1.  Here  is  beauty  given  for  ashes.  In  the  Hebrew  there 
is  a  ring  in  the  words  which  cannot  be  conveyed  in  the  English.  The  ashes  that 
men  put  upon  their  head  in  the  East  in  the  time  of  sorrow  made  a  grim  tiara  for  the 
brow  of  the  mourner ;  the  Lord  promises  to  put  all  these  ashes  away,  and  to 
substitute  for  them  a  glorious  head-dress — a  diadem  of  beauty.  Or,  if  we  run  away 
from  the  words,  and  take  the  inner  sense,  we  may  look  at  it  thus : — mourning  makes 
the  face  wan  and  emaciated,  and  so  takes  away  the  beauty  ;  but  Jesus  promises  that 
He  will  80  come  and  reveal  joy  to  the  sorrowing  soul  that  the  face  shall  fill  up 
again :  the  eyes  that  were  dull  and  cloudy  shall  sparkle  again,  and  the  countenance, 
yea,  and  the  whole  person,  shall  be  onoe  more  radiant  with  the  beauty  which  sorrow 


CHAP,  ua.]  ISAIAH.  868 

had  so  grievously  marred.  2.  Then,  it  is  added,  "He  will  give  the  oil  of  joy  for 
mourning."  Here  we  have  first  beauty,  and  then  unction.  The  Orientals  used  rich 
perfumed  oils  on  their  persons — used  them  largely  and  lavishly  in  times  of  great 
joy.  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  upon  those  who  believe  in  Jesus,  and  gives  them 
an  anointing  of  perfume,  most  precious,  more  sweet  and  costly  than  the  nard  of 
Araby.  "  We  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  3.  Then,  it  is  added,  to  give 
still  greater  fulness  to  the  cheering  promise,  that  the  Lord  will  give  "the  garment 
of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."  The  man  is  first  made  beautiful,  next  he  has 
the  anointing,  then  afterwards  he  is  arrayed  in  robes  of  splendour.  "The  garment 
of  praise,"  what  a  dress  is  this  I  When  a  man  wraps  himself  about,  as  it  were,  with 
psalmody,  and  lives  for  ever  a  chorister,  singing  not  with  equal  voice,  but  with  the 
same  earnest  heart  as  they  do  who  day  and  night  keep  up  the  never-ending  hymn 
before  the  throne  of  the  infinite  I  AM,  what  a  life  is  his,  what  a  man  is  he  !  4. 
Notice  what  will  be  the  result  of  this  appointment,  "That  they  might  be  called 
trees  of  righteousness,"  etc.  The  original  is  like  "oaks  of  righteousness,"  that  is, 
they  shall  become  strong,  firmly  rooted,  covered  with  verdure  ;  they  shall  be  like  a 
well- watered  tree  for  pleasantness.  But  the  very  pith  of  the  text  lies  in  a  little 
word  to  which  you  must  look.  "  Ye  shall  be  called  trees  of  righteousness."  There 
are  many  moumiug  saints  who  are  trees  of  righteousness,  but  nobody  caUs  them  so ; 
they  are  so  desponding  that  they  give  a  doubtful  idea  to  others.  Observers  ask,  "  Is 
this  a  Christian  ? "  But,  0  mourners  1  if  Jesus  visits  you,  and  gives  you  the  oil  of 
joy,  men  shall  call  you  "trees  of  righteousness,"  they  shall  see  grace  in  you.  I 
know  some  Christian  people  who,  wherever  they  go,  are  attractive  advertisements  of 
the  Gospel.  Nobody  could  be  with  them  for  half-an-hour  without  saying,  "  Whence 
do  they  gain  this  calm,  this  peace,  this  tranquillity,  this  holy  delight  and  joy  ? "  Many 
have  been  attracted  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  by  the  holy  pleasantness  and  cheerful  con- 
versation of  those  whom  Christ  has  visited  with  the  abundance  of  His  love.  5.  The 
result  of  all  this  goes  further,  ' '  They  shall  be  called  trees  of  righteousness,  the  planting 
of  the  Lord,"  that  is  to  say,  where  there  is  joy  imparted,  and  unction  given  from  the 
Holy  Spirit,  instead  of  despondency,  men  will  say,  "It  is  God's  work,  it  is  a  tree 
that  God  has  planted,  it  could  not  grow  like  that  if  anybody  else  had  planted  it ; 
this  man  is  a  man  of  God's  making,  his  joy  is  a  joy  of  God's  giving."  6.  Another 
word  remains,  "That  He  might  be  glorified."  That  is  the  great  result  we  drive  at, 
and  that  is  the  object  even  of  God  Himself,  "that  He  might  be  glorified."  For 
when  men  see  the  cheerful  Christian,  and  perceive  that  this  is  God's  work,  then  they 
own  the  power  of  God.  Meanwhile,  the  saints,  comforted  by  your  example,  praise  and 
bless  God,  and  all  the  Church  lifts  up  a  song  to  the  Most  High.  (C.  R.  Spurgeon.) 
Grief  transformed : — There  is  a  beautiful  thijug  which  comes  out  more  distinctly  if  we 
foUow  the  Revised  Version,  and  read  it  as  "to  give  unto  them  a  garland  for  ashes, 
the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness. "  There 
we  have  two  contrasted  pictures  suggested,  one  of  a  mourner  with  grey  ashes  strewed 
upon  his  dishevelled  locks,  and  his  spirit  clothed  in  gloom  like  a  black  robe  ;  and  to 
him  there  comes  One  who,  with  gentle  hand,  smoothes  the  ashes  out  of  his  hair, 
trains  a  garland  round  his  brow,  anoints  his  head  with  oil,  and,  stripping  off  the 
trappings  of  woe,  casts  about  him  a  bright  robe  fit  for  a  guest  at  a  festival.  That  is 
the  miracle  that  Jesus  Christ  can  do  for  every  one,  and  is  ready  to  do  for  us,  if  we 
will  let  Him.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)    The  Joy-hriTiger : — I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 

JOT-BRINGEK  TO  MEN  BECAUSE   He   IS  THE  REDEEMER   OF   MEN.      In  the   original 

application  of  my  text  to  the  deliverance  from  captivity,  this  gift  of  joy,  and  change 
of  sorrow  into  gladness,  was  no  independent  and  second  bestowment,  but  was  simply 
the  issue  of  the  one  that  preceded  it,  viz.  the  gift  of  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the 
opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound.  The  gladness  was  a  gladness  that 
welled  up  in  the  heart  of  the  captives  set  free,  and  coming  out  from  the  gloom  of  the 
Babylonian  dungeon  into  the  sunshine  of  God's  favour,  with  their  faces  set  towards 
Zion  "with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads."  You  have  only  to  keep 
firm  hold  of  this  connection  between  these  two  thoughts  to  come  to  the  crown  and 
centre-point  of  this  great  prophecy,  as  far  as  it  applies  to  us,  and  that  is  that  it  is 
Christ  as  the  Emancipator,  Christ  as  He  who  brings  us  out  of  the  prison  and  bondage 
of  the  tyranny  of  sin,  who  is  the  great  Joy-giver.  For  there  is  no  real,  deep,  funda- 
mental and  impregnable  gladness  possible  to  a  man  until  his  relations  to  God  have 
been  rectified,  and  until,  with  the  consciousness  of  forgiveness  and  the  Divine  love 
nestling  warm  at  his  heart,  he  has  turned  himself  away  from  his  dread  and  his  sin, 
and  has  recognized  in  his  Father  God  "the  gladness  of  his  joy."  There  are  many  or 
OS  who  feel  that  life  is  sufficiently  comfortable  without  any  kind  of  reference  to  God 
vou  m.  24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lii. 


at  all.  But  about  all  that  kind  of  surface  joy,  the  old  words  are  trae,  "  even  in 
laughter  the  heart  is  soiTOwful,"  and  hosts  of  us  are  satisfied  with  joys  which  Jesua 
has  no  part  in  bringing,  simply  because  our  truest  self  has  never  once  awakened. 
When  it  does  you  wifi  find  out  that  no  one  can  bring  real  joy  who  does  not  take 
away  guilt  and  sin.  II.  Jesus  Chkist  transforms  sorrow  because  He  trans- 
forms THE  MOURNER.  All  that  this  Joy-bringer  and  Transmuter  of  grief  into  its 
opposite  is  represented  as  doing,  is  on  the  man  who  feels  the  sorrow.  In  regard  to 
the  ordinary  sorrows  of  life,  He  afifects  these  not  so  much  by  an  operation  upon  our 
circumstances  as  by  an  operation  upon  ourselves,  and  transforms  sorrow  ana  brings 
gladness,  because  He  transforms  the  man  that  endures  it.  The  landscape^  remains 
the  same,  the  difference  is  the  colour  of  the  glass  through  which  we  look  at  it.  How 
does  He  do  it  ?    1.  By  giving  to  the  man  sources  of  joy,  if  he  wiU  use  them,  alto- 

f  ether  independent  of  external  circiunstances.     **  Although  the  fig-tree  shall  not 
lossom, "  etc.     The  paradox  of  the  Christian  life  is  "  as  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoic- 
ing.   2.  There  is  another  way  by  which  for  us,  if  we  will  use  our  privileges,  the  sorrows 
of  life  may  be  transmuted,  because  we,  contemplating  them,  have  come  to  a  changed 
understanding  of  their  meaning.     "We  shall  never  understand  life  if  we  class  its 
diverse  events  simply  under  the  two  opposite  categories  of  good — evil ;  prosperity — 
adversity ;  gains — losses ;  fulfilled  expectations — disappointed  hopes.     Put  them  all 
together  under  one  class — discipline  and  education  ;  means  for  growth  ;  means  for 
Christlikeness.     When  we  have  found  out,  what  it  takes  a  long  while  for  us  to  learn, 
that  the  lancet  and  the  bandage  are  for  the  same  purpose,  and  that  opposite  weathers 
conspire  to  the  same  end,  that  of  the  harvest,  the  sting  is  out  of  the  sorrow,  the 
poison  is  wiped  ofi"  the  arrow.     3.  Here  we  may  suggest  a  third  way  by  which  a 
transformation  wrought  upon  ourselves  transforms  the  aspect  of  our  sorrows,  and 
that  is  that  possessing  independent  sources  of  joy,  and  having  come  to  learn  the 
eduf>ational  aspect  of  all  adversity,  we  thereby  are  brought  by  Jesus  Christ  Himself 
to  t  le  position  of  submission.     That  is  the  most  potent  talisman  to  transform 
mourning  into  praise.     An  accepted  grief  is  a  conquered  grief ;  a  conquered  grief 
will  very  soon  be  a  comforted  grief;  and  a  comforted  grief  is  a  joy.     III.  Jesus 
GIVES  JOY  after  SORROW.    Jesus  Christ,  even  here  and  now,  gives  these  blessed 
results  of  our  sorrows,  if  they  are  taken  to  the  right  place,  and  borne  in  the  right 
fashion.     For  it  is  they  "that  mourn  in  Zion"  that  He  thus  blesses.     There  are 
some  of  us,  I  fear,  whose  only  resource  in  trouble  is  to  fling  ourselves  into  some  work, 
or  some  dissipation.     And  there  are  some  of  us  whose  only  resource  for  deliverance 
from  our  sorrows  is  that,  after  the  wound  has  bled  all  it  can,  it  stops  bleeding,  and 
that  grief  simply  dies  by  lapse  of  time,  and  for  want  of  fuel.     An  affliction  wasted  is 
the  worst  of  all  waste.     But  if  we  carry  our  grief  into  the  sanctuary,  then,  here  and 
now,  it  will  change  its  aspect,  and  be  a  solemn  joy.    I  say  nothing  about  the  ultimate 
result,  where  every  sorrow  rightly  borne  shall  be  represented  in  the  future  life  by 
some  stage  in  grace  or  glory,  where  every  tear  shall  be  crystallized,  if  I  might  so  say, 
into  a  flashing  diamond,  which  flings  oflF  the  reflection  of  the  Divine  light,  where 
"  there  shall  be  no  sorrow  nor  sighing,  nor  any  more  pain,  for  the  former  things  are 
passed  away."    When  the  lesson  has  been  learnt,  God  bums  the  rod.     But  there  is 
another  sadder  transformation  of  joy  into  its  opposite.     I  saw  a  few  days  ago,  on  a 
hill-top,  a  black  circle  among  the  grass  and  heather.     There  had  been  a  bonfire  there 
on  Coronation  night,  and  it  had  all  died  down,  and  that  was  the  end— a  hideous  ring 
of  scorched  barrenness  amidst  the  verdure.    Take  care  that  your  gladnesses  do  not 
die  down  like  that,  but  that  they  are  pure,  and  being  pure  are  undying.     Separation 
from  Christ  makes  joy  shallow,  and  makes  it  certain  that  at  last,  instead  of  a  garland, 
shall  be  ashes  on  the  head,  and  that,  instead  of  a  festal  robe,  the  spirit  shaU  be 
wrapped  in  a  garment  of  heaviness.    (Ibid.)    Trees  of  Righteousness. — Trees  of 
righteousness  .-—Notice  some  points  of  comparison  which  this  figure  suggests  when 
used  to  represent  the  redeemed.     I.  They  are  trees.     This  indicates— 1.  That 
they  have  life.     They  are  not  inanimate  objects.     2.  That  they  have  dependent 
life.     They  are  planted  in  the  ground.     Their    fertility    depends    on   the    soil. 
Those  planted  in  Christ  shall  be    fruitful.     3.  That  they  have  a  life  of  growth. 
Spiritual  life  is  a  development.     II.    They    are    goodly   trees.      "Tree8_  of 
righteousness."     Not   poisonous    or   useless    objects.      The    object   of  trees  is — 
1.  To  afford  shelter.     They  shade  from  the  heat  and  the  storm.    2.  To  adorn 
the  world.    They  are  the  beauty  of  earth,  its  crown  and  delight.     3.  To   give 
fruit.     They  are  the  profit  and  sustenance  of  the  sower.     Trees  of  righteousness 
are  all  this  in  the  spiritual  world.  {Homilist.)    Trees  of  righteousness  .-—The  imagery 
iu  the  text,  taken  from  trees,  is  very  frequently  used  in  the  Bible  (Ps.  L  ig. 


CHAP.  Lxi.]  ISAIAH.  371 

xcii.  12 ;    Jer.  xvii.  8  ;  Hosea  xiv.   5-7 ;  John  xv.  ;  Rev.  xxii.  2).    I.  In  what 

RESPECT  DO  TREES  REPRESENT  CHRISTIANS  ?  1.  Trees  Contribute  largely  to  keep  the 
atmosphere  pure  and  healthful.  When  human  beings,  and  indeed  all  animals, 
breathe  out,  there  is  given  off  a  gas  which  is  injurious  and  destructive  to  animal  life. 
But  this  deleterious  air  is  needful  to  the  life  and  growth  of  plants ;  so  trees  and 
vegetation  eagerly  appropriate  the  air  which  is  hurtful  to  us.  At  the  same  time  the 
leaves  of  trees  give  off  oxygen,  which  tends  to  purify  the  air,  and  render  it  fit  for  ns 
to  breathe.  When  the  air  around  us  has  passed  through  an  extent  of  leaf  surface  it 
is  pure  and  invigorating.  There  is  a  moral  atmosphere,  and  the  presence  of  Christian 
people  in  that  moral  atmosphere  contributes  to  make  it  pure.  2.  Trees  supply  many 
articles  which  are  most  useful  in  commerce — such  as  food,  clothing,  medicine.  These 
things,  as  products  in  which  men  trade,  tend  to  the  enrichment  and  general  benefit 
of  society.  Trees  yield  timber,  with  which  our  houses  are  built  and  our  furniture  ia 
made.  Palms  yield  edible  fruits,  and  a  great  quantity  of  oil.  And  so,  like  these 
trees,  true  Christians  contribute  in  many  ways  to  benefit  society  at  large.  Look 
around  on  our  own  country,  and  notice  the  immense  nimiber  of  charitable  institutions, 
etc.  To  what  do  they  owe  their  existence  ?  Unquestionably  to  the  power  of  Christian 
love.  3.  Trees  are  objects  of  great  beauty.  Scripture  and  poetry  recognize  the 
beauty  of  trees,  and  every  one  who  has  any  eye  to  enjoy  the  charm  of  the  country 
will  readily  admit  that  trees  are  objects  of  indescribable  beauty.  So  there  is  a  beauty, 
a  charm,  in  the  graces  of  Christian  character  as  seen  in  purity  of  life,  a  loving,  self- 
denying  spirit  which  lays  out  its  powers  for  the  good  of  others  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4-8  ; 
Phil.  iv.  8).  4.  Trees  are  endowed  with  great  strength.  There  are  grand  old  oaks 
which  have  stood  for  more  than  a  thousand  years.  A  friend  told  me  that  an  engineer 
in  his  employ  saw  a  cedar  in  Algiers  which  must  have  been  more  than  two  thousand 
years  old.  A  writer  in  the  Times  gives  the  following  calculation  as  to  the  age  of 
the  Mammoth  pine  of  California.  He  says,  "  A  friend  has  sent  me  two  specimens  of 
the  wood  of  the  Wellingtonea  gigantea.  Of  the  timber  sent  there  are  two  pieces  : 
one  a  specimen  of  the  older,  or  heart-wood  ;  the  other  a  specimen  of  the  more  recent, 
or  sap-wood."  He  then  goes  into  a  careful  and  elaborate  calculation  as  to  the  age  of 
the  tree,  and  on  the  lowest  estimate,  he  makes  out  that  the  tree  was  five  thousand 
five  hundred  and  forty-four  years  old.  This  long  duration  suggests  how  many  storms 
and  dangers  the  grand  old  tree  has  had  to  weather.  So  true  Christians  are  possessed 
of  great  strength.  Think  of  the  many  temptations,  the  many  severe  trials,  through 
which  such  believers  have  had  to  pass  !  II.  The  planting  of  these  trees.  They 
are  not  self- planted.    They  are  not  of  man's  planting.     '*  The  planting  of  the  Lord." 

1.  Their  nature  in  its  fruit-bearing  power  and  in  its  beauty  and  strength  is  given  to 
them  by  the  Lord.  How  did  they  become  ' '  trees  of  righteousness  ? "  Not  by  any 
self-originated  choice  or  act  of  their  own.  The  Gentiles  are  spoken  of  by  Paul  as 
being  'cut  out  of  the  wUd  olive  tree,  which  is  wild  by  nature,  and  grafted 
contrary  to  nature  into  the  good  olive  tree."  Here  the  scion  of  the  wild 
olive  is  represented  as  grafted  on  the  stock  of  the  productive  oil-bearing 
one ;  and  they  are  called  on  to  remember  that  they  derive  their  life  and 
nourishment  from  the  root  of  the  stock,  which,  being  holy,  makes  the  branches 
holy    (Rom.   xi.    16,    18).     All    their    life   and  sufiiciency  are  from  Christ  alone. 

2.  The  culture,  as  well  as  the  nature,  of  these  trees  is  of  the  Lord.  *'  My  Father  is 
the  Husbandman. "  ' '  Every  branch  tu  Me  that  beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh  away,  and 
everybranch  that  beareth  fruit  He  piu"geth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit, " 
III.  The  great  design  and  end  of  ottr  being  made  trees  of  righteousness. 
•'That  He  might  be  glorified."  1.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  and  our  spiritual  welfare 
go  together.  The  beauty  of  the  flower,  the  rruitfulness  of  the  tree,  are  the  glory  ot 
the  gardener.  2.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  is  the  highest  end  which  any  created  being 
can  serve.  This  was  the  grand  end  Christ  kept  before  Himself,  and  accomplished : 
"  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth."  This  is  the  deepest  desire  of  every  saint  ia 
his  holiest  moments :  "  that  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified."  {G.  W.  Humphreys,. 
B.A.)  Trees  of  rightemisness : — The  passage  takes  in  the  whole  family  of  God. 
Observe — I.  Why  they  are  called  trees  of  righteousness.  1.  A  tree  is  the- 
beauty  of  the  landscape.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  beauty  of  the  world.  2.  A 
tree  is  remarkable  for  its  strength.  And  there  is  that  in  the  believer  that  gives  one 
the  conviction  of  strength.  Where  ia  his  strength  ?  He  is  united  to  Christ — 
"Rooted  in  Him."  3.  A  tree  is  fruitful  (Phil.  i.  9-11 ;  Jno.  xv.  5).  II.  They 
AEE  described  AS  "THE  PLANTING  OF  THE  LoRD."  There  are  some  trees  that  are 
not  of  His  planting,  and  yet  they  seem  for  a  time  to  be  good  trees.  There  is  a  good 
deal  of  outward  acquaintance  with  Divine  things,  a  good  deal  of  outward  change ; 


919  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxi. 

yet,  after  all,  it  is  not  a  tree  of  the  Lord's  right  hand  planting.  It  is  a  solemn 
truth — •'  Every  plant  which  My  heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted,  shaU  be  rooted 
up."  It  may  look  well  for  a  time  ;  it  may  be  fair  and  promising  to  the  outward 
eye  ;  but  not  being  rooted  in  Christ,  not  bringing  forth  fruit,  it  shall  be  destroyed. 
But  these  are  trees  of  "the  Lord's  planting."  He  chose  them  for  His  own.  And 
with  His  own  hand  He  transplants  them  out  of  the  "waste  howling  wilderness," 
and  plants  them  in  His  own  garden.  All  the  "trees  of  righteousness"  are  trans- 
plants. The  end  for  which  the  Lord  did  it  was  that  they  might  be  "trees  of 
righteousness."  III.  The  great  end.  "That  He  might  be  glorified."  It  shall 
be  His  glory  when  they  exhibit  the  beauty  of  a  consistent  profession.  He  shall  be 
glorified  especially  by  their  fruitfulness.  Concluding  remarks  :  If  you  are  trees  of 
the  Lord,  do  not  be  surprised  if  He  should  take  His  knife.  You  must  be  exposed  to 
storms.  (/.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Trees  of  righteousness: — I.  Men  as  trees.  1.  As 
aU  trees  have  roots,  so  have  all  men.  These  roots  are  the  principles  which  lie  at 
the  foundation  of  their  character.  These  principles  perform  the  same  fanctions  in 
the  moral  organism  of  a  man  as  the  root  does  in  the  material  organism  of  a  tree.  The 
peculiar  business  of  a  tree-root  is  to  collect  the  necessary  food  for  sustaining  the  living 
body  of  the  tree  ;  and  for  this  purpose  it  seems  to  be  endowed  with  a  kind  of  instinct 
which  enables  it  to  attract  only  those  substances  which  correspond  to  the  nature  of  the 
tree  and  wUl  contribute  to  its  growth,  and  to  repel  those  which  are  different  and  would 
accordingly  prove  hurtful.  Similarly,  the  principles  which  underlie  human  character 
are  virtually  the  food-finders  and  life-sustainers  of  the  soul,  groping  about  among  the 
scenes  and  circumstances  and  events  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  for  such  moral 
or  immoral  entertainment  as  is  demanded  by  the  nature  of  the  being  with  which 
they  are  connected.  2.  As  all  trees  grow  by  assimilation  from  within,  so  do  aU 
men.  You  cannot  build  a  tree,  as  you  can  build  a  house  or  construct  a  ship,  by 
mechanical  additions  from  without.  The  tree  must  bmld  itself,  by  a  delicate 
machinery  of  its  own.  In  the  same  way  does  human  nature  grow  by  assimilation 
from  within.  3.  As  all  trees  put  forth  leaves,  so  do  all  men.  They  put  forth  the 
leaves  of  an  outward  profession,  not  necessarily  in  words,  but  tacitly  in  external 
behaviour.  A  man  without  a  profession  is  an  impossibility.  If  there  be  vitality  in 
a  tree  the  annual  approach  of  spring  will  make  it  bud  and  put  forth  tender  sprouts  ; 
and  so  if  there  be  vitality  in  a  soul  it  will  as  surely  clothe  itself  in  a  garment  of 
speech  and  action.  And  as  the  leaves  assume  a  shape  and  tint  corresponding  to  the 
nature  of  the  tree,  so  do  the  words  and  deeds  of  men  contract  a  character  from  their 
souls.  4.  As  all  trees  produce  fruit  of  some  kind  or  other,  so  do  all  men.  There  is 
an  endless  variety  among  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  but  there  are  no  trees  that  have  not 
fruit  of  some  kind  ;  and  there  are  no  souls  that  are  not  continually  producing  fruit, 
whether  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto  righteousness.  II.  Saints  as 
TBEES,  1.  The  saints  as  trees  differ  from  the  rest  of  men  as  to  the  kind  of  fruit  they 
produce.  They  are  "trees  of  righteousness,"  lit.  oaks  of  righteousness,  a  phrase 
susceptible  of  different  renderings,  though  the  obvious  one  is  perhaps  as  good  as  any, 
"  oaks  that  bear  the  fruits  of  righteousness."  Saints  are  instruments  of  holy  service 
"  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works."  They  produce  good  works  by  the  very 
same  necessity  as  an  oak  bears  acorns — a  necessity  of  nature.  ' '  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
is  love,  joy,  peace,"  etc.  2.  Saints  as  trees  differ  from  the  rest  of  men  as  to  the 
special  training  or  culture  they  receive.  They  are  * '  the  planting  of  the  Lord. "  Other 
trees  grow  wild  on  the  open  common  of  an  unprotected  and  sin-accursed  world,  enjoy- 
ing no  other  culture  than  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  winds  and  rains  of  heaven  are 
able  to  impart ;  but  these  have  been  uprooted  from  the  sterile  soil  in  which  they  grew 
and  planted  in  the  garden  of  the  Church — ^uprooted  by  the  skilful  hand  of  the  Great 
Husbandman  of  souls,  and  planted  beside  the  gentle  streams  of  grace  that  proceed 
from  the  throne  of  God,  in  some  quiet  and  secluded  comer,  where  they  are  carefully 
trained  and  tended.  3.  Saints  as  trees  differ  from  the  rest  of  men  as  to  the  ultimate 
end  for  which  they  grow.  Other  trees  have  no  end  to  serve  beyond  bearing  their 
appropriate  fruits,  but  these  have  a  special  view  to  the  honour  and  reputation  of  the 
Husbandman  who  planted  them  ;  being  "  the  planting  of  the  Lord  that  He  mav  be 
glorified. "  So  does  Christ  say  of  saints,  ' '  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear 
much  fruit."  {W.  Jones.)  Tongues  in  trees: — 1.  One  thing  which  strikes  us  in 
connection  with  trees  is  their  very  small  beginnings,  e.  g.  the  oak.  The  trees  of 
righteousness  are  small  in  their  beginnings.  Faith,  as  exercised  at  first,  is  only  as 
a  grain  of  mustard  seed.  Grace,  as  first  experienced  in  the  heart,  is  a  verv  tender 
plant.  Look  at  Paul,  and  Wesley,  and  Whitefield,  and  many  others,  who  illustrate 
the  perfection  that  is  attainable  here.      And  see  what  perfection  these  trees  of 


OHAP.  i^.]  ISAIAH.  873 

righteousness  may  attain  hereafter.     2.  Trees  are  slow  and  progressive  in  their 
growth.     The  concentric  circles  that  may  be  seen  within  certain  Kinds  of  trees,  have 
come  there  by  the  annual  addition  of  one ;  and  in  full-grown  ones  there  may  be 
counted  as  many  as  a  hundred  or  more.     Hence  an  idea  may  be  gathered  of  the 
gradualness  of  development  in  tree  life.    The  trees  of  righteousness  are  often  similarly 
Sow  and  progressive  m  their  growth.     "We  should  not  be  discouraged  because  we  do 
not  reach  perfection  at  once.     Walking  is  a  favourite  Scriptural  mode  of  describing 
the  progress  of  a  godly  life.     The  believer  is  represented  first  as  a  babe,  then  as 
passing  through  a  state  of  youthhood,  and  then  as  having  reached  the  maturity  of 
manhood  in  Christ  Jesus.     3.  Great  varieties  distinguish  trees.     Among  the  well- 
known  kinds  are  the  strong  and  kinglike  oak,  the  lofty  and  aspiring  pine,  the 
fraceful  and  lovely  beech,  the  timid  and  trembling  aspen,  the  unsocial  thorn,  the 
ependent  ivy,  and  many  others.     There  are  equally  great  varieties  within  the  sphere 
of  religious  life.     Moses'  nature  was  equable,  Elijah's  stem  and  inflexible,  Isaiah's 
buoyant,  Jeremiah's  plaintive,  Peter's  impulsive,  and  John's  amiable.     And  what 
varieties  are  met  with  in  the  sphere  of  modem  religious  life !     We  may  be  reminded 
in  relation  to  this  fact,  that  we  should  not  trouble  ourselves  because  we  are  not  like 
somebody  else.     4.  Observe  in  trees  a  dependence  on  external  conditions  for  their 
growth  and  development.     In  aU  the  stages  of  vegetable  life  the  influences  of  the  soil 
and  of  the  atmosphere  are  necessary  to  a  full  and  healthy  growth.     The  trees  of 
righteousness  require  certain  outward  conditions  for  their  growth  and  development. 
Their  spiritual  vitality  is  not  self-originated  and  underived.     We  should  therefore 
not  neglect  communion  with  Him  who  is  "the  fountain  of  life  and  of  grace,"  by  the 
means  which  are  intended  to  secure  us  these  benefits.     5.  Notice  also  the  'different 
eflfects  upon  trees  of  the  sun's  powerful  influence  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  and 
of  the  diminution  of  that  influence  at  other  seasons.  .  When  the  sun  comes  forth 
"  as  a  bridegroom  from  his  chamber,"  and  "  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race," 
as  he  does  in  the  vernal  season  of  the  year,  how  beautifully  the  trees  begin  to  exhibit 
signs  of  returning  life !     How  they  put  forth  shoots !     How  they  cover  themselves 
with  foliage !     And  how,  by  and  by,  thev  are  laden  with  fruits !     But  when  his 
influence  is  partially  withdrawn  or  modified,  as  in  the  autumnal  season,  how  quickly 
there  appear  the  tints  which  are  sure  signs  of  decay.     God's  people  are  similarly 
afiected  by  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.     When  they  enjoy  His  radiant  and  genial 
beams,  as  they  never  faU  to  do  when  they  do  not  interpose  thefr  own  unbelief,  how 
admirable  is  the  efliect !     But  when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  withdraws  Himself,  or 
hides  His  face  from  His  people  through  their  unfaithfulness,  then  there  ensues  a 
period  of  decay,  and  even  death.     6.  Trees  are  useful.     This  is  not  merely  the  case 
with  such  trees  as  provide  us  with  delicious  fruit,  or  furnish  us  with  materials  for 
the  manufacture  of  articles  of  clothing,  or  supply  us  with  certain  medicines,  or  yield 
us  timber  for  the  construction  of  our  dwellings,  it  is  the  case  with  all  trees.     A 
writer,  who  is  an  authority,  teUs  us,  "  Every  tree  in  nature  makes  itself  felt  in  the 
good  it  does  the  air."    The  trees  of  righteousness  are  useftd.    This  is  the  case  with 
all.     We  may  not  have  the  commanding  abilities  of  some,  nor  occupy  the  positions 
of  influence  of  others  ;  but  all  who  are  living  truly  Christian  lives,  however  hidden 
from  public  gaze,  are  helping  to  purify  the  moral  atmosphere  of  society,  and  of  the 
world.     And  this  is  usefulness  that  receives  Divine  approval.     {J.  A.  Eimmer.) 
The  forests  wnd  orchards  of  God: — The  suggestive  description  of  the  characteb 
OF  God's  PEOPLE  AND  of  theie  relation  to  Him.     "Ttees."    II.  The  manner 
IN  which  this   character  is  to  become  the   possession  of  men.     "The 
planting  of  the  Lord."    God  is  His  own  gardener,  and  those  who  would  know  the 
blessedness  of  being  "God's  husbandry"  are  to  be  in  aU  things  submitted  to  God's 
hand.     1.  God  chooses  the  position  in  which  His  trees  are  to  be  planted.    2.  He 
hides  the  roots  in  life-giving  soil.     3.  He  visits  our  life  with  the  renewing  power  of 
His  own  life.     "As  the  rain  cometh  down  and  watereth  the  earth  and  maketh  it 
bring  forth  and  bud,"  so  is  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  inner  life  of 
those  who  "  ask  the  Father"  that  it  may  be  so.     III.  The  great  purpose  which 
THIS  CHARACTER  IS  TO  SERVE.     "That  He  might  be  glorified."    Christians  are 
called  to  increase  the  honour  of  the  Divine  name.     1.  In  the  spiritual  condition  of 
their  own  life.     Trees  of  righteousness  must  exhibit  the  beauty  and  symmetry  of  a 
rightly-formed  and  healthily-developed  spiritual  life.     2.  This  character  has  to  be 
shown  as  the  most  truly  living  thing  the  world  contains.     If  you  erect  a  building 
and  fill  it  with  industrious  or  noisy  people,  and  by  the  side  of  it  plant  a  few  ehn 
trees,  yon  will  find  that  "  life's  little  day  ebbs  out "  from  within  the  house,  that  even 
the  building  onunbles  towards  decay,  and  that  the  trees,  living  and  increasing  in 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxi. 

force  of  life,  will  run  their  roots  beneath  and  through  the  foundations  until  they 
have  warped  the  whole  structure  and  brought  it  to  its  overthrow.  One  has  standing 
room  for  its  lifeless  form  on  the  earth,  the  other  lives,  and  therefore  overcomes.  And 
the  Christian  has  to  show  the  world  that  though  it  may  erect  the  sturdiest  structures 
out  of  itself,  there  is  a  mightier  presence  in  the  character  of  godliness  which  by  roots 
of  living  union  gathers  its  power  from  Christ,  and  which  will  overthrow  resistance 
and  establish  itself  with  the  cahn  irresistibleness  of  eternal  life  planted  and  watched 
over  by  the  almighty  and  unchangeable  God.  3.  Trees  of  righteousness  must  cause 
men  to  taste  the  fruit  of  righteousness  and  to  live  under  its  shadow.  We  aU  love 
shadow.  None  would  like  to  be  deprived  of  its  beauty  or  of  its  refreshment.  And 
even  to  think  afar  off  of  some  firait-trees  is  to  experience  real  pleasure.  Oh !  for  the 
spirit  of  Christ  to  dwell  in  us  so  richly  that  to  have  oxir  society  would  be  like  walking 
beneath  thickly  overhanging  trees  in  the  noontide  heat,  or  roaming  at  will  in  a  well 
watered  garden,  and  woi3d  cause  men  to  give  ungrudging  testimony  that  Christian 
character  was  earth's  true  similitude  of  heaven.  ( W.  H.  Jackson.)  "  Trees  of 
righteousness  " : — Keeping  to  the  natural  figure  under  which  the  things  of  God  in 
man  are  described,  these  must  be  trees  of  beauty  and  symmetiy,  developed  equally 
on  all  sides,  with  timber,  twig,  and  foliage  answering  to  the  ideal  in  a  mind  whicn 
knows  what  a  perfect  tree  would  be.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  And  they  shall  build  the  old  wastes.— Building  the  old  wastes: — There  are 
many  wastes  in  the  world,  and  there  are  all  sorts  of  them.  But  of  all  sad  and 
melancholy  waste  places,  there  is  none  so  melancholy,  so  terrible,  so  desperate  as  a 
waste  soul — a  soid  in  which  there  is  no  sense  of  right  and  wrong  in  the  tribunal  of 
conscience ;  a  soul  where  there  is  no  distinct,  manly,  nobly  inspiring  purpose  for 
spending  and  occupying  life  ;  a  soul  in  which  the  mind  is  not  instructed  or  fed  with 
useful  knowledge,  but  which  lies  fallow  ;  a  soul  where  the  heart  is  a  cage  of  unclean 
birds.  I.  As  to  the  methods  of  building  up  these  waste  places.  Let  us  honestly 
confess  that  there  are  many  of  them,  and  none  of  them  to  be  despised  ;  and  each  is 
to  be  put  in  its  proper  order,  and  none  can  be  dispensed  with — one  comes  first, 
another  second,  and  another  third.  There  are  in  this  earth  of  ours  whole  nations 
which  may  be  called  waste  places.  1.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  with  the  waste 
place  of  a  great  nation  is  to  bring  civilization  into  it ;  then  the  soil  of  the  heart  is 
prepared  for  better  things  to  come.  2.  Then  many  of  our  missionaries  have  to  form 
a  language :  there  are  many  words  missing  in  the  people's  dialect,  without  which 
they  could  not  understand  the  truths  of  the  Gospel.  Then  when  a  man  is  educated, 
he  finds  Ms  imagination  filled  with  new  ideas  ;  he  feels  he  has  taken  his  place  in 
the  great  society  of  mankind,  and  is  ready  to  listen  to  the  truths  which  a  little  while 
before  he  trampled  under  his  feet.  3.  Another  great  means  of  building  waste  places 
is  commerce  and  trade.  4.  Good  government  is  necessary.  No  man  can  receive  the 
greatest  and  loftiest  truths  when  they  are  living  in  a  constant  state  of  danger.  5. 
P^ach  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  II.  The  instruments.  Whom  does  God  use  to  build 
up  the  waste  pkces  ?  1.  His  Son  ia  the  great  Builder  (Luke  iy.  18,  etc.).  2.  Then 
as  His  representative,  and,  so  to  speak,  in  His  place,  His  minister.  His  ambassador. 
His  mouthpiece.  His  witness,  the  Church  of  God.  Her  great  mission  is  to  preach 
the  Word  of  God,  and  administer  the  sacraments  of  Christ.  Then  there  are  other 
ways.  The  Church  must  try  to  enter  into  all  the  needs,  and  difiBculties,  and 
wants  of  those  to  whom  she  ministers.  {A.  W.  Thorold,  D.D.)  SociaZ  needs; 
religions  duties: — Our  work  is  a  work  of  restoration.  This  message  is  infinitely 
varied  in  its  tone.  If  we  are  indeed  to  build  the  "old  wastes,'  we  must  see 
what  has  made  them  wastes ;  and  we  shall  find  that  there  have  been  three  great 
enemies  that  have  done  this— disease  and  ignorance  and  sin.  I.  We  must  bring 
a  message  of  good  news  to  the  body.  We  must  recognize  its  needs — its  need  of 
pure  air,  and  wholesome  food,  and  healthy  homes  ;  and,  also,  its  craving,  especially 
in  the  days  -of  youth,  for  leisure  and  amusement,  and  even  excitement.  We  must 
meet  these  cravings,  not  with  the  forbidding  frown  of  the  Puritan,  as  though 
they  were  in  themselves  sinful,  nor  yet  with  the  easy-going  smile  of  the  good-natured 
Epicurean,  as  though  they  were  the  all  in  all  of  human  happiness,  but  with 
sympathy  and  good  sense  and  forethought,  in  the  belief  that  they  represent  one  part 
of  the  Father's  will  for  His  human  children.  II.  We  must  to  the  full  recognize  the 
rights  of  the  mind.  A  Gospel  that  has  no  message  of  good  news  to  the  intellect  of 
man  is  but  a  mutilated  GospeL  Literature,  art,  science,  music,  have  not,  indeed, 
the  last  word  to  say  on  man's  relation  to  God,  but  they  have  a  mighty  and  a  lovely- 
word  to  aaj  i  and  it  ought  to  bo  the  joj  of  all  Christ's  truest  ministers,  lay  and 


CHAP.  Lxi.]  ISAIAH.  875 

clerical,  to  help  in  conveying  such  words  to  the  ear  and  to  the  heart  even  of  the 
poorest  and  millest.  Public  libraries  and  museums,  cheap  concerts  and  cheap 
magazines,  are  among  the  truest  weapons  of  those  who  would  in  our  day  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil.  III.  Chiefly  must  we  come  face  to  face  with  sin,  not  only 
with  a  message  against  sin ;  we  must  have  a  message  of  good  tidings  also  eo 
HITMAN  SOULS.  And  when  I  say  "good  tidings,"  I  do  not  necessarily  mean 
agreeable  and  attractive  tidings.  "When  Jesus  said,  "Eepent  JQ  and  believe 
the  Gospel,"  the  call  to  repent,  though  hardly  attractive,  was  in  itself  a  Gospel. 
"We  cannot  build  the  waste  places  in  England,  in  morals  and  social  customs, 
in  ways  of  thinking  and  talking  and  feeling,  unless  we  very  plainly  denounce 
what  is  unchristian  in  contemporary  Ufe.  The  message  of  the  Gospel  _  is  not 
only  a  soothing  message  of  forgiveness  to  the  sinner  who  is  troubled  in  mind,  nor 
a  tender  message  of  companionship  to  the  lonely  and  the  bereaved,  nor  a  consoling 
message  of  eventual  justice  to  the  wronged  and  the  overborne.  But  there  is  also  the 
voice  which  convinces  the  world  of  sin,  the  voice  which  says  to  society,  irrespective 
of  class,  to  rich  as  well  as  to  poor,  to  poor  as  well  as  to  rich :  "In  this  and  that  you 
are  wholly  wrong ;  you  are  wrong  in  your  expenditure  of  time,  wrong  in  your 
expenditure  of  money,  wrong  in  your  estimate  of  the  true  prizes  of  life,  wrong  in 
your  worship  of  comfort,  wrong  in  your  class  isolation  ;  wrong,  many  of  you,  in  your 
very  conception  of  religion."  "We  have,  if  we  are  indeed  witnesses  of  our  Master,  a 
message  of  good  tidings  to  all  aUke,  to  all  classes,  to  the  rich  and  to  the  poor,  to  the 
highly  cultivated  and  to  the  ignorant.  {H.  M.  Butler,  D.D.)  Antiquities  revived: 
— I.  The  antiquities  that  are  laid  waste.  1.  Yital  godliness.  2.  Apostolic 
doctrine.  The  sovereignty  of  God,  substitution,  sanctity,  etc.  3.  Loyalty  to  Jesus. 
4.  The  unity  of  the  Spirit.  II.  The  promise  of  the  special  eevivals  that 
ABE  to  take  place.     "  They  shall  buUd,"  etc.     {J.  Irons.) 

Ver.  6.  But  ye  shall  be  named  the  Priests  of  the  Lord. — Israel's  priesthood 
amumg  the  nations : — The  meaning  is  simply  that  in  relation  to  the  Gentiles,  Israel 
shall  enjoy  a  position  of  priesthood  analogous  to  the  relation  between  priests  and 
laymen.  It  was  Israel's  calling  to  be  a  "kingdom  of  priests"  (Ex.  xix.  6),  and  in 
the  latter  days  this  destiny  will  be  fulfilled  in  their  mediatorial  relation  to  the  outer 
world.  Although  prophecy  in  general  accords  a  position  of  supremacy  to  Israelites 
in  the  future  kingdom  of  God,  the  distinction  is,  perhaps,  nowhere  so  definitely 
formulated  as  here.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  New  Testament  privileges  expre^&i 
in  Old  Testament  phraseology: — Regarding  the  position  assigned  to  the  Hebrew 
nation  after  it  has  become  the  teacher  of  other  peoples  and  the  leader  of  their 
worship,  as  here  declared,  we  can  form  no  conception  that  will  harmonize  with  the 
spirit  of  New  Testament  liberty  and  the  abolition  of  all  dividing- walls  between  the 
nations, — the  prophet  predicts  New  Testament  matters  in  Old  Testament  fashion. 
{F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  God' s priesthood  v.  marCs  priestcraft: — "When  Christ  came,  aU 
earthly  priesthoods  were  abolished,  and  of  all  members  of  His  kingdom  it  was  to  be 
said,  "Ye  shall  be  named  the  priests  of  the  Lord."  I.  How  is  the  office  of  the 
PRIESTHOOD  entered  ?  Aaron  and  his  sons  are  the  types  of  Christ's  high  priesthood 
and  the  priesthood  of  all  believers.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  most  clearly  taught  bythis 
type  the  order  of  entrance  into  spiritual  priesthood.  1.  The  priests  become  so  b^  virtue 
of  their  union  with  the  high  priest  (Ex.  xxviii.  1).  And  the  call  of  Chnst  unto 
His  high  priesthood  also  includes  the  call  of  aU  His  sons  into  their  spiritual  priest- 
hood. 2.  In  the  consecration  of  Aaron's  sons  to  the  priesthood  there  was  also 
blood  sprinkling.  Christ's  high  priesthood  rests  on  an  accomjjlished  sacrifice. 
"What  does  my  priesthood  rest  on?  On  blood,  too.  3.  The  anointing  gives  the 
qualification  for  priesthood  (1  John  ii.  20,  27).  4.  The  qualification  of  garments 
pjx.  xxviii.  4,  40).  II.  The  privileges  and  duties  appertaining  to  this 
priesthood.  1.  To  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Our  bodies  (Rom. 
xii.  1) ;  our  prayers ;  our  praise ;  our  intercessions.  2.  It  was  the  priest's  duty 
and  privilege  to  maintain  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  Every  believer,  being  a 
priest,  has  equal  right  with  every  other  believer  to  engage  in  maintaining  the 
service  of  the  sanctuary.     {A.  G.  Brovm.) 

Ver.  7.  Everlasting  joy  shall  he  unto  them. — The  everlasting  joy: — We  pore 
with  intense  earnestness  over  the  words  which  picture  the  joys  of  the  fature. 
"Everlasting  joy."      "What  are  its  springs?     I.  The  inward  harmony,   thb 

PERFECT  order  OF  THE  BEING,  THE  CONCERT  OF  EVERY  FACULTY  AND  FORCB 

XN  THX  FULFILMENT  OF  THS  WILL  OF  GoD.    That  IS  the  peace  of  God — ^the  per£90fe 


S76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  lxi.  , 

peace.  The  redeemed  man  is  the  governed  man ;  the  man  who  has  re-found  the 
King  who  can  evoke  his  loyal  passions,  and  control  and  direct  his  manifold  powers. 
This  rule,  the  rule  of  his  true  King,  has  been  lost  to  hinn  through  sin.  This 
supreme,  complete  control  of  his  being  heaven  will  restore.  An  unsphered  planet 
could  be  won  back  to  the  harmony  of  its  sister  planets  only  by  the  attraction  of 
their  common  sun.  The  King  has  appeared  and  claimed  His  own.  We  know  little 
of  heaven's  occupations,  the  aspect  of  its  homes,  the  modes  of  its  speech,  the  forms 
of  its  life.  We  know  only  that  the  God-man  is  there,  and  reigns.  He  whom  we 
can  love  with  intensest  passion,  and  serve  with  exulting  joy,  will  meet  us  on  its 
threshold,  will  sweep  the  flood  of  His  attractions  round  every  limb  and  organ  of 
our  being,  and  thrill  us  in  one  intense  moment  with  the  sense  that  we  are  one,  that 
we  are  blessed.  II.  The  full  vision  of  the  gloey  of  God  in  the  creation, 
the  beholding  of  all  that  God  has  meant,  and  sin  has  marred,  in  the  constitution  of 
the  worlds.  III.  The  communion  of  the  blessed — the  joy  of  fellowship  when 
the  struggle  and  toil  are  ended  for  ever — the  companionship  of  the  elect  and  beloved 
— intercourse  with  the  elder  spirits  who  are  before  the  throne.    {J.  R.  Brown,  B.A.) 

Yer.  9.  And  their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the  Gentiles. — A  blessed  seed: — 
The  children  of  these  persons  themselves,  that  are  now  the  blessed  of  the  Lord,  or 
their  successors  in  profession,  the  Church's  seed,  shall  be  "  accounted  to  the  Lord 
for  a  generation"  (Ps.  xxii.  30).  1.  They  shall  signalize  themselves,  and  make 
their  neighbours  to  take  notice  of  them.     They  shall  distinguish  themselves  by  the 

fravity,  seriousness,  humUity,  and  cheerfulness  of  their  conversation,  especially 
y  that  brotherly  love  by  which  all  men  shall  know  them  to  be  Christ's  disciples ; 
and  they  thus  distinguishing  themselves,  God  shall  dignify  them  by  making  tJi«iu 
the  blessings  of  their  age,  and  instruments  of  His  glory ;  and  by  giving  tir."^ 
remarkable  tokens  of  His  favour,  which  shall  make  them  eminent,  and  g~>  . 
them  respect  from  all  about  them.  2.  God  shall  have  the  glory  of  this,  for  ever^ 
one  shall  attribute  it  to  the  blessing  of  God.  {M.  Henry. )  The  life-testimony  of  tfU 
Christian  missionary : — The  glorious  fulfilment  of  this  promise  in  its  original  and 
proper  sense  may  be  seen  already  in  the  influence  exerted  by  the  eloquent  example 
of  the  missionary  on  the  most  ignorant  and  corrupted  heathen,  without  waiting  for 
the  future  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  the  land  of  their  fathers.  (J.  A.  Alexander.) 
The  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed. — The  blessed  seed: — I.  There  is  a  seed 
OR  RACE  WHICH  THE  LoRD  HATH  BLESSED.  Elsewhere  it  is  described  as  "the 
Israel  of  God  (Gal.  vi.  16).  But  it  is  neither  co-extensive  with,  nor  confined  to, 
the  descendants  of  Jacob  (Rom.  ix.  6-8  ;  Gal.  iii.  28,  iv.  28  ;  Eph.  iii.  6  ;  PhiL 
lii.  3).  This  seed  God  hath  blessed  abundantly.  1.  With  peace.  2.  "With  purity. 
8.  With  strength.  4.  With  hope.  5.  With  joy.  6.  With  that  which  is  the 
source  of  the  peace  and  hope  and  joy — an  assurance  of  His  love.     II.  There  arb 

OUTWARD  signs  BY  WHICH  THOSE   WHO   BELONG   TO   THE    SEED  WHICH   THE  LORD 

HATH  BLESSED  MAY  BE  INFALLIBLY  KNOWN.  God  has  distinguished  His  ancient 
people  by  certain  physical  characteristics  which  have  survived  through  many 
generations  and  have  proved  indestructible  by  all  changes  of  climate  and  condition, 
so  that  wherever  any  of  them  are  found  we  may  say  with  confidence,  these  are  the 
children  of  Abraham.  And  there  are  certain  marks  by  which  all  who  belong  to 
God's  spiritual  Israel  are  as  clearly  marked  off"  from  their  fellow-men.  Such  as^ 
1.  Love  for  Christ.     2.  Unworldliness.     3.  Consistency.     (J.  Harris,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord. — The  garments  ofsalvcUion: — I.  Here 
is  a  GLAD  RESOLVE.  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in 
my  God."  1.  Where  there  is  a  will  there  is  generally  a  way,  and  sad  though  you 
be,  something  is  gained  if  you  wiU  resolve  to  rejoice.  2.  It  is  always  "in  the 
Lord  "  that  we  must  rejoice.  Friends  are  dying,  helps  are  failing,  hopes  are  being 
blasted.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord.  3.  I  further  admire  this  resolve  because  we  are  by 
it  determining  to  rejoice  "  greatly  "  in  the  Lord.  If  He  is  worth  rejoicing  in  at  all. 
He  is  worth  rejoicing  in  greatly.  4.  We  are  bidden  to  rejoice  as  to  our  inmost 
souls.  "My  soul"  shaU  be  joyful  in  my  God.  Soul-joy  is  the  soul  of  joy,  and 
there  is  no  other  joy  worth  the  having.  5.  The  joy  is  m  a  personal  God.  "My 
soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God."  I  think  the  secret  lies  just  there.  It  is  one  thing 
to  rp  'lice  in  God,  the  God  of  nature,  the  God  of  providence,  or,  for  that  matter,  the 
God  of  grace  ;  but  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  rejoice  in  "my  God."  II.  There  are 
BIGHT  GOOD  REASONS,  the  best  of  reasons,  for  this  glad  resolve.  "  He  hath  clothed  me 
with  the  garments  of  salvation,  He  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness."  , 


CHAP.  Lxi.]  ISAIAH.  877 

1.  "He  hath"  done  it.  We  may  well  say  "I  will,"  if  we  can  already  say  "He 
hath."  It  is  because  "He  hath"  that  we  will.  2.  "He  hath  clothed  me." 
3.  "He  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation."  This  is  an  effectual  way 
of  saying,  "He  hath  saved  me."  (1)  He  has  made  us  holy.  (2)  We  ought  also 
to  wear  the  garment  of  humility.  (3)  Nor  are  Christians  properly  attired  tiU  they 
are  clad  with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak.  (4)  May  we  not  reckon  also  among  the  garments 
of  salvation  that  "garment  of  praise"  of  which  we  have  read  in  the  third  verse? 
(5)  But  chief  of  all  the  garments  of  salvation  is  the  one  that  is  here  specially  named, 
"  He  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness."  But  for  this  we  could  not 
know  the  others  ;  this  is  both  first  and  last  of  all.  Whose  righteousness  ?  Not  our 
own,  but  His.  How,  then,  does  it  become  ours  ?  Just  as  a  garment  becomes  ours. 
We  put  it  on,  we  wear  it,  we  bear  it ;  it  envelopes  us.  Believers  are  ' '  accepted  in 
the  Beloved."  (6)  These  garments  of  salvation  are  in  our  text  associated  with 
wedding  robes.  "  As  a  bridegroom  decketh  himself  with  ornaments,  and  as  a  bride 
adorneth  herself  with  jewels,"  just  so  the  Lord  has  clothed  us  with  garments  of 
salvation,  i.  e.  He  has  married  us.  The  Church  is  His  spouse.  (7)  There  is  a 
reference  here  also,  though  it  does  not  appear  in  our  version,  to  the  decking  of  the 
priest.  The  margin  reads,  "As  a  bridegroom  decketh  as  a  priest,"  and  I  believe 
the  Revised  Version  refers  to  the  garland  or  tiara  that  the  priest  wears  when 
sacrificing.  It  is  gloriously  true  that  we  are  made  both  kings  and  priests  unto  God. 
If  these  robes  are  festal  and  bridal,  they  are  sacerdotal  too.  (8)  The  closing  verse 
of  the  chapter,  though  it  seems  to  introduce  another  metaphor,  is  very  closely  allied 
to  our  text,  "As  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  bud,"  etc.  It  looks  as  if  what  the 
Lord  did  for  His  people  is  comparable  not  merely  to  the  arraying  of  the  bride,  or 
the  decking  of  the  priest,  but  to  the  arraying  of  this  our  earth,  which  at  time  of 
spring  puts  on  its  beautiful  array,  its  garments  of  salvation,  from  whose  new-sprung 
flowers  the  fresh  incense  rises,  as  if  a  garlanded  priest  were  offering  sacrifice  to  God. 
(T.  Spurgeon.)  He  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation. — Dressed  for 
eternity: — I.  The  sacred  dress.  "The  garments  of  salvation."  1.  Garments  are 
used  as  a  covering.  Is  a  garment  for  the  body  more  needed  than  one  for  the  soul  ? 
Which  of  us  could  stand  in  the  presence  of  an  angel  without  sinking  to  the  ground 
in  very  shame  ?  I  draw  your  attention  to  the  glory  of  God's  garments  of  salvation 
— they  completely  cover  all  your  iniquity  and  blot  out  all  your  sin.  2.  A  garment 
is  used  to  beautify,  to  adorn.  The  garment  of  salvation  is  an  adornment,  for  it 
reveals  God  in  you  to  your  neighbours.  What  can  be  more  beautiful  than  a  man 
or  woman  or  child  who  tries  to  bless  another  !  That  is  the  life  of  the  angels  ;  i 
the  life  of  God — ministering  unto  others.  3.  Garments  are  used  also  as  a  sig..  ov 
one's  condition  or  occupation.  Monarchs,  priests,  judges,  and  officers  of  state  wear 
robes  to  indicate  their  real  or  implied  superiority.  Shakespere  says,  "the  apparel 
oft  proclaims  the  man. "  You  can  generally  tell  something  about  a  man's  character 
and  calling  from  his  clothing.  The  world  judges  of  Christian  people  by  the  garments 
of  their  conduct.  II.  The  Giver  of  the  garments.  III.  The  personal 
APPROPRIATION.  "He  hath  clothed  me."  Where  is  salvation?  In  Christ,  and 
Christ  is  in  and  for  us.     ( W.  Birch. ) 

Ver.  11.  For  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  bud. — GocTs  Word  as  seed: — ^The 
Word  in  the  mouth  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  the  seed  out  of  which  great  things 
are  developed  before  all  the  world.  The  ground  and  soil  of  this  development  is 
mankind,  the  garden  enclosed  in  it  is  the  Church,  and  the  great  things  themselves 
are  righteousness  as  the  present  inner  nature  of  His  Church,  and  renown  as  its 
present  outward  manifestation.  The  impulsive  force  of  the  seed  is  Jehovah,  but  the 
bearer  of  the  seed  is  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  possible  to 
scatter  the  seed  of  a  future  so  fuU  of  grace  and  glory  is  the  ground  of  His  festive 
rejoicing.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Certainty  in  redemption  as  in  nature : — As  surely  as 
the  seed  germinates  in  the  earth,  so  surely  will  Jehovah  bring  to  pass  the  great 
redemption  here  promised  through  the  self-fulfilling  power  of  His  Word  (cf.  chaps. 
Iv.  10,  xlii.  9,  xliii.  19,  Iviii.  8).  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  springing  forth  of 
righteousness : — It  is  a  great  act  that  God  performs  before  our  eyes  during  the  spring 
and  summer.  I.  It  is  a  manifestation  that  we  see.  A  mystery  hidden  during 
the  winter  months  is  being  revealed.  As  Nature  hides  and  then  reveals,  "So  the 
Lord  will  cause  righteousness  and  praise  to  spring  forth."  1,  It  is  a  great  manifesta- 
tion of  power  that  we  see.  We  more  readily  associate  God's  power  with  vast 
convulsions  ;  but  this  is  the  continuously  working  and  gentle  power  of  the  Most 
High.     Mark  the  consummate  ease  with  which  aU  is  done.     Yet  not  a  sheath  is 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxi. 

split,  not  a  flower  starts  from  the  earth,  but  it  is  moved  to  do  so  by  some  power. 
2.  Is  not  this  putting  forth  of  leaves  a  great  manifestation  of  mind  ?  Suppose  we 
discard  the  word  "  design  "  and  accept  the  word  "  adaptation,"  do  we  escape  from  the 
suggestion  of  mental  action  ?  It  is  not  possible  to  describe  the  facts  as  they  appear 
to  us  without  using  language  that  implies  adjustment  by  means  of  mind.  3.  It  is 
something  more  than  mind  that  is  manifested  in  the  beauty  of  nature.  Beauty  is 
only  visible  to  reason,  indeed  to  the  higher  kind  of  reason.  Your  horse  sees  nothing 
of  the  beauty  of  the  landscape  ;  your  dog  despises  your  flowers.  The  images  of  aU 
these  things  are  reflected  on  their  eyes  as  on  yours,  but  they  produce  no  emotion. 
So  that  in  nature,  it  seems,  special  provision  is  made  for  the  peculiar  gratification  of 
the  higher  mind  of  man.  Surely  it  must  be  reason  that  thus  addresses  itself  to 
reason,  and  if  reason,  then  benevolence.  II.  The  prophet  sees  in  this  the  parablb 
OF  ANOTHER  MANIFESTATION — a  great  moral  and  spiritual  manifestation.  ' '  So  the 
Lord  God,"  etc.  It  is  pathetic  that  he  should  maintain  this  faith  through  the 
*'  winter  of  his  discontent."  All  spiritual  influences  are  treasured  up,  and  there  is  a 
conservation  of  spiritual  force  as  of  natural.  But  the  preparation  is  long,  as  the 
winter  that  precedes  the  spring.  How  great  the  joy  of  knowing  that  we  may  help 
to  provide  or  strengthen  the  forces  of  the  world's  true  vernal  hour.  III.  Remember 
that  WE  SHALL  BE  MANIFESTED  (2  Cor.  V.  10).  Forccs  are  gathering  within  us. 
When  we  "awake,"  may  our  surprise,  even  in  respect  to  ourselves,  be  like  that  with 
which  we  look  upon  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  I  {A.  H.  Vine. )  The  reign 
of  righteoiLsness : — I.  The  Gospel  is  the  dispensation  of  righteousness.  The 
love  it  reveals  is  a  just  love  ;  the  love  it  requires  is  a  just  love.  It  is  a  righteous 
system  on  two  accounts.  1.  It  defends  the  rights  of  man.  It  takes  nothing  from 
mm  but  his  sin.  (1)  Every  man  has  a  right  over  his  own  person.  God  has  given 
him  a  body,  and  over  its  senses  and  members  he  has  a  sovereign  right ;  and  if  he 
does  not  by  the  use,  or  rather  by  the  abuse  of  this  right,  sin  against  the  laws,  order, 
and  welfare  of  society,  no  one  but  God  has  any  authority  to  take  it  away.  But, 
alas  !  man  is  often  robbed  of  his  original  right.  There  are  two  systems  in  the  world, 
which,  without  shame  or  apology,  perpetuate  and  sanction  the  guUty  act ;  slavery 
and  religious  persecution.  Now  the  Gospel  detects,  condemns,  and  in  proportion  to 
its  progress  destroys,  these  dark  and  direful  systems.  (2)  Man  has  a  right  over  his 
property.  The  Gospel,  by  prohibiting  fraud,  theft,  robbery,  and  every  form  of 
dishonesty,  defends  this  right.  It  teaches  men  to  be  righteous  in  the  acquisition, 
the  enjoyment,  and  the  disposal  of  wealth.  (3)  Man  has  a  right  over  his  mind.  And 
it  is  the  mind,  after  all,  that  gives  value  to  man.  But  it  is  injured,  enslaved  by 
ignorance,  error  and  the  world.  For  there  is  a  slavery  darker  and  deeper  than  that 
which  tortures  the  flesh.  A  mind  in  chains  is  the  gi-eatest  injustice  and  the  greatest 
distress  in  the  universe.  It  is  painful  to  think  how  little  real  advantage  the  souls  of 
men  have  derived  from  civilization,  and  its  attendant  blessings.  There  is  nothing 
on  earth  that  can  give  purity,  freedom,  righteousness,  and  comfort  to  the  soul, 
except  the  truth  and  spirit  of  Christ.  "  If  the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make  you  free, 
ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  2.  The  Gospel  also  reveals  a  righteousness  which  God  has 
provided  for  man  as  a  guilty  and  lost  sinner.  It  shows  that  God  can  save  transgressors 
without  transgressing  Himself  the  eternal  laws  and  the  general  interests  of  His 
government.  To  show  this  is  its  peculiar  use.  The  chief  object  of  the  Gospel  is  not 
to  prove  that  there  is  love  in  God,  but  to  show  the  nature  and  extent  of  that  love. 
Natural  religion  preaches  the  benevolence  of  God ;  revealed  religion  preaches  the 
justice  of  His  benevolence.  The  creation  proves  the  existence  of  God's  perfections  ; 
the  cross  of  Christ  harmonizes  them.  II.  The  Spirit  of  God  alone  can  render 
THIS  system  operative  AND  EFFICIENT  IN  THE  WORLD.  "  The  Lord  God  will  cause 
righteousness  and  praise  to  spring  forth  before  all  the  nations."  The  process  by 
which  this  is  to  be  accomplished  is  figuratively  described  in  the  text :  "As  the  earth 
bringeth  forth  her  bud,  and  as  the  garden  causes  the  things  that  are  sown  in  it  to 
spring  forth,"  so  the  Lord  God  will  make  the  Gospel  effectual  to  the  salvation  of 
men.  The  process  is  Divine,  vivifying,  progressive,  and  beautiful.  {Caleb  Morris.) 
Spring: — I.  The  oncoming  of  spring  teaches  that  there  is  a  God.  There  is 
an  invisible  Creator,  a  reflection  of  whose  thoughts  and  a  product  of  whose  power 
are  all  these  magic  spring  wonders.  II.  Another  lesson  which  spring  particularly 
teaches  is  that  there  are  allotted  seasons  for  certain  tasks.  Our  Saviour 
thus  on  several  occasions  speaks  of  "times  and  seasons "  ordained  by  God.  And  the 
Psalmist  refers  to  this  same  arrangement  when  he  says :  "  The  Lora  appointeth  the 
moon  for  seasons,  the  sun  knoweth  his  going  down."  In  nature,  therefore,  spring 
holds  an  ordered  place.  As  summer  la  for  ripening  and  autumn  for  reaping,  so  is  tlua 


CHAP,  ui.]  ISAIAH.  879 

season  for  planting.  It  is  the  season  for  beginnings,  the  time  for  casting  in  the  seed. 
Just  such  an  order  there  is  in  the  vineyard  of  grace.  There  is  a  spring-time  of  the 
Gospel,  when  aU  the  conditions  are  favourable  to  making  secure  our  eternal  interests. 
Let  every  one  heed  this  period.  For  it  is  most  critical.  It  is  hia  aocepted  time  ;  it 
it  his  day  of  salvation.  Ordinarily,  the  spring  season  is  your  youth.  But  in  some 
cases  it,  doubtless  owing  to  unfavourable  early  circumstances,  comes  later.     III. 

AlfOTHEE    LESSON    OF   SPKING    WE    LEARN   ALONE    FROM   INSPIRATION.      It  is   that 

taught  by  the  prophet  in  the  text :  "  For  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  bud,"  etc. 
That  is,  as  Chnstians  look  upon  nature  putting  on  her  flowery  spring  attire,  and  as 
they  see  a  universal  bursting  forth  of  Ufe,  activity  and  joy,  they  are  to  behold  in  this 
a  sign  and  a  pledge  of  the  progress,  triumph  and  universal  prevalence  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  IV,  Spring,  moreover,  teaches  the  Divine  origin  and  power  of 
BEAUTY.  Does  it  not  fulfil  that  Scripture  which  says  "He  hath  made  everything 
beautiful  in  his  time  "  ?  And  we  learn  therefrom  that  beauty  is  Divine.  That  we 
live  not  for  blind  utility  and  stem  necessities  alone.  V.  Spring  is  an  emblem  of 
IMMORTALITY.  This  rejuvenation  coming  out  of  the  icy  tomb  of  winter  shows  us  that 
Nature  does  not  die — she  only  sleeps.  Emerson  puts  this  argument  thus:  "The 
soul  does  not  age  with  the  body.  On  the  boiders  of  the  grave  the  wise  man  looks 
forward  with  equal  elasticity  of  mind  and  hope.  For  it  is  the  nature  of  intelligent 
beings  to  be  for  ever  new  to  life."  {J.  B.  Remensnyder,  D.D.)  Spring: — The 
teaching  is  that  there  is  a  spiritual  spring-time  appointed  of  God,  and  it  will  surely 
come.  As  certainly  as  spring  comes  to  the  earth  physically,  so  surely  will  it  come 
to  the  Church  spiritually.  I.  Contemplate  this  truth  in  reference  to  the 
BBOAB  FIELD  OF  THE  WORLD.  Let  our  meditations  range  through  history  and  into 
prophecy.  1.  This  leads  us  to  expect  that  there  may  be  in  God's  work,  and  in  our 
work  for  God,  a  period  of  unrequited  labour.  The  analogy  between  the  processes  of 
nature  and  God's  work  in  the  Church  holds  good  not  only  as  to  the  revivals  of 
spring,  but  as  to  the  depressing  incidents  of  winter.  We  must  not  always  reckon  to 
see  nations  converted  the  moment  the  Gospel  is  preached  to  them,  and  especially 
where  new  ground  has  been  broken  up  (James  v.  7).  While  the  seed  is  under  the 
ground  a  thousand  adversaries  present  themselves,  aU  apparently  in  array  against  its 
ever  risiag  from  the  earth.  When  we  siirvey  the  condition  of  affairs  apart  from  faith 
in  God,  it  may  even  seem  to  us  that  our  cause  is  hopeless,  2.  Our  text  excites  the 
hope  of  a  sacred  spring-time.  God's  Gospel  cannot  perish.  That  which  is  sown  in 
the  garden  springs  up  because  there  is  vitality  in  it.  Even  so  the  truth  of  God  is 
an  incorruptible  seed,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  Life  in  garden  seeds  may 
be  destroyed  ;  under  certain  influences  the  life-germ  may  perish,  but  the  living  truth 
■  of  God  is  immortal  and  imconquerable  (1  Pet.  i.  24,  25),  But  seed  springs  up,  not 
only  because  of  its  own  vitality,  but  because  of  its  surrounding  circumstances.  So 
we  may  rest  assured  that  God  wiU  make  all  things  propitious  in  His  providence  to 
the  growth  of  His  own  truth.  But  the  com  comes  not  up  out  of  the  earth  because 
it  is  vital,  or  because  of  its  surroundings  merely,  for,  as  we  believe,  there  is  the 
actual  power  of  God  at  work  throughout  nature.  And  it  is  because  God  is  at  work 
in  His  Gospel — mysteriously  at  work,  it  is  true,  but  certainly  at  work,  for  the  Spirit 
of  the  living  God  which  was  given  at  Pentecost  has  never  gone  back  to  heaven — that 
we  expect  the  Gospel  to  flourish.  If  at  any  time  our  mind  should  grow  desponding 
concerning  the  progress  of  the  Gospel,  it  ought  to  encourage  us  to  remember  that  the 
Gospel  will  conquer,  not  because  it  looks  as  if  it  would,  but  because  God  has  declared 
and  decreed  that  it  shall  do  so.  The  disheartening  circumstances  of  the  winter  may 
have  been,  all  of  them,  promotive  of  the  success  of  the  spring.  Eemember  what 
sowing  has  already  gone  before.  Christ  sowed  the  earth  with  His  own  self.  Remember, 
too,  who  is  the  Husbandman  of  this  field.  Moreover,  there  is  the  Spirit  Himself,  as 
well  as  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  He  has  designed  to  dweU  in  the  midst  of  the 
Church.  II.  Contemplate  this  truth  in  reference  to  the  garden  committed 
TO  YOUR  own  personal  CULTURE.  As  God's  people  you  have  all  something  to  do 
for  Him  ;  I  want  you  to  do  it  in  the  best  possible  manner  ;  but  you  wiU  not  do  so 
unless  you  are  of  good  heart.  Be  not  impatient  with  regard  to  the  result  of 
what  you  are  doing.  Exercise  faith  as  to  results.  III.  Contemplate  this  samb 
TRUTH  in  reference  TO  THE  believer's  SPIRITUAL  STATE.  Do  you  uot  Sometimes 
fall  into  a  wintry  condition  ?  There  are  times  when  we  feel  as  if  we  had  no  life  at 
all.  In  such  times  as  these  we  cannot  make  any  change  in  ourselves.  What  we 
cannot  do,  God  can  do.  Spring  comes  from  yonder  sun,  and  so  must  our  revival  in 
religion,  and  our  restored  joy  and  peace,  come  from  God.    IV.  Contemplate  all 

THIS  UT  BEFEBSNOX  TO  THOSE  WHO  ABE  NEWLT  AWAKEKEO.     Those  V0rj  desireS  of 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lxil 

yours  show  that  there  is  some  good  seed  sown  in  you.  It  is  winter-time  with  you ; 
may  that  winter  do  you  good.  Your  oiJy  hope  of  anything  better  than  what  you 
are  passing  through  lies  in  Ohrist.     (C.  M.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  LXII. 


Ver.  1.  For  Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace. — The  Church  blessed  avd  made 
a  blessiTig  (vers.  1-12) : — The  words  of  the  great  Deliverer  are  continued  from  the 
foregoing  chapter.  1.  He  will  not  rest  until  the  glorious  change  in  the  condition  of 
His_  people  is  accomplished  (ver.  1).  2.  They  shall  be  recognized  by  kings  and 
nations  as  the  people  of  Jehovah  (vers.  2,  3).  3.  She  who  seemed  to  be  forsaken  is  stUl 
His  spouse  (vers.  4,  5).  4.  The  Church  is  required  to  watch  and  pray  for  the  ftdfil- 
ment  of  the  promise  (vers.  6,  7).  5.  God  has  sworn  to  protect  her  and  supply  her 
wants  (vers.  8,  9).  6.  Instead  of  a  single  nation,  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  flow 
into  her  (ver.  10).  7.  The  good  news  of  salvation  shall  no  longer  be  confined,  but 
universally  diffused  (ver.  11).  8.  The  glory  of  the  Church  is  the  redemption  of  the 
world  (ver.  12).  (/.  A.  Alexander.)  The  gradual  development  of  the  glory  of  Jeru- 
salem:— "For  Zion's  sake  I  shall  not  be  silent,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  shall  not 
rest,  until  her  righteousness  breaks  forth  like  morning-splendour,  and  her  salva- 
tion like  a  burning  torch."  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  moral  illumination  of  the 
world: — I.  The  present  implied  obscurity  of  the  Christian  Church.  "The 
righteous  One  and  the  Saviour"  (Vulgate).  Whenever  the  righteous  One  and 
Saviour  are  hidden  there  is  obscurity.  II.  Her  anticipated  glory.  The  burn- 
ing lamp  is  a  symbol  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  Jesus  is  termed  "  the  -bright- 
ness of  His  Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  person. "  Connect  both  the 
figures  in  the  text.  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall  go  forth  like  the  light  of  the 
morning.  1.  Manifestly.  Light  maketh  manifest.  2.  Irresistibly,  as  the  light  of 
the  morning.  3.  Universally.  As  all  the  earth  turns  to  the  sun,  all  are  visited  by 
the  morning  light.  "Righteousness  shall  go  forth  as  brightness"  in  all  the  earth. 
III.  The  means  by  which  the  vpork  is  to  be  accomplished.  "For  Zion's  sake 
I  will  not  hold  My  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  rest. "  Some  think 
these  are  expressions  of  Jehovah.  Correct  or  not,  it  is  a  Scriptural  truth  ;  it  has 
long  lain  near  the  heart  of  God  !  Others,  that  Jesus  is  the  speaker.  The  world  is 
His  purchased  property,  but  His  own  world  received  him  not.  Yet  the  Father  has 
pledged  Himself  to  vindicate  His  right:  "Ask  of  me."  The  most  common  opinion 
is  that  these  words  are  Isaiah's,  as  a  man  of  God  and  as  a  minister  of  God.  It  is 
proper  to  be  used  by  all  who  mention  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Human  agency,  then, 
IS  the  means  employed.  In  providence  God  helps  man  by  man.  In  grace  the  same. 
The  Word  of  God  is  to  be  carried  and  held  forth  as  light.  The  text  indicates  the 
manner  also.  1.  It  shall  be  consistent — prayer  and  exertion.  "  Not  hold  my  peace, 
not  rest."  2.  Affectionate  exertions  also — from  a  principle  of  love.  "For  Zion's 
sake."  3.  Persevering.  "  Until  the  righteousness  go  forth.  {J.Summ£rfield,M.A.) 
The  extension  of  the  Gospel: — I.  The  blessing  of  the  Gospel  as  applied  to  youb 
OWN  SOULS.  Two  inclusive  blessings,  righteousness  and  salvation.  II.  The  exten- 
sion OF  this  blessing  throughout  the  earth.  It  is  evident  that  it  is  in  the 
promise  of  God  that  it  shall  be  so,  because  it  is  made  the  subject  of  the  persevering 
mtercession  of  Christ.  "For  Zion's  sake  will  I,"  etc.  III.  The  ground  of  our 
encouragement  for  the  extension  of  this  blessing.  What  can  be  stronger  t 
It  is  the  grace  of  the  intercession  of  the  Son  of  God.  (C.  Bridges,  M.A.)  Divine 
un/rest  (with  vers.  6, 7) : — I.  The  cause  of  Divine  unrest.  The  needs  of  the  Church, 
Zion  ;  the  condition  of  the  city,  Jerusalem.  It  is  in  the  lack  of  "righteousness," 
the  need  of  "  salvation."  This  is  still  true  of  our  Churches  and  cities.  The  sin  is  pro- 
found, the  sorrow  unfathomable.  Yet  there  is  not  total  darkness.  There  is  twilight ; 
but  all  the  Divine  yearning  is,  that  the  twilight  may  brighten  into  noon.  II.  The 
nature  of  this  Divine  unrest.  It  is  not  chiefly  that  of  indignation  at  wrong,  but 
it  is  the  imrest  of  anxiety  for  others,  the  unrest  of  pity.  It  is — 1.  Unselfish.  2.  Uni- 
TersAl.  Even  God  will  snare  it.  III.  The  manifestation  of  this  Divine  unrest. 
1.  In  loud  human  proclamation  of  the  truth.    2.  In  prayer  to  God.    8.  In  God's  unrest, 


CHAP.LXii.]  ISAIAH.  381 

in  which  He  gives  Jesus  to  save  and  bless.  Christ's  piercing  cry  of  grief,  "  0  Jeru- 
salem," utters  the  unrest  in  God.  Learn — (1)  The  remedy  for  all  the  unrest  of  the 
universe.  "Righteousness,"  "Salvation."  (2)  The  opportunity  good  men  have  for 
commxmion  with  God.  Be  unhappy  because  of  the  sm  and  sorrow  in  the  world. 
Have  fellowship  with  Christ.  Share  the  Divine  unrest.  {U.  R.  Thomas,  B. A.)  The 
heavenly  workers  arid  the  earthly  watchers  (with  vers.  6,  7) : — 1.  The  preceding  chap- 
ter brings  in  Christ  as  proclaiming  the  great  work  of  deliverance  for  which  He  is 
anointed  of  God  ;  the  following  chapter  presents  Him  as  treading  the  wine-press 
alone,  which  is  a  symbol  of  the  future  judgment  by  the  glorified  Saviour.  Between 
these  two  prophecies  of  the  earthly  life  and  the  stUl  future  judicial  energy,  this 
chapter  lies,  referring,  as  I  take  it,  to  the  period  between  these  two — i.  e.  to  all  the 
ages  of  the  Church's  development  on  earth.  For  these  Christ  here  promises  His  con- 
tinual activity,  and  His  continual  bestowment  of  grace  to  His  servants  who  watch 
the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  2.  Notice  the  remarkable  parallelism  in  the  expressions : 
"  I  will  not  hold  My  peace  ; "  the  watchmen  "  shall  never  hold  their  peace."  And 
His  command  to  them  is  literally,  "Ye  that  remind  Jehovah — no  rest  (or  silence)  to 
you !  and  give  not  rest  to  Him.  So  we  have  here  Christ,  the  Church  and  God  all 
represented  as  unceasingly  occupied  in  the  one  great  work  of  establishing  "  Zion  "  as 
the  centre  of  light,  salvation  and  righteousness  for  the  whole  world.  I.  The  glori- 
fied Christ  is  constantly  working  for  His  Church.  We  are  too  apt  to  regard 
our  Lord's  real  work  as  all  lying  in  the  past,  and,  from  the  very  greatness  of  otir 
estimate  of  what  He  has  done,  to  forget  the  true  importance  of  what  He  evermore 
does.  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  In  that 
session  on  the  throne  manifold  and  mighty  truths  are  expressed.  It  proclaims  the 
full  accomplishment  of  all  the  purposes  of  His  earthly  ministry  ;  it  emphasizes  the 
triumphant  completion  of  His  redeeming  work  by  His  death ;  it  proclaims  the 
majesty  of  His  nature,  which  returns  to  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was  ;  it  shows  to  the  world,  as  on  some  coronation  day, 
their  King  on  His  throne,  girded  with  power.  But  whilst  on  the  one  side  Christ 
rests  as  from  a  perfected  work  which  needs  no  addition  nor  repetition,  on  the  other 
He  rests  not  day  nor  night.  When  the  heavens  opened  to  the  rapt  eyes  of  John  in 
Patmos,  the  Lord  whom  he  beheld  was  not  only  revealed  as  glorified  in  the  lustre  of 
the  inaccessible  light,  but  as  actively  sustaining  and  guiding  the  human  reflectors  of  it. 
He  "  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand,"  and  "  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the 
seven  golden  candlesticks."  Not  otherwise  does  my  text  represent  the  present 
relation  of  Christ  to  His  Church.     "I  will  not  rest."    Through  all  the  ages  His 

Sower  is  in  exercise.  He  inspires  in  good  men  all  their  wisdom,  and  every  grace  of 
fe  and  character.  Nor  is  this  all.  There  still  remains  the  wonderful  truth  of  His 
continuous  intercession  for  us.  In  its  widest  meaning  that  word  expresses  the  whole 
of  the  manifold  ways  by  which  Christ  undertakes  and  maintains  our  cause.  So  we 
have  not  only  to  look  back  to  the  cross,  but  up  to  the  throne.  From  the  cross  we 
hear  a  voice,  "  Itis  finished."  From  the  throne  a  voice,  "  For  Zion's  sake  I  will  not 
hold  My  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  rest."  II.  Christ's  servants 
ON  earth  derive  from  Him  a  like  perpetual  activity  for  the  same  object. 
"  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  0  Jerusalem,  which  shall  never  hold  their 
peace  day  nor  night."  On  the  promise  follows,  as  ever,  a  command,  "Ye  that 
remind  Jehovah,  keep  not  silence.  '  There  is  distinctly  traceable  here  a  reference  to 
a  twofold  form  of  occupation  devolving  on  these  Christ-sent  servants.  They  are 
watchmen,  and  they  are  also  Grod's  remembrancers.  In  the  one  capacity  as  in  the 
other,  their  voices  are  to  be  always  heard.  The  former  metaphor  is  common  in  the 
Old  Testament,  as  a  designation  of  the  prophetic  office,  but,  in  accordance  with  the 
genius  of  the  New  Testament,  as  expressed  on  Pentecost,  when  the  spirit  was  poured 
out  on  the  lowly  as  well  as  on  the  high,  on  the  young  as  on  the  old,  and  all  prophe- 
sied, may  be  faurly  extended  to  designate  not  some  select  few,  but  the  whole  mass  of 
Christian  people.  The  remembrancer's  priestly  office  belongs  to  every  member  of 
Christ's  priestly  kingdom,  the  lowest  and  least  of  whom  has  the  privilege  of  unre- 
strained entry  into  God's  presence-chamber,  and  the  power  of  blessing  the  world  by 
faithful  prnj-er.  1.  Our  voices  should  ever  be  heard  on  earth.  A  solemn  message  is 
committed  to  us  by  the  very  fact  of  our  belief  in  Jesus  Christ  and  His  work.  2.  Our 
voices  should  ever  be  heard  in  heaven.  They  who  trust  God  remind  Him  olF  His 
promises  by  their  ver?  faith ;  it  is  a  mute  appeal  to  His  faithful  love,  which  He 
cannot  but  answer.  Beyond  that,  their  prayers  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God, 
and  have  as  real  an  effect  in  furthering  Christ's  kingdom  on  earth  as  is  exercised  by 
their  entreaties  and  proclamations  to  men.    8.  These  two  forms  of  action  ought  to  be 


882  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lxn. 

inseparable.  Each,  if  genuine,  will  drive  ua  to  the  other,  for  who  could  fling  him- 
self into  the  watchman's  work,  with  all  its  solemn  consequences,  knowing  how  weak 
his  voice  was,  and  how  deaf  the  ears  that  should  hear,  unless  he  could  bring  God's 
might  to  his  help  ?  And  who  could  honestly  remiad  God  of  His  promises  and  for- 
get his  own  responsibilities  ?  4.  The  power  for  both  is  derived  from  Christ.  He  seta 
the  watchmen  ;  He  commands  the  remembrancers.  And,  as  the  Christian  power  of 
discharging  these  twofold  duties  is  drawn  from  Christ,  so  our  pattern  is  His  manner 
of  discharging  them,  and  the  condition  of  receiving  the  power  is  to  abide  in  Him. 
Christ  asks  no  romantic  impossibilities  from  us,  but  He  does  ask  a  continuous,  sys- 
tematic discharge  of  the  duties  which  depend  on  our  relation  to  the  world,  and  on 
our  relation  to  Him.  III.  The  constant  activity  of  the  servants  of  Christ 
WILL  secure  the  CONSTANT  OPERATION  OF  God's  POWER.  "Give  Him  no  rest:  " 
let  there  be  no  cessation  to  Him.  These  are  bold  words.  Those  who  remind  God  are 
not  to  suffer  Him  to  be  still.  The  prophet  believes  that  they  can  regulate  the  flow  of 
Diviue  energy,  can  stir  up  the  strength  of  the  Lord.  It  is  easy  to  puzzle  ourselves 
with  insoluble  questions  about  the  co-operation  of  God's  power  and  man's  ;  but  prac- 
tically, is  it  not  true  that  God  reaches  His  end,  of  the  establishment  of  Zion, through 
the  Church  ?  The  great  reservoir  is  always  full  to  the  brim  ;  however  much  may  be 
drawn  from  it,  the  water  sinks  not  ahair's-breadth  ;  but  the  bore  of  the  pipe  and  the 
power  of  the  pumping-engine  determine  the  rate  at  which  the  stream  flows  from  it. 
"  He  could  there  do  no  mighty  works  because  of  their  unbelief."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
SindraTices  to  the  spread  of  the  Gospel : — Our  particular  inquiry  is,  What  obstacles 
to  the  conversion  of  the  world  are  found  among  those  who,  in  different  ways,  are 
eidisted  in  the  cause  of  foreign  missions?    I.  The  defect  OF  our  Christian 

CHARACTER,  OR  THE  WANT  OF  A  HIGHER  DEGREE  OF  HOLINESS.  II.  ThE  DIRECT 
INDULGENCE  OF  AFFECTIONS  WHICH  ARE  SELFISH  AND  EARTHLY.  III.  DIVISION 
AND  STRIFE  AMONG  ChRIST'S  FOLLOWERS.  IV.  ThE  UNNECESSARY  EXCITEMENT 
OF  POPULAR  PREJUDICE.  V.  FALLING  SHORT  IN  OUR  DUTY  IN  REGARD  TO  THE 
BENEVOLENT  USE  OF  PROPERTY.  VI.  ThE  WANT  OF  A  PROPER  FEELING  AND 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT     OF     OUR    DEPENDENCE    ON    GOD    FOR    THE    SUCCESS     OF     OUB 

EFFORTS.  {Leonard  Woods,  D.D.)  Th,e  encouragemerds  aiid  duties  of  Cliristians : — 
I.  Encouragements.  1.  There  are  declarations  respecting  the  character  and 
essential  attributes  of  God,  as,  for  example.  His  sovereignty.  His  power.  His  justice, 
His  wisdom.  His  love  ;  even  from  which,  if  we  had  no  express  or  specific  direction, 
we  might  justly  and  safely  infer  that  the  Almighty  cannot  always  permit  His  own 
world  to  remain  the  almost  unmitigated  form  of  general  apostasy  and  wretchedness  ; 
and  that  for  the  sake  of  His  own  gloiy  He  will  cause  a  vast  and  mighty  change,  by 
which  the  revolt  of  the  world  shall  be  terminated,  and  by  which  it  shall  be  recovered 
and  reclaimed  to  Himself.  2.  There  are  declarations  with  regard  to  the  sufficiency 
and  design  of  our  Saviour's  sacrifice  (John  i.  29,  xii.  32  ;  Heb.  ii.  9  ;  1  John  ii.  2). 
That  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  of  which  such  is  the  declared  sufficiency  and  design  has 
hitherto  but  very  partially  and  imperfectly  accomplished  its  object  is  plain ;  that,  so 
long  as  the  world  continues  as  it  is,  that  partiality  and  imperfection  must  still 
continue  is  plain  also ;  and  we  must  therefore  judge  that  it  never  can  fulfil  the 
objects  for  which  it  was  originally  offered,  except  in  the  final  efliision  of  the  Divine 
Spiiit  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  3.  There  are  declarations  in  regard  to 
the  majesty  and  extent  of  the  Saviour's  exaltation  and  royalty.  As  the  reward  and 
the  recompense  of  His  sufferings.  He  has  been  made  the  possessor  of  a  wonderful 
mediatorial  kingdom,  a  kingdom  in  the  gaining  and  maintaining  of  the  authority 
of  which  the  Spirit  is  the  agent,  and  the  Word  is  the  instrvmaent — that  kingdom  ij» 
which  the  Spirit,  through  the  Word,  is  destined  to  maintain  a  universal  sway 
(Ps.  ii.  7,  8  ;  Isa.  ix.  6  ;  Ps.  Ixii.  8,  etc.).  4.  There  are  those  declarations  witn 
regard  to  the  final  and  renovating  change,  as  we  find  them  expressed  throughout  the 
general  structure  of  the  prophetical  writings.  Because  He  who  cannot  lie  has 
promised,  therefore  we  believe.  II.  Obligations.  1.  There  are  peculiar  duties 
pressing  upon  the  ministers  and  other  public  officers  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  The 
ministers  are  called  upon  to  cultivate  peculiar  eminence  in  personal  holiness ;  they 
ought  to  cultivate  an  enlarged  and  most  accurate  acquaintance  with  evangelical 
truth,  an  ardent  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God,  a  tender  compassion  for  the  souls  of  men  ! 
They  ought  to  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  their  high  vocation.  They  ought  to 
labour  with  quenchless  ardour  and  perseverance,  while  prayer  ought  to  be,  as  it  were, 
their  very  food,  their  very  air,  and  their  very  being.  As  to  the  other  public  officers 
of  the  Church,  their  special  duty  appears  to  be  the  following — exemplary  firmness  in 
the  belief  of  Christian  doctrine,  in  the  practice  of  Christian  precepts,  and  in  the 


CHAP.  Lxii.]  ISAIAH.  883 

manifestation  of  a  Christian  spirit ;  fervent  brotheriy  love  amongst  themselves, 
towards  all  their  fellow-Christians,  and  especially  towards  the  poor,  whose  interests 
they  are  invoked  to  superintend  ;  cheerful  assistance  to  the  pastors  of  the  flock,  in 
aU  measures  which  may  be  deemed  proper  for  preserving  the  purity  of  the  Church, 
and  for  the  conversion  of  the  ungodly  ;  and  an  earnest  endeavour  with  regard  to  all 
departments  of  Christian  character,  that  they  may  shine  as  lights  in  the  world. 
2.  But  there  are  general  duties  which  press  upon  all  the  members  of  a  Christian 
Church.  (1)  A  careful  avoidance  of  all  worldly  conformity.  (2)  The  practice  of 
sincere  brotherly  affection  towards  all  other  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
(3)  Increased  zeal  in  maintaining  and  extending  that  ministry  which  has  been 
ordained  for  the  conversion  of  men.  (4)  A  strong  mental  confidence  in  the  fact  that 
the  change  upon  which  our  aspirations  have  been  fixed  shall  actually  be  accomplished. 
There  is  nothing  by  which  God  is  so  much  dishonoured  as  unbelief.  (5)  There  must 
also  be  the  spirit  of  importunate  prayer  (vers.  1,  6).  {James  Parsons.)  Intercesso^-y 
prayer  and  the  Divine  response : — The  prophet  here  tells  us — I.  What  he  will  do 
FOB  THE  CHtTRCH  (ver.  1).  II.  "What  God  WILL  DO  FOR  THE  Chxjech  (vers.  2-5). 
1.  The  Church  shall  be  greatly  admired.  "And  the  Gentiles  shall  see  thy 
righteousness,"  etc.  2.  3he  shall  be  truly  admirable.  "Thou  shalt  be  called  by 
a  new  name,"  etc.  Two  names  God  shall  give  her.  (1)  He  shall  call  her  His 
crown  (ver.  3).     (2)  He  shall  call  her  His  spouse  (vers.  4,  5).     {M.  Henry.) 

Yer.  2.  And  thou  shalt  be  called  by  a  new  name. — The  new  name  (with 
ver.  12) : — ^According  to  the  Hebrew  idiom,  the  name  which  expresses  the  nature  and 
character  of  a  person  is  used  as  equivalent  to  that  nature  and  character.  The 
promises  of  these  verses  involve,  accordingly,  far  more  than  appears  upon  the  surface. 
1.  The  new  name  abolishes  the  old.  In  the  prophetical  writings  Israel's  sins 
are  very  plainly  described  and  very  faithfully  upbraided.  The  favoured  people  are 
called  rebels  and  traitors,  idolaters  and  spiritual  adulterers.  Upon  their  repentance, 
the  old  reproach  is  wiped  away,  and  the  old  appellations  are  discarded.  This  is  how 
Divine  mercy  treats  aU  true  penitents  and  believers.  Former  sins  are  forgotten, 
former  rebukes  are  reversed,  former  sentences  of  condemnation  are  cancelled.  II.  The 
KEW  name  expresses  A  NEW  CHARACTER.  The  Christian  dispensation  provides,  by 
peculiar  agencies  and  spiritual  powers,  for  the  removal  of  the  nature  and  life  of  men 
(2  Cor.  V.  17).  In  accordance  with  the  fact  is  the  expression  of  the  fact ;  in  accordance 
with  the  new  nature,  the  new  birth,  the  new  life,  is  the  new  name.     III.  The  new 

NAME   IS  significant  OF  A  NEW  STATE  OF  FAVOUR  AND  ACCEPTANCE.      Especially 

those  upon  whom  the  great  change  has  passed  are  the  Lord's.  His  possession  and 
property,  His  beloved  and  honoured,  for  whom  no  privileges  are  too  great  and  no 
dignities  too  eminent.  The  new  name  is  His  name  who  confers  it,  and  who  delights 
to  deem  and  to  call  His  beloved  ones  His  own.     {Homiletical  Library.) 

Vers.  3-6.  Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  glory. — Zion  a  crown  of  glory  in  OocTs 
hand : — It  is  only  through  figurative  representations  that  prophecy  here  sees  what 
Zion  will  be  in  the  future ;  she  becomes  a  crown  of  adornment,  a  tiara  (the  head-dress 
of  the  high  priest,  Ex.  xxviiL  4  ;  Zech.  iii.  5  ;  and  of  the  King,  Ezek.  fcxi.  26)  of  royal 
dignity  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah  her  God.  It  is  a  leading  feature  in  the  picture  that 
Jehovah  holds  the  crown  in  His  hand.  Zion  is  not  the  ancient  crown  which  the 
Eternal  bears  on  His  head,  but  she  is  the  crown  which  He  holds  in  His  hand, 
because  in  Zion  He  is  recognized  by  all  creation  ;  the  who^e  history  of  redemption  is 
the  history  of  Jehovah's  taking  the  kingdom  and  bringing  It  to  perfection, — in  other 
words,  the  history  of  the  working  out  of  this  crown.     {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken. — A  joyful  change  of  condition : — 
"No  more  shall  it  be  called  to  thee  (shalt  thou  be  called)  Azubah  (Forsaken),  and 
thy  land  shall  no  more  be  called  Shemamah  (Desolate) ;  but  thou  shalt  be  called 
Hephzibah  (My  delight  is  in  her),  and  thy  land  Beulah  (Married),  for  Jehovah 
delights  in  thee,  and  thy  land  shall  be  married."  The  joyful  change  of  condition  is 
expressed  in  the  prophet's  favourite  manner,  by  significant  names.  The  common 
version  not  only  mars  the  beauty  of  the  passage,  but  renders  it  in  some  degree  un- 
intelligible to  the  English  reader,  by  translating  the  first  two  names  and  retaining 
the  others  in  their  Hebrew  dress.  It  is  obvious  that  all  four  should  be  treated  alike, 
i.  e.  that  aU  the  Hebrew  forms  should  be  retained,  or  none.  Henderson  prefers  the 
latter  method,  on  the  ground  that  "the  names  are  merely  symbolical,  andTwill  never 
be  employed  as  proper  names."    It  ia  probable,  however,  that  they  were  all  familiar] 


984  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  lxii„ 

to  the  Jews  as  female  names  in  real  life.  This  we  know  to  have  been  the  case  with 
two  of  them  (1  Kings  xxii.  42  ;  2  Kings  xxi.  1).  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  retain  the 
Hebrew  forms,  in  order  to  give  them  an  air  of  reality  as  proper  names,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  render  them  intelligible  by  translation.  In  the  last  clause  there  ifr 
reference  to  the  primary  meaning  of  the  verb,  viz.  that  of  owning  or  possessing ;  and 
as  the  inhabitants  of  towns  are  sometimes  called  in  Hebrew  their  "possessors,"  it» 
use  here  would  suggest,  as  at  least  one  meaning  of  the  promise,  thy  land  shall  be 
inhabited,  and  so  it  is  translated  in  the  Targum.  (/.  A.  Alexander.)  Spiritttal 
espousal: — I  invite  your  attention  to  some  reflections  on  the  Scriptural  use  of 
marriage,  as  a  type  of  the  mystical  onion  betwixt  Christ  and  His  Church.  This 
tender,  beautiful  image  implies — I.  Choice.  In  aU  nations  there  has  been  the 
instinctive  rule  that  the  initiative  choice  is  not  with  the  bride,  but  with  the  bride- 
groom. Its  spiritual  parallel  is  in  the  declaration  of  Jesus  to  His  disciples,  ' '  Ye 
have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."  "I  am  jealous  over  you,"  said  Paul, 
"with  godly  jealousy :  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that  I  may  present 
you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ."  At  the  same  time  aU  are  bound,  because  all  are 
invited,  to  "  seek  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found,"  to  "  choose  this  day  whom  ye 
will  serve  ; "  then  the  farther  element  in  the  marriage  symbol  will  be  verified. 

II.  Devotion.  You  will  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  you.  It  is  often  observed 
in  ordinary  married  life,  how  the  mutual  love  of  husband  and  wife  enables  them  to 
bear,  not  only  without  bitterness  or  mutual  recriminations,  but  with  a  greater  clinging 
to,  and  confidence  in  each  other,  the  trials,  sorrows,  and  burdens  of  life.  Love 
lightens  the  load,  when  each  one,  for  the  other's  sake,  cheerfully  takes  his  or  her 
share.     The  love  of  Christ  endears  Him  to  the  believer,  and  the  believer  to  Him, 

III.  Insepaeable  union.  Earthly  ties  of  man  and  wife  are  liable  to  many  incidents 
of  severance.  Necessities  of  particular  callings  in  Kfe  sometimes  separate  them,  lands 
and  seas  asunder.  Gmlt,  aversion,  insanity,  disease  and  death,  often  dissolve 
the  union,  which  once  bid  fair  to  be  firmly  riveted  "till  death  them  should 
part."  The  believer's  union  with  Christ  is  liable  to  no  such  disastrous  issues.  Not 
that  this  consolatory  doctrine  dispenses  with  the  necessity  of  a  faithful,  obedient, 
and  devout  course  of  effort  to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace 
and  in  righteousness  of  life.  The  Divine  idea  of  marriage  is  a  united  family,  basing 
its  bond  of  union  on  the  unity  of  its  parentage.  "  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave 
his  father  and  mother,"  etc.  True  spiritual  union  with  Christ  involves  an  ascendency 
of  afl'ection.  "  If  any  man  love  father  or  mother  more  than  Me,"  etc.  In  a  deep 
sense  it  may  be  said  of  Christ  and  His  disciple,  "They  twain  are  one  Spirit." 
{J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  Thy  land  shall  be  married. — "  Thy  land  shall  be  married,"  i.  e. 
it  shall  become  fruitful  again  and  be  replenished.  1.  Her  sons  shall  heartUy  espouse 
the  land  of  their  nativity,  and  the  interests  of  it,  which  they  had  for  a  long  time 
neglected,  as  despairing  ever  to  have  any  comfortable  enjoyment  of  it.  Thysona 
shall  marry  thee,  i.  e.  they  shall  live  with  thee,  and  take  delight  in  thee.  When 
they  were  in  Babylon,  they  seemed  to  have  espoused  that  land,  for  they  were  appointed 
to  settle,  and  to  seek  the  peace  of  it  (Jer.  xxix.  5-7) ;  but  now  they  shall  again 
marry  their  own  land,  "as  a  young  man  marrieth  a  virgin"  that  he  takes  great 
delight  in,  is  extremely  fond  of,  ana  is  likely  to  have  many  children  by.  It  bodes 
well  to  a  land  when  its  own  natives  and  inhabitants  are  pleased  with  it,  prefer 
it  before  other  lands ;  when  its  princes  marry  their  country,  and  resolve  to  take 
their  lot  with  it.  2.  Which  is  much  better,  her  God  shall  betroth  her  to  Himself 
in  righteousness  (Hos.  ii.  19,  20).  {M.  Henry.)  Monopoly  and  communism: — I 
propose  to  name  some  of  the  suitors  who  are  claiming  the  hand  of  this  RepubUc 
1.  There  is  a  greedy,  all-grasping  monster  who  comes  m  as  suitor  seeking  the  hand 
of  this  Republic,  and  that  monster  is  known  by  the  name  of  Monopoly.  His  sceptre 
is  made  out  of  the  iron  of  the  rail-track  and  the  wire  of  telegraphy.  He  does  every- 
thing for  his  own  advantage  and  for  the  robbery  of  the  people.  Such  monopolies 
imply  an  infinite  acreage  of  wretchedness.     Great  monopolies  in  any  land  imply 

Seat  privation.  2.  Another  suitor  claiming  the  hand  of  this  Republic  is  Nihilism, 
e  owns  nothing  but  a  knife  for  universal  blood-letting  and  a  nitro-glycerine  bomb 
for  universal  explosion.  He  believes  in  no  God,  no  government,  no  heaven,  and  no 
hell,  except  what  he  can  make  on  earth.  He  slew  the  Czar  of  Russia,  kiUed  Abraham 
Lincoln,  and  would  put  to  death  every  king  and  president  on  earth,  if  he  had  the 
power.    {T.  D«  W.  Talmage,  D.D.) 

I  Ver.  6.  For  h  a  young  man  marrieth  a  virgin. — Fervid  devoHon  to  a  ecmse : — It 
jit  diffionlt  to  im  how  any  real  parallel  oon  exist  between  an  intellectual  interest  ot 


«BAF.  Lzn.]  ISAIAH,  385 

reasoned  sense  of  duty  to  a  public  cause  or  institution,  although  prescribing  exertion 
and  even  sacrifice,  and  the  spontaneous,  glowing,  fervid  devotion  of  a  young  man  to 
his  chosen  bride.  Say  you  so  ?  Then  let  me  say  that  as  yet  you  know  not  some 
salient  features  of  human  nature.  As  a  matter  of  fact  abstractions,  as  we  call  them, 
do  provoke  passion ;  the  passion  of  love  and  the  passion  of  hate,  no  less  truly  than 
do  concrete  and  visible  objects.  Millions  of  human  beings  have  worked,  suffered, 
fought  and  died  for  these  veir  abstractions ;  for  a  political  or  social  doctrine,  for 
the  fame  of  a  fallen  dynasty,  for  the  credit  of  some  secret  club  or  association,  for  a 
country  that  has  been  crushed  out  of  existence,  for  some  wild  undemonstrable  theory, 
for  some  baseless  or  grotesque  superstition,  no  less  than  for  a  true  and  soul-inspiring 
faith  or  principle.  {H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.)  Practical  devotion  to  the  Church  of 
Christ: — Isaiah's  comparison  would  suggest  that  the  devotion  of  her  sons  to  the 
city  of  God  would  have  three  characteristics.  I.  An  unreserved,  whole-hearted 
DEVOTION  ;  a  devotion  which  bestows  on  its  object  its  best  and  its  all.  "  With  my 
body  I  thee  worship  ;  and  with  all  my  worldly  goods  I  thee  endow,"  is  the  language 
not  only  of  a  Christian  Church  formulary,  but  of  the  human  heart  in  its  better 
mood,  throughout  all  time  ;  and  it  marks  the  first  characteristic  of  that  devotion  to 
the  Church  of  God  which  Isaiah  saw  in  vision  across  the  centuries.  Undoubtedly 
a  partial  fulfilment  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  may  be  recognized  in  the  love  and  service 
which  Israel  after  the  flesh  received  from  a  long  line  of  patriot  children.  Noblest 
among  them  were  the  Maccabees ;  but  they  were  only  samples  of  a  spirit  which  was 
shared,  in  their  day  and  afterwards,  by  thousands  of  their  countrymen.  That 
temper  was  indeed  too  often  mingled  with  moral  alloy  that  sullied  its  purity.  But 
the  men  who  saved  their  country  from  the  cidtured  Paganism  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes, 
and  who  even  after  the  utter  ruin  of  their  sacred  house  by  Titus,  rose  once  and 
again  to  pour  out  their  blood  like  water  in  an  unavailing  struggle  with  Imperial 
Home  at  the  epoch  of  its  greatest  military  power,  were  assuredly  not  men  only  under 
the  sway  of  a  common  or  sordid  motive.  In  their  love  to  "Jerusalem  the  Holy," 
whose  name  was  stamped  upon  their  coins,  they  surely  exhibit  the  careless  self- 
abandonment  of  the  passion  which  gives  itself  without  stint  to  the  object  of  its 
choice.  The  Lord  had  chosen  Zion  to  be  a  habitation  for  Himself,  and  this  choice 
made  her,  to  those  who  had  faith  in  it,  the  object  of  a  passionate  attachment  in 
some  respects  without  a  parallel  in  history.  Now,  our  Lord  proclaimed  and  foimded, 
within  the  Jewish  nation,  yet  with  a  capacity  and,  indeed,  an  internal  necessity  of 
passing  beyond  its  bounds,  a  new  Society,  which  was  to  be  more  to  the  intellect 
and  heart  of  man  than  the  Greek  ir6\ts,  or  the  Roman  World  Empire,  or  the  Jewish 
theocracy  itself,  ever  had  been  or  could  be  ;  yet  which  should  sanction  and  satisfy, 
in  ample  measure,  those  instincts  of  union,  brotherhood,  improvement,  order,  of 
which  earlier  forms  of  association  among  men  were  the  outcome  and  assertion.  This 
Society,  in  virtue  of  its  origin,  its  object,  and  its  compass.  He  named  the  Kingdom 
of  Heaven.  Certain  is  it  that  the  Church  of  Christ  has  inspired  millions  of 
Christians  with  mingled  love  and  enthusiasm.  If  we  believe  that  Christ's  Church, 
though  built  upon  the  foimdation  of  apostles  and  prophets,  has  for  the  chief  comer- 
stone.  Himself ;  if  we  see  in  her,  not  a  self-formed  collection  of  individuals  who 
agree  in  following  Him,  but,  as  Scripture  says.  His  Body,  instinct  with  His  life  ;  if 
for  her  He  shed  His  most  precious  blood  that  He  might  present  her  glorious  and 
immaculate  in  the  realms  of  purity ;  then,  in  making  much  of  her,  we  surely  are 
doing  no  wrong  to  Him.  Only  because,  notwithstandSig  the  scars  and  stains  which 
mark  her  sojourn  here  below,  she  is  yet  so  intimately  His,  should  she  be  so  precious 
to  His  servants ; — drawing  the  noblest  souls  into  the  highest  paths  of  service. 
II.  The  devotion  which  Isaiah  predicts  will  be  disinterested.  The  true- 
hearted  bridegroom  marries,  not  that  he  may  win  rank  or  wealth,  or  public  recogni- 
tion, or  any  outward  advantages  whatever :  he  weds  his  bride  for  her  own  sake, 
because  she  is  what  she  is,  because  in  wedding  her  he  finds  the  joy  and  satisfaction 
of  his  heart.  It  is  "  for  better  for  worse,  for  richer  for  poorer,  in  sickness  and  in 
health."  So  was  it  also  to  be  with  the  espousals  of  the  soul.  The  Holy  Bride  is 
wooed  for  her  own  sake,  and  not  for  anything  that  she  may  bestow  on  those  who 
would  win  her.  III.  And  the  prophet's  comparison  suggests  a  devotion 
that  will  last  till  death.  "Till  death  us  do  part."  Weariness,  impaired 
health,  diminished  opportunities  for  usefulness  may  come  with  years ;  but  the  tie 
of  sacred  service  to  the  cause  and  Church  of  Christ  can  only  end  with  life.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls,  0  Jemsalem. — The  ioatchm(m*$ 
mill: — The  prosperity  of  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  teaches  the  Gentle 
▼OL.  in.  25 


886  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rxn.' 

I 

world  through  Hebrew  channels,  depends  on  two  conditions — watchfulness  and 
prayer.  To  the  latter  of  these  subjects  this  discourse  will  be  devoted.  Let  us  dwell 
on  importunity  in  prayer.  "And  give  Him  no  rest."  I.  This  is  a  call  to  thb 
INDIVIDUAL  Christian,  and  to  a  particular  duty.  Personal  devotion  will  largely 
relate  to  matters  affecting  the  individual  and  the  family,  but  it  must  not  stop  there. 
The  Christian  must  not  forget  that  he  is  a  member  of  the  gi'eat  Catholic  Church, 
and  must  bear  its  burdens  on  his  spirit  to  God  in  prayer.     II.  The  Church  also 

MUST    MEET    ON    SPECIAL    OCCASIONS    TO    PRAY    FOR    A    LARGER    OUTPOURING    OF 

THE  Holy  Ghost.  III.  By  a  few  considerations  we  will  endeavour  to 
ENFORCE  THE  DUTY.  1.  One  is  the  fact  that  God  has  promised  to  meet  us  on  the 
groimd  of  earnest  and  constant  prayer.  2.  The  history  of  importunate  prayer  ia 
full  of  marvels.  3.  If  we  survey  the  situation  of  the  Church,  and  call  to  mind 
the  responsibility  which  rests  upon  it,  our  own  souls  would  be  moved  to  greater 
earnestness.  Precious  souls  are  perishing  around  us  ;  the  Cross  of  Calvaiy,  the  love 
of  God,  the  traditions  of  the  Church,  conscience,  himianity,  the  judgment,  heaven, 
hell,  beseech  us  to  rescue  the  perishing.  There  is  but  one  power  that  will  make  the 
Church  of  Christ  equal  to  every  task  which  the  Master  has  set  before  it — earnest 
prayer.  4.  Importunate  prayer  ends  in  praise.  Jerusalem  wiU  be  established,  and 
will  become  the  praise — the  glory — of  the  earth.  5.  Although  prayer  in  all  its 
aspects  is  the  inheritance  of  every  Christian,  yet  every  Christian  is  not  a  watchman. 
Therefore  a  word  to  Church  leaders  will  be  in  place.  Let  them  look  round  and 
survey  the  state  of  the  Church.  {T.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  saints^  importunity  for 
Zion's  prosperity : — It  is  a  truth  which  holds  good  both  in  Scripture  and  experience, 
that  the  care  of  Zion  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  God's  powerful  actings  among  the  sons 
of  men.  All  that  He  is  and  does,  in  the  methods  of  His  common  and  extraordinary 
providence,  is  for  the  sake  of  His  Church,  which  is  the  principal  cause  and  interest 
He  has  in  the  world.  I.  "What  are  those  shakings  to  which  the  cause  and 
Church  of  Christ  are  exposed  in  the  earth  ?  1.  There  are  shakings  to  which 
the  cause  of  Christ  is  exposed,  which  arise  from  outward  violence  (Ps.  ii.  2).  2.  There 
are  shakings  which  arise  from  inward  decays.  A  building  will  shake  and  totter, 
and  grow  ruinous,  without  any  outward  violence,  if  the  foundation  is  undermined  ; 
or  if  the  pins  and  fastenings,  whereby  it  is  held  together,  decay.  This  is  the  case — 
(1)  "When  Gospel-truth  is  perverted  or  denied.  (2)  "When  Gospel-hoUness  is  neg- 
lected. (3)  "When  love  is  not  cultivated.  II.  When  may  God  be  said  so  to 
establish  His  Church  as  to  make  it  a  praise  in  the  earth  ?  To  make  up  this 
praise  and  renown  there  are  four  or  five  things.  As — 1.  Abundance  of  light  and 
knowledge.  2.  High  degrees  of  holiness.  3.  Abundance  of  peace  (Ps.  Ixxii.  7). 
4.  A.  multitude  of  converts.  5.  A  rich  supply  of  all  temporal  good  things.  Men's 
natures  shall  be  changed  ;  their  corrupt  lusts  and  passions  shall  be  subdued  ;  and 
all  their  riches,  honour,  and  power  shall  be  employed  for  the  support  of  Christ's 
cause. and  kingdom.  III.  The  duty  of  such  as  make  any  profession  of 
Christ  with  reference  to  this  great  and  glorious  day.  "Ye  that  make," 
etc.  1.  This  day  of  Zion's  establishment  and  praise  should  be  uppermost  in  our 
thoughts.  That  which  has  no  place  in  our  thoughts  and  affections  will  have  very 
little  in  our  prayers.  The  Church  of  old  deprecated  this  as  an  abominable  sin ; 
(Ps.  cxxxvii.  5,  6).  2.  It  should  be  continually  in  our  prayers.  3.  Prayer  for 
Zion's  establishment  must  be  with  a  holy  importunity  and  constancy.  It  is  not  the 
work  of  one  day,  but  of  every  day  ;  the  blessing  prayed  for  has  every  other  blessing 
and  mercy  in  the  bowels  of  it.  4.  Zion's  friends  are  called  to  pray  and  work.  The 
former  branch  of  the  verse  commands  action  :  "  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls, 
0  Jerusalem. "  It  is  hypocrisy  to  askiin  private  what  you  would  not  be  glad  to  do 
in  public.  Your  time,  gifts,  substance  and  lives  are  God's.  {J.  Hill.)  Spiritual 
patriotism : — "We  propose  to  put  this  illustration  of  Jewish  patriotism  into  another 
frame.  For  in  the  New  Testament  Jerusalem  stands  metaphorically  for  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Clirist  (Heb.  xii.  22  ;  Gal.  ix.  26).  The  rebuilding  of  the  Jewish  capital 
will  thus  signify  in  Gospel  speech  the  establishment  of  the  Christian  Church.  I. 
A  CALL  TO  spiritual  PATRIOTISM.  All  through  the  second  part  of  Isaiah  Jerusa- 
lem is  idealized,  for  Jerusalem,  as  the  city  actually  was,  presented  small  occasions 
for  felicitation.  But  the  Jerusalem  "  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  "  saw  was  the  world's 
centre — the  capital  of  all  the  nations  !  It  was  "  the  city  of  the  Great  King,"  and 
while  the  power  and  glory  of  other  nations  lay  in  their  armies,  their  wealth,  their 
population,  their  culture,  the  glory  of  Jerusalem  was  her  religion.  Now,  what 
Jerusalem  was  to  "the  Servant  of  the  Lord"  the  Christian  Church  is  to  the 
Christian  ;  he  is  a  fellow-citizen  with  the  saints,  bound,  therefore,  to  be  a  spiritual 


CBAP.  ijui.]  ISAIAH.  387 

patriot.     Only  the  Christian  Chiirch  is  not  limited  to  one  nation.     Above  all,  the 
Church  is  a  spiritual  metropolis  among  the  world  powers,  a  heavenly  fatherland  on 
earthly  soil,  an  eternal  State  established  amidst  temporal  surroundings.     Thus  the 
love  01  a  Jew  for  Jerusalem  comes  to  represent  the  solicitude  of  a  Christian  for  the 
Church.     The  Jew  never  forgot  his  fatherland.     II.  The  outcome  of  spiritual 
PATRIOTISM  IN  WATCHFULNESS  AND  PRAYER.     Patriotism  is  here  set  forth  under  two 
similes.     1.  Spiritual  patriots  are  to  be  sentinels.     "  I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy 
walls,  0  Jerusalem."    The  godly  life  is  ever  a  campaign,  and  spiritual  men  are  "men 
with  an  eye,"  as  Carlyle  phrases  it.     When  others  cry,  *'  Peace,  peace,"  it  is  often 
their  painful  duty  to  be  nonconformists  to  a  general  delusion  and  to  sound  an  alarm. 
And  how  gi-eat  a  result  may  be  produced  by  the  faithfulness  of  even  one  man  !     On 
a  dark  night  in  December  1602,  when  the  inhabitants  of  Geneva,  lulled  by  peaceful 
professions,  slept,  but  never  dreamed  of  danger,  a  daring  attempt  known  in  history 
as  the  ' '  Escalade  "  was  made  by  their  foes.     The  Savoyards  scaled  the  walls,  and 
would  have  admitted  their  comrades  but  for  the  discharge  of  the  musket  of  one  of  the 
sentries.     He  fell  a  martyr,  but  the  crack  of  his  piece  brought  the  citizens  from  their 
beds,  and  the  city  was  saved,  while  Beza,  then  eighty  years  of  age,  returned  to  God 
public  thanksgiving,  announcing  the  124th  Psahn  for  singing.     There  is  work  for 
our  sentinels  to-day.     2.  But  spiritual  patriots  are  also  "the  Lord's  remembrancers." 
The  old  State  appointment  is  our  illustration.     In  the  Book  of  Esther  the  work  of 
the  remembrancer  comes  out  in  the  chronicles  which  were  read  before  the  king  on 
the  occasion  of  his  attack  of  insomnia  ;  and  the  office,  in  a  modified  form,  is  known 
to  us  to-day  in  connection  with  our  city  councils.     But  there  are  elect  souls  who  are 
the  Lord's  remembrancers.     It  may  be  that  not  every  Christian  has  leisure  of  heart 
for  this  full  consecration,  for  these  remembrancers  are  such  as  make  the  progress 
of  God's  kingdom  their  prime  solicitude.     Eli  could  bear  to  hear  of  the  ruin  of 
his  house  in  the  death  of  his  sons,   but    died  on  learning   of   the    capture    of 
God's  ark.     This  is  the  highest  style  of  patriotism.     General  "Wolfe,  in  shattered 
health,  led  the  handful  of  English  that  took  Quebec  from  the  French.     Stricken 
down  jvist  as  victory  was  assured,  yet  stimulated  by  the  cry,  "They  run,"  he 
could  just  inquire  who  ran,   and  when  told  it  was  the  French,  forgetful  of  his 
own  interests,   he  gasped,   "I  die  happy,"  and  closed  his  eyes.      Shall  spiritual 
patriots  show  less  devotion  ?     It  is  theirs  to  exercise  unbounded  faith  in  the  Divine 
promises  and  to  "call  things  that  are  not  as  though  they  were."    The  devout 
remembrance  of  the  promises  makes  spiritual  patriots  ' '  the  Lord's  remembrancers  " 
— not  that  the  Divine  mind  can  ever  present  a  blank,  but  that  prayer  ever  means 
preparation   for  the   fulfilment  of  the  Divine  pledge.     Hence  the  strong  point  of 
the  text  lies  in  its  emphasis  of  urgent  and  perpetual  prayer.     ' '  Take  ye  no  rest, 
and  give  Him  no  rest."    This  is  the  Old  Testament  anticipation  of  the  parable  of 
the  importunate  widow.      When  a  lady  appealed  to  the  gi-eat   Protector  for  the 
release   of  her  husband,   Cromwell  preserved  a  stolid  demeanour  so  long  as  the 
wife  confined  herself  to  the  proprieties  of  measured  speech,  but  directly  she  burst 
into  tears  her  plea  was  granted.      Prayer  is  the  wireless  telegraphy  which  unites 
heaven  and  earth  ;  if  only  each  heart  be  a  "receiver"  it  shall  never  lack  a  message 
from  on  high,  and  there  is  always  a  great  "receiver  "  there  in  the  heart  of  our  God. 
III.  For  the  triumph  of  this  spiritual  patriotism  "the  Servant  of  the 
Lord"  renders  Himself  responsible.     The  prayers  of  the  Church  and  the 
purpose  of  Jesus  Christ  run  in  parallel  lines  when  the  prayer-spirit  is  deep  and  real ; 
or  better,  our  prayer  and  His  purpose  are  two  streams  that  run  into  one  channel 
with  united  force.     True  prayer  is  not  the  attempt  to  wring  benediction  from  an 
unwiUing  hand.     God  is  not  in  danger  of  forgetting  His  pledges  ;  only  His  pledges 
can  scarcely  take  effect  in  spiritual  benediction  till  the  Chm'ch  is  ready  to  claim  her 
own.     There  are  millions  of  money  in  Chancery  with  no  one  to  claim  it ;  there  is 
boundless  grace  in  God  waiting  to  be  appropriated  by  man.     While  our  prayers 
co-operate  with  God's  purpose  never  may  we  forget  that  all  real  prayer  has  its 
origin  in  God :   it  is  the  Divine  purpose  struggling  for  expression   in  the  human 
heart.     This  brings  us  to  our  point  of  rest.     "The  Servant  of  the   Lord"   has 
rendered  Himself  responsible  for  His  Church.     The  proof  lies  in  His  Cross,  in  His 
intercession,  in  the  wonderful  providence  by  which  His  Church  has  been  preserved 
from  extinction  all  along  the  ages,  notwithstanding  that  she  has  lived  all  the  M'hile 
in  the  midst  of  foes.     While  we  leave  the  responsibility  of  final  issues  with  our 
Lord,  we  may  share  the  glory  and  the  joy  of  being  "workers  together"  with  Him. 
How  clearly  this  comes  out  in  this  connection  !     "For  Zion's  sake,"  says  He,  "  will 
I  not  hold  my  peace."    "I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy  walls  .  .  .  they  shall 


S88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lxn.« 

never  hold  their  peace."  "  I  will  not  rest."  "Take  ye  no  rest."  The  OhriBt-spirit 
is  thus  the  Christian  spirit ;  the  work  of  Christ  is  continued  by  His  Church.  Now 
look  at  the  magnificent  result  anticipated  1  The  Church  is  to  become  God's  city  of 
light  (ver.  1).  The  ideal  is  developed  in  the  Revelation  (xxi.  23,  24).  Whatever 
light  stands  for,  whether  revelation,  or  brightness,  or  beauty,  or  safety,  or  purity, 
afl  these  are  to  find  their  home  and  sphere  in  Christ's  Church.  The  Church  of 
Christ  is  to  be  first  a  guiding  light  to  men — but  afterwards  she  is  to  be  as  a  sunrise 
to  the  nations  (Isa.  ix.  2).  For  the  Church  is  to  be  at  once  the  expositor  of  God's 
righteousness  and  the  channel  of  God's  salvation.  {J.  T.  Briscoe.)^  No  rest  for 
Ood  or  His  people : — In  its  present  position,  Jerusalem  is  at  once  a  witness  for  God 
and  a  type  of  man — a  witness  to  God's  truth  and  justice,  and  a  type  of  man's  sin 
and  sorrow.  Prayer  to  God  is  enjoined  as  a  means  to  secure  the  renovation  and 
blessing  of  the  temporal  Jerusalem  ;  and  prayer  is  still  one  of  the  mightiest  forees 
which  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  waste  places  and  ruined  magnificence  of  man's 
spiritual  nature.  I.  A  character  we  must  endeavour  to  deserve.  The 
prophet  describes  God's  servants  as  those  who  "make  mention  of  the  Lord,"  or,  in 
other  words,  are  "the  Lord's  remembrancers."  Not  that  they  had  need  to  remind 
Him  of  their  needs  or  His  ftdness,  but  that  their  business  was  to  bring  Him  to  the 
remembrance  of  those  about  them.  II.  If  we  are  thus  to  be  the  Lord's  remem- 
brancers THERE  IS  A  DANGER  WE  MUST  SEEK  TO  AVOID.  This  is,  the  danger  of 
keeping  silence,  of  withholding  our  testimony,  or  giving  it  half-heartedly  and  in  a 
perfunctory  manner.  There  are  not  a  few  roads  which  end  at  this  habitation  of 
"silence."  1.  Doubt.  2.  Despair,  whether  it  be  despair  of  ourselves  or  of  others. 
Hopefulness  is  as  necessary  as  faithfulness.  3.  We  shall  "  keep  silence  "  if  we  grow 
weary  in  well-doing  ;  if  patience  gives  place  to  fretfulness,  and  love  of  ease  cries  out 
against  the  practice  of  self-denial ;  if  the  crown  is  longed  for  while  the  cross  is 
shunned,  and  the  reaping  is  desired  while  the  sowing  is  neglected.  III.  In  con- 
nection with  all  this,  there  is  a  duty  we  must  faithfully  perform.  "Give 
HiTn  no  rest."  No  rest  for  the  servant,  and  no  rest  for  the  Master.  Surely  this 
means:  "Be  earnest  in  supplication."  IV.  A  result  in  which  w^  must  stead- 
fastly believe.  We  are  to  be  "remembrancers " and  ''pleaders " till  He  establish, 
and  "  tiU  He  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth."  That  He  will  do  these  great 
things  we  are  devoutly  to  believe  ;  that  He  may  do  them  we  are  earnestly  to  pray. 
The  early  verses  of  our  chapter  draw  a  picture  already  seen  by  the  prophetic  eye. 
Righteousness,  bright  as  the  light  going  forth  wth  salvation,  clear  as  the  burning 
lamp.  The  new  name  given  to  betoken  the  new  nature.  The  joy  of  weddinff 
festivity  celebrating  the  union  of  the  once  forsaken  city  with  her  new-found  Lord 
and  King.  Glowing  picture  this  ;  yet  to  be  fully  realized  in  the  capital  of  the  Holy 
Land,  and  yet  to  be  spiritually  realized  in  the  fulness  of  blessing  which  shall  crown 
all  faithful  labour,  and  be  the  answer  to  every  earnest  prayer.  ( W.  J.  Mayers.) 
The  Lord's  remembrancers  (R.V.) : — It  is  hardly  possible  not  to  linger  a  little  over 
this  curious  appellation,  "the  Lord's  remembrancers,"  given  in  the  margin  of  the 
Authorised  Version,  and  in  the  text  of  the  Revised.  Several  interpretations  of  it 
have  been  suggested.  The  original  word  itself  has  both  the  ordinary  meaning  of 
one  who  reminds  another,  and  a  technical  meaning  (2  Sam.  xx.  24)  akin  to,  though 
not  identical  with,  that  of  the  English  word.  By  some  it  is  applied  to  the  angels, 
who  are  also  supposed  to  be  the  "watchmen"  upon  the  walls,  referred  to  in  the 
preceding  clause.  But  such  an  explanation  lifts  the  passage  entirely  out  of  the 
sphere  of  human  privilege  and  duty,  and  introduces  into  it  allusions  to  matters 
about  which  very  little  is  known.  There  mav  be  in  it  a  special  reference  to  prophets, 
whose  functions  would  naturally  include  that  of  leading  the  people  in  their  sup- 
plications to  God,  as  weU  as  that  of  warning  them  of  danger  and  inciting  them  to 
eflFort.  But  there  is  no  need  to  confine  the  term  to  oflScials  of  any  kind.  The  entire 
New  Testament  is  a  suflBicient  authority  for  applying  it  to  all  true  Christians.  If, 
indeed,  there  be  truth  in  the  tradition,  in  Judaism  itself  it  was  recognized  in  part 
of  the  sacrificial  ritual  that  every  man  could  be  and  ought  to  be  the  Lord's  remem- 
brancer. Psahn  xliv.  describes  some  of  the  marvellous  things  done  by  Jehovah  for 
Israel  in  the  past,  and  the  forsaken  and  oppressed  condition  of  Israel  in  the  present ; 
and  one  of  its  closing  verses  is  said  to  nave  been  regularly  sung  for  long  in  the 
temple  worship— the  one  in  which  Jehovah's  remembrancers,  after  having  reminded 
Hirn  of  their  need  and  of  His  promised  help,  call  upon  Him:  "Awake,  whj 
sleepest  Thou,  0  Lord?  Arise,  cast  us  not  off  for  e\'3r."  John  Hvrcanus  is 
reputed  to  have  abolished  this  custom,  in  spleen  at  the  refusal  of  the  Pharisees  ta 
let  ^lim  reign  in  peace,  or  possibly,  according  to  a  more  charitable  ooiyeoture,  under 


CEAP.  rxii.]  ISAIAH.  389 

the  feeling  that  the  idea  of  awakening  and  reminding  Jehovah  involves  a  defect  of 
faith.  The  psabn,  however,  is  entirely  true  to  human  nature.  For  when  men  are 
tempted  to  imagine  themselves  forsaken  of  God  and  begirt  inextricably  by  perils,  it 
is  an  immense  stimulus  and  encouragement  of  faith  to  remind  God  of  their  needs 
and  of  His  promises,  of  their  present  reliance  upon  Him,  and  even  (for  Scriptnra 
warrants  it  elsewhere)  of  the  way  in  which  His  faithfulness  and  honour  are  concerned 
in  their  protection  and  deliverance.  Jacob  prayed  in  that  way  when  he  trembled 
at  the  thought  of  his  brother's  probable  rage,  pleading  God's  actual  words  of 
promise :  "0  God  of  my  fathers,  the  Lord  which  saidst  unto  me,  Eetum  unto  thy 
country,  and  to  thy  kindred,  and  I  will  deal  well  with  thee :  .  .  .  Deliver  me,  1 
pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  my  brother :  ...  for  (again)  Thou  saidst,  I  will  surely 
do  thee  good,  and  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea."  Two  remembrancings, 
and  between  them  a  little  prayer ;  and  of  course  the  result  was  that,  when  Esau 
came,  instead  of  pouring  his  rough  followers  upon  the  struggling  and  indefensible 
caravan,  he  fell  on  lus  brother's  "neck  and  kissed  him."  David  was  surprised  and 
almost  staggered  in  unbelief  at  the  prospect  of  greatness  and  renown  which  the 

Cjhet  Nathan  opened  up  to  him,  but  he  recovered  and  fed  his  faith  by  remindkig 
self  and  his  God  of  the  promise,  and  prayed,  "  Now,  0  Lord  God,  the  word 
that  Thou  hast  spoken  concermng  Thy  servant  and  concerning  his  house,  establish 
it  for  ever,  and  do  as  Thou  hast  said. "  In  this  vetj  prophecy  Israel  first  of  all 
reminds  Jehovah  of  what  He  has  been  wont  to  do,  and  wnat  needs  to  be  done  now: 
"Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord;  awake  as  in  the  ancient 
days,  in  the  generations  of  old."  The  result  is  seen  in  vision  at  once:  "Therefore 
the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and  come  with  singing  unto  Zion  ; "  and  so 
all  the  watchmen  lift  up  their  voices :  ' '  Break  forth  irnto  joy,  sing  together,  ye 
waste  places  of  Jerusalem,  for  the  Lord  hath  comforted  His  people.  He  hath 
redeemed  Jerusalem :  the  Lord  hath  made  bare  His  holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of  .all  the 
nations,  and  aU  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God."  We  shall 
never  suffer  much  prolonged  doubt  as  to  our  own  establishment  or  the  Church's,  if 
we  will  only  duly  remember  and  exercise  our  high  vocation,  to  remind  God  of  onr 
perils  and  needs  and  of  His  promised  grace  and  help.  {R.  W.  Moss.)  "  Watchers" : 
— Not  watchmen  (lit.  "lookers  out")  as  in  chaps,  lii.  8,  Ivi.  10,  but  as  in  chap, 
xxi.  11 ;  Cant.  v.  7,  lit.  "keepers,"  those  who  guard  the  city,  especially  during  the 
night.  {Prof.  S.  JR.  Driver,  D.D.)  Three  kinds  of  ministers: — ^The  ministers  of 
the  temple  of  truth,  it  has  been  said,  are  of  three  kinds :  first,  those  stationed  at 
the  gate  of  the  temple  to  constrain  the  passers-by  to  come  in  ;  secondly,  those  whose 
function  is  to  accompany  inside  aU  who  have  been  persuaded  to  enter,  and  display 
and  explain  to  them  the  treasures  and  secrets  of  the  place ;  and,  thirdly,  those 
whose  duty  is  to  patrol  round  the  temple,  keeping  watcn  and  ward  and  defending 
the  shrine  from  the  attacks  of  enemies.  We  are  only  speaking  very  roughly  if  we 
gay  that  the  first  of  these  three  functions  is  that  of  the  Preacher,  the  second  that 
of  the  'Teacher,  and  the  third  that  of  the  Controversialist.     {J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-12.  Go  through,  go  through  the  gates. — The  conversion  of  the  Jews: — 
I.  The  GLORiotrs  event  to  be  proclaimed  (ver.  11).  When  the  Divine  Spirit 
would  attract  special  attention  to  anv  subject,  He  prefixes  "  Behold"  to  the  truth 
revealed.  We  have  here  "Behold"  thrice  repeated.  1.  The  natiu-e  of  the  event. 
"Thy  salvation  cometh."  "Thy  salvation"  is  rendered  by  the  ancient  versions 
(Syriac,  Arabic,  LXX,  Chaldee,  Vulgate)  and  the  best  modem  interpreters,  "Thy 
Savio\ir  ;"  and  from  the  words,  "His  reward  is  with  Him,"  it  is  clear  that  this  u 
the  intended  meaning  of  the  prophet.  The  glowing  promises  of  our  text,  and  the 
prophecies  connected  with  it,  were  most  manifestly  never  fulfilled  at  His  first  com- 
ing. The  second  coming  of  Christ  as  the  Deliverer  of  His  people  Israel  is  then  the 
event  here  foretold ;  an  event  yet  before  the  Church  (Rom.  xi.  26,  27).  It  is  not 
enough  to  proclaim  Christ  crucified  to  the  Jews ;  we  must  also  proclaim  the  once 
crucified  Immanuel  speedUy  to  appear  in  glory,  to  punish  His  rebellious  subjects,  and 
to  save  His  people.  2.  The  things  connected  with  this  event.  "  His  reward  is  with 
Him,  and  His  work  before  Him."  It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  "  His  reward  "  refers 
to  the  reward  which  Christ  receives  or  which  He  bestows.  Our  Lord  is  to  "see  of 
the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  be  satisfied,"  and  He  is  to  be  "glorified  in  His  saints, 
and  admired  in  all  them  that  believe."  But  I  apprehend  that  the  reward  which  He 
bestows  is  here  intended  (Rev.  xxii.  12).  He  has  also  a  "  work"  to  perform.  What 
that  work  is,  we  may  learn  from  the  following  chapters.  It  comprehends,  doubt- 
less,  ft  lengthened  series  of  events.     Notioe  these  three — ^the  overthrow  of  His 


890  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxh. 

I 

enemies  ;  the  mercies  in  store  for  Israel ;  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom.  3.  Its 
required  proclamation.  By  "the  daughter  of  Zion"  is  meant  the  Jewish  nation. 
It  is  a  solemnly  announced  command  to  aU  to  tell  the  Jews  of  the  coming  Saviour. 
But  why  should  the  Lord  tell  the  ends  of  the  world  to  care  for  Zion  ?  He  foresaw 
and  foreordaiued  that  the  Jews  should  be  scattered  everywhere,  that  there  might  not 
be  a  spot  upon  the  earth  uninterested  in  or  unmoved  by  their  return.  It  was  always 
the  duty  of  Christians  to  preach  the  Grospel  "to  the  Jew  first,"  and  then  to  the 
GentUe.  II.  The  blessed  result  of  this  event  to  the  Jews  (ver.  12).  The 
words  apparently  lead  us  to  two  classes  of  persons  to  be  blessed  at  our  Saviour's 
coming.  1.  "They  shall  call  them  the  holy  people,  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  ;" 
2.  ' '  Thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken. "  There  may  be  a  refer- 
ence in  the  first  class  to  the  converted  Gentiles  (Justin  Martyr),  and  m  the  second  to 
the  converted  Jews.  Through  the  chapter  these  are  combined,  while  the  Jews  are 
addressed  by  the  personal  pronoun  (ver.  2).  In  this  view,  our  text  would  contain  a 
delightful  reciprocation  of  congratulation  between  Jews  and  Gentiles.  Yet,  as  the 
leading  subject  of  the  chapter  is  the  restoration  of  the  Jews,  and  as,  in  the  preced- 
ing verse,  the  ends  of  the  world  are  to  be  addressed  on  the  subject,  it  is  rather 
?robable  that  the  word  "they  "  may  here  refer  to  the  admiring  nations  of  the  earth, 
'hey  shall  call  them,  i.e.  the  Jews,  the  "holy"  or  consecrated  people,  "the  re- 
deemed of  the  Lord  ; "  and  then  the  prophet  himself,  as  if  beholding  Jerusalem  thus 
glorious,  changes  the  person  and  number  of  his  language,  and  in  the  rapture  of  exul- 
tation exclaims,  "  Thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken."  III.  Thb 
duties  to  which  we  are  called  (ver.  10).  Here  the  inhabitants  of  cities,  where- 
ever  the  Jews  may  be,  are  called  to  prepare  roads  for  .their  return  to  their  own  land, 
that  they  and  the  nations  at  large  may  be  ready  to  receive  and  welcome  the  great 
Lord  and  King  of  the  whole  earth.  The  general  direction  is  to  prepare  the  Jews, 
and  thus  also  the  GentUes,  for  the  coming  Saviour.  1.  Indifference  is  to  be  cast  off. 
"  Go  through,  go  through  the  gates."  The  double  direction  shows  the  ardour  of  the 
Divine  mind,  the  importance  of  the  duty,  how  dull  Christians  in  general  would  be  to 
it,  and  how  needful  to  rouse  them  by  repeated  exhortations.     2.  A  way  is  to  be  pre- 

Eared.  "Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  people,"  etc.  3.  A  standard  is  also  to  be 
fted  up  for  the  nations.  "  Lift  up  a  standard  for  the  people."  This  is  added  not 
only  as  a  duty  to  be  discharged,  but  as  a  great  encouragement  to  fulfil  duties  to  the 
Jews,  by  the  blessed  effect  it  will  undoubtedly  have  upon  all  nations.  The  meaning 
of  this  standard  will  be  more  clear  by  referring  to  chap.  xi.  10-12.  A  standard  is  a 
token  of  war :  it  is  to  assemble,  direct  and  encourage  the  army,  and  to  animate 
them  in  proceeding  against  their  enemies.  To  lift  up  this  standard  is  to  preach  the 
Gospel.  But  for  whom  is  this  standard  to  be  lifted  up ?  "For  the  people."  The 
original  is  in  the  plural  number,  "  for  the  peoples,"  and  it  is  by  the  best  translators 
rendered,  "  the  nations."  The  restoration  of  the  Jews,  then,  is  a  part  of  the  Divine 
plan  for  attracting  the  attention  of  and  for  blessing  the  whole  world.  {E.  Bickersteth. ) 
Gather  out  the  stones. — Clearing  the  road  to  heaven: — I.  Endeavour  to  remove 

SOME  OF  the  stumbling-blocks   OUT  OF  THE  POOR  BEGINNER'S  WAY.      1.    Let  US 

begin  with  a  very  old  and  common  difficulty,  the  doctrine  of  election.  Many 
will  say,  "  Perhaps  I  am  not  one  of  God's  chosen."  I  know  not  any  better  way  of 
practically  treating  the  matter  than  of  saying,  "  I  will  go  to  Jesus  because  He  bids 
me. "  When  you  are  ill  you  do  not  know  whether  you  are  ordained  to  get  well,  but 
you  send  for  the  doctor  ;  you  cannot  tell  whether  you  are  predestined  to  be  rich,  but 
you  endeavour  to  make  money  ;  you  do  not  know  whether  ydu  will  live  through  the 
day,  but  you  work  to  provide  yourself  with  bread ;  thus  common-sense  cuts  the 
knot  which  mere  theory  can  never  untie.  Leave  the  subtleties  of  argument  alone, 
and  act  as  sensible  men.  Go  to  Jesus  and  try  whether  He  will  reject  you.  2.  A 
deep  sense  of  sin.  If  there  had  not  been  great  sin,  there  would  not  have  been  need 
of  a  great  Saviour.  3.  A  fear  that  the  day  of  grace  has  passed.  The  Lord's  grace 
can  come  to  a  man  at  any  time,  and  at  any  hour.  4.  A  tendency  to  blasphemous 
thoughts.  They  should  lead  you  to  go  and  tell  Jesus  Christ  about  it,  but  they 
should  not  drive  you  to  despair.  5.  The  absence  of  anything  like  a  horrible  thought, 
or  a  terror,  or  an  alarm.  If  you  are  allowed  to  come  to  Jesus  without  being  so 
molested  by  the  Evil  One,  do  not  fret  about  that,  but  rather  rejoice.  There  is  no 
need  to  go  round  by  hell's  gate  to  get  to  heaven.  6.  A  want  of  sensibility  with 
regard  to  their  sins.  A  man  is  saved  by  having  his  heart  broken,  and  being  led  to 
cast  himself  upon  Jesus  ;  and  if  you  have  not  yet  received  this  part  of  salvation, 
your  business  is  to  come  to  Jesus  for  it,  not  to  stay  away  till  you  get  it  of  yourself, 
and  then  come  to  Christ  with  your  feelings  as  a  recommenaation.     7.  "I  cannot 


^CHAP,  LXii.]  ISAIAH.  391 

I ■ 7 — 

beKeve."  The  smallest  grain  of  saving  faith  will  save  a  man.  It  is  the  object  of 
faith  we  should  look  to.  8.  "  I  do  not  think  I  can  be  saved,  because  I  am  not  like 
so-and-so."  Do  be  content  to  have  nothing  good  in  yourself,  and  to  be  nothing 
good,  and  to  take  all  your  good  from  Jesus  Christ.  9.  "I  never  have  any  joy  and 
peace."  You  shall  receive  the  joy  when  you  exercise  the  faith.  II.  Point  yotj  to 
TIiM  WHO  IS  "the  way,  the  truth  and  the  life,"  who  has  already  cleared  the 
stumbling-blocks  out  of  the  way.     (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end  of  the  world. — 

WJw  is  this?  (with  chap.  Ixiil.  1) : — As  in  God's  immediate  dealings  with  men  we 
usually  see  the  Son  of  God  most  manifest,  this  passage  may  fitly  represent  the  glori- 
ous appearance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  whenever  He  has  come  forth  to  vindicate  the 
cause  of  His  people  and  to  overthrow  their  enemies.  This  vision  will  be  astound- 
ingly  fulfilled  in  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  fourteenth  and 
nineteenth  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  give  us  parallel  passages  to  this.  The 
scene  before  us  describes  an  interposition  of  the  Messiah  ;  the  return  of  the  Divinely- 
appointed  Champion  from  the  defeat  of  His  enemies.  As  it  is  evidently  a  picture  of 
salvation  rather  than  of  damnation  ;  as  the  main  feature  in  it  is  that  He  is  mighty 
to  save  ;  as  the  great  and  chief  element  of  the  whole  thing  is  that  the  year  of  His 
redeemed  is  come,  and  that  the  Warrior's  own  arm  has  brought  salvation  to  His 
people  ;  I  cannot  question  that  this  text  is  applicable  to  the  first  coming  of  Christ. 
Then  He  did  battle  with  the  hosts  of  sin  and  death  and  hell,  and  so  vanquished 
them  that  in  His  resurrection  He  returned  with  the  keys  of  death  and  heU  at  Hia 
girdle.  Then  was  He  seen  as  "mighty  to  save."  I.  Theee  is  a  proclamation 
(vers.  11,  12).  The  commentators  as  a  whole  can  see  no  connection  between  the 
sixty -third  chapter  and  the  preceding  part  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  ;  but  surely  that 
connection  is  plain  enough  to  the  common  reader.  In  these  verses  the  coming  of  the 
Saviour  is  proclaimed,  and  in  the  next  chapter  that  coming  is  seen  in  vision,  and  the 
evangelical  prophet  beholds  the  Saviour  so  vividly  that  he  is  startled,  and  inquires, 
"Who  is  this?"  1.  This  great  announcement  tells  you  that  there  is  a  salvation 
from  without.  Within  your  heart  there  is  nothing  that  can  save  you.  The  proclama- 
tion ia,  "  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh."  It  comes  from  a  soiu-ce  beyond  yourself.  . 
2.  It  is  a  salvation  which  comes  through  a  person.  "Thy  salvation  cometh  ;  behold, 
His  reward  is  with  Him,  and  His  work  before  Him."  The  great  salvation  which  we 
have  to  proclaim  is  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  3.  This  salvation 
leads  to  holiness  ;  for  the  text  says  of  those  who  receive  the  Saviour,  "They  shall 
call  them,  The  holy  people."  4.  It  is  salvation  by  redemption ;  for  it  is  written 
that  they  shall  be  called  ' '  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord. "  In  the  sacred  Scriptures  there 
is  no  salvation  for  men  except  by  redemption.  5.  This  salvation  is  complete.  ' '  Thou 
shaltbe  called.  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken."  See  the  beginning  of  it :  "Sought 
out. "  See  the  end  of  it :  "  Not  forsaken. "  You  will  not  begin  with  God,  but  God  wUl 
begin  with  you.  You  shall  be  sought  out,  and  then  you  will  seek  Him.  He  seeks  you 
even  now.  But  suppose  the  Lord  found  you,  and  then  left  you  ;  you  would  perish  after 
all.  But  it  shall  not  be  so ;  for  the  same  Lord  who  calls  you  "Sought  out"  also 
calls  you  "  Not  forsaken."  You  shall  never  be  forsaken  of  the  grace  of  God,  nor  of 
the  God  of  grace.  II.  Consider  the  question,  ' '  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edom  ? "  The  prophet  beholds  in  vision  the  Captain  of  salvation,  returning  from 
battle,  arrayed  like  the  warriors  of  whom  we  read,  "the  valiant  men  are  in  scarlet." 
He  beholds  the  majestic  march  of  this  mighty  Conqueror,  and  he  cries,  "Who  is 
this  ? "  When  a  soul  first  hears  the  proclamation  of  God's  salvation,  and  then  sees 
Jesus  coming  to  him,  he  says,  "Who  is  this  ? "  1.  The  question  in  part  arises  from 
anxiety,  as  if  he  said,  "Who  is  this  that  espouses  my  cause  ?  Is  He  able  to  save  ? " 
2.  The  question  also  indicates  ignorance.  We  do  not  any  of  us  know  our  Lord 
Jesus  to  the  full  yet.  "  Who  is  this  ? "  is  a  question  we  may  still  put  to  the  sacred 
oracle.  Paul,  after  he  had  known  Christ  fifteen  years,  yet  desired  that  he  might 
know  Him  ;  for  His  love  passeth  knowledge.  3.  As  the  sinner  looks,  and  looks 
again,  he  cries,  "Who  is  this?"  in  delighted  amazement.  Is  it  indeed  the  Son  of 
God  ?  Does  He  intervene  to  save  me  ?  The  God  whom  I  ofi'ended,  does  He  stoop  to 
fight  and  rout  my  sins  ?  It  is  even  He.  4.  I  think  the  question  is  asked,  also,  by 
way  of  adoration.  As  the  soul  begins  to  see  Jesus,  its  anxiety  is  removed  hj  know- 
ledge, and  is  replaced  by  an  astonishment  which  ripens  into  worship.  5.  It  appears 
from  the  question  that  the  person  asking  it  knows  whence  the  Conqueror  came  ;  for 
it  is  written,  "Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from 
Bozrah ! "  Yes,  our  Redeemer  has  returned  from  death,  as  said  the  Psalmist,  "  Thou 


892  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixn. 


•wilt  not  leave  My  sonl  in  hell,  neither  wilt  Thou  auffer  Thine  Holy  One  to  see  cor- 
ruption." 6.  Next  notice  that  the  prophet  in  vision  observes  the  colour  of  the 
Conqueror's  garments.  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments 
from  Bozrah  ? "  Red  is  not  Christ's  colour ;  hence  the  question  arises,  "  Wherefore 
art  Thou  red  in  Thine  apparel  !  "  Our  beloved's  garments  are  whiter  than  any  foller 
can  make  them.  The  gloiy  of  His  purity  is  such  that  we  say  to  ourselves,  "Bed, 
why,  that  is  the  colour  of  Edom,  the  adversary !  Red,  that  is  the  colour  of  the 
earth  of  our  manhood  I  Red  is  the  colour  of  our  scarlet  sins."  Why  is  He  red! 
Although  the  text  treats  of  the  blood  of  His  adversaries,  yet  I  would  have  you  de- 
voutly think  of  our  Lord  literally  as  shedding  His  own  blood,  for  His  victory  was 
thus  accomplished.  The  text  sets  forth  the  result  of  that  blood -shedding  in  the  over- 
throw of  His  enemies  and  ours ;  but  we  cannot  separate  the  effect  from  the  cause. 
I  remember  how  Rutherford  seems  to  glow  and  bum  when  in  his  prose  poetry  he 
talks  of  "the  bonnie  red  man."  7.  But  yet  the  question  comes  from  one  who  per- 
ceives that  the  Conqueror  is  royally  arrayed.  "  This  that  is  glorious  in  His  apparel." 
The  Jesus  we  have  to  preach  to  you  is  no  mean  Saviour ;  He  is  clothed  with  glory 
and  honour  because  of  the  sufFenng  of  death.  8.  The  question  ends  with  "travel- 
ling in  the  greatness  of  His  strength."  He  did  not  come  back  from  slaughtering  our 
enemies  feeble  and  wounded,  but  He  returned  in  majestic  march,  like  a  victor  who 
would  have  aU  men  know  that  his  force  is  irresistible.  The  earth  shook  beneath  our 
Lord's  feet  on  the  resurrection  morning,  for  ' '  there  was  a  great  earthquake. "  The 
Roman  guards  became  as  dead  men  at  His  appearing.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  no 
petty,  puny  Saviour.  As  He  travels  through  the  nations  it  is  as  a  strong  man 
against  whom  none  can  stand,  mighty  to  rescue  every  soul  that  puts  its  trust  in 
Him.  III.  Consider  the  answer.  No  one  can  answer  for  Jesus :  He  must  speak 
for  Himself.  Like  the  sun.  He  can  only  be  seen  by  His  own  light.  He  is  His  own 
interpreter.  Not  even  the  angels  could  explain  the  Saviour :  they  get  no  further 
than  desiring  to  look  into  the  things  which  are  in  Him.  He  himself  answers  the 
question  "Who  is  this?"  The  answer  which  our  Lord  gives  is  twofold.  He  de- 
scribes Himself— 1.  As  a  Speaker :  "  I  that  speak  in  righteousness."  Is  He  not  the 
Word  ?  Every  word  that  Christ  speaks  is  true.  The  Gospel  which  He  proclaims  is 
a  just  and  righteous  one,  meeting  both  the  claims  of  God  and  the  demands  of  con- 
science. 2.  Our  Lord  also  describes  Himself  as  a  Saviour.  "  I  that  speak  in  righte- 
ousness, mighty  to  save."  Observe  that  the  word  "mighty"  is  joined  with  His 
saving,  and  not  with  his  destroying.  Conclusion :  Hearken  to  the  proclamation, 
"  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh."  Jesus  can  save  you,  for  He  is  "  mighty  to  save  "  ! 
He  has  saved  others  like  you.  He  can  overthrow  all  your  enemies.  He  can  do  this 
alone.  He  is  able  to  save  you  now.  It  is  a  sad  wonder  that  men  do  not  believe  in 
Jesus.   (C.  H.  Spwrgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  Thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out. — *'  Sought  out " : — 1.  The  first  meaning 
of  our  text  is  very  clear.  Here  is  a  prophecy,  that  as  Jerusalem,  having  been  despoiled 
her  beauty  by  her  enemies,  was  for  a  long  time  forsaken  and  worthy  to  be  called, 
"A  city  which  no  man  seeketh  after,"  so,  in  a  brighter  day,  her  glory  shall  return, 
she  shall  be  an  attraction  to  aU  lands,  and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ;  multitudes 
of  willing  pilgrims  shall  seek  her  out  that  they  may  behold  her  beauty.  She  shall 
be  a  city  greatly  set  by  and  greatly  sought  out  by  tnose  who  love  the  hallowed  spots 
where  the  mighty  deeds  of  the  Lord  were  wrought,  and  the  arm  of  Jehovah  made 
bare.  2.  The  text,  doubtless,  has  a  similar  reference  to  the  Church  of  God.  During 
many  centuries  the  Church  of  Christ  was  hidden — a  thing  obscm-e,  despised, 
unknown,  abhorred  ;  she  concealed  herself  in  the  catacombs  ;  her  followers  were  the 
poorest  and  most  illiterate  of  men,  proscribed  by  cruel  laws,  and  hunted  by  ferocious 
foes.  Although  the  royal  bride  of  Christ,  and  destined  to  be  the  ruler  of  nations, 
she  made  no  figure  in  the  world's  eye ;  she  was  but  a  little  stone  cut  out  of  the 
mountain  without  hands.  But  the  day  is  already  come  in  which  multitudes  seek  the 
Church  of  Christ.  (C  ff.  Spurgeon.)  Am  I  sought  out? — In  a  fuller  and  more 
spiritual  sense  the  Church  of  God  may  well  be  called  "  Sought  out "  ;  and  the  like  title 
may  truthfuUy  be  applied  to  every  single  member  of  that  dearly-loved  and  dearly- 
purchased  family.  1.  The  natural  condition  implied  in  the  title,  "Sought 
OUT."  1.  If  the  Church  of  God  has  been  "sought  out,"  then  it  is  clear  enough  that 
originally  it  was  lost.  2.  We  were  so  lost  that  we  did  not  seek  the  Lord.  8.  As 
we  had  no  thought  of  coming  to  God,  so  we  never  should  have  willed  to  return. 
4.  So  far  fit)m  seeking  God,  we  did  not  desire  Him  to  seek  us.  5.  Our  being  sought 
out,  considering  our  condition,  was  one  of  the  greatest  wonders  ever  known  or  heard 


CHAP.  LXii.]  ISAIAH,  393 

of.  I  have  heard  this  expressed  in  words  occasionally ;  when  a  man  has  come  to 
join  the  Church,  he  has  said  to  me,  "  If  any  one  had  told  me  six  months  ago  that 
I  should  make  a  profession  of  being  a  follower  of  Christ,  I  would  have  knocked  him 
down."  And  yet  the  thing  did  occur.  II.  We  have  surpassing  gbace  revealed. 
This  grace  lies  in  several  particulars.  1.  That  they  were  sought  out  at  all.  It  is 
very  wonderful  grace  on  the  part  of  (Jod  that  He  should  plan  a  way  of  salvation ; 
but  there  is  something  more  gracious  than  this  generous  summons.  One  would  have 
supposed  that  after  the  invitation  had  been  freely  given  and  the  preparation  for  the 
feast  had  been  generously  made,  the  Lord  would  leave  men  to  come  or  not  as  they 
willed.  2.  But  this  grace  appears  even  more  conspicuous  if  you  consider  the  persons 
sought  out.  That  any  should  be  sought  out  is  matchless  grace,  but  that  we  should 
be  sought  is  grace  beyond  degree.  3.  Nor  must  I  fail  to  bring  to  your  recollection, 
that  the  surpassing  grace  of  God  is  seen  very  clearly  in  that  we  were  sought  "  out." 
The  word  "out"  conveys  a  mass  of  meaning.  Men  go  and  seek  for  a  thing  which 
is  lost  upon  the  floor  of  the  house,  but  in  such  a  case  there  is  only  seeking,  not 
seeking  out.  The  loss  is  more  perplexing,  and  the  search  more  persevering,  when  a 
thing  is  sought  out.  We  were  mingled  with  the  mire ;  we  were  as  when  some 
precious  piece  of  gold  falls  into  the  sewer,  and  men  have  to  gather  out  and  careftdly 
inspect  a  heap  of  abominable  filth,  to  turn  it  over,  and  over,  and  over,  and  continue 
to  stir  and  rake,  and  search  among  the  heap  until  the  thing  is  found.  Or,  to  use 
another  figure,  we  were  lost  in  a  labyrinth  ;  we  wandered  hither  and  thither,  and 
when  ministering  mercy  came  after  us,  it  did  not  find  us  at  the  first  coming ;  it  had 
to  go  to  the  right  hand  and  to  the  left,  and  search  hither  and  thither,  and  every- 
where, to  seek  us  out,  for  we  were  so  desperately  lost,  and  had  got  into  such  a  strange 
position,  that  it  did  not  seem  possible  that  ever  grace  could  come  to  us.  And  yet 
we  were  sought  out !  No  gloom  could  hide  us,  no  filthiness  could  conceal  us,  we 
were  found.  The  lives  of  some  of  God's  people,  if  they  could  be  written,  would  make 
you  marvel.  The  romance  of  Divine  grace  is  infinitely  more  interesting  than  the 
romance  of  imagination.  4.  The  grace  of  God  is  illustrious  in  the  Divine  Agent  by 
whom  we  are  sought  out.  It  was  not  the  minister  ;  he  might  have  sought  thee  year 
after  year,  and  never  have  found  thee.  Thy  tearful  mother,  with  her  many  prayers, 
would  have  missed  thee.  Thine  anxious  father,  with  his  yearning  bowels  of  com- 
passion, would  never  have  discovered  thee.  Those  providences,  which  like  great 
nets  were  seeking  to  entangle  thee,  would  aU  have  been  broken  by  thy  strong 
dashings  after  evil.  Who  was  it  sought  thee  out  ?  None  other  than  Himself.  The 
Great  Shepherd  could,  not  trust  His  under-shepherds  ;  He  must  Himself  come,  and 
oh !  if  it  had  not  been  for  those  eyes  of  omniscience.  He  never  would  have  seen  thee  ; 
He  never  would  have  read  thy  history  and  known  thy  case :  if  it  had  not  been  for 
those  arms  of  omnipotence,  He  never  could  have  grasped  thee ;  He  never  could  have 
thrown  thee  on  His  shoulders  and  brought  thee  home  rejoicing.  5.  Eemember  that 
the  glory  of  it  is  that  we  were  sought  out  effectually.  We  are  a  people  not  sought 
out  and  then  missed  at  the  last.  III.  The  distinguishing  title  justified. 
How  were  we  sought  out  t  Let  us  justify  the  name.  1.  We  are  sought  out  in  the 
eternal  purposes  and  the  work  of  Cmist.  2.  This  seeking  out,  as  far  as  we  know  it, 
began  by  gracious  words  of  mercy.  A  godly  mother  told  us  the  truth  with  weeping, 
a  holy  father  set  us  a  good  example ;  we  were  sought  out  by  that  little  Bibfe  we 
were  taught  to  read,  and  that  hymn-book  which  was  put  into  our  hands.  We  were 
sought  out  when  we  were  taken  to  the  house  of  God.  We  were  sought  out  while  the 
preacher  called  the  Sabbath-breaker,  the  hard-hearted,  the  hypocrite,  the  formalist, 
the  abandoned,  the  profane.  According  to  our  case  we  felt  that  he  was  caUing  us, 
and  the  eyes  of  Jesus  were  looking  on  us,  and  His  voice  was  bidding  us  repent  and 
live.  3.  Affictions  sought  us  out.  The  fever  hunted  us  to  the  Cross.  When  the 
cholera  came,  it  carried  a  great  whip  in  its  hand  to  flog  us  to  the  Saviour.  We  had 
serious  losses,  a  decaying  business,  all  which  should  have  weaned  us  from  the  world. 
Our  friends  sickened ;  from  their  graves  we  heard  the  voice  of  invitation,  "Come 
unto  Christ  and  live."  We  were  disappointed  in  some  of  our  fondest  hopes,  and  our 
heart,  riven  for  the  time,  yearned  after  a  higher  life  and  a  deeper  satisfaction. 
4.  Then  came  mysterious  visitations.  It  was  in  the  night  season  when  aU  was  still, 
we  sat  up  in  our  bed,  and  solemn  thoughts  passed  through  us  ;  the  preacher's  words 
which  we  had  heard  years  ago  came  back  fresh  as  when  we  heard  them  for  the  first 
time  ;  old  texts  of  Scripture,  the  recollection  of  a  mother's  tears,  all  these  came  upon 
us.  Or  it  was  in  the  midst  of  business,  and  we  did  not  know  how  it  was,  out 
suddenly  a  deep  calm  came  over  us.  6.  But  after  all,  these  visitations,  these 
providences,  these  preaohinga,  and  so  on,  would  all  have  been  nothing,  if  it  had  not 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txn. 


been  for  the  appointed  time  when  the  Holy  Spirit  came  and  sought  us  out.     IV.  A 

SPECIAL  DUTY  INCUMBENT  UPON  THOSE  WHO  WEAR  THE  TITLE,   "  SOUGHT  OUT."      If 

it  be  really  so  that  you  are  such  debtors  to  Divine  seeking,  ought  you  not  to  spend 
your  whole  lifetime  in  seeking  others  out  ?  We  are  not  to  preach  merely  to  those 
who  come  to  listen.  Let  us  hunt  for  souls  by  visitation.  Where  aU  otner  means 
fail,  seek  men  by  your  prayers.  As  long  as  a  man  has  one  other  man  to  pray  for 
him,  there  is  a  hope  of  his  salvation.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  city  not  forsaken, — "A 
city  not  forsaken  " : — 1.  A  forsaken  city  !  What  a  picture  it  presents.  Streets  once 
crowded  with  life,  left  desolate.  HaUs  once  ablaze  with  light — darkened.  Every 
voice  of  music  hushed,  every  dancer  gone.  No  man  of  wisdom  to  advise.  No 
soldier  to  defend.  No  peopled  homes.  No  schools  with  children.  No  trade.  No 
port.  No  active  work  for  God  or  man.  A  city  forsaken !  Bereft,  indeed !  2.  But 
A  city  not  forsaken " !  How  different !  with  its  crowded  streets ;  its  marts  of 
trade  ;  its  palace  of  legislature  ;  its  courts  of  administration  and  justice  ;  its  gloiy  of 
magnificent  architecture  ;  its  busy  river  ;  its  turrets  ablaze  with  the  glory  of  their 
■  gold  ;  its  towers  of  strength  ;  its  bulwarks  of  defence  ;  its  processions  of  royalty  ;  its 
merchants  ;  its  scholars  ;  its  citizens,  good,  bad  and  indifferent ;  its  sanctuaries  ;  its 
slums  ;  its  manifold  life  and  stir.  Ay,  verily,  "a  city  not  forsaken"  is  a  place  of 
interest  and  power  ;  a  place  to  live  in  ;  where  the  pulse  beats  ;  where  men  feel  the 
blessings  of  community,  and  find  the  possibilities  of  success  ;  where  trade  has  its 
markets  ;  where  intellect  is  sharpened,  and  where  extremes  meet — the  place  of  the 
temple,  the  arena,  the  theatre,  the  gymnasium,  and  the  forum.  (C.  H.  Kelly.)  The 
Church  "a  city  not  forsaken" : — The  text  is  uttered  respecting  the  Church  of  the 
Lord,  and  is  true  of  every  part  of  that  Church.  It  is  descriptive.  It  is  historic.  It 
is  prophetic.  (Ibid.)  The  presence  of  God  in  His  Church : — If  it  was  the  delight  of 
the  ancient  Jews  to  know  that  the  Lord  was  in  His  temple  in  Jerusalem,  it  is  also 
ours  to  know  that  He  is  with  us.  1.  His  Church  abounds  in  splendour ;  in  numbers ; 
in  wealth  ;  in  structures.  She  is  rich  in  schools  and  universities.  Her  sons  are 
among  the  greatest  scholars  ;  the  bravest  soldiers  ;  the  most  eloq^uent  speakers.  She 
is  like  the  King's  daughter,  arrayed  in  costly  attire,  and  all  beautiful  within,  having 
external  adornment  and  internal  excellence  ;  but  what  of  all  that,  if  that  were  all  ? 
What  if  she  were  forsaken  of  God  ?  if  there  were  no  shout  of  the  King  in  the  camp  ! 
2.  But  there  is  the  presence  of  God — the  Father  in  His  family  ;  the  Captain  with 
His  hosts  ;  the  King  in  His  city.  3.  Having  this  truth,  how  rich  is  the  Church  of 
God  !  It  involves  the  heritage  of  power,  wisdom,  love.  4.  We  will  rejoice  because, 
having  God  in  the  city,  the  commonwealth  is  safe  ;  truth  will  be  victorious ;  vice 
will  be  curbed  ;  crime  wiU  cease  ;  ignorance  wiU  be  instructed  ;  men  and  women  will 
be  saved  ;  children  will  be  nurtured  and  trained  aright ;  true  spiritual  religion,  as 
contrasted  with  mere  conventional  Churchism,  will  prevail ;  the  love  of  worldliness 
will  give  place  to  spirituality  of  life  ;  there  will  be  honesty  instead  of  theft ;  truth- 
fulness instead  of  lies ;  purity  instead  of  wickedness ;  holiness  instead  of  mere 
professional  Church  membership.  {Ibid.)  The  Church,  "  a  city  not  forsaken  "  by  its 
own  people: — 1.  Its  numbers  are  larger  to-day  than  ever.  They  help  to  constitute 
its  wealth,  to  make  it  full  of  power  ;  they  make  its  defence  stronger  than  walls  of 
brick  and  stone  ;  mightier  than  ramparts.  The  fellowship  of  believers ;  the  com- 
munion of  saints  ;  the  brotherhood  of  Christians  is  very  real.  It  is  found  in  this 
city — this  Church  of  God.  It  is  illustrated  in  the  lives  of  myriads  who  dedicate 
their  intellect,  their  love,  to  it.  Verily,  this  city  is  not  forsaken.  Its  dwellings  are 
peopled.  Its  population  increases.  2.  And  more  are  coming.  One  day  Henry  Clav 
stood  on  a  peak  on  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  with  arms  folded,  and  as  though 
looking  into  the  distance  far  beyond.  Some  one  said  to  the  rapt  thinker,  "Mr. 
Clay,  what  are  you  thinking  about  1 "  He  replied,  "  I  am  listening  to  the  ontramping 
of  the  feet  of  futm-e  generations  of  Americans."  He  knew  they  would  come.  So  we. 
We  rejoice  in  the  millions  of  our  city.  But  yet  there  is  room.  They  come.  They 
will  continue  to  come.  This  is  no  forsaken  spot.  It  never  will  be.  Desolation  does 
not  belong  to  this  Zion.  3.  There  are  good  reasons  for  its  sons  not  forsaking  it.  In 
it  they  have  found  salvation.     In  it  they  have  been  made  joyful.    When  they  were 

Pursued  and  troubled,  it  opened  its  gates  to  them,  and  gave  them  refuge  and  safety, 
he  walls  which  surround  it  can  never  be  broken  through  by  any  foe  ;  for  God  is  the 
strength  of  those  walls,  and  every  citizen  is  absolutely  safe.  {Ibid.)  Backsliders: — 
But  have  not  any  forsaken  this  city  ?  The  answer  is,  to  their  own  sad  sorrow,  Yes ! 
At  this  hour  there  are  sheep  that  have  strayed  ;  prodigals  that  have  wandered  ;  back- 
sliders that  have  fallen.  They  have  forsaken  purity ;  they  have  turned  their  backs 
on  God.    What  has  the  City  herald  to  proclaim  to  suoh  f    What  is  the  message  of 


C&AP.LZiii.]  ISAIAH.  395 

the  King  ?  The  proclamation  is  mercy  ;  amnesty ;  full  forgiveness.  The  message  of 
the  King  is,  Return.  Will  vou  come  ?  The  gates  of  the  city  are  open :  Will  you 
enter  ?  You  have  forsaken  the  Church  ;  but  God  has  not  forsaken  you.  -  But,  so  far 
as  you  are  concerned,  the  gates  of  the  city  will  soon  be  closed.  Take  care  that  you 
are  on  the  right  side.  One  of  our  ministers  said  that  one  evening,  after  a  day's 
excursion,  he  and  his  party  were  about  to  enter  an  Eastern  city.  They  saw  a  horse- 
man approach  at  a  gallop.  Our  friend  asked,  "Why  does  he  ride  so  fasti" 
' '  Because, "  said  the  guide,  ' '  he  knows  that  in  a  few  moments  it  wiU  be  sunset,  and 
the  city  gate  will  be  closed  ;  and,  if  he  is  not  in  before  that,  he  will  be  too  late,  and 
must  remain  outside  in  the  dark."  It  is  nearly  sunset  with  some  of  you  who  have 
forsaken  the  oity ;  soon  the  gate  will  be  closed ;  be  quick  and  enter  in  1    {IMd.) 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 


Vers.  1-6.  Who  Is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom^ — Jehovah's  triumph  over  Hia 
people's  foes : — A  passage  of  unique  and  sublime  dramatic  power.  The  impotence  of 
Israel's  enemies  to  retard  or  interfere  with  their  deliverance  has  been  insisted  on 
before  (chaps,  xli.  15  f.,  xlix.  25,  26,  li.  23,  liv.  17);  and  it  is  here  developed 
tmder  a  novel  and  striking  figure.  The  historical  fact  upon  which  the  representation 
rests  is  the  long-standing  and  implacable  enmity  subsisting  between  Israel  and 
Edom.  The  scene  depicted  is,  of  course,  no  event  of  actual  history ;  it  is  sym- 
bolical ;  an  ideal  humiliation  of  nations,  marshalled  upon  the  territory  of  Israel's 
Inveterate  foe,  is  the  form  tmder  which  the  thought  of  Israel's  triumph  is  here 
expressed.  The  prophet  sees  in  imagination  a  figure,  as  of  a  conqueror,  his  garments 
crimsoned  with  blood,  advancing  proudly  in  the  distance  from  the  direction  of  Edom, 
and  asks,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  ? "  etc.  In  reply,  he  hears  from  afar  the  words, 
"  I  that  speak  iu  righteousness,  mighty  to  save,"  i.  e.  I  who  have  announced  (chap, 
xlv.  19)  a  just  and  righteous  purpose  of  deliverance,  and  am  able  to  give  it  efifect. 
The  answer  is  not  yet  sufficiently  explicit,  so  he  repeats  the  question  in  a  more  direct 
form,  "Wherefore  art  Thou  red  in  Thine  apparel?"  etc.  (vers.  2,  3).  Not  Edom 
only,  then,  but  other  nations  also  have  been  trodden  down  and  subdued  (vers.  4-6). 
In  the  hour  when  the  contest  Israel  contra  mundum  was  to  be  decided,  no  human 
agent,  willingly  or  consciously,  came  forward  to  assist ;  nevertheless,  God's  purposes 
were  not  frustrated :  Israel's  opponents  were  humbled  and  defeated ;  but  human 
means,  in  so  far  as  use  was  made  of  them,  were  the  unconscious  instruments  of 
Providence.  And  thus  the  blood-stained  colour  of  the  Victor's  garments  is  explained : 
it  is  a  token  of  Jehovah's  triumph  over  His  people's  foes,  primarily,  indeed,  over 
those  foes  who  would  impede  the  release  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon,  or  molest  them 
when  settled  again  in  Palestine,  but  by  implication  also,  over  other  foes  who  might 
rise  up  in  the  future  to  assail  the  people  of  God.  {Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The 
Saviour — God  of  Israel : — The  image  presented  is  one  of  the  most  impressive  and 
awe-inspiring  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  is  most  to  be 
admired,  the  dramatic  vividness  of  the  vision,  or  the  reticence  which  conceals  the 
actual  work  of  slaughter  and  concentrates  the  attention  on  the  Divine  Hero  as  He 
emerges  victorious  from  the  conflict.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Who  is  the  Hero  ? — 
It  was  a  serious  misapprehension  of  the  spirit  of  the  prophecy  which  led  many  of  the 
Fathers  to  apply  it  to  the  passion  and  death  of  Christ.  Although  certain  phrases, 
detached  from  their  context,  may  suggest  that  interpretation  to  a  Christian  reader, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  scene  depicted  is  a  "  drama  of  Divine  vengeance" 
(G.  A.  Smith),  into  which  the  idea  of  propitiation  does  not  entef.  The  solitary 
Figure  who  speaks  in  vers.  3-6  is  not  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Messiah,  but 
Jehovah  Himself  (comp.  the  parallel,  chap.  lix.  16) ;  the  blood  which  reddens  His 
garments  is  expressly  said  to  be  that  of  His  enemies  ;  and  the  "winepress"  is  no 
emblem  of  the  spiritual  sufferings  endured  by  our  Lord,  but  of  the  "fierceness  and 
wrath  of  Almighty  God "  (Rev.  xix.  15)  towards  the  adversaries  of  His  Kingdom. 
While  it  is  true  that  the  judgment  is  the  prelude  to  the  redemption  of  Israel,  the 
passage  before  us  exhibits  only  the  judicial  aspect  of  the  Divine  dealings,  and  it  is 
not  permissible  to  soften  the  terrors  of  the  picture  by  introducing  soteriological 
oonceptiona  which  lie  beyond  its  scope.    {JUd.)    The  Conqueror  frmn  Edam : — What 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  uiu. 

does  it  mean — the  prophetic  Genius  waiting,  watching,  and  questioning ;  the  mighty 
stranger  coming  fresh  from  victorious  battle,  with  the  robe  red  as  if  with  the  stain  of 
grapes,  coming  up  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ?  Edom,  remember, 
was  the  country  where  the  Israelites'  most  inveterate  enemies  lived.  No  other 
nation  pressed  on  them  so  constantly  or  ^ave  them  such  continual  trouble  as  the 
Edomites.  And  Bozrah  was  the  capital  city  of  Edom,  the  centre  of  its  power. 
When  the  conqueror  comes  from  Edom,  then,  and  finds  Israel  anxious  and  eager 
upon  the  mountain,  and  shows  her  his  stained  robe  in  sign  of  the  struggle  which  he 
has  gone  through,  and  then  tells  her  that  the  victory  is  complete,  that  because  ho 
saw  that  she  had  no  defender  he  has  undertaken  her  defence  and  trodden  Edom 
under  foot  for  her,  we  can  understand  something  of  the  power  and  comfort  of  such  a 
poetic  vision  to  the  Hebrew's  heart.  There  may  have  been  some  special  event  which 
it  commemorated.  Some  special  danger  may  nave  threatened  on  the  side  of  the 
tumultuous  Edomites,  and  some  special  unexpected  deliverer  may  have  appeared  who 
saved  the  country,  and  was  honoured  by  this  song  of  praise.  But  every  such  special 
deliverance  to  the  deep  religious  and  patriotic  feeling  of  the  Jew  had  a  much  wider 
meaning.  Every  partial  mercy  to  his  nation  always  pointed  to  the  one  great  mercy 
which  was  to  embrace  all  others,  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  whose  advent  was  to 
be  the  source  of  every  good,  and  the  cure  of  every  evil.  And  so  these  words  of 
Isaiah  moimt  to  a  higher  strain  than  any  that  could  have  greeted  an  Israelite  warrior 
who  might  have  made  a  successful  incursion  into  Edomite  soU.  The  prophet  ia 
singing  of  the  victorious  Messiah.  This  Hebrew  Messiah  has  come,  and  is  more 
than  the  Hebrew  Messiah :  He  is  the  Christian's  Christ,  He  is  our  Saviour.  {Bp. 
Phillips  Brooks. )  Christ's  struggle  and  triumph : — Very  often  now  this  sounds  strange 
and  incomprehensible  ;  this  absorption  of  every  struggle  between  the  good  and  the 
evil  that  is  going  on  in  the  world  into  the  one  great  struggle  of  the  life  and  death  of 
Jesus  Christ ;  but  it  follows  necessarily  from  any  such  full  idea  as  we  Christians  hold 
of  what  Jesus  Christ  is  and  of  what  brought  Him  to  this  world.  If  He  be  reaUy  the 
Son  of  God,  bringing  in  an  utterly  new  way  the  power  of  God  to  bear  on  human  life ; 
if  He  be  the  natural  Creator- King  of  humanity,  come  for  the  salvation  of  humanity  ; 
then  it  would  seem  to  foUow  that  the  work  of  salvation  must  be  His,  and  His  alone : 
and  if  we  see  the  process  of  salvation,  the  struggle  of  the  good  against  the  evil,  going 
on  all  over  the  world,  we  shall  be  ready  still  to  feel  that  it  is  all  under  His  auspices 
and  guidance  ;  that  the  effort  of  any  benighted  soul  in  any  darkest  heathen  land  to 
get  away  from  its  sins,  and  cast  itself  upon  an  assured  mercy  of  its  God,  is  part  of 
His  great  work,  is  to  the  Ml  intelligent  faith  of  the  well-taught  Christian  believer 
just  what  the  struggle  of  a  blind  plant  underground  to  reach  the  surface  is  to  the 
free  aspiration  of  the  oak-tree,  which  in  the  full  glory  of  the  sunlight  reaches  out  its 
eager  branches  toward  the  glorious  sun — a  result  of  the  same  power,  and  a  con- 
tribution to  the  same  victorious  success.  All  forces  strive  after  simplicity  and  unity. 
Operations  in  natmre,  in  mechanics,  in  chemistry,  which  men  have  long  treated  as 
going  on  under  a  variety  of  powers,  are  gradually  showing  themselves  to  be  the  fronts 
of  one  great  mightier  power,  which  in  many  various  forms  of  application  is  able  to 

?roduce  them  all.  This  is  the  most  beautiful  development  of  our  modern  science, 
'he  Christian  belief  in  Christ  holds  the  same  thin^  of  the  spiritual  world,  and 
unites  all  partial  Adctories  everywhere  into  one  great  victory  which  is  the  triumph  of 
its  Lord.  On  no  other  ground  can  Christianity  stand  with  its  exclusive  claims,  and 
Christianity  is  in  its  very  nature  exclusive.  In  the  susceptibility  of  all  men  to  the 
same  influences  of  the  highest  sort,  there  comes  out  the  only  valuable  proof  of  the 
unity  of  the  human  race,  I  think.  Demonstrate  what  you  may  about  tne  diversity 
of  origin  or  structure  of  humanity,  so  long  as  the  soul  capable  of  the  great  human 
struggle  and  the  great  human  helps  is  in  every  man,  the  human  race  is  one.  On  the 
other°hand,  demonstrate  as  perfectly  as  you  will  the  identity  of  origin  and  structure 
of  all  humanity,  yet  if  you  find  men  so  spirituallv  different  in  two  hemispheres  that 
the  same  largest  obligations  do  not  impress  and  the  same  largest  loves  do  not  soften 
them,  what  does  your  unity  of  the  human  race  amount  to !  Here,  it  seems  to  me, 
Christ,  in  His  broad  appeal  to  aU  men  of  aU  races,  is  the  true  asserter  of  the  only 
valuable  human  unity.  If  this  be  so,  then  wherever  there  is  good  at  work  in  the 
world,  we  Christians  may  see  the  progress  of  the  struggle,  and  rejoice  already  in  the 
victory  of  Christ.  {Ibid.)  The  method  of  Christ's  salvation : — Let  us  go  on  and  look, 
as  far  as  we  may,  into  the  method  of  this  salvation  ;  first,  for  the  world  at  large,  and 
then  for  the  single  soul.  And  in  both  let  us  follow  the  story  of  the  old  Jewish 
vision.  "Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom?"  Sin  hangs  on  the  borders  of 
goodness  everywhere,  as  just  across  the  narrow  Jordan  valley  Edom  always  lay 


CHAP.  £xni.]  ISAIAH.  397 

threateningly  upon  the  skirts  of  Palestine.     How  terribly  constant  it  was  !    How  it 
kept  the  people  on  a  strain  all  the  while  I    The  moment  that  a  Jew  stepped  across 
the  border,  the  Edomites  were  on  him.    The  moment  a  flock  or  beast  of  his  wandered 
too  far,  the  enemy  had  seized  him.     If  in  the  carelessness  of  a  festival  the  Israelites 
left  the  border  unguarded,  the  hated  Edomites  found  it  out  and  came  swooping  down 
just  when  the  mirth  ran  highest  and  the  sentinels  were  least  careful.    If  a  Jew's  field 
of  wheat  was  specially  rich,  the  Edomite  saw  the  green  signal  from  his  hUl-top,  and 
in  the  morning  the  field  was  bare.    There  was  no  rest,  no  safety.    They  had  met  the 
chosen  people  on  their  way  into  the  promised  land,  and  tried  to  keep  them  out ;  and 
now  that  they  were  safely  in,  there  they  always  hovered,  wUd,  implacable,  and 
watchful.     There  could  be  no  terms  of  compromise  with  them.     They  never  slept. 
They  saw  the  weak  point  in  a  moment ;  they  struck  it  quick  as  lightning  strikes. 
The  constant  dread,  the  nightmare,  of  Jewish  history  is  this  Edom  lying  there  upon 
the  border,  like  a  lion  crouched  to  spring.     There  cannot  be  one  great  fight,  or  one 
great  war,  and  then  the  thing  done  for  ever.     It  is  an  endless  fight  with  an  undying 
enemy  !     Edom  upon  the  borders  of  Judah  !    1.  We  open  any  page  of  human  history 
and  what  do  we  see  ?     There  is  a  higher  life  in  man.     Imperfect,  full  of  mixture, 
just  like  that  mottled  history  of  Hebrewdom  ;  yet  still  it  is  in  human  history  what 
Judea  was  in  the  old  world — the  spiritual,  the  upward,  the  religious  element ;  some- 
thing that  believes  in  God  and  struggles  after  Him.     Not  a  page  can  you  open  but 
its  mark  is  there.     Sometimes  it  is  an  aspiration  after  civilization,  sometimes  it  is 
a  doctrinal  movement,  sometimes  it  is  a  mystical  piety  that  is  developed  ;  sometimes 
it  is  social ;  sometimes  it  is  ascetic  and  purely  individual ;  sometimes  it  is  a  Socrates, 
sometimes  it  is  a  St.  Francis,  sometimes  it  is  a  Luther,  sometimes  it  is  a  Florence 
Nightingale.     It  is  there  in  some  shape  always:  this  good  among  the  evil,  this 
power  of  God  among  the  forces  of  men,  this  Judah  in  the  midst  of  Asia.     But  always 
right  on  its  border  lies  the  hostile  Edom,  watchful,  indefatigable,  inexorable  as  the 
redoubtable  old  foe  of  the  Jews.     If  progress  falters  a  moment,  the  whole  mass  of 
obstructive  ignorance  is  rolled  upon  it.     If  faith  leaves  a  loophole  undefended,  the 
quick  eye  of  Atheism  sees  it  from  its  watch-tower  and  hurls  its  quick  strength  there. 
If  goodness  goes  to  sleep  upon  its  arms,  sleepless  wickedness  is  across  the  valley,  and 
the  fields  which  it  has  taken  months  of  toil  to  sow  and  ripen  are  swept  off  in  a  night. 
Is  not  this  the  impression  of  the  world,  of  human  life,  that  you  get,  whether  you 
open  the  history  of  any_  century  or  unfold  your  morning  newspaper  ?    The  record 
of  a  struggling  charity  is  crowded  by  the  story  of  the  prison  and  the  court.     The 
world  waits  at  the  chiu-ch  door  to  catch  the  worshipper  as  he  comes  out.     The  good 
work  of  one  century  relaxes  a  moment  for  a  breathing  spell,  and  the  next  century 
comes  in  with  its  licentiousness  or  its  superstition.     Always  it  is  the  higher  life 
pressed,  watched,  haunted  by  the  lower :  always  it  is  Judah  with  Edom  at  its  gates. 
No  one  great  battle  comes  to  settle  it  for  ever :  it  is  an  endless  fight  with  an  undying 
enemy.     2.  How  is  it  in  these  little  worlds,  these  hearts  which  we  are  carrying 
about  ?    You  have  your  good,  your  spirituality,  your  better  life  ;  something  that 
bears  witness  of  God.     How  evil  crowds  you  !     You  cannot  fight  it  out  at  once  and 
have  it  done.     You  go  on  quietly  for  days,  and  think  the  enemy  is  dead.     Just 
when  you  are  safest,  there  he  is  again,  more  alive  than  ever.     We  live  a  spiritual 
life  like  the  life  that  our  fathers  used  to  live  here  in  New  England,  who  always  took 
their  guns  to  church  with  them  and  smoothed  down  the  graves  of  their  beloved  dead 
in  the  churchyard  that  the  hostUe  and  watchful  Indians  might  not  know  how  weak 
they  were.     This  is  the  great  discouraging  burden  of  om-  experience  of  sin.     "We 
look  and  there  is  none  to  help.     We  wonder  that  there  is  none  to  uphold."    No 
power  of  salvation  comes  out  of  the  good  half  of  the  heart  to  conquer  and  to  kill 
the  bad.     We  grow  not  to  expect  to  see  the  bad  half  conquered.     Every  morning  we 
lift  up  our  eyes,  and  there^  are  the  low,  black  hill-tops  across  the  narrow  valley,  with 
the  black  tents  upon  their  sides,  where  Edom  lies  in  wait.     Who  shall  deliver  us 
from  the  bad  world  and  our  bad  selves  1    What  then  ?    It  is  time  for  the  sunrise 
when  the  night  gets  as  dark  as  this.     It  is  time  for  the  Saviour  when  the  world  and 
the  soul  have  learnt  their  helplessness  and  sin.     "Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah?  this  that  is  glorious  in  His  apparel, 
travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength  ? "    The  whole  work  of  the  Saviour  has 
relation  to  and  issues  from  the  fact  of  sin.     If  there  had  been  no  sin  there  would 
have  been  no   Saviour.     He  comes  from  the  right  direction,   and    He    has    an 
attractive  majes^  of  movement  as  He  first  appears.     This,  as  to  the  watcher  on 
the  hill-tops  of  Judea,  so  to  the  soul  that  longs  for  some  solution  of  the  spiritual 
problem,  some  release  from  the   spiritual   bondage,  is  the  first   aspect  nf  the 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  uail. 

approaching  Christ.  He  comes  from  the  right  way,  and  He  seems  strong.  {Ibid.) 
The  righteous  Saviour : — Let  us  look  at  what  He  says  to  His  anxious  questioner ; 
what  account  of  Himself  He  gives ;  what  He  has  done  to  Edom ;  and  especially 
what  mean  these  blood-stains  on  His  robes.  1.  We  ask  Him,  "  "Who  is  this  ? "  and 
He  replies,  "  I  that  come  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  That  reassures  us,  and 
is  good  at  the  very  outset.  The  Saviour  comes  in  the  strength  of  righteousness. 
Righteousness  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  things.  Any  reform  or  salvation  of  which  the 
power  is  righteousness  must  go  down  to  the  very  root  of  the  trouble ;  must  extenuate 
and  cover  over  nothing ;  must  expose  and  convict  completely,  in  order  that  it  may 
completely  heal.  And  this  is  the  power  of  the  salvation  of  Christ.  Edom  must  m 
destroyed,  not  parleyed  with  ;  sin  must  be  beaten  down,  not  conciliated  ;  good  must 
thrive  by  the  defeat,  and  not  merely  by  the  tolerance  of  evil.  2.  The  questioner 
wonders,  as  the  Saviour  comes  nearer,  at  the  strange  signs  of  battle  and  agony  upon 
His  robes.  "  Wherefore  art  Thou  red  in  Thine  apparel,  and  Thy  garments  like  him 
that  treadeth  in  the  wine-fat?"  And  the  answer  is,  "I  have  trodden  the  wine- 
press :  "  "  I  will  tread  them  in  Mine  anger,"  etc.  It  is  no  holiday  monarch  coming 
'  with  a  bloodless  triimiph.  It  has  been  no  pageant  of  a  day,  this  strife  with  sia. 
The  robes  have  trailed  in  the  blood.  The  sword  is  dented  with  conflict.  The  power 
of  God  has  struggled  with  the  enemy  and  subdued  him  only  in  the  agony  of  strife. 
What  pain  may  mean  to  the  Infinite  and  Divine,  what  difficulty  may  mean  to 
Omnipotence,  I  cannot  tell.  Only  I  know  that  aU  that  they  could  mean  they 
meant  here.  This  symbol  of  the  blood  bears  this  great  truth,  which  has  been  the 
power  of  salvation  to  millions  of  hearts,  and  which  must  make  this  Conqueror  the 
Saviour  of  your  heart  too,  the  truth  that  only  in  self-sacrifice  and  suffering  could 
even  God  conquer  sin.  Sin  is  never  so  dreadful  as  when  we  see  the  Saviour  with 
that  blood  upon  His  garments.  And  the  Saviour  Himself,  surely  He  is  never  so 
dear,  never  wins  so  utter  and  so  tender  a  love,  as  when  we  see  what  it  has  cost  Him 
to  save  ua.  Out  of  that  love  bom  of  His  suffering  comes  the  new  impulse  after  a 
holy  life  ;  and  so  when  we  stand  at  last  purified  by  the  power  of  grateful  obedience, 
it  shall  be  said  of  us,  blading  our  holiness  and  escape  from  our  sia  close  to  our 
Lord's  struggle  with  sia  for  us,  that  we  have  "washed  our  robes  and  made  them 
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  3.  But  He  says  something  more.  Not  merely 
He  has  conquered  completely  and  conquered  in  suSering :  He  has  conquered  alone. 
He  brings  out  victory  in  His  open  hand.  From  His  hand  we  take  it  by  the  power 
of  prayer,  and  to  Him  alone  we  render  thanks  here  and  for  ever.  4.  Yet  once  more. 
What  was  the  fruit  of  this  victory  over  Edom  which  the  Seer  of  Israel  discovered 
from  his  mountain-top  ?  It  set  Israel  free  from  continual  harassing  and  fear,  and 
gave  her  a  chance  to  develop  along  the  waj  that  God  had  marked  out  for  her. 
Freedom !  That  is  the  word.  It  built  no  cities  ;  it  sowed  no  fields  ;  it  only  broke 
off  the  burden  of  that  hostile  presence  and  bade  the  chosen  nation  go  free  into  its 
destiny.  And  so  what  is  the  fruit  of  the  salvation  that  the  Divine  Saviour  briuOT 
to  the  souls  of  men  ?  It  does  not  finish  them  at  once  ;  it  does  not  fill  and  stock 
their  lives  with  heavenly  richness  in  a  moment.  But  it  does  just  this.  It  sets 
them  free ;  it  gives  them  a  new  chance.  5.  And  notice  that  this  Conqueror  who 
comes,  comes  strong — "travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength."  He  has  not 
left  His  might  behind  Him  in  the  struggle.  He  is  all  ready,  with  the  same  strength 
with  which  He  conquered,  to  enter  in  and  rule  and  educate  the  nation  He  has  saved. 
And  so  the  Saviour  has  not  done  all  when  He  has  forgiven  you.  By  the  same 
strength  of  love  and  patience  which  saved  you  upon  Calvary,  He  will  come  in,  if 
you  will  let  Him,  and  train  your  saved  lire  into  perfectness  of  grace  and  glory. 
{Ibid.)  Mighty  to  seme: — I.  The  nature  of  the  conflict  Christ  waged  in 
OUR  WORLD  AMONG  MEN.  It  was — 1.  Voluntary.  Christ  came  joyfully,  willingly, 
and  self-forgetfully.  2.  Sanguinary.  The  victory  was  not  achieved  without  a  severe 
struggle.  3.  Substitutionary.  The  hero  was  travelling  in  his  strength,  and  had 
wrought  deliverance  from  the  foe,  had  saved  those  for  whom  he  had  gone  forth  to 
the  fray.  So  our  Redeemer  came  to  conquer  sin  and  death,  not  for  Himself,  but  for 
us.  II.  The  completeness  of  the  conquest  Christ  achieved  in  the  con- 
flict. The  victor  from  Edom  was  more  than  a  conqueror.  1.  He  survived  the 
fight.  Many  a  warrior  has  won  a  victory,  but  has  lost  nis  life  in  winning  it.  Jesus 
laid  down  His  life  to  conquer  death,  but  He  toek  it  up  again  ;  "and  behold  He  is 
alive  for  evermore."  2.  He  subdued  the  foe.  The  hero  from  Edom  was  travelling 
peacefaUy,  for  the  enemy  had  been  completely  vanquished,  the  conquest  finally  won. 
So  our  great  Redeemer  overcame  all  His  foes  ;  He  cried  on  the  cross,  "  It  is  finished." 
And  John  saw  the  Saviour  in  heaven  entiiroued  and  crowned  "  King  of  kings,  Lord 


CHAP.iini.]  ISAIAH.  899 

of  lords."  III.  The  brightness  of  the  crown  Christ  secured  by  His  great 
CONQUEST.  The  conqueror  from  Edom  appeared  clothed  in  glorious  apparel  and  in 
great  strength  ;  there  was  a  halo  of  glory  around  his  head.  In  this  aspect  we  get 
a  picture  of  our  triumphant  Lord.  He  assumed  the  vestment  of  our  poor  himianity, 
and  was  '*  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  groimd  ; "  yet  He  was  clothed  with  the  beautiful 
garments  of  grace  and  righteousness,  of  spotless  purity.  His  crown  of  glory  consisted 
in  the  following  facts— 1.  That  justice  was  satisfied.  2.  That  pardon  was  procured. 
The  fuU  price  of  redemption  was  paid.  3.  That  heaven  was  opened.  {F.  W.  Brown.) 
The  secovd  advent: — I.  The  first  thing  is  to  determine  the  just  answer  to  the 
question,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ? " 
in  other  words,  we  have  to  ascertain  who  is  the  warrior  delineated  in  this 
PROPHECY.  1.  The  only  endeavour  to  refer  this  prediction  to  another  than  Christ, 
appears  to  be  that  which  would  assign  as  its  subject  Judas  Maccabeus,  because  this 
great  Jewish  captain  who  did  so  valiantly  for  the  Jews  in  the  days  of  Antiochus, 
I  overcame  the  Idumeans  in  battle ;  and  if  every  circumstance  favoured  that  inter- 
pretation (and  we  might,  perhaps,  suppose  that  this  illustrious  deliverer,  in  common 
with  Moses,  and  Joshua,  and  other  saviours  of  Israel,  may  be  regarded  as  a  type  of 
the  Messiah),  still  we  could  only  plead  for  the  accommodation,  not  for  the  completion 
of  the  prophecy.  However  splendid  the  achievements  of  Judas  Maccabeus,  there 
can  be  no  sense,  commensurate  with  the  expression,  in  which  the  chieftain  could 
describe  himself  as  "speaking  in  righteousness,"  and  assert  that  the  year  of  his 
redeemed  was  come,  or  aflBrm  that  his  own  arm  had  brought  salvation  :  so  that  were 
it  allowed  that  the  prediction  had  a  primary  fulfilment  in  Judas  Maccabeus,  we 
should  still  have  to  search  for  another  accomplishment.  It  seems,  however,  satis- 
factorily established  that  Idumea  or  Edom  at  the  prophet's  time  was  a  different 
country  from  that  which  Judas  conquered.  This  circumstance  excludes  Judas 
Maccabeus  from  all  share  in  the  prophecy  before  us  ;  and  there  remains  none  but  the 
Bedeemer  of  men  in  whom  we  can  look  for  its  accomplishment.  2.  When  it  is 
admitted  that  the  prophecy  delineates  Christ,  we  have  to  detennine  whether  it  be 
to  an  action  already  achieved  or  yet  to  be  performed  by  the  Saviour,  that  so  sublime 
a  description  refers.  It  can  only  have  been  through  inattention  or  oversight  that 
any  have  supposed  the  prediction  to  relate  to  the  death  and  passion  of  the  Mediator. 
You  observe  that  though  the  Redeemer  is  introduced  as  stained  with  blood,  it  is 
with  the  blood  of  His  enemies,  not  with  His  own.  There  is  a  little  obscurity  in  the 
answer  arising  from  our  translator  having  used  the  future  tense  instead  of  the  past ; 
and,  according  to  Bishop  Lowth,  it  should  be,  "I  trod  them  in  anger,  and  trampled 
them  in  indignation,  and  their  life  blood  was  sprinkled  upon  My  garments,  and  I 
have  stained  aU  My  apparel. "  It  was  not,  therefore,  the  winepress  which  He  trod 
in  His  agony  at  the  crucifixion,  whence  He  brought  these  dyed  garments  ;  He  must 
have  been  engaged  in  shedding  the  blood  of  others  rather  than  pouring  forth  His 
own,  ere  He  breaks  forth  on  the  seer's  vision  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His 
strength.  The  only  circimistance  associated  with  the  first  advent  of  Christ  to  which 
the  prophecy  can  be  fairly  thought  to  refer,  is  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  at  that 
terrible  visitation  in  which  the  Redeemer  came  down  in  vengeance,  and  dealt  with 
His  enemies  with  the  strongest  retribution.  Yet,  whatever  there  might  have  been 
in  the  desolations  of  Judea  answering  to  the  fearful  expressions  which  Christ  applies 
to  this  act,  it  certainly  was  not  from  Edom  and  Bozrah  that  He  came,  when  returning 
from  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem.  Of  course  it  was  not  from  the  literal  Edom,  and 
the  literal  Bozrah,  but  neither  was  it  from  the  figurative.  We  believe  that  Edom 
and  Bozrah  are  here  used  to  denote  nations  that  have  been  opposed  to  Christ  and 
His  people,  and  never  was  there  a  fiercer  opposition  than  that  of  the  Jews  ere  their 
city  was  destroyed  ;  still  it  is  quite  at  variance  with  the  rules  of  Scripture  metaphor, 
that  the  posterity  of  Jacob  should  be  described  by  terms  which  belong  rightly  to 
the  posterity  of  Esau.  We  may  add  that  Christ's  description  of  vengeance  taken  is 
immediately  followed  by  thankful  acknowledgments  of  great  good  to  the  house  of 
Israel.  If  the  prophecy  have  reference  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  how  comes 
it  to  be  instantly  succeeded  by  a  hymn'of  praise  for  God's  mercy  to  the  Jews  ?  On 
these  various  accounts  we  do  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  the  prediction  finds  no 
fulfilment  in  the  events  of  past  days ;  that  the  future  must  be  charged  with  its 
accomplishment,  and  that  the  fearful  form  on  which  the  prophet  looked,  the  form 
of  a  warrior,  fresh  from  the  victory,  must  be  that  of  Christ  appearing,  as  He  shall 
appear,  at  the  close  of  this  dispensation,  when  He  has  swept  a  clear  scene  for  setting 
up  His  kingdom,  and  purged  the  earth  from  the  pollutions  of  crime.  And  to  those 
«!»«  9^6  ^umliar  with  tne  prophecies  which  desoribe  the  last  times,  it  will  immediatelj 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lxiii. 

suggest  itself,  that  the  sudden  transition  from  the  assertion  of  the  destruction 
of  antichristian  powers,  to  the  ofiFering  up  of  the  thanksgiving  of  the  Jews,  ia  in 
admirabla  keeping  with  the  whole  tenor  or  prophecy.  It  seems  clearly  the  import 
of  yet  unfulfilled  predictions  of  Scripture,  that  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  their 
own  land,  that  great  event  on  which  hangs  the  conversion  of  the  nations,  shall  not 
be  accomplished  without  the  opposition  and  overthrow  of  the  confederated  powers 
of  antichrist.  If,  therefore,  we  consider  the  final  destruction  of  the  antichristian 
powers  as  the  slaughter  of  Idumea,  from  which  Christ  is  returning,  it  is  quite  natural 
that  the  praises  of  the  house  of  Israel  should  immediately  succeed  the  account  of  the 
overthrow.  II.  Our  business  is  to  show  the  justice  of  the  ixterpretation  which 
would  associate  the  prophecy  with  the  Saviour's  second  advent.  1.  We  shall  examine 
what  Scripture  makes  known  with  regard  to  the  second  advent.  2.  We  shall  endeavour 
to  establish  the  thorough  agreement  between  all  we  are  thus  taught,  and  the  prophecy 
of  our  text.  (1)  This  coming  is  represented  as  accompanied  by  terrific  judgments. 
It  appears  from  the  Book  of  Revelation  that  immediately  before  the  millennium,  the 
scene  that  is  to  be  introduced  by  the  coming  of  Christ,  there  will  be  a  gathering  of 
the  kings  of  the  earth  to  battle  for  the  great  day  of  God  Almighty.  This  is  the 
confederacy  of  antichristian  powers.  We  not  only  find  that  when  Christ  appears 
the  second  time  it  will  be  to  take  vengeance  on  His  enemies,  but  we  seem  to  be 
furnished  with  a  thorough  answer  to  the  question,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edom  ? "  etc.  (2)  The  only  point  which  seems  to  need  illustration,  ere  we  proceed 
to  fix  the  meaning  of  the  text,  is  the  use  of  the  terms  Edom  and  Bozrah,  to  denote 
the  confederated  powers  of  antichrist.  It  is  common  in  Scripture  to  take  the  name 
belonging  to  some  great  foe,  and  to  give  it  to  others  whose  wickedness  is  the  only 
connection  with  the  parties  so  called  {e.g.  chap.  i.  10).  The  antichristian  power 
which  was  allowed  for  years  to  persecute  and  to  harass  the  Church,  and  is  at  last  to 
be  throMm  down  with  violence,  is  expressly  denominated  ' '  Babylon. "  In  like  manner, 
names  such  as  Edom  and  Moab,  belonging  originally  to  the  declared  foes  of  God  and 
His  people,  are  used  for  others  who  imitate  these  foes  in  their  enmity.  If  you 
examine  the  predictions  which  relate  to  these  nations  you  will  find  prophecy, 
according  to  the  character  which  it  usually  presents,  passing  on  from  the  past  to 
what  we  must  believe  yet  to  come  ;  or,  rather,  describing  the  fall  of  those  that  first 
bore  the  name  in  language  inappropriate,  unless  designed  to  apply  to  others  who  by 
their  wickedness  should  deserve  the  same  punishment.  So  far  as  Edom  and  Bozran 
are  concerned,  the  expressions  are  evidently  too  strong  to  refer  to  those  places 
literally ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  read  them  and  not  see  that  they  relate  to  a  yet 
future  judgment.  (3)  As  to  the  text,  we  must  ascertain  the  period  of  the  judgment 
it  announces.  No  sooner  has  Isaiah  asserted  that  the  visited  land  is  given  up  to 
Christ,  as  the  avenger,  than  he  breaks  out  into  the  exclamation,  "  The  wildemess 
and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them ;  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice,  and 
blossom  as  the  rose ; "  and  proceeds  with  a  glowing  accoimt  of  the  Mediator's 
kingdom.  Hence  it  wiU  appear  evident  that  the  judgments  described  are  those 
which  shall  introduce  the  miUennium,  the  thirty-fifth  chapter  having  reference  to 
this  scene  of  blessedness ;  and,  therefore,  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  delivering,  as  it 
does,  a  fearful  visitation  connected  with  subsequent  happiness,  must  be  expected  to 
coincide  with  other  predictions  respecting  Christ's  second  coming.  But  why  are  we 
anxious  to  prove  that  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  of  Isaiah  predicts  the  judgment  that 
attends  the  Redeemer's  advent  %  Simply  because,  if  this  be  proved,  we  shall  also 
prove  that  by  the  names  Edom  and  Bozrah  are  denoted  those  antichristian  powers 
that  shall  be  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  Christ's  coming.  In  the  fifth  and  sixth 
verses  of  the  thirty-fourth  chapter,  it  is  on  Idumea  and  Bozrah  that  the  prophet 
fastens  the  calamity  which  forms  the  subject  of  his  prophecy.  Idumea  and  Bozrah 
denote  the  antichristian  powers  who  shall  be  confederated  wnen  Christ  shall  appear. 
It  may  be  contended  that  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  the  destruction  of  the  literal 
Edom.  We  know  that  Edom  was  laid  waste  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  this  event  in 
no  degree  justifies  so  high-wrought  a  description.  It  cannot  be  without  opposition 
and  convulsions  that  Satan  is  driven  from  his  usurped  dominion.  It  is  from  Edom 
the  warrior  advances — the  land  in  which  dwelt  the  enemies  of  righteousness.  We 
know  this  Mighty  Being  ;  we  know  the  work  with  which  He  is  busied.  It  is  the 
Redeemer  who  was  crucified  in  weakness  ;  and  who,  after  a  display  of  marvellous 
forbearance,  shall  come  forth  to  avenge  His  own  elect,  and  destroy  them  that 
destroyed  the  earth.  Therefore,  we  know  what  answer  to  give  when  the  prophet 
demands,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom ! "  (4)  We  have  still  to  consider  the 
answer  in  the  text,  and  show  its  appropriateness  as  proceeding  from  Christ  at  His 


OHAP.uaii.]  ISAIAH.  401 

second  appearing.  "WTien  the  prophet  asks  the  name  of  the  being  whom  he  beheld 
travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength,  the  reply  is,  "  I  that  speak  in  righteous- 
ness, mighty  to  save. "  This  reply  is  not  only  characteristic  of  the  Eedeemer,  but 
peculiarly  appropriate,  as  the  Redeemer  returns  from  the  slaughter  of  His  enemies. 
Hi3  actions  nave  just  proved  Him  mighty  to  destroy,  and  His  words  announce  Him 
"mighty  to  save,"  so  that  He  is  able  to  confound  every  foe,  and  uphold  every 
friend.  Now  it  seems  to  us  that  in  the  reply  given  to  the  challenge  of  the  prophet, 
there  is  a  distinct  assertion  that  He  who  comes  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah 
maintains  those  principles  of  righteousness  which  cannot  be  maintained  but  by  an 
infinite  judge.  "I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  The  time  at 
which  the  answer  is  made  can  only  be  that  of  Christ's  second  appearing.  {H.  Mel- 
vill,  B.D.)  ChHsthas  achieved  salvation: — We  behold  here  a  new  revelation  of  a 
blessed  and  startling  fact.  People  talk  of  Christ  as  though  He  were  going  to  do 
something  grand  for  us  after  a  while.  He  has  done  it.  You  might  as  well  talk  of 
"Washington  as  though  he  were  going  to  achieve  our  national  independence  in  1950 
as  to  speak  of  Christ  as  though  He  were  going  to  achieve  our  salvation  in  the  future. 
He  did  it  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  33,  on  the  field  of  Bozrah,  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation  fighting  unto  death  for  our  emancipation.  All  we  have  to  do  is  to  accept  that 
fact  in  our  heart  of  hearts,  and  we  are  free  for  this  world,  and  for  the  world  to  come. 
{T.  Be  W.  Talmage,  B.D.)  Christ's  victory: — I.  Take  the  words  of  the  victoey 
WON  ON  Calvary,  and  how  they  bring  home  to  us  the  greatness  of  our  need  and  of 
our  redemption !  Nothing  short  of  a  Divine  interposition  could  save  us.  There 
was  an  old  rule  of  the  poet's  art  which  a  heathen  has  left  on  record,  which  said  that 
in  the  drama  the  intervention  of  a  god  was  not  to  be  made  use  of  by  the  poet,  except 
on  an  occasion  worthy  of  it.  And  in  the  great  drama  of  the  world's  redemption, 
wrought  out  in  the  presence  of  heaven  and  earth,  God  Himself  may  with  all 
reverence  be  said  to  have  acted  upon  this  rule.  God  waited  whUe  human  systems 
did  what  they  could  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  God  waited  through  the  long 
ages  while  Edom — the  power  of  the  world — seemed  to  wax  mightier  and  mightier. 
Each  one  of  the  centuries  which  rolled  on  before  the  Incarnation  only  added  to  the 
hopelessness  and  despair  of  humanity.  System  after  system  of  philosophy  was  tried. 
Each  in  its  turn  promised  much,  but  performed  little  ;  until  at  length  a  dull,  blank 
despair  seemed  to  be  settling  down  upon  a  decaying  and  dying  world.  And  then,  at 
length,  God  Himself  intervened.  And  the  work  which  the  Son  of  God  undertook  in 
His  infinite  pity  for  man  was  no  holiday  task,  to  be  entered  upon  with  a  light  heart. 
II.  We  may  take  the  vision  as  receiving  a  fulfilment  in  our  own  lives, 
whenever  in  the  mercy  of  God  we  win  a  victory  over  the  power  of  evil  aroimd  us. 
There  are  times  when  we  need  some  such  vision  as  this  to  comfort  and  reassure  us  in 
the  stress  of  the  conflict.  There  is  the  Conqueror  from  Edom.  His  blood-stained 
garments  are  the  pledge  of  His  victory  over  your  foe.  And  that  victory  which  He 
won  for  you  on  Calvary  He  will  repeat  in  you,  if  you  will  only  yield  yourself  up  to 
Him.  III.  But  the  prophecy  is  not  exhausted  yet.  Victory  after  victory  may 
be  won  ;  but  there  are  gaps  in  the  ranks  of  those  who  have  fought ;  and  we  have 
florrowfully  to  confess  that  the  power  of  evil  stUl  remains  in  the  world.  Foiled  in  one 
quarter,  it  is  successful  in  another.  And  so  it  goes  on  from  generation  to  generation. 
The  heart  is  made  sad  and  the  head  grows  heavy  with  the  thought  that,  conquer  evil 
in  our  own  person  as  we  may,  yet,  after  all,  it  wiU  outlive  us.  It  will  give  our 
children  after  us  just  the  same  trouble  that  it  has  given  to  us.  Yet,  here  too  there 
is  comfort  for  us  in  the  vision  of  the  prophet,  if  we  only  take  in  its  full  meaning,  for 
it  points  forward  to  a  final  victoir  in  the  future  when  the  power  of  evil  is  to  be 
destroyed.  {E.  C.  S.  Gibson,  M.A.)  The  Hero: — I.  The  hero  here  is  one  who 
HAD  fought  in  THE  MIDST  OF  ENEMIES.  What  Edom  was  to  Israel,  sin  is  to  the 
universe.  Christ  fought  in  the  midst  of  enemies ;  entered  the  very  heart  of  this 
sinful  world,  battled  with  evil  in  all  its  forms.  II.  The  hero  here  is  one  who 
has  been  deeply  wounded.  He  returns  from  Bozrah  with  dyed  garments.  Christ 
was  woimded — 1.  In  His  body.  2.  In  His  reputation.  He  was  represented  as  a 
blasphemer,  as  a  political  traitor,  as  the  emissary  of  Beelzebub.  3.  In  His  soul. 
"My  soul  is  exceedingly  sorrowful,"  etc.  III.  The  hero  here  is  one  returning 
FROM  battle  in  GREAT  MAGNIFICENCE.  "  Glorious  in  Ms  apparel,  travelling  in  the 
greatness  of  his  strength."  With  what  magnificence  Christ  returned  from  the  battle 
of  earth  to  the  scenes  of  heaven  (Acts  L  9-11).  IV.  The  hero  here  is  one  whose 
CAREER  HAD  BEEN  DISTINGUISHED  BY  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  "  I  that  speak  in  righteous- 
ness." I,  the  declarer  of  righteousness  (as  some  render  it).  Though  a  warrior,  he 
had  invented  no  stratagems  to  deceive,  and  had  violated  no  rights.  Christ  waa 
vol-  III.  26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  lxi«. 

righteous  in  all  His  conflicts.  He  taught  righteousness,  He  practised  righteousness. 
He  fought  for  righteousness,  He  died  for  righteousness.  V.  The  heeo  here  is  onb 
WHOSE  STRENGTH  IS  MIGHTINESS  TO  SAVE.  Hls  form  was  the  Very  embodiment  of 
strength;  but  his  strength  was  not  to  destroy,  but  to  save.  {Homilist.)  1.  "I 
that  speak  in  righteousness."  The  very  essence  and  being  of  Christ  is  righteousness. 
But  the  expression  here  seems  to  refer  to  the  fact  of  His  being  the  incarnate  righteous- 
ness of  God  and  the  imputed  righteousness  of  man.  He  speaks  in  our  stead.  He 
stands  holy  in  place  of  our  unhoUness.  2.  "  Mighty  to  save."  The  victory  was  for 
man.  He  is  mighty  to  save — (1)  From  the  vengeance  of  Divine  justice.  (2)  From 
the  malignity  of  Satan.  (3)  From  the  voice  of  an  accusing  conscience.  (4)  From  the 
power  and  fear  of  death,    \lbid. )    No  man  may  punish  OhrisSs  enemies,  hut  Himself: — 

1.  We  have  no  authority.  2.  We  have  no  prescription,  or  rules  authorized  by  custom. 
3.  Persecution  does  no  good.  4.  Christians  are  taught  to  love  their  enemies.  5.  The 
certainty  of  the  day  of  judgment  deters  good  men  from  persecuting.  It  is  not  enough 
to  persecute  the  enemies  of  Christ ;  we  are  bound  by  every  solemn  tie  to  perform 
every  duty,  yea  more,  every  kind  office  of  friendship  towards  them.  (i?.  Robinson.) 
This  that  is  glorious  in  His  apparel. — The  glory  of  Christ  in  His  humiliation : — I.  In 

WHAT   RESPECTS    THE    GLORY     OF   OTTR    REDEEMER  WAS  APPARENT    EVEN    IN   HiS 

SUFFERINGS,  and  shone  through  the  dark  cloud  that  covered  Him  in  His  humilia- 
tion. 1.  From  His  ready  undertaking  of  the  work  of  our  redemption.  There  can 
be  little  honour  to  any  man  in  submitting  to  what  he  cannot  avoid,  or  doing 
what  he  dare  not  refuse  ;  but  the  humiliation  of  Christ  was  perfectly  voluntary. 

2.  From  the  greatness  of  those  sufferings  which  He  endured.  A  weak  person  is 
crushed  by  a  small  weight ;  but  he  who  is  able  to  endure  uncommon  sufferings  shows 
himself  to  be  possessed  of  uncommon  strength.  Our  blessed  Lord,  in  His  life  in 
this  world,  endured  the  greatest  and  most  dreadful  sufferings.  (1)  His  auctions 
began  early,  with  His  first  entrance  into  the  world.  (2)  His  afflictions  were  constant, 
without  interruption.  (3)  Of  the  severest  kind.  (4)  The  afflictions  of  our  Lord 
not  only  continued,  but  increased,  through  His  Hfe,  till  they  at  last  issued  in  an 
extraordinary  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  an  immediate  subjection  to 
the  wrath  of  a  sin-avenging  God.  3.  From  the  purity  of  His  carriage,  and  the 
perfection  of  His  patience.  4.  From  the  end  He  had  in  view  in  His  sufferings,  and 
which  He  so  effectually  obtained.  The  glory  of  God,  and  the  salvation  of  sinners. 
II.  Practical  improvement.  1.  We  are  here  called  to  admire  and  adore  the 
unsearchable  wisdom  and  imspeakable  love  of  God.  2.  The  guilt  and  danger  of 
all  who  are  not  reconciled  to  God.  3.  The  encouragement  of  sinners  to  return  to 
God  through  Christ.  4.  He  is  able  to  uphold  the  weakest  Christian  in  the  midst  of 
the  most  dangerous  temptations,  though  He  often  suffers  the  self-sufficient  to  fall 
before  His  enemies.  Wherefore  believe  in  the  almighty  power  of  your  Redeemer. 
5.  The  comfort  of  every  disconsolate  soul.  (/.  Witherspoon.)  Mighty  to  save. — 
Might  and  mercy: — Most  of  our  ideas  of  might  are  associated  with  the  "terrible 
majesty  of  God.  E.  g.  the  deluge ;  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain  ;  earthquakes, 
etc.  These  show  might  in  connection  with  judgment.  The  text  directs  our  thoughts 
to  might  in  connection  with  mercy.  I.  Power  in  the  working  out  op  thb 
great  redemptive  plan.  1.  Typical  sacrifices.  2.  Prophetic  ministry.  S.Christ's 
atonement  and  intercession.  II.  Power  in  the  saving  agency  at  wokk  in  the 
WORLD.  1.  The  Divine  Spirit.  2.  The  Church  of  Christ.  III.  Power  as  seen 
IN  the  lives  of  those  saved  by  Divine  mercy.  1.  Their  numbers.  "A 
great  multitude."  2.  Their  characters.  Mary  Magdalene  ;  Saul  of  Tarsus  ;  the 
Corinthians  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  IV.  Power  in  the  completion  of  the  work  of 
MERCY.  Resurrection  of  body,  and  eternal  imion  of  body  and  soul  in  glory.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  The  divine  right  of  mercy  does  not  render  personal  effort  unnecessary. 
2.  The  fact  that  the  Divine  power  and  mercy  are  united  in  seeking  our  salvation 
should  lead  us  to  immediate  and  hearty  surrender  to  God.  (^Julius  Brigg.)  Glorious 
Almightiness  of  the  Redeemer: — The  Redeemer's  mightiness  to  save  may  be  seen — 1. 
In  the  nature  of  the  evil  from  which  He  saves.  So  we  measm-e  the  success 
of  a  physician,  a  statesman,  a  warrior.  Christ  saves  from  sin,  the  most  malignant 
disease — from  sin,  the  wildest  internal  revolt — from  sin,  the  strongest  aggressive  foe. 
In  this  saving  work  this  "  Announcer  of  Righteousness  "  is  almighty  m  atonement 
and  in  redemption.  He  makes  a  man  right  with  God,  ri^t  with  self,  right  with 
the  universe.  II.  In  the  biographies  of  those  Hb  has  saved.  The 
Christ  of  the  ages  has  transformed  multitudes.  His  victoiy  on  the  Cross  over  the 
heart  of  the  dying  thief  is  but  a  pledge  and  specimen  of  His  victory  by  the  Cross 
over  a  million  others.     Mary,   Saol,  Augustine,   Bimyan,  are  but  oonspioaona 


CHAP.ixni.]  ISAIAH,  403 

instances  out  of  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number.  III.  In  the  work 
He  has  yet  to  accomplish.  The  Divine  predictions  are,  "  As  I  live,  the  whole 
earth  shall  be  filled  with  My  glory."  "  He  must  reign,"  etc.  How  vast  the  work 
of  the  Redeemer  yet  to  be  done  I  Its  vastness  is  illustrated  in — 1.  Individual 
characters  yet  to  be  renewed  and  perfected.  Introspection  helps  us  to  understand 
this.  2.  The  vast  area  of  human  lives  to  be  regenerated.  The  redemptive  work  is 
to  girdle  the  entire  globe.  3.  The  ages  through  which  this  work  will  continue. 
For  such  stubborn,  widely-extended,  and  long-enduring  sinners,  only  He  can  be 
equal  who  is  "mighty  to  save."    {17.  R.   Thomas,  B.A.)    A  mighty  Saviour: — 

1.  What  are  we  to  ttkderstand  by  the  words  "to  save"?  Something 
more  than  just  delivering  penitents  from  going  down  to  hell.  By  the  words  "  to 
save,"  I  understand  the  whole  of  the  great  work  of  salvation,  from  the  first  hol^ 
desire,  the  first  spiritual  conviction,  onward  to  complete  sanctification.  All  this 
done  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  II.  How  CAN  we  prove  that  Christ  is 
"  mighty  to  save  "  ?  The  argument  is,  that  He  has  done  it.  We  need  no  other; 
it  were  superfluous  to  add  another.  He  has  saved  men  in  the  full  extent  and 
meaning  of  the  word  which  we  have  endeavoured  to  explain.  The  best  proof  you 
can  ever  have  of  God's  being  mighty  to  save  is,  that  He  saved  you.  III.  Why  IS 
Christ  ' '  mighty  to  save    ?    1 .  Because  of  the  infinite  efficacy  of  his  atoning  blood. 

2.  Because  of  the  omnipotent  influence  of  His  Divine  Spirit.  IV.  What  are  the 
inferences  to  be  derived  from  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  is  "  mighty 
to  save  "  ?  1.  Ministers  should  preach  in 'faith.  2.  There  is  encouragement  for 
men  and  women  who  are  praying  to  God  for  their  friends.  3.  Here  is  encourage- 
ment for  the  seeking  sinner.  {C.  R.  Spurgeon.)  Omnipotent  to  save : — I.  In  thb 
dignity  of  the  nature  of  Christ,  and  the  mysterious  constitution  of  His 
Person  we  have  the  best  of  reasons  for  concluding  that  He  is  omnipotent 
to  save.  II.  In  the  triumph  of  Christ  over  all  His  and  oub  enemies  we 
have  another  reason  for  believing  that  He  is  omnipotent  to  save.  III.  In 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  state  of  the  dead  we  have  another 
reason  to  believe  that  He  is  omnipotent  to  save.  IV.  In  the  exaltation 
of  Christ  to  glory  we  have  another  and  a  convincing  evidence  that  He  is 

MIGHTY  TO  SAVE.  V.  In  THE  POSITIVE  DECLARATIONS  OF  SORIPTURE  ON  THIS 
SUBJECT,  AND  IN  PLAIN  MATTERS  OF  FACT,  IN  THESE  SCRIPTURES  RECORDED,  WE 
HAVE  THE  MOST  INTELLIGIBLE  EVIDENCE  THAT  He  IS  MIGHTY  TO  SAVE.  VI.  IN 
THEIR  OWN  EXPERIENCE  ALL  GOOD   CHRISTIANS   HAVE   AN   EVIDENCE   OF  THE   FACT 

THAT  Christ  is  omnipotent  to  save.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  beware  of  trusting  in 
any  power  but  that  of  Christ.  2.  Let  us  rejoice  that  He  is  in  all  points  such  a 
Saviour  as  we  require.  (  W.  Craig. )  Christ's  power  to  save : — I.  Show  that  this 
18  a  prediction  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  II.  Consider  that  attribute 
OF  THE  Lord  Jesus  to  which  the  text  refers.  "  Mighty  to  save."  III.  Draw 
SOME  practical  INFERENCES.  If  Christ  is  mighty  to  save — 1.  Ministers  have  the 
best  motives  to  preach  the  Gospel  with  unlimited  freedom,  energy  and  zeal.  2. 
Abundant  encouragement  is  provided  even  for  those  who  are  ready  to  sink  in 
despair.  3.  Whatever  disastrous  events  may  come,  the  Church  is  secure.  4.  If 
you  have  experienced  His  might  and  His  mercy,  let  it  be  your  imiform  aim  to 
show  forth  His  praise  both  by  your  lips  and  by  your  life.  (Essex  Congregational 
Remembrancer. ) 

Ver.  3.  I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone. — The  single-handed  conquest. — I. 
The  INTERESTING  FIGURE  EMPLOYED.  "I  have  trodden  the  winepress."  Thisia 
Jesus  speaking  after  His  conquest  over  His  foes,  1.  This  denotes  the  supreme  con- 
tempt with  which  the  mighty  Conqueror  regarded  the  enemies  whom  He  had  over- 
come. It  is  as  if  He  had  said,  "I  compare  My  victory  over  them  to  nothing  but 
the  treading  of  the  winepress."  2.  There  is  in  the  figure  an  intimation  of  toil  and 
labour  ;  for  the  fruit  of  the  vine  is  not  bruised  without  hard  work.  So  the  mighty 
Conqueror,  though,  in  contempt.  He  says  His  foes  were  as  nothing  but  the  grapes  of 
the  vintage  to  His  might ;  yet,  speaking  as  a  man  like  unto  us,  He  had  something 
to  do  to  overcome  His  foes.  3.  Moreover,  there  ia  an  allusion  to  the  staining  of  the 
garments.  II.  The  glorious  fact  stated.  "I  have  trodden  the  winepress." 
III.  The  solitary  Conqueror  described.  "  I  have  trodden  the  winepress 
alone."  IV.  Some  sweet  and  salutary  considerations  suggested  by  this 
SUBJECT.  1.  The  first  inference  is,  there  is  no  winepress  of  Divine  wrath  for  thee, 
0  belijver,  to  tread.  2.  There  are  winepresses  of  suffering,  although  not  of  punish- 
ment, which  thou  wilt  have  to  tread.    But  I  want  thee  to  remember  that  thou  wilt 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  uoii, 

not  have  to  tread  these  winepresses  alone.  3.  But  since  Jesus  trod  the  winepress 
alone,  I  beseech  you  give  all  things  to  Him.  Alone  He  suffered ;  will  you  not  love 
TTim  alone  ?  Alone  He  trod  the  winepress ;  wiU  you  not  serve  Him  1  Alone  He 
purchased  your  redemption  ;  will  you  not  be  His  property,  and  His  alone  1  {0.  S, 
Spiirgeon.)  The  lonely  treader: — I.  Jesus  Christ  was  able  to  tread  the  wine- 
press ALONE.  This  is  characteristic  of  a  great  man,  that  he  is  able  to  stand  alone. 
It  does  not  follow  that  a  man  is  great  because  he  stands  alone.  He  may  be  selfish  ; 
and  not  wishing  to  be  pained  by  the  sorrows  of  humanity,  and  not  desiring  to  give 
his  labour  and  substance  for  the  alleviation  of  those  evils  which  afflict  humanity,  he 
shuts  himself  off  from  society.  Thus  his  self-inflicted  loneliness  will  be  self-inflicted 
torture.  Greater  would  be  his  happiness  if  he  had  greater  self-denial.  The  man 
who  stands  alone  through  nervous  sensibility  is  in  a  measure  to  be  pitied  and  to  be 
helped.  Every  rough  word  strikes  like  a  barbed  arrow  into  the  centre  of  his  nature. 
But  it  was  neither  selfishness  nor  nervous  sensibility  which  caused  Jesus  Christ  to  be 
a  lonely  man.  The  Saviour  stood  alone  by  reason  of  the  sublime  grandeur  of  His 
nature.  The  good  man  is  satisfied  from  himself,  and  the  Saviour  was  for  Himself 
all-sufficient.  Society  was  not  needful  to  Him  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  needful  for 
other  men.  But  it  is  when  a  man  has  to  accomplish  some  vast  enterprise  that  his 
power  to  stand  alone  is  tested.  The  greatness  of  John  the  Baptist  was  revealed,  not 
when  the  crowds  thronged  to  his  preaching,  not  when  the  multitudes  flocked  to  Ms 
baptism  ;  but  when  he  was  cast  into  prison,  and  alone  he  was  left  to  ponder  over  the 
world's  cruel  baseness,  and  the  difficulty  of  reforming  sinning  men.  The  greatness 
of  Luther  was  seen,  not  when  men  admired  his  trenchant  exposures  of  Romish  errors, 
not  when  the  crowds  thronged  his  way  and  crowded  the  houses  and  windows  to  see 
him  pass ;  but  when  he  stood  before  that  imposing  gathering  which  held  his  life  in 
its  hands,  and  said,  "  Here  I  stand,  I  can  do  no  other ;  may  God  help  me.  Amen." 
Only  great  men  can  do  the  world's  greatest  works  alone.  Now  the  greatest  work  of 
all  was  that  which  Jesus  Christ  accomplished  when  He  trod  the  winepress  alone. 
Some  say  that  He  was  only  a  great  Teacher.  But  it  is  difficult  to  utter  new  truths ; 
and  great  teachers  have  found  it  needful  for  their  success  to  surround  themselves 
with  sympathizing  adherents.  As  a  great  Teacher  Jesus  was  able  to  stand  alone. 
The  rude  world  was  not  ready  for  His  moral  lessons,  and  even  His  disciples  could  not 
appreciate  the  spirituality  of  His  utterances.  But  He  was  more  than  a  great  Teacher. 
He  came  to  give  Himself  to  be  the  light  and  the  life  of  men.  And  in  carrying  out 
the  mediatorial  purpose  He  was  able  to  stand  alone ;  for  the  indwelling  Divinity 
imparted  sublime  power.  And  we,  looking  back  to  His  finished  work,  resting  upon 
it  by  faith,  and  deriving  from  it  unspeakable  blessings,  can  triumphantly  declare 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  able  to  tread  the  winepress  alone.  II.  Jesus  Christ  was 
WILLING  TO  tread  THE  WINEPRESS  ALONE.  The  perfectly-coustituted  and  fully- 
developed  man  loves  society.  The  great  man  loves  solitude  ;  but  he  also  delights  in 
social  pleasures  ;  and,  though  able  to  stand  alone,  may  not  be  willing  to  do  so  to  the 
extent  that  his  circumstances  demand.  Or,  again,  a  man  may  be  able  to  do  some 
great  work  for  the  world's  benefit,  but  says,  "  If  there  is  no  one  to  help,  if  there  is 
no  one  with  sufficient  benevolence  to  sacrifice  himself  for  the  good  of  humanity,  I  shall 
not  single-handed  undertake  the  work."  Now  Jesus  Christ  did  not  move  through 
this  world  as  a  gloomy  recluse,  and  yet  He  did  not  give  full  play  to  the  social  part  of 
His  nature,  because  it  was  needful  for  Him  to  be  much  in  solitude  that  His  Divine 
mission  might  be  successful.  III.  Jesus  Christ  was  constrained  to  tread 
THE  winepress  ALONE.  By  the  sting  of  the  lash  the  unwilling  slave  may  be  com- 
pelled to  get  into  the  winepress  and  tread  out  the  grapes,  but  no  such  compulsion 
could  be  applied  to  the  Redeemer.  He  had  all  power — power  over  Himself  as  well 
as  over  others  ;  but  He  kept  His  power  in  check.  He  was  compelled  by  the  sweet 
force  of  His  own  great  love.  And  the  solitariness  of  Jesus  brings  to  our  view  the 
greatness  of  His  love  most  vividly.  IV.  Jesus  Christ  sorrowed  to  tread  the 
WINEPRESS  ALONE.  He  possessed  a  sympathetic  nature,  and  He  would  be  made 
sorrowful  by  the  fact  that  His  mission  separated  Him  from  the  loves  and  the  sympathies 
of  mankind.  V.  Jesus  Christ  rejoiced  to  tread  the  winepress  alone. 
There  is  great  joy  as  well  as  great  sorrow  in  all  spiritual  work ;  and  Jesus  tasted 
both  in  fullest  measure.  This  is  the  climax  of  benevolence,  that  it  can  rejoice  in 
suffering  for  the  welfare  of  others.  And  Jesus  rejoiced  to  tread  the  winepress  alone, 
for  He  foresaw  the  beneficent  and  widespread  results  of  His  labours.  'The  treader- 
ont  of  grapes  is  producing  a  refreshing  beverage  for  society ;  but  Jesus  Christ  was 
producing  not  only  a  refreshing  but  a  healing  and  reviving  remedy  for  humanity  to 
the  very  close  of  the  world's  mstory.     Alone  He  trod  the  winepress,  but  not  alone 


€HAP.  uan.}  ISAIAH.  405 

does  He  drink  of  the  new  wine,  for  He  eaves  men  in  order  that  they  may  participate 
in  the  results  of  His  solitary  labours.  Learn — 1.  To  each  man  there  is  a  winepress 
to  tread.  We  must  in  a  sense  tread  the  winepress  the  Saviour  trod,  for  we  must  be 
crucified  together  with  Christ;  we  must  penitently  and  believingly  recognize  the 
fact  that  He  suffered  for  our  sins.  But  more  than  tnat,  each  man  wUl  have  his  own 
winepress  to  tread.  Each  man  has  his  own  work  to  do,  his  own  cup  of  sorrow  to 
drink,  his  own  besetting  sin  to  conquer,  his  special  thorn  to  endure.  2.  This  wine- 
press must  be  trodden  alone.  We  cannot  be  saved  by  proxy.  Jesus  Christ,  even  in 
the  higher  departments  of  His  work — work  which  we  cannot  do — left  us  an  Example, 
or  indirectly  taught  us  how  we  are  to  work.  Alone  each  one  must  tread  the  wine- 
press. The  great  works  of  life  must  be  done  alone.  Moral  victories  must  be  gained 
when  there  are  none  present  to  applaud.  3.  The  blessed  results  of  lonely  treading 
will  be  diffusive.  No  man  can  do  faithful  soul-work  without  blessing  others  as  weU 
as  himself.  4.  The  glorious  rewards  of  lonely  treading  will  be  publicly  bestowed. 
In  a  measure  it  is  so  in  this  world.  In  a  complete  measure  it  wiU  be  so  in  that 
world  where  rewards  are  rightly  administered.  The  scholar  works  alone,  but  receives 
his  prize  in  public.  The  investigator  toils  in  solitude,  but  publicly  his  labours  are 
acknowledged.  We  sow  in  the  tears  of  solitary  working  but  we  reap  in  the  joy 
of  many  approvals.  The  truth  commands  so  few  admirers  in  this  world  of  error  that 
we  are  often  found  almost  alone  in  its  defence  and  in  its  advocacy  ;  but  to  every 
faithful  defender  of  truth  will  Jesus  Christ  say  in  the  presence  of  assembled  nations, 
""  WeU  done,  goodand  faithftd  servant."  ( JF.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Christ's  loneliness : — 
There  is  always  a  certain  degree  of  solitariness  about  a  great  mind.  What  is  thus 
true  of  all  great  minds  must  have  been,  beyond  aU  others,  characteristic  of  the  mind 
of  Him  who,  with  all  His  real  humanity,  could  "think  it  no  robbery  to  be  equal 
with  God."  You  who  are  parents  have,  I  dare  say,  often  felt  struck  by  the  reflec- 
tion, what  a  world  of  thoughts,  and  cares,  and  anxieties  are  constantly  present  to 
your  minds  into  which  your  children  cannot  enter.  Perhaps  there  is  no  spectacle  so 
exquisitely  touching  as  that  which  one  sometimes  witnesses  in  a  house  of  mourning — 
the  elder  members  of  the  family  bowed  down  to  the  dust  by  some  heavy  sorrow, 
whilst  the  little  children  sport  around  in  unconscious  playfulness.  What  children 
are  to  the  mature-minded  man,  the  rest  of  mankind  were  to  Jesus.  Nay,  such  an 
illustration  falls  far  short  of  conveying  to  us  an  adequate  representation  of  the 
measureless  inferiority  of  all  other  minds  to  that  mighty,  mysterious  Spirit  that 
dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  Jesus.  "He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by 
Him,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not."  "  The  light  shone  in  darkness,  and  the  dark- 
ness comprehended  it  not."  He  had  nothing  in  common  with  the  spirit  of  the 
times  in  which  He  lived.  His  views,  principles,  motives,  associations,  object  of  life, 
were  not  those  of  His  own  nation,  nor  of  any  land  or  clime  on  earth :  they  were 
drawn  from  the  infinite,  the  eternal.  He  moved  among  a  narrow-minded,  grovel- 
ling, sensual  race,  breathing  a  spirit  of  ineffable  purity  and  holiness.  {J.  Caird,  B.B.) 
The  solitariness  of  Christ's  sufferings : — By  this  I  mean  not  that  they  were  solitary  or 
peculiar  as  being  propitiatory  sufferings,  though  in  this  they  were  indeed  distinguished 
from  the  suff"erings  of  all  other  men.  Nor  do  I  mean  merely  that  they  were  suffer- 
ings of  extraordinary  and  unexampled  severity,  though  that  also  is  true.  But  there 
were  connected  with  the  nature  of  this  mysterious  Sufferer  certain  features  or  con- 
ditions which  rendered  His  sorrows  such  as  no  other  of  our  race  could  endure, — 
certain  facts  which  gave  to  them,  as  to  His  whole  history,  a  character  of  elevation 
and  awfulness,  beyond  the  range  of  mere  human  experience.  Amid  all  the  sons  and 
daughters  of  son'ow  that  crowd  the  page  of  human  history,  Jesus  yet  stands  forth 
"  the  Man  of  sorrows," — the  solitary  Sufferer  of  humanity.  I.  All  His  suffer- 
ings WERE,  LONG  ERE  THEIR  ACTUAL  OCCURRENCE,  CLEARLY  AND  FULLY  FORE- 
BEEN.  II.  They  were  the  sorrows  of  an  infinitely  pure  and  perfect 
MIND.  As  it  is  the  cup  that  is  deepest  that  can  be  filled  the  fullest — as  it  is  the  tree 
that  rears  its  head  the  nighest  that  feels  most  the  fury  of  the  storm,  so  it  is  the  soul 
that  is  largest  and  most  exalted  that  is  capable  of  the  greatest  sorrows.  A  little, 
narrow,  selfish,  uncultured  mind  is  liable  to  comparatively  few  troubles.  The  range 
alike  of  its  joys  and  its  sorrows  is  limited  and  contracted.  It  presents  but  a  narrow 
target  to  the  arrows  of  misfortune,  and  it  escapes  uninjured  where  a  broader  spirit 
would  be  "  pierced  through  with  many  sorrows.  The  insect  in  the  summer  breeze, 
brimful  of  mere  animal  happiness,  is  exposed  to  mere  animal  privation  and  pain. 
Its  life  is  but  one  long  sensation.  The  little  child,  again,  has  fewer  capacities  of 
fiufiFering,  fewer  cares  and  anxieties,  and  troubles,  than  the  mature-minded  man, — 
the  savage  than  the  civilized  being, — ^the  ignorant,  unrefined,  unreflecting  man, 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lrni, 

than  the  man  of  high  intellectual  and  moral  culture,  of  thoughtfulness  and  refine- 
ment  of  taste  and  feeling.  It  ia  the  great  law  of  life  that  every  advancing  power, 
every  improvement,  physical,  intellectual,  moral  or  spiritual,  which  a  man  gains, 
carries  with  it,  as  the  necessary  penalty,  an  additional  liability,  a  new  degree  of 
exposure  to  surrounding  evils.  Turn  your  thoughts  to  one  who  has  begun  to  receive 
that  highest  of  all  culture,  the  renewing  influence  of  Divine  grace, — is  it  not  so  that 
he,  too,  becomes  susceptible,  in  such  a  world  as  this,  of  pains  and  sorrows  unfelt 
before  ?  The  blind  know  not  the  pains  of  sight,  nor  the  deaf  of  sound,  nor  the  dead 
and  insensible  of  living  and  breathing  men.  And  so  the  quickening  touch  of  God's 
Spirit  wakes  the  believer's  soul  from  a  state  of  moral  insensibility  and  death,  to  one 
in  which  the  iimer  eye  can  be  pained  by  deformities,  and  the  ear  hj  discords,  and 
the  spiritual  nature  by  sicknesses  and  troubles,  of  which  hitherto  it  had  been  all 
unconscious.  But  if  aU  this  be  so,  how  far  beyond  aU  human  experience,  how  fiu: 
even  beyond  aU  human  comprehension,  must  have  been  the  sufferings  of  the  soul  of 
Jesus.  Conceive  of  the  sun  struck  out  of  yonder  heavens,  and  the  world  suddenly 
overwhelmed  with  the  horror  of  perpetual  darkness  and  cold.  Imagine  the  sustaining 
providence  of  God  withdrawn  from  the  universe,  and  everything  hurrying  to  desolation 
and  ruin.  But  no  emblem,  no  comparison  can  convey  to  us  but  the  faintest  con- 
ception of  what  it  was  for  God's  dear  Son,  as  if  God-deserted,  to  die.  III.  It  was 
THE  SORROW  OF  A  CREATOR  AMID  His  RUINED  WORKS.  The  feelings  of  Jesus  in 
beholding  and  living  amidst  the  moral  ruin  and  degradation  of  mankind  were  not 
those  merely  of  an  exquisitely  pure  and  sensitive  human  spirit:  they  flowed  from 
a  far  deeper  and  more  awful  source.  It  was  nothing  less  than  the  world's  great 
Creator  that,  concealed  in  that  humble  guise,  surveyed  and  moved  for  thirty  years 
amidst  the  ruins  of  His  fairest,  noblest  work,  Iving  widespread  around  Him  I 
(Gen.  vi.  5,  6 ;  Lk.  xix.  41,  42.)  There  is  a  sort  of  sentimental  melancholy  which 
gathers  over  the  mind  of  one  who  surveys  the  scene  of  some  great  nation's  bygone 
glory,  now,  it  may  be,  strewn  only  with  wreck  of  departed  greatness.  But  surely 
an  emotion  of  a  far  deeper  kind  may  well  be  called  forth  in  the  thoughtful  mind 
when  contemplating  the  mournful  moral  and  spiritual  degradation  of  humanity, 
as  contrasted  with  the  glory  of  its  original  structure,  and  the  splendours  of  that 
destiny  for  which  it  was  created !  Even  the  body,  the  mere  tabernacle  in  which  the 
soul  resides,  a  work  which  only  Deity  could  create,  is  a  work  over  whose  ruin  even 
Deity  might  mourn.  Yet  every  sick-bed  by  which  Jesus  stood,  and  every  sufferer's 
cry  He  heard,  and  every  bier  and  grave  to  which  His  steps  were  led,  were  to  His 
eye  the  ruthless  destruction  of  another  and  another  glorious  work  of  God — the  proofe 
of  the  triumph  of  the  destroyer  over  the  results  of  infinite  wisdom  and  skiU.  But 
the  destruction  of  the  body  is  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  ruin  of  the  souL 
Shall  we  wonder,  then,  that  the  Creator  of  such  a  work  as  this — so  noble,  so  death- 
less, so  Divine,  should  have  experienced  bitter  grief  for  its  ruin  ?  Reflections :  1. 
AU  such  views  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  are  most  obviously  suggestive  of  gratitude 
for  His  marvellous  self-devotion  on  our  behalf.  2.  Is  not  this  subject  fraught  with 
a  most  solemn  warning  to  all  who  are  living  in  carelessness  or  indifference  to  the 
spiritual  interests  of  themselves  and  others  ?  What  more  awful  intimation  could  be 
conveyed  to  us  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  of  the  infatuation  of  those  who  are  indifferent 
to  its  fatal  consequences,  than  in  the  sorrow  of  Jesus?  3.  Such  views  of  the 
sufferings  of  Jesus  afford  to  every  penitent  soul  the  strongest  encouragement  to  rely 
on  the  Saviour's  love.  Your  salvation  was  an  object  which  even  at  such  a  fear  fiu 
cost  He  was  willing  to  seek  ;  and  think  you  He  is  less  willing  to  seek  it  now  ? 
{IMd.)  The  loneliness  of  Christ  in  His  stifferings: — "We  behold  the  Redeemer-— I. 
Deserted  by  human  friends.  No  human  friends  could  understand  or  sympathize 
in  the  work  of  Christ.  It  is  the  fate  of  many  men  to  go  through  life  alone.  They 
may  have  many  relatives,  acquaintances,  companions,  and  derive  much  pleasure 
from  their  society  ;  but  they  may  never  meet  with  a  truly  "  kindred  spirit."  There 
are  two  kinds  of  loneliness — the  isolation  of  distance  and  the  loneliness  of  the 
heart ;  and  the  latter  is  the  far  more  complete  and  sad  of  the  two.  The  fisherman, 
alone  at  night  upon  the  sea,  with  no  other  living  being  near,  no  sound  but  the 
plashing  of  the  wavelets,  no  sight  but  of  the  occasional  struggling  of  a  star  through 
the  clouds,  may  be  in  spirit  at  his  cottage  home  upon  the  beach,  and  space  and  time 
are  annihilated,  and  his  heart  peopled  with  many  a  dear  familiar  form.  But  far 
different  is  the  loneliness  of  the  heart  I  What  solitude  is  there  comparable  to  the 
spiritual  loneliness  of  hinn  who,  with  a  soul  filled  with  sadness,  finds  himself  jostled 
in  the  midst  of  a  gay  and  pleasure-seeking  crowd?  So  is  it  with  the  man  of 
transcendent  goodness  or  genius.    Such  a  one  must,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  be 


CHAP,  inn.]  ISAIAH.  407 

lonely.  This  it  was  which  constituted  the  peculiar  bitterness  of  the  trial  of  Elijah 
(1  Kings  xix.  14).  It  has  often  been  said  that  the  possession  of  a  real  and  tnie- 
nearted  Mend  is  at  once  the  greatest  and  the  rarest  of  earthly  blessings ;  such  a 
friend  as  was  Jonathan  to  David.  But  if  such  friendships  are  rare  among  men,  how 
utterly  impossible  was  it  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  should  find  a 
friend  and  sympathizer,  in  the  truest  sense  of  those  words,  among  the  sons  of  men. 
Twelve  chosen  associates,  indeed,  He  had,  but  they  were  utterly  incapable,  as  long 
as  He  lived  below,  even  of  understanding  Him,  much  less  could  they  enter  into,  and 
sympathize  with,  the  great  work  of  His  life  and  death.  That  work  waa  essentially 
a  lonely  one.  For — 1.  He  alone  could  accomplish  our  redemption.  2.  Christ  was 
alone  in  His  foreknowledge.  We  often  hear  those  who  have  passed  through  some 
heavy  trial  say,  '*  If  I  had  known  beforehand  what  I  had  to  endure,  I  could  not  have 
borne  it ;  I  shoiild  have  sunk  under  the  appalling  prospect  I "  So  mercifully  has  our 
Heavenly  Father,  knowing  our  frame,  hidden  the  things  that  are  to  be  from  our 
eyes.  But  there  was  this  ineflFable  aggravation  of  the  grief  of  the  "  Man  of  sorrows," 
that,  to  the  suffering  of  the  present,  there  was  superadded  the  heavier  prospect  of 
the  future.  3.  Then,  too,  from  the  Divine  purity  and  loftiness  of  His  soul,  Christ 
guffered  far  more  than  any  mere  man  could  suffer.  The  more  refined  and  elevated  a 
man's  nature  is,  the  more  sensitive  he  is  apt  to  be  ;  the  keener  are  his  sorrows,  and 
the  more  ecstatic  his  joys.  But  sin,  and  death  its  punishment,  the  whole  world's 
burden  of  which  rested  upon  the  pure  soul  of  the  Redeemer,  had  for  Him  a  dark  and 
dreadful  reality  of  horror,  inconceivable  by  any  of  us  whose  innermost  heart  has  been 
tainted  with  the  love  of  sin.  4.  Moreover,  in  another  way,  the  grief  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  this  world  was  what  the  sorrow  of  no  mere  man  could  be,  the  sorrow 
of  the  Creator  in  the  midst  of  His  ruined  works.  5.  Yet  again,  in  His  power  of 
omniscience  He  stood  "  alone."  '*  He  that  increaseth  knowledge,  increaseth  sorrow." 
If  we  could  discern  the  secrets  of  all  hearts,  if  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  a  crowd 
could  be  rendered  audible  to  us,  how  continually  should  we  be  overwhelmed  with 
shame  and  horror.  But  Christ  knew  all  men.  II.  Left  alone  by  God.  When 
He  foretold  to  the  disciples  their  desertion.  He  added,  "And  yet  I  am  not  alone, 
because  My  Father  is  with  Me."  But  in  the  hour  of  His  deepest  agony  there  was 
an  exception  even  to  that  companionship  of  eternity.  Far  otherwise  has  it  been 
with  the  martyrs  of  Jesus,  and  with  all  His  faithful  people  since,  in  the  "article  of 
death."  Conclusion:  1.  Christ  "trod  the  winepress  alone"  for  you.  Mourn, 
therefore,  and  rejoice.  2.  Christ  will  "tread  the  winepress  alone"  again:  the 
winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God.  3.  It  is  oftentimes  the  lot  of  God's  people  to  be 
called  upon  in  some  degree  to  "tread  the  winepress  alone."  Daniel  had  to  do  so. 
But  remember  for  your  encouragement  that,  in  the  highest  sense,  you  never  can  be 
alone  in  the  conflict.  Your  Saviour  met  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  alone, 
that  you  might  never  have  to  wage  a  single-handed  warfare,  never  be  left  without  a 
higher  Presence  in  the  good  fight  of  faith.  {R.  E.  Nolloth,  M.A.)  The  solitvde  of 
Christ  • — I.  Christ  was  alone  in  the  view  He  had  of  the  woek  He  came  to 
ACCOMPLISH.  The  people  were  looking  for  one  thing,  and  He  was  labouring  for 
another.  Of  aU  earthly  beings  His  mother  was,  for  a  long  season,  the  nearest  to 
Him.  She  cherished  in  her  heart,  as  amongst  her  choicest  treasmres,  all  the  words 
which  both  human  and  angelic  prophets  had  spoken  to  her.  But  we  get  a  glimpse 
of  a  great  gulf  between  even  her  and  Him.  All  the  sadness  involved  in  this  kind  of 
solitude  we  cannot  appreciate.  We  can  only  get  some  faint  perceptions  of  it  from 
illustrations  drawn  from  human  experience.  We  know  that  if  a  man  have  some 
loving  purpose  in  his  heart,  and  some  great  plan  for  achieving  it,  there  is  nothing  so 
cheers  nim  as  to  meet  with  some  one  who  sees  the  matter  very  much  as  he  sees  it, 
and  who  will  listen  intelligently  and  with  interest  while  he  sets  forth  the  wisdom  of 
his  plan  and  the  worth  of  his  purpose.  Think  of  a  Christian  man  going  to  a  strange 
shore,  where  painted  savages  dwell.  He  sets  his  heart  and  his  hands  to  the  work  of 
educating  and  evangelizing  them.  When  he  begins  his  work,  who  amongst  them 
oan  understand  what  he  wants  to  do  ?  When  he  wants  to  feel  that  another  heart 
beats  in  harmony  with  his  own,  he  must  turn  from  man  to  God.  Inquire  of  him, 
and  he  will  tell  you  that  this  is  one  of  the  heaviest  trials  he  has  to  bear.  Christ 
came  from  heaven  to  earth  on  the  grandest  errand  that  wisdom  ever  designed  or 
mercy  ever  proposed.  He  saw  this  world  wandering  far  away  from  God,  to  perish 
there.  He  set  His  heart  on  bringing  back  the  soul  from  its  wandering  to  the  bosom 
of  Him  who  made  it ;  but,  strange  to  say.  He  had  suffered,  died,  come  back  from  the 
dead,  risen  again  to  His  native  skies,  before  even  His  own  disciples  had  clear  ideas 
of  why  He  had  clothed  Himself  in  mortal  flesh,  passed  through  a  baptism  of  agony, 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxiu. 

and  shed  His  blood  on  the  Cross.  11.  He  was  alone  in  His  burning  zeal  fob 
THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  His  woEK.  A  child  sees  that  his  father  is  very  earnest 
about  some  matter.  He  cannot  see  clearly  what  it  is,  still  less  can  he  explain  it  to 
others,  and  yet  he  catches  the  fire  from  nis  father's  heart,  and  in  his  little  way  he 
is  all  burning  with  desire  that  his  father  may  succeed  in  that  about  which  he  is  so 
zealous.  The  heart  may  be  quick  to  sympathize  where  the  head  is  not  wise  enough 
to  understand.  Not  even  such  help  as  this  did  Jesus  have  when  He  for  us  was 
leading  the  life  of  sorrow,  when  He  for  us  was  dying  the  death  of  shame.  In  thia 
matter  His  own  disciples  were  not  much  better  than  the  carnal-minded  multitude. 
Do  not  we  too  frequently  leave  the  Saviour  in  the  same  solitude  even  now  ?  We 
know  what  His  desires  are  concerning  us.  "This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  our 
sanctification. "  But,  alas  1  how  often  it  happens  that  while  He  looks  and  longs  for 
that,  our  strongest  desires  and  most  diligent  endeavours  tend  in  another  direction  ; 
while  His  Word  and  Spirit,  while  His  providence  and  grace,  are  striving  for  our 
holiness,  how  often  we  make  some  other  thing  supreme  !  III.  Jesus  was  alone  in 
His  thottghts  as  to  the  manner  of  accomplishing  His  work.  There  was  one 
thing  the  Saviour  could  not  make  His  disciples  clearly  see — that  He  had  come  into 
the  world  to  die,  and  that  His  death  was  to  be  the  life  of  the  world.  This  kind  of 
solitude  we  may  make  the  Saviour  to  suffer  even  now.  We  do  in  this  same  way  put 
Him  to  shame  when  we  think  that  His  will  can  be  done  without  uplifting  His  Cross, 
in  the  full  and  frequent  setting  forth  of  His  atoning  death.  {C.  Fince.)  Christ 
aZone : — I.  A  general  view  of  the  prophecy.  It  stands  by  itself.  The  general 
subject  of  the  chapter  is  the  destruction  of  the  enemies  of  God.  The  scene  is  one  of 
surpassing  sublimity,  as  one  which  tells  of  a  conquering  Messiah.  Every  enemy 
shall  be  trampled  under  foot ;  but  it  shall  be  Christ's  own  work,  and  one  in  whion 
He  will  have  no  helper.  II.  The  lessons  that  may  be  gathered  from  this  view 
of  the  prophecy.  1.  Christ  is  alone  in  His  great  work,  as  against  aU  other 
mediators,  all  other  saviours,  all  other  intercessors,  all  who,  whether  as  saint,  angel, 
or  glorified  spirit,  should  be  set  up  by  a  false  theology  to  bridge  over  the  infinite 
gulf  between  us  and  God.  And  therefore  the  work  can  be  done  by  none  but  Christ. 
2.  The  work  of  Christ  is  alone — has  been  supplemented  and  helped  by  no  human 
works  and  services.  3.  This  repudiation  of  anything  in  ourselves  that  shares  in  the 
honour  of  Christ's  mediation  is  to  be  extended  to  our  faith.  I  believe  there  are  very 
many  persons  who  would  have  a  holy  and  jealous  shrinking  from  having  a  saviour 
in  their  works,  who  do  not  see  how  near  they  may  go  towards  having  a  saviour  in 
their  faith ;  yet  this  they  do  when,  as  the  ground  of  their  justification,  they  trust 
on  the  realized  experience  of  a  strong  personal  confidence,  and  that  because  it  is 
strong.  The  mistake  arises  from  their  not  perceiving  that  they  must  be  justified  by 
something  out  of  themselves,  and  not  by  anything  in  themselves — by  what  Christ 
has  wrought  for  them,  and  not  by  anything  which  the  Spirit  may  have  wrought  in 
them.  This  thought  should  be  comforting  to  us  under  those  fluctuations  of  trust 
and  weakened  hold  upon  the  promises  which  may  fall  to  the  lot  of  every  one  of  UB. 
4.  This  ia  said  to  exclude  from  all  part  or  lot  in  Christ's  work,  those  frames,  feelings, 
convictions,  emotions  of  the  spiritual  mind,  which  too  many  regard  as  indispensable 
to  theii  salvation,  and  which  therefore  they  do  in  eflect  put  in  Christ's  place. 
(2).  Moore,  M.A.)   Chrid  alone: — I.  In  His  personal  undertaking  of  the  work 

OF  SALVATION.  II.  In  THE  DiVINE  INCARNATION.  III.  In  THE  PURITY  OF  HiS 
LIFE  AND  THE  CHARACTER  OF  HiS  MINISTRATIONS.      IV.    IN   HiS  SUFFERINGS.      V. 

In  His  death.  VI.  In  His  intercessory  and  mediatorial  work.  Conclusion : 
1.  He  is  the  alone  Saviour  for  us.  2.  Without  faith  in  Christ  there  is  no  salvation. 
8.  How  great  the  guilt  of  the  rejecter  of  Christ  I  4.  How  glorious  the  prospect  of 
the  believer  in  Jesus  I  {S.  D.  Phelps.)  Loneliness: — I.  It  has  many  senses, 
INWARD  AND  OUTWARD.  1.  There  is  what  I  may  call  the  loneliness  of  simple 
solitude.  Solitude  which  is  first  voluntary,  and  secondly  occasional,  is  but  half 
solitude.  Solitude  which  we  fly  to  as  a  rest,  and  can  exchange  at  will  for  society 
which  we  love,  is  a  widely  difierent  thing  from  that  solitude  which  is  either  the 
consequence  of  bereavement  or  the  punishment  of  crime  ;  that  solitude  from  which 
we  cannot  escape,  and  which  perhaps  is  associated  with  bitter  or  remorseful  recollec- 
tions. 2.  There  is  the  loneliness  of  sorrow.  Is  not  loneliness  the  prominent 
feeling  in  all  deep  sorrow  ?  Is  it  not  the  feeling  of  loneliness  which  gives  its  sting 
to  bereavement  1  3.  There  is  the  loneliness  of  a  sense  of  sin.  Whatever  duties  may 
lie  upon  us  towards  other  men,  in  our  innermost  relation  to  God  we  are  and  must  be 
alone.  When  the  sense  of  sin  is  heavy  upon  us,  how  incapable  is  the  soul  of 
anything  but  solitude  1    And  if  such  be  the  loneliness  of  repentance,  what  most  be 


CHAP.  Lxiii.]  ISAIAH.  409 

the  loneliness  of  remorse,  which  is  repentancse  without  God,  without  Christ,  and 
therefore  without  hope.  If  repentance  is  loneliness,  remorse  is  desolation.  4.  There 
is  the  loneliness  of  death.  5.  Can  we  follow  the  soul  one  step  further,  and  see  it 
standing  in  judgment  before  the  throne  of  God  ?  "  Every  one  shall  give  account  of 
himself  to  God."  II.  Practical  considerations.  There  are  two  senses  at  least 
in  which  you  ought  to  practise  the  being  alone.  1.  Being  alone  in  prayer.  I  do 
not  mean  that  you  must  necessarily  be  in  a  place  by  yourselves,  in  order  to  pray :  if 
this  were  essential  to  prayer,  then  the  poor  and  the  yotmg  in  most  cases  could  never 
pray.  But  I  mean  that  in  praying,  whether  by  yourselves  (which  is,  no  doubt,  a 
great  advantage)  or  in  the  presence  of  others,  you  should  try  to  shut  out  the 
recollection  of  any  other  presence  than  that  of  God.  2.  If  you  are  to  die  alone,  and 
if  you  are  to  be  judged  alone,  be  not  afraid  also  to  think  alone,  and,  if  necessary,  to 
act  alone.  3.  If  the  view  of  life  thus  presented  seem  to  any  one  to  be  flat  and 
dreary,  let  him  remember  that,  though  we  must  pray  alone,  and  judge  alone,  and 
sometimes  act  alone,  and  certainly  die  alone,  and  be  judged  alone,  yet  there  is  a 
reality  of  sympathy  stUI,  which  we  may  find  and  rejoice  in  if  we  wiU.  It  is  a 
svmpathy  independent  of  sight  and  worH;  secret  yet  real,  unchangeable  and  eternal. 
Sympathy  with  Him  who  so  loved  that  He  died  for  us,  and  who  is  the  same  yesterday 
and  to-day  and  for  ever.  Sympathy  with  Him,  and  with  God  through  Him, 
exercised  by  the  intervention  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  the  Divine  aspect  of 
Christian  sympathy.  But  there  is  a  human  side  also.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Christian 
loneliness : — Every  one  of  us  probably  takes  the  same  impression  from  those  words. 
"What  is  the  figure  they  summon  up  before  us  all  ?  Probably  that  of  a  man  left 
to  solitary  toil,  deserted  but  not  faithless,  having  a  heavy  burden  to  bear,  and 
bearing  it  uncheered  by  social  s^pathy, — a  hard  and  bitter  work  to  do,  yet 
nobly  doing  it  alone.  From  this  image  our  minds  pass  unconsciously  over  to  the 
solitude  of  our  spiritual  strifes  and  inward  sufierings.  We  instantly  and  universally 
recognize  in  Him  who  "trod  the  winepress  alone"  a  representative  of  all  our 
internal  work.  For  a  religious  purpose,  and  as  a  part  of  God's  spiritual  discipline 
with  us,  our  deepest  experiences  must  be  passed  through  in  solitude.  We  must 
suflFer  alone,  we  must  get  wisdom  alone,  we  must  be  renewed  in  the  inmost 
spirit  of  our  minds  alone,  we  must  resist  temptation  alone,  we  must  meditate 
alone  and  pray  alone,  and  we  must  pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death  alone.  It  was  a  distorted  perception  of  that  truth  that  gave  what  value 
they  had  to  the  old  systems  of  monasticism,  or  religious  retirement.  These 
ancient  practices  our  modem  times  have,  for  the  most  part,  reversed.  If  a  man 
is  much  alone  now,  it  must  be  rather  by  a  direct  effort  to  that  end  than  by 
popular  habits.  Some  such  effort  will  be  salutary  to  his  virtue.  Social  habits 
may  soften  asperities,  but  it  needs  solitude  to  settle  our  principles.  Social 
habits  may  make  us  good-natured,  but  to  get  certainty  for  our  ideas,  or 
assurance  for  our  faith,  we  must  be  alone.  The  friction  of  society  may 
smooth  down  individual  peculiarities,  but  there  are  such  things  as  a  smoothness  that 
is  insipid,  and  a  compliance  that  is  so  accommodating  as  to  be  cowardly.  If  constant 
intercourse  with  others  neutralizes  our  prejudices,  it  may  also  undermine  our 
simplicity,  coax  our  kindly  sentiments  into  vicious  compromises,  and  tempt  our 
integrity  out  of  its  self-possession  into  disgraceful  bargains.  If  we  learn  amiability 
in  the  mixed  company,  so  we  do  learn  what  staunch  and  steadfast  convictions  are 
by  standing  alone.  If  we  form  delightful  connections  in  the  one,  so  do  we  gain  the 
nobler  faculty  of  thinking,  acting,  believing  for  ourselves,  in  the  other.  At  a  period 
when  the  activities  of  associate  enterprise  threaten  Christian  individuality  with  so 
many  perils,  among  customs  where  majorities  take  the  place  of  single-headed 
tyrants,  and  the  bribe  of  promotion  bewilders  the  clear-sightedness  of  faith — let  us 
look  to  our  integrity.  I  do  not  forget  the  obvious  arguments  for  association,  nor 
the  often  quoted  benefits  of  a  union  of  minds.  Let  them  stand  for  their  undoubted 
worth.  It  is  clear  that  Christian  faith  wins  some  of  its  noblest  victories  only  in 
social  revivals.  But  let  it  be  also  remembered  that  a  concentration  of  the  individual 
will  upon  its  own  chosen  purpose,  such  as  a  man  never  gets  except  by  isolating  him- 
self, is  a  matter  of  as  much  moment  to  the  success  of  every  good  interest  in  the 
world  as  the  contact  of  numbers.  Who  would  not  prize  more  highly  the  solemn 
determination  of  a  single  independent  mind,  taken  and  weighed  and  perfected  in 
solitude,  unswayed  by  public  dictation,  and  incorrupt  from  the  hot  breath  of 
crowds,  than  the  longest  subscription-list  to  a  set  of  written  or  concocted  measures,  or 
the  enthusiastic  "resolutions  "  of  the  loudest  caucus  ?  Let  it  be  further  remembered, 
that  if  combinations  of  masses  are  promotive  of  good  causes,  they  are  also  naighty 


410  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lxni.j 

facilities  for  bad  ones.  This  truth  may  enter  more  readily  if  we  remember  that 
the  higher  intellectual  qualities — those  that  are  more  intimately  related  to  the 
moral,  and  thus  have  the  largest  agency  in  forming  character — depend  on  solitude 
for  their  most  successful  cultivation.  Judgment,  imagination,  clearness  and  con- 
sistencv  of  thought,  breadth  of  vision,  whatever  constitutes  the  originality  and 
natural  force  of  the  mind — these  are  all  nurtured  in  lonely  studies.  So,  emphatic- 
ally, of  those  best  persons,  who  by  the  combined  weight  of  intellectual  and  moral 
attributes  have  been  the  signal  reformers  or  builders  of  institutions.  Affecting 
society  far  and  wide,  they  did  not  gather  their  best  power  in  social  resorts,  but 
alone  with  heaven :  Paul,  three  years  in  Arabia  ;  Luther,  in  his  cell ;  Alfred,  in  the 
Island  of  Nobles.  Mohammed,  Columbus,  "Washington — their  youth  was  apart 
from  men  ;  their  career  was  baptized  and  initiated  in  the  air  of  retirement.  And  of 
the  great  Lord  of  all,  the  Divine  ministry  to  the  world  must  begin  with  forty  days 
in  the  wilderness.  If  being  alone  is  tributary  to  intellectual  greatness,  it  is  still 
more  so  to  the  proper  symmetry  and  health  of  the  moral  principles.  Still  more 
strictly  does  this  rule  hold  of  the  deeper  emotions.  The  loftiest  of  aU  our  possible 
emotions  is  religious  reverence,  expressing  itself  in  worship,  or  prayer.  Nature  has 
herself  given  a  broad  hint  of  this  truth,  in  making  it  absolutely  impossible  for  us  to 
express  to  any  mortal  the  deepest  feeling.  Impatience  of  solitude  is  a  bad  religious 
sign.  Whoever  dreads  to  be  alone  has  reason  to  dread  the  hereafter.  If  he  is  afraid 
of  being  left  to  himself,  how  shall  he  dare  to  meet  the  searching  of  his  Judge? 
Something  must  have  gone  terribly  wrong  with  us,  if  we  are  afraid  to  be  shut  up 
with  none  but  God.  This  is  demanded  from  us  in  mere  fidelity  to  Truth  herself ; 
for  when  we  begin  to  esteem  her  for  the  multitudes  she  fascinates,  when  we  begin  to 
count  up  her  adherents  and  ask  whether  she  draws  large  audiences,  we  have  already 
broken  from  the  true  loyalty.  Next  to  the  sordidness  of  wedding  Truth  to  her 
dowry,  which  Stillingfleet  satirizes,  is  that  of  choosing  her  because  aU  the  world 
admires  her.  A  Christian  loneliness,  the  solitude  that  has  Christ  in  it,  renews 
man's  strength.  Human  suffering,  in  all  its  forms,  is  solitary.  (F.  D.  Huntington, 
D.D.)  Duty  pertains  to  the  individual: — In  the  responsibilities  of  life  we  must 
tread  the  winepress  alone.  Duty  is,  in  the  last  resort,  to  be  determined  by  the 
individual  conscience,  and  to  his  own  Master  must  each  one  stand  or  fall.  (A.  P. 
Peabody. )  The  soul's  solitude : — What  are  the  appointed  resources  for  this  spiritual 
loneliness?  1.  Christian  fellowship.  We  are  one  in  Christ.  Our  fellowship  ia 
with  Him,  and  through  Him  with  one  another.  2.  Direct  communion  with  Christ. 
8.  We  are  not  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  us.  4.  More  intimate  union  than  we 
can  enjoy  here  is  reserved  for  us  in  heaven :  Shall  not  this  hope  bring  us  into 
nearer  and  happier  fellowship  even  here  ?  {Ibid. )  Christ's  solitariness  in  the  work 
of  atonement : — Look  at  the  ancient  institution  of  the  annual  day  of  atonement.  On 
othar  occasions  inferior  priests  slaughtered  the  animals  and  prepared  the  offering. 
But  upon  this  anniversary,  the  high  priest  alone  officiated.  And  all  the  drudgery, 
clear  down  to  the  lighting  of  the  lamps  and  the  kindling  of  fire  for  incense,  a  long 
work  of  preparation,  requiring  sometimes  more  than  two  weeks  to  complete  it,  so 
the  Rabbins  tell  us,  was  undertaken  by  him.  That  day  was  a  day  of  days  to  him. 
He  was  to  put  aside  his  jewelled  mitre,  and  wear  none  of  the  so-called  "golden 

garments  ; "  even  his  shining  breastplate  of  precious  stones  had  to  be  relinquished, 
is  ephod  and  his  bells.  Clad  in  simple  linen,  a  linen  girdle,  a  linen  coat,  a  linen 
mitre,  he  alone  entered  the  Holy  of  holies,  he  alone  laid  the  victim  on  the  coals,  and 
he  alone  led  the  people's  scapegoat  away  into  the  wilderness.  All  this  was  typical 
of  the  solitary  errand  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Christ's 
solitariness  in  death: — Did  you  ever  ponder  the  pertinency  of  the  fact  that  none 
among  aU  the  disciples  of  our  Lord,  not  one  of  all  the  adherents  who  followed 
Him,  was  permitted  to  die  with  Him  ?  He  was  condemned  as  a  rebel ;  yet  not  a 
single  man  or  woman  who  succom'ed  Him,  or  sustained  Him,  in  that  so-called 
insurrection,  suffered  for  it.  A  few  of  His  friends  talked  about  it ;  one  of  them 
said  outright  on  a  conspicuous  occasion,  "  Let  us  go  and  die  with  Him  ; "  but  none 
of  them  ever  did.  The  meaning  of  this  is  very  plain.  It  was  an  infinitely  wise 
precaution  against  mistake.  It  would,  without  a  doubt,  have  misled  some  feeble 
minds  if,  by  any  accidental  confusion,  another  name  had  been  coupled  with  His  in 
the  dying  hour  on  the  cross.  It  was  just  as  well  that  all  those  disciples  forsook 
Him  and  fled.     One  Priest,  one  Lamb,  was  all  that  was  needed.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  For  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  Mine  heart. — "  The  day  of  vengecmee," 
announced  in  chap.  IxL  2.     "Is  in  Mine  heart,"  *.«.  in  My  purpose.     {Prqf,  J. 


CHAP.  Lxin.]  ISAIAH.  411 

Skinner,  D.D.)     The  Redeemer's  vengeance  upon  the  grand  enemy  of  the  redeemed?—' 
Tiiese  words  are  a  material  repetition  of  the  first  promise  (Gen.  iii.  15).    We  havjl 
here — 1.  The  designation  of  God's  remnant  of  mankind — sinners.     "  My  redeemed. 
They  are  Mine  by  election,  Mine  by  My  Father's  donation,  Mine  by  the  purchase  of 
My  blood,  and  they  are  to  be  Mine  by  conquest.     2.  The  deep  resentment  that  the 

florious  Redeemer  has  of  the  quarrel  of  the  redeemed.  "The  day  of  vengeance  is  in 
line  heart."  3.  The  stated  time  for  the  deliverance  of  the  redeemed.  "  The  day." 
"  The  year."  4.  The  Redeemer's  satisfaction  with  the  view  of  all  this.  He  speaks 
of  it  with  a  particular  air  of  joy  and  triumph.  (E.  Erskine.)  The  annals  of  redeeming 
love : — I.  The  great  and  glorious  Redeemer.  He  is — 1.  A  chosen  Redeemer. 
•'Mine  elect."     2.  A  mighty  Redeemer.     "Mighty  to  save."    3.  A  Redeemer  of 

r sat  authority.  "The  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder."  "His  kingdom 
an  everlasting  kingdom."  4.  A  wealthy  Redeemer.  5.  An  incomparable  Redeemer. 
6.  A  resolute  and  courageous  Redeemer.  II.  The  redeemed.^  III.  The  tear  OF 
THE  REDEEMED.  There  is — 1.  The  year  of  purposed  redemption.  With  respect  to 
this  year  Christ  is  called  "a  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  2.  The 
year  of  purchased  redemption. .  This  year  the  great  God  was  incarnate  ;  the  great 
Lawgiver  voluntarily  subjected  Himself  to  His  own  law;  God  blessed  for  ever  was 
made  a  curse ;  everlasting  righteousness  was  brought  in ;  God  actually  laid  the 
foundation  of  a  throne  of  grace,  in  justice  and  judgment,  etc.  3.  The  year  of 
exhibited  redemption.  The  year  of  a  Gospel-dispensation  among  a  people.  4.  The 
year  of  applied  redemption  ;  imder  which  may  be  comprehended  the  whole  period  of 
time  from  the  soul's  conversion  unto  the  day  of  death.  5.  The  year  of  consummate 
redemption.     This  is  a  year  which  never,  never  ends.     IV.  The  tear  of  thb 

EEDEEMED,  THE  JOY  OF  THE  REDEEMER'S  HEART.   V.  APPLICATION.  (Ibid.)      The 

Redeemer's  vengeance: — I.  Who  is  the  grand  enemy  that  the  gloriotjs 
Redeemer  has  in  His  view  ?  Satan.  II.  The  ground  of  the  quarrel  that 
OUR  Redeemer  hath  against  this  enemy.  What  injury  hath  Satan  done  to  the 
redeemed  ?  He  hath  deceived  them  ;  he  defaced  the  image  of  God  ;  he  made  them 
liable  to  the  curse  of  the  law  ;  he  made  them  his  own  slaves.    III.  What  vengeanob 

IS  IT  THAT  OUR  REDEEMER  TAKES  UPON  THIS  ENEMY  OF  THE  REDEEMED  ?    A  bruising 

of  his  head  (Gen.  iii.  15).  A  judging  of  the  devil  (Jno.  xvi.  11).  A  destroying  of 
the  devU  (Heb.  ii.  14).     A  spoiling  of  principalities  and  powers  (Col.  ii.  15).     Our 

florious  Redeemer — 1.  Invad!es  Satan's  usurped  kingdom  and  government,  which  he 
ad  established  in  this  world.  Satan  is  called  "the  god  of  this  world."  2.  Out- 
shoots  the  devil  in  his  own  bow — takes  this  wise  spirit  in  his  own  craftiness.  3.  Con- 
demns sin,  the  first-bom  of  the  devU.  4.  Wrests  the  keys  of  death  and  hell  out  of 
the  devil's  hand.  5.  Lays  a  heavy  chain  upon  the  roaring  enemy.  6.  Takes  those 
■who  were  his  slaves  from  under  his  power,  and  arms  them  with  His  truth,  whereby 
they  make  war  against  him,  under  Christ  as  their  Leader  and  Commander.  7.  Makes 
a  spectacle  of  him  and  all  his  legions  (Col.  ii.  15).  8.  Makes  a  road  between 
heaven  and  earth,  by  His  ascension,  through  the  very  territories  of  the  devil,  who 
is  called  "the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air."  9.  Will,  at  the  last  day,  make 
the  poor  believer,  who  was  once  under  his  power,  and  whom  he  many  times  harassed 
with  his  fiery  darts,  to  judge  and  condemn  him.  "  Know  ye  not  that  the  saints  shall 
judge  angels ? "  10.  Burns  his  galleries,  where  he  has  walked  up  and  down.  "The 
earth  .  .  .  shall  be  burned  up."  IV.  The  stated  time  of  vengeance,  here 
called  a  "day."  1.  There  are  some  seasons  of  His  taking  vengeance  upon  him  in 
his  own  person.  (1)  Upon  the  back  of  his  first  sin,  when  that  proud  spirit,  swelled 
with  ambition,  attempted  the  throne  of  heaven,  the  Son  of  God,  armed  with  His 
Father's  power,  turned  Him  and  His  apostate  legions  down  from  heaven  to  hell 
(2  Pet.  ii.  4).  (2)  The  day  of  Christ's  incarnation.  (3)  Of  Christ's  death.  (4)  The 
last  judgment.  2.  When  Christ  is  avenged  upon  this  enemy  in  the  redeemed. 
(1)  The  day  of  conversion.  (2)  The  day  of  believing.  (3)  The  renewed  actings  of 
faith  under  strong  temptation.  (4)  The  day  of  special  nearness  to  God  in  His 
ordinances.  (5)  When  the  Redeemer  brings  multitudes  of  souls  to  yield  themselves 
unto  His  obedience.  (6)  When  an  honourable  testimony  is  given  for  Christ  in  a 
Church  against  errors  and  blasphemies  that  the  devil  and  his  emissaries  have  vented, 
to  the  darkening  of  the  Redeemer's  glory.  (7)  The  day  of  death,  when  the  poor 
believer  is  guarded  to  glory  through  his  principality.     V.  Why  this  day  of 

VENGEANCE    IS    SAID    TO    BE    IN     THE     REDEEMER'S    HEART.       1.    He    had    firmly 

purposed  it.  2.  The  thoughts  of  it  were  a  delight  to  Him.  3.  He  had  not  for- 
gotten the  quarrel  he  had  with  Satan  and  his  works.  4.  The  stated  time  of  final 
vengeance  lay  as  a  secret  in  His  own  breast.    Y.  Application.    {Ibid.)    The  year 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lxiiu 

of  My  redeemed  is  come. — The  "year"  of  redemption: — A  rendering  preferred  by 
many  authorities  is,  "the  year  of  My  redemption:"  the  plural  being  taken  aa 
expressing  the  abstract  idea,  in  accordance  with  a  common  Hebrew  usage.  The  year 
of  redemption  is  the  same  as  the  year  of  Jehovah's  favour  in  chap.  Ixi.  2  ;  it  is  the 
time  of  Israel's  victory  and  salvation,  a  year  that  haa  no  end.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner, 
D.D.)  The  year  of  the  redeemed : — I.  Thb  period  foretold.  The  word  "year," 
in  such  connections  as  this,  is  to  be  interpreted  in  a  general  sense  as  applying  to  a 
lengthened  period  of  time.  "The  year  of  the  redeemed"  may  not  mean  so  much 
the  year  when  Christ  died,  in  order  to  redeem  them,  as  the  period  when  He  should 
begin  to  win  the  victories  of  His  grace  among  them  ;  the  period  when  He  should  be 
"  lifted  up  "  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  "  draw  aU  men  unto  Him  ; "  the 
period  when  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man,  in  the  preaching  of  Christ  and  of  HiTT^ 
crucified,  should  be  visible  in  the  ecclesiastical  world,  represented  in  the  everlasting 
prophecy  as  heaven,  and  when  by  the  preaching  of  a  crucified  Saviour,  sinners, 
numerous  as  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  in  succeeding  times,  should  be  won  from 
darkness  to  light,  and  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  Satan  to  the  kingdom  of 
God's  dear  Son.  II.  The  certainty  of  its  arrival.  God  has  decreed  it,  and 
all  its  glories  must  be  realized.  It  may  be  said  to  be  come  in  the  distinct  and 
positive  revelations  of  prophecy.  In  the  prophecies  of  God,  the  decrees  of  God  are 
unfolded.     {W.  H.  Cooper.) 

Yet.  6.  And  I  looked,  and  there  was  none  to  help. — Man's  extremity  the  Divine 
opportwnity : — The  doctrine  of  the  text  is,  that  salvation,  of  every  kiud  and  every 
degree,  is  from  the  Lord.  I.  This  points  out  to  us  that  all  men  are  in  a 
miserable  condition.  Why  should  man  need  salvation  ?  He  is  lost.  II.  Thb 
TEXT  IMPLIES  THE  INTERPOSITION  OF  GoD.  The  Speaker  is  the  great  Messiah,  and 
He  speaks  in  righteousness.  There  are  difficulties  in  the  wajr  of  a  sinner's  recovery 
which  none  can  remove  but  God.  ' '  The  righteousness  by  faith  "  is  accompanied  by 
the  power  of  God,  and  this  alone  can  save  the  soul.  1.  This  shows  God's  knowledge 
of  the  dreadful  condition  of  the  sinner.  He  lays  help  on  One  mighty  to  save.  2.  It 
bespeaks  His  forbearance  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26).  3.  It  implies  the  impossibility  of 
man's  being  saved  but  by  a  Divine  arm ;  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  God  to  save 
sinners,  however  deeply  sunk  in  sin,  misery,  and  guilt.  4.  Here  is  the  language  of 
triumph,  as  though  God  delighted  in  this  work  of  saving  sinners :  "Mine  own  arm," 
etc.  He  had  a  sufficiency  of  wisdom  to  devise  the  plan  ;  a  fulness  of  merit  to  justify, 
of  the  Spirit  to  sanctify,  of  mercy  to  pity,  and  of  grace  that  should  abound,  io  the 
sinner's  pardon,  and  in  the  purity  and  peace  of  his  conscience.  III.  The  advant- 
ages OF  THIS  salvation.  1.  The  fuU  character  of  God  is  displayed.  Here  I  see 
God  to  be  just  and  wise  in  pardoning  the  sin  He  punishes,  and  showing  His  abhor- 
rence of  the  sin  He  forgives.  2.  Salvation  is  secured  to  every  believer.  3.  This 
secures  all  the  glory  to  God.  4.  It  is  the  most  encouraging  that  could  have  been 
devised.  5.  It  binds  the  strongest  obligation  on  us.  If  saved  without  any  power  or 
merit  of  my  own,  what  shall  f  render  for  such  a  salvation  to  such  a  sinner !  {J. 
Cooke.) 

Ver.  7.  I  will  mention  the  lovingkindncBses  of  the  Lord. — God's  redemptive 
triwmph  evoking  thanksgiving,  prayer  and  confession: — The  dialogue  ended,  the 

Jrophet's  tone  changes.  In  the  assurance  that  the  redemption,  guaranteed  by 
ehovah's  triumph,  will  be  wrought  out,  he  supplies  faithful  Israel  with  a  hymn  of 
thanksgiving,  supplication  and  confession,  expressive  of  the  frame  of  mind  worthy  to 
receive  it  (chap.  tiii.  7 — Ixiv.  12).  In  a  stram  of  surpassing  pathos  and  beauty  the 
prophet,  as  it  were,  "leads  the  devotions"  (Cheyne)  of  his  nation,  and  lends  words 
by  his  eloquence  to  their  repentance.  {Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  A  chastened  piety : 
— The  passage  (chap.  Lxiu.  7 — Ixiv.  12)  is  one  of  the  most  instructive  of  Old 
Testament  prayers,  and  deserves  careful  study  as  an  expression  of  the  chastened  and 
tremulous  type  of  piety  begotten  in  the  sorrows  of  the  ExUe.  So  far  as  the  ideas  of 
the  passage  are  concerned,  it  might  have  been  composed  at  any  time  from  the  Exile 
downwards.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  tender  mercies  of  God: — To  discover  the 
heights  or  to  fathom  the  depths  of  this  grace,  exceeds  the  power  of  men  or  angels  ; 
yet  the  view  perhaps  may  be  enlightened  tw  some  of  the  following  reflections.  1.  In 
purposing  and  planning  the  great  work  or  redemption,  the  Eternal  Mind  was  self- 
moved,  uncounselled,  unsolicited.  2.  This  love  was  wholly  disinterested,  having  no 
reward  in  view  but  the  pleasure  of  doing  good.  3.  This  love  is  still  more  sublimely 
considered  ae  acting  towards  inferiors.     4.  Redeeming  love  is  still  more  wonderful  aa 


CHAP.  Lxiii.]  ISAIAH.  413 

exercised  towards  enemies,  5.  This  love  appears  altogether  astonishing  when  we 
consider  the  greatness  of  the  sacrifice  it  made.  6.  The  extent  of  redeeming  love 
further  appears  in  the  magnitude  of  the  blessings  which  it  intended  for  a  ruined  race. 
7.  This  mercy  is  heightened  by  the  fact  that  the  Saviour  is  so  necessary,  reasonable 
and  all-sufficient.  8.  This  mercy  is  still  further  heightened  by  the  patience  and 
condescending  tenderness  which  He  exercises  towards  His  people.  He  calls  them 
His  friends,  His  brethren.  His  children,  His  spouse,  the  members  of  His  body,  the 
apple  of  His  eye.  9.  This  wondrous  mercy  is  fiirther  expressed  in  the  gift  of 
Sabbaths  and  sacraments,  and  especially  the  written  Word.  10.  Fresh  evidence  of 
tMs  love  springs  up  at  every  review  of  God's  past  providence  towards  the  Church. 
11.  All  these  are  the  more  affecting  as  being  marks  of  distinguishing  love.  12.  The 
grace  of  God  appears  still  greater  as  being  abundant.  {E.  Griffin. )  A  song  concerning 
lovin^kindnesses : — I.  The  mercies  to  be  mentioned.  A  complete  summary  we 
cannot  give,  for  who  can  count  the  sands  of  the  sea  or  the  stars  of  the  sky  ?  1.  The 
list  commences  with  special  electing  love.  In  the  Hebrew  the  eighth  verse  runs, 
' '  For  He  said,  they  only  are  My  people. "  2.  Pass  on  to  the  next  sweet  token  of 
Divine  loviugkindness  which  is  found  in  the  Fatherly  confidence  which  the  Lord  has 
manifested  towards  His. people.  ' '  Children  that  will  not  lie. "  3.  His  great  sympathy 
with  us.  "In  aU  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted "  (ver.  9).  4.  His  intimate  mter- 
course  with  us.  "The  Angel  of  His  presence  saved  them."  5.  The  gracious  inter- 
positions of  God  on  behalf  of  His  people.  "In  His  love  and  in  His  pity  He 
redeemed  them. "  6.  God  provided  for,  led,  protected  and  upheld  His  people  by  a 
wondrous  special  providence  while  they  were  in  the  wilderness.  "He  bare  them," 
etc.  (ver.  9).  7.  The  prophet  further  goes  on  to  mention  the  Lord's  chastening.  It 
is  to  be  sorrowed  over  that  we  need  chasteniug,  but  God  is  to  be  praised  that  He 
does  not  withhold  it  from  us  (ver.  10).  8.  The  next  thing  the  prophet  sings  about 
is  God's  faithfulness,  for  though  He  did  smite  His  people,  yet  in  a  very  short  time 
we  findjthat  "He  remembered  the  days  of  old,"  etc.  (vers.  11-13).  We  wiU  close 
this  catalogue  with  one  more  choice  mercy,  for  the  prophet  tells  us  of  God's  giving 
His  people  rest  after  all  (ver.  14).  II.  Certain  points  worthy  of  special 
mention.  1.  Whatever  has  been  bestowed  upon  us  by  God  reveals  His  lovingkind- 
ness.  2.  The  consequent  praise  which  is  due  to  God  on  account  of  this.  3.  The 
uniform  nature  of  all  God's  dealings  with  us.  "According  to  all  that  the  Lord  hath 
bestowed  on  us. "  Let  us  praise  Him  according  to  aU  that  the  Lord  hath  bestowed 
upon  us,  blessing  Him  for  bitters  and  sweets,  for  blacks  and  whites,  for  storms  and 
calms.  4.  The  grandeur  of  the  goodness  which  is  shown  in  every  mercy.  "The 
great  goodness  toward  the  house  of  Israel."  Ingratitude  makes  little  of  much,  but 
gratitude  sees  much  in  little.  5.  We  ought  to  take  peculiar  note  in  our  song  of  the 
condescending  tenderness  and  pity  of  God,  for  such  is  the  force  of  the  next  expression, 
"which  He  hath  bestowed  on  them  according  to  His  mercies," — a  clearer  rendering 
would  be,  "according  to  His  compassion."  6.  One  other  special  note  demands  to  be 
heard,  and  that  is  the  multitudinous  displays  of  His  love.  "According  to  the 
multitude  of  His  lovingkindnesses, "  of  all  shapes,  and  at  all  times,  and  in  all  ways, 
and  from  all  points  of  the  compass.  III.  Practical  reasons  why  we  should 
thus  mention  the  lovingkindnesses  of  the  Lord.  1.  That  we  may  have  pleas 
in  prayer.  This  is  the  best  way  of  praying:  "Lord,  Thou  hast  done  this  for  Thy 
servant,  Thou  hast  done  that  for  Thy  servant,  therefore  I  beseech  Thee  do  more. 
This  is  not  after  the  manner  of  men,  for  when  we  once  relieve  a  man's  necessities  we 
say  to  him,  "  Do  not  come  again  ; "  but  every  gift  which  God  gives  is  an  invitation, 
to  come  again,  and  the  best  way  in  which  we  can  show  our  gratitude  is  to  seek  for 
further  gifts.  2.  These  memories  will  act  as  stays  to  your  faith.  3.  They  wiH 
minister  to  your  present  comfort.  4.  The  thought  of  all  this  would  make  us  love 
God  more,  and  obey  Him  better.  5.  To  mention  the  Lord's  goodness  enables  us  to 
cheer  others,  for  we  do  not  know  who  may  be  standing  by.  6.  It  will  glorify  Him, 
and  this  should  always  be  yom-  master  motive.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  rinsed  mouth: 
— The  Lord  rinse  your  mouths  out  if  you  have  a  bitter  way  of  talking  about  other 
people,  or  about  His  providence,  and  lead  you  henceforth  to  glory  in  His  holy  name. 
{Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  Children  that  will  not  lie. — Sincerity  Uyward  €hd: — The  Christian  ex- 
emplifying the  power  of  truth  in  his  renewed  nature,  and  in  all  the  engagements  and 
relations  of  life,  is  a  phenomenon — a  miracle  of  grace.  A  Christian  Church,  consisting 
of  believers  adorning,  in  all  things,  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour,  are  men 
"wondered  at."    Yet,  peculiar  or  eccentric  as  the  course  of  such  men  may  be 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Lxm.' 

deemed  in  the  world,  it  is  evident,  from  Scripture,  that  the  people  of  God  are 
expected  to  render  practical  homage  to  the  truth  no  less  habitual  and  profound. 
I.  Their  kegabd  for  tritth.  "Children  that  wiU  not  lie."  1.  They  estimate 
truth  at  its  proper  value.  Buy  the  truth,  but  sell  it  not.  Divine  truth — the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus — is  the  greatest  treasure  our  world  contains.  The  full  possession  of 
this  treasure  cannot  he  secured  with  diligence  and  care.  "Search  the  Scriptiu-es." 
"  Prove  all  things."  "  So  that  thou  incline  thine  ear  unto  wisdom,  and  apply  thine 
heart  to  understanding.  Yea,  if  thou  criest  after  knowledge,  and  liftest  up  thy  voice 
for  understanding ;  if  thou  seekest  her  as  silver,  and  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid 
treasures,  then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  find  the  knowledge 
of  God. "  Yet  no  man  ever  reached  a  fall  and  abiding  conviction  of  Divine  truth  by 
a  mere  process  of  investigation.  No  one  will  ever  come  to  the  light  until  he  feels 
that  he  is  walking  in  darkness.  No  one  wiU  ever  find  the  truth  until  he  feels  that 
he  has  everything  to  learn  in  order  to  life  and  salvation,  and  that  Christ  alone  can 
teach  him.  "All  Thy  children  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord."  2.  "When  truth  is 
sought  from  this  Divine  source  it  will  be  cordially  welcomed.  3.  They  are  concerned 
for  the  preservation  of  the  truth  in  themselves.  Not  in  the  letter  only,  but  in  its 
spirit  and  power.  The  truth  may  be  held  in  unrighteousness.  The  Gospel  itself 
may  become  the  savour  of  death  unto  death.  What  solemn  words  are  those  of 
Christ,  "If,  therefore,  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that 
darkness  !  "  4.  They  bear  a  distinct  and  consistent  testimony  for  the  truth.  What 
we  feel  deeply  we  shall  speak  freely.  We  believe,  said  the  apostle,  and  therefore 
speak.  5.  If  the  truth  be  so  valued,  received,  obeyed,  and  testified,  it  will  exert  a 
practical  influence  in  all  the  relative  duties  and  circumstances  of  life.     II.  How  far 

IS  THIS  THOROFGH  TRTTTHFULNESS  DISTINCTIVE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD  ?    1.    Sincerity 

toward  God — faith  unfeigned — brings  with  it  the  conviction  that  the  subjects  of  it 
are  His  people.  They  have  the  witness  within  themselves.  They  are  the  children 
of  light.  They  that  have  known  the  truth  in  its  power  can  say,  "The  truth 
dwelleth  in  us,  and  shall  be  in  us  for  ever."  2.  Their  relation  to  God  is  made 
manifest  to  others.  3.  Such  sincere  and  faithful  men  have  the  strength  of  the 
people  of  God.  If  you  would  find  the  strongest  men  in  the  world's  history  you  must 
not  look  for  them  in  camps,  in  senates,  or  in  palaces,  but  in  dungeons,  in  exile,  or  at 
the  stake.  It  was  not  Caesar,  Alexander,  Napoleon,  or  Wellington  that  efl'ected  the 
greatest  changes  in  the  world,  but  men  who  were  made  witnesses  for  the  truth. 
"Ye  are  strong,  for  the  Word  of  God  abideth  in  you;  and  ye  have  overcome  the 
wicked  one. "  The  spirit  of  faith  alone  is  invincible.  4.  Those  who  are  faithful  to 
the  truth  have  the  freedom  of  God's  people.  "  I  will  walk  at  liberty,  for  I  seek  Thy 
precepts."  5.  They  have  the  peace  of  the  people  of  God  and  the  honour  sure  to 
arise  from  fidelity.  {J.  Waddington,  D.D.)  Fidelity  between  God  and  His  people: — 
God  deals  fafrly  and  faithfully  with  them,  and  therefore  expects  they  should  deal  so 
with  Him.  {M.  Henry.)  "  Children  that  will  not  lie" : — God's  people  are  children 
that  will  not  lie,  for  those  that  wiU  are  not  His  children,  but  the  devil's.     {Ibid. ) 

Ver.  9.  In  all  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted. — God  not  impassive : — Just  as  a 
man  may  feel  pain,  whilst  in  his  own  person  he  is  raised  above  it,  so  God  feels  pain 
without  His  blessedness  suffering  hurt ;  and  so  He  felt  His  people's  suffering  ;  it  did 
not  remain  unreflected  in  His  own  life  ;  it  moved  Him  inwardly.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
*'^  The  Angel  of  His  presence": — 1.  The  "Presence"  (lit.  "Face")  of  Jehovah  is 
used  elsewhere  of  His  self-manifestation.  The  fundamental  passage  is  Ex.  xxxiii. 
14,  15.  But  compare  also  Deut.  iv.  37;  Lam.  iv.  16.  2.  An  "angel  of  the 
Presence,"  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  figure  elsewhere  unknown  to  the  Old  Testament: 
the  phrase  would  seem  to  be  "a  confusion  of  two  forms  of  expression,  incident  to  a 
midway  stage  of  revelation  "  (Cheyne).  3.  The  "  Face  "  of  Jehovah,  however,  is  not 
(as  the  LXX  inferred)  just  the  same  as  Jehovah  Himself  in  person.  It  is  rather  a 
name  for  His  highest  sensible  manifestation,  and  hardly  differs  from  what  is  in  other 
places  called  the  Mal'ak  Yahveh  (Angel  of  Jehovah).  This  is  shown  by  the  com- 
parison of  Ex.  xxxiii.  14  f.  with  xxiii.  20-23.  The  verse,  therefore,  means  that  it 
was  no  ordinary  angelic  messenger,  but  the  supreme  embodiment  of  Jehovah's 
presence  that  accompanied  Israel  in  the  early  days.  {Prof.  J.  Skirmer,  D.D.)  The 
Angel  in  whom  Jehovah  was  seen ;  who  was  Jehovah  Himself  in  manifestation. 
{A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Not  some  one  of  the  "ministering  spirits,"  nor  some  one 
of  the  angel-princes  standing  in  God's  immediate  presence  (archangels),  but  the  one 
whom  God  makes  the  mediimi  of  His  presence  in  the  world  for  effectmg  the  revelation 
of  Himself  in  sacred  history.     {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)     The  Angel  of  His  presence: — 


CHAF.  Lxm.]  ISAIAH.  416 

The  great  majority  of  men  dread  affliction  more  than  they  dread  sin.  And  yet  the 
two  things  are  related — sometimes  as  cause  and  effect  and  sometimes  by  more  distant 
connections.  I.  Afflictions  may  be  divided  into  three  classes — the  physical, 
the  mental,  and  the  emotional.  Not  that  we  can  ever  totally  separate  these  three, 
but  for  purposes  of  consideration  it  may  be  practicable  to  do  so.  1.  It  is  very  hard 
to  resist  a  plea  irom  physical  disability.  It  is  well  that  it  should  be  so,  for  callous 
indifference  to  the  causes  of  sorrow  and  pain  found  in  the  lives  of  others  is  surely  a 
most  unpromising  state.  Anything  which  will  draw  us  out  of  ourselves,  and  keep 
us  from  being  self-contained,  must  surely  be,  in  some  sort,  a  servant  of  God.  Our 
Lord  recognized  the  physical  afllictions  of  men  and  entered  sympathetically  into 
them.  2.  But  physical  afflictions,  though  more  impressive,  are  oftentimes  more 
endurable  than  mental  afflictions.  Indeed,  when  we  come  to  the  last  analysis  of  the 
case,  we  find  that  the  mental  region  is  the  region  where  pain  reports  itself.  If  we 
could  totally  separate  the  physical  and  mental,  and  keep  the  mind  clear  and  calm 
while  the  body  suffered  its  pains  and  penalties,  affliction  would  be  a  very  different 
matter  from  what  it  now  is.  Only  that  then  physical  affliction  would  lose  ita 
meaning  and  purpose,  for  everything  physical  is  for  the  sake  of  the  mental.  But 
there  are  mental  sufferings  which  do  not  report  themselves  in  physical  manifestations. 
The  mind  is  often  so  tried  with  doubt  and  debate — so  cast  down  by  its  own  inability 
and  decrepitude — that  it  is  in  a  constant  state  of  unrest,  and  no  report  thereof  ia 
made  in  the  physical  frame — no  report  anyway  of  such  a  nature  that  all  can  read  it. 
S.  But  back  of  the  intellectual  department  of  the  mind  is  that  other  profounder 
realm  covered  by  the  word  "  emotional."  This  emotional  region  is  the  strangest  and 
Btrongest  of  all.  It  is  the  realm  of  love,  of  joy,  of  peace — or  of  hatred,  joylessness, 
discord.  Without  our  emotions  we  sho\ild  be  not  men  and  women,  but  stones,  or  at 
best  animals.  Our  emotions  gather  around  persons,  places,  objects,  and  these  become 
to  US  of  such  transcendent  worth  that  all  the  world  seems  poor  in  comparison  with 
them.  II.  When  we  think  of  these  things,  how  wondkous,  how  terrible  does 
THIS  NATURE  OF  OXTRS  SEEM  !  We  bccome  afraid  of  ourselves.  To  be  owners  of 
ourselves  seems  too  great  a  responsibility.  Does  it  not  seem  to  us  that  the  Creator, 
in  giving  us  this  nature,  has  taken  upon  Himself  a  responsibility  so  great  and  so 
fearful  that  none  but  Himself  could  bear  it  ?  We  ask  ourselves,  in  amazement,  what 
must  His  own  natiire  be  ?  III.  Is  not  this  the  revelation  made  by  the  prophet,  that 
WE  ARE  NOT  ALONE  IN  OUR  AFFLICTIONS  ?  As  it  was  with  the  Israelites,  so  is  it 
with  all  the  spiritual  Israel ;  for  they  and  we  are  not  unlike.  "  In  all  their  affliction 
He  was  afflicted."  He!  Who?  The  Deliverer.  The  One  who  identified  Himself 
with  them.  And  His  nature  has  not  changed.  We  assume  that  Deity  cannot 
Buffer,  but  we  do  not  know  it.  We  suppose  that  Deity  means  perfection — impassive 
perfection.  But  is  impassivity  perfection  ?  May  there  not  be  suffering  which  has 
in  it  more  of  perfection  than  imperfection,  suffering  which  does  not  arise  from  sin, 
or  from  weakness,  or  from  anything  outside  perfection  ?  Anyway,  Jesus  Christ  has 
come  between  us  and  naked,  unknowable  Deity ;  He  has  united'  in  some  way  the 
human  and  the  Divine.  And  He  is,  in  some  mysterious  manner,  identified  with  us  ; 
and  in  aU  our  afflictions  He  is  afflicted,  and  inside  all  the  affliction  is  "the  Angel 
of  His  presence  "  to  save  us.  I  can't  tell  you  what  this  Angel  of  the  presence  means. 
But  cherish  faith  in  these  unseen  forces  and  powers — ay,  in  unseen  personal  ministries. 
{R.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  spheres  of  compassion: — I.  God's  compassion  in  the 
SPHERE  OF  human  SORROW.  We  must  not  make  too  much  of  human  sorrow.  There 
is  much  else  in  the  life  of  man.  There  is  the  joy  of  youth  and  the  sober  delights  of 
age.  Does  any  man  really  think  that  God  looks  down  on  all  this  welter  and  does 
not  care — and,  because  He  does  not  care,  does  not  prevent  it  ?  God  would  not 
prevent  it  if  He  could,  and  He  could  not  if  He  would.  A  world  such  as  ours,  and 
without  suffering,  is  not  possible  to  God.  It  is  His  sovereign  wHl  which  has  made 
every  law  under  which  we  suffer,  and  His  holiness  which  enforces  every  penalty. 
This  compassion  in  the  sphere  of  sorrow  has  been  from  the  "days  of  old"  long 
before  men  had  eyes  to  see  it.  But  it  reaches  its  highest  manifestation  in  the  life  of 
Jesus  our  Lord.  God's  compassion  is  still  working  in  the  sphere  of  human  sorrow, 
in  the  heart  of  the  ascended  Christ.  Even  now  in  all  your  affliction  He  is  afflicted, 
and  the  angel  of  His  presence  is  saving  you,  not  from  suffering,  but  from  fall  and 
Bhame.  II.  God's  compassion  in  the  sphere  of  sin.  The  compassion  of  God  has 
a  greater  work  to  do  than  to  transform  suffering,  by  grace,  into  nobility  and  strength. 
It  has  to  go  down  into  the  depths  of  ain.  Though  the  sin  of  the  world  lies  behind 
all  our  suffering,  there  is  much  sorrow  that  is  wholly  pure.  But  when  we  come  to 
Bin,  to  the  bondage  of  evil  habit,  the  riot  of  wicked  passion,  to  the  indulgence  of 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR:  [chap.  ltim. 

sloth  and  vanity  and  pride,  ending  in  defiance  of  the  Almighty  and  rebellion  against 
His  law,  then  compassion  might  weU  be  exhausted.  And  then,  indeed,  holiness 
cannot  but  condemn,  and  sovereignty  cannot  but  execute  the  decree  ;  but  compassion 
finds  a  way  even  in  the  sphere  of  sin,  and  so  the  prophet  continues,  "  in  His  love  and 
in  His  pity  He  redeemed  them."  But  the  compassion  needs  no  words  to  make  itself 
known.  In  the  thorns  on  His  brow,  in  the  nails  in  His  hands,  in  the  prayer  for 
human  forgiveness,  compassion  proclaims  its  victory.  This  cross  of  Christ,  just 
because  it  is  so  unlike  man  and  is  so  like  God,  is  the  greatest  mystery  in  the  world. 
Whatever  be  your  sin,  whatever  be  your  shame,  whatever  may  have  been  your  past 
lack  of  faith,  come  to-day  again  to  the  Cross,  to  find  that  sovereignty,  holiness,  and 
compassion  have  redeemed  you.  III.  God's  compassion  in  the  sphere  of  human 
WEAKNESS.  Our  human  needs  are  not  all  supplied  when  our  suSierings  are  borne 
with  us,  and  our  sins  are  pardoned.  Though  we  cross  our  Ked  Sea,  we  have  still  the 
years  of  pilgrimage :  though  we  lose  our  burdens  at  the  Cross,  we  have  still  our  crosa 
to  carry.  Though  we  surrender  ourselves  to  Christ,  we  have  our  warfare  to  accomplish. 
And  who  is  there  among  us  who  knows  the  frailty  of  his  past,  the  slips  and  falls  of 
poor  human  nature,  who  does  not  feel  the  inspiration  of  the  Word  when  it  completes 
the  revelation :  "He  bare  them  and  He  carried  them  all  the  days  of  old."  There  i» 
no  one  so  helpless  as  a  disciple  of  Christ.  Before  we  came  to  Christ,  we  could  gird 
ourselves,  and  walk  whither  we  would.  Now  we  cannot  take  a  step  alone.  Only  by 
continually  casting  ourselves  upon  Him  in  our  prayers,  being  led,  guided,  instructed, 
strengthened  by  His  Spirit ;  only  by  clinging  to  Him  in  Mth  does  our  safety  lie. 
( JF.  M.  Clow,  B.D.)  Christ  with  His  people  in  trouble: — We  remember  an  ola  tale 
of  our  boyhood,  how  poor  Robinson  Crusoe,  wrecked  on  a  foreign  strand,  rejoiced 
when  he  saw  the  print  of  a  man's  foot.  So  is  it  with  the  Christian  in  his  trouble  ; 
he  shall  not  despair  in  a  desolate  land,  because  there  is  the  foot-print  of  Christ 
Jesus  on  all  our  temptations  and  troubles.  Go  on  rejoicing.  Christian  ;  thou  art  in 
an  inhabited  country  ;  thy  Jesus  is  with  thee  in  all  thy  afflictions  and  in  all  thy 
woes.  (C  ff.  Spurgeon.)  In  His  love  and  in  His  pity  He  redeemed  them. — Discipline 
by  chastisement: — "In  His  love  and  in  His  pity  He  redeemed  them,"  says  Isaiah. 
These  sharp  and  tragic  pimishments  wherewith  God  visited  His  people  were  part  of 
His  redemptive  work.  God  pimished  in  order  to  redeem.  He  used  the  sword  in 
order  to  deliver  His  people  from  the  curse  and  doom  of  sin.  It  was  "  love  and  pity  " 
that  prompted  even  His  terrible  judgments.  God  still  sometimes  inflicts  upon  Hia 
people  great  and  sore  troubles,  so  that  we  are  tempted  to  think  He  has  forgotten  to 
be  gracious.  But  in  reality  it  is  love  that  sends  the  trouble  ;  it  is  pity  that  prompts 
the  punishment.  "  God's  wrath, "  somebody  has  said,  "  is  but  His  love  on  fire. "  A 
God  who  never  punished  sin  would  not  be  a  loving  God.  {J.  D.  Jones,  B.D.)  Divine 
discipline: — There  can  be  no  government,  there  can  be  no  Church,  save  there  bo 
discipline.  In  the  natural  world  we  find  this  law.  In  the  animal  kingdom  there  la 
ruling  and  serving.  In  the  vegetable  kingdom  superior  vitality  makes  the  weaker 
plants  give  room.  Among  men  we  witness  this  not  alone  where  brute  force  is 
displayed  and  secures  mastery.  We  see  it  in  the  intellectual  and  moral  world. 
Each  man  has  his  sphere,  his  proper  position.  He  murt  be  held  in  that  position, 
else  there  is  chaos  and  utter  waste — worse  than  utter  waste,  of  all  his  power.  The 
work  of  discipline  is  to  restore  and  hold  man  to  his  proper  sphere.  We  now  behold 
man  as  fallen.  See  him  in  his  pristine  glory.  See  him  as  he  falls.  Even  in  his 
prostration  he  is  not  wholly  without  compensation,  for  he  has  gained  a  knowledge  of 

food  and  evU.  But  now  the  tendency  in  man,  which  before  was  toward  God,  is 
ownward.  We  see  in  fallen  man  attempts  to  recover  himself  a  recognition  of  the 
necessity  of  Divine  help.  In  Scripture,  more  especially,  do  we  find  it  set  forth  that 
God  is  the  Source  of  that  help  which  can  restore  man.  Here  is  sovereignty  manifested 
in  mercy.  Observe  the  characteristics  of  this  discipline.  I.  It  is  just.  II.  It  is 
EQUITABLE  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  10).  III.  It  IS  REMEDIAL-— designed,  like  a  righteous  law, 
for  good,  not  for  punishment.  It  is  paternal,  for  it  brings  the  wanderer  home. 
IV.  It  is  special.  It  is  adapted  to  each  case.  V.  It  is  exhaustivb  of  Divine 
HELP.  You  cannot  think  of  any  one  thing  which  God  has  neglected  to  do  that  man 
might  be  saved.  VI.  It  exhausts  the  greatest  efforts  of  the  human  soul. 
Take  away  the  beneficial  effect  of  this  Divine  discipline,  and  the  human  soul  sinks  in 
anarchy  and  woe  for  evermore.  Rightly  improved,  it  lifts  man  to  more  than  Ms 
pristine  glory.     {N.  H.  Schenck,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Bat  they  rebelled,  and  vexed  His  holy  Spirit. — The  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
Old  Testament: — Except  here  and  in  ver.  11  and  Ps.  li.  11  the  predioate  " holy"  it 


CHAP.  Lzni.]  ISAIAH.  417 

never  in  the  Old  Testament  used  of  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible 
to  determine  the  exact  connotation  of  the  word  in  this  connection.  It  cannot  be 
accidental  that  ia  all  three  cases  the  holy  Spirit  is  a  principle  of  religious  life ; 
hence  the  phrase  hardly  signifies  so  little  as  merely  "His  Divine  Spirit";  as 
Jehovah's  "  holy  arm  "  may  mean  no  more  than  His  Divine  arm.  Nor  is  it  likely 
that  it  describes  the  Spirit  as  the  influence  that  imparts  to  Israel  the  quality  of 
holiness,  i.  e.  separateness  from  other  nations,  and  consecration  to  Jehovah.  The 
idea  rather  is  that  the  Spirit  is  holy  in  the  same  sense  as  Jehovah  Himself  is  holy — 
a  principle  which  is  both  pure  and  inviolable,  which  resents  and  draws  back  from 
the  contact  of  human  impurity  and  especially  of  wilful  opposition.  This  Spirit  is 
a  national  endowment,  residing  in  the  commimity  (ver.  11) ;  it  is  the  Spirit  of 
prophecy,  resting  on  Moses,  bu .  manifesting-  its  presence  also  through  other  Organs 
of  revelation  (Deut.  xxxiv.  9  ;  Num.  xi.  25  fi".).  Hence  it  is  said  to  have  led  the 
people  (ver.  14),  and  to  "vex "  the  Spirit  is  to  resist  His  guidance  by  disobeying  the 
Divine  word  which  He  inspires.  The  use  of  this  verb  marks  the  highest  degree  of 
personification  of  the  Spirit  attained  in  the  Old  Testament,  preparing  the  way  for 
the  New  Testament  doctrine  concerning  Him.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  Holy 
Spirit : — The  Spirit  of  [Jehovah's]  holiness,  as  an  existence  capable  of  feeling,  and 
therefore  not  a  mere  force,  is  distingiiished  from  Him.  For  as  the  Angel,  who  ia 
His  countenance,  i.  e.  the  representation  of  His  nature,  is  described  as  a  person,  both 
by  His  name  and  the  mediatorial  work  of  redemption  ascribed  to  Him,  so  the  Spirit 
of  Holiness,  i.  e.  holy  in  Himself  and  producing  holiness  (Ps.  cxliii.  10)  is  similarly 
described  by  the  circumstance  that  He  is  grieved,  and  He  can  therefore  feel  grief 
(Eph.  iv.  30).  Thus  Jehovah  and  the  Angel  of  His  countenance  and  the  Spirit  of 
His  holiness  are  distinguished  as  three  existences,  in  such  a  way,  indeed,  that  the 
latter  two  have  their  existence  from  the  first ;  who  is  the  primal  ground  of  the 
Godhead  and  of  everything  Divine.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Rebellion  agaifist  God: — 
The  pronoun  at  the  beginning  is  emphatic  :  they  on  thefr  part,  as  opposed  to  God's 
forbearance  and  long-sufifering.  (/.  A.  Alexander.)  The  sin  and  consequence  of 
vexing  the  Holy  Spirit : — I.  Inquire  concerning  the  evil  done.  1.  The  nature 
of  it.  "We  are  no1>  to  understand  it  as  if  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God  was  capable  of 
real  perturbation  or  passion.  That,  common  reason  will  tell  us,  the  Divine  nature 
is  not  capable  of.  But  yet  there  is  some  great  thing  lies  under  this  expression, 
which  we  may  conceive  of  in  these  two  particulars.  (1)  His  will  is  really  crossed. 
(2)  He  doth  apprehend  and  resent  this  matter  ;  though  without  any  commotion,  or 
perturbation.  He  resents  it  so  as  not  to  look  upon  it  as  a  matter  of  indifference. 
This  He  keeps  by  Him  as  the  just  matter  of  a  controversy,  which  He  will  manage  ; 
and  will  animadvert  upon  it  in  His  own  time,  and  when  a  fit  and  proper  season  shall 
come.  2.  The  cause  of  this  vexation.  We  may  well  understand  in  the  general  that 
sin  does  so  ;  being  in  its  own  nature  a  direct  contrariety  to  His  good,  and  holy,  and 
acceptable  will.  But  especially  rebellion  against  the  Spirit  of  God  is  vexatious, 
which  is  a  higher  pitch  of  sin,  and  implies  a  continued  course  of  disobedience.  We 
may  understand  what  sin  is  more  especially  vexing  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  if  we  allow 
ourselves  to  consider  what  the  titles  and  attributes  of  this  Spirit  in  Scripture  are. 

(1)  The  Spirit  of  God  is  styled  the  Spfrit  of  truth  (John  xiv.  17).  It  is  therefore 
very  grievous  and  vexing  to  this  Spirit,  to  have  a  light  esteem  of  Divine  truth  ;  to 
be  indifferently  afifected  towards  it ;  to  have  a  loose  adherence  to  it ;  an  easiness 
to  part  with  it ;  and  much  more  a  proneness  to  oppose  it,  and  run  away  from  it. 

(2)  The  Spirit  of  grace  (Heb.  x.  29).  It  is  therefore  very  vexing  to  this  blessed 
Spirit  when  that  grace,  of  which  it  is  the  Author,  and  which  it  is  its  office  and 
business  to  convey  and  apply,  or  effectually  to  reveal,  is  rejected.  (3)  The  Spirit  of 
faith  (2  Cor.  iv.  13).  When  persons  continue  under  the  Gospel  in  obstinate  imbelief ; 
and  the  great  things  there  revealed  and  discovered  to  us  are  but  as  a  tale  that  is 
told,  or  regarded  no  more  than  we  would  regard  the  word  of  a  child  ;  a  most  vexing 
thing  to  the  Spirit  of  God  this  must  be  understood  to  be.  (4)  A  Spirit  of  con- 
trition and  repentance  (Zech.  xii.  10).  We  cannot  conceive  a  gi-eater  vexation  to 
Him  than  to  find  hearts  hard  as  rocks  and  stones,  under  the  dispensation  of  the 
everlasting  Gospel.  (5)  The  Spirit  of  love  (2  Tun.  i.  7) ;  which  is  the  great 
principle  that  disposes  and  inclines  the  soul  towards  God.  A  cold  heart,  then, 
towards  God  ;  a  heart  that  is  disafifected  to  Him,  that  keeps  at  a  distance  from  Him, 
that  will  not  be  engaged  in  sweet  communion  with  Him  through  love,  is  a  most 
vexing  thing  to  His  Spirit.  (6)  A  Spirit  of  power  and  of  life  (John  vi.  63  ;  2  Tim. 
i.  7).  It  ia  a  very  vexatious  thing  to  this  Spirit  when  any  indulge  themselves  in 
deadness  of  heart ;  when  they  allow  themselves  to  be  formal,  lukewarm,  and 

VOL.  III.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  LXin. 

indifferent.  (7)  The  Spirit  of  holiness  (Rom.  i.  4).  Here  it  is  said,  "  They  rebelled 
and  vexed  His  holy  Spirit. "  This  is  a  most  vexing  thing,  when  persons  professing 
the  Christian  name  indulge  themselves  in  a  liberty  to  walk  at  random.  (8)  A 
heavenly  Spirit,  and  the  design  of  all  its  gracious  operations  upon  souls  is  to  fit 
them  for  heaven  (2  Oor.  v.  5).  A  worldly  heart,  therefore,  is  a  vexation  to  this 
Spirit.  (9)  A  Spirit  of  prayer  (Zech.  xii.  10).  It  is  the  great  business  of  this 
Spirit  to  actuate  souls,  and  to  raise  them  to  God,  in  the  way  of  prayer.  It  is  a 
very  great  vexation,  therefore,  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  persons  grow  to  a  prayerlesa 
disposition.  (10)  A  Spirit  of  sincerity  and  uprightness  ;  and  wherever  it  obtains, 
it  makes  men  upright  and  sincere.  Thus  it  is  called  the  Spirit  of  a  sound  mind 
(2  Tim.  i.  7).  Hypocrisy,  therefore,  or  a  deceitful  dealing  with  the  blessed  God  in 
matters  of  religion,  is  a  most  vexatious  thing  to  his  Spirit.  (11)  A  Spirit  of  union, 
peace  and  meekness,  among  them  that  belong  to  God.  Animosities  among  the 
people  of  God  are  the  most  vexing  things  imaginable  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  (12)  A 
Spirit  of  sobriety  and  temperance,  in  opposition  to  grossly  sensual  lusts.  It  is  a 
very  vexatious  thing  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  when  among  a  people  that  profess  His 
name,  there  is  a  general  profusion,  and  running  into  vile  sensual  lusts  (Jude  19). 
II.  iNQtriRE  CONCERNING  THE  EVIL  SUFFERED  HEREUPON.  Namely,  His  turning 
against  them  so  as  to  become  their  enemy.  1.  The  nature  of  this  evil.  It  is  implied 
that  He  shaU  cease  doing  for  such  a  people  as  He  hath  done.  Have  we  vexed  the 
Spirit  of  God  ?  then  it  is  natural  to  expect  that  the  Spirit  of  God  will  retire.  Then 
these  words  express  some  positive  evils  against  such  persons.  2.  Consider  how 
justly  this  penal  evil  does  ensue  in  this  case.  (1)  This  is  veiy  despiteful  dealing,  to 
do  that  which  will  vex  His  very  Spirit.  (2)  This  is  a  wickedness  wherein  the  most 
immediate  kind  of  affront  is  offered  imto  God.  (3)  Sinning  so  as  more  directly  to 
vex  the  Spirit  of  God,  does  carry  with  it  a  withstanding  of  the  Spirit  in  that  which 
is  its  proper  office  ;  which  is  a  great  aggravation  of  the  wickedness.  It  is  one  thing 
when  I  withstand  a  person  in  a  thing  which  he  does  casually  and  by  the  bye  ;  and 
another  when  I  withstand  him  in  that  which  is  his  stated  business.  Inferences : 
1.  Among  a  people  professing  the  name  of  God,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  wont  to  be  at 
work  ;  and  where  it  is  not  doing  any  work,  we  cannot  but  suppose  it  to  be  thus 
vexatiously  resisted  and  contended  against.  2.  Consider  whether  this  may  not  be 
much  our  case  and  the  case  of  the  generality  at  this  time,  even  thus  like  the  Jews 
to  have  vexed  the  holy  Spirit  of  God,  which  hath  been  for  a  long  season  dealing 
with  us.  3.  Let  us  be  persuaded  to  hasten  the  taking  up  this  controversy  by 
humbling  and  abasing  ourselves  in  the  dust  before  the  Lord  ;  for  ourselves  on  our 
own  account,  and  on  the  behalf  of  the  generality  of  those  among  whom  we  dwell. 
4.  Let  us  apply  ourselves  particularly  and  with  great  earnestness  to  supplicate  the 
continuance  of  the  Spirit,  where  it  remains  breathing  in  us  ;  and  the  restoring  it, 
where  it  had  been  in  any  measure  restrained.  {John  Howe,  M.A,)  Vexing  the  Holy 
Spirit : — I.  Some  of  the  ways  in  which  men  mat  be  said  to  vex  the  Holy 
Spirit.  This  sin  is  committed — 1.  When  the  all-important  office  executed  by  the 
Spirit  in  the  Church,  as  sent  by  Christ  to  quicken,  convert  and  sanctify  the  soul, 
is  not  duly  recognized  and  honoured.  2.  When  the  means  and  instruments  by 
which  He  carries  on  His  work  are  despised  or  abused.  3.  By  the  unwarrantable 
doubts  and  fears  which  sometimes  depress  the  minds  of  the  people  of  God. 
4.  When  any  good  motions  or  purposes  which  He  excites  in  the  heart  are  sup- 
pressed, or  not  followed  out.  5.  When  the  grace  and  energy  which  He  imparts 
are  not  actively  and  faithfully  exercised.  II.  The  dangerous  consequences  of 
VEXING  the  Holy  Spirit.  1.  One  result  of  the  Spirit's  "turning  against"  any 
one  would  be  His  withdrawing  altogether  the  instruments  and  means  and  oppor- 
tunities of  grace  which  men  have  despised  or  abused ;  and  as  they  sought  not  to 
arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  leaving  them  to  perish  in  the  darkness  which 
they  have  loved.  2.  Another  thing  obviously  implied  is.  His  ceasing  to  work 
and  to  make  the  means  of  grace  effectual  for  conviction  and  conversion.  {A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-14.  Then  he  remembered  the  days  of  old. — Israel  remembering  Ood'a 
dealings  with  His  people : — It  is  possible  that  the  words  "  Moses  "  and  ' '  His  people  " 
are  marginal  explanations,  the  former  to  "shepherd"  and  the  latter  to  "he": 
"Then  he"  (Israel)  "remembered  the  days  of  old,  saying,  Where  is  He"  (God) 
.  .  .  "with  the  shepherd  of  His  flock"  (Moses)  .  .  .  "His  holy  Spirit  within 
it!"  (the  flock).  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Where  is  the  Lord? — I.  A  sacred, 
LOVING  REMEMBRANCE.     The  people  remembered  what  God  did  to  them.     What 


CHAP,  uun.]  ISAIAH.  419 

was  it?  1.  He  gave  them  leaders.  "Where  is  He  that  brought  them  up  out  of 
the  sea  ? "  etc.  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  a  band  of  godly  men  who  were  with  them, 
were  the  leaders  of  the  people,  through  the  sea  and  through  the  wilderness.  "We 
are  apt  to  think  too  little  of  our  leaders.  First  of  all  we  think  too  much  of  them. 
We  seem  to  swing  like  a  pendulum  between  these  two  extremes.  There  have  been 
epochs  in  history  that  were  prolific  of  great  leaders  of  the  Christian  Church.  No 
sooner  did  Luther  give  his  clarion  call,  than  God  seemed  to  have  a  bird  in  every 
bush  ;  and  Calvin,  and  Farel,  and  Melancthon,  and  Zwingle,  and  many  besides 
joined  him  in  his  brave  protest  against  the  harlot-church  of  Rome.  The  Church 
remembers  those  happy  days,  with  earnest  longing  for  their  return.  2.  God  put 
His  Spirit  within  these  shepherds.  They  would  have  been  nothing  without  it.  A 
man  with  God's  Holy  Spirit  within  him,  can  anybody  estimate  his  worth  ?  3.  Then 
there  was,  as  a  happy  memory  for  the  Chm-ch,  a  great  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
power.  "That  led  them  by  the  right  hand  of  Moses."  "  The  right  hand  of  Moses," 
by  itself,  was  no  more  than  your  right  hand  or  mine  ;  but  when  God's  glorious 
arm  worked  by  the  right  hand  of  Moses,  the  sea  divided,  and  made  a  way  for  the 
hosts  of  Israel  to  pass  over.     What  we  want  to-day  is  a  manifestation  of  Divine 

f)ower.  4.  Then  there  came  to  God's  people  a  very  marvellous  deliverance  :  "That 
ed  them  through  the  deep,  as  a  horse  in  the  wilderness,  that  they  should  not 
stumble."  Understand  by  the  word  "  wilderness  "  here,  an  expansive  grassy  plain  ; 
a  place  of  wild  grass  and  herbs,  for  so  it  means.  And  as  a  horse  is  led  where  it  is 
flat  and  level,  and  he  does  not  stumble,  so  were  the  hosts  of  Israel  led  through  the 
Red  Sea.  God  has  done  so  with  His  Church  in  all  time.  Her  seas  of  difficulty 
have  had  no  difficulty  about  them.  5.  As  a  blessed  ending  to  their  trials,  God 
brought  them  into  a  place  of  rest:  "  As  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the  valley,  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  causeth  him  to  rest :  so  didst  Thou  lead  Thy  people. "  In  the 
desert  they  rested  a  good  deal ;  but  in  Canaan  they  rested  altogether.  As  the 
cattle  come  down  from  the  mountains,  where  they  have  been  picking  up  their  food, 
when  the  plains  are  fat  with  grass,  and  they  feed  to  their  fall,  and  lie  down  and 
rest,  so  did  God  deal  with  His  people.  I  read  it,  first,  literally  as  a  sketch  of 
Israel's  history ;  next,  as  a  sketch  of  the  Church's  history.  The  same  thing  has 
happened  to  us  as  individuals.  II.  An  object  clearly  shining,  like  the  morning 
star.  I  see,  through  the  text,  God's  great  motive  in  working  these  wonders  for  His 
people.  1.  It  was  God  who  did  it  all.  But  then,  why  had  God  done  all  this  ? 
Did  He  do  it  because  of  His  people's  merits,  or  numbers,  or  capacities  ?  2.  God 
works  His  great  wonders  of  grace  with  the  high  motive  of  making  known  to  His 
creatures  His  own  glory,  manifesting  what  He  is  and  who  He  is,  that  they  may 
worship  Him.  III.  An  anxious  inquiry,  which  I  find  twice  over  in  my  text. 
Believing  in  what  God  has  done,  and  believing  that  His  motive  stiU  remains  the 
same,  we  begin  to  cry,  "Where  is  He  that  brought  them  up  out  of  the  sea  with  the 
shepherd  of  His  flock  ? "  etc.  1.  This  question  suggests  that  there  is  some  faith  left. 
"  Where  is  He  ? "  He  is  somewhere.  Then,  He  lives.  2.  The  question  implies 
that  some  were  beginning  to  seek  Him.  Where  is  He  ?  3.  It  shows  that  she  has 
begim  to  mourn  over  His  absence.  I  like  the  reduplicated  word.  "Where  is 
He?  Where  is  He?"  Not,  "Where  is  Moses?  Where  are  the  leaders?  The 
fathers,  where  are  they  ?  But  where  is  He  that  made  the  fathers  ?  Where  is  He 
that  sent  us  Moses  and  Aaron  ?  Where  is  He  that  divided  the  waters,  and  led  His 
people  safely  ? "  Oh,  if  He  were  here  !  One  hour  of  His  glorious  arm  ;  just  a  day 
of  His  almighty  working,  and  what  should  we  not  see?  4.  Where  is  He,  then? 
Well,  He  is  hidden  because  of  our  sins.  5.  For  your  comfort,  the  next  verse 
(ver.  15)  tells  you  where  He  is.  He  is  in  heaven.  They  cannot  expel  Him  from 
His  throne.  6.  "Where  is  He?"  Well,  He  is  Himself  making  an  inquiry  ;  for, 
as  some  read  the  whole  passage,  it  is  God  Himself  speaking.  He  remembered  the 
days  of  old,  Moses  and  His  people  ;  and  when  He  hid  Himself,  and  would  not  work 
in  wrath,  yet  He  said  to  Himself,  "Where  is  He  that  brought  them  up  out  of  the 
sea  with  the  shepherd  of  His  flock  ? "  When  God  Himself  begins  to  ask  where  He 
1%  and  to  regret  those  happier  days,  something  will  come  of  it.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  12.  That  led  thfem. — God  and  His  people : — I.  God  leads  His  people  by 
instruments  which  He  chooses  and  qualifies.  II.  He  defends  them  with 
the  arm  of  His  power.  III.  He  removes  every  difficulty  that  intercepts 
their  coujise.  IV.  He  glorifies  His  own  name  in  their  deliverance.  {J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  To  make  Himself  an  everlasting  name. — God's  glorious  and  everlasting 
name  (with  ver.  14:  "to  make  Thyself  a  glorious  name") : — Man's  chief  end  is  to 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxih. 


glorify  and  enjoy  God.  God's  greatest  and  highest  object  is  to  make  to  Himself  a 
glorious  and  an  everlasting  name.  Since  God  is  God  it  must  be  so  :  for  He  is  foil  of 
love  and  kindness  to  His  creatures,  and  He  cannot  more  folly  bless  His  creatures 
than  by  making  Himself  known  to  them.  Everything  that  is  good,  true,  holy, 
excellent,  loving,  is  in  God.  God  may  well  desire  to  make  to  Himself  a  name — that 
is  to  say,  to  make  Himself  known — because  He  is  worthy  to  be  known.  This  know- 
ledge of  God  is  the  heaven  of  the  perfect.  It  is  the  help  of  the  growing.  Men  can 
only  get  holier  and  better  as  they  know  more  of  God.  It  is  also  the  great  hope  of 
sinners.  If  you  knew  Him  better,  you  would  fly  to  Him.  If  you  understood  how 
gracious  He  is,  you  would  seek  Him.  If  you  could  have  any  idea  of  His  holiness, 
you  would  loathe  your  self-righteousness.  If  you  knew  anything  of  His  power,  you 
would  not  venture  to  contend  with  Him.  If  you  knew  anything  of  His  grace,  you 
would  not  hesitate  to  yield  yourself  to  Him.  I.  God's  design  has  been  accom- 
plished. From  everlasting  He  was  God  most  glorious ;  He  existed,  but  He  had  as 
yet  no  name.  For  a  name  is  that  by  which  any  one  is  revealed,  and  until  His  power 
called  into  being  the  hosts  of  heaven,  God  was  God  alone,  and  there  were  none  to 
whom  He  could  be  known.  Then  the  angels  lifted  high  His  praise  in  their  songs, 
and  bowed  low  before  His  throne.  In  creation  His  name  was  manifested  and 
magnified.     But  our  subject  is  how  God  has  made  His  name  glorious  amongst  men. 

1.  The  text  speaks  of  God  as  making  to  Himself  a  great  and  glorious  name,  in 
redeeming  Israel.  2.  As  God  got  to  Himself  a  great  name  at  the  Red  Sea,  He  has 
done  much  more  by  the  great  work  of  salvation  in  the  gift  of  Jesus.  3.  His  design 
has  been  accomplished  in  the  saints  in  glory.  II.  God  s  design  is  being  accom- 
plished. In  many  ways  the  grand  work  is  still  going  forward.  God  is  carrying 
out  His  gracious  plan.    This  purpose  is  being  fulfilled — ^1.  In  sparing  the  provoking. 

2.  In  tm-ning  the  rebellious  to  Himself.  3.  In  forgiving  the  guilty.  4.  In  purifying 
the  unholy.  5.  In  preserving  the  tempted.  6.  In  using  weak  instruments.  7.  In 
doing  great  things  for  His  people  by  sending  very  wonderful  seasons  of  refreshing 
and  reviving  to  His  Church.  III.  God's  design  is  very  delightful.  1.  Because 
it  hides  pride  from  men.  2.  Because  it  opens  a  great  door  for  sinners.  3.  Because 
it  gives  comfort  to  stragglers.  4.  Because  it  sustains  in  trying  times.  5.  Because  it 
answers  our  chiefest  prayers.     "  Hallowed  be  Thy  name,"  etc.     (C.  H.  Spu/rgeon.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Look  down  from  heaven. — An  appeal  to  God: — I,  God's  people  in 
trouble.  II.  Their  resource.  III.  Their  plea.  Past  interpositions.  Past 
mercies.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Our  Father — God: — I.  Our  Father's  house.  1.  Heavenly. 
2.  Holy.  3.  Glorious.  II.  Our  Father's  character.  Strong ;  tender ;  com- 
passionate. III.  Our  Father's  faithfulness.  Survives  our  ingratitude; 
vicissitude  ;  time.  IV.  Our  Father's  name.  1.  Father.  2.  Redeemer.  3.  From 
everlasting.  V.  Our  Father's  claims.  Honour ;  obedience  ;  love.  {Ibid.)  The 
habitation  of  Thy  holiness  and  of  Thy  glory. —  Whither  did  our  Lord  ascend  t 
(with  chap.  vi.  3,  "The  whole  earth  is  fall  of  His  glory)": — What  was  the  new 
scene  into  which  our  Lord  was  introduced?  He  went  up  into  heaven.  1.  What  is 
heaven?  The  place  where  Almighty  God  is  specially  present  (John  xiv.  2,  xvi. 
28).  But  is  not  the  Father  present  everywhere  ?  (Ps.  cxxxix.  7-12).  What  means 
the  being  "specially  present "  ?  Has  it  any  meaning ?  In  the  case  of  men  they  are 
present  to  us,  or  absent  from  us  ;  but  there  is  no  medium  between  the  two.  Presence 
does  not  seem  to  admit  of  more  or  less.  Either  we  are  here  or  elsewhere.  There  are 
many  doctrines  of  religion,  and  this  is  one  of  them,  that  can  only  be  apprehended 
by  analogy,  or,  as  the  apostle  says,  "in  a  glass  darkly."  The  union  of  body  and 
soul  furnishes  in  this  case  a  very  just  analogy.  There  is  no  part  of  the  human  body 
in  which  the  soul  is  not  present.  I  mean  by  the  soul  simply  the  animating  principle 
and  the  principle  of  sensation.  Every  member  of  the  living  body  is  endowed  with 
feeling,  or  sensibility  to  pain.  But  that  this  sensibility  resides  not  in  "the  mass  of 
matter,  but  in  the  soul  or  life,  is,  of  course,  clear  from  the  fact  that  when  death 
separates  body  and  soul,  the  body  has  no  longer  any  feeling.  Yet,  although  the  soul 
pervades  the  whole  body,  and  resides  even  in  its  remotest  extremities,  it  has  a  special 
connection  with  what  are  called  the  vital  parts.  A  man  may  pluck  out  his  right 
eye,  and  cut  off  his  right  hand,  or  his  right  foot,  without  ceasing  to  live.  Assault 
the  heart,  and  you  assault  the  seat  of  life.  Surely,  then,  there  can  be  no  objection 
to  afl&rming  as,  on  the  one  hand,  a  general  residence  of  the  soul  in  every  member  of 
the  body,  so,  on  the  other,  a  special  residence  of  the  soul  in  the  heart.  There  is  the 
figure  of  the  truth  of  which  we  are  in  search.  Now,  let  us  elicit  the  truth  from  it. 
^o  district  of  tida  fair,  broad  universe  is  without  the  presence  of  Almighty  God.    In 


CHAP,  iziii.]  ISAIAH.  421 

that  Presence  stands  the  being  of  everything  that  is.  Yet,  although  the  presence  of 
God  in  and  under  all  things  as  their  support  is  unquestionable,  are  we,  for  this 
reason,  to  deny  His  special  connection  with  a  certain  part  of  the  universe  above 
others  ?  No  ?  The  earth  is  but  the  remote  extremity  of  creation — the  universe  has 
a  heart,  the  special  seat,  the  royal  residence  of  that  God  who  quickens  with  His 
presence  the  entire  framework  of  the  world.  This  place,  wherever  it  is  locally 
situated,  is  the  source  of  all  movement  in  the  world,  just  as  the  heart  is  the  source 
of  all  movement  in  the  natural  body.  Heaven  !  The  region  in  which  the  hand  of 
God  immediately  operates  without  any  intervention  of  secondary  causes,  the  region 
in  which  His  fiat  is  issued  to  the  firmament,  and  the  firmament  pours  forth  its  rain 
upon  the  earth,  and  the  earth  yields  her  friut  to  the  inhabitants,  and  the  heart  of 
those  inhabitants  is  filled  with  food  and  gladness  ;  the  region  is  called  heaven.  This 
is  the  region  to  which  our  blessed  Lord's  body  was  carried  up  on  the  day  of  His 
ascension  ;  and  into  which,  without  seeing  death,  the  patriarch  Enoch  and  the 
prophet  Elijah  were  translated.  2.  In  what  sense  Christ's  people  are  now  with  Him  in 
heaven.  The  apostle  intimates  that  Christians  themselves,  in  their  present  state  of 
existence,  have  imdergone  a  similar  translation.  "God,"  says  he,  "who  is  rich  in 
mercy,  for  His  great  love  wherewith  He  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins, 
hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ  (by  grace  ye  are  saved),  and  hath  raised  us 
up  together  (mark,  *hath  raised  us  up  together*),  and  made  us  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."  How  can  language  so  strong  be  substantiated? 
Just  consider  prayer — prayer  oflFered  in  the  faith  of  Christ.  It  penetrates  to  these 
regions  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  and  has  its  efifect  and  operation  there.  A 
sublime  thought  indeed,  and  one  of  which  we  may  make  good  use  in  stirring  up 
ourselves  to  prayer !  Prayer  penetrates  to  a  region  beyond  the  stars,  and,  in  the 
holy  audacity  of  its  enterprise,  lays  hold  of  that  primary  will  of  God  from  which 
proceed,  through  a  long  series  of  intermediate  causes,  all  the  movements  of  the 
universe.  And  prayer,  if  genuine,  is  the  voice  of  the  Christian's  affections,  the  out- 
pouring of  his  heart.  Hence,  because  his  thoughts  are  in  heaven,  his  hope  in 
heaven,  his  affections  in  heaven  ;  the  Saviour,  around  whom  gather  all  his  thoughts, 
and  hopes,  and  affections,  in  heaven  ;  because  his  prayers  move  in  that  sphere  and 
touch  the  spring  of  God's  will,  he  himself,  according  to  the  spiritual  element  of  his 
nature,  is  said  to  "sit  together  in  heavenly. places  in  Christ."  3.  Consider,  that 
this  region  is  "the  habitation  of  God's  holiness  and  of  His  glory."  And  here  remark 
a  striking  and  most  instructive  contrast  between  the  two  passages  of  which  my  text 
consists.  It  is  said  in  the  latter  of  them  that  "the  whole  earth  is  ftdl  of  God's 
glory."  The  seraphim  say  nothing  about  holiness  as  witnessed  upon  the  earth. 
Alas  !  what  could  they  say  ?  There  is  no  spot  upon  the  earth  where  an  intelligent 
and  devout  eye  may  not  see  and  adore  the  glory  of  the  Divine  Being.  But  when  upon 
the  stage  of  this  earth  we  look  "  for  judgment,  behold  oppression  ;  for  righteousness, 
behold  a  cry."  Holiness,  like  Noah's  dove  upon  the  water,  can  find  no  resting-place 
for  the  sole  of  her  foot  upon  this  earth.  But  heaven  is  the  habitation  of  God's 
holiness,  no  less  than  of  His  glory.  Every  heart  admitted  within  its  precincts  is  a 
mirror  which  gives  back  the  holiness  of  the  Most  High,  His  hatred  of  sin.  His  stem 
and  uncompromising  righteousness.  His  exact  justice.  His  fervent  and  all-embracing 
love.  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  heavenly,  "anything  that  defileth, 
neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination  or  maketh  a  lie,  but  they  which  are  written 
in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life."  4.  Heaven  cannot  possibly  be  accessible  to  any  man 
without  a  congeniaKty  of  mind  to  its  pursuits  and  employments.  A  tropical  plant 
cannot  possibly  thrive  in  the  bleak  and  raw  atmosphere  of  the  North  ;  vegetation 
generally  is  blighted  and  killed  by  an  atmosphere  uncongenial  to  it.  And  he  who 
loves  not  praise  and  thanksgiving,  who  turns  away  from  the  thought  of  God's 
presence  as  an  intrusion  on  his  peace,  who  regards  sin  with  levity  rather  than  with 
fear,  and  freely  cherishes  any  animosity,  or  worldly  or  carnal  lusts — that  man's 
sentiments  and  character,  quite  irrespective  of  any  Divine  decree,  must  exclude  him 
from  the  habitation  of  holiness  to  which  he  hath  no  afl&nity.  5.  Our  blessed  Lord's 
presence  in  heaven  is  that  which  lends  to  it  its  great  attraction  in  the  eyes  of  the 
true  Christian.     {Dean  Qoulbwm.) 

Yet.  16.  Doubtless  Thou  art  our  Father. — TJie  Jettdsh  Church  a  spiritual  body: — 
The  true  sense  of  the  verse,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is  that  the  Chiirch  or  chosen  people, 
although  once,  for  temporary  reasons,  co-extensive  and  coincident  with  a  single  race, 
is  not  essentially  a  national  organization,  but  a  spiritual  body.  The  father  is  not 
Abraham  or  Israel,  but  Jehovah,  who  is  and  always  has  been  its  Redeemer,  who  has 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxhi. 

borne  that  name  from  everlasting.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  God's  fatherly  regard/or 
His  people: — "  For  Thou  art  our  Father  ;  for  Abraham  is  ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel 
knows  us  not.  Thou,  Jehovah,  art  our  Father ;  from  of  old  our  Redeemer  is  Thy 
name."  Jehovah  is  Israel's  Father  (chap.  Ixiv.  7),  i.e.  begetter  (Deut.  xxxii.  6) ; 
His  creative  power  and  loving,  merciful  purpose  called  it  into  existence.  The  second 
"for"  justifies  this  confession,  that  Jehovah  is  Israel's  Father,  and  that  it  can 
therefore  look  for  fatherly  care  and  help  from  Him  alone ;  even  the  dearest  and 
most  honourable  men,  the  nation's  progenitors,  cannot  help  it.  Abraham  and 
Jacob — Israel — have  been  taken  away  from  this  world,  and  are  unable  of  themselves 
to  intervene  in  the  history  of  their  people.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  Jewish  sense 
of  orphanhood  : — These  words  came  from  the  heart  of  the  Jewish  people  when  they 
felt  themselves  "aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  to  the 
covenants  of  promise."  They  had  wandered  from  the  God  of  their  fathers,  and  they 
feel  as  if  their  fathers  had  cast  them  off.  If  Abraham  were  to  appear  on  earth,  he 
would  not  know  them  ;  if  Jacob  were  to  return,  he  would  not  acknowledge  them  ; 
and  what  then  can  they  do  ?  They  cannot  endure  life,  cannot  bear  the  burden  of 
its  sorrows  and  struggles  without  a  father  and  a  friend.  What  can  they  do  but  pass 
up  beyond  men,  and  seek  a  father  in  God  ?  Their  heart  is  an  orphan  everywhere 
else,  and  is  forced  to  this  door  of  refage  ;  "  Doubtless  Thou — Thou  art  our  Father." 
(J.  Ker,  D.D.)  The  cry  of  the  orphaned  heart: — It  has  never  died  out,  and  is 
present  stUl  in  many  a  spirit.  I.  The  words  express  a  deep  longing  of  the 
HUMAN  HEART.  With  all  its  foUy  and  frivolity  and  sin,  the  heart  of  man  has  been 
made  to  feel  after  these  words:  "Our  Father — our  Father  which  art  in  heaven." 
The  lower  creatures  have  not  this  cry,  because  they  have  not  our  wants,  our  aspira- 
tions, or  the  possibility  of  our  hopes.  There  are  wonderful  instincts  among  them — 
most  wonderful  often  in  the  most  minute.  But  what  curious  microscope  ever 
discovered  among  them  a  spire  pointing  heavenward,  or  tokens  of  prayer  and  praise  ? 
The  magnet  which  is  passed  over  the  earth  to  draw  things  upward  finds  nothing  in 
this  world  which  trembles  and  turns  to  it  save  the  human  heart.  It  is  very  true  that 
many  hearts  make  little  visible  response,  and  seem  to  bear  the  want  of  a  heavenly 
Father  very  lightly.  But  even  in  them  there  may  be  discerned  the  heart-hunger 
that  shows  itself  in  unnatural  cravings  which  the  lower  creatures  do  not  feel.  The 
void  may  be  discovered  in  the  restless  attempts  men  make  to  fill  it.  When  we 
look  at  the  length  and  breadth  of  man's  history,  it  teUs  us  that  this  cry  constantly 
returns,  "  0  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him  !  "  There  have  been  men  in  all 
ages  to  whom  the  answer  of  this  cry  has  been  the  one  necessity  of  life,  and  if  you 
could  convince  them  that  is  impossible  to  find  a  heavenly  Father,  they  would  smile 
no  more.  II.  Yet  it  is  often  difficult  to  speak  these  words  with  full 
ASSURANCE.  The  struggle  to  reach  them  is  evident  in  the  men  who  use  them  here, 
and  is  felt  in  the  very  word  "doubtless,"  with  which  they  begin  their  claim.  1. 
There  is  one  difficulty,  which  belongs  specially  to  our  time,  in  the  mind  of  man  as 
it  deals  with  the  universe  and  its  laws.  There  is  a  form  of  science  which  says,  "  I 
have  ranged  the  world,  and  there  is  nothing  in  it  but  material  law.  There  may  be 
a  heart  in  man,  but  there  is  no  heart  beyond  to  answer  it ;  or,  if  there  be,  the  heart  of 
man  can  never  reach  it. "  2.  Besides  the  mind,  the  heart  finds  difficulties  in  itself. 
There  are  so  many  things  in  life  which  make  it  hard  to  believe  in  the  love  of  God. 
3.  And  still  beyond  the  mind  and  heart  there  is  the  conscience.  When  we  think 
of  a  Father  in  heaven,  we  must  think  of  a  righteous  Father,  of  One  "who  is  of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity. "  The  weak,  indulgent  fatherhood,  which  is  passed 
so  lightly  from  hand  to  hand,  will  not  fit  into  the  parts  of  the  world's  history  which 
show  the  terrible  penalties  of  sin  ;  it  will  not  satisfy  the  soul  when  it  is  brought  face 
to  face  with  the  majesty  of  God's  law  and  the  holiness  of  His  character.     III.  With 

ALL  these  difficulties,  IT  IS  A  FEELING  WHICH  CAN  BE  AND  HAS  BEEN  REACHED. 

There  have  been  men  who  could  look  up  and  say,  "  Doubtless  Thou  art  our  Father." 
They  have  said  it  not  only  in  sunshine,  but  in  storm  and  in  the  shadow  of  death  ; 
have  given  up  their  lives  that  they  might  testify  to  it  clearly  and  fearlessly  ;  and 
have  shut  the  door  and  said  it  to  their  Father  who  seeth  in  secret.  But  we  are  to 
think  of  One,  the  greatest  of  all.  Even  those  who  take  the  lowest  view  of  Jesus 
Christ  will  admit  that  He,  beyond  all  others,  taught  men  to  think  of  God  as  a 
Father,  and  gave  the  example  of  it  in  His  own  life  and  death.  How  strong  it  made 
Him,  and  how  patient,  how  active  in  doing  good,  how  comforted  in  solitude,  that 
His  Father  had  sent  Him,  and  was  present  with  Him,  putting  the  cup  of  suffering 
into  His  hand,  and  ready  to  receive  Him  when  He  said,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands 
I  commend  My  spirit  I "    But  His  example,  His  influence,  wonderful  as  they  are, 


CHAP.  Lxiii.]  ISAIAH.  423 

•would  not  enable  us  to  follow  Him  to  God  as  a  Father,  unless  there  was  something 
in  His  death  which  laid  hold  of  us  with  stronger  power.  It  is  this  which  enables 
us  to  go  to  God  the  Judge  of  all  with  confidence,  because  we  go  through  the  blood 
of  sprinkling.  And  when  the  conscience  can  say.  My  Father ;  the  heart  begins 
to  say  it  also.  When  the  heart  has  found  a  Father  in  God,  all  the  world's  laws 
cannot  lay  hand  on  it  to  imprison  it ;  it  moves  "through  the  midst  of  them,  and 
80  passes  by."  IV.  This  full  sense  of  God's  Fatherhood  is  not  generally 
GAINED  AT  ONCE.  We  do  not  say  that  the  position  is  not  gained  at  once. 
As  soon  as  any  one  comes  to  God  through  Christ,  he  is  no  more  a  stranger  and 
an  enemy,  but  a  child,  and  all  the  dealings  of  God  with  him  are  paternal.  But 
he  may  fail  to  recognize  a  Father's  voice  and  hand.  Think  of  the  ways  bv 
which  it  may  be  gained.  Come,  first  of  all,  by  a  more  simple  and  loving  faith 
to  the  death  of  Christ  in  the  fulness  of  its  meaning.  Then  seek  more  fully  to 
give  Christ  entrance  into  your  heart  and  life.  As  the  heart  is  purified  we  see  God. 
To  have  God  for  our  Father  is  not  merely  to  be  forgiven,  it  is  not  even  to  be  sancti- 
fied ;  it  is  to  be  one  with  Him  in  thought  and  feeling,  to  listen  to  Him  and  speak 
with  Him,  as  one  speaks  with  a  friend.  It  is  peculiarly  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  lead  us  into  this  inmost  sanctuary  of  sonship.  "As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God."  But  to  be  led  by  Him,  we  must  not  grieve  Him 
by  sin  or  neglect,  but  welcome  His  whispered  admonitions  ;  and  then,  as  we  listen 
and  obey,  we  shall  reach  the  innermost  room  where  "  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  with 
our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God."  V.  To  use  these  words  truly  is  A 
MATTER  OF  infinite  MOMENT  TO  US  ALL.  Here  is  a  Friend  we  need  in  every  stage 
of  life,  and  in  every  event  of  it.  {lUd.)  The  assurance  of  God's  Fatherhood:-— 
There  are  three  chambers  by  which  we  advance  to  the  assurance  of  Fatherhood  in 
God.  The  first  is  the  upper  chamber  of  Jerusalem,  which  comes  to  us  ever  and 
again  in  the  Lord's  table,  with  its  offer  of  pardon  and  peace.  The  second  is  the 
chamber  of  the  heart,  to  which  we  give  Him  admission  in  love  and  obedience.  And 
the  third  is  the  home,  where  the  Holy  Spirit  teaches  us  to  cry,  "Abba,  Father." 
(Ibid.)  The  creed  of  the  optimist : — I.  This  noble  utterance  represents  the  consola- 
tion AND  FINAL  APPEAL  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  MAN,  baffled  and  dissatisfied  with  what 
the  poet  calls  "the  riddle  of  this  painful  earth,"  or  despised  and  rejected  by  his 
fellow-men  ;  and  that  appeal  is  to  the  responsibility,  omnipotence,  unalterable  love, 
and  unerring  justice  of  a  Divine  Father.  II.  The  cry  of  Isaiah  is  the  inspired 
TEXT  OF  THE  OPTIMIST,  of  the  man  who,  in  spite  of  the  riddles  and  difficulties  and 
waste  and  failure  in  a  world  teeming  with  injustice,  persists  in  enthroning  God 
alone  behind  all  worlds,  and  saying  to  Him,  "  Doubtless  Thou  art  our  Father, 
though  scientific  materialism  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  the  facts  of  experience  seem  to 
be  against  us."  {Basil  Wilierforce,  D.D.)  Our  Eedeemer. — God  the  Redeemer: — 
"  Goel "  signifies  both  a  redeemer  and  an  avenger,  but  the  latter  only  as  he  is  the 
former.  Hence  one  reason  for  the  close  linking  together  of  the  two  books  of  Isaiah. 
In  the  first  Jehovah  is  the  Avenger  of  the  nation  against  the  oppressor,  of  the  poor 
against  the  godless  rich,  of  the  widow  and  fatherless  against  the  unjust,  of  the  out- 
raged Theocracy  against  the  no-gods  which  claim  to  be  Jehovah's  rivals  and  equals. 
In  the  second  He  is  the  Redeemer,  who  ransoms  and  delivers  through  the  Man  of 
His  choice.  It  is  used  in  both  senses  throughout  the  Books  of  the  Law,  and  in  the 
Psalms.  But  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets  it  is  nearly  confined  to  Isaiah.  {F. 
Sessions.)  "Our  Redeemer" : — The  Lord  is  our  Redeemer  for  the  soul.  It  is  a 
great  comfort  to  know  that  it  is  our  heavenly  Father  who  is  our  Redeemer,  It  is 
God  in  Christ.  1.  Our  Redeemer  has  suffered  for  us.  2.  He  is  our  Redeemer  from 
the  grave  of  sin.  3.  He  is  our  Redeemer,  bringing  us  to  God.  4.  He  is  our 
Redeemer  from  our  wicked  self,  and  from  the  power  of  sin.  {W.  Birch.)  The 
Redeemer  of  Israel: — "Our  Redeemer  from  everlasting  is  Thy  name."  (A.  B. 
DaA}idson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  0  Lord,  why  hast  Thou  made  us  to  err  from  Thy  ways  1 — God's  anger 
with  His  people : — Very  singular  is  the  plea  that  the  sinfulness  of  the  people  is  due 
to  the  excessive  and  protracted  anger  of  Jehovah,  who  ' '  causes  them  to  err  from  Hia 
ways  "  (cf.  chap.  Ixiv.  5,  7).  This  feeling  appears  to  proceed  from  two  sources  ;  on 
the  one  hand  the  ancient  idea  that  national  calamity  is  the  proof  of  Jehovah's  anger, 
and  on  the  other  the  lesson  taught  by  aU  the  prophets,  that  the  sole  cause  of 
Jehovah's  anger  is  the  people's  sins.  The  writer  seems  unable  perfectly  to  harmonize 
these  principles.  He  accepts  the  verdict  of  Providence  on  the  sins  of  the  nation,  but 
he  feels  also  a  disproportion  between  the  offence  and  the  punishment,  which  neutralizes 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxhi. 

all  efforts  after  righteousness,  unless  Jehovah  will  relent  from  the  fierceness  of  His 
wrath.  The  higher  truth,  that  the  Divine  chastisement  aims  at  the  purification 
of  the  people,  and  is  therefore  a  mark  of  love,  is  not  yet  grasped,  and  for  this  reason 
the  Ola  Testament  believers  fall  short  of  the  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  Yet  amid 
all  these  perplexities  the  faith  of  the  Church  holds  fast  to  the  truth  of  the  Father- 
hood of  God,  and  appeals  to  the  love  which  must  be  in  His  heart,  although  it  be  not 
manifest  in  His  providential  dealings.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  God's  v:ithdr awing 
His  presence,  the  correction  of  His  Church : — These  are  words  that  carry  a  great  deiu 
of  dread  in  them :  tremendous  words  as  any  in  the  Book  of  God.  It  is  the  true 
Church  of  God  that  speaks  these  words.  They  were  "all  as  an  unclean  thing," 
and  their  "holiness  aU  faded  away  as  a  leaf"  (chap.  Ixiv.  6).  Yet  faith  maintains 
a  sense  of  a  relation  to  God  ;  therefore  they  cry,  "  Doubtless  thou  art  our  Father," 
etc.  (vet.  16).  And  if  God  would  help  us  to  maintain,  and  not  let  go  our  interest  in 
TTim  as  our  Father  by  faith,  we  should  have  a  bottom  and  foundation  to  stand  upon. 
Observe,  here,  the  condition  of  the  Church  at  that  time.  1.  It  was  a  time  of  distress 
and  oppression  (ver.  18).  2.  A  time  of  deep  conviction  of  sin  (chap.  Ixiv.  6,  7). 
"Well,  then,  suppose  it  be  a  state  of  great  oppression,  and  a  state  of  great  conviction 
of  sin :  what  is  the  course  that  we  should  take  ?  We  may  turn  ourselves  this  way 
and  that  way  ;  but  the  Church  is  come  to  this,  to  issue  all  in  an  inquiry  after,  and 
a  sense  of  God's  displeasure,  manifesting  itself  by  spiritual  judgments.  I.  What 
IS  IT  TO  ERR  FROM  THE  WATS  OF  GoD  ?  The  ways  of  God  are  either  God's  ways 
towards  us,  or  our  ways  towards  Him,  that  are  of  His  appointment.  God's  ways 
towards  us  are  the  ways  of  His  providence.  Our  ways  towards  God  are  the  ways  of 
obedience  and  holiness.  We  may  err  in  both.  The  ways  that  God  hath  appointed 
for  us  to  walk  in  towards  Him  are  these  here  intended.  Now  we  may  err  from 
thence — 1.  In  the  inward  principle.     2.  In  the  outward  order.     II.  What  is  it  to 

HAVE    Oim    HEARTS    HARDENED    FROM   THE    FEAR    OF    GoD  ?      1.   There    is    a    total 

hardening.  2.  A  partial  hardening.  III.  How  is  God  said  to  cause  us  to  err 
FROM  His  ways,  and  to  harden  our  hearts  from  His  fear  ?  1.  God  is  said  to 
do  that  (and  it  is  not  an  uncommon  form  of  speech  in  Scripture)  whose  contrary  He 
doth  not  do,  when  it  might  be  expected,  as  it  were,  from  Him.  If  there  be  a  prophet 
that  doth  prophesy  so  and  so,  "I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet "  (Ezek.  xiv. 
9),  that  is,  I  have  not  kept  him  from  being  deceived,  but  suffered  him  to  foUow  the 
imaginations  of  his  own  heart,  whereby  he  should  be  deceived."  God  may  be  said  to 
cause  us  to  err  from  His  ways,  and  to  harden  our  hearts  from  His  fear  merely 
negatively,  in  that  He  hath  not  kept  us  up  to  His  ways,  nor  kept  our  hearts 
humble  and  soft  in  them.  2.  God  hardens  men  judicially,  in  a  way  of  punish- 
ment. This  is  a  total  hardening.  (1)  The  first  thing  God  doth,  when  He 
hardens  men's  hearts  penally,  is  to  give  them  over  to  their  own  lusts  (Rom.  i. 
24).  (2)  Then  He  gives  men  up  to  Satan  to  blind  them  and  harden  them,  for  he 
is  "the  god  of  this  world  that  blinds  the  eyes  of  men."  (3)  God  doth  judicially 
give  up  men  to  hardness  of  heart  by  supplying  them  in  His  providence  with  oppor- 
tunities to  draw  out  their  lusts.  (4)  In  pursuit  of  all  these,  God  gives  them  over  to 
"a  reprobate  mind"  (Rom.  i.  28),  i.  e.  a  mind  that  can  neither  judge  nor  approve 
of  anything  that  is  good.  3.  God  may  be  said  to  cause  men  to  err  from  His  ways, 
and  to  harden  their  hearts  from  His  fear,  by  withholding,  upon  their  provocation, 
some  such  supply  of  His  Spirit,  and  actings  of  His  grace,  as  they  have  formerly 
enjoyed  to  keep  up  th^ir  hearts  to  the  ways  and  in  the  fear  of  God.  That  is  the 
hardening  here  intended.  IV.  Why  doth  the  holy  God  deal  thus  with  a 
professing  PEOPLE  ?  1.  What  provokes  God  to  it.  (1)  Unthankfulness  for  mercy 
received  (vers.  8-10).  (2)  Inordinate  cleaving  to  the  things  of  the  world  at  a  most 
undue  season.  (3)  Our  unprofitableness,  and  unsuitableness  to  the  means  of  grace 
we  have  enjoyed.  2.  What  does  God  aim  at  in  such  a  dispensation  ?  (1)  To  awaken 
us  unto  the  consideration  of  what  an  aU-seeing  God  He  is,  with  whom  we  have  to 
do.  (2)  To  awaken  us.  V.  What  way  shall  we  take  now  for  retrieving  our 
SOULS  OUT  OF  THIS  STATE  AND  CONDITION  ?  One  Way  is  prescribed  here.  It  is  by 
prayer:  "Return,  0  Lord."  The  arguments  here  given  are  peculiar  to  the  case; 
and  we  may  plead  them.  1.  Sovereign  mercy  and  compassion  (ver.  15).  2.  Faith- 
fulness in  covenant  (ver.  16).     {John  Owen,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  We  are  Thine. — The  intimate  relation  subsisting  between  God  and  His  people 
BOggests  strong  encouragement  in  their  supplications  at  the  throne  of  grace.  The 
Loiti  God  is  more  ready  to  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  Him  than  earthly 
paienta  are  to  give  to  their  children.    They  may  be  poor,  niggardly,  or  hard-hearted ; 


CHAP.  ixiT.]  ISAIAH.  425 

whereas  the  treasures  of  onr  heavenly  Father  are  inexhaustible,  His  liberality  is 
unbounded,  and  His  compassions  never  faiL    (£.  Maoculloch,) 


OHAPTEE  LXIV. 


Yebs.  1,  2.  Oh  that  Thou  wonldest  rend  the  heavens. — Prayer  for  Divine  mani' 
/estcUion: — I.  This  is  nothing  less  than  a  pkayee  that  God  would  manifest 
Himself  as  a  Judge — yes,  and  as  a  Destrover.  Isaiah  craved  for  a  man  who 
should  deliver  men  from  the  oppressions  of  the  world's  tyranny,  from  the  storms 
which  are  raised  by  the  passions  of  peoples  and  rulers,  from  the  weariness  and 
exhaustion  which  follows  when  they  have  accomplished  their  projects  with  great 
labour,  and  nothing  comes  out  of  them.  He  longed  that  the  true  man  should 
appear,  who  would  thoroughlv  manifest  the  ways  and  purposes  of  the  true  God,  who 
would  remove  the  thick  veil  which  had  intercepted  His  light  from  reaching  His 
creatures,  who  would  make  them  know  that  He  was  present  with  them,  that  He 
was  ruling  and  judging  them.  To  long,  then,  for  a  Man  who  should  be  a  hiding- 
place  from  the  tempest  and  a  covert  from  the  storm  or  heat  was  the  very  same  thing 
as  to  long  that  God  would  rend  the  heavens  and  come  down.     II.  There  is  a 

NATURAL    heart    IN     ALT,    OF    US   WHICH    IS    AVERSE    FROM    THIS    PRAYER.      And 

there  is  a  natural  religion  which  adapts  itself  to  these  cravings  of  ours,  and  supplies 
them  with  a  language.    To  keep  God  at  a  distance  from  men  is  the  end  whicn  it 

S reposes  to  itself;  to  convert  all  persons  who  perform  its  offices,  all  prayers  and 
ogmas,  into  barriers  more  or  less  secme  against  His  appearing,  and  His  vengeance, 
is  its  art.  This  religion  expresses  all  different  feelings  of  men,  in  different  conditions 
of  disease.  It  does  not  express  the  one  common  feeling  of  men,  to  be  raised  out  of 
their  diseases,  to  be  made  whole.  The  imiversal  prayer — the  prayer  that  goes  up 
from  the  whole  heart  of  humanity — is  this  of  Isaiah.     III.  The  prophet  had 

BEEN  DISCIPLINED  TO  UNDERSTAND  THAT  MAN  DOES  NOT  REQUIRE  TO  BE  PRO- 
TECTED AGAINST  God,  but  that  God  should  protect  him  against  himself,  and  should 
raise  him  out  of  the  slavery  which  he  invents  for  himself.  Thus  did  he  learn  to 
rejoice,  even  while  he  trembled,  at  the  convulsions  in  the  outward  world,  or  in 
human  society.  Thus  did  he  understand  that  by  all  such  signs  God  was  avenging 
the  cause  of  the  poor,  of  those  who  had  no  helper,  wsis  shaking  kings  on  their 
thrones,  was  surprising  the  hypocrites.  Thus  was  Isaiah  made  into  the  evangelical 
prophet,  the  witness  that  unto  us  a  Child  is  bom,  imto  us  a  Son  is  given,  who  can 
be  a  covert  from  the  tempest,  because  He  is  both  the  Son  of  man  and  the  Son  of 
God  ;  because  God  appearing  in  Him  does  indeed  rend  the  heavens  and  come  down. 
(F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  heart's  cry: — Here  is  a  voice,  resonant,  magnificent, 
full  of  heart-chords,  that  says.  Break  up  the  scheme  of  nature  and  rebuild  it,  only 
thou  Heart  of  things  come  to  us  ?  We  catch  our  best  selves  in  our  best  reality  when 
we  are  thus  impassioned.  The  zoologist  or  physiologist  tolls  us  that  animals  can 
only  move  when  they  are  warm  ;  they  can  only  move  in  proportion  as  the  sun  is  in 
them.  It  is  the  sun  that  makes  the  bird  fly,  it  is  the  sun  that  made  the  little 
serpent  leap  up  into  your  way  and  flash  into  the  woods  like  a  glare  of  light  in 
darkness.  We  move  by  the  sun.  So,  in  a  higher  sense,  in  the  larger,  richer  realms 
of  education  and  culture  and  growth,  we  are  moved  by  inspiration,  not  by  informa- 
tion. {J.  Parker,  B.D.)  Irresistible  Divine  manifestation: — Jehovah  is  to  descend 
with  such  irresistible  force  as  fire  exerts  on  brushwood  and  water,  kindling  the  one, 
making  the  other  boU,  in  order  by  such  a  display  of  power  to  impress  His  name 
(revealing  itself  judicially,  therefore,  "in  fire,'  chaps,  xxx.  27,  IxvL  15)  on  His 
adversaries,  and  thatt(idomtrous)  nations  may  tremble  before  Him  (fit  Ps.  Ixviii.  2f.). 
(F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  When  Thou  didst  temble  things. — "Terrible  things": — ^A  standing 
phrase  for  the  marvels  of  the  Exodus,  the  type  of  the  great  final  deliverance 
(Deut.  X.  21 ;  2  Sam.  vii  23 ;  Ps.  cvi.  22).  {Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.)  Divine 
surprises: — Isaiah  pleads  with  God  to  return  to  His  chosen  people,  and  restore  their 
former  peace  and  prosperity.  He  makes  use  of  the  past  as  an  argument  for  the 
future,  and  recites  the  wonderftd  acts  of  God  in  days  gone  by  as  an  encouragement 
to  expect  that  He  would  do  the  like  again.    If  it  were  not  that  Qod  is  unchangeable, 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixit. 

no  inference  could  be  drawn  from  His  past  behaviour  toward  us  ;  but  inasmuch  as 
He  is  immutably  the  same,  we  may  safely  infer  that  what  He  has  done  He  will  do 
again.  I.  Let  us  meditate  upon  the  fact  that  the  Divine  presence  is  the  one 
HOPE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.  The  prophet  shows  that  he  believed  this,  for  he 
commences  the  chapter  by  a  most  ardent  cry  to  God  that  He  would  come  into  the 
midst  of  His  people.  A  little  before  this  (chap.  Ixiii.  15)  he  had  prayed,  "  Look 
down  from  heaven  ; "  but  it  is  the  characteristic  of  true  prayer  that  it  grows  as  it 
proceeds  :  he  begins  by  asking  God  to  look  down  ;  but  he  gathers  intensity  of  desire 
and  confidence  of  faith,  and  here  he  cries,  "  Come  down."  So  eager  is  he  that  God 
should  come,  and  come  at  once,  that  he  speaks  to  Him  as  though  addressing  a 
warrior  who  lingered  in  his  tent  while  a  battle  was  raging,  who  would  be  so  eager  to 
rush  to  the  help  of  his  friends  that  he  would  not  stay  to  remove  the  canvas  or  to  lift 
the  curtain,  but  would  rend  a  way  for  himself  through  the  canopy  to  come  at  once 
to  the  deliverance  of  those  who  called  him  to  the  rescue.  It  was  through  the  open 
heavens  that  Christ  went  in  where  He  now  stands  to  plead  for  us,  and  by  that 
open  heaven  the  sacred  Spirit  descended  to  rest  upon  the  Church.  The  impetuous 
character  of  the  simile  here  used  shows  that  the  prophet  looked  upon  the  Divine 
visitation  as  the  one  thing  needful  for  Israel.  Is  not  this  the  prayer  of  every  true 
heart  that  knows  the  need  of  the  Church  and  the  need  of  the  age  ?  We  do  not 
80  much  require  more  ministers,  or  more  eloquent  teachers,  but  more  of  the  sacred 
presence.  We  do  not  want  wealth  in  the  Church,  or  magnificent  buildings,  but  we 
crave  above  all  things  that  the  living  God  will  refresh  His  people.  The  desire  of  the 
prophet  in  the  present  instance  is  abundantly  justified  by  the  history  of  God's  people 
in  all  times  :  for  when  the  tribes  were  in  Egypt  what  could  set  them  free  from  the 
iron  bondage  ? — what  but  the  presence  of  God  ?  So  was  it  when  their  marchings 
were  through  the  lone  vrilderness.  The  favour  of  God  is  the  hope  of  all  His  people. 
First,  we  see  this  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  world  must  have 
perished  if  God  had  not  come  down  to  it  in  the  person  of  His  dear  Son.  So,  too, 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  to  us  by  His  Spirit  our  hope  begins.  And  our  hope  of 
the  perfection  of  our  salvation  still  lies  in  the  coming  of  Christ  to  us.  Until  our 
Lord's  glorious  advent,  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church  is  our  only 
dependence  for  success  in  all  that  we  attempt.  The  presence  of  God  is  essential  to 
each  one  of  us  if  we  are  to  be  saved.  II.  When  the  Lord  comes  His  presence 
CREATES  great  SURPRISES.  "When  Thou  didst  terrible  things  that  we  looked 
not  for,  Thou  camest  down."  It  has  always  been  so.  Even  the  most  expectant 
among  men  have  found  their  expectations  far  exceeded  ;  while  those  who  have  been 
depressed,  and  have  prophesied  dark  things,  have  been  altogether  taken  aback  to 
see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  How  is  it  that  we  continue  to  be  surprised  at  what 
God  does  ?  First,  because  our  largest  conceptions  of  God  fall  short  of  the  truth. 
Besides,  our  experience  of  God  is  very  brief.  We  have  lived  as  yet  only  for  a  span, 
or  a  hand's  breadth.  Besides  that,  our  faith  is  shamefully  weak,  and  does  not  look 
out  for  great  things.  Surprising  mercies  tend  to  rouse  our  gratitude.  How  much 
God  is  glorified  by  His  people  when  He  does  things  they  looked  not  for.  Their 
neighbours  are  surprised.  III.  The  presence  of  God  dissolves  difficulties. 
"The  mountains  flowed  down  at  Thy  presence."  Israel  had  enemies  which  were 
strong  and  powerful,  nations  and  kings  towered  above  them  like  great  mountains, 
but  whenever  God  came  to  help  them  the  kingdoms  dissolved,  the  people  were 
conquered,  and  the  mountains  and  hills  were  laid  low.  At  this  present  time  great 
systems  of  error  oppose  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Church  only  needs  the 
Divine  presence  in  uie  midst  of  her,  and  aU  the  systems  of  error  wiU  now  down  at 
His  feet  like  glaciers  which  dissolve  in  the  summer  sun.  Many  hearts  are  hard  as 
granite  rocks ;  you  may  pray  for  them,  talk  to  them,  preach  to  them,  but  all  in 
vain.  What  is  required  is  tne  presence  of  God,  and  then  hearts  of  stone  are  turned 
to  flesh.  Within  our  own  selves  also  we  may  see  mountains  of  difficulty,  but  if  we 
go  to  Christ,  and  so  obtain  God's  help,  every  mountain  shall  sink  and  every  rock 
melt.  IV.  We  may  expect  to  see  the  same  results  from  the  Divine 
presence  to-day,  and  to-morrow,  and  as  long  as  we  live.  God  is  the  same. 
There  are  things  to  be  done  yet  by  God  which  will  astonish  us  beyond  measure. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  4.  For  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  men  have  not  heard. — Ood  absolutely 
alone  in  His  gradousness : — "  From  of  old  men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived,  nor 
has  eye  seen  a  God  beside  Thee,  who  acted  for  him  that  waits  for  Him."  {F. 
Deliizsch,  D.D.)    Mystery  revealed: — There  is,  perhaps,  nothing  more  likely  to 


CHAP.  LXiv.]  ISAIAH.  427 

withhold  us  from  a  diligent  process  of  self-examination  as  to  our  position  in  reference 
to  heaven,  or  to  induce  a  sort  of  belief  that  such  self-examination  may  safely  be 
spared,  because  we  have  not  sufficient  material  for  conducting  it,  than  the  convenient 
supposition  of  the  incomprehensibleness  of  heaven,  and  our  utter  incompetence  with 
our  present  set  of  faculties  to  the  understanding  what  heaven  is.  The  words  of  our 
text  are  those  which  St.  Paul  quotes,  when  he  says — "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  Him."  And  there  are  no  words  more  frequently  or 
more  unhesitatingly  quoted  than  these,  as  if  it  were  heaven  which  the  writer  had  in 
view.  This  is  only  an  instance  of  popular  misapplication  of  Scripture.  The  words 
may,  indeed,  be  accommodated  to  heaven  ;  but  as  used,  whether  by  Isaiah  or  St. 
Paul,  they  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  heaven  ;  and  it  is  nothing  but  by  that 
common  habit  of  detaching  a  text  from  the  context,  and  thus  suiting  it  to  our  own 
purpose  without  concern  as  to  the  drift  of  the  writer,  that  the  words  are  in  every 
one's  mouth  whensoever  discourse  turns  on  the  invisible  world.     I.  Consider  what 

IS   THE   TRUE   IMPORT   AND   MEANING   OF   THE   PASSAGE,  whether  aS  it  OCCUTS  iu  the 

writings  of  Isaiah,  or  those  of  St.  Paul.  The  chapter  in  which  our  text  occurs 
contains  an  earnest  prayer  for  the  manifestation  of  God's  power,  and  this  prayer 
is  generally  considered  as  that  of  the  first  converts  from  among  the  dispersed  Jews, 
when  the  nation  of  Israel  shall  be  about  to  be  reunited  in  the  Church.  It  is  a 
devout  and  most  importunate  call  for  some  such  mighty  interference  as  had  been 
vouchsafed  to  Israel  in  earlier  days,  when  God  made  "bare  His  holy  arm,  and 
wrought  wondrously  on  behalf  of  His  people. "  Those  words  are  a  declaration  that 
when  God  shall  interfere,  as  we  yet  believe  that  He  will,  on  behalf  of  His  ancient 
people,  gathering  them  from  their  dispersion,  engrafting  them  into  His  Church, 
and  reinstating  them  in  the  land  from  which  they  have  so  long  been  exiled,  there 
will  be  such  exhibitions  of  His  greatness,  and  goodness,  and  awfulness,  as  shall 
immeasurably  siu-pass  the  expectations  even  of  those  who,  most  diligent  in 
remembering  the  marvels  of  old,  have  also  been  most  patient  in  awaiting  the 
ftilfilment  of  the  long-clierished  promise.  "Without  going  more  at  length  into  an 
examination  of  the  prayer  recorded  by  Isaiah,  we  may  safely  say  that  it  is  not  to 
heaven  that  the  suppliants  refer  when  they  use  the  language  "Eye  hath  not  seen," 
etc.  And  if,  as  used  by  the  prophet,  the  words  do  not  refer  to  heaven,  do  they  as 
thus  used  by  the  apostle  ?  (1  Cor.  ii).  You  can  hardly  fail  to  perceive,  if  you  look 
attentively  at  the  context,  that  it  is  the  Gospel  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks — the  plan 
of  salvation  through  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  And  it  is  to  this  Gospel  that  he 
applies  the  words  which  are  so  commonly  quoted,  as  though  he  spake  of  heaven. 
What  are  his  next  words  ?  "  But  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  His  Spirit." 
So,  then,  you  see  the  mysteriousness  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks  was  at  an  end. 
II.  "We  wish  to  suppose  that  the  words  were  used  of  heaven,  and  to  examine 

WHETHER  EVEN  THEN  THEY  WOULD  AT  ALL  WARRANT  MEN  IN  NOT  ENDEAVOURING 
TO   ASCERTAIN   THEIR    FITNESS    FOR    THE    "INHERITANCE    OF    THE    SAINTS."      "We 

believe  of  heaven,  that  its  joys  far  transcend  our  highest  imaginations,  and  are  only 
imperfectly,  if  at  all,  to  be  apprehended  by  our  present  senses  and  feelings.  "We 
are  not  afraid  to  say  of  heaven — "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  laid  up  for  the  righteous, " 
but  do  the  words  prove  that  we  can  know  nothing  about  heaven  ?  Then,  what  mean 
the  words  which  so  immediately  follow — "  But  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by 
His  Spirit "  ?  Heaven  is  a  mystery  to  the  natural  man.  Its  joys  are  such  as  lie 
beyond  his  comprehension  ;  so  that  if  described  to  him,  they  do  not  come  home  to 
his  understanding.  Its  occupations  are  such  that,  when  mentioned,  they  appear  to 
him  as  if  they  must  be  burdens,  so  devoid  are  they  of  the  elements  for  which  he 
possesses  any  relish  or  taste.  It  is  not,  however,  thus  with  the  spiritual  man. 
Unto  him  there  hath  come  a  revelation  of  the  happiness  of  heaven,  seeing  that  he 
has  whisperings  even  now  of  that  holiness  which  is  happiness,  and  therefore  can 
tmderstand,  and  will  be  taught  to  feel  that  happiness  is  to  be  "  holy  even  as  God  is 
holy. "  We  tell  you  of  heaven  as  of  that  whereof  there  hath  been  made  a  revelation 
to  every  believer  in  the  felt  agreement  between  what  is  told  him  of  happiness 
hereafter,  and  what  is  experienced  by  him  of  happiness  here.  And  it  is  just  one 
of  the  worst  delusions  to  which  any  man  can  make  himself  a  prey  to  suppose  that 
he  may  have  a  place  prepared  for  him  in  heaven,  and  yet  be  without  proof  that  he 
is  himself  being  prepared  for  that  place.  Heaven  is  not  so  much  a  place  as  it  is  a 
character ;  neither  is  hell  so  much  a  place  as  it  is  a  character.  You  may  already 
decide  whether  you  are  in  possession  of  the  tastes  without  which  you  could  not  enjoy 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxit. 

heaven,  without  which  you  could  not  find  it  heaven,  even  if  through  some  strange 
distribution  you  were  admitted  amongst  its  inmates.  Submit  yourselves  to  the 
Spirit ;  obey  His  impulses ;  foUow  His  suggestions ;  cherish  His  presence ;  dread  His 
absence.  And  thus  may  you  become  gradually  fitted  for  that  blessed  abode  which 
"  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  but  which,  nevertheless,  may  be  so  unfolded  to  those  who  are 
so  growing  in  grace,  that  they  can  already  drink  of  that  river  which  proceedeth 
"  from  the  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb,"  and  already  join  in  the  anthem  of  the 
redeemed,     {-ff.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth. — Hie  godly  mem: — I.  The  godlt 
man's  conduct.  1.  He  worketh  righteousness.  He  does  not  confine  himself  to  any 
department  of  action,  it  may  be  manual,  conmiercial,  literary,  scientific,  professional ; 
but  in  all  he  "worketh  righteousness."  He  is  right  in  all;  rectitude,  and  not 
expediency,  is  his  law.  2.  He  is  happy  in  his  work.  He  "rejoiceth  and  worketh." 
A  man  that  worketh  righteousness  is  sure  to  be  happy ;  his  affections  will  be 
harmonious,  his  conscience  will  smile  on  him,  his  God  will  bless  him.  There  is  no 
happiness  but  in  work  ;  and  there  is  no  happiness  in  work  that  is  not  the  work  of 
"righteousness."  3.  He  remembers  God  in  all.  "Those  that  remember  Thee  in 
Thy  ways. "  God  has  His  ways  and  His  methods  of  action,  and  they  are  manifold. 
He  remembers  God  in  His  ways  in  nature,  in  the  government  of  man,  in  the  dis- 
pensations of  redeeming  grace.  II.  The  godly  man's  companion.  "  Thou  (i.  e. 
God)  meetest  biTn  that  rejoiceth."  Such  men  have  meetings  with  God.  1.  Conscious 
meetings.  All  men  meet  with  God,  but  they  are  unconscious  of  it.  The  good  man 
knows  it ;  he  can  say,  "God  is  in  this  place."  2.  Loving  meetings.  He  meets  him 
as  the  father  met  the  prodigal  son  on  ms  return,  overflowing  with  love  and  joy.  3. 
Preparatoiy  meetings.  He  meets  them  to  prepare  them  for  a  meeting  with  Him 
that  shall  be  uninterrupted,  beatific,  and  eternal.  Conclusion  :  What  a  noble  life  is 
the  life  of  godliness!  Godliness  is  "profitable  unto  all  things,"  etc.  {Eomilist.) 
How  to  meet  God : — In  these  ancient  words,  in  very  different  phraseology  indeed,  we 
see  a  strikingly  accurate  and  full  anticipation  of  the  very  central  teachtug  of  Paul 
and  his  brother  apostles,  as  to  the  way  by  which  God  and  man  come  into  union  with 
one  another.  "  Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  " — that  joy  is  to  be  manifested  by 
"working  righteousness,"  biit  the  joy  which  is  the  parent  of  righteousness  is  the 
child  of  something  else — "those  that  remember  Thee  in  Thy  ways."  If  we  ponder 
these  words,  and  carefully  mark  their  relation  to  each  other,  we  may  discern,  as  it 
were,  a  great  staircase  with  three  flights  in  it,  and  at  the  top  God's  face.     I.  Wb 

HAVE  TO   BEGIN  WITH  THE  LAST  CLAUSE  OF  OUR  TEXT.      "  ThoU  meetest  him  .    .    . 

that  remembers  Thee  in  Thy  ways."  The  first  stage  on  the  road  which  will  bring 
any  man  into,  and  keep  any  man  in,  contact  with  God,  and  loving  fellowship  with 
Him,  is  the  contemplation  of  His  character,  as  it  is  made  known  to  us  by  His 
acts.  God,  like  man,  is  known  by  His  "fruits."  You  cannot  get  at  a  clear 
conception  of  God  by  speculation,  or  by  thinking  about  Him  or  about  what 
He  is  in  Himself.  Lay  hold  of  the  clue  of  His  acts,  and  it  leads  you  straight 
into  His  heart.  But  the  act  of  acts,  in  which  the  whole  Godhead  concurs, 
in  which  all  its  depths  and  preciousness  are  concentrated,  like  wine  in  a  golden 
cup,  is  the  incarnation  and  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  But  note 
that  word  "Remember,"  for  it  suggests  the  warning  that  such  contemplation  of 
the  ways  of  the  Lord  will  not  be  realized  by  us  without  eSbrt.  There  are  so  many 
things  within  us  to  draw  us  away  ;  the  duties  and  joys  and  sorrows  of  life  so  insist 
upon  having  a  place  in  our  hearts  and  thoughts,  that  assuredly,  unless  by  resolute 
effort,  frequently  repeated,  we  clear  a  space  in  this  crowded  and  chattering  market- 
place of  life,  where  we  can  stand  and  gaze  on  the  white  summits  far  beyond  the 
bustling  crowd,  we  shall  never  see  them,  though  they  are  visible  from  every  place. 
Unless  you  try  to  remember,  you  wiU  certainly  forget.     II.  The  second  flight 

OF    THIS  GREAT  STAIRCASE    IS   POINTED  OUT   IN    THE   FIRST  CLAUSE  OF    MY  TEXT. 

"Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth."  That  meditative  remembrance  of  the  ways  of 
God  will  be  the  parent  of  holy  joy  which  wiU  bring  God  near  to  our  heart.  Alas,  it 
is  too  often  the  very  opposite  of  true  that  men's  joys  are  such  as  to  bring  God  to 
them.  The  excitement  and  often  the  impure  elements  that  mingle  with  what  the 
world  calls  "joy"  are  such  as  to  shut  Him  out  from  us.  But  there  is  a  gladness 
which  comes  from  the  contemplation  of  Him  as  He  is,  and  as  He  is  known  by  His 
"  ways  "  to  be,  which  brings  us  very  near  to  God,  and  God  very  near  to  us.  ^  I  think 
that  we  have  largely  lost  the  veiy  thought  that  gladness  is  a  plain  Christian  duty, 
to  be  striven  after  in  the  appropriate  manner  which  my  text  suggests,  and  certainlj 


CHAF.  ixiv.]  ISAIAH.  429 

to  be  secured  if  we  seek  it  in  the  right  way.  III.  The  third  stage  is  working 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  BECAUSE  OF  SUCH  JOT.  " Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth,  and" 
— because  he  does — "  worketh  righteousness."  Every  master  knows  how  much  more 
work  can  be  got  out  of  a  servant  that  works  with  a  cheery  heart  than  out  of  one  that 
is  driven  reluctantly  to  his  task.  You  remember  our  Lord's  parable  where  He  traces 
idleness  to  fear  :  "1  knew  thee  that  thou  wast  an  austere  man,  gathering  where  thou 
didst  not  strew,  and  I  was  afraid,  and  I  went  and  hid  thy  talent."  No  work  was 
got  out  of  that  servaut  because  "  there  was  no  joy  "  in  him.  The  opposite  state  of 
mind — diligence  in  righteous  work,  inspired  by  gladness  which  in  its  turn  ia  inspired 
by  the  remembrance  of  God's  ways — is  the  mark  of  a  true  servant  of  God.  And  the 
gladness  which  is  wholesome  and  blessed,  and  is  "joy  in  the  Lord,"  will  manifest 
itself  by  efflorescing  into  all  holiness  and  all  loftiness  and  largeness  of  obedience. 
IV.  We  have  the  landing-place  to  which  the  stair  leads.  God  comes  to  such 
a  man.  He  meets  him  indeed  at  all  the  stages,  for  there  is  a  blessed  communion  with 
God  that  springs  immediately  from  remembering  Him  in  His  ways,  and  a  still  more 
blessed  one  that  springs  from  rejoicing  in  His  felt  friendship  and  Fatherhood,  and  a 
yet  more  blessed  one  that  comes  from  practical  righteousness.  For  if  there  is  any- 
thing that  breaks  our  conmiunion  with  God,  it  is  that  there  linger  in  our  lives  evils 
which  make  it  impossible  for  God  and  us  to  come  close  together.  Eemember  if  there 
is  the  practice  of  evil  there  cannot  be  the  sunshine  of  the  presence  of  God.  But 
remember,  too,  that  the  commonest,  homeliest,  smallest,  most  secular  tasks  may 
become  the  very  highest  steps  of  the  staircase  that  briiigs  us  into  His  presence. 
Conclusion :  There  are  two  kinds  of  meeting  God.  "  "Thou  meetest  him  that 
rejoiceth  and  worketh  righteousness,"  and  that  is  blessed,  as  when  Christ  met  the 
two  disciples  on  the  road  to  Emmaus.  There  is  another  kind  of  meeting  with  God. 
"Who,  making  war,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  consulteth  whether  he  be  able 
■with  ten  thousand  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  thousand  ? " 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Behold,  Thou  art  wroth. — An  obscure  passage : — Text  obscure. 
Possibly,  "  Behold  Thou  wast  wroth,  and  we  sinned  ;  Thy  wrath  was  for  ever,  and 
we  became  transgressors."  The  general  idea  is  that,  through  God's  wrath  long  con- 
tinued, the  people  have  simk  ever  deeper  into  sin  (cf.  chaps.  Ivii,  17,  Ixiii.  17 ; 
Koran,  xxvii.  4).  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  " Behold,  Thou,  Thou  wast  enraged,  and 
we  stood  as  sinners ;  already  we  have  long  been  in  this  state ;  and  shaU  we  be 
saved  ? "    {F.  Delitzsch,  D.  D. ) 

Vers.  6-8,  But  we  are  all  as  an  nnclean  thing. — Israel's  uncleanness : — "  And  we 
are  all  become  as  one  unclean" — in  a  ceremonial  sense,  like  the  leper.  (Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.)  Lamentations  of  Isaiah: — You  have  read  some  of  the  lamentations 
of  Jeremiah;  here  is  one  of  the  lamentations  of  Isaiah.  (C.  R.  Spurgeon.)  The 
Church's  complaint  avd  confidence: — I.  A  humble  confession  of  sin.  1.  Of  the 
sins  of  their  nature,  of  their  persons  themselves.  "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing." 
2.  Of  the  sins  of  actions.  "  All  our  righteousness  is  as  filthy  rags."  3.  Of  the  sin 
of  non-proficiency,  of  obduration,  and  senselessness,  that  notwithstanding  the  cor- 
rections of  God,  they  were  little  the  better.  "  There  is  none  that  calleth  upon  Thy 
name,  or  that  stirs  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  Thee."  11.  A  humble  complaint 
of  the  miserable  estate  they  were  in  by  their  sins.  "We  aU  fade  as  a 
leaf,"  etc.  III.  A  humble  suppLiCATiofr  and  deprecation  to  God  (ver.  8,  etc.). 
{R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  A  compreheTisive  confession: — This  brief  prayer  is  a  combination 
of  many  types.  Natural  analogies  are  piled  upon  each  other.  The  confession  con- 
sists of  six  several  but  consecutive  and  closely  connected  parts.  There  is  much 
meaning  in  each  separate  ingredient  of  this  confession  considered  by  itself,  and  more 
in  the  relations  and  union  of  the  whole.  I.  The  taint  of  sin,  that  from  the 
eprings  of  humanity  has  poisoned  all  its  streams.  "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing." 
When  one  who  has  been  convinced  by  the  Spirit  takes  words  and  turns  to  God,  he 
begins  at  the  heart,  as  the  spring  whence  the  many  unclean  streams  of  thoughts  and 
words  and  deeds  flow  out  in  the  daily  life.  This  simplicity  is  a  mark  of  truth. 
II.  The  worthlessness  and  positive  loathsomeness  of  all  the  efforts 
which  a  sinful  man  can  make  to  set  himself  at  first  right  with  God. 
"All  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags."  Most  naturally  this  ingredient  of  the 
confessioH  comes  next  in  order.  He  looked  first  to  his  sins,  and  told  what  he 
thought  of  them;  he  next  looks  to  his  righteousness.  III.  The  frailty,  un- 
certainty, AND  shortness  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  "We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf." 
IV.  The  power  and  success  of  internal  corruption  in  hurrying  the  man 
INTO  ACTUAL  SIN.     "OuT  ioiq^ulties,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  ns  away."    It  is 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mit. 

r 

a  mark  of  true  repentance  when  the  penitent  lays  all  the  blame  upon  himself. 
v.  The  inability  and  imwiLLiNONESs  of  these  helpless  sinners,  as  thet 

AKB   drifting  DOWN  THE  STREAM   OF  SIN  TOWARDS   THE  GULF  OF   PERDITION,  TO 

LIFT  THEMSELVES  UP  AND  TAKE  HOLD  ON  GoD,  *'  There  is  none  that  calleth  upon 
Thy  name,  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  Thee."  VI.  God's  method  of 
DEALING  WITH  SUCH  A  CASE.  "  Thou  hast  hid  Thy  face  from  us."  The  Holy  One 
hides  His  face  from  His  creatures  while  they  live  in  sin.  "  And  hast  consumed  us 
because  of  our  iniquities."  I  prefer  to  take  this  clause  in  its  most  literal  sense,  as  it 
is  given  in  the  mar^ — "  Thou  hast  melted  us  by  the  hand  of  our  iniquities."  God 
melts  the  hardest  sinners,  and  He  employs  their  own  sins  to  make  the  flinty  hearts 
flow  down.  If  this  melting  take  efiect  in  the  day  of  grace,  it  is  repentance  unto 
life.  But  if  the  sinful  are  not  so  melted  in  the  day  of  grace,  they  will  be  melted 
when  that  day  is  done.  Their  own  sins  on  their  own  heads  will  be  at  least  a 
material  part  of  the  doom  of  the  lost  in  the  great  Day.  After  having  looked  to  the 
text,  we  shall  look  at  that  which  touches  it,  before  and  behind.  The  gem  is  the 
chief  object  of  attraction,  but  its  setting  may  be  both  beautiful  and  precious.  The 
word  that  touches  it  on  the  one  side  (end  of  ver.  5)  is,  *'  We  shall  be  saved ; "  the 
word  that  touches  it  on  the  other  side  (beginning  of  ver.  8)  is,  ' '  But  now,  0  Lord, 
Thou  art  our  Father. "  It  is  not  by  chance  that  this  great  deep  confession  lies 
between  these  two  words — is  held  up  and  held  out  in  these  two  tender,  loving  hands. 
"We  are  saved  by  hope,"  not  by  terror.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  hanefuhiess  of 
sin: — I.  Sin  is  a  defiling  power.  "We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing."  Sin 
makes  the  soul  as  unlovely  as  a  man  in  filth.  The  soul  ought  not  to  be  unclean. 
The  stain  of  sin  does  not  belong  to  it,  it  is  separable  from  it.  Once  the  soul  had  no 
stain.  II.  Sin  is  an  impoverishing  power.  "All  our  righteousnesses  are  as 
filthy  rags. "  Moral  character  is  indeed  the  garment  of  the  soul,  the  garment  which 
it  weaves  out  of  its  thoughts,  emotions,  purposes,  and  actual  deeds.  This  garment 
ought  to  be  one  beautiful  whole,  and  clean  also.  But  through  sin  it  is  all  in  "  rags." 
There  is  no  unity,  no  wholeness,  no  completeness.  It  is  all  in  tatters,  and  filthy 
tatters  too.  Sin  indeed  makes  the  soul  ugly  and  hateful.  How  unlovely  is  every 
aspect  of  sin.  III.  Sin  is  a  withering  power.  "We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf.  ' 
Sin  blasts  the  hopes,  pollutes  the  loves,  curtails  the  liberty,  dims  the  vision,  deadens 
the  conscience,  and  enfeebles  all  the  faculties  and  powers  of  the  soul.  IV.  SiN  is 
A  violent  power.  "  Our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us  away."  {Homilist.) 
A  sight  of  self: — I.  I  HAVE  TO  DESCRIBE  the  view  which  every  truly  gracious 
SOUL  WILL  take  of  HIMSELF.  1.  Every  gracious  soul  who  is  truly  enlightened  by 
the  Spirit  has  a  clear  sense  of  the  root  of  all  his  guiltiness.  He  knows  the  plague 
of  his  own  heart,  and  cries,  "We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing."  He  discovers  that 
not  merely  his  outward  acts,  but  his  very  person  is  essentially  sinful  in  the  sight  of 
God.  2.  The  spiritually  enlightened  man  then  perceives  that  all  his  actions  are 
evil.  "All  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags."  If  our  righteousnesses  are  so 
bad,  what  must  our  unrighteousnesses  be  ?  3.  The  enlightened  heart  into  which 
the  candle  of  the  Lord  hath  shone,  is  led  to  see  the  failure  and  futility  of  all  its 
resolutions  to  be  better.  "  We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf."  Our  best  professions,  hopes, 
resolutions,  and  pretensions — all  of  them  fade  like  shadows,  dreams,  and  fancies  of 
the  brain.  4.  But  the  truly  awakened  soul  knows  a  fourth  thing,  namely,  that  he 
is  not  in  himself  able  to  stand  against  the  invasions  of  temptation,  for  the  text  has 
put  it — "  Our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us  away."  When  men  find  that 
their  vows  wither,  yet  they  will  stiU  hang  to  their  hopes,  and  to  their  moralities  ; 
but  some  strong  temptation  comes  unexpectedly  upon  them  just  at  the  moment 
when  their  mind  is  susceptible  of  its  power,  and  where  are  they  ?  The  temptation 
comes  like  a  howling  north  wind  at  an  unexpected  moment,  and  where  is  your 
man  now?  Unable  to  resist,  carried  away  by  the  very  vice  which  he  thought 
he  had  renounced.  5.  Those  souls  upon  whom  God's  sunlight  had  once  shone 
are  also  painfully  aware  of  their  own  natural  weakness  and  slothfulness  in  prayer. 
"There  is  none  that  calleth  upon  Thy  name,"  etc.  6.  That  soul  which  has 
once  perceived  itself  in  the  black  colours  of  its  iniquity,  has  discovered  that 
through  sin  it  has  lost  all  the  favour  and  love  of  God  which  might  have  come  if 
it  had  been  without  sin,  for  so  saith  the  text,  "For  Thou  hast  hid  Thy  face  from 
'us,"  etc.  It  is  no  thing  to  play  with — that  hiding  of  God's  face.  When  the 
prophet  says,  "Thou  hast  consumed  us,"  it  is  a  dreadful  word.  II.  There  is  a 
danger  I  must  warn  you  of,  and  that  is — DO  not  be  content  with  the  mere 
knowledge  that  it  is  so.  You  must  not  merely  know  that  you  are  lost,  but  you 
must  feel  it.     Do  not  be  content  with  simply  feelmg  that  it  is  so,  but  mourn  before 


CHAP.  uiT.]  ISAIAH.  431 

Ood  that  it  is  so,  and  hate  yourself  that  it  is  so.  Do  not  look  upon  it  as  being  a 
misfortune,  but  as  being  your  own  wUful  sin,  and  look  upon  yourselves,  therefore,  as 
beinc  guilty  sinners,  condemned  already,  not  only  for  all  this,  but  condemned  because 
you  Delieve  not  on  Christ,  for  that  after  all  is  the  crowning  condemnation.  And 
when  you  really  feel  your  sinfulness,  and  mourn  it,  do  not  stop  here ;  never  give 
yourself  any  rest  till  you  know  that  you  are  delivered  from  it.  III.  The  text 
SEEMS  TO  SUGGEST  SOME  PLEAS.  Poor  troiibled  soul,  I  am  afraid  thou  canst  not  use 
the  first  one  mentioned  in  the  text — "  Thou  art  my  Father !  "  I  am  half  afraid  you 
have  not  faith  enough  for  that,  but  if  you  have,  what  a  prevailing  plea  it  is !  "  My 
Father,  I  have  sinned,  but  I  am  Thy  son,  though  not  worthy  to  oe  so  called  ;  my 
Father,  by  a  father's  love  forgive,  forgive  Thine  erring  one  ;  by  the  bowels  of  Thy 
compassion  have  mercy  upon  me  !  "  You  who  have  backslidden  can  plead  this,  for 
you  know  your  adoption.  But  if  that  should  be  too  hard  for  you,  take  the  next 
plea.  Say,  "  Lord,  I  am  the  clay  and  Thou  the  potter  ;  I  am  helpless  like  the  clay 
which  cannot  fashion  itself ;  I  am  worthless  like  the  clay  that  is  of  no  value  ;  I  am 
filthy.  Lord,  like  clay !  I  am  only  worthy  to  be  trodden  under  foot,  but  Thou  art 
the  potter,  and  potters  can  make  fine  things  even  of  clay.  Here  I  am,  Lord ;  I  put 
myself  into  Thy  hand.  I  am  nothing ;  make  me  what  Thou  wouldst  have  me  to 
be. "  Win  not  that  plea  suffice  ?  But  hark  thee,  sinner.  There  is  a  sweeter  plea 
than  any  in  the  verse  before  us,  for  this  is  an  Old  Testament  text ;  but  I  must  take 
thee  to  the  New  Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  for  the  plea  that 
never  faUs.  It  is  this,  "  Lord,  it  is  written  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners  ;  if  there  was  never  a  sinner  in  the  world  but  one,  that  sinner  I  am. 
I  trust  myself  in  His  hands  to  save  me. "  It  is  done,  it  is  done.  You  are  saved  ;  you 
are ' '  accepted  ia  the  Beloved. "  {G.H.  Spurgeon. )  Confession  of  sin : — 1 .  The  greatest 
and  noblest  souls,  striving  after  the  loftiest  and  divinest  aims,  have  been  most 
sensible  of  fault  and  failure  in  their  lives,  and  have  in  their  confessions  borne  hardest 
upon  the  weakness  and  sinfulness  of  human  nature.  Not  when  men  are  sunk  in 
depths  of  vice  and  sensuality ;  but  when  they  are  struggling  upwards  to  difficult, 
impossible  heights  of  virtue  and  nobleness,  are  they  seized  with  the  "strong  crying 
ana  tears "  which  pours  itself  forth  in  such  language  as  this,  in  David's  fifty-first 
psahn,  in  Paul's  "I  am  the  chief  of  sinners."  It  is  not  the  utter  depravity  of 
human  nature,  but  rather  a  rare  goodness  and  nobleness  which  expresses  itself  in  the 
language  of  confession,  of  which  this  is  a  specimen,  2.  Eead  it  thus,  and  it  is  true 
and  simple.     Apparently  when  the  prophet  wrote  these  words  his  countrymen  had 

1'ust  returned  from  captivity,  and  were  again  established  at  Jerusalem — Jerusalem 
aid  waste,  and  its  crown  and  ornament,  "the  holy  and  beautiful  house  of  God," 
trampled  in  the  dust.  Something  had  been  learned  by  the  captives  in  their  long  and 
miserable  exile.  There  was  a  lesson  taught  them  now  by  their  desolate  homes  and 
overturned  altars.  But  still,  to  an  earnest  and  far-seeing  mind,  there  was  manifest 
the  need  of  a  much  wider  and  deeper  religious  reformation  than  had  yet  been  accom- 
plished. Before  the  nation  could  be  again  what  it  once  was,  it  had  much  to  learn 
and  much  to  unlearn.  It  was  a  superficial  and  partial  work  which  adversity  had  yet 
done  in  the  way  of  curing  the  evils  which  had  brought  adversity  in  their  train.  With 
painful  certainty  and  distinctness  this  was  evident  to  the  prophet.  His  soul  was 
burdened  to  think  of  it,  and  he  burst  out,  in  his  grief,  with  the  confession  as  for 
himself  and  his  country — "  We  are  aU  as  an  imclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses 
are  as  filthy  rags  ;  and  we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf ;  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind, 
have  taken  us  away, "  3.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  a  prophetic  mind  of  our  own  country 
and  our  own  time  using  similar  language  to  express  similar  feelings.  We  have  a 
great  deal  to  be  proud  of  as  a  nation.  Much  that  is  British  is  great  and  noble.  On 
the  surface  of  things  we  appear  to  be  a  very  religious,  as  well  as  an  industrious 
and  prosperous  people.  Our  Protestant  institutions  are,  no  doubt,  many  of  them 
admirable.  But  can  you  imagine  any  very  sincere,  penetrating,  religious  mind,  one 
impressed  little  by  material  prosperity  and  sensitive  to  moral  and  spiritual  conditions, 
looking  beneath  the  surface  of  our  national  life,  contemplating  all  the  dishonesty  in 
trade  and  manufactures,  the  corruption  of  morals  among  the  rich,  the  low  intel- 
ligence, superstition,  vile  tastes  of  the  mob,  the  religious  cant  and  conventionality, 
the  bitter  rivalry  of  sects,  which  exist  along  with  our  Protestant  institutions,  and 
not  be  forced  to  say — "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses 
are  as  filthy  rags,  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us  away  " — we  are 
not  a  great  and  glorious  people  ;  "we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf"?  As  the  language  of 
confession — confession  being  the  act  not  of  the  vile,  but  of  the  noble — we  read  this 
language,  and  the  application  of  it  to  national  life  is  plain.     4.  In  this  light  it  is 


I 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxit. 

no  less  easy  to  apply  it  to  individual  life  and  conduct.  Strive  to  be  true  and  good 
after  the  example  of  Christ,  and  it  will  be  easy,  perhaps,  to  satisfy  both  the  world 
and  the  Church  that  you  are  successful  in  the  endeavour ;  but  if  your  aim  is  really 
to  live  Christ's  life  you  will  not  so  easily  satisfy  yourself — you  wiU  only  at  the  best 
succeed  far  enough  to  be  conscious  of  immeasurable  failure.  Compared  with  the 
'ood  you  ought  to  win,  any  good  to  which  you  attain  will  appear  to  you  miserable 
.ailure.  Thus,  this  language  in  its  own  light  is  easily  seen  to  be  true.  In  any 
other  light  it  is  false.  He  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous.  I  know  that  right 
things  may  be  done  from  wrong  motives,  and  with  inferior  views,  and  I  know  that 
they  are  not  then  of  the  same  quality  or  value  as  if  they  were  done  from  right 
impulses  and  with  the  highest  aims.  1  know,  too,  that  if  a  man  breaks  one  of  the 
commandments  he  is  in  a  sense  guilty  of  all,  and  cannot  set  himself  up  as  a  perfect 
man,  or  as  a  more  deserving  man  than  another  who  has  broken  all  the  ten.  But 
then  right  is  right,  and  wrong  is  wrong,  be  it  in  saint  or  sinner,  and  nothing  can 
make  these  two  opposites  change  places,  or  have  the  same  character  or  issues. 
Wrong  is  eternally  to  be  feared  and  hated ;  right  is  eternally  to  be  loved  and 
sought  after.  Suppose  you  know  you  are  wrong  in  much,  if  there  is  anything 
in  which  you  are  right,  do  not  consider  that  to  be  filthy  rags — die  rather  than 
surrender  it  to  force  or  fraud.  It  was  not  to  render  our  righteousness  superfluous, 
or  to  certify  that  any  of  our  righteousness  is  worthless,  that  Christ  lived  and 
died ;  it  was  to  make  us  truly  righteous,  to  bind  us  in  a  new  covenant  with 
God  our  Father,  to  be  the  servants  only  of  righteousness.  (J".  Service,  D.D.) 
All  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags. — "Filthy  rags": — "Rags"  is  a  word  that 
applies  to  worn  and  torn  bits  of  cloth  ;  when  used  otherwise  to  designate  apparel, 
contempt  is  implied.  The  word  employed  by  Isaiah  has  no  such  import.  It  is  the 
same  word  that  describes  part  of  what  Abraham's  steward  presented  to  Rebekah — 
"jewels  of  silver  and  jewels  of  gold  and  raiment."  Are  we  to  imagine  that  rags  have 
any  similarity  to  the  gold  and  silver  jewels,  or  are  likely  to  be  among  the  gifts  offered 
in  the  name  of  a  wealthy  sheik  to  a  gentle  lady  whose  favour  is  sought  as  the  bride 
of  the  son  of  promise  %  Besides,  when  a  Hebrew  meant  "  rags  "  he  had  a  word  for  it. 
A  proverb  teUs  how  "  drowsiness  shall  clothe  one  with  rags  ; "  and  here  the  word  is 
very  different  from  Isaiah's.  Hence  it  is  well  that  the  revisers  put  "garment"  in- 
stead of  "  rags  "  in  the  prophet's  phrase,  which  may  thereby  become  less  striking  and 
splenetic,  but  is  certainly  truer  to  the  prophet's  thought.  It  is  not  for  translators  to 
inject  their  own  feelings  into  their  author's  words.  Equally  erroneous  is  the  adjec- 
tive "filthy,"  or  even  "polluted,"  as  the  revisers  have  it.  It  is,  of  course,  admis- 
sible, and  may  be  elegant  to  construe  a  governed  noun  as  an  adjective,  as  is  the  case 
here  ;  but  the  adjective  should  be  a  congruous  one  at  least.  Isaiah's  governed  word 
has  no  reference  whatever  to  filth.  Had  the  expression  been  Zechariah's,  where  he 
speaks,  with  more  force  than  courtesy,  of  Joshua's  "  dungy  robes,"  no  fault  could  be 
found  with  "filthy"  as  a  rendering;  for  there  is  no  question  that  either  Joshua's 
robes  are  represented  as  literally  smeared  with  filth,  or  else  the  prophet  held  them  in 
as  great  disgust  as  if  it  had  been  so,  just  as  Paul  scorned  even  his  privileges  as 
"  dung  "  compared  with  the  blessings  he  enjoyed  in  Christ.  If  Isaiah  had  expressed 
the  like  scorn,  it  would  have  been  fair  so  to  put  it ;  but  as  the  translators  nad  to 
add  the  contempt,  it  is  plain  they  imported  into  their  original  what  was  not  there. 
The  word  chosen  by  Isaiah  denotes  something  over  and  above.  Proof  is  something 
beyond  one's  bare  word  ;  and  an  ornament  is  something  over  and  above  what  is  plain. 
Our  word,  then,  means  proof,  evidence,  or  witness,  and  also  display  or  ornament. 
Besides,  being  plural,  it  nas  special  emphasis.  The  literal  rendering,  then,  is  "a 
garment  of  testimonies,  or  of  mfallible  proof;"  or  "a  garment  of  ornaments,  or  of 
great  display."  To  suggest  adjectives  for  the  governed  noons,  the  translation  comes 
to  be  "an  evidential  article  of  clothing,"  or  "a  showy  dress."  The  first  of  these 
interpretations  was  adopted  by  Aquila,  a  very  old  and  apparently  well-skilled  trans- 
lator, who  improved  upon  the  Septuagint.  He  gives  "marturion"  as  the  Greek 
equivalent ;  and  on  this  Jerome  has  a  note  in  which  he  observes,  "This  is  testimoni- 
orum,"  which  means  "  of  testimonies,"  and  then  goes  on  to  refer  to  the  Deuteronomic 
enactment  concerning  the  scandal  raised  by  a  husband  accusing  his  wife  on  the  score 
of  impurity  before  marriage.  In  such  a  case,  a  cloth  smeared  with  blood,  as  it  came 
from  the  injured  woman's  person,  was  a  suflScient  proof  of  pre-nuptial  purity  as  well 
as  of  the  consummation  of  matrimony.  Looked  at  in  this  light,  Isaiah's  phrase  has 
great  capacity  of  suggestiveness.  Our  good  deeds  attest  our  inward  and  hidden 
uitercourse  vnth  the  Lord,  and  prove  that  with  Him  only  in  all  purity  we  have  had 
to  do>    But  there  is  a  stain  even  on  our  purest  thoughts  and  deeds.    Oar  second 


CHAP.  I2IT.]  ISAIAH.  433 

interpretation,  however,  yields  the  better  sense.  It  takes  into  account  the  previous 
clause  ;  and,  in  the  light  of  it,  both  clauses  are  thus  paraphrased :  "We  are  all  like 
an  unclean  woman,  and  all  our  righteous  acts  like  her  showy  attire."  The  meaning 
is  simple  and  clear.  Outward  show  takes  the  place  of  inward  reality.  Perhaps  their 
loathing  of  the  strumpet's  airs  begot  contempt  in  the  translators'  hearts  for  anything 
that  is  describable  ia  those  terms.  Their  rendering  reminds  us  of  Zephaniah's  indig- 
nant description  of  degenerate  prophets  :  "  Her  prophets  are  debauched  wretches — 
cloaks  ! "  This  corresponds  with  the  old  Scottish  definition  of  a  formal  clergy — 
"  toom  tabards,"  that  is,  empty  gowns,  all  cloak  and  nothing  inside.  The  life  is  taken 
out  of  Zephaniah's  fierce  protest  when  it  is  smoothed  down  to  "  light  and  deceitful 

?)ersons, "  as  in  the  ordinary  version.  When  David  invites  Israel's  daughters  to  weep 
or  Saul,  he  reminds  them  of  the  fashions  of  Saul's  period,  "  with  deUghts,"  referring 
to  the  modiste's  art  with  a  fine  appreciation  of  a  woman's  weakness  for  finery  ;  and 
the  word  is  akin  to  Isaiah's  "  clothing  of  dazzling  display."  Here  is  "  devotion's  every 
grace,  except  the  heart."  The  prophet  seeks  more  heart  and  clean.  [H.  Rose  Hae.) 
We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf. — The  lesson  of  the  leaf: — As  Christ  drew  a  lesson  from  the 
lily,  so  may  we  from  the  leaf.  Yet  the  words  of  the  prophet,  "  We  aU  do  fade  as  a 
leaf,"  may  lead  our  thoughts  in  a  different  way  from  his.  These  words  were 
originally  spoken  in  lamentation  over  the  wrecked,  glory  of  the  temple  and  city  of 
David,  as  devastated  by  Nebuchadnezzar  with  fire  and  sword.  No  fitter  similitude 
of  the  sad  change  could  the  mourning  prophet  fiind  than  the  faded  leaf.  Those 
dilapidated  walls,  those  fire-scarred  ruins  of  Jerusalem  and  Zion,  brought  to  his 
mind  the  magnificent  creations  of  the  shepherd  king  and  his  Ulustrious  son,  only  as 
the  crushed  and  blackened  leaf  recalls  the  image  of  the  glorious  crown  of  spring. 
But  to  us  the  lessons  of  the  fading  leaf  become  spiritually  instructive,  as  we  bring 
to  bear  the  light  which  science  has  afforded  us  respecting  the  nature  and  the  uses  of 
its  short  life,  the  meaning  of  its  fading,  and  the  real  significance  of  its  death.  We 
learn  that  the  reality  is  different  from  the  seeming,  both  as  regards  the  life  of  the 
leaf  and  its  death.  We  find  a  nobler  meaning  in  the  life  of  the  leaf,  and  that 
imparts  a  nobler  meaning  to  its  death.  And  the  lesson  thus  derived  brings  us  con- 
solation and  strengthening  as  we  apply  it  to  some  of  the  sadder  experiences  of 
mortal  life.  {J.  M.  JVhiton,  D.D.)  Usefulness  of  the  leaf: — For  the  tree  itself, 
says  the  botanist,  the  leaf  is  both  stomach  and  lungs.  1.  A  single  elm  has  been 
computed  to  possess  in  one  summer  five  acres  of  leaves  ;  each  leaf  a  wonderful  tissue 
of  nerves  and  pores  and  cells  and  veins.  In  these  countless  cells,  invisible  to  the 
unassisted  eye,  the  sunlight  enables  the  living  plant  to  do  its  work.  In  these  cells 
the  mineral  matter  ascending  from  the  roots  dissolved  in  the  sap,  and  the  gaseous 
matter  drunk  in  through  the  pores  from  the  air,  are  mingled,  and  converted  by  the 
chemistry  of  the  sunbeam  into  food  for  the  tree.  This  then  is  carried  by  the  leaf- 
veins  into  the  twigs,  adown  the  branches  and  the  trunk,  and  is  deposited  under  the 
bark  in  a  ring  of  woody  fibre.  Another  portion  also  goes  to  form  the  nutritious 
fruit  and  another  the  reproductive  seed.  Thus  the  fraU  leaf,  gay,  beautiful,  musical 
as  it  is,  is  yet  ever  at  God's  work,  providing  man  with  material  for  the  necessities, 
comforts  and  luxuries  of  his  Life.  Most  true,  in  creation  as  well  as  in  redemption,  is 
the  apostle's  saying,  that  "God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world,  and 
things  which  are  despised  hath  God  chosen."  2.  But  this  is  not  all  of  the  useful 
duty  to  which  God  has  chosen  the  fair  and  short-lived  leaf.  The  gas  which  the 
leaf-cell  sucks  from  the  air,  and  helps  to  change  into  fibre,  is  poisonous  to  animal 
life,  and  must  not  accumulate  in  the  atmosphere.  The  same  office  that  the  coral 
insect  performs  for  the  sea,  to  keep  the  great  fountain  of  waters  pure,  the  leaf 
performs  for  that  aerial  ocean  from  whose  pure  tides  we  drink  our  life.  A  mark  of 
dignity  has  the  Creator  bestowed  on  all  useful  labour,  however  humble,  by  giving 
the  glory  of  the  forest,  and  the  beauty  of  the  many-coloured  coralline  gardens 
beneath  the  waves,  to  organisms  that  discharge  for  Him  the  duty  of  scavengers  1 
The  carbonic  acid  gas  produced  by  all  our  fires,  and  by  the  myriads  of  breathing 
creatures,  is  absorbed  from  the  air  by  the  leaf  through  its  countless  pores.  In  the 
leaf-cells,  this  noxious  element  is  decomposed  ;  part  is  worked  up  into  food  for  the 
tree,  and  the  residue,  containing  all  that  is  fit  for  animals  to  breathe  again,  is  given 
back  to  the  vital  air.  Measure,  if  it  were  possible,  by  cubic  feet  of  wood,  aU  the 
trees  upon  the  globe.  Forty -five  per  cent,  of  the  whole  mass  is  the  solidified  poison 
of  the  atmosphere,  extracted  by  the  subtle  chemistry  of  the  leaf.  How  grandly 
beneficent  is  its  hvunble  life  1  3.  The  leaf  draws  water  from  the  ground  through  the 
thousands  of  tubes  in  its  stem — eight  hundred  barrels,  says  a  scientist,  from  every 
leaf-covered  acre  every  twenty-four  hours.  This  it  gives  out  to  the  atmosphere  in 
youm.  28 


434  THE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lxw, 

the  form  of  invisible  vapour,  to  be  condensed  into  clouds  and  fall  in  showers — ^the 
very  water  which,  were  it  not  for  the  leaf,  would  either  escape  in  freshets  or  filter 
through  the  ground  to  the  caverns  below.  Thus  the  leaf  works  to  bring  upon  the 
earth  the  early  and  the  latter  rain.  4.  And  now  conies  on  its  change.  It  is  » 
change  that  comes  most  naturally  and  honourably  as  the  leaf  fulfils  its  beneficent 
tasks.  It  is  in  and  by  its  useful  work  that  the  leaf  changes  from  the  pulpy  thing  it 
was  in  May  to  a  thing  of  firmer  texture.  And  so  we  learn  to  look  upon  it  rather  as 
a  ripening  than  a  decaying,  when,  as  its  work  draws  near  the  end,  it  begins  to  borrow 
less  from  earth  and  more  from  heaven.  The  splendours  of  October,  surpassing  the 
tenderness  of  May,  and  the  sober  dignity  of  August,  fitly  crown  the  close  of  a  life 
that  has  been  so  useful.  (Ibid.)  Life  and  death: — Let  us  now  take  up  the  truth 
taught  us  by  the  leaf  into  the  higher  regions  of  the  experience  of  the  soul.  There, 
too,  the  reality  may  be  other  than  the  seeming.  There,  too,  to  rectify  our  view  of 
life  will  be  to  rectify  our  view  of  death.  What  is  the  life  of  the  leaf  ?  The  child 
replies :  To  dance  in  the  sun,  to  play  with  the  breeze,  to  listen  idly  to  the  song  of 
birds.  "What,  then,  is  its  death  i  The  loss  of  all  for  which  it  lived,  faded  beauty, 
a  broken  form,  hurled  from  a  proud  and  peaceful  height  into  the  mire  of  the  street,  a 
dishonoured  and  pitiable  wreck.  Nay,  what  is  the  life  of  the  leaf?  The  teacher  tells 
the  child  :  To  nourish  the  stock  that  bore  it ;  to  prepare  abundant  supplies  for  the 
life  and  the  labours  of  man  ;  the  fuel  that  warms,  the  fruit  that  feeds,  the  roof  that 
shelters,  the  vehicles  of  commerce  by  land  and  sea,  that  draw  the  nations  into  one, 
the  sanctuaries  vocal  with  a  nobler  praise  than  that  which  is  warbled  through  the 
forest  arches.  It  is  to  cleanse  and  vivify  the  vital  air,  and  thus  preserve  in  healthy 
vigour  the  blood  of  man  and  beast.  It  is  to  send  the  rain  upon  the  pastures,  that 
feed  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills,  and  on  the  cornfields  that  nourish  the  great 
family  of  mankind.  What,  then,  is  its  death  ?  It  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  good  end 
it  lives  for,  a  growing  hard  and  brown  in  beneficent  work,  a  ripening  through  con- 
stant usefulness  into  the  many-coloured  tints  of  splendid  autumn,  a  putting  on  of 
the  God-given  decorations  of  ennobled  labour ;  it  is  a  settling  into  an  honoured 
grave  all  purpled  like  a  king  ;  it  is  a  resigning  of  an  outworn  form  to  that  Providence 
which  treasures  up  each  particle  of  faithful  dust  to  enter  into  fresh  forms  of  life 
and  beauty  in  coming  springs.  How  plainly  we  see  here  that  different  ideas  of  the 
purpose  of  the  life  lead  to  different  ideas  of  what  the  death  really  is.  If  we  would 
transform  our  thought  of  death,  we  must  transform  our  thought  of  life.  {Ibid.) 
Lessons  from  the  leaves : — Three  applications  of  the  prophet's  language — I.  To  MAN, 
AS  HE  IS  A  SINNER.  Man's  condition  through  sin  is  the  primary  idea.  "Our 
iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  us  away."  1.  The  fading  leaves  are  separated 
from  the  source  of  their  life  and  growth  and  beauty.  They  are  no  longer  in  vital 
union  with  the  root  of  the  tree.  They  may  hang  for  a  while,  but  are  sure  speedily 
to  fall.  Any  passing  gust  may  carry  them  away.  The  soul  of  man  through  sin  has 
lost  spiritual  union  with  God,  the  som'ce  of  its  true  life,  and  has  become  faded  and 
shrivelled  through  the  separation.  2.  The  fading  leaves  yield  no  response  to,  receive 
no  benefit  from,  the  natural  influences  that  act  upon  them  for  their  life  and  growth. 
The  prophet  says  of  Israel,  "There  is  none  that  calleth  upon  Thy  name,  that 
stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  Thee."  3.  The  fading  leaves,  as  they  fall  from  the 
tree,  are  out  of  their  true  sphere,  and  exposed  to  all  degrading  forces.  The  prophet  has 
in  his  mind  leaves  that  had  faded  unnaturally,  and  that  should  stUl  have  lived  in  green- 
ness and  beauty  upon  the  tree.  Lying  on  the  ground,  trampled  down  by  man  and 
beast,  when  they  should  have  been  waving  high  like  a  warrior's  plume.  Man 
through  sin  has  fallen  from  his  true  sphere.  He  is  the  sport  of  evil  passions,  subject 
to  all  degrading  and  hurtful  forces.  The  emblem  of  his  condition  is  a  faded,  fallen 
leaf,  whirled  about  by  the  winds,  trampled  down  and  tossed  about  by  man  and 
beast.  4.  The  fading  leaves  are  practically  useless  and  worthless.  They  are  of  no 
value  to  the  tree,  nor  yet  to  man.  A  sinner  is  one  who  renders  no  true  and  intelli- 
gent service  to  his  God,  and  brings  no  real  benefit  to  the  great  tree  of  humanity. 
II.  To  MAN,  AS  HE  IS  MORTAL.  In  man,  as  in  nature,  the  same  law  of  decay  is 
acting.  III.  To  man,  as  he  is  a  Christian  believer.  Reversing  the  picture, 
and  excluding  the  prophet's  application,  there  is  hope  and  consolation  spoken  by  the 
fading  leaves.  1.  The  fading  leaves  have  fulfilled  the  purpose  of  their  being  and 
life.  The  Christian,  whether  he  fade  soon  or  late,  has  not  lived  in  vain.  2.  The 
fading  leaves  are  clothed  with  the  richest  and  most  varied  colours.  The  Christian, 
as  life  is  closing,  often  shines  with  a  spiritual  richness  and  lustre  never  seen  before. 
3.  The  fading  leaves  tell  of  the  infinite  skill  and  care  of  the  Creator.  Wonderful  is 
the  interest  God  takes  in  His  people.     "  liTot  one  falleth  to  the  ground  without  your 


CHAP.Liiv.]  ISAIAH.  435 

Father."  4.  The  fading  leaves  do  not  perish.  They  come  back  in  other  forms,  and 
serve  other  uses.  The  Christian  can  take  higher  and  sm-er  ground.  He  shall  live 
again,  live  the  being  he  now  is,  live  never  again  to  fade.  {HomiUtic  Magazine.) 
Fading  leaves: — I.  Leaves  fade  gradually.  The  whole  foliage  of  a  tree  does  not 
fade  and  pass  away  at  one  time.  Some  leaves  droop  and  wither  even  in  spring,  when 
the  rest  of  the  foliage  is  in  its  brightest  and  most  luxuriant  beauty.  Some  are  torn 
away  in  summer,  whUe  green  and  full  of  sap,  by  sudden  and  violent  storms.  The 
great  majority  fade  and  fall  in  autumn  ;  while  a  few  cling  to  the  branches  all  through 
the  cold  and  desolation  of  winter,  and  are  at  last  pushed  off  by  the  unfolding  buds 
of  the  following  spring.  And  is  it  not  so  with  every  generation  ?  _  Decay  and  death 
everywhere  and  always  reign.  But  all  do  not  fade  at  the  same  time._  Somediein 
the  spring  of  life  ;  some  are  cut  off  suddenly,  by  accidents  and  fatal  diseases,  in  ripe 
manhood ;  some  fade  naturally  in  the  autumn  of  old  age.  A  few  survive  their 
generation,  like  the  last  red  leaves  that  rustle  mournfally  in  the  winter  wind  on  the 
topmost  bough  of  the  tree.  Friend  after  friend  departs,  family  after  family  dis- 
appears, until  the  mournful  record  shall  be  written  of  us  as  it  was  written  of  the 
Hebrews  of  old — "  And  Joseph  died,  and  ail  his  brethren,  and  all  that  generation." 
II.  Leaves  fade  silently.  All  the  processes  of  nature  are  silent  and  secret.  It  is 
God's  glory  to  conceal  a  matter.  And  so  silently  do  we  all  fade.  III.  Leaves  fade 
DIFFERENTLY.  The  autumual  foliage  is  very  varied.  No  two  species  of  trees  exhibit 
the  same  appearance.  And  are  there  not  similar  differences  in  tne  way  in  which  men 
fade  and  die?  In  the  hey-day  of  life  and  happiness  they  may  seem  all  alike, 
uniformly  fair  and  attractive.  But  when  death  comes,  it  shows  the  true  character 
of  each.  Its  approach  makes  some  men  gloomy  and  sombre.  It  invests  them  with 
a  dark  and  repulsive  aspect.  It  clothes  them  with  despair.  But  how  widely 
different  is  the  dying  of  the  Christian !  The  idea  of  death  to  them  has  nothing 
death-like  in  it.  IV.  Leaves  fade  characteristically.  The  foliage  that  is 
gloomiest  in  its  unfolding,  is  most  unsightly  in  its  decay  ;  and  the  leaves  that  have 
the  richest  and  tenderest  shade  of  green  in  April,  have  the  most  brilliant  rainbow 
hues  in  October.  The  leaf  of  the  sad  and  sullen  ash  is  the  last  to  kindle  its  bud,  and 
the  first  to  wither  and  fall ;  and  its  colour,  always  sombre,  becomes  blackened  and 
disfigured  in  decay.  The  leaf  of  the  linden  tree,  on  the  contrary,  is  beautiful  ft-om 
first  to  last ;  softly  green  in  spring  ;  fragrant  in  summer  with  delicate  frankincense, 
and  musical  with  the  hum  of  bees,  revelling  in  the  honey-dew_  bloom  ;  and  gorgeous 
as  a  sunset-cloud  in  autumn.  And  so  is  it  with  man.  He  dies  as  he  lives.  A  life 
of  godliness  ends  in  a  saintly  death  ;  and  a  career  of  worldliness  and  sin  terminates 
in  impenitence  and  despair.  And  as  the  fading  itself  is  characteristic,  so  also  are  the 
results  of  the  fading.  The  leaves  of  some  trees  when  they  fall,  leave  no  trace  what- 
ever behind.  The  scar  left  by  their  removal  heals  immediately  ;  and  on  the  smooth, 
naked  bark  of  the  bough,  in  winter,  there  is  no  mark  to  indicate  that  it  was  once 
covered  with  foliage.  There  are  other  trees,  however,  on  which  the  scars  are 
permanent.  Many  of  the  characteristic  markings  on  the  stems  of  palm-trees  and 
tree-ferns  are  due  to  the  permanence  of  these  scars,  when  their  leaves  have  decayed 
and  dropped  off.  And  is  not  the  lesson  of  analogy  here  very  clear  and  impressive  ? 
How  many  there  are  who  fade  and  drop  off  from  the  tree  of  humanity,  and  leave  no 
trace  of  tneir  existence  behind.  Others  there  are,  large-minded  and  large-hearted 
men,  who  live  not  for  themselves,  but  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  their 
fellow-creatures ;  these  when  they  fade  and  drop  off  the  tree  of  life,  leave  behind 
them  an  impression  which  time  will  only  make  deeper.  V.  Leaves  fade. 
PREPAREDLY.  No  leaf  falls  from  the  tree — unless  wrenched  off  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly  in  early  growth  by  external  violence — without  making  due  preparation. 
for  its  departure.  Before  the  slightest  discoloration  is  seen  upon  it,  there  is  a  secret, 
adequate  provision  made  by  nature  for  the  inevitable  hour  of  its  passing  away.  Side 
by  side  with  it,  even  in  its  summer  beauty  and  luxuriance,  it  carries  the  memorial 
at  once  of  its  death  and  of  a  new  birth.  It  bears  the  young  bud  that  is  to  usurp  it* 
place  in  its  bosom,  and  nourishes  it  with  its  own  expiring  life.  This  law  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom  is  one  that  knows  no  exception.  No  leaf  drops  till  a  new  one  ia 
prepared  to  take  its  place  ;  no  flower  perishes  till  its  house  is  made  ready  and  filled 
with  seeds.  Alas,  how  different  is  it  in  human  economy !  Provision  for  the  future 
is  with  man  not  the  law,  but  the  exception,  of  his  conduct.  Should  we  not  imitate 
the  example  of  the  leaf  in  which  the  process  of  preparation  for  the  future  keeps  pace 
with  the  process  of  decay?  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Leaves: — I.  This  leaf  teaches 
vs  the  gospel  of  service.  It  has  lived,  it  has  had  its  day.  It  falls  to  perish  by 
the  wayside,  but  it  has  not  lived  in  vain.    When  that  leaf  breathes  it  takes  up 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  uot.  ' 

carbon  and  exhales  oCTgen.  When  we  breathe  we  take  in  oxygen.  You  could 
not  live  without  the  leaf.  It  keeps  the  atmosphere  pure.  It  prevents  it  from 
becoming  poisonous.  You  are  indebted  to  the  leaf  for  your  life.  But  you  say, 
"That,  after  all,  is  but  a  selfish  life ;  the  leaf  takes  up  what  it  requires,  and  it 
throws  off  what  it  does  not  require.  Where  is  your  gospel  of  service  in  that?" 
Yes  ;  but  it  does  something  else ;  while  feeding  itself,  it  also  feeds  the  tree  upon 
which  it  grows.  It  is  making  the  timber  as  well  as  satisfying  its  own  needs. 
Without  leaves  we  should  have  no  wood  for  our  houses,  our  furniture,  or  our  fres. 
They  die,  leaving  others  to  carry  on  their  uncompleted  work,  but  they  always  build 
firm,  and  straight  and  beautiful.  So  this  little  preacher  says  to  us,  ' '  Live  for  great 
purposes,  build  for  the  future.  You  are  but  one  unit  in  the  great  mass  of  living, 
toUing  men,  but  remember  that  you  can  do  a  work  for  the  generations  to  come. 
Leave  the  world  fairer,  and  better,  and  stronger,  and  sweeter  because  you  have  lived. 
Men  die,  but  man  remains.  You  will  go  as  your  fathers  have  gone  before  you,  but 
Society  wiU  remain  behind."  And  then  there  is  such  a  thing  as  service  continuing 
after  death.  "  Dead  and  done  with  "  is  not  true  of  a  leaf,  much  less  of  a  man.  The 
scientist  teUs  us  how  by  its  decay  the  leaf  is  changed  into  vegetable  mould,  indis- 
pensable for  the  life  of  other  leaves.  Thus  the  decay  of  vegetation  prepares  the  way 
for  a  new  vegetation,  and  death  prepares  for  life.  So  also  is  not  a  man  done  witn 
when  he  is  dead.     There  are  many  who  rule  from  their  graves.     II.  This  leaf 

ALSO   PREACHES  TO   MEN   THE  GOSPEL   OF    A  TRIUMPHANT   DEATH.      HoW  beautiful 

Nature  is,  even  in  decay  1  Like  an  Indian  warrior  chief,  she  gathers  around  her  her 
finery  in  order  to  meet  death.  So  the  gospel  that  the  leaf  has  to  teach  us  is  a 
hopeful  and  a  bright  one.  It  is  the  lesson  of  triumphant  death.  After  this  life, 
another.  "How  are  the  dead  raised,  and  with  what  manner  of  body  do  they 
come?"  is  an  old  question.  Where  will  the  leaves  of  next  spring  come  from? 
Is  it  a  more  wonderful  thing  to  clothe  the  living  soul  with  a  new  body  than  to 
clothe  the  apparently  dead  tree  with  a  new  and  beautiful  foliage?  (^S.  Horton.) 
Withered  leaves : — I.  The  leaf  fades  surely.  If  there  is  one  thing  more  absolutely 
and  infallibly  certain  than  another,  it  is  that  we  all  die  (Gen.  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  ix.  27). 
We  die  at  every  age.  II.  The  leaf  fades  soon.  Some  kinds  of  leaves  last 
longer  than  others  ;  but,  as  a  class,  their  natural  life  is  a  single  summer.     There  is 

fffodigality  in  this.  If  economy  of  life  were  aimed  at,  the  leaf  might  last  much 
onger  than  it  does.  So  might  the  May-fly.  So  might  man.  1.  What  a  testimonjr  to 
the  wealth  of  creative  energy  1  2.  What  an  argument  in  favour  of  economizing 
time  !  3.  What  a  spur  to  the  life  of  watchfulness  1  III.  The  leaf  fades  when 
THE  ends  of  ITS  EXISTENCE  HAVE  BEEN  SERVED.  "  None  of  US  liveth  to  himself ; " 
nor  could  we  if  we  would.  IV.  When  the  leaf  falls  it  provides  materlaxs 
for  the  foliage  of  another  tear.  The  fall  of  a  leaf  and  its  decay  are  not  the 
end  of  it  or  of  its  work.  There  is  something  still  for  it  to  do,  and  which  it  never 
could  do  till  then.  Decaying  leaves  are  the  earth's  great  fertilizers.  The  thing 
we  do  is  immortal  whatever  its  moral  quality.  The  father,  the  mother,  live  again  in 
children  moulded  by  their  influence.  Of  all  responsibilities  there  is  none  so  terrible 
as  this.  We  are  contributing,  by  our  life,  a  poison  or  a  honey  drop  to  the  life-cup 
of  posterity.  (J.  Edgar  Henry,  M.A.)  The  frailty  of  man : — I.  Let  us  endeavour 
to  discover  what  is  implied  in  the  description  of  death  given  us  IN  these 
words.  1.  We  fade,  like  the  leaves,  soon.  2.  Quickly.  3.  The  approaches  of  death 
may  be  lovely.  The  woods  are  never  more  beautiful  than  during  the  brief  period  of 
autumnal  change.  So  our  time  of  decay  may  be  more  beautiful  than  our  summer 
time  of  health  and  activity,  and  "nothing  in  our  life  become  us  like  the  leaving 
of  it."  The  hoary  head  becomes  a  crown  of  glory, — the  patience  of  the  Christian 
vanquishing  the  temptations  to  petulance  and  repining  that  afliiction  presents, — the 
hope  of  the  believer  shining  clear  and  steady  wnen  he  knows  that  he  must  soon 
depart, — are  things  that  often  give  to  the  approaches  of  death  more  interest  and 
loveliness  than  life  has  enjoyed.  4.  "We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf"  in  point  of 
certainty.  5.  How  wide  is  the  empire  of  death,  and  how  many  he  has  brought  into 
his  dark  dominions ;  in  every  track  the  leaves  are  falling,  and  no  favoured  portion  of 
the  country  escapes  the  general  desolation.  How  many  autumns  has  death  had 
among  men  since  first  his  reign  began  !  Our  fathers,  where  are  they  ?  Where  are 
those  hordes  of  painted  barbarians,  whose  savage  courage  stayed  so  long  the  progress 
of  the  Roman  legions  ?  Where  are  those  who  erected  in  our  land  those  ancient  pUes 
that  were  dedicated  to  the  worship  of  God  amid  the  darkness  of  the  Middle  Ages  t 
Where  are  those  who  led  the  devotions  there,  and  those  who  joined  in  them  ?  Where 
are  they  who  but  a  hundred  years  ago  ploughed  the  fields  that  you  now  cultivate. 


CHAP.  uiT.]  ISAIAH.  437 

listened  to  the  Gospel  that  is  now  proclaimed  to  us,  and  walked  in  the  paths  that 
we  are  accustomed  to  tread  ?    They  are  gone,  and  we  are  going  fast.     II.  The 

PRACTICAL  USE  THAT  SHOITLD  BE  MADE  OF    THE    TRUTH    BROUGHT  BEFORE  US  IN 

THE  TEXT.  The  great  lesson  we  should  learn  is  to  make  ready  for  our  fading  time. 
But  there  are  various  circumstances  that  go  far  to  account  for  this  very  common, 
almost  universal  forgetfulness  of  death.  First,  one  cause  may  be,  that  we  see  little 
of  the  sick  and  dying.  In  the  next  place,  death  has  no  periods  corresponding  to  the 
general  fall  of  the  leaf.  Again,  when  we  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  good  health,  we 
leel  nothing  death-like  about  us.  Then  our  worldly  employments  accustom  our 
minds  to  a  different  train  of  thinking  from  that  more  serious  one  which  brings  death 
to  our  view,  and  tend  to  turn  our  thoughts  from  it.  But  the  chief  cause  of  the 
forgetfulness  of  death  is  to  be  foimd  in  the  systematic  attempt  that  is  made  by  most 
men  to  banish  the  remembrance  of  it  from  their  minds.  (  W.  Dickson.)  The  natural 
frailty  and  moral  instability  of  man : — This  afifecting  declaration  of  the  prophet  may 
be  considered  with  reference — I.  To  the  natural  vigour  of  man.  II.  To  the 
MORAL  BEAUTY  OF  MAN.  That  gooduess  wMch  natural  conscience,  enlightened  by 
the  words  of  revelation,  produces  ;  that  goodness  which  is  the  effect  of  imitation, 
and  the  offspring  of  moral  rather  than  pious  principles  ;  and  of  conviction  rather 
than  conversion ;  is  fading  as  the  frailest  leaf  of  the  frailest  plant,  and  transient  as 
the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew.  Let  it  be  exposed  to  the  wintry  blasts  of 
adversity,  or  to  the  scorching  sun  of  persecution  ;  place  it  in  the  cold  atmosphere  of 
the  world  ;  and  let  the  chilling  influence  of  the  world's  indifference  be  felt  by  it — 
and  what  appearance  does  it  assume  ?  It  is  fading  as  a  leaf.  If  your  goodness  fades 
as  a  leaf,  have  you  not  much  need  of  being  bom  of  that  incorruptible  seed  which 
liveth  and  abideth  for  ever  ?  But  even  then  you  will  feel  yourselves  subject  to  a 
measure  of  the  same  instability  and  decay.  For  the  words  of  the  text  and  the 
whole  passage  in  which  they  are  found  seem  to  be  a  description,  not  of  careless  sinners 
without  grace,  but  of  the  people  of  God,  in  all  the  declensions  to  which  they  are 
liable  in  their  best  estate.  {M.  Jackson.)  Autumn: — The  falling  leaves  speak  to 
us — I.  Of  the  abiding  superintendence  of  God.  "Leaves  have  their  time 
to  fall."  They  do  not  come  and  go  at  haphazard.  They  have  lived,  and  now  they 
fade  and  die,  subject  to  His  laws  who  sweetly  ordereth  aU  that  is.  The  orderly 
return  of  the  seasons  teUs  how  this  is  no  haphazard  world.  God  keeps  His  hand  on 
all  forces,  material  and  spiritual.  II.  Of  fulfilled  purpose.  Just  as  neither 
their  rise  nor  fall,  their  springing  nor  fading  was  accidental,  so  their  life  is  not  a 
vague,  aimless  thing.  There  was  design  in  their  creation,  and  as  they  silently 
sink  to  the  earth  they  speak  to  us  of  a  life's  work  done.  What  have  they  done  ? 
1.  They  have  given  added  charm  and  beauty  to  the  world.  Here  is  a  mission  we 
may  all  weU  covet  to  fill,  and  which  we  may  all  fiU.  Whatever  our  position  in  life, 
however  poor  or  lowly,  we  may  so  be  and  live  that  this  shall  be  morally  a  fairer 
world  because  we  are  in  it.  2.  By  their  shade  and  shelter  they  have  rendered 
valuable  service  to  man  and  beast.  So  many  around  us  are  weary  under  the  burden 
and  heat  of  life's  day.  Many  a  struggling  man,  and  many  a  frail,  lonely,  over- 
wrought woman  knows  all  too  well  what  this  life- weariness  means.  Let  the  mission 
of  the  leaves  be  ours.  3.  They  have  played  an  important  part  in  purifying  the 
atmosphere.  They  say  to  us,  '*  So  live  that  when  you  fade  and  fall  like  us  you 
may  have  done  your  part  to  make  the  world  purer."  III.  Of  life's  close. 
{R.  M.  Spoor.)  Autumn: — And  how  often  does  a  leaf  fade  sooner  than  it  falls! 
And  is  it  not  so  with  man  ?  If  spared,  how  soon  does  he  begin  to  discover 
infirmities !  But  to  enable  us  to  judge  properly  in  this  case,  and  to  vindicate 
the  Divine  perfections  and  providence,  let  us  remember — 1.  That  this  state  of 
fraUty  and  vanity  was  not  the  original  state  of  man,  but  the  consequence  of 
transgression.  2.  That  it  is  not  his  only  state.  There  is  another  life  to  which 
the  present  is  introductory,  and  in  connection  with  which  it  should  always  be 
considered.  3.  The  vanity  and  brevity  of  the  present  life,  if  wisely  improved, 
is  advantageous  with  regard  to  the  future.  It  furnishes  us  with  no  inconsider- 
able proof  of  a  world  to  come.  4.  This  frail  life,  too,  is  continually  guarded 
by  a  wise  and  tender  Providence.  Reflections:  If  life  be  like  a  fading  leaf, 
let  us  regard  it  accordingly.  Let  it  prevsnt  despair.  If  life  be  short,  thy 
troubles  cannot,  0  Christian,  be  long.  Let  us  also  repress  fear.  It  is  little 
the  most  powerful  can  do,  and  before  they  strike  they  may  faU.  {W.  Jay.) 
"  Hints  of  failing  health" : — In  the  preface  to  his  "Data  of  Ethics,"  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer  says  (1879)  that  he  has  been  led  to  deviate  from  his  original  plan  and 
publish  this  volume  rather  than  go  on  with  Ms  geaeial  system  of  philosophy. 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lzit. 

Why  ?  Because  "  hints  of  failing  health  "  remind  him  that  he  may  not  be  able  to 
finish  the  entire  work,  and  he  therefore  wishes  to  make  sure  of  the  most  important 
part.  Oh  that  men  would  act  on  this  principle  as  regards  the  salvation  of  their 
souls  !  {T.  R.  Stevenson.)  "  We  all  fade  as  a  leaf" : — 1.  He  means,  first,  in  regard 
of  ceremonial  performances  that  were  without  vigour  and  spirit  of  true  devotion. 
There  was  no  spirit  in  their  legal  performances.  They  were  dead,  empty  things. 
Therefore  when  judgment  came  they  were  as  leaves.  So  an  idle,  careless  hearer, 
when  judgment  comes,  all  is  as  leaves.  2.  So  it  is  true  in  regard  of  mortality,  the 
vanity  of  health  and  strength.  We  all  as  a  leaf  fade_  away  when  God's  judgments 
come  to  nip  us.  Men  are  as  leaves  ;  as  the  leaves  now  in  autumn  fall,  and  there  is  a 
new  generation  in  the  spring.  3.  For  aU  idle  performances,  that  have  not  a  founda- 
tion in  substantial  piety,  they  are  all  as  leaves,  (i?.  Sibbes,  D.D. )  "As  the  leaf" : — 
I.  Like  the  foliage,  we  fade  gradually.  Little  by  little.  Pain  by  pain.  Less 
steady  of  limb.  Sight  not  so  clear.  Ear  not  so  alert.  After  a  while  we  take  a  stafi!, 
Then,  after  much  resistance  we  come  to  spectacles.  Instead  of  bounding  into  a 
vehicle,  we  are  willing  to  be  helped  in.  At  last  the  octogenarian  falls.  11.  LiKB 
THE  LEAF  WE  FADE,  TO  MAKE  BOOM  FOB.  OTHERS.  Next  year's  forests  will  be  as 
grandly  foliaged  as  this.  So,  when  we  go  others  take  our  spheres.  Do  not  be 
disturbed  as  you  see  good  and  great  men  die.  When  God  takes  one  man  away.  He 
has  another  right  back  of  him.     IIL  As  with  the  leaves  we  fade  and  fall 

AMID  myriads  of  OTHERS.      IV.    As  WITH  VARIETY  OF  APPEARANCE  THE  LEAVES 

depart,  so  do  yrs.  You  have  noticed  that  some  trees,  at  the  first  touch  of  frost, 
lose  their  beauty.  So  death  smites  many.  There  is  no  beauty  in  their  departure. 
One  sharp  frost  of  sickness,  or  one  blast  of  the  cold  waters  and  they  are  ^one.  _  No 
tinge  of  hope.  No  prophecy  of  heaven.  Their  spring  was  all  abloom  with  bright 
prospects  ;  their  summer  thick  foliaged  with  opportunities  ;  but  October  came  and 
their  glory  went.  But,  thank  God,  that  is  not  the  way  people  always  die.  Tell 
me,  on  what  day  of  aU  the  year  the  leaves  of  the  woodbine  are  as  bright  as  they  are 
to-day  1  So  Christian  character  is  never  so  attractive  as  in  the  dying  hour.  {T. 
De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Fading  away : — But  although  spiritual  decay  may  be  the 
literal  application  of  these  words,  they  truly  express  the  universal  law  of  our  mortal 
life.  I.  The  leaf  fades  by  a  necessary  law.  There  is  no  power  that  can  keep 
the  foliage  on  the  tree.  So  we  must  decay.  Man  may  and  does  dread  death ;  he 
may  and  does  seek  to  prolong  life  ;  but  he  cannot  by  any  invention  or  art  counteract 
that  resistless  law  of  decay  that  has  swept  all  past  generations  to  the  dust,  and  that 
is  day  after  day,  and  hour  after  hoiir,  working  out  his  dissolution.  II.  The  leaf 
fades  by  a  gradual  process.  So  it  is  with  life.  In  infancy,  childhood,  manhood, 
as  well  as  old  age,  the  fading  process  goes  on.  The  gradualness  of  decay  is  a  blessing. 
It  allows  time  to  prepare  for  the  future.  It  prevents  a  stand-stiU  in  the  machine^ 
of  the  world's  work.  III.  The  leaf  fades  into  its  primitive  elements.  It 
is  only  organized  dust.  It  falls  and  to  dust  it  returns.  So  it  is  with  man.  These 
bodies  wiU  in  a  few  years  be  trodden  on  by  the  beast  or  borne  away  by  the  winds. 
What  a  great  variety  there  is  in  the  foliage  of  nattire.  Some  leaves  are  larger  and 
decked  in  more  lovely  hues  than  others.  Some  gi'ow  in  a  richer  soil,  and  are  breathed 
on  by  more  salubrious  winds  than  others.  But  let  a  few  weeks  pass  away  and  all 
these  distinctions  will  be  lost,  all  will  be  dust.  It  is  ever  so  in  society.  We  see 
there  great  variety.  Some  are  in  wealthy  some  in  poverty ;  some  in  velvet,  some  in 
fustian ;  some  in  beauty,  some  in  deformity ;  some  in  the  pomp  of  power,  and  some 
in  the  misery  of  oppression.  But  let  a  few  years  pass  round,  and  our  princes  and 
peasants,  sovereigns  and  subjects,  despots  and  serfs,  masters  and  menials  will  be 
dust.  IV.  The  leaf  fades  as  preparatory  to  a  new  life.  The  leaf  falls,  but 
its  place  is  soon  supplied.  It  faUs,  in  fact,  because  the  new  life,  rising  from  the 
root,  has  pushed  it  off.  So  with  us.  We  die,  but  others  will  step  into  our  place, 
and  the  world  will  go  on.  The  race  will  carry  on  its  governments,  its  commerce,  its 
literature,  its  religion,  without  our  help.  It  may  require  our  death,  make  our  very 
death  serve  its  interests.  Let  us,  then,  not  be  proud  of  our  position.  V.  The  leaf 
fades  as  a  progressive  stage  of  life.  The  tree  from  which  the  leaf  fell  is  not 
dead.  It  threw  off  the  sere  leaf  to  put  on  another  and  lovelier  garment.  As  tho 
vitality  of  the  tree  continues  when  the  leaf  falls,  the  life  of  man  wiU  remain  when 
the  body  dies.  And  like  the  tree,  that  life  will  dress  itself  in  another  garb.  I 
would  call  your  attention  to  four  states  of  mind  existing  in  relation  to  this  fact,  one 
of  which  must  be  yours — 1.  Unreasoning  indifference.  "Oh  that  men  were  wise 
that  they  would  consider  their  latter  end  1 "  2.  Intellectual  stoicism.  There  are 
some  who  look  at  death  as  the  end  of  ezistenoe.    It  must  be  done,  by  reasoning. 


aup.uiy.]  ISAIAH,  439 

down  reason  into  folly,  mind  into  matter,  God  into  nature.  How  few  can  do  this ; 
and  when  they  do  it,  have  they  rest  ?  3.  Terrible  foreboding.  4.  Christian  com- 
posure. Which  of  these  states  of  mind  in  relation  to  our  approaching  mortality  is 
the  rational  one  ?  I  need  not  ask  which  is  the  happiest  one ;  that  is  obvious. 
(Somilist.)  Fading  and  changing  (with  1  Cor.  xv.  51): — ^We  know  how  many 
signs  and  symptoms  there  are  in  life  which  suggest  the  truthfulness  of  the 
figure.  You  cannot  take  a  hill  now  as  once  you  could.  It  makes  your  breathing  a 
burden,  and  the  slightest  incline  wearies  and  tires  you  out.  It  all  means  the  fading 
leaf  I  Your  eyes  are  giving  you  trouble.  The  glasses  that  served  you  ten  years  ago 
are  of  little  use  to  you  now.  It  is  the  fading  leaf  I  You  veiy  frequently  have  to 
ask  your  friends  to  repeat  their  words.  You  are  inclined  to  thmk  it  is  because  they 
mumble  and  murmur  their  speech.  Nay,  it  ia  the  fading  leaf  1  There  is  your 
memory.  Lately  it  has  begun  to  play  tricks  with  you,  a  thing  it  has  never  done 
before.  It  is  the  fading  leaf  1  AU  these  are  signs,  common  signs,  that  the  prime 
has  been  reached,  that  the  leaf  has  begun  to  fade.  "We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf." 
Such  is  the  Old  Testament  conception  of  life — a  fading  leaf.  Is  it  a  complete  con- 
ception, or  is  it  only  partial  and  fragmentary  ?  It  is  the  conception  of  the  Old 
Testament,  is  it  the  conception  of  the  New  ?  So  far  I  have  only  given  you  one  half 
of  my  text.  Now  let  me  give  you  the  other  half.  I  have  taken  it  from  Paul's 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians :  "  We  shall  all  be  changed."  Now  put  the  two  concep- 
tions side  by  side.  "We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf ; "  "We  shaU  all  be  changed."  The 
Old  Testament  prophet  looked  upon  men  and  women  who  were  beginning  to  feel  the 
weaknesses  and  infirmities  of  age,  and  he  said,  "They  are  beginning  to  fade."  The 
New  Testament  prophet  looked  upon  men  and  women  becoming  burdened  with 
similar  weaknesses,  and  he  said,  "They  are  beginning  to  change. '  "Fading"  is 
the  Old  Testament  word;  "changing"  is  the  word  of  the  New;  and  in  the  two 
words  you  will  find  the  characteristic  difierences  in  the  two  conceptions.  One  looks 
at  the  body  ;  the  other  looks  at  the  soul.  Here  is  a  flower-bud,  in  its  early  stages 
encased  in  ite  wondrous  sheath  of  green.  After  a  while  the  sheath  begins  to  open, 
to  turn  back,  to  droop  and  to  die.  Isaiah  looks  at  the  drooping  sheath,  and  says, 
"Fading."  Paul  looks  at  the  unfolding  flower,  and  says,  "Changing."  One  looks 
at  the  body  which  can  fade  ;  the  other  looks  at  the  soul,  the  unfolding  life,  which 
can  change  but  never  fade.  One  looks  at  the  vesture,  the  other  looks  at  the  man. 
Now  we  know  which  is  the  Christian  standpoint.  Christianity  warns  us  again  and 
again  not  to  confuse  the  man's  body  with  the  man,  but  always  to  distinguish  between 
them,  and  to  make  the  distinction  a  vital  and  influential  article  of  our  faith.  When 
some  one  has  passed  away,  the  inquiry  is  often  made  by  one  friend  of  another, 
"  When  are  they  going  to  bury  him  ? "  Bury  Aim?  Never!  ^e  cannot  be  buried ! 
He  is  not  here  to  be  buried  ;  he  is  risen  1  Bury  him  i  No,  you  bury  it ;  you  b\u:y 
his  body,  you  bury  that  which  has  faded  ;  you  cannot  bury  the  man.  Well,  why 
not  make  that  distinction  as  real  in  speech  as  it  ought  to  be  real  in  faith  ?  I  am 
told  that  "Mr.  So-and-So  is  in  a  decline."  What  do  you  mean  1  Do  you  mean 
that  the  man's  body  is  declining,  or  the  man  1  Immediately  you  reply,  "  'The  man's 
body."  Then  why  not  keep  the  distinction  to  the  front,  that  when  little  children 
hear  you  speak,  they  may  catch  one  of  the  cardinal  doctrines  of  your  faith.  The 
New  Testament  always  keeps  the  two  distinct.  It  speaks  of  the  body,  the  flesh,  as 
a  house ;  it  speaks  of  the  spirit,  the  soul,  as  its  tenant.  The  same  distinction  is 
made  by  another  figure.  The  New  Testament  describes  my  body  as  a  robe.  Look 
at  that.     Here  are  outer  garments  of  cotton  and  wool.     Then  there  is  another 

girment  of  flesh.  And  then  there  is  the  soul,  the  man,  the  woman  1  That  is  the 
hristian  conception — the  flesh  is  the  garment,  it  is  not  the  man !  Tell  your 
children  that  growing  old  and  infirm  just  means  that  the  flesh  garment  is  getting 
worse  for  wear,  and  that  the  soul  is  preparing  for  itself  another  garment  that  will 
never  wear  out,  a  spiritual  garment,  a  garment  of  immortality  and  light  1  Tell 
them  that  death  just  means  that  the  spirit  has  dropped  its  old  clothes,  its  robe  of 
flesh,  and  has  clothed  itself  with  the  garment  that  is  from  heaven.  This  is  a 
beautiful  conception,  this  apostolic  conception  of  change.  It  takes  our  eyes  away 
from  the  temporal  and  fixes  them  upon  the  eternal.  It  takes  the  emphasis  away 
from  the  fading  body  and  fixes  it  upon  the  changing  spirit.  {J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Aviunmal  characteristics: — I.  In  the  mxjtb  organs  of  thb  faded  leaves  is  a 
TENDER  WARNING.  God  tums  every  hill-side  and  meadow  into  an  allegory.  The 
tiny  little  monarch  grappled  with  life,  captured  the  forces  of  nature,  and  vigorously 
ministered  all  simmier.  But  feebleness  is  creeping  over  it,  it  grows  weary,  its  lustre 
ia  fading,  uenres  waziiig  weak.   It  rustles,  it  trembles  in  the  gentle  zephjr,  and  theu 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  lxiT. 


falls.  "  As  the  flowers  of  the  field  »o  man  flourisheth."  How  tenderly  God  begins 
to  warn  us  of  the  coming  king  of  terrors.  Each  leaf  carries  its  own  secrets,  giving 
no  premonition  which  shall  first  fade.  So  tender  is  God's  mighty  providence  1  No 
harsh  voice  calls  out,  "Set  thine  house  in  order,  for  thou  shalt  die  and  not  live." 
The  messenger  comes  in  a  little  rheum,  a  periodic  pain,  a  little  exhaustion  of  breath, 
fainting  moments,  the  love  of  ease,  the  failing  of  memory,  and  little  changes  in  the 
disposition.  God  hides  the  grim  visage  of  fatality  under  shadows.  But  the  angel  of 
death  is  absolutely  there.     II.  On  the  leaf  tw^o  forces  ake  evee  at  work  :  the 

VITALIZING  OR  ORGANIZING,  AND  THE  DISSOLVING  OR  DEOAYING.      The  COal-bcds  of 

the  earth  tell  the  story  of  the  battles  of  these  powers  contending  for  the  supremacy. 
There  are  the  generations  of  the  faded  and  fallen,  metamorphosed,  petrified,  stratified. 
There  are  some  leaves  whose  very  luxury  causes  them  to  decay.     This  is  one  of  the 
mysteries  of  life  among  men.    The  briUiant  geniuses  endowed  with  courage  to  inspire, 
in  teUigence  to  enlighten,  and  sensibility  to  refine,  being  fii'st  misunderstood  and  then 
misrepresented,  contradicted,  or  embittered  by  neglect,  their  very  richness  of  soul 
and  fatness  of  mind  cause  them  to  sicken  under  the  pale  hand  of  languor.    There  are 
some  gorgeous  leaves  which  carry  in  themselves  the  beauty  of  the  blossom  and  leaf 
together.     They  die  early.    There  is  the  young  scholar,   gorgeous  in  intellect, 
prematurely  ripening.     His  youth  is  adorned  with  loveliness.     Of  the  wealth  of  his 
graces  we  have  but  the  prophecy  in  the  bud.     He  has  a  face  like  a  cherub,  and  God 
sends  Hia  angel  to  pluck  it  while  it  is  unsullied  by  the  scorching  sun  or  the  chills  of 
autumn.     At  the  other  extreme  is  gorgeous  old  age.     III.  There  is  a  process  of 
injecting  colour  into  the  fibres  of  plants  to  make  them  bri^t  or  sombre  as  one  may 
wish.     Thus  affected,  THE  leaves  fade  differently.    There  is  also  a  method  of 
inoculating  the  life  of  man.     To  the  character  can  be  given  the  bright  tints  of 
pleasure  as  of  those  who  delight  in  goodness.    When  the  heart  is  inoculated  with  the 
graces  of  Christ  the  perspective  of  the  character  is  determined,  the  sombre  shades  of 
aespondency  are  transfigured.    Some  leaves  are  flabby  and  develop  a  gloomy,  morbid 
colour.     They  wither  and  decay  as  unsightly  things.     Except  for  the  grace  of  God, 
men  bom  in  a  murky  moral  atmosphere  gather  cloudiaess  and  opacity  as  they  grow 
older  and  perish  in  gloom.     Some  leaves  are  beautiful  from  first  to  last.     Like 
Samuel,  they  are  dedicated  from  birth  to  a  whole  life  in  the  ministry  of  goodness. 
Such  is  many  a  Christian  life.     The  innocency  of  youth  is  beautified  by  a  gracious 
spirit.     Middle  life  comes  on  in  the  strength  of  a  righteous  character.     IV.  Leaves 
IN  FADING  DEVELOP  SPECIFIC  CHARACTERISTICS.    Each  spccies  has  its  peculiar  tints. 
This  represents  the  racial  types  of  men  in  the  development  of  their  spiritual  or 
mental  traits.    When  they  come  to  fade  and  to  die  the  individual  trends  of  character 
coma  forth  in  colours  widely  difiering.     The  fatalism  of  the  Chinaman  is  joyless  and 
fearless,  a  dogged  indiS'erence.     The  pantheism  of  the  Brahmin  brings  its  devotee  to 
sink  into  a  gradual  sleep,  a  dull  withering.     The  Mohammedan,  whose  heaven  is 
sensual,  has  spasms  of  fearful  passion.     The  Catholic,  who  has  been  taught  that 
ceremonies  save  him,  in  dying  eagerly  longs  for  a  priest,  a  cross,  or  extreme  unction. 
The  agnostic  comes  to  his  end  glowing  in  the  white  heat  of  apprehension.     The  true 
Christian  has  the  face  of  one  going  home.     Again,  familv  groups  have  their  differ- 
entiation.    On  a  given  tree,  all  the  leaves  are  fashioned  after  a  common  type  in 
colour,  form,  and  texture.    But  as  they  grow  they  acquire  individual  oddities.    Even 
so  one  family  of  people,  nurtured  by  the  sap  of  a  common  civilization,  develop  the 
most  striking-idiosyncrasies.    V.  There  is  no  di«g  race  in  fading.    Grey  hairs  are  a 
crown  of  glory  when  they  are  anointed  with  goodness.     If  we  have  made  good  use  of 
the  simshine,  if  the  fruit  of  our  labour  hangs  in  clusters  on  the  vine,  if  in  God's 
vineyard  we  have  faithfully  ministered,  then  the  fading  tints  are  our  laurels.     The 
fading  shows  two  powers.     The  spirit  that  animates  the  form  is  preparing  the  old 
trunk  for  dissolution.    Yet  while  it  unties  the  twisted  cords  of  earthly  life  it  lifts  up 
the  affections,  dislodging  the  corruptible  from  the  incorruptible,  the  mortal  from  the 
immortal,  and  spiritualizes  the  mind.     In  one  case  the  man  goes  on  walking  with 
God  until  the  fire  of  the  flesh  dies  out,  and  the  spirit  is  left  aglowing.     In  the  other, 
passions  may  bum  the  soul  into  a  cinder.    Richness  in  fading  leaves  is  not  an  accident. 
It  depends  on  sunshine,  atmosphere  and  soil.    The  beauty  of  age  is  the  fruit  of  right 
character.     It  is  the  result  of  effort.    VI.  The  leaf  fades,  faUs,  and  becomes  buried. 

But  in  THE  CORE  OF  THE  RIPE  LEAF  WHILE  PULSATING  IN  THE  SUNLIGHT,  A  JOYOUS 
TET  MYSTERIOUS  SOMETHING  PASSES  THROUGH  THE  STEM  TO  THE  TWIG  UPON  THE 

STURDY  BOUGH.  It  leaves  there  a  scar,  the  sign  of  the  leafs  immortality,  a  nucleus 
of  the  new  life  to  bud  in  the  resurrection  of  the  spring.  Amone  leaves  are  four 
degrees  of  future  life.    The  first  but  lightly  marks  the  place  of  its  departure,  a  mem 


CHAP.uHV.]  ISAIAS.  441 

trace  as  of  a  tear  on  a  cheek  not  washed.  Inward  life  swells  the  branch  and  ita 
memory  is  blotted  out.  The  second  class  leaves  a  scar  which  is  not  effaced,  but  no 
active  life  wUl  come  out  of  its  grave.  The  third  will  raise  a  little  knoll  and  stamp 
its  epitaph  indelibly  as  by  a  signet.  No  luxury  of  growth  or  biting  frost  can  remove 
it.  These  little  monuments  are  the  geometric  scales  on  the  bark  of  the  palm  and 
the  fern.  The  fourth  class  not  only  scar  the  tree,  but  leave  behind  the  conditions  of 
a  new  germ  which  will  bud  and  become  a  new  branch.  Here  is  a  perfect  emblem  of 
four  classes  of  men.  The  first  is  the  class  who  live  only  to  themselves.  The  second 
class  are  generous,  liberal-hearted,  and  full  of  noble  deeds.  They  have  a  memoryin 
their  own  times,  but  die  with  those  who  had  personal  knowledge  of  them.  The 
third  class  send  down  their  roots  into  the  soil  of  future  generations.  They  in-web 
their  deeds  in  the  fibre  of  history.  They  build  institutions  of  charity,  bequeath  to 
posterity  resources  which  will  develop  a  better  manhood.  They  are  a  sort  of 
lepidodendron  leaves.  Their  scale-marks  are  fixed.  The  fourth  class  inspire  new 
buds.  They  are  the  great  thinkers.  Out  of  them  come  new  branches  of  civilization. 
But  some  leaves  have  a  small  eternity.  Thousands  of  years  ago  they  built  great 
forests  and  bogs.  They  faded  and  fell.  Earthquake  catastrophes  buried  them,  and 
their  graves  are  the  coal-beds.  To-day  they  have  a  resurrection.  The  sun-power 
caught  by  the  leaves  millions  of  years  ago,  to-day  warms  our  homes,  lights  our 
streets,  and  creates  thousands  of  industries  for  the  elevation  of  man.  {T.  Parry,  D.D.) 
The  evanescence  of  huTuan  life : — Let  us  follow  the  suggestions  which  our  text 
furnishes  upon — I.  The  causes  of  human  decay.  Why  should  not  man,  and 
everything  coimected  with  him,  be  immortal?  1.  His  present  state  seems  to 
support  a  date  to  its  existence.  He  is  a  member  of  a  mortal  world,  and  its  entire 
economy  seems  to  suppose  and  inexorably  to  work  out  his  mortality.  Everything 
announces  its  own  dissolution.  The  granite  rock,  which  you  would  look  upon  as 
indestructible,  at  length  gives  way,  and  crumbling  down,  forms  the  very  soU  you 
till.  So,  too,  in  the  vegetable  world,  whether  among  the  frosts  of  the  polar  regions, 
or  amid  the  unvarying  warmth  of  tropical  climes.  Thus,  also,  is  it  in  the  animal 
kingdom.  Here,  everything  is  limited  in  its  capabilities  of  life  and  growth.  2.  Life 
has  its  friction  which  tasks  its  powers  and  wears  them  out.  3.  Then,  with  the 
friction  of  a  life  of  toil  comes  often  the  severe  discipline  of  a  life  of  care,  vexation 
and  disappointed  hopes.  4.  But  more  common  and  trying  than  eveii  this  is  the» 
discipline  of  pain  to  which  life  on  earth  is  subject.  5.  But  there  is  still  one  more 
waster  of  life  on  earth.  Sinful  pleasure  sets  its  saddest  seal  upon  the  swollen  or 
wasted,  the  scarred  and  the  disgraced  form  that  comes  under  its  blighting  touch. 
"Tis  sad  to  see  the  beautiful  plant,  which  you  have  nurtured  with  care,  struck  with 
frost  before  its  time  ;  but  how  much  more  saddening  to  see  the  human  form 
disfigured  even  in  the  days  of  its  youth  and  strength  by  siaful  excesses  !  II.  The 
CERTAINTY  OF  HUMAN  DECAY.  How  Certainly  our  life  on  earth  fades  and  decays, 
we  may  learn  from  the  variety  and  the  constant  action  of  those  causes  of  decay 
which  we  have  now  noticed.  The  law  of  nature  under  which  we  live  is  an  inexorable 
law ;  and  this  law  works  out  our  decay.  III.  The  results  of  this  unceasing, 
THIS  INEVITABLE  PROCESS.  1.  Human  beauty  decays.  2.  Human  activity  flags. 
8.  Human  strength  fails.  4.  The  human  intellect  fails.  The  intellect  we  believe 
immortal ;  yet  it  is  true  that  in  this  world  that  intellect  is  dependent  upon  physical 
organs  for  its  successful  exertions,  and  still  more  so  for  the  manifestation  of  its 
power.  All  old  men  are  obliged  to  show,  if  not  confess,  that  they  can  no  longer 
think  and  plan  as  they  could  in  the  days  of  their  strength.  5.  Human  afiections 
feel  and  show  this  withering  process.  6.  One  other  step  only  is  yet  to  be  taken  in 
this  journey  of  decay.  That  leaf,  which  for  days  has  been  turning  pale,  clinging 
still,  though  tremblmgly,  to  its  hold  on  Ufe,  at  last  falls,  not  only  faded,  but  dead. 
And  so,  too,  is  it  to  be  with  us.  {E.  B.  Huntington.)  A  leaf  exposed  to  a  thousand 
dangers : — Insects  gnaw  it  off,  the  beasts  of  the  field  may  devour  it,  winds  may 
scatter  it,  or  it  may  be  shaken  down  with  the  fruit.  And,  between  the  diseases  and 
accidents  to  which  human  nature  is  liable,  comparatively  few  attain  old  age.  The 
Jews  foi-merly  reckoned  up  nine  hundred  and  three  diseases,  but  accidents  are 
absolutely  innumerable.  A  vapour  may  cause  death,  our  houses  may  bury  us  in 
their  ruins,  our  food  may  poison  us.  ( W.  Jay.)  The  leauty  of  fading  life: — It  is 
under  the  approaches  of  the  autumnal  chill  and  frost  that  Faith  puts  on  her 
beautiful  apparel ;  Hope,  her  queenly  robes ;  Love,  her  wedding  garment,  as  the 
heavenly  Bridegroom's  steps  draw  near.  The  richest  manifestations  of  character ; 
the  communings  that  can  never  be  forgotten ;  the  heroic  forms  of  devotion  and 
■abmissiou ;  the  outgoings  of  affection  too  intense  for  utterance,  overflowing  from 


442  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txir. 

the  faltering  tongue  on  eye  and  lip  and  brow, — these  belong  to  the  chamber  of 
illnesa  and  the  bed  of  death.  (-4.  P.  Peabody.)  Our  iniquities,  like  the  wind, 
have  taken  us  away. — Sin  a  cruel  tyrant: — When  God  leaves  us  in  the  hand  of  our 
sins.  He  leaves  us  in  a  cruel  hand.     {B.  Sibbes,  D.I).) 

Ver.  7.  And  there  is  none  that  calleth  upon  Thy  name. — Neglected  religion: — 
1.  There  is  a  confession  of  neglected  privilege  and  duty.  "  There  is  none  that  calleth 
upon  Thy  name."  2.  There  is  a  definition  of  true  and  saving  religion.  "That- 
stirreth  himself  up  to  take  hold  of  Thee."  This  latter  is  the  most  striking  and 
important,  for  it  shows  what  a  man  must  do  in  order  to  approach  God,  the  act 
requiring  exertion  and  activity.  Multitudes  of  so-called  Christians  live  on  without 
the  semblance  of  devotion,  while  with  many  more  this  worship  is  a  mere  matter  of 
form.  I.  What  are  the  causes  1  There  are  many  things  which  operate  to  make 
a  man  neglect  God.  1.  Devotion  to  the  world.  No  man  can  serve  two  masters, 
and  he  who  loves  the  world  cannot  consistently  love  God.  2,  Selfish  indulgence. 
There  are  many  who  do  not,  strictly  speaking,  love  the  world,  who  nevertheless  so 
pamper  their  bodies  with  temporal  comforts  that  they  sink  down  into  a  dreamy 
sloth.  3.  Want  of  desire.  Deadness  of  soul  makes  a  man  sluggish.  If  we  keep 
out  of  the  sunshine,  we  cannot  feel  its  warmth.  If  men  hide  from  God,  they  can 
neither  desire  nor  love  Him.  II.  What  are  the  consequences  ?  A  terrible  roll- 
call  of  iniquity  and  sin.  Evil  rolls  on  like  the  waves  of  the  troubled  sea.  Prayer- 
less  souls  are  marching  on  to  perdition  ;  Satan  triumphs  over  the  ungodly  world  ; 
God  is  dishonoured  ;  angels  weep.  HI.  What  is  the  remedy  ?  Such  reflections 
ought — 1.  To  arouse  us  to  new  efforts  in  prayer.  2.  To  excite  us  to  greater  personal 
efl'orts.  We  can  all  do  something.  Many  can  do  much,  3.  To  awaken  us  to 
indirect  work.  We  can  send  others  to  preach  and  to  labour.  4.  To  see  that  we 
ourselves  are  not  among  those  who  fail  to  take  hold,  and  that  our  personal  example 
is  not  hindering  the  progress  of  the  truth.  {Eomilist.)  Neglect  of  -prayer : — This 
chapter  may  be  considered  as  an  act  of  humiliation  and  confession  by  the  prophet, 
in  behalf  of  the  Jews,  similar  to  that  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  Daniel.  In  the  text 
he  aggravates  their  other  crioaes  by  that  of  hypocrisy,  for  he  does  not  mean  by  the 
expression  that  none  called  upon  or  prayed  to  God  at  aU,  but  that  they  did  not  do  it 
spiritually,  heartily,  fervently.  The  last  clause  in  the  sentence  explains  (as  is 
common  in  the  prophetic  writings)  the  former.  "None  calleth  upon  Thy  name  ; " 
that  is,  "None  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  Thee."  I.  Prayer,  properly 
so  called,  consists  in  certain  exercises  of  the  mind.  1.  Attention  to  our 
wants.  Without  this,  prayer  is  vain  babbling.  Our  wants  arise  from  our  sinful 
conduct — our  unholy  nature — powerful  opposition — daily  circumstances  in  our  ex- 
perience. Our  state  ought  to  be  as  diligently  attended  to  as  the  most  assiduous 
tradesman  attends  to  his  business — as  the  humane  physician  attends  to  the  symptoms 
of  disease  in  his  patient.  2.  Regard  to  God  as  the  Being  who  alone  can  relieve  us. 
3.  Strong  and  fervent  desire.  4.  AfiEiance  in  God.  5.  Humble  and  patient  expect- 
ation. II.  However  frequently  or  forcibly  we  pray,  if  our  prayers  are 
separate  and  distinct  from  these  exercises,  we  shall  be  regarded  by 
God  as  though  we  never  prayed  at  all — that  is,  we  shall  derive  no 
benefit  from  our  services.  1.  This  will  appear  from  the  ancient  Jews,  who 
drew  near  to  God  with  their  lips,  but  their  hearts  were  far  from  Him.  2.  That 
prayer  must  be  distinguished  by  right  dispositions  of  the  mind,  is  evident  from  the 
very  design  of  prayer.  Consider  its  parts — Adoration  ;  thanksgiving ;  confession  ; 
intercession.  The  whole  of  this  duty  is  designed  to  promote  piety,  by  working 
certain  holy  dispositions  in  our  hearts,  by  the  help  and  blessing  of  God.  WUl  not 
these  remarks  account  for  the  barrenness  of  mere  professors  ?  Christians,  stir  up  the 
gift  of  God  that  is  within  you.  (/.  Walker,  D.D.)  Universal  forgetfulness  of  God 
was  the  consequence  of  self-incurred  abandonment  by  God.  {F.  Delitzscli,  D.D.)  The 
duty  of  taking  hold  of  God  :—l.  It  implies  to  take  holdof  God  in  the  exercise 
of  saving  faith.  Expressions  almost  the  same  occur  in  this  sense  in  two  other 
parts  of  Isaiah  (chaps,  xxvii.  5,  Ivi.  6).  To  take  hold  of  God,  to  take  hold  of  His 
strength,  to  take  hold  of  His  covenant,  to  join  ourselves  to  Him,  all  imply  the  one 
act  of  a  sinner  taking  hold  of  Christ,  or  of  God  in  Christ  in  the  exercise  of  saving  faith. 
But  this  first  and  essential  exercise  of  saving  faith  is  not  what  is  principally  referred 
to  in  our  text.  There  is,  then — 11.  A  further  exercise  implied  in  taking  hold  of  God, 
one  which  true  believers  alone  can  engage  in,  and  one  in  which  they  may  be  very 
deficient.  This  exercise  is  alluded  to  by  the  apostle  Paul,  in  PhiL  iii.  12,  where  he 
says  of  himself,  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either  were  already  perfect ; 


OUP.  unr.]  ISAIAH.  44S 

but  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of 
Christ  Jesus."  The  Greek  word  translated  "apprehend,"  corresponds  with  the 
Hebrew  word  in  our  text  translated  "take  hold  of."  Therefore,  we  infer,  that  th© 
second  exercise  implied  in  taking  hold  of  God,  is  to  apprehend  his  mobal  imaok. 
Those  who  are  engaged  in  this  exercise  are  blessings  to  the  world  and  to  the  Church, 
and  are  objects  of  complacency  to  God.  III.  The  third  great  exercise  implied  in 
laking  hold  of  God  is  wkestling,  importunate,  pleading  prayer.  It  is  not 
every  kind  even  of  acceptable  prayer  that  deserves  the  name  of  taking  hold  of  God. 
Five  ways  may  be  mentioned  in  which  a  soul,  through  pleading  prayer,  taketh  hold 
of  God.  1.  By  taking  hold  of  or  pleading  BUs  perfections.  God  can  do  nothing 
contrary  to  His  perfections.  AU  His  actings  are  the  immediate  result  of  them.  But 
it  pleaseth  Him  that  His  saints  should  plead  His  perfections,  and,  as  it  were, 
take  hold  of  them  in  holy,  humble,  fervent  importunity.  2.  By  pleading  Hifl 
relations  to  His  people  as  Father,  Creator,  Preserver  and  Redeemer.  3.  By  pleading 
His  promises,  declarations  and  engagements.  4.  By  pleading  His  past  aealings. 
Thou  hast  begun  a  good  work  in  my  soul ;  carry  it  on.  Thou  hast  delivered  Thy 
Church  and  people  of  old ;  do  it  now.  Thou  hast  shamed  and  confounded  Thine 
enemies,  when  their  pride  and  their  might  were  at  the  highest ;  shame  and  confound 
them  now.  Thou  hast  planted  a  vine  in.  our  land  ;  look  down  from  heaven  ;  revive 
and  quicken  this  Thy  vine.  5.  By  acquiescing  in  the  sovereignty,  and  looking  to 
the  unsearchable  mercies  of  God.  Conclusion :  How  lofty  an  exercise  of  soul  it  is 
to  take  hold  of  God.  How  marvellous  the  thought,  a  worm  of  the  dust  to  influence 
the  thoughts  and  operations  of  the  Almighty  God  !  It  is  a  work  too  mighty  for  the 
feeble  powers  of  man.  No  creature  ever  did  or  could  twcomplish  it,  except  so  far  as 
strengthened  by  the  Spirit.  i^W,  Mackenzie.)  Lethargy  in  prayer : — I.  We  have 
A  striking  definition  of  true  prayer.  It  is  a  taking  hold  of  God,  in  no 
material  sense,  but  by  a  spiritual  apprehension  so  real  and  vivid  that  we  seem  to 
touch  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant  and  say,  with  realizing  perception  of  His  Presence : 
"  We  will  not  let  Thee  go,  except  Thou  bless  us."  This  definition  greatly  helps  us — 
1.  When,  for  instance,  men  insist  that  prayer  is  only  acceptable  as  it  arises  from 
special  fanes,  we  can  reply  that  the  hand  of  faith  may  feel  after,  find,  and  grasp  the 
hand  of  God  in  the  press  of  the  busy  street,  the  woodland  glade,  and  the  sequestered 
chamber.  Since  God  is  eveiywhere  we  may  take  hold  of  Him  anywhere.  2.  Again, 
when  men  tell  us  that  prayers  must  be  uttered  in  words  of  solemn  grandeur  and 
rhythm,  we  may  remind  them  that  prayer  is  a  taking  hold  of  God,  and  that  it  may 
exist  in  its  intensest,  truest  form  when  not  a  word  is  uttered.  3.  When,  again, 
men  suggest  that  priestly  intervention  is  necessary  to  present  our  supplications,  let 
us  find  refuge  in  this  definition  ;  for  surely  God  will  as  much  allow  Himself  to  be 
grasped  by  the  ungloved  hand  of  the  labourer,  as  by  the  dimpled  hand  of  the  little 
chUd.  We  need  none  to  instruct  us  how  to  take  hold  ;  and  each  can  best  take  hold 
for  his  own  preservation.  The  intervention  of  a  third  person  is  indeed  a  source 
of  weakness  when  it  comes  between  us  and  the  gracious  Hand  which  reaches  down 
to  draw  us  out  of  many  and  deep  waters.  II.  The  grievous  complaint.  ' '  There 
is  none  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  Thee. "  Why  this  fatal  lethargy  ? 
1.  In  the  case  of  some,  it  no  doubt  arises  from  the  stupefying  effect  of  worldliness 
and  self-indulgence.  If  the  unwary  traveller  sits  down  to  rest  in  the  forest  or  the 
cave,  where  gases  lie  heavily  on  the  ground,  they  may  so  invade  his  sense  and 
benumb  his  mind  that  he  will  be  presently  unable  to  arouse  himself  to  further 
exertion.  This  is  the  state  of  the  opium-eater  and  the  drunkard,  of  all  whoj  Like 
Tennyson's  Lotus-eaters,  come  under  the  fatal  spell  of  the  narcotic.  And  is  there 
not  a  mephitic  poison  issuing  always  from  worldly  amusements  and  society  ?  2.  In 
the  case  of  others,  lethargy  in  prayer  arises  from  a  mistaken  idea  of  the  privilege  of 
the  child  of  God.  They  say  that  God  is  so  wise  and  good,  that  it  is  a  mistake  and 
a  sin  to  seek  to  impose  our  will  on  Him  ;  that  it  is  enough  to  take  what  He  sends, 
and  to  bear  what  He  imposes,  without  attempting  to  interfere  by  the  urging  of 
our  desires.  But  there  is  nothing  of  this  in  the  teachings  of  our  Saviour.  He 
perpetually  says,  Ask,  seek,  knock.  He  evidently  would  have  us  regard  prayer 
as  a  means  of  obtaining  blessings  which  otherwise  we  would  altogether  miss. 
8.  Others  yield  to  this  lethargy  because  they  have  intellectual  difficulties  in  respect 
to  prayer.  They  point  to  the  majestic  reign  of  law,  the  unbroken  chain  of  cause 
and  effect,  the  unalterable  plan  of  the  Divine  procedure.  How  can  God  rule  the 
■world  and  yet  answer  prayer  ?  They  forget  that  prayer  is  probably  as  much  a  law 
of  the  universe  as  any  other  law,  and  that  it  is  the  method  of  God  to  carry  out  His 
particular  purposes  by  the  skilful  handling  of  law ;  so  that  the  laws  of  the  upper 


444  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lxit. 


realm  (and  prayer  is  one  of  these)  may  be  used  to  cancel  and  overcome  those  of  the 
lower.    Besides,  is  it  not  enough  that  Jesus  prayed,  and  so  unmistakably  taught  Hia 
disciples  to  do  the  same  ?     4.  Yet  others,  again,  do  not  stir  themselves  up  to  pray, 
because  they  say  that  thw  have  prayed  so  long  in  vain.     Prayer,  they  say,  is  so 
irregular  and  uncertain.    There  is  no  counting  on  it.    Why,  then,  they  argue,  should 
they  waste  time  and  energy  on  that  which  is  as  likely  to  disappoint  as  to  help  them  ! 
This  latter  difficulty  is  possibly  the  most  common  of  all,  and  does  more  than  any 
other  to  relax  men's  energy  in  prayer.     It  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  therefore,  to 
insist  that  prayer  has  a  law  as  constant  and  unchangeable  as  gravitation,  and  if  we  do 
not  succeed^  it  is  because  we  are  ourselves  to  blame.    Nay,  more,  if  we  seldom  obtain 
answers  to  our  prayers,  we  must  examine  carefully  into  the  cause  ;  because,  almost 
certainly,  there  is  some  flaw  or  fault  in  our  own  character,  by  reason  of  which 
our  prayers  are  as  missives  lost  in  the  post,  or  ships  that  have  gone  down  at  sea. 
III.  The  lament  over  this  lethargy  in  prater.     1.  It  is  very  dangerous.     Th© 
first  step  in  spiritual  declension  is  almost  invariably  in  the  closet.     The  whole  stress  of 
Satanic  temptation  is  to  induce  us  to  relax  our  prayerfuiness  ;  and  perhaps  there  is 
no  time  when  we  need  to  pray  more  than  when  this  fatal  disinclination  begins  to 
creep  over  us.     2.  It  is  very  smful.     Is  it  not  wrong  to  reject  the  advances  of  our 
God,  and  refuse  to  comply  with  His  commands  to  pray  ?     This  surely  is  a  dishonour, 
a  slight,  a  crime.     3.  It  is  very  strange.     It  must  be  the  wonder  of  the  angels,  as 
they  look  on  our  tired  and  perplexed  faces,  amid  our  complicated  cares,  that  we  are 
so  slack  in  our  approaches  to  the  strongest,  wisest,  gentlest  Being  in  the  universe, 
and  are  so  reluctant  to  stir  ourselves  up  to  take  hold  of  God.     {Life  of  Faith.)    Self- 
influence : — I.  Certain  truths  vthich  this  lamentation  implies.     1.  That  God 
was  ready  to  receive  them  graciously.     2.  That  man  is  prone  to  be  slow  of  heart  to 
seek  unto  God.     3.  That  man  may  oppose  that  slowness  of  heart — may  stir  himself 
up  to  take  hold  on  God.     Such  was  the  view  of  Joshua  when  he  said,  "  Incline  your 
heart  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel "  (Josh.  xxiv.  23).     This  truth  was  regarded  by 
the  Lord  Himself  when  He  proclaimed,  "  Incline  your  ear,"  etc.  (chap.  Iv.  3).     With 
a  view  to  this,  man  may  stir  up — (1)  The  memory.     (2)  The  imagination.     (3)  The 
reason.     (4)  The  wiU.     II.  The  lamentation  itself.     Of  it  we  may  emphatically 
say  (Ezekiel  xix.  14),  "This  is  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a  lamentation.  ' 
Why?    1.  On  account  of  present  loss.     They  "forsake  their  own  mercies,"  wi-ong 
their  own  selves  as  to  present  good.     2.  On  account  of  the  uncertainty  of  life 
on   earth.     3.   On  account  of  the   force  of  habit  (Jer.    xiii.    23).      Through  the 
force  of  habit  conscience  may  become    so   seared   and   the   heart    so   hardened 
that  the  likelihood  may  rapidly  lessen  of  the  deteriorated  mind  ever   stirring 
itself  up  to  take  hold  on  God.     Let  not  the  peculiarly  encouraging  character 
of  the  kind  call  be  overlooked — "Let  him  take  hold  of  My  strength."     (/.  Elliot.) 
No  man  to  pray  (with  chap.  Ixii.   1) : — The  general  condition  of  the  nation  waa 
deplorable  enough  (ver.  6).     But  there  was  one  vein  of  sadness  lying  deeper  than  the 
sadness  which  filled  the  prophet's  heart  because  of  the  condition  of  the  people 
generally ;  he  knew  not  of  any  man  who  was  wounded  and  oppressed  and  driven  to 
prayer  as  his  only  refuge,  and  as  the  people's  only  hope,  by  this  grievous  state  of 
things.     One  man  may  be  a  Church's,  a  city's,  a  nation's  saviour.     Indifference  to 
all  interests  but  our  own  is  a  powerful  narcotic  which  may  put  a  Church  or  a  nation 
to  sleep.     Perfect  is  the  picture  of  this  luxurious,  cynical  indifference  drawn  by  the 
prophet  Amos  (chap.  vi.  1-6).     This  very  indifference  to  things  not  directly  our  own, 
to  things  not  reckoned  our  own  according  to  conventional  standards,  is  again  and 
again  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  a  cause  of  great  astonishment  to  God  ;  as  if  there  waa 
something  too  selfish,  too  cruel,  too  unbrotherly  in  it  to  be  believed ;  as  if  men  could 
not  be  so  careless  of  what  was  good  and  right.     "  The  Lord  saw  it,  and  it  displeased 
Him  that  there  was  no  judgment,  and  He  saw  there  was  no  man,  and  wondered  that 
there  was  no  intercessor."     He  says,  "And  I  looked,  and  there  was  none  to  help  ; 
and  I  wondered  that  there  was  none  to  uphold,"     He  says  again,  "The  people  of 
the  land  have  used  oppression,"  etc.  (Ezek.  xxii.  29,  30).     And  here  it  shoiild  be 
distinctly  observed  that  the  taking  an  interest  in  things  beyond  the  narrow  limits 
of  our  own  personal  affairs  is  an  interest  full  of  tender  concern,  of  self-abnegation,  of 
brotherly  love.     Many  a  harsh  man  can  look  over  his  own  boundary  walls  to  grumble 
and  find  fault ;  but  it  was  not  the  want  of  that  of  which  Isaiah  complained.     Many 
can  sit  in  judgment  and  condemn ;  but  it  was  not  judgment  of  that  kind  that  he 
wanted.     He  did  not  want  any  one  bitterly  to  point  out  the  Church's  faults, 
heartlessly  to  mock  at  her  nakedness  and  poverty,  self-righteously  to  cry  shame  upou 
her  sins — he  wanted  a  man  to  pray  for  her.    When  there  was  no  man  who  oould  or 


CKAP.  I2IV.]  ISAIAH.  445 

would  shake  off  Ms  selfish  indolence  to  pray  for  the  Church,  the  prophet  himself  said, 
"  For  Zion's  sake  I  will  not  hold  my  peace,"  etc.  Then,  as  if  ne  were  confident  of 
success,  and  saw  the  fruits  of  his  prayers,  and  tears,  and  toils,  he  says,  "And  the 
Grentiles  shall  see  Thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  Thy  glory,"  etc.  (chap.  Ixii.  2-4). 
How  different  this  attitude  towards  the  Church  to  the  cold  selfishness  which  stands 
aloof  altogether,  or  comes  from  its  seclusion  only  to  complain,  and,  by  disturbance,  to 
make  bad  worse  !  How  different  from  the  worldiiness  which  is  content  for  the  Church 
also  to  be  worldly  ;  for  her  glory  to  be  hidden  by  carnal  pleasures  and  carnal  things  ! 
How  different  from  the  mere  denominational  fervour — the  fervour  for  church  or 
chapel,  which  is  satisfied  with  outside  show  and  with  prosperity  that  can  be  measured, 
and  cares  little  or  nothing  for  the  growth  of  faith,  hope  and  love,  for  the  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  for  the  salvation  of  souls  !  For  Isaiah  is  bent  upon  seeing  a 
Church  whose  righteousness  should  go  forth  as  brightness,  whose  salvation  should 
go  forth  as  a  burning  lamp  ;  on  whose  glory  the  Gentiles  and  kings  should  look  ; 
which  should  be  named  by  a  new  name  by  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  Himself,  a  name 
indicating  the  delightful  change  that  has  passed  over  her,  and  the  new  relation  in 
which  she  stands  to  God  and  man.  And  surely  it  is  worth  any  Christian's  while 
to  take  up  any  good  cause  in  this  sympathetic  way ;  to  identify  himself  with  it ;  to 
become  responsible  for  it  before  God  and  man  and  his  own  conscience.  To  do  so  ia 
to  follow  the  example  of  aU  the  noblest  and  holiest  of  our  race,  it  is  to  follow  the 
example  of  "Him  who,  though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  became  poor,  that  we, 
through  His  poverty,  might  be  rich,"  identifying  Himself  in  the  most  absolute 
manner  with  our  nature  and  our  condition,  until  He  redeemed  us  from  all  oar 
sins,  and  raised  us  to  sit  at  His  right  hand  in  His  kingdom.  {J.  P.  Gledstone,) 
Takitig   hold  upon  God: — The    prophet   reveals    the  very  essence    and  soul  of 

Srayer.  It  .is  a  stirring  up  of  one's  self  to  take  hold  of  God.  The  very  soul  of 
evotion  lies  in  realizing  the  Divine  presence,  in  dealing  with  God  as  a  real  person, 
in  firm  confidence  in  His  faithfulness, — in  a  word,  in  "taking  hold  of  Him."  Men 
do  not  take  hold  of  a  shadow,  they  cannot  grasp  the  unsubstantial  fabric  of  a 
dream.  Taking  hold  implies  something  real  which  we  grasp  ;  and  there  is  wanted 
to  make  prayer  truthful  and  acceptable  with  God  the  grip  and  grasp  of  a  tenacious 
faith,  which  believes  the  fact  that  God  is,  and  that  He  is  the  rewarder  of  them  that 
diligently  seek  Him.  Taking  hold  implies  a  reverent  familiarity  with  the  Lord,  by 
which  we  use  a  holy  force  to  win  a  blessing  from  His  hand.  Laying  hold  upon  God 
is  not  the  act  of  a  dead  man,  neither  is  it  the  deed  of  one  who  is  destitute  of  spiritual 
perception  ;  it  isithe  act  of  one  who  is  quickened  and  kept  alive  by  the  indwelling 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Men  wUl  do  anything  sooner  than  stir  up  themselves  to 
take  hold  of  God :  they  will  bmld  churches,  and  rear  altars,  and  say  masses  and 
perform  pilgrimages,  and  a  thousand  other  things,  but  they  do  not  want  God,  and 
will  not  have  Him.  It  is  great  condescension  on  the  Lord's  part  that  He  should 
permit  it  to  be  so,  but  so  it  is,  and  when  He  bares  His  right  arm  to  smite  you  your 
safety  lies  in  grasping  that  very  hand  which  apparently  is  lifted  for  your  destruction. 
I.  Tne  first  form  of  taking  hold,  that  which  is  intended  in  the  text,  is  that  in  which 
THE  AWAKENED  SINNER  TAKES  HOLD  UPON  GoD.  II.  We  Very  greatly  need  to  have 
among  us  many  thorough  believers  who  take  hold  upon  God  by  fidelity  to 
Him.  I  have  seen  applied  to  Calvin  the  motto,  ' '  He  took  fast  hold. "  If  ever  a  man 
did  take  fast  hold  on  invisible  things,  it  was  that  famous  reformer.  What  he  grasped 
he  held  with  force  of  clear  conviction,  intelligent  apprehension,  and  devout  reverence. 
Snch  a  man  opens  his  Bible  and  resolves  to  find  out  what  God's  will  is,  and  b« 
judges  for  himself,  for  he  knows  that  he  wiU  have  to  render  a  personal  account. 
Such  a  man  sets  himself  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  impelled  by  inward  zeal. 
Having  obtained  a  solid  fulcrum  of  assured  knowledge,  he  now  begins  to  use  his  lever 
and  work  upon  others.  He  knows  that  he  cannot  be  placed  where  God  is  not,  and 
therefore  he  feels  that  his  best  Friend  is  always  near.  He  is  a,  man  that  caUeth 
upon  God,  not  merely  in  prayer,  but  by  confessing  His  name,  and  owning  His 
cause  ;  and  he  stirs  up  himself  to  take  hold  upon  God  in  the  doing  of  all  these  things. 
III.  We  take  a  step  nirther  in  advance  when  we  mention  a  third  form  of  this  taking 
hold  of  God :  We  need  a  development  in  the  form  of  the  wrestling  pleader. 
The  expression  is  borrowed  from  Jacob  at  the  brook  of  Jabbok.  A  man  who  can 
take  hold  of  God  in  prayer  wiU  be  of  the  utmost  value  to  the  Church.  IV.  The 
fourth  point  ia  the  taking  hold  of  (Jod  by  the  strengthened  believer  :  the 
man  who  has  got  beyond  doubts  and  fears,  and  grasped  the  eternal  verities. 
No  question  now  as  to  whether  there  is  a  God  or  no :  he  knows  Him,  speaks  with 
Him,  walks  with  Him.    He  is  quite  sore  about  Grod's  keeping  His  promises,  he  dares 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lxw/ 

not  doubt  that,  for  ha  has  had  too  many  proofe  already  of  the  faithfulness  of  God 
for  him  to  distrust  Him.  Now,  see  how  steadily  that  man  mores  about :  trial  does 
not  bow  him  down,  he  expected  it,  and  he  expects  to  be  delivered  out  of  it.  If  you 
rush  in  upon  him  with  the  most  terrible  information  it  does  not  distress  him,  for 
*'he  is  not  afraid  of  evil  tidings ;  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord."  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Delivered  unto  iniquity: — For  "hast  consimied,"  read  "hast  delivered 
us  into  the  hand  of  our  iniquities."  Their  sin  has  been  allowed  by  God  to  breed 
deeper  sin.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Melted  into  the  hands  of  iniquity : — We  may 
suppose  with  Rosenmiiller  that  the  phrase  strictly  means.  Thou  dost  melt  us  into 
the  hand  of  our  iniquities,  i.  e.  subject  us  to  them,  make  us  unable  to  resist  them, 
and  passively  submissive  to  their  power.    {J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Ver.  8.  But  now,  0  Lord.  Thou  art  our  Father. — God  our  King-FatJier : — ("Our 
Lord,  Thou  art  our  Father'  with  "the  Lord  is  our  King,"  chap,  xxxiii.  22).  That 
conviction  of  a  living  God,  as  distinguished  from  the  lifeless  one,  which  is  all  that 
many  have,  made  up  of  a  mere  bundle  of  catechetical  doctrines,  will  create  a 
demand  for  many  other  convictions  besides.  For,  mark  what  question  presses,  so 
soon  as  God  has  been  revealed  to  the  soul ;  it  is  the  deeply  self-interested  one, 
In  what  relation,  or  relations,  does  this  almighty  and  glorious  One  stand  to  the 
individual's  self?  The  answer  given  by  our  two  texts,  and  much  of  the  Scripture 
besides,  is,  that  He  is  related  to  each  or  us  both  as  a  Father  and  a  King.  Now, 
not  only  is  there  no  contrariety  betwixt  the  ideas  of  these  two  relations ;  but, 
properly,  there  is  no  sentiment  in  the  one  which  the  other  does  not  contain  in  some 
degree.  Nevertheless,  the  idea  of  a  Father  contains  more  prominently  the  sentiment 
of  bountiful  and  tender  cherishing ;  when  that  of  a  King  contains  more  prominently 
that  of  regulation  and  control ;  and  it  is  not  tiU  we  have  combined  them  that 
we  can  form  an  adequate  conception  of  the  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  us. 
(fF.  Anderson,  LL.D.)  Our  King-Father  or  Father-King  the  memorial  of  Ood:— 
Some  may  say  they  are  identical ;  nor  would  I  deny,  with  much  warmth,  they  are. 
But  when  the  better  mode  of  impressing  the  heart  is  the  subject  of  inquiry,  not 
a  little  depends,  I  am  persuaded,  on  the  order  in  which  the  two  ideas  of  the  complex 
relation  are  presented.  1.  Even  metaphysically  He  is  first  our  Father  and  then  our 
King :  the  idea  of  the  Divine  paternity  is  the  principal  one,  and  that  of  the  royalty 
the  subordinate  and  qualifying  one  :  He  begets  us  as  children  before  He  rules  us  as 
subjects.  2.  But,  whatever  may  be  the  state  of  the  question  metaphysically,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that,  in  respect  of  practical  and  salutary  effect  on  the  heart,  the 
assigning  of  the  place  of  primary  consideration  to  the  relation  of  Father  has  a 
decided  advantage.  When  men  ask  you.  Who  is  God  ?  let  your  reply  be.  He  is  our 
Father.  And  when  they  say.  Is  He  not  your  King  also  ?  let  your  reply  again  be.  He 
is  ;  but  first  our  Father,  and  more  our  Father  than  anything  else.  Even  a  heathen 
could  say,  as  an  apostle  has  approvingly  told  us,  "We  are  also  His  offspring." 
Although,  in  respect  of  our  corporeal  frames,  we  are  in  the  predicament  of  the 
inferior  animals ;  yet  in  respect  of  the  nobler  part  of  our  constitutions — the 
inmiortal  soul — in  virtue  of  which,  especially,  we  bear  the  Divine  image,  that  has 
been  communicated  to  us  du-ectly,  by  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  (Eccles.  xii.  7). 
8.  The  thought  is  both  solemnizing  and  animating  ;  let  us  improve  it  to  the  ends  of 
having  our  sense  of  responsibility  deepened  for  filial  reverence  and  obedience — for 
upholding  the  honour  of  God's  family,  by  the  purity,  the  elevation,  and  dignity  of 
our  characters — and,  also,  for  our  treatment  of  all  mankind  as  being  of  a  Divine 
parentage.  4.  But  it  is  especially  in  respect  of  confidence  in  His  loving-kindness, 
that  I  call  at  present  for  improvement  of  the  meditation.  {Ibid.)  God  the  Father- 
King  in  redemption: — 1.  Who  is  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know  that  cold  parental 
displeasure  and  warm  parental  affection  are  frequently  found  co-existent ;  and  who 
cannot  easily  conceive  the  truth  of  the  following  case  ?  I  knew  a  father  who,  after 
having  long  remonstrated  in  vain  with  a  profligate  son — from  abhorrence  of  the 
sight  and  hearing  of  his  abominations  and  profanities,  and  from  respect  to  his  own 
and  family's  peace  and  honom",  tm-ned  him  out  of  his  house,  and  would  not  acknow- 
ledge him  when  he  met  him  on  the  street.  All  the  time  he  wept  and  prayed  for 
him  in  secret,  and  gave  directions  to  a  friend  to  take  care  that  his  wretched  boy 
should  never  suffer  from  want.  Is  the  paternity  of  the  human  father  more  tender 
and  amiable  than  that  of  the  Divine  ?  Hear  how  He  himself  vindicates  His  parental 
character :  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  "  etc.  (Hosea  xi.  8).  2.  And  yet 
hitherto  I  have  not,  properly,  announced  one  syllable  of  the  tidings  of  the  GospeL 
Nature  and  reason  might  have  sufficed  for  conducting  us  all  the  length  we  have 


OKAP.  LZIT.]  ISAIAH.  447 

gone.  We  need  other  gnidanoe  for  proceeding  further.  I  stopped  short  in  my 
simple  story  about  that  yoimg  man.  What  became  of  him !  well,  he  repented ; 
returned  to  his  father's  door,  with  humble  confessions,  and  earnest  promises  of 
future  well-doing ;  was  taken  in  ;  and  great  was  the  joy  that  night  throughout  that 
dwelling.  Now  observe,  that  though  the  parallel  does  not  terminate  here,  when 
tracing  the  analogy  of  the  recovery  of  an  outcast  from  the  family  of  God,  yet  both 
lines  receive  the  accession  of  new  elements.  On  the  part  of  God,  there  is  the 
accession  of  the  element  of  His  royal  character :  and  on  the  part  of  the  sinner,  the 
accession  of  the  element  of  faith  in  a  Mediator.  The  explanation  is  most  important : 
it  contains  the  secret  of  our  salvation.  Mark,  therefore,  that  God  does  not  re-admit 
the  prodigal  to  Hia  family,  as  an  earthly  father  does,  merely  on  accovmt  of  his 
repentance  ;  because,  beside  being  a  Father,  He  is  a  King.  Consider,  then,  how  this 
aoditional  relationship  of  royalty  is  produced,  and  how  it  affects  the  Divine  pro- 
cedure. An  earthly  father's  administration  of  his  family  is  a  matter  of  privacy. 
Public  interests  are  not  concerned  in  it ;  and  he  may  do  with  his  own  what  pleases 
his  humour.  He  may  open  his  door  and  re-admit  the  prodigal,  even  without  any 
repentance  or  confession,  if  he  choose.  But  God's  fainily  being  the  Public — the 
universal  Public  of  created,  moral  intelligence ;  though  this  does  not  affect  the 
personal  love  of  the  administrator,  yet  does  it  materially  affect  the  mode  of  the 
administration.  The  family  of  children  has  enlarged  into  a  kingdom  of  subjects  ;  and 
though  it  be  a  Father's  heart,  it  must  be  a  King's  policy  by  which  the  administration 
is  conducted.  David's  parental  heart  said.  Spare  the  young  man  Absalom  ;  his  royal 
policy  commissioned  the  army  to  fight  him  down  as  a  rebel.  3.  What,  then,  is  the 
state  of  our  parallel  now  ?  It  was  suflBcient  for  the  re-admission  of  the  prodigal 
into  the  earthly  father's  house  that  he  should  be  penitent.  But  the  order  of  all 
good  government  of  a  kingdom  is,  that  the  violation  of  the  laws  shall  be  visited 
with  penal  suffering,  before  there  be  a  restoration  to  the  privileges  of  citizenship. 
Behold  the  mystery  of  our  redemption !  And  see  the  advantage  of  our  having 
assumed  the  paternity  of  God  as  His  primary  and  most  characteristic  relationship. 
It  is  this  paternity  which,  humanly  speaking,  goes  in  quest  of  means  for  saving  us  ; 
and  returns,  exclaiming  in  triumph,  "Save  from  going  down  to  the  pit,  for  I  have 
found  a  ransom."  When  we  commence  with  the  royal  relationship,  and  make  that 
the  primary  characteristic,  there  is  danger  that  God  may  appear  as  Iseing  but  coldly 
passive  in  the  work  of  our  salvation.  But  when  we  commence  with  the  paternity 
of  God,  we  more  easily  discover  Him  warmly  active  in  the  work  of  our  salvation  ; 
with  all  a  Father's  self-interested  love  devising  and  executing  its  scheme.  Having 
found  the  means  of  ransom  in  the  substitutionary  death  of  His  Son  incarnated.  He 
brings  it  to  us,  that  we  may  carry  it  away  for  presentation  at  the  tribunal  of  His 
government.  4.  TMs  representation  will  explain,  as  clearly  as  any  other,  the  nature, 
the  necessity,  and  the  efficacy  of  faith.  As  being  that  principle  which  gives  credit 
to  the  Divine  testimony,  it  lays  hold  of  the  sacrifice  which  God's  paternal  mercy 
has  provided,  and  pleads  with  His  royal  justice  that  it  be  accepted  as  compensation 
for  our  transgressions.  Mark  the  necessity  of  such  faith.  The  gift  which  God  has 
made  of  Christ  to  "sinners  of  mankind"  universally  is  not  the  gift  of  pardon,  but 
of  the  means  of  pardon,  to  be  used  to  that  end  ;  and  used  by  the  sinner  himself : 
for  it  would  be  unholy  government  to  pardon  a  rebel,  whatever  might  be  the 
amplitude  of  satisfaction  proffered  on  his  behalf  by  another,  if  he  himself  despised 
or  made  light  of  the  transaction.  5.  Observe,  now,  a  second  time,  the  advantage 
of  giving  the  paternal  relation  of  God  the  first  place  in  our  meditation  on  His 
character.  In  virtue  of  this,  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  is  not  so  much  the 
proclamation  of  a  King,  declaring  that  no  man  shall  be  saved  except  through  faith 
in  that  sacrifice  ;  as  it  is  the  earnest  entreaty  of  a  Father  that  His  children  should 
believe,  so  as  to  be  saved  ;  when  His  paternal  love  shall  enjoy  them  in  their  recovery 
to  His  home  ;  yea,  enjoy  them.  It  is  much  for  a  child  to  enjoy  his  parent ;  but  it 
is  more  for  a  parent  to  enjoy  his  child,  as  an  object  on  which  he  may  lavish  his 
affection  ;  and  with  aU  the  yearnings  of  His  paternity  does  God  beseech  the  sinner 
to  afford  Him  this  Divine  satisfaction.  6.  Having  explained  the  doctrine  of  God's 
paternal  love,  I  now  call  for  its  correlative  duty,  filial  confidence  on  the  part  of  His 
children.  7.  When  this  first  principle  of  parental  honour,  confidence  in  God,  is 
secured,  the  honouring  of  Him,  which  consists  in  obedience,  follows  naturally  and 
necessarily.  {Ibid.)  We  are  the  clay  and  Thou  our  Potter. — Clay  and  Potter: — 
The  nearest  parallel  to  this  application  of  the  common  image  of  clay  and  potter  is, 
perhaps.  Job  x.  9.  It  is  the  plea  of  the  creature  against  seeming  imreasonablenesa 
on  the  part  of  the  Creator.     Can  the  Potter  allow  Uie  work  on  which  Ha  has 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxih. 

Iftviflhed  His  utmost  skill  and  care  to  be  broken  in  pieces  ?  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.y 
Lessons  from  a  pottery : — Many  years  ago  it  was  my  privilege  to  visit  the  porcelain 
works  at  Worcester,  and  there  I  learned  most  of  what  1  know  about  the  potter  and 
his  art.  We  were  first  taken  into  a  large  showroom,  where  there  were  displayed  the 
finished  products  of  the  potter's  skill  and  labour.  Here  we  were  glad  to  spend  some 
time  in  looking  upon  the  beauty  and  loveliness  which  the  potter  had  created.  In 
thinking  upon  what  waa  exhibited  there,  what  can  be  learned  about  the  potter  and 
his  art  with  a  view  to  understanding  the  work  and  grace  of  our  heavenly  Father  a» 
our  Potter  ?  There  were  two  things  that  deeply  impressed  me.  The  fixst  was  the 
almost  unlimited  variety  secured  oy  the  potter  in  his  workmanship.  There  were 
not  two  pieces  exactly  afike.  Everywhere  you  perceived  the  mind  of  the  potter  on 
the  stretch,  seeking  to  attain  all  possible  variety  of  form,  design  and  ornamentation. 
I  said  to  myself:  "  Well,  there  is  one  thing  very  clear  about  the  earthly  potter — he 
has  determined  that  in  his  work  there  shall  be  an  utmost  absence  of  repetition, 
monotony,  similarity.  By  infinite  variety  he  reveals  his  skill  and  the  frmtfulnesa 
of  his  mind. "  If  God  is  our  Potter,  are  we  to  think  of  Him  in  this  respect  as  like 
unto  the  earthly  potter  ?  Go  to  His  work  in  Nature.  How  much  of  monotony  is 
there  in  any  department  of  God's  creation?  What  does  that  mean  for  us  I  It 
means  a  very  great  deal  for  Christian  life.    As  a  young  Christian,  I  had  a  way  of 

greatly  adnming  other  people.  If  I  saw  any  person  of  decided  and  beautiful 
hristian  character,  my  neaoi;  was  impressed.  But  the  mistake  was  that  I  alsa 
wanted  to  be  like  them  !  And  if  I  saw  any  one  doing  a  particular  work  for  God  I 
wanted  to  do  something  similar.  This  longmg  to  be  like  other  people  became  a  great 
curse  and  hindrance.  Then  God  had  pity  upon  me,  and  showed  me  the  mistake 
of  it  all,  and  said  to  me :  "  I  do  not  want  to  make  you  like  anvbody  else  in  the 
universe  ;  I  want  to  make  you  something  diflFerent  from  even^body  else  ; "  and  He 
graciously  persuaded  me  to  give  myself  up  to  Him,  to  let  Him  make  me  the  one 
thing  He  wished  to  see  me.  No  greater  deliverance  ever  came  into  my  life  than 
that.  Do  not  try  to  be  like  anybody.  Do  not  be  one  of  a  set.  It  would  be  a 
thousand  pities  to  go  to  heaven,  and  for  the  angels  to  say :  "  We  have  seen  this  sort 
before  !  "  It  will  not  be  Christ's  fault  if  that  should  happen  in  your  case.  There 
is  something  that  God  waaits  to  make  each  one  of  us  that  shall  reveal  His  gloiy  in 
a  way  that  nobody  else  does.  The  second  thing  to  be  noted  about  the  work  of  the 
potter  is  this :  His  whole  aim  is  to  make  of  the  clay,  not  a  vessel  for  its  own  use, 
but  a  vessel  for  the  joy  and  service  of  others.  Let  us  realize  that  Christ  is  in  our 
lives  to  turn  them  outward  1  When  we  had  spent  some  time  in  the  shovrroom,  our 
guide  bade  us  follow  him.  He  at  once  led  us  through  a  door  out  into  the  works. 
What  a  change  !  We  were  now  amid  the  noise  and  splash  and  dirt.  First  of  all 
he  directed  our  attention  to  a  shelf,  on  which  were  some  half-dozen  lumps  of  what 
might  be  described  as  glass  and  chalk  and  clay.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  were 
different  kinds  of  clay.  "All  you  have  just  seen  inside  there  has  been  made  out  of 
such  materials."  Who  had  bridged  the  gulf  between  the  shapeless  clay  and  the 
beautiful  vessel?  The  potter — that  is  what  he  is  for.  "We  are  the  clay" — the 
thing  of  possibility  only.  The  Lord  is  the  Potter  ;  and  He  can  take  the  clay,  and 
by  His  skill  and  power  and  grace,  make  it  into  a  thing  of  joy  and  beauty  for  ever- 
more. But  our  guide  soon  led  us  on,  and  we  saw  something  of  the  processes  of  the 
potter's  art.  One  of  the  first  things  he  did  with  the  clay  was  to  put  it  into  a  mill, 
where  it  was  ground  for  a  week,  ground  until  it  was  so  fine  that  it  would  past 
through  silk  with  hundreds  of  meshes  to  the  square  inch.  If  the  clay  could  hare 
thought,  how  puzzled  it  would  have  been  !  It  would  have  said :  "  There  was  some- 
thing  of  me  once,  but  I  am  coming  to  nothing  now.  I  caught  a  glimpse  through 
that  open  door  of  all  those  lovely  vessels  and  vases,  and  I  thought  the  potter  wa» 
going  to  make  me  into  one  such  as  they  ;  but  here  it  is  only  grind  I  grind  1  grind  I 
What  does  it  all  mean  ? "  Experiences  very  much  like  that  come  to  the  soul  that 
has  surrendered  itself  to  God.  The  methods  and  processes  of  the  heavenly  Potter 
are  at  times  very  perplexing,  and  in  no  discerned  relation  to  the  desired  end.  Be 
quite  sure  that  God  understends  His  own  work  1  Trust  Him.  The  next  thing  that 
struck  me  was  the  large  use  which  the  potter  made  of  fire.  I  cannot  tell  vou  how 
many  times  the  porcelain  was  put  into  the  fire  before  it  was  finished.  But  tnere  waa 
this  remarkable  thing :  it  was  never  put  into  the  fire  unshielded.  It  was  always 
enclosed  in  a  strong  outer  vessel,  closely  sealed,  so  that  the  fire  did  its  work,  and  yet 
no  hurt  came  to  the  porcelain.  Into  the  fire  of  trial  and  suffering  Grod,  our  Potter, 
pats  OS  all ;  bat  He  never  puts  na  in  unshielded.  When  this  white  porcelain  had 
oeMi  taken  through  a  great  many  prooesaes,  it  was  put  into  the  hands  of  skilM 


«KAr.  XJOT.]  JSAIAH.  448 

artists,  whose  work  it  was  to  adorn  it  with  the  glory  of  colour  and  design  with 
which  we  are  all  familiar.  When  the  porcelain  left  the  hands  of  the  artist,  the 
finger  of  a  child  could  have  brushed  awav  all  that  he  had  painted  upon  it.  But  our 
guide  explained  that  the  porcelain  would  go  into  the  fire,  and  that  the  fire  would 
open  its  "pores,"  and  take  in  the  colouring,  so  that  what  the  painter  had  put  on  it 
would  become  part  of  the  very  vessel  itself.  That  illustrated  to  me  this  great  truth, 
that  we  never  become  better  people  by  merely  knowing  more.  New  truth  in  the 
mind  is  like  the  colouring  upon  the  porcelain,  and  some  failure  of  memory  may 
remove  it.  But  God's  way  is,  when  we  have  got  a  new  truth,  to  lead  us  into  some 
trial,  some  fire,  that  will  make  that  truth  part  of  our  very  manhood.  Lastly,  we 
were  taken  into  another  room,  and  there  the  artists  were  all  busy  working  with  a 
black  fluid,  which  they  were  putting  on  the  beautiful,  pure,  white  porcelain.  I  said 
to  our  guide,  "  What  are  they  doing  here ! "  Apparently  they  were  disfiguring  the 
porcelain.  His  answer  was  :  "  They  are  putting  on  the  gilt !  When  the  porcelain 
goes  into  the  fire,  this  black  that  you  see  upon  it  now  will  be  transformed  into  gilt." 
There  are  times  when  God  seems  to  be  disfiguring  the  lives  of  his  people.  What  is 
He  doing  t    Putting  on  the  gilt.     {O.  C.  Moore.) 

Yet.  9.  Be  not  wroth  very  sore,  0  Lord. — God's  torath  deprecated: — I.  Thb 
EVIL  DEPRECATED.  God's  anger.  1.  Merited.  2.  Acknowledged.  II.  Thb 
TERMS  IN  WHICH  IT  IS  DEPRECATED.  1.  Imply  the  justicc  of  God's  procedure.  2. 
Beseech  a  limitation  of  its  severity.  III.  The  plea  by  which  it  is  deprecated. 
1.  Humble.  2.  Confident.  3.  Founded  on  God's  covenant  relation  to  His  people. 
{Homiletic  Commentary.) 

Yer.  11.  Oar  holy  and  oar  beautiful  house,  where  oar  fathers  praised  Thee,  ii 
bomed  up  with  fire. — The  burnt  temple: — I.  Here  is  pathetic  lamentation. 
1.  The  children  of  Israel  regarded  the  temple  as  their  own  house.  They  spoke  of  it 
as  God's  house.  But  because  it  was  God's  it  was  their  own,  for  they  were  God's  ;  and 
all  that  particularly  belonged  to  Him  had  a  special  interest  for  them,  and  they  had 
a  special  claim  in  it.  2.  This  temple  was  sacred  in  the  people's  eyes.  The  prophet 
calls  it,  "our  holy  house."  It  was  really  so.  3.  The  Jews,  exiled  abroad,  thought 
of  yonder  ruined  house  where  their  fathers  praised  the  Lord.  There  is  no  attachment 
stronger  than  that  which  exists  between  men  and  women,  sons  and  daughters  of 
Christian  fathers  and  mothers,  who  are  worshipping  in  the  place  where  their 
predecessors  worshipped.  4.  All  their  pleasant  things  were  laid  waste.  II.  Here 
is  affectionate  expostitlation.  "  Wilt  Thou  refrain  Thyself  ? "  etc.  The  plain 
English  of  it  is,  "  Canst  Thou  bear  to  see  this.  Lord  ?  Does  it  not  affect  Thee  as  it 
does  us  1  Hast  Thou  no  sighs,  no  groans,  no  tears  1  And  if  Thou  hast,  wilt  Thou 
not  pluck  Thy  hand  from  out  Thy  bosom  and  help  us  ?  Wilt  Thou  not  open  Thy 
lips  and  speak  a  word  of  peace  ?  We  cannot  bear  Thy  silence.  Lord.  Wilt  Thou 
hold  Thy  peace,  and  afflict  us  very  sore  ? "  (7*.  Spurgeon. )  All  our  pleasant  things 
are  laid  waste. — Religious  things,  pleasant  things: — The  ordinances  of  religion  are, 
to  the  Israel  of  God,  "pleasant  things."  I.  What  are  they?  1,  In  the  number 
of  their  pleasant  things,  they  include  the  sanctuary.  To  them  the  temple  is  not  a 
prison,  a  place  of  confinement  and  correction  ;  but  the  house  of  their  heavenly 
Father,  their  "holy  and  beautiful  house;"  beautifal  because  holy.  2.  In  the 
number  of  their  "  pleasant  things  "  they  include  Sabbaths.  To  many,  indeed,  God's 
holy  day  is  uninviting,  and  even  irksome.  But  the  Christian  "calls  the  Sabbath  a 
delight,  and  considers  the  holy  of  the  Lord  honourable."  To  him  it  is  a  time  of 
refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ;  a  weekly  jubilee  :  and,  wearied  with  the 
toils,  and  follies,  and  vexations  of  the  world,  he  hails  a  day  of  seclusion  from  it.  3. 
Are  not  the  Scriptures  some  of  their  ' '  pleasant  things  "  ?  4.  This,  too,  will  apply 
to  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  5.  They  find  it  a  pleasant  thing  to  approach  God  in 
prayer,  and  to  "come  before  His  presence  with  singing" — a  pleasant  thing  to 
surround  His  table,  and  to  refresh  their  minds  with  the  memonals  of  a  Saviour's 
dying  love — to  be  in  the  circle  of  pious  friends,  and  hear  from  their  lips  "what  God 
has  done  for  their  souls."  II,  How  they  become  so  powerfully  attractive. 
For  it  is  certain  they  are  not  so  imiversally :  by  numbers  they  are  not  only  neglected, 
but  despised.  Whence,  then,  do  real  Christians  find  them  so  pleasing  ?  1.  There  is 
in  them  a  suitableness  to  their  dispositions.  Thus  we  know  music  charms  those  who 
have  an  ear  for  it.  Money  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  the  covetous ;  honour  to  the 
ambitious ;  scandal  to  the  slanderous.  In  all  these  instances  there  is  something 
that  meets  the  taste  ;  and  that  which  gratifies  always  delights.     So  it  is  here.    The 

you  III.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRJ.TOS.  [chap.  uct. 

pleasure  of  the  Ohristian  does  not  depend  upon  persuasion — but  inclination.  2, 
Experience  is  another  source  of  this  pleasure.  3.  Continual  need  also  renders  them 
pleasant  things.  III.  Review  what  we  have  said — and  learn — 1.  To  justify 
religion  from  the  reproaches  of  the  world.  The  world  pretends  that  the  services 
which  religion  demands  of  us  are  all  slavery  and  gloom.  But  if  you  are  willing  to 
enter  in,  "let  no  man's  heart  fail  him."  2.  Let  us  try  ourselves  bv  this  rule.  A 
man  may  want  assurance  and  stiU  be  in  a  state  of  safety  :  but  if  he  be  habitually  a 
stranger  to  pleasure  in  Divine  things,  and  can  pass  through  all  the  services  of  religion 
as  a  mere  formalist,  it  is  an  awful  proof  that  "  he  has  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter ; 
his  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God. "  A  number  of  speculative  opinions,  cold 
ceremonies,  cheap  moralities,  in  which  the  affections  have  no  share,  can  never  be  a 
substitute  for  real  devotion.  3.  What  an  affliction  do  Christians  sustain  when  they 
are  deprived  of  their  '  *  pleasant  things  "  !  This  may  be  done  in  two  ways.  (1 )  By  the 
removal  of  these  privileges  from  them.  Thus  persecution  has  sometimes  forbidden 
them  to  assemble  together,  and  has  silenced  their  preachers,  destroyed  their  sanctu- 
aries, and  banished  all  religious  ordinances  from  a  neighbourhood.  God  sometimes 
inflicts  His  judgments  upon  a  place  for  neglect  and  abuse  of  Gospel  privileges.  (2) 
By  removing  Christians  from  these  privileges.  Thus  business  may  call  them  away 
from  a  favoured  situation,  accidents  or  sickness  may  detain  them  prisoners  from  the 
courts  of  the  Lord.  4.  Let  us  be  very  thankful  that  these  "pleasant  things"  are 
within  our  reach — that  we  have  been  so  long  favoured  with  them — that  we  have 
them  in  so  rich  an  abundance — that  we  have  liberty  to  partake  of  them — and 
strength  to  go  forth  and  enjoy  them.  5.  Let  us  raise  our  thoughts  and  desires  after 
the  "pleasant  things"  of  heaven.  Philip  Henry  often  said,  when  he  had  finished 
the  delightful  exercises  of  the  Sabbath,  "  WeU,  \i  this  be  not  the  way  to  heaven,  I 
know  not  what  is."  These  are  introductory  to  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed: 
they  are  foretastes  to  endear  it,  and  earnests  to  insure  it.     ( W.  Jay.) 

Ver.  12.  Wilt  Thou  refrain  Thyself  for  these  things,  0  lord  1 — Self-restraiTit  and 
sUenee,  as  applied  to  Qod,  are  common  figures  for  inaction  and  apparent  indifference 
to  the  interests,  and  especially  the  sufierings,  of  His  people.  {J.  A.  Alexander.) 
JeTiovah'a  mercy  cannot  violently  restrain  itself  longer ;  it  must  burst  forth,  like 
Joseph's  tears  in  the  recognition  scene  (Geu.  zlv.  1).    {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 


OHAPTEE  LXV. 


Teb.  1.  I  am  longlit  of  fhem  that  asked  not  for  Me. — JehovaVa  answer  to  the 
prayer  of  the  Chwrch : — The  supplication  is  ended ;  and  chap.  Ixv.  appears  to  be 
intended  as  the  answer — an  answer,  however,  in  which  a  distinction  is  drawn 
between  worthy  and  unworthy  members  of  Israel,  and  a  difiTerent  prospect  is  held  out 
to  each.  God  has  ever,  He  says,  been  accessible  to  His  people.  He  has  ever  been 
ready  to  renew  intercourse  with  them :  it  was  they  who  would  not  respond,  but 
provoked  Him  with  their  idolatries.  {Prof.  S.  E.  Driver,  D.D.)  A  nation  that  teas 
not  called  by  My  name: — "  A  nation  that  called  not  on  My  name."  The  reference  is 
to  those  among  the  people  who,  after  the  Eestoration,  still  practised  the  idolatries  of 
their  pre-exilic  forefathers.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  very  bold  prophecy : — We 
learn  on  inspired  authority  that  this  is  a  very  bold  passage  (Rom.  x.  20) ;  it  required 
much  courage  to  utter  it  at  the  first,  and  in  "Paul's  day  it  needed  still  more  to  quote 
it  and  press  it  home  upon  the  Jews  aroimd  him.  He  who  protests  against  a  self- 
righteous  people,  and  angers  them  by  showing  that  others  whom  they  despised  are 
saved  while  they  themselves  are  being  lost,  will  have  need  of  a  dauntless  spint. 
This  text  has  the  clear  ring  of  free  grace  about  it ;  and  for  this  reason  it  may  be 
called  bold.  I.  The  personality  of  God  in  the  work  op  Hia  grace.  This  is 
remarkably  prominent  in  the  work  before  us.  1.  The  personality  of  God  comes  forth 
in  that  He  Himself  is  observant  of  all  that  is  done.  Do  any  seek  him  ?  He  saith, 
"lam  sought."  Do  any  find  him  I  He  saith,  "I  am  found."  Is  there  any 
preaching  of  the  Gospel?  The  Lord  declares,  " Behold  Me,  behold  Me. "  2.  He 
Himself  is  the  great  object  of  desire  where  grace  is  in  operation.  When  men  are 
savingly  aroused,  they  seek — what  f    Religion  t    By  no  means.    They  seek  God,  if 


CHAP.  liv.]  ISAIAH.  451 

they  seek  aright.  The  Lord  saith,  "I  am  found."  If  men  do  not  find  God  they 
have  found  nothing.  God  Himself  fills  the  vision  of  faith  ;  observe  the  words, 
"  Behold  Me,  behold  Me."  We  look  to  God  in  Christ,  and  find  all  that  our  soul 
needs.  3.  He  Himself  is  the  Speaker  of  that  call  by  which  men  are  saved.  Here 
are  the  words:  "I  said,  Behold  Me,  behold  Me."  The  Lord  Himself  speaks  the 
effectual  word.  4.  He  Himself  is  the  director  of  the  message.  "  I  said,  Behold  Me, 
behold  Me,  unto  a  nation  that  was  not  called  by  My  name. "  Not  only  does  God 
speak  the  Gospel,  but  He  speaks  it  home  to  those  whom  He  appoints  to  hear  it. 
This  surrounds  the  Gospel  with  a  strange  solemnity  :  if  the  Gospel  blesses  us,  it  ia 
not  it,  but  God  that  blesses  :  God  Himself  has  come  unto  us.  This  fact  has  another 
aspect  to  it ;  for  if  the  Gospel  be  rejected,  it  is  God  that  is  rejected.  Read  the  next 
verse  :  "I  have  spread  out  My  hands  all  the  day  unto  a  rebellious  people."  II.  The 
DELIGHT  WHICH  GoD  TAKES  IN  THE  WORK  OF  GRACE.  God  is  glad  to  be  sought  and 
found  by  those  who  once  were  negligent  of  Him.  1.  It  is  evident  that  He  rejoices 
in  contrast  to  the  complaint  of  the  next  verse.  2.  The  Lord  rejoices  in  each  step  of 
the  process.  There  is  a  poor  soul  beginning  to  cry,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  Him  !  "  and  lo,  the  Lord  says,  "  I  am  sought."  A  man  has  only  just  begun  to 
attend  the  House  of  Prayer  ;  he  has  only  lately  commenced  the  earnest  study  of  the 
Bible  ;  the  Lord  sees  it,  and  He  says,  "  I  am  sought."  As  when  a  fisherman  smiles 
because  a  fish  has  begun  to  nibble  at  the  bait,  so  the  Lord  notes  the  first  movings  of 
the  heart  towards  Himself,  and  He  says,  "I  am  sought."  The  very  next  sentence 
is,  "I  am  found."  3.  The  Lord  also  rejoices  in  the  persons  who  seek  Him.  He 
says,  "  I  am  sought  of  them  that  asked  not  for  Me."  He  will  be  glad  for  any  heart 
to  keep  on  seeking  that  has  begun  to  seek  ;  but  He  is  best  pleased  when  non-seekers 
become  seekers.  4.  The  Lord  rejoices  in  the  numbers  who  seek  and  find  Him.  "  I 
said,  Behold  Me,  behold  Me,  unto  a  nation."  When  shall  the  day  come  that  nations 
shall  be  born  at  once  ?  III.  The  description  which  God  Himself  gives  of  the 
WORK  OF  grace.  1.  The  Lord  tells  us  where  He  finds  the  objects  of  His  grace.  He 
says,  "They  asked  not  for  Me  ;  they  sought  Me  not ;  they  were  not  called  by  My 
name."  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  He  comes  to  us  in  our  sin  and  misery  ;  for 
assuredly  we  should  not  else  come  to  Him.  2.  He  next  describes  that  Gospel  which 
comes  to  them  as  the  power  of  God.  Here  are  His  own  words  :  "I  said.  Behold  Me, 
behold  Me."  The  way  of  salvation  is,  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  aU  the  ends 
of  the  earth."  3.  Then  the  Lord  goes  on  to  mention  the  converts  which  the  Gospel 
makes.  The  careless  become  seekers,  the  ungodly  fijiders,  the  prayerless  behold 
their  God  and  live.  4.  The  Lord  also  describes  the  experience  of  the  saved.  God 
comes  to  us  that  we  may  come  to  Him.  IV.  The  use  which  God  makes  of  all 
this.  The  Lord  here  took  care  that  when  He  said,  "  I  am  sought  of  them  that 
asked  not  for  Me,"  His  words  should  be  written  down,  and  that  they  should  be 
made  known  to  us.  It  is  not  everything  that  God  may  say  to  Himself  that  He  will 
afterwards  repeat  to  us ;  but  here  these  private  utterances  of  the  Divine  heart  are 
spoken  out  to  vis  by  Isaiah,  and  left  on  record  in  this  inspired  Book.  To  what  end 
do  you  think  it  is  so  ?  1.  That  he  may  excite  in  us  wonder  and  admiration.  2.  To 
destroy  pride  and  self-esteem.  3.  To  encourage  you  who  are  seeking  Him :  for  if 
those  who  do  no<  seek  Him  often  find  Him,  why,  you  that  do  seek  Him  are  sure  to 
find  Him.  4.  To  encourage  workers.  Go  to  work  among  the  worst  of  the  worst ; 
for  since  God  is  found  of  those  who  seek  Him  not,  there  is  hope  for  the  vilest. 
5.  That  he  may  convict  those  who  do  not  come  to  Him  of  the  greatness  of  their  sin. 
Look,  saith  He,  those  who  never  heard  of  Me  before  have  found  salvation,  while  you 
who  have  been  instructed,  and  Invited,  and  impressed,  have  still  held  out  and 
resisted  My  Spirit.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  3-5.  A  people  that  provoked  Me  to  an^er. — Obstinacy  provokes  God's 
wrath : — By  rejecting  His  love  with  stiff-necked  obstinacy,  they  have  incurred  wrath, 
which,  though  long  and  patiently  restrained,  now  bursts  out  with  uncontrolled 
violence.  "The  people  that  continually  provokes  Me  to  My  face,  sacrificing  in  the 
gardens,  and  burning  incense  on  the  tiles,  who  sit  in  vaults  and  pass  the  night  in 
retired  places,  who  eat  flesh  of  swine,  and  broken  pieces  of  abominable  things  are  in 
their  dishes,  who  say  :  Halt  1  Gome  not  too  near  me  !  For  I  am  holy  to  thee, — 
these  are  a  smoke  in  My  nose,  a  fire  blazing  continually."  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.I).) 
Illegal  and  superstitious  cults: — The  reference  to  "bricks"  remains  unexplained; 
sitting  in  the  graves  was  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  oracles  or  dreams  from  the 
dead — the  so-called  "incubation."  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  "Broth  of  abominable 
ihi*gt" : — Such  creatures  as  are  enumerated  in  chap.  Lzvi  17.    The  "sacrifices  are 


451  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxt. 

boiled  and  yield  a  magical  hell-broth"  (W.  Bobertson  Smith).    (iV(/.  J,  Skiimert 
D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Which  Bay,  Stand  by  thyself. — "I  am  holier  them  thou  ": — For  **  I  am 
holier"  read,  probably,  "else  I  wil  make  thee  holy."  The  practices  referred  to 
■were  "mysteries,"  and  the  initiated  would  commimicate  his  "holiness"  to  otheps 
by  contact  with  them,  and  so  mifit  them  for  all  the  ordinary  uses  of  life  (cp.  Ezek. 
xliv.  19).  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Ver.  5  alludes  to  those  who  claimed  superior 
sanctity  in  virtue  of  certain  rites  into  which  they  had  been  initiated.  {Prof.  S.  R. 
Driver,  D.D.)  Self-righteousness, — a  smouldering  heap  of  rubbish : — The  application 
of  the  passage  to  Israel  is  just  thus.  Year  after  year  God  dealt  with  great  patience 
towards  His  chosen  people,  but  they  seemed  to  be  desperately  set  upon  idolatry  in 
one  form  or  another.  Sometimes  they  worshipped  Jehovah,  but  then  thej  did  it 
under  figure  and  symbol,  whereas  He  has  expressly  forbidden  that  even  His  own 
worship  should  be  thus  celebrated.  At  other  tmies  they  altogether  rejected  Jehovah, 
and  worshipped  Baal  and  Ashtaroth,  and  whole  troops  of  the  gods  of  the  heathen, 
and  thus  they  provoked  the  Lord  exceedingly.  They  also  practised  necromancy,  or 
pretended  communion  with  the  dead,  and  witchcraft  and  sorcery,  and  all  manner  of 
abominable  rites,  like  the  depraved  nations  around  them.  When  this  open  rebellion 
was  given  up,  as  it  was  after  the  captivity — for  the  Jews  have  never  been  guilty  of 
idolatry  since  that  day — they  fell  into  another  form  of  the  same  evil,  namely,  self- 
righteousness  :  so  that  when  our  Lord,  came  He  found  self-righteousness  to  be  the 
crying  sin  of  Israel,  the  Pharisees  carrying  it  to  such  a  pitch  as  to  render  it  utterly 
ridiculous.  They  reckoned  that  the  touch  of  a  common  person  polluted  their  sacred- 
ness,  80  that  they  needed  to  wash  after  walking  down  a  street.  When  they  traversed 
the  ways  they  took  the  edge  of  the  pavement,  so  that  they  might  not  brush  against 
the  garments  of  the  passers-by,  and  even  in  the  temple  in  prayer  they  stood  by 
themselves  lest  they  should  be  defiled.  Their  whole  spirit  is  expressed  in  the  words 
of  the  text — "  Stand  by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me  ;  for  I  am  holier  than  thou." 
liiis  God  declares  to  be  as  obnoxious  to  Him  as  smoke  in  a  man's  nose.  Self- 
righteousness  is  rampant  in  our  own  day.  I.  The  sin  of  self-righteousness 
GROWS  TIP  AMONG  RELlGiOTis  PEOPLE.  It  IS  not  always  the  sin  of  the  outside  world, 
for  many  outsiders  do  not  pretend  to  any  righteousness  at  all,  and  I  fancy  they 
think  all  the  better  of  themselves  for  that.  This  is  an  idle  plea  which  it  needs  not 
many  words  to  expose.  "  I  make  no  profession,"  says  one.  This  is  about  as  honour- 
able a  confession  as  if  a  thief  should  boast  when  caught  at  picking  pockets,  "  I  do 
not  make  any  pretence  to  be  honest,"  or  a  liar  when  detected  should  turn  round  and 
cry,  "I  never  professed  to  speak  the  truth."  Among  those  who  profess  to  be 
religious,  self-righteousness  very  frequently  comes  in,  because  they  have  not  truly 
received  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ ;  if  they  were  true  believers  they  would  be 
humble  and  contrite,  for  self-righteousness  and  faith  in  Christ  are  diametrically 
opposed.  Many  who  mingle  with  Christians,  and  are  religious  in  a  certain  sense 
because  they  practise  the  forms  of  religion,  are  wont  to  put  the  form  into  the  place 
of  the  spirit.  These  persons,  too,  even  when  they  do  not  join  the  Christian  Church, 
but  only  worship  or  seem  to  worship  with  Christians,  are  very  apt  to  think  that  they 
must  be  better  than  other  people  because  they  do  so.  It  is  the  danger  of  outwardly 
religious  people,  who  are  not  savingly  converted,  to  dream  that  they  are  somewhat 
advantaged  by  a  mere  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace.  Should  an  Egyptian  rub 
his  shoulders  against  an  Israelite,  would  it  turn  him  into  an  Israelite  ?  Will  living 
near  a  rich  man  make  you  rich  ?  Do  you  forget  that  cry  of  our  Lord,  "  Woe  unto 
thee,  Ohorazin.  Woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  "  ?  II.  This  is  a  sin  which  floukishes 
WHERE  OTHER  SINS  ABOUND.  We  read  of  these  people  that  they  did  evil  before  the 
eyes  of  God,  and  chose  that  wherein  He  delighted  not.  They  blasphemed  God,  and 
polluted  themselves  with  unhallowed  rites,  communing  witli  demons  and  the  powers 
of  darkness,  and  pretending  to  speak  with  departed  spirits  ;  and  yet  for  all  that 
they  said — "  Stand  by  thyself,  I  am  holier  than  thou."  Self- righteousness  is  never 
more  ridiculous  than  in  persons  whose  conduct  would  not  bear  scrutiny  for  a  moment. 
Self-righteous  men,  like  foxes,  have  many  tricks  and  schemes.  They  condemn  in 
other  people  what  they  consider  to  be  very  excusable  in  themselves.  These  people 
will  make  a  righteousness  this  way — they  plead  that  if  they  do  wrong  yet  there  are 
lome  points  in  which  they  are  splendia  fellows.  Some  one  thing  in  which  the 
nnoonverted  man  may  excel  is  put  in  to  make  up  for  his  deficiencies  in  a  hundied 
other  ways.  By  hook  or  by  crook  a  man  will  make  out  that  he  is  not  so  bad  as  he 
to  be ;  the  inventiveness  of  self-esteem  is  prodigions.    No  heap  of  rabbish  ii 


CHAP.  tzT.]  ISAIAH.  45S 

too  rotten  for  the  accursed  toadstool  of  proud  self  to  grow  upon.  III.  It  is  nr 
ITSELF  A  GREAT  SIN.  One  is  almost  startled  to  find  self-esteem  placed  after  such  a 
list  of  sins  as  this  chapter  records.  To  the  Jew  the  eating  of  swine's  flesh  and  broth 
of  abominable  things  was  a  great  pollution,  but  self-righteousness  is  classed  with  it ; 
it  is  even  placed  with  necromancy  and  witchcraft.  Drunkenness  and  swearing  are  sin 
in  rags,  but  self-righteousness  is  sin  in  a  respectable  black  coat.  It  is  an  aristocratio 
sin,  and  does  not  like  to  be  put  down  with  the  common  ruck  ;  and  if  we  call  it  sin, 
yet  many  will  plead  that  it  is  only  so  in  a  very  refined  sense.  But  God  does  not 
think  so  ;  He  classes  it  with  the  very  worst,  and  He  does  so  because  it  is  one  of  the 
worst.  For  a  man  to  be  self-righteous  is  in  itself  a  sin  of  sins.  For,  first,  it  is 
blasphemy.  God  is  holy.  Here  comes  this  base  impostor  and  boasts,  "And  I  am 
holy  too.  '  Is  not  that  a  ludicrous  and  contemptible  form  of  blasphemy  t  It  is 
profanity  in  its  very  essence.  More,  this  self-righteousness  is  idolatry,  for  the  man 
who  counts  himself  to  be  righteous  by  his  own  works  worships  himself.  Practically, 
the  object  of  his  adoration  is  his  own  dear,  delectable,  excellent  self.  Then,  again, 
it  is  profanity,  for  it  gives  God  the  distinct  lie.  The  Lord  declares  that  no  man 
is  righteous.  IV.  Self-righteousness  is  the  fruit  of  man's  own  thoughts. 
Look  at  ver.  2.  Those  who  have  high  thoughts  of  themselves  do  not  walk  according 
to  God's  commandments,  but  according  to  their  own  notions.  If  any  man  thinketh 
himself  to  be  righteous  in  himself,  he  has.  never  derived  that  idea  from  God's  law, 
and  certainly  not  from  the  Gospel,  for  the  Gospel  knows  no  man  after  the  flesh  aa 
righteous,  but  it  regards  all  men  as  sinners,  and  comes  to  them  with  pardon ;  it 
treats  men  as  lost  and  comes  to  save  them.  Self-righteous  people  swe  not  much 
inclined  to  search  the  Scriptures,  they  do  not  read  them  with  an  understanding  heart, 
60  as  to  get  the  meaning ;  they  rather  make  the  Bible  say  their  own  meaning,  and 
twist  it  to  support  their  own  pleasing  dream.     V.  Self-righteousness  has  this 

VICE  ABOUT  IT,  THAT  IT  ALWAYS  LEADS  TO  DESPISING  OTHERS.      That  is  the  pith  of 

the  text.  VI.  Self-righteousness  is  most  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God. 
What  does  He  compare  it  to?  He  says,  "It  is  a  smoke  in  My  nose,  a  fire  that 
bumeth  aU  the  day. "  At  the  bottom  of  the  garden  we  gather  together  the  dead 
leaves,  and  aU  the  rubbish  of  the  garden,  and  the  heap  is  lighted,  and  it  keeps  on 
burning  and  smouldering  all  the  day ;  and  if  you  go  and  stand  in  the  eye  of  the 
wind  your  eyes  will  smart,  your  nose  will  be  oflended,  and  you  wiU  feel  that  you 
cannot  bear  it.  We  do  not  wonder  that  He  thus  scorns  and  abhors  proud  self- 
righteousness,  for  God  is  a  God  of  truth,  and  truth  cannot  bear  a  lie,  and  self- 
righteousness  is  a  mass  of  lies.  Moreover,  self-righteousness  is  such  a  proud  thing. 
God  is  always  provoked  with  pride.  Self-righteousness  also  denies  the  wisdom  of 
God's  plan,  and  is  utterly  opposed  to  it.  God's  present  plan  of  working  in  the  world 
goes  upon  the  theory  that  we  are  guilty  ;  being  guilty,  He  provides  a  Saviour  for  us, 
and  sends  us  a  Gospel  fall  of  grace.  VII.  Self-righteousness  most  effectually 
BARS  A  MAN  PROM  ALL  HOPE  OF  SALVATION.  We  cannot  be  saved  unless  we  become 
truly  holy,  but  no  man  ever  becomes  truly  holy  who  is  content  with  a  false  holiness. 
Self-righteousness  prevents  repentance.  You  will  never  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  while 
you  believe  in  yourself.  What  is  the  remedy  for  all  this  ?  God  saith,  "Behold  Me": 
that  is  to  say,  He  bids  thee  cease  from  doting  upon  thine  own  fancied  beauties  and 
worshipping  thine  own  foolish  image.  Look  first  to  the  holy  God  and  tremble. 
Canst  thou,  of  thyself,  ever  be  like  Him,  pure,  spotless,  glorious  ?  Look  to  Him  and 
despair.  "Then  comes  the  second,  "Behold  Me."  See  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross 
dying,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  As  thou  seest  Him  dying  thy 
self-righteousness  will  die.  (C.  H.  Spwrgeon.)  False  grounds  of  superiority  in 
holiness : — The  disposition  to  arrogate  the  dignity  of  religious  worth  and  excellence 
has  never  become  extinct  among  men,  nor  the  quite  consistent  disposition  to  turn  it 
to  the  use  of  pride.  1.  In  some  instances,  an  assumption  of  superior  holiness  has 
been  made  upon  the  ground  of  belonging  to  a  certain  division  or  cLws  of  mankind ;  a 
class  having  its  distinction  in  the  circumstance  of  descent  and  nativity,  or  in  some 
artificial  constitution  of  society.  Thus  the  ancient  Jews, — in  virtue  merely  of  being 
Jews.  Imagine  the  worst  Jew  comparing  himself  with  Anstides,  Phocion  or  Socrates. 
The  Brahmins,  in  virtue  of  a  pretended  pre-eminently  holy  descent ;  an  emanation 
from  the  head  of  their  creating  god.  In  popish  countries,  the  numerous  ecclesiastical 
class.  Something  of  this  even  in  protestant  England.  In  these  instances  there  has  been 
an  assumption  of  holiness  independently  of  individual  personal  character.  What  an 
infamy  to  perverted  human  reason,  that  anything  which  might  leave  the  individual 
evidently  bad,  in  heart  and  life,  could  yet  be  taken  as  constituting  Him  the  reverse  of 
bad,  that  is,  holy !    2.  In  many  periods  and  places  men  have  reputed  themselves 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txv. 

"holy  "  on  the  ground  of  a  punctilious  observance  of  religious  forma  and  ceremonies 
whether  of  Divine  appointment  or  human  invention.  This  took  the  place  of  th« 
true  religious  sanctity  among  the  Jews.  It  is  a  grand  characteristic  of  paganism. 
It  actually  stands  instead  of  religion  and  morality  among  the  far  greater  part  of  the 
people  under  the  dominion  of  the  Romish  Church.  It  is  to  be  feared  there  are  some 
among  us  who  venture  a  delusive  assumption  on  the  ground  of  a  regular  attention  to 
the  external  services  of  religion.  But  we  have  cause  to  know  that  all  this  may 
be,  and  yet  no  vital  transforming  prevalence  of  religion  in  the  heart.  3.  Another 
ground  of  such  assumption  is  general  rectitude  of  practical  conduct,  separate  from 
the  true  religious  principle  of  moral  excellence.  4.  The  pride  of  self-estimation  for 
holiness  is  apt  to  be  betrayed  by  persons  who  have  preserved  a  character  substantially 
free  from  reproach,  against  those  who  have,  in  some  known  instance,  fallen  into  great 
sin.  It  might  have  been  a  caae  in  which  they  were  encountered  by  sudden,  or  com- 
plicated, or  very  extraordinary  temptation,  such  as  all  should  pray  earnestly  to  be 
saved  from.  The  delinquent  may  have  penitently  deplored  the  transgression  through 
many  subsequent  years.  But  it  has  been  often  enough  seen  that  another  person, 
who  has  been  happy  enough  not  to  incur  any  such  marked  blemish  on  his  character, 
will  assume  a  tone  of  high  superiority  against  him,  though  he  may  never  have  had 
the  same  strength  of  temptation  to  combat  with  ;  may  never  think  of  ascribing  his 
exemption  to  any  higher  cause  than  his  own  good  principles ;  and  may  be  quite 
destitute  of  some  valuable  qualities  the  other  possesses.  The  whole  life  of  this  self- 
applauder  may  have  been  little  better  than  a  series  of  negatives.  His  faulty,  penitent 
brother  may  have  done  much  good.  5.  A  man  may  have  had  his  mind  directed  to  a 
speculative  knowledge  of  religious  doctrine  ;  and  we  will  suppose  that  it  is  valuable 
knowledge  that  he  has  gained.  All  this  may  be,  and  yet  the  man  feel  little  or 
nothing  of  the  sanctifying  power  of  religious  truth.  Yet,  so  ready  is  the  speculatist 
to  take  to  himself  all  the  dignity  and  excellence  of  his  subject  and  his  cause,  that 
this  man  may  take  up  a  lofty  pretension — if  not  strictly  and  formally  to  "holiness," 
yet  to  some  meritorious  relation  to  truth  and  religion  ;  something  which  authorizes 
nim  in  a  high  contempt, — not  only  of  those  who  know  nothing  about  religion,  but 
also  of  those  who  feel  its  genuine  influence  and  power,  when  they  are  feeble  in  the 
speculative  intelligence  of  it.  He  accounts  himself  to  be,  as  it  were,  in  the  confid- 
ence of  religion,  and  that  he  must  be  invested  with  something  of  its  venerable 
character,  when  he  can  so  authentically  declare  its  mind.  6.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  a  factitious  zeal  in  the  active  service  of  religion  ;  and  that  forms  a  ground  of  high 
pretension.  Men  in  restless  activity;  fall  of  scheme,  and  expedient,  and  experiment, 
and  ostentatious  enterprise.  But  an  attentive  observer  could  easily  descry  that  the 
cause  of  God  was  a  very  secondary  concern  with  them,  even  at  the  best  interpreta- 
tion. Their  grand  object  (whether  they  were  conscious  of  it  or  not)  was  their  own 
notoriety  ;  and  the  cause  of  religion  happened  to  be  that  which  would  most  effectu- 
ally serve  this  purpose.  7.  There  are  a  number  of  persons  among  professing  Chris- 
tians whose  mmds  are  almost  ever  dwelling  on  certain  high  points  of  doctrine, 
sought  chiefly  in  the  book  of  God's  eternal  decrees.  And  it  is  on  these  doctrines  that 
they  found,  in  some  manner,  an  absolute  assurance  of  their  being  in  the  Divine 
favour.  God  forbid  that  we  should  deny  or  doubt  that  there  is  a  firm  and  rational 
assurance  of  salvation  attainable  in  this  life.  But  such  persons  as  we  are  referring 
to  betray  that  their  assurance,  which  takes  its  stand  on  so  lofty  a  position,  inde- 
pendent of  a  faithful  estimate  of  the  heart  and  life,  has  an  unsanctifying  effect ;  it 
slackens  and  narrows  the  force  and  compass  of  the  jurisdiction  of  conscience  ;  and, 
especially,  cherishes  in  them  the  spirit  of  our  text.  8.  "We  may  name  as  one  of  the 
things  made  a  ground  of  pretension  and  pride,  the  experience  of  elated,  ardent, 
enthusiastic  feelings,  in  some  semblance  of  connection  with  religion,  but  not  really  of 
its  genuine  inspiration.     {John  Foster.) 

Yer.  8.  Thns  saith  the  Lord,  As  the  new  wine  is  foond  in  the  duster. — Qod'a 
regard  for  the  faithful  remnarvt  of  His  people: — As  one  does  not  destroy  a  cluster 
consisting  of  good  and  bad  berries,  because  one  would  also  destroy  the  Divine  blessing 
contained  in  it,  so  Jehovah  for  His  servants'  sake  will  not  annihilate  Israel.  He 
will  not  destroy  all  indiscriminately ;  the  sense  is  not :  the  sap  along  with  husk 
and  shell  (Knobel,  Hahn),  but :  the  berries  having  good  sap  along  with  the  pre- 
ponderant bad  berries  (J.  H.  Michaelia,  Seinecke).  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  It  is  an 
application  to  new  circumstances  of  Isaiah's  doctrine  of  the  remnant  (chap.  vi.  18). 
(rrqf.  J.  Skirmer,  D.D.)  Destroy  it  not. — "  Destroy  it  not " : — View  the  passage  in 
reference  to — I.  God's  ancient  people,  the  Jews.     II.  Oinss  and  nations 


CHAP.  LXT.]  ISAIAH.  455 

GENERALLY.  III.  ThE  STATE  OF  CHRISTIAN  CHURCHES.  IV.  PENITENT  BACK- 
SLIDERS. V.  Young  inquirers.  VI.  Those  who  are  called  most  unpromising 
CHARACTERS.  (/.  O.  Pmrsall.)  Little  things : — Here  we  have  four  lessons  taught 
us  by  a  bunch  of  grapes.  I.  That  great  good  mat  be  stored  in  little  things. 
A  bunch  of  grapes  is  a  little  thing,  and  yet  there  is  a  blessing  in  it.  With  a  heart 
given  to  Jesus,  a  child  is  a  sun  which  cannot  but  shine,  a  fountain  which  cannot  but 
send  out  streams,  a  flower  which  cannot  but  fill  the  air  with  sweetness.  II.  GoD 
alone  puts  the  blessing  into  little  things.    In  this  He  displays — 1.  His  wisdom. 

2.  His  omnipotence.  3.  His  condescension  and  compassion.  III.  Little  things 
ARE  TO  BE  SPARED  FOR  THIS  BLESSING  IN  THEM.  There  are  plenty  of  little  things 
which  you  are  apt  to  despise  because  they  are  little,  and  yet,  d!estroy  them  not,  says 
God,  for  a  blessing  is  in  them.     1.  Your  vows  and  resolutions.     2.  Your  principles. 

3.  Your  habits.  4.  Your  character.  5.  Your  friendships.  6.  Your  interest  in  the 
heathen.  IV.  If  the  blessing  is  lacking  in  them  thet  will  be  undone  for 
EVER.  "Destroy  it  not ;  for  a  blessing  is  in  it."  As  if  it  were  said,  If  there  were 
no  blessing  in  it,  then  it  might  be  destroyed.  It  is  the  blessing  which  delivers. 
If  there  is  no  blessing  in  us,  we  are  doomed.  The  unprofitable  servant  hid  his 
talent  in  the  napkin,  but  he  could  not  hide  himself  from  his  master's  indignation. 
(J.  Bolton.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  That  prepare  a  table  for  that  troop. — Luck  and  Fortune  .--^Among 
Orientals  the  planets  Jupiter  and  Venus  were  worshipped  as  the  Larger  and  the 
Lesser  Luck.  They  were  worshipped  as  Merodach  and  Istar  among  the  Babylonians. 
Merodach  was  worshipped  for  prosperity.  It  may  be  Merodach  and  Istar  to  whom 
are  here  given  the  names  Gad  (or  Luck)  and  Meni,  or  Fate,  Fortune.  There  was  in  the 
Babylonian  Pantheon  a  "  Manu  the  Great,  who  presided  over  fate."  {Pro/.  G, 
A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  "  lectistemia" : — The  rites  described  are  the  lectistemia, 
well  known  throughout  the  ancient  world,  ta  which  a  table  was  spread,  furnished 
with  meats  and  drinks  as  a  meal  for  the  gods.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  God  or 
chance  f — Let  us  give  the  passage  its  true  rendering,  and  it  may  convey  to  us  a  very 
solemn  lesson.  It  is,  "  That  as  for  you  that  forsake  His  service,  that  prepare  a  table 
for  fortune,  and  pour  out  the  wine  for  destiny,  I  have  destined  you  for  the  slaughter. 
Behold,  My  servants  shall  eat  ;  but  ye  who  prepare  a  table  for  fortime  shall  be 
hungry.  Behold,  My  servants  shall  drink  ;  but  ye  who  pour  out  libations  to 
destiny  shall  be  thirsty.  Behold,  My  servants  shall  rejoice  ;  but  ye  who  believe  in 
luck  shall  be  ashamed.  Ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a  curse.  My  servants  shall 
bless  themselves,  and  shall  swear  by  the  God  of  Amen — that  is,  the  God  of  verity 
and  of  faithfulness."  The  apostate  Jews  were  beginning  to  trust  in  the  gods  of  the 
nations,  to  make  banquets  to  the  planet  Jupiter,  which  they  regarded  as  the  star  of 
fortune,  and  to  pour  libations  to  the  planet  Venus,  which  they  regarded  as  the  star 
of  luck.  Therefore  God  tells  them  that  not  these  stars,  not  these  idols,  not  these 
imaginary  entities  ;  but  that  He  would  be  their  destiny,  and  that  He  would  deliver 
them,  because  fortune  and  destiny  which  they  worshipped  could  guide  them  only  to 
hunger  and  thirst,  and  ruia  ;  but  His  servants,  they  who  trusted  ia  Him,  should 
never  be  ashamed  ;  they  should  find  Him  to  be  their  God,  a  God  of  blessing,  a  God 
of  amen — yea,  a  faithfol  witness.  {F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.)  The  temptation  to  ignore 
God: — Have  we  no  similar  temptation  ?  The  passage  is  full  of  the  deepest  lessons. 
It  touches  upon  the  very  first  commandments— "Thou  shalt  have  none  other  goda 
but  Me."  It  emphasizes  the  very  first  chapter  of  Genesis— "It  is  God  that  hath 
made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves."  It  is  nothing  short  of  a  whole  philosophy  of  history 
and  a  whole  philosophy  of  Ufe.  The  terms,  "accident,"  "fortune,"  "luck,  "play  a 
vast  part  in  the  customs  and  literature  of  the  world,  but  no  part  at  all  in  Scrip- 
ture. The  very  word  "chance,"  properly  speaking,  is  entirely  absent  alike  from  the 
Old  and  New  Testament.  It  is,  I  suppose,  belief  in  chance  that  gives  its  terrible 
fascination  to  that  pestilent  folly  of  gambling  which  has  ruined  so  many  thousands 
of  Englishmen.  But  let  us  look  at  this  subject  of  the  supposed  government  of  Kfe 
by  chance  from  far  wider  points  of  view  than  these.  1.  For  instance,  it  very  closely 
affects  our  human  history.  The  ancient  nations  believed  in  chance.  They  called  it 
"  chance,"  or  "  fortune,'  if  one  man  got  a  crown  as  the  prize  of  his  wickedness  and 
the  other  got  a  gibbet ;  they  called  it  "chance  "  if  a  battle  lost,  which  raised  one 
ruler  from  a  dungeon  to  a  throne,  cut  down  another  from  the  throne  to  a  dungeon. 
In  this  way  they,  as  the  prophet  says,  raised  a  table  to  fortune.  Do  you  look  at  the 
history  of  mankind  in  this  way  or  not  ?  What  is  history  to  you  ?  Is  it  a  mere 
ghastly  phantasmagoria  of  human  passions  struggling  together,  or  is  it  the  unfolding 


456  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixr. 

of  a  great  Divine  drama  to  a  merciful  issue  ?  Neither  in  national  life  nor  individual 
life  can  we  pretend  to  understand  the  dealings  of  God.  We  cannot  tell  why  the 
career  of  a  great  man  is  cut  short  just  when  he  might  seem  to  have  been  most  able 
to  save  his  country,  and  why  the  life  of  a  villain  is  not  cut  short  before  he  has  done 
thousands  into  misery  and  ruin.  We  are  Mke  a  deaf  man  watching  the  fingers  of 
the  harpist  as  they  dance  over  the  strings.  2.  But  now,  turning  from  history  in 
general  to  the  individual  lives  of  each  of  us,  I  can  hardlv  exaggerate  the  difference 
which  it  will  make  to  us  whether  we  regard  our  lives  as  being  guided  by  God  or  as 
being  guided  by  accident.  Nominally,  I  suppose,  we  all  profess  that  it  is  God  who  is 
weaving  the  pattern  of  our  little  day  ;  but  do  we  truly  believe  it,  and  do  we  behave 
as  if  we  did  1  Take,  for  instance,  the  events  of  which  we  habitually  speak  as  the 
accidents  of  life.  If  we  can  think  that  these  things  happen  simply  by  chance,  what 
misery  it  may  cause  us  !  How  do  men  and  women  thus  painfudly  stricken  some- 
times curse  the  day  of  their  life  1  But  what  a  difiFerence  when  they  have  the  grace 
to  recognize  that  this  may  be  in  their  own  life  but  bitter  aloes  from  the  gentle  hand 
of  God  !  As  this  thought,  that  it  is  God  and  not  chance  who  "shapes  our  ends," 
touches  even  the  most  imperfect  characters  with  the  glory  of  resignation,  how  may 
it  give  to  the  whole  course  of  our  daily  life  the  grace  of  contentment !  {Ibid.)  I 
wish  to  emphasize  the  prophet's  warning  against  the  counter  sin  of  pouring  out 
spiced  wine  for  destiny — in  other  words,  of  regarding  all  life  as  though  we  were  the 
helpless  victims  of  bhnd  necessity,  of  irreversible  laws,  of  passionless  and  adaman- 
tine forces,  which  we  can  neither  modify  nor  resist.  The  forms  taken  by  this  view 
of  destiny  are  sometimes  religious  and  sometimes  irreligious.  1.  One  of  them  pro- 
fesses to  be  very  religious  indeed — it  is  Calvinism.  2.  Another  fonn  of  this  worship 
of  destiny  is  fatalism — the  notion  that  as  God  has  decreed  everything  in  this  Kfe, 
nothing  will  happen  except  what  He  has  decreed,  and  therefore  that  it  is  quite 
useless  for  men  to  stir.  When,  in  the  conquest  of  Mexico,  the  unhappy  emperor, 
Montezuma,  was  crushed  with  blow  after  blow  of  disaster,  he  made  use  of  this 
proverb,  "We  are  bom  ;  let  that  come  which  must  come."  Fatalism,  like  Calvin- 
um,  is  foimded  on  misapprehended  truths,  and  issues  in  deplorable  results  ;  and  it, 
too,  must  be  flung  away  as  being,  for  all  practical  purposes,  absurd  and  false.  3. 
But  there  is  one  more  form  of  "preparing  a  table  for  fortune,  and  pouring  out  spiced 
wine  for  destiny."  It  is  materialism,  which  denies  the  existence  of  God  altogether, 
or  treats  Him,  at  the  best,  as  an  unproved  hypothesis.  It  makes  its  God  of  science, 
of  nature,  of  material  laws,  of  man  himself.  It  makes  man  a  mere  machine.  It 
destroys  at  a  touch  all  responsibility.  It  makes  suicide  a  perfectly  permissible 
resource.  It  says,  to  quote  its  own  votaries,  that  nothing  is  worthy  our  efforts,  oar 
struggles,  or  our  energies — that  the  world  is  a  bankrupt  in  all  quarters,  and  life  a 
business  which  does  not  pay  its  expenses,  and  annihilation  preferable  to  existence, 
and  the  world  fundamentally  something  which  ought  not  to  exist.  Well,  as  long  as 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  Christianity,  we  must  brand  the  insolent,  aspiring  brow  of 
these  spurious  notions.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Therefore  will  I  number  yon  to  the  sword. — The  declaration  <if 
God  agaiTist  the  disobedience  of  Israel : — I.  The  accusation.  A  guilty  inattention 
to  the  voice  of  God.  II.  The  threat  (vers.  13,  14).  {R.  C.  Buddicomb,  M.A.) 
God's  call  despised: — I.  The  gracious  call  of  God.  II.  The  impenitence  of 
MANY.    III.  The  inevitable  result.    (/.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-14.  Behold,  My  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be  hungry. — The 
better  feast : — It  is  observable  how  frequently  in  Holy  Scripture  mankind  are  divided 
into  two  classes.  In  the  text,  the  Lord  God  Himself  clearly  distinguishes  between 
His  servants  and  others.  The  one  shall  eat,  drink,  and  rejoice  ;  the  other  shall 
hunger,  thirst,  and  be  sorrowful.  I.  The  blessedness  of  the  Lord's  servants. 
II.  The  misery  of  those  who  disobey  Him.  {W.  Mudge.)  Incentives  to 
religious  decision: — I.  From  the  superior  advantages  of  the  religious  life 

BEYOND     ALL    THE    BOASTED    DISTINCTIONS    OR     PROFESSIONS     OF    WORLDLY    AND 

UNGODLY  MEN.  1.  They  have  a  better  Master  and  portion.  2.  They  have  better 
resources  and  supplies.  3.  They  have  better  enjoyments.  4.  They  have  better 
prospects.  II.  From  the  pecuuar  sources  of  dissatisfaction  and  wretched- 
JIBS8  to  which  YOU  ARE  EXPOSED.    {S.  Thodey.) 

Yet.  14.  Behold,  My  servants  shall  sin^. — Joys: — Heathenism  knows  nothing 
of  the  gladness  described  in  our  text.     But  in  this  life  every  man  may  sing  for  joy 


CHAP.  Lxv.]  ISAIAH.  4S7 

of  heart.  1.  God  makes  His  serrants  sing  for  joy  of  heart.  There  was  once  a  famoos 
musician  who  could  bring  out  the  most  charming  music  from  one  string  of  a  violin. 
Like  that  violin,  many  of  us  have  only  one  string,  and  that  a  cracked  one  ;  but  our 
God  can  make  it  sound  forth  perfect  praise.  2.  You  may  recogjnize  a  servant  of 
(Jod  by  his  joyous  face.  We  do  not  see  many  joyous  faces,  except  in  little  children ; 
and  only  then  at  odd  times.  The  human  race  is  bom  to  trouble  ;  but  God  can  turn 
our  sorrow  into  joy.     How  pleasant  to  look  on  a  glad  and  joyous  face !    Nightin- 

fales  do  not  often  come  so  far  north  as  Manchester  ;  but  last  year  one  of  those  birds 
uilt  its  nest  outside  our  city,  and  dozens  of  people  went  out  to  hear  the  sweet 
singer  of  the  night.  Letters  were  written  to  tne  newspapers  about  it,  and  every- 
bo^  thought  it  a  remarkable  thing.  How  sweet  it  was  to  hear  the  warble  of  that 
bird  in  the  darkness  of  the  night !  If  the  nightingale  sang  in  the  day-time,  we 
might  not  notice  it  any  more  than  the  melody  of  the  lark  or  the  music  of  the  wren  ; 
it  is  delightsome  to  us  because  it  is  a  song  in  the  night.  Likewise,  a  joyous  face  and 
joyous  words  are  equally  remarkable.  In  this  world  of  dark  doubts  and  fears,  let 
the  singing  of  the  joy  in  your  heart  be  Been  in  your  face  and  heard  in  your  words. 
8.  The  servants  of  God  are  also  known  by  their  joyous  disposition.  Lave  temper- 
ately, be  home  in  good  time  every  evening,  rise  early ;  and  the  joyousness  of  life 
shall  enter  your  heart.  4.  The  servants  of  God  have  the  joy  of  miowing  Him.  5. 
There  is  the  joy  of  pardon.  6.  There  is  the  joy  of  salvation.  7.  We  have  also  the 
joy  of  faith.  How  blessed  to  be  able  to  trust  God's  care !  In  the  long  roads  of  the 
East,  where  people  have  to  travel  wearily  on  foot  for  many  miles,  it  is  the  custom  of 
kindly-hearted  people  to  put  on  the  road-side  a  pitcher  of  water,  so  that  the  thirsty 
traveller  may  freely  drink.  Likewise,  God  puts  blessings  and  comforts  for  us  on  our 
pathway  ;  and  such  tokens  of  His  goodness  cause  us  to  sing  for  joy.  8.  We  have 
the  joy  of  His  presence.  One  day,  when  the  Grecian  army  was  near  the  enemy's 
camp,  Alexander  the  Great  slept  very  peacefully ;  and  when  he  awoke,  one  of  his 
friends  said — "  Alexander,  how  is  it  you  slept  so  well  ? "  The  king  replied,  "  Slept 
80  well  ?  Of  course  I  can  sleep  well.  Does  not  Parmenio  watch  ? '  Does  not  God 
watch  over  you  ?  9.  There  is  the  joy  of  His  promises.  Lord  Chatham  one  day 
promised  his  son  that  when  the  garden  wall  was  pulled  down,  he  should  be  present 
to  see  it  fall.  But  forgetting  his  promise,  he  gave  orders  for  the  wall  to  be  taken 
down  in  the  absence  of  his  son.     He  remembered  it  the  next  day,  and  at  once  ordered 


frame;  and  when  his  wife's  tears  dropped  on  his  face,  he  said,  "My  dear,  have 
patience  ;  this  pain  is  only  the  chiselling  1 "  So,  when  death  comes  to  you,  you 
shall  have  the  joy  of  knowing  that  your  pain  is  God's  kindly  hand  dealing  veiy 
gently  with  you.     ( W.  £irch!) 

Vers.  17-25.  For,  behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth. — "yeuf 
heavens  and  a  new  earth,"  i.  e.  a  new  universe,  Hebrew  having  no  single  word  for 
the  Cosmos.  The  phrase  sums  up  a  whole  aspect  of  the  prophetic  theology.  The 
idea  of  a  transformation  of  nature  so  as  to  be  in  harmony  with  a  renewed  humanily 
has  met  us  several  times  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  book  (chaps,  xi.  6-9,  xxix.  17, 
XXX.  23  ff.,  xxxiL  15,  xxxv.,  etc.),  and  is  a  frequent  theme  of  prophecy,  but  the 
thought  of  a  new  creation  is  nowhere  expressed  so  absolutely  as  here.  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.B.)  The  state  of  the  Church  during  the  millennium. — ^The  heavens  and 
the  earth  mean  the  New  Testament  Church.  There  are  beauty  and  propriety  in  the 
figvire  employed  ;  for,  not  to  speak  of  the  manner  in  which  the  state  of  the  world  ia 
affected  by  the  state  of  religion,  the  dependence  of  the  Church  upon  spiritual  and 
heavenly  influences  is  as  immediate  as  that  which  our  earth  has  upon  the  surrounding 
atmosphere.  When  the  sky  is  filled  with  dark  clouds  and  pours  forth  incessant 
rains,  or  when  it  emits  a  continued  and  scorching  heat,  the  fruits  of  the  field  are 
destroyed ;  but  when  it  diffuses  genial  influences,  and  gives  sunshine  and  rain,  in 
just  proportions,  fertility  and  abundance  are  the  results.  In  like  manner  the  state 
of  the  Church  depends  upon  the  influences  which  God  is  pleased  to  communicate : 
should  these  be  rich  and  gracious,  the  Church  is  prosperous  and  happy ;  but  should 
these  be  scanty  and  affictive,  the  interests  of  rehgion  languish  and  aecay.  When, 
therefore,  it  is  said  that  God  will  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  we  are  to 
explain  the  words  as  referring  to  the  beneficial  change  which  is  to  be  effected  upon 
the  state  of  the  Ohnroh.  This  change  will  be  so  great,  and  so  blissful,  as  to  merit 
the  name — a  new  creation.    It  will  introdooe  so  many  blessings,  and  unfold  so  manj , 


,458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxt. 

beauties,  and  diffuse  such  universal  joy,  that  the  former  state  of  affliction,  sorrow, 
and  danger  shall  not  be  remembered  nor  come  into  mind.  To  what  period  in  the 
hi3tory  of  the  Church  does  this  prediction  (ver.  17)  refer  ?.  Many  of  the  early  Chris- 
tian writers  regarded  it  as  descriptive  of  the  state  of  the  Church  in  heaven,  and 
supported  their  view  by  the  words  of  Peter,  that  after  the  earth  and  atmosphere 
have  been  destroyed  by  fire,  there  will  be  formed  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  in 
which  the  righteous  shall  dwell.  But  the  verses  assert  that,  in  the  time  to  which 
this  prediction  refers,  there  will  be  sin  and  death,  and  that  men  shall  build  houses 
and  mhabit  them  ;  and  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.  Others,  again, 
have  viewed  the  predictions  as  pointing  out  the  change  which  took  place  upon  the 
Chiu"ch  and  world,  when  the  Jewish  State  was  overthrown,  and  tne  Gospel  was 
preached  to  all  nations.  At  this  time  the  relations  which  existed  between  heaven 
and  earth  underwent  a  great  alteration.  The  worship  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars 
was  abolished  in  many  places,  the  false  gods  with  which  they  had  filled  heaven 
were  set  aside,  and  just  views  of  the  supreme  Being  were  attained  by  many,  while 
God  lifted  the  covering  of  darkness  which  had  been  spread  over  all  nations,  offered 
Himself  to  them  as  their  gracious  God,  and  invited  them,  as  His  people,  to  come 
into  the  communion  of  the  Church.  But  though  the  change  which  then 
happened  was  great — so  great  as  to  be  set  forth  by  such  terms  as  God's 
shaking  the  heavens  and  the  earth — yet  it  does  not  correspond  to  the  magnifi- 
cence of  the  scene  delineated  in  the  words  before  us.  The  seeds  of  prosperity  and 
coming  happiness  were  then  sown.  But  then  judgment  kept  pace  with  mercy. 
The  word  was  received  in  much  affliction  ;  and  nearly  all  the  Churcnes  had  to  endure 
severe  and  fiery  trials,  while  on  the  literal  Jerusalem  the  wrath  of  God  fell  and 
consumed  it.  We  agree,  therefore,  with  those  who  look  upon  the  text  as  character- 
izing the  state  of  the  Church  in  the  millennium.  The  glory  of  the  Church  will  then 
outshine  and  eclipse  all  the  happiness  that  has  ever  been  seen  on  earth,  and  exceed 
the  loftiest  expectations  of  the  saints.  1.  It  wiUbe  a  period  of  unparalleled  gracious 
communications  on  the  part  of  God.  The  heavens  will  then  seem  to  be  opened,  and 
the  Divine  Persons  to  smile  on  man.  The  whole  of  that  time  shall  be  a  season  of 
gracious  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  2.  It  will  be  a  period  of  clear 
and  universal  knowledge.  3.  Of  extraordinary  holiness.  This  is  the  result  which 
sanctified  knowledge  invariably  produces.  4.  It  will  be  a  period  of  unprecedented 
joy.  In  ver.  16  it  is  said,  that  "the  former  troubles  shall  be  forgotten  ;"  and  in 
ver.  18  God  says,  "be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  in  that  which  I  create :  for,  be- 
hold, I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy."  The  state  of  the  Church 
wiU  be  so  prosperous,  and  the  benefits  conferred  upon  its  members  so  full  and  so 

gracious,  as  to  afford  to  all  the  highest  causes  of  gladness.  There  will  be  a  joy 
erived  from  clear  and  exalted  views  of  Divine  truth ;  from  sin  overcome,  grace 
imparted,  and  holiness  promoted ;  from  realized  communion  with  God,  and  from 
heavenly  contemplations.  5.  It  will  be  a  time  of  cordial  union  and  love.  6._  Of 
universal  peace  and  liberty.  7.  Of  remarkable  outward  prosperity.  8.  All  things 
shall  be  subordinated  to  the  interests  of  religion.  The  world  and  its  engagements 
are  now  too  frequently  injurious  to  the  growth  of  piety.  But,  then,  the  service  of 
God  wUl  be  the  one  grand  business  that  will  engage  all  hearts  and  all  hands.  {A. 
Somerville.)  God  refoicing  in  the  new  creation: — This  passage,  like  the  rest  of 
Isaiah's  closing  chapters,  will  have  completest  fulfilment  in  the  latter  days  when 
Christ  shall  come.  But  the  work  which  is  spoken  of  is  begun  already  among  us.  «^ 
There  is  to  be  a  literal  new  creation,  but  that  new  creation  has  commenced  already ; 
therefore,  even  now  we  ought  to  manifest  a  part  of  the  joy.  Do  you  know  what  this 
■work  of  creation  is,  which  is  here  thrice  promised  in  the  words,  "I  create  ...  I 
create  ...  I  create "  ?  It  is  evidently  a  second  creation,  which  is  altogether  to 
eclipse  the  first,  and  put  it  out  of  mind.  Concerning  the  joy  to  which  we  are  caUed, 
we  would  say — I.  It  is  a  jot  in  creation.  "Behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a 
new  earth.  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy."  It  is  a  most 
right  and  excellent  thing  that  you  and  I  should  rejoice  m  the  natural  creation  of 
God.  The  man  who  is  tatogether  bad  seldom  delights  in  nature,  but  gets  away  into 
the  artificial  and  the  sensual.  One  of  the  purest  and  most  innocent  of  joys,  apart 
from  spiritual  things,  in  which  a  man  can  indulge,  is  a  joy  in  the  works  of  God. 
Much  more  is  there  something  bright  and  pure  and  spiritually  exhilarating  in 
rejoicing  in  (Jod's  higher  worla,  in  God's  spiritual  works,  in  God's  new  creation. 
There  is  no  one  of  the  attributes  of  God  which  has  not  its  illustration  under  the 
economy  of  grace ;  and  blessed  shall  your  whole  being  be  if  yon  can  to  the  fall 
l^joioe  In  that  which  Gk>d  creates.    There  is  one  reason  why  you  are  called  upon  to 


CHAP,  txv.]  ISAIAH.  459 

rqoice  in  it,  namely,  that  you  are  a  part  of  it.  When  I  lay  sore  sick  and  tormented 
in  body,  it  seemed  always  to  be  such  a  joy  to  me  that  I  myself,  my  inner  self,  my 
spirit,  had  been  new-created,  and  that  my  nobler  part  could  rise  above  the  suffering, 
and  soar  into  the  pure  heavens  of  the  spiritual  realm  ;  and  I  said  of  this  poor  body, 
"Thou  hast  not  yet  been  new-created  ;  but  thou  shalt  yet  be  delivered."  II.  It  is 
A  JOY  WHICH  WILL  ECLIPSE  ALL  THAT  HAS  GONE  BEFORE.  "And  the  former  shall 
not  be  remembered,  nor  come  into  mind."  God's  great  new-creating  work  ought  to 
fin  us  with  such  joy  as  to  make  us  forget  the  old  creation,  as  though  we  said  to  our- 
selves : — What  are  the  sun  and  the  moon  ?  "We  shall  not  have  need  of  these  variable 
lights  in  the  perfection  of  the  new  creation,  for  in  heaven,  "they  need  no  candle, 
neither  light  of  the  sun. "  "What  is  the  sea,  though  it  be  the  very  mirror  of  beauty  ? 
In  that  new  creation  there  will  be  no  more  sea,  and  storms  and  tempests  will  be  all 
unknown.  "What  are  these  luxuries  of  sight  and  hearing  ?  "We  shall  not  want  them 
when  our  eyes  shall  behold  the  King  in  His  beauty  in  the  land  that  is  very  far  off. 
The  joy  of  the  spiritual  is  such  that,  while  it  admits  the  joy  of  the  natural,  yet, 
nevertneless,  it  swallows  it  up  as  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  the  rods  of  the  magicians. 
As  an  instance  of  the  expulsive  powers  of  a  new  delight,  we  all  know  how  the 
memory  of  the  old  dispensation  is  gone  from  us.  Did  any  one  of  you  ever  weep 
because  you  did  not  sit  at  the  Passover !  Did  you  ever  regret  the  Paschal  lamb  1 
Never,  because  you  have  fed  on  Christ.  I  want  you  to  feel  jvist  the  same  with  regard 
to  all  your  former  life  as  you  now  feel  towards  that  old  dispensation.  The  world  is 
dead  to  you,  and  you  to  tne  world.  You  have  a  higher  pleasiire  now  which  enchants 
your  soul.  III.  It  is  a  present  and  a  lasting  joy.  "Be  ye  glad  and  rejoice 
for  ever  in  that  which  I  create."  Be  glad  in  anything  that  the  Lord  has  created  in 
you.  Find  your  joy,  also,  in  the  new  creation  of  God,  as  you  see  it  in  others.  I 
think  it  is  very  beautiful  where  John  Bunyan  represents  Christiana  and  Mercy  as 
admiring  each  other.  They  had  both  enjoyed  a  wash  in  that  wonderful  beauty- 
giving  bath,  and  Mercy  said  to  Christiana,  ' '  How  beautiful  you  are  I  I  never  saw 
any  one  look  so  lovely  as  you  are. "  But  Christiana  said  that  she  was  not  beautiful 
at  all ;  she  could  not  see  anything  about  herself  to  admire,  while  in  Mercy  she  saw 
everything  to  esteem  and  love.  Oh,  to  have  an  eye  for  the  work  of  God  in  other 
people,  and  to  rejoice  in  it !  Such  an  eye  sees  not  itself,  and  yet  it  is  itself  one  of 
God's  loveliest  works.  IV.  It  is  a  joy  which  God  intended  for  its.  "For, 
behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy."  He  has  made  the 
new  city,  the  new  people,  the  new  world  to  be  a  source  of  joy.  Take  Jerusalem  as 
the  emblem  of  the  Church  of  God.  God  always  intended  that  His  chosen,  called, 
and  converted  people  should  be  a  rejoicing.  God  intended  not  only  that  we  should 
have  joy,  but  that  we  should  spread  it  among  others.  As  soon  as  ever  we  are  con- 
verted, what  is  one  of  the  first  things  that  comes  of  it  ?  "Why,  joy.  But,  by-and- 
by,  there  will  be  a  stiU  greater  joy.  "We  shall  enter  into  heaven,  and  there  will  be 
joy  among  the  angels,  and  joy  in  our  heart  over  God's  new-creation  work,  which  will 
proceed  at  a  glorious  rate.  Then  the  nations  will  be  converted  to  God.  I  know  not 
when,  nor  exactly  how,  but  the  day  shall  come  when  Christ  shall  reign  from  pole  to 
pole.  V.  It  is  a  joy  in  which  we  shall  share  with  God.  "And  I  will  rejoice 
in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  My  people."    (C.  H.  Spwrgeon.) 

Ver.  20.  There  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days. — Longevity: — The 
whole  is  a  highly  poetical  description  of  longevity,  to  be  explained  precisely  like  the 
promise  of  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  (ver.  17).  (/.  A.  Aleocander.)  The  child 
shall  die  an  hundred  years  old. — Youth  and  age: — There  is  promised  a  practical 
annihilation  of  the  line  which  divides  youth  and  age.  Youth  shall  be  wise  and  age 
shall  be  ardent.  "We  are  to  study  the  spirit  of  youth  in  history  and  in  the  Church. 
Hope,  enthusiasm,  energy,  and  audacity  are  elemental  forces  in  youth.  Youth 
makes  mistakes,  but  age  magnifies  difficulties.  Age  regards  that  impossible  which 
to  youth  presents  the  prospect  of  success.  Most  of  the  leaders  of  our  American 
Revolution  were  under  forty,  and  the  same  fact  appears  in  European  history,  so  that 
Disraeli  was  right  in  saying,  "  The  history  of  heroes  is  the  history  of  youth."  So  in 
art.  Raphael  died  at  thirty-seven,  Keats  at  twenty-two,  Shelley  before  thirty,  and 
Professor  Clifford  at  thirty -five.  The  time  for  action  is  the  morning !  There  is  a 
fiery  enthusiasm  in  youth.  It  is  to  be  utilized.  Luther  was  but  twenty-four  when 
he  denounced  the  Papal  Church,  and  Calvin  twenty-six  when  he  wrote  his  great 
work,  "The  Institutes."  So  with  "Wesley  and  Summerfield,  who  made  themselves 
felt  in  early  manhood.  Robertson,  of  Brighton,  died  at  thirty-four.  Though 
preaching  to  but  few,  he  has  influenced  the  world  by  his  broad  and  catholic  views. 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txr. 

Henry  Martyn  died  at  thirty-two,  and  Harriet  Newell  when  hardly  out  of  girlhood. 
Is  youth  blind?  It  is  sometimes  good  to  be  blind  to  danger  and  oMculty, 
uninfluenced  by  discouragements,  if  only  awake  to  the  grandeur  of  the  work  and  the 
promised  alliance  of  God  !  I.  The  elder  should  not  be  jealous  of  the  toungee. 
It  is  pitiful  to  see  a  cynical  spirit  shown  toward  those  who  are  coming  to  take  our 
places.  Better  imitate  the  magnanimous  temper  of  John,  who  said,  as  he  saw  the 
growing  popularity  of  the  Master,  "He  must  increase,  I  must  decrease."  The 
coming  generation  must  do  their  own  thinking  and  make  their  own  philosophies. 
Wisdom  was  not  bom  with  us.  It  will  not  die  with  us.  God  honours  individuality. 
He  makes  faces  unlike  and  minds  imlike.     II.  The  Chtjech  should  be  alert  to 

TRAIN   youth  to   BE   EQUAL  TO   THE   DEMANDS  OF  THE  AGE.      Its  offices  of  trUSt 

should  not  be  wholly  in  the  hands  of  old  persons.  III.  Some  people  never  seem 
TO  LOSE  THEIR  YOUTH.  It  is  a  lovely  sight  to  see  the  youthful  spirit  strong  at 
seventy.  It  is  like  seeing  a  river  pouring  its  life  through  a  desert.  IV.  We  learn 
HOW  TO  continue  TO  BE  YOUTHFUL.  If  linked  to  Christ,  how  can  we  be  otherwise  ' 
than  glad  and  growing,  hopeful  and  purposeful  ?  A  vital,  vivid,  constant  faith  in 
God  feeds  enthusiasm  with  perpetual  strength.  Suffering  often  brings  a  deep,  quiet 
joy.  Shrink  not  from  it.  Moreover,  we  can  cultivate  this  yoiithful  spirit.  We 
can  compel  ourselves  to  look  on  the  bright  side  of  things.  They  who  believe  that 
all  things  work  together  for  good  to  those  who  love  God  ought  to  be  continually 
young.  {A.  H.  Bradford,  D.D.)  "  The  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old" : — 
The  verse  is  a  puzzling  one.  But  none  the  less  it  is  true.  The  more  Christlike  men 
and  women  become,  the  nearer  they  grow  to  absolute  childlikeness.  It  is  with  them 
as  with  the  ripe  com  in  the  autumn  ;  the  com  bends  its  head  down  again  to  the 
ground  out  of  which  it  sprang  in  the  spring.  Just  so  the  saints  of  God,  in  their 
maturity,  in  their  noblest  and  wisest  and  heavenliest  estate  here  on  earth,  resemble 
most  the  children — resemble  them  in  their  trustfulness  and  teachableness  and 
lowliness.  {A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  A  child-man: — When  James  Clerk  Maxwell, 
loaded  as  he  was  with  his  scientific  learning,  lay  dyin^,  these  were  his  last  words  : 
"  Lay  me  down  lower,  for  I  am  very  low  myself,  and  it  suits  me  to  lie  low  ; "  and 
then,  with  a  long,  loving  look  at  his  wife,  he  went  home  to  God.  He  was  a  man, 
but  he  died  as  a  child.  {Hid.)  But  the  sinner,  being  an  hundred  years  old,  shall 
be  accursed.— TAe  aged  sinner:— I.  It  is  not  usual  for  a  man  to  live  to  the 
AGE  of  a  hundred  YEARS.  Some,  indeed,  have  lived  so  long,  but  their  number 
has  been  very  small,  and  he  who  flatters  himself  that  he  shall  do  so  is  both  vain 
and  foolish.  II.  As  it  is  not  usual  for  any  man  to  Live  to  the  age  of  a  hundred 
years,  so  it  is  less  likely  that  the  sinner  should  live  so  long.  The  way  of  a 
sinner  is  such  as  naturally  tends  to  shorten  his  days,  and  provoke  God  to  destroy 
him.    III.  If  a  wicked  man  should  live  to  be  a  hundred  years  old,  yet  hk 

MUST  DIE  AT  LAST.      IV.   WHENEVER  WICKED  MEN  DIE,  WHETHER  IT  BE  IN  YOUTH 

OB  EXTREME  OLD  AGE,  THEY  DIE  ACCURSED.  Some  of  them  are  cursed  by  their 
fellow-creatures,  whom  they  have  injured  or  oppressed ;  but,  above  all,  they  are 
xmder  the  curse  of  God.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  live  under  a  curse,  but  it  is  far 
worse  to  die  under  one  ;  yet  this  is  the  awful  condition  of  such  as  live  and  die  in 
their  sins.  They  may  possess  much,  and  have  their  houses,  lands  and  estates,  but 
it  is  with  a  curse ;  they  may  also  hope  for  more,  but  when  it  comes  it  is  with  a  curse. 
{B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 

Ver.  22.  As  the  days  of  a  tree. — Trees: — Of  all  natural  objects  trees  have  the 
closest  fellowship  with  man.  When  growing  together  in  dense  jprimeval  forests  they 
indeed  exclude  his  presence,  and  the  gloom  and  solitude  produce  an  awe  as  of  the 
supernatural  world.  But  in  the  open  cultivated  spaces  around  his  home  they  become 
domesticated,  and  are  regarded  with  a  sentiment  akin  to  afl"ection.  God  first  talked 
with  man  under  their  shadow  ;  man's  first  worship  was  helped,  if  not  inspired,  by  the 
solemn  sights  and  sounds  of  the  grove,  the  flitting  lights  and  shades  as  of  mvsterious 
shapes,  and  the  whispered  secrets  of  the  leaves  ;  and  the  pillared  aisles  ana  groined 
interlacing  of  branches  first  suggested  to  him  the  ideas  of  architectural  beauty  which 
grew  into  permanent  shape  in  the  house  of  prayer.  The  heart  twines  around  them 
some  of  its  most  fragrant  memories  ;  and  at  the  end  of  every  vista  of  the  vanished 
years  we  see  through  the  golden  light  a  favourite  tree  associated  with  some  cherished 
incident  of  the  past.  TVees  are  often  planted  as  memorials  of  visits  to  celebrated 
scenes,  or  at  the  birth  of  an  heir  to  an  estate.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)    As  the  daya 

of  a  tree : ^These  human  associations  give  to  the  emblem  of  the  prophet  a  touching 

significance.    It  is  a  very  appropriate  emblem.    The  comparison  between  the  twa 


CHAP,  txv,]  ISAIAH.  461 

kinds  of  life  is  verjr  close.  In  every  particular  connected  with  organic  existence,  in 
the  laws  of  their  development,  decay  and  reproduction,  trees  and  human  beings  are 
complete  counterparts  of  one  another.  Even  their  structure  to  a  certain  extent  is 
similar.  The  leaves  correspond  to  the  lungs  and  digestive  organs  ;  the  blossoms 
represent  the  distinctions  of  sex  ;  and  the  names  of  trunk,  arms,  and  limbs  are  given 
indiscriminately  to  similar  parts  of  both  organisms.  But  if  we  inquire  what  a  tree 
really  is,  we  shall  find  in  the  emblem  a  correspondence  still  more  profound.  A  tree 
is  generally  supposed  to  be  a  single  individual,  in  the  same  sense  that  a  man  is  an 
individual.  It  passes  through  a  period  of  youth,  maturity  and  old  age.  It  has  a 
fixed  limit  of  size  and  age.  It  gradually  loses  its  vital  properties,  and  ceases  to 
perform  its  vital  functions.  But  this  popular  view  is  altogether  erroneous.  A  tree 
18  not  a  single  individual ;  it  is  an  aggregate  of  separate,  independent  individuals, 
a  composite  organism  in  which  there  is  no  centralization  of  life,  and  all  the  parts 
are  frequently  repeated :  there  being  as  many  lunga  as  there  are  leaves,  and  as  many 
organs  of  reproduction  as  there  are  blossoms.  Each  shoot  is  a  distinct  plant 
performing  the  functions  of  nutrition  and  propagation  by  and  for  itself,  but,  by 
virtue  of  its  organic  imion  with  the  rest  of  the  tree,  contributing  to  the  general 
welfare,  and  helping  to  build  up  the  common  fabric.  Cut  off — its  removal  would  not 
virtually  injure  the  tree,  nor  impair  its  own  vitality ;  and  planted  in  the  soU,  it 
would  strike  root  and  in  course  of  time  grow  to  the  same  size  as  its  parent.  A  tree 
may  thus  be  said  to  be  a  colony  of  plants  growing  vertically  instead  of  horizontally. 
Regarding  a  tree,  then,  as  a  body  corporate,  consisting  of  an  aggregate  of  living  and 
dead  plants,  the  dead  enclosed  and  preserved  in  the  tissues  of  the  living,  and  the 
living  continually  reproducing  and  grafting  themselves  upon  one  another,  it  follows 
necessarily  that  there  is  no  physical  limit  to  the  size  it  may  attain,  or  to  the  age  it 
may  reach.  From  its  very  nature  a  tree  is  immortal.  It  may  go  on  growing  and 
enlarging  for  ages,  and  after  thousands  of  years  be  still  in  the  full  vigour  of  ita 
existence.  Even  in  Europe,  where  man  has  so  long  held  sway,  and  has  ever  been 
destroying  the  woods  and  forests,  individual  trees  have  survived  since  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Christian  era,  and  their  vigorous  hold  of  life  seems  to  secure  them  a 
longevity  in  comparison  with  which  the  period  already  passed  may  be  no  more  than 
their  early  youth  ;  while  in  other  less-known  parts  of  the  world  trees  are  to  be  found 
whose  enormous  size  would  indicate  that  they  reached  back  to  the  origin  of  the 
existing  state  of  the  globe.  From  the  nature  of  a  tree  as  a  composite  social  organism, 
it  also  necessarily  follows  that  it  is  exempt  from  death  by  old  age.  The  individual 
plants  whose  combination  constitutes  the  corporate  body,  being  only  annuals,  may 
be  said  to  die  of  old  age  in  autumn,  when  the  leaves  fade  and  fall.  But  as  regards 
the  whole  organism  there  is  no  such  thing  as  old  age.  {Ibid.)  The  tree  of  ly'e: — 
These  considerations  help  us  to  understand  more  clearly  why  a  tree  should  have  been 
chosen  as  the  sacrament  or  symbol  of  immortality  in  Eden,  and  why  it  should 
represent  the  eternal  felicity  of  the  redeemed  in  the  heavenly  paradise.  The 
expression  "tree  of  life,"  acquires  a  new  and  deeper  significance  when  we  remember 
that  there  is  nothing  else  with  life  that  bridges  across  the  centuries,  connects  departed 
dynasties  and  systems  of  religion  with  modem  governments  and  fresh  creeds,  and 
binds  the  sympathies  of  the  human  heart  with  the  sorrows  and  joys  of  other  ages 
dead  and  gone.  {Ibid.)  "  As  the  days  of  a  tree" :  the  Jews: — How  truly  applicable  to 
the  marvellous  history  of  the  Jews  !  As  trees  are  the  oldest  of  living  organisms,  so 
the  Jews  are  the  oldest  of  living  races.  Though  the  least  of  all  people,  unable  to 
compete  in  the  arts  of  life  with  the  nations  of  antiquity,  they  have  outlived  the 
wisest  and  most  powerful  of  them.  The  people  that  oppressed  and  led  them  captive 
have  perished,  leaving  behind  only  a  few  nameless  ruins  ;  the  kingdoms  whose  glory 
overshadowed  theirs  have  vanished,  and  left  not  even  a  wreck  behind.  But  the  Jews 
have  still  lived  on.  Like  their  own  cedars  of  Lebanon  they  have  survived  the  storms 
and  vicissitudes  of  ages,  and  endured  while  all  else  has  perished  around  them. 
Although  the  trunk  and  maia  stem  of  the  Jews  may  be  withered  away,  and  only  a 
fragment  remain,  yet  this  fragment  is  as  full  of  life,  is  as  green  and  flourishing,  as  in 
the  brightest  days  of  prosperity.     And  from  this  fragment  will  spring  up  a  new  and 

florious  tree.  The  tree,  rather  than  the  "everlasting  hiUs,"  may  have  been  chosen 
y  the  prophet  as  the  symbol  of  the  perpetuity  of  God's  people,  not  only  because  it 
has  life,  and  is  therefore  a  mors  appropriate  emblem  of  life,  not  only  because  of  its 
power  of  indefinite  longevity  and  increase,  but  also,  as  Dr.  Harvey  has  suggested, 
because  it  is  possessed  only  of  a  contingent  perpetuity.  In  its  own  nature  a  tree  is 
immortal,  but  it  is  subject  to  accidents  which  impair  its  vitality  and  lead  to  decay 
and  deat^    Most  trees  die  of  mechanical  injuries ;  a  storm  breaks  off  a  branch  and 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  uct. 

inflicts  a  wound  which  expoaea  the  inner  heart-wood  to  the  weather,  decay  takes 
^lace,  the  inside  of  the  trunk  becomes  hollow,  and,  incapable  of  ofiFering  resistance,  it 
IS  hurled  to  the  ground  by  a  fiercer  blast  of  wind  than  usual.  Many  trees  are  placed 
in  unsuitable  situations,  where  they  are  too  much  crowded  by  other  trees,  or  too  much 
exposed  to  the  wind,  or  where  the  soil  does  not  afford  sufficient  nourishment  to  them, 
and  they  die  of  hunger.  Their  own  growth,  by  hardening  and  compressing  their 
tissues,  prevents  the  roots  of  the  young  shoots  from  growing,  and  the  sap  from  rising 
freely  upwards,  and  thus  they  are  choked  out  of  life.  Add  to  these  causes  the 
mamfold  destructive  influences  of  nature  and  the  necessities  and  caprices  of  men,  and 
it  will  be  at  once  seen  that  the  great  majority  of  trees  must  perish  ere  they  have 
reached  their  prime,  and  that  even  the  oldest  and  largest  must  finally  disappear. 
This  circumstance  may  have  been  meant  to  infuse  a  salutary  warning  into  the 
gracious  assurance  of  the  text.  The  days  of  God's  people  wovild  be  like  the  days  of  a 
tree  so  long  as  they  obeyed  the  laws  of  truth  and  righteousness,  by  which  the 
stability  of  a  nation  is  maintained  ;  but,  like  the  tree,  their  days  would  be  cut  short 
prematurely,  if  they  exposed  themselves  by  disobedience  to  the  forces  which 
inevitably  bring  aU  tnat  is  evil  to  an  end.  {Ibid.)  The  tree  of  life: — Many  of  the 
ablest  scholars,  ancient  and  modem,  hold  to  the  opinion  that  the  true  rendering  of 
the  passage  is  this :  "As  the  days  of  the  tree,  are  the  days  of  My  people  " — "  as  the 
days,"  that  \s,  of  the  "tree  of  life  1 "  And  there  is  very  much  to  be  said  in  favour  of 
this  rendering.  The  Tree  of  Life  in  Eden — that  first  of  sacraments — was  designed  to 
sustain  and  refresh  the  life  infused  into  man  at  his  creation.  To  us,  however,  there 
is  another  Tree  of  Life,  even  the  Cross  of  Christ.  The  body  broken,  and  the  blood 
shed  upon  that  Tree,  are  to  us  the  means  of  resurrection  and  immortalitj^.  And, 
again,  there  is  another  Tree  of  Life,  to  which  as  yet  we  can  only  look  in  faith,  that, 
namely,  which  is  fast  beside  the  river  that  issues  forth  beneath  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb — which  bears  its  twelvefold  fruit  twelve  times  within  the  twelvemonth, 
and  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  "As  the  days  of  the  Tree,  are 
the  days  of  My  people."  Their  destiny  is  to  feed  on  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  midst  of 
the  Paradise  of  God  ;  and  as  the  days  of  that  Tree  are  never  ending,  never  darkened, 
so  shall  the  days  of  God's  people  be.  (Ibid.)  Christian  life  imaged  by  the  trees  of  the 
earth: — I.  The  dukabilitt  of  the  Church,  of  which  the  Saviour  has  said,  "The 

gites  of  heU,"  of  death,  "shall  not  prevail  against  it."  That  which  ia  true  of  the 
hurch  collectively  is  true  of  the  humblest  living  member  of  the  Church  ;  for  he  shall 
reign,  shall  share  in  the  rule  of  his  Saviour,  for  ever  and  ever.  II.  The  condition 
OF  THE  Church  and  of  evert  Christian  is  to  be  one  of  daily,  noiseless 
growth.  Nurtured  by  the  sunshine  and  the  rain,  by  sorrow  and  joy,  by  temptation 
and  quiet,  exposed  to  all,  and  strengthened  by  all,  flourishing  like  a  palm-tree  amidst 
the  summer  heats,  and  growing  amid  snows  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  (Ps.  xcii.  12). 
III.  Not  only  growing  amid  the  changes  of  earth,  but  drawing  nourish- 
ment FROM  ALL.  The  Christian  is  planted  here,  has  his  allotted  duties  here  (Ps. 
xcii.  13),  as  the  tree  is  rooted  in  earth.  Both  derive  nourishment  from  the  earth. 
Trials,  affliction,  spiritual  and  fleshly  temptations,  and  the  winds  of  false  doctrine, 
should  but  strengthen  the  Christian.    IV.  It  is  frxht-bearing.    ( W.  Denton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  24.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  before  they  call,  I  will  answer. — The 
Church  in  harmony  with  God's  mil: — The  will  of  the  Church  of  the  new  Jerusalem 
will  be  Jehovah's  will  to  such  a  degree  that  he  already  hears  and  fulfils  the  slightest 
movement  of  prayer  in  the  heart,  the  prayer  but  half-uttered.  [F.  Delitzseh,  D.D.) 
The  Divine  willingness  to  hear  ■prayer. — I.  Man  needs  to  call  upon  and  speak 
TO  God.  What  is  man's  greatest  need  ?  To  him  who  believes  in  a  future  world — 
eternal  life.  To  whom  shall  he  go  for  this?  He  must  call  upon  God.  This  is 
shown — 1.  From  the  consciousness  of  an  existing  want  which  cannot  be  supplied. 
(1)  By  himself,  (a)  From  within,  (b)  From  without.  (2)  By  the  world,  (a)  Its 
inhabitants,  (b)  Its  wealth,  (o)  Its  pleasures.  2.  From  the  fact  that  light, 
pardon,   guidance,   comfort,   heaven,   can  only  be   had    from    God.     II.  Man  is 

ENCOURAGED    TO    CALL    UPON    AND    SPEAK    UNTO    GOD.      This    18    shown    by    foUT 

considerations  of  God's  dealings  with  man — 1.  Opening  the  way  of  approach  to 
Himself  by  His  Word.  2.  Teaching  the  way  by  His  servants.  8.  Directing  in  the 
way  by  His  Spirit.  4.  Distinctly  promising  to  bless  all  who  come  in  the  way.  But 
from  the  text  we  learn  explicitly  that  man  is  encouraged  to  call  upon  and  speak  unto 
Qod.  "Before  they  call,  I  will  answer."  God  perceives  and  realizes  the  desires  of 
the  Christian  heart.  Amid  all  the  complex  movements  of  the  universe,  He  sees  the 
imfolcliDg  of  the  praying  heart,  and,  swifter  than  the  lightning  flash,  the  answer 


CHAP,  ixvi.]  IBAIAH.  46S 

comes.  David  found  it  so  (Ps.  xxxiL  5),  so  did  Daniel  (Dan.  x.  12),  and  we  haye 
found  it  80  (Matt.  vi.  8).  '  'And  while  they  are  vet  speaking  I  will  hear. "  Grod  is  willing 
to  listen  to  the  articulated  wish  of  the  Christian  hearts.  Amid  the  clash  of  nations^ 
strife,  the  busy  hum  of  struggling  humanity,  the  hoarse  cries  for  sensual  pleasure, 
the  blasphemies  of  the  lewd,  the  groans  of  the  crushed  and  disappointed.  He  listens 
to  the  speaking  of  His  children,  and  hears  the  faintest  whispered  want.  Illustrations : 
The  Israelites  at  Mizpeh  (1  Sam.  vii.) ;  David's  triumph  over  his  enemies  (Ps.  ri.  8, 
9) ;  Daniel  and  the  seventy  weeks  (Dan.  ix.  21) ;  Cornelius  (Acts  x.  8).  (/.  K 
Eargreavet.) 


CHAPTER  LXYI. 


TsBS.  1, 2.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  The  heaven  is  My  throne. — The  eternal  hlessedneu 
qf  the  true  Israel ;  t?ie  doom  of  the  apostates : — This  chapter  continues  the  antithesis 
that  runs  through  chap.  Ixv. ,  canying  it  onward  to  its  eschatological  issues.  The 
connection  of  ideas  is  frequently  extremely  difficult  to  trace,  and  no  two  cities  are 
agreed  as  to  where  the  different  sections  begin  and  end.  {Prof,  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
Temple  building: — Hitzig  thinks  (and  with  him  Knobel,  Hendewerk)  that  the 
author  here  begins  quite  abruptly  to  oppose  the  purpose  of  building  a  temple  to 
Jehovah  ;  the  builders  are  those  who  meditated  remaining  behind  in  Chaldea,  and 
wished  also  to  have  a  temple,  as  the  Jews  in  Egypt,  at  a  later  time,  built  one  in 
Leontopolis.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  offerings  of  the  impenitent  offensive  to  God: — 
The  address,  directed  to  the  entire  body  ready  to  return,  says  without  distinction 
that  Jehovah,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  needs  no  house  made  by  men's  hands ; 
then  in  the  entire  body  distinguishes  between  the  penitent  and  those  alienated  from 
God,  rejects  all  worship  and  offering  at  the  hand  of  the  latter,  and  threatens  them 
with  just  retribution.  {Hid. )  The  inward  and  spiritual  preferred  by  God  to  the 
outward  and  material  .•—[These  great  words]  are  a  declaration,  spoken  probably  in 
view  of  the  approaching  restoration  of  the  temple  (which,  in  itself,  the  prophet 
entirely  approves,  chap.  xliv.  28,  and  expects,  chaps.  Ivi.  7,  Ix.  7.  Ixii.  9),  reminding 
the  Jews  of  the  truth  which  a  visible  temple  might  readily  lead  them  to  forget,  that 
no  earthly  habitation  could  be  really  adequate  to  Jehovah's  majesty,  and  that 
Jehovah's  regard  was  not  to  be  won  by  the  magnificence  of  a  material  temple,  but 
by  humility  and  the  devotion  of  the  heart.  How  needful  the  warning  was  history 
shows.  Jeremiah  (chap.  vii.  1-15)  argues  at  length  against  those  who  pointed,  with 
a  proud  sense  of  assurance,  to  the  massive  pile  of  buildings  that  crowned  the  height 
of  Zion,  heedless  of  the  moral  duties  which  loyalty  to  the  King,  whose  residence  it 
was,  implied.  And  at  a  yet  more  critical  moment  in  their  history,  attachment  to 
the  temple,  as  such,  was  one  of  the  causes  which  incapacitated  the  Jews  from 
appropriating  the  more  spiritual  teaching  of  Christ :  the  charge  brought  against 
Stephen  (Acts  vi.  13,  14)  is  that  he  ceased  not  "to  speak  words  against  this  holy 
place  and  the  law ; "  and  the  argument  of  Stephen's  defence  (Acts  viL)  is  just  to 
show  that  in  the  past  God's  favour  had  not  been  limited  to  the  period  during  which 
the  temple  of  Zion  existed.  Here,  then,  the  prophet  seizes  the  occasion  to  insist 
upon  the  necessity  of  a  spiritual  service,  passing  on  (vers.  3-5)  to  denounce,  in 
particular,  certain  superstitious  usages  which  had  apparently,  at  the  time,  infected 
the  worship  of  Jehovah.  {Prof  S.  B.  Driver,  D.  D. )  The  inwardness  of  religion : — 
1.  The  tendency  to  make  religion  consist  in  external  actions,  apart  from  the  inward 
dispositions  which  should  accompany  them,  is  very  common.  The  reason  for  this 
is  discovered  from  the  fact  that  outward  actions  are  easier  than  inward.  It  is  easier, 
for  instance,  to  become  outwardly  poor  than  to  become  poor  in  spirit ;  easier  to 
adore  with  the  body  than  to  worship  with  the  sold.  The  tendency  is  observable  in 
all  dispensations.  For  instance,  whatever  other  differences  there  may  have  been 
between  the  sacrifices  of  Cain  and  Abel,  we  are  expressly  told  that  it  was  "by  faith 
Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  "  (Heb.  xi.  4).  The  outward  act 
was  linked  with  the  right  inward  disposition.  So,  again,  in  the  time  of  the  Levitical 
Law,  the  tendency  often  manifested  itself  to  put  ceremonial  above  moral  obligations 
(Ps.  1.).  And  Isaiah,  in  his  first  chapter  (vers.  11-18),  shows  how  an  outward 
service,  without  the  putting  away  of  evil,  is  an  abomination  to  Qod.    In  the  same 


464  TEE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txn> 

way  our  Lord  condemned  the  Pharisees  (Matt.  xv.  8).  2.  This  closing  prophecy 
of  Isaiah  seems  to  contain  a  warning  against  formalism.  It  is  not  that  the  outward 
is  unimportant,  for  this  would  be  to  run  from  one  extreme  to  the  other,  but  that  the 
outward  alone  will  not  avail.  The  return  of  Israel  from  captivity  will  be  followed 
by  the  building  of  a  new  temple,  as  the  event  has  shown  ;  and  the  warning  of  the  text 
is  twofold — one,  to  remind  the  Israelites  that  Jehovah  had  no  need  of  a  temple  ;  the 
other,  to  impress  them  with  a  truth  they  were  very  apt  to  forget,  that  religion  must 
be  a  matter  of  the  heart.  I.  A  revelation  of  God.  "  Heaven  is  My  throne,  and 
the  earth  is  My  footstool."  1.  These  words,  or  the  substance  of  them,  are  again 
and  again  repeated  in  Holy  Scripture  (1  Kings  viii.  27  ;  Matt.  v.  34  ;  Acts  vii.  49). 
Repetitions  in  the  Bible  show  the  importance  of  a  truth,  or  our  difficulty  in 
remembering  it.  2.  What  is  the  truth?  That  God  is  incomprehensible.  He  ia 
everywhere  and  cannot  be  localized  (Jer.  zxiii.  24).  There  is  nowhere  where  God's 
power  and  essence  and  presence  do  not  reach.  He  knows  no  limit  of  space  or  time, 
of  knowledge  or  love.  II.  The  reference  to  the  external  temple.  "Where 
is  the  house  that  ye  build  unto  Me  ? "  1.  These  words  are  not  intended  to  deter 
Israel  from  buildmg  a  material  temple  when  they  had  returned  to  their  own 
land.  The  prophet  would  be  contradicting  himself  (Isa.  Ivi.  5-7  ;  Ix.  7) ;  and  he 
would  be  running  counter  to  the  solemn  injunctions  of  other  prophets,  such 
as  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  who  were  in  part  raised  up  by  God  to  further  the  work 
of  buUding  the  temple.  What  the  words  are  intended  to  rebuke  is  the  falseness 
of  the  ideas  that  God  requires  a  temple,  and  that  His  presence  can  be  restricted  to 
its  walls.  God  does  not  need  a  temple,  but  we  do.  In  heaven  there  will  be  no 
necessity  for  any  temple  (Rev.  xxi.  22),  where  the  glory  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb 
floods  with  its  radiance  the  whole  place.  2.  Here  the  church,  with  its  sacred 
objects  and  associations,  appeals  to  us  and  excites  our  devotion  ;  here  in  the  sacred 
place  there  is  a  distinct  promise  to  prayer ;  here  God  acts  upon  us,  and  we  upon 
God,  through  prescribed  ordinances  ;  here  He  promises  to  be  present  in  some  especial 
manner  ;  here  we  act  upon  one  another,  and  kindle  fervour,  and  therefore  must  not 
forsake  "the  assembling  of  ourselves  together"  in  the  house  of  God  (Heb.  x.  25). 
III.  But  the  text  alludes  to  the  internal  temple — ^the  dispositions  of  the 

SOUL  OF  the  worshipper,  WHICH  ATTRACT  THE  FAVOUR  OF  GoD.  "To  this  man 
will  I  look,  .  .  .  who  is  poor,  .  .  .  contrite,  and  who  trembleth  at  My  word." 
1.  Poor,  not  merely  outwardly,  but  poor  in  spirit  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  6).  The  man  who 
at  all  realizes  the  Divine  majesty  will  have  a  sense  of  his  own  nothingness.  2.  Of 
a  contrite  spirit.  A  perception  of  the  Divine  holiness  brings  self-humiliation  by 
force  of  contrast  (Job  xHi.  6).  8.  "Trembleth  at  My  word."  Fear  is  ever  an 
element  of  the  spirit  of  worship.  A  sense  of  the  Divine  justice  and  judgments  fills 
the  soul  with  awe  in  approaching  God.  The  Word  or  revelation  of  God  is  received, 
not  in  the  spirit  of  criticism,  but  with  reverence  and  godly  fear.  IV.  Lessons.  1. 
The  remembrance  of  the  all-pervading  presence  of  God  should  be  a  deterrent  from 
evil,  and  an  incentive  to  good.  2.  The  obligation  of  regularity  in  attendance  at 
Divine  worship  ought  to  be  insisted  upon,  both  as  a  recognition  of  God  and  our 
relations  with  Him,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  subjective  effects  on  human  character. 
3.  But  outward  worship  is  of  no  avail  without  inward.  There  are  tests,  in  the  text, 
of  the  presence  of  the  spirit  of  worship — lowliness,  contrition,  and  awe,  as  products 
of  the  realization  of  God's  presence  and  perfections.  {The  Thinker.)  God's  elevation 
and  condescension: — 1.  Toe  subject  of  remark — God  Himself.  "Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  The  heaven  is  My  throne,  the  earth  is  My  footstool."  The  attention  is  turned 
simply  to  God — His  grandeur.  His  magnificence.  His  immensity.  His  omnipresence. 
He  abides  in  heaven,  He  puts  the  earth  under  His  feet.  2.  The  manner  in  which 
the  remark  about  God  is  conducted,  is  that  of  a  kind  of  contrast  betwixt  Him  and 
men.  "Where  is  the  house  that  ye  build  unto  Me,  and  where  is  the  place  of  My 
rest?"  God  is  unlike  man.  He  challenges  any  comparison.  "The  heaven,  even 
the  heaven  of  heavens,  cannot  contain  Him. "  Ancient  kings  aimed  often  to  impress 
their  subjects  with  an  idea  of  their  magnificence,  and  surrounded  themselves  with  a 
solemn  and  salutary  awe,  by  rearing  palaces  of  the  most  imposing  splendour  and 
magnificence.  They  wished  to  overawe  the  multitude.  On  this  ground,  God  Himself 
seems  to  have  ordered  the  unequalled  grandeur  of  the  ancient  temple.  But  in  doing 
it.  He  took  care  that  its  dazzling  beauty  and  stateliness  should  only  be  an  aid,  a 
stepping-stone,  to  assist  the  imagination  in  its  upward  reach  towards  the  grandeur 
of  God.  In  the  prayer  of  the  dedication,  Solomon's  devotion  soars  infinitely  above 
the  temple.  Here,  the  majesty  of  God,  and  the  littleness  of  man,  stand  side  by 
side.    After  mentioning  the  earth  and  the  heaven,  God  says,  "All  these  thintr* 


fiBAP.  tZfl.3  ISAIAH.  465 

hath  My  hand  made. "  8.  But  yet,  lest  dread  should  too  mnch  terrify  the  worshipper, 
or  a  high  and  just  idea  of  God's  infinite  majesty  lead  the  humble  into  the  error  of 
supposing  that  such  an  august  Being  would  not  regard  such  an  insignificant  creature 
as  man,  He  adds,  "To  this  man  wiU  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite 
spirit,  and  trembleth  at  My  word. "  A  turn  of  thought  well  worthy  of  our  admira- 
tion. A  contrite  sinner  has  nothing  to  fear  from  God.  His  very  majesty  need  not 
terrify  him.  Indeed,  His  majesty  constitutes  the  very  ground  for  his  encouragement. 
It  can  condescend.  Just  as  much  does  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  glorify 
Himself,  when  He  consoles,  by  the  whisperings  of  His  Spirit,  the  poorest  and  most 
unworthy  sinner  that  ever  felt  the  pangs  of  a  bruised  heart,  as  when  He  thunders 
in  the  heavens  as  the  most  High,  and  gives  His  voice,  hail-stones  and  coals  of  fire. 
With  this  idea,  sinners  should  approach  Him  and  meditate  His  grandeur.  (/.  S. 
Spencer,  D.D.)  The  magnificence  of  God:— I.  Thb  style  of  the  text.  God 
speaks  of  Himself.  "The  heaven  is  My  throne,  the  earth  is  My  footstool."  This 
style  of  religious  address  is  especially  common  in  the  Scriptures  (Ps.  cxxxvlL  ; 
Job  xi.  7,  8  ;  xxvi.  6-14  ;  Isa.  xl.).  These  passages  all  speak  of  God  in  a  style  which 
we  cannot  attempt  to  analyze.  Their  aim  appears  to  be  twofold.  1.  To  lead  us 
to  make  the  idea  of  God  Himself  the  leading  idea  in  religion.  2.  To  have  this 
idea,  which  we  are  to  entertain  about  God,  an  idea  of  the  utmost  grandeur,  of  the 
most  amazing  magnificence,  and  solemn  sublimity.  II.  The  design  in  view  can- 
not EASILY  BE  MISTAKEN.  They  would  give  us  just  ideas  of  God.  The  impression 
they  aim  to  make  is  simply  this,  that  God  is  incomparably  and  inconceivably  above 
OS — an  infinite  and  awful  mystery !  III.  The  necessity  of  this  may  exist  on 
DIFFERENT  GK0TJND3.  1.  OuT  littleness.  In  the  nature  of  the  case,  there  can 
be  no  comparison  betwixt  man  and  God.  AU  is  contrast — an  infinite  contrast. 
2.  Our  sinfulness.  Sin  never  exists  aside  from  the  mind's  losing  a  just  impression 
of  the  Deity ;  and  wherever  it  exists,  there  is  a  tendency  to  cleave  to  low  and 
unworthy  ideas  of  Him.  3.  Our  materiality,  the  connection  of  our  minds  with 
material  and  gross  bodies.  This  connection  renders  it  difficult  for  us  to  soar  beyond 
matter.  We  are  in  danger  of  introducing  the  imperfections  of  our  existence  into 
our  religion,  even  into  our  ideas  of  God.  Consequently,  when  God  speaks  to  us  of 
Himself,  He  speaks  in  a  manner  designed  to  guard  us  from  error.  He  says  to  us, 
"  The  heaven  is  My  throne,  and  the  earth  is  My  footstool.  Where  is  the  house  ye 
build  unto  Me?"  We  are  limited  to  the  world.  We  cannot  get  foothold  any- 
where else.  We  are  circumscribed  within  very  narrow  limits.  But  God  asks, 
"Where  is  the  place  of  My  rest?"  He  would  elevate  our  conceptions  of  Him 
beyond  matter,  out  of  the  reach  of  its  botmds.  4.  The  nature  of  God.  Man  is 
only  a  creature.  He  owes  his  existence  to  a  cause  without  him.  That  cause  still 
rules  him.  That  cause  allows  him  to  know  but  little,  and  often  drops  the  veil  of 
an  impenetrable  darkness  before  his  eyes  just  at  the  point,  the  very  point,  where 
he  is  most  desirous  to  look  further,  and  it  drops  the  veU  there,  in  order  to  do  him 
the  twofold  office  of  convincing  him  of  the  grandeur  of  God  and  his  own  littleness, 
and  of  compelling  him,  under  the  influence  of  those  convictions,  to  turn  back  to 
a  light  which  concerns  him  more  than  the  darkness  beyond  the  veil  can,  to  a 
light  where  are  wrapped  up  the  duties  and  interests  of  his  immortal  soul.  God 
would  repress  his  curiosity,  and  make  him  use  his  conscience.  Therefore,  He 
makes  darkness  preach  to  him.  IV.  Application.  1.  Let  us  be  admonished  to 
approach  the  study  of  religion  with  a  solemnity  of  mind  which  belongs  to  it.  It  is 
the  study  of  God.  The  voice  comes  from  the  burning  bush,  "Draw  not  nigh 
hither,  put  off  thy  shoes  from  oflF  thy  feet,  for  the  ground  whereon  thou  standest 
is  holy  ground."  How  unlike  all  other  subjects  is  religion!  How  differently  we 
should  approach  it !  2.  This  mode  in  which  God  teaches  us — this  grandeur  and 
magnificence  which  belong  to  Him — ought  to  remove  a  very  common  difficulty  from 
our  minds,  and  prepare  us  to  receive  in  faith,  those  deep  and  dark  doctrines,  whose 
mystery  is  so  apt  to  stagger  us.  What  can  we  expect  ?  3.  Since  God  is  so  vast  a 
being,  how  deep  should  be  our  humility  1  4.  How  deep  should  be  our  homage ! 
5.  The  greatness  of  God  should  gauge  the  depth  of  our  repentance.  Our  sin  is 
against  Him.  6.  The  greatness  of  God  should  invite  our  faith.  "  If  God  be  for 
tis,  who  can  be  against  us  ? "  7.  The  magnificence  of  God  should  be  a  motive  to  our 
service.  He  is  able  to  turn  our  smallest  services  to  an  infinite  account.  8.  The 
greatness  of  God  ought  to  encourage  the  timid.  Because  He  is  great,  His  regard 
reaches  to  every  one  of  your  annoyances.  Your  enemies  cannot  hurt  you.  9.  The 
grandeur  of  God  ought  to  rebuke  our  reliance  upon  creatures.  {Ibid. )  What  Chd 
does  not,  and  what  He  does,  regard : — I.  What  the  Lobd  does  not  beoard.  H« 
▼OL.  iu»  80 


4M  TEE  BIBUCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.lxvj. 

speaks  quite  slightingly  of  this  ^«at  building.  But  is  it  not  said  elsewhere  that 
"the  Lord  loved  the  courts  of  Zion  "  ?  Did  He  not  expressly  tell  Kong  Solomon 
when  his  temple  was  completed,  "Mine  eyes  and  Mine  neart  shall  be  on  it  per- 
petually "  %  He  did ;  but  in  what  sense  are  we  to  understand  those  words  ?  Not 
that  He  delighted  in  the  grandeur  of  the  house,  but  in  as  much  of  spiritual  worship 
as  was  rendered  there.  The  temple  itself  was  no  otherwise  well  pleasing  to  Him 
than  as  it  was  raised  in  obedience  to  His  orders,  and  as  it  served,  in  its  fashion  and 
its  furniture,  for  "an  example  and  a  shadow  of  heavenly  things ;"  but  the  Lord 
*'  loved  the  gates  of  Zion  "  because  the  prayers  of  Zion  were  presented  there.  He 
points  out  to  us  two  things — His  throne,  and  His  footstool !  and  then  He  leaves  it 
to  ourselves  to  say  whether  any  building  man  can  raise  to  Him  can  be  considerable 
in  His  eyes.  IL  Hear  from  the  Lord's  own  lips  the  description  of  the  man 
WHO  DBAWS  His  eye.  "To  this  man,"  etc.  1.  The  sort  of  character  described. 
(1)  He  is  "poor" — humble  towards  God.  He  is  humble,  too,  towards  his  fellow- 
creatures ;  carrying  himself  meekly  towards  all  men,  and  "in  lowliness  of  mind, 
esteeming  others  better  than  himself."  He  is  "slow  to  wrath" — patient  under 
provocation — anxious  not  to  be  "overcome  of  evil"  but  rather  to  "overcome  evil 
with  good."  (2)  Another  quality  which  marks  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  looks  is 
contrition.  (3)  He  "trembleth  at  My  word."  But  what  kind  of  trembling  is 
meant  ?  Felix  trembled  at  God's  word  ;  and  many  a  wicked  man  from  his  days  to 
the  present  has  trembled  at  it  also.  And  yet  it  has  been  but  a  momentary  pang — a 
sudden  fright  that  has  come  over  them,  but  which  they  have  soon  laughed  off  again. 
Now  it  is  certainly  not  this  sort  of  trembling  which  the  Lord  regards.  The  man 
who  "  trembleth  "  at  God's  word  is  one  who  entertains  a  deep  and  abiding  reverence 
for  every  word  which  hath  proceeded  from  God's  lips.  2.  What  does  the  Lord  mean 
when  He  saith,  "To  this  man  will  I  look"?  He  evidentlv means,  "To  this  man 
wiU  I  look  with  an  eye  of  notice  and  regard."  The  Lord  s  favourable  look,  be  it 
remembered,  is  quite  another  thin^  from  man's ;  there  is  help,  and  comfort,  and 
support  conveyed  by  it  (chap.  Ivii.  15).  The  Lord  but  looked  on  Gideon,  and 
Gideon,  weak  before,  was  wonderfully  strengthened  (Judg.  vi.  14).  {A.  Roierts, 
M.A.)  God' a  greater  glory: — Here  are  described  two  phases  of  the  Divine  greatness, 
one  material,  and  the  other  moral ;  the  superiority  of  the  latter  being  clearly 
implied.  I.  The  material  greatness  of  God.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  The 
heaven  is  My  throne,  and  the  earth  is  My  footstool."  Here  God  represents  Himself 
as  a  mighty  potentate,  leaving  us  to  infer  the  measure  of  His  kingly  glory  and  the 
extent  of  His  dominion  from  these  two  things — His  throne  and  His  footstooL 
Thus  the  glory  of  the  whole  is  indicated  by  the  glory  of  the  part.  1.  The  throne. 
We  must  note  carefully  the  full  extent  and  purport  of  the  figure,  "The  heaven  is 
My  throne."  It  is  not  that  the  heaven  is  the  place  of  His  throne,  but  that  the 
heaven  is  itself  the  throne.  The  conception,  bold  as  it  is,  strikingly  agrees  with 
another  figure  used  by  inspiration  to  set  forth  the  transcendent  majesty  of  God, 
"Behold,  the  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Thee."  The  figure  is 
a  bold  one.  The  human  imagination,  daring  as  its  flights  often  are,  could  never 
have  conceived  it.  It  is  purely  a  Divine  conception,  and  the  text  is  careful  to  say 
so,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord!l"  2.  His  footstool.  "The  earth."  We  know  very  little 
of  the  heaven.  We  know  a  great  deal  about  the  earth.  Men  have  taken  its 
dimensions,  explored  its  resources,  and  discovered  its  glories.  Yet  this  magnificent 
object  is  but  His  footstool.  The  footstool  is  the  humblest  article  of  furniture  in 
the  household  ;  so  needless  is  it  deemed  that  thousands  of  houses  dispense  with  it 
altogether.  Others  easi^  convert  the  thing  nearest  to  hand  into  a  footstool,  as 
occasion  may  require.  Nevertheless,  some  have  expended  no  Kttle  skUl  and  expense 
upon  the  construction  even  of  footstools.  There  is  preserved  as  a  relic  in  Windsor 
Castle  such  an  article,  once  belonging  to  the  renowned  Hindoo  prince,  Tippoo  Sahib. 
If  is  in  the  form  of  a  bear's  head,  carved  in  ivory,  with  a  tongue  of  gold,  teeth  of 
crystal,  and  its  eyes  a  pair  of  rubies.  This  article  is  adjudged  worth  £10,000.  It 
is  after  all  but  a  footstool.  If  Tippoo  Sahib's  footstool  were  so  magnificent,  what 
must  have  been  the  splendour  of  his  throne  1  Yet,  were  all  the  thrones  of  the  world 
collected  together  into  one  vast  pile,  they  would  form  but  a  heap  of  rubbish  as 
compared  with  God's  footstool.  II.  The  text  presents  us  with  another  phase 
OF  His  glory — the  moral,  which  is  also  His  greater  glory.  "  But  to  this 
man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  trembleth  at 
My  word."  What  a  contrast  we  have  presented  to  us  here.  Qod,^  the  Mighty 
Potentate,  from  the  height  of  His  heavenly  throne,  looking  down  with  yeami^, 
oompassionate  regard  npon  such  objects  as  are  here  described,  the  Teiy  dnJit  of  ms 


CHAP.  Lxn.]  ISAIAH.  467 

footstool.  There  is  a  moral  grandeur  in  this  far  transcending  the  power  of  language 
to  describe.  In  order  to  appreciate  fully  the  beauty  and  glory  of  this  act,  we  must 
notice  particularly  the  characters  which  are  its  special  objects.  They  are  described 
as  those  who  are  "poor"  and  are  "of  a  contrite  spirit,"  and  that  "tremble  at  Hia 
word."  These  several  expressions  do  not  describe  one  and  the  same  condition. 
They  indicate  three  distinct  and  progressive  stages  of  spiritual  experience.  1. 
Destitution.  "  Poor."  It  is  not  physical  poverty  that  is  meant,  for  the  wealthiest, 
those  who  abound  most  in  worldly  possessions,  are  equally  with  the  most  destitute 
in  the  condition  here  indicated  by  the  term  "poor."  It  describes  a  spiritual 
condition — the  spiritual  poverty  into  which  all  men  are  reduced  through  sin — the 
wretched,  the  miserable,  the  oppressed  of  sin  and  guilt — the  poor  in  the  sense  of 
being  without  hope,  destitute  of  true  peace  and  happiness.  2.  The  second  stage 
indicated  is  one  of  conviction — the  misery  becoming  a  felt  fact.  "  And  of  a  contrite 
spirit."  In  these  words  we  have  indicated  that  condition  of  the  mind  when  the 
all-crushing  fact  of  its  poverty  and  wretchedness  has  come  home  with  overwhelming 
conviction.  3.  The  third  stage  is  one  of  hope.  "  Trembleth  at  My  word."  God,  out 
of  the  infinite  depth  of  His  compassion,  hath  spoken  to  this  poor,  wretched,  sin- 
convicted  creature,  and  the  word  spoken  is  a  word  of  hope.  The  "  trembling  "  at  the 
word  does  not  mean  regarding  it  with  fear,  terror,  or  dismay,  but  solemnly,  feelingly, 
and  trustingly.  It  is  the  trembling  of  gratitude  and  of  an  awakened  hope — an  exquisite 
thrill  of  gratitude  piercing  the  whole  soul,  causing  it  to  vibrate  with  responsive  joy 
to  the  message  of  hope.  This  wonderful  condescension  of  God  in  relation  to  sinfiil 
men  is  His  greater  glory,  it  redounds  to  His  honour  far  more  than  His  conversion  of 
the  heavens  into  His  throne  and  of  the  earth  into  His  footstool.  {A.  J.  Parry.) 
Worship  a/nd  ritual : — The  desire  for  Divine  communion  has  ever  been  strong  in  man. 
This  desire  was  originated  by  God  Himself.  If  not  from  God,  whence  could  it  come  f 
We  have  no  right  to  suppose  it  to  be  self-originated.  That  finite  man  shovdd  con- 
ceive an  infinite  Deity  is  an  incredible  supposition,  for,  to  use  the  words  of  Pascal, 
"  the  infinite  God  is  infinitely  inconceivable."  The  manner  in  which  God  has  thus 
revealed  Himself  in  response  to  the  passionate  desire  which  He  originated  in  man  is 
a  study  fraught  with  a  singular  interest.  He  made  Himself  known  to  our  first 
parents  in  Eden's  garden,  and  in  our  first  Scriptures  we  have  several  examples 
recorded  of  revelations  made  by  Him  after  the  banishment  to  the  fathers  of  our  race. 
By  tradition  these  revelations  were  spread  throughout  the  earth,  and  so  we  find  the 
earliest  religious  faiths  of  our  world  abounding  in  sublime  truths.  But  He  specially 
revealed  Himself  to  a  chosen  people.  Israel  lived  under  the  very  shadow  of  Jehovah, 
for  God  dwelt  in  that  temple  and  specially  manifested  His  presence  in  it.  But  that 
presence  did  not  restrain  the  people  from  rebellion.  "When  not  open  followers  of  the 
idolatries  of  the  surrounding  nations,  they  left  worship  for  ritual  and  forsook  God 
for  observances,  and  so  made  that  temple  to  be  at  once  their  glory  and  their  shame. 
It  was  at  such  time  as  this  that  the  words  of  our  text  were  uttered.  Thus  are  we 
taught  that  Divine  worship  is  not  material,  but  spiritual,  and  that  the  habitation  of 
God  is  not  the  building,  but  the  soul.  I.  The  nattjee  of  the  Being  whom  we 
WORSHIP.  Our  text  brings  before  us  His  omnipresence.  He  is  in  heaven,  and 
He  is  on  earth.  We  have  a  revelation  also  of  the  Divine  omnipotence.  Not 
only  is  He  in  heaven,  not  only  is  He  on  earth,  but  He  has  a  throne.  Of 
course  the  one  includes  the  other.  If  He  be  the  omnipresent  One,  He  is  also 
the  omnipotent  One.  That  which  is  Infinite  must  be  Absolute.  We,  how- 
ever, distinguish,  so  as  to  obtain  clearer  conceptions.  We  are  in  danger  of 
supposing  that  amidst  all  this  vastness  we  can  be  but  of  little  consequence. 
But  mind  is  greater  than  matter,  and  such  ideas  immediately  vanish  when  we 
remember  that  the  vastest  material  substance  can  never  outweigh  a  holy  thought,  a 
feeling  of  devotion,  a  thrill  of  love.  The  man  who  can  tell  the  motions  of  the  stars 
is  greater  than  the  stars.  And  thus  looking  at  the  question,  what  shall  we  say  of 
that  man  in  whom  God  dwells  ?  He  who  lives  in  a  palace  is  greater  than  the  palace, 
no  matter  how  gorgeous  it  may  be  ;  and  in  the  presence  of  a  holy  man  the  whole 
material  creation  is  dwarfed  into  nothingness.  II.  The  nature  op  that  worship 
WHICH  this  great  God  REQUIRES.  It  must  be  something  more  than  outward.  Of 
all  ceremonialism  the  Jewish  was  the  most  gorgeous.  It  was  also  of  Divine  appoint- 
ing. The  temple  was  built  according  to  Divine  plan  and  under  Divine  direction. 
The  services  were  divinely  commanded.  The  priests  belonged  to  a  Divinely  set  apart 
tribe.  Tokens  of  the  Divine  presence  were  given.  But  although  this  ceremonial 
was  thus  gor^ous,  and  of  Divine  appointment,  yet  God  rejected  it  so  soon  as  it  lost 
its  Bpiritnal  significance.    All  trae  religion  begins  in  povertrjr  of  spirit.    There  must 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxvi. 

be  a  sense  of  natural  defect  and  a  consciousness  of  our  own  inability  either  to  atone 
for  the  past  or  to  deliver  in  the  future.  And  with  this  poverty  of  spirit  there  must 
be  contriteness.  The  heart  needs  to  be  broken  before  it  can  be  bound  up.  {Allan 
Sees.)  A  transcendent  existence  and  a  tratiscendent  doctrine: — I.  An  existence 
THAT  STANDS  IN  CONTRAST  WITH  ALL  THAT  IS  CREATED.  1.  Here  is  an  Omni- 
present Existence.  One  whose  throne  is  heaven,  whose  footstool  is  earth,  and  to 
whom  all  places  are  alike.  One  who  fills  heaven  and  earth,  not  merely  with  His 
influence,  but  with  His  actual  presence,  as  much  at  all  times  in  one  point  of  space  as 
in  another.  The  incommensurable  One,  not  only  everywhere,  as  the  pantheists 
teach,  as  a  substance,  but  everywhere  as  a  Personality,  free,  conscious,  active.  All 
created  existences  are  limited  by  the  laws  of  space,  and  those  that  occupy  the  largest 
space  are  mere  specks  in  immensity.  Concerning  the  stupendous  fact  of  God's 
Omnipresence,  observe — (1)  This  fact  is  agreeable  to  reason.  The  denial  of  it  would 
involve  a  contradiction.  It  enters  into  our  very  conception  of  God.  A  limited  God 
would  in  truth  be  no  God.  (2)  This  fact  is  essential  to  worship.  It  is  essential  to 
the  spirit  of  worship.  Worship  implies  mystery.  It  is  essential  to  constancy  of 
worship.  True  worship  is  not  an  occasional  or  specific  service  confined  to  times  and 
places,  it  is  an  abiding  attitude  of  the  soul.  " God  is  a  Spirit,"  etc.  (3)  This  fact 
18  promotive  of  holiness.  Let  men  realize  the  constant  presence  of  God,  and  how 
strongly  will  they  feel  restraint  from  sin  and  stimulation  to  virtue  and  holiness.  (4) 
This  fact  is  assurative  of  retribution.  Who  can  hide  himself  from  the  Lord  ?  (5) 
This  fact  is  illustrative  of  heaven.  There  is  nothing  local  or  formal  in  the  worship 
of  heaven.  "  I  saw  no  temple  in  heaven,  for  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb 
are  the  temple  of  it."  He  is  felt  to  be  everywhere,  and  He  is  worshipped  every- 
where. 2.  Here  is  a  creative  Existence.  "For  all  those  things  hath  Mine  hand 
made,"  etc.  Because  He  made  all.  He  owns  all.  Oreatorship  implies  Eternity, 
Sovereignty,  Almightiness,  and  Proprietorship.  II.  A  doctrine  that  transcends 
HUMAN  DISCOVERT.  "  To  this  man  will  I  look,"  etc.  The  doctrine  is  this, — that  this 
Infinite  Being,  who  is  everywhere,  who  created  the  universe  and  owns  it,  feels  a  pro- 
found interest  in  the  individual  man  whose  soul  is  in  a  humble,  contrite,  and  reverent 
state.  Could  reason  ever  have  discovered  such  a  truth  as  this  ?  Never.  Although 
this  doctrine  transcends  reason  it  does  not  contradict  it.  {Homilist.)  Living  temples 
for  the  living  God : — I.  God's  rejection  of  all  material  temples.  There  was  a 
time  when  it  could  be  said  that  there  was  a  house  of  God  on  earth.  That  was  a  time 
of  symbols,  when  as  yet  the  Church  of  God  was  in  her  childhood.  She  was  being 
taught  her  ABC,  reading  her  picture-book,  for  she  could  not  as  yet  read  the  Word 
of  God,  as  it  were  in  letters.  She  had  need  to  have  pictures  put  before  her,  patterns 
of  the  heavenly  things.  Even  then,  the  enlightened  amongst  the  Jews  knew  well 
that  God  did  not  dwell  between  curtains,  and  that  it  was  not  possible  that  He  could 
be  encompassed  in  the  most  holy  place  within  the  veil.  It  was  only  a  symbol  of  His 
presence.  But  the  time  of  symbols  is  now  passed  altogether.  In  that  moment  when 
the  Saviour  bowed  His  head,  and  said  "It  is  finished !  "  the  veil  of  the  temple  was 
rent  in  twain,  so  that  the  mysteries  were  laid  open.  So,  one  reason  why  God  saith 
He  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  is,  because  He  would  have  us  know 
that  the  symbolical  worship  is  ended  and  the  reign  of  the  spiritual  worship  inaugur- 
ated at  this  day  (John  iv.  21,  23).  But  our  text  gives,  from  God's  own  mouth, 
reasons  why  there  can  be  no  house  at  the  present  time  in  which  God  can  dwell ; 
and,  indeed,  there  never  was  any  house  of  the  kind  in  reality — only  in  symbol. 
For,  say  now,  where  is  the  place  to  build  God  a  house  ?  In  heaven  ?  It  is  only  His 
throne,  not  His  house  !  On  earth  ?  What,  on  His  footstool  ?  Will  ye  put  it  where 
He  shall  put  His  foot  upon  it  and  crush  it  ?  Fly  through  infinite  space,  and  ye  shall 
not  find  in  any  place  that  God  is  not  there.  Time  cannot  contain  Him,  though  it 
range  along  its  millenniums !  Space  cannot  hold  Him,  for  He  that  made  all  things  is 
greater  than  all  the  things  that  He  has  made.  Yea,  all  the  things  that  are  do  not 
encompass  Him.  But  then,  the  Lord  seems  to  put  it, — What  kind  of  a  house  (sup- 
posing we  had  a  site  on  which  to  erect  it)  would  we  build  God  ?  Sons  of  men,  of 
what  material  would  ye  make  a  dwelling-place  for  the  Eternal  and  the  Pure  ?  Would 
ye  build  of  alabaster  ?  The  heavens  are  not  clean  in  His  sight,  and  He  charged  His 
angels  with  folly  1  Would  ye  build  of  gold  ?  Behold,  the  streets  of  His  metropolitan 
city  are  paved  therewith,  not  indeed  the  dusky  gold  of  earth,  but  transparent  gold, 
like  unto  clear  glass.  And  what  were  gold  to  Deity  ?  Find  diamonds,  as  massive 
as  the  stones  whereof  Solomon  built  his  house  on  Zion,  and  then  lay  on  rubies  and 
jaspers — pile  up  a  house,  all  of  which  shall  be  most  precious.  What  were  that  to 
Him!    God  is  a  Spirit.     He  disdaineth  your  materialism.     And  yet  men  think. 


CHAP,  ixn.]  ISAIAH.  469 

forsooth,  when  they  have  put  up  their  Gothic  or  their  Grecian  structures,  "  This  is 
God's  house."  Ana  then  the  Lord  shows  that  the  earth  and  the  heavens  themselves, 
which  may  be  compared  to  a  temple,  are  the  works  of  His  hand.  How  often  I  have 
felt  as  if  I  were  compassed  with  the  solemn  grandeur  of  a  temple,  in  the  midst  of 
the  pine  forest,  or  on  the  heathery  hUl,  or  out  at  night  with  the  bright  stars  looking 
down  through  the  deep  heavens,  or  listening  to  the  thunder,  peal  on  peal,  or  gazing 
at  the  lightning  as  it  lit  up  the  sky  1  Then  one  feels  as  if  he  were  in  the  temple  of 
God  !  Afar  out  on  the  blue  sea,  where  the  ship  is  rocking  up  and  down  on  the  waves' 
foam — then  it  seems  as  if  you  were  somewhere  near  to  God — amidst  the  sublimities 
of  natvu-e.  But  what  then  %  All  these  objects  of  nature  He  has  made,  and  they  are 
not  a  house  for  Him.  II.  God's  choice  of  spiritual  temples.  "To  this  man 
will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  trembleth  at  My 
word."  III.  Those  that  are  op  this  character  secure  a  great  blessing. 
God  says  He  wiU  "  look  "  to  them.  That  means  several  things.  1.  Consideration. 
2.  Approbation.  3.  Acceptance.  4.  AflFection.  5.  Benediction.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  greatness  cmd  condescension  of  God : — That  is  an  excellent  answer  which  was  given 
by  a  poor  man  to  a  sceptic  who  attempted  to  ridicule  his  faith.  The  scoffer  said, 
•'  Pray,  sir,  is  your  Goa  a  great  God  or  a  little  God  ?  "  The  poor  man  replied,  "  Sir, 
my  God  is  so  great  that  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Him  ;  and  yet  He 
condescends  to  be  so  little,  that  He  dwells  in  broken  and  contrite  hearts."  Oh,  the 
greatness  of  God,  and  the  condescension  of  God  1    {Ibid.) 

Yet.  2.  To  this  man  will  I  look. — God's  regard  for  the  humble : — I.  Thi  oharao- 

TER  mentioned.  II.  Jhhovah's  ATTENTION  TO  SUCH  AN  ONE.  {R.  Davis.)  Heligi- 
oils  affections  attended  with  humility : — Those  that  are  destitute  of  true  humility 
have  no  true  religion.  It  is  the  object  of  the  Gospel  to  produce  this  efiFect  in  the 
heart.  I.  Legal  humility.  This  attends  the  natural  workings  of  the  conscience, 
and  the  perception  of  God's  greatness,  power  and  terrible  majesty.  It  has  in  it  no 
virtue  ;  but  yet  it  may  be  useful  as  a  means  to  produce  what  is  gracious.  II.  Evan- 
gelical humility.  This  arises  from  a  "sense  of  the  transcendent  beauty  of 
Divine  things  in  their  moral  quality,"  and  a  sense  that  a  Christian  has  of  his  own 
utter  insufficiency,  despicableness  and  odiousness,  with  an  answerable  frame  of 
mind.  1.  It  is  the  chief  part  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Christian  duty  of  self-denial, 
2.  Many  hypocrites  profess  great  humility  and  are  loud  in  declaring  their  vUeness. 
Yet,  if  a  minister  were  to  use,  as  Edwards  suggests,  the  same  language  to  them  in 
private,  and  should  signify  that  he  feared  they  were  very  low  and  weak  Christians, 
they  would  feel  themselves  highly  injured,  and  ever  after  cherish  a  deep-rooted 
prejudice  against  that  minister.  3.  It  is  free  from  the  spirit  of  pride  in  one's  own 
righteousness,  goodness  and  the  like.  Some  think  themselves  very  humble  and  make 
a  boast  of  it.  This  is  spiritual  pride.  III.  Some  applications.  1.  TVue  humility 
is  fundamental  to  the  Christian  life.  2.  It  is  a  bad  sign  to  think  we  are  better 
Christians  than  others.  3.  If  we  think  "  none  are  so  bad  as  I,"  then  have  a  care  lest 
you  think  yourself  better  than  others'  on  this  account.  4.  Have  a  care  also  of  self- 
conceit,  lest  you  think  too  highly  of  your  humility.  5.  Let  us  think  meanly  of  our 
attainments  m  religion  and  in  humility.  6.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit.  {ITomiletie 
Review.)  The  contrite  heart : — 1.  Such  a  spirit  is  the  very  essence  of  the  religion  of 
Christ.  2.  There  is  no  surer  test  of  the  genuineness  of  one's  religious  experience. 
8.  The  exceeding  value  of  this  spirit  in  God's  sight,  and  the  imperative  duty  of 
cultivating  it,  are  too  much  lost  sight  of  in  this  age  of  the  world.  {J.  M.  Sher- 
wood, D.D.)  Poor  and  contrite  spirits  the  objects  of  Divine  favour: — I.  The  poor 
MAN.  This  does  not  principally  refer  to  those  that  are  poor  in  this  world:  for 
though  it  be  very  common  that  ' '  the  poor  of  this  world  are  chosen  to  be  rich  in 
faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom,"  yet  this  is  not  an  universal  rule.  The  "poor" 
here  signifies  such  as  Christ  characterizes  more  fully  by  "  the  poor  in  spirit"  (Matt. 
v.  3).  And  this  character  implies  the  following  ingredients.  (1)  The  poor  man  to 
whom  Jehovah  looks  is  deeply  sensible  of  his  own  insufficiency,  and  that  nothing 
but  the  enjoyment  of  God  can  make  him  happy  (Ps.  iv.  6,  7  ;  Ixxiii.  25,  26  ;  xviii. 
15).  (2)  'This  spiritual  poverty  implies  deep  humility  and  self-abasement.  (3)  He 
who  is  poor  in  spirit  is  sensible  of  his  need  of  the  influences  of  Divine  grace  to 
sanctify  and  enrich  him.  (4)  He  is  deeply  sensible  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  for  his  justification.  (5)  He  is  an  importunate  beggar  at 
tJie  throne  of  grace.  II.  Contrition  of  spirit.  The  word  "  contrite "  signifies 
one  that  is  beaten  or  bruised  with  hard  blows,  or  a  heavy  burden.  And  it  belongs 
to  the  mooming  penitent  whose  heart  is  broken  and  wounded  for  ain.    Sin  is  an 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  txn, 

intolerable  burden  that  crushes  and  bruises  him,  and  he  feels  himself  pained  and 
sore  under  it.  III.  Consider  the  remaining  character  of  the  happy  man  to  whom 
the  Lord  will  look  :  "Him  that  trembleth  at  My  word."  This  character  im- 
plies a  tender  sense  of  the  great  things  of  the  Word,  and  a  heart  easily  impressed 
with  them  as  the  most  important  realities.  This  was  remarkably  exemplifiedTin  the 
tender-hearted  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  19-28).  The  threatenings  of  the  "Word  do 
not  appear  vaiu  terms,  nor  great  swelling  words  of  vanity,  but  the  most  tremendous 
realities.  Such  an  one  cannot  bear  up  under  them,  but  would  tremble,  and  fall, 
and  die  away,  if  not  relieved  by  some  happy  promise  of  deliverance.  {S.  Bavies, 
M.A.)  God's  look  towards  the  humble: — 1.  He  looks  upon  you  with  acceptance. 
2.  He  looks  to  you  so  as  to  take  particular  notice  of  you.  He  sees  all  the  workings 
of  your  hearts  towards  Him.  3.  He  looks  to  you  so  as  to  look  after  you,  as  we  do 
after  the  sick  and  weak  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11).  {Ibid.)  Htcmility  essential  to  success  in 
prayer: — ^The  "Times"  once,  in  recording  petitions  presented  to  the  House  of 
Lords,  mentioned  one  which  was  rejected  on  account  of  an  omission — the  word 
"  humble  "  was  left  out.  How  many  petitions  to  a  higher  tribunal  must  be  rejected 
for  lack  of  humility  in  the  hearts  of  those  presenting  them  I  {Free  Methodist.)  Th» 
hv/mility  of  Godliness: — In  the  evening  of  the  morning  that  Gordon,  when  in 
Palestine,  received  a  telegram  from  England,  asking  him  to  undertake  a  mission 
which  he  had  all  his  life  longed  to  undertake,  he  was  found  outside  the  city  wall, 
kneeling  in  prayer.  When  remonstrated  with  on  account  of  the  place  being  dangerous 
from  Arabs,  he  replied,  "  The  telegrams  from  England  this  morning  filled  me  with 
such  elation,  I  felt  I  might  get  iuto  trouble  by  being  proud,  and  I  thought  I  would 
just  get  upon  my  horse  and  go  away  by  myself  and  humble  myself  before  God." 
{Svmday  School  Chronicle. )  And  trembleth  at  My  word. — Trembling  at  the  word  of 
the  Lord: — I.  Who  are  these  people  that  tremble  at  God's  word.  1.  Who 
they  are  not.  (1)  They  are  not  a  proud  people :  they  do  not  cry,  "  Who  is  the 
Lord,  that  I  shoidd  obey  His  voice  ? "  (2)  They  are  not  a  profane  people :  they 
neither  make  a  mock  at  sin  nor  at  God's  word.  (3)  They  are  not  indifferent  people. 
(4)  They  are  not  a  critical,  sceptical  people.  (5)  They  are  not  presumptuous  people, 
who  derive  fictitious  comfort  from  it.  2.  Who  they  are.  (1)  They  are  people  who 
do  believe  that  there  is  a  Word  of  God.  (2)  They  are  acquaiuted  with  God's  Word. 
II.  Why  do  they  tremble  ?  1.  Because  of  His  exceecMng  majesty.  2.  Because 
of  the  searching  power  of  God's  Word.  3.  They  tremble  at  the  word  when  it  is  in 
the  form  of  threatening.  4.  They  tremble  with  fear  lest  they  should  break  God's 
law.  5.  They  tremble  lest  they  should  miss  the  promises  when  they  are  spread 
out  before  t.beT».  We  hear  of  some  who  "  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief ; " 
and  tvb  are  taken  with  trembling  lest  we  should  be  like  them.  III.  What  does 
God  compare  them  to  ?  To  a  temple  (vers.  1,  2).  He  prefers  us  to  the  temple ; 
and,  further.  He  prefers  us  even  to  the  great  temple  of  the  universe,  not  made  with 
human  hands,  wmch  He  Himself  sets  so  much  above  the  house  that  Solomon  built. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Trembling  at  God's  Word: — What  meaneth  this  trembling?  It 
does  not  mean  a  slavish  fear.  They  that  tremble  at  God's  Word  at  the  first  may  do 
so,  because  the  word  threatens  them  with  death.  But  afterwards  as  they  advance, 
and  become  familiar  with  the  God  of  love,  and  enter  into  the  secret  of  His  covenant, 
they  tremble  for  a  very  different  reason.  They  tremble  because  they  have  a  holy 
reverence  of  God,  and  consequently  of  that  Word  in  which  resides  so  much  of  the 
power  and  majesty  of  the  Most  High.  {Ibid.)  Trembling  at  God's  Word: — It  was 
our  privilege  once  to  witness  a  very  curious  experiment  by  a  scientific  lecturer  on 
the  effects  of  musical  sounds.  The  lecturer  showed  a  disc  of  thin  glass,  delicately 
poised  on  a  suitable  apparatus.  On  this  disc  was  spread  a  thin  layer  of  very  fine 
dust.  A  musical  note  was  sounded  underneath  the  disc,  and  the  waves  of  sound 
caused  the  glass  to  vibrate,  which  again  caused  the  fine  dust  on  its  surface  to 
tremble  and  form  itself  into  every  conceivable  shape  of  exquisite  beauty,  much  after 
the  manner  of  frost  on  the  window  pane.  Thus,  we  presume,  it  is  with  the  "poor  " 
of  the  text,  the  dust  of  God's  footstool.  The  musical  note  of  hope  will  cause  them 
to  vibrate  and  tremble  and  throb  into  the  various  forms  of  reverence,  hope,  joy,  and 
gratitude.  It  implies  precisely  a  sumlar  attitude  to  that  manifested  on  the  memor- 
able day  of  Pentecost.  Here  we  have  the  multitude  as  "the  dust  of  the  balance," 
and  Peter,  the  Gospel  experimentalist,  sounding  the  musical  note  of  Gospel  hope, 
and  behold !  how  the  dust  trembles  and  vibrates  into  such  forms  of  spiritual  beanty 
M  fiutii  and  hope  and  gratitude  and  obedience.    {,A.  J.  Parry.) 

Ytr.  8.  Es  that  kUleth  aa  to. — WoniMp  ani  voiekednen  :~-Ova  prophet  af3rm% 


CHAP,  ixn.]  ISAIAH.  471 

that  the  sacrifices  ofTered  by  the  wicked  and  hypocritical  among  the  Jews,  being 
attended  with  enormous  crimes  and  profane  rites,  and  not  presented  with  pure 
hearts,  according  to  the  Divine  appointment,  were  an  abomination  to  the  Lord. 
They  intermixed  impious  ceremonies  and  odious  superstitions  with  the  sacrifices 
which  they  ofi"ered  to  the  Most  High,  (iJ.  Macculloch.)  Hateful  sacrifices: — The 
first  part  of  the  verse  runs  literally  thus :  "  The  slaughterer  of  the  ox,  a  slayer  of  a 
man ;  the  sacrificer  of  the  sheep,  a  breaker  of  a  dog's  neck ;  the  ofiTerer  of  an 
oblation,  swine's  blood ;  the  maker  of  a  memorial  of  incense,  one  that  blesseth 
vanity  (i.  e.  an  idol) ; "  four  legitimate  sacrificial  acts  being  bracketed  with  four 
detestable  idolatrous  rites.  The  first  member  of  each  pair  is  probably  to  be  taken 
as  subject,  the  second  as  predicate,  of  a  sentence.  But  this  leaves  open  a  choice 
between  two  interpretations.  1.  That  the  legal  sacrificial  action  is  as  hateful  in 
the  sight  of  God  as  the  idolatrous  rite,  so  long  as  it  is  performed  by  unspiritual 
worshippers.  2.  That  he  who  does  the  first  series  of  actions  does  also  the  second, 
i.e.  combines  the  service  of  Jehovah  with  the  most  hateful  idolatries.  It  is 
extremely  difficult  to  decide  which  is  thfi  true  sense.  The  words  "as  if "  in  E.  V. 
are,  of  course,  supplied  by  the  translators,  but  the  rendering  is  a  perfectly  fair  one. 
The  one  fact  that  favours  the  second  explanation  is  that  the  latter  part  of  the  verse 
speaks  of  those  who  "delight  in  their  abominations."  Unless  there  be  a  complete 
break  in  the  middle  of  the  verse,  which  is  unlikely,  this  would  seem  to  imply  that 
the  abominations  enumerated  were  actually  practised  by  certain  persons,  who  at 
the  same  time  claimed  to  be  worshippers  of  Jehovah  (cf.  ver.  17,  chaps.  Ixv.  3-5, 
Ivii.  3-9).  {Prof.  J.  Skiwner,  D.D.)  Unacceptable  scumfices: — I  regard  Vitringa's 
exposition  as  the  most  exact,  profound  and  satisfactory.  He  agrees  with  Geseniua 
in  making  the  text  the  general  doctrine  that  sacrifice  is  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God 
if  offered  in  a  wicked  spirit,  but  with  a  special  reference  to  those  who  still  adhered 
to  the  old  sacrifices  after  the  great  Sacrifice  for  sin  was  come  and  had  been  offered 
once  for  all.  Thus  understood,  this  verse  extends  to  sacrifices  that  which  the  fore- 
going verse  said  of  the  temple,  after  the  change  of  dispensation.  {J.  A.  Alexander.) 
"As  if  he  slew  a  man" : — The  reference  may  be  either  to  murder  merely  or  to 
human  sacrifice  ;  most  probably  the  latter,  since  every  other  member  of  the  sentence 
expresses  a  religious  act.  That  human  sacrifice  was  actually  perpetrated  by  those 
spoken  of  may  be  safely  inferred  from  chap.  Ivii.  5.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  "As 
if  he  cut  off  {breaketh)  a  dog's  neck  " : — This  sacrifice  .  .  .  seems  ...  to  be  alluded 
to  as  a  Punic  rite  in  Justin  xviii.  I.  10,  where  we  read  that  Darius  sent  a  message 
to  the  Carthaginians  forbidding  them  to  sacrifice  human  victims  and  to  eat  the 
flesh  of  dogs.  In  the  connection  a  religious  meal  must  be  understood.  {W. 
Bobertson  Smith.)  ForTnal  worship : — I.  Its  feattibes.  II.  Its  offensiveness  to 
God.    III.  Its  utter  worthlessness.     {Homiletie  Commentary.) 

Yer.  4.  I  also  will  choose  their  delosions. — Sin  and  penalty: — I.  The  offence. 
Impenitence,  aggravated  transgression,  wilftd  contempt.  IL  The  pitkibhuemt. 
Delusion,  fear,  ruin.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord. — A  godly  minority : — From  the  majority  of 
the  whole  body,  godless  and  heathen  in  character,  the  prophet  now  turns  to  the 
minority,  who  tremble  with  reverence  when  they  hear  God's  word.  Let  them  hear 
how  Jehovah  will  help  them  against  their  persecutors.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Hatred 
of  the  godly : — They  who  hate  them  are  their  own  brethren  and,  what  aggravates  the 
sin  still  more,  Jehovah's  name  is  the  ground  (cf.  Luke  xxi.  12)  on  which  they  are 
hated  by  them.  {Ibid.)  "Let  th^  Lord  be  glorified": — "Be  glorified"  means, 
Show  His  glory.  They  speak  in  incredulous  mockery.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Acceptable  worship: — I.  The  distinguishing  character  of  acceptable  wor- 
shippers. They  "tremble  at  His  word."  This  fear  arises  from — 1.  Their  tender 
love  and  reverence  for  the  Author  of  the  Word.  2.  A  settled  delight  in  the 
holiness  of  that  Word.  3.  Produced  alike  by  the  terror  of  the  threatenings  and 
the  sweetness  of  the  promises,  II.  The  spiritual  repard  which  God  pays  to 
THEM,  1,  He  looks  upon  them,  2.  He  dwells  with  them.  3.  He  vindicates  their 
cause  from  the  rebuke  of  enemies,  4.  He  brings  them  for  ever  to  dwell  with  TTim, 
{S.  Thodey.) 

Yer.  6.  A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city. — Social  degeneracy,  national  apostasy,  and 
ffie  voice  of  Ghd : — It  is  well  for  ns  to  look  around  upon  the  things  that  are  done  in 
the  midst  of  ns  as  a  people ;  well,  because  we  must  give  no  oonnivanoe  at  evil 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxw. 

thinking  or  teaching  or  doing ;  well,  because  we  must  be  careful  about  ourselves ; 
well,  because  we  must  be  tmthM  towards  our  neighbours ;  well,  because  we  must 
be  faithful  toward  our  God.  This  text  suggests  three  difiFerent  voices  which 
thoughtful  men  should  hear:  "A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city,"  etc.  In  other 
words,  our  ear  must  listen  to  the  state  of  society  and  the  state  of  religion  amongst 
us,  and  then  consider  what  the  Lord  has  to  say  concerning  both.  1.  What  is  the 
voice  which  comes  from  the  city,  from  the  secular  pursuits,  the  social  habits,  tJie 
business  transactions,  the  political  doings  of  men  ?  There  is  a  voice  of  noise,  as  of 
men  that  laugh,  as  of  men  that  strive,  as  of  men  that  boast.  Luxury,  with  all 
its  attendant  evils,  has  come  up  as  a  cry  from  all  our  land,  into  the  ears  of  earnest 
and  anxious  men,  who  know  how  foolish  it  is  to  be  "lovers  of  pleasure  more  than 
lovers  of  God. "  It  has  carried  with  it  a  hasting  to  be  rich  ;  and  out  of  that  has 
grown  a  covetousness,  a  cold  system  of  reckless  speculation,  a  hard  system  of  in- 
difference, to  the  ruin  of  many  for  the  enrichment  of  a  few,  which  have  made  our 
age  and  our  country  a  by-word  amongst  men.  What  awful  accounts  of  utter  con- 
tempt for  human  sufferings  !  What  sad  chronicles  of  entire  forgetfulness  of  human 
wrongs  have  become  the  familiar  subjects  of  e very-day  knowledge  amongst  ubI 
These  are  crying  evils  in  our  days  ;  the  voice  of  noises  from  the  city,  symptoms  of 
our  social  life,  of  which  all  true  patriots  ought  to  be  blushinglv  ashamed.  Yet, 
over  the  meanings  of  the  oppressed,  and  the  sorrows  of  the  forsaken,  the  roar  still 
rises,  I  ask  every  pious  parent  to  keep  a  jealous  and  watchful  eye  upon  the  children 
growing  in  their  simplicity  at  home,  and  to  protect  them  against  the  strange 
fascination  which  has  come  over  the  land,  I  call  upon  all  true  servants  of  Christ 
to  come  out  and  be  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing.  The  Lord's  people 
should  be  often  with  their  God,  seeking  protection  against  the  prevailing  current  of 
evil  in  men's  hearts,  minds,  and  ways.  Expect  no  sympathy,  because  everything 
seems  to  say  that  faithful  men  must  suffer  for  their  faithfulness  in  the  evil  day. 
Fall  back  upon  the  right,  the  true,  the  good,  the  pure  ;  faU  back  upon  the  oath 
and  covenant  and  power  and  promise  of  God  ;  but  make  no  compromise  with  Satan. 
2,  But  the  prophet  heard  a  voice  out  of  the  temple,  and  so  may  we.  The  luxury 
of  the  nation  has  had  its  influence  upon  the  nation's  faith.  Men  who  will  not  shape 
their  conduct  by  God's  law  will  soon  find  means  of  accommodating  their  creed  to 
their  conduct.  The  pure  Gospel  is  too  plain-spoken  for  the  consciences  of  men  who 
desire  to  quarrel  with  God  rather  than  with  themselves.  What  is  the  voice  from 
the  temple  in  this  our  day  ?  The  great  feature  is  a  real  indifference,  not  an  avowed 
unbelief,  not  a  bold  blasphemy,  not  a  studied  contempt,  not  an  entire  ignoring  of 
religious  things,  but  a  real  indifference.  There  is  an  evil  spirit  abroad  which 
takes  to  itself  the  blessed  name  of  charity.  It  has  always  an  excuse  for  evil,  but 
it  has  little  patience  with  truth.  It  has  no  strong  convictions  and  no  real  love. 
There  is  a  voice  to  be  heard  from  the  temple  which  may  well  make  thoughtful 
people  tremble.  Men  are  falling  again  to  their  old  and  mischievous  work  of 
tampering  with  God's  Word.  Multitudes,  it  is  to  be  feared,  have  lost  their  reverence, 
if  not  thefr  faith.  3.  This  brings  me  to  the  third  voice,  which  the  prophet  heard  in 
the  days  of  Israel's  decline  and  fall :  "A  voice  of  the  Lord  that  renaereth  recom- 
pence  to  His  enemies."  In  the  written  Word  we  have  warning  about  evil  time. 
(1  Tim.  iv,  1  ;  2  Tim,  iii,  1.)  The  voice  of  God  is  against  all  such  evil  (2  Tim,  iv,  1-4). 
"The  voice  of  Him  that  rendereth  recompense  unto  His  enemies  is.  Woe  unto  you." 
What,  then,  should  God's  servants  do  ?  The  voice  from  the  city  suggests  that  they 
must  make  their  healthy  influence  felt  in  social  life  by  a  solemn  and  sacred  protest 
against  things  which  fnvolize,  secularize,  materialize  men's  minds  and  ways.  The 
voice  from  the  temple  suggests  that  aU  who  love  the  pure  Gospel  truth  must  search 
it  out  so  as  to  boldly  set  it  forth,  stand  by  it,  speak  for  it,  identify  themselves  with 
its  honour,  its  advance,  its  defence.  And  the  voice  of  the  avenging  God  suggests 
that  all  who  know  Him  should  humble  themselves  before  Him,  and  plead  with  Him 
that  He  would  have  mercy,     (J.  Richardson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  7-9.  Before  she  travailed,  she  brought  tort)i.— The  new  Israel: — ^The  j»re- 
dictive  message  of  our  prophet  is  now  so  far  advanced  that  the  future  promised  is  at 
the  door  ;  the  Church  of  the  future  is  already  like  a  child  ripe  for  birth,  and  about 
to  separate  from  the  womb  of  Zion  hitherto  barren.  The  God,  who  has  already 
prepared  everything  so  far,  will  suddenly  make  Zion  a  mother  ;  a  man-child,  i.  e.  a 
whole  nation  after  Jehovah's  heart,  will  suddenly  lie  in  her  lap  ;  and  this  new-bom 
Israel,  not  the  corrupt  mass,  will  build  Jehovah  a  Temple,  {F.  DelUzsch,  D.D.) 
The  birth  qfthe  Geniile  Church ,— It  ia  perfectly  8ufl5cient  to  understand  the  parturition 


CHAP.  Lxn.]  ISAIAH.  478 

as  a  figure  for  the  whole  eventful  crisis  of  the  change  of  dispensations,  and  the  con- 
sequent change  in  the  condition  of  the  Church.  This  indestructible  ideal  person, 
when  she  might  have  seemed  to  be  reduced  to  nothing  by  the  defection  of  tho 
natural  Israel,  is  vastly  and  suddenly  augmented  by  the  introduction  of  the  Gentiles, 
a  succession  of  events  which  is  here  most  appropriately  represented  as  the  birth  of  a 
male  child  without  the  pains  of  child-birth.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  hirth  of  the 
Christian  Church  .-—The  children  bom  to  Christ  were  so  numerous,  and  so  suddenly 
and  easily  produced,  that  they  were  rather  like  the  dew  from  the  morning's  womb 
than  like  the  son  from  the  mother's  womb  (Ps.  ex.  3).     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  8.  Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day ! — The  aceelercUion  of 
Ood's  movements  .-—We  are  taught  that  in  these  latter  days  God  is  to  shorten  normal 
processes,  accelerate  events,  and  so  "make  a  short  work  in  righteousness."  I.  Thb 
TRUTH    OF   God    has    weight,    therefore   momentum.     II.  This    inherent 

MOMENTUM  INCREASES  WITH  THE  PROGRESS  OF  God'S  TRUTH,  IN  HARMONY  WITH 
THE  NATURAL  LAW  OF  FORCES.      III.    GOD  IS  BEGINNING  TO  GIVE  IT  NOW  AN  ADDED 

CELERITY.  {E.  W.  Thwing,  M.D.)  As  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her 
children.— TramiZin^  far  souls  :—l.  There  must  be  travail  before  there  wilIi 
BE  spiritual  birth.  1.  Let  me,  first,  establish  this  fact  from  history.  Before  there 
has  fallen  a  great  benediction  upon  God's  people,  it  has  been  preceded  by  great 
searchings  of  heart.  Israel  was  so  oppressed  in  Egypt,  that  it  woiild  have  been  a 
very  easy,  and  almost  a  natural  thing  for  the  people  to  become  so  utterly  crushed  ill 
spirit  as  to  submit  to  be  hereditary  bondslaves,  making  the  best  they  could  of  their 
miserable  lot :  but  God  would  not  have  it  so  ;  He  meant  to  bring  them  out  "  with  s 
high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm."  Before,  however,  He  began  to  work  He  made 
them  begin  to  cry.  Let  us  take  a  long  leap  in  history  to  the  days  of  David.  The 
era  of  the  son  of  Jesse  was  evidently  a  time  of  religious  revival.  But  David  was  the 
subject  of  spiritual  throes  and  pangs  of  the  most  intense  kind.  What  petitions  he 
poured  forth  that  God  would  visit  Zion,  and  make  the  vine  which  He  had  planted  to 
flourish  once  again.  Now,  David  was  only  the  mouth  of  hundreds  of  others,  who 
with  equal  fervency  cried  unto  God  that  the  blessing  might  rest  upon  His  people. 
Remember  also  the  days  of  Josiah,  the  king.  The  book  of  the  law  was  foimd  neglected 
in  the  temple,  and  when  it  was  brought  before  the  king,  he  rent  his  clothes,  for  he 
saw  that  the  nation  had  revolted,  and  that  wrath  must  come  irpon  it  to  the  utter- 
most. The  young  king's  heart,  which  was  tender,  for  he  feared  God,  was  ready  to 
break  with  anguish  to  think  of  the  misery  that  would  come  upon  his  people  on 
account  of  their  sins.  Then  there  came  a  glorious  reformation,  which  purged  the 
land  of  idols,  and  caused  the  passover  to  be  observed  as  never  before.  Travail  of 
heart  among  the  godly  produced  the  delightful  change.  It  was  the  same  with  the 
work  of  Nehemiah.  In  the  early  dawn  of  Christian  history,  there  was  a  preparation 
of  the  Church  before  it  received  an  increase.  The  like  living  zeal  and  vehement 
desire  have  always  been  perceptible  in  the  Church  of  God  before  any  season  of  refresh- 
ing. Think  not  that  Luther  was  the  only  man  that  wrought  the  Reformation.  There 
were  hundreds  who  sighed  and  cried  in  secret.  And  this,  while  true  on  the  large 
scale,  is  true  also  in  every  individual  case.  As  a  rule,  those  who  bring  souls  to 
Christ  are  those  who  first  of  all  have  felt  an  agony  of  desire  that  soids  should  be 
saved.  This  is  imaged  to  us  in  our  Master's  character.  His  ministering  servants 
who  have  been  most  useful  have  always  been  eagerly  desirous  to  be  so.  2.  The 
reasons  for  it.  Why  is  it  that  there  must  be  this  anxiety  before  desirable  restdts  are 
gained !  It  might  suffice  us  to  say  that  God  has  so  appointed  it.  It  is  the  order  of 
nature.  The  child  is  not  bom  into  the  world  without  the  sorrows  of  the  mother, 
nor  is  the  bread  which  sustains  life  procured  from  the  earth  without  toil.  As  it  is 
in  the  natural,  so  is  it  in  the  spiritual ;  there  shall  not  come  the  blessing  we  seek, 
without  first  of  all  the  earnest  yearning  for  it.  It  is  so  even  in  ordinary  business. 
We  say,  "No  sweat  no  sweet,"  "No  pains  no  gains,"  ",No  mill  no  meal."  But 
better  still.  He  has  ordained  this  for  our  good.  Every  grace  within  the  man  is 
educated  and  increased  by  his  travail  for  souls.  Besides,  the  zeal  that  God  excites 
within  us  is  often  the  means  of  eflfecting  the  purpose  which  we  desire.  The  Holy 
Ghost  usually  breaks  hard  hearts  by  tender  hearts.  Besides,  the  travail  qualifies  for 
the  proper  taking  care  of  the  offspring.  Who  is  so  fit  to  encourage  a  new-bom 
believer  as  the  man  who  first  anguished  before  the  Lord  for  his  conversion  ?  The 
Church  that  never  travailed,  should  (Jod  send  her  a  hundred  converts,  would  be 
unfit  to  train  them.  Once  more,  there  is  ^eat  benefit  in  the  law  which  makes 
tnvail  necessary  to  spiritaal  birth,  becaose  it  secures  all  the  gloiy  to  Grod.    Tour 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixn. 

longing  that  others  should  be  saved,  and  your  vehemence  of  spirit,  shall  secure  to 
God  aU  the  glory  of  His  own  work.  3.  Notice  how  this  travail  shows  itself.  Usually 
when  God  intends  greatly  to  bless  a  Church,  it  will  begin  in  this  way :  Two  or  three 
persons  in  it  are  distressed  at  the  low  state  of  affairs,  and  become  troubled  even  to 
anguish.  Perhaps  they  do  not  speak  to  one  another,  or  know  of  their  common  grief, 
but  they  begin  to  pray  with  flaming  desire  and  untiring  importunity.  The  passion 
to  see  the  Church  revived  rules  them.  They  suffer  great  heaviness  and  continual 
sorrow  in  heart  for  perishing  sinners  ;  they  travail  in  birth  for  souls.  By  degrees 
the  individuals  are  drawn  together  by  sacred  affinity,  and  the  prayer-meetings  become 
very  different.  Meanwhile,  not  with  the  preacher  only  will  be  the  blessing,  but  with 
his  hearers  who  love  the  Lord.  One  will  be  trying  a  plan  for  getting  in  the  young 
people  ;  another  will  be  looking  after  the  strangers  in  the  aisles,  who  come  only  now 
and  then.  One  brother  will  make  a  vehement  attempt  to  preach  the  Gospel  at  the 
comer  of  the  street ;  another  will  open  a  room  down  a  dark  court ;  another  will  visit 
lodging-houses  and  hospitals :  all  sorts  of  holy  plans  will  be  invented,  and  zeal  will 
break  out  in  many  directions.  All  this  will  be  spontaneous,  nothing  will  be  forced. 
II.  The  result  is  often  vert  surprising.  1.  Frequently  for  rapidity.  "As 
soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her  children."  During  the  ten  years  which 
ended  in  1870  such  wondrous  changes  were  wrought  throughout  the  world  that  no 
prophet  would  have  been  believed  had  he  foretold  them.  Reforms  have  been  accom- 
plished in  England,  in  the  United  States,  in  Germany,  in  Spain,  in  Italy,  which, 
according  to  ordinary  reckoning,  would  have  occupied  at  least  one  hundred  years. 
2.  For  the  greatness  of  it.  It  is  said,  "Shall  a  nation  be  bom  at  once  ? "  for  as  soon 
as  ever  Zion  was  in  distress  about  her  children,  tens  of  thousands  came  and  built  up 
Jerusalem,  and  re-established  the  fallen  state.  So  in  answer  to  prayer,  God  does  not 
only  give  speedy  blessings,  but  great  blessings.  There  were  fervent  prayers  in  that 
upper  room  "  before  the  day  of  Pentecost  had  fully  come,"  and  what  a  great  answer 
it  was  when,  after  Peter's  sermon,  some  three  thousand  were  ready  to  confess  their 
foith  in  Christ,  and  to  be  baptized.  III.  This  travail  and  its  result  are 
ABUNDANTLY  DESIRABLE.  There  is  no  hope  for  China,  for  the  world,  for  our  own 
city,  while  the  Church  is  lethargic.  It  is  through  the  Church  the  blessing  is 
bestowed.  Besides  this,  when  a  Church  is  not  serving  God,  mischief  is  brewing 
within  herself.  The  Church  must  either  bring  forth  children  unto  God,  or  die  of 
consumption :  she  has  no  alternative  but  that.  A  Church  must  either  be  fruitful  or 
rot,  and  of  all  things  a  rotting  Church  is  the  most  offensive.  And  then,  worst  of  all, 
God  is  not  glorified.  IV.  The  woe  which  will  surely  come  to  those  who 
HINDER  THE  TRAVAIL  OF  THE  Church,  and  SO  prevent  the  bringing  forth  of  her 
children.  An  earnest  spirit  cannot  complete  its  exhortations  to  zeal  without  pro- 
nouncing a  denunciation  upon  the  indifferent.  What  said  the  heroine  of  old  who 
had  gone  forth  against  the  enemies  of  Israel,  when  she  remembered  coward  spirits  I 
"Curse  ye,  Meroz,  saith  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants 
thereof ;  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  against  the  mighty. "  Some 
such  curse  will  assuredly  come  upon  every  professing  Christian  who  is  backward  in 
helping  the  Church  in  the  day  of  her  soul's  travail.  Who  are  they  that  hinder  her  ? 
Every  worldly  Christian  hinders  the  progress  of  the  Gospel.  They  are  also  guilty 
who  distract  the  mind  of  the  Church  from  the  subject  in  hand.  Above  all,  we  shall 
be  hindering  the  travail  of  the  Church  if  we  do  not  share  in  it.  Many  Church- 
members  think  that  if  they  do  nothing  wrong,  and  make  no  trouble,  then  they  are 
all  right.  Not  at  all.  V.  I  shall  close  with  A  word  of  blessing.  There  shall 
come  a  great  blessing  to  any  who  feel  the  soul  travail  that  brings  souls  to  God.  Your 
own  heart  will  be  watered.  Moreover,  will  it  not  be  a  joy  to  feel  that  you  have  done 
what  you  could  T    {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  10.  Bejoice  for  joy  with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn  for  her. — A  dirge  for  the 
dovm-grade,  and  a  song /or  faith : — A  mourner  is  always  an  interesting  person.  The 
highest  style  of  mourner  is  one  whose  griefs  are  neither  selfish  nor  grovelling.  He 
who  bears  spiritual  sorrow  on  account  of  others  is  of  a  nobler  order  than  the  man 
who  laments  his  personal  woes.  The  most  excellent  style  of  mourner  is  the  mourner 
in  Zion,  the  mourner  for  Zion,  the  mourner  with  Zion.  I.  Who  are  those  that 
MOTTBN  with  JERUSALEM?  Those  that  love  the  Church  of  God,  and  desire  her 
prosperity  ;  and  when  they  do  not  see  that  prosperity,  are  depressed  in  spirit.  1. 
Nothing  can  make  the  heart  of  the  people  of  God  more  heavy  than  to  think  that  the 
Gospel  glory  of  the  Church  is  declining.  2.  Another  cause  of  mourning  is  when  we 
•ee  the  holiness  of  the  visible  Ohurch  beclouded.    8.  Moreover,  we  see  her  sacred 


CHAP.  iSYi.]  ISAIAH.  476 

ardour  is  cooling.  4.  There  is  grave  canse  of  motiming  in  Zion  because  the  serrioM 
of  God's  house  are  neglected.  6.  Another  very  grave  cause  for  mourning  to  all  true 
Christians  is  the  multitude  of  sinners  that  remain  unsaved.  II.  "V^^  mat  tbtt 
KEJOiCE  WITH  JERTTSALEM.  1.  When  we  remember  that  God  has  not  changed, 
either  in  nature  or  in  love  to  His  people,  or  in  the  purpose  of  His  grace.  2.  We  may 
expect  the  Lord  to  appear.  "  He  shall  appear  to  your  joy,"  etc.  (ver,  6.)  3.  When 
the  Lord  shall  put  on  strength,  then  shall  His  Cnurch  be  aroused.  4.  Then  shall 
the  Church  have  many  converts.  5.  Then  shall  she  nourish  them  well.  6.  At 
Buch  times  there  is  an  abundant  degree  of  peace  and  joy  in  all  believing  hearts  (ver. 
12).     7.  God  will  raise  up  men  fitted  to  do  His  work  {ver.  21).     Ill,  Why  should 

"WE  PERSONALLY  BE  OF  THE  NUMBER  THAT  MOURN  WITH  THE  ChURCH,  AND  THAT 

KEJOICE  WITH  HER?  1.  There  is  our  own  sin  and  ruin  to  mourn  over.  2.  We 
might  wisely  become  mourners  when  we  think  of  our  own  want  of  zeal.  3.  May  we 
not  add  to  this  our  own  failures  in  the  matter  of  holiness  ?  4.  We  have  all  a  great 
concern  in  tMs  matter,  and  we  ought,  therefore,  to  join  with  the  Church  in  all  her 
griefs.  If  the  ministry  of  our  pastors  be  not  successful,  we  shall  lose  by  its  want  of 
power.  If  the  Gospel  is  not  preached  our  souls  will  not  be  fed.  Suppose  the  Gospel 
18  not  preached  with  saving  power,  then  we  shall  have  our  children  unconverted,  and 
they  will  not  be  our  joy  and  crown.  There  cannot  be  a  deficiency  in  the  pulpit 
without  its  bringing  mischief  to  our  households.  We  are  members  of  one  body,  and 
if  any  part  of  the  body  suffers,  every  other  part  of  the  body  will  have  to  suffer  too. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  12.  For  thus  Balth  the  Lord,  Behold  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  s 
river. — The  Ghv/rch  in  peace  and  prosperity : — The  members  of  the  Church  can  then 
revel  in  peace  and  wealth,  like  a  child  on  its  mother's  breast ;  the  world  belongs 
entirely  to  the  Church,  for  the  Church  belongs  entirely  to  God.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
The  peace  of  the  river: — The  illustrations  which  Grace  borrows  from  Nature  are 
strikingly  appropriate.  The  history  of  this  appropriateness  is  that  Nature  and 
Grace  proceed  from  one  and  the  same  Hand,  are  cMldren  of  one  and  the  same  Parent. 
You  have  in  the  text  two  objects  compared  and  put  side  by  side — the  peace  of  God's 
Church  and  a  river.  The  quietness  of  a  river  is  perhaps  the  most  obvious  ground  of 
the  comparison.  The  peace  of  God's  Church  resembles  a  river — I.  In  its  source. 
The  source  of  a  river  is  nidden.  It  wells  up  from  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep 
beneath  the  earth.  And  even  the  spot  where  it  first  rises  is  often  inaccessible,  being 
situated  in  the  heart  of  tangled  brushwood,  or  beneath  the  perilous  vault  of  an  ice- 
cave.  The  source  of  peace  to  God's  children  is  God  Himself.  And  God  is  a  God  who 
hides  Himself — a  God  who  is  apprehended  only  by  those  into  whose  hearts  the  light 
of  the  glorious  Gospel  has  shined.  And  the  spot,  too,  whence  the  peace  of  God's 
children  takes  its  rise  lies  not  open  to  the  scrutiny  of  man's  eye,  or  the  passage  of 
man's  footstep.  That  spot  is  the  heart,  the  inmost  spirit.  Accordingly,  men  can  see 
that  peace  only  in  its  effects.  And  there  is  yet  another  sense  in  which  the  source  of 
the  Christian  peace  is  hidden.  The  events,  the  great  historical  facts,  which  lie  at 
the  root  of  it — the  means  by  which  God  ministers  it — are  by-gone  and  accomplished. 
The  great  central  facts  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  are  now,  if  I  may  say 
so,  buried  and  out  of  sight,  and  centuries  are  piled  upon  them,  like  rocks  and  icebergs 
on  the  spot  where  some  mighty  river  takes  its  rise.  But  these  events,  nevertheless, 
are  God's  instruments,  whereby  He  exerts  a  mighty  influence  on  many  a  heart  even 
at  the  present  day.  II.  In  the  method  of  its  nourishment.  It  is  true  that 
rivers  are  fed  perpetually  by  their  springs.  But  an  external  nourishment  is  also 
supplied  to  them  by  occasional  rains  and  landfloods.  The  river  of  the  Christian's 
peace — I  do  not  say  flows  from,  but  \a  augmented  by  contrition.  Strange  paradox 
this,  that  what  seems  to  destroy  peace  should  promote  it !  But  so  it  is.  III.  Ik 
its  course.  1.  A  river  in  its  course  is  quietly  progressive.  Its  quietness  is  not  the 
quietness  of  stagnation,  but  of  advancement.  The  Christian's  peace  is  a  peace  of 
progi'css  in  grace.     It  is  not  a  peace  which  leaves  him  where  it  found  him,  but  a 

Seace  which  bears  him  on  silently  towards  the  bosom  of  his  God.  2.  It  is  exceeding 
eep.  And  the  peace  of  God  is  said  to  "pass  all  understanding."  This  maybe 
unclerstood  in  two  ways.  The  nature  and  character  of  this  peace  is  unintelligible  to 
those  who  have  not  tasted  it,  and  by  those  who  have  tasted  it  its  depth  is  unfathomable. 
8.  It  is  fertilizing  and  enriching.  The  country  smiles  with  plenty  along  its  banks.  It 
is  also  the  great  medium  of  commerce  and  traflBc,  whereby  men  are  made  rich  and 
their  estate  and  substance  is  increased.  It  is  a  means  of  communication  for  those 
who  live  on  its  margin  with  the  ocean  and  with  one  another.    The  peace  of  God  is  at 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixn. 

the  root  of  all  holy  fniitfulneas.  Many  people  accept  the  truth  that  "  the  fruit  of 
righteousness  is  peace,  and  the  eflFect  of  righteousness  quietness  and  assurance  for 
ever, "  while  they  discard  the  truth — equally  important  and  Scriptural — that  peace  is 
the  root,  as  well  as  the  firuit  of  righteousness,  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
promises  to  give  rest  to  the  weary  and  heavy  laden,  before  they  can  and  in  order  that 
they  may,  submit  themselves  to  His  yoke.  At  the  root  of  the  Christian's  love  is 
peace — at  the  root  of  his  joy  is  peace — at  the  root  of  his  long-suffering,  gentleness 
and  goodness  is  peace — at  the  root  of  his  meekness  and  temperance  is  peace.  Peace 
it  is  which,  like  the  broad  bosom  of  a  fair  river,  quietly  undulates  along  and  ministers 
nourishment  to  the  roots  of  all  these  graces,  nor  is  it  possible  that  the  leaf  of  any  of 
them  should  be  green,  were  the  streams  of  this  river  diverted  another  way.  This 
peace  is  enriching  as  well  as  fertilizing,  because  it  opens  into  the  ocean ;  it  is  the 
medium  of  communicating  with  God  and  with  the  saints  of  God.  It  is  on  the  broad 
bosom  of  this  peace — even  because  it  is  through  Jesus  Christ  alone  that  our  prayers 
float  towards  our  heavenly  Father.  And  I  need  not  tell  you  what  a  peculiarly  rich 
traffic  is  the  traffic  with  heaven.  Then,  again,  this  peace  of  God  is  enriching,  in  that 
it  is  a  medium  of  communication  between  us  and  those  who  have  obtained  like 
precious  faith  with  ourselves.  It  is  a  pleasant  river,  on  whose  margin  both  I  and  my 
brother  dwell — and  which  conveys  from  me  to  him  sympathies,  and  prayers,  and 
outgoings  of  the  heart,  and  brings  back  the  same  from  him  to  me.  And  when  my 
prayers  and  missives  are  sent  forth  on  their  way  towards  heaven,  my  brother's  meet 
and  join  them — and  both  perform  the  voyage  side  by  side — and  no  sooner  shall  both 
return  than  he  shall  send  me  notice  of  the  treasure  he  hath  acquired,  and  demand 
on  his  part  an  account  of  mine.  Such  is  in  a  figure  that  doctrine  which  we  profess, 
when  we  say  "I  believe  in  the  communion  of  saints."  4.  It  is  clean  and  cleansing. 
And  we  need  not  to  be  told  that  the  peace  of  God's  Church  is  a  clean  and  holy 
(because  a  living)  peace — clear  as  crystal  and  perfectly  alien  from  all  defilement. 
The  slightest  allowed  filthiness  of  flesh  or  spirit  is  abhorrent  to  the  nature  of  this 
peace.  "There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  And  as  this  peace  is 
clean,  so  also  it  makes  clean.  As  soon  as  it  enters  into  the  conscience,  it  cleanses  it. 
5.  It  bears  burdens.  Barges  and  ships  of  many  tons'  weight  float  on  its  bosom  down 
to  the  ocean.  It  is  one  of  the  most  delightful  characteristics  of  the  Christian's  peace 
that  its  buoyancy  supports  many  and  grievous  burdens.  Into  God's  bosom  they  are 
carried  in  the  exercise  of  confession  and  faithful  repentance  ;  in  His  breast  they  must 
be  lodged,  if  we  desire  them  to  be  finally  obliterated  and  annulled.  But  surely,  if  it 
were  not  for  His  peace  within,  we  could  neither  have  courage  to  lodge  them  there, 
nor  strength  to  support  the  burden  of  them  ourselves.  IV.  At  its  mouth.  It 
expands.  For  the  last  few  miles  of  its  progress,  the  distance  between  its  banks 
becomes  wider,  tiU  at  length  it  pours  itself  with  a  full  flood  into  the  ocean.  So  it  is 
as  a  matter  of  fact  in  the  Christian's  experience.  The  peace  of  the  true  believer  is 
enlarged  as  he  draws  near  to  the  heavenly  goal,  and  accordingly  the  country  of  Ms 
soul  is  more  abundantly  fertilized.  Who  shall  say  how  wide  its  flood  may  not  extend, 
when  it  pours  itself  into  His  bosom  in  eternity,  from  whom  it  issued  forth  in  time  ? 
{Dean  Ooulbum,  D.C.L.) 

Ver.  13.  As  one  whom  his  mother  ooaiforteth. — Isaiah's  figwre  of  mofherhood 
(vers.  7-13) : — The  prophet  reawakens  the  figure,  that  is  ever  nearest  his  heart,  of 
motherhood — children  suckled,  borne  and  cradled  in  the  lap  of  their  mother  fill  all 
his  view ;  nay,  finer  still,  the  grown  man  coming  back  witn  wounds  and  weariness 
upon  him  to  be  comforted  of  his  mother.  {Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  exiles'  home 
in  Jerusalem : — Israel  then  wiU  be  like  a  man  returned  from  foreign  soil,  escaped 
from  captivity,  full  of  sad  remembrances,  whose  echoes,  however,  completely  vanish 
in  the  mother-arms  of  Divine  love  in  Jerusalem,  the  beloved  home  that  was  the  home 
of  their  thoughts  even  on  foreign  soil.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D. )  The  Motherhood  of  God: — 
God  is  Creator,  Preserver,  Father,  but  something  more.  I.  A  ^ood  mother  has  a 
wonderful  fund  of  sympathy  ;  so  has  God.  II.  Motherhood  is  wonderful  in  its 
CONSTANCY ;  80  is  God.  III.  Motherhood  is  grieved  over  sin  ;  so  is  God.  IV. 
A  mother's  love  is  often  redemptive  ;  God's  love  is  redemptive  ten  thousand  times 
more.  {D.  J.  Rounsefell.)  Divine  comfort  mx)st  evdeariiig  and  effiderU: — God  will 
comfort  His  people — 1.  "With  all  the  aff'ection  and  solicitude  of  a  mother.  See  the 
mother  how  she  loves,  strives,  labours,  suft'ers,  and  sacrifices  for  her  cMld.  2.  With 
all  the  long-suffering  and  forbearance  of  a  mother.  3.  With  all  the  forgiveness  and 
consolation  of  a  mother.  How  ready  to  forgive  her  erring,  wandering  child — and 
leady  to  console  in  trouble.     4.  With  all  the  instruction  and  correction  of  a  mother. 


OflAP.  ixn.]  I8AIAS.  477 

God  teaches  in  varions  ways,  and  whom  He  loveth  He  chasteneth.  6.  With  all  the 
constancy  of  a  mother.  (Helpifor  the  Pulpit.)  Divine  consolation: — I.  The  oon- 
80LATI0N  PBOMISKD.  '*  I  wiU  comfort  you."  It  is  the  character  of  Divine  promises 
that  they  apply  to  real  cases :  they  meet  the  condition  and  circumstances  of  man. 
Are  we  ignorant  ?  "I  will  instruct  thee."  Are  we  weak  t  "I  will  strengthen  thee ; 
yea,  I  will  help  thee."  Are  we  in  danger!  "I  will  deliver  thee."  Are  we  dis- 
consolate 1  "I  will  comfort  you."  The  discouragements  of  life  are  many,  trials  are 
various :  the  fears  to  which  we  are  subject,  and  the  sins  which  easily  beset  us,  who 
can  number?  These  all  impair  oui;  comfort,  and  have  a  natural  tendency  to  sink  us 
in  despondency.  But  the  Gospel  provides  a  cordial.  1.  This  consolation  is  Divine 
in  its  origin.  It  springs  not  from  creatures,  not  from  earthly  good,  or  from  carnal 
cratifications.  The  Most  High  claims  the  prerogative  as  His  own.  2.  It  is  rational 
in  its  nature ;  not  consolation  visionary  and  enthusiastic,  but  intelligent,  consistent 
with  reason  as  well  as  according  to  faith.  3.  Free  in  its  bestowment.  4.  It  is  select 
in  its  subjects.  All  are  not  partakers  of  heavenly  consolation,  for  all  are  not  qualified 
to  enjoy  it.  Penitence  of  disposition  is  requisite :  "  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for 
they  shall  be  comforted."  Earnest  desire  also  is  implied ;  for  who  can  be  supposed 
to  possess  Divine  comfort  who  are  indifferent  about  it,  who  are  living  without  prayer, 
or  whose  petitions  are  languid  and  lifeless  ?  "  Ask,  and  you  shall  receive,  that  your 
joy  may  be  full."  Holy  watchfulness  is  likewise  supposed ;  for  whoever  is  careless 
and  slothful  must  be  deceived  if  he  imagine  himself  to  be  comforted  of  the  Lord. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  "the  Comforter,"  but  "grieve"  Him  not;  otherwise  He  with- 
draws His  influence,  and  all  is  darkness  or  delusion.  II.  The  mannek  m  which 
CONSOLATION  IS  AFFOEDED.  "As  one  whom  Ms  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I 
comfort  you."  A  stranger  may  administer  comfort,  but  it  is  in  a  distant  way;  m 
friend  may  console  us,  and  this  with  kindness ;  a  father  also,  with  tenderness  still 
more  impressive  ;  but  none  comforts  like  a  mother.  1.  The  affection  of  a  mother  is 
warm  ;  she  loves  her  child,  loves  it  as  part  of  herself.  2.  The  care  of  a  mother  is 
indulgent.  8.  The  condescension  and  self-denial  of  a  mother  are  not  small.  4.  The 
assiduity  of  a  mother  ia  unwearied.  III.  The  means  by  which  consolation  is 
ENJOYED.  "Ye  shall  be  comforted  in  Jerusalem."  The  pious  Jews  were  comforted 
when  in  Babylon,  and  during  their  dispersion  among  the  nations  ;  but  their  comfort 
in  such  circumstances  was  attended  with  much  affliction :  it  was  when  returned  to 
Jerusalem,  when  resettled  in  their  own  country,  and  among  their  own  people,  that 
their  enjoyment  rose  the  highest,  and  was  most  regular.  This"  teaches — 1.  The 
importance  of  separation  from  an  ensnaring  world.  2.  The  propriety  of  regular 
attendance  on  religious  worship.  It  was  a  high  privilege  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem, 
because  of  attendance  on  religious  worship.  3.  The  duty  of  Church-membership. 
Jerusalem  was  not  only  the  seat  of  Divine  worship,  but  an  emblem  of  the  Christian 
Church,  and  they  who  constitute  this  Church  are  particularly  authorized  to  plead 
the  promise  of  the  text,  "  You  shall  be  comforted  in  Jerusalem,"  4.  It  suggests  the 
worth  of  a  right  spirit  in  attending  Christian  ordinances.  The  form  of  godliness  is 
nothing.  {Anon.)  The  Motherhood  of  God: — Readers  of  such  writers  as  Theodore 
Parker,  Frances  Power  Cobbe,  and  Chunder  Sen  must  often  have  been  struck  with 
the  frequency  with  which  these  theists  address  invocations  or  prayers  to  God  as  the 
Father  and  Mother  of  our  spirits.  "Why  should  they  not  ?  There  are  surely  as  valid 
reasons  for  our  thinking  and  speaking  of  God  as  our  Perfect  Mother  as  there  are  for 
claiming  Him  as  the  Perfect  Father  of  us  all.  1.  Even  if  there  were  no  hint  or 
simile  to  this  effect  in  the  Scriptures  we  should  still  find  it  necessary  to  predicate  it 
of  God  in  order  to  perfect  our  conceptions  of  Him.  What  these  conceptions  are  will 
best  be  understood  by  a  disclosure  of  their  basis.  To  our  thinking,  the  ultimate 
source  of  our  knowledge  of  God  is  the  intuitions  of  the  human  heart.  The  instincts, 
the  qualities,  the  affections  in  human  nature  (though  these  are  at  a  very  great  remove 
from  those  in  God)  are  the  truest  indications  and  interpretations  to  us  of  what  God 
is ;  if  the  revelation  recorded  in  the  Bible  be  the  light  (as  it  undoubtedly  is),  these 
things  in  us  are  the  eye  to  which  that  light  appeals  and  by  which  we  see ;  in  fact,  if 
we  cannot  argue  from  our  own  spiritual  natures  up  to  God's,  then,  aU  metaphysical 
reasoning  and  the  Christian  Scriptures  notwithstanding,  we  have  no  reliable  know- 
ledge of  God,  faith  is  presumptuous,  worship  delusive,  and  the  ground  of  personal 
responsibility  crumbles  away  from  under  our  feet.  Further,  a  philosophical  inter- 
pretation of  the  person  of  the  Christ,  as  well  as  the  Scriptural  declaration  that  man 
IS  made  in  the  image  of  God,  warrants  the  assertion  that  in  a  very  true  sense  one  of 
the  worthiest  conceptions  of  tiie  Divine  nature  is  that  of  a  folly  developed,  completely 
perfected,  homan  nature,    (hi  this  groond  we  believe  we  are  jtistified  in  z^gaiding 


478  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ixvi. 

Ck)d  as  our  Father ;  or,  to  pat  oonversely  what  this  implies,  we  do  right  in  assmninff 
the  fatherly  elements  in  men  to  be  the  best  index  or  goarantee  of  what  God 
is.  But  whilst  the  Fatherhood  of  God  is  the  perfection  oi  onr  hnman  nature,  so 
fiur  as  man  is  concerned,  it  is  not  the  crown  of  our  hmnanitjr  in  its  totality,  Uiat 
is  to  say,  so  far  as  human  nature  includes  womanhood  as  well  as  manhood.  God, 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  must  gather  up  in  Himself  all  the  essential  qualities 
of  the  mother  no  less  than  of  the  father.  That  this  is  so,  is  in  a  measure  evidenced 
by  the  facts  of  our  human  experience.  Take,  for  example,  the  evidence  deducible 
from  the  case  of  a  family  where  the  children  have  been  deprived  of  either  parent,  say 
the  mother  ;  in  this  instance,  not  only  do  the  boys  lose  the  beneficial  effect  of  the 
softening  and  refining  atmosphere  of  their  mother's  presence,  but  the  girls  also, 
however  wise  and  fond  their  father  may  be,  become  prudish  suid  unnaturally  grave. 
In  like  manner,  if  the  children  are  left  fatherless,  both  sons  and  daughters  suffer 
from  the  loss  of  their  father's  sobering,  restraining  influence,  while  the  daughters 
especially  miss  the  strengthening  force  derivable  from  acquaintance  with  his  life  and 
character.  Yes,  that  child  only  is  rightly  trained  and  fully  educated  who  has  had 
the  good  fortune  to  know  both  the  gentler  sway  of  a  mother's  and  the  severer  rule 
of  a  father's  nature.  We  see,  then,  that  in  actual  life  only  that  parentage  is  normally 
complete  which  is  the  blending  of  the  two  complementing  sides,  the  fatherly  and  the 
motherly.  And  since  of  necessity  the  ideal  in  heaven  cannot  be  less  perfect  than 
the  actual  on  earth,  and  since,  moreover,  God  is  the  source  whence  all  the  phases  of 
our  humanity  have  sprung,  we  may  reverently  address  God  in  our  prayers  as  being 
both  the  Perfect  Father  and  Mother  in  whom  we  confide.  2.  Nor  is  this  idea  of  the 
Divine  Motherhood  as  unserviceable  as  at  first  sight  it  may  seero.  It  may  be  urged 
as  affording  one  practical  way  of  escape  from  the  beautiful  but  blinding  web,  so 
to  say,  which  the  thoughts  of  many  are  busily  weaving.  It  not  unfrequently  occurs 
that  men,  whose  scientific  tastes  or  pursuits  change  rather  than  destroy  their  hold 
on  religion,  find  their  thoughts  of  nature,  life,  and  God  taking  a  purely  pantheistic 
colouring.  To  highly  imaginative  minds,  to  devout  poetic  temperaments,  this  habit 
of  deifying  everything  is  not  a  little  fascinating.  If  God  be  thought  of  as  He  who 
is  nature  itself,  then  the  more  sensuous  sides  of  our  being  will  be  appealed  to  and 

Siuickened,  we  grant,  as  wiU  our  intellectual  needs  in  many  respects  be  met  and 
bstered.  But  the  deep  hunger  and  thirst  of  our  more  human  natures  will  be 
unappeased,  the  more  spiritual  and  practical  cravings  of  our  personal  life  will  be 
slighted  and  wronged.  For  how  little  will  such  a  pantheistic  faith,  beautiful  as  it 
is,  and  true  in  part  though  it  be,  serve  and  console  the  heart  when  it  is  beset  with 
agonizing  doubt  or  disheartened  by  the  strength  and  shame  of  its  sin,  or  well-nigh 
crushed  by  a  fatalistic  sense  of  the  hard,  merciless  rule  of  the  inevitable  I  Nature 
in  some  of  her  moods  is  anything  but  pitiful.  Besides,  what  does  a  religion  of  this 
kind  avail  for  those  who  have  not  been  endowed  vrith  a  lively  imagination,  or  with 
poetic  insight,  or  with  mental  vigour ;  what  will  or  can  it  mean  to  those  whose 
meas  and  impressions  of  life  are  chiefly  toned  and  tempered  by  povertjr  or  pain  or 
thankless  toil,  or  misery  or  crime  %  With  such  an  abstract  God  as  this,  we  shall 
feel  ourselves  before  long  like  to  one  wearied,  oppressed  with  all  the  rechercM  elegance 
of  a  palace,  and  yearning  for  the  real  and  simple  comfort  of  a  home.  See  now  the 
remedy  the  truth  under  discussion  affords.  Let  it  be  granted  that  God  is  the  sum 
total  of  all  the  beauty  and  order,  and  music  and  life  of  the  universe,  but  then  surely 
He  is  more  than  this.  He  is  the  source  and  crown  of  all  the  human  affections  that 
have  scattered  themselves  like  so  many  sun's  rays  throughout  the  fatherhoods  and 
motherhoods,  and  childhoods  and  friendships  of  the  world.  These  intensely  real 
elements  in  our  experience  must  have  a  living  background  in  God  from  whom  all 
things  issue.  "  He  that  made  the  ear,  shall  He  not  near ;  He  that  made  the  eye 
shall  He  not  see  ? "  and  shall  not  He  who  bestowed  on  us  so  personal  and  potent 
a  divinity  as  our  mother,  "  the  holiest  thing  on  earth,"  be  Himself  equally 
personal  and  motherly  ?  {J.  T.  Starmard.)  Divine  comfort : — I.  A  dire  necessity. 
Comfort.  II.  A  deplokable  incapacity. — We  are  helpless  as  babes.  III.  An 
ABSOLUTE  ignorance.  A  babe  does  not  know  its  griefs.  It  can  only  realize  a 
sense  of  discomfort.  Its  complaints  are  often  unmeamng,  foolish,  needless.  In  this 
way  many  of  us  live  and  die.  IV.  A  considerate  Comforter.  What  a  charm 
there  is  in  the  mother's  voice !  So  in  the  Divine  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit  He 
comforts — 1.  With  the  solicitude  of  a  mother.  How  a  mother  loves,  strives,  labours, 
and  sacrifices  for  her  child.  2.  With  the  forgiveness  and  consolation  of  a  mother. 
8.  With  the  instruction  and  correction  of  a  mother.  A  good  and  wise  mother  will 
instruct  and  correct.     4.  With  the  constancy  of  a  mother  (chap.  zliz.  14,  16)> 


CHAP.  Lxn.]  ISAIAH.  470 

God  loves  to  the  end.  V.  An  important  means.  "Ye  shall  be  comforted  in 
Jerusalem."  The  promise  is  not  without  limitations.  This  expression  means  that 
the  consolations  of  God  come  to  those  who  are  in  His  Church,  who  are  in  Christ 
Jesus.  This  is  the  place  for  us  to  rest  in.  1.  It  is  the  place  which  He  has  appointed. 
2.  The  place  where  He  delights  to  dwell.  8.  The  place  where  His  spirit  is  poured 
out.  4.  The  place  where,  by  our  own  acts  of  devotion  and  hearing,  we  derive  peace 
and  rest,  {ffomilist.)  TJie  Divine  Motherhood: — Is  not  the  highest  use  of  human 
relationships  to  reveal  God  ?  Are  not  the  genuine  king,  judge,  friend,  father,  so 
many  mirrors  in  which  the  Divine  character  is,  in  some  degree,  reflected  ?  And 
if  this  be  true  of  aU  other  human  relationships,  especially  of  those  most  natural 
and  elemental,  is  it  not  emphatically  thus  in  the  unique,  peerless  one  of  mother  I 
Indeed,  since  there  is  need  of  aU  human  relationships  combined  to  reveal  God,  it  is 
most  clear  that  this  one  cannot  be  omitted.  And  if  even  idolaters  have  ever  felt 
they  must  select  the  best  material  at  their  command  to  adumbrate  the  deity  they 
worship,  we  may  surely  lay  our  hands  on  this  highest  thing  we  call  motherhood, 
to  illustrate  something  of  the  attributes  and  the  ways  of  "  our  own  God."  His  love 
transcends  aU  motherhood.  It  is  a  relationship  marked  by — I.  Closest  intimacy. 
The  child's  life,  especially  at  its  beginning,  is  a  part  of  its  mother's  life.  Supported 
by  maternal  sustenance,  watched  by  maternal  wisdom,  embosomed  in  maternal  love, 
the  child  has  more  from  its  mother,  and  owes  more  to  her,  than  science  can  analyze 
or  poetry  describe.  Thus  intimate  is  God's  relationship  to  us.  "  We  are  His 
offspring."  II.  Intense  individualism.  In  two  aspects  there  is  an  individualizing 
element  and  habit  in  motherhood  that  is  on  the  very  surface  of  the  relationship,  and 
that  yet  is  one  of  its  profoundest  realities.  1.  The  mother  individualizes  her  child. 
So  both  the  Old  and  New  Testament  revelation,  and  indeed  aU  His  dealings  with 
us,  discover  how  individual  aU  men  are  to  God.  2.  Then,  the  child  individualizes 
its  mother.  "  Our  own  God."  III.  Unweariedness  of  care.  The  devotion  of  a 
mother  is  not  that  of  hours,  but  of  days — ^not  of  days  only,  but  of  nights  also.  It 
is  not  exhausted  when  its  object  has  passed  through  infancy,  but  is  active  and 
anxious  over  Us  youth ;  yearns  fondly,  even  when  it  can  accomplish  little,  over  its 
manhood  o.'  womanhood  ;  lives  and  reigns  in  the  heart  till  the  mother  herself  dies  ; 
and — who  can  tell  ?— perhaps  may  still  watch  and  guide  and  bless  from  the  world 
of  spirits.  All  human  history  gives  emphasis  to  the  question,  "  Can  a  woman  forget 
her  child  ?  "  Others  may  degrade  and  desecrate  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  love," 
by  saying  profanely,  "  I  loved  once."  The  mothers  of  the  world  are  the  monuments 
of  the  perpetuity — one  had  almost  said,  of  the  eternity — of  love.  Yet  the  highest 
authority  says,  they  may  forget,  yet  will  not  God.  IV.  Sacrificialness  of  love. 
Probably  all  true  love  is  sacrificial.  Anyway,  it  is  beyond  contradiction  that  a 
mother's  love  is.  Conclusion:  1.  Lessons  for  parents.  (1)  Here  is  a  word  of 
instruction  for  those  who,  whether  as  fathers  or  mothers,  are  not  fulfilling  the  highest 
duty  of  their  relationship,  namely,  revealing  God  to  their  children.  (2)  Here  is 
a  word  of  consolation.  Motherhood  means  a  life  of  sacrificial,  often  unhonoured, 
often  imrequited  love.  But  what  if  that  love  is  revealing  God  t  "What  if  it  is 
fulfilling  some  of  the  functions  of  the  Cross  at  Calvary?  Is  any  endurance  too 
heavy,  any  toil  too  irksome,  any  anguish  too  keen,  if  thereby  God's  heart  is  unveiled 
as  it  never  otherwise  could  have  been  ?  2.  Remonstrance  with  sinners.  The  most 
heinous  sins  are  sins  against  love.  AU  transgression  against  this  God  of  Divine 
motherliness,  is  such  sin.  It  is  folly  to  rebel  against  the  God  of  all  wisdom  ;  the 
rebellion  will  ultimately  be  thwarted.  It  is  madness  to  rebel  against  the  God  of  all 
power :  He  must  reign  till  His  enemies  be  made  His  footstool.  But  it  is  darkest 
sin  to  rebel  against  "the  God  of  all  comfort."  {U.  H.  Thomas,  B.A.)  God 
comforting  as  a  mother : — 1.  God  comforts  like  the  ideal  mother.  The  only  perfect 
mother  is  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  God.  And  He  comforts  as  that  image  might  be 
expected  to  comfort  and  would  be  capable  of  comforting.  2.  God  comforts  as  the 
mothers  comforted  of  whom  the  prophet  spoke.  No  mother  is  perfect,  but  every  true 
and  good  mother  is  a  great  consoler.  God  comforts.  (1)  Naturally,  (2)  Personally.  (3) 
Lovingly.  (4)  Practically.  (5)  Broadly.  (6)  Constantly.  (7)  E3"ectually.  {S.  Martin.) 
God  our  Mother : — The  Bible  is  a  warm  letter  of  afifection  from  a  parent  to  a  child  ; 
and  yet  there  are  many  who  see  chiefly  the  severer  passages.  As  there  may  be  fifty 
or  sixty  nights  of  gentle  dew  ta  one  summer,  that  will  not  caiise  as  much  remark 
as  one  hailstorm  of  half-an-hour  ;  so  there  are  those  who  are  more  struck  by  those 
passages  of  the  Bible  that  announce  the  indignation  of  God  than  by  those  that 
announce  His  afi"ection.  1.  God  has  a  mother's  simplicity  of  instruction.  A  father 
does  not  know  how  to  teach  a  child  the  ABO.      Men  are  not  skilful  in  the 


480  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lxvi. 

5)rmiary  department.     But  a  mother  has  so  much  patience  that  she  will  tell  a  child 
or  the  hundredth  time  the  difiference  between  F  and  G  and  between  I  and  J. 
She  thus  teaches  the  child,  and  has  no  awkwardness  of  condescension  in  so  doing. 
So  God,  our  Mother,  stoops  down  to  our  infantUe  minds.     God  has  been  teaching 
some  of  us  thirty  years,  and  some  sixty  years,  one  word  of  one  syllable,  and  we  do 
not  know  it  yet — f-a-i-t-h,  faith.     When  we  come  to  that  word,  we  stumble,  we 
halt,   we  lose  our  place,  we  pronounce  it  wrong.     Still,  God's  patience  is  not 
exhausted.     God,  our  Mother,  puts  us  in  the  school  of  prosperity,  and  the  letters 
are  in  simshine,  and  we  cannot  spell  them.     God  puts  us  in  the  school  of  adversity, 
and  the  letters  are  black,  and  we  cannot  spell  them.     If  God  were  merely  a  king, 
He  would  punish  us.     If  He  were  simply  a  father.  He  would  whip  us.     But  God  ia 
a  mother,  and  so  we  are  borne  with  and  helped  all  the  way  through.     A  mother 
teaches  her  child  chiefly  by  pictures.     God,  our  Mother,  teaches  us  almost  every- 
thing by  pictures.     Is  the  Divine  goodness  to  be  set  forth  ?     How  does  God  teach 
us  ?    By  an  autumnal  picture.     The  bams  are  full.     The  wheat-stacks  are  rounded. 
The  orchards  are  dropping  the  ripe  pippins  into  the  lap  of  the  farmer.     Does  God, 
our  Mother,  want  to  set  forth  what  a  foolish  thing  it  is  to  go  away  from  the  right, 
and  how  glad  Divine  mercy  is  to  take  back  the  wanderer  ?    How  is  it  to  be  done  ? 
By  a  picture.     2.  God  has  a  mother's  favouritism.     A  father  sometimes  shows  a 
sort  of  favouritism.     Here  is  a  boy — strong,   well,  of  high  forehead  and  quick 
intellect.     The  father  says,  "I  wUl  take  that  boy  into  my  firm  yet;"  or,  "Twill 
give  him  the  very  best  possible  education."    There  are  instances  where,  for  the 
culture  of  the  one  boy,  all  the  others  have  been  robbed.     A  sad  favouritism  ;  but 
that  is  not  the  mother's  favourite.     I  will  tell  you  her  favourite.     There  is  a  child 
who,  at  two  years  of  age,  had  a  fall.     He  has  never  got  over  it.     The  scarlet  fever 
mufiBed  his  hearing.     He  is  not  what  he  once  was.     The  children  of  the  family  all 
know  that  he  is  the  favourite.     So  he  ought  to  be  ;  for  if  there  is  any  one  in  the 
•world  who  needs  sympathy  more  than  another,  it  is  an  invalid  child.    Weary  on 
the  first  mile  of  life's  journey ;  carrying  an  aching  head,  a  weak  side,  an  irritated 
lung.     So  the  mother  ought  to  make  him  a  favourite.     God  loves  us  all ;  but  there 
is  one  weak,  and  sick,  and  sore,  and  wounded,  and  suffering,  and  faint.     That  is  the 
one  who  lies  nearest  and  more  perpetually  on  the  great,  loving  heart  of  God. 
There  is  not  such  a  watcher  as  God.     3.  God  has  a  mother's  capacity  for  attending 
to  little  hurts.    The  father  is  shocked  at  the  broken  bone  of  the  chUd,  or  at  the 
sickness  that   sets  the  cradle  on  fire  with  fever,  but  it  takes  the  mother  to 
sympathize  with  all  the  little  ailments  and  little  bruises  of  the  chUd.     If  the  child 
has  a  splinter  in  its  hand,  it  wants  the  mother  to  take  it  out,  and  not  the  father. 
So  with  God  our  Mother :  all  our  annoyances  are  important  enough  to  look  at  and 
sympathize  with.     4.  God  has  a  mother's  patience  for  the  erring.     If  one  does 
•wrong,  first  his  associates  in  life  cast  him  off ;  if  he  goes  on  in  the  wrong  way,  hia 
business  partner  cuts  him  off;  if  he  goes  on,  his  best  friends  cast  him  off.     But 
after  all  others  have  east  him  off,  where  does  he  go  ?    Who  holds  no  grudge,  and 
forgives  the  last  time  as  well  as  the  first  1    Who  sits  by  the  murderer's  counsel 
all  through  the  long  trial  ?    Who  tarries  the  longest  at  the  •windows  of  a  culprit's 
cell  ?    Who,  when  all  others  think  ill  of  a  man,  keeps  on  thinking  well  of  him  ? 
It  is  his  mother.     5.  God  has  a  mother's  way  of  putting  a  child  to  sleep.    You 
know  there  is  no  cradle-song  like  a  mother's.     The  time  •will  come  when  we  will  be 
wanting  to  be  put  to  sleep.    Then  we  want  God  to  soothe  us,  to  hush  us  to  sleep. 
(y.  Be  W.  Tahnage,  D.I).)     God's  motherly  comfort: — A  mother  comforts — 1.  By 
her  presence.     It  is  always  to  her  children  a  benediction — a  comfort.     2.  By  her 
love.     Of  a  mother's  love  the  child  becomes  deeply  conscious  as  she  strokes  gentlv 
his  fevered  brow,  or  lifts  upon  him  the  light  of  her  loving  eyes.     3.  By  her  fooa. 
She  knows  their  needs  and  their  tastes,  and  she  gives  nourishing  and  satisfying 
food.     4.  By  her  words.     There  are  three  different  kinds  of  experience  common  to 
men  in  this  life  which  seem  to  require  the  presence  of  our  mothers,  and  in  each  of 
these  God  has  promised  to  be  near  us.     1.  When  troubles  come.     2.  When  we  are 
sick.     3.  When  death  is  nigh.     {Christian  Age.)    God  both  Father  and  Mother: — 
Broadly  we  may  state  the  contrast  of  these  relations  in  two  well-known  and 
exceeding  precious  Old  Testament  sayings:  "Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children, 
80  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him.     For  He   knoweth    our  frame;    He 
remembereth  that  we  are  dust."     "As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so  •will 
I  comfort  you."    The  father  pities,  the  mother  comforts,  her  children.^   The  father 
in  his  strength  stoops  in  gracious  kindliness  to  succour  them  in  their  need ;  the 
mother  hoI(u  them  in  •  warm,  eager  embrace  to  comfort  them  in  their  pain.    So  wt 


CHAP,  ixn.]  ISAIAH.  481 

come  to  speak  amongst  ourselves  of  the  father's  hand,  but  always  of  the  mother's 
arms.  The  father  leads  by  the  hand  ;  the  mother  soothes  and  carries  in  her  arms. 
Jesus  did  both.  He  was  in  His  own  person  the  perfect  revelation  at  once  of  the 
Father-God  and  the  Mother-God.  He  took  God's  little  ones  up  into  His  arms,  laid 
His  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them — blessed  them  with  the  double  blessing  of 
hand  and  arms.  We  find  it  easy  to  speak  of  the  Ahnighty  Father,  but  we  are 
conscious  of  a  dissonance  of  thought  in  saying  the  Almighty  Mother.  Almightiness 
is  not  an  attribute  of  motherhood.  But  "  everlastingness  "  is  ;  and  the  "everlasting 
anna  "  are  the  arms  of  the  Mother-God.  There  is,  therefore,  the  rare  insight  of  truth 
as  well  as  rich  beauty  and  pathos  in  Isaiah's  imagery,  "As  one  whom  his  mother 
comforteth."  The  glorious  prophecies  of  evangelical  blessedness  which  Isaiah 
proclaimed  had  reached  their  close.  The  final  results  to  faithful  and  unfaithfiil 
of  the  revelation  of  the  grace  of  God  mingle  in  the  last  two  chapters.  As  we  read 
especially  Ixv.  17-25  and  Ixvi.  10-13,  we  feel  that  this  figure  of  the  Motherhood  of 
God  touches  the  climax  of  the  writing.  The  prophet's  swift  imagery  halts  here. 
It  has  no  farther  flight.  The  evolution  of  a  mother  is  the  vanishing-point  in 
nature  and  art,  where  human  comfort  melts  away  into  the  infinite  comfort  of  the 
Divine.  {F.  Piatt.)  The  Mother-God  in  Scripture: — Several  great  Oriental  scholars 
believe  that  in  the  earliest  times  the  Semitic  religions  had  a  goddess,  but  no  god. 
The  matriarchal  state  of  society  came  before  the  patriarchal.  Whatever  historic 
value  this  opinion  may  have,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  to  a  careful  reader,  that 
much  of  the  Old  Testament  imagery  and  poetry,  which  seek  to  cheer  the  hearts  of 
men  with  promises  of  Divine  comfort,  can  oe  best  realized  as  we  read  into  them  the 
idea  of  the  Motherhood  of  God.  There  is  a  New  Testament  reference  to  those  wUdemess 
ways  in  which  the  children  of  God  were  led  in  ancient  days  which  at  least  suggests 
a  lingering  recognition  of  this  idea.  The  margin  of  Acts  xiii.  18  reads — and  the 
reading  has  considerable  support:  "About  the  time  of  forty  years  He  bore  or  fed 
them  as  a  nurse  beareth  or  feedeth  her  child."  Much  more  definite,  however, 
is  Deut.  xxxii.  11:  "As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  fluttereth  over  her 
young,  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,  taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings :  so 
the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him."  We  scarcely  need  to  remind  ourselves  that  it  is  the 
mother-eagle  that  fluttereth  over  her  young,  and  beareth  them  in  safety  on  her 
broad  pinions  whither  she  will.  A  similar  fidelity  to  nature  should  always  be 
borne  in  mind  that  we  may  interpret  the  inner  meaning  of  the  well-known  psalms 
of  comfort,  which  tell  us  of  a  hiding-place  and  a  refuge  beneath  the  shadow  of 
God's  wings,  or  under  the  covering  of  His  feathers  (Ps.  xviii.  8  ;  Ivii.  1 ;  Ixi.  4 ; 
xci.  1-4).  It  is  of  course  the  mother-bird  that  gathers  her  brood  under  her  wings, 
and  hides  them  in  warmth  and  safety  beneath  her  fluffy  feathers.  Nor  can  we  ever 
forget  that  when  our  Lord  was  leaving  the  great  city  of  human  sorrow  He  had 
yearned  in  vain  to  comfort,  when  He  strove  in  His  anguish  of  weeping  to  leave  some 
picture  in  the  mind  of  her  people  of  the  infinite  wealth  of  the  Divine  tenderness  of 
comfort  to  which  they  had  been  blind,  the  passion  of  the  great  mother-soul  within 
Him  could  find  no  more  perfect  imagery  than  that  familiar  to  them  and  their 
fothers  in  the  psalmists  of  Israel:  "0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the 
prophets,  and  stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto  thee,  how  often  would  I  have 
gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her 
wings,  and  ye  would  not !  "  All  nature  is  plaintive  with  an  instinctive  mother-cry, 
from  the  bleating  cry  of  the  lost  lamb  to  the  lonely  cry  of  the  lost  child  of  the 
Mother-God.  And  instinct  should  count  for  something  in  interpreting  the  God 
whose  children  we  are.  The  lad  dying  of  fever  in  some  rude,  rough  shanty  at  the 
gold  diggings,  or  tossing  in  thirst  in  the  hospital  of  a  far-off  foreign  port,  cries  in 
nis  delirium  for  his  mother.  It  is  his  deepest  instinct.  It  was  always  his  mother's 
touch  which  brought  coolness  to  his  brow,  and  his  mother's  voice  that  had  a 
•witchery  of  comfort  in  its  whisper  in  the  old  village  home.  And  in  that  other 
sickness  of  the  mind,  in  the  soul's  day  of  fever  and  fret,  it  is  a  true  spiritual  instinct 
we  obey  as  our  lonely  or  wearied  spirits  cry  aloud  for  the  arms  of  the  Mother-God. 
{Ibid.)  Paul's  conception  of  the  Motherhood  of  God: — There  are  glimpses  here  and 
there  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  revealed  by  subtle  delicacies  of  speech,  which 
more  than  suggest  that  the  Motherhood  of  God  was  a  flitting  presence  of  grace  and 
tenderness  in  his  thought.  We  recall  how  when  he  wrote  to  the  Thessalonian 
Church,  he  turned  for  a  time  from  ministering  the  needed  tonic  of  rebuke  to  the 
sweeter  ministry  of  the  comfort  of  hope.  Our  version  reads:  "Them  also  which 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him,"  St.  Paul  wrote:  "Them  also  which  have 
been  laid  to  sleep  by  Jesus  wiU  God  bring  with  Him."    "Laid  to  sleep  by  Jesus.'* 

TOL.  lU.  81 


482  THE  SIB  Lie JI.  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ucvb 

There  is  a  picture  in  the  words — a  homely  and  famiKar  one.  The  day  is  done. 
The  tiny  feet  of  children,  which  aU  day  long  have  pattered  to  and  fro  within  the 
home,  are  tired.  As  the  darkness  falls  their  prattle  grows  drowsy.  Then  they  are 
hushed  to  sleep  in  the  mother's  arms,  and  laid  in  their  cradle-bed  until  morning. 
We  see  it  all.  We  are  God's  children  of  an  older  growth.  While  it  is  called  day 
we  spend  our  strength  in  toils  and  joumeyings.  As  the  shadows  lengthen  we  grow 
aweary.  It  is  time  to  rest.  In  the  arms  of  the  Mother-God,  who  stoops  over  U8 
in  the  Saviour's  condescending  ways,  we  are  put  to  sleep,  and  laid  in  stillness  to 
rest  "  until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away."  Perhaps  even  more  literally 
than  we  thought,  our  dead  "  die  into  the  arms  of  God."  {Ibid?)  The  Motherhood  of 
God : — There  are  old  lessons  of  the  love  of  God  we  may  learn  in  a  fresh  light  as  we 
interpret  them  through  the  thought  of  the  Motherhood  of  God.  1.  The  intensity 
of  the  Divine  self-sacrifice  grows  keener  through  it.  All  love  gives  itself,  but  its 
climax  of  self-renunciation  is  motherhood.  2.  The  sense  of  the  inalienableness  of 
the  Divine  love  is  deepened  also  by  the  thought  of  the  Motherhood  of  God.  Does 
a  mother's  love  ever  die  t  When  every  other  love  expires,  it  lives  its  secret  life. 
Its  patience  is  infinite.  A  mother  may  forget.  Her  motherhood  may  prove  false. 
But  it  is  not  likely.  It  is  the  most  unnatural  thing  in  nature.  It  is  as  if  the  sun 
should  rise  in  the  west,  and  set  in  the  east.  A  lioness  will  fight  to  the  death  for 
her  whelps,  and  the  she-bear  for  her  cubs.  It  is  the  first  and  last  instinct  creation 
knows.  But  let  nature  have  denied  herself,  let  her  have  given  the  lie  to  her  primal 
instincts,  let  the  stars  have  gone  backward  in  their  courses,  and  aU  the  settled 
order  of  the  universe  have  returned  to  chaos,  yet  even  then,  saith  the  Lord,  will  I 
not  forget  thee.  8.  Possibly  also  the  Divine  yearning  over  the  wayward  and 
prodigal  may  find  a  fresh  setting  in  the  idea  of  the  Motherhood  of  God.  When 
a  father's  love  does  not  easily  forgive,  because  his  sense  of  justice  and  order  and  true 
discipline  in  the  family,  of  which  he  is  the  responsible  governor,  are  hindrances,  the 
mother's  love  deviseth  prevailing  persuasions,  and  intercedes  with  tears.  And  in 
imknown  depths  of  a  common  love  of  the  prodigal  the  justice  and  the  mercy 
somehow  meet  and  are  reconciled.  Evangelical  theologians  are  ever  conscious  of  two 
elements  in  the  character  of  God,  whose  nature  and  whose  name  is  Love.  The  law 
of  righteousness  and  the  ministry  of  mercy  are  always  present.  And  the  problem  of 
their  reconciliation  is  the  problem  so  much  profound  and  noble  thought  has  striven 
to  solve  in  the  doctrine  of  atonement.  They  are  both  true.  The  Lord  our  God  ia 
one  God  ;  but  He  is  Father-God  and  Mother-God.  We  wonder  at  times  whether 
the  prodigal  son  of  our  Lord's  parable  had  a  mother.  It  is  not  difficult  to  suggest 
reasons  why,  in  an  Oriental  country,  where  the  position  of  woman  is  so  different 
from  her  place  in  our  own,  the  father's  love  should  wisely  be  Christ's  type  of  the 
Divine.  But  there  is  a  fragment  of  further  meaning  hidden  in  the  story  for  those 
who  remember  that  the  promgal  may  not  have  been  motherless.  Certain  it  is  that, 
if  his  father  olimbed  to  the  house-top  to  gaze  expectant  in  the  direction  of  the  far 
country,  his  mother  crept  into  her  chamber  alone  to  pray.  As  the  father  commands, 
"Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,"  the  mother's  eyes  are  homes  of 
silent  tears.  And  who  shall  say  that  the  rejoicing  of  the  home-coming  was  not 
tenderer  in  the  mother's  heart,  and  that  tender  joy  the  last  balm  of  healing  to  the 
prodigal  son?  {Ibid.)  The  craving  for  the  feminine  in  Ood: — The  Rev.  John 
Watson  ("Ian  Maclaren ")— he  told  me  the  story  himself— was  once  in  a  Roman 
Catholic  church  in  Italy.  Before  the  altar  to  the  Virgin  knelt  a  woman,  her  lips 
moving  devoutly  in  prayer,  her  eyes  alight  with  wondering  worship  and  love.  As 
she  was  making  her  way  to  the  door,  after  ending  her  devotion.  Dr.  Watson  asked 
her  in  Italian  some  question  about  the  points  of  interest  in  the  building.  The 
woman  seemed  pleased  to  find  an  English  visitor  (or  perhaps  I  should  say  a  Scot) 
who  could  converse  in  her  own  language,  and  the  two  fell  to  chatting  about  the 
scenery  and  show-places  of  the  neighbourhood.  By  and  by  the  conversation  turned 
upon  the  differences  between  the  Roman  Catholic  and  Protestant  religions,  especially 
in  regard  to  the  fact  that  Protestants  do  not  address  prayers  to  the  Virgin.  "Don  t 
you  ever  pray  to  the  Mother  of  God?"  she  asked.  "  No,"  said  Dr.  Watson,  very 
gently,  "  for  it  seems  to  me  that  all  you  find  which  is  holy  and  helpful  and  adorable 
m  the  character  of  that  most  revered  and  beautiful  of  women — all  that,  and  infinitely 
more,  I  find  in  her  Divine  Son."  "Yes,  sir,"  she  said,  wistfully.  "I  understand 
that  for  you,  but  you  see  you  are  a  man,  and  you  don't  know  how  a  woman  needs 
a  woman  to  pray  to."  "  And  although  I  should  be  the  last  man  in  the  world  ever 
to  become  a  Roman  Catholic,"  said  Dr.  Watson,  when  teUing  the  story,  "you'U 
believe  me  when  I  assure  you  that  I  hadn't  the  heart  to  add  another  word." 


CHAP.  Lxvi.]  ISAIAU.  488 

{Coulson  Kemahan.)  "  As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth  " : — At  a  summer  resort 
a  clergyman  and  a  lady  sat  on  the  piazza  of  the  hotel.  The  lady's  heart  was  heavily 
burdened,  and  she  talked  of  her  sorrows  to  the  aged  minister,  who  tried  to  lead  her 
in  her  hour  of  need  to  the  Great  Comforter.  His  efforts  seemed  to  be  in  vain  ;  the 
lady  had  heard  all  her  life  of  the  promise  that  if  a  tired  soul  casts  its  burden  on  the 
Lord  it  will  be  sustained,  no  matter  how  heavy  that  burden  may  be,  but  she  seemed 
to  lack  the  faith  to  thus  cast  herself  upon  the  Lord.  A  half-hour  afterward  a  severe 
thunderstorm  came  up  in  the  western  sky.  With  the  first  flash  of  lightning  the 
mother  jumped  out  of  her  chair  and  ran  up  and  down  the  piazza,  exclaiming: 
"  "Where  is  Freddie  ?  Where  is  Freddie  ?  He  is  so  terribly  frightened  in  a  thunder- 
storm I  don't  know  what  he  will  do  without  me. "  In  a  few  moments  afterward  her 
boy  came  running  up  the  walk,  almost  breathless,  and  his  face  plainly  showing  the 
great  fear  that  was  in  his  heart.  "  Oh,  mother,"  he  exclaimed,  "I  was  so  frightened, 
I  ran  just  as  fast  as  ever  I  could  to  get  to  you. "  The  mother  sat  down  and  took  the 
frightened  child  into  her  arms.  She  allayed  his  fear  and  quieted  him,  until  his 
head  rested  calmly  on  her  loving  heart  The  good  clergyman  stepped  up  gently, 
and,  putting  his  hand  on  the  mother's  shoulder,  he  whispered :  "As  one  whom  ms 
mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort  you."  "  I  understand  it  now,"  she  replied,  aa 
she  looked  up  with  tearful  face.  "I  will  throw  myself  into  His  arms  as  a  little 
child,  and  remember  His  promise.  I  never  felt  the  depth  of  Divine  love  as  shown 
in  that  promise  before."  {Siisan  T.  Perry.)  A  mother's  self-sacrificing  love: — In 
the  buried  city  of  Pompeii,  that  was  destroyed  by  an  eruption  of  Mount  Vesuvius, 
I  was  shown  a  place  where  had  been  found  the  remains  of  a  lady  and  her  three 
children.  She  had  tried  to  gather  two  of  her  little  ones  in  her  arms,  and  the  babe 
was  hid  on  her  breast  in  the  folds  of  her  robe.  And  when  the  scorching  dust  came 
down,  every  one  fled ;  but  the  mother  could  not  leave  her  children,  and  she  died 
with  them.  A  mother  would  give  her  own  life  to  save  her  child.  The  Lord  is  as 
a  mother.  He  did  die  to  save  you  t  And  He  now  lives  to  comfort  you  as  a  mother 
comforteth  her  child.    {W.  Birch.) 

Yer.  14.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  shall  be  known  toward  His  servants. — Th.e  Lord!* 
hand  revealed: — I.  Some  of  the  ways  the  hakd  of  the  Lokd  makes  itself 
KUOWN  towards  His  SERVANTS.  1.  In  the  character  they  bear.  2.  In  the  work 
they  do.  3.  In  the  sufi"erings  they  endure.  4.  In  aU  the  triumphs  of  their  faith 
and  patience.  II.  The  condition  of  this  visible  display  of  God's  power. 
Simply  to  let  it  operate  upon  us  and  through  us.  We  can,  and  often  do,  prevent  His 
hand  from  being  known.     There  must  be  humble  receptiveness,  believing  prayer. 

III.  The  effects  of  this  manifestation  of  the  Lord's  hajjd.  1.  It  encourages 
the  Lord's  servants.  2.  It  rebukes  the  unbelief  of  the  ungodly.  Conclusion: 
Unconverted  sinner  1  the  Lord  desires  to  show  forth  the  power  of  His  grace  in  you. 
Will  you  not  aJlow  Him  to  work  upon  you  this  miracle  of  His  saving  power! 
{W.  Chdhrie,  M.A.) 

Vers.  18-24.  It  shall  eome,  that  I  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues. — The 

conversion  of  the  world : — I.  FtrnxRE  prospects  of  providence  respecting  thb 
glorious  work  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  to  Christ.    II.  The  means 

BY  WHICH  IT  SHALL  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.     III.   ThE  EXTENT  TO  VTHICH  IT  SHALL  REACH. 

IV.  The  HOLY  and  blessed  effects  which  shall  be  produced  by  IT.  (/.  Snod- 
grass,  D.D. )  The  Gospel  to  he  preached  to  the  imcivilized : — No  regard  seems  here  to  be 
paid  to  that  favourite  maxim  with  many,  that  the  Gospel  can  only  be  successfully 
preached  to  a  people  already  in  a  civilized  state.  It  is  certain  that  the  first  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  to  the  nations  of  the  world  was  not  conducted  upon  any  such  narrow 
principle.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  mentioned  by  some  of  the  early  apologists  for 
Christianity,  as  one  of  its  honourable  achievements,  that  it  has  turned  even  the  most 
cruel  and  barbarous  people  into  mildness  and  docility.  If  any  intimation  is  given, 
in  prophecy,  upon  this  point,  it  seems  rather  to  reverse  the  above-mentioned  maxim. 
Were  Pul  and  Lud,  and  Tubal  and  TarsMsh,  civilized  countries  in  the  days  of  this 
prophet  I  yet  God  is  represented  as  sending  messengers  to  them,  to  declare  His  glory 
among  the  Gentiles.  Is  there  a  more  unfavourable  manner  of  life  for  receiving 
instruction  than  that  of  a  people  wandering  about,  without  any  fixed  residence  ?  or 
is  there  any  state  of  society  more  base  than  that  of  men  living  m  caves  and  rocks  of 
the  earth  ?  yet  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Gospel  will  make  the  villages,  or  clustered 
tents,  of  Eedar  to  rejoice,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock  to  sing.     {Ibid.) 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vxmu 

Yet.  19.    And  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them. — Missions: — I.  The  manner  in 

WHICH  THE  NATIONS  WERE   TO    BE    GATHERED    INTO    THE  OhTJROH    OF    GOD.      II. 

The  instruments  to  be  employed  in  effecting  this  great  work.  {B.  Mae- 
cuUoch.)  Tarshish  .  .  .  Javan: — That  is,  to  far  Spain,  and  the  distances  of  AMca, 
towards  the  Black  Sea,  and  to  Greece,  a  full  round  of  the  compass.  (Prof.  G.  A. 
Smith,  D.I).)  "  The  isles  afar  off" : — Coastlands  (chap.  xl.  15).  This  distinction 
between  the  nearer  nations  who  have  experienced  somethrag  of  the  greatness  of 
Jehovah  through  contact  with  His  people  Israel,  and  the  remoter  nations  who  have 
not  heard  His  name,  originates  with  the  prophet  Ezekiel  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  f.).  But 
while  the  distinction  is  common  to  the  two  prophets,  the  development  of  the  idea  is 
strikingly  different.  In  Ezekiel  Gog's  ignorance  of  Jehovah  tempts  him  to  an  act  of 
sacrilege  on  the  land  of  Israel  which  is  avenged  by  the  annihilation  of  him  and  his 
host.  The  spirit  of  this  passage  is  more  evangelical.  Jehovah  sends  missionaries 
from  the  nearer  nations  to  those  who  have  not  heard  His  fame  nor  seen  His  glory  ; 
and  the  report  carries  conviction  to  their  minds,  so  that  they  restore  the  Israelites 
exiled  amongst  them,  as  an  offering  to  the  Lord.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  And. 
they  shall  declare  My  glory  among  the  Gentiles. — Missionary  responsibility: — 
I.  The  state  of  the  heathen  who  know  not  God.  1.  Their  present  state. 
They  know  nothing  of  the  God  of  love.  The  weary  and  heavy-laden  among  them 
never  heard  Christ's  "  Come  unto  Me."  The  sorrowftil  among  them  never  heard  His 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn."  They  know  nothing  of  the  Paraclete,  the  Comforter, 
the  Strengthener,  although  their  need  is  as  urgent  as  ours,  of  comfort  and  of  strength. 
They  do  not  know  what  prayer  is.  They  do  but  send  up  deprecations  to  demons. 
They,  as  we,  are  bereaved  of  dear  ones  ;  but  the  grand  music  of  those  words,  "  I  am 
the  Kesurrection  and  the  Life,"  never  hushed  the  discords  of  their  wailing,  nor  lifted 
the  darkness  of  their  silent  despair.  2.  Their  future.  All  is  to  them  wrapt  in 
gloom  impenetrable.  II.  Our  responsibility.  Imagine  the  plague  once  more 
devastating  our  cities.  Suppose  jjrou  knew  of  an  infallible  remedy.  Then  suppose 
utter  indifference  on  your  part  in  imparting  it.  What  a  monster  you  would  be  I 
No  one  really  loves  the  Lord  Jesus  who  is  not  zealous  to  make  others  love  Him.  If 
you  do  love  Him,  and  are  anxious  to  make  others  love  Him,  what  are  you  doing  for 
the  spread  of  His  kingdom  ?  III.  What  can  we  do  ?  We  can  pray  for  the  full 
coming  of  Christ's  kingdom,  for  the  sending  more  labourers  into  the  harvest.  We 
can  provoke  others  to  pray.  We  can  try  to  realize  this  truth,  that  our  Lord  makes 
the  evangelization  of  the  world  to  depend,  in  we  know  not  what  degree,  upon 
faithful,  earnest  prayer.     {J.  R,  Vernon,  M.A.) 

Yer.  21.  And  I  will  also  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Levites. — Taken  for 
priests  and  for  Levites: — Those  taken  to  be  priests  and  Levites  might  be  the  Gentiles 
who  bring  back  the  dispersed  of  Israel,  or  the  restored  Israelites  themselves.  The 
latter  is  the  more  probable  meaning.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  "From  them" 
refers  to  the  converted  heathen,  by  whom  the  Israelites  were  brought  back  to  their 
home.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Incorporated  in  Jehovah's  priestly  Church  (chap.  Lxi. 
6),  the  heathen  are  not  now  excluded  even  from  priestly  and  Levitical  service  in  the 
temple.  {Ibid.)  A  new  order  of  priests  and  Levites: — Under  the  Gospel  dispensation 
God  will  select  both  out  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  a  chosen  people,  who  shall  stand  before 
Him  spiritually  as  the  priests  and  the  Levites  stood  before  him  typically.  The 
connection  leads  us  to  see  that  not  only  a  great  promise  but  likewise  a  great  privilege 
is  herein  implied.  It  is  that  we  shall  be  priests  and  Levites.  Now,  the  priests  or 
Levites  were  persons  set  apart  to  be  God's  peculiar  property.  Being  thus  set  apart 
they  lived  only  for  Divine  service.  Further,  they  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  drawing 
near  to  God — nearer  than  the  rest  of  people  in  that  typical  dispensation.  In  like 
manner  there  is  a  people  to  be  found  on  earth  at  this  day  whom  God  has  chosen  to 
draw  near  unto  Him.  But  priests  and  Levites  had  two  works  to  do.  They  were 
engaged  to  do  something  towards  God  for  men,  and  so  they  offered  the  sacrifices 
that  were  brought  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  whether  according  to  the  general 
ordinances,  or  to  any  special  vows.  Spiritually  minded,  they  much  engaged  in 
intercession  for  the  rest  of  Israel.  So  there  is  a  people  to  be  found  this  day  who 
offer  unto  God  acceptable  prayer  and  praise,  and  in  answer  to  their  prayer, 
unnumbered  blessings  come  down  upon  the  sons  of  men.  Another  part  of  their 
office  consisted  in  speaking  for  God  to  the  people:  "For  the  priest's  lips  should 
keep  knowledge."  As  for  the  Levites,  they  were  as  ushers  in  the  schools  and  tutors 
in  the  families  of  Israel.  Amongst  the  Levites  were  found  those  scribes  who  became 
the  instructors  of  the  people,  the  copyists  of  the  law,  and  the  expounders  of  its 


CHAP,  ixn.]  ISAIAH.  486 

statutes  and  ordinances ;  ministers  who  opened  up  to  the  people,  as  E2xa  did,  the 
knotty  points  of  the  old  covenant,  and  expounded  the  Word.  So,  not  all  of  us  in 
the  same  degree,  but  all  of  us  in  a  measure,  are  to  be  teachers  of  God's  revealed 
truth,  even  as  He  has  taught  us.  The  great  point  is  this.  It  seems  to  be  mentioned 
here  as  a  matter  of  surprise  that  God  should  take  any  of  the  persons  here  mentioned 
— of  the  sinful,  backsliding,  transgressing  Jews,  or  of  the  blinded,  dark,  benighted, 
heathen  Gentiles — and  make  them  to  be  priests  and  Levites  before  Him.  That  is 
parallel  to  the  fact  that  God  does  take  some  of  the  most  unlikely  persons,  who  seem 
to  be  the  most  unsuitable  of  aU,  and  make  these  to  be  His  faithful  and  honoured 
servants  among  the  sons  of  men.  I.  The  fact.  According  to  the  text,  men  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  selection  ;  for  it  is  said,  "  I  will  also  take  of  them  " — not, 
"  their  parents  shall  bring  them  up  to  it ; "  not,  "  those  who  shall  be  looked  out  as 
the  most  fit  and  proper  men  on  account  of  some  natural  bent  and  bias,  or  gift  and 
talent,"  but,  "  I  will  take."  God's  priesthood  in  the  world  is  a  priesthood  of  His 
own  choosing,  of  His  own  setting  apart,  of  His  own  anointing.  "  He  hath  made  va 
kings  and  priests  unto  God. "  In  their  case,  it  appears  that  whatever  was  unfit  in 
their  character  has  been  overcome  by  Divine  grace.  If  God  takes  them  for  Levites, 
He  makes  them  Levites ;  if  He  chooses  them  for  priests,  He  makes  them  priests. 
II.  The  reason  of  the  fact.  Does  not  He  do  this  to  display  His  infinite 
mercy  ?  And  His  power  ?  And  His  sovereignty  ?  Does  He  not  thereby  secure  to 
Himself  the  most  loving  service  ?  Another  reason  why  the  Lord  takes  the  vilest  of 
men  to  make  them  the  saintliest  is,  that  He  might  openly  triumph  over  Satan. 
And  do  not  you  think  this  is  done  very  much  for  the  encouragement  of  the  Church 
of  God  ?  III.  "What  is  the  lesson  fkom  this  ?  Eemember  what  state  you  were 
in  before  God's  grace  took  you  in  hand.  Then  consider  what  you  are  called  to  be  ; 
you  are  made  priests  and  Levites.  Then  ask  yourself  what  you  would  soon  become 
if  His  grace  were  to  depart  from  you.  And  what  humility  this  vocation  of  God 
should  produce  1  However  high  we  may  be  raised,  we  must  remember  whence  the 
honour  cometh.  And  since  He  hath  taken  us  for  priests  and  for  Levites,  let  us  do 
every  oflBce  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord.  Let  us  serve  Him  with  great  thankfulness 
and  joy.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  22.  For  as  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth. — The  perpetuity  of  the  true 
Israel: — The  bulk  of  the  heathen  world  and  also  of  Israel  perish,  but  Israel's  name 
and  seed,  i.  e.  Israel  as  a  nation  with  the  same  ancestors  and  an  independent  name, 
remains  for  ever  (cf.  Jer.  xxxi.  35  f.  ;  xxxiii.  20-26),  as  the  new  heaven  and  the 
new  earth.  And  just  because  Israel's  calling  in  regard  to  the  heathen  world  is  now 
fulfilled  and  all  things  are  made  new,  the  old  fencing  off  of  Israel  from  the  heathen 
now  comes  to  an  end  ;  and  what  qualifies  for  priestly  and  Levitical  service  in  God's 
temple  is  no  longer  mere  natural  descent,  but  inner  nobility.  .  .  .  The  prophet 
thus  represents  to  himself  the  Church  of  the  future  on  a  new  earth  and  under  a  new 
heaven  ;  but  he  is  unable  to  represent  the  eternal  in  the  form  of  eternity ;  he 
represents  it  to  himself  merely  as  an  unending  continuation  of  temporal  history 
(ver.  23).  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  A  figure  of  the  spiritual: — The  thought  of  chap. 
Ivi.  7  is  here  (ver.  23)  expressed  by  a  figure,  which,  understood  literally,  involves  a 
physical  impossibility  ;  but  the  prophet  cannot  altogether  emancipate  himself  from 
the  forms  of  the  Jewish  economy,  and  clothes  a  spiritual  truth  in  a  garb  which  in 
strictness  is  too  narrow  for  it  (cf.  Zech.  xiv.  16-19).  {Prof  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 
The  stability  of  the  Christian  Church  (with  chap.  Ix.  20,  21) : — The  Christian  Church 
is  not  the  conqueror  of  the  Jewish  polity,  but  the  heir  and  successor.  The  new 
covenant  has  been  developed  out  of  the  old.  There  was  no  break  when  Christ 
came,  but  a  fulfilment  and  a  completion.  And  so  the  promises  were  handed  down 
in  the  Christian  line,  among  which  these  from  the  latter  part  of  Isaiah,  relating  to 
the  "  stability  "  of  the  ancient  Church,  are  not  the  least  remarkable.  They  declare 
that  God  is  an  "everlasting"  light  to  His  people,  that  their  permanence  is  like  the 
permanence  of  the  creation  of  God.  {T.  D.  Woolsey.)  The  Christiam.  Chu/rch  not 
a  human  vnstitutian : — The  permanence  of  the  Christian  Church  in  the  world,  if  it 
be  a  fact,  is  unlike  aU  facts  of  history.  Everything  human  decays  and  passes 
away.  All  institutions,  forms  of  government,  civilizations,  have  their  day  and 
decline.  No  one  doubts  that  the  old  religions  of  India  and  its  castes  are  doomed 
to  perish.  We  cannot,  therefore,  be  assured  from  history  that  Christianity  may  not 
perish  also.  Still  when  you  look  at  its  origin,  its  power  of  growth,  its  vitality, 
when  everything  around  was  dead ;  its  changes  of  form  joined  to  unchangeableness 
of  principle ;  its  power  to  correct  evils  within  its  pale  ;  its  predominance  among  ths 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixti. 

influences  that  act  on  mankind ;  its  universal  character,  and  its  consciousness — so 
to  speak — that  the  world  is  its  own,  you  cannot  feel  it  to  be  otherwise  than  quite 
probable  that  it  is  to  be  man's  guide  to  the  end  of  time.  {Ibid.)  The  history  of  the 
Church  augurs  its  permanence : — Though  history  is  not  prophecy,  though  it  cannot 
with  authority  predict  the  universal  and  final  sway  of  Christ's  Gospel  and  of 
Christian  institutions,  it  reveals,  at  the  least,  a  working  power,  a  tenacity  of  life,  a 
hopefulness,  a  benevolent  energy  which  are  not  inconsistent  with  stability  and  with 
continuance  untU  the  end  of  time.  {Ibid.)  The  stability  of  the  Christian  Church : — 
I.  We  shall  look  at  several  causes  to  which  it  is  not  due,  but  to  which,  on  a 
superficial  view,  it  might  be  ascribed.  1.  It  is  not  owing  to  strength  borrowed  from 
governments,  the  Church  grew  without  help  from  the  government ;  it  grew  also  in 
^ite  of  long  efforts  of  the  government  to  destroy  it.  2.  Nor  is  the  stability  of  the 
Church  due  to  the  stability  of  its  forms  of  discipline  and  order.  These  have  passed 
through  a  great  variety  of  changes,  from  the  times  of  the  nascent  Church,  when 
there  was  Sttle  of  established  order,  down  through  the  ages  of  hierarchy,  to  our 
times,  when  the  Church  thrives  in  a  great  variety  of  forms,  and  with  variedf  theories 
of  government.  3.  Nor  yet  is  the  stability  of  the  Church  owing  to  the  stability 
of  theological  systems.  It  grew,  it  almost  reigned,  before  any  received  dogmatic 
statements  of  its  sacred  truth  were  current.  It  has  outlived  theories  and  expositions 
innumerable,  and  indeed  nothing  connected  with  Christianity  has  been  more  chang- 
ing than  the  scientific  arrangements  of  its  truths.  4.  Nor  can  the  stability  of  the 
Church  be  explained  by  saying  that  it  got  the  control  of  opinion  and  kept  thought 
in  leading  strings,  so  that  when  science  was  emancipated,  new  conditions  full  of 
danger  to  the  Church  began.  It  arose  in  spite  of  a  reigning  heathen  opinion  and 
philosophy,  which  it  overthrew  and  put  another  in  the  place.  It  has  in  its 
healthiest  state  favoured  all  knowledge  in  the  confidence  of  being  itself  together 
with  every  other  true  thing  from  God.  5.  Nor  can  the  stability  of  the  Church  be 
attributed  to  the  condescending  patronage  of  large-minded  men,  who  saw  in  its 
justice  and  humanity  a  help  for  the  world  to  be  found  nowhere  else,  but  yet  did 
not  believe  in  it  themselves.  II.  To  what,  then,  is  the  stability  of  the 
Ohukch  due?  To  this  question  it  is  no  sufficient  answer  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  ever  in  and  with  the  Church.  For  the  Spirit's  office  is  to  act  on  men  according 
to  the  laws  of  character  by  Divine  realities.  It  is  due — 1.  To  this :  that  the 
Gospel,  on  which  the  Church  is  bmlt,  works  out  some  of  the  great  problems  which 
lie  on  the  heart  of  man,  in  a  way  to  give  lasting  peace  and  satisfaction  to  the  souL 
I  refer  to  practical  rather  than  to  intellectual  problems,  although  even  the  restless 
questionings  of  the  mind  either  meet  with  an  answer  from  the  Divine  oracles,  or  are 
carried  up  into  a  higher  realm  of  truth.  The  power  inherent  in  Christianity  itself, 
as  a  way  of  reconcOing  God  and  man,  and  of  raising  man  above  sin  by  great  truths 
and  great  hopes,  is  a  real  and  permanent  power.  It  is  suited  to  all  natures  and 
capacities,  to  all  races  and  times.  2.  To  those  permanent  features  of  the  Gospel, 
which  bind  men  together  in  a  brotherhood  pervaded  by  the  spirit  of  love  and 
fellowship.  3.  To  its  self-reforming  capacity.  The  human  and  the  Divine  have 
ever  mingled  and  will  ever  mingle  in  the  historical  progress  of  Christianity,  as  they 
mingle  in  the  development  of  a  Christian  life.  There  are  unavoidable  sources  of 
corruption  in  the  revolutions  of  society,  in  the  growth  of  wealth,  in  the  love  of 
self-gratification,  in  the  increase  of  worldly  comforts.  There  are  other  sources  in 
the  ignorance  of  untrained  Christians,  in  the  ambition  of  the  clergy  and  their  lovt 
of  dominion,  in  the  rewards  oSered  within  the  Church  to  the  aspiring,  in  formalinn, 
in  a  dead  orthodoxy.  At  the  lowest  ebb  of  Christian  life  and  knowledge  there 
remain  within  the  reach  of  the  Church  the  sources  of  a  better  spiritual  state,  so  that 
it  can  reform  itself  as  it  has  done  more  than  once.  (1)  As  long  as  the  Bible  is 
acknowledged  as  an  authority,  there  is  an  appeal  to  it  from  all  other  authorities, 
from  popes,  and  councils,  and  philosophers,  and  the  current  opinion  of  the  time. 

i2)  There  are  at  the  times  of  greatest  declension  men  who  are  somehow  led,  as  we 
>elieve,  by  the  Divine  Spirit  concurring  with  the  Word,  into  a  deeper  experience ; 
they  rise  above  their  times,  they  reach  convictions  which  are  irrepressible,  they 
must  proclaim  to  the  world  at  any  cost  what  they  found  out  as  the  resting-places  of 
their  souls ;  they  become  the  starting-points  of  a  reform  which  sweeps  over  sJI 
Christian  nations.  4.  The  stability  of  the  Church  is  ensured  by  the  stability  of 
Christ.  "  J««us  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day  and  for  ever.  Doubt  is  of  to 
day,  but  He  is  of  all  time.  He  is  a  permanent  possession  for  the  soul.  He  does  not 
wear  out  in  a  lifetime.  He  is  the  permanent  possession  of  the  Church  in  all  its  ages 
and  ohangea.  He  does  not  wear  out  while  there  are  men  to  long  for  redemption,  {llnd,) 


emw.  vwwt]  I8AIAE,  487 

y«r.  24.  And  they  shall  go  forth. — Tramagmton  punished  ."^Thoae  that  trans- 
gressed or  "  rebelled "  against  the  Lord  ore  the  obstinate  idolaters  referred  to  in 
chaps.  Lev.,  Izvi.  Their  carcasses  lie  a  spectacle  to  all  who  come  np  to  worship  at 
Jerasalem,  subject  to  never-ending  corraption  and  never-endLng  bnrmng.  According 
to  the  prophet's  conception,  the  scene  takes  place  on  the  earth,  in  the  vicinity  of 
Jerusalem,  probably  in  the  Valley  of  Hinnom,  but  the  language  may  have  suggested 
a  punishment  by  everlasting  fire  in  the  world  to  come.  {A.  B.  Damdson,  D.D.) 
Gehenna: — This  verse  is  the  basis  of  the  later  Jewish  conception  of  Grehenna  as 
the  place  of  everlasting  punishment  (see  Salmond's  "Christian  Doctrine  of  Im- 
mortality"). Grehenna  is  the  Hebrew  Oi-EimUhn  (Valley  of  Hinnom),  the  place 
where,  of  old,  human  sacrifices  were  offered  to  Moloch,  and  for  this  reason  desecrated 
by  King  Josiah  (2  Kings  xziii.  10).  Afterwards  it  became  a  receptacle  for  filth  and 
refuse,  and  Rabbinical  tradition  asserts  that  it  was  the  custom  to  cast  out  unclean 
corpses  there,  to  be  burned  or  to  undergo  decomposition.  This  is,  in  all  probability, 
the  scene  which  had  imprinted  itself  on  the  imagination  of  the  writer,  and  which 
was  afterwards  projected  into  the  unseen  world  as  an  image  of  endless  retribution. 
The  Talmudic  theology  locates  the  mouth  of  hell  in  the  Valley  of  Hinnom.  {Prof. 
J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  eternal  imaged  by  the  temporal: — The  prophet  blends 
temporal  and  eternal.  This  world  and  the  next  coalesce  to  hia  view.  (F.  Delitzsch, 
D.D.)  Sell  is  of  both  worlds,  so  that  in  the  same  essential  sense,  although  in 
different  degree,  it  may  be  said  both  of  him  who  is  still  living  but  accursed,  and 
of  him  who  perished  centuries  ago,  that  his  worm  dieth  not  and  his  fire  is  not 
quenched.     {J.  A.  Aleaxtnder.)    Doom  following  v/nfaUhfulneasamd  transgression:— - 

I.  It  is  a  terrible  ending,  but  it  is  the  same  as  upon  the  same  floor  Ohxist  set  to 
His  teaching — the  Gospel  net  oast  wide,  but  only  to  draw  in  both  good  and  bad 
upon  a  beach  of  judgment ;  the  wedding  feast  tlirown  open  and  men  compelled  to 
come  in,  but  among  them  a  heart  whom  grace  so  ^reat  oould  not  awe  even  to 
decency ;  Ohrist's  Gospel  preached,  His  example  evident,  and  Himself  owned  as 
Lord,  and  nevertheless  some  whom  neither  tne  hearing  nor  the  seeing  nor  the 
owning  with  their  lips  did  lift  to  unselfishness  or  stir  to  pity.  Therefore  He  who 
had  cried,  "Oome  all  nnto  Me,"  was  compelled  to  close  b^  saying  to  many, 
"Depart."  2.  It  is  a  terrible  ending,  but  one  only  too  conceivable.  For  though 
God  IS  love,  man  is  firee — free  to  turn  from  that  love ;  free  to  be  as  though  he  had 
never  felt  it ;  free  to  put  away  from  himself  the  highest,  dearest,  most  urgent 
grace  that  God  can  show.  But  to  do  this  is  the  judgment.  8.  "  Lord,  are  there 
few  that  be  saved  t "  The  Lord  did  not  answer  the  question  but  by  bidding  the 
questioner  take  heed  to  himself:  "Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate."  {Prof. 
O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)    Eternal  punishment: — I.  The  wickedness  op  the  wiokeb. 

II.  Its  PTTNisHiiENT.  Certain.  Terrible.  Without  alleviation  or  hope.  III.  Thk 
PKRFSTXTATION  07  ITS  MOBAL  LESSONS.  (/.  I/yth,  D.D.)  The  goodness  and  severity 
ef  God: — ^The  pnblio  reading  of  the  synagogue  repeats  onoe  more  after  ver.  24,  on 
account  of  its  terrible  import,  the  encouraging  words  of  rat,  28|  '*lll  order  to 
MBolnds  with  words  of  oomf<xt.'*    {F,  IMitodk,  D.D,) 


Pnncelon  Theological  S,f'"'"^;Viifffi  l  tnllli' 


1   1012  01128  4959 


Date  Due 


