BV 

ETzT 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


^fje  2aest  of  jFait^. 


z?-^ 


THE 


REST    OF    FAITH. 


BY 


KEY.  A.  B.  EAELE. 


"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
I  will  give  you  rest."  —Matt.  xi.  28. 

"  For  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,  as  he  said." 
—  Heb.  iv.  3. 


BOSTON: 
JAMES  H.  EARLE,  PUBLISHER, 


Washington  Street. 
1871. 

V 


4< 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1871,  by 

JAMES  H.  EAKLE, 
In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington. 


OAMBKIDGE; 
PilESS  OF  JOHN  WILSON  AND  SON. 


TO   ALL 

"WHO     EAENESTLY     DESIRE     THB 

Eegt  of  JFattlj, 

THIS    BOOK    IS    SINOEBELY    LNSCRIBED    BY 

THE   AUTHOR. 


PREFACE. 


THE  design  of  this  book  is  to  show- 
how  a  Christian,  though  weak  and 
imperfect,  seeing  and  knowing  but  in 
part,  surrounded  as  he  must  be,  while 
living  here,  with  influences  opposed  to 
Christ  and  holiness,  —  may  walk  with 
Christ  without  interruption  or  condem- 
nation. 

That  the  Holy  Spirit  may  guide  the 
answer  to  this  question,  and  bring 
peace  and  rest  to  many  anxious,  ach- 
ing   hearts,  is    the    sincere    desire    and 

prayer  of 

A.  B.  E. 

Newton,  Mass.,  1871. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

I.    An  Enemy  Within 11 

II.  Testimony      ........  17 

ni.  Seventh  and  Eighth  of  Romans  85 

IV.  Rest  found  by  BeuevinG  ...  43 

V.  How   CAN  I  ABIDE  IN  THIS  ReST  ?  .  63 

yi.    How  He  led  me 62 

VII.  Imperfect,  yet  Sweetly  Resting  82 

Vin.  The  Value  of  Faith  .....  89 


THE   REST   OF   FAITH. 


CHAPTER    I. 


AN    ENEMY    WITHIN. 


nPHERE    are    usually   two    marked    J 

periods  in  the  experience  of  every 
Christian  who  learns  how  to  abide  in 
Christ's  love. 

The  first  memorable,  never-to-be-for- 
gotten season  in  his  history  is  that  hour 
when  he  receives  the  witness  of  his 
adoption,  and  begins  to  cry,  "  Abba, 
Father."    "  Old  things  are  passed  away ; 


12  THE  BEST  OF  FAITH. 

behold,  all  things  are  become  new."  All 
enemies  seem  slain.  His  cup  of  joy  is 
full.  His  peace  is  like  a  river.  He  has 
found  "the  pearl  of  great  price,"  and 
desires  that  all  may  possess  it.  The 
language  of  his  heart  is,— 

"Now  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round 
What  a  dear  Saviour  I  have  found ; 
ril  point  to  thy  redeeming  blood, 
And  say,  Behold  the  way  to  God  ! " 

He  is  surprised  that  every  Christian 
is  not  as  happy  as  he  is.  He  thinks  it 
must  be  they  are  not  faithful  to  Jesus. 
The  way  seems  so  pleasant,  and  Christ's 
service  so  easy,  that  he  expects  to  go 
right  on  and  do  every  duty,  and  enjoy 
the  same  through  life. 

But  it  is  not  long  before  he  cries  out 


AN  ENEMY   WITHIN.  13 

in  great  distress :  "  I  see  another  law  in 
my  members  warring  against  the  law 
of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  cap- 
tivity to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  my 
members." 

He  finds  he  has  been  doing  or  saying 
the  very  things  he  hates,  and  leav- 
ing undone  the  things  he  should  have 
done.  He  begins  to  feel  condemnation  ; 
but,  supposing  he  can  soon  overcome 
this  difficulty,  makes  new  resolutions 
that  hereafter  he  will  be  faithful.  These 
resolutions,  however,  are  not  kept.  He 
finds  it  more  difficult  to  perform  his 
vows  than  he  expected.  He  cries  out, 
"  How  to  perform  that  which  is  good 
I  find  not."  Finding  himself  disap- 
pointed in  his  own  efforts,  he  goes  to 
the  law  for  assistance ;  but  the  law  is 


14  THE  BEST    OF  FAITH. 

too  "  weak  through  the  flesh "  to  keep 
him  :  his  peace  is  greatly  interrupted. 

A  season  of  fasting  and  prayer,  with  the 
confession  of  his  departures,  brings  back 
to  him  "  the  joy  of  salvation."  But  it  is 
soon  gone.  The  most  thorough  conse- 
cration and  solemn  vows  are  again  made, 
but  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts  they  are 
broken.  He  is  almost  discouraged,  and 
cries  out :  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  "  Who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this 
death?"  "Is  there  no  balm?"  "Is 
there  no  physician  ?"  "  Must  I  always 
live  in  this  way  ?  " 

"  You  that  love  the  Lord  indeed, 
Tell  me,  is  it  thus  with  you  V 

I  find  a  large  number  of  Christ's  dear 
children   in  just   this   restless,    anxious 


AN  ENEMY    WITHIN,  15 

State :  dissatisfied  with  this  way  of  liv- 
ing; hungering  and  thirsting  to  know 
how  they  may  abide  in  the  fulness  of 
Christ's  love  without  these  changes  in 
their  religious  experience. 

And  yet,  in  this  very  hungering,  this 
longing  for  the  fulness  of  Christ's  love, 
among  so  many  Christians,  I  see  signs 
of  great  promise  to  the  church  and  the 
world. 

Christ  is  saying  to  his  people,  "  Come 
up  higher; "  and  they  are  coming,  where 
they  can  realize  the  exceeding  blessed- 
ness of  a  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God. 

This  is  no  new  feeling.  Many  in  the 
past  have  felt  the  same,  and  sought  and 
found  this  blessing.  I  will,  in  the  fol- 
lowing chapter,  give  a  part  of  the  ex- 
perience of  a  few  of  them. 


16  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

"  I  ask  them  whence  their  victory  came : 
They,  with  united  breath, 
Ascribe  their  conquest  to  the  Lamb, 
Their  triumph  to  his  death.'' 

"  Stand  ye  in  the  ways,  and  see,  and 
ask  for  the  old  paths,  where  is  the  good 
way,  and  walk  therein,  and  ye  shall  find 
rest  for  your  souls." 


CHAPTER     11. 


TESTIMONY. 


■p  EV.  DR.  PAYSON  says:  "  Were 
I  to  adopt  the  figurative  language 
of  Bunyan,  I  might  date  this  letter  from 
the  land  of  Beulah,  of  which  I  have  been 
for  some  weeks  a  happy  resident. 

"  The  celestial  city  is  full  in  my  view  ; 
its  glories  beam  upon  me;  its  breezes 
fan  me ;  its  odors  are  wafted  to  me ;  its 
sounds  strike  my  ears,  and  its  spirit  is 
breathed  into  my  heart.  Nothing  sepa- 
rates me  from  it  but  the  river  of  death, 
which  now  appears  but  as  an  insignificant 
2 


18  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

rill,  that  may  be  crossed  at  a  single  step 
whenever  God  gives  permission. 

"  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  has  been 
drawing  nearer  and  nearer,  appearing 
larger  and  brighter  as  he  approached. 
And  now  he  fills  the  whole  herni- 
sphere,  pouring  forth  a  flood  of  glory, 
in  which  I  seem  to  float  like  an  insect 
in  the  beams  of  the  sun ;  exulting,  yet 
almost  trembling,  while  I  gaze  upon 
this  excessive  brightness,  and  wonder- 
ing, with  unutterable  wonder,  why  God 
should  deign  thus  to  shine  upon  a  simple 
worm." 

After  this  rich  experience,  this  great 
increase  of  faith,  Dr.  Payson  cried  out, 
in  view  of  his  former  distressing  doubts, 
his  severe  and  unequal  struggle  with  the 
powers  of  darkness,  and  the  great  loss  he 


TESTIMONY,  19 

had  thereby  sustained  in  his  own  enjoy- 
ment and  usefulness  :  "  Oh  that  I  had 
known  this  twenty  years  ago !  "  That 
is,  that  twenty  years  before  he  could 
have  known,  as  he  did  then,  that  Christ 
had  made  provisions  for  him  to  live  and 
walk  with  him,  without  these  sad,  de- 
pressing breaks  in  his  religious  enjoy- 
ment; that  the  keeping  power  was  in 
Christ,  and  not  in  his  faithfulness  :  ''  We 
are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith ; "  and  if  our  faith  in  Christ  is 
unwavering,  nothing  can  disturb  our 
peace  and  rest. 

Mrs.  Edwards,  wife  of  President  Ed- 
wards, as  far  back  as  1742,  realized  this 
same  void  within,  this  unrest,  this  long- 
ing after  the  fulness  of  Christ's  love. 


20  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

She  says :  "  I  sought  and  obtained 
the  full  assurance  of  faith.  I  cannot 
find  language  to  express  how  certain  the 
everlasting  love  of  God  appeared :  the 
everlasting  mountains  and  hills  were  but 
shadows  to  it.  My  safety  and  happi- 
ness, and  eternal  enjoyment  of  God's 
immutable  love,  seemed  as  durable  and 
unchangeable  as  God  himself.  Melted 
and  overcome  by  the  sweetness  of  this 
assurance,  I  fell  into  a  great  flow  of 
tears,  and  could  not  forbear  weeping 
aloud. 

"  The  presence  of  God  was  so  near 
and  so  real,  that  I  seemed  scarcely  con- 
scious of  any  thing  else.  My  soul  was 
filled  and  overwhelmed  with  light  and 
love,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
seemed  just  ready  to  go  away  from  the 


TESTIMONY.  21 

body.  This  exultation  of  soul  subsided 
into  a  heavenly  calm  and  rest  of  soul  in 
God,  which  was  even  sweeter  than  what 
preceded  it." 

"  My  life  is  folded  in  the  life  of  Je&us, 
No  longer  mine,  but  purchased  by  that  tide,  — 
That  crimson  tide,  which,  shed  on  Calvary,  frees  us 
From  those  dark  stains  that  in  our  hearts  abide. 
My  life  is  hid  with  Christ,  and  I  am  his  : 
Whatever  his  will,  that  am  I  bound  to  do ; 
Where'er  he  goes,  I  cannot  stay  behind ; 
In  what  he  does  my  hand  shall  have  employ ; 
Whene'er  he  suffers,  sorrow  fills  my  mind ; 
When  he  rejoices,  I  partake  the  joy. 
He  bought  me  by  his  blood,  and  I  am  his  : 
I  have  no  other  will,  no  other  grief  nor  bUss.'' 

James  B.  Taylor  is  another  instance 
of  this  rich  experience,  after  years  of 
struggle  with  the  powers  of  darkness.  I 
give  a  few  extracts  from  his  memoir. 


22  THE  REST    OF  FAITH, 

He  says :  "  It  was  on  the  23d  of  April, 
1822,  when  I  was  on  a  visit  at  Haddani, 
Conn.  Memorable  day  !  The  time  and 
place  will  never,  no,  never,  be  forgotten. 
I  recur  to  it  at  this  moment  with  thank- 
ful remembrance. 

"  I  pleaded  and  wrestled  with  God  ; 
and,  praise  to  his  name,  after  six  long 
years  I  found  what  I  had  so  long  and  so 
earnestly  sought. 

"  My  earnest  desire  then  was,  as  it 
had  been  ever  since  I  professed  religion 
six  years  before,  that  all  love  of  the 
world  might  be  destroyed,  all  selfishness 
extirpated,  pride  banished,  unbelief  re- 
moved, all  idols  dethroned,  every  thing 
hostile  to  holiness  and  opposed  to  the 
divine  will  crucified ;  that  holiness  to 
the  Lord  might  be  engraved  on  my  heart, 


TESTIMONY.  23 

and  evermore  characterize  my  conversa- 
tion. 

"  I  felt  that  I  needed  that  for  which  I 
was  then,  and  for  a  long  time  had  been, 
hungering  and  thirsting.  I  desired  it, 
not  for  my  benefit  only,  but  for  that  of 
the  church  and  the  world.  At  this  very 
juncture  I  was  most  delightfully  con-  \ 
scious  of  giving  up  all  to  God.  I  was 
enabled  in  my  heart  to  say:  '  Here,  Lord, 
take  me,  take  my  whole  soul,  and  seal 
me  thine,  —  thine  now,  and  thine  for 
ever.  If  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 
clean.' 

,"  There  then  ensued  such  emotions  as 
I  never  before  experienced :  all  was  calm 
and  tranquil,  silent,  solemn,  and  a  heaven 
of  love  pervaded  my  whole  soul.  I  had 
a  witness   of  God's  love  to  me  and  of 


24  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

mine  to  him.  Shortly  after  I  was  dis- 
solved in  tears  of  love  and  gratitude  to 
our  blessed  Lord.  The  name  of  Jesus 
was  precious  to  me,  — 

*  'Twas  music  in  my  ear/ 

<"  He   came   as    King,    and  took   full 
possession  of  my  heart ;  and  I  was  en- 
abled to  say,  '  I  am  crucified  with  Christ: 
nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth   in   me.'     Let  him,    as    King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  reign  in   me, 
—  reign  without  a  rival  for  ever. 
"  I  know  and  am  as  fully  assured  of 
*•   my  acceptance  with   God  as  I  can  be 
\  of  my  existence, 

"  I  have  no  anxiety  about  the  future. 
My  only  wish  is  to  know  what  my 
heavenly  Father  will  have  me  do. 


TESTIMONY.  25 

"  I  would  not  determine.  '  Speak, 
Lord  ;  for  thy  servant  heareth.'  I  am 
not  my  own  keeper;  neither  would  I  be 
at  my  own  disposal.  Godliness  with 
contentment  is  great  gain.  I  trust  I  have 
won  this  prize. 

"  People  may  call  this  blessing  by 
what  name  they  please,  —  faith  of  assur- 
ance, holiness,  perfect  love,  sanctifica- 
tion, — it  makes  no  diiBTerence  with  me 
whether  they  give  it  a  name  or  no 
name,  it  continues  a  blessed  reality ; 
and,  thanks  to  my  heavenly  Father,  it 
is  my  privilege  to  enjoy  it :  it  is  yours 
also;  and  the  privilege  of  all  to  enjoy 
the  same,  and  to  go  beyond  any  thing 
that  I  have  ever  yet  experienced." 

Rev.  Daniel  Steele,  D.  D.,  President 


26     '^  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

of  Genesee  College,  says :  "  At  my  con- 
version, thirty  years  ago,  through  weak- 
ness of  faith,  the  seal  of  my  justification 
was  impressed  so  slightly  that  the  word 
Abba,  my  Father,  was  scarcely  legible. 
Yet  in  answer  lo  a  mother's  prayers,  in 
my  infancy,  consecrating,  with  conscious 
acceptance,  her  son  to  the  Christian  min- 
istry, I  was  called  to  preach,  but  called 
with  a  '  woe  unto  me,'  instead  of  an 
'  anointing  with  the  oil  of  gladness.' 

"  I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  unpleasant 
theme  of  a  ministry  of  twenty  years 
almost  fruitless  in  conversions,  through  a 
lack  of  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One. 
My  great  error  was  in  depending  on  the 
truth  alone  to  break  stony  hearts.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  though  formally  acknowl- 
edged and  invoked,  was  practically  ig- 


TESTIMONY,  27 

nored.     My  personal  experience  during 
much  of  this  time  consisted  in 

*  Sorrows  and  sins,  and  doubts  and  fears, 
A  howling  wilderness.' 

"  But  I  discovered  in  one  who  came 
across  my  path  the  fulness  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  enjoyed  as  an  abiding  blessing, 
styled  by  him  '  Rest  in  Jesus.'  I  was 
convicted :  I  sought  earnestly  th^  same 
great  gift,  but  could  not  exercise  faith 
till  I  had  made  a  public  confession  of 
my  sin  in  preaching  self  more  than  Christ, 
and  in  being  satisfied  w^ith  the  applause 
of  the  Church  above  the  approval  of  her 
divine  Head. 

"  I  immediately  began  to  feel  a  strange 
freedom  daily  increasing,  the  cause  of 
which  I  did  not  distinctly  apprehend.  I 
was  then  led  to  seek  the  conscious  and 


28  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

joyful  presence  of  the  Comforter  in  my 
heart.  Having  settled  the  question  that 
this  was  not  merely  an  apostolic  bless- 
ing, but  for  all  ages,  '  He  shall  abide 
with  you  for  ever,'  I  took  the  promise, 
'  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  whatso- 
ever ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name, 
he  will  give  it  you.'  The  'verily^  had 
to  me  all  the  strength  of  an  oath.  Out 
of  the  '  whatsoever '  I  took  all  temporal 
blessings,  not  because  I  did  not  believe 
them  to  be  included,  but  because  I  was 
not  then  seeking  them.  I  then  wrote  my 
own  name  in  the  promise,  not  to  exclude 
others,  but  to  be  sure  that  I  included 
myself.  Then  writing  underneath  these 
words,  '  To-day  is  the  day  of  salvation,' 
I  found  that  my  faith  had  three  points 
to  master:  the   Comforter^  for  me,  now. 


TESTIMONY.  29 

"  Upon  the  promise  I  ventured  with  an 
act  of  appropriating  faith,  claiming  the 
Comforter  as  my  right  in  the  name  of 
Jesus.  For  several  hours  I  clung  by 
naked  faith,  praying  and  repeating 
Charles  Wesley's  hymn:  — 

'  Jesus,  tliine  all-victorious  lore 
Shed  in  my  heart  abroad/ 

I  then  ran  over  in  my  mind  the  great 
facts  in  Christ's  life,  especially  dwelling 
upon  Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  his 
ascension,  priesthood,  and  all-atoning 
sacrifice.  Suddenly  I  became  conscious 
of  a  mysterious  power  exerting  itself  f 
upon  my  sensilDilities.  My  physical  sen- 
sations, though  not  of  a  nervous  tem- 
perament, in  good  health,  alone  and 
calm,  were  like  those  of  electric  sparks 


30  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

passing  through  my  bosom  with  slight 
but  painless  shocks,  melting  my  hard 
heart  into  a  fiery  stream  of  love.  Christ 
became  so  unspeakably  precious  that  I 
instantly  dropped  all  earthly  good,  repu- 
tation, property,  friends,  family,  every 
thing,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  ;  my 
soul  crying  out, 

'  None  but  Christ  to  me  be  given, 
None  but  Christ  in  earth  or  heaven/ 

"  He  stood  forth  as  my  Saviour,  all  ra- 
diant in  his  loveliness,  '  the  chief  among 
ten  thousand.'  Yet  there  was  no  phan- 
tasm, or  image,  or  uttered  word,  appre- 
hended by  my  intellect.  The  affections 
were  the  sphere  of  this  wonderful  phe- 
nomenon, best  described  as  *  the  love  of 
God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the 


TESTIMONY.  .    31 

Holy  Ghost.'  I  was  more  certain  that 
Christ  loved  me  than  I  was  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  solid  earth  and  the  shining 
sun. 

"  I  intuitively  apprehended  Christ.  My 
college  class  were  just  then  discussing 
the  subject  of  the  intuitive  cognitions.  I 
began  to  apply  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton's 
tests  of  these;  namely,  that  they  are 
simple,  incomprehensible,  necessary,  and 
universal.  The  last  adjective,  of  course, 
could  not  apply  to  the  intuitive  belief  of 
one  individual. 

"  But  my  consciousness  testified  that 
my  certainty  of  Christ's  love  had  the 
three  first-named  characteristics,  that  it 
was  to  me  even  a  necessary  truth,  the 
contrary  of  which  was  as  unthinkable 
as  the  annihilation  of  space.     The  last 


32  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

remarkable  peculiarity  remained  more 
than  forty  days,  after  which  I  had  hours 
in  which  I  could  conceive  the  contrary 
of  the  proposition,  '  Christ  loves  me.' 
On  such  occasions  my  firm  conviction 
of  his  love  was  not  an  intuition,  but 
an  inference  from  my  past  experience, 
together  with  the  absence  of  any  feel- 
ing of  condemnation.  .  .  . 

"  But  language  is  wholly  inadequate 
to  express  a  manifestation  of  Christ 
which  did  not  formulate  itself  in  words, 
but  in  the  mighty,  overwhelming  pul- 
sations of  love.  The  joy  for  weeks  was 
unspeakable.  ... 

"  The  ecstasy  has  subsided  into  a 
delicious  and  unruffled  peace,  rising  into 
ecstasy  only  in  acts  of  especial  devo- 
tion.    I   find   no   fear   of   man    nor   of 


TESTIMONY,  33 

death.  I  can  no  longer  accuse  myself 
of  unbelief,  the  root  of  all  sin.  What 
may  be  in  me,  below  the  gaze  of  con- 
sciousness, I  do  not  know.  I  must  w^ait 
till  occasions  shall  put  me  to  the  test. 
It  would  not  be  wise  for  me  to  assert 
that  all  sinful  ang^r  —  there  is  a  right- 
eous anger  —  is  taken  away,  till  I  have 
passed  through  a  college  rebellion,  or 
something  equally  provoking. 

"  If  sin  consists  only  in  active  energies, 
I  am  not  conscious  of  such  dwelling 
within  me.  If  sin  consists  in  a  state,  as 
some  assert,  I  infer  that  I  am  not  in  such 
a  state,  from  the  absence  of  sinful  ener- 
gies flowing  therefrom,  and  more  espec- 
ially from  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.     I  have  had  no  other  direct  wit- 


34  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

ness  than  that   attesting    Christ's   love 
to  me. 

"  My  experience,"  he  writes,  after  en- 
joying this  blessing  several  months,  "  of 
the  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  grows  richer 
and  richer.  Every  day  I  seek  a  place  for 
secret  praise.  I  am  filled  and  flooded 
with  a  sense  of  the  divine  love.  How 
delightful  any  kind  of  service  for  the 
blessed  Master !  How  sweet  to  feel  his 
circling  arms  around  one  on  every  side, 
—  so  that  no  calamity  can  possibly  be- 
fall the  soul ! " 


^ 


CHAPTER  III. 


SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  OF  ROMANS. 


npHE  Apostle  Paul  has  given  us  a 
similar  experience  in  the  seventh 
and  eighth  chapters  of  Romans. 

After  his  deep  conviction  for  sin,  and 
receiving  evidence  of  regeneration,  he 
arose  and  was  baptized ;  and  at  once 
commenced  to  persuade  men  to  embrace 
Christ  as  their  Redeemer. 

He  soon  connected  himself  in  church 
relation  with  those  disciples  he  had 
hated  and  persecuted.  In  common 
with  other  converts  he  found  pleasure  in 


36  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

Christ's  service.  The  Bible  now  became 
precious  to  him.  "  I  delight  in  the  law 
of  God  after  the  inward  man."  "  The 
law  is  holy,  just,  and  good,"  he  said. 

But  he  soon  met  with  a  great  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  his  spiritual  advancement. 
It  was  an  enemy  within,  a  law  in  his 
members  warring  against  the  law  of 
his  mind.  Sometimes  this  enemy 
would  get  great  advantage  over  him, 
and  bring  him  into  captivity  "  to  the 
law  of  sin.-'  Strong  efforts  were  at 
once  made  to  overcome  this  difficulty. 

Repeated  resolutions  of  faithfulness 
were  made,  but  they  were  not  kept. 
"  To  will,"  he  says,  "  is  present  with 
me,"  —  that  is,  to  make  good  resolutions, 
—  "but  how  to  perform  that  which  is 
good  I  find  not." 


SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  OF  ROMANS.     37 

His  inability  to  perform  these  vows, 
and  do  what  he  clearly  saw  he  ought  to 
do,  troubled  him,  interfered  with  his 
peace  and  usefulness,  so  that  at  times 
he  became  unhappy ;  and  in  his  distress 
cried  out,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am ! 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 
this  death?" 

He  felt  the  need  of  a  deliverer,  and 
must  have  one,  — ■  a  present  Saviour  to 
keep  as  well  as  to  redeem  him,  —  or  he 
would  continue  to  make  resolutions 
without  being  able  to  "perform  that 
which  is  good." 

The  great  burden  of  his  prayer  and 
inquiries  now  seemed  to  be,  to  know 
how  he  could  live  and  walk  in  the  ser- 
vice of  Christ,  without  being  brought 
into  captivity  to  sin,  to  abide  in  the  ful- 


38  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

ness  of  Christ's  love  without  condemna- 
tion. 
V  He  seemed  first  to  get  a  glimpse  of 
^  Christ  in  his  infinite  fulness,  as  not  only 
able  to  keep  him  from  falling,  but  to 
keep  him  through  a  simple  faith  from 
condemnation. 

This  view  greatly  encouraged  him, 
and  caused  him  to  exclaim,  "  I  thank 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. " 
That  is,  I  thank  God  there  is  a  deliv- 
erer. "  "What  the  law  could  not  do," 
what  conscience  could  not  do,  what 
his  own  faithfulness  could  never  do, 
Christ  could  do  for  him.  He  now  saw 
clearly  that  every  necessity  was  fully  pro- 
vided for  in  Christ.  "  What  the  law 
could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through 
the  flesh,"  God  had  sent  his  Son  to  do. 


SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  OF  ROMANS,     39 

At  this  point  of  his    struggle  Christ 
seemed  to  open  "  his  understanding  that 
he   might  understand    the    Scriptures," 
Here  he  received  light.     He  discovered  | 
that  all  power  to  keep  as  well  as  to  re-  ; 
deem  was  in  Christ.     His  reliance  for 
keeping  power  was  transferred  from  his 
own  efforts  to    Christ.      To  be  faithful 
was  then   a  pleasure,  a  luxury.      Like 
the  Redeemer,  it  was  his  meat  to  do  the 
.will  of  God.     But  his  calm,  quiet,  yet  I 
active  rest  was  the  rest  of  faith. 

Christ  now  became,  by  a  strong  faith,  ■ 
in  -  reality  his  practical  deliverer  from 
sin  and  temptation  ;  his  "  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption." At  tjiat  moment  Paul 
"  entered  into  rest."  Then  he  could  say 
from  actual  experience,  "  There  is  there- 


40  THE  REST  OF  FAITH, 

fore  now  (not  at  death  or  in  the  future, 
but  now)  no  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit/' 
Then  he  knew  (in  the  higher  sense)  in 
whom  he  had  believed.  His  body  of 
death  was  laid  down  at  the  cross,  and 
never  taken  back.  He  went  on  believ- 
ing, working,  triumphing,  through  all 
the  rest  of  his  long  and  very  useful  life ; 
willing  to  stay  and  toil  on  earth,  but 
having  a  desire  "  to  depart  and  be  with 
Christ,  which  is  far  better." 

He  was  never  again  heard  to  say,  "  O 
wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  de- 
liver me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  '' 
but,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
which  strengtheneth  me,"  He  was  con- 
tent   in    any    situation.     The    fear    of 


SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH   OF  ROMANS.     41 

death  was  gone :  he  was  ready  to  be 
offered  at  any  time.  Although  imper- 
fect as  yet  and  reaching  forth  for  what 
was  before,  yet  he  realized  a  calm, 
sweet,  abiding  rest  in  Christ,  that  never 
seemed  disturbed  by  the  severe  trials 
through  which  he  passed.  "  None  of 
these  things  move  me."  And  when  the 
summons  came  for  him  to  leave  his 
work  on  earth  for  his  crown  in  heaven, 
it  found  him  still  enjoying  the  rest  of 
faith.  When  the  Master  asked  him  to 
lay  down  his  life  for  him  in  Rome,  he 
said,  ''  I  am  ready." 

"  Lord,  give  us  such  a  faith  as  this ; 
And  then,  whatever  may  come, 
We'll  taste  e'en  here  the  hallowed  bhss 
Of  an  eternal  home." 

I  could  mve  a  cloud  of  witnesses  all 


42  TEE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

testifying  to  the  same  thing ;  that  is, 
after  receiving  evidence  of  regeneration, 
they  felt  a  longing  of  heart  for  some- 
thing higher,  a  state  that  would  en- 
able them  to  abide  in  Christ's  love 
without  interruption.  This  they  sought 
and  found,  and  continued  to  enjoy  until 
dismissed  from  the  toils  of  earth  to  the 
joys  of  heaven;  while  others,  still  liv- 
ing, after  ten  or  twenty  years  continue 
to  enjoy  the  same  blessing,  with  in- 
creasing sweetness  ;  —  showing  that 
Christians,  though  imperfect  and  un- 
worthy, can  by  faith  rest  in  a  perfect 
Saviour  without  condemnation. 


CHAPTER    IV. 


REST    FOUND    BY    BELIEVING. 


T    WILL   next    answer    the    anxious 

inquiry  that   comes  from   so   many 

^struggling,  longing,  Christian  hearts  :  — 

"  How  can  I  reach  this  state  of  rest 
in  Jesus  ?  " 

The  very  first  thing  to  be  settled  in 
your  own  mind  is  this  :  "  Do  I  fully  be- 
lieve Christ  has  made  provision  for  me 
to  abide,  without  interruption,  in  the 
fulness  of  his  love  ?  "  If  one  doubt  re- 
mains in  your  mind  about  this,  you  will 


44  TEE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

not  obtain  it,  however  anxious  or  ear- 
nest you  are  in  your  efforts. 

As  it  is  attained  by  faith,  it  is  neces- 
sary for  you  to  believe  it  attainable. 
Think  of  the  absurdity  of  praying  and 
searching  for  a  thing  you  doubt  can 
be  obtained.  Would  not  such  an  effort 
be  solemn  mockery  ?  "  What  things 
soever  ye  desire  when  ye  pray,  believe 
that  ye  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have 
them." 

Let  this  point  be  fully  settled.  Take 
time,  if  necessary.  Search  the  Scrip- 
tures for  light.  Pray  in  faith.  If  your 
unbelief  is  in  your  way,  turn  all  your 
batteries  on  that;  ask  those  you  think 
are  walking  with  Christ  to  help  you. 
Continue  these  efforts  until  all  doubt  is 
gone  on  the  subject,  until  you  become 


EEST  FOUND  BY  BELIEVING,  45 

entirely  satisfied  that  Christ  has  made 
ample  provision  for  you  to  abide  in  his 
love  without  condemnation. 

When  this  is  clear  to  your  own  mind, 
then  come  to  the  Saviour  just  as  you 
would  if  you  could  see  him  with  your 
natural  eyes.  Come  at  once,  by  a 
childlike,  simple  faith,  believing  just 
what  he  has  said.  When  he  says  to 
you,  "  Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest,"  your  immediate  reply  should 
be, — 

"  Just  as  I  am,  thou  wilt  receive, 
Wilt  welcome,  pardon,  cleanse,  relieve  ; 
Because  thy  promise  I  believe, 
0  Lamb  of  God  !  I  come,  I  come7^ 

Do  not  stop  to  inquire  of  Jesus  how 
he  can  give  rest  to   one  so  sinful  and 


46  THE  REST  OF  FAITH, 

unworthy  as  you  are, —  to  one  who  has 
made  so  many  vows  and  resolutions  to 
be  faithful,  and  failed.  Leave  all  that 
to  him :  let  him  take  his  own  time  and 
way  to  fulfil  his  promise.  It  is  enough 
for  you  that  he  has  said,  "  I  will  give 
you  rest."  Expect  him  to  do  as  he  has 
said. 

"  Only  trust  him,  only  trust  him, 
Only  trust  him  just  now  ; 
Just  now  only  trust  him, 
Only  trust  him  just  now." 

If  you  have  no  emotion,  no  joy  or 
light  for  the  present,  no  matter:  trust 
God  in  the  dark.  Let  your  faith  look 
to  the  other  side  of  the  cloud  for  the 
'^  silver  lining." 


HEST  FOUND  BY  BELIEVING.  47 

"  Behind  a  frowning  providence 
He  hides  a  smiling  face." 

If  the  Divine  face  is  hid  from  you, 
and  all  appears  dark,  even  though  the 
providences  of  God  seem  to  frown  upon 
you,  —  health  fails,  friends  die,  property 
is  taken  away,  —  still  stand  j&rm,  trust 
all,  without  wavering,  to  him. 

"  God  is  his  own  interpreter, 
And  he  will  make  it  plain." 

"  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night, 
but  joy  Cometh  in  the  morning." 

"  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust 
in  him." 

Having  consecrated  all  to  Jesus  as 
far  as  knowledge  goes,  as  far  as  you 


48  THE  BEST  OF  FAITH, 

understand  yourself,  take  nothing  from 
the  altar ;  but  expect  him  to  give  you 
the  evidence  of  your  acceptance,  with- 
out one  doubt,  just  when  and  as  he 
pleases,  whether  you  perceive  any 
change  in  your  feelings   or   not. 

"What  if  for  the  present  your  heart 
^  seems  harder  than  ever,  and  you  realize 
^'  no    love    for    souls,   no    enjoyment    in 
/    prayer,  the    promises   seem   sealed   and 
^     hid  from  your  view,  and  your  own  heart 
'     and  life,  it    may  be,  never  before    ap- 
peared  so  vile  and  useless,  —  what  of 
it  ?      You   are  the  patient,   and    Christ 
the  physician:  you  are  not  to  select  the 
remedies,    nor    the    mode    of   applying 
them.       There     stand     the      promises. 
Christ    is   the    same    almighty   Saviour 


HEtiT  FOUND  BY  BELIEVING.  49 

he  would  be  if  every  thing  was  bright 
to  you.  He  may,  and  probably  will, 
answer  your  prayer  very  differently  from 
any  thing  you  have  arranged,  or  would 
arrange.  Newton  has  so  well  described 
this  point  that  I  will  ask  you  to  read 
this  hymn  carefully:  — 

"  I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow 
In  faith  and  love  and  every  grace  ; 
Might  more  of  Ms  salvation  know, 
And  seek  more  earnestly  Ms  face. 

'Twas  he  who  taught  me  thus  to  pray, 
And  he,  I  trust,  has  answered  prayer ; 

But  it  has  been  in  such  a  way 
As  almost  drove  me  to  despair. 

I  hoped  that  in  some  favored  hour 
At  once  he'd  answer  my  request, 

And  by  Ms  love's  constraining  power 
Subdue  my  sins  and  sr^'ve  me  rest.  ■ 


50  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

Instead  of  this,  he  made  me  feel 

The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart ; 
And  let  the  angry  powers  of  hell 

Assault  my  soul  in  every  part. 

Yea,  more  :  with  his  own  hand  he  seemed 

Intent  to  aggravate  my  woe  ; 
Crossed  all  the  fair  designs  I  schemed, 

Blasted  my  gourds,  and  laid  me  low. 

*  Lord,  why  is  this  ?  '   I  tremblmg  cried  : 

*  Wilt  thou  pursue  thy  worm  to  death  %  ' 

*  'Tis  in  this  way,*  the  Lord  replied, 

*  I  answer  prayer  for  grace  and  faith. 

'  These  inward  trials  I  employ, 
Erom  self  and  pride  to  set  thee  free. 

And  break  thy  schemes  of  earthly  joy, 
That  thou  may^st  seek  thy  all  in  me.'  " 

The  treatmeat  of  your  case  may  be 
very  different  from  this.  But  it  will  be 
in  such  a  way  as  to  humble  you  in  the 


REST  FOUND  BY  BELIEVING.  51 

dust,  and  let  you  see  that  you  have  not 
had  your  own  way  in  the  matter  at  all, 
that  your  will  has  been  given  up  to 
God. 

If  there  seems  to  be  a  delay  in  giving 
you  this  blessing,  do  not  stagger  at  the 
promise.  "  Though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it ; 
because  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not 
tarry ; "  that  is,  it  will  not  tarry  a  moment 
after  you  are  prepared  for  its  reception. 

Remember  God  loves  you,  although 
you  are  so  unworthy  of  his  love ;  and 
does  not  afflict  willingly  any  one. 

As  soon  as  he  has  prepared  you,  so 
that  you  can  see  that  it  is  all  of  grace 
through  faith  that  you  are  kept,  and 
you  can  trust  him  wholly,  then  he  will 
give  you  rest, —  not  fear,  not  torment, 


52  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

but  rest;  a  calm,  sweet,  abiding  rest  in 
him.  It  is  your  privilege  to  remain 
in  this  sweet  state  of  rest  in  Jesus, 
whatever  may  be  the  toils  or  trials  of 
earth,  until  you  receive  your  crown  in 
heaven. 

"  Rest,  weary  soul ! 
The  penalty  is  borne,  the  ransom  paid, 
For  all  thy  sins  full  satisfaction  made ; 
Strive  not  to  do  thyself  what  Christ  has  done, 
Claim  the  free  gift  and  make  the  joy  tliine  own; 
No  more  by  pangs  of  guilt  and  fear  distrest, 
Rest,  sweetly  rest !  " 


CHAPTER    V. 


HOW  CAN  I  ABIDE  IN  THIS  REST  1 


"\/'OUR  own  experience  in  reaching 
it  will  furnish  the  answer.  As  it  is 
reached  only  by  faith,  it  can  be  retained 
only  by  faith.  Christ  needs  no  assist- 
ance from  you  or  any  one  else  to  keep 
your  heart  in  perfect  peace ;  but  asks 
you  to  leave  it  all  to  him,  and  says, 
"  Only  believe." 

Then  you  can  say,  "  I  know  whom 
I  have  believed  and  am  persuaded  that 
he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  unto  him  against  that  day." 


54  THE  REST  OF  FAITH, 

Be  faithful  and  watchful,  but  do  not 
depend  on  either  faith  or  vigilance. 
Your  promises  and  resolutions,  so  far 
as  keeping  you  in  the  love  of  Christ  is 
concerned,  are  ropes  of  sand.  "  We  are 
kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith 
unto  salvation."  "  Only  believe."  Your 
faith,  like  Abraham's,  is  counted  to  you 
for  righteousness. 

If  your  faith  in  Christ  is  unwavering, 
nothing  can  interrupt  your  peace  and 
rest.  The  darkness  and  the  light  are 
both  alike  to  faith.  If  your  way 
seems  dark  and  hedged  up  for  the  pres- 
ent, you  need  not  be  troubled.  Trust 
God  in  the  dark. 

"  Faith  is  the  brightest  evidence 
Of  things  beyond  our  sight : 
It  pierces  through  the  veil  of  sense, 
And  dwells  in  heavenly  Hght." 


HOW  CAN  I  ABIDE  IN  THIS  BEST?        55 

If  at  any  time  you  are  assailed  by  the 
powers  of  darkness,  or  if  sudden  tempta- 
tion meets  you,  then  let  your  prayer  be, 
''Jesus,  keep  me  ;  "  or  a  prayer  embrac- 
ing this  thought.  Depend  on  Christ 
entirely  to  keep  you. 

You  may  hear  him  whispering,  "  Do 
you  believe  without  a  doubt  I  will  keep 
you  now  ?  "  If  at  that  moment  your 
faith  and  trust  are  alone  in  him,  and  not 
in  your  faithfulness,  to  keep  you,  he  will 
say,  "  Peace,  be  still ; "  and  all  will  be 
calm.  The  fiery  dart  will  be  quenched 
before  it  reaches  your  heart.  He  will 
keep  that  soul  in  "  perfect  peace " 
whose  entire  trust  is  in  him.  You  will! 
not  retain  this  sweet  peace  and  rest  by^ 
hard  fighting  and  personal  struggles, 
but  by  believing.     "  Only  believe,"  and 


56  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

you  may  look  on,  while  Christ  does  all 
the  rest.  Although  you  are  weak  and 
imperfect,  and  see  in  part,  and  know 
but  in  part,  yet  the  grace  of  God  meets 
you  in  your  weakness,  and  supplies  all 
your  necessities  in  Jesus. 

There  is  one  way  by  which  you  may 
Know  when  you  are  resting  in  Christ  by 
faith.  It  is  when  you  are  bearing  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  "  love,  joy, 
peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  good- 
ness, faith,  meekness,  temperance."  Do 
you  bear  this  fruit  ?  If  not,  you  are  not 
abiding  in  the  fulness  of  Christ's  love, 
no  matter  what  you  profess.  It  would 
be  well  for  every  Christian  to  ask,  "  Do  I 
bear  this  fruit  ?     If  not,  I  am  not  right." 

I  am  very  sorry  to  find  persons  claim- 
ing to  live  near  the  Saviour,  w^ho  mani- 


BOW  CAN  I  ABIDE  IN  THIS  BEST?       57 

fest  a  harsh,  unkind,  and  even  a  fault- 
finding spirit;    and   in    some   instances 
whose  lives  are  a  reproach.     In  this  way 
Christ  is  greatly  dishonored ;  and  many 
anxious  Christians,  who  long  to  get  up 
higher  and  abide  in  him,    are  hindered 
and  kept  back.     Any  Christian  sweetly 
/   resting   in    Christ  will  have    great    pa- 
j    tience  ;  he  will  not  be  offended  at  every 
I    little  thing ;  he  will  speak  kindly,  even 
I    to  those  he  thinks  are  wrong.     "  Char- 
^  ity "  —  which    is     love   to     God     and 
man  — "  suifereth    long,  and   is   kind," 
"is  not  easily  provoked,"  "  beareth  all 
things."      "  Charity  never  faileth." 

Since  it  does  not  please  God  to  give 
us  any  darkness,  a  Christian  resting 
in  Christ  will  have  warm  and  glowing 
love  for  Christ  and  his  people,  and  will 


58  THE  REST    OF  FAITH. 

not  walk  in  darkness.  If  he  lacks  these 
things,  he  is  not  right,  does  not  abide 
in  the  love  of  God;  and  Jesus  says, 
"  Friend,  come  up  higher." 

He  may  have  severe  trials  of  his  faith, 
but  will  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord :  let  him  do 
what  he  will." 

God  tried  Abraham,  —  asked  him  to 
offer  up  his  son.  The  trial  was  a  severe 
one  ;  yet  he  obeyed,  although  he  could 
not  understand  the  reasons  for  this  ap- 
parently strange  requirement.  He  went 
forward  without  hesitation.  He  knew 
God  could  not  make  a  mistake,  nor  do 
a  wrong  thing.  After  this  trial,  God 
said,  "  I  know  Abraham."  ''  In  blessing 
I  will  bless  him."  So  let  us  trust  God 
in  trial,  or  in  affliction,  the  same  as  in 
the  day  of  prosperity. 


HOW  CAN  I  ABIDE  IN  THIS  BEST?      59 

"  BKnd  unbelief  is  sure  to  err, 
And  scan  liis  work  in  vain/' 

Many  of  God's  dealings  with  us  seem 
mysterious  now  ;  but  let  us  quietly  and 
trustingly  wait :  he  will  make  all  plain 
to  us  "  hereafter." 

As  the  fierce  winds  ruffle  the  surface 
water,  while  the  deep  fountain  beneath 
remains  calm  and  peaceful,  so  the 
'  Christian  may  realize  changes  in  his 
emotions^  while  his  faith  and  rest  in 
Christ  remain  undisturbed.  If  dear 
ones  are  removed,  he  will  no  doubt 
keenly  feel  the  trial,  but  will  say,  "  The 
Lord  has  given,  and  the  Lord  has  taken 
away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  Christ's  own  fingers  take  up•^ 
the  bleeding  veins  severed  by  these.' 
afflictions. 


60  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

"  If  tliou  shouldst  take  them  all  away, 
Yet  would  I  not  repine  ; 
Before  they  were  possessed  by  me, 
They  were  entu^ely  thme." 

This  state  will  prevent  gloomy  and 
distressing  fears  about  the  future.  It 
teaches  the  Christian  the  great  lesson  : 
In  whatever  situation,  therewith  to  be 
content.  The  fear  of  death  is  greatly 
removed ;  he  knows  he  has  not  dying 
grace  now,  and  does  not  need  it ;  but 
believes  Christ's  word,  "  As  thy  days, 
so  shall  thy  strength  be."  He  sweetly 
rests  in  Jesus,  expecting  grace  and  help 
just  when  needed.  It  would  be  bur- 
densome to  carry  dying  grace  with  us 
in  all  the  trials  of  life.  Christ  does  not 
teach  us  to  pray  for  bread  to-day  for  all 
coming  time,  but  "  day  by  day."     And 


HOW   CAN-  I  ABIDE  IN  THIS  BEST?      61 

hence  to  a  believing,  trusting  Christian, 
Christ's  ''  burden  is  light."  Only  for 
the  present;  no  anxious  care,  no 
trouble  on  our  part  about  "  the  mor- 
row." "  For  the  morrow  " —  with  Christ 
to  arrange  and  provide  for  it — ''shall 
take  thought  for  the  things  of  itself." 

"  0  happy  Christian  !  who  can  boast, 
'  The  Son  of  God  is  mine/  — 
Happj,  though  humbled  in  tlie  dust, 
liicli  in  this  s-ift  divine.' ' 


-i 


■j» 


CHAPTER    VL 


HOW    HE     LED     ME. 


A  BOUT  ten  years  ago,  I  began  to 
feel  an  inexpressible  hungering 
and  longing  for  the  fulness  of  Christ's 
love.  I  had  often  had  seasons  of  great 
joy  and  peace  in  Christ,  and  in  his  ser- 
vice. I  had  seen  many  precious  souls 
brought  into  the  fold  of  Christ.  I  fully 
believe  I  then  belonged  to  Christ,  that 
my  name  was  in  his  family  record. 

I  loved  the  work  of  the  ministry,  but 
had  long  felt  an  inward  unrest,  a  void 
in  my  soul  that  was  not  filled.     Seasons 


HOW  hi:  led  me.  63 

of  great  joy  would  be  followed  by  sea- 
sons of  darkness  and  doubt.  If  I  had 
peace,  I  feared  it  would  not  continue  ; 
and  it  did  not. 

Many  anxious  Christians  came  to  me, 
complaining  of  the  same  thing.  How 
could  I  help  them  on  that  point,  when  I 
did  not  know  how  to  get  right  myself? 
I  took  them  to  the  seventh  chapter  of 
Romans,  and  there  left  them,  saying, 
"  O  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  " 
I  was  there  myself,  and  supposed  I  must 
live  and  die  there. 

In  this  state  I  was  exposed  to  severe 
temptations  and  attacks  of  the  enemy. 
I  made  strong  and  repeated  resolutions 
that  I  would  be  faithful,  but  could  not 
keep  them.     Then  I  sought  and  found 


64  THE  REST  OF  FAITH, 

forgiveness  again,  and  was  happy,  and 
said,  "Oh  that  I  could  always  enjoy  such 
peace!"  Bat  it  was  soon  disturbed  by 
some  word,  or  act,  or  heart-wandering. 

Thus  I  lived  on  for  many  years  :  now 
happy  in  my  Christian  experience,  and 
now  unhappy  ;  sometimes  doubting 
and  fearing,  and  sometimes  resting. 
God  gave  me  success  in  winning  souls, 
and  granted  me  many  hours  of  sweet 
communion  with  my  Saviour,  for  which 
I  am  truly  grateful ;  still  I  was  unsatis- 
fied,—  I  wanted  an  uninterrupted  rest 
and  peace. 

I  often  read  those  precious  words, 
uttered  by  our  Saviour,  "  If  ye  abide  in 
me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye 
shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  you."     I  longed  and  prayed 


HOW  HE  LED  ME,  65 

to  be  there,  but  knew  not  the  way.  Oh 
that  some  one  had  then  taught  me  the 
way  of  rest  in  Jesus  ! 

I  frequently  met  Christians  who 
claimed  sinless  perfection :  many  of 
them  were,  indeed,  a  better  type  of 
Christians  than  ordinary  professors;  but 
they  did  not  seem  perfect  to  me.  The 
rest  in  Jesus,  for  which  I  longed,  was 
still  unfound. 

At  last  I  felt  that  the  question  for  me 
to  settle  was  this,  —  Can  an  imperfect 
Christian  sweetly  and  constantly  rest  in 
a  perfect  Saviour,  without  condemna- 
tion? 

This  I  revolved  in  my  mind  for  a  long 
time.  I  read,  as  far  as  I  could,  the  ex- 
periences of  those  who  seemed  to  live 
nearest  to  Christ.  I  searched  the  Scrip- 
5 


66  THE  BEST  OF  FAITH. 

tures  for  light,  and  asked  such  as  I 
believed  had  power  with  God  to  pray 
with  and  for  me,  that  I  might  be  led 
aright  on  this  great  question.  At  length 
I  became  satisfied  that  Christ  had  made 
provision  for  me  and  all  his  children  to 
abide  in  the  fulness  of  his  love  without 
one  moment's  interruption. 

Having  settled  this,  I  said  :  I  need 
this;  I  long  for  it;  I  cannot  truly  repre- 
sent religion  without  it,  and  Christ  is 
dishonored  by  me  every  day  I  live  with- 
out it. 

I  therefore  deliberately  resolved,  by 
the  help  of  my  Redeemer,  to  obtain  it 
at  any  sacrifice ;  little  realizing  how  un- 
like Christ  I  then  was,  or  how  much 
would  be  needed  to  bring  me  there. 

I  first  procured  a  blank  book,  which  I 


EOlV  HE  LED  ME,  67 

called  my  "  Consecration  Book,"  and 
slowly  and  solemnly,  on  my  knees, 
wrote  in  it  the  following  dedication  :  — 

Andover,  February  10,  1859. 

"  This  day  I  make  a  new  consecra- 
tion of  my  all  to  Christ. 

"  Jesus,  I  now  and  for  ever  give  my- 
self to  thee  ;  my  soul  to  be  washed  in 
thy  blood  and  saved  in  heaven  at  last ; 
my  whole  body  to  be  used  for  thy  glory  ; 
my  mouth  to  speak  for  thee  at  all 
times ;  my  eyes  to  weep  over  lost  sin- 
ners, or  to  be  used  for  any  purpose  for 
thy  glory ;  my  feet  to  carry  me  where 
thou  shalt  wish  me  to  go  ;  my  heart  to 
be  burdened  for  souls,  or  used  for  thee 
anywhere;  my  intellect  to  be  employed 
at  all  times  for  thy  cause  and  glory.     I 


68  THE  REST  OF  FAITH, 

give  to  thee  my  wife,  my  children,  my 

property,  all  I  have,  and  all  that  ever 

shall    be    mine.      I   will   obey   thee    in 

every  known  duty. 

"A.  B.  E." 

I  then  asked  for  grace  to  enable  me 
to  carry  out  that  vow,  and  that  I  might 
take  nothing  from  the  altar.  I  sup- 
posed, with  this  consecration,  entire  as 
far  as  knowledge  went,  I  should  soon 
receive  all  that  my  longing  heart  could 
contain  ;  but  in  this  I  was  sadly  mis- 
taken, 

1  think  I  then  came  nearer  to  Christ. 
But  as  clearer  light  began  to  shine 
into  my  heart,  I  saw  more  of  its  vile- 
ness. 

I  find  in  my  journal  the  following  :  — 


HOW  HE  LED  ME,  69 

Boston,  December  22,  1859. 

"  The  last  three  weeks  have  been 
weeks  of  great  searching  of  heart.  I 
never  had  my  heart  so  searched  before. 
I  detect  pride,  envy,  self-will,  a  great 
deal  of  unbelief,  my  love  to  the  Saviour 
to  be  very  weak.  Yet  I  have  conse- 
crated all  to  Christ,  and  cannot  with- 
draw it  from  the  altar.  Oh,  can  a  worm 
so  vile  be  like  Christ  ?  I  know  it  is 
possible ;  and  if  I  am  ever  to  be  like 
him,  why  not  now,  while  I  am  where 
I  can  do  good  in  leading  others  to 
him?" 

I  felt  like  a  patient  who,  though  in 
the  hands  of  a  skilful  physician,  groans 
and  writhes  under  the  severe  treatment 
which  has  been  found  necessary  in  order 
to    save    his    life.      But   my    constant 


s^ 


70  THE  REST    OF  FAITH. 

prayer  was,  ^'  Be  thorough  with  me, 
Jesus,  —  be  thorough."  Many  a  discour- 
aging day  followed  this  consecration 
and  these  heart-searchings.  I  grew 
weak  and  small  and  unworthy  in  my 
own  estimation. 

At  times  my  joy  and  peace  were 
almost  unbounded.  Sometimes  I  felt 
that  I  grasped  the  prize  so  earnestly 
sought,  but  was  shown  some  hidden 
sin  in  my  heart  which  greatly  humbled 
and  distressed  me.  How  fully  I  realized 
the  words  of  J.  B.  Taylor,  who  said, 
while  seeking  this  blessing,  "  Notwith- 
standing my  profession  that  I  had  cruci- 
fied the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil, 
I  have  had  keener  sorrows  for  indwelling 
sin  than  I  ever  experienced  before  con- 
version. 


HOW  HE  LED  ME,  71 

"  Oh,  the  distress  which  I  have  felt  on 
account  of  pride,  envy,  love  of  the 
world,  and  other  evil  passions  which 
have  risen  up  and  disturbed  my  peace, 
and  separated  between  God  and  my 
soul!"  How  many  have  realized  all 
this,  and  even  more,  in  their  struggles 
after  abiding  rest  in  Jesus ! 

One  sin  that  troubled  me  most,  and 
was  the  hardest  to  overcome,  was  a 
strong  will, —  a  desire,  and  almost  a 
determination,  to  have  my  own  way;  — 
and  thus  —  even  in  regard  to  little 
things,  or  any  little  injury  or  supposed 
wrong  —  to  speak  without  reflection, 
and  sometimes  severely,  even  to  those  I 
knew  were  my  friends ;  to  say,  "  I  will 
do  this,"  and  "  I  will  not  do  that." 

This  I  clearly  saw  must  be  overcome, 


72  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

if  I  would  become  a  consistent  and  use- 
ful Christian.  As  I  could  not  do  it 
myself,  I  gave  it  over  to  Jesus :  he 
could  give  me  grace  to  overcome  even 
this.  But  I  found  I  gave  nothing  into 
the  hands  of  Jesus,  except  by  a  simple 
faith.  My  faith  was  very  deficient  and 
weak:  to  believe  the  promises  fully  was 
not  easy.  I  believed  the  theory  of 
religion ;  but  to  have  my  heart  grasp 
the  reality,  without  wavering,  was  more 
difficult.  Yet  I  found  my  faith  grow- 
ing stronger,  until  at  last  I  came  to 
believe  just  what  God  has  said  in  his 
word.  I  found  first  the  blade  of  faith, 
then  the  ear,  and  then  the  full  corn  in 
the  ear.  No  rest  could  be  obtained 
until  I  could  believe  just  what  God  had 
said,  and  trust  him  fully. 


HOW  HE  LED  ME,  73 

I  felt  that  I  must  have  in  my  heart 
something  I  did  not  then  possess.  Be- 
fore I  could  be  filled  with  the  fulness  of 
Christ's  love  I  must  be  emptied  of  self. 
Oh,  the  longing  of  my  heart  for  what  I 
then  believed,  and  now  believe,  to  be 
sweet  and  constant  rest  in  Jesus !  I 
believed  I  should  receive  it,  and  thought 
it  was  near. 

I  soon  found  it  easier  to  resist  temp- 
tation. I  began  to  trust  Christ  and  his 
promises  more  fully. 

With  this  mingling  of  faith,  desire, 
and  expectation,  I  commenced  a  meet- 
ing on  Cape  Cod.  After  re-dedicating 
myself,  in  company  with  others,  anew 
to  God,  I  was  in  my  room  alone,  plead- 
ijjig  for  the  fulness  of  Christ's  love,  when 
all  at  once  a  sweet,  heavenly  peace  filled 


74  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

all  the  vacuum  in  my  soul,  leaving  no 
longing,  no  unrest,  no  dissatisfied  feel- 
ing in  my  bosom,  I  felt,  I  knew,  that  I 
was  accepted  fully  of  Jesus.  A  calm, 
simple,  childlike  trust  took  possession 
of  my  whole  being.  I  felt  that  if  I  had 
a  thousand  hearts  and  lives,  I  would 
give  them  all  to  the  Saviour :  my  grate- 
ful love  to  him  found  expression  in  these 
glowing  lines :  — 

"  Oh  for  a  thousand  tongues  to  sing 

My  dear  Redeemer's  praise  ; 

The  glories  of  my  God  and  King, 

Tlie  triumphs  of  his  grace  !  " 

Then,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  ] 
had  that  rest  which  is  more  than  peace, 
I  had  felt  peace  before,  but  feared  I 
should  not  retain  it ;  now  I  had  peace 
without  fear,  which  really  became  rest. 


HOW  HE  LED  ME.  75 

That  night  I  retired  to  sleep  without 
one  fear,  —  much  like  a  tired  babe  rest- 
ing in  its  mother's  arms.  I  believed 
Jesus  had  received  me,  and  would  keep 
me.  I  had  no  fear  of  losing  that  happy 
state  :  the  fear  which  had  so  disturbed 
my  rest  was  taken  away.  I  seemed  in 
a  new  world :  my  burden  was  gone,  my 
cup  was  full,  and  Jesus  was  present 
with  me.  I  felt  not  only  that  I  was 
forgiven  and  cleansed,  but  that  Jesus 
would  hereafter  keep  me  ;  that  I  should 
not  have  to  help  him  keep  me,  as  I  had 
been  vainly  trying  to  do,  but  could  trust 
it  all  to  him  ;  that  now  I  had  two  hands 
instead  of  one  to  work  with. 

I  was  a  Christian  before.  I  loved 
Christ,  and  his  people,  and  his  cause ; 


76  THE  REST    OF  FAITH. 

yet  did  not,  could  not,  trust  myself 
without  fear  in  his  hands.  But  now 
I  seemed  all  at  once  to  lose  a  great 
burden  of  care  and  anxiety. 

I  found  that  much  of  my  care  had 
been  not  only  useless,  but  a  hinderance 
to  my  success,  rendering  my  work  in 
Christ's  cause  much  harder  and  less 
pleasant  to  myself.  I  had  been  like  the 
traveller  with  a  heavy  burden  on  his 
back,  who,  when  invited  by  a  friend  to 
ride  in  his  carriage  and  rest  himself, 
took  his  seat  with  his  burden  still 
weighing  him  down.  When  asked  to 
lay  his  burden  off  while  riding,  and  rest, 
he  replied,  "  Oh,  sir,  you  have  been  so 
kind  to  let  me  ride,  I  will  carry  my  bur- 
den myself."  I  had  not  learned  to  lay 
my  burden  on  Jesus  while  toiling  in  his 


HOW  HE  LED  ME.  77 

vineyard,  which  would  have  rendered 
my  work  comparatively  light  and  easy. 

The  Bible  seemed  like  a  new  book. 
I  had,  as  it  were,  read  with  a  veil  before 
my  eyes.  All  through  the  week  I 
labored  on  without  fear  of  losing  the 
long-sought,  and  now  so  highly-prized 
blessing.  I  believed,  in  the  hour  of 
temptation,  Christ  would  keep  me,  and 
I  should  not  lose  that  happy  state. 

This  change  occurred  about  five 
o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  second 
day  of  November,  1863 ;  and  although 
I  never  felt  so  weak  and  small,  yet 
Jesus  has  been  my  all  since  then. 
There  has  not  been  one  hour  of  con- 
scious doubt  or  darkness  since  that 
time.  A  heaven  of  peace  and  rest  fills 
my  soul.     D.ay  and   night  the  Saviour 


78  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

seems  by  me.  Preaching  is  a  luxmy, 
—  it  is  a  glorious  work.  In  prayer 
Christ  does  not  seem  far  away,  but  near 
and  with  me.  The  Bible  still  appears 
like  a  new  book.  All  Christians  are 
dearer  to  me  than  ever  before.  All 
earthly  ties  are  more  precious  to  me  ; 
home,  friends,  all  blessings,  temporal 
or  spiritual,  are  dearer  and  brighter  than 
ever  before.  That  terrible  fear  and  tor- 
ment about  death  is  in  a  great  measure 
gone.  Thought  is  quickened.  My 
views  of  truth  are  much  clearer  than 
before.  I  have  come  to  believe  just 
what  God  says.  I  can  trust  him.  and 
go  forward,  even  "  with  sealed  orders." 

My  success  in  leading  souls  to  Jesus 
has  been  much  greater  than  before. 
My  joy  in  telling  the  world  of  Christ 


HOW  HE  LED  ME,  79 

and  his  goodness  constantly  increases. 
And  as  I  realize  more  and  more  the 
greatness  of  his  love,  and  the  perfection 
of  his  character,  my  swelling  heart  often 
cries  out,  — 

"  Oh,  could  I  speak  the  matchless  worth, 
Oh,  could  I  sound  the  glories  forth. 
Which  m  my  Saviour  sliine  ! " 

Oh  that  I  had  an  angel's  tongue,  or 
could  in  some  way  express  to  others  the 
love  I  bear  to  Jesus ! 

"  I'd  sing  the  characters  he  bears, 
And  all  the  forms  of  love  he  wears, 
Exalted  on  his  throne/' 

If  any  one  should  ask  if  this  is  "  sin- 
less perfection,"  I  would  answer,  No,  by 
no  means.  I  feel  very  imperfect  and 
weak,  yet  I  am  enabled  to  believe   and 


80  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

trust  Jesus ;  and  he  is  so  near  that  I 
have  realized,  in  several  instances  of  lit- 
tle inconsistences,  that  before  the  dark 
wave  reached  my  soul  to  produce  con- 
demnation, Jesus  said,  "  Peace,  be  still." 

Temptation  is  presented,  but  the 
power  of  it  is  broken.  I  seem  to  have 
a  present  Saviour  in  every  time  of  need  ; 
so  that  for  several  years  I  have  done  the 
trusting  and  Jesus  the  keeping ;  it  is 
much  easier  now  to  resist  temptation 
than  it  was  before. 

I  feared  the  crosses  would  be  much 
heavier  if  I  was  nearer  Jesus  ;  but  they 
are  much  lighter  now ;  so  that  I  can 
sum  it  all  up  in  a  few  w^ords,  and  call  it, 
not  perfection,  not  a  sinless  state,  but 
rest  —  the  rest  of  faith,  —  a  calm,  sweet 
resting  all  with   Christ.     This  state  of 


HOW  HE  LED  ME.  81 

heart  is  reached  only  by  faith,  and  re- 
tained only  by  faith ;  not  by  helping 
Christ  take  care  of  us,  but  by  trusting 
him  to  do  it  all. 


CHAPTER    VII. 


IMPERFECT,    YET    SWEETLY   RESTING. 


T^OES  any  one  ask  how  an  imperfect 
Christian  can  rest  in  a  perfect  Sav- 
iour, and  feel  no  condemnation  ? 

For  many  years  I  stumbled  at  this 
point.  T  could  not  then  find,  and  can- 
not now,  the  doctrine  of  sinless  perfec- 
tion, in  this  life,  in  the  word  of  God. 
And  yet  I  find  imperfect  and  erring 
Christians  sweetly  abiding  in  Christ's 
love,  walking  with  him,  without  condem- 
nation. "  Enoch  walked  with  God,"  in 
the  higher  sense,  "  and  he  was  not,  for 


IMPERFECT,   YET  S  WEE TL  Y  RES  TING,     83 

God  took  him."  For  three  hundred 
years  his  peace  and  rest  in  God  seein 
to  have  been  undisturbed. 

Paul  says,  "  There  is  therefore  now  no 
condemnation  to  them  which  are  in 
Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not  after  the 
flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  He  realized 
this  in  his  own  experience,  and  yet  con- 
fesses his  imperfections  as  a  Christian. 
Many  others  have  experienced  and  con- 
fessed the  same. 

After  a  long  search  and  much  prayer, 
I  found  that  the  secret  of  rest  in  Christ 
was  not  in  our  perfect  soundness,  nor  in 
our  entire  obedience  ;  but  in  our  entire 
surrender  of  all  to  Christ,  with  an  un- 
wavering, unquestioning  trust ;  and  his 
meeting  all  the  demands  of  the  law  in 
such  a  way  that  the  soul  realizes  no  con- 


84  THE  REST  OF  FAITH, 

demnation.  He  ''  is  the  end  of  the  law 
for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believ- 
eth ; "  that  is,  meets  all  the  demands  of 
the  law,  fulfils  all  its  requirements  for 
us,  on  the  simple  condition  that  we  fully 
believe  in  him,  and  confide  all  to  him ; 
no  merit  in  us,  no  righteousness,  no 
equivalent  rendered  by  us ;  Jesus  does  it 
all,  redeems,  keeps,  and  sanctifies. 

Perhaps  a  figure  will  relieve  the  mind 
of  the  reader  :  — 

Suppose  you  had  a  great  many  debts 
coming  due  every  day,  and  these  debts 
were  a  constant  source  of  grief  and 
pain  because  you  were  unable  to  meet 
the  demands,  though  they  were  just. 

After  a  long  season  of  distress  and 
worrying,  a  kind  rich  friend  says  to  you, 
"  I  know  all  about  your  indebtedness, 


IMPERFECT,  YET  SWEETLY  RESTING.       85 

and  your  inability  to  meet  it ;  but  if  you 
will  come  to  my  house,  and  trust  all  to 
me,  I  promise  you  undisturbed  rest  as 
long  as  you  choose  to  remain  with  me : 
no  one  shall  disturb  you."  You  fully 
believe  and  trust  him,  and  go  to  his 
house.  A  short  time  after  reaching  his 
home,  you  hear  his  bell  ring.  He  goes 
to  the  door.  Some  one  inquires  if  you 
are  in  the  house ;  your  friend  replies 
that  you  are,  and  asks  what  is  wanted. 
The  creditor  at  the  door  says,  "  I  have 
a  bill  of  fifty  dollars  I  would  like  to 
have  him  settle."  The  bill  is  promptly 
paid  by  your  friend  without  disturbing 
you.  Thus  your  rich  friend  continues 
to  meet  all  just  demands  brought 
against  you  during  your  stay  with  him. 


86  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

He  knew  before  he  made  the  offer  just 
what  he  was  undertaking  to  do,  and 
that  he  had  all  needed  means  to  do 
with. 

Do  you  not  see  how  you  could  be  at 
rest,  knowing  that  your  rich  friend  was 
daily  meeting  demands  that  you  were 
entirely  unable  to  pay,  while  his  means 
were  unbounded? 

This  rich,  precious  friend  is  Jesus, 
who  said  to  me  long  ago,  when  I  was 
worrying  over  my  inability  to  keep  my- 
self or  atone  for  one  sin,  "  Come  unto 
me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  "  All 
power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth."  ''  I  came  into  this 
world  to  help  just  such  sinners  as  you 
are."      But   I   did    not,   and    seemingly 


IMP  ERF E  C  r,   YET  S  WEETL  Y  EES  TING,     87 

could  not,  believe  it,  and  continued  to 
worry.  But  at  last  I  was  enabled  to 
believe  just  what  Jesus  said,  and  trust 
him  entirely ;  and  at  once  he  gave  me 
rest,  —  not  fear,  not  torment,  but  sweet, 
constant,  abiding  rest. 

Thus  w4iile  I  believe  and  trust  Christ 
entirely,  nothing  wavering,  he  gives  me 
rest ;  not  Jesus  and  my  faithfulness,  but 
Jesus  alone,  gives  me  rest.  So  that 
Christ  is  made  at  this  very  point,  to 
those  who  fully  believe,  "  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption." Christ  meets  at  first,  and 
all  along  the  way,  the  demands  of  the 
law  for  us,  on  the  simple  condition  that 
we  fully  believe,  and  trust  all  to  him. 

In    this  way  an  imperfect    Christian 


88  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

can,  by  an  unshaken  faith,  rest  in  a 
perfect  Saviour  without  condemnation. 
His  faith  is  counted  (as  it  was  to  Abra- 
ham) for  perfect  satisfaction  for  every 
claim  the  perfect  law  of  God  brings 
against  the   soul. 


r^M^ 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

THE   VALUE    OF   FAITH. 

"  Faith  is  the  rainbow's  form 
Hung  on  the  brow  of  heaven ; 
The  glory  of  the  passing  storm, 
The  pledge  of  mercy  given. 
It  is  the  bright  triumphal  arch, 
Through  which  the  saints  to  glory  march." 

L^AITH  is  so  important  that  the  soul 
cannot  be  saved  without  it.  When 
Christ  finds  a  lost,  condemned  sinner 
asking  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved,  he 
does  not  send  him  to  the  law  for  help, 
nor  require  of  him  an  equivalent  for 
salvation ;  but  takes  from  him  all  reli- 


90  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

ance  on  every  thing  but  himself,  and 
says,  "  Only  believe."  If  this  is  done, 
there  is  at  once  a  transfer  of  Christ's 
perfect  righteousness  to  him,  and  his 
pollution  and  guilt  to  Christ.  In  this 
way  every  demand  of  the  law  is  met  as 
perfectly  as  it  would  be  if  the  sinner  had' 
never  fallen. 

No  wonder  that  when  this  stupen- 
dous plan  of  redemption  was  first  ru- 
mored in  heaven,  the  angels  wanted  to 
look  into  it.  Every  attribute  of  the 
Godhead  here  seems  united  to  save  a 
lost  soul.  "  Mercy  and  truth  are  met 
together ;  righteousness  and  peace  have 
liissed  each  other."  What  a  meeting 
and  blending  of  divine  perfection.  "  O, 
the  depth  of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wis- 
dom and  knowledge  of  God." 


THE    VALUE    OF  FAITH.  91 

"  Here  the  whole  Deity  is  seen ; 
Nor  can  a  creature  trace 
Which  of  the  glories  brighter  shine, 
The  justice  or  the  grace/^ 

The  same  truth  is  seen  in  the  expe- 
rience of  all  who  abide  in  Christ's  love. 
They  do  not  continue  there  simply  be- 
cause they  are  faithful  and  watchful, 
but  because  they  rely  —  not  partly,  but 
wholly  —  on  Christ  to  keep  them.  Faith 
sprinkles  the  blood  on  the  door-posts, 
and  retires  within  the  house  and  is 
calm.  God  sees  the  blood,  and  passes 
by.  So  that  our  peace  and  rest  are 
undisturbed,  while  our  faith  in  Clmst 
remains  unshaken. 

There  need  not  necessarily  be  a 
change  in  the  opinions  or  doctrines  of 
one  abiding  in  Christ's  love  :  his  senti- 


92  THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

merits  never  may  have  been  dearer  to 
him.  The  difference  is  in  his  faith.  He 
has  let  go  of  all  but  Jesus,  and  relies 
on  him  for  peace  and  rest,  and  is  not 
disappointed. 

Formerly,  if  he  had  a  season  of  great 
religious  enjoyment,  he  was  almost 
sure  that  it  would  be  followed  by  de- 
pression and  darkness.  Now  it  is  not 
so:  he  can  trust  -Christ  without  this 
fear,  and  may  go  forward  trusting  and 
resting  through  life.  "  They  that  trust 
in  the  Lord  shall  be  as  Mount  Zion, 
which  cannot  be  removed,  but  abideth 
for  ever." 

Reader,  before  I  close  let  me  ask  you, 
Are  you  enjoying  the  fulness  of  Christ's 
love  ?  are  you  sweetly  resting  in  Christ 
by  faith  now  ?     If  so,  will  you,  with  a 


THE    VALUE  rOF  FAITH,  93 

grateful,  humble  heart,  make  known  (if 
you  are  not  now  doing  it)  in  every  suit- 
able way  and  place  this  rich  experience  ? 
Say  to  all  around  you,  "  Come  and 
hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I  will 
declare  what  he  has  done  for  my  soul." 
Christ  says,  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses." 
The  Spirit  will  use  your  testimony  in 
assisting  others  to  "  obtain  like  precious 
faith." 

Christians  all  around  you  are  groan- 
ing and  suffering  for  the  want  of  the 
very  light  you  can  give  them.  Not 
only  let  your  light  shine  on  this  subject, 
but  let  it,  like  the  light  along  our  coasts, 
be  a  "revolving  light,"  throwing  off  its 
bright  and  happy  rays  all  around  you. 

But  if  you  are  yet  saying,  "  O 
wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall  de- 


94  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

liver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?  " 
if  you  realize  in  your  heart  an  unrest,  a 
hungering  and  thirsting  after  the  fulness 
of  Christ's  love,  let  me  urge  you  at 
once,  without  dismissing  the  subject 
from  your  thoughts,  to  give  yourself 
anew  to  the  Saviour,  never  to  be  taken 
back.  Press  your  importunity  for  light 
and  help  at  this  point.  Begin  to  trust 
Christ  as  never  before,  without  ques- 
tioning. Trust  him  all  you  can  just  to- 
day. Pray  for  faith:  it  is  the  gift ^ of 
God  in  answer  to  prayer.  Ask,  seek, 
knock,  until  the  door  is  opened  to  you, 
until  you  can  believe  just  what  God 
has  said,  and  trust  him  without  waver- 
ing. The  time  is  short;  w^hat  you  do 
must  be  done  soon.  Christ  paid  a 
great  price  for  you,  and  needs  you  with 


THE    VALUE    OF  FAITH,  95 

your  full  armor  on.  Souls  on  every 
hand  are  pressing  their  way  to  death, 
and  nriust  be  saved  soon,  or  not  at  all. 
"  Awake  !  awake !  put  on  thy  strength, 
O  Zion ;  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments, 
O  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city."  Thus 
arrayed  "one  can  chase  a  thousand.'' 
And  Christ  will  then  lay  out  plenty  of 
work  for  you,  knowing  that  you  are  not 
only  willing,  but  prepared  by  the  fulness 
of  his  love,  to  do  it. 

"When  you  can  trust  Christ  without 
wavering,  and  a  calm,  sweet,  abiding 
peace  and  rest  fill  your  whole  heart, 
then  you  are  just  prepared  to  grow  in 
divine  things.  The  roots  of  your  faith 
can  strike  deep  into  the  soil  of  truth 
and  love,  and  need  not  be  disturbed 
again  until   transplanted  into  heavenly 


96  THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 

soi],  there  to  continue  to  grow  and 
flourish  for  ever  in  the  garden  of  the 
Lord.  '^  And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with 
the  Lord." 

"  Then  shall  I  see  and  hear  and  know 
All  I  desired  or  wished  below ; 
And  ev^ry  power  jSnd  sweet  employ 
In  that  eternal  world  of  joy." 


