Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



F 




THE STILL HOUR; 



OB, 



COMMUNION WITH GOD. 



THE STILL HOUR; 



OB, 



COMMUNION WITH GOD. 



BDIMBUBOH : 

nUMTCD BY BALULinnnB AMD OOMPAlTr^ 

PAUL'S WORK. 



I 



THE STILL HOUR; 



OB, 



COMMUNION WITH GOD. 



BT 

AUSTIN PHELPS, 

pRonnasuR in akdovsb thsolooioal sisinNABT. 



By all means, vw MnnetiinM to be alooe. 

SalntethyMlf; see what tLy aoul doth ' 
Dare to look in thy chert : for 'tia thine own ; 

And tumble up and down wliat thoa flnd'at there. 

anosoBHnBaa 



ALEXANDER STRAHAN & CO., EDINBURGH. 
SAMPSON LOW, SON, & CO., LONDON. 

i860. 



y^^/. a^.^^P. 



PEEFATOET NOTE 




|OME subjects of reKgious meditation axe 
always timely, and standard thoughts 
upon them the most timely. Such, it 
is hoped, will be found to be the character of 
the following pages. 

A portion of thf m have been delivered, as a 
sermon, in the Chapel of the Andover Theo- 
logical Sfeminary, and several times elsewhere. 
Evidences of their usefulness in that form have 
been so obvious, that the author is induced to 
comply with the repeated requests which have 
reached him, that they should be given to the 
press. 



vi PREFATORY NOTE. 

That they should be much enlarged in the 
course of revision for this purpose, is almost 
the necessaiy result of a review of a subject so 
prolific, and so vital to Christian hearts. 



Thbological Seminary, 

Andoyeb, Mass., Dec 1859. 



CONTENTS. 



L 

PAGE 

ABSENCE OF OOD IN PRAYER, .... 1 

IL 
UNHALLOWED PRAYER, 7 



IIL 
ROMANCE IN PRAYER, 11 

IV. 

DISTRUST IN PRAYER, 20 

V. 

FAITH IN PRAYER, 25 

VI. 
SPECIFIC AND INTENSE PRAYER, .... 30 



viii CONTENTS. 

VIL 

PAOB 

TEMPERAMENT OF PRAYER, 36 

VIIL 
INDOLENCE IN PRAYER, 40 

IX. 

IDOLATRY IN PRAYER, 48 

X 

CONTINUANCE IN PRAYER, 55 

XL 
FRAGMENTARY PRAYER, 62 

XII. 
AID OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN PRAYER, ... 71 

XIII. 

REALITY OF CHRIST IN PRAYER, • ... 80 

XIY. 
MODERN HABITS OF PRAYER, .... 87 



THE STILL HOUR 




** OH THAT I KNEW WHERE I MIGHT FIND HIM ! ** 

Job xziil. 8. 

|F God had not said, ' Blessed are those 
that hunger/ I know not what could 
keep weak Christians from sinking in 
despair. Many times all I can do is to complain 
that I want Him, and wish to recover Him." 

Bishop Hall, in uttering this lament, two cen- 
turies and a half ago, only echoed the wail which 
had come down through living hearts, from the 
patriarch, whose story is the oldest known litera- 
ture in any language A consciousness of the 

« 

absence of God is one oi the standard incidents of 
religious life. Even when the forms of devotion 
are observed conscientiously, the sense of the pre- 
sence of God, as an invisible Friend, whose society 
is a joy, is by no means unintermittent. 

The truth of this will not be questioned by one 



S THE STILL HOUR. 

who is familiar witH those phases of religions ex* 
perience which are so often the burden of Christian 
confession. In no single feature of "inner life," 
probably, is the experience of many minds less 
satisfactory to them than in this. They seem to 
themselves, in prayer, to have little, if any, effluent 
emotion. They can speak of little in their de- 
votional life that seems to them like life ; of little 
that appears like the communion of a living soul 
with a living God. Are there not many "closet 
hours," in which the chief feeling of the worshipper 
is an oppressed consciousness of the absence of 
reality from his own exercises ? He has no words 
which are, as George Herbert says, "heart deep." 
He not only experiences no ecstasy, but no joy, no 
peace, no repose. He has no sense of being at 
home with God. The stillness of the hour is the 
stillness of a dead calm at sea. The heart rocks 
monotonously on the surface of the great thoughts 
of God, of Christ, of Eternity, of Heaven — 

" Ab idle as a painted ship 
Upon a painted ocean." 

Such ex;)eriences in prayer are often startling in 
the contrast with those of certain Christians, whose 
communion with God, as the hints of it are re- 
corded in their biographies, seems to realise, in 
actual being, the scriptural conception of a life 
which is hid with Christ in God. 



EDWARDS. 3 

We read of Payson, that his mind at times 
almost lost its sense of the external world, in the 
ine^ble thoughts of God's glory, which rolled like 
a sea of light around him, at the throne of grace. 

We read of Cowper, that, in one of the few lucid 
hours of his religious life, such was the experience 
of God's presence which he enjoyed in prayer, that, 
as he tells us, ho thought he should have died with 
joy, if special strength had not been imparted to 
him to bear the disclosure. 

We read of one of the Tennents, that on one 
occasion, when he was engaged in secret devotion, 
so overpowering was the revelation of God which 
opened upon his soul, and with augmenting inten- 
sity of effulgence as he prayed, that at length he 
recoiled from the intolerable joy as from a pain, 
and besought God to withhold from him further 
manifestations of His glory. He said, " Shall Thy 
servant »ee Thee and live ? " 

We read of the " sweet Jiours" which Edwards 
enjoyed " on the banks of Hudson's river, in secret 
converse with God," and hear his own description 
of the inward sense of Christ which at times came 
into his heart, and which he "knows not how to 
express otherwise than by a calm, sweet abstrao- 
tion of soul fi'om all the concerns of this world ; 
and sometimes a kind of vision .... of being 
alone in the mountains, or some solitary wilder- 



4 THE STILL HOUR. 

ness, far from all mankind^ sweetly conversing with 
Christ, and rapt and swallowed up in God." 

We read of such instances of the fruits of prayer, 
in the blessedness of the suppliant, and are we not 
reminded by them of the transfiguration of our 
Lord, of whom we read, " As He prayed, the fashion 
of His countenance was altered, and His raiment 
became white and glistering 1" Who of us is not 
oppressed by the contrast between such an experi- 
ence and his own ? Does not the cry of the patri- 
arch come unbidden to our lips, " Oh that I knew 
where / might find Him 1" . 

Much of even the ordinary language of Chris- 
tians respecting the joy of communion with God, 
— Slanguage which is stereotyped in our dialect of 
prayer, — many cannot honestly apply to the history 
of their own minds. A calm, fearless self-examinar 
tion finds no counterpart to it in anything they 
have ever known. In the view of an honest con- 
science, it is not the vernacular speech of their 
experience. As compared with the joy which 
such language indicates, prayer is, in all thrt they 
know of it, a dull duty. Perhaps the characteristic 
of the feelings of many about it is expressed in the 
single fact, that it is to them a duty as distinct 
from a privilege. It is a duty which, they cannot 
deny, is often uninviting, even irksome. 

If some of us should attempt to define the ad- 



COWPER 6 

irauitage we derive from a performance of the duty, 
we might be surprised, perhaps shocked, as one 
after another of the folds of a deceived heart should 
be taken off, at the discovery of the littleness of 
the residuum, in an honest judgment of ourselves. 
Why did we pray this morning? Do we often 
derive any other profit from prayer than that of 
satisfying convictions of conscience, of which we 
could not rid ourselves if we wished to do so, and 
which will not permit us to be at ease with our- 
selves, if all forms of prayer are abandoned ? Per- 
haps even so slight a thing as the pain of resistance 
to the momentum of a habit, will be found to be 
the most distinct reason we can honestly give fur 
having prayed yesterday or to-day. 

There may be periods, also, when the experiences 
of the closet enable some of us to understand that 
maniacal cry of Cowper, when his friends requested 
him to prepare some hymns for the Olney Collec- 
tion, — " How can you ask of me such a service ? 
I seem to myself to be banished to a remoteness 
from God's presence, in comparison with which the 
distance from East to West is vicinity, is cohesion," 

If such language is too strong to be truthful to 
the common experience of the class of professing 
Christians to which those whom it represents be- 
long, many will still discern in it, as an expression 
of joylessness in prayer, a sufficient approximation 



6 THE STILL HOUR 

to their own experience, to awaken interest in some 
thoughts upon the causes of a want of enjoyment 

IN FBAYER. 

The evil of such an experience in prayer is too 
obvious to need illustration. If any light can be 
thrown upon the causes of it, there is no man liv- 
ing, whatever may be his religious state, who has 
not an interest in making it the theme of inquiry. 
" Never any more wonder,'* says an old writer, 
"that men pray so seldom. For there are very 
few that feel the relish, and are enticed with the 
ddidousnessy and refreshed with the comforts, and 
acquainted with the secrets of a holy prayer." Yet, 
who is it that has said, " I will make them joyful 
in my house of prayer 1 " 




IL 

*VHAS IB THB HOFB OF THB HTFOOBITB? WILL GOD HXAB 

HIS CRT ? " — Job zxviL 8, 9. 

|N impenitent sinner never prays. In an 
inquiry after the causes of joylessness in 
the forms of prayer, the very first which 
meets us, in some instances, is the absence of jnetyi 
It is useless to search behind or beneath such a 
cause as this for a more recondite explanation of 
the eviL This is, doubtless, often all the interpre- 
tation that can be honestly given to a man's experi- 
ence in addressing God. Other reasons for the 
lifelessness of his soul in prayer are rooted in this 
— that he is not a Christian. 

If the heart is not right with God, enjoyment 
of communion with God is impossible. That com- 
munion itself is impossible. I repeat, an impeni- 
tent sinner never prays. Impenitence involves 
not one of the elements of a spirit of prayer. Holy 
desire, holy love, holy fear, holy trust — not one of 
these can the sinner find within himsel£ He has, 
therefore, none of that artless spontaneity, in call- 



8 THE STILL HOUR. 

ing upon God, which David exhibited when he 
said, " Thy servant hath found in his heaH to pray 
this prayer unto thee." An impenitent sinner 
finds no such thing in his heart. He finds there 
no intelligent wish to enjoy God's friendship. The 
whole atmosphere of prayer, therefore, is foreign to 
his tastes. If he drives himself into it for a time, 
by forcing upon his soul the forms of devotion, he 
cannot stay there. He is like one gasping in a 
vacuum. 

One of the most impressive mysteries of the 
condition of man on this earth is his deprivation 
of all visible and audible representations of God. 
We seem to be living in a state of seclusion from 
the rest of the universe, and from that peculiar 
presence of God in which angels dwell, and in 
which departed saints serve Him day and night. 
We do not see Him in the fire ; we do not hear 
SEim in the wind; we do not feel Him in the 
darkness. But a more awful concealment of God 
from the unregenerate soul exists by the very law 
of an unregenerate state. The eye of such a soul 
is closed even upon the spiritual manifestations of 
God, in all but their retributive aspects. These 
are all that it feels. These are all the thoughts of 
€rod which it has faith in. Such a soul does not 
enjoy God, for it does not see God with an eye of 
faith — ^that is, as a living God, living close to itself, 



DEAD SLEEP IN SIN. 9 

and in vital relations to its own destiny — except 
as a retributive Power, 

The only thing that forbids life, in any of its 
experiences, to be a life of retribution to an im- 
penitent sinner, is a dead sleep of moral sensibility. 
And this sleep cannot be disturbed while he re- 
mains impenitent, otherwise than by disclosures of 
God as a consuming fire. His experience, there- 
lore, in the forms of devotion, while he abides in 
impenitence, can only vibrate between the ex- 
tremes of weariness and of terror. Quell his 
fear of God, and pi-ayer becomes irksome; stimu- 
late his indifference to God, and prayer becomes 
a torment. 

The notes of a flute are sometimes a torture to 
the ears of idiots, like the blare of a trumpet The 
reason has been conjectured to be, that melodious 
sound unlocks the tomb of idiotic mind by the sug- 
gestion of conceptions, dim, but stai*tling, like a 
revelation of a higher life, with which that mind 
has certain crushed affinities, but with which it feels 
no willing sympathy; so that its own degradation, 
disclosed to it by the contrast, is seated upon the 
consciousness of idiocy like a nightmare Such a 
stimulant only to suffering may the form of prayer 
be in the experience of sin. Impenitent prayer can 
only grovel in stagnant sensibility, or agonise in 
remorseful torture, or oscillate from one to th^ 



10 TEE STILL HOUR, 

other. There is no point of joy between to which 
it can gravitate, and there rest. 

It is not wise that even we, who profess to be 
followers of Christ, should close our eyes to this 
truth, that the uniform absence of joy in prayer is 
one of the threatening signs in respect of our re- 
ligious state. It is one of the legitimate intima- 
tions of that estrangement from God, which sin in- 
duces in one who has not experienced God's renew- 
i!ng grace. A searching of ourselves with an honest 
desire to know the truth, and the whole of it, may 
disclose to us other kindred facts, mih which this 
feature of our condition becomes reasonable evi- 
dence, which it will be the loss of our souls to 
neglect, that we are self-deluded in our Christian 
hope. An apostle might number us among the 
" many" of whom he would say, " I now tell you, 
even weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of 
Christ" 




m 

• IF I BEGARD INIQUITY IN MT HEART, THE LORD WIXL NOT 
HEAR ifE."— Psalm IxvL 18. 

|E often affront God by offering prayers 
which we are not willing to have an- 
swered. Theoretical piety is never more 
deceptive than in acts of devotion. We pray for 
blessings which we know to be accordant with 
God's will, and we persuade ourselves that we 
desire those blessings. In the abstract, we do 
desire them. A sane mind must be far gone in 
sympathy with devils if it can help desiring all 
virtue in the abstract. 

The dialect of prayer established in Christian 
usage wins our trust; we sympathise with its 
theoretical significance ; we find no fault with its 
intensity of spiritual life. It commends itself to 
our conscience and good sense as being what the 
phraseology of devout affection should be. Ancient 
forms of prayer are beautiful exceedingly. Their 
hallowed associations fascinate us like old songs. 
In certain imaginative moods, we fall into delicious 



12 THE STILL HOUR. 

reverie over them. Yet, down deep in our heart 
of hearts, we may detect more of poetry than of 
piety in this fashion of joy. We are troubled, 
therefore, and our countenance is changed. 

Many of the prime objects of prayer enchant us 
only in the distance. Brought near to us, and in 
concrete forms, and made to grow lifelike in our 
conceptions, they very sensibly abate the pulse of 
our longing to possess them, because we cannot but 
discover that, to realise them in our lives, certain 
other darling objects must be sacrificed, which we 
are not yet willing to part with. The paradox is 
true to the life, that a man may even fear an an- 
swer to his prayers. 

A very good devotee may be a very dishonest 
suppliant. When he leaves the height of medita- 
tive abstraction, and, as we very significantly say 
in our Saxon phrase, comes to him&elf he may find 
that his true character, his real self, is that of no 
petitioner at all. His devotions have been dra- 
matia The sublimities of the closet have been but 
illusions. He has been acting a pantomime. He 
has not really desired that God would give heed to 
him, for any other purpose than to give him an 
hour of pleasurable devotional excitement. That 
his objects of prayer should actually be inwrought 
into his character, and should live in his own con- 
sciousness, is by no means the thing he has been 



ENYIO US DEVOTION. 13 

thinking of, and is the last thing he is ready just 
now to wish for. If he has a Christian heart 
buried up anywhere beneath this heap of pietism, 
it is very probable that the discovery of the bur- 
lesque of prayer of which he has been guilly will 
transform his fit of romance into some sort of hypo- 
chondriacal suffering. Despondency is the natural 
offspring of theatrical devotion. 

Let us observe this paradox of Christi^ life in 
two or three illustrations. 

An enviotLS Christian — ^we must tolerate the con- 
tradiction : to be true to the facts of life, we must 
join strange opposites — an envious Christian prays, 
with becoming devoutness, that God will impart to 
him a generous, loving spirit, and a conscience void 
of offence to all men. His mind is in a solemn 
state, his heart is not insensible to the beauty of 
the virtues which he seeks. His posture is lowly, 
his tones sincere, and self-delusion is one of those 
processes of weakness which are facilitated by the 
deception of bodily habitude. His prayer goes on 
glibly, till conscience grows impatient, and reminds 
him of certain of his equals, whose prosperity stirs 
up within him that *' envy which is the rottenness 
of the bones.'* 

What then 1 Yery probably, he quits tTiat subject 
of prayer, and passes to another, on which his con- 
science is not so eagle-eyed. But after that glimpse 



14 TEE STILL HOUR 

of a hidden sin, how do the clouds of estrangement 
from God seem to shut him in, dark, and damp, 
and chill, and his prayer become like a dismal 
pattering of rain ! 

An ambitious Christian prays that God will be- 
stow upon him an humble spirit. He volunteers to 
take a low place, because of his unworthiness. He 
asks that he may be delivered from pride and self- 
seeking.* He repeats the prayer of the publican, 
and the benediction upon the poor in spirit. The 
whole group of the virtues kindred to humility 
seems to him as radiant as the Graces with loveli- 
ness. He is sensible of no check in the fluency of 
his emotions, till his conscience, too, becomes angry, 
and dashes the little eddy of goodness which is just 
now covering up the undertow of selfishness that 
imperils his souL If then he is not melted into 
tears at the disclosure of his heartlessness, that 
prayer probably ends in a clouded brow, and a 
feverish, querulous self-conflict. 

A revengeful Christian prays that he may have a 
meek spirit; that he may be harmless as doves; 
that the synonymous graces of forbearance, long- 
fiuflering,' patience, may adorn his life ; that he may 
put away bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and cla- 
mour, and evil-speaking, with all malice ; that that 
mind may be found in him which was also in 
Christ. At the moment of this devotional episode 




EFFEMINATE PRAYER. 16 

in his experience^ he feels, as Boussean did, the 
abstract grandeur of a magnanimity like that of 
Jesus. There is no doubt about the fervour of his 
theoretic love of such an ideal of character ; and he 
13 about to take courage from his rapture, when his 
conscience becomes impertinent, and mocks him, by 
thrusting upon his lips the words which are death 
to his conceit — " Forgive me as I forgiva" If then 
he is not shocked into self-abhorrence at the ghast- 
liness of his guilt, he probably exhausts that hour 
of prayer in palliations smd compromises, or in reck- 
less impositions upon the forbearance of God. 

A IvauHous Christian prays, in the good set 
phrases of devotion, for a spirit of self-denial ; that 
he may endure hardness as a good soldier of Christ; 
that he may take up the cross and follow Christ ; 
that he may be ready to forsake all that he hath, 
and be Christ's disciple ; that he may not live unto 
himself ; that he may imitate Him who went about 
doing good, — ^who became poor that we might be 
rich, and who wept over lost souls. In such a 
prayer there may be, consciously, no insincerity, but 
a pleasurable sympathy, rather, with the grand 
thoughts and the grander feeling which the lan- 
guage portrays. The heart is buoyant with its 
gaseous distention to the bounds of its great swell- 
ing words. 

This lover of the pride of life does not discover 



16 THE STILL HOUR. 

his self-inflation^ till conscience pricks him with 
such goads as these : " Are you living for the things 
you are praying for ? " — " What one thing are you 
doing for Christ which costs you self-denial?" — 
" Are you seeking for opportunities to deny your- 
self, to save souls?" — "Are you willing to be like 
Him who had not where to lay his head?" — "Can 
ye be baptized with the baptism that He is baptized 
with?" If then this effeminate one is not roused 
to a more Christ-like life by the uncovering of his 
hypocrisy, what a sickly murmuring of self-reproach 
fills his heart at the collapse of that prayer 1 

Such is human nature ; such, but by the grace of 
God, are we all. We must be dull inspectors of 
our own hearts, if we have never discerned there, 
lurking beneath the level at which sin breaks out 
into overt crime, some single offence — an offence of 
feeling, an offence of habit in thought, which for a 
time has spread its infection over the whole char- 
acter of our devotions. We have been self-con- 
victed of falsehood in prayer ; for, though praying 
in the full dress of sound words, we did not desire 
that our supplications should be heard at the ex- 
pense of that one idoL 

Perhaps that single sin has woven itself like a web 
over large spaces of our life. It may have run like 
a shuttle to and fi*o in the texture of some plan of 
life, on which our conscience has not glared fiercely 



DEJECTION NO MYSTERY, 17 

as upon a criine, because the usage of the world has 
blindfolded conscience by the respectability of such 
sin. Yet it has been all the while tightening its 
folds around us, repressing our liberty in prayer, 
stopping the life-blood and stiflfening the fibre of our 
moral being, till we are like kneeling corpses in our 
worship. 

That is a deceptive notion which attributes the 
want of unction in prayer to an arbitrary, or even 
inexplicable, withdrawment of God from the soul. 
Aside from the operation of physical causes, where 
is the warrant, in reason or revelation, for ascribing 
joylessness in prayer to any other cause than some 
wrong in the soul itself 1 What says an old pro- 
phet % " Behold, the Lord's ear is not heavy that 
it cannot hear. But your iniquities have separated 
between you and your God. Your sins have hid 
his face from you. Therefore, we wait for light, but 
behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in 
darkness. We grope for the wall like the blind; 
we grope, as if we had no eyes; we stumble at 
noonday as in the night; we are in desolate places, 
as dead men." Could words describe more truth- 
fully, or explain more philosophically, that pheno- 
menon of religious experience which we call the 
" hiding of God's countenance t" 

It does not require what the world pronounces a 

great sin to break up the serenity of the soul in its 

B 



18 THE STILL HOUR. 

devotional hours. The experience of prayer has 
delicate complications. A little thing, secreted 
there, may dislocate its mechanism and arrest its 
movement. The spirit of prayer is to the soul 
•^hat the eye is to the body, — ^the eye, so limpid in 
its nature, of such fine finish and such intricate 
convolution in its structure, and of so sensitive 
nerve that the point of a needle may excruci- 
ate it, and make it weep itself away. 

Even a dovhtful principle of life, harboured in the 
heart, is perilous to the peacefulness of devotion. 
May not many of us find the cause of our joyless- 
ness in prayer in the fact that we are living upon 
some unsettled principles of conduct? We are as- 
suming the rectitude of courses of life with which 
we are not ourselves honestly satisfied. I appre- 
hend that there is very much of suspense of consci- 
ence among Christians upon subjects of practical 
life, on which there is no suspense of action. Is 
there not a pretty large cloud-land covered by the 
usages of Christian society? And may not some of 
us find there the sin which infects our devotions 
with nauseous incense? 

Possibly our hearts are shockingly deceitftd in 
such iniquity. Are we strangers to an experience 
like this — ^that when we mourn over our cold 
prayers as a misfortune, we evade a search of that 
disputed territory for the cause of them, through 



SUSPENSE OF GONSGIENGE. 19 

fear that we shall 6iid it there, and we struggle to 
satisfy ourselves with an increase of spiritual duties 
which shall cost us no saciifice ? Are we never 
sensible of resisting the hinU which the Holy Spirit 
gives us in parables, by refusing to look that way 
for the secret of our deadness % — saying, " Not that ! 
Oh, no, not that 1 Bub let us 'pray more." 

Many a doubtful principle in a Christian mind, 
if once set in the focus of a conscience illumined 
by the Holy Spirit, woxdd resolve itself into a sin, 
for which that Christian would turn and look up 
guiltily to the Master, and then go out and weep 
bitterly. 





IV. 

" WHAT PROFIT SHOULD WB HAVB IIP YfE PRAT UNTO HIM ? *' 

JOBXxL 15. 

HE great majority of us have little faith in 
prayer. This is one of those causes which 
may produce a habit of mind in devotion 
resembling that of impenitent prayer, and yet 
distinguishable from it, and co-existent often with 
some degree of genuine piety. Christians often 
have little faith in prayer as a power in real life. 
They do not embrace cordially, in feeling as well as 
in theory, the truth which underlies the entire 
scriptural conception and illustration of prayer, 
that it is literally, actually, positively, eflfectually, 
a means of power. 

Singular as it may appear, the fact is indisput- 
able, that Christian practice is often at a discount 
by the side of heathen habits of devotion. Hea- 
then prayer, whatever else it is or is not, is a 
reality in ,the heathen idea. A pagan suppliant 
has fidth in prayer, as he understands it. Grovel- 
ling as his notion of it is, mch as it is he means it. 



PRAYER A POWER 21 

He trusts it as an instrument of power. He ex- 
pects to accomplish something by praying. 

When Ethelred, the Saxon king of Northumber- 
land^ invaded Wales, and was about to give battle 
to the Britons, he observed near the enemy a host 
of unarmed men. He inquired who they, were, 
and what they were doing. He was told that they 
were monks of Bangor praying for the success of 
their countrymen. "Then," said the heathen 
prince, "they have begun the fght against us; 
attack them/r«<." 

So any unperverted mind will conceive of the 
scriptural idea of prayer, as that of one of the 
most downright, sturdy realities in the universe. 
Eight in the heart of God's plan of government it 
is lodged as a power. Amidst the conflicts which 
are going on in the evolution of that plan, it stands 
as a power. Into all the intricacies of Divine 
working and the mysteries of Divine decree it 
reaches out silently as a power. In the mind of 
God, we may be assured, the conception of 
prayer is no fiction, whatever man may think 
of it. 

It has, and God has determined that it should have, 
a positive and an appreciable influence in directing 
the course of a human life. It is, and God has pur- 
'posed that it should be, a link of connexion between 
human mind and Divine mind, by which^ thcwiL^ 



22 THE STILL HOUR. 

His infinite condescension, we may actually move 
His will. It is, and God has decreed that it should 
be, a power in the universe, as distinct, as real, as 
natural, and as uniform, as the power of gravita- 
tion, or of light, or of electricity. A man may use 
it as trustingly and as soberly as he would use 
either of these. It is as truly the dictate of good 
sense, that a man should expect to achieve some- 
thing by praying, as it is that he should expect to 
achieve something by a telescope, or the mariner's 
compass, or the electric telegraph. 

This intense practicalness characterises the scrip- 
tural ideal of prayer. The Scriptures make it a 
reality, and not a reverie. They never bury it in 
the notion of a poetic or philosophic contemplation 
of God. They do not merge it in the mental fiction 
of prayer by action in any other or all other duties 
of life. They have not concealed the fact of prayer 
beneath the mystery of prayer. The scriptural 
utterances on the subject of prayer admit of no 
such reduction of tone and confusion of sense as 
men often put forth in imitating them. Up, on 
the level of inspired thought, prayer is pbayeb — a 
distinct, unique, elemental power in the spiritual 
universe, as pervasive and as constant as the great 
occult powers of Nature. 

The want of trust in this scriptural ideal of 
prayer often neutralises it, even in the experience 



HOPE IN PRAYER. 23 

of a Christian. The result cannot be otherwise. 
It lies in the nature of mind. 

Observe, for a moment, the philosophy of this. 
Mind is so made that it needs the hope of gaining 
an object^ as an inducement to effort. Even so 
simple an effort as that involved in the utterance 
of desire, no man will make persistently, with no 
hope of gaining an object. Despair of an object is 
speechless. * So, if you wish to enjoy prayer, you 
must first form to yourself such a theory of prayer, 
— or, if you do not consciously form it, you must 
have it, — and then you must cherish such trust in 
it, as a reality, that you shall feel the force of an 
object in prayer. No mind can feel that it has an 
object in praying, except in such degree as it appre- 
ciates the scriptural view of prayer as a genuine 
thing. 

Our conviction on this point must be as definite 
and as fixed as our trust in the evidence of our senses. 
It must become as natural to us to obey one as the 
other. If we suffer our faith to drop down from 
the lofty conception of prayer as having a lodgment 
in the very counsels of God, by which the universe 
is swayed, the plain practicalness of prayer as the 
Scriptures teach it, and as prophets and apostles 
and our Lord himself performed it, drops propor- 
tionately ; and in that proportion, our motive to 
prayer dwindles. Of necessity, then, our devotlo\M^ 



24 THE STILL HOUR. 

become spiritless. We cannot obey such faith in 
prayer with any more heart than a man who is 
afflicted with double vision can feel in obeying the 
evidence of his eyes. Our supplications cannot, 
under the impulse of such a faith, go, as one has 
expressed it, "in a right line to God." They be- 
come circuitous, timid, heartless. They may so 
degenerate as to be oflfensive, " like the reekings of 
the Dead Sea." 




Y. 

**AS A PBINCB HAST THOTJ POWER WITH GOD." 

Gen. xxxii 28. 

|!N" intrepid faith in prayer will always give 
it unction. Let the faith of apostles in 
the reality of prayer as a power with 
God take possession of a regenerate hearty and it is 
inconceivable that prayer should be to that heart a 
lifeless duty. The joy of hope, at least, will vitalise 
the duty. The prospect of gaining an object 
will always affect thus the expression of intense 
desira • 

The feeling which will become spontaneous with 
a Christian, under the influence of such a trust, 
is this :— " I come to my devotions this morn- 
ing on an errand of real life. This is no romance 
and no farce. I do not come here to go through 
a form of words. I have no hopeless desires 
to express. I have an object to gain. I have 
an end to accomplish. This is a business in which 
I am about to engage. An astronomer does not 
turn his telescope to the skies with a more reason- 



26 THE STILL HOUR. 

t 
able hope of penetrating those distant heavens, 

than I have of reaching the mind of God, by 

lifting up my heart at the throne of grace. This 

is the privilege of my calling of God in Christ 

Jesus. Even my faltering voice is now to be heard 

in heaven, and it is to put forth a power there, the 

results of which only God can know, and only 

eternity can develop. Therefore, O Lord ! thy 

servant findeth it in his heart to pray this prayer 

unto Thee." 

" Good prayers," says an old English divine, 
"never come weeping home. I am sure I shall 
receive either what I ask, or what I should ask." 
Such a habit of feeling as this will give to prayer 
that quality which Dr Chalmers observed as being 
the characteristic of the prayers of Doddridge — 
that they had an intensely " business-like " spirit. 

Observe how thoroughly this spirit is infused 
into the scriptural representation of the interior 
working of prayer in the counsels of God respect- 
ing the prophet Daniel The narrative is in- 
telligible to a child j yet scarcely another passage 
in the Bible is so remarkable in its bearing upon 
the difficulties which our minds often generate out 
of the mystery of prayer. Almost the very me- 
chanism of the plan of God, by which this in- 
visible power enters into the execution of His 
decrees, is here laid open. 



PRAYER OF DANIEL. 27 

"While I was speaJring," the prophet says, 
" Gabriel, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me, 
aad said, *0 Daniel, at the beginning of thy 
supplication, the commandment came forth, and I 
am come to shew thee ; for thou art greatly be- 
loved.' ^ What gi eater vividness could be given to 
the reality of prayer, even to its *occult operation 
upon the Divine decrees 1 No sooner do the words 
of supplication pass out from the lips, than the 
comm£ind is given to one of the presence-angels, 
" Go thou ; " and he flies swiftly to the prostrate 
suppliant, and tenches him bodily, and talks with 
him audibly, and assures him that his desire is 
given to him. " I am come to thee, man 
greatly beloved; I am commissioned to instruct 
and to strengthen thee. I was delayed in my 
journey to thee, else I had come more speedily to 
thy relief; for one-and-twenty days the prince of 
Persia withstood me; but Michael came to help 
me ; the archangel is leagued with me to execute 
the response to thy cry. I must return to fight 
that prince of Persia who would have restrained 
me from thee; unto thee am I sent. From the 
first day that thou didst set thy heart to chasten 
thyself before thy God, thy words were heard ; and 
I am come because of thy words. Again I say, O 
man gi-eatly beloved, fear not; peace be unto thee; 
be strong, yea, be strong." Coxdd any diagram of 



28 THE STILL HO UR. 

the working of prayer, amidst the purposes of God, 
give to it a more vivid reality in our conceptions 
than it receives from this little passage of dramatic 
narrative, which you will find, in substance, in 
the ninth and tenth chapters of the prophecy of 
Daniel ? 

I have sometimes tried to conceive a panorama 
of the history of one j^rayer. I have endeavoured 
to follow it from its inception in a human mind, 
through its utterance by human lips j and in its 
flight up to the ear of Him who is its Hearer, be- 
cause He has been also its Inspirer; and on its 
journey around to the unnumbered points in the 
organism of His decrees which this feeble human 
voice reaches, and from which it entices a respon- 
sive vibration, because this also is a decree of as 
venerable antiquity as theirs; and in its return 
from those altitudes, with its golden train of bless- 
ings to which eternal counsels have paid tribute, at 
His bidding. I have endeavoured to form some 
conception thus of the methods by which this om- 
nipotence of poor human speech gains its end, with- 
out a shock to the system of the universe, with not 
so much as a whit of change to the course of a leaf 
falling in the air. But how futile is the strain 
upon these puny faculties ! How shadowy are the 
thoughts we get from any such attempt to master 
prayer ! Do we not fell back with glad relief upon 



MTSTERT OF PRAYER. 29 

the magnitude of this fact of prayer, " beyond the 
stars heard/' and answered through these ministries 
of angels ? 

Human art has not yet succeeded in extending 
the electric telegraph around one globe. The com- 
bined science and skill and wealth of the nations 
have failed thus to connect the two continents. 
But yonder is a child whose lisping tongue is every 
day doing more than that. In God's administration 
of things, that child's morning prayer is a mightier 
reality than that. It sets in motion agencies more 
secret and more impalpable, and yet conscious 
agencies, whose chief vocation, so far as we know 
it, is to minister at that child's bidding. " Verily 
I say unto you, that in heaven their angeLs do 
always behold the face of my Father who is in 
heaven," Could we appreciate prayer, think you, 
as such a reality, such a power, so genuine, so vital 
a thing in the working of the Divine plan, so free 
from trammel in its mystery, so much resembling 
the power of God because of its mystery, and yet 
could we find it to be^ in our own experience, an 
insipid duiyi 




VI 



AS THE HABT FANTETH AFTER THE WATER BROOKS. 

Ps.xliLl. 

|E lose many prayers for the want of two 
things which support each other,— spe- 
cificness of object and intensity of desire. 
One's interest in such an exercise as this is neces- 
sarily dependent on the. co-existence of these 
qualities. 

In the diary of Dr Chalmers, we find recorded 
this petition : '' Make me sensible of real answers 
to actual requests, as evidences of an interchange 
between myself on earth and my Saviour in 
heaven." Under the sway of intense desires, our 
minds naturally long to individualise thus the 
parties, the petitions, the objects, and the restdts of 
prayer. 

Sir Fowell Buxton writes as follows : — " When 
I am out of heart, I follow David's example, and 
fly for refuge to prayer, and he furnishes me with a 
store of prayer. ... I am bound to acknow- 
ledge that I have always found that my prayers 



SIE FOWELL BUXTON. 31 

^ve been heard and answered ; . . . in al- 
most every instance I have received what I asked 
for. . . . Hence, I feel permitted to offer up my 
prayers for everything that concerns me. ... I 
am inclined to imagine that there are no little things 
with God. His hand is as manifest in the feathers 
of a butterfly's wing, in the eye of an insect, in the 
folding and packing of a blossom, in the curious 
aqueducts by which a leaf is nourished, as in the 
creation of a world, and in the laws by which 
planets move. I understand literally the injunc- 
^tion : *In everything make your requests known 
unto Godj' and I cannot but notice how amply 
these prayers have been met." 

Again, writing to his daughter on the subject of 
a " division " in the House of Commons, in the 
conflict for West Indian Emancipation, he says : 
" What led to that division 1 If ever there was a 
subject which occupied our prayers, it was this. 
Do you remember how we desired that God would 
give me His Spirit in that emergency; how we 
quoted the promise, * Ho that lacketh wisdom, let 
him ask it of the Lord, and it shall be given him ;' 
and how I kept open that passage in the Old 
Testament, in which it is said, * We have no might 
against this great company that cometh against us, 
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon 
Thee' — ^the Spirit of the Lord replying, *Be not 



32 THE STILL HOUR, 

afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multi- 
tude, for the battle is not yours, but God's T If 
you want to see the passage, open my Bible, it will 
tui^i of itself to the place. I sincerely believe that 
prayer was the cause of that division ; and I am 
confirmed in this by knowing that we by no means 
calculated on the effect. The course we took 
appeared to be right, and we followed it blindly" 

In these examples is illustrated, in real life, the 
working of these two forces in a spirit of prayer, 
which must naturally exist or die together — inten- 
sity of desire and specificness of object. 

Let a man define to his own mind an object of 
prayer, and then let him be moved by desires for 
that object which impel him to pray, because he 
cannot otherwise satisfy the irrepressible longings 
of his soul j let him have such desires as shall lead 
him to search out, and dwell upon, and treasure in 
his heart, and return to again, and appropriate to 
himself anew, the encouragements to prayer, till his 
Bible opens of itself at the right places — and think 
you that such a man will have occasion to go to his 
closet, or come from it with the sickly cry, " "Why, 
oh, why, is my intercourse with God so irksome to 
me?" Such a man mtist experience, at least, the 
joy of uttering hopefully emotions which become 
painful by repression. 

On the contrary, let a man's objects of thought 



LANGUID DESIRES, 33 

at the throne of grace be vague, and let his desires 
be languid, and from the nature of the case, his 
prayers must be both languid and vagua Says 
Jeremy Taylor : — " Easiness of desire is a great 
enemy to the success of a good man's prayer. It 
must be an intent, zealous, busy, operative prayer. 
For, consider what a huge indecency it is that a 
man should speak to God for a thing that he values 
not. Our prayers upbraid our spirits, when we beg 
tamely for those things for which we ought to die ; 
which are more precious than imperial sceptres, 
richer than the spoils of the sea, or the treasures of 
Indian hills.** 

The scriptural examples of prayer have, most of 
them, an unutterable intensity. They are pictures 
of struggUiy in which more of suppressed desire is 
hinted than that which is «rpressed. Itecall the 
wrestling of Jacob, — " I will not let Thee go till 
Thou hast blest me;'* and the "panting" and 
" pouring out of' soul '* of David, — " I cried day 
and night ; my throat is dry with calling upon my 
God ; '* and the importunity of the Syro-Phenician 
woman, with her " Yes, Lord, yet the dogs under 
the table eat the children's crumbs ; *' and the per- 
sistency of Bartimeus, crying out " the more a great 
deal," " Have mercy on me ; " and the strong crying 
and tears of our Lord, " If it be possible — ^if it be 
possible 1 " There is no '' easinesB of desire" hero. 



34 THE STILL EO UR. 

The scriptnral examples of prayer, also, are clear 
as light in their objects of thought. Even those 
which are calm and sweet, like the Lord's prayer, 
have few and sharply-defined subjects of devotion. 
They are not discursive and voluminous, like many 
uninspired forms of supplication. They do not 
range over everything at once. They have no 
vague expressions; they are crystalline; a child 
need not read them a second time to understand 
them. As uttered by their authors, they were in 
no antiquated phraseology ; they were in the fresh 
fonns of a living speech. They were, and were 
meant to be, the channels of living thoughts and 
living hearts. 

Let a man, then, be negligent of both scriptural 
example and the nature of his own mind ; let him 
approach God with both vagueness of thought and 
languor of emotion ; and what else can his prayer 
be but a weariness to himself and an abomination 
to €k>d ? It would be a miracle if such a suppliant 
should enjoy success in prayer. He cannot succeed, 
he cannot have joy, because he has no object that 
elicits intense desire, and no desire that sharpens 
his object. He has no great, holy, penetrative 
thought in him, which stirs up his sensibilities; 
and no deep, swelling sensibility, therefore, to 
relieve by prayer. His soul is not reached by any- 
thing he is thinking about, and, therefore, he has 



CONSCIENCE IN PEA YER. 36 

no soul to pour out before God. Such a man prays 
because he thinks he must pray ; not because he is 
grateful to God that he rnay pray. There is an 
unspeakable difference between " must " and "may." 
It is his conscience that prays ; it is not his heart. 
His language is the language of his conscience. 
He prays in words which ought to express his 
heart, not in those which do express it. Hence 
arises that experience, so distressful to an ingenuous 
mind, in which devotion is prompted by no vivid- 
ness of conception, rolling up a force of sensibility 
to the level of the lips, so that it can flow forth in 
childlike, honest speech. 

Such an experience, so far from rendering prayer 
a joy either sweet and placid, or ecstatic, can only 
cause the time spent in the closet to be the season 
of periodical torture to a sensitive conscience, like 
that of a victim daily stretched on a rack. For it 
is in such prayer that such a conscience is most 
vehement in its reproaches, and guilt seems to be 
heaped, up most rapidly. Oh, wretched man that 
he is I Who shall deliver him 1 




TIL 

** THAT DISCIPLE WHOM JESUS LOVED." — ^JoHM xxl 7. 

|OME Christians do not cultivate the teTit' 
perament of prayer. Devout joy is more 
facile to some temperaments than to 
others ; yet, in all, it is susceptible of cultureu 
Especially is it true, that prayer is in its nature 
emotive. It is an expression of feeling : not neces- 
sarily of tumultuous feeling, but naturally of pro- 
found and fluent feeling, and, in its most perfect 
type, of habitual feeling. To enjoy prayer, we 
must be used to it. Therefore, we must be used 
to the sensibility of which it is the expression. 
Devotion should spring up spontaneously from an 
emotive statey rather than be forced out in jets of 
sensibility on great occasions. 

The necessity of this is often overlooked by 
Christians, whose lives, in other respects, are not 
visibly defective. They do not possess desires 
which may very naturally be expressed in prayer. 
They have no deep subsoil of feeling fix)m which 
prayer would be a natural growtL The religion 



TEMPERAMENT OF PRAYER. 37 

of some of us — whatever may be true of our oppo- 
sites in temperament — ^is not sufficiently a religion 
of emotion. "We have not sufficiently cherished 
our Christian sensibilities. "We have not cultivated 
habits of religious desire which are buoyant in 
their working. "We have not so trained our hearts, 
that a certain emotive current is always ebullient, 
welling up &om the depths of the soul, like the 
springs of the deepest sea. "We think more than 
we believe. "We believe more than we have &ith 
in. Our faith is too calm, too cool, too sluggish. 
Our thAry of the Christian life is that of a clear, 
erect, inflexible head, not of a great heart in which 
deep calleth unto deep. 

This clear-headed type of piety has invaluable 
uses, if it be tempered with meekness, with gentle- 
ness, with " bowels of mercies." But we must con- 
fess that it does not always bear well the drill 
which the world gives it in selfish usage. It too 
often grows hard, solid, icy. It reminds one of 
the man with a " cold heart," whose blood never 
ran warm, whose eye was always glassy, whose 
touch was always clammy, and whose breath was 
always like an east wind. Such a religious tern- 
perament as this will never do for the foundation 
of a life of joy in conmiunion with God. "We 
must have more of the earnest nature of the loved 
disciple, more of the spirit of the visions of Patmos, 



38 THE STILL HOUR. 

Our Northern and Occidental constitution often 
needs to be restrained from an excess of phlegmatic 
wisdom. I must think that we have something 
to learn from the more impulsive working of the 
Southern and the Oriental mind. I must believe 
that it was not without a wise forecast of the 
world's necessities, and an insight into human 
nature all aroundy that God ordained that the 
Bible, which should contain our best models of 
sanctified culture, should be constructed in the 
East, and by the inspiration of minds of an Eastern 
stock and discipline; whose imaginative ^faculty 
could conceive such a poem as the Song of Solomon; 
and whose emotive nature could be broken up like 
the fountains of a great deep. I must anticipate 
that an improved symmetry of character will be 
imparted to the experience of the Church, and 
more of the beauty of holiness will adorn her 
courts, when the Oriental world shall be converted 
to Christ, and Ethiopia shall stretch out her hands 
unto God. Our unimpassioned, taciturn, and often 
cloudy temperament in religion, does need an in- 
fusion of the piety which will grow up in those 
lands of the sun. 

Such an infusion of the Oriental life-blood into 
the stock of our Christian experience would bring 
us into closer sympathy with the types of sancti- 
fication represented in the Scriptures. It would 




ORIENTAL DEVOTION. • 39 

be like streams from Lebanon to our culture. 
We need it to render the Psalms of David, for 
instance, a natural expression of our devotions. 
We need a culture of sensibility which shall de- 
mand these Psalms as a medium of utterance.. 

We need habits of feeling, disciplined indeed, 
not effervescent, not mystic, but, on the other 
hand, not crushed, not fearful of outflow, not 
bereaved of speech. We need a sensitiveness to 
the objects of our faith, which shall crea;te desire 
for the objects of prayer, not passionate, not devoid 
of self-possession, but fluent and self-forgetful in 
its earnestness, so that it shall have more of the 
grace of a child in its outgoings. 

Of such an experience, intercourse with God in 
prayer would be the necessary expression. It 
could And no other so flt Joy in that intercourse 
would be like the swellings of Jordan. 




vm 

"TX said also, behold "WHAT A WBAiumns IS irt" 

—Hal. I 13. 

|E ojSer many dead prayers through mental 
indolence. This fact is often forgotten, 
that prayer is one of the most spiritual 
of the duties of religion,-^spiritual as distinct from 
corporeal It is the communion of a spiritual soul 
with a spiritual God. God calls himself the Farmer, 
only, of our bodies, but the Father of our spirits. 
So prayer, to be a filial intercourse with Him, must 
be abstract from sensation. Do we not naturally 
seek darkness in our devotions? Why is it that 
to pray with open eyes seems either heartless or 
ghastly ? So, too, do we seek stillness and solitude. 
Only a Pharisee can pray at the comer of a street. 
A truly devout spirit leaiiis to sing, from its own 
experience — 

** Blest is the tranquil hour of mom. 
And blest that hour of solemn eye. 
When, on the wings of prayer upborne. 
The world I leave." 



INTELLECT IN PRA7EK 41 

Physical enjoyment is as much a drag upon the 
spirit of worship as physical pain. "We want no- 
thing to remind us of our corporeal being, in these 
hours of communion with Him who seeth in secret. 
"We worship One who is a Spirit. A soul, caught 
up to the third heaven in devout ecstasy, cannot 
tell whether it be in the body or out of the body. 

These well-known phenomena of prayer suggest 
its purely mental character. They involve, also, 
the need of mental exertion. " "We may pray with 
the intellect without praying with the heart ; but 
we cannot pray with the heart without praying 
with the intellect." 

True, there is, as we shall have occasion to ob- 
serve, a state of devotional culture which may ren- 
der prayer habitually spontaneous, so that the mind 
shall be unconscious of toil in it, but shall spring 
to it rather as to its native and wonted atmosphere 
of joy. This is the reward of practised effort in all 
things. But who can number the struggles with a 
wayward spirit which must create that high deport- 
ment in devotion ) 

True, there may be hours when the mind is alert 
from other causes ; when the fountains of the soul 
are unsealed by a great sorrow, or a great deliver- 
ance; when, before we called, God has heard us, 
and the Spirit now helps our infirmities, so that 
thought is nimble, sensibility is fluent, and the 



42 TEE STILL HOUR, 

mouth speaketh out of the abundance of the heart. 
Yet such unforeseen and gratuitous aids to mental 
elasticity are not the law of devotional life. In 
this, as in other things, no great blessing is given 
thoughtlessly, and none can be received thus. The 
law of blessing allies it, in some sort, with struggles 
of our own. 

True, God's condescension is nowhere more con- 
spicuous than in His hearing of prayer. No pon- 
derous intellectual machinery is needful to its 
dignity ; no loftiness of reasoning, no magnificence 
of imagery, no polish of diction ; no learning, no 
art, no genius. In its very conception, prayer 
implies a descent of the Divine Mind to the homes 
of men ; and with no design to lift men up 
out of the sphere of their lowliness, intellectually. 
Bruised reeds, smoking flax, broken hearts, dumb 
sufferers, the slow of speech, timid believers, 
tempted spirits, — weakness in all its varieties, — 
find a refuge in that thought of God, which no- 
thing else reveals so afiectingly as the gift of 
prayer, that He is a very present help in every time 
of trouble. He whom the heaven of heavens 
cannot contain, '^ has come down and placed Him- 
self in the centre of the little circle of human ideas 
and afiections," as if for the purpose of making our 
'^ religion always the homestead of common feel- 
ings." It has been debated by philosopheiSy 



COLERIDGE. 4a 

whether prayer be not of the nature of poetry. 
Yet poetry has seldom attempted to describe 
prayer ; and, when it has done so, what is the phra- 
seology in which it has spoken to our hearts most 
convincingly % Is it that of magnificent and trans- 
cendental speech ? ISo ; it portrays prayer to us 

as only 

" The motion of a hidden pre 

That trembles in the breast/' — 

as the mere " burden of a sigh," the " falling of a 
tear," " the upward glancing of an eye," the " sim- 
plest form of speech" on "infant lips." 

All this is true, and no idea of the intellectu- 
ality of prayer should be entertained which con- 
flicts with this. But we degrade the dignity of 
God's condescension, if we abuse His indulgence of 
our weakness to an encouragement of our indolence. 
Must we not wince under the rebuke of the preacher 
at Golden Grove : " Can we expect that our sins 
can be washed by a lazy prayer ? "We should not 
dare to throw away our prayers so, like fools 1" 

Coleridge, in his later manhood, expressed his 
sorrow at having written so shallow a sentiment 
on the subject of prayer, as that contained in one 
of his youthful poems, in which, speaking of God, 
he had said — 

" Of whose all-seemg eye 
Aught to demand were im^tence of mind.** 



44 THE STILL HOUR. 

This sentiment he so severely condemned, that 
he said he thought the act of praying to be, in 
its most perfect form, the very highest energy of 
which the human heart was capable. The large 
majority of worldly men, and of learned men, 
he pronounced incapable of executing his ideal of 
prayer. 

Many scriptural representations of the idea of 
devotion come up fully to this mark. The prayer 
of a righteous man, that availeth much, which our 
English Bible so infelicitously describes as '' effec- 
tual, fervent," is in the original an "e/ier^g^tc" 
prayer, a "working" prayer. Some conception of 
the inspired thought in the epithet may be derived 
from the fact that the same word is elsewhere 
used to intensify the description of the power of 
the Holy Spirit in a renewed heart. Thus : "Ac- 
cording to the power that worketh in us," — ^the 
power that energises us in a holy life : — such is the 
inspired idea of a good man's prayer. 

"What else is the force of the frequent conjunc- 
tion of " watching " and " praying," in the scrip- 
tural style of exhortation to the duties of the 
•closet ? Thus : " Watch and pray," " watch unto 
prayer," "praying always and watching," "con- 
tinue in prayer and watch : " there is no mental 
lassitude, no self-indulgence here. It was a lament 
of the prophet over the degeneracy of God's people : 



ENERGY IN PEA TEE. 46 

" None stirreth himself up to take hold on Thee." 
Paul exhorts the Bomans to " strive together with 
him in their prayers/' and commends an ancient 
preacher to the confidence of the Colossians, as one 
who " laboured fervently in prayers." There is no 
droning or drawling effort here. 

Indeed, what need have we of more significant 
teaching on this point than our own experience % 
Setting aside as exceptional, emergencies in which 
God condescends to our incapacity of great mental 
exertion, do we not habitually feel the need of such 
exertion in our devotions ) Is not even a painful 
effort of intellect often needful to recall our minds 
from secular engagements, and to give us vivid 
thoughts of God and of eternity ? I do not assume 
that this ought to be so, or need be ; I speak of 
what is, in the ordinary life of Christians. 

Prayer can have no intelligent fervour, unless 
the objects of our faith are represented with some 
degree of vividness in our conceptions of them. 
But this is a process of intellect. As we must have 
clear thought before we can have intelligent feeling, 
so must we have vivid thought before we can have 
profound feeling. But this, I repeat, is a process 
of intellect. 

Yet, do we not often come to the ,hour and place 
of prayer burdened by an exhausted body ; with 
intellect stupified by the absorption of its forces in 



46 TEE STILL HOUR. 

the plans, the toils, the perplexities, the disap- 
pointments, the irritations of the day? How 
wearily do we often drag this great earthen world 
behind us into the presence of God ! Is not our 
first petition often an ejaculation for the ornament 
of a meek and quiet spirit ? But, in such a state 
of body and of mind, to acquire impressive concep- 
tions of God and of eternity is an intellectual 
change. I do not affirm that a state of intellect is 
all that is involved here ; but intellectual change is 
indispensable ; and it requires exertion. 

On this topic, what can the man do that cometh 
after the King 1 Let us hear Jeremy Taylor once 
more. His description of a good man's prayer, 
though well known, one can never outgrow : — 

" Prayer is the peace of our spirit, the stillness 
of our thoughts, the evenness of our recollection, 
the seat of our meditation, the rest of our cares, 
and the calm of our tempest. Prayer is the issue 
of a quiet mind, of untroubled thoughts ; it is the 
daughter of charity and the sister of meekness. 
He that prays to God with .... a troubled and 
discomposed spirit, is like him that retires into a 
battle to meditate, and sets up his closet in the 
out-quarters of an army, and chooses a frontier 
garrison to be wise in. 

" For so have I seen a lark rising from his bed of 
grass, and soaring upwards, singing as he rises, and 



SERENITY OF PRA YER. 47 

hopes to get to heaven, and climb above the clouds j 
but the poor bird was beaten back by the loud sigh- 
ings of an eastern wind, and his motion made 
irregular and inconstant, descending more at every 
breath of the tempest than it could recover by the 
libration and frequent weighing of his wings, till 
the little creature was forced to sit down and pant, 
and stay till the storm was over; and then it 
made a prosperous flight, and did rise and sing as 
if it had learned music and motion from an angel, 
as he passed sometime through the air about his 
ministries here below. 

"So is the prayer of a good man. When his 
afiairs have required business, .... his duty met 
with infirmities of a man, .... and the instru- 
ment became stronger than the prime agent, and 
raised a tempest, and overruled the man ; and then 
his prayer was broken, and his thoughts were 
troubled, and his words went up towards a cloud, 
and his thoughts pulled them back again, and 
made them without intention ; and the good man 
sighs for his infirmity, but must be content to lose 
his prayer; and he must recover it when .... 
his spirit is becalmed, made even as the brow of 
Jesus, and smooth like the heart of God : and then 
it ascends to heaven upon the wings of a holy dove, 
and dwells with God, till it returns, like the useful 
bee, loaden with a blessing and the dew of heaven." 




'^TE HAVE BBOUOHT THAT WHIOH WAS TOBN, AND THE LAMI^ 
AND THE SIOK. SHOULD I ACCEPT THIS OF YOUB HAND ? ** 

— Mal. i. 18. 

|TJE> mental indolence may poison the very 
fountain of prayer. Are we not often 
reminded of our need of an effort of in- 
tellect to enable us to realise to ourselves the 
personality of God, and to address to Bam the 
language of supplication, as if to a friend who is in- 
visibly with usi What is left of prayer, if these 
two things are abstracted from it — a sense of the 
personal pi'esence and of the personal friendship of 
God? He that cometh unto God must believe 
that He is, and that He is a rewarder. Subtract 
these from our ideal in prayer, and all that remains 
the Polish peasant possessed, when he strung his 
prayers upon a windmill, and counted so many to 
the credit side of his conscience, with every turn 
of the wheeL 

A plain man once said : " Before my conversion, 
when I prayed in the presence of others, I prayed 
to them; when I prayed in secret, I prayed to my- 



IDOLATRY IN PRAYER. 49 

self; but now I pray to God,^^ But your experi- 
ence has doubtless taught you, long before this time, 
that one of the most difficult things involved in an 
act of devotion is to secure to it this reality of in- 
tercourse between the soul and a present friend. 

Does it cost us no effort to feel, in the silence and 
solitude of the closet, the truthfulness of language 
like this? — perhaps we are sometimes assisted by 
uttering it audibly, — "God is here, within these 
walls ; before me, behind me, on my right hand, on 
my left hand. He who fills immensity has come 
down to me here. I am now about to bow at His 
feet, and speak to Him. He will hear the very 
words I utter. I may pour forth my desires before 
Him, and not one syllable &x>m my lips shall escape 
His ear. I may speak to Him as I would to the 
dearest Mend I have on earth, whose hand I should 
grasp, and whose eye I should watch, and in the 
changes of whose speaking countenance I should 
read the interest which he felt in my story. Yes ; 
I am about to speak to God, though I do not see 
Him; no image of Him aids my vision or my faith ; 
though I do not hear His footfall around me; He 
is not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in 
the fire. Yet He is here as truly as if clothed in 
a refulgent body, and these eyes could look upon 
Him, and these ears could hear the sound of Hia 
tread." 



60 THE STILL HOUR. 

" Jesus, these eyes have never seen 
That radiant form of Thine ! 
The veil of sense hangs dark between 
Thy blessed face and mine I 

'^ I see Thee not^ I hear Thee not, 
Tet art Thou oft with me ; 
And earth hath ne'er so dear a spot 
As where I meet with Th^e." 



In this manner, to feel the reality of God*s 
spiritual presence, and then to speak the language 
of adoration, confession, petition, thanksgiving, 
with a continuous sense of its being, as Chalmers 
longed to feel it, an actual interchange between 
ourselves and God, a real confermce of friends, — 
this, surely, is not at all times, in all states of the 
body, in all moods of sensibility, under all varieties 
of circumstance, natural to fallen minds like ours. 
It is not a state of mind to which, without culture, 
without discipline in Christian life, we spring spon- 
taneously, involuntarily, as we spring to conscious 
thinking when we wake from sleep. A process of 
intellect is involved in it which demands exertion. 

The difficulty is that which idolatry was invented 
to meet, by furnishing an image of God to aid the 
mind ; that is, by giving it an object of sense to 
relieve it from the labour of forming the conception 
of a spiritual Deity. 

Is it not evident, then^ what effect must be pro- 



INDOLENCE IN PEA TEE. 61 

duced upon our devotional hours, if we squander 
them, through a habit of intellectual indolence? 
It has been said that we are all bom idolaters. 
We truly are very like idolaters in indolent prayer. 
Pursue this thought, for a moment, into the details 
of individual experience, and let us have courage 
to look the evil in the fiEtce, and call it by its right 
name ; for this is a matter which, to be felt as it 
deserves, needs to be permitted to pierce to the 
most secret habits of the closet. 

Imagine, then, that you go to your place of 
retirement reluctantly, listlessly. Your mind, per- 
haps, is in a state of reaction from the excitements 
of the day. ^You are indisposed to thought of any 
kind. You have no eagerness of search after God ; 
it is not the struggling cry of your heart, " Oh that 
I knew where I might find Him ! " From sheer 
reluctance to endure the labour of thinking, you 
neglect preparatory meditation. You read the 
Scriptures indolently; you do not expect, or seek 
for a spur to your own conceptions, in the words 
of inspired thinkers. Your indolent mind infects 
the body with its infirmity; you instinctively 
choose that posture in your devotions which is 
most tempting to physical repose. 

Imagine that, in the act of prayer, your mind 
dreams its way through a dialect of dead words ; 
it floats on the current of a stereotyped phraseology, 



62 THE STILL HOUR. 

which once leaped with life from the lips of hoi j 
men who originated it j but some of which, your 
memory obliges you to confess, never had any 
vitality in your own thoughts. It was never 
origiiial with you ; you have never worked it out 
in your own experience ; you have never lived it ; 
it has never forced itself into expression, as the 
fruit of self-knowledge or of self-conflict. 

Or, imagine that you invariably, or even habitu- 
ally, pray inaudibly, because the luxuriousness of 
silent thought is more facile to an indolent spirit 
than the labour of expressing thought with the 
living voice. You cannot often say, with David, 
" I cried unto the Lord with my voice; with my 
voice unto the Lord did I make my supplication.** 
You do not pause, and struggle with yourself, and 
gird up your loins like a man, and ejaculate a cry 
for Divine aid, in the mastery of thoughts which 
wander like the fool's eyes. And you close your 
prayer with a formula which touches the very soul 
of faith, and hope, and love, and all that is grand 
and mysterious and eternal in redemption, — a 
formula hallowed by centuries of prayer; yet, in 
uttering it, when you say, "For Christ's sake, 

I 

Amen," your mind is not conscious of a single 
definite, affecting thought, of either the history or 
the meaning of that language. 

Imagine this as a scene of real life in the dosetk 



A SECRET FAULT. 63 

h this a caricature of some possible modes of 
secret devotion 1 And if it is not, is it marvellous 
that such devotion should be afflicted with a want 
of enjoyment of the Divine presence % " Should I 
accept this of your hand 1 saith the Lord." 

The truth is, that an indulgence of sluggishness 
of mind is sometimes the secret sin of good men. 
It is the iniquity which they regard in their hearts, 
and because of which God will not hear them. 
Mental ease is a refined and seductive idol, which 
often beguiles men who have too much Christian 
principle, or too much delicacy of nature, or too 
much prudence of self-control, or, it may be, too 
much pride of character, to fall into a physical 
vice. 

When good men are ensnared in this sleek 
idolatry, before the decline of old age or the in- 
firmities of disease render rest a necessity, God 
often breaks in upon it with the blows of His 
hard hand. He fights against it ''with battles of 
shaking;" and in part with the design of recal- 
ling His mistaken Mends into closer communion 
with Himself. He thwarts their plans of life. 
He sends troubles to plague them. He knocks 
out from under them the props of their comfort. 
He does this, in part, for the sake of startling 
their torpid minds, and thus reaching their stag- 
nant hearts, by giving them something to think of, 



64 THE STILL HOUR. 

which they feel they mvM make the subject of 
living, agonising prayer. 

Oh ! God's thoughts are not as our thoughts. 
Dear as our happiness is to Him, there is another 
thing within us which is more precious in His 
sight. It is of far less consequence, in any Divine 
estimate of things^ how much a man suffers, than — 
what the man t& 




" COULD YE KOT WATOH WITH ME ONE HOUR ? **— Matt. XXvL 40. 

are often in a rdigiotu hurry in our 
devotions. How much iivM do we spend 
in them daily) Can it not be easily 
reckoned in minutes % 

Probably many of us would be discomposed by 
an arithmetical estimate of our communion with 
God. It might reveal to us the secret of much of 
our apathy in prayer, because it might disclose 
how little we desire to be alone with God. We 
might learn from such a computation that Augus- 
tine's idea of prayer, as " the measure of love," is 
not very flattering to us. We do not grudge time 
given to a privilege which we love. 

Why should we expect to enjoy a duty which 
we have no time to enjoy 1 Do we enjoy anything 
which we do in a hurry % Enjoyment presupposes 
something of mental leisure. How often do we 
say of a pleasure, '' I wanted more Htm to enjoy it 
to my heart's content." But of all employmenta. 



56 THE STILL HOUR. 

none can be more dependent on " time for it," than 
stated prayer. 

Fugitive acts of devotion, to be of high value, 
must be sustained by other approaches to Grod, 
deliberate, premeditated, regular, which shall be to 
those acts like the abutments of a suspension- 
bridge to the arch that spans the stream. It will 
never do to be in desperate haste in laying such 
foundations. This thougktfvl duty, this spiritual 
privilege, this foretaste of incorporeal life, this 
communion with an unseen Friend, — can you 
expect to enjoy it as you woidd a repartee or a 
dance ? 

In the royal gallery at Dresden, may be often 
seen a group of connoisseurs, who sit for hours 
before a single painting. They walk around those 
halls and corridors, whose walls are so eloquent 
with the triumphs of art, and they come back and 
pause again before that one masterpiece. They go 
away, and return the next day, and again the first 
and the last object which charms their eye is that 
canvaa on which genius has pictured more of 
beauty than on any other in the world. Weeks 
are spent every year in the study of that one work 
of Raphael's. Lovers of art cannot enjoy it to the 
full till they have made it their own by prolonged 
communion with its matchless form& Says one of 
its admirers : '' I could spend an hour every day. 



PRAYER A COMMUNION. 57 

for years upon that assemblage of human, and 
angelic, and divine ideals, and on the last day of 
the last year discover some new beauty, and a new 

joy- 

I have seen men standing in the street before an 
engraving of that gem of the Dresden Gallery, a 
longer time than a good man will sometimes demote 
to his evening prayer. Yet, what thoughts, what 
ideals of grace, can genius express in a painting, 
demanding time for their appreciation and enjoy- 
ment, like those great thoughts of God, of heaven, 
of eternity, which the soul needs to conceive vividly, 
in order to know the blessedness of prayer 1 What 
conceptions can art imagine of the " Divine Child," 
which can equal in spirituality the thoughts which 
one needs to entertain of Christ in the " prayer of 
faith 1" We cannot hope, commonly, to spj'ing 
into possession of such thoughts in the twinkling 
of an eya 

Prayer, as we have observed, is an act of friend- 
ship also. It is intercourse; an act of trust, of 
hope, of love, all prompting to interchange between 
the soul and an infinite, spiritual, invisible 
Eriend. We all need prayer, if for no other pur- 
pose, for this which we so aptly call communion 
with God. 

Kobert Bums lamented that he could not " pour 
out his inmost soul without reserve to any human 



68 THE STILL HOUR 

being, without danger of one day repenting his 
confidence." He commenced a journal of his own 
mental history, " as a substitute," he said, " for a 
confidential Mend." He would have something 
" which he could record himself in," without peril 
of having his confidence betrayed. We all need 
prayer as a means of such intercourse with a 
Friend who will be true to us. 

Zinzendorf, when a boy, used to write little 
notes to the Saviour, aud throw them out of the 
window, hoping that He would find them. Later 
in life, so strong was his faith in the friendship of' 
Christ, and in his own need of that friendship as 
a daily solace, that once, when travelling, he sent 
back his companion, that he might converse more 
freely with "the Lord," with whom he spoke 
audibly. 

So do we all need friendly converse with Him 
whom our souls love. '* He alone is a thousand 
companions ; He alone is a world of friends. That; 
man never knew what it was to be fiimiliar with 
God who complains of the want of friends whild 
God i^ with him." 

But who can originate such conceptions of God 
as are necessary to the enjoyment of His friendship 
in prayer without time for thought, for self-collec- 
tion, for concentration of soul 1 Momentary deyo^ 



STUDIO US PR A 7ER, 59 

tioD, if genuine, must presuppose the habit of stu- 
dious prayer. 

We have portraits of deceased friends before 
which we love to sit by the hour, striving to recall 
the living features which are so feebly portrayed 
there, and to resuscitate the history of expression 
on those countenances in life which no art could 
£lz on canvas, and to which our own memory is 
becoming treacherous. Have we never struggled 
with the twilight to make those loved but flitting 
expressions live again 1 

Yet, have we any more vivid or indelible concep- 
tions of God, ''whom no man hath seen at any 
time 1" How can we expect to enjoy a sense of 
the friendship of a present Saviour, if we never 
linger in the twilight to freshen and intensify our 
thoughts of Him ? Does He never speak to va that 
plaintive reproof, "Could ye not watch with me 
one hour ? " 

A very busy Christian says, " This is a cloisteral 
piety which demands much time for secret prayer." 
No, not that. But, on the other hand, it is not a 
piety which, in its recoil from the monastery, is 
heedless of the look of business in devotion, which is 
expressed by the words, " Enter into thy closet, 
and shiiit thy door;** and of the scriptural stress 
upon perseverance in prayer; and of the inspired 



60 THE STILL HOUR. 

idea of fasting and prayer ; and of the histonc 
argument from the example of eminent saints, both 
of biblical and of later times. 

Who ever knew an eminently holy man who did 
not spend much of his time in prayer ? Did ever a 
man exhibit much of the spirit of prayer who did 
not devote much time to his closet 1 Whitefield 
says, " Whole days and weeks have I spent, pros- 
trate on the ground, in silent or vocal prayer." 
"Fall upon your knees, and grow there," is the 
language of another, who knew that whereof he 
affirmed. These, in spirit, are but specimens of a 
feature in the experience of eminent piety which 
is absolutely uniform. 

It has been said that no great work in literature 
or in science was ever wrought by a man who did 
not love solitude. We may lay it down as an ele- 
mental principle of religion, that no large growth 
in holiness was ever gained by one who did not 
take time to be often, and long, alone with God. 
This kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting. 
No otherwise can the great central idea of God 
enter into a man's life, and dwell there supreme. 

" Holiness," says Dr Cudworth, " is something of 
God, wherever it is. It is an efflux from Him, and 
lives in Him ; as the sunbeams, although they gild 
this lower world, and spread their golden wings 
over us, yet they are not so much here where they 



CONTINUANCE IN PRAYER, 61 

shine, as in the sun from whence they flow." Such 
a possession of the idea of God we never gain but 
from still hours. For such holy joy in God, we 
must have much of the spirit of Him who rose up 
a great while before day, and departed into a soli- 
tary place and prayed, and who continued all night 
in prayer — " the morning star finding Him where 
the evening star had leffc HiuL" 




XL 

"a devout man, one that prated always." — ACTSX. 2. 

|E miss very mucli devotional joy by the 
neglect of fragmervtai*y prayer. In the 
intervals which separate periodical sea- 
sons of devotion, we need a habit of offering up 
brief ejaculatory expressions of devout feeling. 
The morning and the evening sacrifice depend 
very much upon these interspersed offerings, as 
these in return are dependent on thosa Com- 
munion with God in both is assisted by linking 
the " set times " together by a chain of heavenward 
thoughts and aspirations, in the breaks which 
occur in our labours and amusements. Sunrise 
and sunset may attract our attention more strongly 
than the succession of golden rays between them, 
but who can say that they are more cheering ? It 
is not often that a day wholly clouded lies between 
two clear twilights. 

Prayer, as we have seen, is, in the highest con- 
ception of it, a state rather than an a(A A full 



FRAGMENTARY PRATER. 63 

frtdtion of its benefits depends on a continuity of 
its influences. Keduce it to two isolated experi- 
ments daily, and separate these by long blank 
hours in which the soul has no glimpse of God for 
its refreshment, and how can prayer be other than 
a toil, and often a drudgery 1 

We come to the eventide with the impression 
ot the morning watch all obliterated; probably 
with a conscience burdened by accumulations X>i 
sin upon an ungovemed spirit through the day. 
We feel that we must take a new start every time 
we seek God's presence. Our sense of spiritual 
progress is lost. Sinning and repenting is all our 
life; we do not have holy force enough to get 
beyond repentance in our devotion. Our prayers, 
instead of being, as they should be, advancing 
steps, are like the steps of a tread-mill. Humane 
law has abandoned this, even as a punishment for 
felons ; why should one whom Christ has made free 
inflict it upon himself? 

We need, then, something that shall make our 
prayerful hours support each other — the morning 
tributary to the evening, and the evening to the 
morning. Nothing else can do this so naturally as 
the habit of ejaculatory prayer. The spirU of 
prayer may run along the line of such a habit 
through a lifetime. So, one may live in a state of 
prayer, " a devout man that prays always." 



64 THE STILL HO UR. 

Not only does this habit of fragmentary prayer 
contribute to a lofty, devotional spirit, but such a 
spirit demands it for its own indulgence. 

It is characteristic of minds which are aspiring 
in their- piety, and which have begun to reap 
the reward of arduous devotional culture, to be 
habitually conversant with God. Such minds are 
constantly loohing up. In the very midst of 
earthly toils, they seize moments of relief to spring 
up to the eminences of meditation, where they love 
to dwelL In the discharge of duties most xm- 
friendly to holy joy, they are apt to experience 
a buoyancy of impulse towards a heavenly plane 
of thought, which it may even require a power 
of self-denial to keep down. 

Critics have observed that, in the apostolic 
epistles, doxologies are sometimes embedded in 
passages of remonstrance and of warning. It 
should seem that the apostolic mind came down 
unwillingly, or from a sense of duty only, to deal 
with the sins and weaknesses of earth ; and was 
on the watch for chances to rise, like a bird let 
loose, though but for a moment, into the tipper 
air. 

Such is the nature of holiness. Being j^w» God, 
it is ever seeking to revert to its source. The 
heavier the pressure of a mundane life upon it, the 
stronger is the force of its compressed aspirations. 



PROVIDENCE AND PRAYER, 65 

Such pressure is like that of the atmosphere on 
water, "which seeks, through crevices in its inclosure, 
the level of its fountain. A spirit like this, I re- 
peat, will demand the habit of fragmentary prayer 
for its own holy indulgence ; and will demand it 
with an importunity proportioned to the superin- 
cumbent weight of earthly cares. 

The providence of God also contemplates these 
impulses as a counterpart to certain of its own pro- 
cedures. 

Under the laws of Providence, life is a probation ; 
probation is a succession of temptations ; tempta- 
tions are emergencies ; and for emergencies we need 
the preparation and the safeguard of prayer. We 
have duties which are perilous. We meet surprises 
of evil. We struggle with a wily advei-sary. We 
feel perplexities of conscience, in which holy deci- 
sion depends on the mind we bring to them. We 
encounter disappointments which throw us back 
from our hopes rudely. We have difficult labours, 
in which we sometimes come to a " dead-lock ; " 
we do not know what to do. We have an unlmow^i 
experience opening upon us every hour. We are 
like travellers in a fog, who cannot see an arm's- 
length before them. Providence is thus continually 
calling for the aids of prayer ; and in a soul which 
is keen in its vigilance, prayer will be continually 

responsive to providences, often anticipative of thent 

£ 



66 THE STILL HO UR, 

The methods of the Holy Spirit also presuppose 
the value of these fragmentary devotions. God 
often secretly incUnes a Christian's heart to engage 
in them. 

Are there not, in the lives of us all, moments 
"when, without the formality of retirement to the 
closet, we feel disposed to pray 1 We are conscious 
of special attraction towards God. Perhaps with 
no obvious reason for " looking up " now rather 
than an hour ago, we do look up. " We feel just 
like prayingm It is as if we heard heavenly voices 
saying, " Come up hither." 

There is often a beautiful alliance between Pro- 
vidence and grace, in these experiences. A Chris- 
tian who will be studious of his own history, will 
probably discover that often the occasions for such 
fragmentary communings with God follow hard 
upon these secret incitements to them. Emer- 
gencies come soon for which they are needed. The 
Holy Spirit has anticipated them, and sought to 
forearm us. Providence and grace thus hover over 
us not far asunder. 

In this view, those biblical exhortations to 
prayer, which men have sometimes deemed extra- 
vagant, are transparently rational : " Contintie in 
prayer;" "Continue instant in prayer;" "Pray 
without ceasing; " " Men ought always to pray ; " 
*' RtQoice in the Lord always I " Such exhortations 



CONTENDING WITH GOD, 67 

contemplate a state, not insulated acts, of prayer. 
They fit in well to the system of things in which 
we are living ; for that system seems, on all sides 
of it, to presuppose just this continuity of unpre- 
meditated ejaculations, joining together our stated 
seasons of devotion. 

No Christian, then, can afford to be frugal of 
prayer in the intervals of daily business and amuse- 
ment. Enjoyment of all communion with God 
must be impaired by the loss of these little tribu- 
taries. A Christian's life, so conducted, must lan- 
guish, as a tree does whose fibrous roots are stripped 
off, leaving only its truncal roots, possibly only a 
tap-root, for its nourishment, l^at Christian is 
hoping against impossibilities, who thinks to enjoy 
a life of intercourse with God in any such way. 

We are opposing God's method of working, if 
our life has a tendency to incapacitate us for the 
enjoyment of prayer at aU times. If by needless 
excess of worldly cares ; if by inordinate desires, 
which render it impossible for us to accomplish our 
objects in life vnthovt such excess of care ; if by 
frivolous habits ; if by the reading of infidel or 
effeminate literature ; if by an indolent life j if by 
any self-indulgence in physical regimen — we render 
the habit of fragmentary prayer impracticable or 
unnatural to us, we are crossing the methods of God^s 
working. Something has gone wrong, is going 



68 THE STILL HOUR. 

wrong, in the life of that Christian who finds him- 
self thus estranged from filial freedom with God. 

Such a Christian must, sooner or later, be 
brought back to Christ, and miist begin life anew. 
He will come back heavy laden and in tears. No 
words express more becomingly the wail of his 
spirit, whenever he comes to his right mind, than 
the plaint of Cowper — 

*' Oh, for a chi&r walk with God ! " 

In the vestibule of St Peter's, at Kome, is a 
doorway, which is walled up and marked with a 
cross. It is opened but four times in a century. 
On Christmas Eve, once in twenty-five years, the 
Pope approaches it in princely state, with the 
retinue of cardinals in attendance, and begins the 
demolition of the door, by striking it three times 
with a silver hammer. When the passage is 
opened, the multitude pass into the nave of the 
cathedral, and up to the altar, by an avenue which 
the majority of them never entered thus before, 
and never will enter thus again. 

Imagine that the way to the throne of grace 
were like the Porta Santas inaccessible, save once 
in a quarter of a century, on the 25th of December, 
and then only with august solemnities, conducted 
by great dignitaries in a holy city. Conceive that 
it were now ten years since you, or I, or any other 
sinner, had been permitted to pray ; and that fifbeen 



THE PORTA SANTA. 69 

long years must drag themselves away before we 
could venture again to approach God ; and that, at 
the most, we could not hope to pray more than two 
or three times in a lifetime ! With what solicitude 
we should wait for the coming of that holy day ! 
We should lay our plans of life, select our homes, 
build our houses, choose our professions, form our 
friendships, with reference to a pilgrimage in that 
twenty-fifth year. We should reckon time by the 
openings of that sacred door, as epochs. No other 
one thought would engross so much of our lives, or 
kindle our sensibilities so intensely, as the thought 
of prayer. It would be of more significance to us 
than the thought of death is now. It would 
multiply our trepidations at the thought of dying. 
Fear would grow to horror at the idea of dying 
before that year of Jubilee. No other question 
would give us such tremors of anxiety as these 
would excite : " How many years now to the time 
of prayer ? How many months 1 How many 
weeks? How many days? Shall we live to see 
it? Who can tell?" 

Tet, on that great day, amidst an innumerable 
throng, in a courtly presence, within sight and 
hearing of stately rites, what toould prayer he worth 
to us ? Who Would value it in the comparison 
with those still moments, that 

** secret silence of the mind," 



70 THE STILL HOUR, 

in which we now can "find God" every day and 
every where ? That day would be more like the 
day of judgment to us, than like the sweet minutes 
of converse with "Our Father," which we may 
now have every hour. We should appreciate this 
privilege of hourly prayer, if it were once taken 
from us. Should we not ? 

« Still with Thee, my God, 
I would desire to be ; 
By day, by night, at home, abroad, 
I would be stlLl with Thee 1 

* With Thee amid the crowd 
That throngs the busy mart ; 
To hear Thy voice, 'mid clamour loud^ 
Speak softly to my heart J** 




xn. 

"the SPIBIT also HBLPBTH our infirmities.'* — ^RoiC vlii.26. 

[ANGUOIt may be the penalty of egotism 
in prayer. No other infirmity is so 
subtle, or so corrosive to devotion, as 
that of an overweening consciousness of sel£ It is 
possible that an intense self-conceit should flaunt 
itself in the forms of devoutness. 

To a right-minded man, some of the most aston- 
ishing passages in the Bible are the mysterious 
declarations and hints of the residence of the Holy 
Spirit in a human soul. We must stand in awe 
before any just conception of the meaning of such 
voices as these : " The Spirit of God dwelleth in 
you ;" " God dwelleth in us ;" " Ye are the temple 
of God;" "Your body is the temple of the Holy 
Ghost f " Full of the Holy Ghost ;" " Filled with 
all the fulness of God;" "Praying in the Holy 
Ghost;" "With aU prayer in the Spirit;" "The 
Spirit itseK maketh intercession for us." 

But the mysteriousness of such language should 



72 THE STILL HOUR. 

not surprise us. Its mystery is only the measure 
of its depth. It is the reality which it expresses 
that is amazing. Let us not fritter it away by 
shallow interpretations. While, on the one hand, 
we are under no necessity of blinking the truth of 
the intense activity of the soul in any holy experi- 
ence ; on the other hand, we must discern in such 
phraseology, the greater intensity of the Holy 
Spirit's action in a holy mind. The existence of 
the mind is no more a reality, than this indwelling 
of God. 

What, then, is prayer as seen in perspective with 
this doctrine of "the Spirit?" Is it merely the 
dialect of helplessness ? Is it only, as Paley defines 
it, the expression of want ? Is it nothing but the 
lament of poverty, or the moan of suffering, or the 
cry of fear ? Is it simply the trust of weakness in 
strength, the leaning of ignorance upon wisdom, 
the dependence of guilt upon mercy? It is all 
these, but more. A holy prayer is the Spirit of 
Crod speaking through the infirmities of a human 

soul — 

" God's breath in man, returning to His birth.** 

We scarcely utter hyperbole in saying that prayer 
is the Divine Mind communing with itself through 
finite wants, through the woes of helplessness, 
through the clinging instincts of weakness. On 
this side of the Judgment, no other conception of 



DISHONOURING GOD. 73 

the presence of God is so profound as that which 
is realised in our souls every time we offer a genu- 
ine prayer. Grod is then not only with us, but 
within us. 

That was human nature in honest dismay at its 
own guilt, in which the children of Israel said to 
Moses, " Speak thou with us, and we will hear ; let 
not Gk>d speak with us, lest we die." That was an 
adventurous trustfulness which could enable the 
Monk of Mount St Agnes to say of this language^ 
" I pray not in this manner ; no, Lord, I pray not 
so ; but, with Samuel, I entreat, * Speak Lord, for 
thy servant hearetL' Do Thou, therefore, O Lord 
my God ! speak to my soul, lest I die." But what 
is the sacredness of God's speaking to us in com- 
parison with the more awful thought of His speak- 
ing within us ? Yet this is prayer. Know ye not 
that ye are the temple of God 1 

It is obvious, then, that the loss of much joy in 
prayer may be attributed to some form of dishon- 
our done to the Holy Spirit, in either the intent or 
the manner of our devotions. The Spirit sternly 
refuses to become a participant in any act which 
disparages Him, and exalts in the heart of the wor- 
shipper the idea of self. A profound Christian 
truth may be clothed in the language of a heathen 
proverb : " A Divine Spirit is within us, who 
treats us aa He is treated by us." 



74 TEE STILL HOUR, 

We may offer our supplications with no pene- 
trating sense of the necessity of supernatural aid. 
There may be no childlike consciousness of infir- 
mity which should lead us to cry out for help. 
The inspired words, often on our lips, may seldom 
come from the depth of our hearts : " We know 
not what we should pray for as we ought." We 
make prayer itself one of the standard subjects of 
prayer ; yet, on what theme do our devotions more 
frequently degenerate into routine than on this? 
Have we a sense of indigence when we ask for the 
indwelling of God in our souls ? Have we such a 
sense of need of it as we have of the need of air 
when we are gasping with faintness? It is the 
law of Divine blessing, that want comes before 
wealth, hunger before a feast. We must experi- 
ence the necessity, in order to appreciate the 
reality. 

Have we desires in prayer which we feel un- 
able to utter without the aid of God 1 Dr Fayson 
said, that he pitied the Christian who had no long- 
ings, at the throne of grace which he could not 
clothe in language. There may be a silent dis- 
avowal of our need of the Holy Ghost in the very 
act in which we seek His energy. The lips may 
honour Him, but the heart may say 2 " What have 
I to do with Thee 1 " 

We may dishonour the Holy Spirit by irreverent 



IRREVERENT PRAYER. 75 

speech in prayer. The Spirit can indite no other 
than reverent words. Where do we find in the 
Scriptures an unhallowed familiarity of com- 
munion with Godi Only at that gathering of 
the sons of God at which " Satan came also among 
them." It required the effrontery of an evil spirit 
to talk to God as to an equal. 

The consciousYiess of Divine friendship in devo- 
tion, so far from being impaired, is deepened by 
holy veneration. The purest and most lasting 
human friendships are permeated with an element 
of reverence ; much more this friendship of a man 
with God. Moses, with whom God spoke "as a 
man with his friend," was the man who said, " I 
exceedingly fear and quake." Abraham was called 
the " friend of God ;" yet hLs favourite posture in 
prayer was prostration. He " fell on his face, and 
God talked with him." Angels, too, veil their 
faces in any service which approximates to the 

nature of prayer : — 

" Lowly reverent 
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground, 
With solemn adoration, down they cast 
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold.** 

Even He who could say to His Father, " I know 
that Thou always hearest me," we are told, " was 
heard in that He/earec?." 

What, other than solemn mockery, can that de- 
votion be which clothes itself in pert speech 1 The 



76 THE STILL HOUR, 

heart wliich is moved in healthy pulsations of sym- 
pathy with the promptings of the Holy Ghost in- 
dulges in no such gasconade. It is not boisterous 
and rude of tongue, lifting itself up to " talk saucily 
to God." It is emptied of self, because it is filled 
with the fulness of God. Therefore it rejoices with 
joy unspeakable. 

We may disparage the Holy Spirit by a quei'ulous 
devotion. Self-sufficiency is impatient when it is 
rebuffed; scarcely less so in intercourse with Grod, 
than in intercourse with men. Complaint that 
prayer is not answered immediately, or in the spe- 
cific thing we pray for, proves that the Spirit has 
not "helped our infirmities" in that prayer. We 
have not sought His aid, nor desired it. He 
prompts only submissive petitions, patient desires, 
a willingness to wait on God quietly, and self- 
forgetfully. 

A Hottentot beats his idol when he fails in his 
supplications. The people of Naples are frenzied 
with rage when the miracle of the " liquefaction " 
does not appear at the festival of San Gennaro. 
How far is that Christian elevated above these, in 
possession of the " fruits of the Spirit," whose heart 
mutters hard thoughts of God at the delay or the 
refusal of an answer to his prayers ? Such devotion 
is intepsely selfish, however it may be glossed by 
the refinements of devout speech. 



EGOTISM IN PRAYER, 77 

We may be false to the moving of the Holy 
Spirit by a diseased inspection of our own minds in 
the act of communion with Gk)d. Self-examination 
is a suitable preliminary, or after-thought, to pi-ayer, 
but is no part of it. Devotion is most thoroughly 
objective in respect of the motives which induce its 
presence. It is won into exercise by attractions 
from without, not forced into being by internal 
commotions. It is an outgoing, not a seething of 
sensibility. The suppliant looks upward and around, 
beyond himself; and devout affection grows in in- 
tensity with the distance which he penetrates, as 
the eye grows keen with far-seeing. The Spirit in- 
vites to no other than such expansive devotion. 
We are never more like Christ than in prayera of 
intercession. In the most lofty devotion we be- 
come unconscious of self. 

Joy too, has, from its very nature, the same ob- 
jective origin. It springs from fountains out of 
ourselves. It comes to us ; we do not originate it, 
we do not gain it by searching. We are never 
jubilant in thinking of our joy. Our happiness is 
an incident of which, as an object of thought, 
we are unconscious. Divine influence is adjusted 
to this law of our minds ; it seeks to bless us by 
leading us out of self into great thoughts of 
God. 

Hence, ope of the most delusive methods of cross- 



78 THE STILL HO UR 

ing the will of the Holy Spirit, is that habit of 
mental introversion in prayer which corresponds to 
" morbid anatomy " in medical science. The heart, 
instead of flowing outward and upward at the bid- 
ding of the Spirit, turns in upon itself, and dissects 
its own emotions, and studies its own symptoms 
of piety. Any kindlings of joy in the soul are 
quenched by being made the subject of morbid 
analysis. 

" There are anatomists of piety," says Isaac Tay- 
lor, "who destroy all the freshness of faith, and 
hope, and charity, by immuring themselves, night 
and day, in the infected atmosphere of their own 
bosoms.** Andrew Fuller has recorded of himself, 
that he found no permanent relief from melancholy, 
in his early religious life, till his heart outgrew the 
pettiness of his own sorrows, through his zeal in 
the work of foreign missions. We may often be 
sensible that the "teachings of the Spirit" in our 
hearts are of just this character. They prompt 
away from ourselves. "Look up, look abroad," 
is the interpretation of them. " Come away from 
thyself; pray for something out of thine own soul ; 
be generous in thine intercession; so shall thy 
peace be as a river." 

Have you never observed how entirely devoid is 
the Lord's Prayer of any material which can tempt 



GENERO US PRAYER. 79 

to this subtle self-inspection in the act of devo- 
tion? It is full of an outflovdng of thought and of 
emotion, towards great objects of desire, great neces- 
sities, and great perils. " After this manner, 
therefore, pray ye." 




XIII. 

" WE HAVE AN ADVOCATE "WITH THE FATHER.**— 1 JOHN iL L 

HRISTIANS sometimes offer heathen 
prayers. The lifelessness of devotiou 
may often be attributable to the want of 
a cordial recognition of Christ as the medium of 
access to the throne of grace. Prayer, in the Di- 
vine plan of things, has but one avenue. " No 
man cometh unto the Father but by me." Who- 
ever slights Christ in devotion, " climbeth up some 
other way." 

The central idea in the ChristiEin theory of prayer 
i« that of privilege gained by mediation. The lan- 
guage of Christian faith is, " I am permitted to pray 
because of the merits of another ; I do not deserve 
to pray, I cannot claim to pray, I have no light to 
pray, but by Christ's permission." The doctrine of 
prayer, as a doctrine of nature, is but a fragmen- 
tary truth. In its fulness, it is a Christian pecu- 
liarity. The fact of an atonement is its foundation. 
The person of a Bedeemer is the nucleus of its 
history. 



TEACHINGS OF NATURE, 81 

One of the grounds on which the necessity of a 
Revelation rests, is that, by the teachings of Nature, 
we have no clear right to pray — ^no right which 
satisfies a guilty conscience. Philosophy has often 
taught men that prayer is impiety. To an awakened 
conscience. Nature seems to shut man in to the 
i^olitude of his own forebodings. In its dim lights 
prayer and sacrifice grope hand in hand, as the blind 
leading the blind. The right of either to existence 
is only a presumed right. Faith in the efficacy of 
either staggers, whenever the soul is shaken by 
remorse, or philosophy approaches the Christian 
conception of sin. 

Not till Christ is revealed does prayer settle itself 
as an undoubted fact ; and then it is as a privilege 
only, and as a device of mediatorial government. 
We may pray ^^for ChrisCs sakeJ^ This is the 
Christian theory of prayer, and this is the whole 
of it. 

Now, it is not difficult to see that one may pray 
with no adequate appreciation of this mediatorial 
element in the groundwork of devotion. 'A man 
may habitually pray with no such cordiality of soul 
towards Christ as is becoming to a suppliant whose 
only right of prayer is a right purchased by atoning 
blood. 

Is it unusual for a Christian mind to be thus 

heedless of Christ in devotion 1 Pi*actical heresy of 

F 



82 THE STILL HO UK 

this kind may nestle side by side with irreprodxsh- 
able orthodoxy. A creed and a faith, even upon a 
truth so vital, are, by no means, of necessity one. 
The very soundness of the creed miay shelter the 
decay of the faith. We may " profess and call our- 
selves Christians," and yet may every day approach 
God as a converted heathen would, who- had never 
heard of Christ. The general mercy of God may be 
the foundation of all the hopefulness, all the trust, 
all the fervour we really feel in prayer, while not a 
thought occurs to us of Christ as the ground of that 
mercy. We may pray, then, as, perhaps, Socrates 
and Plato prayed. 

We may rejoice to believe that even such prayer 
would have power with God from one who should 
be ignorant of redemption. The northern aurora 
lights up our midnight skies with scintillations, 
emanating from magnetic vortices, whose locality 
and causes are otherwise unknown to us. So we 
can conceive of &ith in mercy without a known 
atonement, and in prayer without a revealed Savi- 
our, as looming up in radiant twilight, and suffus- 
ing the heavens with beauty to the eye of a hea- 
then seer, because of the zecreL history of such 
prayer, in its movement among the mediatorial 
counsels of God. 

But what an Arctic temperature does such 
prayer suggest to one who, in the full meridian of 



DISHONOURING CHRIST. 83 

time, can say, with Simeon, " Mine eyes have seen 
Thy salvation." Such devotion could do no justice 
to Christian truth. It could be no exponent of 
Christian privilege. It is not Christian prayer. 

In the experience of a Christism mind, such 
prayer would involve a conceivable, but an impos- 
sible distinction, which expresses, perhaps, as nearly 
as language can describe it, the error of him who 
struggles with such an idea of devotion. It is, that 
one may approach God rather as a good man than 
aB a redeemed dinner. This, be it repeated, is an 
unreal distinction in any religious life on this 
globe. Christian faith recognises no other objects 
of God's mercy than redeemed sinners. No others 
are invited to hold communion with God. The 
invitation is to " the world," only because God so 
loved "the world" that it is a redeemed world. 
That Christian struggles against impossibilities who 
strives to realise, in his own experience, any other 
than the joy of a redeemed sinner. 

Yet the human heart is exceedingly tortuous in 
its exercises on this theme. I repeat that a neglect 
of Christ may lurk in our habits of feeling, and 
may give character to our devotions, when no 
heresy infects the convictions of our intellect. 

A distinguished divine, of the last generation, 
expressed his confidence in the faith of a Christian 
brother whose soundness as a theologian had been 



84 THE STILL HOUR, 

questioned j and he gave as his reason that he had 
heard that brother pray, and that he prayed as if 
Christy as an atoning Saviour, were a reality to 
him, and that such a man could not be essentially 
heterodox. The principle was truthful, but the 
converse of it is not so. The experience of prayer 
may be founded on no more than Socrates believed, 
and yet the creed of the intellect may be that of 
the Epistle to the E.omans. 

"We do not need to be taught for the enlighten- 
ment of our understanding; but do we not need 
that that Spirit, which shall not speak of Himself, 
but shall take of the things of Christ and shew 
them unto us, should teach our hearts? — that the 
most profound joy, in communion with God, must 
centre in an experience of the reality of an atoning 
blood. In this one thought it must culminate and 
rest. 

A divided heart on this subject cannot know the 
fulness of the liberty of prayer. A heart which is 
confused in its religious life, by a compromise of 
this truth, cannot. Christ, as the Atoning One, 
must be a reality to the soul, or prayer cannot rise 
to its full growth as an experience of blessedness in 
the friendship of God. For such blessedness, we 
need much of that sense of the reality of Christ 
which one of the early preachers of New England 
is said to have had upon his death-bed, when, after 



THE MISSION OF SOU WW. 85 

giving his last messages to his earthly friends, he 
turned and said, " Where, now, is Jesus of Naza- 
reth, my most intimate, most faithful Friend ? '* 

May we not often solve, with this principle, the 
mystery of God's disciplinary providence 1 " Many 
are the affictions of the righteous ; " and " where- 
fore," writes one, "but to necessitate the use of 
prayer as a real and efficient means of obtaining 
assistance in distress 1" "Lord, in trouble have 
they visited Thee," says another ; " they poured out 
a prayer when Thy chastening was upon theln." 
Often, to deepen our knowledge of Christ in prayer 
is the mission of the angel of sorrow. 

The truth is, that we never feel Christ to be a 
reality until we feel Him to be a necessity. There- 
fore, God makes us feel that necessity. He tries 
us here, and He tries us there. He chastises on 
this side, and He chastises on that side. He 
probes us by the disclosure of one sin, and another, 
and a third, which have lain rankling in our 
deceived hearts. He removes, one after another, 
the objects in whicli we have been seeking the 
repose of idolatrous afifection. He afflicts us in 
ways which we have not anticipated. He sends 
upon us the chastisements which He knows we 
shall feel most sensitively. He pursues us when 
we would fain flee from His hand ; and, if need 
be^ He shakes to pieces the whole framework of 



86 THE STILL HO UR 

our plans of life, by which we have been struggling 
to build together the service of God and the ser- 
vice of self; till, at last, He makes us feel that 
Christ is all that is left to us. 

"When we discover that, and go to Christ, con- 
scious of our beggary in respect of everything else, 
— wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, 
and naked, — ^we go, not expecting much, perhaps 
not asking much. There may be hours of pro- 
stration when we ask only for rest ; we pray for 
the cessation of suffering j we seek repose from 
conflict with ourselves, and with God's providence. 
But God gives us more. He is mora generous 
than we have dared to believe. He gives us joy ; 
He gives us liberty; He gives us victory; He 
gives us a sense of self-conquest, and of union with 
Himself in an eternal friendship. On the basis of 
that single experience of Christ as a reality, be- 
cause a necessity, there rises an experience of 
blessedness in communion with God ; which prayer 
expresses like a revelation. Such devotion is a 
jubilant psalm. 




XIV. 

" DRAW NIQH TO GOD, AOT) HE WILL DRAW NIGH TO YOU." 

—James i7. 8. 

|0D only knows what are the prevailing 
habits of Christians of our own day 
respecting the duties of the closet. On 
no subject is it more necessary to speak with 
reserve, if we would speak justly, of the experience 
of others. Each man knows his own, and for the 
most part, only his own. That is not likely to be 
a truthful or a candid severity which would bring 
sweeping accusations against the fidelity of God's 
people in their intercourse with Him. We should 
believe no such charges. They are sometimes 
made in a spirit which invites one to say to the 
censorious brother, " Take heed to thyself; Satan 
hath desired to have <Aec." 

It cannot reasonably be doubted that multitudes 
of Christ's followers are struggling daily to get 
nearer to God. Perhaps, of all the recent treasures 
of hymnology, no other lines have thriUed so many 
Christian hearts^ or called forth so deep a throb of 



88 THE STILL HO UR. 

sympathy as the following, from one of our living 
poets, viz. — 

" Nearer, my God, to Thee, — 

Nearer to Thee ; 
Ev'n though, it be a cross 

That raiseth me. 
Still, all my song shall be. 
Nearer, my God, to Thee,^ 

Nearer to Thee!" 

None are more sensible of their failures in prayer 
than those Christians to whom these words have 
become a song of the heart, more precious than 
rubies. Yet such Christians are more successful 
than they seem to themselves. 

It cannot be proved that the modern Church — 
taking into account its numbers, the variety of 
rank, of nation, of temperament, and of opinion 
which it embraces, the breadth of its Christian cha- 
racter, and the energy of its benevolent activities — 
is inferior, in respect of the spirit of prayer, in its 
most scriptural and healthy forms, to the Church 
of any other, even of apostolic times. It is often 
affirmed, to the discredit of the modem develop- 
ments of piety ; but, I repeat, it cannot be proved, 
nor, in view of the aggressive revival of religion 
which seems to be sweeping over Protestant Chris- 
tendom, is it probably true. It is not the law of 
Divine Influence to bestow such measure of power 
when and where the spirit of prayer is dying out 



MODERN ACTIVITY. 89 

The law of procedure in reference to such grand 
strides of progress is rather, " For all this will I be 
inquired of by the house of Israel." The language 
of fidelity, then, should not be mistaken for the 
language of suspicion and of croaking. 

Yet, this doubtless is true of the tendencies of 
our modern Christian life — ^that they embody cer- 
tain centrifugal forces, as related to a life of solitude 
and stillness. Modem piety goes outward, in 
duties and activities extrinsic to a secret life with 
Grod. It does this by an inborn instinct, which, 
perhaps, was never more vigorous in its operation 
than now. This is no eviL It is a growth, rather, 
upon the usage of other ages. It is an advance, 
certainly, upon the piety of the cloister and the 
cowL It is a progress of religious life, too, beyond 
that of the early denominational contentions of 
Protestantism. Those contentions may have been 
a necessary preliminary to it, but it is an advance 
upon the spirit and the aims of them. It is a salu- 
tary growth. 

But, like every large, rapid growth, it involves a 
peril peculiar to itself — a peril which we cannot 
avoid, but which, by wise forethought, we may 
encounter with safe courage. That very obvious 
peril is, that the vitality of holiness may be ex- 
hausted by inward decay, through the want of an 
increase of its devotional spirit, proportioned to the 



90 THE STILL HOUR. 

expansion of its active forces. Individual experi- 
ence may become shallow for the want of meditative 
habits and much communion with God. 

Should this be the catastrophe of the tendencies 
working in modem Christian life, centuries of con- 
flict and corruption must follow, by a law fixed 
like gravitation. Our religious organisations must 
begin soon to settle, like a building whose frame is 
eaten through and through with the "dry rot." 
Activity can never sustain itself. Withdraw the 
vital force which animates and propels it, and it 
falls like a dead arm. We cannot, then, too keenly 
feel, each one for himself, that a still and secret 
life with God must energise all holy duty, as vigour 
in every fibre of the body must come from the 
strong, calm, faithful beat of the heart. 

To one who is conscious of defect in his own 
piety, respecting the friendship of the soul with 
God, there will be great aptness and beauty in the 
appeal of a foreign preacher : — " Why fleest thou 
from solitude ? Why dost thou shun the lonely 
hour ? Why passeth thy life away, like the feast 
of the drunkard 1 Why is it, that to many of you 
there cometh not, through the whole course of the 
week, a single hour for self-meditation % You go 
through life Hke dreaming men. Ever among 
mankind, and never with yourselves. . . . You 
have torn down the cloister, but why have you not 



THOLUCK. 91 

erected it within your own hearts 1 Lo, my bro- 
ther, if thou wouldst seek out the «till hour, only a 
single one every day, and if thou wouldst meditate 
on the love which called thee into being, which 
hath overshadowed thee all the days of thy life 
with blessing, or else by mournful experiences 
hath admonished and corrected thee j this would 
be to draw near to thy God. Thus wouldst thou 
take Him by the hand. But whenever, in cease- 
less dissipation of heart, thou goest astray, the sea 
of the Divine blessing shall surround thee on all 
sides, and yet thy soul shall be athirst "Wilt thou 
draw near to God 1 • • • Then seek the still 

HOUR." 



THE xin>. 



BALLANTYKE A2ID COMPAMT, FRINTEBS, EDINBimOn. 



