NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES 


3  3433  06825194  5 


y^ 


THE 

RESURRECTION 

E.  M.  BOUNDS 

Washington,  Ga. 


O  that  Christ  would  remove  the  covering, 
draw  aside  the  curtain  of  time,  and  rend  the 
heavens  and  come  down!  O  that  shadows  and 
night  were  gone,  and  that  the  day  would  break, 
that  He  who  feedeth  among  the  lilies  would 
cry  to  his  heavenly  trumpeters,  '■'■Make  ready! 
let  us  go  dow7t  and  fold  together  the  four  cor- 
ners of  the  world,  and  marry  the  Bride.'"* — 
Samuel  Rutherford. 


SERIES  ON  HEAVEN 


Nashville,  Tenn.  ;  Dallas,  Tex. 

Publishing  House  of  the  M.  E.  Church,  South 

Smith  &  Lamar,  Agents 

1907 


THENEV^/  vr  oT^ 

PUBLIC  ; 


4031 


j^J  i 


ASTOR, LENOX  AND 
TILOEN   r^iiNOATIONS. 


Copyright,  1907 

BY 
E.  M,  BOUNDS 


This  encourageth  all  drooping  spirits;  this  sustain- 
eth  all  fainting  hearts;  this  stveeteneth  all  present 
miseries;  this  lighteneth  all  heavy  burdens;  this  en- 
courageth in  all  dangers;  this  supporteth  in  all  calam- 
ities— Pearson,  on  the  Creed. 

(3) 


Prefatory. 

It  is  frequently  asserted  that  the  old  rea- 
soning on  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  or 
of  such  a  fact  as  that  of  the  resurrection, 
will  no  longer  answer  in  view  of  modern 
objections.  It  might  have  done,  they  say, 
fifty  years  ago,  but  the  higher  criticism  has 
given  a  new  aspect  to  the  whole  matter. 
Paley  and  Lardner  did  very  well  against 
the  more  shallow  infidels  of  their  day,  but 
there  has  arisen  a  race  of  unbelieving  Ana- 
kim  far  surpassing  Hume  and  Voltaire. 
The  defender  of  the  Scriptures  needs  new 
armor  to  meet  them.  German  rationalism 
has  rendered  all  the  old  arguments  obsolete. 
This  is  repeated  continually.  By  sheer 
reiteration,  often  without  the  attempt  to 
give  a  particle  of  evidence,  the  impression 
is  produced,  especially  on  the  minds  of  the 
young,  that  there  has  somehow  arisen  some 
5 


The  Resurrection, 

new  and  terrible  form  of  doubt,  some  most 
formidable  difficulty  unknown  to  other 
times  and  unassailable  by  any  former  argu- 
ments. It  is  an  undefined  specter.  It  is 
everywhere  haunting  our  modern  literature, 
though  taking  no  precise  form.  It  is  the 
shadowy  presence  of  some  new  enemy  nev- 
er clearly  seen,  but  who  has  rendered  un- 
availing, it  is  said,  all  former  tactics,  wheth- 
er of  assault  or  defense.  In  defending 
Christianity,  if  it  can  be  defended,  we  must 
take  a  new  start  and  succeed  on  grounds 
differing  altogether  from  the  old. 

Now  this  is  all  an  impudent  falsehood. 
We  say  it  unhesitatingly.  There  is  no  new 
difficulty,  or  any  so  surpassing  former  diffi- 
culties as  to  be  entitled  to  the  name.  There 
is  no  substantial  objection  to  the  Gospels, 
or  to  the  Bible  generally,  that  has  not  been 
known  to  scholarly  and  thinking  men  for 
more  than  a  thousand  years.  Some  aspects 
of  Bible  authorship  have  been  changed; 
some  ecclesiastical  writings  have  been  pro- 
nounced spurious,  though  very  few  that 
had  not  always  been  suspected;  some  new 
6 


The  Resurrection, 

various  readings  have  been  discovered,  but 

in  no  respects,  except  in  the  most  unessen- 
tial points,  have  they  changed  the  general 
aspect  even  of  the  critical  field,  much  less 
that  great  argument,  remaining  the  same 
from  age  to  age  because  built  on  the  un- 
changing foundations  of  our  deeply  investi- 
gated human  nature.  There  is,  in  short, 
no  vital,  no  essential  difficulty,  no  one  go- 
ing to  the  root  of  the  great  debate,  that 
was  not  as  familiar  to  the  learned  men  of 
the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  as 
it  is  to  the  best  scholars  now. 

Equally  unfounded  are  the  ignorant  as- 
sertions, so  often  and  so  flippantly  made,  in 
respect  to  what  science  has  done  or  is  going 
to  do.  Owe  modern  investigations  have 
furnished  no  stronger  objections  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  than 
such  as  were  familiar  to  Celsus,  or  even  to 
the  Corinthian  sophist  whom  Paul  seems 
to  have  had  in  view  and  who  so  confidently 
asked:  "With  what  body  do  they  come?" 
All  that  need  be  contended  for  is  that  it 
remains  just  where  it  was.  The  modem 
7 


The  Resurrection. 

infidel  has  here  no  advantage  over  the  an- 
cient unbeliever.  We  may  safely  defy  any 
man  to  show  w^herein  the  position  of  the 
argument  has,  in  this  respect,  undergone 
any  essential  change. 

Tayler  Lewis. 

Introduction   to  Nott's  "Sermons  on  the  Resurrection   of 
Jesus  Christ." 


11. 


The  remembrance  that  our  risen  Lord  ivas  the 
veritable  first  fruits  of  them  that  sleft^  that  as  he  rose 
■zve  shall  rise,  tvill  always  fress  on  us  the  thought 
that  the  nature  of  his  resurrection  body  must  involve 
somethings  at  any  rate,  remotely  analogous  to  the 
nature  of  the  future  bodies  of  his  glorified  servants. — 
Bishop  Ellicott. 

Besides  the  principles  of  which  we  con- 
sist and  the  actions  which  flow  from  us, 
the  consideration  of  the  things  without 
us  and  the  natural  course  of  variations  in 
the  creature  will  render  the  resurrection 
yet  more  highly  probable.  Every  space  of 
twenty-four  hours  teacheth  thus  much  in 
which  there  is  always  a  revolution  amount- 
ing to  a  resurrection.  The  day  dies  into 
night  and  is  buried  in  silence  and  dark- 
ness; on  the  next  morning  it  appeareth 
again  and  reviveth,  opening  the  grave  of 
darkness,  rising  from  the  dead  of  night. 
This  is  a  diurnal  resurrection.  As  the  day 
dies   into  the  night,   so  does   the   summer 

9 


The  Resurrection, 

into  winter;  the  sap  is  said  to  descend  into 
the  root,  and  there  it  hes  buried  in  the 
ground;  the  earth  is  covered  with  snow  or 
crusted  with  frost,  and  becomes  a  general 
sepulcher.  When  the  spring  appeareth,  all 
begin  to  rise ;  the  plants  and  flowers  peep 
out  of  their  graves,  revive,  and  grow  and 
flourish.  This  is  the  annual  resurrection. 
The  corn  by  which  we  live  and  for  want 
of  which  we  perish  with  famine  is,  not- 
withstanding, cast  upon  the  earth  and  bur- 
ied in  the  ground  with  a  design  that  it 
may  be  corrupted  and,  being  corrupted,  may 
revive  and  multiply;  our  bodies  are  fed  by 
this  constant  experiment,  and  we  continue 
this  life  by  a  constant  succession  of  resur- 
rections. Thus  all  things  are  repaired  by 
corrupting,  are  preserved  by  perishing,  and 
revived  by  dying ;  and  can  we  think  that 
man,  the  lord  of  all  these  things  which  thus 
die  and  revive  for  him,  should  be  detained 
in  death,  never  to  live  again?  Is  it  imag- 
inable that  God  should  thus  restore  all 
things  to  man,  and  not  restore  man  to  him- 
self ?     If  there  were  no  other  consideration 

10 


The  Resurrection. 

but  the  principles  of  human  nature,  of  the 
liberty  and  remunerability  of  human  actions 
and  of  the  natural  revolutions  and  resurrec- 
tions of  other  creatures,  it  were  abundantly 
sufficient  to  render  the  resurrection  of  our 
bodies  highly  probable. — Pearson  on  the 
Creed. 

II 


III. 


Even  the  most  illustrious  \ske;ptic\  has  no  better  end 
than  that  of  displaying  his  fovjers  in  confounding  and 
darkening  iruthy  and  the  happiest  efforts  of  vjhose 
skepticism  cannot  be  more  leniently  described  than  as 
brilliant  feats  of  mental  debauchery. 

Sir  James  Mackintosh. 

The  whole  system  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
based  on  the  immortaUty  of  the  man.  It  is 
not  the  philosophical  idea  or  guesses  of  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  but  the  immortal- 
ity of  the  man.  The  whole  man,  in  his 
dual  or  triune  nature,  is  to  live  forever. 
The  spirit  or  higher  department  defies 
death ;  the  body  is  to  come  out  of  the  ruins 
and  prison  house  of  death  and  be  raised  to 
life.  Man  immortal;  the  whole  man,  soul, 
body,  spirit,  immortal — this  is  the  key- 
stone and  keynote  of  the  redemption  by 
Christ.  The  deathless  nature  of  the  soul 
has  been  taught  in  the  philosophies  of 
earth,  pagan  and  Christian,  but  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  is  distinctively  a  Chris- 

12 


The  Resurrection. 

tian  doctrine.  It  belongs  to  the  revelation 
of  God's  Word.  It  is  found  in  the  Bible, 
and  nowhere  else.  Nature  may  have 
echoes,  analogies,  figures;  but  nowhere  is 
the  doctrine  fully  asserted,  fully  assured, 
but  in  the  Scriptures  which  contain  the  re- 
vealed will  of  God. 

This  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body  is  not  a  mere  inference  from  Bible 
statement.  It  is  the  statement  itself,  the 
key  of  its  arch,  the  corner  stone  of  its 
foundation.  It  is  not  a  rich  afterthought 
of  the  gospel,  but  coordinate  "Jesus  and 
the  resurrection"  are  the  gospel. 

Faith  can  make  no  appeal  to  reason  or 
the  fitness  of  things;  its  appeal  is  to  the 
Word  of  God,  and  whatever  is  therein  re- 
vealed faith  accepts  as  true.  Faith  accepts 
the  Bible  as  the  word  and  will  of  God  and 
rests  upon  its  truth  without  question  and 
without  other  evidence. 

Faith  accepts  the  Word  of  God  as  indu- 
bitable evidence  of  any  fact,  and  rejoices  in 
the  fact  as  true  because  God  asserts  it  in 
his  Word.     Many  of  the  facts  revealed  to 
13 


The  Resurrection. 

us  in  the  Bible  receive  the  credence  of  our 
reason  as  fit  and  proper  things.  Others  ex- 
tend beyond  the  range  of  reason,  and  it  has 
neither  vision  nor  analogy  to  measure  them. 

The  resurrection  of  the  human  body,  its 
coming  back  into  life  from  the  ravages, 
decay,  and  oblivion  of  the  grave,  is  one  of 
these  supernatural  facts.  It  has  been  the 
anxious  and  tearful  question  of  the  ages: 
"Can  the  dead  live?  Is  there  strength  any- 
where to  vanquish  death  ?  Is  there  any  hope 
of  victory  over  the  grave?"  Reason  has 
neither  answer  to  the  question  nor  hope 
for  the  questioner.  Analogy  starts  some 
faint  light,  but  this  goes  out  amid  the  in- 
creasing night  of  the  tomb. 

There  are  but  two  questions  to  quicken 
and  satisfy  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
body.  These  questions  are  of  promise  and 
ability :  Has  God  promised  to  raise  the  body 
from  the  dead?  Is  he  able  to  perform  his 
promise  in  this  respect?  The  body  is  a 
distinct,  a  very  important  part  of  the  man. 
It  is  the  part  seen,  known,  handled,  de- 
scribed as  the  man,  the  organ,  the  outlet, 
H 


The  Resurrection. 

through  which  the  man  comes  into  contact, 
sympathy,  and  action  with  the  world  around. 
A  part,  an  all-important,  indispensable  part, 
of  the  man,  the  body  belongs  to  the  man,  is 
an  original,  organic  part  of  the  man,  evi- 
dent and  conspicuous — will  this  body  rise 
from  the  dead  where  it  has  been  laid  amid 
tears  and  heart-breaking  farewells?  Its 
death  is  a  fact  distinct  and  clearly  outlined. 
"Will  it  live  again?"  is  the  passionate  ques- 
tion of  love  and  longing. 

The  heathen  world  sighed  out  their  up- 
braidings,  emptiness,  and  despair.  The 
flowers,  said  they,  die  by  the  chill  of  win- 
ter, but  spring's  warm  breath  brings  them 
to  life  again.  The  day  declines  into  dark- 
ness and  night,  but  rises  again  into  the  full 
day ;  suns  set,  but  come  again  full-orbed  out 
of  the  eclipse  of  their  setting ;  moons  wane, 
but  wax  into  fullness  and  brightness  again ; 
but  their  loved  ones  leave  them,  eclipsed 
and  lost  in  the  darkness  of  death,  but  no 
spring,  no  morn,  no  rising  ever  brings 
them  again. 

Christianity  hushes  these  sighs,  fills  this 
15 


The  Resurrection. 

emptiness,  lifts  this  despair.  She  Hghts  the 
darkness  of  the  grave  with  the  morning 
star  of  hope,  and  sheds  the  luster  of  the 
resurrection  day  upon  the  night  of  the 
tomb.  Faith  asks  of  unbelief,  of  doubt 
and  despair:  "Why  should  it  be  thought  a 
thing  incredible  with  you  that  God  should 
raise  the  dead?  Is  anything  too  hard  for 
God?"  She  declares:  "All  that  sleep  in 
their  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son 
of  God  and  shall  come  forth." 

Faith  puts  the  brightness  of  an  immortal 
hope  amid  our  graveyard  griefs;  writes  on 
every  tombstone,  *'l  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life ;"  calls  aloud  to  every  mourner, 
"Thy  dead  shall  live."  Christianity  is  not 
agnosticism,  but  faith,  assurance,  knowl- 
edge; not  negative,  but  positive.  *'I  be- 
lieve in  the  resurrection  of  the  body,"  is  a 
fundamental  and  enduring  item  of  her 
creed. 

Christianity  is  not  rationalism,  but  faith 
in   God's   revelation.     A   conspicuous,   all- 
important  item  in  that  revelation  is  the  res- 
urrection of  the  body. 
i6 


IV. 

Present  and  future  are  alike  bound  up  in  our  belief 
of  our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension ;  and  dreary 
indeed  must  this  present  bc^  and  gloomy  and  clouded 
that  future^  if  our  belief  tJi  our  risen  and  ascended 
Lord  be  uncertain,  partial,  precarious. 

Bishop  Ellicott. 

To  the  front,  as  the  soHd  foundation  for 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  is  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  Christ.  His  resurrection 
opens  the  doors  of  the  grave  and  lets  in 
Hght  and  creates  hope.  "Go  tell  his  disci- 
ples that  he  is  risen."  This  angel  an- 
nouncement carries  assurance  and  bright- 
ness to  all  earth's  realms  of  doubt  and 
death. 

"The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  cause 
of  our  resurrection,"  as  Pearson  on  the 
Creed  says,  "by  a  double  causality  as  an 
efficient  and  an  exemplary  cause — as  an  effi- 
cient cause  in  regard  that  our  Saviour  by 
and  upon  his  resurrection  hath  obtained 
%  17 


The  Resurrecfiofio 

power  and  right  to  raise  all  the  dead,  'For 
as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall 
all  be  made  alive ;'  as  an  exemplary  cause  in 
regard  that  all  the  saints  of  God  shall  rise 
after  the  similitude  and  in  conformity  to 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  *For  if  we  have 
been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his 
death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of 
his  resurrection.'  He  shall  change  our  vile 
bodies  that  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
his  glorious  body.  As  we  have  borne  the 
image  of  the  earthy,  we  may  bear  the  image 
of  the  heavenly.  This  is  the  great  hope  of 
the  Christian  that  Christ  rising  from  the 
dead  hath  obtained  the  power  and  is  become 
the  pattern  of  his  resurrection."  Thy  dead 
shall  live;  my  dead  bodies  shall  arise. 
Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  the  dust, 
for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,  and 
the  earth  shall  cast  forth  her  dead. 

The  Scriptures  link  these  two  facts  to- 
gether, the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead  and  the  resurrection  of  man's 
body  from  the  grave.  The  dire  results  of 
his  failing  to  rise,  the  gloom  and  wreck  of 
i8 


The  Resurrection. 

an  unrisen  Christ  is  not  too  strongly  put  by 
an  inspired  writer:  "Now  if  Christ  be 
preached  that  he  rose  from  the  dead,  how 
say  some  among  you  that  there  is  no  res- 
urrection of  the  dead?  But  if  there  be  no 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  then  is  Christ 
not  risen:  and  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then 
is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also 
vain.  Yea,  and  we  are  found  false  wit- 
nesses of  God ;  because  we  have  testified  of 
God  that  he  raised  up  Christ:  whom  he 
raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that  the  dead  rise 
not.  For  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not 
Christ  raised:  and  if  Christ  be  not  raised, 
your  faith  is  vain;  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins. 
Then  they  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in 
Christ  are  perished.  If  in  this  life  only  we 
have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most 
miserable.  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from 
the  dead,  and  become  the  first  fruits  of  them 
that  slept.  For  since  by  man  came  death, 
by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in 
Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive.  But  every 
man  in  his  own  order :  Christ  the  first  fruits ; 

^9 


The  Resurrection. 

afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  com- 
ing." 

Paul  puts  it  strongly  again:  "For  if  we 
believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even 
so  them  also  that  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God 
bring  with  him.  But  if  the  Spirit  of  him 
that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell 
in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the 
dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies 
by  his  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you.  And 
God  hath  both  raised  up  the  Lord,  and  will 
also  raise  up  us  by  his  own  power.  Know- 
ing that  he  which  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus 
shall  raise  up  us  also  by  Jesus,  and  shall 
present  us  with  you." 

The  Scriptures  bear  ample  and  contin- 
uous evidence  that  the  faith  of  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  lies  in  the  faith  tliat 
Jesus  Christ  died  and  rose  again.  If  his 
flesh  rotted  in  the  sepulcher  of  Joseph,  then 
our  hope  of  coming  out  of  the  grave  rots 
also;  if  his  body  went  to  the  dust  of  Pales- 
tine, then  our  faith,  fancied  faith  and 
vaunted  hope,  of  the  resurrection  is  as 
pulseless  and  dead  as  dust. 
20 


The  Resurrection. 

All  the  simple  and  invincible  proofs  of 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  are  con- 
firmations deep,  true,  eternal  as  Holy  Writ 
that  our  bodies,  at  the  call  of  Jesus  Christ, 
shall  roll  off  the  reproach  and  break  the 
iron  chains  of  death. 

The  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  the  great  af- 
firming and  cementing  fact.  By  it  he  was  de- 
clared to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power ;  it  is 
the  fitting  and  necessary  complement  to  his 
advent  and  crucifixion ;  it  binds  into  a  com- 
plete whole  all  the  facts  of  his  wondrous 
life  and  puts  the  seal  of  truth  on  them ;  the 
keystone  of  the  sacred  arch,  the  crown  of 
the  system,  the  miracle  of  all  miracles.  It 
saves  his  crucifixion  from  scorn;  it  puts 
divinity  and  glory  on  the  cross.  The  res- 
urrection of  Jesus  Christ  was  necessary  to 
establish  the  truth  of  his  mission  and  put 
the  stamp  of  all-conquering  power  on  his 
gospel.  His  death  met  the  law,  conciliated 
divine  justice;  his  resurrection  sent  the 
proclamation  of  liberty  through  all  the 
realms  of  the  dead  and  led  the  conqueror 
Death  in  chains. 

21 


The  Resurrection. 

The  most  casual  reader  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament can  scarcely  fail  to  see  the  com- 
manding position  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
holds  in  Christianity.  It  is  the  creator  of 
its  new  and  brighter  hopes,  of  its  richer 
and  stronger  faith,  of  its  deeper  and  more 
exalted  experience.  It  is  the  salient  point 
of  New  Testament  preaching.  *'J^sus  and 
the  resurrection"  summarized  the  subject 
of  their  sermonizing.  Without  this  to  them 
there  was  nothing  but  gloom  and  despair. 
If  Christ,  says  the  apostle,  be  not  risen, 
then  is  our  preaching  vain,  our  faith  vain, 
we  are  perjured  as  false  witnesses  for  God, 
we  are  yet  in  our  sins,  our  dead  in  Christ 
have  perished  hopelessly,  and  we  are  of  all 
men  most  miserable.  All  these  dire  results 
are  predicated  of  us  if  Christ  be  not  risen. 
But  the  apostle  arrests  all  these  appalling 
consequences,  and  throws  a  flood  of  light 
and  hope  and  life  over  the  scene  by  this 
restatement  and  reassurance:  "But  now 
is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become 
the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept."  The  res- 
urrection of  Christ  reanimates  our  hopes  of 
22 


The  Resurrection. 

heaven  and  fixes  them  as  sure  as  its  foun- 
dations of  adamant,  and  as  precious  and 
beautiful  as  its  jeweled  walls. 

The  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
birth  of  a  new,  glorious,  immortal  life  on 
the  realms  of  the  midnight  of  death,  the 
rising  of  the  new  sun  on  the  terrors  of 
darkness  and  night.  It  is  the  opening  of  a 
bright  and  noble  highway  to  heaven  where 
everything  had  been  closed  and  sealed  and 
every  hope  withered.  Peter's  rapturous  ac- 
claim is  not  the  transport  of  impulse,  but  it 
is  born  of  the  most  glorious  and  divine  fact 
— a  fact  as  solid  and  enduring  as  the  granite 
of  heaven,  as  enrapturing  as  the  bliss  and 
beauty  of  heaven. 

The  resurrection  of  Christ  not  only  lifts 
darkness  and  dread  from  the  tomb,  but  also 
spans  the  abyss  which  separates  us  from 
our  loved  dead,  and  puts  into  us  the 
strength  and  hope  of  a  glorious  reunion  in 
the  very  face  of  a  separation  the  most  pain- 
ful, disastrous,  and  despairing. 

The  resurrection  of  Jesus  both  assures 
and  patterns  our  resurrection;  the  two  are 
23 


The  Resurrection, 

conjoined.  The  nonresurrection  of  the 
body  relegates  Jesus  back  to  his  grave,  and 
seals  it  as  forever  dead.  Peter's  trium- 
phant shout  plants  the  flower  of  immor- 
tality and  life  on  every  tombstone  v/here 
faith  had  wrought  its  wondrous  work. 

''Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  according  to  his 
great  mercy  begat  us  again  unto  a  living 
hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead,  unto  an  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible, and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not 
away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  you,  who  by 
the  power  of  God  are  guarded  through 
faith  unto  a  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed 
in  the  last  time.  Wherein  ye  greatly  re- 
joice." 

Hope  throws  its  rich  luster  over  the 
night  of  the  tomb  and  thrills  with  death- 
less joy  the  heart  where  the  resurrection 
of  Jesus  has  been  realized.  We  are  to  come 
out  of  the  grave  because  Jesus  came  out 
of  his  grave.  Our  tombs  will  be  empty  of 
our  bodies  because  Joseph's  new  tomb  on 
the  third  morn  was  empty  of  his  body. 
24 


The  Resurrection. 

There  is  an  inevitable,  insuperable  connec- 
tion between  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  the  resurrection  of  our  bodies. 

The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  assur- 
ance and  type  of  ours — his  body  which  died, 
the  same  and  not  another,  was  raised. 
These  bodies  we  now  bear,  the  same  ones 
we  shall  put  in  the  grave,  will  be  raised  and 
fashioned  after  his  glorious  body.  His  res- 
urrection takes  the  tyranny  and  sting  from 
death,  destroys  its  fears  and  vanquishes  its 
dominion,  brings  the  angels  down  beside 
our  grave,  plants  hope  and  immortality  on 
the  ruins  of  that  grave.  His  resurrection 
conquers  for  us  a  way  through  the  dark  do- 
main of  death;  by  it  corruption  puts  on  in- 
corruption,  mortality  puts  on  immortality. 
Death  is  swallowed  up,  the  victor's  song  is 
on  our  dying  lips,  and  death  becomes  our 
coronation  day. 

25 


V. 


Never  ivas  there  an  age  -when  it  was  more  neces- 
sary to  set  forth  events  that  7iot  only  imfly  but  frac- 
tically  prove  the  resurrection  of  the  boch\  and  that  not 
only  suggest  but  confirm  the  teaching  of  the  Church  in 
reference  to  the  future  state  which  it  is  the  obvious 
tendency  of  the  speculations  of  our  own  times  to  ex- 
plain awayy  to  modify^  or  to  dejiy. — Bishop  Ellicott 

In  the  person  of  Jesus,  his  acts  and 
teachings,  death  holds  an  essential,  con- 
spicuous place.  It  could  not  be  otherwise. 
Death  holds  a  commanding  and  ruinous 
reign  over  the  race  which  Jesus  Christ 
came  to  redeem.  There  could  be  no  re- 
demption of  man  without  an  invasion  of 
the  realms  of  death.  No  sunlight  to  hu- 
manity while  the  clouds  and  night  of  death 
hung  heavy  and  dread,  no  spring  bloom 
to  man  while  the  winter  of  death  swept  and 
froze  with  its  polar  blasts  and  killing  frosts. 
The  Emancipator  must  break  the  thrall 
which  holds,  throttles,  and  enslaves.  Of 
his  coming  and  of  himself  the  long-away 
26 


The  Resurrection. 

prophet  had  declared:  "I  will  ransom  them 
from  the  power  of  the  grave :  I  wall  redeem 
them  from  death:  O  death,  I  will  be  thy 
plagues;  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruc- 
tion/' An  age  frivolous,  recklessly  tread- 
ing on  the  verge  of  agnosticism  and  suicide, 
may  reck  nothing  of  death,  its  mystery  and 
fear ;  but  a  serious  age  will  open  its  eye  and 
seriously  and  prayerfully  confront  death, 
recognize  and  lament  its  reign  and  ruin, 
as  the  king  of  terrors,  the  woe  and  blight 
of  earth.  Jesus  Christ  came  to  confront 
death,  to  war  on  death,  to  dismantle  its 
empire,  to  discrown  its  king  until  every  one 
of  Christ's  imprisoned  ones  shall  shout: 
''Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  O 
death,  where  is  thy  sting?  O  grave,  where 
is  thy  victory?" 

Jesus  holds  in  his  own  person  the  death 
of  death.  He  boldly  declares :  ''If  a  man 
keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  taste 
of  death."  He  said  in  the  presence  of  a 
death  whose  ruthless  ravages  had  desolated 
his  friendliest  home  and  filled  with  bitterest 
grief  his  most  devoted  hearts:  "I  am  the 
27 


The  Resurrection, 

resurrection,  and  the  life :  he  that  beHeveth 
in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he 
live:  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in 
me  shall  never  die."  He  attested  the  wealth 
and  glory  of  his  triumph  over  death :  "1  am 
the  first  and  the  last,  and  the  living  one; 
and  I  was  dead,  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for 
evermore,  and  I  have  the  keys  of  death  and 
of  Hades." 

What  does  Jesus,  the  great  Teacher  sent 
by  God  to  teach  us  the  great  things  of  God, 
say  about  the  rising  again  of  the  body  from 
death?  In  raising  the  dead  does  he  not  in 
action  and  in  plain,  unmistakable  fact  de- 
clare his  ability  to  raise  the  dead  and  inti- 
mate the  possibility  and  encourage  the  hope 
of  the  resurrection?  *'And  it  came  to  pass 
the  day  after,  that  he  went  into  a  city  called 
Nain;  and  many  of  his  disciples  went  with 
him,  and  much  people.  Now  when  he  came 
nigh  to  the  gate  of  the  city,  behold,  there 
was  a  dead  man  carried  out,  the  only  son 
of  his  mother,  and  she  was  a  widow:  and 
much  people  of  the  city  was  with  her.  And 
when  the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had  compassion 
28 


The  Resurrection. 

on  her,  and  said  unto  her,  Weep  not.  And 
he  came  and  touched  the  bier:  and  they 
that  bare  him  stood  still.  And  he  said, 
Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise.  And 
he  that  was  dead  sat  up,  and  began  to 
speak.  And  he  delivered  him  to  his  moth- 
er. And  there  came  a  fear  on  all :  and  they 
glorified  God,  saying,  That  a  great  prophet 
is  risen  up  among  us;  and.  That  God  hath 
visited  his  people." 

Is  there  not  in  this  picture  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  ?  Is  it  not  a 
prophecy  and,  even  more,  a  pledge  that 
death  in  all  its  forms  shall  be  conquered? 
Shall  he  live  and  death  reign?  Does  not 
this  great  miracle  raise  hope  in  him  as  the 
Lord  of  death?  Can  we  not  say,  looking 
with  wonderment  on  this  display  of  the 
power  of  Jesus:  "My  flesh  shall  rest  in 
hope?'* 

On  his  way  to  Jairus's  house  to  heal  his 
daughter,  and  while  pausing  to  cure  the 
woman  with  the  issue  of  blood:  *'While  he 
yet  spake,  there  came  from  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue's  house  certain  which  said.  Thy 
29 


The  Resurrection. 

daughter  is  dead;  why  troubles!  thou  the 
Master  any  further?  As  soon  as  Jesus 
heard  the  word  that  was  spoken,  he  said 
unto  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  Be  not 
afraid,  only  believe.  And  he  suffered  no 
man  to  follow  him,  save  Peter,  and  JameSi 
and  John  the  brother  of  James.  And  he 
Cometh  to  the  house  of  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue,  and  seeth  the  tumult,  and  them 
that  wept  and  wailed  greatly.  And  when 
he  was  come  in,  he  saith  unto  them,  Why 
make  ye  this  ado,  and  weep?  the  damsel 
is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth.  And  they  laughed 
him  to  scorn.  But  when  he  had  put  them 
all  out,  he  taketh  the  father  and  the  mother 
of  the  damsel,  and  them  that  were  with 
him,  and  entereth  in  where  the  damsel  was 
lying.  And  he  took  the  damsel  by  the 
hand,  and  said  unto  her,  Talitha  cumi ; 
which  is,  being  interpreted,  Damsel,  (I  say 
unto  thee,)  arise.  And  straightway  the 
damsel  arose,  and  walked;  for  she  was  of 
the  age  of  twelve  years.  And  they  were 
astonished  with  a  great  astonishment.  And 
he    charged    them    straitly    that    no    man 

30 


The  Resurrection. 

should  know  it ;  and  commanded,  that  some- 
thing should  be  given  her  to  eat." 

Another  proof  is  this  of  his  mastery  over 
death  that  he  has  the  keys  of  death  and 
the  fact  that  man^s  best  friend  has  the 
power  over  man's  greatest  foe.  It  has  that 
in  it  which  gives  hope  over  death,  which 
does  so  readily  yield  to  the  power  of  Christ. 

The  other  record  of  raising  the  dead  is 
that  of  Lazarus.  This  is  the  crown  of  his 
miracles.  Martha  averred  her  belief  in  the 
fact  of  the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
"I  know,"  said  Martha,  "that  he  shall  rise 
again  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last  day. 
Jesus  said  unto  her,  I  am  the  resurrection, 
and  the  life :  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though 
he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live :  and  who- 
soever liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  nev- 
er die."  Do  not  these  words  coupled  with 
the  action  of  Jesus  give  strong  intimations 
and  a  well-grounded  hope  that  Jesus  will 
break  the  rule  of  death  and  bring  light  and 
immortality  to  light  out  of  the  midnight  of 
the  tomb.  "And  Jesus  lifted  up  his  eyes, 
and  said.  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou 
3^ 


The  Resurrection, 

Iiast  Heard  me.  And  I  knew  that  thou 
hearest  me  always;  but  because  of  the 
people  which  stand  by  I  said  it,  that 
they  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me. 
And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come  forth. 
And  he  that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound 
hand  and  foot  with  graveclothes :  and  his 
face  was  bound  about  with  a  napkin.  Je- 
sus saith  to  them,  Loose  him,  and  let  him 
go."  How  many  others  were  raised  from  the 
dead  is  not  recorded.  It  seems  an  incident 
of  common  observation  and  the  attestation 
of  the  divinity  of  his  mission. 

The  raising  from  the  dead  of  these  per- 
sons is  not  only  an  attestation  of  the  divin- 
ity of  his  mission,  but  we  repeat  that  they 
are  prophetical  and  proclamatory  to  the  race 
of  their  emancipation  from  their  fierce  and 
relentless  foe — death. 

In  addition  to  these  acts  which  heralded 
the  release  of  all  incarcerated  in  the  prison 
house  of  death,  Jesus  taught  in  express  lan- 
guage the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  His 
attitude  toward  death  was  one  of  dire  and 


The  Resurrection, 

eternal  opposition.  He  came  as  the  rep- 
resentative of  life  and  life-giving;  that  man 
might  have  life  and  have  it  more  abmidant- 
ly — a  life  unshadowed  by  death,  and  to 
which  death  was  a  stranger.  In  contrast 
and  opposition  to  Adam,  he  was  a  life-giving 
Spirit.  ''Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  If 
a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  see 
death."  Again  we  refer  to  those  wonder- 
ful words  used  in  the  presence  of  death, 
and  in  view  of  its  iron  rule,  and  while  the 
tears  of  sympathy  and  indignation  were 
still  wet  upon  his  cheeks  he  declared :  "I  am 
the  resurrection  and  the  life :  he  that  be- 
lieveth  on  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet 
shall  he  live:  and  whosoever  liveth  and  be- 
lieveth  in  me  shall  never  die."  These 
words  find  their  highest  and  broadest  truth : 
that  in  his  very  person  there  were  forces 
and  principles  inimical  and  destructive  to 
death;  that,  as  he  lived,  death  must  die. 
The  saying  of  Paul  is  but  a  condensed  sum- 
mary of  this  great  purpose.  "The  appear- 
ing of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath 
abolished  death,  and  hath  brought  life  and 
3  2>Z 


The  Resurreetidn, 

immortality  to  light."  The  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  asserts  the  same  great  truth:  that 
in  Jesus  Christ,  his  person  and  his  work, 
were  lodged  the  mighty  forces  which  were 
to  bring  universal  freedom  from  death. 
''Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  par- 
takers of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself 
likewise  took  part  of  the  same ;  that  through 
death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  de- 
liver them  who  through  fear  of  death  were 
all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage." 
34 


VI. 


/  am  not  so  ignorant  of  the  temjjcy  and  tendency  of 
the  age  in  xvhich  I  live  as  either  to  be  unpre;pared  for 
the  sort  of  remarks  xvhich  the  literal  interpretation  of 
the  Evangelist  ivill  call,  or  to  attem^pt  an  afisxver  to 
them.  Visiotiary  ravings,  obsolete  rvhimsies,  tran' 
scendental  trash,  and  the  like  I  leave  to  pass. 

— Coleridge. 

The  attitude  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  one 
of  familiarity  and  matter  of  course.  In  the 
sixth  chapter  of  John  with  what  an  em- 
phatic, authoritative  manner  he  deals  with 
it  as  a  generally  acknowledged,  great  basic 
fact!  "For  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not 
to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him 
that  sent  me.  And  this  is  the  Father's  will 
which  hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he 
hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but 
should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day." 

This  resurrection  he  puts  as  the  declared 
purpose  and  will  of  God,  that  he  should 
raise  them  up  at  the  last  day.  This  was  Im- 
perative if  he  accomplishes  God's  design. 
35 


The  Resurrection. 

The  capsheaf  of  God's  purposes  for  Jesus 
Christ  was  that  he  should  raise  the  dead. 
Again  he  returns  to  this  great  thought, 
purpose,  and  fact :  ''And  this  is  the  will  of 
him  that  sent  me,  that  every  one  which 
seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him,  may 
have  everlasting  life :  and  I  will  raise  him 
up  at  the  last  day." 

Again  he  iterates  the  fact,  and  declares 
that  he  is  committed  to  it.  The  Father 
commits  it  to  him.  The  resurrection  pow- 
er is  lodged  in  Jesus.  "No  man  can  come 
to  me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent 
me  draw  him:  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at 
the  last  day."  Again  Jesus  gives  utterance 
to  the  important  statement:  "Whoso  eateth 
my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eter- 
nal life;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the 
last  day." 

Death  and  him  that  had  the  power  of 
death — that  is,  the  devil — against  these, 
the  author  of  evil  and  his  works,  Jesus 
Christ  set  himself.  He  declared  himself  to 
be  the  resurrection  and  the  life,  that  death 
in  every  form,  in  every  way,  and  at  every 

36 


The  Rcsurrecfion. 

place,  must  yield  to  him.  We  stress  and 
iterate  the  fact  that  he  is  life.  *'If  a  man 
keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  see  death." 
"Whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me 
shall  never  die."  "He  that  believeth  in  me, 
though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live." 
"I  am  the  first  and  the  last,  and  the  Living 
one ;  and  I  was  dead,  and  behold,  I  am 
alive  for  evermore,  and  I  have  the  keys  of 
death  and  of  Hades."  ''I  am  come  that  they 
might  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundant- 
ly." Life  against  death  is  he.  Jesus  Christ, 
the  source  of  all  deathless  energy,  by  abso- 
lute and  eternal  fitness,  by  a  matter  of 
course,  and  by  character  he  is  the  foe,  the 
destruction  of  death.  He  is  coequal,  coeter- 
nal  with  the  Father,  and  pours  the  Father's 
full  tide  of  life  on  the  world.  ''For  the 
Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  showeth  him 
all  things  that  himself  doeth:  and  he  will 
show  him  greater  works  than  these,  that 
ye  may  marvel.  For  as  the  Father  raiseth 
up  the  dead,  and  quickeneth  them;  even  so 
the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will.  For  the 
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  commit- 
37 


TJie  Resurrection. 

ted  all  judgment  unto  the  Son :  Verily,  ver- 
ily, I  say  unto  you,  He  that  heareth  my 
word,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me, 
hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come 
into  condemnation ;  but  is  passed  from 
death  unto  life.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when 
the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God :  and  they  that  hear  shall  live.  For  as 
the  Father  hath  life  in  himself;  so  hath  he 
given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself; 
And  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute 
judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of 
man." 

"Marvel  not  at  this :  for  the  hour  is  com- 
ing, in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  tombs 
shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth : 
they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resur- 
rection of  life;  and  they  that  have  done  ill, 
unto  the  resurection  of  judgment."  He 
had  made  strong  declarations  of  life,  eter- 
nal life,  and  of  a  spiritual  resurrection ;  see- 
ing their  wonderment,  he  goes  on  to  de- 
clare a  greater  marvel  still — the  resurrec- 
tion  of   the   bodv   from   the   grave   as   the 

38 


The  Resurrection. 

inevitable  sequence  of  the  life  in  his  Fa- 
ther and  in  himself.  All  shall  come  forth 
— death  shall  yield  its  hold,  and  the  grave 
deliver  its  prisoners  long  held.  All  shall 
come  forth — not  a  body  left — not  an  atom 
of  the  grave's  dust  but  shall  have  the  touch 
and  taste  of  the  resurrection  life.  Jesus 
Christ  tells  his  disciples  that  when  he  comes 
in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  the  holy 
angels  he  will  reward  every  man  accord- 
ing to  his  works.  To  secure  this  end,  the 
resurrection  is  a  necessity. 

The  transfiguration  of  Jesus  is  one  of 
the  typical  facts  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body;  not  only  of  the  glorious  change,  but 
of  the  renewed  life  of  the  body  and  of  the 
general  judgment  day.  The  presence  of 
Moses  and  Elijah  there  are  the  trophies  as 
they  appear  in  glory  of  the  resurrection 
power  of  Christ.  It  is  a  distinct  prophecy 
and  foreshadowing  of  the  coming  of 
the  body  out  of  the  power  and  ravages  of 
death.  Moses  and  Elijah  appear  at  this 
hour  as  the  first  fruits  of  the  resurrection 
glory.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  it  is 
39 


The  Resurrection. 

here  as  well  as  in  the  continuous  ministry 
of  Christ  that  the  body,  this  body  of  our 
humiliation,  has  its  sign  and  pledge  of  its 
future  glory. 

"I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day." 
These  iterated  words  deserve  great  and 
grave  consideration — there  is  to  be  a  day,  a 
great  day,  a  tremendous  day ;  the  last  day, 
the  closing  of  this  world's  history.  Time 
shall  be  no  more.  Eternity,  changeless 
eternity,  will  begin  its  new  history  for  man. 
Paul  calls  it  *'the  day  of  wrath  and  revela- 
tion of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God ;" 
the  day  when  ''the  dead,  small  and  great, 
shall  stand  before  God."  The  raised  dead — 
raised  from  their  sleep  in  proud  city  cem- 
etery or  the  silent  forsakenness  of  the  un- 
marked loneliness  of  the  country  sleeper; 
from  the  ocean  depths,  shrouded  and  en- 
tombed, for  ages  in  its  restless,  defiant, 
fathomless  caves;  from  the  dismal  abodes 
of  the  Hades  whose  waves  and  fires  were 
but  the  voices  which  told  of  deeper  waves 
and  fiercer  fires  to  come.  This  is  the  day 
when  Christ  is  committed  to  the  raising 
40 


The  Resurrection. 

of  his  dead  ones,  when  his  and  man's  last 
enemy,  death,  shall  be  destroyed. 

''Last  day!"  Day  of  God's  glory  and 
power !  Day  of  terror  and  alarm  to  the 
unbelieving  and  impenitent — their  eternal 
doom !  Day  of  renown  and  victory  to  Je- 
sus Christ,  of  infinite  comfort  to  all  his 
saints.  Infinite  comfort !  Infinite  in  meas- 
ure and  infinite  in  length.  This  last  day 
is  one  of  God's  appointed  days — God's  de- 
creed days. 

41 


VII. 

The  fovjer  of  God  speaks  it  possible  that  there  may 
be  a  resurrection;  the  Scriptures  make  it  certain  that 
there  shall  be  a  resurrection. — Henry. 

If  you  kiie-v  the  poiver  of  God^  you  ivould  ktiozv 
that  he  can  do  it;  and  if  you  knerv  the  Scriptures,  you 
ivould  knoiv  that  he  tvill  do  it. — Bishop  Horne. 

In  the  lessons  that  Jesus  Christ  taught 
of  the  unselfish  ministries  of  the  social  life 
he  guards  our  feasts  and  their  guests  so 
that  there  may  be  none  of  the  pride  of  life 
in  them:  "Then  said  he  also  to  him  that 
bade  him,  When  thou  makest  a  dinner  or  a 
supper,  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  breth- 
ren, neither  thy  kinsmen,  nor  thy  rich 
neighbors;  lest  they  also  bid  thee  again, 
and  a  recompense  be  made  thee.  But  when 
thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor,  the 
maimed,  the  lame,  the  blind:  and  thou 
shalt  be  blessed;  for  they  cannot  recom- 
pense thee :  for  thou  shalt  be  recompensed 
at  the  resurrection  of  the  just." 

The  resurrection  of  the  dead  was  an  ac- 
42 


The  Resurrection. 

cepted  fact  in  Jewish  popular  teaching  and 
credence,  well  known  and  constantly  taught 
in  the  Pharisaic  schools  of  thought  and  doc- 
trine, grounded  on  the  teaching  of  the  Old 
Testament  and  their  schools  of  tradition 
and  stalwart  orthodoxy.  In  teaching, 
Christ  accepts  as  true  the  doctrine  as  un- 
derstood and  so  bases  and  refers  the  holy 
ministries  of  mercy  and  service  to  that 
great  time  for  their  recompense:  "At  the 
resurrection  of  the  just." 

All  the  events  of  this  life  are  to  have 
their  reference  to  the  resurrection  hour! 
How  unselfish  and  dignified,  how  full  of 
gravity  will  a  life  be  that  shapes  all  its 
actions  by  the  resurrection  or  judgment 
day!  "But  I  say  unto  you,  That  every 
idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall 
give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. For  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be 
justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be 
condemned."  "Thou  shalt  be  recompensed 
at  the  resurrection  of  the  just."  Assured 
fact !  The  truth  of  all  truths !  Let  us 
keep  our  eye  on  that  great  hour.  Let  us 
43 


The  Resurrection. 

shape  our  actions  by  its  high  rules  of 
righteousness,  rectitude,  truth !  Let  us 
await  its  awards  with  a  holy,  lowly,  unself- 
ish ministry  to  the  afflicted  and  beggared 
ones  of  earth,  w^ho  cannot  recompense  us — 
take  God  as  their  security,  and  look  to  the 
resurrection  as  pay  day. 

The  statements  of  Jesus  are  direct  in  re- 
gard to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  The 
Sadducees,  who  did  not  believe  in  the  res- 
urrection, propounded  a  question  to  Christ 
in  order  to  confute  the  doctrine.  In  his 
reply  he  asserts  the  fact  in  opposition  to 
the  Sadducees  and  elevates  the  doctrine 
above  the  low  and  carnal  views  of  the  Phar- 
isees, and  also  asserts  it  as  fundamental  to 
the  nature  of  God  and  as  belonging  to  the 
teachings  of  Moses. 

''Then  came  to  him  certain  of  the  Saddu- 
cees, which  deny  that  there  is  any  resur- 
rection; and  they  asked  him,  saying.  Mas- 
ter, Moses  wrote  unto  us.  If  any  man's 
brother  die,  having  a  wife,  and  he  die  with- 
out children,  that  his  brother  should  take 
his  wife,  and  raise  up  seed  unto  his  broth- 
44 


The  Resurrection. 

er.  There  were  therefore  seven  brethren: 
and  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  died  without 
children.  And  the  second  took  her  to  wife, 
and  he  died  childless.  And  the  third  took 
her :  and  in  like  manner  the  seven  also :  and 
they  left  no  children,  and  died.  Last  of 
all  the  woman  died  also.  Therefore  in  the 
resurrection  whose  wife  of  them  is  she? 
for  seven  had  her  to  wife.  And  Jesus  an- 
swering said  unto  them,  The  children  of 
this  world,  marry,  and  are  given  in  mar- 
riage: but  they  which  shall  be  accounted 
worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  and  the  resur- 
rection from  the  dead,  neither  marry,  nor 
are  given  in  marriage :  neither  can  they 
die  any  more :  for  they  are  equal  unto  the 
angels;  and  are  the  children  of  God,  being 
the  children  of  the  resurrection.  Now  that 
the  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  showed  at 
the  bush,  when  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God 
of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the 
God  of  Jacob.  For  he  is  not  a  God  of  the 
dead,  but  of  the  living:  for  all  live  unto 
him." 

This  afforded  Jesus  Christ  a  fine  oppor- 
45 


The  Resurrection. 

tunity  to  explode  the  doctrine  of  the  resur- 
rection if  not  true;  instead  he  reheves  the 
doctrine  of  its  Pharisaic  rubbish  and  de- 
bauchment,  declares  and  confirms  it  by 
Scripture  and  by  the  character  of  God,  put- 
ting it  upon  its  divine  and  spiritual  basis. 

This  is  an  important  occasion.  It  is 
light  on  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  to 
those  who  opposed  it.  Doubtless  this  ques- 
tion had  often  confused  and  silenced  the 
Pharisees.  The  Sadducees  denied  the  res- 
urrection— angel  and  spirit.  Here  they 
came  saying  there  was  no  resurrection, 
maintaining  this  against  our  Lord.  He  an- 
swers: '*Ye  do  not  understand  the  Scrip- 
tures which  imply  the  resurrection,  nor  the 
power  of  God  before  which  all  these  ob- 
stacles vanish."  Our  Lord  asserts  here 
against  the  Sadducees  the  existence  of  an- 
gels and  reveals  to  us  the  similarity  of  our 
future  glorified  state  to  their  present  one. 
The  books  of  Moses  were  the  great  and 
ultimate  appeal  for  all  doctrine.  The  asser- 
tion of  the  resurrection  comes  from  the  very 
books  from  which  their  objections  had  been 

46 


The  Resurrection. 

constructed.  Our  Lord  here  speaks  of  the 
conscious  intent  of  God  in  speaking  the 
words.  God  uttered  these  words  to  Moses 
in  the  consciousness  of  the  still  enduring 
existence  of  his  peculiar  relation  to  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Jesus  declares  that 
they  still  live.  It  Is  an  assertion  which 
could  not  be  made  of  an  annihilated  being 
of  the  past.  Weighty  testimony  against 
the  so-called  sleep  of  the  soul  In  the  Inter- 
mediate state.  The  burden  of  the  law,  "I 
am  the  Lord  thy  God,"  contains  in  it  the 
seed  of  immortality  and  the  hope  of  the 
resurrection. 

For  the  present  state  of  men  marriage 
Is  an  ordained  and  natural  state  of  things. 
They  who  are  worthy  to  obtain  the  resur- 
rection life  are  no  longer  under  the  or- 
dinance of  marriage,  for  neither  can  they 
die  any  more.  They  will  have  no  need  of 
a  succession  and  renewal ;  they  are  alive  for 
evermore.  They  are  by  their  resurrection 
essentially  partakers  of  the  divine  nature, 
and  can  die  no  more.  It  is  a  covenant  rela- 
tion on  which  the  matter  rests,  In  regard 
47 


The  Resurrection, 

to  him  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  the  being  of 
all  is  a  living  one  in  all  its  changes.  (Al- 
ford's  "Commentary  on  INIatthew  and 
Luke.") 

How  clearly,  distinctly,  sublimely  our 
Lord  declares  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
from  God's  relation  to  his  covenant  pa- 
triarchs, as  shown  in  the  call  of  Moses  for 
their  deliverance  from  an  enslavement  as 
dark,  as  terrible,  and  as  hopeless  as  death ! 
Their  deliverance  from  the  death  and  slav- 
ery of  Egypt  was  to  be  a  type  and  proph- 
ecy of  the  glory  of  the  resurrection  from 
the  dominion  and  tyranny  of  death. 

Our  Lord  on  this  occasion,  answering 
the  questioning  of  the  Sadducees,  puts 
them  to  silence ;  but  beyond  this  he  draws 
the  sublimest  lesson  about  the  great  doc- 
trine of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  from 
the  call  of  Moses,  and  unfolds  the  truth 
free  from  the  stain  and  thralls  of  the  flesh. 
The  resurrection — heavenly  life — is  to  be  a 
new  Hfe  based  on  new  relations.  The 
earthly  family  institutions  are  not  to  be 
revived  in  the  resurrection  life.     They  have 


The  Resurrecfion. 

their  divine  uses  on  earth,  pass  their  day 
here,  but  will  not  have  their  place  in  the 
eternal.  The  angel  life  will  be  the  model. 
The  angels  are  not  born  into  families ;  each 
one  is  separate,  independent.  So  will  be 
our  future,  individualized  and  immortal. 
No  marriage  there — marriage,  the  basis  of 
earthly  relations,  the  prime  factor  in  earthly 
good,  will  not  be  there.  No  death — the 
source  of  deepest  woe  and  pain  will  not  be 
there.  Marriage  and  death  are  earthly  and 
not  heavenly — belong  to  earth  and  not  to 
heaven. 

4  49 


VIII. 

Had  Jesus  Christ  delivered  no  other  declaration 
than  the  following y  ^^ Marvel  not  at  this:  for  the  hour 
is  comings  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall 
hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth;  they  that  have 
done  goody  unto  the  resurrection  of  life;  atid  they  that 
have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation  y"*  he 
had  pronounced  a  message  of  itiestimable  importance 
and  xvell  worthy  of  that  splendid  apparatus  of  prophecy 
and  miracle  with  which  his  mission  was  introduced  and 
attested — a  message  in  which  the  wisest  of  mankind 
•would  rejoice  to  find  an  answer  to  their  doubts  and 
rest  to  their  inquiries. — Coleridge. 

The  bringing  back  of  the  dead  is  one 
of  the  great  distinctive  and  gloriously  mag- 
nificent and  triumphant  facts  of  the  gospel 
— its  glory,  the  crown  and  seal  of  its 
divinity.  If  the  dead  rise  not,  its  scepter 
is  departed,  its  prophecies  and  promises 
have  failed,  its  luster  is  dimmed  and  tar- 
nished, its  melody  turned  to  discord  and 
shame.  The  resurrection  is  to  the  world 
what  the  minstrel  was  to  Elisha.  All 
prophecies,  all  visions  of  beauty,  the  hand 

5° 


The  Resurrection. 

of  the  Lord — all  are  in  it.  If  the  dead  rise 
not,  then  are  we  most  miserable,  tuneless, 
and  dead  —  neither  inspiration,  vision, 
prophecy,  nor  God  with  us.  This  great 
fact  is  iterated  and  reiterated  by  new  state- 
ment, by  figure,  and  by  type.  It  is  the 
theme  which  checks  the  sigh,  comforts 
the  mourner,  makes  strong  the  weak,  lights 
the  fires  of  immortality  and  eternal  life 
amid  the  darkness  and  ravages  of  earth's 
graveyards,  spans  the  dark  abyss  of  death 
with  the  golden  bridge  of  an  eternal  re- 
union, spirit  and  body  both  in  heaven. 

A  simple  setting  will  show  how  large  a 
place  the  resurrection  of  the  body  had  in 
the  preaching,  experience,  hopes,  and  com- 
forts of  the  New  Testament  Christians. 

Jesus  Christ  had  in  his  person  the  power 
of  the  resurrection.  He  was  the  incarna- 
tion of  the  resurrection.  Yet  outside  of 
his  person  there  was  the  fact  of  the  resur- 
rection. The  power  in  him,  his  resurrec- 
tion applied,  brings  into  life  again  all  the 
dead.  "As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in 
Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  How  clear 
5^ 


The  Resurrection. 

and  strong  is  the  statement  about  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  us,  whose  indwelling  gives  to  us 
the  pledge  and  verity  of  the  resurrection  as 
well  as  the  earnest  of  heaven !  **But  if  the 
Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the 
dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ 
from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mor- 
tal bodies  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in 
you." 

So  we  come  into  sympathy  with  strug- 
gling, groaning,  oppressed  creation  about 
us,  which  has  in  its  very  groans  the  proph- 
ecy of  its  resurrection.  Nature  in  this  says 
that  the  divine  word  is  but  a  figure  of  us 
looking  with  oppressed  and  eager  groanings 
to  the  future.  ''For  the  earnest  expectation 
of  the  creature  waiteth  for  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  sons  of  God.  For  the  creature 
was  made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly, 
but  by  reason  of  him  who  hath  subjected 
the  same  in  hope.  Because  the  creature 
itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bond- 
age of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God.  For  we  know  that 
the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
52 


The  Resurrection. 

in  pain  together  until  now.  And  not  only 
they,  but  ourselves  also,  which  have  the 
first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves 
groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the 
adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our 
body.  For  we  are  saved  by  hope :  but  hope 
that  is  seen  is  not  hope :  for  what  a  man 
seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for?  But  if 
we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do  we 
with  patience  wait  for  it." 

This  is  the  prophecy,  poetry,  and  bloom 
of  Christ's  system.  The  future  is  its  glory. 
The  resurrection  is  the  rich  jewel  of  the 
gospel.  The  Holy  Spirit  inspires  nature 
and  fills  man  with  this  glorious  resurrection 
hope.  The  more  we  have  of  the  power  of 
the  Spirit's  inworking,  the  deeper  and 
stronger  are  the  convictions  of  the  resur- 
rection; and  the  richer,  sweeter,  more  as- 
sured the  consciousness  of  our  salvation  by 
hope,  the  more  profound  the  certainty  of 
the  adoption  of  these  bodies  into  the  glo- 
rious familyhood  of  the  heavenly  home. 

The  Sadducees  denied  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead.  That  which  inflamed  and 
53 


The  Resurrection. 

grieved  them  and  aroused  them  to  unite 
with  the  enemies  of  the  disciples  was  that 
the  disciples  taught  and  preached  through 
Jesus  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  Apos- 
tolic teaching  and  preaching  broadened  the 
resurrection  from  the  personal  resurrection 
of  Jesus  to  the  universal  fact  of  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead.  As  certainly  as  Jesus 
had  been  raised  from  the  dead,  so  certainly 
would  all  the  dead  be  raised. 
54 


IX. 

Skepticism  must  ever  be  a  misfortune  or  defect: 
a  misforttcne  if  there  be  no  tneans  of  arriving  at  truth; 
a  defect  if  ■while  there  exists  such  means,  tve  are  unable 
or  unwilling  to  use  them. 

— Arnold,  Roman  History. 

The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  was  emphasized  by  Paul  and  made 
most  conspicuous  as  being  the  essence  and 
sum  of  the  gospel.  In  Athens — cultured, 
skeptical,  proud  Athens — he  declares  the 
great  fact.  It  brought  a  new  life  and  a 
new  and  unknown  hope  to  the  paganized 
world:  "Now  while  Paul  waited  for  them 
at  Athens,  his  spirit  was  stirred  in  him, 
when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  to  idol- 
atry. Therefore  disputed  he  in  the  syna- 
gogue with  the  Jews,  and  with  the  devout 
persons,  and  in  the  market  daily  with  them 
that  met  with  him.  Then  certain  philoso- 
phers of  the  Epicureans,  and  of  the  Stoics, 
encountered  him.  And  some  said,  What 
will  this  babbler  say  ?  other  some,  He  seem- 
55 


The  Resurrection. 

eth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods: 
because  he  preached  unto  them  Jesus,  and 
the  resurrection." 

Mars  Hill  heard  the  same  before  its  au- 
gust tribunal :  ''And  the  times  of  this  igno- 
rance God  winked  at;  but  now  command- 
eth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent:  because 
he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he 
will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by 
that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained ;  whereof 
he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in 
that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead. 
And  when  they  heard  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  some  mocked:  and  other  said, 
We  will  hear  thee  again  of  this  matter." 

Before  the  Jewish  council  he  declared: 
*'0f  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead 
I  am  called  in  question." 

Paul's  address  before  the  Roman  gov- 
ernor, Felix,  was  a  personal  defense,  yet 
made  strong  by  the  doctrine  of  the  resur- 
rection which  he  declared  to  be  his  main 
offense.  ''But  this  I  confess  unto  thee," 
he  declares,  "that  after  the  way  which  they 
call  heresv,  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my 

56 


The  Resurrection. 

fathers,  believing  all  things  which  are  writ- 
ten in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets :  and 
have  hope  toward  God,  which  they  them- 
selves also  allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and 
unjust." 

In  the  same  address  he  returns  to  and 
dwells  on  this  fact  of  raising  the  dead: 
"Let  these  same  here  say,  if  they  have 
found  any  evil  doing  in  me,  while  I  stood 
before  the  council,  except  it  be  for  this 
one  voice,  that  I  cried  standing  among 
them.  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  I  am  called  in  question  bv  vou  this 
day." 

He  asserted  before  Agrippa  that  the  doc- 
trine of  the  resurrection  was  the  great 
promise  of  God  to  the  fathers,  the  prom- 
ise which  gave  hope  to  them  and  hope  and 
fortitude  to  him;  and  then  startles  the  Ro- 
manized Jewish  judge  by  the  question: 
'*Why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  in- 
credible with  you,  that  God  should  raise 
the  dead?" 

The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
57 


The  Resurrection. 

dead  was  everywhere  preached  and  believed 
as  one  of  the  primary,  fundamental,  all-in- 
clusive facts  of  the  gospel.  It  comes  in 
also  incidentally  as  well  as  doctrinally.  It 
comes  to  give  largeness  and  power  to  ex- 
perience;  to  give  point  and  force  to  an 
exhortation  or  injunction.  "Now  the  body 
is  not  for  fornication,  but  for  the  Lord ; 
and  the  Lord  for  the  body.  And  God  hath 
both  raised  up  the  Lord,  and  will  also 
raise  up  us  by  his  own  power.  Know  ye 
not  that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of 
Christ  ?"  "But  we  had  the  sentence  of  death 
in  ourselves,  that  we  should  not  trust  in 
ourselves,  but  in  God  which  raiseth  the 
dead."  Again :  "We  having  the  same  spirit 
of  faith,  according  as  it  is  written,  I  believed,* 
and  therefore  have  I  spoken;  we  also  be- 
lieve, and  therefore  speak ;  knowing  that 
he  w^iich  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus  shall 
raise  up  us  also  by  Jesus,  and  shall  present 
us  with  you." 

Some  members  of  the  Corinthian  Church 
had  fallen  into  error  about  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead.     The  fifteenth  chapter  of 

58 


The  Resurrection. 

First  Corinthians  is  devoted  to  the  refuta- 
tion of  their  errors  and  the  statement  of 
the  doctrine.  Therein  the  apostle  views  it 
from  almost  every  standpoint  and  with  all 
colors.  The  fact  of  death  so  universal  and 
deplorable  is  centered  in  Adam ;  the  fact  of 
the  resurrection,  its  truth,  authority,  and 
glory,  centers  in  Christ:  ''For  since  by  man 
came  death,  by  man  came  also  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all 
die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive.  But  every  man  in  his  own  order: 
Christ  the  first  fruits ;  afterwards  they  that 
are  Christ's  at  his  coming.  Then  cometh 
the  end,  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up 
the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father; 
when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule  and  all 
authority  and  power.  For  he  must  reign, 
until  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet. 
The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is 
death.  For  he  hath  put  all  things  under  his 
feet.  But  when  he  saith,  all  things  are 
put  under  him,  it  is  manifest  that  he  is 
excepted,  which  did  put  all  things  under 
him.  And  when  all  things  shall  be  sub- 
59 


The  Resurrection. 

dued  unto  him,  then  shall  the  Son  also  him- 
self be  subject  unto  him  that  put  all  things 
under  him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all." 

He  declares:  "In  a  moment,  in  the  twin- 
kling of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump:  for  the 
trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be 
raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be 
changed.  For  this  corruptible  must  put 
on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put 
on  immortality." 

The  following  majestic,  luminous,  and 
comforting  declarations  were  made  to  the 
Thessalonians :  "But  I  would  not  have  you 
to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concerning  them 
which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even 
as  others  which  have  no  hope.  For  if  we 
believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even 
so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God 
bring  with  him.  For  this  we  say  unto  you 
by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  which  ar^ 
alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  shall  in  no  wise  precede  them  which 
are  asleep.  For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the 
voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
60 


The  Resurrection, 

of  God :  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first:  then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain 
shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them 
in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air: 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 
Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  these 
words." 

What  a  place  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
had  in  apostolic  preaching !  What  comfort 
and  solaces  it  had !  How  oft  repeated  to 
edify,  refresh,  strengthen !  What  a  rich 
message  it  was  for  the  early  Church  to 
bear  and  receive !  What  a  volume  full  of 
inspiration  and  embellished  to  them !  How 
oft  repeated!  how  well  assured  were  they 
of  its  truth !  It  belonged  to  the  heart  of 
their  faith ;  it  burnished  with  a  double  ra- 
diance their  hopes ;  it  made  them  to  endure 
martyr  fires  and  persecutions  fiercer  than 
martyr  flames !  We  need  to  have  these  first 
fundamental  facts  put  into  our  spiritual 
being  anew  like  iron  put  into  the  blood  to 
make  it  red  and  strong  and  life-giving. 
These  mighty  fact-forces  have  to  us  lost 
their  energy  and  their  divine  magic.  Our 
6i 


Tlie  Resurrection. 

faith  demands  to  be  fed  anew  by  them.  They 
must  be  to  us  what  they  were  to  the  apos- 
tles— the  summary,  subject,  and  power  of 
our  preaching.  They  must  be  to  us  the 
pabuhim  of  our  faith,  the  food  of  our 
souls,  the  nurser  of  a  giant  faith,  the  in- 
spirer  of  giant  praying. 

These  facts  must  be  to  us  what  they 
were  to  the  primitive  Christians — creed, 
experience,  service.  They  must  w^eave  our 
songs,  fill  our  testimony.  We  must  know 
that  Jesus  Christ  has  been  raised  from  the 
dead,  for  we  have  been  raised  from  the 
death  of  sin  wath  him.  We  must  know 
that  our  bodies  shall  be  raised  from  the 
dead  by  his  Spirit  which  is  in  us,  which 
gives  an  assurance  and  foretaste  of  the  res- 
urrection day. 

O  what  a  blessed  hope  is  ours ! 

While  here  on  earth  we  stay, 
We  more  than  taste  the  heavenly  powers, 

And  antedate  that  day: 
We  feel  the  resurrection  near, 

Our  life  in  Christ  concealed, 
And  with  his  glorious  presence  here 

Our  earthen  vessels  filled. 
63 


/  am  laboring^  though  most  imperfectly^  to  lead 
them  ( jny  scholars)  to  Christ  in  true  and  devoted  faith. 
I  hold  all  the  scholarship  that  ever  man  had  to  be  in- 
finitely  worthless  tji  comparison  with  even  a  very  hum- 
ble  degree  of  spiritual  advancement. 

— Arnold  of  Rugby. 

The  resurrection  of  the  body  will  be  uni- 
versal and  personal,  general  and  particular, 
of  every  one  good  and  bad,  or,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  Bible,  ''a  resurrection  of  the 
just  and  unjust."  It  will  take  place  gen- 
erally and  at  the  last  day.  Jesus  Christ  is 
very  clear  in  his  statement  as  to  the  time. 

He  declares  his  supreme  loyalty  to  the 
Father,  and  avers,  'T  came  down  from 
heaven  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the  will 
of  him  that  sent  me,"  and  then  declares 
the  will  of  his  Father  in  regard  to  the  res- 
urrection: "And  this  is  the  Father's  will 
which  hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he 
hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but 
should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day." 

63 


The  Resurrection. 

With  great  solemnity  he  again  declares 
the  will  of  the  Father  and  his  own  power 
and  purpose  in  raising  all  believers  from 
the  dead  "at  the  last  day :"  *'And  this  is  the 
will  of  him  that  sent  me,  and  every  one 
which  seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him, 
may  have  everlasting  life :  and  I  will  raise 
him  up  at  the  last  day." 

He  combines  it  with  the  statement  of 
the  Father's  drawing,  and  the  drawn  ones 
are  to  be  raised  *'at  the  last  day:"  "No 
man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father 
which  hath  sent  me  draw  him:  and  I  will 
raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  And  again  he 
iterates  and  reasserts  that  the  crowning 
glory  is  to  be  the  resurrection  at  the  last 
day:  "Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh 
my  blood,  hath  eternal  life ;  and  I  will  raise 
him  up  at  the  last  day." 

This  was  the  accepted  truth  of  the  res- 
urrection stated  by  Martha  in  her  great 
sorrow  at  Lazarus's  death :  *T  know  that 
he  shall  rise  again  in  the  resurrection  at  the 
last  day."  Again  Jesus  uses  the  statement 
which  locates  the  resurrection  and  combines 

64 


The  Resurrection. 

it  with  the  judgment:  "He  that  rejecteth 
me,  and  receiveth  not  my  words,  hath  one 
that  judgeth  him :  the  word  that  I  have 
spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the 
last  day." 

These  two  tremendous  facts — the  judg- 
ment and  the  resurrection — are  united  in 
God's  Word.  They  certainly  have  a  close 
unity  in  importance,  in  event,  and  in  bear- 
ing. Peter  declared  of  Christ:  "He  which 
is  charged  of  God  to  be  judge  of  the  quick 
and  dead."  Paul  in  his  solemn  charge  to 
Timothy  declares  of  Jesus  that  he  shall 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his  ap- 
pearing and  kingdom.  Peter,  in  his  Epistle, 
says:  "Who  shall  give  account  to  him  that 
is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead." 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  plain 
teaching  of  Jesus  and  his  apostles  these 
two  facts,  resurrection  and  judgment,  are 
united.  "Wherefore  we  labor,  that,  wheth- 
er present  or  absent,  we  may  be  accepted 
of  him.  For  we  must  all  appear  before 
the  judgment  seat  of  Christ;  that  every  one 
mav  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body, 
5  65 


The  Resurrection. 

according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it 
be  good  or  bad.  Knowing  therefore  the 
terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  The 
saints  are  specially  charged  and  reminded 
that  they  must  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ  for  the  things  done  in  the 
body.  In  the  interest  of  compassion  and 
love,  in  our  judgment,  Paul  in  Romans  in- 
terrogates and  reminds  Christians:  "But 
why  dost  thou  judge  thy  brother?  or  why 
dost  thou  set  at  naught  thy  brother?  for 
we  shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment  seat 
of  Christ.  But  he  that  judgeth  me  is  the 
Lord.  Wherefore  judge  nothing  before 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,  who  will 
both  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of 
darkness,  and  make  manifest  the  counsels 
of  the  heart;  and  then  shall  each  man  have 
his  praise  from  God." 

To  heal  broken  hearts,  to  confirm  faith, 
to  arrest  excessive  mourning  for  our  dead, 
Paul  gives  utterance  to  the  Thessalonians : 
*'But  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant, 
brethren,  concerning  them  which  are  asleep, 
that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  which 
66 


The  Resurrection. 

have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Je- 
sus died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also 
which  ^leep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with 
him.  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  which  are  alive 
and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
shall  not  prevent  them  which  are  asleep. 
For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from 
heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God: 
and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first:  then 
we  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be 
caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  the  Lord.  Wherefore  com- 
fort one  another  with  these  words." 

In  the  fact  of  a  general  judgment  as 
well  as  in  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  the  res- 
urrection of  the  dead  is  held  as  a  fact  prece- 
dent and  to  be  taken  for  granted.  This  is 
declared  in  the  parable  of  the  talents,  the 
lord  coming  to  reckon  with  his  servants. 
This  purpose  had  been  declared  and  es- 
tablished from  the  first:  *'And  Enoch  also, 
the    seventh    from    Adam,    prophesied    of 

67 


The  Resurrection. 

these,  saying,  Biehold,  the  Lord  cometh 
with  ten  thousand  of  his  saints." 

We  have  Christ's  inimitable  description 
of  his  coming  the  object  in  the  twenty-fifth 
chapter  of  Matthew:  "When  the  Son  of 
man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy 
angels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  his  glory:  and  before  him  shall 
be  gathered  all  nations:  and  he  shall  sep- 
arate them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd 
divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats :  and  he 
shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  but 
the  goats  on  the  left." 

His  dual  purpose  is  set  forth  to  the  dis- 
quieted Thessalonians  in  strong  terms,  and 
they  are  urged  to  repose  under  the  cheer- 
ing fact  that  their  Saviour  would  come 
again,  and  his  coming  would  be  to  them 
the  end  of  sorrow,  of  pain,  and  fear:  "And 
to  you  who  are  troubled  rest  with  us,  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heav- 
en with  his  mighty  angels.  In  flaming  fire 
taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ :  who  shall  be  punished 
68 


The  Resurrection. 

with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of 
his  power ;  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glori- 
fied in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe." 

"xA.nd  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great, 
stand  before  God ;  and  the  books  were 
opened :  and  another  book  was  opened, 
which  is  the  book  of  life :  and  the  dead  were 
judged  out  of  those  things  which  were 
written  in  the  books,  according  to  their 
w^orks.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which 
were  in  it ;  and  death  and  hell  delivered  up 
the  dead  which  were  in  them :  and  they 
were  judged  every  man  according  to  their 
works.  And  death  and  hell  were  cast  into 
the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death. 
And  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in 
the  book  of  life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of 
fire." 

"And  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God 
winked  at ;  but  now  commandeth  all  men 
everywhere  to  repent:  because  he  hath  ap- 
pointed a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge 
the   world    in    righteousness   bv   that    man 

69 


The  Resurrection. 

whom  he  hath  ordained;  whereof  he  hath 
given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he 
hath  raised  him  from  the  dead." 

All  these  passages  of  the  judgment  are 
promises  and  pledges  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead.  The  Bible  is  explicit  on  the 
point ;  no  vague  analogies,  no  poetic  dreams. 
but  plain  statement  declaring  the  fact. 

The  resurrection  will  be  general,  all  will 
be  raised  at  the  same  time,  as  Paul  declares 
— a  resurrection  "both  of  the  just  and  un- 
just." 

The  resurrection  is  one  of  God's  uncon- 
ditional facts ;  it  will  take  place  all  the  same 
though  never  a  man,  woman,  or  child  be- 
lieve in  it.  In  regard  to  this  alarming  and 
comforting  fact,  our  unbelief,  neglect,  can- 
not make  the  truth  of  God  a  lie.  It  is  inev- 
itable and  irresistible.  God,  who  cannot 
lie,  has  promised,  and  Jesus  has  sealed  the 
promise  by  his  resurrection. 

We  should  familiarize  ourselves  with  the 

fact.     It  will  nerve  us   for  the  conflict  of 

faith,  bring  comfort  to  the  grave  bereft  of 

all  other  comfort,  give  a  sweet  and  bright 

70 


The  Resurrection. 

hope  in  death  which  destroys  every  other 
hope. 

We  are  assured  that  these  soul-cheering, 
faith-invigorating  facts  of  the  Bible  are  not 
fed  upon  as  a  sweet  sacrament,  cherished 
as  our  talisman  against  sorrow  and  sin. 
They  do  not  enter  like  iron  into  our  blood. 
Or  else  we  would  not  be  children  tossed 
about  by  every  wind,  the  prey  of  every 
temptation.  This  doctrine  should  be  the 
joy  and  rejoicing  of  our  hearts.  Inspired 
and  charmed  by  its  hopes,  we  should  be 
lifted  above  all  weakness  and  defy  all  as- 
saults. 

We  subscribe  to  the  creed,  *T  believe  in 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,"  which  was 
taught  by  God  to  Moses  in  the  burning 
bush,  confirmed  to  us  by  prophet  and  apos- 
tle, symbolized  and  assured  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ.  We  accept  it  not 
because  we  understand  its  method  but  be- 
cause God  has  declared  it  in  his  holy  Word. 

To  raise  the  dead  is  one  of  the  thrilling 
and  momentous  objects  of  the  coming  of 
Jesus.  The  dead  are  to  be  raised,  and  Je- 
71 


The  Resurrection. 

sns  Christ  is  coming  to  do  that  work ;  it  is 
too  important  and  glorious  to  be  delegated 
to  the  most  honored  and  lofty  among  angels 
or  men.  The  Lord  in  person  coming  from 
heaven,  with  a  shout  of  triumph  and  a  call 
of  authority  to  the  heavens  and  to  the 
earth.  The  archangel's  trump  and  the 
dead  raised  first — that  is,  before  our  Lord 
attends  to  any  other  business.  The  living 
are  neither  noticed  nor  crowned  till  the  dead 
are  awakened  to  share  in  their  joys  and 
honors.  Locked  in  the  embraces  of  love 
and  reunion,  we  will  be  caught  up  to  meet 
the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  we  ever 
be  with  the  Lord  !  Amen,  so  let  it  be ! 
72 


XI, 


A  going-'doivn  star  is  not  annihilated^  but  shall  ap- 
pear again.  O  happy  arid  blessed  death,  that  golden 
bridge  laid  over  by  Christ  my  Lord  betivixt  timers 
clay  banks  and  heaven'' s  shores  ! 

Tour  sun  is  ivell  turned  and  low;  be  nigh  your 
lodging  against  night.  We  go^  one  by  one,  out  of  this 
great  market  till  the  toivti  be  empty  and  the  tivo  lodg- 
ing s^  heaven  and  hell,  be  filled.  O  thrice  blessed  are 
they  v.'ho  hold  Christ  v:ith  their  tears  and  prayers! — 
Samuel  Rutherford. 

It  will  be  a  resurrection.  The  same  body 
which  is  put  in  the  grave  will  come  out. 
This  is  necessary  to  a  resurrection.  It  is 
not  an  evolution,  not  a  new  creation,  but  a 
resurrection — a  standing  out  and  up  into 
life  again,  the  same  body  in  form,  sub- 
stance, identity.  The  body  is  a  being,  a 
department  of  man's  marvelous  nature.  It 
is  separable  from  the  other  part  of  man's 
being,  and  will  be  separated  by  death.  The 
body,  its  identity  and  being,  is  clear,  un- 
mistakable, well-defined,  visible  to  eye,  sen- 
73 


The  Resurrection. 

sible  to  touch,  much  more  tangible,  visible, 
real  to  us  than  the  soul.  When  death  sep- 
arates the  spirit  from  the  body  and  God 
says  it  shall  return  to  dust,  it  will  be  so ;  and 
when  God  says,  the  body  shall  come  out  of 
the  grave,  out  of  its  dust,  the  same  thing  we 
put  in  the  grave. 

The  Word  of  God  teaches  that  the  same 
body  which  lived  and  died  and  lay  in  the 
grave  will  be  raised — a  literal  resurrection, 
not  a  new  creation,  but  a  raising  of  the 
body  from  its  grave  and  dust,  an  awaken- 
ing from  its  long  and  undisturbed  sleep. 

The  power  of  Christ  over  death  was  de- 
clared in  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  and 
his  own  triumph  over  the  grave.  These 
were  prophecies,  pledges,  and  patterns  of 
our  coming  from  the  dead;  and  in  each  in- 
stance the  same  body  which  went  into  the 
grave  came  out.    It  shall  be  so  with  us. 

The  resurrection  of  the  identical  body 
that  was  laid  in  the  grave  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  Bible.  This  literal  resurrection  is  the 
foundation  stone  of  New  Testament  revela- 
tion. Nothing  indicates  our  defection  and 
74 


The  Resurrection. 

driftings  more  than  the  views  of  the  resur- 
rection which  are  finding  favor  in  high  and 
low  places  among  preachers,  teachers,  and 
people.  With  many,  fiction  and  philosophy 
are  substituted  for  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Je- 
sus. We  are  inhaling  our  religious  opin- 
ions from  the  tainted  atmosphere  of  ration- 
alism instead  of  the  Bible.  We  are  leaving 
Isaiah  and  David  for  Emerson  or  George 
Eliot.  Robert  Elsmere  and  John  Ward 
preach  to  us  instead  of  Paul  and  Peter.  We 
have  surrendered  faith  to  philosophy,  re- 
duced revelation  to  reason,  and  deem  our- 
selves wiser,  if  not  better,  than  our  fathers. 
\Yq  hesitate  not  to  say  that  every  departure 
in  a  less  or  remote  degree  from  the  ortho- 
dox doctrine  that  the  resurrection  is  a  lit- 
eral raising  of  the  body  is  a  departure  from 
the  Bible  and  a  lessening  of  the  tenacity 
and  strength  of  our  personal  faith. 

"I  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
body,"  is  Christendom's  universal  creed. 
The  orthodox  explanation  of  this  item  of 
the  creed  is  thus  summed  up  by  Bishop 
Pearson:  "We  can  therefore  not  otherwise 
75 


The  Resurrection. 

expound  this  article  than  by  asserting  that 
the  bodies  which  have  lived  and  died  shall 
live  again  after  death,  and  that  the  same 
flesh  which  is  corrupted  shall  be  restored. 
Whatsoever  alterations  shall  be  made  shall 
not  be  of  their  nature  but  of  their  condi- 
tion, not  of  their  substance  but  of  their 
qualities ;  which  explication  is  agree- 
able to  the  language  of  the  Scripture,  to 
the  principles  of  religion,  to  the  constant 
profession  of  the  Church  against  the  Ori- 
genists  of  old  and  the  Socinians  of  late." 

The  Bible  statement  is  direct,  unmistak- 
able in  its  meaning  that  these  same  bodies 
which  have  been  the  vehicles  as  well  as  the 
abode  of  the  soul,  its  partner  as  well  as 
its  servant,  shall  be  raised.  The  man  is  as 
much  body  as  soul,  and  the  Bible  doctrine 
holds  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body — this 
body — its  identity  well  maintained,  and  its 
dust  rekindled  to  life  and  beauty.  This 
same  body,  which  has  shared  so  fully  in 
the  trials  and  sorrows  of  this  earthly  life, 
shall  share  in  all  the  ultimate  triumphs  or 
sorrows  of  the  life  to  come. 

76 


The  Resurrection, 

In  the  eighth  chapter  of  Romans  we 
have  this  most  expHcit  statement:  "But  if 
the  spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from 
the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up 
Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken 
your  mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit  that  dwell- 
eth  in  you."  It  is  the  mortal  body,  the  dead 
body,  which  is  to  be  quickened  into  life. 

In  the  fifth  chapter  of  First  Thessalo- 
nians  we  have  a  prayer  which  has  a  strong 
bearing  on  this  point:  "And  the  very  God 
of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly;  and  I  pray 
God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body 
be  preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  body  is  to  be 
sanctified,  set  apart  in  all  its  uses  and  mem- 
bers to  God,  sealed  as  his  property;  and  in 
that  case  to  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the 
coming  of  our  Lord — blameless,  no  cause 
for  censure,  the  body  kept  pure,  free  from 
blame. 

We  have  the  word  "preserved,"   which 

means  guarding,  watching,  take  care  of,  to 

guard,  to  watch,  to  keep,  as  a  prisoner  is 

kept  with   sleepless  vigilance.     Who  is  to 

77 


The  Resurrection. 

guard  the  spirit?  God.  Who  is  to  guard 
and  keep  the  body?  God.  To  keep  till 
the  coming  of  Christ.  God  is  to  watch  over 
the  body,  keep  it  as  he  keeps  the  spirit.  So 
God  will  guard  the  body's  sleeping  dust 
till  Jesus  comes,  and  then  bring  it  with 
him.  Soul,  spirit,  body,  kept  by  God's 
power  till  Jesus  comes!  The  common 
and  simple  meaning  of  Scripture  is  that 
the  same  body  will  be  raised  from  the 
grave.  There  would  be  no  triumphant 
strain,  triumph  would  not  be  admissible,  if 
the  body  was  not  delivered  from  death ! 
"O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  O  grave, 
where  is  thy  victory?"  would  have  neither 
fitness  nor  place;  but  how  appropriate  the 
enrapturing  notes  of  victory  to  a  body  laid 
low  and  humbled  by  the  enemy  death,  and 
now  released  and  all-victorious !  The  rigid 
Bible  and  orthodox  view  has  been  almost 
wholly  surrendered  by  modern  theology. 
The  following  will  perhaps  show  the  com- 
monly received  opinion.  It  is  called  the 
modern  idea:  'The  modern  doctrine  repu- 
diates this  idea  of  a  literal  resurrection  of 

78 


The  Resurrection. 

the  flesh.  Yet  it  holds  that  the  spirit  has 
in  another  world  some  sort  of  organism 
through  which  it  acts,  and  by  which  it  has 
its  connection  with  the  material  universe. 
What  that  organism  is,  and  how  it  operates, 
no  one  pretends  to  know.  Swedenborg 
held  that  there  is  in  the  human  body  a 
spiritual  body,  and  that  this  spiritual  or- 
ganism rises  at  death,  so  that  the  soul  is 
not  yet  clothed  with  an  immortal  taber- 
nacle. This  is  one  form  of  the  modern 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body. 
In  a  sentence,  then,  the  modern  doctrine  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  so  far  as  that 
doctrine  is  in  any  form  intelligently  held, 
is  that  the  spirit  has  in  the  other  life  a  spir- 
itual organism,  and  that  this  spiritual  or- 
ganism has  some  sort  of  connection,  not 
by  us  understood,  with  the  material  organ- 
ism which  it  possessed  upon  the  earth." 
79 


XII. 

Uj>on  the  supposition  that  the  living  agent  each  man 
calls  himself  is  a  single  beings  it  is  as  easy  to  conceive 
that  ive  may  hereafter  animate  these  satne  or  nevj 
bodies^  variously  modified  and  organized,  as  to  con- 
ceive hovj  -we  ca?i  animate  such  bodies  as  our  present. 

— Bishop  Butler. 

Church  leaders  whose  standards  of  dic- 
tum hold  to  the  literal  resurrection  have 
fallen  in  with  this  modern  idea.  The  mod- 
ern idea  is  essentially  rational.  It  has  no 
special  regard  for  revelation,  no  great  rev- 
erence for  authority.  The  modern  idea 
takes  its  cue  from  the  Bible,  but  makes 
havoc  of  Bible  facts  and  principles.  It  may 
range  itself  under  the  name  of  some  great 
Bible  doctrine,  but  it  disembowels  the  doc- 
trine, and  leaves  us  nothing  but  an  empty, 
delusive  name.  No  one  conversant  with 
the  trend  of  things  can  be  ignorant  of  the 
fact  that  rationalism,  under  the  cover  of 
modern  ideas  or  thought,  is  affecting  the 
80 


The  Resurrection. 

granite  foundations  of  God's  truth.  Doc- 
trines which  the  wisdom  and  faith  of  the 
Church  have  reduced  to  axiomatic  dogmas 
are  so  changed  by  the  transforming  process 
of  modern  thought  that  no  essential  part  of 
the  original  doctrine  remains.  The  new 
dress  has  changed  not  only  the  outward  ap- 
pearance, but  the  heart  of  the  precious  old 
truths  is  entirely  changed.  It  is  marvelous- 
ly  strange  how  widespread  are  false  views 
of  Christ,  his  atonement,  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  and  of  eternal  judgment. 
These  pernicious  views  are  found  in  lit- 
erature, commentary,  exposition;  they  are 
clothed  in  such  attractive  garb  and  found  in 
so  many  places  that  they  fix  themselves  in 
thought  before  we  are  aware  of  it,  and  we 
have  so  little  knowledge  of  the  Bible  that 
we  cannot  detect  the  counterfeit.  It  comes 
to  pass  that  views  always  rejected  by  the 
great  body  of  believers  as  unscriptural  are 
referred  to  without  scrutiny  or  protest. 

It  is  one  of  the  problems  of  this  age  to 
find   out   the   process   how   the   current   of 
orthodoxv,    purified,    deepened,    and    made 
6  '  8i 


The  Resurrection. 

strong  by  the  confluent  piety  of  ages,  finds 
itself  almost  lost  in  the  shallows  and  sands 
of  the  ancient  and  worst  forms  of  hetero- 
doxy. 

These  modern  ideas  are  not  modern, 
though  they  may  bear  its  imprint.  They 
are  almost  as  old  as  Christianity,  and  are 
as  heterodox  as  they  are  old.  We  would 
not  oppose  them  because  they  are  new,  nor 
reject  them  because  they  are  hoary  rep- 
robates. We  put  no  store  by  the  modern 
idea.  No  special  store  do  we  put  by  the 
ancient  idea.  We  do,  though,  put  store, 
all  the  store  we  can  muster,  by  the  Bible 
idea.  We  measure  all  that  is  old  and  all 
that  is  new  by  that  infallible  standard;  and 
of  whatever  is  new  or  whatever  is  old  which 
does  not  agree  with  that,  we  say.  Let  it  be 
accursed,  and  he  who  bids  it  Godspeed  is 
partaker  in  the  sin. 

Is  this  modern  idea  the  Bible  idea?  Is 
it  worthy  of  being  put  to  the  front  of  gos- 
pel statements  ?  How  vague  and  intangible 
this  modern  idea  of  the  resurrection !  How 
strang-e   that   reason   should   reject   as   un- 


The  Resurrection. 

worthy  of  credence  the  Bible  statement  of 
the  resurrection,  and  yet  gulp  down  with 
greediness  the  dreamy  vagaries  contained 
in  the  modern  idea.  The  Bible  idea  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  is  the  fact  of  a 
literal  resurrection  of  the  body.  The  Bible 
declares  that  our  bodies  are  parts  of  us,  that 
they  are  included  in  the  recovering  scheme 
of  grace,  that  they  are  partners  with  the 
spirit  in  its  earthly  course  of  faith  or  dis- 
obedience, and  that  they  are  to  share  in  the 
honors  or  shame  of  the  eternal  future. 

The  resurrection  of  the  same  bodies 
which  we  put  in  the  grave  is  the  doctrine 
which  pervades  the  Bible  through  and 
through.  All  its  truths  are  soaked  in  this 
great  doctrine.  The  same  body  put  in  the 
grave  is  to  come  forth.  Its  weakness  is  to 
put  on  immortal  energy.  Its  corruption  is 
to  put  on  incorruption.  This  comforting 
doctrine  full  of  enrapturing,  deathless  hope, 
which  has  been  the  support  of  martyrs  and 
saints,  which  has  quenched  for  them  the 
violence  of  the  fiery  stakes,  which  has  quick- 
ened their  faith,  wiped  away  their  tears, 

83 


TJic  Resurrection. 

relieved  the  bitterness  of  death,  and  enabled 
them  to  triumph  over  the  grave — this  doc- 
trine, which  commends  itself  to  reason  as 
well  as  to  faith,  is  to  be  relinquished  for 
this  modern  idea,  which  for  practical,  vig- 
orous Christian  uses  is  as  profitless  as 
".Esop's  Fables"  or  the  "Arabian  Nights." 

The  Bible  word  to  assert  this  doctrine  is 
"resurrection,"  which  means  the  rising 
again  after  a  fall — the  rising  again  of  the 
thing  that  had  fallen,  not  the  rising  of 
something  else — and  to  this  idea  the  Bible 
strongly  and  constantly  holds  us. 

Not  only  is  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body  involved  in  the  doctrine 
of  the  general  judgment,  but  the  fact  that 
it  is  the  same  body.  A  new  body  could  not 
stand  in  the  judgment,  for  it  is  not  ac- 
countable— it  is  the  same  body  that  was  a 
witness  and  a  sharer  in  the  transactions  of 
life  that  is  to  be  in  the  judgment.  A  new 
body  would  not  be  amenable  to  the  judg- 
ment bar.  So  it  is  declared  that  the  judg- 
ment will  be  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead. 
'*And  he  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the 
84 


The  Resurrection. 

people,  and  to  testify  that  it  is  he  which 
was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  judge  of 
quick  and  dead."  Paul  writes  to  Timothy: 
"I  charge  thee  therefore  before  God,  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing  and 
his  kingdom."  The  dead  represent  the 
ones  put  in  the  grave.  Isaiah  preached  the 
resurrection  of  the  same  bodies.  He  was 
called  the  evangelical  prophet  because  he 
saw  these  latter-day  glories  and  doctrines 
so  distinctly.  He  says:  "Thy  dead  men 
shall  live,  together  with  my  dead  body  shall 
they  rise.  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell 
in  dust ;  for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs, 
and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead." 

The  dead  are  to  live.  The  body  only  is 
dead;  the  body  is  to  live.  With  Christ's 
resurrection  as  the  pattern  and  power  they 
are  to  arise.  That  which  dwells  in  the 
dust  is  to  awake  and  sing;  the  body  only  is 
to  be  resolved  to  dust.  The  body  in  the 
dust  is  the  body  that  is  raised.  The  earth 
shall  cast  out  her  dead.  The  earth  holds 
nothing  but  the  body;  the  spirit  has  never 

85 


The  Resurrection. 

been  imprisoned  by  the  earth  nor  soiled  by 
its  mold.  The  earth  holds  our  bodies.  The 
authority  of  the  resurrection  will  break  that 
hold,  and  these  prisoners  of  hope  will  come 
forth. 

86 


xni. 

We  converse  every  day  tvith  -wonders  and  miracles 
no  less  admirable  than  many  of  those  foints  of  faith 
■which  a  naturalist  ■will  not  believe.  For  the  footprints 
of  Onmifotence  and  Wisdom  are  iti  everything  ■we  see 
and  hear :  only  here  is  the  blindness  of  mankind^  that 
he  looks  not  diligently  into  things  of  ordinary  occur- 
rencey  but  passeth  them  over  as  of  course. 

— Lord  Hale. 

The  resurrection  of  the  body — of  the 
same  body  which  we  put  in  the  grave — is 
the  corner  stone  of  the  whole  Christian  sys- 
tem. Against  this  doctrine  the  rudest  as- 
saults of  unbelief  have  been  aimed.  Phi- 
losophy has  held  the  doctrine  up  to  scorn 
and  contempt,  as  being  unreasonable  and 
impossible.  The  first  departure  from  the 
Christian  faith  was  the  denial  of  the  res- 
urrection. No  one  doctrine  of  Christ's  sys- 
tem tests  the  genuineness  and  solidity  of 
faith  as  a  belief  in  this  cardinal  fact.  Satan 
generally  makes  the  first  break  in  faith  at 
this  point.     A  giving  way  at  this  point  de- 

87 


The  Resurrection. 

stroys  the  foundations.  Richard  Wat- 
son, whose  "Theological  Institutes"  have 
been  the  training  school  of  Methodist 
preachers  for  nearly  a  hundred  years, 
deals  with  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
after  a  masterly  way,  with  the  strength 
of  a  philosopher,  the  simplicity  and  direct- 
ness of  a  child's  faith,  unswerving  loyalty 
to  God's  truth.    He  says : 

In  this  intermediate  but  felicitous  and 
glorious  state  the  disembodied  spirits  of 
the  righteous  will  remain  in  joy  and  felicity 
with  Christ  until  the  general  judgment, 
when  another  display  of  the  gracious  effects 
of  our  redemption  by  Christ  will  appear 
in  the  glorious  resurrection  of  their  bodies 
to  an  immortal  life,  thus  distinguishing 
them  from  the  wicked,  whose  resurrection 
will  be  to  "shame  and  everlasting  contempt," 
or  to  what  may  be  emphatically  termed  an 
immortal  death. 

On  this  subject,  no  point  of  discussion  of 
any  importance  arises  among  those  who  ad- 
mit the  truth  of  Scripture,  except  as  to  the 
way  in  which  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrec- 


The  Resurrection. 

tion  of  the  body  is  to  be  understood ; 
whether  a  resurrection  of  the  substance  of 
the  body  be  meant,  or  of  some  mmute  and 
indestructible  part  of  it.  The  latter  theory 
has  been  adopted  for  the  sake  of  avoiding 
certain  supposed  difficulties.  It  cannot, 
however,  fail  to  strike  every  impartial  read- 
er of  the  New  Testament  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection  is  there  taught  without 
any  nice  distinctions.  It  is  always  exhibited 
as  a  miraculous  work,  and  represents  the 
same  body  which  is  laid  in  the  grave  as  the 
subject  of  this  change  from  death  to  life 
by  the  power  of  Christ.  Thus,  our  Lord 
was  raised  in  the  same  body  in  which  he 
died,  and  his  resurrection  is  constantly  held 
forth  as  the  model  of  ours ;  and  the  apostle 
Paul  expressly  says,  "Who  shall  change  our 
vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
his  glorious  body."  The  only  passage  of 
Scripture  which  appears  to  favor  the  notion 
of  the  rising  of  the  immortal  body  from 
some  indestructible  germ  is  i  Corinthians 
XV.  35 :  "But  some  men  will  say.  How  are 
the  dead   raised   up,   and  with  what  body 

89 


The  Resurrection. 

do  they  come  ?  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou 
sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  die;  and 
that  which  thou  sowest,  thou  sowest  not 
that  body  that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain,  it 
may  chance  of  wheat,  or  of  some  other 
grain."  If,  however,  it  had  been  the  inten- 
tion of  the  apostle,  holding  this  view  of  the 
case,  to  meet  objections  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  resurrection,  grounded  upon  the  difficul- 
ties of  conceiving  how  the  same  body,  in  the 
popular  sense,  could  be  raised  up  in  sub- 
stance, we  might  have  expected  him  to  cor- 
rect this  misapprehension,  by  declaring  that 
this  was  not  the  Christian  doctrine,  but  that 
some  small  parts  of  the  body  only,  bearing 
as  little  proportion  to  the  whole  as  the  germ 
of  a  seed  to  the  plant,  would  be  preserved, 
and  be  unfolded  into  the  perfected  body  at 
the  resurrection.  Instead  of  this,  he  goes 
on  immediately  to  remind  the  objector  of 
the  differences  which  exist  between  material 
bodies  as  they  now  exist :  between  the  plant 
and  the  bare  or  naked  grain ;  between  one 
plant  and  another;  between  the  flesh  of 
men,  of  beasts,  of  fishes,  and  of  birds;  be- 
90 


The  Resurrection. 

tween  celestial  and  terrestrial  bodies ;  and 
between  the  lesser  and  greater  celestial  lu- 
minaries themselves.  Still  farther  he  pro- 
ceeds to  state  the  difference,  not  between 
the  germ  of  the  body  to  be  raised  and  the 
body  given  at  the  resurrection,  but  between 
the  body  itself,  understood  popularly,  which 
dies,  and  the  body  which  shall  be  raised.  "It 
is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incor- 
ruption,"  which  would  not  be  true  of  the 
supposed  incorruptible  and  imperishable 
germ  of  this  hypothesis ;  and  can  be  affirmed 
only  of  the  body  itself,  considered  in  sub- 
stance, and  in  its  present  state  corruptible. 
Further,  the  question  put  by  the  objector, 
"How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ?"  does  not  rcr 
fer  to  the  modus  agendi  of  the  resurrection, 
or  the  process  or  manner  in  which  the  thing 
is  to  be  effected,  as  the  advocates  of  the 
germ  hypothesis  appear  to  assume.  This  is 
manifest  from  the  answer  of  the  apostle, 
who  goes  on  immediately  to  state,  not  in 
what  manner  the  resurrection  is  to  be  ef- 
fected, but  what  shall  be  the  state  or  condi- 
tion of  the  resurrection  body,  which  is  no 

91 


The  Resurrection. 

answer  at  all  to  the  question,  if  it  be  taken 
in  that  sense. 

The  first  of  the  two  questions  in  the 
passage  referred  to  relates  to  the  possibility 
of  the  resurrection,  '*How  are  the  dead 
raised  up?"  the  second  to  the  kind  of  body 
which  they  are  to  take,  supposing  the  fact 
to  be  allowed.  Both  questions,  however, 
imply  a  denial  of  the  fact,  or,  at  least,  ex- 
press a  strong  doubt  concerning  it.  It  is 
thus  that  ''hoii/'  in  the  first  question  is 
taken  in  many  passages  where  it  is  con- 
nected with  a  verb;  and  the  second  ques- 
tion only  expresses  the  general  negation  or 
doubt  more  partcularly  by  implying  that 
the  objector  couid  not  conceive  of  any  kind 
of  body  being  restored  to  man  which  would 
not  be  an  evil  and  imperfection  to  him. 
For  the  very  reason  why  some  of  the 
Christians  of  that  age  denied  or  strongly 
doubted  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  ex- 
plaining it  figuratively  and  saying  that  it 
was  past  already,  was,  that  they  were  in- 
fluenced to  this  by  the  notion  of  their  phil- 
osophical schools,  that  the  body  was  the 
92 


The  Resurrection. 

prison  of  the  soul,  and  that  the  greatest 
deHverance  men  could  experience  was  to 
be  eternally  freed  from  their  connection 
with  matter.  Hence  the  early  philosophiz- 
ing sects  in  the  Christian  Church,  the  Gnos- 
tics, Marcionites,  etc.,  denied  the  resurrec- 
tion on  the  same  ground  a.b  the  philoso- 
phers, and  thought  it  opposed  to  that  per- 
fection which  they  hoped  to  enjoy  in  anoth- 
er world.  Such  persons  appear  to  have 
been  in  the  Church  of  Corinth  as  early  as 
the  time  of  St.  Paul,  for  that  in  this  chap- 
ter he  answers  the  objections  not  of  pagans 
but  of  professing  Christians  appears  from 
verse  12 :  "How  say  some  among  you, 
that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead?" 
The  objection,  therefore,  in  the  minds  of 
these  persons  to  the  doctrine  of  the  resur- 
rection did  not  lie  against  the  doctrine  of 
the  raising  up  of  the  substance  of  the  same 
body ;  so  that,  provided  this  notion  could 
be  dispensed  with,  they  were  prepared  to 
admit  that  a  new  material  body  might 
spring  from  its  germ,  as  a  plant  from  seed. 
They  stumbled  at  the  doctrine  in  every 
93 


The  Resurrection. 

form,  because  it  involved  the  circumstance 
of  the  reunion  of  the  spirit  with  matter, 
which  they  thought  an  evil.  When,  there- 
fore, the  objector  asks,  "How  are  the  dead 
raised  up?"  he  is  to  be  understood  not  as 
inquiring  as  to  the  process,  but  as  to  the 
possibility.  The  doubt  may,  indeed,  be  tak- 
en as  an  implied  negation  of  the  possibility 
of  the  resurrection  with  reference  to  God; 
and  then  the  apostle,  by  referring  to  the 
springing  up  of  the  grain  of  corn  when  dis- 
solved and  putrified,  may  be  understood  to 
show  that  the  event  was  not  inconceivable 
by  referring  to  God's  omnipotence,  as 
shown  in  his  daily  providence,  which,  a 
priori,  would  appear  as  marvelous  and  in- 
credible. But  it  is  much  more  probable  that 
the  impossibility  implied  in  this  question  re- 
fers not  to  the  power  of  God,  which  every 
Christian  in  the  Church  of  Corinth  must  be 
supposed  to  have  been  taught  to  conceive  of 
as  almighty,  and  therefore  adequate  to  the 
production  of  this  effect;  but  as  relating  to 
the  contrariety  which  was  assumed  to  exist 
between  the  doctrine  of  the  reunion  of  the 
94 


The  Resurrection. 

soul  with  the  body,  and  those  hopes  of  a 
higher  condition  in  a  future  Hfe,  which  both 
reason  and  revelation  taught  them  to  form. 
The  second  question,  "With  what  body  do 
they  come?"  like  the  former,  is  a  question 
not  of  inquiry  but  of  denial,  or  at  least 
of  strong  doubt,  importing  that  no  idea 
could  be  entertained  by  the  objector  of  any 
material  body  being  made  the  residence  of 
a  disenthralled  spirit  which  could  comport 
with  those  notions  of  deliverance  from  the 
bondage  of  corruption  by  death  which  the 
philosophy  of  the  age  had  taught  and 
which  Christianity  itself  did  not  discounte- 
nance. The  questions,  though  different, 
come,  therefore,  nearly  to  the  same  import ; 
and  this  explains  why  the  apostle  chiefly 
dwells  upon  the  answer  to  the  latter  only, 
by  which,  in  fact,  he  replies  to  both.  The 
grain  cast  into  the  earth  even  dies  and  is 
corrupted,  and  that  which  is  sown  is  not 
'^the  body  which  shall  be,"  in  form  and 
quality,  but  "naked  grain;"  yet  into  the 
plant,  in  its  perfect  form,  is  the  same  mat- 
ter transformed.      So  the  flesh  of  beasts, 

95 


The  Resurrection. 

birds,  fishes,  and  man  is  the  same  matter, 
though  exhibiting  different  quahties.  So, 
also,  bodies  celestial  are  of  the  same  matter 
as  "bodies  terrestrial ;"  and  the  more  splen- 
did luminaries  of  the  heavens  are,  in  sub- 
stance, the  same  as  those  of  inferior  glory. 
It  is  thus  that  the  apostle  reaches  his  con- 
clusion, and  shows  that  the  doctrine  of  our 
reunion  with  the  body  implies  in  it  no  im- 
perfection— nothing  contrary  to  the  hopes 
of  liberation  ''from  the  burden  of  this 
flesh" — because  of  the  high  and  glorified 
qualities  which  God  is  able  to  give  to  mat- 
ter ;  of  which  the  superior  purity,  splendor, 
and  energy  of  some  material  things  in  this 
world,  in  comparison  with  others,  is  a  visible 
demonstration.  For  after  he  has  given 
these  instances,  he  adds:  *'So  is  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead ;  it  is  sown  in  corruption, 
it  is  raised  in  incorruption ;  it  is  sown  in 
dishonor,  it  is  raised  in  glory ;  it  is  sown  in 
weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power ;  it  is  sown 
a  natural  [an  animal]  body,  it  is  raised  a 
spiritual  body,"  so  called,  "as  being  accom- 
modated to  a  spirit,  and  far  excelling '  all 

96 


The  Resurrection. 

that  is  required  for  the  transaction  of  earth- 
ly and  terrene  affairs ;"  and  so  intent  is  the 
apostle  on  dissipating  all  those  gross  repre- 
sentations of  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
which  the  objectors  had  assumed  as  the 
ground  of  their  opposition,  and  which  they 
had  probably  in  their  disputations  placed 
under  the  strongest  views,  that  he  guards 
the  true  Christian  doctrine  on  this  point 
in  the  most  explicit  manner,  "Now,  this  I 
say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  neither  doth 
corruption  inherit  incorruption ;"  and,  there- 
fore, let  no  man  henceforward  affirm  or 
assume  it  in  his  argument  that  we  teach 
any  such  doctrine.  This  also  he  strength- 
ens by  showing  that,  as  to  the  saints  who 
are  alive  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ, 
they  also  shall  be  in  like  manner  "changed," 
and  that  ''this  corruptible,"  as  to  them  also, 
"shall  put  on  incorruption." 

Thus,  in  the  argument,  the  apostle  con- 
fines himself  wholly  to  the  possibility  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  in  a  refined  and 
glorified  state:  but  omits  all  reference  to 
7  97 


The  Resurrection. 

the  mode  in  which  the  thing  will  be  ef- 
fected as  being  out  of  the  line  of  the  ob- 
jector's questions  and  in  itself  above  hu- 
man thought  and  wholly  miraculous.  It  is, 
however,  clear  that  when  he  speaks  of  the 
body  as  the  subject  of  this  wondrous 
"change"  he  speaks  of  it  popularly  as  the 
same  body  in  substance,  whatever  changes 
in  its  qualities  or  figure  may  be  impressed 
upon  it.  Great  general  changes  it  will  ex- 
perience, as  from  corruption  to  incorrup- 
tion,  from  mortality  to  immortality;  great 
changes  of  a  particular  kind  will  also  take 
place,  as  its  being  freed  from  deformities 
and  defects,  and  the  accidental  varieties  pro- 
duced by  climate,  ailments,  labor,  and  he- 
reditary diseases.  It  is  also  laid  down  by 
our  Lord  that  ''in  the  resurrection  they 
shall  neither  marry  nor  be  given  in  mar- 
riage, but  be  like  to  the  angels  of  God;" 
and  this  also  implies  a  certain  change  of 
structure;  and  we  may  gather  from  the 
declaration  of  the  apostle  that,  though  "the 
stomach"  is  now  adapted  ''to  meats  and 
meats  to  the  stomach,  God  will  destroy  both 

98 


The  Resurrection. 

it  and  them;"  that  the  animal  appetite  for 
food  will  be  removed,  and  the  organ  now 
adapted  to  that  appetite  have  no  place  in 
the  renewed  frame.  But  great  as  these 
changes  are,  the  human  form  will  be  re- 
tained in  its  perfection,  after  the  model  of 
our  Lord's  ''glorious  body,"  and  the  sub- 
stance of  the  matter  of  which  it  is  com- 
posed will  not  thereby  be  affected.  That 
the  same  body  which  was  laid  in  the  grave 
shall  arise  out  of  it,  is  the  manifest  doctrine 
of  the  Scriptures. 

99 


403957 


XIV. 

The  resurrection  of  the  saints  is  called  the  manifes- 
tation of  the  sons  cf  God,  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God,  the  adoption,  the  redemption  of  our 
bodies.  It  is  the  grand  jubilee  of  the  Church,  and 
even  of  the  creation.  Till  then  the  former  as  well  as 
the  latter  shall  be  held  under  a  degree  of  bondage,  as 
being  yet  subject  to  the  effects  of  sin.  But  then 
Chrisfs  promise  shall  be  fulfilled,  "/  will  raise  them 
up  at  the  last  day,''''  and  the  deliverance  of  the  saints 
will  be  the  signal  of  that  of  the  creation. 

Andrew  Fuller. 

This  able  writer  continues : 

The  notion  of  an  incorruptible  germ,  or 
that  of  an  original  and  unchangeable  sta- 
men, out  of  which  a  new  and  glorious  body, 
at  the  resurrection,  is  to  spring,  appears  to 
have  been  borrowed  from  the  speculations 
of  some  of  the  Jewish  rabbins,  who  speak 
of  some  such  supposed  part  in  the  human 
frame  under  the  name  Luz,  to  which  they 
ascribe  marvelous  properties  and  from 
which  the  body  was  to  arise.  No  allusion 
loo 


The  Resurrection. 

is,  however,  made  to  any  such  opinion  by 
the  early  fathers  in  their  defenses  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
On  the  contrary,  they  argue  in  such  a  way 
as  to  prove  the  possibiHty  of  the  reunion 
of  the  scattered  parts  of  the  body,  v/hich 
sufficiently  shows  that  the  germ  theory  had 
not  been  resorted  to,  by  Christian  divines 
at  least,  in  order  to  harmonize  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection  with  philosophy.  So 
Justin  ]\Iartyr,  in  a  fragment  of  his  con- 
cerning the  resurrection,  expressly  answers 
the  objection  that  it  is  impossible  for  the 
flesh,  after  a  corruption  and  perfect  dis- 
solution of  all  its  parts,  to  be  united 
together  again,  and  contends  '*that  if  the 
body  be  not  raised  complete,  with  all  its 
integral  parts,  it  would  argue  a  want  of 
power  in  God;"  and  although  some  of  the 
Jews  adopted  the  notion  of  the  germinating 
or  springing  up  of  the  body  from  some  one 
indestructible  part,  yet  the  most  orthodox 
of  their  rabbis  contended  for  the  resur- 
rection of  the  same  body.  So  Maimonides 
says:  "Men,  in  the  same  manner  as  they 

lOI 


The  Resurrection. 

before  lived,  with  the  same  body,  shall  be 
restored  to  life  by  God,  and  sent  into  this 
life  with  the  same  identity;"  and  "that 
nothing  can  properly  be  called  a  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead  but  the  return  of  the  very 
same  soul  into  the  very  same  body  from 
which  it  was  separated." 

This  theory,  under  its  various  forms,  and 
whether  adopted  by  Jews  or  Christians, 
was  designed,  doubtless,  to  render  the  doc- 
trine of  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  less 
difficult  to  conceive,  and  more  acceptable 
to  philosophic  minds;  but,  like  most  other 
attempts  of  the  same  kind  to  bring  down 
the  supernatural  doctrines  of  revelation  to 
the  level  of  our  conceptions,  it  escapes  none 
of  the  original  difficulties  and  involves  it- 
self in  others  far  more  perplexing. 

For  if  by  this  hypothesis  it  was  designed 
to  remove  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  how 
the  scattered  parts  of  one  body  could  be 
preserved  from  becoming  integral  parts  of 
other  bodies,  it  supposes  that  the  constant 
care  of  Providence  is  exerted  to  maintain 
the     incorruptibility     of    those     individual 

I02 


The  Resurrection. 

germs,  or  stamina,  so  as  to  prevent  their 
assimilation  with  each  other.  Now,  if  they 
have  this  by  original  quality,  then  the  same 
quality  may  just  as  easily  be  supposed  to 
appertain  to  every  particle  which  composes 
a  human  body;  so  that,  though  it  be  used 
for  food,  it  shall  not  be  capable  of  assimila- 
tion, in  any  circumstances,  with  another 
human  body.  But  if  these  germs,  or  stam- 
ina, have  not  this  quality  by  their  original 
nature,  they  can  be  prevented  from  assim- 
ilating with  each  other  only  by  that  opera- 
tion of  Gk)d  which  is  present  to  all  his 
works,  and  which  must  always  be  directed 
to  secure  the  execution  of  his  own  ultimate 
designs.  If  this  view  be  adopted,  then,  if 
the  resort  must  at  last  be  to  the  superin- 
tendence of  a  Being  of  infinite  power  and 
wisdom,  there  is  no  greater  difficulty  in 
supposing  that  his  care  to  secure  this  ob- 
ject shall  extend  to  a  million  than  to  a 
thousand  particles  of  matter.  This  is,  in 
fact,  the  true  and  rational  answer  to  the 
objection  that  the  same  piece  of  matter  may 
happen  to  be  a  part  of  two  or  more  bodies, 
103 


Th e  Resu rrection . 

as  in  the  instances  of  men  feeding  upon 
animals  which  have  fed  upon  men,  and 
of  men  feeding  upon  one  another.  The 
question  here  is  one  which  simply  respects 
the  frustrating  of  a  final  purpose  of  the  Al- 
mighty by  an  operation  of  nature.  To  sup- 
pose that  he  cannot  prevent  this  is  to  deny 
his  power;  to  suppose  him  inattentive  to  it 
is  to  suppose  him  indifferent  to  his  own 
designs;  and  to  assume  that  he  employs 
care  to  prevent  it  is  to  assume  nothing 
greater,  nothing  in  fact  so  great  as  many 
instances  of  control  which  are  always  oc- 
curring; as,  for  instance,  the  regulation  of 
the  proportion  of  the  sexes  in  human  births, 
which  cannot  be  attributed  to  chance,  but 
must  either  be  referred  to  superintendence 
or  to  some  original  law. 

Thus  these  theories  afford  no  relief  to 
the  only  real  difficulty  involved  in  the  doc- 
trine, but  leave  the  whole  case  still  to  be 
resolved  into  the  almighty  power  of  God. 
But  they  involve  themselves  in  the  fatal 
objection  that  they  are  plainly  in  opposition 
to  the  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures.     For: 

IQ4 


The  Resurrection. 

1.  There  is  no  resurrection  of  the  body 
on  this  hypothesis,  because  the  germ,  or 
stamina,  can  in  no  good  sense  be  called 
''the  body/'  If  a  finger,  or  even  a  limb, 
is  not  the  body,  much  less  can  these  mi- 
nuter parts  be  entitled  to  this  appellation. 

2.  There  is,  on  these  theories,  no  resur- 
rection at  all.  For  if  the  preserved  part 
be  a  germ,  and  the  analogy  of  germination 
be  adopted,  then  we  have  no  longer  a  res- 
urrection from  death,  but  a  vegetation  from 
a  suspended  principle  of  secret  life.  If  the 
stamina  of  Leibnitz  be  contended  for,  then 
the  body,  into  which  the  soul  enters  at  the 
resurrection,  with  the  exception  of  these 
minute  stamina,  is  provided  for  it  by  the 
addition  and  aggregation  of  new  matter, 
and  we  have  a  creation,  not  a  resurrection. 

3.  If  bodies  in  either  of  these  modes  are 
to  be  framed  for  the  soul  by  the  addition 
of  a  large  mass  of  new  matter,  the  resur- 
rection is  made  substantially  the  same  with 
the  pagan  notion  of  the  metempsychosis; 
and  if  St.  Paul  at  Athens  preached  not 
"Jesus  and  the  resurrection,"  but  Jesus  and 

105 


The  Resurrection. 

a  transmigration  into  a  new  body,  it  will 
be  difficult  to  account  for  his  hearers  scoff- 
ing at  a  doctrine  which  had  received  the 
sanction  of  several  of  their  own  philosophic 
authorities. 

Another  objection  to  the  resurrection  of 
the  body  has  been  drawn  from  the  changes 
of  its  substance  during  life.  The  answer 
to  this  is  that,  allowing  a  frequent  and  total 
change  of  the  substance  of  the  body  (which, 
however,  is  but  a  hypothesis)  to  take 
place,  it  affects  not  the  doctrine  of  Scrip- 
ture, which  is  that  the  body  which  is  laid 
in  the  grave  shall  be  raised  up.  But,  then, 
we  are  told  that  if  our  bodies  have  in  fact 
undergone  successive  changes  during  life, 
the  bodies  in  which  we  have  sinned  or  per- 
formed rewardable  actions  may  not  be,  in 
many  instances,  the  same  bodies  as  those 
which  will  be  actually  rewarded  or  pun- 
ished. We  answer  that  rewards  and  pun- 
ishments have  their  relation  to  the  body 
not  so  much  as  it  is  the  subject,  but  the 
instrument  of  reward  and  punishment.  It 
is  the  soul  only  which  perceives  pain  or 
1 06 


The  Resurrection. 

pleasure,  which  suffers  or  enjoys,  and  is, 
therefore,  the  only  rewardable  subject. 
Were  we,  therefore,  to  admit  such  corporeal 
mutations  as  are  assumed  in  this  objection, 
they  affect  not  the  case  of  our  accountabil- 
ity. The  personal  identity  or  sameness  of 
a  rational  being,  as  Mr.  Locke  has  ob- 
served, consists  in  self-consciousness :  ''By 
this  every  one  is  to  himself  what  he  calls 
self,  without  considering  whether  that  self 
be  continued  in  the  same  or  divers  sub- 
stances. It  was  by  the  same  self,  which  re- 
flects on  an  action  done  many  years  ago, 
that  the  action  was  performed."  If  there 
were  indeed  any  weight  in  this  objection,  it 
would  affect  the  proceedings  of  human 
criminal  courts  in  all  cases  of  offenses  com- 
mitted at  some  distance  of  time;  but  it 
contradicts  the  common  sense  because  it 
contradicts  the  common  consciousness  and 
experience  of  mankind, 
107 


XV. 

JV/io  for  the  first  time  saw  the  little  pendant  coffin 
in  Tvkich  the  insect  lay  entombed  ivould  ever  ^predict 
that  in  a  fetv  iveeks^  perhaps  in  a  few  days  or  hours, 
it  zvotdd  become  one  of  the  most  elegant  and  active 
of  ivinged  insects^  And  ivho  that  contemplates  tvith 
the  mind  of  a  philosopher  this  curious  transformation 
and  knows  that  two  years  before  the  insect  mounts  into 
the  air,  even  "while  it  is  living  in  water,  it  has  the  rudi- 
ment of  wings,  cati  deny  that  the  body  of  a  dead  man 
may  at  some  future  period  be  again  invested  with 
vigor  and  activity  and  soar  to  regions  for  which  some 
latent  organization  may  have  peculiarly  fitted  it  f 

— Dr.  Gregory. 

John  Wesley,  who  has  the  undisputed 
premiership  in  the  great  Methodist  move- 
ment, holds  to  the  doctrine  of  the  resur- 
rection in  an  inflexible  and  scriptural  way. 
In  a  sermon  from  the  fifteenth  chapter 
of  First  Corinthians  he  says : 

The  apostle,  having  in  the  beginning  of 

this  chapter  firmly  settled  the  truth  of  our 

Saviour's     resurrection,     adds:     "Now     if 

Christ  be  preached  that  he  rose  from  the 

1 08 


The  Resurrection. 

dead,  how  say  some  among  you  that  there 
is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead?"  It  cannot 
now  any  longer  seem  impossible  to  you 
that  God  should  raise  the  dead;  since  you 
have  so  plain  an  example  of  it  in  our  Lord, 
who  was  dead  and  is  alive;  and  the  same 
power  which  raised  Christ  must  also  be 
able  to  quicken  our  immortal  bodies. 

"But  some  man  will  say,  How  are  the 
dead  raised  up?  and  with  what  body  do 
they  come?"  How  can  these  things  be? 
How  is  it  possible  that  these  bodies  should 
be  raised  again  and  joined  to  their  several 
souls,  which  many  thousands  of  years  ago 
were  either  buried  in  the  earth  or  swal- 
lowed up  in  the  sea  or  devoured  by  fire? — 
which  have  moldered  into  the  finest  dust, 
that  dust  scattered  over  the  face  of  the 
earth,  dispersed  as  far  as  the  heavens  are 
wide — nay,  which  has  undergone  ten  thou- 
sand changes,  has  fattened  the  earth,  be- 
come the  food  of  other  creatures,  and  these 
again  the  food  of  other  men?  How  is  it 
possible  that  all  these  little  parts,  which 
made  uo  the  body  of  Abraham,  should  be 
109 


The  Resurrection. 

again  ranged  together,  and,  unmixed  with 
the  dust  of  other  bodies,  be  all  placed  in  the 
same  order  and  posture  that  they  were  be- 
fore, so  as  to  make  up  the  very  selfsame 
body  which  his  soul  at  his  death  forsook? 
Ezekiel  was  indeed,  in  a  vision,  set  down 
in  a  valley  full  of  dry  bones,  "and  he 
lieard  a  noise,  and  behold  a  shaking,  and 
the  bones  came  together,  bone  to  his  bone : 
the  sinews  and  the  flesh  came  upon  them, 
and  the  skin  covered  them  above,  and 
breath  came  into  them,  and  they  lived,  and 
stood  upon  their  feet."  This  might  be  in 
a  vision.  But  that  all  this,  and  much  more, 
should  in  time  come  to  pass ;  that  our  bones 
after  they  are  crumbled  into  dust  should 
really  become  living  men ;  that  all  the  little 
parts  whereof  our  bodies  were  made  should 
immediately,  at  a  general  summons,  meet 
again,  and  every  one  challenge  and  possess 
its  own  place,  till  at  last  the  whole  be  per- 
fectly relDuilt — that  this,  I  say,  should  be 
done  is  so  incredible  a  thing  that  we  can- 
not so  much  as  have  any  notion  of  it. 
And  we  may  observe  that  the  Gentiles 
no 


The  Resurrection. 

were  most  displeased  with  this  article  of 
the  Christian  faith.  It  was  one  of  the  last 
things  the  heathens  believed,  and  it  is  to 
this  day  the  chief  objection  to  Christianity. 

It  may  be  proper  to  mention  some  of  the 
reasons  upon  which  this  article  of  our 
faith  is  built. 

The  plain  notion  of  a  resurrection  re- 
quires that  the  selfsame  body  that  died 
should  rise  again.  Nothing  can  be  said  to 
be  raised  again  but  that  very  body  that 
died.  If  God  give  to  our  souls  at  the  last 
day  a  new  body,  this  cannot  be  called  the 
resurrection  of  our  body,  because  that  word 
plainly  implies  the  fresh  production  of  what 
was  before. 

There  are  many  places  of  Scripture  that 
plainly  declare  it.  St.  Paul,  in  the  fifty- 
third  verse  of  this  chapter,  tells  us  that 
'This  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption, 
and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality.** 
Now  by  this  mortal  and  this  corruptible 
can  be  meant  only  that  body  which  we  now 
carry  about  with  us,  and  shall  one  day  lay 
down  in  the  dust. 


The  Resurrection. 

The  mention  which  the  Scripture  makes 
of  the  places  where  the  dead  shall  rise 
further  shows  that  the  same  body  which 
died  shall  rise.  Thus  we  read  in  Daniel: 
"Those  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth 
shall  awake; -some  to  everlasting  life,  and 
some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt/' 
And  we  may  likewise  observe  that  the  very 
phrase  of  sleep  and  awake  implies  that 
when  we  rise  again  from  the  dead  our 
bodies  will  be  as  much  the  same  as  they 
are  when  we  awake  from  sleep.  Thus 
again  our  Lord  affirms:  ''The  hour  is  com- 
ing in  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall 
hear  his  voice  and  shall  come  forth;  they 
that  have  done  good  to  the  resurrection  of 
life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil  to  the  res- 
urrection of  damnation."  (John  v.  28,  29.) 
Now  if  the  same  body  do  not  rise  again, 
what  need  is  there  of  opening  the  graves 
at  the  end  of  the  world?  The  graves  can 
give  up  no  bodies  but  those  which  were 
laid  in  them.  If  we  were  not  to  rise  with 
the  very  same  bodies  that  died,  then  they 
might  rest  forever.     To  this  we  need  only 

112 


The  Resurrection. 

add  that  of  St.  Paul:  "The  Lord  shall 
change  this  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fash- 
ioned like  unto  his  glorious  body."  Now 
this  vile  body  can  be  no  other  than  that 
with  which  we  are  now  clothed,  which  must 
be  restored  to  life  again. 

That  in  all  this  there  is  nothing  incred- 
ible or  impossible,  I  shall  show  by  proving 
these  three  things:  (i)  That  it  is  possible 
for  God  to  keep  and  preserve  unmixed  from 
all  other  bodies  the  particular  dust  into 
which  our  several  bodies  are  dissolved,  and 
can  gather  and  join  it  again,  how  far  so- 
ever dispersed  asunder.  (2)  That  God  can 
form  that  dust  so  gathered  together  into 
the  same  body  it  was  before.  (3)  That 
when  he  hath  formed  this  body  he  can 
enliven  it  with  the  same  soul  that  before 
inhabited  it. 

I.  God  can  distinguish  and  keep  un- 
mixed from  all  other  bodies  the  particular 
dust  into  which  our  several  bodies  are  dis- 
solved, and  can  gather  it  together  and  join 
it  again,  how  far  soever  dispersed  asunder. 
God  is  infinite  both  in  knowledge  and  pow- 
8  113 


The  Resurrection. 

er.  He  knoweth  the  number  of  the  stars, 
and  calleth  them  all  by  their  names;  he 
can  tell  the  number  of  the  sands  on  the 
seashore;  and  is  it  at  all  incredible  that  he 
should  distinctly  know  the  several  particles 
of  dust  into  which  the  bodies  of  men  are 
moldered,  and  plainly  discern  to  whom  they 
belong  and  the  various  changes  they  have 
undergone?  Why  should  it  be  thought 
strange  that  he,  who  at  the  first  formed  us, 
whose  eyes  saw  our  substance  yet  being 
imperfect,  from  whom  we  were  not  hid 
when  we  were  made  in  secret  and  curiously 
wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth, 
should  know  every  part  of  our  bodies  and 
every  particle  of  dust  whereof  we  were 
composed?  The  artist  knows  every  part 
of  the  watch  which  he  frames;  and  if  it 
should  fall  in  pieces,  and  the  various  parts 
of  it  lie  in  the  greatest  disorder  and  con- 
fusion, yet  he  can  soon  gather  them  to- 
gether and  as  easily  distinguish  one  from 
another  as  if  every  one  had  its  particular 
mark.  He  knows  the  use  of  each,  and  can 
readily  give  it  its  proper  place  and  put 
114 


The  Resurrection. 

them  all  exactly  in  the  same  figure  and  or- 
der they  were  before.  And  can  we  think 
that  the  Almighty  Builder  of  the  world, 
whose  workmanship  we  are,  does  not  know 
whereof  we  are  made  or  is  not  acquainted 
with  the  several  parts  of  which  this  earthly 
tabernacle  is  composed?  All  these  lay  in 
one  vast  heap  at  the  creation  till  he  sep- 
arated them  one  from  another  and  framed 
them  into  those  distinct  bodies  whereof 
this  beautiful  world  consists.  And  why 
may  not  the  same  power  collect  the  ruins  of 
our  corrupted  bodies  and  restore  them  to 
their  former  condition?  All  the  parts  into 
which  men's  bodies  are  dissolved,  however 
they  seem  to  us  carelessly  scattered  over 
the  face  of  the  earth,  are  yet  carefully  laid 
up  by  God's  wise  disposal  till  the  day  of 
the  restoration  of  all  things.  They  are  pre- 
served in  the  waters  and  fires,  in  the  birds 
and  beasts,  till  the  last  trumpet  shall  sum- 
mon them  to  their  former  habitation. 

But  say  they:  "It  may  sometimes  hap- 
pen that  several  men's  bodies  may  consist 
of  the  selfsame  matter.     For  the  bodies  of 


The  Resurrection. 

men  are  often  devoured  by  other  animals, 
which  are  eaten  by  other  men.  Nay,  there 
are  nations  which  feed  upon  human  flesh; 
consequently  they  borrow  a  great  part  of 
their  bodies  from  other  men.  And  if  that 
which  was  part  of  one  man's  body  becomes 
afterwards  part  of  another  man's,  how  can 
both  rise  at  the  last  day  with  the  same 
bodies  they  had  before?"  To  this  it  may 
easily  be  replied  that  a  very  small  part  of 
what  is  eaten  turns  to  nourishment;  the  far 
greater  part  goes  away  according  to  the 
order  of  nature.  So  that  it  is  not  at  all 
impossible  for  God,  who  watches  over  and 
governs  all  this,  so  to  order  things  that 
what  is  part  of  one  man's  body,  though 
eaten  by  another,  shall  never  turn  to  his 
nourishment;  or  if  it  does,  that  it  shall 
wear  off  again,  and  sometime  before  his 
death  be  separated  from  him,  so  that  it 
may  remain  in  a  capacity  of  being  restored 
at  the  last  day  to  its  former  owner. 

2.  God  can  form  this  dust,  so  gathered 
together,  into  the  same  body  it  was  before. 
And  that  it  is  possible  all  must  own  who 
Ji6 


The  Resurrection. 

believe  that  God  made  Adam  out  of  the 
dust  of  the  earth.  Therefore  the  bodies 
of  men  being  dust  after  death,  it  is  no  oth- 
er than  it  was  before ;  and  the  same  power 
that  at  the  first  made  it  of  dust  may  as 
easily  remake  it  when  it  is  turned  into  dust 
again.  Nay,  it  is  no  more  wonderful  than 
the  forming  of  a  human  body  in  the  womb, 
which  is  a  thing  we  have  daily  experience 
of,  and  is  doubtless  as  strange  an  instance 
of  divine  power  as  the  resurrection  of  it 
can  possibly  be.  And  were  it  not  so  com- 
mon a  thing,  we  should  be  as  hardly 
brought  to  think  it  possible  that  such  a 
beautiful  fabric  as  the  body  of  man  is,  with 
nerves  and  bones,  flesh  and  veins,  blood, 
and  the  several  other  parts  whereof  it  con- 
sists, should  be  formed,  as  we  know  it  is, 
as  now  we  are,  that  hereafter  it  should  be 
rebuilt  when  it  has  been  crumbled  into  dust. 
Had  we  only  heard  of  the  wonderful  pro- 
duction of  the  bodies  of  men,  we  should 
have  been  as  ready  to  ask:  "How  are  men 
made,  and  with  what  bodies  are  they  born?" 
as  now,  when  we  hear  of  the  resurrection, 
117 


The  Resurrection. 

"How  are  the  dead  raised  up,  and  with 
what  bodies  do  they  come?" 

3.  When  God  hath  raised  this  body,  he 
can  enliven  it  with  the  same  soul  that  in- 
habited it  before.  And  this  we  cannot  pre- 
tend to  say  is  impossible  to  be  done,  for 
it  has  been  done  already.  Our  Saviour 
himself  was  dead,  rose  again,  and  appeared 
alive  to  his  disciples  and  others,  who  had 
lived  with  him  many  years,  and  were  then 
fully  convinced  that  he  was  the  same  per- 
son they  had  seen  die  upon  the  cross. 

Thus  have  I  shown  that  the  resurrection 
of  the  same  body  is  by  no  means  impossible 
to  God.  That  which  he  hath  promised  he 
is  able  also  to  perform  by  that  "mighty 
power  by  which  he  is  able  to  subdue  all 
things  to  himself."  Though,  therefore, 
we  cannot  exactly  tell  the  manner  how  it 
shall  be  done,  yet  this  ought  not  in  the 
least  to  weaken  our  belief  of  this  impor- 
tant article  of  our  faith.  It  is  enough  that  he 
to  whom  all  things  are  possible  hath  passed 
his  word  that  he  will  raise  us  again.  Let 
those  who  presume  to  mock  at  the  glorious 
118 


The  Resurrection* 

hope  of  all  good  men,  and  are  constantly 
raising  objections  against  it,  first  try  their 
skill  upon  the  various  appearances  of  na- 
ture. Let  them  explain  everything  which 
they  see  happen  in  this  world  before  they 
talk  of  the  difficulties  of  explaining  the 
resurrection.  Can  they  tell  me  how  their 
own  bodies  were  fashioned  and  curiously 
wrought?  Can  they  give  me  a  plain  ac- 
count, by  what  orderly  steps  this  glorious, 
stately  structure,  which  discovers  so  much 
workmanship  and  rare  contrivance,  was  at 
first  created?  How  was  the  first  drop  of 
blood  made,  and  how  came  the  heart  and 
veins  and  arteries  to  receive  it?  Of  what 
and  by  what  means  were  the  nerves  and 
fibers  made?  What  fixed  the  little  springs 
in  their  due  places,  and  fitted  them  for  the 
several  uses  for  which  they  now  serve? 
How  was  the  brain  distinguished  from  the 
other  parts  of  the  body  and  filled  with 
spirits  to  move  and  animate  the  whole? 
How  came  the  body  to  be  fenced  with  bones 
and  sinews,  to  be  clothed  with  skin  and 
flesh,  distinguished  into  various  muscles? 
119 


The  Resurrection, 

Let  them  but  answer  these  few  questions 
about  the  mechanism  of  our  own  bodies, 
and  I  will  answer  all  the  difficulties  con- 
cerning the  resurrection  of  them.  But  if 
they  cannot  do  this  without  having  recourse 
to  the  infinite  power  and  wisdom  of  the 
First  Cause,  let  them  know  that  the  same 
power  and  wdsdom  can  reanimate  it  after  it 
is  turned  into  dust,  and  that  there  is  no 
reason  for  our  doubting  concerning  the 
thing  because  there  are  some  circumstances 
belonging  to  it  which  we  cannot  perfectly 
comprehend  or  give  a  distinct  account  of. 
1 20 


XVI. 

[  This  he  \_Paul'\  calls  the  manifestation  of  the  sons 
of  God,  alluding  to  children's  being  brought  forth  to 
the  light  ivhen  they  are  born.  This  was  to  have  its 
highest  fulfillment  at  the  resicrrection^  xvhen  they  shall 
be  born  from  the  grave.  They  themselves,  therefore, 
join  ivith  the  creation  around  thern^  groarmig  -within 
themselves,  'waiting  for  the  most  glorious,  the  ultimate 
and  perfect  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  when  they 
shall  be  born  of  the  grave. — ^Jonathan  Edwards. 

Then  John  Wesley  shows  the  change 
between  the  quaHties  of  the  mortal  and 
glorified  bodies  of  God's  saints.    He  says : 

The  change  which  shall  be  made  in  our 
bodies  at  the  resurrection,  according  to 
the  Scripture  account,  will  consist  chiefly 
in  these  four  things:  (i)  That  our  bodies 
shall  be  raised  immortal  and  incorruptible. 

(2)  That   they   shall   be    raised   in   glory. 

(3)  That  they  shall  be  raised  in  power. 

(4)  That    they   shall    be    raised    spiritual 
bodies. 

I.  The  body  that  we  shall  have  at  the 
121 


The  Resurrection, 

resurrection  shall  be  immortal  and  incor- 
ruptible: 'Tor  this  corruptible  must  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on 
immortality."  Now  these  words  ''immor- 
tal" and  ''incorruptible"  not  only  signify 
that  we  shall  die  no  more  (for  in  that  sense 
the  damned  are  immortal  and  incorrupti- 
ble), but  that  we  shall  be  perfectly  free  from 
all  the  bodily  evils  which  sin  brought  into 
the  world.  That  our  bodies  shall  not  be 
subject  to  sickness  or  pain  or  any  other  in- 
conveniences we  are  daily  exposed  to.  This 
the  Scripture  calls  *'the  redemption  of  our 
bodies,"  the  freeing  them  from  all  their 
maladies.  Were  we  to  receive  them  again, 
subject  to  all  the  frailties  and  miseries 
which  we  are  forced  to  wrestle  with,  I  much 
doubt  whether  a  wise  man,  were  he  left  to 
his  choice,  would  willingly  take  his  again 
— whether  he  would  not  choose  to  let  his 
still  lie  rotting  in  the  grave  rather  than  to 
be  again  chained  to  such  a  cumbersome 
clod  of  earth.  Such  a  resurrection  would 
be,  as  a  wise  heathen  calls  it,  "a  resurrec- 
tion to  another  sleep."    It  would  look  more 

122 


The  Resurrection, 

like  a  redemption  to   death  again   than  a 
resurrection  to  life. 

The  best  thing  we  can  say  of  this  house 
of  earth  is,  That  it  is  a  ruinous  building, 
and  will  not  be  long  before  it  tumbles  into 
dust;  that  it  is  not  our  home  (we  look  for 
another  house,  eternal  in  the  heavens)  ;  that 
we  shall  not  always  be  confined  here,  but 
that  in  a  little  time  we  shall  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  from  this 
burden  of  flesh,  into  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  sons  of  God.  What  frail  things  these 
bodies  of  ours  are !  How  soon  are  they 
disordered !  To  what  a  troop  of  diseases, 
pains,  and  other  infirmities  are  they  con- 
stantly subject!  And  how  does  the  least 
distemper  disturb  our  minds  and  make  life 
itself  a  burden!  Of  how  many  parts  do 
our  bodies  consist !  And  if  one  of  these 
be  disordered,  the  whole  man  suffers.  If 
but  one  of  these  slender  threads  whereof 
our  flesh  is  made  up  be  stretched  beyond 
its  due  proportion,  or  fretted  by  any  sharp 
humor,  or  broken,  what  torment  does  it 
create!  Nay,  when  our  bodies  are  at  the 
123 


The  Resurrection. 

best,  what  pains  do  we  take  to  answer  their 
necessities,  to  provide  for  their  sustenance, 
to  preserve  them  in  health,  and  to  keep 
them  tenantable,  in  some  tolerable  fitness 
for  our  soul's  use.  And  what  time  we  can 
spare  from  our  labor  is  taken  up  in  rest 
and  refreshing  our  jaded  bodies  and  fitting 
them  for  work  again.  How  are  we  forced, 
even  naturally,  into  the  confines  of  death ; 
even  to  cease  to  be ;  at  least  to  pass  so  many 
hours  without  any  useful  or  reasonable 
thoughts,  merely  to  keep  them  in  repair! 
But  our  hope  and  comfort  are  that  we  shall 
shortly  be  delivered  from  this  burden  of 
flesh,  when  "God  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  our  eyes,  and  there  shall  be  no 
more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying, 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain;  for 
the  former  things  are  passed  away."  O 
when  shall  we  arrive  at  that  happy  land 
where  no  complaints  were  ever  heard,  where 
we  shall  all  enjoy  uninterrupted  health  both 
of  body  and  mind,  and  nevermore  be  ex- 
posed to  any  of  those  inconveniences  that 
disturb  our  present  pilgrimage?  When  we 
124 


.  The  Resurrection, 

shall  have  once  passed  from  death  unto 
life,  we  shall  be  eased  of  all  the  trouble- 
some care  of  our  bodies,  which  now  takes 
up  so  much  of  our  time  and  thoughts. 
We  shall  be  set  free  from  all  those  mean 
and  tiresome  labors  which  we  must  now 
undergo  to  support  our  lives.  Yon  robes 
of  light,  with  which  we  shall  be  clothed  at 
the  resurrection  of  the  just,  will  not  stand 
in  need  of  those  careful  provisions  which 
it  is  so  troublesome  to  us  here  either  to 
procure  or  to  be  without.  But  then,  as 
our  Lord  tells  us,  those  who  shall  be  ac- 
counted worthy  to  obtain  that  world  nei- 
ther marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage,  nei- 
ther can  they  die  any  more,  but  they  are 
equal  to  the  angels.  Their  bodies  are 
neither  subject  to  disease,  nor  want  that 
daily  sustenance  which  these  mortal  bodies 
cannot  be  without.  "Meats  for  the  belly, 
and  the  belly  for  meats;  but  God  will  de- 
stroy both  it  and  them."  This  is  that  per- 
fect happiness  which  all  good  men  shall  en- 
joy in  the  other  world:  a  mind  free  from 
all  trouble  and  guilt  in  a  body  free  from  all 
125 


The  Resurrection. 

pains  and  diseases.  Thus  our  mortal  bod- 
ies shall  be  raised  immortal.  They  shall 
not  only  be  always  preserved  from  death 
(for  so  these  might  be,  if  God  pleased), 
but  the  nature  of  them  shall  be  wholly 
changed  so  that  they  shall  not  retain  the 
same  seeds  of  mortality:  they  cannot  die 
any  more. 

2.  Our  bodies  shall  be  raised  in  glory. 
'Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  as  the  sun 
in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."  A  re- 
semblance of  this  we  have  in  the  luster  of 
Moses's  face  when  he  had  conversed  with 
God  on  the  mount.  His  face  shone  so 
bright  that  the  children  of  Israel  were 
afraid  to  come  near  him  till  he  threw  a 
veil  over  it.  And  that  extraordinary  maj- 
esty of  Stephen's  face  seemed  to  be  an  ear- 
nest of  his  glory.  "All  that  sat  in  the 
council,  looking  steadfastly  on  him,  saw 
his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  an- 
gel." How  then,  if  it  shone  so  gloriously 
even  on  earth,  will  it  shine  in  the  other 
world,  when  his  and  the  bodies  of  all  the 
saints  are  made  like  unto  Christ's  glorious 
126 


The  Resurrection, 

body !  How  glorious  the  body  of  Christ  is, 
we  may  guess  from  his  transfiguration. 
St.  Peter,  when  he  saw  this,  when  our 
Lord's  face  shone  as  the  sun  and  his  rai- 
ment became  shining  and  white  as  snow, 
was  so  transported  with  joy  and  admira- 
tion that  he  knew  not  what  he  said.  When 
our  Saviour  discovered  but  a  httle  of  that 
glory  which  he  now  possesses,  and  which 
in  due  time  he  will  impart  to  his  followers, 
yet  that  little  of  it  made  the  place  seem  a 
paradise;  and  the  disciples  thought  that 
they  could  wish  for  nothing  better  than  al- 
ways to  live  in  such  pure  light  and  enjoy 
so  beautiful  a  sight.  *'It  is  good  for  us  to 
be  here:  let  us  make  three  tabernacles." 
Here  let  us  fix  our  abode  forever.  And  if 
they  thought  it  so  happy  only  to  be  present 
with  such  heavenly  bodies  and  to  behold 
them  with  their  eyes,  how  much  happier 
must  it  be  to  dwell  in  such  glorious  man- 
sions and  to  be  themselves  clothed  with  so 
much  brightness ! 

This   excellency  of  our  heavenly  bodies 
will  probably  arise  in  a  great  measure  from 
127 


The  Resurrection. 

the  happiness  of  our  souls.  The  unspeak- 
able joy  that  we  then  shall  feel  will  break 
through  our  bodies  and  shine  forth  in  our 
countenances.  As  the  joy  of  the  soul  even 
in  this  life  has  some  influence  upon  the 
countenance,  by  rendering  it  more  open  and 
cheerful,  so  Solomon  tells  us:  "x\  man's 
wisdom  makes  his  face  to  shine."  Virtue, 
as  it  refines  a  man's  heart,  so  it  makes  his 
very  looks  more  cheerful  and  lively. 

3.  Our  bodies  shall  be  raised  in  power. 
This  expresses  the  sprightliness  of  our 
heavenly  bodies,  the  nimbleness  of  their  mo- 
tion, by  which  they  shall  be  obedient  and 
able  instruments  of  the  soul.  In  this  state 
our  bodies  are  no  better  than  clogs  and 
fetters,  which  confine  and  restrain  the  free- 
dom of  the  soul.  The  corruptible  body 
presses  down  the  soul,  and  the  earthly  tab- 
ernacle weighs  down  the  mind.  Our  dull, 
sluggish,  inactive  bodies  are  often  unable, 
or  backward,  to  obey  the  commands  of  the 
soul.  But  in  the  other  life  "they  that  wait 
upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength; 
they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles, 
128 


The  Resurrection. 

they  shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  thiey 
shall  walk  and  not  famt."  Or,  as  an- 
other expresses  it:  'They  shall  run  to  and 
fro  like  sparks  among  the  stubble."  The 
speed  of  their  motion  shall  be  like  that  of 
devouring  fire  in  stubble,  and  the  height  of 
it  above  the  towering  of  an  eagle ;  for  they 
shall  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  when  he 
comes  to  judgment,  and  mount  up  with  him 
into  the  highest  heaven.  This  earthly 
body  is  slow  and  heavy  in  all  its  motions, 
listless,  and  soon  tired  with  action.  But 
our  heavenly  bodies  shall  be  as  fire,  as 
active  and  as  nimble  as  our  thoughts  are. 

4.  Our  bodies  shall  be  raised  spiritual 
bodies.  Our  spirits  are  now  forced  to 
serve  our  bodies  and  to  attend  their  leisure, 
and  do  greatly  depend  upon  them  for  most 
of  their  actions.  But  our  bodies  shall  then 
wholly  serve  our  spirits  and  minister  to 
them  and  depend  upon  them.  So  that  as 
by  a  natural  body  we  understand  one  fitted 
for  this  lower,  sensible  world,  for  this 
earthly  estate,  so  a  spiritual  body  is  one 
that  is  suited  to  a  spiritual  state,  to  an  in- 
9  129 


The  Resurrection. 

visible  world,  to  the  life  of  angels.  And, 
indeed,  this  is  the  principal  difference  be- 
tween a  mortal  and  a  glorified  body.  This 
flesh  is  the  most  dangerous  enemy  we  have : 
we  therefore  deny  and  renounce  it  in  our 
baptism.  It  constantly  tempts  us  to  evil. 
Every  sense  is  a  snare  to  us.  All  its  lusts 
and  appetites  are  inordinate.  It  is  ungov- 
ernable, and  often  rebels  against  reason. 
The  law  in  our  members  wars  against  the 
law  of  our  mind.  When  the  spirit  is  will- 
ing, the  flesh  is  weak;  so  that  the  best  of 
men  are  forced  to  keep  it  under  and  use  it 
hardly  lest  it  should  betray  them  into  folly 
and  misery.  And  how  does  it  hinder  us  in 
all  our  devotions !  How  soon  does  it  jade 
our  minds  when  employed  on  holy  things! 
How  easily  by  its  enchanting  pleasures  does 
it  divert  them  from  those  noble  exercises! 
But  when  we  have  obtained  the  resurrec- 
tion unto  life,  our  bodies  will  be  spiritual- 
ized, purified,  and  refined  from  their  earth- 
ly grossness.  Then  they  will  be  fit  instru- 
ments for  the  soul  in  all  its  divine  and 
heavenly  employment;  we  shall  not  be 
130 


The  Resurrection. 

weary  of  singing  praises  to  God  through  in- 
finite ages. 

Thus  after  what  little  we  have  been  able 
to  conceive  of  it,  it  sufficiently  appears  that 
a  glorified  body  is  infinitely  more  excellent 
and  desirable  than  this  vile  body. 


XVII. 

The  resurrection  of  the  dead  must  be  admitted  to  be 
a  great  mystery  rvhich  nothing  hut  the  occurrence  of 
the  fact  can  unfold.  The  apostle  f>uts  this  question 
itito  the  mouth  of  an  infidel:  *'Hoiv  are  the  dead  raised 
upf  and  -with  ivhat  body  do  they  come?  "  'which  he  an- 
swers in  a  very  unceremonious  manner:  *'-Thou  fool^ 
that  which  thou  soivest  is  not  quickened^  except  it  die: 
and  that  which  thou  sozuest,  thou  sowest  not  that  body 
that  shall  be^  but  bare  grain^  it  may  chance  of  wheats 
or  of  some  other  grain:  but  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it 
hath  pleased  him,  and  to  every  seed  his  own  bodyT 
The  g'orious  prospect  opened  by  this  doctrine  is  not 
less  animating  because  it  surpasses  our  co7nprehension. 
On  the  contrary^  its  profundity  only  serves  to  increase 
our  astonishment  and  enhance  our  gratitude.  The 
apostle,  in  his  apology  before  Felix,  resolves  the  whole 
into  an  immediate  exertion  of  divine  power.  Why 
should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  that  God  should 
raise  the  dead?  Jf  indeed  the  gospel  profes'ied  to 
teach  the  theory  of  the  fact,  it  rvould  be  a  just  objection 
that  this  was  beyond  the  grasp  of  our  factdties.  Jf,  on 
the  contrary,  it  merely  reveals  facts  and  those  ficts 
have  immediate  practical  bearings  on  the  hearts  and 
lives  of  those  who  receive  them,  all  objections  on  account 
of  their  mysteriousness  are  futile,  because  they  proceed 


The  Resurrection. 

on  the  supi>ositton  that  God  intended  to  develop  the 
whole  mystery^  ivhereas  he  discovers  only  so  much  as 
may  be  adapted  to  rectify  the  conscience  and  purify  the 
heart. — Robert  Hall. 

John  Wesley  concludes  by  practical 
inferences : 

I.  From  what  has  been  said,  we  may 
learn  the  best  way  of  preparing  our- 
selves to  .live  in  those  heavenly  bodies, 
which  is  by  cleansing  ourselves  more  and 
more  from  all  earthly  affections,  and  wean- 
ing ourselves  from  this  body  and  all  the 
pleasures  that  are  peculiar  to  it.  We  should 
begin  in  this  life  to  loosen  the  knot  between 
our  souls  and  this  mortal  flesh;  to  refine 
our  affections,  and  raise  them  from  things 
below  to  things  above;  to  take  off  our 
thoughts  and  disengage  them  from  present 
and  sensible  things,  and  accustom  ourselves 
to  think  of  and  converse  with  things  future 
and  invisible;  that  so  our  souls,  when  they 
leave  this  earthly  body,  may  be  prepared  for 
a  spiritual  one,  as  having  beforehand  tasted 
spiritual  delights  and  being  in  some  degree 
acquainted  with  the  things  which  we  then 
133 


The  Resurrection. 

shall  meet  with.  A  soul  wholly  taken  up 
with  this  earthly  body  is  not  fit  for  the  glo- 
rious mansions  above.  A  sensual  mind  is 
so  wedded  to  bodily  pleasures  that  it  can- 
not enjoy  itself  without  them,  and  it  is  not 
able  to  relish  any  other,  though  infinitely 
to  be  preferred  before  them.  Nay,  such  as 
follow  the  inclinations  of  their  fleshly  appe- 
tites are  so  far  unfit  for  heavenly  joys  that 
they  would  esteem  it  the  greatest  unhappi- 
ness  to  be  clothed  with  a  spiritual  body.  It 
would  be  like  clothing  a  beggar  in  the  robes 
of  a  king.  Such  glorious  bodies  would  be 
uneasy  to  them ;  they  would  not  know  what 
to  do  in  them ;  they  would  be  glad  to  retire 
and  put  on  their  rags  again.  But  when  we 
are  washed  from  the  guilt  of  our  sins,  and 
cleansed  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spir- 
it, by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then 
we  shall  long  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with 
our  exalted  Saviour.  We  shall  be  always 
ready  to  take  wing  for  the  other  world, 
where  we  shall  at  last  have  a  body  suited 
to  our  spiritual  appetites. 

2.  From  hence  we  may  see  how  to  ac- 
134 


The  Resurrection. 

count  for  the  different  degrees  of  glory  in 
the  heavenly  world.  For  although  all  the 
children  of  God  shall  have  glorious  bod- 
ies, yet  the  glory  of  them  all  shall  not  be 
equal.  "As  one  star  differeth  from  another 
star  in  glory,  so  also  is  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead."  They  shall  all  shine  as  stars,  but 
those  who,  by  a  constant  diligence  in  well- 
doing, have  attained  to  a  higher  measure  of 
purity  than  others  shall  shine  more  bright- 
ly than  others.  They  shall  appear  as  more 
glorious  stars.  It  is  certain  that  the  most 
heavenly  bodies  will  be  given  to  the  most 
heavenly  souls;  so  that  this  is  no  little  en- 
couragement to  us  to  make  the  greatest 
progress  we  possibly  can  in  the  knowledge 
and  love-  of  God,  since  the  more  we  are 
weaned  from  the  things  of  the  earth  now 
the  more  glorious  will  our  bodies  be  at  the 
resurrection. 

3.  Let  this  consideration  engage  us  pa- 
tiently to  bear  whatever  troubles  we  may 
be  exercised  with  in  the  present  life.  The 
time  of  our  eternal  redemption  draweth 
nigh.  Let  us  hold  out  a  little  longer,  and 
135 


The  Resurrection. 

all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  our  eyes  and 
we  shall  never  sigh  nor  sorrow  any  more. 
And  how  soon  shall  we  forget  all  we  en- 
dured in  this  earthly  tabernacle,  when  once 
we  are  clothed  with  that  house  which  is 
from  above?  We  are  now  but  on  our  jour- 
ney toward  home,  and  so  must  expect  to 
struggle  with  many  difficulties;  but  it  will 
not  be  long  ere  we  come  to  our  journey's 
end,  and  that  will  make  amends  for  all.  We 
shall  then  be  in  a  quiet  and  safe  harbor, 
out  of  the  reach  of  all  storms  and  dangers. 
We  shall  then  be  at  home  in  cur  Father's 
house,  no  longer  exposed  to  the  incon- 
veniences which,  so  long  as  we  abide  abroad 
in  these  tents,  we  are  subject  to.  And  let 
us  not  forfeit  all  this  happiness  for  want 
of  a  little  more  patience.  Only  let  us  hold 
out  to  the  end,  and  we  shall  receive  an 
abundant  recompense  for  all  the  trouble 
and  uneasiness  of  our  passage,  which  shall 
be  endless  rest  and  peace. 

Let  this  especially  fortify  us  against  the 
fear  of  death ;  it  is  now  disarmed,  and  can 
do  us  no  hurt.     It  divides  us  indeed  from 
136 


The  Resurrection, 

this  body  awhile,  but  it  is  only  that  we 
may  receive  it  again  more  glorious.  As 
God  therefore  said  once  to  Jacob,  'Tear  not 
to  go  down  into  Egypt,  for  I  will  go  down 
with  thee,  and  will  surely  bring  thee  up 
again,"  so  I  may  say  to  all  who  are  born 
of  God,  Fear  not  to  go  down  into  the  grave : 
lay  down  your  heads  in  the  dust;  for  God 
will  certainly  bring  you  up  again,  and  that 
in  a  much  more  glorious  manner.  Only 
"be  ye  steadfast  and  unmovable,  always 
abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,"  and 
then  let  death  prevail  over  and  pull  down 
this  house  of  clay;  since  God  hath  under- 
taken to  rear  it  up  again,  infinitely  more 
beautiful,  strong,  and  useful. 

We  see  how  this  apostle  and  founder  of 
Methodism  held  to  the  Bible  statement  of 
this  vital  and  fundamental  fact.  Had  John 
Wesley  held  the  fact  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  body  by  a  feeble  or  a  lax  tenure, 
then  he  would  neither  have  been  God's 
apostle  nor  the  founder  of  Methodism. 
Wesleyan  Methodism  had  not  been  if  John 
137 


The  Resurrection. 

Wesley  had  gingerly  held  this  essential  and 
indispensable  fact  dissolved  and  disem- 
boweled by  philosophical  admixture  and 
rationalistic  dubiety.  All  his  marvelous  work 
v/ould  not  have  been,  or  gone  glimmer- 
ing— "A  schoolboy's  tale,  the  wonder  of  an 
hour;"  ''Like  a  tale  told  by  an  id"ot;  full 
of  sound  and  fury  signifying  nothing." 

We  have  made  these  extracts  from  men 
of  the  highest  order  of  intellect  and  cul- 
ture of  varied  creeds  of  faith,  yet  essentially 
one.  We  see  that  they  accepted  the  fact  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  body  as  their  gos- 
pel creed,  maintained  it  despite  all  philo- 
sophical objections,  and  heartily  approved 
and  advocated  it. 

We  would  reemphasize  the  fact  that 
there  are  no  new  arguments  nor  stronger 
ones  against  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
than  those  which  the  fathers  had  to  con- 
front, and  they  met  them  with  resolute  and 
strong  faith.  Why  is  this  doctrine  held  so 
feebly  and  with  so  many  qualifications  by 
the  Church  of  this  day?  There  is  no  solu- 
tion of  this  question  to  be  found  outside  of 
13S 


The  Resurrection, 

the  decay  of  that  simple,  spiritual,  strong 
faith  which  dominated  these  men  who  made 
their  times  a  great  spiritual  era. 

These  men  spent  no  time  nor  devices  in 
devising  methods  to  make  it  easy  for  God 
to  seem  to  do  what  he  had  promised  to  do 
and  yet  not  do  it.  By  the  modern  popular 
process  of  tinkering  and  toning  we  get  God 
out  of  the  matter,  and  reduce  the  Christian 
system  to  a  godless  philosophy.  A  resur- 
rection without  God  is  the  point  to  which 
modern  progressive  theology  is  moving.  It 
is  high  time  w^e  had  quit  this  toning  down 
divine  truth  to  answer  the  purposes  of  our 
unfaith  and  bad  philosophy.  This  is  a  poor 
business  for  preachers  or  people  to  be  at — 
this  playing  the  role  of  philosophers,  this 
dwarfing  and  destroying  revelation  to  sat- 
isfy the  limitations  and  blindness  of  reason. 
Let  reason  use  all  its  sanctified  pov/ers  in 
ascertaining  what  God  says,  in  learning  in 
silence,  reverence,  and  meekness  God's 
words — learn  to  obey  revelation,  but  never 
to  sit  in  judgment  on  its  truth,  its  fitness, 
nor  its  facts. 

139 


XVIII. 

We  may  think^  perchance,  that  ive  are  free  to  spec- 
ulate to  prove  historical  credibilities,  to  boast  the  liberty 
of  a  suspended  assent  to  ivhat  seems  all  too  objective 
and  material  for  the  falsely  spiritualizinor  tendencies 
of  the  age  in  vjhich  ive  live.  We  may  think  so  noTv; 
but  ivhen  the  end  draws  near^  "when  sorrozv  breaks  us, 
ivken  age  weakens,  ivhen  darkness  begins  to  close 
around  us,  where  will  all  such  licettse  of  thought  le 
a)td  -what  will  it  avail  us? — Bishop  Ellicott. 

Amid  the  signs  and  transactions  of  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  we  have 
this  statement:  "And  the  graves  were 
opened;  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints 
which  slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the 
graves  after  his  resurrection,  and  went  into 
the  holy  city,  and  appeared  unto  many." 

The  graves  were  opened,  the  bodies  that 
slept  arose  and  came  out  of  their  graves. 
Nothing  could  be  more  explicit;  nothing 
clearer  than  that  this  was  a  literal  resur- 
rection, a  literal  return  to  life  of  the  bodies 
put  in  the  grave.     This  is  the  first  fruit  of 

1^0 


The  Resurrection. 

Christ's  resurrection,  the  pledge  and  sym- 
bol of  ours. 

Christ's  resurrection  was  the  great  pat- 
tern of  ours.  He  said  to  his  disciples :  "Be- 
hold, my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I 
myself,  handle  me  and  see."  He  showed 
them  his  hands  and  side — a  literal  resur- 
rection of  his  pierced,  marred,  and  bleed- 
ing body.  This  is  the  earnest  authority 
and  hope  of  our  resurrection.  We  are  to 
be  raised  from  the  dead,  not  from  a  germ, 
for  this  is  the  fact  paganized.  It  is  not  a 
rehabilitation,  not  a  new  creation,  but  a 
raising  up  again  of  the  same  thing  which 
had  fallen — raised  and  transfigured,  refined, 
glorified,  in  conditions,  relations,  qualities. 
So  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 

Among  the  first  indications  of  heresy  is 
that  about  the  resurrection;  our  going  off 
begins  here.  In  Paul's  masterly  argument 
in  Corinthians  to  refute  these  resurrection 
heretics,  he  sets  forth  the  literal  resurrec- 
tion: the  body  sown  in  weakness,  raised 
in  power;  the  same  body  raised  that  is 
sown.  The  mortal — that  is,  the  dead  body 
141 


The  Resurrection. 

— puts  on  immortality.  The  corruptible 
body  puts  on  incorruption. 

The  dead  are  to  stand  before  God  in 
judgment.  We  are  to  be  judged  for  the 
deeds  done  in  this  body.  This  body  is  a 
partner  in  all  our  doing,  and  it  must  bear 
its  share  in  the  awards  of  that  judgment 
day.  Christ  says  soul  and  body  can  be 
cast  by  God  into  hell.  The  identity,  the 
unity,  and  sameness  follow  through  the 
history  of  eternity.  These  vile  bodies  are 
to  be  changed — not  other  bodies  made,  but 
these  we  bear  and  will  put  in  the  grave 
are  to  feel  the  regenerating  and  transform- 
ing force  of  the  resurrection. 

Daniel  says :  "And  many  of  them  that 
sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake, 
and  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to 
shame  and  everlasting  contempt." 

The  sleepers  are  to  come  forth.  It  is  the 
body  that  sleeps;  the  soul  never  sleeps. 
It  is  that  which  is  sleeping  in  the  dust  of 
the  earth  which  is  to  awake.  The  sleep' 
ers  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  are  to  awake. 
The  body  only  is  sleeping  in  the  dust  of 
142 


The  Resurrection. 

the  earth.  What  could  be  more  specific, 
direct,  than  this  statement? 

Our  Lord  says:  "Marvel  not  at  this:  for 
the  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that 
are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and 
shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  good, 
unto  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that 
have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of 
damnation." 

Here  the  resurrection  is  coming  out  of 
the  grave.  What  have  we  put  in  the 
grave?  These  mortal  bodies — and  that 
which  we  put  in  the  grave  is  to  hear  his 
voice  and  come  out  of  the  grave. 

Paul  puts  the  doctrine  in  a  wholesome 
form  and  very  full  of  comfort:  *'But  I 
would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  breth- 
ren, concerning  them  which  are  asleep,  that 
ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  which  have 
no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him." 

No  refining  in  this  to  meet  the  vicious 
philosophy  of  the  day.  No  surrender  to 
the  higher  rationalistic  and  Sadducean 
H3 


The  Resurrection. 

criticism.  It  is  a  brave  and  tender  state- 
ment of  a  precious  and  divine  truth.  Who 
are  sleeping  in  Christ?  We  know  who! 
We  folded  their  hands  with  tears  and 
kissed  the  lips  and  laid  them  to  sleep  and 
wrote  on  their  tombs  the  words  of  hope 
and  resurrection.  We  did  not  see  their 
spirits  and  could  not  follow  them  in  their 
heavenward  flight,  but  we  did  bear  their 
bodies,  broken-hearted,  and  lay  them  to 
sleep  and  their  forms  are  forever  mir- 
rored on  our  hearts,  and  Christ  shall  bring 
them  back  to  us  out  of  their  graves  and 
out  of  their  sleep  to  our  embrace  and  to  our 
hearts. 

We    sang,    as    we    laid    them    to    sleep, 
"Asleep  in  Jesus."     We  put  it  on  the  mar- 
ble that  marked  their  bed  of  sleep: 
"Asleep   in  Jesus !    Blessed   sleep ! 
From  which  none  ever  wakes  to  weep." 

It  is  out  of  the  grave  they  are  to  come! 
It  is  out  of  the  dust  they  are  to  come!  It 
is  out  of  the  sea  they  are  to  come!  The 
body  is  in  the  grave,  the  body  is  in  the 
dust,  the  body  is  in  the  sea.  The  body,  im- 
144 


The  Resurrection. 

perishable  as  the  spirit,  shall  by  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God  come  out  of  the  grave, 
come  out  of  the  dust,  come  out  of  the  sea. 
Glorious  fact,  mysterious  fact;  but  God, 
God's  Son,  God's  Word  makes  and  solves 
its  mystery.  Faith  holds  to  God,  faith 
holds  to  God's  Son,  faith  holds  to  God's 
Word.  Faith,  almighty  faith,  sees  God, 
sees  the  Son  of  God,  sees  his  word,  laughs 
at  mysteries  and  impossibilities,  and  cries: 
'It  shall  be  done!" 

ID  145 


XIX. 

Patil  felt  in  the  depths  of  his  soul  that  the  life  of 
the  Christian ^  as  it  subsists  in  faith  noiv,  can  only  sub- 
sist in  hope  of  the  future.  Without  this  assumed  vievj 
of  the  future^  the  "whole  Christian  life  appears  in  his 
eyes  as  endeavors  xvithout  an  object^  the  pursuit  of  a 
phantom^  the  sport  of  a  delusion.  For  the  life  of  other 
men  is  directed  to  the  higher  or  lower  aims  "which  are 
to  be  attained  /«  intellectual  purs  uits,  or  in  the  grati- 
fication of  the  senses  and  which  can  be  actually  attained 
on  earth.  But  the  life  of  Christians^  with  all  its  con- 
flicts^ efforts^  and  rettunciations^  refers  to  an  object 
that  has  no  truth,  if  it  be  not  realized  in  the  eternal 
life  of  the  future. — Neander. 

It  is  obvious  that  this  present  body,  not 
in  substance  but  in  quaHties  and  capacity, 
will  not  be  suited  to  the  changed  and  high- 
er conditions  and  employments  of  the  heav- 
enly life.  It  may  not  be  so  obvious,  but 
must  be  equally  true  that  the  revelation  on 
this  point,  if  made  to  us  in  detail,  could  not 
be  understood,  and  so  we  have  the  facts 
stated  in  an  explicit  but  general  way,  that 
these  bodies  are  to  be  changed.  The  great 
146 


The  Resurrection, 

outlines  only  are  given.  It  is  said  with 
force  that  these  bodies  in  their  present 
qualities  will  be  entirely  unsuited  to  the 
changed  relations ;  that  flesh  and  blood  can- 
not inherit  that  happy  state  nor  meet  its 
high  demands. 

Speculations  and  theories,  never  satis- 
factory, are  generally  profitless  in  regard 
to  these  divine  mysteries.  The  Bible  is  the 
only  safe  guide.  We  are  not  to  seek  after 
mysteries  in  God's  Word,  or  marvels,  but 
to  search  out  and  know  the  truth  as  re- 
vealed by  God  in  its  teaching  without  error, 
fancy,  human  opinion,  or  philosophy.  God's 
truth  is  all  we  need  to  know.  It  is  what 
we  ought  to  want  and  earnestly  and  faith- 
fully to  seek. 

God  reveals  to  us  two  distinct  facts  about 
his  purposes  with  our  bodies:  The  first  is 
tlie  raising  of  our  bodies  from  the  grave. 
The  body  is  his  in  its  original  creation:  he 
made  it  fearfully  and  wonderfully.  This 
body  is  sacred  to  God;  sacred  to  God  by 
creation.  God  created  these  bodies.  Out 
of  common  dust  they  were  made,  but  the 
147 


The  Resurrection. 

dust  was  sanctified  and  made  holy  for  God's 
high  purposes.  The  body  is  sacred  to  God, 
for  it  is  his  temple,  as  sacred  and  holier 
than  any  temple  ever  built  to  God:  "Know 
ye  not  that  your  body  is  a  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you?"  The  body 
dedicated  as  a  temple  is  devoted  to  God. 
The  body  holy  to  God  as  a  tempje  is  holy. 
Our  bodies  are  God's  work,  God's  work- 
manship, God's  temple,  God's  property. 
He  owns  these  bodies;  they  are  to  glorify 
him  and  he  will  glorify  them.  The  body 
is  sacred  to  God  because  he  clothed  his 
Son  in  it.  Jesus  wore  this  body  on  earth, 
wears  it  now  in  heaven.  The  body  shares 
in  the  work  of  the  redemption  by  Jesus ;  its 
regeneration  will  come  through  its  resur- 
rection and  glorious  change.  God  sanc- 
tified and  ennobled  it  by  appearing  in  the 
body  to  patriarch  and  prophet.  He  gave  it 
divine  honor  and  clothed  it  with  immortal- 
ity when  he  clothed  his  Son  in  a  body  of 
flesh.  He  gave  the  body  triumph  when  he 
raised  it  from  the  dead  in  the  person  of  his 
Son.  This  body  he  has  declared  he  will 
148 


The  Resurrection. 

raise  from  the  deadly  ravages  of  the  grave. 
The  second  great  purpose  God  has  in  de- 
cree for  the  body  is  that  it  shall  be  so 
changed  as  to  qualify  it  for  and  adapt  it  to 
all  the  highest  enjoyments,  employments, 
pursuits,  and  advantages  of  the  heavenly 
life. 

This  change  so  marvelous  may  be  lik- 
ened to  the  regeneration  of  our  souls.  The 
substance  is  not  changed,  the  identity  and 
sameness  not  destroyed,  but  a  wonderful 
transformation  has  taken  place  in  the  con- 
ditions, relations,  appetencies  of  the  soul. 
The  man  is  the  same,  and  yet  a  new  man; 
old  things  are  passed  away,  and  behold,  all 
things  are  become  new.  This  change 
which  comes  over  the  body  may  be  likened 
to  that  which  comes  over  the  earth  when 
the  deadness  and  coldness  of  winter  give 
way  to  the  life,  beauty,  and  warmth  of 
spring;  it  seems  a  different  world,  so 
changed  from  glory  to  glory,  and  yet  it 
is  the  same,  but  we  see  what  God  can  work. 
The  same  God  who  works  such  regenera- 
ting wonders  in  the  soul,  such  natural  won- 
149 


The  Resurrection, 

ders  in  the  transforming  spring — this  same 
God  shall  awake  these  dead  bodies  from  the 
sleep  and  wreck  of  the  grave  and  regen- 
erate them  into  glories  far  more  abiding 
and  sublime  than  these  which  mark  the 
changing  spring.     Amen!     So  let  it  be! 

We  have  no  adequate  idea  of  the  change ; 
imagination  has  scarcely  a  foundation  on 
which  to  build,  fancy  must  not  be  indulged. 
Our  ordinary  language  and  conceptions  are 
tame  and  cannot  rise  to  the  height  of  this 
mysterious  and  thrilling  fact.  The  Bible 
gives  us  the  model  and  some  outlines.  The 
model  is  the  glorious  body  of  Christ.  The 
model  we  have  never  seen.  Its  picture  was 
shown  to  us  on  the  Mount  of  Transfigura- 
tion, but  we  are  blinded  and  stupefied  by  its 
glory.  The  outlines  of  this  great  change 
which  is  to  come  upon  our  bodies  is  given 
us  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  First  Corin- 
thians. We  there  learn  that  the  change 
will  make  it  a  powerful  body,  not  in  the 
enlargement  of  size,  but  in  the  elements  of 
force,  endurance,  energy.  It  will  have 
neither  inherent  nor  acquired  tendency  to 


The  Resurrection, 

decay;  its  vigor  will  be  unimpaired,  its  en- 
ergy never  relaxed.  Corruption  will  put  on 
incorruption.  Death  will  be  swallowed  up 
in  life.  Dimness,  dishonor,  shame  will  be 
changed  to  glory.  The  change  will  be  from 
a  natural,  earthly  body  to  a  spiritual,  heav- 
enly one.  The  body,  so  the  Bible  teaches 
us,  will  come  out  of  the  grave  changed  into 
immortal  strength,  never  to  know  weari- 
ness, weakness,  tears,  decay,  death,  ready 
for  the  different  and  higher  uses  of  the 
heavenly  life. 

The  change  will  not  be  by  stages  or  pro- 
gressions— no  evolution  in  it — but  in  a  mo- 
ment, in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  when  the 
last  trump  shall  sound.  The  change  will 
be  by  the  immediate  power  of  God,  dis- 
tinct from  the  resurrection  in  fact  and  act, 
but  scarcely  in  time.  This  is  our  faith:  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  by  the  power  of 
God.  We  live  in  this  faith;  we  bury  our 
dead  by  the  light  of  this  hope;  shall  fall 
asleep  ourselves  with  this  blissful  hope  as 
our  winding  sheet. 

»5i 


XX. 

We  a/'e  informed  that  both  Moses  and  Elijah  ap- 
peared also  in  glory! — a  glory  someivhat  similar,  vje 
may  suppose,  though  far  inferior ,  to  that  ivith  -which 
Christ  xvas  invested.  Like  him,  they  ivere  probably 
clothed  in  raiment  of  unusual  ivhiteness  ajid  splendor; 
and  the  form  of  their  countenances  might  also  be 
changed  to  something  brighter  and  more  illustrious. 
No'lV  this  tvould  be  a  Just  representation  of  the  glori- 
fied state  of  saints  in  heaven.  Particular  attestation 
ivas  given  on  the  mount  to  tivo  of  its  principal  doc- 
trines: a  general  resurrection  and  a  day  of  retribu- 
tion.— Bishop  Portkus. 

The  change  will  not  be  in  material  sub- 
stance nor  shape.  Christ  was  of  the  same 
form,  shape,  and  substance  after  his  res- 
urrection as  before,  but  refined,  glorified. 
Xhe  marvelous  change  is  based  simply  on 
the  power  of  God,  who,  out  of  the  same 
substance  and  material,  can  make  so  many 
diverse  things.  Many  most  serious,  perni- 
cious errors  have  had  their  origin  in  the 
failure  to  discriminate  between  the  two — 
the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  its  mirac- 


The  Resurrection, 

ulous  change.  The  error  among  some 
Corinthians  about  the  doctrine  of  the  res- 
urrection seems  to  be  the  modern  idea  that 
this  body,  earthly,  dull,  low,  and  fleshly  in 
its  nature  and  appetences,  was  thereby  un- 
fitted for  the  heavenly  life,  and  would  not 
be  raised.  The  Bible  comes  in  and  says 
it  will  be  changed  and  refined  in  substance 
— not  new,  but  changed  to  meet  changed 
conditions.  The  husband  builds  a  house 
ample  and  well  fitted  to  his  uses  when  first 
married,  family  small;  but  when  the  fam- 
ily enlarges  and  conditions  change,  with 
ample  means  he  does  not  build  a  new  house, 
but  out  of  the  substance  and  material  of 
the  old  he  changes  his  home. 

Paul  avers  God's  ability  to  change  the 
body  by  referring  to  nature  in  seed-sowing. 
The  farmer  in  his  wheat  sows  a  bare  grain ; 
God  is  able  to  take  that  grain  of  wheat  and 
so  alter  it  that  it  comes  out  in  a  blade  and 
stalk — the  body  that  God  chooses  to  give  it. 
Then  God  takes  the  substance — flesh,  mere 
flesh — and  he  changes  some  of  it  into  the 
highest  order  of  flesh,  flesh  of  men;  then 


The  Resurrection. 

he  changes  the  same  substance  into  a  coarser 
fabric,  flesh  of  beasts,  another  flesh  of  fish- 
es, and  another  part  he  fashions  flesh  of 
birds — showing  God's  power  to  endlessly 
diversify  the  same  substance.  Then  God's 
ability  extends  to  make  out  of  the  same 
material  heavenly  bodies  for  heavenly  uses, 
and  earthly  bodies  for  earthly  uses.  Not 
only  does  God's  illimitable  power  extend  to 
diversifying  the  same  flesh  into  various 
kinds,  not  only  does  his  power  enable  him 
to  make  out  of  the  same  substance  bodies 
for  low  earthly  uses  and  also  for  high  heav- 
enly uses;  but  the  power  by  which  he  can 
diversify  and  make  the  same  substance  di- 
verse in  its  glory,  like  the  sun,  moon,  and 
stars,  all  the  same  in  substance  and  form  but 
different  in  glory  by  God's  power.  So  the 
argument  that  God  can  change  the  elements 
and  material  of  this  body  make  it  all  glo- 
rious. So  he  replies  to  the  heterodox  Co- 
rinthian who  in  the  spirit  of  unfaith  asked : 
"How  are  the  dead  raised  up?  and  with 
what  body  do  they  come?"  Raised  up,  says 
Paul,  by  the  power  of  God,  and  changed, 
J  54 


The  Resurrection, 

says  Paul,  to  fit  the  demands  of  the  resur- 
rection Hfe. 

We  have  the  distinct  and  luminous  state- 
ment in  Philippians:  "For  our  citizenship 
is  in  heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  wait  for 
a  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  who  shall 
fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation, 
that  it  may  he  conformed  to  the  body  of 
his  glory,  according  to  the  working  where- 
by he  is  able  even  to  subject  all  things  unto 
himself." 

The  time  of  the  change  will  be  at  the 
second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
"For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from 
heaven,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel  and 
with  the  trump  of  God:  and  the  dead  in 
Christ  shall  rise  first."  And  he  (the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ)  will  fashion  anew  this  body 
of  our  humiliation — the  old  body.  The 
pattern  of  new  fashioning  of  our  bodies 
will  be  his  own  glorious  body,  nothing  high- 
er, nothing  richer,  nothing  diviner,  noth- 
ing more  beautiful  than  the  glorified  body 
of  Jesus.  We  have  in  the  transfiguration 
of  Jesus  a  glance  at  his  glorious  body.  As 
155 


The  Resurrection, 

Trench  says:  "The  transfiguration  has 
ever  been  contemplated  in  the  Church  as  a 
prophecy  of  the  glory  which  the  saints  shall 
have  in  the  resurrection.  As  was  the  body 
of  Christ  on  the  mount,  so  hereafter  shall 
their  bodies  be.  In  passages  out  of  num- 
ber we  have  hints  of  the  luminous  char- 
acter of  the  future  glorified  bodies  of  the 
redeemed.  All  these  scriptures  pointing  to 
the  glorious  conformity  of  their  bodies  then, 
with  all  which  his  body  at  this  time  was, 
who  now  showed  in  himself  as  the  first 
fruits  of  the  new  creation  what  hereafter 
he  would  show  in  all  them  that  were  his." 
How  luminous  his  body  the  night  of  the 
transfiguration !  They  describe  it :  "His 
face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  his  garments 
became  white  as  the  light."  "His  gar- 
ments became  glistering,  exceeding  white; 
so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  whiten  them." 
*'And  as  he  was  praying,  the  fashion  of  his 
countenance  was  altered,  and  his  raiment 
became  white  and  dazzling."  Glory  was 
there!  Moses  and  Elijah  appeared  in 
glory. 


The  Resurrection. 

The  pattern  after  which  our  resurrection 
will  be  found  is  the  glorified  body  of  Christ 
This  is  not  only  hinted  at,  but  distinctly 
asserted  in  the  Bible :  "And  so  it  is  written, 
The  first  man,  Adam,  was  made  a  living 
soul;  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  quicken- 
ing spirit.  Howbeit  that  was  not  first  which 
is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural;  and 
afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual.  The 
first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  the  second 
man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  As  is  the 
earthy,  such  are  they  also  that  are  earthy; 
and  as  is  the  heavenly,  such  are  they  also 
that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we  have  borne 
the  image  of  the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear 
the  image  of  the  heavenly." 


XXI. 

HoTX)  shall  dust  and  ashes  hope  to  ascend  into  the 
heavefi  of  heavens  if  it  cannot  feel  ivith  all  t  he  fullness 
of  conviction  that  One  ivho  was  bone  of  our  bone  and 
ficsh  (f  our  flesh  has  entered  those  realms  before  us 
and  has  taken  up  our  very  nature  glorified  and  beau- 
tified to  the  right  hand  of  the  Everlasting  Father? — 
Bishop  Ellicott. 

The  Bible  declares  that  these  bodies  are 
to  be  changed,  not  other  bodies  made  or 
developed ;  but  these  vile  bodies,  the  earthly 
bodies  which  belonged  to  us,  the  bodies  of 
our  humiliation,  shame,  and  weakness,  are 
to  be  changed  and  fashioned  into  the  form 
of  Christ's  glorious. body.  It  was  Christ's 
same  body,  the  body  pierced  and  dead  on 
the  cross,  the  body  which  slept  in  Joseph's 
tomb  that  was  made  glorious.  So  it  is  to 
be  our  same  body — the  body  which  had 
suffered  the  humiliation — that  is  to  share 
the  glory.  It  is  to  be  accomplished  by  his 
divine  power,  and  at  his  second  coming. 
'5S 


The  Resurrection.. 

This  change  will  follow,  in  point  of  time, 
immediately  after  the  resurrection.  The 
change  will  not  be  secured  by  the  gracious 
effects  of  the  genial  clime  nor  advanced  by 
slow  stages  of  progress.  It  will  be  in- 
stantaneous, the  immediate  act  of  God's 
creative  and  regenerating  power. 

This  will  be  the  hour  of  our  final  tri- 
umph; the  last  enemy,  Death,  will  be  de- 
stroyed, and  no  traces  of  the  ravages  of 
death  nor  the  ruin  of  sin  will  be  left.  Then 
we  will  have  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the 
apostle's  figuring  and  its  results:  "For  I 
reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present 
time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us." 

Then  will  be  realized  the  transmuting 
power  of  God — how  the  dull  and  dreary 
things  of  this  life  can  be  changed  to  jew- 
eled brightness;  how  its  light  afflictions, 
which  pressed  so  wearily  and  heavily  upon 
us,  have  been  working  for  us  a  far  more 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory. 
Then  we  shall  not  see  through  this  earthy 
glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face,  with  full  and 


The  Resurrection. 

unveiled  vision;  then,  in  the  fullness  of 
knowledge  as  well  as  light,  we  shall  know 
even  as  we  are  known.  Then  we  will  real- 
ize how  here,  even  with  the  highest  spiritual 
vision,  eye  did  not  see,  nor  ear  hear,  neither 
did  it  enter  into  the  heart  of  man  to  con- 
ceive of  things  which  God  hath  prepared 
for  them  that  love  him. 

These  are  the  two  glorious  facts  await- 
ing these  bodies — these  bodies  broken  and 
imprisoned  even  in  this  life  and  humbhd 
into  death  and  dust.  They  are  to  be  raised 
from  the  dead,  the  long  sleep  of  death 
is  to  be  broken  by  the  power  of  God  when 
the  archangel's  trump  shall  sound;  but  it 
also  teaches  that  the  body  thus  raised  shall 
undergo  a  change  to  fit  it  for  its  glorious 
resurrection  life.  Paul  declares  to  us  that 
this  change  shall  consist  of  several  partic- 
ulars, which  shall  distinguish  it  from  and 
contrast  it  with  the  present  body,  described 
by  him  thus:  ''It  is  sown  in  corruption;  it 
is  raised  in  incorruption."  Changed  from 
corruption  to  incorruption.  Our  bodies 
now  are  wasted,  wasted  by  sickness,  wasted 
i6o 


The  Resurrection. 

by  age,  wasted  by  care,  wasted  by  toil.  All, 
everything,  mark  it  as  corruptible — its  beau- 
ty fades,  its  strength  decays,  its  life  grows 
feeble  and  feebler.  Our  heavenly  bodies 
will  not  be  subject  to  decay  nor  to  the 
weakness  of  age ;  they  will  not  be  the  heirs 
of  sickness  or  death;  by  them 

"Sickness  and  sorrow,  pain  and  death 
Will  be  felt  and  feared  no  more." 

Sorrow  and  the  labors  of  this  earthly 
life  break  and  mar  the  force  of  this  body 
and  it  wastes  away.  Our  resurrection  body 
will  not  be  affected  by  any  of  these. 

"It  is  sown  in  dishonor;  it  is  raised  in 
glory.''  Dishonor,  ignominy,  disgrace,  the 
grave,  the  dirt,  the  rottenness.  We  bury 
our  dead  out  of  our  sight,  dishonored,  lost 
to  sight,  surrendered  to  darkness,  loneli- 
ness, silence,  to  rottenness,  worm.s,  and  to 
earth,  to  ashes,  to  dust. 

These  bodies  are  dim  and  dishonored 
things,  bodies  of  humiliation,  shame,  and 
suffering;  they  arrest  the  full  flow  of  joy 
and  check  the  rapture  of  the  immortal  spir- 
it. The  transformation  which  they  will  un- 
II  i6i 


The  Resurrection. 

dergo  will  make  them  glorious,  shining  with 
a  splendor  which  outvies  the  sun.  Doubt- 
less they  will  be  luminous  and  attractive, 
shapely  with  symmetry  and  perfect  in  form, 
lustrous  with  an  immortal  life,  radiant  with 
its  deathless  charms. 

Do  we  overstate  the  change:  Raised  in 
glory  f  Glory,  magnificence,  excellence, 
preeminence,  dignity,  grace,  splendor, 
brightness — these  all,  each,  are  in  it.  Christ 
said  of  them :  "They  shall  shine  forth  as  tht 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."  "They 
that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of 
the  firmament;  and  they  that  turn  many  to 
righteousness  as  the  stars  forever  and  ever." 
162 


XXII. 

/  rejoice  in  the  glory  to  be  revealed^  for  it  is  no  un- 
certain glory  ive  look  for.  Our  hope  is  not  hung  upon 
such  an  untwisted  thread  as  I  imagine  sOy  or  it  is 
likely,  but  the  cable  of  the  strong  tow  of  our  fastened 
anchor  is  the  oath  and  promise  of  Him  ivho  is  eternal 
verity.  Our  salvation  is  fastened  with  God's  own 
hand,  with  Chrisfs  ozvn  strength,  to  the  strong  strap 
of  God's  unchangeable  nature. 

Let  us  be  ballasted  with  grace  that  we  be  not  blown 
over  and  that  we  stagger  not.  I  never  believed  till 
noTV  that  there  was  so  much  to  be  found  in  Christ  on 
this  side  of  death  and  heaven.  How  sweet,  how  sweet 
is  our  investment! — Samuel  Rutherford. 

"It  is  sown  in  weakness;  it  is  raised  in 
power."  Our  bodies  in  their  present  form 
are  feeble.  Their  history  is  sown  in  weak- 
ness, frailty  is  the  essential  quality,  their 
greatest  vigor  is  dashed  in  a  moment's  dis* 
ease,  its  manliest  strength  goes  down  to 
childish  feebleness  in  a  day  and  sinks  help- 
less and  nerveless  into  the  grave — ^born  to 
weakness,  as  well  as  to  sorrow,  as  the  sparks 
fly  upward.  The  resurrection  change  will 
163 


The  Resurrection. 

be  into  power.  Energy  will  be  one  of  its 
predominant  features  then,  as  weakness  is 
now — energy,  deathless  energy;  energy  un- 
impaired by  labor,  by  clime,  by  sickness,  or 
death;  energy  without  restraint  or  dimi- 
nution, energy  tireless  in  its  pursuits.  Ex- 
haustless  in  its  flow  of  Hfe  and  spirits,  it  will 
need  no  rest  to  repair,  no  sleep  to  refresh, 
no  recreation  to  recover  waste;  it  will  feel 
no  faintness  nor  fatigue  by  the  strongest 
pressure,  severest  tension,  and  most  engag- 
ing employments.  They  will  serve  God 
day  and  night,  as  the  outflow  of  a  vigor 
which  is  sustained  without  pain  or  weari- 
ness through  all  the  midday  hours  of  that 
nightless  land. 

Weariness,  weakness,  waste  are  here. 
The  heavenly  bodies  will  be  strength  un- 
abated, vigor  unworn,  life  unweakened;  no 
age  to  its  youth,  no  sickness  to  its  health, 
no  fatigue  to  its  toil,  no  night  to  its  day. 
Energy  unabated,  power  unlimited,  strength 
unimpaired,  vigor  unweakened — these  will 
characterize  our  heavenly  bodies. 

'Tt  is  sown  a  natural  body;  it  is  raised  a 
164 


The  Resurrection. 

spiritual  body."  Natural,  our  present 
bodies  are  akin  to  the  brutes  and  in  com- 
mon with  them — subject  to  appetite  and 
passion,  not  actuated  by  the  higher  part 
of  our  being.  The  spiritual  body  will  be 
lifted  above  appetite,  passion,  fitted  for  the 
uses  and  as  the  vehicle  of  the  immortal  part 
of  man  which  is  akin  to  God,  and  all  its 
being,  uses,  and  employment  must  be  after 
God's  high  and  heavenly  designs.  These 
bodies  of  ours  in  their  present  form  are  nat- 
ural bodies,  fitted  for  our  present  uses,  but 
low  and  fleshly  in  their  tastes  and  tenden- 
cies. They  are  but  dragged  unwillingly 
into  the  regions  of  the  spiritual  and  heav- 
enly; they  are  truly  of  the  earth  earthy — 
"vile  bodies"  they  are  called  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Philippians.  The  change  will  fit  them 
for  heavenly  and  spiritual  uses;  they  will 
be  the  fitting  agents  for  the  changed,  high, 
happy  sphere  into  which  the  resurrection 
life  has  introduced  them.  The  fittest  or- 
gans they  will  be  for  heavenly  activities  and 
heavenly  engagements.  These  earthborn 
and   earth-habituated   bodies   translated   to 

'65 


The  Resurrection. 

heaven  without  change  would  be  unfit  for 
the  engagements  of  that  world,  bewildered 
by  its  brightness,  appalled  by  its  sleepless 
labors.  Smitten  and  overpowered  by  its 
ecstatic  visions,  they  could  not  bear  the 
strain  of  that  life ;  they  could  not  engage  in 
its  worship  nor  meet  the  duties  of  one  hour 
of  heavenly  demands.  Its  change  will  fit  it 
for  the  exchange  of  weakness  for  strength, 
sickness  for  health,  life  for  death,  and  mor- 
tality for  immortality,  earth  for  heaven. 

The  apostle  begins  this  fifteenth  chap- 
ter of  First  Corinthians  to  refute  errors 
about  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  but 
carries  it  on  by  putting  the  doctrine  in  its 
true  and  sublime  attitude,  and  closes  with  a 
lofty  and  triumphant  strain:  **If  there  is  a 
natural  body,  there  is  also  a  spiritual  body. 
So  also  it  is  written.  The  first  man  Adam 
became  a  living  soul.  The  last  Adam  be- 
came a  life-giving  spirit.  Howbeit  that  is 
not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is 
natural;  then  that  which  is  spiritual.  The 
first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy :  the  second 
man  is  of  heaven.  As  is  the  earthy,  such 
i66 


The  Resurrection. 

are  they  also  that  are  earthy :  and  as  is  the 
heavenly,  such  are  they  also  that  are  heav- 
enly. And  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of 
the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of 
the  heavenly.  Now  this  I  say,  brethren, 
that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God;  neither  doth  corruption  in- 
herit incorruption.  Behold,  I  tell  you  a 
mystery:  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we 
shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump :  for 
the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall 
be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be 
changed.  For  this  corruptible  must  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on 
immortality.  But  when  this  corruptible 
shall  have  put  on  incorruption,  and  this 
mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality,  then 
shall  come  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  writ- 
ten. Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  O 
death,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  O  death,  where 
is  thy  sting?  The  sting  of  death  is  sin ;  and 
the  power  of  sin  is  the  law:  but  thanks  be 
to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Wherefore,  my 
167 


The  Resurrection. 

beloved  brethren,  be  ye  steadfast,  unmov- 
able,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  your  la- 
bor is  not  vain  in  the  Lord." 

Here  the  apostle  includes  in  this  great 
change  those  who  are  living  when  Christ 
shall  come.  Though  they  do  not  die,  they 
will  be  changed — that  is,  those  who  are 
Christs's.  In  a  moment,  quicker  than 
thought,  the  work  will  be  wrought;  the 
change  not  in  substance  but  in  quality.  At 
that  time,  the  bodies  of  the  dead  in  every 
particle  rescued  from  the  grave  and  changed 
to  incorruption,  the  triumph  will  be  com- 
plete. Then,  and  not  till  then,  our  raptur- 
ous and  victorious  song  will  be  sung,  and 
the  prophecy  fulfilled. 
i68 


XXIII. 

Believe  me,  I  find  heaven  a  city  hard  to  be  won. 
The  righteous  ivill  scarcely  he  saved.  Make  sure  to 
yourself  that  ye  are  above  ordinary  ^professions. 

Salvation y  salvation  is  our  only  one  necessary  thing. 
Be  greedy  of  grace.  Remember  that  judgment  and 
eternity  are  before  you.  Let  this  be  your  desire,  let 
your  thoughts  divell  much  on  that  blessedness  which 
abideth  you  in  the  other  world. 

— Samuel  Rutherford. 

Solicit  heaven^  then,  that  thou  may  est  be  strengthened 
with  all  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the  i^mer  man.  In  that 
thy  strength  is  so  little  and  the  service  so  great,  ply 
Heaven  the  harder  and  fetch  dovjn  a  daily  influx  of 
divine  help.  Run  to  Him  in  every  difficulty,  and  repose 
thyself  on  Him  in  every  duty.  Draw  strength  from 
Him  that  thou  mayest  declare  His  sufficiency.  Blessed 
is  the  man,  O  Lord,  whose  strength  is  in  thee. 

— Alleine. 

The  future  of  man  will  be  divinely  glo- 
rious and  divinely  illustrious.  He  is  to 
share  the  place  of  Jesus,  where  Jesus  and 
his  followers  are  to  be.  This  is  the  spe- 
cific teaching  of  Jesus.  "I  go  to  prepare  a 
169 


The  Resurrection. 

place  for  you,"  said  Jesus;  *'and  if  I  go 
and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  come  again, 
and  will  receive  you  unto  myself;  that 
where  I  am,  there  ye  may  he  also."  In 
his  sacerdotal  prayer  Jesus  said:  "Father, 
that  which  thou  hast  given  me,  I  will  that, 
where  I  am,  they  also  may  be  with  me ;  that 
they  may  behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast 
given  me."  The  statement  in  the  Apoc- 
alypse is  very  exalted,  very  strong,  and 
very  clear :  "He  that  overcometh,  I  will  give 
to  him  to  sit  down  with  me  in  my  throne, 
as  I  also  overcame,  and  sat  down  with  my 
Father  in  his  throne." 

Jesus  must  have  the  place  of  greatest 
dignity,  of  highest  honor  in  the  universe. 
God  has  awarded  this  to  him  without  ques- 
tion or  limitation — a  name  above  every 
name,  a  place  above  every  place.  Jesus 
calls  it  paradise,  a  place  of  ineffable  beauty, 
God-adorned  and  exuberant  in  its  divine 
embellishments — untold  beauty  to  fasci- 
nate the  eye  and  ravish  and  intoxicate  the 
heart.  The  divine  word  is  that  Jesus  will 
shepherd  all  the  blessed  flock  of  that  thrice- 
170 


The  Resurrection. 

blessed  land.  With  them  Jesus  will  be, 
and  for  them  Jesus  will  be.  The  honor, 
dignity,  power,  and  glory  bestowed  on  him 
will  be  theirs.  They  are  joint  heirs  with 
him  of  all  God's  most  generous  inheritance. 
Rich  indeed,  surpassing  rich,  shall  be  the 
saints  in  that  large,  exhaustless,  immortal 
store. 

"I  am  fully  persuaded  of  this  as  of  a 
most  necessary  and  infallible  truth:  that  as 
it  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die,  so 
it  is  determined  that  all  men  shall  rise  from 
death,  that  the  souls  separated  from  our 
bodies  are  in  the  hands  of  God  and  live, 
that  the  bodies  dissolved  into  dust  or  scat- 
tered into  ashes  shall  be  recollected  in  them- 
selves and  reunited  to  their  souls,  that  the 
same  flesh  which  lived  before  shall  be  re- 
vived, that  the  same  numerical  bodies 
which  did  fall  shall  rise,  that  this  resusci- 
tation shall  be  universal,  no  man  excepted, 
no  flesh  left  in  the  grave,  that  all  the  just 
shall  be  raised  to  a  resurrection  of  life, 
and  all  the  unjust  to  a  resurrection  of 
damnation;  that  this  shall  be  performed  at 
171 


The  Resurrection, 

the  last  day  when  the  trump  shall  sound, 
and  this  I  believe  the  resurrection  of  the 
body." 

With  what  acclamations  will  saints,  ris- 
ing from  the  dead,  applaud  the  Redeemer! 
How  will  the  heaven  of  heavens  resound  his 
praises  forever!  ''Thanks  be  to  God"  will 
be  the  burden  of  their  song ;  and  angels  will 
join  in  the  chorus  and  declare  their  con- 
sent with  a  loud  Amen  !  Hallelujah  ! 
172 


^v 


.■y» 


K?h 


