ma 


5^   HH/UJ,  iA^A^AjLtAJi  ylu 


1-  7 


/afo. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/biblebritishmuseOOhabeiala 


BLE 


LOJJDON 


■(  -hv 


if  V—' — V 


L 


THE  BIBLE  AND  THE 
BRITISH    MUSEUM 


BY 

ADA    R.    HABERSHON 

author  of 

'the  study  of  the  parables,"  "the  study  of  the  types,' 

'  outline  studies  of  the  tabernacle,"  etc. 


WITH   A   PREFACE   BY 
SIR   ROBERT    ANDERSON,  K.C.B.,  LL.D. 


MORGAN    &    SCOTT    Ltd. 

(Office  of  '"^ht  Christian") 
12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS 
LONDON  MCMIX 


WHY    AND    WHAT 

AT 

THE    BRITISH    MUSEUM 

BY 

LETTICE    BELL 

Author  of 

"tabernacle  talks  with  little  people," 

"  go-to-bed  stories,"  etc. 

For  the  big  family  of  little 
**Why^s''  who  have  been — 
are  going — and  cannot  go  to 
THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM 

With  a  Preface  by 
Rev.  G.  CAMPBELL  MORGAN.  D.D. 

Attractively  bound  in  Cloth,  with  Cover  Design 
by  John  Hassall,  la.  6d.  net 

MORGAN  &  SCOTT  LTD. 
12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  London 


PREFACE 

Sir  Robert  Anderson,  K.C.B.,  LL.D. 

My  friend,  the  author  of  The  Bible  and  the  British 
Museum,  has  asked  me  for  a  few  words  by  way  of 
preface,  and  I  gladly  respond.  For  I  deem  it  both  a 
pleasure  and  a  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  identify  myself 
with  her  book.  I  have  read  it  with  very  great  interest, 
and  I  hope  to  have  it  as  my  companion  in  future  visits 
to  the  great  Bloomsbury  treasure-house. 

But  its  chief  value  will  not  be  as  a  guide-book  to 
the  Museum,  but  as  a  handbook  to  the  Bible.  The 
avowed  aim  of  the  sham  "Higher  Criticism"  is  to  get 
rid  of  the  miraculous — that  is,  of  the  Divine  element  in 
Scripture.  And  in  furtherance  of  this  aim  no  effort  has 
been  spared  to  shake  confidence  in  its  historical  accuracy. 
The  book  has  yet  to  be  written  which  wiU  record  in 
detail  the  struggle  by  which  the  assailants  of  the  Bible 
have  been  driven  out  of  one  position  after  another  by 
the  discoveries  of  archaeology;  but  the  present  volume 
marks  out  the  lines  on  which  that  magnum  opus  will 
be  framed. 


iv .  PREFACE 

Even  Nebuchadnezzar  was  at  one  time  regarded  as 
a  myth.  And  it  seems  but  yesterday  that  Amraphel 
(the  Hammurabi  of  the  Inscriptions)  was  rescued  from 
that  same  category.  But  these  famous  kings  of  ancient 
Babylon  now  stand  out  among  the  greatest  figures  of 
ancient  history.  And  thus  one  after  another  of  "the 
assured  results"  of  modern  criticism  is  destroyed  by 
the  spade  of  the  explorer. 

But  Miss  Habershon's  book  is  fitted  not  merely  to 
confirm  the  faith  of  waverers,  but  to  make  the  Bible 
more  interesting  to  all  who  prize  it  as  the  Word  of 
God;  and  it  will,  I  doubt  not,  be  warmly  welcomed  and 
widely  read. 


INTRODUCTION 

A  LABOURING  man  had  come  up  from  the  country  for  a 
holiday  in  London.  He  seemed  strong  and  active,  though 
his  hair  was  grey ;  and  standing  in  the  Eoman  Gallery,  he 
looked  wonderingly  at  the  long  line  of  statues  and  busts 
of  the  Eoman  Emperors.  As  I  pointed  out  one  and  another 
to  a  friend  with  me,  he  stepped  forward  and  said,  "  Have 
they  got  Julius  Caesar  here  ? "  I  at  once  told  him  that  the 
bust  stood  at  the  end  of  the  gallery  {Frontispiece),  and 
he  walked  towards  it,  but  soon  came  back  again,  evidently 
not  quite  satisfied.     I  asked  him  if  he  had  found  it. 

"  No,"  he  said, "  I  couldn't  see  him."  So  I  took  the  old 
man  back  to  where  it  stood,  and  pointed  it  out. 

"Is  he  the  one  that  took  Jerusalem?"  he  asked. 

"  Oh  no,"  I  replied,  "  that  was  Titus ;  his  statue  is  up  on 
the  waU." 

He  at  once  placed  himself  in  front  of  the  bracket  on 
which  it  stood,  and  gazed  up  for  some  minutes,  then  went 
to  one  side,  then  to  the  other,  and  examined  the  face  well 
{FroTitispiece). 

"  You  are  interested  in  these  things  ? "  I  inquired. 

"  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  and  now  I  can  tell  folks  when  I  go 
home  that  I've  seen  him.  Which  is  the  one  that  was  alive 
when  Jesus  Christ  was  crucified  ? "  I  soon  showed  him 
Tiberius  Caesar,  and  then  Augustus,  telling  him  how  God 


vi  INTRODUCTION 

had  through  his  means  set  the  whole  Eoman  world  in 
motion,  in  order  that  according  to  prophecy  Christ  might 
be  born  in  Bethlehem.  And  then  I  asked  him  if  he 
knew  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  With  a  bright  satisfied 
look  lighting  up  his  fine  old  face,  he  said,  "  Ah,  yes !  one 
gets  to  know  summat  of  Him  in  a  lifetime." 

There  were  many  things  to  be  seen  in  London,  but 
evidently  the  British  Museum  stood  first  and  foremost  in 
his  estimation,  because  he  could  there  see  portraits  of 
those  about  whom  he  read  in  the  Bible. 

Many  of  us,  like  this  old  countryman,  take  a  keen 
interest  in  being  able  to  look  on  the  sculptured  features  of 
the  very  men  whose  names  are  familiar  to  us  through  our 
study  of  Scripture,  or  in  gazing  at  the  monuments  executed 
at  their  command. 

What  a  fascination  there  is  in  actually  looking  at  the 
very  objects  upon  which  the  eyes  of  the  Apostle  Paul  rested, 
or  in  standing  before  the  colossal  Egyptian  statues  under 
whose  shadow  the  patriarchs  themselves  stood. 

Bible  students  in  the  British  Museum  have  two  special 
requirements.  First,  they  need  help  in  finding  the  objects 
which  are  of  most  interest,  and  second,  they  want  to  be  able 
to  look  at  the  passages  of  Scripture  illustrated  by  the  monu- 
ments. In  this  volume  an  endeavour  is  made  to  meet  these 
two  requirements. 

Those  who  visit  our  national  storehouse  of  antiquities 
for  the  first  time  scarcely  know  where  to  begin.  With 
guide-book  in  hand  they  go  round  gallery  after  gallery, 
looking  for  the  objects  bearing  upon  Bible  history;  and 
long  before  they  have  discovered  them  all,  their  time  has 
gone. 


INTRODUCTION  vii 

We  need  to  make  a  selection  out  of  the  various  depart- 
ments, looking  at  a  few  things  in  one  gallery,  and  then 
passing  on  to  another  section.  By  means  of  the  illustrations, 
reproduced  from  beautiful  photographs  taken  specially  to 
illustrate  this  volume,  it  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  found  quite 
easy  to  find  most  of  the  objects  mentioned,  and  even  those 
who  cannot  visit  the  Museum  will  be  able  to  follow  us  in 
our  walk  through  the  collections. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  look  at  passage  after  passage 
of  Scripture  in  the  galleries  themselves,  and  to  turn  over 
the  pages  of  the  Bible  when  standing  in  front  of  the 
monuments.  A  notebook  in  which  all  the  passages  had 
been  carefully  collected  has  for  many  years  been  found 
invaluable,  when  again  and  again  little  companies  of 
Bible  students  have  walked  round  the  galleries  listening 
to  the  words  of  Scripture,  which  seemed  to  have  new 
meaning  when  studied  with  British  Museimi  commentaries. 

It  was  at  the  very  earnest  request  of  several  members 
of  such  parties  that  these  gallery  talks  have  been  pre- 
pared for  publication.  Additions  have  been  made,  so  as 
to  include  more  objects  than  can  be  seen  in  one  visit. 

The  last  two  chapters,  although  they  do  not  deal  with 
things  actually  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  are  on  subjects 
which  should  be  of  very  keen  interest  to  every  lover  of 
the  Word.  The  history  of  the  Book  itself  is  illustrated 
in  a  most  complete  series  of  MSS.  and  books  in  the 
libraries;  and  the  centuries  of  "Church  History,"  since 
the  days  of  the  Apostles,  are  in  a  wonderful  way 
represented  in  this  priceless  collection. 

"Church  History"  is  too  little  studied  in  these  days, 
but  here  we  can  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  whole 


viii  INTRODUCTION 

as  it  is  unfolded  page  by  page  before  our  eyes.  It  is 
well  to  remind  ourselves  of  what  our  fathers  suffered  in 
order  to  win  for  us  the  religious  freedom  which  we 
enjoy. 

My  debt  of  gratitude  to  Sir  Eobert  Anderson  is  very 
large,  not  only  for  the  Preface  which  he  has  so  kindly 
written,  but  for  all  the  inspiration  and  help  received 
from  his  books  and  his  teaching. 

I  would  also  express  my  grateful  thanks  to  Rev. 
John  Tuckwell,  M.R.A.S.,  for  having  most  kindly  read 
through  the  manuscript  of  this  book;  and  to  several  of 
the  officials  in  the  British  Museum  for  answering  questions 
as  to  the  verification  of  facts,  and  for  directing  me  to 
some  of  the  best  authorities  to  be  consulted. 

Those  who  wish  to  know  more  of  the  ancient  empires 
referred  to  in  this  little  volume,  cannot  do  better  than 
study  the  valuable  Guide  Books  of  the  various  departments 
to  which  I  am  greatly  indebted. 

This  book  is  sent  forth  with  the  prayer  that  it  may 
be  used  of  God  on  behalf  of  the  truth  and  for  the  help 
of  His  children,  that  interest  may  be  stirred,  that  study 
of  the  Bible  may  be  encouraged,  that  faith  may  be 
strengthened,  and  that  thus  He  Himself  may  be  glorified. 

A.  R.  H. 

27  Devonshire  Street, 
Portland  Place,  W. 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  THE  ROMAN  GALLERY  (FrorUispiece) : 

Julius  Ccesar  —  Augustus  —  Tiberius  — 
Caligula  —  Nero  —  "I  appeal  unto 
Ccesar  " — Titus — Domitian — The  Apostle 
John — Trajan  and  IgnMius — Hadrian — 
Antoninus  Pius  and  Polyearp — Marcus 
Aurelius  —  Severus  —  Contrast  between 
Church  History  under  the  Ccesars  and  in 
the  days  of  Us  temporal  power  .        .        .       1-8 

//.  THE  EPHESUS  ROOM  {Plate  IL): 

The  Virgin  and  Child — Th^  Temple  of 
IHana — Paul's  visit  to  Ephesus — A  holy 
temple  unto  the  Loi'd — Alexander  the 
Great 9-12 

///.  THE  ELGIN  GALLERY  (Plate  III.)  : 

The  Parthenon  at  Athens — Paul  on  Mars' 

Hill 13-15 

IV.  THE  HITTITE  SECTION  (Plate  IV): 

The  great  world-powers — The  Hittites  traced 
through  tJie  Bible     .....  16-18 

V  THE  NIMROUD  CENTRAL  SALOON: 

Seven  Assyrian  monarchs — Shalmaneser's 
movA)lith — Ahoib  and  Benhadad — The 
Black   Obelisk — Jehu's  tribute — Hazael — 


X  CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

Tiglath-Pileser  or  Pul — Ahaz  tribute — 
Menahem — Captivity  of  the  tribes  east  of 
the  Jordan — The  great  bulls  and  lions — 
Logon — Sacred  trees — Ashur  fighting  for 
his  people 19-24 

VI.  THE  ASSYRIAN  SALOON  AND  BASE- 
MENT: 
Sennacherib  before  Lachish  —  Hezehiah's 
tribute — EzeJciel  xxiii.  12-15 — Lion  hunt 
— "The  great  and  noble  Asnapper" 
—  Shamash  -  shum  -  uMn  —  Susa  —  The 
Elamite  invasion  of  Erech  and  Ur — 
Esther's  feast —  Wars  in  Elam — Sargon^s 
conquests — Samaria — Judah — Hamath — 
Ashdod — King  Jareb — Baldwdt  gates — 
Jonah — The  marks  of  fire         .         .         .  25-33 

VII.  THE  NINEVEH  GALLERY  {Plate  V.): 

The  mxin  with  the  scrubbing-brush — Senna- 
cherib's building  operations — The  siege 
of  .  .  .  alammu — Ashur-bani-pal's  con- 
quest of  Elam — Table-Case  A,  Creation 
and  Deluge  Tablets — Table-Case  C,  Sargon 
at  Ashdod — Table-Case  D,  The  Eponym 
Canon — Historical  records — Table-Case  E, 
Royal  letters — Bel  and  Nebo — Table-Case  F, 
"  The  Lake  of  Fire"— Table-Case  I,  Shabako 
or  So 34-49 

VIII.  THE  EGYPTIAN  ROOMS: 

The  mummies  —  Jacob's  burial  —  Joseph's 
mummy — TJie  gods  of  the  Egyptians — 
Early     Christianity    in     Egypt — Coptic 


CONTENTS  xi 

CHAP.  PAGE 

ifiscriptions— Gnostic  inscriptions — Mark 
the  Evaifigelist — Egyptian  bricks — "  Jewels 
of  gold  and  jewels  of  silver" — Shishak,  So, 
Tirhakah  and  Necho        ....  50-56 

IX.  BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  BOOM 
{Plate  ri): 
Khammurabi's  code — Gen.xiv. —  Ur  and  Erech 
— Eri-aku  or  Arioch — Kudur-mabuk — 
Remote  records — Sargon  of  Agade — Table- 
Case  A,  Tablets  and  envelopes — Jeremiah 
xxxii. — Boundary  stones — Assyrian  bricks 
— Nebuchadnezzar's  building  operations — 
Babylon  to  be  rebuilt — Shushan  the  palace 
— The  Behistun  Rock  inscription —  Weights 
and  measures — The  handwriting  on  the 
Wall — The  sentinel's  skull — Hebrew  in^ 
scriptioTis — Table-Case  F,  The  Tell  el- 
Amarna  tablets — Table-Case  D,  Cylinder 
seals — Records  of  Tiglath-Pileser — Sargon 
—  Table-Case  E,  Khammurdbi — Senna- 
cherib's murder — Capture  of  Ecbatana  by 
Nabonidus  —  Ezra  vi.  —  Table-Case  Hy 
Sennacherib's  cylinder — Hezekiah  shut  wp 
like  a  bird  in  a  cage — Annals  of  Esarhaddon 
— Ashur-bani-pal's  wars — Inscription  of 
Shamash-shum-ukin — The  ^ndBahylonian 
Empire — Ndbopolassar —  Nebuchadnezzar 
— Nabonidus  and  Belshazzar — Cyrus  kin^ 
of  Anshan — Harran  and  the  Moon^od — 
Cyrus'  inscription  and  tlie  prophecies — 
The  taking  of  Babylon — Gobryas  or  • 
Darius  the  Mede — EvU-Merodach — The 
accession    year — Neriglissar — Cambyses — 


xii  CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

Darius  Hystaspes  —  Xerxes  —  Artaxerxes 

— Daniel's  "seventy  weeks"     .        .         .  57-84 

X  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  ANTIQUITIES: 
Rin^s — Constantine's  portrait — Glasses  from 
the  Catacombs — Lamps  and  flasks — The 
homage  to  Martyrs — Christianity  and 
mythology  —  Coptic  antiquities  —  The 
Church  of  Abyssinia — The  Greek  Church .  85-88 

XL  FECENICIAN  REMAINS: 

The  Moabite  Stone — Mesha  king  of  Moah — 
The  worship  of  Chemosh — Prophecies 
against  Moab — The  discovery  of  the  Stone 
— The  Siloam  inscription — Hezekiah's 
water-works — The  waters  of  Shiloah.         .  89-93 

XIL  THE  EG  YPTIAN  CALLER  Y  {Plate  VII.) : 
The  Pharaohs  of  the  Bible — Egyptian  and 
Assyrian  monuments — Uncertain  chrono- 
logy— The  Shepherd  Kings — Thothmes  III. 
and  Bameses  II. — Cleopatra's  needle — 
Amenhetep  III.  and  IV. — Rameses  II. — 
Pithom — Menepthah — Seti-Meren-Ptah — 
Shishak — Necho — Hophra — Amasis  II. — 
The  Ptolemies — Ptolemy  Philadelphus  and 
the  Septuagini — Ptolemy  Epiphanes — The 
Rosetta  Stone — Roman  Emperors  in  Egypt 
— Tiberius  Coesar — Days  of  Nero — Diocle- 
tian— Constantinc — Coptic  inscriptions — 
The  Book  of  the  Dead       .        .         .         94-104 

XIII.  HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE  {Plate  VIII.): 

The     Codex     Alexandrinus  —  The     Codex 

Vaticanus — The    Codex   Sinaiticus — The 


CONTENTS  xiii 

CHAP.  PAOE 

earliest  Hebrew  MS. — Palimpsest  MSS. — 
The  Septv/igint — Syrian  Translations — 
Coptic  and  Arabic — Jerome's  Vulgate — 
English  paraphrase — The  Lindis/arne 
Gospels  —  Wycliffe's  Translation  —  The 
King'sLibrary — Syriac  Version — Arabian 
— Armenian — Coptic — Invention  of  print- 
ing— (hdertherg  Press — The  Mazarin  Bible 
— A  French  New  Testament — The  English 
Bible — Tyndale's  New  Testament — Bishop 
Tunstall's  purchase — Miles  Coverdale — 
Matthew's  Bible — Granmer's  Bible — Scotch, 
Irish,  Welsh,  and  American  Translations 

—  The  Authorised  Version — The  treatment 

of  God's  Word         ....        105-115 

XIV.  CEURGH  HISTORY: 

The  Ccesars — The  Bphesus  Boom — Elgin 
Marbles — Egyptian  Booms — Coptic  and 
Gnostic  remains — The  early  Christian 
antiquities — The  Bible  MSS. — Constan- 
tine's  conversion — The  "  Fathers  " —  St. 
Cyprian — Origen — Jerome — St.    Ambrose 

—  Monasteries  —  Lindisfarne  Gospels  — 
Great  seals — >S'^.  Patrick — Bede — Gregory 

—  Augustine's  mission  —  John  —  Ma^na 
Charta  —  Crusades  —  Indulgences  —  Wy- 
dij^e^s  trial — TJie  Reformation — Luther — 
The  Defender  of  the  Faith — Philip  Melan^- 
thon — Erasmus — Calvin  and  Farel — 
Voltaire  —  Charles  V.  —  Philip  and 
Mary — Henry  of  Navarre — Louis  XIV. — 
Henry  VIII — Laiimer,  Ridley,  Cranmer 
— Thomas  Ldd  Cromwell — Edward  VI, — 


xiv  CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

The  Spanish  Armada — Milton —  Wesley — 
King's  Lihrary — Oriental  MSS. — Clement 
of  Rome — Eusebius — The  Koran — Guide 
to  Borne — IndulgenMS — Cranmers  Bible — 
Foxe's  Book  of  Martyrs — Tyndale's  martyr- 
dom— Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress — Boyal 
Bibles 116-134 

XV.  CONCLUSION: 

Proofs  of  the  in^iration  of  the  Bible — The 
uselessness  of  fighting  against  God — Israel, 
the  key  to  the  Bible  and  to  God's  dealings 
with  the  nations — Egypt — Assyria — Baby- 
lon— Cyrus — God  is  faithful  to  His  Word 
—  Nebuchadnezzar's  vision —  Unfulfilled 
prophecy — The  times  of  the  Gentiles — The 
stone  cut  out  without  hands — The  oracles 
of  God — Israel  the  key  to  Church  History 
— Two  "untils" — Balaam's  prophecy — 
Paul's  Doxology      ....       135-142 

INDEX  OF  PASSAGES  OF  SCBIPTUBE 

to  which  reference  is  made      .        .       143-144 

INDEX 145-152 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


THE  ROMAN  GALLERY 

THE  EPHESUS  ROOM 

THE  ELGIN  GALLERY 

THE  NIMROUD   CENTRAL  SALOON 

THE  NINEVEH  GALLERY  . 

THE  BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

THE  EGYPTIAN  GALLERIES 

THE  MANUSCRIPT  SALOON 


I.     Frontispiece 

II. 

9 

ni. 

13 

IV. 

17 

V. 

36 

.       VI. 

67 

VII. 

95 

VIII. 

105 

BRITISH    MUSEUM    GUIDE-BOOKS   TO    WHICH   REFERENCE 

IS   MADE. 


A.  Guide  to  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  Antiquities 


1908 


B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 


„    Third  and  Fourth  Egyptian  Rooms    .         .  1904 

,,    Egyptian  Collections 1909 

,,   Early  Christian  and  Byzantine  Antiquities  1903 

,,   Manuscripts,  Charters,  etc.          ,         .         .  1906 

,,    Printed  Books  in  the  King's  Library  1901 


CHAPTER   I 

THE    ROMAN    GALLERY      (Frontispiece.) 

The  Roman  Gallery,  which  is  so  well  shown  in  our 
frontispiece,  is  on  our  left  as  we  stand  in  the  Entrance 
Hall  of  the  British  Museum,  and  in  our  search  for  the 
objects  which  illustrate  the  Bible,  it  is  convenient  to 
commence  here  before  visiting  the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian 
collections. 

The  busts  in  this  gallery  are  arranged  in  chronological 
order.  Standing  at  the  end  of  the  line  we  see  Julius 
Csesar  (Frontispiece),  ^  whose  conquests  led  him  to  Great 
Britain,  even  before  the  birth  of  Christ.  Next  to  him, 
in  the  comer  of  the  corridor,  there  are  four  representa- 
tions of  Augustus  CsBsar,  b.c.  29  to  a.d.  14,  "And  it 
came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  there  went  out  a  decree 
from  Caesar  Augustus,  that  all  the  world  should  be  taxed."  ^ 
He  did  not  know  that  by  thus  bringing  Joseph  and  Mary 
to  Bethlehem,  he  was  preparing  the  way  for  the  fulfilment 
of  prophecy. 

Next  we  notice  Tiberius,  a.d.  14  to  a.d.  37,  who 
ruled  till  a  few  years  after  the  crucifixion.  "Now  in 
the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Caesar, 
Pontius  Pilate  being  governor  of  Judaea,  and  Herod 
being  tetrarch  of  Galilee.  .  .  ."  ^  The  image  of  Tiberius 
must  have  been   on    the   penny    which    was    handed    to 

*  See  Note  at  end  of  this  chapter. 
-  Luke  2.  1.  »  Luke  3.  1. 

1  I 


2  THE  ROMAN  GALLERY 

the  Lord  Jesus  when  He  was  asked,  "Is  it  lawful 
to  give  tribute  unto  Caesar,  or  not  ?  But  Jesus  per- 
ceived their  wickedness,  and  said.  Why  tempt  ye  Me, 
ye  hypocrites  ?  Show  Me  the  tribute  money.  And 
they  brought  unto  Him  a  penny.  And  He  saith  unto 
them.  Whose  is  this  image  and  superscription  ?  They 
say  unto  Him,  Caesar's.  Then  saith  He  unto  them, 
Bender  therefore  unto  Csesar  the  things  which  are 
Caesar's;  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's." ^ 

When  the  Lord  stood  before  Pilate  it  was  to  Tiberius 
Caesar  that  the  Jews  referred  when  they  "  cried  out 
saying,  If  thou  let  this  Man  go,  thou  art  not  Caesar's 
friend :  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king  speaketh  against 
Caesar  .  .  .  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar."  ^  And  so  to 
prove  that  he  was  "  Caesar's  friend "  Pilate  delivered  the 
King  of  kings  to  be  crucified. 

The  cruel  Caligula,  a.d.  37  to  a.d.  41,  only  reigned 
four  years.  Herod  Agrippa  was  his  friend  and  com- 
panion, and  owed  his  sovereignty  to  him.  This  must 
have  been  the  Caesar  to  whom  Cornelius  gave  allegiance. 
An  equestrian  statue  of  Caligula  stands  between  the 
Entrance  Hall  and  the  Eeading  Koom. 

Claudius  Csesar,  a.d.  41  to  a.d.  54  {Frontispiece), 
is  twice  mentioned  by  name  in  the  Book  of  the  Acts.  It 
was  prophesied  "  that  there  should  be  great  dearth  through- 
out all  the  world:  which  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of 
Claudius  Caesar."  ^  And  when  Paul  came  to  Corinth  he 
"  found  a  certain  Jew  named  Aquila,  born  in  Pontus, 
lately  come  from  Italy  with  his  wife  Priscilla  (because 
that  Claudius  had  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  from 
Rome)."  * 

It  was  of  Nero,  a.d.  54  to  a.d.  68  {Frontispiece),  that  the 

1  Matt.  22.  17-21.  «  John  19.  12,  15. 

'  Acts  11.  28.  *  Acts  18.  2. 


PAUL  BEFORE  NERO  3 

Apostle  Paul  spoke  when  he  said,  "I  appeal  unto  Caesar."^ 
His  true  character  had  not  revealed  itself  in  those  days. 
The  label  on  his  statue  well  describes  him  as  "  the  typical 
example  in  history  of  capricious  and  inordinate  vanity 
combined  with  cruelty."  The  stories  of  his  mad  cruelty, 
which  developed  soon  afterwards,  have  made  him  one  of 
the  most  infamous  and  notorious  of  the  Caesars.  It  was 
truly  a  fiery  trial  through  which  the  Christians  had  to 
pass  in  the  days  of  Nero.  Accused  by  him  of  having  set 
Rome  on  fire,  they  were  themselves  burnt,  the  stakes  being 
erected  in  the  public  gardens  of  Rome,  and  the  martyrs 
saturated  with  inflammable  materials,  so  that  the  blaze 
of  their  burning  lit  up  the  dark  city.  The  Christians 
might  have  comforted  one  another  then,  as  Latimer  at 
the  stake  cheered  Ridley  many  years  afterwards,  with  the 
prophetic  words:  "We  shall  this  day  light  such  a  candle, 
by  God's  grace,  as  I   trust  shall  never  be  put  out." 

Paul's  first  imprisonment  lasted  for  two  years,  and 
he  was  able  to  receive  all  who  came  to  him.^  To  be  a 
Christian  was  not  then  punishable  with  death ;  but  his 
second  imprisonment  must  have  been  much  more  rigorous 
after  the  wholesale  massacres  had  nearly  exterminated 
them.  Onesiphorus,  who  was  not  ashamed  of  Paul's 
chain  when  he  was  in  Rome,  had  to  seek  Paul  out 
"very  diligently"  before  he  succeeded  in  finding  him, 
and  it  was  at  the  risk  of  his  life  that  he  did  so.'  In 
the  same  epistle,  Paul  tells  Timothy  something  about 
his  first  appearance  before  Nero:  "At  my  first  answer 
no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all  men  forsook  me:  .  .  . 
notwithstanding  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened 
me;  .  .  .  and  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
lion."*      It    was    no    private    examination,    for    he    says 

J  Acts  25.  10-12.  a  Acts  28.  30. 

3  2  Tim.  1.  16,  17.  *  2  Tim.  4. 16,  17. 


4  THE  ROMAN  GALLERY 

that  the  strength  was  given  to  him,  in  order  that  by 
him  "the  preaching  might  be  fully  known,  and  that  all 
the  Gentiles  might  hear."  We  shall  never  know  till  the 
Day  shall  declare  it  what  was  the  result  of  that  brave 
testimony  which  he  soon  afterwards  sealed  with  his 
blood. 

The  gospel  had  reached  even  to  "  Cassar's  household." 
Writing  to  the  Philippians  he  could  say,  "All  the  saints 
salute  you,  chiefly  they  that  are  of  Caesar's  household."^ 
Among  the  courtiers  and  attendants  of  the  cruel  Nero 
were  some  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  may  be  that 
it  was  through  the  influence  of  such  well-known  men  as 
Aristobulus  and  Narcissus  that  the  apostle  owed  his 
escape  from  his  first  captivity.  As  we  look  at  the 
sculptured  features  of  the  Caesars,  it  is  well  to  read 
Romans  16,  reminding  us  of  some  of  these  honoured 
Roman  citizens  and  their  households.  "Salute  them 
which  are  of  Aristobulus'  household  (or  friends,  marg.) 
.  .  .  Greet  them  that  be  of  the  household  of  Narcissus 
which  are  in  the  Lord."^  And  we  also  think  of 
"Pudens,  and  Linus,  and  Claudia,"  mentioned  in  the 
Epistle  to  Timothy,^  the  last  of  whom  is  supposed  to 
have  been  a  British  Princess. 

The  Apostle  Paul  is  not  the  only  Bible  character  who  is 
said  to  have  been  martyred  by  Nero  .If  the  well-known 
tradition  is  to  be  believed,  Peter  also  suffered  about 
the  same  time;  and  we  are  told  that  Trophimus,  the 
Ephesian,  after  witnessing  the  martyrdom  of  Paul,  was 
soon  afterwards  beheaded.  In  other  parts  of  the  empire 
others  were  put  to  death;  Erastus  the  chamberlain  of 
Corinth  at  Philippi,  Ananias  at  Damascus,  and  Aristarchus 
the  Macedonian  at  Rome. 

The  bust  of  Titus,  the  son  of  Vespasian,  which 

>  PhiL  4.  22.  2  Rom.  16.  10,  11.  »  2  Tim.  4.  21. 


THE  C.ESARS  5 

stands  on  its  bracket  above  {Frontispiece),  reminds  us 
of  the  tenible  sufferings  of  the  Jews  when  he  besieged 
and  took  Jerusalem.  The  final  destruction  of  the  city 
had  been  foretold;  and  in  the  parable  of  the  marriage 
feast  the  Lord  shows  that  it  was  a  judgment  upon 
the  Jews  for  having  rejected  the  King's  invitation,  and 
for  their  treatment  of  His  servants,  especially  of  the 
greatest  Messenger  that  King  ever  sent.  "When  the 
King  heard  thereof  He  was  wroth:  and  He  sent  forth 
His  armies  and  destroyed  those  murderers  and  burned 
up  their  city."^  He  had  once  called  it  "the  city  of 
the  great  King,"  ^  now  it  is  only  "  their  city,"  but  He  will 
claim  it  again  by  and  by.  He  calls  the  armies  of  Titus 
"His  armies,"  for  they  are  sent  by  Him. 

Domitia  {Frontispiece)  was  the  unhappy  wife  of 
the  cruel  Domitian  who  succeeded  his  brother  Titus. 
Tradition  tells  us  that  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  and 
Simeon  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  were  martyred  under 
Domitian,  and  it  was  probably  he  who  banished  the  beloved 
disciple  to  Patmos.  Under  Nerva  the  banished  Christians 
were  recalled,  and  among  them  the  Apostle  John  returned 
from  Patmos.    He  survived  till  the  reign  of  Trajan. 

It  was  Trajan  who  gave  the  command  to  exterminate 
the  seed  of  David,  and  by  his  order  Ignatius,  the  disciple 
of  John,  having  been  examined  by  him,  was  brought  from 
Antioch  to  Rome,  and  there  thrown  to  the  wild  beasts. 

New  Testament  times  are  covered  by  the  reigns  of 
these  Caesars,  beginning  at  Caesar  Augustus,  the  second 
in  the  line. 

Hadrian  {Frontispiece)  was  not  such  a  systematic  per- 
secutor, but  many  Christians  must  have  suffered  during 
his  reign  in  different  parts  of  the  empire.  Hadrian  is  the 
last  of  the  Caesars  whose  busts  are  shown  in  our  illustration, 

'  Matt.  22.  7.  '  Matt.  5.  35. 


6  THE  ROMAN  GALLERY 

but  the  long  line  of  statues  is  continued  all  down  the 
gallery. 

The  first  of  Justin  Martyr's  famous  Apologies  was 
addressed  to  Antoninus  Pius,  and  the  trial  and  martyr- 
dom of  Polycarp  took  place  during  this  reign  or  that  of 
Marcus  Aurelius.  The  story  of  Polycarp  is  of  special  interest 
in  connection  with  the  epistle  to  the  church  at  Smyrna,^  for 
he  was  the  "  bishop  "  there,  and  reference  is  probably  made 
to  this  persecution.  "Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  in 
Smyrna  write;  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last, 
which  was  dead,  and  is  alive;  I  know  thy  works,  and 
tribulation,  and  poverty  (but  thou  art  rich)  ....  Fear 
none  of  those  things  which  thou  shalt  sufier :  behold  the 
devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be 
tried ;  and  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  days :  be  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." 
It  was  Polycarp  who  made  that  memorable  reply  to  his 
judge  when  offered  freedom  if  he  would  "revile  Christ." 
"  Six  and  eighty  years  have  I  served  Him,  and  He  has  done 
me  nothing  but  good ;  and  how  could  I  revile  Him,  my 
Lord  and  Saviour  ? "  and  so  he  allowed  himself  to  be  led  to 
the  stake. 

Justin  Martyr  suffered  under  Marcus  Aurelius, 
in  whose  reign  the  second  Apology  was  written. 
During  the  reign  of  Conunodus  the  Christians  enjoyed 
peace,  but  the  persecutions  again  broke  out  under 
Septimius  Severus.  Many  were  put  to  death  in 
Africa,  the  most  celebrated  being  Leonidas,  the  father  of 
Origen,  and  the  two  women  Perpetua  and  Felicitas. 
Severus  passed  an  edict  forbidding  conversions,  and 
this  drew  forth  the  eloquence  of  Tertullian,  the  new 
scenes  of  bloodshed  in  Carthage  causing  him  to  write 
several  of  his  famous  tracts.  The  mother  of  Alexander 
'Rev.  2.  8-11. 


THE  CiESARS  7 

Severus,  Julia  MammsBa,  sent  for  Origen,  and  seems 
to  have  heard  from  him  some  of  the  truths  of  the 
gospel. 

Caracalla  was  the  son  of  Septimius  Severus,  and 
is  said  to  have  had  a  Christian  nurse  and  tutor.  The 
story  of  his  cruelties  is  well  known,  especially  the 
massacre  at  Alexandria,  but  there  was  no  general  persecu- 
tion of  Christians,  except  in  some  provinces  where  the 
governors  were  very  cruel.  This  was  the  case  with 
Scapula,  pro-consul  of  Africa,  to  whom  Tertullian  addressed 
his  last  writing. 

The  wives  of  two  of  the  Emperors  are  represented 
in  the  corner  of  this  gallery,  Severa,  the  wife  of  Philip 
the  Elder,  and  the  wife  of  Decius.  PhiUp  was  favour- 
able to  the  Christians,  and  Jerome  goes  so  far  as  to  call 
him  a  Christian.  It  is  known,  however,  that  he  and  his 
wife  Severa  had  been  in  correspondence  with  Origen. 

The  first  great  general  persecution  broke  out  under 
Decius,  but  all  through  most  of  these  reigns  Christians 
were  called  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  the  truth.  The 
edict  of  Nero,  which  made  it  a  capital  crime  to  be  a 
Christian,  remained  unrepealed  even  in  the  days  of 
those  who  may  be  termed  good  emperors,  such  as 
Hadrian,  Antoninus  Pius,  and  Marcus  AureKus.  There 
were  ten  special  periods  of  persecution  between  the  days 
of  Nero  and  Constantine  (a.d.  64-a.d.  312).  Augustine 
gives  the  following  list  of  persecuting  emperors : — Nero, 
Domitian,  Trajan,  Marcus  Aurelius,  Septimius  Severus, 
Maximin,  Decius,  Valerian,  Aurelian,  and  Diocletian. 

As  we  look  along  this  line  of  Caesars,  and  try  to 
picture  the  opening  scenes  of  Church  History,  we  see 
the  persecutors  on  their  pedestals  and  the  Church  of 
God  trodden  under  their  feet.  An  extraordinary  change 
has  taken  place  in  its  history  when  we  cross  the  Entrance 


8  THE  ROMAN  GALLERY 

Hall  and  go  into  the  Manuscript  Saloon  and  King's  Library: 
there  we  are  surrounded  with  evidences  of  a  wealthy 
organisation.  The  temporal  power  has  passed  into  the 
hands  of  a  corrupt  church.  Costly  books,  beautifully 
illustrated,  tell  of  wealthy  monasteries;  charters  granted  by 
and  to  abbots  tell  of  the  land  being  in  their  possession, 
and  now  it  is  the  "  Church "  that  has  climbed  on  to 
the  pedestal  of  power,  and  in  its  turn  is  persecuting  the 
followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "In  the  days  of  Pagan 
Rome  the  Church  was  on  the  side  of  the  martyrs.  But 
under  Papal  Rome  the  martyrs  were  the  victims  of 
'the  Church.'"! 

"What  has  happened  to  bring  about  this  great  change  ? 
In  which  period  is  the  Church's  history  most  in  accordance 
with  the  mind  and  purpose  of  the  great  Head  of  the 
Church  ?  In  the  days  represented  chronologically  by  the 
portraits  in  the  Roman  Gallery,  or  in  the  times  which 
brought  forth  the  various  manuscripts  and  documents  of 
the  Libraries  ?  2 


1  Sir  Robert  Anderson,  K.C.B.,  LL.D.,  in  The  Bible  or  the  Church? 
^  For  further  illustrations  of  Church  History,  see  chap,  xiv,  p.  116. 


Note. —  WTiile  these  pages  have  been  in  the  Press  two 
important  additions  have  been  made  to  the  row  of  "  Ccesars  " 
shown  in  the  Frontispiece,  viz.  a  bust  of  Vespasiau  and 
another  of  his  son  Titus.  They  are  placed  on  this  side  of 
the  portrait  of  Nero,  Nos.  10  and  11  in  the  line. 


> '.    of    the 
-    •l^^s.s    the    end    of 
we  come  to 


bruise   His  hr- 


lilSJij   ohje.. 


«      JUUfcxi 


i  i         i 


\ 


# 


M 


_J 


CHAPTER    II 

THE  EPHESUS   ROOM  (Plate  II.) 

Passing  through  the  doorway  at  the  end  of  the 
Roman  Gallery  (Frontispiece)  and  across  the  end  of 
the  Egyptian  Gallery  (Plate  VII.,  p.  95),  we  come  to 
the  Ephesus  Room  (Plate  II.)  where  are  shown 
the  remains  of  the  great  Temple  of  Diana  at 
Ephesus. 

But  first  we  may  notice  in  the  ante-room  a  number 
of  Greek  statuettes,  amongst  the  earliest  of  which, 
dating  about  two  or  three  centuries  B.C.,  is  a  repre- 
sentation of  a  Virgin  and  Child.  It  might  easily  be 
mistaken  for  an  image  of  Romish  origin,  and  is  a 
striking  illustration  of  the  fact  that  the  worship  of  a 
Virgin  and  Child  was  prominent  in  many  of  the  heathen 
religions  of  the  world  long  before  our  Lord  Jesus  was 
born  in  Bethlehem.^ 

As  the  germ  of  all  Messianic  prophecy  is  contained 
in  Gen.  8.  15,  so  the  germ  of  all  heathen  mythology  is 
found  there  also.  We  need  not  wonder  that  the  words 
addressed  to  the  serpent  concerning  the  seed  of  the  woman 
were  perverted  by  him.  "  It  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and 
thou  shalt  bruise  His  heeL"  What  a  triumph  for  the 
serpent  (who  is  himself  represented  on  so  many  objects 
in   the   Museum),  when    Christian    truth    became    mixed 

^  See  Rev.  Alexander  Hialop,  in  Thf  Two  Babylons, 
■       9  » 


lo  THE  EPHESUS  ROOM 

with  pagan  mythology,  and  the  worship  of  the  Virgin 
and  Child  was  incorporated  with  the  Christian  religion ! 

In  the  Ephesus  Eoom  we  stand  among  the  ruins  of 
that  very  building  which  the  Apostle  Paul  saw  when 
he  visited  that  city;  and  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the 
Acts  has  a  new  meaning  when  we  read  it  amid  the 
shattered  columns  of  the  great  temple.  Beneath  those 
huge  pillars  the  excited  mob  raged  when  "  the  whole 
city  was  filled  with  confusion,"  and  "all  with  one  voice, 
about  the  space  of  two  hours,  cried  out,  Great  is  Diana 
of  the  Ephesians!"  We  can  almost  hear  the  echo 'of 
their  shouts !  The  story  is  worth  reading  again  in 
presence  of  the  ruins.  "Demetrius,  a  silver-smith  which 
made  silver  shrines  for  Diana,"  called  together  the  crafts- 
men and  workmen,  and  told  them  how  "  almost  throughout 
all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath  persuaded  and  turned  away  much 
people,  saying  that  they  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with 
hands:  so  that  not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  danger  to 
be  set  at  nought;  but  also  that  the  temple  of  the  great 
goddess  Diana  should  be  despised,  and  her  magnificence 
should  be  destroyed,  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world 
worshippeth." 

The  town-clerk  found  it  very  difficult  to  appease  the 
people.  He  thought  there  was  not  the  slightest  danger 
of  the  temple  suffering  from  the  preaching  of  these  men, 
but  he  was  afraid  that  they  themselves  would  get  into 
trouble.  Nero  and  his  governors  might  hear  of  the 
disturbance.  "For  we  are  in  danger  to  be  called  in 
question  for  this  day's  uproar,  there  being  no  cause 
whereby  we  may  give  an  account  of  this  concourse,"  and 
thus  "he  dismissed  the  assembly."^ 

But  Demetrius  was  right  after  all.  The  temple  was 
doomed,    its    magnificence    has    been    destroyed,  and   we 

»  Acts  19.  23-41. 


THE  TEMPLE  OF  DIANA  ii 

can  stand  in  London  in  the  midst  of  the  ruins.  These 
give  some  little  idea  of  the  grandeur  and  vastness  of  the 
building  itself.  A  plan  is  shown  in  the  illustration 
behind  the  sculptured  fragments  (Plate  II.,  p.  9),  and  the 
gigantic  blocks  help  us  to  picture  it.  The  huge  pillars 
consisted  first  of  the  square  base  surmounted  by  the 
sculptured  drum  (Plate  II.,  p.  9),  then  there  was  the 
fluted  column  ending  far  above  in  an  ionic  capital 
(Plate  II.,  p.  9). 

Demetrius  and  the  mob  drove  the  apostle  away,  but 
not  before  he  had,  by  his  preaching,  founded  the  Church 
at  Ephesus.  When  later  he  sent  his  epistle  to  the  Church 
there,  he  spoke  of  another  temple  of  which  the  believers 
at  Ephesus  formed  a  part.  "Built  upon  the  foundation 
of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being 
the  chief  corner  stone;  in  whom  all  the  building,  fitly 
framed  together,  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the 
Lord."i 

As  we  sit  among  the  ruins  of  the  heathen  temple, 
which  was  rightly  considered  one  of  the  wonders  of 
the  world,  we  think  of  this  other  which  can  never  be 
destroyed.  "The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against 
it." 2  The  living  stones  are  even  now  being  quarried 
in  all  parts  of  the  world,  for  God  is  still  working  like 
Solomon  of  old,  when  he  said :  "  Prepare  thy  work  without, 
and  make  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the  field ;  and  afterwards 
build  thine  house."  ^ 

The  glory  of  God's  temple  will,  one  day,  not  merely 
fill  Asia,  or  even  the  world,  but  rather  will  be  revealed 
to  the  whole  universe. 

As  we  leave  this  room  we  notice  on  the  right  of  the 
door  a  bust  of  Alexander  the  Great.      Daniel  had 

J  Eph.  2.  20,  21.  3  Matt.  16.  18. 

»  Prov.  24.  27,  with  1  Kings  6.  7. 


t2  THE  EPHESUS  ROOM 

a  vision  of  his  reign  and  the  fourfold  division  of  his 
empire  which  was  to  take  place  at  Alexander's  death 
in  B.C.  323. 

"  And  as  I  was  considering,  behold,  an  he  goat  came 
from  the  west,  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and  touched 
not  the  ground :  and  the  goat  had  a  notable  horn  between 
his  eyes. 

"  And  he  came  to  the  ram  that  had  two  horns,  which 
I  had  seen  standing  before  the  river,  and  ran  unto  him  in 
the  fury  of  his  power. 

"  And  I  saw  him  come  close  unto  the  ram,  and  he  was 
moved  with  choler  against  him,  and  smote  the  ram,  and 
brake  his  two  horns :  and  there  was  no  power  in  the  ram 
to  stand  before  him,  but  he  cast  him  down  to  the  ground, 
and  stamped  upon  him :  and  there  was  none  that  could 
deliver  the  ram  out  of  his  hand. 

"  Therefore  the  he  goat  waxed  very  great :  and  when  he 
was  strong,  the  great  horn  was  broken ;  and  for  it  came 
up  four  notable  ones,  toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  .  .  . 

"  The  ram  which  thou  sawest  having  two  horns  are  the 
kings  of  Media  and  Persia. 

'*  And  the  rough  goat  is  the  king  of  Grecia :  and  the 
great  horn  that  is  between  his  eyes  is  the  first  king. 

"  Now  that  being  broken,  whereas  four  stood  up  for  it, 
four  kingdoms  shall  stand  up  out  of  the  nation,  but  not  in 
his  power."  ^ 

In  the  room  of  Greek  and  Latin  Inscriptions,  between 
the  Entrance  Hall  and  the  Beading  Eoom,  there  are  several 
of  later  date  which  refer  to  the  Temple  of  Diana  (Nos.  448- 
476,  552).  On  the  other  side  of  the  room  is  a  Greek 
inscription  (No.  171)  from  Thessalonica,  which  indirectly 
corroborates  the  accuracy  of  the  Book  of  the  Acts,  for  it 
mentions  certain  Magistrates,  styled  "  Politarchs,"  a  local 
title,  quoted  in  Acts  17.  6,  8. 

'  Dan.  8.  6-8,  20-22. 


CIIAFW.C 


THE   EIXJIN    '-^1^'-  2 


Xkbocgh  ibo  Jt>orway  Ui»'    ^  ■ ^ 

(Plate     n.,    p.     9) 

(inate  in.y  -•■-'■'  -  ..!.■. 

•  f     iho     I  .on     at 


on     ..,,. 

;-;    Viru 

to  ^ 

»- 

r,f    ,  J 

could  ltt?iHet>n 
mo  VI.  :  3" 

the     Oue     Tfhryif 

uriagino   hiy-Vi^^^ 
Gi'eek  ary      L — ^-O^ 
all  thi£.'/< 
earth.  </  n»>t  iu 

Liter,  r     /■  ■  y^vxj^  '^\ 


^ 


'  A<t«  17. 


CHAPTER    III 

THE  ELGIN  GALLERY  (Plate  III.) 

Through  the  doorway  at  the  end  of  the  Ephesus  Room 
(Plate  II.,  p.  9)  we  come  to  the  Elgin  Gallery 
(Plate  HI.),  which  is  jBUed  with  the  sculptured  remains 
of  the  Parthenon  at  Athens.  We  are  here 
reminded  of  an  earlier  chapter  in  the  life  of  the  Apostle 
Paul  when  he  visited  that  city;  and  we  can  to-day  look 
on  the  very  objects  which  he  saw  on  the  memorable 
occasion  described  in  Acts  17.  "His  spirit  was  stirred 
in  him,"  we  read,  "when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given 
to  idolatry."  1  The  model  in  one  of  the  Cases  at  the  end 
of  the  gallery  (Plate  III.)  shows  how  the  temples  were 
grouped  together  upon  the  Acropolis.  The  Parthenon 
could  be  seen  from  Mars'  Hill,  which  is  shown  in  the 
model,  and  possibly  the  altar  "  to  the  unknown  God "  was 
also  near  at  hand.  As  the  apostle  told  his  hearers  of 
the  One  whom  they  ignorantly  worshipped,  we  can 
imagine  him  pointing  to  these  wonderful  specimens  of 
Greek  art  as  he  cried,  "God  that  made  the  world,  and 
all  things  therein,  seeing  that  He  is  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth,  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  And 
later,  he  said,  "  We  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead 
is  like  unto  gold,  or  silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and 
man's  device,"  ^      Probably  there  was  no   stone  on  earth 

»  Acts  17.  16.  =»  Acts  17.  24,  29. 

u 


14  THE  ELGIN  GALLERY 

at  that  time  more  beautifully  graven  than  these  specimens 
of  Greek  art,  and  nothing  has  equalled  them  since.  It 
is  noteworthy  that  this  is  the  only  place  in  the  New 
Testament  where  the  word  "art"  is  used  in  this  sense; 
though  the  Englishman's  Greek  Concordance  shows  that  the 
Greek  word  for  which  it  stands  is  rendered  "occupation" 
in  Acts  18.  3,  and  "craft"  in  Eev.  18.  22. 

The  model  of  the  Parthenon  (Plate  III,  p.  13)  shows 
where  the  various  portions  were  placed.  The  outside 
was  decorated  above  the  columns  by  the  "metopes,"  the 
square  slabs  ornamented  with  high  relief  which  are  on 
the  walls  of  the  gallery  (Plate  III.,  p.  13).  Below  them 
we  have  the  remains  of  the  frieze  (Plate  III.,  p.  13),  which 
can  be  seen  on  the  model  running  round  the  building 
within  the  outer  pillars.  The  most  beautiful  groups  of 
sculpture  were  on  the  Eastern  and  Western  "pediments," 
the  triangular  spaces  at  the  two  ends  of  the  building. 
These  broken  fragments  are  all  that  are  left  of  the 
wonderful  groups  of  Grecian  gods  and  goddesses,  but 
they  still  retain  much  of  their  grace,  and  are  considered 
amongst  the  best  known  specimens  of  the  Greek  art  of 
Pheidias  and  his  times. 

The  Eastern  pediment,  representing  the  birth  of  Athene 
(Plate  TIL,  p.  13),  must  have  been  specially  beautiful. 
Emerging  out  of  the  sea  at  one  angle  was  the  chariot 
of  the  rising  sun.  The  horse,  as  it  comes  up  from  the 
waves,  is  full  of  life  and  spirit,  and  the  power  of  the 
conception  has  made  this  horse's  head  deservedly  famous. 
At  the  other  end  of  the  pediment  the  chariot  of  Selen6, 
the  Moon-god,  or  Night,  is  sinking  beneath  the  horizon. 

Paul's  visit  to  Athens  took  place  some  time  before 
the  scene  at  Ephesus  to  which  we  have  already  referred 
(p.  10),  but  the  fame  of  his  address  at  Mars'  Hill  seems 
to  have  reached  Demetrius.     It  was  at  Athens  that  Paul 


PAUL  ON  MARS'  HILL  15 

had  so  notably  proclaimed  that  "they  be  no  gods  which 
are  made  with  hands."  ^  If  he  could  thus  speak  against 
the  temples  on  the  Acropolis,  it  was  no  wonder  that 
Demetrius  feared  for  the  temple  of  Diana. 

The  tall  pillar  on  the  left  of  the  illustration 
(Plate  III.,  p.  13)  and  the  figure  opposite  came  from  the 
Erictheon,  which  stood  on  the  Acropolis  a  little  below  the 
Parthenon,  Probably  these  objects  were  also  seen  by  the 
apostle  on  that  memorable  occasion. 

1  Acta  19.  26  ;   17,  24,  29. 


CHAPTEK    IV 

THE   HITTITE  SECTION  (Plate  IV.) 

Passing  through  the  doorway  in  the  centre  of  the  Elgin 
Eoom,  we  cross  the  Nimroud  Central  Saloon,  and  stand  for 
a  few  minutes  with  our  backs  to  the  great  statue  of 
Kameses  ii.  in  the  Egyptian  Gallery,  the  gallery  shown 
in  Plate  VII.  In  the  distance  (Plate  IV.)  we  see  a 
small  portion  of  the  eastern  pediment  of  the  Parthenon 
in  the  room  we  have  just  left.  We  also  see  the  Nereid 
Room,  full  of  Greek  sculptures;  and  nearer  still  are  the 
Assyrian  and  Babylonian  remains.  Thus  we  are  sur- 
rounded by  the  records  of  several  great  world-powers, 
Egypt  and  Greece,  Assyria  and  Babylon,  whilst  in  the  little 
strip  of  corridor  in  which  we  stand  another  nation  is 
represented,  viz,  the  Hittites. 

Some  years  ago  the  so-called  "higher  critics"  of  the 
day  used  to  refer  to  the  Bible  mentions  of  this  people  as 
one  of  the  evidences  of  the  imagined  inaccuracies  of  the 
Bible.  They  themselves  knew  nothing  about  the  Hittites, 
therefore  the  Hittites  could  not  have  existed !  They  have 
had  to  give  up  this  point  of  attack.  The  Bible  has  been 
proved  absolutely  correct  on  this  subject  as  on  others. 
The  Hittite  remains,  with  the  quaint  picture  writing, 
"unknown  hieroglyphics"  as  the  description  upon  the 
monuments  calls  them,  prove  the  existence  of  a  great 
nation  or  group  of  nations.     Other  discoveries  corroborate 

16 


u 


:n  \   'V3<';    .1' r 


it  uui  t,\a 


I  ni?  ware   w.'  !> 


-^^  tiohk 


*.    rr.-alled    evt 


hem.     At  the  com 


of  them  m  th\  '  uvif^f^ahk'.  K! 


V€'  r^ 


h   3t:ri    19tl 


•+nr 


z 


1^ T-ff 


8  5 


1 1 '  L        ■ ,.  1 


and  thy  mother  a  .  ,'  and  it  was  "ihe  k 

Bittites "  tb»t  waa  promised  to  the  childrcii  of  I 


oh  were  &  grief  of 

■■:ii    tilC 


kiri!    of    Ff 
■im  wtt!| 


lie    wc; 


t     C»<i 


'..,J.  ^ 


«i»«i'«r    aKHWfcl  >■    i'B»  -~~  •"' 


■    -'.i^-u... 


L- 


'i  \i 


THE  HITTITES  17 

the  Bible  accounts,  and  show  that  the  Hittites  were  a 
powerful  people.  The  Egyptian  poet  Pentaur,  celebrating 
the  triumphs  of  Rameses  11.  at  the  time  of  Egypt's  great- 
ness, described  one  of  his  wars  with  them.  At  the  com- 
mencement he  speaks  of  them  as  the  "miserable  Kheta," 
but  after  the  war  they  are  "  most  noble  Kheta,"  showing  that 
they  belonged  to  no  puny  tribe,  but  were  a  mighty  nation 
which  rivalled  even  the  Egypt  of  the  18th  and  19th 
dynasties. 

Many  are  the  references  to  the  Hittites  in  the  Bible. 
Abraham  purchased  the  cave  of  Machpelah  from  "the 
people  of  the  land,  even  the  children  of  Heth,"'  and  from 
'Ephron  the  Hittite." 

Their  city  "  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before  Zoan 
in  Egypt."' 

They  also  founded  Jerusalem,  for  we  read,  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God  unto  Jerusalem,  Thy  birth  and  thy  nativity 
is  of  the  land  of  Canaan;  thy  father  was  an  Amorite, 
and  thy  mother  a  Hittite " ;'  and  it  was  "  the  land  of  the 
Hittites "  that  was  promised  to  the  children  of  Israel  for 
an  inheritance.* 

Esau   married    "Judith    the    daughter    of    Beeri    the 

Hittite,  and  Bashemath  the  daughter  of  Elon  the  Hittite, 

which  were  a  grief  of  mind  unto  Isaac  and  to  Rebekah."^ 

Ahimelech   the   Hittite   and    Uriah   the  Hittite   were 

amongst  the  followers  of  king  David.^ 

Toi,  king  of  Hamath,  a  Hittite  city,  sent  his  son 
Joram  with  a  present  of  "  vessels  of  sUver,  and  vessels  of 
gold,  and  vessels  of  brass;  which  also  king  David  did 
dedicate  unto  the  Lord,  with  the  silver  and  gold  that  he 
had  dedicated  of  all  nations  which  he  subdued."^ 

'  Gen.  23.  3-20.  «  Num.  18.  22.  3  Ezek.  16.  3. 

*  Joah.  1.4;  Judg.  1.  26.  »  Gen.  26.  34.  35. 

"  1  Sam.  26.  6  ;  2  Sam.  23.  39.  ?  2  Sam.  8.  9-11. 
3 


1 8  THE  HITTITE  SECTION 

Solomon  had  horses  and  chariots  brought  out  of  Egypt 
for  the  kings  of  the  Hittites;^  and  "he  loved  many- 
strange  women,"  amongst  them  "  women  of  the  Hittites."  ^ 
Thus  he  disobeyed  all  the  three  commandments  given  to 
those  who  should  be  "  set  king  "  over  Israel.  "  He  shall 
not  multiply  horses  to  himself,  nor  cause  the  people  to 
return  to  Egypt,  to  the  end  that  he  should  multiply 
horses.  .  .  .  Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself 
.  .  .  neither  shall  he  greatly  multiply  to  himself  silver 
and  gold."^ 

"As  for  all  the  people  that  were  left  of  the  Hittites 
and  (other  nations)  which  were  not  of  Israel  .  .  .  them 
did  Solomon  make  to  pay  tribute."* 

The  incident  related  in  2  Kings  7  shows  that  even  later 
the  Hittites  were  a  powerful  people,  for,  when  the  Syrians 
besieged  Samaria  and  the  Lord  interfered  in  the  behalf 
of  Israel,  He  "made  the  host  of  the  Syrians  to  hear  a 
noise  of  chariots,  and  a  noise  of  horses,  even  the  noise  of 
a  great  host:  and  they  said  one  to  another,  Lo,  the 
king  of  Israel  hath  hired  against  us  the  kings  of  the 
Hittites  and  the  kings  of  the  Egyptians  to  come  upon 
us."^  The  Hittites  and  the  Egyptians  are  thus  put  on  an 
equality,  and  the  Syrians  were  so  smitten  with  terror 
that  they  fled  precipitately. 

It  is  probable  that  the  first  heathen  congregation  to 
which  the  gospel  was  preached  by  the  Apostle  Paul  was 
of  Hittite  origin,  for  "when  the  people  saw  what  Paul 
had  done,  they  lifted  up  their  voices,  saying  in  the  speech 
of  Lycaonia,  The  gods  are  come  down  unto  us  in  the  like- 
ness of  men."^  Some  have  held  that  this  was  a  Hittite 
dialect. 

'  1  Kings  10.  28,  29.  ^  j  Kings  11.  1. 

8  Deut.  17.  16,  17.  *  2  Chron.  8.  7,  8. 

»  2  Kings  7-  6.  «  Acts  14.  11. 


CHAPTER    V 

THE  NIMKOUD  CENTRAL  SALOON  (Plate  IV.) 

There  were  seven  great  monarchs  who  ruled  over  Assyria 
and  Babylon  who  were  closely  connected  with  Bible 
history. 

They  were — 

Shalmaneser  II.,  b.c.  860-825. 
Tiglath-Pileser  III.  or  Pul,  b.c.  745-727. 
Shalmaneser' IV.,  b.c.  727-722. 
Sargon,  b.c.  722-705. 
Sennacherib,  b.c.  705-68L 
Bsarhaddon,  b.c.  681-668. 
Ashur-bani-pal,  b.c.  668-626. 

The  monuments  of  these  kings  fill  this  and  the  Nineveh 
Gallery  and  also  the  Assyrian  Saloon  and  Basement. 

In  the  centre  of  our  illustration  (Plate  IV.,  p.  17) 
behind  the  celebrated  "  Black  Obelisk "  stands  a  slab  with 
rounded  top.  This  monolith  records  the  early  conquests 
of  Shalmaneser  II.  It  tells  how,  on  the  occasion  of  one 
of  his  inroads  into  Syria,  he  found  drawn  up  against  him 
a  strong  allied  army  consisting  of  the  troops  of  Damascus, 
Hamath,  and  others.  Among  the  confederates  were  Ahab 
king  of  Israel  and  Benhadad  king  of  Syria.  A  battle, 
which  is  described  on  the  stone,  was  fought  at  Karkar. 
This  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  but  we  read  there  how 

19 


20         THE  NIMROUD  CENTRAL  SALOON 

Ahab,  contrary  to  God's  command,  spared  the  life  of 
Benhadad  and  "made  a  covenant  with  him."^  "And 
they  continued  three  years  without  war  between  Syria 
and  Israel."  ^ 

It  must  have  been  during  this  three  years,  probably 
at  its  close,  that  Shalmaneser  fought  against  them  and 
broke  up  the  confederacy,  for  immediately  afterwards  Ahab 
king  of  Israel  made  an  alliance  with  Jehoshaphat  king 
of  Judah,  in  order  to  recover  Ramoth  in  Gilead  and  take 
it  "out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Syria." ^ 

The  discovery  of  this  monolith  gave  an  incidental 
proof  of  the  accuracy  with  which  the  cuneiform  or  wedge- 
shaped  writing  of  the  Assyrian  monuments  had  been 
deciphered.  The  stone  was  found  at  Kurkh  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Tigris,  and  when  sent  home  was 
deciphered  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson.  He  read  that 
Shalmaneser  had  set  it  up  by  the  side  of  a  similar 
inscription  by  his  father,  Ashur-nasir-pal.  Word  was 
therefore  sent  to  those  who  were  exploring  to  dig  again 
in  the  same  place,  and  the  companion  monolith  was 
found.  It  stands  opposite  the  doorway  leading  to  the 
Assyrian  Basement. 

The  celebrated  "Black  Obelisk"  (Plate  IV.,  p.  17) 
stands  in  the  centre  of  the  Nimroud  Saloon;  and  is  of 
special  interest,  because  it  mentions  two  well-known  Bible 
characters,  Jehu  and  Hazael,  the  two  whom  Elijah  was 
commanded  to  anoint,  and  to  whom  Elisha  conveyed  the 
news  that  they  should  reign  over  Israel  and  Syria.* 

The  obelisk  represents  Shalmaneser  receiving  the 
tribute  of  five  different  nations,  and  among  them,  on  the 
second  row,  is  depicted  the  tribute  of  "Jehu  the  son  of 
Omri  " ;  the  figure  bowing  down  being  either  Jehu  himself 

1  1  Kings  20.  34.  2  j  Kings  22.  1.  ^  Vers.  2,  3. 

♦  1  Kings  10.  16-17  ;  2  Kings  8.  7-15  ;  0.  1-6. 


THE  BLACK  OBELISK  2i 

or  his  ambassador.  The  word  "  son  "  is  used  very  loosely, 
or  probably  the  Assyrians  had  not  heard  that  Jehu  had 
usurped  the  throne,  and  so  called  him  "  the  son  of  Omri,' 
as  though  he  had  been  the  son  of  Ahab  his  predecessor. 
Samaria  itself  was  called  Bit-Omri  the  house  of  Omri,  and 
this  agrees  with  the  account  of  the  founding  of  the  city. 
"  Omri  bought  the  hill  Samaria  of  Shemer  for  two  talents 
of  silver,  and  built  on  the  hill,  and  called  the  name  of  the 
city  which  he  built  after  the  name  of  Shemer  owner  of 
the  hill,  Samaria."  ^ 

The  large  historical  text  which  runs  round  the  base  of 
the  obelisk  describes  the  conquests  of  Shalmaneser.  No 
mention  is  made  of  Jehu,  but  "  it  is  stated  that  he  captured 
1,121  chariots  and  470  battle  horses,  and  the  whole  camp 
of '  Hazael  king  of  Damascus.'  .  .  .  From  a  paper  squeeze 
in  the  British  Museum,  we  learn  that  Shalmaneser  il. 
received  tribute  from  Jehu  during  the  expedition  against 
Hazael."  2 

In  the  Book  of  the  Kings  we  read  that  "  Jehu  took  no 
heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with  all 
his  heart :  for  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam, 
which  made  Israel  to  sin.  In  those  days  the  Lord  began 
to  cut  Israel  short,  and  Hazael  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts 
of  Israel."  ^  It  is  therefore  very  probable  that  Jehu  sought 
the  help  of  the  king  of  Assyria  against  Hazael ;  but,  if  so, 
the  help  received  was  of  no  avail,  for  we  see  from  these 
passages  that  Hazael  and  his  son  continued  to  trouble 
Israel  until  at  last  "  the  Lord  was  gracious  unto  them  and 
had  compassion  on  them."* 

The  seated  figure,  the  back  of  which  is  shown  in  the 
illustration  (Plate  IV.,  p.  17),  represents  Shalmaneser  him- 
self.   The  account  of  the  last  nine  years  of  his  reign  is 

»  1  Kings  16.  24.  »  Cfuide  A,  p.  30. 

3  2  Kings  10.  31,  32.  <  2  Kings  13.  3,  22,  23. 


2  2  THE  NIMROUD  CENTRAL  SALOON 

given   on   the   Balawat   Gates  in  the  Assyrian   Basement 
(see  p.  32). 

In  the  Nimroud  Central  Saloon  there  are  several  inscrip- 
tions of  Tiglath-Pileser  III. ,  or  Pul.  He  is  associated 
with  several  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah.  "Ahaz  sent 
messengers  to  Tiglath  -  Pileser  king  of  Assyria,  saying, 
I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son:  come  up,  and  save  me 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Syria,  and  out  of  the  hand 
of  the  king  of  Israel,  which  rise  up  against  me.  And 
Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold  that  was  found  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and 
sent  it  for  a  present  to  the  king  of  Assyria.  And  the 
king  of  Assyria  went  up  against  Damascus  and  took  it.  .  . 
And  king  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus  to  meet  Tiglath-Pileser 
king  of  Assyria,  and  saw  an  altar  that  was  at  Damascus,"  ^ 
of  which  he  had  a  copy  made. 

Menahem  king  of  Israel  also  paid  tribute.  "And 
Pul  the  king  of  Assyria  came  against  the  land,  and 
Menahem  gave  Pul  a  thousand  talents  of  silver,  that  his 
hand  might  be  with  him  to  confirm  the  kingdom  in  his 
hand  ...  so  the  king  of  Assyria  turned  back  and  stayed 
not  there  in  the  land."  ^  This  alliance  only  lasted  during 
the  lifetime  of  Menahem.  In  the  days  of  Pekah,  Tiglath- 
Pileser  carried  captive  to  Assyria  the  Eeubenites,  the 
Gadites,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh.^  The  two  and  a 
half  tribes  had  begged  that  Moses  would  allow  them  to 
settle  on  the  wilderness  side  of  Jordan.  The  land  first 
obtained  was  first  lost,  and  thus  began  the  first  stage  of  the 
captivity  of  Israel.  The  two  names  for  this  monarch  are 
given  in  1  Chron.  5.  26,  but  the  verb  which  follows  is 
in  the  singular,  showing  that  they  were  different  names 
for  the   same   person.      "  And   the   God   of   Israel   stirred 

1  2  Kings  16.  7-18.  "  2  Kings  15.  19,  20. 

=•  2  Kings  15.  29  ;  1  Chron.  5.  26. 


DAGON  23 

up  the  spirit  of  Pul  king  of  Assyria,  and  the  spirit  of 
Tiglath-Pileser  king  of  Assyria,  and  he  carried  them 
away."  "In  the  Babylonian  dynastic  tablets  discovered 
by  Dr.  Pinches,  the  two  years'  reign  of  Tiglath-Pileser  is 
given  as  that  of  Pulu."^ 

The  great  man-headed  bull  and  lion  on  either  side  of 
the  doorway  record  the  conquests  of  the  father  of  Shal- 
maneser  n.  The  claws  of  the  one  and  the  hoofs  of  the 
other  enable  us  to  see  which  is  which.  They  each  have, 
as  usual,  five  legs;  so  that,  whether  looked  at  from  the 
front  or  the  side,  they  appear  correct.  Such  figures  were 
the  protectors  of  the  royal  pathway,  and  were  set  up  at 
the  entrance  of  tlie  palace  to  protect  the  king's  going  out 
and  coming  in.  Jehovah,  the  confidence  of  the  Psalmist, 
is  contrasted  to  the  gods  in  whom  the  heathen  trusted. 
"  The  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out  and  thy  coming 
in." 

Passing  between  these  two  great  figures  we  enter  the 
Nimroud  Gallery.  Most  of  the  wall-pictures  tell  of  the 
doings  of  the  same  king,  Ashur-nasir-pal,  who  is  not  directly 
connected  with  Bible  history.  There  are,  however,  two  or 
three  things  of  special  interest  to  the  Bible  student,  viz. 
the  figure  of  a  fish  deity  (No.  30),  reminding  us  of  Dagou, 
the  god  of  the  Philistines,  spoken  of  in  1  Sam.  5.  2-5 ;  and 
1  Chron.  10.  10.  To  those  who  were  familiar  with  the 
worship  of  this  fish  god,  the  miraculous  preservation  of 
Jonah  would  appeal  with  special  power. 

There  are  in  this  gallery  several  representations  of  what 
were  probably  meant  for  sacred  trees.  The  **  groves " 
which  are  so  often  mentioned  in  Scripture — rendered  in 
the  Eevised  Version  "asherah" — may  have  been  sacred 
trees  of  this  description. 

^  Prof.  Sayce  in  The  "  Higher  Criticitm,"  etc.,  p.  404,  and  7%«  Records 
of  the  Past,  New  Series,  voL  i.  p.  18  n. 


24  THE  NIMROUD  CENTRAL  SALOON 

On  several  of  the  wall-pictures  on  the  right,  a  small 
figure  within  a  winged  circle  represents  the  god  Ashur, 
who  is  protecting  the  king  in  battle  and  fighting  for  him, 
reminding  us  of  the  words  concerning  the  God  of  Israel 
"The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your 
peace."  ^ 

1  Ex.  14.  14. 


CHAPTER    VI 

THE  ASSYRIAN  SALOON  AND  BASEMENT 

Eeturning  to  the  doorway,  near  the  human -headed  bull 
and  lion,  we  pass  into  the  Assyrian  Saloon.  In  the  ante- 
room are  sculptures  and  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-Pileser, 
and  in  the  farther  comer  the  noted  wall-picture  depicting 
Sennacherib  before  Lachish.  The  inscription  in  front 
of  the  king  says:  "Sennacherib,  king  of  hosts,  king  of 
Assyria,  sat  upon  his  throne  of  state,  and  the  spoil  of  the 
city  of  Lachish  passed  before  him."  The  Bible  account 
says :  "  After  this  did  Sennacherib  send  his  servants  to  Jeru- 
salem (but  he  himself  laid  siege  against  Lachish,  and  all 
his  power  with  him). "  ^  It  was  at  this  time  that  Hezekiah 
king  of  Judah  sent  to  the  king  of  Assyria  to  Lachish, ^ 
and  paid  him  tribute  of  "three  hundred  talents  of  silver 
and  thirty  talents  of  gold,"  the  tribute  which  is  evidently 
referred  to  in  the  "  Taylor  Cylinder  "  (see  p.  74). 

Passing  round  the  gallery,  entering  at  the  farther  side, 
we  see,  after  the  war  pieces,  a  series  of  hunting  scenes.  Some 
of  the  figures  at  the  end  of  the  gallery  are  most  elaborately 
carved  with  very  fine  workmanship,  the  patterns  on  the 
dresses  being  minutely  finished.  We  read  in  Ezekiel  of 
such  in  the  description  of  the  sin  of  Samaria  when  she  went 
after  "  the  Assyrians  her  neighbours,  captains  and  rulers, 
clothed  most  gorgeously,  horsemen  riding  upon  horses,  all 

>  2  Chron.  82.  9  ;  Isa.  86.  1,  2.  ■  2,  Kings  18.  13-16. 

4  » 


26     THE  ASSYRIAN  SALOON   AND  BASEMENT 

of  them  desirable  young  men  .  .  .  she  saw  men  portrayed 
upon  the  wall,  the  images  of  the  Chaldeans  portrayed  with 
vermilion,  girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  exceeding 
in  dyed  attire  upon  their  heads,  all  of  them  princes  to  look 
to,  after  the  manner  of  the  Babylonians  of  Chaldea."^  (An 
example  of  the  use  of  vermilion  is  to  be  seen  inside  the 
Egyptian  tomb  in  the  centre  of  the  Assyrian  Basement.) 

On  the  wall-pictures  in  the  corner  of  the  gallery  are 
some  beautiful  little  figures  of  antelopes,  and  on  the  last 
side  of  the  gallery  is  a  long  series  of  pictures  of  lion  hunts. 
This  was  doubtless  king  Ashur-bani-pal's  favourite  sport. 
We  see  the  cages  in  which  the  lions  were  kept.  The  lions 
into  whose  den  Daniel  was  cast  were  evidently  those  kept  for 
the  royal  sport.  We  notice  how  the  cages  were  opened  by 
a  man  at  the  top  raising  a  door  in  the  front.  The  character 
and  animation  depicted  in  the  representations  of  the  furious 
lions  is  very  striking,  and  many  of  them  show  a  remarkable 
knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physiology.  One  lion  has  been 
wounded  by  an  arrow  that  has  pierced  the  spinal  cord,  and 
the  hind  part  is  instantly  paralysed ;  another  is  furiously 
biting  at  the  wheel  of  the  king's  chariot. 

Descending  the  stairs,  we  come  to  the  Assyrian  Base- 
ment, where  some  of  the  campaigns  of  Ashur-bani-pal 
are  represented.  These  are  full  of  interest  to  the  Bible 
student.  He  was  the  son  of  Esarhaddon  and  the  grandson  of 
Sennacherib,  and  is  once  mentioned  by  name  in  the  Bible, 
where  reference  is  made  to  "the  nations  whom  the  great 
and  noble  Asnapper  brought  over  and  set  in  the  cities  of 
Samaria." 2  In  the  previous  verse  there  is  a  long  list  of 
these  nations,  and  amongst  them  are  mentioned  "the 
Babylonians,  the  Susanchites  .  .  .  and  the  Elam- 
ites."  These  three  conquests  by  Ashur-bani-pal  are 
depicted  on  the  walls  here  and  in  the  Nineveh   Gallery 

>  Ezek.  23.  12,  14,  15.  '^  Ezra  4.  9,  10. 


MANASSEH'S  CAPTIVITY  27 

upstairs.  They  are  illustrations  of  a  part  of  this  one  verse 
— a  verse  full  of  hard  names,  which  in  our  reading  we  are 
inclined  to  pass  over  as  of  no  interest  to  us. 

(1)  On  the  right-hand  side  we  see  the  campaign  against 
Shamash-shum-ukin  king  of  Babylon,  the  brother  of 
Ashur-bani-pal.  On  the  death  of  Esarhaddon  the  empire 
was  divided  between  his  two  sons,  Babylon  being  the  vassal 
of  Assyria;  Shamash-shum-ukin  had  rebelled,  and  had 
persuaded  "other  nations"  to  join  in  the  revolt.  This 
probably  illustrates  a  passage  in  Bible  history  in  the  life 
of  Mauasseh.  We  are  told  that  on  account  of  his  sin 
"  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  the  captains  of  the  host  of 
the  king  of  Assyria,  which  took  Manasseh  among  the 
thorns,  and  bound  him  with  fetters,  and  carried  him  to 
Babylon,"^  but  no  other  reason  is  given  for  his  captivity. 
He  must  have  joined  some  such  revolt,  possibly  this  very 
one.  The  captivity  of  Manasseh  is  placed  by  some  in  the 
time  of  Esarhaddon,  and  by  others  in  that  of  his  son 
Ashur-bani-pal,  and  connected  with  the  revolt  of  Shamash- 
shum-ukin.  Manasseh  is  mentioned  in  the  lists  of  kings 
who  paid  tribute  to  both  Esarhaddon  and  Ashur-bani-pal.^ 
The  so-called  "  higher  critics "  found  in  this  verse  another 
fancied  proof  of  the  inaccuracy  of  Scripture.  Nineveh  is 
the  capital  of  Assyria,  said  they,  not  Babylon,  but  these 
discoveries  and  the  historical  tablets  which  describe  the 
events,  prove  the  accuracy  of  the  Bible  account,  for 
the  kings  of  Assyria  ruled  over  Babylon  as  well  as 
Assyria. 

(2)  The  campaign  represented  in  the  next  series 
illustrates  the  taking  of  a  city  in  Susa,  and  this  is  Knked 
with  a  much  earlier  chapter  in  Bible  history.  Ashur- 
bani-pal,   when    he    took    the   city   of    Susa   in    Elam, 

»  2  Chron.  88.  11. 
-  Prof.  Sayce  in  The  "  Higher  Criticism  "  and  the  MonumenU,  pp.  386-889. 


2  8     THE  ASSYRIAN  SALOON  AND  BASEMENT 

recovered  an  image  of  the  goddess  Nana  which  had  been 
captured  long  years  ago  from  the  city  of  Erech  and 
carried  into  Elam.  In  his  inscription  he  says :  "  Nana  who 
1,635  years  had  been  desecrated,  had  gone  and  dwelt  in 
Elam,  a  place  not  appointed  to  her ;  and  in  those  days,  she 
and  the  gods  her  fathers  proclaimed  my  name  to  the 
dominion  of  the  earth.  The  return  of  her  divinity  she 
entrusted  to  me  thus:  ' Ashur-bani-pal  from  the  midst 
of  Elam  (wicked)  bring  me  out  and  cause  me  to  enter 
into  Bitanna.'  The  will  commanded  by  their  divinity 
which  from  days  remote  they  had  uttered,  again  they 
spoke  to  later  people.  The  hands  of  her  great  divinity 
I  took  hold  of  (and)  the  straight  road  rejoicing  in  heart 
she  took  to  Bitanna."  ^  The  image  of  the  goddess  Nana  had 
been  taken  when  Erech  and  Ur  were  sacked  by  Elamite 
kings,  and  this  was  evidently  in  the  time  of  Abraham. 
Two  hymns  have  been  found  making  lament  over  this 
same  calamity,  saying  how  "the  great  lady  dwells  in  the 
hostile  land."  In  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Genesis  we 
find  a  confederacy  of  kings,  including  an  Elamite  king, 
making  war  on  the  kings  of  Syria.  "  And  it  came  to  pass 
in  the  days  of  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar,  Arioch  king 
of  Ellasar,  Chedorlaomer  king  of  Elam,  and  Tidal  king 
of  nations."^  There  is  strong  proof  in  the  Museum  that 
reference  is  made  to  these  very  kings  (see  p.  57-60). 

The  Elamite  invasion  of  Ur  was  probably  one  cause  of 
the  migration  of  Terah  and  his  son  Abraham.  The  words 
of  Joshua  seem  to  indicate  that  Terah  was  an  idolater: 
"  Your  fathers  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood  in  old 
time,  even  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham,  and  the  father 
of  Nachor:  and  they  served  other  gods,"^  and  if  he  were 
driven  out  of  Ur  because  of  a  foreign  invasion,  and  wanted 

'  Records  of  the  Past,  First  Series,  vol.  i.  p.  88. 
2  Gen,  14.  1.  3  Josh.  24.  2,  14,  15. 


ASHUR-BANI-PAL'S  WARS  29 

to  go  to  a  city  where  the  same  god  was  worshipped  as 
in  Ur,  he  would  have  chosen  Haran,  for  the  Moon-god  was 
worshipped  in  both  (see  p.  77).  The  fact  that  he  named  his 
son  Haran  before  this,  suggests  a  connection  of  the  sort: 
"Haran  died  before  his  father  Terah,  in  the  land  of  his 
nativity,  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees."^ 

(3)  A  small  slab  on  the  side  of  this  room  represents 
Ashur-bani-pal  and  his  queen  drinking  wine  in  a  garden. 
It  reminds  us  of  the  description  of  Esther's  feast,  "the 
banquet  of  wine,"  where  Esther,  like  the  king  in  the 
picture,  reclined  upon  a  bed;^  and  "the  king 
(Ahasuerus)  arising  from  the  banquet  of  wine  in  his 
wrath,  went  into  the  palace  garden,"  like  the  garden  here 
represented. 

This  picture  is  evidently  the  sequel  to  the  wall- 
pictures  in  the  Nineveh  Gallery,  which  depict  the  wars  in 
Elam,  the  death  of  the  king  of  Elam,  and  the  carrying 
away  to  Babylon  of  the  king's  head.  While  the  king 
and  queen  are  feasting  in  the  garden  this  gruesome 
trophy  is  hanging  on  a  tree.  Thus  we  have  represented 
on  these  wall-pictures  the  expeditions  of  Ashur-bani-pal 
against  three  of  the  nations  mentioned  in  Ezra  4.,  viz. 
"  the  Babylonians,  Susanchites,  and  Elamites." 

The  inscription  of  Sargon,  near  the  staircase,  carries 
us  back  to  a  much  earlier  date,  for  he  was  the  great- 
grandfather of  Ashur-bani-pal.  Though  he  is  only  once 
mentioned  by  this  name  in  the  Bible  (Isa.  20.  1),  see  p.  31, 
he  is  intimately  connected  with  Bible  history,  for  it  was 
he  who  took  Sfibiuaria.  Shalmaneser  IV.  had  begun 
the  siege,  but  before  the  city  was  captured  Sargon  had 
revolted.  "Against  him  (Hoshea)  came  up  Shalmaneser, 
king  of  Assyria,  and  Hoshea  became  his  servant,  and 
gave  him  presents.  And  the  king  of  Assyria  found  con- 
»  G«o.  11.  28.  3  Egth.  7.  7,  8. 


30     THE  ASSYRIAN  SALOON  AND  BASEMENT 

spiracy  in  Hoshea,"  and  imprisoned  him.  "Then  the 
king  of  Assyria  (the  Shalmaneser  mentioned  in  a  preceding 
verse)  came  up  throughout  all  the  land,  and  went  up  to 
Samaria  and  besieged  it  three  years.  In  the  ninth  year 
of  Hoshea,  the  king  of  Assyria  (Sargon)  took  Samaria,  and 
carried  Israel  away  into  Assyria."  i  This  large  wall-tablet 
records  some  of  Sargon's  conquests,  Judah  and  Hamath 
being  mentioned.  The  captives  from  Hamath,  which  he 
took  two  years  after  Samaria,  were  amongst  those  "  placed 
in  the  cities  of  Samaria,  instead  of  the  children  of  Israel."  ^ 
The  tenth  chapter  of  Isaiah  refers  to  these  same 
conquests.  Sargon,  though  he  knew  it  not,  was  God's 
rod  executing  judgment  on  rebellious  Israel.  "  0  Assyrian, 
the  rod  of  Mine  anger  .  .  .  against  the  people  of  My 
wrath  will  I  give  him  a  charge,  to  take  the  spoil  and  to 
take  the  prey.  .  .  .  Howbeit,  he  meaneth  not  so,  neither 
doth  his  heart  think  so;  but  it  is  in  his  heart  to  destroy 
and  cut  off  nations  not  a  few.  ...  Is  not  Calno  as 
Carchemish  ?  is  not  Hamath  as  Arpad  ?  is  not  Samaria 
as  Damascus  ?  .  .  .  Shall  I  not,  as  I  have  done  unto 
Samaria  and  her  idols,  so  do  to  Jerusalem  and  her  idols  ?"2 
But  he  was  not  permitted  to  take  Jerusalem  also.  At 
the  close  of  the  chapter  his  march  and  the  flight  of  the 
inhabitants  is  described  as  he  gradually  draws  nearer 
and  nearer  to  the  city.  "He  is  come  to  Aiath;  he  is 
passed  to  Migron;  at  Michmash  he  hath  laid  up  his 
carriages;  they  are  gone  over  the  passage;  they  have 
taken  up  their  lodging  at  Geba ;  Eamah  is  afraid ;  Gibeah 
of  Saul  is  fled  .  .  .  the  inhabitants  of  Gebim  gather 
themselves  to  flee.  As  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob  that 
day  ('  this  very  day '  E.V.),  he  shall  shake  his  hand  against 
the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the  hill  of  Jerusalem." 
Sargon  entitles  himself  "the  conqueror  of  the  widespread 

»  2  Kings  17.  3-6.  ■'  2  Kings  17.  24.  »  Isa.  10.  5-11,  28-32. 


SARGON  OR  JAREB  31 

land  of  Judah,"^  but  there  is  no  description  of  his  conquest, 
probably  because  he  did  not  take  part  in  it  himself  but 
left  it  to  his  "Tartan"  or  commander-in-chief. 

When  Sargon  seized  the  throne  of  Assyria,  the  Baby- 
lonians threw  off  the  yoke,  and  made  Merodach-Baladau 
king.  Ashdod  revolted  at  the  same  time,  and  we  know 
that  both  these  cities  were  punished  by  Sargon.  "  In  the 
year  that  Tartan  came  unto  Ashdod  (when  Sargon  the 
king  of  Assyria  sent  him)  and  fought  against  Ashdod,  and 
took  it." 2  "The  king  of  Assyria  brought  men  from 
Babylon  .  .  .  and  placed  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria,"^ 
some  years  after  the  taking  of  Samaria.  It  is  probable 
that  Hezekiah  joined  Merodach-Baladan  in  his  revolt,  and 
that  his  embassage  was  not  merely  to  congratulate  him 
on  his  recovery  from  illness. 

It  is  thought  by  many  that  while  Sargon  took  the 
name  of  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  Assyrian  kings  when 
he  usurped  the  throne,  his  own  name  before  that  was 
Jareb,  and  that  the  two  passages  in  Hosea  refer  to  him. 
"When  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness,  and  Judah  saw  his 
wound,  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent  to 
king  Jareb ;  yet  could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you  of  your 
wound."  *  "  The  inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall  fear  because 
of  the  calves  of  Beth-aven :  for  the  people  thereof  shall 
mourn  over  it,  and  the  priests  thereof  that  rejoiced  on  it, 
for  the  glory  thereof,  because  it  is  departed  from  it.  It 
shall  be  also  carried  unto  Assyria  for  a  present  to  king 
Jareb:  Ephraim  shall  receive  shame,  and  Israel  shall  be 
ashamed  of  his  own  counsel  As  for  Samaria,  her  king  is 
cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the  water."  ^  This  prophecy 
was  evidently  written  after  the  imprisonment  of  Hoshea  by 
Shalmaneser,  Sargon's  predecessor.    "The  king  of  Assyria 

'  Prof.  Sayce  in  The  "  Higher  Criticism,"  etc.,  pp.  426,  427.         '  Isa.  20.  1. 
3  2  Kiugs  17.  24.  *  Hoe.  5.  13.  «  Hoe.  10.  5-7. 


32     THE  ASSYRIAN  SALOON  AND  BASEMENT 

found  conspiracy  in  Hoshea:  for  he  had  sent  messengers 
to  So  king  of  Egypt,  and  brought  no  present  to  the  king 
of  Assyria,  as  he  had  done  year  by  year :  therefore  the 
king  of  Assyria  shut  him  up,  and  bound  him  in  prison."  ^ 
We  can  imagine  how  on  Shalmaneser's  death  or  dethrone- 
ment an  embassy  would  be  sent  from  the  besieged  city  to 
Sargon. 

In  a  Case  in  the  centre  of  the  Assyrian  Basement 
are  the  remains  of  the  Bala'wS<t  gates — "bronze  bands 
which  ornamented  the  gates  of  the  temple  at  Tell-Balawat, 
to  the  south-east  of  Nineveh,"  recording  the  battles  and 
conquests  of  Shalmaneser  (the  contemporary  of  Ahab,  not 
the  Shalmaneser  who  besieged  Samaria).  Band  5,  repre- 
senting his  Western  campaign,  shows  tribute  being  carried 
by  the  ships  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  It  was  in  one  of  the 
ships  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  that  Jonah  fled,  and  "  he  went 
down  to  Joppa ;  and  he  found  a  ship  going  to  Tarshish : 
so  he  paid  the  fare  thereof,  and  went  down  into  it,  to  go 
with  them  unto  Tarshish  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  ^ 
He  had  been  told  to  go  to  Nineveh,  the  capital  of 
Shalmaneser  (they  may  have  been  contemporaneous),  to 
declare  God's  judgment  against  that  great  city.  "  Now 
Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  city  of  three  days' 
journey."  ^  This  wide  circumference  probably  included  the 
outlying  suburbs.  The  Lord  Himself  told  Jonah  that  it 
contained  "  more  than  sixscore  thousand  persons  that 
cannot  discern  between  their  right  hand  and  their  left 
hand,"  * — 120,000  infants,  for  such  a  description  could  not 
be  applicable  to  full-grown,  intelligent  Assyrians;  so  that 
its  population  must  have  been  very  large.  We  know  from 
Jonah  the  result  of  his  subsequent  mission — how  Nineveh 
and  her  king  repented,  and   the  judgment  was  averted. 

1  2  Kings  17.  4  (see  p.  29).  =  Jonah  1.  3. 

^  Jonah  3.  3.  *  Jonah  4.  11. 


NAHUM'S  PROPHECY  33 

But  it  was  only  for  a  time.  The  Prophet  Nahum  again 
foretold  that  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  would  overtake  it, 
and  in  the  Assyrian  Basement  we  see  before  our  eyes 
the  evidence  of  how  literally  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled. 
The  mural  pictures  from  Ashur-bani-pal's  palace  are 
blackened  by  fire.  Nahum  said,  "The  fire  shall  devour 
thy  bars.  .  .  .  There  shall  the  fire  devour  thee."^  The 
charred  condition  of  the  remains  of  Nineveh  is,  however, 
better  seen  in  the  Nineveh  Gallery. 

To  reach  this  we  must  go  upstairs  again,  and  pass 
through  the  Central  Saloon  where  the  Black  Obelisk  stands, 
and  enter  the  gallery  in  front  of  us. 

»  Nah.  3.  13,  15. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  NINEVEH  GALLERY  (Plate  V.  i) 

"The  bas-reliefs  which  line  the  walls  of  this  room  were 
excavated  by  Sir  Henry  Layard  from  the  mound  of 
Kouyunjik,  Mneveh,  between  the  years  1845-54;  a  large 
number  of  them  were  fractured  by  the  action  of  fire  when 
Nineveh  was  destroyed  by  the  allied  forces  of  the 
Babylonians  and  Medes,  about  B.C.  609."  ^ 

A  few  months  ago,  when  visiting  the  British  Museum 
with  some  friends,  we  found  that  "  spring  cleaning  "  was  in 
full  swing.  Not  only  had  the  walls  and  floor  been  painted 
and  washed,  but  the  monuments  themselves  were  being 
thoroughly  cleansed.  The  glass  had  been  taken  from 
before  the  great  slabs  which  represent  the  building  of 
Sennacherib's  palace,  and  a  workman  was  kneeling 
in  front  of  one  of  them  with  a  bucket  of  water  by  his  side, 
and  in  his  hand  a  scrubbing-brush,  which  he  was  using 
vigorously.  As  we  watched  him  he  was  concentrating  all 
his  energies  on  the  corner  of  the  great  bas-relief,  and  was 
doing  his  best  by  means  of  a  plentiful  supply  of  soap  and 
water  to  remove  the  evident  traces  of  the  smoke  and  fire 
which  had  blackened  it. 

When  asked  if  the  marks,  of  which  he  was  trying  to 
get  rid,  were  not  caused  by  fire,  he  at  once  agreed   but 

^  This  illustration  shows  the  gallery  from  the  other  end. 

'  Guide  A,  page  37. 

S4 


t'  A  T  A  rp 


nn".     UM 


i<:    its 


SENNACHERIB'S  PALACE  35 

looked  surprised  at  the  next  question :  "  Do  you  know  what 
you  are  doing  ?  You  are  trying  to  wash  away  the  evidence 
that  God's  Word  has  been  fulfilled.  Those  marks  of  fire 
are  the  proof  of  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy ! " 

Pointing  to  the  book  in  my  hand,  in  which  were  pasted 
passages  of  Scripture  illustrated  by  the  monuments,  I 
showed  him  the  prophecy  of  Nahum  about  Nineveh 
(Nah.  3.  13,  15) :  "  The  fire  shall  devour  thy  bars  .  .  . 
there  shall  the  fire  devour  thee."  This  prophecy,  uttered 
many  years  before  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  was  actually 
fulfilled,  Nineveh  was  destroyed  by  fire,  and  the  evidence 
was  before  our  eyes. 

The  overseer,  who  was  also  in  the  gallery,  was  greatly 
interested  in  these  passages  of  Scripture ;  and  although  the 
workman  continued  his  scrubbing,  we  did  not  think  he  tried 
quite  so  hard  to  wash  the  charred  stone.  He  had  already 
found  that  he  could  not  get  out  the  black  stains. 

When  God  fulfils  His  Word,  and  pours  out  His 
threatened  judgments,  it  is  vain  for  man  to  try  and 
obliterate  the  traces.  Neither  the  soap  of  science  nor  the 
scrubbing-brush  of  philanthropy  will  remove  the  marks  of 
the  fire  of  God's  judgment. 

On  the  left  of  the  doorway  (Plate  V.)  is  a  large 
bas-relief  portrait  of  Esarhaddon,  but  the  sculptures  in 
this  gallery  belong  chiefly  to  the  reigns  of  Sennacherib 
and  Ashur-bani-pal. 

On  our  right  (the  left  of  the  illustration)  are  a  series 
representing  Sennacherib's  building  operations.  Seated  on 
his  throne  he  is  watching  the  work  as  one  of  the  large  bulls 
is  being  hoisted  into  its  place.  We  notice  that  the 
Chaldeans  were  familiar  with  the  laws  of  physics,  and 
understood  the  use  of  inclined  planes,  levers,  wheels,  pulleys, 
etc.  The  taskmasters  with  their  whips  stand  over  the 
gangs  of  labourers  as  they  pull  the  colossal  figure  to  its 


36  THE   NINEVEH  GALLERY 

place,  others   having  first  built  up  the  mound  on  which 
it  is  to  stand. 

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  gallery,  very  much  blackened 
by  fire,  is  a  bas-relief  representing  the  assault  on  the  city 
of  [UrusJ-alammu.  The  beginning  of  the  name  is  lost, 
but  it  probably  stands  for  Jerusalem. 

It  is  one  of  a  series  illustrating  Sennacherib's  conquests, 
those  he  actually  made,  and  in  this  case  what  he  hoped  to 
achieve.  For,  if  this  name  is  correct,  the  picture  does  not 
represent  fact.  Though  Sennacherib  took  some  of  the  cities 
of  Judah  (p.  73),  the  forts  were  never  built  under  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem,  for  God  fulfilled  His  promise,  "  Therefore  thus 
saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  king  of  Assyria,  He  shall 
not  come  into  this  city,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  nor  come 
before  it  with  shields,  nor  cast  a  bank  against  it."^  All 
these  things  are  depicted  on  the  wall,  but  Sennacherib's 
plans  were  entirely  frustrated.  The  historical  account  is 
shown  upstairs  (Plate  VI.,  p.  57),  and  even  from  his  own 
record  it  is  evident  that  something  remarkable  occurred. 

The  various  fragments  of  this  picture  are  more  damaged 
by  fire  than  any  others.  They  are  blacker  than  any  of 
the  rest.  Is  it  by  accident  that  this  representation  of 
Assyria's  enmity  to  the  people  of  God  should  be  the  one 
which  through  all  these  centuries  most  clearly  proves 
that  the  God  of  Israel  has  fulfilled  the  word  of  judgment 
which  He  spoke  against  Nineveh  ?  The  prisoners  depicted 
on  Nos.  27-29  have  Jewish  features. 

At  the  end  of  the  gallery  (the  immediate  left  of  Plate 
v.,  p.  35)  there  is  a  realistic  representation  of  Ashur-bani- 
pal's  battle  in  Elam,  where  king  Te-umman  is  killed. 
Short  inscriptions  show  the  chief  events  of  the  battle — 
where  the  king  is  telling  his  son  to  shoot  with  the  bow — 
and  where  the  king  and  his  son  are   being   killed.      At 

1  iBa.  87.  33,  36. 


CREATION  AND  DELUGE  TABLETS    37 

the  end  near  the  doorway  some  soldiers  are  driving  away 
in  a  chariot,  holding  the  head  of  Te-umman,  which  "  as  (a 
symbol  of)  glad  tidings  they  carried  quickly  to  Assyria." 
We  have  already  seen  how  this  trophy  was  hung  up  on  a 
tree  in  the  palace  garden  of  Ashur-bani-pal  (p.  29). 

"Along  the  middle  of  the  gallery  are  placed  nine 
table-cases,  in  which  are  exhibited  some  of  the  most 
valuable  and  interesting  tablets  from  the  Eoyal  Library 
at  Nineveh.  This  library  existed  in  a  humble  form  in 
the  days  of  Sargon,  king  of  Assyria  from  B.C.  722  to 
B.C.  705,  and  his  son  Sennacherib  and  grandson  Esar- 
haddon  added  to  its  contents.  During  the  reign  of  his 
great-grandson  Ashur-bani-pal,  B.C.  668  to  B.C.  626,  many 
thousands  of  tablets  were  copied  and  incorporated  with 
older  works  already  in  the  library."^ 

In  the  same  way  we  know  that  Hezekiah  (the  con- 
temporary of  Sargon)  caused  former  writings  to  be 
collected,  for  we  read,  "  These  are  also  proverbs  of 
Solomon,  which  the  men  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  copied 
out."2 

In  Table-Case  A  are  fragments  of  the  Assyrian 
account  of  the  Creation  and  the  Deluge.  According 
to  the  translations  that  have  been  made,  there  are  many 
passages  in  them  which  remind  us  of  the  Bible  records, 
but  they  are  mixed  up  with  the  pagan  mythology,  the 
legends  of  their  gods.  The  similarities  have  led  some  of 
the  German  professors  and  so-called  "higher  critics"  to 
imagine  that  the  inspired  account  is  derived  from  the 
polluted  pagan  source.  "Doth  a  fountain  send  forth 
at  the  same  place  sweet  water  and  bitter?  ...  so  can 
no  fountain  both  yield  salt  water  and  fresh."' 

As  well  might  we  affirm  that  the  ocean  receives  her 
supply  of  seaweed  from  the  shore  by  gathering  with  her 

^  Guide  A,  p.  40.  ^  Prov.  26.  1.  '  Jaa.  8.  11,  12. 


38  THE   NINEVEH  GALIJERY 

waves  the  dried  dead  piles  of  weed  that  lie  upon  the 
beach.  The  shrivelled  weed  originally  came  from  the 
ocean.  It  was  once  living  and  fresh,  but  exposure  to 
the  air  and  sun  and  sand  have  made  it  dry  and  putrid, 
and  it  only  has  a  slight  resemblance  to  what  it  once 
was.  So  with  these  ancient  records  of  the  past — they 
too  are  dead  and  dry  and  contaminated  with  many  traces 
of  heathen  religion. 

During  the  many  centuries  which  had  elapsed  between 
the  days  of  Adam  and  Moses,  God  had  not  been  silent. 
We  know  that  He  spoke  directly  to  Enoch,  Noah,  and 
Abraham.  Because  the  history  of  these  centuries  is 
compressed  into  so  few  chapters  in  the  Bible,  in  imagin- 
ation we  are  inclined  to  place  Abraham  quite  near 
the  beginning  of  the  world's  history,  whereas,  even  if 
our  dates  are  correct,  he  was  about  half  way  between 
4000  B.C.  and  the  Lord's  birth  at  Bethlehem.  The  Lord 
said:  "Abraham  obeyed  My  voice,  and  kept  My  charge. 
My  commandments.  My  statutes,  and  My  laws."^  It  is 
therefore  certain  that  the  laws  given  to  Moses  were  not 
the  first  God  had  given.  The  earliest  revelations  were 
very  soon  corrupted  till  only  traces  of  the  pure  truth 
were  left,  and  it  was  necessary  that  God  should  again 
make  Himself  known,  and  show  to  Moses  what  was  true 
and  what  false.    (See  p.  57.) 

The  "  Creation  Tablets"  are  portions  of  an  Assyrian 
Epic  of  the  Creation.  It  was  an  attempt  to  throw 
together  into  poetic  form  many  of  the  mythological  ideas 
of  Babylon  and  Assyria.  "  The  poem  describes  the  coming 
forth  of  the  gods  from  chaos,  and  tells  the  story  of  how 
the  forces  of  disorder,  represented  by  the  primeval  water- 
gods  Apsu  and  Tiamat,  were  overthrown  by  Ea  and 
Marduk   respectively,  and  how  Marduk,  after  completing 

1  Geu.  26.  5. 


CREATION  TABLETS  39 

the  triumph  of  the  gods  over  chaos,  proceeded  to  create 
the  world  and  man."^ 

It  "was  termed  by  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians 
'  Enuma-elis '  — '  When  in  the  height '  (or  '  when  on 
high ') — from  the  two  opening  words  of  the  text,"^  in  the 
same  way  as  the  Books  of  Moses  received  their  Hebrew 
names  from  the  opening  words. 

The  first  of  these  fragments  begins — 

"When  on  high  the  heavens  were  imnamed, 
(and)  earth  beneath  a  name  had  not  received, 
then  the  abyss  of  waters  was  in  the  beginning  their 

generator, 
the  chaos  of  the  deep  (Tiamat)  was  she  who  bore 

them  all. 
The  waters  were  embosomed  together,  and 
the  reed  was  ungathered,^  the  marsh-plant  ungrown," 

etc.* 

The  fourth  tablet  is  in  almost  perfect  condition,  and 
is  especially  interesting  in  its  reference  to  Merodach 
or  Marduk,  the  "firstborn." 

5.  "'0  Marduk,  thou  art  chiefest  among  the  great 
gods.  .  .  . 

14.  We  give  thee  sovereignty  over  the  whole  world 

15.  Sit    thou    down    in    might,    be    exalted    in    thy 

command. 

16.  Thy  weapon  shall  never  lose  its  power,  it  shall 

crush  thy  foe, 

17.  0  lord,  spare   the  life  of  him   that  trusteth    in 

thee, 

18.  But  as  for  the  god  who  began  the  rebellion  pour 

out  his  life.' 

'  L.  W.  King,  M.A.,  F.S.  A.,  in  iSeren  Toilets  of  Creation,  Introduction.  * 
'  Ibid.  «  Or  ("  no  field  was  formed  "),  L.  W  King. 

*  Prof.  Sayoe  in  The  "Higher  Criticitm,"  eta,  p.  63. 


40  THE   NINEVEH  GALLERY 

19.  Then  set  they  in  their  midst  a  garment 

20.  And  unto  Marduk  their  first-born  they  spake: 

21.  '  May   thy   fate,  0  lord,   be   supreme   among  the 

gods, 

22.  To  destroy  and  to  create;    speak   thou  the  word, 

and  (thy  command)  shall  be  fulfilled.'" 

Then  follows  an  account  of  how  he  made  the  garment 
vanish  and  re-appear. 

27.  "  When  the  gods,  his  fathers,  beheld  (the  fulfilment 

of)  his  word 

28.  They  rejoiced,  and   they  did  homage  (unto   him 

saying)  'Marduk  is  king!' 

29.  They   bestowed   upon  him   the   sceptre,   and   the 

throne  and  the  ring, 

30.  They    gave     him    an    invincible    weapon,    which 

overwhelmed  the  foe."^ 

The  fifth  tablet    speaks   of   the   stars    and    constella- 
tions— 

"  He  (Marduk)  prepared  the  mansion  of  the  great  gods ; 
he  fixed  the  stars  that  corresponded  with  them,  even 

the  Twin  stars 
He   ordained    the    year,  appointing  the  signs  of  the 

Zodiac  over  it; 
for  each  of  the  twelve  months  he  fixed  three  stars, 
from   the   day   when   the   year    issues    forth   to   (its) 

close. 
He  founded  the  mansion  of  the  Sun-god  who  passes 

along  the  ecliptic  that  they  might  know  their 

bounds, 
that   they  might   not   err,   that    they   might  not  go 

astray  in  any  way. 
He  illuminated  the  Moon-god  that  he  might  be  the 

watchman  of  the  night, 
and  ordained  for  him  the  ending  of  the  night  that 

the  day  may  be  known, 

*  L.  W.  King  in  Seven  TcAlets,  etc.,  pp.  60,  61. 


THE  CREATION  OF  MAN  41 

(saying):    'Month    by  month,  without    break,    keep 

watch  in  (thy)  disk. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  month  shine  brightly  on  the 

earth, 
with  glittering  horns  to  determine  six  days. 
On  the  seventh  day  halve  (thy)  disk."'i 

The  portion  which  describes  the  creation  of  plants 
and  animals  has  not  been  recovered,  though  there  is  a 
fragment  which  speaks  of  the  creation  of  "the  cattle  of 
the  field,"  which  has  been  thought  to  belong  to  an 
independent  poem.^ 

The  sixth  tablet,  discovered  by  Mr.  King,  has  some 
interesting  opening  lines  telling  of  the  creation  of  man  by 
Merodach  in  the  place  of  the  fallen  angels. 

"When  Merodach  heard  the  word  of  the  gods, 
Hia  heart  prompted  him  and  he  devised  (a  cunning 

plan). 
He  opened  his  mouth  and  unto  Ea  (he  spake) 
(that    which)    he    had    conceived    in    his    heart    he 

imparted  (unto  him): 
'My  blood  will  I  take  and  bone  will  I  (fashion), 
I  will  make  man,  that  man  may  .  .  . 
'    I  will  create  man  who  shall  inhabit  (the  earth), 
that  the  service  of  the  gods  may  be  established,  and 

that  (their)  shriaes  (may  be  built). 
But  I  will  alter  the  ways  of  the  (hostile)  gods,  I 

will  change  (their  paths); 
together  shall  they  be  punished,  and  unto  evil  shall 

they  be  (delivered).'"' 

On  No.  20  we  find  a  copy  of  the  instructions  which 
Marduk  or  Merodach  gave  .to  man  after  he  had  been 
created,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  tablet  to  which 
this  fragment  belonged  was  connected  with  the  creation 

^  Prof.  Sayce  in  The  "  Higher  Criticism"  etc.,  pp.  69,  70. 
*Ibid.  'IbitL 

6 


42  THE  NINEVEH  GALLERY 

series.  The  god  says,  "Thy  heart  shall  be  pure  before 
thy  God,  for  that  is  what  is  due  to  Him.  Thou  shalt 
pray,  and  shalt  make  supplication,  and  bow  low  to  the 
earth  early  in  the  morning."^  This  fragment  also  makes 
mention  of  a  power  of  evil  called  "  Akil-karsi,"  i.e.  the 
"Calumniator,"  reminding  us  of  the  name  given  to  Satan 
— the  accuser.^ 

The  fragment  numbered  21  gives  what  was  thought  to 
be  an  account  of  the  building  of  the  tower  of  BabeL 

But  the  Gilgamesh  series  to  which  the  *  *  Deluge 
Tablets"  belong  are  the  most  important  in  this  Case. 
Their  mutilated  condition  makes  us  wonder  that  they  could 
ever  have  been  deciphered,  but  as  duplicate  copies  of  some 
portions  exist,  the  work  has  been  rendered  possible.  In 
many  respects  the  account  coincides  with  the  Bible  narrative, 
— the  building  of  the  ship  at  the  command  of  the  god — 
the  smearing  it  over  inside  and  outside  with  bitumen — the 
sending  forth  of  raven  and  dove,  etc. 

The  Chaldean  Noah,  Sisuthros  or  Sit-Napishtim,  relates 
the  story  of  how  the  god  said  to  him — 

14.  " '  Frame  the  house,  build  a  ship :  leave  what  thou 

canst ;  seek  life ! 

15.  Resign  (thy)  goods,  and  cause  (thy)  soul  to  live, 

16.  and  bring  all  the  seed  of  life  into  the  midst  of  the 

ship. 

17.  As  for  the  ship  which  thou  shalt  build, 

18.  .  .  .  cubits  (shall  be)  in  measurement  its  length, 

19.  and  .  .  .  cubits  the  extent  of  its  breadth  and  its 

height. 

20.  Into  the  deep  (then)  launch  it ! ' 

21.  I  understood  and  spake  to  Ea  my  lord. 

22.  '  As  for  the  building  of  the  ship,  0  my  lord,  which 

thou  hast  ordered  thus, 

23.  I  will  observe  (and)  accomplish  (it) ; 

1  Chdde  A,  1900,  p.  37.  =  Rev,  12.  10. 


THE  DELUGE  TABLETS  43 

24.  (but  what)   shall  I  answer  the  city,   the  people 

and  the  old  men?' 

25.  (Ea  opened  his  mouth  and)  says,  he  speaks  to  his 

servant,  even  to  me: 

26.  '  (If  they  question  thee)  thou  shalt  say  unto  them : 

27.  Since  (?)     Bel  is  estranged  from  me  and 

28.  I  will  not  dwell  in  (your)  city,  I  will  not  lay  my 

head  (in)  the  land  of  Bel; 

29.  but  I  will  descend  into  the  deep ;  with  (Ea)  my 

lord  will  I  dwell. 

30.  Bel  will  rain  fertility  upon  you.'"^  .  .  . 

In  a  fragment  from  another  account  we  have  the  god 
saying — 


« ( 


I  will  judge  (him)  above  and  below 

(But)  shut  (not  thou  thy  door) 

(Until)  the  time  that  I  shall  tell  thee  of 

(Then)   enter   the   ship   and   close   the   door  of   the 

vessel.  .  .  . 
he  speaks  to  Ea  (his)  lord: 
'(0  my  lord)  none  has  ever  made  a  ship  (on  this 

wise) 
that  it  should  sail  (?)  over  the  land.'"^  .  .  . 

This  fragment  ends  here.  In  the  other  account  he 
describes  how  he  built  the  ship  according  to  direction; 
poured  bitumen  over  the  outside  and  the  inside,  and  stocked 
it  with  food,  etc. 

70.  "  the  cattle  of  the  field,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field, 

and  the  sons  of  my  people,  all  of  them  did  I 
bring  into  it. 

71.  The  Sun-god  appointed  the  time  and 

72.  utters  the  oracle :  In  the  night  will  I  cause  the 

heavens  to  rain  destruction; 

73.  enter  into  the  ship  and  close  thy  door. 

*  Prof.  Sayoe  in  The  •'  Higher  Criticism,"  eta,  pp.  108-113.  "  Ibid. 


44  THE   NINEVEH  GALLERY 

74.  That   time   drew   near   (whereof)   he   utters   the 

oracle : 

75.  In  this   night   I   will  cause  the  heavens  to  rain 

destruction, 

76.  I  watched  with  dread  the  dawning  of  the  day: 

77.  I  feared  to  behold  the  day. 

78.  I  entered  within  the  ship  and  closed  my  door.  .  .  . 

87.  (The  waters  of  the  morning  at  dawn) 

88.  arose  from  the  horizon  of  heaven,  a  black  cloud; 

89.  The  Storm-god  Eimmon  thundered  in  its  midst, 

and 

90.  Nebo  and  Merodach  the  king  marched  in  front; 

91.  the  throne -bearers   marched   over   mountain  and 

plain ; 

92.  the  mighty  god  of  Death  lets  loose  the  whirlwind; 

93.  Uras  marches  causing  the  storm  (?)  to  descend ; 

94.  the   spirits   of   the  underworld   lifted   up    (their) 

torches, 

95.  with  the  lightning  of  them  they  set  on  fire  the 

world ; 

96.  the  violence  of  the  Storm-god  reached  to  heaven; 

97.  all  that  was  light  was  turned  to  (darkness).  .  .  . 

116.  Six  days  and  nights 

117.  rages  the  wind;  the  flood  and  the  storm  devastate. 

118.  The  seventh  day  when  it  arrived  the  flood  ceased, 

the  storm 

119.  which  had  fought  like  an  army 

120.  rested,  the  sea  subsided,  and  the  tempest  of  the 

deluge  was  ended. 

121.  I  beheld  the  deep  and  uttered  a  cry, 

122.  for  the  whole  of  mankind  was  turned  to  clay; 

123.  like  the  trunks  of  trees  did  the  bodies  float. 

124.  I   opened   the   window  and    the   light   fell  upon 

my  face; 

125.  I  stooped,  and  sat  down  weeping; 

126.  over  my  face  ran  my  tears. 

127.  I  beheld  a  shore  beyond  the  sea ; 

128.  twelve  times  distant  rose  a  land. 


THE  DELUGE  TABLETS  45 

129.  On  the  mountains  of  Nizir  the  ship  grounded; 

130.  the  mountain  of  the  country   of  Nizir  held  the 

ship  and  allowed  it  not  to  float. 

131.  One  day  and  a  second  day  did   the  mountain  of 

Nizir  hold  it. 

132.  A  third  and  a  fourth  day  did  the  mountain  of 

Nizir  hold  it. 

133.  A  fifth  and  a  sixth  day  did  the  mountain  of  Nizir 

hold  it. 

134.  When  the  seventh  day  came  I  sent  forth  a  dove 

and  let  it  go. 

135.  The  dove  went  and  returned:   a  resting-place  it 

found  not  and  it  turned  back. 

136.  I  sent  forth  a  swallow  and  let  it  go ;  the  swallow 

went  and  returned; 

137.  a  resting-place  it  found  not  and  it  turned  back. 

138.  I  sent  forth  a  raven  and  let  it  go. 

139.  The  raven  went  and  saw  the  going  down  of  the 

waters,  and 

140.  it  approached,  it  waded,  it  croaked  and  did  not 

turn  back. 

141.  Then  I  sent  forth  (everything)  to  the  four  points 

of  the  compass;   I  offered  sacrifices. 

142.  I   built  an  altar  on  the  summit  of  the  moun- 

tain. .  .  . 
145.  The  gods  smelt   the  savour,  the  gods  smelt  the 
sweet  savour." 

Then   follows  a  discussion  amongst   the  gods,  Bel  is 
angry  and  says: 

170.  "  'Let  no  living  soul  come  forth,  let  no  man  sur- 

vive in  the  judgment!' 

171.  Uras  opened  his  mouth  and  says,  he  speaks  to 

the  warrior  Bel: 

172.  '  Who  except  Ea  can  devise  a  speech  ? 

173.  for  Ea  understands  all  kinds  of  wisdom.' 

174.  Ea  opened  his  mouth  and   says,  he  says  to  the 

warrior  Bel: 


46  THE  NINEVEH  GALLERY 

175.  '  Thou  art  the  seer  of  the  gods,  O  warrior ! 

176.  Why,  0  why  dost  thou  not  take  counsel,  but  didst 

cause  a  deluge? 

177.  (Let)  the  sinner  bear  his  own  sin,  (let)  the  evil- 

doer bear  his  own  evil-doing. 

178.  Grant  (?)  that   he   be  not  cut  off,  be  merciful 

that  he  be  not  (destroyed). 

179.  Instead  of  causing  a  deluge  let  lions  come  and 

minish  mankind; 

180.  instead   of   causing  a   deluge    let    hysenas  come 

and  minish  mankind ; 

181.  instead  of  causing  a  deluge  let  there  be  a  famine 

and  let  it  (devour)  the  land ; 

182.  instead  of  causing  a  deluge  let   the  plague-god 

come  and  minish  mankind ! '  .  .  . 

185.  Then  Bel  again  took  counsel  and  ascended  into 

the  ship. 

186.  He  took  my  hand  and  caused  me,  even  me,  to 

ascend. 

187.  he  took  my  wife  (also  and)  caused  her  to  bow  at 

my  side; 

188.  he    turned   to   us   and    stood    between    us;    he 

blessed  us  (saying) 

189.  'Hitherto  Sisuthros^  has  been  mortal,  but 

190.  henceforth  Sisuthros  and  his  wife  shall  be  like 

unto  the  gods  even  unto  us,  and 

191.  Sisuthros  shall  dwell  afar  at  the  mouth  of  the 

rivers.' 

192.  Then  he  took  us  afar,  at  the  mouth  of  the  rivers 

he  made  us  dwell."  ^ 

The  tablets  in  Table-Case  B  are  grammatical, 
but  in  Case  C.  there  are  some  interesting  historical 
records. 

Nos.  1-11.  "Fragments  of  an  eight-sided  cylinder  in- 
scribed with  part  of  the  annals  of  Sargou "...  viz.  the 

^  Or  Sit-Napiahtim.       ^  Prof.  Sayce  in  The  "Higher  Criticism"  etc.,  p.  113. 


THE  EPONYM  CANON  47 

campaign  of  Sargon  against  Ashdod,  B.C.  711.  See 
Isaiah  20.  1  (p.  31). 

The  people  of  Ashdod  rejecting  the  king  given  them  by 
Sargon,  revolted,  and  made  a  league  with  other  nations — 
Judah  amongst  them — to  withstand  his  power,  but  were 
defeated  by  Sargon,  and  their  city  once  more  became 
subject  to  Assyria. 

In  Table-Case  D  there  are  "a  number  of  most  im- 
portant documents,  .  .  .  historical  inscriptions  of  Tiglath- 
Pileser  III.,  Sennacherib,  Esarhaddon,  Ashur- 
bani-pal."  The  *  *  Epony m  Canon  "  shown  here  has  been 
of  great  service  in  connection  with  Assyrian  chronology.  The 
eponym  was  an  official  of  high  rank  who  held  office  for  one 
year.  A  careful  record  of  each  name  was  kept,  the  name  of 
the  reigning  king  was  also  inscribed  in  another  column, 
and  any  great  event  might  be  mentioned.  In  one  list  we 
are  told  that  during  the  year  of  office  of  an  eponym  named 
"Pur-Sagali  in  the  month  Sivan  (i.e.  May-June)  an 
eclipse  of  the  sun  took  place;  and  recent  astronomical 
calculations  prove  that  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  visible  at 
Nineveh,  took  place  on  June  15,  763  B.c.  With  this  year 
as  a  fixed  point  we  can  accurately  assign  correct  dates  to 
all  the  important  events."^ 

Nos.  18-36.  Several  of  these  "  fragments  of  terra-cotta 
bowls,  inscribed  with  names  and  titles  and  genealogies  of 
kings  of  Assyria,"  belonged  to  kings  whose  names  or  doings 
are  familiar  to  us  from  Bible  history,  e.g.  Nos.  24  and  29, 
Sargon;  No.  32,  Shalmaneser  II.;  Nos.  35,  36, 
Sennacherib. 

No.  41.  An  inscription  of  Tiglath-Pileser  recording 
the  tribute  of  "  Ahaz  king  of  Judah,"  mentioned  in 
2  Kings  16.  7-10 ;  2  Chron.  28.  16,  20  (see  p.  22). 

No.  42.    An  inscription  of  Esarhaddon. 

^  Guide  A,  p.  57. 


48  THE   NINEVEH  GALLERY 

No.  43  gives  "  an  account  of  the  accession  of  Ashur- 
bani-pal  to  the  throne  of  Assyria,  and  of  the  installation 
of  his  brother  Shamash-shum-ukiu  as  Viceroy  of 
Babylon"  (see  p.  27). 

The  remaining  fragments  relate  to  the  conquests  of 
Ashur-bani-pal,  which  are  illustrated  by  the  great  bas- 
reliefs  in  the  Assyrian  Saloon  and  Basement  (pp.  26-29). 

No.  44  records  his  conquests  of  Arabia. 

Nos.  45-48,  his  wars  in  Elam.  These  four  tablets 
tell  of  the  "bringing  back  of  the  image  of  the  goddess 
Nana,  which  had  been  carried  thither  by  Kudur- 
Nan-hundi  king  of  Elam,  sixteen  hundred  and  thirty 
years  before "  (see  p.  28),  and  thus,  as  we  have  seen,  take 
us  back  to  the  time  of  Abraham. 

Nos.  49,  50,  refer  to  wars  in  Egypt.  It  was  during 
this  campaign  that  he  destroyed  Thebes,  or  No-Amon, 
to  which  reference  is  made  by  the  Prophet  Nahum. 
"Art  thou  better  than  populous  No  (margin  No-Amon), 
that  was  situate  among  the  rivers,  that  had  the  waters 
round  about  it,  whose  rampart  was  the  sea,  and  her 
wall  was  from  the  sea  ?  Ethiopia  and  Egypt  were  her 
strength,  and  it  was  infinite;  Put  and  Lubim  were  thy 
helpers.  Yet  was  she  carried  away,  she  went  into 
captivity."^ 

Amongst  the  documents  in  Table-Case  E,  many 
of  which  have  to  do  with  private  afifairs,  commercial 
contracts,  astronomical  and  astrological  reports,  there  are 
a  few  royal  letters  of  special  interest  to  us. 

No.  104.  A  letter  from  Sennacherib  to  his  son 
Esarhaddon.  We  know  from  the  Bible  that  "Esar- 
haddon  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead."  ^  This  tablet  is 
generally  known  as  the  "Will  of  Sennacherib,"  as  it 
refers  to  certain  objects  given  by  him  to  Esarhaddon. 

»  Nah.  8.  8-10.  «  Isa,  87.  39. 


CLAY  TABLETS  49 

No.  105.  Letter  from  Sennacherib  to  his  father 
Sargon. 

No.  106.  Letter  to  Sargon,  concerning  the  move- 
ments of  Merodach-Baladan  (see  p.  31). 

No.  107.  Letter  of  Shamash-shum-ukin  to  his 
brother  Ashur-bani-pal. 

In  No.  169 — there  is,  twice  over,  a  mention  of  gods 
whose  names  are  linked  together  in  Scripture.  "May 
Bel  and  Nabu,  unto  the  mother  of  the  king,  my  lady, 
be  propitious."     "  Bel  boweth  down,  Nebo  stoopeth.''^ 

In  Table-Case  F  there  are  a  number  of  fragments 
containing  incantations,  spells,  exorcisms  of  witches,  etc. 

No.  3  closes  with  a  remarkable  expression.  "May 
the  Moon-god  destroy  thy  body,  and  may  he  cast  thee 
into  the  Lake  of  Water  and  of  Fire."  How  little  we 
know  of  the  first  revelations  made  by  God.  Here  and 
there  we  are  confronted  with  sentences  which  suggest 
that  far  more  had  been  revealed  than  we  generally 
imagine,  but  it  soon  became  corrupted  into  paganism  and 
heathen  mythology. 

In  Table-Case  I,  No.  32,  there  is  the  impression  of 
a  seal  bearing  the  name  of  Shabako  or  Sabako,  the 
So  mentioned  in  2  Kings  17.  4,  who  helped  Hoshea 
in  his  revolt  against  Assyria  (see  pp.  101,  102).  It  is 
evident  that  he  must  have  had  some  correspondence  with 
Sargon  or  Sennacherib,  as  the  seal  was  found  among  the 
tablets  of  the  Eoyal  Library  at  Nineveh. 

1  Isa.  46.  1. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

FIKST  TO  FOURTH  EGYPTIAN  ROOMS 

Passing  through  the  doorway  at  the  end  of  the  Nineveh 
Gallery  we  mount  the  stairs  to  the  Egyptian  Rooms.  On 
the  left  are  the  First  and  Second  Egyptian  Rooms,  which  are 
full  of  Mummies  and  their  cases.  These  remind  us  of 
several  funeral  processions  which  started  from  Egypt, 
when  similar  burdens  would  be  carried. 

The  closing  chapter  of  Genesis  tells  us  of  two  such. 
We  think  of  the  great  "mourning  to  the  Egyptians" 
when  Jacob's  body,  having  been  embalmed,  was  carried 
with  great  pomp  to  its  resting-place  in  Shechem.^  We 
may  be  sure  the  funeral  cortege  travelled,  not  by  the 
wilderness,  but  by  that  shorter  road  "the  way  of  the 
Philistines."  The  inhabitants  of  the  land,  as  they  looked 
on,  little  knew  that  that  grave  was  the  guarantee  of 
their  own  overthrow. 

The  Book  of  Genesis  ends  with  the  death  of  Joseph. 
"  So  Joseph  died,  being  a  hundred  and  ten  years  old ;  and 
they  embalmed  him,  and  he  was  put  into  a  coffin  in 
Egypt."  ^  We  know  that  "  by  faith  Joseph,  when  he  died, 
made  mention  of  the  departing  of  the  children  of  Israel; 
and  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones."  ^  He  knew 
that  God  would  fulfil  His  promise  of  giving  the  land  to 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  so  gave  this  command  "  in  sure 

1  Gen.  60.  2,  3,  11.  ^  q^^^   qq  26.  a  Heb.  11.  22. 

SO 


MUMMIES  5 1 

and  certain  hope"  of  its  accomplishment.  This  one  act 
of  simple  faith,  out  of  all  his  life  of  trust,  is  cited  by  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

His  mummy,  in  some  such  sarcophagus  as  one  of 
these,  was  carried  all  through  the  wilderness  journey, 
for  "Moses  took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with  him."^  The 
Book  of  Joshua  closes  with  a  record  of  his  burial  in 
Shechem.2 

From  the  address  of  Stephen  we  have  reason  to  believe 
that  the  mummy  of  Joseph  was  not  the  only  one  carried 
by  the  children  of  Israel  through  their  wilderness  journey. 
"  So  Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  died,  he,  and  our 
fathers,  and  were  carried  over  into  Sychem."^  The  mummy 
of  the  head  of  the  family  would  be  looked  upon  in  Egypt 
as  a  very  sacred  treasure,  and  it  is  not  likely  that  the 
body  of  Joseph  only  would  be  brought  away  when  they 
left  the  land.  The  bones  of  each  of  the  sons  of  Jacob 
would  probably  be  carried  by  their  several  tribes  (unless 
they  had  been  conveyed  thither  previously),  for  Stephen 
seems  to  imply  that  all  the  "fathers"  were  buried  in 
Shechem. 

There  are  many  objects  of  interest  in  these  rooms. 
Especially  we  notice,  on  the  left  as  we  enter,  an  example 
of  very  ancient  mode  of  burial.  The  body  is  that  of 
a  fair-haired  man  of  some  early  race.  In  the  opposite 
Case  on  the  right  are  the  few  crumbling  bones  of  the 
builder  of  one  of  the  pyramids. 

In  the  Third  Egyptian  Eoom  there  are  many  represen- 
tations of  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  mummified 
animals  sacred  to  those  gods.  The  plagues  which  were 
sent  upon  Pharaoh  because  he  would  not  let  the  children 
of  Israel  go,  were  directed  against  the  gods.  The  Lord 
said  to  Moses,  "Against   all   the  gods  of  Egypt  I   will 

»  Ex.  18.  19.  a  Josh.  24.  32.  »  Acts  7.  16,  18. 


5  2      FIRST  TO  FOURTH  EGYPTIAN  ROOMS 

execute  judgment." ^  He  redeemed  His  people  "from 
Egypt,  from  the  nations  and  their  gods."^  The  1st  and 
2nd  plagues,  when  the  water  was  turned  into  blood  and 
the  frogs  invaded  the  land,  fell  amongst  others  upon  the 
Nile-god  and  the  god  of  water. 

The  3rd,  when  the  dust  of  the  earth  became  lice — 
upon  the  Earth-god  Seb. 

The  4th  and  8th,  when  swarms  of  flies  and  locusts 
filled  the  air — were  directed  against  Shu,  the  personifica- 
tion of  the  atmosphere.  The  5th,  the  murrain  of  beasts, 
would  touch  the  sacred  bulls.  Apis  was  the  sacred  bull 
of  Memphis,  Mnevis  of  Heliopolis,  and  Hathor  was  the 
cow  goddess,  who  represented  the  place  of  sunrise. 

In  the  6th  plague  the  ashes  of  the  furnace  were  flung 
to  the  winds,  as  were  the  ashes  of  the  victims  in  the 
worship  of  Sutech  or  Typhon. 

The  7th  plague  of  the  hail  and  the  mighty  storm 
which  accompanied  it,  and  the  9th  plague  of  darkness, 
were  judgments  on  the  larger  number  of  the  gods  of 
Egypt,  the  hawk-headed  Horus  who  represented  the  Face 
of  Heaven,  Heru  the  sky-god,  Ra,  Osiris,  and  all  the 
other  forms  of  the  Sun-god,  such  as  Ftah  the  rising  sun, 
Temu  the  setting  sun,  Sekhet  the  fierce,  scorching,  and 
destroying  heat  of  the  sun's  rays, — all  these  and  many 
more  were  proved  to  be  absolutely  powerless  before  the 
God  of  Israel,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth. 

The  last  plague  touched  Pharaoh  himself,  and  the 
kings  of  Egypt  were  themselves  elevated  to  a  position 
amongst  their  gods. 

In  these  rooms,  especially  Room  iv.,  there  are  many 
things  illustrative  of  early  "Church  History"  in 
Egypt  and  the  foes  with  which  it  had  to  contend. 

In   the   3rd  Egyptian  Room — Table-Case   B,   Nos. 

1  Ex.  12.  12.  2  2  Sam.  7.  23. 


COPTIC  REMAINS  53 

39-51,  there  are  specimens  of  linen  embroidered  with 
figures  of  saints,  religious  symbols,  birds,  etc. ;  they  were 
originally  sewn  on  mummy  shirts  of  the  Coptic  period. 
In  the  Guide,  attention  is  drawn  to  the  signs  of  crosses 
within  wreaths  in  the  corners  of  four  specimens,  "one 
(No.  48)  has  the  sign  of  the  cross  without  a  wreath,  and 
the  other  (No.  49)  has  the  old  Egyptian  sign  for  life  (the 
cross  with  a  loop  at  the  top)  within  a  wreath.  These 
facts  show  that  the  Coptic  Christians  confused  the  old 
heathen  symbol  with  the  Christian  Cross."^  May  we  not 
also  add  that  they  prove  the  probable  origin  of  the  use  of 
the  symbol  ?  Many  things  which  are  considered  Christian 
are  really  derived  from  the  pagan  religions  of  Egypt  and 
Babylon. 

In  Table-Case  M  (Room  iv.),  on  the  sloping  side 
of  the  case,  there  are  many  Coptic  inscriptions.  The 
Egyptian  Christians  from  about  the  third  century  A.D.  were 
called  Copts,  and,  probably  in  imitation  of  the  heathen 
recluses  of  the  temple  of  Serapis  (see  p.  119),  many  of  them 
became  hermits  and  recluses  of  various  kinds.  In  time, 
the  whole  land  was  bordered  by  communities  of  monks 
and  anchorites — Dean  Milman  tells  us  that  there  were 
in  the  desert  of  Nitria  alone,  5,000 :  that  the  total  number 
of  males  was  estimated  at  76,000,  and  the  females  at 
27,700.2  How  different  would  have  been  the  history  of 
the  Church  had  these  100,000  men  and  women  been 
truly  converted  to  God,  and  become  missionaries  to  the 
heathen  around ! 

In  these  Cases  we  see  fragments  of  Coptic  writing — 
No.  6,  a  promise  by  three  persons  who  wish  to  be  made 
deacons,  that  they  will  obey  the  canons  to  learn  the 
Gospel  of  St.  John  by  heart,  etc.;  portions  of  Scripture, 
as  in  No.  17,  which  is  an  extract  from  Psalm  98,  "  Sing 

^  Guide  B,  p.  25.  '  The  Hittory  of  Chriitianity,  voL  iii.  p.  209. 


54      FIRST  TO  FOURTH  EGYPTIAN  ROOMS 

unto  the  Lord  a  new  song";  hymns  and  psalms  and 
exercises,  ISTos.  20,  22,  33. 

In  division  4  there  are  many  Coptic  crosses. 

No,  153  is  "a  bronze  ornament  from  a  staff  used  in 
religious  processions,  with  model  of  the  seven-branched 
candlestick  which  stood  in  the  Jewish  Tabernacle." 

In  Table-Case  N  there  is  a  collection  of  Gnostic 
amulets  and  gems.  Gnosticism  had  its  home  in  Egypt. 
A  few  things  taken  from  Christianity  were  blended  with 
Platonic  philosophy,  Jewish  theology,  and  old  Oriental 
theosophy.  The  word  Gnostic  comes  from  the  Greek 
word  gnosis,  knowledge.  They  claimed  a  superior  know- 
ledge, but  it  was  a  science  or  knowledge  "falsely  so 
called." 

No.  201  is  "a  chalcedony  plaque  inscribed  with  the 
names  of  Michael,  Gabriel,  Raphael,"  etc. 

No.  231  is  "  a  jaspar  oval  for  inlaying  in  a  ring,  inscribed 
with  the  scene  of  the  Crucifixion." 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  also  (Wall-Cases  176- 
180),  No.  5,  a  lamp,  mentioning  the  name  of  Mark 
the  Evangelist.  It  is  supposed  that  about  a.d.  37  he 
commenced  a  mission  in  Egypt,  and  founded  the  Church 
of  Alexandria  about  a.d.  40,  being  martyred  during  the 
reign  of  Nero,  about  A.D.  61-62. 

To  return  to  ancient  Egyptian  history,  in  Wall-Case 
175  we  see  a  number  of  unbaked  bricks.  Our  thoughts 
at  once  go  to  the  time  of  the  oppression  in  Egypt,  when 
the  children  of  Israel  were  forced  to  make  bricks  without 
straw.  No.  6020  is  stamped  with  the  cartouche  of 
Rameses  II.,  and  the  straw  can  be  plainly  seen  in  it, 
also  in  No.  6007.  "  The  mud  of  Egypt  was  not  very 
suitable  for  the  making  of  bricks  of  a  large  size,  hence 
Egyptian  bricks  are  relatively  small,  and  it  was  found 
necessary  to  mix  chopped  straw  and  reeds,  hair,  etc.,  with 


EGYPTIAN  JEWELS  55 

the  mud  in  order  to  bind  it  together."^  "And  Pharaoh 
commanded  the  same  day  the  taskmasters  of  the  people, 
and  their  officers,  saying,  Ye  shall  no  more  give  the 
people  straw  to  make  brick,  as  heretofore:  let  them  go 
and  gather  straw  for  themselves.  ...  So  the  people 
were  scattered  abroad  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt, 
to  gather  stubble  instead  of  straw."  ^ 

In  Case  J  are  a  number  of  Egyptian  jewels,  reminding 

us  of  the  jewels  of  gold  which  the  Israelitish  women  asked 

from  the  Egyptians  on  the  night  of  their  escape.     In  our 

Authorised    Version    the    word    rendered    "borrowed"    is 

misleading.      There  was  no   thought  of  the  jewels  being 

lent,  the  word  is  rendered  in  the  RV.  "asked."    Jewels 

such  as  these  must  have  been  thrust  upon  the  Israelitish 

women,  and  the  settings  of  such  ornaments  provided  the 

gold  which  they  afterwards  offered  for  the  construction  of 

the  Tabernacle.    The  command  God  gave  in  Egypt :  "  Let 

every  man  ask  of  his  neighbour,  and  every  woman  of  her 

neighbour,  jewels  of  silver  and  jewels  of  gold,"'  was  in 

anticipation   of    His   later    command:    "Speak  unto   the 

children   of  Israel,   that   they   bring  Me   an    offering:   of 

every  man   that  giveth  it  willingly   with    his   heart  ye 

shall  take  My  offering.      And  this  is  the  offering  which 

ye  shall  take  of  them;   gold,  and   silver,  and  brass,  and 

blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,"  etc.*     In  the  Wall-Cases 

adjoining,  Nos.  182-187,  there  are  a  number  of  bronze 

Egyptian  mirrors.     From  mirrors  such  as  these  the  laver 

was  made,  for  we  read  that  the  mirrors   of   the    women 

were  thus   used.^     It   was   appropriate   that   that    which 

typified    "the   washing  of    water   by   the  Word" — itself 

compared  to  a  mirror* — should  be  thus  constructed.     On 

the   walls  of  this  room   there  are  painted  plaster  casts 

»  Cfuide  B,  p.  266.         «  Ex.  6.  6,  7,  12.      »  Ex.  11.  2. 

*  Ex.  25.  2-4.  5  Ex.  38.  8.  •  Eph.  6.  26  ;  Jm.  1.  23-26. 


56      FIRST  TO  FOURTH  EGYPTIAN  ROOMS 

representing  the  wars  of  Rameses  II.,  one  of  which 
includes  the  conquest  of  a  Canaanitish  tribe. 

The  names  and  cartouches  of  many  of  the  kings  of 
Egypt  are  to  be  found  in  the  various  cases  on  all  sorts 
of  objects,  but  the  kings  themselves  are  better  represented 
in  the  Egyptian  Gallery  on  the  ground  floor,  with  the 
exception  of  Shishak,  Shabako  or  So,  Tirhakah, 
and  Necho,  of  whom  we  have  no  large  statues. 

In  the  large  collection  of  scarabs^  in  Table-Case  D 
the  name  of  Shishak  or  Shishanq  appears  on  No.  1269ff ; 
Shabako  or  So,  No.  1324fif;  Tirhakah,  No.  1333;  and 
Necho,  No.  1341,  42.  In  "Wall-Case  No.  85  is  "an 
alabaster  jar  with  the  prenomen  and  titles  of  Shabaka," 
and  No.  86,  "  alabastron  inscribed  with  that  of  Necho  ii." 

^  Engraved  stones  in  the  shape  of  a  beetle  "found  in  the  swathings  of 
mummies,  and  in  rings  on  their  fingers,  and  in  chambers  of  tombs,  and  in 
ruins  of  temples,  etc." — Guide  B,  p.  187. 


ill  a;  :.-j'Jii     ,i  •.„<.?«   Yl.i 


'ronr.a;;:i 


4 


nfvl 


I  ">       Sbjjiar,  a 


'IKO    C 


.   )i&y*.  *3Xi-;H<J   id   tut;  time  of 
V)e  Mo 


if 


J      s 


3?" 


[IE 


.»*    li 


llgtf^^3F 


>/^ 


n 


CHAPTER    IX 

BABYLONIAN   AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM    (Plate  VI.) 

This  room  is  a  veritable  storehouse  of  objects  which 
are  full  of  interest  to  the  Bible  student.  It  contains  all 
sorts  of  inscribed  antiquities  and  historical  records,  not 
only  of  the  kings  already  mentioned,  but  of  those  who 
lived  at  the  dawn  of  history  and  also  of  those  who  reigned 
as  late  as  a  century  B.C. 

The  large  inscribed  monument  on  the  right  of  the 
doorway  is  a  cast  of  the  celebrated  Code  of  Laws  of 
Khamiuurabi  ^  or  Hammurabi.  He  is  supposed  to  be 
identical  with  the  Amraphel  ^  king  of  Shiuar,  mentioned 
in  Gen.  14.  The  twenty-eight  columns  of  text  contain  a 
very  remarkable  series  of  laws,  and  the  fact  that  such  a 
wise  code  should  have  existed  in  the  time  of  Abraham 
has  been  urged  as  a  proof  that  the  Mosaic  law  was  not 
a  revelation  from  God,  but  a  copy  from  Babylon.  As  we 
have  already  noticed  (see  p.  38),  there  is  clear  evidence 
from  God's  words  concerning  Abraham,  that  He  had 
already  given  a  "charge,"  "commandments,"  "statutes," 
and    "laws."'     How   God    gave    these    laws  we   do  not 

^  This  name  is  often  spelt  Hammarabi,  but  the  spelling  on  the  labels 
and  in  the  Ouides  has  been  followed. 

'  "  In  Babylonian  Uu  is  *  god,'  the  Hebrew  d,  and  Anvmu-rapi  Uu  would 
be  ' Khammu-rabi  the  god.'  Now  Ammu-rapi  Uu  is  letter  for  letter  the 
Amraphel  of  Grenesis." — Prof.  Sayce  in  Mon.  FacU  and,  Higher  Critieal 
Fanciet,  p.  60. 

3  Gen.  26.  5. 

8  « 


58       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

know.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  stone  the  king  is 
represented  "in  the  traditional  attitude  of  worship,  in  the 
act  of  receiving  them  from  the  Sun-god,  who  is  seated 
on  a  mountain";  and  it  may  be  that  there  is  here  a 
much  corrupted  record  of  a  real  fact. 

Khammurabi's  code^  seems  to  explain  several  of  the 
customs  of  the  patriarchs,  such  as  Sarah  giving  Hagar 
to  Abraham,  Eachel  giving  Bilhah  to  Jacob,  because  they 
were  childless.  A  provision  covering  this  is  in  the  code. 
There  are  also  laws  concerning  the  adoption  of  a  slave, 
thus  making  him  a  freeman  and  the  heir  of  his  adopted 
father,  reminding  us  of  Abraham's  reference  to  Eliezer.^ 
There  are  many  laws  against  theft  of  any  kind,  a  death 
penalty  being  attached  to  robbery  from  the  palace.  This 
reminds  us  of  the  supposed  theft  of  Joseph's  cup,  and 
explains  the  fear  of  his  brethren.^  The  customs  represented 
in  Gen.  24.  where  Abraham  seeks  a  wife  for  his  son, 
the  giving  of  gifts,  etc.,  are  all  in  keeping  with  the  code. 
Another  law  illustrates  the  adoption  of  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh  by  their  grandfather  Jacob.* 

Before  this  code  of  Khammurabi  was  found,  the  critics 
had  been  saying  that  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  was 
written  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  and  the  other  books  of 
Moses  subsequently.  "This  discovery  undermined  the 
very  foundations  of  'the  critical  hypothesis.'  But  instead 
of  repenting  of  their  error  and  folly,  the  critics  turned 
round,  and,  with  amazing  effrontery,  declared  that  the 
Mosaic  code  was  borrowed  from  Babylon.  This  is  a 
most  reasonable  conclusion  on  the  part  of  those  who 
regard   the   Mosaic  law  as  a  purely  human   code.     But 


*  For  a  translation  of  the  Code  see  T.  G.  Pinches,  LL.D.,  in  The  Old 
Testament  in  the  Light  of  the  Historical  Records  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia, 
Appendix. 

2  Gen.  15.  2,  3.  ^  Gen.  44.  9.  *  Gen.  48.  6. 


UR,  ERECH,  AND  LARSA  59 

here  the  critic  is  'hoist  with  his  own  petard.'  For  if 
the  Mosaic  law  were  based  on  the  Hammurabi  code,  it 
could  not  have  been  framed  in  the  days  of  Josiah  long  ages 
after  Hammurabi  had  been  forgotten.  This  Hammurabi 
discovery  is  one  of  many  that  led  Professor  Sayce  to 
declare  that  'the  answer  of  archaeology  to  the  theories 
of  modern  "criticism"  is  complete;  the  Law  preceded 
the  Prophets,  and  did  not  follow  them.'  But  even 
this  is  not  all.  It  is  a  canon  of  'criticism'  with  these 
men  that  no  Biblical  statement  is  ever  to  be  accepted 
unless  confirmed  by  some  pagan  authority;  Gen.  14. 
was  therefore  dismissed  as  fable  on  account  of  its  naming 
Amraphel  as  a  king  of  Babylon.  But  Amraphel  is  only 
another  form  of  the  name  of  Hammurabi,  who  now 
stands  out  as  one  of  the  great  historical  characters  of 
the  past."^ 

In  the  Wall-Cases  on  the  left  is  a  remarkable  series 
of  bricks  from  the  ruins  of  royal  palaces  in  Babylon  and 
Assyria.  The  date  of  many  of  these  inscribed  relics  is 
extremely  remote.  At  the  left  of  the  doorway  we 
find  those  which  speak  of  days  when  history  and  legend 
are  inextricably  mixed.  Beginning  at  No.  12  we  notice 
that  many  are  stamped  with  the  names  of  kings  of  Ur, 
Erech,  and  Larsa,  and  some  of  them  mention  also  the 
building  of  temples  to  the  Moon-god  Nannar.  The  cities 
of  Ur  and  Erech  were  sacked  by  the  Elamite  dynasty 
already  referred  to,  and  we  have  seen  how  Ashur-bani-pal 
restored  the  image  of  the  goddess  Nana  which  had  been 
carried  to  Elam  sixteen  hundred  years  before  (see  p.  28, 
and  Nineveh  Gallery,  Case  D.,  45-48).  These  bricks  give 
evidence  that  Abraham's  early  home  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees 
was  in  one  of  the  greatest  cities  of  the  day. 

The  bricks  numbered  from  59  to  69  refer  to  the  next 

'  Sir  Robert  Aaderaon  in  In  Defence,  p.  171-2. 


6o       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

event  in  history  with  which  we  are  familiar  from  the 
Bible  record.  The  invading  hosts  were  not  content  with 
their  conquest  of  Babylonia.  After  Abraham  had  left  Ur 
and  Haran,  and  had  pitched  his  tent  in  the  land  that 
was  afterwards  to  be  his  for  an  inheritance,  they  also 
made  their  way  into  Palestine. 

One  of  the  four  confederate  kings  who  fought  against 
the  five  kings  of  Canaan  is  called  in  Genesis  Ariooh 
king  of  Ellasar.  These  bricks  record  the  name  of 
Bim-Sin,  or  Eri-aku,  king  of  Larsa.  The  chief  of 
the  confederacy  is  called  Chedorlaomer  king  of  Elam, 
while  these  inscriptions,  63-66,  tell  of  one  named  Kudur- 
Mabuk,  governor  of  Elam,  the  father  of  Eriaku.  The 
prefix  in  both  cases  is  almost  identical,  Chedor  or  Kudur, 
and  this  king  evidently  belonged  to  the  same  dynasty 
as  the  king  conquered  by  Abraham. 

Nos.  69-73  are  the  inscriptions  of  Khammurabi.  We 
hear  no  more  of  the  Elamite  rulers,  for  this  great  king, 
who  was  at  first  confederate  with  them,  after  their  defeat 
in  Palestine,  seems  to  have  completed  their  final  over- 
throw and  assumed  the  power.  We  read  concerning 
Abraham  and  his  family,  "  Truly,  if  they  had  been  mindful 
of  that  country  from  whence  they  came  out,  they  might 
have  had  opportunity  to  have  returned."^  This  was  an 
opportunity,  but  Abraham  did  not  take  it.  The  figure 
on  the  slab,  No.  72,  represents  Khammurabi  himself, 
and  "bears  the  title  (incomplete)  'King  of  Amoria' 
(the  Amorites)."^  No.  73  describes  his  greatness  and 
glory. 

The  first  Babylonian  empire  dates  from  the  days  of 
Khammurabi.  Then  Babylon  for  the  first  time  became 
the  real  capital  of  the  land.  As  shown  by  these  bricks 
and  other  records,  the  separate  cities  of  Babylonia,  like 
*  Heb.  11.  15.  "  Dr.  Pinchea  in  The  Old  TestametU,  etc.,  Frontispiece. 


SARGON  OF  AGADE  6i 

those  in  Palestine  in  the  time  of  Joshua,  had  their  own 
kings. 

In  the  adjoining  Cases,   A,  B,  and  C  (Plate  VI., 
p.   57),  there  are  many  very  ancient  inscriptions.      Some 
of  these,  in  Case  C  especially,  are  said  to  date  back  as  far 
as  about  b.c.  4000.    We  can  only  emphasise  the  "  about," 
chronology  being  somewhat  uncertain  just  at  that   time. 
It  is  very   clear  from  the   writing  and  other  facts  that 
they  are  exceedingly  ancient.     One  of  the  most  interest- 
ing is  the  "  stone  mace-head  (Case  C,  No.  6)  with  inscription 
in  archaic  Babylonian  characters,  dedicated  to  the  Sun-god 
at  Sippar,  by   Sargon  king  of  Agade,  who,  according 
to  the  statement  of  Nabonidus,  reigned  about  B.C.  3800. 
The  king  is  referred  to  on  a  cylinder  of  Nabonidus  (see 
Case   Q,  No.   65),  which  states  that  in   the  course  of 
certain  work  which  he  was  undertaking  in  connection  with 
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  of  the  Sun-god,  at  Sippar, 
he  found  an  inscription  of  Nard.m-Sin  the  son  of  Sargon, 
the  original  founder  of  the  temple,  'which  had  not  been 
seen    for    three    thousand    two    hundred    years.'       Now 
Nabonidus  reigned    from    B.C.  555    to    B.C.  538,    and,    on 
the  assumption   that   the  year  of  the  restoration  of  the 
temple  was  B.C.  550,  by  adding   550  to   3200,  a  date  of 
B.C.  3750  has  been  obtained  for  the  reign  of  Naram-Sin. 
And  Naram-Sin  was  the  son  of  Sargon,  to  whom,  therefore, 
the  date  of  B.C.  3800   has  been  assigned."     "  But  recent 
excavation    and  research  have    shown    that    the    scribes 
of  Nabonidus  exaggerated  this  interval,"^  and  we  cannot 
rely  on  the  chronology :    but  we  have  proof  that  in  the 
remote  days  of  this  king  of  Agade,  the  Accad  mentioned 
in  Gen.  10.  was  a  city  of  chief  importance. 

"The  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel  (Babylon), 
and  Erech,  and  Accad,  and  Calneh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar."  * 

^  Ovide  A,  pp.  112,  143,  3.  -  Gen.  10.  10. 


62       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

The  days  when  the  city  of  Calueh  stood  foremost  were 
earlier  still.  Erech  flourished  in  the  time  of  Abraham, 
and  Khammurabi  set  up  his  kingdom  in  Babylon, 
showing  that  these  four  cities  are  mentioned  in  the  reverse 
order  in  which  they  were  chronologically  of  chief  import- 
ance. Babel  was  built  first,  but  these  other  cities  seem 
to  have  soon  become  more  prominent  until  Erech  and 
Ur  were  sacked.  Later  still,  Khammurabi  consolidated 
the  empire  and  made  Babylon  his  capital 

In  Case  A,  which  contains  a  number  of  tablets  re- 
ferring to  legal  and  commercial  transactions,  the  names 
of  the  same  kings  that  are  mentioned  on  the  bricks  occur 
again  and  again.  Many  of  the  deeds  are  dated  "Eeign 
of  Khammurabi  king  of  Babylon."  From  the  earliest 
times  we  see  therefore  that  the  Babylonians  were  most 
careful  in  the  preservation  of  all  legal  documents.  A 
dupKcate  of  the  transaction  was  made  on  the  clay  envelope 
as  well  as  on  the  tablet  itself.  The  broken  envelopes  are 
shown  in  Case  A,  side  by  side  with  the  tablet.  The  mark 
of  the  seal  can  be  noticed  on  the  left-hand  side  or  the  back 
of  each,  also  the  list  of  witnesses'  names. 

These  records  illustrate  the  incident  in  the  book  of 
Jeremiah  when  he  was  instructed  by  God  to  buy  the 
field  in  Anathoth.  He  says :  "  And  I  bought  the  field  of 
Hanameel  my  uncle's  son,  that  was  in  Anathoth,  and 
weighed  him  the  money,  even  seventeen  shekels  of  silver. 
And  I  subscribed  the  evidence,  and  sealed  it,  and  took 
witnesses,  and  weighed  him  the  money  in  the  balances. 
So  I  took  the  evidence  of  the  purchase,  both  that  which 
was  sealed  according  to  the  law  and  custom,  and  that 
which  was  open."^  These  evidences  of  the  purchased 
possession  were  to  be  "  put  in  an  earthen  vessel  that  they 
may  continue  many  days."  The  incident  was  given  as  a 
1  Jer.  32.  9-11,  14. 


ASSYRIAN  BRICKS  63 

sign  that  after  the  captivity  the  land  would  once  more 
return  to  its  rightful  possessors. 

God  Himself  has  a  purchased  possession.  The  evidence 
is  "sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption."  "We  who  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  "  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit 
of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance  until 
the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession,"  ^  and  He 
too  has  put  this  evidence  of  His  purchase  "in  earthen 
vessels."  ^ 

Returning  to  the  Wall-Cases,  we  see  in  Cases  9-12 
a  number  of  boundary  stones.  There  is  also  a  large 
boundary  stone  near  the  door,  opposite  Khammurabi's  code. 
They  remind  us  of  the  command,  "  Remove  not  the  ancient 
landmark,  which  thy  fathers  have  set."  (Prov.  22.  28; 
23.  10 ;  Deut.  27.  17.)  Such  stones  are  amongst  the  oldest 
existing  monuments. 

The  bricks  in  these  and  adjoining  cases  are  inscribed 
with  the  names  of  the  kings  of  Assyria,  whose  monuments 
we  have  already  seen  in  the  galleries  downstairs. 

Nos.  120-124  record  the  name  and  titles  of  Shal- 
maneser  II.,  the  Shalmaneser  of  "the  Black  Obelisk"; 
Nos.  125-131,  Sargon;  Nos.  132-140,  Sennacherib; 
Nos.  141-143,  door-sockets  and  pivots  inscribed  with  the 
same  name ;  Nos.  144-146,  Esarhaddon  ;  Nos.  147  and 
148  represent  Ashur-bani-pal  himself,  and  No.  153  his 
brother  Shamash-shum-ukin.  The  slabs  numbered 
150-152  record  the  restoration  of  a  temple  of  Nineveh,  in 
commemoration  of  the  victories  of  Ashur-bani-pal  over  the 
Elamites  (see  pp.  26-29,  36). 

Wall-Cases  16-19  are  chiefly  filled  with  bricks, 
inscriptions,  etc.,  belonging  to  Nebuchadnezzar  II.,  who 
is  so  well  known  to  us  from  Bible  history  as  the  conqueror 
of  Jerusalem.     The  king  whcj  carried  captive  the  kings  arid 

>  Eph.  1.  18,  14  ;  4.  30.  "2  C3or.  4.  7. 


64       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

princes  and  people  of  Judah — the  proud  king  who  himself 
represented  "  the  head  of  gold "  in  the  vision  of  the  great 
image  which  God  revealed  to  him, — he  it  was  who  set  up 
the  golden  image  in  imitation  of  what  he  had  seen,  and 
who  cast  into  the  fiery  furnace  the  faithful  Jews,  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abednego.  He  it  was  who  saw  walking  with 
them  in  the  fire  the  form  of  a  fourth  who  was  like  the  Son 
of  God.  The  miracle  made  a  great  impression,  but  did  not 
suffice  to  touch  his  heart.  Daniel  tells  us  how,  after  he 
exalted  himself  still  further,  and  refused  to  bow  before  the 
King  of  heaven,  his  pride  was  humbled;  but  at  last  he 
learnt  his  lesson,  and,  when  his  reason  was  restored,  he 
proclaimed  to  all  his  people  how  he  "  blessed  the  Most 
High,  and  praised  and  honoured  Him  that  liveth  for  ever, 
whose  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion,  and  His  king- 
dom is  from  generation  to  generation :  and  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  earth  are  reputed  as  nothing:  and  He  doeth 
according  to  His  will  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and  among 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth :  and  none  can  stay  His  hand, 
or  say  unto  Him,  What  doest  Thou?"  and  he  ended  his 
remarkable  testimony  thus  :  "  Now  I  Nebuchadnezzar  praise 
and  extol  and  honour  the  King  of  heaven,  all  whose  works 
are  truth,  and  His  ways  judgment :  and  those  that  walk  in 
pride  He  is  able  to  abase."  ^ 

The  inscriptions  before  us,  especially  No.  181,  Case  18, 
a  cast  of  the  India  House  Inscription,  together  with 
many  other  records  (see  p.  75),  show  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
made  no  idle  boast  when,  walking  upon  the  roof  of  his 
palace  and  looking  over  his  royal  city,  he  said,  "  Is  not  this 
great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built." ^  His  building  operations 
were  evidently  very  extensive;  and  travellers  tell  us  that 
the  village  of  Hillah,  not  far  from  the  fuins  of  Babylon, 
is  almost  entirely  built  with, bricks  and  stones  from  the 

1  Dan.  4.  34-37.  ^  Vera.  29,  30. 


DARIUS  THE  GREAT  65 

ancient  city,  many  of  them  still  inscribed  with  the  name 
of  Nebuchadnezzar.  This  fact  is  a  proof  that  the  actual 
city  of  Babylon  is  to  be  rebuilt,  for  the  prophecies  con- 
cerning the  destruction  of  Babylon  have  not  yet  been 
fulfilled,  viz.  it  is  to  be  destroyed  by  fire  from  heaven,  as 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ;  no  Arab  is  to  pitch  his  tent  there 
after  its  destruction;  and  "They  shall  not  take  of  thee  a 
stone  for  a  comer,  nor  a  stone  for  foundations."  ^  No 
sudden  calamity  brought  the  Babylonian  empire  to  an  end. 
After  repeated  conquests  it  gradually  faded  away,  and  none 
of  these  prophecies  have  yet  been  fulfilled. 

The  bricks  numbered  183,  187,  are  stamped  with  the 
name  of  Nabonidus,  the  father  of  Belshazzar  (see 
p.  76). 

Nos.  196-203,  Case  19,  record  "  the  names  and  titles  of 
a  number  of  the  Elamite  kings  who  reigned  at  Susa  (about 
B.C.  700),  the  'Shushan,  the  palace'  of  Esther  1.  2."* 
In  those  of  Kutir-Nakhkhunte,  No.  198,  199  (or  Kudur- 
Nan-hundi),  we  notice  the  prefix  of  the  Elamite  kings  of 
the  time  of  Abraham — Chedorlaomer,  Kudur-Mabuk  (p.  60). 

In  "Wall-Cases  20-22  (Plate  VI.,  p.  57,  at  the  end 
of  the  gallery)  there  are  some  casts  from  the  large 
inscriptions  of  Darius  the  Great  (Darius  Hystaspes)  on 
the  Behistun  Bock  in  Persia,  and  on  the  floor  of 
Case  21  are  the  actual  paper  impressions  made  by  Sir 
Henry  Eawlinson  in  1837.  The  great  inscription  in  three 
languages,  Persian,  Scythic,  and  Babylonian,  had  been 
cut  on  the  face  of  the  cliff  by  order  of  Darius  Hystaspes 
and  furnished  the  key  by  which  the  cuneiform  writing 
was  deciphered,  just  as  the  Rosetta  Stone  gave  the  key 
to  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphs  (p.  103).  At  much  personal 
risk  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  managed   to  obtain  copies  of 

>  laa.  18.  19,  20  ;  Jer.  60.  40 ;  61.  25,  26  ;  Rey.  la  18,  19. 
'  OuifU  A,  p.  102. 

9 


66       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

all  the  different  sections,  but  it  was  no  easy  task.  Scaling 
ladders  proved  useless,  and  in  order  to  reach  some  of 
the  highest  lines  of  inscription — more  than  one  hundred 
feet  from  the  ground — he  had  to  be  let  down  from 
the  top  of  the  rock.  On  studying  these  copies,  it  was 
first  noticed  that  a  certain  character  was  to  be  met  with 
at  regular  intervals,  and  scholars  concluded  that  it 
must  be  some  sign  to  divide  the  words.  They  thought 
that  the  name  of  the  king  to  whom  the  inscription 
belonged  would  probably  appear  in  the  first  line,  and 
they  tried  several,  such  as  Xerxes,  Artaxerxes,  and 
Cyrus,  but  they  did  not  agree  with  the  number  of 
characters.  Then  they  tried  Darius,  and  found  that 
this  suited  it,  Daryvush,  and  thus  his  name  was 
the  first  deciphered  word  in  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian ; 
and  with  this  key  the  rest  of  the  secret  was  un- 
locked. "As  some  scholars  doubted  the  interpretation 
of  Assyrian,  however,  an  inscription  of  king  Tiglath- 
Pileser  was  procured,  and  given  to  three  different  scholars 
to  decipher.  They  were  not  to  communicate  with  one 
another,  and  the  translations  were  to  be  sent  to  the 
Eoyal  Asiatic  Society  in  sealed  packets,  which  were  to 
be  opened  before  a  select  committee  of  the  Society. 
These  rules  were  strictly  observed,  and  when  they  came 
to  be  compared  they  were  found,  with  the  exception  of 
one  or  two  details,  to  be  exactly  alike,  thus  proving  the 
correctness  of  the  translations." 

In  "Wall-Case  27,  on  the  right  of  the  gallery,  there 
are  some  lion-shaped  weights,  the  standard  Assyrian 
Manah.  We  are  familiar  with  the  name  of  the  other 
weight,  the  shekel.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the 
names  of  these  weights  were  mentioned  in  the  hand- 
writing on  the  wall  at  Belshazzar's  feast.  Daniel's 
interpretation   showed  that  each  solemn  message  had   to 


THE  HANDWRITING  ON  THE  WALL       67 

do  with  weighing  and  measuring.  "And  this  is  the 
writing  that  was  written,  Mene,  Mene,  Tekel,  Upharsin. 
This  is  the  interpretation  of  the  thing:  Mene;  God 
hath  numbered  thy  kingdom  and  finished  it.  Tekel; 
Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  foimd  wanting. 
Peees;  Thy  kingdom  is  divided,  and  given  to  the  Medes 
and  Persians."  1 

" Par'su,  or  bar'su,  in  Assyrian,  means  'a  part  of  a 
shekel'  Mene  is  the  equivalent  alike  of  the  weight  and 
the  verb  manil,  '  to  reckon.'  In  the  Babylonian  language, 
therefore,  the  mysterious  words  which  appeared  upon  the 
wall  would  have  been  Mani  mana  sikla  u-bar'si.  '  Eeckon 
a  maneh,  a  shekel  and  (its)  parts.'  Pere's  or  par'su  '  a  part 
of  a  shekel'  comes  from  a  root  which  signifies  to  divide, 
while  the  name  of  Persia  is  written  in  precisely  the 
same  manner  both  in  Babylonian  and  in  Aramaic.  Here, 
therefore,  we  have  an  obvious  play  upon  the  name  of 
the  Persians."* 

On  the  floor  of  Wall-Cases  27,  29,  there  are  some 
stone  weights  of  2  manahs,  30  manahs,  etc.  Some  of 
the  jars,  vases,  and  bowls  in  these  Cases  bear  familiar 
names,  such  as  Xerxes,  Nos.  699-704;  Sargon,  Nos. 
705,  726;  Ashur-bani-pal,  No.  709. 

The  larger  skull  in  the  earthenware  vase,  Wall-Case 
28,  No.  1583,  has  been  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  the 
soldier  who  was  on  guard  in  the  palace  of  the  Assyrian 
king  when  Nineveh  was  captured,  and  the  fractures  in  it 
testify  to  a  violent  death. 

The  destruction  of  Nineveh  and  the  fall  of  Assyria 
took  place  about  the  year  B.C.  609.  Nabopolassar,  the 
father  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  revolted  in  Babylon,  and  in 
alliance    with    Necho    king    of    Egypt,    and    Cyaxeres, 

»  Dan.  6.  25-28. 
^  Prof.  Sftyoe  in  The  "  Higher  CriticUm,"  etc,  pp.  630,  531. 


68       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

accomplished  the  overthrow  of  Assyria,  Josiah,  a  vassal 
of  the  king  of  Assyria,  was  slain  at  Megiddo.  "In  his 
days  Pharaoh-nechoh  king  of  Egypt  went  up  against 
the  king  of  Assyria  to  the  river  Euphrates:  and  king 
Josiah  went  against  him;  and  he  slew  him  at  Megiddo." ^ 

Some  of  the  bowls  in  Wall-Cases  31-40  are  inscribed 
with  Hebrew  characters.  The  inscription  on  No.  934  (behind 
Khammurabi's  code),  was  supposed  to  confer  blessing  and 
health  from  heaven  upon  him  who  drank  from  it. 
There  is  in  it  a  reference  to  the  "sixty  mighty  men  of 
Israel"  who  stood  round  about  the  couch  of  Solomon,  and 
an  extract  from  the  priest's  blessing  in  Num.  6.  24-26. 
"The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  (thee):  the  Lord  make 
His  face  shine  upon  tliee  and  be  gracious  unto  thee: 
the  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give 
thee  peace.  Amen.  Amen.  Selah."  These  bowls  are 
of  different  periods;  the  oldest  belongs  to  the  third  or 
second  century  B.C.,  and  the  latest  to  the  third  or 
fourth  century  A.D.2 

Table-Case  P  (Plate  VI.,  p.  57)  contains  some  of  the 
celebrated  Tell  el-Axuarna  tablets  which  were  discovered 
in  1887.  Colonel  Conder  says :  "  These  letters  are  the  most 
important  historical  records  ever  found  in  connection 
with  the  Bible  .  .  .  and  most  fully  confirm  the  historical 
statements  of  the  Book  of  Joshua,  and  prove  the  antiquity 
of  civilisation  in  Syria  and  in  Palestine."^ 

The  name  of  Kirjath-sepher,  mentioned  in  Josh.  15. 
15,  16,  means  "  the  city  of  the  book,"  but  though  it  was 
suspected  that  a  library  might  have  existed  there,  these 
tablets  prove,  as  no  other  find  has  ever  done,  that  the 
cuneiform  writing  was  in  common  use  in  Palestine  and  Egypt, 

1  2  Kings  23.  29.  »  Chiide  A,  pp.  113,  114, 

3  The  Tell  Amama  Tablets.     Translated  0.  R.  Conder,  R.E.,  D.C.L., 
LL.D.,  M.R.A.S.,    .  6. 


TELL  EL-AMARNA  TABLETS  69 

as  well  as  in  Assyria.  Only  a  few  of  the  three  hundred  and 
twenty  letters  are  shown  in  this  Case.  They  were  from  the 
cities  of  Palestine  and  Western  Asia,  to  Amenophis  III. 
and  his  son  Amenophis  IV.,  kings  of  Egypt,  and  were 
found  in  Egypt.  Many  of  them  refer  to  the  marriage 
negotiations  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  and  a  large  number 
are  appeals  from  the  tributary  cities  of  Palestine  for 
military  help  to  enable  them  to  withstand  the  attacks 
of  their  enemies. 

The  tablets  give  us  a  picture  of  the  land  in  the  time 
of  Joshua  or  before.  It  has  been  claimed  that  there 
are  references  in  some  to  the  Israelites  themselves  and 
the  kings  they  conquered.  "The  most  interesting  letters 
are  from  the  south,  and  these  refer  with  great  clearness 
to  the  conquest  of  the  country  between  Mount  Seir  on 
the  east,  Ajalon,  Lachish,  Ascalon,  and  Gezer  on  the 
west,  and  Shiloh  and  Rimmon  on  the  north.  The  name 
of  one  of  the  kings  killed  by  Joshua  (Japhia,  Josh.  10.  3) 
is  found  in  the  south,  and  in  all  probability  that  of 
Adonizedek  of  Jerusalem  also;  and  in  the  north  the 
name  of  the  King  of  Hazor  is  probably  to  be  read  as 
Jabin,  which  was  the  name  of  the  King  of  Hazor  whom 
Joshua  attacked  (Josh.  11.  1).  The  Hebrews  ('Abiri)  are 
said  to  have  come  from  the  desert,  and  from  Mount 
Seir."^  Colonel  Conder  translates  No.  51  thus:  "With  the 
usual  salutation  from  Yapa'a  (whom  he  identifies  with 
Japhia)  the  letter  continues :  '  Whatever  the  King  my  Lord 
says  to  me  I  listen  to  him  exceedingly.  It  is  gracious. 
But  as  I  fear  what  shall  befall,  help  thou  my  region  from 
the  power  of  the  people  of  the  desert  lands.'"* 

If  the  tablets  refer  to  the  time  of  Joshua,  as  Colonel 
Conder  affirms,  the  Pharaoh  of  the  oppression  was   not 

*  Colonel  Conder  in  The  Tdl  Amama  TaUeU,  p.  4. 
3  Ibid.  p.  138. 


70       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

Rameses  II.  as  generally  believed,  for  he  lived  a  century 
later  (see  p.  99).  If  not  Eameses,  Thothmes  III., 
as  many  think,  might  have  been  the  Pharaoh  of  the 
oppression. 

In  the  lower  portion  of  Table-Case  D  (Plate  VI., 
p.  57)  there  is  an  interesting  series  of  Cylinder  seals, 
some  of  which  are  very  ancient.  These  were  rolled 
over  the  moist  clay  when  tablets  were  sealed,  as  shown  in 
Case  A.  No.  29  is  "  engraved  with  a  scene  representing  a 
male  and  female  figure  seated  at  the  side  of  a  tree  bearing 
fruit:  behind  the  woman  is  a  serpent  (standing  erect). 
This  scene  has  been  identified  by  some  as  the  Babylonian 
equivalent  of  the  temptation  of  Eve  recorded  in  the 
Book  of  Genesis."  ^ 

Nos.  30,  31,  are  supposed  to  represent  the  Deluge. 
"  Sit-napishtim,  the  Babylonian  equivalent  of  Noah,  is 
being  steered  in  an  ark,  or  vessel,  over  the  water  of  the 
Flood."  2 

The  upper  part  of  Case  D  (Plate  VI.,  p.  57)  contains 
historical  cylinders.  The  Tiglath-Pileser,  whose  records 
are  on  the  large  eight-sided  cylinder  in  the  front  of  the 
Case,  lived  much  earlier  than  the  king  of  that  name  who  is 
referred  to  in  the  Bible.  On  No.  3  he  mentions,  amongst 
other  wars,  the  defeat  of  4000  of  the  Hittites. 

No.  12,  at  the  far  end,  is  a  chronicle  of  the  expeditions 
of  Sargon,  and  above  it,  No.  13,  of  the  campaigns  and 
building  operations  of  Sennacherib. 

Some  of  the  tablets  in  Case  B  (on  the  left-hand  side 
of  the  illustration,  Plate  VI.,  p.  57)  are  inscribed  with  the 
name  of  Khammurabi  and  early  kings  of  Babylon, 
others  are  much  later. 

No.  120  is  of  special  interest,  for  it  mentions,  among 
other  facts  of  Babylonian  history,  the  murder  of  Sen- 

1  Guide  A,  p.  159.  ^  /ji^f. 


DARIUS  THE  MEDE  71 

naoherib  by  his  son.  This  happened  some  years  after  his 
army  had  been  destroyed  by  the  angel  of  Jehovah.  There 
is  a  long  gap  in  history  between  the  two  verses  in  the 
Bible  record :  "  So  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  departed, 
and  went  and  returned,  and  dwelt  at  Nineveh.  And  it  came 
to  pass,  as  he  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch 
his  god,  that  Adrammelech  and  Sharezer  his  sons  smote 
him  with  the  sword;  and  they  escaped  into  the  land  of 
Armenia:  and  Esarhaddon  his  son  reigned  in  his 
8tead."i 

No.  122  is  a  "portion  of  a  clay  tablet  inscribed  with  the 
annals  of  Nabonidus  king  of  Babylon,  recording  the  defeat 
of  Astyages  by  Cyrus,  and  the  capture  and  spoiling  of 
Eobatana,  his  capital  city,  and  the  taking  of  Babylon, 
and  the  downfall  and  death  of  Nabonidus  king  of  Babylon, 
B.C.  556  to  B.C.  538."  2  (see  p.  80). 

This  Median  city  Ecbatana  is  mentioned  in  Ezra  6.  2 
(marg.).  Sir  Robert  Anderson  has  pointed  out  the 
importance  of  this  passage,  which  tells  us  that  the 
decree  of  Cyrus,  that  could  not  be  found  in  Babylon, 
was  discovered  at  Ecbatana,  the  city  of  the  Medes, 
having  evidently  been  carried  thither  when  Darius  the 
Mede,  the  vassal  king  of  Babylon,  retired  to  his  o\m 
city  (see  p.  81). 

There  are  also  in  this  case  some  lists  of  Babylonian 
kings,  from  b.c.  2300  to  B.C.  625,  Nos.  125,  126 ;  and  lists 
of  "  events  by  which  the  early  Babylonians  reckoned  their 
years,"  Nos.  121,  123,  124. 

In  Table-Case  H  (Plate  VL,  p.  57,  on  the  right-hand 
side)  there  is  a  most  important  collection  of  cylinders 
relating  to  Assyrian  history.  In  the  upper  part  we  notice 
the  records  of  Sennaoherib  (Nos,  1-6),  which  are  full 
of  interest  from  their  mention  of  Hezekiah. 

» laa.  37.  37,  38  ;  2  Kings  19.  36,  37.  '■'  Guide  A,  p.  171. 


72        BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

No8.  1-4  tell  of  the  invasion  of  Palestine,  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem,  and  Hezekiah's  tribute. 

No.  6  is  the  most  famous  of  his  inscriptions,  sometimes 
known  as  "the  Taylor  Cylinder."  The  king  describes 
his  campaign  against  other  nations,  and  then  says :  "  I  then 
besieged  Hezekiah  of  Judah  who  had  not  submitted  to 
my  yoke,  and  I  captured  forty-six  of  his  strong  cities  and 
fortresses  and  innumerable  small  cities  which  were  round 
about  them,  with  the  battering  of  rams  and  the  assault  of 
engines,  and  the  attack  of  foot  soldiers,  and  by  mines  and 
breaches  (made  in  the  walls).  I  brought  out  therefrom 
two  hundred  thousand  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  people, 
both  small  and  great,  male  and  female;  and  horses,  and 
mules,  and  asses,  and  camels,  and  oxen,  and  innumerable 
sheep  I  counted  as  spoil.  (Hezekiah)  himself,  like  a  caged 
bird,  I  shut  up  within  Jerusalem  his  royal  city.  I  threw 
up  mounds  against  him,  and  I  took  vengeance  upon  any 
man  who  came  forth  from  his  city.  His  cities  which  I 
had  captured  I  took  from  him  and  gave  to  Mitinti  king  of 
Ashdod,  and  Padi  king  of  Ekron,  and  Silli-Bel  king  of 
Gaza,  and  T  reduced  his  land.  I  added  to  their  former 
yearly  tribute,  and  increased  the  gifts  which  they  paid 
unto  me.  The  fear  of  the  majesty  of  my  sovereignty 
overwhelmed  Hezekiah,  and  the  Urbi  and  his  trusty 
warriors,  whom  he  had  brought  into  his  royal  city  of 
Jerusalem  to  protect  it,  deserted.  And  he  despatched 
after  me  his  messenger  to  my  royal  city  Nineveh  to  pay 
tribute  and  to  make  submission  with  thirty  talents  of  gold, 
eight  hundred  talents  of  silver,  precious  stones,  eye-paint, 
...  a  heavy  treasure,  together  with  his  daughters,  and 
the  women  of  his  palace,  and  male  and  female  musicians."^ 
We  read  of  this  invasion  in  2  Kings  18,  19;  in 
Isa.  36,  37;  and  in  2  Chron.  32.     "After  these  things 

^  Guide  A,  pp.  219,  220. 


SENNACHERIB  AND  HEZEKIAH  73 

.  .  .  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria  came,  and  entered  into 
Judah,  and  encamped  against  the  fenced  cities,  and 
thought  to  win  them  for  himself."^  We  learn  from 
the  books  of  Isaiah  and  Kings  that  he  took  them,  but 
he  could  not  keep  them  after  his  own  overthrow. 

"  And  when  Hezekiah  saw  that  Sennacherib  was  come, 
and  that  he  was  purposed  to  fight  against  Jerusalem,  he  took 
counsel  with  his  princes  and  his  mighty  men  to  stop  the 
waters  of  the  fountains  which  were  without  the  city :  and 
they  did  help  him."  He  also  made  other  preparations  but 
did  not  rely  upon  these,  he  encouraged  his  people  in 
God  and  said:  "Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid 
nor  dismayed  for  the  king  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the 
multitude  that  is  with  him :  for  there  be  more  with  us 
than  with  him:  with  him  is  an  arm  of  flesh;  but  with 
us  is  the  Lord  our  God  to  help  us,  and  to  fight  our 
battles."  2 

This  does  not  look  as  though  Hezekiah  was  over- 
whelmed with  fear.  "We  know  how  God  met  his  faith. 
Sennacherib  claims  that  he  "  threw  up  mounds  against 
him,"  which  he  probably  represents  on  the  wall-picture 
in  the  Nineveh  Gallery  (Plate  V.,  p.  35),  but  we  may  be 
quite  sure  that  God  kept  His  promise.  "Therefore  thus 
saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  king  of  Assyria,  He  shall 
not  come  into  this  city,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  nor  come 
before  it  with  shields,  nor  cast  a  bank  against  it.  .  .  .  Then 
the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  forth,  and  smote  in  the  camp  of 
the  Assyrians  a  hundred  and  fourscore  and  five  thousand : 
and  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold,  they 
were  all  dead  corpses."^ 

Contract  tablets  found  at  Nineveh  throw  a  flood  of 
light  on  the  request,  "Speak,  I  pray  thee,  to  thy  servants 
in  the  Aramaen  language."    "  They  have  made  it  clear  that 

'  2  Chron.  32.  1.  '2  Chron.  82.  2-8.  '  lea.  37-  33-37. 

10 


74       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

Aramaen  was  at  the  time  the  commercial  language  of  the 
civilised  East."^ 

Sennacherib  said  that  he  shut  up  Hezekiah  like  a  bird 
in  a  cage.  This  reminds  us  of  the  words  of  David,  "  Our 
soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowlers :  the 
snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  escaped.  Our  help  is  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  who  made  heaven  and  earth."  ^  The 
words  occur  in  one  of  the  fifteen  Songs  of  Degrees,  and 
it  has  been  suggested  that  they  formed  Hezekiah's  hymn- 
book,^  and  that  they  commemorated  the  going  back  of 
the  shadow  ten  "degrees,"  and  the  fifteen  years  which 
were  at  the  same  time  added  to  his  life,  the  psalms 
being  chosen  which  were  appropriate  to  his  own  experience. 
If  this  be  so,  it  gives  an  added  interest  to  the  psalm,  as 
we  connect  it  with  Sennacherib's  cylinder.  The  king  says 
nothing  about  the  destruction  of  his  host,  but  even  on  his 
own  showing  something  remarkable  occurred.  If  he  were 
victorious  as  he  boasts,  it  is  scarcely  likely  that  the 
defeated  king  would  send  the  tribute  after  him  to 
Nineveh.  It  is  far  more  likely  that  the  tribute  here 
mentioned  is  the  very  same  as  that  previously  sent  to 
Lachish  (p.  25).  The  amount  is  nearly  the  same,  the 
only  difference  being  that  the  Bible  account  mentions 
300  talents  of  silver*  and  Sennacherib  says  800  talents. 
This  may  be  merely  the  difference  between  the  Jewish 
and  Assyrian  values,  or  it  may  be  an  exaggeration  on 
the  part  of  Sennacherib. 

The  cylinders  numbered  7-11  are  the  annals  of 
Esarhaddon.  One  of  them,  No.  9,  was  discovered  in  an 
Arab  tent,  where  it  served  as  a  candlestick.  The  marks 
are  clearly  visible. 

*  Prof.  Sayoe  in  The  "  Higher  Criticism,"  etc.,  p.  441  ;  Isa,  36.  11. 

2  Ps.  124.  7,  8.  »  See  Dr.  J,  W.  Tbirtle  in  Old  Testament  Problems. 

*  2  Kings  18.  14, 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR  75 

N08.  12-22,  are  records  of  Ashur-bani-pal ;  (No.  12, 
the  last  large  one  in  the  front,  the  rest  at  the  side  and  back), 
the  first  especially  relating  to  the  events  depicted  on  the 
wall-pictures  in  the  Assyrian  Basement  and  Nineveh  Gallery. 

No.  23  (at  the  side)  is  an  inscription  of  Shamash- 
shum-ukin. 

The  upper  portion  of  Table-Case  G  (Plate  VI.,  p.  57) 
is  full  of  important  records  relating  to  Babylonian  history. 

Nos.  1-4  belong  to  the  reign  of  Nabopolassar,  the 
father  of  NebuchEuinezzar,  who  acted  as  his  father's 
general  the  first  time  he  besieged  Jerusalem.  Nabopolassar 
revolted  against  the  Assyrian  rule,  and  assisted  in  the 
downfall  of  that  great  empire.     (See  p.  67.) 

The  last  Babylonian  empire  began  with  this  revolt,  and 
the  kings  who  have  specially  to  do  with  Bible  history  are — 
Nabopolassar.    b.c.  625-604. 
Nebuchadnezzar  II.    b.c.  604-561. 
Evil-Merodach.     b.c.  561-559. 
Nabonidus.     b.c.  555-538. 
Belshazzar.     (?)-538. 

In  Nos.  6-51  we  have  a  series  of  barrel-shaped 
cylinders,  which  record  the  building  operations  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  II.  in  Babylon  and  the  other  great 
cities  of  his  empire.  He  "devoted  great  attention  to 
the  repair  and  completion  of  the  very  ancient  shrine  of 
the  god  Nebo  at  Borsippa,  the  modern  Birs  Nimriid, 
which  has  been  identified  with  the  Tower  of  Babel."* 
"I  finished  its  summit,  the  temple  of  the  Seven  Planets 
which  is  the  tower  of  Borsippa  which  former  kings  had 
built,  and  raised  it  to  the  height  of  forty-two  cubits,  but 
had  not  finished;  its  upper  part  from  extreme  age  had 
rotted  away."  2 

The    four    cylinders    numbered    53-56    are    of    great 

»  Cfuide  -4,  p.  194.  ^  Record*  of  the  Patty  New  Series,  vol.  vii.  p.  76. 


^6       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

importance  to  Bible  students.  "They  are  inscribed  with 
an  account  of  the  rebuilding  by  Nabonidus  of  the  temple 
of  the  Moon-god  in  Ur.  The  text  concludes  with  a  prayer 
to  the  Moon-god  on  behalf  of  Nabonidus,  and  of  his  eldest 
son  Bel-shar-utsur  (Belshazzar)  .  .  . 

"And  as  for  me,  Nabonidus,  the  king  of  Babylon, 
protect  thou  me  from  sinning  against  thine  exalted  god- 
head, and  grant  thou  me  graciously  a  long  life:  and  in 
the  heart  of  Belshazzar,  my  first-born  son,  the  off-spring 
of  my  loins,  set  the  fear  of  thine  exalted  godhead,  so  that 
he  may  commit  no  sin  and  that  he  may  be  satisfied  with 
the  fulness  of  life!"i 

"When  the  sceptics  first  framed  their  indictment  of 
Daniel,  Belshazzar  appeared  to  be  a  myth.  For  history 
testifies  that  the  last  king  of  Babylon  was  Nabonidus; 
that  he  was  absent  from  the  capital  when  Cyrus  entered 
it.  .  .  .  The  contradiction  between  history  and  Scripture 
was  complete.  But  the  since-deciphered  inscriptions  have 
disclosed  that  Belshazzar  was  eldest  son  and  heir  to 
Nabonidus,  that  he  was  regent  in  Babylon  during  his 
father's  absence,  and  that  he  was  killed  the  night  the 
Persian  army  entered  the  inner  city."^ 

It  is  this  inscription  which  gave  an  answer  to  the 
attacks  of  the  so-called  "higher  critics."  It  confirms 
the  accuracy  of  the  Book  of  Daniel,  and  explains  also 
the  reason  why  Belshazzar,  as  a  reward  to  Daniel, 
promised  to  make  him  "third  ruler  in  the  kingdom."^ 
Belshazzar  was  himself  only  second. 

There  are  several  other  cylinders  of  Nabonidus  in 
this  Case — Nos.  57-65.  They  chiefly  refer  to  his  building 
operations.      In   Nos.    61-64,  he   teUs  how  he   found  an 

1  Guide  A,  p.  195. 
^  Sir  Robert  Anderson  in  The  Bible  and  Modem  Criticism,  pp.  136,  137. 
»  Daniel  5.  7,  16,  29. 


HARRAN  ^^ 

inscription  of  Sargon  I.  and  his  son  Naram  Sin  in 

the  foundations  of  the  temple  at  Agade.  They  had, 
he  said,  been  sought  for  in  vain  by  Esarhaddon, 
Nebuchadnezzar  ii.,  and  others.  In  the  cylinder  No.  65 
he  records  the  finding  of  the  foundation  record  of  Naram 
Sin  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  stone  object 
inscribed  with  the  name  of  his  father  Sargon  i.,  exhibited 
in  Case  C.     (See  p.  61.) 

This  cyhnder  also  mentions  that  "'the  god  Sin  (the 
Moon-god)  in  times  past  was  wroth  with  his  people,  and 
that  he  brought  the  Scythians  into  the  city  of  Harran 
where  they  destroyed  the  temple'  .  .  .  Cyrus,  king  of 
Anzan,  attacked  the  hordes  of  the  Scythians  and  captured 
their  king  Astyages,  and  carried  him  captive  to  his  own 
land.  As  a  thank-offering  for  his  deliverance  from  the 
Scythians,  Nabonidus  rebuilt  the  temple  of  Sin  the 
Moon-god."^  This  proves  that  the  Moon-god  was 
worshipped  at  Harran.  We  have  already  seen  from 
the  inscriptions  in  the  Wall-Cases,  etc.,  that  Ur  was 
sacred  to  this  worship,  and  thus  we  have  a  proof  that 
if  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham,  driven  out  of  Ur  by 
the  Elamite  invasion,  had  wanted  to  go  to  a  city  where 
the  worship  was  similar,  he  would  have  chosen  Harran. 
(See  pp.  28,  29.) 

The  name  of  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  is 
inscribed  in  Persian,  Median,  and  Babylonian,  on  the 
weight  No.  66.    "Two-thirds  of  a  manah  and  one  shekel" 

No.  67  is  an  interesting  cylinder  of  CyniS,  giving 
an  account  of  his  conquest  of  Babylonia,  and  the  chief 
events  of  his  reign.  He  describes  how  the  god  Marduk, 
or  Merodach,  "  sought  out  a  righteous  prince,  a  man  after 
his  own  heart,  whom  he  might  take  by  the  hand;  and 
he    called  his    name    Cyrus,    king    of    Anshan,    and    he 

I  Qvi,idA  A,  p.  196. 


78       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

proclaimed  his  name  for  sovereignty  over  the  whole  world. 
The  hordes  of  the  land  of  Kutu  he  forced  into  submission 
at  his  feet,  and  the  men  whom  (the  god)  had  delivered  into 
his  hands  he  justly  and  righteously  cared  for.  And 
Marduk,  the  great  lord,  the  protector  of  his  people, 
beheld  his  good  deeds  and  his  righteous  heart  with  joy. 
He  commanded  him  to  go  to  Babylon,  and  he  caused  him 
to  set  out  on  the  road  to  that  city,  and  like  a  friend  and 
ally  he  marched  by  his  side;  and  his  troops,  with  their 
weapons  girt  about  them,  marched  with  him  in  countless 
numbers  like  the  waters  of  a  flood.  Without  battle  and 
without  fighting  Marduk  made  him  enter  into  his  city  of 
Babylon;  he  spared  Babylon  tribulation,  and  Nabonidus,  the 
king  who  feared  him  not,  he  delivered  into  his  hand."^ 

The  fact  that  Cyrus  is  called  king  of  Anshan  or 
Elam  is  an  explanation  of  Isa.  21.  2,  where  Elam  and 
Media  are  called  upon  to  bring  about  the  destruction  of 
Babylon.  "Go  up,  0  Elam;  besiege,  0  Media,"  Elam, 
which  had  been  conquered  by  Ashur-bani-pal,  regained  its 
independence  on  the  fall  of  the  Assyrian  Empire.  In 
Jer.  25.  25  there  is  a  mention  of  the  kings  of  Elam. 

"  After  the  occupation  of  the  city  by  the  Persians,  Cyrus 
conciliated  the  Babylonians  by  restoring  the  images  to 
their  original  shrines."  ^  It  was  his  policy  to  propitiate 
the  gods  of  the  nations  he  conquered,  by  rebuilding  their 
temples  or  giving  them  presents,  and  his  dealings  with  the 
Jews  in  permitting  them  to  rebuild  their  temple  was  quite 
in  harmony  with  his  general  policy. 

Some  of  the  expressions  in  the  cylinder  of  Cyrus  remind 
us  of  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  written  according  to  Isa.  1.  1, 
no  later  than  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  about  698  B.C.,  and 
therefore  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  before  the  time  of 
Cyrus. 

»  Guide  A,  pp.  196,  197.  ^  Chtide  A,  p.  197. 


CYRUS  79 

"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  His  anointed,  to  Cyrus,  whose 
right  hand  I  have  holden,  to  subdue  nations  before  him ; 
and  I  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open  before  him  the 
two-leaved  gates;  and  the  gates  shall  not  be  shut;  I  will 
go  before  thee,  and  make  the  crooked  places  straight  .  .  . 
that  thou  mayest  know  that  I,  the  Lord,  which  call  thee 
by  thy  name,  am  the  God  of  Israel.  For  Jacob  My 
servant's  sake,  and  Israel  Mine  elect,  I  have  even  called 
thee  by  thy  name:  I  have  sumamed  thee,  though  thou 
hast  not  known  Me."^ 

"For  Israel's  sake,"  that  he  might  be  the  means  of 
setting  them  free  from  the  captivity.  "  I  have  raised  him 
up  in  righteousness,  and  I  will  direct  all  his  ways :  he  shall 
bmld  My  city,  and  he  shall  let  go  My  captives,  not  for 
price  nor  reward,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  ^  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  tell  us  how  exactly  this  was  fulfilled  under 
Cyrus  and  his  successors.  "Now  in  the  first  year  of 
Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  by 
the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  might  be  fulfilled  (concerning  the 
seventy  years'  captivity  (Jer.  29.  10)),  the  Lord  stirred 
up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  that  he  made  a 
proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom,  and  put  it  also 
in  writing,  saying,  Thus  saith  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  the 
Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the  kingdoms  of 
the  earth ;  and  He  hath  charged  me  to  build  Him  an  house 
at  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah.  Who  is  there  among 
you  of  all  His  people  ?  his  God  be  with  him  and  let  him 
go  up  to  Jerusalem."  ^  It  was  quite  possible  that  Cyrus 
had  heard  of  the  words  of  Isaiah. 

It  was  in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah 
that  Cyrus  took  Babylon  so  easily.  "And  it  shall  come 
to  pass,  when  seventy  years  are  accomplished,  that  I  will 

'  Isa.  46.  1-4.  -Isa.  45.  13. 

»  Ezra  1.  1-3  ;  2  Chron.  86.  22,  23. 


8o       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

punish  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  that  nation,  saith  the  Lord, 
for  their  iniquity,  and  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans."  ^ 

In  this  cylinder  Cyrus  claims  to  have  taken  the  city 
"without  battle  and  without  fighting."  Nabonidus  had 
greatly  oSended  the  priests  by  attempting  to  gather  into 
Babylon  the  images  of  the  gods  from  the  local  temples. 
It  may  be,  therefore,  that  the  priests  favoured  Cyrus  and 
opened  the  gates  to  him,  and  that  the  army  of  Cyrus  had 
already  gained  admittance  whilst  Daniel  was  explaining  to 
Belshazzar  the  handwriting  on  the  wall. 

"  One  post  shall  run  to  meet  another,  and  one  messenger 
to  meet  another,  to  show  the  king  of  Babylon  that  his  city 
is  taken  on  every  quarter,  and  the  passages  are  surprised, 
and  the  reeds  they  have  burned  with  fire,  and  the  men  of 
war  are  affrighted."  ^  In  quick  succession  the  messengers 
carrying  the  bad  tidings  must  have  arrived  at  the  palace — 
probably  before  Belshazzar  and  the  "  thousand  of  his  lords  " 
had  left  the  banqueting  chamber.  "In  that  night  was 
Belshazzar  the  king  of  the  Chaldeans  slain,"  ^  and  thus  the 
prophecy  was  already  being  fulfilled  at  the  gates  whilst 
the  words  of  the  interpretation  were  being  spoken  in  the 
palace. 

The  records  tell  us  that  on  the  16  th  of  the  month 
Tammuz,  Gobryas,  the  governor  of  Gutium  (Kurdistan), 
and  the  army  of  Cyrus  came  to  Babylon.  Cyrus  appointed 
Gobryas  to  be  governor  in  Babylon,  together  with  others, 
and  we  know  that  chief  of  those  others  was  Daniel.  "It 
pleased  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom  an  hundred  and 
twenty  princes,  which  should  be  over  the  whole  kingdom : 
and  over  these  three  presidents;  of  whom  Daniel  was 
first."* 

"There  appears  to  be  no  longer  any  doubt  that  this 

1  Jer.  25.  12,  2  jer.  61.  31,  32,  R.V. 

3  Dan.  5.  80.  *  Dan.  6.  1,  2. 


GOBRYAS  THE  MEDE  8i 

Darius  was  Gobryas,  Governor  of  Kurdistan,  the  general 
who  commanded  the  army  of  Cyrus  that  captured  Babylon. 
Gobryas  was  the  son  of  Cyaxeres  (Ahasuerus  in  the  Hebrew), 
and  the  brother  and  heir-apparent  of  Astyages,  the  last 
king  of  the  Medes.  (Xenophon  calls  him  his  son  in  error, 
for  Herodotus  states  that  Astyages  had  no  son.)  In  his 
youth  he  would  have  known  Cyrus,  who  attended  the 
Median  Court;  and  this,  combined  with  the  fact  of  his 
kingly  rank,  may  well  have  led  Cyrus  to  trust  and  honour 
him.  'Darius'  was  doubtless  a  'throne  name'  (like 
'  Artaxerxes.'  Josephus  mentions  that  he  had  another  name 
among  the  Greeks).  A  most  striking  confirmation  of  this  is 
supplied  by  a  statement  in  Ezra  6.  1,  2.  The  decree  issued 
by  Cyrus  for  the  building  of  the  temple,  which  could  not  be 
found  either  in  the  Chaldean  or  the  Persian  capital,  was  at 
last  discovered  in  the  capital  of  Kurdistan.  How,  then, 
could  it  have  got  to  Ecbatana?  The  obvious  solution  of 
this  enigma  is  that,  for  some  reason  or  other,  Gobyras  was 
sent  back  to  his  own  province,  and  that  he  carried  with 
him  the  archives  of  his  rule  in  Babylon.  The  language  of 
Dan.  9.  1  clearly  indicates  that  he  was  a  vassal  king  (he 
'was  made  king  over  the  realm ')."^ 

The  legal  and  commercial  tablets  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  case  are  arranged  in  chronological  order,  and  the  period 
covered  by  them  extends  from  the  reign  of  Esarhaddon, 
B.C.  675  to  B.C.  100. 

Nos.  83-156  were  written  in  the  reign  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar II. 

Nos.  157-162  during  the  reign  of  Evil-Merodach, 
B.C.  561  to  B.C.  659,  the  king  who  was  kind  to  the  captive 
Jehoiachin.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth 
year  of  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  Judah  .  .  .  that 
Evil-Merodach  king  of  Babylon  in  the  year  that  he  began 

'  Sir  Robert  Anderson  in  In  Dtfenee,  p.  192. 
11 


82       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

to  reign,  did  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  Judah 
out  of  prison;  and  he  spake  kindly  to  him,  and  set  his 
throne  above  the  throne  of  the  kings  that  were  in  Babylon ; 
and  changed  his  prison  garments :  and  he  did  eat  bread 
continually  before  him  all  the  days  of  his  life.  And  his 
allowance  was  a  continual  allowance  given  him  of  the  king, 
a  daily  rate  for  every  day,  all  the  days  of  his  life."^  The 
first  of  these  tablets  is  dated  in  the  accession  year  of  Evil- 
Merodach,  the  very  year  mentioned  in  Kings,  "the  year 
that  he  began  to  reign."  The  ^rs^  year  of  the  king's  reign 
would  begin  on  the  New  Year's  Day  after  he  came  to  the 
throne,  until  that  day  it  was  the  accession  year. 

The  tablets  Nos.  163-171  are  inscribed  with  the  name 
of  Neriglissar  (Nergal-shar-usur),  king  of  Babylon 
from  B.C.  559  to  B.C.  556.  "We  find  this  name  in  Jeremiah. 
"Now  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon  gave  charge  con- 
cerning Jeremiah  to  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain  of  the 
guard,  saying,  Take  him,  and  look  well  to  him,  and  do 
him  no  harm ;  but  do  unto  him  even  as  he  shall  say 
unto  thee.  So  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain  of  the  guard 
sent,  and  Nebushasban,  Eab-saris,  and  Nergal-sharezer, 
Eab-mag,  and  all  the  king  of  Babylon's  princes ;  even 
they  sent,  and  took  Jeremiah  out  of  the  court  of  the 
prison."  2 

Nos.  174-235  were  inscribed  in  the  reign  of  Naboni- 
dus,  B.C.  555  to  B.C.  538 ;  Nos.  236-278  in  that  of  Cyrus, 
B.C.  538  to  B.C.  529.  No.  238  is  dated  in  his  first  year, 
the  year  when  he  made  the  decree  concerning  the  temple 
in  Jerusalem.' 

No.  254  mentions  a  loan  by  Cambyses,  the  crown 
prince.  The  tablets  numbered  279-305  record  transac- 
tions for  every  year  of  his  reign,  B.C.  529  to  B.C.  521. 

»  2  Kings  25.  27-30.  »  j^^  39   ii_i4 

'  Ezra  1.  1 ;  2  Chron.  36.  22.     See  p.  79. 


THE  CAPTIVITY  83 

Nos.  306-308  are  dated  in  the  reign  of  Smerdis 
(or  Barzia),  who  usurped  the  throne  for  a  few  months, 
B.C.  521.  Darius  the  Great  records  on  the  Behistun  rock 
the  names  of  five  pretenders,  of  which  Smerdis  is  one. 
Casts  of  these  inscriptions  are  shown  in  Wall-Case  20, 
Nos.  208-12  (see  p.  65). 

Nos.  309-331  are  dated  in  the  reign  of  Darius  the 
Great  (Darius  Hystaspes)  from  B.C.  521  to  B.C.  485. 

It  was  in  the  first  year  of  Darius  that  Daniel  received 
the  wonderful  Messianic  prophecy  of  his  ninth  chapter. 
In  the  second  year  of  his  reign  the  seventy  years'  desola- 
tions prophesied  in  Jer.  25.  11  terminated  (see  Dan. 
9.  2). 

There  were  two  periods  of  seventy  years  which  had 
to  be  fulfilled  by  the  captivity  of  Judah.  (1)  The  seventy 
years'  servitude  (Jer.  29.  10),  which  dated,  not  from  their 
deportation  to  Babylon  as  captives,  but  from  their  subjection 
to  the  suzerainty  of  Babylon.  The  servitude  began  (in 
the  reign  of  Nabopolassar)  the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim, 
B.C.  606-605.1  jt  ended  in  b.c.  536,  when  Cyrus  issued 
his  decree.  (2)  The  seventy  years'  desolations  (Jer.  25.  11) 
began  in  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah*  (in  the  reign  of 
Nebuchadnezzar),  and  lasted  till  the  second  year  of 
Darius — the  exact  date  being  given  in  Hag.  2.  18,  19.* 

These  tablets  are  a  collection  of  commercial,  legal,  and 
other  documents,  dated  in  various  years  of  the  reign  of 
Darius  Hystaspes.  It  was  in  his  second  year  that  the 
second  decree  was  made  for  the  building  of  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem,  after  search  had  been  made  for  the  former 
decree  of  Cyrus.*  The  temple  was  finished  in  the  sixth 
year  of  Darius.    Our  attention  is  called  to  the  fact  that 

»  2  Kings  24.  1.  22  Kings  26.  1-6. 

•  See  Sir  Robert  Anderson  in  Dwnid  in  the  Critics'  Den  and  The  Coming 
Prinoe,  9th  Ed.  *  Ezra  6. 


84       BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ROOM 

on  some  of  these  tablets  (Nos.  312,  324,  325)  there  are 
notes  in  the  Aramean  language,  reminding  us  of  Ezra 
4.  7,  "  the  writing  of  the  letter  was  written  in  the  Syrian 
tongue."     (See  p.  73.) 

No.  332  is  dated  in  the  reign  of  Xerxes  (b.c.  485 
to  B.C.  465),  the  Ahasuerus  of  Esther.  The  book  begins 
in  his  second  year,  and  the  whole  of  it  forms  a  parenthesis 
between  Ezra  6.  and  7. 

Nos.  333-335  belong  to  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes 
(B.C.  465  to  B.C.  424),  the  last  being  dated  in  his  thirtieth 
year.  One  of  the  most  important  dates  to  students  of 
prophecy  occurred  in  his  reign,  for  in  his  twentieth  year 
the  decree  was  given  to  Nehemiah  permitting  the  Jews 
to  rebuild  their  city.^  This  most  significant  date,  there- 
fore, is  the  starting-point  of  Daniel's  "seventy  weeks," 
for  they  were  to  commence  "from  the  going  forth  of 
the  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem."  ^ 
They  did  not  therefore  date  from  the  decree  of  Cyrus 
concerning  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  It  suited 
the  policy  of  Cyrus  to  conciliate  conquered  nations  by 
rebuilding  the  temples  of  their  gods,  and  it  suited  the 
policy  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia  to  have  a  strong 
fortress  paying  allegiance  to  him  near  to  the  borders  of 
Egypt. 

1  Neh.  2.  1.  Dan.  9.  24-27. 


CHAPTER    X 

EARLY  CHRISTIAN  ANTIQIHTIES 

Passing  through  the  doorway  at  the  end  of  the  Assyrian 
and  Babylonian  Room  and  turning  to  the  right,  we  return 
along  the  galleries  parallel  to  those  through  which  we 
have  come.  In  Room  V.  we  find  a  number  of  early 
Christian  antiquities  from  various  places. 

In  Table-Case  A  there  are  many  rings.  The  Guide  ^ 
tells  us  that  the  use  of  rings  as  signets  or  ornaments  was 
as  widely  spread  among  the  early  Christians  as  among 
their  pagan  contemporaries,  and  it  reminds  us  of  how  the 
Apostle  James  speaks  of  a  man  entering  the  assembly 
wearing  a  gold  ring  and  goodly  apparel.^  Many  of  these 
rings  have  scriptural  designs,  such  as  No.  25,  which  has  a 
quaint  representation  of  Jonah  and  of  the  Good  Shepherd ; 
and  No.  43,  of  the  Crucifixion. 

In  the  centre  of  the  Case  is  a  bowl  of  the  early  fourth 
century,  with  a  figure  of  our  Lord,  and  two  small  busts 
of  Constantine  the  Great  and  his  wife  Fausta,  and 
an  inscription  relating  to  them.  The  so-called  conversion 
of  Constantine  marked  a  great  epoch  in  Church  History, 
for  from  that  date  Christianity  became  more  and  more 
paganised. 

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  Case  there  are  a  number 
of  specimens  of   gilded   glasses  from  the   Cataoombs, 

1  Ouide  D,  p.  55  ^  Jas.  2.  2. 


86  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  ANTIQUITIES 

dating  from  the  third  to  the  fifth  century.  The  story  of 
the  Catacombs  is  full  of  interest  to  the  student  of  Church 
History,  as  we  picture  the  scenes  that  took  place  in  those 
dimly  lighted  passages  and  vaults,  the  secret  assemblies 
and  the  countless  funeral  services.^  These  glasses,  the  bases 
of  which  alone  remain,  are  supposed  to  have  been  given 
frequently  as  presents,  and  in  many  instances  to  have  been 
impressed  in  the  mortar  of  the  freshly  closed  niches  or  loculi. 
"  Some  may  have  been  the  possessions  of  the  deceased  during 
life ;  but  many  would  appear  to  have  been  left  behind  by 
friends  and  relatives  who  had  been  present  at  the  inter- 
ment." 2 

Many  of  the  glasses  are  ornamented  with  scriptural 
designs,  some  with  portraits,  and  a  few  with  pagan 
subjects. 

In  the  Wall-Cases  12,  13,  to  the  right  of  the  door, 
there  is  a  collection  of  lamps  and  flasks.  The  lamps  come 
from  Carthage,  Sicily,  Italy;  from  Egypt,  Syria,  Palestine, 
and  Asia  Minor.  Many  of  them  show  clearly  that  they 
belonged  to  Christian  owners,  by  the  sacred  monogram, 
the  cross,  the  fish,  the  Bible  scenes  and  other  designs  that 
are  on  them.  Such  lamps  were  in  common  use,  and  were 
often  left  burning  at  the  graves  of  the  martyrs. 

The  flasks  in  the  upper  part  of  these  Wall-Cases  are 
chiefly  connected  with  this  same  custom,  and  were  pro- 
bably used  by  the  pilgrims  when  visiting  the  shrines  of 
saints  and  martyrs.  The  worship  of  relics  and  of  sacred 
places  became  more  and  more  prevalent  as  the  days  went 
on.  Though  it  began  at  first  with  a  pure  desire  to 
honour  those  who  had  witnessed  a  good  confession,  from 
merely  celebrating  their  memory  the  "  Church  "  in  a  short 
time   almost   deified   the   martyrs.      Pagan    customs   very 

'  See  W.  H.  Withrow,  M.A.,  in  The  Catacombs  of  Rome. 
■  Guide  2),  p.  61. 


MARTYRS  AND  MYTHOLOGY  87 

soon  became  incorporated,  and  the  heathen  practice  of 
placing  lighted  lamps  before  the  gods  was  transferred  to 
the  martyrs.  Churches  were  built  to  their  honour,  feasts 
were  held  on  the  anniversaries  of  their  martyrdom,  and 
"  many  pagan  myths  were  mixed  up  with  Christian  legends, 
martyrs  converted  into  mythical  personages."  ^ 

The  lamps,  flasks,  rings,  and  other  antiquities  in  this 
room  illustrate  this  phase  of  church  declension.  Repre- 
sentations of  **  St.  Menas,  or  Mennas,  an  Egyptian  martyr 
decapitated  during  the  persecutions  of  Diocletian's  time." 
are  very  common  on  the  flasks,  such  as  on  No.  860.  "  The 
legend  relates  that  the  saint's  body  was  placed  upon  a  camel 
which  was  let  loose  to  follow  what  course  it  chose ;  and  that 
in  the  place  where  the  camel  stopped,  some  miles  from 
Alexandria,  a  grave  was  made  and  a  shrine  subsequently 
built.  In  allusion  to  this  legend,  St.  Menas  is  constantly 
represented  as  standing  between  two  camels,"  ^  as  in  this 
representation. 

The  large  silver  casket,  Wall-Cases  7,  8,  dating  from 
the  fourth  to  the  fifth  century,  is  a  typical  illustration  of 
the  laxity  prevailing  at  this  time,  for  it  shows  the  strange 
admixture  of  pagan  superstition  and  Christian  truth  that 
pervaded  the  Church  in  the  days  of  the  "  Fathers."  From 
the  design,  it  was  evidently  a  bridal  gift  given  to  Projeota, 
a  Roman  lady  of  rank,  wife  of  Secundus,  a  member  of  the 
great  family  of  Asterii.  The  inscription  which  contains 
this  name  is  preceded  by  the  sacred  monogram,  and  shows 
that  they  were  "  Christians " ;  but  the  design  is  entirely 
mythological. 

Many  Coptic  antiquities  are  shown  on  the  other  side 
of  the  room,  and  in  Wall-Cases  24-26  a  number  of 
ostraka  (from  the   Greek  word  meaning  literally  "shell," 

*  Necmder't  Church  History,  vol.  iii.  pp.  448-463. 
2  Guide  D,  p.  80. 


88  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  ANTIQUITIES 

afterwards  "  sherd  ")  fragments  of  limestone  or  pottery,  on 
which  Coptic  and  Greek  inscriptions  are  written  in  ink. 
Probably  these  were  written  by  the  monks  to  whom 
reference  has  been  already  made  (p,  53). 

It  may  be  that  they  were  the  copybooks  in  which  they 
learned  to  write  passages  of  Scripture.  In  the  Manuscript 
Saloon  we  have  Coptic  Biblical  MSS.  written  by  the  monks 
of  Egypt. 

The  Church  of  Abyssinia  is  also  represented  in  this 
room,  and  the  Greek  Church  which  finally  separated 
from  the  Latin  in  a.d.  1054.  (Other  Byzantine  objects  are 
shown  in  the  Mediaeval  Eoom.) 

The  history,  therefore,  of  all  the  objects  in  this  one 
little  room  would  be  the  history  of  the  professing  Church 
during  the  first  centuries  of  its  existence,  and  they  bear 
witness  to  its  rapid  declension.^ 

An  interesting  account  of  the  Coptic,  Abyssinian,  and 
Greek  Churches  is  given  in  the  Guide  to  these  antiquities. 

^  For  further  notes  on  Church  History,  see  Chapter  XIV. 


CHAPTER    XI 

THE    PHOENICIAN    REMAINS 

Passing  through  several  rooms  along  this  gallery  towards 
the  staircase  up  which  we  ascended,  we  notice  two  famous 
inscriptions  which  were  discovered  in  the  land  of  Moab 
and  in  Jerusalem. 

The  Moabite  Stone,  of  which  this  is  a  cast, 
was  found  in  1868  at  Dibon.  It  is  the  actual  inscrip- 
tion of  Mesha  king  of  Moab,  who  revolted  against 
Ahab. 

"And  Mesha  king  of  Moab  was  a  sheepmaster,  and 
rendered  unto  the  king  of  Israel  an  hundred  thousand 
lambs,  and  an  hundred  thousand  rams,  with  the  wool. 
But  it  came  to  pass,  when  Ahab  was  dead,  that  the  king 
of  Moab  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Israel."^ 

The  inscription  is  too  long  to  give  the  whole  of  the 
translation,  but  the  introduction  is  the  most  interesting 
part. 

"  I,  Mesha,  son  of  Chemosh-melech  king  of  Moab,  the 
Dibonite.  My  father  reigned  over  Moab  thirty  years,  and 
I  reigned  after  my  father.  I  made  this  monument  to 
Chemosh  at  Korkah,  a  monument  of  salvation,  for  he 
saved  me  from  all  invaders,   and   let  me  see  my  desire 

>  2  Kings  8.  4,  5,  etc.  The  remainder  of  the  chapter  describes  the  defeat 
of  Moab,  and  God's  miraculous  intervention  on  the  behalf  of  His  people 
Israel. 

12  «► 


90  THE  PHOENICIAN  REMAINS 

upon  all  my  enemies.  Omri  (was)  king  of  Israel,  and 
he  oppressed  Moab  many  days,  for  Chemosh  was  angry 
with  his  land.  His  son  followed  him,  and  he  also  said: 
I  will  oppress  Moab.  In  my  days  Che(mosh)  said :  I 
will  see  my  desire  on  him  and  his  house.  And  Israel 
surely  perished  for  ever.  Omri  took  the  land  of 
Medeba  and  (Israel)  dwelt  in  it  during  his  days  and  half 
the  days  of  his  son,  altogether  forty  years.  But  there 
dwelt  in  it  Chemosh  in  my  days."^  Mesha  then 
goes  on  to  describe  his  capture  of  various  cities,  from 
one  of  which  he  says,  "I  took  from  it  the  areh  of 
Yahveh,  and  tore  them  before  Chemosh."  This  shows 
that  the  name  of  Jehovah,  so  sacred  to  Israel,  was  known 
to  the  nations  around.  The  worship  of  "  the  abomination 
of  Moab,"  "  Chemosh  the  god  of  the  Moabites,"^  was  intro- 
duced by  Solomon,  and  because  of  this  God's  wrath  fell 
upon  the  land  of  Israel. 

Prophecies  concerning  Moab  are  contained  in  Isa.  15, 
16,  and  Jer.  48,  where  the  names  of  cities .  mentioned 
in  the  Moabite  stone  constantly  recur.  "Send  ye  the 
lambs  for  the  ruler  of  the  land"  (Isa.  16.  1)  may  have 
reference  to  the  king  of  Moab's  tribute  of  lambs.  It 
may  be  that  in  some  passages  in  these  prophecies  there 
are  references  to  this  very  stone  which  so  boastfully 
proclaims  the  victory  of  Moab  over  Israel. 

"We  have  heard  of  the  pride  of  Moab;  that  he  is 
very  proud :  even  of  his  arrogancy  and  his  pride,  and 
his  wrath:  his  boastings  are  nought,"^  or  "have  wrought 
nothing."* 

"  Was  not  Israel  a  derision  unto  thee  ?  ...  for  since 

^  This  translation,  given  by  Prof.  Sayce  in  7%e  ' '  Higher  Criticism  "  and 
the  Monuments  (p.  366),  is  from  the  text  published  in  1886  by  two  German 
professors,  after  weeks  of  study  of  the  squeezes  preserved  in  the  Louvre,  and 
translated  by  Dr.  Neubauer. 

»  1  Kings  11.  7,  33.  »  Isa.  16.  6,  B.v.  ♦  Jer.  48.  30,  E.v. 


THE  MOABITE  STONE  91 

thou  spakest  of  him,  thou  skippedst  for  joy "  (or  RV.  "  as 
often  as  thou  speakest  of  him,  thou  waggest  the  head  ")  .  .  . 
"  80  shall  Moab  be  a  derision  and  a  dismaying  to  all  them 
about  him  .  .  .  And  Moab  shall  be  destroyed  from  being 
a  people,  because  he  hath  magnified  himself  against  the 
Lord."! 

Dr.  Klein,  who  found  the  stone,  did  not  at  first  realise 
the  importance  of  his  discovery,  and  only  copied  a  few 
words,  which  he  sent  to  the  Berlin  Museum.  But  when, 
a  year  later,  a  large  sum  was  offered  for  it  and  men  were 
sent  to  take  squeezes,  the  cupidity  of  the  Arabs,  both 
the  people  and  their  governors,  was  aroused,  and  they 
began  to  fear  that  they  should  lose  it.  The  governor 
demanded  it  himself,  but  the  Arabs  put  a  fire  under  it, 
and,  pouring  cold  water  on  it,  broke  it  in  pieces,  which 
were  distributed  through  the  tribe.  Most  of  these  frag- 
ments were  recovered,  and  put  together  by  the  help  of 
the  imperfect  squeezes  taken  before  the  monument  was 
broken.2  The  language  in  which  the  stone  is  written  is  of 
particular  interest.  It  shows  what  were  the  forms  of  the 
Phoenician  letters  used  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Jordan 
in  the  time  of  Ahab.  The  forms  employed  in  Israel  and 
Judah  on  the  western  side  could  not  have  differed  much; 
and  we  may  therefore  see  in  these  venerable  characters 
the  precise  mode  of  writing  employed  by  the  earlier 
prophets  of  the  Old  Testament.' 

In  the  Siloam  stone,  a  cast  of  which  is  shown  in 
the  adjoining  case,  we  have  an  early  Hebrew  inscription. 
It  was  discovered  in  1880.  Some  native  lads  were 
playing  in  the  so-called  Pool  of  Siloam,  when  one  of 
them,  while  wading  up  a  channel  cut  in  the  rock  which 

»  Jer.  48.  27,  39,  42. 

■■*  Prof.  Sayoe  in  Preth  Light  from  Ancient  Monwnentt,  pp.  90,  91. 

»  iUd.  p.  96. 


92  THE  PHCENICIAN  REMAINS 

leads  into  the  pool,  slipped  and  fell  into  the  water.  On 
rising  to  the  surface  he  noticed  what  looked  like  letters 
on  the  rock  which  formed  the  southern  wall  of  the 
channel.  The  lad  was  a  pupil  of  Dr.  Schick,  a  German 
architect  in  Jerusalem,  whom  he  at  once  informed. 
Dr.  Schick,  on  visiting  the  spot,  found  the  ancient  in- 
scription partly  concealed  by  the  water.  It  was  difficult 
to  obtain  an  exact  copy  owing  to  this  and  the  darkness 
of  the  tunnel,  but  in  1881  this  was  accomplished :  the 
inscription  having  been  cleaned  by  means  of  acid,  squeezes 
were  taken. 

The  inscription  (which  is  in  the  purest  Biblical 
Hebrew)  is  as  follows : — "  (Behold)  the  excavation !  Now 
this  is  the  history  of  the  excavation.  While  the  excavators 
were  lifting  up  the  pick,  each  towards  his  neighbour, 
and  while  there  were  yet  three  cubits  to  (excavate,  there 
was  heard)  the  voice  of  one  man  calling  to  his  neighbour, 
for  there  was  an  excess  in  the  rock  on  the  right  hand 
(and  on  the  left).  And  after  that  on  the  day  of 
excavating  the  excavators  had  struck  pick  against  pick, 
one  against  the  other,  the  waters  flowed  from  the  Spring 
to  the  Pool  for  a  distance  of  1200  cubits.  And  a 
hundred  cubits  was  the  height  of  the  rock  over  the  head 
of  the  excavators."  2 

It  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  time  of  Hezekiah, 
for  we  read  "how  he  made  a  pool,  and  a  conduit,  and 
brought  water  into  the  city."  "This  same  Hezekiah 
also  stopped  the  upper  watercourse  of  Gihon,  and 
brought  it  straight  down  to  the  west  side  of  the  city  of 
David."3 

The  inscription,  however,  may  refer  to  an  earlier 
engineering  feat,  for  in  the  time  of  Ahaz,  the  father  of 

*  Ibid.  p.  98,  99.  =  The  "  Higher  Criticism,"  etc.,  p.  379. 

'  2  Kings  20,  20 ;  2  Chron.  82.  30. 


THE  SILOAM  INSCRIFflON  93 

Hezekiah,  the  Prophet  Isaiah  speaks  of  "the  waters  of 
Shiloah  that  go  softly,"^  and  it  may  therefore  be  as 
old  as  the  time  of  Solomon.  The  language  is 
supposed  to  be  quite  as  ancient  as  that  of  the  Moabite 
Stone,  and  some  words  seem  to  suggest  an  even  earlier 
date. 

1  Isa.  8.  6. 


CHAPTER  XII 

EGYPTIAN  GALLERY    (Plate  VII.) 

Eeturning  down  the  same  flight  of  stairs  we  walk  through 
the  great  Egyptian  Galleries  full  of  remains  from  the 
land  of  the  Pharaohs.  We  see  at  once  that  they  are 
very  different  from  the  sculptures  of  Babylon  and  Assyria. 
They  are  arranged  as  far  as  possible  in  chronological 
order,  beginning  at  the  end  of  the  gallery  which  we 
now  enter.  The  eyes  of  Jacob  and  his  sons  may  have 
rested  many  times  on  some  of  these  earlier  statues, 
and  Moses  and  Aaron  probably  looked  on  still  more  of 
them. 

There  were  many  Pharaohs  connected  with  Bible 
history,  but  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  all  of  them  by 
their  Egyptian  names. 

(1)  There  was  first  the  Pharaoh  of  Gen.  12.,  whose 
court  Abraham  and  Sarah  visited. 

(2)  Then  there  was  the  Pharaoh  before  whom  Joseph 
stood.  Both  of  these  are  supposed  to  have  been 
"Shepherd  Kings"  or  "Hyksos,"  foreigners 
belonging  to  nomad  tribes  who  had  settled  in  Egypt 
and  gained  the  ascendency.  Probably  the  wave  of 
conquest  which  swept  over  Chaldea '  and  Syria  in  the 
days  of  Abraham  spread  to  Egypt  also. 

(3)  "There  arose  up  a  new  king  .  .  .  which  knew  not 
Joseph."      It    is    thought    that    he    belonged    to,    and 

94 


TiiJfc  ni.vujvt^HS 


rtf     I: 


!ho    T'haraoh    who    opprea^od 


r    ur>oii    whom    fell    the    rlapuea    oi      ^ 


2  rt 


^^iriTT 


J= 


.V 


-     / 


rT-''.rt; 


/ 


her  into  the  r< 


a     ibo    duitb     «i< 


«5««     3  


m  • 
Z  « 


S 


??4^ 


>:aci  WW  in 


I^T^ 


:^L. 


-^ 


l« 


ff 


/ 


X^- 


^^ 


I  5  ^ 

o   r   2 
i7i 


li 


THE  PHARAOHS  95 

possibly  founded,  the  new  dynasty  that    conquered   the 
Shepherd  Kings. 

(4)  We  read  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  who  adopted 
Moses. 

(5)  There  was  the  Pharaoh  who  oppressed  Israel, 
and  who  is  mentioned  in  Ex.  2.  23,  "in  process  of  time 
the  king  of  Egypt  died." 

(6)  His  successor  upon  whom  fell  the  plagues  of 
Egypt. 

(7)  The  "firstborn,"  who  probably  shared  the  throne 
with  his  father. 

Then  for  many  years  there  is  silence  in  Scripture 
about  Egypt. 

(8)  In  the  time  of  Solomon  we  read  of  another  king 
who  became  his  father-in-law,  for  "  Solomon  made  affinity 
with  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and  took  Pharaoh's  daughter 
and  brought  her  into  the  city  of  David." ^ 

(9)  We  find  mention  of  Shishak  king  of  Egypt, 
who  befriended  Jeroboam.  "And  Jeroboam  arose,  and 
fled  into  Egypt,  unto  Shishak  king  of  Egypt,  and  was  in 
Egypt  until  the  death  of  Solomon."  ^  He  besieged 
Rehoboam,  "And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fifth  year  of 
king  Rehoboam,  that  Shishak  king  of  Egypt  came  up 
against  Jerusalem.  And  he  took  away  the  treasures  of 
the  house  of  the  Lord."^ 

(10)  Although  not  a  king  of  Egypt  we  have  mention 
in  2  Chron.  14.  9  of  Zerah,  the  Ethiopian,  who  fought 
against  Asa. 

(11)  Hoshea  made  an  alliance  with  So  king  of 
Egypt,  which  led  to  his  ruin.  "The  king  of  Assyria 
found  conspiracy  in  Hoshea,  for  he  had  sent  messengers 
to  So  king  of  Egypt."* 

»  1  Kings  8.  1.  =  1  Kings  11.  40, 

»  1  Kings  14.  26,  26  ;  2  Chron.  12.  1-12.  *  2  Kings  17.  4. 


96  EGYPTIAN  GALLERY 

(12)  Hezekiah  formed  an  alliance  with  Tirhakah 
king  of  Ethiopia  and  Egypt.  Sennacherib  "heard  say 
concerning  Tirhakah  king  of  Ethiopia,  He  is  come  forth 
to  make  war  with  thee,"^  There  was  much  truth  in  one 
part  of  Sennacherib's  message  to  Hezekiah.  "Lo,  thou 
trustest  in  the  staff  of  this  broken  reed,  on  Egypt; 
whereon  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and 
pierce  it:  so  is  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  to  all  that  trust 
in  him."  2     So  it  was  all  through  Israel's  history. 

(13)  Necho  is  the  next  king  of  Egypt  who  had  to  do 
with  Bible  history.  Allied  with  Nabopolassar,  the  father 
of  Nebuchadnezzar,  he  was  marching  against  Assyria  when 
Josiah  withstood  him  and  was  slain. 

"  In  his  days  Pharaoh-nechoh  king  of  Egypt  went  up 
against  the  king  of  Assyria  to  the  river  Euphrates:  and 
king  Josiah  went  against  him:  and  he  slew  him  at 
Megiddo,  when  he  had  seen  him."^ 

After  Jehoahaz  the  son  of  Josiah  had  been  placed  on 
the  throne,  "  Pharaoh-nechoh  put  him  in  bands  at  Eiblah 
in  the  land  of  Hamath,  that  he  might  not  reign  in 
Jerusalem ;  and  put  the  land  to  a  tribute  of  an  hundred 
talents  of  silver,  and  a  talent  of  gold.  And  Pharaoh- 
nechoh  made  Eliakim  the  son  of  Josiah  king  in  the  room 
of  Josiah  his  father,  and  turned  his  name  to  Jehoiakim, 
and  took  Jehoahaz  away :  and  he  came  to  Egypt,  and 
died  there."* 

Necho's  allies  accomplished  the  overthrow  of  Assyria 
B.C.  609,  but  four  years  later  he  himself  was  defeated  at 
Carchemish  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  This  great  battle  gave 
the  mastery  of  Western  Asia  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  "Thou 
art  this  head  of  gold."^ 

» Isa.  37.  9.  2  iga.  36,  6. 

3  2  Kings  23.  29  ;  2  Chron.  35.  20-24. 
*  2  Kings  28.  33,  34  ;  2  Chron.  36.  3,  4.  <^  Dan.  2.  38. 


HOPHRA  9; 

The  prophecies  of  the  defeat  of  Necho  are  found  in 
Jer.  46. 

(14)  Hophra,  the  successor  of  Necho,  induced  Zedekiah 
to  break  his  allegiance  with  Babylon.  He  invaded  Phoe- 
nicia and  captured  Gaza.  "  Before  that  Pharaoh  smote 
Gaza."i 

The  approach  of  the  Egyptians  caused  the  Assyrians  to 
raise  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  for  a  time.  "  Then  Pharaoh's 
army  was  come  forth  out  of  Egypt :  and  when  the 
Chaldeans  that  besieged  Jerusalem  heard  tidings  of  them 
they  departed  from  Jerusalem."  ^ 

But  Pharaoh  was  no  help  to  Zedekiah.  "As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord  God,  surely  in  the  place  where  the  king 
(Nebuchadnezzar)  dwelleth  that  made  him  (Zedekiah)  king, 
whose  oath  he  despised,  and  whose  covenant  he  brake,  even 
with  him  in  the  midst  of  Babylon  he  shall  die.  Neither 
shall  Pharaoh  with  his  mighty  army  and  great  company 
make  for  him  in  the  war."  ^  "  Behold,  Pharaoh's  army, 
which  is  come  forth  to  help  you,  shall  return  to  Egypt 
into  their  own  land."  * 

Thus  from  the  beginning  of  Israel's  history,  and 
throughout  the  centuries  which  followed,  they  were  con- 
stantly being  mixed  up  with  Egyptian  history,  and  it  is 
interesting  to  read  of  these  links  as  we  stand  under  the 
shadow  of  the  colossal  heads  of  the  Pharaohs  in  the 
Egyptian  Gallery.  In  spite  of  all  they  had  suffered  from 
their  oppression,  the  children  of  Israel  constantly 
turned  to  Egypt,  although  they  were  repeatedly  warned 
of  God.  "Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for 
help."  5 

In  Assyria  a  predecessor's  monuments  and  inscriptions 
were    treated    with    superstitious    reverence.     Many    in- 

»  Jer.  47.  1.  "  Jer.  37.  5.  »  Ezek.  17.  16,  17, 

*  Jer.  87.  7  ;  see  also  2  Chron.  86.  13.  <>  Isa.  81.  1-3  ;  80.  1-S. 

13 


98  EGYPTIAN  GALLERY 

scriptions  ended  with  a  curse  on  those  who  should  in  any 
way  damage  them,  and  invoked  blessing  on  those  who  should 
preserve  them.  Thus  Sennacherib  writes  :  "  In  future  days, 
if  one  of  the  kings,  my  sons  whom  Ashur  shall  call  to  the 
sovereignty  over  this  land  and  people:  when  the  palace 
shall  grow  old  and  decay,  shall  repair  its  injuries,  shall  see 
the  written  record  of  my  name,  shall  pour  a  libation  on  the 
altar,  and  sacrifice  a  victim,  and  shall  then  replace  it  in 
its  place :  Ashur  will  hear  and  accept  his  prayers."  ^  But 
it  was  not  so  in  Egypt.  The  Pharaohs  thought  nothing 
of  erasing  the  names  of  their  predecessors,  and  of  carving 
instead  their  own  names. 

At  the  end  of  the  gallery  by  which  we  entered,  are  the 
remains  of  kings  of  the  earliest  dynasties.  The  chronology 
of  Egypt  is  still  very  uncertain.  "Not  only  is  the  order 
of  succession  of  the  kings  of  these  dynasties  unknown,  but 
authorities  differ  greatly  in  their  estimate  of  the  length  of 
the  period  of  their  rule.  Some  say  that  the  interval 
between  the  12th  and  the  18th  dynasties  consisted  of 
more  than  five  hundred  years,  and  others  that  it  was 
less  than  two  hundred  years."  ^ 

The  Shepherd  Kings,  who  are  probably  the  first 
directly  connected  with  Bible  history,  belonged  to  the 
15th,  16th,  and  17th  dynasties.  There  are  a  good  many 
scarabs  belonging  to  this  period  in  the  Cases  upstairs,  but 
the  chief  objects  are — (1)  The  famous  Mathematical  Papyrus 
(No.  10,058),  which  was  written  in  the  reign  of  Apepa  I.  ;^ 
(2)  A  red  granite  slab  from  the  Temple  of  Bubastis,  with 
his  name  (Bay  23,  No.  339),  other  fragments  of  the  series 
bearing  the  names  of  the  builders  of   the  pyramids,  etc.; 

*  InBcription  of  Sennacherib.  Records  of  Past,  vol.  i.  Ist  Series,  2nd  Ed. 
p.  82. 

"  Guide  C,  p.  222.  This  new  Guide  to  the  Egyptian  Collections  is  a  very 
valuable  history  of  Egypt,  its  manners,  customs,  religion,  etc. 

^  Not  shown  in  the  gallery. 


THOTHMES  AND  RAMESES  99 

(3)  The  granite  lion  (Bay  5,  No.  340),  with  the  name 
of  Khian,  another  Hyksos  king. 

The  first  king  of  the  18th  dynasty  was  Aahmes,  or 
Amasis  I.,  who  fought  against  the  Hyksos  and  conquered 
them.  He  was  possibly  No.  3  on  our  list,  the  "  new  king " 
which  knew  not  Joseph.  The  slab  of  a  granite  altar  is 
inscribed  with  his  name  (Bay  16,  No.  343).  There  is 
division  of  opinion  as  to  who  were  the  Pharaohs  of  the 
Oppression  and  the  Exodus,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that 
the  period  when  Israel  was  in  Egypt  was  the  period  of 
Egypt's  greatness.  God  gave  them  great  prosperity  while 
His  chosen  people  were  sheltered  there,  and  turned  His 
hand  upon  them  in  judgment  when  they  became  their 
persecutors.  The  two  greatest  kings  were  Thothmes  III., 
who  some  think  to  have  been  the  Pharaoh  of  the 
Oppression,  and  Rameses  II.,  who  is  believed  by  almost 
all  Egyptologists  to  have  been  the  one  under  whom  it 
took  place. 

The  great  head  of  Thothmes  is  shown  in  our  illustra- 
tion at  the  end  of  the  gallery  (Plate  VII.,  p.  95). 

It  was  Thothmes  iii.  who  erected  Cleopatra's  Needle, 
now  standing  on  the  Thames  Embankment,  but  Eameses  11. 
added  a  central  row  of  hieroglyphics  between  those  of 
Thothmes  on  each  of  the  four  sides.  Besides  the  head 
of  Thothmes  in  red  granite  (No.  360,^  Northern  Gallery) 
there  is  a  massive  granite  monument,  with  figures  of 
the  god  Menthu-Ra  and  Thothmes  iii.  in  relief  (Bay  2, 
No.  363);  a  cast  of  a  granite  sphinx  bearing  his 
name  on  its  breast  (Northern  Gallery,  No.  366);  and 
the  cast  of  the  famous  granite  stele  inscribed  with  an 
address  to  the  king  by  Amen-Ra,  in  which  the  god 
describes  the  exploits  of  Thothmes  in.  (Central  Saloon, 

^  The  black  (igores  refer  to  the  larger  monaments  in  the  centre  of  the 
gallery,  the  smaller  figures  to  the  less  important  ones  on  the  walls. 


lOO  EGYPTIAN  GALLERY 

No.  367).  In  Bay  9  (No.  374)  is  a  statue  of  Anebni, 
the  master  of  the  armoury,  set  up  to  his  memory  by 
Thothmes  iii.  and  his  sister,  Queen  Hatshepset. 

Amenhetep  III.  and  Amenhetep  IV.  (called  by 
some  Amenophis)  were  the  Pharaohs  to  whom  the 
majority  of  the  Tell  el-Amarna  tablets  were  addressed. 
The  colossal  statues  Nos.  412,  413,  415,  416, 
417,  represent  Amenhetep  ill.  The  grey  granite  column 
from  a  temple  built  by  him  at  Memphis  (?)  was  repaired 
by  Menephthah  I.  or  Mer-en-Ptah  under  the  19th 
dynasty,  and  about  one  hundred  years  later  Set-nekht 
inscribed  his  cartouches  upon  it  (Bay  7,  No.  419).  The 
red  granite  lion,  No.  430,  is  also  from  a  temple  built  by 
Amenhetep  iii. 

In  Bay  13,  No.  435  is  the  base  of  a  statue  inscribed 
with  the  name  of  Amenhetep  iv. 

The  first  two  kings  of  the  19th  dynasty  were 
Rameses  I.  and  Seti  I.  They  were  followed  by  the 
most  famous  of  all  Pharaohs,  Rameses  II.  He  reigned 
sixty-seven  years,  and  died  aged  about  one  hundred  years. 
If  he  were  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Oppression,  the  expression 
in  Ex.  2.  23  would  be  significant,  "In  process  of  time 
the  king  of  Egypt  died."  Two  large  heads  of  Kameses  ii., 
Nos.  588,  576,  are  in  the  centre  of  the  gallery  on  the 
left.  There  are  several  statues  of  Eameses  besides  these 
great  heads,  such  as  No.  582,  and  the  kneeling  figure.  Bay 
17,  No.  584.  He  was  a  great  builder,  and  built,  among 
other  places,  the  store-city  of  Pithom  (Ex.  1.  21).  This 
was  discovered  and  identified  a  few  years  ago  by  M. 
Naville,  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Society. 

The  statue  of  the  "Recorder  of  Pithom,"  though  be- 
longing to  a  later  period  (Bay  21,  No.  776),  found  at 
Tell  el-Maskh^tah  (the  modern  name),  identified  the  place 
with    Pithom.      The  granite  hawk   (Central   Saloon,  No. 


MENEPHTHAH  loi 

596)  was  also  found  at  Pithom.  M.  Naville  suspected 
that  the  place  was  dedicated  to  the  god  Turn,  and  having 
been  shown  a  statue  to  that  god,  he  dug  in  the  mound 
from  which  it  had  been  taken  and  discovered  the  treasure 
city. 

Central  Saloon,  No.  577.  —  On  the  breast  of  this 
statue  of  Eameses  ii.  are  cut  the  prenomen  and  name  of 
Seti  Meren-Ptah  or  Menephthah. 

The  two  granite  columns  of  Eameses  ii.  (Nos.  598, 
599)  bear  also  the  names  of  Osorkon  II.  and 
Menephthah  I.,  who  often  inscribed  his  name  on 
monuments  which  he  had  not  made,  such  as  Nos.  419, 
577.  He  is  supposed  by  many  to  have  been  the  Pharaoh 
of  the  Exodus.  He  "  was  associated  with  his  father  in 
the  rule  of  the  kingdom  for  about  twelve  years  before  he 
became  sole  king."^  No.  1169  (near  the  Hittite  remains) 
is  the  door-jamb  from  his  temple. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  Seti  II.  Meren- 
Ptah  II.  was  the  "firstborn"  who  was  slain  on  the 
night  of  the  passover,  and  that  he  was  really  sitting  on 
the  throne  with  his  father.  No.  616,  Bay  21,  is  a  statue 
of  him. 

Shishak,  or  Shashanq  i.,  was  the  descendant  of  a 
Libyan  chief.  He  founded  the  22nd  dynasty.  "  He  re- 
paired the  temple  of  Mut,  at  Thebes,  and  set  up  in  it  a 
number  of  granite  seated   statues  of  the  goddess  Sekhet, 

*  Guide  C,  p.  247.  In  the  monolith  of  Menephthah  (not  in  the  Museum), 
found  by  Petrie,  in  1896,  is  a  mention  of  the  Israelites  :  "  Kheta  (the  land 
of  the  Hittites)  is  in  peace,  captive  is  Canaan  and  full  of  misery,  Askelon 
is  carried  away,  Gezer  is  taken,  Yennuamma  is  non-existant,  Israel  is  lost, 
his  seed  is  not,  Syria  is  like  the  widows  of  Egypt.  The  totality  of  all 
the  lands  is  at  peace,  for  whoever  rebelled  was  chastised  by  King 
Menepthah."  The  phrase  mentioning  the  Israelites  has  also  been  translated 
"  Jenoam  has  been  brought  to  naught ;  Israel  the  horde,  destroyed  his 
crops."— Dr.  Pinches  in  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Light  of  Historical  Records, 
etc.,  p.  306. 


102  EGYPTIAN  GALLERY 

two  fine  examples  of  which,  inscribed  with  the  king's 
names  and  titles,  are  exhibited  in  the  Southern  Egyptian 
Gallery  (Nos.  763,  764)."  ^  This  was  the  Pharaoh  who 
robbed  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Eehoboam. 
So  is  supposed  to  be  identical  with  Shabaka,  or  Sabaco, 
the  first  king  of  the  25th  dynasty.  A  basalt  slab  bears 
his  name  (Bay  25,  No.  797)  "inscribed  with  a  copy  of  a 
mythological  text  copied  by  the  king's  order  from  an  old 
half  -  obliterated  document."  *  Several  scarabs  and  an 
alabaster  vase  in  the  Fourth  Egyptian  Koom  (Table-Case 
D  and  Wall-Case  139)  bear  his  name;  also  there  is  the 
impression  of  a  seal  in  the  Nineveh  Gallery,  Table-Case  I, 
No.  32  (see  p.  49). 

Tirhakah  or  Tarharq,  and  Necho  or  Nakau,  are 
represented  in  the  Egyptian  Eooms  upstairs  (see  p.  56). 

Psammetichus  II.,  the  head  of  whose  colossal  statue 
is  in  Bay  23,  No.  803,  was  a  son  of  Necho. 

The  name  and  figure  of  Pharaoh  Hophra  appear  on  a 
limestone  stele,  Bay  22,  No.  804;  his  name  is  also  on  a 
statue  in  the  Central  Saloon,  No.  805.  The  prophecies 
concerning  him  came  to  pass,  he  was  dethroned  and  after- 
wards slain  by  his  own  soldiers,  who  made  their  general 
Aahmes  (Amasis  II.)  king  in  his  stead.  It  was  during 
the  reign  of  Psammetichus  iii.,  son  of  Aahmes,  that  Egypt 
was  invaded  by  the  Persians  under  Cambyses,  and  became  a 
Persian  province  or  satrap.  Alexander  the  Great 
defeated  the  Persians  B.C.  332,  and  was  welcomed  in  Egypt 
as  the  saviour  of  the  country.  His  name  is  inscribed  on 
a  clepsydra  (Bay  29,  No.  948),  "a  time-piece  used  by  the 
Greeks  and  Eomans,  which  measured  time  by  the  dis- 
charge of  a  certain  quantity  of  water."  There  is  a  bust 
of  Alexander  in  the  Ephesus  Room  (see  p.  11). 

Egypt  was  ruled   by  the   Ptolemies  from   B.C.  304  to 

1  Guide  C,  p.  253.  -  Ibid.  p.  256. 


THE  ROSETTA  STONE  103 

B.C.  30,  when  on  the  death   of  Antony  and  Cleopatra  it 
became  a  Eoman  Province. 

Ptolemy  I.,  Soter  I.,  B.C.  304,  founded  the  Library 
and  Museum  at  Alexandria,  and  settled  a  number  of  Jews 
in  that  city.  It  was  during  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  II., 
Philadelphus,  b.c.  287  or  286,  that  the  Septuagint  version 
of  the  Old  Testament  was  compiled  (p.  107). 

Ptolemy  V.,  Epiphanes,  B.C.  205,  is  the  Ptolemy  re- 
ferred to  on  the  Rosetta  Stone  (Plate  VII.,  p.  95).  This 
stone  was  discovered  at  Kosetta  by  one  of  the  savants  who 
accompanied  Napoleon  on  his  Egyptian  Expedition  in 
1798.  At  the  taking  of  Alexandria  it  passed  into  the  hands 
of  the  British.  It  well  deserves  the  prominent  place  given 
to  it  in  the  British  Museum,  for  it  supplied  the  key  to  the 
decipherment  of  the  hieroglyphic  writing.  The  decree  is 
engraved  upon  the  stone  in  two  languages  and  three  forms 
of  writing  —  the  hieroglyphic  or  ancient  Egyptian,  the 
demotic  or  modem  Egyptian,  and  the  Greek.  The  first  had 
up  to  the  time  of  this  discovery  baffled  the  students,  but, 
after  several  others  had  attempted  it,  Thomas  Young  and 
Champollion  solved  the  problem.  The  names  of  Ptolemy 
and  Cleopatra  gave  the  key,  for  noticing  the  lines  round 
certain  characters,  they  believed  that  these  cartouches 
contained  the  royal  names,  and  knowing  from  the  Greek 
and  demotic  below  that  these  two  names  occurred  several 
times  in  the  inscription,  they  succeeded  in  deciphering 
them ;  and  by  means  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  thus 
discovered  they  obtained  the  key  to  the  whole  hieroglyphic 
alphabet.  A  similar  inscription,  in  these  same  three  forms 
of  ancient  script,  is  shown  in  Bay  28  (No.  957),  a  decree  of 
Ptolemy  m.,  Euergetes  i.,  about  B.C.  238. 

Many  of  the  Roman  emperors  whose  statues  we  saw  at  the 
commencement  of  our  visit  (pp.  1-7)  adopted  Egyptian  names 
and  titles,  and  are  represented  by  Egyptian  inscriptions. 


104  EGYPTIAN  GALLERY 

The  stele  in  Bay  27  (No.  1052)  records  building  opera- 
tions of  Tiberius  Caesar  about  a.d.  20,  also  the  tablet  in 
Bay  29  (No.  1053). 

The  stele  in  Bay  32  (No.  1057)  belongs  to  the  reign  of 
Nero  at  the  period  when,  according  to  tradition,  St.  Mark 
was  preaching  Christianity  in  Alexandria.  A  stone  in  Bay 
26,  No.  1059,  bears  the  names  of  Diocletian  and  Con- 
stantiue.  It  was  Diocletian  who  issued  the  edict  against 
the  Christians  in  Egypt  which  was  followed  by  such  terrible 
persecutions.  The  stone  is  from  one  of  his  buildings  in  the 
island  of  Philse.  Several  sepulchral  tablets  of  Egyptian 
Christians,  or  Copts,  are  shown  in  Bay  32,  Nos.  1106, 1145, 
1117;  and  in  Bay  30,  Nos.  1136,  1160,  and  1103  amongst 
others.  The  last  was  set  up  in  memory  of  the  "  father  "  of 
one  of  the  numerous  monastic  settlements  (see  p.  53). 
There  are  many  Coptic  remains  in  this  part  of  the  gallery, 
some  of  them  showing,  as  we  have  already  seen  (p.  53), 
that  the  sign  of  the  cross  was  adapted  from  the  ancient 
Egyptian  sign  for  life. 

Thus  in  the  splendid  series  of  galleries  shown  in  Plate 
VII.  we  have  passed  down  amongst  the  remains  of  the  great 
world  powers  who  have  in  turn  conquered  Egypt.  The 
antiquities  speak  to  us,  not  only  of  the  Egyptians  them- 
selves, but  of  Shepherd  Kings,  Persians,  Greeks,  and 
Eomans;  and  finally,  in  the  Eosetta  Stone,  we  have  repre- 
sented French  and  English  conquerors  of  modern  date. 

The  large  papyrus  in  the  centre  of  the  gallery  is  a  copy 
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  Facsimiles  of  other  papyri  are 
shown  in  the  rooms  upstairs.  The  weighing  of  the  soul 
after  death  is  here  represented. 


"       .5    .9 

',7  c  =  J  a-o  2 


M'F 


OL,  X  X  M  KtJ5< 
V  S  V  « 

HOOOUHH 


th^  I        /  T 


Ut*0 


CHAPTER    XIII 

HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE    (Plate  VIII.) 

The  Bible  student  visiting  the  British  Museum  will  not 
only  be  interested  in  the  monuments  and  inscriptions 
which  so  wonderfully  illustrate  Bible  history,  but  should 
not  leave  without  seeing  the  Manuscripts  and  printed 
books  which  explain  how  our  Bible  came  to  us  in  the 
present  form.  They  demonstrate  in  a  most  complete 
manner  the  history  of  the  Book  itself.  Probably  in  no 
other  collection  in  the  world  can  the  subject  be  so 
clearly  unfolded  before  our  eyes. 

Returning  to  the  Entrance  Hall  we  pass  under  the 
clock  through  the  Grenville  Library  into  the  Manuscript 
Saloon,  where,  in  Cases  Q  and  H,  some  of  the  typical 
MSS.  of  the  Bible  have  been  arranged  "to  illustrate  the 
textual  history  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  from  the  earliest 
known  copies  of  them  in  the  original  Hebrew  and  Greek 
down  to  the  appearance  of  the  first  complete  Bible  in 
English."! 

In  Case  G  (Plate  VIII.)  we  see  one  of  the  three 
great  Biblical  treasures  of  the  world.  It  is  the  Codex 
Alexandrinus,  a  Greek  manuscript  of  the  Bible,  which 
was  written  in  the  fifth  century.*      It  belonged   to  the 

'  Guide  E,  from  which  many  of  the  descriptions  of  MSS.  in  this  room  are 
taken  (p.  109). 

'  It  also  contains  the  so-called  Epistles  of  St.  Clement  of  Rome.     See  p.  131. 

14  i« 


1 06  HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE 

Patriarchal  Chamber  at  Alexandria,  and  was  presented 
to  Charles  i.  by  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople, 
formerly  of  Alexandria.  Only  two  Biblical  MSS.  of  older 
date  are  known  to  exist.  These  are  the  Codex 
Vaticanus,  wliich  is  treasured  in  the  Vatican  Library, 
and  the  Oodex  Sinaiticus,  which  was  discovered  by 
Tischendorf  in  1844  in  the  convent  of  St.  Catherine  on 
Mount  Sinai.  Some  of  the  leaves,  which  he  rescued  from 
a  basket  of  papers  for  lighting  the  convent  fires,  are  at 
Leipzig,  while  the  rest  of  the  MS.,  obtained  in  1859  with 
great  difficulty,  is  at  St.  Petersburg. 

Photographs  of  the  Codex  Vaticanus  and  the  Codex 
Sinaiticus  are  shown  in  the  same  Case,  above  the  Alex- 
andrian Codex.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  columns  in 
the  Sinaiticus  are  very  narrow.  It  is  probable  that  it 
was  copied  from  a  papyrus  roll,  such  as  those  on  which 
the  earliest  Manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament  would 
be  written  in  the  first  three  centuries  after  Christ. 
Papyrus  MSS.  are  shown  in  Case  A  in  front  of  the 
Biblical  MSS.^  (the  nearest  Case  in  the  illustration)  (Plate 
VIIL,  p.  105.)  In  the  corner  of  the  Case,  No.  11  is  a  frag- 
ment of  a  Psalter  (Ps.  12.  7,  15.  4)  on  papyrus,  found  in 
Egypt  in  1892.  It  was  written  in  the  late  third  or 
early  fourth  century,  and  thus  "  is  one  of  the  earliest  MSS. 
of  any  portion  of  the  Bible  at  present  known  to  be  in 
existence."  ^         *• 

Side  by  side  with  the  ancient  Greek  MS.  is  the  oldest 
MS.  in  Hebrew  of  any  considerable  part  of  the  Scriptures 
— a  copy  of  the  Pentateuch  written  in  the  ninth  century. 
(Plate  VIIL,  p.  105.)  No  older  copy  has  been  preserved 
to  us,  owing  to  the  custom  among  the  Jews  of    doing 

*  In  the  comer  of  Case  B,  near  to  the  Biblical  MSS.,  is  a  wax  tablet 
such  as  was  commonly  used  for  writing  purposes.     See  Luke  1.  63. 
2  Guide  E,  pp.  74,  76. 


THE  SEPl'UAGINT  107 

away  with  any  of  the  sacred  MSS.  that  should  become 
damaged  or  defective.  The  marginal  notes  at  the  side 
of  the  text  are  called  the  Lesser  Massorah,  those  at  the 
top  and  the  bottom  are  the  Greater  Massorah. 

In  the  triangular  portion  of  the  same  Case,  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Codex  Alexandrinus,  is  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  in 
Greek  (Codex  Nitriensis)  —  a  palimpsest  manuscript 
(one,  that  is,  in  which  the  original  writing  has  been  partially 
washed  out  and  another  work  written  above  it).  The 
original  writing  consists  of  portions  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel; 
and  a  Syriac  treatise  by  Severus  of  Antioch  has  been  written 
above  it  at  right  angles  to  the  Greek.  The  Syriac  is  dated 
at  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  the  Greek  in  the 
sixth  century. 

No.  9,  on  the  right  side  of  the  same  Case  (at  the  end), 
is  another  example  of  a  palimpsest  MS.  Arithmetical 
tables  and  problems  have  been  written  over  the  Gospel  of 
St.  John,  which  is  in  parallel  columns  of  Greek  and  Coptic 
(see  p.  53),  probably  of  the  sixth  century.  These  two  MSS. 
are  very  suggestive  of  the  way  in  which  God's  Word  has 
constantly  been  handled.  It  is  but  too  often  obscured  by  a 
human  treatise,  or  nearly  obliterated  by  men's  problems 
and  calculations. 

After  the  original  Greek  and  Hebrew  MSS.  we  come  to 
translations — or  versions  of  the  Scriptures. 

The  first  of  these  is  a  copy  of  the  Septuagint,  No.  4 
(Plate  VIIL,  p.  105),  the  Greek  translation  of  the  Old 
Testament,  commenced  by  Jews  in  Alexandria  about  the 
middle  of  the  third  century  B.C.  Many  legends  surround 
the  story  of  its  origin.  It  is  stated  that,  at  the  instance  of 
Ptolemy  Philadelphus  (b.c.  285-247),  the  Jewish  high  priest 
sent  a  copy  of  the  Law  to  Alexandria,  accompanied  by  six 
chosen  interpreters  from  every  tribe,  making  seventy-two 
in  all     One  familiar  legend,  which   has   been  proved  a 


io8  HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE 

forgery,  says  that  seventy  elders  translated  it,  and  that 
their  work,  done  independently,  agreed  in  all  respects.  We 
know,  however,  that  it  was  translated  at  Alexandria,  and 
that  the  translators  numbered  seventy  or  more.  This  fact 
has  given  it  the  name  Septuagint,  and  it  is  often  represented 
by  the  Eoman  figures  LXX.  It  is  the  version  of  the 
Old  Testament  which  must  have  been  best  known  in  New 
Testament  times.  This  copy  was  written  in  the  thirteenth 
century.  There  is  a  copy  of  Judges  and  Euth  in  the 
Septuagint  in  Case  B,  No.  44,  written  in  the  tenth 
century. 

Nos.  6  and  7,  Case  G,  are  in  Syriac.  The  one  contains 
the  four  Gospels  in  the  earlier  version,  and  is  dated  in  the 
fifth  century ;  the  other  is  a  copy  of  the  Pentateuch  in  the 
later  version  known  as  the  Feshitto  (or  'simple').  It 
became  the  authorised  version  of  the  Syriac  Church.  This 
MS.  was  written  in  a.d.  464.  It  "  is  one  of  the  earliest 
extant  copies  of  the  Feshitto,  and  the  earliest  MS.  of  the 
Bible  in  any  language  of  which  the  exact  date  is  known." 

Nos.  8,  9,  and  10  are  in  the  Coptic  of  Upper,  Middle, 
and  Lower  Egyptian  dialects.  They  contain,  severally,  the 
Apocalypse,  the  Gospel  of  St.  John  (to  which  reference  has 
bsen  made  above),  and  the  Epistles  and  the  Acts.  The  last 
has  an  Arabic  translation  in  the  margins.  No.  8.  is  dated  in 
the  fifth,  and  No.  9  in  the  sixth  century.  No.  10  was  copied 
much  later,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  from  a  MS.  of  a 
century  earlier.  All  these  important  MSS.  are  well  shown 
in  the  illustration  in  the  Case  of  Bible  Manuscripts. 

In  Case  H,  the  corresponding  Case  on  the  other  side, 
we  have  Biblical  MSS.  in  Latin  and  English.  The  two 
most  important  versions  being — the  Latin  or  Vulgate  of 
Jerome,  and  the  first  English  Bible  of  Wycliffe. 

There  are  several  complete  copies  of  the  Vulgate,  large 
and  small     No.  16  with  illuminated  initials,  No.  13  a  very 


THE  VULGATE  109 

large  volume,  and  No.  14.  Others  contain  only  portions, 
such  as  Nos.  11,  12,  which  contain  the  Gospels;  No.  15 
the  Acts,  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse.  They  are  arranged 
according  to  their  dates.  No.  11  was  written  in  the 
sixth  or  seventh  century;  No.  17  in  the  thirteenth. 

No.  13  is  a  revised  edition  of  the  Vulgate,  the  revision 
being  undertaken  by  Alcuin  of  York,  then  Abbot  of 
Tours,  by  Charlemagne's  orders. 

It  was  in  a.d.  383  that  Jerome,  in  his  retreat  at 
Bethlehem,  began  to  revise  parts  of  the  old  Latin  version 
— the  ItaUv — that  had  been  made  for  the  Church  of 
Carthage,  and  had  been  translated  from  the  Greek.  It 
was  very  incomplete  and  imperfect.  In  a.d.  390  Jerome 
started  on  a  much  greater  work,  viz.  that  of  translating 
the  Old  Testament  from  the  original  Hebrew.  He  was 
fourteen  years  completing  his  task,  but  it  was  very  long 
before  the  Vulgate  was  generally  accepted.  In  the  Cases 
round  us  there  are  many  MSS.  from  the  Vulgate.  Three 
very  large  volumes,  written  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth 
centuries,  stand  in  the  lower  part  of  Case  C  on  the  floor. 

It  was  from  the  Vulgate  that  Wycliffe  in  the  fourteenth 
century  translated  the  Bible  into  English,  and  for  the 
first  time  the  people  of  England  were  able  to  read  it  in 
their  native  tongue.  Some  attempts  had  been  made  to 
translate  portions,  as,  for  instance,  Bede's  translation 
of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  which  he  completed  on  his 
deathbed. 

No.  18  in  Case  H  is  the  Pentateuch,  and  Book  of 
Joshua  paraphrased  in  English  by  JSSMStiG  the  Grammarian, 
produced  early  in  the  eleventh  century.  It  can  scarcely  be 
termed  a  version,  but  it  was  "  the  earliest  form  in  which 
the  Old  Testament  narrative  was  made  accessible  to  any 
English  readers  in  their  own  tongue."  No.  19  is  a  copy 
of  the  four   Gospels  in  English,  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  or 


no  HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE 

Wessex  version,  produced  early  in  the  eleventh  century, 
the  earliest  English  version  of  the  G-ospels.  This  copy 
belonged  at  one  time  to  Archbishop  Cranmer.  In  the 
magnificent  Liudisfarue  Gospels  (see  p.  119),  written 
about  A.D.  700,  an  Anglo-Saxon  paraphrase  was  added  under 
the  Latin  words  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  later. 

It  was  the  work  of  Wycliffe  and  his  followers  to 
put  the  complete  Word  of  God  within  reach  of  the 
common  people,  and  the  story  of  its  rapid  circulation  is 
the  story  of  the  dawn  of  the  Keformation.  There  are 
several  copies  in  this  Case  of  Wycliffe  versions.  No.  23 
is  an  interesting  specimen  of  a  small  pocket  portion. 
The  Epistles  and  Revelation  are  contained  in  this  little 
volume.  To  possess  such  a  book  may  have  meant  danger 
to  the  house  in  which  it  was  found,  and  even  death  at 
the  stake  to  its  owner. 

All  these  copies  of  the  Scriptures  are  in  manuscript, 
and  when  we  think  that  for  these  many  centuries  the 
accuracy  of  the  copies  depended  on  the  care  of  the 
writers,  the  wonder  is,  not  that  a  few  clerical  errors 
have  crept  into  our  Bibles,  but  that  so  few  have  been 
discovered  there.  The  Biblical  "  criticism  "  which  compares 
the  text  of  the  various  MSS.,  in  order  to  determine  which 
of  the  divergent  readings  are  correct,  is  of  the  greatest  value. 
It  is  said  that  in  the  Codex  Sinaiticus  there  are  traces  of 
seven  different  corrections  between  the  fourth  and  twelfth 
centuries. 

As  we  look  at  these  manuscripts  of  the  Bible,  and 
realise  that  all  our  versions  were  derived  from  such 
copies,  it  will  easily  be  understood  that  the  mistakes 
due  to  a  copyist's  blunders  do  not  interfere  with  the 
grand  fact  of  the  inspiration  of  God's  Word. 

Passing  through  the  doorway  in  the  illustration 
(Plate   VIIL,  p.  105)  we    come    to  the  King's  Library. 


THE  FIRST  PRINTED  BIBLE  iii 

Just  inside,  on  the  right,  in  Case  A,  there  are  some 
interesting  Biblical  MSS. — No.  5,  the  Book  of  Genesis  in 
the  Peshitto  version,  or  usual  Syriac,  written  in  the 
sixth  or  seventh  century.  No.  6,  a  fragment  of  the 
Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  John,  in  the  same,  with 
an  Arabic  translation  of  the  early  tenth  century. 
No.  8,  the  four  Gospels  in  Armenian,  dated  a.d.  1181. 
In  Case  D,  on  the  other  side  of  the  room,  there  are 
two  specimens  of  the  Gospels  in  Coptic,  one  on  paper, 
probably  written  in  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century, 
the  other,  No.  14,  having  an  Arabic  version  as  well  as 
the  Coptic  (see  note  at  end  of  chapter). 

But  the  contents  of  the  greater  number  of  Cases  in 
this  room  are  printed  books,  arranged  to  illustrate  the 
history  of  printing  in  the  various  countries.  This  inven- 
tion was  used  of  God  to  increase  the  circulation  of  the 
Scriptures  in  a  wonderful  way,  and  it  was  also  facilitated 
by  the  advance  in  the  manufacture  of  paper.  A  lai^e 
sum  of  money  was  needed  to  pay  for  the  labour  of 
copying  the  Bible  by  hand,  and  the  vellum  itself  was 
expensive,  but  these  inventions  soon  enabled  men  to 
produce  them  more  cheaply. 

In  Case  II.,  the  large  one  on  the  right  (Plate  VIIL, 
p.  105),  we  see  the  first  products  of  the  printing  press. 

The  first  book  printed  in  Europe  was  a  Latin  Bible, 
No.  3.  It  is  supposed  to  have  come  from  the  Guten- 
berg press  in  1456.  It  used  to  be  known  as  the 
Mazarin  Bible,  because  the  first  copy  that  became 
famous  was  in  Cardinal  Mazarin's  library.  A  second 
copy  of  the  same  date  is  shown  in  this  case. 

In  Case  VIII.,  No.  3,  is  a  French  New  Testament 
printed  at  Lyons  about  1478,  or  about  forty-four  years 
before  Luther's  German  Bible  appeared. 

But  it  is  in   the    English    Bible    that  we  are    most 


112  HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE 

interested,  and  the  earliest  copies  of  this  may  be  seen  in 
Case  XIII.  These  books  were  not  printed  cheaply,  for 
it  was  at  the  risk  of  men's  lives  that  they  were  brought 
out  and  circulated,  when  the  so-called  "  Church  "  did  not 
permit  the  reading  of  the  Bible- 
No.  9  is  a  fragment  of  the  first  edition  of  Tyndale's 
New  Testament,  and  the  only  fragment  known  to  exist. 
He  translated  from  the  original  Greek,  In  1525  three 
thousand  of  the  first  ten  sheets  had  been  printed  at 
Cologne,  when  the  editors  had  to  flee  to  Worms. 

"It  was  probably  not  until  the  beginning  of  1526 
that  the  first  copies  reached  this  country.  Money  for  the 
work  had  been  found  by  a  number  of  English  merchants, 
and  by  their  means  the  copies  were  secretly  conveyed  into 
England,  where  they  were  eagerly  bought  and  read  on  all 
sides.  The  leaders  of  the  Church,  however,  declared  against 
the  translation.  .  .  .  Sir  Thomas  More  wrote  against  it  with 
much  bitterness.  . .  .  The  Book  was  solemnly  burnt  at  Paul's 
Cross,  and  the  bishops  subscribed  money  to  buy  up  all  copies 
obtainable  from  the  printers;  a  proceeding  which  Tyndale 
accepted  with  equanimity,  since  the  money  thus  obtained 
enabled  him  to  proceed  with  the  work  of  printing  transla- 
tions of  other  parts  of  the  Bible. 

"The  account  of  this  transaction  given  by  the  old 
chronicler  Hall  is  very  quaint.  After  describing  how  a 
merchant  named  Packington,  friendly  to  Tyndale,  intro- 
duced himself  to  Tunstall,  Bishop  of  London,  and  offered 
to  buy  up  copies  of  the  New  Testament  for  him,  he 
proceeds  thus :  '  The  Bishop,  thinking  he  had  God  by 
the  toe,  when  indeed  he  had  the  devil  by  the  fist,  said, 
"  Gentle  Mr.  Packington,  do  your  diligence  and  get  them ; 
and  with  all  my  heart  I  will  pay  for  them  whatsoever  they 
cost  you,  for  the  books  are  erroneous  and  nought,  and  I 
intend  surely  to  destroy  them  all,  and  to  burn  them  at 


TYNDALE'S  TESTAMENTS  113 

Paul's  Cross ! "  Packington  came  to  William  Tyndale  and 
said,  "William,  I  know  thou  art  a  poor  man,  and  hast  a 
heap  of  New  Testaments  and  books  by  thee,  for  the  which 
thou  hast  both  endangered  thy  friends  and  beggared  thyself, 
and  I  have  now  gotten  thee  a  merchant  which,  with  ready 
money,  shall  despatch  thee  of  all  that  thou  hast,  if  you  think 
it  so  profitable  for  yourself."  "Who  is  the  merchant?" 
said  Tyndale.  "The  Bishop  of  London,"  said  Packington. 
"  Oh,  that  is  because  he  will  burn  them ! "  said  Tyndale. 
"  Yea,  marry,"  quoth  Packington.  "  I  am  the  gladder," 
said  Tyndale,  "for  these  two  benefits  shall  come  thereof; 
I  shall  get  money  to  bring  myself  out  of  debt,  and  the  whole 
world  will  cry  out  against  the  burning  of  God's  Word ;  and 
the  overplus  of  the  money  that  shall  remain  to  me  shall 
make  me  more  studious  to  correct  the  said  New  Testament, 
and  so  newly  to  imprint  the  same  once  again,  and  I  trust 
the  second  will  much  better  like  you  than  ever  did 
the  first!"  And  so  forward  went  the  bargain,  the  Bishop 
had  the  books,  Packington  had  the  thanks,  and  Tyndale  had 
the  money.' "^ 

The  first  printed  English  Bible,  1535,  is  shown  just 
below,  No.  10.  Edited,  and  as  regards  the  parts  not  already 
rendered  by  Tyndale,  translated  by  IVEiles  Coverdale, 
probably  printed  at  Zurich. 

After  Tyndale's  death  other  versions  appeared.  His 
friend  John  Rodgers  in  1537  issued  a  Bible  under  the 
name  of  "  Thomas  Matthew,"  embodying  Tyndale's  transla- 
tions, and  adding  to  them  from  Coverdale's.  "  Matthew's 
Bible  "  became  the  first  Authorised  Version,  for  it  secured 
the  sanction  of  the  archbishop  and  of  Henry  viii. 

On  the  other  side  of  Case  XIII. ,  No.  4,  is  a  copy  of  the 
first  edition  of  Cranmer's  Bible,  1540,  revised  from 
"  Matthew's  Bible  "  at  the  instigation  of  Thomas  Cromwell, 

'  Dr.  Kenyon  in  Our  £Me  and  the  Ancient  Mantucripts,  pp.  212,  213. 

15 


114  HOW  WE  GOT  OUR  BIBLE 

Earl  of  Essex.  There  is  a  prologue  by  Archbishop 
Cranmer,  and  this  copy  bears  an  inscription  showing  that 
it  was  presented  to  Henry  viii. 

In  Case  XIV.  there  are  some  other  interesting  copies 
and  translations  of  the  Bible,  No.  3,  the  first  printed  in 
Scotland,  1576-79 ;  No.  5,  the  first  edition  of  the  New 
Testament  in  Irish,  1602 ;  No.  6,  the  first  portion  in 
Welsh,  1567 ;  and  No.  7,  the  first  Bible  printed  in 
America — John  Eliot's  translation  into  the  language  of 
the  Indians  of  Massachusetts. 

And  finally,  in  Case  XV.,  No.  5  is  a  copy  of  the  first 
edition  of  the  so-called  "  King  James'  Bible,"  or 
Authorised  Version  of  1611,  Thus  we  are  brought 
down  to  the  very  times  in  which  we  live,  for  this,  in  its 
later  editions,  is  the  Bible  we  are  still  using. 

It  takes  us  but  a  few  minutes  to  look  at  all  these 
MSS,  and  versions,  but  they  tell  us  the  history  of  our 
English  Bible  through  many  centuries.  The  book  that 
cost  so  much  to  our  forefathers  is  now  free  to  all,  because 
of  what  they  suflFered  to  win  this  freedom  for  us. 

It  was  the  Church  of  Eome  that  burnt  the  Bibles 
and  their  readers  in  the  days  of  Wyclifife  and  Tyndale, 
and  the  Church  of  Eome  would  do  exactly  the  same  now 
if  it  had  the  power. 

The  history  of  the  Bible  and  the  way  it  has  been 
treated  is  reaUy  the  history  of  the  "  Church "  itself.  Its 
condition  at  any  period  can  be  gauged  by  the  place  which 
is  given  to  God's  Word.  So  it  was  in  ancient  days  in 
Israel's  history.  If  the  law  of  the  Lord  was  prized, 
studied,  and  obeyed,  the  land  prospered,  but  if  it  was 
neglected  the  people  sufiFered.  History  repeats  itself,  and 
the  way  in  which  God's  Word  in  those  days  was  forgotten 
and  ill-used  is  illustrative  of  the  treatment  of  the  Scrip- 
tures since  New  Testament  times. 


FIRE  AND  PENKNIFE  115 

At  one  time  we  read  of  the  law  of  the  Lord  being 
re-discovered  after  having  been  hidden  in  the  temple  for 
a  long  period.^ 

On  another  occasion  the  Word  of  the  Lord  by  one  of 
His  prophets  was  cut  with  a  penknife  and  cast  into  the 
fire  on  the  hearth  till  it  was  consumed  in  the  fire.^ 

These  three  methods  of  rendering  God's  Word  of  none 
effect  mark  not  only  incidents  but  eras  in  Church  history. 

For  centuries  it  was  hidden  away — and  buried  under 
rubbish.  Then  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries, 
after  it  had  been  re-discovered  by  the  Eeformers,  it  was 
burnt  in  the  Jire — now  it  is  suffering  by  the  use  of  the 
"penknife"  of  so-called  Higher  Critics.  But  in  spite  of 
all  attempts  to  destroy  it,  the  Old  Book  still  stands — 
"  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  ' 


1  2  Kings  22.  8.  2  jer   qq  20-23. 

'  In  Case  A  (see  p.  Ill),  it  is  interesting  to  notice  an  illuminated  copy 
of  the  MishnS  Torah  by  Maimonides,  dated  a.d.  1472.  Maimonides  was 
a  learned  Jewish  rabbi  and  a  great  Talmudist  of  the  twelfth  century.  This, 
his  chief  work,  is  the  "  systematic  codification  of  the  whole  of  the  Jewish 
law  as  it  is  found  in  the  Bible,  the  Mishnah,  etc.  ...  It  is  to  this  day  a 
place  of  tournament  for  all  Talmudists "  {Ency.  Brit.).  A  study  of  such 
a  commentary  of  the  Mishnah,  or  traditional  oral  law,  with  all  its  burden- 
some requirements,  would  illustrate  and  explain  the  Lord's  scathing 
denunciation  of  the  Jews  in  Mark  7.  6-13 :  '*  making  the  Word  of  God 
of  none  effect  through  your  tradition." 

Side  by  side  with  this  Rabbinical  MS.  is  another  interesting  fragment : 
"  Portions  of  the  original  Hebrew  text  of  Ecclesiasticus  found  in  the  Genizah 
of  the  ancient  disused  synagogue  in  Old  Cairo.  Probably  written  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  twelfth  century." 


CHAPTER    XIV 

CHURCH  HISTORY 

In  our  walk  through  the  Galleries  we  have  already  noticed 
many  things  illustrative  of  Church  history.  Before  leaving 
the  Museum  it  is  interesting  to  gather  together  the  threads, 
and  trace  them  still  further  in  the  Manuscript  Saloon  and 
King's  Library,  where  there  is  abundant  material  for  the 
study.  Those  who  have  the  time  to  do  so  will  be 
amply  repaid  if  they  devote  one  visit  entirely  to  this 
subject. 

At  the  beginning  of  our  "  Gallery  round  "  we  noticed  in 
the  Eoman  Gallery  the  dawn  of  Church  history.  We  saw 
the  Portrait  Sculptures  of  the  Caesars,  the  persecutors  of  the 
early  Church,  and  tried  to  picture  the  condition  of  the 
Christians  who  lived  in  their  times  (see  p.  7);  we  read 
in  the  Ephesus  Room  and  Elgin  Room  of  Paul's  visits  to 
Ephesus  and  Athens,  and  the  foundation  of  the  Churches 
there.  Then  in  the  Third  and  Fourth  Egyptian  Rooms 
we  saw  evidence  of  the  rapid  leavening  that  took  place 
as  shown  by  the  Coptic  and  Gnostic  remains.  In  the 
early  Christian  Room  we  found  many  interesting  relics  of 
the  first  few  centuries  which  illustrate  the  declension  of  the 
Church.  But  it  is  amongst  the  MSS.  and  books  that  we 
find  such  a  rich  collection  of  illustrations. 

The    Libraries  are   full   of    new  interest  if    we   come 

to   them   well  grounded  in   Church   history,  and  look  at 

ue 


JEROME  1 1 7 

MSS.,  autographs,  books,  etc.,  in  the  light  of  such 
knowledge. 

Eeturning  to  the  Cases  where  the  Biblical  MSS.  are 
kept,  we  think  of  the  days  when  they  were  written.  The 
earliest  go  back  to  the  fourth  century,  when  the  "  Church  " 
had  become  paganised  instead  of  the  world  having  become 
Christianised.  The  so-called  conversion  of  Constantine, 
whose  portrait  we  saw  amongst  the  early  Christian 
antiquities  (see  p.  85),  had  changed  things  greatly,  and 
the  picture  of  the  times  in  which  the  "Fathers  of  the 
Church"  lived  is  a  very  dark  one.^ 

The  names  we  see  attached  to  many  of  the  Latin  and 
Greek  MSS.  bring  before  us  some  of  the  best  known  of 
these  so-called  "  Fathers."  In  Case  C  there  is  a  treatise 
of  St.  Cyprian  (No.  72),  the  Bishop  of  Carthage, 
who  was  martyred  by  the  decree  of  Valerian,  a.d.  258. 
Nos.  61  and  93  are  two  of  the  works  of  Origen,  who  was 
born  about  a.d.  185.  His  father,  Leonidas,  was  murdered 
under  Septimius  Severus,  but  Origen  himself  was  sent  for 
by  Mammaea,  the  mother  of  Alexander  Severus,  who  learnt 
from  him  some  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  (see  p.  7). 

Origen,  by  trying  to  harmonise  Christianity  with  philo- 
sophy and  the  other  systems  around  him,  introduced  much 
error  into  his  writings.  The  name  of  Jerome  occurs 
again  and  again  in  this  and  in  Case  D  as  the  translator  of 
the  Vulgate,  and  as  the  author  of  treatises.  The  histories 
of  the  time  do  not  give  us  a  very  attractive  picture  of 
his  character,  and  much  of  his  teaching  was  at  variance 
with  the  Bible,  over  which  he  laboured  so  nobly.  These 
were  the  days  when  the  great  Arian  controversy  rent  "  the 

'  See  The  Bible  or  the  Church  f  Sir  Robert  Anderson  ;  The  Influence  of 
Oreek  Idetu  upon  the  Church — Dr.  Hatch's  Hibbert  Lectures  ;  Dean  Milman's 
History  of  Christianity,  eta  ;  The  Lives  of  the  Fathers  and  Oathering 
Clouds,  Dean  Farror. 


I  1 8  CHURCH  HISTORY 

Church"  and  filled  Southern  and  Eastern  Europe  with 
dissension  and  bloodshed.  The  triumph  of  the  Arian 
party  in  Constantinople  led  to  the  exile  and  death  of 
St.  Chrysostom,  the  "golden  mouthed"  patriarch  of  that 
city. 

In  Case  B,  No.  38,  are  some  "  Hymns  used  in  the  Greek 
Church,"  reminding  us  of  the  great  rivalry  and  subsequent 
division  between  the  churches  of  the  East  and  West. 
When  Constantine  transferred  the  seat  of  empire  to 
Byzantium  and  built  Constantinople,  the  rivalry  between 
the  East  and  the  West  began;  and  while  the  Greek  or 
Eastern  Church  became  Arian,  the  Western  or  Latin 
adhered  to  the  Mcene  creed  (see  p.  88). 

No.  101  contains  homilies  of  St.  Ambrose,  St. 
Gregory,  etc.  The  story  of  Ambrose,  Bishop  of  Milan, 
is  well  known.  Thessalonica  had  offended  the  Emperor 
Theodosius,  and,  in  spite  of  the  intercession  of  Ambrose, 
the  city,  in  A.D.  390,  was  put  to  the  sword.  Artists  have 
often  tried  to  depict  the  memorable  scene  when  Ambrose 
refused  to  admit  the  proud  emperor  to  the  church,  and 
obliged  him  to  do  long  penance  for  his  crime  and 
humble  himself  in  the  dust  before  he  was  allowed  to  enter 
once  more.  No.  108  (also  in  Case  C)  is  a  copy  of 
St.  Augustine's  Commentary  on  the  Psalms. 

The  MSS.  before  us  are  copies  of  the  writings  of  these 
"Fathers"  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  centuries.  If 
we  could  study  them,  we  should  find  that  they  contain  a 
strange  mixture  of  truth  and  error,  for  it  is  a  great 
mistake  to  think  that  the  teaching  of  the  first  few 
centuries  of  the  "  Church's "  history  was  pure  and  trust- 
worthy. The  writings  of  the  "Fathers"  do  not  compare 
well  with  the  Scriptures  on  which  they  professed  to  be 
writing  commentaries. 

But  to  know  the  history  of  these  men  is  to  gain  an 


LINDISFARNE  GOSPELS  119 

insight  into  the  character  of  the  first   few  centuries  of 
the  "Church's"  history. 

These  MSS.  as  well  as  the  Biblical  MSS.  in  Case  G 
were  almost  without  exception  copied  in  monasteries. 
Keference  has  already  been  made  to  the  vast  number  of 
anchorites,  monks,  etc.,  that  immolated  themselves,  at  first, 
in  "Egypt  especially.^  We  read  that  in  the  desert  of 
Nitria  alone  there  were  five  thousand,^  and  two  of  these 
MSS.,  No.  3,  the  palimpsest  Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  and  No.  6, 
the  Syriac  Gospels,  were  written  in  the  monastery  there. 

It  is  impossible  to  compute  the  numbers  of  those  who 
through  the  Middle  Ages  thus  tried  to  withdraw  them- 
selves from  the  darkness  instead  of  giving  light.  God 
doubtless  had  His  witnesses  among  them,  and  He  has 
overruled  their  mistakes  to  His  own  glory  in  this  respect 
at  least,  that  they  became  the  preservers  of  the  Manu- 
scripts of  the  Bible.  But  if  instead  they  had  all  been 
missionaries,  the  Word  of  God  would  have  spread  through- 
out the  world,  and  would  have  done  much  to  dispel  the 
darkness.  The  copies  of  Scripture  were  regarded  with 
superstitious  reverence,  instead  of  being  studied  by  the 
help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  Ecclesiastical  History  of 
Simeon  of  Durham,  shown  in  the  central  octagonal 
Case  P,  No.  5,  the  exhibited  page  gives  a  description  of 
the  perilous  voyage  of  the  monks  of  Lindisfarne,  who, 
with  the  body  of  St.  Cuthbert  and  a  copy  of  the  Gospels 
written  in  his  honour,  fled  from  an  invasion  by  the  Danes. 
During  a  "  storm,  while  the  ship  was  lying  on  her  side,  a 
copy  of  the  Gospels,  adorned  with  gold  and  precious  stones, 
fell  overboard  and  sank  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."    The 

>  Amongst  the  Greek  MSS.,  Case  A  (Plate  VIII.,  p.  105),  there  is  a 
papyrus  (No.  16)  coDtaining  a  petition  from  a  recluse  in  the  temple  of 
Serapis,  at  Memphis,  B.C.  161.  It  was  from  the  devotees  of  this  heathen 
deity  that  the  monastic  idea  first  arose  (see  p.  63). 

'  Dean  Milman'a  Miatory  of  Chriitianity,  voL  iii.  p.  209. 


I20  CHURCH  HISTORY 

history  describes  how  they  prostrated  themselves  at  full 
length  before  the  feet  of  the  "  Saint's "  body,  and,  having 
reached  the  shore  at  length,  "  the  accustomed  help  of  their 
pious  patron  came  to  their  aid,"  the  tide  went  out  further 
than  usual,  and  they  found  the  book  on  the  strand  unspoilt. 
The  identical  MS.  is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  and 
may  be  seen  in  the  adjourning  room  leading  to  the  students' 
rooms.  It  is  very  beautifully  illuminated,  and  it  seems 
scarcely  possible  to  believe  that  it  ever  fell  into  the  sea. 

In  all  parts  of  these  rooms  there  is  evidence  of  the 
immense  power  that  was  centred  in  these  religious  houses. 
The  "Church"  had  assumed  an  entirely  wrong  position 
in  the  world.  The  temporal  power  for  which  it  had 
long  been  struggling,  passed  more  and  more  into  the 
hands  of  those  who  professed  to  be  followers  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  but  by  their  lives  too  often  denied  Him. 

We  have  already  compared  this  state  of  things  with 
the  days  when  the  early  Christians  were  persecuted  by 
the  Caesars  (see  pp.  7,  8).  Well  may  we  ask  what  has 
happened  as  we  walk  from  the  Eoman  Gallery  into  the 
Manuscript  Saloon.  The  Cases  full  of  charters  give  evi- 
dence to  the  constant  acquisition  of  lands  by  the  abbots 
and  priors  who  ruled  the  religious  houses.  The  great 
seals  in  Case  M  show  that  those  of  the  archbishops  and 
bishops  of  England  and  Wales,  of  abbots  and  abbeys,  were 
equal  to  those  of  the  kings  themselves;  and  the  student 
of  history  knows  that  the  kings  of  Europe,  England 
included,  were  often  made  to  tremble  before  the  power 
of  the  prelates. 

In  Case  F  (Plate  VIII.,  p.  105)  there  are  several 
other  interesting  Chronicles.  No.  1  was  written  in  the 
twelfth  century,  and  the  passage  exhibited  describes  the 
preaching  of  Christianity  in  Ireland  by  St.  Patrick, 
beginning  in  A.D.  485.     He  must  have  been  a  true  mission 


BEDE'S  CHRONICLE  121 

preacher,  who  knew  the  simple  gospel.  He  was  born  in 
Scotland  of  Christian  parents,  his  mother  being  sister  to 
Martin  of  Tours,  but  he  was  carried  off  by  Irish  pirates 
when  quite  a  lad.  During  his  captivity  the  truths  he 
had  before  learned  were  blessed  to  him,  and  he  became 
truly  converted.  He  gained  his  freedom,  but  soon  after- 
wards decided  to  go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  the  barbarians 
of  Ireland.  As  a  result  of  his  preaching,  Ireland  was 
flooded  with  gospel  light,  and  missionaries  went  forth  to 
other  lands. 

No.  2  is  a  copy  of  the  celebrated  Ecclesiastical  History 
of  the  "Venerable  Bede"  (Plate  VIIL,  p.  105).  He 
was  born  in  673,  and  lived  all  his  life  as  a  monk  at 
Jarrow  in  Northumberland.  The  story  of  the  deathbed 
scene  is  very  familiar,  for  he  passed  away  just  as  he 
had  completed  his  translation  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John. 
(There  is  an  older  copy  in  Case  0,  No.  64.)  The 
passage  exhibited  gives  the  account  of  Gregory's  visit 
to  the  slave  market  at  Kome,  where  he  saw  the  captives 
from  Britain,  and  made  his  three  puns.  "He  asked 
therefore,  again,  what  was  the  name  of  the  people,  and 
it  was  answered  that  they  were  called  Angles.  '  Good,' 
said  he,  'for  they  have  an  angelic  face,  and  such 
should  be  co-heirs  of  the  angels  in  heaven.'  He  was 
told  they  were  of  the  province  of  Deira.  'Good,'  said 
he,  'De-ira,  they  are  snatched  from  wrath'  {de-ira  in 
Latin.)  .  .  ,  He  was  then  told  that  their  king  was  called 
iElla,  whereupon,  playing  upon  the  name,  he  said, '  Alleluia, 
the  praise  of  God  the  Creator  must  be  sung  in  those  parts.' 
Then  going  to  the  bishop  of  the  Eoman  and  Apostolic 
See  (for  he  was  not  yet  bishop  himself)  he  asked  him 
to  send  some  ministers  of  the  Word  into  Britain,  to  the 
people  of  the  Angles,  by  whom  they  might  be  converted 

to  Christ."     And  so  Augustine  was  sent  to  introduce 
16 


122  CHURCH  HISTORY 

papacy  into  England.  A  Life  of  St.  Augustine  of  Canter- 
hury  is  shown  in  Case  D,  No.  113.^ 

The  struggle  for  the  supremacy  raged  for  several 
centuries,  for  Kome  desired  nothing  less  than  full  power, 
not  merely  ecclesiastical,  but  political.  Everything  was 
to  be  under  its  control.  It  was  this  that  led  to  the 
murder  of  Thomas  h.  Becket  in  the  reign  of  Henry  li., 
A.D.  1171,  which  again  brought  about  the  complete  sub- 
jection of  the  king.  But  when,  in  1207,  John  revolted, 
he  was  excommunicated,  and  the  whole  country  was  placed 
under  the  ban  of  Eome,  the  throne  was  declared  vacant, 
and  was  offered  to  the  King  of  France.  Such  was  the 
power  of  Eome  in  those  days  that  John  submitted 
abjectly,  and  the  bull  of  Pope  Innocent  III.,  which 
ratifies  the  submission,  is  here  exhibited.  Case  V.,  No.  38. 
The  country  was  handed  over  to  Kome  in  the  presence 
of  the  Papal  Legate,  Eandulph,  and  received  back  by 
John  on  his  "promising  for  himself  and  his  successors 
fealty  and  a  yearly  payment  of  1000  marks." 

The  terms  of  John's  oath,  taken  on  15th  May  1213, 
are  as  follows  : — 

"I,  John,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England  and 
Lord  of  Ireland,  in  order  to  expiate  my  sins,  from  my 
own  free  will  and  the  advice  of  my  barons,  give  to  the 
Church  of  Eome,  to  Pope  Innocent  and  his  successors, 
the  kingdom  of  England,  and  aU  other  prerogatives  of 
my  crown.  I  will  hereafter  hold  them  as  the  Pope's 
vassal.  I  will  be  faithful  to  God,  to  the  Church  of  Eome, 
to  the  Pope  my  master,  and  to  his  successors  legitimately 

^  "The  Church  founded  by  Augustine  of  Canterbury  was  not  the 
Church  of  England,  but  a  branch  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  England. 
Pope  Gregory's  mission  corrupted  and  eventually  stamped  out,  so  far  as  the 
southern  kingdom  was  concerned,  the  purer  Christianity  of  the  ancient 
Church  of  Britain — a  Church  founded  in  apostolic  times  by  apostolic 
emisaaries." — Sir  Robert  Anderson  in  The  Bible  or  the  Church  ?  p.  99. 


MAGNA  CHARTA  123 

elected.  I  promise  to  pay  him  a  tribute  of  1000  marks; 
to  wit,  700  for  the  kingdom  of  England,  and  300  for  the 
kingdom  of  Ireland."^ 

The  triumph  of  the  Pope  was  shortlived,  for  two  years 
later  the  king  was  forced  by  his  barons,  who  felt  greatly 
humiliated  by  the  degradation  of  this  submission,  to  affix 
his  seal  to  the  famous  Magna  Charta,  the  great  charter 
of  the  liberties  of  England.  A  copy  of  this  is  to  be  seen 
here,  No.  40.  The  remains  of  the  original,  much  damaged 
by  fire,  may  be  seen  in  the  inner  room,  also  a  second 
copy  of  the  oath  of  John.  Part  of  the  Great  Seal  remains, 
for  it  was  "  signed  "  by  means  of  a  seal,  not  a  signature. 

The  document  in  Case  VI.,  No.  53,  is  a  relic  of  the 
Crusades.  It  is  a  "covenant  by  Pain  de  Cha worth  and 
Robert  Tybetot  to  serve  Edward,  son  of  Henry  m.,  in 
the  Holy  Land  with  twelve  knights  for  one  year  for 
1200  marks  and  their  passage,  i.e.  hire  of  ship,  water,  and 
horses.    Dated  at  Westminster,  20th  July,  54  Hen.  iii,"  ^ 

We  have  already  noted  (p.  86)  how,  even  in  the  early 
days  of  the  "Church,"  pilgrimages  were  made  to  places 
consecrated  to  the  memory  of  the  martyrs.  Very  soon 
streams  of  pilgrims  visited  the  Holy  Land  and  the  sacred 
places  there,  and  in  the  eleventh  century  the  Roman 
Church  began  to  call  on  the  faithful  from  all  parts  of 
Europe  to  enter  upon  these  "  Holy  Wars,"  viz.  to  wrest 
these  sacred  spots  from  the  power  of  the  Turk.  The 
story  of  the  Crusades  is  well  known  to  all ;  it  is  interesting 
that  this  phase  of  so-called  "Church"  history  is  also 
represented  in  the  Manuscript  Saloon. 

They  marked  another  aspect  of  Rome's  power  during 
the  three  centuries  which  followed.  The  preaching  of 
the  "cross"  no  longer  meant  what  it  had  done  in  the 
days  of  the  apostles.      It  was  a  call   to  arms,  and  men 

*  Ency.  Brit.,  8th  Ed.,  voL  viii.  p.  677.  *  Guide  E,  p.  44. 


124  CHURCH  HISTORY 

were  taught  that  such  things  would  give  them  favour 
in  the  sight  of  heaven  and  help  towards  the  salvation  of 
their  souls.  Whilst  a  false  superstitious  value  was  put 
on  the  wood  of  the  cross,  and  the  spot  on  which  it  was 
supposed  to  have  stood,  the  work  accomplished  on  that 
cross  was  forgotten,  misunderstood,  or  ignored.  If  the 
so-called  head  of  the  "  Church "  had  preached  instead  a 
crusade  against  sin,  and  armies  of  soul  winners  had  gone 
forth  from  their  homes  for  Christ's  sake,  how  different 
would  have  been  the  history  of  Europe  and  of  the 
"Church."  The  indulgences  were  a  source  of  immense 
revenue  to  Eome.  Two  indulgences  relating  to  a  later 
Crusade  may  be  seen  in  the  King's  Library  (see  p.  132). 

Eeturning  to  the  octagonal  case  in  the  centre  of  the 
room,  there  is  one  more  Chronicle  which  is  worth  look- 
ing at,  as  illustrating  an  important  epoch  in  "  Church " 
history,  viz.  No.  14,  the  Chronicle  of  St.  Albans, 
1328-1388.  The  page  exhibited  is  from  the  description 
of  the  trial  of  Wycliffe  at  St.  Paul's  in  1377.  The 
tone  of  the  chronicle  is  bitterly  opposed  to  Wyclifife  and 
his  protector  John  of  G-aunt,  and  was  suppressed 
when  Henry  IV.,  son  of  John  of  Gaunt,  came  to  the 
throne.  At  the  trial,  when  Wycliffe  was  to  appear  before 
the  bishops,  he  was  accompanied  by  John  of  Gaunt  and 
Lord  Henry  Percy,  the  Marshall  of  all  England. 
A  quarrel  arose  between  the  two  parties,  and  thus  Wycliffe 
was  delivered.  No.  148,  in  Case  B,  contains  some 
tracts  attributed  to  Wycliffe. 

But  we  have  here  gathered  together  not  only  books 
written  by  those  whose  names  are  familiar  to  students  of 
"Church"  history,  but  the  actual  handwriting  of  many 
famous  characters. 

If  a  history  of  the  Reformation  could  be  brought  out 
illustrated  by  original  autographs  of  the  chief  personages 


MARTIN  LUTHER  125 

to  which  reference  was  made,  the  value  of  that  volume 
would  be  almost  priceless,  yet  in  this  room  alone  we 
have  the  handwriting  of  many  of  the  most  celebrated  of 
these. 

It  is  with  peculiar  interest  that  we  turn  to  one  spot 
in  this  MSS.  Saloon.  In  Case  VIII.,  on  the  right  of 
the  entrance  to  the  Students'  Eoom,  is  a  little  group  of 
autograph  letters,  which  recall  many  memories  of  these 
stirring  times.  Martin  Luther !  how  much  that  name 
means  to  us.  Here  is  a  letter  (No.  2)  from  his  hand. 
The  brave  champion  of  the  faith  writes  to  Thomas 
Cromwell,  Henry  viii.'s  Secretary  of  State,  rejoicing 
in  Cromwell's  zeal  for  the  cause  of  Christ  and  his  power 
to  advance  it.  This  was  written  in  1536,  ten  years  before 
his  death,  and  fifteen  years  after  Henry  VIII.  had  gained 
the  title  "  Defender  of  the  Faith  "  by  writing  against  Luther. 
In  1522  Luther  wrote  to  George  Spalatin:  "I  must  reply 
to  the  growling  lion  who  calls  himself  King  of  England. 
The  ignorance  the  book  displays  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
in  a  royal  author,  but  the  bitterness  and  lies  are  gigantic. 
How  Satan  rages!     But  I  shall  embitter  him  more."^ 

The  original  Bull  of  Leo  X.  conferring  the  title  upon 
Henry  is  on  the  wall  near  the  entrance  to  the  King's 
Library.'  A  copy  of  the  book  which  he  wrote  against 
Luther  is  in  the  King's  Library  (p.  133).  But  since 
then  Henry  had  cast  off  the  papal  yoke,  as  we  shall  see 
farther  on. 

No.  3  is  a  letter  from  Luther's  friend,  Philip 
Melancthon,  to  Henry  viii. 

No.  1  is  from  Erasmus,  the  learned  Dutch  scholar, 

*  LetUrs  of  Martin  Luther,  translated  by  M.  Carrie. 

^  Next  to  the  Bull  of  Leo  X.  hangs  a  grant  of  Ma-homet  II.,  Sultan 
of  the  Ottoman  Turks.  Dated  the  week  following  the  Capture  of 
Constantinople  by  the  Turks,  29th  May  1453.  Those  were  dark 
days  for  the  Christians  in  the  east  of  Europe. 


126  CHURCH  HISTORY 

who  studied  at  Paris  and  at  Cambridge,  and  often  visited 
England.  It  was  he  who  did  so  much  to  revive  the 
study  of  Greek  by  bringing  out  an  edition  of  the  Greek 
Testament.  Though  he  never  took  the  stand  for  the 
truth  which  Luther,  Melancthon,  and  others  took,  he  had 
his  share  in  the  work  of  the  Eeformation.  "Eeuchlin 
and  Erasmus  gave  the  Bible  to  the  learned,  Luther 
gave  it  to  the  people."^ 

No.  4  gives  us  two  familiar  and  much  honoured  names, 
for  it  is  a  letter  from  Calvin  to  William  Parel,  pastor 
of  the  church  of  Neufchatel.  Farel  had  first  come  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  truth  through  the  preaching  of  Lefevre, 
at  the  imiversity  of  Paris,  before  Luther  had  become 
famous. 

The  light  of  the  Eeformation  sprang  up  almost  simul- 
taneously in  several  of  the  countries  of  Europe,  as  God's 
Spirit  called  forth  one  and  another  to  do  His  work.  Both 
Farel  and  Calvin  were  brought  into  the  light  in  Paris, 
though  they  laboured  afterwards  in  Switzerland.  To  be 
familiar  with  the  lives  of  these  five  men  would  be  to  know 
a  good  deal  of  the  history  of  the  Eeformation  in  Germany, 
France,  Switzerland,  Holland,  and  England. 

But  at  the  other  end  of  the  same  case  we  see  the  hand- 
writing of  some  very  different  men — Voltaire  (No.  16), 
Jean  Jacques  Rousseau  (No.  17),  Immanuel  Kant 
(No.  20).  Voltaire  thought  that  the  Bible  was  an  exploded 
book,  but  it  still  lives.  Neither  his  bitter  hatred,  nor  the 
rationalism  of  the  great  philosopher  Kant,  nor  the  scepticism 
of  Rousseau,  have  been  able  to  undo  the  magnificent  work 
of  these  champions  of  the  truth.  But,  in  spite  of  Voltaire's 
opposition  to  Christianity,  and  the  dangerous  views  of 
Eousseau,  which  so  influenced  the  generation  then  living 
and   helped  to  bring  about  the  French   Revolution,  both 

^  Merle-d'Aubign^'s  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.  p.  124. 


ENEMIES  OF  THE  REFORMATION        127 

these  men  used  their  pens  on  behalf  of  the  Protestants. 
The  cruel  persecutions  of  "the  Church  in  the  Desert" 
roused  their  feelings  of  humanity,  and  their  efforts  were 
largely  instrumental  in  causing  the  martyrdoms  to  cease, 
and  some  of  the  galley-slaves  to  be  released.  In  the  letter 
shown  here,  Rousseau  refers  to  his  labours  on  behalf  of 
Protestants. 

In  Case  I.  there  are  three  autograph  letters  of  foreign 
sovereigns  who  played  a  very  important  part  in  the  history 
of  the  "  Church."  No.  32  is  a  letter  from  Charles  V.  to 
his  daughter-in-law  Mary,  Queen  of  England,  expressing 
his  wish  to  see  his  son  Philip,  to  whom  he  was  on  the 
point  of  resigning  the  crown  of  Spain.  How  many  scenes 
these  three  names  bring  before  us — Charles  v.,  Philip  n. 
of  Spain,  and  Bloody  Mary!  Charles  v.,  before  whom 
Luther  stood  on  his  trial  at  Worms  ;^  Philip  II.,  who 
afterwards  despatched  the  Invincible  Armada  to  conquer 
England;  and  Mary,  who  sent  so  many  martyrs  to  the 
stake  at  Smithfield. 

No.  33  is  a  letter  of  Henry  IV.,  King  of  Navarre  and 
France.  It  was  his  marriage  with  Margaret,  the  daughter 
of  Catherine  de  Medici,  which  had  brought  so  many  of  the 
Huguenot  nobles  to  Paris  just  before  the  massacre  of  St. 
Bartholomew's  Eve,  for  Henry  was  a  Protestant  in  those 
days.  When  all  Catherine's  sons  had  died,  Henry  iv.  gave 
up  his  Protestantism  that  he  might  ascend  the  French 
throne.  In  order  to  secure  some  privileges  to  his  Protestant 
subjects,  he  passed  the  Edict  of  Nantes. 

No.  34  is  an  autograph  letter  of  Louis  XIV.  It  was 
he  who  revoked  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  and  deluged  the 
land  with  the  blood  of  the  Huguenots.  The  record  of  his 
long  reign  was  stained  by  many  sins,  and  he  was  persuaded 

1  See  Merle-d'Aubign^'s  History  of  the  Reformation ;  Motley's  Rite  of 
the  Dutch  Republic,  etc. 


128  CHURCH  HISTORY 

by  Madame  de  Maintenon  and  his  priestly  advisers  that 
this  attempt  to  exterminate  the  heretics  would  expiate 
these  sins. 

All  the  three  other  letters  in  this  Case  are  from  great 
kings  and  generals — Peter  the  Great,  Frederic  the  Great, 
and  Napoleon.  The  last  refers  to  his  expedition  in  Egypt, 
to  which,  as  we  have  seen,  we  are  indebted  for  the  Eosetta 
Stone  (see  p.  103). 

Amongst  the  Historical  Autographs  are  several  which 
are  connected  with  the  Eeformation  period.  We  have 
already  referred  to  the  great  struggle  with  the  Papal  power 
for  the  supremacy.  The  power  of  Eome  was  effectually 
broken  in  the  time  of  Henry  VIII.,  for  he  threw  off  the 
yoke,  not  because  of  his  love  to  the  gospel,  but  because 
the  Pope  interfered  with  his  arrangements,  and  refused  to 
sanction  his  divorce. 

No.  46,  The  King's  Book,  or  Necessary  Doctrine  for  a 
Christian  Man,  published  in  1543,  was  a  revision  by  Henry 
of  an  earlier  book.  The  autograph  corrections  are  in  Henry's 
hand,  and  in  the  passage  exhibited,  refer  to  the  claims  of 
the  Papacy.  The  MS.  said:  "Herby  it  may  appere  that 
the  busshop  of  Eome  contrary  to  Goddes  lawes  doth 
chalenge  superioritie  and  pre-eminence  " ;  and  Henry  added, 
"  Over  all,  and  to  make  an  apparance  that  itt  shuld  be  so 
hath  and  dothe  wrest  Scripture  for  that  porpose  contrary 
bothe  to  the  trw  menyng  off  the  same,  and  the  auncyent 
doctors  interpretations  of  the  chyrche,  so  that  by  that 
chalenge  he  wolde  nott  do  wrong  wonly  to  this  chyrche  off 
England,  but  also  to  all  other  chyrches  in  claymeyng 
superioryte  w*  ought  any  auctoryte  by  God  so  to  hym 
gyffen."! 

No.  40  is  a  letter  written  by  Cardinal  Wolsey,  after 
his  disgrace,  to  Stephen  Q-ardiner,  afterwards  Bishop  of 

1  Guide  E,  p.  14. 


LATIMER  AND  CRANMER  129 

Winchester,  one  of  the  chief  persecutors  during  Mary's 
reign. 

No.  45  is  a  letter  of  Hugh  Latimer,  containing 
arguments  against  the  doctrine  of  purgatory.  It  also 
has  annotations  by  Henry  viii.  This  was  written  in 
the  days  when  the  Eeformers  were  in  favour.  In  after 
years,  in  the  reign  of  Mary,  Latimer  and  Ridley,  Cranmer, 
and  multitudes  of  others  were  led  to  the  stake.  At 
Oxford  we  may  see  the  place  where  he  and  Eidley 
suffered.  The  noble  words  of  Latimer  are  well 
known :  "  Be  of  good  comfort,  Master  Ridley,  and  play 
the  man.  We  shall  this  day  light  such  a  candle,  by 
God's  grace  in  England,  as  I  trust  shall  never  be  put 
out."i 

No.  43  is  a  letter  from  Archbishop  Cranmer  to 
Thomas,  Lord  Cromwell,  thanking  him  "that  your 
Lordship  at  my  requeste  hath  not  only  exhibited  the 
Bible"  (in  English  known  as  Matthew's  Bible  (see  p.  113)), 
"which  1  sent  unto  you  to  the  Kinges  maiestie,  but  also 
hath  obteigned  of  his  grace  that  the  same  shalbe  alowed 
by  his  auctoritie  to  be  bowghte  and  redde  within  this 
realme  .  .  .  assuryng  your  Lordeship  for  the  contentacion 
of  my  mynde  you  have  shewid  me  more  pleasour  herin 
than  yf  you  hadd  given  me  a  thowsande  pownde."^  The 
hand  that  signed  this  letter,  signed  his  recantation,  in 
a  moment  of  weakness.  We  know  what  grief  this  sin 
occasioned  him,  and  when  he  so  bravely  recalled  his  act, 
he  said,  "And  forasmuch  as  my  hand  hath  offended, 
writing  contrary  to  my  heart,  therefore  my  hand  shall 
first  be  punished:  for  when  I  come  to  the  fire,  it  shall 
be  first  burned.  .  .  .  And  when  the  wood  was  kindled  and 
the  fire  began  to  burn  near  him,  stretching  out  his  arm, 
he  put  his  right   hand   into   the   flame,  which  he  held  so 

1  Foxe'B  Book  of  Martyrs  64,  865.  '^  Guide  E,  p.  1:J. 

17 


I30  CHURCH  HISTORY 

steadfast  and  immovable  .  .  .  that  all  men  might  see  his 
hand  burned  before  his  body  was  touched."^ 

No.  47  is  a  letter  of  Edward  VI.,  and  No.  48  a 
diary  of  his  reign  written  with  his  own  hand,  the  exhibited 
page  speaking  of  his  difficulties  with  his  sister  Mary 
about  the  celebration  of  the  mass  which  he  had  forbidden. 
He  also  mentions  threats  from  the  emperor  (Charles  v.) 
if  he,  Edward,  refused  to  allow  Mary,  who  was  the 
daughter  of  Charles'  aunt,  Catherine  of  Aragon,  to  follow 
her  popish  practices.  We  know  how  soon  she,  on  the 
death  of  Edward  vi.,  found  herself  at  liberty  to  have  the 
mass  celebrated  throughout  the  realm,  and  her  subjects 
who  refused  to  bow  the  knee  were  burnt  at  Smithfield. 
But  she  too  died,  and,  during  her  sister  Elizabeth's  reign, 
the  attempt  of  Philip  ii.  to  bring  the  Inquisition  into 
England  was  frustrated  by  the  defeat  of  the  Spanish 
Armada. 

No.  57  in  this  case  recalls  that  memorable  event.  It 
is  the  resolution  of  the  Council  of  English  Commanders 
after  the  defeat  "to  folowe  and  pursue  the  Spanishe 
rieete  untill  we  have  cleared  oure  owne  coaste  and 
broughte  the  Frithe  weste  of  us,  and  then  to  returne 
backe  againe,  as  well  to  revictuall  oure  ships  (which 
stand  in  extreme  scarsitie),  as  alsoe  to  guard  and  defend 
oure  owne  coaste  at  home."^  It  is  signed  by  the  heroes 
of  that  day  —  Lord  Howard  of  Effingham,  Lord 
Thomas  Howard,  Sir  Francis  Drake,  Sir  John 
Hawkins,  and  others. 

Many  other  names  might  be  noticed  in  Case  III., 
such  as  those  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  No.  61 ;  Thomas 
Went  worth.  No.  64 ;  Archbishop  Laud,  No.  65  ; 
Oliver  Cromwell,  Nos.  75,  77,  78;  and  Graham  of 
Claverhouse,  No.  83,  the  scourge  of  the   Covenanters 

^  Fore'B  Book  of  Martyrs,  pp.  924,  925.  -  Guide  E,  p.  17. 


EARLY  MANUSCRIPTS  131 

of  Scotland.  This  letter  gives  an  account  of  the  skirmish 
with  the  Covenanters  at  Drumclog. 

Amongst  the  English  autographs  are  several  which 
remind  us  of  various  periods  of  Church  history  in 
England,  such  as  one  on  the  wall  on  the  left  of  Case  H, 
No.  3,  an  agreement  signed  by  John  Milton  for  the 
sale  of  Paradise  Lost.  This  name  reminds  us  of  the 
period  when  Nonconformists  became  a  power  in  England. 
In  Case  VII. ,  No.  17,  is  a  letter  of  John  Wesley,  who, 
with  his  brother  Charles  and  with  Whitefield,  were  the 
instruments  in  God's  hands  of  the  great  revival  at  the 
end  of  the  eighteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century. 

In  the  King's  Library  (Plate  VIII.,  p.  105)  we  must 
first  glance  at  the  Cases  of  Oriental  MSS.  No.  4,  Case  A, 
takes  us  back  to  early  Church  history.  The  label  tells 
us  that  it  contains  "  Recognitions  of  Clement  of 
Rome  ;  the  discourses  of  Titus,  Bishop  of  Bostra,  against 
the  Manichseans;  the  treatise  of  Eusebius  of  Csesarea  on 
the  Theophania,  written  at  Edessa,  A.D.  411.  The  oldest 
dated  volume  extant,  Estrangela,  in  the  earliest  known 
form  of  Syriac  writing."  Here  are  several  famous  names. 
Irenaeus,  who  lived  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second 
century,  tells  us  that  Clement  of  Rome  was  the  third 
bishop  of  Rome,  and  that  Clement  "had  seen  the  blessed 
apostles  and  conversed  with  them."  Eusebius,  Bishop  of 
Csesarea,  the  friend  of  Constantine,  was  born  about  A.D.  260, 
and  attended  the  great  council  of  Nicaea  in  a.d.  325,  and 
there  joined  in  condemning  Arius,  but  afterwards,  with 
Eusebius  of  Nicomedia,  he  tried  to  reinstate  Arius  in 
opposition  to  Athanasius.^ 

No.  7.  is  the  earliest  Coptic  MS. — a  Gnostic  work — 
of  the  seventh  century. 

^  See  Smith  and  Waoe's  Dictionary  of  Christian  Biography,  vol.  ii.  p.  308  ff. 


132  CHURCH  HISTORY 

No.  10  is  one  of  the  earliest  paper  MSS.  extant,  it  is  in 
Arabic,  a.d.  960. 

No.  9  is  a  fragment  of  the  Koran,  probably  of  the 
eighth  century,  and  No.  11  is  a  complete  copy,  about 
A.D.  1200.  Mohammed  professed  to  have  received  his 
oracles  direct  from  heaven  by  the  angel  Gabriel,  and  they 
are  preserved  in  the  Koran,  which  is  the  Bible  of  the 
Mohammedans.  It  was  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh 
century  that  Mohammed  "the  impostor  of  Arabia"  estab- 
lished his  religion,  and  henceforward  the  religion  of  Islam 
made  rapid  progress,  till  it  became  one  of  the  greatest 
enemies  of  Christianity. 

In  Case  D,  on  the  other  side,  there  are  several  Coptic 
MSS.,  and  also  two  modern  Ethiopic  illuminated  books 
(seventeenth  or  eighteenth  century). 

Before  the  invention  of  printing  from  movable  type, 
the  letterpress  and  illustrations  were  cut  out  in  wood,  and 
the  page  printed  from  the  solid  block.  In  Case  I. ,  block- 
books  are  shown.  Nos.  2  and  3  were  called  "  the  Bible 
of  the  Poor,"  and  consisted  of  rhyming  verses  and  texts 
illustrated.  No.  4  is  the  Apocalypse  in  Latin.  No.  9  is  a 
Guide-book  to  Rome  for  the  use  of  German  pilgrims, 
about  1475.  Did  Luther  see  a  copy  of  this  on  his 
memorable  journey  to  Eome,  when,  as  he  climbed 
"Pilate's  Staircase,"  he  thought  he  heard  the  words 
"The  just  shall  live  by  faith,"  words  which  changed  the 
whole  current  of  his  life  and  became  the  keynote  of  the 
Reformation  ? 

In  Case  II.  (Nos.  1  and  2),  side  by  side  with  the  first 
printed  Bibles,  are  two  indulgences  granted  by  Pope 
Nicholas  v.,  conferring  privileges  on  all  Christians  con- 
tributing to  the  cost  of  the  war  against  the  Turks.  These 
were  printed  in  1455,  about  sixty  years  before  Luther 
nailed   his    theses   on    the    church   at   Wurtemberg  con- 


DEFENDER  OF  THE  FAITH  133 

demning  the  sale  of  indulgences.  In  Case  XII.  b,  No.  10,  is 
the  first  edition  of  Henry  VIII. 's  book  against  Luther, 
for  which  the  Pope  gave  him  the  title  of  "Defender  of 
the  Faith"  (see  p.  125). 

The  Bibles  we  have  already  seen  illustrate  most  fully 
the  history  of  the  Kef ormation  in  England.  In  Case  XIII. , 
close  to  Cranmer's  Bible,  there  is  a  copy  of  "  Foxe's 
Book  of  Martyrs,"  1563  (No.  7).  "The  Actes  and 
Monuments  of  these  latter  and  perillous  days."  This  book 
gives  us  an  account  of  Tyndale's  life  and  work,  how  he 
was  persecuted  in  England,  and  went  to  Germany  to  finish 
his  splendid  achievement  of  translation;  and  it  tells  us 
something  of  what  the  printing  of  the  Bibles  cost  the 
Eeformers. 

In  1527  the  writings  of  Tyndale  were  prohibited  and 
denounced,  and  at  last  Tyndale  himself  was  seized  when 
living  at  Antwerp,  and  was  put  to  death  in  1536.  His 
martyrdom  took  place  at  the  town  of  Filford,  eighteen 
miles  from  Antwerp,  where  he  was  strangled  at  the  stake 
and  afterwards  burnt.  As  he  stood  firmly  amidst  the  wood, 
with  the  executioner  at  his  side  ready  to  strangle  him,  he 
lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said  in  a  loud  and  fervent 
manner,  "  Lord,  open  the  eyes  of  the  King  of  England."  As 
we  have  already  seen,  Henry  viii.  did  become  later  the 
instrument  by  which  the  Bibles  were  circulated  and  read 
in  England,  and  the  copy  of  Cranmer's  Bible  (No.  4),  in 
the  same  Case,  which  was  presented  to  the  king,  shows 
that  he  sanctioned  its  use. 

In  Case  XV.,  No.  4,  there  is  a  first  edition  of  the 
Prayer  Book  of  Edward  VI. 

In  Case  XVI.,  No.  8,  there  is  an  early  copy — 1678 — of 
Bunyau's  Pilgrim's  Progress.  This  reminds  us  of 
another  period  when  many  of  God's  children  suffered  for 
the  faith.    The  wonderful  allegory  was  written  in  Bedford 


134  CHURCH  HISTORY 

Gaol,  where  John  Bunyan  had  been  imprisoned  for 
preaching  the  gospel.  This  was  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  ii. 

In  Cases  XXIX.,  XXX.  are  many  beautifully  bound 
Bibles  and  other  books,  some  of  which  belonged  to  kings 
and  queens  of  England. 

To  those  who  are  familiar  with  the  story  of  the 
Reformation  in  England,  the  splendid  copy  of  the  Bible 
(No.  1)  bearing  the  initials  of  Henry  VIII.  and  Aune 
Boleyn  — "  probably  bound  for  presentation  to  the 
Queen  "1 — recalls  much  that  is  full  of  interest. 

No.  9.  A  New  Testament  belonging  to  Queen 
Elizabeth  illustrates  another  chapter  in  the  history  of 
the  great  struggle.  The  dark  days  of  Mary's  reign  had 
come  between,  but  at  last  the  truth  has  conquered  and 
liberty  to  read  the  Word  of  God  has  been  won. 

1  Guide  F,  p.  110. 


CHAPTER     XV 

CONCLUSION 

There  are  many  important  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the 
things  we  have  seen  in  the  British  Museum. 

(I.)  "We  have  been  confronted  with  innumerable  proofs 
of  the  accuracy  of  Scripture,  and  the  more  we  compare 
the  records  and  learn  their  deeper  meaning,  the  more 
shall  we  be  convinced  that  the  Bible  is  indeed  the 
inspired  revelation  which  it  claims  to  be. 

(II.)  We  are  also  taught  in  a  very  striking  manner 
the  uselessness  of  fighting  against  God. 

As  we  look  on  the  sculptured  features  of  some  of 
these  mighty  monarchs,  or  read  inscriptions  signed  with 
their  names,  we  are  reminded  how  several  of  them  were 
taught  in  a  miraculous  manner  their  own  littleness  and 
God's  greatness.  We  are  specially  reminded  of  this  in 
connection  with  Pharaoh,  Sennacherib,  Nebuchadnezzar, 
and  Belshazzar.  God  spake  to  these  men  by  His  mighty 
acts.  He  does  not  now  send  swift  judgment  on  those 
who  set  themselves  up  against  Him,  for  He  is  on  a  throne 
of  grace,  but  the  God  who  now  "  commendeth  His  love 
toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died 
for  us,"  is  the  same  God  who  smote  these  kings,  and  if  His 
love  be  rejected  He  will  again  prove  a  God  of  judgment 
Like  the  people  in  Egypt,  in  the  time  of  the  Pharaoh  of 
the  Exodus,  we  must  either  be  sheltered  under  the  blood 

186 


136  CONCLUSION 

of  the  Paschal  Lamb  or  exposed  to  the  stroke  of  the 
destroyer — Which  is  it?  If  we  have  never  settled  the 
question,  may  we  not  take  warning  from  these  mighty 
monarchs,  and  humbly  bow  before  the  God  of  Israel,  who 
is  also  the  God  and  Father  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ? 

(III.)  We  feel  the  importance  of  possessing  some  key 
to  the  world's  history  as  a  whole. 

In  passing  through  all  these  galleries  in  this  wonderful 
collection  of  antiquities,  we  have  been  conscious  of  the 
vastness  of  our  subject,  and  have  been  almost  over- 
whelmed in  trying  to  grasp  something  of  its  meaning, 
as  page  by  page  has  been  unfolded  before  us. 

We  have  been  reminded  of  century  after  century  of 
events,  but  it  has  been  impossible  to  study  the  monuments 
chronologically.  We  have  had  to  pass  from  one  period 
to  another  in  rapid  succession,  and  then  backwards  and 
forwards  again  and  again.  We  have  seen  nation  after 
nation  rise  and  fall.  We  have  looked  upon  the  remains 
of  what  were  once  the  greatest  empires  of  the  world,  and 
have  seen  how  they  passed  away.  Are  all  these  events 
of  history  mere  accidents  ? 

It  has  perhaps  seemed  as  though  a  perfect  chaos  of 
dry  facts  has  been  presented.  Is  there,  however,  no 
connection  between  all  that  we  have  seen  ?  Can  we  find 
no  key  to  the  whole  ?  We  have  been  like  children  playing 
with  a  wonderful  puzzle;  we  have  fingered  piece  after 
piece;  have  looked  on  a  little  bit  of  the  picture  on  each 
separate  fragment.  How  are  we  to  put  the  puzzle  together 
so  as  to  find  out  the  complete  picture,  or  is  there  no  picture 
at  all,  but  merely  confusion?  Is  there  Someone  behind 
the  whole  Who  has  been  working  His  own  purposes 
through  the  centuries  ? 

The  key  to  the  puzzle  is  to  be  found  in  God's  Word. 
When  the  fragments  are  put   together  we  shall   discern 


ISRAEL  THE  KEY  137 

on  the  completed  picture,  and  connected  with  each  portion, 
one  central  figure — that  of  Israel.  God's  purposes  toward 
Israel,  and  through  Israel  to  the  world,  form  the  key  to  the 
Bible  itself  and  to  history  as  a  whole. 

Many  may  think  this  is  a  bold  assertion,  and  fanciful 
also,  but  we  have  Scripture  warrant  for  making  it.  "When 
the  Most  High  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance, 
when  He  separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  He  set  the  bounds 
of  the  people  according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of 
Israel."^  This  clearly  states  that  the  geographical  dis- 
tribution of  the  nations  is  in  relationship  to  Israel,  and 
the  historical  events  therefore  which  have  brought  about 
that  partitioning  of  the  earth's  surface  must  also  be 
included  in  this  statement. 

As  Daniel  told  Nebuchadnezzar,  "  The  Most  High 
ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whom- 
soever He  will."  "He  removeth  kings,  and  setteth  up 
kings."  - 

Throughout  the  rise  and  fall  of  these  empires  His 
purposes  with  regard  to  Israel  have  been  worked  out. 
This  is  the  key  to  the  politics  of  the  Bible  and  to  the  politics 
of  the  world.  Egypt,  Assyria,  and  Babylon  have  been 
dealt  with  in  view  of  this,  and  still  the  thought  of  Israel 
governs  God's  dealings  with  modern  nations.  Other 
purposes  were  being  worked  out  in  the  several  nations, 
but  this  one  ran  through  them  all.  For  instance,  Egypt 
was  raised  up  to  shelter  His  people  in  the  infancy  of 
the  nation.  Prosperity  was  given  to  Egypt  while  they 
were  there,  for  it  was  the  time  of  their  greatness.  The 
dynasties  that  ruled  during  Israel's  sojourn  were  the 
mightiest  of  all  But  when  Egypt  oppressed  Israel,  it 
was  visited  with  heavy  judgment,  as  God  had  foretold 
to  Abraham.      "Also  that  nation  whom  they  shall  serve 

1  Deat.  82.  8.  «  Dan.  4.  25 ;  2.  21. 

18 


138  CONCLUSION 

will  I  judge,"  ^  for  they  "  dealt  proudly  against  them  "  and 
became  "their  persecutors," ^  and  therefore  met  with 
disaster. 

Assyria  was  used  as  the  "  rod  "  of  God's  anger.  He  was 
but  the  "  axe  "  and  "  saw  "  in  His  hand,  but  afterwards  the 
Lord  punished  "  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  king  of 
Assyria  and  the  glory  of  his  high  looks.  For  he  saith,  By 
the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  it."^  Sargon  and 
Sennacherib  his  son  were  used  to  punish  Israel,  but  their 
pride  led  to  their  own  punishment.  And  so  with  Babylon, 
God  gave  the  world-power  "unto  whom  it  seemed  meet 
unto  Him."  He  calls  Nebuchadnezzar  His  "servant,"*  for 
he  was  raised  up  to  execute  God's  purpose  on  Israel;  but 
when  He  was  "  wroth  "  with  His  people,  Babylon  did  "  shew 
them  no  mercy," ^  and  so  Babylon  is  judged,  and  in  the  very 
year  that  Israel's  servitude  ends  Babylon  falls  into  the 
hands  of  Cyrus.  ^  Cyrus  in  his  turn  is  raised  up  to  help 
Israel  and  to  execute  judgment  on  Babylon.'^ 

This  is  the  principle  upon  which  God  has  acted  all 
through  the  world's  history  from  the  time  when  He  first 
took  up  Israel,  Though  He  visits  Israel  by  means  of  other 
nations,  their  cruelties  to  His  people  are  never  unpunished. 
"I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen  that  are  at 
ease,  for  I  was  but  a  little  displeased,  and  they  helped 
forward  the  affliction," ^ 

(IV,)  Another  lesson  that  we  may  learn  from  the  monu- 
ments as  a  whole,  is  that  God  is  faithful  to  His  Word,  The 
things  He  spake  before  came  to  pass.  We  have  noticed 
this  in  connection  with  the  defeat  of  Sennacherib,  the 
destruction  of  Nineveh,  the  rise  of  Cyrus,  and  the  fall  of 


1  Gen.  15.  14,  -  Neh.  9.  10,  11. 

s  Isa.  10.  5-7,  12-16.  *  Jer.  27.  6.  «  Isa.  47.  6. 

•  Jer.  25.  12  ;  Ezra  1.  1.         '  Isa.  44.  28 ;  45.  13. 
8  Zeoh.  1.  15. 


PROPHECY  AND  FULFILMENT  139 

Babylon,  all  of  which  had  been  foretold.  When  Israel  was 
set  aside  for  a  time,  and  the  world-power  was  given  to 
Gentile  nations  because  of  their  failure,  God  gave  to  Nebu- 
chadnezzar a  vision  and  an  interpretation  of  the  vision, 
in  which  He  revealed  the  various  powers  that  would  wield 
the  sceptre  of  the  world  during  the  "  times  of  the  Gentiles." 
"  Thou  art  this  head  of  gold,"  He  proclaimed  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar. To  Daniel  afterwards  He  revealed  the  names  of 
some  of  the  other  powers.  After  Babylon,  the  kingdom  of 
the  Medes  and  Persians  was  to  take  the  ascendency,  and  to 
be  followed  by  Greece.  Then  at  the  height  of  its  power 
Greece  was  to  be  broken  up  into  four.  This  was  all 
exactly  fulfilled;  Alexander  the  Great's  kingdom  was  divided 
amongst  his  four  generals. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  those  who  disbelieve  in  prophecy, 
and  deny  the  Divine  element  in  Scripture,  believe  the  book 
of  Daniel  to  have  been  written  after  the  events  happened, 
(V.)  If  God  has  fulfilled  His  Word  so  strikingly  in  the 
past,  He  will  continue  to  do  so  until  all  His  purpose  has 
been  carried  out.  There  is  much  still  to  be  fulfilled  con- 
cerning Israel.  Though  set  aside,  it  is  only  for  a  time.  The 
nations  of  the  world  are  just  as  much  working  out  His 
purposes  in  regard  to  Israel  as  did  Egypt,  Assyria,  and 
Babylon  of  old.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  foretold  that 
"  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled."^ 

The  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  was  a  figure  of 
these  very  "  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  the  times  when  Israel 
is  no  longer  an  independent  nation — but  the  whole  of  that 
prophetic  vision  is  not  yet  fulfilled.  He  saw  a  stone  fall 
upon  the  image  so  that  it  was  overthrown,  and  "the 
stone  became  a  great  mountain  and  tilled  the  whole  earth." 
For  God  shall  "set  up  a  kingdom  which  shall   never   be 

1  Lake  21.  24. 


140  CONCLUSION 

destroyed   ...   it  shall   break  in  pieces  and  consume  all 
these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for  ever."^ 

Thus  did  the  "great  God"  make  known  to  the  king 
what  should  come  to  pass.  And  the  same  "great  God" 
lives  to-day,  and  still  works  to  accomplish  His  purposes. 
Daniel  had  a  further  revelation :  "  I  saw  in  the  night  visions, 
and,  behold,  One  like  the  Son  of  Man  came  with  the  clouds 
of  heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 
brought  Him  near  before  Him.  And  there  was  given  Him 
dominion,  and  glory,  and  a  kingdom,  that  all  people, 
nations,  and  languages,  should  serve  Him:  His  dominion 
is  an  everlasting  dominion,  which  shall  not  pass  away,  and 
His  kingdom  that  which  shall  not  be  destroyed."  ^  This,  too, 
must  be  fulfilled.  And  when  it  comes  to  pass  Israel  will 
be  the  centre  of  blessing  on  this  earth,  as  God  has  so  long 
planned ;  and  the  promises  to  Abraham,  to  David,  and  to 
the  prophets  will  at  last  be  fulfilled.  It  was  for  this  that 
God  took  up  the  seed  of  Abraham :  "  In  thee  shall  all  families 
of  the  earth  be  blessed."  This  one  promise  contains  the 
germ  of  all  the  subsequent  contents  of  Scripture.  From 
the  time  when  the  declaration  was  made  to  Abraham  in 
Gen.  12.  the  books  of  the  Bible  are  full  of  the  unfolding  of 
God's  purpose,  the  working  out  of  His  plan,  the  seeming 
frustration  of  much  of  it,  the  partial  fulfilment  of  a  portion 
of  it,  the  postponement  of  most  of  it,  and  the  final  con- 
summation of  the  whole  of  it. 

(VI.)  When  we  study  the  subjects  illustrated  in  the 
Manuscript  Koom  and  King's  Library  (Chapters  XIIL, 
XIV.)  we  still  find  that  Israel  is  the  key.  We  com- 
menced our  sketch  of  "  How  we  got  our  Bible,"  by  look- 
ing at  fourth  and  fifth  century  MSS.  We  must  go  much 
further  back  for  the  true  origin,  for  the  Apostle  Paul 
tells    us  of    the    Jews,  "To    them  were   committed    the 

^  Dan.  2.  35,  44,  45.  ^  Dan.  7.  13,  14. 


UNTIL   141 

oracles  of  God."  ^  One  of  the  reasons  for  which  God  took 
up  the  seed  of  Abraham  was  that  they  might  be  the 
guardians  of  His  revelation  and  the  agents  to  the  world 
for  that  which  was  committed  to  them  ;  but  instead  of  being 
channels  of  blessing  to  the  world,  they  strove  to  keep  it  all 
to  themselves. 

(VII.)  The  present  position  of  the  children  of  Israel 
explains  Church  history,  though  the  connection  may  not  be 
apparent  at  first  sight.  Alas  that  there  should  have  been 
seemingly  so  little  connection  between  the  two,  and  that 
the  people  that  are  still  "beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes" 
should  have  been  hated  by  those  who  call  themselves 
Christians ! 

There  are  no  chronicles  in  the  MS.  Saloon  telling  of 
great  missionary  labours  amongst  the  Jews,  but  probably 
there  are  many  things  which  point  to  the  way  in  which 
they  were  treated  till  they  grew  to  hate  those  who  perse- 
cuted them  and  "  the  Christian  religion "  in  whose  name 
all  was  done. 

And  yet  there  is  a  very  great  link  between  Church 
history  and  Israel.  Even  in  this  department  Israel  is 
still  the  key,  as  we  discover  if  we  examine  Eomans  11.  It 
is  because  Israel  has  been  set  aside  that  the  Gentiles  of  this 
dispensation  have  been  brought  into  the  place  of  privilege. 
"  Now  if  the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  world,  and 
the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles;  how 
much  more  their  fulness  ?  .  .  .  For  if  the  casting  away  of 
them  be  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall  the  re- 
ceiving of  them  be,  but  life  from  the  dead  ?  .  .  .  For  I  would 
not,  brethren,  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of  this  mystery, 
lest  ye  should  be  wise  in  your  own  conceits ;  that  blindness 
in  part  is  happened  to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  be  come  in.     And  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved :  as 

I  Bom.  3.  2. 


142  CONCLUSION 

it  is  written,  There  shall  come  out  of  Sion  the  Deliverer, 
and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob."  ^ 

The  whole  of  the  present  dispensation  is  included  in 
the  two  passages  under  the  little  word  "until" — the  one, 
Luke  21.  24,  represents  the  "until"  of  judgment  upon 
Israel — the  other,  Eom.  11.  25,  the  "until"  of  grace  to  the 
Gentiles. 

As  certainly  as  the  treasures  in  the  British  Museum 
prove  that  God  has  fulfilled  His  Word  in  the  past,  so 
surely  are  they  a  guarantee  that  every  remaining  un- 
fulfilled prophecy  will  be  literally  accomplished.  The 
Lord  Himself  will  come  for  His  own,  and  then  will  come 
in  glory  to  set  up  His  kingdom  on  earth. 

Then  the  whole  picture  will  be  complete.  The  missing 
pieces  of  the  puzzle,  the  absence  of  which  makes  it  so 
difficult  for  us  to  fit  the  others  in  their  places,  will  at 
last  have  been  supplied,  and  all  the  universe  will  see  the 
finished  design  of  God's  purpose. 

"  God  is  not  a  man,  that  He  should  lie ;  neither  the  son 
of  man,  that  He  should  repent :  hath  He  said,  and  shall  He 
not  do  it  ?  or  hath  He  spoken,  and  shall  He  not  make  it 
good  ?  .  .  .  According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said  of  Jacob 
and  of  Israel,  What  hath  God  wrought ! "  ^ 

It  was  when  the  Apostle  Paul  had  been  contemplating 
the  wonders  of  God's  purposes  towards  Israel  and  the  world, 
that  he  broke  forth  into  his  marvellous  doxology :  "  0  the 
depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God !  how  unsearchable  are  His  judgments,  and  His  ways 
past  finding  out!  .  .  .  For  of  Him,  and  through  Him, 
and  to  Him,  are  all  things:  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever. 
Amen,"' 

1  Rom.  11.  12,  15,  25,  26.  2  jfum,  28.  19,  23. 

3  Rom.  11.  33-86. 


PASSAGES    OF    SCRIPTUKE 


To  which  reference  is  made 


Ocruiit 

PAOI 

8.  15   .     .     . 

9 

10.  10      .     . 

.     61 

11.28      .     . 

.     29 

12.  3  .     .     . 

.  140 

,.     10-20     . 

.     94 

14.  1,  etc.    .  28 

,  57,  69 

15.  2,  3  .     . 

.     58 

„     14.    .     . 

.  138 

23.  3-20 

.     17 

24.      .    .    . 

.     58 

26. 5  .     .    . 

38,57 

„    34,  35     . 

.     17 

44.9.     .     . 

.     58 

48.  5  .     .     . 

.     58 

50.  2,  3, 11  . 

.     50 

,.     26     .    . 

.     50 

Exodus 


1.  21    .     . 

100 

2.  23  .     . 

95,  100 

5.  6,  7,  12 

.     .     55 

11.  2  .     . 

55 

12.  12     . 

52 

13.  19      . 

51 

14.14     . 

24 

25.2-4   . 

55 

38.  8  .    . 

55 

Numbers 

6.  24-26  ....     68 

13.  22      ....     17 

28.  19,  23    .     .     .  142 

Deutenmomy 

17.  16,  17    ...     18 

27.  17      ....     63 

32.  8 137 

Joihua 

1.4 17 

10.  3 69 

11.  1 69 

15.  15,  16    ...    68 

24.  2,  14,  15    .     .     28 

.,32      .     . 

61 

Judges 


1.  26 


1  Kings 


2  Kings 

3.  4,  5  .  . 

7.  6    .  .  . 

8.  7-15  .  . 

9.  1-6  .  . 

10.  31,  32  . 
13.  3,  22,  23 

15.  19,  20,  29 

16.  7-10 
„    7-18 

17.  3-6  . 
„  4  . 
„     24     . 

18. ;  19. 
„     13-16 

19.  36,  37 

20.  20    . 
22.  8 
28.  29    . 

„     33,34 

lis 


PAGE 
,        17 


1  Samuel 

5.  2-5 23 

26.  6 17 

2  Samuel 

7.  23 62 

8.  9-11    ....  17 
23.  39     ....  17 


a  1  .  .  . 

6.  7    .     .    . 

10.  28,  29   . 

11.  1      .     . 

„    7,33     . 

»    40     .     . 

14.  25,  26  . 

16.24    .     . 

19.  15-17   . 

20.  34    .     . 

22.  1-3  .     . 

32, 


.  89 
.  18 
.  20 
.  20 
.  21 
.  21 
.  22 
.  47 
.  22 
.     30 

49,  95 

30,  31 
.     72 

26,  74 
.  71 
.  92 
.  115 

68,96 
.     96 


24.  1      .     .     .     . 

25.  1-5  ...     . 
„     27-30    .     .     . 

1  Chronicles 

5.  26 

10.  10    ...     . 


PAOB 

83 
83 
82 


22 
23 


2  ChronieUs 


8.  7,  8    . 
12.  1-12 
14.9      . 
28.  16,  20 
32.  1-8  . 

„     9      . 

,,     30    . 
38.11    . 

35.  20-24 

36.  3,  4 . 
„  13  . 
„     22,  23 


.  18 

.  95 

.  95 

.  47 

.  73 

.  25 

.  92 

.  27 

.  96 

.  96 

.  97 

79,  82 


Ezra 


1.1-3 
4.7    . 
„  9,  10 
6.  1,  2 


79,  82,  138 
.  84 
26,29 
71,  81 
83,  84 
.     84 


Nehemiah 

2.  1 

9.  10,  11      .     . 


Esther 


7.  7,8 


84 
138 


29 


Psalms 


12.  7      .    . 

.     .  106 

16.4      .    . 

.     .  106 

9ai.   .   . 

.   63-64 

124.7,8    . 

.     .     74 

144 


TEXTUAL  INDEX 


Proverbs 


22.  28 
28.  10 
24.27 
25.1. 


Isaiah 


1.  1    .     . 
8.  6    .     . 
10.  5-32 
13.  19,  20 
15. 
16. 
»    1      . 

„     6(B.V.) 

20.  1 
21.2      . 

30.  1-3  . 

31.  1-3  . 
36. 

„     1,2 
M      6       . 
37.  9      . 
„     33-38 
„     39    . 

44.  28    . 

45.  1-4  . 
„    13    . 

46.1.    . 
47.6      . 


PAOE 

63 
63 
11 
37 


.  78 
.  93 
30,  138 
.  65 
.  90 
.  90 
.  90 
.  90 

29,  31,  47 
.  78 
.  97 
.  97 
.  72 
.  25 
.  96 
.  96 

36,  71,  73 
.  48 
.  138 
.  79 
79,  138 
.  49 
.  138 


Jeremiah 

25.  11    .    .    . 
„    12    .     . 
„    25    .     . 

27.  6  .  . 
29.  10  .  . 
32.  9-11,  14 

36.  20-23    . 

37.  5,  7  .  . 
89.  11-14   . 

46.  .    . 

47.  1     .    . 

48.  .    . 
„    27,  39,  42 
„    30(B.v.) 

60.  40    .     . 
51.  25,  26   , 
„    31,  32  (E.v 

Ezehicl 

16.8.     .     .     . 

17.  16,  17    .     . 

28.  12,  14,  15  . 


.  83 

80,  138 

.  78 

.  138 
79,  83 

.  62 

.  115 

.  97 

.  82 

.  97 

.  97 

.  90 

.  91 

.  90 

.  65 

.  65 

I   .  80 


17 
97 
26 


Daniel 

PAGE 

2.  21 137 

,,  35,  44,  45  .  .  140 
„  38 96 

4.  25 137 

„  29,  30,  34-37    .     64 

5.  7,  16,  29 .  .  .  76 
„  25-28.  ...  67 
„  30 80 

6.  1,  2     .     .     .     .  80 

7.  13,  14      .     .     .  140 

8.  5-8,  20-22    .     .  12 

9.  1 81 

„  2 83 

„  24-271.     ...     84 


Hosea 


5.  13. 
10.  5-7 


Jonah 

1.  3 32 

3.  3 32 

4.  11 32 

Nahum 

3.  13,  15     .     .    33,  35 

„  8-10   ....     48 

Haggai 

2.  18,  19      .     .  8 

Zechariah 
1.15.     .     .     .        138 


St.  Matthew 


5.  35  .  .  .  . 
16.18  .  .  . 
22.  7     ... 

„    17-21    .     . 

St.  Luke 

1.  63  .  .  .  . 

2.  1    .  .  .  . 

3.  1  .  .  .  . 
21.  24  .  .  . 

St.  John 
19.  12,  15  .     . 


5 

11 

5 

2 


106  n 

1 

.       1 

.  139 


Acts 


7.  15,  16 
11.28  . 
14.  11  . 
17.  6,  8 . 

„    16,24, 
18.2      . 

„  3.  . 
19.  23-41 

,,  26  . 
25.  10-12 
28.  30    . 


29 


PAGE 
.        51 

2 
'.  18 
.  12 
13,  15 

2 
.  14 
.  10 
.  15 
.  3 
.       3 


Romans 


3.  2    .     . 
11.     .     . 

16.  10,  11 


.  .  141 
141,  142 
.     .       4 


2  Corinthians 


4.7 


£  Timothy 

1.  16,  17  .  . 
4.  16,  17  .  . 
.,21       ... 


Hebrews 


11.15 

„    22 


James 

1.  23-25 .     .     . 

2.  2    .     .     .     . 

3.  11,  12      .     . 

Jtevdation 

2.8-11    .  .  . 

12.  10    .  .  . 

18.  18-19  .  . 

.,    22     .  .  . 


63 


Ephesians 

1.  13,  14      ...  63 

2.  20,  21      ...  11 

4.  30 63 

5.  26 55 

PhUippians 

4.  22 4 


60 
50 


55 
85 
37 


6 
42 
65 
14 


INDEX 


Aahmes  or  Amasis  i.,  99. 
Aahmes  or  Amasis  ii.,  102. 
'Abiri,  the,  69. 
Abraham  and  the  Hittites,  17. 

God's  revelation  to,  38,  57, 140. 

migration  of,  28,  60,  77. 

seeking  a  wife  for  Isaac,  ^8. 

in  Egypt,  94. 

Abyssinian  Church,  88. 
Aocad  or  Agade,  61. 
Accession  year,  the,  82. 
Acropolis,  the,  13-15. 
Adonizedek,  69. 
Adoption,  58. 

Adrammelech  and  Sharezer,  71. 
.^frio  the  Grammarian^  109. 
Ahab  and  Shalmaneser,  19. 

and  Mesha,  89-90. 

Ahasuerus,  84. 

Ahaz  and  Tiglath-Pileser,  22,  47. 

time  of,  92. 

Ahimelech  the  Hittite,  17. 
Alcuin  of  York,  109. 
Alexander,  bust  of,  11. 

Daniel's  vision  concerning,  12. 

inscription  of,  102. 

fulfilment  of  prophecy,  139. 

Alexander  Severus,  6-7,  117. 

Alexandria,  massacre  at,  7. 

Church    of,    founded    by    St. 

Mark,  54,  104. 

Ptolemy's  Library  at,  103. 

token  by  British,  103. 

Amasis.     See  "Aahmes." 
Amenophis  or  Amenhetep  in.,  69, 

100. 
Amenophis  or  Amenhetep  rv.,    69, 

100. 
American  Indians,  Eliot's  Bible,  114. 
Amorites,  the  king  of  the,  60.  i  - 

Amraphel,  28,  57,  69.     See  "  Kham-  j 

murabi." 

19  i« 


Anderson,  Sir  Robert,  K.C.6.,  LKD., 

71. 
The  BiUt  or  the  Church,  8,  117, 

122. 

In  Defence,  58-59,  80-81. 

The  Bible  a/nd  Modem  Criticism, 

.  76. 
Daniel  in  the  Critics'  Den  and 

The  coming  Prince,  83. 
Angels,  fallen,  41. 
Anne  Boleyn,  134. 
Antoninus  Pius,  6,  7. 
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  103. 
Apepa  I. ,  98. 
Apis,  the  sacred  bull,  52. 
Aquila  and  Priscilla,  2. 
Arabia,    Ashur-bani-pal's    conquests 

in,  48. 
Arabic  MS.  Ill,  132, 
Aramean  language,  73-74,  84. 
Arian  controversy,  117-118. 
Arioch,  28,  60. 
Aristorchus  and  Ananias,  4. 
Aristobulus,  4. 
Armenian  Version,  111. 
Art,  Greek,  14. 

of  printing.  111. 

Artaxerxes,  66,  84. 

Asa,  95. 

Ashdod,  31,  47. 

'*  Asherah  "  or  "  groves,"  23. 

Ashur,  24. 

Ashur-bani-pal,  date  of,  19. 

lion  hunting,  26. 

conquests  of,  26-29,  35,  36-37, 

78. 

burning  of  palace  of,  33. 

library  of,  37. 

toblets  of,  47,  48.  49, 

recovery  of  Nana's  image  by, 

28,  48,  59. 
portrait  of,  63. 


146 


INDEX 


Ashur-bani-pal,     brother    of.        See 
"  Shamash-shum-ukln." 

bowls  and  cylinders  of,  67,  75. 

Ashur-nasir-pal,  20,  23,  Plate  vii. 
Asnapper.  See  "  Ashur-bani-pal. " 
Assyria,  fall  of,  67. 

God's  rod,  138. 

Assyrian  bricks,  59,  63. 
Astyages,  71. 
Athene,  the  birth  of,  14. 
Athens,  Paul  at,  13-15. 
Anshan,  king  of,  77,  78. 
Augustine  of  Canterbury,  121-122. 
Augustus  Caesar,  1. 
Aurelian,  7, 
Authorised  Version,  114. 

Babel,  supposed  account  of,  42. 
"  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom," 

61-62. 

rebuilt  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  75. 

Baiawat  Gates,  22,  32. 

Babylon,  taken  by  Ashur-bani-pal,  26. 

Khammurabi's  capital,  60,  62. 

built  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  64. 

to  be  rebuilt,  65. 

taken  by  Cyrus,  71,  78,  80. 

Bede,    translation   of   St.    John   by, 

109. 

Chronicle  of,  121. 

Bel,  43,  45,  46. 
Bel  and  Nebo,  49. 
Belshazzar,  65,  75,  135. 

feast  of,  66-67,  80. 

the  king's  son,  76, 

death  of,  80. 

Benhadad,  19-20. 

Behistun  Inscription,  65-66,  83. 

Bethlehem,  the  birth  of  Christ  at,  1. 

Bible  of  the  Poor,  the,  132, 

Biblical  "criticism,"  110. 

Boundary  stones,  63. 

Borsippa,  75. 

Book  of  the  Dead,  the,  104. 

Bricks,  Assyrian,  59,  63. 

Egyptian,  64-55. 

Britain,  1,  121. 

British  princess,  4. 

Bubastis,  temple  of,  98. 

Bull  of  Pope  Innocent  iii.,  122. 

Bull  of  Leo  X.,  125. 

Bulls,  human-headed,  23. 

Bunyan,  John,  133,  134. 

Burial,  ancient  mode  of,  51. 

Burning  of  Bibles,  112, 113,  114. 

Christians,  3,  129. 

Rome,  3. 

Nineveh,  33,  34-86,  36. 


Caesars,  1-8,  116,  120. 
Caesar's  household,  4. 
Caligula,  2. 
Calneh,  61-62. 
Calvin,  126. 
Cambyses,  82. 
Candlestick,  the,  54. 
Captivity,  the,  83. 

of  the  two  and  a  half  tribes,  22. 

CaracaUa,  7. 

Carchemish,  battle  of,  96. 

Carthage,  6. 

Cartouches,  56,  103. 

Catacombs,  85-86. 

ChampoUion,  103. 

Chaldean  princes,  26. 

Charlemagne,  109, 

Charles  11.,  134. 

Charles  v.,  127,  130. 

Chedorlaomer,  28,  60,  65. 

Chemosh,  89,  90. 

"Church  in  the  Desert,"  the,  127. 

Claudia,  4. 

Claudius  Caesar,  2. 

Claverhouse,  Graham  of,  1 30. 

Clement  of  Rome,  131,  105  n. 

Cleopatra,  103. 

Cleopatra's  needle,  99. 

Codex,  Alexandrinus,  105,  106. 

Nitriensis,  107. 

Sinai  ticus,  106,  110. 

Vaticanus,  106. 

Commodus,  6. 

Conder,    Colonel,  Tell     Amarna 

Tablets,  68-69, 
Constantine  the  Great,  7,  85, 104, 117. 
Constantinople,  118,  125  n. 
Coptic  crosses,  53,  54,  104. 
Coptic  MSS.,  108,  111,  131,  132. 
Coptic  remains,  87-88,  104,  116. 
Cornelius,  2. 

Covenanters,  the,  130-131. 
Coverdale,  Miles,  113. 
Cranmer,  Archbishop,  110,  114,  129. 

martyrdom  of,  129, 

Bible  of,  113,  133, 

Creation  tablets,  37-41. 
Cromwell,  Thomas,  113,  125,  129. 

Oliver,  130. 

Cross,  the  sign  of  the.     See  "  Coptic." 

Crucifixion,  the,  64,  85. 

Crusades,  the,  123. 

Cuneiform  writing,  20,  66-66. 

Cyaxerxes,  67, 

Cyrus  defeats  Astyages,  71, 

takes  Babylon,  71,  77-81,  138. 

king  of  Anshan,  78, 

decree  of,  81,  82,  83,  84. 


INDEX 


147 


DsgoD,  23. 

Daniel's  vision  of  Alexander's  con- 
quests, 12. 

interpretation  of  the  handwrit- 

ing, 66, 

Messianic  prophecy,  83. 

"  weeks,"  84. 

interpretation     of     Nebuchad- 

nezzar's vision,  137,  139. 
vision  of  the  Ancient  of  days, 

140. 
Daniel  made  third  in  the  kingdom, 

76. 
Darius  Hystaspes  or  Darius  the  Great, 

77,  83. 
inscription  of,  on  the  Behistun 

rock,  65. 

decree  of,  83. 

the  Mede,  71,  80-81. 

David,  seed  of,  5. 

Decius,  7. 

Decree  of  Cyrus.     See  "  Cyrus." 

of  Darius.     See  "  Darius." 

"Defender  of  the  Faith,"  125,  133. 
Deluge  tablets,  37,  42-46. 

seals,  the,  70. 

Desolations,  the  seventy  years,  83. 
Demetrius,  10,  11,  14. 
Diana,  temple  of,  9-11,  12. 
Diocletian,  7,  87,  104. 
Dionysius,  5. 
Domitia,  5. 
Domitian,  5,  7. 
Drake,  Sir  Francis,  130. 

£a,  38,  42,  43,  45. 
Ecbatana,  71,  81. 
Eoclesiasticus,  115  n. 
Eclipse  of  the  sun,  47. 
Edict  of  Nantes,  the,  127. 
Edward  vi.,  130,  133. 
Effingham,  Lord  Howard  of,  130. 
Egypt,  conquest  of,  by  Ashui-bani- 

pal,  48. 
Egyptian  history,  94-104. 

bricks,  54,  55. 

jewels,  etc.,  55. 

mummies  and  gods,  50,  51,  52. 

seal,  49. 

Elam,  Cyrus  king  of,  78. 

Elamite  invasion  of  Ur,  28,  59,  94. 

dynasty,  59. 

wars  of  Ashur-bani-pal,  26,  27- 

29,  36. 
Eliezer,  Abraham's  servant,  58. 
Elijah  and  Elisba,  20. 
Hiot's  Version,  John,  114. 
Elizabeth,  Queen,  130,  134. 


Encyd.  Brit.,  115,  123. 
Envelopes  and  tablets,  62, 
English  Bible,  the,  108,  111  fiF. 
Ephesus,  Temple  of  Diana  at,  9  S. 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  58. 
Ephron  the  Hittite,  17. 
"  Eponym  Canon,"  the,  47. 
Esau's  wives,  17. 
Esarhaddon,  date  of,  19. 

sons  of,  27. 

tablets  of,  37,  47,  81. 

portrait  of,  36. 

bricks  of,  63. 

cylinders  of,  74. 

succeeds  his  father,  48,  71. 

Esther,  the  book  of,  84. 

feast  of,  29. 

Erasmus,  125-126. 
Erastus,  4. 
Erech,  28,  59,  61. 
Eri-aku,  60. 
Erictheon,  the,  15. 
Ethiopic  books,  132. 
Eusebius  of  Caesarea,  131. 
Eve,  70. 

EvU-Merodach,  75,  81,  82. 
Ezekiel's  description   of    Chaldeans, 
25-26. 

Faithfulness  of  God's  Word,  138. 

Farel,  WiUiam,  126. 

"Fathers,"  the,  87,117,  118. 

Fausta,  85. 

Fighting  against  God,  135. 

Fire,  the  Lake  of,  49. 

Fire  on  the  hearth,  the,  115. 

Firstborn  in  Egypt,  95,  101. 

Flasks,  early  Christian,  86. 

Foxe's  Sook  of  Martyrs,  1 33. 

quoted,  129,  130. 

French  New  Testament,  111. 
Frieze  of  the  Parthenon,  14. 
Fulfilled  prophecy,    33,  35,   36,    79, 
80,  83,  138,  189,  142. 

Gabriel,  54. 

Gardiner,  Stephen,  128. 

Gaza,  97. 

••  Gentiles,  the  times  of  the,"  139. 

Gnostic  remains  and  MSS.,  54,  116, 

131. 
Greek  art,  14. 

Church,  88,  118. 

Gregory,  121.     See  "St.  Gregory." 

Gobryas,  80-81. 

Groves,  23. 

Guide  to  Rome,  182. 


148 


INDEX 


Guide   (A)   to    the    Babylonian    and 

Assyrian  Antiquities,  21,  34, 

37,  42,  47,  61,  65,  68,  70,  71, 

72,  75,  76,  77,  78. 
(B)   to   the    Third  and   Fourth 

Egyptian  Rooms,  53,  55,  56. 
(C)  to  the  Egyptian  Collections, 

98,  101,  102. 
(D)  to  the  Early  Christian,  etc., 

85,  86,  87. 
(E)    to    the    Manuscripts,    etc., 

105,  106,  123,  128,  129,  130. 
(F)   to  the  Printed  Books,  etc., 

134. 
Gutenberg  Press,  111. 

Hadrian,  5,  7. 

Hatch's  Influence  of  Greek  Ideas,  117. 

Hamath  conquered,  30. 

the  king  of,  17. 

Hammurabi.     See  "  Khammurabi." 

Haran  or  Harran,  29,  77. 

Hathor,  52. 

Hawkins,  Sir  John,  130. 

Hazael,  20,  21. 

Head  of  gold,  the,  96,  139. 

Hebrew  inscriptions,  68. 

MS.,  106-107. 

Hebron  a  Hittite  city,  17. 
Henry  iv.  of  England,  124. 

France,  127. 

Henry  viii.  and  the  Bible,  113,  133, 

134. 

and  Luther,  125,  133. 

books  of,  128,  133. 

See  "Defender  of  the  Faith." 

Herod  Agrippa,  2. 

Heru,  52. 

Hezekiah  and  Sennacherib,  25,  71- 

74. 

and  Jareb,  31. 

library  of,  37. 

and  Isaiah's  date,  78. 

and  the  Siloam  inscription,  92. 

and  Tirhakah,  96. 

Hidden  Book,  the,  116. 
Hieroglyphs,  Hittite,  16. 

Egyptian  deciphered,  103. 

"Higher  Criticism,"  16,  27,  37,  58, 

69,  76,  115. 
Hillah,  64. 

Hislop's  Two  Babylons,  9  n. 
History,  the  key  to,  136. 
Hittites,  the,  16-18. 
Hophra,  Pharaoh,  97,  102. 
Horus,  52. 

Hoshea  and  Shalmaneser,  29-30,  31. 
and  Shabako  or  So,  49,  95. 


Howard,  Lord  Thomas,  130. 
Hyksos.     See  ' '  Shepherd  Kings." 

Ignatius,  5. 

India  House  Inscription,  64. 

Indulgences,  124,  132. 

Irenaeus,  131. 

Irish  New  Testament,  114. 

Israel,  the  children  of,  55,  101  n. 

the  wilderness  journey  of,  51. 

the  conquest  of  Palestine  by,  69. 

the  key  to  history,  136,  137. 

Jabin,  69. 

Jacob's  funeral,  50. 

James'  Bible,  King,  114. 

Japhia,  69. 

Jareb,  31. 

Jehoiachim,  83. 

Jehoiachin,  81. 

Jehoshaphat,  20. 

Jehu,  20,  21. 

Jeremiah's  field,  62. 

Jeroboam,  95. 

Jerome,  7,  108-109,  117. 

Jerusalem,  its  Hittite  origin,  17. 

the  supposed  siege  by  Senna- 
cherib, 36. 

Hezekiah  shut  up  in,  72-74. 

the  siege  of,  75,  97. 

decree  of  Darius  to  rebuild,  84. 

rebuilding  of  temple  at,  79,  83. 

Jews,  the  future  blessing  of,  141, 
142. 

the  treatment  of,  141. 

in  Alexandria  and  the  LXX., 

103,  107. 

John,  the  Apostle,  5. 

John,  King,  122,  123. 

John  of  Gaunt  and  Wycliffe,  124. 

Jonah,  23,  32. 

a  representation  of,  85. 

Joseph  in  Egypt,  99. 

cup  of,  58. 

mummy  of,  50,  51. 

Joshua,  times  of,  69. 

Josiah,  68,  96. 

Judah  invaded  by  Sargon,  30. 

Ahaz  king  of,  47. 

Julius  Caesar,  1. 

Justin  Martyr,  6. 

Kant,  Immanuel,  126. 

Kenyon,    Dr.,    Our    Bible  and    the 

Ancient  Mon.,  112-113. 
Kirjath-sepher,  68. 
Kheta,  the,  17. 


INDEX 


149 


Khammurabi,  Code  of,  57-59.  See 
"  Amraphel." 

empire  of,  62. 

conquests  of,  60 

tablets  bearing  name  of,  70. 

Key  to  history,  136,  137. 

King,  L.  W  ,  Seven  TaUets  of  Crea- 
tion, 93,  40,  41. 

Klein,  Dr.,  and  the  Moabite  Stone, 
91. 

Koran,  the,  132. 

Kudur-Mabuk,  60,  65. 

Kudur-Nanhundi,  4S. 

Kutir-Nakhkhunte,  65. 

Lachish,  Sennacherib  before,  25,  74. 

Lamps,  early  Christian,  86. 

Larsa,  59,  60. 

Latimer,  Hugh,  3,  129. 

Laud,  Archbishop,  130. 

Laver  made  from  mirrors,  the,  55. 

Layard,  Sir  Henry,  34. 

Leonidas,  6,  117. 

Letters  of  Martin  Luther  quoted,  125. 

Library  at  Nineveh,  37,  49. 

at  Alexandria,  103. 

Lindisfame  Gospels,  110,  119. 
Linus,  4. 
Lion  hunts,  26. 
Louis  XIV.,  127. 
Luther,  125,  126,  132. 

theses  of,  132. 

German  Bible  of,  111. 

at  Rome,  132. 

Lycaonia,  speech  of,  18. 

Machpelah,  the  cave  of,  17. 

Magna  Charta,  123. 

Mahomet.     See  "  Mohammed." 

Mahomet  II.,  Sultan,  125  n. 

Maimonides,  115  n. 

Maimmaea,  Julia,  7,  117. 

Manah,  66-67,  77. 

Manasseh,  27. 

Marcus  Aurelius,  6,  7. 

Marduk.     See  "Merodach." 

Mark  the  Evangelist,  54,  104. 

Marks  of  fire,  33,  34,  36. 

Martin  Luther.     See  "Luther"  and 

"Letters  of." 
Mars'  HUl,  13-15. 
Martyrs  at  Rome,  3-8. 

veneration  of,  86-87. 

Martyrdom  of  Paul  and  Peter,  4. 
of  Latimer,   Ridley,   Cranmer, 

3,  129-130. 

of  Tyndale,  133. 

Mary,  Queen,  127,  130. 


Massorah,  Greater  and  Lesser,  107. 

Matthew's  Bible,  113,  129. 

Maximin,  7. 

Mazarin  Bible,  111. 

Medes  and  Persians,  81,  139. 

Media,  78. 

Megiddo,  battle  of,  68,  96. 

Melancthon,  Philip,  125. 

Menahem,  22. 

Menephthah  or  Meren-Ptah,  100, 101. 

Merle-d'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Re- 

formation,  126,  127. 
Merodach  or  Marduk,  38,  39,  40,  41, 

77. 
Merodach  Baladan,  31,  49. 
Mesha  king  of  Moab,  89-90. 
Messianic  prophecies,  9,  83. 
Metopes,  14. 
Michael,  54. 
Milman's  History  of  Christianity,  53 

117,  119. 
Milton,  John,  131. 
Mirrors,  Egyptian,  55. 
Mishne  Torah,  115  n. 
Mnevis  of  Heliopolis,  52. 
Moabite  Stone,  the,  89-91. 
Mohammed,  132. 

Monastic  system,  53,  88,  104,  119. 
Monogram,  the  sacred,  86,  87. 
Monuments,  reverence  for,  97. 
Moon-god,  29,  59,  76,  77. 
Moon-goddess.     See  "  Nana." 
More,  Sir  Thomas,  112. 
Mummies,  50-51. 
Mythology,  9,  38,  49,  87. 

Nabonidns  the  father  of  Belshazzar. 
65,  75,  76. 

annals  and  inscriptions  of,  71,  82. 

finding  of  Naram  Sin's  inscrip- 
tion by,  76-77. 

Nabopolassar,  date  of,  75. 

revolt  of,  67,  96. 

Nahum,  prophecy  of,  38,  35. 

refers  to  Ashur-bani-pal's  con- 
quest, 48. 

Nana,  the  goddess,  28,  48,  59. 

Napoleon  and  Rosetta  Stone,  108, 128 

Nar4m-Sin,  61,  77. 

Narcissus,  4. 

Naville'sdiscovery  of  Pithom,  100, 101. 

Neander's  Church  History  quoted,  87. 

Nebuchadnezzar  11.,  63-65, 67,  81, 137. 

date  of,  75. 

buildings  of,  64,  75. 

lessons  learnt  by,  64,  135. 

See  also  "  Jerusalem  "  ;  ♦'  Head 

of  gold." 


ISO 


INDEX 


Necho,  Pharaoh,  56,  67-68,  96,  102. 

Nehemiah,  decree  to,  84. 

Neriglissar,  82. 

Nero,  2-4,  7,  54,  104. 

Nerva,  5. 

Nineveh,  Jonah's  visit  to,  32. 

fall  of,  34,  67,  138. 

~-  the  great  city.      See  "  Nahum." 

library  at,  37,  49. 

Nile-god,  the,  52. 
Nimrfid,  Birs,  75. 
Nitria,  desert  of,  53,  119. 
Nitriensis,  Codex.     See ''Codex." 
Noah,  the  Chaldean,  42-46,  70. 
No-Amon  or  Thebes,  48. 

Obelisk,  the  Black,  20-21,  63. 
Omri,  Jehu  the  son  of,  20. 

the  house  of,  21. 

and  the  Moabite  Stone,  90. 

Onesiphorus,  3. 

Oppression  in  Egypt,  the,  54,  95. 

Oracles  of  God,  140,  141. 

Origen,  6,  117. 

Osiris,  52. 

Osorkon  ii.,  101. 

Palimpsest  MSS.,  107,  119. 
Paper  manufacture  of.  111. 

MS.,  first,  132. 

Papyrus,  Book  of  the  Bead,  104. 

MSS.,  106. 

Paradise  Lost,  131. 
Parthenon,  13-16. 
PatmoB,  5. 
Paul  at  Corinth,  2. 

before  Nero,  3,  4. 

at  Ephesus,  9-11. 

on  Mars'  Hill,  13-15. 

Pediments,  14. 

Pekah,  22. 

Penknife  of  the  "critics,"  115. 

Penny,  the  image  on  the,  1-2. 

Pentaur's  poem,  17. 

Percy,  Lord  Henry,  124. 

Persecutions  under  Caesars,  3-7.    See 

' '  Martyrs. " 
Perpetua  and  Felicitas,  6. 
Peshitto  MSS.,  108,  111. 
Peter's  mart)rrdom,  4. 
Pharaoh  of  the  Oppression,  the,  69- 

70,  99,  100. 
of  the  Exodus,  the,   100,    101, 

135. 

the  daughter  of,  95. 

Pharaohs,  the,  94-102. 

worshipped,  52. 

Pheidias,  14. 


Philip  II.  of  Spain,  127. 

Philip  the  Elder,  7. 

Pilgrimages,  86,  123. 

Pilgrim's  Progress,  Bunyan's,  133. 

Pinches,  Dr.,    The    Old    Test.,    etc., 

58,  60,  101. 
Pithom,  100,  101. 
Plagues  of  Egypt,  51-52,  95. 
Pocket  Bibles,  110. 
'•  Politarchs,"  12. 
Polycarp,  6. 
Pontius  Pilate,  1. 
Power,  struggle  for  temporal,  8,  120, 

122. 
Prayer  Book,  133. 
Printing,  art  of,  111. 
Prophecy    fulfilled.      See   "  FulfiUed 

prophecy,"  "Nahum." 
Projecta's  casket,  87. 
Psammetichus  ii.,  102. 
Ptah,  52. 
Ptolemy  i.,  103. 

Philadelphus,  103,  107. 

Epiphanes,  103. 

Euergetes,  103. 

Pudens,  4. 

Pul,  19,  23.    See  "Tiglath-Pileser." 

Pyramids,  builders  of,  51,  98. 

Ra,  52. 

Rab-saris  and  Rabmag,  82. 
Rachel  and  Bilhah,  58, 
Rameses  i.,  100. 

11.,  17,  70,  99.  100. 

bricks  of,  54. 

wars  of,  55-56.     See  "  Pharaoh 

of  the  Oppression." 
Raphael,  54. 

Rawlinson,  Sir  Henry,  20,  65. 
Records  of  the  Past.      First  Series, 

28,  98. 

New  Series,  23,  75. 

Reformation,    115,    126,    133,    134. 

See  "  Luther." 
Rehoboam,  95,  102. 
Relics,  86. 
Ridley,  3,  129, 
Rings,  early  Christian,  85. 
Rim-sin.     See  "Eri-aku." 
Rodgers,  John,  113. 
Rome,  burning  of,  3. 

Church  of,  114. 

Pagan  or  Papal,  8. 

Rosetta  Stone,  65,  103,  128. 
Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques.  126. 

St.  Alban's  Chronicle,  124. 
Ambrose,  118. 


INDEX 


151 


St.  Augtistine,  7,  118. 

Chryaoetom,  118. 

Cuthbert,  119. 

Cyprian,  117. 

Gregory,  118. 

Menas,  87. 

Patrick,  120-121. 

Samaria  built,  21. 

besieged  by  Syrians,  18. 

Shalmaneser,  29. 

taken  by  Sargon,  29. 

Sargon  of  Agade,  61,  76-77. 
Sargon,  the  date  of,  19. 

taking  of  Samaria  by,  29. 

invasion  of  Judah  by,  30. 

library  of,  37. 

before  Ashdod,  31,  46-47. 

cylinders  of,  46,  70. 

bricks  and  bowls,  63,  67.     See 

also  '*  Jareb"  and  Plate  vii. 
Sayce,   Prof.,   Higher   Crit.   and   the 

Mon.,  23,  27,  31,  89,  40-41, 

43-46,  67,  73-74,  90,  92. 
Fresh  Light  from  Ancient  Mon., 

91,  92. 
Mon.   Pacts  and  Higher   Crit. 

Fancies,  57  n. 
Sarah  and  Hagar,  58. 
Scapula,  7. 
Scarabs,  56. 
Scotch  Bible,  114. 
Scripture,  accuracy  of,  16,  27,  136. 
Sealing  of  tablets,  62. 
Seal,  Egyptian,  49. 
Seals,  cylinder,  70. 

ecclesiastical,  120. 

Seb,  62. 

Seed  of  David,  5. 

the  serpent,  9. 

the  woman,  9. 

Sekhet,  52. 

Selen^  the  Moon-god,  14. 

Sennacherib,  date  of,  19. 

before  Lachish,  25. 

palace  of,  34. 

tablets  of.  37,  47. 

"wiU"of,  48. 

bricks  of,  63. 

cylinders  of,  70,  71. 

and  Hezekiah,  36,  71-74,  96. 

charge  of  respecting  inscriptions, 

98. 

practical  lessons  from,  135,  138. 

Septimius  Severus,  6,  7,  117. 
Septuagint,  the,  103,  107. 
Serapis,  recluses  of ,  53,  11 9  n. 
Serpent,  the,  9,  70. 
Servitude,  the,  83. 


Seti  I,,  100. 

Seti-Meren-Ptah.    See  "MenephUh." 
Seti  II.,  Meren-Ptah  II.,  101. 
Seventy  years,  83. 

"  weeks  "  of  Daniel,  84. 

Severa,  7. 

Severus,  Alexander,  6-7,  117. 

Septimus,  6,  117. 

Shabako  or  So,  32,  49,  56,  95,  102. 
Shadrach,  Meshach  and  Abednego,64. 
Shalmaneser  11.,  date  of,  19. 

monolith  of,  19-20. 

Black  Obelisk  of,  20-21. 

Baiaw&t  gates  of,  32. 

inscriptions  of,  47,  63. 

Shalmaneser  iv.,  date  of,  19. 

siege  of  Samaria  by,  29. 

Shamash-shum-ukln's  revolt,  27. 

accession,  48. 

letter  to  Ashur-bani-pal,  49. 

portrait,  63. 

inscription,  75. 

Shechem,  burials  in,  51. 
Shekel,  66,  67. 
Shepherd,  the  Good,  85. 
Shepherd  Kings,  94,  98-99. 
Schick,  Dr.,  92. 
Shishak,  scarabs  of,  56. 

Jeroboam  and  Rehoboam,  95. 

monuments  of,  101-102. 

Shiloah,  the  waters  of,  93. 

Shu,  52. 

Shushan,  the  palace,  65. 

Siloam  Stone,  the,  91-93, 

Siege  of  Jerusalem.  See  "  Jerusalem." 

Simeon,  Bishop,  5. 

Simeon  of  Durham,  119. 

Sit-Napishtim  or  Sisusthroe,  42-46, 

70. 
Sktdl  of  sentinel,  67. 
Slave  market  at  Rome,  121. 
Smerdis,  83. 
Smyrna,  6. 
So.     5ce  "Shabako." 
Solomon  and  Hittite  women,  18. 

men  of,  68. 

and  Chemosh,  90, 

and  date  of  Siloam  Stone,  93. 

and  Pharaoh's  daughter,  95. 

Songs  of  Degrees,  the,  74. 
Spanish  Armada,  the,  130. 
Susa  and  Susanchites,  26,  27,  65. 
Sutech,  52. 
Stephen's  address,  51. 
SyriacMSS.,  108,  111. 
Syria  and  the  Hittites,  18. 

and  Shalmaneser,  19,  20,  21. 

Tabernacle,  the,  54,  55. 


152 


INDEX 


Tartan,  the,  31. 

Taylor,  Cylinder,  the,  25,  72-74, 

Tell  el-Amarna  Tablets,  68-69. 

Temple  of  God,  the,  11. 

Temple  of  Diana,  9-11,  12, 

Temple  at  Jerusalem  rebuilt,  83,  84, 

robbed,  95, 

Temu,  52. 

Terah,  28-29,  77. 

Tertullian,  6. 

Te-umman,  36,  37. 

Textual  Index,  143. 

Theft,  Khammurabi's  laws  against,  58. 

Theodosius,  118, 

Thessaloniea,  massacre  at,  118. 

inscription,  12. 

Third  ruler,  the,  76. 

Thirtle,  J.  W.,  Old  Test.  Prob.,  74. 

Thothmes  ill.,  70,  99. 

Tiberius  Caesar,  1,  104, 

Tiglath-Pileser,  i.,  70, 

Tiglath-Pileser  or  Pul,  date  of,  19. 

Ahaz  and  Menahem,  22. 

and  two  and  a  half  tribes, 

22, 

names  of,  23, 

wall-pictures  and  inscrip- 
tions of,  22,  25,  47. 

Tirhakah,  56,  96,  102. 

Titus,  4,  5. 

Trajan,  5,  7, 

Trophimus,  4. 


Turks  capture  Constantinople,  125  n. 

Tunstall,  Bishop  of  London,  112-113, 

Tyndale,  112-114,  133. 

Typhon,  52. 

Tyre  and  Sidon,  32. 

Ur,  28,  59,  76. 
Uriah  the  Hittite,  17. 
(Urus)-alammu,  36. 

Valerian,  7. 

Vespasian,  4. 

Virgin  and  Child,  the,  10. 

Voltaire,  126. 

Vulgate,  the,  108-109,  117. 

Wax  writing  tablet,  106  n. 
Weights,  Babylonian,  66-67. 
Welsh  portion,  114. 
Wentworth,  Thomas,  130. 
Wesley,  John,  131. 
Wolsey,  Cardinal,  128. 
Wor<i  of  God  a  mirror,  55. 
Wycliflfe,  108,  110,  114. 
trial  of,  124, 

Xerxes,  66,  67,  84. 

Yahveh,  90. 
Young,  Thomas,  103. 

Zerah,  95. 


Printed  by  Morrison  &  Qibb  Limited,  Edinburgh, 


0s 

H33 


THE  LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Santa  Barbara 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW. 


Series  9482 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  llBR*Rr 


II  II II 1 1  mill 
A     000  994  702     9 


Uni 


