DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


» 


i 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe31wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A, 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXXI. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street. 

MDCCL  XXIV, 


V 


' 


. ' " ; • • : : - ■ 


’ 


[ 3 ] 


Wj/ie 


R : 


« A N 

E X T , R A C T 

OF  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley’s 

JOURNAL, 

From  May  6,  1760,  to  October  28, 
1762. 


Number  XI. 


To  the  READS  R. 

T Am  fenfible,  there  are  many  particulars  in 
-4-  the  enfuing  journal,  which  fome  ferious  per- 
fons  will  not  believe,  and  which  others  will  turn 
A 2 


to 


C 4 ] 

to  ridicule.  But  this  I cannot  help,  unlefs  by 
concealing  thofe  things,  which  I believe  it  my 
bounden  duty  to  declare.  I cannot  do  otherwife 
while  I am  perfuaded,  that  this  wras  a real  work 
of  God  : and  that  he  hath  fo  wrought  this  and  all 
his  marvellous  works , that  they  ought  to  be  had  in 
remembrance.  I have  only  to  defire,  that  tbofe 
who  think  differently  from  me,  will  bear  with 
me,  as  I do  with  them : and  that  thofe  who 
think  with  me,  that  this  was  the  mod  glorious 
work  of  God,  which  has  ever  been  wrought  in 
our  memory,  may  be  encouraged  to  expert  to  be 
themfelves  partakers  of  all  the  great  and  precious 
promifes  : and  that  without  delay  ; feeing 
Now  is  the  accepted  time ! Now  is  the  day  oj  fal- 
vation ! 

London, 

Jan.  31,  1767. 


Tuesday,  May  6. 

I Had  much  converfation  (at  Carrickfergus) 
with  Monfieur  Cavenac,  the  French  Gene* 
ral,  not  on  the  circumflances,  but  the  effence  of 
religion.  He  feemed  to  flartle  at  nothinsr : but 

O O' 

faid  more  than  once,  and  with  much  emotion, 
“ Why,  this  is  my  religion ! There  is  no  true 
religion  befides  it.’’ 


Wednefday 


[ 5 ] 

Wednefday  7.  I rode  to  Larn.  The  rain  which 
had  continued  with  little  intermiftion  for  feveral 
days  flopped  this  afternoon  : fo  that  I had  a 
very  large  as  well  as  ferious  congregation. 
And  I fpoke  to  them  with  the  utmoft  plain- 
nefs.  But  I could  not  find  the  way  to  their 
hearts. 

Thurfday  8.  We  rode  over  the  mountains  to 
Ballimena,  and  had  juft  palled  through  the  town, 
when  a man  came  running  out  of  the  field,  called 
me  by  my  name,  and  prefied  me  much  to 
preach  there.  But  I could  not  flay,  having  ap- 
pointed one  to  meet  me  at  Portlo-nane,  which 
he  accordingly  did,  and  brought  me  to  Mr.  Bur- 
rows, near  Garvah. 

Friday  9.  A little  reft  was  acceptable.  Satur- 
day 10.  I preached,  morning  and  evening  in 
Mr.  B- — ’s  houfe,  to  a well-behaved  con- 
gregation, though  of  various  denominations. 
Churchmen,  Papifts,  Prefbyterians,  Camero- 
nians.  One  feceder  likewife  ventured  in: 
but  the  moment  he  heard,  “ Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven,”  he  ran  away  with  all 
fpeed. 

Sunday  11.  We  had  fuch  a congregation  in 
the  church,  as  perhaps  had  not  been  there  in  this 
century.  And  I believe  God  reached  fome  of 
their  hearts : feveral  were  in  tears.  I fpoke 
extremely  plain  ; efpecially  to  thofe  who 
were  full  of  their  own  wifdom  and  righteouf- 
nefs. 

A 3 


Monday 


[ 6 ] 

Monday  12.  Returning  through  Ballimena,  I 
preached  in  the  market-houfe  to  a large  concourfe 
of  people.  And  God  was  there  of  a truth.  I have 
found  no  fuch  fpirit  in  any  congregation  fince  I 
left  Dublin.  Thence  I rode  to  Moyra  and 
preached  to  a very  civil  congregation.  But  there 
is  no  life  in  them  ! 

TueiJay  13.  My  Irifn  horfe  was  thoroughly 
tired.  However  with  much  difficulty,  partly  rid- 
ing, and  partly  walking,  about  eight  in  the 
evening  I reached  Coot-hill.  I preached  in  the 
houi’e  now,  and  at  five  in  the  morning ; but  at 
eleven  in  the  market-houfe,  where  I delivered 
my  own  foul,  tc  moff  of  the  proteffants  in  the 
town. 

Having  procured  a frefh  horfe,  I rode  on  to 
Belturbet,  a town  in  which  there  is  neither  Pa- 
piff,  nor  Prefbyterian.  But  to  fupply  that  defect, 
there  are  fabbath-breakers,  drunkards  and  com- 
mon-fwearers  in  abundance.  Thurfday  13.  We 
rode  th  ough  a delightful  country  to  Swadling- 
bar,  famed  for  its  mineral  waters.  Soon  af-er,  my 
new  horfe  began  to  tire,  fo  that  it  was  with  much 
difficulty  I got  to  Sligo. 

* Friday  16.  I walked  round  the  ruins  of  the 
abbey,  formerly'  one  of  the  largeft  in  the  king- 
dom. The  walls  of  it  are  Handing,  and  three  Tides 
of  the  cloyfters  are  entire.  But  you  can  fcarce 
tread,  either  within  or  without,  unlefs  ymu  will 
ffep  upon  fcullsor  human  bones,  which  are  every' 
where  fcattered  up  and  down,  as  dung  upon  the 

earth. 


[ 7 ] 

earth.  Surely  no  other  nation,  Chriflian  or  Hea- 
then, would  endure  this ! 

In  the  evening  the  congregation  was  a little 
diflurbed  by  two  or  three  giddy  officers.  I fpoke 
to  them  and  they  flopped:  but  they  foon  reco- 
vered their  fpirits,  and  behaved — as  they  ufed  to 
do  at  church! 

Sunday  1 8.  I preached  at  nine  to  a large  con- 
gregation, who  all  feemed  to  hear  with  under- 
flanding.  At  five  in  the  evening  they  were  not 
lefs  attentive,  though  abundantly  more  nume- 
rous. On  Monday  we  met,  for  the  lafl  time, 
between  four  and  five.  Many  were  deeply 
affefted,  and  all  received  the  word  with  all 
readinefs  of  mind.  But  which  of  thefe  will 
bring  forth  fruit  with  patience?  God  only 
knoweth. 

Monday  19.  We  rode  to  Caflle-bar,  where  I 
preached  in  the  evening.  I was  particularly  con- 
cerned for  the  poor  baekfliders.  It  feems  as  if 
molt  of  us  faid  in  our  hearts,  “ If  they  have  a 
mind  to  go  to  hell,  let  them  go.”  Not  fo  : rather 
let  us  pluck  the  brands , willing  or  unwilling,  out 
of  the  burning  ! 

Thurfday  22. 1 rode  to  Newport,  and  preached 
at  feven  in  the  evening.  I fuppofe  all  the 
Proteflants  in  the  town  were  prefent,  and 
many  of  the  Papifls,  notwithflanding  the  pro- 
hibition and  bitter  curfes  of  their  priefls.  So  has 
God  fpread  the  line  from  fea  to  fea,  from  Dub- 
A 4 lin 


[ 8 3 

lin  on  the  eaft,  to  this  place  on  the  weflera 
ocean. 

May  the  25th,  being  Whitfunday,  Mr.  Ellifon 
defired  me  to  affift  him  at  the  Lord’s  fupper. 
Tuefday  27,  there  was  a remarkable  trial  here. 
A Swedifh  fhip,  being  leaky,  put  into  one  of  our 
harbours.  The  Irilh,  according  to  cuftom,  ran 
to  plunder  her.  A neighbouring  gentleman 
hindered  them,  and  for  fo  doing  demanded  a 
fourth  part  of  her  cargo.  And  this,  they  faid,  the 
law  allows  ! But  where,  meantime,  is  the  law  of 
God? 

To  hear  this  caufe  all  the  gentlemen  of  the 
country  were  come  to  Caftle-bar.  It  was  to 
be  heard  in  the  court-houfe,  where  I preached. 
So  they  met  an  hour  fooner,  and  heard 
the  fermon  firft.  Who  knows  but  even  fome 
of  thefe  may  be  found  of  him  they  fought 
not  ? 

Wednefday  28. 1 rode  to  Hollymount,  and  the 
next  day  to  Aghrim,  where  were  a people  alive 
to  God.  I told  them  plainly  what  things  they 
wanted  flill.  And  furely  God  will  fupply  all  their 
wants ! 

Trinity-Sunday,  June  1.  I preached  about 
nine  in  the  market-houfe  at  Athlone,  on  There  are 
three  that  bear  record  in  heaven — and  thefe  three 
are  one.  Afterwards}  at  the  minifter's  defire,  I 
read  prayers  in  the  church,  and  in  the  evening 
preached  on  the  Connaught  fide  of  the  river,  on 

Ye 


[ 9 ] 

Ye  rrtuft  be  born  again.  Both  Papifts  and  Protef* 
tants  attended.  And  fome  Teemed  cut  to  the  heart. 

Tuefday  3.  I met  the  clafles  and  was  agree- 
ably furprized,  to  find  that  bitternefs  againft  the 
church,  with  which  many  were  infe&ed  when 
I was  here  before,  was  now  entirely  over. 
Yet  the  deadnefs  which  it  had  occafioned, 
remained,  and  I doubt  it  will  not  Toon  be  re- 
moved. 

Friday  6.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  Aha- 
fkra,  where  the  bulk  of  the  congregation  were 
Papifts.  Yet  the  decency  of  their  behaviour  was 
fuch  as  might  have  made  many  Proteftants 
afhamed. 

Sunday  8.  I rode  over  to  Aghrim  again.  Un- 
derflanding  the  refitor  had  none  to  affift  in  the 
fervice,  I offered  to  read  prayers  for  him,  which 
he  willingly  accepted.  Immediately  after  the 
church  fervice,  I preached  to  a numerous  con- 
gregation, and  returned  to  Athlone,  foon  enough 
to  fpeak  once  more  to  a large  concourfe  of  all 
ranks  and  religions.  But  great  part  of  them  were 
as  bullocks  unaccuftomed  to  the  yoke,  neither 
taught  of  God,  nor  man, 

Monday  9.  About  one  I preached  at  Abidar- 
rig,  and  then  rode  on  to  Longford.  The  town 
was  fo  thronged  by  reafon  of  the  approaching 
fair,  that  we  had  much  ado  to  pafs.  But  this 
increafed  the  evening  congregation  much : 
among  whom  was  Dr.  Hort,  then  reffor  of  the 
A 5 parifh, 


[ *o  ] 

parifh,  a learned,  fenfible,  pious  man,  and  a 
pattern  both  for  clergy  and  laity. 

Tuefday  10.  I rode  to  Drumerfnave,  a village 
delightfully  fituated.  Almoft  the  whole  town, 
proteflants  and  papifts  were  prefent  at  the  fer- 
mon  in  the  evening:  and  a great  part  of  them  in 
the  morning  : but  O ! how  few  ol  them  will  bear 
fruit  to  perfeftion ! 

At  noon  William  Ley,  James  Glafbrook  and 
I rode  to  Carrick  upon  Shannon.  Inlefs  than  an 
hour,  an  efquire  and  jullice  of  the  peace,  came 
down  with  a drum  and  what  mob  he  could 
gather.  I went  into  the  garden  with  the  congre- 
gation, while  he  was  making  a fpeech  to  his  fol- 
lowers in  the  flreet.  He  then  attacked  William 
Ley,  (who  flood  at  the  door)  being  armed  with  an 
halbert  and  long  fword  ; and  ran  at  him  with 
the  halbert,  but  miffing  his  thru  ft,  he  then  (truck 
at  him,  and  broke  it  fhort  upon  his  wrift.  Having 
made  his  way  thro’  the  houfe  to  the  other  door, 
he  was  at  a full  flop.  James  Glafbrook  held  it 
fall  on  the  other  fide.  While  he  was  endeavour, 
ing  to  force  it  open,  one  told  him,  I was  preach- 
ing in  the  garden.  On  this  he  quitted  the  door  in 
hafle,  ran  round  the  houfe,  and  with  part  of  his 
retinue,  climbed  over  the  wall  into  the  garden; 
and  with  a whole  vollev  of  oaths  and  curfes  de- 
clared, “ You  fh all  not  preach  here  to-day.”  I 
told  him,  “ Sir,  Ido  not  intend  it  ; fori  have 
preached  already.”  This  made  him  ready  to 
tear  the  ground.  Finding  he  was  not  to  be  rea- 

foned 


[ 11  ] 

Toned  with,  I went  into  the  houfe.  Soon  after  he 
revenged  himfelf  on  James  Glafbrook,  (by  break- 
ing the  truncheon  of  his  halbert  on  his  arm)  and 
on  my  hat,  which  he  beat  and  kicked  mod  vali- 
antly. But  a gentleman  refcued  it  out  of  his 
hands,  and  we  rode  quietly  out  of  the  town. 

After  preaching  to  feveral  of  the  intermedi- 
ate focieties  in  the  way,  on  Saturday  14,  I came 
to  Tyrrels-pafs,  and  found  feveral  of  our  friends 
who  were  come  from  various  parts.  Sunday  15. 
I preached  at  eight  and  at  twelve,  (there  being 
no  fervice  at  the  church.)  A heap  of  fine  gay 
people  came  in  their  pofi-chaifes  to  the  evening 
preaching.  I fpoke  very  plain,  but  the  words 
feemed  to  fly  over  them  ; Gallic  cared  for  none 
of  thefe  things. 

Monday  16.  I preached  in  the  evening  in 
the  long  fhady  walk  at  Edinderry,  to  fucli 
a congregation  as  had  not  been  feen  'here  for 
many  years.  And  God  gave  an  edge  to  his  word, 
both  this  evening  and  the  next  morning.  He  can 
work,  even  among  thefe  dry  bones. 

Wednefday  18.  I defigned  to  preach  in  the 
market-houfe  at  Portarlington.  But  it  was  pre- 
engaged  for  a ball.  So  I preached,  and  with 
much  comfort,  in  our  own  room  ; as  alfo,  at  five 
in  the  morning.  I preached  at  ten,  for  the  fake 
of  the  gentry.  But  it  was  too  early;  they  could 
not  rife  fo  foon. 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Mountmelick.  The 
rainv/as  fufpendedin  the  evening,  whilelexhort- 
A 6 ed 


[ I*  ] 

ed  a large  congregation  to  walk  in  the.  old  paths. 
Many  papifts  appeared  to  be  quite  aftonilhed  : fome 
of  them  were  almoft  perfuaded  to  walk  therein. 
The  next  evening  I preached  in  the.  market-place, 
for  the  fake  of  the  rich,  who  could  hear  there, 
without  impeachment  to  their  honour.  And  fome 
were  deeply  affeffed.  Surely  the  thorns  will 
not  choak  all  the  good  feed ! 

Saturday  21.  The  congregation  at  Tuliamore 
was  near  as  large  as  at  Moummelick.  At  eight 
in  the  morning,  Sunday  22,  it  was  much  increaf- 
ed,  but  much  more  at  one.  And  I have  reafon  to 
believe,  that  God  at  this  time  touched  feveral 
carlefs  hearts.  I rode  from  thence  to  Coolylough, 
and  found  a congregation  gathered  from  twenty 
miles  round.  It  rained  when  I began  to  preach: 
but  none  offered  to  go  away.  And  God  did  in- 
deed fend  a gracious  rain  upon  his  inheritance , 
and  comforted  the  fouls  of  his  fervants. 

Monday  23.  Being  the  quarterly  meeting,  the 
Rewards  from  all  the  country  focieties  were  pre- 
fent ; a company  of  fettled,  fenftble  men.  Noth- 
ing is  wanting  in  this  kingdom  but  zealous, 
aftive  preachers,  tenacious  of  order,  and  exaft 
difcipline. 

Tuefday  24.  I took  horfe  early,  and  at  ten 
preached  at  Cloughan,  about  24  miles  from 
Coolylough.  We  afterwards  rode  through  Long- 
ford, but  did  not  flop,  as  the  day  was  cool  and 
pleafant.  About  two  we  were  unawares  en- 
compaft  with  a multitude  of  papifts,  coming 

out 


[ >3  1 

out  of  their  mafs-houfe.  One  of  them  know- 
ing me  foon  alarmed  the  reft,  who  fet  up  a hi- 
deous roar,  and  drew  up  in  battle-array.  But 
we  galloped  through  them,  and  went  on  to 
Drumerfnave,  where  1 preached  in  the  even- 
ing, and  the  next  day,  Wednefday  2j,  rode 
on  to  Slbo. 

o 

Never  did  1 fee  a fairer  profpefft  of  good  than 
here.  But  blolfoms  are  not  fruit.  As  large  if 
not  a larger  congregation  than  before,  was  at 
the  market-place  in  the  evening.  I was  ex- 
ceeding weary,  having  rode  an  extremely  dull 
horfe  : but  I foon  forgot  my  wearinefs,  feeing 
fo  many  young  and  old,  rich  and  poor,  receiv- 
ing the  word  with  all  gladnefs. 

Thurfday  26.  I preached  at  five  in  a large 
commodious  room,  which  has  been  procured 
fmce  I was  herelafl.  I breakfafled  at  Mr.  A — ’s 

and  dined  at  Mr.  K : but  two  fuch  families 

I have  feldom  feen.  They  had  feared  God  for 
many  years,  and  ferved  him  in  the  belt  manner 
they  knew.  Nothing  was  wanting  but  that  they 
fhould  hear  the  more  excellent  way , which  they 
then  embraced  with  all  their  heart. 

Friday  27.  Our  morning  congregation  was 

doubled.  Mr.  D did  not  fail  to  be  there, 

though  it  feerned  ftrange  to  him  at  firft,  when 
mention  was  made  of  preaching  at  five  in  the 
morning.  In  the  evening  we  had  a Bill  larger 
congregation,  and  I believe,  Gcd  applied  his 
word.  Some  trembled,  others  wept.  Surely 

fome 


[ n ] 

fome  of  thefe  (hall  know,  there  is  balm  in  Gilead , 
. Satur.  28.  At  five  the  congregation  was  larger 
than  ever  it  had  been  at  that  hour.  After  break- 
fafi  I rode  out  with  Mr.  K.  and  Mr.  D,  who 
hearing  I was  ill-mounted,  defined  me  to  make 
ufie  of  one  of  his  horfes,  during  my  fiay  inlreland. 

In  the  evening  (it  being  market-day,  fo  that  the 
market- houfe  was  full  of  people)  I wrote  a line  to 
the  colonel,  who  readily  gave  me  the  liberty  of 
preaching  in  the  barrack-yard.  He  likewifecame 
to  hear  himfelf,  as  did  feveral  of  the  officers.  It 
was  a folemn  conclufion  of  the  happieft  birth- 
day, which  I have  known  for  many  years. 

Sund.  29.  W e had  a folemn  meeting  of  the  fio- 
ciety  at  five.  At  eight  I preached  again  in  the  bar- 
rack-yard. And  I did  not  obferve  a trifler  there. 
They  all  feemed  to  hear  as  for  life.  To-day  I fiaw 
an  odd  inftanceof  the  force  of  example.  When 
we  were  at  church  in  the  morning,  fcarce  any  one 
either  fung  or  flood  at  the  pfalms;  fo  that  I was- 
almofl  alone  therein.  But  in  the  afternoon  almoft 
every  one  flood  up  : and  moil  of  them  fung,  or 
endeavoured  fo  to  do.  After  fervice  I went  di- 
reffly  to  the  market- houfe,  and  inforced  thofe 
folemn  words.  What  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  re- 
quire of  thee,  but  to  do  jujlly,  and  to  love  mercy , 
and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God? 

* Mr.  D had  left  us  at  fix  in  the  morning, 

in  order  to  ferve  his  cure.  But  about  ten  at 
night  he  came  back,  and  was  with  me  fioon  after 
four,  importuning  me  to  flay  another  day.  But 
as  my  journies  were  fixt,  I could  not  do  that, 
without  difappointing  feveral  congregations. 

Now 


[ 15  ] 

Now  was  the  general  call  for  the  town  of  Sligo. 
And  many  did  receive  the  word  with  joy.  But 
the  greateft  part  had  no  root  in  them/elves.  What 
fruit  then  could  be  expefted  from  them  ? 

Monday  30.  I have  rarely  feen  fo  heavy  rain 
in  Europe,  as  we  had  in  the  way  to  Tubber-cur- 
raugh.  I was  quickly  wet  to  my  toe’s  end:  but 
the  day  clearing,  I was  dry  again  in  a few  hours. 
We  had  a very  large  congregation  at  Caftle-barr 
in  the  evening  : and  many  feemed  almofl  per - 
funded  to  he  Chrifians.  O what  does  it  avail, 
almoji  to  hit  the  mark  ? Almofl  to  efcape  the 
damnation  of  hell  ? 

Tuefday,  July  1.  We  took  horfe  about  four. 
And  it  was  well  we  did.  For  our  feven  and 
thirty  Irifh  miles,  fo  called,  were  little  lefs 
than  feventy  Englilh.  I preached  at  a friend’s 
houfe  foon  after  three  : and  then  procuring  a 
frelh  horfe,  about  the  fize  of  a jack-afs,  I rode 
on,  with  more  eafe  than  date,  to  Aghrim. 

Wednefday  2.  We  rode  on  to  Eyre-court, 
where  many  threatened  great  things  : but  all  va- 
nifhed  into  air.  I preached  at  ten  in  the  court- 
houfe  : Col.  Eyre  was  there,  and  feveral  other 
perfons  of  fafhion.  In  the  evening  I preached 
at  Birr,  with  more  fatisfaflion  than  for  feveral 
years;  finding  many  more  alive  to  God  than 
ever,  and  provoking  one  another  to  love  and 
to  good  works.  I had  purpofed  to  fet  out  early 
in  the  morning;  but  their  love  conftrained  me 
to  flay  a day  longer.  So  I had  leifure  to  com- 
pleat  the  account  of  the  focieties.  At  prefent 

the 


[ 16  J 


the  focieties  in  Connaught  contain  Jittle  more 
than  two  hundred  members:  thofe  in  Ulfter,  a- 
bout  two  hundred  and  fifty  ; thofe  in  Leinfter, 
a thoufand. 

Friday  4.  I took  my  eafe,  riding  in  a chaife  to 
Limerick,  where  on  Saturday  5,  ten  of  us  met 
in  a little  conference.  By  the  bleffing  of  God 
we  were  all  of  one  mind,  particularly,  with  re- 
gard to  the  church.  Even  J — D — has  not 
now  the  lead  thought  of  leaving  it,  but  attends 
there,  be  the  minifier  good  or  bad.  On  Tuef- 
day  8,  having  fettled  all  our  little  affairs,  we 
parted  in  much  love. 

* Wednefday  9.  I rode  over  to  Killiheen,  a 
German  fettlement,  near  twenty  miles  fouth  of 
Limerick.  It  rained  all  the  way,  but  the  ear- 
neftnefs  of  the  poor  people  made  us  quite  forget 
it.  In  the  evening  I preached  to  another  colony 
of  Germans  at  Ballygarane.  The  third  is  at 
Court-mattrafs,  a mile  from  Killiheen.  I fup- 
pofe  three  fuch  towns  are  fcarce  to  be  found 
again  in  England  or  Ireland.  There  is  no  curf- 
ing  or  fwearing,  no  fabbath-breaking,  no  drun- 
kennefs,  no  ale-houfe  in  any  of  them.  How 
will  thefe  poor  foreigners  rife  up  in  the 
judgment  againfl  thofe  that  are  round  about 
them ! 

Friday  11.  I preached  in  the  new  houfe  at 
Clare,  to  a genteel  congregation.  What  a con- 
trail between  thefe  and  the  poor  people  at  Kil- 
leheen  ! We  had  a dill  more  genteel  congrega- 
tion, 


[ *7  ] 

tion,  the  next  morning  at  nine  in  the  court- 
houfe  at  Ennis,  to  whom  I fpoke  with  all  plain- 
nefs.  I did  the  fame  on  Sunday  morning  : fo 
if  they  hear  me  no  more,  I am  clear  of  their 
blood.  I took  my  leave  of  them  at  Clare  in  the 
afternoon,  and  in  the  evening  returned  to  Li- 
merick. 

* Wednefday  16.  I rode  to  New-market, 
which  was  another  German  fettlement.  But 
the  poor  fettlers  with  all  their  diligence  and  fru- 
gality, could  not  procure  even  the  coarfeft  food 
to  eat,  and  the  meaneft  raiment  to  put  on,  un- 
der their  merciful  landlords ! So  that  mold  of 
thefe,  as  well  as  of  thofe  at  Balligarane,  have 
been  forced  to  feek  bread  in  other  places : fome 
of  them  in  diflant  parts  of  Ireland,  but  the 
greater  part  in  America. 

Thurfday  ry.  I met  the  clafTes  at  Limerick, 
and  found  a confiderable  decreafe.  And  how 
can  it  be  otherwife,  when  vice  flows  as  a tor- 
rent, unlefs  the  children  of  God  are  all  life, 
zeal,  aftivity  ? In  hopes  of  quickening  them,  I 
preached  at  feven  in  the  old  camp,  to  more  than 
twice  the  ufual  congregation  : which  the  two 
next  evenings  was  more  numerous  hill,  and 
equally  attentive.  I was  well  pleafed  to  fee  a 
little  army  of  foldiers  there,  and  not  a few  of 
the  officers.  Nor  did  they  behave  as  uncon- 
cerned hearers,  but  like  men  that  really  defired 
to  fave  their  fouls. 

Sunday  20.  I took  my  leave  of  that  comfort- 
able 


[ i8  ] 

able  place,  where  fome  thoufands  of  people 
were  alfernbled.  I have  feen  no  fucli  fight  fince 
I came  to  the  kingdom.  They  not  only  filled 
all  the  lower  ground,  but  compleatly  covered 
the  banks  that  iurround  it,  though  they  flood 
as  clofe  as  pofhble.  I exhorted  them  to  ajkfor 
the  old  paths , and  walk  therein,  that  they  might 
Jind  reft  to  their  Jouls.  We  had  afterwards  a fo- 
lemn  meeting  of  the  fociety,  in  confidence  that 
God  would  revive  his  work. 

Monday  21.  I left  Limerick,  and  abom  noon 
preached  at  Shronill,  near  a great  houfe  which  a 
gentleman  built  many  years  ago.  But  he  cannot 
yet  afford  to  finifh  it,  having  only  thirty  thoufand 
a year,  and  fome  hundred  thoufands  in  ready 
money  ! 

“ The  beggars  but  a common  lot  deplore  : 

The  rich-poor  man’s  emphatically  poor.” 

At  fix  I preached  at  the  camp  near  Caire,  to 
a large  and  ferious  congregation  of  foldiers, 
Thence  we  rode  on  to  Clonmell,  where  I preach- 
ed near  the  barracks  at  eight  in  the  morning, 
to  a wild,  flaring  people;  but  quite  perforce: 
for  the  foldiers  kept  them  in  awe.  We  rode  in 
the  afternoon  to  Waterford,  where  our  friends 
had  procured  a commodious  place,  inclofed  on 
all  Tides.  I preached  there  three  evenings,  with 
great  hope  of  doing  good.  Our  large  room  was 

full 


C 19  ] 

full  every  morning.  O why  fhould  we  defpair 
of  any  fouls  whom  God  hath  made  ? 

Thurfday  24,  I looked  over  that  well-wrote 
book,  Mr.  Smith’s  “ State  of  the  county  and  city 
of  Waterford.”  He  plainly  {hews,  that  twelve 
hundred  years  ago,  Ireland  was  a flourifhing 
kingdom.  It  feems  to  have  been  declining  almoft 
ever  fince  ; efpecially  after  it  was  torne  into 
feveral  independent  kingdoms.  Thence  forward 
it  grew  more  and  more  wild  and  barbarou".  for 
feveral  hundred  years.  In  Queen  Elizabeth  s 
time  it  began  to  revive.  AnJ  u increafed  greatly 
both  in  trade  and  inhabitants,  ’til!  the  deadly 
blow,  which  commenced  on  October  23,  1641. 
Three  hundred  thoufand  proteflants,  by  a moder- 
ate computation,  were  then  deftroyed  in  lefs 
than  a year : and  more  than  twice  as  many  pa- 
piffs,  within  a few  years  following.  Moll  of  thefe 
were  adults  ; and  this  was  a lofs,  which  the  na- 
tion has  not  recovered  yet.  Nay,  it  will  probably 
require  another  century,  to  reftore  the  number 
ofinhabitants  it  had  before. 

Friday  23.  I preached  once  more  near  the  bar- 
racks in  Clonmell,  and  the  next  morning  took 
horfe  at  four.  About  eleven  the  fun  was  fcorch- 
ing  hot,  ’till  a little  cloud  rofe  and  covered  us 
’till  we  were  near  Ratheormuck.  Here  we  reded 
two  hours,  and  then  rode  on  (moflly  fhaded  by 
flying  clouds)  to  Cork. 

Sunday  27.  The  houfe  was  well  filled  : but  I 
expefd  fmall  incre^fe  of  the  work  of  God  ’till 

we 


[ 20  J 

we  preach  abroad.  Thurfday  31.  I rode  to  Ban- 
don  : but  my  good  old  friend,  Mrs.  Jones,  did 
not  flay  for  my  coming.  She  was  releafed  out  of 
life  fome  weeks  ago,  in  the  feventy-fecond  vear 
of  her  age.  I preached  as  ufual  in  the  main  ftreet 
to  a large  and  attentive  congregation.  And  they 
were  nearly  doubled  the  next  evening  ; yet  all 
behaved  with  the  utmoft  decency.  The  market 
obliged  me  to  preach  in  the  houfe  on  Saturday  in 
the  afternoon,  a very  neat  and  lightfome  build- 
ing. Having  fpent  the  time  I propofed  here,  with 
much  fatisfaftion,  in  the  evening  I returned  to 
Cork. 

Sunday,  Auguft  the  3d,  I had  wrote  to  the 
commanding  officer,  for  leave  to  preach  near  the 
barracks.  But  he  was  juft  gone  out  of  town.  So  1 
was  obliged  once  more  to  coop  myfelf  up  in  the 
room.  Monday  4.  Knowing  by  the  experiment 
I made  two  years  fince,  that  it  was  an  entertain- 
ment above  the  tafte  of  our  evening  congrega- 
tion, I read  fome  feleft  letters  at  five  in  the 
morning,  to  thofe  who  defired  to  hear  them. 
And  many  of  them  were  not  a little  comforted, 
and  eftablifhed  in  the  ways  of  God. 

Thurfday  7.  In  the  afternoon  I fet  out  for 
Kinfale.  In  the  way  a violent  ftorrn  drove  us 
into  a little  hut,  where  a poor  tvoman  was  very 
thankful  for  phyfical  advice,  and  another  for  a 
little  money  to  buy  her  food.  The  fky  then  clear- 
ing, we  foon  reached  Kinfale,  where  I preached 
at  fix  in  the  exchange,  to  a multitude  of  foldiers, 

and 


[ ] 

and  not  a few  of  the  dull,  carelefs  t own’s-folk. 
At  five  in  the  morning,  it  being  a field-day,  the 
foldiers  could  not  attend.  But  I had  a large  and 
ferious  congregation  notwithfianding.  Surely 
good  might  be  done  here  alfo,  would  our  preach- 
ers always  preach  in  the  exchange,  as  they  may 
without  any  moleftation,  inftead  of  a little,  ugly, 
dirty  garret. 

* About  nine,  -a  fharp  ftorm  having  put  an 
•end  to  their  exercite,  I went  to  the  foldiers  in  the 
field.  I flood  fo  near  the  intrenchments  of  the 
fort,  that  they  could  hear  within  as  well  as  with- 
out. The  fun  indeed  fhone  extremely  hot  on  my 
head  ; but  prefently  a cloud  interpofed.  And 
when  I began  to  be  chill  (for  the  wind  was  high 
and  fharp)  it  removed  till  I wanted  it  again. 
How  eafily  may  we  fee  the  hand  of  God,  in  fmall 
things  as  well  as  great  ? And  why  fhould  a little, 
pointlefs  raillery  make  us  alhamed  to  acknow- 
ledge it  ? 

In  the  evening  I preached  to  the  ufual  congre- 
gation in  the  main  flreet  at  Bandon,  on  Her  ways 
are  ways  of  pleajantnefs , and  all  her  paths  peace. 
The  congregation  was  near  twice  as  large  at  five 
in  the  morning,  as  it  was  laft  week,  when  I 
preached  an  hour  later.  Sunday  10.  After 
preaching  at  feven,  in  an  houfe  crouded  within 
and  without,  I left  this  comfortable  place,  and 
went  back  to  Cork.  I had  a defire  to  preach 
abroad  in  the  evening  ; but  the  weather  would 
I not 


[ 22  3 


not  permit.  When  the  fociety  met,  a perfon 
hugely  daubed  with  gold,  thruft  violently  in.  By 
his  appearance  I fhould  have  judged  him  to  be 
fome  nobleman.  But  I was  afterward  informed, 
it  was  Dr.  Taylor. 

* On  Monday  and  Tuefday  I took  an  account 
of  the  fociety,  and  was  grieved,  though  not  fur- 
prized,  to  find  fucha  declenfion.  I left  two  hun- 
dred and  ninety  members:  I find  only  two  hun- 
dred and  thirty-three.  And  what  will  the  end  be, 
unlefs  thofe  that  remain,  learn  to  bear  one  ano- 
ther’s burdens  ? Adding  to  thofe  in  the  other 
provinces,  about  fix  hundred  who  are  in  Mun- 
fter,  the  whole  number  is  a little  above  two  thou- 
fand. 

Our  evening  congregations  this  week  were 
fmaller  than  ufual : as  the  gentry  were  engaged 
in  a more  important  affair.  A company  of  play- 
ers were  in  town.  However  many  of  them  came 
on  Friday  : for  a watch-night  was  newer  to  them 
than  a comedy. 

Monday  18.  Being  advifed  from  Dublin,  that 
Capt,  Danfey  (witlf  whom  I defired  to  fail) 
would  fail  on  the  19th  or  20th,  I took  horfe 
early,  and  reached  Clonmell  between  five  and  fix 
in  the  evening.  I took  my  ufual  Hand  near  the 
barrack-gate  ; and  had  abundantly  more  than  my 
ufual  congregation,  as  it  was  the  affize  week,  fo 
that  the  town  was  extremely  full  of  gentry  as  well 
as  common  people. 

* Tuefday  19.  We  had  many  light  fhowers, 
which  cooled  the  air,  and  laid  the  duff.  M e 

dined 


[ 23  ] 

dined  at  Kilkenny,  noble  in  ruins  ; I fee  no  fuch 
remains  of  magnificence  in  the  kingdom  The 
late  Duke  of  Ormond’s  houfe,  on  the  top  of 
a rock,  hanging  over  the  river,  the  ancient  cathe- 
dra), and  what  is  left  of  many  grand  buddings, 
yield  a melancholy  .pleafure.  Thus 

“ A little  power,  a little  fway, 

A fun-beam  in  a winter's  day. 

Is  all  the  great  and  mighty  have 
Between  the  cradle  and  the  grave!” 

We  lodged  at  Cafile-dermot,  and  reached 
Dublin  on  Wednefday  20,  but  Capt.  Danfey  was 
not  to  fail  this  week.  I then  enquired  for  a Chef- 
ter  fhip,  and  found  one,  which  was  expe&ed  to 
fail  on  Friday  morning.  But  on  Friday  morning 
the  captain  fent  us  word,  “ He  mud  wait  for 
General  Montague.”  So  in  the  afternoon  I rode 

c J 

over  to  the  Skirries,  where  the  packet  lay.  But 
before  I came  thither,  the  wind,  which  was  fair 
before,  fhifted  to  the  eaft,  and  blew  a florin.  I faw 
the  hand  of  God,  and  after  refting  a while,  rode 
chearfully  back  to  Dublin.  It  being  the  watch- 
night,  I came  juft  in  time,  to  fpend  a comforta- 
ble hour  with  the  congregation.  O how  good  it 
is,  to  have  no  choice  of  our  own,  but  to  leave 
all  things  to  the  will  of  God  ! 

Saturday  23.  The  captain  of  the  Chefter  fhip 
fent  word,  “ The  General  would  not  go,  and  he 

would 


[ 24  ] 

would  fail  the  next  morning.”  So  we  have  one 
day  more  to  fpend  in  Ireland.  Let  us  “ Live  this 
day,  as  if  it  were  our  laft  !” 

* Sunday  24.  At  feven  I took  leave  of  my 
friends,  and  about  noon  embarked  in  the  Nonpa- 
reil for  Chefler.  We  had  forty  or  fifty  paffengers 
on  board,  half  of  whom  were  cabin  paffengers. 
I was  afraid  we  fhould  have  an  uneafy  time,  in 
the  midfl  of  fuch  a croud  of  gentry.  We  failed 
out  with  a fair  wirsd,  but  at  four  in  the  afternoon 
it  failed  and  left  us  in  a dead  calm.  1 then  made 
the  gentlemen  an  offer  of  preathing,  which  they 
thankfully  accepted.  While  I was  preaching  the 
wind  fprung  up  fair : but  the  next  day  we  were 
becalmed  again.  In  the  afternoon  they  defired 
me  to  give  them  another  fermon,  and  again  the 
wind  fprung  up  while  I was  fpeaking,  and  conti- 
nued till  about  noon  on  Tuefday,  we  landed  at 
Farkgate. 

Being  in  hafle,  I would  not  flay  for  my  own 
horfe,  which  I found  could  not  land  till  low  wa- 
ter. So  I bought  one,  and  having  hired  another, 
fet  forward  without  delay.  We  reached  Whit- 
church that  evening.  Wednefday  27.  We 
breakfafled  at  Newport,  where  finding  our  horfes 
begin  to  fail,  we  thought  it  bell  to  take  the  Bir- 
mingham road,  that  if  they  fhould  fail  us  altoge- 
ther, we  might  flay  among  our  friends.  But 
they  would  go  no  farther  than  Wolverhampton; 
fo  we  hired  frefh  horfes  there,  and  immediately 
fet  out  for  Worcefter.  But  one  of  them  foon  af- 
ter 


[ *5  ] 

ter  fell,  and  gave  me  fuch  a fhock,  (though  I 
did  not  quit  my  feat)  that  I was  feized  with  a 
violent  bleeding  at  the  nofe,  which  nothing  we 
could  apply  would  Hop.  So  we  were  obliged  to 
go  a foot  pace  for  two  miles,  and  then  ftay  at 
Broadwater. 

Thurfday  28.  Soon  after  we  fet  out,  the  other 
horfe  fell  lame.  An  honeft  man  at  Worcefter 
found  this  was  owing  to  a bad  fhoe.  A fmith 
cured  this  by  a new  fhoe  : but  at  the  fame  time, 
by  paring  the  hoof  too  clofe,  he  effe&ually  lamed 
the  other  foot,  fo  that  we  had  hard  work  to  reach 
Glocefter.  After  refling  here  a while,  we  pufhed 
on  to  Newport : where  I took  a chaife,  and 
reached  Brillol  before  eleven. 

I fpent  the  two  following  days  with  the  preach- 
ers, who  had  been  waiting  for  me  all  the  week. 
And  their  love  and  unanimity  was  fuch  as  foon 
made  me  forget  all  my  labour. 

Monday,  Sept.  1.  I fet  out  for  Cornwall, 
preaching  at  Shepton,  Middlefey  and  Tiverton 
in  the  way.  Wednefday  3.  I reached  Lancefton, 
and  found  the  fmall  remains  of  a dead,  fcattered 
fociety.  And  no  wonder,  as  they  have  had  fcarce 
any  difcipline,  and  only  one  fermon  in  a fort- 
night. On  Friday  3,  I found  juft  fuch  another 
fociety  at  Camelford.  But  their  deadnefs  here 
was  owing  to  bitternefs  againft  each  other.  In 
the  morning  I heard  the  contending  parties  face 
to  face  : and  they  refolved  and  promifed  on  all 
fides,  to  let  paft  things  be  forgotten.  O how  few 
Vol.  XXXI.  B have 


[ 26  ] 

have  learned  to  forgive  one  another,  as  God  for 
Chrifl's fake  hath  forgiven  us  ? 

Saturday  6.  We  had  an  exceeding  lively  con- 
gregation in  the  evening  at  Trewalder.  Indeed 
all  the  fociety  (lands  well,  and  adorns  the  do&rine 
of  God  our  Saviour.  Sunday  7.  At  eight  I 
preached  again,  and  was  much  comforted.  I 
then  rode  to  Port-Ifaac  church,  and  had  the  fa- 
tisfadlion  of  hearing  an  excellent  fermon.  After 
fervice  I preached  at  a final!  diftance  from  the 
church,  to  a numerous  congregation  : and  to  a 
far  more  numerous  one  in  the  town,  at  five  in 
the  afternoon. 

In  examining  this  fociety,  1 found  much  reafon 
to  blefs  God  on  their  behalf.  They  diligently  ob- 
ferve  all  the  rules  of  the  fociety,  with  or  with- 
out  a preacher.  They  conftantly  attend  the 
church  and  facrament,  and  meet  together  at 
the  times  appointed.  The  confequence  is,  that 
thirty  out  of  thirty-five,  their  whole  number, 
continue  to  walk  in  the  light  of  God’s  counte- 
nance. 

Monday  8.  A gentleman  followed  me  to  my 
inn  at  St.  Colomb’s,  and  carried  me  to  his  houfe, 
where  were  three  or  four  more  as  friendly  as 
himfelf.  One  of  them  rode  with  me  feven  or 
eight  miles,  and  gave  me  a pleafing  account,  of 

two  young  clergymen,  Mr.  C and  Air. 

Phelps,  who  had  the  care  of  three  adjoining  pa* 
rifhes.  Surely  God  has  a favour  for  the  people  of 
t he fe  parts!  He  gives  them  fo  ferious,  zealous, 

lively 


[ 27  ] 

lively  miniflers.  By  thefe  and  the  Methodifls 
together,  the  line  is  now  laid,  with  no  inconfi- 
derable  interruption,  all  along  the  north  fea, 
from  the  eaftern  point  of  Cornwall  to  the  Land’s- 
End.  In  a while,  I truft,  there  will  be  no  more 
caufe  on  thefe  coafls,  to  accufe  Britannos  hofpi- 
tibus feros. 

The  congregation  at  St.  Agnes  in  the  evening 
was,  I fuppofe,  double  to  that  at  Port-Ifaac.  * We 
had  near  as  many,  Tuefday  9,  at  five  in  the 
morning,  as  the  preaching-houfe  could  contain. 
Afterward  I examined  the  fociety,  and  was 
furprized  and  grieved  to  find,  that  out  of 
ninety-eight  perfons,  all  but  three  or  four  had 
forfaken  the  Lord’s  table.  I told  them  my 
thoughts  very  plain  : they  feemed  convinced, 
and  promifed  no  more  to  give  place  to  the 
devil. 

Wednefday  10.  I had  much  converfation  with 
Mr.  Phelps,  a man  of  an  humble,  loving,  tender 
fpirit.  Between  him  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
Methodifls  on  the  other,  moll  in  the  parilh  are 
now  awakened.  Let  but  our  brethren  have  zeal 
according  to  knowledge,  and  few  will  efcape  them 
both. 

W hen  I came  to  St.  Ives,  I was  determined 
to  preach  abroad:  but  the  wind  was  fo  high,  I 
could  not  Hand  where  I had  intended.  But  we 
found  a little  inclofure  near  it,  one  end  of  which 
was  native  rock,  rifing  ten  or  twelve  leet  perpen- 
dicular, from  which  the  ground  fell  with  an  eafy 
B2  defcent, 


[ 28  ] 


defcent.  A jetting  out  of  the  rock,  about  four 
feet  from  the  ground,  gave  me  a very  convenient 
pulpit.  Here  well  nigh  the  whole  town,  high  and 
low,  rich  and  poor  aflembled  together.  Nor  was 
there  a word  to  be  heard,  or  a fmile  feen,  from 
one  end  of  the  congregation  to  the  other.  It  wras 
juft  the  fame  the  three  following  everiings.  In- 
deed I was  afraid  on  Saturday,  that  the  roaring 
of  the  fea,  raifed  by  the  north  wind,  would  have 
prevented  their  hearing.  But  God  gave  me  fo 
clear  and  ftrong  a voice,  that  I believe  fcarce 
tine  word  was  loft. 

Sunday  14.  At  eight  I chofe  a large  ground, 
the  (loping  fide  of  a meadow,  where  the  congre- 
gation flood,  row  above  row,  fo  that  ail  might  fee 
as  well  as  hear.  It  was  a beautiful  fight.  Every 
one  feemed  to  take  to  himfelf  what  was  fpoken. 

I believe  every  backflider  in  the  town  was  there. 
And  furely  God  was  there,  to  heal  their  bac'i- 
Jlidings. 

I began  at  Zen  nor,  as  foon  as  the  church  fer- 
vice  ended  : I fuppofe  fcarce  fix  perfons  went 
away.  Seeing  many  there  who  did  once  run 
well,  I addreffed  myfelf  to  them  in  particular. 
The  fpirit  of  mourning  was  foon  poured  out : 
and  forne  of  them  wept  bitterly.  O that  the 
Lord  may  yet  return  unto  them,  and  leave  a blef- 
fmg  behi  nd  him  ! 

At  five  I went  once  more  into  the  ground  at 
St.  Ives,  and  found  fuch  a congregation,  as  I 
think  was  never  feen  in  any  place  before  (Gwe- 

nap 


[ ^9  ] 

nap  excepted)  in  this  county.  Some  of  the  chief 
of  the  town  were  now  not  in  the  fkirts,  but  in 
the  thickeft  of  the  people.  The  clear  fky,  the 
fetting  fun,  the  fmooth  ft  ill  water,  all  agreed 
with  the  ftate  of  the  audience.  Is  any  thing  too 
hard  for  God  ? May  we  not  well  fay,  in  every 
fenfe, 

" Thou  doft  the  raging  fea  controll 

And  fmooth  the  profpedt  of  the  deep  : 

Thou  mak’ft  the  fleeping  billows  roil  ; 

Thou  mak’ft  the  rolling  billows  fleep.” 

* Monday  15.  I enquired  concerning  the  un- 
common ftorm,  which  was  here  on  March  9, 
the  laft  year.  It  began  near  the  Land’s-End,  be- 
tween nine  and  ten  at  night,  and  went  eaftward, 
not  above  a mile  broad,  over  St.  Juft,  Morva, 
Zennor,  St.  Ives  and  Gwinnear,  whence  it 
turned  northward,  over  the  fea.  It  uncovered  all 
the  houfes  in  its  way,  and  was  accompanied  with 
impetuous  rain.  About  a mile  fouth-eaft  from 
St.  Ives,  it  tore  up  a rock,  twelve  or  fourteen  ton 
weight  from  the  top  of  a rifing  ground,  and 
whirled  it  down  upon  another,  which  it  fplit 
through,  and  at  the  fame  time  dafhed  itfelf  in 
pieces.  It  broke  down  the  pinnacles  of  Gwin- 
near church,  which  forced  their  way  through 
the  roof.  And  it  was  remarkable,  the  rain 
B 3 which 


[ 30  ] 

which  attended  it,  was  as  fait  as  any  fea- 
water. 

At  one  I preached  in  Maddern  parifh,  and 
then  rode  to  St.  Juft.  I have  not  feen  fuch  a con- 
gregation here,  for  twice  feven  years.  Abun- 
dance of  backfiiders  being  prefent,  I chiefly  ap- 
plied to  them.  Some  of  them  fmiled  at  firft  ; but 
it  was  not  long  before  their  mirth  was  turned 
into  mourning.  And  I believe  few,  if  any,  went 
away,  without  a witnefs  from  God,  that  he  zuill- 
eth  not  the  death  of  a fnner. 

Tuefday  16.  At  five  the  room  was  near  full  : 
and  the  great  power  of  God  was  in  the  midft  of 
them.  It  was  now  accompanied  with  one  un- 
ufual  effedl  : the  mouth  of  thofe  whom  it  moft 
affedled,  was  literally  flopped.  Several  of  them 
came  to  me  and  could  not  fpeak  one  word  : very 
few  could  utter  three  fentences.  1 re-joined 
to  the  fociety  ten  or  eleven  backfiiders,  and 
added  fome  new  members.  Here  (as  at  Port- 
Ifaac,  St.  Agnes,  and  St.  Ives)  we  are  called 
to  thankfulnefs : and  at  moft  other  places,  to 
patience. 

All  the  day  it  blew7  a florm  : and  in  the  even- 
ing, though  the  rain  ceafed,  the  furious  wind 
continued.  I ordered  all  the  window's  of  the 
preaching-houfe  to  be  fet  open,  fo  that  moft 
could  hear  without  as  well  as  within.  I preached 
on,  He  will  not  break  the  bruijed  reed,  nor  quench 
the  fmoaking  fax.  And  again  God  applied  his 

word, 


[ 31  ] 


word,  both  to  wound,  and  to  heal  them  that  were 


already  wounded. 


About  this  time  I wrote  the  following 
letter : 

To  the  Editor  of  the  London  Chronicle. 


Sept.  17,  1760. 


Sir, 


As  you  fometimes  infert  things  of  a religious 
nature  in  your  paper,  I (hall  count  it  a favour, 
if  you  will  infert  this. 

“ SOME  vears  ago  I publilhed  A Letter  to 
Mr.  Law,  and  about  the  fame  time  An  Addrefs 
to  the  Clergy.  Of  the  former  Mr.  Law  gives  the 
following  account,  in  his  Collettion  of  Letters , 
lately  publilhed. 

“To  anfwer  Mr.  Welley’s  letter  feems  to  be 
quite  needlefs,  becaufe  there  is  nothing  fubftan- 
tial  or  properly  argumentative  in  it.  I was  once 

a kind  of  oracle  to  Mr.  W . I judged  him 

to  be  much  under  the  power  of  his  own  fpirit. 
To  this  was  owing  the  falfe  cenfure  which  he 
publilhed  againft  the  myltics,  as  enemies  to  good 
works,  p.  128,  130.  His  letter  is  fuch  a juvenile 
compofttion  of  emptinefs  and  pertnefs,  as  is  be- 
low the  charadler  of  any  man,  who  had  been  fe. 
rious  in  religion  for  half  a month.  It  was  not  abi- 
lity, but  neceffitv,  that  put  his  pen  into  his  hand. 
He  had  preached  much  againft  my  books ; and 
forbid  bis  people  the  ufe  of  them  ; and  for  a co- 
ver of  all  this,  he  promifed,  from  time  to  time. 


to 


C 32  ] 

to  write  againft  them : therefore  an  anfwer  was 
to  be  made  at  all  adventures.  He  and  the 
Pope  conceive  the  lame  reafons  for  condemn- 
ing the  myftery  revealed  by  Jacob  Behme.’  p. 

190. 

Of  the  latter,  he  gives  this  account.  ‘ The 
pamphlet  you  fent  is  worfc  than  no  advice  at  all; 
but  infinitely  beyond  Mr.  Wefley’s  Babylonifh 
Addrejs  to  the  Clergy ; almofl  ail  of  which  is 
empty  babble,  fitter  for  an  old  grammarian,  that 
was  grown  blear-eyed  in  mending  diflionaries, 
than  for  one  who  had  tailed  of  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come.’ p.  198. 

* I leave  others  to  judge,  whether  an  anfwer 
to  that  letter  be  quite  neddlefs  or  no;  and  whe- 
ther there  be  any  thing  fubjlariiial  in  it : but  cer- 
tainly there  is  fomething  argumentative.  The 
very  queries  relaiing  to  Jacob’s  philofophy,  are 
arguments,  though  not  in  form  ; and  perhaps 
mod  of  them  Will  be  thought  conclufive  argu- 
ments, by  impartial  readers.  Let  thefe  likewife 
judge  if  there  are  not  arguments  in  it  (whether 
conclufive  or  no)  relating  to  that  entirely  new 
fyftem  of  divinity,  which  he  has  revealed  to  the 
world. 

* It  is  true,  that  Mr.  Law,  whom  I love  and 
reverence  now,  was  once  ‘ a kind  of  oracle  to 
me.’  He  thinks  I am  fl ill  ‘ under  the  power  of 
my  own  /pint,’  as  oppofed  to  the  Spirit  of  Cod. 
If  I am,  yet  my  cenfure  of  the  myftics  is  not  at 
all  owing  to  this,  but  to  my  reverence  for  the 

oracles 


[ 33  1 

oracles  of  God,  which,  while  I was  fonrl 
of  them,  I regarded  lefs  and  lefs;  till  at 
length,  finding  I could  not  follow  both,  I ex- 
changed the  myftic  writers  for  the  fcrip- 
tural. 

* It  is  fure,  in  expofing  the  philofophy  of 
Behme,  I ufe  ridicule  as  well  as  argument;  and 
yet  I trull;  I have,  by  the  grace  of  God,  been  in 
fome  meafure  ‘ ferious  in  religion,’  not  ‘ half  a 
month’  only,  but  ever  fince  I was  fix  years  old, 
which  is  now  about  half  a century.  I do  not 
know  that  the  Pope  has  condemned  him  at  all, 
or  that  he  has  any  reafon  fo  to  do.  My  reafon  is 
this,  and  no  other  : I think  he  contradifts  fcrip- 
ture,  reafon,  and  hirnfelf ; and  that  he  has  reduc- 
ed many  unwary  fouls  from  the  bible-way  of  falv&- 
tion.  A flrong  conviftion  of  this,  and  a defire  to 
guardothers  againft  that  dangerous  fedu&ion,  laid 
me  under  a necejjity  of  writing  that  letter.  I was 
under  no  other  necefiity  ; though  I doubt  not 
but  Mr.  Law  heard.  I was,  and  very  ferioufly  be- 
lieved it.  I very  rarely  mention  his  books  inpub- 
lic : nor  are  they  in  the  way  of  one  in  an  hun- 
dred of  thofe  whom  he  terms  my  people-,  mean- 
ing, I fuppofe,  the  people  called  Methodijls.  I 
had  therefore  no  temptation,  any  more  than 
power,  to  forbid  the  afe  of  them  to  the  Methodijls 
in  general.  Whofoever  informed  Mr.  Law  of 
this,  wanted  either  ability  or  integrity. 

* He  is  fo  deeply  difpleafed  with  the  Addrefs 
to  the  Clergy,  becaufe  it  fpeaks  ftrongly  in  favour 

B 5 of 


[ 34  ] 


of  learning.  But  flill,  if  this  part  of  it  is  only 
* fit  for  an  old  grammarian,  grown  blear-eyed  in 
mending  dictionaries,’  it  will  not  follow,  that 
‘ almojl  all  of  it  is  mere  empty  babble  ; for  a 
large  part  of  it  much  more  flrongly  infifts  on  a 
fingle  eye  and  a clean  heart.  Heathen  phi- 
lofophers  may  term  this  empty  babble : but 
let  not  Chriftians  either  account,  or  call  it  fo  !’’ 

Wednefday  17.  The  room  at  St.  Juft  was 
quite  full  at  five,  and  God  gave  us  a parting 
blefling.  At  noon  I preached  on  the  cliff  near 
Penzance,  where  no  one  now  gives  an  uncivil 
Word.  Here  I procured  an  account  from 

eye-witnefs,  of  what  happened  the  27th  of  laft 
month.  * A round  pillar,  narrowefl  at  bottom, 
of  a whififh  colour,  rofe  out  of  the  fea  near 
Moufehole,  and  reached  the  clouds.  One  who 
was  riding  over  the  ftrand  from  Marazion  to 
Penzance,  faw  it  ftand  for  a fhort  fpace,  and 
then  move  fwiftly  toward  her,  till  the  fkirt  of  it 
touched  her,  the  horfe  threw  her  and  ran  away. 
It  had  a ftrong  fulphurous  fmell.  It  dragged 
with  it  abundance  of  fand  and  pebbles  from  the 
fhore,  and  then  went  over  the  land,  carrying 
with  it  corn,  furze,  or  whatever  it  found  in  its 
way.  It  was  doubtlefs  a kind  of  water-fpout : 
but  a water-fpout  on  land  I believe  is  feldom 
feen. 

The  ftorm  drove  us  into  the  houfe  at  Newlin 

alfo. 


[ 35  ] 

alfo.  Thurfday  18.  As  we  rode  from  thence,  in 
lefs  than  half  an  hour  we  were  wet  to  the  fkin. 
But  when  we  came  to  Penhale,  the  rain  ceafed, 
and  the  people  flocking  from  all  parts,  we 
had  a comfortable  opportunity  together.  About 
fix  I preached  near  Helftone.  The  rain  flopped 
till  I had  done,  and  foon  after  was  as  violent  as 
before. 

Friday  19.  I rode  to  Illuggan  : v/e  had  heavy 
rain  before  I began,  but  fcarce  any  while  I was 
preaching.  I learned  feveral  other  particulars 
here  concerning  the  water-fpout.  * It  was  feen 
near  Moufehole  an  hour  before  fun-fet.  About 
fun-fet  it  began  travelling  over  the  land,  tearing 
up  all  the  furze  and  fhrubs  it  met.  Near  an  hour 
after  fun-fet  it  pafied  (at  the  rate  of  four  or  five 
miles  an  hour)  acrofs  Mr.  Harris’  fields,  in  Cam- 
bourn,  fweeping  the  ground  as  it  went,  about 
twenty  yards  diameter  at  bottom  and  broader  and 
broader  up  to  the  clouds.  It  made  a noife  like 
thunder,  took  up  eighteen  flacks  of  corn,  with 
a large  hay-flack  and  the  Hones  whereon  it 
flood,  fcattered  them  all  abroad,  (but  it  was 
quite  dry)  and  then  paffed  over  the  cliffinto  the 
fea. 

Saturday  20.  In  the  evening  I took  my  old 
Hand  in  the  main  flreet  at  Redruth.  A multitude 
of  people,  rich  and  poor,  calmly  attended.  So  is 
the  roughefl  become  one  of  the  quieteft  towns 
in  England. 

Sunday  2ii  I preached  in  the  fame  place  at 
B 6 eight. 


[ 36  ] 

eight.  Mr.  C—  of  Sf.  Cuthbert,  preached  at  the 
church  both  morning  and  afternoon,  and  ftrong- 
ly  confirmed  what  I had  fpoken.  At  one,  the 
day  being  mild  and  calm,  we  had  the  larged  con- 
gregation of  all.  But  it  rained  all  the  time  I was 
preaching  at  Gwenap.  We  concluded  the  day 
with  a love-feaff,  at  which  James  Roberts,  a tin- 
ner of  St.  Ives,  related  how  God  had  dealt  with 
his  foul.  He  wasone  of  the  firft  in  fociety  in  St. 
Ives,  but  foon  relapfed  into  his  old  fin,  drunken- 
nefs,  and  wallowed  in  it  for  two  years,  during 
which  time  he  headed  the  mob  who  pulled  down 
the  preaching- houfe.  Not  long  after,  he  was 
Handing  with  his  partner,  at  Edward  May’s  fiiop, 
when  the  preacher  went  by.  His  partner  faid, 
“ I will  tell  him,  I am  a Methodift.”  Nay,  faid 
Edward,  your  fpeech  will  bewray  you.”  James 
felt  the  word  as  a fword,  thinking  in  himfelf,  “ So 
does  my  fpeech  now  bewray  me”!  He  turned 
and  haftened  home,  fancying  he  heard  the  devil 
flepping  after  him  all  the  way.  For  forty  hours 
he  never  clofed  his  eyes,  nor  tafied  either  meat 
or  drink.  He  was  then  at  his  wit’s  end,  and  went 
to  the  window,  looking  to  drop  into  hell  inftant- 
ly,  when  he  heard  thofe  words,  I will  be  merciful 
to  thy  unrighteoufnefs,  thy  fins  and  iniquities  will  I 
remember  no  more.  All  his  load  was  gone  : and 
he  has  now  for  many  years  walked  worthy  of  the 
gofpel. 

Monday  22.  I preached  at  Penryn  in  the 
evening.  It  rained  before  and  after,  but  not  while 

I was 


[ 37  ] 

I was  preaching.  While  we  were  at  prayer,  a 
fheet  of  light  feemed  to  fill  the  yard,  and  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  was  heard  over  our  heads.  This 
fixt  the  impreflion  they  had  received,  upon  the 
minds  oi  many  ; as  if  it  had  faid  in  exprefs 
terms,  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God  ! 

On  Wednefday  evening,  having  (over  and 
above  meeting  the  focietiesj  preached  thirty 
times  in  eleven  days,  I found  myfelf  a little  ex- 
haulled  : but  a day’s  reft  fet  me  up.  So  on 
Friday  26  I preached  at  noon  again  near  Lifkard. 
In  the  afternoon  we  had  rain  and  wind  enough  ; 
and  when  we  came  to  SaltaPn,  no  boat  would 
venture  out  : fo  we  were  obliged  to  take  up  our 
lodgings  there. 

Saturday  27.  Finding  there  was  no  hope  of 
palling  here,  the  wind  being  as  high  as  ever,  we 
determined  to  ride  round  by  the  new  bridge. 
The  rain  ftiil  fell  on  either  fide  : but  for  near 
twenty  miles  we  had  not  one  drop,  and  not  a 
eonfiderahle  fhower  all  day.  Soon  after  four  in 
the  afternoon,  we  came  fafe  to  Plymouth- 
dock. 

I had  but  a melancholy  profpedf  here,  finding 
moll  of  the  people  dead  as  ftones.  And  when  I 
took  an  account  of  the  fociety,  only  thirty-four 
out  offeventy  were  left.  At  feven  in  the  even- 
ing, and  at  five  in  the  morning,  I ftrongly  exhort- 
ed them  to  return  to  God.  At  eight  I did  the 
fame,  and  at  five  in  the  afternoon  ; and  God 
made  his  word  as  an  hammer.  At  the  meeting 

of 


[ 3»  ] 

of  the  fociety’likewife,  firong  and  effe£lual  words 
were  given  me.  Many  were  convinced  afrefli ; 
many  backfliders  cut  to  the  heart.  And  I left 
once  more  between  fixty  and  feventy  mem- 
bers. 

Monday  29.  Being  invited  by  the  minilfer  of 
Mary- Week  to  preach  in  his  church,  I crolfed 
over  the  country,  and  came  thither  about  four 
in  the  afternoon.  The  congregation  was  large, 
corifidering  the  weather,  and  quite  attentive  and 
unconcerned.  Hence  I rode  on  to  Mill-houfe, 
and  the  next  day  to  Columpton  : where  finding 
the  congregation  waiting,  I began  preaching 
without  delay,  and  felt  no  wearinefs  or  want  of 
firength,  ’till  I had  delivered  my  meffage  to 
them. 

Wednefday,  Oftober  x.  After  preaching  at 
five,  1 examined  the  fociety,  and  found  them 
more  alive  to  God,  than  I had  done  for  many 
years.  About  one  I preached  at  Halberton,  and 
at  Tiverton  in  the  evening.  The  next  morn- 
ing I rode  to  Maiden-down,  where  the  congrega- 
tion was  waiting  for  me.  About  noon  I preached 
at  Taunton.  The  rain  lefiened  the  congregation 
at  Bridgewater,  a dead,  uncomfortable  place  at 
belt.  About  feven  we  fet  out  thence  for  Bade- 
ripp,  in  as  dark  a night  as  I ever  faw.  But  God 
gave  his  angels  charge  over  us,  and  we  defied  not 
our  foot  againjl  a Jlone. 

I was  furprized  to  fee  a congregation  at  five 
in  the  morning,  to  whom  I fpoke  with  much 

enlargement 


[ 39  ] 

enlargement  of  heart.  About  one  I preached 
at  Shepton-Mallet,  and  about  feven  in  the  even- 
ing at  Briftol. 

Sunday  5.  I perceived  by  the  livelinefs  of 
the  people,  that  Mr.  Gilbert’s  labour  had  not 
been  in  vain.  But  I found  feme  exercife  too. 
And  this  is  always  to  be  expended,  among  a large 
body  of  people  : it  being  certain,  that  as  all  men 
have  not  faith , fo  all  believers  have  not  wifdom. 

Sunday  12.  I vifited  the  dalles  at  Kingfwood. 
Here  only  there  is  no  increafe.  And  yet  where 
was  there  fur.li  a profpefi,  till  that  weak  man, 
John  Cenick,  confounded  the  poor  people  with 
ftrange  dodrines  P O what  mifehief  may  be 
done,  by  one  that  means  well  ! We  fee  no  end 
of  it  to  this  day. 

In  the  afternoon  I had  appointed  the  children 
to  meet  at  Briftol,  whofe  parents  were  of  the 
fociety.  Thirty  of  them  came  to  day,  and 
above  fifty  more  on  the  Sunday  and  Thurfday 
following.  About  half  of  thefe  I divided  into 
four  dalles,  two  of  boys  and  two  of  girls,  and 
appointed  proper  leaders  to  meet  them  feparate. 
I met  them  all  together  twice  a week.  And  it 
was  not  long  before  God  began  to  touch  fome 
of  their  hearts. 

On  Tuefday  and  Wednefday  I vifited  fome 
of  the  focieties  in  the  country.  On  Thurfday  I 
returned  to  Briftol,  and  in  the  afternoon  preach- 
ed a charity  fermon  in  Newgate,  for  the  ufe  of 
the  poor  prifoners. 


On 


[ 4«  ] 

On  the  three  following  days  I fpoke  feveralJy 
to  the  members  of  the  fociety.  As  many  of 
them  increafe  in  worldly  goods,  the  great  danger 
I apprehend  now,  is  their  relapfing  into  the  fpi- 
rit  of  the  world.  And  then  their  religion  is  but 
a dream. 

Wednefday  22.  Being  informed,  that  fome 
neighbouring  gentlemen  had  declared,  “ They 
would  apprehend  the  next  preacher  who  came  to 
Pensford,  I rode  over  to  give  them  the  meeting. 
But  none  appeared.  The  houfe  was  more  than 
filled  with  deeply  attentive  hearers.  It  feems, 
the  time  is  come  at  length,  for  the  word  of  God 
to  take  root  here  alfo. 

Friday  24.  I vifited  the  French  prifoners  at 
Knowde,  and  found  many  of  them  almolt  naked 
again.  In  hopes  of  provoking  others  to  jealou- 
fy,  I made  another  collection  for  them,  and  or- 
dered the  money  to  be  laid  out  in  linen  and 
waiflcoats,  which  were  given  to  thofe  that  were 
moll  in  want. 

Saturday  25.  King  George  was  gathered  to  his 
fathers.  When  will  England  have  a better 
prince? 

Many  of  us  agreed  to  obferve  Friday  the  31ft 
as  a day  of  failing  and  prayer,  for  the  blefling  of 
God  upon  our  nation,  and  in  particular  on  his 
prefent  Majeily.  We  met  at  five,  at  nine,  at 
one,  and  at  half  hour  pail  eight.  I expebted  to 
be  a little  tired,  but  was  more  lively  after  twelve 
at  night,  than  I was  at  fix  in  the  morning. 

Saturday, 


[ 4t  J 

Saturday,  November  1.  I had  the  pleafure  of 
fpending  a little  time,  with  that  venerable  man, 
Mr.  Walker  of  Truro.  I fear  his  phyficians  do 
not  underhand  his  cafe.  If  he  recovers,  it  mu  ft 
be  through  an  almighty  phyfician. 

Monday  3.  I left  Briftol,  and  took  Bath, 
Bradford,  and  Frome,  in  my  way  to  Salifbury, 
where  I fpent  a day  with  much  fatisfaQion. 
Friday  7.  I preached  about  nine  at  Andover,  to 
a few  dead  hones;  at  one  in  Whitchurch,  and 
in  the  evening  at  Bafinghoke.  The  next  day, 
Saturday  8.  I was  once  more  brought  fafe  to 
London. 

I fpent  about  a fortnight,  as  ufual,  in  examin- 
ing the  fociety,  a heavy,  but  neceffary,  labour, 

Monday  17.  I fent  the  following  letter. 

To  the  Editor  of  Lloyd's  Evening-Pof. 

Sir,  Nov.  17,  1760. 

“ In  your  lah  paper  we  had  a letter  from  a 
very  angry  gentleman  (though  he  fays,  he  had 
‘ put  himfelf  into  as  good  humour  as  poftible,’) 
who  perforates  a clergyman,  but  is,  I prefume, 
in  reality  a retainer  to  the  theatre.  Fie  is  very 
warm  again h the  people,  vulgarly  termed  Me~ 
tkodijls,  ‘ ridiculous  impohors,’  ‘ religious  buf- 
foons,’ as  he  fiiles  them  : ‘ faint  errants’  (a  pret- 
ty and  quaint  phrafej  full  of  ‘ inconfideratenefs, 
madnefs,  melancholy,  enthuhafm  teaching  a 
‘ knotty'’  and  unintelligible  fyjlem  of  religion, 
yea,  a ‘ contradictory  or  felf-contradi£ling 

nay, 


[ 4^  } 


flay,  ‘ a mere  illufion,’  a ‘ deftru£live  fcheme 
and  of  pernicious  confequence fince  4 an  hy- 
pothecs is  a very  flippery  foundation  to  hazard 
our  all  upon.’ 

Methinks  the  gentleman  has  a little  miffaken 
his  character  : he  feems  to  have  exchanged  the 
fock  for  the  bufkin.  But,  be  this  as  it  may,  ge- 
neral charges  prove  nothing:  let  us  come  to 
particulars.  Here  they  are.  4 The  bafis  of 
thodifm  is  the  grace  of  nffuranced  fexcufe  a lit- 
tle impropriety  of  expiefiion)  ‘ Regeneration  be- 
ing only  a preparative  to  it.’  Truly  this  is  fome- 
what  4 knotty  and  unintelligible.’  I will  endea- 
vour to  help  him  out.  The  fundamental  doc- 
trine of  the  people  called  Methodijls  is,  Whom- 
ever will  be  faved,  before  all  things  it  is  neoef- 
fary  that  he  hold  the  true  faith  ; the  faith  which 
woiks  by  love,  which,  by  means  of  the  love  of 
God  and  our  neighbour,  produces  both  inward 
and  outward  holinefs.  This  faith  is  an  evidence 
of  things  not  feen  : and  he  that  thus  believes,  is 
regenerate,  or  born  of  God.  And  he  has  the 
witnefs  in  himfelf : (call  it  aflurance,  or  what 
you  pleafe.)  The  fpirit  itfelf  witneffes  with  his 
Spirit,  that  he  is  a child  of  Gcd  : 4 from  what 
fcriprme’  every  one  of  thefe  propofitions 
4 is  collefted,’  any  common  concordance  will 
fhew.  4 This  is  the  true  portraiture  o f Mctko- 
difn,’  fo  called.  4 A religion  flip e dor  to  this' 
(the  love  of  God  and  man)  none  can  4 enjoy,’ 
either  in  time  or  in  eternity. 


But 


[ 43  ] 

But  the  Methodijls  do  not  hold  ‘ Good  works 
meritorious.’  No  : neither  does  ours,  or  any 
other  protefiant  church.  But  meantime  they 
hold,  it  is  their  bounden  duty,  as  they  have 
time,  to  do  good  unto  all  men  ; and  they  know 
the  day  is  coming  wherein  God  will  reward 
every  man  according  to  his  works. 

But  they  ‘ aft  with  fullennefs  and  fournefs, 
and  account  innocent  gaiety  and  chearfulnefs  a 
crime  almoft  as  heinous  as  facnlege.’  Who 
does  ? Name  the  men.  I know  them  not,  and 
therefore  doubt  thefaft:  though  it  is  very  pof- 
Able  you  account  that  kind  or  gaiety  innocent, 
which  I account  both  foolifh  and  ftnful. 

I know  none  who  denies,  that  true  religion, 
that  is  love,  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour, 
' elevates  our  fpirits,  and  renders  our  minds 
chearful  and  ferene.’  It  mull,  if  it  be  accom- 
panied, as  we  believe  it  always  is,  with  peace 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft  : and  if  it  produces 
a cotifcience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and 
toward  man. 

But  they  ‘ preach  up  religion  only  to  ac- 
compli fh  a lucrative  defign,  to Jleece  their  hear- 
ers, to  accumulate  wealth,  to  rob  and  plunder , 
which  they  efteem  meritorious.’  We  deny  the 
faft.  Who  is  able  to  prove  it  ? Let  the  affirmer 
produce  his  witneffes,  or  retraft. 

This  is  the  fum  ofyourcorrefpondent’s  charge, 
not  one  article  of  which  can  be  proved.  But 
whether  it  can  or  no,  ‘ we  have  made  them  fays 

he 


[ 44  1 

he  a theatrical  feoff,  and  the  common  jell  and 
fcorn  of  every  chorifter  in  the  ftreet.’  It  may  be 
fo  ; but  whether  you  have  done  well  herein, 
may  hill  admit  of  a queftion.  However,  .you 
cannot  but  wifh  ‘ we  had  fome  formal  court  of 
judicature  erefted,  (happy  Portugal  and  Spain  !) 
to  take  cognizance  of  fuch  matters.  Nay,  cur 
optas  quod  habts  ? Why  do  you  wifh  for  what 
you  have  already  ? The  court  is  erefted  ; the 
holy,  devout  play-houfe  is  become  the  houfe  of 
mercy  l And  does  take  cognizance  hereof,  ‘ of 
all  pretenders  to  fanfdity,  and  happily  furnifhes 
us  with  a difeerning  fpirit  to  diftingufh  betwixt 
right  and  wrong"’  But  I do  not  hand  to  their  fen- 
tence  ; I appeal  to  fenpture  and  reafon,  and  by 
thefe  alone  confent  to  be  judged.  I am,  Sir, 

Your  humble  fervant. 

John  Wesley.” 

Saturday  22,  I was  obliged  to  trouble  him 
with  another  letter,  as  follows. 

Sir, 

“ JUST  as  I had  finifhed  the  letter  publifhed 
in  vour  lafl  Friday’s  paper,  four  tracts  came  to 
my  hands  : one  wrote,  or  procured  to  be  wrote, 
by  Mrs.  Downes:  one  by  a clergyman  in  the 
county  of  Durham  ; the  third,  by  a gentleman 
of  Cambridge  ; and  the  fourth,  by  a member  (I 
fuppofe,  dignitary)  of  the  church  of  Rome. 
How  gladly  would  I leave  all  thefe  to  them- 
•felves,  and  let  them  fay  juft  what  they  pleafe  ! 

As 


[ 45  ] 

As  my  day  is  far  fpent,  and  my  tafte  for  con- 
troverfy  is  uttely  loft  and  gone.  But  this  would 
not  be  doing  juftice  to  the  world,  who  might 
take  filence  for  a proof  of  guilt.  I fhall  therefore 
fay  a word  concerning  each.  I may  perhaps, 
fome  time  fey  more  to  one  or  two  of  them. 

The  letter  which  goes  under  Mrs.  Downes’s 
name,  fcarce  deferves  any  notice  at  all,  as  there 
is  nothing  extraordinary  in  it,  but  an  extraordi- 
nary degree  of  virulence  and  fcurrility.  Two 
things  only  I remark  concerning  it  {which  I 
fuppofe  the  writer  of  it  knew  as  well  as  me)  1. 
That  my  letter  to  Mr.  Downes  was  both  wrote 
and  printed  before  Mr.  Dowries  died : 2.  That 
when  I faid,  Tibi  parviua  res  ejl  (your  ability  is 
fmall)  I had  no  view  to  his  fortune,  which  I 
knew  nothing  of ; but,  as  I there  exprefsly  fey, 
to  his  wit,  fenfe,  and  talents,  as  a writer. 

The  traft  wrote  by  the  gentleman  in  the  north 
is  far  more  bulky  than  this.  But  it  is  more  confi- 
derable  for  its  bulk,  than  for  its  matter,  beimx 
little  more  than  a dull  repetition  of  what  was 
publifhed  fome  years  ago,  in  The  enthujiafm  of 
the  methodifls  and  papijls  compared.  I do  not 
find  the  author  adds  any  thing  new  ; unlefs  we 
may  beftow  that  epithet  on  a fennon  annext  to 
his  addrefs,  which,  I prefume,  will  do  neither 
good  nor  harm.  So  I leave  the  Durham  gentle- 
man, with  Mrs.  Downes,  to  himfelf  and  his  ad- 
mirers. 

fine  author  of  the  letter  to  Mr.  Berridge  is  a 

more 


C 46  ] 

more  confderable  writer.  In  many  things  I whol* 
Iy  agree  with  him,  tho’  not  in  admiring  Dr.Tay- 
lor.  But  there  is  a bitternefs  even  in  him,  which 
I fhould  not  have  expended  in  a gentleman  and  a 
fcholar.  So  in  the  very  firft  page  I read,  ‘ The 
church,  which  moll  of  your  gracelejs  fraternity 
have  defected. ’ Were  the  fa£t  true  (which  it 
is  not)  yet  is  the  expreffion  to  be  commended  ? 
Surely  Dr.  G.  himfelf  thinks  it  is  not.  I am 
forty  too  for  the  unfairnefs  of  his  quotations. 
For  inflance  ; he  cites  me  (p.  53.)  as  fpeaking 
of  “ Faith  filed  abroad  in  mens  hearts  like  light- 
ning.” Faith  Jkea  abroad  in  mens  hearts ! I ne- 
ver ufed  fuch  an  expreiTton  in  my  life  : I do  not 
talk  after  this  rate.  Again,  he  quotes,  as  from 
me,  p.  57.  (fo  I prefume,  Mr.  W.  means  ‘ A 
behaviour  does  not  pretend  to  add  the  leaft  to 
what  Chrift  has  done.’  But  be  thefe  words 
whofe  they  may,  they  are  none  of  mine.  I 
never  fpoke,  wrote,  no,  nor  read  them  before. 
Once  more  . is  it  well  judged,  for  any  writer  to 
fhew  fuch  an  utter  contempt  of  his  opponents, 
as  you  affeft  to  do,  with  regard  to  the  whole 
body  of  people,  vulgarly  termed  Methodifls  ? 
‘ You  may  keep  up  (fay  you)  a little  bufh-fight- 
ing  in  controverfy.  You  may  fkirmiih  a while 
with  your  feeble  body  of  irregulars.  But  you 
muft  never  truft  to  your  fkill  in  reafoning.’  p. 
77.  Upon  this  I would  afk,  1.  If  thefe  are  fuch 
poor,  filly  creatures,  why  does  fo  wife  a man 
fet  his  wit  to  them  ? Shall  the  king  of  Ifrael  go 

cut 


cut  againjl  ajlea  ? 2.  If  it  fhould  happen,  that 
any  one  of  thefe  filly  bufh-fighters  fteps  out 
into  the  plain,  'engages  hand  to  hand,  and  foils 
this  champion  by  mere  dint  of  reafon,  will  not 
his  defeat  be  fo  much  the  more  fhameful  as  it  was 
more  unexpected  ? But  I fay  the  lei's  at  prefent, 
not  only  becaufe  Mr.  Berridge  is  able  to  anfwer 
for  himfelf,  but  becaufe  the  title  page  bids  me 
expeft  -a  letter,  more  immediately  addreft  to  my- 
felf. 

The  laft  tra£i,  intitled  “ A Caveat  againjl  the 
methodiftsj  is,  in  reality,  a Caveat  again!!  the 
church  of  England  : or  rather  again!!  all  the 
churches  in  Europe  who  dilTent  from  the  church 
of  Rome,  Nor  do  I apprehend  the  writer  to  be 
any  more  difgufied  at  the  Methodifls,  than  at pro- 
teftants  of  every  denomination  ; as  he  cannot 
but  judge  it  equally  unfafe,  to  join  to  any  fociety 
but  that  of  Rome.  Accordingly  all  his  argu- 
ments are  levelled  at  the  reformed  churches 
in  general  : and  conclude  juft  as  well,  if  you 
put  the  word  proteftant,  throughout  in  the  place 
of  the  word  Metbodift.  Although,  therefore,  the 
author  borrows  my  name,  to  wound  thofe  who 
fufpeCi  nothing  lefs,  yet  I am  no  more  concern- 
ed to  refute  him,  than  any  other  proteftant  in 
England  : and  ft  ill  the  lefs,  as  thofe  agruments 
are  refuted  over  and  over,  in  books  which  are 
ftill  common  among  us. 

But  is  it  poftible  any  proteftanfs,  nay  protef- 
tant clergyman,  fhould  buy  thefe  tra£!s  to  give 

away  ? 


[ 43  ] 

away  ? Is  then  the  introducing  Popery  the  only 
way  to  overthrow  Methodijhv ? If  they  know 
this,  and  chufe  Popery  as  the  fmaller  evil  of  the 
two,  they  are  confident  with  themfeives.  But  if 
they  do  not  intend  this,  I with  them  more  feri- 
oufly  toconfider  what  they  do. 

I am.  Sir,  your  humble  fervant, 

John1  Wesley." 

* Monday  24.  I vifited  as  many  as  I could  of 
the  fick.  How  much  better  is  it,  when  it  can 
be  done,  to  carry  relief  to  the  poor,  than  to  Jend, 
it?  And  that  both  for  our  own  fake  and  theirs. 
For  theirs,  as  it  is  fo  much  more  comfortable  to 
them,  and  as  we  may  then  aflifi  them  in  fpiri- 
tuals  as  well  as  temporals.  And  for  our  own,  as 
it  is  far  more  apt  to  foften  our  heart,  and  to 
make  us  naturally  carejor  each  other. 

Monday,  December  1.  I went  in  the  ma- 
chine to  Canterbury.  In  going  and  returning  I 
read  over  The  Chrijlian  Philofopher.  It  is  a verv 
extraordinary  book:  containing  among  many 
(as  fome  would  be  apt  to  term  theml  wild 
thoughts,  feveral  fine  and  ftriking  obfervations, 
not  to  be  found  in  any  other  treatife. 

Wednefday  3.  I rode  to  Dover:  who  would 
have  expecled  to  find  here  fome  of  the  bed 
fingers  in  England  ? I found  likevvife  what  was 
better  hill,  a ferious,  earned  people.  There  was  a 
remarkable  bleffing  among  them,  both  in  <he 


evening 


[ 49  3 

evening  and  the  morning:  fo  that  I did  not  re- 
gret the  having  been  wet  to  the  fkin,  in  my  way 
to  them. 

Friday  12.  Having  as  far  as  Hyde-Park-Corner 
to  go,  I took  a coach  for  part  of  the  way,  order- 
ing the  man  to  flop  any  where,  at  the  end  of 
Piccadilly,  next  the  Hay-market.  He  flopped 
exaflly  at  the  door  of  one  of  our  friends,  whofe 
mother,  above  ninety  years  old,  had  long  defiled 
to  fee  me,  though  I knew  it  not.  She  was  ex- 
ceedingly comforted,  and  could  not  tell  how  to 
praife  God  enough,  for  giving  her  the  defire  of 
her  foul. 

We  obferved  Friday  the  19th  as  a day  of  fall- 
ing and  prayer,  for  our  king  and  country  and  the 
fuccefs  of  the  gofpel.  And  part  of  the  an- 
fwer  immediately  followed,  in  the  remarkable 
increafe  ofbelievers,  and  in  the  flrengthening  of 
thofe  who  had  before  attained  that  precious 
faith,  unto  all  patience  and  long-fuffering  with 
joyfulne/s. 

Saturday  20.  In  the  evening  I haflened  back 
from  Snow’s- fields,  to  meet  the  penitents,  (a  con- 
gregation which  I wifh  always  to  meet  myfelf} 
and  walked  thither  again  at  five  in  the  morning; 
Blefled  be  God,  I have  no  reafon  or  pretence,  to 
fpare  myfelf  yet.  I preached  a charity  fermon  in 
Weft-ftreet  chappel,  both  morning  and  after- 
noon. But  many  were  obi  ged  to  go  away,  find- 
ing it  impofiible  to  get  in.  Is  it  novelty  ftiil 
Vol.  XXXI.  C which 


[ <5°  ] 

which  draws  thefe  from  all  parts  ? No,  but  the 
mighty  power  of  God. 

To-day  I fent  the  following  letter. 

To  the  Editor  of  Lloyd’s  Evening  Pojl . 

To  Mr.  T.  H.  alias  E.  L.  &c.  &c. 

“ WHAT,  my  good  friend  again  ? Only  a 
little  difguifed  with  a new  name,  and  a few 
fcraps  of  Latin  ? I hoped,  indeed,  you  had  been 
pretty  well  fatisfied  before  ; but  fince  you  defire 
to  hear  a little  farther  from  me,  I will  add  a few 
words,  and  endeavour  to  fet  our  little  contro- 
verfy  in  a dill  clearer  light. 

Lad  month  you  publicly  attacked  the  people 
call'd  Methodifis , without  cither  fear  or  wit. 
Yotn  charged  them  with  ‘ madnefs,  enthuCafm, 
felf-contradi£lion,  impodure,’  and  what  not  ? I 
confidered  each  charge,  and,  I conceive,  refuted 
it,  to  the  fatisfaftion  of  all  indifferent  perfons. 
You  renewed  the  attack,  not  by  proving  any 
thing,  but  affirming  the  fame  thing  over  and 
over.  I replied,  and  without  taking  notice  of 
the  dull,  low  feurrility,  either  of  the  fird  or  fe- 
cond  letter,  confined  myfelf  to  the  merits  of 
the  caufe,  and  cleared  away  the  dirt  you  had 
thrown. 

You  now  heap  together  ten  paragraphs  more, 
mod  of  which  tequire  very  little  anfwer.  In  the 
firlt,  you  fay,  ‘ your  foolifviejs  is  become  the 
wonder  and  admiration  of  the  public.’  In  the 

fecond, 


[ 5*  ] 

Second,  ‘ the  public  blufhes  for  you,  till  you  give  a 
better  folution  to  the  articles  demanded  of  you.’ 
In  the  third,  you  cite  my  words,  I Hill  maintain 
‘ the  bible  with  the  liturgy,  and  homilies  of  our 
church,  and  do. not  efpoufe  any  other  principles, 
but  what  are  confonant  to  the  book  of  common- 
prayer.’  You  keenly  anfwer,  ‘ Granted,  Mr. 
Methbdijl — But  whether  or  no  you  would  not 
efpoufe  other  principles,  ifyoudurft,  is  evident 
from  fome  innovations  you  have  already  intro- 
duced, which  I ihall  attempt  to  prove,  in  the  fub- 
fequent  part  of  my  anfwer,’  Indeed  you  won’t. 
You  neither  prove , nor  attempt  to  prove,  that  I 
* would  efpoufe  other  principles,  if  I durft.5 
However,  you  give  me  a deadly  thrufi,  ‘ you  fal- 
fify  the  fir  ft  article  of  th  e Aiken afi an  creed.’  But 
how  fo  ? .Why,  I faid,  ‘ The  fundamental  doc- 
trine of  the  people  called  Methodijls  is,  whomever 
will  be  faved,  before  all  things  it  is  neceffary 
that  he  hold  the  true  faith.’  Sir,  fhall  I tell 
you  a fecret  ? It  was  for  the  readers  of  your  clafs 
that  I changed  the  hard  word  Catholic,  into  an 
eafier. 

In  the  fourth  paragraph  you  fay,  ‘ Did  you  ne- 
ver ufe  that  phrafe.  The  Grace  of  -Aflurance 
Never,  that  I remember,  either  in  preaching  or 
writing.  Both  your  ears  and  eyes  have  been 
very  unhappy , if  they  informed  you  I did  : and 
how  many  foever  look  either  forrowful  or  joyful, 
that  will  not  prove  the  contrary.  ‘ But  produce 
your  texts.’  What,  for  a phrafe  I never  ufe?  I 
C 2 pray 


[ 52  ] 

pray  you,  have  me  excufed.  But  (as  I faid  be- 
fore) from  what  fcripture  every  one  of  my  propo- 
fitions  is  collefled,  any  common  concordance 
will  fhew.’  To  fave  you  trouble,  I will  for  once 
point  out  thofe  fcriptures.  ‘ Whofoever  will  be 
laved  mult  believe,’  Markxvi.  16.  A£ts  xvi.  31. 
This  ‘ Faith  works  by  love.’  Gal.  v.  6.  It  is 
‘ An  evidence  of  things  not  feen.’  Heb.  xi.  1. 
‘ He  that  believes,  is  born  of  God.  1 John 
v.  1.  ‘ He  has  the  witnefs  in  himfelf.’  ver. 

10.  ‘ The  Spirit  itfelf  witnefies  with  his 

fpirit,  that  he  is  a child  of  God.’  Romans 
viii.  1 q. 

In  the  fifth  you  fay,  ‘ you  embrace  any  fhift 
totwift  words  to  your  own  meaning.’  This  is  fay- 
ing  juft  nothing.  Any  one  may  fay  this  of  any 
one.  To  prove  it,  is  another  point.  In  the  fixth 
you  fay,  ‘ no  proteftant  divine  ever  taught  vour 
dofhine  of  afTurance.’  I hope  you  know  no  bet- 
ter ; but  ’tis  ftrange  you  (hould  not.  Did  yoti 
never  fee  Bilhop  Hall’s  works  ? Was  not  he  a 
proteftant  divine  ? Was  not  Mr.  Perkins  ? Bol- 
ton? Dr.  Sibbs  ? Dr  Preflon  ? Archbifhop 
Leighton  ? Enquire  a little  farther;  and  don’t 
run  thus  hand  over  head,  affertine  you  know 
not  what.  By  ajfurance  (if  we  inuf  ufe  the 
expreffion)  I mean  * a confidence  which  a man 
hath  in  God,  that  by  the  merits  of  Chrift  his 
fins  are  forgiven,  and  he  reconciled  to  the 
favour  of  God.’  Stop  ! Do  not  run  your  head 

into 


[ 53  ] 

into  a noofe  again.  Thefe  are  the  words  of  the 
homily. 

In  the  feventh,  vou  grant,  ‘ that  works  are  not 
?ncritorious,  nnlefs  accompanied  with  faith.’  No, 
nor  hen  neither.  But  pray  don’t  talk  of  this  any 
more,  till  you  know  the  difference  between  me- 
rit 01  'v.s  and  ■/ ezvardable ; otherwife  your  igno- 
rance will  canfe  you  to  blunder  on,  without 
fhame,  and  without  end. 

In  your  eighth,  y ou  throw  out  a hard  word, 
which  fomeboay  has  helped  you  to,  Thaumaturg 
— What  is  it,  about  lay -preachers.  When  yrou 
have  anfwered  the  arguments  in  the  Farther  Ap- 
peal to  Men  of  Rea/on  and  Religion,  I will  fay 
fomething  more  upon  that  head. 

In  the  ninth  you  fay  fomething  no  way  mate- 
rial, about  the  houfes  at  Briftol,  Kingfwood,  and 
Newcaftle  : and,  in  the  laft,  you  give  me  a fair 
challenge  to  a ‘ perfonal  difpute.’  Not  fo  : you 
have  fallen  upon  me  in  public  ; and  to  the  public 
I appeal.  Let  all  men,  not  any  fingle  umpire, 
judge,  whether  I have  not  refuted  your  charge, 
and  cleared  the  people  called  Methodijis  from 
the  foul  afperfions  which,  without  why  or 
wherefore,  you  had  thrown  upon  them.  Let 
all  my  countrymen  judge,  which  of  us  have 
fpoken  the  words  of  truth  and  fobernefs  ? 
Which  has  reafon  on  his  fide  ? And  which  has 
treated  the  other  with  a temper  fuitable  to  the 
gofpel  P 

If  the  general  voice  of  mankind  gives  it  againfl: 

C 3 you, 


[ 54  ] 

you,  I hope  you  will  be  henceforth  lefs  flip- 
pant with  your  pen.  I aiTure  you,  as  little  as 
you  think  of  it,  the  Melkodijh  are  notfuch  fools 
as  you  fuppofe.  But  their  defire  is  to  live 
peaceably  with  all  men  : and  none  defires  this 
more  than 

John  Wesley.” 

About  the  clofe  of  this  year,  I received  a re- 
markable  account  from  Ireland  ; “ When  Mifs 

E was  about  fifteen,  fire  frequently  heard 

the  preaching,  of  the  Methodifls , fo  called  ; and 
though  it  made  no  deep  impreilion,  yet  fbe  re- 
tained a love  for  them  ever  after.  About  nine- 
teen fhe  was  feized  with  a lingering  il'nefs.  hire 
then  began  to  wreflle  With  God  inpra  . er,  that 
his  love  might  be  fired  abroad  in  her  heart.  Then, 
faid  fhe,  how  freely  could  I give  up  all  that  is 
dear  to  me  in  this  world  ? And  from  t!  is  very 
time3  fhe  did  not  expeft,  nor  indeed  defire  to 
recover  ; but  only  to  be  cleanfed  horn  fin,  and 
to  go  to  Chrifl. 

“ Some  who  vifited  her,  faid,  “ O Mifs,  you 
need  not  fear  : your  innocence  will  bring  you  to 
heaven.”  She  earneflly  rep’ied,  “ Uniefs  the 
merits  of  Chrifl  plead  for  me,  and  his  nature  he 
imparted  to  me,  I can  never  enter  there.”  And 
fhe  was  incefiantly  breaking  out  into  thefe  and 
the  like ' exprefiions,  “ O that  I knew  my  fins 
were  forgiven  ! O that  I was  born  again  ! My 

one 


C 55  ] 

one  wifh  is,  To  know  God,  and  be  with  him' 
eternally." 

She  frequently  fung  or  repeated  that  verfe  : 

O that  he  would  himfelf  impart, 

And  fix  his  Eden  in  my  heart, 

The  fenfe  of  fin  forgiven  ! 

How  would  I then  throw  off  my  load 
And  walk  delightfully  with  God, 

And  follow  Chrift  to  heaven  ! 

“ She  had  now  an  earnefi  defire  to  fee  fome 
of  the  Methodijis , and  fpoke  to  feveral,  to  alk 
fome  of  thofe  in  Tullamore  to  vifit  her.  At 
length  her  importunity  prevailed,  and  James 
Kelly  was  fent  for.  On  his  coming  in,  fhe  faid, 
I am  exceeding  glad  to  fee  you.  I have  had  a 
longing  defire  of  it  this  month  pad.  1 believe 
the  power  of  God  is  with  you.  If  I had  health 
and  ftrength,  there  fhould  not  be  a fermon 
preached  or  a prayer  put  up  in  your  preaching- 
houfe,  but  I would  be  there. 

“ I told  her,  I hope  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will 
be  your  prefent  and  eternal  comforter.  She  an- 
fwered,  “ I can  find  no  comfort  in  any  thing 
but  in  God  alone.”  While  fhe  fpoke,  her  foul 
was  melted  down.  The  love  of  God  was  fhed 
abroad  in  her  heart,  the  tears  ran  down  her  cheeks, 
and  fhe  began  to  rejoice  in  God  exceedingly. 
Her  mother  feeing  this,  was  fully  convinced,  that 
C 4 there 


C 56  ] 

there  was  more  in  religion  than  fhe  had  herfelF 
experienced  ; and  began  to  pray,  with  many 
tears,  that  God  would  fliew  her  his  falvation. 
This  fo  affefted  me,  that  I could  not  refrain  from 
tears  myfelf:  fo  we  all  wept  and  prayed,  and 
fang  praife  together. 

“ On  my  going  to  her  a fecond  time,  I found 
her  truly  alive  to  God.  “ O,  fhe  faid,  how  I 
have  longed  to  fee  you,  that  we  may  be  happy 
in  God  together.  Come  let  us  fing  an  hymn.” 
I ^ave  out 

“ Of  him  that  did  falvation  bring 
I could  for  ever  think  and  fing:” 

She  fung  all  the  time  with  exceeding  joy.  Af- 
terwards fhe  faid,  “ This  is  a weary  world ; but 
I have  almoft  done  with  it.  O how  I long  to 
be  gone  ! Some  people  tell  me  I may  recover, 
but  I do  not  thank  them : I do  not  count 
them  my  friends.”  On  my  faying  occafionally, 
“ There  is  no  fatisfaflion  for  fin,  but  that 
which  Chrifl  has  made  by  his  precious  blood 
fhe  anfwered,  “ That  is  all  the  fatisfaftion 
I want : and  I believe,  he  both  lived  and  died 
for  me." 

* “ After  this,  fhe  gave  a flrift  charge,  that 
none  fhould  be  admitted  to  fee  her  but  fuch  as 
could  fpeak  for  God : faying,  “ I do  not  love 
to  have  a word  fpoken,  which  is  not  to  edifica- 
tion. 


C 57  ] 

tion.  O how  unfuitable  to  me,  are  all  things 
which  do  not  tend  to  the  glory  of  my  Godf’ 
On  her  fpitting  a large  quantity  of  blood,  one 
faid,  You  are  in  great  pain.  She  anfwered,  “ I 
think  little  of  it.  My  blefled  Redeemer  fuffered 
greater  pain  for  me.” 

“ When  I Rood  up  to  go  away,  fire  faid,  “ I 
now  take  my  leave  of  you.  Perhaps  we  may 
not  meet  again  in  this  world:  but  I truR,  we 
fhall  meet  in  heaven.  I am  going  to  God. 
O may  it  be  foon  ! I now  feel  an  heaven  in  my 
foul.” 

“ The  laR  time  I came  was  on  Sunday,  Dec. 
14.  Hearing  file  was  extremely  ill,  and  wanted 
refl,  we  did  not  go  up,  but  after  a while,  began 
Ringing  below.  She  immediately  heard,  fat  up  in 
bed,  and  infifled  on  our  being  brought  into 
the  room,  and  Ringing  there.  Many  times 
file  repeated  thefe  words,  “ Come,  Lord 
Jefus,  come  quickly !”  And  this  (he  conti- 
nued to  do,  till  on  Wednefday  the  17,  fhe  re- 
figned  her  foul  into  the  hands  of  her  dear  Re- 
deemer.” 

January  2,  1761.  I wrote  the  following 
letter. 

“ To  the  Editor  of  the  London  Chronicle . 

“ Sir, 

“ OF  all  the  feats  of  woe  on  this  Ride  hell, 
few,  I fuppofe,  exceed  or  even  equal  Newgate. 

C5  If 


[ 58  ] 


If  any  region  of  horror  could  exceed  it  a few 
years  ago,  Newgate  in  Briftol  did  : fo  great  was 
the  filch,  the  flench,  the  mifery,  and  wicked- 
nefs  which  fhocked  all  who  had  a fpark  of  hu- 
manity left.  How  was  I furprized  then,  when 
I was  there  a few  weeks  ago  5 1.  Every  part 
of  it,  above  flairs  and  below,  even  the  pit , 
wherein  the  felons  are  confined  at  night,  is  as 
clean  and  fweet  as  a gentleman's  houfe  : it 
being  now  a rule,  that  every  priloner  vvafh  and 
clean  his  apartment  throughly  twice  a week. 
2.  Here  is  no  fighting  or  brawling.  If  any 
thinks  himfelf  ill  ufed,  the  caufe  is  immediately 
referred  to  the  keeper,  who  hears  the  contend- 
ing parties  face  to  face,  and  decides  the  affair 
at  once.  3.  The  ufual  grounds  of  quarrelling 
are  removed.  For  it  is  very  rarely  that  anv 
one  cheats  or  wrongs  another,  as  being  fare, 
if  any  thing  of  this  kind  is  difcovered,  to  be 
committed  to  a clofer  confinement,  q.  Here  is 
no  drunkennefs  fuffered,  however  advantageous 
it  might  be  to  the  keeper,  as  well  as  the  tapfier  : 
t\.  Nor  any  whoredom:  the  women  prifoners 
being  narrowly  obferved,  and  kept  feparate 
from  the  men  ; nor  is  any  woman  of  the  town 
nozu  admitted,  no,  not  at  any  price.  6.  All 
poffible  care  is  taken  to  prevent  ialenefs  : thofe 
who  are  willing  to  work  at  their  callings,  are 
provided  with  tools  and  materials,  partly  by 
the  keeper,  who  gives  them  credit  at  a very 

moderate 


[ 59  ] 


moderate  profit,  partly  by  the  alms  occafion- 
ally  given,  which  are  divided  with  the  utmofl 
prudence  and  impartiality.  Accordingly  at  this 
time,  among  others,  a fhoe-maker,  a taylor,  a 
brafier,  and  a coach-maker  are  working  at  their 
feveral  trades.  7.  Only  on  the  Lord’s  day 
they  neither  work  nor  play,  but  drefs  them- 
felves  as  clean  as  they  can,  to  attend  the  public 
fervice  in  the  chappel,  at  which  every  perfon 
under  the  roof  is  prefent.  None  is  excufed 
unlefs  fick : in  which  cafe  he  is  provided 
gratis,  both  with  advice  and  medicines.  8. 
And  in  order  to  afiilf  them  in  things  of  the 
greateff  concern  (befides  a fermon  every  Sunday 
and  Thurfday)  they  have  a large  bible  chained 
on  one  fide  of  the  chappel,  which  any  of  the 
prifoners  may  read.  By  the  bleffing  of  God 
on  thefe  regulations,  the  prifon  now  has  a 
new  face.  Nothing  offends  either  the  eye  or 
ear,  and  the  whole  has  the  appearance  of  a 
quiet,  ferious  family.  And  does  not  the 
keeper  of  Newgate  deferve  to  be  remembered, 
full  as  well  as  the  man  of  Rofs  ? May  the 
Lord  remember  him  in  that  day  ! Mean  time, 
will  no  one  follow  his  example  ? 

I am,  Sir, 

Your  humble  fervant, 

John  Wesley.” 

Monday,  January  5.  This  week  I wrote 
C 6 to 

..i  ...  'i 


[ 6o  ] 

to  the  author  of  the  Weftminfter  Journal 
as  follows. 

“Sir, 

“ I HOPE  you  are  a perfon  of  impartiality. 
If  fo,  you  will  not  infert  what  is  urged  on  one 
fide  of  a queftion,  but  likewife  what  is  offered  on 
the  other. 

Your  correfpondent  is,  doubtlefs,  a man  of 
fenfe;  and  he  feems  to  write  in  a good  humour. 
But  he  is  extremely  little  acquainted  with  the 
perfons,  of  whom  he  undertakes  to  give  an  ac- 
count. 

There  is  ‘ gone  abroad,  fays  he,  an  ungo- 
verned fpirit  of  enthufiafm,  propagated  by  knaves, 
and  embraced  by  fools.’  Suffer  me  now  to  ad- 
drefs  the  gentleman  himfelf.  Sir,  you  may 
call  me  both  a knave  and  a fool.  But  prove 
me  either  one  or  the  other,  if  you  can.  ‘ Why, 
you  are  an  enthufiaft.’  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  term  ? A believer  in  Jefus  Chrift  ? An 
afferter  of  his  equality  with  the  Father,  and 
of  the  entire  Chrillian  revelation  ? Do  you 
mean  one  who  maintains  the  antiquated  doc- 
trines of  the  new  birth,  and  juftification  by 
faith  ? Then  I am  an  enthufiaft.  But  if  you 
mean  any  thing  elfe,  either  prove  or  retraft:  the 
charge. 

The  enthufiafm  which  has  lately  gone  abroad, 
is  faith  which  worketh  by  love.  Does  this  ‘ en- 
danger government  itfelf?’  Juft  the  reverfe. 

Fearing 


[ 6i  ] 

Fearing  God,  it  honours  the  king.  It  teaches 
all  men  to  be  fubjeft  to  the  higher  powers,  not 
for  wrath  but  for  confcience  fake. 

But  ‘ no  power  in  England  ought  to  be  in- 
dependent of  the  fupreme  power.’  Moft  true. 
Yet  * the  Romanifts  own  the  authority  of  a 
pope,  independent  of  civil  government.’  They 
do,  and  thereby  fhew  their  ignorance  of  the 
Englifh  conftitution.  ‘ In  Gieat-Britain  we 
have  many  popes,  for  fo  I muft  call  all  who 
have  the  fouls  and  bodies  of  their  followers  de- 
voted to  them'  Call  them  fo  and  welcome. 
But  this  does  not  touch  me;  nor  Mr.  White- 
field,  Jones,  or  Romaine  : nor  any  whom  I am 
acquainted  with  : none  of  us  have  our  followers 
thus  devoted  to  us.  Thofe  who  follow  the  ad- 
vice we  conlfantly  give  are  devoted  co  God,  not 
man.  But  ‘ the  Methodijl  proclaims  he  can 
bring  into  the  field  2,5,000  men.’  What  Metho- 
dijl ? Where  and  when  ? Prove  this  faft,  and  I 
will  allow  you,  I am  a Turk. 

“ But  it  is  faid,  they  are  all  good  fubjedfs. 
Perhaps  they  are,  becaufe  under  a protefiant 
government  they  have  all  the  indulgence  they 
can  wifh  for.’  And  do  you  ferioufly  wifh  for  a 
popifh  government,  to  abridge  them  of  that  in- 
dulgence ? ‘ But  has  not  a bad  ufe  been  made 
of  this  ? Has  not  the,  decency  of  religion  been 
perverted  ?’  Not  in  the  leaft ; the  decency  of 
religion  is  never  fo  well  advanced,  as  by  ad- 
vancing inward  and  outward  religion  together. 

2.  ‘ Have 


[ 62.  J 

2.  ‘ Have  not  the  minds  of  the  vulgar  been 
darkened  to  a total  negleCt  of  their  civil  and  fo- 
cial  duties  ?’  Juft  the  contrary  : thoufands  in 
London,  as  well  as  elfewhere,  have  been  en- 
lightened to  underhand,  and  prevailed  on  to 
praftife  thofe  duties,  as1  they  never  did  before. 

3.  ‘ Has  not  the  peace  of  many  families  been 
ruined?’  The  loft  peace  of  many  families  has 
been  reftored.  In  others,  a furious  oppofition 
to  true  religion,  has  occaftoned  divifion,  as  our 
Lord  foretold  it  would.  4.  ‘ Have  not  the  cir- 
cumftances  of  many  induftrious  tradefmen  been 
hurt  ?’  I believe  not.  I know  no  inftance. 
But  I know  an  hundred  tradefmen  in  London, 
who  began  to  be  induftrious,  fince  thev  began 
to  fear  God  : and  their  circumftances,  low 
enough  till  then,  are  now  eafy  and  affluent. 

I am  aimoft  afhamed  to  fpend  time  upon 
thefe  thread-bare  objections,  which  have  been 
anfwered  over  and  over.  But  if  they  are  ad- 
vanced again,  they  muft  be  anfwered  again,  left 
filence  fhould  pafs  for  guilt. 

‘ But  how  can  the  government  difiinguifh  be- 
tween tendernefs  of  confcience,  and  fchemes  of 
intereft  ?’  Nothing  more  eafy.  ‘ They  may 
withdraw  the  licences  of  fuch.’ — Sir,  you  have 
forgot  the  queftion.  Before  they  withdraw 
them,  they  are  to  diftinguifh,  whether  they  are 
fuch  or  no  ? And  how  are  they  to  do  this  ? ‘ O, 

’tis 


them  as  wife  as 


[ % 3 

’ti-s  very  eafy.’  So  you  leave 
they  were  before. 

* But  ‘ the  Methodijl,  who  pretends  to  be  o!  the 
church  of  England  in  forms  ofworfhip,  and  dif- 
fers from  her  in  point  of  doch  ine,  is  not,  let  his 
pretences  be  what  they  will,  a member  of  that 
church.’  Alas,  fir,  your  friends  will  not  thank 
you  for  this.  You  have  broke  their  heads  fadly. 
Is  no  man  of  the  church,  let  him  pretend  what 
he  will,  who  differs  from  her  in  point  of  doc- 
trine ? Au  ! abftcro  ; Cave  dixeris  ! I know  not 
but  you  may  humble  upon  Jcandalum  Magna - 
turn.  But  flay  : you  will  bring  them  off  quick- 
ly. ‘ A truly  good  man  may  fcruple  figning 
and  fwearing  to  articles,  that  his  mind  and  rea- 
fon  cannot  approve  of.’  But  is  he  a truly  good 
man  who  does  not  fcruple  figning  and  fwearing 
to  articles  which  he  cannot  approve  of?  How- 
ever, this  doth  not  affedl  us : for  we  do  not  dif- 
fer from  our  church  in  point  of  dodfrine.  But 
all  do,  who  deny  juftification  by  faith.  There- 
fore, according  to  you,  they  are  no  members 
of  the  church  of  England, 

* Methodift  preachers,  you  allow,  praftife, 
fign,  and  fwear  whatever  is  required  by  law 
a very  large  conceffiori : ‘ But  the.referves  they 
have  are  incommunicable  and  unintelligible.’ 
Favour  us,  fir,  with  a little  proof  of  this  : till 
then  I muff  plead  not  guilty.  In  whatever  I 
fign  or  fwear  to,  I have  no  referve  at  all.  And 
I have  again  apd  again  communicated  my 

thoughts 


[ 64  ] 

thoughts  on  mod  heads  ; to  all  mankind  : I be- 
lieve  intelligibly:  particularly  in  th z Appeals  to 
men  of  reafon  and  religion. 

But  ‘ if  Methoaifm,  as  its  profeffors  pretend, 
be  a new  difcovery  in  religion’ — This  is  a griev- 
ous miftake  ; we  pretend  no  fuch  thing.  We 
aver,  it  is  the  one,  old  religion  ; as  old  as  the  re- 
formation, as  old  as  chriftianity,  as  old  as 
Mofes,  as  old  as  Adam. 

‘ They  ought  to  difcover  the  whole  ingredients 
of  which  their  nodrum  is  compofed,  and  have  it 
enrolled  in  the  public  regifter,  to  be  peiufed  by 
all  the  world.’  It  is  done.  The  whole  ingredients 
of  Methodifm,  fo  called,  have  been  difcovered 
in  print  over  and  over.  And  they  are  enrolled 
in  a public  regifter,  the  bible;  from  which  we  ex- 
trafted  them  at  firft.  ‘ Elfe  they  ought  not  to  be 
tolerated.’  We  allow  it  and  defire  toleration  on 
no  other  terms,  ‘ Nor  fhould  they  be  buffered  to 
add  or  alter  one  grain  different  from  what  is  fo 
regiftered.’  Mod  certainly.  We  ought  neither 
to  add  or  diminifh,  nor  alter  whatever  is  written 
in  that  book. 

I wifh,  fir,  before  you  write  concerning  the 
Methodifts  again,  you  would  candidlv  readfome 
of  their  writings  : common  report  is  not  a 
fure  rule  of  judging,  I fhould  be  unw'illing  to 
judge  of  you  thereby. 

To  fum  up  the  matter.  The  whole  ingredients 
of  our  religion  are,  love,  joy,  peace,  long-fuffer- 
ing,  gentlenefs,  goodnefs,  fidelity,  meeknefs,  tem- 

pearancei 


[ 65  ] 


perance.  Againft  thefe,  I think,  there  is  no  law  ; 
and  therefore  I ftill  apprehend  they  may  be  to- 
lerated, at  leaft  in  a Chriftian  country. 

I am,  fir, 

Your  fmcere  well-wifher, 

Jo  hn  Wesley. 

Friday  9.  I rode  to  Sundon,  and  preached  in 
the  evening:  and  the  next  evening  at  Bedford  ; 
Sunday  1 1.  I read  prayers  and  preached  at  Ever- 
ton,  both  morning  and  afternoon.  Monday  12,  I 
rode  to  Colchefter,  and  after  fpending  two  or 
three  comfortable  days,  on  Friday  16,  went  on 
to  Bury.  I would  gladly  have  flayed  a day  or 
two  here,  had  it  been  only  on  account  of  the 
feverity  of  the  weather  : but  I had  work  to  do 
elfewhere.  So  I took  horfe,  foon  after  preaching 
in  the  morning,  Saturday  17,  tho’  as  bitter  an 
one  as  m oft  I have  known.  I never  before  felt 
fo  piercing  a wind,  as  that  which  met  us  in  rid- 
ing out  of  the  gate  at  day  break.  To  think  of 
looking  up  was  a vain  thing  : I knew  not  whe- 
ther I fhould  not  lofe  one  of  my  eyes.  The  wind 
affe£led  it  as  if  I had  received  a fevereblow:  fo 
that  I had  no  ufe  of  it  for  a time . To  mend  the 
matter,  having  a very  imperfe£l  dire&ion,  we 
foon  got  out  of  our  way.  However  we  hobbl- 
ed on,  through  miferable  roads,  till  about  three 
in  the  afternoon  we  got  to  Norwich. 

Sunday  18.  1 met  the  fociety  in  the  morning, 
and  many  of  them  went  with  me  to  the  cathe- 
dral. 


[ 66  ] 

dral.  At  two  we  had  the  largeft  congregation  I 
ever  faw  at  that  hour.  At  five  the  houfe  was 
well  filled  : and  juft  as  long  as  I was  fpeaking,  all 
were  filent.  But  when  I ceafed,  the  floods  lift- 
ed up  their  voice  ; one  would  have  thought  Bed- 
lam was  broke  lcofe.  And  thus  it  always  is  : 
the  cuftorn  began  in  the  reign  of  king  Log,  and 
continued  ever  fince.  T he  next  evening,  the 
fame  hubbub  began  again,  not  among  the  mob, 
. but  the  ordinary  hearers.  I defired  them  to 
flop,  and  reafoned  the  cafe  with  them.  The  ef- 
fe£l  was  far  greater  than  one  could  expe£l. 
The  whole  congregation  went  as  quietly  and  fi- 
lently  away,  as  they  ufe  to  do  at  the  Foundery 
in  London. 

* Tuefday  20.  I enquired  concerning  Yar- 
mouth, a large  and  populous  town,  and  as  emi- 
nent both  for  wickednefs  and  ignorance,  as  even 
any  fea  port  in  England.  Some  had  endea- 
voured to  call  them  to  repentance  ; but  it  was  at 
the  hazard  of  their  lives.  What  could  be  done 
more  ? Why,  laft  fummer  God  fent  thither  the 
regiment,  in  which  Howell  Harris  was  an  officer. 
He  preached  every  night,  none  daring  to  oppofe 
him ; and  hereby  a good  feed  was  fown.  Many 
were  ftirred  up  to  feek  God.  And  fome  of  them 
now  earneftly  invited  me  to  come  over.  I went 
this  afternoon  and  preached  in  the  evening. 
The  houfe  was  prefentlv  more  than  filled.  And 
inftead  of  the  tumult  which  was  expefted,  all 
were  as  quiet  as  at  London,  Indeed  the  word 

of 


[ 6;  ] 

©f  God  was  quick  and  powerful  among  them,  as 
it  was  again  at  fix  in  the  morning.  At  eleven  I 
preached  my  farewell  fermon.  I faw  none  that 
was  not  deeply  affe&ed.  O fair  bloffoms ! But 
how  many  of  thefe  will  bring  forth  fruit  unto 
perfection  ? 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  back  to  Norwich,  and 
took  an  account  of  the  fociety  there.  I found  the 
perfons  who  profeffed  to  meet  in  clafs,  were  a- 
bout  three  hundred  and  thirty.  But  many  of 
them  were  as  bullocks  unaccuftomed  to  the 
yoke  : where  or  what  will  they  be  a year  hence? 

Thurf.  22.  We  had  our  firft  watch-night  at 
the  tabernacle : at  which  I could  not  but  obferve, 
though  I preached  the  law  from  the  beginning 
of  my  fermon  to  the  end,  yet  many  were  ex- 
ceedingly comforted : fo  plain  it  is,  that  God 
can  fend  either  terror  or  comfort  to  the  heart, 
by  whatever  means  it  pleafeth  him. 

Sunday  the  25th  was  a day  of  folemn  rejoic- 
ing. Both  at  eight,  at  eleven,  at  two  and  at  five, 
God  was  eminently  prefent  in  the  congregation, 
filling  their  hearts  with  love  and  their  mouths 
with  praife. 

In  fome  of  the  following  days  I vifited  the 
country  focieties.  Friday  30.  After  preaching 
at  the  Foundery  in  the  evening,  I met  the  bands 
as  ufual.  While  a poor  woman  was  fpeaking  a 
few  artlefs  words  out  of  the  fulnefs  of  her  heart, 
a fire  kindled  and  ran  as  frame  among  the  Rub- 
ble, through  the  hearts  of  almofi:  all  that  heard  : 

fo 


[ 68  1 

fo  when  God  ispleafed  to  work,  it  matters  not 
how  weak,  or  how  mean  the  inftrument  ! 

Saturday  21.  I fpent  an  hour  with  one  who 
was  as  hot  as  any  of  the  lambs  at  the  tabernacle. 
But  fhe  is  now  a calm,  reafonable  woman.  In- 
deed God  has  now  bieathed  a fpirit  oflove  and 
peace,  into  all  that  remain  united  together. 
Thofe  who  are  otherwife  minded,  have  left  us. 

Sunday,  February  1.  Many  were  comforted 
and  {Lengthened  both  at  the  Lord’s  fupper,  and 
at  the  evening  fervice.  I think  all  jealoufies 
and  mifundertlandings  are  now  vanifhed,  and 
the  whole  fociety  is  well  knit  together.  How 
long  will  they  condnue  fo,  confidering  the  un* 
paraded  ficklenefs  of  the  people  in  thefe  parts  ? 
That  God  knows.  However  he  does  work  now, 
and  we  rejoice  therein. 

Monday  2.  I left  them  with  a chearful  heart, 
and  rode  on  to  Lakenheath.  The  congregation 
was  large,  but  to  this  day  there  was  no  fociety. 
So  after  preaching,  I explained  the  nature  of  a 
fociety,  and  examined  thofe  who  were  willing 
to  join  together.  Near  half  of  them  had  known 
the  love  of  God,  and  feemed  alive  to  him. 

* Tuefdav  3.  About  noon  I preached  at  Har- 
fton,  five  miles  beyond  Cambridge.  Here  Mr. 
Berridge’s  labour  has  not  been  in  vain.  Several 
have  found  peace  with  God.  And  a more  artlefs, 
loving  people  I have  feldom  feem.  They  ■were 
gathered  from  all  parts.  It  pleafed  God  to  give 
a njanifeftation  of  his  love  to  one  woman  in  the 

midft 


L % ] 

Tnidft  of  the  fermon.  She  praifed  God  aloud, 
and  inflamed  many  hearts  with  love  and  thanlc- 
fulnefs. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Melbourn,  ano- 
ther fmall  town,  about  four  miles  from  Harfton. 
Many  from  "Harfton  walked  thither,  and  from 
the  neighbouring  villages.  And  furely  God  was 
in  the  midft  of  them,  juft  3S  in  our  Briftol  con- 
gregations at  the  beginning. 

Hence  we  rode  on  Alh  wednefday,  February 
4,  to  Mr.  Hicks,  who  {hewed  me  the  way  to 
his  church,  at  Wreftlingworth,  where  I exhort- 
ed a large  and  ferious  congregation,  from  the 
fcripture  appointed  for  the  epiftles,  to  rend  their 
hearts , and  not  their  garments,  and  turn  unto  the 
Lord  their  God, 

In  the  evening  Mr.  Berridge  read  prayers, 
and  I preached  at  Everton.  Few  of  them  are  now 
afledfled  as  at  fir  ft,  the  greater  part  having  found 
peace  with  God.  But  there  is  a gradual  in- 
creafmg  of  the  wmrk  in  the  fouls  of  many  be- 
lievers. 

Thurfday  5.  I called  at  Barford  half  way  to 
Bedford,  and  was  agreeably  fuprized,  to  meet  J. 
C.  from  London,  who  came  to  Bedford  the  day 
before  and  walked  over  with  Mr.  Parker.  We 
had  a far  larger  congregation  than  I expedited  : 
and  all  were  deeply  ferious.  I preached  at  Bed- 
ford in  the  evening  ; on  Friday,  at  Sundon,  and 
on  Saturday  returned  to  London. 

Monday  9,  and  the  following  days  I vifited 

the 


[ 70  ] 


the  claftes.  Friday  13,  being  the  general  faft-day, 
the  chapel  in  Weft-ftreet,  as  well  as  the  reft,  was 
throughly  filled  with  ferious  hearers.  Surely  God 
is well-pleafed  with  even  thefe  outward  humilia- 
tions, as  an  acknowledgment  that  he  is  the 
difpofer  of  all  events.  And  they  give  fome 
check,  if  it  be  but  for  a time,  to  the  floods,  of 
ungodlinefs.  Befides,  we  cannot  doubt  but 
there  arc  fome  good  men,  in  inoft  of  the  congre- 
gations then  aftembled.  And  we  know,  the  effec- 
tual fervent  prayer  even  cf  one  righteous  man 
availeth  much. 

This  week  I publifhed  in  the  London  Chroni- 
cle an  anfwer  to  a traft,  intitled,  A Caveat 
againji  the  Methcdifs.  It  is  here  fubjoined. 

To  the  editor  of  the  London  Chronicle. 

Sir,  Feb.  19,  1761. 

“ IS  it  not  furprizing,  that  every  perfon  of 
underftanding  does  not  difcern,  at  the  very  firft 
view,  that  the  traft,  intitled  A Caveat  again Jl  the 
Methodtjls,  is  in  reality,  A Caveat  againjl  the  pro- 
le/lants  ? Do  not  the  arguments  conclude  (if  they 
conclude  at  all)  not  againft  the  Methodifls  only, 
but  again!!  the  whole  body  of  proteftants  3 The 
names  indeed  of  Mr.  Whitefield  and  Mr. 
Wefley  are  ufed  ; but  this  is  mere  finefle ; 
greater  men  are  defigned,  and  all  along  are 
wounded  through  our  fide, 

I was  long  in  hopes  of  feeing  an  anfwer  to 

this 


[ 7i  ] 


this  artful  performance,  from  fome  one  of  more 
leifure,  as  well  as  abilities  ; and  fome  whofe 
name  would  have  recommended  his  work ; for 
that  thought  has  fomething  of  truth  in  it, 

* O what  a tuneful  wonder  feiz’d  the  throng, 

‘ When  Marlbro’s  conquering  name  alarm’d 
* the  foe  ! 

■*  Had  Whiznowifky  led  the  armies  on, 

‘ The  general’s  fcarecrow  name  had  foil’d 
e each  blow.’ 

However,  who  knows  but  reafon,  for  once,  may 
be  ftronger  than  prejudice  ? And  many  may  for- 
get my  fcarecrow  name,  and  mind  not  who 
fpeaks,  but  what  is  fpoken.  I am  pleading  notv 
not  for  Methodijls  only,  but  for  the  whole  body 
of  proteftants  ; firft,  for  the  church  of  England  ; 
then  for  the  proteftants,  of  every  denomination  : 
in  doing  which  1 fhall  firft  give  the  fubftance  of 
each  fettion  of  the  Romifh  traft  : fecondly,  an- 
fwer,  and  retort  it  upon  the  members  of  the 
church  of  Rome.  O that  this  may  incite  fome 
more  fkilful  advocate,  to  fupply  my  lack  of  fr- 
zjice  ! 

Section  I. 

‘ The  Methodifts  (Proteftants)  are  not  the 
* people  of  God ; they  are  not  true  gofpel 
‘ Chriftians ; nor  is  their  new-raifed  fociety  the 

* true 


[ 72  ] 

* true  church  of  Chrift,  nor  any  part  of 

3. 

‘ This  is  demonftrated  by  the  word  of  God, 
8 marking  out  the  people  of  God*  the  true 

* church  of  Chrift  by  fuch  charadlers  as  cannot 
‘ agree  to  the  Method fs,  or  any  other  new-raifed 
‘ fed  or  community.’  ibid. 

‘ The  Old  Teftament  is  full  of  prophecies  re- 
‘ lating  to  the  church.  And  the  New  Teftament 
■»  makes  glorious  promifes  to  it,  and  gives  glori- 
‘ ous  charadters  of  it.’  p.  4. 

‘ Now  all  thofe  prophecies,  promifes,  and 
‘ characters,  point  out  a fociety  founded  by  Chrift 
‘ himfelf,  and  by  his  commiftion  propagated 
« throughout  the  world,  which  fhould  flourifh  till 
« time  fhould  end,  ever  one,  ever  holy,  ever  or- 
‘ thgdox  ; fecured  againft  error,  by  the  perpetual 
‘ prefence  of  Chrift  ; ever  diredied  by  the  fpirit 
‘ of  truth  ; having  a perpetual fucce JJi on  of  paftors 

* and  teachers,  divinely  appointed  and  divinely 

* aflifted:  but  no  part  of  this  charadler  is  appli- 
‘ cable  to  any  new-raifed  fed!  ; who  have  no 
‘ fuccefhon  from,  or  connection  with,  that  one, 

* holy  fociety  : therefore  no  modern  fedt  can  be 

* any  part  of  the  people  of  God.  p.  5. 

I anfwer.  It  is  true,  + all  theje  promifes,  pro- 
phecies, and  characters,  point  out  a fociety  founded 
by  Chrijl  himfelf,  and  by  his  commiffion  propagated 
thought  the  world , which  fiould  flour  if  1 ’till  time 

fhould 

t The  words  of  the  Caveat  are  in  italics. 


[ 73  ] 

JJiould  end.  And  fuch  is  the  Catholic  church, 
that  is  the  whole  body  of  men,  endued  with  faith 
working  by  love,  difperfed  over  the  whole  earth, 
in  Europe,  Alia,  Africa,  and  America  ! And 
this  church  is  ever  one  : in  all  ages  and  nations 
it  is  the  one  body  of  Chrift  : it  is  ever  holy,  for 
no  unholy  man  can  pofiibly  be  a member  of  it. 

It  is  ever  orthodox  ; fo  is  every  holy  man,  in  all 
things  neceffary  to  falvation  : fecin ed  againjl 
error,  in  things  effential,  by  the  perpetual  prefence 
of  Chrijl  ; and  ever  direEled  by  the  Jpirit  of  truth , 
in  the  truth  that  is  after  godlinefs.  This  church 
has  a perpetual  fucufficn  of  paftors  and  teachers , 
divinely  oppointed,  and  divinely  ajfifed.  And 
there  has  never  been  wanting  in  the  reformed 
churches,  fuch  a fucceflion  of  pallors  and  teach- 
ers ; men  both  divinely  appointed,  and  divinely 
aflifted  ; for  they  convert  finners  to  God  ; a 
work  none  can  do  unlefs  God  himfelf  doth  ap. 
point  them  thereto,  and  affifl  them  therein  : 
therefore  every  part  of  this  character  is  applica- 
ble to  them.  Their  teachers  are  the  proper 
fuccelfors  of  thofe  who  have  delivered  down, 
through  all  generations,  the  faith  once  delivered 
’'to  the  faints  : and  their  members  have  true 
fpiritual  communion,  with  the  one  holy  fociety  of 
true  believers  : confequently,  although  they  are 
not  the  whole  people  of  God,  yet  are  they  an  un- 
>deniable  part  of  his  people. 

On  the  contrary,  the  church  of  Rome,  in  its 
prefent  from  was  not  fouaded-by  Chrijl  himfelf. 
L-  Vol.  XXXI.  ' D All 


[ 74  ] 

All  the  doflrines  and  practices  wherein  fhe 
differs  from  us,  were  not  inftituted  by  Chrift  : 
they  were  unknown  to  the  antient  church  of 
Chrift ; they  are  unfcriptural,  novel  corrup- 
tions : neither  is  that  church  propagated  through- 
out the  world.  Therefore  if  either  antiquity,  or 
univerfality,  be  effential  thereto,  the  church  of 
Rome  cannot  be  the  true  church  ofChriJl. 

* Nor  is  the  church  of  Rome  one  : it  is  not 
in  unity  with  itfelf:  it  is  to  this  day  torne  with 
numberlefs  divifions.  And  it  is  impoffible  it 
fhould  be  the  one  church , unlefs  a part  canbethe 
whole:  feeing  the  Afiatic  the  African,  and  the 
Mufcovite  churches  (to  name  no  more)  never 
were  contained  in  it. 

Neither  is  it  holy.  The  generality  of  its  mem- 
bers are  no  holier  than  Turks  or  Heathens.  You 
need  not  go  far  for  proof  of  this.  Look  at  the 
Romanifrs  in  London,  or  Dublin.  Are  thefe  the 
holv,  the  only  holy  church  ? Juft  fuch  holinefs 
is  in  the  bottomlefs  pit. 

Nor  is  it fecured againjl  o ror  either  by  Chrijl  or 
his  Spirit:  witnefs  pope  againft  pope  ; council 
againft  council  ; contradiffing,  anathematizing 
each  other.  The  inftances  are  too  numerous  to 
be  recited. 

Neither  are  the  generality  of  her pajlors  and 
teachers  either  divinely  appointed  or  divinely 
aljijled.  If  God  had  fent  them,  he  would  confirm 
the  word  of  his  meffengers : but  he  does  not  ; 
they  convert  no  finners  to  God  : they  convert 

many' 


[ 7-5  ) 

many  to  their  own  opinion,  but  not  to  the 
knowledge  or  love  of  God.  He  that  was  a drun- 
kard, is  a drunkard  ftill ; he  that  was  filty  is  filthy 
flill ; therefore  neither  are  they  ajjijled  by  him  ; 
fo  they  and  their  flocks  wallow  in  fin  together : 
confequently  (whatever  may  be  the  cafe  of  fome 
particular  fouls)  it  mull  be  faid,  if  your  own 
marks  be  true,  the  Roman  Catholics,  in  general, 
are  not  the  people  oj  God." 

It  may  be  proper  to  add  here  the  fecond 
feclion,  which  is  all  I had  leifure  to  write, 
though  it  was  not  publi fired  till  the  following 
week. 

Section  II. 

‘ 1 he  Methodift  (Proteftant)  teachers  are  not 
‘ the  true  minifters  of  Chrift : nor  are  they  called 
‘ or  fent  by  him.  p.  6. 

4 This  appears  from  what  has  been  already  de- 
‘ monftrated.  For  if  the  Proteftants  are  not 
4 the  true  people  of  Chrift,  their  minifters  cannot 
1 be  the  true  minifters  of  Chrift.’  ibid. 

Farther,  ‘ The  true  minifters  came  down  by 
‘ fucceflion  from  the  apoftles.  But  the  proteftant 
‘ teachers  do  not.  Therefore  they  are  not  the 
‘ true  minifters  of  Chrift.’  ibid. 

‘ All  power  in  the  church  of  Chrift  comes 
‘ from  him ; fo  that  whoever,  without  a commif- 
‘ fion  from  him,  intrudes  into  the  paftoral  office, 
D 2 ‘is 


[ 76  ] 

‘ is  a thief  and  a robber.  Now  the  commiflion 
‘ can  be  conveyed  but  two  ways,  either  im- 
‘ mediately  from  God  himfelf,  as  it  was  to 
‘ the  apoflles,  or  from  men  who  have  the  au- 
‘ thority  handed  down  to  them  from  the  apoftles.- 

4 But  this  commiflion  has  not  been  conveyed 
4 to  proteflant  preachers,  either  of  thefe  ways. 

4 Not  immediately  from  God  himfelf:  for  how 
4 do  they  prove  it?  By  what  miracles?  Neither 
4 bv  men  deriving  authority  from  the  apoflles, 

4 through  the  channel  of  the  church.  And  they 
4 hand  divided  in  communion  from  all  churches 
4 that  have  any  preienfions  to  antiquity.  Their 
‘ doftrine  of  jullification  bv  faith  alone,  was  ana- 
4 thematized  at  its  firfl  appearance,  by  the  un- 
4 doubled  heirs  of  the  apoflles,  the  pajlors  of  the 
4 apofolic  churches ; confequently  they  are  fent 
‘ by  no  other  but  him,  who  fent  all  the  falfe  pro- 
4 phets  irom  the  beginning.’  p.  8,  9. 

I anfwer,  jrom  what  has  been  already  demon - 
Jl rated,  nothing  will  follow;  for  you  have  de- 
monftrated  juft  nothing. 

Now  for  your  farther  proof.  The  true  mini- 
Jlerscame  down  by  fucceffion  from  the  apoflles.  So 
do  the  proteflant  minillers,  if  the  llomifh  do  ; 
the  Englifh  in  particular ; as  even  one  of 
yourfelves,  F.  Courayer,  has  irrefragably 
proved. 

All  power  in  the  church  of  Chrifl  comes  from 
him  ; either  immediately  from  himfelf  or  from  men 
who  have  the  authority  handed  down  to  them  from 

the 


[ 77  1 

the  apojlles-  But  this  commiffion  has  not  been  con- 
veyed to  the  protejiant  preachers , either  of  thefe 
ways  : not  immediately  : for  by  what  miracles  do 
they  prove  it?  So  faid  Cardinal  Bellarmine  long 
ago.  Neither  by  men  deriving  authority  from  the. 
apojlles . Read  F.  Courayer,  and  know  better. 
Neither  are  the  proteftants  divided  Jrom  any 
churches,  who  have  true  prctenfions  to  antiquity . 
But  their  dodlrine  of  jufification  by  faith  alone, 
was  anathematized  at  its  frjl  appearance,  by  the 
undoubted  heirs  of  the  apojtles,  the  pajlors  of  the 
apofolic  church.  By  the  prelates  at  the  council 
of  Trent  it  was:  who  thereby  anathematized  the 
apoftle  Paul,  to  all  intents  and  purpofes.  Here 
you  throw  off  the  mafk;  otherwife  you  might 
have  palled  for  a proteflant  a little  longer. 
Conjequently  they  are  fent  by  no  other  but  him , 
who  fent  all  the  falfe  prophets  from  the  begin- 
ning. Sir,  we  thank  vou.  This  is  really  a very 
model!  alfertion  for  the  fubjedl  of  a protellant 
king. 

But  to  turn  the  tables : I faid,  ‘ If  the  Romifh 
‘ bilhops  do.’  For  this  I abfolutely  deny.  I 
deny  that  the  Romifh  bilhops  came  down  by 
uninterrupted  fuccelhon  from  the  apoflles.  1 
never  could  fee  it  proved;  and,  I am  perfuad'ed, 
I never  lhall.  But  unlefs  this  is  proved  ; your 
own  pallors,  on  your  principles,  are  no  pallors  at 
all. 

* But  farther:  it  is  a dodlrine  of  your  church, 
that  the  intention  of  the  admin illrator,  is  elfen- 
D 3 tiai 


[ 78  ] 

tial  to  the  validity  of  the  facraraents  which  are 
adminiftered  by  him.  Now,  are  you  allured  of 
the  intention  of  every  priefl,  from  whom  you 
have  received  the  holt  ? If  not,  you  do  not  know, 
but  what  you  received  as  the  facrament  of  the  al- 
tar, was  no  facrament  at  all.  Are  you  alfured  of 
the  intention  of  the  prieft  who  baptized  you  ? If 
not,  perhaps  you  are  not  baptized  at  ail.  To 
come  clofe  to  the  point  in  hand  : if  you  pafs  for 
a prieft,  are  you  alfured  of  the  intention  of  the 
bifliop  that  ordained  you  ? If  not,  you  may  hap- 
pen to  be  no  prieft,  and  fo  all  your  miniftry  is 
nothing  worth  : nay,  by  the  lame  rule,  he  may 
happen  to  be  nobilhop.  And  who  can  tell  how 
often  this  has  been  the  cafe  ? But  if  there 
has  been  only  one  inftance  in  a thoufand 
years,  what  becomes  of  your  uninterrupted  fuc- 
cefiion  ? 

* This  ad  hominem.  But  I have  a word  more 
ad  ran.  Can  a man  teach  what  he  does  not 
know  ? Is  it  pofiible  a man  Ihould  teach  others 
what  he  does  not  know  himfelf?  Certainly  it  is 
not.  Can  a prieft  then  teach  his  hearers  the  way 
to  heaven,  marked  out  in  our  Lord’s  fermon  on 
the  mount,  if  he  does  not  know  or  underftand  the 
way  himfelf?  Nothing  is  more  impolflble.  But 
how  many  of  ycur  priefts  know  nothing  about 
it  ? What  avails  then  their  cornmijfion  to  teach, 
what  they  cannot  teach,  becauie  they  know  it 
not  ? Did  God  ihznfend  thefe  men  on  a fool's 
errand  ; fend  them  to  do  what  they  cannot  do  ? 

O fay 


C 79  ] 

O fay  not  fo  ! And  what  will  be  the  event  of 
their  attempting  to  teach  they  know  not  what-? 
Why,  if  the  blind  lead  the  blind , both  Jhall fall  into 
the  pit.” 

Saturday  21.  I fpent  fome  hours  with  Mr.  L. 
and  Mr.  I’Anfon,  in  order  to  prevent  another 
Chancery-fuit.  And  though  the  matter  could  not 
then  be  fully  adjufled,  yet  the  fuit  did  not 
go  on. 

Tuefday  24.  I retired  to  Lewifham,  and  tran- 
fcribed  the  lift  of  the  fociety.  About  an  hundred 
and  fixty  I left  out,  to  whom  I can  do  no  good  at 
prefent.  The  number  of  thofe  which  now  re- 
main, is  two  thoufand,  three  hundred,  and  fe- 
venty-five. 

* Friday  27.  At  twelve  I met  about  thirty  per- 
fons,  who  had  experienced  a deep  work  of  God. 
And  I appointed  an  hour  for  meeting  them  every 
week.  Whether  they  are  faved  from  fin  or  no, 
they  are  certainly  full  of  faith  and  love,  and  pe- 
culiarly helpful  to  my  foul. 

Sunday,  March  1.  We  had  a happy  love-feaft 
at  the  chappel.  Many  of  our  brethren  fpoke 
plainly  and  artlefsly  what  God  had  done  for  their 
fouls.  1 think,  none  were  offended  ; but  many 
were  ftrengthened  and  comforted. 

* Wednefday  4.  I was  fcarce  come  into  the 
room  where  a few  believers  were  met  together, 
when  one  began  to  tremble  exceedingly,  and 

D 4 foon 


C 80  ] 

foon  after  funk  to  the  floor.  After  a violent 
ftruggle,  fhe  burft  out  into  prayer,  which  was 
quickly  changed  into  praife.  She  then  declared, 
“ The  Lamb  ot  God  has  taken  away  all  my  /ins/* 
She  fpoke  many  ftrong  words  to  the  fame  effecf, 
rejoicing  with  joy  unfpeakable. 

Friday  6.  I met  again  with  thofe  who  be- 
lieve God  has  delivered  them  from  the  root  of 
bitternefs.  Their  number  increafes  daily.  I know 
nor,  if  fifteen  or  fixteen  have  not  received  the 
bleffing  this  week. 

Monday  9.  I fet  out  early,  and  about  noon 
preached  at  High-wycombe,  where  the  dry  bones 
began  to  fhake  again.  In  the  afternoon  I rode 
on  to  Oxford,  and  fpent  an  agreeable  evening 
with  Mr.  H.  * His  opennefs  and  franknefs 
of  behaviour  were  both  pleafing  and  pro- 
fitable. Such  converfation  I want  : but  I 
do  not  wonder  it  is  offenfive  to  men  of  nice 
ears. 

Tuefday  10.  We  rode  to  Evefham,  where  I 
found  the  poor,  fhattered  fociety  almofl  funk  into 
nothing.  And  no  wonder,  fince  they  have  been 
almofl  without  help,  till  Air.  Mather  came.  In 
the  evening  I preached  in  the  town-hall.  Both 
at  this  time  and  at  five  in  the  morning,  God  ap- 
plied his  word,  and  many  found  a defire  to 
Jlrevgthen  the  things  that  remained.  I defigned 
to  have  relied  on  Wednefday  ; but  finding  that 
notice  had  been  given  of  my  preaching  at  Stan- 
ley, 


[ «»  ] 


Icy,  we  got  thither,  through  roads  almoft  impaf- 
fable,  about  noon,  and  found  more  people  than 
the  boufe  could  contain.  So  I flood  in  the  yard, 
and  proclaimed  free  falvation  to  a loving,  fimple 
people.  Several  were  in  tears,  and  all  of  them 
fo  thankful,  that  I could  not  repent  of  my  la- 
bour. 

The  congregation  at  Evefham  in  the  evening 
was  thrice  as  large  as  the  night  before.  Indeed 
many  of  them  did  not  deftgn  to  hear,  or  to  let 
any  one  elfe  hear.  But  they  were  over-ruled  and 
behaved  with  tolerable  decency,  till  the  fervice 
was  over.  Then  they  roared  amain.  But  I walked 
flrait  through  them.  And  none  offered  ihe  leafl 
rudenefs. 

Thurfday  12.  About  one  I preached  at  Red- 
ditch,  to  a deeply  ferious  congregation  : about 
feven,  in  the  room  at  Birmingham,  now  far  too 
fmall  for  the  congregation.  Friday  13.  Many 
flocked  together  at  five  : and  far  more  than  the 
room  would  contain  in  the  evening.  Perhaps  the 
time  is  come  for  the  gofpel  to  take  root  even  in 
this  barren  foil. 

* Saturday  14.  I rode  to  Wednefbury.  Sunday 
15.  I made  a fhift  to  preach  within  at  eight  in 
the  morning.  But  in  the  afternoon  I knew  not 
what  to  do,  having  a pain  in  my  fide,  and  a fore 
throat.  However,  I refoived  to  fpeak  as  long  as 
I could.  I flood  at  one  end  of  the  hotife,  and  the 
people  (fuppofed  to  be  eight  or  ten  thoufandj  in 
the  field  adjoining.  I fpoke  from  I count  all 
D 5 things 


[ 82  j 

things  hut  lofs,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knovcledge 
of  Jef us  Chrijl  ihy  Lord.  When  I had  done 
fpeaking  my  complaints  were  gone.  At  the  love* 
feaft  in  the  evening,  many,  both  nsen  and  wo- 
men fpoke  their  experience,  in  a manner  which 
affe&ed  .all  that  heard.  One  in  particular  faid, 
“ For  feventeen  or  eighteen  years  I thought 
God  had  forgotten  me.  Neither  I,  nor  anv  under 
my  roof,  could  believe.  But  now,  blelfed  be 
hi§  name,  he  has  take-n  me  and  all  my  houfe  : 
and  given  me,  and  my  wife,  and  our  feven 
children,  to  rejoice  together  in  God  our  Sa- 
viour.” 

Monday  16.  I intended  to  reft  two  or  three 
days.  But  being  prefTed  to  vifit  Shrewfbury,  and 
having  no  other  time,  I rode  over  to-day,  though 
upon  a miferable  beaft.  When  I came  in,  my 
head  ached  as  well  as  my  fide.  I found  the  door 
of  the  place  where  I was  to  preach,  furrounded 
by  a numerous  mob.  But  they  Teemed  met,  only 
to  ftare.  Yet  part  of  them  came  in  : almoft  all 
that  did,  (a  large  number)  behaved  quietly  and 
ferioufly. 

luefdayiy.  At  five,  the  congregation  was 
large,  and  appeared  not  a little  affeFted.  The  dif- 
ficulty now  was,  how  to  get  back  ? For  I could 
not  ride  the  horfeon  which  I came.  But  this  too 
was  provided  for.  We  met  in  the  ftreet,  with 
one  who  lent  me  his  horle,  which  was  fo  eafy, 
that  I grew  better  and  better  till  I came  to  Wol- 
verhampton. 


C 83  ] 


verhampton.  None  had  yet  preached  abroad  in 
this  furious  town : but  I was  refolved  with  God’s 
help,  to  make  a trial,  and  ordered  a table  to  be 
fet  in  the  inn-yard.  Such  a number  of  wild  men 
I have  feldom  feen.  But  they  gave  me  no  d ill  ur- 
ban ce,  either  while  I preached,  or  when  I 
afterwards  walked  through  the  midft  of  them. 

About  five  I preached  to  a far  larger  congre- 
gation at  Dudley,  and  all  as  quiet  as  at  London. 
The  fcene  is  changed,  fince  the  dirt  and  fiones 
of  this  town,  were  flying  about  me  on  every 
fide  ! 

Wednefday  18.  By  talking  with  feveral  at 
W ednefbury,  I found  God  is  carrying  on  his 
work  here  as  at  London.  We  have  ground  to 
hope,  one  prifoner  was  fet  at  full  liberty,  under 
the  fermon  on  Saturday  morning;  another,  un- 
der that  on  Saturday  evening.  One  or  more 
received  remiflion  of  fins  on  Sunday.  On  Mon- 
day morning  another,  and  on  Wednefday  vet 
another  believed  the  blocd  of  Jefns  Chiijl  had 
deanfed  him  from  all  Jin.  In  the  evening  I 
could  fcarce  think,  but  more  than  one  heard 
him  fav,  I will : be  thou  dean  ! Indeed  fo  won- 
derfully was  he  prefent  till  near  midnight,  as 
if  he  would  have  healed  the  whole  congre- 
gation. 

Thurfday  19.  After  preaching  at  Bilbrook  I 
rode  on  to  Borflam,  and  preached  at  half  hour 
paft  five,  in  an  open  place  on  the  top  of  the  hill, 
D 6 to 


" [ 84  ] 

to  a large  and  attentive  congregation,  though  it 
rained  almoft  all  the  time,  and  the  air  was  ex» 
tremely  cold.  The  next  morning,  being  Good- 
friday,  I did  not  preach  till  eight.  But  even  then, 
as  well  as  in  the  evening,  the  cold  confiderably 
leffened  the  congregation.  Such  is  human  wif- 
dom  ! So  fmall  are  the  things  which  divert  man- 
kind from  what  might  be  the  means  of  their 
eternal  falvation ! 

Saturday  21.  About  ten  I preached  at  Bid- 
dulph,  and  about  fix  at  Congleton.  Sunday  22. 
About  one  I preached  at  Macclesfield,  near  the 
preaching-houfe.  The  congregation  was  large, 
though  the  wind  was  (harp.  But  it  was  more 
than  doubled  after  the  evening  fervice,  while  I 
opened  and  enforced  the  folemn  declaration, 
Him  hath  God  exalted  with  his  own  right  hand,  to 
be  a Prince  and  a Saviour.  In  the  evening  I rode 
on  to  Manchefier. 

Monday  23.  After  preaching  at  five,  I haftened 
forward,  and  reached  Leeds  about  five  in  the 
evening,  where  I had  defired  all  the  preachers  in 
thofe  parts  to  meet  me  ; and  an  happy  meeting 
we  had  both  in  the  evening  and  morning.  I af- 
terwards enquired  into  the  (fate  of  the  focieties 
in  Yorkfhire  and  Lincolnlhire.  I find  the  work 
of  God  increafes  on  every  fide;  but  particularly 
in  Lincolnlhire  ; where  there  has  been  no  work 
like  this,  fince  the  time  I preached  at  Epworth 
on  my  father’s  tomb. 

* In  the  afternoon  I talked  with  feveral  of 

tbofe 


[ *o  J 

thofe  who  believe  they  are.  faved  from  fin.  And 
after  a clofe  examination,  1 found  reafon  to 
hope,  that  fourteen  of  them  were  not  deceived. 
In  the  evening  I expounded  the  thirteenth 
chapter  of  the  fird  epidle  to  the  Corinthians, 
and  exhorted  all,  to  weigh  themfelves  in  that 
balance,  and  fee  if  they  were  not  found 
zi'anting. 

Wednefday  25.  I took  horfe  early,  breakfafied 
with  Mr.  Venn,  and  about  four  in  the  afternoon 
came  to  Stockport.  Finding  the  congregation 
waiting,  I preached  immediately,  and  then  rode 
on  to  Manchefier  : where  I relied  on  Thurfday. 
Fridav  27.  I rode  to  Bridgefield,  in  the  midfl  of 
the  Derby  (hire  mountains,  and  cried  to  a large 
congregation,  If  any  man  thirjl,  let  him  come  unto 
me  and  dunk.  And  they  did  indeed  drink  in  the 
word,  as  the  thinly  earth  the  flaowers.  About  fix 
I preached  at  Stockport.  Idere  I enquired  after  a 
young  man,  who  was  fome  time  fince  much  in 
earned  for  falvation.  But  it  was  not  long  before 
he  grew  quite  cold,  and  left  the  fociety.  Within 
a few  months  after,  he  left  the  world,  and  that 
by  his  own  hand  ! The  next  day  I returned  to 
Mancheder. 

Sunday  29.  We  had  an  uncommon  bleding, 
both  morning  and  afternoon.  In  the  evening  I 
met  the  believers,  and  drongly  exhorted  them 
to  go  on  to  perfection.  To  many  of  them  it  feemed. 
a new  doftrine.  However  they  all  received  it  in 

love : 


[ 86  ] 

love  : and  aflame  was  kindled,  which  I truft  nei- 
ther men  nor  devils  (hall  ever  he  able  to  quench. 

Tuefday  31.  I rode  to  Altringham.  We  had 
four  rooms,  which  opened  into  each  other.  But 
they  would  not  near  contain  the  congregation, 
fo  that  many  were  obliged  to  (land  without.  I 
believe  many  were  wounded,  and  fome  much 
comforted.  Perhaps  this  tow'n  will  not  be  quite 
fo  furious  as  it  has  been. 

In  the  evening  we  had  abundance  of  genteel 
people  at  Manchefter,  while  I defcribed faith  as 
the  evidence  of  things  not  fetn.  I left  Manchefter, 
in  the  morning,  April  1,  in  a better  condition 
than  ever  I knew  it  before  : fuch  is  the  (baking 
not  only  among  the  dry  bones,  but  likewife 
among  the  living  fouls. 

About  noon  I preached  at  Little-Leigh, 
and  at  Chefter  in  the  evening.  Thurfdav  2.  I 
rode  over  to  Tatten-hall,  eight  or  nine  miles 
from  Chefter.  When  we  came  the  town  feemed 
to  be  all  in  an  uproar.  Yet  when  I began 
preaching  (in  the  open  air,  the  houfe  not  being 
large  enough  to  contain  one  quarter  of  the  con- 
gregation) none  oppofed,  or  made  the  leaft  dif- 
turbance,  the  fear  of  God  falling  upon  them.  I 
think  Tatten-hall  will  be  lefs  bitter  for  the  time 
to  come.  Well  may  Satan  be  angry  with  field- 
preaching. 

Friday  3.  I preached  about  one  at  Mould  in 
Flintfhire,  and  was  again  obliged  to  preach 
abroad  though  the  wind  was  exceeding  rough. 

All 


[ 87  ] 


All  were  deeply  attentive.  1 preached  in  the 
evening  at  Chelber,  and  in  the  morning  fet  out 
for  Liverpool,  I came  thither,  (preaching  at 
Warrington  by  the  way)  in  the  evening.  The 
eleftion  feemed  to  have  driven  the  common  fort 
of  people  out  of  their  fenfes.  But  on  Sunday  they 
were  tolerably  recovered,  and  the  town  looked 
like  itfelf.  I heard  two  ufeful  fermons  at  our 
parifh  church  ; one  upon  Follow  peace  with  all 
men,  and  holinefs  ; the  other,  on  Blejftd  are  the 
dead  zuhich  die  in  the  Lord.  I pity  thofe  who  “ can 
learn  nothing  at  church. ’’ 

Monday  13.  I left  them  at  Liverpool,  a little 
increafed  in  number,  but  very  confiderablv  in 
firength,  being  now  entirely  united  together  in 
judgement,  as  well  as  in  affedlion. 

About  noon  I preached  to  a ferious  congrega- 
tion at  Downath-green  near  Wigan  : but  to  a far 
more  ferious  one  in  the  evening  at  Bolton. 
1 find  fexv  places  like  this.  All  difputes  are  for- 
got ; and  the  Chri Ilians  do  indeed  love  one  ano- 
ther. When  I vifited  the  dalles,  on  Wednef- 
day  15,  I did  not  find  a diforderly  walker  among 
them;  no  nor  a trifler.  They  appeared  to  be, 
one  and  all  ferioufly  feeking  falvation. 

Thurfday  16.  After  preaching  at  n o on,  I rode 
to  Lower- darwen,  near  Blackburn,  where  a 
large  congregation  behaved  with  deep  feriouf- 
nefs.  Leaving  honeft  Mr.  Grimfhaw  to  preach 
in  the  morning,  I fet  out  early,  and  in  the  even- 
ing 


[ 88  ] 


in g reached  a little  quiet  houfe  a few  miles  be- 
yond Kendal,  to  which  I believe,  we  did  not 
come  in  vain.  The  man  of  the  houfe,  having 
been  long  ill,  was  thankful  for  advice,  with  re- 
gard to  his  bodily  diforder.  And  his  guefts  ap- 
peared right  willing  to  receive  fome  advice, 
with  refpeft  to  their  fouls. 

Saturd.  1 8.  We  were  foon  loft  on  the  moun- 
tains. But  in  an  hour  we  found  a cottage,  and 
a good  woman,-  who  bad  her  fon  “ take  the  gal- 
loway, and  guide  them  to  the  Fell- foot.”  There 
we  met  a poor  man  juft  coming  from  a doQor 
who  I think  had  quite  miftaken  his  cafe.  Perhaps 
his  meeting  us  may  fave  his  life.  He  piloted 
us  over  the  next  mountain,  the  like  to  which  I 
never  beheld  either  in  Wales  or  Germany.  As 
we  were  climbing  the  third,  a man  overtook  us, 
who  was  going  the  fame  road.  So  he  accom- 
panied us  till  we  were  in  a plain  level  way,  which 
in  three  hours  brought  us  to  Whitehaven. 

Sunday  19.  I preached  morning  and  even-, 
ing  at  the  Gins,  to  far  more  people  than  the 
houfe  would  have  contained.  At  one  I preach- 
ed in  the  alfembly-room  at  Workington.  The 
whole  congregaiion  behaved  well  : though  I 
could  not  perceive,  that  the  greater  part  under- 
Hood  any  thing  of  the  matter. 

Wednefday  22.  About  noon  I preached  at 
Branthwayte,  and  in  the  evening  at  Lorton. 
Who  would  imagine,  that  deifm  fhould  find  its 
way  into  the  heart  of  thefe  enormous  moun- 
tains! 


C % 1 

tains  ! Yet  fo  it  is.  Yea,  and  one  who  once 
knew  the  love  of  God,  is  a ftrenuous  advocate 
for  it. 

Saturday  25.  As  the  people  at  Whitehaven 
are  ufually  full  of  zeal,  right  or  wrong,  I this 
evening  Ihewed  them  the  nature  of  Chriflian 
zeal.  Perhaps  fome  of  them  may  now  diftin- 
guifh  the  flame  of  love,  from  a fire  kindled  fn 
hell. 

Sunday  26.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  the 
Gins,  in  the  room  at  one,  and  about  five  at 
Cockermouth,  on  the  Heps  of  the  market-houfe. 
Even  the  genteel  hearers  were  decent  : many  of 
the  reft  feemed  deeply  affefled.  The  people  of 
the  town  have  never  been  uncivil.  Surely  they 
will  not  always  be  unfruitful. 

Monday  £7.  I preached  at  eight  in  the  mar- 
ket-place at  Wigton.  The  congregation,  when 
I began,  confifted  of  one  woman,  two  boys,  and 
three  or  four  little  girls.  But  in  a quarter  of 
an  hour  we  had  moft  of  the  town.  I was  a good 
deal  moved  at  the  exquifite  fell-fufficiency, 
which  was  vifible  in  the  countenance,  air  and 
whole  deportment,  of  a confiderable  part  of 
them.  This  conftrained  me  to  ufe  a very  un- 
common plainnefs  of  fpeech.  They  bore  it 
well.  Who  knows  but  fome  may  profit  ? 

Before  noon  we  came  to  Solway-frith.  The 
guide  told  us,  it  was  not  paffable.  But  I re- 
folved  to  try,  and  got  over  well.  Having  loft 
ourfelves,  but  twice  or  thrice,  in  one  of  the 

moft 


[ 9°  ] 

jnofl  difficult  roads  lever  Taw,  we  came  to  Mof- 
fat in  the  evening.  Tuefday  28.  We  rode  part- 
ly over  the  mountains,  partly  with  mountains 
on  either  hand,  between  which  was  a clear, 
winding  river,  and  about  four  in  the  afternoon 
reached  Edinburgh. 

Here  I met  Mr.  Hopper,  who  had  promifed 
to  preach  in  the  evening,  in  a large  room,  late- 
ly an  epifcopal  meeting-houfe.  Wednefday  29. 
It  being  extremely  cold,  I preached  in  the  fame 
room  at  feven.  Some  of  the  reputable  hearers 
cried  out  in  amaze,  “ Why  this  is  found  doc- 
trine ! Is  this  he,  of  whom  Mr.  Wh.  u fed  to 
talk Jo  Talk  as  he  will,  I (hall  not  retaliate. 

I preached  in  the  evening,  and  the  next  day 
rode  round,  by  the  Oueen’s-Ferry  to  Dundee. 
But  the  wind  being  high,  the  boatmen  could 
not,  at  leafl  would  not  pafs.  Nor  could  we  pafs 
the  next  day  till  between  nine  and  ten.  We 
then  rode  on  through  Montrofe  to  Stonehaven. 
Here  Mr.  Mentis  met  us,  and  on  Saturday 
morning  brought  us  to  his  houfe  at  Aberdeen. 

In  the  afternoon,  I fent  to  the  principal  and 
regent,  to  defire  leave  to  preach  in  the  College- 
clofe.  This  was  readily  granted  ; but  as  it  be- 
gan to  rain,  I was  defined  to  go  into  the  hall.  I 
fuppofe  this  is  full  an  hundred  feet  long,  and 
feated  all  around.  The  congregation  was  large, 
notwithftanding  the  rain,  and  full  as  large  at  five 
in  the  morning.  Sunday,  May  3.  I heard  two 
rjfeful  fermons  at  the  Kirk,  one  preached  by  the 

principal 


L 9-1  ] 

principal  of  the  college,  the  other  by  the  divi- 
nity profeiior.  A huge  multitude  afterwards  ga- 
thered together  in  the  College-  clofe.  And  all 
that  could  hear  feemed  to  receive  the  truth  in 
love.  I then  added  about  twenty  to  the  little 
fociety.  Fair  blolloms  ! But  how  many  of  thefe 
will  bring  forth  fruit  ? 

Monday  We  had  another  large  congrega- 
tion at  five.  Before  noon,  twenty  more  came 
to  me,  defiring  to  call  in  their  lot  with  us,  and 
appearing  to  be  cut  to  the  heart. 

About  noon  I took  a walk  to  the  King’s  Col- 
lege in  Old  Aberdeen.  It  has  three  fiaes  of  a 
fquare  liandfomely  built,  not  unlike  Queen’s-col- 
le'ge  in  Oxford.  Going  up  to  fee  the  hall,  we 
found  a large  company  of  ladies  with  feveral 
gentlemen.  They  looked,  and  fpoke  to  one 
another,  after  which  one  of  the  gentlemen  took 
courage  and  came  to  me.  He  faid,  “ We  came 
laft  night  to  the  College-clofe,  hut  could  not 
hear,  and  fhould  be  extremely  obliged,  if  you 
would  give  us  a fhort  difcourfe  here.”  I knew 
not  what  God  might  have,  to  do,  and  fo  began 
without  delay,  on  God  was  in  Ckrijl  reconciling 
the  world  unto  himfelf  I believe,  the  word 
was  not  loft.  It  fell  as  dew  on  the  tender  grafs. 

In  the  afternoon  I was  walking  in  the  library 
of  the  Marefball  College,  when  the  principal, 
and  the  divinity  profelfor,  came  to  me,  and  the 
latter  invited  me  to  his  lodgings,  where  I fpent 
an  hour  very  agreeably.  In  the  evening  the  ea- 

gernefs 


[ 92  ] 

gernefs  of  the  people  made  them  ready  to  tram- 
ple each  other  under  foot.  It  was  fome  time 
before  they  were  flill  enough  to  hear  ; but  then 
they  devoured  every  word.  After  preaching, 
Sir  Archibald  Grant  (whom  bufinefs  had  called 
to  town)  fent  and  defired  to  fpeak  to  me.  I 
could  not  then,  but  promifed  to  wait  upon  him, 
with  God’s  leave  in  my  return  to  Edinburgh. 

Tuefday  5.  I accepted  the  principal’s  invita- 
tion, and  fpent  an  hour  with  him  at  bis  houfe. 
I obferved  no  fliftnefs  at  all,  but  the  eafy  good 
breeding  of  a man  of  fenfe  and  learning.  I fup- 
pofe  both  he  and  all  the  profeffors,  whir  fome 
of  the  magiflrates,  attended  in  the  evening.  I 
fetall  the  windows  open,  but  the  hall,  notwith- 
flanding,  was  as  hot  as  a bagnio.  But  this  did 
not  hinder  either  the  attention  of  the  people,  or 
the  bleffingof  God. 

Wednefday  6.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Ogilvey  s, 
one  of  the  minifiers,  between  whom  the  city  is 
divided.  A more  open-hearted,  friendly  man, 
I know  not  that  I ever  faw.  And  indeed  I 
have  fear ce  feen  fuch  a fett  of  minifiers,  in  any 
town  of  Great-Bntain  or  Ireland. 

At  half  hour  after  fix  I flood  in  the  College- 
clofe,  and  proclaimed  Clirifl  crucified.  My  voice 
was  fo  flrengthened  that  all  could  hear  : all  were 
earneflly  attentive.  I have  now  cajl  my  bread 
upon  the  waters  : may  I find  it  again  after  many 
days. 

Thurfday  7.  Living  near  ninety  members 

in 


[ 93  ] 

in  the  fociety,  1 rode  over  to  Sir  A.  Grant’s, 
near  Monymufk,  about  twenty  miles  north-weft 
from  Aberdeen.  It  lies  in  a fruitful  and  pleafant 
valley,  much  of  whi  ch  is  owing  to  Sir  Archi- 
bald’s improvements,  who  has  ploughed  up  abund- 
ance of  wafte  ground,  and  planted  fome  millions 
of  trees.  His  {lately  old  houfe  is  furrounded  by 
gardens,  and  rows  oi  trees,  with  a clear  river  on 
one  fide.  And  about  a mile  from  his  houfe,  he 
has  laid  out  a fin al  1 valley  into  walks  and  gar- 
dens, on  one  fide  of  which  the  river  runs.  On 
each  fide  rifes  afteep  mountain  ; one  rocky  and 
bare,  the  other  covered  with  trees,  row  above 
row,  to  the  very  top. 

About  fix  we  went  to  the  church.  It  was 
pretty  well  filled  with  fuch  peifons  as  we  did  not 
look  for,  fo  near  the  High  lands.  But  if  we  were 
furprized  at  their  appearance,  we  were  much 
more  fo  at  their  Tinging.  Thirty  or  forty  fung  an 
anthem  after  fermon,  with  fuch  voices  as  well  as 
judgment,  that  I doubt  whether  they  could  have 
been  excelled  at  any  cathedral  in  England. 

Friday  8.  We  rode  to  Glammifs,  about  fixty- 
four  meafured  miles,  and  on  Saturday  g.  about 
fixty-fix  more  to  Edinburgh.  I was  tired;  how- 
ever I would  not  difappoint  the  congregation  ; 
and  God  gave  me  iirength  according  to  my 
day. 

Sunday  to,  I had  defigned  to  preach  near  the 
infirmary.  But  for  m u the  managers  would  not 
fuffer  it.  So  I preactied  in  our  room,  morning 

an  d 


[ 94  ] 


and  evening,  even  to  the  rich  and  honourable. 
And  I hear  them  witnefs,  they  will  endure  plain 
dealing,  whether  they  profit  bv  it  or  not. 

Monday  1 1.  I took  my  leave  of  Edinburgh 
for  the  prefent.  The  fituation  of  the  citv,  on  a 
hill  (helving  down  on  both  fides,  as  well  as  to 
the  eafl,  with  the  (lately  caflle  upon  a craggv 
rock  on  the  weft,  is  inexpreflily  fine.  And  the 
main  ftreet  fo  broad  and  finely  paved,  v ith  the 
lofty  houfeson  either  hand  (many  of  them  feven 
or  eight  ftories  high]  is  far  beyoned  any  in 
Great-Britain.  But  how  can  it  be  luffercd,  that 
all  manner  of  filth  fhould  ftill  be  thrown  even 
into  this  ftreet  continually  ? Where  are  the 
magiftracy,  the  gentry,  the  nobility  of  the  land  ? 
Have  thev  no  concern  for  the  honour  of  their 
nation  ? How  long  fhall  the  capital  city  of  Scot- 
land, yea,  and  the  chief  ftreet  of  it,  ftink  worfe 
than  a common-fewer  ? Will  no  lover  of  his 
country,  or  of  decency  and  common  fenfc,  find  a 
remedy  for  this  ? 

Holyrood-houfe,  at  the  entrance  of  Edinburgh, 
the  antient  palace  of  the  Scotifh  kings,  is  a noble 
llruflure.  It  was  re-built  and  furnifhed  by  king 
Charles  the  fccond.  One  fide  of  it  is  a piclure 
gallery,  wherein  are  pictures  of  all  the  Scotifh 
kings : and  an  original  one  of  the  celebrated 
Queen  Maty.  It  is  fcarce  pofifible  for  any,  who 
looks  at  this,  to  think  her  fuch  a monfter  as  fome 
have  painted  her  : nor  indeed  for  any  who  con- 


L 95  ] 

Hitlers  the  circumftances  of  her  death,  equal  to 
that  of  an  antient  martyr. 

I preached  in  the  evening  at  Muffelborough, 
and  at  five  in  the  morning.  Then  we  rode  on  to 
Haddington,  where  (the  rain  driving  me  in)  I 
preached  between  nine  and  ten  in  provofi;  Dick- 
fon’s  parlour.  About  one  I preached  at  North* 
berwick,  a pretty  large  town,  clofe  to  the  fea- 
fhore  ; and  at  feVen  in  the  evening  (the  rain 
continuing)  in  the  houfe  at  Dunbar. 

Wednefday,  May  13.  It  being  a fair  mild 
evening  I preached  near  the  key  to  moll  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  town,  and  fpoke  full  as  plain  as 
the  evening  before.  Every  one  feemed  to  receive 
it  in  love,  probably  if  thet-e  was  regular  preach- 
ing here,  much  good  might  be  done. 

Thurfdav  14.  I fet  out  early  and  preached  at 
noon  on  the  Bowling-green  at  Berwick-upon- 
Tweed.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Alnwick. 
Friday  15.  Abundance  of  foldiers  came  in,  on 
their  way  to  Germany,  many  of  thofe  attended 
the  preaching  to  whom  I could  no!  but  make  a 
particular  application.  And  who  knows,  but  what' 
they  have  now  heard,  my  hand  them  in  Head  in  a 
day  of  trial  ? 

Saturday  16.  One  of  our  friends  importuned 
me  much  to  give  them  a fermon  at  Warkfworth. 
And  a poft  chaife  came  for  me  to  the  door  ; in 
' which  I found  one  waiting  For  me,  whom  in  the 
! bloom  of  youth  mere  anguifh  of  foul  had  br  mght 
to  the  gates  of  death.  She  told  me  the  troubles 

which 


[ 96  ] 

which  held  her  in  on  every  fide,  from  which  fhe 
faw  no  way  to  efcape.  I told  her,  “ The  way 
lies  ftrait  before  you.  What  you  want  is  the  pure 
love  of  God.  I believe,  God  will  give  it  you 
fhortly.  Perhaps  it  is  his  good  pleafure,  to  make 
you,  a poor  bruifed  reed,  the  firlf  witnefs  here  of 
that  great  falvation.  Look  for  it  juji  as  you.  are, 
unfit,  unworthy,  unholy,  by  fimple  faith,  every 
day,  every  hour.”  She  did  feel  the  next  day 
iomelhing  fhe  could  not  comprehend,  and  knew 
not  what  to  call  it.  In  one  of  the  trials  which 
ufed  to  fink  her  to  the  earth,  Ore  was  all  calm,  all 
peace  and  love:  enjoying  fo  deep  a commu- 
nion with  God,  as  nothing  external  could  inter- 
rupt. Ah  thou  child  of  affhtlion,  of  forrow  and 
pain,  hath  Jefus  found  out  thee  alfo  ? And  he  is 
able  to  find  and  bring  back  thy  hufband,  as  far  as 
he  is  wandered  out  of  the  way. 

About  noon  I preached  at  Warkfworth,  to  a 
congregation  as  quiet  and  attentive  as  that  at 
Alnwick.  How  long  fhall  we  forget,  that  God 
can  raife  the  dead  ? Were  not  we  dead,  till  he 
quickened  us  ? 

A little  above  the  town,  on  one  fide  of  the 
river  (land  the  remains  of  a magnificent  caflle. 
On  the  other  fide,  toward  the  bottom  of  a fteep 
hill,  covered  with  wood,  is  an  antient  chappel, 
with  feveral  apartments  adjoining  to  it,  hewn  in 
the  folidrock.  The  windows,  the  pillars,  the  com- 
munion-table, and  feveral  other  parts  are  intire. 
But  where  are  the  inhabitants  ? Gathered  to 

their 


[ 97  ] 


their  fathers,  fome  of  them  I hope,  in  Abraham’s 
bofom,  till  rocks,  and  rivers,  and  mountains  flee 
away,  and  the  dead,  fmall  and  great,  Hand  before 
God  ! 

Sunday  17.  I preached  at  eight  in  Alnwick, 
and  about  one  at  Alemouth,  a poor,  barren  place, 
where  as  yet  there  is  no  fruit  of  all  the  feed 
which  has  been  fown.  But  there  may  be,  fince 
many  are  {fill  willing  to  hear. 

In  the  evening  a multitude  of  people,  and  a 
little  army  of  foldiers  were  gathered  in  the 
market-place  at  Alnwick.  In  the  morning  they 
were  to  march  for  Germany.  I hope  fome  of 
them  have  “ put  their  armour  on.” 

Mond.  18.  At  nine  I preached,  do  a large  and 
ferious  congregation  at  Widdrington.  Thence 
we  rode  to  Morpeth.  As  it  was  a rainy  day,  thev 
expended  me  to  preach  in  the  room.  But  obferv- 
ing  a large,  covered  place  in  the  market-place, 
I went  thither  without  delay.  It  was  foon 
more  than  filled  : and  many,  foldiers  and  others 
flood  on  the  outfide,  notwithftanding  the  rain. 
Why  fhouid  we  defpair  of  doing  good  in  any  place, 
becaufe  we  do  not  fee  prefent  fruit  ? At  five  I 
preached  to  the  honed,  fimple-hearted  colliers  at 
Placey,  and  before  fun-fet  reached  Newcaftle. 

Tuefday  the  19th  was  a day  of  reft.  In  the 
evening  God  was  with  us  of  a truth  : and  many 
felt  their  hearts  burn  with  fervent  defire  of  being 
renewed  in  the  whole  image  of  God.  The  fame 
flame  was  kindled  at  Gatefhead-fell,  while  I was 

Vol.  XXXI.  E opening 


one 


[ 98  ] 

opening  and  applying  thofe  words,  Every 
that  hath  this  hope  in  him,  purijidli  himfelf  even  as 
he  is  pure. 

Thurfday  21.  I was  much  {truck  with  a dory 
told  by  Ephraim  Syrus.  I wonder  it  was  never 
tranflated  into  Englilh,  It  is  as  follows. 

“ My  beloved  brethren,  I have  a defire  to 
relate  to  you,  what  our  brother  Abraham  did  in 
his  old  age.  This  blefied  man  had  a brother  ac- 
cording to  the  flefh,  who  had  an  only  child. 
When  her  father  fell  afieep,  {he  remained  an 
orphan.  Her  friends  brought  her  to  him,  being 
fix  years  old.  He  ordered  her  to  be  placed  in 
the  outer  cel!  : he  himfelf  abode  in  the  innen 
A little  door  was  between  them.  He  taught  her 
the  pfalms  and  the  other  feriptures,  and  watched 
and  fang  with  her.  And  as  he  lived  an  auftere 
life,  fo  did  fhe,  willingly  profiting  in  every'  exer- 
cife,  and  labouring  to  excell  in  all  virtues.  The 
holy  man  often  befought  God  for  her  with  tears 
that  her  heart  might  be  fixt  on  God,  and  not 
inlangled  with  the  care  of  worldly  things  : for 
her  father  had  left  her  much  wealth,  which  by 
his  advice  (he  gave  to  the  poor.  And  fhe  intreat- 
ed  him,  faying,  “ Pray  for  me,  that  I may  be 
delivered  from  evil  thoughts,  and  from  all  the 
wiles  and  fnares  of  the  devil.”  The  blefied  man 
rejoiced  feeing  her  good  converfation  and  for- 
wardnefs,  and  tears,  her  lowlinefs,  meeknefs, 
quietnefs  of  fpirit,  and  earneft  love  to  God.  And 

for 


£ 99  ] 

for  twenty  years  fhe  thus  exercifed  herfelf  with 
him,  as  a fair  lamb,  a fpotlefs  dove. 

“ When  the  twentieth  year  was  fulfilled.,  the 
devil  was  mad  againft  her,  and  lay  in  wait  to  get 
her  into  his  net.  There  was  a man,  in  name  re- 
ligious, but  not  in  truth,  who  frequently  came  to 
confult  Abraham.  He  faw  the  maid,  and  his 
heart  burnt  within  him.  He  lay  in  wait  for  her 
a whole  year,  till  her  heart  was  inflamed  alfo. 
And  opening  the  door  of  her  cell,  Ihe  went  out 
to  him,  and  confented  to  his  will.  But  no  fooner 
had  (he  committed  wickednefs,  than  Hie  rent  her 
cloaths,  fmote  her  bread,  and  thought  of  putting 
an  end  to  her  own  life.  For  fhe  faid  in  herfelf, 
“ Now  I am  dead,  and  I have  Io(t  all  my  time 
and  all  my  labour,  and  my  aufterity,  and  my 
tears  are  periflied,  and  I have  deftrqyed  my  own 
foul,  and  I have  brought  forrow  upon  the  man  of 
God,  and  am  become  a laughing  flock  to  the 
devil.  Why  do  I live  any  longer  ? Ah  me,  what 
have  I done?  Ah  me,  from  whence,  how  low  am 
I fallen  ! How  fhall  I be  hid  ? Where  fhall  I «'go  ? 
Into  what  pit  fhall  Icaft  myfeif  ? Where  is  the 
exhortation  of  the  blelfed  man,''  “ Keep  thyfoul 
fpotlefs  for  thy  immortal  bridegroom.”  I dare  no 
more  look  up  to  heaven  I am  loft,  both  to  God 
and  men.  I dare  not  approach  that  holy  man,  fin- 
ner  as  I am  and  full  of  uncleannefs.  Were  I to 
make  fuch  an  attempt,  finely  fire  would  come 
out  of  that  door,  and  confume  me.  It  is  better 
for  me  to  go  where  none  knows  me.  For  I am 
E 2 undone, 


[ 100  ] 


undone,  and  there  is  no  falvation  for  me.”  And 
rifing  up,  fhe  went  ftrait  to  another  city,  and 
became  fervant  at  an  inn. 

A little  before  this,  Abraham  faw  a vifion  : a 
dragon,  great  and  terrible,  rifing  out  of  his  place. 
And  coming  to  his  cell,  he  found  a dove  and  de- 
voured it,  and  then  returned  to  his  place.  The 
holy  man  coming  to  himfeif,  was  much  troubl- 
ed and  wept  bitterly  and  faid,  “ Thou,  Lord, 
knoweft  all  things : and  thou  only  knoweft,  what 
this  vifion  meaneth.”  After  two  davs,  he  faw 
the  fame  dragon  again.  And  he  came  out  of  his 
place,  to  the  blefled  man,  and  laying  his  head 
under  Abraham's  feet,  burft  afunder,  and  the 
dove  was  found  alive  in  the  dragon’s  belly. 

Coming  to  himfeif,  he  called  once  and  again, 
faying,  “ Child,  where  art  thou  ? Behold,  here 
are  two  days  that  thou  haft  not  opened  thv 
mouth,  in  the  praife  of  God.”  Finding  that 
none  anfwered,  and  that  fhe  was  not  there,  he 
perceived  the  vifion,  related  to  her.  And  he 
groaned  in  fpirit  and  faid,  “ O Saviour  of  the 
world,  bring  back  this  lamb  into  thy  fold,  that 
my  gray  hairs  come  not  down  with  forrow  to  the 
grave.  Lord,  defpife  not  my  Application.  But 
fend  down  thy  hand,  and  take  her  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  dragon  that  hath  devoured  her.” 

After  a feafon  he  heard  where  fhe  was;  and 
having  learned  all  things  concerning  her,  he 
called  one  of  his  friends,  and  faid  to  him, 
“ Bring  me  an  horfe  and  the  habit  of  a foldier.  ’ 

And 


[ 101  ] 


And  having  put  it  on,  with  a large  cap  on  his 
head,  lie  left  his  cell,  and  rode  away.  Being 
come  to  the  place  he  alighted  and  went  in  ; and 
after  a time  faid  to  the  inn-keeper,  “ Friend,  I 
have  heard  thou  haft  a beautiful  damfel  here. 
Call  her  to  me,  that  I may  rejoice  with  her.” 
Being  called,  fhe  came.  When  the  holy  man  faw 
her,  in  her  harlot’s  attire,  he  was  melting  into 
tears.  But  he  refrained  himfelf,  that  fire  might 
not  perceive  it.  After  they  fat  down,  fhe  em- 
braced him,  and  kiffed  his  neck.  And  fhe  fm?I- 
led  the  fmell  of  his  cell,  and  called  to  mind  paft 
things,  and  groaning  deeply,  faid  “ W oe  is  me  ! 
What  am  I ?”  The  inn-keeper,  being  aftonifhed 
faid,  “ Mary,  thou  haft  now  been  with  us  two 
years,  and  I never  heard  thee  groan  before, 
or  heard  fuch  a word  from  thee.  What  is 
come  to  thee  ?”  She  anfwered,  “ Would  I 
had  died  three  years  fince  ; then  I had  been 
happy.” 

Immediately  Abraham  faid  to  him,  “ Prepare 
us  a fupper,  that  we  may  rejoice  together  ; fori 
am  come  from  far,  for  her  fake.”  After  fupper 
file  faid  to"  him,  “ Let  us  go  into  the  chamber.” 
And  when  they  were  come  in,  he  faw  a bed 
made  ready.  And  he  fat  upon  it,  and  faid, 
“ Make  faft  the  door.”  She  made  it  faft,  and 
came  to  him.  Having  taken  hold  of  her,  fo  that 
fhe  could  not  run  away,  he  took  off  his  cap,  and 
faid  to  her  weeping,  “ My  child,  Marv,  doftthou 

Ed 


not 


[ 102  ] 

not  know  me  ? Am  not  I he  that  brought  thee 
up  ? Mary,  what  is  come  to  thee  ? Who  hath 
deftroyed  thee,  my  daughter  ? Where  are  thy 
prayers  and  thy  tears  ? Thy  watching  and  holy 
exercife?  My  child,  when  thou  hadft  finned, 
why  didft  thou  not  tell  me,  that  I might  have 
humbled  myfell  for  thee  ? My  daughter,  why  haft 
thou  done  this  P Why  haft  thou  forfaken  thy 
father  ?”  She  remained  in  his  hands  as  a lifelefs 
ftone  : till  he  faid  to  her  with  tears,  “ Doft  thou 
not  fpeak  to  me,  my  child,  Mary  ? Doft  thou  not 
fpeak  to  me  ? Am  I not  come  hither  for  thy 
fake  ? I have  befought  the  Lord  concerning 
thee.”  Till  midnight  he  continued  exhorting 
and  comforting  her.  Then  coming  a little  to 
herfelf,  flue  faid  to  him  weeping,  “ I cannot  look 
at  thee;  fori  am  defiled  with  fin.”  The  bleffed 
man  replied,  “ On  me  be  thy  fin;  only  come  : 
let  us  go  to  cur  place.”  She  faid  to  him,  “ If  it 
be  poffible  for  me  to  repent,  and  if  God  can  ac- 
cept my  repentance,  I come : and  I fall  down, 
and  kifs  thy  fteps,  wetting  them  with  my  tears, 
that  thou  haft  thus  had  compafTion  on  me  a for- 
lorn wretch,  and  art  come  hither,  to  draw  me 
out  of  the  mire  of  fin.”  And  laying  her  head  at 
his  feet,  fhe  wept  bitterly  all  the  night,  fay- 
ing, “ What  (hall  I render  thee  for  all  thy 
benefits  ?” 

Early  in  the  morning,  he  fet  her  upon  the 
horfe,  and  went  before  her  with  great  joy.  And 
being  come  to  his  place,  he  put  her  in  the  inner 

cell ; 


[ 103  ] 

cell ; where  (he  gladly  refumed  her  former  exer- 
cife,  with  fackcloth  and  afhes,  and  much  humi- 
liation, with  mourning  and  watching,  and  ceafe- 
lefs  calling  upon  God.  And  the  merciful  Lord 
gave  her  a fign  that  he  accepted  her  repentance, 
healing  many  that  were  fick,  through  her 
prayers. 

Holy  Abraham  lived  ten  years  after,  behold- 
ing her  good  converfation,  and  bleffing  and 
praifing  and  magnifying  God.  Then  having  lived 
feventy  years,  he  flept  in  peace.  Mary  furvived 
him  thirty  and  five  years,  calling  upon  God 
night  and  day  : infomuch  that  all  who  paffed  by, 
glorified  God,  who  faveth  them  that  were  gone 
affray.” 

* Among  the  believers,  who  met  in  the  even* 
ing,  God  has  kindled  a vehement  defire  of  his 
full  falvation.  Enquiring  how  it  was,  that  in  all 
thefe  parts,  we  have  fcarce  one  living  witnefs  of 
this,  I conftantly  received  from  every  perfon 
one  and  the  fame  anfwer : “ We  fee  now,  we 
fought  it  by  our  works . We  thought  it  was  to 
come  gradually.  We  never  expended  to  re- 
ceive it  in  a moment,  by  faith,  as  we  did  jujlifica- 
tion.”  What  wonder  is  it  then,  that  you  have 
been  fighting  all  thefe  years,  as  one  that  beateth 
the  air  ? 

Friday  22.  I earneftly  exhorted  all  who  were 
fenfible  of  their  wants,  and  athirfl  for  holinefs,  to 
look  unto  Jefus : to  come  to  him  juji  as  they 
were,  and  receive  all  his  promifes.  And  furely  it 
E 4 will 


[ 104  ] 


will  not  be  long,  before  forae  of  thefe  alfo  are 
fully  faved  by  fnnple  faith. 

Saturday  23.  I rode  over  to  Placey.  I was  wet 
through  both  going  and  coming;  but  I did  not 
repent  of  my  journey.  Such  a number  gathered 
together,  a great  part  of  whom  could  rejoice  in 
God.  Thefe  were  quite  ripe  for  all  the  great  and 
precious  promifes,  which  they  received  with  all 
gladnefs. 

Monday  25.  I rode  to  Shields,  and  preached 
in  an  open  place  to  a lillning  multitude.  Many 
of  them  followed  me  to  South-Shields,  where 
I preached  in  the  evening  to  almoft  double  the 
congregation.  How  ripe  for  the  gofpel  are 
thefe  alfo?  What  is  wanting  but  more  la- 
bourers ? 

* “ More  ! Why,  is  there  not  here  (as  in  every 
parilh  in  England)  a particular  minifter  who 
takes  care  of  all  their  fouls  ?”  There  is  one  here, 
who  takes  charge  of  all  their  fouls  : what  care  of 
them  he  takes,  is  another  queftion.  It  may  be 
he  neither  knows,  nor  cates,  whether  they 
are  going  to  heaven  or  hell.  Does  he  afk  man, 
woman  or  child  any  queftion  about  it,  from  one 
Chriftmas  to  the  next  ? O what  account  will 
fuch  a pallor  give,  to  the  Great  Shepherd  in  that 
day ! 

Tuefday  26.  I went  on  to  Sunderland,  and 
in  the  evening  preached  in  the  new  houfe. 
The  next  evening  I preached  at  Monk-were- 
mouth. 


Thurfday 


[ 105  ] 


Thurfday  28.  About  noon  I preached  at  Bid- 
dick,  and  the  power  of  God  was  in  tiie  midft  of 
his  people  : and  more  eminently  at  Sunderland 
in  the  evening.  After  preaching  I met  the  be- 
lievers, and  exhorted  them  to  go  on  to  perfeElion. 
It  pleafed  God  to  apply  the  plain  words  which 
were  fpoken,  fo  that  all  were  athirft  for  him. 
Objeftions  vanifhed  away  : and  a flame  was  kin- 
dled almofl  in  every  heart. 

Sunday  31.  I preached  again,  both  morning 
and  evening  in  Monk-were-mouth  church.  But 
it  would  not  near  contain  the  people,  many  of 
tv  horn  were  confrrained  to  go  away.  After 
evening  fervice  I haftened  to  Newcaftle,  and 
exhorted  a willing  multitude,  To  Jiand  in  the 
zvays  and  fee , and  ajk  for  the  old  paths , and  zualk 
therein . 

In  the  week  following  I preached  at  many  lit- 
tle places  round  Newcaftle.  Friday,  June  5.  I 
went  to  Prudhoe,  where  there  had  been  fomejar 
in  the  fociety,  occaftoned  by  a few,  who  had 
lately  efpoufed,  and  warmly  defended  a new 
opinion.  I faid  not  one  word  about  it,  but 
preached  on,  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  (inner 
that  repenteth , more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  juji 
perfons  who  need  no  repentance.  Afterwards  per- 
ceiving their  hearts  were  much  foftened,  I met 
the  fociety,  and  exhorted  them  to  beware  of  bit- 
ter zeal,  and  to  walk  in  love , as  Chrijl  alfo  loved 
ns.  They  were  afhamed  before  God,  and  (for 
E 5 the 


[ io6  ] 


the  prefent  at  leaf!)  their  contentions  were  at  an 
end. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Nafferton ; and 
the  next  morning  rode  to  Winlington,  where  I 
had  appointed  to  be  between  twelve  and  one. 
They  placed  the  hand  exaftly  fronting  the  fun, 
which  flione  very  warm  and  very  bright.  But  al- 
moft  as  foon  as  I began,  the  clouds  rofe  and  fha- 
dowed  us  till  I concluded.  I preached  at  Swal- 
well  at  five,  to  fuch  a congregation  as  was  never 
feen  there  before. 


^Monday  8.  I rode  to  Hexham,  and  preached 
at  noon  in  an  open  place  near  the  church.  Some 


expected  there  would  be  much  dillurbance  : but 
there  was  none  at  all.  We  rode  thence  over  the 
mountains  to  Allandale,  where  I had  not  been  for 
feveral  years.  After  preaching  and  meeting  the 
fociety,  I took  horfe  again,  and  crolnng  another 
chain  of  mountains,  reached  Wardale  before 
eleven. 

Thurfday  9.  I preached  at  nine,  but  was  ob- 
liged to  Hand  abroad,  becaufe  of  the  multitude 
ofpeople.  The  fun  fnone  full  in  my  face,  but  af- 
ter having  fpent  a fhort  time  in  prayer,  I regard- 
ed it  not.  I then  met  the  fociety,  and  came  juft 
in  time,  to  prevent  their  all  turning  di  (Tenters, 
which  they  were  on  the  point  of  doing,  being 
quite  difgufted  at  the  curate,  whofe  life  was  no 
better  than  his  doftrine. 

At  noon  I preached  in  Teefdale.  Moft  of  the 
men  are  lead-miners,  who  a while  ago  were 


turned 


[ io7  1 

turned  out  of  their  work  for  following  this  way . 
By  this  means  many  of  them  got  into  far  better 
work.  Andfome  time  after,  their  old  mailer  was 
glad  to  employ  them  again. 

We  had  a long  ftage  from  hence  to  Swal-dale, 
where  I found  an  earned,  loving,  fimple  people, 
whom  I likewife  exhorted,  Not  to  leave  the 
church,  though  they  had  not  the  bed  of  mini- 
fters.  I then  baptized  a man  and  two  women, 
who  had  been  bred  among  the  anabaptids:  and  I 
believe  all  of  them  received  luch  a bleding  there* 
in,  as  they  were  not  able  to  expiefs. 

Wednefday  10.  I took  horfe  at  half  hour  pad 
three,  and  reached  Barnatd-cadle  foon  after  fix. 
I preached  at  eight  in  a ground  adjoining  to  the 
town.  Are  tliefe  the  people  that  a few  years  ago, 
were  like  roaring  lions  ? They  were  now  quiet 
as  lambs  : nor  could  feveral  (howers  drive  them 
away  till  I concluded.  In  the  evening  1 preached 
at  Branfpath,  near  Bidiop-awkland.  Mod  of  the 
congregation,  though  I dood  in  the  dreet,  were 
deeply  attentive.  Only  one,  a kind  of  gentleman, 
feemed  difpleafed.  But  he  had  none  to  fecond 
him. 

Friday  12.  We  had  one  of  the  mod  folemn 
watch-nights  at  Newcadle,  which  we  have  had 
for  feveral  years.  Saturday  13.  I rode  once 
more  to  Sunderland,  and  preached  as  ufual,  to  a 
numerous  congregation.  Sunday  14.  After  Mr. 
G.  had  read  prayers,  I fpoke  exceeding  plain  to 
E 6 as 


[ 108  ] 


as  many  as  could  croud  into  the  church.  And  out 
of  fo  many  that  are  called,  will  not  fome  be  cho - 
Jen? 

About  three  I preached  at  Gatefhead-fell  ; 
about  five,  at  the  Garth-heads : at  each  place  to 
a larger  congregation  than  I ever  faw  there  be- 
fore. What  a change  is  wrought  in  this  whole 
country  ? And  will  it  not  be  wrought  in  the 
whole  kingdom  ? 

Monday  15.  I rode  to  Durham,  having  ap- 
pointed to  preach  there  at  noon.  The  meadow, 
near  the  river  fide,  was  quite  convenient,  and  the 
fmall  rain  neither  difturbed  me  nor  the  congre- 
gation. In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Hartlepool. 
But  I had  much  ado  to  preach.  My  firength  was 
gone  as  well  as  my  voice  ; and  indeed  they  ge- 
nerally go  together.  Three  days  in  a week  I 
can  preach  thrice  a day  without  hurting  myfelf. 
But  I had  now  far  exceeded  this,  befides  meeting 
daffies,  and  exhorting  the  focieties.  I was  ob- 
liged to  lie  down  good  part  of  Tuefdav  : how- 
ever in  the  afternoon  I preached  at  Cherington, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Hartlepool  again,  though 
not  without  difficulty.  Wednefday  17. 1 rode  to 
Stockton,  where  a little  before  the  time  of  preach- 
ing, my  voice  and  firength  were  reftored  at  once. 
The  next  evening  it  began  to  rain  juft  as  I began 
to  preach : but  it  was  fufipended  till  the  fervice 
was  over.  It  then  rained  again  till  eight  in  the 
morning. 

Friday  19.  It  was  hard  work  to  ride  eight  miles, 

fo 


[ io9  ] 


fo  called,  in  two  hours  an-d  an  half:  the  rain 
beating  upon  us,  and  the  by-road  being  exceed- 
ing flippery.  But  we  forgot  all  this,  when  we 
came  to  The  Grange  : fo  greatly  was  God  pre- 
fect with  his  people.  Thence  we  rode  to  Dar- 
lington. Here  we  were  under  a difficulty  again. 
Not  half  the  people  could  come  in,  and  the  rain 
forbad  my  preaching  without.  But  at  one  (the 
hour  of  preachingl  the  rain  flopt,  and  did  not 
begin  again  till  paft  two.  So  the  people  flood 
very  conveniently  in  the  yard.  And  many  did 
not  care  to  go  away.  When  I went  in,  they 
crouded  to  the  door,  and  windows,  and  flayed 
till  I took  horfe.  At  feven  I preached  at  Yarm, 
and  defired  one  of  our  brethren  to  take  my  place 
in  the  morning. 

Saturday  20.  At  noon  I applied  thofe  words, 
Now  abide,  faith,  hope,  love : but  the  greatefl  of 
theft  is  love. 

This  evening  alfo  it  rained  at  Hutton-Rugby, 
till  feven,  the  hour  of  preaching.  But  God  heard 
the  prayer,  and  from  the  time  I began,  we  had 
only  fome  fcattering  drops.  After  fermon  the  fo- 
ciety  alone,  filled  the  new  preaching- houfe.  So 
mightily  has  the  word  of  God  prevailed,  fince 
Alexander  Mather  laboured  here. 

Sunday  21.  I preached  to  a larger  congrega- 
tion than  in  the  evening,  on  Behold  what  manner 
of  love  the  Father  hath  bfowed  upon  us,  that  we 
Jhould  be  called  the  children  of  God  1 1 then  rode  to 
Ofmotherly,  where  the  minifter  read  prayers  fe- 

rioufly. 


[ 1,0  ] 

rioufly,  and  preached  an  ufeful  fermon.  After 
fervice  I began  in  the  church-yard,  I believe 
many  were  wounded,  and  many  comforted.  Af- 
ter dinner  I called  on  Mr.  Adams,  who  firft  in- 
vited me  to  Ofmotherly.  He  was  reading  the 
firange  account  of  the  two  miftionaries,  who  have 
lately  made  fuch  a figure — in  the  news-papers.  I 
fuppofe  the  whole  account  is  juft  fuch  another 
grofs  impofition  upon  the  public,  as  the  man’s 
gathering  the  people  together  to  fee  him  go  into 
the  quart  bottle.  “ Men  feven  hundred  years 
old  !”  And  why  not  feven  yards  high?  He  that 
can  believe  it,  let  him  believe  it. 

At  five  I preached  at  Potto,  a mile  from  Hut- 
ton. When  I began  I was  extremely  weak.  Bat 
God  renewed  my  ftrength,  and  fo  applied  his 
word,  that  it  feemed  as  if  every  onemujl  believe 
it.  But  the  fcripture  cannot  be  broken.  Some 
feed  will  ftill  fall  by  the  way-fide , and  fome  onjlony 
ground  ! 

* Monday  22.  I fpoke  one  by  one,  to  the  fo- 
ciety  at  Hutton-Rugby.  They  were  about  eighty 
in  number  ; of  whom  near  feventy  tvere  belie- 
vers, and  fixteen  (probably)  renewed  in  love. 
Here  were  two  bands  of  children,  one  of  boys, 
and  one  of  girls,  rnoft  of  whom  were  walking  in 
the  light.  Four  of  thofe  who  feemed  to  be  faved 
from  fin,  were  of  one  family  : and  all  of  them 
walked  holy  and  unblameable,  adorning  the  doc- 
trine of  God  their  Saviour. 


At 


[ 1*1  ] 

At  eleven  I preached  once  more,  though  in 
great  weaknefs  of  body,  and  met  the  flewards  of 
all  the  focieties.  I then  rode  to  Stokefley,  and 
having  examined  the  little  fociety,  went  on  for 
Gifborough.  The  fun  was  burning  hot,  but  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  a cloud  interpofed,  and  he 
troubled  us  no  more.  I was  defired  by  a gentle- 
man of  the  town,  to  preach  in  the  market-place. 
And  there  a table  was  placed  for  me.  But  it  was 
in  a bad  neighbourhood.  For  there  was  fo  vehe- 
ment a flench  of  finking  fifh,  as  was  ready  to 
fuffocate  me.  And  the  people  roared  like  the 
waves  of  the  fea  : but  the  voice  of  the  Lord  was 
mightier.  And  in  a few  minutes  the  whole  mul- 
titude was  fill,  and  ferioufly  attended,  while  I 
proclaimed  Jefus  Chrift , made  of  God  unto  us 
wifdom,  and  righteoujnejs , and  fanBif  cation,  and 
redemption . 

Tuefday  23.  I began  about  five,  near  the  fame 
place,  and  had  a great  part  of  the  fame  audience. 
Yet  they  were  not  the  fame  : the  change  might 
eafily  be  read  in  their  countenance.  When  we 
took  horfe,  and  jufi  faced  the  fun,  it  was  hard 
work  for  man  and  beaf . But  about  eight,  the 
wind  fhifted,  and  blowing  in  our  face,  kept  us 
coo),  till  we  came  to  Whitby. 

In  the  evening  I preached  on  the  top  of  the 
hill,  to  which  you  afcend  by  an  hundred,  ninety 
and  one  fleps.  The  congregation  was  exceeding 
large,  and  ninety- nine  in  an  hundred  were  atten- 
tive. When  I began,  the  fun  fhone  full  in  my 

face: 


no 


[ 112  J 

face:  but  he  was  foon  clouded,  and  fhone 
more  till  I had  done. 

* After  meeting  the  fociety,  f talked  with  a 
fenfible  woman,  whofe  experience  feemed  pecu- 
liar. She  faid,  “ A few  days  before  Ealler  laft,. 
I was  deeply  convinced  of  fin  : and  in  Eafter- 
week,  I knew  my  fins  were  forgiven,  and  was 
filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  But  in 
about  eighteen  days,  I was  convinced  in  a dream 
of  the  necelfity  of  a higher  falvation  : and  I 
mourned  day  and  night,  in  agony  of  defire  to  be 
throughly  lanfitified  : till  on  the  23d  dav  after  my 
jollification,  I found  a total  change,  toge- 
ther with  a clear  witnefs,  that  the  blood  of 
Jefus  had  cleanfed  tne  from  all  ur.righte- 
oufnefs.” 

* Wednefday  24.  I walked  round  the  old  Ab- 
bey, which  both  with  regard  to  its  fize,  (being, 
I judge  an  hundred  yards  long)  and  the  work- 
manfhip  of  it,  is  one  of  the  fineft,  if  not  the  fineft 
ruin  in  the  kingdom.  Hence  we  rode  to  Robin- 
hood’s-Bay,  where  I preached  at  fix  in  theLower- 
llreet,  near  the  Key.  In  the  midft  of  the  fermon 
a large  cat,  frighted  out  of  a chamber,  leaped 
down  upon  a woman’s  head,  and  ran  over  the 
heads  or  fhoulders  of  many  more.  But  none  of 
them  moved,  or  cried  out,  any  more  than  if  it  had 
been  a butterfly. 

Thurfday  25.  I had  a pleafant  ride  to  Scarbo- 
rough, the  wind  tempering  the  heat  of  the  fun. 
I had  defigned  to  preach  abroad  in  the  evening ; 

but 


[ 1 1 3 ] 


but  the  thunder,  lightning,  and  rain  prevented. 
However  I hood  on  a balcony,  and  feveral  hun- 
dreds of  people  flood  below  : and  notwithftand- 
ing  the  heavy  rain,  would  not  Air,  till  I con- 
cluded. 

Frid.  2 6. 1 rode  to  Hull,  and  had  there  alfo  the 
comfort  of  finding  fome  witneffes  of  the  great  fal- 
vation.  I was  conftrained  to  leave  them  early 
in  the  morning,  on  Saturday  27.  At  feven,  I 
preached  in  Beverley,  about  one,  in  Pocklingtort 
and  at  York  in  the  evening,  to  the  far  genteeleli 
audience  I have  had,  fince  I left  Edinburgh. 

Monday  29.  I met  the  dalles,  and  found  many 
therein  who  were  much  alive  to  God.  But  many 
others  were  utterly  dead,  which  fufhciently  ac- 
counts for  the  fociety’s  not  increafing.  Wednes- 
day, July  1,  the  flewards  met,  from  the  focie- 
ties  in  the  country.  In  the  evening  we  all 
wreflled  with  God,  for  the  revival  of  his  work. 
Many  found  their  hearts  much  enlarged  herein, 
and  had  confidence  he  would  anfwer  the  prayer. 

Thurfday  2.  I fet  out  early  for  North  Cave, 
twenty  computed  miles  from  York.  I preached 
there  at  nine  to  a deeply  ferious  congregation, 
and  was  much  refrefhed.  At  two.  I preached 
to  fuch  another  congregation  at  Thorpe,  and 
concluded  the  day,  by  preaching  and  meeting 
the  fociety  at  Pocklington. 

Friday  3.  We  returned  to  York,  where  I 
was  defired  to  call  upon  a poor  prifoner  in  the 
caflle.  I had  formerly  occafion  to  take  notice  of 

an 


[ “4  ] 

an  hideous  monfler,  called  a chancery  bill,  I 
now  faw  the  fellow  to  it,  called  a declaration. 
The  plain  fad!  was  this.  Some  time  fince  a man 
who  lived  near  Yarm,  alMed  others  in  running 
fome  brandy.  His  (hare  was  worth  near  four 
pounds.  After  he  had  wholly  left  off  that  bad 
work,  and  was  following  his  own  bufinefs,  that 
of  a weaver,  he  was  arrefted,  and  fent  to  York 
goal.  And  not  long  after  comes  down  a declara- 
tion, “ that  Jac.  Wh — had  landed  a velfel  lad» 
ed  with  brandy  and  Geneva,  at  the  port  of  Lon- 
don, and  fold  them  there,  whereby  he  was  in- 
debted to  his  Majelty  577 1.  and  upwards.” 
And  to  tell  this  worthy  ftory,  the  lawyer  takes 
up  thirteen  or  fourteen  fheets  of  treble  ftampt 
paper. 

*0  England,  England  ! Will  this  reproach 
never  be  rolled  away  from  thee  ? Is  there  any 
thing  like  this  to  be  found,  either  among  Papifts, 
Turks  or  Heathens?  In  the  name  of  truth,  juf- 
tice,  mercy,  and  common  fenfe,  I afk  1.  Why 
do  men  lie,  for  lying  fake  ? Is  it  only,  to 
keep  their  hands  in  ? What  need  elfe,  of  fay- 
ing it  was  the  port  of  London  ? When  every  one 
knew  the  brandy  was  landed,  above  three  hun- 
dred miles  from  thence.  What  a monifrous  con- 
tempt of  truth  does  this  fhew,  or  rather  hatred 
to  it?  2.  Where  is  the  jujlice  of  fwelling  four 
pounds  into  five  hundred  and  feventy  feven  ? 3. 
Where  is  the  common  fenfe,  of  taking  up  fourteen 

fheets  to  tell  a ftory,  that  may  be  told  in  ten 

lines  ? 


[ 115  ] 

iines  ? 4.  Where  is  the  mercy,  of  thus  grinding 
the  face  of  the  poor  ? Thus  fucking  the  blood 
of  a poor,  beggared  prifoner  ? Would  not  this 
be  execrable  villainy,  if  the  paper  and  writing 
together  were  only  fix-pence  a fheet,  when  they 
have  ftript  him  already  of  his  little  all,  and  not 
left  him  fourteen  groats  in  the  world  ? 

Sunday  5.  Believing  one  hindrance  of  the 
work  of  God  in  York,  was  the  negledf  of  field- 
preaching,  I preached  this  morning  at  eight,  in 
an  open  place,  near  the  city  walls.  Abundance 
of  people  ran  together,  moll;  of  whom  were 
deeply  attentive.  One  or  two  only  were  angry, 
and  threw  a few  ftones  : but  it  was  labour  loft  ; 
for  none  regard  them. 

Monday  6.  I rode  to  Tadcafter,  and  preach- 
ed within,  the  rain  not  fuffering  us  to  be  abroad, 
as  I intended.  In  the  evening,  I preached  at 
Otley,  and  afterwards  talked  with  many  of  the 
fociety.  There  is  reafon  to  believe,  that  ten  or 
twelve  of  thefe,  are  filled  with  the  love  of  God. 
1 found  one  or  two  more,  the  next  day  at  Few- 
fton,  a few  miles  north  of  Otley,  (where  I 
preached  at  noon)  whom  God  had  raifed  up,  to 
witnefs  the  fame  good  confeflion.  And  indeed 
the  whole  congregation  feemed  juft  ripe,  for  re- 
ceiving all  the  promifes. 

Wednefday  8.  I rode  to  Knarefborough, 
where  it  was  expedled,  we  fhould  not  meet  with 
fo  friendly  a reception.  But  the  Lord  is  king. 
Our  own  houfe  being  too  final],  I preached  in 

the 


[ ] 

the  alien  lblv-room.  Mofl  of  the  people  looked 
wild  enough  when  they  came  in.  But  they 
were  tame  befoie  they  went  out ; and  behaved 
as  decently  and  ferioufly,  as  the  congtegation  at 
Otley. 

Indeed  the  mob  never  wasfo  furious  here,  as 
they  were  formerly  at  Otley  : where  the  good 
magi  ft  ate  chrefiecl,  “ Do  what  you  will  to  them, 
fo  you  break  no  bones."  But  may  not  a man  cut 
his  neighbour’s  throat,  without  breaking  his 
bones. 

The  remaining  part  of  this  week  I preached 
atGuifeley,  Bingley,  and  Kighley.  Sunday  12.  I 
bad  appointed  to  be  at  Haworth.  But  the  church 
would  not  near  contain  the  people  who  came 
from  all  tides.  However  Mr.  Grimfbaw  had  pro- 
vided for  this  by  fixing  a fcallold  ontheoutfide 
of  home  of  the  windows  thro’  which  I went  after 
prayers,  and  the  pe  ole  like  wife  all  went  out  into 
the  church-yard.  The  afternoon  congregation  was 
larger  Hill.  What  has  God  wrought  in  the  mid  ft 
of  thofe  rough  mountains  ] 

Monday  13.  At  five  I preached  on  the 
manner  of  waiting  for  Pe  fc£t  Love  ; the  rather 
to  latisly  Mr.  Grimfbaw,  whom  many  had  la- 
boured to  puzzle  and  perplex  about  it.  So  once 
more  their  had  labour  was  loll,  and  we  were  more 
united  both  in  heart  and  judgment  than  ever. 

At  noon  I preached  in  Coin,  once  inacceffible 
to  the  gofpe!  ; but  now  the  yard  I was  in,  would 
not  contain  the  people.  I believe,  I might  have 

preached 


[ 1*7  3 

preached  at  the  crofs,  without  the  leaft  interrup- 
tion. 

About  y.  I preached  at  Paddiham,  another 
place  eminent  for  all  manner  of  wickednefs.  The 
multitude  of  people  obliged  me  to  Hand  in  the 
yard  of  the  preaching-houfe.  Over  againft  me, 
at  little  diftance  fat  fome  of  the  moil  impudent 
women  I ever  faw.  Yet  1 am  not  fure,  that  God 
did  not  reach  their  hearts.  For 

! 

: “ They  roar'd,  and  would  have  blufh'd,  if  capable 
| ofjharne 


li 

ie  I 
)■  ! 

le 

er 

;o 
a s 

in 

h 

ict 

b 

ice 

ere 

We 

aid 

ave 

ki 


In  the  morning  I preached  at  Bentley  Wood- 
Green,  on  Be.  ye  perjetl  as  your  Father  winch  is  in 
heaven  is  pefedl.  Mr.  G.  afterwards  told  me, 
That  this  perfection  he  firmly  believed,  and 
daily  prayed  for,  namely,  The  love  ol  God  and 
man  producing  all  thofe  fruits  which  are  deferib- 
ed  in  our  Lord’s  fermon  upon  the  mount. 

About  noon  I preached  at  Baycup,  a village  in 
Rofendale.  The  new  preaching-houfe  is  large, 
but  not  large  enough  to  contain  the  congrega- 
tion. Soon  after  five,  I preached  at  Hepionitall, 
The  fociety  here  had  been  greatly  hurt,  bv  two 
leaders  getting  into  new  opinions.  One  oi  them 
fell  upon  me  direftly,  for  “ denying  the  right- 
eoufnefs  ol  Chrift.”  On  this  we  difeourfed  abouit 
an  hour.  The  i flue  was,  one  of  them  was  ouite 
convinced : and  the  other  (to  my  no  final!  fatif- 

fafiion) 


[ »8  ] 

fa&ion)  defired  me  to  put  a new  leader  in  his 
place. 

Wednefday  15.  About  feven  I preached  at 
Ewood,  and  about  noon  at  Halifax.  New  opini- 
ons had  done  harm  here  alfo.  But  at  this  time 
all  was  quiet.  I rode  over  to  Bradford  in  the  after- 
noon, where  I found  an  Anabaptift  teacher  had 
perplexed  and  unfettled  the  minds  of  feveral. 
But  they  are  now  lefs  ignorant-of  Satan’s  devi- 
ces, 

Friday  j 7.  I rode  to  Birftal,  and  was  much 
comforted,  to  find  many  of  our  firft  children  in 
this  county,  who  are  not  yet  weary  of  the  good, 
old  way.  May  they  continue  therein  unto  the  day 
of  the  Lord  Jefus  ! 

Saturday  18.  At  one  I preached  at  South- 
Royd.  The  good  people  had  placed  the  Hand,  fo 
that  the  fun,  which  was  very  hot,  fhone  upon 
my  head,  and  the  wind,  which  was  very  cold, 
blew  in  my  neck.  But  it  was  all  one  : 1 was  on 
my  mailer’s  bufinefs.  And  great  was  our  rejoic- 
ing in  him. 

Sund.  19.  I preached  in  Birftal  room  at  eight. 
At  one  we  had  thoufands,  the  greateft  part  of 
whom  were  perfons  fearing  God  and  working 
righteoujnefs.  I rode  thence  to  Leeds,  in  order 
to  preach  a funeral  fermon  for  Mary  Shent,  who 
after  many  fevere  conflidls,  died  in  great  peace. 
It  was  one  of  the  largeft  congregations,  which 
has  been  feen  at  Leeds,  to  whom  I fpoke  vely 
plain  from  part  of  the  gofpel  for  the  day,  Give 

an 


[ W9  ] 

#n  account  of  thy  fewardjhip,  for  thou  mayejl  be 
no  longer  fezvard. 

* I battened  back  to  the  love-featt  at  Birftal.  It 
was  the  firft  of  the  kind  which  had  been  there. 
Many  were  furprized  when  I told  them,  “ the 
very  defign  of  a love-feaft  is  a free  and  familiar 
converfation,  in  which  every  man,  yea  and 
woman  has  liberty  to  fpeak  whatever  may  be  to 
the  glory  of  God.”  Several  then  did  fpeak  ; and 
not  in  vain  : The  flame  ran  from  heart 
to  heart.  Efpecially  while  one  was  declaring 
with  all  fimplicity,  the  manner  wherein  God, 
during  the  morning  fermon,  (on  thole  words, 

I will  be  thou  clean)  had  fet  her  foul  at  full  li- 
berty. Two  men  alfo  fpoke  to  the  fame  effefi : 
and  two  others,  who  had  found  peace  with  God. 
We  then  joyfully  poured  out  our  fouls  before 
God,  and  praifed  him  for  his  marvellous 
works. 

Monday  20.  I came  to  a full  explanation, 

with  that  good  man  Mr.  V . Lord,  if  I 

mujl  difpute,  let  it  be  with  the  children  of  the 
devil.  Let  me  be  at  peace  with  thy  children  ! 

* On  Tuefday,  Wednefday,  and  Thurfday,  I 
preached  at  the  neighbouring  towns.  Friday  24. 
in  fpeaking  from  thofe  words,  In  many  things  we 
\ offend  all , I obferved,  i.  As  long  as  we  live, 

I our  foul  is  connefled  with  the  body.  2.  As  long 
as  it  is  thus  connected,  it  cannot  think  but  by 
the  help  of  bodily  organs.  3.  As  long  as  thefe 
organs  are  imperfeft,  we  are  liable  to  miflakes, 

both 


[ 120  ] 

both  fpecuiative  and  practical  : 4.  Yea,  and  a 
midake  may  occafion  my  loving  a good  man  lefs 
than  I ought  ; which  is  a defective,  that  is,  a 
wrong  temper.  5.  For  all  thefe  we  need  the  aton- 
ing blood,  as  indeed  for  every  defefb  or  omif- 
fion.  Therefore,  6.  all  men  have  need  to  fay- 
daily,  Forgive  us  our  Irefpajfes. 

About  one,  I preached  at  Bramley,  where 
Jonas  Rufhford,  about  fourteen  years  old,  gave 
me  the  following  relation. 

“ About  this  time  lad  year  I was  defired  by 
two  of  our  neighbours,  to  go  with  them  to  Mr. 
Crowther’s  at  Skipton,  who  would  not  fpeak  to 
/hem,  about  a man  that  had  been  miffing  twenty 
days,  but  bid  them  bring  a boy  twelve  or  thir- 
teen years  old.  When  we  came  in,  he  dood 
reading  a book.  He  put  me  into  a bed,  with  a 
looking-glafs  in  my  hand,  and  covered  me  all 
over.  Then  he  afked  me,  whom  I had  a mind 
to  fee  ? And  I faid,  “ my  mother.”  I prefently 
faw  her  with  a lock  of  wool  in  her  hand,  hand- 
ing jud  in  the  place,  and  the  eloaths  die  was  in, 
as  die  told  me  afterwards.  Then  he  bid  me  look 
again  for  the  man  that  was  miffing,  who  was 
one  of  our  neighbours.  And  I looked  and  faw4 
him  riding  towards  Idle  ; but  he  was  very  drunk. 
And  he  dopped  at  the  alehoufe  and  drank  two 
pints  more  : and  he  pulled  out  a guinea  to 
change.  Two  men  dood  by,  a big  man  and  a 
little  man : and  they  went  on  before  him.  and  got 
two  hedge-dakes.  And  when  he  came  up  on 

Min  del- 


[ 1»1  ] 

Windel-Common,  at  the  top  of  the  hill,  they 
pulled  him  off  his  horfe,  and  killed  him,  and 
threw  him  into  a coal-pit.  And  I faw  it  all  as 
plain,  as  if  I was  clofeto  them.  And  if  I faw  the 
men  I fhould  know  them  again. 

“ We'went  back  to  Bradford  that  night,  and 
the  next  day  I went  with  our  neighbours,  and 
fhewed  them  the  fpot  where  he  was  killed,  and 
the  pit  he  was  thrown  into.  And  a man  went 
down,  and  brought  him  up.  And  it  was  as  I had 
told  them  : his  handkerchief  was  tied  about  his 
mouth,  and  fattened  behind  his  neck.” 

Is  it  improbable  only,  or  flatly  impoffible, 
when  all  the  circumftances  are  confidered,  that 
this  fhould  all  be  pure  fidlion  ? They  that  can 
believe  this  may  believe  a man’s  getting  into  a 
bottle. 

From  Bramley  I rode  to  Kippaxu  Mr.  Venn 
came  a little  after  we  were  cone  into  the  church. 
Mr.  Romaine  read  prayers.  I preached  on 
Chrift.  cruified,to  the  Jews  a Jr  ambling  block,  and 
to  the  Greeks  foolifhnejs.  O why  fhould  they  who 
agree  in  this  great  point,  fall  out  about  fmaller 
things ! 

Saturday  25.  About  one,  I preached  at  Sea- 
croft,  and  found  feveral  who  believed  God  had 
laved  them  from  fin.  In  the  evening  I talked  with 
twelve  or  fourteen  of  thefe  particularly.  But  I 
found  not  one,  who  prefumed  to  fay,  that  he 
did  not  need  the  atoning  blood.  Nor  could  I 
hear  of  any  more  than  two  perfons,  that  ever 
Vol.  XXXI,  F fpoke 


[ 122  ] 

fpoke  in  this  manner.  And  thefe  wefe  foon  after 
for  that  reafon,  expelled  out  ofOtley  fociety. 

Sunday  26.  I preached  at  feven,  on  Lord,  ij 
thou,  wilt,  thou  canjl  make  me  clean.  And  oh  ! what 
a flame  did  God  kindle  ! Many  were  “ on  fire, 
to  be  diffolved  in  love.” 

About  one  I preached  to  the  ufual  congrega- 
tion at  Birfial.  What  a work  is  God  working 
here  alfo  ! Six  in  one  clafs  have  within  this 
week  found  peace  with  God  : two,  this  morning, 
in  meeting  the  clafs.  While  I was  praying  on 
Sunday  evening,  that  God  would  give  us  a token 
for  good,  James  Eaftwoodwas  fet  at  full  liberty  : 
as  were  William  Wilfon,  and  Elizabeth  his  wife 
before,  and  Martha  his  daughter  with  Agnes 
Gooddel  on  the  Wednefday  after.  To  thele 
were  added,  Jofeph  Newfam,  and  Richard  Helle- 
well,  fixteen  years  of  age.  So  that  the  oldeft  of 
our  believers  now  cry  out,  We  never faw  it  before 
on  this fajhion. 

Monday  27.  I preached  at  Staiocrofs  about 
eleven,  about  five,  at  Barley-hall  ; the  next 
morning  at  Sheffield.  In  the  afternoon  I rode  on 
to  Matlock-Buth.  The  valley  which  reaches 
from  the  town  to  the  bath  is  p'eafant  beyond 
expreflion.  In  the  bottom  of  this  runs,  a little 
river:  clofe  to  which  a mountain  rifes,  almoft 
perpendicular,  to  an  enormous  height,  part 
covered  with  green,  part  with  ragged  and  naked 
rocks.  On  the  other  fide  the  mountain  rifes 
gradually,  with  tufts  of  trees  here  and  there. 

The 


[ 123  ] 


The  brow  'on  both  Tides  is  fringed  with  trees, 
which  Teem  to  anfwer  each  other. 

Many  of  oiir  friends  wrere  come  from  various 
parts.  At  Cx,  I preached  handing  under  the 
hollow  of  a rock,  on  once  fide  of  a fmall  plain, 
on  the  other  fide  of  which  was  a tall  mountain. 
There  were  many  well-dreft  hearers,  this  being  the 
hicrh  feafon  ; and  all  of  them  behaved  well.  But 
as  I walked  back,  a gentleman-like  man  afked 
me,  “ Why  do  you  talk  thus  of  faith,  fluff,  nan - 
fenfe:'  Upon  enquiry,  I found  he  was  an  emi- 
nent deift.  What  has  the  plague  crept  into  the 
Peak  of  Derhyjlnre? 

Wednefday  29.  I preached  at  five,  near  the 
Bath,  inWoodfeats  at  two,  and  in  the  evening,  at 
the  end  of  the  houfe  in  Sheffield,  to  thrice  as  many 
people  as  it  would  have  contained.  Thurfday 
and  Friday  I preached  at  Rotherham,  in  the 
{hell  of  the  new  houfe,  which  is  an  oftagon.  Pity 
our  houfes,  where  the  ground  will  admit  of  it 
fhould  be  built  in  any  other  form.  The  congrega- 
tion was  larger  than  ever:  the  focietywell  unit- 
ed and  much  alive  to  God. 

Saturday,  Auguft  1.  I rode  to  Clayworth,  and 
after  preaching,  laboured  all  I could  to  reconcile 

Itwo  brothers,  who  had  long  been  quarrelling 
about  their  inheritance.  But  it  was  labour  loft. 
Indeed  the  reafon  of  the  thing  was  clear  : but 
paflion  is  ever  too  hard  for  reafon. 

Hence  I went  on  to  Mifterton,  and  both  in 
the  evening  and  morning,  fpoke  to  a lifelefs 


F 3 


nroney 


[ 124  1 


money-getting  people,  in  a {harper  manner  than 
ever  I did  before  : and  (I  heard  afterward)  with 
good  effedh 

Sunday  2.  I had  the  fatis faction  of  hearing  Mr. 
Madan  preach  an  excellent  fermon  at  Haxey.  At 
two  I preached  at  Weftwodd  fide,  to  the  largeft 
congregation  I ever  faw  in  the  ifle  of  Axholme  : 
and  to  nearly  the  fame  at  Epworth-Crofs,  as  foon 
as  the  church  fervice  was  ended.  After  {pending 
two  days  here,  on  Wednefday  5.  I preached 
about  nine  at  Ferry,  and  then  rode  on  to  Gainf- 
borough.  I preached  in  the  old  hall  to  a mixt 
multitude,  part  civil,  part  rude  as  bears.  We  rode 
home  thro’  heavy  tain  joined  with  much  thunder 
and  lightning,  part  of  which  was  juft  over  our 
heads.  But  the  Lord Jitteth  above  the  water  floods. 
So  we  came  fafe,  only  very  wet,  to  Epworth. 

Thurfdav  6.  I preached  about  nine,  at  Hatfield 
Wood-houfe,  and  about  one  at  Syke-houfe,  to  far 
the  largeft  congregation  which  has  been  fecn 
there  formally  years.  Boaft  who  will,  that  “ Me- 
thodifm  (the  revival  of  true  religion)  is  juft  com- 
ing to  nothing.”  We  know  better  things,  and  are 
thankful  to  God  for  its  continual  increafe. 

SaturdayB.  I preached  at  W interton  to  fuch  a 
congregation,  as  1 fuppofe  never  met  there 
before.  From  thence  we  rode  on  to  Barrow, 
where  the  mob  was  in  readinefs  to  receive  us.  But 
their  hearts  failed  : fo  they  gave  onlv  two  or 
three  huzzas,  and  let  us  pafs  by  unmplefted. 

As 


[ 125  ] 


As  foon  as  I came  out  to  preach,  we  had  ano- 
ther huzza.  But  as  more  and  more  of  the  angry 
ones  came  within  hearing,  they  loft  all  their 
fiercenels,  and  funk  into  calmnefs  and  attention. 
So  I concluded  my  difcourfe  with  quietnefs  and 
fatisfadlion.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Grimfby,  where  I fpent  Sunday  and  Monday. 
Tuefday  11,  I preached  at  two  in  Lorborough, 
in  the  evening,  at  Elkington.  The  next  morn- 
ing we  rode  to  Horncaftle,  where  Satan’s  chil- 
dren had  threatened  terrible  things.  But  they 
could  go  no  farther,  than  to  give  one  feeble 
fhout,  as  we  entered  into  the  town.  As  the 
houfe  would  not  contain  the  congregation,  I 
preached  on  the  outfide  of  it.  And  there  was  no 
difturbance.  Indeed  a filly,  pert  man  fpoke 
twice  or  thrice:  but  none  regarded  him. 

About  one  I preached  at  Sibfey,  on  the  edge 
of  the  Fens.  There  were  a few  wild  colts  here 
alfo.  But  all  the  reft,  (and  they  were  not  a lew) 
were  ferious  and  deeply  attentive.  So  were 
rnoft  of  the  congregation  even  at  Bofton,  tho’ 
much  aftonilhed,  as  not  being  ufed  to  field- 
preaching. 

Thurfday  13.  I took  a walk  through  the 
town.  I think  it  is  not  much  fmaller  than 
Leeds;  but,  in  general,  it  is  far  better  built. 
The  church  is  indeed  a fine  building.  It  is 
larger,  loftier,  nay^  and  rather  more  lightfome, 
than  even  St.  Peter’s  at  Norwich.  And  the 
fleeple  is  I fuppofe,  the  higheft  tower  in  Eng- 
F 3 land, 


[ ta6  ] 

land,  nor  lefs  remarkable  for  the  archite£iure 
than  the  height.  The  congregation  in  the  even- 
ing was  far  more  numerous  than  the  day  before; 
And  I trnif,  God  fixt  the  arrows  of  conviction 
in  not  a few.  of  their  hearts. 

We  went  forward,  after  preaching  at  a friend’s 
houfe,  about  nine  miles  from  Bofton.  Friday 
14,  we  rode  to  Bellingford  and  on  Saturday, 
to  Norwich.  After  fpending  a few  davs  here, 
and,  a few  more  at  Yarmouth  and  Colchefter, 
on  Saturday  22.  I returned  to  London. 

I found  the  work  of  God  fwiftly  increafing  here. 
The  congregations  in  every  place  were  larger 
than  they  had  been  for  feveral  years.  Many  were 
from  day  to  day  convinced  of  fin.  Many  found 
peace  with  God.  Many  backfliders  were  healed, 
yea  filled  with  joy  unfpeakable.  And  many  be- 
lievers entered  into  fuch  a reft,  as  it  had  not  be- 
fore entered  into  their  hearts  to  conceive.  Mean 
time,  the  enemy  was  not  wanting  in  his  endea- 
vours, to  fow  tares  among  the  good  feed.  I faw 
this  clearly,  but  durft  not  ufe  violence  ; left  in 
plucking  up  the  tares,  I fhould  root  up  the  wheat 
alfo. 

Tuefday  September  1.  Our  conference  began, 
and  ended  on  Saturday.  After  fpending  a fort- 
night more  in  London,  and  gaurding  both  the 
preachers'and  people  againft  running  into  extremes 
on  the  one  hand  or  the  other,  on  Sunday  20.  at 
night  I took  the  machine,  and  on  Monday  21. 
came  to  Bnftol. 


Here 


[ 12"7  ] 

Here  likewife  I had  the  fatisfa&on  to  obferve  a 
confiderable  increafeof  the  work  of  God.  The  con- 
gregations were  exceeding  large,  and  the  people 
hungring  and  thirfting  after  righteoufnefs.  And 
every  day  afforded  us  frefh  inflances,  of  p'erfons 
convinced  of  fin  or  converted  to  God.  So  that  ifc 
feems  God  was  pleafed  to  pour  out  his  fpirit  this 
year,  on  every  part  both  of  England  and  Ireland : 
perhaps  in  a manner  we  had  never  feen  before  : 
certainly  not  for  twenty  years;  O what  pity,  that 
fo  many  even  of  the  children  of  God,  did  not 
know  the  day  of  their  vifitation  ! 

Sunday,  O ft.  4.  I preached  at  Kingfwood, 
morning  and  afternoon,  but  not  as  I defigned, 
under  the  fycamore-tree,  becaufe  of  the  rain.  In 
the  enfumg  week  I vifiled  the  focieties  inSomer- 
fetlhire.  Sunday  11.  I obferved  God  is  reviving 
his  work  in  Kingfwood.  The  fociety  which  had 
much  decreafed,  being  now  increafed  again,  to 
near  three  hundered  members  : Many  of  whom 
are  now  athirft  for  full  redemption,  which  for 
fome  years  they  had  almoft  forgot. 

Tuefday  13. 1 preached  at  Newgate  ; at  Kingf- 
wood in  the  afternoon,  and  in  the  evening,  at 
North-Common.  Here  a people  are  fprung  up, 
as  it  were  out  of  the  earth:  moft  of  them"  em- 
ployed in  the  neighbouring  brafs-works.  We 
took  a view  of  thefe  the  next  day  : and  one 
thing  I learned  here,  the  propriety  of  that  ex- 
preffion,  Rev.  i.  15,  Unfed  were  as  finebrafs , 
burning  in  a furnace.  The  brightnefs  of  this 
F 4 cannot 


[ 128  ] 


cannot  eafily  be  conceived.  I have  feen  nothing 
like  it,  but  clear,  white  lightning. 

Monday  19.  I defired  all  thole  to  meet  me, 
who  believed  they  were  faved  from  fin.  There 
were  feventeen  or  eighteen.  I examined  them 
feverally,  as  exactly  as  I could.  And  I could  not 
find  any  tiling  in  their  tempers,  (fuppofing 
they  fpoke  true)  any  way  contrary  to  their  pro- 
feflion. 

Wednefday  21.  I was  defired  by  the  con- 
demned prifoners  to  give  them  one  fermon 
more.  And  on  Thurfday,  Patrick  Ward,  who 
was  to  die  on  that  day,  fent  to  requefi,  I would 
adminifter  the  facrarnent  to  him.  He  was  one 
and  twenty  years  of  age,  and  had  fcarce  ever  had 
a ferious  thought,  till  he  fhot  the  man,  who  went 
to  take  away  his  gun.  From  that  inllant  he  felt 
a turn  within,  and  never  fwore  an  oath  more. 
His  whole  behaviour  in  prifon  was  ferious  and 
compofed.  He  read,  prayed,  and  wept  much  : 
efpecially  after  one  ol  his  fellow. prifoners  had 
found  peace  with  God.  His  hope  gradually  in- 
creafed  till  this  day,  and  was  much  firengthened 
at  the  Lord’s  flipper.  But  flill  he  complained, 
“ I am  not  afraid , but  I am  not  dfirous  to  die. 

I do  not  find  that  zvargith  in  my  heart:  I am 
not  fare,  my  fins  are  forgiven.”  He  went  into 
the  cart  abdut  twelve  in  calmnefs,  but  mixt  with 
fadnefs.  But  in  a quarter  of  an  hour,  while  he 
was  w refiling  with  God  in  prayer,  not  feeming 
to  know,  that  any  one  was  near  him)  the  Holy 

Gholf, 


[ 129  3 


Ghoft,  faid  he,  came  upon  me,  and  I knew  that 
Chrift  was  mine.”  From  that  moment  his 
'whole  deportment  breathed  a peace  and  joy  be- 
yond all  utterance ; till  after  having  fpent 
about  ten  minutes  in  private  prayer,  he  gave  the 
fign. 

Sunday  25,  I took  a comfortable  leave  of 
Kingfwood,  leaving  both  the  fociety  and  fchool 
in  a flourifhing  ftate  : and  the  next  morning,  of 
Briflol,  leaving  the  fociety  larger  than  it  had 
been  for  many  years.  Now  let  zeal,  as  well  as 
brotherly  love  continue,  and  it  will  not  decreafe 
any  more.  Having  travelled  {lowly- 

through  the  intermediate  focieties,  on  Saturday 
31.  I came  to  London. 

Sunday,  November  1.  I found  the  fame  fpirit 
which  I left  here,  both  in  the  morning  and  even- 
ing fervice.  Monday  2.  at  five,  I beganacourfe 
of  fermons  on  Chriflian  Perfeflion.  At  feven, 
I began  meeting  the  claffes.  Tuefday  10.  I 
{ound  the  fociety  at  Deptford  more  alive  than 
ever;  a fure  confequence  of  which  is  their  in- 
creafing  in  number.  Thurfday  12.  I rode  to- 
Brentford.  Here  likewife  God  is  at  work,  and 
fmners  are  converted  to  him.  Saturday  14.  I 
fpent  an  hour  with  a little  company  near  Grof- 
venor-fquare.  For  many  years  this  has  been  the 
darkeft,  drielt  fpot,  of  all  in  or  near  London.. 
But  God  has  now  watered  the  barren  wildernefs* 
and  it  is  now  become  a fruitful  field. 


Mondav 


[ J3o  ] 

Monday  1 6.  I retired  to  Lewifham,  having 
many  things  to  write.  Friday  20.  I fpent  an 
hour  at  St.  George’s- hofpital.  The  behaviour  of 
two  or  three  patients  there  had  done  unfpeak- 
able  good.  Deep  prejudice  was  torn  up  by  the 
roots,  and  much  good-will  to  the  truth  had  fuc- 
ceeded  it.  O what  may  not  a fingle  believer 
do,  who  feeks  nothing  but  the  glory  of  God  ? 

Monday  23.  I went  to  Canterbury.  The  con- 
gregations were  larger  than  I ever  remember. 
And  many  found  a deeper  work  of  God  in  their 
hearts,  than  ever  they  had  known  before. 
* Thurfday  26.  I was  defired  to  read  part  of 
Bifhop  Pontopidan’s  natural  hiftory  of  Norway. 
I foon  found  he  was  a man  of  fenfe,  yet  credu- 
lous to  an  extreme.  And  therefore  I was  the 
lefs  furprized,  when  I came  to  his  cracktn  and 
fea-frpent.  Of  the  former,  (an  animal  a mile 
round,  to  which  a poor  whale  is  no  more  than  a 
gudgeon)  he  gives  no  proof,  or  fhadow  of  proof, 
nothing  but  vague,  uncertain  hearfays.  “ Two 
bailors  he  fays,  made  oath  of  feeing  part  of  the 
latter,  feven  or  eight  folds  of  his  back.”  But  I 
did  not  talk  with  them  myfelf : fo  I can  lay  lit- 
tle ftrefs  on  their  evidence*  They  might  be 
weak  men  ; they  might  be  frighted:  yea,  they 
were,  by  their  own  confeflion.  Or  they 
might  be  men  of  no  confcience:  on  any  of  which 
fuppofitions  their  teftimony  is  nothing  worth. 

* Saturday  28.  We  returned  to  London. 

Sunday 


C *3l  1 

Sunday  29.  We  had  a comfortable  love-feaft,  at 
which  feveral  declared  the  bleffirigs  they  had 
found  lately.  We  need  not  be  careful,  by  what 
name  to  call  them,  while  the  thing  is  beyond  dif- 
pute.  Many  have,  and  many  do  daily  experi- 
ence an  unfpeakable  change.  After  being  deeply- 
convinced  of  inbred  fin,  particularly  of  pride,  an- 
ger, felf-will  and  unbelief,  in  a moment  they  feel 
all  faith  and  love ; no  pride,  no  felf-will,  or  an- 
ger. And  from  that  moment  they  have  continual* 
fellovvfhip  with  God,  always  rejoicing,  praying 
and  giving  thanks.  Whoever  afcribes  fuch  a 
change  to  the  devil,  I afcribe  it  to  the  Spirit  of 
God.  And  I fay,  let  whoever  feels  it  wrought, 
cry  to  God,  that  it  may  continue  ; which  it  will, 
if  he  walks  clofely  with  God  : otherwife  it  will 
not.- 

Preaching  at  Deptford,  Welling;  and  Seven- 
oaks  in  my  way,  on  Thurfday,  December  3.  I 
came  to  Shoreham.  * There  I read  the  cele- 
brated life  of  St.  Katherine  of  Genoa;  Mr. 
Lefley  calls  one,  a devil  of  a faint:  I am  fure 
this  was  a fool  of  a faint.  That  is,  if  it  was  not 
the  folly  of  her  hiltoriaft,  who  has  aggrandized 
her  into  a mere  ideot..  Indeed  we  feldom  find 
a faint  of  God’s  making,  fainted  by  the  Bifliop 
of  Rome.  I preached  at  five,  to  a fmall,  fe- 
rrous company,  and  the.  next  day  returned  to 
London. 

Monday  7.  I rode  to  Colcheiler,  and  had  the 
[atisfa&ion  to  find  many  of  our  brethren  much 

F 6 alive 


[ *3*  J 

alive  to  God.  After  confirming  them,  as  I could, 
in  the  ways  of  God,  on  Thurfday  I returned 
home.  Sunday  the  13th,  was  a comfortable 
day,  wherein  feveral  prifoners  were  fet  at  liberty. 
Saturday  19.  I vifited  many  near  Oxford-market 
and  Grofvenor-fquare,  and  found  God  was  Hill 
lolarging  his  work.  More  and  more  were  con- 
vinced, converted  to  God,  and  built  up  day  by 
day  : and  that,  notwithftanding  the  weaknefs 
of  the  inftruments,  by  whom  God  was  pleafed 
to  work. 

* Monday  21.  I retired  again  to  Lewifham, 
and  wrote  Farther  Thoughts  on  Chrijiian  Perfec- 
tion. Had  the  cautions  given  herein  been  ob- 
ferved,  how  much  fcandal  had  been  prevented  ? 
And  why  were  they  not  ? Because  my  own  fa- 
miliar friend  was  even  now  forming  a party 
againft  me. 

Friday  25.  We  began,  as  ufual,  at  four.  * A 
few  days  fince,  one  who  lived  in  known  fin, 
finding  heavy  conviction,  broke  away,  and  ran 
out  file  knew  not  whither.  She  met  one,  who 
offered  her  a (hilling  a week,  to  come  and 
take  care  of  her  child.  She  went  gladly.  The 
woman's  hufband,  hearing  her  ftir  between  three 
and  four,  began  curbing  and  fwearing  bitterly. 
His  wife  faid,  “ I with  thou  wouldft  go  with  her, 
and  fee  if  any  thing  will  do  thee  good.”  He  did 
fo.  In  the  firft  hymn  God  broke  his  heart,  and  he 
was  in  tears  all  the  reft  of  the  fervice.  How  foon 

did 


did  God  recompenfe  this  poor  woman,  for  tak- 
ing the  Granger  in  ? 

^Saturday  2 6.  I made  a particular  enquiry  into 
the  cafe  of  Mary  Special,  a young  woman  then 
in  Tottenham  Court-Road.  She  faid,  “ Four 
years  fince,  I found  much  pain  in  my  breafts, 
and  afterward,  hard  lumps.  Four  months  ago  my 
left  bread  broke,  and  kept  running  continually. 

I Growing  worfe  and  worfe,  after  fome  time,  I 
was  recommended  to  St.  George’s-hofpital.  I 
was  let  blood  many  times,  and  took  hemlock 
thrice  a day  ; but  I was  no  better,  the  pain  and 
the  lumps  were  the  fame,  and  both  my  breads 
were  quite  hard,  and  black  as  foot : when  yefter- 
■ day  fe’nnight  I went  to  Mr.  Owen’s,  where  there 
was  a meeting  for  prayer.  Mr.  Bell  faw  me 
and  aiked,  “ Have  you  faith  to  be  healed  ?”  I 
faid,  “Yes.”  He  prayed  for  me,  and  in  a mo- 
ment all  my  pain  was  gone.  But  the  next  day,  I 
felt  a little  pain  again,  I clapped  my  hands  on  my 
breafts,  and  cried  out,  “ Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou 
canft  make  me  whole.”  It  was  gone  : and  from 
that  hour  I have  had  no  pain,  no  forenefs, 
no  lumps,  or  fwelling,  but  both  my  breafts 
were  perfedlly  well,  and  I have  been  fo  ever 
I fince.” 

Now  here  are  plain  fadls.  1.  She  was  ill.  2. 
i She  is  well.  3.  She  became  fo  in  a moment. 

1,  Which  of  thefe  can  with  modefty  be  denied  ? 

Tuefday  29.  In  order  to  remove  fome  mif- 
vtnderftandings,  I defired  all  parties  eoncerned 


[ 134  ] 

to  meet  me.  They  did  Co;  all  but  T — M — d, 
who  flatly  refufed  to  come.  Is  this  only  the 
firfl:  flep  toward  a feparation?  Alas  for  the  man! 
Alas  for  the  + people! 

Thurfday  gi.  We  concluded  the  year  as 
ufual,  with  a folemn  watchnight.  O may  we 
conclude  our  lives  in  the  fame  manner,  blefling 
and  praifing  God ! 

Friday,  January  1,  1762.  We  bad,  I be- 
lieve, pretty  near  two  thoufand  of  the  fociety 
at  Spittlefields,  in  the  evening,  were  Mr. 
Berridge,  Maxfield,  and  Colley  aflifled  me. 
And  we  found  God  was  in  the  midfl,  while  w e- 
devoted  ourfelves  in  the  moll  folemn  and  expli- 
cit manner. 

Saturday  2.  I fet  out  for  Everton,  in  order  to 
fupply  Mr.  Berridge’s  church  in  his  abfence.  In 
my  way  I preached  at  Rood-Farm,  five  and.  forty 
miles  from  London,  Afterwards  the  moon 
fliining  bright,  we  had  a pleafant  ride  to  Ever* 
ton. 

Sunday  3.  I read  prayers  and  preached  morn- 
ing and  evening  to  a numerous  and  lively  con- 
gregation. I found  the  people  in  general  were 
more  fettled,  than  when  I was  here'before.  But 
they  were  in  danger  of  running  from  eaft  to  weft. 
Inftead  of  thinking,  as  many  then  did,  that  none 
poflibly  have  true  faith,  but  thofe  that  have 
trances  or  vifions,  they  were  now  ready  to 

think, 

JrN.  B.  Thefe  were  the  words  I wrote  at  the  time. 


[ *3  5 ] 

think,  that  whoever  had  any  thing  of  this  kind, 
had  no  faith. 

Monday  4.  After  preaching  to  a large  congre- 
gation at  Wieftlingworth,  we  rode  on  to  Harfton. 
I never  preached  a whole  fermon  by  moon-light 
before.  However  it  was  a foiemn  feafon  : a fea- 
fon  of  hply  mourning  to  fome ; to  others  of  joy 
unfpeakable. 

Tuefday  5.  I preached  in  Harfton  at  nine, 
and  about  eleven  at  Wiltftow,  three  miles  far- 
ther, to  a people  juft  ripe  for,  Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden . In  the  after- 
noon, we  fet  out  for  Stoke,  on  the  edge  of  Suf- 
folk. As  we  rode  through  Haverhill,  we  were 
faluted  with  one  huzza,  the  mob  of  that  toivn 
having  no  kindnefs  for  Methodijls.  But  all  was 

quiet  at  Stoke  : for  Sir  H — A- will 

fuffer  no  difturbance  there.  The  congregation 
came  from  many  miles  round  : and  God  was  in 
the  midft  of  them.  Their  hearty  prayers  went 
up  on  every  fide.  And  many  felt  the  anfwer  to 
them. 

Wednefday  6.  The  largenefs  of  the  congre- 
gation at  five,  fhewed  they  were  not  forgetful 
hearers.  I preached  longer  than  I am  accuftomed 
to  do  : but  Hill  they  were  not  fatisfied.  Many 
crouded  after  me  into  the  dwelling-houfe.  Af- 
ter fpeaking  a few  words,  I went  to  prayer.  A 
cry  began,  and  foon  fpread  through  the  whole 
company,  fo  that  my  voice  was  loft.  Two  feem- 
ed  to  be  diftreft  above  all  the  reft.  We  continued 

wreftling 


i 


C *36  ] 


wreftling  with  God,  till  one  of  them  had  a good 
hope,  and  the  other  was  filled  with  joy  and  peace  ■ 
in  believing. 

In  the  afternoon  it  blew  a ftorm,  by  the  favour 
of  which  we  came  into  Haverhill  quite  unmo- 
lefled.  But  notwilhftanding  wind  and  rain,  the 
people  crouded  lb  fall  into  the  preaching-houfe, 
that  I judged  it  be fl  to  begin  half  an  hour  before 
the  time,  by  which  means  it  contained  the 
greater  part  of  them.  Although  they  that  could 
not  come  in  made  a little  noife,  it  was  a folemn 
and  an  happy  feafon. 

Thurfday  7.  Abundance  of  them  came  again 
at  five,  and  drank  in  every  word.  Here  alfo 
many  followed  me  into  the  houfe,  and  hardly 
knew  how  to  part.  At  nine,  I preached  at 
Steeple -Bumfiead,  three  miles  from  Haverhill, 
to  a confiderably  larger  congregation.  And  all 
were  ferious.  Hence  we  rode  for  Barkway,  four 
miles  from  Royllon.  The  preaching-place  was 
exceeding  large;  yet  it  was  well  filled,  and  the 
people  were  wedged  in  as  clofe  as  pofiible.  And 
many  of  them  found  that  God  was  there,  to  their 
unfpeakable  comfort. 

Hence  we  rode  to  Barley,  where  I preached 
at  one.  A middle-aged  woman  dropt  down  at 
my  fide,  and  cried  aloud  for  mercy.  It  was 
not  long  before  God  put  a new  fong  in  her 
mouth.  At  fix  in  the  evening  I preached 

at  Melbourn.  Here  too  God  both  wounded 

and. 


L i37  ] 

and  healed.  I laid  hold  after  preaching  on 
a poor  backflider,  who  quickly  melted  into 
tears,  and  determined  to  return  once  more 
to  him,  from  whom  lhe  had  deeply  revolted. 

Here  I talked  at  large  with  one  who  thinks, 
he  is  renewed  in  love.  Perhaps  he  is  ; 
but  his  underllanding  is  fo  fmall,  his  experi- 
ence fo  peculiar,  and  his  expreffions  fo  un- 
couth, that  I doubt  very  few  will  receive  his 
teftimony. 

Saturday  9.  I rode  to  Potton.  What  has 
God  wrought  here,  fince  1 faw  this  town, 
twenty  years  ago!  I could  not  then  find  a 
living  Chri flian  therein;  but  wild-beafls  in 
abundance.  Now  here  are  many  who  know 
in  whom  they  have  believed  : and  no  one  gives 
~us  an  uncivil  word  ! I preached  at  fix 

1 to  a very  numerous  and  ferious  congregation. 
What  have  we  to  do  to  defpair  of  any  perfon  or 
people  ? 

Sunday  10.  I preached  at  fix  in  the  morn. 

Iing  to  nearly  the  fame  congregation.  I 
read  prayers  and  preaehed,  morning  and  af- 
ternoon, at  Everton,  and  gave  the  facrament 
to  a large  number  of  communicants.  At  four 
we  took  horfe,  and  reached  Grandcheller  a 
little  before  feven.  Finding  a little  com- 

pany  met  together,  I fpent  half  an  hour 
with  them  exceedingly  comfortably.  And 
through  the  bleffing  of  God  I was  no  more 

tired 


[ ^38  ] 

tired  when  I went  to  bed,  than  when  I arofe  in 
the  morning. 

Monday  it.  The  houfe  was  throughly  filled 
at  five,  and  that  with  ferious  and  fenfible 
hearers.  I was  forry  I had  no  more  time  at 
this  place  : efpecially  as  it  was  fo  near  Cam- 
bridge, from  whence  many  gentlemen  ufed  to 
come,  when  any  clergyman  preached.  * But 
my  work  was  fixt : fo  I took  hoi  fe  foon  after 
preaching,  and  rode  to  a village  called  Boifam- 
lode,  feven  miles  from  Cambridge.  Here  a 
large  congregation  was  foon  aflembled  : and  I ' 
had  no  looner  named  my  text,  When  they  had 
nothing  to  pay , ite frankly  forgave  them  both,  than 
a murmur  ran  through  the  whole  people,  and 
many  of  them  were  in  tears.  This  concern  in- 
creafed  as  I went  on,  fo  that  none  appeared 
to  be  unmoved.  One  juft  by  me  cried  with  a 
hitter  cry.  But  in  a fhort  time  file  (homed  for 
joy.  So  did  feveral  others;  fo  that  it  %vas  not 
eafy  to  tell,  whether  mote  were  wounded  or 
comforted. 

Hence  we  rode  to  Lakenheath,  and  pafled  a 
comfortable  night.  Tuefday  12.  Juft  as  we  fet 
out,  the  fiorm,  w'hich  had  been  very  high  all 
night,  brought  on  impetuous  rain.  It  was  a 
good  providence,  t.  That  we  had  now  firm, 
fandy  road,  not  clay  and  mirv  fields  as  yefter- 
day  : 2.  That  the  wind  was  behind  us : otherwife 
I believe  it  would  have  been  impoffible  to  go  on. 
It  was  often  ready  to  bear  away  man  and  bead. 

However 


[ *39  ] 

However  in  the  afternoon  we  came  fafe  to 
Norwich. 

Wednefday  10.  We  reded  from  our  labour. 
How  can  they  who  never  labour,  tade  the 
fweetnefs  of  reft  ? Friday  15.  I preached  at  Yar- 
mouth. Saturday  16.  1 tranfcribed  the  focietv  at 
Norwich.  But  two  hundred  of  them  I made  no 
account  of,  as  they  met  no  clafs.  About  four 
hundred  remained : half  of  whom  appeared  to 
be  in  earned. 

Tuefday  19.  I rode  to  Bury,  and  was  glad  to 
find  a little,  ferious  company  ff ill.  But  there 

! cannot  be  much  done  here,  till  we  preach 
abroad,  or  at  leaft  in  the  heart  of  the  town.  We 
are  now  quite  at  one  end;  and  people  will  not 
come  from  the  other,  till  they  have  firft  tajhd  the 
good  word. 

Thurfday  21.  I rode  to  Colchefter,  and  found 
a quiet,  loving,  regular  fociety.  After  fpending  a 
day  with  them,  on  Sunday  22.  I chearfully  re- 
turned to  London. 

* Wednefday  27.  I had  a linking  proof,  that 
God  can  teach  by  whom  he  will  teach.  A man 
full  of  words,  but  not  of  underftanding,  con- 
vinced me  of  what  I could  never  fee  before,  that 
amnia  ejl  ex  traduce  : that  all  the  fouls  of  his 
pofterity,  as  well  as  their  bodies,  were  in  our  fird 
parent. 

Friday,  Feb.  5.  I met  at  noon,  as  ufual,  thofe 
who  believe  they  are  faved  from  fin,  and  warned 
them  of  the  enthufiafm  which  was  breaking  in 


[ Mo  ] 

by  means  of  two  or  three  weak  though  good  men, 
who  from  a mifconftrued  text  in  (he  revelation,  in- 
ferred, that  they  fhould  not  die.  They  received 
the  warning  in  much  love.  However  this  gave 
great  occafion,  of  triumph,  to  thofe  who  fought 
occafion,  fo  that  they  rejoiced,  as  though  they  had 
found  great  fpod. 

Afrer  preaching  at  Deptford,  Welling,  and 
Sevenoaks.  On  Tuefdayand  Wednefdav,  I roue 
on  to  Sir  Tho.  I’  \nfon’s  near  Tunbridge,  and  be- 
tween fix  and  feven  preached  in  his  large  par- 
lour, which  opens  likewife  into  the  hall.  The  plain 
people  were  all  attention  : if  the  feed  be  watered, 
furely  there  will  be  fome  fruit. 

Sunday  14.  I buried  the  remains  of  Thomas 
Salmon,  a good  and.ufeful  man.  What  was  pe- 
culiar in  his  experience  was,  he  did  not  know 
when  he  was  juft; Bed  : but  he  did  know  when 
he  was  renewed  in  love,  that  work  being 
wrought  in  a mod  didinct  manner.  After  this  he 
continued  about  a year,  in  condant  love,  joy  and 
peace.  Then  after  an  illnefs  of  a few  days,  he 
chearfullv,  went  to  God. 

Mon.  15.  and  the  following  days  I fpent  in  tranf- 
cribing  lie  lid  of  the  fociety.  It  never  came  upbe- 
fore  to  2400 ; now  i.  contains  above  2700  members. 

Sunday  28.  We  had  a peculiar  bledi.ng  at 
Spitalfields,  while  I was  inforcing,  Now  is  the  day 
of falvation.  Indeed  there  is  alwavs  a bleding, 
when  we  cut  off  all  delay,  and  come  to  Gcd  now 
by  fimple  faith. 


Friday, 


[ 141  ] 

Friday,  March  5.  I had  a long  converfation 
Tvi th  Jofeph  Rule,  commonly  called  the  white 
quaker.  He  appeared  to  be  a cairn,  lovin'!-  fen* 
fible  man,  and  much  devoted  to  God. 

Monday  1 I returned  to  Lewifham,  to  anfwer, 
Dr.  Horne’s  ingenious  fermon  on  jollification  by 
works.  O that  I might  difpute  with  no  man  ! 
But  if  I mud:  difpute,  let  it  be  with  men  of  fenfe  ! 

Thurfday  11.  I buried  the  remains  of  Mary 
Ramfey,  a true  daughter  of  aftliflion,  worn  out 
by  a cancer  in  her  bread,  with  a variety  of  other 
diforders.  To  thefe  was  added  for  a time  great 
darknefs  of  mind,  the  body  prefiing  down  the  foul. 
Yet  (lie  did  not  murmur  or-  repine  ; much  !efs 
charge  God  foolifhly.  It  was  not  long  before  he 
reftored  the  light  of  his  countenance  ; and  fhort- 
3y  after  (he  fell  afleep, 

Friday  the  12th,  the  national  fall,  was  obferved 
all  over  London  with  great  folemnitv.  Surely  God 
is  well  pleafed  even  with  this  acknowledgement,' 
that  he  governs  the  world:  and  even  the  outward 
humiliation  of  a nation,  may  be  rewarded  with 
outward  bleftings, 

Monday  15.  I left  London,  tho’  not  without 
regret,  and  went  flewly,  thro’-  the  foceieties  to 
Briftol.  Saturday  27,  I heard  a large  account, of 
the  children  near  Lawford’s-gate,  which  has  made 
fo  much  noife  here.  The  fafts  are  too  glaring-  to 
be  denied.  But  how  are  they  to  be  accounted 
for?  By  natural,  or  fupernat Ural  agency?  Con- 
tend  who  lift  about  this. 

Monday, 


i 


[ ] 

Monday,  March  29.  I came  to  the  New-Paf- 
fage  a little  before  nine.  The  rain  and  A7ind  in- 
creafed  much  while  we  were  on  the  water : how- 
ever  we  were  fafe  on  Ihore  at  ten.  I preached 
about  twelve,  in  the  New-Room  at  Chepftow. 
One  of  the  congregation  was  a neighbouring 
clergyman,  who  lived  in  the  fame  ft  air- cafe  with 
me  at  Chrift-church,  and  was  then  far  more  feri- 
ous  than  me.  Blefted  be  God,  who  has  looked 
upon  me  at  laft  ! Now  let  me  redeem  the  time  ! 

In  the  afternoon  we  had  fucii  a ftorm  of  hail, 
as  I fcarce  ever  faw  in  my  life.  The  roads  like  - 
wife  were  fo  extremely  bad,  that  we  did  not 
reach  Hereford  till  paft  eight.  Having  been  welt 
baaered  both  by  hail,  rain  and  wind,  I got  to 
bed  as  foon  as  I could,  but  was  waked  many 
times  by  the  clattering  of  the  curtains  : in  the 
morning,  I found  the  cafement  wide  open.  But  I 
was  never  the  worfe.  I took  horfe  at  fix,  with 
William  Crane,  and  Francis  Walker.  The  wind 
was  piercing  cold,  and  we  had  many  (howers  of 
fnow  and  rain  : but  the  worft  was,  part  of  the 
road  was  fcarce  paiTable.  So  that  at  Church-ftret- 
ton,  one  of  our  horfes  lay  down  and  would  go  no 
farther.  However  William  Crane  and  I pufhed 
on,  and  before  feven  reached  Shrewfbuiy. 

A large  company  quickly  gathered  together, 
many  of  them  were  wild  enough.  But  the  far 
greater  part  were  calm  and  attentive,  and  came 
again  at  five  in  the  morning. 

Wednefday  30.  Having  been  invited  to 

preach 


[ M3  ] 

preach  at  Wem,  Mrs.  Glynne  defired  (he  might 
take  me  thither  in  a pofl-chaife.  But  in  little 
more  than  an  hour,  we  were  faff  enough.  How- 
ever the  horfes  pulled,  till  the  traces  broke.  I 
fhould  then  have  walked  on,  had  I been  alone, 
though  the  mud  was  deep,  and  the  fnow  drove 
impetuoufly.  But  I could  not  leave  my  friend. 

So  I waited  patiently,  till  the  man  had  made 
fhift  to  mend  the  traces.  And  the  horfespulled 
amain  : fo  that  with  much  ado,  not  long  after  the 
time  appointed  I came  to  Wem. 

I came  : but  the  perfon  who  invited  me  was 
<rone  ; gone  out  of  town  at  four  in  the  morning. 
And  I could  find  no  one,  who  feemed  either  to 
expeft  or  defire  my  company.  I enquired  after 
the  place  where  Mr.  Mather  preached  ; But  it 
was  filled  with  Hemp.  It  remained  only  to  go  into 
the  market-houfe  : but  neither  any  man,  woman, 
nor  child  cared  to  follow  us  ; the  north- wind 
roared  fo  loud  on  every  fide  and  poured  in  from 
every  quarter  : however  before  I had  done  hinging 
two  or  three  crept  in,  and  after  them,  two  or 
three  hundred.  And  the  power  of  God  was  fo 
prefent  among  them,  that  I believe,  many  forgot 
the  ftoi'm. 

The  wind  grew  fill  higher  in  the  afternoon,  fo 
that  it  was  difficult  to  fit  our  horfes.  And  it  blew 
full  in  our  face  but  could  not  prevent  our  reach- 
ing Chefter  in  the  evening.  Tho’  the  warning 
-was  fhort,  the  room  was  lull  : and  full  of  ferious 
! earneft 

i ' " 

1 1 

1 


[ *44  ] 

earned  hearers,  many  of  whom  exprefled  a long- 
ing defire  of  the  whole  falvation  of  God. 

Here  l.refted  on  Thurfday.  Frida.,  April  l,  I 
rode  to  Park  gate,  and  found  feveral  fhips : but 
the  wind  was  contrary.  I preached  at  five  in  the 
fmall  houfe  they  havejud  built : and  the  hearers 
were  remarkably  ferious,  I gave  notice  of  preach- 
ing at  five  in  the  morning.  But  at  half  hour 
after  four  one  brought  us  word,  that  the  wind  was 
come  fair,  and  Captain  Jordan  would  fail  in  lefs 
than  an  hour.  We  werefoon  in  the  fltip,  wherein 
we  found  about  threefcore  pairengers.  d he  lun 
{hone  bright,  the  wind  was  moderate,  the  fea 
fmootb,  and  we  wanted  nothing  but  room  to  dir 
ourfelves  : the  cabin  being  filled  with  hops,  fo 
that  we  could  not  get  into  it,  but  by  climbing 
over  them,  on  our  bauds  and  knees.  In  the  after- 
noon we  were  abreaft  ol  Holyhead.  But  the 
fcene  was  quickly  changed  : the  wind  rofe  higher 
and  higher,  and  by  feven  o'clock  blew  a dorm. 
The  fea  broke  over  us  continually,  and  fome- 
times  covered  the  fliip  which  both  pitched  and 
rolled  in  an  uncommon  manner.  So  I was  in- 
formed : for  being  a li  tie  fick,  I lay  down  at  fix 
and  flept  with  little  intermiffion,  till  near  fix,  in 
the  morning.  W e were  then  near  Dublin  Bay, 
were  we  went  into  a boat,  which  carried  us  to 
Dunlary.  There  we  met  with  a chaife  juft  ready 
in  which  we  went  to  Dublin. 

I found  much  liberty  of  fpirit  in  the  evening 
while  1 was  inforcing,  A Tow  is  the  day  of  falvation. 

The 


[ H 5 J 

The  congregaion  was  uncommonly  large  in  the 
morning ; and  feemed  to  be  much  alive.  Marty 
children,  I find,  are  brought  to  the  birth.  And  fhall 
there  not  be  ftrength  to  bring  forth  ? 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Mr.  Grimfhaw  fell 
afleep.  He  was  born  Sept.  3.  1708,  at  Brindle, 
fix  miles  fouth  of  Prefionin  Lancafhire,  and  edu- 
cated at  the  fchools  of  Blackburn  and  Hefkin,  in 
the  fame  county.  Even  then  the  thoughts  of 
death  and  judgment  made  feme  imprefiion  upon 
him.  At  eighteen  he  was  admitted  at  Chrift’s 
College  in  Cambridge.  Here  bad  example  fo 
carried  him  away,  that  for  more  than  two  years  he 
feemed  utterly  to  have  loll  all  fenfe  of  feriouf- 
nefs  ; which  did  not  revive,  ’till  the  day  he  was 
ordained  deacon,  in  the  year  1731.  On  that  day  he 
was  much  affefted  with  the  fenfe  of  the  impor- 
tance of  the  minifterial  office.  And  this  was  in- 
creafed  by  his  converfing  with  fome  at  Rochdale, 
who  met  once  a week  to  read,  and  fing  and  pray. 
But  on  his  removal  to  Todmorden  foon  after,  he 
quite  dropped  his  pious  acquaintance,  conformed 
to  the  world,  followed  all  its  diver lions,  and  con- 
ten'ed  himfelf  with  “ doing  his  duty”  on  Sun- 
days. 

But  about  the  year  1734,  he  began  to  think 
ferioufly  again.  He  left  off  all  his  diverfions; 
he  began  to  catechife  the  young  people,  to 
preach  the  abfolute  neceffity  of  a devout  life ; 
and  to  vifit  his  people,  not  in  order  to  be  merry 
Vol.  XXXI.  G with 


[ *46  1 


with  them  as  before,  but  to  prefs  them  to  feek 
the  falvation  of  their  fouls. 

At  this  period  alfo,  he  began  himfelf  to  pray  in 
fecret  four  times  a day.  And  the  God  of  all 
grace,  who  prepared  his  heart  to  pray,  foon  gave 
the  anfwer  to  his  prayer  ; not  indeed  as  he  ex- 
pelled : not  in  joy  or  peace,  but  by  bringing 
upon  him,  very  ftrong  and  painful  convitlions  of 
his  own  guilt,  and  helplednefs,  and  mifery  ; by 
difcoveringto  him  what  he  did  not  fufpe£t  before, 
that  his  heart  was  deceitful  and  defperately  wick- 
ed, and  wThat  was  more  afflifling  Hill,  that  all  his 
duties  and  labours  could  not  procure  him  pardon 
or  gain  him  a title  to  eternal  life.  In  this  trouble 
he  continued  more  than  three  years,  not  acquaint- 
ing any  one  with  the  diftrefs  he  fullered  ; ’till 
one  day,  (in  1742)  being  in  the  utmoft  agony  of 
mind,  there  was  clearly  reprefe'nted  to  him.Jefus 
Chrift  pleading  for  him  with  God  the  father, 
and  gaining  a free  pardon  for  him.  In  that  mo- 
ment all  his  fears  vanifhed  away,  and  he  was 
filled  with  joy  unfpeakable.  “ I was  now,  fays 
he,  willing  to  renounce  mvfelf,  and  to  embrace 
Chrift  for  my  all  in  all.  O what  light  and  com- 
fort did  I enjoy  in  my  own  foul,  and  what  a talle 
of  the  pardoning  love  of  God  !” 

All  this  time  he  was  an  entire  ftranger  to  the 
people  called  Methodifts,  whom  afterwards  he 
thotight  it  his  duty  to  countenance,  and  to  labour 
with  them  in  his  neighbourhood.  He  was  an  en- 
tire ftranger  alfo  to  all  their  writings  ; hill  he 

came 


[ H7  ] 

came  to  Haworth,  May  26.  of  this  year.  And  the 
good  effe&s  of  his  preaching  foon became  vifible. 
Many  of  his  flock  were  brought  into  deep  con- 
cern for  falvation,  were  in  a little  time  after  filled 
with  peace  and  joy  thro’  believing.  And  (as  in 
antient  times)  the  whole  congregation  have  been 
often  feen  in  tears  on  account  of  their  provoca- 
tions againft  God,  and  under  a fenfe  of  his  good- 
nels  in  vetfparing  them. 

His  lively  manner  of  reprefenting  the  truths  of 
God  could  not  fail  of  being  much  talked  of,  and 
bringing  many  hunderds  out  of  curiofity  to  Ha- 
worth church  : who  received  fo  much  benefit 
by  what  they  heard,  that  when  the  novelty  was 
long  over,  the  church  continued  to  be  full  of 
people  many  of  whom  came  from  far,  and  this 
for  twenty  years  together. 

Mr.  Grimfbaw  was  new  too  happy  himfelf  in 
the  knowledge  of  Chrift  to  reft  fatisfied,  without 
taking  every  method,  he  thought  likely  to  fpread 
the  knowledge  of  his  God  and  Saviour.  And  as 
the  very  indigent,  conftantly  make  their  want  or 
better  cloaths  to  appear  in,  an  excufe  for  not 
coming  to  church  in  the  day  time,  he  contrived, 
for  them  chiefly,  a lefture  on  Sunday  evenings, 
tho’  he  had  preached  twice  in  the  day  before. 
God  was  pleafed  to  give  great  fuccefs  to  thefe 
attempts,  which  animated  him  ftill  more  to  fpend 
and  be  fpent  for  Chrift.  ^o  the  next  year  he 
began  a method,  which  was  continued  by  him  for 
ever  after  ; of  preaching  in  each  of  the  four  ham- 
G 2 lets 


[ *48  ] 

lets  he  had  under  his  care  three  times  every 
month.  By  this  means  the  old  and 
who  could  not  attend  the  church,  had  the 
truth  of  God  brought  to  their  houfes ; and  many, 
who  were  fo  profane  as  to  make  the  diftance 
from  the  houfe  of  God  a reafon  for  fcarce  ever 
coming  to  it,  were  allured  to  hear.  By  this  time, 
the  great  labour  with  which  he  inflrufted  his 
own  people  ; the  holinefs  of  his  converfation, 
and  the  benefit,  which  very  many  from  the 
neighbouring  parifhes  had  obtained  by  attending 
his  miniftry  ; concurred  to  bring  upon  him  many 
earneft  intreaties  to  come  to  their  houfes,  who 
lived  in  neighbouring  parifhes,  and  expound  the 
word  of  God  to  fouls  as  ignorant  as  they  had 
been  themfelves.  This  requeff  he  did  not  dare  to 
refufe  : fo  that  while  he  provided  abundantly  for 
his  own  flock,  he  annually  found  opportunity  of 
preaching  near  three  hundred  times,  to  congre- 
gations in  other  parts. 

And  for  a courfe  of  fifteen  years,  or  upwards, 
he  ufed  to  preach  every  week,  fifteen,  twenty, 
and  fometimes  thirty  times,  befide  vifiting  the 
fick,  and  other  occafional  duties  of  his  funftion. 
It  is  not  eafy  to  afcribe  fuch  unwearied  dili- 
gence, chiefly  among  the  poor,  to  any  motive 
but  the  real  one.  He  thought  he  would  never 
keep  ftlence,  while  he  could  fpeak  to  the  honour 
of  that  God,  who  had  done  fo  much  for  his  foul. 
And  while  he  faw  Tinners  perifhing  for  lack 
of  knowledge,  and  no  one  breaking  to  them  the 

bread 


t *49  ] 

bread  of  life,  he  was  conftrained,  notwithftand- 
ing  the  relu&ance  he  felt  within,  to  give  up 
his  name  to  ffill  greater  reproach,  as  well  as  all 
his  time  and  ftrength,  to  the  work  of  the  mini- 
ftry. 

During  this  intenfe  application  to  what  was 
the  delight  of  his  heart,  God  was  exceeding  fa- 
vourable to  him.  In  fixteen  years  he  was  only 
once  fufpended  from  his  labour  by  ficknefs, 
though  he  dared  all  weathers,  upon  the  bleak 
mot  mains,  and  ufed  his  body  with  lefs  compaf- 
fion,  than  a merciful  man  would  ufe  his  bead. 
His  foul  at  various  times  enjoyed  large  manifefta- 
tions  of  God’s  love;  and  he  drank  deep  into  his 
Spirit.  His  cup  ran  over,  and  at  fome  feafons, 
his  faith  was  fo  ftrong,  and  his  hope  fo  abundant, 
that  higher  degrees  of  fpiritual  delight  would 
have  overpowered  his  mortal  frame. 

In  this  manner  Mr.  Grimlhaw  employed  all 
his  powers  and  talents  even  to  his  laft  illnefs. 
And  his  labours  were  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 
He  faw  an  effeftual  change  take  place  in  many 
of  his  flock;  and  a reflraintfrom  the  commiffion 
of  fin  brought  upon  the  parifh  in  general.  He 
faw  the  name  of  Jefus  exalted,  and  many  fouls 
happy  in  the  knowledge  of  him,  and  walking  as 
became  the  gofpel.  Happy  lie  was  himfelf,  in 
being  kept  by  the  power  of  God,  unblameable 
in  his  converfation.  Happy  in  being  beloved  in 
feveral  of  the  laft  years  of  his  life,  by  every  one 
G 3 in 


[ *5°  ] 


in  bis  p2rifh  ; who,  whether  they  would  be  per- 
/uaded  by  him  to  forfake  the  evil  of  their  ways, 
or  no,  had  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Grim fh aw  was  their 
cordial  friend.  Hence*  at  his  departure,  a gene- 
ral concern  was  vifible  through  his  parifh. 
Hence  his  body  was  interred  with  what  is  more 
ennobling  than  all  the  pomp  of  a royal  funeral : 
for  he  was  followed  to  the  grave  by  a great  mul- 
titude, with  affefiionate  fighs,  and  many  tears ; 
who  cannot  dill  hear  his  much-lov’d  name, 
without  weeping  for  the  guide  of  their  fouls,  to 
whom  each  of  them  was  dear  as  children  to  their 
father. 

His  behaviour,  throughout  his  lad  ftcknefs, 
was  of  a piece  with  the  laft  twenty  years  of  his 
life  ; from  the  very  firff  attack  of  his  fever,  he 
welcomed  its  approach.  His  intimate  knowledge 
of  Chrift,  abolifhed  all  the  reludiance  nature  feels 
to  a diffolution,  and  triumphing  in  him,  who  is 
the  refurretiion  and  the  life.  He  departed  April 
the  7th,  in  the  55th  year  of  his  age,  and  the  21ft 
of  eminent  ufcfulnefs. 

It  may  not  be  unacceptable  to  fubjoin  here 
one  of  his  plain,  rough  letters,  to  the  fociety 
in  London. 

Haworth,  January  9,  1760. 

My  dear  brethren , 

“ Grace,  mercy  and  peace  be  to  you  from 

God  our  Father  and  from  our  Lord  Jefus 

It  is -well  with  four  forts  of  people,  that  you  have 

had. 


[ *5*  ] 

had,  or  now  have,  to  do  with. It  is  well  witn 

thofe  of  you  in  Chrijl,  who  are  gone  to  God. 

It  is  well  with  thofe  of  you  in  Chrijl,  who  are  not 
gone  to  God. — It  is  well  with  thofe,  who  ear- 
neftly  long  to  he  in  Chrijl,  that  they  may  go 

to  God.- It  is  well  with  thofe,  who  neither 

dejire  to  be  in  Chrijl,  nor  to  go  to  God. 

And  ’tis  only  bad  with  fuch,  who,  being  out 

of  Chrift,  are  gone  to  the  devil.— Thefe  tis 

heft  to  let  alone  and  fay  no  more  about  them. 

“ But  to  be  fure,  it  is  well  with  the  other 
four. It  is  well  with  thofe  of  you,  who  be- 

ing in  Chrijl,  are  gone  to  God. — You  miniflers 
and  members  of  Chrift  have  no  more  doubt,  or 
pain  about  them. — They  are  now,  and  for  ever, 
out  of  the  reach  of  the  world,  flefh  and  devil.- — • 
They  are  gone,  where  the  wicked  ceafefrom  trou- 
bling, and  where  the  weary  are  at  rejl. — They  are 
fweetly  repofed  in  Abraham’s  bofom. — They 
dwell  in  his  prefence  who  hath  redeemed  them, 
where  there  is  julnejs  ojjoy  and pleajures  for  ever- 
more.— They  are  waiting  the  joyful  morning  of 
the  refurreffion,  when  their  vile  bodies  fhall  be 
made  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  fhall  be  re- 
united to  their  fouls,  fhall  receive,  the  joyful  fen- 
tence,  and  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

“ It  is  well  alfo  with  thofe  of  you,  who  are  in 
Chrijl,  though  not  gene  to  God. — You  live  next 
door  to  them. — Heaven  is  begun  with  you  too. 

G 4 —-The 


[ »5®  ] 

" The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you.— You 
fee!  it. — This  is  a kingdom  of  rigfueoufuefs,  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. — It  is  begun 
in  grace  and  fhall  terminate  in  glory. — Yea  ; it 
is  Chrilt  within  vou  the  hope  of  glory. — Chrift 

the  rock,  the  foundation,  laid  in  your  hearts. 

Hope  in  the  middle,  and  glory’  at  the  top.  Chrift, 
hope,  glory;  Chrift,  hope,  glory.— You  are 
wafhed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  juftified,  fane- 
tified;  and  fhall  fhortly  be  glorified. — Yea,  your 
lives  are  already  hid  with  Chrifi  in  God. — You 
have  your  converfation  alreadv  in  heaven. — Al- 
ready you  fit  in  heavenly  places  in  Ckrifl  Jefus. — 
What  heavenly  fentences  are  thefe  ? — What  can 
come  nearer  paradife  ? — Blefs  the  Lord,  O ye 
happy  fouls,  and  let  all  that  is  within  y'ou  blefs 
his  holy  name.  — Sing  unto  the  Lord,  fo  long  as 
you  live,  and  praife  your  God,  while  you  have 
your  being. — And  how  long  will  that  be  ? 
Through  the  endlefs  ages  of  a glorious  eter- 
nity’. 

“ O my  dear  brothers  and  fitters,  this  is  my 
hope,  and  this  is  my  purpofe. — But  to  whom  and 
to  what  are  we  indebted  for  all  this,  and  infi- 
nitely more  than  all  the  tongues  and  hearts  of 
men  or  angels  can  tell  or  conceive  ? — To  our 
Redeenter  only,  and  to  bis  merits. — Chrift  with- 
in us  is  Jefus  to  us. — We  were  poor,  loft,  help- 
lefs  finners,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Ifrael,  and  children  of  wrath. — But  Jefus  lived. 

and 


C *53  1 

and  jefus  died,  the  juft  for  the  unjuft,  to  bring  us 
to  the  enjoyment  of  it. 

“ And  what  does  all  this  require  at  our 
hands  ? Why  infinitely  more  than  we  can  ren- 
der him  to  all  eternity. — However  let  us  praife 
and  glorify  God  in  the  beft  manner,  and  with 
the  beft  member  that  we  have. — Let  us  do  it 
conftantly,  cordially,  chear-fully,  fo  long  as  we 
live  ; and  then  no  doubt  we  fhall  do  it  in  heaven 
for  ever. 

“ Keep  clofe,  I befeech  you,  to  every  means 
of  grace.  Strive  to  walk  in  all  the  ordinances 
and  commandments  of  God  blamelefs,  giving  all 
diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  eleftion  fure: 
add  to  your  faith  virtue  ; to  virtue  knowledge  ; to 
knowledge  temperance;  to  temperance  patience; 
to  patience  godlinefs  ;to  godlinefs  brotherly  kind- 
nefs ; to  brotherly  kindnefs  charity. — For  ifthefe 
things,  fays  St.  Peter,  be  in  you,  and  abound,  they 
make  you  that  you Jhould  neither  be  barren  nor  un- 
fruitful in  the  knowledge  oj  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifi 
—Thus  you  will  give  the  beft  token  of  your 
thankfulnefs  to  him,  for  what  he  hath,  done  for 
your  fouls  ; and  you  fhall  not  long  hence  in  hea- 
ven, fing  his  praife  with  your  happy  brethren,, 
gone  thither  before  you. 

“ It  is  well  likewife  with  all  thofe  of  you,  who 
do  truly  defire  to  be  in  Chrifi,  that  you  may  go  to 
God. — Surely  he  owns  you. — Your  defires  are 
from  him  : you  fhall  enjoy  his  favour.  By  and 
by  you  fhall  have  peace  with  him  through  our 


[ »54  ] 


Lord  Jefus  Chrift. — -Go  forth  by  the  footfteps  of 
the  flock:  and  feed  ye  by  the  fhepheid’s  tents. 
— Be  conftant  in  every  means  of  grace.  He  will 
be  found  of  them  that  diligently  feek  him. — 
Bleffed  arc  they  that  mourn,  for  they  {hall  be 
comforted. — Though  your  fins  be  never  fo  ma- 
ny, never  fo  monlirous,  all  fhall  be  forgiven. — 
He  will  have  mercy  upon  you  and  will  abun- 
dantly pardon.  For  where  fin  hath  abounded, 
prace  doth  much  more  abound. — He  tvho  hath 

O 

begun  this  good  work  in  you  will  accomplifh  it 
to  your  eternal  good,  and  las  eternal  glory. — 
Therefore  doubt  not,  fear  not.  A broken  and  a 
contrite  heart  God  will  not  defpife.  The  deeper 
is  your  forrow  ; the  nearer  is  your  joy.  ^our 
extremity  is  God’s  opportunity. — I is  ufually 
darkeft  before  day-break. — You  lhall  fhortly  find 
pardon,  peace,  and  plenteous  redemption,  and  at 
lait  rejoice  in  the  common  and  glorious  falv3tion 
of  his  faints. 

f * “ And  laflly  ; it  is  well  for  you,  who  neither 
truly  dtfire  to  be  in  Chrijl,  nor  to  go  to  God. — 
For  ’tis  well  for  you  that  you  are  out  of  hell. — 
Tis  well,  your  day  of  grace  is  not  utterly  paft. — 
Behold,  now isyouraccepied  time:behold,  nowis 
the  day  ofyour  falvation ! O thatvou  may  employ 
the  remainder  of  it  in  working  out  your  falvation 
wiih  fear  and  trembling.  Now  is  faith  to  be 
had,  facing  faith. — Now  you  may  be  wafhedfrom 
all  your  fins  in  the  Redeemer’s  blood,  juftified, 
fanftif-ed,  and  prepared  for  heaven.— Take,  I 

befeech 


[ 355  ] 

befeech  you,  the  time  while  the  time  is. — You 
have  now  the  means  of  grace  to  ufe ; — The  ordi- 
nances of  God  to  enjoy  ; — His  word  to  lead  and 
hear  ; — His  miniffers  to  inftruft  you,  and  his 
members  to  converle  with. — You  know  not 
what  a day  may  bring  forth. — You  may  die  fud- 
denly. — As  death  leaves  you  ; judgment  will  find 
you. — And  if  you  die,  as  you  are,  out  oj Chriff , 
void  of  true  faith,  unregenerate,  unfanftified, 
fnares,  fire  and  brimflone,  {form  and  tern  pelf 
God  will  rain  upon  you.  Pfal.  xi.  7.  as  your 
eternal,  intolerable  portion  to  drink. 

“ Suffer  me  therefore  thus  far,  one  and  all  of 
you.  God’s  glory  and  your  everlafting  welfare  is 
all  I aim  at. — What  I look  for  in  return  from 
you,  is,  I confefs  much  more  than  I deferve, 
your  prayers.  Pray  for  me  and  I will  pray  for 
you,  who  am, 

Your  ajjedionate,  brother, 

W.  Grimshaw.” 

Friday  9.  (Being  Good-Friday)  I had  al- 
mofl  loft  my  voice  by  a cold.  However 
I fpoke  as  I could,  till  before  twelve,  (it  be- 
ing a watch-night).  I could  fpeak  near  as  well 
as  ever. 

On  Eafter-day  we  had  uncommon  congrega- 
tions, as  indeed  we  have  had  all  the  week.  And 
I obferved  a more  frayed  and  folid  behaviour  in 
moft,  than  is  ufualin  this  kingdom.  Monday  and 
G 6 Tuefday 


C >56  ] 

Tuefday  I was  employed  in  vifiting  the  claffes  : 
and  I was  much  comforted  among  them:  there 
was  fitch  an  hunger  and  thirff  in  all  who  had 
tailed  of  the  grace  of  God,  after  a full  renewal 
in  his  image. 

Sunday  18.  As  often  as  I have  been  here, 
1 never  faw  the  boufe  throughly  filled  be- 
fore. And  the  multitude  did  not  come  toge- 
ther in  vain.  I think,  many  will  remember  this 
day. 

* Monday  19.  I left  Dublin.  And  I could 
look  back  with  fatisfaftion  on  the  days  I had 
fpent  therein.  I had  reafon  to  believe,  that  God 
had  been  at  work  in  a very  uncommon  manner. 
Many  of  thofe  who  once  contradiffed  and  blaf- 
phemed,  were  now  convinced  of  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jefus.  Many  who  had  long  revolted  from 
God,  had  returned  to  him  with  full  purpofe  of 
heart.  Several  mourners  had  found  peace  with 
God,  and  fome  believe,  he  has  faved  them  from 
all  fin.  Many  more  are  all  on  fire  for  this  falva- 
tion  : and  a fpirit  of  love  runs  through  the  whole 
people. 

I came  in  the  evening  to  Newry,  w'here  I 
found  a far  different  face  of  things.  Offences  had 
broke  the  fociety  in  pieces,  only  two  and 
thirty  being  left  of  near  an  hundred.  But 
God  has  a few  names  left  here  alfo.  Let  thefe 
Hand  firm,  and  God  will  maintain  his  own 
caufe. 

Wednefday  21.  I rode  to  Carrick  fergus.  The 

violent 


[ 157  i 

violent  rain  kept  away  the  delicate  and  curious 
hearers.  For  the  fake  of  thefe  I delayed  the  morn- 
ing preaching,  till  a quarter  before  nine.  But 
it  was  too  early  1H11  for  a great  part  of  the  town, 
who  could  not  pofhblv  rife  before  ten.  I added 
a few  members  to  the  fociery,  and  left  them  in 
peace  and  love. 

Where  to  preach  in  Belfalt,  I did  not  know. 
It  was  too  wet  to  preach  abroad.  And  a dancing- 

! mailer  was  bufily  employed  in  the  upper  part  of 
the  market-houfe  : till  at  twelve,  the  fovereign 
him  out,  by  holding  his  court  there.  While  he 
was  above,  I began  below,  to  a very  ferious  and 
attentive  audience.  But  they  were  all  poor  : 

1 the  rich  of  Belfajl  cared for  none  of  thefe  things. 
After  dinner  we  rode  to  Newtown,  and  found 
another  poor,  fhattered  fociety,  reduced  from 
fifty  to  eighteen  members,  and  moll  of  thofe 
cold  enough.  In  the  evening  I preached  to  a 
large  congregation  in  the  market-houfe,  on,  I 
will  heal  their  backfliding.  God  fulfilled  his  word. 
Many  were  healed,  and  many  more  deeply 
wounded.  I had  lull  employment  among  them 
the  next  day.  And  on  Saturday  24.  I left  be- 
tween thirty  and  forty  members,  full  of  defire, 
and  hope,  and  earnelt  refolutions,  not  to  be  aU 
mojl,  but  altogether  Chriflians. 

About  ten  I preached  at  Comber,  and  then 
rode  to  Lilburn,  where  in  the  evening  I had  ma- 
ny rich  ar.d  genteel  hearers.  Sunday  25.  The 
congregation  was  larger  in  the  morning,  than  the 

evening 


r '.5*  i 

evening  before.  And  many  appeared  to  be  deep- 
ly wounded  : O may  none  heal  their  wound 
{lightly  ! But  far  the  larged  congregation  of  all 
met  in  the  evening  : and  yet  I faw  not  a fcoffer, 
no  nor  trifler  among  them. 

Mon.  2b.  In  the  evening  I preached  to  a large 
congregation  in  the  market-  ho  life  at  Lurgan.  * I 
now  embraced  the  opportunity  which  I had  long 
defired,  of  talking  with  Mr.  Miller,  the  con- 
triver of  that  flatue,  which  was  in  Lurgan  when 
I was  there  before.  It  was  the  figure  of  an  old 
man,  handing  in  a cafe,  with  a curtain  drawn 
before  him,  over  againll  a clock  which  flood 
on  the  other  fide  of  the  room.  Every  time  the 
clock  flruck,  he  opened  the  door  with  one  hand, 
drew  back  the  curtain  with  the  other,  turned  his 
head,  as  if  looking  round  on  the  company,  and 
then  faid  with  a clear,  loud,  articulate  voice, 
“ Pafl  one,  two,  three,”  and  fo  on.  But  fo 
many  came  to  fee  this  (the  like  of  which  all  allow- 
ed was  not  to  be  feen  in  Europe)  that  Mr.  Mil- 
ler was  in  danger  of  being  ruined,  not  having 
time  to  attend  his  own  bufinefs.  So,  as  none 
offered  to  purchafe  it,  or  to  reward  him  for  his 
pains,  he  took  the  whole  machine  in  pieces  : 
nor  has  he  any  thought  of  ever  making  any  thing 
of  the  kind  again. 

Tuefday  27.  I preached  in  Lurgan  aL-five,  in 
Terryhugan  at  ten,  and  at  two  in  the  market- 
houfe  at  Richill.  I have  rarely  feen  fo  ferious  a 
congregation  at  a new  place.  At  fix  I preached 

in 


[ *59  ] 

in  the  new  preaching  houfe  at  Clanmain,  the 
largeft  in  the  north  of  Ireland.  And  the  people 
were  all  alive,  being  ftirred  up  by  Mr.  Ryan, 
once  an  attorney,  but  now  living  upon  his  own 
eftate. 

* Wednefday  28.  The  rain  kept  off  the  curi- 
ous hearers,  fo  that  we  had  few  in  the  evening, 
but  earneft  fouls  : after  fermon  we  had  a love- 
feaft.  It  was  a wonderful  time.  God  poured 
out  his  fpirit  abundantly.  Many  were  filled 
with  confolation,  particularly  two,  who  had 
come  from  Lifburn,  (three  and  twenty  Irifh 
miles)  one  a lifelefs  backflider,  the  other  a girl  of 
fixteen,  who  had  been  fome  time  {lightly  con- 
vinced of  fin.  God  reftored  him  to  the  light  of 
his  countenance,  and  gave  her  a clear  evidence 
of  his  love  : and  indeed  in  fo  uncommon  a man- 
ner, that  it  feemed,  her  foul  was  all  love.  One 
of  our  brethren  was  conftrained  openly  to  de- 
clare, he  believed  God  had  wrought  this  change 
in  him.  1 trull  he  will  not  lightly  caft  away  the 
gift  which  God  has  given  him.  In  the  morning 
I left  them  rejoicing  and  praifing  God,  and  rode 
to  Monaghan. 

The  commotions  in  Munfter  having  now  a- 
larmed  all  Ireland,  we  had  hardly  alighted,  when 
fome  wife  perfons  informed  the  provoft,  there 
were  three  flrange  fort  of  men  come  to  the 
King’s-arms.  So  the  provoft  with  his  officers 


imminent  a danger.  I was  juft  come  out,  when 

I was 


[ 160  ] 

I was  required  to  return  into  the  houfe.  The 
provoft  afked  me  many  queftions,  and  perhaps 
the  affair  might  have  turned  ferious,  had  I not 
had  two  letters  with  me,  which  I had  lately  re- 
ceived, one  from  the  hi  (hop  of  Londonderry, 
the  other  from  the  Earl  of  Moyra.  Upon  read- 
ing thefe,  he  excufed  himfelf  for  the  trouble  he 
had  given,  and  wifhed  me  a good  journey. 

Between  fix  and  feven  I preached  at  Coot-hill, 
and  in  the  morning  rode  on  to  Inifkilhn:  the 
fituation  of  which  is  both  pleafant  and  flrong,  as 
it  is  furroundc-d  by  a deep  and  broad  river.  But 
fortifications  it  has  none  ; no,  nor  fo  much  as  an 
old  caftle.  The  inhabitants  glory  that  they  have 
no  papift  in  the  town. 

After  riding  round,  and  round,  we  came  in 
the  evening  to  a lone  houfe  called  Carrick-a- 
biggan.  It  lay  in  the  midfl  of  horrid  mountains ; 
and  had  no  very  promifing  appearance.  However 
it  afforded  corn  for  our  horfes,  and  potatoes  for 
ourfelves.  So  we  made  an  hearty  fupper,  called 
in  as  many  as  pleafed  of  the  family  to  prayers,  and 
tho’  we  had  no  faftning  either  for  our  door,  or 
our  windows,  flept  in  peace. 

Saturday,  May  1.  We  took  horfe  at  five,  the 
north  eaft-wind  would  have  fuited  the  firft  of 
January.  And  we  had  foaking  rain  on  the  black 
mountains.  However  before  noon  we  came  well 
to  Sligoe. 

None  in  Sligoe,  when  I was  there  laft,  profeft 
fo  much  love  to  me  as  Mr.  Knox’s  family.  They 

would 


[ i6i  ] 

would  willingly  have  had  me  with  them  morn- 
ing,  noon,  and  night,  and  omitted  no  poffible 
mark  oF  afFe£tion.  But  what  a change  ? Mrs.  K— 
went  into  the  country,  the  day  before  1 came. 
Her  brother  and  his  wife  fet  out  for  Dublin,  at 
the  fame  time.  He  himfelf,  and  the  reft  of  his 
family  faw  me,  that  is  at  church,  becaufe  they 
could  not  help  it ; 

“ But  wonder’d  at  the  ftrange  man’s  face, 

As  one  they  ne’er  had  known.” 

I am  forry  for  their  fake,  not  my  own.  Perhaps 
they  my  wilh  to  fee  me  when  it  is  too  late. 

Sunday  2.  I preached  in  the  market-houfe, 
morning  and  evening.  Abundance  of  the  dragoons 
were  there  : fo  were  many  of  ihe  officers,  who 
behaved  with  uncommon  ferioufnefs. 

Monday  3.  In  the  evening  a company  of 
players  began  afling,  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
market-houfe,  juft  as  we  began  finging  in  the 
lower.  The  cafe  of  thefe  is  remarkable.  The  pref- 
byterians  for  a long  time  had  their  public  wor- 
fhip  here.  But  when  the  ftrollers  came  to  town, 
they  were  turned  out  : and  from  that  time  had 
no  public  worlhip  at  all.  On  Tuefday  evening 
the  lower  part  too  was  occupied  by  buyers  and 
fellers  of  oatmeal.  But  as  foon  as  I began,  the 
people  quitted  their  facks,  and  liftened  to  bufi- 
nefs  of  greater  importance. 

On  the  following  days,  I preached  at  Carrick 


on 


[ i6®  ] 


on  Shannon,  Drumnerfnave,  Cleg-hill,  Lonford, 
and  Abidarring.  Saturday  8.  Calling  on  a friend 
in  our  way,  we  had  not  fat  down,  before  feveral 
of  the  neighbours,  papids  as  well  as  protedants 
came  in,  fuppofing  I was  to  preach.  I was  not 
willing  to  difappoint  them.  And  they  all  liden- 
ed  with  deep  attention. 

Hence  I rode  to  Athlone,  I intended  on 
Sunday  9.  to  preach  abroad  as  ufual.  But  the 
fharp  wind  made  it  imprafticable  ; and  obliged 
me  to  keep  in  the  houfe.  The  congregations 
however  were  large,  both  morning  and  evening  : 
and  I found  a little  fruit  of  my  labour. 

Thurfday  13,  I was  in  hopes  even  the  papids 
here  had  at  length  a fhepherd  who  cared  for 
their  fouls.  He  was  drifter  than  any  of  his  pre- 
deceffors,  and  was  edeemed  a man  of  piety  as  well 
as  learning.  Accordingly  he  had  given  them  drift 
orders,  not  to  work  on  the  Lord’s  day.  But  I 
found  he  allowed  them  to  play,  as  much  as  they 
pleafed,  at  cards  it)  particular  ; nay,  and  averred 
“ It  was  their  duty  fo  to  do,”  to  “ refrelh  both 
their  bodies  and  minds.”  Alas,  for  the  blind 
leader  of  the  blind  ! Has  not  he  the  greater 
fin ! 

Sunday  16,  I had  obferved  to  the  fociety  lad 
week,  that  I had  not  feen  one  congregation  ever 
in  Ireland,  behave  fo  ill  at  church  as  that  at  Ath- 
lone, laughing,  talking  and  daring  about  during 
the  whole  fervice  ; I had  added,  “ This  is  your 
fault:  for  if  you  had  attended,  the  church  as 

you 


C l63  ] 

you  ought  to  have  done,  your  prefence  and  ex- 
ample would  not  have  failed  to  influence  the 
► whole  congregation”.  And  fo  it  appeared.  I faw 
• not  one  to  day  either  laughing,  talking  or  flaring  • 
about  : but  a remarkable  ferioufnefs  was  fpread, 
from  the  one  end  of  the  church  to  the  other. 

Monday  17.  I preached  at  Ahalkra,  to  all  the 
: proteflants  in  or  near  the  town.  But  their 
f priefls  would  not  fuffer  the  papifls  to  come. 
What  could  a magiftrate  do  in  this  cafe  3 Doubt- 
lefs  he  might  tell  the  priefi,  “ Sir,  as  you  enjoy 
liberty  of  confcience,  you  lhall  allow  it  to  others. 
You  are  not  perfecuted  yourfelf.  You  (hall  not 
perfecute  them.” 

Tuefd.  18.  Ipreachedat  Ballinaflo’ about  ten 
'in  the  morning,  and  in  the  evening  at  Aghrim. 
Thurfday  20.  I rode  on  to  Hollymount.  The  fun 
was  extremely  hot,  fo  thatl  was  much  exhaufted,. 
But  after  a little  reft,  I preached  in  the  church- 
yard, without  any  wearinefs. 

Friday  21.  I preached  at  Balcanow  church  at 
ten  to  a deeply  ferious  congregation,  and  in  the 
court-houfe  at  Calllebarr  in  the  evening.  Sunday 
23.  The  chief  family  in  the  town  made  a part 
of  our  congregation.  And  whether  they  received 
any  benefit  thereby  or  no,  their  example  may 
bring  others,  who  will  receive  it. 

Monday  24.  I went  with  two  friends,  to  fee 
one  of  the  greateft  natural  wonders  in  Ireland, 
Mount  Eagle  vulgarly  called  Crow-Patrick.  The 
foot  of  it  is  fourteen  miles  from  Caftlebarr.  There 


we 


[ *64  ] 

we  left  our  horfes,  and  procured  a guide.  It  was 
juft  twelve  when  we  alighted  ; the  fun  wasburn- 
ing  hot,  and  ue  had  not  a breath  of  wind.  Part 
of  the  afcent  was  a good  deal  deeper  than  an  or- 
dinary pair  of  flairs.  About  two  we  gained  the 
top,  vhich  is  an  oval,  grafT\  plain,  about  an  hun- 
dred and  fifty  yards  in  length,  and  70  or  eigbi  in 
breadth.  The  upper  part  of  the  mountain  much 
refembles  the  Pike  ofTenerifif.  I think,  it  can- 
not rife  much  lefs  than  a mile  perpendicular  fr  >na  ; 
the  plain  below.  There  is  an  immenfe  profpccu 
on  one  fide  toward  the  fea,  and  on  the  other 
over  the  land.  But  as  molt  of  it  is  wafte  and  un- 
cultivated, the  profpefl  is  not  very  pleafing. 

At  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  at  New- 
port and  at  fix  in  the  morning  I then  returned 
to  Newport,  and  began  reading  prayers  at  ten. 
After  fermon  I had  a little  converfation  with 
Lord  Wefhport,  an  extremely  fenfible  man,  and 
would  gladly  have  flayed  with  him  longer,  but 
that  I had  promifed  to  be  at  Cafllebarr ; where 
in  the  evening  I preached  my  farewel  fermon, 
to  a numerous  congregation. 

Wednefday  26.  We  took  horfe  at  four,  to  en- 
joy the  cool  of  the  morning.  At  feven  the  fun! 
was  warm  enough  : I verily  think  as  warm  as  in 
Georgia.  We  could  not  have  borne  it,  but 
the  wind  was  in  our  face.  However  in  the  after-: 
noon  we  got  well  to  Galway.  There  was  as  finall  1 
fociety  here,  and  (what  is  not  common)  all  ol 
them  were  young  women.  Between  feven  and; 


[ l65  3 

• eight  I began  preaching  in  the  court-houfe,  to  a 
mixt  multitude  of  papifts  and  proteftants,  rich  and 
poor,  who  appeared  to  be  ulerly  aflonifhed.  At 
five  in  the  morning  I preached  again,  and  fpoke 
as  plain  as  I poflibly  could.  But  to  the  far  great- 
er part  it  feemed  to  be  only  as  the  found  of  many 
|;  waters. 

Thurfday  27.  We  had  another  Georgian  day. 
But  having  the  wind  again,  full  in  our  face,  after 
riding  about  fifty  Englifh  miles,  we  got  well  to 
Ennis  in  the  afternoon.  Many  being  ready  to 
make  adifturbance  at  the  court-houfe  I left  them 
to  themfelves,  and  preached  over  againfl  Mr. 

1 Bindon’s  houfe,  in  great  quietnefs. 

Friday  28.  I was  informed,  that  a few  days 
1 before,  two  of  Mr. — - — 's  maids,  went  to  bathe, 
(as  the  women  here  frequently  do)  in  the  river 
| near  his  houfe.  The  water  was  not  above  a vard 
deep  : but  there  was  a deep  hole  at  a little  dif- 
tance.  As  one  of  them  dafhed  water  at  the  other, 

[;  fhe  endeavouring  to  avoid  it,  flipped  into  the 
hole,  and  the  firft  firiving  to  help  her  flipt  in 
too  : nor  was  either  of  them  feen  any  mote,  ’till 
1 their  bodies  floated  upon  the  water.  Yet  after 
fome  hours,  one  of  them  was  brought  to  life.  But 
the  other  could  not  be  recovered. 

The  violent  heat,  which  had  continued  for 
eight  days,  was  now  at  an  end,  the  wind  turning 
north.  Soon  Saturday  eg.  we  had  a pleafant  ride 
to  Limerick.  Sunday  go.  I preached  in  the  old 
camp.  The  pleafantnefs  of  the  place,  the  calm- 

nefs 


[ 166  ] 

nefs  of  the  evening  and  the  convenient  diftance 
from  the  town  all  confpired  to  draw  the  people 
together,  who  flocked  from  every  quarter  Many 
officers,  as  well  as  abundance  of  foldiers  were 
among  them,  and  behaved  with  the  utmoft  de- 
cency. I preached  the  following  evenings  at  the 
fame  place,  and  that  in  great  meafure  for  the  fake 
of  the  foldiers,  it  being  within  a mufket-fhot  of 
the  place  where  they  were  exercifing.  Nay,  two 
evenings  an  officer  ordered  a large  body  to  ex- 
ercife  on  the  verv  fpot.  But  the  moment  I began 
they  laid  down  their  arms,  and  joined  the  reft  of 
the  congregation, 

Friday,  June  g.  I preached  at  noon  in  Bailiga* 
rane,  to  a large  congregation,  chiefly  of  Palatines. 
And  fo  at  New-market  in  the  evening,  and  the 
morning  following.  Thefe  have  quite  a different 
look  from  the  natives  of  the  country,  as  well  as 
a different  temper.  They  are  a ferious,  think- 
ing people.  And  their  diligence  turns  all  their 
land  into  a garden. 

Monday  7.  I met  a large  number  of  children, 
juft  as  much  acquainted  with  God,  and  with  the 
a things  of  God  as  wild  cffes  coil , and  juft  as  much 
concerned  about  them.  And  yet  who  can  be- 
lieve, that  thefe  pretty  little  creatures,  have  the 
wrath  of  God  abiding  on  them  ? 

Numberlefs  crowds  ran  together  about  this 
time,  to  fee  the  execution  of  the  poor  deferter. 
And  I believe  feme  of  them  retained  ferious  im- 
prefiions,  for  pear  four  and  twenty  hours  ! But 

it 


[ *67  ] 

it  was  not  fo  with  the  foldiers : although  they 
walked  one  by  one,  clofe  to  the  bleeding,  mangl- 
ed carcafe,  mod  of  them  were  as  merry  within 
fix  hours,  as  if  they  had  only  feen  a puppet* 

Ihew. 

Tuefday  8.  I vifited  the  dalles,  and  wonder- 
ed to  find  no  witnefs  of  the  great  falvation. 
Surely  the  flame  which  is  kindled  in  Dublin,  will 
not  flop  there.  The  next  evening  God  did  in- 
deed kindle  it  here  : a cry  went  up  on  every  fide  : 
and  the  lively  believers  feemed  all  on  fire,  to  be 
cleanfed  from  all  unnghteoufnefs. 

On  Friday  and  Saturday,  I had  much  conver- 
fation  with  a very  noted  perfon.  But  I found 
none  in  town  who  expe&ed,  that  any  good  could 
be  done,  to  fucb  a finner  as  him  ! Suck  a firmer  ? 
Why,  were  we  not  all  Juch  ? We  were  dead  in 
\ Jin.  And  is  he  more  than  dead  ? 

Sunday  13.  Being  informed,  I had  fhot  over 
the  heads  of  the  foldiers,  who  did  not  “ under- 
iland  any  thing  but  hell  and  damnation,”  I took 
my  leave  of  them  this  evening,  by  ftrongly  ap- 
i,  plying  the  ftory  of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  They 
feemed  to  underfland  this  : and  all,  but  two  or 
three  boy-olficers,  behaved  as  men  fearing  God. 

* Monday  14.  I rode  to  Cork.  Here  I pro- 
1 cured  an  exafl;  account  of  the  late  commotions. 
About  the  beginning  of  December  laid,  a few 
men  met  by  night  near  Nenagh,  in  the  county  of 
Limerick,  and  threw  down  It  he  fences  of  fome 
icommons,  which  had  been  lately  inclofed.  Near 

the 


[ >68  ] 

the  fame  time  others  met,  in  the  county  of  Tip. 
perarv,  of  Waterford,  and  of  Cork.  As  no  one 
offered  to  fupprefs  or  hinder  them,  they  increaf- 
ed  in  number  continually,  and  called  themfclves 
White-boys,  wearing  white  cockades,  and  white 
linen  frocks.  In  February,  there  were  five  or 
fix  parties  of  them,  two  or  three  hundred  men 
in  each,  who  moved  up  and  down,  chiefly  in 
the  night ; but  for  what  end,  did  not  appear. 
Only  they  levelled  a few  fences,  dug  up  fome 
grounds,  and  hamftrung  fome  cattle,  perhaps 
fifty  or  fixty  in  all.  One  body  of  them  came  in- 
to Cloheen,  of  about  five  hundred  foot,  and  two 
hundred  horfe.  They  moved  as  exaftly  as  re- 
gular troops,  and  appeared  to  be  throughly  dif- 
ciplined.  They  now  fent  letters  to  feveral  gen- 
tlemen, threatning  to  pull  down  their  houfes. 
They  compelled  every  one  they  met  to  take  an 
oath,  “ to  be  true  to  queen  Sive  (whatever  that 
meant)  and  the  white-boys:  not  to  reveal  their 
fecrets,  and  to  join  them  when  called  upon/’ 
It  was  fuppofed,  eight  or  ten  thoufand  were  now 
aftually  rifen,  many  of  them  well-armed  : and 
that  a far  greater  number  were  ready  to  rife, 
whenever  they  fhould  be  called  upon.  Thofe 
who  refufed  to  fwear,  they  threatened  to  bury 
alive.  Two  or  three  they  did  bury  up  to  the 
neck  and  left  them : where  they  muft  quickly 
have  perifhed,  had  thev  not  been  found  in  time 
by  fome  travelling  by.  At  length,  toward  Eafler, 
a body  of  troops,  chiefly  light  horfe,  were  fent 

againft 


■ ' ' ' 

[ l69  ] 

%ainft  therm  Many  were  apprehended  and 
committed  to  goal : the  reft  of  them  difappeared. 
This  is  the  plain,  naked  faff,  which  has  been  fo 
varioufly  reprefented. 

Thurfday  17.  I rode  about  thirty  Englifh 
miles,  through  a pleafant  and  well-cultivated 
country  to  Youghall.  It  is  finely  fituated  on  the 
fide  of  an  hill,  fo  as  to  command  a wide  fea- 
profpecf.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  the  Ex- 
change. Abundance  of  people  attended  : as  did 
the  rar  greater  part  of  them,  at  five  o’clock  in  the 
morning.  I returned  to  Cork  on  Friday.  Sun- 
day 20.  at  the  defire  of  captain  Taylor,  I went 
ito  Paftage,  and  preached  to  many  of  the  town’s 
ipeople,  and  as  many  of  the  bailors  as  could  attend. 
* On  Monday  and  Tuefday  I vifited  the  claftes, 
‘and  obferved  what  was  very  uncommon  ; in  two 
years  there  was  neither  any  increafe,  nor  any 
decreafe  in  this  fociety.  Two  hundred  and  thir- 
‘ ty  three  members  I left,  and  two  hundred  and 
thirty  three  I find. 

Thurfday  24.  I rode  to  Kinfale  and  preached 
in  the  Exchange,  to  a confiderable  number  of  at- 
tentive hearers.  In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Ban- 
don,  and  found  the  fociety  much  leftened,  and 
dead  enough.  Yet  the  congregation  in  the 
jmain-ftreet  was  remarkably  large,  as  well  as 
deeply  attentive.  So  it  was  on  Friday.  Satur- 
day 26.  I vifited  the  claftes,  and  exhorted  them 
■0  be  zealous  and  repent . The  word  funk  into 
I Vql,  XXXI.  H their 


[ 170  ] 


their  hearts  : fo  that  when  we  met  in  the  even- 
ing, they  did  not  feem  to  be  the  fame  perfons. 
They  appeared  to  breathe  quite  another  fpirit, 
every  one  {lining  up  his  neighbour.  I know 
not  when  I have  feen  fo  deep  and  general  an  im- 
preffion  made  in  fo  fhort  a time. 

Sunday  27.  1 returned  to  Cork,  and  in  the 
afternoon  preached  on  the  Barrack-hiil.  The 
congregation  was  fuch,  as  I had  not  feen  at 
Cork,  for  at  lead  twelve  years.  One  foldier 
made  fome  noife  : but  the  commanding  officer 
foon  ordered  him  into  cudody.  The  top  of  the 
walls,  being  covered  with  foldiers,  made  a fo- 
lemn  appearance.  Let  this  preaching  be  conti- 
nued, and  the  work  of  God  will  quickly  revive 
at  Cork. 

On  Monday  and  Tuefday  the  congregation  at 
the  houfe  was  far  larger  than  on  any  week-day 
before.  And  there  was  much  life  among  the 
people,  which  perhaps  was  increased  by  the  epi- 
demic diforder.  This  generally  attacked  firft 
the  head  ; afterward  the  throat  and  the  bread. 
Mr.  Jones,  who  had  been  drooping  for  fome 
time,  was  feized  with  this  three  weeks  fince  : 
while  I was  at  Youghal,  he  fent  for  a phvfician, 
who  applied  a blider  to  his  head.  In  two  or 
three  days  a fecond  phfician  was  called  in  ;who 
told  his  relations,  he  was  better  and  better.  Re- 
turning from  Bandon,  and  obferving  what  was 
prefcribed,  I could  not  help  faying,  “ W hen  a 
fever  neither  intermits,  nor  remits,  the  bark  is 


no 


[ *7*  3 

no  better  than  poifon.”  At  hearing  this,  the  doc- 
tors were  much  difpleafed,  and  declared  again, 
“ He  was  a great  deal  better.”  On  W ednefday 
morning  a little  before  two,  his  fpirit  returned  to 
God. 

* So  died  honeft  Thomas  Jones,  Jecundum 
artem  ! A man  whom  God  raifed  from  nothing 
by  a bleffing  on  his  unwearied  diligence,  to  a 
plentiful  fortune.  Yet  when  riches  increafed  on 
every  fide,  he  did  not  fet  his  heart  upon  them. 
Some  years  fince  he  retired  from  bufinefs,  but 
was  {till  fully  employed  in  building  and  in  doing- 
good.  His  natural  temper  was  rough,  and  fo  was 
his  fpeech,  which  occafioned  him  many  trials. 
But  notwithftanding  this,  he  was  generous  and 
compaffionate,  and  never  weary  of  well-doing. 
From  the  beginning  of  his  illnefs,  he  was  conti- 
nually in  prayer:  for  fome  time  with  much  fear 
and  diftrefs.  But  I faw  no  firms  of  this, 
after  I came  from  Baridon  : I believe  his  fears 
were  then  all  fcattered ; and  he  waited  with 
calm,  though  earneft,  defire  for  the  falvation  of 
God. 

Wednefday  30.  I rode  to  Limerick.  I had 
promifed  to  come  again,  if  our  brethren  found  a 
convenient  place  to  build  a preaching-houfe. 
One  now  offered,  proper  in  all  refpefts. 
Saturday,  July  3.  I met  the  fociety,  and 
enquired,  what  each  was  willing  to  fubfcribe? 
A confiderable  fum  was  fubfcribed  immedi- 
ately. 

. ' . Ha 


* Sunday 


[ i;s  ] 

* Sunday  4.  was  a day  of  folemnjoy,  equal  tct 
any  I had  feen  in  Dublin.  At  the  love-feaft  in 
the  evening  it  appeared,  that  God  had  now  vi- 
fited  Limerick  alfo.  hive  perfons  defired  to 
return  thanks  to  God,  for  a clear  fenfe  of  his 
pardoning  love  : feveral  others,  for  an  increafe 
of  faith,  and  for  deliverance  from  doubts  and 
fears.  And  two  gave  a plain,  fimple  account,  of 
the  manner  wherein  God  had  cleanfed  their 
hearts,  fo  that  they  now  felt  no  anger,  pride  or 
fel f-will,  but  continual  love,  and  praver,  and 
praife. 

Monday  5.  I rode  to  Clonmell,  and  preached 
in  the  evening  near  the  Barrack-gate,  to  a wild, 
flaring  multitude,  many  of  whom  would  have 
been  rude  enough  ; but  they  flood  in  awe  of  the 
foldiers.  Tuefday  6.  I rode  to  Carrick  on  Sure. 
♦Having  been  informed,  there  was  one  family 
here  alfo,  wherein  both  the  man  and  his  wife 
feared  God,  I immediately  fent  to  the  houfe. 
The  woman  prc-fently  came ; from  whom  I 
learned,  that  her  hufband  died  the  Saturday  be- 
fore, and  left  her  with  nothing  but  four  little 
children,  and  an  unfhaken  confidence  in  God. 
Her  words,  her  look,  her  whole  carriage  were  of 
a piece,  and  fhewed  the  dignity  of  Chriflian  bor- 
row. I could  not  but  admire,  that  God  fhould 
fend  ?ne  juft  at  fuch  a time!  And  her  tears  were 
turned  into  tears  of  joy. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Waterford,  in  a 
court,  adjoining  to  the  Main-flreet.  W ednefday 

7.  Four 


[ *7  3 ] 

y.  Four  of  the  white-boys,  lately  condemned  for 
breaking  openhoufes,  were  executed.  They  were 
all,  notwithffanding  the  abfolution  of  their  prieft, 
ready  to  die  for  fear  of  death.  Two  or  three  of 
them  laid  faff  hold  on  the  ladder,  and  could  not 
be  perfuaded  to  let  it  go.  One  in  particular  gave 
fuch  violent  Ihrieks,  as  might  be  heard  near  a 
mile  off'.  O what  but  love  can  caff  out  the  fear  of 
death  ? And  how  inexpreffibly  miferable  is  that 
bondage ! 

On  this  and  the  two  following  days,  God 
remembered  poor  Waterford  alfo.  Several  back- 
fliders  were  healed  : many  awoke  out  of  fleep. 
And  fome  mightily  rejoiced  in  God  their  Sa- 
viour. 

Saturday  10.  We  rode  to  Kilkenny,  one  of 
the  pleafanteff,  and  the  moft  antient  cities  in  the 
kingdom  : and  not  inferior  to  any  at  all  in  wick- 
ednefs,  or  in  hatred  to  this  way.  I was  therefore 
glad  of  a permiffion  to  preach  in  the  Town-hall; 
where  a fmall,  ferious  company  attended  in  the 
evening.  Sunday  it.  I went  to  the  cathedral, 
one  of  the  bed  built  which  I have  feen  in  Ire- 
land.  The  pillars  are  all  of  black  marble. 
But  the  late  bifhop  ordered  them  to  be  white- 
washed ! Indeed  marble  is  fo  plentiful 

near  this  town,  that  the  very  flreets  are  paved 
with  it. 

At  fix  in  the  evening  I began  preaching  in 
the  old  Bowling-green,  near  the  cable.  Abun- 
H 3 dance 


[ *7  4 ] 

dance  ofpeople,  proteftants  and  papifts,  gathered 
from  all  parts.  They  were  very  flill  during  the 
former  part  of  the  fermon.  Then  the  papifts  ran 
together,  fet  up  a fhout,  and  would  have  gone 
further:  but  they  were  reftrained,  they  knew  not 
how.  I turned  to  them  and  faid,  “ Be  filent,  or 
be  gone  !”  Their  noife  ceafed,  and  we  heard 
them  no  more.  So  I refumed,  and  went  on  with 
my  difcourfe,  and  concluded  without  interrup- 
tion. 

When  I came  out  of  the  green,  they  gathered 
again  and  gnafhed  upon  me  with  their  teeth. 
One  cried  out,  “ O what  is  Kilkenny  come  to  ?” 
But  they  could  go  no  farther.  Only  two  or  three 
large  flones  were  thrown  : but  none  wTas  hurt, 
-fave  he  that  threw  them.  For  as  he  was  going  to 
throw  again,  one  feized  him  by  the  neck,  and 
gave  him  a kick  and  a cuff,  which  fpoiled  his 
diverfion. 

* Monday  12. 1 went  to  Dunmore  cave,  three 
or  four  miles  from  Kilkenny.  It  is  full  as  remark- 
able as  Poole’s-hole,  or  any  other  in  The  Peak. 
The  opening  is  round,  parallel  to  the  horizon, 
and  feventy  or  eighty  yards  acrofs.  In  the  midfl 
of  this,  there  is  a kind  of  arch,  twenty  or  thirty 
feet  high.  By  this  you  enter  into  the  firft  cave, 
nearly  round,  and  forty  or  fifty  feet  in  diameter.  It 
is  incompaffed  with  fpar  flones,  juft  like  thofeon 
the  ftdes  of  Poole’s-hole.  On  one  fide  of  the  cave 
is  a narrow  paffage,  which  goes  under  the  rock 

two 


[ *75  ] 

two  or  three  hundred  yards : on  the  other,  an 
hollow,  which  no  one  has  ever  been  able  to  find 
an  end  of.  I fiippofe  the  hole  too,  as  well  as 
many  others,  was  formed  by  the  waters  of  the 
deluge,  retreating  into  the  great  abyfs,  with 
which  probably  it  communicates. 

Tuefday  13.  I rode  to  Birr.  About  iorty  per- 
fons  attended  in  the  evening,  and  half  as  many  in 
the  morning.  I faw  there  was  but  one  way  to  do 
any  good.  So  in  the  evening  I preached  abroad. 
I had  then  hundreds  of  hearers,  and  God  himfelf 
fpoke  to  many  a cold  heart.  The  next  morning 
at  five,  the  room  was  full,  and  light  fprung  out 
of  darknefs : fo  that  many  poor,  withered  fouls 
began  to  revive,  and  rejoice  again  in  God  their 
Saviour. 

Thurfday  lg.  I took  my  old  Handing  in  the 
market-place  at  Mountmelick.  But  the  next 
evening  the  rain  drove  us  into  the  market- 
houfe.  Afterward  we  had  a joyful  love-feaft.  In- 
deed hitherto  God  has  been  pleafed  to  mark  all 
our  way  with  blefiings. 

* Saturday  17. 1 went  on  to  poor  dead  Portar- 
lington.  And  no  wonder  it  fhould  be  fo,  while 
the  preachers  coop  themfelves  up  in  a room  with 
twenty  or  thirty  hearers.  I went  ftrait  to  the 
market-place,  and  cried  aloud,  Hearken  ! Behold, 
a fow&r  went  forth  to  fow.  God  made  his  word 
quick  and  powerful , and  fiarp  as  a two-edged 
fword.  Abundantly  more  than  the  room  could 
contain,  were  prefent,  at  five  in  the  morning. 

H 4 At 


[ 176  ] 

At  eight  I began  in  the  market-place  again,  on, 
How Jhall  I give  thee  up,  Ephraim?  Solemn  at- 
tention fat  on  every  face,  and  God  repeated  his 
call  to  many  hearts; 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  market-place 
at  Tullamore.  Monday  19.  Between  two  and 
three  in  the  morning,  was  fuch  thunder  and 
lightning  as  I never  knew  in  Europe.  The  crack 
and  the  flafh  were  in  the  fame  inftant.  Moft 
of  the  houfes  fhook  : and  yet  no  hurt  was  done 
in  the  whole  town.  But  fome  good  was  done  ; 
for  at  five  o’clock,  the  preaching-houfe  w'as 
quite  filled.  And  the  inward  voice  of  the  Lord 
was  mighty  in  operation  : this  all'o  was  a glorious 
voice  ! 

Tuefday  20.  We  had  our  quarterly  meeting 
at  Cooly-lough.  On  Wednefday,  I preached  at 
Clara:  Thurfday  22,  at  Tyrrel’s-pafs,  and  on 
Friday  went  on  to  Edinderry.  Here  I found  fome 
who  had  been  long  labouring  in  the  fire,  and 
toiling  to  work  themfelves  into  holinefs.  To  fhew 
them  a more  excellent  way,  I preached  on  Rom. 
x.  6,  7,  8.  They  found  this  was  the  very  thing 
they  wanted  : and  at  the  meeting  of  the  fociety, 
God  confirmed  the  word  of  his  grace  in  fo  potv- 
erful  a manner,  that  many  wondered,  how  they 
could  help  believing. 

* Saturday  24.  I rode  to  Dublin,  and  found 
the  flame  not  only  continuing,  but  increafing. 
The  congregation  ufed  to  be  finall  on  Saturday 

night  j 


[ *77  ] 

night : but  it  was  as  large  now  as  formerly  on 
Sunday,  Monday  26.  At  five  in  the  morning 
the  congregation  was  larger  than  it  ufed  to  be  in 
the  evening.  And  in  thefe  two  days  and  an  half, 
four  perfons  gave  thanks,  for  a fenfe  of  God’s 
pardoning  mercy  : and  feven  (among  whom  were 
a mother  and  her  daughter)  for  bein gperfeQedin 
love . 

* The  perfon  by  whom  chiefly  itpleafed  God 
to  work  this  wonderful  work,  was  John  Man- 
ners, a plain  man,  of  middling  fenfe,  and  not 
eloquent,  but  rather  rude  in  fpeech  : one  who 
had  never  before  been  remarkably  ufeful, 
but  feemed  to  be  raifed  up  for  this  fingle 
work.  And  as  foon  as  it  was  done,  he  fell 
into  a confumption,  languifhed  a while,  and 
died. 

I now  found  he  had  not  at  all  exceeded  the 
truth,  in  the  accounts  he  had  fent  me  from  time 
to  time.  In  one  of  his  firft  letters,  after  I left  the 
town,  he  fays,  * “ The  work  here  is  fuch  as  I 
never  expended  to  fee.  Some  are  juftified  or 
fanftified  almoft  every  day.  This  week  three  or 
four  were  jufiified,  and  as  many,  if  not  more, 
renewed  in  love.  The  people  are  all  on  fire. 
Such  a day  as  laft  Sunday  I never  faw.  While  I 
was  at  prayer  in  the  fociety,  the  power  of  the 
Lord  overlhadowed  ns,  and  fome  cried  out, 
“ Lord,  I can  believe.”  The  cry  foon  became 
general  with  ftrong  pcayers.  Twice  I attempted 
tofing:  but  my  voice  could  not  be  heard,  I 
H ,5  thea 


C 178  ] 

then  defn  ed  them  to  reftrain  themfelves,  and  in 
ftillnefs  and  compofure  to  wait  for  the  bleffing : 
on  which  all  but  two  or  three,  who  could  not 
refrain,  came  into  a folemn  filence.  I prayed 
again,  and  the  foftning  power  of  grace  was  felt 
in  many  hearts.  Our  congregations  increafe 
much,  and  I have  no  doubt,  but  we  fhall  fee 
greater  things  than  thefe.” 

Four  days  after  he  writes,  “ The  work  of  God 
increafes  every  day.  There  is  hardly  a day,  but 
fome  are  juftified,  or  fandtified,  or  both.  On 
Thurfday,  three  came  and  told  me,  that  the  blood 
of  Jefus  Chrijl  had  cleanfed  them  from  all  fn. 
One  of  them  told  me,  (he  had  been  juftified  feven 
years,  and  had  been  five  years  convinced  of  the 
neceffity  of  fandlification.  But  this  eafy  convic- 
tion availed  not.  A fortnight  fince  fhe  was  feized 
with  fo  keen  a convidiion,  as  gave  her  no  reft, 
till  God  had  fandlified  her,  and  witneffed  it  to 
her  heart,” 

Three  days  after  (May  11.)  he  writes  thus  : 
“ God  ftili  continues  his  marvellous  loving  kind- 
nefs  to  us.  On  Sundav  laft  Dor.  King  entered 
into  the  rejl.  She  had  been  feeking  it  for  fome 
time.  But  her  convidlions  and  defires  grew 
fironger  and  ftronger,  as  the  hour  approached. 
A while  ago  fhe  told  me,  fhe  grew  worfe  and 
worfe,  and  her  inward  conflidls  were  greater 
than  ever.  But  on  the  Lord’s  day  fhe  felt  an  en- 
tire change,  while  thefe  words  were  fpoke  to  her 
heart,  Thou  art  all  fair,  my  love:  there  is  no  fpot 

in 


[ *79  ] 

in  thee.  She  now  walks  in  fweet  peace  and  re- 
joices evermore.  Her  father  received  the  blef- 
fing  a few  days  before  her,  and  is  exceeding 
happy. 

“ The  fire  catches  all  that  come  near.  An  old 
foldier,  in  his  return  from  Germany  to  the  north 
of  Ireland,  fell  in  one  night  with  thefe  wreftling 
Jacobs,  to  his  great  aflonifhment.  He  was  jufti- 
fied  feventeen  years  ago,  but  afterward  fell  from 
it  for  five  years.  As  he  was  going  to  Germany, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  war,  the  Lord  healed 
him  in  Dublin  : and  in  fpite  of  all  the  diftreftes 
of  a fevere  campaign,  he  walked  in  the  light 
continually.  On  his  return  through  London  he 
was  convinced  of  the  neceflity  of  fanHification. 
And  foon  after  he  came  hither,  his  heart  was 
broken  in  pieces,  while  he  was  with  a little  com- 
pany, who  meet  daily  for  prayer.  One  evening 
as  they  were  going  away  he  (lopped  them,  and 
begged  they  would  not  go  till  the  Lord  had  blef- 
fed  him.  They  kneeled  down  again,  and  did  not 
ceafe  wreftling  with  God,  till  he  had  a witnefs, 
that  he  was  faved  from  all  fin. 

* “ The  cafe  of  Mr.  Timmins  is  no  Iefs  re- 
markable. He  had  been  a notorious  finner.  He 
was  deeply  wounded  two  months  fince.  Ten 
days  ago,  on  a Friday,  God  fpake  peace  to  his 
foul.  The  Sunday  following,  after  a violent 
ftruggle,  he  funk  down  as  dead.  He  was  cold  as 
clay.  After  about  ten  minutes  he  c?une  to  him- 
lelf,  and  cried,  “ A new  heart,  a new  heart.” 

H 6 He 


[ *8o  J 

He  faid,  “ He  felt  himfelf  in  an  inftant  entirely 
emptied  of  fin  and  filled  with  God.”  Brother 
Barry  likewife  had  been  juftified  but  a few  days, 
before  God  gave  him  purity  of  heart. 

May  J5.  He  writes,  “ God  ftill  makes  me  a 
melfenger  of  good  tidings.  His  work  goes  on. 
Our  laft  night’s  meeting  was  remarkable  for  the 
prefence  and  power  of  God,  while  feveral  were 
relating  what  he  had  done.  One  faid,  “ All  that 
day  in  which  God  delivered  me,  I felt  the  blef- 
fing  juft  at  hand,  but  could  not  open  my  heart  to 
receive  it.  I was  fall  fhut  up,  till  under  the  fer- 
mon  in  the  evening,  I felt  God  open  my  heart, 
remove  the  bar  of  unbelief,  and  gave  me  power  to 
receive  the  blefling  freely. 

“ There  are  now  three  places  in  the  city, 
wherein  as  many  as  have  opportunity  aflemble 
day  and  night,  to  pour  out  their  fouls  before  God, 
for  the  continuance  and  enlargement  of  his 
work.” 

May  29.  “ Since  my  laft  account  many  have 
been  fan£fified  and  feveral  juftified.  One  of  the 
former  is  Wm.  Moor.  He  was  a longtime  ftrug- 
gling  for  the  blefling.  And  one  night  he  was  re- 
folved,  not  to  go  to  bed  without  it.  He  continued 
wreftling  with  God  for  two  hours,  when  he  felt 
a glorious  change,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  witnef- 
fing  that  the  work  was  done. 

“ We  begin  now  to  meet  with  oppofition 
from  every  quarter.  Some  fay,  “ This  is  rank 
enthufiafm  :”  others,  that  it  is  “ either  a cheat. 


or 


[ i8j  ] 

or  mere  pride  others,  that  it  is  11  a new  thing" 
and  that  they  “ can  find  no  fuch  thing  in  the 
bible.” 

June  3.  “The  Lord  increafes  his  work,  in 
proportion  to  the  oppofition  it  meets  with.  Be- 
tween Monday  morning  and  Tuefday  night,  I 
have  had  eight  bills  of  thankfgiving : for  two 
jollified,  three  renewed  in  love,  and  three  back- 
fliders  healed. 

June  15.  “ There  is  no  end  to  the  mercies  of 
God.  Three  days  of  this  week  are  gone,  in 
which  God  has  jullified  five  finners.  On  Sun- 
day in  the  afternoon,  I preached  at  three  in  the 
Barrack-fquare.  And  a more  folemn  time  I 
have  not  feen.  The  hearers  were  as  many  as  my 
voice  could  reach,  and  all  remarkably  attentive. 

“ In  the  evening  a cry  ran  through  the  foci- 
ety,  and  four  were  jullified  that  night.  Two  of 
thefe,  Alexander  Teate  and  his  wife,  were  but 
lately  joined.  The  power  of  God  firll  feized 
her,  and  conllrained  her  to  cry  aloud,  till  Ihe 
heard  the  Hill,  fmall  voice.  He  continued  call* 
ing  upon  God,  and  would  not  ceafe  before  God 
anfwered  him  alfo  in  the  joy  of  his  heart.” 

Saturday,  June  19.  ‘‘  We  have  had  eight  this 
Aveek,  whofe  fins  are  blotted  out,  and  two  more 
have  entered  into  that  reft.  One  of  them  fays, 
fhe  has  enjoyed  the  love  of  God  nine  years  ; but 
felt  as  great  a difference  between  that  ftate ; and 
the  ftate  fhe  is  now  in,  as  if  her  foul  was  taken 
into  heaven !” 


June 


[ i8*  ] 


June  26.  “ Laft  week  eleven  were  juftified, 
or  fan&ified,  and  this  week  eleven  more;  eight 
of  whom  received  remiffion  of  fins,  and  three  a 
clean  heart.  And  a troop  are  waiting  for  the 
moving  of  the  water.  Among  them  whom  the 
power  of  God  has  feized  lately,  are  two  eminent 
fmners,  each  of  whom  lived  with  a woman  to 
whom  he  was  never  married.  One  of  them  al- 
ready rejoices  in  God;  the  other  mourns  and  will 
not  be  comforted.  But  the  women  are  gone  : 
they  put  away  the  accurfed  thing  immediately. 

* “ I had  much  fear  about  the  children,  led; 
our  labour  fhould  be  lod  upon  them.  But  I find, 
we  fhall  reap,  if  we  faint  not.  Margaret  Roper, 
about  eight  years  old,  has  been  thoughtful  for 
fome  time.  The  other  day,  while  they  were  at 
family-prayer,  fhe  burd  into  tears,  and  wept  bit- 
terly. They  alked,  what  was  the  matter  ? She 
faid,  “ fhe  was  "a  great  finner,  and  durd  not 
pray.”  They  bad  her  go  to  bed.  She  no  fooner 
came  into  the  chamber,  than  fhe  began  crying, 
and  clapping  her  hands,  fo  that  they  heard  her 
acrofs  the  ftreet.  But  God  foon  bound  up  her 
broken  heart.  Being  afked,  how  fhe  felt  her- 
felf  ? She  faid,  “ Ten  times  better.  Now  I can 
love  God.  I wifh  you  would  fit  up  and  fing  with 
me  all  night.”  She  has  been  happy  ever  fince, 
and  as  ferious  as  one  of  forty.” 

July  3.  “ Our  joy  is  now  quite  full.  The 
flame  rifes  higher  and  higher.  Since  Saturday 

lad. 


[ lS3  ] 

laft,  eight  finners  more  are  freely  juftined,  and 
two  more  renewed  in  love.  Our  houfe  was  once 
large  enough  : now  it  is  fcarce  able  to  contain 
us.  And  we  have  not  many  in  the  fociety,  who 
are  not  either  wreflling  with  God  for  his  love  or 
rejoicing  therein.” 

Thus  far  the  account  of  John  Manners,  quite 
unadorned,  but  plain  and  fenfible. 

* Upon  farther  examination  I found  three  or 
four  and  forty  in  Dublin,  who  feemed  to  enjoy 
the  pure  love  of  God.  At  lead  forty  of  thefe  had 
been  fet  at  liberty  within  four  months.  Some 
others,  who  had  received  the  fame  bleffing,  were 
removed  out  of  the  citv.  The  fame,  if  not  a 
larger  number,  had  found  remifTion  of  fins.  Nor 
was  the  hand  of  the  Lord  fhortened  yet:  he  flill 
wrought  as  fwiftly  as  ever. 

* In  fome  refpefts  the  work  of  God  in  this 
place  was  more  remarkable  than  even  that  in 
London,  x.  It  is  far  greater,  in  proportion  to 
the  time,  and  to  the  number  of  people.  That 
fociety  had  above  feven  and  twenty  hundred 
members : this,  not  a fifth  part  of  the  number. 
Six  months  after  the  flame  broke  out  there,  we 
had  about  thirty  witnefles  of  the  great  falvation. 
In  Dublin  there  were  above  forty,  in  lefs  than 
four  months.  2.  The  work  was  more  pure.  In 
all  this  time,  while  they  were  mildly  and  tenderly 
treated,  there  were  none  of  them  headflrong  of 
unadvifeable,  none  that  were  wifer  than  their 

teachers: 


[ i«4  ] 

teachers:  none  who  dreamed  of  being  immortal 
or  infallible,  or  incapable  of  temptation  : in 
fhort,  no  whimfical  or  enthufiaftic  perfons.  All 
were  calm,  and  fober-minded. 

1 know,  feveral  of  thefe  were  in  procefs  of 
time  moved from  their  JiedfaJinefs.  * I am  nothing 
furprized  at  this  : it  was  no  more  than  might  be 
expe&ed  : I rather  wonder,  that  more  were  not 
moved.  Nor  does  this  in  any  degree  alter  my 
judgment,  concerning  the  great  work  which 
God  then  wrought. 

Tuefday  27.  I received  a comfortable  letter 
from  Edinderry.  “When  you  came  hither,  Satan 
had  gained  fuch  an  advantage  over  us,  that  few 
even  of  the  fociety  would  read  your  fermons, 
faying,  they  were  nothing  but  the  law.  But 
God  has  now  taught  us  better.”  His  power  fell 
upon  us  firfi.  in  the  preaching,  but  abundantly 
more  when  the  fociety  met.  At  that  time  many 
who  were  in  heavinefs,  were  filled  with  confola- 
tion.  And  two  of  the  old  believers  were  con- 
ftrained  to  declare,  they  believed  God  had 
cleanfed  them  from  all  fin. 

Wednefday  18.  I received  farther  accounts 
from  Limerick  : one  letter  ran  thus, 

July  20,  1762. 

* “ There  is  a glorious  work  going  on  at  Li- 
merick.  Twelve  or  fourteen  have  a clear  fenfe 
of  being  renewed.  Several  have  been  juflified 

this 


[ i85  ] 


this  week  i and  on  Sunday  night,  at  the  meeting 
of  the  fociety,  there  was  fuch  a cry  as  I fcarce 
ever  heard  before,  fuch  confeffion  of  fins,  fuch 
pleading  with  the  Lord,  and  fuch  a fpirit  of 
prayer,  as  if  the  Lord  himfelf  had  been  vifibly 
prefent  among  us.  Some  received  remiffion  oi 
fins,  and  feveral  were  juft  brought  to  the  birth, 
All  were  in  floods  of  tears ; they  trembled,  they 
cried,  they  prayed,  they  roared  aloud  ; all  of 
them  lying  on  the  ground.  I began  to  fing  : yet 
they  could  not  rife,  but  fang  as  they  lay  along. 
When  we  concluded,  fome  of  them  could  not 
go  away,  but  flayed  in  the  houfe  all  night.  And 
blefTed  be  our  Lord,  they  all  hitherto  walk  wor? 
thy  of  their  calling.” 

Another  writes, 

“ I will  juft  tell  you,  the  Lord  has  made 
your  laft  vifit  to  us  a great  blefiing.  Such  times 
were  never  before  in  Limerick.  The  fire  which 
broke  out  before  you  left  us,  is  now  fpreadingon 
' every  fide.  Four  were  happy  before  you  left  us; 

feveral  others  can  now  rejoice  evermore,  and  pray 
I without  ceafing.  And  this  certainly  they  could 
not  do,  did  they  not  love  God  with  all 
their  heart.” 

A third  letter,  dated  July  2£,  fays, 

* “ BlefTed  be  God,  his  word  runs  fwiftly.  Laft 
night  his  power  was  prefent  indeed : and  another 


[ 186  J 

was  aiTared,  that  God  who  had  before  forgiven  his 
fins,  had  now  cleanftd  him  from  all  unrighttouf- 
nefs.  There  aie  now  ten  women  and  thirteen 
men,  who  witnefs  the  fame  confeflion.  And  their 
lives  agree  thereto.  Eight  have  lately  received 
the  remiffion  of  their  fins.  And  many  are  on  the 
full  firetch  for  God,  and  juft  ready  to  ftep  into  the 
pool.”  Hence  it  appears,  that  in  proportion  to 
the  time,  which  was  only  three  or  four  weeks, 
and  the  number  of  hearers,  (not  one  half,  if  a 
third  part)  the  work  of  .God  was  greater  in  Lime- 
rick, than  even  in  Dublin  itfelf. 

Thurfday  29.  I was  informed  of  a remarkable 
infiance  of  divine  mercy.  An  harmlefs  unawak- 
ened  young  woman  came  to  one  of  themeetings 
lor  prayer  in  Dublin.  While  they  were  praying 
file  felt  herfelf  a finner,  and  began  crying  aloud 
for  mercy.  And  when  they  rofe  to  go  away, 
file  cried  with  a bitter  cry,  “ What,  mull  I go 
without  Chrift?”  They  began  praying  again  ; 
and  in  a fhort  time,  file  was  as  loud  in  praifing 
God  for  his  pardoning  mercy. 

No  lefs  remarkable  was  the  cafe  of  Alexander 
Tate.  He  and  his  wife  were  prefent,  where  a few 
were  met  for  prayer.  Her  forrow  was  quickly 
turned  into  joy.  Her  liufhand,  who  was  before 
little  awakened,  was  juft  then  cut  to  the  heart, 
and  felt  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  him.  Nor 
did  he  ceafe  crying  to  God,  ’till  his  prayers  and 
tears  were  fwallowed  up  in  thankfgiving.  So 

here 


[ *8;  ] 


here  are  two  indances  of  perfons  both  convinc- 
ed and  converted  in  the  fame  hour. 

Saturday  gi.  Altho’  I never  before  felt  fuel) 
an  union  of  heart  with  the  people  of  Dublin,  yet 
believing  my  prefent  work  in  Ireland  was  ended, 
I chearfully  commended  them  to  God,  and  em- 
barked on  board  the  Dorlet  for  Park-gate.  We 

I weighed  anchor  at  eight  in  theevening.  BeLween 
nine  and  ten  on  Sunday  morning,  the  captain 
afked  me,  “ If  I would  not  go  to  prayers  with 

[them  ?”  All  who  were  able  to  creep  out  were 
willingly  prefent.  After  prayers  I preached  on 
Pro.  iii.  17.  We  had  fear ce  any  wind  when  I 
began.  But  while  I was  preaching  it  fprung  up, 
and  brought  us  to  Park-gate  between  fix  and 
feven, 

Mond.  2.  I rode  on  to  Cheder.  Never  was  the 
fociety  in  fuch  a date  before.  Their  jars  and 
contentions  were  at  an  end,  and  I found  nothing 
but  peace  and  love  among  them.  About  twelve 
of  them  believed  they  were  faved  from  fin,  and 
their  lives  did  not  contradi£l  their  profedion. 
Mod  of  the  red  were  dongly  athird  for  God,  and 
looking  for  him  continually. 

Tuefd.  3.  . was  defined  to  preached  at  North- 
wich.  And  one  had  duck  up  notices  in  all  parts 
of  the  town.  But  what  place  had  they  for  me  to 
preach  in  ? Only  a little  room,  which  would 
rold  about  fifty  people.  Between  twelve  and 
ane  they  gathered  from  all  parts,  noify  and  rude 
enough,  I could  not  dand  in  the  yard,  without 

juft 


[ iM  ] 

juft  facing  the  fun.  So  I flood  at  the  cafement, 
that  thofe  without  might  hear,  that  is  if,  they  had 
a mind  to  it.  But  a great  part  of  them  h?id  no 
fuch  intention.  They  came  only,  either  for  fport 
or  mifchief.  However  they  were  pretty  quiet, 
till  I had  done.  Our  friends  would  then  have 
perfuaded  me  to  flay,  ’till  the  mob  was  difperfed. 
But  as  they  grew  lounder  and  louder  I judged  it 
beft,  to  walk  immediately  thro*  the  midft  of  them. 
Many  things  were  thrown,  but  nothing  touched 
me,  ’till  I took  horfe,  and  rode  to  Manchef- 
ter. 

Here  I received  letters  from  Congleton  in 
Chefhire,  and  Burflem  in  Staffordfhire,  part  of 
the  former  ran  thus. 


Auguft  i,  1762. 

“ The  work  of  God  for  fome  time  flood  hill 
here.  But  at  the  Jove-feaft,  on  the  21ft  of  March 
laft,  (glory  for  ever  be  to  God  !)  there  was  an 
out-pouring  of  his  fpirit  among  us.  Five  perfons 
were  aflured  of  their  acceptance  with  God,  of 
whom,  by  his  free  grace,  I was  one  ; four  be- 
lived,  he  had  not  only  forgiven  their  fins,  but 
likewife  cleanfed  them  from  all  unrighteoufnefs. 
Many  more  have  fince  found  him  gracious  and 
merciful  : nor  is  his  hand  yet  flayed  at  all.” 

Part  of  the  other  is  as  follows. 

“ Before  Mr.  Furz  came  into  thefe  parts,  we 
were  biting  and  devouring  one  another.  And 

jnany 


[ i89  ] 

ftiany  who  once  had  known  God,  were  in  thdt 
works  denying  him.  The  fociety  in  general  was 
cold  and  dead,  and  only  two  were  converted  to 
God  in  a whole  year.  But,  glory  be  to  God,  the 
cafe  is  now  altered.  Thofe  grievances  are  re- 
moved. The  power  of  God  is  prefent  with  us, 
and  the  fire  of  his  love  is  kindled  among  us.  We 
are  very  weak  but,  bleffed  be  God,  we  are  all 
alive.  Many  are  crying  out  in  the  bitternefs  of 
of  their  fouls  ; “ God  be  merciful  to  me  a Tin- 
ner.” Sometimes  we  have  had  two,  at  other 
times  fix  or  feven  juftified  in  one  week.  Others 
find  the  very  remains  of  fin  deftroyed,  and  wait 
to  be  filled  i uith  all  the fulnejs  of  God.” 

Wednefday  4.  I rode  to  Liverpool,  where 
aifo  was  fuch  a work  of  God,  as  had  never  been 
known  there  before.  We  had  a furprizing  congre- 
gation in  the  evening,  and  as  it  feemed,  all  a- 
tliirft  for  God.  This,  I found,  had  begun  here 
likewife,  in  the  latter  end  of  March.  And  from 
that  time  it  had  continually  increafed,  ’till  a little 
before  I came,  nine  were  juftified  in  one  hour. 
The  next  morning  I fpoke  feverally  with  thofe 
who  believed  they  were  fanftified.  They  were 
fifty  one  iri  all,  twenty  one  men,  twenty  one 
widows  or  married  women,  and  nine  young 
women  or  children.  In  one  of  ihefe  the  change 
was  wrought  three  weeks  after  fhe  was  juftified, 
in  three,  feven  days  after  it,  in  one,  five  days, 
and  in  S.  Lutwich,  aged  fourteen,  two  days  only. 
I afked  Hannah  Blakely,  aged  eleven,  “ what  do 

you 


[ J9°  ] 

you  want  now  ?”  She  faid,  with  amazing  ener* 
gy,  the  tears  running  down  her  cheeks,  “ no- 
thing in  this  world  : nothing  but  more  of  my 
Jefus.”  How  often  out  oj  the  mouth  of  babes  and 
fucklings  dof  thou  perJeEl  prafe  / 

* Friday  6.  I was  informed  of  the  flame, 
which  had  broken  out  at  Bolion.  One  writing 
to  Air.  Furz,  deicribed  a little  of  it  in  the  follow- 
ing words.  “ Glory  be  to  God,  he  is  doing 
wonders  among  us-  Since  you  left  us,  there 
have  been  feven  (if  not  more)  juflified,  and  fix 
fanflified  at  one  meeting.  Two  of  thefe  were 
(I  think)  juflified  and  fanciified,  in  lefs  than  three 
days.  O what  a meeting  was  our  faff  clafs-meet- 
ing!  In  three  minutes  or  lefs,  God,  quite  unex- 
pectedly convinced  an  old  oppoferof  the  truth, 
and  wounded  many.  I never  felt  the  abiding 
prefence  of  God  fo  exceeding  powerful  before.5’ 

I preached  at  Alacclesfield  in  the  evening,  to 
a people  ready  prepared  for  the  Lord.  An  im- 
petuous fhower  began,  juft  as  we  came  into  the 
town  : but  it  did  us  no  hurt.  Enquiring  how 
the  revival  here  began,  I received  the  follow- 
ing account.  In  Alarch  lad,  after  a long  feafon 
of  drvnefs  and  bariennefs,  one  Monday  night 
John  Oldham  preached.  When  he  had  done,  and 
was  going  away  a man  fell  down,  and  cried  aloud 
for  mercy.  In  a fnort  time,  fo  did  feveral  others, 
He  came  back,  and  wreftled  with  God  in  prayer 
for  them.  About  twelve  he  retired,  leaving  fome 
of  the  brethren,  who  refolved  to  wreflle  on,  till 

they 


[ *9*  ] 

they  had  an  anfwer  of  peace.  They  continued 
in  prayer  ’till  fix  in  the  morning,  and  nine  pri- 
foners  were  fet  at  liberty. 

They  metagain  the  next  night,  and  fix  orfeven 
more  were  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 
So  were  one  or  two  more  every  night  ’till  the 
Monday  following,  when  there  was  another  ge- 
neral fhower  of  grace.  And  many  believed  that 
tht  blood  oj  Ckrijl  hah  cleanftd  them  from  all 
fin. 

I fpoke  to  thefe  (forty  in  all)  one  by  one. 
Some  of  them  faid,  they  received  that  bleffing, 
ten  days,  fome  feven,  fome  four,  fome  three  days 
after  they  found  peace  with  God.  And  two  of 
them  the  next  day.  What  marvel  ? Since  one 
day  is  wfith  God  as  a thoufand  years  ? 

The  cafe  of  Ann  Hooly  was  peculiar.  She 
had  often  declared,  “ The  Methodift’s  God  fhail 
not  be  my  God.  I will  fooner  go  to  hell,  than  I 
will  go  to  heaven  in  their  way.”  She  was  {landing 
in  the  flreet  with  two  young  women  when  John 
Oldham  paffing  by,  fpoke  to  one  and  the  other, 
and  went  on.  She  burft  into  tears,  and  faid, 
“ What,  am  I fo  great  a finner,  that  he  won’t 
fpeak  to  me?”  About  twelve,  has  was  fent  for 
in  hade.  He  found  her  in  deep  diff refs,  but  con- 
tinued in  prayer,  ’till  all  her  trouble  was  gone, 
and  her  fpirit  rejoiced  in  God  her  Saviour.  Yet 
three  nights  after  fhe  was  in  much  difirefs  again, 
crying,  “ I have  a wicked  heart,  and  I cannot 
reft  ’till  God  takes  it  away.”  He  didfo  in  a few 

hours. 


[ ’92  ] 

hours.  Ever  fince  fire  has  been  a pattern  to  all  the 
young  people  in  the  town.  She  was  thirteen 
years  old.  In  about  a year,  her  fpirit  returned  to 
to  God. 

Saturday  7.  I made  one  mere  trial  at  North- 
wich,  preaching  in  Mr.  Page’s  yard.  Abundance 
of  people  flocked  together,  nor  did  any  one  op- 
pofe,  or  make  the  lead,  didurbance.  And  when  I 
afterward  rode  quite  thro’  the  town,  I had  not 
one  uncivil  word. 

In  the  evening  I fpoke  with  thofe  at  Manchef- 
ter  who  believed  God  had  cleanfed  their  hearts. 
They  were  fixty  three  in  number  : to  about  fixty 
of  whom  I could  not  find  there  was  any  reafon- 
able  obje£tion. 

Monday  9.  I preached  at  Eland  and  Birflal  in 
my  way  to  Leeds,  where  our  conference  began 
'on  Tuefday  morning.  And  we  had  great  reafon 
to  praife  God  for  his  gracious  prefence,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end. 

Sund.  15.  I preached  about  one  at  Bridal,  and 
in  the  morning  and  evening  at  Leeds.  I then  rode 
about  eighteen  miles  : on  Monday  morning  I 
preached  at  Sheffield,  and  in  the  evening  came 
to  Derby.  I had  fent  word,  that  I did  not  intend 
to  preach.  But  after  I had  reded  a while  in  my 
chamber,  coming  down  and  finding  the  houfe 
full  of  people,  I fpoke  to  them  half  an  hour  in  a 
familiar  manner,  and  then  fpent  fotne  time  in 
prayer.  I believe,  God  touched  fome  of  their 

hearts. 


[ *93  ] 

hearts.  Indeed  it  feemed,  none  were  un- 
moved. 

Tuefday  17.  We  rode  to  Northampton,  the 
next  day  to  Sundon,  and  on  Thurfday  19.  to  Lon- 
don. Friday  20.  As  I expected,  the  Tower  of  tares 
had  not  been  idle  during  ray  five  month’s  ab- 
fence.  But  I believe  great  part  of  his  work  was 
undone  in  one  hour,  when  we  met  atWeft-fireet. 
I pointed  out  to  thofe  who  had  more  heat  than 
light,  thefnares  which  they  had  well  nigh  fallen 
into.  And  hitherto  they  were  of  an  humble  teach- 
able fpirit.  So  for  the  prelent  the  fnare  was 
broken. 

Saturd.  21.  Aly  brother  and  I had  a longcon- 
yerfation  with  Mr.  Maxfield,  and  freely  told  him 
what  ever  we  ddliked.  In  fome  things  we  found 
he  had  been  blamed  without  caufe  : others  he 
promifed  to  alter  : fo  we  were  throughly  iatis- 
fied  with  the  converfation,  believing  all  milun- 
derfiandings  were  now  removed. 

Monday  23.  I let  out,  and  on  Tuefday  reach- 
ed Brifiol.  After  fpending  two  day's  there,  on  Fri- 
day 27,  I fet  out  for  the  wefi,  and  having  preach- 
ed at  Shepton  and  Middlefey  in  the  way,  came 
on  Saturday  to  Exeter.  When  I began  the  fer- 
\ ice  there,  the  congregation,  (befide  ourfelves) 
were  two  women,  and  one  man.  Before  I had 
' done,  the  room  was  about  half-full.  This  comes 
of  omitting  field-preaching. 

Sunday  29.  I preached  at  eight  on  Southney- 
Green,  to  an  extremely  quiet  congregation.  At 
Yol.  XXXI,  I the 


[ *94  ] 

the  cathedral  we  had  an  ufeful  fermon,  and  the 
whole  fervice  was  performed  with  great  feriouf- 
nefs  and  decency.  Such  an  organ  I never  faw  or 
heard  before,  fo  large,  beautiful  and  fo  finely 
toned.  And  the  mufic  of  “ Glory  be  to  God 
in  the  higheft,’  I think  exceeded  the  Meffiah  it* 
felf.  I was  well  pleafed  to  partake  of  the  Lord’s 
Supper,  with  my  old  opponent,  Bifhop  Laving- 
ton.  O may  we  fit  down  together,  in  the  kingdom 
of  our  Father  ! 

At  five  I went  to  Southney-Green  again,  and 
found  a multitude  of  people.  But  a lewd,  pro- 
fane, drunken  vagabond  had  fo  ftirred  up  many  of 
the  bafer  fort,  that  there  was  much  noife,  hurry, 
and  confufion.  While  I was  preaching,  feveral 
things  were  thrown,  and  much  pains  taken  to 
overturn  the  table.  And  after  I concluded,  many 
endeavoured  to  throw  me  down,  but  I walked 
thro’  the  midft  and  left  them. 

Monday  30.  We  rode  to  Plvmoutb-dock.  , 
Wednefday  2.  I came  about  two  to  Poleperrow,  , 
a little  village,  four  hours  ride  from  Plymouth- 
palfage,  furrounded  with  huge  mountains.  How- 
ever abundance  of  people  had  found  the  way  thi- 
ther. And  fo  had  Satan  too.  For  an  old,  grey- 
headed finner,  was  bitterly  curfing  all  the  Metho- 
difts,  juft  as  we  came  into  the  town.  However, 
God  gave  his  blefling,  both  to  us  and  the  con- 
gregation. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Medras,  the  next  : 
evening  in  St.  Auftle,  and  on  Friday  4.  at  Meva- 


C *95  ] 

gizzy.  Saturday  5.  After  preaching  in  Gram- 
pond,  I rode  on  to  Truro.  I almofl  expedited, 
there  would  be  fome  diflurbance,  as  it  was  mar- 
ket-day, and  I flood  in  the  ftreet  at  a fmall  dis- 
tance from  the  market.  But  all  was  quiet.  Indeed 
both  perfecution  and  popular  tumlt  feem  to  be 
forgotten  in  Cornwall. 

Sunday  6.  As  I was  inforcing  in  the  fame 
place  thofe  folemen  words,  God forbid  that  Ijhould 
glory,  fave  in  the  crojs  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chnfl, 
a poor  man  began  to  make  fome  tumult.  But 
many  cried  out,  “ Conllables,  take  him  away.” 
They  did  fo,  and  the  hurry  was  over.  At  one  I 
preached  in  the  main  ftreet  at  Redruth,  where 
rich  and  poor  were  equally  attentive.  The  wind 
was  fo  high  at  five,  that  1 could  not  ftand  in  the 
ufual  place  at  Gwenap.  But  at  a fmall  diftance 
was  a hollow,  capable  of  containing  many  thou- 
fand  people.  I flood  on  one  fide  of  this  amphi- 
theatre toward  the  top,  with  the  people  beneath 
and  on  all  Tides,  and  enlarged  on  thofe  words  in 
the  gofpel  for  the  day,  Luke  x.  S3.  Blejfed  are  the 
eyes  which  fee  the  things  that  ye  fee,  and  which  hear 
the  things  that  ye  hear. 

Monday  7.  I preached  at  Penryn  ; Tuefday 
8.  at  Portkellis  about  one  o’clock.  Thence  I rode 
on  to  Mullion,  near  the  Lizard-point.  A man 
who  was  a finner,  gladly  received  us.  For  he 
knew,  God  had  received  him  ; having  been 
deeply  convinced  of  fin,  the  lafl  time  I preached 
I 2 near 


[ 196  ] 

near  Helfton,  and  not  long  after  filled  with  peace 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoit. 

A flame  was  kindled  ahnofl;  as  foon  as  I began 
to  fpeak,  which  increafed  more  and  more,  all 
the  time  I was  preaching,  as  well  as  during  the 
meeting  of  the  fociety.  How  tender  are  the 
hearts  of  the  people  ! Such  is  the  advantage  of 
true,  Chrifiian  fimplicity  ! 

Wednefday  8.  The  congregation  at  St.  John’s 
near  Helflon,  was  thrice  as  large  as  when  I was 
there  before.  The  next  day,  I preached  at 
Coowan  at  noon,  and  at  Penhale  (in  Breag)  in 
the  evening.  Friday  10.  I nreached  on  St.  Hi- 
lary-downs,  to  a congregation  gathered  from  all 
parts.  Abundance  of  them  were  athirfl:  for  God. 
And  he  did  not  deceive  their  hope.  The  cry  of 
the  mourners  went  up  before  him.  And  he 
fentdown  an  anfwer  of  peace. 

Saturday  n.  I preached  at  one  on  tire  cliff, 
near  Penzance,  and  in  the  evening  at  Newlin. 
Sunday  12.  At  eight  God  was  in  the  midft,  and 
many  hearts  were  broken  in  pieces.  Between 
one  and  two  I preached  at  St.  Creet,  where  I 
never  was  before.  Abundance  of  flrangers  came 
from  every  fide.  And  I believe  not  many  went 
empty  away.  Hence  we  rode  to  St.  Jufl,  where 
I fpent  two  comfortable  nights,  the  congrega- 
tions being  very  large,  evening  and  morn.ng. 
Tuefday  14.  I preached  in  Lelarit  about  one, 
and  in  the  evening,  near  the  key  at  St  Ives. 
Two  or  three  pretty  butterflies  came,  and  look- 
ed. 


[ *9  7 ] 


ed,  and  frniled,  and  went  away.  But  all  the 
reft  of  the  numerous  congregation,  behaved  with 
the  utmoft  ferioufnefs. 

Wednefdav  15.  We  had  our  quarterly  meet- 
ing. The  next  day  I appointed  the  children  to 
meet.  I expe&ed  twenty.  But  I fuppofe  we 
had  fomfcore;  all  of  them  wanting,  many  defir- 
ing inftruClion. 

* The  more  I converfe  with  the  believers  in 
Cornwall,  the  more  I am  convinced,  that  they 
have  fufiained  great  lofs,  for  want  of  hearing 
the  doctrine  of  Chnftian  Perfection  clearly  and 
ftrongly  inferred.  I fee,  wherever  this  is  not 
done,  the  believers  grow  dead  and  cold.  Nor 
can  this  be  prevented,  but  by  keeping  up  in 
them  an  hourly  expectation  of  being  perfected  in 
love.  I fay,  an  hourly  expeElation  ; for  to  expeCt  it 
at  death , or  fomt  time  hence,  is  much  the  fame 
as  not  expecting  it  at  all. 

Frid.  17.  At  one  I preached  in  Illuggan  ; at  fix 
near  Redruth,  at  a gentleman’s  houfe,  in  a large 
court,  fhaded  with  trees.  It  was  fo  calm  that 
hardly  a leaf  moved.  Satur.  18.  I preached  once 
more  in  the  flreet  at  Redruth,  and  in  St.  Agnes, 
in  the  evening.  I preached  again  at  eight  in 
the  morning,  and  afterwards  heard  an  excellent 
fermon  at  church,  preached  by  the  reCtor  Mr. 
Walker,  elder  brother  to  the  late  Mr.  Walker 
of  Truro.  He  likewife  gave  notice  of  his  defign 
to  preach  in  the  afternoon,  a funeral  fermon  for 
I 3 Mr. 


[ *98  ] 

Mr.  Phelps,  his  late  curate,  a man  eminently 
humble,  ferious  and  zealous  for  God.  He  was 
fnatched  away  by  a fever  three  weeks  fince,  as 
was  his  predeceffor,  Mr.  Vowler,  three  or  four 
years  before:  another  upright,  zealous  fervant 
of  God,  and  indefatigable  in  his  labour.  How 
ftrange  a providence  is  this  ? Who  can  account 
for  it  ? Did  the  God  of  love  take  them  away, 
that  they  might  not  out  of  zeal  for  him,  con- 
tinue to  oppofe  their  fellow-labourers  in  the 
gofpel  ? 

Mr.  Walker  gave  him  his  due  praife,  in  a 
llrong  and  pathetic  fermon,  well  wrote  and  well 
pronounced.  Concluding  with,  “ God  grant 
me,  (and  I believe  you  will  all  join  in  the  peti- 
tion) like  him  to  live,  like  him  to  die.” 

Juft  as  the  fervice  was  ended,  it  began  to 
rain.  The  wind  alfo  was  exceeding  high.  This 
created  fome  difficulty.  No  houfe  could  con- 
tain the  people,  neither  could  I preach,  as  be- 
fore, on  the  top  of  the  hill.  I therefore  made 
a halt  at  the  bottom.  The  congregation  gathered 
round  me  in  a few  minutes.  We  were  tolerably 
ffieltered  from  the  wind,  and  the  rain  ceafed 
till  I had  done.  I particularly  advifed  all  that 
feared  God,  to  confirm  their  love  to  each  other, 
and  to  provoke  each  other,  not  to  doubtful  dif- 
putations,  but  to  love,  and  to  good  works. 

The  night  came  on  foon  after  we  were  on 
horfeback,  and  we  had  eight  miles  to  ride.  In 
about  half  an  hour,  it  was  fo  dark,  I could  not 

fee 


[ 199  ] 

fee  mv  hand  ; and  it  rained  inceffantly.  How- 
ever, a little  after  eight,  God  brought  us  fafe  to 
St.  Kubert.  I preached  at  the  Church-town  the 
next  day,  and  on  Tuefday  21,  rode  on  to  Port- 
Ifaac.  Here  the  Rewards  of  the  eaftern  circuit 
met.  What  a change  is  wrought  in  one  year’s 
time  ! That  deteftable  pra£Kce  of  cheating  the 
king  is  no  more  found  in  our  focieties.  And 
fmce  that  accurfed  thing  has  been  put  away,  the 
work  of  God  has  every  where  increafed-  This 
fociety,  in  particular,  is  more  than  doubled  : 
and  they  are  all  alive  to  God.  Friday  24.  About 
two  I preached  at  Trewalder,  and  found  God 
was  there  alfo  ; but  more  abundantly  at  Camel- 
ford,  in  the  evening,  as  well  as  at  five  on  Satur- 
day morning.  In  the  afternoon,  the  rain  inter- 
mitting, I preached  in  the  market-place.  And 
it  was  a folemn  feafon. 

Sunday  26.  After  preaching  at  eight  I left  Ca- 
melford,  now  one  of  the  livelieft  places  in  Corn- 
wall. About  noon  I preached  at  Trewint.  It  was 
fifteen  years  fmce  I preached  there  before.  Hence 
I rode  to  Launcefton  to  a people  as  dead,  as 
thofe  at  Camelford  were  once.  Yet  how  foon 
may  thefe  alfo  be  quickened,  by  the  voice  that 
raifeth  the  dead  ! 

Monday  27.  I rode  to  Mary-Week,  It  was  a 
kind  of  fair-day  : and  the  people  were  come  far 
and  near,  for  wreflling  and  other  diverfions.  But 
they  found  a better  way  of  employing  their  time. 
For  young  and  old  flocked  to  church  from  all 
I 4 quarters. 


C 200  ] 

quarters,  i he  next  day  I preached  at  Mill-houfe, 
on  .Wednefday,  at  Collumpton,  and  on  Thurfday 
30,  in  the  market-houfe  at  Tiverton. 

About  midnight  I was  waked  by  loud  thunder 
which  continued  about  a quarter  of  an  hour  at 
Tiverton.  In  other  places,  we  were  afterwards 
informed,  it  continued  great  part  of  the  night. 
Yet  by  comparing  various  accounts,  I found  the 
main  fhock  was  at  the  fame  time  for  near  an  hun- 
dred miies.  So  it  feems  there  was  a train  of  clouds 
for  at  leaft  that  fpace,  which  by  an  eleftrical 
touch,  were  all  difcharged  at  once. 

Friday,  O&ober  1.  I preached  at  Taunton  and 
Shepton-Mallet,  and  on  Saturday  2,  rode  on  to 
Briiiol.  In  the  two  following  weeks  I vifited  as 
many  as  I could  of  the  focieties  in  the  country,  as 
well  as  regulated  thole  of  Briflol  and  Kingfwood, 
Saturday  19.  Being  informed,  that  James  Oddie 
coming  to  Briflol,  was  flopped  at  Newport  by  a 
pleuritic  fever.  I went  to  him  direftly.  He  re- 
covered from  that  hour,  and  in  two  or  three  days 
followed  me  to  Briflol. 

The  next  week  I went  to  many  of  the  focie- 
ties in  Somerfetfhire.  Monday  25.  I preached  at 
one  in  the  fhell  of  the  new  houfe  at  Shepton- 
Mallet.  In  digging  the  foundation,  they  found  a 
quarry  of  ftone,  which  was  more  than  fufficient 
for  the  houfe.  Thence  I rode  to  Wincanton.  The 
rain  prevented  my  preaching  abroad.  So  I wil- 
lingly accepted  the  offer  of  a large  meeting-houfe 
■where  I preached  to  a crowded  audience,  with 

much 


. 

- 

[ 201  ] 

much  fatisfa&ion  : and  again,  at  feven  in  the 
morning. 

Abundance  of  rain  fell  in  the  night : fo  that 
in  the  morning  we  were  blocked  up  : the  river 
which  runs  by  the  fide  of  the  town,  not  being 
fordable.  At  length  we  made  a Ihift  to  lead 
our  horfes  over  the  foot-bridge.  I preached  at 
Coleford  about  noon,  and  at  BriRol  in  the 
evening. 

Thurfday  28.  One  who  had  adorned  the  gof- 
pel  in  life  and  in  death,  having  defired  that  I 
Ihould  preach  her  funeral  fermon,  I went  with 
a few  friends  to  the  houfe,  and  fang  before  the 
body  to  the  room.  I did  this  the  rather,  to  fhew 
my  approbation  of  that  folemn  cuftom,  and  to 
encourage  others  to  follow  it.  As  we  walked, 
our  company  fwiftly  increafed,  fo  that  we  had. 
a very  numerous  congregation  at  the  room. 
And  who  can  tell,  but  fome  of  thefe,  may  blefs 
God  for  it  to  all  eternity  ? 

* Many  years  ago  my  brother  frequently  faid, 
“ Your  day  of  Pentecoft  is  not  fully  come.  But 
I doubt  not,  it  will.  And  you  will  then  hear  of 
perfons  fanftified,  as  frequently  as  you  do  now 
of  perfons  juftified.”  Any  unprejudiced  reader 
may  obferve,  that  it  was  now  fully  come.  And 
accordingly  we  did  hear  of  perfons  fanffified,  in 
London,  and  moll  other  parts  of  England,  and 
in  Dublin,  and  many  other  parts  of  Ireland,  as 
frequently  as  of  perfons  juftified  : although  in- 
fiances  of  the  latter  were  far  more  frequent  than 
I . 5 they 


[ 202  ] 

they  had  been  for  twenty  years  before.  That  , 
many  of  thefe  did  not  retain  the  gift  of  God,  is  no 
proof,  that  it  was  not  given  them.  That  many  do 
retain  it  at  this  day,  is  matter  of  praife  and  thankf-  . 
giving.  And  many  of  them  are  gone  to  him 
whom  they  loved,  praifing  him  with  their  latefl 
breath  : juft  in  the  fpirit  of  Ann  Steed,  the  firft 
witnefs  in  Briftol  of  the  great  falvation ; who  j 
being  worn  out  with  ficknefs  and  racking  pain, 
after  fhe  had  commended  to  God  all  that  were 
round  her,  lifted  up  her  eyes,  cried  aloud, 

“ Glory  ! Hallelujah,”  and  died. 


A N 


A N 


EXTRACT 

O F T H E 

Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley's 

journal, 

From  October  29, 1762,  to  M ay  25, 
1765. 

Number  XII. 


Friday,  October  29,  1762, 

I Left  Briftol,  and  the  next  day  came  to  Lon- 
don. Monday,  November  1.  I went  down 
to  Canterbury.  Here  I ferioufly  reflefted  on 
1 6 feme 


[ 204  ] 

forae  late  occurrences,  and  after  weighing  the . 
matter  thoroughly,  wrote  as  follows  : 

“ WITHOUT  any  preface  or  ceremony, 
which  is  needlefs  between  you  and  me,  I will 
limply  and  plainly  tell  what  I diflike,  in  your 
doftrine,  fpirit,  or  outward  behaviour.  When 
I fay  yours , I include  brother  Bell  and  Owen, 
and  thofe  who  are  mold  clofely  connefled  with 
them. 

1.  I like  your  doftrine  of  perfeltion , or  pure 
love  : love  excluding  fin.  Your  infilling  that  it  is 
merely  by  faith  : that  confequently  it  is  injlanta- 
neous,  (though  preceded  and  followed  by  a gra- 
dual work]  and  that  it  may  be  now,  at  this 
inllant. 

But  I diflike,  your  fuppoftng  man  may  be  as 
perfe£l  as  an  angel , that  he  can  be  abfolutely 
perfeft  : that  he  can  be  infallible , or  above  being 
tempted:  or,  that  the  moment  he  is  pure  in  heart, 
he  cannot  fall  from  it. 

I diflike  the  faying,  This  was  not  known  or 
taught  among  us,  till  within  two  or  three  years. 
I grant,  you  did  not  know  it.  You  have  over  and 
over  denied  inftantaneous  fanftification  to  me. 
But  I have  known  and  taught  it,  (and  fo  has  my 
brother,  as  our  writings  fhew)  above  thefe 
twenty  years. 

I diflike  your  direftly  or  indireftly  depreciat- 
ing juftification : faying,  a juftified  perfon  is  not 
inCkrif,  is  not  born  of  God , is  not  a new  creature , 

has 


[ 20  5 ] 

has  not  a new  heart , is  not  fanB.ifi.ed , not  a temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghofi  ; or  that  he  cannot  pleaje  God, 
or  cannot  grow  in  grace. 

I diflike  your  frying,  That  one  faved  from  fin, 
needs  nothing  more  than  looking  to  Jefus , needs 
not  to  hear  or  think  of  any  thing  elfe  : believe, 
believe  is  enough  : that  he  needs  no  felf-exami - 
nation , no  times  of  private  prayer  ; needs  not 
mind  little,  or  outward  things : and  that  he  can- 
not be  taught  by  any  perfon,  who  is  not  in  the 
fame  ftate. 

I diflike  your  affirming,  that  “juftified  per- 
Tons  in  general  perfecute  them  that  are  faved, 
from  fin:  that  they  have  perfecuted you  on  this 
account : and  that  for  two  years  part,  you  have 
been  more  perfecuted  by  the  two  brothers , 
than  ever  you  was  by  the  world  in  all  your 
life.” 

2.  As  to  your  fpirit,  I like  your  confidence 
in  God,  and  your  zeal  for  the  falvation  of 
fouls. 

But  I diflike  fomething  which  has  the  appear- 
ance of  pride,  of  overvaluing  yourfelves  and  un- 
dervaluing others ; particularly  the  preachers, 
thinking  not  only  that  they  are  blind,  and  that 
they  are  not  fent  of  God ; but  even  that  they  are 
dead',  dead  to  God,  and  walking  in  the  way  to 
hell : that  “ they  are  going  one  way,  you  ano- 
ther ;**  that  “ they  have  no  life  in”  them  ! Your 
fpeaking  of  youifelves,  as  though  you  were  the 
only  men  who  knew  and  taught  the  gofpel ; and 

as 


[ 2 06  ] 

as  if,  not  only  all  the  clergy , but  all  the  Methodijis 
befides,  were  in  utter  darknefs. 

I diflike  fomething  that  has  the  appearance  of 
enthufiafm  : overvaluing  feelings  and  inward  im- 
preffions  ; miftaking  the  mere  work  of  imagina- 
tion, for  the  voice  of  the  Spirit : expending  the 
end  without  the  means,  and  undervaluing  reafon , 
knowledge  and  wifdom , in  general. 

I diflike  fomething  that  has  the  appearance  of 
antinomianifm ; not  magnifying  the  law  and  mak- 
ing it  honourable:  not  enough  valuing  tendernefs 
of  confcience,  and  exaft  watcffulnefs  in  order 
thereto:  ufing  faith  rather  as  contradiftinguifh’d 
from  hohnefs,  than  as  produftive  of  it. 

* But  what  I moft  of  all  diflike  is,  your  little- 
nefs  of  love  to  your  brethren,  to  your  own  fo- 
cietv  : your  want  of  union  of  heart  with  them, 
and  bowels  of  mercies  toward  them : your  want 
of  meeknefs , gentlenefs , long  fujfenng  ; your  impa- 
tience of  contradiction  : your  counting  every  man 
your  enemy  that  reproves,  or  admonifhes  you 
in  love  : your  bigotry  and  narrownefs  of  fpirit, 
loving  in  a manner  only  thofe  that  love  you  : 
your  cenforioufnefs,  pronenefs  to  think  hardly  of 
all,  who  do  not  exaftly  agree  with  you : in  one 
word,  your  divifve fpirit.  Indeed  I do  not  be- 
lieve, that  any  of  you  either  defign  or  defire  a 
reparation.  But  you  do  not  enough  fear , abhor , 
and  detejl  it,  fhuddering  at  the  very  thought. 
And  all  the  preceding  tempers  tend  to  it,  and 
gradually  prepare  you  for  it.  Obferve  I tell  you 

before  ! 


[ 2cv  3 

before  ! God  grant  you  may  immediately  and 
affe&ionately  take  the  warning  ! 

3.  As  to  your  outward  behaviour,  I like  the 
general  tenor  of  your  life,  devoted  to  God,  and 
fpent  in  doing  good. 

But  1 diflike  your  flighting  any,  the  very 
lead  rules  of  the  bands  or  fociety ; and  your  do- 
ing any  thing  that  tends  to  hinder  others,  from 
exablly  obferving  them.  Therefore 

I diflike  your  appointing  fuch  meetings,  as 
hinder  others  from  attending  either  the  public 
preaching,  or  their  clafs  or  band;  or  any  other 
meeting,  which  the  rules  of  the  fociety,  or  their 
office  requires  them  to  attend. 

I diflike  your  fpending  fo  much  time  in  feve- 
ral  meetings,  as  many  that  attend  can  ill  fpare, 
from  the  other  duties  of  their  calling,  unlefs  they 
omit  either  the  preaching,  or  their  clafs,  or  band. 
This  naturally  tends  to  diffolve  our  fociety,  by 
cutting  the  finews  of  it. 

As  to  your  more  public  meetings,  I like  the 
praying  fervently  and  largely,  for  all  the  blef- 
fings  of  God.  And  I know  much  good  has  been 
done  hereby,  and  hope  much  more  will  be 
done. 

But  I diflike  feveral  things  therein:  1.  The 
finging,  or  fpeaking,  or  praying,  of  feveral  at 
once  : 2.  The  praying  to  the  Son  of  God  only, 
or  more  than  to  the  Father : 3.  The  ufing  im- 
proper expreflions  in  prayer:  fometimes  too 
bold,  if  not  irreverent ; fometimes  too  pompous 

and 


[ 208  ] 

and  magnificent,  extolling yourfelves  rather  than 
God,  and  telling  him  what  you  are,  not  what 
you  want : 4.  Ufing  poor,  flat,  bald  hymns : 5. 
The  never  kneeling  at  prayer;  6.  Your  ufing 
poflures  or  geflures  highly  indecent  : 7.  Your 
{creaming,  even  fo  as  to  make  the  words  unin- 
telligible : 8.  Your  affirming,  people  will  be.  juf- 
tified  or  fandlified  juft  now  : 9.  The  affirming 
they  are,  when  they  are  not  : 10.  The  bidding 
them  fay,  I believe:  n.  The  bitterly  condemn- 
ing any  that  oppofe,  calling  them  wolves,  &c. 
and  pronouncing  them  hypocrites,  or  not  jufti- 
fied. 

Read  this  calmly  and  impartially  before  the 
Lord  in  prayer.  So  fhall  the  evil  ceafe  and  the 
good  remain.  And  you  will  then  be  more  than 
ever  united  to 

Your  affeElionate  brother, 

J.  WESLEY. 
Canterbury,  November  2,  1762. 

Saturday  6.  Having  had  more  fatisfaftion 
here,  than  I had  had  for  many  years,  1 chearfully 
commended  the  little  flock  to  God.  In  the  way 
to  London  I read  The  Death  of  Abel . That  man- 
ner of  writing,  in  profe  run  mad,  I cordially 
diflike.  Yet  with  all  that  difad  vantage,  it  is  ex- 
cellent in  its  kind  : as  much  above  moft  modern 
poems,  as  it  is  below  Paradife  Lojl. 

I had  hopes  of  feeing  a friend  at  Lewifham 

in 


[*  209  ] 

in  my  wav.  And  fo  I did ; but  it  was  itt 
her  coffin.  It  is  well,  fince  fhe  finiffied  her 
courfe  with  joy.  In  due  time  I fhall  fee  her  in 
glory. 

Monday  8.  I began-  vifiting  the  claffes ; in 
many  of  which  we  had  hot  fpirits  to  deal  with. 
Some  were  vehement  for,  fome  ao-dinft  the  meet- 
ings  for  prayer,  which  w ere  in  feveral  parts  of 
the  town.  I faid  little ; being  afraid  of  taking 
any  hep,  which  I might  afterwards  repent  of. 
One  I heard  of  on  Friday,  and  five  on  Sa- 
turday, who  if  I did  not  aft  as  they  thought 
bell,  “ would  leave  the  fociety.”  I cannot  help 
it.  I mull  hill  be  guided  by  my  own  con- 
fidence. 

Tuefday  16.  I preached  at  Deptford  and  Well- 
ing, and  Wednefday  17,  rode  on  to  Sevenoaks. 
But  it  was  with  much  difficulty  ; for  it  was  a 
fharp  froft,  and  our  liorfes  could  very  hardly 
keep  their  feet.  Here  likewife  I found  feveral 
who  believed,  that  God  had  cleanfd  them 
from  all  fin.  And  all  of  them  (except  perhaps 
one)  “ lived  fo,  that  one  might  believe 
them.” 

Friday  19.  1 called  upon  Jane  Cooper,  praif- 
ing  God  in  the  fires.  The  next  day  I faw  her  for 
the  lafl  time,  in  every  thing  giving  thanks,  and 
overcoming  all  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  A day 
or  two  after  ffie  fell  afleep. 

From  Monday  the  22d,  to  Friday  26th,  I was 
employed  in  anfwering  the  Bp.  of  Glocefier’s 

book, 


[ 210  ] 

boot.  Wednefday  24,  being  determined  to  hear 
for  myfelf,  I flood  where  1 could  hear  and  fee, 
without  being  feen.  George  Bell  prayed,  in  the 
whole,  pretty  near  an  hour.  His  fervour  of  fpirit 
I could  not  but  admire.  I afterwards  told  him  what 
I did  not  admire:  namely,  l.His  fcreaming every 
now  and  then  in  fo  flrange  a manner,  that  one 
could  fcarce  tell  what  he  faid  : 2.  His  thinking, 
he  had  the  miraculous  difcernment  of  fpi- 
rits:  and  3.  His  fharply  condemning  his  op- 
pofers. 

Thurfday  25.  I buried  the  remains  of  Jane 
Cooper,  a pattern  of  all  holinefs,  and  of  the 
wifdom  which  is  from  above,  who  was  fnatched 
he  nee  before  fhe  had  lived  five  and  twenty 
years.  In  good  time  ! God  who  knew  the  ten- 
dernefs  of  her  fpirit,  took  her  away  from  the  evil 
to  come. 

* Monday  29.  I retired  to  tranfertbe  my  an- 
fwer  to  Bifhop  Warburton.  My  fragments  of 
time  I employed  in  reading,  and  carefully  con- 
fidering,  the  lives  of  Magdalen  de  Pazzi,  and 
fome  other  eminent  Romifh  faints.  I could  not 
but  obferve,  that  many  things  related  therein, 
are  highly  improbable.  I fear  the  relators  did 
not  fcruple  lying  for  the  church , or  for  the  cre- 
dit of  their  order.  2.  That  many  of  their  re- 
puted virtues,  were  really  no  virtues  at  all ; being 
no  fruits  of  the  love  of  God  or  man,  and  no 
part  of  the  mind  which  was  in  Chrifl  Jefus  : 3. 
That  many  of  their  applauded  aftions,  were  nei- 
ther 


[ 21X  ] 

ther  commendable,  nor  imitable  : 4.  That  what 
was  really  good  in  their  tempers  or  lives,  was  fo 
deeply  tin&ured  with  enthufiafm,  that  moft  rea- 
ders would  be  far  more  likely  to  receive  hurt 
than  good  from  thefe  accounts  of  them, 

Saturday  4-  At  the  defire  of  Mr.  M.  and  th& 
fteming  defire  of  themfelves,  I baptized  two  fo- 
reigners, (one  of  them  in  a Turkifh  habit)  who 
profeffed  themfelves  to  have  been  Turks.  On 
this  I then  remarked,  “ They  may  be  what  they 
profefs  : but  I wait  for  farther  evidence.  Their 
dory  is  extremely  plaufible:  it  may  be  true,  or 
it  may  not.” 

Sunday  5.  To  take  away  one  ground  of  con- 
tention from  many  well-meaning  people,  in 
preaching  on,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a 
grain  of  mvfardfeed , I endeavoured  to  {hew  at 
large,  in  what  fenfe  fanftification  is  gradual,  and 
in  what  fenfe  it  is  inftantaneous.  And  (for  the 
prefent  at  lead)  many  were  delivered  from  vain 
reafonings  and  difputings. 

* Monday  6.  and  the  following  days,  I cor- 
ie£ied  the  notes  upon  the  Revelation.  O how 
little  do  we  know  of  this  deep  book  ! At  lead, 
how  little  do  / know  ? I can  barely  conje&ure, 
not  affirm  any  one  point,  concerning  that  part  of 
it  which  is  yet  unfulfilled. 

Wednefday  8.  I had  a fecond  opportunity  of 
hearing  George  Bell.  “ I believe  part  of  what 
he  faid  was  from  God  (this  was  my  refleftion  at 
that  time)  part  from  an  heated  imagination.  But 


as 


[ 212  ] 

as  he  did  not  fere  am,  and  there  was  nothing  dan- 
geroufly  wrong,  I did  not  yet  fee  caufe  to  hinder 
him.” 

Ail  this  time  I obferved  a few  of  our  brethren 
were  diligently,  propagating  that  principle, 

“ That  none  can  teach  thofe  who  are  renewed 
in  love,  unlefs  he  be  in  the  flate  himfelf.”  I 
faw  the  tendency  of  this  : but  I faw,  that  violent 
remedies  would  not  avail. 

Monday  13.  I mentioned  this  to  fome  of  iny 
friends,  and  told  them,  what  would  be  the  con- 
fequence.  But  they  could  not  believe  it.  So  I let 
it  reft  : only  defiring  them,  to  remember,  I had  I 
told  them  before. 

* Sunday  19.  From  Matt.  Nviii.  3.  I endea- 
voured to  fhew  thofe,  who  ufethe  word  without 
underftanding  it,  what  Chrijiian  Jimplicily  pro- 
perly is ; and  what  it  is  not.  It  is  not  ignorance 
or  folly  : it  is  not  enthufiafm,  or  credulity.  It  is 
faith,  humility,  willingnefs  to  be  taught,  and  free- 
dom from  evil  reafonings. 

Tuefday  21.  I had  an  opportunity  oflooking 
over  the  regifter  of  St.  Luke’s  hofpital.  And  I 
was  furprized  to  obferve,  that  three  in  four  (at 
leaft)  of  thofe  who  ate  admitted,  receive  a 
cure.  I doubt  this  is  not  the  cafe  of  any  other 
lunatic  hofpital,  either  in  Great  Britain  or  Ire- 
land. 

Wednefday  22.  I heard  George  Bell  once 
more,  and  was  convinced  he  mull  not  continue 

to  , 


[ 1 J3  ] 

to  pray  at  the  Foundery.  The  reproach  of  Chrift 
I am  willing  to  bear  ; but  not  the  reproach  of 
enthufiafm,  if  I can  help  it. 

Saturday  25.  We  met  at  the  chappel  in  Spi- 
talfields,  to  renew  our  covenant  with  God,  And 
he  did  indeed  appear  in  the  midft  of  the  congre- 
gation, and  anfwer  as  it  were  by  fire. 

Sunday  26.  That  I might  do  nothing  ha  fitly,  I 
permitted  George  Bell  to  be  once  more  (this 
j evening)  at  the  chappel  in  Wefi-fireet,  and  once 
more  (on  Wednefday  evening)  at  the  Foundery. 
But  it  was  worfe  and  worfe.  He  now  fpoke  as 
from  God,  what  I knew  God  had  not  fpoken.  I 
therefore  defil  ed,  that  he  would  come  thither  no 
more. 

I well  hoped  this  would  a little  reprefs  the 
' impetuofity  of  a few  good,  but  miftaken  men  -. 
elpecially  confidering  the  cafe  of  Benjamin  Har- 
ris, the. molt  impetuous  of  them  all.  A week  or 
two  ago,  as  he  was  working  in  his  garden,  he  was 
firuck  raving  mad.  He  continued  fo  till  Tuefday, 
December  2u,  when  he  lay  fiill  and  fenfible  : 
but  could  not  fpeak,  till  on  Wednefday  morning 
his  fpirit  returned  to  God. 

* Friday  21.  I now  flood  and  looked  back  on 
the  pall  year:  a year  ol  uncommon  trials  and 
uncommon  blefiings.  Abundance  have  been  con- 
vinced of  fin  : very  many  have  found  peace  with 
God.  And  in  London  only,  I believe  lull  two 
hundred  have  been  brought  into  glorious  li- 
berty. And  yet  I have  had  more  care  and  trouble 

in 


in  fix  months,  than  in  feveral  years  preceding. 
What  the  end  will  be,  I know  not.  But  it  is 
enough  that  God  knoweth. 

Saturday,  January  1,  1763.  A woman  told 
me,  “ Sir,  I employ  feveral  men.  Now  if  one 
of  my  fervants  will  not  follow  my  direction,  is  it 
not  right  forme  to  difcard  him  at  once  ? Pray, 
doj you  apply  this  to  Mr.  Bell.”  1 anfwered, 
“ It  is  right,  to  difcard  fuch  a favant.  But 
what  would  you  do,  if  he  were  your  Jon  ?” 

Wednefday  3.  Having  procured  one  who  un- 
derdood  Spanifh  to  interpret,  I had  a long  con- 
verfation  with  the  fuppofed  Turks.  One  ac- 
account  they  gave  of  themfelves  then  ; a fecond 
they  foon  after  gave  to  Mrs.  G.  I obferved  the 
account  now  given,  which  I read  over  to  them, 
in  fome  particulars  differed  from  both.  This  in- 
creafed  my  fear  ; though  I dill  hoped  the  bed  : 
till  Mr.  B.  procured  a Jew  to  talk  with  them, 
who  underdood  both  Turkifli  and  Spanifh  ; upon 
whofe  quedioning  them  thoroughly,  they  con- 
tradidled  all  the  accounts  given  before.  And 
upon  the  elder  of  them  mentioning  Solomon 
Selim,  a Jewifh  merchant  of  Amderdam,  one  who 
knew  him,  wrote  to  Solomon  about  him  : who 
anfwered,  “ He  had  known  him  upwards  of 
fourteen  vears;  that  he  was  a Spanifh  Jew,  a 
phyfician  by  profedion  : that  fome  years  fince 
he  had  cured  him  of  a dangerous  illncfs  : in  gra- 
titude for  which  he  had  given  him  ten  pounds, 
to  carry  him  over  to  England.” 


* Friday 


[ 2 *5  ] 


* Friday.  7.  I defired  George  Bell  with  two  or 
three  of  his  friends,  to  meet  me  with  one  or  two 
others.  We  took  much  pains  to  convince  him  of 
his  miftakes,  particularly  that  which  he  had  lately 
adopted,  “ That  the  end  of  the  world  was  to  be 
on  February  the  28th.”  which  at  firft  he  had 
earneffly  withllood.  But  we  could  make  no  im- 
preflion  upon  him  at  all.  He  was  as  unmoved  as 
a rock. 

Sunday  9.  I endeavoured  (from  1 Cor.  xii. 
x 1.  and  the  following  verfes)  to  guard  the  fincere 
againft  all  thoughts  of  feparating  from  their  breth- 
ren, by  (hewing  what  need  all  the  members  of 
the  body  have  of  each  other.  But  thofe  who 
wanted  the  caution  molf,  turned  all  into  poi- 
fon. 

Monday  10.  I rode  to  Shoreham,  and  paid 
the  laft  office  of  love  to  Mrs.  Perronet.  Wednef- 
day  12.  I returned  to  London,  and  the  next 
day  ftrongly  inforced  on  a large  congregation  at 
the  Foundery,  the  words  of  Ifaiah  (never  more 
needful)  He  that  believethjhall  not  make  hafle. 

Monday  17.  I rode  to  Lewifham,  and  wrote 
my  fermon,  to  be  preached  before  the  fociety 
for  reformation  of  manners.  Sunday  23.  in  order 
to  check,  if  not  flop  a growing  evil,  I preached 
on  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged.  But  it  had 
juft  the  contrary  effect  on  many,  who  conftrued 
it  into  a fatire  upon  G.  Bell  : One  of  whofe 
friends  faid,  “ If  the  devil  himfelf  had  been  in 

the 


[ 216  ] 

the  pulpit,  he  would  not  have  preached  fuch  a 
fermon.” 

All  this  time  I did  not  want  information  from 
all  quarters,  “ That  Mr.  M.  was  at  the  bottom 
of  all  this  : That  he  was  the  life  of  the  caufe  : 
That  he  was  continually  fpiriting  up  all  with 
whom  he  was  intimate  againlt  me  : That  he 
told  them  I was  not  capable  of  teaching  them, 
and  infinuated,  that  none  was  but  himfelf  : And 
that  the  inevitable  confequence  mult  be,  a divi- 
fion  in  the  fociety.” 

Yet  I was  not  without  hope,  that  by  bearing 
all  things,  I Ihould  overcome  evil  with  good, 
till  on  Tuefday  25,  while  I was  fitting  with  many 
of  our  brethren  Mrs.  Coventy  fthen  quite  in- 
timate with  Mr.  M.)  came  in,  threw  down  her 
ticket,  widi  thofe  of  her  hulhand,  daughters,  and 
fervants,  and  faid,  “ They  would  hear  two  doc- 
trines no  longer.’’  They  had  oiten  faid  before 
“ Mr.  M.  preached  Perfeftion ; but  Mr.  WJ 
pulled  it  down.”  So  I did,  that  perfection  of 
Benjamin  Harris,  G.  Bell,  and  all  who  abetted 
them.  So  the  breach  is  made  ! The  water  is  let 
out.  Let  thofe  who  can,  gather  it  up. 

I think  it  was  on  Friday  the  28th  that  I re- 
ceived a letter  from  John  Fox,  and  another  from 
John  and  Elizabeth  Dixon,  declaring  the  fame 
thing.  Friday  February  4.  Daniel  Owens  and  G. 
Bell  told  me,  “They  fhould  flay  in  the  fociety 
no  longer.  The  next  day  Robert  Lee,  with  five 
or  fix  of  his  friends  fpake  to  the  fame  effeH. 

I now 


[ 217  ] 

I now  ferioufly  confidered,  whether  it  was  its 
my  power  to  have  prevented  this  ? I did  not  fee 
that  it  was  ; for  tho’  I had  heard  from  time  to 
time  many  objeftions  to  Mr.  M’s;  conduft,  there 
was  no  poffibility  of  clearing  them  up.  Above  a 
year  ago  I defired  him  to  meet  me  with  fome 
that  accufed  him,  that  I might  hear  them  face  to 
face.  But  his  anfwer  was  as  follows. 

Dec.  28,  1761. 

“ I have  conftdered  the  thing,  finceyou  fpoke 
tome,  about  meeting  at  Mrs.  March’s.  And  I 
don’t  think  to  be  there,  or  to  meet  them  at  any 
time.  It  is  enough  that  I was  arraigned  at  the 
conference.”  (At  which  I earneftly  defended 
him  and  filenced  all  his  accufers.)  “ I am  not  con- 
vinced, that  it  is  my  duty,  to  make  James  Mor- 
gan, &c.  my  judges.  If  you  Sir,  or  any  one  of 
them  have  any  thing  to  fay  to  me  alone,  I will 
anfwer  as  far  as  I fee  good.” 

The  next  month  I wrote  him  a long  letter, 
telling  him  mildly  all  I heard  or  feared  concern- 
ing him.  He  took  it  as  a deep  affront ; and  in 
confequence  thereof  wrote  as  follows : 

Jan.  14,  1762. 

— — “ If  you  call  me  proud  or  humble, 

I angry  or  meek,  it  feems  to  fit  much  the  fame 
on  my  heart.  If  you  call  me  John  or  Judas, 
Mofes  or  Korah,  I am  content. — As  to  a repara- 
tion, I have  no  fuch  thought,  if  you  have,  and 
VoL.  XXXI.  K now 


[ »8  ] 

now  (as  it  were)  fqueeze  blood  out  of  a (lone, 
be  it  to  yourfelf.”— — 

Several  months  after,  hearing  fome  rumours, 

I again  wrote  to  him  freely.  In  his  anfwer  were 
the  following  words. 

Sept.  23,  1762. 

“ Experience,  teaches  me  daily,  that  they 

that  preach  Salvation  from  the  nature  of fin , will 
have  the  fame  treatment,  from  the  others,  as  they 
had  and  have  from  the  world.  But  I am  willing 
to  bear  it.”  “ Your  brother  is  gone  out  of  town. 
Had  he  flayed  much  longer,  and  continued,  Sun- 
day after  Sunday,  to  hinder  me  from  preaching, 
he  would  have  forced  me  to  have  got  a place  to 
preach  in,  where  I Ihould  not  have  heard  what 
I think  the  higheft  truths  contradifted.” » 

In  his  next  letter  he  explained  himfelf  a little 
farther. 

OB.  16,  1762. 

“ We  have  great  oppofition  on  every  i 

fide.  Nature,  the  world  and  the  devil  will  never  1 
be  reconciled  to  Chriflian  perfeftion.  But  the  1 
great  wonder  is,  that  Cbriflians  will  not  be  re- 
conciled to  it : all,  almoft  every  one  who  call 
thernfelves  Miniflers  of  Chrift,  or  preachers  of 
Chrifl,  contend  for  fin  to  remain  in  the  heart  as 
long  as  we  live,  as  tho’  it  were  the  only  thing 
Chrift  delighted  to  behold  in  his  members. 

“ I long  to  have  your  heart  fet  at  full  liberty. 

I know  you  will  then  fee  things  in  a wonderful 

different 


[ 219  1 

different  light  from  what  it  is  pojfible.  to  fee  them 
before — 

The  day  after  the  firft  feparation,  viz.  Jan. 
2 6,  I wrote  him  the  following  note. 

My  Dear  Brother, 

“ For  many  years  I,  and  all  the  preachers  in 
conne&ion  with  me  have  taught,  that  every  be- 
liever  may  and  ought  to  grow  in  grace.  Lately 
you  have  taught  or  feemed  to  teach  the  contrary.. 
The  effeft  of  this  is,  when  I fpeak  as  I haWe 
done  from  the  beginning,  thofe  who  believe  what 
you  fay  will  not  bear  it.  Nay,  they  will  re- 
nounce connexion  with  us  : as  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Coventry  did  lafl  night.  T his  breach  lies  wholly 
upon  you.  You  have  contradicted  what  I taught 
from  the  beginning.  Hence  it  is,  that  many  can- 
not bear  it,  but  when  I fpeak  as  I always  have 
done,  they  feparate  from  the  fociety.  Is  this  for 
your  honour,  or  to  the  glory  of  God  P 

“ O Tommy,  feek  counfel,  not  from  man  but 

God  : Not  from  brother  B , but  Tefus 

Chrift  ! 

I am. 

Your  affcblionate  Brother 

J.  w. 

Things  now  ripend  apace  for  a farther  fepara- 
tion; to  prevent  which,  (if  it  were  pofhble)  I 
defired  all  our  preachers,  as  they  had  time,  to  be 
prefent  at  all  meetings,  when  I could  not  my- 
felf,  particularly  at  the  Friday  meeting  in  the 
K 2 chappel 


[ 220  ] 

ehappel  at  Weft-Street.  At  this  Mr.  M.  was 
highly  offended,  and  wrote  to  me  as  follows. 

Feb.  5.  1763. 

“ I wrote  to  vou  to  afk  if  thofe  who  before 
met  at  brother  Guilford’s  might  not  meet  in  the 
chapel.  Soon  after  you  came  to  town,  the  preach- 
ers were  brought  into  the  meeting,  tho’  you 
told  me  again  and  again,  they  fhould  not  come.” 
(True;  but  fince  I faid  this,  there  has  been  an  en- 
tire change  in  the  fituation  of  things.)  “ Had  I 
known  this,  I would  rather  have  paid  for  a room 
out  my  own  pocket.  Iam  not  fpeaking  of  the 
people  that  met  at  the  Foundery  before  : tho’  I 

let  fome  of  them  come  to  that  Meeting. If 

you  intend  to  have  the  preachers  there  to  watch, 
and  others  that  I think  very  unjit,  and  will  not 
give  me  liberty  to  give  leave  to  fome  that  I 
think jit  to  be  there,  I fhall  not  think  it  my  duty 
to  meet  them.” — So  from  this  time  he  kept  a fe- 
parate  meeting  elfewhere. 

Sunday  6.  Knowing  many  were  greatly  tempt- 
ed on  occafion  of  thefe  occurrences,  I preach- 
ed on  1 Cor.  to.  13.  God  is  jaithjul  who  will 
not  fuffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  : 
but  will  with  every  temptation  alfo  make  a way  to 
efcape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it.  In  the  even- 
ing we  had  a love-feaft,  at  which  many  fpoke 
with  all  fimplicity.  And  their  words  were  tike 

fire. 


[ 221  ] 

fire.  I hardly  know  when  we  have  had  fo  refrefti- 
ing  a feafon. 

Alond.  7.  One  who  is  very  intimate  with  them 
that  had  left  us,  told  me  in  plain  terms,  “ Sir, 
the  cafe  lies  here;  They  fay  you  are  only  an  hy- 
pocrite, and  therefore  they  can  have  no  fellow- 
fhip  with  you.” 

So  now  the  wonder  is  over.  Firft  it,  was  reveal- 
ed to  them,  that  all  the  people  were  dead  to  God. 
Then  they  faw,  that  all  the  peracher s were  fo  too, 
only  for  a time  they  excepted  me.  At  laft  they 
difcern  me  to  be  blind  and  dead  too.  Now  let  him 
help  them  that  can  1 

Thurfday  10.  I rode  to  Brentford,  expecting 
to  find  difagreeable  work  there  alfo.  But  I was 
happily  difappointed.  Not  one  feemed  inclined 
to  leave  the  fociety,  and  fome  were  added  to  it. 
And  the  congregation  was  not  only  quiet,  but 
more  deeply  attentive  than  is  ufual  in  this 
place. 

Hence  I rode  on  Friday  1 1,  to  Shoreham,  and 
buried  the  remains  of  Mrs.  P.  who  after  a long, 
diftrefting  illnefs,  on  Saturday  the  5th  iriftant,  fell 
afieep. 

Saturday  12.  I vifited  the  claffesat  Snowfields 
where  I was  told  many  would  go  awav.  But  the 
time  is  not  come.  As  yet  we  have  loft  none  : 
tho’  fome  are  held  as  by  a fingle  hair. 

Tuefday  15. 1 rode  to  Deptford,  and  found  the 
fociety  there  united  in  faith  and  love.  During  the 
fermon  in  the  afternoon,  one  poor  mourner 
K 3 found 


[ 222  ] 

found  peace  with  God.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed at  Willing,  and  on  Thurfday  17,  rode  on  to 
Sevenoaks.  Here  I was  grieved  to  find  one  who 
did  run  well  quite  hardened  by  the  deceitfulnefs 
of  fin.  But  in  the  evening,  God  looked  upon  him 
once  more,  and  melted  him  into  tears  of 
love. 

Thurfday  17.  Light  from  above  broke  into 
the  heart  of  another  hard-hearted  finner.  At  the 
fame  time  many  were  delivered  from  doubts 
and  fears,  and  knew  the  things  which  were freely 
given  them  of  God.  On  Friday,  I returned  to 
London. 

* Monday  21.  Obferving  the  terror  occafioned 
by  that  wonderful  prophecy  to  fpread  far  and 
wide,  I endeavoured  to  draw  fome  good  there- 
from, by  flrongly  exhorting  the  congregation  at 
W apping,  To  feek  the  Lord  while  he  might  be  found. 
But  at  the  fame  time  I thought  it  incumbent 
upon  me  to  declare  (as  indeed  I had  done  from 
the  hour  I heard  it)  That  “ it  mufl  be  falfe,  if  the 
bible  be  true.” 

The  three  next  days  I fpent  in  the  tedious 
work  of  tranferibing  the  names  of  the  fociety.  I 
found  about  thirty  of  thofe  who  thought  they 
were  faved  from  fin,  had  feparated  from  their 
brethren.  But  above  four  hundred,  who  wit- 
nefied  the  fame  confelfion,  feemed  moie  united 
than  ever. 

Monday  28.  Preaching  in  the  evening  at  Spit- 
talfields,  on  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  I largely 

fhewed 


[ 223  ] 


fhewedthe  utter  abfurdity  of  the  fuppofition,  that 
the  world  was  to  end  that  night.  But  not- 
withftanding  all  I could  fav,  manv  were  afraid  to 
go  to  bed,  and  fome  wandered  about  in  the 
fields,  being  perfuaded,  that  if  the  world  did  not 
end,  at  leaft  London  would  befwallowed  up  by 
an  earthquake.  I went  to  bed  at  my  ufual  time, 
and  was  fall  afleep  about  ten  o’clock. 

Monday,  March  8.  I took  the  machine  for 
Norwich,  and  after  fpending  a few  quiet,  com- 
fortable days,  in  Norwich,  Yarmouth,  and  Col- 
chefter,  without  any  jar  or  contention,  on  Satur- 
day the  19th  returned  to  London. 

Monday  28. 1 retired  to  Lewifham,  and  wrote 
the  fermon  on  Sin  in  Believers,  in  order  to  re- 
move a miftake,  which  fome  were  labouring  to 
propagate,  That  there  is  no  fin  in  any  that  are 
juftified. 

Monday,  April  11.  Leaving  things  as  it  feemed 
pretty  well  fettled  in  London,  I took  the  ma- 
chine for  Brifiol,  where  on  Tuef.  19.  I paid  the 
lafh  office  of  love  to  Nicholas  Gilbert,  who  was 
a good  man,  and  an  excellent  preacher  ; and 
likely  to  have  been  of  great  ufe.  But  God  faw  it 
beft,  to  fnatch  him  hence  by  a fever,  in  the  dawn 
of  his  ufefulnefs. 

Saturday  23.  I returned  to  London.  On  Thurf- 
day  28.  I was  at  Weftminfier,  where  I had  ap- 
pointed to  preach,  when  word  was  brought  me, 

about  five  in  the  afternoon.  “ That  Mr.  M d 

would  not  preach  at  the  foundery.”  So  the  breach 
K 4 is 


[ Z24  ] 

is  made.  But  I am  clear,  I have  done  all  I poffibfy 
could  to  prevent  it.  I walked  immediately  away 
and  preached  myfelf  on,  If  I am  bereaved  of  my 
children,  I am  bereaved. 

That  I may  conclude  this  melancholy  fubjefl 
at  once,  and  have  no  need  to  refume  it  any  more, 
I add  a letter  which  I wrote  fome  time  after,  for 
the  information  of  a friend. 

“ At  your  inffance  I undertake  the  irkfome 
tafk  of  looking  back  upon  things,  which  I wilh 
to  forget  for  ever.  I have  had  innumerable  proofs 
tho’  fuch  as  it  wouljl  now  be  an  endlefs  tafk  to 
colleft  together)  of  all  the  faffs  which  I recite. 
And  I recite  them  as  briefly  as  pofftble,  becaufe 
I do  not  defire  to  aggravate  any  thing,  but 
barely  to  place  it  in  a true  light. 

1.  Mr.  Maxfield  was  jufiified  while  I was  pray- 
ing with  him  in  Baldwin-flreet.  Briftol. 

O 

2.  Not  long  after  he  was  employed  by  me,  as 
a preacher  in  London. 

g.  Hereby  he  had  accefs  to  Mrs.  Maxfield, 
whom  otherwife  he  was  never  likely  to  fee, 
much  lefs  to  marry  ; from  whence  all  his  out- 
ward profperity  had  its  rife. 

4.  He  was  by  me  (by  thofe  who  did  it  at  my 
inflance)  recommended  to  the  bifhop  of  Derry, 
to  be  ordained  prieft,  who  told  him  then,  (I  had  it 
from  his  own  mouth)  “ Mr.  M — , I ordain  you, 
to  affifl  that  good  man,  that  he  may  not  work 
himfelf  to  death.” 

5.  When  a few  years  ago  many  cenfured  him 

much, 


[ 22 5 ] 


much,  I continually  and  ftrenuoufly  defended 
him  ; tho’  to  the  difgufting  feveral  of  the  preach- 
ers, and  a great  number  of  the  people. 

6.  I difgufted  them,  not  barely  by  defending 
him,  but  by  commending  him  in  Itrong  terms* 
from  time  to  time,  both  in  public  and  private, 
with  regard  to  his  uprightnefs,  as  well  as  ufeful-. 
nefs. 

7.  All  this  time  Mr.  M — was  complaining  (of 
which  I was  frequently  informed  by  thofe  to 
whom  he  fpokej  That  “ he  was  never  fo  ill  per- 
fected by  the  rabble  in:  Cornwall,  as  by  rae  and. 
my  brother.” 

8.  Four  or  five  years  fince,  a few  perfons  were 
appointed  to  meet  weekly  at  the  Foundery,. 
When  I left  London,  I left  thefe  under  Mr.  M’s., 
care,  defiring  them,  “ To  regard  him.  juft  as. 
they  did  me.” 

9.  Not  long  after  t was  gone,  fome  of  thefe 
had  dreams,  vifions  or  impreflions,  as  they 
thought,  from  God.  Mr.  M.  did  not  put  a ftop^ 
to  thefe  : rather  he  encouraged  them. 

10.  When  I returned,  I oppofed  them,  with 
my  might,  and  in  a fhort  time,  heard  no  more  of 
them.  Meanwhile  I defended  and  commended, 
Mr.  M.  as  before,  and  when  I left  the  town* 
again,  left  them  again. under  his  care. 

1,1.  Prefently  vifions  and  revelations  returned;. 
Mr.  M.  did  not  difeourage  them.  Flerewith.was, 
now  joined  a contempt  of  fuch  as  had.  them, not,. 

& 5..  with; 


[ 226  1 

with  a belief  that  they  were  proofs  of  the  higheft 
grace. 

1 2. Some  of  our  preachers  oppofed  them  rough- 
ly. At  this  they  took  fire,  and  refufed  to  hear 
them  preach,  but  crouded  after  Mr.  M.  He 
took  no  pains  to  quench  the  fire  but  rather  avail- 
ed himfelf  of  it  to  difunite  them  from  other 
preachers,  and  attach  them  to  himfelf.  He  like- 
wife  continually  told  them,  “ They  were  not  to 
be  taught  by  man,  efpecially  by  thofewhohad 
lejs  grace  than  themfelves .”  I was  told  of  this  like- 
wife  from  time  to  time.  But  he  denied  it.  And  I 
would  not  believe  evil  of  my  friend. 

13.  When  I returned  in  O ft.  1763,  I found 
the  fociety  in  an  uproar,  and  feveral  of  Mr.  M’s. 
molt  intimate  friends,  formed  into  a detached 
body.  Enthufiafm,  pride,  and  great  uncharitable- 
nefs  appeared  inmanv  who  once  had  much  grace. 
I very  tenderly  reproved  them.  They  would  not 
bear  it.  One  of  them,  Mrs.  C.  cried  out,  “ We 
will  not  be  brow-beaten  any  longer  : we  will  throw 
offthemajk."  Accordingly  a few  days  after  fhe 
came,  and  before  an  hundred  perfons  brought 
me  her’s  and  her  hufband’s  tickets,  and  faid, 
“Sir,  we  will  have  no  more  to  do  with  you:  Mr. 
M.  is  our  teacher.”  Soon  after  feveral  more  left 
the  fociety,  (One  of  whom  was  George  Bell  ;) 
faying,  “ Blind  John  is  not  capable  of  teaching 
us : we  will  keep  to  Mr.  M.” 

14,  From  the  time  that  I heard  of  Geo.  Bell’s 
prophecy,  I explicitly  declared  againft  it,  both  in 

private 


[ 227  ] 

private,  in  the  fociety,  in  preaching,  over  and 
over : and  at  length  in  the  public  papers.  Mr. 
M.  made  no  fuch  declaration  : I have  reafon  to 
think,  he  believed  it.  I know  many  of  his 
friends  did,  and  feveral  of  them  fat  up  the  laft 
of  February,  at  the  houfe  of  his  molt  intimate 
friend,  Mr.  Biggs,  in  full  expectation  of  the  ac- 
complifhment. 

15.  About  this  time,  one  of  our  Itewards, 
who  at  my  defire,  took  the  chappel  in  Snowfields 

for  my  ufe,  fent  me  word,  “ The  chappel  was 
his,  and  Mr.  Bell  fhould  exhort  there,  whether 
I would  or  no.”  Upon  this,  I defired  the  next 
preacher  there,  to  inform  the  congregation, 

“ That  while  things  flood  thus,  neither  I nor 
our  preachers  could  in  cor.fcience  preach  there 
any  more.” 

16.  Neverthelefs  Mr.  M.  did  preach  there. 
On  this T fent  him  a note,  defiring  him,  not  to 
do  it ; and  adding,  “If  you  do,  you  thereby  re- 
nounce connexion  with  me.” 

17.  Receiving  this  he  faid,  “ I will  preach  at 
Snowfields.”  He  did  fo,  and  thereby  renounced 
connexion.  On  this  point,  and  no  other  we  di- 
vided. By  this  aft  the  knot  was  cut.  Refolv- 
ing  to  do  this,  he  told  Mr.  Clementfon,  “ I am 
to  preach  at  the  Foundery  no  more.” 

18.  From  this  time  he  has  fpoke  all  manner  of 
evil  of  me,  his  Father,  his  friend,  his  greatefl 
earthly  benefactor.  I cite  Mr.  F — r lor  one  wit-, 
nefs  of  this,  and  Mr.  M — n for  another.  Did  he 

K 6 fpeak  _ 


[ 228  ] 

i'peak  evil  of  me  to  Mr.  F — one  day  only. 
Nay,  but  every  day,  for  fix  weeks  together. 
To  Mr.  M — n he  faid,  (among  a thoufand  other 
things,  which  he  had  been  20  years  raking  toge- 
ther) “ Mr.  W.  believed  and  countenanced  all 
which  Mr.  Bell  faid.  And  the  reafon  of  out" 
parting  was  this.  He  faid  to  me  one  day, 
“ Tommy,  I will  tell  the  people,  you  are  the 
greatefl  gofpel  preacher  in  England.  And  you 
fhall  tell  them,  I am  the  greatefl.  For  refufing 
to  do  this.  Mr.  W.  put  me  away !” 

Now  with  perfefl  calmnefs,  and  I verily  think, 
without  the  leafl  touch  of  prejudice.  I refer  it 
to  your  own  judgment,  what  connexion  1 ought 
to  have  with  Mr.  M.  either  till  I am  fatisfied, 
thefe  things  are  notfo;  or  till  he  is  thoroughly 
fenfible  of  his  fault.” 

Monday,  May  2.  and  the  following  days,  I 
was  fully  employed  in  vifiting  the  fociety,  and 
fettling  the  minds  of  thofe  who  had  been  con- 
fufed  and  diftrefl  by  a thoufand  mifreprefenta- 
tions.  Indeed  a flood  of  calumny  and  evil-fpeak- 
ing,  (as  was  eafily  forefeen  ) was  poured  out  on 
every  fide.  My  point  was  flill,  to  go  flrait  for- 
ward in  the  work  whereto  I am  called. 

Monday  16.  Setting  out  a month  later  than 
ufual,  I judged  it  needful  to  make  the  more  hafle. 
So  I took  pofl-chaifes,  and  by  that  means  eafily 
reached  Newcaflle,  on  Wednefday  18.  Thence 
I went  on  at  Ieifure  and  came  to  Edinburgh,  on 
Saturday  21,  The  next  day  I had  the  fatisfa£lion 

of 


C 229  ] 

t>f  {pending  a little  time  with  Mr.  WhitefieleL 
Humanly  fpeaking,  he  is  worn  out.  But  we 
have  to  do  with  him,  who  hath  all  power  in 
heaven  and  earth. 

Monday  23. 1 rode  to  Forfar,  and  on  Tuefday 
the  24th  rode  on  to  Aberdeen. 

Wednefday  25.  I enquired  into  the  ftate  of 
things  here.  Surely  never  was  there  a more  open 
door.  The  four  minifters  of  Aberdeen,  the  mini- 
fler  of  the  adjoining  town,  and  the  three  mini- 
flers  of  Oid-Aberdeen  hitherto  feem  to  have  no 
diflike,  but  rather  to  wijh  us  good  luck  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  Mod  of  the  town’s  people  as  yet 
feem  to  with  us  well,  fo  that  there  is  no  open  op- 
pofition  of  any  kind.  O what  fpirit  ought  a 
preacher  to  be  of  that  he  many  be  able  to  bear  all 
this  fun-lhine  ! 

About  noon  I went  to  Gordon’s  hofpital,  built 
near  the  town  for  poor  children.  It  is  an  exceed- 
ing handfome  building,  and  (what  is  not  common) 
kept  exceeding  clean.  The  gardens  are  pleafant, 
well  laid  out,  and  in  extremely  good  order.  But 
the  old  batchelor  who  founded  it,  has  exprefly 
provided,  That  no  woman  fhould  ever  be 
there. 

At  Seven  the  evening  being  fair  and  mild,  I 
preached  to  a multitude  of  people,  in  the  college- 
clofe,  on  Stand  in  the  ways  and  fee , and  a/k  for 
the  old  paths.  But  the  next  evening  the  wea- 
ther being  raw  and  cold,  I preached  in  the  col- 
lege- 


[ 23°  3 


lege-hall.  What  an  amazing  willingnefs  to  hear 
runs  thro’  this  whole  kingdom  ! There  wantonly 
a few  zealous,  aftive  labourers,  who  defire  noth- 
ing but  God,  and  they  might  foon  carry  the  gof- 
pel  though  all  this  country,  even  as  high  as  the 
Orkneys. 

Friday  27.  I fet  out  for  Edinburgh  again. 
About  one  I preached  at  Breechin.  All  were 
deeply  attentive.  Perhaps  a few  may  not  be  for- 
getful hearers.  Afterwards  we  rode  on  to  B rough - 
ty-caflle,  two  or  three  miles  below  Dundee.  We 
were  in  hopes  of  palling  the  river  here,  though 
we  could  not  at  the  town.  But  we  found  our 
horfes  could  not  pafs,  till  eleven  or  twelve  at 
night.  So  we  judged  it  would  be  bell,  to  go  over 
ourfelves  and  leave  them  behind.  In  a little  time 
we  procured  a kind  of  a boat,  about  half  as  long, 
as  a London  wherry,  and  three  or  four  feet 
broad.  Soon  after  we  had  put  off,  I perceived  it. 
leaked  on  all  fides,  nor  had  we  any  thing  to  lade 
out  the  water.  When  we  came  toward  the  mid- 
dle of  the  river,  which  was  three  miles  over,  the 
wind  being  high,  and  the  water  rough,  our  boat- 
men feemed  a little  furprized.  But  we  encou- 
raged them  to  pull  away . and  in  lefs  than  half  an 
hour  we  landed  fafe.  Our  horfes  were  brought 
after  us.  And  the  next  day  we  rode  on  to 
Kinghorn -ferry,  and  had  a pleafant  palfage  to 
Leith. 

Sunday  29.  I preached  at  feven  in  the  High- 

fchool- 


fchool-yard.  at  Edinburgh.  It  being  the  time  of 
the  general  affembly,  which  drew  together,  not 
the  minillers  only,  but  abundance  of  the  nobility 
and  gentry,  many  of  both  forts  were  prefent:  but 
abundantly  more  at  five  in  the  afternoon.  I 
fpake  as  plain  as  ever  I did  in  my  life.  But  I 
never  knew  any  in  Scotland  offended  plain- 
dealing . In  this  refpeft  the  North-Britons  are  a 
pattern  to  all  mankind. 

Monday  30.  I rode  to  Dunbar.  In  the  even- 
ing it  was  very  cold,  and  the  wind  was  exceed- 
ing high.  Neverthelefs  I would  not  pen  myfelf 
up  in  the  room,  but  refolved  to  preach  in  the 
open  air.  We  faw  the  fruit:  many  attended, 
notwithflanding  the  cold,  who  never  fet  foot  in 
the  room.  And  I am  Bill  perfuaded,  much  good 
will  be  done  here,  if  we  have  zeal  and  pa- 
tience. 

Tuefday  31.  I rode  to  Alnwick,  and  was  much 
refrefhed,  among  a people,  who  have  not 
the  form  only,  but  the  fpirit  of  religion,  fellow- 
fhip  with  God,  the  living  power  of  faith  divine. 
Wednefday,  June  1.  I went  on  to  Morpeth,  and 
preached  in  a ground  near  the  town,  to  far 
the  moft  ferious  congregation  which  I had  ever 
feen  there.  At  one  I preached  to  the  loving 
colliers  in  Placey,  and  in  the  evening  at  New- 
caflle. 

Saturday  3.  I rode,  though  much  out  of  order, 
to  Sunderland,  and  preached  in  the  evening  at 

the 


[ 232  ] 

the  room.  I was  much  worfe  in  the  night,  but 
toward  morning  fell  into  a found  fleep,  and  was 
refrefhed.  Sunday  4. 1 defigned  to  preach  abroad 
this  morning ; but  the  wind  and  rain  hindered. 
So  at  eight  I preached  in  the  room  again,  pur- 
pofing  to  preach  in  the  ftreet  at  noon.  But  Mr. 
Goodday  fent  me  word,  “ He  was  taken  ill  in 
the  night,  and  begged  I would  fupply  his  church. 
So  at  ten  I began  reading  prayers;  though  I was 
fo  exceeding  weak,  that  my  voice  could  fcarce 
be  heard.  But  as  I went  on,  I grew  ftronger,  and 
before  I had  half  done  preaching,  I fuppofeall  in 
the  church  could  hear. 

The  wind  drove  us  into  the  houfe  at  New- 
caflle  likewife,  that  is,  as  many  as  the  houfe 
would  contain.  But  great  numbers  were  con- 
flrained  to  hand  in  the  yard.  However,  I fup- 
pofed  all  could  hear.  For  my  weaknefs  was  en- 
tirely gone,  while  I was  inforcing  thofe  impor- 
tant words,  Jf  thou  canjl  belitve , all  things  are 
pojjible  to  him  that  belitveth. 

Monday  5.  I rode  to  Barnard-caftle  and 
preached  in  the  evening,  but  to  fuch  a congre- 
gation, not  only  with  refpefl:  to  number,  but  to 
ferioufnefs  and  compofure,  as  I never  faw  there 
before.  I intended  after  preaching  to  meet  the 
fociety  : but  the  bulk  of  the  people  were  fo  ea- 
ger to  hear  more,  that  I could  not  forbear  letting 
in  almoft  as  many  as  the  room  would  hold. 
And  it  was  a day  of  God’s  power.  They  all 

feemed 


[ 233  1 

feemed  to  take  the  kingdom  by  violence, 
while  they  befieged  heaven  with  vehement 
prayer. 

Tuefday  6.  So  deep  and  general  was  the  im« 
predion  now  made  upon  the  people,  that  even  at 
five  in  the  morning  I was  obliged  to  preach 
abroad,  by  the  numbers  who  flocked  to  hear, 
although  the  northerly  wind  made  the  air  ex- 
ceeding fharp.  *A  little  after  preaching  one  came 
to  me,  who  believed  God  had  jufl  fet  her  foul 
at  full  liberty.  She  had  been  clearly  juflified  long 
before  ; but  faid,  “ The  change  fhe  now  experi- 
enced, was  extremely  different  from  what  fhe 
experienced  then,  as  different  as  the  noonday- 
light  from  that  of  day-break.  That  fhe.  now  felt 
herfoul  all-love,  and  quite  fwallowed  up  in  God.” 
Now  fuppofe,  ten  weeks  or  ten-months  hence, 
this  per  Ion  fhould  be  cold  or  dead  : {hall  I fay, 
“ She  deceived  herfelf ; this  was  merely  the  work 
of  her  own  imagination  ?”  Not  at  all : I have  no 
right  fo  to  judge,  nor  authority  fo  to  fpeak.  I 
will  rather  fay,  She  was  unfaithful  to  the 
grace  of  God,  and  fo  cajl  away  what  was  really 
given. 

* Therefore  that  way  of  talking  which  has 
been  very  common,  of  “ flaying  to  fee,  if  the 
gift  be  really  given,”  which  fome  take  fo  be  ex- 
ceeding wife,  I take  to  be  exceeding  foolifh.  If 
a man  fays,  “ I now  feel  nothing  but  love,”  and 
I know  him  to  be  an  honefl  man,  I believe  him, 

What 


[ 234  ] 

What  then  fhould  I “ flay  to  fee  ?”  Not  whe- 
ther he  has  fuch  a blefling:  but  whether  he  will 
keep  it. 

* There  is  fomething  remarkable  in  the  man- 
ner wherein  God  revived  his  work  in  thefe  parts. 
A few  months  ago  the  generality  of  people  in 
this  circuit  were  exceeding  lifelefs.  Samuel 
Meggot  perceiving  this,  advifed  the  fociety  at 
Barnard- caftle,  to  obferve  every  Friday  with  fall- 
ing and  prayer.  The  very  find  Friday  they  met 
together,  God  broke  in  upon  them  in  a wonder- 
ful manner.  And  his  work  has  been  increafing 
among  them  ever  fince.  The  neighbouring  fo- 
cieties  heard  of  this  agreed  to  follow  the  fame 
rule,  and  foon  experienced  the  fame  blefiing.  Is 
not  the  negleft  of  this  plain  duty,  I mean,  falling, 
ranked  by  our  Lord  with  almfgiving  and  prayer, 
one  general  occafion  of  deadnefs  among  Chrifti- 
ans  ? Can  any  one  willingly  negle6l  it,  and  be 
guiltlefs  ? 

* In  the  evening  I preached  at  Yarm.  But 
I found  the  good  do£lrine  of  Chriftian  Per- 
fe£lion,  had  not  been  heard  of  there  for  fome 
time.  The  wildnefs  of  our  poor  brethren  in 
London,  has  put  it  out  of  countenance  above 
two  hundred  miles  off.  So  thefe  drange 
advocates  for  perfe£lion  have  given  it  a deeper 
wound,  than  all  its  enemies  together  could 
do  ! 

* Wednefday  8.  Juft  as  I began  preaching,  (in 
the  open  air,  the  room  being  too  fmall  even  for 

the 


[ 235  ] 


the  morning  congregation)  the  rain  began.  But 
it  Hopped  in  two  or  three  minutes,  I am  perfuad- 
ed,  in  anfwer  to  the  prayer  of  faith.  Incidents 
of  the  fame  kind  I have  feen  abundance  of  times, 
and  particularly  in  this  journey.  And  they  are 
nothing  ftrange  to  them  who  ferioufly  believe, 
The  very  hairs  oj your  head  are  all  numbered. 

After  preaching  at  Potto  about  noon,  I rode 
to  Thirfk,  intending  to  preach  near  the  houfe 
where  I alighted.  But  feveral  gentlemen  of  the 
town,  fent  to  defire,  I would  preach  in  the  mar- 
ket-place. I did  fo,  to  a numerous  congregation, 
mofl  of  whom  were  deeply  attentive.  I haftened 
away  after  preaching,  and  between  nine  and  ten 
came  to  York. 

Saturday  11.  I rode  to  Epworth,  and  preached 
at  feven  in  the  market-place.  Sunday  12.  I 
preached  at  the  room  in  the  morning,  in  the  af- 
ternoon, at  the  market-place,  and  about  one  to 
the  congregation  gathered  from  all  parts,  in 
Haxey  parifh,  near  Weflwood-fide.  At  every 
place  I endeavoured  to  fettle  the  minfrs  of  the 
poor  people,  who  had  been  not  a little  barrafled, 
by  a new  doffrine,  which  honeft  Jonathan 

C , and  his  converts,  had  indufirioufly 

propagated  among  them,  “ That  there  is  no  fm 
in  believers,  but  the  moment  we  believe,  fin  is 
deftroyed,  root  and  branch.”  I trufl,  this  plague 
alfo  is  flayed.  But  how  ought  thofe  unftable  ones 
to  be  afhamed,  who  are  fo  eafily  toll  about  with 
every  wind  of  dodrine? 


# I had 


[ *3«  ] 

* I had  defired  Samuel  Meggot,  to  give  me 
feme  farther  account  of  the  late  work  of  God 
at  Barnard-caftle.  Part  of  his  anfwer  was 
as  follows : 

June  7,  1763. 

“ Within  ten  weeks,  at  lead  twenty  perfons 
in  this  town  have  found  peace  with  God,  and 
twenty-eight  the  pure  love  of  God.  This  morn- 
ing, before  you  left  us,  one  found  peace,  and  one 
the  feccnd  bleffing;  and  after  you  was  gone  two 
more  received  it.  One  of  thefe  had  belonged  to 
the  fociety  before  : but  after  he  turned  back,  had 
bitterly5'  perfecuted  his  wife,  particularly  after  fhe 
pro  fe  fled  the  being  favedfrotn  fin.  May  2 9,  he 
came,  in  a furious  rage,  to  drag  her  out  of  the 
focicty.  One  cried  out,  “ Let  us  go  to  prayer 
for  him.”  Prefently  he  ran  away,  and  his  wife 
went  home.  Not  long  after,  he  came  in,  like  a 
madman,  and  fworc  he  would  be  the  death  of 
her.  One  faid,  “ Are  you  not  afraid,  left  God 
fhould  fmite  you  ?”  He  anfwered,  “No,  let  God 
do  his  worft.  I will  make  an  end  of  her,  and  the 
brats,  and  myfelf  too,  and  we  will  all  go  to  hell 
together.”  Kis  wife  and  children  fell  down, 
and  broke  out  into  prayer.  His  countenance 
changed,  and  he  was  quiet  as  a lamb.  But  it  was 
not  long,  before  an  horrible  dread  overwhelmed 
him  ; he  was  fore  diftrefled.  The  hand  of  God 
was  upon  him,  and  gave  him  no  reft,  day  or 
night.  On  Tuefday  in  the  afternoon  he  went  to 

her 


[ 23  7 ] 

her  who  prayed  for  him  when  he  came  to  drag 
his  wife  out,  begging  her  with  a {bower  of  tears, 
to  pray  for  his  deliverance.  On  Tliurfday  lie 
wrellled  with  God,  till  he  was  as  wet  all  over 
with  fweat,  as  if  he  had  been  dipped  in  water. 
But  that  evening  God  wiped  away  his  tears,  and 
filled  him  withjoy  unfpeakable.” 

“ This  morning  while  brother  Story  was  at 
prayer,  God  gave  him  a witnefs  in  himfelf,  that 
he  had  purified  his  heart.  When  he  was  rifen 
from  his  knees,  he  could  not  help  declaring  it. 
He  now  ran  to  his  wife,  not  to  kill  her,  but  to 
catch  her  in  his  arms,  that  they  might  praife 
God,  and  weep  over  one  another  with  tears  of 
joy  and  love.” 

Monday  13.  Even  in  Epworth  a few  faithful 
fervants  of  Satan  were  left,  who  would  not  leave 
any  {tone  unturned,  to  fupport  his  tottering  king- 
dom. A kind  of  gentleman  got  a little  party  to- 
gether, and  took  huge  pains  to  difturb  the  con- 
gregation. He  hired  a company  of  boys  to  fhout, 
and  made  a poor  man  exceeding  drunk,  who 
bawled  out  much  ribaldry  and  nonfenfe,  while 
he  himfelf  played  the  French-horn.  But  he  had 
little  fruit  of  his  labour.  I fpoke  a few  words  to 
their  champion,  and  he  difappeared.  The  con- 
gregation was  not  at  all  diiturbed,  but  quietly 
attended  to  the  end. 

Wednefday  15.  I rode  to  Doncafier,  and  at 
ten  {landing  in  an  open  place,  exhorted  a wild, 

yet 


[ 23S  ] 

yet  civil  multitude,  To  feek  the  Lord , while  he 
might  be  found.  Thence  I went  on  to  Leeds,  and 
declared  to  a large  congregation,  Now  is  the  day 
of falvalion.  Thurfdav  16,  at  five  in  the  evening 
1 preached  at  Dewfbury,  and  on  Friday  17, 
reached  Manchefier.  Here  I received  a particu- 
lar account  of  a remarkable  incident.  * An  emi- 
nent drunkard  of  Congleton,  ufed  to  divert  him- 
felf,  whenever  there  was  preaching  there,  by 
(landing  over  againfl  the  houfe,  curfing  and 
fwearing  at  the  preacher.  One  evening  he  had  a 
fancy  to  fiep  in,  and  “ hear  what  the  man  had  to 
fay.”  He  did  fo;  but  it  made  him  fo  uneafy, 
that  he  could  not  Deep  all  night.  In  the  morning 
he  was  more  uneafy  dill  : he  walked  in  the 
fields,  but  all  in  vain,  till  it  came  in  his  mind,  to 
go  to  one  of  his  merry  companions,  who  was  al- 
ways ready  to  abufethe  Metliodifls.  He  told  him  > 
how  he  was,  and  afked,  what  he  (hould  do  ? j 
“ Do  ? Said  Samuel:  go  and  join  the  fociety.  I 
will  ; for  I was  never  fo  uneafy  in  my  life.” 
They  did  fo  witlrout  delay-  But  prefentlv  David' 
cried  out,  “ I am  forry  I joined  : fori  fhall  get  ' 
drunk  again,  and  they  will  turn  me  out.”  How- 
ever he  (food  firm  for  four  days  : on  the  fifth,  he 
was  perfuaded  by  his  old  companions,  to  “ take 
one  pint,”  and  then  another  and  another,  till  one 
of  them  faid,  “ See,  here  is  a Methodift  drunk!” 
David  darted  up,  and  knocked  him  over,  chair 
and -all.  He  then  drove  the  reft  out  of  the  houfe, 

caught 


[ 239  ] 

caught  up  the  landlady,  carried  her  out,  threw 
her  into  the  kennel;  went  back  to  the  houfe, 
broke  down  the  door,  threw  it  into  the  ftreet, 
and  then  ran  into  the  fields,  tore  his  hair,  and 
rolled  up  and  down  on  the  ground.  In  a day  or 
two  was  a love-feaft : he  hole  in,  getting  behind, 
that  none  might  fee  him,  While  Mr.  Furz  was 
at  prayer,  he  was  feized  with  a dreadful  agony, 
both  of  body  and  mind.  This  caufed  many  to 
wreflle  with  God  for  him.  In  a while  he  fprung 
up  on  his  feet,  flretched  out  his  hands  and  cried 
aloud,  “ All  my  fins  are  forgiven !”  At  the  fame 
inflant,  one  on  the  other  fide  of  the  room  cried 
out,  “ Jefus  is  mine  ! And  he  has  taken  away  all 
my  fins.”  This  was  Samuel  H.  David  burfl 
through  the  people,  caught  him  in  his  arms  and 
faid,  “ Come,  let  us  fing  the  Virgin  Mary’s 
fong:  I never  could Jing  it  before.  “ My  foul  doth 
magnify  the  Lord , and  my  fpirit  doth  rejoice  in 
God  my  Saviour.”  And  their  following  beha- 
viour plainly  fhewed  the  reality  of  their  profef- 
fion. 

Saturday  18.  I found  the  work  of  God  was 
flill  greatly  increafing  here  : although  many 
humbling  blocks  had  been  thrown  in  the  way, 
and  fome  by  thofe  who  were  once  ftrong  in 
grace.  But  this  is  no  wonder:  I rather  wonder, 
that  there  are  not  abundantly  more.  And  fo  there 
would  be,  but  that  Satan  is  not  able  to  go  beyond 
his  chain. 

Monday  20.  I preached  at  Maxfield  about 


noon. 


[ 24°  ] 

noon.  As  I had  not  been  well,  and  was  not  quite 
recovered,  our  brethren  infilled  on  fending  me 
in  a chaife  to  Borflem.  Between  four  and  five 
I quitted  the  chaife  and  took  my  horfe.  Pre- 
fently  after,  hearing  a cry,  I looked  back,  and 
faw  the  chaife  upfide-down  (the  wheel  having 
violently  (truck  againft  a (tone)  and  well-nigh 
dafhed  in  pieces.  About  feven  I preached  to  a 
large  congregation  at  Borflem  : thefe  poor  pot« 
ters  four  years  ago,  were  as  wild  and  ignorant  as 
any  of  the  colliers  in  Kingfwood.  Lord,  thou 
hzW.  poi ver  over  thy  own  clay ! 

Tuefday  21.  I rode  to  Birmingham,  and  on 
Thurfday  to  Towcefier.  I would  willingly  have 
-refted  there  : but  our  brethren  defiring  me  to  go 
a little  farther,  I walked  on  (about  three  miles]  to 
Whittlebury.  Here  I found  a truly  loving  and 
dmple  people.  I preached  at  the  fide  of  the  new 
preaching-houfe  : I fuppofe  mod  of  the  town 
were  prefent.  Friday  24.  I took  horfe  early,  and 
in  the  afternoon  came  once  more  fafe  to  Lon- 
don. 

About  this  time  I received  the  following 
letter : 

“ GOD  is  the  fame  yederdav,  to-day  and  for 
ever  ! He  was,  is,  and  will  be  all  in  all ! Being 
a minute  part  of  the  whole , let  me  confider  myfelf 
alone.  Where  was  I before  my  parents  were 
born  ? In  the  mind  of  him  who  is  all  in  all.  It 
was  God  alone  that  gave  me  a being  amongd  the 

human 


[ ] 

human  race.  He  appointed  the  country  in  which 
I fhould  begin  my  exiftence.  My  parents  were 
alfo  his  choice.  Their  fituation  in  mind,  body, 
and  eftate  was  fully  known  to  him.  My  parents 
are  anfwerable  for  my  education  in  infancy.  My 
capacity  was  from  above.  That  I improved  fo 
little  was  moftly  owing  to  my  connexions;  but 
partly  to  my  own  inattention  or  idlenefs.  In 
mod  things,  whilft  an  infant,  whether  good  or 
evil,  I was  certainly  paffwe , i.  e.  I was  inftruXed 
or  led  by  others,  and  fo  afted  right  or  wrong. 
In  all  the  incidents  of  life,  whether  ficknefs, 
health,  efcapes,  crofles,  fpiritual  or  temporal  ad- 
vantages or  difadvantages,  1 can  trace  nothing  of 
rnyfelj  during  my  childhood.  And  till  I became  a 
fubjeX  to  my  own  will,  perhaps  I was  innocent  in 
the  eyes  of  infinite  jullice  : for  the  blood  of  Je- 
fus  Chrift  certainly  cleanfeth  from  all  original 
fin,  and  prefents  all  fpotlefs,  who  die  free  from 
the  guilt  of  aXual  tranfgreftion. 

At  what  time  I became  a fubjeft  to  my  own 
will,  I cannot  afcertain  ; but  from  that  time  in 
many  things  I offended.  Firlt,  again!!  my  parents  ; 
next  again!!  God  ! And  that  I was  preferved  from 
outward  evils,  was  not  owing  to  the  purity  of  my 
own  will;  but  the  grace  of  Chrift  preventing  and 
over-ruling  me. 

My  natural  will  ever  cleaved  to  evil:  and  if  I 
had  ever  any  good  in  me,  it  came  from  above. 
What  is  called  good  nature  is  a divine  gift  and 
Vol.  XXXI.  L not 


C 242  ] 

not  from  the  corrupt  root.  My  will  could  not 
produce  good,  and  in  various  inltances  it  was  in 
a manner  annihilated,  before  grace  could  fix  any 
good  in  me.  In  other  words,  my  will  a£ts  from 
the  motions  of  the  Old  Adam  where  I tranfgrefs ; 
but  what  is  good  in  me  is  from  the  grace  of  Chrift 
working,  whilft  my  own  wilt  is  made  pa/five  or 
unrejjjling.  Thus  my  life  has  been  fo  far  holy,  as 
I gave  up  my  own  will  and  lived  in  God,  who  is 
all  in  all. 

From  the  time  I could  fin,  I trace  the  divine 
goodnefs,  in  preferving  me  from  innumera- 
ble evils,  into  which  my  own  will  would  have 
led  me.  The  unknown  temptations  and  evils 
perhaps  are  infinitely  more  numerous  than  the 
known.  If  my  will  was  only  not  rejijiing,  when  I 
received  or  did  any  good,  how  little  was  it  con- 
cerned in  my  conviction,  my  converfion,  my 
peace  and  the  fphere  of  life  I engaged  in,  after 
receiving  fuch  divine  bleflings  ? My  concern 
about  my  foul’s  welfare,  the  time  of  my  conver- 
fion, the  mimjlers  raifed  up  to  be  the  infiruments 
of  it,  the  place  of  my  fii  ft  hearing  the  gofpel,  and 
various  other  circumftances,  that  inftrumen- 
tally  brought  about  thofe  great  and  bleffed  events 
in  my  life,  were  no  more  from  any  thing  in  my- 
felf,  than  my  birth  and  education.  Rather,  my 
will  was  overpowered,  and  grace  triumphed  over 
it. 

From  thefe  reflections  I conclude,  that  what- 
ever blellmgs  I have  enjoyed  as  to  parents,  coun- 
try 


[ M3  ] 

try,  education,  employments,  converfton,  con- 
nexions in  life,  or  any  exterior  or  interior  cir- 
cumftance. — All  came  from  God,  who  is  all  in 
all ! And  whatever  in  my  paft  life  is  matter  of 
repentance  and  lamentation,  has  arofe  chiefly 
from  my  corrupt  will , though  partly  from  a de- 
feXive  judgment,  ever  prone  to  err ! So  that 
upon  the  whole,  I have  great  caufe  to  be  thank- 
ful that  God  has  been  fo  much  the  all  in  all  of 
my  life;  at  the  fame  time  I mull  bewail  that 
I ever  followed  my  own  corrupt  will  in  any 
thing. 

My  prefent  ftate  of  life  I believe  is  from  God  ! 
In  a bad  ftate  of  health,  out  of  employment  and 
retired  from  all  engagements  in  the  world.  I ufe 
the  means  for  my  recovery,  and  it  is  not  from 
any  evil  principle  that  I am  a cypher  : but  I can- 
not yet  obtain  health,  bulinefs,  or  a fphere  of 
ufefulnefs.  Nor  can  I afcertain  how  far  I am 
culpable  as  to  being  wbat  I am.  My  prefent 
duty  \$,fubmiJJion  to  the  divine  will,  I ftudy  for 
improvement,  and  pray  for  fuch  bleflings  as  I 
want.  Is  not  God  all  in  all  as  to  my  prefent 
ftate  ? I have  no  defire  fo  ftrong  as  this,  Let  thy 
bleffed  will  be  done  in  and  upon  me.  And  the 
prayer  which  governs  my  foul  continually  is,  O 
may  my  will  die  day  by  day  ; and  may  God  in 
Chrift  Jefus,  be  all  in  all  to  me  and  in  me  and 
mine,  during  our  life,  in  our  laft  moments,  and 
to  all  eternity!  Amen.” 

L 2.  Finding 

O 


, [ 244  ] 

Finding  it  was  not  expedient  to  leave  London, 
during  the  ferment  which  ftill  continued  by  rea- 
fon  of  Mr.  M.’s  reparation  from  us,  I determined 
not  to  remove  from  it  before  the  conference. 
This  began  on  Tuefday,  July  19,  and  ended 
on  Saturday  23.  And  it  was  a great  bleffmg, 
that  we  had  peace  among  ourfelves,  while 
fo  many  were  making  themfelves  ready  for 
battle. 

Monday,  Augufl  1. 1 began  vifiting  the  clalfes 
again,  and  found  lefs  lofs  than  might  reafonably 
have  been  expected  : as  moll  of  thofe  who  had 
left  us,  fpake  all  manner  of  evil,  wiihout  either 
fear  or  fhame ! Poor  creatures!  Yet  he  that 
betrayed  them  into  this,  hath  the  greater  fin. 

Monday  13. 1 went  in  the  one-dav  machine  to 
Bath,  where  one  of  our  friends  from  Briftol  met 
me,  (as  1 had  defined)  in  the  afternoon,  and  took 
me  thither  in  a poftchaife.  Wednefaay  17.  Be- 
ing informed  that  the  boat  at  the  Old  Palfage 
would  go  over  at  fix  o’clock,  I took  horfe  at  four, 
and  came  to  the  palfage  a few  minutes  after  fix. 
But  they  told  us  they  would  not  pafs  till  twelve, 
and  I had  appointed  to  preach  in  Cheplfow  at 
eleven.  So  we  thought  it  bell  to  try  the  New 
Palfage.  We  came  thither  at  feven,  and  might 
probably  have  fiayed  till  noon,  had  not  an  herd 
of  oxen  come  juft  in  time  to  the  other  fide.  In 
the  boat  which  brought  them  over,  we  croffed 
the  water,  and  got  to  Chepftow  between  ten  and 
eleven.  As  it  had  rained  almoft  all  the  day,  the 

houfe 


C 245  ] 

houfe  contained  the  congregation.  Hence  we 
rode  to  Coleford.  The  wind  being  high,  I con- 
tented to  preach  in  their  new  room.  But  large 
as  it  was,  it  would  not  contain  the  people,  who 
appeared  to  be  not  a little  affe&ed  : of  which  they 
gave  a fufficient  proof,  by  filling  the  room  at  five 
in  the  morning. 

Thurfday  18.  We  breakfafted  at  a friend’s,  a 
mile  or  two  from  Monmouth,  and  rode  to  Crick- 
howell,  where  I intended  to  dine  : but  I found 
other  work  to  do.  Notice  had  been  given,  that  I 
would  preach,  and  fotne  were  come  many  miles 
to  hear.  So  I began  without  delay,  and  I did 
not  obferve  one  light  or  inattentive  perfon  in  the 
congregation.  When  we  came  to  Brecknock, 
we  found  it  was  the  affize  week,  fo  that  I could 
not  have  the  town-hall,  as  before  ; the  court  be- 
ing to  fit  there,  at  the  very  time  when  I had  ap- 
pointed to  preach.  So  I preached  at  Mr.  James's 
door:  and  all  the  people  behaved  as  in  the  pre- 
fence of  God. 

- Friday  19.1  preached  near  the  market-place, 
and  afterwards  rode  over  to  Trevecka.  Howell 
Harris’s  houfe  is  one  of  the  moll  elegant  places 
which  I have  feen  in  Wales.  The  little  chappel 
and  all  things  round  about  it,  are  finifhed  in  an 
uncommon  tafle  : and  the  gardens,  orchards, 
fifh-ponds  and  mount  adjoining,  make  the  place 
a little  paradife.  He  thanks  God  for  thefe  things 
and  looks  through  them.  About  fix  fcorce  per- 
L g fons 


[ H6  ] 

Tons  are  now  in  the  family  : all  diligent,  all  con- 
flantly  employed,  all  fearing  God  and  working 
righteoufnefs.  I preached  at  ten  to  a crowded 
audience,  and  in  the  evening  at  Brecknock  again  : 
but  to  the  poor  only:  the  rich,  (a  very  few  ex- 
cepted) were  otherwife  employed. 

Saturday  20.  W e took  horfe  at  four,  and  rode 
through  one  of  the  pleafanteft  countries  in  the 
world.  When  we  came  to  Trecaftle,  we  had 
rode  fifty  miles  in  Monmouthfhire  and  Breck- 
nockfhire.  And  I will  be  bold  to  fay,  all  England 
does  not  afford  fuch  a line  of  fifty  miles  length, 
for  fields,  meadows,  woods,  brooks,  and  gently- 
rifing  mountains,  fruitful  to  the  very  top.  Car- 
marthenfhire,  into  which  we  came  foon  after, 
has  at  lead  as  fruitful  a foil.  But  it  is  not  fo  plea- 
fant,  becaufe  it  has  fewer  mountains,  though 
abundance  of  brooks  and  rivers.  About  five  I 
preached  on  The  Green  at  Carmarthen,  to  a large 
number  of  deeply  attentive  people.  Here  two 
gentlemen  from  Pembroke  met  me  : with  whom 
we  rode  to  St.  Clare,  intending  to  lodge  there  ; 
but  the  inn  was  quite  full.  So  we  concluded  to 
try  for  Larn,  though  we  knew  not  the  way,  and 
it  was  now  quite  dark.  Juft  then  came  up  an  ho- 
neft  man  who  was  riding  thither : and  we  will- 
ingly bore  him  company. 

Sunday  21.  It  rained  almoft  all  the  morning; 
However  we  reached  Tenby  about  eleven.  The 
rain  then  ceafed,  and  I preached  at  the  crofs  to  a 
congregation  gathered  from  many  miles  round. 

The 


[ 247  ] 

The  fun  broke  out  feveral  times  and  (hone  hot 
in  my  face  ; but  never  for  two  minutes  toge- 
ther. About  five  I preached  to  a far  larger  con- 
gregation at  Pembroke.  A few  gay  people  be- 
haved ill  at  the  beginning.  But  in  a fhort  time 
they  loft  their  gaiety,  and  were  as  ferious  as  their 
neighbours. 

Wednefday  24.  I rode  over  to  Haverfordweft. 
Finding  it  was  the  affize  week,  I was  afraid  the 
bulk  of  the  people  would  be  too  bufy,  to  think 
about  hearing  fermons.  But  I was  miftaken  : I 
have  not  feen  fo  numerous  a congregation  fince 
I fet  out  of  London.  And  they  were,  one  and 
all,  deeply  attentive.  Surely  fome  will  bring 
forth  fruit. 

* Thurfday  2£.  I was  more  convinced  than 
ever,  that  the  preaching  like  an  apoftle,  without 
joining  together  thofe  that  are  awakened,  and 
training  them  up  in  the  ways  of  God,  is  only 
begetting  children  for  the  murderer.  How  much 
preaching  has  there  been  for  thefe  twenty  years 
all  over  Pembrokefhire  ? But  no  regular Jocieties , 
no  difcipline,  no  order  or  connexion.  And  the 
confequence  is,  that  nine  in  ten  of  the  once 
awakened,  are  now  fafter  afieep  than  ever. 

Friday  28.  We  defigned  to  take  horfe  at  four. 
But  the  rain  poured  down,  fo  that  one  could 
fcarce  look  out.  About  fix  however  we  fet  out, 
and  rode  through  heavy  rain  to  St*  Clare.  Hav- 
ing then  little  hopes  of  crofting  the  fands,  we  de- 
termined to  go  round  by  Carmarthen.  But  the 
L 4 hoftler 


[ »4«  ] 


holller  told  us,  we  might  fave  feveral  miles,  by 
going  to  Llanfteffan’s-ferry.  We  came  thither 
about  noon,  where  a good  woman  informed  us, 
the  boat  was  aground,  and  would  not  pafs  till  the 
evening.  So  we  judged  it  bell  to  go  by  Carmar- 
then Hill.  But  when  we  had  rode  three  or  four 
miles,  I recollefted,  that  I had  heard  fpeak  of  a 
ford,  which  would  fave  us  fome  miles  riding. 
We  enquired  of  an  old  man,  who  foon  mounted 
his  horfe,  fhewed  us  the  way  and  rode  through 
the  river  before  us. 

Soon  after  my  mare  dropt  a fhoe,  which  oc- 
eafioned  fo  much  lofs  of  time,  that  we  could  not 
ride  the  fands,  but  were  obliged  to  go  round 
through  a miferable  road,  to  Lanellos.  To  mend 
the  matter,  our  guide  loll  his  way,  both  before 
we  came  to  Lanellos  and  after;  fo  that  it  was  as 
much  as  we  could  do,  to  reach  Bocher-ferry,  a 
little  after  fun-fet.  Knowing  it  was  impollible 
then  to  reach  Penreefe,  as  we  defigned,  we  went 
on  llraitto  Swanfey. 

Saturday  27.  I preached  at  feven  to  one  or 
two  hundred  people,  many  of  whom  feemed  full 
of  good  defires.  But  as  there  is  no  fociety,  I ex- 
pe£l  no  deep  or  lalling  work. 

* Mr.  Evans  now  gave  me  an  account  from 
his  own  knowledge,  of  what  has  made  a great 
noife  in  Wales.  “ It  is  common  in  the  congre- 
gations attended  by  Mr.  W.  W.  and  one  or  two 
other  clergymen,  after  the  preaching  is  over,  for 

any 


[ 249  ] 

any  one  that  has  a mind,  to  give  out  a verfe  of 
an  hymn.  This  they  ling  over  and  over  with  all 
their  might,  perhaps  above  thirty,  yea,  forty 
times.  Meanwhile  the  bodies  of  two  or  three, 
fometimes  ten  or  twelve,  are  violently  agitated  ; 
and  they  leap  up  and  down,  in  all  manner  of 
poftures,  frequently  for  hours  together.”  I think, 
there  needs  no  great  penetration  to  underftand 
this.  They  are  honeft,  upright  men,  who  really 
feel  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts.  But  they 
have  little  experience,  either  of  the  ways  of  God, 
or  the  devices  of  Satan.  So  he  ferves  himfelf 
of ' their  fimplicily,  in  order  to  wear  them 
out,  and  to  bring  a difcredit  on  the  work  of 
God. 

About  two  I preached  at  Cowbridge  in  the  af- 
fembly-room,  and  then  went  on  to  LandafF. 
The  congregation  was  waiting : fo  I began 
without  delay,  explaining  to  them  the  righ - 
teoufnefs  of  faith.  A man  had  need  to  be  all 
fire,  who  comes  into  thefe  parts,  where  almoft 
every  one  is  cold  as  ice.  Yet  God  is  able  to 
warm  their  hearts,  and  make  rivers  run  in  the  dry 
places. 

Sunday  28.  I preached  once  more  in  W 

church : but  it  was  hard  work.  Mr.  H.  read  the 
prayers,  (not  as  he  did  once,  with  fuch  fervor  and 
folemnity  as  ftruck  almoft  every  hearer,  but)  like 
one  reading  an  old  fong,  in  a cold,  dry,  carelefs 
manner.  And  there  was  no  finging  at  all.  O 

what 


[ 25°  ] 

what  life  was  here  once  ! But  now  there  is  not 
one  fpark  left ! 

Thence  I rode  to  Cardiff,  and  found  the 
fociety  in  as  ruinous  a condition  as  the  caflle. 
The  fame  poifon  of  myjiicifm  has  well-nigh 
extinguifhed  the  lafl  fpark  of  life  here  alfo. 

I preached  in  the  town-hall,  on,  Now  God 
commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent. 
There  was  a little  fhaking  among  the  dry  bones. 
Poffibly  fome  of  them  may  yet  conic  together  and 
live. 

Monday  29.  At  noon  I preached  again  at 
Landaff,  and  in  the  evening  at  Aberthaw. 
1 found  the  mod  life  in  this  congregation,  that 
I have  found  any  where  in  Glamorganfhire.  We 

lodged  at  F caflle  : fo  agreeable  once  ! But 

how  is  the  ftene  changed?  How  dull  and  un- 
lovely is  every  place,  where  there  is  nothing  of 
God? 

Thurfday  30.  I preached  in  the  caflle  at  Car- 
diff, and  endeavoured  to  lift  up  the  hands  that 
hung  down.  A few  feemed  to  awake,  and  {hake 
themfelves  from  the  duft.  Let  thefe  go  on  and 
more  will  follow. 

I came  to  Chepflow,  Friday  31,  jufl  at  noon, 
and  began  preaching  immediately  at  Mr.  Cheek’s 
door.  The  fun  fhone  full  in  my  face,  extremely 
hot ; but  in  two  or  three  minutes  the  clouds  co- 
vered it.  The  congregation  was  large  and  be- 
haved well  : perhaps  fome  may  be  doers  of  the 
word.  When  we  went  into  the  boat  at  the  Old 

Paffage, 


C 25i  ] 

Paflage,  it  was  a dead  calm.  But  the  wind  fprung 
up  in  a few  minutes,  fo  that  we  reached  Briftol 
in  good  time. 

Thurfday,  September  1.  I began  expounding 
a fecond  time,  after  an  interval  of  above  twenty 
years,  the  firft  epillle  of  St.  John.  How  plain, 
how  full,  and  how  deep  a compendium  of  genuine 
Chriflianity ! 

* Saturday  3.  I defcribed  the  one  undivided 
fruit  of  the  Spirit : one  part  of  which  men  are 
continually  labouring  to  feparate  from  the 
oilier:  but  it  cannot  be  : none  can  retain  peace 
or  joy  without  meeknefs  and  long  fuff ering  : nay, 
nor  without  fidelity  and  temperance.  Unlefs  we 
have  the  whole,  we  cannot  long  retain  any  part 
of  it. 

Sunday  4.  I preached  on  the  Key,  where  mul- 
titudes attended,  who  would  not  have  come 
to  the  other  end  of  the  city.  In.  the  after- 
noon 1 preached  near  the  New-fquare.  I find 
no  other  way  to  reach  the  out-cafts  of  men; 
And  this  way  God  has  owned,  and  does  ftill  own, 
both  by  the  conviflion  and  converfion  of  fin- 
ners. 

Wednefday  7.  I preached  at  Pensford 
about  eight,  and  it  began  raining  ahnoft  as 
foon  as  I began  preaching.  But  I think 
none  went  away.  At  noon  I preached  at  Shep- 
ton-Mallet,  to  a numerous,  nay  and  ferious  con- 
gregation : and  about  fix  in  a meadow  at  Win- 

L6 


caunton*. 


[ 252  ] 

caunton.  1 fuppofe  this  was  the  firft  field-preach- 
ing which  had  been  there.  However  the  people 
were  all  quiet,  and  the  greater  part  deeply  atten- 
tive. 

Thurfday  8.  At  nine  I preached  in  the  fame 
place,  to  a far  more  ferious  audience.  Be- 
tween eleven  and  twelve  I preached  at  Weft- 
comb,  and  in  the  evening  at  Frome.  How  zea- 
lous  to  hear  are  thefe  people  ! And  yet  how  little 
do  they  profit  by  hearing  ! I think,  this  will  not 
always  be  the  cafe.  By  and  by  we  (hall  rejoice 
over  them. 

Wednefday  14.  I preached  at  Bath,  on. 
Now  is  the  day  of  falvation.  I was  after- 
wards not  a little  refrefhed  by  the  converfa- 
tion  of  one  lately  come  from  London  ; not- 
withflanding  an  irregularity  of  thought,  almoft 
peculiar  to  herfelf.  How  much  preferable  is 
her  irregular  warmth,  to  the  cold  wifdom  of 
them  that  defpife  her  ? How  gladly  would  I 
he  as  (he  is,  taking  her  wildnefs  and  fervor  toge- 
ther ? 

In  the  evening  the  congregation  at  Coleford 
was  all  alive,  and  great  part  of  them  were  prefent 
again  in  the  morning.  The  next  evening  we  had 
a love-feaft  : at  which  many  were  not  able  to 
contain  their  joy  and  defire ; but  were  con- 
ftrained  to  cry  aloud,  and  praife  God  for  the 
abundance  of  his  mercies. 

Saturday  17.  I preached  on  the  Green  at  Bed- 
minfter.  I am  apt  to  think  many  of  the  hearers, 

fcarce 


[ 2 53  ] 

fcarce  ever  heard  a Methodift  before,  orperhaps 
any  other  preacher.  What  but  field-preaching 
could  reach  thefe  poor  finners  ? And  are  not 
their  fouls  alfo  precious  in  the  fight  of  God  ? 

Sunday  18.  I preached  in  the  morning  in 
Princefs-ftreet,  to  a numerous  congregation.  Two 
or  three  gentlemen,  fo  called,  laughed  at  firft. 
But  in  a few  minutes  they  were  as  ferious  as  the 
reft.  On  Monday  evening  I gave  our  brethren  a 
folemn  caution,  Not  to  love  the  world , neither  the 
things  of  the  world.  This  will  be  their  grand  dan- 
ger. As  they  are  induftrious  and  frugal,  they  mud 
needs  increafe  in  goods.  This  appears  already  ; 
in  London,  Briftol,  and  moft  other  trading  towns 
thofe  who  are  in  bufinefs  have  increafed  in  fub- 
ftance  feven-fold  ; fome  of  them  twenty,  yea,  an 
hundred  fold,  what  need  then  have  thefe  of  the 
flrongeft  warnings,  left  they  be  intangled  therein, 
and  periffi  ? 

Frid.  23.  I preached  at  Bath.  Riding  home  we 
faw  a coffin  carrying  into  St.  George’s-churcb, 
with  many  children  attending  it.  When  we  came 
near,  we  found  they  were  our  own  children,  at- 
tending the  corpfe  of  one  of  their  fchool-fellows, 
who  had  died  of  the  fmall-pox.  And  God  chere- 
by  touched  many  of  their  hearts,  in  a manner 
they  never  know  before. 

Monday  26.  I preached  to  the  prifoners  in 
Newgate,  and  in  the  afternoon  rode  over  toKingf- 
wood,  where  I had  a folemn  watch-night,  and  an 
opportunity  of  fpeaking  clofely  to  the  children. 

One 


[ 2M  ] 


One  is  dead  ; two  recovered,  feven  i 1 Hill.  And 
the  hearts  of  all  are  like  melting  wax. 

Tuefday  17.  I took  my  leave  of  the  congre- 
gation at  Brifiol  by  opening  and  applying  thofe 
words,  (bv  which  no  fie fli  living  fhall  be  jufti- 
fied)  Thou  Jlialt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thvfelf.  I 
believe,  an  eminent  deifl,  who  was  prefent,  will 
not  eafily  forget  that  hour  ; he  was  (then  at  leaf!) 
deeply  afTefted,  and  felt  he  flood  in  need  of  an 
advocate  with  the father. 

Wednefdav  and  Thurfday  evening,  I fpent  at 
Salilbury,  and  with  no  fmall  fatisfa&ion.  Friday 
30.  I preached  about  one  at  Whitchurch,  and 
then  rode  to  Bafingfloke.  Even  here  there  is  at 
length  fome  profpeft  of  doing  good.  A large 
number  of  people  attended  : to  whom  God  en- 
abled me  to  fpeak  flrong  words.  And  they  Teem- 
ed to  fink  into  the  hearts  of  the  heareis. 

Saturday,  O£lober  1.  I returned  to  London, 
and  found  our  houfe  in  ruins,  great  part  of  it 
being  taken  down  in  order  to  a thorough  repair. 
But  as  much  remained  as  I wanted  : fix  foot 
fquare  fuffices  me  by  day  or  by  night. 

I now  received  a very  ftrange  account,  from  a- 
manof  fenfe,  as  well  as  integrity.  “ I afked  M. 
S.  many  queftions,  before  fhe  would  give  me  any 
anfwer.  At  length,  after  much  perfuafion  fhe 
faid,  “ On  old  Michaelmas  day  was  three  years, 
I was  fitting  by  myfelf  at  my  father's  with  a 
bible  before  me,  and  one  whom  I took  to  be  my 
uncle  came  into  the  room,  and  fat  down  by  me. 

He 


[ 2 S5  ] 

He  talked  to  me  fome  time,  till  not  liking  hi® 
difcourfe,  I looked  mote  carefully  at  him.  He 
was  dreft  like  my  uncle;  but  1 obferved  one  of 
his  feet  was  juft  like  that  of  an  ox.  Then  I was 
much  frighted,  and  he  began  torturing  me  fadly, 
and  told  me  he  would  torture  me  ten  times  more 
if  I would  not  fwear  to  kill  my  father,  which  at 
laft  I did.  He  faid  he  would  come  again,  on  that 
day  four  years,  between  half  hour  paft  two  and 
three  o’clock.” 

“ I have  feveral  times  fince  flrove  to  write 
this  down  ; but  when  1 did,  the  ufe  of  my  hand 
was  taken  from  me.  I flrove  to  fpeak  it  ; but 
whenever  I did,  my  fpeech  was  taken  from  me. 
And  I am  afraid  I fhallbe  tormented  a deal  more 
for  what  I have  fpoken  now.” 

Prefently  fhe  fell  into  fuch  a fit  as  was  dreadful 
to  look  upon.  One  would  have  thought  fhe  would- 
be  torn  in  pieces.  Several  perfons  could  fcarce 
hold  her  ; till  after  a time,  fhe  funk  down  as 
dead. 

From  that  Michaelmas  day,  fhe  was  conti- 
nually tormented  with  the  thought  of  killing  her 
father  : as  likewife  of  killing  herfelf : which 
fhe  often  attempted  but  was  as  often  hindred. 
Once  fhe  attempted  to  cut  her  own  throat;  once 
to  throw  herfelf  into  Rofamond’s  Pond  : feveral 
times  to  flrangle  herfelf,  which  once  or  twice  was 
with  much  difficulty  prevented. 

Her  brother,  fearing  left  fhe  fhould  at  laft  fuc- 
1 ceed  in  her  attempt,  and  finding  her  fits  come 

more 


[ 256  ] 

more  frequently,  got  a ftrait  waiftcoat  made  for 
her  fuch  as  they  ufe  at  Bedlam.  It  was  made  of 
ftrong  ticking,  with  two  ftraps  on  the  fhoulders, 
to  fallen  her  down  to  the  bed  ; one  acrofs  her 
breaft,  another  acrofs  her  middle,  and  another 
acrofs  her  knees.  One  hkewife  was  buckled  on 
each  leg,  and  fattened  to  the  fide  of  the  bed.  The 
arms  of  the  waiftcot  drew  over  her  fingers,  and  faf- 
tened  like  a purfe.  In  a few  minutes  after  lhe  was 
thus  fecured,  her  brother  coming  to  the  bed  found 
lhe  was  gone.  After  fome  time,  he  found  lhe 
was  up  the  chimney,  fo  high  that  he  could  fcarce 
touch  her  feet.  When  Mary  Lary  called  her. 
Hie  came  down,  having  her  hands  as  fall  as 
ever. 

The  night  after  I fattened  her  armsao  her 
body  with  new  flraps  over  and  above  the  reft. 
She  looked  at  me  and  laughed  ; then  gave  her 
hands  a flight  turn,  and  all  the  faftenings  were 
off. 

In  the  morning  Mr.  Spark  came.  On  our  tel- 
ling him  this,  he  faid,  “ But  I will  take  upon  me 
to  fatten  her  fo  that  lhe  lhall  not  get  loofe. ' 
A ccordingly  he  fent  for  fome  girth-web,  with 
which  he  fattened  her  arms  to  her  fides,  firft 
above  her  elbows  round  her  body  ; then  below  her 
elbows  : then  he  put  it  round  each  wrilt,  and  brac- 
ed them  down  to  each  fide  of  the  bedftead  : after 
this  lhe  was  quiet  a night  and  a day.  Then  all 
this  was  off  like  the  reft. 

After  this  we  did  not  tie  her  down  any  more, 

only 


[ 1 

only  watched  over  her,  night  and  day.  I afked 
the  phyfician  that  attended  her,  Whether  it  was 
a natural  diforder  ? He  faid,  “ Partly  natural,  par- 
tly diabolical.”  We  then  judged  there  was  no 
remedy  but  prayer,  which  was  made  for  her,  or 
with  her  continually  ; tho’  while  any  were  pray- 
ing with  her,  {he  was  tormented  more  than 
ever. 

The  Friday  before  Michaelmas-day  laft,  Mr. 
W.  came  to  fee  her.  He  afked,  “ Do  you  know 
me  ? “ She  faid,  No,  you  all  appear  to  me  like 
blackamoors.”  But  do  not  you  know  my  voice  ? 
“ No,  I know  no  one’s  voice,  except  Molly 

L .”  Do  you  pray  God  to  help  you  ? No  I 

can’t  pray.  God  will  never  help  me.  I belong 
to  the  devil : and  he  will  have  me.  He  will  take 
me,  body  and  foul  on  Monday.”  Would  you 
have  me  pray  for  you  P No  indeed.  For  when 
people  pray,  he  torments  me  wrofe  than  ever.” 
In  her  fits  fhe  was  firft  convulfed  all  over,  feem- 
ingin  an  agony  of  pain,  and  fcreaming  terribly. 
Then  fhe  began  curfing,  fwearing  and  blafphem- 
ing  in  the  moll  horrid  manner.  Then  fhe  burfl 
into  vehement  fits  of  laughter:  then  funk  down  as 
dead.  All  this  time  fhe  was  quite  fenfelefs  : then 
fhe  fetched  a deep  figh,  and  recovered  her  fenfe 
and  underftanding  : but  was  fo  weak,  that  fhe 
could  not  fpeak  to  be  heard,  unlefs  you  put  your 
ear  almofl  clofe  to  her  mouth. 

When  Mr.  W.  began  praying,  fhe  began 
{creaming,  fo  that  a mob  quickly  gathered  about 

the 


[ 258  ] 

the  houfe.  However  he  prayed  on  till  the  con- 
vulfions  and  (creaming  ceafed,  and  (he  came  to 
her  fenfes  much  fooner  than  ufual.  What  moft 
furprized  us  was,  that  (he  continued  in  her  fenfes 
and  foon  after  began  to  pray  herfelf. 

On  Sunday  evening  Mr.  W.  came  again, 
afked  her  many  queftions,  preft  her  to  call  upon 
God  for  power  to  believe,  and  then  prayed  with 
her.  She  then  began  to  pray  again,  and  continu- 
ed in  her  fenfes,  longer  than  (he  had  done  for  a 
month  before  ; but  (till  infifted,  “ The  devil 
would  come  the  next  day  between  two  and  three, 
and  take  her  away.” 

She  begged  me  to  fit  up  with  her  that  night, 
which  I willingly  did.  About  four  in  the  morn- 
ing, (he  burft  out  into  a flood  of  tears,  crying, 

“ What  (hall  I do  ? What  (hall  I do  ? I can- 
not (land  this  day.  This  day  I (hall  be  loft.”  I 
went  to  prayer  with  her,  and  exhorted  her  to 
pray  for  faith,  and  her  agony  ceafed. 

About  half  hour  after  ten,  ten  of  us  came  to- 
gether, as  we  had  agreed  the  day  before.  I faid, 

“ Is  there  any  among  you  who  does  not  believe, 
that  God  is  able  and  willing  to  deliver  this  foul  ?”  1 
They  anfwered  with  one  voice,  “ We  believe, 
he  both  can  and  will  deliver  her  this  day.”  I 
then  faflened  her  down  to  the  bed  on  both  fides, 
and  fet  two  on  each  fide  to  hold  her,  if  need 
were.  We  began  laying  her  cafe  before  the 
Lord,  and  claiming  his  promife  on  her  behalb 
Immediately  Satan  raged  vehemently.  He  cauf 

ed  ! 


. 

[ 2 59  ] 

ed  her  to  roar  in  an  uncommon  manner,  then 
to  ffiriek,  fo  that  it  went  through  our  heads, 
then  to  bark  like  a dog.  Then  her  face  was 
didorted  to  an  amazing  degree,  her  mouth  being 
drawn  from  ear  to  ear,  and  her  eyes  turned  op- 
pofite  ways  and  darting  as  if  they  would  ftart  out 

I of  her  head.  Prefently  her  throat  was  fo  con- 
vulfed,  that  fhe  appeared  to  be  quite  firangled. 
Then  the  convulfions  were  in  her  bowels,  and 
her  body  fwelled,  as  if  ready  to  burft.  At  other 
times  fhe  was  diff  from  head  to  foot,  as  an  iron 
bar,  being  at  the  fame  time  wholly  deprived  of 
her  fenfes,  and  motion,  not  even  breathing  at 
all.  Soon  after  her  body  was  fo  writhed,  one 
would  have  thought  all  her  bones  mull  be  dido- 
cated. 

We  continued  in  prayer,  one  after  another, 
till  about  twelve  o’clock.  One  then  faid,  “ I 
mud  go:  I can  day  no  longer.”  Another  and 
another  faid  the  fame,  till  we  were  upon  the 
point  of  breaking  up.  I faid,  “ What  is  this  ? 
Will  you  all  give  place  to  the  devil  ? Are  you 
dill  ignorant  of  Satan’s  devices  ? Shall  we  leave 
this  poor  foul  in  his  hands'?”  Prefently  the  cloud 
vanidied  away.  We  all  faw  the  fnare,  and  re- 
vived to  wredle  with  God,  till  we  had  the  peti- 
tion we  afked  of  him.  We  began  dinging  an 
hymn,  and  quickly  found  his  fpirit  was  in  the 
midd  of  us.  But  the  more  earnedly  we  prayed, 
the  more  violently  the  enemy  raged.  It  was 
with  great  difficulty  that  four  of  us  could  hold 

her 


[ 2 6o  ] 

her  down : frequently  we  thought  fhe  would 
have  been  torn  out  of  our  arms.  By  her  looks  and 
motions  we  judged  fhe  faw  him  in  avifible  fhape. 

She  laid  fall  hold  on  Molly  L sand  me  with 

inexpreflible  eagernefs : and  foon  burft  into  a 
flood  of  tears,  crying,  “Lord,  fave  or  I perifh. 

I will  believe.  Lord,  give  me  power  to  believe, 
help  my  unbelief.”  Afterwards  (he  lay  quiet  for 
about  fifteen  minutes.  I then  alked,  “ Do  you 
now  believe  Chrift  will  fave  vou  ? And  have 
you  a defire  to  pray  to  him  ?’*  She  anfwered, 
“ I have  a little  defire,  but  I want  power  to  be- 
lieve.” We  bid  her  keep  alking  for  the  power,  1 
and  looking  unto  Jefus.  I then  gave  out  an' 
hymn,  and  (he  earneflly  fung  with  us  thofe 
words, 

“ O fun  of  righteoufnefs  arife, 

With  healing  in  thy  wing! 

To  my  difeafed,  my  fainting  foul, 

Life  and  falvation  bring.” 

I now  looked  at  my  watch  and  told  her,  “ It 
is  half  hour  pall  two.  This  is  the  time  when  the 
devil  faid,  he  would  come  for  you.”  But,  blef« 
fed  be  God,  inftead  of  a tormentor  he  fent  a 
comforter.  Jefus  appeared  to  her  foul,  and  re- 
buked the  enemy  ; though  ftill  fome  fear  remain- 
ed. But  at  three  it  was  all  gone,  and  fhe  migh- 
tily rejoiced  in  the  God  of  her  falvation.  It 
was  a glorious  fight.  Her  fierce  countenance 

war. 


C 261  ] 


svas  changed,  and  fhe  looked  innocent  as  a child. 
And  we  all  partook  of  the  bleffing.  For  Jefus 
filled  our  fouls  with  a love  which  no  tongue  can 
exprefs.  We  then  offered  up  our  joint  praifes 
to  God,  for  his  unfpeakable  mercies,  and  left 
her  full  of  faith  and  love  and  joy  in  God  her  Sa- 
i Hour. 

* Sunday  2.  All  this  week  I endeavoured  to 
tonfirm  thofe,  who  had  been  fhaken  as  to  the 
important  doHrine  of  Chriflian  perfection,  ei~ 
her  by  its  wild  defenders  or  wife  oppofers,  who 
nuch  availed  themfelves  of  that  wiidnefs.  It 
null  needs  be  that  fuch  offences  will  come.  But 
vo  unto  him  by  whom  the  offence  cometh  ? 

' Monday  10.  I fet  out  for  Norwich,  taking 
Hertford  in  my  way,  where  I began  preaching 
jetween  ten  and  eleven.  Thofe  who  expeCfed 
iifturbance  were  happily  difappointed  ; for  the 
whole  congregation  was  quiet  and  attentive.  I 
loubt  not  but  much  good  may  be  done  even 
rere,  if  our  brethren  live  what  we  preach. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  New-room 
it  Bedford,  where  we  at  laft  fee  fome  fruit  of 
)ur  labour.  Tuefday  lx.  I rode  through  mifer- 
ible  roads  to  Cambridge,  and  thence  to  Laken- 
teath.  The  next  day  I reached  Norwich  and 
ound  much  of  the  prefence  of  God  in  the  con- 
legation,  both  this  evening  and  the  next  day. 
Dn  Friday  evening  I read  to  them  all,  the  rules 
)f  the  fociety,  adding,  “ Thofe  who  are  refolved 
o keep  thefe  rules,  may  continue  with  us,  and 

thofe 


[ 262  ] 

thofe  only.”  I then  related  what  I had  done,  fince 
I came  to  Norwich  firft,  and  what  I would  do  for 
the  time  to  come  ; particularly,  that  I would 
immediately  put  a Hop,  to  preaching  in  the  time 
of  Church  fervice.  I added,  “ For  many  years  I 
have  had  more  trouble  with  this  fociety,  than 
with  half  the  focieties  in  England  put  together.  , 
With  God’s  help,  I will  try  you  one  year  longer. 
And  I hope  you  will  bring  forth  better  fruit.” 

Sunday  16.  Notwithflanding  the  notice  I had 
given  over  and  over,  abundance,  of  people  came 
to  the  tabernacle  at  two  in  the  afternoon,  the 
ufual  time  of  preaching.  And  many  of  thefe 
lambs  roared  like  lions.  But  it  was  no  more 
than  I expe&ed.  Monday  17.  I found  at  Yar- 
mouth, a little,  loving,  earnefl  company.  In 
the  evening  both  the  houfe  and  the  yard  were 
pretty  well  filled  with  attentive  hearers.  Tuefday 
18.  I read  over  that  furprizing  book,  The  lift  of  ^ 
Mr . William  Lilly.  If  he  believed  himfelf,  as  he 
really  feems  to  have  done,  was  ever  man  fo  de-'  , 
luded  ? Perfuaded  that  Hermeli,  the  queen  of  j 
the  Fairies,  Micol  Regina  Pygmceorum  and  ! 
their  fellows,  were  good  angels ! How  araaz. 
ing  is  this!  And  is  it  not  flill  more  amazing,  that 
fome  of  the  greatefl  and  mofl  fenfible  men  in  the 
nation,  fhould  not  only  fcruple  to  employ  him, 
but  be  faff  friends  upon  all  occafions? 

Wednefdav  19.  I returned  to  Norwich,  and 
found  the  ferment  a little  abated.  I was  much  f 
pleafed  with  the  leaders  in  the  evening,  a com-  ' 

pany  lt|: 


C 263  ] 

pany  of  fteddy,  lively,  zealous  perfons  : and  in- 
deed with  moil  of  the  fociety  with  whom  I have 
converfed,  none  of  -whom  feem  to  have  loft 
ground  fince  I was  here  laft. 

Sunday  23.  I met  the  fociety  for  the  firft  time 
immediately  after  the  morning  preaching.  After- 
wards I went  to  church,  with  a confiderable  num- 
ber of  the  people,  feveralof  whom  I fuppofe  had 
not  been  within  thofe  walls  for  many  years.  I was 
glad  to  hear  a plain,  ufeful  fermon,  and  efpeci- 
ally  for  the  fake  of  thofe,  who  if  they  had  been 
offended  at  firft,  would  hardly  have  come  any 
more.  In  the  evening  God  made  bare  his  arm, 
and  his  word  was  {harp  as  a two-edged  fword.  Be- 
fore I had  concluded  my  fermon,  the  mob  made 
a little  difturbance.  But  let  us  only  get  the  lambs 
in  order,  and  I will  quickly  tame  the  bears. 

Monday  24.  I rode  to  Bury.  Here  the  mob 
had  for  fome  time  reigned  lords  paramount.  But 
a firange  gentleman  from  London,  who  was  pre- 
fent  one  evening,  when  they  were  in  high 
fpirits  took  them  in  hand,  and  profecuted  the 
matter  fo  effedlually,  that  they  were  quelled  at 
once. 

Tuefday  2,5.  I rode  to  Colchefter,  and  found 
a ftrange  ferment  in  the  fociety,  occafioned  by 

the  imprudence  of , who  had  kindled  a 

flame  which  he  could  not  quench,  and  fet 
every  man’s  fword  againft  his  brother.  I heard 
them  all  face  to  face,  but  to  no  purpofe.  They 
regarded  neither  fcripture  nor  reafon.  But  on 

Thurfday 


[ 264  1 

evening,  at  the  meeting  of  the  fociety.  God  was 
intreated  for  them.  The  flony  hearts  were 
broken:  anger,  revenge,  evil-furmifing  fled  away. 
The  hearts  of  all  were  again  united  together, 
and  his  banner  over  us  was  love. 

It  may  be  of  ufe  to  infert  part  of  a letter, 
which  I received  about  this  time. 

“ In  reading  your  note  on  Heb.  xii.  9.  a while 
fince,  I was  flruck  with  your  expofnion  of  the  1 
ninth  verfe.  “ Perhaps  thefe  exprefftons,/aMerj 
of  our  fefi  and  fathtr  offpirits  : intimate,  that  . 
our  earthly  fathers  are  only  the  parents  of  our  bo-  j 
dies,  our  fouls  not  being  derived  from  them,  but  , 
rather  created  by  the  immediate  power  of  God, 
and  infufed  into  the  body  from  age  to  age.”  But 
meeting  with  a curious  old  book  which  afferts  a 
contrary  dotlrine,  1 hope,  you  will  pardon  my 
freedom  in  tranfcribing,  and  begging  your 
thoughts  upon  it. 

“ That  fouls  are  not  immediately  infufed  by 
God,  but  mediately  propagated  by  the  parent,  is 
proved,  1.  From  the  divine  ref!,  Gen.  ii.  2.  And 
he  refed  on  the  fevenlh  day  from  all  the  work  which 
he  had  made-.  2.  from  the  blefling  mentioned, 
Gen.  i.  28.  And  God  blejfed  them , and  faid  unto 
them,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply  : for  this  does  not 
relate  to  part,  but  to  the  whole  of  man  : 3.  from 
the  generation  of  Seth,  Gen.  v.  3.  And  Adam — 
begat  a Jon  in  his  own  likenejs,  after  his  image,  for 
his  image  principally  confided  in  hhe  foul : 4. 
from  the  procefiion  of  the  foul  from  the  parent 

mentioned, 


mentioned,  Gen.  xvi.  26.  All  the  fouls — which 
came  out  of  his  loins  5.  from  the  very  confidera- 
tion  of  fin;  for  they  are  infufed.-I.  Either  pure, 
and  then  1.  They  will  either  be  free  from  original 
fin,  the  primary  feat  of  which  is  the  foul  ; and 
fo  God  will  be  cruel  in  condemning  the  foul  for 
what  it  is  not  guilty  of ; or,  2.  We  mull  fuppofe 
the  impure  body  to  pollute  the  foul  which  is  ab- 
furd.  Or  II.  they  are  infufed  impure,  and  in  that 
Cafe,  God  will  be  the  caufe  of  impurity,  which 
is  impoffible.  This  is  further  proved  from  the  doc- 
trine  of  regeneration  ; for  that  which  is  regene- 
rated was  alfo  generated  or  begotten,  but  the 
whole  man  is  regenerated,  therefore  the  whole 
man  is  generated  ; compare  John  iii.  6.  That 
which  is  bomofthefefiis  jlejh , and  that  which 
is  born  of  the  fpirit  is  fpirit  : and  Eph.  iv.  23. 
And  be  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  your  mind. 

“ That  the  human  foul  is  propagated  by  the 
parents  together  with  the  body,  is  further  proved 
1.  by  the  creation  of  Eve  : whofe  foul  is  not  faid 
to  have  been  breathed  into  her  by  God  T 2.  from 

I the  confeffion  of  David,  Pfal.  li.  2.  Behold,  I was 
fiapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  fin  did  my  mother  con' 
ceive  me  ; which  words  cannot  poilibly  relate  to 

I the  body  only  : 3.  from  our  redemption  ; what 
Chrift  did  not  afiume,  he  did  not  redeem;  if 
therefore  he  did  not  afiume  his  foul  together 

I with  his  body  from  the  Virgin  Mary,  our  fouls 
are  not  redeemed  by  Chrift,  which  is  evidently 
-falfe  : 4,  from  fimilar  expreflions  Job  x.  8.  Thy 
hands  have  made  and  fafiioned  me  ; and  Pfal. 

1 Vol.  XXXI.  M 


cxxxix. 


[ 265  ] 


cxxxix.  15.  For  thou  hajl  pofjrjfed.  my  reins. 
Thou  hajl  covered  me  in  my  mother's  womb  ; where 
God  is  faid  to  have  formed  us  with  his  own 
hands,  which  yet  istno  otherwife  done  then  medi- 
ately by  generation  : 5.  from  the  nature  of  the 
begetter  and  the  begotten : they  are  of  one 
fpecies  ; but  the  man  who  begets  confiding  of  a 
foul  and  body,  and  a body  without  a foul,  are  not 
of  one  fpecies. 

“ Again,  fuppofing  the  foul  to  be  infufed  by  the 
deity,  either  firft  it  will  be  free  from  fin,  and  fo 
God  himfelf  will  be  accufed  as  guilty  of  injuftice 
in  condemning  a pure  fpirit,  and  infufing  it  into 
an  impure  body  : or,  2.  he  will  be  accounted  the 
author  of  the  foul's  pollution,  by  uniting  it  a 
pure  fpirit,  to  an  impure  body,  in  order  that  it 
Ihould  be  polluted  : 3.  3 double  abfurdity  will 
follow  upon  this  fuppofition,  viz.  1.  the  orgatii- 
cal  parts  of  man  only  will  be  flaves  to  fin.  2. 
the  immortal  fpirit  would  be  corrupted  bv  the 
mortal  body.  3.  Or  if  the  foul  being  thus  infufed 
be  polluted  by  fin,  it  will  fallow  that  God  is  ex- 
prefly affigned  to  be  the  caufe  of  fin,  which  is  the 
higheft  blafphcmy.” 

Friday,  Oflober  28.  At  the  requeft  of  the  lit- 
tle fociety  there,  I rode  round  bv  Braintree. 
Here  I met  with  one  who  was  well  acquainted 

with  the  honourable  Mr. . It  he 

anfwers  the  character  Mr.  S gives,  he  is 

one  of  the  mod  amiable  men  in  the  world. 
O what  keeps  us  apart?  Why  cannot  we 

openly 


[ 267  ] 

openly  give  each  other  the  right-hand  of  fellow- 
fhip  ? 

Saturday  29.  I returned  to  London.  Sunday 
30.  I now,  for  the  firft  time,  fpolte  to  thefociety 
freely  concerning  Mr.  M.  both  with  regard  to 
his  injuflice  in  the  affair  of  Snow-fields,  and  his 
almolt  unparallelled  ingratitude  to  me.  But  I ne- 
ver expefft  one  that  is  falfe  to  God  to  be  true  to 
an  human  friend. 

Saturday  2. 1 fpent  an  agreeable  hour  with  old, 

venerable  Mr.  . How  linking  is  a man 

of  fenfe,  learning  and  piety,  when  he  has  well- 
nigh  finifhed  his  courfe,  and  yet  retains  all  his 
faculties  unimpaired  ? His  grey  hairs  are  indeed 
a crown  of  honour . 

In  this  neighbourhood  I learned  the  particulars 
of  a remarkable  occurrence.  On  Friday,  Au- 
guft  19,  a gentleman  who  was  at  Lifbon  during 
the  great  earthquake,  walking  with  his  friend 
near  Brighthelmflone  in  Sufiex,  and  looking 
foiuh-weft  toward  the  fea,  cried  out,  “ God  grant 
the  wind  may  rife  ! Otherwise  we  ihall  have  an 
earthquake  quickly.  Juft  fo  the  clouds  whit  led 
to  and  fro,  and  fo  the  iky  looked  that  day  at  Lif- 
bon.5’ Prefently  the  wind  did  rife,  and  brought 
an  impetuous  llorm  of  rain  and  large  hail.  Some 
of  the  hail-ftones  were  larger  than  hen-eggs.  It 
moved  in  a line  about  four  miles  broad,  makino- 
ftrange  bavock,  as  it  palfed  quite  over  the  land, 
till  it  fell  into  the  river,  not  far  from  Sheernefs. 

M 2 And 


[ 268  ] 


And  wherever  it  paffed  it  left  an  hot  fulphurous 
fleam,  fuch  as  almoft  fuffocated  thofe  it 
reached. 

Thurfday  3.  I returned  to  London.  Saturday 
5.  I fpent  fome  time  with  my  old  friend  J.  G. 

Who  but  Count  Z could  have  feparated 

fuch  friends  as  we  were?  Shall  we  never  unite 
again  ? 

Sunday  13.  I found  much  of  the  power  of 
God  in  preaching,  but  far  more  at  the  Lord’s  ta- 
ble. At  the  fame  time  one  who  had  been  wan- 
dering from  God  for  many  years,  and  would  fain 
have  been  with  us,  but  could  not,  found  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  was  not  hindered,  or  confined  to 
one  place.  He  found  out  the  poor  b'ackflider  in 
his  own  houfe,  and  revealed  Chrifl  anew  in  his 
heart. 

* Tuefday  15-  I vifited  Jofeph  Norbury,  a 
good  old  foldier  of  Jefus  Chrifl.  I found  him 
juft  on  the  wing  for  paradife,  having  rattled  in 
the  throat  for  fome  time.  But  his  fpeech  was  re- 
ftored  when  I came  in,  and  he  mightily  praifed 
God  for  all  his  mercies.  This  was  his  lall  tefti- 
mony  for  a good  Mailer.  Soon  after  he  fell 
afleep. 

On  Friday  I finifhed  vifiting  the  claffes,  and 
obferved  that  fince  February  lall,  an  hundred  and 
feventv.five  perfons  have  been  feparated  from 
us.  An  hundred  and  fix  left  us  on  Mr.  M.’s  ac- 
count : few  of  them  will  reiurn  till  they  are 
deeply  humbled. 


* Here 


[ 269  ] 

# Here  I flood,  and  looked  back  on  the  late 
occurrences.  Before  Thomas  Wallh  left  Eng- 
land, God  began  that  great  work,  which  has  con- 
tinued ever  fince,  without  any  confiderable  in- 
termiffion.  During  the  whole  time,  many  have 
been  convinced  of  fin,  many  juflified,  and  many 
backfliders  healed.  But  the  peculiar  work  of 
this  feafon  has  been,  what  St.  Paul’s  calls  The 
perfecting  of  the  faints.  Many  perfons  in  Lon- 
don, in  Briflol,  in  York,  andin  various  parts  both 
of  England  and  Ireland,  have  experienced  fo 
deep  and  univerfal  a change,  as  it  had  not  be- 
fore entered  into  their  hearts  to  conceive.-  After 
a deep  conviction  of  inbred  fin,  of  their  total 
fall  from  God,  they  have  been  fo  filled  with  faith 
and  love,  (and  generally  in  a moment)  that  fin 
vanifhed,  and  they  found  from  that  time,  no 
pride,  anger,  defire,  or  unbelief.  They. could  re- 
joice evermore,  pray  without  ceafing,  and  in 
every  thing  give  thanks.  Now  whether  we  call 
this  the  dejlruClion  or  fufptnfi on  of  fin,  it  is  a glo- 
rious work  of  God:  fuch  a work,  as  confidering 
both  the  depth  and  extent  of  it,  we  never  faw 
in  thefe  kingdoms  before. 

* ’T is  poffible,  fome  who  fpoke  in  this  manner 
were  miflaken  : and  it  is  certain,  fome  have  loft 
what  they  then  received.  A few  (very  few  com- 
pared to  the  whole  number)  firft  gave  way  to 
enthufiafm,  then  to  pride,  next  to  prejudice  and 
offence,  and  atlaft  feparated  from  their  brethren. 

M 3 But 


[ s7°  ] 

But  although  this  laid  a huge  ftumbling-block  in 
the  wav,  fiill  the  work  of  God  went  on.  Nor  has  it 
ceafed  to  this  day  in  any  of  its  branches.  God  {till 
convinces,  juftifies,  fanCtifies.  We  have  loft  only 
the  drofs,  the  enthufiaftn,  the  prejudice  and  of- 
fence. The  pure  gold  remains,  faith  working  by 
love,  and  we  have  ground  to  believe,  increases 
daily. 

Monday  21.  I buried  the  remains  of  Jofeph 
Norbury,  a faithful  witnefs  of  Jefus  Chrift.  For 
about  three  years  he  has  humbly  and  boldly  tefti- 
fied,  that  Gcd  had  faved  him  from  all  fin.  And 
his  whole  fpirit  and  behaviour  in  life  and  death 
made  his  teftimony  beyond  exception.  Decem- 
ber 1.  All  the  leifure  hours  I had  in  this  and  the 
following  months,  during  the  time  I was  in  Lon- 
don, I fpent  in  reading  over  our  works  with 
the  preachers,  confidering  what  objections  had 
been  made,  and  correcting  whatever  we  judged 
wrong,  either  in  the  matter  or  expreftion, 

Monday,  December  5.  I rode  to  Shoreham, 
and  preached  in  the  evening  to  a more  than  ufu- 
ally  ferious  company.  The  next  evening  they 
were  confiderably  increafed.  The  fmall-pox,  juft 
broke  out  in  the  town,  has  made  many  of  them 
thoughtful.  O let  not  the  impreffion  pafs  away 
as  the  morning-dew ! 

Wednefday  7. 1 rode  to  Staplehurft,  where  Mr. 

Ch , who  loves  all  that  love  Chrift,  received 

us  gladly.  At  fix  the  congregation  gathered  from 

many 


[ 27*  ] 

many  miles  round,  feemed  juft  npe  for  the  goi- 
pel  : fo  that  (contrary  to  my  cuflom  in  a new 
place)  I fpoke  merely  of  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jefus  Chrifl.  Thurfday  8.  In  returning  to  Lon- 
don I was  throughly  wet : but  it  did  me  no  hurt 
at  all. 

Friday  16.  I fpent  an  agreeable  hour,  and  not 
unprofitable,  in  converfation  with  my  old  friend 
John  Gambold.  O how  gladly  could  I join  heart 
and  hand  again  ? But  ! alas!  Thy  heart  is  not  as 
my  heart  / 

Saturday  17.  I dined  at  Dr.  G — ’s,  as 

friendly  and  courteous  as  Dr,  Doddridge 
himfelf.  How  amiable  is  courtefy  joined  with 
fincerity  ! Why  fhould  they  ever  be  divided? 

Wednefday  21.  I took  my  leave  of  the  Bull 
and  Mouth,  a barren,  uncomfortable  place, 
where  much  pains  has  been  taken  for  fever-al 
years;  I fear  to  little  purpofe.  Thurfday  22.  1 

fpent  a little  time  in  a vifit  to  Mr.  M , 

twenty  years  ago  a zealous  and  ufeful  magiftrate, 
now  a pifture  of  human  nature  in  difgrace: 
feeble  in  body  and  mind  ; flow  of  fpeech  and  of 
underftanding.  Lord,  let  me  not  live  to  be  ufe- 
lefs ! 

Monday  26. 1 began  preaching  at  a large  com- 
modious place  in  Bartholomew-Clofe.  I preached 
there  again  on  Wednefday,  and  at  both  times 
with  peculiar  liberty  of  fpirit.  At  every  place 
M 4 this 


[ 27a  ] 

this  week  I endeavoured  to  prepare  our  bre- 
thren, for  renewing  their  covenant  with  God. 

Sunday,  January  1,  1764.  We  met  in  the 
evening  for  that  folemn  purpofe.  I believe  the 
numbei  of  thofe  that  met  was  confiderably 
larger  than  it  was  lalf  year.  And  fo  was  the 
■hie fling  : truly  the  conjolalions  oj  God  were  not 
fmall  with  us.  Many  were  filled  with  peace  and 
joy  ; many  with  holy  fear,  and  feveral  backfliders 
were  healed. 

On  fome  of  the  following  days,  I vifited  the 
little  focieties  near  London.  Thurfday  12.  I 
preached  at  Mitcham  : and  in  the  afternoon 
rode  to  Darking.  But  the  gentleman  to  w'liofe 
lioufe  I was  invited,  feemed  to  have  no  defire  I 
fhould  preach.  So  that  evening  1 had  nothing  to 
do.  Friday  13.  I went  at  noon  into  the  ftreet, 
and  in  a broad  place,  not  far  from  the  market- 
place, proclaimed  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Ckrift.  At  firft  two  or  three  little  children  were 
the  whole  of  my  congregation.  But  it  quickly 
increafed,  though  the  air  was  fharp,  and  the 
ground  exceeding  wet.  And  all  behaved  well 
but  three  or  four  grumbling  men,  who  flood  fo 
far  off,  that  they  diffurhed  none  but  themfelves. 

I had  purpofed  to  preach  there  again  in  the 
morning  : but  a violent  florm  made  it  imprafili- 
cable.  So  after  preaching  at  Mitcham  in  the  way 
I rode  back  to  London. 

Mond.  16.  I rode  to  High- Wycombe,  and 

preached 


[. ' 273  3 

preached  toa  more  numerous  and  ferious  congre- 
gation than  ever  I faw  there  before.  Shall  there 
be  yet  another  day  of  vifitation  to  this  carelqfs 
p eople  ? 

A large  number  was  prefent  at  five  in  the 
morning.  But  my  face  and  gums  were  fo  fwell- 
ed  I could  hardly  fpeak.  After  I took  horfe,  they 
grew  worfe  and  worfe,  till  it  began  to  rain.  I was 
then  perfuaded  to  put  on  an  oil-cafe  hood,  which 
(the  wind  being  very  high)  kept  rubbing  contin- 
ually on  my  cheek,  till  both  pain  and  fwelling 
were  gone. 

Between  twelve  and  one  we  eroded  Enlham- 
Ferry.  The  water  was  like  a fea  on  both  fides.  I 
afked  the  ferry-man  “ can  we  ride  the  canfe- 
way  ?”  He  faid,  “ Yes,  Sir,  if  you  keep  in  the 
middle.”  But  this  was  the  difficulty,  as.the  whole, 
caufeway  was  covered  with  water  to  a conficJer- 
able  depth.  And  this  in  many  parts  ran  over  the 
caufeway  with  the  ■ fwiftnefs  and  violen 
ftuice.  Once  my  mare  loft  both  her  fore 
fhe  gave  a fpring,  and  recovered  the  cant: 
Otherwife  we  mull  have  taken  a fwirn^.  01 
water  on  either  fide  was  ten  or  twelve  feet  cl- 
However,  after  one  or  two  plunges  more  wr  ;ru. 
thro’  and  came  fafe  to  Wilnev 

The  congregation  in  the  evening,  as- well  w 
the  next  day,  was  both  large  <md  deeply  a‘:e;: 
tive.  This  is  fuch  a people  as  I nave  ..at  ...  n : f 
remarkably  diligent  in  bufinels ; and  at  the.  an. 

M £ time 


[ 274  3 

time  of  fo  quiet  a fpirit,  and  fo  calm  and  civil  in 
their  behaviour. 

Thtirfday  19.  I rode  thro’  Oxford  to  Henley. 
The  people  here  bear  no  reafemblance  to  thofe 
of  Witney.  I found  a wild  flaring  congregation, 
many  of  them  void  both  of  common  fenfe  and 
common  decency.  I fpoke  exceeding  plain  to 
them  all,  and  reproved  fome  of  them  fharply. 
friday  20.  I took  (probably  my  final)  leave  of 
Henley,  and  returned  to  London. 

Mon.  23.  I rode  to  Sundon,  and  preached  in  the 
evening  to  a very  quiet  and  very  flupid  people. 
How  plain  is  it,  that  even  to  inlighten  the  under- 
flanding  is  beyond  the  power  of  man  ? After  all 
our  preaching  here  even  thofe  who  have  con- 
flantly  attended,  no  more  underhand  us,  than  if 
we  had  preached  in  Greek. 

Thtirfday  26.  Returning  from  Bedford,  I tried 
another  way  to  reach  them.  I preached  on 
Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not 
quenched,  and  fet  before  them  the  terrors  of  the 
Lord,  in  the  flrongefl  manner  I was  able.  It 
feemed  to  be  the  very  thing  they  wanted.  They 
not  only  liflened  with  the  deepefl  attention,  but 
appeared  to  be  more  affefted,  than  I had  ever 
feen  them,  by  any  difeourfe  whatever. 

Wednefday,  February  1.  I buried  the  remains 
of  William  Hurd,  a fon  of  afflidlion  for  many 
years,  continually  flruggling  with  inward  and 
outward  trials.  But  his  end  was  peace. 

Thurfday,  February  2.  I preached  again  in  the 

Found ery* 


[ 27o  ] 

Foundery,  which  had  been  repairing  for  feveral 
weeks.  It  it  not  only  firm  and  fafe  (whereas  be- 
fore the  main  timbers  were  quite  decayed)  but 
clean  and  decent,  and  capable  of  receiving,  fever-, 
al  hundreds  more. 

Sunday  5.  I began  Mr.  Hartley’s  ingenious 
“ Defence  of  the  myflic  writers.”  But  it  does 
not  fatisfy  me.  I mull  flill  objefl,  1.  To  their 
fentiments.  The  chief  of  them  do  not  appear  to 
me,  to  have  any  conception  of  church-communi- 
on. Again,  they  flight  not  only  works  of  piety, 
the  ordinances  of  God,  but  even  works  of  mercy. 
And  yetmoft  of  them,  yea,  all  that  I have  feen, 
hold  jollification  by  works.  In  general,  they  are 
wife  above  what  is  written,  indulging  themfelves 
in  many  unfcriptural  fpeculations.  I objedl  2.  To 
their  fpirit,  that  moll  of  them  are  of  a dark,  fhy, 
referved,  unfociable  temper.  And  that  they  are 
apt  to  defpife  all  who  differ  from  them,  as  carnal 
unenlightened  men.  I objeft  3.  To  their  whole 
Phrafeology.  It  is  both  unfcriptural,  and  affeft- 
edly  myflerious.  I fay,  affeQedly.  For  this  does 
not  neceffarilyrefult  from  the  nature  of  the  things 
fpoken  of.  St.  John  fpeaks  as  high  and  as  deep 
things  as  Jacob  Behrne.  Why  then  does  not 
Jacob  fpeak  as  plain  as  him  ? 

Monday  6.  I opened  the  New  chappel  at 
Wapping,  well-filled  with  deeply-attentive  hear- 
ers. Thurfday  16.  I once  more  took  a ferious 
walk  thro’.the  tombs  inWeftminfter-Abby.  What 
heaps  of  unmeaning  Hone  and  marble  ? But 
M 6 there 


[ ] 

there  was  one  tomb  which  fhewed  common 
fenfe  ; that  beautiful  figure  of  Mr.  Nightingale, 
endeavouring  to  fereen  his  lovely  wife  from 
Death.  Here  indeed  the  marble  feems  to  fpeak, 
and  theftatues  appear  only  not  alive. 

After  taking  Bientford,  Deptford,  Welling, 
and  Sevenoaks,  in  my  way,  on  Thurfdav  23.  I 
rode  to  Sir  Thomas  I’Anfon’s,  (at  New-bounds, 
two  miles  beyond  Tunbridge)  juft  quivering  on 
the  verge  of  life,  helplefs  as  a child,  but  (as  it 
feems)  greatly  profited  by  this  fevere  jdifpenfa- 
tion.  The  hall,  ftair-cafe  and  adjoining  rooms, 
juft  contained  the  people  in  the  evening.  One 
poor  backflider,  whom  providence  had  brought 
thither,  was  exceedingly  wounded.  I left  her  re- 
folved  to  fet  out  once  more,  if  haply  God  might 
heal  her. 

Friday  24.  I returned  to  London.  Wednefday 
2 g.  I heard  Judith,  an  oratorio  performed  at  the 
Lock.  Some  parts  of  it  were  exeeding  fine.  But 
there  are  two  things  in  all  modern  pieces  of 
mufic,  which  I could  never  reconcile  to  common 
fenfe.  One,  is  Tinging  the  fame  words  ten  times 
over  ; the  other.  Tinging  different  wordsby  dif- 
ferent perfons,  at  one  and  the  fame  time.  And 
this,  in  the  moft  Tolemn  addreffes  to  God, 
whether  by  way  of  prayer  or  of  thankfgiving. 
This  can  never. be  defended,  by  all  the  muficians 
in  Europe,  till  reafon  is  quite  out  of  date. 

Monday,  March  12.  I fet  out  for  Briftol.  Fri- 
day 16.  I met  feveral  ferious  Clergymen.  I have 

long 


[ *77  ] 


long  defired  that  there  might  be  an  open,  avow- 
ed  union,  between  all  who  preach  thofe  funda- 
mental truths',  original  fin,  and  juftification  by 
faith,  producing  inward  and  outward  holinefs. 
But  all  my  endeavours  have  been  hitherto  in- 
effectual. God’s  time  is  not  fully  come. 

Mond.  19.  I fet  out  for  the  north.  We  reach- 
ed Stroud  about  two  in  the  afternoon.  How 
many  years  were  webeating  the  air  in  this  place! 
One  wrong-headed  man  pulling  down  all  we 
could  build  up.  But  fince  he  is  gone,  the  word 
of  God  takes  root,  and  the  fociety  increafes  both 
in  number  and  drength.  Tuefday  20.  At  feven 
I preached  in  Painfwick.  For  many  years  an  ho- 
ned, difputing  man,  greatly  hindered  the  work  of 
God  here  alfo,  fubverting  the  fouls  that  were  juft 
fetting  out  for  heaven.  But  fince  God  took  him 
to  himfelf,  his  word  has  free  courfe,  and  many 
finners  are  converted  to  him.  We  rode  hence 
over  the  top  of  the  bleak  mountains  to  Stanley, 
where  an  earned  congregation  was  waiting;  From 
Stanley  to  Evefham  we  were  to  go  as  we  could* 
the  lanes  being  fcarce  paffable.  However  at  length 
we  got  thro’,  I never  before  faw  fo  quiet  a con- 
gregation in  the  Town-hall,  nor  yet  fo  numer- 
ous. I defigned,  afterwards  to  meet  the  fociety 
at  our  room.  But  the  people  were  fo  eager  to 
hear,  that  I knew  not  how  to  keep  them  out.  So 
we  had  a large  congregation  again.  And  again 
God  gave  us  his  blefling, 

Wednefday  21.  After  riding  about  two  hours 

and 


[ «78  ] 

and  an  half  from  Evefliam,  we  flopped  at  a little 
village.  We  eafily  perceived,  by  the  marks  he 
had  left,  that  the  man  of  the  houfe  had  been 
beating  his  wife.  I took  occafion  from  thence,  to 
fpeakftrongly  to  her,  concerning  the  hand  of  God, 
and  his  defign  in  all  affli&ions.  It  feemed  to  be 
a word  in  fealon.  She  appeared  to  be  not  only 
thankful,  but  deeply  affefled. 

We  had  an  exceeding  large  congregation  at 
Birmingham,  in  what  was  formerly  the  play  - 
houfe.  Happy  would  it  be,  if  all  the  play-houfes 
in  the  kingdom,  were  converted  to  fo  good  an  ufe. 
After  fervice  the  mob  gathered,  and  threw  force 
dirt  and  flones,  at  thofe  who  were  going  out. 
But  it  is  probable  they  will  foon  be  calmed,  as 
fome  of  them  are  in  goal  already.  A few  endea- 
voured to  make  a diflurbance  the  next  evening 
during  the  preaching.  But  it  was  loft  labour: 
the  congregation  would  not  be  diverted,  from 
taking  earneft  heed  to  the  things  that  were [poken. 

Friday  23.  I rode  to  Dudley,  formerly  a den 
of  lions,  but  now  as  quiet  as  Briftol.  They  had 
juft  finiflied  their  preaching- houfe  which  was 
thoroughly  filled  ; I faw  no  trifler  ; but  many 
in  tears.  Here  I met  with  a remarkable  account 
of  a child,  the  fubftance  of  which  was  as 
follows. 

‘ John  B — , about  ten  years  old,  was  fome 
time  fince  taken  ill.  He  often  alked,  how  it  was 
to  die  ? His  lifter  told  him,  “ Some  children 
know  God.  And  then  they  are  not  afraid  to  die. 

He 


C 279  J 

He  faid,  what,  children  as  little  as  me  ? She  a«- 
fwered,  your  lifter  Patty  did  ; and  Ihe  was  lefs 
than  you  : At  which  he  feemed  to  be  much  affeft- 
ed.  Sunday  was  fortnight  he  took  his  bed,  but 
was  not  able  to  deep.  Soon  after  he  faid,  we 
(hall  foon  be  with  angels  and  archangels  in  heaven. 
What  dignifies  this  wicked  world?  Who  would 
want  to  live  here,  that  might  live  with  Chrift  ? 
The  maid  faid,  “ I wilh  I was  married  to  Chrift.” 
He  faid,  “ Being  married  to  Chrift  is  coming  to 
Chirft,  and  keeping  with  him  : All  may  come 
to  him  ; I'm  happy,  I’m  happy.”  His  filter  alked 
“ Do  you  love  God  ?”  He  anfwered,  “ Yes,  that 
I do.”  She  alked,  “ And  do  you  think  God  loves 
you  ?”  He  replied,  “ Yes  I know  he  does.” 

The  next  evening  fhe  faid,  “ How  are  you 
Jacky,  when  you  are  fo  happy  ?”  He  faid,  ftrok- 
ing  his  breaft  down  with  his  hand,  “Why  like 
as  if  God  was  in  me.  Omy  filter  what  an  happy 
thing  it  was  that  I came  to  Dudley  ? I am  quite 
happy,  when  I am  faying  my  prayers.  And  when 
I think  on  God,  I can  almoftfee  into  heaven.” 

“ Tuefday  night  laft  fhe  alked,  “Are  you 
afraid  to  die  ?”  He  faid  I have  feen  the  time  that 
I was.  But  now  I am  not  a bit  afraid  of  death,  or 
hell,  or  judgment  : For  Chrift  is  mine.  I know 
Chrift  is  my  own.  He  fays,  what  would  you 
have  ? I would  get  to  heaven,  I will  get  to  hea- 
ven as  foon  as  I;can.  And  as  well  as  I love  you  all 
when  I am  once  got  to  heaven,  I would  not  come 
to  you  again  for  ten  thoufand  worlds,”  Soon  after 

lie 


[ s8o  ] 

Tie  faid,  “ If  God  would  let  me  do  as  the  angels 

O 

do  I would  come  and  watch  over  you.  I will  if 
God  will  let  me  : And  when  you  are  ready,  I 
will  come  and  fetch  you  to  heaven,  yea  if  God 
would  let  me,  I would  fly  all  over  the  world,  to 
fetch  fouls  to  heaven.” 

“ He  afked  his  coufin,  “ If  fhe  had  feen  the 
king?”  And  added,  “ I have  : indeed  I have  not 
feen  king  George,  but  I have  feen  abetter  king. 
For  I have  feen  the  king  of  heaven  and  earth.” 
His  health  fince  that  time  has  been  in  fome  mea- 
fure  recovered.  But  he  continues  in  the  fame 
fpirit.” 

Saturday  24.  We  came  once  more,  to  our  old 
flock  at  Wednefbury.  The  congregation  differed 
from  moft  that  we  have  lately  feen.  It  almoft  en- 
tirely confided  of  fuch  as  had  repented  if  not  alfo 
believed  the  gof pel.  Sunday  25.  at  eight  I preach- 
ed in  the  room  tho’  it  would  by  no  mear^s  con- 
tain the  congregation.  But  the  north-eaft  wind 
was  fo  extremely  fharp,  that  it  was  not  prafdicable 
to  preach  abroad.  At  one  it  drove  us  likewife 
into  the  houfe  at  Darlaflon,  that  is  as  many  at  it 
could  contain.  At  five  there  was  fuch  a congre- 
gation at  Wednefbury,  as  I have  not  feen  fince  I 
left  London.  But  I found  my  voice  would  have 
commanded  twice  the  number,  while  1 declared, 
The  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth  and  in 
thy  heart  ; that  is  the  word  of  faith  which  we 
preach. 

Monday  26,1  was  defired  to  preachat  WalfaU 

James 


[ *«•  ] 


James  Jones  was  alarmed  at  the  motion,  appre- 
hending there  would  be  much  difturbance.  How- 
ever I determined  to  make  the  trial.  Coming 
into  the  houfe,  I met  with  a token  for  good.  A 
woman  was  telling  her  neighbour,  why  file  came, 
“ I had  a defire,  faid  file  to  hear  this  man  : yet  I 
durfl:  not  becaufe  I heard  fo  much  ill  of  him. 
But  this  morning  I dreamed,  I was  praying 
earneflly,  and  I heard  a voice,  faying,  “ Seethe 
the  8th  verfe  of  the  firft  chapter  of  St.  John.”  I 
waked  and  get  my  bible  and  read,  He  was  not  that 
light  but  was  fentto  bear  witnefs  of  that  light.  I got 
up  and  came  away  with  all  my  heart.” 

The  houfe  not  being  capable  of  containing  the 
people,  about  feven  I began  preaching  abroad. 
Arid  there  was  no  oppofer,  no  nor  a trifler  to  be 
feen.  All  prefent  were  earneftly  attentive.  How 
; i is  Walfal  changed  ! How  has  God  either  tamed 
the  wild  beafts,  or  chained  them  up  ! 

In  the  afternoon  I came  to  Afhby'de  la  Zouch. 
The  houfe  and  yard  contained  the  people  toler- 
ably well.  I faw  but  one  trifler  among  all,  which 
1 underftood,  was  an  attorney.  Poor  man  1 If 
men  live  what  I preach , the  hope  of  his  gain  is 
loft. 


Wednefd.  27.  We  rode  to  Donnington,  where 
1 great  multitude  earneflly  attended,  while  I ex- 
amined and  inforced,  God  forbid  that  I fhould 
ftory,  favein  the  crofsof  our  Lord  JefusChrift. 

Hence  we  rode  to  Derby.  Mr.  Dobinfon  be- 
ieved  it  would  be  befl  for  me  to  preach  in  the 

market* 


[ 2?2  ] 


market-place  as  there  feemed  to  be  a general  in- 
clination in  the  town,  even  among  people  of  fa- 
fhion,  to  hear  me.  He  had  mentioned  it  to  the 
mayor,  who  faid  “ He  did  not  apprehend,  there 
would  be  the  lead  dilturbance.  But  if  there 
fhould  be  any  thing  of  the  kind,  he  would  take 
care  tofupprefs  it.”  A multitude  of  people  were 
gathered  at  five,  and  were  pretty  quiet  till  I had 
named  my  text.  Thence  bea/ls  of  the  people  lifted 
up  their  voice,  hollowing  and  fhouting  on  every 
fide.  Finding  it  impoflible  to  be  heard,  I walked 
foftly  away.  An  innumerable  retinue  followed 
me.  But  only  a few  pebble-flones  were  thrown, 
and  noonehurtat  all.  Mofl  of  the  rabble  followed 

quite  to  Mr.  D ’s  houfe  : but  it  feems, 

without  any  malice  prepenfe.  Tor  they  flood 
flock  ft  ill  about  an  hour,  and  then  quietly  went 
away. 

At  feven  I met  the  fociety,  with  many  others, 
who  earneflly  defired  to  be  prefent.  In  the 
morning  moll  of  them  came  again,  with  as  many 
more  as  we  could  well  make  room  for.  And  in- 
deed they  received  the  word  gladly.  God  grant 
they  may  bring  forth  fruit! 

Thurfday  28.  Between  eleven  and  twelve  I 
preached  at  Alferton,  twelve  miles  from  Derby, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Sheffield,  to  many  more 
than  could  hear,  on,  Nozois  the  day  of falvation. 
In  the  morning  I gave  a hearing  to  feveral  of 
the  fociety,  who  were  extremely  angry  at  each 

other. 


[ 2&3  ] 

other.  It  furprized  me  to  find  what  trifles  they 
had'  ftumbled  at.  But  I hope  their  fnare  is 
broken. 

In  the  evening  while  I was  inlarging  upon  the 
'■l  iighteoufnefs  of  faith , the  word  of  God  was 
quick  and  powerful.  Many  felt  it  in  their  in- 
moft  fouls  : one  backflider  in  particular,  who 
■ was  then  reftored  to  all  flie  had  loft,  and  the 
next  morning  believed  fhe  was  faved  from 
fin. 

# Friday  30.  I metthofe  who  believe  God  has 

! redeemed  them  from  all  their  fins.  They  are  about 
fixty  in  number.  I could  not  learn,  that  any 
among  them  walk  unworthy  of  their  profeffion; 
Many  watch  over  them  for  evil  : but  they  over- 
come evil  with  good.  I found  nothing  of  felf- 
conceit,  ftubbornnefs,  impatience  of  contradic- 
tion, or  London  enthufiafm  among  them.  They 
have  better  learned  of  him  that  was  meek  and 
lowly  of  heart,  to  adorn  the  doflrine  of  God  their 
Saviour. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  new  houfe 
at  Rotherham,  on  the  fure  foundation,  Ye  are 
faved  through  faith.  It  was  a feafon  of  ftrong 
confolation  to  many.  One  who  had  been  fome 
time  groaning  for  full  redemption,  now  found 
power  to  believe,  that  God  had  fulfilled  her  de- 
fire, and  fet  her  heart  at  liberty. 

I*  Saturday  31.  An  odd  circumftance  occurred 
during  the  morning  preaching.  It  was  well,  only 
hi  - ferious 


[ *84  ] 

ferious  people  were  prefent.  An  afs  walked 
gravely  in  at  the  gate,  came  up  to  the  door  of  the 
houfe,  lifted  up  his  head,  and  flood  flock  ftill,  in 
a pofture  of  deep  attention.  Might  not  the  dumb  * i 
beafl  reprove  many  who  have  far  lefs  decencv, 
and  not  much  more  underflanding  ? 

At  noon  I preached  (the  room  being  too  fmall  ! j 
to  contain  the  people)  in  a yard  near  the  bridge 
in  Doncafter.  The  wind  was  high  and  exceed- 
ing fharp,  and  blew  all  the  time  on  the  fide  of  my 
head.  In  the  afternoon  I was  feized  with  a fore 
throat,  almoft  as  foon  as  I came  to  Epworth. 
However  I preached,  though  with  fome  diffi- 
culty; but  afterward  I could  hardly  fpeak.  Be- 
ing better  the  next  day,  Sunday,  April  1,  I 
preached  about  one  at  Weflwood-fide  ; and  foon 
after  four  in  the  market-place  at  Epworth,  to  a 
numerous  congregation.  At  firft  indeed  but  few 
could  hear.  But  the  more  I fpoke,  the  more  my 
voice  was  ftrengthened,  till  toward  the  clofe  all 
my  pain  and  weaknefs  were  gone,  and  all  could 
hear  difiin£Hy. 

Monday  2. 1 had  a day  of  reft.  Tuefday  3.  I 
preached  about  nine  at  Scotter,  a town  fix  or 
feven  miles  eaft  of  Epworth,  where  a fudden 
flame  is  broke  out,  many  being  convinced  of  fin 
almoft  at  once5  and  many  juftified.  But  there 
are  many  adverfaries  ftirring  up,  by  a bad  man, 
who  tells  them,  “ There  is  no  law  for  Metho- 
difts.”  Hence  continual  riots  followed  : till  after 
a while,  an  upright  magi  (Irate  took  the  caufe  in 

hand* 


hand,  and  fo  managed  both  the  rioters  and  him 
who  fet  them  at  work,  that  they  have  been  quiet 
as  lambs  ever  fince. 

Hence  we  rode  to  Grimfby,  once  the  moll 
dead,  now  the  moll  lively  place  in  all  the  county. 
Here  has  been  a large  and  fwift  increafe  both  of 
the  fociety  and  hearers,  fo  that  the  houfe,  though 
galleries  are 'added,  is  hill  too  fmall.  In  the 
morning,  Wednefday  4.  I explained  at  large 
the  nature  of  Chriftian  Perfeftion.  Many 
who  had  doubted  of  it  before,  were  fully  fatis- 
fied.  It  remains  only,  to  experience  what  we 
believe. 

* In  the  evening  the  mayor  and  all  the  gentry 
of  the  town  were  prefent.  And  fo  was  our  Lord 
in  an  uncommon  manner.  Some  dropt  down  as 
dead,  but  after  a while  rejoiced  with  joy  unfpeak- 
able.  One  was  carried  away  in  violent  fits.  I 
went  to  her  after  the  fervice.  She  was  firongly 
convulfed  from  head  to  foot,  and  fhrieked  out 
in  a dreadful  manner.  The  unclean  fpirit  did 
tear  her  indeed  : but  his  reign  was  not  long.  In 
the  morning  both  her  foul  and  body  were  healed, 
and  file  acknowledged  both  the  juftice  and  mercy 
of  God. 

Thurfday  5*  About  eleven  I preached  at  El- 
fham.  The  two  perfons,  who  are  the  mod  zea- 
lous and  afitive  here,  are  the  fieward  and  gar- 
dener  of  a gentleman,  whom  the  minifter  per- 
fumed to  turn  them  off  unlefs  they  would  leave 


[ 286  ] 

this  way.  He  gave  them  a week  to  confider  of 
it : at  the  end  of  which  they  calmly  anfwered, 

“ Sir,  we  chufe  rather  to  want  bread  here,  than 
to  want  a drop  of  water  hereafter.”  He  replied,  j 
“ Then  follow  your  own  confcience,  fo  you  do 
my  bufinefs  as  well  as  formerly.” 

Friday  6.  I preached  at  Ferry  at  nine  in  the 
morning,  and  in  the  evening:  a©d  about  noon  | 
in  Sir  N.  H.’s  hall  at  Gainfborough.  Almofl  as  j 
foon  as  I began  to  fpeak,  a cock  began  to  crow 
over  my  head.  But  he  was  quickly  diflodged  : 
and  the  whole  congregation,  rich  and  poor,  were 
quiet  and  attentive. 

Sunday  8.  I fet  out  for  Mifterton,  though  the 
common  road  was  impaffable,  being  all  under 
water.  But  we  found  a way  to  ride  round.  I 
preached  at  eight,  and  I faw  not  one  inattentive  i 
hearer.  In  our  return,  my  mare  ruffling  violently 
through  agate,  flruck  my  heel  againlf  the  gate- 
pofi,  and  left  me  behind  her  in  an  inftant,  laid 
on  my  back  at  full  length.  She  flood  dill,  till  I 
rofe  and  mounted  again;  and  neither,  of  us  was  I 
hurt  at  all. 

Monday  9.  I had  defigned  to  go  by  Authorp-  J 
ferry,  and  Winterton,  to  Hull.  But  we  had  not 
gone  far,  before  the  wind  rofe  fo,  that  we  judged 
it  would  be  impofTible  to  pafs  the  Trent  at  Au- 
thorp. So  we  turned  back  and  went  by  Oufton 
and  Brigg.  The  rain  beat  vehemently  upon  us  all 
the  way.  When  we  came  to  Brigg,  defpairing  of: 
being  able  to  crcfs  the  Humber,  we  thought  it 

heft 


[ 287  ] 

belt  to  turn  afide  to  Barrow.  When  I was  here 
laft,  the  mob  was  exceeding  rude  and  noify.  But 
all  the  people  were  now  quiet  and  attentive. 
I was  much  pleafed  with  their  fpirit  and  their 
behaviour,  and  could  not  be  forry  for  the 
ftorm. 

Tuefday  10.  The  wind  abating,  we  took  boat 
at  Barton,  with  two  fuch  brutes  as  I have  feldom 
feen.  Their  blafphemy,  and  flupid  grofs  obfce- 
nity,  were  beyond  all  I ever  heard.  Wefirft 
fpoke  to  them  mildly  ; but  it  had  no  efl’e£l.  At 
length  we  were  con  drained  to  rebuke  them 
fharply:  and  they  kept  themfelves  tolerably 
within  bounds,  till  we  landed  at  Hull.  I 
preached  at  five,  two  hours  fooner  than  was  ex- 
pended. By  this  means  we  had  tolerable  room, 
for  the  greatefl;  part  of  them  that  came.  And  I 
believe  not  many  of  them  came  in  vain. 

Wednefday  11.  Between  eight  and  nine  I 
began  preaching  at  Beverley,  in  a room  which  is 
newly  taken.  It  was  filled  from  end  to  end,  and 
that  with  ferious  hearers.  Perhaps  even  thefe 
may  know  the  day  of  their  vifitation. 

About  one  I began  at  Pocklington.  Here 
likewife  all  were  quiet,  and  liflened  with  deep 
attention.  When  I came  to  York,  at  five  in 
the  afternoon,  I was  frefher  than  at  feven  in 
the  morning.  During  the  preaching,  many 
were  not  a little  comforted;  and  one  old  fol- 
lower of  Cirri  ft,  more  than  fevenly  years  of  age, 

was 


[ 288  ] 

was  now  firft  enabled,  to  call  him  Lord,  by  the 
Holy  Ghoft. 

I found,  that  a mod  remarkable  deadnefs  had 
overfpread  this  people,  infomuch  that  not  one 
had  received  remiffion  of  fins,  for  feveral 
months  laft  paft.  Then  it  is  high  time  for  us,  to 
prophefy  on  thefe  dry  bones,  that  they  may  live. 
At  this  I more  immediately  pointed,  in  all  my 
following  difcourfes.  And  I have  reafon  to  be- 
lieve, God  fpoke  in  his  word  : to  him  be  all  the 
glory ! 

Thurfday  12.  I fpent  an  hour  with  John  Man- 
ners, weak  in  body,  but  not  in  fpirit.  He  is  1 
fairly  worn  out  in  a good  fervice,  and  calmly 
waits  till  his  change  flrall  come. 

Sunday  15.  In  the  evening  many  even  of  the 
rich  were  prefent,  and  ferioufly  attentive.  But 
O!  How  hardly  fhall  thefe  enter  into  the  king- 
dom ! How  hardly  efcape  from  the  defire  of  other 
things  ? 

Monday  16.  1 preached  at  Tollerton  at  one. 
The  congregation  was  large  and  ferious.  Some 
were  deeply  afiedled,  and  wept  much.  Many  re- 
ceived comfort. 

At  fix  Ibegan  preaching  in  the  ftreet  atThirfk. 
The  congregation  was  exceeding  large.  Juft  as  I 
named  my  text,  What  is  a man  profited,  .if  he 
fall  gain  the  whole  zcorld  and  lofe  his  own  foul ; 
a man  on  horfeback,  who  had  flopped  to  fee 
what  was  the  matter,  changed  colour  and  trem- 
bled. Probably  he  might  have  refolved  to  fave 

his 


C 289  ] 

his  foul,  had  not  his  drunken  companion  dragged 
him  away. 

* Tuefday  17.  In  confequence  of  repeated  in- 
vitations, I rode  to  H y : when  I came  Mr. 

C was  not  at  home;  but  his  houfekeeper 

faintly  afking  me,  I went  in.  By  the  books  lying 
in  the  window  and  on  the  table,  I eafily  per- 
ceived how  he  came  to  be  fo  cold  now,  who 
was  fo  warm  a year  ago.  Not  one  of  ours,  either 
verfe  or  profe,  was  to  be  feen,  but  feveral  of  ano- 
ther kind.  O that  our  brethren  were  as  zealous 
to  make  Chrjjhans,  as  they  are  to  make  Cal * 
vnrijls ! 

He  came  home  before  dinner,  and  foon  con- 
vinced me,  that  the  Pkilijiines  had  been  upon 
him.  They  had  taken  huge  pains  to  prejudice 
him  againft  vie , and  fo  fuccefsfully,  that  he  did 
not  even  afk  me  to  preach.  So  I had  thoughts  of 
going  on.  But  in  the  afternoon  he  altered  his 
purpofe,  and  I preached  in  the  evening  to  a large 
congregation.  He  feemed  quite  furprized,  and 
was  convinced  for  the  prefent , that  things 
had  been  mifreprefented.  But  how  long 
will  the  conviftion  laft  ? Perhaps,  till  next 
month. 

Wednefday  18. 1 called  upon  another  ferious 
clergyman,  vicar  of  a little  town  near  Pickering. 
He  immediately  told  me,  how  he  had  been  re- 
ceived by  warm  men  to  doubtful  difputations. 
He  faid,  this  had  for  a time  much  hurt  his  foul ; 
but  that  now  the  fnare  was  broken. 

Vo  l.  XXXI.  N 


About 


[ 29°  ] 


About  one  I preached  at  Snainton,  eight  or 
nine  miles  beyond  Pickering,  to  a fmall  but 
deeply  ferious  congregation.  When  I came 
to  Scarborough,  though  the  wind  was  very 
high  and  very  fharp,  the  multitude  of  people 
conllrained  me  to  preach  abroad.  And  all, 
but  a few  noify  children,  behaved  remarkably 
well. 

* Thurfday  19.  The  room  was  filled  at  five. 
And  the  congregation  this  evening  was  larger 
than  the  lad.  Plow  is  the  face  of  things  changed 
here  within  a year  or  two  ? The  fociety  increafed 
four-fold : moll  of  them  alive  to  God : and 
many  filled  with  love.  And  all  of  them  enjoy 
great  quietnefs,  inllead  of  noife  and  tumult, 
fince  God  put  it  into  the  heart  of  an  honeft  ma- 
gi ftrate,  to  fill l the  madnefis  ofi  the  people. 

I wrote  a letter  to-day,  which  after  fome  time 
I fent  to  forty  or  fifty  clergymen,  with  the  little 
preface  annext. 

“ Rev.  Sir, 

“ Near  two  years  and  a half  ago,  I wrote  the 
following  letter.  You  will  pleafe  to  obferve,  1. 
That  I propofe  no  more  therein,  than  is  the 
bounden  duty  of  every  Chriftian  : 2.  That  you. 
may  comply  with  this  prop'ofal,  whether  any 
other  does  or  not.  I myfelf  have  endeavoured  fo 
to  do  for  many  years,  though  I have  been  alinofr 
alone  therein,  arid  although  many,  the  more  ear- 

nellly 


[ 291  ] 

neftly  I talk  of  peace , the  more  zealoufly  make 
themjelves  ready  for  battle. 

I am,  Rev.  Sir, 

Your  affeftionate  brother, 

John  Wesley.” 

“ Dear  Sir, 

“ It  has  pleafed  God  to  give  you  both  the  will 
and  the  power,  to  do  many  things  for  his  glory, 
(although  you  are  often  afhamed  you  have  done 
fo  little,  and  wifh  you  could  do  a thoufand  times 
more.)  This  induces  me  to  mention  to  you, 
what  has  been  upon  my  mind  for  many  years : 
and  what  I am  perfuaded  would  be  much  for  the 
glory  of  God,  if  it  could  once  be  effected.  And 
I am  in  great  hopes  it  will  be,  if  you  heartily  un- 
dertake it,  muffing  in  him  alone. 

“ Some  years  fince  God  began  a great  work 
in  England  : but  the  labourers  were  few.  At  fi rfl 
tliofe  few  were  of  one  heart : but  it  was  not  fo 
long.  Firft  one  fell  off,  then  another  and  another, 
till  no  two  of  us  were  left  together  in  the  work, 
befides  my  brother  and  me.  This  prevented 
much  good  and  occafioned  much  evil.  It 
grieved  our  fpirits  and  weakened  our  hands.  It 
gave  our  common  enemies  huge  occafion  to 
blafpheme.  It  perplexed  and  puzzled  many 
fincere  Chriflians.  It  caufed  many  to  draw 
back  to  perdition.  It  grieved  the  holy  Spirit  of 
God. 

“ As  labourers  increafed,  difunion  increafed. 

N 2 Offences 


C 292  ] 

Offences  were  multiplied.  And  inflead  of  com- 
ing nearer  to,  they  flood  farther  and  farther  off 
from  each  other:  till  at  length  thofe  who  were 
not  only  brethren  in  Chrift,  but  fellow-labourers 
in  his  gofpel,  had  no  more  conne6tion  or  fellow- 
fhip  with  each  other,  than  proteftants  have  with 
papifts. 

“ But  ought  this  to  be  ? Ought  not  thofe  who 
are  united  to  one  common  head,  and  employed 
by  him  in  one  common  work,  to  be  united  to 
each  other?  I fpeak  now’  of  thofe  labourers,  who 
are  minifters  of  the  church  of  England.  Thefe 
are  chiefly 

Mr.  Perronet,  Romaine,  Newton,  Shirley  : 

Mr.  Downing,  Jeffe,  Adam  : 

Mr.  Talbot,  Riland,  Stilling  fleet,  Fletcher  : 

Mr.  Johnfon,  Baddily,  Andrews,  Jane: 

Mr.  Hart,  Symes,  Brown,  Rouquet : 

Mr.  Sellon  : 

Mr.  Venn,  Richardfon,  Burnet,  Furly  : 

Mr.  Conyers,  Bendy,  King  : 

Mr.  Berridge,  Hicks,  J.  W.  C.  W.  John 
Richardfon. 

Not  excluding  any  other  clergyman,  who 
agrees  in  thefe  effentials, 

I.  Original  fin, 

II.  Juftification  by  faith, 

III.  Holinefs  of  heart  and  life:  provided 

their  life  beanfwerable  to  their  doc- 
trine. 

“ But 


[ 293  ] 

“ Bat  what  union  would  you  defire  among 
thefe  ?”  Not  an  union  in  opinions.  They  might 
agree  or  difagree,  touching  abfolute  Decrees  on 
the  one  hand,  and  Perfection  on  the  other.  Not 
an  union  in  exprejfions.  Thefe  may  {till  fpeak  of 
the  imputed  righteoufnefs,~d.n<k  thofe,  of  the  merits 
ofChrij}.  Notan  union,  with  regard  to  outward 
order.  Some  may  ftill  remain  quite  regular ; 
forne  quite  irregular  ; and  fome  partly  regular 
and  partly  irregular . But  thefe  things  being  as 
they  are,  as  each  is  perfuaded  in  his  own  mind, 
is  it  not  a mod  defirable  thing,  that  we  fhould 

1.  Remove  hindrances  out  of  the  way  ? Not 
judge  one  another,  not  defpife  one  another,  not 
envy  one  another  ? Not  be  difpleajed at  one  ano- 
ther’s gifts  or  fuccefs,  even  though  greater  than 
our  own  ? Not  wait  for  one  another’s  halting, 
much  lefs  wifh  for  it,  or  rejoice  therein  ? 

Never  [peak  difrefpeft  fully,  {lightly,  coldly,  or 
unkindly  of  each  other : never  repeat  each 
other’s  faults,  miftakes,  or  infirmities,  much  lefs 
lijlen  for  and  gather  them  up : never  fay  or  do 
any  thing  to  hinder  each  other’s  ufefulnefs,  either 
direftly  or  iudiredly. 

Is  it  not  a mod  defirable  thing,  that  we 
fhould 

2.  Love  as  brethren  ? Think  well  of  and  honour 
one  another  ? Wifh  all  good,  all  grace,  all  gifts, 
all  fuccefs,  yea  greater  than  our  own  to  each 
other  ? ExpePl  God  will  anfwer  our  wifh,  rejoice 
in  every  appearance  thereof,  and  praife  him  for 

N 3 it  ? 


[ 29  4 ] 

it  ? Readily  believe  good  of  each  other,  as  readily 
as  we  once  believed  evil  ? 

Speak  refpectfully,  honourably,  kindly  of  each 
other : depend  each  other’s  chara&er : fpeak  all 
the  good  we  can  of  each  other:  recommend  one 
another  where  we  have  influence  : each  help  the 
other  on  in  his  work,  and  inlarge  his  influence  by 
all  the  honefl  means  we  can. 

This  is  the  union  which  I have  long  fought  af- 
ter. And  is  it  not  the  duty  of  every  one  of  us  fo 
to  do  ? Would  it  not  be  far  better  for  ourjelves  ? 
A means  of  promoting  both  our  holinefs  and 
happinefs  ? Would  it  not  remove  much  guilt 
from  thofe  who  have  been  faulty  in  any  of  thefe 
inflances  ? And  much  pain  from  thofe  who  have 
kept  themfelves  pure  ? Would  it  not  be  far  bet- 
ter for  the  people?  Who  fuffer  feverely  from  the 
clafhings  and  contentions  of  their  leaders  P 
Which  feldom  fail  to  occafion  many  unprofitable, 
yea,  hurtful  difputes  among  them.  Would  it  not 
be  better  even  for  the  poor,  blind  world,  robbing 
them  of  their  fport,  “ O they  cannot  agjee 
among  themfelves.”  Would  it  not  be  better  for 
the  whole  work  of  God,  which  would  then  deepen 
and  widen  on  every  fide? 

“ But  it  will  never  be  : it  is  utterly  impoffi- 
ble.”  Certainly  it  is  with  men.  Who  imagines 
zve  can  do  this  ? That  it  can  be  effefted  by  any 
human  power  ? All  nature  is  againfl  it,  every  in- 
firmity, every  wrong  temper  and  pajfion  ; love  of 
honour  and  praife,  of  power,  of  pre-eminence  ; 

anger, 


[ 29.5  1 

anger,  refentment,  pride  ; long-contra£led  habit, 
and  prejudice  lurking  in  ten  thoufand  forms. 
The  devil  and  all  his  angels  areagainflit.  For  if  this 
takes  place,  how  fhall  his  kingdom  Hand  ? All 
the  world,  all  that  know  not  God  are  againft  it, 
though  they  may  feem  to  favour  it  for  a feafon. 
Let  us  fettle  this  in  our  hearts,  that  we  may  be 
utteily  cut  off  from  all  dependence  on  our  own 
flrength  or  wifdom. 

But  furely  with  God  all  things  are  pojjible. 
Therefore  all  things  are  poffible  to  him  that  be- 
lt eve  tk.  And  this  union  is  propofed  only  to 
them  that  believe,  that  fhew  their  faith  by  their 
works. 

When  Mr.  C.  was  obje&ing  the  impofTibility 
of  ever  effefting  fuch  an  union,  I went  up  flairs, 
and  after  a little  prayer,  opened  Kempis  on 
thefe  words, 

“ Expefta  Dominum  : Viriliter  age:  noli 
diffidere  : Noli  difcedere  ; fed  corpus  & animam 
expone  conllanter  pro  gloria  Dei.” 

I am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affeftionate  fervant, 
Scarborough,  J.  W. 

April  19,  1764. 

I received  three  letters  in  anfwer  to  this, 
(though  not  at  the  fame  time)  part  of  which  I 
gladly  fubjoin. 

N 4 


Dear 


C 2g6  ] 


Dear  Sir, 

* “ I am  not  infenfible  of  the  happy  conse- 
quences it  might  produce,  if  “ thofe  who  agree 
in  preaching  that  capital  doctrine,  B\  grace  ye 
ate  faved  through  faith,  would  maintain  a free 
intercourfe  with  each  other  and  if  it  could  by 
any  means  be  accomplished,  it  is  doubtlefs  an 
event  moft  devoutly  to  be  wifhed.  It  is  what  I 
always  have  Shewn  the  greateft  readinefs  to,  and 
what  I have  laboured  at  for  thefe  Several  years 
paft,  within  my  little  Sphere  ; and,  though  my 
luccefs  hitherto,  through  cauSes,  which  I will 
not  pretend  to  aflign,  has  by  no  means  equalled 
my  hopes ; yet,  I Shall  heartily  rejoice,  if  at 
length  it  may  pleafe  God  to  make  you  the  in- 
strument of  effecting  fo  important  a defign.  For 
my  own  part,  I defpife  no  man  for  his  opinion  ; 
however,  I may  be  moSt  clofely  attached  (as 
every  one  is)  to  thofe,  whofe  judgment  moSl 
nearly  harmonizes  with  my  own  : and  if  I can 
bear  any  thing,  it  is  contradiftion  ; So  long  as  I 
am  allowed  the  common  liberty  of  anfwering  for 
myfelf,  without  being  treated  with  reproach  or 
fcorn  for  any  heterodox  notions  I may  be  fup- 
pofed  to  maintain. 

“ I Shall  very  gladly  go  half  w'av  to  London  at 
any  time,  to  give  a meeting  to  a number  of 
ministers  of  any  denomination,  that  may  be 
brought  together  with  this  pious  intention  : and, 
I think,  I may  anfwer  for  Mr.  Johnfon’s  concur- 
rence. Will  you  forgive  me,  if  for  once  I pre- 
fume 


[ 297  ] 

fume  to  fuggeft,  what  (I  apprehend]  may  be  molt 
conducive  on  fuch  an  occafion  to  our  general 
profit  and  edification  ? 

l.  Let  one  of  the  books  of  the  New  Teftament 
be  made  choice  of  previous  to  our  interview, 
for  the  fubjeft  of  our  conference  when  we  meet, 
not  with  a view  of  difplaying  our  critical  talents 
on  every  word  or  verfe  that  occurs  ; but  of 
pointing  out  thofe  things  which  neceffarily  enter 
into  the  plan  of  apoftolical  preaching.  2.  Let 
every  one  fettle  this  in  his  heart  before-hand,  to 
expeft  contradiflion,  at  the  fame  time  refolving 
to  bear  it  calmly  for  the  Lord’s  fake  : and  feeing 
we  naturally  carry  about  us  an  accurfed  fpirit  of 
felfifhnefs,  pride,  and  impatience,  that  is  ready  to 
take  fire  at  the  mod  trivial  offence  : let  us  make 
it  a point  before-hand,  daily  to  lament  this  our 
wretchednefs  of  difpofition  at  the  throne  of 
grace,  earnefily  befeeching  the  Lord  to  prepare 
us  all  for  our  intended  conference,  by  enduing 
us  with  the  fpirit  of  meeknefs,  forbearance,  hu- 
mility, and  love.  * 3.  Let  every  one  confent 
to  renounce  any  favourite  phrafe,  term,  or  mode 
of  fpeech,  that  is  not  fcriptural,  if  required  fo  to 
do  by  thofe  who  diffent  from  him.  Becaufe 
whatever  doflrine  cannot  maintain  its  ground 
without  the  aid  of  humanly-invented  words,  is 
not  of  God. 

“I  have  unbofomed  myfelf  to  you,  in  the 
frankeft  manner,  with  a view  to  promote  that 
N 5 happy 


[ »9«  ] 

happy  intercom  fe  which  you  wifh  to  eftablifh : 
and  if  you  imagine  it  will  anfwer  any  good  pur- 
pofe,  you  are  welcome  to  Ihew  this  letter  to  any 
of  the  miniflers  you  have  had  in  your  eye,  and 
todifclofe  to  them  largely  all  you  know  of, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  affe&ionate  friend  and  brother, 

R.  H.” 


Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

“ I received  your  printed  letter,  and  fhould 
rejoice  to  fee  the  union  propofed  therein  take 
place  ; but  I mull  own  I am  an  infidel  concern- 
ing it.  Daily  experience  convinces  me  more 
and  more,  that  the  zeal  for  opinions  and  charity, 
Non  bene  conveniunf,  nec  iri  una  fcde  morantur. 
It  has  well-nigh  deftroyed  all  Chrillian  love, 
zeal,  and  holinefs  among  us.  I have  met  with 
greater  trials  from  thefe  bigots  within  this 
twelvemonth,  than  I have  met  with  from  all 
other  oppofers  for  fifteen  years.  Many,  that  once 
would  almoft  have  plucked  out  their  own  eyes, 
and  given  them  to  me,  are  now  ready  to  pluck 
out  my  eyes. 

“ I really  am  tired  of  preaching  to  an  un- 
grateful, gain-faying  people.  Pray  for  me, 
dear  Sir,  for  my  hands  hang  down  exceed- 
ingly. 

I am  your  unworthy  brother, 

W.  S.” 
Shoreham. 


[ 299  ] 


Skoreham. 

My  Reverend  and  dear  brother, 

“ Your’s  of  the  15th  inftant  gave  me  both 
pain  and  pleafure. 

“ I was  highly  delighted  with  your  ardent 
wifhes  and  endeavours  for  promoting  the  fpirit 
of  the  gofpel  among  the  preachers  and  other 
profeff'ors  of  it: — but  deeply  concerned  at  the 
difappointment  and  oppofition  you  have  met 
with  ! 

“ It  has  been  always  a leading  principle  with 
me,  (and  1 pray  God  confirm  and  ftrengthen  it 
more  and  more)  to  love  all  thofe  labourers  of 
Chrijl , who  give  proof  by  their  diligence , their 
holy  and  heavenly  behaviour , that  they  love  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chrijl  in  Jincenty ; even  though  their 
Jentiments  in  many  things,  fhould  differ  from 
mine.  \ 

“ And  therefore,  though  it  be  abfurd  to  ex- 
peft  an  entire  union  of  fentinients  in  all  things; 
— Yet  the  endeavouring,  by  every  Chriftian 
method,  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  fpirit  in  the  bond 
of  peace , — is  the  indifpenfable  duty  of  all  Chrif- 
tians.  Where  this  fpiritual  peace  and  union  are 
not, — there  faith  working  by  love — is  not : and 
where  this  divine  faith  is  wanting, — there  Chrif 
is  wanting : there  his  Spirit  is  wanting',  and  then, 
neither  circumcifon , nor  uncircumcifon  will  avail 
us  any  thing ! 

“ In  this  melancholy  fituation,  whilff  we  are 
N 6 ffrangers 


[ 300  ] 

firangers  to  the  divine  fruits  of  the  holy  Spirit,— 
let  ouv gifts  and  talents  be  what  they  may  : — let 
us  fpeak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels  ; 
we  are  yet  nothing  in  the  fight  of  God ! Nay, 
though  his  fpirit  fhould  fpread  the  gofpel,  by  our 
miniftery,  in  the  hearts  of  thoufands  ; yet  our 
own  fouls  will  remain  but  a barren  wildetnefsl 
AndChrilt  may  fay, — “ I never  knew  you." 

“ How  ought  we  therefore  always  to  pray, — 
that  th  z peace  of  God  may  ever  rule  in  our  hearts  : 
— that  we  may  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love  ; 
and  that  we  may  conftantly  follow  after  the 
things,  which  make  for  peace  ; and  things  where- 
with one  may  edify  another  ! 

“ This  is  the  gofpel  of  Jefus  Chrift  ! And  may 
God  imprefs  it  thoroughly  upon  the  minds  and 
hearts  of  all ! — And  may  the  poor  defpifed  fock 
grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jefus  Chrif  ! 

I am,  dear  Sir, 

Your’s  mod  afte£lionately, 

Yin.  Perro.vet.” 

April  20.  Being  Good-Friday,  we  had  a part- 
ing bleffing  at  five.  I then  rode  to  Robinhood’s- 
bay,  and  about  two  preached  in  the  Little- 
fquare.  A poor  madman,  literally  fuch,  came 
up  to  me  juft  as  I began,  and  fat  down  quietly 
till  I had  done.  At  fix  I preached  in  the  new 
houfe  at  Whitby,  ill  containing  the  congregation. 

Here 


[ 301  1 

Here  God  does  ftill  make  bare  his  arm,  and  fei. 
ners  are  continually  converted  to  him. 

Saturday  21.  I vifited  one  who  was  ill  in  bed, 
and  after  having  buried  feven  of  her  family  in  fix 
months,  had  juft  heard  that  the  eighth,  her  be- 
loved hufband,  was  caft  away  at  fea.  I afked, 
“ Do  not  you  fret  at  any  of  thofe  things  ?”  She 
faid,  with  a lovely  fmile  upon  her  pale  cheek, 
“ O no  ! How  can  I fret  at  any  thing  which  is 
the  will  of  God  ? Let  him  take  all  befides  : He 
has  given  me  himfelf.  I love,  I praife  him  every 
moment.”  Let  any  that  doubts  of  Chrillian  per- 
fe£Hon  look  on  fuch  a fpefdacle  as  this  ! One 
in  fuch  circumftances  rejoicing  evermore  and 
continually  giving  thanks. 

April  22.  (Eafter-day)  I preached  in  the  room 
at  five  and  at  eight.  There  were  fuch  a number  of 
communicants  at  church,  as  it  was  fuppofed,  had 
not  been  there  thefe  fifty  years.  In  the  evening 
I preached  under  the  Cliff,  for  the  fake  of  thofe 
who  were  not  able  to  get  up  the  hill.  The  fkirts 
of  the  congregation  could  not  hear,  though  my 
voice  was  clear  and  loud.  But  the  bulk  of  them 
feemed  both  to  hear  and  underftand.  How  ripe 
for  the  gofpel  is  this  place  ? 

Monday  23.  After  preaching  at  five,  I met  the 
felebf  fociety  who  feem  all  to  have  tafted  of  the 
fame  blefling.  I then  rode  to  Gifborough,  and 
about  eleven  preached  in  a meadow  to  a large 
and  ferious  congregation  : but  not  more  ferious 
than  that  in  the  ftreet  at  Stockefly,  to  whom  I 

declared 


[ 302  ] 

declared  in  the  afternoon.  Jefus  Chrifi,  made  of 
God  unto  us  wifdom , righteoufnefs , fanBif cation, 
and  redemption.  I was  a little  tired  before  I came 
to  Hutton.  But  it  was  over,  when  I faw  the  huge 
congregation,  among  whom  I found  a greater 
blefling,  than  either  at  Stokefly  or  Gifborough. 

I then  met  the  fociety,  gathered  from  all  parts. 
Afterwards  I met  the  feleft  fociety.  And  when 
they  were  gone,  I was  juft  as  freih,  as  when  I fet 
out  in  the  morning. 

Tuefday  24.  I preached  about  noon  at  Potto, 
and  in  the  evening  in  the  New-Houfe  at  Yarm, 
by  far  the  moil  elegant  in  England.  A large  con- 
gregation attended  at  five  in  the  morning  and, 
feemed  to  be  juft  ripe  for  the  exhortation,  Let 
us  go  onto  perfe&ion.  I had  indeed  the  fatisfac- 
tion  of  finding  moll  of  the  believers  here  athirft 
for  full  redemption. 

„ In  the  evening  I preached  at  Stockton.  The 
rain  was  fufpended,  while  I was  inforcing  thofe 
awful  words,  Now  God  commandeth  all  men  every 
■where  to  repent.  Friday  2 7. 1 was  obliged  to  preach 
abroad  at  five  : as  alfo  in  Darlington  at  noon, 
and  at  Barnard-caftle  in  the  evening  : where 
many  hearts  weTe  bowed  down  before  the 
Lord. 

Saturday  28.  I rode  to  Newcaftle  ; here  I re- 
ceived a fhort  letter  from  John  Johnfon  at  York. 

“ This  evening  about  a quarter  before  feven,  it 
pleafed  God  to  take  to  himfelf  our  dear  brother 
John  Manners,  after  a time  of  remarkable  afflic- 
tion, 


C 3°3  3 

tion,  and  as  remarkable  patience.  He  was  clearly 
fenfible  to  the  laft,  as  well  as  folidly  happy,  fay- 
ing,  “ The  way  is  quite  clear  ; my  heart  is  at 

liberty .”  i 

Sunday  29.  The  ground  being  wet  with  heavy 
rain,  I preached  in  the  houfe  both  morning  and 
evening.  I foon  found  what  fpirit  the  people 
were  of.  No  jar,  no  contention  is  here  ; but  all 
are  peaceably  and  lovingly  ftriving  together,  for 
the  hope  of  the  gofpel.  And  what  can  hurt  the 
Methodifts,  fo  called,  but  the  Methodifts  ? Only 
let  them  not  fight  one  another,  let  not  brother 
lift  up  fword  againft  brother,  and  no  weapon form • 
ed  againjl  them  Jhall  profper. 

Monday  30.  I received  a letter  from  Corn- 
wall, wherein  were  thefe  words:  “ "Yefterday, 

I preached  to  a large  congregation  at  St.  John’s. 
Theoccafion  was  this.  One  of  our  friends  came 
into  Mr.  Thomas’s  a few  days  fmce.  After  fpeak- 
ing  a little  upon  bufmefs,  he  faid,  “ What  need 
have  we  to  watch.”  Prefentlv  fitting  down,  he  ad- 
ded “ There  is  but  one  ftep  between  me  arid 
death,”  and  died. 

Wednefday,  May  2. 1 talked  with  M.  L.  are- 
markable  monument  of  divine  mercy.  She  is 
about  two  and  twenty,  and  has  about  fix  hundered 
pounds  a year  in  her  own  hands.  Some  months 
fince  God  fpoke  peace  to  her  foul,  while  fhe 
was  wreftling  with  him  in  private  prayer.  This 
was  never  entirely  taken  from  her,  even  while 
fhe  was  almoft  alone.  But  fhe  was  often  dull  and 

faint, 


[ 3°4  ] 

faint,  till  fhe  broke  thro’ all  hindrances,  and  join, 
ed  heartand  hand  with  the  children  of  God. 

Tuefday  8.  We  rode  over  the  wild  moors  to 
Wolfingham.  It  proved  to  be  the  fair-day.  So 
I had  hearers  from  all  parts.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  to  the  fimple,  loving,  earnefl  people  at 
Barnardcallle.  If  all  to  whom  we  preach  were  of 
this  fpirit,  what  an  harveft  would  enfue  ? 

Wednefday  9.  I was  invited  to  breakfaft  by 
Air.  T — a neighbouring  gentleman.  I found  we 
had  been  fchool-fellows  at  the  Charterhoufe  : and 
he  remembered  me,  though  I had  forgot  him.  I 
Spent  a very  agreeable  hour,  with  a ferious  as  well 
as  fenfible  man. 

About  noon  I preached  to  a large  congrega- 
tion in  Teefdale,  and  to  a ftill  larger  in  Wardale 
in  the  evening.  The  next  day,  after  preaching 
at  Prudhoe  and  Nafferton,  I returned  to  New- 
caftle. 

Tuefday  15.  I rode  to  Southfhields,  and  was 
perfuaded  to  preach  in  the  houfe.  It  was  well 
I did,  for  about  the  middle  of  the  fermon, 
there  was  a violent  fhower.  But  it  was  quite  fair 
at  fix  while  I preached  in  Northfliields,  to  a very 
large  and  yet  very  ferious  congregation.  How  is 
the  fcene  changed,  fince  my  brother  preached 
here,  when  the  people  were  ready  to  fwallow 
Jiim  up  ? O what  has  God  wrought  in  this  land,, 
within  four  or  five  and  twenty  years  ! 

Frid.  18.  I received  much  fatisfa&ion  in  con- 
verfing  with  the  moil  honourable  member  of 

our 


[ a°5  ] 

suv  fociety  Henry  Jackfon,  now  in  the  ninety-* 
fifth  or  ninety-fixth  year  of  his  age.  He  put  me 
m mind  of  that  venerable  man,  Mr.  Elliot  of 
New-England  : who  frequently  ufed  to  fay  to 
his  friends,  a few  years  before  he  went  to  God, 
“ My  memory  is  gone:  my  underftandingis  gone  : 
but  I think  I have  more  love  than  ever.” 

Saturday  19.  I preached  to  the  poor  colliers  at 
Placey  who  are  Hill  a pattern  to  all  the  county. 
We  rode  home  by  a great  houfe  I had  frequently 
heard  of.  The  front  is  truly  noble.  In  the  houfe 
I faw  nothing  remarkable,  but  what  was  remark- 
ably bad  : fuch  pi&ures  as  an  honeft  heathen 
would  be  alhamed,  to  receive  under  his  roof;  un- 
lefs  hedefigned  his  wife  and  daughters  fhould  be 
common  proftitutes.  And  this  is  the  high  fafhi- 
on  ! What  an  abundant  proof  of  the  tafte  of  the 
prefent  age  ? 

Sunday  20.  Between  eight  and  nine  I preach- 
ed in-Gatefbead,  to  a liitning  multitude.  I believe 
their  number  was  doubled  at  the  Fell,  about 
two  in  the  afternoon.  About  five  I preached  to 
fuch  another  congregation,  on  the  outfide  of 
Pandon-Gate.  I know  not  that  I ever  before 
preached  to  three  fuch  congregations  in  one  day  : 
fuch  as  obliged  me  to  fpeak  to  the  utmoft  extent 
of  my  voice,  from  the  firft  word  to  the  laft.  But 
it  was  all  one,  I was  no  more  tired  in  the  even- 
ing, than  if  I had  fat  ftill  all  day. 

Monday  21.  I took  my  leave  of  Newcaftle, 
and  about  noon  preached  in  themarket-placeat 

Morpeth, 


[ 3«6  } 

Morpeth.  A few  of  the  hearers  were  a little  ludi- 
crous at  firfl;  but  their  mirth  was  quickly  fpoil- 
ed.  In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  Court- 
houfe  at  Alnwick,  where  I relied  the  next  day. 
Wednefday  23.  I rode  over  the  fands  to  Holy- 
Ifland,  once  the  famous  fee  of  a bifhop  ; now  the 
refidence  of  a few  poor  families,  who  live  chief- 
ly by  fifhing.  At  one  fide  of  the  town  are  the 
ruins  of  the  cathedral,  with  an  adjoining  monaf- 
tery.  It  appears  to  have  been  a lofty  and  elegant 
building,  the  middle  ifle  being  almofl  entire.  I 
preached  in  what  was  once  the  market-place,  to 
almofl  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  ifland,  and  diftri- 
buted  fome  little  books  among  them,  for  which 
they  were  exceeding  thankful.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  Berwick  upon  Tweed  ; the  next 
evening  at  Dunbar  : and  on  Friday  25,  about 
ten  at  Haddington,  in  provofl  D’s.  yard  to  a very 
elegant  congregation.  But  I expe£l  little  good 
will  be  done  here.  For  we  begin  at  the  wrong 
end.  Religion  muft  not  go from  the  great  f to  the 
leaf,  or  the  power  would  appear  to  be  of  men. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Muffelborough, 
and  the  next,  on  the  Calton-liill  3t  Edinburgh.  It 
being  the  time  of  the  General  affembly,  many  of 
the  miniflers  were  there.  The  wind  was  high  and 
fbarp,and  blew  away  a few  delicate  ones.  But  moft 
ofthecongregationdid  not  flir,  till  I had  concluded. 

Sunday  27.  At  feven  I preached  in  the  High- 
School  yard,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  city.  The 
morning  was  extremely  cold.  In  the  evening  it 

blew 


[ 3°7  ] 

blew  a ftorm.  However  having  appointed  to  be 
on  the  Calton-hill,  I began  there,  to  an  huge  con- 
gregation. At  firft,  the  wind  was  a little  trouble- 
fome  ; but  I foon  forgot  it.  And  fo  did  the  peo- 
ple for  an  hour  and  half,  in  which  I fully  deli- 
vered my  own  foul. 

Mon.  28.  I fpent  fome  hours  at  the  general 
alfembly,  compofed  of  about  an  hundred  and 
fifty  minifters.  I was  furprized  to  obferve,  1. 
That  any  one  was  admitted  even  lads,  twelve  or 
fourteen  years  old:  2.  That  the  chief  fpeakers 
were  lawyers,  fix  or  feven  on  one  fide  only  : 3. 
That  a fingle  queltion  took  up  the  whole  time, 
which  when  I went  away,  feemed  to. be  as  far  from 
a conclufion  as  ever,  namely,  “ Shall  Mr.  Lind- 
fay  be  removed  to  Kilmarnock  parilh  or  not  ?” 
The  argument,  for  it  was,  “ He  has  a large  fami- 
ly, and  this  living  is  twice  as  good  as  his  own.” 
The  argument  agairift  it  was,  “The  people  are  re- 
folved,  not  to  hear  him,  and  will  leave  the  Kirk, 
if  he  comes.”  If  then  the  real  point  in  view  had 
been  (as  their  law  direfts)  “ Majus  bonxun  Eccl&- 
fiace ,”  infiead  of  taking  up  five  hours,  the  debate 
might  have  been  determined  in  five  minutes. 

On  Mon.  and  Tuef.  I fpoke  to  the  members  of 
the  fociety  feverally.  Thurfd.  13.  I rode  to  Dun- 
dee, and  about  half  an  hour  after  fix,  preached  on 
the  fide  of  a meadow  near  the  town.  Poor  and  rich 
attended.  Indeed  there  is  feldom  fear  of  wanting 
3 congregation  in  Scotland.  But  the  misfortune 
is,  They  know  entry  thing.  So  they  learn  nothing. 

Friday, 


[ 3o8  ] 

Friday,  June  1.  I rode  to  Brethin,  where  Mr. 
Blaire  received  me  in  the  moll  friendly  manner. 
In  the  afternoon  I preached  on  the  fide  of  an 
hill  near  the  town,  where  we  foon  forgot  the  cold. 
I truft,  there  will  be  not  only  a knowing,  but  a 
loving  people  in  this  place. 

About  feven  Mr.  B.  wasoccafionally  mention- 
ing, what  had  lately  occurred  in  the  next  parifh. 
I though  it  worth  a farther  enquiry,  and  there, 
fore  ordered  our  horfes  to  be  brought  immedi- 
ately. Mr.  B.  guided  us  to  Mr.  Oglevie’s  houfe, 
the  minifler  of  the  parifh  : who  informed  us, 
“ That  a flrange  diforder  had  appeared  in  his 
parifh,  between  thirty  and  forty  years  ago  ; but 
that  nothing  of  the  kind  had  been  known  there 
fince,  till  fome  time  in  September  lafl.  A boy  was 
then  taken  ill,  and  fo  continues  Hill.  In  the  end 
of  January  or  beginning  of  February,  many  other 
children  were  taken,  chiefly  girls,  and  a few 
grown  perfons.  They  begin  with  an  involuntary 
fhaking  of  their  hands  and  feet.  Then  their  lips 
are  convulfed  ; next  their  tongue,  which  feems 
to  cleave  to  the  roof  of  the  mouth.  Then  the  eyes 
are  fet  flaring  terribly,  and  the  whole  face  vari- 
oufly  diflorted.  Prefently  they  flart  up,  and 
jump  ten,  fifteen  or  twenty  times  together  flrait 
upward,  two,  three  or  more  feet  from  the  ground. 
Then  they  flart  forward  and  run  with  amazing 
fwiftnefs  two,  three,  or  five  hundred  yards.  Fre- 
quently they  run  up  like  a cat,  to  the  top  of  an 
houfe,  and  jump  on  the  ridge  of  it,  as  on  the 


[ 3°9  ] 

' 

ground.  But  wherever  they  are,  they  never  fall, 
or  mifs  their  footing  at  all.  After  they  have  run 
and  jumped  for  fome  time,  they  drop  down  as 
dead.  When  they  come  to  themfelves,  they  ufu- 
i ally  tell,  when  and  where  they  fliall  be  taken 
again  : frequently,  how  often  and  where  they 

Ifhall  jump,  and  to  what  places  they  fh all  run.” 

I afked,  “ Are  any  of  them  near  ?”  He  laid, 
“ Yes,  at  thofe  houfes.”  We  walked  thither 
I without  delay.  One  of  them  was  four  years  and 
half  old,  the  other  about  eighteen.  The  child 
we  found,  had  had  three  or  four  fits  that  day,  run- 
ing  and  jumping  like  the  red,  and  in  particular 
leaping  many  times  from  a high  table  to  the 
ground  without  the  lead  hurt.  The  young 
woman  was  the  only  perfon  of  them  all,  who 
ufed  to  keep  her  fenfes  during  the  fit.  In  anfwer 
to  many  quedions,  fhe  faid,  “ I fird  feel  a pain 
in  my  left  foot,  then  in  my  head.  Then  my  hands 
and  feet  fhake,  and  I can’t  fpeak.  And  quickly 
I begin  to  jump  or  run.”  While  we  were  talk- 
ing fhe  cried  out,  “ O,  I have  a pain  in  my  foot. 
It  is  in  my  hand.  It  is  here,  at  the  bending  of  my 
arm.  O my  head,  my  head,  my  head.”  Immedi- 
ately her  arms  were  dretched  out,  and  were  as  an 
iron  bar  : I could  not  bend  one  of  her  fingers  ; 
and  her  body  was  bent  backward  ; the  lower 
part  remaining  quite  ere  ft,  while  her  back  formed 
exaftly  a half  circle,  her  head  hanging  even  with 
her  hips.  I was  going  to  catch  her  ; but  one  faid 
Sir,  you  may  let  her  alone  ';  for  they  never 

fall.” 


C 3*0  ] 

fall”  Biit  I defy  all  mankind  to  account  for  her 
not  falling,  when  the  trunk  of  her  body  hung  in 
that  manner. 

In  many  circumftances  this  cafe  goes  far  be- 
yond the  famous  one  mentioned  by  Boerhaave  : 
Particularly  in  that : their  telling  before,  when 
and  how  they  fhould  be  taken  3gain.  Whoever 
can  account  for  this  upon  natural  principles,  has 
my  free  leave.  I cannot : I therefore  believe, 
if  this  be  in  part  a natural  diftemper,  there  is 
fomething  preternatural  too.  Yet  fuppoftng  this, 
I can  eafily  conceive,  Satan  will  fo  difguife  his* 
part  therein,  that  we  cannot  precifely  determine, 
which  part  of  the  diforder  is  natural,  and  which 
preternatural. 

Saturday  2.  I rode  to  Aberdeen  and  preached 
in  the  evening  in  the  College-hall,  and  at  feven 
in  the  morning,  Sunday  3.  At  four  in  the  after- 
noon I preached  to  a crouded  audience  in  the 
college-kirk  at  old  Aberdeen.  At  feven  I preach- 
ed in  the  College-clofe,  at  New  Aberdeen.  But 
the  congregation  was  fo  exceeding  large,  that 
many  were  not  able  to  hear.  However  many 
did  hear  : and  I think,  feel  the  application  of 
Thou  art  not  far  Jrom  the  kingdom  oj  God. 

We  want  nothing  here  but  a larger  houfe. 
And  the  foundation  of  one  is  laid  already.  It  is 
true,  we  have  little  money,  and  the  foeiety  is 
poor.  But  we  know  in  whom  we  have  be- 
lieved. 

Thu.rfday  8.  I rode  over  to  Sir  Archibald 

Grant's, 


[ 311  ] 


Grant’s,  twelve  computed  miles  from  Aberdeen. 
’Tis  furprizing  to  fee,  how  the  country  between 
is  improved  even  within  thefe  three  years.  On 
every  fide  the  wild,  dreary  moors  are  ploughed 
up,  and  covered  with  rifing  corn.  All  the  ground 
near  Sir  Archibald’s  in  particular,  is  as  well  culti- 
vated as  molt  in  England.  About  feven  I preach- 
ed. The  kirk  was  pretty  well  filled,  though 
upon  fhort  notice.  Certainly  this  is  a nation 
fiotft  to  hear , and  Jlow  to  /peak,  though  not  Jloiu 
to  wrath. 

Mr.  Grant  a gentleman  from  the  county  of 
-Murray,  came  in  foon  after  us  : And  under- 
ftanding  we  were  going  north,  defined  we  would 
call  at  the  Grange-green  in  our  way.  In  the  morn- 
ing Frid.  g,  I rode  to  Old  Meldrum,  and  preach- 
ed in  the  Marketplace  at  noon,  to  a large  and  , 
ferious  congregation,  among  whom  were  the 
minifier  and  his  wife.  But  I was  more  furpriz- 
ed,  to  fee  a company  of  our  friends  from  Aber- 
deen, feveral  of  whom  had  come  on  foot, 
twelve  old  Scotch  miles,  and  intended  to  walk 
back  thither  the  fame  day.  In  the  afternoon  we 
rode  on  to  Banff.  I had  defig'ned  to  preach  : but 
the  ftormy  weather  would  not  permit.  We  fet 
out  early  on  Saturday  morning,  and  reached 
Nairn  in  the  evening.  Sund.  10.  About  eight  we 
reached  Invernefs.  I could  not  preach  abroad, 
becaufe  of  the  rain,  nor  could  I hear  of  any  con- 
venient room  : fo  that  I was  afraid,  my  coming 
hither  would  be  in  vain,  all  ways  feeming  to  be 

blocked 


[ 312  ] 

blocked  up.  At  ten  I went  to  the  kirk.  After  fer- 
vice,  Mr.  Frafer,  one  of  the  minifters,  invited  us 
to  dinner,  and  then  to  drink  tea.  As  we  were 
drinking  tea,  he  afked,  “ At  what  hour  I would 
pleafe  to  preach  ?”  I faid,  “ At  half  hour  pad 
five.  The  high  kirk  was  filled  in  a very  fhort 
time.  And  I have  feldom  found  greater  liberty  of 
fpirit.  The  other  minifter  came  afterwatds  to 
our  inn,  and  fhewed  the  moft  cordial  affedfion. 
Were  it  only  for  this  day,  I fhould  not  have  re- 
gretted the  riding  an  hundred  miles. 

Monday  11.  A gentleman  who  lives  three 
miles  from  the  town,  invited  me  to  his  houfe, 
affuring  me,  the  minifter  of  his  pari fh  would  be 
glad  if  I would  make  ufe  of  his  kirk.  But  time 
would  not  permit,  as  I had  appointed  to  be  at 
Aberdeen  on  Wednefday.  All  I could  do  was, 
to  preach  once  more  at  Invernefs.  I think  the 
church  was  fuller  now  than  before.  And  I could 
not  but  obferve  the  remarkable  behaviour  of  the 
whole  congregation  after  fervice.  Neither  man, 
woman,  nor  child  fpoke  one  word,  all  the  way 
down  the  main  flreet.  Indeed  the  ferioufnefs 
of  the  people  is  the  lefs  furprifing,  when  it  is 
confidered,  that  for  at  leafl  an  hundred  years, 
this  town  has  had  fuch  a fucceflion  of  pious  mi- 
nifters, as  very  few  in  Great-Britain  have  known. 

After  Edinburgh,  Glafgow,  and  Aberdeen,  I 
think  Invernefs  is  the  largeft  town  I have  feen  in 
Scotland.  The  main  ftreets  are  broad  and  ftrait; 
thehoufes  moftly  old;  but  not  very  bad,  nor  very 

good. 


[ 3*3  ] 


good.  It  Hands  in  a pleafant  and  fruitful 
country,  and  has  all  things  needful  for  life  and 
godlinefs.  The  people  in  general  fpeak  remark- 
ably good  Englifh,  and  are  of  a friendly,  courte- 
ous behaviour. 

* About  eleven  we  took  horfe.  While  we 
were  dining  at  Nairn,  the  inn-keeper,  faid,  “ Sir, 
the  gentlemen  of  the  town  have  read  the  little 
book  you  gave  me  on  Saturday,  and  would  be 
glad  if  you  would  pleafe  to  give  them  a fermon.” 
Upon  my  confenting,  the  bell  was  immediately 
rung,  and  the  congregation  was  quickly  in  the 
kirk.  O what  a difference  is  there  between 
South  and  North  Britain  ! Every  one  here  at 
leaf!  loves  to  hear  the  word  of  God.  And  none 
takes  it  into  his  head,  to  fpeak  one  uncivil 
word  to  any,  for  endeavouring  to  fave  their 
fouls. 

Doubting  whether  Mr.  Grant  was  come  home, 
Mr.  Kirlhaw  called  at  the  Grange-green,  near 
Forres,  while  I rode  forward.  But  Mr.  Grant 
foon  called  me  back-  * I have  feldom  feen  a 
more  agreeable  place.  The  houfe  is  an  old  caflle, 
which  Hands  on  a little  hill,  with  a delightful 
profpeftall  four  ways.  And  the  hofpitable  mailer 
left  nothing  undone,  to  make  it  (till  more  agree- 
able. He  Ihewed  us  all  his  improvements,  which 
are  very  confiderable  in  every  branch  of  huf- 
bandry.  In  his  gardens  many  things  were  more 
forward  than  at  Aberdeen,  yea  or  Newcaftle. 
And  how  is  it,  that  none  but  one  Highland  gen- 
Vol.  XXXI.  O tleman 


[ 3*4  ] 

tleman  has  difcovered  that  we  have  a tree  in  Bri- 
tain, as  eafily  raifed  as  an  afh,  the  wood  of  which 
is  of  full  as  fine  a red  as  Mahogany  ! Namely,  the 
Liburnum.  I defy  any  mahogany  to  exceed  the 
chairs  which  he  has  lately  made  of  this. 

Thurf.  12.  We  rode  through  the  pleafant  and 
fertile  county  of  Murray  to  Elgin.  I never  fuf- 
pedled  before  that  there  was  any  fuch  country  as 
this  near  an  hundred  and  fifty  miles  beyond  E- 
dinburgh  : a county,  which  is  fuppofed  to  have 
generally  fix  weeks  more  funfhine  in  a year,  than 
any  part  of  Great-Britain. 

At  Elgin  are  the  ruins  of  a noble  cathedral, 
the  largeft  that  I remember  to  have  feen  in  the 
kingdom.  We  rode  thence  to  the  Spey,  the  moll 
rapid  river  next  the  Rhine  that  I ever  faw. 
Though  the  water  was  not  breafl  high  to  our 
horfe.s,  they  could  very  hardly  keep  their  feet. 
W e dined  at  Keith,  and  rode  on  to  Strathbogie, 
much  improved  by  the  linen  manufaflure.  All 
the  country  from  Fochaber  to  Strathbogie,  has 
little  houfes  fcattered  up  and  down.  And  not 
only  the  vallevs,  but  the  mountains  themfehes 
are  improved  with  the  htmoft  care.  There  want 
only  more  trees  to  make  them  more  pleafant 
than  moll  of  the  mountains  in  England.  The 
whole  family  at  our  inn,  eleven  or  12  in  number 

gladly  joined  with  us  in  prayer  at  night.  Indeed 

fo  they  did  at  every  inn  where  we  lodged.  For 
among  all  the  fins,  they  have  imported  from 
England,  the  Scots  have  not  yet  learned,  atleaft 


C 3*5  ] 

pot  the  common  people,  to  feoff  at  facred 
things. 

Wednefday  13.  We  reached  Aberdeen  about 
one.  Between  fix  and  feven,  both  this  evening 
and  the  next,  I preached  in  the  Ihell  of  the  new 
houfe,  and  found  it  a time  of  much  confolation. 
Frid.  15.,  We  fet  out  early,  and  came  to  Dundee 
juft  as  the  boat  was  going  off.  We  defigned  to 
lodge  at  the  houfe  on  the  other  fide  ; but  could 
not  get  either  meat,  drink,  or  good  words.  So 
we  were  conftrained  to  ride  on  to  Coupar.  After 
travelling  near  ninety  miles,  I found  no  weari- 
nefs  at  all.  Neither  were  our  horfes  hurt.  Thou, 

0 Lord  doft  fave  both  man  and  beaft  ! 

Satur.  16.  We  had  a ready  paffage  at  Kinghorn, 
and  in  the  evening  I preached  on  theKalton-hill, 
to  a very  large  congregation.  But  a ftill  larger  af- 
fembled  at  feven  on  Sund.  morning  in  the  high 
Schoolyard.  Being  aferwards  informed,  that  the 
Lord’s  fupper  was  to  be  adminiftered  in  the  Weft 
Kirk.  I knew  not  what  to  do.  But  at  length  I judg- 
ed it  beft  to  embrace  the  opportunity,  though 

1 did  not  admire  the  manner  of  adminiltra- 
tion.  After  the  ufual  morning  fervice  the  mini- 
fter  enumerated  feveral  forts'effinners,  whom  be 
forbad  to  approach.  Two  long  tables  were  let  on 
the  Tides  of  one  lfie,  covered  with  table-cloths. 
On  each  fide  of  them  a bench  was  placed  foi  the" 
people.  Each  table  held  four  or  five  and  thirty* 
Three  minifters  fat  at  the  top,  be  hind  a crofs- 
table ; one  of  whom  made  a long  exhortation 

O 2 clofed 


[ 3*6  ] 

clofed  with  the  words  of  our  Lord ; and  then, 
breaking  the  bread,  gave  it  to  him  who  fat  on 
each  fide  him.  A piece  of  bread  was  then  given 
to  him  who  fat  firft  on  each  of  the  four  benches. 
He  broke  off  a little  piece,  and  gave  the  bread  to 
the  next : fo  it  went  on,  the  deacons  giving  more 
when  wanted.  A cup  was  thengiven  to  the  firft 
perfon  on  each  bench,  and  fo  by  one  to  another. 
The  minifter  continued  his  exhortation,  all  the 
time  they  were  receiving.  Then  four  verfes  of 
the  twenty-fecond  pfalm  were  fung,  while  new 
perfons  fat  down  at  the  tables.  Afecond  minifter 
then  prayed,  confecrated,  and  exhorted.  I was 
informed  thefervice  ufually  lafted  till  five  in  the 
evening.  How  much  more  fimple,  as  well  as 
more  folemn,  is  the'fervice  of  the  church  of  Eng- 
land ? 

The  evening  congregation  on  the  hill,  was  far 
the  largeft  I have  feen  in  the  kingdom  : and 
the  moft  deeply  affe&ed.  Many  were  in  tears  ; 
more  feemed  cut  to  the  heart.  Surely  this  time 
will  not  foon  be  forgotten.  Will  it  not  appear  in 
the  annals  of  eternity  ? 

Monday  18.  I fat  out  early,  and  reached 
Woller,  about  four  in  the  afternoon.  Some 
friends  from  Newcaftle  met  me  here,  and  took 
mein  a chaife  to  Whittingham.  1 uefday  19. 
After  preaching  about  noon  at  Morpeth,  wTe  went 
on  to  Newcaftle.  The  fire  had  not  gone  out  fince 
I was  here.  I felt  it  as  foon  as  1 began  to  fpeak  . 
and  fo  it  feems,  did  the  whole  congregation. 

At 


[ 3*7  3 


At  five  in  the  morning  the  fame  fpirit  was  in  the 
midft  of  us,  as  well  as  at  feven  in  the  evening  : 
but  mod  of  all  at  the  Fell,  while  I was  applying 
thofe  words,  Believe  and  thou  Jhalt  be  faved. 

Thurfday  21.  Leaving  this  houfe  of  God,  I 
rode  to  Carlifle.  The  day  was  extreamly  fultry, 
fo  that  I was  faint  and  feverilh  in  the  evening. 
However  the  next  day  I got  well  to  White- 
haven. 

What  has  continually  hurt  this  poor  people  is 
offence.  I found  the  fociety  now  all  in  confu- 
fion,  becaufe  a woman  had  “ fcolded  with  her 
neighbour,1’  and  another  “ ftole  a two-penny 
loaf.”  I talked  largely  with  thofe,  who  had  been 
molt  offended  : and  they  flood  reproved.  Sun- 
day 24.  About  feven  I preached  at  the  Gins, 
and  the  people  flocked  together  from  all  quarters. 
The  want  of  field-preaching  has  been  one  caufe 
of  deadnefs  here.  I do  not  find  any  great  in- 
creafe  of  the  work  of  God  without  it.  If  ever  this 
is  laid  afide,  I expect  the  whole  work  will  gra- 
dually die  away. 

Mond.  25.I  rode  by  Kefwickto  Kendal.  The 
clouds  fhaded  us  moft  of  the  way,  and  the  wind 
was  juft  in  our  face  ; otherwife  we  fhould  fcarce 
have  been  able  to  bear  the  heat.  A few  years 
ago  the  fields  here  were  white  for  the  harveft. 
But  the  poor  people  have  fince  been  fo  harraft, 
by  feceders,  and  difputers  of  every  kind  that  they 
are  dry  and  dead  as  ftones.  Yet  I think  fome  of 
them  felt  tire  power  of  God  this  evening.  And 
O 3^  can 


[ 3*8  J 

can  he  not  out  of thefe  Jlones , raife  up  children 
unto  Abraham  ? 

Tuefday  26.  I preached  abroad  at  five.  And, 
I believe  not  in  vain.  Between  nine  and  ten  we 
reached  Black-Burton,  where  there  was  a ge- 
neral awakening,  till  thejars  between  Mr.  Ing- 
ham and  Allen  laid  the  people  afleep  again.  How- 
ever Tome  are  united  again  in  a quiet,  loving 
fociety,  zealous  of  good  works.  I preached  about 
eleven.  Thence  we  rode  to  Long-Predon,  being 
hill  fanned  by  the  wind,  and(unlefs  a few  mi- 
nutes now  and  then)  fhaded  by  the  clouds.  The 
congregation  was  exceeding  ferious.  Hence  I 
rode  to  Skipton  where  fomei  ime  fince,  no  Me- 
thodic preacher  could  appear.  I preached  in  the 
evening  near  the  bridge,  without  the  lead:  inter- 
ruption. Nor  did  I find  any  wearinefs,  after 
preaching  four  times,  and  riding  fifty  miles. 

Wednefday  27.  I rode  to  Otley.  In  the  even- 
ing we  had  a large  congregation,  at  the  foot  of 
the  great  mountain.  After  preaching  in  the  morn- 
ing, I examined  thofe  who  believe  they  are 
faved  from  fin.  They  are  a little  increafed  in 
number  fince  I met  them  lad  1 and  fome  of 
them  much  increafed  in  love.  This  evening  I 
preached  at  Guifeley,  the  next  at  Kighley,  and -on 
Saturday  30.  at  Bradford.  This  was  a place  of 
contention  for  many  years.  But  fince  the  con- 
tentious have  quitted  us,  all,  is  peace.  Sunday 
July  1.  I preached  at  feven  to  a more  numerous 
congregation,  than  I believe  ever  afTembled  there 

before. 


E 3*9  ] 

before.  And  all  were  ferious  as  death.  About 
one  I preached  at  Birftal,  on  Now  is  the  day  of 
falvation.  The  people  flood  by  thoufands,  cover- 
ing both  the  plain  and  the  Tides  of  the  adjacent 
hill.  It  was  a glorious  opportunity.  At  five  the 
congregation  in  Leeds  was  almoft  as  large,  but 
not  To  deeply  affedled. 

Monday  2.  I gave  a fair  hearing  to  two  cf  our 
brethren,  who  had  proved  bankrupts.  Such  we 
immediately  exclude  from  our  fociety,  unlefs  it 
plainly  appears,  not  to  be  their  own  fault.  Both 
thefe  were  in  a profperous  way,  till  they  fell  into 
that  wretched  trade  of  Bill  broking,  wherein  no 
man  continues  long,  without  being  wholly  ruin- 
ed. By  this  means,  not  being  fufhcientlv  ac- 
curate in  their  accounts,  they  ran  back  without 
being  fenftble  of  it.  Yet  it  was  quite  clear,  that 
I — R — is  an  honeft  man  ; I would  hope  the 
fame  concerning  the  other. 

Tuefdav  3.  I was  reflecting  on  an  odd  circum- 
ftance,  which  I cannot  account  for.  I never 
relifh  a tune  at  fir  ft  Rearing,  not  till  I have 
almoft  learnt  to  Ting  it.  And  as  I learn  it  more 
perfectly,  I gradually  lofe  my  relifh  for  it.  I ob- 
ferve  fomething  fimilar  in  poetry  : yea,  in  all 
the  objeCts  of  imagination.  I feldom  relifh  verfes 
at  firft  hearing  ; till  I have  heard  them  over  and 
over,  they  give  me  no  pleafure  : and  thev  give 
me  next  to  none  when  I have  heard  them  a few 
times  more,  fo  as  to  be  quite  familiar.  Juft  fo  a 
face  or  a picture,  which  does  notftrike  me  atfirft 
O 4 becomes 


C 32°  ] 

becomesmore  pleafing,  as  I grow  more  acquaint- 
ed with  it.  But  only  to  a certain  point : for 
when  I am  too  much  acquainted,  it  is  no  longer 
pleafing.  O how  imperfe&'y  do  we  underRand, 
even  the  machine  which  we  carry  about  us ! 

Thurfday  5.  I had  the  comfort  of  leaving  our 
brethren  at  Leeds,  united  in  peace  and  love. 
About  one  I preached  in  a meadow  at  Wakefield, 
At  firR  the  fun  was  inconvenient.  But  is  was 
not  many  minutes  before  that  inconvenience 
was  removed,  by  the  clouds  coming  between. 
We  had  not  only  a larger,  but  a far  more  atten- 
tive congregation,  than  ever  was  feen  here  before. 
One  indeed,  a kind  of  gentleman,  was  walking 
away,  with  great  unconcern,  when  I fpoke  aloud, 
“ Does  Gall i.o  care  for  none  of  thefe  things  ? 
But  where  will  you  go,  with  the  wrath  of  God 
on  your  head,  and  the  curfe  of  God  on  your 
hack  ?’’  He  ftopt  fhort,  Rood  Rill,  and  went  no 
farther,  till  the  fermon  was  ended. 

In  the  evening  I preached  on  the  top  of  the 
hill  near  Dewfbury,  cne  of  the  pleafantefi  towns 
in  England.  The  congregation  was  larger  than 
ever  before.  They  filled  the  preaching-houfe  at 
five  in  the  morning. 

I had  pmpofed  to  take  horfe  early,  to  avoid 
the  heat;  but  was  detained  till  between  nine 
and  ten.  It  was  then  warm  enough,  there  being 
no  wind,  and  the  fun  Alining  full  in  our  face. 
However  before  one  we  got  to  Heptonfiall, 
where  I preached  in  the  fhell  of  the  new  houfe. 

After 


[ 321  1 

After  fervice,  one  brought  his  daughter  to  me, 
who  had  been  ill  fome  months,  juft  like  thofe 
near  Brechin.  Her  filler  was  fo  two  years  fince, 
and  when  that  recovered  this  was  taken.  How 
often  muft  even  phyficians  acknowledge  fpiri- 
tual  agents,  did  not  the  nerves  help  them  out  as 
a dead  lift  ? 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Halifax,  where 
I had  the  pleafure  of  meeting  Mr.  Venn,  with 
whom  in  the  morning  Sat.  7. 1 rode  to  Hudders- 
field, and  preached  between  eleven  and  twelve  : 
The  church  was  pretty  well  filled,  confidering 
the  fhort  warning.  At  half  hour  after  one  we 
took  horfe.  The  fun  fhone  burning  hot,  and  the 
wind  was  in  our  back.  But  very  foon  the  fky 
was  overcaft,  and  the  wind  changed  and  blew 
juft  in  our  face  all  the  way  to  Manchefter.  It 
was  with  difficulty  that  I preached  in  the  even- 
ing, my  voice  being  exceeding  weak  : as  I had 
preached  three  times  a day  for  ten  days,  and 
many  of  the  times  abroad. 

Sunday  8.  I rode  to  Stockport,  and  preached; 
atone  on  a Green  at  the  end  of  the  tow.. 
A few  wild  young  men  ftrove  to  make  a dis- 
turbance. But  none  regarded  them.  A'  nve  T 
preached  at  Manchefter  on  one  thing  is  needf  ul,  and 
fcarce  knew  how  to  leave  off  At  the  meeting  of 
the  fociety  likewife,  it  pleafed  God  to  comforc 
us  greatly.  Monday  9.  The  ftewards  from  va. 
ous  parts  gave  a good  account  of  the  work,  of 
God  among  diem,  fteddily  increafing  on:  every 
O ,5,  fide. 


C 322  ] 

fide.  In  the  evening,  curiofity  brought  to  the 
houfe,  many  unbelievers,  in  the  proper  fenfe,  men 
who  do  not  receive  the  ChriAian  revelation.  I 
preached  on  Thou  Jhaltlove  thy  neighbour  as  thy- 
feif  and  proved  them  finners  on  their  own  prin- 
ciples, Some  of  the  flout-hearted  trembled.  I 
hope,  to  more  purpofe  than  poor  Felix  did. 

Wednefday  ii.  I gave  all  our  brethren  a fo- 
lemn  warning,  not  to  love  the  world  or  the  things 
oj  the  world.  This  is  one  way  whereby  Satan 
will  furely  endeavour  to  overthrow  the  prefent 
work  of  God.  Riches  fwiftly  increafe  on  many 
Methodifts,  fo  called  ; what  but  the  mighty 
power  of  God  can  hinder  their  fetting  their 
hearts  upon  them  ? And  if  fo,  the  life  of  God  va- 
nifhes  away. 

About  feven  I preached  in  the  Areet  at  Bol- 
ton to  twice  or  thrice  as  many  as  the  room  would 
have  contained.  It  was  a calm,  flill  evening,  and 
the  congregation  was  as  quiet  as  the  feafon, 
though  compofed  of  awakened  and  unawakened, 
churchmen,  diffenters  and  what  not  ? As  many 
as  the  houfe  would  well  contain  were  prefent 
again  at  five  in  the  morning.  About  feven  in  the 
evening,  the  multitude  of  people  conArained  me 
to  preach  in  the  Areet,  though  it  rained.  But  in  a 
very  fliort  time,  the  rain  Aopped  : and  I Arong- 
ly  inforced  our  Lord’s  word,  If  thou  canjl  believe , 
all  things  are  pojjible  to  him  that  believeth. 

After  fermon,  one  was  mentioning  a perfon 
who  according  to  his  account  was  difordered  juA 


[ 323  ] 

like  thofe  in  Scotland.  In  the  morning  Friday 
13,  Tier  father  brought  her  over.  Soon  after  fhe 
fell  into  a fit  : hut  it  was  plainly  natural.  I 
judged  it_  to  be  of  the  epileptic  kind;  when 
fhe  fell  into  a fecond,  I advifed  eledlrifying.  The 
fit  ceafed  by  a very  gentle  fhock.  A third  was 
removed  in  the  fame  manner.  And  fhe  was  fo 
well  that  her  father  found  no  difficulty  in  carry- 
ing her  home  behind  him. 

At  ten  I began  to  preach  at  Wigan,  proverbial- 
ly famous  for  all  manner  of  wickednefs.  As  I 
preached  abroad,  we  expeffed  fome  difturbance  : 
but  there  was  none  at  all.  A few  were  wild  at 
firft  : but  in  a little  fpace,  grew  quiet  and  atten- 
tive. I did  not  find  fo  civil  a congregation  as  this 
the  firfi  time  I preached  at  Bolton. 

To-day  I wrote  the  following  letter  which  I 
defire  may  be  ferioufly  confidered,  by  thofe  to 
whom  it  belongs. 

“ Dear  Sir, 

* “ There  was  one  thing  when  I was  with  you,' 
that  gave  me  pain.  You  are  not  in  the  fociety. 
But  why  not  ? Are  there  not  ffifficient  arguments 
for  it,  to  move  any  reafonable  man  ? Do  you  not 
hereby  make  an  open  confeffion  of  Chrift,  of 
what  you  really  believe  to  be  his  work,  and  of 
thofe  whom  you  judge  to  be  in  a proper  fenfe, 
his  people  and  his  meffengers  ? By  this  means  do 
not  you  encourage  his  people  and  flrengthen  the 
hands  of  his  meffengers  ? And  is  not  this  the  way 
0 6 to 


[ 324  3 

to  enter  into  the  fpirit  and  fhare  the  bleffing  ofa 
Chriftiaii  community  ? Hereby  likewife  you 
may  have  the  benefit  of  the  advices  and  exhor- 
tations at  the  meeting  of  the  fociety  ; and  alfo 
of  provoking  one  another,  at  the  private  meet- 
ings, to  love  and  to  good  works. 

“ The  ordinary  obje&ions  to  fuch  an  union  are 
of  little  weight  with  you.  You  are  not  afraid  of 
the  expence.  You  already  give  unto  the  Lord 
as  much  as  you  need  do  then.  And  you  are  not 
alhamed  of  the  gofpel  of  Chrift,  even  in  the 
midfl:  of  a crooked  and  perverfe  generation.  Per- 
haps you  will  fay,  “ I am  joined  in  affe&ion.” 
True,  but  not  to  fo  good  effeft.  This  joining  half- 
way, this  being  a friend  to,  but  not  a mem- 
ber of  the  fociety,  is  by  no  means  fo  open  a con- 
fefiion  of  the  work  and  fervants  of  God.  Many  go 
thus  far  who  dare  not  go  farther,  who  are  afnam- 
ed  to  bear  the  reproach  of  an  entire  union.  Either 
you  are  afhamed,  or  you  are  not.  If  you  are,  break 
through  at  once;  if  you  are  not  come  into  the 
light,  and  do  what  thofe  well-meaning  cowards 
dare  not  do.  This  imperfeft  union  is  not  fo  en- 
couraging to  the  people,  not  Jo  ftrengthening  to 
the  preachers.  Rather  it  is  weakening  their  hands, 
hindering  their  work,  and  laying  a flumbling- 
block  in  the  way  of  others  ; for  what  can  any  man 
think,  who  knows  you  are  fo  well  acquainted 
with  them,  and  yet  do  not  join  in  their  focietv  ? 
What  can  we  think,  but  that  you  know  them 
too  well  to  come  any  nearer  to  them  : that  you 

know 


[ 32  5 ] 

know  that  kind  of  union  to  be  ufelefs,  if  not  hurt- 
ful. And  yet  by  this  very  union  is  the  who!e(ex- 
tern-ai)  work  of  God  upheld  throughout  the  na- 
tion ; befides  all  the  fpiritual  good  which  accrues 
to  each  member.  O delay  no  longer  for  the  fake 
of  the  work,  for  the  fake  of  the  world,  for  the 
fake  of  vour  brethren.  Join  them  inwardly  and 
outwardly,  heart  and  hand,  for  the  fake  of  your 
own  foul.  There  is  fomething  not  eafilv  ex- 
plained in  the  fellomfhip  of  the  Spirit,  which  we 
enjoy  with  a fociety  of  living  Chriftians.  You 
have  no  need  to  give  up  your  fhare  therein, 
and  in  the  various  bleffings  that  refult  from  it. 
You  have  no  need  to  exclude  yourfelf  from  the 
benefit  of  the  advice  and  exhortations  given  from 
time  to  time.  Thefe  are  by  no  means  to  be  def- 
pifed,  even  fuppofing  you  have  yourfelf  more 
underftanding  than  him  that  gives  them.  You 
need  not  loofe  the  benefit  of  thofe  prayers  which 
experience  fhews  are  attended  with  a peculiar 
bleffing.  “ But  I do  not  care  to  meet  a clafs  ; 

I find  no  good  in  it.”  Suppofe  you  find  even  a 
diflike,  a loathing,  of  it  ; may  not  this  be  natural 
or  even  diabolical  ? In  fpite  of  this,  break  thro’, 
make  a fair  trial.  It  is  but  a lion  in  the  way.  Meet 
only  fix  times,  (with  previous  prayer)  and  fee  if 
it  do  not  vanifh  away.  But  if  it  beacrofs,  fiill  bear 
it  for  the  fake  of  your  brethren.  “ But  I want 
to  gain  my  friends  and  relations.”  If  fo,  hand 
firm.  If  you  give  way,  you  hurt  them,  and  they 
will  prefs  upon  you  the  more.  If  you  do  not, 

vou 

* 


[ 326  ] 

you  will  probably  gain  them,  otherwise  you  con- 
firm both  their  wrong  notions  and  wrong  tem- 
pers. Becaufe  I love  you  I have  fpoken  fully 
and  freely  ; to  know  that  I have  not  fpoken  in 
vain,  will  be  a great  faiisfaftion  to 

Your  affe&ionate  brother , 

J-  W.” 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Liverpool,  and 
the  next  day,  Sunday  15.  The  houfe  was  full  e- 
nough.  Many  of  the  rich  and  falhionable  were 
there,  and  behaved  with  decency.  Indeed  I have 
always  obferved  more  courtefey  and  humanity 
at  Liverpool,  than  at  moft  fea  ports  in  England. 

Monday  16.  In  the  evening  the  houfe  was 
fuller  if  poffible  than  the  night  before.  1 preach- 
ed on  the  one  thing  needful:  and  the  rich  be- 
haved as  ferioufly  as  the  poor.  Only  one  young 
gentlewoman,  (I  heard)  laughed  much.  Poor 
thing  ! Doubtlefs  fhe  thought,  “ I laugh  pret- 
tily.” 

Tuef.  17.  I preached  atWarrington.  Butwhat 
a change!  No  oppofer,  nor  any  trifler  now! 
Every  one  heard  as  for  life,  while  I explained 
and  applied,  Why  will  ye  die,  0 houfe  of  I/rael ? 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  Little-fquare, 
adjoining  to  the  preaching-houfe  at  Chefter. 
There  were  many  wild,  rude  people,  but  they 
were  quite  out-numbered  by  thofe  who  were 
civil  and  attentive.  And  I believe  fome  im- 
prefiicm  was  made  on  the  wildeft.  What 
' can 


£ 327  J 

can  (hake  Satan’s  kingdom  like  jield-preachr 
ing  ? 

Wednefday  18.  I fhould  have  been  glad  of  a 
day  of  reft.  But  notice  had  been  given  of  my 
preaching  at  noon  near  Tatten-hall,  The  rain 
began  almoft  as  foon  as  we  came  in.  So  I could 
not  preach  abroad  as  I defigned,  but  in  a large 
commodious  barn,  where  all  that  were  prefenr, 
feemed  to  receive  the  word  of  God  with  joy  and 
reverence. 

The  congregation  at  Chefter,  in  the  evening 
was  more  numerous,  and  far  more  ferious  than 
the  day  before.  There  wants  only  a little  more 
field  preaching  here,  and  Chefter  would  be  as 
quiet  as  London. 

Thurfday  9.  After  preaching  at  Little-Leigh, 
I rode  on  to  Macclesfield.  Here  I heard  an 

agreeable  account  of  Mrs.  R , who  was  in  the 

fociety  at  London  from  a child  ; but  after  fhe 
was  married  to  a rich  man,  durft  not  own  a poor, 
defpifed  people.  Laft  year  fhe  broke  through 
and  came  to  fee  me.  A few  words  which  I then 
fpoke  never  left  her,  not  even  in 'the  trying  hour, 
during  the  illnefs  which  came  a few  months  af- 
ter. All  her  converfation  was  then  in  heaven : 
till  feeling  her  ftrength  was  quite  exhaufted,  fhe 
faid  with  a fmile,  “ Death  thou  art  welcome,” 
and  refigned  her  fpirit. 

I preached  about  feven  to  an  huge  multitude 
©f  attentive  hearers.  Friday  20.  At  noon  we 

made 


[ 328  ] 

jnade  the  fame  fhift  at  Congleton,  as  when  I 
was  here  laft.  I Hood  in  the  window,  having  put 
as  many  women  as  it  would  contain  into  the 
boufe.  The  reft,  with  the  men,  ftood  below  in 
the  meadow,  and  many  of  the  townfmen  wiTd 
enough.  I have  fcarce  found  fuch  enlargement 
of  heart  fince  I came  fromNewcaftle.  The  brutes 
refilled  long,  but  were  at  length  overcome,  not 
above  five  or  fix  excepted.  Surely  man  fhall  not 
long  have  the  upperhand;  God  will  get  unto 
himfelf  the  viclory. 

It  rained  all  the  day,  till  feven  in  the  evening, 
when  I began  preaching  at  Borflem.  Even  the 
poor  potters  here  are  a more  civilized  people, 
than  the  better  fort , fo  called,  at  Congleton. 
A few  ftood  with  their  hats  on,  but  none  fpoke 
a word,  or  offered  to  make  the  leaft  diftur- 
hance. 

Saturday  21.  1 rode  to  Bilbrook,  near  Wol- 
verhampton, and  preached  between  two  and 
three.  Thence  we  went  on  to  Madeley,  an  ex- 
ceeding pleafant  village  encompafled  with  trees 
and  hills.  It  was  a great  comfort  to  me,  to 
converfe  once  more  with  a Methodift  of  the  old 
ftamp,  denying  himfelf,  taking  up  his  crofs,  and 
refolve  to  be  altogether  a Chrijlian. 

Sunday  22.  At  ten  Mr.  Fletcher  read  prayers, 
and  I preached  on  thofe  words  in  the  gofpel,  1 
am  the  good  Shepherd ',  the  good  Shepherd  layeth 
down  his  life  Jot  the  Jheep.  The  church  wTould  no- 
thing near  contain  the  congregation.  But  a win- 
dow 


[ 329  ] 

dow  near  the  pulpit  being  taken  down,  thofe 
who  could  not  come  in,  flood  in  the  church- 
yard, and  I believe  all  could  hear.  The  congre- 
gation, they  faid,  ufed  to  be  much  fmaller,  in 
the  afternoon  than  in  the  morning.  But  I could 
not  difcern  the  leaft  difference,  either  in  num- 
ber or  ferioufnefs. 

I found  employment  enough  for  the  interme- 
diate hours,  in  praving  with  various  companies, 
who  hung  about  the  houfe,  infatiably  hungring 
and  thirfting  after  the  good  word.-  Mr.  Grim- 
fhaw,  at  his  firft  coming  to  Haworth,  had  not 
fuch  a profpeft  as  this.  There  are  many  adver- 
faries  indeed;  but  yet  they  cannot Jliut  the  open 
and  effeBual  door. 

Monday  23.  The  church  was  pretty  well  filled 
even  at  five,  and  many  flood  in  the  church-yard. 
In  the  evening  I preached  at  Shrewfbury,  to  a 
large  congregation,  among  whom  were  feveral 
men  of  fortune.  I truft,  though  hitherto  we  feem 
to  have  been  ploughing  on  the  fand,  there  will 
at  laft  he  fome  fruit. 

Wednefday  25.  I took  horfe  a little  after 
four,  and  about  two  preached  in  the  market- 
houfe  at  Lanidlos,  two  or  three  and  forty  miles 
from  Shrewfbury.  At  three  we  rode  forward 
through  the  mountains,  to  the  Fountain-head. 

I was  for  lodging  there  ; but  Mr.  B 

being  quite  unwilling,  we  mounted  again  about 
feven.  After  having  rode  an  hour,  we  found 

we 


[ 33°  3 

we  were  quite  out  of  the  way,  having  been 
wrong  dire&ed  at  fetting  out.  We  were  then 
told,  to  ride  over  fome  grounds  : but  our  path 
foon  ended  in  the  edge  of  a bog  : however  we 
got  through  to  a little  houfe, where  an  honed  man 
mdantly  mounting  his  horfe,  galloped  before  us, 
up  hill  and  down,  till  he  brought  us  into  a road 
which  he  faid  led  (trait  to  Roes-fair.  We  rode 
on,  till  another  met  us  and  faid,  No,  this  is  the 
way  to  Aberydwith.  If  you  would  go  to  Roes- 
fair,  you  mud  turn  back,  and  ride  down  to  yon- 
der bridge.  The  matter  of  a little  houfe  near 
the  bridge,  then  direfted  us  to  the  next  village  : 
where  we  enquired  again,  (it  being  pad  nine) 
and  were  once  more  fetexaftlv  wrong.  Having 
wandered  an  hour  upon  the  mountains,  through 
rocks,  and  bogs  and  precipieces,  we  with  abun- 
dance of  difficulty  got  back,  to  the  little  houfe 
near  the  bridge.  It  was  vain  to  think  of  red 
there,  it  being  full  of  drunken,  roaring  miners  : 
befides  that  there  was  but  one  bed  in  the  houfe, 
and  neither  grafs,  nor  hay,  nor  corn  to  be  had. 
So  we  hired  one  of  them  to  walk  with  us  to 
Roes-fair,  though  he  was  miferably  drunk,  till 
by  falling  all  his  length  in  a purling  dream,  he 
came  tolerably  to  his  fenfes.  Between  eleven 
and  twelve  we  came  to  the  inn  ; but  neither 
here  could  we  get  any  hay.  When  we  were  in 
bed,  the  good  odler  and  miner,  thought  good  to 
mount  our  beads.  I believe,  it  was  not  long 

before 


[ 33*  ] 

before  we  rofe,  that  they  put  them  into  the  fta- 
ble.  But  the  mule  was  cut  in  feveral  places,  and 
ray  mare  was  bleeding  like  a pig,  from  a wound 
behind  two  inches  deep,  made,  it  feemed,  by  a 
liroke  with  a pitch  fork.  What  to  do  we  could  not 
tell,  till  I remembered,  I had  a letter  for  one  Mr. 
Nathaniel  Williams,  whom,  upon  enquiry,  I 
found  to  live  but  a mile  off.  W e walked  thi- 
ther, and  found  an  Ifraelite  indeed,  who  gladly 
received  both  man  and  bead. 

After  I had  got  a little  reft,  Mr.  W.  debited 
me  to  give  an  exhortation  to  a few  of  his  neigh- 
bours. None  was  more  ftruck  therewith,  than 
one  of  his  own  family,  who  before  cared  for 
none  of  thefe  things.  He  fent  a fervant  with 
us  after  dinner  to  Tregarron,  from  whence  we 
had  a plain  road  to  Lampiter. 

Friday  28.  We  rode  through  a lovely  vale, 
and  over  pleafant  and  fruitful  hills  to  Carmar- 
then. Thence  after  afhortbait,  we  went  on  to 
Pembroke,  and  came  before  I was  expended.  So 
I refted  that  night,  having  not  quite  recovered 
my  journey  from  Shrewfbury  to  Roes-fair. 

Sunday  29.  The  minifter  of  St.  Mary’s  fent 
me  word,  be  was  very  willing  I fhould  preach 
in  his  church;  but  before  fervice  began,  the 
mayor  fent  to  forbid  it.  So  he  preached  a very 
ufeful  fermon  himfelf.  The  mayor’s  behaviour 
fo  difgufted  many  of  the  gentry,  that  they  re- 
folved  to  hear  where  they  could.  And  accord- 
ingly 


[ 332  } 

ingly  flocked  together  in  the  evening,  from  aH 
parts  of  the  town.  And  perhaps  the  taking  up 
this  crofs  may  profit  them  more,  than  my  fer- 
mon  in  the  church  would  have  done. 

Monday  30. 1 rode  to  Haverfordweft.  But  no 
notice  had  been  given,  nor  did  any  in  the  town 
know  of  my  coming.  However  after  a fhort  time 
I Walked  up  toward  the  caflle,  and  began  flinging 
an  hymn.  The  people  prefently  ran  together 
from  all  quarters.  They  have  curiofity  at  leaf!. 
And  fome,  I cannot  doubt,  were  moved  by  a 
nobler  principle.  Were  zealots  and  a£iive  la- 
bourers here,  what  an  harveft  might  there  be, 
even  in  this  corner  of  the  land. 

We  returned  through  heavy  rain  to  Pembroke. 
Tuefday  31.  We  fet  out  for  Glamorganfhire,  and 
rode  up  and  down  fteep  and  flony  mountains, 
for  about  five  hours,  to  Larn.  Having  procured 
a pretty  ready  paflage  there,  we  went  on  to 
Llanfluthan-ferry  : where  we  were  in  fome  dan- 
ger of  being  fwallowed  up  in  the  mud,  before 
we  could  reach  the  water.  * Between  one  and 
two  we  reached  Kidwelly,  having  been  more 
than  feven  hours  on  horfeback,  in  which  time 
we  could  have  rode  round  by  Carmarthen,  with, 
more  eafeboth  to  man  and  beafl.  I have  there- 
fore taken  my  leave  of  thefe  ferries : coDflder- 
ing  we  fave  no  time  by  crofling  them,  (not  even 
when  we  have  a ready  paflage)  and  fo  have  all 
the  trouble,  danger,  and  expence,  clear  gains. 
I wonder  therefore  that  any  man  of  common 

fenfe. 


[ 333  1 

fenfe,  who  has  once  made  the  experiment, 
fliould  ever  ride  from  Pembroke  to  Swanfey,  any 
other  way  than  by  Carmarthen. 

* An  honeft  man  at  Kidwelly,  told  us,  there 
was  no  difficulty  in  riding  the  hands.  So  we  rode 
on.  In  ten  minutes  one  overtook  us,  who  ufed 
to  guide  perfons  over  them.  And  it  was  well  he 
did,  or  in  all  probability,  we  had  been  fwallcyv- 
ed  up.  The  whole  fands  are  at  leaf!;  ten  miles 
over,  with  many  ftreams  of  quickfands  intermixt. 
But  our  guide  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with 
them,  and  with  the  road  on  the  otherfide.  By 
his  help,  between  five  and  fix,  we  came  well  tir- 
- ed  to  Oxwych  in  Gower. 

Gower  is  a large  traft.  of  land,  bounded  by 
Brecknockfliire  on  the  north-eaft,  the  fea  on  the 
fouth-weft,  and  rivers  on  the  other  fides.  Here 
all  the  people  talk  Engliffi,  and  are  in  general, 
the  moll  plain,  loving  people  in  Wales.  It  is 
therefore  no  wonder,  that  they  receive  the 
word,  with  all  readinefs  of  heart. 

Knowing  they  were  fcattered  up  and  down,  I 
had  fent  two  perfons  on  Sunday,  that  they  might 
be  there  early  on  Monday,  and  fo  fent  notice 
of  my  coming  all  over  the  country.  But  they 
came  to  Oxwych  fcarce  a quarter  of  an  hour  be- 
fore me,  fo  that  the  poor  people  had  no  notice 
at  all.  Nor  was  there  any  to  take  us  in  : the 
perfon  with  whom  the  preacher  ufed  to  lodge, 
being  three  miles  out  of  town.  After  I had  Hayed 
a while  in  the  ftreet,  (for  there  was  no  public 

houfe) 


[ 334  ] 


houfe)  a poor  woman  gave  me  houfe-roona. 
Having  had  nothing  fince  breakfaft,  I was  very 
willing  to  eat  or  drink  : but  fhe  limply  told  me, 
“ She  had  nothing  in  the  houfe  but  a dram  of 
gin.”  However  I afterwards  procured  a difh  of 
tea  at  another  houfe,  and  was  much  refrefhed. 
About  feven  I preached  to  a little  company,  and 
again  in  the  morning.  They  were  all  attention: 
fo  that  even  for  the  fake  of  this  handful  of  peo- 
ple, I did  not  regret  my  labour. 

Wednefday,  Aug.  1.  It  was  with  difficulty  I 
reached  Cowbridge,  about  one,  where  the  con- 
gregation was  waiting.  I found  they  had  had 
heavy  rain  great  part  of  the  day:  but  very  little 
fell  upon  us.  Nor  do  I remember,  that  from 
the  beginning  of  March  till  now,  we  have  been 
in  more  than  one  heavy  ffiower  of  rain,  either 
in  England,  Scotland,  or  Wales. 

I preached  in  the  evening  at  Landaffi  and  on 
Thurfday  2,  in  the.  Town-hall  at  Cardiff.  Satur- 
day 4,  we  eroded  at  the  New-paffage,  and  rode 
on  to  Briflol. 

Sund.  5.  I preached  in  Princes-llreet  at  eight, 
at  two  under  the  fycamore-tree  at  Kingfwood, 
and  at  five  near  King’s-fquare,  in  Briftol.  How 
many  thoufands  in  this  city,  do  fee  in  this  their 
day,  the  things  that  belong  to  their  peace  ! 

On  Monday  the  6th  our  Conference  began  : 
the  great  point  I now  laboured  for  was,  a good 
undertlanding  with  all  our  brethren  of  the  cler- 
gy, who  are  heartily  engaged  in  propagating  vi- 
tal 


[ 335  ] 

tal  religion.  Saturday  11.  I took  chaife  early 
in  the  morning,  and  at  night  came  fafe  to  Lon- 
don. 

Sunday  12.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  in 
Moorfields  on  thofe  comfortable  words,  Believe 
in  the  Lord  Jefus  Chriji,  and  thou  Jhalt  be  faved. 
Thoufands  heard  with  calm  and  deep  attention. 
This  alfo  hath  God  wrought  ! 

Monday  13.  I was  again  as  fully  employed  as 
at  the  Conference,  in  vifiting  claffes  from  morn- 
ing till  night.  Saturday  18.  I preached  for  the 
firft  time  in  our  new  Chappel  at  Snowfields,  on 

how  amiable  are  thy  tabernacles , thou  Lord  of 
hojlsl 

* Sunday  19.  Meeting  with  a pious  and  fenfi. 
ble  man,  who  was  born  in  the  Me  of  Skie,  I faid, 
“ Tell  me  freely  : did  you  yourfelf  ever  know 
a fecond-fighted  man  ?”  He  anfwered  after  a little 
paufe,  “ I have  known  more  than  one  or  two.” 
I faid,  “ But  were  they  not  deceivers  ? How 
do  you  know  they  were  really  fuch  ■?”  He  re- 
plied, “ I have  been  in  company  with  them, 
when  they  dropped  down  as  dead.  Coming  to 
themfelves,  they  looked  utterly  amazed  and  faid, 
“I  have  been  in  fuch  a place,  and  I law  fuch 
perfons  (perhaps  fifty  miles  off)  die  in  fuch  a 
manner.”  And  when  enquiry  was  made,  I ne- 
ver could  find,  that  they  were  miftaken  in  one 
circumflance.  But  the  reafon  why  it  is  fo  hard 
for  you  to  get  any  information  concerning  this 
is,  thofe  who  have  the  fecond-Jight,  count  it  a 

great 


[ 336  ] • 

great  misfortune.  And  it  is  thought  a fcandal  to 
their  family.” 

Afonday  20.  I went  to  Canterbury,  and  open- 
ed our  new  Chappel,  by  preaching,  on  One 
thing  is  needful.  How  is  it,  that  many  proteftants, 
even  in  England,  do  not  know,  that  no  other 
confecration  of  Church  or  Chapel  is  allowed , much 
lefs  required  in  England,  than  the  performance 
of  public  worfhip  therein?  This  is  the  only  con- 
fecration  of  any  church  in  Great-Britain,  which 
is  neceffary,  or  even  lawful . It  is  true,  archbi- 
fhop  Laud  compofed  a form  of  conjecration  ; but 
it  was  never  allowed , much  lefs  ejlablified  in 
England.  Let  this  be  remembered  by  all  who 
talk  fo  idly,  of  preaching  in  unconf ecx ated  places! 

Wednefday  22.  I had  defigned  to  return  to 
London  ; but  being  importuned  to  pay  a vifit 
firft  to  Sandwich,  I went  over,  and  preached 
about  ten,  to  a dull,  but  attentive  congregation. 
Immediately  after  fervice  we  fet  out  for  Dover. 
In  the  way  we  were  on  the  point  of  being  da(h- 
ed  in  pieces:  the  chariot  wheels  running  with- 
in two  or  three  inches  or  lefs  of  the  edge  of  a 
bank  ten  or  twelve  feet  high.  I preached  in 
Dover  at  two,  and  returned  time  enough  for  the 
fervice  at  Canterbury.  Thurfday  23.  I preach- 
ed at  Bednal-Green,  and  in  the  evening  at  the 
Eoundery. 

* Monday  27.  I faw  a pattern  of  patience, 
John  Matthews,  daily  dying  of  a confumption, 
but  in  conllant  pain,  weaknefs,  wearinefs,  and 

want 


[ 337  ] 

want  of  fleep,  calmly  giving  himfelf  up  to 
God. 

Sunday,  Sept.  2.  After  a toilfome,  yet  com- 
fortable day,  I fet  out  in  the  machine,  and  on 
Monday  evening  came  to  Briftol,  as  frelh  as  I 
left  London: 

Monday  10.  I rode  to  Shepton-Mallet,  and 
preached  at  noon  on,  One  thing  is  needful.  Only 
one  man,  a common  difturber,  behaved  amifs. 
I was  conftrained  to  rebuke  him  lharply.  All 
the  people  turned  their  eyes  upon  him  ; and  for 
once  he  was  afhamed.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed  at  Bayford,  near  Wincaunton,  and  at  feven 
in  the  morning.  Wednefday  12.  I returned  to 
Briftol,  and  at  fix  in  the  evening  preached  on 
Redclift-hill.  Many  were  here  who  I fuppofe 
never  heard  me  before.  And  attention  fat  on 
every  face. 

* Thurfday  13.  I fpent  an  hour  in  Lord 

B ’s  gardens,  or  more  properly  woods. 

They  are  finall  to  the  late  Duke  of  Kent’s 
in  Bedfordlhire,  and  therefore  not  capable 
of  fo  much  variety  : but  for  the  fize,  it 
is  not  poffible  for  any  thing  of  the  kind  to 
be  more  agreeable.  And  the  fituation,  on 
die  top  of  an  high  hill,  in  one  of  the  fruitful- 
left  counties  in  England,  gives  them  an  advan- 
tage which  even  Stow  gardens  have  not.  Yet 
happinefs  is  not  in  jhefe  fhades ! And  if  it  were, 
yet, 

Vol.  XXXI.  P HoW 


P 


[ 338  ] 


How  long  ? How  foon  will  they  upbraid 

Their  tranfitory  mailer  dead? 

Monday  17.  About  noon  I preached  at  Bath. 
The  day  before  Mr.  Davis  had  preached  abroad. 
One  fruit  of  this  was,  the  congregation  was 
larger  now  than  I remember  it  to  have  been  thefe 
feven  years.  Thence  I rode  to  Comb-grove,  an 
houfe  built  in  a large  grove  on  the  fide  of  an  high 
fleep  hill.  I found  Mrs.  W — the  fame  Hill,  with 
regard  to  her  livelinefs,  but  not  her  wildnefs  ; 
in  thisfhe  was  much  altered.  I preached  at  five 
to  a fmall,  ferious  congregation.  And  I believe 
few  were  fent  empty  away. 

Two  perfons  from  London,  who  wTere  at  Bath 
for  their  health,  had  walked  over  to  the  preach- 
ing. Afterwards  we  all  fpent  an  hour  in  Tinging 
and  ferious  converfation.  The  fire  kindled  more 
and  more  till  Mrs.  — alked,  “ If  I would  give 
her  leave  to  pray  ?”  Such  a prayer  I never 
heard  before,  it  was  perfectly  an  original  : odd 
and  unconnected,  made  up  of  disjointed  frag- 
ments : and  yet  like  a flame  of  fire.  Every  fen- 
tence  went  thro’  my  heart,  and  I believe  the  heart 
of  every  one  prefcnr.  For  many  months  I have 
ound  nothing  like  it.  It  w'as  good  for  me  to  be 
here. 

Tuefday  18.  I preached  again  in  the  court- 
yard at  feven ; and  it  was  now,  that  one  of  the 
fervants,  who  was  in  tears  the  night  before,  was 
throughly  convinced,  that  God  had  blotted 

out 


[ 339  ] 


out  all  her  fins.  About  noon  I preached  to  a 
large  congregation  at  Frefhford,  on  Now  is  the 
day  of  falavtion.  A little  before  fix,  being  de- 
termined to  be  no  longer  cooped  up  in  the  room 
at  Bradford,  I began  in  the  main  ftreet,  near  the 
bridge.  In  a very  fhort  time  a multitude  of  peo- 
ple ran  together,  and  liftened  with  all  attention, 
’till  an  impetuous  fhower  drove  part  of  them 
away.  The  reft  would  not  ftir  ’till  I conclud  - 
ed.  I then  gave  notice  of  meeting  thefociety’: 
but  a crowd  of  people  prefled  in  with  them.  See- 
ing their  earneftnefs,  I was  unwilling  to  hinder  : 
fo  we  had  quickly  another  large  congregation. 
And  I know  not  if  we  have  had  fuch  a feafon  at 
Bradford,  for  twice  feven  years  before. 

Wednefady  19.  At  five  we  had  fuch  a con- 
gregation as  does  not  ufe  to  meet  here  at  that 
hour.  At  nine  I preached  again  at  Comb- Grove, 
and  found  again  that  God  was  there. 

Is  not  this  an  inftance  of  tenthoufand,  of  God’s 
chufing  the  foolifh  things  of  the  world  to  con- 
found the  wife  ? Here  is  one  that  has  not  only  a 
%veak  natural  underftanding,  but  an  impetuofity 
of  temper,  bordering  upon  madnefs.  And  hence 
both  her  fentiments  are  confufed,  and  her  ex- 
preftions  odd  and  indigefted.  And  yet  notwith- 
ftanding  this,  more  of  the  real  power  of  God  at- 
tends thefe  uncouth  exprefiions,  than  the  fen- 
fible  difcourfes  of  even  good  men,  who  have 
twenty  times  her  underftanding. 

Thus  I have  many  times  known  God  attach 
P 2 his 


t 34»  J 

his  power  to  the  words  of  extremely  weak  men. 
The  humble  overlooked  the  weaknefs  of  the  men 
and  rejoiced  in  the  power  of  God.  But  all  his 
power  is  unacknowledged,  unfelt  by  thofe,  who 
Humble  at  the  weaknefs  of  the  inftrumerit. 

I reached  Briflol  time  enough  to  preach  in  the 
evening  upon  Redclift-hill.  A malignant  fever 
had  lately  broke  out  upon  the  very  fpot,  which 
much  increafed  the  number  and  ferioufnefs  of  the 
congregation. 

Saturday  22.  I was  much  refrefhed  by  hearing 
the  experience  of  Mary  G , once  a deter- 

mined enemy  to  the  doftrine  of  perfection,  op- 
pofingit  wi tli  great  eagernefs  and  many  reafons  ; 
but  now  an  happy  witnefs  of  it.  During  her  hot- 
teft  oppofitioa  fhe  never  could  reft  in  any  known 
fin.  And  this  at  length  made  both  pride  and 
anger  fo  exceeding  bitter  to  her,  that  fhe  could 
have  no  peace  ’till  the  was  fully  delivered  from 
them. 

Sunday  23.  I do  not  know  whether  we  have 
had  fo  large  a congregation  thefe  twenty  years 
as  this  evening,  at  the  new  fquare.  Surely  the 
wife  world  will  not  impute  this  to  novelty  : 
unlefs  becaufe  the  grace  of  God  is  ever  new. 

On  Monday,  Tuefday,  and  Wednefday  I 
vifited  the  focieties  in  Somerfetffiire.  On  the 
following  days  I met  the  clafles  in  Briftol,  and 
narrowly  enquired  into  the  character  and  behavi- 
our of  each  perfon  : the  rather  becaufe  if  had 
been  ftrongely  affirmed,  That  there  were  many 

diforderly 


[ 34*  ] 

diforderly  walkers  in  the  fociety.  I found  one  wo- 
man and  one  man,  who  I am  afraid  defe'rved  that 
chara£ler.  Let  any  one  that  is  more  clear  lighted 
than  me,  find  two  more,  and  I will  thank  him. 

Sun.  30.  The  whole  fociety  met  in  the  evening, 
and  jointly  renewed  their  covenant  with  God, 
in  the  form  recommended  by  Mr.  Rich.  Allen. 
And  many  felt  that  God  was  there.  It  was  a day 
of  his  power  not  to  be  forgotten,  a day  both  of 
godly  borrow  and  flrong  confolation. 

Monday,  Oftober  1,  I left  Briftol  with  joy, 
having  feen  the  fruit  of  my  labour.  At  noon 
I preached  at  Comb-Grove,  to  a final!  congre- 
gation of  earnell,  fimple  people.  I had  defigned 
to  preach  in  the  evening  at  Bradford,  in  the  fame 
place  I did  before;  but  Mr.  R.  at  whofe  door  I 
then  flood,  had  now  altered  his  mind.  Sol  was 
conllrained  to  preach  in  our  own  room,  to  (com- 
paratively) an  handful  of  people. 

Tuefday  2.  I breakfafled  at  the  Devizes,  with 

Mr.  B , a black  Swan,  an  honeft  lawyer  ! 

Hence  we  rode  thro’  a moll  intricate  road  to 
Pewfey.  I found  a neighbouring,  gentleman  had 
been  there,  moving  every  flone,  to  prevent  mv 
preaching.  I was  informed,  his  firft  defign  was, 
to  raife  a mob.  Then  he  would  have  had  the 
church-wardens  interpofe.  Whether  they  in- 
tended it  or  no,  I cannot  tell  ; but  they  neither 
did  nor  (aid  any  thing.  The  congregation  filled 
a great  part  of  the  church,  and  were  all  deeply  at- 
tentive. Surely  good  will  be  done  in  this  place, 

P 3 if 


[ 342  ] 

if  it  be  not  prevented  by  a mixture  of  various 
dodlrines.  Wed.  3.  I rode  to  Salifbury,  and  go- 
ing flowly  forward,  on  Satur.  6,  came  to  London. 

Sunday  7.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  Snow- 
fields  and  afterwards  at  Weft-ftreet.  We  had  a 
glorious  opportunity  at  the  Lord’s  fupper.  The 
rocks  were  broken  in  pieces.  At  five  I preached 
in  Moorfields  to  an  huge  multitude,  on  Ye  are 
Javed thro' faith*  A little  before  twelve  I took 
the  machine  for  Norwich.  Monday  8.  We 
dined  at  Bury,  where  a gentlewoman  came  into 
the  coach,  with  whom  I fpent  moft  of  the  after- 
noon in  clofe  converfation  and  finging  praifes 
to  God. 

Tuefday  9.  I was  defined  to  meet  Mr.  B.  and 
we  had  a good  deal  of  converfation  together.  He 
fieems  to  be  a perfon  of  middling  fenfe,  but  a 
moft  unpleafing  addrefs.  I would  hope,  he  has 
fome  little  experience  of  religion  ; but  it  does 
not  appear  to  advantage,  as  he  is  extremely  hot, 
impetuous,  overbearing,  and  impatient  of  con- 
tradiftion.  He  hooked  me  unawares,  into  a little 
difpute  ; but  I cut  it  Ihort  as  foon  as  poffible, 
knowing  neither  was  likely  to  convince  the 
other.  So  we  met  and  parted  in  peace. 

Wednefday  10.  I went  to  Yarmouth,  where 
the  earneft  congregation,  was  gathered  at  Ihort 
warning.  ThuTday  11.  I was  defined  to  go 
to  Leofloffe  in  Suffolk,  nine  miles  fouth-eaftof 
Yarmouth.  The  ufe  of  a large  place  had  been  of- 
fered, which  wrould  contain  abundance  of  people. 

But 


[ 343  ] ' 

But  when  I was  come,  Mr.  Romain  had  change 
ed  his  mind.  So  I pl  eached  in  the  open  air.  A 
wilder  congregation  I have  not  feen  ; but  the  bri- 
dle was  in  their  teeth.  AIL  attended,  and  a con- 
fiderable  part  feemed  to  underftand  fomething  of 
what  was  fpoken.  Nor  did  any  behave  uncivilly 
when  I had  done  : and  I believe  a few  did  not 
lofe  their  labour. 

It  was  eafy  in  the  evening  to  obferve  the  dif- 
ferent fpirit  of  the  congregation  at  Yarmouth. 
Almofi  all  feemed  to  feel  the  power  of  God,  and 
many  were  Jiiled  ivith  confolation. 

Frid.  11.  I returned  to  Norwich  and  enquired 
into  the  (late  of  the  fociety.  I have  feen  no  peo- 
ple in  all  England  or  Ireland  fo  changeable  as  this. 
This  fociety  in  1 755  confided  of  eighty-thre e 
members  : two  years  after  of  an  hundred  and 
thirty-four  : in  1758,  it  was  fhrunk  to  an  hundred 
and  ten.  In  March  1759  we  took  the  taberna- 
cle : and  within  a month  the  fociety  was  increaf- 
ed  to  above  feven  hundred  and  fixty.  But  near- 
ly five  hundred  of  thefe  It  ad  formerly  been  with 
James  Wheatley,  and  having  been  fcattered 
abroad,  now  ran  together,  they  hardly  knew  why. 
Few  of  them  were  throughly  awakened,  mod, 
deeply  ignorant,  all  bullocks  unaccujlomed  to  the. 
yoke,  having  never  had  any  rule  or  order  among 
them,  but  every  man  doing  what  was  right  in 
his  own  eyes.  It  was  not  therefore  ftrange, 
that  the  next  year,  only  five  hundred  and  feven 
of  thefe  were  left.  In  1761  they  were  farther 
P 4 reduced, 


L 344  1 


reduced,  namely  to  four  hundred  and  twelve. 
J cannot  tell  how  it  was,  that  in  1762,  they 
were  increafed  again  to  fix  hundred  and  thirty. 
But  the  moon  foon  changed,  fo  that  in  1763, 
they  were  fhrunk  to  three  hundred  and  ten. 
This  large  reduftion  was  owing  to  the  with-draw- 
ing the  faeratnent,  to  which  they  had  been  ac- 
euftomed  from  the  time  the  tabernacle  was  built. 
They  are  now  funk  to  an  hundred  and  feven  ty- 
four.  And  now  probably  the  tide  will  turn 
again. 

Sunday  14.  At  feven  I clearly  and  hrongly 
defcribed  the  height  and  depth  of  Chrihian  ho- 
hnefs.  And  (what  is  hrange)  I could  not  after- 
ward find,  that  any  one  perfon  was  offended. 
At  ten  we  had  a congregation  indeed  : I truft 
all  of  one  heart.  I went  as  ufual,  to  the  cathe- 
dral in  the  afternoon,  and  heard  a found  prac- 
tical fermon.  About  five  our  great  congrega- 
tion met,  and  (what  has  feldom  been  known) 
very  quietly.  We  were  equally  quiet  at  the 
meeting  of  the  fociety,  which  met  now  for  the 
firft  time  on  a Sunday  evening.  So  has  God 
hilled  the  madnefs  of  the  people.  Are  not  the 
hearts  of  all  men  in  his  hand  ? 

Monday  15.  At  the  requeft  of  many,  I had 
given  notice  of  a watch-night.  We  had  but  an 
indifferent  prelude  : between  fix  and  feven,  the 
mob  gathered  in  great  numbers,  made  an  huge 
noife,  and  began  to  throw  large  hones  againh: 
the  outward  doors.  But  they  had  put  themfelves 

®ut 


[ 345  ] 

out  of  breath  before  eight,  fo  that  when  the  fer- 
vice  begun,  they  were  all  gone. 

Tuefday  16.  In  the  evening  the  whole  con- 
gregation feemed  not  a little  moved,  while  Lwas 
inforcing  thofe  folemn  words,  He  died  for  all, 
that  they  who  live  might  not  henceforth  live  unto 
themf elves,  but  unto  him  that  died  for  them  and 
roje  again.  The  fame  was  obfervable,  and  that 
in  an  higher  and  higher  degree,  the  two  follow- 
ing evenings.  If  1 could  flay  here  a month,  I 
think  there  would  be  a fociety  little  inferior 
to  that  at  Briftol.  But  it  mull  not  be  : they 
who  will  bear  found  doftrine  only  from  me,  mull 
fl ill  believe  a lie. 

Saturday  20.  My  horfes  meeting  me  at  Burnt- 
wood,  I rode  onto  Laton-Stone,  and  preached 
to  a ferious  congregation,  on  I will : be  thou 
clean.  The  following  wdek  I made  a little  tour 
througWpart  of  Kent  and  Suflex,  where  fome  of 
our  brethren  fwiftly  increafe  in  goods.  Do 
they  increafe  in  grace  too  ? If  not,  let  them  take 
care  that  their  money  do  not  perifh  with  them.  - 

Sunday,  Now  4.  I propofed  to  the  leaders, 
the  aflifting  the  fociety  for  the  reformation  of 
manners,  with  regard  to  their  heavy  debt.  - One 
of  them  afked,  “ Ought  we  not  to  pay  our  own 
debt  firft  ?”  After  fome  confutations,  it  was  a- 
greed  to  attempt  it.  The  general  debt  of  the 
fociety  in  London,  occafioned  chiefly  by  re- 
pairing the  Foundery;  and  chappels,  and  by 
building  at  Wapping  and  Snowfields,  was  about 
P ,5  nine- 


[ 346  ] 

nine  hundred  pounds.  This  I laid  before  the 
fociety  in  the  evening,  and  defired  them  all  to 
fet  their  fhoulders  to  the  work,  either  by  a pre- 
fent  contribution,  or  by  fubfcribing  what  they 
could  pay,  on  thefirft  of  January,  February  or 
March. 

Monday  g.  My  fcraps  of  time  this  week  I 
employed  in  fetling  down  my  prefent  Thoughts 
upon  a Jingle  life , which  indeed  are  juft  the  fame 
they  have  been  thefe  thirty  years.  And  the  fame 
they  muft  be,  unlefs  I give  up  my  bible. 

Thurfday  8.  At  ten  (and  fo  every  morn- 
ing] I met  the  preachers  that  were  in  town,  and 
read  over  with  them  the  “ Survey  of  the  wif- 
dom  of  God  in  the  creation.”  Many  pupils  I 
had  at  the  univerfity  ; and  I took  fome  pains 
with  them.  But  to  what  effefl  ? What  is  be- 
come of  them  now  ? How  many  ®f  them  think 
either  of  their  tutor  or  their  God?  But,  blelTed 
be  God,  I have  had  fome  pupils  fince,  who  will 
reward  me  for  my  labour.  Now  I live  : for  ye 
Jland fajl  in  the  Lord. 

Monday  12.  I retired  to  Hoxton,  to  anfwer 
what  was  perfonal  in  the  letters  afcribed  to  Mr. 
Hervey,  * How  amazing  is  the  power  of  pre- 
judice ! Were  it  not  for  this,  every  one  who 
knew  him  and  me,  would  have  cried  out  with 
indignation,  “ Whatever  Mr.  W.  was,  none 
can  commend  or  excufe  Mr.  H.  Such  bitter- 
nefs  he  ought  not  to  have  fhewn,  to  his  tnoft 
cruel  enemy.  How  much  lefs  to  the  guide  of 

his 


£ 347  ] 

his  youth  ? To  one  he  owns  to  have  been  his 
“ Father  and  his  friend  ?” 

Monday  19,  and  the  other  afternoons  of  this 
week,  I took  up  my  crofs,  and  went  in  perfon, 
to  the  principal  perfons  in  our  fociety,  in  every 
part  of  the  town.  By  this  means  within  fix  days 
near  fix  hundred  pounds  were  fubfcribed  toward 
the  public  debt.  And  what  was  done,  was  done 
with  the  utmoft  chearfulnefs.  I remember  but 
one  exception.  Only  one  gentleman  fqueezed  out 
ten  {hillings,  as  fo  many  drops  of  blood. 

Saturday,  December  2.  M.  B.  gave  me  a far- 
ther account  of  their  affairs  at  Laton-ftone.  It  is 
exaftly  Pietas  Hallenfis  in  minature.  What  will 
be,  does  it  not  yet  appear. 

Tuefday  4,  I made  a little  excurfion  to  Col- 
chefter.  Saturday  8.  Ifaw  one  who  many  years 
ago,  was  a minijler  of  God  to  us  for  good  in  rep  re  f- 
fing  the  madnefs  of  the  people.  Sir  John  Gon- 
fon,  who  was  near  fifty  years  a magiftrate,  and 
has  lived  more  than  ninety.  He  is  majefticin 
decay : having  few  wrinkles,  and  not  {looping 
at  all,  tho’  juft  dropping  into  the  grave,  having  no 
ftrength,  and  little  memory  or  underftanding. 
Well  might  that  good  man,  Bifhop  Stratford 
pray,  “ Lord  let  me  not  live  to  be  ufelefs  !”  And 
he  had  his  defire  : he  was  ftruck  with  a palfy 
in  the  evening,  praifed  God  all  night,  and  died 
in  the  morning. 

Monday  10.  and  the  three  following  days, 
I vifited  Canterbury,  Dover,  and  Sandwich,  and 
returned  to  London,  on  Friday  14.  In  the  ma» 
P 6 _ chine 


[ 34^  ] 


chine  I read  Mr.  Baxter’s  book  upon  apparitions* 
It  contains  feveral  well-atteiled  accounts.  But 
there  are  fome  which  I cannot  fubfcribe  to.  How 
hard  is  it,  to  keep  the  middle  way  ! Not  to  be- 
lieve too  little,  or  too  much. ! 

Sunday  16.  I buried  Mrs.  Prior,  housekeeper 
to  Mr.  P.  who  told  me,  “ On  — night,  juft  at 
one  I rung,  and  laid  to  my  man  coming  in, 
“ Mrs.  Prior  is  dead.  She  juft  now  came  into  my 
room,  and  walked  round  my  bed.  About  two, 
the  nurfe  came,  and  told  me,  fhe  was  dead.  I 
afked,  at  what  time  (he  died  ? And  was  anfwer- 
ed,  juft  at  one  o’clock  ” 

Thurfday  2 7.  I preached  and  adminiftered 
the  facrament  at  the  New  chapel  in  Snowfields. 
How  well  does  God  order  all  things  ! By  lofing 
the  former  chapel  we  have  gained  both  a better 
houfe  and  a larger  congregation. 

Friday  28.  Between  two  and  three  in  the 
morning,  I was  fent  for  to  John  Matthews.  For 
fome  months  he  had  frequently  faid,  “ I have  no 
more  doubt  of  being  in  heaven,  than  if  I was 
there  already.”  A little  before  we  came,  one 
afked,  “ How  do  you  do  now.”  He  anfwered, 

“ The  Lord  protefts  for  ever  near.” 

When  I came  in,  he  was  perfeftlv  fenfible,  but 
too  weak  to  fpeak  Juft  at  three  I began  to  pray. 
I had  fcarce  prayed  two  minutes,  when  without 
any  ftruggle,  or  figh,  or  groan,  he  fell  afleep. 


A 


[ 349  ] 

A man  of  fo  fault! efs  a behaviour,  1 have  hard- 
ly ever  been  acquainted  with.  During  twenty 
years,  I do  not  remember  his  doing  or  faying  any 
thing,  which  I would  wifh  to  have  unfatd  or 
undone. 

Monday  31.  I thought  it  would  be  worth 
while,  to  make  an  odd  experiment.  Remember- 
ing how  furprifingly  fond  of  mufic,  the  Lion  at 
Edinburgh  was,  I determined  to  try,  whether 
this  was  the  cafe  with  all  animals  of  the  fame 
kind.  I accordingly  went  to  the  Tower  with  one 
who  plays  on  the  German  flute.  He  began  play- 
ing, near  four  or  five  lions.  Only  one  of  thefe 
(the  reft  not  feeming  to  regard  it  at  all)  rofe  up, 
came  to  the  front  of  his  den,  and  feemed  to  be 
all  attention.  Mean  time  a tyger  in  the  fame  den 
ftarted  up,  leaped  over  the  lions  back,  turned 
and  ran  under  his  belly,  leaped  over  him  again, 
and  fo  to  and  fro  inceftantly.  Can  we  account 
for  this  by  any  principle  of  mechanifm  ? Can 
we  account  for  it  all  all  ? 

Tuefday,  January  1,  1765.  This  week  I wrote 
an  anfwer  to  a warm  letter,  publifhed  in  the 
London  Magazine,  the  author  whereof  is  much 
difpleafed,  that  I prefume  to  doubt  of  the  mo- 
dern aftronomy.  I can  not  help  it.  Nav,  the  more 
Iconfider,  the  more  my  doubts  increafe  So  that 
at  prefent  I doubt,  whether  any  man  on  earth 
knows  either  the  diftance  or  magnitude,  1 will 
not  fay,  of  a fixt  ftar,  of  Saturn,  or  Jupiter  : yea 
of  the  fun  or  moon. 


Sunday 


C 350  J 

Sunday  6.  The  whole  fociety  met  in  the  even- 
ing. The  fervice  lafted  from  five  ’till  near  nine. 
And  I do  not  remember  fo  folemn  a feafon, 
fince  the  firfl:  time  we  joined  in  renewing  out- 
covenant  with  God. 

Wednefday  7.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
High-Wycombe  : and  Thurfday  8,  at  Witnev. 
The  congregation  here,  tho’  of  fo  late  Handing, 
may  be  a pattern  to  all  England.  When  the  fer- 
vice was  ended,  no  one  fpoke,  either  in  the 
evenings  or  mornings.  All  went  filently  out  of 
the  houfe  and  yard.  Nay,  when  I followed  a 
large  part  of  them,  I did  not  hear  any  open  their 
lips,  ’till  they  came  to  their  own  houfes.  Thurf- 
day 10.  I preached  again  at  Wycombe,  and  on 
Friday  returned  to  London. 

Saturday  12.  I rode  to  Mr.  D — ’s,  at  Oving- 
ton  in  Effex  about  fix  and  fifty  miles  from  the 
Founder)’.  Sunday  13.  Not  withllanding  the 
rain,  the  church  was  pretty  well  filled.  And  all 
gave  earneft  heed,  while  I opened  and  applied 
thofe  words  in  the  fecond  leffon,  Come  unto  me, 
all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I will 
give  you  rejl. 

Titbury  church  is  confiderablv  larger  than 
this : accordingly  the  congregation  was  much 
larger  than  that  in  the  morning.  But  I did  not 
fee  one  carlefsor  inattentive  perfon.  All  feemed 
refolved,  to  feek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be found. 
At  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  again  to  a 
fmall  company  in  Mr,  D’s.  houfe,  onfellowlhip 

with 


[ 35 1 ] 

with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Tuefday  15,  I re- 
turned to  London. 

Sunday  20.  I looked  over  Mr.  R — ’s  ftrange 
book  on  the  life  of  faith.  I thought  nothing  could 
ever  exceed  Mr.  Ingham’s : but  really,  this  does : 
altho’  they  differ  not  an  hair’s  breadth  from  each 
other  : any  more  than  Mr.  Sandiman. 

I employed  all  my  leifure  hours  this  week  in 
revifing  my  letters  and  papers.  Abundance  of 
them  I committed  to  the  flames.  Perhaps  fome 
of  the  reft  may  fee  the  light  when  I am  gone. 

* Friday  31.  I was  confidering,  how  it  was, 
that  fomany  who  were  once  filled  with  love,  are 
now  weak  and  faint.  And  the  cafe  is  plain : 
the  invariable  rule  of  God’s  proceedings  is. 
From  him  that  hath  not,Jhall  be  taken  away  even 
that  which  he  hath.  Hence  it  is  impoffible  that 
any  fhould  retain  what  they  receive,  without 
improving  it.  Add  to  this,  that  the  more  we 
have  received,  the  more  of  care  and  labour  is 
required,  the  more  watchfulnefs  and  prayer,  the 
more  circumfpetHon  and  earneftnefs  in  all  man- 
ner of  converfation.  Is  it  any  wonder  then, 
that  they  who  forget  this,  fhould  foon  lofe  what 
they  had  received  ? Nay,  who  were  taught , to 
forget  it  ? Not  to  watch  ! Not  to  pray — under 
pretence  of  praying  always. 

Wednefday  13.  I heard  Ru^h,  an  oratorio, 
performed  at  Mr.  Madan’s  chappel.  The  fenfe 
was  admirable  throughout;  and  much  of  the 
poetry  not  contemptible.  This  joined  with  ex* 

quifite 


[ 35 2 ] 

qnifite  mufic  might  poffibly  make  an  imprefllon, 
even  upon  rich  and  honourable  Tinners. 

Monday  18.  I fet  out  for  Norwich,  and  fpent 
a few  days  there  with  more  comfort  than  I had 
ever  done  before.  The  congregation  were  not 
only  more  numerous  than  ever,  but  abundantly 
more  ferious.  And  the  fociety  appeared  to  "be 
more  fettled,  and  more  loving  to  each  other. 
Monday  25.  In  my  way  to  Yarmouth  I read  Dr. 
Watts,  on  “ the  improvement  of  the  under- 
ftanding.”  He  has  many  juft  and  ufeful  obfer- 
vations,  mixt  with  fome  that  are  not  juft,  and 
with  more  that  are  of  little  ufe,  befides  that  they 
are  trite  and  obvious.  I preached  at  feven  in  a 
preacbing-houfebuilt  for  thegenefal  Anabaptifts; 
one  of  the  moll  elegant  buildings  I have  feen; 
which  was  well  filled  both  this  and  the  following 
evening  with  ferious  and  attentive  hearers. 
There  now  feems  to  be  a general  call  to  this 
town:  furely  fome  will  hear  the  voice  that  raifes 
the  dead.  We  returned  to  Norwich  on  Wed- 
nelday,  and  left  it  on  Thurfday  morning,  in  a 
wonderful  day  of  froft  and  fnow,  and  fleet  and 
wind.  However  we  reached  Lakenheath  in  the 
afternoon.  Confidering  the  weather,  there  was 
a large  congregation.  Mr.  I.  read  prayers  and  I 
preached,  with  great  liberty  of  fpirit,  on  What  is 
a man  profited,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  loj'e 
his  own  foul  ? 

Friday,  March  1.  I read  prayers  and  preached 
at  feven  in  the  morning.  It  was  noon  before  we 

could 


[ 3,53  3 


could  procure  a poft-chaife.  We  then  puflied 
on,  though  the  fnow  lay  deep  on  the  ground,  to 
the  great  inn  at  Hockerill,  the  dearefl  houfe  I 
ever  was  at.  So  fare  it  well.  In  the  morning  we 
went  on  to  London. 

Sunday  to.  I made  a colle&ion  in  our  congre- 
gation for  the  poor  weavers  who  are  out  of  em- 
ployment. It  amounted  to  about  forty  pounds. 
In  the  evening  our  own  fociety  met,  and  contri- 
buted fourteen  pounds  more,  to  relieve  a few  of 
their  own  di flrefTed  members. 

Monday  11.  I took  horfe  with  Mr.  Pening- 
ton  forBriftol.  In  two  or  three  hours  my  mare 
fell  lame,  without  any  difcernible  caufe  ; and  in 
an  hour  or  two  after,  the  bead;  he  rode  was  taken 
ill,  and  grew  worfe  and  worfe,  till  fhe  dropt 
down  and  died.  So  I was  glad  to  go  into  a mar- 
chine  which  was  driving  by;  and  the  next  even- 
ing I reached  Bridol. 

Monday  18.  I rode  to  Stroud,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  in  the  new  houfe.  But  a con- 
fiderable  part  of  the  congregation  were  obliged 
to  Hand  without.  Toward  the  clofe  of  the  fer- 
mori,  a young  man  dropt  down  and  vehemently 
cried  to  God.  This  occafioned  a little  hurry  at 
firft:  but  it  was  foon  over,  and  all  was  quiet  as 
before. 

After  fupper  I was  fpeaking  a little,  when  a 
voung  gentleman  cried  out,  “ I am  damned,’5 
and  fell  to  the  ground.  Afecond  did  fo  quickly 

after* 


i 


after,  and  was  much  convulfed,  and  yet  quite 
fenfible.  We  joined  in  prayer,  but  had  not  time 
(it  growing  late)  to  w re  d ie  with  God  for  their 
full  deliverance. 

*Tuefday  19.  We  rode  to  Worceder,  and 
had  the  pleafure  of  fpending  an  hour  with  Mr. 

R-*- , a fenfible,  candid  man.  But  who  is 

prool  againd  prejudice  ? Efpecially  when  thofe 
who  labour  to  infufe  it,  converfe  with  him  daily, 
and  thofe  who  drive  to  remove  it,  not  two 
hours  in  a year. 

Wecame  to  Birmingham  in  the  evening,  3nd 
had  a comfortable  feafon  with  the  great  congre- 
gation. Wednefdav  20.  M.  Lewen  took  me  in 
a pod-chaife  to  Derby,  where  the  new  houfe 
was  throughly  filled:  and  the  people  behaved  in 
a quite  different  manner,  from  what  they  did 
when  I was  here  lad.  Thurfday  21.  Me  went 
on,  though  with  much  difficulty,  being  often 
readv  to  dick  fad,  to  Sheffield.  The  houlehere 
is  full  twice  as  large  as  it  was.  And  lo  is  the 
congregation.  The  little  differences  which  had 
been  for  fome  time  among  the  people,  were 
now  eafily  adjuded.  And  I left  them  all,  united 
in  love,  and  refolved  to  drengthen  each  other  s 
hands. 

Saturday  23.  We  took  horfe  in  a furious 
wind,  which  was  ready  to  bear  us  away.  About 
ten  I preached  in  Bradwill,  in  the  High- Peak, 
where  notwithdanding  the  dorm,  abundance  of 


[ 355  ] 


people  were  got  together.  * I had  now  an  op- 
portunity of  enquiring,  concerning  Mr.  B y. 

He  did  run  well  ; till  one  offence  after  another 
fwallowed  him  up.  But  he  fcarce  enjoyed  him- 
felf  after.  Find  his  oldeft  daughter  was  (hatched 
away.  Then  his  only  fon  : then  him felf.  And 
only  two  or  three  of  that  large  family  now 
remain. 

Sunday  24.  At-feven  I preached  at  Manches- 
ter, on,  / beftecli  you,,  fujfer  the  word  of  exhor- 
tation, and  obferved,  that  the  exhortation  which 
it  is  particularly  difficult  to  fuffer,  is  that  to  ac- 
cept of  falvation  now,  and  now  to  improve  that 
whole  grace  of  God.  The  evening  congregation 
was  far  larger  than  the  houfe  could  contain,  and 
all  feemed  to  have  the  hearing  ear. 

Tuefday  26.  It  rained  all  the  way  to  Little- 
Leigh  : but  from  thence  we  had  a pleafajat  ride 
to  Cheffer. 

As  feveral  fhips  were  ready  to  fail  from  Park- 
gate,  I waited  here  two  days.  But  the  wind  con- 
tinuing foul,  on  Friday  29.  I croffed  over  to 
Liverpool.  I was  furprized  at  the  evening  con- 
gregations, particularly  on  Sunday.  The  houfe,_ 
even  with  the  addition  of  three  new  galleries, 
would  not  near  contain  the  congregation  : and  I 
never  before  obferved  the  word  to  take  fuch 
effefl  upon  them.  So  that  I was  not  forry,  the 
wind  continued  in  the  fame  point  on  Monday, 
Tuefday  and  Wednefday.  Only  it  Ihifted  a little  • 

o.n 


[ 3 56  ] 

on  Wednefday  morning:  on  which  fome  impa- 
tient captains  failed  immediately.  But  in  a few 
hours  it  came  full  weft  again  : fo  that  they  were 
glad  to  get  well  back. 

Thurfday,  April  4.  I rode  to  Bolton,  and  not 
being  expended,  was  the  more  welcome.  The 
houfe  was  filled  in  the  evening,  and  the  hearts 
of  many  filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing. 
April  5,  being  Good-friday,  Mr.  Johnfon 
preached  at  five  : I preached-  at  twelve  and  at 
fix.  What  a bleffed  calm  has  God  at  length  gi- 
ven to  this  poor,  fhattered  fociety  ? For  many 
years  the  men  of  bitter  and  contentious  fpirits, 
were  harrafting  them  continually.  But  they  are 
now  funk  into  quiet,  formal  prefby  terians : and 
thofe  they  have  left,  enjoy  God  and  one  ano- 
ther. 

Saturday  6.  I returned  to  Liverpool  : and  on 
Wednefday  10,  the  wind  continuing  weft,  I fet 
out  northward,  and  in  the  evening  found  a 
friend’s  houfe,  James  Edmondfon’s,  near  Gar- 
ftang.  Thurfday  1 1.  We  rode  on  to  Francis  Gil- 
bert’s, at  Kendal,  where  there  is  now  a real  work 
of  God.  The  genuine  gofpel  now  takes  root,  and 
finners  are  converted  to  God." 

Saturday  13.  We  rode  through  much  wind 
and  rain  to  Barnard-caftle.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  in  the  new  preaching-houfe,  (not 
opened  before)  and  at  eight  in  the  morning.  I 
would  have  preached  abroad  on  Sunday  even- 
ing : but  the  weather  drove  us  into  the  houfe. 


[ 357  ] 

And  God  was  there,  both  to  invite  finners,  and 
to  comfort  believers. 

* Afterwards  I fpent  an  hour  with  thofe,  who 
once  believed  they  were  faved  from  fin.  I found 
here,  as  at  London,  about  a third  part,  who  held 
faft  their  confidence.  The  reft  had  fuffered  lofs, 
more  or  lefs,  and  two  or  three  were  ftvorn  of  all 
their  ftrength. 

* Monday  15.  I rode  on  to  Newcaftle,  where 
I was  quite  unexpefted.  I found,  both  the  hear- 
ers, the  fociety,  and  the  believers,  are  increafed 
fince  I was  here  laft.  And  feveral  more  believe 
they  are  faved  from  fin.  Mean  time  Satan  has 
not  been  idle.  Two  were  following  George  Bell 
ftep  by  ftep,  as  to  the  “ not  needing  felf-exami- 
nation,”  the  “ not  being  taught  by  man,”  and 
moft  of  his  other  unfcriptural  extravagancies : 
but  as  they  appeared  to  be  ftill  of  an  advifeable 
fpirit,  for  the  prefent  at  leaft,  the  fnare  was 
broken. 

Thurfday  18.  I went  to  Durham  with  Mifs 
Lewen,  and  fpent  an  hour  with  her  father.  He 
behaved  with  the  utmoft  civility  : faid,  I had 
done  his  daughter  more  good  than  all  the  phyfi- 
cians  could  do : and  he  fliould  be  exceeding 
glad,  if  fire  would  goto  London  again,  at  the  ap- 
proach of  winter.  At  three  I preached  to  the 
poor  colliers  in  Gatelhead-Fell.  How  do  thefe 
fhame  the  colliers  of  Kingfwood  ? Flocking 
from  all  parts  on  the  week-days  as  well  as  Sun- 
days ; 


[ 3 <5^  ] 

days ; fuch  a thirft  have  they  after  the  good 
word  ! 

Friday  19.  I had  a little  time  with  that  vene- 
rable monument  of  the  grace  of  God,  Henry 
Jac.kfon.  He  isjuft  dropping  into  the  grave,  be- 
ing now  quite  bedrid,  but  praifing  God  with, 
every  breath. 

Monday  22.  Two  of  our  friends  took  me  in  a 
poft-chaife  to  Alnwick.  But  the  road  was  fo  in- 
tolerably bad,  that  we  did  not  reach  it  till  pall 
twelve.  I began  preaching  immediately,  and 
then  haflened  away.  On  Berwick-moor  we  were 
ready  to  hick  faft  again.  And  it  was  paft  feven 
before  I reached  the  town,  where  I found  notice 
had  been  given  of  my  preaching.  Healing  the 
congregation  waited  for  me,  I went  to  the  town- 
hall,  and  began  without  delay.  About  one  in  the 
morning  we  had  a violent  llorm  of  thunder  and 
lightning.  The  houfe  being  full  of  dragoons,  M. 
L.  and  M.  D.  were  conflrained  to  lod^e  in  the 

O 

fame  room  with  our  landlady,  who  being  waked 
by  the  florin,  and  throughly  terrified,  began 
praying  aloud.  M.  D.  laid  hold  on  the  opportu- 
nity, to  fpeak  very  clofely  to  her.  The  words 
feemed  to  fink  into  her  heart.  Who  knows  but 
they  may  bring  forth  fruit  ? 

1 uefday  23.  I preached  at  Dunbar  about  noon, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Edinburgh.  My  coming 
was  quite  feafonable,  (though  unexpected)  as 
thofe  bad  letters,  pubhlhed  in  the  name  of  Mr. 
Hervey,  and  reprinted  here  by  Mr.  John  Er- 

fkine, 


[ 359  ] 

fkine,  had  made  a great  deal  of  noife.  Wednef- 
day  24.  I preached  at  four  in  the  afternoon  on 
the  ground  where  we  had  laid  the  foundation  of 
our  houfe.  Friday  26.  About  noon  I preached 
at  Muflelborough,  where  are  a few  living  fouls 
ftill.  In  the  evening  we  had  another  bleffed  op- 
portunity at  Edinburgh,  and  I took  a folemn 
leave  of  the  people.  * Yet  how  I fhould  be 
able  to  ride,  I knew  not.  At  Newcaftle  I had  ob- 
ferved  a fmall  fwelling,  lefs  than  a pea;  but  in 
fix  days  it  was  as  large  as  a pullet’s  egg,  and  ex- 
ceeding hard.  On  Thurfday  it  broke.  I feared 
riding  would  not  agree  with  this,  efpecially  an 
hard  trotting  horfe.  However  trufting  God,  I fat 
out  early  on  Saturday  morning  ; before  I reach- 
ed Glafgow,  it  was  much  decreafed  ; and  in  two 
or  three  days  more  it  was  quite  gone.  If  it  was  a 
boil,  it  was  fuch  an  one  as  I never  heard  of.  For 
it  was  never  fore  firft  or  laft,  nor  ever  gave  me 
•any  pain. 

This  evening  I preached  in  the  hall  of  the  hos- 
pital : the  next  day,  morning  and  afternoon,  in 
the  yard.  So  much  of  the  form  of  religion  is 
here  ftill,  as  is  fcarce  to  be  found  in  any  town 
in  England.  There  was  once  the  power  too. 
And  fhall  it  not  be  again  ? Surely  the  time  is  at 
hand. 

Monday  29.  I rode  with  James  Kerlhaw 
through  a fruitful  country,  to  K ilmarnock,  and 
thence  to  Air.  After  a fliort  bait  at.  May  bole  in 
the  afternoon,  we  went  on  to  Guvane,  a little 

town 


C 36°  ] 

town  on  the  fea-fhore.  Tuefday  30.  We  rode 
over  high  and  fteep  mountains,  between  Ballin. 
trae  and  Strangrawer : where  we  met  with  as 
good  entertainment  of  every  kind,  as  if  we  had 
been  in  the  heart  of  England. 

We  reached  Port-patrick  about  three  o’clock, 
and  were  immediately  furrounded  with  men  of- 
fering to  carry  us  over-the  water.  But  the  wind 
was  full  in  our  teeth.  I determined  to  wait  till 
morning,  and  then  go  forward  or  backward,  as 
God  fhould  pleafe. 

Wednefday,  May  1.  The  wind  was  quite  fair : 
fo  as  foon  as  the  tide  ferved  I went  on  board. 
It  feemed  ftrange  to  crofs  the  fea  in  an  open 
boat : efpecially  when  the  waves  ran  high.  I was 
a little  fick,  till  I fell  afleep.  In  five  hours  and 
an  half  we  reached  Donaghadee.  But  my  mare 
could  not  land  till  five  hours  after  : fo  that  I did 
not  reach  Newtown  till  paft  eight. 

I fpent  the  next  day  here,  endeavouring  to  lift 
up  the  hands,  of  a poor,  fcattered,  deje&ed  peo- 
ple. In  the  evening  I preached  on  the  green; 
though  it  was  exceeding  cold,  none  of  the  con- 
gregation feemed  to  regard  it.  And  a few  of  them 
do  remember  from  whence  they  are  fallen , and 
refolve  to  do  (he frjl  works. 

Friday  3.  I rode  on  to  Lifburn,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  in  the  market-houfe.  The 
wind  was  as  keen  as  in  December:  yet  a large 
congregation  attended.  I then  re  et  what  was  left 

of 


[ 3«>  ] 

of  the  fociety : and  the  fpirit  of  many  that  were 
faint  revived,  Saturday  4.  I preached  in  the 
room  at  five,  which  had  been  difcontinued  for 
three  years.  And  this  alone  would  account  for 
the  fcattering  of  the  people,  and  the  deadnefs  of 
them  that  remained.  In  the  evening  I preached 
in  the  Linen-hall,  fo  called,  a large  fquare,  with 
piazza’s  on  three  fides  of  it.  And  fo  deep  an  at- 
tention I never  faw  in  the  people  of  Lifburn 
before. 

Sunday  5.  For  the  fake  of  the  country  people, 
I delayed  the  morning  preaching  till  half  an 
hour  pad  nine.  At  eleven  the  church  fervice  be- 
gan, and  we  had  an  ufeful  fermon  on,  Follow 
peace  with  all  men  and  holinefs.  At  five  I 
preached  in  the  Linen-hall  again,  to  a numerous 
congregation,  on,  Yea,  doubtlefs  and  l count  all 
things  but  lofsfor  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of 
Chmft  Jefus  my  Lord. 

Monday  6. 1 rode  to  Newry,  and  in  the  even- 
ing preached  in  the  market-houfe,  on,  Her  ways 
are  ways  of  pleafantncfs,  and  all  her  paths  peace . 
The  whole  congregation  feemed  affected,  this  as 
well  as  the  next  evening:  indeed  more  than  I 
had  feen  them  for  fome  years.  Hence,  Wed- 
nefday  8. 1 rode  to  Terryhugan,  and  found  much 
of  the  power  of  God  among  that  plain,  fimple- 
hearted  people.  Here  Mr.  Ryan  overtook  me, 
and  led  me  to  Clanmain,  where  we  had,  as  ufual, 
a lively,  earned  congregation  : mod  of  whom, 
(except  thofe  that  came  from  far)  were  prefent 
Vol.  XXXI.  Q again 


[ 362  3 

again  at  five  in  the  morning.  About  eleven  I 
preached  in  The  Grange,  a fmall  village,  about 
five  miles  from  Clanmain.  Friday  10.  I took 
Mr.  Ryan  with  me,  and  fet  out  for  London- 
derry. * When  we  had  rode  about  twelve 
miles,  a road  turned  fnort  to  the  left : but  having 
nodireftion  to  turn,  we  went  ftrait  forward,  till 
a woman  running  after  us,  (taking  one  of  us,  I 
know  not  why,  for  a dottor)  told  us  the  cafe  of 
her  poor  hulband,  who,  (he  faid,  had  kept  his  bed 
for  feven  weeks.  After  riding  half  an  hour,  we 
found  we  were  out  of  our  way  and  rode  back 
again.  By  this  means  we  went  by  the  houfe 
where  the  man  lay.  When  I alighted  and  went 
in,  I quickly  faw,  that  he  needed  fomethingraore 
than  I had  piefcribed  before.  Who  knows 
but  our  lefingthe  way  may  be  the  means  of  fav» 
ing  the  poor  man’s  life  ? 

In  the  afternoon,  after  riding  through  a fruit- 
ful country,  (one  mountain  only  excepted)  we 
came  to  Omagh,  the  Pnire  town  of  the  county  of 
Tyrone.  We  found  a good  inn;  but  were  not 
glad,  when  we  heard  there  was  to  be  dancing  that 
night,  in  the  room  under  us.  But  in  a while, 
the  dancers  removed  to  the  (hire-hall.  So  we 
fiept  in  peace. 

* Saturday  1 1.  Having  no  direftion  to  any  one 
in  Derry,  I was  mufing  what  to  do,  and  wifhing 
fon.e  one  would  meet  me  and  challenge  me, 
though  I knew  not  how  it  could  be,  as  I never 
had  been  there  beiore,  nor  knew  any  one  in  the 

town. 


I 3&3  ] 

town.  When  we  drew  near  it,  a gentleman  on 
horfeback  hopped,  afked  me  my  name,  and  {hew- 
ed me  where  the  preacher  iodged.  In  the 
afternoon  he.  accommodated  me  with  a conve- 
nient lodging  at  his  own  lioufe.  So  one  Mr. 
Knox  is  taken  awav,  and  another  given  me  in 
his  head. 

At  feven  I preached  in  the  Linen-hall,  (a 
fquare  fo  called)  to  the  larged  congregation  I 
have  feen  in  the  north  of  Ireland.  The  waters 
fpread  as  zvide  here  as  they  did  at  Athlone.  God 
grant  they  may  be  as  deep  ! 

Sunday  12.  At  eight  I preached  there  again, 
to  an  equal  number  of  people.  About  eleven 
Mr.  Knox  went  with  me  to  church,  and  led  me 
to  a pew,  where  I was  placed  next  the  mayor. 
What  is  this  ? What  have  I to  do  with  honour  ? 
Lord,  let  me  always Jear,  not  defire  it. 

The  afternoon-fervice  was  not  over,  till  about 
half  an  hour  pah  fix.  At  feven  I preached  to 
near  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  city.  I think, 
there  was  fcarce  one  who  did  not  feel  that  God 
was  there.  So  general  an  imprefiion  upon 
a congregation,  I have  hardly  feen  in  any- 
place. 

Monday  13.  and  the  following  days,  I had 
leifure  to  go  on  with  the  Notes  of  the  Old  Tef- 
tament.  But  I wondered  more  at  the  fituation  I 
was  in,  in  themidftof  rich  and  honourable  men! 
Whilft  this  lafts  it  is  well.  And  it  will  be  well 
Q 2 too, 


[ 364  ] 

too,  when  any  or  all  of  them  change  their  coun- 
tenance : 

“ And  wonder  at  the  ftrange  man’s  face, 

As  one  they  ne'er  had  known.” 

* Tuefday  14,  I wrote  the  following  letter  to 
a friend  ; 

Dear  Sir,  Londonderry,  May  14, 1765. 

“ Your  manner  of  writing  needs  no  excufe. 

I hope  you  will  always  write  in  the  fame  man- 
ned. Love  is  the  plainejl  thing  in  the  world:  I 
knew  this  difilates  what  you  write  : and  what 
need  of  ceremony  ? 

“ You  have  admirably  well  exprelTed  udiat  I 
mean  by  an  opinion,  contradiftingnifhed  from  an 
efi'ential  doftrine.  Whatever  is  “ compatible 
with  love  to  Chrift  and  a work  of  grace,”  I term 
an  opinion.  And  certainly  the  holding  particular 
election  and  final  perfeverance  is  compatible 
with  thefe.  “ Yet  what  fundamental  errors” 
(you  afk)  have  you  oppofed  with  half  that  fer- 
vency as  you  have  thefe  opinions  ?” — I have 
printed  near  fifty  fermons,  and  only  one  of  thefe 
oppofes  them  at  all.  I preach  about  eight  hun- 
dred fermons  in  a year,  and  taking  one  year 
with  another  for  twenty  years  paft,  I have  not 
preached  eight  fermons  in  a year  upon  the  fub- 
jedl.  But,  “ how  many  of  your  beft  preachers 

have 


[ 3 65  } 

have  been  thruji  out  becaufe  they  diffented  from 
you  in  thefe  particulars  ?”  Not  one,  beft  or 
worft ; good  or  bad  ; was  ever  thruji  out  on  this 
account.  There  has  not  been  a fingle  inftance  of 
this  kind.  Two  or  three,  (but  far  from  the  bejl  of 
our  preachers)  voluntarily  left  us,  after  they  had 
embraced  thofe  opinions.  But  it  tvas  of  their 
own  mere  motion.  And  two  I fhould  have  ex- 
pelled for  immoral  behaviour  : but  they  with- 
drew, and  pretended  “ they  did  not  hold  our 
doftrine.”  Seta  mark  therefore  on  him  that  told 
you  that  tale,  and  let  his  word  for  the  future  go 
for  nothing. 

“ Is  a man  a believer  in  Jefus  Chrift,  and  is 
bis  life  fuitable  to  his  profeflion  ?”  Are  not  only 
the  main,  but  the Jole  enquiries  I make  in  order 
to  his  admiflion  into  our  fociety.  If  he  is  a dif- 
fenter  he  may  be  a diffenter  ft  ill  : but  if  he  is  a 
churchman,  I advife  him  to  continue  fo  : and  that 
for  many  reafons,  fome  of  which  are  mentioned 
in  the  traft  upon  that  fubjeft. 

“ I think  on  jyflification  juft  as  I have  done 
any  time  thefe  feven  and  twenty  years  ; and  juft 
as  Mr.  Calvin  does.  In  this  refpeft,  I do  not 
differ  from  him  an  hair’s  breadth. 

“ But  the  main  point  between  you  and  me  is 
Perfection.  “This,  you  fay,  has  no  prevalence 
in  thefe  parts.  Otherwife  1 fhould  think  it  my 
duty  to  oppofe  it  with  my  whole  ftrength:  not 
as  an  opinion,  but  as  a dangerous  miftake, 
which  appears  to  be  fubverfive  of  the  very 
O 3 fourt- 


[ 366  ] 

foundation  of  Chriftian  experience,  and  which 
has  in  faft  given  occafion  to  the  moll  grievous 
offences.” 

“ Juft  fo  my  brother  and  I reafoned  thirty 
years  ago,  “ as  thinking  it  our  duty  to  oppofe 
predomination  with  our  whole  ftrength  : not  as  an 
opinion,  but  as  a dangerous  miftake,  which  ap- 
pears to  be  fubverfive  of  the  very  foundation  of 
Chriftian  experience,  and  which  has  in  fa£l  gi- 
ven occafion  to  the  moll  grievous  offences.” 

That  it  has  given  occafion  to  fuch  offences  I 
know;  I can  name  time,  place  and  perfons.  But 
fill]  another  faft  flares  me  in  the  face.  Mr. 

H — and  Mr.  N hold  this,  and  yet  I 

believe  thefe  have  real  Chriftian  experience. 
But  if  fo,  this  is  only  an  opinion  : it  is  not  fub- 
verfive, (here  is  clear  proof  to  the  contrary)  of 
1 he  Very  foundation  ol  Chriftian  experience.  It 
is  compatible  with  love  to  Chrift,  and  a genu- 
ine work  of  grace.”  Yea  many  hold  it,  at  whofe 
icet  1 defire  to  be  found  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Jefus.  If  then  1 “ oppofe  this  with  my  whole 
ftrength,”  I am  a mere  biggot  ftill.  Ileavejotrin 
your  calm  and  retired  moments  to  make  the  ap- 
plication. 

“ But  how  came  this  opinion  into  my  mind  ?” 
I will  tell  you  with  all  fimplicity.  In  1725,  I 
met  with  Bifhop  Taylor’s  Rule  of  holy  living 
and  dying.  I was  ftruck  particularly  with  the 
chapter  upon  intention,  and  felt  a fixt  intention 
to  give  myjelf  up  to  God.  In  this  I was  much 

con- 


[ 367  ] 

confirmed  foon  after  by  the  Chrijlian  pattern,  and 
longed  to  give  God  all  my  heart.  This  is  juft 
what  I mean  by  perfedion  now.  I fought  after  it 
from  that  hour. 

In  1727.  I read  Mr.  Law’s  Chriftian  Perfec- 
tion, and  Serious  Call,  and  more  explicitly  re- 
folved  to  be  all  devoted  to  God,  in  body,  foul,  and 
fpirit : in  1730,  I began  to  be  homo  unius  libri; 
to  fiudy  (comparatively)  no  book  but  the  bible. 
I then  faw  in  a ftronger  light  than  ever  before, 
that  only  one  thing  is  needful,  even  faith  that 
worketh  by  the  love  ol  God  and  man,  all  inward 
and  outward  holinefs,  and  I groaned  to  love 
God  with  all  my  heart,  and  to  ferve  him  with 
all  my  frength. 

“ January  1,  1733,  I preached  the  fermon 
on  the  circumcifion  of  the  heart which  con- 
tains all  that  I now  teach  concerning  falvation 
from  all  fin,  and  loving  God  with  an  undivided 
heart.  In  the  fame  year  I printed  (the  firft  time 
I ventured  to  print  any  thing)  for  the  ufe  of  my 
pupils  “ a colle&ion  of  forms  of  prayer.”  And 
in  this  I fpoke  explicitly  of  giving  the  whole  heart 
and  the  whole  life  to  God.  This  was  then  as  it  is 
now,  my  idea  of  Perfe&ion,  tho’  I fhould  have 
ftarted  at  the  word. 

In  1735,  I preached  my  farewell  fermon  at 
Epworth  in  Lincolnfhire.  In  this  likewife  I fpoke 
with  the  utmoft  clearnefs  of  having  one  defign, 
one  defire,  one  love,  and  of  purfuing  the  one  end 
of  our  life  in  all  our  words  and  a&ioris. 


In 


C 368  ] 

In  January,  1738,  I expreft  my  defire  in  thefe 
words  : 

O grant  that  nothing  in  my  foul 

Many  dwell  but  thy  pure  love  alone  ! 

O may  thy  love  pojjefs  me  whole. 

My  joy,  my,  treafure,  and  my  crown, 

Strange  flames  far  from  my  heart  remove  ! 

My  every  aft,  word,  thought  be  love. 

And  I am  Hill  perfuaded  this  is  what  the  Lord 
Jefus  hath  bought  for  me  with  his  own  blood. 

Now  whether  you  defire  and  expect  this  blef- 
fing  or  not,  is  it  not  an  aftonifhing  thing,  that 
you  or  any  man  living  fhould  be  difgufted  at  me 
for  expefting  it  ? And  that  they  fhould  perfuade 
one  another  that  this  hope  is  “ fubverfive  of  the 
very  foundations  of  Chriflian  experience.”  Why 
then,  whoever  retains  it  cannot  poflibly  have  any 
Chriflian  experience  at  all ! Then  my  brother, 
Mr.  Fletcher,  and  I,  and  twenty  thoufand  more, 
who  feem  both  to  fear  and  to  love  God,  are  in 
reality  children  of  the  devil,  and  in  the  road  to 
eternal  damnation  ! 

In  God’s  name  I intreat  you  make  me  fenfi* 
ble  of  this.  Shew  me  by  plain,  ftrong  reafons, 
whatdifhonour  this  hope  docs  to  Chrifl,  where- 
in it  oppofes  juflification  by  faith,  or  any  funda- 
mental truth  of  religion.  But  do  not  wreft, 
and  wiredraw  and  colour  my  words,  as  Mr.  Her- 
vey,  (or  Cudwortb)  has  done,  in  fuch  a manner, 

that 


[ 369  ] 

that  when  I look  in  that  glafs,  I do  not  know 
my  own  face  ! “ Shall  I call  you  (fays  Mr.  Her- 
veyj  my  father  or  my'  friend  ? For  you  have 
been  both  to  me.”  So  I was,  and  vou  have  as 
well  requited  me  ! It  is  well  my  reward  is  with 
the  Molt  High. 

Wilhing  all  happinefs  to  you  and  your’s, 

I am,  dear,  Sir,  your  affe&ionate  brother 
and  fervant, 

JOHN  WESLEY. 

On  Wednefday  and  Thurfday  I fpoke  feveral- 
ly  to  the  members  of  the  fociety.  I found  (juft 
as  I expefled)  that  the  work  of  God  here  is  ex- 
ceeding (hallow.  Yet,  while  fo  many  flock  to 
hear,  one  cannot  doubt,  but  God  will  cut  fome 
of  them  to  the  heart. 

Sunday  19.  Mr.  S — , one  of  the  curates, 
preached  an  excellent  fermon  on  receiving  the 
Holy  Ghojl.  I afterwards  accepted  his  invitation 
to  dinner,  and  found  a well-natured,  fenfible 
man,  and  one  well  acquainted  with  every  branch 
of  learning,  which  we  had  occafion  to  touch  up- 
on. At  feven  I preached  on  God  forbid  that  l 
Jhould  glory,  fave  in  the  crofs  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrif.  And  truly  the  people  of  this  place  will 
hear  found  doElrine.  Wednefday  22.  I exhort- 
ed the  little  fociety,  to  avoid  (loth,  prodigality 
and  (luttifhnefs,  and  on  the  contrary,  to  be  pat- 
terns of  diligence,  frugality  and  cleanlinefs. 

^ Thurfday  23.  Lighting  on  a volume  of  Mr. 

Seed’s 


[ 37°  ] 

Seed’s  fermons,  I was  utterly  furprized.  Where 
did  this  man  lie  hid,  that  I never  heard  of  him, 
all  the  time  I was  at  Oxford  ? His  language  is 
pure  in  the  higheft  degree  ; his  appreherifton 
clear,  his  judgment  ftrong.  And  for  true,  man- 
ly wit,  and  exquifite  turns  of  thought,  1 know 
not  if  this  century  has  produced  his  equal. 

Saturday  25.  Both  in  the  morning  and  even- 
ing, I fpokeas  clofely  and  fharply  as  I could.  But 
yet  I cannot  find  the  way  to  wound  the  people. 
They  are  neither  offended,  nor  convinced. 

Ever  fince  I came  hither,  I have  been  amaz- 
ed at  the  honefty  which  runs  thro’  this  city. 
Nonefcruples  to  leave  his  houfeopen  all  day  and 
the  door  only  on  the  latch  at  night.  Such  a thing 
as  theft  is  fcarce  heard  of  at  Derry  : no  one  has 
the  leaft  fufpicion  of  it.  No  wondertherefore  that 
the  inhabitants  never  fuipett  themfelves  to  be 
finners.  O what  pity  that  honefty  fhould  be  a 
bar  to  falvation  ! Yet  fo  it  is  it  a man  puts  it  in 
the  place  of  Clnift. 

Having  a remarkable  anecdote  put  into  my 
hands,  which  fome  will  probably  be  pieaied  to 
fee,  I mav  infert  i.t  here,  as  we!!  as  elfewhere. 
It  is  a converfation  between  m lather’s  father, 
(taken  down  in  fhort-hand  bv  himre’:f)  and  the 
then  bifhop  of  Briftol.I  may  be  exc  u it  it  ap- 
pears more  remarkable  to  me,  than  it  will  do  to 
an  unconcerned  perfon 


Wejley . 


Bifliop.  What  is  your  name  ? 


[ 371  ] 

Wejley.  John  Wefley. 

B.  There  are  many  great  matters  charged 
upon  you. 

TV.  May  it  pleafe  your  lordfhip,  Mr.  Horlock 
was  at  my  houfe  on  Tuefday  laft,  and  acquainted 
me  that  it  was  your  lordfhip’s  defire  I fhould  come 
to  you  : and  on  that  account  I am  here  to  wait 
on  you. 

B.  By  whom  were  you  ordained  ? Or  are 
you  ordain’d  ? 

TV.  I am  fent  to  preach  the  gofpel. 

B.  By  whom  were  you  fent  ? 

TV.  By  a church  of  Jefus  Chrift. 

B.  What  church  is  that  ? 

TV.  The  church  of  Chrift  at  Melcomb. 

B.  That  factious  and  heretical  church  ! 

TV.  May  it  pleafe  you,  Sir,  I know  no  faflion 
or  herefy  that  church  is  guilty  of. 

B.  No  ! Did  not  you  preach  fuch  things  as 
tend  to  faftion  and  herefy  ? 

TV.  I am  not  confcious  to  myfelf  of  any  fuch 
preaching. 

B,  I am  informed  by  fufficient  men,  gentle- 
men of  honour  of  this  county,  viz.  Sir  Gerrard 
Napper,  Mr.  Freak,  and  Mr.  Tregonnel,  of  your 
doings.  What  fay  you  ? 

TV.  Thofe  honoured  gentlemen  I have  been 
with  ; who  being  by  others  mifinformed,  pro- 
ceeded wi  h lome  heat  againlf.  me. 

B.  There  are  oaths  of  feveral  honeft  men, 

and 


[ 372  ] 

and  fhall  we  take  your  word  for  it,  that  all  is  but 
mifinformation  ? 

TV.  There  was  no  oath  given  or  taken.  Be- 
fides,  if  it  be  enough  to  accufe,  who  fhall  be 
innocent  ? — I can  appeal  to  the  determination 
of  the  great  day  of  judgment,  that  the  large  cata- 
logue of  matters  laid  to  me,  are  either  things 
invented  or  miftaken. 

B.  Did  not  you  ride  with  your  fword,  in  the 
time  of  the  Committee  of  J'afety , and  engage  with 
them  P 

TV.  Whatever  imprudences  in  civil  matters 
you  may  be  informed  I am  guilty  of,  I fhall 
crave  leave  to  acquaint  your  lordfhip,  that  his 
majefly  having  pardoned  them  fully,  I fhall  wave 
any  other  anfwer. 

B.  In  what  a manner  did  the  church  you 
fpeak  of  fend  you  to  preach  ? At  this  rate  every 
body  might  preach. 

TV.  Not  every  one.  Every  body  has  not 
preaching  gifts  and  preaching  graces.  Befides, 
that  is  not  all  I have  to  offer  to  your  lordfhip  to 
juffify  my  preaching. 

B.  If  you  preach  it  mufl  be  according  to  or- 
der, the  order  of  the  church  of  England,  upon 
ordination. 

IV.  What  does  your  lordfhip  mean  by  ordina- 
tion ? 

B.  Do  not  you  know  what  I mean  ? 

W.  If  you  mean  that  fending  fpoken  of  Rom. 
to-  I had  it. 


B.  I mean 


[ 373  ] 

3.  I mean  that  ; What  million  had  you  ? 

W.  I had  a million  from  God  and  man. 

B.  You  mull  have  it  according  to  law,  and 
the  order  of  the  church  of  England. 

IV.  I am  not  fatislied  in  my  fpirit  therein. 

B.  Not  fatislied  in  your  fpirit  ! You  have  more 
new. coined  phrafes  than  ever  were  heard  of ! 
You  mean  your  confcience,  do  you  not  ? 

W.  Spirit  is  mo  new  phrafe.  We  read  of  be- 
ing fanftified  in  foul,  body,  and  fpirit. 

B.  By  fpirit  there  we  are  to  underhand  the 
upper  region  of  the.  fouL 

TV.  Some  think  we  are  to  take  it  for  the  con- 
fcience : but  ifyour  lordlhip  like  it  not  fo,  then 
I fay  I am  not  fatisfied  in  confcience,  as  touching 
the  ordination  you  fpeak  of. 

B.  Confcience  argues  fcience,  fcience  fup- 
pofes  judgment,  and  judgment  reafon.  What  rea- 
fon  have  you  that  you  will  not  be  thus  or- 
dained ? 

TV.  I came  not  this  day  to  difpute  with  your 
lordlhip  ; my  own  inability  would  forbid  me  fo 
to  do. 

B.  No,  no  ; but  give  me  your  reafon. 

TV.  I am  not  called  to  office  : and  therefore 
cannot  be  ordained; 

B.  Why  have  you  then  preached  all  this 
while  ? 

TV.  I was  called  to  the  work  of  the  minihry  j 
tho’  not  the  office.  There  is  as  we  believe,  Vo- 
catio  ad  opus , <S?  ad  munus. 

R 


B.  Why 


* [ 374  3 

B.  Why  may  you  not  have  the  office  of  the 
minifhy  ? 

W.  May  it  pleafe  your  lordffiip,  becaufe  they 
are  not  a people  who  are  fit  fubjeft  s for  me  to 
exercife  office  work  among  them. 

B.  You  mean  a gathered  church  : but  we 
mud  have  no  gathered  churches  in  England ; 
and  you  will  fee  it  fo.  For  there  mull  be  a uni- 
ty without  divisions  among  us : and  there  can 
be  no  unity  without  uniformity — Well  then 
we  mud  fend  you  to  your  church  that  they  may 
difpofe  of  you,  if  you  were  ordained  by  them. 

JV.  I have  been  informed  by  my  coufin  Pit- 
field  and  others  concerning  your  lordfhip,  that 
vou  have  a difpofition  inclined  againft  morofity. 
However  you  maybe  prepoffefs’d  by  fome  bitter 
enemies  to  my  perfon  : yet,  there  are  others,  who 
can  and  will  give  vou  another  character  of  me. 
Mr.  Gliffion  hath  done  it.  And  Sir  Francis  Tul- 
ford  defiled  me  to  prefent  his  fervice  to  you,  and 
being  my  hearer  is  ready  to  acquaint  you  con- 
cerning me. 

B.  I a Iked. Sir  Francis  Tulford,  Whether  the 
prefentation  to  Whitchurch  was  his : whofe  is 
it  ? He  told  me  it  was  not  his. 

W.  There  was  none  prefented  to  it  thefefixty 
years  lince.  Mr.  Walton  lived  theie.  At  his  de- 
parture the  people  defired  me  to  preach  to  them, 
and  when  there  was  a way  offettlement  appoint- 
ed. I was  by  the  truflees  appointed,  and  byr  the 
triers  approved. 

B.  They 


[ 3 75  ] 

B.  They  would  approve  any,  who  would 
come  to  them  and  clofe  with  them.  I know 
they  approved  thofe  who  could  not  read  twelve 
lines  of  Englilh. 

• W.  All  that  they  did  I know  not  : but  I was 
examined  touching  gifts  and  graces. 

B.  I queftion  not  your  gifts,  Mr.  Wefley.  I 
will  do  you  any  good  I can  : but  you  will  not 
long  be  buffered  to  preach,  unlefs  you  will  do  it 
according  to  order. 

IV.  I fhall  fubmit  to  any  trial  you  (hall  pleafe 
to  make.  I fhall  prefent  your  lordfhip  with  a 
confefiion  of  my  faith,  or  take  what  other  way 
you  pleafe  to  infill  on. 

B.  No,  we  are  not  come  to  that  yet. 

W.  I fhall  defire  thofe  feverals  laid  together, 
which  I look  on  as  juflifying  my  preaching. 

1.  Iwas  devoted  to  the  fervice  from  mine  in. 
fancy. 

2.  I was  educated  in  order  thereto  at  fchool, 
and  in  the  univerlity  of  Oxford. 

B.  What  age  are  you  ? 

W.  Twenty -five. 

B.  No,  fure,  you  are  not. 

W.  3.  As  a fon  of  the  prophets,  after  I had 
taken  my  degrees,  I preached  in  the  country, 
being  approved  of  by  judicious  able  Chriftians, 
minifters  and  others. 

4.  It  pleafed  God  to  feal  my  labour  with  fuc- 
cefs,  in  the  apparent  converfion  of  many  fouls. 

B.  Yea,  that  is  it  may  be,  to  your  way. 

R 2 W.  Yea, 


[ 376  ] 

W.  Yea,  to  the  power  of  godlinefs,  from  igno- 
rance and  profanenefs.  Ifitpleafe  your  lordfhip, 
to  lay  down  any  evidences  of  godlinefs,  agree- 
ing with  fcripture.and  that  are  not  found  in  thofe 
perfons  intended,  I am  content  to  be  difcharged 
the  mini  Ary.  I will  hand  or  fall  on  the  iffue' 
thereof. 

B.  You  talk  of  the  power  of  godlinefs;  fuch 
as  you  fancy. 

TV.  Yea  to  the  reality  of  religion.  Let  us 
appeal  to  any  common-place  book  for  eviden- 
cies  of  graces,  and  they  are  found  in  and  upon 
them. 

B.  How  many  are  there  of  them  ? 

TV.  I number  not  the  people. 

B.  Where  are  they  ? 

TV.  Wherever  I have  been  called  to  preach. 
At  Radpole,  Melcomb,  Turnwood,  Whitchurch, 
and  at  fea.  I (hall  add  another  ingredient  of  my 
million. 

5.  When  the  church  faw  the  prefence  of  God 
going  along  with  me,  they  did,  by  failing  and 
prayer,  in  a day  fet  apart  for  that  end,  feek  an 
abundant  bleffmg  on  my  endeavors. 

B.  A particular  church  ? 

' TV.  Yes,  my  Lord,  I am  not  afhamed  to  own 
myfelf  a member  of  one. 

B.  Why  you  may  miftake  the  apo file’s  intent. 
They  went  about  to  convert  Heathens.  You 
have  no  warrant  for  your  particular  churches. 

TV.  We  have  a plain,  full,  and  fufficient  rule 

for 


C 2,77  ] 


for  gofpel  worfhip  in  the  New  Teftament,  re- 
corded in  the  A Sis  of  thp  ap-ojiles,  and  in  the 
ep flies. 

B.  W e have  not. 

W.  The  praftice  of  the  apoftles  is  a handing 
rule  in  thofe  cafes  which  were  not  extraor- 
dinary. 

B.  Not  their  practice,  but  their  precepts. 

JV.  Both  precepts  and  pra&ice.  Our  duty  is 
not  delivered  to  us  in  fcripture  only  by  precepts, 
but.  precedents,  by  promifes,  bv  threatnings 
mixed.  We  are  to  follow  them  as  they  followed 
Chrift. 

B.  But  the  apohle  Paid,  “ This  [peak  I,  not  the 
Lord:”  that  is  by  revelation. 

JV.  Some  interpret  that  place,  “ This  fpeak  I 
now  by  revelation  from  the  Lord,’’  not  the  Lord 
in  that  text  before  inhanced  concerned  divorces. 
May  it  pleafe  your  lordlhip,  we  believe  that 
“ Cultus  not  inflitutus  eft  indebitus.” 

B.  It  is  falfe. 

W.  The  fecond  commandment  fpeaks  the 
fame;  Thou  (halt  not  make  to  thyfelf  any  gra- 
ven intake. 

B.  That  is,  forms  of  your  own  invention. 

JV.  Bifhop  Andrews  taking  notice  of  “ non 
fads  tibi,”  fatisfied  me  that  we  may  not  worfhip 
God,  but  as  commanded. 

B.  Well  then  you  will  juhify  your  preach- 
ing, will  you,  without  ordination,  according  to 
law  ? 

Ra  w. 


[ 378  ] 

W '■  All  tliefe  things,  laid  together,  are  fatisfac- 
tory  to  me,  for  my  procedure  therein. 

B.  They  are  not  enough. 

W.  There  has  been  more  written  in  proof  of 
preaching  of  gifted  perfons,  with  fuch  appro- 
bation, than  has  been  anfwered  yet  by  any  one. 

B.  Have  you  any  thing  more  to  fay  to  me, 
Mr.  Wefley. 

W.  Nothing  : your  Lordfhip  fent  for  me. 

B.  I am  glad  to  hear  this  from  your  mouth, 
you  will  hand  to  your  principles  you  fay  ? 

W.  1 intend  it  through  the  grace  of  God  ; and 
to  be  faithful  to  the  King’s  majefty  however  you 
deal  with  me. 

B.  I will  not  meddle  with  you. 

W.  Farewell  to  you,  Sir. 

B.  Farewell  good  Mr.  Wefley. 


The  End  of  the  Thirty-Firft  Volume. 


THE 


CONTENT  S 

Of  the  Thirty-Firft  Volume. 


Page 

An  ex  trad  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’i 
journal , from  May  6,  1760,  to  Cd.  28, 

1762.  — — 3 

An  extrad  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  W efleyh 
journal,  from  Od.  2 9,  1762,  to  May  25, 
1765.  — — 203 


I 


' V* 


i 


Date  Due 


u 

Demco  293-5 


